The Ban of the Bori (Arthur John Newman Tremearne, 1914)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/banofboridemonsd00trem). Demons and demon-dancing in West and North Africa - the pioneering English study of the Bori spirit-possession cult of the Hausa.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE BAN of 

THE BORI 

DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING 
IN WEST AND NORTH AFRICA 

LIBRARY OF 
WELLESLEY COLLEGE 

GIFT OF 

Fairleigh Dickinson 
University 

THE BAN OF THE BORI 

DcfctcateD 

TO 

THE FRENCH AND ITALIAN OFFICERS 

IN TUNIS AND TRIPOLI 

AS A SLIGHT TOKEN OF THE ADMIRATION 

FELT FOR THEIR WORK 

iidan Kun. 

The Ban of theBori 

Demons and Demon-Dancing in West 
and North Africa 

BY 

MAJOR A. J. N. TREMEARNE 

M.A., LL.M., Dip.Anth. 

Sometime Scholar and Prizeman, Christ's College, 

Hausa Lecturer and Worts Travelling Student, Cambridge, 

Of Gray's Inn, Barrister -at- Law 

Author of 

" Hausa Superstitions and Customs," " The Tailed Head- Hunters 

of Nigeria" " Some Austral- African Notes and Anecdotes ," 

" -The Law in British West Africa" " The Niger 

and the West Sudaji" " Hausa Folk- Tales" 

" Fables and Fairy Tales" etc. 

WITH COLOURED FRONTISPIECE, 60 PHOTOGRAPHIC 
ILLUSTRATIONS AND 47 FIGURES IN THE TEXT 

HEATH, CRANTON & OUSELEY LTD. 
FLEET LANE, LONDON, E.C. 

6 
/?/9 

CONTENTS 

Foreword 

CHAPTEK PACI 

I. Introduction 

II. The Origin of the Hausa Colonies in 
North Africa 

iii. totemism and klng-killing 

IV. Totemism and King-killing — continued 

V. Personal Enhancement and Dress 

VI. Habitations and Domestic Life 

VII. Habitations and Domestic Life — continued 84 

VIII. Birth and Puberty 

IX. Marriage and Divorce 
X. Death and the After-Life 

XL Magic. The Saints and the Magicians 
XII. Magic in the House — Love Charms 

XIII. Magic in the House — Self-Preservation 

XIV. Magic in the Fields — Agriculture, etc. 
XV. Magic in the Fields — Hunting, etc. 

XVI. Superstitions and Omens . 

XVII. Pilgrimages and Festivals 
5 

19 

25 
30 
43 
54 
70 

95 
113 
126 
146 

159 
169 

185 
200 

213 
224 

( ONTENTS 

i Mai run rm 

XVIII. Bori— J he Spirits and their Powers . 243 

MX. Bori — Iiik I BMPLB8 AND THE Sect 
X \ . Bori — The Dances 
XXI. Bori— The Mohammedan Spirits 

XXII. Bori — The Mohammedan Spirits— continued 310 

XXIII. Bori— The Black Spirits . 

XXIV. Bori — The Black Spirits — continued 
XXV. Bori — The Fighting Spirits 

XXVI. Bori— The Youths 

XXVII. Bori — The Little Spots 

XXVIII. Bori — The Spirits of the Forest, of the 
Waters, and of the Grove 

269 
280 
296 

328 
343 
354 
366 

375 

382 

XXIX. The Origin of Demons and Demon -Dancing 392 

XXX. The Origin gf Demons and Demon-Dancing 

— continued .... 406 

Appendix I. Notes and References 
Appendix II. Botanical Notes 
Appendix III. A Comparison of the Bori 
Index ..... 

427 

474 
478 
489 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

i. TheGidan Kuri at Tunis . . . Front 

Fac 

2. Tunisian Fashions . 

ispiece 

NG PAOR 
30 

3. Nigerian Fashions . 

30 

4. Medicine-Men . 

54 

5. Khameis and his Father Salah 

54 

6. Haj Ali - . 

54 

7. Munchi Masu-Bori . 

66 

8. Jukuns ..... 

66 

9. A Lane in Tunis .... 

70 

10. The Arifa's House in Tripoli 

70 

II. Cooking in the Courtyard, Tunis . 

86 

12. Hausas at work, Tunis . 

86 

13. A Funeral at Kairuan 

128 

14. Arab and Hausa Graves . 

128 

15. Looking towards Carthage . 

190 

16. The Shrine of Sidi Bu'l Hassan 

190 

17. The Manubia, Tunis 

. 192 

18. The Marabout at the Bab El Khaderi 

. 192 

19. The Goat for the Ziara, Gafsa 

. 224 

20. The Shrine of Sidi Sa'ad, Tunis 

. 226 

21. The Courtyard .... 
7 

226 

8 LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

i \' on pAog 

22. The River where the Dances are held . . 228 

23. The Sacred Tree ..... 228 

24. The Entrance to the drove . . . 230 

25. The Spiril ' \\', II ..... 230 

26. The Stone Shelters and the Rag-Offerings . . 234 

27. Liu Sadiya ...... 240 

28. The Veiled Offerings in the Gidan Kuri . . 270 

29. The " Holy of Holies " . . . . 270 

30. The Temple of "The Little Spots " . . 274 

31. The Gidan Belik ..... 274 

32. The Recess in the Gidan Belik . . . 284 

33. The Sacrificial Altar .... 284 

34. Censing the Sacrificial Goat . . . 286 

35. Feeding with the Special Foods . . . 286 

36. Spirits of the Great Mallams praying . . 298 

37. Uwal Yara, the Render .... 298 

38. The Spirit-Prince and his Bori-Barber . . 304 

39. The Spirit of the Lamp and the Butcher's Daughter 314 

40. The Climber and the Lesser Mallams 

41. The Whip Demon .... 

42. Two Tripoli Bori .... 

43. The Spirit of the Snake 

44. Kuri, the Lord of the Black Spirits 

45. Doguwa — the Half-Spirit of the City 

46. Doguwa — the Half-Spirit of the Bush 

47. The Spirits of Drunkenness at Tripoli 

48. The Spirits of Fire, Leprosy and Sleeping-Sickness 

49. The Bori Blacksmiths 

314 
322 
322 

330 
330 
334 
334 
338 
338 
340 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 9 

Facing pack 

50. The Hornet Demon .... 340 

51. Disreputable Jinns .... 350 

52. The Parade of the Youthful Bori . . . 350 

53. The Warrior- Jinns ..... 358 

54. The Spirits of Deafness and other Complaints . 358 

55. Mai-Lema and his Comrades . . . 368 

56. " The Little Spots "—the Girls . . .378 

57. " The Little Spots "—the Boys . . .378 

58. The Spirits of the Dog, the Lion, and the Hyasna . 384 

59. The Water Jinns ..... 384 

60. The Spirits of the Monkey, Crab, Vulture and others 390 

61. The Final Jumping at Tripoli . . . 390 

FIGURES IN THE TEXT 

i. A Pot for Dabga . 

57 

2. A Cooking Utensil . 

74 

3. A Cooking Utensil . 

74 

4. The Stove . 

74 

5. A Cooking Utensil . 

75 

6. Painted Eyebrows . 

115 

7. Hand stained with Henna 

115 

8. Hand stained with Henna 

115 

9. Votive Clogs 

155 

10. Votive Clogs 

155 

11. A Sign against the Evil Eye 

176 

12. A Sign against the Evil Eye 

176 

13. A Frame for censing Clothes 

236 

14. A Supernatural Being 

245 

15. An Evil Bird 

246 

16. Music — A Song to Allah 

. 252 

17. Music — A Song to Mallam Alhaji 

252 

18. Music — A Song to Mallam Alkali 

. 252 

19. Music — A Song to Yerima . 

. 252 

20. Music — A Song to Kuri 

. 252 

21. Music — A Song to Doguwa 

. 252 

22. Music — A Song to Jigo 

. 252 

II 

12 

FIGURES FN THE TEXT 

PAOI 

2 ;. 

Music A Song to Jato 

• 252 

34 

Mw 11 A Song to An^tzuri 

. 252 

85' 

Mu^ic — A Song to Ismaila . 

. 252 

26. 

M11 sic A Song to Dodo Ibrahim . 

. 252 

-7- 

Plan dI the Gidan Kuri 

. 270 

28. 

A Basin shaped Drum 

. 282 

29. 

Clappers ..... 

. 282 

30. 

n ns upon a Drum 

. 282 

3i- 

Drum with Hole for the Snake-Spirit 

. 282 

.;••■ 

A Guitar ..... 

. 283 

33- 

A Vase-shaped Drum 

283 

34- 

The Spear of Sarikin Rafi . 

3ii 

35- 

The Spear of Sarikin Masu 

3ii 

36. 

A Koraiya ..... 

319 

37- 

The Stick of Sarikin Makafi 

322 

38- 

Kuri's Pestle .... 

330 

39- 

Kuri's Throwing-Stick 

330 

40. 

Kuri's Club . 

330 

4i- 

The Throwing-Stick of Jam Maraki 

336 

42. 

A Spear of the Warrior Spirits 

355 

43- 

A Spear of the Warrior Spirits 

355 

44. 

Jaruma's Spear . 

355 

45- 

Ba-Absini's Spear . 

361 

46. 

A Skittle of the Yayan Jidderi 

376 

47- 

Ba-Absinis Rattle . 

479 

FOREWORD 

I had been hoping for several years to visit Tunis and 
Tripoli, but owing to various causes I was unable to attain 
the fulfilment of my desires until last February, and as 
just a few days before starting a Worts grant at Cam- 
bridge was approved, I set forth all the more anxious to 
make the most of the time. My wife went with me to 
Tunis and helped me, but as this book is a record of work 
and not of personal anecdotes, no allusion is made to our- 
selves except -where necessary in connection with some 
particular statement. 

We had four months in North Africa, but this would not 
have been anything like enough had I not already known 
the language, and had help on the spot not been forth- 
coming. I desire, therefore, to thank specially Mr Alfred 
Dickson, H.B.M.'s Consul at Tripoli, who lent me a room 
in which to question my informants, and has since replied 
to several questions, and Mr A. V. Liley of the North 
African Mission at Tunis, also for the loan of a room, and 
for accompanying me and taking some photographs. 
Just before leaving Tunis we had the good fortune to meet 
Miss Matthews, whom I took to the temple where she pro- 
cured the autochrome from which the frontispiece has 
been produced, and since my return Mr W. J. W. Roome 
of the Sudan United Mission has sent me two photographs 
of the bori on the Benue. My director of studies when up 
at Cambridge, Dr A. C. Haddon, F.R.S., has been most 
kind in offering valuable suggestions and criticisms, and 
13 

! , //// B iv OF rm B0R1 

l >r k. R, M.'iirtt oi Oxford has helped to iome extent in a 
similar manner. I must not forget al o lient. G. R. K. 

't, wii.i has again questioned some <»f his men in 

ri;i upon }»>ints scut to him from X< »i t Ji Afrit a. Most 
"I the photographs were taken with a Newman & 

Guardia i amera, a few an- from an Ensignette, and it is 
because of the I hemical sul)stances in the water, and of 
the Uu k "I ■! dark room thai the results arc not quite so 

good as I had hoped certainly it is through uo fault of 
the materials. These remark ;ipply particularly to the 
photograph oi the sai red well and to those of the 
dancing at Tripoli, some of which have had to be 

touched up. The drawings arc Hiss Clarke's. 

Hausa Superstitions and Customs (which dealt with the 
folk-lore of the people in their own country) contained a 
good deal about the magic and religion, and no material 
given there is repeated here or even referred to except 
where confirmation or comparison has seemed advisable, 
so that book and this may be considered as the comple- 
ment of each other, even though they mostly deal with 
different parts of Africa. New rules of spelling Hausa 
words have been laid down lately, and I have conformed to 
them in this book and in Hausa Folk-Tales, which contains 
the original text. At first sight, I may seem to have 
wandered a little from the subject of demons, but this is 
not so in reality, for to understand thoroughly the beliefs 
of the people, one must first become acquainted with the 
conditions under which they live, and it is then seen that 
the shape of their bodies, their dress, their food, and even 
their most simple actions are governed by their religion. 
In its broadest sense, therefore, this branch of anthropology 
is as much concerned with the price of matches (for a fire- 
spirit is a necessity in their absence) as with the dimensions 

FOREWORD 15 

of a skull, the shape of which depends to some extent upon 
the activities of the demons, for it must be massaged. 

In the portions dealing with the belief in spirits (bori) 
I have tried to enter into the Hausas' own thoughts, or " to 
think black," and although some strange and apparently 
contradictory statements are made, I have striven not to 
analyse them too severely since my return here to England, 
but to preserve the African atmosphere and attitude of 
mind in which they were given me, for there is no doubt 
about the opinions of the Hausas. For that reason the 
exact words of the narrator have been given in many 
places. It is seldom that I have had connected descrip- 
tions of any length, however, and nearly everything had 
to be eked out by questioning. But anyone who has done 
field work will easily recognise from the arrangement that 
which has been given freely, and that which has come in 
reply to a question. The material in the body of the book 
is all my own except where the contrary is expressly stated, 
but it is impossible in a work of this kind to forbear from 
giving comparisons or confirmation from other authors. 
These I have reserved for two concluding chapters and for 
notes, but as footnotes spoil the sale of a book so far as 
the general public is concerned, the remarks have been 
collected together in appendices. The student, therefore, 
will find all that he requires, I hope, while the ordinary 
reader will not be bothered with arguments. 

The material has been left to a great extent in the form 
in which it was received, and this needs a word of explana- 
tion. One might have arranged most of the spirits into 
definite and distinct classes according to their origin, and 
this appeals more to the orderly European mind, but it 
would have been quite contrary to the Hausa conception, 
for all are now equally " bori." Three different persons 

e6 THE H l.v <)/■ THE BORI 

gave tne Hats, and the arrangi men1 in each was pia< tically 
the Bame, 1 1 »« - spirit ben • classed according to their 
position in their city of Jan Gari. still, although the di 
tiiiriion between the different kind of bori in West A 
is no longer recognised, there is ;i line dividing ofl those 
which have come from the north of the continent, though 
even here it will be seen that i srtain individi al spirits 
have strayed over the boundary (e.g. Bcbe and W'.iwa), 
because of their similarity to some on the otlierside — and, 
with the bori as with human beings, like seeks out like. 
There seems to be but little doubt that totemism with the 
Hausas was a result of the belief in bori, and that the 
killing of the king was in every way comparable to the 
sacrifice of the sacred animal. 

Finally, I wish to say that every statement has been 
fully corroborated except where otherwise stated, my 
principal authorities being : — 

Haj Ali (see Illustration No. 6 and others), a Hausa of 
Gobir who has lived in Alexandria, Tripoli, and Tunis, 
and has been back to the Hausa states upon more 
than one occasion. He is one of the heads of the 
Masu-Bori. 

Salah (No. 5 and others), a half-Hausa, half -Arab, born 
in Zinder. He has revisited Nigeria. He is the chief 
boka (or bori medicine-man) of Tunis. 

Tanko, a half-Hausa, half-Asben, now living in 
Tripoli. 

Auta (No. 54 and others), a Hausa of Zaria, a hunter, 
now living in Tunis. 

Abd Allah (No. 36 and others), a half-Hausa, half- 
Nupe, one of the drummers of the Masu-Bori, now in 
Tunis. 

FOREWORD 17 

Khameis (No. 5 and others), son of Salah, one of the 
principal Masu-Bori of Tunis. 

Mai-Nassara (No. 36 and others), one of the bori 
drummers of Tunis. 

Hassan (No. 12), " King of the Slaves," chief of the 
community at Tunis. 

Nassar (No. 27 and others), one of the bori musicians of 
Tunis. 

The Chief Priestess of the principal temple at Tunis 
(No. 7 and others). 

The Chief Priestess of the principal temple at Tripoli. 

Khadeza (No. 34 and others), a priestess of the principal 
temple at Tunis. 

Fedia or Khadejia, wife of Auta, one of the drummers 
for the women's dances at Tunis. 

In addition to the above, a number of other people, each 
of whom I saw only for a short time, answered a few 
questions, put usually to confirm or deny something told 
me by the above. 

Demon-dancing is not by any means a new subject, but 
I think that I may claim for the Hausas a much more 
definite and lengthy cast of characters than is found at 
the dances elsewhere in the world, and for myself the 
fullest account of such rites and their signification yet 
published wherever practised. Whether the idea of inocu- 
lation exists elsewhere I am unable to say, but it is so 
natural that I think that it will be found with further 
study. Readers of this book and of Hausa Superstitions 
and Customs will find much that is familiar to them if 
they have read accounts of European witchcraft, and 
the question may be asked, " Is there anything in 
common between the Hausa Mai-Bori and the English 

1 8 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

witch ? " Undoubtedly there is, as I hope to show in 
a future volume. 

A. J. N. T. 
Blackheath, January 1914. 

P.S. — I am now back in North Africa, where the paged 
proofs are being corrected, and although no additions 
can be made to this volume, I hope to be able to submit 
further material later. In the index will be found transla- 
tions of Hausa words used in the text. 

A. J. N. T. 

Tripoli, 2yd April 1914. 

THE BAN OF THE BORI 

CHAPTER I 

INTRODUCTION 

When one speaks to a Hausa, he sees only one individual, 
but in reality he is addressing himself to four or five beings, 
the number depending usually upon whether the person 
with whom he is conversing is married or not. 

First there is the visible body which contains the soul 
and the life, the former being situated in the heart, the 
latter wandering at will all over the body. Sometimes 
outside of the body, sometimes in the head, is the familiar 
bori of the same sex, a kind of second soul, and yet in a 
way separate, for it acts as an intermediary between its 
human host and the denizens of the jinn country generally. 
From about puberty until marriage, most Hausas have 
another bori, but of the opposite sex, with which they have 
relations, and when a boy or girl thinks of marriage he 
or she must consult his or her female or male bori, for it 
does not like being ousted by a human rival — hence the 
precautions taken to protect the bride and bridegroom. 
Lastly, there are two angels, one hovering above the right 
shoulder, the other over the left, which record the good and 
evil thoughts of the person to whom they are attached. 

The above are closely connected with the body, but 
there is a world of spirits also which are more or less 
inimical to human beings unless propitiated, or unless they 
19 

20 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

happen to be totems. These also are called bori, but they 
have other names, and it is evident from various signs 
that they are a mixture of Moslem marabouts (the Mal- 
lams), Semitic jinns (such as Uwal Yara), representatives 
of other — probably hostile — tribes (Yem Yem), pagan 
ancestors {e.g. Ba-Maguje), spirits of infants (the Little 
Spots), totems (the lion), nature gods both borrowed 
(Sarikin Rah) and local (Kuri) and fetishes — those with 
a tsere, an object which they inhabit. These bori are 
now regarded as being responsible for the various ill- 
nesses suffered by mankind, and are propitiated accord- 
ingly by offerings and sacrifices, by the setting apart of 
certain rooms as temples for their use, and by being 
honoured with dances — or rather, rites — during which 
certain of the worshippers (the sect of the Masu-Bori) 
become temporarily possessed or " ridden " by the spirits. 
The object of these performances is comparable in a way 
to that of inoculation, for by inducing the disease demons 
to enter the dancers who are ready for them — and who, 
owing to their special preparations, will not suffer evil 
effects — they hope that the bori will leave them in peace 
at other times, when visits would be exceedingly incon- 
venient and perhaps dangerous. If for bori we read 
bacillus, we shall find that the Hausa tabus are at least as 
intelligible to us as are our sanitary regulations to certain 
alien denizens of the London slums. 

The Hausa 's whole existence is occupied in combating 
these evil influences. Before birth special means are 
taken to prevent an unfriendly bori obtaining possession 
of the baby, and directly after he has made his appearance 
into the world more precautions are necessary7. During 
childhood and puberty Uwal Yara and others are almost 
certain to give trouble, and marriage, as we have seen, is 

INTRODUCTION 21 

a particularly dangerous time, for then even the friendly 
bori becomes a foe. No house, and therefore no town, 
can be built without permission, and, in fact, the whole 
organisation of the community was due to the bori, for 
totemism and even king-killing were part of the cult. 
All through life, neglect or an unintentional slight to a 
bori will bring immediate punishment, and even if, by 
proper attention to the rites, the Hausa manages to escape 
the more serious illnesses and misfortunes, he will have 
to succumb at the end when claimed by the spirit of old 
age, Mallam Tsofo. Although, therefore, Allah is sup- 
posed to be The One God, above all, it is the bori which 
receive all the real attention.1 

It will be understood from the foregoing that the 
religion of the-Hausas of North Africa is a medley, con- 
sisting of (a) what they remember of their own, taught 
them in their childhood, distorted, no doubt, by many 
years' absence ; (b) what they have learned from later 
travellers from their own and other countries of West 
Africa, this already having been contaminated by local 
mixtures ; and (c) what has been forced upon them by 
their contact with the Arabs and other inhabitants of 
North Africa, whose beliefs and customs vary in different 
parts of the country. It is therefore absolutely impossible 
to say in every case that some particular rite is practised 
in all the colonies of North Africa, for differences are 
found amongst members of the same colony, even amongst 
worshippers at the same temple. Thus Haj Ali was a 
Gobir who was taken to Alexandria, whence he proceeded 
to Tripoli, and is now in Tunis, married to a woman of 
Twat. How different are the influences to which he has 
been subject from those which have acted upon Fedia, a 
woman of Daura, married first to an Arab in Zinder, and 

22 THE B IX OF THE BORI 

now to a Hau^.i of Zaria, bu1 who has spent most 61 lior 
life in Tn ni . Wi ii would be quite wrong to ignore every- 
thing which either of these two believes and does, jn.st 

becaiiM- one i ould nol trace a Hausa origin. Many others 
a iv placed in similar circumstances, and there soon 
develops a certain average standard — a kind of common 
law — by which all the members of the particular com- 
munity are regulated. Whatever their origin, their beliefs 
and customs arc now " North-African-Hausa," even if 
they be not " Nigerian -Hausa," though even in the old 
Hausa States great differences have been noted. 

Before becoming impatient with the Hausa for his con- 
fused idea of the bori, we may remember that certain of 
us hold that the saints are everywhere at the same time — 
and so every worshipper, in whatever part of the globe he 
may be situated, can have his supplication heard imme- 
diately— yet the saints are specially in the vicinity of 
churches, while the devil, some clerics would have us 
believe, is always hanging about outside public -houses. 
The Hausa holds much the same ideas, for whereas the 
bori are supposed to be everywhere, yet most of them are 
to be found in the temples (the same spirits in each), and 
can even be imprisoned in them, while Jato prefers a 
drain, and whereas we often name a church after a saint, 
their temples are called after a particular bori. There is 
a further similarity, for surely conjuring a bori to reveal 
some hidden treasure does not differ essentially from a 
request to St Anthony of Padua, say, to find something 
which one has lost — for in either case if the person be not 
successful a new patron will be approached. 

There seems to be great confusion in the Hausa mind 
owing to the fact that the old and the new spirits and 
demons have been assimilated, and Islam has been imposed 

INTRODUCTION 23 

upon the people, for when each clan or town had its own 
special spirits, it would expect particular attention from 
them, and this is seen in the fact that when the people 
of old fought, their gods assisted them — hence the warrior 
jinns. There is still a survival of this belief showing itself, 
therefore, although all the bori are now said to be omni- 
present, and the Hausa can hardly be expected to abandon 
the idea altogether, when we remember that in a European 
war each nation believes that the Almighty is specially 
upon its own particular side. The converse is shown in 
the First Commandment, which we still recite, though 
explaining away its original meaning, and probably in 
Psalms xcv. 3, 7, xcvi. 4, 5, and xcvii. 7 may be 
gathered something of the Hausa's ideas of Allah and of 
His power, growing from a mere king of gods into The 
Only One, while the others became less and less im- 
portant, until they were no longer gods but spirits, and 
servants of the God. 

It is only to be expected that the religious and magical 
beliefs have become greatly modified through contact 
with the Arabs, and it is extremely difficult — as will be 
seen — to distinguish what has been brought from West 
Africa, and what has been bred locally, but where possible 
I have tried to do so. It is somewhat strange to find 
that whereas in Nigeria we have forbidden the practice 
of the bori rites in consideration of the Filani protests, 
here in North Africa (which is surely more Mohammedan) 
the negroes are encouraged to continue them, because 
their magic is acknowledged to be much more powerful 
that than of the pure and undefiled True-Believers. In 
fact, in Tunis, one of the cousins of the Bey has a private 
bori temple, and in Tripoli several members of the Kara- 
manli encouraged the rites. And in saying this it must 

24 THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

not be thought thai I wish to belittle them foril in anyway. 
Quite to the i ontxary, for they were good enough to help 
me, and I certainly enjoyed the performances. All I 

Wish I" suggest is thai we may have been a little too ready 

to listen to the Mohammedans in our West Afrii an po 
sions. More than that, While prohibiting all kinds oi 
heathen magic, we pu1 no ban upon Koranic charms, thus 

driving the pagans to Eslam, for the native (like the 
European) will have an amulet or mascot of some kind, 
and lie mUSl appease the evil spirits. 

Not all of even the Kansas are .Mohammedans as yet, 
some, known as the Magazawa (in the singular, Ba- 
Maguje, possibly from Majusun, and meaning fire- 
worshipper),2 still indulge in pagan rites. Some say that 
the Magazawa were once Mohammedans, and that they 
recanted, but it is more likely that they were never con- 
verted— though it is quite possible that they pretended to 
embrace the faith during the Filani conquest, so as to 
save themselves from extermination. At any rate, the 
belief of the Hausas of North Africa in the superior 
efficacy of their home-made charms and spells is very 
strongly implanted, and, as has been said, the Arabs are of 
the same opinion. 

It is time to bring these preliminary remarks to a close, 
but I hope that I have been able to state the general 
idea as clearly as — or, rather, no less vaguely than — it 
was expressed to me. We must now descend from the 
abstract to the concrete, and, by following the Hausa 
through his daily life, see how real a thing to him is the 
ban of the bori.3 

CHAPTER II 

THE ORIGIN OF THE HAUSA COLONIES IN NORTH AFRICA 

All over North Africa are to be found colonies of West 
Africans, living their lives more or less apart, and speaking 
their own languages. They are apart in a metaphorical 
sense — one can be very lonely in a strange gay city — for 
they have never been allowed to intermarry with the 
Arabs, although they are forced to live in their houses. 
Most of them were taken in slavery some thirty to fifty 
years ago, and although no longer slaves, they have no 
status. Speaking generally, they are not allowed to 
congregate and build houses of their own pattern, the round 
hut for which their hearts yearn, but must rent rooms from 
their former masters. It is no wonder, therefore, that they 
are downtrodden and suspicious, and that their pleasures 
are characterised more by fanaticism than by the childish 
light-heartedness shown in their old country. All are 
steeped in magic, and no event happens to them which 
has not been caused by a spirit in answer to their own 
prayer or to that of an enemy. 

Many of these negroes — including the Hausas with 
whom I am concerned — have been brought from our own 
protectorates, and they are intensely proud of what they 
regard as their British citizenship. It would be of no use 
to tell them that they are not British subjects at all, since, 
owing to political convenience and legal technicality, 
Northern Nigeria is not a part of the King's dominions. 
They are never tired of asserting that they are " Inglisi,"for 
25 

26 Till BA V OF THE BORI 

they do H'.i care very much for the French, and they fear 
the Italians, being strangers, although, really, they have 
no reai on to i omplain of the- European conquerors in cither 
country. They were continually inquiring if I had come 
to take them home, for they are still sojourners in a strange 
land, and I could not help feeling that to repatriate them 
would be an act worthy of a great empire. We have 
always been solicitous of the welfare of African natives 
in the Congo and elsewhere. Can we not remember that 
charity begins at home ? Of course there are no atrocities 
to be exposed in Tunis, nor even in Tripoli, but the sentence 
of banishment from everything dear to them naturally 
causes the Hausas suffering. Great Britain has an 
honoured name even now in North Africa, but an act 
such as this would raise it far above that of any other 
throughout the world. The Mohammedans would care 
but little, for the people are no longer their slaves. Surely 
we can make an effort. I do not think that either the 
French or the Italians would object, because their own 
labouring classes can do all the work which now falls to 
the Hausas. One or two ships might be sufficient — and 
we have so many ! 

The origin of the Hausa colonies in North Africa, there- 
fore, is mainly due to the Arab slave-raiders, but a few of 
the people have come voluntarily, either on a trading 
expedition or on a pilgrimage to Mecca. Some reached 
the Holy City, some never got farther than where they are 
now, while many merchants, after a successful deal, were 
robbed of all their possessions. Some of the women have 
borne children to their Arab masters (though no Hausa 
man could marry an Arab woman), so the colonies have 
become somewhat mixed, and all the members speak 
Arabic. Indeed, while some of the older people have 

THE ORIGIN OF THE HAUSA COLONIES 27 

forgotten their mother-tongue, many of the children have 
never been taught it, though I was much interested to find 
that a certain old rule of grammar (the feminine in a) was 
much more strictly observed in North Africa than in 
Nigeria, where there has been a development — a parallel, 
I suppose, to the French spoken in Canada. 

Perhaps it was natural that the Hausas should desire to 
make out that they were really no strangers to the soil 
(we know how the Italians emphasise the existence of the 
Roman remains in Tripoli), so those of Tunis traced their 
origin from there, though they conceded a little to the 
popular theory in allowing that the route taken was via 
the Fezzan. From Carthage to Kano, therefore, was their 
march, according to them, long before the movement in 
the contrary direction set in. But it might be as well to 
start from the beginning, and give their explanation of 
the appearance of man upon earth. 

One informant told me that at first the world was smoke,1 
and that when it had settled down, Allah created animals, 
fishes, birds, and men ; there were no bori then. But 
certain of the people were bad-tempered and did ill, and 
because of this, Allah turned some into evil spirits, the 
aljannu or bori — which although like men are not human 
beings, and cannot be seen when in the cities of men — 
others into ayu (manattee), which are half-fish and half- 
man, but have to live in the water. Some of the pagan 
spirits were supposed to be deceased ancestors who had 
died as men — one cannot say a " natural death," because 
there is no such thing, according to native ideas. Appar- 
ently the bori were condemned to remain for ever in the 
state in which they then were (or more probably the state 
in which they were when the fusion of the cults took place) 
for, as is pointed out in Chapter XVIII., except in their 

28 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

cityof Jan Gari, the old ones do not < lie, and the young ones 
never grow up. Now, Allah is high above all ; below Him, 
in the seven layei • ol heaven, arc the angels. Men :irc 
upon earth, and in some contused way the bori are sup- 
Mo be below them in the seven layers of earth down to 
the internal sea. Yet the bori are al o dxjve the earth, 
and are confounded with the angels, for they are supposed 
to execute the commands of Allah — the belief in angels is 
still too new to the Hausa to be fixed definitely. The 
souls are Upon the earth in the Well of Life, " far, far away 
in the Cityof The South." 

Allah first created Adam and Eve, according to another 
man, and (hey brought forth two white children, a boy and 
a girl. One day while Adam was sleeping, a certain part 
of his anatomy became exposed to view, and this amused 
the son, who began to laugh. Adam woke up, and was so 
angry that he cursed his son, and on his asking Allah to 
turn him black, the boy's colour immediately began to 
change. But just then an angel flew up, and, having 
scolded Adam for doing this, he told the son to run to a lake 
near by, and to wash himself at once. Adam's curse could 
not be recalled, however,2 for when the son arrived at the 
lake, he found that all the water had dried up. He put 
his hand on the bed of the lake to get some water, and there 
was just enough to wet his palms (that is why they are 
white to this day), so, finding none with which to wash his 
face, he ran on to a deeper part. But again he was too 
late, for he could procure no water, only his feet became 
a little damp. He returned to his father's home and 
remained there, later on marrying his sister, and of their 
offspring some were white and some black, and so the 
people of the world became divided. 

The latter is evidently a corrupt version of the story in 

THE ORIGIN OF THE HAUSA COLONIES 29 

Genesis (ix. 22-25) °f Noah and his son, and Noah comes 
further into the legend, for he is supposed to have landed 
upon a saddled-backed mountain near the city of Tunis. 
It was even said that the large anchors kept in one of the 
mosques at Kairuan came from the Ark. But this does 
not seem to be a general belief. In Tripoli and in Nigeria, 
in fact, I was told that the Ark grounded actually in Bornu. 
At any rate, Noah eventually went south to Kuka, and 
there married some of the local negresses, giving rise to the 
Kanuri and also to the Hausas. As has been stated in 
The Niger and the West Sudan (where the question of origin 
is argued fully), the name " Bornu " is said to have come 
from the words Bahar and Nuhu, " the Sea of Noah " — 
i.e. Lake Chad,3 and Bello, Sultan of Sokoto, wishing to 
deride the Hausas whom his people, the Filani, had 
conquered, ascribed their origin to a slave from Bornu. 
He excepted the Gobirawa, however, maintaining that 
they were descended from the Copts of Egypt. One man, 
Tanko, an Asben, said that the Hausas originated in 
Gwanja, the centre of the kola-nut cultivation, and that 
it was through the trade in these nuts that the Hausas 
spread in all directions. I had not heard of this idea 
before, and it is certainly not generally held by the Hausas 
themselves. 

With Tunis, therefore, as well as with Tripoli and 
Alexandria, the Hausas consider that they have some 
connection, although this does not prevent them from 
longing to return to their own country. Those of us who 
have spent some of our years abroad — even voluntarily — 
can surely understand this feeling ! 

CHAPTER III 

TOTEMISM AND KING-KILLING 

The Hausas of Tunis and Tripoli, although scattered in 
houses belonging to people of another race, are banded 
together by two bonds. They elect chiefs amongst them- 
selves who will apportion the available work (building, 
etc.) amongst them, and they have bori (spirit) houses or 
temples with regularly appointed priestesses, the members 
of which form distinct communities. Neither the chief nor 
the chief priestess need always be a Hausa, but both will 
be West Africans, and the woman must be able to speak 
the language, for she has to direct the performances, 
but not even this is necessary in the case of the chief, the 
one at Sfax being able to talk nothing but Arabic. Neither 
office is hereditary, for special qualifications are required ; 
the man must be honest and possessed of good judgment, 
„the woman must have the virtue of continency — and 
will almost certainly be a widow or an ancient divorcee. 
Birth, therefore, has nothing to do with the selection of 
the person to fill either office. 

The organisation of the modern Hausa state is described 
in Hausa Superstitions and Customs,1 so it is unnecessary 
to go into the subject at length here. Suffice it to say 
that every profession in every town (even that of thieving) 
and every tiny village has its head with his train of 
retainers, and these are subject to a chief and suite of a 
larger town, who again is under the great man of the 
whole district, the latter being responsible to the Sultan. 

Between the people of certain districts there is what is 

30 

2. — Tunisian Fashions. 3. — Nigerian Fashions. 

TOTEMISM AND KING-KILLING 31 

called a wasa (game) — i.e. an understanding that they 
may behave to each other as if they were members of the 
same family. Haj Ali of Gobir and Auta of Zaria had 
such a wasa between them, because long ago, when the 
Hausa states were first formed, the King of Gobir came to 
Zaria with the intention of attacking the city, although 
the people were of the same stock. Now, although the 
ancestor, Zaria, is said to have been a male, the people are 
known as Zazaga, and by a special meaning, females. 
So when the Gobirawa arrived, the King of Zaria, feeling 
unequal to the contest, ordered his people to bring cala- 
bashes, mortars, and other female domestic implements, 
and all marched out to the enemy's camp. The King of 
Gobir was very much surprised, naturally, and asked 
why they had come to meet him with household utensils 
instead of with weapons, as men ought to have done ; they 
were no better than a lot of women. The King of Zaria 
replied : " We are only women, and your sisters, so we have 
come to welcome the warriors." The King of Gobir was 
ashamed, and since that day there has been a truce between 
the two countries, an entente which is observed wherever 
the people happen to be. Owing to this, should Haj Ali 
put on a new garment, or his old one inside out, Auta can 
claim a present, and vice versa. But this is not all. One 
must pay something to the other on his marriage, before he 
may consummate it, again at the birth of a child, and if 
the other finds the child running about in the streets. 
Lastly, at death, a present of flour must be given before 
the body may be buried. Should the fee not be paid, the 
claimant may keep property of the defaulter and, appar- 
ently, if the latter were so lost to decency as to appeal 
to the authorities, he would lose his suit — or the relatives 
would in the last case. 

//// B I.Y OF THE BORI 

The <.i: . i! ! an- mi o| the lx.ri communities iii North 
Africa is In A d<-.-< i i be cl in the < hapters on spirits ; they 
.in . « • 1 1 1 j »> - cd of people from different parts of Ni 

i ighbouring i onntries , and they do not depend upon 
totemism in any way, in Eai t tin- bond <»f tin- kan-gida 

(" lie ul <>i the i "ii <• ") i> hardly ivi Ognised now, id.!'. 

The amount of information obtainable upon thesubj<< l 
of totemism was very small, unfortunately, for the older 
Hausas seem to have forgotten their totems, and the 
younger ones never knew them, but the following scraps 
were elicited, most being from Haj Ali and Salah, though 
Auta is responsible for the first two paragraphs. 

The members of a clan regarded the totem as sacred ; 
they did not kill it upon ordinary occasions, and they were 
supposed never to eat it. But each year at harvest-time — 
before the crops had been gathered in — the totem (ah 
a beast, reptile, fish, bird, or plant, never an inanimate 
object) was killed by the chief men of the clan. The 
flesh was buried with the skeleton, but all the members of 
the clan smeared a little of the blood upon their faces, and 
the head was dried in the sun, and then kept in the hut of 
the chief until the next harvest season, when it was re- 
placed by a new skull.2 Every person had to wash his 
or her body at least three days in advance, and to be 
continent from that time until a day or two after the 
conclusion of the rites. If a member had killed the totem 
at any other time by accident, he would not have been 
punished ; if he had eaten of it, however, even unknow- 
ingly, he would have become ill ; and if he had killed it 
intentionally he would certainly have died, the punishment 
being meted out perhaps by the familiar bori of the animal 
itself (seep. 382). 

The totem was a brother. Children inherited those of 

TOTEMISM AND KING-KILLING 33 

their fathers, women retaining these on marriage. No 
person had more than one totem, and the sexes had not 
different ones. A man might marry a woman with the 
same or with a different totem, according to Auta, and this 
is in accordance with what has been found in Nigeria 
amongst the Magazawa of to-day. 

Haj Ali (a Ba-Maguje, converted to Mohammedanism 
after having been taken in slavery to Egypt) told me 
that a woman would still continue to sacrifice to her 
father's (and, therefore, still her own) totem after marriage ; 
she would give her husband the choice of allowing her to 
sacrifice near the house, or else of giving her leave to go 
home to join in the rites with her father, and the former 
would almost certainly be the husband's choice. 

He says that not every totem was killed, and that in any 
case it would not be put to death each year.3 A child took 
the totem of his father, but a man would sacrifice to his 
mother's totem occasionally so that the bokas (medicine- 
men) of her clan should not become angry with him. Haj 
Ali's father's totem was the shamowa (the red-legged horn- 
bill), and, because it was accustomed to rest in the kiriya, 
that tree was also sacred, and was in some way connected 
with the bird. Tree-totems were not cut down. One 
knew when they had lost their virtue, for they withered 
and gradually died, and on the first sign of this they were 
deserted, others being substituted for them. 

When a sacrifice was offered to the shamowa and kiriya, 
the rites were as follows. Two new cloths, one black and 
one white, were wrapped around the trunk of the tree. 
Millet (guinea-corn) was ground from early morning, and 
at noon the flour thus produced was, by mixing it with 
water, made into jura, and drunk. Then a black bull was 
killed, if available, or a black he-goat, and some of the 
c 

;i ////•; H !.V <>!■ Till: H0R1 

blood was smeared upon the trunk, the rest being led by 
a channel into the roots of the tree ; but there was no 
divination from the entrails. The flesh was eaten, the 

head was buried. The chief (who was also chief priest) 
and four other priests donned the hide in turn,4 and they 
and the other worshippers danced round the tree (all 
the people were there, men, women and children) and the 
flesh was eaten. On the fourth day another bull was 
sai nth t (1. and on the seventh day, at midnight, a he-goat, 
every part of this except the flesh being buried in the hole 
already made for the blood of the bull. The worshippers 
then washed their hands over the hole. Early next 
morning the hole was closed up, and the people went home, 
taking care not to look back until they had arrived at their 
town. When they had reached the gate, they performed 
a symbolic washing of hands and face, and threw their 
hands towards the place of sacrifice (just as is done when 
trying to cast off the evil eye), and they entered the town, 
the ceremonies being then at an end. This washing 
was to prevent any contamination entering the town, as, 
apparently, it would have been very dangerous there 
though not outside. " Magical influence must not be 
brought to the house." After the worshippers had 
gone, the shamowa would alight upon the ground, and 
drink some of the blood. Haj Ali (in contradistinction 
to his first statement) and Salah both said that a young 
bird was taken from his nest and killed each year. 

Each Thursday night it was necessary to pour fresh milk 
on the ground at the foot of a pole erected by the door, 
the jigo, to represent the kiriya,6 but the blood offering 
took place only once a year. 

Haj Ali's mother's totem was another tree, the faru, and 
being a Mai-Bori, he had to sacrifice also to the tsamiya or 

TOTEM ISM AND KING-KILLING 35 

tamarind. Even supposing he was cold and starving, he 
would not cut any of these trees, nor would he eat any 
food which had been cooked by a fire made with the logs 
of any of them. If he were travelling along and came 
upon these three trees, he would sacrifice to all if possible, 
but if he had only one fowl, he would kill it at the foot of 
the kiriya, that being connected with his father's totem ; 
if he had another fowl, he would offer it up by the faru, for 
the totem of his mother would take precedence of that of 
his calling. 

As the shamowa has red legs, none of the unmarried 
youths or girls might stain their hands or feet with henna. 
If anyone had broken this tabu he Would have sickened 
and died for the uwar-gida (mother of the house) or kan- 
gida (head of the house) would naturally have been angry 
at young persons trying to dress like her. Men also might 
not adorn their eyes with antimony until after marriage. 
Another informant, Salah, says that the prohibition lasted 
only while the shamowa was at home — it migrates yearly. 

According to Haj Ali's account, the practices of king- 
killing and the sacrifice of the totem seem to have been 
connected. In the Lion, Leopard, and kindred clans, the 
totem animal was controlled by the priest-chief, or, as 
Professor Frazer calls him, the priestly king (known as 
" the Lion of the Town " or otherwise, according to the 
particular totem) and four other priests. Why the 
animal was first adopted is not now known, but the 
following was the procedure for securing a new representa- 
tive animal in Haj Ali's time, according to him. 

When the people had seen that the totem was becom- 
ing powerless, or was allowing — perhaps even helping — 
some other town to become more prosperous than those 
actually worshipping the animal, the five priests would 

36 THE B IV OF THE BORI 

burn incense one ni^ht , and the totem would at once 
appeal and li<' down in the place appointed. The < hicf 
WOUld then lay his Complaint, and the lion WOllld nod or 

shake his head according as he admitted or denied the 
accusations. If there was no actual proof, the lion might 
be warned and allowed to go again on promising to take 
more (are of his brethren, but if one of the five could say 
that he had seen the animal actually helping one of the 
other people, or actually refusing to aid one of his own 
people, the charge was held proved. Then the priestly 
king would say to the lion : " We have found you out, you 
have been a traitor to us, and we are going to kill you." 
The lion would not struggle, for it would know that it was 
in the wrong, and the chief would catch hold of its mane 
and pull back its head, and one of the other four men 
would cut its throat. The body would then be cut open, 
and the liver, entrails, heart, and kidneys examined, and it 
would be found that some parts or all of these were black, 
thus proving that the animal had really been false to his 
followers. The skull and skin of the beast would be taken 
to the gidan tsafi (medicine-house), and left there until the 
next lion was killed, but no other part of his body would 
be used afterwards, all would be burned, for medicine 
made with it would certainly fail. A new animal would 
then be summoned, and would be appointed totem, and 
shown how to recognise his followers. 

If the priestly king had held his position for two years, 
and everything was going on well with the community, he 
might be allowed to remain in office for another year, but 
probably the other four would decide that his power was 
waning, and that a new man was required for the good of 
the town — though the chief would not necessarily be told 
this. The lion would be summoned, therefore, in the same 

TOTEM ISM AND KING-KILLING 37 

manner as before, but upon his arrival one of the four 
priests would stand forth and accuse the chief. The lion 
would at first shake his head, for the chief was his brother, 
but on proof being adduced as before, he would nod and 
admit the truth of the charge. The accuser would then 
say to the lion : " Very well, now you must kill him." 
The lion would at first refuse, but the man would say : 
" Either you must kill him or we will kill you, because if 
you do not wish to do so, it will show that you are both 
guilty," and then the lion would spring upon the chief, and 
kill him with a blow of his paw. He would not eat him, 
but directly he had killed him, he would rip open his body 
and then retire to his former position. The four men 
would then examine the entrails as before, and if there 
was any black it was known that the priestly king had been 
guilty, but if not, then it was seen that the charge was a 
false one, and the accuser would be put to death. 

In either case, the entrails were taken to the medicine- 
house in a small gourd, and left there for seven days. 
That night the lion would come and roar, and the new 
priestly king would hear and come out and take the lion 
to the medicine-hut, and the animal would examine the 
entrails. If he saw that they were of no use for protection, 
he would tell the new chief so, and then they would be 
thrown away, and everything belonging to the late chief 
would be burnt so as to thoroughly remove the evil 
influence ; but if he said that they were good, the skull 
would be split open with a sharp hatchet, and the brains 
extracted, the skull being burned. If by then there were 
many maggots in the brains, they would be buried at once, 
but if only a few, the brains would be replaced in the gidan 
tsafi for fifteen days, and then rinsed with water, and 
buried in a deep hole, together with the vessel containing 

38 THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

tkOD. H tluic ut ■!<■ DO lna^ots Si all, the brain B would 

be dried .mil ground to powderi rod sprinkled upon the 

floor of the hut. It is quite possible that it \ 

.uound to the beads oi families at one time bo as to spread 

the albaraka. albinoes wen- eaten before .1 war, it will be 
remembered.8 

The killing of the king has been sufficiently vouched for 
in Nigeria.7 In some o! the north-western districts the 
dead kin;; was wrapped in the hide of a bull while the suc- 
cessor was smeared with its blood, and perhaps had to step 
over the corpse, these customs reminding one strongly of 
the king-killing in Egypt and elsewhere. It is interesting 
to note that amongst the Shilluk, the king's wives would 
inform him of his imminent fate by spreading a piece of 
cloth over his face and knees as he lay sleeping in the after- 
noon,8 for it may be that the dance of the House Doguwa 
— which symbolises death — is connected with such a 
piactice. Perhaps the dead king (or, at any rate, his 
brain) was eaten by his successor originally — in North 
Africa the sacrificer had to eat his victim at one time — 
and the bull was substituted when this idea became too 
abhorrent. The story of why the young giant lost his 
strength (H.S.C., No. 99) resembles that of Tammuz 
and Ishtar, and it may be that this is only another version 
of tne legend of the Dying God. The eating or the stepping 
over would be for the purpose of passing on the divine 
influence to the new ruler. This is a very old idea, and 
it still exists not only in Africa but even in England, for 
not many years ago, the infant son of a dying clergyman 
(a connection of my own) was held to his father's lips in 
order to receive his last breath. The son has since been 
to Cambridge and is now in Holy Orders. 

The death of the priestly king made a vacancy in the 

TOT EM ISM AND KING-KILLING 39 

priesthood, but this was easily filled, since all men were 
anxious for the post. The others made the candidate 
swear that he would act in concert with them, that he 
would never divulge their secrets, etc., and then he was 
put to the test, and, if successful, admitted. Apparently, 
however, he had to be a relative of the deceased, for only 
a member of the same family could become chief. Still, 
it may not have been necessary for every candidate to the 
priesthood to be related, for no one would have succeeded 
merely by seniority. A vacancy might occur also because 
the eldest of the four priests had become too old for his 
work, and wished to retire. In either case, the initiation 
was the same. Should it happen that there was no pupil 
to step into the vacancy, some person was selected by the 
four and the chief, and told that he was eligible for the 
position. A certain medicine was then prepared, and four 
days later, when it was ready, the candidate would enter 
the gidan tsafi. He stayed there seven days, drinking the 
medicine, and at the end of that time he was ready for 
the first test, which was to face an aljan which appeared 
to him without a head.9 If he quaked at all, he was 
returned to the gidan tsafi for another seven days' drink- 
ing. At the end of that time he was again tried, but on 
this occasion the tests were more severe. First there 
would come a headless horse, and if the initiate showed no 
fear, the headless aljan would reappear. If still there was 
no shrinking, a donkey with no head or tail, and only 
three legs, would rush at him. If still the candidate was 
brave, a snake would come and open its mouth at him, 
and, if this test also was passed, a horseman would charge 
at him, and make as if to cut him down with his sword. 
This was the last trial of his fortitude, and if successful in it, 
the initiate was taken by the priests and washed in a large 

40 THE BAN 01 THE B0R1 

i alabash, the i hief and the othen pouring tin- medii ine 
upon his in ad. Two of the four prie q then bold b hand 

ea< li, while the othen tied a Leather skis in front , and then 
one behind, then a skin upon the left shoulder, then one 
upon the right, and a white cap with a gusset "t sheep's 

wool was placed upon his head.10 The totem lion would 
have been summoned to the washing, and when that rite 
had been finished, the newly appointed priest would be 
shown to him. 

The four priests (or five, if one had retired because 
aged) and the chief would then return to the gidan isafi, 
and the initiate would take a small ladle and dip it into 
one of four large jars of medicine which were kept there, 
He would hold it up, and pour the medicine back into 
the jar, continuing this until froth had appeared, and 
when this had come, he would drink a little, following the 
same procedure at each of the other jars. He would then 
give a little out of each to the ex-priest and to the other 
three, and the ceremony would be ended, but he would 
shortly have to give a feast to all the heads of families in 
the clan. If everything went on well, the ex-priest would 
be left in peace, but he would be forced to attend the 
ceremonies (though he took no part in them) so as to make 
sure that he was not working against his late colleagues. 
But if things went ill, it would be evident that he was 
false, and he would be put to death by the lion in the 
manner before described. 

In any year in which no sacrifice either of the animal or 
of the priestly king took place, an offering would be made 
to the totem. It would be summoned in the usual way, 
and would come and squat in its appointed place, but 
this time all the people of the community would be 
present. At first the beast might be inclined to be fierce, 

TOTEMISM AND KING-KILLING 41 

but the priestly king would talk to it, and tell it that 
none but relatives were present, and soon the beast would 
become quiet. Then the four priests would bring a bull 
and make it stand by the medicine-hut, and feed it with 
millet, honey, beans, and rice in a spoon. It would then 
be made to kneel down, and its throat would be cut. It 
would be skinned at once, the chief man of the four taking 
the hide, and its entrails, heart, liver, and kidneys would 
be removed. A portion of each would be cut off and given 
to the lion, and when he had eaten them, the people 
would rejoice and say that the animal was certainly their 
totem. Another portion of each would be given to the 
five priests, who would cause a woman to roast them, and 
they would eat a little, and give the rest to the important 
persons around them. The rest of the entrails, etc., 
would be cooked and given to the women and children 
afterwards. The flesh would be hung up in the medicine- 
hut for that night, but next day it would be cut up, small 
pieces of it being sent to all the members of the clan.11 
They were always very glad to receive it, for it was their 
albaraka (blessing, power — i.e. white magic) ; they did 
not value it on account of its being food, for perhaps there 
was hardly anything for them to eat. 

Not every animal was a totem and a brother. If a 
member of one of these clans, say that of the leopard, 
had been attacked and wounded while in the forest by 
an animal of the same kind as his totem, he would com- 
plain to his chief upon his return, and the totem would 
be summoned. The chief would repeat the charge, and, 
if it was shown that the totem himself had been false 
or careless, it would be put to death as already described, 
but, if it were innocent, it would select a certain root, and 
give it to the chief, telling him that the person wounded 

42 THE H I.Y OE THE BORJ 

was to pound it up in ;i mortar, mix it with water in a 

gomdi and iii.it be was bo drink some oi it, and daub bis 

body witli the rest. The leopard would then go away, 

and next day the complainant would do as directed, and 
would then go to the place where the atlai k had been 
made. Soon the guilty leopard would arrive, summoned 
and rendered harmless l>v the < harm, and the man would 
tie him up and lead him to a spot which had been indicated 
by the totem. There the latter would take charge oi the 
offender, and would ask him why the attack had been 
made upon one of the totem's brothers. The prisoner 
would reply that it did not know who his victim was, and 
then the other would tell it never to do such a thing again, 
and release him, perhaps after some punishment, but if the 
man had been killed, the totem leopard would put the 
offending animal to death. 

CHAPTER IV 

TOTEMISM AND KING-KILLING — continued 

The information contained in the preceding chapter is 
practically in the words of the narrators, and it seemed 
so extremely unlikely that I dropped the subject for the 
time, and sent my notes to Professor J. G. Frazer, who 
very kindly made some remarks which encouraged me to 
proceed, especially as in the meantime I had ascertained 
that Haj Ali's information upon other subjects was quite 
trustworthy, and further inquiry has corroborated practi- 
cally the whole of it. After all, it only corresponds with 
what has been found on the other side of the continent, 
though this fact was not then known to me.1 I re- 
examined him, therefore, and with the further answers 
from him, and information gathered from other sources, 
we may proceed to examine what has been said. But first 
it will probably clear the atmosphere if it be noted that 
others have discovered that with one clan at any rate 
(the Geawaskawa of Katsina), the soul of the totem is 
supposed to be indwelling in their chief, and that a story 
given elsewhere shows that the chief may have the soul of 
the clan (Mafari) in his keeping. This latter is probably 
the soul of the first king, for amongst the Shilluk " the 
spirits of Nyakang [the divine ancestor] and his successors 
are considered as identical," and this is only what we 
should expect when the divine ancestor is an animal, a 
totem.2 With many peoples, the chief is regarded as 
being a son of the god. However, it will be well to state 
43 

II THE B I.V OF THE BORI 

.it once ili«' view <>i totemism held by Salah, the prim ipal 

bok.i in Tunis. 

The intioductioo of the totem, according to him, is due 
to the belief in spirits. To invoke or appease these, magic 
rites \vci\- performed, ;md gradually particular bori were 
thoughl to take ;i special interest in a certain individual 
or family, or even in a town. It was evident to the Ba- 
Maguje that, if when he invoked one particular spirit, he 
\v;is always more fortunate than when he sought the aid of 
others, that spirit had a special interest in him. Many 
of the bori appeared in animal forms — particularly those 
of snakes and wild beasts — and some of the less harmful 
members of the kingdom (e.g. lizards) were almost members 
of the man's family, while certain trees were noted for the 
attraction which they had for the bori, so it became the 
custom to identify an animal or a tree with the spirit 
invoked. The same thing is noticeable in totemism, for 
to Haj Ali not only the shamowa, but also the tree in 
which it rests, is sacred, and, in fact, the title kan-gida is 
used both for the patron bori and for the totem, so it is 
not surprising to find that in former times the instruction 
in the duties due to the totem and the initiation into the 
mysteries of the bori cult were simultaneous — at the Fittan 
Fur a. Gradually, however, the connection was lost, and 
to-day a person may have a bori as well as a totem for his 
kan-gida, or even a bori only. According to all whom I 
have asked here, totemism had nothing whatever to do 
with marriage, and this is only to be expected, for whereas 
some clans were exogamous, others were endogamous.3 

There was evidently a great difference in the practices 
in vogue in different parts of the country regarding the 
killing of the totem, and it may be that those animals 
which were killed every year were offerings made in the 

TOTEM ISM AND KING-KILLING 45 

hope of getting a good harvest, for Haj Ali says that all 
these clans which worshipped Magiro (a corn spirit) sacri- 
ficed at harvest-time, and in Chapter XIV. it will be seen 
that a part of the crop is always preserved until the next 
has been gathered in. Another observer (in Man, 1910, 
Art. 40) has stated that the clan of Kai Na Fara sacrifice 
their totem, a crippled fowl, " on very special occasions 
once a year," but unfortunately he does not state what 
those occasions are. He also says that the Mahalbawa 
think that they are descended from the kwakiya (a short 
black snake), and that any member of the clan who put 
one to death would die. Again, any animal killed by a 
kwakiya must not be eaten by a member of the clan. 

Salah's totem was a Baban Dammo (iguana), and it also 
was killed annually, after having been summoned as 
above. The followers smeared blood three times upon 
their foreheads (the seat of the bori, as is explained later) 
and upon their tongues (so as to give them a good voice 
when the spirit took possession of them). The priests 
then returned home, and slept in the gidan tsafi, and 
next morning the flesh was cut into small pieces and 
divided up, some being made into laiyu or charms, the 
rest being dried and powdered, the latter being a powerful 
medicine for anyone who had previously had the albaraka.4 
A bori performance was held a few days afterwards, and 
the rites were over. These people were Hausa of the 
earliest Katsina stock, so it is possible that the smearing 
of the blood was performed only by the original Hausa 
communities, and was not adopted by those of later 
growth, for the smearing at the present bori rites may not 
be a survival from West Africa, but a reintroduction from 
the North. Many totems were never sacrificed at all, and 
Salah says that the lion, leopard, etc., were never killed 

46 THE BAN OF Till' B0R2 

so long as they did no harm, but that when a guilty 
animal had to !><• put to death, the priestly king lolled H 
with a poisoned arrow. The ceremony may quite well 
haw been biennial or triennial, however, for the Dasawa 
Hausas of Katsina sacrifice to Kuri and Uwardawa at 
intervals of three years.6 

The account of the killing of the lion, leopard, etc., is 
very strange, yet there seems to be some truth in it, though 
the alleged interviews and conversations between man and 
beast arc clearly fabulous. Yet Haj Ali certainly seemed 
to believe what he said, and I fancy that, as in the bori 
dance, hallucinations can be induced by those interested. 
When asked to state in the name of A radii (Thunder) 
whether he had ever actually seen a lion or other beast 
thus put to death, he admitted that he had not done so, 
but that he had seen a priest killed by a lion at three 
different towns which he named, when he was between 
seventeen and nineteen years of age. In each case the 
beast had torn the victim open, and had then left him. 
In another town, Kworen Habjia, where the buffalo was 
the totem, one of these animals was seen one day wander- 
ing about near the village. " Incense was offered up, and 
the buffalo approached. The four men assembled together 
with the Buffalo-of-the-Town (the priestly king) — he had 
very large testicles 6 — and they said that he had been 
playing false. He replied, ' You cannot hurt me (even if 
I have done so).' Then they placed the censer at the 
Eastern gate, and the buffalo approached, they prevented 
the people shooting it. The buffalo entered and bounded 
forward, and gored him, and pierced him on one side until 
the horn protruded at the other. Then she lifted him up — 
I can see it now, I swear by Allah — and threw him upon 
the ground. Then she returned, and threw him again, 

TOTEM ISM AND KING-KILLING 47 

and then went away. In a little while his life ebbed out, 
and they appointed another in his stead." 

That is much more easy to believe, and it is quite possible 
that the " guilty " priest was always tied up and left for 
the totem to kill, the animal when carnivorous being driven 
off by fire before it could have time to eat its victim. 
Or, the priests may have acted as do the members of the 
notorious Leopard Society in other parts of West Africa, 
and have killed their victims by mauling them with the 
claws of the kind of animal concerned.' If the killing of 
the lion, etc., was not mere hallucination, and the other 
suggestion is incorrect, it is possible that the beast was 
caught and drugged first — in fact, meat may be left for the 
totem. That, however, is simply a guess on my own part, 
and I must give the Hausa view. 

Salah's totem was an iguana. When it was desired to 
consult the totem, incense was burned at nights at the 
foot of some specially sacred tree, and sooner or later the 
reptile would appear. " The totem must appear when 
summoned thus, for incense attracts the bori, and they 
drive the animal to the spot required " — showing that 
there is still a connection between the bori and the totem 
animal. If there had been trouble in the clan, and the 
lizard was long in coming, it was evident that it had been 
playing false. On the first occasion it might be merely 
warned and let go, but on the second, it would probably 
be caught and taken to the dakin tsafi, and tied up there 
and censed. If things improved, the animal would be set 
free again in the hope that after such a lesson it would see 
the error of its ways/but if not, it would be killed, and a 
new one would be substituted. The priests could talk to 
animals because they had drunk the appropriate medicines, 
I was told. Every totem knows its own incense, accord- 

48 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

ing to Haj Ali, for different herbs are used for the different 
animals, and " all totems understand the language of their 
followers. Do not even dogs and fowls understand when 
you call them ? " 

As for the connection between the shamowa and the 
kiriya, it has already been noted in Northern Nigeria 
that an animal and a plant totem may be followed by the 
same clan, thus the Dubawa of Katsina have a lion, a 
kirni tree, and a shiruwa (hawk) ; the Rungumawa of 
Katsina have a kwakiya snake and a tamarind ; while, 
stranger still, the Berawaof Katsina, whose totem is a lion, 
have yet some connection with the baobab.8 

In spite of the fact that the priestly king may lose his 
life, there is no lack of candidates for the office. He would 
be safe for some years at least, even though — as one man 
informed me — the chief in Gobir was invariably killed after 
two or three years of office. All my informants agreed 
that they would be candidates under such conditions. 
" If you asked me to be Bey of Tunis to-day on the con- 
dition that I should be killed to-morrow, I should refuse, 
for I could not enjoy myself. But if you said for ten days, 
plenty of people would offer. Everybody likes power and 
wealth, so one must get all he can while it is possible. 
Besides, everyone must die some time — but he might 
manage to live longer than the ten days." Intrigue being 
inborn in the Hausa's nature, the last remark explains 
a good deal, perhaps, but at the same time, there is no 
doubt that the native regards death with much less horror 
than does the European. And many pagans in Northern 
Nigeria9 believe that the stronger and richer a man is upon 
earth, the better will be his position in the next world. 
To die while in health and strength, therefore, would seem 
to be rather a wise provision for the hereafter than a source 

TOTEMISM AND KING-KILLING 49 

of sorrow for the present. But, after all, even in Great 
Britain to-day persons give themselves up to the police, 
and thougli perfectly innocent, claim to have committed 
murders in order to gain notoriety, and — one must presume 
— induce a feeling of self-exaltation. 

The dance of the king and priests around the sacred 
tree is interesting. One informant said that only the 
priestly king wore the hide, but Haj Ali maintained that 
all did so in order to obtain the albaraka. It was first 
dried in the sand, and after the chief and the three senior 
priests had worn it, the fourth (called Dan Wawa, Fool, 
although he was not really silly) 10 put it on, and danced 
foolishly before the people at some distance from the tree 
so as to distract their attention from the other four men 
who were performing some secret rites at the foot of the 
tree — one being to place medicines amongst the roots. 
These four also burned some herbs upon a fire, and by 
watching the smoke could foretell the fortunes of the clan. 
These seems to have been no idea that the priests dressed 
in the skin so as to resemble kinsmen of the victim, they 
did it in order to obtain the sacred virtue of its life, 
the albaraka. 

The offering to the snake totems consists of eggs and 
milk — the appropriate one now to the bori named Mai-Ja- 
Chikki, as will be seen later. The proper place to put it 
is upon an ant-heap or by a hollow tree, and incense should 
be burned at the same time. " If the totem likes you it 
will come out, and you can then make your supplication." 
It was not killed in Daura (this has been observed in 
Nigeria also), but if unfaithful, the priests will bring a 
larger snake to drive it away. In Gobir, however, it was 
killed. There are several species which are worshipped, 
and the practices differ slightly, but the following was said 

50 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

to be the procedure in Daura. In addition to the ordinary 
offering, each year a black bull or he-goat was killed, the 
blood was spilt upon the ground for the snake, while the 
meat was cut up and eaten by the worshippers present on 
the spot ; no part was ever brought into the house. If any 
head of a family could not be there, his son, wife, or 
daughter would eat his share for him, so that he would not 
lose the albaraka. Then the priestly king or a priestess 
would dance around with the skin still wet with blood. 
I am told that the iguana was killed annually at Magammi 
in Maradi. 

Snakes are — theoretically — by no means regarded as 
enemies. It may be remembered that in Hausa Supersti- 
tions and Customs, one story (No. 80) relates how one of 
these reptiles, which had previously saved a youth's life, 
bit him because its weekly offering — which ought to have 
been placed upon an ant-hill — was not forthcoming, and 
this probably refers to the practice mentioned above. 
Some snakes indeed become very friendly. Thus the 
kwakiya may take up its abode in the grass roof of the 
living hut, and from time to time descend to the floor 
— it will always do so in honour of the birth of a son — 
and for that reason a pinch of meal is thrown down by 
the people before eating. 

It would seem from the case of the shamowa that some 
tabus originate through a fear that the worshippers may 
appear to be too much like the totem, and so enrage it, 
and another instance strengthens this view — namely, that 
members of snake and iguana clans generally were not 
allowed to wear clothes of the peculiar speckled pattern 
called sake, not, at any rate, until adult. In fact, some 
members of the latter clan could not eat beans before the 
proper rites had been performed because the iguana ate 

TOTEMISM AND KING-KILLING 51 

them. Other tabus are harder to understand, such as not 
carrying fire in a calabash (gourd) but only in an earthen- 
ware pot (the Kai na Fara), or, again, refusing to use a 
pot for fire, and carrying it only between two sticks (the 
Dubawa). The tabu observed by the former against 
eating food if iron has touched it is rather more compre- 
hensible, because the bori abhor that metal (see p. 289), 
and totemism is said to have originated from the belief in 
the spirits. 

It will be found that nearly all the totem animals are 
represented in the bori dances, and although the plant 
totems do not figure there as such, it is quite possible that 
they are intimately connected with their special animals, 
as Salah says.11 Certain bori have the names of trees, as 
will be seen, but they come to the dance because they 
are disease-spirits, apparently, not because they are 
plant-totems. People may become ill through having sat 
under certain trees, but it seems that the illness is caused 
by the spirits in the trees, not by the trees themselves, 
though, as a story of " conceptional totemism " shows, a 
tree may contain and identify itself in every way with a 
human being if a leaf has caused the mother to conceive, 
just as the body and soul of a man form a complete 
individual — for the soul can leave the body at night as 
easily as the man can leave his tree. In another story, a 
tiee grows from the head of a man buried in a well, and 
the man is afterwards taken from the branches of the 
tree (which has grown up above the surface of the ground), 
and, after having been shaved, is able to return to his 
old life.12 To some extent the Hausa dancer (or " horse ") 
is one with the spirit which " rides " him during possession, 
for the spirit is supposed to be speaking, and the dancer 
is not considered to be responsible for his actions. " Is 

52 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

it likely tint .l person would hurt himself if he could 
avoid it ? " 

Still, one must not try to press the analogy too far at 
present, for in the Hausa bori dance of to-day there seems 
to be nothing of animation, and even in the case of the 
tree spirits, each dancer illustrates the effects of the seizure, 
not the movements of a branch, though it must be admitted 
thai it would be somewhat difficult for him to behave like 
a tree. 

From the foregoing, it will have been seen that the 
reasons for the killing of the king are the same as for the 
killing of the totem — namely, the continuance of the 
health and prosperity of the clan, and the more scientific 
explanations of the phenomena are no less similar, so it is 
evident that the two are connected, and that both have 
arisen through a belief in spirits. 

The points in common seem to be as follows 13 : — 

(i) The guardian spirit or the bori of the clan appears 
as an animal, and becomes the totem. 

(2) The bori begins to appear in other forms, yet leaving 
some of its virtues with the animal, and so both bori and 
totem are kan-gida — possibly the tree-totems are now 
developed because of their connection with either the 
bori or the animal. 

(3) The bori is thought to be not quite content with its 
animal habitation, and, in order to persuade it to appear 
only in the recognised form as before, and to confine its 
attentions to the particular clan concerned, a selected 
animal is specially set apart as a habitation, and it only 
is the totem, other animals of the same species being 
perhaps enemies. 

(4) The totem animal (which ages quickly) is put to 
death : (a) in order to substitute a more perfect member 

TOTEMISM AND KING-KILLING 53 

of the same species ; (b) as an offering to the bori, perhaps ; 
and (c) so that the worshippers may absorb the albaraka 

possessed by the animal. 

(5) The priestly king stands in a special relation to 
this totem animal {e.g. he has a similar name), and also 
with the bori, the latter compelling the totem to answer 
his summonses. 

(6) The soul of the totem is thought to be indwelling 
in the priestly king. 

(7) The soul of the clan is in his keeping. 

(8) The bori takes possession of him, and of him only, 
since he alone would be able to receive the spirit. 

(9) The soul of the totem is identified with the bori, as 
is also the soul of the clan. 

(10) The priestly king is killed : (a) in order to sub- 
stitute a younger and stronger man ; (b) possibly as an 
offering to the bori (e.g. Magiro) ; and (c) so that, if faithful, 
parts of his body may be used as charms. 

It is hardly necessary, perhaps, to point out that the 
full development would not be found in every clan, and 
that even where it was, sooner or later a strong king would 
object to experiencing the fate of his predecessors. By 
sacrificing some of his subjects or prisoners of war, he would 
appease the wrath of the bori, and would at the same time 
divest himself of a part of his special divine attributes ; 
by allowing the priests to perform the rites of the guardian 
bori as well as those pertaining to the other spirits, they 
would be enriched and so bought off ; and, gradually, the 
bori would become again merely a guardian spirit un- 
connected with either the totem or the priestly king. 

CHAPTER V 

PERSONAL ENHANCEMENT AND DRESS 

Tin: negroes in the cities of Tunis and Tripoli, and in the 
towns of Gafsa and Sfax are very much cleaner than are 
many of their brethren in their own country, because 
they have to conform to the regulations imposed by the 
French and Italians, but even in Northern Nigeria the 
Hausas will bear comparison with all other tribes there 
which I have noticed except the Ankwoi, though they 
come nowhere near, hygienically speaking, to some of the 
Gold Coast tribes — e.g. the Ashantis. 

The houses themselves are often kept very neat, washing 
water, etc., being emptied down the drains, but as the 
sweepings are all shot out into the streets, the surround- 
ings are anything but tidy. The rubbish is collected by 
men (mostly Arabs) in the employ of the Government, 
who place it in carts, and take it to a depot to be 
destroyed. 

The great majority of the inhabitants of Hausaland, 
being now Mohammedans, must perform some ceremonial 
washings, but I am solemnly assured that it was always 
their custom to wash face, hands, and feet early in the 
morning, before and after food, and that those in North 
Africa always do this. I do not remember, however, that 
the people in Nigeria were particular about washing before 
meals. They do not necessarily wash before prayer, 
unless they have polluted themselves in some way, and 
there need be no special ablution before paying a visit. 

54 

(0 

PERSONAL ENHANCEMENT AND DRESS 55 

The face, hands, and feet may be washed outside the room, 
but when the whole body is bathed with warm water, 
it is done in the room itself, and French soap is used, 
the water being afterwards thrown down the drain, which, 
combined with the washhouse, etc., is called salanga. 
There are Arab baths in which the natives can bathe — 
at a charge of threepence in Tunis. The men rub their 
teeth with a stick of jinjiriya, and rinse their mouths early 
in the morning and after food ; the women use swak or 
kuriya, which will stain if not washed off at once. 

The people have no odour peculiar to themselves, and 
I did not notice them as being different to most of their 
neighbours, though in Northern Nigeria, at any rate, they 
did not smell anything like as much as the Nupes. But 
in this connection it may be truly said that " comparisons 
are odorous," so I must not continue them. In any case, 
perfumes are used of either European or Arabic make, 
bought in the suk, or market. 

The people are fairly careful of their personal appearance, 
for they are not at all desirous of appearing old. One 
woman, Khadejia, quite forty years of age, informed me 
that if she could only go back to her own country she 
would become a virgin again, and her husband (Auta) a 
youth. 

The men shave their heads in accordance with the 
Mohammedan custom, and wear beards and moustaches 
if they will come, but the hair is usually sparse. The 
heads of all children are shaved on the eighth or name- 
day, but after that, only the foreheads and necks are so 
treated in the case of girls. In Hausaland, the women 
wear a ridge (daitka) of cotton-wood, or some other hard 
substance, running from front to back, over which the hair 
is plaited, but in Tunis it is not worn, and, in fact, many of 

PERSONAL ENHANCEMENT AND DRESS 55 

The face, hands, and feet may be washed ontside the room, 
but when the whole body is bathed with warm wfcter, 
it is done in the room itself, and French soap is used, 
the water being afterwards thrown down the drain, which, 
combined with the washhouse, etc., is called salanga. 
There are Arab baths in which the natives can bathe — 
at a charge of threepence in Tunis. The men rub their 
teeth with a stick of jinjiriya, and rinse their mouths early 
in the morning and after food ; the women use swak or 
kuriya, which will stain if not washed off at once. 

The people have no odour peculiar to themselves, and 
I did not notice them as being different to most of their 
neighbours, though in Northern Nigeria, at any rate, they 
did not smell anything like as much as the Nupes. But 
in this connection it may be truly said that " comparisons 
are odorous," so I must not continue them. In any case, 
perfumes are used of either European or Arabic make, 
bought in the suk, or market. 

The people are fairly careful of their personal appearance, 
for they are not at all desirous of appearing old. One 
woman, Khadejia, quite forty years of age, informed me 
that if she could only go back to her own country she 
would become a virgin again, and her husband (Auta) a 
youth. 

The men shave their heads in accordance with the 
Mohammedan custom, and wear beards and moustaches 
if they will come, but the hair is usually sparse. The 
heads of all children are shaved on the eighth or name- 
day, but after that, only the foreheads and necks are so 
treated in the case of girls. In Hausaland, the women 
wear a ridge (dauka) of cotton-wood, or some other hard 
substance, running from front to back, over which the hair 
is plaited, but in Tunis it is not worn, and, in fact, many of 

56 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

the women have no hair at all upon their heads, and 
in despair are forced to paint their polls and eyebrows 
with a preparation made bom the da1>£a plant. This, 
I was told, is due to the bad water of Tunis, which destroys 
the hair. With some women it falls out suddenly, with 
others giadually, and only strangers suffer, for in the case 
of the Arabs who have lived there always, the hair is said 
not to be affected, though this cannot be the case if wigs 
command a sale. No measures are taken to make the hair 
grow again, and in Tunis wigs (sha'ir) do not appear upon 
the heads of the Hausas, although they may be worn by 
the Arabs (as are also false teeth), and they are for sale in 
the suks. In North Africa, a girl when about seven has 
her hair tied into a tail and bound round with braid, the 
occasion being marked by a feast. The braid comes tightly 
round the forehead also, but instead of giving the wearer 
a headache, as one might suppose, it is regarded as a charm 
against such a thing.1 The girl often increases its length 
by artificial means, and coloured wool is used for the 
purpose, though even amongst the negresses the artifice 
is not successfully hidden. A woman in Haja Gogo's 
house, for instance, had a mat of red-brown wool, which 
was more like a baby's " Dutch bonnet " (after the baby 
had been playing with it) than hair ! However, the wearer 
seemed exceedingly proud of her possession. 

Dabga for the face and head is prepared in the following 
manner. The fruit (something like that of a gum-tree) 
is roasted in a small pot of clay (Fig. i), the joint being 
covered with mud. When smoke begins to arise — within a 
few minutes — the pot is removed, and the lid is taken off. 
A few drops of water are poured in, and the mixture (black) 
is painted on with a thin stick or other object — Khadejia 
used a broken European knitting-needle for the purpose. 

PERSONAL ENHANCEMENT AND DRESS 57 

The patterns on the face (Fig. 6) are interesting. I could 
not discover their signification, however, for they have 
been borrowed from the Arabs, but they probably corre- 
spond to the rings and marks made round the eyes with 
coloured earth by Hausa women to ward off the evil eye 
— and also, perhaps, as a protection against the bori. 

Fig. i.— A Pot for Dabga 

A man will not have his hair shaved in the presence of 
anyone who owes him a grudge. After his hair has been 
cut, he will look around, and if there is no enemy about 
he will mix his cuttings with those of other men and leave 
them, but if he fears someone there he will collect the 
cuttings, and take them secretly to some place and bury 
them. With a baby this is said to be unnecessary, as he 
has no enemies — a surprising statement. Nails are cut 
with scissors, and they are always buried in secret. 

58 THE BAN OF THE RORI 

Most of the Hausas of Tunis rity use no henna for their 
hands, feet, or nails, part ]y <»n account of the exp< n <•, 
partly on account of the fact that they have no heart to 
keep up the practices of their country in a strange land, 
so they say. The skin at the root of the nail is called 
dan-uba (father's son) because the removal of it causes as 
much pain as docs the separation of a man from his child 
in a time of plenty. Antimony is used for the eyes. 

After a baby has been born, the mid wives will mould its 
head with their hands, if necessary, for seven days, and the 
mother may do it also during that time, but after this 
" the head becomes bone" and it is not touched. Not only 
the top of the head, but the nose, chin, and cheek-bones 
are treated, if necessary. This is merely so as to make the 
head " look good," for " a person with a head on one side 
would excite ridicule," and there is not, so I am told, any 
religious motive for it 2 ; in fact, were it to happen that by 
some mischance (e.g. the unavailability of a midwife, and 
the idleness or illness of the mother) the child's head were 
not moulded within the first seven days, it would be left 
alone. 

I noticed that a few members of the community now 
speaking Hausa had their lips pierced, and some had holes 
in their noses also,3 but these mutilations are not strictly 
Hausa, they had been done before the people (pagans of 
Bauchi, Zaria, and Bornu provinces, in all probability) 
had been captured, and it is only in females that the lobes 
of the ears are pierced. This, in North Africa, is done by 
the mother or other responsible female when the girl is 
about the age of four, the instrument nowadays being a 
sewing needle of European make, and a piece of silk is left 
in for a week or so. Then a small gold or silver ring may 
be inserted, and later on — when the wearer has reached 

PERSONAL ENHANCEMENT AND DRESS 50 

the age of seven or thereabouts — the bigger earrings are 
worn if available. No girls are left with the ears un- 
pierced, for " they would then be like men," and so, if they 
are not willing to undergo the operation they are forced 
into it. 

The teeth are not filed or broken in any way. Extrac- 
tion in Nigeria is rare, but in Tunis the Hausas say that 
their teeth are much worse owing to the damp, and Arab 
barbers extract their teeth with pincers when necessary. 
The women's teeth are sometimes stained with swak or 
with the juice of the tobacco flower, as there is no kola- 
nut here, and this makes the lips red also. The milk-teeth 
or any subsequently extracted must be carefully buried, 
for with these, as with the hair and nail-parings, evil may 
be worked upon the person from whom they have come — 
a child with milk-teeth has a magical influence or a special 
immunity in some cases, as will be seen later. Such 
characteristics have been noticed in other countries, of 
course, but with the Hausas it is possible that the differ- 
ence between the dangers threatening old and young is 
due to the fact that the latter have no jealous bori-lover. 
Any change from the ordinary order of growth is greatly 
objected to, for the child will certainly develop an evil 
disposition. A certain chief of Hadejia, Gariba, was born 
with teeth, and he put to death many of his subjects for 
nothing ; which was only to be expected in the case of 
such a monstrosity ! 

The trunk and limbs are not purposely deformed except 
in a few trifling particulars. In Nigeria, a child may have 
a band of string or beads which has gradually become 
tight because of the growth of the wearer, but sooner or 
later this is removed or enlarged, it is not intended to cause 
any permanent deformation. In North Africa, however, 

60 THE B IV OF THE BORI 

the string is discarded, for the children have to wear 
clothes. The gripping of the catch of the sandal -c log won 
in Nigeria between the great and second iocs produces a 
slighl change in their position, but tliis is not noticeable 
in North Africa, for although the feet are more often 
shod than in Ifansaland — where any kind of footwear is 
the exception amongst all but the higher classes — the 
clogs, etc., have a single strap right across the foot.4 The 
Hausa women often wear Arab shoes, so much too short 
for their feet that they do not reach the heel, and owing to 
this their gait is greatly altered, the body being thrown 
forward and the length of the stride reduced. 

The genital organ in the female is untouched nowadays, 
even if — as some assert — the clitoris ever was excised, 
but circumcision is practised upon the male, and this was 
not due to Mohammedanism,5 several tribes in the Hausa 
States which are still pagan performing this rite, as has 
been mentioned in The Tailed Head Hunters of Nigeria. 
The boy is operated upon between the ages of five and 
nine years. He makes no special preparation beforehand, 
but on the appointed day his father washes him, his hands 
and feet are stained with henna, and having been dressed 
up and adorned with ornaments of silver, etc., he parades 
the streets near his home for an hour or so. He then 
returns (about three p.m.) and the operation is performed 
by a barber who comes to the house, the instrument being 
a razor or pair of scissors of the ordinary pattern, but 
never used for any other purpose. It is worth noting, 
perhaps, that scissors are not closed as with us, but are 
held open, and the material to be cut is slid down the 
very sharp blades towards their junction. Only one cut 
is made, I am told, for the skin is first drawn forward, the 
operator sitting opposite the patient, and the boy is then 

PERSONAL ENHANCEMENT AND DRESS 61 

lifted on to a bed and is nursed for seven days — or more, if 
absolutely necessary — the operator dressing the wound 
each morning and evening. 

In Hausaland no female must come near him during 
this time, but in North Africa it does not matter, and, in 
fact, owing to the circumstances in which the people live 
it would be impossible to observe such a rule. The fore- 
skin is buried in some spot outside — for it is " a dead man " 
— the blood is swept up with the dust and thrown down 
the drain. No new name is given to a youth at this time 
or afterwards, the only change ever made being that 
the youngest child will be called Auta, as is mentioned 
later. 

The above ceremonial holds in Tunis, but in the Hausa 
States several boys may be circumcised at the same time, 
living afterwards, under the supervision of some of the 
elders, in a special house built or set apart for the purpose, 
until healed, each boy leaving when well enough. In this 
case, each patient in turn sits over a hole, and the foreskin 
and blood fall into it. Strangely enough, it is said now 
that an enemy could not work evil through the foreskin 
of another, although he could do so through his clothes, 
but the fact of the immediate burial of the prepuce seems 
to point to the contrary being the case. There is usually 
no hanging back on the part of the candidate, for a boy is 
anxious to be circumcised, though if he did refuse to be 
operated upon, force would be used, and if a boy ran 
away and lived among a non-circumcising tribe, he would 
be compelled, if he returned, to become as the others, even 
though grown up. But the rite would never be per- 
formed upon a dead boy, for " since He had called him, 
Allah would have shown that He did not wish it done." A 
circumcised youth has precedence over his uncircumcised 

62 ////' BAN or THE B0R1 

brothers in tin- QCda Oi dipping in the dish at meals, but 
in North Africa tint. . , ms to be n<> ntlni advantage. 

A woman would not many an umcircumciBed man, how- 
ever, bi be would not be a piopei person, but, apparency, 
be w..uld not be< on idered in- apableoi begetting children, 

and bC would he I mind after death, and WOold gO t" Allah 
in the usual way. 

The Semiti i ostom of patting the hand under the thigh 
when swearing i^ explained byaomeas the tonchingofthat 

pari of the body win. h has been made holy by circum- 
i iaion. Perhaps a survival of this is seen in the praetice 
found amongst certain West African tribes of passing a 
knife or other piece of iron between the legs when taking 
an oath.6 

The operator is a barber, anyone whom the parents 
may choose. He has no particular status, and there is 
no difficulty in the way of any person becoming one. He 
washes his hands before and after the operation, but need 
not make any other preparation. His fee depends upon 
the position and generosity of the patient's father. 

In certain districts, Zinder, Bornu, and Baghirimi, 
youths taken captive in war were castrated, but they were 
very few in number, as it is said that only two or three per 
cent, survived the operation, for the whole of the parts 
were cut off, boiling oil being poured upon the wound to 
stop the bleeding, according to my informant. These 
eunuchs were therefore exceedingly valuable, and they 
often formed part of a very special present from one big 
chief to another. 

In Daura, the tribal marks are said to be made upon 
the name day, but they are usually made later in life. 
There is no magic in them, they simply show where the 
wearer has come from.7 " If a person said that he was 

PERSONAL ENHANCEMENT AND DRESS 63 

born in Daura, and had not the marks, people would call 
him a liar." In other places, they may be made at any 
age during youth. The children born in North Africa 
are not scarified, even though both of the parents are 
natives of the same district. In addition to the tribal 
marks pure and simple, there are several scarification 
charms,8 and very often a lizard is seen, particularly upon 
the forearm, though it may appear elsewhere. I do not 
think that this is totemistic, for I have not noticed repre- 
sentations of other animals, one bird being excepted, and 
the prayer-board is quite common. The real explanation 
seems to be that it has been evolved from the sign of Tanith 
described in the final chapter. In the diagrams of tribal 
and other marks given in Hausa Superstitions and Customs, 
will be seen several which are known as " sleeping with the 
one desired," being charms to attract prostitutes. Fig. 3 
(H.S.C.) is much conventionalised, but Fig. 77 gives us 
clearly the sign of Tanith in an anthropomorphic form. 
From it the evolution of a lizard-shaped object is easy, 
and it is not at all unlikely that this was at first a crocodile 
(for the water-spirit) although now called a " crocodile of 
the town " or lizard. It is used in Tunis and elsewhere as 
an amulet against the evil eye.9 

The scarifications are made by clean cuts with a sharp 
knife, in shape something like an arrow-head, after which 
a mixture of grease and black from the cooking pots is 
rubbed in. Sometimes, so as to make the patterns more 
distinguishable, antimony is put into the pricks in addition 
to the grease and pot-black. 

Black stripes are often painted upon the face in Nigeria 
for ornament, or to avoid the evil eye.10 I have not seen 
them here, though I am told that some women have them 
at times, and that, as for the eyebrows, a preparation of 

64 THE BAN 01 THE B0R1 

dabga is used, but in Nigeria the stain is obtained from the 
kiriya tree. 

Flowers are worn only by boys, irresponsible men, and 
prostitutes, according to Auta, but Haj Ali said that many 
DUO decorated themselves thus when they wished to look 
nice. A small bunch is placed over the right ear, Wk- 
blossoms being turned towards the face, as is seen in the 
photograph of Haj Ali, No. 6. In Tunis, where there are 
wild flowers in plenty, many youths and several men were 
wearing them. I did not see any in Tripoli — but flowers 
are exceedingly scarce there, so that may be the reason. 
Some say that the wearing of flowers is entirely due to the 
people's love of scent, hence the custom of arranging them 
so that the blossoms are as near the nose as possible. 

Ornaments of gold and silver are worn, most of them 
being charms against the evil eye, as is mentioned later, 
but beads are not plentiful here except during the bori 
dances, when all the women and many of the men array 
themselves in all their finery.11 

The Hausas of Tunis wear much more than do their 
relatives in Hausaland, because, owing to their living with 
the Arabs and others, they are compelled to follow the 
customs of the country. There is also more distinction 
between the dress worn by the different sexes — as is only 
natural where the garments become more elaborate. But 
even the Arab clothing has proved insufficient, and many 
Hausas don European socks — usually white — when out 
walking, while some of them even substitute elastic-sided 
boots for the leather slippers or wooden clogs in more 
general use. A native clad in the loose garments of the 
patriarchs is apt to amuse one when the finishing touch to 
his costume is a cheap, ill-made French edition of the 
modern Jemima ! 

PERSONAL ENHANCEMENT AND DRESS 65 

In the Hausa States, a man will never omit his loin- 
cloth, even after he has been promoted to the dignity of 
trousers, for it would be indecent for him to do so ; but 
in North Africa there is no such rule. On the other hand, 
whereas women in Nigeria think a short petticoat (a small 
cloth wrapped from waist to thighs) is quite sufficient, in 
Tunis and Tripoli trousers must be worn, for a woman is 
said to be naked without them. Another explanation is 
that the trousers are better for keeping out the cold, and 
that were the women to return home, they would at once 
leave them off — but this argument hardly applies to the 
discarding of the loin-cloth. It is a curious fact that in 
the bori dances held by certain pagan tribes in parts of 
the Muri province, the women wear trousers during their 
performance, though this is not at all usual even there, 
for at Amar, they had only the ordinary cloths.12 The 
significance in this will be pointed out in a later chapter, 
and it is worth noting that in Bornu, horses are sometimes 
dressed in these garments for a State procession,13 though 
I am not prepared to say that there is any connection, 
religious or otherwise, between the two customs. 

The men wear a shirt tucked inside the trousers, a 
zouave jacket, a tobe, or long robe, and a turban. When 
outside, they put on a burnous. The women wear a 
jersey or shirt, of flannel or cotton, a short chemise 
(usually of coloured material) not reaching to the waist, a 
zouave jacket, trousers, several Hausa or other native 
made cloths wrapped round the body, and a handkerchief 
over their heads, while for the streets most of them in the 
city of Tunis have adopted the black veil, or, rather, the 
band of silk crepe wound above and below the eyes. In 
Gafsa (111. 19) the costume more resembles that of the 
Bedawin. 

66 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

But many introduce articles of European manufacture, 
some ol them delighting in a shortened blouse, or as 
they call it, a bilusa. When going outside, they wrap 
round themselves a white cloth — like a light blanket — 
and put a smaller one over the head, these being two 
garments in Tunis, not one as is the burnous of the men. 
They have QO burnous, but they are much less often seen 
in the streets than are the members of the sterner sex, so 
perhaps they are supposed not to require it. 

At night, the man takes off all but his shirt and trousers, 
and if he has plenty of clothes he will perhaps keep special 
ones for night use. Women also sleep in trousers in North 
Africa. 

One reason given why the veil is worn is that the men do 
not want their women to be seen — as in the case of the 
Arabs — but a more likely one seems to be that supplied by 
Haj Ali, who says that negresses without veils would be very 
noticeable in the streets, and would invite rude remarks 
about the size of their mouths and noses. They know 
nothing about the original reason for the adoption of this 
covering, which is said to be the fear of the evil eye, and 
women being much more likely to attract attention, it was 
more important to protect them. A better explanation 
seems to be that the veil hides the woman — especially 
at her wedding — from her bori of the opposite sex, for this 
is a very ancient Semitic idea ; even St Paul (i Cor. xi. 10) 
recommends the chalebi (no doubt the Hausa kallabi) 
" because of the angels," and, apparently, to show them 
that she now belongs to a human husband.14 In Tripoli, 
however, the Hausa women did not seem to mind, for 
they did not cover their faces in any way. 

The articles of clothing are made of cotton, wool, or silk, 
being bought from the Arabs — or, in rare cases, from 

**AA 

0k 

p 1* ■ JL V 

3 MM |l | 

' iff J va 

W '■ 

1 

n -V-Wrti 

7. — Munchi Masu-B< 

-Jakuns. 

PERSONAL ENHANCEMENT AND DRESS 67 

Europeans. They are not shaped to the body, except in 
a general way, the zouave jacket being the best-fitting 
garment worn, and in the case of the women some of the 
articles are merely cloths wrapped round the body. They 
are sewn with a perforated needle of European make, 
sewing machines — especially the Singer — being very 
common, and the tobes of the men and the jackets are 
often beautifully embroidered, the patterns having been 
derived from signs against the evil eye, perhaps. But 
there are no Hausa tailors here, and the manufacture, 
therefore, hardly comes under Hausa culture. 

There are rules of fashion in that the Hausa has to copy 
the Arab or Berber with whom he lives, but certain differ- 
ences (particularly in the case of the women) are noticeable, 
and have been mentioned above. At special times — e.g. 
feasts — specially good clothing will be worn if the owner 
has it, the wardrobe depending entirely upon the person's 
purse. At the bori ceremonies in Tunis, for instance, 
several of the women had gaudy European bodices, and 
one or two even skirts, the rest of the attire being either 
Hausa or Arabic. In Tripoli the scene was exceedingly 
pretty, for although the faces of the performers were not 
exactly handsome, the brilliant tints and the variety of 
the wide silken scarves waved in the air produced quite a 
beautiful picture. No one could accuse a West African 
of the lack of an eye for colour ! 

There is no hunting or fishing done by the Hausas in 
North Africa, except, perhaps, in the case of an individual 
or two in the employ of Europeans or Arabs, but there is 
no change in the costume in Hausaland for such sports so 
far as I know — except that superfluous clothing (e.g. the 
tobe) would be removed, and, while hunting, no white 
would be worn, because it could be seen afar off. For 

68 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

riding, long boots of soft leather are worn there, and Arab 
ones would be adopted in the north were there a Hausa 
who had B horse, but as there is not, the question of the 
proper costume does not worry them. 

Prostitutes may wear no veil, though they usually do 
so in Tunis, and may paint the cheeks red with hommi, 
a rouge (of European manufacture) obtained in the suk. 
They have a peculiar walk which makes them known, says 
my informant (Auta), but a stranger could always ask the 
police to direct them to them, for both in Tunis and 
Tripoli they are under supervision, and live in a street 
specially set apart for such people. 

The Hausas here do not fight, so there is nothing corre- 
sponding to a uniform or a war medal, yet in Nigeria the 
forces could be distinguished at a distance, owing to some 
peculiarity of dress or formation.15 

In the Hausa States, a boy is given a tobe at any time 
after his circumcision, though he may have only a long 
shirt at first, and perhaps trousers also, the turban coming 
after marriage. A girl is given a cloth when she begins to 
know that she is naked. In Tunis and Tripoli, the tobe 
and trousers are worn by small boys, but the turban is not 
bestowed until after the twentieth year. The girls also 
are clothed from infancy. There are no changes in cloth- 
ing to mark puberty or initiation (except as suggested 
above), betrothal or marriage (except during the actual 
ceremony), pregnancy or parentage (except that some- 
times in Hausaland the turban is not worn by a man until 
he becomes a father), or in sickness or insanity. In North 
Africa, a person in mourning may be unable to afford to 
show it in his dress, but even in the Hausa States only the 
widow need make any great change, wearing white for 
three months, and this rule is often disregarded. The 

PERSONAL ENHANCEMENT AND DRESS 69 

clothes of the deceased are divided up amongst those 
entitled to them, or washed and sold. 

Sometimes European umbrellas and goggles are used, 
but they are not common. Gloves are never worn, though 
this is natural, considering their discomfort in a hot 
climate, and the size of the Hausas' hands. But it strikes 
one as curious that they have never been adopted by 
these superstitious and inventive people, for, if blown out, 
what an excellent protection they would be against the 
evil eye ! 

CHAPTER VI 

HABITATIONS AND DOMESTIC LIFE 

The Hausas of Tunis have no houses of their own, as has 
been stated, and they say that they would not be allowed 
to build in their own way, nor to congregate together even 
if they had land on which to live, owing to the fear of their 
rulers that they would be trying to combine and thus 
form a centre of revolt. They live in Arab or Berber 
houses, therefore, and have oblong rooms forming sides 
of a hollow square, instead of separate round huts. The 
building and plan of the common round and square Hausa 
houses have already been described elsewhere,1 so they 
need not be repeated here, and since the Arabic house 
hardly enters into the question, a detailed description is 
not appropriate. All that need be said is that there are 
the several apartments, in addition to the ordinary bed- 
sitting-rooms, all opening on to a central court, there being 
usually the depth of only one room between the court- 
yard and the outer wall. The house is therefore square, 
consisting of single rooms forming the four sides, the walls 
being strongly built of brick, and permanent. The rooms 
are separate structurally, and with no inside doors. 
Auta's room, the best one which I saw, measured 25 feet 
by 9 feet by about 12 feet in height. 

A double door, opening inwards on to the nagged court- 
yard, is secured by hooks stuck in the wall, and by bars of 
wood. It is often studded with nails, and although it is 
evident that they have been placed so as to give a dia- 

70 

9. — A lane in Tunis. 
10. — The drawing-room (and medicine-hous?) of Haja Gogo. 

HABITATIONS AND DOMESTIC LIFE 71 

grammatic representation of a hand — which in some cases 
is in the form of a lyre — it may be that the mere driving 
in of the nails gives protection, imprisoning in the wood- 
work of the door the good influence invoked. An out- 
line resembling a double hand is often seen also. An iron 
ring acts as a knocker, and when this is rapped, the cry 
comes : " Askul " (Who is it ?). On a satisfactory reply 
being received, the fastenings are undone, and, after 
waiting a moment for the women to get inside the rooms 
out of sight, the visitor enters. Near the door is the 
retiring room, and washhouse, through which flows water 
in a drain, that for drinking being obtained from a well 
in the courtyard. The furniture consists of divans, raised 
wide beds, European chairs, chiffoniers, etc., gaudily 
painted Arabic brackets, like those in the Frontispiece, 
pictures, and various cushions. Nails, upon which things 
are to be hung, are driven into the walls, but garments 
are usually folded up and kept out of sight. The furniture, 
with the exception of the beds, is the private property of 
the tenant. Auta's bed was 7 feet by 5 feet, the iron 
decoration over the side facing the centre of the room (the 
bed just fitted into one end of the room) was 9 feet in 
height, the pattern being one of scrolls and crescents. 

After a Ba-Maguje has received leave from his chief to 
build a house, he will go to the spot with friends (not neces- 
sarily the Masu-Bori), and will offer a sacrifice. This, if 
he is a rich man, may consist of a bull, if not, of a he-goat ; 
or he will omit these if too poor to afford them, but a white 
hen and a red cock must always be offered. All the bori 
will drink the blood of the bull or he-goat, but only Kuri 
and Mai-Inna take that of the fowls, it being spilt upon 
the ground in each case, while the flesh is always eaten 
by the house-owner and the other people. The man can 

72 '////•. BAN OF THE BORI 

then build, but upon the day when he is to enter his house, 
lie will offer another cock and hen.2 

Before commencing B farm (which might not be too near 
to the wall of a city before our occupation) he must offer 
fowls in a similar manner, and may, if he likes, add a he- 
goat. It is always better to offer as much as one can afford, 
for the bori love a cheerful giver, and will not only help in 
the erection, but will take care of the owner afterwards, if 
generous. The boundary is often marked at first by a 
knot in the grass ; afterwards, a charm post may be set up 
at a corner of the field, this having given rise, perhaps, to 
the Tar Baby story.3 

In North Africa the same practices may be followed if 
anyone knows of them, but as the Hausas do not build 
for themselves, the sacrifices are not due from them. One 
European gave a ram at the end of the first and second 
weeks once, in Tunis, and the bori drank its blood and 
helped in the work — " they must have done so for it was 
completed so soon." But when Hausa tenants go to 
another lodging, they will offer at any rate a white hen 
upon the new threshold. In Nigeria some men did not 
trouble much about these bori after the house had once 
been built ; others, however, used to set apart one of the 
huts, and put into it any bori objects which they could 
obtain. Incense was offered every Thursday night inside 
the door (in a pot), and two fowls were sacrificed upon each 
anniversary. Some of the bori would always be there, 
except when called away temporarily by some other 
worshipper, though even the householder would not know 
which, for no one can see them, but incense would bring 
them all instantly, even from Egypt or Tunis. Some of 
the Magazawa still perform these rites, but the Moham- 
medan Hausa of Nigeria does not admit having a special 

HABITATIONS AND DOMESTIC LIFE 73 

temple for his spirits, though the Bokas and Arifas of 
North Africa are proud of theirs. 

Each family has its house, there are no communal 
dwellings. The house, or rather the lease, passes to the 
heir on the death of the owner, in accordance with the 
Maliki (or sometimes the Hanafi) code of the Mohammedan 
law. There is no definite number of years fixed, payment 
is made every six months, and, apparently, the tenants 
have a right to stay on so long as they are not in arrears. 
In Tripoli, owing to a mistake in the meaning of an Italian 
proclamation, the rent has been doubled, and the Hausas 
are worse off than ever, now paying monthly. In that pro- 
tectorate there are small negro villages outside the Arab 
cities, but in the city the Hausas rent rooms as in Tunis. 

In Nigeria, the porch is usually the guest-chamber, 
though one of the inside huts may be used ; in North 
Africa there is no special room. Nor are any storehouses 
set apart for food ; the people rent one room only, unless 
richer than the average, and everything has to be kept 
therein. Cooking is done in Nigeria in the courtyard, 
outside the living rooms or huts ; in North Africa it may 
be either outside or inside, though I believe that meat is 
cooked in the open.4 It is regarded as women's work, but 
bachelors would have to do it unless they could engage 
someone for the purpose, and, if a wife were too ill for the 
duty, and the husband unable to obtain help, he could do 
it without exciting ridicule. Certain charms, however — 
e.g. those used by hunters — are made by men only, as is 
explained later. The food of both sexes is prepared 
together, but it is served in separate calabashes. The fire is 
produced from charcoal in an earthenware pot with three 
prongs called kyanu or murufu. Sometimes a single dish 
(tukuniya) is placed above this, but for certain foods (e.g. 

74 

THE BAN OF THE BORI 

couscous) another with holes In the bottom (kashas or 
madambachc) is placed on top again, the centre vessel 
containing only water. In Hausaland, the cooking pot 

is nearly always of the shape 

shown in Fig. 2, the manu- 
facture of which lias been de- 
scribed in Hansa Superstitions 
and Customs. 

A person, either male or 
female, cooking in the dark 
must not put a light close to 
the pot, and look in to see 
how the operation is progress- 
ing, nor must he or she taste 
the contents otherwise than 
by sipping from a spoon. A 
breach of either of these rules 
would render the men who ate 
of the food useless in war and 
in hunting. 

Cooking vessels and cala- 
bashes are always cleaned 
directly after use, except, 
perhaps, at night, or in un- 

FlGS.2 3and4.-CookingUtensils j circumstances. It is a 

which arc placed above each 

other in this order. In Illustra- sign of extreme disrespect to 
tion 5 a different Utensil is seen. _ . 

serve food in a dirty vessel. 
Meat may be preserved in Tunis by salting lumps of it 
(leaving it in the salt from noon one day until early the 
next morning), and then cutting it into strips, drying 
it in the sun (for one, two, or more days, as required), 
and packing it away in a pot of zid (oil) until required — 
perhaps a year hence. When eventually used, it is 

HABITATIONS AND DOMESTIC LIFE 75 

cooked immediately before being eaten. In the Hausa 
States, it is not necessarily salted first. Large fish may be 
smoked over the fire, and these will need no subsequent 
cooking. 

Meat is preferred rather high, milk when sour, and strong- 
smelling dishes are great favourites, though this is more 
noticeable in West than 
in North Africa. Fish 
is considered most ap- 
petising when very dead 
indeed ! Th e meat 
should not be too well 
cooked. Spits are used 
for broiling in Nigeria, 
being stuck upright in 

the ground by the Side, FlG- 5- -A Vessel for Water. 

but in Tunis they are placed above the fire. There is 
no roasting done by Hausas in the city of Tunis, but in 
the country and in Nigeria a trench may be dug and rilled 
with sticks, which are then lighted. When reduced to 
live charcoal leaves are thrown over them, and the meat 
is placed upon these.5 More leaves are put on top of the 
meat, and then the hole is closed up, another fire being lit 
above the closed hole. Hot springs exist here, but they 
are not used by the Hausas for boiling purposes, nor are 
hot stones. Vegetables may be stewed alone, or with 
the meat. 

The cooking sometimes gives trouble. There is a plant 
called magiro, any part of which if put in a rival's pot will 
prevent the food being cooked however much wood is 
heaped upon the fire. It is only to be expected that any- 
thing with such an infamous name would behave badly. 

No proper bread is baked in Nigeria, though a certain 

;<> THE R.\N OF THE B0R1 

kind, OOBtalnlng a plentiful supply of red pepper, is made 
in the northern districts, but in Tunis it is sold in the 
streets. Khadejia, who makes and sells it, gave me the 
following dea rip! ion. " At four a.m. I mix salt and yeast 
with the flour, and pour boiling water on to this. I leave 
it for half-an-hour so that it may rise, and then knead 
and add water as required for an hour and a half. I cover 
it up, and let it rise for another half-an-hour, then stir it 
for some time, and take it to the oven, the owner of which 
I pay, to have it baked. About eleven a.m. it will be done, 
and then I take it to market, and sell it." In Tunis, a 
yeast (hamira) is used ; in Nigeria, palm-wine makes quite 
a good substitute. 

Several oils may be used in frying, palm-oil being the one 
most preferred by the Hausas, but if this is not available 
(it is not in Tunis), cow butter will do instead, and even 
shea-butter — though pepper must not be put into the last- 
named, else the food will be too hot, so they say. Ground- 
nut oil is not used, not at any rate in ordinary times. In 
addition to the oils, animal fat is also employed, of course, 
and salt and pepper. The salt in Tunis comes from the 
local deposits, or may be bought from European grocers ; 
in Nigeria some is supplied by the different trading 
companies, some is prepared by natives in Bomu, Muri, 
and other provinces. The pepper there is grown by the 
natives ; in North Africa it can be obtained in the Arab 
or the European suks or shops. Sugar is taken in tea and 
coffee in Tunis and Tripoli, but not in Nigeria, except in 
the Arab houses in Kano and elsewhere, but honey (from 
wild bees, which are induced to live in hives made of bark) 
appears in several dishes. 

There seems to be no appetiser used by the Hausas in 
North Africa. A few kola-nuts, which, however, are more 

HABITATIONS AND DOMESTIC LIFE 77 

of a stimulant, are to be had, but are too dear for these 
people except on very special occasions. They are not 
quite so rare in Tripoli, however, and are given to those 
visitors of sufficient importance who know how to 
appreciate them. 

The meal-times are fairly well defined, though they must 
in certain circumstances depend upon the work of the 
particular people. The food supply is regular, and, as the 
cooking takes time, the hours must be observed, except, 
perhaps, by bachelors living alone and without any manual 
work to do. In the early morning in Tunis, tea or coffee 
is taken, with some scraps of bread or biscuit, should there 
be time, but if the worker goes out about four-thirty a.m. 
he may not have his breakfast until eight o'clock. Some 
may take both. .In Tripoli the Hausas go in more for 
trading, and so suit their hours to the convenience of 
their customers. In Nigeria, water and scraps from the 
previous night are probably all that will be available in 
the average house. The midday meal, the most im- 
portant of the day, is taken soon after noon, and meat will 
be eaten then if to be had. The meat comes cut up, and 
it is eaten first, each person taking a piece with his right 
hand. In Nigeria the grain is eaten in the same way, 
but in North Africa spoons are used for the latter, and for 
the soup or gravy which accompanies it. 

The supper comes any time after sunset, and will be to 
a large extent a repetition of the dinner. When travelling, 
flour is carried in the haversack, and this, mixed with 
water, and, if possible, sour milk, may be drunk at any 
time — probably between ten and eleven a.m., on the 
march. 

Each family eats separately, and in Nigeria the circum- 
cised males eat apart from and before the other members. 

78 THE B l.V OF THE BORI 

In North Afrii a, the husband eats inside the room, and the 

wife does so also and it the same time, though she may 
turn away from him, and will at any rate dip out of a 
separate vessel. In Nigeria, the husband eats in the 
courtyard — or in his own hut — while each wife lias her food 
in her own apartment, and would not allow any circum- 
cised male to see her doing so, probably on account of a 
fear of harm, as has been mentioned elsewhere. If the 
husband has sons, those who have been circumcised eat 
with him, and dip in order of seniority after him in the 
dishes placed upon the ground between them, the juniors 
saying " Gafera " (excuse me) the first time. If there be 
a guest of inferior or equal status, he will dip after the 
master of the house ; if slightly superior, he will dip first. 
But if the guest be a chief — a real chief, not simply a slave 
elected head, as in North Africa — lie will eat by himself, 
and not even the householder will partake until he has 
finished. If the householder has a visitor just before 
ordering a meal, he must invite him to take pot-luck, 
however little he has, and however hungry he himself may 
be. This is said to be due to a feeling of shame at being 
thought greedy, but there is no doubt that it arose origin- 
ally through fear of the evil eye, as has been explained in 
Hausa Superstitions and Customs.6 Should several persons 
be dining together, and, after each one has helped himself 
a few times, it is seen that there is not enough to go the 
whole round again, the least important person present 
takes what remains. However greedy a man might be 
(for there are plenty of such) he would not be able to be- 
little himself simply in order to get the most, for everyone 
would know his status. 

Grace is said both before and after meals, but no thanks 
are given to the bori. They must not be ignored altogether, 

HABITATIONS AND DOMESTIC LIFE yg 

however, and should a person yawn without covering his 
mouth, he is almost certain to let in some bori, and he 
should then spit it out again. One says, "Thanks be to 
God " after sneezing, for by that act one expels some bori 
which has entered without his knowing it. The expression 
is not used, however, when the person induces the bori to 
enter, as in the bori dance. For that reason, pepper is 
not at all popular with the spirits, for it makes a person 
sneeze and so drive them out. 

Haj Ali says that eggs are never given to children, 
because they would like them so much that they would do 
anything to get them, and so would rob all the hen-roosts 
in the vicinity. Adults poach them, however. 

The heart and liver of animals have special properties, 
and certain products are valuable — thus the dung of 
cattle in a lotion is excellent for small-pox,7 and the 
urine will kill worms in the stomach, according to 
Haj Ali. 

In times of scarcity, certain foods would be eaten which 
would never be touched in ordinary occasions, such as the 
fruit of the bulbous kinchiya plant, the rogon daji (a kind 
of wild manihot), and chakkara (a poor species of yam), 
the root of which is cooked in salt and oil, or even ash and 
oil. In Nigeria, the gwaza, a very bitter tuber, is also 
eaten when yams, sweet potatoes, etc., are not available. 
There seems to be no religious significance in this, the 
reason being merely that these articles of diet are much 
less palatable than those in general use. Some foods are 
prohibited in Nigeria, however, for clans would not eat 
their totem, and in addition both there and in North 
Africa there are the rules imposed by Islam. Women 
and children have the same food as the men, and the only 
difference between the supplies for their table (or rather 

80 THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

floor) and fur that of a chief would be due solely to the 
cost. But during the first three months of pregnancy, a 
white earth i-. eaten by a woman to ensure a succe 
result — it is nol used as bod during a famine. En (- 

and elsewhere it is mixed with charcoal, and olive oil, 
as a means to deaden the pangs. 

There is no cannibalism amongst the Han • in North 
Africa, and it does not exist amongst these people in their 
own country nowadays, though there are signs that human 
flesh was eaten by them at one time.8 Many other tribes 
in Nigeria continue to delight in the delectable dish, 
however, and even those which have abandoned the practice 
are still accused of it by their neighbours in many cases. 
There is no room for any folk-lore in this book, but the 
following " true account of an eye-witness " (told by 
Kandi to Haj Ali about twenty years ago) is interesting 
as showing to what length these travellers' tales will go, 
even though founded upon truth. It is not surprising, 
however, for if the ordinary person, however intelligent, 
who has never travelled out of Europe thinks of cannibals, 
he will conjure up visions of evil monsters who with gloating 
eyes voraciously devour their victims as do wild beasts, 
whereas in many cases the man-eater is in appearance a 
gentle person who pecks delicately at his enemy in order 
to absorb the virtues of the deceased, not on account of 
the taste of his flesh. The heart of a lion or a leopard will 
make a man who eats it fearless of any danger whatever, 
and the raw heart of a valiant enemy will render the 
eater very brave in war. A story of mine which appeared 
in Folk-lore (September 191 1) shows that the Hausas 
believe that to eat a very popular person will cause the 
epicure to be very well liked by all — except by the family 
of the deceased, one would imagine ! 

HABITATIONS AND DOMESTIC LIFE 81 

Some years before, when she was about sixteen years of 
age, Kandi's town, Maradi, was raided by the people of 
Kano, and she was captured and carried off. Soon after- 
wards she was bought by a Hausa slave merchant, and 
she started with him and thirteen other female slaves on 
a journey to the north. A month after they had left 
Kano, they approached a large city, and although there 
was evidence of cultivation everywhere there was not a 
man to be seen, though there were numbers of dogs.9 
As they reached the gate, one of the dogs rushed up to the 
slave merchant, put his paws upon his shoulders, and 
was evidently welcoming him, and then he jumped upon 
one of the women. They were afraid, and wanted to drive 
it away, but the merchant forbade them to do so, saying 
that the dog was an important person. The animal then 
preceded them, and they entered the city, and came to a 
house where they found women with eyes like those of 
a spider — or, as we should say, a lobster. But still 
there was no sign of a man. 

They were shown to a hut, and the merchant went off 
with the dog, and that night, when the spider-eyed women 
brought them food, they asked in whose house they were. 
The women replied that the dog was the owner, and 
that they were his wives, that all women were married 
to dogs in that city, there being no men. They also 
told them that the merchant brought women every 
year, and always sold some to this or another dog, and 
that they themselves had been brought from Hausaland, 
the air of the country having caused their eyes to grow 
out. 

Next day, the merchant summoned his slaves to the 
entrance hall, and when they had entered, they saw several 
dogs there. A sale at once commenced, and two of the 

F 

82 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

women were bought by dogs, in spite of their tears and 
protestations, and they were taken away. 

The merchant and the remaining twelve women then 
continued their journey, and fifteen days afterwards 
reached a city in which all the people had tails — and were 
cannibals, as they discovered later. On arrival, the 
travellers were taken before the chief, a man with fearful 
burning eyes, and one woman was immediately picked out 
and given to him. Next day the chief took three more, 
passing on two of them to his councillors, and keeping 
the other himself. 

The Hausa women wondered why their two fellow- 
slaves had been handed over to be the property of several 
men — for exactly the converse is what they had been 
accustomed to — and, upon their return to their lodgings, 
they asked the women of the house if such was the custom 
there. To their horror, they learned that the four women 
were not destined to be wives and to cook food, but to 
furnish it, and they at once rushed to the merchant 
and begged him not to give them up also for they were 
Mohammedans — as were the people of the city — and, on 
learning this, he promised to save them if possible, and 
went at once to the chief. The latter, however, had been 
looking forward to his feast, and was most reluctant to 
forgo any of the courses, but at last he agreed that he 
ought not to eat any who knew how to pray properly, so 
the women were brought to him and were told to pray. 
Of the eight (the other four had already been cooked), 
one half could not do so correctly, and the chief immedi- 
ately seized them with delight, and ordered them to be 
added to the menu for that very night, promising, however, 
that those four who had been successful in the test should 
leave the town next morning. But on their return to their 

HABITATIONS AND DOMESTIC LIFE 83 

lodgings, the merchant said : "Perhaps the chief will change 
his mind to-morrow, be ready to start as soon as the city 
is asleep." 

They got off without mishap, and travelled all night, and 
as soon as day broke, the merchant told them to rest a 
while by a stream at which they had just arrived, but they 
were too terrified to stop, and kept struggling along. 
Late in the afternoon they arrived at a large river, and 
being utterly worn out, and thinking that they were safe, 
they rested there for a time in peace. But just as they were 
about to continue their journey they saw horsemen coming 
upon them, and they were soon surrounded. The leader 
of these, the chief's son, was a personal friend of the 
merchant, however, and after a lot of persuasion, he 
allowed them to proceed, the merchant promising to bring 
him a special private present of two slaves in the following 
year. So the fugitives ran on, and that night they crossed 
the frontier, and were safe. 

They again passed the city of the dog-husbands and 
spider-eyed wives, and these, horrible as they had appeared 
at first, now seemed like friends after the cannibals. The 
truth of what they had been told about the eyes was proved, 
for those women who had been left there had already begun 
to look like spiders. But even here the four remaining 
women were not sold, and the merchant brought them 
back and disposed of them in Hausaland. 

Haj Ali appeared to believe the story thoroughly, saying 
that the dogs were probably aljannu or else human beings 
punished by them, and their wives would naturally change, 
while as for the tailed cannibals, are there not many of 
them even in Hausaland ? 

CHAPTER VII 

HABITATIONS AND DOMESTIC LIFE — continued 

If a Ba-Maguje wished to dig a well, he would first enlist 
the services of a diviner, who would examine the vicinity, 
and tell the client where to dig. He would have no rod, 
but he would have powerful charms which would make 
him able to see below the surface, and after the spot had 
been indicated, the digger would sacrifice two fowls, and 
then dig. If no water were found after all, he would be 
ridiculed, and would lose his reputation. Apparently, 
therefore, the spirit of life in the rod is affected by the 
character of the person using it. In North Africa, the 
Arabs have dug all the wells already. 

Water is commonly drunk, some of the people — par- 
ticularly in Nigeria — never take anything else. Usually 
no special means are taken to purify it, even in sickness, 
though it may be roughly strained through cloth. In the 
Hausa States, a native beer (called gia or giya) is drunk, 
and so is palm-wine, though both of these are supposed to 
be prohibited to Mohammedans ; in North Africa European 
beers are taken by most, and palm-wine is obtainable at 
certain places to the south of Tunis, and in Tripoli. Many 
Mohammedans consider — or rather pretend — that they are 
quite within their own laws so long as they drink only 
those intoxicants not known to the Prophet, and therefore 
not literally forbidden by him. But Europeans can hardly 
sneer at this, seeing that it is their intoxicants which have 
brought about such hypocrisy ! 

84 

HABITATIONS AND DOMESTIC LIFE 85 

As has been mentioned already, tea and coffee are almost 
unknown to the Hausa in Nigeria unacquainted with the 
European or the Arab, and in the north both are drunk 
by nearly all. Tea is said to help the action of the bladder, 
but coffee has no beneficial effect ; on the contrary, it is 
harmful, if anything, for " if a person much addicted to this 
latter beverage cannot get it he will feel very unhappy." 
Except in the morning, tea and coffee are drunk some time 
after food, and are made so sweet that their taste is 
nauseating to a European, mint being often mixed with 
the former. There may be another strange element, 
for the tea leaves do not necessarily come from the East, 
sometimes the leaves of a small running plant resembling 
dead moss are used instead. The coffee is boiled for some 
time in small tin mugs with long handles, and is drunk out 
of cups or glasses, many people carrying their own mugs 
with them. 

A man would not like another to step over the vessel in 
which his food was being cooked, though this would not 
prevent his eating it, but the shadow of a dog would spoil it. 
The reason is that " food is king over every living thing, 
and it should not be insulted." Even a chief will let 
everything go for food if he is hungry. " Food rules the 
world." The Hausa expression probably has reference to 
an Arab tabu. Shoemakers stick the layers of leather 
together with clay or with the blood of the spleen ; they 
do not use paste, because flour was not given by God to 
be walked upon. This may be a survival, for a lump of 
dough was once worshipped by the Hanifas, while the 
Collyridians offered the Virgin Mary, as God, a twisted cake. 
Paste was frequently used in Assyrian inscriptions, especi- 
ally when making the circle of defence against demons.1 

Matches are now so common in North Africa, and even 

86 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

in Nigeria, that very primitive methods need seldom be 
resorted to, but in both countries, the flint and steel is still 
used to some extent in the less « ivilised parts. My in- 
formant (Auta) remembers that lie used to make a lire in 
Nigeria in two different ways : (i) A piece, about a foot 
long, of the hard tafashiya shrub was split up lengthwise. 
A groove was made in another piece of wood, and the hard 
tafashiya was rubbed backwards and forwards in the hole 
until the cotton tinder smoked, and at last caught fire when 
blown ; (2) a stalk of guinea-corn was split and held 
upon the ground by the feet, and another stalk was nibbed 
to and fro with the hands. A third method was described 
by Haj Ali, who said that in his district a pointed stick was 
twirled round and back in the hole in another stick, 
and powdered guinea-corn stalk acted as tinder. These 
methods are not used nowadays even in religious cere- 
monies in the districts where matches are easily obtain- 
able. Burning lenses are sometimes found amongst the 
Arabs of Tunis, but the French are said to confiscate them, 
probably in the hope of making the people more civilised 
through the use of their own matches. No match can 
equal one of French manufacture, of course, as all who 
have had the misfortune to use them will agree. 

" Fire has been known to the Hausas ever since they 
were created," so there were no legends obtainable as to 
its introduction, not, at least, by the people who gave me 
this information about their early culture. Fire is not a 
bori, nor does a bori dwell in it (" Would a bori wish to be 
burnt up ? ") but some of the spirits {e.g. Ba-Toye) set fire 
to houses, and burn people. The bori like the smell of the 
incense, not the fire, although a man could not escape from 
them on account of this, even if he were to sit in a circle 
of fire, for the bori could fly up above the flame, and come 

ii. — Cooking. The girl is an Arab, the woman a Hausa. 
12. — Hausas at work. 

HABITATIONS AND DOMESTIC LIFE 87 

down inside the circle, or else they could go and destroy his 
possessions. The Magazawa quench their fires on the 
death of the master of the house, but the Mohammedan 
Hausas do not do so. 

Live charcoal is kept in the earthenware kyanu (see 
Fig. 4), and it can be carried about in this. It corresponds 
to the three stones of Hausaland (used also in country 
places here), and is, in fact, often given the same name, 
murufu. Should the tenants go out, or be ready for sleep, 
the ash is raked to one side with an iron implement shaped 
like sugar-tongs, and the live coals, having been pushed 
down to the bottom, are covered with the ash, and although 
the embers will live for several hours, it is said that there 
is then no danger from fire. Should anyone's house be 
in flames all neighbours would help to put them out, and 
they would also assist in the rebuilding afterwards, such 
"' working-bees " being common in Nigeria, and furnishing a 
foundation for some of the folk-tales.2 The people there are 
not so careful, and at one time the soldiers and police were 
always having conflagrations in their lines, for they would 
leave a fire in their grass huts in cold weather and go on 
parade quite unconcernedly. At last they were made to 
pay for all damage arising from such causes, and the 
accidents ceased, but the people thought the regulation 
extremely unfair. It was the work of a bori or of some- 
one with the evil eye, according to them, and to make the 
victims pay for the damaged property, although they had 
lost their own, was adding insult to injury. 

The houses in the North African towns mentioned are 
now lighted by European oil-lamps. In Nigeria, open 
saucers or lamps of metal are used with a wick of cotton 
floating in ground-nut-oil or shea-butter, and the Hausas 
in the country north of the Sahara use similar articles. 

8S THE BAN 01 THE B0R1 

Many of them possess large French coloured glass lamps, 
but for the mo1 1 pari they are useful merely to imprest the 
visitor, it being considered better to allow them to stand 

imposingly as ornaments on the broken-down <l- i of 
drawers than to degrade them by putting them to the base 
use for which they were originally intended by ignorant 
Europeans. 

The Hausas as a people do not keep cattle, so beef, milk 
and butter have to be obtained from the pastoral peoples 
if in the vicinity, otherwise they do without, or use sub- 
stitutes, but goats and sheep are kept for food, and horses, 
camels, donkeys, dogs, and cats for use. 

In Nigeria, the oxen are bought from the Filani by the 
Hausa butchers, and may be kept for a little time to be 
fattened up, or until most of the meat has been contracted 
for. But they are not used for draught by the Hausas 
(except under European direction), nor are they ridden as 
in Bornu. They are humped, usually white in colour, and 
have long horns set wide apart. The bori keep their own 
cattle, of course, but that is no reason why they should not 
afflict or use the herds belonging to human beings, and 
snakes are supposed to be specially troublesome. One 
kind of viper is called shanono — i.e. " drink-milk." 

The people say that they do not keep cattle because they 
like the company of their own kind, they cannot under- 
stand the Filani going out every day and all day with 
cattle. They like to work in fits and starts, and although 
they go on long trading journeys, they can have some 
opportunity for some time afterwards to rest and to sit 
with others and talk about it. The Hausa is a sociable 
person, so he does not like being alone more than he can 
help. " A Hausa cannot talk to a cow ! " 3 

To many people he appears to be stolid and rather dull, 

HABITATIONS AND DOMESTIC LIFE 89 

but he is really a merry soul delighting in mirth. The 
laughter must be soft, however, for this passes unnoticed 
by the bori, whereas a loud gaffaw may bring trouble 
at once, the noise attracting the spirits, the merriment 
exciting their animus, and the open mouth letting 
them in. It is rather interesting to note that the European 
devil never laughs loudly.4 

The goats are of several colours, but it is generally a 
black he-goat which is used in sacrifices. They and the 
sheep are small animals, and not remarkable except for the 
fact that the latter have hair rather than wool, and even 
the Hausa confuses them in his folk-lore. There are 
several varieties, one, from Bornu, with a Jewish nose, 
being much larger than the average, but, so far as I know, 
it is not sacrificed,. the favourite animal being a white ram 
with black marks round the eyes. The milk is drunk, and 
the supply can be increased by grinding up a little of the 
root of the Nonon Kurichiya with a pinch of potash, and 
mixing the powder with the chaff. The root of the dafara 
creeper thickens milk, and so enables water to be added 
without the risk of detection. Are there no honest 
milkmen in the world ? All of these animals are sold to 
the butchers or are killed for private use, the skins being 
tanned and made into " Morocco " leather of various 
colours. There are fat-tailed sheep specially bred in 
Tunis, but none are to be found in Nigeria, I believe. 

Horses are known to have been imported — one legend 
says from Bagdad, though Professor Ridgeway has proved 
that this is not correct. They are mostly small ponies 
about fourteen hands or less in height, but some are much 
higher, and are greatly valued by the chiefs. They are 
not used for draught in Nigeria, but are ridden, the saddle 
and bridle (already described in Hausa Superstitions and 

qo THE BAN OF THE BORI 

Customs) being of Arab origin. A white stnr seems to be 
lm ky, and white stockings arc supposed to signify lliat 
the animal lias strength. The horse often saves the hero 
from witches in the folk-tales, the belief in the animal's 
power to do this being due possibly to the fact that it was 
associated with Tanith. A winged steed appears on some 
of the coins of Carthage and is a divine symbol.6 Camels 
are used in the Northern Hausa States, and by rich Arabs 
in Tunis and Tripoli, but the Hausas in the latter countries 
have neither horses nor camels. Donkeys are used to 
carry loads, one being slung on each side in a long double 
bag. They are very small animals with a cross down the 
back and shoulders ; I could get no explanation of this 
marking. 

The dogs in Nigeria resemble greyhounds to some extent 
in build, and are usually small and cowardly, but there are 
some breeds of bigger and stronger animals which will 
fight hyenas. They are of several colours, brown, tan, and 
black and white. As is mentioned later, the faster ones 
are used in hunting. They are unfriendly to strangers, 
whether of their own people or not, and some of them 
greatly object to Europeans, as do many of the horses in 
Nigeria which have not previously seen a white skin. In 
the folk-lore, dogs are credited with powers over witches 
and bogeys, probably because of their use in hunting, 
and although it is hotly denied, there is but little reason 
to doubt that Hausas ate dogs as well as horses at one time, 
though probably as much on account of the virtues thus 
absorbed as for the taste. In fact, burnt dog's head is 
said by one man to have been a remedy for many ills. 
Some Arabs hold that the ashes of such, mixed with vinegar, 
are excellent for patients suffering from hydrophobia. 

Cats are sometimes half wild in Northern Nigeria, but 

HABITATIONS AND DOMESTIC LIFE 91 

in Tunis and Tripoli they have been tamed. They are 
good mousers and rat-killers. 

As the Hausas usually have fires in their rooms or huts 
for a great part of the year, vermin is not particularly 
plentiful. But lice find a happy hunting ground in the 
women's hair in Nigeria, and fleas attack both sexes when 
sufficient clothing is worn, though the people say that there 
are none in the city of Tunis. Ticks are a source of loss 
in Nigeria, and the non-hairy parts and manes and tails 
of horses are smeared with a mixture of tobacco, onions 
and grease to keep them clear. Locally bred dogs do not 
seem to suffer anything like as much from ticks, fleas, or 
mosquitoes as do the animals brought by Europeans. 

Fowls are kept, and sometimes guinea-fowls with them. 
They seem to be of several breeds, smaller in each case than 
the European birds. They are used for food, but quite as 
often for sacrifice, as are pigeons. Turkeys and ducks (or 
" Yoruba fowls ") are kept in small quantities — they are 
never sacrificed. In Nigeria, these birds run loose in the 
compound, or even outside, but here they are kept shut up 
in coops by the salanga. 

Two varieties of hives are made for bees in Nigeria, one 
in the trees, and the other either there or close to the 
ground. The first is made of a cylinder of bark two or more 
feet long, with wood or mud at each end, the other is an 
earthenware pot the mouth of which is almost stopped up. 
In North Africa there are hives in the courtyards of a few 
houses, so I am told, but I have not seen any. In order to 
be able to take the honey, which is of a dark colour, and 
watery, a smudge of grass is held under the hive until the 
bees have been driven away, and then the person, having 
opened one end, takes what he requires, while waving the 
smudge about so as to protect himself from attack. There 

THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

is a honey-guide bird, thegunda, which will show the where- 
abouts "l tin- liives of the wild bees, but this, according to 
some, is a bad bird, for " even though you have given it 
its share on eai b w casiou (hat you have found a hive, one 

day it will guide you on to a li<»ii, or a snake, or something 
else dangerous, and you may lose your life. When it 
takes you to a hive, it waits for its share of the honey 
(whi h you place upon the ground), but when it betrays you 
thus, it simply laughs at you and flies off, leaving you to 
get out of danger as best you can." Not all birds behave 
so badly, however (in the folk-tales they are almost uni- 
versally friendly), and "if the suda (which resembles a 
small sparrow) says Kadda ka zo wurin nan (Do not come 
here) just as you are entering any part of the bush, do not 
go on, for if you do, you will meet a snake or some wild 
beast." 

Should an animal be about to die, its throat will be cut, 
and then it may be eaten by the poorer Mohammedan 
Hausas, unless it has suffered from some disease of which 
they are afraid. The Magazawa do not mind if it has died 
naturally or not, they will eat it just the same. If a 
Moslem Hausa were to leave a bull or cow with another 
when going on a journey, and the beast fell ill and was 
dying, the person in charge of it would have to kill it in 
time, and so enable other Moslems to eat of the flesh. If 
he did this, he would be under no liability to the owner, 
so I am informed, but if he were to let it die naturally, 
so that it became unavailable for food, he would have to 
pay for it on the owner's return. 

Scars may be made with brands of iron usually on the 
fore or hind quarters of the beast, but other marks of 
ownership are recognised, such as a slit in the ear. In 
Tunis, donkeys are often branded upon the nose, and all 

HABITATIONS AND DOMESTIC LIFE 93 

animals may have the sign of the hand painted upon their 
foreheads or other parts of the body as a preventive 
against the evil eye. It is for more than this, however. 
The English visitor's blood boils at the cruelty openly 
shown by Arabs to their animals, though the French seem 
to care but little, the Italians less, and the Spanards not at 
all. If the poor beast has been so badly knocked about 
that it can hardly move, its master paints it with henna, 
hangs a charm about its neck, flogs it along, or prods an 
open sore with a stick, and leaves its recovery to Allah ; he 
will not rest it if he can possibly avoid doing so. The 
raider used to treat his Hausa slave in something the 
same way, and often one would dearly like to see the 
owner treated in a similar fashion. Yet one wonders 
sometimes if the Arab is really so intentionally cruel as he 
seems to be to us, and whether he really thinks that the 
animal feels pain, and that he is not treating it in the best 
way possible ! Even in England there are some cruel 
and useless " remedies." The Hausa also is callous, and 
will saddle a horse whatever the condition of its back. 

The Hausa of Nigeria is profuse in his salutations,6 but 
in North Africa these have been greatly reduced and 
altered. There, on meeting an equal, each man will squat 
and touch his breast three times, murmuring various 
greetings such as " Hail ! " " How are you ? " " What is 
the news ? " " How is your household ? " etc. — but not 
" How are your wives ? " If the men are of unequal 
status only the inferior squats. If there is a great differ- 
ence, the inferior may in addition take the right hand of 
the superior between his two hands and press it. As for 
the women, every one of them kneels to her husband or 
other superior, especially when bringing food. In Tunis 
and Tripoli, however, neither the men nor the women 

94 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

kneel, and the salutation is a single pressure of the hand 
without necessarily touching the breast, though a few of 
the women and fewer still of the men kiss either the 
fingers of the person saluted while holding the hand, or 
else tin v kiss their own first finger after having let the 
other's hand go. They may even bend right down to 
the hand. An especially warm salutation is the kiss 
upon the side of the neck. European women in Tunis 
and Tripoli are addressed as " Madama," the Hausa does 
not like to end his words with a consonantal sound, and he 
cannot understand that anything — even a vowel — should 
ever be mute. 

They are trying to learn other words from their con- 
querors— or rather the conquerors of their masters, fcr 
the Hausas had no particular love for Tunis or Tripoli ; 
they do not claim to belong to either country — and I 
was somewhat startled a couple of nights after my 
arrival in the first-named city. A dilapidated old rascal 
(see 111. 50), wearing a cotton cap, a greeny-black 
twenty-second-hand frock-coat, and a pair of European 
trousers which had long lost all their buttons, had accom- 
panied me home through the streets much against my 
will, and after I had bidden him good-night in my best 
Hausa, he replied, with quite a Parisian accent : " Adieu." 
Perhaps he thought that it suited his clothes — being 
a little patch of civilisation which only emphasised 
the black skin. At any rate, it was the only French 
word, except merci, which he knew. 

CHAPTER VIII 

BIRTH AND PUBERTY 

Children are much desired, and I suspect that there was 
once a religious motive as well as the natural ones of 
protection from the sons and of gain through the marriage 
of the daughters, but the reason given now is that if a man 
dies without any children, some, if not all, of his property 
goes to the chief. On account of this, adoption is recom- 
mended, but since the descendants of the adopted son are 
said to bless the adopting parent, and to remember him at 
meal-times, I thin£ the reason given in Hausa Supersti- 
tions and Customs (p. 96) — i.e. that the descendants 
were necessary in order to carry on ancestor-worship — is 
the correct one.1 

Barren women are not exactly despised, for there are 
many of them, but they are certainly ridiculed to some 
extent, and they themselves are always bemoaning their 
sad fate. At first, various measures will be tried, both 
Mohammedan and pagan. Thus a charm may be pro- 
cured from a mallam, which may be either a laiya — a 
verse of the Koran, or some other written charm, enclosed 
in a leather purse — or a drink, or a wash. A boka or other 
wise man will supply one of the latter (probably made 
from the root of the bazere tree), upon reasonable payment. 
Allah may be invoked, and if He does not hear the prayer, 
a sacrifice may be made to a bori, which, however, accord- 
ing to some, can give nothing of itself, but can only ask 
Allah's permission. A pilgrimage may also take place to 
95 

06 Till B I.V OF THE BORI 

the tomb <.l m.ihc powerful saint, and a rag may be tied 
to a tree in the vicinity, while some earth at the roots 
is collected and broughl li.uk, though bul few Ifau.-a 
women do this. Should all these means fail, it is recog- 
nised that the woman h;is not been mated with her 
bunsuru (he-goat), and if both the parties are particularly 
anxious for i hildivn, and the husband can afford it, there 
will probably be a divoice. There is no belief that a 
virgin can give birth. 

Sometimes a woman will have eveiy sign of pregnancy, 
and yet at the end of nine months she will not be delivered, 
but will grow bigger than ever. This is due to the fact 
that an iska (a wind — another name for bori) has played 
a trick upon her, he having done this because either 
some jealous woman or else a disappointed lover has got 
him upon his side. The worst of it is that the particular 
iska can hardly ever be identified and propitiated, for 
each bori when asked by the diviner will say that it is 
another one, and thus it is very seldom indeed that the 
woman is cured.2 

The souls of every living thing go to Allah — even those 
of flies — for He made them and He loves them. Some 
say that they cannot return and enter the bodies of 
descendants, although the bori can do so, but the better 
opinion is that the soul can become reincarnate in the 
grandchild, while a few say that it can enter even a child 
of the deceased. 

If a woman does conceive, she will procure certain 
washes and drinks from a boka or a mallam, and when she 
has used these, she will burn incense for a short time on 
three consecutive days, taking care to breathe in some of 
it, and she will pray to Allah, Mohammed, and to Kuri 
and other bori, to give her a son who will be tall, strong, 

BIRTH AND PUBERTY 97 

and fortunate. The reason of this inhalation is not quite 
clear. The natural explanation is that the mother thus 
summons the bori which is to be the child's familiar, but 
this can hardly be so, for it does not come until after the 
child has been actually born, for the sex is not known 
before that time. The idea seems to be rather that the 
mo therfrees herself of evil influences than that she attracts 
good ones, and so the child is affected indirectly, not 
directly. Except for the facts that white earth must be 
eaten and that hot tea must not be drunk during the first 
three months of pregnancy, there seems to be no special 
diet for a pregnant woman, nor are any preparations 
made except that firewood is collected so as to provide 
warm water and fires for the mother. She will sleep (in 
her turn) with her husband up to the eighth month ; he 
has no restrictions whatever. 

Should a woman in an interesting condition wish for 
anything, she must be given it immediately. This may 
be on account of the fear of the evil eye of a woman in such 
a dangerous state, but the people say not, that otherwise 
the person refusing would be responsible for any bad 
results — e.g. the birthmarks or little growths on the face 
of a child.3 Thus Haj Ali knows a man who has molelike 
excrescences under his eyes, which are due to the fact 
that his mother when carrying him asked for some grapes 
from her husband, but he could get none. Things obtained 
by the expectant mother need not be returned on delivery, 
but very little is demanded thus, for a woman knows that 
if she were to ask, she would have to suffer, for one day 
later on more would be obtained from her. Discolora- 
tions come from a similar cause, he says, but another 
reason for the " port wine stains " on the skin is that a 
woman's womb burns like fire within, and so, unless great 

G 

i ill, has 01 THE BOR1 

care is exercised in delivery, the baby is certain to show 
some signs of it. " Anyone who has touched the entrails 
of a Sacrificed animal knows that the womb is &TC, lot he 
will have found them very hot." An Arab girl, Xaji. 
part owner of the house in which Ilaj Ali lives, has eyes 
very tar apart -lie has a Mongolian appearance. This 
Came about be* anse, when carrying her in the womb, her 
mother went to bathe, and was frightened by a ghost. 
She returned home, her eyes staring, and so Naji has 
had to suffer. 

Opinions differ as to what happens during pregnancy. 
For the first forty days the womb contains only water, 
according to Haj Ali's wife, for the next forty blood, and 
for the forty days after that a wormlike object. During 
the following forty days this gradually changes into a 
human being, though very small " half as big as your 
finger," and it grows and grows until at the proper time it 
is born. Another informant says that the child is formed 
at the end of three months in the case of a female, but not 
until one hundred and twenty days if a male. Still 
another account gives the development as above, and 
adds that the life is then breathed into the fcetus for ten 
days, and when this has been done Allah pushes the womb 
to the front one night while the woman is asleep. A Hausa 
on the Gold Coast gives the shortest time with normal 
women as six months, the longest nine, though some go 
on for four years if afflicted with a disease.4 There is no 
massaging of the mother at any time during pregnancy. 

Some of the Hausas of Tunis, no doubt following the 
Arabs, procure a black hen during the seventh month of 
pregnancy, and keep it in the house until labour has begun. 
It is then taken to the Jews' quarter by one of the old 
women of the house, who lets it loose there, so that it will 

BIRTH AND PUBERTY oo 

take away any evil bori (not the personal spirit described 
in Chapter X.) which has been watching for the child's 
appearance. The idea is that the spirit will have been 
waiting about, and will have taken possession of the hen, 
intending to leave it and enter the child as soon as it has 
been born. As the hen — and the bori in it — is taken and 
lost in a strange locality, the spirit is supposed not to be 
able to find its way back, and so it must leave the child in 
peace. Considering the fact that the bori found the 
house in the first instance, this explanation seems quite 
insufficient, and it is possible that at one time there was 
an element of the changeling theory in the practice.5 
But as the Hausas borrowed the idea from the Arabs they 
are unaware of any other signification than that mentioned 
above, and, after all, one does not expect magical beliefs 
to be quite logical. Should labour be delayed a charm 
may be drunk, and a laiya placed or rubbed upon the 
woman's abdomen, or a draught of water from the kaskon 
tsoro, a brass bowl upon which characters are embossed, 
may be taken instead or in addition, for it will ensure an 
easy time for the drinker.6 

On the delivery of the child, the cord is tied, preferably 
with red wool, some four inches from the child's body, and 
is cut with a razor. As with the Arabs, the after-birth 
may be buried in the garden in the centre of the courtyard 
if the house is large enough to have one, but in the case of 
most of the Hausas it is placed in a hole in some waste 
place, or in an old grave. The stump dries up, and after 
a little time it falls off, but Mai-Chibi gives many babies 
umbilical hernia, so any signs of his presence should be 
watched for. In Nigeria the stump is buried, but in 
Tunis it is sometimes placed in the child's pillow so as to 
cause the owner to develop quickly. After about three 

loo THE BAN OF THE BORI 

years it is placed in a tin to be kepi in some set ret plai e; 
for, if stolen, the i liild would be injured mentally, though 
not nc, essarily in body. In some places it is dried and 
powck'ivd, hi hi- then used as a medicine for sore eyes. If 

it were burnt, the mother would bear no more I hildren- - 
the List idea being comparable to our belief that burning 
dressings helps to dry up a wound. 

The child is washed in warm water by the midwives in 
Nigeria, and generally the North African Hausa baby is 
treated likewise, though it may sometimes only be wiped 
dry. It is given water to drink for the first few hours, then 
the milk of its mother. The midwives assist at the delivery, 
and have to be closely watched, because they try to get 
the caul should the child be born with one, some people 
say the sac also. These bring the possessor great lu< k ; 
in fact, even a small portion is enough, and so they are 
eagerly bought if for sale. A person having a piece of a 
caul will not fail in anything, and even if he does evil he 
will succeed in it, and escape punishment. At the same 
time it would not save him from drowning, so to some 
extent English cauls are more valuable — our superstition 
striking them as being most absurd and amusing ! A 
piece of the sac is not anything like so effective, but some 
think that it acts in the same way. After delivery the 
caul (and with some the sac also) is covered with sugar 
and dried in the sun, and the whole or small pieces of it 
may be sold. 

If the mother should die in labour, no means are taken 
to save the child ; both are buried together, as has been 
shown elsewhere.7 Nor are still-born children treated as 
if they could be brought to life ; for if there is no breath, 
the child is regarded as being dead, and is buried accord- 
ingly. A story is told of a child which was born later of 

BIRTH AND PUBERTY mi 

itself, and, its cries having been heard, it was rescued, and 
on growing up became a mallam. Should the new-born 
child arrive normally, however, its head is moulded for 
some seven days, as has already been said. 

Twins and triplets are not common, but they are lucky. 
Some mothers have been known to have three sets of 
twins ; Khadejia knew one. In Nigeria, twin sons cannot 
be stung by scorpions, nor will snakes harm them, but 
in North Africa, unfortunately, they have no such good 
fortune. Anyone can pick up scorpions with perfect 
safety, however, if he takes a certain young plant (Nonon 
Kurichiya, or Dove's Milk), and rubs it between his 
hands ; and by drinking the juice of this plant, mixed with 
milk, he can secure general popularity amongst his fellows. 
He can also catch snakes by pounding up a certain creeper 
(name unknown), mixing it with water, and rubbing it 
upon his hands and arms, while pieces of garlic or onion 
rubbed on the legs will drive snakes away. Should food 
be on the fire, and should one or both of the twins become 
angry at something or other, it will not cook until the 
twins have been appeased, and one has touched the pot. 
In any case, twins are supposed to be much more 
intelligent and cunning than ordinary children. 

" In Kabbi (or Kebbi) the new baby was taken upon its 
first night in the world to a river, and was thrown in, and 
on the following morning the people of the house went to 
find it. If it was discovered alive on the bank it was held 
to be legitimate, but if dead in the water, it was proved 
a bastard." The reason was, I understand, that the 
crocodile was once a totem, and if it accepted the child, 
and put it back upon the bank, all was well, otherwise 
there had been treachery. Another man says that the 
baby was placed upon the bank, not in the water, and this 

102 THE B IV OF THE BORI 

i- rrrLiinly the more probable, or rather was, §DC the 
prac tit c ceased some lime a; 

On Hie fortieth day the mother boils the root of dundu 
shrub in water, and Sprinkles herself with it by dipping 
in a brancli of the runJui tree. This is important, for were 
she feo diiiit it, both she and the child would remain weak. 
When it has been done she must drink kunu (gruel) 
into which has been put potash ; were she not to do so, 
mother and baby would always feel cold. A child which 
cries continually is evidently afflicted by a bori, probably 
Sa'idi, so it should be held over a pot of incense until quiet 
— but there must be moderation in this, of course. 

The mother takes life easily for forty days in the case 
of those who are well-to-do, but where the woman has to 
work for her living she may not be able to afford to lie up 
at all. At the end of forty days or less she will wash, 
again sprinkling herself with the runhu. The ordinary 
period of lactation in Nigeria is two years, but sometimes a 
girl may be weaned at eighteen months ; sometimes, on 
the contrary, the nursing of a child of either sex may con- 
tinue for three years. In North Africa six months may be 
considered sufficient. The period depends mainly upon 
the circumstances of the parents ; the more wives and 
concubines the husband has, the greater being the time 
allowed to each mother — and, of course, something depends 
upon the woman's desires also. During this period a 
husband is not supposed to have intercourse with his wife, 
for if she were to become pregnant again, both the newly 
conceived child and the one at the breast would grow 
weak and useless. In North Africa, however, where 
hardly any of the men have more than one wife, and no 
concubines, the risk is taken, and a man may sleep with 
the mother after the forty days are over, though not 

BIRTH AND PUBERTY m; 

before then. In Nigeria, after weaning, she gives her 
breasts seven days to recover, then she washes, and 
sleeps with her husband again. During the forty days, 
men in North Africa will eat food prepared by her, but in 
Nigeria perhaps not until the child is weaned. The same 
applies to a woman at certain times.8 

Children, both Mohammedan and pagan, are named 
on the seventh day after that of the birth. One name 
(chosen by the parent) is spoken aloud ; another, given by 
the mallam, is whispered into the child's ear, and the 
parents are informed of it afterwards. With some, the 
secret name is never divulged, but with others the child 
is known by it after its third year, although it is admitted 
that the knowledge of the secret name will enable an evil 
wisher to work the bearer ill. He can do no harm by using 
the name spoken aloud, except by calling it over a bowl of 
water, as is described later. The difference, apparently, 
is merely that the magic worked with the secret name 
would be much more certain in its effect than that with 
the ordinary name. 

There does not seem to be any other name given at any 
time, however, though a kirari, or form of address, may 
be bestowed either as an honour or in ridicule. A husband 
does not use the name of his first wife, nor a wife of her 
first husband in Nigeria, but in Tunis and Tripoli there is 
no such restriction, nor is there with the name of the first 
child. In Nigeria, should a father wish to speak to his 
eldest child he will do so secretly at night ; he will never be 
seen talking to him until adult or married, but no such 
precaution is necessary in regard to the other children,9 
and none at all is observed in North Africa, not even that 
respecting the eldest. In Nigeria a wife calls her husband 
" Master of the House," or something similar ; in the 

104 THE BAN ()J: THE B0R1 

north she says, " Son of my Mother," because the husband 
is not master, apparently ; she even calls a second husband 
by name. In neither country is then any marked objec- 
tion to usin^r the names of the dead. 

A child would probably not re. eive the name of a grand- 
parent who was alive, nor of his father or her mother even 
if dead, but this is said to be due simply to the fact that 
it would not be right to hear the father's or mother's name 
Spoken out loudly by other children. Another informant 
denies this, and says that there is no such restriction, for 
he knows of examples to the contrary. 

When a mother has had several children who have died 
young, special care will be taken with the next, for it is 
recognised that the woman is a wabi — i.e. one fated to lose 
her offspring. One way is as follows. It is taken upon a 
cloth by the mother and placed disdainfully upon a dung- 
hill, or upon a heap of dust, and left there by her, she 
going home and pretending to abandon it. But immedi- 
ately behind her come friends, who pick it up, and take it 
back to her. The child will have only one half of its head 
shaved alternately until adult, and will be called Ajuji 
(Upon the Dunghill) or Ayashi (Upon the Dust-heap) ac- 
cording to the place upon which it was placed. A mother 
who thinks this procedure too drastic may call her child 
Angulu (Vulture) and trust to luck. This dirty bird is said 
to disgust the spirits, which is somewhat confusing, con- 
sidering that certain of them, Jato, for instance, is anything 
but polished, and one bori bears this very name. The real 
explanation seems to be that the spirits do not want the 
child because of itself, but merely to punish the mother, 
and if so her best means of keeping it is to convince them 
that she would be glad if it went. Brass rings threaded on 
a string are worn around neck and waist until the child is 

BIRTH AND PUBERTY 105 

adult, and the mother will shave half or the whole of lior 
head, as already described, probably in order to render her 
unrecognisable by the bori. 

Some four or live years after a woman lias ceased child- 
bearing, her youngest child will be called Auta (Tiny), for 
she knows that the bori Auta or Kulita, "The One who 
puts an end to birth," has visited her. 

For some time special means will be taken to protect the 
child from the Yayan Jidderi who always attack children. 
A good method is to place a few ground-nuts and sweets by 
the child's head at night, and then the young bori will be 
pleased, and will leave the child in peace. After the sweets 
have lain there for three days, they are given to a Mai- 
Bori, such as Salah, so that he may put them in one of his 
small medicine-pots, and in a few days it will be found that 
they have been' eaten — by the spirits, of course ! The 
mother has to be careful of herself too, else the tundara — a 
bori in the shape of a spotted snake — will drink the milk 
from her breasts, and so prevent her feeding the child. 

Children do not always develop quite normally, and 
when this is the case a Boka or a Mai-Bori should be con- 
sulted so that the parents may know which spirit must be 
appeased. Abd Allah had no eyebrows for a long time, but 
the parents, having discovered that " Father Kuri " was 
angry, sacrificed a red cock and a white hen to him, and 
lo ! the eyebrows began to grow instanter ! Sometimes a 
particular dead marabout may be appealed to, the women 
of the household taking the child to the tomb, where they 
make it lie down while they rub its body with the blood of 
a white cock which they have sacrificed, or else with a little 
of the earth near the tomb. A candle is lighted and incense 
is burnt before and during this treatment, and a present is 
made to the guardian of the tomb. 

eo6 THE B i.v OF THE B0R1 

A wife in Nigeria may Bpeak tlic name of the youth who 
is to be her iii st husband, but do! after marriage ; in North 

Africa it docs not matter. Tlie name of an important chief 
should nut be mentioned while he is alive, but this pro- 
hibition is very often disregarded by irreverent persons 
who think that they are not being overheard by any of 
his suite. After death the name may be mentioned with 
impunity, though with the prefix Sariki (Chief).10 

The Magazawa give a child a name which is known only 
to its parents and to itself later, and one according to the 
time at which it is born, the latter being known by all. 
Thus Chi-Wakt (Eating Beans) arises through the owner 
having been born when beans were being eaten by the other 
people in the house, and the name Ta-Roro (Grubbing) 
informs all and sundry that he who bears it made his 
first appearance when the ground-nuts, etc., were being 
gathered in. The Mohammedan Hausas also sometimes 
call a child after the season or even by the name of the 
day of the week upon which it was born. 

Infanticide has been treated of fully in Hausa Super- 
stitions and Customs. The people here confirm the state- 
ments that virgins were once offered to Dodo, and that 
albinos were sacrificed by chiefs before going to war, but 
they deny any knowledge as to whether these latter were 
eaten or not.11 The fact that the mother will not allow 
the father to see her nursing her eldest child may be a 
survival from the time when the first-born was put to 
death . 

Should an unmarried girl become pregnant, she will take 
drugs to restore her regularity, but this is said to be very 
uncommon, and it seems certain that some regular drink 
is taken before or after each act to prevent trouble arising, 
so abortion and child-murder must happen but seldom. 

BIRTH AND PUBERTY 107 

The llausu giilb are not kept in like their Arab sisters, and 
so they have man}' more opportunities of giving way to 
free love if they desire to do so — and they are not by any 
means moral. 

Adoption must be free and open. If the child has a 
father, it is necessary to obtain his consent. If the child 
is small and is in the charge of a paternal uncle, the latter 
must agree. In the case, however, of an adult male who is 
married, or of one who has no father, his own consent is 
sufficient, but this must be either in writing which is wit- 
nessed or spoken openly before several people. Before it 
has been given there is no relationship, but afterwards, 
the 3'outh becomes a full member of the family, and is 
subject to the usual prohibitions regarding marriage, re- 
taining, however, the disabilities of his own blood relation- 
ship with his former family. 

There seem to have been no elaborate ceremonies of 
initiation for everyone, even in the past in Nigeria, and 
there are certainly none in North Africa. A girl is in- 
structed in wifely duties, a boy in the elements of his pro- 
fession, but there is not much else done. Circumcision 
was practised long before the introduction of Islam, so it 
was part of an old initiation, in all probability. Girls also 
were excised in some districts, Kano, for instance, and I am 
told that this still holds good with some clans — e.g. the 
Mujiga. I do not know the name ; they are said to be 
pagan Hausas who pierce their lips and knock out the two 
bottom front teeth. These are rather strange customs for 
Hausas, and I much doubt the purity of their blood, and 
also that of the pagan girls of Kano. 

Children in Nigeria, after having been weaned, are taken 
by their paternal or even their maternal uncles to be 
educated, and they may remain under their charge until 

i.i.x THE B i.v OF THE BORI 

grown up in the case of a youth, until marriage in the case 
hi .1 girl. They become practically the children ol their 
guardians (whose own children have gone to another 

relative), and are disciplined and taught what is necessary 
for them to learn. The schools are conducted bymallams, 
and the young sons and often also the daughters of the 
most important men are taught to read and write, the 
education being continued as long as is necessary. In 
the case of the boys destined to become mallams, they live 
with one of these learned men for some years, and are 
taught to recite portions of the Koran by heart. The class 
begins early in the morning, all the pupils repeating the 
verses together in a high tone. The education is much the 
same for the children of all grades, but the more money 
there is forthcoming, the greater the amount of instruction 
given, naturally. 

Children are expected to be respectful towards their 
seniors, being punished when not so, and if a child were 
continually disobedient he might even be sent from home. 
Girls are not well guarded in certain parts of Nigeria, but 
in North Africa more care is taken of them, and in any case 
they are not supposed to know too much. Hausa children 
of both sexes are much more respectful in West than they 
are in North Africa. 

There are various exercises and sports practised by the 
boys, boxing, wrestling, shooting with toy bow and arrow, 
horse-racing, etc., and when out hunting or fishing they are 
given instruction by those in whose charge they are, or by 
their deputies. Those youths who are to become metal 
workers, huntsmen, etc., undergo a kind of apprenticeship 
somewhat similar to that of those who desire to be mallams, 
though probably it will be less rigorous and lengthy. 

All children are taught folk-tales, proverbs and word- 

BIRTH AND PUBERTY tog 

games, and though most of them affect to despise the first 
and last when adult, a great knowledge of proverbs is 
thought very highly of by everyone.12 Music and dancing 
are learnt mainly by watching the older performers, but 
the drum signals are taught. 

A girl is not secluded at her first menstruation, so she is 
not prevented from seeing the sun or fire ; she does her 
ordinary work. But the food which she prepares will not 
be eaten by males, except in North Africa. Should 
menstruation come on during the fast (Azumi) she will at 
once return to her ordinary food, and will eat it for the 
period during which the courses last. Then she will again 
fast, continuing to do so for a number of days after the 
other people have ceased equal to the number which she 
has missed. Sometimes the flow may be delayed or much 
increased by an enemy — e.g. by a rejected youth who is 
taking his revenge. In the latter case three pieces of the 
root of the Sahara, Magariya and Kalgo trees are taken, 
and are pounded up and soaked in water, which, when 
saturated, is mixed with guinea-corn flour and made into 
a kind of porridge. If the girl takes this for seven days 
she will be well, so it is said. Another method is to drink 
the ink washed off a charm obtained from a mallam. If the 
girl has grown big, and no flow has appeared, she will take 
the bark of the Durimi tree, pound it up, mix it with water, 
and drink it for seven days. If not then successful, she will 
repeat the treatment, and will continue doing so until the 
desired result is attained. If it is her special male bori 
(see p. 118) who is stopping the course of nature she will 
endeavour to find out why he is annoyed with her, and to 
appease him, though she can guess that the real reason 
is that he does not want her to mature, and so marry and 
leave him.13 

tio /"///• B IN Of /Iff-: BORI 

(iirls were .it one time thestri test i esson <>f their sex, 
apparently, for once a week, according to Haj Ali, the mar- 
Mr maidens in Gobir used to meet, and each wonki 
collect a calabash of earth. They would men sit dowA, 
and the principal girl would cause one of them to m.-il. 
examination of all the others. If anyone was found guilty, 
her fellows beat her with switches, and then they marched 
to her house and deposited their calabashes of earth at 
her door, singing of the discovery which they had made.14 
Soon, someone would take the news to the chief of the 
city, and he would send for the girl and her parents and 
uncles. He would ask the girl and her parents whether 
the news was true, and if they desired it, he would have 
her examined by an old woman. If the latter reported 
that the girl "had become a woman," the chief would 
make the girl say who had seduced her. The guilty 
man might have had warning and have got away, but 
some of his relatives would be seized, and they and the 
girl's people made to pay a fine under a threat of selling 
the girl and the boy, when caught, into slavery — a little 
unfair, considering that the chiefs were never noted for 
having any virtue of their own. 

In some parts, some half-dozen each of boys and girls 
who had not yet matured were shut up in a large house a 
month before the harvest, both sexes wearing a leather loin- 
covering, and were stuffed with food and with various 
medicines for one month. They were taught bori dancing 
on seven consecutive nights, and were then allowed to 
rest for four nights. They were also instructed in what 
was due to the totem of their clan, and sacrifices were made 
to Kuri, Uwargwona and other bori. They were forced to 
eat a lot so as to have strength enough to dance, but were 
not allowed to sleep together. On the last day, a big feast 

BIRTH AND PUBERTY m 

commenced, being continued for seven days, and during 
this time either a boy or a girl died, " having been taken by 
the bori." After the feast, an old man would lead the 
youths to the forest and wash them medicinally, while an 
old woman did the same to the girls, and all the children 
were then allowed to return to their parents. One child 
was always taken by the bori, so the parents were very 
anxious during the time that their children were under- 
going the treatment, and only one or two out of each family 
entered the house ; the others learned about the kan-gida 
later by watching those who had been initiated into the 
mysteries in the manner described. After the children 
had been liberated, the harvest was gathered in. 

According to a recent account of this rite — the Fila 
Furra, or better, the Fittan Fura 15 — an equal number of 
boys and girls were in the autumn shut up together in an 
enclosure, and left there for a month. Food was taken to 
them by an attendant, the expense of which was borne by 
some rich man in the belief that he thereby conferred a 
benefit upon the community. At the end of that time, any 
of the girls who were found to be enceinte were considered 
to be the wives of the youths with whom they had lived 
while in the enclosure. Sacrifices were made before a pole, 
a jigo or gausami, and the whole rite was probably practised 
to secure fecundity in the clan. A third description 
appears in Chapter XIV. 

The first account above was given me by Haj Ali, who 
had been through the Fittan Fura ; the third by Auta ; and 
both said that it was to promote good harvests. Haj Ali's 
statement that the boys and girls did not live together 
applied only to the people of Gobir (he said that they did so 
in other parts, however), and there must be some truth in it, 
because the girls are stated to be young, and no licence is 

[ia THE BAN Of THE B0R1 

ever allowed just before or dura f tbe bori dances. 

n appears likely too thai the i bild whom tl e I oii i 
was really \m rifi< ed -probably to Biagiro or Uws I Gw< na 
— in older to ecure k,,,,(1 crop , foi Blagiro dei tided 
human victims, mother districts it is almost certain that 
intimate relations were allowed the Hausa , it musl be 
remembered, . i re a mixture of peoples. Two tories which 
seem to bear upon the subject certainly supporl this view 

(though these give another variant, for only one boy and 
one girl are shut up together — probably a test oi fitness for 
marriage), and it is quite possible that the rite there was 
to promote the fecundity of the clan rather than the fertility 
of the fields. But the two ideas often go together, and in 
any case, the accounts are quite reconcilable, for the Dative 
thinks that whereas at certain times his amours make the 
ground fertile, at others by his continence he fortifies not 
only his own body (e.g. with a view to wrestling) but also 
the vegetation — in both cases by the means of sympathetic 
magic. As we may see in the folk-lore, the life of a man 
may be bound up with that of a tree, and this is not sur- 
prising when we remember that Earth is the mother of all 
her living offspring, both animal and vegetable. The rites 
for fertility in both kingdoms may be the same, therefore, 
for to a people which knows how to fertilise date-palms, 
the idea that plants marry like human beings is only 
natural. In fact, the spathe of the male palm is a symbol 
of human fertility*. If ordinary mortals can influence 
the population and the crops, how much more will the 
guardian spirit of the clan be able to do so ? Hence the 
necessity for ensuring that its temporary habitations — 
tire totem animal and the king — shall be in their prime. 

CHAPTER IX 

MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE 

A full account of marriage, divorce, the relations of 
husband and wife, and other subjects, as far as regards 
Nigeria, has been given elsewhere,1 and it is unnecessary 
to repeat that here. But in several cases there are some 
differences noticeable in North Africa, and it would be 
advisable to mention these, as well as a few other points 
of interest. If a youth wishes to show a maiden that he 
wants to marry her, but is afraid to ask, he may send her a 
little packet of charcoal (to show that his heart is black), 
and sugar — which signifies how she appears to him. If she 
reciprocates she will keep the sugar (to show that her heart 
is white), but will return the charcoal. If undesirous of his 
advances, she will return both. Kola-nuts are always 
included in the dainties for the marriage feast, and form a 
part of the preliminary present when available, but they 
are used for proposing less honourable relationships also. 
" If you desire a woman, particularly someone else's wife, 
send her ten nuts, one of which you have previously split 
almost in two. If she rejects your advances she will return 
the whole lot ; but if she is willing to respond to your ad- 
vances, she will keep nine and return the split one with a 
piece bitten off. If she has had only a small bite, you are 
to go to her house, if a large part she will come to you." 
There is but little doubt that in some parts prostitution 
was once practised by young girls as a means for procuring 
a dowry. 

h 113 

hi THE BAN 01 HIE BORI 

Formerly in Nigeria, if an unmarried youth wished to 
marry a girl, he would just ask her consent, and if she was 
agreeable he would get the companion who is to be best 
man, in- •■ bridegroom's friend," to tell his father's brother, 

lor lie would be too much ashamed of 5U< h desires to tell 
his own parent this, In iwever, is not usually the case now- 
adays. The uncle would go to the younger brother of the 
girl's father, and between them they would arrange the 
details — supposing all parties were agreeable — and the 
girl would then be betrothed. Or perhaps the parties to 
the marriage might have been promised in infancy, and 
even if both contracting parents had died; the guardians 
would consider that the engagement must be carried out 
unless the youth (or in Nigeria, perhaps, the maiden) 
objected. In Tunis and Tripoli, the youth is not ashamed 
to tell his parent, and the latter arranges the marriage, 
which may be at any time except during the season just 
after Moharem, called Wowo. No kola-nuts are sent in 
Tunis, where they are very rare ; the gifts consist only of 
ornaments and other articles, including European-made 
furniture. 

In Tunis, five days before the date fixed, the bride- 
groom's hands and feet are stained with henna, the 
operator coming to his house for the purpose. The bride's 
hands and feet also are stained by a woman who specialises 
in the art, and a feast commences at her father's or uncle's 
house. The faces of many of her female relatives may be 
painted with dabga, the eyebrows receiving special atten- 
tion, and figures representing either a double hand or else 
the spathe of the male palm — a symbol of fertility — are 
painted upon the walls of the house. The staining is 
repeated upon the two following nights, and the feast goes 
on for one night more, but on the fifth, a feast is held at 

MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE 

ii5 

the bridegroom's father's house, and during the evening 
the bride is brought to her husband's house by her mother, 
and is accompanied by the henna woman, and the brides- 
maids. After she has settled down, the father pushes the 

r 

Fig. 6. — Design painted with Dabga upon a Woman's 
Face at certain Festivals 

Figs. 7 and 8. — Front View and Back View of the Staining of 
the Hand of a Girl when her Hair is put into a Plait 

son into the room, and he says a prayer there, but comes 
out again immediately, and goes elsewhere to sleep. 

Next morning the girl's mother and the junior brides- 
maids leave at daybreak, and the bridegroom, accom- 

[i6 nil- BAN 0* Illl. BORI 

panied by his best man, goes to the market and buys a 
6 h, which is carried by the best man, and about eight 
a.m. they proceed to the house in which the bride lias 

•<l the night. There tin b< I man knocks, and the 

chief i)iitl< unaid or "bride's friend" (or, according to 
a less probable account, the henna woman) takes the 
bride by her hand, and leads her to the door. The 
best man then puts the fish into the bridegroom's 
hand and extends it towards the bride, and the 
bridesmaid having seized the bride's hand in a similar 
manner, and made her take it, the men go away. The 
bride throws the fish upon the floor, as if refusing to have 
anything to do with it, but the bridesmaid picks it up, and 
cooks it, and they eat some of it, the rest being divided 
between the bridegroom and best man, who come again 
at midday. The men eat it sitting upon the floor of the 
room — the bride has previously climbed on to the bed at 
one end — and after the meal, the best man goes away, the 
bridesmaid leaving about the same time. According to 
another account, the bride waits upon them during the 
meal, and washes their hands afterwards. The bride- 
groom is then free to consummate the marriage, but he 
will not live openly with his bride until several days have 
elapsed, on account of the " shame " which he is expected 
to make a pretence of feeling. On the seventh day, 
another feast is held at the bridegroom's father's house, 
and the new household settles down to the ordinary 
manner of life. 

In Nigeria, the newly made benedict may not go 
near his bride for a few days, and when he does, he is 
accompanied by his best man, who approaches the bride 
first, but things are changing there, for I am told that 
thirty or forty years ago the bridegroom might not live 

MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE 117 

with her openly for a month or more, though he would 
visit her secretly at night. Both parties to Che marriaj e 
are seized by their relatives, and forcibly stained, the 
exact time being unknown to them. They are supposed 
to try to escape this, and, when eventually caught, to 
resist vigorously, as if they had no wish to be married. 

In Tripoli, according to Tanko, the customs are different. 
After the bride has been brought to her husband's room, 
she sits on a chair surrounded by her bridesmaids, and 
candles are lit around her. The bridegroom enters alone, 
and she gives him a little piece of a present of sugar which 
he has previously sent her, and he then hands her a piece, 
this being done in absolute silence.2 He then gives 
money to the bridesmaids, and they go away, leaving the 
bride and bridegroom alone together. He speaks to her, 
but she does not reply, and it is only after he has given 
her a present of cloth or money that she will consent to do 
so. He then sleeps with her, the drummers, all women 
apparently, keeping up their music in the courtyard until 
late at night. Early next morning the bridegroom goes 
out and buys a cake (fankasu) made of wheat-flour and 
honey, and brings it to the bride, who, however, divides 
it amongst her bridesmaids who come to greet her. Later 
in the day there will be a feast — provided by the bride- 
groom— to the musicians and others, and the ceremonies 
are over unless the family is rich enough to provide more 
money for the drummers and more food for the guests. 

There are several points of interest in the foregoing. 
First, there are the important roles played by the best 
man and chief bridesmaid, and it is possible that at one 
time these characters had even more important duties to 
perform, for amongst the Hausas of the Hinterland of the 
Gold Coast, and of the north of Northern Nigeria, the 

n THE B I v OF THE BORI 

bride's friend ifl veiled and made to ride about (upon a 
mare, if possible), she being then called the " False Bride/1 
while the real one i being taken to her husband's bouse, 
tin- original idea being, in all probability, to distract 
attention bom the latter.1 It is a common belief in 
North Africa that should an enemy call a bridegroom 
while riding to his bride, and he reply and look around, if 
the i'nemy closes a knife held open in readiness, the bride- 
groom will be rendered impotent ; so his relatives accom- 
pany him to protect him against possible ill-wishers.1 It 
is, therefore, not impossible that the custom is a Moham- 
medan one, introduced by the Filani or other Moslem 
invaders, performed in order to avoid danger of this kind. 
But since it is not considered necessary in North Africa 
but only in the Black Country, and since the object in the 
Gold Coast is said to be the distraction of the attention of 
evil spirits, it is more probable that the practice is the 
survival of an early pagan custom, instituted in order to 
deceive the jealous bori, which, as is shown on p. 109, is 
unwilling to give up its human mistress. In some parts 
we have what seems to be a contradiction, for the bride 
is conducted to her new abode with a great noise. This, 
however, is done in all probability to frighten off the other 
evil influences, for all spirits hate a horrid din, though 
sweet music may attract them. 

The protection of the bride and bridegroom against 
their respective sexual bori, therefore, seems to have been 
very thorough originally. First there is the fact that 
neither party informed the parents, in each case it was the 
uncles who arranged the contract, and it was the best man 
who made the first move ; secondly, both parties were 
stained with henna, being forcibly seized by friends, and 
stained, as it were, against their wills, and to their great 

MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE in, 

surprise; thirdly, a false bride attracted the attention of 
the jealous bori; fourtlily, the bride was veiled; fifthly, the 
bridegroom vacated his house, and visited his wife only 
in secret ; sixthly, the best man and not the bridegroom 
made the first advances to the bride ; and seventhly, two 
fowls are still given by the parents in some parts, possibly 
the survival of a former sacrifice. The false bride has 
no place amongst the Hausas of Tunis and Tripoli, and it 
may be that contact with the Arabs has led them to believe 
that they can escape most of the danger by obtaining 
the consent of the familiar bori in advance, but the 
general evil influences would not be appeased thus, so the 
noise and staining still goes on, though the element of 
surprise has been eliminated. Tanko says that the false 
bride in Nigeria can perform marvellous feats, being able 
to throw herself down from great heights without injury — 
but that is exactly what a person possessed by a strange 
bori is supposed to be able to do, and we may conclude, 
therefore, that the jealous bori goes off with her. 

The bride is always accompanisd to her new home by 
a number of bridesmaids of about the same age as herself, 
and the bride screams and resists. In Hausa Superstitions 
and Customs I supposed this to be a survival of marriage 
by capture, but it may be no more than a protest by the 
girls of her age-grade, particularly as they drive the 
bridegroom away until bribed by him. 

The fish is a well-known symbol of fertility. With the 
so-called Jews of Constantinople, the bride and bride- 
groom jump three times over a large platter filled with 
fish, or else seven times backwards and forwards over one, 
and this is said to be a prayer for children.5 The Jews of 
Tunis are stated to have a curious custom. At the first 
meal after the marriage, the bride places a cooked fish 

[30 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

before her husband, and he finds that he cannot carve it. 
She then tries, and accomplishes the task, die reason being 

that she has stuffed it with two wooden rings, placed end 
to end, at her mother's suggestion, and so knows where to 
divide it.a It is not impossible, therefore, that there is 
a connexion between the custom of the Jews of Constanti- 
no]'If and that of the Hausas of Tunis ; at any rate, with 
the latter also the gift is surely a symbol of fertility, the 
natural modesty of the maiden making her throw it upon 
the ground. The sugar also, and possibly the cake of the 
Tripolitan bridegroom must have a similar signification. 
Elsewhere it has been found amongst Hindu and Moham- 
medan women that during and previously to pregnancy, 
they receive gifts of rice, and sweets, and some- 
times the women (if already pregnant) divide them 
amongst their kinswomen — including the young girls — 
the idea being to convey similar fertility to all of them.7 

In Tunis, amongst the Arabs, little cakes are made in 
the shape of fish and also of snakes, and this seems to 
leave no doubt at all upon the subject. 

There is no breaking of pots or tearing of the door-mat 
as in Northern Nigeria. If the bride be found to have 
been " already a wife," the husband simply drives the 
girl away, and locks his door, keeping not only every- 
thing that she has brought, but also getting back his money 
and other presents from her parents. Formerly, a black- 
smith in Nigeria, who married a blacksmith's daughter, 
had quite an exciting test. On the night that she was 
taken to his house, he would heat a piece of iron in the 
fire until red-hot, and with her veil he wrould bind it to 
her back in the position to be occupied by a child. If she 
was a virgin, the iron would scorch neither her nor her 
veil, although left until cool, but if not, she would be 

MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE 121 

burnt at once. Auta says that a man who was not a 
blacksmith would not allow his daughter to be tested 
thus, because he would not know the proper charm to give 
her — an ordinary girl would certainly be burnt. 

A Mohammedan Hausa has the right to marry the 
daughter of his father's brother, and he will pay less 
for her, but not the daughter of his mother's brother, of 
his father's sister, nor of his mother's sister, though he 
may marry even the last of these if both parties agree, at 
any rate in North Africa. He may not marry his father's 
or his mother's sisters. In Nigeria these rules do not 
apply to the Magazawa, though they do in certain respects 
to the Mohammedan Hausas, but the code seems to vary 
in different districts, and no doubt the matter is often one 
of mere family arrangement, for a youth would obey his 
father's commands. The Mohammedan may not marry 
two full or half-sisters while the first of the two is alive, 
but the pagan may marry two half-sisters unless they 
are of the same mother. He may marry a younger full 
sister after the death of an elder, but not vice versa, and 
not after her divorce, I am told. A foster-mother stands 
in the same position as a real mother as far as regards 
marriage amongst the Mohammedan Hausas, but not 
amongst the Magazawa. 

The Mohammedan Hausas are bound by the laws of 
Islam, of course, but the pagans are not, and may have as 
many wives as they can afford ; there is no polyandry, 
however. In Tunis and Tripoli, each wife is entitled to 
two nights in turn, a bride seven for the first time, and 
the same applies to the Mohammedan Hausas in Nigeria, 
but the Magazawa sleep with them as they please. In 
North Africa, should a wife be unable to take her two days, 
she would sleep at the opposite end of the room to him, 

122 THE B IV OF THE B0R1 

but where ea< li wife has a separate hut, she may lean a 
stalk of guinea-con] against her doorway, if nol in< lined 
ive the information verbally, and the husband nm-t 
then sleep in his own lint alone. 

The children of wives and concubines are legitimate 

amongst the Mohammedan [lausas, and share in the 
inheritance according to the Maliki code — or sometimes 
the Hanafi, in North Africa — but the offspring of any other 
woman would be illegitimate, even if the father had raped 
the mother. The reason is as follows : " If you buy a mare, 
all her foals are yours, but if you borrow one the foal is not 
yours, it belongs to the person from whom you borrowed 
the mare." The first-born son of any wife is the eldest 
son, and ranks accordingly, but the first wife is the chief, 
or Uwar-Gida (Mother of the House), and is in charge of 
the others. Should the first wife be a poor girl, and the 
second the daughter of a chief, however, they would each 
be assigned special duties by the husband. But probably 
the chief would insist upon a man divorcing his first wife 
so that there would be no doubt as to the position of his 
daughter. 

At one time it was almost certain death to be convicted 
of adultery with a chief's wife. Sariki Dan Baskore, 
however, was once lenient when he found a youth living 
in his harem. Two years previously, a part of the main 
wall of the palace had fallen in, and the youth, one of those 
engaged in repairing it, had been kept hidden ever since. 
Instead of killing him and the guilty women, Dan Baskore 
said that a youth who could outwit him was well worth 
keeping alive, so he gave him rank in the army, and 
those members of his household who had conceived 
by him were sent to live with him. Dan Baskore did 
not regret his action, for the youth won great renowm 

MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE 123 

as a solider in his service, and attained the rank of 
Magaji. 

Judging by the folk-lore, there was evidently at one 
time a prohibition upon the crossing of running water by 
spirits, though that is said not to be the case now — but 
there seems to have been no idea of conception by bathing. 
At the same time, supposing a pregnant woman were to 
enter water, the spirit might decide to marry the child 
later if it turned out to be a girl. The mother would not 
know this at the time, but later on, when the girl grew up, 
and her parents wanted to marry her off, she would refuse, 
and say that she did not want anyone. If she persisted 
in this state of mind, the parents would know that she was 
not normal, and would secure the services of a Mai-Bori. 
This person would find out what had happened, and which 
bori had claimed her, and would pay the spirit on her 
behalf ; or the aid of a mallam or of a boka would be 
enlisted, and he would release her altogether. Judging 
by the foregoing, it is probable that Dodo, in the story in 
which he arrives at the marriage-feast of the girl promised 
to him, and is slain only by the means of a heavenly knife, 
is an incubus.8 

Many stories exist of marriages between human beings 
and animals, and it is probable that they refer to a totem- 
istic stage, and that when the marriage turns out un- 
happily it is because there has been some insult offered 
to the totem of the spouse. Of course, many animals can 
turn themselves into human beings for a time, and they 
may even mix with ordinary people and not be found out, 
but a hunter who is expert in charms will recognise them, 
and sometimes will shoot them even in the market-place, 
and, when wounded and dying, the animal will gradually 
take on its bestial form again. In Nigeria, many hunters 

ui THE B \N OF THE B0R1 

and otheiS can turn themselves into animals, but not hero, 

because the i harm! have been forgotten. All the inhabi- 
tants of .it least one city can be* ome hyenas at pl< ■■> 
.i« i oxding to many informants* 

A man may eal food in his mother-in-law's house, but 
his wife should HOI eat in his lather's house until alter the 
second or even the third < hild is born, though this rule 
has often to be modified or even abrogated in North 
Africa.9 A man may sec his mother-in-law eating, because 
she is like his own mother, and he has seen the latter 
doing so. " If your father or father-in-law comes to see 
you, he should be given his food first, but if you go to see 
him you will probably eat with him — unless your food is 
sent to your own hut," and this does not happen in 
North Africa. 

Formerly, in Nigeria, a bridegroom walking along a 
road would run and hide if he saw his first mother-in-law 
approaching, because he would be ashamed for her to see 
him. If he could not get away, he would bend his head, 
or even squat down and not look at her until she had 
passed. She, on her part, would pretend not to have seen 
him. Later on, or after the birth of the second or third 
child, he would not run away from her ; but he should 
always be respectful. He would not avoid subsequent 
mothers-in-law, and in North Africa he would not mind 
meeting even the first. 

The elder sister of the wife should be avoided in the same 
way, but not the younger, according to one informant ; 
another says that both should be avoided (and this is more 
likely, judging by the folk-lore), but the rule does not hold 
in North Africa. A woman would run from a man who was 
to be her father-in-law, but when he had become a grand- 
father for the second or third time she would not mind him 

MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE 125 

so much. Brothers and sisters eat together when young, 
but a boy who has been circumcised eats with the men, 
not with women and children. A younger brother should 
not sit in the same circle as his eldest brother, and he 
certainly should not argue with him in public. However, 
all of these rules are observed much more strictly in Nigeria 
than in North Africa, and, in fact, in Tunis no one minds 
these things. " What manners, indeed, can poor people 
afford to have ? " 

CHAPTER X 

DEATH AND Till. AI '1 IK I III-. 

The (lentil <>f a Hausa mortal may be brought about in 
many ways. Bodily injuries and diseases m?y be caused 
by Allah, in which case none but a mallam can cure the 
patient, and even he only with the proper medicines or 
words, etc., from the Koran, the ink being washed off 
with water, and drunk. It is very much more likely to 
be a bori, however, who is working the evil by drinking 
the blood of the victim, and it should be appeased by the 
proper sacrifice which is indicated by one of the members 
of the bori sect (see p. 258), the list of disease demons 
(Chapters XXI. -XXVIII.) being long enough to include 
most illnesses. Then there is the wizard {maiye) or 
witch (maiya), who catches the soul and eats it, and a 
mallam or a boka is the only one who can save the patient. 
Lastly, there are the persons with the evil eye (mugun ido), 
and those with the evil mouth {mugun baki), which though 
much the same can be distinguished, for whereas you can 
usually see the former, you do not always see the latter, 
because he wishes you evil under his breath, and it may 
not be until you have reached home that you become ill 
and know that someone has been jealous of you — e.g. has 
seen that you can work much better than he can. The 
hand, khams, "five" (fingers), protects one against both 
of these persons if used in time ; if not, then a boka will 
give the correct remedy. 

Often, however, a person dies in spite of all the precau- 

126 

DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE 127 

tions taken, for perhaps the real cause is not discovered 
until too late, or perhaps Allah has decided that his time 
has come, and then the relatives and friends gather round 
and wait for the end, some of them assisting the patient 
as best they know how. When a Mohammedan Hausa 
dies, the body is stripped and washed, and, after having 
been wrapped in a white shroud (likafani), it is placed upon 
its right side, the right arm under the head. In the case 
of rich men, a new white tobe, trousers, cap, and turban 
may be put on under the likafani, and frankincense may 
be used, though the body is not preserved in any way. 
On the morrow, the funeral will take place, so the body is 
wrapped in a mat, and placed upon a bier, and is carried 
to the grave by men, whatever the sex of the deceased. 
The women do not go to the grave until the following day, 
generally, though they may walk behind the male mourners 
and sit some distance away during the ceremonies in some 
parts. The procession does not move slowly, as with us. 
On the contrary, the obsequies are hurried through, so 
that if he has been good, the deceased may the sooner 
attain happiness ; if evil, in order that his influence may 
be removed. The bearers are changed frequently both 
for the above reason, and also because they derive spiritual 
advantage from the sad duty. If funds are forthcoming, 
the bier may — in Tunis, at any rate — be strapped upon 
the back of a donkey for the homeward journey. 

The grave is oblong in shape and some eight feet long 
and four feet wide at the mouth, suddenly narrowing a 
few feet down to the size just sufficient to take the corpse. 
Some four men enter it, and, taking the body from the 
bearers, place it in the narrow trench upon its right side 
and with the head to the south, so that it faces towards 
the east. Then they climb out, and, sticks having been 

us THE BAN OF Till. B0R1 

placed over the bench (rating upon the ledge), grass is 
Spread "ii top of them. Some earth is sprinkled over the 

grass, and then kneaded earn or clay is smeared over the 

Whole in order to make it more or less secure. After One 

has been done, the earth removed from the grove is heaped 

on top, so there is no loose earth touching the body. 
Nothing is buried with it, nothing is burnt. The 1 lausasdo 
not let t heir tears fall upon the corpse, nor do they cut or 
scratch themselves like some of the Arabs. The mourners 
pray by the side of the grave, the women, if present, being 
apart from the men, and upon their return must wash their 
hands. When all is over, the property of the deceased is 
divided up as has been described elsewhere.1 

In North Africa, a slab of marble, or a layer of bricks 
and cement, or even mud, will be placed over the grave, 
and an erection supposed to resemble a fez and turban is 
reared over the head if the deceased has been a man, a 
plain slab like a slate being substituted in the case of 
a woman. Sometimes one similar to the latter may be 
erected over the feet also, and nowadays, epitaphs are 
written upon the stones at the head. A hole for offerings 
is made through the large slab, sometimes at the head, 
I am told, as is the case in the Fiyum and in the Congo,2 
but usually above the stomach. In the Mohammedan 
cemeteries at Tunis and Tripoli all of the holes which 
I have noticed are in the middle, but many of them are 
merely shallow indentations in the slabs, and are not 
really holes. Over the grave of a marabout will be erected 
a four-pillared dome, or kuba, such as is seen in 111. 16. 
Except when in a recognised cemetery, they are usually at 
the tops of hills, but this is by no means always the case. 

In North Africa, the graves are in regularly constituted 
cemeteries, though the rulers (e.g. the Beys of Tunis) may 

13 

13- — A funeral at Kairwan. 
14. — Arab and Hausa graves. 

DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE 129 

have a special mausoleum. In Nigeria, too, a chief or a 
rich man may be buried in his own compound, and his 
wives and children will be placed there, also a concubine 
if he has been sleeping with her just before he died, but 
slaves, unless they have obtained high office — a common 
occurrence in Nigeria — and poor people are buried in 
shallow graves outside the town.3 Any grave, except that 
of a chief, may be reopened after some fifteen years or 
so, for there will be nothing left of the body by then, and 
another corpse may be interred, it does not matter whose. 
As nothing valuable is placed in the graves, they are not 
robbed, but the bodies of poor people are usually carried 
off by hyenas — or rather " by people who have trans- 
formed themselves into these animals " — which dig down 
until under the level of the sticks. It would not be 
dangerous to step upon a grave, except in North Africa, 
perhaps, so far as injury by ghosts is concerned, but 
the relatives of the deceased would not like it. 

In Tunis, Hausas make no change in their dress when in 
mourning ; in fact, great grief is shown by keeping the 
clothes on for several days, though they will wear white 
at the funeral, but women, if they can afford it, don white, 
or sometimes black, I am told. No man must shave his 
head in less than seven days afterwards ; many will not do 
so until after forty days, and some do not even cut their 
nails or wash, but this applies with less force to the women, 
though a mother in Nigeria who has lost three children, 
running, will shave only one side of her head ; if four, 
the whole. In the case of the death of a parent or a 
child, a married couple may discontinue relations for a 
short time, but whether this is from a religious reason or 
simply because " the heart is black " is not apparent, the 
latter being the one now given. There is no special abstin- 
1 

ejo ////. /MA OF l Hi- BOR1 

lint from food though "is one w\ b okfiO 

able to feast ? " but from the day of the death until two 
d after tin- funeral, no i orn ii ponnded, and no i"<>d i> 
cooked in the house, it being brought by relative 101 Eriendi 
outside. On the third day after tin- death, howi 
there 1 .1 f< asl in tin- house, all the mounu 1 - and mallami 
being invited, and tii<- latter read portions ol the K 
On the third day after this, there is another feast, one again 
on the fortieth day, and still another 00 the anniversary. 
Daring the fust four days, the real mourners are not 
supposed to sleep, and they remain in the house of death, 
but the first feast relieves them of this restru tion. One 
man told me that tales arc told to keep the people awake, 
but I was unable to verify this. 

Some tombs — e.g. those of marabouts or mallams — there 
have been several from West Africa — are very sacred, 
and people (both men and women) offer goats and fowls 
there, asking for favours at the same time, as is explained 
later. A sadaka (not a sacrifice originally) may be made 
upon the anniversary of the death of anyone who is not 
a marabout, and perhaps this is the character of the offer- 
ing to the marabout also. On Fridays, offerings are made 
to the dead of bread and water, which are placed in the 
holes mentioned above, and even flowers are placed upon 
the tombs, especially those of children, as is shown in 
111. 14. Orange-peel, too, can be seen upon one of the 
slabs, the mourners having eaten the fruit, and although 
this is evidence of a careful economy, it is sufficient to 
refute the statements often heard that Mohammedans 
do not care for their dead, and that they have no hope 
in a future life, the latter seeming to show an extraordinary 
disregard for the teaching of Islam. Another idea which 
this custom disproves is that women have no souls, a 

DE Mil IND THE AFTER LIFE i.;i 

myth often insisted upon as true by interested per<u . 
There is no idea nowadays that the ghosl eats I 

offerings ; the Hausa lias no doubt that they are taken by 
the birds and ants, bat the ghost knows by these signs that 
it has not been forgotten, and it is thus made happy. 
But, as we shall see, the soul often takes the form of a 
bird (an old Egyptian idea) and it is quite possible that 
it was this particular one and not any bird which took 
the offerings.4 

In considering the doctrine of souls, we are faced with 
an extraordinary medley of beliefs. All human beings, 
animals, plants, and big rocks have a permanent soul 
(kuruwa) and a familiar bori of the same sex, and, in addi- 
tion, young people have a temporary bori of the opposite 
sex, while all living things have two angels (malaika) in 
attendance. Snlall stones are soulless, and so are those 
large ones which are deep in the earth, " for they are 
evidently dead," else they would not have been buried. 
The soul has a shape like that of the body which it inhabits, 
and it dwells in the heart, but where it comes in and out 
of the body is not known. It is not the shadow (enniiwa), 
for it cannot be seen, and in fact the ennuwa is the shadow 
both of the body and of the soul. Yet the word kuruwa is 
sometimes loosely used for shadow, and there is evidently 
some connexion, for a wizard can pick the soul out of it. 
Neither is it the breath, for when a person sleeps his soul 
wanders about ; in fact, it does so even when a person is 
day-dreaming. " If you dream, you know when you wake 
that your soul has been to visit the people and places seen, 
for the soul can travel as quickly as a bori." For this 
reason, however suddenly one awakened a person, he could 
not do so before the soul had returned, for it would know 
directly one touched its body, and would be there as quick 

ijj THE BAN 01 THE BORI 

as thought unless detained, as is explained later. But 

another opinion is thai one so often found — namely, that 

the SOUl can !><• caught napping — and that the person will 
feel heavy for some time after, until, in fact, the soul has 
got back properly. 

There was once a belief in an external soul, as certain 
stories (Hausti Superstitions and Customs, 29, and p. 132) 
show, but it seems to have died out now as regards the 
people generally, though it may persist still amongst some 
of the more backward Magazawa. However, with the 
Hausas as with us, the science of yesterday may be but 
the folk-lore of to-day, and as the book upon that subject 
deals with this point, there is no need to consider it 
further here. 

The kuruwa can be summoned by an enemy by magical 
means, as is described in Chapter XIII., but it can also be 
caught by a wizard (maiye) or witch (maiya), and unless 
it be rescued, the wizard or witch will eat it, and so kill the 
owner. Luckily, there are people who can prevent this 
unless summoned too late — viz. the mallam and the boka. 
The bori cannot be caught thus ; it can be injured only by 
another bori, and then one of the Masu-Bori can help. 
When a man is once dead, nothing will bring the soul back, 
and it is useless to try anything, for it is evident that the 
time appointed by Allah has come. The soul, after a 
period in the Well of Life, goes to Allah, as do the angels, 
but the bori flies off to the bush, and mixes with the others 
there, unless it goes to some other person, preferably, but 
not necessarily, a descendant. The body rots, for it does 
not matter what happens to it. The soul and the bori 
may revisit their old haunts temporally, and in fact they 
do so. The soul will never belong to any other body, 
according to some, though others hold that it may reappear 

DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE E33 

in a child, or even a grandchild, and at any rate the bori 
may do so, but neither will transmigrate into an animal. 

Haj Ali says that the soul is in the shadow, and that it is 
caught in the following manner. If a wizard sees a per on 
whom he wishes to injure coming along, he will wait near 
a stone or a wall, or close to any projection upon which 
the shadow of the enemy must fall as he passes. When 
this has happened, the wizard at once claps his hand upon 
the shadow, and picks out the soul, keeping it in his fist 
until he has reached his house, when he quickly places a 
vessel over his hand and transfers the soul to it — as one 
does a rare beetle. 

The person who has thus lost his kuruwa may not 
know of it for a little time, but he soon begins to feel ill, 
although no disease or injury is apparent, and upon his 
saying this, he is asked whom he met upon his way home. 
In North Africa all he can do is to seek some counter 
influence,5 but in the olden time in Nigeria, when he had 
pronounced the name of someone thought to be inimical, 
his men-folk would start for the person's house, and accuse 
him of having taken the soul of their father, brother, or 
other relative, as the case may have been. Probably the 
wizard would deny this and if so, an accusation would be 
laid before the Sarikin Maiyn (Chief of the Wizards), who 
would summon the accused, together with other known 
wizards, to come to the sick man's house. A large basin 
of water would then be brought in, and placed upon the 
fire, and each of the wizards would be asked to poke the 
fire, but somehow only the guilty one would consent to do 
so. They would then be asked to drink up the water, 
and again all would fail but the offender, " for in his case 
the thirsty soul of the sick man would drink too, and so he 
would be able to hold a lot." This would be held to be 

i ',| ////• B iv OF '//// B0R1 

ailliri. nt proof, and tin- Sarikin Maiyu would <ud<T liini tO 

be bound up, and would demand to be told where the soul 
was. rt tin- offender did nol tell even men, be would bo 

flogged, and sound 01 later In- would din < t the people 

around him to gel .1 1 ertain vt -<■] ou1 ol his house, and 
bring him and it bo the I k man. When this had be> n 

done, tin' wizard would tap the Other with his hand, and 
the soul would fly bark to him, and he would rise again 
thoroughly well. No one would see the soul, of course, 
but the man's recovery would be quite sufficient proof of 
what had happened. Considering the credulity of the 
Hausa, it is easy to imagine that the alleged restoration 
of the soul really did cause the ailing person to feel well 
again, but, after all, we can quite understand that. 

The Sarikin Maiyu was appointed by the Chief of the 
town upon the principle of setting a thief to catch a thief 
— there is generally a Sarikin Barawo (King of the Thieves) 
also. He was always a noted soul-eater, and was threatened 
on appointment that he would be put to death if he ever 
ate another one. He knew all the other wizards in the town, 
and since it was to his interest to prevent deaths by witch- 
craft— for he might be accused of complicity, did any 
occur — he would always be certain to catch the real 
offender — or, at any rate, he would see that someone was 
punished, and that was just as efficacious as far as the 
victim was concerned. 

Sometimes a person is thirsty during the night, but is 
too sleepy to wake up and get a drink. " This shows that 
his soul is suffering from thirst, and is trying to get out of 
his body to assuage it. On the person going off to sleep 
soundly, the soul will leave the body, and will take the 
shape of a bird, and fly to where there is water. You often 
hear a ' tweet-tweet-tweet ' at night, and you know that 

DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE 1 35 

that is some thirsty soul, for all the birds sleep at night and 
do not fly about." When I pointed out that the biro- 
biro does, my informant said : " This is not the biro-biro, 
though it is like it, but any of the old men can tell the 
difference, and they also know by the sound whether the 
owner of the soul is /lead [and the soul leaving for ever], 
or if he is sleeping, and the soul out for a mere temporary 
flight. After the soul has had its drink, and it is time for 
the person to wake up, it re-enters the body, and when the 
person wakes he is not thirsty." 

Things do not always turn out so happily, however, for 
sometimes it happens that the soul is caught, for instance 
it may fly down a well and not be able to get out again, 
or it may be caught by a wizard 01 witch and be shut up 
in the hollow of a tree. In either case the person will 
sicken, and may not live through the next day unless the 
soul can be recovered. A mallam or a boka will be con- 
sulted at once, and he can recover it if down a well, but in 
the other case, in the old days in the Hausa States, the 
person suspected of witchcraft would be summoned by 
the Sarikin Maiyu as has been described before. In this 
case, however, instead of the guilty wizard patting the 
victim, he would tell the chief wizard where the soul would 
be found, and sure enough, " when the people went to the 
tree indicated, they would find a hollow in which was the 
bird. This would be set free, and would fly off, and before 
the messengers had had time to return, the sick person 
would have recovered." In North Africa, the wizard 
cannot be treated in this way, so a mallam has to give a 
laiya or a Mai-Bori must perform the proper rites and offer 
appropriate sacrifices to a bori in order to persuade it to 
set matters right. 

" Sometimes you dream that you are falling or being 

136 THE /MA7 OF THE BORI 

pursued, and awake with a start. You know then that 
a wizard has lum trying to catch your soul, and that it 
has run back suddenly into your body and jumped in 
anywhere, head first." 

Only a maiye can catch a soul in the shadow. If an 
ordinary person were to tread upon it no harm would be 
done, for a man must be born a maiye, he cannot become 
one, " but how could you be certain that the person was 
not a maiye ? " Again, many people do not like their 
reflection in a glass or in water to be seen even by them- 
selves, for a maiye could catch the soul through it, and 
they greatly object to a camera — though more in Tunis 
than in Nigeria. I am told that Mohammed said that 
the angels do not enter a house in which there is a picture, 
for every painter of human beings is destined for hell fire, 
though he may escape if he confines himself to trees and 
" still life." One would almost fancy that certain of our 
own artists believed in this, and had, in consequence, 
given us those masterpieces depicting a frugal — and very 
messy — lunch of bread, cheese, and stout. But even a 
liquid may be dangerous, for the soul can be caught by an 
enemy by calling the name over a bowl of water, as will 
be seen, and it might be noted that an echo is also named 
kuruwa, though it is also known as iblis, a devil. 

The familiar bori seems to resemble an external soul to 
some extent, for it is like the being to which it belongs, 
but it is outside him, and casts no shadow, and it is really 
a double, corresponding to the Egyptian Ka. It also 
wanders when the owner sleeps (but not when only day- 
dreaming), though it does not necessarily go in company 
with the soul, " each goes off upon its own." Its duty 
is to protect the being from injury by another bori, and 
"if it is stronger than the enemy, all you will know is 

DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE 137 

that you feel tired on account of the struggle ; but if 
weaker, it will be worsted, and you will become ill." 
Now all bori are not unfriendly, especially if ample and 
appropriate sacrifices have been made to them, so "if 
in your dream you are told to do something, and you do 
it and are fortunate, you will know that a well-disposed 
bori has been to visit yours." The latter would know 
immediately of the pending visit of the strange bori, and 
would return at once, in this case to receive the friendly 
intimation. The function of the familiar bori then is to 
act as an intermediary between the spirits of Jan Garu 
and the human being. 

In addition to this familiar bori of the same sex, each 
person has also a bori of the opposite sex, which stays 
underground in his house. Such a bori does not like its 
particular mortal to get married, for it sleeps with the 
person, and has relations during sleep — as is known by the 
dreams — though with neither combination can conception 
take place. This is modern, because the Semites — from 
whom the idea of the sexual bori was borrowed — believed 
that offspring were begotten in such a manner. There are 
many biblical examples (e.g. Ezek. xxiii. 4).6 

When the person wishes to be married, he or she should 
consult the bori, because otherwise the latter will be 
jealous of its human rival and will cause trouble — we 
have seen that it may delay the courses in a girl, or 
produce false conception. In fact, in any case it will be 
jealous, but if incense is offered to it, and its mother is 
summoned,7 she will advise it not to annoy the person, and 
it will be too much ashamed not to obey. But even then, 
it may refuse to give the person up absolutely ; and a 
female bori may be particularly troublesome, for even 
though a man has four wives it may persist in having it 

i.-s THE BAN OF THE BORI 

tinii lomehow. < Jthcr informant! deny this last statement, 

and sav tiut the bod are ooi consulted at all before a 
wedding, and, in Eat t, sometimes a person is so ill-natnrcd 
that no bori will come near him or her before marriage, 
much less stay in the house afterwards. One says, howc\ ci , 
that although women often keep their bori after marriage, 
man almost always separate from them then. In any case, 
there is danger at the time the human being changes 
his or her condition, and the fear of these familiar bori 
accounts for the practice of leaving so much to the best 
man and the chief bridesmaid, as we have seen. 

Professor Seligmann, in his contribution to the volume 
of Essays and Studies, presented last year to that brilliant 
scholar, Professor William Ridgeway, after having noted 
that the belief in the Ka still exists in Upper and Lower 
Egypt* savs (p- 449) tnat " a variant of the belief in 
the ' double ' [or qarina] ... is that everyone has an 
invisible companion of the opposite sex who is regarded 
and spoken of as a ' sister ' or ' brother.' This companion 
lives in quiet shady places, in dark rooms, and especially 
under the threshold. . . . The death of one or more 
children in a family is often attributed to the influence of 
their mother's ' brother ' (companion) and the mother and 
surviving children may wear iron anklets to avoid this 
danger. I could not ascertain what was supposed to 
happen to the qarina [in Syria] at death, there seemed to 
be a vague belief that it might in some way pass to one of 
the children of the deceased. ... [In Egypt] the majority 
believe that it perishes with the individual, while some few 
say that it enters the grave with the bod}'." Mr Engel- 
bach tells me that the qarina can sometimes be seen by 
certain persons, and that the double of a twin may wander 
about in the form of a cat. The lover does not leave its 

DEATH AND THE 1 1TER-UFE 139 

human spouse at marriage. It seems to me that the two 
ideas are quite distinct, that one is not a variant of the 
other at all, and although the statement may be true with 
regard to the Egyptian belief, anything of the kind would 
seem to be absolutely incorrect so far as the Hausas are 
concerned, for both beliefs are held by the same individual, 
as was the case in Assyria, and is now in Egypt, in all 
probability. 

In addition to the kuruwa and the different bori, there 
is the Rai (Life), which is connected in some way with the 
soul (for both leave the body together at death) and with 
the breath (hwifashi, for it leaves the body in the breath 
at death) , and yet is distinct from both, for it never wanders 
outside the body ; it has no shadow, and although it is 
usually in the heart, it is not always there. Neither is it 
the familiar bori, and jret it may at one time have been 
thought to be a spirit, or a second soul, perhaps, as there 
is an old plural form, raiuka, which means spirits. It is 
not the pulse (jini), though this is regarded as being 
the health and strength of the bod}', and rai sometimes 
means self. There is a possibility that it is connected 
with some Libyan, Egyptian, or Semitic word meaning 
" serpent," but so far I have not found one. Such a 
connexion would be quite intelligible, I think, especially 
as the Arabic hiya has both significations.8 " Sometimes 
a small part of your body may commence to quiver — 
e.g. the eyelids may twitch, or a lump may suddenly 
appear — that is the rai wandering about," and it is 
dangerous to touch a person in that condition. Haj Ali 
was in a cafe one day with an Arab whose arm suddenly 
began to swell, and a friend who entered, being delighted 
to see the Arab, struck him a hard blow in a friendly 
manner. As it happened, his hand hit the swelling, and 

i |o THE BAN OF THE BORI 

the Arab fell down and died, " for the friend had beaten 
the life." Was it an embolism ? 

The kuniwa and the rai are in the womb with the foetus, 
but the bori does not arrive until the deliver}' of the child. 
It is not the same bori as the one avoided by the trick of 
losing the hen kept for the purpose (see p. 98), for that 
one is evilly disposed, whereas the familiar bori tries to 
preserve the human being to which it belongs. The bori 
departs at once upon the death of its body, but the kuruwa, 
although it comes out of the body when the washing is 
done, waits about, follows it to the grave, and does not 
fly away until the grave has been closed up and the people 
have gone. Then it proceeds to the Rijiyan Rai (Well of 
Life), which is situated in the City of The South — either 
Jerusalem or Medina. Here it seems to become identified 
with the rai, for henceforth there is only one being.9 

In the Rijiyan Rai are the souls of human beings of 
every race and colour, white, black, and brown, and they 
have their kings and officials exactly as upon earth ; but 
there is no war, for Allah would not allow it. Good and 
bad are there, but " the good souls make the bad ones keep 
to one part of the rijiya, for they will not mix with them." 
The latter are not punished in anj' way, however, for 
all the souls will remain in peace until Allah judges them. 
There is no marriage — though both male and female souls 
are there, of course — nor is any food eaten. There are 
no houses, for shelter is not required since neither sun nor 
rain can reach them. It is dark, but that does not matter 
to the souls, for they have been accustomed to going about 
at night when their bodies were alive, and they can see 
quite well. A soul which has been eaten by a wizard 
cannot go there at once, but " Allah will lose nothing, and 
will make a fresh one out of the remains." The souls of 

DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE 141 

animals also go to the Rijiyan Rai, for Allah created them, 
and to Him will they return ; they also will be judged and 
rewarded or punished according to their records. 

The familiar bori of an enemy may be sold to one of the 
forest bori in the following way. " Go to a Mai-Bori and 
tell him what you want. The Mai-Bori will agree, but 
will make you promise that the blame will be yours, and 
that he will be only the intermediary to let the bori know. 
He then burns incense at the drain, say, and calls Jato, and 
by-and-by this spirit will enter the head of the Mai-Bori 
and announce his arrival. You then tell him what you 
want, saying that he can have so and so as an offering, and 
you promise to sacrifice a black bull (nothing less will be 
accepted) , and Jato will probably tell you that your request 
will be granted, that he ' will wipe away your tears.' 
You then return liome, and within a few days you will 
hear that your enemy has become ill, and then you must 
arrange to procure a black bull. Soon afterwards you 
will hear that he is dead, so you sacrifice the bull ; and 
thus while the people in his house are mourning, those in 
yours are rejoicing." 

Apparently, anyone can sell anyone else thus. It is 
true that a person has no proprietory or other right over 
his enemies, but " if you offer a human being by name to 
any bori it will accept him and kill him." My informants 
agreed that a bori could kill a person if it wished to do so 
without waiting for him to be named by a worshipper, but, 
although they could not give the reason, they had no 
doubt that a person would be fairly safe unless named, 
supposing that he had not offended the bori, but that 
there would be no escape for him when this had happened 
unless he discovered the deed, and persuaded the spirit to 
let him live — substituting another victim, of course. The 

i.jj THE BAN 01 I III- B0R1 

idea thai a person • an sell himself or uiotfaaf to the devil 
will n< it lie strange to English readers. There was a York- 
shire case in [329 in whit h one man bought the devil from 

.mother Coi ;{<l. and »ued the vendor lat< 1 * ■ j 1 because the 
goods were qoI delivered.10 

Not every person hu^> a ghost (fataluiva) though lie h 
SOUl Which may revisit the earthly haunts of its body after 
death. The fataluwa are found about a battlefield <">n 

.ifter .1 combat, but they will disappear after a time. 
They have the same shape as men, and are clothed in 
white, but they are of no substance, for " if you beat them, 
you will go right through them." They may come into 
the town and "crouch against a wall and try to jump 
out and frighten you as you pass. If you show fear and 
run or fall, they will kill you, but if you rush for them and 
beat them with a whip, or clank two pieces of iron together, 
you will be quite safe." A fataluwa comes from the blood 
of a person who has been killed, and is not seen otherwise 
except as follows. In the case of a person dying in the 
ordinary manner, the fataluwa waits with the body until 
it is buried; those with the corpse do not see it. But if 
anyone who hated the deceased enters the room, or if 
the deceased has said that lie does not want a particular 
person to attend his funeral, and he comes, this person 
will see the fataluwa, and it will frighten him away. After 
burial the fataluwa remains in the grave, and it will never 
appear again, so there is no need to be afraid of any evil 
there. Again, a very wicked person may have a fataluwa 
although he died a natural death, but it is uncertain how 
long such an one will exist. 

In the case of people killed, however, the case is different. 
" There was a certain town in the North of Nigeria called 
Ungwal Gamji renowned for its prowess in war, and at last it 

DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIU. 1 4 .; 

was besieged and taken by a strong enemy. But none of the 
inhabitants would surrender, and those who had not been 
killed while fighting, committed suicide upon the capture of 
the town, even the women throwing themselves and their 
children into the flames. The town was destroyed, and no 
one has ever been able to live there since, for anyone who goes 
near it can hear the ghosts of the people killed calling to each 
other, just as the people themselves did when alive." n There 
is a saying " Ungwal Gamji cannot be reinhabited until the 
resurrection." This story was told me in Tunis ; it savours 
somewhat of the capture of Carthage. 

It is not necessary that there should have been a battle, 
for a person who has been murdered has a fataluwa which 
is similar to that of a fallen warrior. It is a widespread 
belief in North Africa that if a new nail be driven into the 
ground at the spot where the crime has been committed 
the ghost will be imprisoned — just as a good spirit is 
confined in the woodwork of a door. Otherwise a cairn is 
built up, as is explained later. In Egypt, in the Fiyum, 
so Mr Engelbach tells me, the ghost {afrit) can take posses- 
sion of a human being just as can a jinn, and one can arise 
from the blood of even animals which have been killed. 

" There is always one angel hovering above at your right 
hand, and another at your left, the former recording all your 
good thoughts, writing them down as he goes along, the 
latter your evil ones. Upon this record you will be judged, 
but if at night before going to sleep you say, ' I repent,' the 
left-hand angel erases his record, and you start afresh, though 
with the good thoughts recorded." To be extra safe, it is as 
well to make a present of grain to a mallam, for this will pro- 
cure the forgiveness of sins committed during the previous 
year. The angels also wander about during sleep, but not in 
company with the soul or the bori, for each takes its own 

i.\4 THE BAN 01 THE BORI 

p;ith, but each knows when the body is about to wake up, 
and returns with equal speed — though, us lias been seen, 
the soul is sometimes late, according to some. The belief in 
the malaiku is confined to the Mohammedan Hausas, the 
Bagazawa will have none of them. 

Dreams are always true, though it may be some time 
before they are fulfilled, but when at length the time <omes, 
you will say: "Ah! I remember, I dreamed that!" If 
you dream that you see a certain man sitting in a farm all 
alone, or in a courtyard amidst a ring of his friends, all of 
whom pass him by without speaking to him, you will know 
that he is dying or dead. Sometimes spitting or washing 
on waking up will postpone the evil event. 

In the interpretation of dreams, there are certain definite 
rules. For instance, an egg or an article of clothing signifies 
a woman, this being in consequence of a reference in the 
Koran ; a ship implies safety, because Noah was saved ; 
whereas the visit of a chief warns one of approaching poverty 
— easily understood when one remembers the rapacity of the 
rulers when subject to no check. Omens or objects which 
are fortunate or the contrary in ordinary life have the same 
value in dreams, so a raven is unlucky (though here it 
signifies an enemy) while a horseshoe or a ke}r implies good 
luck, as does the presence of a person named Salim or some- 
thing else denoting good health. There is even a kind of 
language of flowers. With the Arabs, in case none of these 
methods are applicable, it is recognised as with us that 
dreams often go by contraries, the people arguing that as 
darkness is the opposite to light, so will be the course of 
the events which seem to occur then. The interpreter is 
fairly safe, therefore, if not called upon to use his powers 
too soon. But the Hausa is not quite prepared to thus wil- 
fully insult his own soul's inteligence, and he believes in the 

DEATH AND THE AFTER-LIFE 145 

true fulfilment of dreams, if proper preparation has been 
made, such as fasting and praying, though the credibility 
of the dreamer is to be taken into account. The Arab says 
that a poet's dreams can never be believed in because he 
always lives in an atmosphere of unreality. There should 
be many laureates amongst the Hausas of Tunis, and 
Nigeria could furnish a host of at least minor poets, if this 
were the only qualification. 

CHAPTER XI 

MAGIC — THE SAINTS AND THE MAGICIANS 

It will have been seen that magical practices are frequently 
resorted to in order to obtain success, and these means must 
now be examined in detail. The principal rites are per- 
formed in order to obtain good fortune in love or in hunting, 
for the rightful purpose of self-defence, either in private life 
or in time of war, or so as to work evil upon a rival or 
an enemy ; and in the following chapter they will be 
examined in order. 

The people who advise upon or prescribe the appropriate 
charm or spell are either mallami who are Mohammedan 
priests, or the bokaye, medicine-men. The former have 
studied their Koran, and the charms made with verses, 
words, letters, or figures from it have been learned from 
other mallams, as has been explained in Chapter VIII. 
The training of the boka is much more mystical. 

Mallams are of two kinds : the scholar who is really edu- 
cated, and the magician who lives by his wits.1 Perhaps 
"doctor" or "professor" would be the nearest English 
equivalent, for each of these words describes the great man 
of science equally with the quack, and, with the Hausas as 
with us, anyone professing to work wonders (e.g. Professor 
XYZ, The Famous Medico - Electrical - Pharmaceutical 
Diagnostician) will command a following. There too, 
as here, the learned men try to prevent the public being 
gulled by the inexpert, while the latter strive by making 
their charms all the more alluring to snatch a precarious 
livelihood. 

146 

MAGIC— THE SAINTS AND MAGICIANS 147 

This antipathy is natural, for originally the scholar was 
one who, dissatisfied with the stock remedies and explana- 
tions, tried to find out a straighter path in which to walk, 
and, as in England, scientific discovery was never popular 
with the men settled in the old beliefs. In Hausaland the 
difference is not marked even yet, for the greatest scholar 
believes in the efficacy of a written talisman for illness, while 
regarding with contempt the herbal decoction of a pagan 
medicine-man — though the latter may really be quite 
appropriate chemically, and very much more useful. But 
there is method in this, for each mallam has a natural desire 
to sell his own prescriptions, and to prevent or crush opposi- 
tion. The natives are much too superstitious to take a 
medicine in our way ; they must have some magical rite, and 
when European doctors in Nigeria give pills even to their 
own servants, the patients often seek a written charm from 
a mallam as well, and, if cured, the latter gets the credit — 
and, of course, the fee. So, too, with the pagan medicines, 
the wonderful results may be attributed rather to the 
magical qualities of a mouse's tail than to the curative 
properties of the insignificant herbs which accompany it. 
Thus each bori, which is a distinct illness, has its own special 
plants, but the part of the treatment which attracts the 
patient is the rite, not the potion. Have not we also a 
little lingering desire for the unknown, for letters strange 
and figures magical? A patient will willingly drink and 
pay for a prescription of Sod. Chlr. 51 j , Ad aq 5H, when he 
would refuse with scorn a direction in plain English to take 
a spoonful of salt in a glass of water. Nay, more, the latter 
would do him no good, for he would have no faith in it, and 
a trusting belief in one's medical attendant has at least as 
much effect as have his drugs and his skill. I know of 
miners and farmers in Australia thinking that their doctor 

i r TBI B i \ "/■ ////■ BORI 

or their dentist could not have done his work properly 

because he had not hurt them sutli< ientlv, and the talc of the 
Arab who, on being i batged three lira for having had B tooth 
pulled cut in .* few seconds, and without pain, COmpli uml 
that his own " da t..r " would have i harp d lOBB than half, 
although be I Bd taken half-an-hour about it, is very true to 
life. Is their BOmetfaing in this of the idea of the ne< ( 

for Buffering on the part of the animal when the evil is being 
removed ? 

It is hardly strange that the doctor should be a magician 
as well when we remember that the maladies are considered 
to be evil spirits, and that exorcism rather than surgery is 
required for the relief of the sufferer. The Hausa's ex- 
ions, Chiwu ya kama ni (Sickness has seized me) and 
Ta rikka borin kumiya (She had the Demon of Shame) arc- 
indications of his belief — were we altogether free of such 
ideas in the past ? Or even nowadays, when we have " A 
devil of a cold," because " the wind caught us " ? And 
really, if we regard the bori as a bacillus, the notion is 
not absolutely absurd, for it is certainly an invisible evil 
being which consumes our life. It is almost an argument 
for the degeneration theory ! 

In North Africa the Hausas believe in the mallams, not 
only when alive, but when dead, and it will be seen that the 
powers of marabouts are exercised in exactly the same 
direction as those of the magicians. But this is not astonish- 
ing, for the saint also commands the bori, though in the 
name of Allah, to whom they are subject, arid the magician 
forces the same spirits into his service through the efficacy 
of the appropriate rite. In fact, if the magician uses the 
name of Allah, his incantation is akin to a prayer. The 
names of Christ were used to protect against diseases and 
evil spirits, not only in Africa, but even in England, and 

MAGIC— THE SAINTS AND MAGICIANS 140 

the Hebrew sorcerers culled upon angels and other heavenly 
powers to aid them. As an example of the Oppo i ( < kiiul , 
let me quote Curtisss story of the woman who appealed 
to a marabout (by shaking the pall of his tomb) to recall 
a recalcitrant lover for whom she had made her husband 
divorce her. The Saint made the man so ill that he 
capitulated, and the marriage was celebrated at the shrine.2 
The mallams and the Masu-Bori are generally, if not 
always, physicians ; the barber is the surgeon — just as 
he was once in England, his pole reminds us. 

Neither the scholar nor the magician is necessarily an 
impostor. It is known now that many of our own ancient 
" remedies " or remedial measures in reality killed the 
patients whom it was intended that they should cure, but 
surely it is not necessary to prove that the medical men acted 
conscientiously in- the full belief that they were right ? 
Nor does anyone seriously believe that none of the methods 
of treatment now in force will ever be discarded. Almost 
any day one can read in a newspaper that some doctor has 
recommended a certain article while another declares that 
it is the worst thing possible, yet the opinion of each has been 
given in good faith.3 Here, as well as in Hausaland, people 
have got to do the best with what knowledge they have, and, 
as has been said before, faith is the principal ingredient. 
Indeed, for some hypochondriacs hypnotism may be much 
more beneficial than a drug. Public opinion, too, is a very 
serious factor, and just as the mallam in Africa is often 
forced to act in the prescribed manner, so a surgeon in 
England will hesitate to use a new method of treatment 
which he has discovered, although absolutely convinced 
in his own mind of its superiority to those in general 
use. 

It is not always easy to become a boka. Haj Ali, who is 

THE B [N 01 nil BORI 

him til one, aj thai only men who h gh the 

Fittan Fura, and havi b( i n initiated into the bori <•< I an 
eligible, and, in order to attain to 1 1 i po ition, the< andidate 
must take medii inei for three months from the other bokas, 
p »1 ions whi li will Lru re ise his i apai ity for ondi r I anding 
drugs, and also teach him how they should be prep 
After that, he offer: up a sai rinceof a red cock and a white 
hen, or more, according to his means, and must then burn 
incense in the medii ine-hul (gidan tsafi) for five nights 
running, taking care nol to go to sleep. On the last night, 
his eyes are opened, and he sees an aljan without a head, and 
then various others which arc described in Chapter XIV., of 
none of which must he show the slightest sign of fear. Next 
night he goes into the midst of the forest, and meets the 
dwarf, Gajere Mai-Dowa, with his bow and arrow in his 
hand. This bori asks what he wants, and he makes his 
request, and then Gajere will indicate certain roots which 
will give him special power in particular cases. He returns 
to the gidan tsafi, offers another sacrifice and incense, and is 
then a fully fledged boka. He builds his own gidan tsafi, and 
may be heard inside conversing with the bori, who appear to 
him in the shape of frogs, scorpions, snakes, chameleons, 
etc. If very proud of his Arabic, he may call himself an 
ettabibi, who is as much like a boka as is a medical student 
who has qualified for the Ch.B. to one content with a 
mere B.S. 

The boka is a man nowadays, though I fancy at one time 
women were held to be more powerful in magic, for the 
boka may wear a woman's head-dress (see 111. 46), and 
the chief (arifa) of the temple in North Africa is always 
a woman. Again, an ordinary female has a harmful effect 
upon charms, as will be seen. It is said that a proper 
boka is too full of medicines ever to wish for intimate 

MAGIC THE SAINTS AND MAGICIANS 151 

relations witli a female, and that if lie did sleep with one 
he would be unable to complete the act. In any case, 
sexual intercourse ruins the power to call up the bori, as 
is explained later on. 

There was a very celebrated arifa in Tripoli some ten 
years ago, named Mai-Bille, who had been taken as a slave 
from Maradi. " She had a gidan tsafi of her own, and you 
could hear the bori going cheet-cheet-cheet in her house 
until she stopped them.4 Her totem was a snake, and she 
had one in a corner of her room which used to come out, when 
she would rub its head, and promise it eggs and milk. There 
were scorpions also, and a hare, all being spirits which had 
taken animal form," the scorpions being some of the Yayan 
Zanzanna, or small-pox spirits. " She kept them so that she 
might maintain her health, and in order to make herself 
feared." The second reason is easy enough to understand, 
the other is not, 'but my informant, Salah, said that had she 
not lived with them she would have been ill — she being so 
full of medicine, apparently, that it had to be given an outlet. 
Both Haj Ali and Salah had been her assistants, so they 
knew her well, but I found that her name was a byword to 
all in Tunis as well as Tripoli, Haja Gogo, the present arifa 
of Tripoli, being her successor, and living in her room, part 
of which is seen in 111. 10. She was better known by 
her nickname of Giwa Azuza (Old Elephant), which, how- 
ever, was a compliment ! It is not only the bori which can 
be brought into a house ; the keeper of a tomb will sometimes 
hear the marabout who has been buried there talking to 
the ghosts of others of his profession who have come to 
visit him. This, however, is not surprising, for in time 
these marabouts will become bori just as have Mallam 
Alhaj and others. 

Another story of her goes as follows. She would eat 

Till. HAS Oh THh BORI 

no in pi tin t< ti< les of rams, and one- Tu< d.v 

went to market to buy then as usual. The but< her, an 
Arab, who did not kimw her, ivfu ed to SOU tluin to h<r, 
and she returned home (jj ,L rage, and, burning incense, 
told the bori what hud happened. So great was the eftei t 
that fnun early morn till dewy eve the bat) hei sold none 
of his meat, and he could not imagine the reason, since it 
was quite as good — or as bad — as usual. At last, someone 
bold him of what he had done, and he at once brought a 
whole carcass, testicles and all, to her house, begging her 
to accept it as a present, and to pardon him. She graciously 
consented, and gave him a small drop of scent to rub upon 
his face, commanding him not to speak a word until he 
had got back to his stall. He carried out her instructions, 
and lo ! upon his return he sold out his whole stock 
immediately. Needless to say, she had no more trouble 
after that, and perhaps it was fortunate for her that she 
lived in North Africa. In England not so very long ago 
she would have been burnt as a witch. 

A third anecdote is even more interesting. Azuzaand 
another arifa named Jibaliya (in whose house the dances 
shown in Ills. 51, etc., were held) once had a quarrel, 
the latter presuming to match herself with her great 
colleague, and saying that she could call up the bori quite 
as well as could The Old Elephant. Azuza put medicines 
and incense into a malafa (straw hat) in her room, folded 
it, and made Salah sew the two sides of the brim together. 
She then challenged Jibaliya to summon the bori, but the 
latter could not do so, because " Azuza had imprisoned 
them all in her hat," and for a whole year there were no 
dances, since neither woman could give in. At last, 
however, Sidi Hamura, one of the Karamanli, gave a big 
performance which was to consist of seven days' bori 

MAGIC— THE SAINTS AND MAGICIANS is; 

dancing, and Jibaliya and heT people attended. Bui tlu-y 
were powerless ; the drummers could not even beat the 

correct rolls, and after three days of failure, Sidi Hamura 
summoned Azuza. On her arrival she taunted Jibaliya 
and said: "Now see how / shall make you dance." She 
put a little incense into her mouth and chewed it, and then 
spat it out upon the drummers' faces, and no sooner did 
it touch them than they played madly. She then began 
to undo the hat, and immediately the spirits commenced 
to roar, and by the time that the hat had been opened 
fully every one of the Masu-Bori present had become 
possessed.5 

In Tunis, the men seem to be the more important, but 
in Tripoli it is the other (one cannot say the " fair ") sex 
which has the advantage. The boka and the arifa ma}' 
become comparatively rich through the practice of their 
professions, and the principal Masu-Bori also may manage 
to acquire property, but they never become chiefs. The 
mallams can, however, and they are now destroying the 
chances of all of the others in Nigeria, for they combine 
the work of all, and through playing upon the fanaticism 
of their fellow- Mohammedans, they are able to have the 
bokas, Masu-Bori, and wizards punished, although in 
reality they profess to do the same things themselves 
through the efficacy of their holy Koran ! 

The boka is not the only one who dresses like a woman, 
for the Garde, or snake-charmers, wear a long tuft of hair, 
and the Turdi (their inveterate enemies) use the pad 
or dauka. In the bori dances, too, many of the male 
characters wear cloths and silken scarves — though this 
may be simply an indication of non-Mohammedan origin, 
as will be explained. 

In spite of the fact that the Hausa has become a Moslem, 

is I THE B w OF THE B0R1 

not above accepting tali mans from a Christian, and 
as will be seen later (p. i's's). a missionary wa 
not Lo • i.. |.i.i\ for rain for them ini e they 

were doubtful of the success of their own efforts in that 

din, tion. Tn Nigeria I was often begged by lfan-as and 
ins for charms for a child-birth, but never by a Fulah; 
in North Africa I was eagerly besought by Hausa 
amulets for success, but not by Arabs. A marabout 
imparts his baraka to all who tout b his tomb, and though 
I could hardly be supposed to pass on holiness, it is very 
evident to the negro that the European with his wonderful 
inventions and his apparent wealth must be able to 
compose very powerful charms. I do not know if there 
is a special word to convey the meaning of European 
influence; baraka is generally used in North Africa to de- 
scribe the force diffused by or flowing from the marabout, 
but although the Hausa uses the word albaraka, he speaks 
of his mallam as having zafi. 8 — i.e. magic — though it 
is not used in a bad sense here, quite the contrary. At 
the same time, the marabout's baraka is a dangerous force, 
since it may work evil as well as good. The late Master 
of Christ's College, Cambridge, Dr Peile, when in chapel 
always made one feel that some effulgence, some invisible 
influence of a really good man was emanating from him ; 
that there was an almost tangible aura, part of which could 
be taken away afterwards. I imagine that the Hausa's 
idea of his saint's baraka is much the same, except that 
with him fear is predominant, and so nervous superstition 
takes the place of peaceful affection and admiration. The 
more successful the European or the mallam, the stronger 
his influence must be, and, of course, his talismans also, 
for the objects which have been in contact with or have 
been constructed by him partake to some extent of his 

MAGIC— THE SAINTS IND MAGICIANS C55 

personality, and are valued accordingly, just as we cling 
to a place for its old associations, and treat with 1 lu- 
greatest love and veneration a broken toy which once 
belonged to a dear parent now dead and lost to us. 

The same idea is held with regard to the rags seen 
hanging to the tree in 111. 26, for having been touched 
by the women, they have become in a way part of 
themselves, and when left on the tree they cause to be 
duplicated in " the rest of the body " (the person herself) 
the influence which is produced in them by the spirits 
imprisoned in the tree. The connexion between the 
rag and the woman is comparable with the fact that 

Figs. 9 and 10. — Votive Clogs 

certain fortune-tellers in London claim to predict the fate 
of a person by simply " sensing " a glove or other article 
which he or she has worn. In Roman Catholic churches 
and elsewhere may be seen legs, arms, etc., placed in the 
shrines of the Virgin — or of a saint with special power 
over the particular complaint — by persons suffering from 
afflictions of these parts of their bodies, the presence of 
the model in the church being supposed to procure or 
secure the health of the corresponding member of the wor- 
shipper. In the Hausa temples also are votive offerings, 
but they are not comparable to those of the Christians, 
for they are not in any way sympathetic, the age of the 
spirit being considered, not the seat of the disease. A pair 
of wooden clogs, therefore, will answer just as well for a 
rash on the face as for an abscess on the leg, since the 

is*. THE B i v OF THE BORI 

afflicting Ix-ri in eat h i n e i one ol " The Little Sp 

A t<>v hone will 1><- even nunc elfira< ions, ber-anse il is 

Dions welcome. 

As lias been pointed oat elsewhere,7 many white men 
when travelling in .1 savage country have been asked by 
the Datives to try cases of difficulty; perhaps becau 
probable injustice <»n the pari ol the chief, who might be 
an interested party ; perhaps because the chief is only too 
glad not t<» have to judge between them, and so escape 
incurring the enmity of one side or the other ; or perhaps 
because the stranger is regarded as a supernatural 
messenger, or at least a magician. This is only natural in 
the case of a European who has so many strange posses- 
sions, and comes perhaps from the land of the setting or 
the rising sun — one enters Hausaland from the south-west 
— but every visitor is regarded as a little uncommon and 
uncanny, and, as in English, " stranger " means someone 
" strange," so too the Hausa word bako contains both 
meanings, though, owing to the travelling propensities and 
hospitality of the people, bako also stands for "guest." 
The idiom: Muna yin bako (lit., We are "doing" a 
stranger — there is no arriere pensee) may originally have 
implied some state in which there was a little danger, and 
the hospitality may have arisen from a wish to establish 
friendly relations with the unknown rather than from any 
wish to do him a good turn. In fact, this is clearly seen, 
for the chief sends a present to and calls upon his import- 
ant guest, and, in the stories, the Hausa is often compelled 
to ask a persistent visitor to share his meal, in spite of his 
attempts to evade the honour.8 Again, a guest is not 
expected to help in the work of the house, certainly not in 
the preparation of food — the reason being obvious — and 
neighbours take it ill if not informed of his arrival. Even 

MAGIC— THE SAINTS AND MAGICIANS 157 

the copious salutations and politeness of many people 
are said to be due to the desire to use words of good augury, 
and probably for this reason a man's father is said " to be 
missing " rather than that he is dead. We soften it into : 
" He is no longer with us, he has gone to a better world," 
and although with us such a thought soothes the feelings 
of those left behind, the Hausas are still in the state when 
the expression was meant for the benefit of the deceased — 
so that he would not wish to return to this one. 

In North Africa, the prostitute is another being to whom 
are attributed powers above the average, either because she 
to some extent symbolises fertility, or else on account of 
her practising a profession not accessible to all. It may 
be that the same held good in Hausaland at one time, for 
in several tales a witch appears in this role, and special 
warnings are given to the hero against marrying such a 
person, but nowadays I think that the Hausa looks down 
upon her ; at any rate this is the case in some parts, and, 
as will be seen, she is not quite safe with the bori. In 
Nigeria there were many loose characters in the com- 
munity, though with the exception of the Fittan Fura, 
I have not heard of any recognised religious prostitution. 
That it existed, however, can hardly be doubted, for the 
Hausa rites are, in the main, those of Baal Hammon and 
Tanith, and there is no lack of West African examples. 

The Hausa blacksmith does not seem to be regarded 
at the present time with as much awe by people of his own 
race as those of surrounding pagan tribes, although he still 
is to some extent different (e.g. the test of virginity in a 
blacksmith's daughter) and in certain pagan districts he 
is quite a person apart. But he still has one distinction, 
for, according to a proverb, every workman makes excuses, 
but a blacksmith is the worst.9 

THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

Butchers arc dangerous people, for, on account of the 
blood which they Bpill, they are constantly surrounded 
by boil For this reason they usually marry within their 
own guild. 

Last, though not least, come the wizard and the witch.M 
People cannot become wizards or be witches ; they must be 
born so. They me\y marry ordinary persons and have 
children, some of whom will possess the power of witch- 
craft, others not, although it is probable that the latter 
can develop it, for it is a hereditary gift. Office, however, 
depends upon merit, and a candidate for the rank of 
Sarikin Maiyu (Chief Wizard) is supposed to take one 
hundred meals of every kind of food and drink. These 
people catch the soul of a person they dislike and eat it, 
but no one can do anything to them, not nowadays at any 
rate, because there is no actual proof which is accepted 
by a court, although it is well known who is the culprit. 
The only thing to do is to go to a boka (who is more power- 
ful still) and get a charm to drink or to wash with, or else 
to obtain a laiya from a mallam. Neither a wizard nor a 
witch can enter fire or deep water in safety, though both 
the mallam and the boka are protected against the former 
element. 

CHAPTER XII 

MAGIC IN THE HOUSE — LOVE CHARMS 

It is now time to examine some of the love charms, but 
first it should be noted that if one has to buy the ingredi- 
ents for a charm, they will be much more powerful if the 
money used in payment has been obtained in a certain 
manner. Thus to make a husband cleave to a wife, the 
latter should beg one-seventh of the sum from each of 
seven wives who have had only one husband, and have 
been the sole wives. Again, in other cases, the money 
would be obtained from seven persons of the same name, 
and these would preferably be namesakes of the person 
making the charm, though I am told that this is not 
always so, as instances are known of a mallam telling the 
applicant to go to others. 

I must also mention that the charms to be described are 
all medicines or rites of some kind, for although written 
talismans or laiyas exist in great numbers and are employed 
by almost every Hausa, they are essentially of foreign 
origin. This would not matter if the people understood 
them, but they do not; they simply accept blindly the little 
scraps of paper, and treat them as directed, and in any 
case these charms have been examined at length by 
M. Edmond Doutte, so it is not worth while going into the 
subject, especially as such charms are essentially of Arabic 
or Berber origin, not Hausa. But it is well to state that 
written charms are of much more value than printed ones ; 
in fact, the latter have but little power, the reasons being 

159 

I III- B i.v 01 THE B0R1 

that the in;ill.mi imparts his own virtue when writing 
(a does the person who touches the pen when hi- fortune 
i I) ting told), and secondly, that the ink has been p< < ially 
i»r< pared. It might !»• added that, in all probability, the 

objection to a change has also something to do with it, 

religious rites. But the last is dis- 

appearing, for llaj Ali thinks that if some of the mallam's 

ink was used for the printing, especially if he himseh 

helped in the work, the (harms thus produced would be 
almost as powerful as the written ones. Another informant, 
however, says that this would not be so, especially as in 
the latter case the charms would not be written in secret, 
an essential in many cases. It may be noted that in these 
talismans, the number i, especially in combination — e.g. 
in, iooi, or even 99 (100- 1) — is specially endowed with 
magical properties, and a survival of a similar belief with 
us is shown by the fact that a murderer is safe if his 
victim lives for " a year and a day." 1 

Written charms become useless if taken across the sea, 
for there are many unclean things in the water, and charms 
are contaminated by them. I have mentioned several 
written charms for awakening love or producing popularity 
and for conferring invisibility or invulnerability, in Hausa 
Superstitions and Customs,2 and in the book mentioned 
above will be found the proper formulae for many others, 
including those giving protection against headache, tooth- 
ache, flatulence, heart disease, fever, and other ailments ; 
against accidents, drowning, attacks by wild beasts, and 
stings of insects ; against jealousy, slander, and theft ; 
for the power to wreck a boat, to get news or to foretell 
the events of the year ; to bring absent friends to one, 
to make a couple absurdly fond of each other, to increase 
the sexual power, and to keep a spouse faithful ; or, on the 

MAGIC IN THE HOUSE— LOVE CHARMS 161 

contrary, to sow discord, to separate a wife from a husband, 
or to part adulterous lovers ; to cum ire success in hunting, 
fishing, trading, etc. ; to discover hidden treasures and also 
to protect them ; to min or blind one's oppressor or to make 
him sleepless, and even to burn down an enemy's house, 
the last an extremely useful one to a man who is afraid 
to accomplish the desired end by the ordinary means. 
Lastly, in order to protect completely the person thus 
acting — by the virtue of holy words, be it remembered — 
other charms enable him to enter the presence of the great 
to press his claims, or to ensure delivery from prison should 
such natural acts unfortunately send him there. But, as 
I have said, these are of foreign origin, and so, although 
used by the Hausas, it is not necessary to consider them 
further here. 

In the spring, especially a tropical spring, a young man's 
fancy lightly turns to thoughts of love, or rather, of desire, 
and one of the first charms which he himself will think of 
procuring is that which will make a maiden smile upon him. 
It is comforting, therefore, to know that there are many 
means by which a girl can be made to look favourably 
upon an amorous swain. First try an easy one. Take a 
tiny piece of the Dan Mutum Mutume plant, pound it up, 
and by some means or other get it into her food. " If she 
eats of it she will follow you like a dog." 

That is quite simple, and it may be unnecessary to do 
more, but should failure unfortunately be the result, it 
will be found that the next one is more efficacious. Take a 
tiny piece of the Nonon Kurichiya, mix it with a morsel 
of millet flour, and place the whole — not bigger than a 
pea — under the tongue before going to sleep at night. 
Next day take the pellet out of your mouth, dry it in the 
sun, and, after having added a scrap of the placenta of a 

K..! rill- 11 f.v <>/■ THE B0R1 

donkey, pound h up. This put into the lair one's food 

lias the -.iiii> gratifying result. 

The next charm is somewhat more suggestive, and is a 
very powerful one. Take a small piece of the root of a 
mattfowa tree, and then, sitting down, pull a certain part of 
the anatomy as far as possible along the thigh and make 
an incision in the leg at the point reached — the farther 
down the Stronger the (harm. Then, after having rubbed 
the mantowa into the cut, take it, and mix it with a small 
lock of hair from the forehead and the parings of all the 
nails (hands and feet) except those of the first fingers — 
for these are stretched out in praying. Burn these up in 
a vessel, and pound the remains into powder if necessary. 
Next morning put out your tongue to its full extent and 
touch the medicine, then manage to get the powder into 
the woman's food. 

A very powerful charm is made as follows. Take a 
small portion of the dried after-birth of a she-ass, a little 
of the dried heart of a fowl, a piece of the root of the man- 
towa tree, and a little of the bark of the madowachi. 
Pound these together with a little grain, make into a 
ball, and sleep with it in your mouth. Next day give 
it to the woman in her food, and " after she has eaten 
it she will cry whenever she does not see you. Donkeys 
and fowls will keep coming back home, however much 
they are shooed away, and so will she hang around 
you." 

Another good method is to pierce a certain hump-backed 
ant called Rakumin Kassa 3 (Camel of the Earth) with a 
thorn of the Fara Kaya tree, and when she is not looking, 
squash the ant in her body-cloth. As long as that cloth 
lasts, she will never go near another man. Driving in a 
nail has the same effect as the tying of a knot — i.e. it 

MAGIC IN THE HOUSE— LOVE CHARMS 163 

imprisons the influence, and there seems to he a suggestion 
of the former process in the above. 

The following charm is not popular, for he who has used 
it may live to be sorry that he did so. Take the hearts of 
a fowl, a pigeon, and a dog, and after having pounded 
them up with a piece of the root of the mantowa tree, get 
them into the woman's food. After she has eaten the 
medicine she will give you no peace. " Even though you 
beat a dog he will keep on coming to you if you are eating 
meat, and so will the woman bother you, and she will wear 
you out." 

The spittle and any remains of food, etc., taken from the 
stick with which a person cleans his or her teeth, mixed with 
a part of the mantowa and put into the food of the person 
desired, is another powerful love charm. It will be re- 
membered that a s'aint can pass on some of his baraka by 
spitting into a dish of food, which is then greedily devoured 
by the faithful. Very faithful. 

If your advances to a woman have been rejected, take 
a certain kind of kola-nut called labuje and a small piece 
of ramma stalk which you break into seven pieces. Put 
these into a new pot, and pour in a little water. Then 
add the dung of a black horse or a black ass, close up the 
pot, and put it away in a secret place. Each morning 
early, before you have spoken to anyone, spit into the pot 
and then close it up again, and on the seventh day take out 
the kola-nut, and give it to the woman. " If she eats of 
it, when you are in bed that night you will hear her 
knocking at the door." 

The amorous swain has by no means a corner in these 
commodities, for a love-sick girl can use all of the foregoing 
except, of course, the third ; instead of that she has a 
course open to her which is quite as good. She takes a 

io.} THE B IV OF THE FORI 

small piece oi meat, places it high up between her I 
and Bleeps with it there .ill night. In the morning! she 

. uts it up very line, dries .m<l powder.- it. ;md . .t it into 

the f I of the one whom he admires, and a similar 

resull follows. It should have been stated thai in all oi 
the <• love charms, the name oi the person desired must 
be pokes aloud at r.n I 

It is not unnatural thai a wife should wish to confine 
her husband's attentions to herself, though she knows that 
there is but little chance of such a thing in Hausaland. 
Still, she can but try — and incidentally help to enrich one 
of the mall. mis or bokas — at any rate, she can make her 
husband powerless to have intimate relations with other 
women. To do this, mix roots of the bagaruwa, dundu, and 
gamji together, pound them up, and give to the husband 
in food. 

There is some means of making a man impotent even 
with his own wife, though my informants did not know 
what it was, but Haj AH is acquainted with a man in 
Tunis named Hamuda who, nineteen months ago, wanted 
to marry a second woman, and his wife tried to dissuade 
him. Finding her arguments useless she swore that he 
would never touch any woman — not even herself — again, 
and he immediately became powerless. The wife was 
arrested, according to Haj Ali, and is still kept a prisoner, 
because she will not undo her spell, and as Hamuda does 
not exactly know what she did to him, he cannot obtain 
the appropriate antidote. It is evident that she did not 
injure him physically, and she may have used one of the 
Arab methods — e.g. that with a looking-glass. 

If a wife is lonely during her husband's absence, or 
suspicious, or if for any other reason she is anxious for 
him to return to her without delay, she throws salt and 

MAGIC IN THE HOUSE-LOVE (HARMS [65 

pepper upon the fire, calling his name a1 the tine time. 
" If you were in a cafe you would jump up and nm home 
so suddenly that your companions would think you mad." 
If some distance off the husband would travel all day and 
all night until he arrived. The fruit of the begeyi tree will 
reconcile a husband and wife, or even lovers, hence the 
name. 

But alas ! it must be admitted that not every wife is 
anxious for her husband to return in a hurry, nay more, 
she is even desirous of blinding him when at home, and 
when such an one wishes to have a lover, the following 
are useful charms to know. 

Take a little water in which a corpse has been washed, 
and a pinch of earth from a grave just above where the 
head is, and about a foot down.4 Mix the earth and water 
together, and, in this, place a pin or a piece of rag. Put 
this under your husband's pillow, after he has gone to bed, 
and his eyes will close at once, and he will sleep so soundly 
that nothing will wake him. You can then get out of bed 
and leave him, if not exactly with a clear conscience at 
any rate with an easy mind, for you know that he will 
sleep until you have returned and have removed the pin 
or piece of rag. 

A much more powerful charm, but unfortunately so 
difficult to obtain, is made as follows. Take a certain 
field-mouse known by the Hausas here as Beran Benghazi,6 
and cut its throat. Then dry the body, taking care to 
save the blood with it, and pound it up with certain roots. 
Obtain the right hand of a corpse, place the powder in 
couscous, and stir it with the dead hand, hiding it in your 
own. At any time after the husband has eaten the couscous 
so doctored, he will be amenable to treatment, and all the 
wife has to do is to place the dead hand under his pillow. 

[66 ////• HAN OF TIIF. BOM 

After this, ho will l>n oine so trai table thai ! he will be able 

to talk to her lover in his presence, and he will even summon 
the lover to visit her a1 her reqne t. Eiaj Ali knows of 
.in Arab whose wife worked this charm, and, although 
everyone told him of her infidelity, he would not admit it; 
in t ict, he even abused those who were kind and thoughtful 
enough to bring bim the information, fo qow he is shunned 
by bis former ( ompanions. As Haj Ali said : " How could 

one be friendlv with such ;• fool ? " 

In both of the above it is the corpse which exercises the 
soporific influence, for the husband is made to appear as if 
dead for the time. The mouse (which moves in dark 
corners) and the roots (which never see the sun) in the 
second charm cause the husband to be blind to the wife's 
misdeeds even when he is awake. 

Life in Africa is so uncertain that a man may never 
marry a girl whom he desires. It may be that her father 
has promised her to three or four men in order to obtain 
presents from them — as has been mentioned in Hausa 
Superstitions and Customs, Story 47. But more likely it 
is because the girl herself has become enamoured of some- 
one who can give her more luxury, and in that case it is 
only natural that the disappointed lover should seek to 
avenge himself. The following charm can be used by a 
man against any woman who has rejected or even insulted 
him. Take the intestines of a goat and blow them out. 
Then put a medicine prepared from the roots of certain 
trees inside, mentioning the woman's name, and again 
blow, and tie the intestines up. Then put them in the 
fire, and they will fizzle and pop, and as they do this so 
will the female be seized with internal pains, and lose 
control over herself. So bad will she become that when 
the parents or other relatives know that your feelings have 

MAGIC IN THE HOUSE- LOVE (HARMS ify 

been hurt, they will guess what is happening, and will 
rush to you, and promise you anything if you let her get 
well again. Then, if you take the intestines off the fire, 
the illness will leave her at once. 

So much for the faithless fair. But the rejected lover's 
armoury is not yet depleted, for he can still deal with his 
supplanter. As has been said, a bridegroom can be rendered 
impotent if the rival walks behind him with an open knife 
or pair of scissors, and calls him, shutting it immediately 
he answers. If the bridegroom does not reply, however, 
he is safe — as in the case of the traveller in the vicinity 
of Jan Gari. The same effect may be brought about by 
sticking a needle into the clothing worn by the bride- 
groom, or into a small piece previously torn off and 
stolen. 

No concrete instance of the above spells upon a Hausa 
could be given, but Haj Ali knew of an Arab girl, Khlaira, 
who was married, and yet no efforts upon her husband's 
part or her own could bring about consummation. About 
fifteen days afterwards, an aunt (the mother being dead) 
remembered that the girl had been " tied " by a weaver 
when young, so she was taken to another weaver, and made 
to walk around the loom, and that night the husband was 
successful. 

It is just possible that the girl's mother, aunt, elder 
sister, or someone else interested, may have wanted her to 
marry the unsuccessful suitor, not the man who has been 
accepted, or who has even become her husband — and 
may make up her mind to bring about the union which 
she desires. She therefore awaits her opportunity, and 
manages to sprinkle the girl with water in which a corpse 
has been washed. If the accepted lover hears of this he 
will break off the engagement at once in all probability, 

[68 THE BAN 01 THE B0R1 

hut if nut, and he m irries her, the girl will d<> her besl t<> 
leave him. Only •> charm from ;i maBam can undo this, 
and if the man cannol gel it Boon lie had better renounce 
«>r divorce her, otherwise Bhe will certainly dis( 
him. 

CHAPTER XIII 

MAGIC IN THE HOUSE — SELF-PRESERVATION 

Everyone is interested in his own preservation, and there 
are many charms to enable a person to become invisible — 
alas ! not often from the best of motives — passively to ward 
off the attacks of his enemies, and also to be able, in an 
active manner, to attack them with success. These are 
prepared in various ways, and range in importance from 
the simple piece of sabani (one of the leguminosae) — which, 
when held in the hand by a naughty boy, protects him 
against threatened chastisement by his father — to the brain 
of the hyena — wtiich, when eaten by a rival, drives him 
mad — or to the various means by which an enemy is killed. 
Perhaps the fact that the word sammo means both " to 
obtain a talisman to injure," and also " to poison " may 
throw some light upon the methods of the mallams and 
others ! 

The plant in a tree which comes from a seed dropped by 
a bird will make a powerful charm. There is one which 
grows in the kalgo tree (Kauchin Kalgo), for instance, 
which is useful in many charms, but " you must cut it 
without speaking, for if you mention its name it will 
wither up at once and disappear." Another, in a large- 
leaved palm-tree {Kauchin Kabba Sha Nema), is particu- 
larly valuable. Take a piece of this, and after having 
pounded it up, together with the flower of the Kawo tree, 
make a laiya of it, and wear it above your forehead or 
around your neck. Should you see some men with money 
169 

1 7o THE BAN OF THE BORJ 

spread oul before them on a mat (thia would occur when 
payii oi for certain woi k, or i1 might be only a 

small amount in the market), place the charm between 
your teeth, yon will then bo ome invisible immediately, 
.iiul will be able to eiae ill their money and take it away. 

Another method ol becoming invisible i^ to carry <>ut the 
following dire* tions, Take a small i*>rti<>n <»f some pari 
(either the bair, hoof, blood, or entrails) oi ;i black (.it. 
a black dog, a blai k fowl, a black goat, and a donkey, and, 
having mixed these with a Badufu1 beetle, pound all 
together in a mortar. Then make a laiya by placing the 
powder in a bag made of a piece of the skin of a hyena, 
and wear it. 

The two charms just mentioned, and others for a similar 
purpose, are very much sought after by thieves, and the 
next one is almost invaluable. With a small piece of the 
root of a certain tree, pound up the heart, a piece of skin 
from the forehead, and the nails of a dabgi (ant-eater). 
Then make these into a laiya in the usual way, and keep in 
a safe place. When out following one's profession, if the 
wearer sits down, he immediately begins to sink, and can 
get under a wall (like the dabgi), or if he leans against it 
the wall will open and give him a passage — a policeman at 
Jemaan Daroro was accused of having a similar charm, 
and the people really believed that it acted. But the 
wearer must be careful. He is only safe when standing, 
for whenever he sits down he will sink, whether he wishes 
to do so or not, so the charm is not widely used. 

The hearts of an owl, a jackal, and a jerboa, dried, 
powdered, and placed in a laiya, make the wearer invisible, 
and the charm is particularly powerful if the skin of a frog 
is used as the covering. 

The heart of a vulture (a very silent bird) wrapped in 

MAGIC IN HOUSE—SELF-PRESERVATION 171 

rags, and placed upon the skin <>f a hyena (the enemy <>f 
the dog) will prevent that animal barking, and this is a 
very useful charm for burglars to possess. But a more 
efficacious one is made by mixing medicine with, or by 
wrapping the torn-up pieces of a written charm in, meat, 
and by giving it to the dog for several days before the 
midnight visit so that the charm has time to act. The 
last one, at any rate, has a reasonable chance of success ! 

If a burglar should be sufficiently unfortunate to be 
detected and captured, a mallam can give him a talisman 
for delivery from prison, it will be remembered. Still it 
is much more convenient and cheaper not to be caught 
at all, of course. 

It may have been impossible to obtain any of the above 
charms, or a person may have some which through age 
have become usejess, so he must think of other means 
of protecting himself whilst earning a more or less peaceful 
and honest living. In this chapter, charms used in war 
and the chase will not be considered, however, for the 
professions of a soldier and a hunter require more than 
ordinary risks. But in civil life there are dangers too, 
though there are so many potions, amulets, and talismans, 
that the rich man may be very well protected unless he 
forgets Allah, ridicules a bori, or, becoming careless of his 
safety, allows his charms to perish. A cautious man will 
obtain new ones every now and then, because all lose their 
efficacy at some time or other, and a careless person may 
not discover this until they have failed to work, when it is 
too late. But no one could excuse himself for not having 
the following charm, since it is so easy to obtain. Take 
a little of the Keke Koma Mashekiya, grind it up, and mix 
with water. By washing yourself with this you will 
cause the evil wishes of an enemy to recoil upon himself. 

i;j THE B l.V OF THE B0R1 

It is unnece «iy, perhaps, to point oui thai .1 mallam 
can give .1 charm by writing the appropriate word , letters 
or figures from the Koran, and it is interesting to note that 
.1 parallel can be bund in Europe, for the Bible 
in a similar manner. "11 is .1 good phy h . and helps to 

drive away glio-t . •■ ]>e< ially the beginning of the < i« . - j>« -I 

of St John." So the first fourteen verges or more, or parts 

of them, were written upon a piece of paper, and worn 
around the neck as a charm against devils; a custom 
which was expressly forbidden by Kirg Edward VI.2 

If you suspect that a human being is trying to wound 
or imprison you, get a piece of the skin of an electric eel 
(munjiriya) , and wear it like a laiya, for " this will not 
only enable you to slip through the hands of anyone who 
manages to catch hold of you (as might be expected), but 
it also causes all blows with club or sword to be harmless." 

Another method is to get a black snake, and to cut off 
its head, and in the head place a seed of the ramma plant. 
" Bury the head and seed in a grave which must be exactly 
seven days old, and pour water upon it at midnight for 
three nights running, when the shoot will appear. Seven 
days afterwards, take some of the fat from the body of the 
snake, and at midnight proceed to the grave, strip quite 
naked (removing even the loin-cloth in Hausaland), lie 
down, and rub the fat upon the plant. An aljan, like 
a man with a big head, will appear, and try to frighten you, 
and another in the shape of a big snake — but you must 
keep on. Next night do the same, also on the third night. 
When the plant has grown to a height of between three and 
four feet, go at midnight to the grave, again strip naked, 
pull up the ramma, peel it, and mould with the hands into 
the shape of a girdle, and then tie it round your waist, 
and go home. Afterwards, if anyone attempts to strike 

MAGIC IN HOUSE— SELF-PRESERVATION 173 

you, pull off your girdle aud wave it in your hand, and it 
will become a snake, and will bite your enemy." 

The great causes of dread to the Hausa in Tunis are the 
evil eye (mugun ido) and the evil mouth (muguu baki), 
each of which is an occult force residing in an evil-wisher. 
There are man}'' means used to prevent the effect of both 
of these, but somehow one is caught napping some day. 

The evil eye is perhaps the easier to guard against, 
because one has more chance of seeing a person's expression 
than one has of knowing what he is saying under his 
breath. But if one could only get a good look at the 
latter one might know, for the person with a mugun baki 
has a black tip to his tongue. Auta told me that it was 
through someone's mugun baki that he had been out of 
work so long, but Khadejia or Fedia, his wife, had a much 
more patent case -than that, and it was extremely interest- 
ing to me, for, as I was going to their house just at that 
time, I had the news on the spot. She was one of the 
priestesses of the Gidan Yara (House of the Young Spirits), 
and as she had had a bad attack of fever — for which I was 
giving her quinine — she had not been out for several days. 
She had a gold-fish (of which she was very fond) in a glass 
bowl upon a chest of drawers. One afternoon, one of the 
other priestesses, Araba (see 111. 38), came to call, and 
said, " Why do you not come up to the temple, do you 
expect everyone to come down to you ? " This was all that 
passed, for I saw them meet and part, apparently good 
friends. But it was quite enough. When I came next 
day, the gold-fish was dead, and that was a clear case of 
mugun baki. I doubt if Araba had ever noticed the fish, 
though perhaps that was a point in favour of the theory, 
for if she had it would have been her evil eye which had 
done the harm. In any case, she had evidently intended 

174 THE /MY ()]■ THE B0R1 

to wound Khadejia. However, there was some ti fa 
tion. Khadejia boughl another gold-fish, and told me thai 
Arii>i\ evil wish would recoil upon herself, for when she 
saw thai the fish was still there* she would not know that it 
had been replaced- she would think her wish had mis- 
carried, and would go about in fear and trembling, for an 
influence once let loose lias got to do something. The 
question as to whether Araba had really seen it or not 
seemed to make no difference, though just how that 
could be, Fedia was unable to explain. 

Paradoxically, the "evil" eye may act because of a 
feeling of admiration, not on account of any envy at all, 
and the same may be said of the evil mouth, for over- 
praise is immediately resented, and in certain cases (p. 97) 
a person who desires a thing must be given it. A survival 
of each of these is found in our objection to being 
stared at and to "gushing." The idea of the evil eye 
is perhaps due to the power of fascination such as 
that possessed by snakes. Mai-Ja-Chikki is, in fact, 
the personification of it. The evil mouth is probably 
connected in origin with the curse, both being the word of 
a person, the power of which has been explained in Hausa 
Superstitions and Customs.3 

Some of the charms against evil-wishing are easily 
obtained, and any number can be used in combination. I 
saw one child — an Arab, however — with a silver chain 
round its neck, to which were fastened in order a scimitar, 
a fish, two cowries, crossed keys, a hand, a crescent, and a 
square prayer-board on one side of which was a fish, on the 
other a branch, all of the above being of silver except the 
shells. The hand (of Fatima, it is generally supposed) is a 
great favourite in Tunis, and one sees it above the great 
majority of doorways ; in Tripoli there is hardly one, and 

MAGIC IN HOUSE— SELF-PRESERVATION 175 

this is only to be expected, since the sign is ;m old Cartha- 
ginian one, representing not the hand of Fatima at all, but 
that of Tanith. But it is even more ancient than that, 
for we find the hand mentioned very early in the Bible 
— e.g. in swearing (Gen. xxiv. 2, 3), and the laying on of 
hands was employed by the Jews symbolically to denote 
the transfer of some influence. It has been thought, 
however, that the amulet is so curiously similar to the 
thunderbolt of Adad, worn in the necklet of the Assyrian 
kings along with emblems for the sun, the moon, and 
Venus, that it may be a survival of that.4 

The hand was painted upon the drum used in the bori 
dances by Fedia (see Fig. 28), because, she said, she might 
be so much engrossed in her playing that she could not 
see an enemy casting the evil eye upon her, but the sign 
of "five," as it fs called, would throw it back into his 
face. The hand may be held up, fingers outstretched and 
pointing towards the evil-wisher, and this in Nigeria has 
now become a gesture of abuse, as has been pointed out 
elsewhere. In North Africa one should say at the same 
time A idonka — " (Back) in your eyes." 

A string of cowries around the arm wards off the evil 
eye, for the glance is lost amongst the shells. Four single 
ones tied in the hair of a dan wabi (the child of a mother 
who has lost her previous children) are very powerful. A 
piece of string (generally double) tied around the wrist or 
ankle is a charm against pain (? rheumatism). Henna is 
a very powerful preservative against evil, so is the paint 
used upon the face. The teeth of a horse or the tusks of a 
boar are good preventives, while those of the antelope 
leucoryx are much prized by wrestlers. The inverted 
horseshoe, the horns of cattle and certain large fish- 
bones (see 111. 27), are also efficacious. 6 The curtain 

\7(> THE B l.v OF THE B0R1 

on Auta's dooi had cotton moons and hands sewn 

on to it. 

It yon know tli.it yon have been affected by ;m evil- 
wisher, take .1 piece of the root of the jiga tree, pound 

it up, and then mix with water, knead Into a lump, 
and ea1 it. Another excellent method is to touch 
the naked body, especially that of a child, with a 

red-hoi iron. 

When the whole household has begun to quarrel, it is 
evident that some evil influence has been at work. The 

Figs, ii and 12. — Signs against the Evil Eye. The 
Designs were cut out of a Cotton Cloth and sewn 
on the Curtain in front of Auta's Door 

door is examined, therefore, and, if any grease is found, 
one knows that some enemy has rubbed pig's fat there in 
order to cause dissensions in the house. This is easily 
rectified, for washing will remove the fat and its influence. 
If nothing is found, however, one may be sure that the 
evil eye has been at work, and salt 6 and ruban, mistik, and 
tabl are put into a pot over the fire. This mixture begins to 
splutter, and soon gives off incense, when the women take it 
up, and walk around the house, asking Allah to preserve 
them against someone who has not the fear of God in his 

MAGIC IN HOUSE SELF-PRESERVATION 177 

heart. By this ceremony the evil influence will be 
removed, and the household can settle down again in 
peace — well, comparative peace. 

One charm against the evil eye and the evil mouth is 
prepared as follows ; it is also a remedy. Steal secretly 
a few threads of the cloth, a lock of hair, or a piece of any- 
thing personal belonging to the man or woman suspected, 
and put it into a vessel with a piece of Kwaro, one of 
Sawiya, and a little salt. Wave this round the head seven 
times, then throw the contents of the vessel upon the fire, 
and, while the smoke is rising, step over it seven times. 
Then kneel down by the fire, and brush one arm with the 
other alternately, seven times, and lastly fling both hands 
towards the back, as if throwing the smoke over the 
shoulders. 

The following is said to be a general charm, protecting 
one against everything if done often enough, and suffi- 
ciently far in advance of the injury intended. Some 
leaves of the faru tree are boiled in water, and allowed to 
cool. The pot having been taken into the bush and 
placed upon an ant-hill, the person places one foot on 
either side, and washes himself (or herself) and the charm 
is complete. 

Lastly let me mention that the remains of a dog's food 
are an exceedingly powerful preventive and remedy, but 
one must eat them immediately the animal has left them, 
and he must not be called off for the purpose — this wise 
precaution preventing the charm from becoming too 
common, for the animals are always ravenous. 

There seems to be but little doubt that the influence of 
the evil eye and the evil mouth respectively is exerted by 
means of a bori, the look or wish sending one in the re- 
quired direction to do the work of the evil-wisher. That 

1 7s THE BAN OF THE l«)RI 

the evil influence proceed from the head (the eyi 
mouth) of the ill-wisher, the eat of the bori, does nol prove 
anything, bul we find in an an< ienl ra ord thai the vi< tim 
was supposed to K' eive the influen< <• in exai tly the ame 
manner as does a dancer at the rites. Heliodorus tell^ as 
thai " (he air, infected by the malign influent <■, penetrates. 
the eyes, nose and breath of the victim, and carries with 
it the bitterness of Hie envy with which it is sun liarged." 
He argues forcibly that love is of the same origin as di 
whirl i through the sight strikes passion into the soul 
— compare our expression " love-sick." It was believed 
in England at the time of the Black Death that even a 
glance from a sufferer was sufficient to infect the person 
looked at, and the Hausa avenges himself upon his enemies 
by bribing a bori (a disease-demon) to attack them — we 
have had just lately an example of the use of modern 
disease-demons (bacilli) to kill off inconvenient wives. 
Again, it was a widely spread belief that fascination was 
a power derived from a pact with the devil, who helped 
the fascinator by infecting with evil the person looked at. 
Some of the charms (e,g. writings), rites (the cleansing of 
the house), and other means of protection (the wearing of 
the veil) against ill-wishing are also used against bori, 
and this is not strange, for the Hausas regard Mai-Ja- 
Chikki as the personification of the evil eye (see p. 328), 
the same character being ascribed to Lilith by the Jews in 
Palestine. When a bori has been sent out upon its work 
it must accomplish something, and, if it cannot reach the 
intending victim, it may return and attack the ill-wisher 
himself, for, after he has sent it upon its mission, he no 
longer has any power over it. Again, if a bori be cheated 
out of a promised human sacrifice, it will kill the person 
who has invoked it. Surely these facts give us the reason 

MAGIC IN HOUSE—SELF-PRESERVATION 179 

for the expression " Back in your eyes " to a person with 
the evil eye. 

The idea is seen too in the fact that a blessing cannot 
be recalled (H.S.C., p. 140), just as " the word of the Lord 
cannot return to Him void " (Isa. lv. n), and in our ex- 
pression " curses come home to roost," or, as the Hausa 
has it, " chaff falls again upon the winnower." In England, 
when a spirit had been summoned, it was necessary to 
dismiss it again by the appropriate " Licence to depart," 
otherwise the evil forces would have been only too glad to 
avenge themselves upon the operator for having disturbed 
them. Lastly, as has been mentioned, the Hausa says 
that a ground-nut treated in the proper manner (p. 183) 
actually becomes a bori, and does the work, but it is just 
as likely that the rite really summons — does not create — 
one, though in either case the statement gives us the 
necessary link. This explanation seems to be the correct 
one, for it has been recorded that among the Nabateans 
of the Lower Euphrates a sorcerer would spit upon an 
effigy of a person to be injured, and tie a knot in a cord as 
evidence of his evil intention. " To these processes and 
malevolent words a wicked spirit is united, which comes 
forth from the operator's mouth covered with saliva. 
Many evil spirits then descend and the result of all is that 
the magician causes the victim to be attacked by the 
desired evil." 7 

There are other enemies than one's human rivals, and 
although the treatment of most of the complaints would 
not be appropriately described in this chapter, one or two 
prescriptions may be mentioned, since they are certainly 
more magical than medical. Uwal Yara is likely to 
attack children, as has been said elsewhere. To cure a 
little victim, get a black beetle known as Khenfusa of 

180 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

Gttrgungtttna, put it inside a hollow st;ilk, (lose it up, and 
tie the stalk around the child's neck. At the same time 
rub the throat from the sides upwards and towards the 
front, and the spirit (? croup) will be vomited up. Need- 
less to say, the Hausa regards the rubbing as a very 
unimportant accessory. 

For a different kind of attack (probably convulsions) 
make three tiny cuts on the forehead, small of the back, 
inside each knee, and between the thumb and first finger 
of each hand. Then mix some gunpowder with water 
and the urine of a camel, and rub this on the cuts so as to 
mix it with the blood. If the attack is only a slight one 
the patient will recover, if a bad one it will die — and no 
wonder. 

For the bite of a scorpion, squash the insect upon 
the spot and then get certain healing roots, and wash the 
wound. For a dog's bite put a little of the hair upon the 
wound, together with certain roots. This is applicable 
only to a bite from a dog in the house ; if bitten by a mad 
dog in the streets there is hardly any cure, for one cannot 
get any of its hair. Kneeling to a dog is, as one knows,8 a 
remedy for certain boils. The following two prescriptions 
are more like charms than medicines. For soreness of 
heart pound up a small white kola-nut, chew it, and then 
take a draught of water and swallow the whole. For sore 
eyes take a little of the fruit of the Fidili shrub, pound it 
up, and, having mixed it with the gall of a crow and some 
antimony, paint the mixture upon the eyelids. 

Lastly comes the elixir of life, for these simple people 
are no less innocent than we are — or were — and it is com- 
forting to know that the leaves of the Namijin Gabbarnwan 
Kassa, if ground into a powder, and worn in a leather case 
as a laiya, will prolong life. But a more general — and 

MAGIC IN HOUSE—SELF-PRESERVATION 181 

perhaps more useful — mode of employment is to mix it 
with potash in water as a cure for hoarseness. 

A man is not necessarily contented with passive resis- 
tance, for he knows that only by active means can he hope 
to defeat his enemies, so he must find some way of hitting 
back, or even of getting in the first blow. 

If another man thinks too much of his work, and you 
wish to show the fact in a perfectly legitimate manner, the 
following charm may prove useful. Suppose, for instance, 
that he has built a better wall than you have — not, of 
course, that you would be guilty of a feeling of mere 
jealousy ! Catch a chameleon and press it with the left 
hand against the side of a vessel, then take a deep breath, 
and, while holding it, cut the chameleon in two with a 
knife held in your right hand. Collect the blood, and, 
using it as ink, write'a sentence upon a piece of paper, and, 
when dry, fold the paper up. Next time that you are 
going past the other man's wall, hold this paper in your 
hand, look at the wall, and tell it to fall down. It will do 
so immediately ! The only way of avoiding such a dis- 
aster is for the person threatened to stick into the crevices 
pieces of paper upon which magic letters or words have 
been written by a mallam. This has been copied from the 
Arabs, many of whose houses can be seen to be protected 
in this manner. 

People can be injured by means of their footprints or 
by the impress of their bodies upon sand or soft ground, 
for not only may the place where they are going to sit be 
prepared previously, but also the earth upon which their 
bodies have left something of themselves can be used 
against them. As a good deal has appeared elsewhere upon 
the injury of an enemy by such means,9 it is not necessary , 
to give further instances here, but it is well to note that 

l8a THE BAN OF THE BORI 

supposing you want to get a man turned out of the King's 
Council because more attention is paid to his advi e than 

yours, you should go to the person who sweeps the ground 
after each meeting, and bribe him to sprinkle some flour 
which you give him upon the spot where your rival is to sit. 
If this is done, you will be avenged next day, for the other 
will bring himself into disfavour, and will be turned out of 
the Council. 

Blood is always dangerous, for wherever there is blood 
there will the bori be also, and the person who treads upon 
it will be certain to hurt one, and to be punished accord- 
ingly. A person after having been cupped — a very 
common operation, performed by the barbers — must be 
careful to hide his blood in the ground so that it may not 
be taken by an enemy. 

In the streets of Tunis there is no need to cover up one's 
spittle, for there is so much about that no one could 
possibly know which was yours, but if alone with an 
enemy you must certainly hide it and take care that he 
does not take it and the earth upon which it has fallen. 
If two men hate one another, and one steps over the 
other's spittle, the former will get a sore throat. This 
seems somewhat strange, but it is evident that the person 
spitting cannot be injured, else he would be more careful. 
How devoutly one who has to walk in the street wishes 
that it were the other way about ! 

If you place a bowl of water before you, and, after 
having poured some specially prepared medicines (from 
roots) into it, call your enemy by name, he will answer 
wherever he is ; he will be bound to answer. When he has 
done so, plunge a knife into the water, and he will be so 
much injured that he will die. This charm is seldom 
worked except at night, because you have a better chance 

MAGIC IN HOUSE—SELF-PRESERVATION E83 

then to prevent people knowing what you are doing, and 
also you can call the soul instead. Haj Ali says that an 
outline of the enemy may be drawn in the sand instead of 
using the bowl of water, and that the same result will 
ensue. An arrow would be of no use, for " one does not 
stab with such a weapon." 

As will be mentioned later, the water-spirits can be 
enticed out of their mounts at the bori-dances by present- 
ing to them a calabash of water, but at one time it would 
seem, judging by the above, to have been believed that 
any spirits could be treated in this way. This is quite 
natural, for the Assyrians thought so, as did the Aztecs, 
who placed a bowl of water with a knife in it behind the 
door in order to keep away sorcerers, for, on seeing their 
reflection transfixed, they would flee in terror. This 
corresponds to ouf belief in the ill-luck consequent upon 
the smashing of a mirror, and also the looking in one which 
is cracked, as in each case the reflection is broken.10 

Haj Ali told me that if one treated a black ground-nut 
or even a needle with the proper medicines, and told it to 
kill one's enemy, it would go and pierce his heart and kill 
him, for the nut or needle was turned into a bori by these 
means. Unfortunately, he had forgotten the proper 
medicines. 

Sometimes a charm may react upon the person making 
it, as we have seen. Excrement is not dangerous in a 
magical sense (it is a pity that it is not, for in that case the 
Hausas might be cleaner), but the urine is sometimes 
used to work injury. Haj Ali knew of a case which 
happened in Dan Gantammo (Maradi) while he was there. 
In a wrestling match, one youth was thrown four times 
by one of his opponents, and he determined to be avenged, 
so he went to a mallam and asked for a charm which would 

1 84 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

make bin invhu ible. The m. ilium told liim to obtain 
.Mine oi his antagonist's urine, and while watching the 

house carefully, the youth saw the other come out and 

make water. After the other had re-entered his house, 
the youth b< raped up the sand upon which the water had 
fallen, and brought it to the mallam, who told him to go 
home. Next day, not the victor but the beaten youth was 
taken 111, and a1 length ho became so l>;id that he knew 
that the charm had miscarried, and told his father of 
What lie had done. The latter went off to the other 
youth's parents and told them, and, seeing that it was 
merely a case of childish jealousy, the father of the latter 
prevailed upon his son to go to the sick youth. Upon his 
arrival, he tapped him with his hand three times upon the 
chest, and immediately the patient felt so much better 
that he was able to move about again. The other said : 
" If you go to the mallam's house now, you will hear some 
news," and then he went home. Next day, the youth 
went to the mallam's house, and found everyone mourning, 
for at the very hour that he himself had been restored to 
health the mallam had been stricken with an illness, and 
he had died soon afterwards. 

This is not always the case, of course, for if the earth 
with the water be thrown upon a fire, as the smoke rises 
so will illness seize the person whom it is desired to injure. 
Or again, a mallam may make a preparation from it which 
is to be sprinkled upon the floor in a place where he must 
tread. The bone of a dead man also is a powerful agency if 
steeped in some medicine and then stuck in the ground by 
the side of a fire. The mallam working this charm speaks 
the name of the enemy continuously, and as the fire dies 
down (it is not fed) so will the life of the person named 
pass away. 

CHAPTER XIV 

MAGIC IN THE FIELDS — AGRICULTURE 

The Hausas have always been great traders, but they 
have been fine agriculturists as well, and so one is not 
surprised to find a good many magical practices designed 
to increase the yield of the farmers, either by making the 
rain fall when required or by causing the crops to grow 
of themselves by supernatural means. 

In Northern Nigeria, amongst the Magazawa of Gobir, 
the rain was made to fall and to cease in the following 
manner, according, to Haj Ali. The rainmakers were nine 
in number, and they would go round with wooden clubs 
to a tsamiya (tamarind) or a gamje (rubber) tree near the 
gate of the town, and sacrifice a black bull, the blood being 
allowed to flow into the roots. Then four pots of giya 
(beer) were brought, and were drunk by the rainmakers. 
After this, the eldest of the nine (Mai-Shibko) would arise, 
put on the hide, and call out : " You Youths, You Youths, 
You Youths, ask the man [Allah] to send down water to us, 
tell the Owner of the Heavens that men are dying here, 
ask him to spit upon us." The eight others would arise 
and stand around the old man, and call out in a loud voice 
what they had been told to say, and add : " If you do not 
send the rain we will kill this old man. We are true to you, 
see, we have sacrificed a bull to you." Then, brandishing 
their weapons in the air, they would continue : " If you do 
not send down the rain we will throw up our clubs at you." 
After that they would cook the flesh of the bull, and as tne 
185 

[86 THE B \\ OF THE B0R1 

smoke arose the clouds would begin to appear. Winn they 
had eaten the meat, they would put the old man upon 
another hull, \vhi< h (hey had brought with them, and all 
would go hack to their town, hut they would not separate, 

for everyone would go to the medicine-house. No sooner 
would they have started back than the wind would arise, 
and by the time tiny had entered the house the rain would 
have commenced to fall, and it would continue for as long 
as the rainmakers remained together. 

When enough rain had fallen, the old man would order 
one of the others to go outside, and tell Allah that they had 
had sufficient, and the youngest would go out of the hut 
and wave his club, and say : " Hey, Owner of the Heavens, 
that is enough. 0 Allah, stop making water, oh, One with 
the big stomach, that is enough," and the rain would stop 
within half-an-hour. Then the old man would send four 
of the younger ones out in the four different directions 
with orders to travel from sunrise to noon in a straight line, 
and at the spot where they found themselves at midday 
to dig down an arm's length into the ground, and see if 
they still felt water. Upon their return they would make 
their reports to the old man, and if all was satisfactory, 
he would inform the chief, who would cause a proclama- 
tion to be made throughout the town that everyone could 
commence to sow. Should the rain not fall again for some 
time — the rains are fitful at the commencement of the wet 
season — it would be again called down in a manner some- 
what similar to that described above, but instead of sacri- 
ficing, the rainmakers would simply throw up their clubs 
in the air to punish Allah, in some way hurting or insulting 
His sky. They do this during an eclipse of the moon also, 
threatening to hit the sun should it not let the moon go. 

For seven days previous to the rite, and until it had been 

MAGIC IN THE FIELDS— AGRICULTURE 187 

completed, the rainmakers might have no relations with 
their wives, though women and children might be present 
at the ceremonies outside the town, but there was no 
prohibition regarding food. The old man would not have 
been killed even if no rain had come — but Haj Ali says that 
failure was impossible — though, if suspected of false deal- 
ing, he would have been removed. The threat was made 
simply because everyone knew that Allah did not like hear- 
ing the younger men abusing their elders. Questioned 
upon this, and upon the threats and the language used to 
Allah generally, Haj Ali said that the Magazawa were 
Allah's children, and that He did not mind what they did, 
for He knew that although they acknowledged Him they 
were only ignorant pagans who could not read and write, 
so He forgave them everything, and did what they asked 
Him to do. He 'only laughed at them. 

The rainmaker seems to be of a later period than the 
priestly king, for the latter did everything in his time. 
But when the Filani conquered the country, they put in 
their own men as chiefs, and although these were in many 
cases the proper heirs, special independent priests were 
appointed to attend to the rain and other rites. But as the 
Filani supervision was very unequal, king-killing might be 
the rule in one town, although it had died out in the next 
one to it. 

The Mohammedans often employ the Magazawa to 
make rain for them, just as the Hausas act for the Arabs 
in Tunis, the pagan rites being either in substitution for 
or as a complement to their own, and " the Hausa magic 
never fails." All over North Africa the negro is renowned 
for his magical powers,1 and in certain cases the presence of 
a young negress is a necessity even to the Arab magician, 
though usually, it is an old woman who has the greater 

1 88 THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

reputation. The rainmaker- (In in -elves did not spit, nor 
did they cause the bull to make water, though both of these 
things arc done to-day in North Africa, a cow being used 

instead of a male animal. The Mohammedan llausas 
worship Allah as long as everything goes well, but if He 
fails them, they invoke if not exactly the devil, at any rate 
influences which are more or less suspicious. A rather 
curious inversion is recorded from Northern Nigeria, and it 
is worth noting because it confirms to some extent the in- 
formation given me by Haj Ali, although the following 
refers to the Yerghum, a tribe of Bauchi. " One Sunday 
some few weeks ago we had a most remarkable experience," 
says the writer. " During our afternoon service we were 
disturbed by the sounds of yelling, beating of drums, and 
blowing of whistles. On looking out we saw a company 
of men and women coming in the direction of our house. 
Slowly and orderly the procession passed in front of us, 
dressed most hideously in skins and feathers, brandishing 
spears, knives, etc., and twisting their bodies into such 
attitudes as might defy the efforts of the most accomplished 
gymnasts. Thus they proceeded as far as our well, and 
returned in the same manner. After our service was over 
we were waited upon by the oldest chief in the district 
(supposed to be ninety years old) and one of the local 
chiefs with their headmen. They came to tell us that 
they had just been asking for rain. No rain had fallen 
for over a fortnight, and if the crops were destroyed they 
would all die of hunger. They knew ' The Mallam ' was 
their friend, and that he prayed to God, and God heard 
him. Would he now pray for rain and so save them all 
from hunger and distress." 2 

A photograph of Mohammedan Hausas praying for rain 
in Nigeria appears in Hausa Superstitions and Customs. 

MAGIC IN THE FIELDS— AGRICULTURE c8g 

The modem customs of those people have come from the 
north, and it will be as well to note what happens there. 

In Tunis and Tripoli, if there is no rain, and the crops are 
being ruined, the Arabs go in procession outside the city 
with drums and flags, and pray for rain, and, according to 
Haj Ali, cows are made to urinate and the roofs of houses 
are wetted with water by the Arabs and Hausas with them 
as a means of bringing down rain. But if there is no re- 
sult, the negroes are summoned to use their magic. Eight 
years ago, when the grain in Tunis was about half ripe, 
there was a drought, and, the Arabs' prayers having failed, 
the aid of the Hausas was sought. So, early in the morning, 
they dressed up in all their finery (Arabs may do the 
opposite), and marched with flags, drums, and clappers to 
the shrine of Sidi Bu'l Hassan in the Arab cemetery. One 
of the Hausas had had a dream in which he was told 
that two black bulls and a sheep (not a ram or a he-goat 
on this occasion) had to be sacrificed, and these animals 
were provided accordingly by the Arabs. 

On arriving at a little flat space near the top and to the 
left, the bori spirits took possession of some of the per- 
formers, while right upon the top the dance with sticks 
{takai) took place, incense being burned in the vicinity. 
At noon, the sacrificial animals were killed, and while the 
meat was being cooked, the young men seized four pieces 
of meat, and perhaps also a fowl, and ran away with them, 
and tried to eat them before being caught and despoiled 
by the others, who were always successful, and then ate 
what they could. After a time this was stopped by the 
elders, and what was left of the flesh (perhaps not more 
than one-half) was brought to the Arifa (Chief Priestess), 
who, helped by her Kasheka, then apportioned the fura 
(flour and water) and milk which were first drunk, and trien 

[go I ill B i.\ OF III! BORI 

the meat, the \rifa Karama (Little P rving the 

women, the Sarikin Soman (Chief ol tin- Youths) the men, 
while a youth known as 1 1 1 « - Fagge (evidentrj 
brought water <" any who called him, When all had 
eaten, the dishes were brought bai k to thi \iii.i. audi 
washed by the women. Then the procession Conned up 
again, and man bed bai k to the pfin< ipal temple (Gidan 
Jama'a) and the rain wet them through before they had 
had time to get there. 

Every third year, a visit is made to the RIanubia, and 
hcic there is no summoning of the bori, but only the ordin- 
ary dancing and the meat-stealing. It is now held after 
the harvest, because, according to Haj AH, about six years 
ago one of the youths snatched up some embers with a 
piece of meat, and when he dropped these they set the crop 
on fire. There therefore seems to have been some idea 
of obtaining a good crop in this rite originally, though it 
seems to be performed rather to secure sunshine than rain. 
If so, the rites on the hill of Sidi Bu'l Hassan are a curious 
mixture. Whereas all the bori communities go to Sidi 
Bu'l Hassan, only that of the Gidan Ziria go to the 
Manubia, but three years ago all joined together to go 
before the harvest as there was a drought, and the same 
pleasing success crowned their efforts. 

The stealing of tlje meat is said to drive away all past 
misfortune, and to prevent the occurrence of fresh evils.3 
It is just possible that it symbolises the lightning,4 but 
it has certain resemblances to a rite even now found in 
Morocco, in which girls steal a doll — dressed in a pointed 
bonnet — from each other, this being an invocation for 
rain. The explanations are not at all antagonistic. 

The takai has much the same effect, so originally it 
was a religious rite (and it still is in North Africa) rather 

15- — Looking towards Carthage. 
16.— The Shrine oi Sidi Bu '] Hassan. 

MAGIC IN THE FIELDS -AGRICULTURE [9] 

than a war dance, which it seems to be now in Nigeria. 
Another man says that it is performed simply to keep 
people awake, because it would not do to sleep at such 
a time. But this seems a quite inadequate explanation, 
especially as the people do not eat until after the dances, 
and there is but little doubt that it is a rite to promote 
fertility, the perambulations representing the apparent 
journeys of the sun around the earth, while the beating of 
the sticks or hands helps to produce the rain. Against 
this theory, however, is the fact that West African dancers 
may move in the contrary direction — as do the Kajjis 
and other head-hunters. So it may be that the dancers 
going round in opposite concentric circles (right arm to 
right arm) represent the powers of good and evil, the 
beating or clapping symbolising the constant struggle 
between them, for in North Africa a perambulation in a 
contrary direction to the sun is unlucky (as at our mess 
tables) , while one in the opposite direction helps the shining 
orb on its way, and so brings good fortune. In this case, 
the dance corresponds to the kora of North Africa, and to 
our football and lacrosse, once religious invocations to 
Tanith. Perhaps the best explanation is that takai is a 
survival of a mixture of this and another ancient northern 
rite. Herodotus describes a fight between two parties of 
girls who fenced with sticks and threw stones (? the 
clapping) at each other, many of them falling in the 
fray. This was a rite in honour of Tanith, the goddess 
of fertility and of war, and there is another point of 
resemblance — namely, that in both the kururuwa or 
guda (Hausa), zagrit (Arab), or yuyu (European) is heard 
in each.6 

It is only during the rites to produce rain that takai 
and the cooking and stealing of the meat must take 

192 77//: BAN 01 THE B0R1 

place high up upon a hill. The game of kora, which in 
Some parts resembles football, in others larrosse, is also 
a rite li.r rain. Haj Ali told me that it was played before 
harvest but not a1 other times, "because the people had 
no time to spare," but that is not the original reason, of 
course. It is somewhat strange that in European schools, 
the natives are being taught a modern development of their 
own games ! 

In addition to the foregoing and the Ziara mentioned 
later, there are other regular festivals called Sadaka 
(or Daffa Ble) and also intermittent ones, some depending 
for their performance upon the dream of a member of the 
community. Some fourteen years ago (according to Haj 
Ali) the then Arifaof theGidan Kuri, named YarGaladima, 
fell ill, and nothing seemed to do her any good. At last 
she had a dream in which she was told that if she offered 
up a sacrifice at a certain shrine close to the Bab el 
Khadari, she would be cured. She informed the com- 
munity of this, and the members at once decided to go 
with her, and, a sacrifice of a goat having been made, she 
immediately recovered. This so impressed the community 
that an annual sacrifice was proposed, but the Arifa said 
that she had been told that every two years would be 
sufficient. She lived for six years after her dream, but 
ever since her death the rite has been kept up. On a 
certain morning — there is no fixed day of the week, it 
depends upon the work of the community — all go to the 
tomb, and, two fowls and a he-goat having been sacrificed, 
the bori take possession of their mounts. While the meat 
is being cooked, the youths try to steal pieces as at Bu'l 
Hassan, while others dance the takai. When the good 
things have been finished, and the dishes returned, a 
collection is made from the onlookers, a part of the money 

i7- — The Manubia, Tunis, where rites for rain are performed. 
18. — The Marabout at the gate of Al Khadari. 

MAGIC IN THE FIELDS— AGRICULTURE 193 

thus obtained being placed in the Sandukan Kuri (the 
public chest of the community), the rest being divided 
amongst those members taking part, a good collection 
giving the Galadima four francs, the Arifa two and a half, 
the Magajiya one and a half, and the Kasheka one franc. 
The cooks, the Sarikin Samari, Arifa Karama, and the 
Fagge have a small payment in addition to their share, 
and at the Ziara it amounts to half-a-franc a day ; they 
may also have some extra scraps of food which have been 
left over. 

One does not always want rain, however, especially if 
one be a trader. Take some berries of the Ta-Ga-Rana, 
and pound them up with the head of a mouse, and, after 
boiling in water with a couple of fowls' feathers, dry and 
put into a gourd. If rain threatens, pour a little of the 
powder on to the hand, and then blow it off, and the rain 
will be driven away simultaneously. The methods of 
preventing rain are very rare, for where the people depend 
to a great extent upon their crops, anyone producing a 
drought would be an enemy of the community. 

The Hausas of Nigeria may grow a few fruit-trees in their 
compounds, such as the banana or paw paw, but there 
is no real cultivation of anything except cereals, nuts, 
and vegetables, fruit-trees being uncared for, although 
some are known to yield very good food — e.g. the dinya, a 
species of plum. Great attention is paid, however, to the 
various kinds of millet, nuts, and roots. 

Before clearing a farm, the appropriate rites already 
described will be performed, and before cutting down 
certain trees, such as the rimi (silk-cotton), the kiriya 
(which yields charcoal) , and the maje (which yields a sweet 
scent), it is necessary to obtain permission of the particular 
spirit concerned. First a fowl or two is sacrificed, and a * 

N 

i.,| l III i: IA Of I III- BORI 

cloth is tit (l round the trunk in the evening. Nexl morn- 
ing, if the i loth is till there, the tree may be i ul down, 
but ii it has blown away the pei I ewhere, 

for tii.it shows thai the spirit has rejected the requ 
(Jwar-Gwona (Farm Mother) look aitei tl 

fio ol a he-goal or a couple of fowl are made 
to her by those who worship her wh< n the cro] b in to 
appear above the ground, and she will take com, etc., 

from (he fields of people who ;uv not her true foQoV 

and add it to th< farms of those who are. Some oi those 
who do not sai rifice to her trust to Ifagiro or another 

bori, and obtain a powerful chann instead, but hedem 
a human sacrifice. For Uwar-Gwona, \U(- woishippers 
throw certain herbs upon the fire in the centre of the farm, 
and as soon as the smoke begins to rise they run away. 
If they look behind they will go mad, and perhaps die, 
but if not, and if the rite has been carried out properly, 
when they come again next day they will see that there has 
been a great increase both in the number of blades and in 
their height, this increase continuing until the harvest. 
But this is not the only advantage. Should anyone try 
to steal this corn he will hear a voice saying : " Leave it 
alone ; leave it alone." If he should disregard this warning 
and eat of the corn, his stomach will swell, and the only 
person able to cure him will be the owner of the farm. 
The final sacrifice to Uwar-Gwona or other bori, except 
Magiro, is the same — viz. two fowls when the corn is ripe. 
Salah told me that he had seen the following ceremony 
at Daura. Just before sowing-time, the old men of the 
town went out amongst the farms, and took up a position 
on an ant-hill, where they drank flour and water and sour 
milk, staying there a week, and offering a sacrifice of a 
he-goat and fowls each day, the people of the town bringing 

MAGIC IN THE FIELDS AGRICULTURE 195 

them food. On the seventh day, everyone was sent away, 
and the old men erected a screen of black cloths around 
their sanctuary. Then they walked round and round 
inside, slapping their loin-coverings, and calling out : 
" Uwar-Dawa, break up the ground, the time for sowing 
has come." She replied : " So and So will have much g< k m I 
com, So and So but little, So and So will die, and So and 
So will go mad," and so on, foretelling the events to come. 
When she had ceased, the screen was removed, and the 
rite was at an end. Uwar-Dawa 's voice was not produced 
by a bull-roarer, " boys have something of the kind, but 
if a man did that sort of thing in a religious rite the spirit 
would be offended and would refuse to reply." Nor 
would she take any notice if too many men called her at 
once. She would wait until the following year in either 
case, and then the crops would be a failure for she would 
not look after them. 

According to Auta, the Magazawa practised another 
rite to promote the fertility of the fields, called Fittan 
Fura, three variants of which have already been described 
in Chapter VIII. A number of boys were shut up for a 
month before the harvest, being fed up specially, and, 
though allowed to go out for exercise, they might not go 
near women during this time. The boys did not need to 
be those with their fathers and mothers alive, but they 
had to have either parents or guardians, for they did not 
work during their month of seclusion, and had to be 
supplied with plenty of food from outside. Usually, a 
rich man paid for the whole school, a similar arrangement 
being observed sometimes with regard to circumcision, 
for this was supposed to render the rite extra efficacious. 
On the day that the sheaves were to be bound, the boys 
were liberated and made to wrestle. Sacrifices were* 

////• li l.v OF THE B0R1 

offered up, Bind, » fttr blond had been smeared upon some 
of the corn-bins, the crops were gathered in.0 Ii a boy 
had had relations with .1 woman doling the month, he 
would be injured when he wrestled,1 and, in order to make 
all the offerings mentioned above, the sacrincer liad to 
• ntinent for three days previously, and had to wash 
himself before pel forming the rite. But there wa no 
restriction from food at this time, in fact, the contrary 
was the case, the extra allowance being for the purpose of 
making the boys able to wrestle well. The Garabawa of 
Katsina erect a pole in the village, and hold wrestling- 
contests in the vicinity, it being supposed to symbolise in 
some way the prowess of the youths. So long as it stands, 
they will be strong, but it must stand of itself, for if it 
falls down, no other will be erected until the youths have 
grown up, and another generation has taken their place.8 

The first one, two, or three heads of corn would be hung 
up in the hut-roof and left there until the next harvest 
was ready, when they would be replaced and eaten. This 
is said to cause the crops not to fail. 

It is not only the crops which need to be considered, 
but certain trees will well repay attention, although they 
can give no direct result in the way of food, so it is very 
useful to know the following charm. Sometimes the 
kawo tree has a twin trunk (trees are sometimes artifi- 
cially made to grow together), and if fresh milk be poured 
upon the roots of such an one for seven days, it becomes 
inhabited by a bori who will be friendly. " If you come 
close up to it, your hair will stand on end ; if you scratch 
the trunk, not sap, but blood, like human blood, exudes." 
This tree will then give the sacrificer invisibility against 
any man or animal pursuing him, and if you see such a 
tree, you will probably find that passers-by have left 

MAGIC IN THE FIELDS— AGRICULTURE 197 

something near it so as to be able to claim the benefit in 
case of necessity at some future 01 casion. For instant <■, if 
the worshipper's goats are lost, he ties a piece cf rope or 
string (not necessarily belonging to them) around the 
double trunk, and tells the bori what is his trouble. He 
then goes home content, for " he knows that the goats will 
sleep in safety, since, even if leopards and hyenas manage 
to find them, they will not be able to do them any harm." 
Haj Ali heard of a case in which a man's cattle had been 
driven off by a raiding party. He went to the tree and 
did as above, and next day all but one returned — having 
escaped during the night — and no doubt the other would 
have arrived safely also had it not been unfortunately 
killed for food, and so was unable to profit by the tree's 
kindness. If a wife or child is missing, a rag should 
be tied to the tree. Haj Ali knew of a case in which a 
woman was captured by slavers, and was carried off some 
distance from her town. At midnight she was awakened, 
and saw the tree standing over her, and, recognising it, she 
got up quietly. Immediately the tree began moving off, 
and, following it, she was brought to its usual spot, whence 
she found her way home without difficulty. 

Sometimes a certain tree may be bound up with the life 
of a member of the family, though it would seem that the 
tree must either be a totem or else one which is specially 
designated as having a connexion. This is more in the 
realm of folk-lore, however, so it need not be discussed 
here, as it has been mentioned in the previous book. 

If you see a large hollow tree, you know that there is a 
bori inside it. Bori are everywhere but there are more in 
a hollow tree than in one which is not hollow. If you 
were to go inside, merely from curiosity, you would be 
seized by the bori there, but if you were running from a 

cq8 THE HAN OF THE BORI 

wild beast ot rain, and said " Bismillah," you i ould enter 
in safety, for many oi the bori are good, and are quite 
ready to help one who Beeks their aid, thus ensuring that 
when the name of All th has been invoked no danger may 
ensue. Even a quarrelsome bori would hesitate to hurl a 

person who had said "Bismillah." 

It is not absolutely clear in the case of the tree near the 
shrine of Sidi Sa'ad (see Chapter XVII.) whether the two 
are connected or not. The Hausas say that Sidi Sa'ad 
once lived in the shelter nearer its foot, but as it is some 
distance from the shrine, and it is fairly certain that Sidi 
Sa'ad did not live there, and also, as nearly all of the rags 
upon it have been placed there by Arab women, we 
may suppose that it has its own distinct virtues. How- 
ever, the question will be argued later, when the ceremonies 
have been described, suffice it to say here that this idea 
is often held in the case of primitive people, the tree itself 
being able to imprison good and evil spirits by its inter- 
twining branches. 

Any tree may be dangerous. There is one in the centre 
of the Gidan Jama 'a at Tunis which is old and dying, but 
no one dares to remove it, nor would the house be safe 
without the presence of some of the Masu-Bori. The Arab 
landlord turned all the Hausas out some two years ago, 
and took up his residence there. He made up Ids mind 
to fell the tree, and one day he cut a few twigs from it, but 
within a few days a son died, and soon afterwards his 
father, while an enormous black he-goat (a bori, needless 
to say) rushed about every Thursday night and terrified 
him. He coidd not fight against this, so he and his family 
left the house, and the Masu-Bori returned. The Hausas 
are noted for their humour, and in this case they seem to 
have been aided by a little good fortune ! A few Arabs 

MAGIC IN THE FIELDS— AGRICULTURE 199 

live in one of the rooms, but they could not do so were 
there no Hausas there to keep the bori quiet. Even so, 
no one can touch the tree ; the blood of sacrifices for many 
years has been poured upon its roots, and it is absolutely 
full of spirits. 

The Money Tree, Jato, Itachen Kurdi, has been described 
in Hausa Superstitions and Customs,9 a piece of it will turn 
any metal which it touches into money ; even a twig, if 
placed in a hut containing beans, will turn them all into 
cowries. " In Soba, a town of Zaria, there are plenty of 
these trees, but they are never seen during the day, and 
so are difficult to find." It is said that some mallams can 
make laiyas which have the same effect, and this, perhaps, 
accounts for the tales in which a thief takes a pot with a 
snake in it to a holy man, meaning to injure him, and 
when the latter opens the pot, it contains only silver. 
When I asked my informant why a mallam was ever poor 
if he had such wonderful powers, he confessed that that 
point had never struck him, but that is not altogether 
surprising, for I once heard tales of wonderful riches from 
a company promoter who was wearing tin studs in his 
frayed shirt-cuffs, and I believe that he easily obtained the 
necessary number of Directors (sic) — who paid fees for 
their positions — though the ventures are not even yet 
regarded as " trust securities." 

An orchid is said to have a long, thin stem which passes 
down close to, but separate from, the tree-trunk, and a 
root in the ground. No one can see these except a boka 
or a very learned mallam, who can take the roots and 
make powerful charms with them, as has been mentioned 
in the preceding chapter. They are to be envied for their 
valuable — and lucrative — accomplishment. 

CHAPTER XV 

MAGIC IN THE FIELDS (continued) — WAR, HUNTING, 
AND GAMES 

The Hausas have been fighting during the whole period 
of their history, so it is only to be expected that they have 
many magical practices connected with war. But, strange 
to say, hardly any pagan rite is now known, and the people 
seem to trust in Mohammedan charms and laiyas. Per- 
haps this is due to the fact that they were conquered by 
the Mohammedan Filani, for in that respect, at any rate, 
the verses from the Koran were more concerned with 
victory than were the pagan medicines. Before a war, the 
highest officers ate an albino if available, the flesh being 
cut up into small pieces. This was a local custom, in all 
probability, for sacrificial flesh was always distributed, as 
we have seen, and the custom of summoning men by 
sending them pieces of meat is as well known in West 
Africa to-day as it was to the Israelites in the days of 
Samuel.1 As has been observed amongst so many other 
peoples, war was a sacred function, and the tabus upon the 
warriors resemble those imposed upon the pilgrims during 
the Ziara. Rites for the success of the expedition were 
performed by the Uban Yaki (Father of War), or by a 
priest, and it is now impossible to ascertain what these 
were, but those for individual safety in battle were no 
doubt to a great extent the same as those employed for 
self-preservation in the house. Some have been described 
already ; here are a few more. 

200 

MAGIC IN FIELDS— WAR, HUNTING, GAMES 201 

If a warrior wishes for a charm by means of which he 
can become invisible to his enemies he must prepare a 
laiyan zana from various roots and wear it. If pursued 
or driven back, the wearer can turn sideways, and imme- 
diately be lost to sight, and he can then cut at his enemies 
as they pass him by. But with this as with the other war 
charms, the man must have been continent for fifteen days 
at least before he puts the charm to the test. 

If a young girl with her first teeth winds thread upon an 
appropriate laiya obtained from a mallam, no arrow will be 
able to wound the wearer. Again, however invulnerable 
a man may be against arrows shot by adults on account of 
the medicines which he has taken, a boy with his first 
teeth will be able to wound him unless provided with the 
foregoing charm. 

Some of the men in the hostile army may be private as 
well as public enemies, and when that is the case it is useful 
to know that when a man is preparing poison for his 
arrows, the poison will be rendered much more deadly if 
he indicates the kind of death which he desires the victim 
to die by himself performing the appropriate movements. 
Thus, if he throws himself down and kicks, the victim will 
fall and go into convulsions ; if he clutches parts of his 
body, the victim will tear himself to pieces ; if he holds a 
small gourd of water upside down and allows the water 
to trickle out slowly (this is done by closing and opening 
an air-hole in the bottom, the neck being very small) the 
victim will drain himself away ; and if he makes certain 
noises by blowing with his lips, the victim will become ill 
internally, and lose control of himself. 

The Hausas of Northern Nigeria were renowned as 
hunters, and their legends tell of great heroes who slew 
elephants and carried them home, perhaps several at a 

I 111- B l.v 01 THE BORI 

time, upon their shoulders, and, as they were always 
bettei hunters than the Filani, theii magi in this sport 

kepi its pl.i. c Hut they did cot trust to magic alone by 
any means, and it may i><' as well to describe the pnu ti< al 
means taken t«> help the bori to answei their prayers. 
The people hunted in various ways, in parties and indi- 
vidually, and they do so still, but not to anything like the 
same extent, and as the accounts were given to me in the 
pasl tense I maintain it, though I know from per 
observation that most of the traps, etc., are still in use. 
M,mv of the Bauchi pagans hold an annual " Opening of 
the Forest.'' 

The man who was a hunter by profession would gener- 
ally be aware of the habitat of the animals which he hunted, 
but it might happen that he was in a new country or upon 
a trading trip. He would be able to know by the spoor 
what game was in the vicinity, and would follow it up. I 
have noticed that many of the Hausas, although not 
hunters, knew the tracks of a number of animals. When 
he had viewed his quarry, he would have to stalk the game 
in order to get near enough either (a) to shoot with his 
dane-gun or his bow and arrow, or (b) to give his dogs a 
chance of catching it, and the native is generally so 
excellent a scout that this was not very difficult to the 
properly qualified hunter. Often the head-dress (of a 
hornbill or other bird 2) was used where the cover did not 
allow of a very close approach, a short red skirt being worn 
sometimes underneath. The hunter moved up in a 
crouching position. He would not employ this method 
against the lion, leopard, elephant or wart-hog, though he 
might against the buffalo. With such large and fierce 
animals, the hunter would sit in a tree overlooking the 
road near a watering-place or other rendezvous and shoot 

MAGIC IN FIELDS-WAR. HUNTING, GAMES *>3 

as the quany passed. The dog had no special training ; 
the pup watched its parent. 

Hunting parties were sometimes formed, and the pro- 
cedure was either (a) to force the game into enclosure i 01 
pits, or (b), by employing beaters, to drive it on to the 
hunters who lay in ambush. The fences were merely light 
stockades, with several gates, above each of which one or 
more hunters were stationed, either with a dane-gun 
(perhaps firing a harpoon), a bow and arrow, or a 
harpoon to be thrown with the hand. Thro wing-sticks 
were used too, and although they could not be made 
to return like the boomerang, " certain hunters knew 
charms which would make their arrows come back and 
enter their quiver " ! Such a saving of cash and 
trouble ! 

In addition to the modes of active hunting, the Hausas 
used various kinds of traps,3 consisting of pits, running 
nooses, and weighted spears or harpoons. These and the 
arrows were smeared with several kinds of poison {daffi), 
and one decoction was used in water for animals, or in 
grain for birds, either to destroy them as vermin, or to 
obtain them as food. 

Now it is obvious that it would have been of no use to 
make traps unless there had been animals to fall into them. 
If there were no hares the JJban Farauta would take off 
his sandals and throw them upon the ground, and hares 
would immediately be put up in all directions, while one 
boka, named Mandal of Dagana, could make elephants 
appear by dancing with his buttocks and shaking a magic 
rattle. Hyenas are notoriously wary beasts,4 and, since 
they always know what is happening, will never come if 
awaited. But a lotion may be made, and if a hunter 
washes with this, and dries himself in the air — he must not 

204 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

go near the fire nor wipe himself — a hyena will be forced 

to i ome when lit- next sits up for it. 
Fishing was done with nets, traps, dams, lines. sp< 

the hands, and by means of poison. The nets might be 
large like a seine, and being fitted with leads and floats (of 
wood) could be shot from a canoe, or they might be like 
bags about five feet long. In the latter case several men 
would take two each and dive to the bottom, and after 
having swept the bed for a short distance — the mouths of 
the nets being kept open with a stick — they would return 
to the surface. 

The traps consisted of a form of lobster-pot and also a 
cage, the door of which was lowered when the fish were 
seen to be within. Generally both of these were used in 
connexion with a fence. 

Dams were sometimes built across a part of the river 
away from the current, but the water was not bailed out. 
When this had been done, in the case of a pool, the fish 
were transfixed with a barbed spear, tickled and caught 
with the hand, or poisoned with the bark of the dorowa or 
aduwa tree, or they were stupefied with the magimpa 
plant. The hook was of iron, the line was made from the 
ramma fibre. Generally, the fisherman held the line so as 
to feel the strain at once, but in some cases a float of light 
wood might be used to give warning. The bait might be 
live worms or a piece of meat. 

Hunting parties — which were composed of men only — 
were under the San kin Bakka (Chief Huntsman), but the 
Sarikin Dowa (King of the Forest — appointed for the 
occasion) was the Uban Farauta. The latter made 
charms against meeting the lion, leopard, and other 
dangerous beasts unprepared, against treading upon the 
snake, or stumbling upon bori. I am told that a jigo or 

MAGIC IN FIELDS- WAR, HUNTING, GAMES 205 

post was set up, to which were hung bows and arrows, and 
that these participated in the blessing. It is quite likely, 
for this ceremony takes place amongst other tribes of 
Northern Nigeria, and has been reported from Mecca.5 
Offerings were made at the foot, but whether these were to 
the hunting bori or to the weapons themselves it is difficult 
to say. The two seem to have been connected, for even 
now the bori Sarikin Bakka lives in a small iron bow 
when not riding a human being. Before starting out the 
Chief Huntsman also sacrificed some fowls to Kuri, Jato, 
Sarikin Bakka, and Gajere Mai-Do wa, and perhaps also 
to another bori. 

Many of the hunters made their own special arrow 
poisons and their charms, the secret of the composition 
of some of which, being known only to themselves, was 
jealously guarded? Only men could make these, and 
during the time of their preparation they might not speak 
to a woman ; if they did, the mixtures would be thrown 
away, and fresh ingredients obtained. The charms were 
made in many ways, for they varied, of course, for the 
different dangers to be guarded against. If the leaves of 
a certain small plant were dried and ground, and then 
boiled with water and shea-butter into a paste, the paste 
being eaten by the hunter with his mouth only — his 
hands (as in some bori rites) not touching even the pot — 
he would be safe from leopards, for should one of these 
animals attack him, it would not be able to open its 
mouth. By some, the Rumafada, mixed with other 
herbs and ground and dried, was carried in a gourd. 
If a wounded animal attacked the hunter, a little of 
the powder sprinkled upon his head made him invis- 
ible and so able to complete his work in safety. One 
charm, rubbed upon the body (ba dufuwan giwa — giver of 

306 THE HAN OF THE B0R1 

darkness to the elephant) made the hunter invisible to 
elephants ; another made an elephant become rigid 
when trying to trample upon the hunter who had drunk 
the » i>n. m lion, thus giving him the chance to shoot from 
underneath. Another, again, caused snakes to run away 
on smelling it. The best one of all — and also very rare — 
gave the person possessed of the secret the power to trans- 
form himself into anything he liked. 

The men composing a hunting-party might not have 
relations with their women upon the evening before 
starting, as they would be certain to fail next day, and 
perl laps even lose their lives if they did so. But they did 
not have to avoid them altogether, and, even when 
engaged in the hunt, they might speak to them should 
they come their way — an unusual occurrence, however. 
On their return, they were subject to no restrictions, and 
there seems not to have been any veto on food, either 
before or after the hunt. 

The division of the spoil was simple, each man taking 
what he himself had killed. The chief, the owner of the 
land, if any, and the owner of the weapons, if borrowed, 
had no claim to any share of the bag except at the opening 
ceremony. He who had inflicted the first wound was 
regarded as having killed the animal, however slight the 
injury, because the weapon, being poisoned, must have 
killed the animal at some time or other. If a beast had 
been hit with six arrows belonging to six different men, 
he who had fired the first would pluck out the others and 
return them to their owners, for each knew his own arrow 
by his own particular method of binding the head to the 
shaft, the pattern thus formed by the sinew (from cattle) 
being his mark.' 

Hunters and fishers did not form a particular class or 

MAGIC IN FIELDS—WAR, HUNTING, GAMES 207 

caste, neither did those who had charge of the ferries, 
but their chief was always nominated by the last one in 
office, who selected his younger brother, son, or pupil. 
The chief of the tribe did not need to act upon this nomina- 
tion unless he liked, but if not, the usurper would soon die, 
and everyone would know that it was the rightful man 
who had killed him, although there would be no punish- 
ment because there could be no proof. Anyone might be 
a hunter, but only he whose father or uncle was a member 
of that profession would be able to learn the proper charms, 
and one could do nothing without them. The people 
themselves would not have agreed to the appointment of 
an uninitiated person, for no one would ever have had any 
meat if the Chief Huntsman had been ignorant of his trade, 
and as for the Chief of the Water, "who would trust 
himself in a canoe" or on gourds without being certain 
that the proper rites had been performed for his 
safety ? " 

On a certain day, which had been fixed by the principal 
chief of the district, the hunters of each town assembled 
in a locality assigned to them, and all hunted together 
under the supervision of the chief and his suite, or under 
a nominee of his. This was called the Bude Dowa (opening 
of the forest), and, according to my informant (a hunter), 
a certain proportion of the game was given to the principal 
chief on this occasion. After the conclusion of this great 
hunt (which might last more than a day in a large district), 
each town was free to send out its hunting parties inde- 
pendently, and these did not need to confine themselves 
to the localities which had been assigned to them upon the 
opening day, although they had had to do so on that 
occasion, but they could not hunt previously to the Bude 
Dowa. Any breach of this rule would not only have 

ao8 /'///• BAN OF THE BORI 

i aused their i banns to fail, but would have brought down 
the wrath oi their neighbours. 

There were, and arc, numerous games played 
contests waged by theHausa , but only those whii li 5( em 
to have had some magical connexion need be considered 
here, for a general survey <>f them has appe n d el ew\ ■ 

In Hit- Koraiya, a Magazawa contest, each arm was 
encased in Leather, and an iron weapon, in sliape something 
like the rim <>f a pulley-wheel, was plai ed upon ea< h wrist . 
according to Haj Ali. Two youths then attacked each 
other, and, if both were expert, each would prevent the 
other from touching him witli the weapon, or, if lie had 
plenty of magani (medicine) he would not be hurt even if 
he were struck.8 

If a youth wished to become invincible in this contest, 
he went to a mallam or a boka, and tried to persuade him 
to tell him what to do. If the request was granted, the 
mallam or boka prepared medicine for seven days, and 
this was given to the youth, who drank it for ten days, 
during which time he could not even speak to a woman. 
Then he was ready for the test of his courage. He was 
sent to cross-roads at midnight, with orders to stay there, 
and, after a time, a bori would come along with a short, 
heavy stick, with which he would poke at the boy. If 
the latter took no notice, the bori would go on, but soon a 
bori with one eye glowing like fire would come up and 
make as if to seize him. If the youth remained unmoved, 
he too would pass on, and another bori like a spearman 
would appear, and thrust his weapon at him. If the 
youth took no notice, he also would pass, and a snake 
would spring at him. If this failed to produce any effect, 
a lame man would arrive, and if still with the same result, 
he would tell the youth to seize the bori who was following, 

MAGIC IN FIELDS—WAR, HUNTING, GAMES 209 

and would pass on. Last of all, a half-man would appear, 
and the youth would seize him, and demand the charm 
required.0 " What kind do you want ? " the half-man 
would ask. "Do you wish to be able to kill your 
opponent with one blow, to knock him senseless after 
several blows, or simply to be able to win after a long 
struggle ? " The youth would make his choice, release 
the half-man, and return home, having been warned by 
the half-man not to look behind, and not to speak to 
anyone until he had entered his own hut. Next morning, 
about 8 a.m., the youth would go to the mallam or boka, 
and report the result of his trial, and would state which 
charm he had obtained. If the first, the mallam or boka 
would say : " That was wrong, and, lest you should kill 
everybody, you shall have your power only once a year. 
If you contest at .any other time, the charm will have no 
effect, and you will have to take your chance." If the 
youth had chosen the second charm, he would be warned 
not to fight too often ; but if the third, the mallam or 
boka would approve, and place no restriction of any kind 
upon him. 

Tests similar to the above are found all over the world. 
Sir E. B. Tylor notes " the descriptions by Zulu converts 
of the dreadful creatures which they see in moments of 
intense religious exaltation, the snake with great eyes and 
very fearful, the leopard stealing stealthily, the enemy 
approaching with his long assegai in his hand — these 
coming one after another to the place where the man has 
gone to pray in secret, and striving to frighten him from his 
knees." 10 It is only natural to suppose that a youth 
brave enough to pass the tests will not fear a human foe, 
and will thus have the advantage of confidence in himself. 

In Sharru (originally a Filani contest and apparently 

no I ill- B i.v <>/■ THE BORI 

a b i "i fitness for mini o each of the contestants 
broughl a switch of the i amiya, and stripped himself to 
the waist. One then beat the other, and, aft< r a < ertain 
number of blew.-, the other had the right to rel 
either then 01 at some other time. The id< hting 

thus appears in many of the tales, the one who I 
punishment first managing to give more than I e has had.11 
By the procedure described above a youth could obtain B 
medicine for this contest also. 

Dambe is a kind of boxing in which the feel are used ;is 
well as the hands. Either foot will do, but punches may 
be delivered with one hand only, and this is bound up. 
The charm for victory in this was obtained in something 
the same way as was that for success in the Koraiya 
contests, but, instead of going to cross-roads, the youth 
proceeded to a new grave, dug a hole in it, and then lay 
down, and put his arm down the hole until he could touch 
the corpse. Soon a headless man would come up, but if 
the youth showed no signs of fear, he would pass, and was 
succeeded by a headless hyena, a headless leopard, and 
other animals — or rather bori. Then would come a spirit 
with clothes of gold, mounted upon a horse with golden 
caparisons, and holding his sword as if about to cut down 
the youth, whom he would seize and ask what he wanted. 
On the candidate telling him, he would say : " A bori is 
behind me who will give it you," and then he would gallop 
off. Last of all would come a bori " with one eye as large 
as the moon and glowing like fire, and with only one 
testicle, only half a body," and the youth would seize him 
and demand the charm. The same questions would be 
asked as to the kind required, and when the youth had 
made his choice, the one-eyed bori would say : "Go, you 
will have it, but as you are returning, you will meet a 

MAGIC IN FIELDS— WAR, HUNTING, GAM US zn 

woman at dawn, do not speak to her. You will also meet 
a man, do not speak to him. Do not utter a word until 
you are inside your own hut." Next morning the youth 
would visit the mallam or boka, as in the case of the 
Mai-Koraiya, and, if necessary, similar restrictions would 
be put upon him. 

Wrestling (kukuwa) is a religious rite in some cases, as has 
been explained already, but amongst the Mohammedan 
Hausas it is now regarded as being merely an exercise. 
A wrestler naturally wishes to excel even now, but in former 
times it was extremely important to be good, and there 
were two ways open to him. He could go to a Ba-Maguje, 
who would give him tiny pieces of the roots of the gamji, 
taru, and tsamiya, and bark of the hankuja, sewn up in 
little square leather cases (like the laiyas) and fastened 
together so as to form armlets. These were no good unless 
prepared by a Maguje, because only he knew the right 
proportions, but there was no limit to the number which 
might be bought by the wrestler, and naturally the more 
he had, the more afraid his opponent would be of him. In 
addition, a waistband might be prepared of string treated 
with preparations of the above-mentioned roots.12 But a 
much better charm could be had from a mallam and a 
boka combined. The latter would give the youth the ink 
which he had washed off a written charm, and this was 
drunk for seven days to make him equal to the tests to 
follow. Then he would be sent at midnight to cross-roads, 
and soon the dwarf Gajere Mai-Dowa would come along. 
The youth would seize him and demand a charm, but the 
dwarf would tell him to go to a certain boka for it, and 
they would separate. Next day the youth would go to 
the boka, who would give him more medicine to drink for 
another seven days, and on the eighth he would be sent to 

212 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

an ant-hill, where he would have to wash his body, doing 
the same for six days more. On the night of the seventh 
day of such washing he would again meet the dwarf, and 
then the latter would give him a pill to put under his 
tongue just before a bout was going to commence. The 
candidate would return to the boka, who would tell him 
that he must sacrifice to Uwar-Dowa (? Uwal-Gwona) in 
future, and lie would take the youth to a tsamiya tree, and 
order him to sweep the ground around its base for seven 
days. On the last day, the boka would go with him again, 
and they would sacrifice a red cock and a white hen, and 
the boka would present the youth to the bori in the tree. 
After that, whenever he wrestled, a red cock would crow 
from his head, and a white or other coloured hen would 
appear close to his feet, and his opponents would be so 
much afraid that they would be overcome at oik e. 
Directly he had finished his bout, he would wave his hand, 
and the cock and hen would disappear. Haj Ali had 
himself seen a hen and chickens appear at a wrestler's feet, 
though he did not see the cock. He had no doubt that it 
was there, however, and the opponent must have seen it, 
for he was conquered immediately afterwards. 

If two youths, both of whom had been through the tests 
above mentioned, were to meet in a bout, neither would be 
able to beat the other, and they would struggle and struggle 
until one of the judges separated them and pronounced 
them to be equal. No one who had been successful in the 
tests, and had paid proper attention to Uwar-Dowa could 
be beaten. A useful tip for our athletes at the forth- 
coming Olympic Games ! 

CHAPTER XVI 

SUPERSTITIONS AND OMENS 

More or less connected with magic are certain supersti- 
tions which must now be considered, though no long 
account of nature myths will be necessary, for these have 
been treated already in Hausa Superstitions and Customs,1 
and really belong to the realm of folk-lore. 

The earth is said to be a female, though it is doubtful 
if the crops are supposed to be her offspring, or if the sun 
is the husband. Prayers are offered to it, but not sacrifices. 
The earth is supported upon one of the horns of the Sa- 
Na-Duniya (Bull of the World), and when he gets tired of 
holding it on one, he tosses it on to the other, and it is 
this which makes the earth quake. It is flat like a plate, 
being divided in two by a wall, and it meets the sky, but 
just where only Allah knows.2 

Many mountains are held to be sacred and have the 
reputation of being inhabited by bori who will kill the 
person who ascends them. The Dutsin Wase in the Muri 
province is one which I have seen ; another is in the 
Tangale country, the reputation of the latter having been 
greatly increased since an European was killed there a few 
years ago. I have not seen a volcano in Nigeria, but it is 
said of one mountain north of the Kagoro district, that 
cattle come out at night and wander about, and that a 
black bull was sacrificed to it by the chief of Zaria when 
fighting the Kagoro.3 

In many places in North Africa there are heaps of stcmes 
213 

2t | THE B IV OF TJJF. B0R1 

to which each passer-by adds a similar article, the piles 
being u ually i>\ the t < >i 1 1 1 > of a marabout, In Nigeria, 
where a sacred place exists, it is pointed oul by ome 
learned in.iii.nn. The reason for adding t<> the pile is to 
make certain thai the journey on which you are going 
shall be sua essful, for " by depositing something, the holy 
man will remember and help you in whatever you are 
going to do, while by passing by without paving any 
attention, lie will become angry and thwart you." 

I have Q01 noticed any large piles <>l stones thus formed 
in the parts of Nigeria which I have visited, but Haj Ali 
and Auta assure me that they do, or did, exist. Certainly 
offerings of other kinds are made to sacred rocks in West 
Africa.4 It is quite likely, for in North Africa these 
karkur arc often raised at a spot where a person has died 
a violent death, since "the blood cries out for vengeance,"5 
and must be appeased permanently by payment from the 
slayer, or temporarily by a periodical addition of stones, 
both by the relatives of the victim and also by those of 
the guilty person — or else it must be imprisoned in the 
ground by means of a new nail. As has been seen, the 
Hausas regard the ghost of a man who has been killed 
in battle or murdered as particularly dangerous, so 
throwing stones in this manner would be quite in accord- 
ance with their beliefs. I have been told by a fellow- 
official that there is a series of tumuli running along 
certain rivers in the north-west of Nigeria, which measure 
some forty feet in height and in width. These were 
tombs, built in all probability by Berber conquerors, 
and Doutte" wonders if there is any connexion between 
tumuli and piles of stones.6 Small heaps sometimes mark 
a boundary, but whether originally built for this purpose 
or because of the death of a person is uncertain, for, in a 

SUPERSTITIONS AND OMENS 215 

country where each tribe is fighting its neighbour, no one 
can travel in safety outside his own country, so the 
boundary lines and the scenes of many deaths become 
practically identical. In North Africa, piles of stones 
grow at the spot where two roads diverge, these being due 
perhaps to the natural hesitation of a traveller strange to 
the country who has to choose his route, and wishes for 
guidance, for is it not certain that some spirit must live 
there which will show him the right way if appeased, or 
the wrong one if ignored ? A European, who, travelling 
in West Africa for the first time, finds himself alone in 
thick forest or in an unfriendly district, can easily under- 
stand this view. The belief that the point where roads 
cross is dangerous is well known ; even our ancestors 
considered that such a place was almost as tabu as 
consecrated ground. 

Rags are sometimes used in a somewhat similar manner 
to the stones in some parts, though they are not necessarily 
added to by every traveller, thus those shown tied to 
the tree in 111. 26 are placed there only by women 
desiring children. Cloths are wrapped around trees 
which the person wishes to fell, as has been mentioned 
already (p. 194), and also by the Masu-Bori at certain 
times, in the first place to ask the spirits' permission to 
cut, in other to attract their attention to the initiate. 
In several parts of West Africa trees are sacred and rags 
are tied to them.7 

Springs, rivers, and lakes are inhabited by spirits, and 
sacrifices are offered to them by the Sarikin Rnwa (Chief of 
the Water) for all passengers on a ferry, by the passengers 
themselves when going on a long journev, and by the 
owner of a canoe before launching it. 

The stars are now the children of Allah, but they were 

2x6 THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

once ] Mini. 1 1 1 beings- One d;iy, long ago, some Magazawa 
ho\'s began to throw stones it an old woman, the World, 
who w.i . sweeping the ground in front of her hut, and she 
was naturally unit b annoyed by this. So she gave them 

her calaba-.h of rubbish to empty, and immediately after 
they had taken hold of it they began to rise in the air, 
and at last they readied the sky. When they had arrived 
there, Allah told them to remain, so they have been there 
ever since. Another version is to the effect that the stars 
were always stars, but were once quite near the earth, 
being moved up above by the old woman because the boys 
were throwing stones at them — not at her. When stars 
fall, it shows that they arc fighting amongst themselves, 
and that some are running away and are being killed. 
They foretell battles upon earth because, by a kind of 
sympathetic magic, they thus induce warfare amongst 
human beings. Another theory of shooting stars is that 
they are being thrown by angels, at demons which have 
been trying to pry into the secrets of paradise, and to 
tempt the inhabitants. This is the Koranic version, of 
course.8 

In the summer, the sun travels by a long path, and that 
is why he is so long in the heavens, but in winter he takes 
a shorter route, and of course gets over his journey more 
quickly. He goes round the horizon at night to return to 
the east. No sacrifices are made to the sun nor to the 
moon, but time is reckoned by the latter. " There are 
twelve months in the year, and the time of harvest." 
This seemed to me like thirteen months, but Haj Ali said 
no, six moons (practically the rainy season) were for 
agriculture, six not, and the rest of the time was for 
the harvesting and feasting. The Mohammedan Hausas 
have the sundial, and use the Moslem almanac, but the 

SUPERSTITIONS AND OMENS 217 

Ba-Maguje simply tell the time by the position of the sun. 
In Tunis, Arab time is half-an-hour later than the French. 
The Mohammedan year being unsuitable for agricultural 
purposes, the Hausas have to reckon their seasons by the 
sun, and where Europeans have conquered, the Gregorian 
calendar must be taken notice of, but in North Africa the 
Arabs and Hausas use the Julian calendar for themselves, 
which is thirteen days after our own. 

Sometimes an old woman can manage to make a charm 
by which she sits upon a stool and can reach the sun. She 
squeezes it (that is the eclipse), and extracts a medicine 
from it by which she can make other charms. One of 
these is given to a woman whose rival wife (kishiya) has 
given the husband a drink and made him turn against 
her (the wife seeking revenge) after having preferred her 
to the kishiya. By means of the charm made from the 
sun's juice the wife will be able to send the kishiya mad 
if she is able to sprinkle some of it upon the floor of her hut, 
or can get someone else to do so. It is also a boon to a 
wife who has become unable to bear children. The moon 
can be milked in the same manner, and for a similar 
purpose. 

The moon will give people cold heads if exposed to its 
rays, the cure for which is a bandage and certain lotions. 
The moon is supposed to die when it disappears, but no 
means are taken to bring it to life again, for it is well 
known that it will reappear in a few days. When there 
is an eclipse, however, drums are taken, and the sun is 
asked to spare the moon, for the sun has seized it for 
coming upon its path. This story and another are given 
in Hausa Superstitions and Customs (pp. 116, 117), but 
whereas this one is true science, the account of the moon 
dropping the sun's daughter is mere fable, according-to 

2i8 THE B I.V OF THE BORI 

Haj Ali. The beating of the dnims is due to North 
African influence, no doubt, for the same cites were per- 
formed by the followers of Hecate who has been equated 
with Artemis." 

The rainbow arises from a well of salt, and enters an 
ant-hill. It drinks up the rain, thus preventing any more 
from falling. The mirage is a device of the bori to capture 
travellers, and the person who is deceived by it is lost, for 
he gradually goes mad, and the bori drink his blood. The 
wind is a bori ; in fact the name Iska is used for both . 
The rain is Allah's spittle or water. 

The thunder is not caused by a bori, it is a meteorite let 
fall by Allah. If you see where it has fallen, pour some 
fresh milk into the hole, and you will come upon it, in 
shape like an iron bar. If this be melted and forged with 
iron into a sword, whatever you touch with it will drop 
dead. Abd Allah thought that the sword of Sidi Ali, with 
which he killed Ghul (see p. 245), was made in this way. 
Hausas who do not mind swearing falsely upon the Koran 
will hesitate to do so when they have called upon Aradu 
(Thunder), for, when the next storm comes, either a 
meteorite, lightning, or the rain will find them out and kill 
them. Haj Ali knows of a case where, during a thunder- 
storm, a man who was in a cafe sitting amidst friends 
suddenly dropped dead though no one else was injured, 
and it was discovered later on that he had sworn by the 
thunder and had lied. In North Africa there is divina- 
tion by thunder. 

When a Hausa commences some undertaking, he will 
choose a lucky day if he can afford to do so. This can be 
indicated by a mallam or a diviner, for it depends upon the 
stars, perhaps, or something equally important, but certain 
days are inherently unlucky for stated acts. On Sunday 

SUPERSTITIONS AND OMENS 219 

the world was formed,10 and also the seven members of the 
body (hands, feet, knees, and head), so one must not shave 
the head nor wash clothes, at least not in Nigeria, for 
should a woman do the former her husband will die. But 
these prohibitions are not observed in North Africa, 
although there would be no great delay, because Monday, 
fortunately, is a good day, and almost everything done 
then will be lucky, especially as regards travel and business, 
since Moses went up to Sinai then. On Tuesdaj^ it is quite 
safe to shave, but not to wash clothes in Nigeria, for they 
would be stolen, lost, or burnt if the rule were ignored. 
Eve is said to have had her first courses upon this day. 
A man who shaves on a Wednesday will soon be put to 
death by his chief, and a woman who washes clothes then 
has not much longer to live, for was not Pharaoh drowned 
upon such a day ? Sheep's wool must not be worked 
in North Africa on a Thursday, nor must one shave, but 
clothes may be washed without danger, for Mohammed 
returned to Mecca then. In Nigeria, it is dangerous to 
shave on a Friday night, although washing clothes brings 
long life, but in North Africa it is the worst day of all for 
washing, and sheep's wool must not be touched. It is the 
day of all days for marrying, since Adam and Eve came 
together on a Friday. It is lucky to cut the nails on this 
day, but not to commence a journey except at night, for the 
rivers are full, and spirits are about. These spirits are said 
to be angels, not jinns, but they do not care to be inter- 
fered with by the presence of human beings. In North 
Africa, he who shaves on a Saturday will not die in debt — 
a chance for our working men — but a woman who combs 
her hair then will speedily die or be divorced. Clothes 
may not be washed in Nigeria then, for the act causes 
early death or divorce, and generally, it is a day when 

THE BAN OF THE BORI 

people must be careful <»f being imposed upon. The evil 
reputation "i Saturday may be a survival from the time 
when it was sacred to Eiammon, it being considered un- 
lucky .uid illegal to work tlien. 

Tin- interpretation <>f dreams lias been mentioned in 
Chapter X. A person may save himself much trouble by 
B proper study of omens also, and yet it is a mistake to be 
guided by them absolutely, for everyone makes his own 
rules to some extent.11 In a general sense, however, every- 
thing white is good, while black is bad, males are usually 
more fortunate than females, and certain races (Jews) and 
animals (hogs) are likely to foreshadow misfortune. But 
a man will often disregard the general rules if he finds that 
there has been any notable exception in his own individual 
case. Thus, to meet a person with milk is usually a good 
omen because it is white, and a crow is a bad one, but at 
the same time if a man had been unfortunate after meeting 
the first, and had been luck)'' after the second, he would no 
longer believe in the above. He might be influenced also 
by the experiences of a friend, though, of course, some 
people are never Lucky, and one must take care not to be 
led astray by such ; in fact, the best thing to do with a 
Jonah is to throw him over. 

A perfect male of the same race — particularly if he be 
a sherij, a descendant of the Prophet — is a very fortunate 
omen, though a dwarf also is luck)' ; a leper is a very bad 
one. A Jew does not matter much to a Hausa, although 
anyone who has become impregnated with the likes and 
dislikes of his former master would regard him as an evil 
omen, and a blacksmith is said to be lucky — perhaps this 
has something to do with the great reputation of the Hausa 
blacksmith in his own country. 

The female influence is usually unlucky, but here is a 

SUPERSTITIONS AND OMENS 223 

notable exception. Haj Ali's vis-a-vis, an Arab named 
Ali, used to work for a French butcher, but one day he 
became mixed up in a tight, and was dismissed. Ali's 
relatives besought the master to take him back, and much 
money was spent in buying written charms from the 
mallams for the purpose. But, alas ! all was useless, and, 
except for an odd day's job now and then, he had had no 
work for four months when Haj Ali and his wife, Khadejia, 
came to live in the room which they had hired. Next 
morning, Khadejia, seeing Ali in the compound after all 
the other men had gone off, asked him had he no work to 
go to as he had not left the house, and Ali told her what 
had happened. She said : " You go out now and you will 
find work," and sure enough, he was taken on by the first 
person to whom he applied. But something much more 
remarkable than that followed, for the very next day the 
former master sent for him, and took him back in his old 
employment ! Since that day Ali will never leave the 
house until he has seen Khadejia's face, and if she is not 
out of doors before he leaves, he will knock her up so that 
he can see her through her doorway. 

This, however, is an exceptional case, the Hausa usually 
agreeing with enlightened Englishmen (according to The 
Dundee Advertiser of 20th October 1913) that " women, 
like rabbits, are of ill-omen to the miner. In many places, 
particularly in Wales, if a pitman meets or sees a woman 
on his way to work he will turn back ; for such an en- 
counter is held to forebode evil not only to the man himself, 
but all his associates. At Owestry, some years ago, a 
woman was employed as messenger by one of the collieries, 
and in the course of her duties met many of the colliers 
on their way to work. The men immediately told the 
manager that they could not run the risk of ill-luck entailecl 

2 82 I III- 6 I.V OF ///£ #0/?/ 

in meeting a woman OX) the way to the pit, and threatened 
tn strike it she were nol di missed." 

A dog lyin^r by the fire is said by Douttc to presage 
rain and one wants i<> have i ome idea <>f the weather if 
going <m a journey. I la j AH gives the more natural 
explanation — i.e. that it simply shows that the animal is 
• old, though, oi course, this may include the former. 
' There is no charm against cold except clothes and a 
fire." 

A hooting owl is unlucky, and so is a braying donkey 
because it is said to be calling Iblis. A donkey foal, 
however, is not unlucky, although it is nicknamed Shaitan 
Karami (Little Satan), because it is small, and young 
things generally are fortunate. A donkey has a bori, and 
a very dangerous one it is, for " if you step over the space 
where a donkey has rolled, the bori may cling to you. 
There is a boy in Tunis who has one, and now and then it 
drives off his own proper bori and seizes him ; he becomes 
rigid, then falls down if not held up — meanwhile gnashing 
his teeth — and rolls about like a donkey ; he had fallen into 
the fire a little while before. His hands are clenched 
tight, and must be wrenched open with a male key [one 
without a ward — which he carries about with him] when 
he will become all right again. There is no cure for this, 
as the bori will not agree to leave the boy." I saw this 
victim of the spirits, but not during one of his seizures 
unfortunately ; his father was an Arab, his mother a 
woman of Kano. A dog's bori also may take possession 
of a person, and he will then bark if he hears drums being 
played, but only then, for it is the drums which arouse 
him. In fact, every animal has its bori, though not all of 
them take possession of human beings. 

Birds, etc., in pairs are much more lucky than when in 

SUPERSTITIONS AND OMENS 223 

an uneven number, for, in the first case, each has a mate, 
so all are contented. A large flock is better than a small 
one — apparently because the birds are then more likely 
to be occupied with each other, and will not want to bother 
about anything else, though this is not quite intelligible. 
A kabare, a crow, or any other black bird is a bad omen. 

It is unlucky to meet a person with a squint or with eyes 
half closed, for the latter is probably a bori in disguise. 
All bori have their eyes only partly open, and they put 
their heads slightly back and rather on one side to look 
at a human being. Yet eyes which show too much white 
are "the eyes of Iblis," and this seems rather contradictory. 
Married eyebrows are lucky, at any rate in a woman 
(they are often painted so as to nearly meet, as has been 
seen in Fig. 6), and they are beautiful too. " If not, 
would not the owner pull them out ? " She would ! 

CHAPTER XVII 

PILGRIMAGES AND FESTIVALS 

In addition to the bori dances and the rites for rain, there 
are regular festivals and pilgrimages which must be 
observed if the community is to be prosperous. One has 
been described already, that of the Daffa Ble to the tomb 
of Al Khaderi in Tunis, but there is a much more impor- 
tant pilgrimage and festival, known as the Ziara, which 
must be performed annually. In Tripoli, the Hausas go 
to the tomb of Sidi Masari or of Sidi Makari, I was told ; 
in Tunis there are four marabouts who are thus honoured, 
the most popular being Sidi Sa'ad. 

Men and women, Arabs and Hausas, go there together 
each year to offer sacrifices, and to make their requests. 
They go on a Wednesday morning, taking a sacrificial he- 
goat and some fowls for each party, together with candles 
and incense, and extra food. For the rest of that day they 
dance, at night sleeping in the rooms built there for the 
pilgrims, and the ceremonies continue for three more days. 
It would be a very serious thing to prevent anyone going 
there, as the following story, from Auta, will show. " Four 
years ago a Frenchman of Susa (Sousse) had an Arab 
female servant who asked for leave to go, which he refused. 
As he persisted in his refusal, the woman took her wages, 
left his service, and went off. One night afterwards, Sidi 
Sa'ad himself, armed with a big club, appeared by the side 
of the Frenchman, and told him that he (the latter) would 
have to perform the pilgrimage in the following year, and 

224 

~^m k\ •-!• Sr- &-■'*■) 

CD 

PILGRIMAGES AND FESTIVALS 225 

that if he did not do so, the saintly Sidi would break his 
neck. The Frenchman was so frightened, that he gave 
the required promise, so in due time he came with all his 
family in a ship, went to the tomb, took off his hat and his 
boots, knelt by the tomb, and said, ' I repent.' He then 
sacrificed the usual animals, gave food to many people, 
and returned home again after the conclusion of the 
ceremonies. He has come each time since." 

The faith of the Hausa is not at all upset by a tem- 
porary disappointment, or rather one which he hopes is 
only temporary. " Should your request be unanswered 
you must perform the rite again ; perhaps you are only 
being tried further, perhaps you did not do everything 
quite correctly. At any rate, say nothing against Sidi 
Sa'ad, for he will certainly punish you if you do." 

The following account of the Ziara was given me by 
Haj AH, with whom I went over the ground. It is an 
annual festival and pilgrimage in one, taking place after 
the harvest season, the shrine being the tomb of Sidi Sa'ad, 
some twelve miles south-east of Tunis. The story is that 
Sidi Sa'ad and three others (Sidi Al Khatab, Sidi Faraj, 
and Sidi Bu Sa'id) became so very full of magical power 
(zafi, not baraka) that the other less fortunate mallams 
grew jealous, and they determined to get rid of them. In 
those days (Haj Ali could not tell me the date), " If I were 
to steal your stick, and when accused of the theft I swore 
by Sidi Sa'ad (or one of the others) that I had not done so, 
the stick would immediately appear." The Bey, too, was 
afraid of them, and yet knew that he could not treat them 
in the same way in which he could dispose of the ordinary 
people to whom he objected, so he called all the mallams 
together and put them to a test. Some goats were placed 
secretly in a dark room, and a butcher having beerf 

226 /'///■ B l.\ OF I ill- B0R1 

stationed Openly a1 the door, the mallams were invited to 
enter the room, being told thai any one of tliem who did 
so would hive hi.s throat cut, but thai a real mallam 
would bave ii" fear <>f that. The ordinary mallams were 
extremely reticent — great men are always modest — and 
were not at all anxious to show what power they really 
possessed, so all refused to enter except the four men- 
tioned above. Sidi Sa'ad entered first, and upon the 
threshold he was seized and thrown down to the ground 
in the sight of the assembled mallams, but he was dragged 
further into the dark room, where he was allowed to rise, 
and the throat of a goat was cut, the butcher then running 
out to the mallams, and exhibiting his bloody knife. The 
same thing happened to the other three, and then the four 
mallams, alive and well, were shown to their rivals.1 But 
the Bey, pretending to have been deceived in the same 
way as was the general audience, declared that such men 
were too holy to live in the city, so he gave them each a 
district, Sidi Sa'ad going to the south-east, Sidi Bu Sa'id 
to the north-east, and the other two to the north-west 
and south-west respectively.2 Sidi Sa'ad was a Beriberi 
slave, but it is not merely on account of that fact that the 
Hausas and others visit his shrine, for they go to the others 
also, each community or lodge pleasing itself. Prepara- 
tions are made some time beforehand, a decorated he- 
goat being led around the streets while those who accom- 
pany it beg for alms with which preserved meat and fish 
will be bought, and flour is ground if necessary, for there 
will be no time for anything of this kind at the shrine. 
There will be enough for poor worshippers, all of whom 
will share equally with the richer members, the only thing 
which counts during the rites being rank in the bori 
community. :{ 

:o. — The shrine of Sidi Sa'ad. 

21. — The courtyard <>t the shrine. 

PILGRIMAGES AND FESTIVALS 227 

About nine o'clock on a Wednesday morning, the women 
start off in carriages with their stores, cooking-pots, etc., 
and the men, also driving, take their departure soon 
afterwards, but some seven boys witli flags, and others 
witli drums and iron clappers walk. Between seven and 
eight kilometres out, they cross a river, and, as it is the one 
which flows past the shrine, all cry out, and thank Allah 
for having brought them safely through another year. 

Those in the carriages arrive at the destination first, 
naturally, and the time is so arranged that the women 
will have put the houses in order by the time that the men 
arrive. After a short time, all walk back along the road 
to meet the pedestrians, and then, falling in behind these, 
they march in, and walk around the tomb of the saint 
seven times. Then the flags are tied to a pillar, and all 
go out into the courtyard, where they eat their first meal, 
consisting of well-peppered fish, and bread. In the after- 
noon, they walk about and talk, drumming going on 
all the time, and, after the evening meal, the bori take 
possession of them until about midnight. 

On the Thursday, they go about eight a.m. to a place a 
little higher up the river, and at once call up the spirits, 
Sarikin Rafi and the crocodile bori trying to throw them- 
selves into the water, Jato and his friends running away 
into the fields, Ba-Toye and Gindema looking for trees, and 
others behaving as is expected of them. On their return, 
about noon, couscous is eaten, and then there are more 
dances and bori rites until sunset. After an hour or two's 
rest and another meal, the dancing and bori possession 
begin again, and last until dawn, with an interval near 
midnight for a meal. 

On the Friday morning, about eight o'clock, all go to 
the sacred well, and stand around it. The Arifa then 

THE FAX OF THE FORI 

app: kneelr. the brink, tl 

into tin r which the 

(trammers pi all for M - 1 -Chikki. ,md immedi- 

ately : niter is seen I stir.4 Then Sarikin R.iii I 

nt. and the other Masu-Bori mu>t be 
.t him ofi from the well, otherwise he will 
imself into the water. 
Nexl M fifty yards in rear 

Sidi S id to have slept for 

1 hite cloth having been spread over 
.lou th of the shelter, nearer to the tree upon which 
.wishing to become mothers tie i been 

Arila puts her head in. and censes it. Behind 
her is her Hagajiya, and behind her again the K - 
and many of the people present [Arabs as well as H 
hand incense to the last named for her to pass it on to the 
Arifa. Many offerings of money and candles 
made, and those which remain are kept by the Arifa. 
ring been placed by her under the white cloth. 
S o Mai-Inna takes; possession of the Arifa, and she 
comes out and dances, her place being taken by the Maga- 
jiya. and then individual bori start up all over the place. 
Ordinary dancing is indulged in at the mouth of the other 
shelter (Ramin Zagatf), and here a collection is made from 
the onlookers. 

S B a move is made to a large karub tree close by. 
-indema and Ba-Toye immediately climb, and, 
after more dancing, each person breaks off a twig with a 
leaf or two. and puts it in his turban or in her hair, all then 
returning to their quarters at the shrine. The Hausas 
are not clear as to just what the significance of this is, but 
it reminds us that the belief that certain plants protect 
from evil influence^ L> very ancient. Thus even in England 

'"■4 

Hi '"i'l- '■'■$£* 

MM* 

LH 

* '« 

j 

22. — The river in which Sarikin Kali and other water spirits try to 
throw themselves. 

23.— The tree (right in the centre) up which Ba-Toye, Gindema, a«d 
other spirits climb. 

PILGRIMAGES AND FESTIVALS 229 

anyone wearing a laurel wreath was supposed to be ill no 
clanger from lightning.6 

It is now time for the sacrifices, and the animals (which 
have been brought from Tunis) are offered up in the 
courtyard in front of the window of the room in which the 
coffin lies, the blood flowing into a hole below, after whi h 
the people, headed by flag-bearers and drummers, walk 
around the tomb seven times. Then the big meal is eaten, 
and there are dancing and bori possession until sunset. 
After a couple of hours' rest, during which time the evening 
meal is taken, dancing and bori recommence, and are 
continued until dawn. 

On the Saturday morning, about eight o'clock, the 
carriages having arrived, all go outside, and stand by the 
cafe in rear of the shrine, and the Arifa, burning incense, 
takes up a position_in the centre of the flag-bearers, who 
march around her while the onlookers throw her offerings. 
Then the people shout, and all is ready for the return. The 
Arifa and her attendants go first, then the other women 
with their cooking-pots, etc., followed by the men in order 
of importance, and, lastly, the flag-bearers and musicians 
take their departure, walking as before. After the loads 
have been deposited and the carriages dismissed, the 
people go back on foot along the road until underneath 
the shrine of Sidi Bu'l Hassan, where they wait for the 
pedestrians, and upon their arrival, all enter the Arab 
cemetery, walk seven times around a shrine there near 
the gate, and then halt while the Al Fatiha is read by one 
of the important men. The procession then marches to 
the Gidan Jama'a, the bori beginning to take possession 
just above the little suk, and the rites are kept up until 
about two o'clock. Then there is a final meal, Al Fatiha 
is read once more, and all go to their own homes. 

230 THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

Qn the following Wednesday, some other house will 
perform the Ziara, eithei there or at another shrine, and, 
in the succeeding weeks, the remaining houses will do 
likewise until all which go there have been. The ordei i 
always the same, for the community of the Gidan Kuri 
initiated the practice, so it always has the right to go first — 

in fact, it must do so. The rites of the various houses 
.uf similar in the main, though there are some slight 
differences, one house going to the well on Thursday as 
well as Friday, and so on. Only one modification is worth 
noting, and that is the practice of the members of the 
Gidan Bclik and the Gidan Aska (who go on the same da}* 
to Sidi Sa'ad and to Sidi Faraj respectively) to meet 
before leaving Tunis, the Arifa of each community handing 
a red cock to the other to be sacrificed with the offerings 
of the community performing the pilgrimage. 

So much appears in this book about the proper offerings 
to particular spirits, that perhaps a word upon the Hausa 
idea of sacrifice will not be out of place. The Arabic word 
chart means both " to stipulate " and " to make an 
incision," 6 this being supposed by some to be connected 
with the fact that " blood-brotherhood " existed amongst 
the ancient Arabs. The Hausa word sare (or sara or sari) 
means " to salute " and " to cut," and at first sight there 
might seem to be some similarity, but unfortunately for 
such an idea, sare is used only for the military salutes 
taught by Europeans, corresponding exactly to the 
direction in our drill-books to " cut away the hand smartly." 
It is just possible, however, that it is connected with a 
similar word meaning " to tell," " to inform against," for 
there is no doubt that when the blood is made to flow, the 
spirits assemble and listen to what is said by the worshipper 
— who in practically all private seances has a complaint 

^4- — The entrance to the Grove between the well and the shelters. 

25. — The well in which spirits are seen to move about alter incense 
lias been offered. 

PILGRIMAGES AND FESTIVALS 531 

to make. Still, here again, one must be careful not to be 
led astray by similarities, for sacrifices were offered to some 
of the bori long before the introduction of Islam, and, in 
any case, the word for " sacrifice " and for " to sai rifice " 
is yanka. This, however, may not be any argument to 
the contrary, for the word used for " to kill," except when 
implying " to cut the throat," is kasshe. I must content 
myself by saying that by means of the blood, the Hausa 
enters into communication with the spirits, and apparently 
even with the marabout when the beast or bird is put to 
death in his sanctuary, as is the case as regards that of 
Sidi Sa'ad, the sacrifices by his window being evidently 
not to the bori, for the spirits have previously been 
summoned. With the Arabs, the offering is probably 
merely a gift or sadaka, comparable with the offerings of 
the bread and water upon the tombs of members of the 
family, but there is little doubt that it is a sacrifice 
according to Hausa ideas. 

The worshippers must prepare themselves for the 
ceremonies. The bori mounts must be continent for at 
least three days before the performances, and it will be 
noted that, at the annual Ziara just described, the sacrifice 
is not offered until the people have sufficiently purified 
themselves by their previous exercises to be safe from the 
holiness let loose around them as it were, any inadvertence 
or fault committed at this time being at least as dangerous 
as would be the case during a purely bori performance. 

The sacrificial he-goat of the Hausas is always black 
in North Africa, either because it resembles the night — 
and so the bori — or, in the case of the rites for rain, because 
it is of the same colour as the rain-clouds which the 
worshippers desire to attract. But, whereas the Arabs 
prefer black fowls, it will be seen that the Hausas place 

THE BAN OF THE BORI 

inn. b more cell in< <• upon a rod cock and a white hen, and, 
although the cock is a worthy offering at the Ziara, it is 
rather strange thai he should be sacrificed to a bori, 
for, being the harbinger of the dawn, he is regarded as 
chasing away the evil spirits of the night. This supports 
the statement made Later that the bori are not regarded 
as being wholly bad beings, in spite of the harm which 
they cause. Again, in Nigeria, the sacrifice is sometimes a 
white ram (e.g. to Mallam Tsafo) or a white ewe (to Uwal- 
Gwona), and even the goat may not be black, for Kuri 
prefers a red he-goat, Uwar-Dowa a she-goat of the same 
colour, and Ibrahim has a white-bellied kid. The he-goat 
to be sacrificed at the Ziara is, as has been seen, chosen 
some time beforehand, though this seems now to be more 
with the idea of obtaining contributions than to purify 
it in any way. M. Doutte suggests that the he-goat was 
chosen because of his incessant ardours,7 being therefore 
a symbol of fertility, for even the act of generation is 
regarded almost as a sacred rite — hence the respect, or at 
least toleration, for a prostitute. If so, the choice of fowls 
could also be accounted for, and this reason might be 
considered to hold good for the selection of a ram too, 
but in West Africa, at any rate, the true explanation would 
seem to be the more simple one that these offerings are 
much cheaper and more easily obtainable, for in the most 
important cases a bull is required, and he cannot be con- 
sidered as being more prolific than a he-goat or a cock. 
In fact this question is not considered — not nowadays, 
at any rate — the choice of the victim sometimes depending 
upon a dream, as has been seen. All of these animals 
were imported from the East, and it would be convenience 
rather than religious enthusiasm which would account 
for the fact that sacrifices of fowls and goats are more 

PILGRIMAGES AND FESTIVALS 233 

numerous than those of cattle. Surely much the same 
reason caused Jacob to substitute goats for gazelles ? On 
special occasions, a bull would be provided to please the 
god or spirit, and also, possibly, for the good of his health, 
since the bull is so much more powerful than the ram or 
he-goat — though not more cunning than the cock, perhaps. 
Still, we can sympathise with the view of the Hausas, for 
no one would expect our fighting forces to become giants 
upon a diet of mutton and kid — still less upon one of 
vegetables only — any more than he could imagine the 
heroes of Trafalgar and Waterloo to have been teetotallers. 

The mention of Jacob reminds us that at the Ziara, 
instead of the worshipper being dressed in the skin of 
the victim, a contrary process takes place, for the goat is 
arrayed in women's clothes, scarves, and ornaments, this 
apparently being \ a curious survival of a rite to express 
the kinship between man and beast, for we find that a goat 
dressed up as a maiden was offered to Artemis Munychia.8 

There is one other point. It was not considered safe to 
wear the same clothes during religious rites as at other 
times, or at least, there was some special preparation, for 
the tabu arising from the holiness would make them 
dangerous. Special clothes would be kept for religious 
festivals, therefore, and so holy dress and gala dress were 
the same — and indeed, the name " Sunday best " still 
survives with us. Again, religion is conservative, and we 
see vestments used during religious services which have 
gone out of use for everyday life. So the Hausas of North 
Africa when they perform their bori rites, whether when on 
the Ziara or at other times, substitute Hausa cloths for 
part of their Arabic clothing — though what they do wear 
of the latter is the best which they possess, of course, and 
not being able to wash their shoes or clogs, they put them 

234 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

horn oil their feel when they arc about to trend on holy 
ground. 

The rites a1 the shrine of Sidi Sa'ad are worth dwelling 
upon because within a i ircumscribed nrea we find river- 
worship, well-worship, two kinds of tree- worship, and the 
cults of the eainl and of the bori. Possibly there is even 
a seventh kind — namely, the survival of stone worship. 
In England, where three consecutive fine days constitute 
a "drought," the feeling towards water can hardly be 
understood, but in a country which depends so much upon 
its water supply as does North Africa, it is not surprising 
to find that all rivers are sacred, and this is possibly an 
old Libyan belief. It is not necessarily Semitic, though the 
Israelites regarded rivers as sacred (e.g. the Jordan), and 
the Carthaginians had a similar idea — probably because 
the stream was thought to be alive, the life-blood of the 
god being diffused through the waters. 

Wells too were sacred in very ancient times, the holiness 
of even Zemzem being pre-Islamic. Gifts were often cast 
into them — a survival of which may be seen in the custom 
of throwing in pins, and wishing. The belief was that the 
sacred waters were instinct with divine life and energy. 
The living power in the water was often supposed to be 
a serpent, really a jinn, as in the case of the well at Sidi 
Sa'ad. In the legend of Daura, Auta kills the god of the 
well, and this probably means that that particular kind 
of worship was abolished. 

A sacred well is very often found close beside a sacred 
tree, and this is not surprising, for in most parts of Africa 
vegetation can flourish only where there is underground 
water, and sometimes the god of the well was also god 
of the tree. This appears not to be the case here now, 
however, as no rites are performed to the tree by the 

PILGRIMAGES AND FESTIVA 

well during the Ziara — ii id — the 

connected only with * the 

tying oft .with the well. Still, 

ot difficult to co) 

been some connexion. The I t the k 

quite distinct, this species of tree being particularly 

demoniac, the reddish hue of the wc 

The bori dancing and the rites at the shrhv 
need not be further commented upon, but \ ! question 
of the stone worship Is a difficult one. The rsunt 
rather shelters, are cert;.:: - nd their 

does not seem to be derived from the water 
is it due to the shape, for there are no pillars of an)- h 
Yet the may be equivalent to anointing t 

with oil or with blood. The explanation that the; 
places where Sidi. Sa'ad slept seems quite inadequate, 
for the river — and probably the well also — exi * 
before the shrine was built, and the karub and the c 
tree are really quite independent of it, so some stor 
stones may have been worshipped there from early times. 
The oldest Phoenician temples were natural or artificial 
grottos, however, and all branches of the Semites bel: 
in chthonic demons, so it is much more likely tha: 
the stones themselves but the bori in the caves were 
worshipped original- 

The Baban Salla or Great Prayer fand feast) is held in 
both North and West Africa upon the tenth day of Dulkejia, 
and certain preparations are necessary for it o I 0 ly in 
order to obtain the full benefit of the rites, but afc 
to avoid the dangers with which I remonie- : 

attended. 

The first requisite is personal cleanliness, so all males 
have their heads shaved, and then go to one of the numerous 

2^6 

THE BAN OF THE BORI 

hot (" Turkisli ") baths in the i ity which are open nighl 
and day for some time beforehand. But the cleansing 
applies only to the body, apparently, and not to the mind, 

for " when you go ii\ you must give the i aretakei your 
riot lies, and these he rolls up and puts in a particular place, 
otherwise some other bather will steal them." Still, after 

all, physical deanlii 
had no connexion with god- 
liness— or rather, ritual 
purity — until the use of 
water had established 
them both upon common 
ground. 

On the Ran Salla (day 
of the prayer) those who 
can afford clean clothes, 
or better still, new ones, 
don them, having previ- 
ously censed9 and scented 
them over a wooden frame 
in shape something like a 
round beehive (Fig. 13). 
. Lelle (henna) is daubed 

Fig. 13. — A Frame over which Clothes v ' 

are hung, a Pot of Incense being upon people and certain 
placed inside , . 

animals — but not upon 
the houses, I believe, although this is the case in 
Morocco 10 — the stain being applied and protected by 
rags which are left upon the skin for some hours. 
There is no doubt that this practice was originally intro- 
duced as a preventive against evil influences, but the 
Hausas do not recognise this. Haj Ali says that the bori 
have no connexion whatever with henna ; the bori sacri- 
ficial animal is not stained, and there is no rule either for or 

PILGRIMAGES AND FESTIVALS 237 

against its use by the Masu-Bori. But " the people of old 
used to do it instead of crying when there was a death in 
the house," he says, and this seems to point to an idea of 
protection in its use. The women at the Salla even stain 
their hair, this being ' ' to protect them against the heat 
of the sun, which will make them ill otherwise." Certain 
domestic animals are also stained ; horses, donkeys, and 
cattle have spots on their foreheads and noses, and upon 
all four fetlocks, while sometimes there is an imprint of a 
hand upon the rump. Dogs and cats also may receive 
similar attentions. 

Upon the Jajiberi, or eve of the Salla, the men and 
women put antimony upon their eyelashes, and the 
Women stain their teeth with walnut or swak. It is 
supposed that " the antimony drives out sickness from 
the eyes to the corners during the night, and so it can be 
wiped off in the morning." Antimony is often used, 
therefore, especially by men when tamping the ground, 
for it is said to bring out all the dust which has got inside — 
a very material evil influence ! There is no doubt, how- 
ever, that there is a deeper signification than this, for 
when a ram is to be sacrificed, an animal which is mai- 
kwolli (with black rings around the eyes) is much preferred. 
The reason of the use of swak does not seem to be known 
now, but it is said to be confined to women and to such men 
as behave as if they were such. 

Some fast upon the jajiberi, though it is not necessary 
to do so, but if a meat soup is drunk " it should not be too 
hot, otherwise the throat will be dry next day." Alms- 
giving is enjoined, the latter being easy of fulfilment since 
children march in procession through the streets, and beg. 
They also visit houses asking for corn, the leader singing 
" En shiga, en shiga, ko en koma? " (Shall I enter, shall I 

238 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

enter, or shall I return ?). Hie proper reply to this is 

•' Zumo Huii-kiaini kifittgO da kasski akan san barra" (O 

Prick-Eared Hare, through a bone one gets service) — i.e. 
lie who is rich enough to give away food will always have 

some people eager to do work for him in expectation of 
a return. The others clap hands in time, and may join in 
with the leader now and then. All the food thus collected 
is said to be eaten by the children themselves, nothing 
being saved for the sacrificial animal. On the first day 
of the Salla, figs, dates, bread, and money arc given to 
children and to poor people, and this is said to please 1 la- 
souls of the deceased ancestors of the givers. As has been 
noticed elsewhere, a gift will sometimes avert an attack of 
illness.11 

The last but greatest mode of protection from evil 
influences is prayer, and, in the case of a private prayer, 
care must be taken that it is not polluted, so if a person 
passes you while praying, you must place a stone — or 
better, your stick — between yourself and him so that no 
influence from him reaches you. In Hausaland, many 
houses have little stoeps of sand, raised a couple of inches 
from the ground, the sand being confined by logs or stones 
which also give the necessary protection to the prayer. At 
the Salla, however, all go in procession to an open space, 
and perform the various necessary acts there. 

After this comes the sacrifice, the best animal for which, 
as has been said above, is a rago mai-kwolli. The Hausas 
here cannot afford too much for one, but they will get the 
most perfect specimen possible, and for that reason, 
should it manage to escape, they will recapture and kill 
it ; there will be no substitution. The ram is daubed with 
henna from the nose to the tail, and around the chest, and 
before it is killed it is censed, and fed — as is the bori goat — 

PILGRIMAGES AND FESTIVALS 239 

with millet-flour, rice, coriander, honey, and milk. The 
animal is then placed so as to face the east, and the 
sacrificial knife having been censed, the animal is put to 
death in exactly the same manner as was the bori he-goat 
at the dance described in Chapter XX. 

Some of the blood is collected at once in a pot, and, a 
little of the incense powder having been thrown in, the 
pot is put by. Next morning, if any idon mutum (eye of 
man — i.e. spots) are seen, the sacrifice will not be parti- 
cularly fortunate, though it is said that, even so, no steps 
will be taken to avert any evil influence. 

The entrails are stewed with salt, pepper, oil, and a 
couple of vegetables (salg and badenus), and small portions 
are eaten that night by some half-a-dozen of the chief 
persons present before the other people touch theirs — no 
part of the entrails is given to infants. At the following 
midnight, one half of the flesh is eaten, after having been 
cut up into small pieces, and boiled with a herb called 
malokwiya, salt, pepper, and oil, and coffee is drunk after- 
wards. A small portion of the meat may be sent to 
members of the family in other houses, and the remainder 
may be eaten at any time, or it may be dried, placed in 
oil, and preserved, being eaten with onions when required. 

It is said to be lucky if the animal jumps after having 
had its throat cut, though the explanation is hardly 
satisfactory to a European — viz. that the knife had been 
so sharp, and the man so quick, that the animal had not 
felt the cut, and, on being released, had jumped up to run 
away. The real reason is more likely to be that the 
struggles of the animal are thought to indicate the 
ability of the householder to light against his evil influ- 
ences, and so, the longer the animal is in dying, the more 
lengthy will be the owner's life. But there is still another 

240 Till BAN OF THE BORI 

explanation possible — namely, that the animal must suffer 
if it has absorbed the evil influences, so a quick and 
painless death would leave the worshippers still in danger. 

The Arab landlords of Tunis may Iiang the gall-bladders 
of the sacrificed animals in their houses near the door, 
according to Haj Ali (though I did not notice any), but the 
Hausa tenants do not do so, though a little may be dried, 
pounded, and mixed with antimony for the eyes since it 
is said to be good for stickiness (? blight). 

The right shoulder-blade or " prayer-board " may be 
used for divination, and formerly, boxers, wrestlers, and 
those who fought with the koraiya, would never eat either 
blade of any sacrificed animal, for if they did so, their own 
would be broken in their next bout. Here, at the present 
time, there is no such tabu apparently, but since there are 
no professional boxers, etc., it would be unnecessary. 

The larynx, or a part of it, is a charm against coughing, 
while the jawbones are tied up against the doorway, and 
if they are heard to be rattling the husband must not go 
to work that day, otherwise his body will tremble. The 
skin may be used as a rug, or it may be sold ; it is often 
cut into fine strips (by the Arabs) with which to make 
sieves for couscous. 

The heart is examined, and a black one {i.e. one full of 
blood) will indicate the evil character of the seat of the 
affections of the owner, but here again, the very blackest 
seems to entail no special precautions. 

To be a good Mohammedan, a man should be well off, 
apparently, for, although no one should work on the first 
day or two of the Salla, most of the poor Hausa ex-slaves 
have no option, and they go to work as usual if they 
can get it. Those who can play, however, do so ; they can 
at any rate watch the Arabs, and in Nigeria horse-races are 

PILCRIMACES AND FKSTIV \LS 24] 

held, one youth holding a scarf which others try to cat< h, 
or each one simply gallops up and down a set course.12 In 
some parts, a tug of war is held on the Jajiberi, youths 
pulling against girls, and the rope is secretly cut by some- 
one so that both teams fall down sooner or later. This at 
Marrakech symbolises the conflict between drought and 
the rainfall,13 but the Hausa seems to be ignorant of any 
special signification. There are also boxing, wrestling, and 
target practice, though all of these are said to be indulged 
in more from the joy of being alive than for the purpose 
of driving away evil influences. Haj Ali says that in Gobir, 
a Ba-Maguje who had drunk much medicine would stoop 
down at festivals, and invite any adult present to " put 
an arrow into your father's quiver " {i.e. into his own 
buttocks) for no one, however strong, could pierce him, 
except young uncircumcised boys, against whom the 
medicines were powerless. 

Masquerades now take place, though these are mainly 
performed by Arabs, the only one in which the Hausas 
have any part being the Bu Sadiya, in which a man dresses 
up in a mask ornamented with birds' feathers (to represent 
the head of an eagle), puts vulture wings upon his shoulders 
and wears a coat of pieces of various skins — e.g. jackal, 
fox, hyena, and, if possible, leopard and lion (see 
111. 27). But this is not confined to the Salla ; it may 
take place at any time, the main care at present seeming 
to be a collection from the onlookers. Some of the Arab 
performances resemble the dance of Jato at the bori. 

In some parts, a combat between a warrior and a 
monster is represented, corresponding to our St George 
and the Dragon, perhaps also to Auta (the Hausa " Jack 
the Giant-Killer ") and the bogey, Dodo, and to the killing 
of the Ghul by Sidi Ali, a favourite picture in Tunis, whjch 
Q 

THE B i.v <>/ nil BORI 

[hop I ' • 

African idea, and it will be remembered thai in the third 
century, in the few spots in Egypt where the Greek 
soldi ol the chnn hi Bishop G 

Am. i Minor Was olteu rcprorntfd on hoi rh.i k Lying 

the great serpen! oi "Athanasian Error."11 

I stly, there will be the dan< <■ ol takai on the firs! four 
evenings, and 1 iter on the Ufa, in whi b one person out oi 
every group oi four dances round the ring singly, 

then returns, falls, and is caught by tin- other three. In 

Nigeria I saw it danced only by women, but here it is 
done by both sexes, or even by men only." 
At the Gidan Jama'a tour men prepare the food for 

the midnight repast, and, about ten o'do< k, another man 
(an adult, not necessarily a youth, as in the case ol the 

meat) will suddenly seize the spoon, and dame around 
with it. Soon someone will nib a little of the meal ofl it, 
and daub it in the fai e oi another member of the com- 
munity, and then there is a general melee which lasts until 
the food is ready, when all very wisely (Town the pleasures 
of the day by demolishing everything which has been 
provided. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

BORI — THE SPIRITS AND THEIR POWERS 

We have seen that each person has a familiar bori of the 
same sex, and generally one also of the opposite sex, in 
constant attendance, and here and there mention has been 
made of other spirits, quite independent of human beings, 
and often working harm to them. They are ready for their 
human victim before his birth, and will be certain to get 
him in the end ; their ban cannot be avoided, for, to the 
Hausa mind, the world is full of these spirits also called 
bori, which word. is really the singular, but the plural 
form, boruruka, is hardly ever used. Whereas the per- 
sonal bori have but the one name, however, these indepen- 
dent spirits are sometimes called aljannu (sing, ctijan, from 
the Arabic for jinn), iblisai (sing, iblis, devil), or iskoki 
(sing, iska, also a wind),1 and the words are important, 
as to some extent they indicate the origin of the belief. 
These beings have some substance, for a charm for child- 
birth can be made from an aljan's head — though only a 
madman would think of trying to procure such a thing, 
as it would mean certain death. They are everywhere, 
and a man must be exceedingly careful in everything 
which he does, lest he offend or injure some bori or other. 
Many of them are not evil unless offended, however, and 
by worshipping certain powerful members of the spirit 
community, the Hausa can keep himself fairly secure, 
though even then any careless act, such as throwing away 
hot water or the embers of a fire, may bring him into 
243 

244 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

trouble, for the hoi substance may fall upon a bori, and 
be or she will uaturally be annoyed at being burnt. Every- 
one has his or her own Familial and sexual bori, as has 
been mentioned in Chapter X., but we must now pro- 
ceed to inquire into these spirits which have no direct 
connexion with human beings. 

They are of botli sexes, and are divided roughly into 
those of the city and those of the forest, in a general way 
— and in a general way only — it may be said that the 
former are mostly introductions from the north, grafted 
on to the latter, which again are the result of the mixture 
of original cults in West Africa. But the question of 
their origin is a very difficult one, and it had better be 
reserved for a final chapter after we have had an oppor- 
tunity of examining them, for after all, that is the logical 
sequence. Suffice it to say at this stage that the present 
cult is a combination of the worship of marabouts, 
ancestors, child-ghosts, representatives of other tribes, 
jinns, nature-gods (both imported and local), fetishes, and 
totems, the classification now adopted by the Hausas being 
shown in the arrangement of the later chapters. 

Allah is above all, and to some extent they may be 
compared to the attendants around a Mohammedan chief, 
for although the name of Allah is used in vain and with 
great frequency, the Hausa considers that to approach 
Him with a direct request is to court failure, even when 
the wish is a good one, and that the surest method is to 
bribe His courtiers, the bori, who will put the prayer into 
the proper form — or do what is required themselves unless 
prevented. It is evident, therefore, that although the 
Hausa Moslem professes to worship The One God, yet the 
intermediate spirits receive nearly all of the real attention. 

Many of the people are quite confused as to the identity 

BORI—THE SPIRITS AND THEIR POWERS 245 

of some of the spirits, thus several told me that Kuri and 
Mai-Gizzo were one, others held that they were quite 
distinct, although brothers. Ami Baba and Ba-Maguje 
are held in Tunis to be the same, whereas in Tripoli they 
are danced together by different mounts, and so must 
be distinct. Possibly some of the spirits have several 
avatars, or it may be that, as in 
Egypt, new gods or spirits have 
been evolved out of old ones. The 
order of importance varies also, so I 
have tried to give the average view, 
but more than that, there may be 
several descriptions of the same 
bori. Of course the spirits can 
change themselves into anything 
they like,2 so those which appear 
as headless beings, as snakes, etc., 
or to the candidates for the priest- 
hood or for success in gladiatorial 
contests are not always in that 
condition. But that is not exactly pIG. I4._a Supernatural 
the point, and the differences may Bein§ 

be accounted for, I think, by the fact that the spirits 
have been confused in the effort to combine the cults. 
Most people agree, however, that the form is that of 
a human being with cloven feet, though some say at 
first "like the hoofs of a horse" — and yet open their 
fingers to show a cleft. One or two said that Fig. 14 
was very much like a bori ; it is really from an Arab 
picture of Ghul being slain by Sidi Ali, a very favourite 
subject in Tunis. The bird also (Fig. 15) is an evil 
spirit temporarily transformed, being half snake and half 
bird — nothing out of the ordinary in prehistoric times.3 

246 THE B I.V OF THE BORI 

BCany people think that a spirit leaves a footprint on 
ashes likr that <>f ;i cock, and, although the If 

did Q01 tell me SO, I think th;it a similar belief explains 
the spur .it ea< h of Ghul's heels. 

Uw.il V.n.i or Nana Magajiya does not fit in with the 
foregoing. She is known to the Arabs as Um l£s Sibyan, 
and corresponds to the Lilitli of the Jews, whence OQX 
" Lullaby " (Lilla abi) to protect the child. In Tunis she 
is said to have the body of a fowl 
with, however, a chest like that of a 
camel, and a human face. Some 
connect her with a bird which flies 
about at night calling warh-warh- 
warh, for if a child hears this it will 
die, so anyone seeing or hearing the 
bird should make the sound tchlok- 
Fig. 15.— An Evil Bird tchlok-tchlok loudly until it has passed, 
that noise being effective against the evil influence. 
Others say that she takes the form of an owl, and one 
day in Tunis I met a party of boys with one of these 
birds which they had killed because " it had been 
injaring children." Among the Arabs of Palestine also, 
the Egyptian eagle-owl is said to be an enchanted 
woman who exercises baneful influences over childbirth, 
and the nomad woman and children reply to the screech- 
owl with mocking words, it being a bereaved mother.4 
In Nigeria, however, the name is given to a large 
species of snake. 

Great uncertainty exists, therefore, and although it may 
be said that all or nearly all of the bori are disease demons 
nowadays, one cannot give the exact functions and 
descriptions of man}'- of them. But this is hardly sur- 
prising, for certain ancient peoples of higher intelligence 

BORI -THE SPIRITS INI) THEIR POWERS 247 

than the Hausas .managed to get their gods into a tangle, 
the unravelling of which has defied Learned men of every 
generation.5 Speaking generally, it may be said that the 
more important the bori, the more definite is the disease 
which lie inflicts, but in many cases, the spirit's power is 
indicated by the number of illnesses which come from him, 
and, at an}' rate, the young bori can be responsible only 
for rashes of some kind or other and for sore eyes. I 
think that in a number of cases, the ignorance of the 
special powers of a particular bori is due to the absence of a 
proper mount, for in time the bori would tend to become 
forgotten. It must be noted that no Mai-Bori except one 
who had learned the actions would dare — or be allowed — 
to invite a bori to ride him, for any mistake in the ritual 
would bring the bori (not the mount) into contempt, and 
the dancer and the whole audience would be liable to his 
displeasure. 

Amongst the Magazawa, Kuri was the chief bori next 
to Magiro, though the first place is now given to Dakaki in 
North Africa. With the Mohammedans Mallam Alhaji 
is the head, or in some parts Yerima, but with both the 
same spirits are of the highest rank. The bori have an 
organisation somewhat similar to that of the human 
beings, but the spirits whose names appear here do not 
now give in marriage, nor do they ever grow older, for 
although they do not die, they also do not increase, and 
the young bori (Yayan Jidderi or Zanzanna) never grow 
up. In the " Red Country " {Jan Kassa), however, the 
unnamed bori marry and give birth as with us. More 
than that, the bori of different districts fight against each 
other if the people are at war, and they also kill their 
spirit enemies in exactly the same way as a human 
wizard catches the soul of a fellow-mortal. 

248 rill: BAN OF THE BORI 

They are summoned to a gidan tsafi or to a sick person 
by incense, and perhaps also by drumming, to a d 

(rawan bori) always by both, blood may be employed 
as well, and, when .1 d.m< <■ i in progress, the spirits 
worshipped by any particular dancer arc all anxious for 

their turn to take possession of him, " to ride " upon his 
head. But there is necessarily some decency here, for 
the inferior spirits would not think of jostling their 
superiors, and, in fact, when the former announce them- 
selves in a hoarse voice through the mouths of their 
mounts, the greater ones retire temporarily and sit aside, 
not deigning to dance simultaneously. There need never 
be any doubt as to a spirit's identity, for most of them 
announce themselves in a kirari (very often a boastful 
description) immediately upon their arrival, and those 
who do not do so are named by the Arifa directly they 
have made some distinctive movement. 

In the songs sung to the spirits certain resemblances can 
be seen to the Arabic incantations, and before going 
further it might be as well to state that just as " incanta- 
tion " comes from cantare, and "charm" from carmen, 
it is quite probable that waka has the meaning of " incan- 
tation " as well as that of " song " since each bori is said 
to have his special song {wakansa) to summon him to the 
dance, and it is also not impossible that magana (a word) 
and magani (a medicine, a charm) were connected originally. 
Amongst the Arabs, the singing of the incantation has 
almost disappeared, in spite of its universally recognised 
power, but the Hausas even in North Africa still summon 
their bori by the aid of music, except at private seances, 
for just as disagreeable sounds can drive away the spirits, 
so can pleasant ones attract them. The form also is of 
consequence. In many songs it appears as if the bori is 

BORI—THE SPIRITS AND THEIR POWERS 249 

being asked a question about himself, thus " Where is 
Jaruma ? " But this is not so in reality, the interrogative 
form for summoning jinns being classical amongst the 
Arabs. Naturally, the bori is asked for something, so he 
is addressed directly by the musicians ; sometimes he is 
supposed to be speaking, though he never really does 
so after he has once announced himself — except in private 
consultations — so Ma-Dambache (p. 324) would seem 
to be saying that he had ruined a camel. In a few cases, 
even the mount is noticed, thus in Sarikin Rafi's song, the 
doki begs to be let off lightly — but here again only the 
musicians speak. Even the audience may be addressed, 
babies, children, and adults being invited to look at the 
bogey, Ba-Toye. Sometimes an element of real poetry is 
introduced — though this is exceedingly rare — for in the 
song of Dan Manzq.are the words : "The mouth of the world 
would eat a stone, much more a child of men." The 
rhythm too is often striking ; compare, for instance, Gajere 
Mai-Dowa, Gajere, Enna ka halbe shi Gajere with Da Rinna, 
da Rinna, da Rinna a Dowa, and with the songs of Jigo, 
Jato, and others given with the music a few pages further 
on. 

There is a saying that " eloquence is a magic force," 
and even in England we can understand that since certain 
orators have led respectable citizens to perform acts which 
they would never have even thought of if not so moved. 
It has been pointed out that the Hausas believe that a 
person may be acted upon by another through knowing 
his name, and this belief is reproduced in the incantations, 
the repetition of the name or names of the bori causing 
them to do as asked, since they are " the servitors of their 
names." The repetition itself is powerful, hence the value 
of many prayers. As is only natural, many of the bori 

250 THE B !.v 01 THE BOR1 

are Battered in order to persuade them to <l<> what is 
required <•..". by attributing heroic ai ta to the youths (as 

in the i .ill of I -in. iil. i), or by pretending to Nana Mariyamu 
thai her rash is a mark of beauty. But they are often 
abused and dei ided, this being perhaps a form of menai e 
cm if they do nol behave as desired, and < corresponding 
to the threats i ommon in Arab incantations.1 

The meaning is often obscure, this being common in 
many countries, and in North Africa the difficulty of 
interpretation is intensified because here and there words 
and even lines have been substituted for those of the 
original incantations or songs which have been forgotten. 
Where necessary, and possible, I have supplied an ex- 
planation in square brackets, but in certain cases even 
the singers themselves did not understand the reference 
although quite sure that any omission or alteration by 
them might have an evil effect. At the same time, when 
the Arifa or other authority in the bori world happens to be 
of a people not Hausa, she or he, when possessed or when 
singing, may introduce a word or two of the mother tongue 
in momentary forgetfulness of the correct Hausa words, 
perhaps, and afterwards these words may become per- 
manently substituted. Thus in Tunis, where the Arifa 
of the Gidan Kuri is from Bomu, some Kanuri words 
appear in the songs — e.g. that of Doguwa. But there is 
another reason for this confusion — namely, that a dancer 
speaking another language may prevail upon the com- 
munity to accept one of his spirits on account of its 
similarity to one upon the authorised establishment, 
and words or even whole lines from the song in the 
strange language may be interchanged with those in the 
incantation of the Hausa spirit. Thus in the case of 
Ba-Toye (Ba-Maguje), Gindema (? Fulah), and Gwegwe 

BORI—THE SPIRITS AND THEIR POWERS 251 

(Kanuri), it does not seem to matter much which song 
is sung. When the bori have thus been associated they 
are said to be brothers, or they may evi n be merged into 
one individual, and in the latter case an interesting result 
follows — namely, that the wives also may become identified 
although bearing different names, and although said to be 
of distinct origin. A state of confusion thus arises which 
is beyond the power of even the Arifas to reduce to order, 
and they seek safety in the simple expression hakka (" it 
is so "), and leave the inquirer still bewildered. 

I intended at first to obtain the music as well as the 
words of each song, but I soon discovered that that would 
be impossible on account of the limitations of time. Again , 
our notation will not give the sounds exactly, nor can the 
time always be indicated, so whereas one might spend a 
whole afternoon in writing down a dozen airs, he would not 
do the work one quarter so well as if he had had a phono- 
graph for half-an-hour. I had to content myself with the 
following songs, therefore, in the hope that at some future 
time I might be able to revisit the country, equipped with 
the proper instruments. These tunes are only approximate, 
and are given merely as a guide. They are recognisable 
only when played upon the violin, the singers do not neces- 
sarily follow the notes at all, they may merely give each 
song in a similar recitative voice, so the observer would 
distinguish them only if he knew the words. The mai- 
gimbiri (player on the guitar) merely vamps, so it is almost 
impossible to tell what air he thinks he is accompanying, 
but usually the beats upon the drum are distinct, although 
I doubt if one half of the Hausa audience can recognise 
them — much less a European. 

252 

////•: /m.v or the bori 

A liymn to Albh is often Bung (hiring the preliminary 
pro, eedingS, though whither there is any i<le;i other than 

the mere desire to give thanks I < anno! Bay. The trans- 
lation is " (There is) no (God) but God, God is great. We 
thank God by night and by day." 

AIWi 

! :i| 10 

-ib AJ AjA./4/AiA /»/ yli r, M, 

A1^7iOM^ri da aJ-'fo Aa Jib re mu-jLJisdi. 

• BoToL)«.Dodo liyrahiutfand amy ottm which artBocfe yj) 

Dent). }a/n. Do-do. £h-do da mar-na/ba 

Figs. 16 to 26. — The translations of the above are given in the 
following chapters under the appropriate sub-heads 

Bori may be approached at any time, for the more 
attention a person pays to them the more likely will they 
be to grant requests — they do not like being ignored at 
all — and sometimes they will come of their own free will, 

BORI THE SPIRITS AND THEIR POWERS 253 

as happens in the case of a soothsayer. But there are 
certain occasions when they must be consulted, such as 
when building a new house, or changing to another, or 
when commencing a farm, and their aid ought to be 
sought in cases of sickness. This refers to the more or less 
good spirits ; there are some which are always evil, whose 
black force is sought only when an enemy has become too 
powerful. 

Great care must be taken to see that the sacrifice is the 
correct cne, otherwise there will be no good result, and the 
boka makes many a little extra by examining fowls to 
ascertain if their markings are those required by the 
particular bori which is to be approached. In many cases 
when two fowls are to be offered, one is for the husband 
or wife of the bori whose aid is invoked, thus for Kuri and 
his wives Doguwa and Risana, a red cock and a white hen 
are sacrificed. Sometimes the children of a bori have the 
same offering as their parent — e.g. in the case of Mallam 
Ali Geshe. 

It will have been noticed that certain bori have a pre- 
dilection for particular colours, the tints of the clothes of 
their mounts and even the markings of their sacrificial 
fowls being laid down, and, in a few cases, so strongly 
have these been identified with the spirits concerned that 
they may be used as their symbols — thus white, in the 
story of Bawa, indicated a mallam, and a crippled fowl 
would almost certainly stand for Kuturu. The Hausa 
system does not seem to be quite consistent, however, for 
Kuri, Yerima, and the mallams and others have white 
cocks, whereas the colour of the clothes is different. This, 
however, seems to be due merely to the fact that a white 
cock is particularly efficacious. Tiie rules are probably 
the survival of a very ancient system, for Assyrian tablets 

254 THE BAN 01 THE B0R1 

show th.it i doable i ord ol black and white (breads spun 
together removed a tabu, while one composed ol a varie- 
gated and a i ariel thread (treated with spittle, earth from 
an ant-hill, etc.) was a protet tjoo against ghosts. In 
India a patienl is tied to an image of Hanuman by a 

formed of tn reads of time colours, and in the MaL . 
taper IS placed " upon a silver dollar, with the end of a 
pie e of parti-coloured thread inserted between the dollar 
and the foot of the taper," the other end being held by the 
patient. The Hebrews used a blue ribband in their fringes 
(Num. xv. 38), and the later Jews the ashes of two threads 
(treated medicinally, or rather magically) for bleeding at 
the nose. In Europe a cord of different coloured threads 
preserved the wearer against the evil eye, while I have 
personal knowledge of a lady suffering with a kidney com- 
plaint being signally benefited by the wearing of a green 
stone — she had pined from the very first for something 
green, and had no knowledge of the very ancient idea 
which attributed specific properties to jade or nephrite. 
Cart-horses are often decorated with bunches of coloured 
ribbons, while many have a half-moon on the forehead and 
a disc pivoted in a crescent frame, possibly the disc of 
Merodach of Babylon. Coming now to Africa, we find 
that the badge of Christianity in Ethiopia is a blue neck- 
band, though in Hausa Superstitions and Customs we saw 
that the word shudi (blue) wa? not much used, while with 
some clans light shades of that colour were tabu. Again, 
certain rings painted on the face averted the evil eve, and 
in Tunis during the cholera epidemic some extraordinary 
remedies were eagerly sought after by the populace, amorg 
others being bits of coloured ribbon to be pinned to the 
clothes of those afraid of infection. This is not surprising, 
for we also saw that the bori have special colours or objects 

BORI—THE SPIRITS AND THEIR POWERS 255 

into which they will pass, and that in Morocco the Gnawa 
dress themselves and the patients in the colour peculiar to 
the jinn in possession (known by ascertaining the day of 
the week upon which the illness commenced) and exon ise 
it — even we speak of " blue devils." But the same thing 
has been found in West Africa also. Is it too much to 
say that the origin of the present system of colours is to 
be found in the East ? 7 

An evil smell drives away the bori, as we have seen, but 
a sweet one attracts them, and each spirit has his special 
incense — or should have, if available. Scents, too, are 
used in profusion by the worshippers, and the " sacrifice 
of sweet savour " makes the spirits propitious by giving 
them a foretaste of the good things in store for them. As 
in the case of the soft laughter, we are faced by a contra- 
diction, for these sweet scents are also a protection against 
the bori. The explanation seems to be that the spirits are 
human in this respect as in others, and that when attracted 
by sounds or acts which please them they will not be pre- 
disposed to do harm. Thus certain sweet herbs — or 
washes made from them — which were found to be effica- 
cious against the diseases came to be used as charms, 
because the Hausas misunderstood their effect, and 
attributed it to the scent instead of to the medicinal 
properties of the plants.8 

The chief abode of the bori is Jan Gari (Red City) or 
Jan Gam (Red Walls), which is stated to be in the Red 
Country {Jan Kassa) between Aghat and Asben. No 
living person has ever seen this city close, but " all travel- 
lers know of its whereabouts, and, should anyone enter it, 
he will never be heard of more." One day Haj Ali, while 
going across the desert to Hausaland, halted for a few 
minutes and, on proceeding again, he saw four caravans 

856 / "///■ B I.V OF THE BORI 

going in different direction . He did not know which was 
his, for .ill appeared to be alike, but be i hose that whi h 
he thought was taking his own route, and started to 
follow. All .it once, he heard the lowing oi cattle, the 
beating of drums, and the sounds of a great < it\ generally, 

and Looking up be saw Jan Gain far ahead of him. As 
he knew it immediately, he hurriedly retraced his steps, 
and luckily he SOOD saw Nome (if his own people who had 
been sent back to find him. " It is well known that the 
boricome .it night and (all people from a caravan byname, 
and if they answer and go, they will be lost, just as will 
stragglers be in the daytime. Often in the early morn, 
travellers will hear cocks crowing quite close, and sounds 
of a city awaking, but when they arise they will see 
nothing, and they will know that they have been sleeping 
near the city of the Aljannu." 

All bori can move with lightning speed, or perhaps one 
should say like the wind, since one of their names is iskoki, 
so distance is no deterrent. It might happen that two 
persons summoned a particular spirit simultaneously, 
and then a choice would have to be made. Suppose, for 
instance, that one man in Nigeria and another in Egypt 
offered up incense at exactly the same moment, the bori 
would go first to him who had been the most regular in his 
sacrifices, but if both were of equal merit, it would come 
and go between them so quickly that the worshippers 
would not know. If these last two both desired the same 
object, of which there was only one in the world, the bori 
would create a duplicate and thus satisfy both worshippers. 
It has been seen in Hausa Superstitions and Customs 9 that 
certain very learned mallams can do the same thing, 
for there, when a man had promised his only daughter to 
three different suitors, two others were produced from a 

BORI—THE SPIRITS AND THEIR POWERS 257 

bitch which he cut in two. This, however, is only another 
instance of the similarity of the powei^ possessed by the 
priest and the magician, the holy Moslem saint and the 
pagan medicine-man, for the bori would be invoked 
through a Mai-Bori unless the person himself were one. 

In Nigeria, soothsaying amongst the Masu-Bori seems to 
have been dying out for some time, but it was once common. 
Richardson the explorer mentions it, and " whatever 
Giwa Azuza of Tripoli foretold always happened." 
Reference is made to divination in the songs of Baraje. 
Haj Ali was taken as a slave to Egypt, and one day while 
with his master, Ibrahima, at Sarowi, Nakada (also called 
Jato and Janzirri) took possession of him, and he foretold 
that on the third day his master would be summoned 
before the chief of the district, Tanta. On the departure 
of the bori, the listeners told Haj Ali what he had said, 
and asked him what he had meant, but he then remembered 
nothing of it, and simply told them that Nakada had 
mounted him, and that it must have been that spirit 
speaking through his mouth. A female Hausa slave 
who knew the wisdom of the bori, corroborated, and the 
people then became anxious, for clairvoyance is well 
known to the Arabs, and when on the third day the district 
head's messengers arrived, they were terrified. However, 
the master, instead of being disgraced as he had feared, 
was given a post under the Government, and so Haj Ali 
had great honour, was taken to Mecca, and later on 
received his freedom. 

At the dances, worshippers may consult the bori while 
in the ring, but for obvious reasons oracles are usually 
asked for in private. Calling up spirits is, of course, a very 
ancient practice, and one which will never die out prob- 
ably, for not even a saint is allowed to rest in peace. Qn 

R 

THE BAN OF THE BORI 

the contrary, the more holy a man is daring life, the more 
in is the aid of liis spirit to be invoked after death, 
and just as tin- wit< h of Hndor I ailed nj> Samuel (i S 

xxviii. 7), so does the Efausa Kai-Bori invoke a mallam 
or othet bori, and I have personal knowledge "i .1 case in 

England of tin: summoning of a departed dignitary of the 
Church by his own daughter. 

As lias been said, hoi water or embers of lire must never 
be thrown down carelessly, but, however cautious you are, 
you may injure one of the numerous bori. One boy (an 
Arab) named Salah, belonging to the family of the landlord 
of the informant Auta, went out one night two years ago, 
and paid a visit to the salanga. As it happened, some of 
Mai-Inna's children were playing down in it — some are 
always there, in fact — and he wetted them, though, of 
course, without knowing it. Immediately, Mai-Inna hit 
him on the offending member, and he screamed, and the 
people who rushed out and brought him into the house, 
found that the part was swollen. He could not pass 
water again, and was in great pain, so next morning the 
parents sent for Salah, the principal boka of Tunis. He 
told them what had happened, and gave the boy proper 
medicine and lotion, applying this night and morning for 
seven days, burning incense while performing the other 
rites, and after a week the boy was quite cured. 

The manner in which the second Salah (there is no 
significance in the similarity of the names in this case) 
found which bori had done the mischief was as follows. 
He brought another man, whom he made squat opposite 
to him on the floor. The parents gave the boka a franc, 
which he put on the ground, and then he placed a pot 
upon it and lit the incense which it contained. He then 
placed his hands upon the ground, backs upwards, thumbs 

BORI -THE SPIRITS AND THEIR POWERS 250, 

together, ringers touching the pot, and the assistant began 
repeating the names of the bori spirits. On Mai-Inna 
being mentioned, Salah commenced to shout, and, after 
having been calmed, he (or rather the spirit in him) de- 
scribed what had happened, and the proper sacrifice afld 
remedy. The diviner was in the same room as his patient, 
but did not touch him in any way. 

The Yayan Jidderi or Zanzanna (" Children of Small 
Pox, or Little Spots ") cause skin eruptions and sore eyes. 
If a person sees another whose appearance is somewhat 
out of the common he should not remark upon it, for he 
may be a bori, dreamy eyes being an almost certain indica- 
tion. Adults seldom take any notice, but children are apt 
to be rude, and if the person is one of the Yayan Jidderi 
(which apparently can assume adult human form, though 
they will never grow up to the full bori's estate) the rude 
child will soon become ill — though his punishment may not 
follow as rapidly as did that of the children who ridiculed 
Elisha. Or again, someone may throw hot water on one 
of these or upon some other bori, and his eyes will become 
sore.10 If the cause is not apparent, a Mai-Bori is called in, 
as has been seen in the case of Salah, and he will say what 
has happened, and prescribe the appropriate remedy. 

Haj Ali's method was slightly different from that of 
Salah. Asked to describe an actual case, he said that he 
went with another man, his assistant, at the beginning of 
the year to see a child thus afflicted, and fixed a day when 
they would return and divine. At the appointed hour 
they came, and Haj Ali, having wrapped a cloth tightly 
round his waist, and squatted down by the incense, began 
to rub his right hand round and round on the ground, 
fingers bent slightty downwards, and then to turn it over 
" so as to call the spirits out of the earth," and, apparently, 

260 THE BAN 01 THE B0R1 

to mesmerise himself. Soon he began to breathe heavily, 
and Buddenly he grunted and yelled, and it was evident 
that the bori had entered his head. Then the other man 
asked the bori who ho was, and he replied " I am Kuri." 
Then the assistant said " O Father Kuri, So and So is ill, 
will you tell me in wlnt he has offended ? " Kuri replied 
" He threw hot water upon the Yayan Jidderi, and they 
have made his eyes sore." Then the other said "O 
Father Kuri, will j'ou not cure him ? " And Kuri asked 
" Wliat will you give me if I cure him ? " The assistant 
(having consulted the father) said "We will sacrifice a 
he-goat to you." Then Kuri touched his left shoulder 
(i.e. that of his horse, Haj Ali), his right shoulder, and 
then his forehead, and replied " Very well, he will 
recover." Apparently, Kuri then summoned the guilty 
bori (who had not responded to the summons of the 
incense), and arranged with him to forgive the child. Kuri 
then left Haj Ali, and he and the assistant went home, 
neither goingnear the patient until several days afterwards, 
when they were sent for. On arriving at the house they 
found the child much better, and then they said " You 
must now offer up the sacrifice which you promised." 
This was done, and the cure was complete. 

The cloth is alwaj's worn thus, according to Haj Ali. 
We have seen the real reason, but his own should be noted. 
" If there are drummers present it is necessary because 
the Mai-Bori will dance, but even if not, he will try to 
knock himself about until besought by the assistant to be 
quiet and listen to his request." Before the Mai-Bori 
summons Kuri he is paid between two and five francs. 
On the child's recovery he gets more money, and perhaps 
cloths for Kuri, or whichever bori has responded, as well. 
He gets the liver of the animal sacrificed, and also a share 

BORI -THE SPIRITS AND THEIR POWERS 

in the flesh. Each Mai-Bori Specialises in < ertain spirits, 
and Haj Ali would always be ridden by Kuri or Ma- 
Dambache, or some other one whom he follows, just as 
Salah would obtain the aid of Mai-Aska, and Khameis 
that of Jam Maraki. Each mount professes two or 
more, and must undergo a training in the rites (actions 
and medicines) in order to be able to do so. 

From the foregoing it will be evident that a bori does not 
necessarily kill a man at once, even if mortally offended, 
in fact it does this very seldom, usually it gradually sucks 
his life away. The drinking of the blood may be rather 
an Arab idea ; the pagan seems to think that the bori 
slaps him. We have seen this in the case of Mai-Inna, 
and a similar notion is reported of other people in Nigeria.11 
Sometimes Mai-Inna pushes his victim's face to one side, 
thus making it swell. Should you be chased by one of 
these spirits say "Allah ba su ganin nisa" (0 God, let their 
attention be attracted far from me), and you will be safe 
for the time. Sometimes even calling out the name of iron 
will be sufficient — naturally so, for the name is a part of 
that substance just as a man's name is a part of himself. 
After that, you must go to a mallam to give you a charm, 
or to a Mai-Bori, who will find out which spirit it is that 
you have annoyed, and make your peace for you. If, 
however, the bori has already caught you, it is of no use 
asking Allah's help, and you will feel no relief at all until 
you have obtained the charm or the forgiveness referred 
to above. 

There is no means of getting rid of the boruruka ; they 
are everywhere, so nothing you could do would clear them 
out. The only hope that a person has is to try to annoy 
them as little as possible — for it is out of all question that 
he must fall foul of them sometimes, and yet there would 

77//" BAN 01 Till BORI 

seen to bean idea in tome i i e Mi.it t lu- victim am I 
voluut irily pin e himself in their power, as has been 
in the i ase oi the wit. h in l [ausaland,M Cor he is lost near 
Jan < iari only it he responds. Some are inclined to 1>< 
friendly, many will not bother about yon so long as you 

do not offend them, but a few are always looking out for 
trouble. Those of the fn t cla S will reward you richly 
for the sacrifices offered to them; those of the second may 
or may aol grant your requests, though, naturally, the 
more often you remember them, the more ready will they 
be to regard you with favour ; but the third class must be 
propitiated if you have any reason to fear that you have 
attracted their attention. Above all, one must avoid 
ridicule and abuse, for if there is one thing which a bori 
will not stand it is contempt. So when the name of any 
spirit belittles the bearer, one must not mention it, but use 
another which one thinks he will like — we see a similar idea 
in " The Good People." Thus Kutuni (the leper) is 
nearly always known as Sarikin Kofa (Keeper of the 
Gate) because he sits there, or as Uban Dowaki (Master 
of the Horse) , intended as a compliment as if the worshipper 
were blind to his deformities, although the title seems to 
be a sarcastic one. But many of the songs are exceedingly 
impolite and contemptuous, many of them being obscene 
as well,13 so the statements about the deference due to a bori 
are difficult to reconcile. It seems that so long as the 
words are part of the recognised incantation, derision and 
even abuse will entail no evil consequences, or it may be 
that — as with us — offensive remarks made in a friendly 
way are really compliments ! Still, no Hausa would dare 
to speak of a saint in similar terms. 

Magiro is a very evil spirit, and since he always demands 
a human victim, no Hausa cares even to talk about him. 

BORI—THE SPIRITS AND THEIR POWERS 263 

He is a very useful spirit to have on one's own side, though, 
if one has enemies, and he may be induced to take up his 
abode in a man's house by simply screening off a corner 
of a room with a white cloth and burning incense there. 
But the proper way — one that will bring any bori you like 
— is as follows. Dig a hole in the corner of the room, and 
screen it off with a white cloth. Throw a little incense 
into the hole (do not burn it) each night for forty nights, 
and then place therein a curved thro wing-stick, a club, 
and a pot of beer, and cover the mouth of the hole with a 
black cloth. Then burn incense in the usual manner, 
and your spirits will be there. But it is important that 
only the man himself should be in the room during these 
operations ; should even a child enter, the whole will be 
ruined. A person must sacrifice to Magiro, Uwar-Gwona, or 
Taiki annually if Jiis gadon gida (inheritance of the house — 
i.e. worshipped by his ancestors), or, although not gadon 
gida, if the bori has been invoked specially at any time 
previously. Failure in this respect would mean certain 
death. 

If a worshipper wants something very much, he ap- 
proaches Magiro in the usual manner, promising a sacrifice 
of a he-goat or a bull according to his means, but Magiro 
may demand a human being and then " you tell him that 
if you get your wish he may have So-and-So. You will be 
successful, and you will see that So-and-So will gradually 
waste away, you will not have to do anything at all. 
Should you have promised a bull, however, and you do 
not carry out your obligation on obtaining your wish, 
Magiro will warn you once in a dream, and if still false, 
you, or one of your family, will die." 

He is the chief of the bori city Jan Gari, and all the 
spirits are in his power ; they cannot even leave the* city 

264 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

unless he give* The Keeper of The Gate permission to let 
them pa> . Ed Nigeria, he will direct a farmer who in- 
voke-, his aid to mix powdered portions of the roots of 
the g&tnji, bauje, and hankufa trees with his millet or 

guinea-! orn seeds, and if his dire* tion tried out, the 

crop will be larger than that of anyone else. In North 
Ali i. a, DO Earms are owned by Hausas, so there is no need 
to worship him as a corn spirit, and lie is useful mainly for 
killing enemies. Some think that Magiro and Uwar- 
Gwona are the same, but the general opinion is that the 
fi inner is a male, the latter a female. A few say that they 
are husband and wife. There seems to be no suggestion 
nowadays that this corn spirit was in any way connected 
with the reigning chief or head of the clan, although these 
men were responsible for the fertility of the fields. But 
it would be most unsafe to say that there never was any 
connexion, and it may be as well to note that in Tchekna 
(to the east of Bornu) a man shrouded in a long black veil 
— a "Hidden One" — and known as Magira represents 
the Sultan's mother (even though deceased) in state pro- 
cessions, and, as such, has precedence over everyone. He 
is supposed to be the " incarnate ghost of the queen- 
mother." In Bornu the part is taken by a woman.14 In 
Tripoli, one of the priestesses is called " Mother of the 
King " (see p. 278). The name seems to mean " He with 
the Eyebrows," or, possibly, " The Frowning One." 

Mr C. E. Boyd of the Northern Nigeria Political De- 
partment sends me the following notes referring to the 
portion of the Bangawa tribe inhabiting some rocky hills 
about forty miles north-east of Kontagora. Some time 
ago, as the result of a quarrel over the question of succes- 
sion to the chieftainship of Katsina, the successful chief's 
brother emigrated with a following to Zanfara. On his 

BORI -THE SPIRITS AND Til KIR POWERS 265 

death, some of these people returned to Katsina, but 
others remained to look after the tomb, and were known as 
Bayan Gawa (Behind the Corpse), later on shortened into 
Bangawa. Subsequently they emigiated to Donko (about 
a hundred miles north of Kontagora), and, as another 
quarrel arose over the succession, a portion split off, and 
went to Ukata, or Bangi, in the hills sixty miles away. 
" There is little doubt that human sacrifices used to be 
offered there, up to comparatively recent times, to propiti- 
ate evil spirits in time of stress. ... In the case of an 
important or wealthy man who had incurred the jealousy 
of his fellows, it was customary to throw a corpse into his 
house in the dead of night. The owner of the house, if 
he did not make good his escape at once, was seized and 
charged with murdering the deceased by witchcraft and 
was taken off to _the 'Magiro.' He was never seen or 
heard of again. The Gidan Magiro is surrounded by a 
thicket, and is invisible from the outside." This method 
of procuring victims was not peculiar to the Hausas, as I 
have pointed out elsewhere, and there is but little doubt 
that Magiro was a foreign spirit, almost certainly, Moloch, 
or Baal Hammon, introduced at the same time as Tanith. 
Just exactly who Baal Hammon was it is not necessary 
to argue here, but it is worthy of note that he has been 
identified especially with the Amon whose shrine and oracle 
is situated in the oasis of Siwa, and that he was worshipped 
there not only under the Egyptian form of a ram, but also 
in connexion with a stone strongly suggestive of Semitic 
rites. This is only natural, for since a close connexion 
always existed between Siwa and the Phoenician Colonies 
in North Africa, a mixture of Libyan and Semitic beliefs 
is a natural corollary. Here too must have been wor- 
shipped his companion, that composite goddess — who 

266 //// BAN Of THE BORI 

.il><» had both Libyan and Semitii < barai teristka — Neith, 
or. with the Berber feminine article — ta — prefixed, Ta- 
fs i tli. i orre ponding to, and possibly influenced by, Astarte. 

B I I [amman became by degrees identified with the 
sun ; not, liowever, the glorious Amon-Ka, but a dark and 
terrible god, to whom sa< rid. es of human beings were 
necessary as well as those of the bull and the ram — the 
horns of which he wore. He had a temple in Cartilage, 
near that of Tanith, but his principal sanctuary, consisting 
merely of an enclosed grove, was situated in the saddle- 
backed mountains opposite — appropriately named 
" Horned Father " — where not only prisoners of war, but 
even children of the noblest families were sacrificed to him. 
Later on dogs were burned also, horses too, and no doubt 
the belief in the efficacy of a burnt dog's head is due to this 
custom, as is also that in a horse's power against witches 
(see ante, p. 90, and H.S.C., Story No. 95). 

The Romans fostered the cult at first, but identified 
Baal Hammon with Kronos the gloomy god who devoured 
his children until dethroned by one who had escaped, a 
myth familiar to the Hausas in the story of the witch who 
ate her children (H.F.-T., 155). Probably Mallam Alhaji, 
who corresponds in many respects to Father Time, is con- 
nected with this aspect of the god. Tiberius forbade the 
worship and crucified the priests to trees in their own 
sacred grove, but it was not crushed out immediately, for 
five children were sacrificed in 1535, when Charles V. 
threatened Tunis, and traces still exist in the practices 
of the Aisawias. 

Cruelty and sensuality usually go together, so no doubt 
the rites of Baal Hammon became licentious. But in 
any case the worship of Tanith was so closely associated 
with that of Baal Hammon that it is almost impossible to 

B0R1 -THE SPIRITS AND THEIR POWERS 267 

say which hud the greater influence upon the bori rite . 
for Tanitli also demanded the sacrifice by her votar 
of their chastity or their hair. 

We can now the better understand the reason of the 
Filani for wishing to suppress the rites in Northern 
Nigeria, perhaps, for in North Africa also Islam has pro- 
hibited the participation of the women — except as 
spectators — in many festivals, and so has eliminated the 
orgies which used to accompany them. It is only in theory, 
however, for many such practices still exist in North Africa 
in spite of the protests of the more orthodox. 

The summer and winter suns were naturally differenti- 
ated, Baal being supposed to go down to the grave and to 
rise again as are gods in other religions. The dying of the 
god was celebrated by : 

1. Sacrifices : „(«) of the first-born — even now avoidance 
exists between the Hausa father and his eldest son ; (b) of 
girls in mystic marriages — compare H.S.C., Story 99, 
where the girl throws herself into the fire to resurrect her 
lover ; (c) of prisoners — common all over Africa ; (d) of 
animals — the magical value of the heads of horses and 
dogs have been commented upon. 

2. Mutilations : (a) scratching the face — this apparently 
was not adopted by the Hausas, though still indulged in 
by the Arabs and others ; (b) emasculation ; (c) self-torture 
— now of the Aisawias and of the Masu-Bori. The two 
latter kinds have been attenuated into circumcision in 
most cases. 

3. Sacrificial Feasts : (a) of human victims at first — 
and still so in certain cases ; (b) of dogs — even to-day a 
dish with magical influence ; (c) of other animals. 

The reawakening of the god was celebrated by Phallic 
rites : (a) of sacred prostitution — of which survivals are 

THE BAN OF THE BORI 

found amongsl the Walid Nails in North Africa, and 
among I the Ma u Bori; (6) of orgies- of which the Fittan 
Fnra and the feast in the temple arc survivals ; (c) of 
lascivious dances — of which modern representatives are 

still to be seen — e.g. the danse du ventre, in North 
Africa, and the performance of the bori Jato.15 

CHAPTER XIX 

BORI — THE TEMPLES AND THE SECT 

The principal medicine-house (gidan tsafi) in Tunis is a 
long, narrow room in an Arab building called the Gidan 
Kuri (House of Kuri), though really it is only a part of the 
Gidan Jama'a (House of the Community), jama'a origin- 
ally signifying the elementary social unit, or clan, though 
it does not bear exactly that meaning in this case. Gidan 
Jama'a is the more general name, and it corresponds to 
our "temple" or "church," the temples being named after 
particular bori (in. this case Kuri) just as are our churches 
after saints. Unfortunately I have lost the measurements, 
but they were about 25 ft. by 18 ft. by 9 ft. In any 
case they are not important, as the room was only rented ; 
it was not built for the purposes of the Musu-Bori. 

In the centre of the room, in a wide recess opposite 
the door, were fixed shelves of Arab manufacture, gaily 
painted in gold and colours, and holding pots and cups 
(as is seen in the frontispiece) filled with groimd-nuts, 
sugar, and sweets, offerings to the younger spirits. These 
were usually covered by a white cloth (see 111. 28), 
to which were fastened two dolls, the playthings of Mai- 
Nassara. Below were hung the trappings of the various 
adult bori, and toys for the children. 

On each side of the wide recess was one very much 

smaller, like a blind window. In the one on the right hand, 

which contained two bottles of oil and a night-light in a 

tumbler of water, was burnt incense to Mai-Inna "(or 

269 

j;n THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

Doguwa) mi Thursday nights. That on the loft confc lined 
a lampi and Was connected with the rites due to Abd El 
Khadari, an Arab marabout evidently becoming HausaLsed 

into a bori, while in each corner stood spears, clubs, pel let , 
and other insignia.. The principal objects were the various 
Weapons, etc., illustrated later on, a straw hat, and two 
red goat-skins, on lamented with cross-pieces of leather, 
bells, and COWties for Jato; a similar skin, a bow and 
arrows, and beads for Gajere Mai-Dowa ; a rope, knotted 

JdL2«4 

VbltvtO/fiTmg'8 

~1_>H 

ooo 

□ □ □ 

"5 

pi* 

.■ -'o 

OS 

-1 Shtli-ts 

I>TUWk 

Mniow 

■ Bottle Oo 
SH*e tj.'o ° ° 

Fig. 27. — Plan of the Gidan Kuri, the special Apartment or Daki 
( = Chapel) of this Spirit being curtained off on the Right 

at each end, for Mai-Knrufu ; a narrow coloured cotton 
sash ornamented at the ends with bells and beads for 
Kwollen Kwolma ; a string of prayer-beads and charms, 
and a prayer-board for Mallam Tsofo ; an ornamented 
leather bag for Yerima's tobacco ; a fly-whisk and a gourd 
for Uban Dowaki ; an ornamented razor-case for Mai- 
Aska ; a red smoking-cap covered with cowries for Sarikin 
Gwari, and one of green velvet, ornamented with red and 
white beads and cowries for Ba-Gwariya ; a yellow quilted 
cap ornamented with a ridge of yellow wool and a stripe 
up one side composed of red beads and small white 
cowries for Kuri ; a mat lined with cowries for Sarikin 
Makafi ; and a few skittles painted green with red stripes 

28. — The Recess in the Gidan Run. 
29. — The Holy of Holies. 

BORI THE TEMPLES AND THE SECT 271 

and yellow daubs, and several dolls for the Yayan 
Jidderi. 

At one end, which is raised (for a bed originally), a 
cloth hangs down, screening off Kuri's private apartment 
(see 111. 29), but his throwing stick and pestle and 
the special wrappings of all of the bori are hung on the 
wall, opposite to the door. I was not allowed to look 
inside the private apartment, which was carefully guarded 
at first, so, of course, I did not do so — at least not while 
there were Hausas there. It was not because they had 
any mere personal objection, I was told, but because of the 
fact that no one but the Arifa could enter and live, and 
they did not want to be responsible for my death. It was 
a veritable Holy of Holies. But on our fifth visit we 
found only three old women in the compound, and, my 
wife having managed to attract their attention by means 
of a bottle of Eau de Cologne, I was left alone in the temple. 

Inside the white sheet, on which was fastened a doll, 
said to belong to Doguwa, one of Kuri's wives, were hung 
two other white sheets screening the right-hand corner 
nearer the door. Behind the third sheet were bottles of 
beer, an offering to Kuri, who — being one of the pagan 
spirits — is fond of this beverage, some milk for his wife, 
Doguwa, and some eggs for Mai-Ja-Chikki. Between this 
and the second sheet were the sandukan Kurt (Kuri's box), 
in which are kept the offerings made by the members of the 
community, and an object of leather covered with cowries. 
I could not examine this properly, but it seemed not to be 
an idol, simply a head-dress, possibly one used in the Bu 
Sadiya. Why it should have been kept there I do not 
know, but I expect that from its resemblance to the 
head-dress sometimes worn by Kuri and others (see 
Ills. 7 and 44) some connexion has been or is berag 

272 //// BAN 01 '1111: HON/ 

mi (I. It is probably a symbol of some powerful pagan 
spirit. Outside this sheet weir other boxes containing 
candles, grain, etc., I believe, though 1 did not have time 
to open them. 

At the other end of the room, opposite Kuri's apartment, 
were mortars, pestles and dishes used at the feasts, and 
drums for the dances, while on the wall near to the door 
were more dolls, miniature sandals, etc ., and even wooden 
horses. 

The object of the offerings is, of course, to appease the 
spirits, and whereas the elder ones usually prefer a sacrifice, 
food, or a contribution to the sandukan Kuri, except when 
their wardrobe requires replenishing, the younger bori 
delight in toys and sweets, for after all, they are very much 
like human beings. If, therefore, a person fears that he or 
his will be attacked by some illness, he will make an offer- 
ing to the temple; if actually ill he will ascertain the correct 
procedure from a boka or a Mai-Bori as has been already 
described. Somehow the young spirits give much more 
trouble than their elders, being always up to mischief 
(as will be understood considering the number of people 
with sore eyes and skin complaints), and the gifts to them 
are much the more numerous — fortunately so, since they 
are less costly — and in fact, just opposite the Gidan Kuri 
is a Gidan Yara (Children's House) in which are similar 
toys and sweets. In this are kept also the flags used in 
processions, but there is no particular reason for this except 
convenience apparently, nor for the placing of the domestic 
utensils in the larger room, though, of course, they are 
safer there than elsewhere from thieves. 

I have described this temple, if so it may be called, fully, 
because it is the oldest and the best in Tunis, and also 
because the others are arranged upon similar lines. The 

BORI THE TEMPLES AND THE SECT 273 

one which I saw in Tripoli was practically the same though 
very much smaller, but there, Doguwa had a special apart- 
ment in the house of Jibaliya, in addition to her niche in 
the Gidan Kuri. 

When a new house or room has been obtained for the use 
of the spirits, it must first be well censed, and sand is 
sprinkled upon the floor. Then a sacrifice of a white hen 
and a red cock must be made upon the threshold, but a 
little of the blood must be allowed to run in upon the floor, 
so that the bori will really go inside. When this has been 
done, the weapons, implements, and trappings will be 
brought in, and the spirits will have taken up their abode 
there. The ceremonies are completed by a bori dance 
which may last from one to three days. Nothing is done 
to the old house, for bori naturally follow their trappings 
and weapons, and rush to drink the blood of the sacrifice 
in their new abode. 

A woman with the title of Arifa (priestess) or Sarauniya 
(chieftainess) is in charge of the room, and it is her duty to 
open it each day, and to see that all is in order, but at 
certain regular times she must get another to act for her. 
Animals are not allowed to enter it, for they would 
probably make a mess there, and the spirits would naturally 
be offended, for all are clean except Jato and his colleagues. 
Each Thursday night, except during the month of Azumi, 
a candle is lighted and incense is burned there, but not 
on other nights at the expense of the sect. But if someone 
wanted to work evil, he might do so on Thursday or even 
Wednesday night. Some time ago a woman burnt a 
candle on a Wednesday night. One of the Sarauniya 's 
attendants (Khadeza the Mai-Ja-Chikki), who was tempor- 
arily in charge, tried to dissuade her from doing so, but 
she would persist in her purpose. Next day Khadeza found 

274 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

that the candle was burnt only half-way through, and she 
knew then that the woman would have her wish. There is 
a danger in this procedure, for if the whole of the candle 
had been burnt, the wish would have recoiled upon the 
burner. It seemed to me that the extinction of the candle 
implied failure on the part of the person who had lit it, 
but I was assured that this was not so. Probably, since 
a candle is usually regarded as driving away an evil spirit 
(not attracting it) the fact that it went out showed that the 
spirit had conquered, In this case, the worshipper would 
nearly always seem to obtain his wish, for he could easily 
manage to put in some substance which would extinguish 
the flame at a certain point. This is quite natural, for the 
Hausa is not above trying to help-r-or even to deceive — 
the bo ri which he invokes ! 

During the month of Azumi (the fast) each year, there 
are certain changes in the rites. Three days before the fast 
commences a black he-goat is sacrificed, and a dance is 
held on that and the two following days. On the eve of 
the fast, the room is locked up until the fifteenth day, 
when it is opened, and some incense is burned, it being 
then locked up again. On the twenty-seventh day one red 
cock and a white hen are sacrificed inside the house, and 
then (about one a.m.), the Sarauniya sits down outside 
the door with a couple of drummers and any others present, 
and burns incense. Soon the drummers play the special 
beats for Kuri, Yerima, Jato, Sarikin Rafi, and Mai- 
Aska, under the direction of the Sarauniya, and each of 
these comes out in reply to his individual summons, and 
flies away. Mallam Tsofo has been sitting by the door all 
this time, he has not been locked up like the others, for he 
is so old, and he is among the first to be summoned and 
allowed to go. These are comparatively good spirits, and 

BORI THE TEMPLES AND THE SECT 275 

do not wish to harm anyone, but the others which are not 
so dependable ore kept as long as possible. On the eve of 
the Salla, however, all are allowed to go, being summoned 
in the same way. But they rush out so madly — especially 
the Yayan Jidderi and the other bori children — that they 
injure many mortals, and so you see next day plenty of 
people with sore eyes (because the Little Spots have 
brushed against them), weak or swollen legs and arms 
(caused by Doguwa), and other complaints. Only a cynical 
and ignorant European would imagine that the fasting 
by day and the gorging at night were responsible. During 
the time that they are imprisoned thus, the bori can do 
no harm, and it is only right that spirits capable of working 
evil should not be allowed to go amongst people engaged 
in such a very religious act as that of fasting, but they are 
also incapable of doing any good either, so it is of no use 
appealing to them at that time.1 

The bori sect is composed of those who have been 
initiated into the mysteries, and there are several ranks in 
it. The general names are Masu-Bori (doers of or pos- 
sessors of — and probably possessed by — the spirits), Yam- 
Bori (children of the spirits), or Dow akin Bori (horses or 
mounts of the spirits), a male being a doki (horse), and a 
woman a godiya (mare) because the bori mount their heads 
or upon the backs of their necks, and ride them. Neither 
membership nor office is hereditary, though it is extremely 
probable that if a parent is a member, at least one of the 
children will join when old enough. 

With the exception of the Arifa, the members are not 
bound to be married or to be single, but she must always 
be a widow or a divorcee, I understand. It is not im- 
possible that we see in this a survival of the custom at the 
temple of Bel at Babylon, where women were set apart as* 

27t> THl B l.\ Of THE B0R1 

the human wives of the deity, elsewhere in West Africa, 

the priestess is noted for her licentiousness.2 Prostitution 
is not .1 i \\ i." teristk <>f the cult, and special means were 
taken even in Northern Nigeria to prevent exposure of the 
person, but in thai country many- and lure >ome — 

people of loose morals join in the dani es SO as to be able 
to attract more attention, and apparently to command 
higher fees, though they are said to be looked down upon 
by the proper professors. In fact, the Masu-Bori must 
abstain from sexual intercourse for a period of three days 
before the rites (some go even up to ten), and for the whole 
time during their continuance — a strange tabu considering 
the origin of the dances — and they should also drink no 
intoxicant of any kind. Should they break this tabu, one 
of the spirits will be certain to notice it, and will cause his 
doki to go over to him or her, and begin to sniff. If the bori 
be Kuri or another of the Babbaku, everyone will know 
that the person has had connexion, for Kuri does not mind 
beer-drinking since he indulges in it himself, but if it 
is not Kuri there will be a doubt. In either event the 
guilt}' person will be ejected at once, otherwise he would be 
killed by the offended spirit, and perhaps even some of the 
spectators would suffer. Haj AH saw a case in Tripoli 
seven years ago. A man named Dan Juma, whom Sarikin 
Rafi always mounted, was known to ignore the tabu upon 
women. The other Masu-Bori argued with him, but to no 
effect, and at last he was so foolish as to give way upon the 
very eve of the rites. Next day Sarikin Rafi mounted him, 
and threw him down a well, and, when there, made Dan 
Juma sneeze and so expel him. Had Sarikin Rafi remained 
in him, the man could have been made to jump out of the 
well as easily as lie had been thrown in, of course, but as it 
was, he was helpless, and it was not until the people above 

BORI THE TEMPLES AND THE SECT 277 

had helped him that he could get out. That lesson was 
sufficient, and he never sinned again, and m> was all 
right afterwards. 

The head of the Masu-Bori next to the bokaye — and in 
rites at the temple sometimes above them — is a woman, 
chosen by the members for the position, and called in 
Hausaland Sarauniya, in North Africa either Sarauniya 
or, as has been said, Arifa. She gets a larger share than the 
others of the offerings at the rites, and she may take a 
certain amount of the food, beer, and candles, etc., offered 
to the spirits by the worshippers. Generally, the beer 
should be left in the gidan tsafi for a year, and the grain, 
etc., must remain until renewed, while there must always 
be candles enough to bum on Thursday nights. About nine 
years ago, the Arifa who was in power then, Ayesha, had 
a horrible lesson. She had been taking the food and drink 
too soon, and sometimes there were no candles at all on a 
Thursday, so the bori were naturally very angry. One 
day there was a dance, and Ayesha joined in when Yerima 
had mounted her, and surprised everyone by her agility. 
Usually she hobbled about on a stick, but that day she 
jumped like a young girl. After one final bound, she sat 
still, and Yerima told the people through her mouth of all 
that she had done. She then sneezed, and immediately he 
had left her, she screamed, and the people, on rushing to 
her, found that she had broken her right thigh. She was 
so old that the doctors wanted to amputate her leg, but 
the Masu-Bori would not hear of this, so they made her 
a special bed, and did their best for her, allowing her to 
retain her quarters. But it was of no use, for in three 
months' time she was dead. 

In Tripoli, the Arifa, Haja Gogo, is chief diviner as well, 
and though, of course, any of the Masu-Bori can discover* 

THE B iv OF THE B0R1 

the correcl pints to be propitiated in time of trouble, 
the higher and more experienced the mount, the more 
.11. i esi t'll will be his or her pi i dons. 

Under the orders of the Arifa are the Magajiya (Heii 
or Lieutenant), the Arifa Karama (Little Arifa), and the 

Kasheka, in Tunis, while in Tripoli the gl de .in Arifa, 

Galadimiya (Fun. ess), Uwar Sariki (Mother of the King), 
and Kalankuwa (? the Charm). At festivals, various 
servants are appointed, the Sarikin Samari, Fagge, or Mai- 
Ruwa, and the cooks and others, us has been seen. 

The rent for the Gidan Kuri at Tunis is two hundred and 
twenty francs per annum, paid half-yearly. When the 
payment is nearly due, notice is sent to all the members of 
the community, and a small box is brought out and placed 
in the midst of the assembled worshippers. As soon as 
everyone has made his offering, the money is counted, and 
should there be a surplus (as there always is), it is ear- 
marked for candles, oil, incense, etc., for the Thursday- 
night offerings. At the ordinary dances, about one half 
is supposed to go into this box. 

The Bori Jama'a is not by any means without its good 
points. If a poor, strange man or an unmarried woman 
arrives in Tunis, and is connected with anyone belonging 
to the particular community, he or she will go to the tsafi 
house and report, and the Arifa will then arrange for him 
or her to be kept until work has been found. A room 
next to the Dakin Kuri is assigned to such a visitor, and 
members of the community will take it in turn to bring 
him a day's food. Should everyone have do le so, and the 
stranger be still destitute and workless, a donation will be 
allowed from the sandukan Kuri or, if it is empty, a con- 
tribution will be levied upon the members. At present 
(May) there are two women there of whom one — a former 

BORT THE TEMPLES AND THE SECT 279 

cook at the Ziara — is too old and feeble to marry. She 
has been there six months and will be kept until she dii , 
and then the commurity will pay her funeral expenses, 
for no member is allowed to die a pauper.3 But she was a 
very long time in dying, according to my informants, and 
the sandukan Kuri was quite empty — a hint which could 
not be ignored, in spite of the fact that I had the very 
best reasons for knowing the contrary to be the case. 
Of course, a person who was well and strong would have 
to do something sooner or later, for if he wilfully sponged 
upon the community he would be expelled. But such 
a thing is exceedingly rare, natives know one another too 
well, and none but regularly approved candidates are 
admitted to this lodge of ancient pagan African Free- 
masons. 

CHAPTER XX 

BORI — THE DANCES 

A big dance, in honour of Mohammed's birthday, was 
held in Tunis the week after our arrival, and as it lasted 
for three days (from the 18th to the 20th of February) 
there was ample opportunity to witness it. Owing, 
however, to the fact that a tarpaalin had been stretched 
across the courtyard from the tops of the walls, so as to 
shield the dancers and spectators from the sun, all the 
photographs taken were worthless, and I had to arrange 
special performances later in order to obtain some of the 
illustrations given here. 

At Tripoli I was more lucky. The people had not had 
a dance of any kind since the arrival of the Italians, and 
as I procured permission for them to continue their rites 
and customs (an easy matter, for the Government is 
sympathetic), and as again I was paying the piper, the 
Hausas were ready to do anything that I wished. I had 
their tarpaulin removed, therefore, and managed to obtain 
a number of photographs, the day being Whitsunday, 
not altogether an inappropriate season for approaching, at 
any rate, the nature spirits. A marked difference will be 
noted in the expressions of the dancers, for in Tunis many 
of them are seen to be laughing, whereas in Tripoli, where 
they were in earnest, there is no suspicion of anything of 
the kind. The people imagine themselves to be in a 
dangerous state when being ridden, and any merriment 
or even inattention would bring immediate punishment. 

280 

BORI —THE DANCES 281 

So completely are the bori and the mount thought to be 
identified, that if a man be ridden by a female spirit, the 
audience remarks that she is dancing well, etc., the sex of 
the dancer not counting. For that reason either men or 
women can be ridden by any bori in whose mysteries they 
have been trained. There is another difference — namely, 
that whereas in Tunis men and women, or rather " horses 
and mares," dance in the ring together, in Tripoli this does 
not occur, and even in Nigeria I have never seen them 
performing actually at the same moment. 

At Tunis, the courtyard was crowded with Arabs and 
Hausas sitting upon the ground, and leaving a small 
space clear in front of the musicians for the dancers. At 
Tripoli the house was two-storeyed, and the surrounding 
balconies also were full of interested spectators. In 
Nigeria, of course,-the performances are given in an open 
space, and by comparing the following chapters with the 
account in Hausa Superstitions and Customs, it will be 
seen that there are several differences. 

At Tunis, the musicians (all males) were eight in 
number, and they sat upon their haunches in a crescent 
formation, in the following order. First, on the left 
facing us was a man with an earthenware drum (kurkutu) 
of which one side only was covered with parchment. The 
drum was placed upon the floor in front of him, and was 
played with two straight pieces of stick, used so that they 
beat the parchment with the flat and not with the points. 
Next were two men holding a pair of iron implements 
(karakab) in each hand, in shape like a double spoon, and 
clacking them together, the sound reminding one some- 
what of " bones," though the karakab were held in the 
palm of the hand, and not between different fingers. 
Next sat two men with large drums under their left arms, 

282 

////• B IV OF THE BORI 

having pain timent on each side {ganga), their right hands 

playing with one piece oi straight stick, their left hands 

ing tiic pan hmenl so as to muffle or alter the tone. 

In.. 29.- Iron Clappers or 
h'arakab 

FlG. 2S.--A Hasin-shaped Drum, 
the A'urkittit, with the Sign 
<>f the Hand. Flayed with 
two straight Sticks 

Fio. 30. — Signs upon the „ 

large Drum FlG- 3 '•-Large Drum or Ganga 

with a Hole into which Mai- 
Ja-Chikki is supposed to pass. 
The Drum is smeared with 
Blood. Played with one 
straight Stick 

Next were two other men with karakab, and then another 
with a large drum. In front of these was a mat upon 
which the offerings were to be made. The signs upon one 
of the big drums (the centre one) are worth noting. The 
drummer knew the signification of only two of them — at 

BORI—THE DANCES 

283 

least those are all which he could or would tell me, but 
Nos. 5 and 6 resemble some of the Arab representations 
of eyes which are given by Doutte. They, as well as Nos. 
2 and 4, may be symbols of Tanith, but I must be careful 
not to build upon such a slight resemblance, especially as 
Abd Allah said that No. 2 was a prayer-board, No. 3 

Fig. 32. — A Guitar or Gimbiri 

Fig. 33. — A Vase- 
shaped Drum or 
Dttrubuka used at 
Tripoli. Played 
with the open 
Hand 

being a fly. At the dances, which were arranged specially 
for me, there were two men with karakab, and one with a 
gimbiri, a kind of guitar. 

At Tripoli there were differences. On the extreme left 
sat an old man — the only member of his sex — with a 
gimbiri, next to him was a woman with a kurkutu, and 
the fifth one had a similar instrument. The third, fourth, 
sixth, and ninth musicians had a durubuka each, „an 

284 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

earthenware vase with parchment over the open bottom, 
played with the right hand. The seventh had an upturned 
• alabasb which she beal rapidly with two straight sticks, 

and the eighth had a rattle. 

In Nigcii.i, ;i violin is always used, in fact that and the 
upturned calabash are usually the only instruments of 
music, not even the drum being seen. The durubuka, 
kurkutu, karakab, rattle, and gimbiri are Arab instru- 
ments, though many kinds of drums, stringed instruments 
and rattles are known in Hausaland, of course, drawings 
of several of which have been given elsewhere,1 so these 
may be compared. At Tunis, the gimbiri is used at 
night, and sometimes the violin also. In Nigeria, the 
musicians are, I believe, invariably men ; in Tunis they 
are generally so, but in Tripoli all except one were 
women. A mat is spread in front of the orchestra, 
usually a bowl or calabash also, for the reception of 
offerings. 

There was no altar and no sacrifice at the latter city ; 
the bori can be summoned by incense and drumming alone, 
as is the case at the Ziara, or even solely by incense — e.g. 
by the diviner — but the rites at Tunis were more complete 
last February, commencing about two-thirty p.m. At first 
there was a good deal of preliminary dancing in front of 
the musicians, each person, male or female, moving more 
or less sedately at first, and not falling down, the object 
being, apparently, to show off the different cloths owned 
by the dancer, though, originally, the change of vestments 
may have had a religious motive ; it was not until the 
sacrifice had been made that the bori " mounted their 
horses." 

At three-thirty p.m. the following song was sung by 
the Masu-Bori : 

32. — The Recess in the Gidan Belik. 

33. — The sacrificial altar with the incense and special foods at the loot. 

BORI—THE DANCES 285 

" Where, where are they, where are the lovers of God ? 
Let them help. 
Where are the lovers of God and of the Prophet, the 

King? 
Where are the lovers of God ? Let them help. 
O Arifa with the incense, enter the ring, 
Our Mother, step in and come." 

The Arifa then entered the dancing-space with an 
earthenware kyanu of incense, and waved it in every 
direction, while one of the principal bokaye stood up and 
called upon the Prophet. After this, the people felt 
somewhat relieved, for had anyone tried to induce any 
bori to enter before these ceremonies had been performed, 
although he would have been unsuccessful, he would have 
been certain to die before very long. 

Then an altar 2 was erected in rear of the spectators, and 
the three men with the big drums moved to a point facing 
it. First a large white cloth — the emblem of Death — 
was hung on two spears leaning against the wall, so as to 
reach the ground, over this being folded a blue cloth (both 
of these referring to Kuri's wife, Doguwa), and to one of 
the spears Jato's goatskin was suspended, while at the foot 
was placed a circular mat upon which were certain objects 
hidden by a small white cloth. I was not allowed to 
approach close to the altar at first, but there was no circle 
drawn upon the ground as a boundary. 

A black he-goat was then led in front of the altar, and 
was held by two men, while the Arifa and other chief 
women present passed the pot of incense three times over 
the back and under the belly of the goat, and then around 
each leg. The he-goat made water during this operation, 
and its organ was censed, but whether this was accidental 
or not I am unable to say, though I think that it was. B«t 

386 THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

I was t<.l<l thai this wa a good ign, and thai it i- regarded 
as bu< h is extremely likely, for the feeding of the animal 

seems to be a surviv.tl of an agri< ultur.il rite, and in this 
the urinating would symbolise the rainfall. I was not 
allowed to photograph this p;<rt of the ceremony, for many 
of the people of Tunis are still afraid of the camera, 
especially at sin h a time, thinking that if anything goes 
amiss in the rites, the influences invoked will turn against 
the worshippers, and injure rather than benefit them. 
I had to persuade the Arifa to do it for me privately later 
on, therefore, when she had come to know me better — and 
would make certain that she would not have to share with 
others any votive offerings made in consequence. 

The small white cloth was then removed from the foot of 
the altar, and four of the china vessels from the Gidan 
Kuri were exposed to view, each one covered by a round 
mat of basket-work. These were removed in turn, and 
the goat was fed by a spoon with a little of the contents 
of each, which were (i) flour and water, (2) milk and 
cooked rice, (3) cooked beans, and (4) coriander, three 
other women assisting in this operation. Sometimes 
honey may be mixed with the flour and milk.3 

Then one of the men (if possible, according to one in- 
formant, the doki of Geshe, Yerima, or Mai-Aska), who 
was holding the he-goat, knelt down on his left knee, put 
both arms over the body of the animal, and, catching hold 
of its feet, pulled it upon his right knee, turning it upside 
down at the same time. He immediately cut its throat, 
and threw it upon the ground, where it flung itself about 
several times in its last convulsions, and its blood gushed 
out upon the ground.4 A red cock was also sacrificed and 
thrown down by it. Immediately some of the dowaki 
began yelling, and certain ones of them flung themselves 

34- — The Arifa censing the sacrificial Goat. 
35. — Feeding the animal with the special foods. 

BORI—THE DANCES 287 

upon the ground and began drinking the blood, these 
being Mai-Ja-Chikki, Kuri, Sarikin Pawa, Jigo, and Jam 
Maraki. Others smeared their faces and clothes — and 
their instruments also, in the case of the musicians — with 
the blood, and the Arifa, having scooped some of it up, 
sprinkled those near her. The first of the bori had now 
mounted, and the persons possessed were forcibly con- 
ducted into the dancing-space. 

The first to appear were Kuri (Haj AH), Jam Maraki 
(Khameis), and Mai-Ja-Chikki (Khadeza), and, after a 
little while, Haj Ali became Jigo, and Khameis Gajere, 
while Salah, the father of the latter, was ridden by Mai- 
Aska. But Khadeza was too much overcome to take any 
other character, she simply lay exhausted in the ring. A 
few other dowaki became possessed as fresh bori arrived 
upon the scene, or got their turn, as the case might be, and 
the performances went on until six a.m. next morning, 
though from six p.m. until midnight, only the ordinary 
dancing was indulged in. Again next day, about two- 
thirty p.m., it recommenced, and a similar programme was 
performed, though there were no more sacrifices. A third 
day completed the rites. 

As has been said, a bowl is placed upon a mat spread in 
front of the musicians into which are thrown the offerings 
from the onlookers, and if they are at all reticent some of 
the waiting Masu-Bori (usually females) will make a 
collection. At Tunis, any large gift, two francs or more, 
was held up by the Mai-Bori for all to see ; sometimes she 
would stick it upon her forehead. At Tripoli, the donor 
often waved his coin round the head of one or more of the 
Masu-Bori then possessed before depositing it in the bowl. 
This, I was told, was merely to show appreciation of a 
particular spirit or spirits, for everyone has a patron, and 

388 THE BAN 01 THE BORI 

must make an offering when he is in the ring. As I had 

claimed to be under the protection of Kuri, I was called 
upon several times bo contribute when that spirit was 
pre rut. and it eemcd to me that he was somewhat loath 
to leave. In Nigeria, kola-nuts are often poured into 
the dancer's mouth. 

The spirits are all summoned by the incense, and ex- 
pelled by the sneezing, and if any character becomes 
offensive to the spectators (as did Jato at Tripoli) the Arifa 
will touch the mount on the back of the neck and under the 
chin, so as to make him or her sneeze and so get rid of the 
spirit. The performers, as has been said, are supposed to 
act involuntarily and unconsciously, in fact, to be " pos- 
sessed " in every sense of the word. For that reason, 
when describing the dances in the succeeding chapters, I 
have written as if the spirit itself were performing the 
motions, even the sneezing, and ignoring the sex of the 
dancer, as does the audience. 

Haj Ali told me that when the bori first takes possession 
of him, he feels cold all over, and his limbs become so 
rigid that the other Masu-Bori have to cense them forcibly 
before he can move — I did not see them do this, however, 
it was not done on the first day, so far as I could see, 
though as each mount possessed was seized and forcibly 
pushed by several Masu-Bori through the crowd into the 
ring, it may have escaped my notice. He is not sure how 
or where the spirit enters, he says that it sits upon his 
neck with its legs upon his shoulders, and yet it is inside 
his head. But sneezing brings it out, though whether 
by the mouth, nose, or eyes he is not certain, because all 
parts may be affected. " A bori is like the wind, it is 
everywhere, so who can tell just where it goes in or out ? 
One knows that it is there, and that is all." The dancer 

BORI—THE DANCES 289 

nearly always has to wait some time for the spirit to get 
properly up, to settle down in the saddle, as it were, and 
he often glides around the ring or to and fro in it — this 
being supposed to be the bori floating in the air — or 
rather making his mount do so. At other times the 
mount becomes rigid, as has been stated. 

Sometimes, he says, the women do not become possessed, 
and then it is evident that some enemy has put a hairpin 
or something made of iron into their hair, or in their head- 
coverings, for the bori do not like iron. When this is 
supposed to be the case, a boka will commence to dance, 
and will jump and fall three times, on the last occasion 
managing to seat himself just in front of the women. He 
then abuses them, and, having ordered them to put their 
heads forward, he feels about to find the neutralising 
influence, and upon its removal they immediately become 
possessed. This is something akin to the account of 
Jibaliya and Mai-Bille given in a previous chapter. 

Five different men (including Haj Ali and Salah) said 
that in Tripoli and Tunis there is no tsere (object into which 
the spirit escapes and leaves its mount) for any bori 
except that of an animal (e.g. Zaki and Kadda), the 
sneezing alone expelling the others. At the same time, 
Sarikin Barchi in Tunis has a thread of cotton which 
influences him or her, and in Tripoli a blue silk handker- 
chief was pulled along the ground in front of any dancer 
whose spirit was treating him too roughly. 

When a dance has commenced, each bori is impatient 
for his turn, so no individual one can remain very long, 
however powerful he may be. Of course, if there is no 
doki specially assigned to him he cannot mount at all, 
and this has happened in the case of Magiro, I was told, 
who, although he has plenty of followers, has no horse or 

T 

290 THE BAN <>/■ THE B0R1 

in. i iv there. Magiro, however, is a very evil spirit, and 
is danced only once a year, all masu-bori touch the 
ground when his name is mentioned. 

After the he-goat has been killed, it i? skinned, and the 
inside is removed. The skin will be used for a drum, the 
entrails are eaten that night about nine o'clock, by those 
then present, while the flesh is divided up next day amongst 
all who have subscribed to buy it. At night candles arc 
burnt in the Gidan Kuri, in other rooms of the Arab house 
where food and coffee are prepared, in the salanga, in the 
Dakin Yara, and in the guest-chamber. 

According to Abd Allah, at midnight on the last night of 
the rites, before the spirits have come again, the Sarauniya 
sits down almost opposite the mai-gimbiri (the player on 
the guitar), and sets fire to a pot of incense in front of her, 
while a candle is lighted in front and on each side of him. 
Then another man, Mai-Ruwa (the water-man), sits outside 
the candle on the right of mai-gimbiri. Everyone sits 
down, and then one of the male Masu-Bori walks to and 
fro seven times in the ring between the Sarauniya and the 
mai-gimbiri, with a large basket or dish of couscous and 
meat (bought in the market) upon his head, ending by 
placing the basket upon the ground in front of mai- 
gimbiri, and putting out and taking away the candle 
there. The Sarauniya then arises, picks up her censer, 
and walks seven times around the dish of couscous and 
meat, halting the last time in front of mai-gimbiri, into 
whose mcuth she puts three separate pinches of the food. 
Then she places three other pinches upon the ground by 
the vessel, and kneeling down, and placing her hands 
behind her back, she bends forward and takes a little in 
her lips three times — always a magical rite.5 Then she 
arises, picks up what is left upon the floor, and gives a 

BORI—THE DANCES 291 

grain here and there to those around her. She then 
returns to the vessel, and having broken up the meat with 
her ringers, she gives one small piece to mai-gimbiri, one 
each to the masu-shema'a (the men looking after the 
candles), one to mai-ruwa, and then one each to the women 
of rank around her, after which, having placed her hands 
(backs up) in the vessel, and turned them over three 
times (palms up), she returns, and sits down again. The 
more important men then come up, and eat some of the 
meat and couscous, and then the musicians do the same. 
After that, the man who brought the vessel inserts his 
hand, and fills his mouth three times, saying as he does 
so " Salla Annabi," and, after this, the vessel is handed 
to the wcmen, who finish the food. 

Then come masu-wuta who pass lighted torches over 
themselves without injury, and others who beat their 
heads with clubs, and thrust swords into themselves 
without injury.6 And then, the bori spirits having 
reappeared, the dancing begins again, and lasts until 
dawn. Most of the people then go home for good, but 
the most influential of the Masu-Bori will sleep in the 
dakin tsafi that night, and sacrifice a white hen at mid- 
night. That ends the rites, and the dancers recover as 
best they can, the effect lasting for several days in many 
cases, a diet of kola-nut being the best pick-me-up, which, 
on account of its stimulating properties, is regarded as 
being almost magical. 

The method of initiation into the bori sect has been 
given in full elsewhere (The Tailed Head-Hunters of 
Nigeria), so there is no need to repeat it here. But it may 
be said that after it, all members claim to be so full of 
medicine that they can feel no pain or (if honest) suffer 
any injury during the performance. Sarikin Rafi always 

390 THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

mare there. Magiro, however, is a very evil spirit, and 
is d.mced only once a year, all masu-bori touch the 
ground when his name is mentioned. 

After the he-goat has been killed, it is skinned, and the 
inside is removed. The skin will be used for a drum, the 
entrails are eaten that night about nine o'clock, by those 
then present, while the flesh is divided up next day amongst 
all who have subscribed to buy it. At night candles are 
burnt in the Gidan Kuri, in other rooms of the Arab house 
where food and coffee are prepared, in the salanga, in the 
Dakin Yara, and in the guest-chamber. 

According to Abd Allah, at midnight on the last night of 
the rites, before the spirits have come again, the Sarauniya 
sits down almost opposite the mai-gimbiri (the player on 
the guitar), and sets fire to a pot of incense in front of her, 
while a candle is lighted in front and on each side of him. 
Then another man, Mai-Ruwa (the water-man), sits outside 
the candle on the right of mai-gimbiri. Everyone sits 
down, and then one of the male Masu-Bori walks to and 
fro seven times in the ring between the Sarauniya and the 
mai-gimbiri, with a large basket or dish of couscous and 
meat (bought in the market) upon his head, ending by 
placing the basket upon the ground in front of mai- 
gimbiri, and putting out and taking away the candle 
there. The Sarauniya then arises, picks up her censer, 
and walks seven times around the dish of couscous and 
meat, halting the last time in front of mai-gimbiri, into 
whose mcuth she puts three separate pinches of the food. 
Then she places three other pinches upon the ground by 
the vessel, and kneeling down, and placing her hands 
behind her back, she bends forward and takes a little in 
her lips three times — always a magical rite.5 Then she 
arises, picks up what is left upon the floor, and gives a 

BORI—THE DANCES 291 

grain here and there to those around her. She then 
returns to the vessel, and having broken up the meat with 
her fingers, she gives one small piece to mai-gimbiri, one 
each to the masu-shema'a (the men looking after the 
candles), one to mai-ruwa, and then one each to the women 
of rank around her, after which, having placed her hands 
(backs up) in the vessel, and turned them over three 
times (palms up), she returns, and sits down again. The 
more important men then come up, and eat some of the 
meat and couscous, and then the musicians do the same. 
After that, the man who brought the vessel inserts his 
hand, and fills his mouth three times, saying as he does 
so " Salla Annabi," and, after this, the vessel is handed 
to the wcmen, who finish the food. 

Then come masu-wuta who pass lighted torches over 
themselves without injury, and others who beat their 
heads with clubs, and thrust swords into themselves 
without injury.6 And then, the bori spirits having 
reappeared, the dancing begins again, and lasts until 
dawn. Most of the people then go home for good, but 
the most influential of the Masu-Bori will sleep in the 
dakin tsafi that night, and sacrifice a white hen at mid- 
night. That ends the rites, and the dancers recover as 
best they can, the effect lasting for several days in many 
cases, a diet of kola-nut being the best pick-me-up, which, 
on account of its stimulating properties, is regarded as 
being almost magical. 

The method of initiation into the bori sect has been 
given in full elsewhere (The Tailed Head-Hunters of 
Nigeria), so there is no need to repeat it here. But it may 
be said that after it, all members claim to be so full of 
medicine that they can feel no pain or (if honest) suffer 
any injury during the performance. Sarikin Rafi always 

j«.j THE BAN OF THE BORI 

tries to fiing himself into water, Gindema and Ba-Toyc may 
throw themselves from trees if not prevented, others dash 
their bodies upon the ground, or against a wall, and beat 

themselves witli clubs or whips. In Tunis the performers 
certainly banged the ground with their fists, but the 
beating with clubs and the whipping were farcical, and 
falling is not at all popular. In Tripoli the jumping was 
more lively, certainly, but the other "tortures" were 
inflicted with exceeding moderation. In my ignorance 
I thought that the reason of the gentle jumping was the 
hardness of the cemented floors there as compared with 
the soft ground of Hausaland, but I was informed that my 
idea was absolutely incorrect, the real cause being that the 
medicines of the strange land could not be compared with 
those of the old country, and therefore the performances 
suffered. Still, I have no doubt that even in North 
Africa there is quite enough self-punishment inflicted at 
times, for, when a native is worked up he does not pause 
to think, and there is certainly some self-induced hypnotic 
influence in the seizure. In any case, no act of which I 
have yet heard can compare with that of the English 
bishop who, when at the stake, deliberately held out his 
right hand so that it might be burnt first. 

I am told that Kuri's mount must beat himself the 
proper number of times with the pestle or stick, other- 
wise he will suffer afterwards. One night, some years ago, 
not long after his arrival in Tunis, Haj Ali was taken by a 
friend to one of the other bori houses, and after a time 
Kuri mounted him, and he began to dance. The people 
there, not knowing him, gave him a big log to dance with, 
and he began to knock himself about so badly that they 
became afraid that he would kill himself, and stopped 
him. The friend argued with them, saying that he would 

BORI —THE DANCES 293 

answer for Haj Ali's safety, but all in vain, and the 
drummers changed their call. The friend then took Haj 
Ali home, and lie was so ill for four days that he could not 
rise. On learning what was the matter, the then Arifa 
ordered her own drummers to go to the house, taking a 
pestle witli them, and on their arrival Haj Ali arose, got 
through the remainder of his performance, made up the 
required number of thuds upon his body, and was quite 
well immediately. 

No mount must be given a drink during seizure, else 
he will vomit afterwards, and perhaps be so bad that he 
will die, so the}' say, but directly after the bori has gone, 
the mount may have a few sips of water. The vessel is 
not entrusted to him, however, a special person (Fagge 
or Mai-Ruwa) brings it, and holds it to his lips. Kola-nuts 
are the proper stimulant to be taken afterwards, but, as 
there are so few in North Africa, coffee is drunk instead. 
At Tripoli, the guests were treated to sherbet. 

During seizure a mount may have his arms stretched 
backwards three times ; this is in order to render them 
supple and so avoid any injury to them ! If a bori is 
treating his mount too severely, the other Masu-Bori 
clasp the mount in their arms (if it be a woman), or put his 
head under the arm of one of them (if a man), and hold him 
while begging the bori to be more gentle, especially in the 
presence of his " children " — the other Masu-Bori. If the 
spirit still persists, the mount's neck and chin are touched, 
and the spirit " is sneezed away." 

The dancing on the knees at Tripoli (111. 52) is peculiar, 
and probably is derived from the marriage dances which 
are held all along the coast between Gabez and Tripoli. 
In these, the bride and her maids let their hair loose, and 
perform all their movements with the upper part of the 

2()4 THE BAN OF THE RORI 

body — a contra ( to the danse du ventre, or tarihize, in 
which the head is kept still, while with the buttocks are 

performed movements like those of J;it<>.7 

15. » ri dancing is supposed to have been introduced into 
Nigeria as a treatment for the insane, the actions of the 
performers being supposed to simulate different forms of 
insanity — and, of course, there is no doubt about the 
hallucination during possession^but the worship of the 
nature gods and others must have been a very ancient one 
amongst the Magazawa, so such an account — if indeed 
there is any truth at all in it — must apply merely to the 
fusion of different cults. 

One chief of Gobir, Bawa (who believed in the jinns, 
of course), is related to have summoned the Masu-Bori 
to him, intending, if their performances were objection- 
able, to put an end to them by killing the members of the 
sect. Upon receiving the chief's message, the Sarikin Bori 
(corresponding to the chief boka, or Ajenge) was going to 
run away, but the Sarauniya told him that all would be 
well if he left it to her. So next day the yam-bori turned 
up, all being in fear and trembling except the Sarauniya, 
who had made her arrangements, and had had various 
kinds of cooked and raw food brought. 

The chief first asked her to show him Doguwa, and she 
pointed to a long stalk of maiwa (a kind of guinea-corn), 
saying " This is doguwa [the feminine adjective, " tall "], 
O Chief." 

Bawa next asked to see Mallam Alhaji, and she produced 
another species of guinea-corn called jar ajar a (white), 
white being the proper colour for the dress of a mallam. 

" Good," said the chief, "now I wish to see the mad 
one, Jato." So she held out a dish of beans, saying 
" These are Jato, for you know that if a person cooks and 

BORI—THE DANCES 295 

eats them, and then can get no water to drink, he will go 
mad." 

Not being satisfied yet, the chief asked to see Yerima 
(a prince), and she showed him a bundle of guinea-corn, 
saying " Fullness is a prince, for food rules the world. 
Hunger makes a boy like an old man, food makes an old 
man young." 8 And she continued " All bori is a question 
of food. You know that we sacrifice fowls and goats, see, 
here they are, ready to be eaten " — for she had had them 
killed and cooked, and divided up amongst the dishes of 
food. 

That convinced Bawa, and, instead of killing the Masu- 
Bori, he gave them presents, and allowed them to continue 
their practices. 

CHAPTER XXI 

BORI — THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS 

The spirits are divided into several categories, the Great 
Ones (Bab a) ; the Children of the To be (Yan Riga) — 
i.e. those wearing the Mohammedan clothing ; the Black 
Men or Pagans (Babbaku) ; the Youths (Samari) ; the 
Warriors or Children of the Shield (Yan Garke) ; the 
Children of the Grove (Yan Kurimi) ; or of the Stream 
(Yan Rawa) ; those responsible for petty illnesses, the 
" Little Spots " (Yayan Jidderi) ; and a few others who 
seem to be unclassified. As the dancers in the photographs 
are not always in the order in which they appear in the 
following lists — some of the spirits preferring to keep bad 
company — the number of the photograph in which the 
bori appears has been placed in parentheses after the name 
in each case. 

The greatest of all is Magiro, and as he is a Ba-Maguje, 
or pagan Hausa, he might have been placed in the next 
chapter, but being " the grandfather of all the spirits " 
he must come first. No one in Tunis or Tripoli cares to 
perform his dance, so he is not usually represented at 
the rites, but he has some worshippers who screen off a 
corner of the room with a white cloth, and entice him there 
by offering incense and promising him sacrifices. 

The next one in order of importance is Mallam Alhaji 
(the Learned Pilgrim), or Mallam Tsofo (the Learned 
Old Man) (36), a Hausa, the oldest of all the town bori, 

296 

BORI—THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS 2^7 

and the chief of the Yan Riga. He is very learned, is 
praying continually, and will harm no one unless annoyed, 
but being the spirit of old age, he must carry off some 
people in the end. He seems to be the same as that Angel 
of Death, described in an Arabic Midrash as a decrepit old 
man, who was sent to take Abraham. He is the father of 
Yerima, but not the husband of Doguwa, as he is said to be 
in Nigeria. He is a town spirit, and sits at the threshold of 
the house, but owing to his age does not arrive at the dances 
until after many of those from the bush. He gives 
medicines for any sickness when his aid is invoked, the 
proper sacrifice being a ram, or, in default, a white cock 
and hen ; he wears prayer-beads, and he holds a stick in 
his hand with which to walk. 

At the dance he walks around the ring, bent almost 
double, coughing weakly all the time, and then he sits 
down and commences to count beads with his right hand 
and to read from an imaginary Koran or a prayer-board 
which he holds in his left hand. He then goes through 
the actions of the prayer, the photograph showing him in 
the last position, the sajadda. After that, he sneezes and 
goes away, and then the dancer rises and retires. 

The song sung by the musicians or other Masu-Bori to 
him is : 

" Begin the song of The Learned One, The Father of Many, 
Begin the song of The Learned One, The Father of Many, 
[These are the lines with the music in Chapter XVII.] 
Complete the town, O Horn of pushing, [i.e. make it pure 

by your efforts,] 
White Wizard, like men, 
It is your day, Pilgrim, Learned old Man who works 

hard. 
See the great one of the town, the Father of Many, 

2q8 the ban of the bori 

White wizard like men, 

It is you day, Pilgrim, Learned Old Han who works 

hard. 
I nes] our father, the old man, Learned Old 

M : th( I therol Yerima. 
Wearer of the White Tobe, it i> your day, Learned Old 

Mm. 
To-day [comes] our father, the Old Man, the Old Doctor, 

the boat [bearer = father] of Yerima. 
He who has the mat [upon which he sits] Old Man, Old 

Doctor. 
From Mecca he will go to Medina, 
The old Pilgrim, Man of Men. 
Complete the town without delay, O Net of Many Meshes, 

[i.e. to catch things in, cf. " fishers of men." 
It is your day, Pilgrim, Learned Old Man." 

The next spirit in order of importance, Kuturu (Leper), 
Gurugu (Lame One), Dungu (Deformed One) (48) is also a 
Hausa, but as he does not like these names he is generally 
called Ubax Dowaki (Master of the Horse) or Sarikin 
Kofa (Keeper of the Gate). It is he who stays by the gate 
of Jan Gari, and gives the spirits egress or not, according 
to Magiro's commands. He can give medicines for various 
diseases (including his own) if invoked, the proper sacrifice 
being a fowl with distorted feathers. But he is bad- 
tempered, and will give a human being a cold in the head 
and even leprosy at once should he laugh at him, so all, 
even the other spirits, keep out of his way. In the photo- 
graph he is in rather disgraceful company, for he is with 
two of the Babbaku. Should he appear at the dance, 
his mount stumbles along, making faces and noises as he 
moves. He then sits down and hides his legs, and waves 
his arms before his face, his hands hanging down (for the 
spirit has neither hands nor feet), brushing away invisible 

5" — Spirit? of the t 'treat Mallams. 

37- — Uwal Vara, or Magatiya, the spirit which gives croup and • ■tlrej 
ailments to children. 

BORI—THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS 299 

flies from imaginary sores. He is not popular, as has 
been said, and though flattered, he is encouraged to go 
away as soon as possible. 

When he appears he makes the following speech or 
kirari. 

" Um, um, urn. You think me useless because I have 
no fingers, nor toes. The hyena says ' The footprint is 
confusing, is the man going this way or that way ? ' for if 
there is no foot the print is round." 

The song sung to him is : 

" Open the door, I sing your praises, 
Keeper of the Gate, Son of Magajiya. 
Open the door, Son of Magajiya, 
Keeper of the Gate, I sing your praises." 

And then, if he takes no notice : — 

" Master of the Horse open the gate for me, 
Hey, Leper, open the gate for me, 
Hey, Distorted One, open the gate for me." 

These are the great ones of the spirit community. The 
Yan Riga and the Babbaku are about equal in importance, 
though as the chief ones of the former are greater than the 
heads of the latter, it may be as well to take the Yan 
Riga first. They are all Hausas and Mohammedans, and 
are classed as more or less good spirits, though any of them 
will kill or injure any human being who annoys him, of 
course. Some of these, the mallams, are evidently mara- 
bouts, a few are probably ancestors, but the majority 
seems to consist of jinns borrowed from foreign sources. 

First come the mallams who are much the same. Mallam 
Ali, and Mallam Alkali are the chief ones, and a little 

300 THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

farther down the tisl come Mallam Dam Sangammi, 

Mam am DUWATSU, .mil Mali am I)a\ KalGO. All 01 
these arc supposed to be near the mosques for the most 
part, and to be praying continually, and — I suppo 
to be bringing some good upon the community, though I 
could not discover that any particularly valuable power 
ribed to any one of them except Mallam Duwatsu 
— who settles quarrels — though he himself is very hot- 
tempered. They prescribe medicines — or rather charms 
— for any complaints if invoked, but no special illnesses 
are attributed to their influence. Alkali (36) is a Kano 
spirit, and the patron of the dyers. All wear white clothes 
and prayer-beads, and all carry sticks. The proper 
sacrifice is a ram, preferably one with black rings around 
its eyes {rago mai-kwolli), in default, a white cock and 
hen, or either. In Hausaland, the rites would be per- 
formed at the foot of a tsamiya, or a kawo tree, but in 
North Africa in some secret place in the house, probably 
the salanga. 

At the dance they sit on a mat, count their beads, and 
pray, waving both forefingers up and down in front of 
their faces. 

Mallam Ali's song is : — 

" Ali, oh, without delay, let us salute my old one. 
Learned Ali, there is secret talking, there is mischief. 
Ali, oh, see the old one with laughter [i.e. who makes us 

laugh]. 
There is the seeking after women by the old man." 

It is said that he is always trying to seduce the female 
bori, in spite of his age and his holy calling, and this, of 
course, always raises a smile. 

After Mallam Alkali has prayed, he stands up, and puts 

BORI—THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS 30] 

his right leg over his left and back three times, then he 
turns and places his left over his right. In the photograph 
he is praying with Mallam Alhaji. When he enters the 
ring, he says : — 

" The judges arc the owners of the world [by] God and 
the Prophet." 

His song (sung by the musicians and other Masu-Bori 
while he is in the ring) is : — 

" O Judge of [belonging to] Zara [his wife] O Little 

Elephant, My father, My father. 
Alkali will not decide [unjustly], the Bull, My father, 

My father 
[This is the line given with the music in Chapter XVII.] 
Kola-nuts are being distributed quickly [they are very 

scarce in Tunis, as has been said, so anyone who 

has them must be a person of rank.] 
Divide them and give me my small portion. 
The people of Kano have feasts from indigo [i.e. make 

their money by dyeing clothes] 
If there is no indigo there is no feast." 

The next on the list is Nana Magajiya (37 and 39), 
other names being Uwal Yara (Mother of Children) and 
Fattatakko (Render). She is the wife of Geshe, but 
owing to her fierce temper and iron will, she is a much 
stronger spirit. She nursed several of the Yan Riga and 
killed them all (so their names do not appear in the list), 
but her only child was Haukachi, and Yerima, her brother, 
fearing that she would kill him also, took him away to his 
own house — this being the usual procedure in the human 
society. In her second name, Uwal Yara, she is the same 
as Um Es Sibyan apparently. She gives children croup, 
for she dislikes them (see p. 246), and when this happens 

302 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

Yerima's aid should be invoked. He will scold her, and 
she will be ashamed and hang her head, and, while her 
attention is thus distracted, the victim can be removed 
to .mother house; or room — as was her own. She also 
makes a child's body swell up (? an affection of the spleen) 
in consequence of some injury given perhaps unthinkingly 
by the child, and the swelling will stop the breathing and 
also kill the little victim unless reduced in time. The only 
way is to summon a Mai-Bo ri at once, and get him or her 
to burn incense and gently rub the stomach round and 
round, saying " O Uwal Yara, 0 Uwal Yara, be merciful, 
it is only a child, it did not know that it was hurting you. 
O Uwal Yara, O Uwal Yara, be merciful, and let it live." 
If the injury done has not been a very serious one, the 
spirit will forgive and let the child recover, but, of course, 
no one knows what it lias done, so there is no certainty. 

At the dance, she goes around in much the usual manner, 
but then appears to fall into a paroxysm of passion, and 
tries to tear her cloths (she has one large one over all) 
and her body, particularly her breasts (39) and mouth. 
Should she see any of the human mistresses of Haukachi 
she will fall upon them and treat them in a similar manner, 
so her audience is usually glad to see the last of her. In 
the photograph from Tripoli she is rushing round wildly 
looking for someone upon whom to vent her temper. 

Her kirari is : — 

" I am Uwal Yara, Ah ! All ! Ah ! I am Uwal Yara, 
Um, Um, Um, Um." 

Her song is : — 

" The elephant does not [stop to] consider, O Magajiya 
[and neither do you]. 
0 One with the big cloth for carrying children, 

BORI —THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS 303 

O One with the big belly for bearing children. 

O Elephant, finish the quarrel, Magajiya, 

O One with the club for beating [people]. 

The Elephant does not [stop to] consider, O Magajiya. 

O Woman like a Man, Magajiya, 

Without delay, O Mother of The Town." 

The next in order of importance is Yerima (one of the 
princely titles) (38), a son of Dundurusu, and he is known 
also as Abba, Alfanda, Buwaye, Dan Galladima, 
Daudu, Gugaya, Gimba, Mai-Gidan Goro, Mai-Wuka 
Daya, Murukushe, and Shakali. The clothes and 
weapons of this spirit, and the caparisons of his horse are 
all of gold, because he is a prince, but whether he repre- 
sents an ancestor or a son of a Jinn Sultan is uncertain. 
He gives his victims fever or any other illness, and if they 
gamble he will steal" their money — i.e. make them lose it. 
The reference to the knife is that being a chief's son he 
takes his father's knife and kills poor bori with it, and no 
questions are asked, for other bori think that it is the 
chief himself who has done the deed. The proper sacrifice 
is a bull or a red and white ram (sandan bagaruwa) or a 
white cock with a red saddle, and a white hen with a red 
breast, or else fowls with red and white spots— red being 
the royal colour. At the dance he wears gorgeous robes 
of silk and satin, and walks up and down with several 
others, jumps and falls, and finally sits and puts one leg 
stiffly over the other. A chair is brought for him and he 
holds his Court. Then he beats his elbows upon the ground 
three times, he calls his followers, cuddles them, sneezes, 
and goes. In the photograph (Tunis) he is being shaved 
by Mai-Aska, and he is wearing a dauka, a woman's head- 
dress, but that is merely to show that the mount (Khameis) 
is a boka. 

;o, THE B l.v OF I III- B0R1 

His kirari is : 

I .1 in tin i, atesl of the young men. I am Dun In. 

[I give presenl »] if not with your property, then with 

• imeone el se's. 
Take black pota sh and give it to the black goat." 

Mi, songs are m.inv, the best known being : 

" o Yerima, I follow God, I follow you, 
Great Camel. The head of a lizard [is oi no usej except 

as a charm. 
Yerima, roar. Really this is your father's palace [i.e. 

you are amongst your own followers] 
[This is the line given with the music in Chapter XVII.] 
Drink in your praises. Here is a bucket, a bucket of 

iron, 
Great Camel. The head of a lizard [is of no use] except 

as a charm. 
Yerima, to which town shall I return ? 
Great Camel. The head of a lizard [is of no use] except 

as a charm. 
You take me to Jan Gari or Boda, 
Whatever you dislike I will leave it, 
You take me to Sokoto or Rinno, 
Whatever you dislike I will leave it. 
O great One. Pride is enough for you, 
Great Camel. The head of a lizard [is of no use] except 

as a charm." 

The reference to the head of a lizard is that charms are 
sometimes made by writing a sentence on a piece of paper, 
placing it in the dried head of a lizard, and wrapping the 
whole in leather, thus converting it into a laiya or talisman 
for any ill to which the sentence applies. Why it is 
inserted here is more than my informants could tell me. 
Boda is a town in the Kano province, of which all the 

BORI—THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS 305 

inhabitants, botli male and female, are said to have 
belonged to the bori at one time. Another song, not so 
polite, is : 

" He gives women a disease which cannot be cured, 
He afflicts them with worms which kill men, 
He has a two-storeyed house, a chief's income. 
He preens himself, he changes colour like a chameleon. 
He has robes of velvet. 
Not all women have seen Daudu, 
Only those with marks on their mouths [many Hausas 

have them] or Arabs. 
O Yerima, your father is a mallam, your mother [has 

her lips] pierced." 

The reference to the chameleon means that he changes 
his robe several times to show that — as a prince — he is 
well off. The last line is somewhat in derision, for a 
mallam should not marry such a woman since she is a 
very low type of pagan. 

Then come Mallam Dan Sangammi and Mallam Ali 
Geshe, and with these may be considered two other 
mallams, although not next on the list — viz. Duwatsu 
and Dan Kalgo. 

Mallam Dan Sangammi (36), gives any illness, probably 
lumps on, or deformation of, the back, judging by the 
song. After his prayer, he beats his left forearm with his 
right three times as if cutting it, and then changes hands 
and does the same again, as if he were righting, and 
catching the cuts of a sword upon his shield. In the 
photograph he is shown with Mallams Alhaji and Alkali, 
but he does not pray with them, he waits until they have 
finished, for he is their junior. 
u 

3©6 l III B IA OF THE B0R1 

His song i^ : 

" You have possessions [here = private paints] Sangam, 

Son of .1 M.ill.un, 
You !i.i\ i li'j.iin, Son of a Mallam, 

Husband of Gajera [not known otherwise], Sangam, 

Son of a Mallam. 
Let us go to Hausaland for the sake of this Youth. 
You have possessions, O Fool, Breaker of Horses pic 

twists the necks of his mounts if not pleased with 

them]. 
Saruru, you have possessions. 
You have possessions, Son of a Mallam, 
O Husband with a Hump, Wife witli a Hump lower 

down, Breaker of Horses." 

Mallam Ali Geshe (40), is also known as Sarikin 
Fushi (King of Wrath, who, however, in Tunis is not a 
bee), Sarikin Diya (Chief of the Youths), Sidi Ali 
(Lord Ali), Zakuwa (Lion — because of his ferocity), 
and Gadanga (Strong One). He is the brother-in-law 
and cousin of Yerima, the husband of Nana Magajiya, and 
the father of Haukachi. He gives chest complaints 
and their medicines, the proper sacrifice being any cock 
and hen except black ones. He is extremely jealous, 
so it is not safe for a married woman to be his mare, 
for if she has slept with her husband at a recent date, 
the bori will cause her to break her limbs, and will 
kill the husband. At the dance, after praying, he beats 
his shoulders, hips, and chest, three times for each, 
then rushes at a wall, trying to batter it with his 
shoulders, and then he falls upon his shoulders and his 
chest. 

In the photograph he is holding himself stiffly, ready to 
spring up and rush. 

BORI—THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS 307 

His kirari is : 

" I went to the farm, I prepared the ground, I was left 
a bori without a mare," the meaning being that a woman 
always takes this part in Tunis, and the bori is not popular 
because he treats her so badly. 

His song is : 

" O Lion, O Geshe, O He [whose roar sounds] like a drum 
[in the forest]. 

[Brother-in-Law] of Yerima, Sidi Ali, 

Welcome to my Geshe, who has a special drum, 

O Lion, Son of a Chief, consider, you consider, Sidi Ali. 

See the woman against the wall, she is hurt [the godiya 
is here referred to, very unusual]. 

[Brother-in-Law] of Yerima, Father Ali, 

O Wizard Geshe, O wizard, you conquer, you avenge 
yourself, O Geshe. 

If the mare is good 

Her bori also is good [for a mount who dances badly 
will bring ridicule upon the spirit]. 

The character of the mount is the character of the bori, 

The character of the master of the house is the char- 
acter of his wives." 

Mallam Duwatsu is a youthful bori, and so is hasty, but 
he often settles quarrels. He gives to his victims those 
chest complaints which produce rapid breathing (? pneu- 
monia), the proper sacrifice being a speckled cock and 
hen. At the dance he announces himself as Duwatsu the 
Wizard, and after having prayed, he is given a stone for 
each hand, and, having clenched his fists, he beats his 
breast with them. " To show that he is not hurt " was 
the explanation — probably in order to draw attention 
to the fact that his victims, at any rate, do have pain 
there. * 

308 THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

His song is : 

" Duwatsu, the wizard, you give liim room, 
The bogey, the wizard, you give him room, 
Duwatsu from the East you give him room. 

The bogey, the wizard, you give him room, 

Duwatsu, the wizard, our father is in the dancing ring 

[so throw him your offerings]. 
Stones he has taken [in his hands], the young wizard, 
The friend of Ja Gaude, the breaker of kola-nuts [i.e. lie 

is ricli enough to eat them], the wizard, 
The friend of Zakuwa. Stones he has taken, 
The friend of Zakuwa. 

Dutsi has seized [someone's soul] the great wizard, 
See here a ram, drink its blood [and let the human 

victim go]. 
If he has seized [someone] he, the great one, 
He will carry him off." 

In the above, East is changed to South in Tunis, but he 
is supposed to have come from Murzuk. Tunis is called 
East because one travels via Tripoli to get there from 
Kano, and Duwatsu is supposed to have come from there. 
" Our father " is simply a title of respect. 

Mallam Dan Kalgo (40), is also a youth, who gives 
aches in the bones of the limbs (? rheumatism) and prob- 
ably internal pains, the sacrifice being as for Mallam 
Duwatsu. At the dance he prays, and then rises and 
stands still, putting his left foot in front of and then 
behind his right several times, and raising and letting fall 
his right hand. He then turns about and goes through 
similar actions with the right foot, thinking that he is on 
horseback riding in amongst and spearing his enemies. 
He then sits down, and beats himself in the small of the 
back and stomach ; and then falls upon the ground, 

BORI—THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS 309 

pushes himself up on his elbows, and falls to one side. He 
is anything but moral, and in the photograph he is looking 
about for women. 
His song is : 

" O Husband of Ten [he has four wives and six con- 
cubines], O Husband of Ten, Son of a Chief, 

O Husband of Ten, O Wizard, one who does the pil- 
grimage in one day, 

Slavery in the kitchen uses up the strength of the slaves 
[for there is plenty of pounding, kneading, stirring 
and cooking to be done], 

We did not bring goods, yet they [the Arabs] said 
' Where are your goods ? ' 

We did not bring money, yet they said ' Where is your 
money ? ' 

O Husband of Ten, O Husband of Ten, O Young Kalgo 
[i.e. strong as a -tree], 

Slavery in the chief's house uses up the strength of the 
slaves." 

CHAPTER XXII 

BORI — THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS — continued 

Sarikin Rafi, the chief spirit of the lakes and rivers, is 
also known as Sarikin Kogi (King of the Big River), 
Sarikin Bahari (King of the Big Water), Sarikin 
Faddamma (King of the Marsh), Ba-Daure (One of 
Daura), or Mai-Garin Daura (Citizen of Daura), Mai- 
Tumbutu (Owner of Timbuktu), Salima, Dan Gozo, and 
Zugu (Shuttle). His parentage is unknown, but he was 
created in Daura and nursed by Nana Arzikki, I was told, 
though I suggest his origin in Chapter XXX. He natur- 
ally inhabits the various waters, but he is also a great 
farmer, for the water makes the land fertile. He is the 
patron spirit of the rain-makers too, apparently, though 
he has no direct power over the rain, he can only ask 
Allah to send it — possibly a later idea. He wanted all 
the land watered by his rivers, but the other bori objected, 
and at last excluded him from the southern parts of 
Hausaland, though, as a recompense, they allowed him 
to have all the country to the west as far as Timbuktu. 
He was once head of the Yan Riga, but he was so despotic 
and cruel that he was deprived of his position, and a 
mallam (Alhaji) was appointed in his stead. 

He can give any illness, though he specialises in those 
brought on by damp, the proper sacrifice being a speckled 
cock and hen, or, on great occasions, a bull or he-goat as 
near as possible of the same colours. 

At the dance he yells, jumps and falls, and then leans 

310 

BORI-THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS ;u 

upon one arm, repeats, and leans upon the other. He 
rushes at a wall and beats himself against it, and will 
throw himself into any water near, so the well at the 
Gidan Tsafi has to be guarded during his performance. 

Fig. 34. — The Spear of 
Sarikin Rafi 

Fig. 35.— The Spear of 
Sarikin Masu 

The Arifa and others persuade him to stop these antics 
and spare his mount, reminding him that he is a big spirit, 
and usually his fury abates, but the bori may reply " The 
fowl does not tread upon her chicks because she hates 
them " (but because she does not see them), and continue. 

312 THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

However, eventually, lit- is persuaded, and when quieted 
he counts his in-.ui , ;md then puts the palms <>f bis hands 
ii} ». .11 his knees, If he appears with Yerima, he sits by 

him (as in the photograph), and will be shaved after liim 

by Mai-Aska. A calabash of water is brought to him, 
and he noses it three times, and then sneezes and goes. 
Sometimes he walks around with a spear as if spearing 

fish, but he is then called Sarikin Masu, and it is probable 
that these are becoming two distinct spirits though 
originally avatars of the same one. 
His kirari is : 

" I am a strip of cloth on the earth, and a strip of 
cloth above. Thirty seams are the antidote to sitting 
idle. I am mad, my children are mad, my wife is mad." 

The Hausa cloth is made in narrow strips which 
must be stitched together, so people are forced to be 
industrious, but what the meaning of the first sentence is 
I could not discover. It is just possible that a river is 
likened to a strip of cloth. At any rate, my informants 
said that he referred in some way to the rain and the 
rivers. 

The song sung to him is : 

" My father, he who has his portion, I follow God, I follow 

you. 
O Owner of the Heavens do not throw me down, O One 

of Timbuktu, 
O One of Jan Kassa [the Red Country where the bori 

are], Owner of the City of Daura, 
O One of Timbuktu, you are the owner of the Red 

Country, 
O Owner of Daura. Oh, oh, oh, Stranger [representing 

the cries of the ill-treated mount]. 

BORI—THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS 313 

O Child of the Shuttle, save my life [i.e. O Cloth pre- 
vent my being injured when I am driven against the 
wall. The mount is supposed to be begging for mercy]. 

If you hear the women's cry in Jan Gari [you know 
that] 

The rivers are swollen. 

If you hear shouting in Jan Gari 

The spirits are in the water. 

You cringe before the women, 

That is not power [He will not go to war, he stays 
behind and seduces the female bori]. 

Improve your towns, O Bad One [i.e. train your youths 
properly]. 

This year's war will not be finished [yet]. 

The pagans have slung on their quivers, 

This year's war will not be finished [yet]. 

Fill your mouth with kola-nuts like ground-nuts [you 
can get them] „ 

Where there are Filani. Tasawa is a city, 

The gamblers will ruin it. 

O Sir, to like you and to like another 

Is not right [lie is always going from one woman to 
another] . 

He roars, the earth salutes him, it is going to open. 

It seems as if he is angry because he has not eaten kola- 
nuts [always being chewed by men of rank]. 

He of Daura, he is angry because he has not eaten kola- 
nuts. 

O One of Timbuktu, you are the Owner of Jan Gari." 

Next comes Mai-Fitilla (One with the Lamp) (39), 
who is one of the wives of Yerima. It is her duty to 
supervise the fires and lights in the city of Jan Gari, and 
generally to see that the bori children and servants do 
their work in the house. When she seizes a victim, his 
eyes turn up and in a wrong direction, and he falls down 

;i I THE HAN OF THE BORI 

(Pin a fit). At the dance, she seizes the souls of the 
human ini-.tiv. ses of Ycrima if she sees them in the ring. 
In the photograph, she is supposed to be eating fire, for 
if i string which has been soaked in oil and lighted is held 
out t<» her, ti«' pats it to Tier mouth and is not burned. 
Her kirari is : 

"Ya. ya, ya, Light a Lamp, Light a Lamp. Light a 
Lamp. I eat fire." 

Her song is : 

" 0 She-Elephant of the women of Medina [a bori I ity of 

which she is queen], 
She fills her mouth with kola-nuts, 
She covers her face with scent [another sign of riches 

and rank]." 

With Mai-Fitilla is sometimes confused Nana Medina, 
but, although the songs are the same, the attributes are 
different. She gives any illness, her proper sacrifice 
being grey speckled fowls. At the dance, she beats her 
face, chest, and body, and tries to tear her clothes. 

Ja Gaude (40) was said by one man to be the elder 
brother of Yerima, though for some reason not holding 
so high a rank, but the general view is that he is a relative 
of Ba-Toye, and, although said not to be connected with 
fire, his characteristics are very similar to those of that 
pagan spirit, as he climbs and roars. Perhaps he was 
once a Mohammedan counterpart. He is a friend of 
Mallams Dan Kalgo and Duwatsu. At the dance, he 
moves around, then throws his hands alternately into the 
air and draws them down, and moves his feet as if climb- 
ing. He gives chest complaints (? pneumonia after 

39 

• ** 

■ft 

40 

39. — Mai-Fitilla, the Spirit of the Lamp, is seen on the left. Next 
comes Magajiya or Uwal Yara, then Yar Maso, drawing her knife across 
her throat, and then Risana, one of the spirits which give itch. 

40. — J a Gaude is in the centre, while to the left and right respectively 
are Mallam Dan Kalgo, who gives rheumatism, and Zakuwa, the bori of 
chest complaints. 

BORI—THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS 315 

burning), the proper sacrifice being fowls of any coloui 
other than black. He is supposed to do the jifa (jump) 
forty times (three is the number for others), just to show 
how strong he is — possibly because fire jumps from one 
tree to another. 
His song is : 

" Roar, you roar, O Follower of Ali, 

O Laughing One with [however] an evil countenance, 
roar [for he smiles while plotting evil]. 

Snatcher of the insides of cattle [referring to his un- 
governable rage], roar, 

Roar, Ja Gaude, You, you roar, O Strong One, 

Follower of Ali." 

Next comes Dafo or Sarikin Makadda, the chief of the 
drummers, who naturally supervises the bori musicians, 
possibly an ancestor. He injures his victims' arms, thus 
preventing them from playing (? cramp), but fortunately 
any fowls available may be offered as a sacrifice. When 
he comes to the dance, he makes the usual movements, 
and then hops round, playing upon his left breast with his 
right hand, and making as if altering the tone with his left. 

His kirari is : 

" I am the chief of the drummers, I drum for the youths, 
I drum for the elders." 

His song is : 

" O Drum come here, O Drum come here, 
O Drum come here [Son] of Miriam. 
Come and enjoy the drumming, [Son] of Miriam. 
Chief of the drummers, Dafo, forgiveness we are seeking 
[in case those awaiting the summons for their special 
spirits may have seemed to be impatient]. * 

3i6 ////• B IV or Till BORl 

We know that drumming is difficult, forgiveness we re 

king. 
[Son] of Miriam tin- in. ill drum follows after the father 

of the iliunKi . 

[Son] <>f Miri.im the hourglass - shaped drum follows 
after tlir father of the drummei . 
•n] of Miriam the kettle drum follows after the father 
of the drummers." 

And so on, naming other instruments. 

Mai-Aska (The One with the Razor), or Wanzami 
(the Barber) (38) as he is more usually called in Nigeria, 
is the next, possibly an ancestor. He is the husband of 
Yar-Maso and NanaTsamiya — and, an 1 ording to some, the 
son of Kuri and Uwar-Dowa, and is the tonsorial expert, 
scarifier, and circumciser of boriland. He gives his 
victims baldness, shaving rashes, and slow healing after 
an operation, the proper sacrifice being a cock and hen 
coloured black or red in front, on the wings, and along 
the back, or else red, white, and grey speckled ones. At 
the dance he comes in with several other attendants upon 
the Yerima, all of whom he pretends to shave, after his 
(human) mistress has brought him water. Then the chairs 
are removed, and all dance, and throw themselves down 
together. Then they go around the ring upon their 
knees, stretching out their hands (see 111. 55), and 
then they stop and beat their elbows upon the ground 
until (after the third time) a cloth is thrown between them. 
The Yerima's chair is then brought back, and, after he 
has seated himself, Mai-Aska sits on the ground in front, 
and Bawa, Mai-Bulala, and Sarikin Raft (if present) stand 
or sit close behind Yerima. A red cloth is then thrown 
over the lot, when they sneeze and go. 

BORI—THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS ;i7 
Mai-Aska's kirari is : 

" [It is] I, O Women, see the barber, blood gushes out. 
[It is] I, O Women, see the scarifier, blood gushes out." 

His song is : 

" I do for you the pounding, I do for you the winnowing, 
Take the spoon and taste the broth of Doguwa. 
O one who stops the cry of the poor, O Barber [lie gives 

presents], 
O youths. Oh ! Oh ! You do the shaving for the Son of 

Zanfara, 
Shaver of the people of the world, Shaver, 
You are the black stalk of grass in the thatch unable to 

be pulled out [else the roof will have a hole] 
You are the black horse unable to be tied to a post, 
You are the dark pit difficult to get out of. 
O Youths, Oh ! Oh ! the slave will pay [when he has been 

operated upon]. 
Whether within the house the slave will pay, 
Or within the entrance-porch the slave will pay. 
You are the black beads [worn around the neck] difficult 

to thread. 
Dried monkey-flesh is only for pagans, dog's meat for the 

heathen. 
To-day now, I heard the cry of Mako, I heard the cry of 

Son Bawa [another of Yerima's suite]. 
[For] signs of punctuation [come] out, O Women, see 

the Barber, the chief [if the word scarification were 

used, the women would be afraid to come]. 
Whoever has someone who wants a pattern [done]. 
[Son] of Doguwa, are you, and son of Kuri." 

Sambo or Sarikin Filani (Filani chief) is one of the 
spirits which look after the masu-sharru, probably an 
ancestral spirit. He is a younger son of Kuri and Doguwa- 
Na-Daji, according to most (the husband of the latter, say 

3i 8 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

some), and gives the same illnesses as his mother (or wife). 
He wears a leather loin-covering, sometimes his face is 
covered, and lie < arrie - a stii k and a whip. At the dance, 
he beats himself with a whip three times OVCT each 
shoulder (not with two whips, as does M.ii-Bulala), and he 
looks for his imaginary herds of phantom cattle. 

His levari is : 

"Yo, Yo, Yo." 

His song is : 

" La, la, la, la, Sambo, we arc going to tend our herds. 
La, la, la, la, Sambo, we are going to tend our herds. 
Re, re, re, re [a Filani call], we are going to tend our 

herds. 
Young Fulah, Son of His Parent, we are going to tend 

our herds. 
Drink fresh milk, drink sour milk, we are going to tend 

our herds." 

Ba-Gobiri (the man of Gobir) is also known as Mai- 
Kurada (the One with the Hatchet). He is a slave of 
Yerima, but himself enslaves people, and, being a warrior, 
he carries a sword and a spear, as well as his hatchet. 
His sacrifice is fowls with a yellowish tint in their feathers. 
At the dance, he poises his spear and thrusts downwards 
on each side, then he moves round in the usual way, begs, 
and beats the ground. 

His kirari is : 

" I am the slave of the elders of the town." 
His song is : 

" Man of Gobir I like you, 
Both he of the house and he of the forest. 
Though you see him with a bracelet [of gold or silver, 
the badge of a prince], 

BORI—THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS 319 

Though you see him [thus] wait, 

You will find that he is a slave [explaining][the first two 

lines]. 

Man of Gobir I like you, 

Not because you are a slave. 

The man of Gobir, the slave, came to Kano, 

He was in slavery. 

O One with the Hatchet, the slave of Daudu (Yerima), 

O One with the Hatchet, he cursed me. 

O One with the Hatchet, he ruined me. 

Is this one one Spirit or many spirits ? " [Said in 

derision, as his actions are not distinctly characteristic 

since he copies those of several spirits.] 

Son-Bawa (Desire for a Slave), said by most to be the 

same as Mai-Koraiya (He . _ *+^\ 

with the Sharp Bracelets) is 

a spirit of Zanfara, and is said & as 

to have the masu-koraiya and 
the wrestlers in his care, 
though there seems to be no 
special invocation to him in 
the tests described elsewhere 
(p. 208) . He makes his victim's 
nose bleed, the proper sacrifice 
being a brown cock and hen. 
In some confused way, Son- 
Bawa is identical with Yerima, 
andMai-Koraiyahas a separate 
existence, for it is Yerima who 
is supposed to be singing the 
song, the latter having gone Fig 36.— a Koraiya 

to Gwanja with his wife and family for kola-nuts. 
Another version of the story is that Mai-Koraiya went 

.\2» THE HAN 01 THE BORI 

alone, leaving his wife withoul any family or signs of one. 
On his return three years Liter, he found her with a < hild 

by her Side, another at the breast, and another in her 
Womb, s<> he left her, and it is she who is supposed to be 
seeking him. At the dance, he holds a peculiar-shaped axe, 
and .ifter the usual parade, lie cuts at each forearm three 
times with the other hand, then at his forehead, then at 
his thighs. He is supposed to be cutting down an opponent ; 
he would really guard himself with his left arm, of course. 
But this, Haj AH says, was not the original weapon. The 
proper koraiya is a metal two-edged bracelet, in shape like 
a pulley-wheel. The miniature axe in Tunis (see Fig. 36) 
resembles a throwing knife in use in the north-east of 
Nigeria. 

His kirari is : 

" I am Son-Bawa, see my footprints, see [thosel of my 
dog." 

His song is : 

" Where is the slave ? 
He went to Gwanja [the kola-nut centre, north of 

Ashanti] this year, 
With a baby behind, with one in the womb, 
And a child walking in front. 
Son of the Galladima of Jar Gari, 
Where is the slave ? 

Stir yourself Mako I have not seen the slave 
Shish [i.e. move] Monkeys and Birds, I have not seen the 

slave. 
Shish Monkeys and Birds, where is the slave ? 
Shish Monkeys and Birds, I have not eaten any kola-nuts 

[a great deprivation for a chief]. 
Stir yourself Mako, I have not seen the slave. 
O Birds of Gwanja, where is the slave ? 

BORI—THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS 321 

One who cuts at the forehead, where is the slave ? 
Where is the slave, the son of the Prince of Jan Gari ? 
He can wrestle, that spirit of Zanfara." 

Mai-Kurufu or Mai-Bulala (41) means " The One with 
the Whip." In some way he looks after the masu-sharru, 
and yet he is not their patron spirit, for the bush Doguwa 
and Sambo have them under their special care, as is only 
natural since they are Fulahs. He whips the young bori at 
their school in Jan Gari if not diligent, but he also beats 
human husbands and wives secretly, and they quarrel, 
each thinking the other is doing it. He also makes his 
victims scratch their arms, etc., so that they leave long 
scars like the weals from a whip. His offerings are grey 
speckled fowls. At the dance he has a hippopotamus- 
hide whip in each hand, and he flogs his back three times 
with each across each shoulder alternately, then whips 
both bulalas over his right shoulder three times, then over 
his left three times, and then repeats the programme. It 
is possible that he originated in the representations of the 
death of Hassan and Husein, in which the characters and 
attendants cut themselves with swords or flog their bodies 
until raw.1 
His kirari is : 

" I am Bulala, Mai-Kurufu. See me Bulala in the 
ring." 

His song is : 

" My life, my life it drives men to the forest [i.e. when this 
bori rides, his mount wishes to run to the bush so as 
to escape punishment. It also refers to the separa- 
tion of married couples]. 

My life, O Whip, Son of a Hippopotamus, 

Great Spirit of the people of the world, * 

.;-- 

THE BAN OB THE HORI 

My life, O Whip, Owner of the Hippopotami! 

My life, my life drives men to the forest. 

He wished to many, he had not even a cowry, 

He began to grumble, he put his head upon his arms. 

[wanted to marry a slave of Magajiya's, 

The Bulala prevented me " [she was afraid of it]. 

This is the only case which I have rome across in which 
a bori is called rai (life), and the people could 
not tell me why.2 There is no reason to 
suppose that he is more intimately connected 
with his human victims than any of the 
other spirits. 

Sarikin Makafi (Chief of the Blind Men) 
(60) afflicts his enemies with blindness. At 
the dance he goes about with a stick, tapping 
his way along the ground, and a small 
calabash which he holds out for offerings ; 
he does not jump. The proper stick is 
shown by Fig. 37, that in HI. 60 is not for 
great occasions. 

His kirari is : 

" Eyes ! Eyes ! who will make me a 
present of eyes ? " 

His song is : 

" Behind is darkness, before is darkness [i.e. 
he cannot see in any direction] 
Sarikin Makafi has entered. 
Tread on the mat of the chief [because 
he cannot see it, otherwise he would 
not dare to do so], 
Tread on the mat of the poor man [it is all the same to 
him]. 

Fig. 37. 

The Stick of 

Sarikin Makafi 

*i 

41. — Ba-Dako gives illnesses arising Er< m damp. Mai-Bulala whips 
husband and wife secretly, thus making them quarrel, while Ma-Damba^je, 
the boxer, makes the arms of his victims stiff. 

4::. — Kuba and Shaiyu. two doubtful Tripoli bori. 

BORI—THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS 323 

Open your eyes O Mallam of the Chief [a blind man is 

supposed to be very cunning]. 
Open your eyes [but] you cannot see." 

Ba-Dako (in Hausaland Ba-Dakuwa) (41) is a younger 
brother of Sarikin Rafi, but, as a contrast, he is a great 
warrior, being entrusted with the care of the rear or flank- 
guards in the bori wars. He gives the same illnesses as 
his brother, but the proper sacrifices are fowls coloured 
black or white, or variegated like a guinea-fowl. I rather 
fancy that he is confused in some way with the rainbow, 
but he is not the same as Gaj jimare. At the dance, he is 
very careful of his appearance, for after the usual parade, 
he takes out a looking-glass and rubs his face, etc., in order 
to titivate himself up, and so attract human mistresses. 

His kirari is : 

" I am Ba-Dako the Prince, I am Ba-Dako the Relative 
of Sarikin Rafi, I am Ba-Dako the Relative of Gozo." 

His song is : 

" Welcome to him Ba-Dako. 
What shall we say ? You have quilted armour. 
Ba-Dako come quickly, 

I follow the Owner of the Heavens, I follow you, 
Ba-Dako go ahead. 

Ba-Dako, Relative of Rafi, with you I go ahead. 
Ba-Dako come quickly. 

Ba-Dako, Relative of Gozo, with you I go ahead. 
Ba-Dako go ahead. 
Ba-Dako, I follow God, I follow you." 

Ma-Dambache (41) is the boxer. He is a slave of the 
Yerima, so the latter will not stay in the ring with him. 
He looks after the human boxers, though, again, he is not 

324 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

necessarily their p;itron-spirit. He gives rheumatism in 
the .inns, but yellowish fowls will propitiate him. At the 
dance, he challenges imaginary rivals, and goes through 
the actions <>f boxing, the thumb of the hand to be bound 
being plai ed between the first and second fingers. 
His kir.iri is : 

" I am the slave of Yerima [but] I am more proud than 
the Yerima, whoever has any boxers let him bring them 
out, here is the ring." 

Another is : 

" I am the Rock- Jerboa, unless a man has dug a hole 
[for himself] I will find his hiding place." 

His song is : 

" You are the Yerima's dodo [or doshiro, boxer] 
God is true, the Prophet is true. 
You are greater than Yerima in the ring [yet] you are 

Yerima's slave. 
You are the Yerima's slave, his slave voluntarily [one 

who has not been bought, but has put himself under 

his protection]. 
If I knew who was going to the water I should take a pot. 
If I knew who was going to the farm I should take wood. 
The promise of a new moon is seventeen days [of light]. 
My fault with the camel [was in not] going slowly [for 

he tried to ride it fast like a horse and ruined it]. 
You are the Yerima's boxer. 
God is true, the Prophet is true. 
When she is in the house she is the wife of the Yerima 

[only because she is under observation] 
When she has come outside she is the wife of Ma- 

Dambache." [This refers to one of the wives of 

Yerima who is carrying on an intrigue with this 

spirit.] 

BORI—THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS 325 

Risana (39) is one of the wives of Kuri. She gives her 
victims irritation in certain parts (? dhobi itch), the proper 
sacrifice being fowls, bine or black, or of the same colour 
as those of Kuri. At the dance, she moves around, bites 
her hands, rubs her chest, scratches herself, sits down, 
tries to tear her clothes like Magajiya, yells, and then does 
the three jumps, sneezes and goes. 

Her kirari is : 

" I Risana have come, see me Risana in the ring." 

Her song is : 

" O Risana, Wife of Kuri, O Risana Wife of Kuri, 
You Risana what are you searching for ? 
Risana whom has she seized ? 
O Risana, Wife of Kuri, 
Our Mother whom has she seized ? " 

She, like other female bori, looks around for the human 
mistresses of her spirit husband so as to punish them. 
If she catches the souls of any of them, she becomes silent 
at once, and the onlookers become anxious, and wonder 
whose it can be, for there may be no signs at once. 

The next is Yar-Maso (Daughter of the Knife) or Yar- 
Sarikin Pawa (39). She is the daughter of the Chief 
Butcher (the head of the market) as her second name 
indicates, and a wife of Mai-Aska. She can give any ill- 
ness. When she arrives at the dance, she drives all but 
her own relatives from the ring, for she is very quarrelsome, 
and most unfriendly to strange bori. On her announcing 
herself, therefore, the others draw quickly to one side. 

Her kirari is : 

" I am the Daughter of the Knife, I am the Daughter of 
the Chief Butcher, let me kill, let me drink blood, let me 
eat flesh." 

326 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

I was unable to obtain the song. 

Another itch spirit is Nana Ayesha Baba, who 
behaves in a similar manner. 

Her song is : 

" O she who seeks men by crying, Nana Ayesha [i.e. she 
wants them, and if they don't come to her, she 
cries. 

But she does not wish to be married lest her husband 
later on should have another and younger wife]. 

O she who seeks men by crying but does not want a rival 
wife. 

She does not want a rival wife. You would see punch- 
ing " [i.e. she would hit her]. 

Ruba (42), Shaiyu (42), and Sainya, all males, are 
indefinite spirits of whom but little seems to be known, 
except that Shaiyu has a very bad character in Jan Gari, 
but they can give any illness, and any fowls will propitiate 
them. At the dance, they move forwards and backwards 
in the ring, but there are no characteristic movements so 
far as I could see. 

Their songs are : 

" Your good will I am seeking, 
Verily not riches. 
Your good will I am seeking. 
If you like me I like you, 
Even though you do not give me anything. 
Where is Ruba ? He has gone on ahead." 

and 

" Go yourself, do not send a substitute. 
Going yourself is [the work of] a sherif (descendant of 

the Prophet, and so great man], 
Shaiyu, the immoral Spirit." 

BORI—THE MOHAMMEDAN SPIRITS 327 

and 

" Sainya, Sainya, see him. 
Sainya welcome to you." 

Then comes a group of female spirits, all three of which 
are trees, and, I suppose, at one time were totems, though 
not known as such nowadays, I am told. Nana Durimi 
(the Lady Ficus) makes her victims listless (? through 
their having sat under it), the proper sacrifice being dry- 
grass-coloured fowls. At the dance, she moves around 
waving a cloth, jumps, sneezes, and goes. 

Her kirari is : 

" I Durimi, the giver of cold, I Durimi have come. 
I Durimi from Jan Gari, if I like." 

The song is the same, except for the simple alteration 
of the pronouns. The meaning is that whoever sits under 
the ficus she makes feel cold if she wishes to do so. 

Nana Chediya (Lady Ficus — another species) makes 
the eyelashes turn into the eyes and so have to be pulled 
out. In other respects she is similar to Nana Durimi. 

Lastly comes Nana Tsamiya (Lady Tamarind). She 
was a wife of Mai-Aska, but they quarrelled through her 
jealousy, and then he drove her out of his house. She 
can give her victims any illness, the proper sacrifice being 
fowls of the same colour as a hawk. 

Her kirari and song are : 

" Alas for me [it is upon] my own head [i.e. it is my 
own fault], 
Kuri's son has gone and left me." 

CHAPTER XXIII 

BORI- THE BLACK SPIRITS 

The next spirits to be considered are the Babbaku or 
" Black Ones," all of which either farm or hunt in the 
forest, and are no doubt either pagan nature-gods or else 
ancestral spirits. Strangely enough, the chief of these is 
not Kuri, but Dakaki (Crawler), or, as he is better known 
in Hausaland, Mai-Ja-Chikki (The Drawer along of The 
Stomach) — i.e. the snake. He it is who, when the bori 
are released, comes out first and sweeps their playground. 
He gives any illness, the proper offering being four cala- 
bashes of milk and four eggs, placed alternately in a 
circle, though a sacrifice of a red cock with a black breast 
and a grey hen is made on important occasions. " If you 
leave the eggs and milk for three days in the gidan tsafi 
you will find the milk drunk and the egg-shells empty, a 
tiny hole having been pierced in each." At the same 
time, Dakaki is very fond of blood, and is one of the first to 
drink that which has run from the sacrificed animal. 

At the dance, he crawls, or rather pulls his body along 
the ground, raising his head now and then to look around, 
but the other Masu-Bori put their hands before his eyes 
when he does this, for if he were to see any of the onlookers 
he might become angry, and kill them with a glance. He 
thus appears to be the personification of the evil eye. 
Should any of his followers wish to consult him, his head 
and that of the questioner are covered with a black cloth 
so as to bring them together. When it is time to go, he is 

328 

BORI- THE BLACK SPIRITS 329 

shown the hole in a drum, and, thinking it to be a hollow 
tree, he sneezes and goes inside — leaving the visible 
human mount in the ring, of course. 

He has no kirari, for " he has no mouth " — i.e. he 
cannot speak. 

His song is : 

" O Snake, what do you say ? 
O Wizard of the Night, what do you say ? 
0 Bori Dancers, you have bad medicines. 
The Drawer along of The Stomach is having his day. 
This night [there are] wizards of the night in plenty, 
The Drawer along of The Stomach is having his day, 
See a spirit without feet, 

The Drawer along of The Stomach is having his day. 
This night the bearded ones [i.e. hooded ones] of night 

are in plenty, 
The Drawer along of The Stomach is having his day. 
O Crawling Bori, what do you say ? 
The Drawer along of The Stomach is having his day. 
This night those which go shish are in plenty [i.e. those 

things which make a noise like shish — e.g. snakes]. 
The Drawer along of The Stomach is having his day. 
Mounts of The Spirits, bind on your kamarbands [to be 

able to dance the better], 
The Drawer along of The Stomach is having his day. 
Hey ! Crawler, Snake, he [your intended victim] is in 

front not behind [i.e. the singers are trying to divert 

the snake's attention from someone in the audience]. 
He is in front, O Red Eyed One. See we have an evil 

guest. 
Where is the fun of laughing ? Whoever may laugh 

[at you], I shall not do so. 
Hey, Crawler, Hey, Crawler, mounting at night is not 

for you, 
By day we like you to mount so that everyone can see 

you " [and avoid your evil eye]. 

//// /; \N OF THE BORI 

Next comes Kuri, Yerko, or Yandu (the Filani name) 
(44), the husband <>f Doguwa, Risana, and others. At 
one time, in all probability, lie was the chief spirit of the 
pagans, for he can give charms for everything, and is 

SSI 

FlG. 38.— Kuri's 
Pestle with 
which he beats 
himself 

Fio. 39.— Kuri's Club 

Fig. 40. — Kuri's 
Throwing-stick 

responsible for boxing and other sports. Kuri's universal 
prescription is composed of pieces of the roots of the Jibda 
Kassa, the Uwal Magunguna, the Sahara, the Aduwa, the 
Gamji, the Tumfafiya, the Kalgo, the Magariya, the Notion 

44 

43- — Mai-Ja-Chikki, the essence of the evil eye, is crawling on the 
right. Dan Jigo stands above. To the left is Gindema. a highway rob- 
ber ami Spirit nt Fire. Jigo (who gives shivering fit;-) is waiting in 
ambush, while Ami. a spirit of drunkenness, is drinking. 

44. — Jato is a disreputable spirit. Kuri was the chief god of the pagan 
Hausas. Jam Maraki is a drunkard, while Sarikin Bakka is chief of the 
Hunting Spirits. Kuri and Jam Maraki give any illness, the other two 
drive their victims mad' 

BORI THE BLACK SPIRITS 331 

Kurichiya, and the Sabri, the bark of the Madowachi, and 
the blossoms of the Sahara and the Kainya, These are 
powdered up together, and may be used as an incense, a 
drink, or a lotion — or all together — and, in the last resort, 
as snuff. 

Kuri has very long black negro hair, a moustache, and a 
beard, and he wears a leather loin-covering, while in his 
hands he carries a curved throwing-stick or a pestle. The 
decorations on the former are worth noting as they are 
said to be eyes, and perhaps correspond to the eyes in the 
wings of Christian pictures of Lucifer, also the markings 
upon certain snakes. Kuri is not cannibalistic, so does not 
drink anyone's blood, unless annoyed with him, but he is 
very fond of dead horses — a Ba-Maguje delicacy — (like 
Kure, the hyena). It is very dangerous to take his name 
in vain. Twelve years ago, Albaraka, a Gwari of Tripoli, 
swore by Yandu that he had not been with a certain Arab 
woman. He had, and he immediately fell down and was 
unconscious for two hours, when incense brought him 
round. Since then, he has always carried a stick like 
Kuri's to show that he believes in this bori. The proper 
sacrifice is a red cock and a white hen, and he is one of 
those who drink the blood of the victim at the dance. 
After this, he is brought into the ring, where he jumps 
about by placing his left hand on his left knee, his right 
hand and his right knee being upon the ground. On 
reaching the drummers, he changes knees, and after 
this he hops upon both, later on pulling with his hands 
in the air as if climbing, after which he beats the ground 
three times with each elbow. Then he stands and waves 
his arms, tucks both loose corners of a short body-cloth 
into his belt, and kneels and mutely begs for his wooden 
pestle. On this having been brought, he beats his chest 

THE B l.Y OF THE BORI 

with it three t in M , then his head, and then his sides, and 
again dam es around the ring. Finally, he beats himself 
as before, sneezes, and goes off lame. 

His kirari is simply : 

" Ta, ta, ta, ta, ta." 

His song is : 

" The Thunderer with the spear, he roars, 
He shakes his hair, the pagan cannot cope with Kuri. 
Whoever stays until night at the door of the Council 

he will meet with Kuri, 
The One witli The Club is my father but not the husband 

of my mother [i.e. he is called father by all]. 
Take up some earth and throw it in your eye [in the eye 

of your mount ; who is given ashes which he throws 

over himself — a native salutation], 
So that your mount will look well. 
Answer O One with The Club, O Splendid Dancer, 
Answer O One with The Club, You with the short 

throwing-spear. 
If the One with the spear roars 
He does not know whether it is day or night [for he has 

become possessed ; nere, too, reference is made to the 

mount]. 
O Hairy One, open Doguwa's door for me, Yerro, Kuri 

with the spear [i.e. act as mediator. This is the line 

given with the music in Chapter XVII.]. 
A white hen and a red cock [have been offered]. 
Everyone is late." 

Doguwa is a somewhat incomprehensible spirit, for she 
is double, but the two halves are different. Doguwa Na 
Gida (Doguwa of the House — ta would be more correct) 
(45), the part which lives in the town, is often called 
Mai-Inna (The Mother, and under this name is sometimes 
said to be the wife of Gajere Mai-Dowa), while Doguwa 

BORI THE BLACK SPIRITS 333 

Na Daji (Dogiiwa of the Bush) )46) is also known as Uwar- 
Dowa (Mother of the Forest), and Mai-Gida Biyu (Owner 
of Two Houses). Each part of her is a wife of Kuri — 
though the bush half is sometimes said to have Sambo 
as her husband — and she is called the mother of all the 
Masu-Bori. With her, too, is confused Uwar-Gwona or 
Uwar-Dawa, though in this manifestation she is the wife 
of Magiro. Doguwa of the House is a Hausa spirit, very 
fond of combing her hair, and she looks after the boxers, 
wrestlers, and those who fight with the koraiya. In some 
ways she symbolises death, so that may be the reason of 
this patronage. She wears black cloths, and the sacrifice 
to her is a black cock and hen, or, according to some, the 
same as that of Kuri. She will paralyse the limbs, or 
blind, or at least make sore, the eyes of any person who 
offends her. Doguwa of the Bush is only a half-woman, 
though a very tall one (perhaps the giantess in Hausa 
Superstitions and Customs, Story No. 100), and she can 
cause human enemies to become like her. She is a Fulah 
and the protecting spirit of the Masu-Sharru. She wears 
white clothes — or none at all, according to another in- 
formant, her hair being long enough to hide her nakedness 
— and the proper sacrifice is a white cock and hen, or a 
white hen with black beak and legs. 

At the dance, the former lies upon her side, and rocks 
herself backwards and forwards while one Mai-Bori behind 
and another in front flap a cloth which is laid over her. 
If a Fulah wishes to consult her, he gets under the cloth. 
She swells up, and then one of the attendant Masu-Bori 
places his left hand upon her navel, his right hand under 
her head, and raises her up to a sitting position, when she 
immediately becomes Na Dowa. The latter sits up under 
a cloth, and goes through the movements of milking. 

;;t THE BAN 01 THE BORI 

A photograph of Aby sshuao women eating covered on 
account of their fear of the evil eye greatly resemble.-. 111. 
46. l Some say thai the spirit of the bush should be under 
a black sheet, others say that even Doguwa Na Gida may 
have a black sheet, and in another performance a black 
sheet was used for both, so there seems to beno significant c 
in the colour. In neither 1 ase can the face be exposed 
without great danger to the onlookers. 
The kirari is : 

" Yo, Yo, Yo, Yo." 

The Hausa spirit's song is as follows : 

" Leave off plotting, Doguwa. 

Leave off plotting, Doguwa. 
[This is the line given with the music in Chapter XVII.]. 

With her white cloth she has come. 

Our Mother, Wife of Yerro, Our Mother, whom has she 
caught ? 

Whomsoever she seizes, he will lose his hand. 

Whomsoever she seizes, he will lose his feet [her parti- 
cular punishments]. 

Leave off plotting, Doguwa, Our Mother, Wife of Kuri, 

Our Mother, Mother of Us [supposed to be the meaning 
of Yeme ye moma, which words my informant said 
were Kanuri, a language which he did not speak]. 

Adamari, Wife of Yerro, leave off plotting Doguwa, 

Leave off plotting, Doguwa, the shouter, 

Warri jam baruntun Beriberi [? more Kanuri] come, 

Men of Kano, Carriers of Potash. 

Leave off plotting, Doguwa, Wife of Kuri, 

Our Mother, Mother of Us, 

Praise to God and his Prophet, 

Chief of Risana, Wife of Kuri [Doguwa, being the first 
married, is the head wife]. 

Chief of Risana are you, O Doguwa, 

Doguwa, Wife of Kuri." 

45 and 46. — Doguwa of the City and Dotuiwa of tin- Bush. A double 
spirit, wife of Kuri, which paralyses and blinds people. 

BORI—THE BLACK SPIRITS 335 

The song of the Bush spirit is : 

" O Wife of Yerro, Wife of Kuri, 
Enter quickly. Great is our mother, 
To-day [she] goes to the bush, 
[The wife] of Kuri, the wearer of the small cloth. 
Let us go home and drink sour milk [she looks after 

cattle], 
To-day we shall not rest. 
If Bujaji [a Fulah name for Doguwa] seizes [us] 
To-day we shall have no sleep. 
[If] the mother of our house seizes [us] 
To-day we shall not rest." 

Strangely enough, very little seems to be known about 
Uwal-Gwona in North Africa, although she is of such 
high rank. The reason is, so I was told, that the Hausas, 
having no farms, have no occasion to seek her good offices, 
but if that reason were always acted upon, a good many 
of the other spirits would be abandoned also. However, 
she appears only once a year here, and nothing more 
could be found out about her than has been related 
in Chapter XIV. I think, however, that she is really 
another manifestation of Doguwa, although said by some 
to be a wife of Magiro, for it is almost certain that since 
wrestling is a rite for increasing the crops, she would be 
the patron of the wrestlers. 

According to some, Mai-Gizzo (He with the hair) is the 
same as Kuri, but others say that they are separate spirits. 
Mai-Gizzo also is a farmer, wears a leather loin-covering, 
and carries a walking-stick. 

His song is : 

" Mai-Gizzo what is the news ? 
Shake your hair. 4 

[You are the husband] of Doguwa, Yerro, or is it not you ? 

336 

THE BAN OF THE BORI 

Where is Doguwa, O Kuri with the club ? 
Mai-Gizzo, God made you, 
Not man." 

Jam Maraki (the white Mara/a, a tree) (44) comes 
next, a pagan spirit and a drunkard — probably an ancestor. 

He can give any illness, the 
proper sacrifice being red 
fowls. At the dance, he 
jumps about on his knees in 
the same manner as does 
Kuri, but instead of carrying 
a pestle, he has a club. 

His kirari is : 

" Ah, Ah, All, I am Ami, 
Ah, Ah, Ah, I am Ami." 

His song is : 

"This heathen is a great 
bogey, one who smokes 
tobacco. 

When he has drunk water 
[meaning beer] he pro- 
trudes his lips, he makes 
[i.e. opens his mouth like] 
a crow. 

He it is, is it not he, the 
strong one ? 

This heathen is a great 

bogey, he stumbles about. 

When he has drunk water he protrudes his lips and rolls 

Fig. 41. — The Throwing-stick of 
Jam Maraki 

his tongue. 

Pagan, I am for you, Jam Maraki, 

See, your father has come [this to the spectators]. 

BORI—THE BLACK SPIRITS 337 

Come and drink beer and drink fresh milk, 
Pagan, I am for you. 

You have eyes as red as a tomato [from drink]. 
You are a great spirit and yet you behave like a boy." 
[The height of disdain.] 

Arni (Pagan) or Sarikin Noma (Chief of the Farmers, 
(43), is a Gwari spirit — another ancestor. He can give 
his victims any illness, but is propitiated with fowls of 
any colour. At the dance, he walks around, then calls 
for beer, and after he has drunk it, gets drunk, sneezes, 
and goes off. 

His song is : 

" To-day Arni has drunk millet [beer], the bogey, Arni. 
You have eaten the millet [flour], Bogey Arni, you have 

eaten the millet [flour] which has been brought. 
You and Ta-Roro [a name meaning " (born) during the 

grubbing"], have eaten the millet which has been 

brought. 
You and Ta-Noma [" (born) during the farming "] have 

eaten the millet which has been brought, 
You and Fudan [" (born) during the digging"] have 

eaten the millet which has been brought." 

The singers continue the song with other names until 
he leaves the ring. 

Ba-Maguje (Pagan Hausa) is sometimes classed as a 
hunter, but he seems to be more a farmer, and as his name 
follows Arni on the list, he had better come here. He is 
certainly the spirit of some convivial ancestor. He wears 
a leather loin-covering and a bull's hide over his shoulders, 
while he carries a club and an axe. The proper sacrifice 
is a red and white cock and hen, though some say that it 
should always be a goat, never fowls. At the dance, 4ie 
also drinks and becomes drunk, and then rolls about. 

338 THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

His kirari is : 

" I am an elder, I am a youth. When I drink fura 
[flour and water, but here meaning beer] I pout my lips like 
a crow. I have had my wife, I have eaten my fill." 

His song is : 

" Son of Ta-Rana, you are an elder, you are a youth 
[i.e. old but foolish], 
Pagan great bogey, Tobacco Smoker, 
The chief has let us off. We shall not pay again, we 
shall go to the bad." 

The last line is said to refer to an event of history in 
Nigeria, where the chief of a certain district, seeing that 
they would do nothing but drink, let them off with their 
taxes. 

In Tripoli, there are many spirits of this kind, and they 
are said to give their victims a thirst and other evil effects 
of drunkenness. At the dance, a number appear together, 
and sit down in a ring, laugh foolishly, let saliva run over 
their clothes, and then fall about, finally being helped out 
of the ring by Masu-Bori not being ridden at the moment. 
Since bori and wild animals were evidently connected in 
the Hausa mind, it is not at all inappropriate to say that 
these particular spirits are " beastly drunk." 

Mai-Gangaddi (The Nodding One) or Sarikin Barchi 
(King — should be Queen — of Sleep — because nearly al- 
ways a female) (48) gives her victims sleeping-sickness. 
At the dance, she suddenly dozes off in the middle of some 
act. She does not dance around, but simply sits down 
and begins to spin, but soon lets her head fall upon one 
side or the other, waking up again for an instant when 
touched or spoken to by other Masu-Bori. Apparently 

47- — Spirits of Drunkenness at Tripoli. 

48- — Ba-Toye, the Fire Bori ; Sarikin Kofa, the Leper, and Mai»Gan- 
gaddi, the Spirit of Sleeping-Sickness. 

BORI—THE BLACK SPIRITS 339 

she will never leave the ring of her own free will (or perhaps 
she has not the energy to do so), so when it is time for her 
to go, a thread of cotton is held out to her, and seeing this 
she sneezes and departs. 
Her song is : 

" Complete the town [i.e. buck up] Gangaddi. She pre- 
vents my spinning, [does] Gangaddi, 
She prevents my sitting properly. See she is sleepy, 
She prevents my spinning. 
Look, your rival wife is coming, sit up and spin 
Lest your husband drive you away." 

The above is somewhat difficult to follow. It is sung 
by the musicians, of course, the first three lines describing 
the spirit, the last two being a friendly warning to her — 
an unusual form. 

Bidda is a bad spirit. When he seizes anyone whom he 
does not like, he makes his body quite stiff " by putting a 
piece of iron in it which reaches from the navel to the neck' ' 
(presumably rigors). At the dance, the doki lies down 
and becomes rigid, and then various instruments, drum, 
violin, and gimbiri are placed upon his body from the chest 
to the stomach, and the musicians play these hard until 
the mount makes as if to vomit. Bidda then departs, his 
place being taken immediately by another bori. 

Next come Babam Mazza (Great One of Men) (50) and 
Kugara (The Rubber) (50), who are similar, for both give 
any illness, chiefly loss of power in the legs. At the dance 
they arrive together, and each one lies upon his back, 
raises himself upon his hands and feet and moves about 
thus, bumping his buttocks upon the ground, being covered 
with a black cloth. A wooden mortar ought then to be 

340 Tin /■; i v oi- Tin-: hori 

pl !< ed upon me stomach j and pounded, if not, eai h kneels 

and bc.its himself with a pestle. 

The only part of the song which I could obtain is : 

" Babam Mazza [Son] of Ayesha, 
Kugaxa, Tlie One with The Pestle " [he beats his stomach 
with it]. 

Then comes Taiki (? The Bag) (49). If he attacks a 
person, the stomach of the victim will swell, and, if not 
stopped, will burst. The only remedy is to beat lightly 
upon the stomach with iron implements, for the spirit, not 
liking this metal, will then go. The proper sacrifice is a 
pair of black fowls. At the dance, he lies down and rolls 
from side to side, then lying still upon his back. His 
stomach soon begins to swell, and it is treated as described, 
whereupon he heaves a deep breath, and sneezes, and 
departs. This may be the same spirit as Mai-Jan-Ruwa 
noted in Hausa Superstitions and Customs, though the 
procedure is somewhat different. 

Gajjimare (49) 2 is in shape something like a snake but 
is hermaphrodite, or at least double gendered, the male 
part being red, the female blue, and it is said by some to 
be the father of Uwar-Dowa. It lives in wells, and comes 
out of them when it wants to drink up the water (hence its 
name, Ma-Sha-Ruwa), thence going over the sky and down 
into an ant-hill. It makes its victims incapable of sitting 
up (? paralysis of the back). It is a Daura spirit, and is 
said in Tunis not to be related to Kuri. If water is left in 
a house, it will take it and be satisfied, otherwise it will 
steal money. At the dance, it stands quite still until 
censed, and then falls on its back, and is covered with a 
black cloth, and rolls to and fro, calling for water, and, 

.)<). — When TaiUi attacks people then' abdomens must be beaten with 
iron. Gajjimare (also lying down, covered) is the Rainbow, while Dun- 
durusu and Makeri are Bori Blacksmiths. , 

50. — Kinna the Hornet. Babam Mazza and Kugara cause their victims 
to lose their power over their legs. 

B0R1 -THE BLACK SPIRITS 341 

when this has been brought, it sneezes and goes. It does 
not dance or jump. 
The song is : 

" Bogey Gajjimare, Drinker of The Water, Gajjimare. 
He drinks water [does] Gajjimare, he drinks water, 
He breaks small stones, even rocks, [does] this water 
spirit." 

Samayi, Rako, and Kumo, all males, are but little 
known bori, and are not worshipped in North Africa now, 
so far as I know. Samayi gives his victims rigors, and, 
at the dance, he stands stiffly, his arms held by his sides, 
and his fists clenched, until a black cloth has been thrown 
over him, when he goes. 

Rako seems to give the weakness and loss of power due 
to old age, the proper sacrifice being fowls of a yellowish 
colour. At the dance, he shouts "Oh," shakes his head, 
and then sits down and nods. 

Kumo distorts the bodies of his victims. At the dance, 
he coughs and grunts as if old, and then sits down, and 
bends over to one side, holding himself in this position 
until he goes. None of these three does the jifa. 

Wuruwa, sister of Nana Arzikki Boboniya, gives her 
victims stiff backs, the proper sacrifice being a black hen. 
At the dance, she puts her hand behind her as if settling 
the baby upon her back, and then pushes upwards. I 
could not obtain her song. 

Marmara, another female, is a friend of Dakaki. She 
makes the whole body of her victim stiff, the proper 
sacrifice being a red cock with a black chest, and a greyish 
hen. At the dance, she lies out stiffly like Taiki, but is 

342 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

nut covered with a black cloth, she then calls f<»r water, 
drinks, sneezes, and goes. Her song is : 

" Harmara is seen, 

She is like a stone, the spirit of the water " [i.e. she lies 
like a stone]. 

Kworrom is very well known to travellers, for he lives 
under the roots of trees which grow across the road, and 
makes passers-by stumble. But he also gives victims 
continual movement (? St Vitus 's dance), and diarrhoea. 
At the dance, he falls upon his face, and afterwards lies 
upon his back, and then turns over with his legs above his 
head. 

His song is : 

" Boys stop coming for wood [lie does not want them to 
taek it]. 
Kworrom has seized someone, 
The Bender of The Buttocks, Giver of Diarrhoea." 

CHAPTER XXIV 

bori — the black spirits (continued) 

The next spirits to be considered are the hunters, also 
Babbaku. All of these are pagans and live in the bush, 
and all wear leather loin-coverings and capes, while as 
weapons they carry a bow and arrows, perhaps, also a 
spear. 

The chief one is the Sarikin Bakka (Chief of The 
Bow) (44), and he is often said to be the same as Gajere 
Mai-Dowa, but as some informants said that they were 
distinct spirits, it will be as well to keep them separate. 
Sarikin Bakka has another name, All He takes care of 
all the beasts of the forest, so sacrifices of a red cock and 
a white hen are offered to him before a hunt (see Chapter 
XV.). He makes his victims prick themselves, or drives 
them mad. 

At the dance, he wags his buttocks, jumping up and 
down, and then takes a miniature bow and arrow — or else 
places his left thumb between the first finger and thumb 
of the right hand, holding it out in front of him, and moves 
about cautiously as if looking for game. 

His song is : 

" To-day Sarikin Bakka [comes] without delay, 
He has killed the roan antelope, he has killed the oribi, 
Even the antelope he has not left. 
He made a farm at the edge of the bush 
But the jerboa would not let him alone [it stole all his 
corn]. 

343 

344 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

Ali — O is the father of many [i.e. of all tlio hunters] 
Ali— O is the chief of the bowmen." 

The description of Sarikin Bakk;i answers for GAJERE 
Mai-Dowa (Dwarf of the Forest), also, in most respects, 
the dances are the same. He is the son of Jigo, but is a 
greater hunter than his father. The proper sacrifice is 
any dwarfed fowls. 

His kirari is : 

" I am Gajere, my father is Jigo." 

His song is : 

" Gajere Mai-Dowa, Gajere, 
Gajere Mai-Dowa, Gajere, 
Where did you shoot it Gajere ? 
In the pupil of the eye Gajere ? 
The hartebeeste you shot Gajere, 
In the pupil of the eye, Gajere." 

And so on, naming different animals, until he has left 
the ring. 

Jigo or Jihu (43) is much the same as Gajere Mai-Dowa, 
but he sits and moves like an old man ; he is the "father" 
of the hunters, and was once their chief. He gives his 
victims shivering fits and fever, and pricks them — probably 
the feeling of the perspiration just before it commences. 
In the photograph he is lying in ambush, waiting for game. 
The proper sacrifice is a guinea-fowl, or fowls coloured like 
it. At the dance, he appears to hunt like the others. 

His song is : 

" My Father, Jigo, blessings upon your coming, [This 
is the line given with the music in Chapter XVII.] 
The Old One, he eats only the liver [because he has no 
teeth with which to chew solid meat]. 

BORI—THE BLACK SPIRITS 345 

O, Dwarf, Father of The Hunters, 

Blessings upon your sleep, blessings upon your coining, 

Hail, My Father, Father of The Hunters. 

If the elephant is in the forest [and meets you], 

She will say ' This tiling is not good for us ' [i.e. this 

spirit will kill us]. 
If the buffalo is in the forest [and meets you] 
She will say ' This thing is not good for one's health.' 
O, Stranger, Angel of the Forest [because he knows it 

all], 
Let us go back to the bush and set an ambush." 

Dan Jigo (43) does not come next in order of seniority, 
but it will be better to complete the list of hunters before 
considering another class, though it must be remembered 
that every pagan (and therefore every black spirit) is a 
hunter at one time and a farmer at another, the hoe being 
converted into arrow-heads, or vice versa, as occasion 
demands. Dan Jigo, son of the last named, dances in the 
same way at first, but he will seize any calabashes, pottery, 
etc., and break them if he can. This is symbolic of the 
illness which he gives his victims, for he also makes them 
shiver. 

His kirari is : 

" Smash, smash, smash, where younger brothers are sold 
there also can they be bought " [i.e. nothing is too valu- 
able for him to destroy]. 

His song is : 

" Dan Jigo, Maker of Orphans [for he kills the parent 

beasts], 
Dan Jigo, to-morrow [let us go to] the bush. 
Dan Jigo, Maker of Poverty [he shoots cattle belonging 

to the Filani]. 
Dan Jigo, let us go to the Bush." 

346 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

Mahalbiya (Markswoman) is a daughter of Jigo, and 
therefore a sister of the last named spirit. " If you shake 
your clothes, it< ., it night she will shoot you, but she sleeps 
in the daytime, so you can then shake them in safety " — 
because the person can then see what he is doing perhaps. 
Her arrow makes a small sore, which will grow bigger and 
deeper if scratched, but any fowls will do for a sacrifice. 
I could not obtain her song ; her actions were said to be 
much the same as those of Jigo. 

Why Rinna (Hornet) (50) should be a huntress is not 
quite clear at first sight, but she is a younger sister of 
Sarikin Bakka, and hunts with him, and she is said to sting 
and kill her prey. She thus requires no weapons at the 
dance, and all she does in addition to the usual parade and 
jumping is to sit down and beat her face first on one side 
and then on the other, and flap her elbows upon her sides 
to imitate the movement of wings. 

Her song is : 

" There's a hornet, there's a hornet, there's a hornet in the 

forest, 
She has killed the roan antelope, she has killed the oribi. 
There's a hornet, there's a hornet, there's a hornet in the 

forest, 
She has killed the elephant, she has killed the oribi. 
There's a hornet, there's a hornet, there's a hornet in the 

forest. 
She has killed the hyaena, she has killed the oribi." 

And so on, naming different animals. 

Gindema (43), Ari (possibly the same), and Gwegwe are 
also hunters occasionally, but all these spirits drive their 
victims into the forest and injure them there, Gindema 
varying the pleasure of the legitimate chase with the excite- 

BORI—THE BLACK SPIRITS 347 

ments of the profession of a highway robber. They seem 
to be Beriberi bori, however, for their songs are in that 
language, and I am not quite sure of the translation. At 
the dance, they run up trees and sit there, saying, " I am 
home." Possibly they are connected with fire like Ba-Toye, 
but they were described as hunters. The song of the two 
first is : 

"Ali(orAri)OAli 
Ali the hunter of (?) fish 
The tall one with small feet. 
Ali the hunter of (?) fish 
Chief of the council with gold in his hair." 

Gwegwe had only three lines : 

" Whence iiave you come Gwegwe ? 
From the inside of a tree have you come ? 
Or from the top of a tree have you come ? " 

Now follow four spirits who drive people mad, and 
though exceedingly disgusting to describe, and still more 
to watch, they cannot be omitted. 

Jato is known also as Nakada (Nodder), Janzirri 
(? a hog), and Ja-Ba-Fari (Neither Red nor White) (44 
and 51). He is half Arab and half negro, and was once 
a mallam, but too much reading and over-indulgence in 
forbidden pleasures made him mad, and he is now the 
dirtiest of all the spirits, usually living in a drain, or the 
salanga. It is not impossible that he, in one of his avatars, 
represents the old Egyptian Nakada tribe, but I doubt 
this, for in the Malays, near the Johol frontier, is a kramet 
(holy place) of Nakhoda Hussin, a jinn presiding over 
water, rain, and streams.1 He is the husband of Mariyamu , 
and a cousin of Yerima. He gives venereal diseases and 

348 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

fever, and the medicines for them, but if lie gets a person 
entirely into his power, and drives him mud, there is no 
help for the victim. 1 fe gives riches to his true followers 
(? prostitutes), however, the proper sacrifice being a 
speckled cock and hen. 

At the dance, he sniffs about trying to find some of his 
particular scent (dung), and if successful he will rub it 
upon his body, or turn a somersault over it, and even 
devour it if not forcibly prevented. He afterwards twists 
part of his tobe in front, holding it like the male organ, 
and runs around the ring, later on standing in front of the 
musicians and beating it for having brought him trouble. 
Some of the attendant Masu-Bori then throw a white cloth 
over him (this is sometimes omitted, it was not done in 
Tripoli), and he falls down and simulates copulation, then 
sneezes and goes. Jato is very much afraid of death, and 
a white cloth (like a shroud) will always drive him away. 

His song is : 

" O Son of a Mallam, Grandson of a Mallam, 
Sleeping at the edge of the bush [a woman's private 

parts] disturbs me. 
O Son of a Mallam, Grandson of a Mallam, 
Open the mouth of the vagina and put in your penis, 
O Son of a Mallam, Grandson of a Mallam. 
Sleeping at the edge of the corn-binn [same meaning] 

disturbs me. 
Someone has eaten dung, certainly it was not I, 
Someone has drunk filth, certainly it was not I. 
Oh, I say Nakada, I have no one [to care for me but you]. 
O Disease, leave me, O Disease release me now, 
[For] I have no one." 

Some people object to the above song, and, if there is 
general disapproval, the following is substituted : 

BORI—THE BLACK SPIRITS 349 

" Jato, 0 Jato, Jato the friend of Kuri, 
Jato, O Jato, Jato, the town is astir. 
Jato, O Wizard, Red [white] Madman, 
Leave them [your enemies] to God, I praise you. 
Jato, White One, I praise you. 
Jato, Wizard, let us off to-day. 

0 Nakada, let the musicians play on [do not go near 
them — for they run when he brings filth]. 

Red One belonging to Mariyamu, O Disease, release me. 

1 have no one. 

A good thing is desired by all, a bad one only by the 
owner. [This refers to Mariyamu. No one wants 
her but Jato, for her nose is always running.] 

He goes to the dung-hill and there he plays, 

He eats pumpkins together with weeds." 

Ruge is a brother of Jato, a drunken spirit which gives 
similar diseases. At the dance, he wags his buttocks, etc., 
like Jato, and dances with him. 

His kirari is : 

" Ho, I am the learned fool." 

His song is : 

" Ruge the fool, the foolish mallam, 
Ruge the fool, the .One with the mat [upon which he 

prays], 
This man has money [but] he cannot marry 
Because of his penis, which is so large." 

This last line refers to the fact that Ruge is responsible 
not only for the diseases of the genital organs, but also for 
all troubles concerning them. A Gwari in Tunis, known 
as Kumburin Banza, is said to have killed several women 
because Ruge made him swell to such a size. For a 
similar reason, an Arab in Tripoli, Haji Firaj, had to be 
forcibly separated from his wife, who then died. 

350 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

Kwollen Kwolma or Kulen Kulma is a friend of the 
above two bori, and his actions are similar. He drives 
his victims mad through drink. 

His song is : 

" Kwollen Kwolma has come. 
You eat dog, you drink beer. 
Kwollen Kwolma the bori. 
If death comes 

I shall get inside a cave, a vagina, 
I and my goats. 

I the son of a mallam, grandson of a mallam, 
Sleeping close to a vagina disturbs me. 
You know that the lips of a woman's parts have more 
soft flesh than the shoulders of a ram." 

Dan Wawa makes his victims become idiots through 
over-indulgence in sexual acts and drink. He wears a 
goat's skin, as does Jato, and probably has some con- 
nexion with the priestly clown mentioned in Chapter III. 
His actions and song are the same as those of Jato. 

His kirari is : 

" O Girls, a Ba-Maguje is better [for you] than a Moham- 
medan." 

Baba (59) dances like Jato, whose friend and understudy 
he is. But he will steal any pots which he can find unless 
there is incense in them, and, in the photograph, he is 
looking around furtively to see if anyone is watching him. 

His song is : 

" Baba, where is Baba, Baba, where is Baba, 
Where is Jallo, Baba, where is Jallo ? 
Baba, O Baba, Baba await me and I'll come." 

The next spirit is much less unsavoury, although his 
functions are not particularly noble. Ba-Toye, the 

5i. — Jato and Kwollen Kwolma, two disreputable J inns. 
52. — The Parade of the Youthful Spirits. 

BORI—THE BLACK SPIRITS 351 

Burner (48), is the spirit of fire. He is said not to be the 
fire itself, but the bori which sets the houses and the forest 
alight, and burns people. He is a son of Gajere and Uwar- 
Dowa — possibly Gajere was once the same as Kuri, there 
was great confusion upon this point. He can run very 
fast, not only along the ground but even up trees — like 
the flames, I presume. The proper sacrifice is a pair of 
speckled fowls. 

At the dance, he jumps up and down, wagging his 
buttocks. 

His kirari is : 

" I am Ba-Toye, I have burnt the bush of Jan Gari, 
I have burnt the forest." 

His song is : 

" [See the] Bogey, Children [see the] Bogey. Babies 

[see the] Bogey. 
Whoever has not seen this Bogey has come to [i.e. is 

living upon] the earth without profit. 
He will go to the next world without profit. [Possibly 

alluding to the pagans, who are supposed to have 

learnt the use of fire only recently.] 
The Bogey is one of the hunters, he has burnt the forest 

of Jan Gari. 
[See the] Bogey, Children, [see the] Bogey. Grown-ups, 

[see the] Bogey, 
Son of the Dwarf, the Bogey, the strong one. 
Uwar-Dowa bore me, me alone. 
I brought upon my mother trouble, much more [am I 

ready to bring it upon] anyone else." 

In addition to the foregoing, there are several bori 
which my informants were unable to class, but these seem 
to be patron-spirits of industries, though they no doubt 
give their victims the pains brought on by the work. Of 

352 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

these, the greatest is Dundurusu 2 (Hammer) (49). He is 
a blacksmith, and does that work for the bori in Jan Gari. 
He can give any illness, particularly stiff and sore arms 
and hands, the proper sacrifices being black fowls. At the 
dance, he kneels down upon both knees, puts his left hand 
upon the ground, and beats it with the right elbow three 
times, and then changes hands — this represents the 
beating of the iron. He then blows and moves his arms 
upwards and outwards, and downwards and inwards, as if 
working a bellows, and then beats each hand again. 
His kirari is : 

" I am Dundurusu, I do not know [i.e. fear] fire." 

His song is : 

" O Dundurusu beside the fire, 
The day has broken, you have been all night by the fire." 

Another, much like Dundurusu, is Makeri or Sarikin 
Makera (Chief of the Blacksmiths) (49) , and according to 
some he is the same. His actions are similar. 

His song is : 

" I do not see my bellows, my bellows are in the house, I 

am forging iron. 
I do not see my bellows, my bellows are in the house, I 

am forging metal. 
The sword wielded only by men [is made by you] O One 

with the fire in his house, 
[With] my bellows, I forge, I beat iron." 

Masaki (Weaver), can give any illness, but particularly 
those pains in the arms and legs caused by weaving, the 
proper sacrifice being speckled fowls. At the dance, he 
first stands, then sits down and throws his hands inwards 

BORI—THE BLACK SPIRITS 353 

(as if throwing the shuttle), and sometimes he moves his 
feet up and down. 
His song is : 

" O Weaver, weave for the chief, weave, 
Take the cotton, take the strip of cloth, take the cotton. 
O Weaver, weave for him [the chief] pepper and salt 

cloth, 
O Weaver, weave for him [the chief] green cloth." 

And so on, naming different kinds and colours of cloth so 
long as he is in the ring. 

Mai-Sassari is evidently an evil spirit, as he kills his 
victims. But he is not now danced in North Africa, I 
believe, for I could find out nothing further about him. 

Sarikin Pawa or Sarikin Yanka (King of Slaughter) 
is Chief Butcher of Jan Gari. Although his daughter, 
Yar Maso, is given amongst the Mohammedans, he is said 
by most to be still a pagan. At the dance, directly the 
sacrificial animal has been killed, he is expected to stand 
up, and to try to cut his throat with a knife (like Yar 
Maso), calling out " Blood, blood," and if a bull has been 
killed, he is said to sit astride its neck. He is then lifted 
into the ring, where he moves to and fro, then stands, and 
cuts at his throat again, calling for blood as before. 

His song is : 

" Sarikin Pawa the Flayer, Sarikin Yanka the Flayer." 

CHAPTER XXV 

BORI — THE FIGHTING SPIRITS 

In a country which contains so many different tribes, and 
where almost every town, even when belonging to people 
speaking the same language, was at enmity with its 
neighbours, it was only natural for the inhabitants to 
imagine that every community had its own particular 
spirits, and that when the worshippers went to war these 
supernatural beings aided them against the bori of the 
enemy. In any case, since the bori community is organ- 
ised upon the same lines as those of the worshippers, it 
necessarily follows that there should be a special corps 
of warriors, the Yan Garke (Children of the Shield), all 
of whom are renowned in war. Many are fighting jinns 
of foreign origin, no doubt, but some are almost certainly 
heroes. 

Of these, the chief is Jaruma or Garke Baba (Great 
Shield) (53), a Gwari. He gives his victims any illnesses, 
the proper sacrifices being fowls coloured black and 
white. At the dance, he waves his spear in his right hand 
level with his head, and dances around thus. Then he 
jumps, waves his spear again, and goes. 

His song is : 

" Where is Jaruma, the chief's son ? Where is Jaruma, 
the chief's son ? 
You followers of the chief, show me the councillors 
[but here meaning horsemen whom Jaruma — who is 
speaking now — will lead]. 

354 

BORI—THE FIGHTING SPIRITS 

355 

Where is Jaruma, the chief's son ? Where is Jaruma ? 

He has made night [i.e. he is late in coming — because 

he has been pursuing his enemies] 
With his wooden hafted spear, and his iron spear. 

Figs. 42 and 43. — Spears of the 
Warrior Spirits 

Fig. 44. — Jaruma's 
Spear 

Where is Jaruma sleeping, the white man, the killer of 

men ? 
O Jaruma, Oh dear, Jaruma, Son of a Chief, 
If she has not the pair of twos [of tribal marks] 
Give her the pair of fours, 
If she has not the pair of fours 

356 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

Give her the yan takai. 

I shall follow Janima to Jan Gari 

That I may rest from this weary life. 

Where is Janima ? He thnists 

With his wooden hafted spear and his iron spear." 

The " pair of twos," etc., refers to the fact that Janima 
captured a pagan slave, and he is advised to make tribal 
marks upon her face to pretend that she is a Hausa — these 
would still be tribal marks, however, not the signs of 
slavery.1 

Tsaggi is a son of Yerima. He gives diseases of the 
hips and bad eyes — and probably makes people snore — 
the proper sacrifice being a pair of many-coloured fowls. 
At the dance, he puts hfc right foot over his left and then 
vice versa, meanwhile moving his spear as if on horseback, 
and piercing enemies underneath him. 

His song is : 

" Tsaggi — O Tsaggi dances with kola-nuts in his mouth 
[a sign of rank]. 

Tsaggi — the son of Abba dances with kola-nuts in his 
mouth. 

Tsaggi, O Young Men, does not divide [if he has any- 
thing he gives it as a present, he does not keep a share]. 

Tsaggi, O Young Men you must salute this warrior. 

Tsaggi, O Young Men, he is enough for the Assembly 
[can fight an}'one in it]. 

Here I brought her, a fool, 

If you know where your home is, go to it. 

You, since you brought me, guide me, 

Hear the snoring, see the bad eyes." 

The last four lines refer to the fact that Tsaggi brought 
a woman to his house who did not know what to do, so he 

9 

54 

53- — The warriors, Jaruma, Kulita, Sarikin (iarkc, and Dan Man/". 
Kulita prevents women from bearing more children. * 

54. — Bebe is the deaf mute, Ya Biyu and Kwara at the end are twins. 
Mai-Chibi is responsible for umbilical hernia. Musai is an Asben spirit 
and Dan Hasumi gives baldness. 

BORI—THE FIGHTING SPIRITS 357 

became angry and told her to go home. She snid (last 
line but one) that lie ought to take her back, and he then 
insulted her. 

Baraje is supposed to be the same as Sarikin Garke 
(Chief of the Shield-Wearers) (53), by some ; others say 
that the spirits are distinct. He too can give any illness, 
the proper sacrifice being speckled fowls. He plants his 
spear in the ground, and then puts his right foot over his 
left and back three times, and then he turns and does the 
same with his left foot. 

His song is : 

" Baraje, welcome, Young Baraje, welcome to the chief, 
Gird yourself Baraje, gird yourself Baraje." [The 

loose clothes are tied in by smaller cloths when going 

into action and also at the dance.] 
Baraje where is my fault, enter the King's house, 
Son of a Dwarf where is my fault Baraje, where is my 

fault ? 
Give her a spindle [sit down with her and weave] and 

you will enjoy conversation. 
The butcher's daughter is very nice. [He is the lover 

of Yar Maso]. 
Give her money and you will enjoy cuddling. 
The young Filani is very nice. 
O One with The White Horse, with The White Tobe, 
You are the one who does a good turn. 
O One with The Black Horse, with the Black Tobe, 
You are the one who does a bad turn." 

The last part refers to the fact that if you want to have 
foretold the result of some venture, you summon the bori 
by his proper sacrifice and incense, and on his arrival you 
throw in a lot more incense. If you see him in white and 
mounted on a white horse, you will be fortunate, for he is 

358 TEE BAN OF THE B0R1 

going to help you ; if .ill i> black then i no chance of 

BO I I 

Manzo Baha (The Great He senger) is a boo or 

nephew of Mariyamu. lie . an give any illness, the 
piopex >.i' rifice being a pair of ivd fowls. At the dance, 
in- puts his hand over his mouth and < alls ou1 jo a to give 
an al.inn. If he dances with Bi raji and Kulita, the 1 
take up calabashes, pots, eti .. and having thrown them 
upoo the ground, fall upon them, pounding the broken 
pieces with their elbows. 
His kirari is : 

" I am a wizard, I am a wizard, I eat [other] wizards. 
I am a wizard, my father is a wizard." 

His song is : 

" Have patience O my Manzo, Manzo, [Son] of Mariyamu, 
Manzo, Wizard, 

Have patience, O my Manzo, the journey is not [to be 
done in] one day, 

Twice seven days have we rested. 

Beware, O my Manzo, of worthless women. 

Even to him who [often] goes to the city, the women 
[who ask] a halfpenny are not women [worth having — 
i.e. the cheap prostitutes are certain to have some- 
thing wrong with them. Manzo does not like paying 
them more than he can help]. 

I have not eaten, I have not drunk [i.e. I have not seen 
or heard, so do not accuse me of having said anything 
about you]. 

The stick is waiting by the tent [ready to strike]. 

The spirit upon the bed does not speak, he only roars. 
[Many bori are supposed to make at once for a bed 
upon their arrival.] 

Arzikki with the small pot has been spreading false 

reports, 

BORI—THE FIGHTING SPIRITS 359 

She has taken them to her lord [Manzo]. The lord, the 

gossiper, 
He has believed the false reports and has told them to 

Lilla [his wife]. 
Verily Lilla, the hot-tempered one, 
Took a stick, and said ' You kill her ' " [Arzikki]. 

Kulita, Auta (Little One), or Ja-Ja-Maiya (Attracter 
of The Great) (53), is one of the spirits of the drummers, 
apparently those who go with the troops. He is a son or 
a nephew of Sarikin Ran, and is very fierce. He is also 
known as Mai-Karewan Haifuwa (The Finisher of 
Child-Bearing) as has been explained in Chapter VIII. 
He, like Manzo Baba and Dan Jigo, causes people to 
become unable to hold things in their hands, so they drop 
and break them, the proper sacrifice being a pair of speckled 
fowls. 

It is just possible that this breaking of calabashes, etc., 
had quite a different meaning at one time, for the Jews of 
Galicia break a pot or dish in front of a child to drive away 
the demon of convulsions, and Arabs sometimes break 
one behind the back of a person whom they fear. Perhaps 
there is some connexion also in the Levitical laws laying 
down that earthenware vessels made unclean are to be 
broken.2 

At the dance, he kneels and beats the ground with his 
fists, after which he stands up. A cloth is then put upon 
his shoulders, and he walks around, pulling it off (because 
he is so hot) and putting it on again. After a time he asks 
for plates, etc., and breaks them upon his head. Then, 
balancing his body as if drunk, he calls some of the Masu- 
Bori to kneel before him, and after having caught hold of 
each of them, he sneezes and goes. 

;(m. 11 IF BAN OF THE BORI 

His kir.m is : 

" I am Auta, The Attractcr of The Great, [Son] of Gozo, 
the smallest of the warriors." 

His song is : 

"O Kulita, Spirit of The Drummers, Kulita The Soft 

Pestle [i.e. lie is strong yet young and supple], 
While one is pounding with one end, the other end 

sprouts. 
Warrior, Spirit of The Drummers. You Little Grain of 

Corn upon a rock 
None but God can give you water. O Spirit of the 

Drummers, 
You Little Acacia [the bark of which is used for tanning], 

if one eats you you are bitter, 
If one leaves you you are a medicine [an astringent 

medicine is made from the seeds]. 
Little Pepper, if one eats you you are hot, 
If one leaves you you see something small and good." 

Garuje is a brother of Sarikin Rati. He hates whisper- 
ing, and so punishes people who indulge in the habit. He 
is also a " peacemaker," since he settles quarrels — though 
hardly by arbitration ! ! If he finds, say, ten men fighting, 
he will twist the necks of four, beat four others until life- 
less, and pull out the eyes of the remaining two. Then he 
will say " I have settled the quarrel." He seems to be 
almost a demon of scandal. 

At the dance, he moves round and round, then to and 
fro, and then he kneels, beats his chest, jumps, sneezes, 
and goes. 

His song is : 

" Garuje, save me from shame. 
I did not come here on your account [i.e. to bother you]. 
Garuje, save me from shame. 

BORI—THE FIGHTING SPIRITS 

361 

Garuje, where can we wander ? 

I did not come here on your account. 

I punched the whisperer. 

Garuje, save me from shame. 

Will you not give the drummer a tobe ? " [i.e. will 

you not reward the musicians for playing and singing 

so nicely]. 

Ba-Absini is, as his name denotes, an Asben spirit, but 
one who is welcome among the warriors 
(though amongst them only, since he is a 
thief), because of his prowess. He tends 
his herds of camels when all is peaceful, 
and gives health and strength of body to 
his worshippers, the proper sacrifices being 
a red cock and a white hen according to 
one informant, a pair of black fowls 
according to another — the latter being 
probably correct. At the dance, he moves 
about with a spear, thrusting at enemies 
before him. 

His kirari is in the Asben tongue. 

His song is : 

" Ba-Absini, wearer of a leather skin, 
His hand is saluting, his foot is stealing 

[the toes can grip things]. 
When your mother was measuring grain 
You would measure out some [for your- 
self], 
Even while [you were a baby and] she 
was carrying you on her back [i.e. with 
your foot]. fig. 45. 

You hit with your club, the head in the Ba-Absini's Spear 
morning is as in the evening [i.e. it does not matter 

I III BAN OF THE BORI 

whether it is light or dark, you cannot aim straight 

and hit itj. 

Your money 18 nol mere than 10,000 cowries [under 10s.]. 
Bad youth, Offspring of a Monkey, 
Your penis is as large as that of the grown men. 
The orphan, the one difficult to suckle, 
You give him meat and lie asks for the bone." [Not at 
.ill grateful for having been given the best part.] 

Manzo Karami or Dan Manzo (Little Messenger) (53) 
is a brother of Manzo Baba, but as they have quarrelled, 
they never enter the ring together, though the friends of 
each are the same. He can give any illness, the proper 
sacrifice being a pair of red fowls. At the dance, he 
shakes an imaginary spear in his right hand and then 
gives an alarm like his brother. He may also stab him- 
self with knives. 

His kirari is : 

" I am Dan Manzo, the Dwarf Date Palm, the friend of 
Kulita, the friend of Baraje." 

His song is : 

" Dan Manzo save me from shame, save me from ridicule, 
The mouth of the world will destroy me uselessly and 

for nothing. 
I heard the alarm, I heard the war shout at the camp of 

the Beriberi, 
It was not war, it was not fire, so I went to help. 
It was the battle of the head-cloth and hair, the battle 

of the eyes [i.e. love-making between men and 

women]. 
Sir, save me from shame, save me from ridicule, 
The mouth of the world would eat a stone much more 

a child of men. 
O One who ends the fight, the one who pits men [against 

one another] has pitted them, 

BORI—THE FIGHTING SPIRITS 363 

The Youths are suffering from the hatchet and the axe. 
Dan Manzo, Friend of Kulita, Friend of Barajc, 
Friend of Baraje, Small Date-Palm, 
Its goodness prevents his height " [i.e. that which is 
little and good]. 

Angazari is a son of Yerima. He gives his victims 
pain in the ankle (? rheumatism), the proper sacrifice being 
red and white fowls. At the dance, he waves cloths in 
the air, and then sits down and claps, afterwards beating 
his breast with the right and then with the left hand. 

His song is : 

" Angazari, Son of The Whiskered One, 
Kolas and tobacco [you have], Son of Abba, 
Angazari, Son of The Whiskered One. 
I give thanks to him with the beak, 
I give thanks to Angazari. 
Chew kola-nuts, Son of the Ruler, 

0 Wise One, stay with your people. 

Can an ostrich alight upon a branch of a tree ? [i.e. 

your place is with your own people]. 
The chief is too great for a ram to be killed for him pie 

ought to have a bull given in his honour], 
With this song are you angry, O Son of The Ruler ? 
Chew kola-nuts, Angazari. 

Bull of Abba, Bull of the Heir rboth refer to Yerima] 
Mourning for poverty I want [to do — he is very generous]. 

1 had no tobe, the son of Abba bought me a tobe ; 

I had no trousers, the son of Abba bought me trousers. 

0 Youths, O Youths, blind lust is the cure for a girl 
[this spirit makes any female who refuses him 
desire him madly afterwards]. 

1 have my own money, I go to every market. 
The baby in arms refuses to be comfortable, 
It vomits, it excretes, its nose runs. 

364 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

O Angajsari, if is you who rule the city." |This is the 
line given with the tnusi in Chapter XVII.] 

Mai-Chibi or Mai-Zumbulku (The One with The 
Navel) (54), sings in war behind the Yan Garke to en- 
courage them. He gives his victims large navels, or pain 
there, and the sufferer ought to sacrifice a pigeon and 
make an offering of ground-nuts — he is, therefore, a very 
young spirit. At the dance, he places his hands upon his 
stomach, elbows out, and rocks from side to side. I 
could not obtain the song. 

Musai or Buzu (54) is another Asben, a slave to Ba- 
Absini. At the dance, lie goes around with his spear, 
plants it in the ground, brings his shield in front of his left 
foot, and then beats the ground hard with his feet, jumps, 
sneezes, and goes. He does not stay long, for Ba-Absini 
takes his place as soon as he can do so. He is a very humble 
spirit, and should he arrive too early he must ask leave to 
dance — he is doing this in the photograph. 

His song is : 

" Ali— O Ali-li, Son of Abba, 
AH — O Ali-li, Son of Abba. 

Buzu, give me your mount [supposed to be said by Ba- 
Absini], 
Do you hear, Buzu, [Slave] of Ba-Absini ? " 

The next one is Bebe (The Deaf-Mute) or Kuruma 
(The Deaf One) (54). He afflicts with deafness those who 
annoy him, and often makes them dumb as well, but he 
also gives the appropriate medicines, the proper sacrifice 
to him being a goat or fowls of the red and white mixture, 
known as sandan bagaruwa. At the dance, he makes 
strange noises, and walks around, and is very quarrelsome. 

BORI—THE FIGHTING SPIRITS 365 

Kuri, Yerima, Sarikin Rafi, and others always retire 
when he comes, for if he sees them he pouts his lips, and 
taps his right cheek with the fingers of his right hand, 
this being a signal to the audience that these spirits tell 
lies, and they, of course, hate to be held up to ridicule. 
His song is : 

" [You have] no mouth, O my Deaf-Mute, 
Deaf One of the company. 
To-day [you have] no mouth O my Deaf-Mute. 
Abba is calling me, Great Bebe, Son of a Chief, 
[But] not with his mouth Great Bebe, Son of a Chief. 
Give us happiness 0 Players upon the violin, 
Give us happiness, O Players upon the calabash [instead 

of drum in Hausaland and in Tripoli]. 
Give us happiness, O Great Bebe." 

Dan Hasumi (54) is an apprentice of Mai-Aska, and, 
like him, makes his victims bald — rather a libel upon the 
tonsorial profession of Jan Gari. At the dance, he goes 
round and round, and then sits down, and places one hand 
over another, and then changes them, this being a sign 
that he is true, and also an invitation to the young girls to 
give him money. 

His song is : 

" Show me Dan Hasumi [spectators supposed to be 
speaking], 

Show me my warrior. 

Whether I die rests with my mount [Dan Hasumi sup- 
posed to be speaking], 

Whether I live rests with my mount [i.e. if the mount 
does the dance badly the spirit is ridiculed]." 

CHAPTER XXVI 

BORI — THE YOUTHS 

The next class of spirits to be considered is that of the 
Samari or youths — though a few of them are females. 
Those are Mohammedans, but do not offer up prayers, 
except privately in Jan Gari. At the dance, they do not 
act as mallams, though they can read and write, and are 
well educated. It is impossible to give their origin, but 
they seem to have been borrowed from foreign sources. 
There is a doubt as to who is the principal one 
in this class, but Mai-Lema is generally given the pre- 
ference, so we may start with him. 

Mai-Lema (He with The Covering, i.e. the canopy) 
(55). or» as ne is better known in Hausaland, Ba-Gudu 
(Not Running, i.e. Brave Man), is the eldest of the 
children whom Yerima placed with Mallam Ali Geshe 
and Magajiya when he took away their son Haukachi, 
the others being Zanzammo, Yaura, and Magajin Yaura. 
Another account says that Yerima gave them six of his 
children, these being Mai-Lema Kaura, Sa'idi, Ba-Jin- 
Chiwu, Kuwara, and Ya-Biyu. 

At the dance, he walks around, holding his clothes 
wide open, and later on waving his hand with a spear in 
it. In Tunis, he and his friends first assemble under a 
canopy, where they pay him court, but I have not seen 
this elsewhere. In Nigeria Alfanda may have the 
canopy. 

366 

BORI—THE YOUTHS 367 

His kirari is : 

" I am the Ba-Gudu of the King." 

His song is : 

" Ba-Gudu go in front, O Son of Yerima, 
If the king is going to war 
God preserve the orphans. 
Let him who has a wife give her [to work at getting 

ready the commissariat — flour, dried meat, etc.], 
The king this year is going to war. 
Let him who has two wives give one, 
The king this year is going to war." 

Zanzammo (55) is a spirit which prevents sleep, and is 
a kind of skin irritation apparently. At the dance, he 
walks to and fro, and then round the top part of the ring 
three times, stopping in front of the drums. After this 
he goes to the opposite end and drives unfriendly spirits 
out of the ring. Then he walks round three times, and 
finally he comes near to the drummers, sits down, sneezes, 
and goes. 

His song is : 

" Zanzammo prevents sleep, 
Zanzammo prevents rest. 

O Render do not do that." [When he is driving the 
other bori away.] 

Yaura (55) is the patron-spirit of the gamblers {Yan 
Chacha or Yan Gujiya), and he is mostly concerned with 
their good or bad fortune, though he can give illnesses also, 
the proper sacrifices being speckled fowls. At the dance, 
he moves around, and then sits down and flips his fingers 
as if gambling with cowries. He dances with Mai-Lema 
also, and in the photograph he is seen with his leader 
under the canopy. * 

368 THE BAN 01 THE BORI 

His song i 

" Yaura, the son of the Galladima, 

Yaura has sent for me [to come and sleep with 
him], 

Although I have not yet rubbed on the blue [indigo 

mixed with grease or shea butter in the hair, to 

render the woman more attractive]. 
Yaura come and get milk [from her breasts], 
Not tli at of cows, 

Even if you do not give me anything [in payment]. 
Me, he has called me, has Yaura, 
Even if you do not give me anything, 
Yaura will be the master of my house [i.e. her husband 

pro tern., probably while he has money]. 
My name in childhood, they called me [i.e. was] 

Yaura, 
The Beriberi in play they called me Yaura, 
The Filani in play they called me Yaura. 
My name in the register [of Jan Gari] is Baba-da-Rai 

Yam Musa [Father is alive, Son of Moses]. 
Oh dear ! Yam Musa, Musan Gaya, and Abubakar 

[are your friends]. 
If it were not night I should follow you." 

Musan Gaya is a friend of Yaura, and seems now to 
have become merged into him. He is also confused with 
Mallam Ali Geshe. 

Magajin Yaura (Heir of Yaura), Abubakar, or 
Ismaila, the youngest of the four, is also a patron of 
Chacha. He makes girls' breasts irritate — and possibly 
awakens desire within them — the proper sacrifice being as 
for Mallam Geshe. At the dance, he rubs himself all over, 
and seems to have some skin complaint, though not one 
as bad as itch. 

■h ~ 

■all 

o « i 

«-"e ° 

■?2o 

c,^s 

•£> C O, 

5 3 

— rt 

QJ Ifl 3 

- ~ 

— -i ^ 
§■"■.2 

— > * 

pq 1 

BORI—THE YOUTHS 369 

His song is : 

" Magajin Yaura, Abubakar, 
Magajin Yaura, with you I want to do it [the young 

girls want him and invite him to sleep with them]. 
Magajin Yaura, Ismaila, 
Magajin Yaura with you I want to do it [i.e. I am for 

you]. 
I am being sought in the dark, I am found in the light of 

the moon. 
Disciple of the young girls, he begs with a calabash for 

kola-nuts, 
Abubakar begs, and at the same time he feels their 

breasts. 
Abubakar begs, and at the same time he tickles their 

waists." 

Kaura causes a man to want another man's wife, and 
so he raises trouble continually. He also looks after a 
mother at her delivery, and is often invoked by pregnant 
women. At the dance, Kaura goes upon his hands and 
feet because Magajiya's husband (Geshe) — his foster- 
father — is in some way connected with a lion (Zakuwa). 

His kirari is : 

" I am Kaura (Son of) Mai-saje, I am the son of a 
concubine." 

His song is : 

" Kaura, Son of the house of Mai-saje, 
There is no God but God. 
I am not tired, I am not tired, 
There is no God but God. 
I have brought trouble upon my own head. 
I saw a horse tied up ; it was not the horse which I 

desired, 
It was the owner of the horse which I sought [the wife]". 

2A 

370 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

I shall not marry in Tunis, ' wash your feet and enter ' 
[i.e. clean feet is all you bring, there are no presents, 
because the Hausas are poor]. 

I shall not marry in Tunis [where] the women eat with 
the men, 

The women eat manihot, Son of a Slave." 

Sa'idi (55) is another of Yerima's sons. He is responsible 
for children's unknown ailments, but any fowls will pro- 
pitiate him. He seduces every female lie meets. At the 
dance, he sits down for a little while, sneezes, and goes. 

His kirari is : 

" I am Sa'idi one of Allah's chosen." 
His song is : 

"Oh, Oh, Oh, Husband of many, 
Sa'idi does not understand ' leave it ' [i.e. he will never 

desist]. 
Oh, Oh, Oh, Sa'idi, take thirty [of your numerous 

women] and throw them 
Between the kalgo and the sabara [trees]. 
Take thirty more and sell them, take thirty and keep 

them. 
Sa'idi [is] the spirit of Bagiro [a celebrated dancer]. 
Oh, Oh, Oh, Husband of many. 
If your mistresses are too many for you already send me 

back home." 

Ba-Jin-Chiwu (Not Feeling 111) (55), a son of Yerima, 
or, according to some, of Sarikin Rafi, belies his name, for 
he gives sore ribs and internal pains — probably gripes — 
the proper sacrifice being black and white fowls. At the 
dance, he walks around holding his stomach and groaning, 
then falls, sneezes and goes. 

BORI—THE YOUTHS 371 

His song is : 

" He despised me, oh, he despised me, oh, 

0 Allah, it is not I who am Allah. Allah give me a lover, 
Whether tiny or adult, a child, or one in the womb lying." 

And then a bit of a song is added which was evidently 
Kaura's at one time, and as it is sometimes the custom to 
mention the elders when speaking of the younger, it is 
evident that Ba-Jin-Chiwu is Kaura's brother. 

" Kaura, Son of the Whiskered One, 
O Allah, leave me my own bori. 
Kaura is in his room lying down, 
Ten mistresses are massaging him. 
Love is like water in a basin, 
You rinse your mouth and then spit it out again." 

Ya Biyu (54) ahd Kuwara (54) are twins, sister and 
brother, children of Yerima by a concubine. They can 
give any illness, and any fowls will do as a sacrifice. They 
enter the ring together, and Kuwara's song is sung for 
both. Although a female, Ya Biyu can fight, and her 
kirari is : 

" I am Ya Biyu, equal to ten." 

The song is : 

" It is night, Kuwara, Twin Bori, 

1 want to sleep but I cannot, 

Even though an ear of corn they give me. 

0 Crowd of Women get to spinning, 

1 cannot dance without cloths. 
Kuwara, Cuddler, Son of Nana, 

You are like water in which cotton has been soaked 

[supposed to be very good]. 
Stop looking at him [this to the other women], 
May Allah preserve to me my own bori." 

372 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

Haukaciii (Mad One) (55) is a son of Geshe and Magajiya, 
as lias been said, and was brought up by Yerima. He is 
lame in his right leg because once lie ran away from Yerima, 
and played with the six youths in Zukuwa's cave. 
Zakuwa (Geshe, liis own father) saw him and bit his leg, 
whereupon he drew his sword and cut the lion down. 
He can give any illness, but mostly loss of sense and lame- 
ness, the sacrifice being a pair of red and white fowls. 
At the dance, he throws one cloth over each shoulder, 
binds up his right thigh with a cloth, and then places the 
right foot over the left three times, and does the same with 
the left. Then he goes round the ring, stopping in front of 
the drummers to repeat the action with his legs. Then he 
kneels, beats himself upon the ground, sneezes, and goes 
off. 

His kirari is : 

" I am the son of Yerima, the heir of Yerima. I am the 
spine of the hedgehog so hard to bind. I am the plant 
which grows on the walls. Where are those of Abba, the 
sons of Abba ? I am the one son, the one, the one." 

His song is : 

" Step out, O Orphan [deprived of his parents], step out, 
There are kola-nuts and tobacco, O Infant. [He is very 

popular with women.] 
Step out, O Orphan, step out, 
There are kola-nuts and flowers, O Son of Abba [called 

so because in his charge]. 
He can dance like those with sound legs this son of 

Abba, 
He can dance like those with parents this son of Abba. 
Son of Abba, there are kola-nuts and tobacco, I thank 

you. 
Bite the kola-nut and step out. Hail, Son of Abba. 

BORI—THE YOUTHS 373 

They [women] have spoiled him. They even chew up 

[the kola-nut] for him [so as to save him the 

trouble]. 
He does not understand the hidden meaning of 

words, 
The women have spoiled him. 
He does not understand the hidden meaning of 

words, 
[But] lie does know the meaning of Tsarenchi [sleeping 

with a girl but not completing the act]." 

Maba is said by some to be a son of Mallam Geshe, and if 
so, Haukachi is not the only one. He can give any illness, 
the sacrifice being like that of his father. At the dance, 
he enters with some of the foregoing samari — e.g. Ba-Gudu, 
Yaura, Magajin Yaura, Kaura, Sa'idi, or Haukachi, and 
while they sit down, he stands amongst them and sings 
to them, afterwards they all dance together. Or else, as 
in the photograph, he plays with the Yam-Makaranta, 
when he sits down, rubs his body, and rolls from side to 
side. 

His song is : 

" In front is better than behind [if you did not want to go 

to another place you would not travel], 
The canoe travels for a year. 
The son of Mariyamu did not inherit ' No ' [will not be 

put off by a refusal]. 
The son of a king because of his greed 
Married a beggar [to beg for him]. 
She bore a son to him. 
Come Marabout [bird], the one which prevents women 

spinning. [It is so beautiful that they drop their 

spindles and run after it *]. 
The chief's son when he went begging * 

Was given a cow. 

374 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

r am not a boxer [to whom such a prize is given] ; I am 

not a bu teller. 
What shall I do with a horned bull in the city ? " 

The last part is supposed to be the bori speaking, and 
complaining that he has been given too much, so, 
apparently, even a spirit may become embarrassed by his 
riches ! 

CHAPTER XXVII 

BORI — THE LITTLE SPOTS 

Most of the Yayan Jidderi, as they are called in North 
Africa, or the Yayan Zanzanna, as they are known in 
Hausaland, are spirits which cause rashes and sore eyes, 
hence their name " Children of Spots," or Little Spots, 
but some of them afflict their victims in other ways. 
Their complaints are comparatively trivial on the whole, 
they call in the aid of a greater spirit to inflict a serious 
injury, as we have seen in the case of Salah, but 
they can give smallpox, and that, particularly among 
the Hausas, is anything but trifling. The names are 
Arabic, but since we can hardly imagine that skin 
complaints were unknown in early times, we must suppose 
that these spirits are dead children whose names have been 
changed. 

Usually, offerings of sugar and ground-nuts (placed in 
the Temple) are sufficient, or, in times of danger, pigeons 
are sacrificed, but in extreme cases, the spirits will demand 
fowls like the adult bori, though I was told that goats are 
never offered. Toys are always acceptable, as has been 
said, the most common being dolls, wooden horses, 
miniature sandals, and skittles, with the last of which some 
of the Little Spots dance at times. 

They are divided into the Yam-Makaranta, or Scholars, 

and the Yam-Mata or Girls, and, although the former are 

the more powerful, they seem to believe in the idea of 

" ladies first," for the Yam-Mata always precede those of 

375 

37^ 

THE BAN OF THE BORI 

the iterner sex io the ring, and, when tlicy have gone, 
the Yam-Makaranta arrive, u oally mounting the same 
horse and mare . Mb A of them < 1:lp their hands at the 

dance, bill there is no particular signification 

in this, I was informed, it is simply bee 

the Spirits, being young, behave like children. 
For a similar reason they cry if touched 
during the dance, and they are not supposed 
to jump. 

There is some difference of opinion as to 
which of the Yam-Mata is the senior, but as 
Nana Mariyamu (56) is usually named, we 
may consider her first. One might suppose 
that, being only a girl, she would not be 
married, but that would be wrong, for she is 
a wife of Jato, though some say that she has 
not yet lived with him. She gives her victims 
sore eyes and colds in the head, the proper 
sacrifice being a speckled hen and a red cock. 
She always appears with some of her com- 
panions at the dance, when she washes her 
clothes, smells them — like a German Customs 
Official — to ascertain if they have been thor- 
oughly cleansed, and then spreads them out 
Fig" 46 —A *° ^^ Upon her head she places two head- 
Skittieofthe cloths, and she touches these to draw people's 

Yayan Jidderi . . 

attention to them, and also to indicate to 
the audience that she is ready for presents of sugar. 
Then she wipes her nose, sneezes, and goes. 
Her song is : 

" Where is Mariyo, where is Mariyamu ? 
Where is Mariyamu with her ornaments ? [spots]. 

BORI-THE LITTLE SPOTS 377 

Where is Mariyo, wlicre is Mariyamu ? 
Beautiful is she with her small spol . 
Where is Mariyo, where is Rfariyamu ? 

Nana Ayesha Karama (56) is said to be a grandchild 
of Yerima. She has a farm of her own. She gives sore 
eyes and smallpox, the proper sacrifice being speckled 
fowls. Although young, she is by no means innocent, as 
her song shows. At the dance, she wears white, red, and 
pink cloths on her body, and two head-cloths, one tied 
on each side. She rushes about, claps her hands, waves 
a cloth in the air, and then sits down and scratches herself, 
and lets her head fall first on one side and then on the 
other, afterwards resting it upon one hand. If not given 
sugar then she cries, but if she receives enough she becomes 
lively again, and dances around once more, until she 
sneezes and goes. 

Her song is : 

" Nana Ayesha welcome to you, 
Let us salute the owner of the farm, salute Nana Ayesha. 
Let us salute Nana Ayesha, salute the grinder of the corn. 
Alas Nana, Alas Nana, O Nana ! 
The [Grandchild] of Yerima, Daughter of Zanzanna. 
Let us salute Nana, let us salute Nana, 
Nana, the Daughter of the Claws [she scratches with her 

sharp nails, hence the pock-marks]. 
Alas Nana, alas, she came with her ornamentation, 
She conceived a bastard, 
She brought on an abortion. 
O Nana Ayesha, you had an abortion." 

Nana Hassana is the daughter of an Arab spirit of 
Gwanja. She gives sore eyes like the others, but she also 
turns her victims' blood white (anaemia), because she drinks 

378 THE FAN OF THE B0R1 

it, the proper sacrifice being any fowls. At the dance, 
she moves round clipping her hand.-, and then sits down 
and again claps. 
Her kirari is : 

" I am Nana Hassana." 

Her song is : 

" Hassana has not eaten yesterday's meat, 
But she has drunk blood [of the person whom she has 

seized]. 
With a small dish she walks about collecting blood 
[Does] Hassana, the daughter of the Arab of Gwanja. 
Hassana with her dish collects blood." 

Nana So-Jikki (Love Body) makes her victims lose 
their power to sit up properly, her sacrifice being fowls of 
the colour of ashes. At the dance, she sits and falls on one 
side, then on the other. I was unable to obtain her song. 

Nana Tsiwa (Impertinence} is a daughter of Ba-Maguje. 
She causes quarrels amongst children, the proper offering 
being a cloth. She is also glad of ground-nuts and even 
beer, but does not like any sacrifice, so I was told. At 
the dance, she rolls her buttocks from side to side, and 
after having beaten her face and stomach, she stands at the 
salute. Lastly she jumps, sneezes, and goes. 

Her kirari is : 

" I am Nana Tsiwa, the horned one. Whoever wants to 
quarrel with me will find me to-morrow morning." 

Her song is : 

" You Nana Tsiwa with the beautiful appearance [dress, 
ornaments, etc.], 
Whoever seeks to quarrel with you, 
To-morrow will find you." 

57 

56. — Dangira (itch), Nana Ayesha Karama (small-pox), Nana Mariyamu 
(colds), Yal Bawa (small-pox), Val Kunama (pimples). 

57. — Mai-Nassara and Essiayako (small-pox), Ismaila (sore eyes *nd 
>legs), Adani, and Maba. 

All of the above are the Yayan Zanzatina, or " Little Spots." 

BORI—THE LITTLE SPOTS 379 

Yal Kunama (Daughter of The Scorpion) (56) is said by 
some to be the same as Nana Ayesha, but this does not 
appear to be correct. She too gives sore eyes, but also 
sharp pricking pains (? pimples or boils) like scorpion bites, 
the proper offering being sweets. At the dance, she moves 
around, and then sits and claps her hands, afterwards 
opening and closing them, imitating the insects' move- 
ments. Lastly she smoothes them over her body, sneezes, 
and goes. 

Her song is : 

" She can sting can Yal Kunama, 
She can sting can Yal Kunama." 

Yal Bawa (Daughter of a Slave) (56) is a Zanfara 
spirit which gives sore eyes and smallpox. At the dance, 
she moves round, and then sits down and claps her hands 
until she is given onions, which she rubs upon her face, 
saying that they are scent. I was told that her song is the 
same as that for Nana Ayesha Karama. 

Dangira,1 Dausa, or Kaikai (Itch) (56) is a sister of 
Yerima. She causes the ailment which her name denotes, 
the proper sacrifice being a pair of speckled fowls. At 
the dance, after the usual parade, she sits down and 
scratches herself violently, particularly the face and chest. 
Ismaila and the other Yam-Makaranta drive her away if 
they come while she is in the ring, as they dislike her. 

Her song is : 

" Improve the town, You, Nana, 
Improve the town, Dangira, 

Improve the town, Dwarf [Little Sister] of the Yerima. 
She dances in the clothes of her slave [no one else would 
lend her any, for she would infect them]. 

THE B iv OF THE B0R1 

Improve the tow Yon, N ina. 

Do not j mm [if the kola-nut: d<> nol come]. 

Bring, bring the calab h <>f kola-nul ." 

Theprincipa] boy i^ Essiyako. Heal o gives sore eyes 

and smallpox, but is appeased by anything red — the 
martial colour for lie likes people to think that he and all 
of his companions are warriors. At the dance, he moves 
round with a spear, and then sits down and claps his hand 
and beats the ground like the others— for he is really only 
a child like them. I was unable to obtain his song. 

Ismaila or Almajiri Disciple) (57) also gives sore eyes, 
and he is appeased by sugar, ground-nuts, etc., as are the 
others. At the dance, he walks about holding out his 
tobe for offerings which he gives to the drummers. Then 
he sits down and reads from an imaginary book, after 
which some of the Masu-Bori press his arms so as to fold 
them over his breast (the hands being upon the opposite 
shoulders), and then he claps his hands, sneezes, and goes. 
Sometimes he holds a spear at first like Essiyako. 

His song is : 

" Ismaila you have a horse, Ismaila, 
O, Mallam with the prayer-board, you defeated those in 

armour. [This is the line given with the music in 

Chapter XVII.] 
Ismaila, Disciple with the horns.2 
O Disciple [to] the citizens, [he seeks alms from the rich 

only] O Ismaila, 
Waters, waters are stirred up Ismaila [he fouls them], 
The waters on the earth not those from above. 

0 Youth with the tatu marks, Ismaila. 

1 like the city, I like the village, 

He who has the city has not the village [he cannot live 
in both at the same time]. 

BORI THE LITTLE SPOTS 383 

The village maiden docs not get Kano cakes, 
Buy for her roots and beans " [the universal contempt 
of the city dweller for his suburban countrymen]. 

Mai-Nassara (57) is sometimes known as Mijin Mazza 
(Man of Men), and his functions are similar to those of 
Essiyako. At the dance, he holds a spear, and walks round 
three times, then stops in front of the drummers, puts his 
right hand upon his left breast, and bends slightly forward, 
then vice versa. Afterwards, he claps his hands, mimics 
some of the other bori, sneezes, and goes. 

His song is : 

" Mai-Nassara with the amulets [upon the arms usually], 
O Youth who shows diligence. 
Mai-Nassara, Man of Men, One with a beard like a he- 
goat. 
Mai-Nassara with the charms of youth, O Mai-Nassara, 
The Breaker of Horses, Man of Men." 

Adani (57) is much like Essiyako, but is said by some 
to wrestle with the Yan-Ruwa at times. His dance is the 
same as that of Essiyako. 

His song, a very flattering one, is : 

" O Strong One, Adani, 
Going without returning [one who will not turn back in 

war]. 
Hey Hen, do not ignore the wild cat [i.e. let no one 

ignore Adani]. 
You, Goat, do not insult the hyena [that is as dangerous 

as for a human being to insult this spirit]. 
O Strong One, Mallam Adani." 

The last of the Yayan Jidderi is little Mallam Mushe, 
so called in play. He also gives sore eyes and smallpox. 
At the dance, he repeats the Koran in a loud voice, reading 
from a prayer-board (as do children), and then prays. m 

CHAPTER XXVIII 

BORI — THE SPIRITS OF THE FOREST, OF THE WATERS, AND 
OF THE GROVE 

The spirits of the Forest, Yan Dowa, which are danced in 
Tunis, are the Lion, the Hyena, the Elephant, and with 
these is classed the Dog, because he chases them when they 
are near to the house. Probably they were much more 
numerous at one time, for there seems to be but little doubt 
that they were totems. Thus in the photograph, we see 
Zaki (or Zaiki), and Bultu in front, and Kare (or Karre) 
behind, watching them. These spirits seem to be the 
personal bori of the animals themselves, for they are 
supposed simply to bite and claw their victims as the real 
animals would do — though no marks need be visible, for 
the gnawing and tearing might be internal. The idea is 
seen in the case of the boy which the donkey bori caused 
to roll upon the ground. If this is so, it is more easy to 
understand the connexion between the totem and the bori 
(as Salah put it), for, according as the bori of the animal 
was pleased or offended, so would the totem animal itself 
treat its worshippers well or ill. The same would apply 
to the bird bori mentioned later, and to the tree bori which 
we have already examined. I was told that at one time 
many more animals were represented at the dance than 
there are now, and, as has been seen in the initiation rites 
of the Fittan Fura, instruction in the bori dances was 
given during the time that the children were being taught 
how to approach their totems. 

382 

BORI—THE SPIRITS OF THE FOREST 383 

At the dance, when it is time for the Lion or Hyena 
spirit to leave the mount, a piece of meat is held out, and 
the bori at once seizes it, and so leaves his doki. 

To Zaki (The Lion) (58) are sacrificed fowls coloured 
like a partridge. At the dance, he moves on hands and 
knees, clawing the ground and looking for something to eat. 

His kirari is : 

" Allah is feared, the Lion is to be feared." 

His song is : 

" O Lion, you go to the forest, it is not yours, 
Whoever owns a house he will have a visitor [the Lion], 
Even the poor man. 
When shall I find-a fool 
Who will bring me a ram to eat ? [This to prevent the 

lion looking for food in the ring.] 
There is nothing but the hollow of a tree and an empty 

house. 
O Lion, Elder Brother of the Forest, Drum of the Forest 

[his roar is an alarm]. 
There is nothing so strong as the Lion." 

The Hyena (58), called Bultu (Kanuri) or Kura 
(Hausa), gives glandular swellings (? as from a poisonous 
bite), and makes the victims' mouths water. At the dance, 
she moves about on hands and knees slightly behind Zaki, 
and, if she sees anything of a red colour, she will rush at it 
and try to devour it, thinking that it is flesh. Other Masu- 
Bori have to be on guard, therefore, to prevent this, by 
getting in front, but the mount is not tied in any way as 
in Nigeria.1 I am not sure if Wula is the same as Kura 
or not, the actions and attributes appear to be the same.* 

384 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

The song is : 

" You, O Daughter of the Bush, 
Bultu, Daughter of the Bush, 
Kura, Daughter of the Bush, 
Do not eat the drummers' ram 
Saying that you have been given nothing. 
O Scrambler, everything is yours [she is very greedy]. 
O Walker in Slippery Plates, Dog of the Rain [will go 

anywhere in any weather for anything to eat], 
Whoever is out at night is your father's servant [i.e. 

she will seize him as if he belonged to her father and 

she had a right to bring him home]." 

Giwa (Elephant) makes her victims' bodies sore all over, 
and heavy. At the dance, she goes about heavily upon 
hands and knees, and jumps twelve times. 

Her song is : 

" They are in front of the Great One, I have not left you 

behind, 
O Mountain of Flesh of the River, O Strong One, 
O Elephant, One with The Trunk, O Burster, O Strong 

One, 
O Elephant, Owner of the Forest, Allah gave you it not 

men. 
O Elephant, Owner of the Forest, you are equal to many 

men. 
The Mountain of Flesh has come." 

Kare (Dog) (58) is the same as Tsuguna in Northern 
Nigeria. He causes his victims to make noises like a bark 
(? whooping-cough). He has to watch the foregoing, and 
he always appears with Zaki and Bultu, barking at them 
to alarm the people. 

58. — Kare the Dog, Zaki the Lion, and Bultu the Hyaena. The last- 
named animal is driven off by the lion, while the dog barks at both in 
rear. * 

59. — Baddo, Kadda, Dnbabi, and Sarikin Kabbi are water-jinns, the 
last of whom is calling down the rain. Sarikin (iwari walks about with a 
stick; he is silly through drink. Baba steals pots. 

THE SPIRITS OF THE FOREST 385 

His song is : 

"Hap! Hap! Dog. 
Hap ! Hap ! Dog. 
See the dog. The dog of the Chief." 

There are several Spirits of the Waters 2 which give their 
victims thirst, the sacrifice being a pair of fowls coloured 
like a hawk. All seem to be crocodiles except Sarikin 
Raft, the chief, who is now classed amongst the Moham- 
medan spirits, though his prototype was once a pagan god. 

The next one in order of importance is Dodo Ibrahima, 
Sarikin Kabbi, or Ba-Kabbi (59), the son of Sarikin Ran, 
and he also has power over the rain — in the photograph 
he is calling it down. 

At the dance, he kneels down, and a calabash of water is 
brought to him, which he noses. He lifts up his head, 
shakes it, puts it down again, lifts and shakes it, puts it 
down for the third time, sneezes, and goes. All of the 
water-spirits may be enticed away in this manner, and it is 
interesting to note that such a belief was held by the ancient 
Assyrians. Sometimes Ibrahima may throw some of the 
water over his head. 

His song is : 

" Bogey Ibrahima, Bogey Ibrahima, 
[See the] Bogey, Children, [see the] Bogey. The Bogey 

is welcome. [This line is given with the music in 

Chapter XVII.] 
See Bogey Ibrahima, Servant of Goje. 
A spirit [he is], a spirit of Sangwai [another bori city], 
A spirit [lie wishes to be] upon a bed in Sangwai." 

For after a bath one always wishes to rest, or, as another 
informant puts it, he is a chief and will not sit upon the 
ground. 

2B 

//// BAN OF THE B0R1 

K \hda (Crocodile) (59) and Baddo (59) arc practically 
.mic as Dodo Ibrahima. They are supposed to be 
swimming in the photograph. Baddo is also the name of 
.1 water-lily said to be edible, but whether the planl has 
been named after the spirit or vice versa, it is impossible 
to say. 

Their song is : 

" One who plays with the waters, Kadda. 
Son of Sarikin Ran, Kadda." 

Dubabi (59) is a son of Dodo Ibrahima, and his functions 
and dance are similar. He must not dance in front of his 
father without permission, and only then when his head 
has been covered with a cloth. 

His song is : 

" O Son of the King of the Waters, Dubabi, 
O Son of the King of the Waters, Dubabi. 
He has gone to Jan Gari and left me, 
He has left me with a headache. [People sitting near 

water are affected by him thus.] 
He has left me, I am seeking him, 

Dubabi, Dubabi, Dubabi, Son of the King of the 
Waters." 

Ba-Kabba is a young full-sister of Dubabi, and gives 
thirst, but also sore feet (? through standing in the water), 
and, in fact, any illness, her offerings being the same as 
those made to the Yayan Jidderi. At the dance, she sits 
like the others, but first jumps around like a frog ; possibly 
she represents this animal. 

Her song is : 

" Little Dish of the house of the Arifa, she jumps." [A 
small dish is placed in vessels of water so that it floats 
on top, and thus acts to some extent as a stopper. It 
is also used as a ladle.] 

BORI—THE SPIRITS OF THE FOREST 387 

Ayu (Mannattee) drags down anyone whom he catches 
in the water. He is not danced in North Africa, I was told. 
He calls " wa'ak, wa'ak," and holds his arms down to his 
sides, then lifting them, and slapping his face. The execu- 
tioners of the Crocodile Secret Society drag their victims 
down in this manner. 

The Yan Kurimi (Children of the Grove — not bush or 
forest) are both male and female, some being ancestors, 
apparently, others totems. The most important of the 
former is Sarikin Gwari (59), who makes people silly 
through drink, thus softening their brains, but he is fairly 
accessible, for any fowls may be sacrificed to him. At 
the dance, he walks about with a long chief's stick, then 
sits on a stool, lights his pipe, and smokes. 

His song is : 

" See we are going to war with Gwari 
Let us be in front not behind. 
See we are going to war with Gwari 
We are afraid of the Gwari knife [one with a handle in 

the shape of a ring],3 
Let us go in front not behind, 
We are going to war with Bauchi " [which country often 

used to fight with Gwari]. 

Yakoba (named after a former chief of Bauchi) or Yam- 
Yam (or Yem Yem) is rather a mysterious spirit, for he 
appears to be double, though this is denied. He is a 
cannibal, and at the dance he looks about for meat, and, 
if he gets none, starts biting his hands. 

His song is : 

" Yakoba, leave the meat for the Yam- Yam, 
Pour out the blood for the Yam- Yam. • 

Dada, Dada [Arzikki Boboniya, the mother of the 

388 THE BAN OF THE RORI 

wmnaii supposed to be singing], give me my body- 

cloth [to pnt on for] 
I am going to gaze upon Yakoba the medicine [i.e. the 

terror] of Gwari, 
The Puller out of the chiefs, the Bull." 

Mai-Kasosowa (He with The Iron spear) or Farin 
Ba-Larabe (White Arab) gives trembling fits. He dances 
with a knife or sword in his hand, which he waves about 
bis licad. 

His song is : 

" O Mai-Kasosowa, Killer of Men, White Arab, 
Here are a virgin and an old woman. 
Where is the man from Zaria ? 

Here are the sweet cakes, Here are cakes boiled in oil 
[this is supposed to be sung by Kano people laughing 
at those of Zaria], 
Give them to the Zaria man." 

Matan Sarikin Gwari, or Ba-Gwariya, the principal 
female spirit of the grove, is the wife of the chief of these 
spirits, as her name denotes ; she is sometimes confused 
with Arzikki Boboniya. At the dance, after having 
covered her face with a cloth — because it is so hideous 
is one reason given ; Medusa was of Libyan origin — she 
moves around, then she sits and grinds imaginary corn 
upon her thigh, and looks about, and swallows it when 
no one is looking. 

Her song is : 

" Arzikki is beautiful, Ba-Gwariya, 
She has come in a white cloth. 
Arzikki is beautiful, Boboniya, 
The mother of Yerima, the mother of citizens." 

BORI—THE SPIRITS OF THE FOREST 380 

Arzikki Boboniya or Nana Arzikki 4 (Lucky Nana) is 
a Gwari, and a wife of Mallam Alliaji, also the nurse (but 
not the mother) of Yerima. She makes her victims' legs 
useless, the proper sacrifice being a red cock and a speckled 
hen. She was a poor old Gwari female, and was the slave 
of the other bori, until her marriage. One account is that 
Kuri took her first, but would not marry her. At the dance, 
she walks round and claps her hands, then stands with her 
knees turned in against one another, her hands bent down 
holding the cloth, and she cries and lets her nose run. 

Her song is : 

" Arzikki Boboniya has no cloth, only a rag [many 

pagans wear only leaves]. 
And the rag is not hers, the rag belongs to her slave 

[she has nothing]. 
Arzikki Boboniya, I am not coming for the rag. 
In the city are many mallams [so you may procure a 

husband — said in derision]. 
Arzikki Boboniya, people are roaring with laughter. 
Whoever laughs I shall not do so. 
She ate a dog she did not give me any. 
Arzikki Boboniya borrowed a rag." 

Biri or Birri (Monkey) (60) gives people lice.5 He 
also destroys their crops unless propitiated. At the dance, 
he simply squats down upon his haunches, and when asked 
who he is, he sneezes and goes. 

His song is : 

" My young monkey has a rake [his fingers], 
Steal, steal with the rake. 
My young monkey is cunning. 
Here you, Young Monkey, come here, come here." 

Angulu (Vulture) (60) makes people smell badly, the 
sacrifice being fowls of the same colour as herself. At the 

390 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

dance, she squats and flaps lier arms like wings, and makes 
appropriate noises. 
Angulu's song is : 

" Angulu your meat [as you like it] stinks, 

I have not eaten it [I shall not do so] until to-nioriow " 
[when it has gone bad]. 

Hankaka (White Breasted Crow) (60) and Gauraka 
(Crown-bird) (60) are very similar. Both can give any 
illness to people in the bush, the proper sacrifice being 
fowls of the same colour as themselves. At the dance, 
they squat and flap their arms like Angulu. 

Hankaka calls " Da, Da, Da, Da, Da, Da, Da [sounds 
like this bird makes] the men of Ilorin make one 
frightened " [because they have guns imported from 
Lagos]. 

Gauraka calls " Garanga, Garanga, Garang, garang, 
gara, gara, gar, gar." 

Hankaka's song is : 

" ' Da, da, da,' so says Hankaka 
Because she sees that one is grinding flour [and thinks 

that she will get some], 
Because she sees that we are going to Katsina. 
' Da, da, da,' so says Hankaka. 
Because she sees that we are going to Sokoto for a 

walk. 
The young slave it is whom I have driven out." 

The meaning of the last line is said to be that the bori 
of the slave was found to have been having illicit relations 
with the daughters of the master, but what that had to do 
with the Hankaka I could not discover. 

60 

6o. — Biri the Monkey gives lice. Kaguwa the Crab makes her victims 
•walk bent double Hankaka the Crow and Gauraka the Crown Bird (second 
to right) give any illness in the bush. No one must see the face of Ba- 
Gwariya. Angulu the Vulture causes people to smell badly, and Sarikin 
JMakafi makes them blind. 

61. — The Final Jumping at Tripoli. 

BORI-THE SPIRITS OF THE FOREST 391 
Gauraka's song is : 

" Of the seeds but three have I taken, [crown-birds pick 
up the newly sown grain], 
Do not say that I have done any harm." 

The last is Kaguwa (60), the Crab, which distorts her 
victims' bodies, and makes them walk bent to one side. 
At the dance, she sits, turns hands and feet inwards, drops 
one shoulder, and makes movements as if walking along 
with a distorted body. 

The musicians, to humour her, sing : 

" [To be like] the Crab is better than standing," 

but they are not particularly anxious to copy her, and so 
must keep on good terms. The Hausa is no novice in the 
gentle art of flattery ! I have not heard of a Blarney 
Stone in Nigeria, but there must be one, or, at least, 
something quite as efficacious. 

CHAPTER XXIX 

THE ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON- DANCING 

The belief in demons is not strange to us. Sir E. B. 
Tylor, in his Primitive Culture, lias given examples in 
countries literally from China (via Africa) to Peru, and 
even Patagonia ; from England across America to the 
Antipodes.1 The mention of the all-red route reminds 
us that even to-day our language shows us to be not free 
of such an idea, for, putting aside the question of the 
" good angels," the ritual for the casting out of devils is 
still preserved in the Roman Church, and we had only last 
year the edifying account of a ghost-laying in this country 
by a clergyman of even the Church of England ! What 
wonder then that we still speak of being in good or bad 
spirits, or of an evil genius ? The demon of unrest is often 
referred to, while not long ago a new devil was invented 
— namely, the " Influenza Fiend " — and even yet we are 
not quite certain " what the devil " to do to get rid of it. 

The belief then that illnesses and misfortunes are due to 
demons is world-wide, and I think that any attempt to 
trace the origin of the fear of the bori amongst the Hausas 
to any foreign source would be futile. But there is a better 
chance of discovering the origin of some of the individual 
spirits, and of the rites due to them, so in these two con- 
cluding chapters an attempt will be made in that direction, 
and we shall commence by examining the personal spirits, 
for, as we have seen, a Hausa is really four or five beings. 

The two angels are Semitic, probably an importation of 

392 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING 393 

Islam. The question as to whether Mohammed got the 
idea through the Jews from Persia or not need not concern 
us now, so the following may be sufficient for us, as far as 
this book is concerned. " We created man, and we know 
that his soul whispereth within him ; and we are nearer to 
him than his jugular vein. When the two angels deputed 
to take account of a man's behaviour, take an account 
thereof ; one sitting on the right hand, and the other on 
the left ; he uttereth not a word, but there is with him a 
watcher, ready to note it." 2 According to Sale, the evil 
angel will drive the person to the judgment, where the 
other will bear witness for him. But there is a tradition 
that " the angel who notes a man's good actions, has com- 
mand over him who notes his evil actions : and that when 
a man does a good action, the angel of the right hand 
writes it down ten* times ; and when he commits an ill 
action, the same angel says to the angel of the left hand, 
' Forbear setting it down for seven hours ; peradventure 
he may pray or may ask pardon.' " Sale says in his 
" Preliminary Discourse " that these angels were changed 
each day, and, though this is not the belief of the Hausa 
— who likes to think of a permanent association with his 
spirit — it is quite evident that his angels are those men- 
tioned in the Koran. 

Next let us take the bori of the opposite sex, the suc- 
cuba or incubus, as the case may be. This spirit is cer- 
tainly of the same kind as the bori of the bush, and, 
indeed, may even be one of those actually honoured at 
the dances, for it will be remembered that several of the 
spirits (e.g. Mallam Ali) chose human partners then, 
and other bori — generally females (e.g. Risana) — try to 
injure their human rivals, Magajiya objecting to the 
amours of even her son. Nana Ayesha Baba especially is 

;.,| Till 5 IV OF THE BORJ 

a very troublesome bbri. Tyloi gives examples in many 

parts of the world, finally quoting "Richard Burton's 

seriously believing account in the 'Anatomy of Melan- 
choly,' where he con ludes with a» <]wiescence in a declara- 
tion lately made l>v Lipsius, thai on the showing of daily 

narratives and judicial sentences, in no age had these 
lecherous demons appeared in such numbers as in his own 

time and this was about a.d. 1660." 3 

We need not bother further with general examples, 
however, though it is as well to note that formal rites are 
specified in the Hindu Tantra which enable a man to 
obtain a companion nymph by worshipping her, and by 
repeating her name by night in a cemetery, because it 
seems to show that in early times the connexion was not 
considered to be disgraceful, and a similar idea must be in 
the mind of the Hausa who says that only good-tempered 
people have these spirit-lovers. I think that this belief 
also came from — or, at any rate, was influenced by — the 
East, for in Tobit vi. we find the following, spoken by 
Tobias to the angel who wished him to marry Sarah. " I 
am afraid, lest if I go in unto her, I die, as the others before: 
for a wicked spirit loveth her which hurteth no body, but 
those which come unto her ; wherefore I also fear lest I 
die." Fortunately the angel told him how to make a 
charm, so, when Tobias entered the bridal chamber, he 
" took the ashes of the perfumes, and put the heart and 
liver of the fish thereupon, and made a smoke therewith, 
the which smell when the evil spirit had smelled, he fled 
into the utmost parts of Egypt " (vii.). 

Now this is exactly the Hausa case, for, as I pointed out, 
the precautions taken at marriage are due to a fear 
of the Asmodeus or Lilith, whichever it may be. And 
the argument is made stronger, I think, by the fact that at 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING 395 

the time when I came to this conclusion I had not thought 
of the passage in the Apocrypha.4 But I do not say that 
the idea comes from the introduction of Mohammedanism, 
of course, it is a survival due to the Semitic influence in the 
races which went to form the mixture which we now call 
" Hausa," retained in full force even at the present time, 
owing to the fruitful nature of the soil upon which the 
seed fell.5 The fact that a despised and neglected wife is 
known as a bora may have some connexion with this 
question — for all wives are noted for their jealousy, and 
evil wishes may become evil influences. 

As to the familiar bori, I am inclined to think that it is 
the soul of a deceased ancestor — or, at any rate, a member 
of the clan — for although the Hausa now says that a bori 
may go to any other person on the death of its temporary 
charge, the idea is quite foreign to the original belief (i.e. 
that every stranger was an enemy, a notion which was 
held not so many years ago in Nigeria, in all probability, 
the different districts being in constant conflict until our 
arrival), though it would easily weaken in North Africa, 
where all negroes, whatever their nationality, were slaves, 
for all, being equal, would naturally have much in common.6 
Even nowadays, there is some confusion between the 
familiar and the soul, for when both go to the Rijiyan Rai, 
they may become one — which is quite comprehensible 
considering that both may have belonged to the same 
ancestor — and Mai-Bulala is called Rai, though such a 
description is very unusual for a bori. If this be correct, 
we need not look outside West Africa for the origin of the 
belief, since the ghosts in Nigeria are often consulted as to 
the welfare of the tribe, over the members of which they 
naturally watch with benevolence.7 The brilliant thcughts 
— ascribed to " genius " or " inspiration " — by means of 

396 THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

which we solve a difficulty, and the influence, unseen but 
felt, of our " Guardian Angel," which forces us into a 

particular path, away (as we discover later) from danger, 
are due without doubt in the Hausa mind to the only 
being which could care for him- -namely, a member of his 
own clan. 

The transmigration of the familiar bori is no more sur- 
prising than that of the soul, and that doctrine is generally 
accepted ; in fact, the resemblance of some members of 
a certain generation to those of one no longer living is 
always apparent to the native, and lie can explain the 
phenomenon only in this way. After all, by substituting 
the word " cell " for " soul," lie will be absolutely correct 
in lus theory of continuity. Now, ancestors are not 
always regarded as being friendly to their own family, 
although ready to help others of the clan against strangers, 
but that difficulty is more apparent than real, for they 
must be the ancestors of other survivors, and, generally 
speaking, they will be considered as being benevolent if 
properly reverenced, for, although it is said that God made 
man in His own image, it is really the other way about, 
at any rate with the Hausas, since when a really great and 
well-loved parent goes to his rest, it is easy to imagine that 
he becomes something more than mortal, and, of course, 
with greater power to help his own people. 

Still, some may always be inimical, for it must be 
remembered that amongst many peoples, abortions, 
children dying undelivered in the mothers, and others 
become revengeful spirits, hoping to punish the com- 
munity for their own sad fate, and I cannot help thinking 
that many of the " Little Spots " have arisen in this 
manner. The mothers dying in childbirth will likewise 
return for their babies. Then again there are the souls 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING yyj 

which never have been bori, and these, though perhaps 
inclined to be friendly at first, may easily become hostile 
if no food is offered at their graves. 

Numbers of the familiar bori do not return to human 
bodies at all. Of these some join the forest bori, and 
become the spirits which are also called aljannu, iblisai, or 
iskoki. In reality, there never was very much distinction 
between them, for the familiars, even when attached to a 
person, were always in the closest relationship with the 
others, and might even be temporarily dispossessed. 
But when once the connexion is lost, they begin to grow 
less careful of their clan, and even become inimical to 
individuals, though always ready to fight for the clan as a 
whole against a general enemy. Jato, as we have seen, 
was once an ornament to bori society, but, owing to his 
excesses, he is no longer looked upon with favour. 

We have a mixture of two cults probably, one in which 
the ancestors were thought to be friendly, another in 
which the contrary was the idea, the familiar bori being 
the spirits of the former class, once souls, but degraded to 
a lower level in a subsequent generation. That this is 
not an extravagant notion is seen by a passage in Tylor, 
where he states that " in West Africa, manes-worship 
displays in contrast its two special types. On the one 
hand, we see the North Guinea negroes transferring the 
souls of the dead, according to their lives, to the rank of 
good and evil spirits, and if evil worshipping them the 
more zealously, as fear is to their minds a stronger impulse 
than love. On the other hand, in Southern Guinea, we 
see the deep respect paid to the aged during life, passing 
into worship when death has raised them to yet higher 
influence."8 That they should become disease-demons 
is not really strange, for they may be merely punishing 

77//" BAN OF THE BOh'I 

their des endanl foi lai Ic oi re pe I ; ej did in life — 
»»r it may be even then love v/hii h i auses them to want 
thesurvivon to come to them, [nan the inference 

is quite natural when the member of a family die one after 
the other of ^>me contagious or infectious disease. I had 
very great trouble in i olating patients during an outbreak 
of smallpox in Jemaan Daroro in 1909, for the people 
that any thus treated would be angry — and their ghosts 
malignant, I presume, though they said sad. Ancestor- 
worship exists amongst the Hausas, as has been said, this 
being the reason why children are adopted by a childless 
couple to please the ancestors, and also to benefit them- 
selves, and why offerings are placed upon the grave. The 
fact that some of the bori are called " father " and 
" mother" signifies nothing, for these are general terms 
of respect given to adults, but two other facts are very 
much to the point — namely, that some of the bori are 
patrons of industries, and that a few (e.g. Ba-Maguje) are 
still stated to have been actual men. 

For convenience in tracing the bori, let us suppose that 
a pagan Hausa and his wife had been forced to leave their 
own town, for some reason or other, and had made up 
their minds to start afresh in a virgin spot — an event 
which has often happened in Hausa history.9 We can 
imagine the West African savage on his first arrival in an 
uninhabited spot, seeing great clouds of sand, if in the 
desert, overwhelming everything before them, or, if in the 
forest-belt, finding trees flourishing luxuriously, watered 
by the flooding of a river, perhaps, and, as no human 
agency is visible, ascribing the phenomena to local super- 
natural beings. It would be of no use to him to worship 
his ancient gods in a place where they had no power, so 
his old religion would be modified to conform with the new 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-D. I N( ING 199 

conditions, and every mountain and rock, and still more 
every river, pool, and tree — where life was apparent — 
would be thought to be inhabited by a spirit which listened 
gladly to the pious pagan's prayers, and, in return for his 
offerings, allowed him to perform certain acts which other- 
wise would have been dangerous. Instances of all of the 
above have been given already, and whereas some of the 
rites (e.g. that of sacrificing a virgin to Dodo, the river- 
god or bogey) may have been brought from the north or 
east, animism is much too widely spread in West Africa 
to doubt that others are indigenous. At first, the nature- 
spirits might appear malignant, for the savage would not 
understand the risings of the river, perhaps, nor how to 
shelter himself from the storms which were of a kind quite 
new to him, but he would seek to propitiate the powers 
responsible, and, although his greater safety would be 
really due to his a'dvance in bush-craft, he would attribute 
it to the acceptance of his worship. The rites of this 
would be upon the same lines as those performed for the 
spirits of his ancestors, for the means which seem to have 
proved efficacious in maintaining an enduring covenant 
between the living and the dead would be clearly the ones 
to be employed in binding together the worshipper and 
his God, and in time — the rites being identical — the 
distinction between the different kinds of spirits would be 
lost. More than that, as the generations increased, some 
ancestor would be regarded as being the god of the district, 
and the nature-gods which once held full sway would be 
relegated to an inferior position, becoming simultaneously 
of the same nature as the human forefather. 

This might not be the only change, for instead of a man 
who had become the first god, we might get a god who had 
created the first man, and to him would be attributed also 

400 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

the mountains, rivers, trees, and animals. As the people 
increased and conquered their neighbours, so also would 
tlic cult of the gods be propagated, those of the beaten 
tribe being absorbed or regarded . vil -pint , and at 
length W€ Bhould find that the whole country was under 
one or more supreme gods, while lower in the scale would 
< oine a heterogeneous crowd of spirits from each district, 
some identified with each other {e.g. those of the same 
river), some being regarded as companion spirits (thus 
Ba-Toye and Gindema), while others would remain 
distinct, being worshipped properly only in their own 
districts — thus accounting for the fact that some bori are 
known in West but not in North Africa, and vice ve*sa. 
In addition to these three (really but two) classes, there 
would be others formed by marriages between the members 
of each, liaisons between gods and men giving rise to 
heroes, those between men and evil spirits to devils 10 ; and 
so even at this early stage there would be great confusion. 

Let us suppose now that the settlement is attacked and 
conquered by a people practising " fetishism " or anima- 
tism, a very well-known aspect of West African religion. 
The idea is not put forth fantastically, for the inhabitants 
of the land of the fetish are in constant contact with the 
Hausa towns north of the Gold Coast, and this may give 
us a clue to the origin of the word bori. 

In Sierra Leone, the Mendis have a devil binni, which 
rushes about during the ceremonies of initiation into the 
rites, and the members of one of the two sets of its satel- 
lites are called bori. They wear mitre-shaped caps 
resembling those of Kuri and others in the Hausa dances 
(see Ills. 8 and 44), and run in front of the binni, 
inviting him to follow them. A few women belong to the 
order, these being known as mabori.11 Again, in Liberia, a 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING 401 

Vai girl before her initiation (during which — as in Sierra 
Leone — her clitoris is excised) is known as a boni, before- 
hand she is a boroa, while a youth goes to the beri institu- 
tion for a few months for sexual initiation, or may stay 
there for years if he desires to learn all the secrets of the 
tribal freemasonry. Here again, the girls wear a peaked 
head-dress.12 The Bwem word for children is beleku ; in 
Ahanta male and female are rendered by bekire and bale 
respectively ; boy in Nkoranza is mberi ; child in Wala is 
bile ; while the Wolof word mbola means association.13 In 
Songhay bangou and benta mean circumcision, while bere 
is to turn around, etc. 14 ; the Efik for circumcision is mbobi, 
while bre means to bewitch and also to play.15 Lastly, 
amongst the Ibo-speaking peoples of Southern Nigeria, 
the word belu (from be) means to have circumcised.16 All 
this may seem a little vague, I must try to make my 
meaning clear. 

The Bambaras, farther up the Niger, worship gnena 
(jinns) and gna or boli, spirits subject now to Allah. 
These classes are quite distinct, the former — of Arab 
origin — being white and good, the latter black and evil, 
and probably of local origin, although a legend says that 
they were brought from Mecca, this having been invented, 
thinks the author, in order to save the cult from suppres- 
sion. Here again, circumcision and excision are practised, 
the boys wearing a peaked cap in this case, and the parts 
cut off are offered upon an altar to the spirits of the 
ancestors.17 

Now the letter which in Kano is " r " is often " 1 " in 
So koto (nearer Bambara), and, in fact, boli is used instead 
of bori for a spirit, so if we can find any trace of fetishism 
in the Hausa cult, we may conclude that there is some 
connexion between it and that of the Bambara,* not 

2C 

|02 THE BAN (>/■' THE BORI 

iurprising when it i-. remembered that Sarikin Rafi i 
only " li<- of Daura " but also "Owner of Timbuktu." 
But, several of I ie pints have a tsere, an inanimate 
obje t whi< ii they inhabil when not riding ;i human hoxse 

or mare (e.g. Sarikin Bakka's bow), and surely this is the 
link required, especially as the t^erc i hardly known in 

North Africa (except, perhaps as regards the water- 
spirits), whereas numbers of the bori are connected with 
special objects in Nigeria. A similar interchange of " 1 " 
and " r " takes place in Mendi, and in both that language 
and in Hausa, " b " is sometimes substituted for " p " or 
vice versa, so there may be some connexion even between 
bori and poro.18 

I have quoted a few examples, all of which — if correctly 
transcribed — seem to show some similarity in the wo^ f< >r 
" initiate" and "circumcision," and even "dance" or 
"rite." Probably these could be greatly multiplied if 
vocabularies of all the West African languages were 
available, but Koelle and others do not give any of the 
words required, and although such reticence is quite 
intelligible, it is most unfortunate for me, especially when 
one considers the attention paid to such things by natives. 
Still, even these examples seem to indicate the existence 
of a widespread cult at one time. 

In Babylon, the baru who were noted as seers at least 
as far back as the time of Hammurabi, consulted the gods 
by the inspection of the liver and entrails, and in other 
ways, and had their liturgical vestments, which they 
changed frequently during the ceremony. Whether these 
seers were supposed to be possessed by a " Ba'al " I have 
not been able to find out, but it is almost certain that they 
were, for oracles were given by inspired prophetesses in 
Babylon, and hi any case there is no doubt in my mind 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING 403 

that bori and boli have been derived from Ba'al — or some 
form of it — e.g. Ba'lu, Bol, Bel, or Bar. Professor Robert- 
son Smith tells us that the Baal was conceived as the male 
principle of reproduction, and his life-giving power was 
not limited to the vegetable kingdom, for to him also were 
ascribed the increase of the flocks and herds, and also of the 
human inhabitants. The word Ba'al was only a title, a 
general name, there were ba'als of animals, trees, streams, 
mountains and fetish-stones, and it seems to correspond 
in every way to bori, for, although the changes in letters 
may seem at first to be unlikely, the occurrence of the ain 
" in words which have been definitely incorporated into the 
Hausa language [not in those merely borrowed] does not 
affect the pronunciation," and, in fact, is often replaced 
by alif — which, later on, may be omitted altogether. The 
interchange of "J " and " r " has already been com- 
mented upon, as has also the Hausa aversion to ending a 
word in a consonant, so the derivation is quite possible 
and reasonable, though perhaps a much less elaborate 
origin is the correct one — namely, the simple change in 
the Egyptian word, bar.19 

We have seen that young Hausa boys and girls were 
once shut up together in order to promote the fertility of 
the clan, and that bori rites were then taught. We have 
seen that a jigo or gausami was erected as a symbol of the 
prowess of the village youth in wrestling, during the pre- 
paration for which they had to be continent, while offerings 
were made near to it during the Fittan Fura, and that a 
pole was touched as a gesture of abuse — an important point, 
because many a survival lingers in such angry acts — 
while a perfectly true reference to the manner of a person's 
birth is the greatest insult possible.20 Again, we have seen 
how the Semitic incubus and succuba found a place in 

M THE BAN OF THE BORI 

If. in a demonology . [t would seem, therefore, as if the cult 
were phalli) , originally ; the idea of the di ease-demons 
being incorporated later on. This idea is confirmed in 
my mind by the facts thai the common word for the male 
organ of generation is hura, an old word nol used in polite 
50< icfy, and that the Hebrew word bara "created," has 
also a phallic signification.*1 It has been seen that the 
women may weir trousers, and that the male dancers al- 
ways wear cloths during the ceremonies. In Babylon 
" every woman was obliged by law to submit to the em- 
brace of a stranger ; and the Phoenician worship of Astarte 
was no less distinguished by sacred prostitution, to which 
was added a promiscuous intercourse between the sexes 
during certain religious fites, at which the men and women 
exchanged garments." 22 Surely this gives us the clue, 
and the present custom and also the Fittan Fura are 
survivals. 

That continency is now required of the Masu-Bori 
may be an altogether foreign idea, for, as we have seen in 
Nigeria, the sect was noted for its immorality, and finally, 
although Jato may have been an importation, some of 
his friends were most certainly pagan, and at the dance 
he and they go through the different stages of the sexual 
act. In fact, the tabu upon intimate relations may have 
nothing whatever to do with morality, for it has been found 
that amongst the Shilluk, before the requisite ceremony 
had been performed for the benefit of a man of whom Dag 
had taken possession, " the spirit would be so strong in 
his body that he would not dare to approach his women." 
Again it was recognised in ancient times that " though 
the gods, likewise, do not hear him who invokes them, if 
he is impure from venereal connexions, yet at the same 
time they do not refuse to lead anyone to illegal venery." 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING 405 

Robertson Smith ascribes the tabu to the savage belief that 
" birth and everything connected with the propagation 
of the species on the one hand, and disease and death on 
the other, seem to him to involve the action of superhuman 
agencies of a dangerous kind." 23 

This is not a savoury subject, however, and we may 
close it by saying that the conclusion has forced itself upon 
me against my will, for, somehow, when one has studied a 
people for years, it is unpleasant to have to accuse them of 
a disreputable practice, however strong the evidence. 
The word " bori " is evidently an old one, for, even apart 
from any consideration of the examples from neighbouring 
languages, it will have been remarked that all spirits, no 
matter what their origin, are now simply bori. Still, 
although this shows that the aljannu, iblisai and iskoki 
were incorporated. long after the original word had come to 
embrace all the local spirits, it does not prove that the 
cult had a local origin, and there is no doubt that a good 
deal of what now takes place in Nigeria — for no doubt the 
rites are still performed in secret — was once seen in 
Carthage, and even in Babylon. 

( ITAPTER XXX 

mi: ORIGIN OB demons and demon-dancing (continued) 

There is another factor of which we must not lose sight — 
that is, totemism. This arose, according to Salah, from a 
belief in spirits, and, although agreeing in the main idea 
with what Professor Robertson Smith has told us, the 
sequenceis reversed, for, whereas Salah thinks that animals 
were revered because bori used to appear in their form, 
and that this went on even after the distinction between 
them had been made, the author of The Religion of the 
Semites holds that " the jinn, with all their mysterious 
powers, are mainly nothing else than more or less modern- 
ised representatives of animal kinds, clothed with the 
supernatural attributes inseparable from the savage con- 
ception of animate nature. A species of jinn allied by 
kinship with a tribe of men would be indistinguishable 
from a totem kind, and instead of calling the jinn gods 
without worshippers, we may with greater precision speak 
of them as potential totems without human kinsfolk." x 

But that has made us anticipate a little. It will have 
been noticed that the powers of beasts and bori in the 
folk-lore are the same, for animals can appear as human 
beings just as easily as spirits can transform themselves 
into men or beasts, both are organised in the same manner 
as are their worshippers, and sometimes it is an animal (a 
snake), sometimes a bori (Dodo), which mates with a human 
being. The spirits help man in a miraculous manner, it 
is true, but there are also wonderful animals which can 

406 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING 407 

confer similar benefits, and this happens whether the 
patron is alive or dead, for, whereas the efficacy of an 
animal's skull as a charm has been already commented 
upon, it will not be forgotten that the head of a young 
aljan is an excellent thing for producing conception in a 
woman.2 

Witchcraft is known to both kingdoms, for the wizard 
bori of Jan Gari can catch the shadows of their victims in 
exactly the same manner as do people on earth, so we are 
not surprised to hear that the hyena can fascinate another 
animal, or, by treading upon his shadow, render a man 
incapable of movement or sound. 

Again, we often find that bori and wild beasts act 
together, the virgin spots of land being haunted by both in 
combination, and this is particularly the case where treasure 
is concerned, the approach to the Money-Tree, Jato, being 
guarded " by phantoms — fearful men and animals, leopards, 
hyaenas, and enormous snakes." The jinns often had 
animal characteristics ; thus amongst the Arabs, the Queen 
of Sheba is said to have had hair upon her ankles, this 
showing her to be a jinniyah, whilst some people amongst 
the Sabeans worshipped demons which they thought took 
the form of goats.3 The jinns have keen sight and smell, 
and swift movement, and there is no doubt that the reason 
of making blood offerings to them was that wild beasts 
ate uncooked prey. Finally, if further proof be needed, 
a conclusive one is at hand, for the bogey Dodo appears 
at various times as a spirit, a giant, an animal, or a bird, 
and his attributes resemble also those of the witch. 
Ultimately, amongst the Semites, the only animals directly 
and constantly identified with jinn were snakes and other 
noxious creeping things, and, though this is not yet the 
case with the Hausas — the authority of certain utterances 

408 i Hi. BAN OF THE BORI 

i i Hohaxnmed having had a share in the limitation in the 
t I eAi bs, from whom I the jinns ! 

borrowed — the snake is the i>iin< ipal animal left, 
naturally so, because it -till haunts hitman habitations, 

Whereas most «>f the other animals have been driven away. 

Since the hyena is so frequent a gur-t in Nigeria, one 
would l""k f«>r a similar exception in the case of that 

animal also, and the pc< nliar belief P g irding it meet the 
expectation. The reason why the .snake occupies so im- 
p irtant a place amongst the Hausas is no doubt <»n account 

of the widespread worship of that reptile in West Africa, 
though whether the Hausas regard it, like others, as the 
symbol of the male principle is not i 1« r. Many clans 
claim it as their totem, a special mode of sacrifice is in 
vogue (eggs and milk), and last, but not least, it is the per- 
sonification of the evil eye. Whether it is the serpent 
itself or the spirit in it which is worshipped, I cannot say. 
Each of these opinions has been put forward with regard 
to other peoples in West Africa, and I feel inclined to 
believe that both ideas exist in the minds of the Hausas, 
for, whereas Mai-Ja-Chikki is the snake, Dan Musa is said 
by some to be the spirit in the snake. 

So much for the common origin of the totem and the bori. 
Why should the ultimate result be to regard one class as 
friendly, while the other remains inimical ? The reason is 
fairly clear. The Hausa admired strength and cunning, 
and, since the beast often overcame his human opponent, 
the latter naturally regarded it as having powers beyond 
his own. Possibly too, the tale of the deception of an 
animal or man by a pair of tortoises, or other competitors 
which seemed to run a race backwards and forwards 
(each one of the pair merely appearing at its own end of 
the course, and not moving from the spot) really represents 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING 409 

the savage idea, and that when one lion had been met far 
away and another near home, they were supposed 1" be the 
same. From such accidents marvellous tales of cunning 
and powers of movement would arise, and it is extremely 
likely that at some time or other something would happen 
which would make it seem as if the lion had been helping 
the man. 

Now, as the people increased in numbers and became 
better armed, and as the land came more and more under 
cultivation, the fear of the wild beasts would grow less, 
because they would not be an ever-present danger. More 
than that, the ancestor-god, as we have seen, would come 
to be regarded as god of the district, and so bring the 
animals under his sway. But since all strangers would be 
enemies, all friends would be relatives, and a time would 
come when the man considered the animal to be of the 
same blood as himself. After some generations, as men 
advanced in the scale, the tales of adventures with animals 
would glorify some of them still further, and by-and-by 
the ancestor-god would be regarded as having been an 
animal ; this is still observable amongst some of the Maga- 
zawa. Finally, as men rose still higher, the human idea 
would prevail, and the god would become anthropomorphic, 
though with certain animal connexions, at any rate at 
first, so the priestly king as his representative would still 
be called by the name of the totem. In the above, the 
totem has been described as an animal, but, of course, it 
need not be, for, as we have seen, trees are common, and 
several are represented even now at the dances. 

As for the general body of animals never regarded as 
being friendly, vague stories are remembered of them, 
and so, although certain ones gradually become distinct 
and separate, we have left the phantom invisible evil 

410 THE B i.V OF THE BORI 

jino or bori alw dy ;ind anxion to do a person 

barm. 

\\ e I ave een how tin- dr. id hci Mine bori, we may look 

for .1 moment at some of the spirits imported from the 
north and east, and in older to keep to our < heme, let as 
now imagine two more invasions, thi time from the north 
and ea I a . in fact, we know that they did come — the 
now arrival i being Eroni the i ountrie of Asben and Bornu. 
We have heard a good deal about the City of the Jinns, bat 
thai it should be in the desert near to Hausaland is only 
natural, probably the Arab slavers are responsible, so we 
may pa S over that point without comment. The fact that 
two at least of the charzu ters are of Asben origin is more 
important, but we may still look ahead, to the people who 
introduced certain spirits to Asben, from even farthernorth. 
As to those from Bornu, they would be most interesting, 
but beyond the fact that there is a form of bori posse—ion 
called kwaga in that country, we unfortunately know no- 
thing. The cult of Magiro may have reached Hausaland 
from that direction, for we have several other bori which 
originated there, but we shall have to turn our attention 
to countries farther off — namely, to North Africa and to 
the country west of the North Egyptian Sudan. 

In several Arabic legends, the eccentric movements of 
dust whirlwinds are accounted for as being the signs of 
battle between two clans of jinns, and some, if not all of 
these, would be hostile. The bori supposed to be mounted 
are now regarded as fighting spirits, but this may be due 
simply to the fact that the ancient inhabitants were 
conquered by mounted men. The Yorubas have a god 
which is supposed to drive out the evil influences, and, in 
form, he is comparable to some reliefs of a " Cavalier 
God " found in various parts of North Africa, possibly to be 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING 411 

identified with Bacchus, in his role of promoter of civilisa- 
tion, and lover of peace, and guardian of Moham- 
medanism.* At any rate, the spirit was not a local one, 
for horses are not indigenous in West Africa. Thi i 
not the only instance, for the goddess of hunting and of 
fertility is represented as kneeling, witli her hands above 
her head, holding a calabash, and here again we see some 
resemblance to Neith or Tanith — the Yorubas claim to 
have come from Egypt. However, one must not build 
upon such a fact, for it is only natural to represent a 
goddess of fertility with some signs of her produce, though 
it is worth noting in support of the argument which follows. 

We have now left the foreign jinns, and are amongst the 
nature-gods, which, however, become bori when introduced 
into Hausaland. The Legend of Daura tells us that at some 
time or other a youth came (from Bornu in one version) 
and killed the spirit of the well, Dodo, which is variously 
described as being a monster, a wild beast, a snake, or a 
bird, and we can easily recognise in him an animal bori 
such as has been described a little way back. The cult has 
been called fetishism, but I think that there is little doubt 
that it was that of a male Astarte, or rather of the Libyan 
goddess, Neith, who was worshipped along the whole of 
the Nile Valley at one time, and, of course, in North 
Africa. 

It has been recognised for some time that some of the 
old Hausa rites resemble those of Astarte, and one of the 
suggested derivations of the word " Hausa " is that it 
comes from Housal (one of the early kings of Egypt), a 
servant of Astarte. But although inviting, this is not 
necessary to our purpose, because practically the same 
rites were to be seen at Carthage, and, since Tanith was 
hailed by the Phoenician colonists as corresponding to 

412 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

their own Tstar, or Astarte, it is probable that they further 
in. teased the- resemblance in the services. After the 
Reman conquest, however, Tanitli seems to have become 
mere definitely Libyan again, though since certain parts 

of the ritual of Tauitli had spread .i< toss the Mediterranean 
{e.g. the Yuyu or cry of the priestesses), and Astarte had 
entered Egypt, it is only natural that there would not be 
much change in the worship. 

These goddesses were not actually equated at first, 
apparently, for in the museum at Carthage is the record 
of the dedication of a temple to the Ladies Astarte and 
Tanith in Lebanon (Carthage), but we also find one to 
Astartc-Tanith, and it would seem that Astarte was gradu- 
ally merged into Tanith. In fact, according to Professor 
Robertson Smith, the Carthaginian Great-Mother was 
identical with Tanith Artemis, the Heavenly Virgin — or 
rather the unmarried goddess — and identical witli Dido, 
the foul type of worship in each case being consequent 
upon the conception of the goddess as being polyandrous. 
Augustine speaks indignantly of the incredible obscenity 
of the songs which accompanied the worship of the Car- 
thaginian Mother-Goddess, and we know that the priest- 
esses of Istar did not marry, but were free to love as they 
pleased, like their goddess, whose amours were as numerous 
as they were notorious. Once each year the women wept 
and tore their hair in memory of the death of the sun-god, 
and Istar was said to descend into Hades to bring him to 
life again — this corresponding to the Hausa story of the 
Young Giant and his Lover (H.S.C., No. 99). It does 
not follow, however, that the founders of Carthage were 
wholly responsible for the rites in that city, in spite of 
the similarity of them to those in their own country, 
for the general laxity on the point of female chastity in 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING 413 

people who worship an unmarried goddess has always been 
characteristic of North Africa.5 

The legend of the killing of the spirit is not peculiar 
to Daura, and, occurring as it does also in Songhay, it may 
well point to the suppression of a local cult. A similar 
sacrifice to a water-spirit once existed in the Eastern 
Sudan.8 It seems to me that it indicates a change — 
namely, the abolition of the sacrifice of young virgins, and 
what makes it certain that this explanation is correct is the 
fact that in another version of the legend, the hero, Andi 
Baba, saves the virgin from death, and causes the custom 
to be discontinued. But the cult was not quite abolished, 
for a survival of it still continues, and, as will be seen, the 
ancient monster is now, with Tanith, the bori Sarikin Rafi. 

The names of many snake-worshipping tribes in the West 
Sudan consist of sa or so, in combination with other letters. 
But sa or za, alone or in combination, also meant chief, and 
rulers with these names are said to have come from the 
east, Sa, a younger son of Misraim or Menes, the earliest 
historic king of Egypt, being given the district bordering 
the Fezzan route to the desert. Sa was not an uncommon 
name for a prince in Egypt, for Sa-ab was a Horus name 
of Nekau, and Sa-Ra means " Son of Ra," but if the Sa 
mentioned above really stands for serpent, the legend 
appears to be merely a statement that serpent-worship 
extended at one time right into Egypt — as, of course, it 
did — in fact, the king third in succession to Misraim is 
denoted by Zy, which may indicate that he was a serpent- 
king — and that it was driven out to the west. A Za is 
said to have come from the east to Songhay, and to have 
killed the monster there, just as did Auta in Nigeria. 
But what did the word Za mean ? 

In The Niger and the West Sudan I tried to show 4hat 

.ji.i ////■. BAN (>/■ THE B0R1 

it was Dot nt. i . rily " erpent," bu1 was more likely t<> 
be " i iiiri " or " long/' and the Abbe* Efem i ven 

further. "A certain Bantu races," tie "worship 

the aake, Europeans have been ready to ee in the word 
ha the translation ' serpent.' (So fax as the Bambara are 
concerned) this is a gro and radical mi take/' and be 
I>iint> oul thai whereas the word a used in invocations 
i hard " ." the consonant in the name of the snake 
it, and the former designates the divinity, the snake 
never having been regarded as sin h. 

There seems to be a difference, therefore, though it 
would be difficult to make a like distini t ion in Hausa, 
because the " s " and " z " arc sometimes — though rarely 
— interchanged, so we must look elsewhere for an explana- 
tion. In the first division of the Book of Pylons — written 
to adjust the cult of Ra to that of Osiris — is a representa- 
tion of {inter alia) the Boat of the Sun, and in it is seen a 
disc containing the beetle and encircled by a serpent hold- 
ing its tail in its mouth, while in the bows stands the god 
Sa. The serpent here seems to symbolise eternal life, not 
snake-worship, but since Sa, together with Hu, sprang 
from drops of blood which fell from the phallus of Ra 
(though I do not suggest Hu-Sa), and Sa, the Intelligence, 
was one of the kas of Ra, there seems to be another theory 
possible, for elsewhere it lias been found that the same word 
means both " life " and " bull." 

In the Songhay version, the hero who kills the bogey 
bore the name of Za, probably seen later in Mansa, a chief, 
the hard " z " being softened. In Daura, he was known as 
Makass-Sariki (the killer of Sariki), and it is quite probable 
that, as time went on, the first word was dropped — just 
as usually happens in our Captain-General — and so Sariki, 
" The Seizer," became Sariki " The chief," a not impossible 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING 415 

change, since the reigning chief is even now culled Mai- 
Chi, and the word for snake is ma-chi-je. Now, it would 
be exceedingly strange for invaders who worship a serpent 
to abolish local cults of that reptile — unless the rites were 
wholly different — and it is much more likely that they 
worshipped something else, particularly as the serpent-cult 
cannot be traced to any local origin, but has arisen spon- 
taneously, according to the late Lord Avebury, and, in 
fact, if snake-charmers were brought to Egypt from West 
Africa, as some have stated, the cult could hardly have 
come from the land of the Pharaohs. In any case, the 
worship of serpents must have been known centuries 
before a.d. 1000, the date ascribed to the Hausa advance- 
guard. 

It seems much more satisfactory to regard the za or sa 
who killed the local monster as being identical with the bull, 
and the Hausa as its worshipper. Some upholders of the 
snake story have said that the name Hausa is the plural 
of Sa, but I have never been able to admit this (although 
it would suit the theory now put forth), and think that 
" Children of Sa," or " Worshippers of Sa," is much more 
probable, especially if Hannibal means " Servant of 
Ba'al." This does not do away with the difficulty of the 
derivation of Ba-Haushe, however, which certainly seems 
to mean mixed, a verb hautsina having that signification. 
It is not at all improbable that the singular and plural 
are of distinct origins, a not uncommon circumstance, as 
is noted in my Hausa Folk-Tales.7 

As has been said, Tanith and Baal Hammon became 
gradually confused, and, as Baal Hammon became more 
and more a sun-god, Tanith became the goddess of the 
moon, so the curved bull-horns of the god were given her 
to represent the crescent, sometimes resting upon the sun's 

4x6 I Hi. BAN OF l III B0R1 

disc, ometime bending over or embrai ing it. But i 
are v& j ignsoi the present water-spirit, Sarikin Rafi. 

This requires some proof, Another name for the spirit 
i- Ba-Daure, Citizen oi Daura, or Born in Daura, while he 
i> a] o known as ftfai-Tumbutu, Owner oi Timbuktu, so 
bis wor liip in the we t i almost as widely spn-ai 
that oi Neith in Egypt, and naturally so sini e he is the 
spirit of fertility, the giver of rain, as was she. Another 
name for Sarikin Rail is ZugU ; a shuttle is the idiogram 
for Neith. Tanith's symbol wa ia< rescent moon embrac- 
ing the disc of the sun. An approximation to this — 
exactly the same as some of the Carthaginian drawings — 
is visible in the spear of Sarikin Masu, and as great a 
resemblance is seen between Sarikin Rafi's own weapon 
and Tanith's brooch.8 I have already drawn attention 
(Chapter V.), to the prevalence of the " Crocodile of the 
Town " upon the human body, and a difficulty will have 
been noticed, for the crocodile cult was associated with 
Neith, and in Egypt young virgins were sacrificed to the 
Nile just as they were to rivers in Hausaland, while the 
test of legitimacy at Kabbi seems to imply that the croco- 
dile was worshipped there at some time or other. The 
only conclusion I can come to is that either the cult of the 
reptile — like that of the serpent — arose spontaneously, as 
it well might do, being a totem, or else that the cult of 
Neith was introduced in early times — we can hardly 
imagine it as being fresh in a.d. iooo — and that it was 
afterwards replaced by that of Baal and Tanith, in which 
the sacrifice to a water-spirit found no place, the victims 
being offered to the antagonistic element, fire. The wear- 
ing of an amulet or the scarifying of a design of the animal 
is not at all strange, for this practice was probably intro- 
duced by the followers of Tanith — the amulet is quite 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-/) I N( ING \ 1 7 

common in Portugal — though it may have existed previ- 
ously since the crocodile or lizard was sacred to the sun.9 

Neith's symbol may have been a hatchet originally, 
however. Is there any sign of that in Sarikin Rail's 
weapon ? Just as much as in some of Tanith's, might 
be the reply, and it is not so vague as it appears to be, 
for the symbol has been found much farther off than is 
the bori's domain — namely, in Southern Nigeria, where 
" on every hand, indications are to be found ... of a 
form of worship which carries us back to the oldest known 
Minoan civilisation, and links the belief of the present day 
Ekoi with that of the ancient Phoenician, the Egyptian, 
the Roman, and the Greek." A painting of a double- 
headed axe lying horizontally across a knobbed sceptre, 
over which is an Ekoi feather, is a representation of the 
mystic marriage of earth and sky, " and so in the course of 
the ages, strangely enough, Mother Earth has become 
Father Earth in Ekoi legend."10 

We have seen that the conquerors brought the horse to 
Daura, but Tanith was always connected with this animal, 
and perhaps the fact that the Masu-Bori are called doki and 
godiya is a survival of this fact. In The Niger and the 
West Sudan I ascribed the place of origin of the Hausas to 
the district of Meroe, I might have been more correct had 
I said Siwa, but, in any case, there seems to be but little 
doubt, from their language, their religion, and their 
customs, that the Hausas were a mixture of Hamitic and 
Semitic elements, probably tempered by the addition of 
a little Egyptian blood. 

It has been said that sa means a bull, and that the Hausas 
brought the bull cult with them, and perhaps the fore- 
going will be sufficient to show that Tanith replaced, or 
rather, absorbed, the water-spirit. If not, I have one more 

2D 

4x8 THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

cartridge in the chamber. One title of the Manipur chiefs 
is Hao-sa, " Rich in cattle," ami this is extremely interest- 
ing, but what is in< ax- useful for our present purpose is the 
fat I that, as M.ijc.r Ma li k has pointed out, many tribes 
c all the people not " Hausa," but " Afunu," in fa< t that 
the names were almost equally common, and he says that 
Barth suggests that the name originated from a king of 
K.mo. If so, the king must have been the first one, be- 
cause the people are widely known by the name. In other 
words, it was Ba-Goda — probably Ba-Guda, the " Maker 
of Cries " peculiar to Tanith. This statement of Merrick's 
fits in exactly with my theory of the nature of the 
invasion, for, whereas in one part the hero is called Sa 
(a bull), in another the king is known as Afunu, and in 
Berber — or at least the Dwirat dialect of that tongue — 
afunas means " a bull." n 

That a goddess should become a god is not wonderful. 
A change of sex is apparent in the case of Sarikin Ran, 
and it is by no means uncommon, for, in so far as religion 
keeps pace with the new laws of morality due to the change 
from polyandry to polygamy, the independent divine 
mother becomes the subordinate partner of a male deity 
unless her supremacy is too well established, in which 
case she changes her sex. Or where a male god is already 
established, she may gradually be merged into him. But, 
after all, the change of sex may have been made before 
the cult reached Hausaland. Woman was equal to man 
in the Sumerian family, and consequently the female spirit 
was as powerful as the male, acting independently and 
possessing the same attributes. The Semites, who 
borrowed Istar, could not understand this, so among the 
Canaanites she became Ashtoreth, the Moon — the consort 
and reflection of Ba'al the Sun-God — the Southern Arabianb 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING 419 

transformed her into a male god, while amongst the 
Moabites she became merged in Chemosh or Shamash. 
A similar fate awaited her — or rather Tanith — in Carthage, 
for gradually she came to be known as Tanith with Ba'al's 
face, or the Bearded Goddess, while an inscription lias 
been found on one of the cippi, " To my Lord Tanith." 

At the same time, the rites were not wholly changed, for 
religious tradition has often refused to move forward witli 
the progress of society, the goddess or god retaining the 
old character as a mother who was not a wife — and conse- 
quently not bound to fidelity — and so at her sanctuary- 
she still protected, under the name of religion, the sexual 
licence which had always characterised her worship. 
Single women, therefore, could always find support for 
immorality, while in the case of those wishing to become 
wives, the god or goddess required the previous sacrifice 
of their chastity or their hair before binding themselves 
to that conjugal fidelity which was, of course, contrary to 
the religion of the deity concerned.12 

There is one more point. Sarikin Rafi was once chief of 
the spirits, but was so cruel that he was deposed by Mallam 
Alhaji, probably another aspect of Baal Hammon, always 
associated with Tanith. What does this mean but that 
until the advent of the new cult the water-spirit was the 
chief divinity ? That the votaries of the new religion 
regarded with horror the sacrifice of children to a water- 
spirit while upholding that to Baal Hammon is no more 
surprising than the fact that the Roman Catholic Spaniards 
considered tortures inflicted b}r their " Holy " Inquisition 
to be quite justified although they sternly suppressed 
anything of the kind — also done in the name of religion 
— amongst the native Americans. That the followers of 
the new and purified cult should fiercely suppress the ©Id 

i jo i in B i.v <>i i in r.oRi 

i in can hardly be trai I udent <>i even English 

hi tdl\ . 

Probably other gods wire introdui ed a well, thei toco* 
dile maynol all have been local totems, though the ai 
i the patron of at least one clan -till, certainly the name 
[brahima is oi eastern origin, the title Dodo being pn fixed 
to Eiausaise him, as it were. Many oi the beast (lion) 
and birds (crow) were totems, and then presence at the 
rites may be accounted for in that way, but so far I have 
not heard of a clan owning to the vulture, and, though 

absence of information i> very far from being proof, it is 
not impossible that the bori Angulu is nol Hausa, but is 

the representative of the Arabian Nasr, and that she has 
compatriots also in the temple. Or it may be simply that 
she also represents Tanith. 

The: possession by an animal spirit is not always con- 
nected with totemism, therefore. In Abyssinia a person 
may imagine himself to be possessed by a hyena spirit, 
and behave in every way as does that animal. " One 
woman fancied she would like a little donkey-flesh ; so to 
satisfy her strange taste she seized hold by her teeth to the 
hinder part of one which happened to be near. Off went 
the astonished beast at a pace that nothing in the form 
of persuasion will lead him to adopt for the gratification 
of man. Off, too, clinging tight with her teeth to his 
haunches, went the frenzied girl." The exorcist makes the 
patient smell a rag in which a bone of a hyena and other 
things arc tied — just as the Hausa in Nigeria holds out a 
bone — and after this a sacrifice is made, some fragments 
from the feast being buried for the demon should it return. 
In the Straits Settlements, a monkey-spirit may take 
possession of a person, causing him or her to behave like 
the animal. 1J 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING 421 

Wc are upon safer ground when we come to the mallam , 
and although at fir.^t sight wc may wonder that saints and 
evil spirits are confused together, the position may become 
clearer when we rememberthat saintsare in a way ancestors, 
and also that the marabout and the magician use some- 
what similar means to produce the same results. But 
really the dead saints become spirits capable of doing not 
only good but evil — as we have seen in the case of the 
person who ignores their shrines. They visit each other, 
and can be heard talking just as could Mai-Bille's bori. 
Indeed, in Egypt at least one can appear in the shape of 
a serpent, and cure the diseases of pilgrims to his shrine, 
and elsewhere in North Africa there are " saints " who 
cause paralysis, impotence, and sudden death, while a 
female (surely a suffragette) will burn a house on the 
slightest provocation ! 14 As with us, the shrines are often 
built near a pagan "well or tree, and gradually the worship 
is transferred to the saint — perhaps quite as imaginary as 
the former spirit. Again, the danger let loose at the ziara 
is comparable ir all respects to that from the bori at the 
dances, and the sacrifices are the same. It is no wonder, 
therefore, that the Hausa in Nigeria saw no difference, and 
incorporated the saints into the bori cult, giving them the 
Hausa title, mallam. In North Africa, however, the local 
marabouts are still distinct, and while Sidi Sa'ad's rank 
is a high one, Abd El Khadari seems to be destined for 
a much more enviable position, for, in addition to the 
attention at his shrine, he has a special niche in the bori 
temple. 

As for the " Little Spots," they are probably untimely 
births, we find evidence of them in Assyria, and, according 
to Rabbinic traditions, " an infant cut or torn at birth, a 
miscarriage, or born alive at the eighth month, or born 

422 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

dead at the ninth — all the religious ceremonies do not 
apply to it." The Jews believed that such misfortunes 
were due to ;m ulterior cause, and, according to the legends 
of their liter demonology, devils were not so much fallen 
angels as immature mortals.15 

As was said at the commencement of the preceding 
chapter, demons are not new to us, and the belief that 
some people are possessed by them at times is world-wide, 
so many people since David's time have " forgotten them- 
selves." The rites of divination and exorcism seem to be 
similar in all parts of the globe, and everywhere magic 
has been medicine's greatest enemy, for when diseases 
were supposed to be due to spirits, no attention was paid 
to the patient's body since the only thing necessary or 
useful was to persuade the spirit to leave it. The priest 
when in a state of exaltation was " not himself," so when 
any other person behaved unnaturally, he supposed that 
a similar influence was at work, both possession and 
obsession being traced to a bori. In Australia, the victim 
is struck upon the back of the neck — the favourite seat of 
the Hausa bori. In New Zealand the spirit, often an 
infant, gnaws the vitals of a sick relative, and the exorcist 
has to get it on to a flax-stalk in order to send it off home 
— in North Africa, Dakaki is shown the hole in a drum. 
Another common method was to tie a piece of cotton or 
string to the patient, the other end being made fast to the 
victim to be sacrificed, and a survival of this is to be seen 
in the case of Mai-Gangaddi, who is shown a piece of 
cotton.16 All over the world we find that the persons 
possessed foam at the mouth, talk in unnaturally hoarse 
voices, roll their eyes, perform acts of apparently super- 
natural strength, and seem to be indifferent to torture. 
In India, amongst the Holiyas, Bhuta-dances are held at 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING 423 

certain festivals, and " sometimes a rope is tied around 
their waist and they are held like infuriated wild animals."17 
The Zulu feels a heavy weight creeping up to his shoulders, 
then songs come to him which he has never learnt, he floats 
in the air, and he sees things which are no longer there 
when he " comes to himself " again. In Patagonia, Dan 
Kano would have become a priest long ago. In the West 
Indies, the exorcist puts himself into communication with 
the spirits by snuffing cohoba powder, and then he affirms 
that he is talking with the cemis, who tell him what has 
happened. Snuffing, smoking, or drinking brings on the 
state all over the world, and naturally so, since these drugs 
excite the nerves. Sometimes music alone is sufficient, 
the sound of the drum and some preliminary dancing 
having the same effect in Ceylon as in Nigeria. A few 
people do not require even this aid, and, just as the Fijian 
steadfastly regards a whale's tooth until he has gone into 
convulsions, so do Haj Ali and Salah induce hysteria by 
movements of their hands. The sacrifices too are the 
same. In Ceylon, the demon will say to the exorcist " I 
am So-and-So, I demand a human sacrifice, and will not 
go without." So the victim is promised, the patient 
comes to from the fit, and later on the sacrifice is made — 
but a fowl suffers instead of a human being. 

The ordinary spirit possession then is an everyday affair, 
coming on naturally, or being brought on by movement, 
music, or a narcotic, but I have not seen in any book an 
indication that a long cast of characters behaves in a 
special set manner for each different spirit, as is the case 
with the Masu-Bori. Perhaps there has never been much 
more than the mere excitement and oracular speech with 
most other peoples, and yet this seems unlikely — though 
but few of the writers whose works I have seen have 

424 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

rded anything further— for it is only natural thai by- 
;iik1 by particular steps should beasscx iated with individual 

spiril . c pecially where tli ey have become gre;it ijods with 
distinct powers. The bori performance includes both the 
Arab tikr (in whicn the dam era stand in line, and gradu- 
ally work themselves into a frenzy by swaying their 

bodies about, and by calling upon Allah) and the zar 
(pn v inn by a spirit which makes the person comatose, 
and refuses to leave until the victim has been given a 
present), yet it is much more, for there is no representation 
of any special actions in either of these. Magajiya and 
some others whirl like the dervishes, and bori dancing 
generally resembles the rite of the Aisawias to a great 
extent, for they also represent the movements of several 
animals ; and here too the performers torture themselves, 
and seem to feel no pain. Still, there seems to be no 
great festival during which scores of spirits are represented 
as is the case amongst the Hausas, and we must look for 
another cause than that of the people running amuck. 

We must attribute the origin to a desire to get some- 
thing from the spirit, I think, the latter being forced to 
come and listen to his worshippers when his proper 
movements were performed, and whereas the rite is now 
comparable to inoculation against disease, that idea was 
probably not the moving principle of the original cult, 
for, although disease demons were exorcised then as now, 
it is probable that the nature-gods were summoned so that 
prayers might be made to them — such a practice still 
surviving in the case of Doguwa and a few others. With 
the advent of Islam, however, these spirits would lose 
some of their importance, and would have to fall into line 
with the others, for Mohammed recognises the jinns 
though not the nature-gods, and so at the present day, all 

ORIGIN OF DEMONS AND DEMON-DANCING 425 

are summoned so that they may torment those people who 
are prepared for them, and thus be more likely to leave 
the rest of the community in peace. 

The power of summoning the bori by means of the 
proper words and names has been noticed in Chapter 
XVIII., so that thej^ should be influenced by actions is not 
surprising. During a game of bowls one will often see 
the man who has just sent down his ball still kneeling, 
with his hand stretched out, and, at last turning it stiffly 
over in the direction of the bias, trying, as it were, to aid 
the bowl, even to force it in the required direction. While 
amusing to a European onlooker, such an act would be 
absolutely intelligible to a Hausa — and to our remote 
forefathers. As the bori cult progressed, there would 
be a separate dancer for each spirit honoured (as is now 
almost always the case),18 and it is only natural to suppose 
that each Mai-Bori would try to introduce something from 
outside, both so as to outvie the others, and also in order 
that he or she might have a monopoly of that particular 
rite. But there would be a real wish to honour the spirit 
too, and as soon as set steps had become recognised, the 
subsequent dancers would have to learn them, and would 
not be allowed to make any alteration. I am inclined to 
think that the present dances are mere survivals of much 
more complicated magical performances, for, as other 
cults were being grafted on to the old one, an average 
would gradually establish itself. As they are religious cere- 
monies, they have persisted, for religion is always con- 
servative, and no doubt they will continue for many years 
more, if allowed, on account of the profits earned by the 
professors. The dances are exciting and interesting, 
even in their present form, and probably no similar 
performance in the whole world can boast such a lengthy 

436 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

of I hararters, but what must they have I >* -« • 1 1 in the 

olden day in unknown savage Africa ? 

History always repeats itself, of OOUCSe, and yet it is 
stiange to think that many of the ancient rites which were 
taken from Carthage to Kano — or perhaps even from Bi 
Ionia to the Bcmie — should be re-established in their old 
home by those strange peoples upon whom they had been 
forced. Unwilling converts they were at first, no doubt, 
but the seeds of the new religion fell upon exceptionally 
favourable ground, and the Kansas and others have so 
combined the whole that even the local marabouts and 
other magicians are often considered to have a less ex- 
tensive mastery of magic than that possessed by the 
Masu-Bori from the Black Country in West Africa. 

THE END 

APPENDIX I 

NOTES AND REFERENCES 

In the following notes and references, H.S.C. stands for 
Hausa Superstitions and Customs ; H.F.-T. for Hausa 
Folk-Tales {in Hausa) ; T.H.H. for The Tailed Head- 
Hunters of Nigeria ; A. -A.N. A. for Some Austral- African 
Notes and Anecdotes ; and N.W.S. for The Niger and the 
West Sudan. 

CHAPTER I 

1 Spirits receive the attention. According to The Times 
(ist Oct. 1913), the Bishop of London, referring to the 
Invocation of Saints, said, at the last Church Congress : 
" As history had shown, it was easy to slip from asking 
for prayer to asking for help, and such help as could come 
alone from God. Might they never see in their Church 
papers such a notice as appeared elsewhere, ' Thanks to 
such-and-such a saint for curing my sore throat ; publica- 
tion promised.' Could superstition go much lower, to say 
nothing of the vulgarity of the suggestion contained in the 
last two words ? " 

According to The Daily Mail, the Bishop quoted the 
belief of some of his friends : 

" '. What is your idea ? ' the Bishop said he asked one 
who was keenly alive to what he thought was the comfort 
427 

428 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

and help lie derived from invoking the prayers of this 
great cloud of witnesses. ' Does it not take away from 
the honour yon pay to Jesus Christ ? ' ' Not a1 all,' lie 
warmly replied. ' I approach my Lord throned in glory, 

hut is I walk u]) to Him I walk through a line of saint- and 
angels, and feeling my infirmity and the Holiness of the 

Presence I approa< Ii I I ry from side to side as I walk np, 
' Pray for me, pray for me. Of your mere y grant me your 
prayers.' 

" Yet I would plead for the revival of a belief in the 
great doctrine of the Communion of Saints." 

Surely this is not far removed from the Hausa idea, 
and it is no wonder that Sir E. Clarke said {The Times, 
3rd Oct. 1913) that such a doctrine had been universally 
condemned by those who represented the National Church. 
In any case, the Bishop ought to be safe, since he wears 
horns — his mitre. See Elworthy, The Evil Eye, p. 186. 

2 Ba-Maguje. — I have always maintained that the 
name " Ba-Haushe " (a Hausa) comes from a term of 
contempt bestowed upon them by the Arabs on account 
of their mixed origin, though there need not be any more 
connexion between them and the Abyssinians than there 
is between the Kafirs of South Africa and of India. The 
words Ba-Haushe and Hausawa show the same changes 
as Ba-Maguje and Magazawa, and there is no doubt about 
the origin of the name in this case — the Magazawa did 
not come from Persia. 

3 The ban of the bori. The title was not chosen 
hurriedly, but because the word " ban " seemed to con- 
tain all the different ideas. According to the late Pro- 
fessor Robertson Smith [The Religion of the Semites, 
p. 454), " the ban is a form of devotion to the deity, and 
so the verb ' to ban ' is sometimes rendered ' consecrate ' 

APPENDIX I—NOTES AND REFERENCES 429 

(Micali iv. 13) or 'devote' (Lev. xxvii. 28 seq.). But in 
the oldest Hebrew times it involved the utter destruction, 
not only of the persons involved, but of their property. 
. . . Such a ban is a taboo, enforced by the fear of super- 
natural penalties (1 Kings xvi. 34), and, as with taboo, 
the danger arising from it is contagious (Deut. vii. 26 ; 
Josh, vii.) ; he that brings a devoted tiling into his house 
falls under the same ban himself." To ban a spirit means 
to bind it, to prevent it from doing harm. Lastly, in an 
ancient Assyrian incantation (quoted by R. C. Thompson, 
Semitic Magic, p. 97), we find : 

" A ban of evil hath settled on his body, 
And evil disease on his body have they cast." 

CHAPTER II 

1 Origin of the world and of men. According to the 
Koran and Sale's notes (pp. 4, 389), Allah created the 
earth duiing the first two days of the week from the smoke 
arising from the waters under His throne. Then moun- 
tains were made to steady it, and food was provided for the 
future inhabitants in two more days. Then He created 
the heavens on the Thursday from that portion of the 
smoke which had risen above the earth, and on the 
Friday He made the sun, moon, and stars, Adam appear- 
ing in the evening. Adam's creation caused some trouble. 
The angels Gabriel, Michael, and Israfil were sent by Allah 
to fetch seven handfuls of earth from different depths and 
of various colours (accounting for the skin shades of men), 
but the earth, fearing that the creature to be made would 

THE BAX OF THE BORl 

rebel against Allah and perhaps bring His wrath upon 
her also, prevailed upon them to leave the command 
unexecuted. Azrael, however, had no compunction, and 
afterwards was appointed to separate the souls from the 
bodies — i.e. he became the Angel of Death. The earth, 
after having been kneaded by the angel-, was fashioned by 
Allah into human form, and left to dry for forty days— 
Of years. The angels visited it. and so did Iblis, who 
kicked it. The clay was afterwards given a soul, and 
later on Eve was formed out of the left side (ib. p. 4). 
All others were formed of congealed blood except Jesus 
(ib. p. 400). According to a Mohammedan tradition, 
Adam's soul was created thousands of years before his clay 
body, and it refused to enter this until God forced it in 
through the nose — thus causing him to sneeze (Jewish 
Encyclopedia, p. 178). 

After quoting similar accounts of the creation of man in 
Babylonian lore, Mr Thompson comes to the conclusion 
that in this method of changing one material into some- 
thing more valuable we may see the prototype of that 
goal of even- wizard of the Middle Ages, the Philosopher's 
Stone (Semitic Magic, p. 20). 

2 Curse. Neither could a blessing have been revoked 
(see the story resembling that of Isaac blessing Jacob, 
H.S.C., pp. 140, 141). 

3 Noah's Ark. According to some, Ashura is the 
anniversary (Doutte, Magie et Religion dans I'Afrique du 
Xord, p. 526). It is also claimed that the ark actually 
grounded in Bornu, see N.W.S., p. 69, and Chiefs and 
Cities of Central Africa, pp. 205-210, from which the 
following is taken : — " Dawn found us at the edge of the 
lake (Chad) gazing out across the little bay at Hajer el 
Hamis, which, though actually but a few hundred feet in 

APPENDIX I— NOTES AND REFERENCES 431 

height, seems a veritable mountain in that sandy plain, 
where for several days' journey these rocks are the only 
eminence. One hill, the highest, stands alone, and it 
here that the Ark rested when the Flood subsided. If 
there are any sceptics who demand proof thereof, let 
them go to Hajer el Hamis with eyes open to the evidence 
of birds and beasts, for these could hardly have found 
their way there in such variety and number had it not 
been for their historic origin. The name of the surround- 
ing country, too, bears its testimony to the past : Bomu, 
Bur-Noah — the land of Noah. 

" As the name Hajer-el-Hamis denotes, it is a place of 
pilgrimage. . . . The summit was very narrow, and on the 
pinnacle was a perched rock, supported at the corners by 
small stones. Though this formation is not unusual in 
Northern Nigeria, there was no similar example in these 
hills ; and as it looked like an ordinary cairn, I supposed 
that someone must have preceded us there. The natives . 
however, adhered to their statement that no man had 
ever climbed the peak. . . . Perhaps, after all, Noah and 
his sons had made one [a caim, cf. Gen. xxxi. 44-46] here 
in honour of their landing." Again : " Till comparatively 
recently Lake Chad surrounded the hills, there are traces 
of water action as high as 50 ft. upon them. Now the 
lake has receded, and not only the high lonely peak where 
Noah first set foot, but the group of rocks with the sacri- 
ficial cave, stand in a desert of sand." 

The belief is so fixed and widespread that one wonders 
if some tribe did originate upon the hills, being descended 
from some ancestor (now confounded with Noah). 
arrived in a canoe — some of the Buduma families have 
arisen thus — but it is hardly likely that it was the Hausa 
folk. The people probably did live either right up on ^op 

432 Till- HAN 01 I UK HOh'l 

of the mountains, or else along tin.- river bank-, .it first so 
us to have the better means of defem e or est ape, we find 
ex. i. try similar condition existing in Nigeria to-day. 

CHAPTER ill 

1 Organisation. Sec H.S.C., pp. 97-99- 

•The dried skull. The head is particularly valuable. 
In some countries of West Africa {e.g. Whida) it is the 
most sacred part of the pagan's anatomy, and the 
Mohammedan, wherever he is, regards his turban as a 
diadem. The Arabian rule against washing or anointing 
the head is not ascetic, but is simply a consequence from 
the inviolability of the head, which must not be touched 
in a way that might detach hairs (Robertson Smith, 
op. tit. p. 485). Possibly, with the Hausa, at any rate, 
the sacredness of the head may be connected with the 
fact that the bori mount it. In North Africa a camel's 
head is sometimes tied up in a palm-tree as a charm for 
fertility. The site of Carthage is related to have been 
fixed by the discovery of a horse's head. The magical use 
of a dried head had a great vogue amongst the Semites, 
hares' heads being worn as amulets by women (Robert^m 
Smith, op. tit. p. 381). Dried dogs' heads are mentioned 
in a later chapter as having magical powers. 

3 Auta told me that some of the Bebeyi of Zaria used to 
keep a fish prisoner in a pot in a hut for a year, and at the 
end of that time to substitute another, putting the old one 
back in the water. 

4 The skin of the victim. See pp. 38, 49, etc. 

APPENDIX I— NOTES AND REFERENCES 433 

5 Jigo. See post, p. 111, and H.S.C. {Gausami), pp. yy, 
78, 496, 511. 

6 Albinoes. See H.S.C, p. 93. 

7 King-killing. See H.S.C, pp. 103-105, 132. The 
Borum of Bauchi still sew their adult dead in the wet skin 
of a goat, and bury the body behind the house. After- 
wards, if all is well, the medicine-man hears the spirit 
humming like a bee in the hut (cf. H.S.C, Story 11). 
See After Many Days (S.U.M.), 1912, pp. 36, 37. 

8 Shilluk. See Seligmann, The Cult of Nyakang and the 
Divine Kings of the Shilluk (Wellcome Research), p. 222. 

9 Tests. The common tests in all initiations. See 
p. 209. 

10 Cap. Such as Sarikin Bakka and others wear. See 
111. No. 44. The cap was the emblem of chieftainship, and 
was worn by the king-killer in Muri. See H.S.C, p. 105. 

11 Distribution of flesh. So as to distribute the good 
influence. See post, Chapter XV., Note 1. 

CHAPTER IV 

1 Totemism, etc. Amongst the Dinka, men of the croco- 
dile clan will not hesitate to swim rivers at night, and a 
man belonging to the lion clan sleeps in the open with im- 
punity. " If a lion was suffering from a splinter in the 
paw, or a bone in its throat, it would roar in the vicinity 
of his hut, and he would come out and remove the splinter 
or bone. This intimacy did not appear to be shared by 
all the members of the lion clan. There are two kinds of 
lions recognised by all Dinka, the man-eating lion and the 
cattle-eating variety. The former are killed without 

2E 

434 THE BAN or THE B0R1 

scruple, as they are QOt recognised as relations, but the 
latter are propitiated by offerings of food " (C. G. Selig- 
ni. urn, Customs of the World, " The Southern Sudan," 
pp. 712, 713). Malay crocodile-wizards can summon 
crocodiles, and can compel one guilty of man-eating to 
allow itself to be killed (W. W. Skeat, Malay Magic, 

P. 293)- 

2 Soul of Clan. Sec H.S.C., Story No. 29, and Seligmann, 
The Cult of Nyakang, p. 232. At Sofala, the soul of a 
previous king was supposed to possess and to give 
counsel to the successor. See Encyclopaedia Britannica, 
" Possession." 

3 Marriage rules. See H.S.C., pp. 79, 80, 119. 

* Charm. At Tlemcen, the blood of the victims at the 
annual sacrifice is dried and kept. Afterwards it is used 
as a charm to cure toothache, or, mixed with henna, as 
a remedy for sore breasts (Doutte, op. cit. p. 470). 

6 Nigerian Totemism. See Man, 1910, Art. 40. 

6 Testicles. I have not deleted this description, because 
it seems to show that Haj Ali was describing a real event, 
and also the priestly-king may have been revered for his 
peculiarity, since testicles seem to have a magic character. 
See post, p. 152. 

7 Human leopards. An article by Dr Burrows, in The 
journal of the African Society for January, is just in time 
to be noted. The two societies support the fetish " Bor- 
fimah," usually an elongated calabash, filled with a dis- 
gusting concoction — possibly symbolic of fecundity — and 
revivified periodically by the application of fat from human 
kidneys, or else abandoned for a new one. The account 
of the actual sacrifice of a selected human being bears out 
my suggestion in the text. " The ' leopard men ' are 
selected, and they are warned to be in readiness on the 

APPENDIX I—NOTES AND REFERENCES 435 

fateful night to don the costumes made of leopard skins, on 
the legs of which are wooden models of the leopard's feet, 
so that their impressions in soft earth may convince 
sceptical folk as to their ' authenticity.' Further, they 
are armed with the cruel leopard knives, which have three 
or four incurved blades to imitate the mauling of a leopard 
in case the victim should escape ! . . . The leopard men 
. . . first lacerate the [victim's] throat with the sharp claw 
knives, sometimes severing all the vital structures, and 
they then return into the bush, growling and roaring like 
leopards." The abdomen of the victim is opened, omens 
being deduced from the state of the liver and intestinal 
membranes, and then small portions of the body are sent 
to the different lodges for distribution to the members of 
the society. The fact that the amount of flesh eaten by 
the members at the-present day is minute leads the writer 
to think that it must be regarded as an incriminating 
measure, and one desired to secure secrecy, and that 
formerly this was " not an integral rite in the ceremony." 
But surely the minute morsels may always have been dis- 
tributed on account of their virtue ? 

8 Bori in trees. See T.H.H., p. 258, and Man, 1910, 
Art. 40. 

9 State in after life. The Kagoro think that it depends 
upon the rank and prowess in this. See T.H.H., p. 170. 

10 Dan Wawa. One of the pagan spirits is called Dan 
Wawa. He wears a skin at the dances. Perhaps the 
fact that the hyena (the buffoon of the animal world) 
dances before the lion in the skin of the slaughtered ram 
has some reference to this. See H.S.C., p. 138, and 
Hausa Folk-Tales, No. in. 

11 Tree Totems. Professor Robertson Smith says (The 
Religion of the Semites, p. 132) : " It appears probable 

I i. THE BAN OF THE BORI 

that the association <>f certain kinds <>f jinn with trees 

must in many cases be regarded a> primary, the trees 

themselve being conceived as animated demoniai beings." 

And he relates .1 story of two men who were killed be 
they had set fire to a thicket in order to bring the land 
under cultivation, the jinns flying away with doleful cries 
in the- shape <>f white serpents. 

l- Conceptional Totemism. See II.S.C, pp. 120-122, 
and Story 55. 

13 Points in common. As I have acknowledged Dr 
Haddon's help, it is only right to say that lie does not agree 
with my stages. But I have retained my own arrange- 
ment, not because I consider it to be the best possible, 
but because it seems to follow from the information given 
me by the Hausas. 

CHAPTER V 

1 This is a very ancient charm. In an ancient Assyrian 
tablet, a ghost is turned back by tying tightly a cord with 
seven knots and treated with medicines round the temples. 
See Semitic Magic, p. 33. 

2 Massage. It seems to be done nowadays for the sake 
of the baby's appearance, but there may have been a 
religious motive originally, for Robertson Smith says 
(op. cit. p. 133) that new-born children's heads were rubbed 
with gum of the acacia to keep away the jinn, or daubed 
with the blood of the sheep slain as a sacrifice, this ceremony 
bringing the child under the protection of the god of the 
community. The modern practice is described in Chapter 
VIII. In Egypt and Morocco, the babies are smeared in 

APPENDIX I- -NOTES AND REFERENCES 437 

butter or oil and kept unwashed for perhaps seven days, 
this too being a protection, apparently. 

3 Mutilations of lips, nose, and teeth. See T.H.H., 
pp. iio-iii and several illustrations, and A.-A.N.A., 
p. 209. 

4 The difference in the catch of the clog, etc. See Figs. 
9, 10, and H.S.C., Figs. 22, 23. 

6 Circumcision. The rite of circumcision was practised 
in the days of Carthage. Of his priests Baal Hammon 
demanded the sacrifice of their manhood, while all his 
servants had to be mutilated, and young children were 
burnt in the autumn when nature and the sun seemed to 
languish and die. Dr Bertholon (whom I had the pleasure 
of meeting in Tunis) says in his Essai sur La Religion des 
Libyens (p. 40) that the stone knife was used in the rite for 
a long time, and the fact that it is the custom of modern 
North Africans (as amongst the Hausas) to operate upon a 
number of children on the same day points to its being a 
survival of a rite of substitution which in ancient times 
celebrated the death of the god Hammon. Tanith re- 
quired her votaresses to sacrifice their chastity or their 
hair, and a trace of the latter custom may be seen in the 
fact that the Carthaginian ladies made their locks into 
strings for the catapults to be used against the Romans 
in the final siege. 

6 Swearing. See Wake, Serpent Worship and Other 
Essays, p. n, and H.S.C., p. 139. 

7 Tribal marks. See H.S.C., pp. 100-103. 

8 Scarification charms. See H.S.C., pp. 170, 518, 524, 
526. 

9 Crocodile or lizard. See The Evil Eye, p. 321. 

10 Painting. See H.S.C., pp. 102, 161. 

11 Best clothes. See post, p. 233. « 

438 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

ltBori in Amur. Sec H.S.( ., Fronti piece. 

1:1 Hoi e in trou era. Sec my article, " West Africa," 

in Customs of the Wold, p. 801. 

14 Veil. See Semitic Magic, p. 75. 

15 Uniform. See a photograph of the Emir of Kano's 
Bodyguard in The Field, iotli January 1914. 

CHAPTER VI 

1 Hausa Houses. See H.S.C., pp. 106, 469, 484, 
and several illustrations. For method of building, see 
T.H.H., pp. 138-142. 

2 Sacrifice. All over North Africa even now, a sheep or 
other animal is offered at some stage in the building, the 
owners eating it with the workmen. The house is thus 
provided with a guardian spirit just as is a ship by the act 
of breaking a bottle over its bows. 

3 Tar Baby Story. See H.S.C., pp. 20-24. A knot also 
is often supposed to have magic powers, and it is not 
impossible that the idea holds good in the case of those 
tied to mark a boundary. 

4 Cooking in the open. In early times killing animals 
was a religious act, and worship took place in the open 
although there was a building of some kind in which the 
rites might have been performed (Robertson Smith, op. cit. 
p. 197), so it may be that cooking outside is a survival. 
Even in Nigeria, fires are made in the huts for warmth, 
so there is no objection to the fire itself. 

5 Oven. Cf. the story of the punishment of the witch 
who ate her grandchild {Man, 1911, Art. 37). 

6 Eating rules. See. H.S.C., p. 144. 

APPENDIX I—NOTES AND REFERENCES 430. 

7 Cow dung. I know of such a poultice having been 
used by a European for faceache. 

8 Cannibalism amongst the Hausas. See H.S.C., pp. 
18, 123, 516. Even this may have had a Semitic origin, 
for Numbers xxiii. 24 and xxiv. 8 show that the flesh 
and blood of enemies was consumed. 

9 Dogs play an important role in both North and West 
Africa. The Mohammedans regard them as unclean, and 
yet to feed them is an act of piety, and they should not be 
killed. Among the Kagoro they always form part of the 
bride-price (see T.H.H., p. 232). Amongst the Bambara 
one is killed upon the grave of a chief (Abbe" Henry, op cit.), 
and this was the case in North Africa also, a number of 
bones of dogs and horses having been found in the 
necropolis of the Rabs, these animals having been sub- 
stituted for the human victims of earlier times. Grant 
('Twixt Sand and Sea, p. 23) mentions a tribe which 
bred dogs in order to eat them at solemn feasts, though 
the reason was unknown. Bertholon (Recherches Anthro- 
pologiques dans la Berberie Orientate, p. 537) says that the 
sedentary Arabs and others along the coast claim that 
such food is efficacious against fever and syphilis. In 
Tunis the young Jewesses are said to be fattened upon 
dogs' flesh before marriage, while the inhabitants of Jerba 
say that it prevents dates irritating the throat. In the 
south of Tunis, dog is a Friday (Sunday) dish. The 
head is not eaten. See Bertholon, p. 538. For their 
power against witches, ghosts, and bogeys, see H.S.C., 
p. 34. In Tripoli also puppies are eaten by girls who are 
anxious to be married, especially if suitors are not forth- 
coming, and I am told that the same thing happens in 
Nigeria. 

440 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

CHAPTER VIT 

1 Food is .1 King. Sec Al Koran (Sale's Prel. Disc -., pp. 
16, 27), and Semitic Magic, p. 207. Cf also the practice 
of the Arabs who call sarsapariUa " Mabmka Tlic Prin 
Daughter of a Prince/' greeting it with cries of joy when 
brought into the house, and treating it with special respect. 
See Doutte\ op. cit. p. 307. For the objection to a dog, see 
H.S.C., p. 174. 

■ Working-bee. See the story in Folk-Lore, June 1910, 
in which the spider asks different members of the animal 
kingdom to aid him to repair his roof (which he himself 
has burnt on purpose), arranging so that the weakest ones, 
which arrive first, will be killed by the strongest, and thus 
provide him with the corpses for food. 

3 Talking to cattle. The Hausa believes that cows 
understand Filani. See T.H.H., p. 299. 

4 Laughter. See Devils, p. 148. 

6 Horse. See N.W.S., p. 60 ; and The Religion of the 
Semites, p. 477. 

6 Salutations. See T.H.H., p. 210. 

CHAPTER VIII 

1 Adoption. Adoption was practised by the pre-Islamic 
Arabs, and Mohammed adopted his freedman, Zaid, but 
subsequently he forbade the practice {Al Koran, Sura 
xxxiii.). Still, if a man acknowledges a child to be his, 
that child will be acknowledged to be his child in law, 
provided that (1) it is of unknown descent, (2) its age is 

APPENDIX I— NOTES AND REFERENCES 441 

suitable, (3) the child asserts that the man is its father, and 
with the Malikitis (4) the adopter lias had a wifa or concu- 
bine, (5) that he and the child are not complete strangers, 
and (6) that there is no manifest desire in the declaration 
to defeat the claims of legal heirs. See Burge's Com- 
mentaries on Colonial and Foreign Laws, 1907, vol. ii., 
p. 420. 

2 Wind. A parallel to this is found in the Jewish belief 
in Azazel, who makes women appear to be heavy with 
child, " but since such offspring cannot be carried by men, 
the woman in question breaks wind." See Semitic Magic, 
p. 76. 

3 Presents. In Egypt when a woman has zar, she must 
be given some article which she desires before she can 
become normal again. The present is often of no value, 
the idea is that the spirit in her must be placated. 

4 Gestation. See Rattray (Hausa Folk-Lore, Customs, 
Proverbs, etc., p. 186). See also second note on Chapter II. 
The Maliki law, as construed in Algiers, limits gestation 
to three hundred day* at most. The Hanafi allows two 
years after the dissolution of marriage unless the woman 
has declared that her idat has ended. If there are grounds 
for ascribing a child, bom say seven months after a second 
marriage, to either of the two husbands, it is assigned to 
the second. See Burge, p. 300. 

6 Changeling. See, however, H.S.C., p. 93. 

6 Charm for childbirth. The proper drink is the water 
and ink washed off a copy of the third chapter of the 
Koran, which relates to the birth of the Virgin Mary. 
Probably the kasko is ornamented with words from this 
source. I could not procure a specimen, unfortunately. 
See Hartland, op. cit. p. 69. 

7 Mother dying in childbirth. See H.S.C., pp. 90,^91. 

442 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

An Arab parallel is given in Semitic Magic (p. 22), but in 
that story the boy was ten years of age when found, and 
seems to have been led by his mother's spirit. 

8 Childbirth, lactation, etc.. See H.S.C., pp. 90-93. 
Amongst the Hanahs and Shiahs, an irrebuttable pre- 
sumption of puberty arises at the expiration of the 
fifteenth year, amongst the Malikis not until the end of 
the eighteenth. The earliest age of majority (puberty) is 
twelve years in a boy, nine in a girl, and in the case of the 
latter puberty is presumed in the absence of evidence to 
the contrary. See Burge, p. 447. 

9 Father speaking to children. The same tiling has been 
noticed amongst the Semites. " It is only with his little 
children that the father is effusively affectionate and on 
quite easy terms " (Robertson Smith, op. cit. p. 59). 

10 Names. See H.S.C., pp. 178-182. 

11 Infanticide. See H.S.C., pp. 93, 126. 

12 Proverbs, word-games, etc. See H.S.C., pp. 57-73. 
18 Bori stops flow. " According to Zoroaster, the men- 

struous flow, at least in its abnormal manifestations, is a 
work of Ahriman or the devil." See Semitic Magic, p. 119. 

14 Throwing earth by the door of a hut. A great insult. 
See H.S.C., Story 22. 

15 Fittan Fura or Fita Furra. See H.S.C., pp. yy, 
78, 496. Amongst some of the pagan Filani of Nigeria, 
maidens and youths sleep together in the forest during the 
festival of Girewali, this practice being supposed to promote 
the prosperity of the clan. See Man, 1910, Art. 40. See 
also post, Chapter XIV., Note 10. The custom of making 
a youth and girl live together before marriage without 
eating may not have any connexion with the Fittan Fura, 
for amongst some of the Manipur groups a young couple 
may not marry until they have slept under the same roof 

APPENDIX I NOTES AND REFERENCES 443 

for at least three nights without intercourse. See Hod on, 
" The ' Genna ' amongst tlie Tribes of Assam," in Journal 
R.A.I., 1906, p. 97. 

CHAPTER IX 

1 Marriage Ceremonies, Divorce, etc. See H.S.C., 
pp. 74-89. 

2 Sugar. This is given in Morocco also, and milk, these 
signifying the life of sweetness and softness which she is 
to lead. Possibly the milk indicates fertility. 

3 False Bride. See Rattray, op. cit. p. 164. 

4 Protection of Bride and Bridegroom. See Doutte, 
Magie et Religion .dans L'Afrique du Nord, p. 290. This 
author mentions later (p. 503) that at the burial of the son- 
in-law of the Prophet, a " false corpse " was given a public 
funeral, while the body was buried secretly, so as to 
preserve it from the enemies of the deceased. Even in 
England, the police often practise ruses of a similar nature 
when a popular — or still more, an unpopular — person has 
been arrested, so as to prevent release or capture by 
the multitude. 

5 Fish for conception. In England also a trout was 
regarded as having procreative power if swallowed alive. 
See Hartland, Primitive Paternity, pp. 51, 52. The 
fish was the symbol of Dagon, the Phoenician god, and 
later on was adopted by the Christians because the}' were 
as fish being born again of water, so it was certain to come 
to North Africa. It occurs also in Morocco, I am told. 

6 Fish Trick. See Sladen, Carthage and Tunis, vol. ii. 
p. 529. I have no confirmation of this. * 

Ill THE BAN OF THE BORI 

7 Gifts. See Hartland, op. cit. i. 35, and the second 
note above. The Druids considered that the powder of 
mistletoe made women fruitful. See also Bertholon, 
of. cit. p. 578. A key is also given by Arabs, this being 
a phallic symbol. For the snake, see p. 408. 

8 Marriage to water-spirit. See the story of Dodo's 
Debt, H.S.C., No. 75. 

9 Avoidance. See H.S.C., pp. 88, 89, 461, 471, 508. 

CHAPTER X 

1 Death and Burial, See H.S.C., pp. 46, 71, 72, 103- 
107, 136, 151, 157, 163, 458, 507, 508. Inheritance. See 
H.S.C., pp. 107, 108, 487, 495, 496. 

2 Congo. See Tylor, Primitive Culture, ii. p. 31. In the 
cemetery at Susa (Sousse) some graves have both. 

3 Professor Seligmann (The Cult of Nyakang, p. 218) 
thinks that the grave of a Shilluk chief is made in the town 
in which his umbilical cord has been buried. It is not im- 
possible that there is some connexion in the case of the 
Hausas also, for the placenta of the child of an important 
person may be buried within the compound — as will his 
body be later — while in the case of the poor everything is 
regarded as of no worth. 

4 Birds take offerings. According to Sale (Koran, Prel. 
Disc, p. 59), when the souls have been separated from the 
bodies by the Angel of Death, that of a prophet goes 
straight to paradise, that of a martyr rests in the crop of a 
green bird which lives in paradise, while regarding the soul 
of an ordinary believer there are various opinions : 1. It 
may stay near the sepulchre with liberty to go elsewhere, 

APPENDIX I —NOTES AND REFERENCES 445 

and with the power of hearing the voices of those who 
visit it ; 2. It may stay with Adam in the lowest heaven ; 
3. It may remain in the well Zemzem ; 4. It may stay at 
the grave for seven days and then depart to an unknown 
place ; 5. It may enter the trumpet which will wake all at 
the proper time ; or 6. It may dwell in the form of a white 
bird under the throne of God. As to the souls of un- 
believers, after having been refused entrance into both 
heaven and hell, they will be taken down to the seventh 
earth and thrown into a dungeon, called sajin, to be 
tormented. Another idea of the bird is found in the belief 
of the pagan Arabs that one called Hamah was formed 
from the blood of the brain and visited the sepulchre 
once in one hundred years. Others thought the bird was 
animated by the soul of a person who had been unjustly 
slain (ib. p. 16). - 

Considering the legend of the Myrmidons, and the fact 
that the ant is a totem on the Gold Coast (Lang, Myth, 
Ritual, and Religion, i. 69), it is just possible that this 
insect was at one time connected with the soul, but it does 
not necessarily follow, for when once the idea of the bird 
being a soul had been lost, the people would see that the ant 
also ate of the offerings. Still, the ant-hill is possessed of 
special importance as a rendezvous (H.S.C., Nos. 58 and 80), 
dust from an ant-hill is a powerful Hebrew charm, and 
it was the custom with the Arabs to place an ant in the 
hand of a new-born babe, praying that it might grow up 
wise and good (Semitic Magic, p. 33). 

5 No punishment of Wizards. Doutte says (p. 322) 
that amongst the orthodox Arabs, it is unsettled whether 
an ill-wisher should be punished for his acts or not, for, 
since envy is uncontrollable, the ill-wisher is not perhaps 
responsible. Very amusing at first sight, but quite 

446 THE BAN 01 THE BORI 

comparable t<> the old judicial view of kleptomania with 

us. 

6 

SujHTii.ilur.il conception. Sec Semitic Magic, p. y^, 
and The Religion of the Semites, p. 50. 

7 Summoning the bori. This seem.-, to be an Arabic 
touch, the proper form to summon being, " So and So, Son 
ol So and So " (the mother). See Doutti', op. cit. 

H Rai. See Serpent Worship, p. 89. 

9 The Well of Life. Not Hell, but perhaps Zemzem. 

10 Buying the devil. The case is recorded in the Court 
Rolls of the Manor of Hatfield, near the Isle of Axholme, 
in Yorkshire, " The said John refused to deliver the said 
devil, nor has he yet done it, to the grievous damage of the 
said Robert to the amount of sixty shillings ; and lie has 
therefore brought his suit." See Devils, p. 56. 

11 Fataluwa. In the Malay Peninsula, the blood of a 
murdered man is put into a bottle, and from it comes a 
spirit in the form of a tiny female. See Encyclopedia 
Britannica, " Demonology." 

CHAPTER XI 

1 The similarity between the powers of the priest and the 
magician is seen in the following example, which is par- 
ticularly interesting since it relates to a European. " A 
curious illustration of the prevailing belief in the power of 
the marabout to transfer himself rapidly from place to 
place by occult means was given to us by an Arab boy at 
Bou Saada. The reputed marabout, who strangely enough 
in this case happened to be the French cure of the place, 
was able, said my informant, ' to fly like a scarab.' He 
was often seen by the natives flying over the mountain^ 

APPENDIX I - NOTES AND REFERENCES 447 

at night. Upon one occasion during the daytime two 
natives were journeying from Bou Saada across the desert. 
When they had travelled a distance of forty miles they 
suddenly saw the cur6 whom they had left behind in the 
village. He had reached the spot before them. The 
conclusion they came to was that he had flown there. The 
cure is now living in Algiers, but, the boy told us, he did 
not fly there — that would never have done ; too many 
people would have seen him, and he wished to keep the fact 
of his powers secret " (Grant, op. cit. p. 350). Possibly 
the cure was the first to ride a bicycle in the district — if he 
allowed his clothes to float loose he would not be unlike 
a beetle — and when the vehicles became common the 
means of locomotion were forgotten, only his rapid journey 
being remembered. In the up-to-date city of Algiers he 
would excite no comment. A North American Indian 
legend describes the first train as a magical animal breath- 
ing fire, and the story persisted even when the railways 
had become familiar. 

2 Invocations. For authorities see Semitic Magic, 
p. xlix., quoting The Magic Book of the Disciples, etc. 
See also Devils, p. 144, and Curtiss, Primitive Semitic 
Religion, p. 168. 

3 Changes in treatment of disease. While the proofs were 
being corrected The Times (2nd January 1914) published 
an article upon " The Scientific Use of Drugs," based upon 
Sir Almroth Wright's report on pneumonia on the Rand. 
Certain parts of the article fit in so well with what I have 
written that I quote them herewith. " The time has now- 
long passed when blood-letting was generally looked upon 
by the medical profession as the chief and most efficacious 
remedy for all diseases. The present movement towards 
a rational and scientific system of drug treatment . . * is 

448 Till BAN 01 I 111. BORI 

in it way ii" Let of a [evolution than that which 1<<1 the 
profe ion to prefer the use of drag to the use of lee 

to be n-. ognised thai - imply to 
.1 drag into the human body, with the objei I oi de- 
stroying bai teria, without any regard to the fter-< : 

whi. h it may have on the body it « It, i un I i< ntiti. 

barmfuL It i useles to kill the poi microbe if at 

the same time you kill the patient. . . ■ There can be no 

doubt that gradually a new system oi medicine will be 
built up." 

4 Talking to spirits. This has been recorded elsewhere 

also. See Encyclopedia Britannica, " Demonology." 

5 Imprisoning the bori in a hat. The head and head- 
dress are particularly connected with the spirits, as has 
been seen on p. 66. 

6 Zafi. Magic which is more or less for the sake of the 
whole community. Tsafi is the worship of bori. Malta 
is witchcraft, and evil. Dabbo sometimes has a bad 
meaning, but is more often used for conjuring. 

7 Europeans appealed to. See A.-A.N.A., p. 191. 

8 Hausa must ask guest to share a meal. See H.S.C., 
p. 144. 

9 The blacksmith. In West Africa the blacksmith is 
treated by man}' tribes as a being apart (T.H.H., p. 136) ; 
it is possible that Auta, who killed the bogey Dodo, was a 
blacksmith (H.S.C., p. 511). In North Africa, the Arab 
farrier in many parts is exempt from taxes, and if, when 
pursued by enemies, he kneels down and with the corners 
of his burnous goes through the actions of blowing bellows 
— thus revealing his profession — his life will be spared 
(Grant, op. cit. p. 453, quoting Daumas, The Horses of the 
Sahara). Adam is supposed to have brought from heaven 
five things made of iron — viz. an anvil, a pair of tongs, 

APPENDIX I— NOTES AND REFERENCES 449 

two hammers, and a needle. The bori are afraid of iron 
(p. 289), as is the witch, according to some (H.S.C.. 
p. 156), but it is hardly necessary to go more fully into 
a subject which is so widely known. 

10 The wizard. It might have been better to have used 
the term " male-witch," for " wizard " has now not neces- 
sarily a bad signification. In this book, however, it must 
be taken to include the sorcerer and the evil-wisher. 

CHAPTER XII 

1 The number 1. Probably another survival may be 
found in our ace in cards. A London publication 
" explains the reason of the numbers, potentiality from an 
occult point of view." It clearly shows what is in a name 
and how it is associated with number." By the time we 
have read of the different kinds of fortune-telling, mes- 
merism, conjuring tricks, and herbal remedies, the West 
African forest is not far off. 

2 Charms and Potions. See H.S.C., pp. 23, 24, 31, 33, 
iai, 125, 135, 147, 149, 153, 156, 168-172, 469, 482, 483, 
486, 518, 520, 522, 526. To those who regard the African 
charms with contempt, the following may come as a sur- 
prise, for since the advertisement covers a whole page of a 
certain publication which foretells events — in itself rather 
an anachronism for our enlightened age, surely — there 
must be a large number of ready purchasers. " Everyone 
should have a talisman. . . . Faith in its working efficacy 
is essential. . . . The magical squares and pentacles of the 
Jewish Kabala were of a more elaborate nature. To their 
construction is imported knowledge of Astrology and 

2F 

450 THE BAN OF Tin. B0R1 

planetary influent e, ;md the magii al bu ulty of the human 
soul ai expire ed in the will and imagination. They 
made Belei tion oi tunc fox their work, choosing tl e day 

and hour of that ]>l.inct under which the tali man 

to be made, taking care that the planet was suitably 
situated in the heavens by aspect, and making their 
operations in Buch Burroundings as Nature hud sealed to 

the service of SUCh work. The talisman is worn upon 
breast . . . no one should touch it or see it . . . 
it should not be allowed to touch the ground . . . 
the secret of its power lies hidden in words. . . . Captain 
W. reports that in Abyssinia he discovered races of 
giants who inhabit the devil-possessed district of Walamo. 
He was a victim of the magical power of the Walamo, 
and ' was quite % unable to explain the cause of this 
mysterious business.' . . . All that is done under good 
influences comes to good effect, whether by sigil, charm 
or talisman, it is effected by faith of the operator, aided 
by will and imagination." How deliciously candid. 
" Imagination is the creative power of the mind by which 
a mould is delivered to Nature for the reception of the 
vitalising element of the will." At the foot of the 
advertisement are offered talismans on parchment. For 
Honour and Riches, is. 3d. — a good investment, surely. 
For Health, is. 3d. — cheaper than a panel doctor. For 
Learning, is. 3d. — no university could do it at the price. 
Success in Hazard, Betting, Cards, Stock Exchange, is. 8d. 
— what a happy combination ! For Man's or Woman's 
Love, is. 3d. — there ought to be one to keep down the 
household expenses also. King Solomon's Key to Wisdom, 
3s. 6d. — a boon to Borough Councillors. These are very 
low rates, and for those who would scorn to obtain their 
desires by such cheap means it is comforting to know that 

APPENDIX I- -NOTES AND REFERENCES 451 

the same can be had engraved on silver for 25s., or on gold 
for £5. And to think that we go on slaving ! 

An even better commentary upon our credulity is 
found in the fact that a statute is still in force against 
witches in Ireland, and in his Commission of the Peat e, a 
newly appointed magistrate is empowered to take cog- 
nisance of " Witchcraft, Inchantment, Sorcery, Magic 
Arts." See Seymour, Irish Witchcraft and Demonology, 
pp. 61, 248. 

3 Rakumin Kassa. The dictionary gives " the larva of 
a small species of ant." My informant says it is a hump- 
backed ant. 

4 Grave. This is not the same as the solwan, the draught 
composed of water and dust from the grave drunk by 
Arab mourners in order that they may forget their grief, 
for the dust in the charm may come from any grave, 
whereas the drinking" of the solwan is a form of communion 
which consoles the survivors. See Robertson Smith, 
op. cit. p. 323. The soporific influence of the dead hand 
was recognised in this country, Irish burglars as late as 
1831 putting a candle in " the hand of glory " in the belief 
that the people of the house would thus sleep on and 
not see the light. See Irish Demonology and Witclicraft, 
p. 232. 

6 Beran Benghazi. I was told that the Arabic name is 
Abu Hamma. It digs a very deep hole and so is hard to 
find. It is hunted for food. Miss Murray tells me that 
the mouse was often used in old Egyptian charms, and 
Robertson Smith says {op. cit. p. 293) that it was 
supposed to have supernatural and demoniac qualities. 

452 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

I ITAPTER XIII 

1 Bad u J u. Lit. "Giver of darkness." Sonic sp< 
of black beetle, I was told. 

2 Gospel as charm. See Devils, p. 144. 

•Praise. See H.S.C., p. 161. See also H.S.C., pp. 
140, 141. 

4 The hand. See Semitic Magic, p. lxii. To stretch 
out the hand was an exercise of power (cf. the hand of 
justice), and we still use the contrary expression, " to 
stay one's hand." Many survivals are to be found with 
us — e.g. giving the hands on a bargain, and at maniage, 
blessing, kissing hands on appointment, etc. The sign 
too is often seen in the form of a brooch amongst the 
poorer people. 

6 The horn. This also is an ancient sign, the cornucopia 
being one of the symbols of good fortune and " Plenty." 
The exaltation of the horn mentioned in the Psalms 
and elsewhere possibly refers to the fact that the people 
wore horns (introduced into England in the reign of Henry 
V.) as a part of the head-dress, the height varying directly 
with the rank of the wearer. Moses was sometimes pictured 
as wearing horns, this being a mistaken representation of 
the beams of light from his face which shone (Brewer, 
Dictionary of Phrase and Fable). I have never seen the 
hand formed into a horn (by closing the second and third 
fingers) in Africa, but it still survives in Europe. 

The fish has been mentioned already (see Chapter IX.). 
Certain species were sacred even in very early times. 

6 Salt. Amongst the ancient Arabs, when two men had 
had a dispute they were made to sit by the fire while 
priests cast salt upon it, the appeal being made to the 

APPENDIX I— NOTES AND REFERENCES 453 

common bond of food which united the two tribesmen 
(see Robertson Smith, op. cit. p. 479). Salt also frightens 
away evil influences (see H.S.C., p. 84). 

7 The evil wisli . See The Evil Eye, pp. 33-35, and Semitic 
Magic, pp. lx., 72, 145. 

8 Kneeling to a dog. See H.S.C., p. 172. 

9 Injury through earth. See also H.S.C., pp. 163, 460. 

10 Spirit in water. See Semitic Magic, p. 28, and The 
Evil Eye, p. 83. 

CHAPTER XIV 

1 Magical power of negroes. Their reputation was 
great in Europe also, hence the corruption of the word 
necromancy into negromancy, or black magic. 

2 Rain-making. See H. J. Cooper in Go and Tell (S.U.M.), 

19*3. P- 37- 

3 Stealing meat. Amongst the pagan Filani in Nigeria, 
on the name-day of the first child, an ox is killed, and the 
biwali — i.e. the heart, and flesh which covers the stomach — 
is seized by the youth who was best groomsman at the 
wedding, and he, holding a blazing torch in one hand, nms 
off with the spoil, being pursued by other youths, two of 
whom catch him and help him to eat the biwali, sometimes 
reserving a little for the bridegroom. See Man, 1910, 
Art. 40. 

4 Lightning. At the season of Wowo, boj's go in pro- 
cession with torches, sometimes throwing them about. 
This too may represent lightning, but not necessarily, as 
the bearers cry out " Behold the torches of the Prophet." 

6 Tanith and Takai. See H.S.C., Ills, xxxiii.-xxxyi. 

454 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

.uid T.il.ll., pp. 263, 264. Sc«- il «. Bertliolon, 
Recherche* Anihropdogiguet, pp. 634-637, quoting various 
authorities. 

6 Smearing blood upon corn-binns. See also T.H.H., 
p. 207. 

7 Continency. This is also necessary for boxers. See 
H.S.C., Story 99 and note. 

8 Pole rite. This is almost certainly a phallic rite ;even 
to-day a person wishing to insult another will touch a 
pole, and say " Your father." A similar rite occurs in 
India. See references in H.S.C., pp. 496, 511. 

9 The money tree. Somewhat similar stories existed in 
Assyria. See Semitic Magic, p. xx. See also Chapter II., 
Note 1. 

CHAPTER XV 

1 Distributing victim's flesh. See H.S.C., p. 93, T.H.H., 
p. 178, and 1 Sam. xi. 7. See also ante, Chapter III., Note 
11. Perhaps there is something comparable in the fact 
that in Ireland the body of a witch was cut in pieces and 
distributed over the area over which her evil influence 
extended. See Irish Demonology and Witchcraft, p. 198. 

2 Hunter's head-dress. See my article, "West Africa," 
in Customs of tJie World, p. 799. 

3 Traps. See T.H.H., pp. 58, 124. 

4 Hyenas. See H.S.C., p. 35. 

6 Hunters' Jigo. A photograph of a Munchi blessing 
is seen in my article on " West Africa " quoted above, 
p. 810. See also Robertson Smith, op cit. p. 185. 

8 Identification of arrows. Cf. T.H.H., p. 291. 

APPENDIX I— NOTES AND REFERENCES 455 

7 Games, etc. Sec H.S.C., pp. 57, 58. 

8 The koraiya. This in the bori rites now is a miniature 
battle-axe, but Haj Ali's description is correct, for I have 
seen one since. Tuwaregs wear a ring of serpentine on 
the right arm with which to break an enemy's head. 
See Bertholon, op. cit. p. 449. 

9 The half-man. See H.S.C., pp. 123, 124. 

10 Initiation tests. See Primitive Culture, ii. p. 194. 
The Earl of Desmond, a magician, frightened his 
wife in a similar manner by his transformations. See 
Irish Demonology and Witchcraft, p. 71. 

11 Sharru. See H.S.C., Story 22. The contests are still 
carried on, one having been described recently. " A 
circle was formed around some young braves, who stood 
with arms raised above their heads, thus signifying their 
readiness to undergo the ordeal. Their expression might 
not vary from cheerfulness and calm. Meantime their 
comrades were armed with long sticks, and from time to 
time they would step forward and beat the young Stoics 
with a force abundantly attested by the weals that a Cow- 
Fulani bears round his body to his dying day. The man 
who has shown no sign of suffering has proved his man- 
hood, and is now considered worthy of marriage. Girls 
stand round to watch, and to them belongs the right of 
ending the test ; this they do by stepping forward with 
raised hands. When a man has already gained a great 
reputation for courage, his fellows will not strike him — 
not, it is said, that they dread reprisals, but for fear that 
his demeanour should excite worship from too many 
young ladies " [Chiefs and Cities of Central Africa, p. 257). 

There is probably in this performance an idea of fer- 
tility, the act of the flagellation driving out any evil 
influences, the stick conferring the fertilising and strength- 

456 THE />'.!. V OF THE BORI 

ening power oi the tree into the youth's body. It is so in 
North Africa ( ee Doutte*, <>/>. dl j>. 555). 
A omewhal irnilar contest in Central Amexi a has l>een 

desi [ibed by Brett [The Indian Tubes of Guiana, p. 158), 

though tin- maquani may be dm- to African influence. 

12 Waistband. Such magic girdles may be tin- parents 
of tin- modern elei trii belts. 

CHAPTER XVI 

1 Nature Myths. See H.S.C., pp. 112-118. 

2 Earth divided. The full story is given in the Koran, 
chap, xviii. The wall is related to have been built 
by Dhu'l Karnein, variously described as Alexander the 
Great, a king of Persia contemporary with Abraham, or 
else one of the kings of Yaman. After having found that 
the sun set in a sea of black mud, he journeyed to the 
land where it rose. Then he travelled from south to 
north, until he came to two mountains (in Armenia or 
Turkestan), and taught the people there how to make the 
wall to protect themselves against Gog and Magog (prob- 
ably Turks and others) who were wasting the land. The 
wall was made of stone, melted brass, and iron, and was so 
high that Gog and Magog could not climb it, nor could 
they cut through it. But when the end of the world 
comes they will be able to come south again, for the wall 
will crumble to dust. The above has a faint resem- 
blance to the story of the youth who cheated death 
(H.S.C., 96), and was probably borrowed from the Jews 
(c/. Ezekiel xxxviii., especially verse 20). Two variants 
are given in 'Twixt Sand and Sea (p. 422). In the first, 

APPENDIX I— NOTES AND REFERENCES 457 

pygmies are said to be gradually licking through the wall, 
though they will be restrained from perforating it until 
the proper time. In the second, the pygmies arc 

tunnelling a mountain, and will get through when 
they say " Inshallah " (If God wills). This they at 
present refuse to do, but by-and-by a child will be 
given that name, and in calling him they will utter the 
fateful word and so succeed. 

3 Sacred rocks. See T.H.H., pp. 50, 99, and A.-A.N.A., 
Illustration LXXVI. 

4 Offerings. See Lord Avebury, The Origin of Civilisa- 
tion, p. 315. 

6 Blood speaking. This is often related in the folk-lore. 
See Story 100 (variant) in H.S.C., where the drops of 
the witch's blood threaten to kill the youth who has cut 
her down. See also p. 157. Spittle, etc., has a similar 
power (p. 464). 

6 Tumuli. See Doutte, op. cit. p. 434. 

7 Cloths wrapped around trees. See T.H.H., p. 260. 
See also Lord Avebury, op cit. p. 305. 

8 Stars. The devils are trying to get into the heavens, 
from three of which they were excluded on the birth of 
Jesus, and from the other four when Mohammed graced 
the earth with his presence. 

9 Drums. See The Evil Eye, p. 446. 

10 Creation. See Chapter II., Note 1. 

11 Omens. A good many of these have been borrowed 
from the Arabs, I think. With them " omens are not 
blind tokens ; the animals know what they tell to men." 
See Robertson Smith, op. cit. p. 443. 

458 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

CHAPTER XVII 

1 Pretended death. This story has a marked resem. 
blance to the initiation ceremonies in West Ceram (Fr 
The Golden Bough, iii. p. 442), the boys' heads being 
supposed to be cat off, a resurrection taking place a few 
days afterwards. 

8 Four saints. In the Malays also four sheikhs are said 
to be "penned " in the four directions, and the people 
therefore " ask pardon of the four corners of the world " 
(Skeat, op. cit. p. 100). The fact that a West African rose 
to such eminence is not at all surprising, for according to 
Dr Bertholon, even the celebrated priestess of Tanith 
shows numerous negroid characteristics. See Recherches 
A nthropologiques dans la Berberie Orientalc, p. 279. 

3 Free meals to poor. The Semites regarded them as the 
guests of the deity. See Robertson Smith, op. cit. p. 223. 

4 Snake in well. The Southern Arabs believe that the 
jinn of the well takes this form (Robertson Smith, op. cit. 
p. 168). See also H.S.C., p. 124. Cf. our ordeals, T.H.H., 
p. 201. 

5 Bay leaves. See Devils, p. 137. 

6 Chart. See Doutte, op. cit. p. 452. 

7 Sacrifice. lb. chap. x. 

8 Goat dressed up. See Robertson Smith, op. cit. 
p. 306. Conversely human sacrifices were often disguised 
as animals. lb. p. 366. 

9 Incense. It is interesting in this connexion to quote 
a passage from Professor Robertson Smith's Religion of 
the Semites (p. 426). "The most powerful cleansing 
media are necessarily derived from the body and blood 
of sacrosanct victims, and the forms of purification 

IPPENDIX I—NOTES AND REFERENCES 459 

embrace such rites as the sprinkling of sacrificial blood 01 
ashes upon the person, anointing with holy unguents, or 
fumigation with the smoke of incense, which from c;irlv 
times was a favourite accessory to sacrifices. It seems 
probable, however, that the religious value of incense was 
originally independent of animal sacrifice, for frank- 
incense was the gum of a very holy species of tree, which 
was collected with religious precautions. . . . The right 
even to use the trees was reserved to certain holy families, 
who, when engaged in harvesting the gum, had to abstain 
from all contact with women and from participation in 
funerals. . . . Whether, therefore, the sacred odour was 
used in unguents or burned like an altar sacrifice, it 
appears to have owed its virtue, like the gum of the 
samova tree [an acacia which was regarded as being 
a woman, the gum being her menstruous blood], to the idea 
that it was the blood of an animate and divine plant." 
Both incense and scent seem to be somewhat contradictory 
in their action, for both attract the bori at times, and yet 
free people from their evil influence. From the fact that 
certain plants produced the required ingredients for the 
incense or scent arose the belief that the plant itself had 
the power to expel evil influences, and so pieces of it 
were worn as charms, to be succeeded later by articles of 
metal when its power had become known. 

10 The Great Prayer in Morocco. See Westermarck in 
Folk-Lore, 1911. For an illustration of the method of 
staining, see my article " West Africa " in Customs of the 
World, p. 795. 

11 Gift to avoid illness. Corn given to the poor averts 
fever. See H.S.C., p. 55. Also cf. p. 143. 

12 Horse-races. See H.S.C., Illustration IV. 

13 Tug o' War. See Doutte, op. cit. p. 587. 

THE BAN OF THE BOh'l 
u Killing "f Dragon. See Sharpe, Egyptian Mythoi 

and Egyptian ('linstianity, \> iu. 

l'' lakai and Ida. See H.S.C., Ettu tntkm XXXIII.- 
XXXVL, and T.H.H., pp. 262-264 

CHAPTER XVIII 

1 Winds are spirits. In East Africa also diseases are 
caused by spirits or winds. See Burton, Central Africa, 
ii. p- 253. 

transformation. The belief in the power of witches, 
animals, hunters and anyone possessing the appropriate 
(harms to transform themselves is fully described in 
H.S.C. (pp. 43, 126, 132-135, 154, 158, 159), and need not 
be dwelt upon here. 

3 Ghul. The Ghul or R'ul are said to have been the 
pagan people responsible for the dolmens which are found 
in various parts of North Africa, they having built them in 
order to obtain shelter from a hailstorm which Allah sent 
upon them because of their wickedness. As they had no 
houses, Allah had thought to destroy them, but by these 
means they escaped death, and Allah then punished them 
by transforming them into vampires or ghouls — another 
example of the fall of man. They were immortal, there- 
fore, until Sidi Ali killed their chief with his magical two- 
bladed sword, when all perished, according to my 
informant. They are distinct from the jinns. Professor 
Robertson Smith, however, regards them {op. cit. p. 129) 
as being the same, although in some stories the ghul is 
called one of the wild beasts of the jinns, for the evil places 
where huntsmen have been carried off by the ghul have 

APPENDIX I— NOTES AND REFERENCES 46] 

really been haunted by wild beasts — which, as lias been 
noted elsewhere, he identifies with the jinns. Still 
another description is given by Doughty (Arabia Deserta, 
i- P- 53) > wno says that the ghul (or ghoul) is a female, 
having " a Cyclops' eye set in the midst of her human-like 
head, long beak of jaws, in the ends one or two great sharp 
tushes, long neck ; her arms like chickens' fledgeling 
wings, the fingers of her hands not divided ; the body big 
as a camel's, but in shape as the ostrich ; the sex is only 
feminine, she has a foot as the ass' hoof and a foot as an 
ostrich. She entices passengers, calling to them over the 
waste by their names, so that they think it is their own 
mother's or their sister's voice." In this are contained the 
descriptions of the bori seen during the initiation tests and 
of Uwal Yara. One would almost think that the pre- 
historic animals had been remembered. According to 
Hebrew tradition, demons always had cock's feet. See 
Semitic Magic, p. 61. 

4 The Owl. See Semitic Magic, pp. 20, 21. 

5 Functions of bori. The conception that each deity 
presides over a distinct department is too abstract for the 
primitive mind. " The really vital question is not what a 
god has power to do, but whether I can get him to do it 
for me, and this depends on the relation in which he 
stands to me " (Robertson Smith, ib. p. 83). 

6 Arab incantations. Several forms are given in Doutte 
(op. cit. pp. 119 et seqq.). These forms are very old, for 
curious invocations which have been found in the graves 
of Roman officials at La Malga, written on thin sheets 
of lead, exhibit similar characteristics. Some are love 
charms, others are curses, and the following is worth 
quoting because of its similarity to modern charms and 
for the example it affords of a sympathetic magical rite. 

469 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

In C i intere I was i.iken in the chariot races 

between the rival I u dons of the Bine . Graens, Red . and 
Whites, and the invoi ation evidently i azne from a partisan 
of one of the lit t. i . " I invi >ke Tl ee by the Greal Names 
to hind f.i-1 every limb and every nerve of Biktorikos 
[Victorious] whom Earth, the HotheroJ every living 
brought forth., the Charioteer of the Blues, and his hi 
which he is about to drive [the owners' names follow]. . . . 
A this lock is bound by its feet and hands and head, so 
bind fast the legs and hands and head and heart of Bik- 
torikos, Charioteer of the Bines, to-morrow, and his 
horses which he is about to drive. . . . Again I adjure Thee 
by the God of Heaven above Who sitteth upon the 
Cherubim, Who divided the Earth, and severed the Sea, 
lao, Abrico, Arbathiao, Sabao, Adonai, to bind fast 
Biktorikos. . . . Now, Now, Quickly, Quickly." See 
Grant, op. cit. p. 135. 

If we look further back into the past we shall see that a 
similar idea existed in Babylon. See Devils, p. 13. 

7 Colour. See Semitic Magic, pp. ^, 163-165 ; Malay 
Magic, p. 432 ; The Evil Eye, pp. 58, 59, 413 ; The 
Origin of Civilisation, p. 25 ; and H.S.C., pp. 144, 150, 
161, 164. 

8 Smell. See Chapter XVII. , Note 9. 

9 Duplicating an object desired. See H.S.C., Story 47, 
variant. 

10 The same belief is found in Palestine, and in Persia, 
where the Yezidis fear to scald " the little devils. " Semitic 
Magic, p. 59. Also in Egypt, so Mr Engelbach tells me. 

nBori slaps face. The "fairies" of Fika (Bornu) do 
this. See Chiefs and Cities of Central Africa, p. 260. 

12 Voluntary submission to an evil influence. See 
H.S.C., p. 155. The same idea is seen in some of the 

APPENDIX I— NOTES AND REFERENCES 463 

Arab incantations. Thus when a beautiful princess of 
the jinns offers marriage to the man who lias invoked her, 
he need not consent to do so, but if he does, he will become 
impotent. See Doutte, op. cit. 93. " Whether such 
marriages are lawful is solemnly discussed by Moham- 
medan jurists ! " (Robertson Smith, op. cit. p. 50). It 
is related that James Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, in 
the seventeenth century, received a visit from a lady who 
was dead. He accepted an invitation to sup with her the 
following night, and died in the afternoon — in time to keep 
his appointment ! See Irish Demonology and Witchcraft, 

p. 103. 

13 Obscene songs. This is usual not only in West Africa 
but in the northern part of the continent as well. 
"Augustin speaks with indignation of the incredible 
obscenity of the songs that accompanied the worship of 
the Carthaginian mother-goddess ; but perhaps this is not 
to be set down as of Punic origin, for the general laxity 
on the point of female chastity in which such a type of 
worship [of a polyandrous goddess] originates has always 
been characteristic of North Africa " (Robertson Smith, 
ib. p. 56). 

14 Magira. See Chiefs and Cities of Central Africa, 
pp. 160, 169. 

15 Baal Hammon. See Grant, op. cit. pp. 20-31 ; and 
Bertholon, Recherches, p. 632. 

CHAPTER XIX 

1 Imprisoning the bori. This is not a strange idea to 
the Hausa. King Solomon is supposed to have confined 

464 THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

those jinna which refused to help in the building of the 

temple. lie kept them in subjection by means of his 
ring, and this was stolen <»n< e by a jinn (by deceiving one 
of the King's concubines), who tlms deprived Solomon of 
his power. Ttois jinn gave rise to the people of Asben 
(see H.S.C., p. 481) by causing many of the women to 
conceive, but, becoming tired of a human mode of life, 
he flew away, dropping the ring into a pool {'Twxt Sand 
and Sea, p. 479). This was swallowed by a fish, and 
Solomon recovered the ring in the same manner as did 
There-is-no-King-but-God (in Story 1, H.S.C.). Mallams 
can bind the bori. 

2 Unmarried priestess. See Thompson, op. cit. p. 78, 
quoting Herodotus, Book I., chaps, clxxxi. and clxxxii., 
and other authors, and his remarks on modern instances 
of phallic worship amongst the Arabs and others. 
In The Tshi-S peaking Peoples of the Gold Coast, Colonel 
Ellis tells us (pp. 121, 122) that " Dancing is a special 
branch in the education of a priest or priestess. They 
must be very proficient in the art, and are taught privately 
by adepts for many months before they are allowed to 
perform in public. . . . Priests marry . . . but priestesses 
are never married . . . the reason appears to be that a 
priestess belongs to the god she serves. . . . Priestesses 
are ordinarily most licentious, and custom allows them to 
gratify their passions with any man who may chance to 
take their fancy . . . when excited by the dance they 
frequently abandon themselves to the wildest excesses .... 
Very commonly priests wear a white linen cap, which 
completely covers the hair, and a similar cap is sometimes 
worn b}r priestesses, but only when they are about to 
communicate with a god." 

3 The Roman law allowed slaves to form associations, so 

APPENDIX I— NOTES AND REFERENCES 465 

that subscribers might be certain of having a decent burial, 
and such societies are not uncommon in Africa. Thus in 
Egypt there is the Demerdache Order, which has its secret 
signs and tenets, encourages worship, and has a charitable 
fund for the widows and orphans of its members. See 
Leeder, Veiled Mysteries of Egypt, p. 166. 

CHAPTER XX 

1 Instruments. See H.S.C., Figs. 76-89, and my article 
in The Journal of the R.A.I. , vol. xlii. pp. 161, 182. 

2 The altar. This is not always necessary, and in fact 
I have seen it at bori ceremonies only in Tunis, not in 
Tripoli or Nigeria. According to Doutte (p. 463) it is very 
rare. Erections are often found in West Africa, and I 
have never heard any question raised as to their being true 
altars. That used at Tunis is a very primitive form. 

3 Foods. The respect paid to flour has been commented 
upon already. Water is valuable in hot countries. Milk 
is nearly always regarded as being sacred. Coriander was 
used as an ingredient in Assyrian charms. See Semitic 
Magic, p. 146. 

4 Sacrifice. In Algiers, at the Jardin d'Essai, the negro 
sacrificer kisses the bull on the mouth before killing it, and 
then rubs on cream and butter so that the sanctity of these 
products passes into it, and at the same time the sacrificer 
identifies himself with them (says Doutt6, op. cit. p. 466) . 
Unfortunately he does not give the name of the rite 
nor of the negro community practising it, but the rite 
of kissing by a Hausa appears somewhat strange. It fe 

2G 

466 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

interesting to note that in the current official report, the 
Re [deal of Kontagora says, wit; ! to the DakakafJ 

and the Oukiwa tribes that there is a great scarcity of 
fowls owing to the frequent sa< rifices. 

5 Eating without the hands. This lias to be done by all 
initiates, and is supposed to confer upon them the ability 
to throw themselves upon the ground without injury. 
See T.H.H., p. 260. It is possible that this is done 
in imitation of the manner in which most animals (not 
e.g. monkeys) take their food. A similar rite is found 
amongst the Malays. See Skeat, op. cit. p. 442. 

6 Masu-wata, etc. This is not strange to the Hausas, for 
they can see the Aisawias doing very much more than this, 
the frenzied performers gashing themselves with knives 
and glass, and in other ways ill-treating themselves. This 
kind of thing (apart from bori) has been noticed at Fika 
in Bornu, Nigeria (see Chiefs and Cities of Central Africa, 
p. 279), a medicine-man sticking a knife into his leg 
without bringing blood, and hitting his head with a 
tomahawk. The Koraiya in the Gidan Kuri at Tunis 
seems to be an axe for this purpose. 

7 Dance upon knees. See Berth olon, op. cit. p. 499. 

8 Yerima. In the Malays, the third best kind of rice is 
called " The Veiled Princess," the sheath being so long as to 
overshadow the head. See Skeat, op. cit. p. 248. See also 
ante, Chapter VII., Note 1. 

CHAPTER XXI 
1 Mallam Alhaji. See Semitic Magic, p. 86. 

APPENDIX I— NOTES AND REFERENCES 467 

CHAPTER XXII 

1 Flogging. See Leeder, Veiled Mysteries of Egypt, 
p. 231. 

2 Rai. A description of a bori. See p. 139. 

CHAPTER XXIII 

1 Doguwa. See Customs of the World, " Abyssinia," 
p. 917. 

2 Gajjimare. See H.S.C., p. 112. 

CHAPTER XXIV 

1 Nakhoda. See Skeat, Malay Magic, p. 63. 

2 Dundurusu. See the note on the blacksmith in 
Chapter XL 

CHAPTER XXV 

1 Tribal Marks. See H.S.C., pp. 94, 100-103, 119, 161, 170, 
171, 518-531, 533, 535- 

2 Breaking pots. See Thompson, Semitic Magic, p. 30, 
quoting Jewish Encyclopaedia, xi. p. 600 ; Lane, Manners 
and Customs, p. 324, and Lev. xi. 29-38. 

CHAPTER XXVI 

1 Beautiful bori. This has probably been borrowed 
from the Arabs, who have an amulet the wearer of which 

468 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

will captivate every woman who sees him (Doutt6, p. 168). 
This is brought about by means of the efficacy of a certain 
verse of the Koran dealing with the history of Joseph. 
When Potiphar's wife brought him before her women, they 
were so enraptured that instead of cutting the oranges 
which they held in their hands, they cut their lingers. 

CHAPTER XXVII 

1 Dangira. The head of the ramma plant is called 
dangira because it causes irritation when touched. 

2 Horns. Cf. the Biblical analogy in 2 Chron. xviii. 
io, where the prophet Zadekiah wears horns. Almajiri 
signifies religious scholar or disciple. 

CHAPTER XXVIII 

1 Beast bori tied. This has been noticed in many places. 
See Burn ell, The Devil-Worship of the Tulavas (Indian 
Antiquary, 1904), p. 4. 

2 Water spirits. See Semitic Magic, p. 28. 

3 Knife. See this and other shapes in H.S.C., Figs. 
102-104. 

4 Arzikki Boboniya. The name ought to be spelt Ba- 
Boniya, perhaps, I do not know the word. 

6 Monkey dance. A similar possession has been 
noticed amongst the Malays. See Skeat, Malay Magic, 
p. 465. 

APPENDIX I— NOTES AND REFERENCES 469 

CHAPTER XXIX 

1 Demons. See Tylor, Primitive Culture, numerous 
references in index. 

2 Angels. See Al Koran, chap, i., and Sale's notes, 
p. 419. See also Prel. Disc, p. 55. 

3 Succubae and Incubi. See Tylor, op. cit. pp. 190, 191. 

4 Tobit. Thompson, op. cit. pp. 68-72, quote this and 
other ancient and even modern examples, and it is evident 
from them that Lilith still consorts with men after 
marriage, for she borrows the clothes of wives so as to 
deceive the husbands. It seems that Tobias drove away 
Asmodeus by reason of the smell of the fish. Among 
modern Arabs a dead husband may revisit his wife (p. 76). 

6 Hausa a mixture. .. See Chapter II., Note 2. 

8 Familiar Bori. " In Hesiod they are described as the 
souls of men who had lived in the golden and silver ages, 
and who were divided into different orders " (Devils, 
p. 9). See also The Encyclopcedia Britannica, Art. " De- 
monology." Amongst the Shilluk, " one ancestral spirit 
may be immanent in many ajuago at the same time, often 
passing at the death of an ajuago, or shortly afterwards, 
into one of his children, who thus becomes an ajuago like 
his or her father." See Seligmann, op. cit. p. 232. The 
latter writer has observed that in Egypt the karina may 
pass to a child (Essays and Studies, p. 450). I am told that 
Dr Breasted holds a similar opinion, but I have been 
unable to trace his paper. 

7 Ghosts consulted. See T.H.H., p. 153. 

8 Ancestors. Op. cit. p. 116. 

9 Foundation of cities. See H.S.C., p. 103. 

10 Gods, Demons, and Human Beings. Connexioas 

470 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

between demons and men are mentioned several times in 
the Apocrypha. For Biblical references to heroes, see 
(icn. vi. 1-4, Ps. Ixxxii. 6. 

11 Bori in Sierra Leone. See Aldridge, A Transformed 
Colony, pp. 197, 209. 

12 Boni, Boroa, Beri. See Sir H. Johnston, Liberia, pp. 
1033, 1037. Boroa should perhaps be boroa. If so it may 
correspond to baure, the fig, which throughout the East is 
11 10 symbol of virginity owing to the resemblance between 
its shape and that of the virgin ntems. The pomegranate 
symbolises the full womb. See Serpent Worship, p. 23. 

13Beleku, etc. See Migeod, The Languages of West 
Africa, and Faidherbe, Langues Senegalaises. 

14 See Hacqnard et Depnis, Manuel de la Langue Songay. 
16 Mbobi. See Goldie, Dictionary of the Efik Language. 

16 Belu. See Thomas, Anthropological Report on the 
Ibo-speaking Peoples of Nigeria, vol. iii. (Dictionary). 

17 Boli. See Henry, L'Ame d'un Peuple Africain 
(Anthropos, 1910), p. 128. A Hausa word boli means 
urine, but that, I think, is an accidental resemblance, being 
probably of Arab origin. Barbara, " to couple " — used only 
of animals — may have some connexion. 

18 Bori. I know that there are many English names of 
spirits (Bogey, Beli, Barbason, etc.) which may not have 
the slightest connexion with each other, and there is also 
the word baudy, while in Australia we find that the Bora is 
an initiation ceremony {Customs of the World, p. 1). Still, 
a similarity in names and rites in neighbouring countries, 
which have been subject to invasions by the same peoples, 
seems to establish so close a connexion that the possibility 
of a similar origin must be admitted. 

19 Bori and Baal. See Semitie Magic, p. xxi. ; Sayce, 
Babylonians and Assyrians, p. 16 ; The Religion of the 

APPENDIX I— NOTES AND REFERENCES 471 

Semites, pp. 107, 108 ; Did. of Religion and Ethics, 
" Ba'al " ; Robinson, Hausa Dictionary, p. xviii. ; and 
H.F.T., p. 5. 

20 Phallic worship. Ignorant Moslems and Christians 
in some parts of Arabia conceive of God as having a com- 
plete male organism. Moslem men at Hamath and Greek 
Christian women near Damascus swear by God's phallus. 
See Curtiss, Primitive Semitic Religion To-Day, p. 113. 

aiBara. See Serpent Worship, p. 15. 

22 Exchange of garments. lb. p. 150. 

23 Tabu on relations. See Seligmann, op. cit. p. 231; 
Semitic Magic, p. 117, and The Religion of the Semites, 
p. 446. 

CHAPTER XXX 

1 Totems and jinns. Op. cit. p. 130. 

2 Hausa animals and bori. See H.S.C., pp. 42-45, 124- 
131, 170, 172, etc. 

3 Animal characteristics. See Thompson, op. cit. p. 57, 
who quotes several authorities. 

4 Mounted bori. See Robertson Smith, op. cit. p. 134. 
Also T. H. H., pp. 34, 162, and Grant, op. cit. p. 330 : " In 
a French MS. of the History of the Holy Grail is a drawing 
of the Trinity of Evil presiding over a council of devils 
who are considering the birth of Merlin, the magician. . . . 
The host of minor devils is likened to locusts which 
come from the smoke that issued from the bottomless pit. 
They bore the likenesses of horses prepared for battle, 
with men's faces, lion's teeth, and women's hair. They 

472 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

had i towns as of gold on their heads, and breastplates of 

imn." See Devils, p. 28. 

6 Astarte and Tanith. See N.W.S., p. 55 ; 'Twixt Sand 

and Sea, p. 30 ; Babylonians and Assyrians, pp. 16, 17 ; 
Semitic Magic, pp. 7J-79 ; .lh<1 The Religion of the Semites, 
p. 56. 
8 See R.G.S. Journal, September 1913, p. 252. 

7 Sa. See N.W.S., pp. 60 et seqq., where several 
authorities are quoted : L'Ame d'un Peuple Ajricain, p. 
76 ; Budge, The Book of the Kings of Egypt, i. p. xxvi. and 
ii. p. 80 ; Budge, The Gods of the Egyptians, i. pp. 180, 
203, and ii. pp. 89, 292, 300 ; Inman, Ancient Faiths 
embodied in Ancient Names, i. p. 377 ; The Origin of 
Civilisation, 280 ; Journal, R.A.I., 1906, p. 92 ; and 
H.F.T., p. 22. 

8 Spear. Similar weapons are " in use among the negro 
savages of Ashantee . . . where they are used to stick 
into the ground ' to protect the crop sown from evil spirits,' 
or, in other words, from the witchcraft of possessors of the 
evil eye " {The Evil Eye, p. 215). 

9 The crocodile. See The Evil Eye, p. 320. 

10 Hatchet. See Talbot, In the Shadow of the Bush, 
pp. 14-16. 

uAfunu. See Hausa Proverbs, p. 92, and Sir H. 
Johnston, R.G.S. Journal, 1898, p. 608. 

12 Change of Sex. See Robertson Smith, op. cit. pp. 58, 
478 ; and Sayce, op. cit. p. 240. 

13 Bouda. See Semitic Magic, pp. 103, 104, quoting 
several authorities. 

14 Saints and Demons. There seems to be a somewhat 
similar mixture in Tibet at certain plays where Ogres, 
Wild Beasts, Ghouls, Genii and Teachers — sometimes 
even Buddhas — appear together. The teachers represent 

APPENDIX I— NOTES AND REFERENCES 473 

the early Indian priests, and (like Dan Wawa) are the 
buffoons of the play. See Waddell, The Buddhism of Tibet, 
P- 537- See also Semitic Magic, p. 88, and Bertholon, 
Recherches, p. 605. 

16 Child spirits. See Semitic Magic, p. 23. 

16 Exorcism by string. In the story of the False Friend 
(H.S.C., Story 5), the mallam is guided to another hut and 
then driven out. 

17 Dancers tied up. See " The Devil Worship of the 
Tuluvas " in The Indian Antiquary, 1894, p. 4. 

18 Dances. With the Bechuanas, " What do you dance 
(bina) ? " is equivalent to asking " What tribe (totem) are 
you ? " Dancing was a part of the ancient worship. See 
Hartland, Presidential Address, Folk-Lore, 1901, p. 31. 

APPENDIX II 

BOTANICAL NOTES 

A number of the following notes has been taken from 
The Hausa Dictionary, but in some cases the descriptions 
there do not agree with the identification of specimens 
which I sent to Kew, and where that has occurred, I have 
followed the latter authorities, of course. 

Adduwa (Balanites aegyptiaca). A thorny tree from 
which gum and edible fruit are obtained. Its wood takes 
a good polish and is used for prayer boards. 

Bagaruwa or Gabbaruwa (Acacia arabica). The bark 
is used in tanning. One of the ingredients of a medicine 
for complaints. Perhaps it has an astringent effect. 

Bauje (terminalia macroptera) . A large tree with flat, 
winged fruit. Bows and sticks are made from it. 

Chediya. The Chediya is a species of ficus which yields 
a milky juice having some of the properties of rubber, 
it is akin to the durimi and the gamje. 

Dafara (Vitis sp.). A woody climber from which a 
medicine or cement is made. 

Dan Mutum Mutume. I do not know the plant, it is 
said to be one which takes root in the crannies of rocks 
and splits them by its growth. 

Dorowa (Parkia filicoidea, Leguminosae) . It resembles 
an acacia. From the fruit, in a pod, is made dodowa cakes 
or a soup. 

474 

APPENDIX II— BOTANICAL NOTES 475 

Dundu. A fairly common shrub with stiff branches which 
has white or yellow blossoms. It produces a gum. 

Durimi. A large species of ficus yielding a milky juice 
like rubber. The fruit resembles a kola-nut somewhat. 

Faru. A wild stone-fruit from which a drink is made. 

Gamje (ficus sp. Urticaceae). One of the rubber trees. 

Gwaza (Colocasia sp. Aroideae) has large lily-like leaves. 
Cultivated by many pagan tribes. It causes great irrita- 
tion in the throat if cooked and eaten too soon after having 
been picked. 

Hankufa (Waltheria Americana, Buettneriaceae). A 
common weed. 

Jato. The Money Tree. See H.S.C., p. 172. This tree 
is supposed to give off a ruddy light at night — an electrical 
discharge, perhaps. Compare with this the Gold Coast 
belief in a " gold smoke " indicating the presence of the 
precious metal. But there is some foundation for this, 
for the hot sun may draw up the moisture containing the 
fine dust, depositing it on evaporation (see Gold Coast 
Palaver, p. no). Several plants in North Africa were 
supposed to change lead into gold, and some of these were 
said by an ancient writer to be in the gardens in Tunis and 
Tripoli (Doutte, op. cit. p. 79). They did not appear to 
be celebrated locally, alas ! But perhaps, like prophets, 
they have no honour in their own country. 

Jibda Kassa. A scented creeper. 

Jinjiriya (Erythrina senegalensis Leguminosae) . A 
prickly tree with scarlet blossoms. 

Kabba or Kaba. A large species of palm with edible 
fruit. The name is applied especially to the young dum 
palm. 

Kainya (Diospyros mespilifermis, Ebenaceai). The 
African ebony. It has a fruit. See H.S.C., Story «6. 

47^ THE BAN OF THE BORI 

Kalgo (Bauhinia reticulata, Leguminosae). A small tree 
with slightly fragrant leaves in which food is sometimes 
wrapped. The bark may be used in strips as cords, or to 
darken the lips of the women. 

Kauchin Kalgo (Lovanthus globifera, Lovanthaceae) . 
A parasite which grows upon various trees, not necessarily 
upon the Kalgo. 

Kawo (Afzelia Wanzensis, Leguminosae) . A large shady 
tree with thick, woody pods. 

Kiriya. A small tree (which often grows on roofs) from 
which blacksmiths obtain charcoal. It gives also vegetable 
poison for arrows, and a dye used for the stripes painted 
on the face (katambiri), but not for the scarifications. 

Kirni (Briedelia ferruginea Euphor biaceae). A tree 
from which is obtained an antidote to arrow poison. 

Madowachi (Khaya Senegalensis, Meliacae). The African 
mahogany. Its bark is used medicinally. 

Magariya (Zizyphus lotus). A bushy tree with edible 
cherry-like fruit. 

Magimpa (Tephrosia vigelii). Placed in pond to 
stupefy fish. 

Maje (Daniellia thurifera, Leguminosae). The large 
copaiba tree. 

Mantowa or Mantawa. A parasitic plant with fern-like 
leaves and green pendent fruit. One word mantuwa means 
" forgetfulness." It may be that the name of this plant 
signifies that the person who has taken of it forgets all 
else but the giver ! 

Namijin Gabbarwwan Kassa (Cassia mimosoides, Linn). 
Supposed to be the male plant of another species of acacia. 

Nonon Kurichiya (Euphorbia pilulifera). A creeping 
plant with a pink flower and fleshy stalk which gives 
a white milky sap. 

APPENDIX II— BOTANICAL NOTES 477 

Ramma (Hibiscus spinosus, Malvaceae). A plant having 
a high, thin stem, from the bark of which rope is made. 
It may be that the idea in this charm is to bind the parties 
together. 

Rimi (Eriodendron anfractuosum, Malvaceae). A large 
shady tree. Its seeds are enveloped in long silken hairs 
closely resembling the true cotton, but owing to the lack 
of adhesion between them, they cannot be manufactured. 
The Hausas use them to stuff pillows and quilted " armour." 

Rogon daji gives also a poison for smearing upon arrows. 

Rumafada (Oldenlandia Heynei, Wall). Another kind 
is given in the dictionary, a common herb with small white 
flowers (scoparia dulcis, scrophularinae) . 

Runhu (Cassia goratensis, Leguminosae). It is used by 
a newly made mother. See note on Chapter VII. 

Sahara. A small thorny palm. 

Tafashiya (Sarcocephalus Russegeri, Rubiaceae). A 
shrub with red edible fruit. Also gives poison for arrows. 

Ta-Ga-Rana (Biophytum sensitivum, Do.). The berries 
are used in head-dresses for magic rites. 

Taru (Combretum spinosum). A low undershrub used 
medicinally. 

Tsamiya (Tamarindus Indica, Leguminosae). The 
tamarind, the acid pulp of which is sometimes used as 
leaven. 

Tumfafiya (Calotropsis procera, Asilepiadeae). A hoary- 
leaved shrub with milky juice and bladder-like capsules. 

Uwal Maganguna. A shrub with purple flowers, an 
arrow poison is obtained from it. 

APPENDIX III 

A COMPARISON OF THE BORI 

Many of the spirits described in this book have not been 
noted by myself (nor by other observers, so far as I know) 
in Northern Nigeria, but it is almost certain that most of 
them are followed there, though the Hausas in North 
Africa have borrowed largely from the Arabs, and the 
Hausas still in Nigeria have incorporated more and more 
of the spirits of other tribes still pagan. This is only 
natural, and it is to be hoped that the Munchi bori will be 
described before it has disappeared altogether — it is for- 
bidden by the Government, though our laws have not 
much effect in the district as yet. A record of the Kanuri, 
Nupe, and other forms also would be most valuable. It 
will probably be useful to students of such dances to com- 
pare the characters observed in North and West Africa, so 
the following list has been drawn up, the numbers in 
brackets indicating the number in Hausa Superstitions 
and Customs, pp. 534-540, and the initials the countries 
concerned. 

1. Abba. The same as Yerima. 

2. Abubakar. The same as Magajin Yaura. Not 
reported from N.N. 

3. Adani. Not reported from N.N. 

4. Alfanda 2). Another name for Yerima. Is now 
distinct in some parts of N.N. In others he is confused 
with Mai-Lema, the dancer sitting under a canopy and 
rocking his body from side to side, the persons holding the 

478 

APPENDIX III— COMPARISON OF THE BORI 479 

cloth moving with him. Finally the sheet is held high up. 
Alfanda stands, then jumps, sneezes, and goes. 

5. All The same as Sarikin Bakka. 

6. Almajiri (4). Another name for Ismaila. More 
distinctly a fighting spirit in N.N. 

7. Anakwanche (5). Possibly Mai-Ja-Chikki in N.A., 
but name not known. Appears to be 
general paralysis. 

8. Andi (6). Not known in N.A. Said 
by some in N.N. to be the same as Ba- 
Gobiri (28) and Ba-Dakuwa (18), but more 
likely to be one of the Yan Dowa. The 
dancer sits down and growls, then jumps 
fifteen times. 

9. Angazari. Not reported from N.N. 

10. Angulu. Ditto. 

11. Aradu (7). Not a bori in N.A. 

12. Ari. Probably the same as Gindema. 
Not reported from N.N. 

13. Arni Baba or Sarikin Noma. Re- 
ported from N.N. 

14. Arzikki Boboniya. Ditto. 

15. Auta. The same as Kulita. 

16. Ayu. Not reported from N.N. 

17. Ba-Absini (i). In Nigeria his tsere is an iron fork. 

18. Baba. Not reported from N.N. 

19. Babam Mazza (49). Probably what is described as 
his tsere in H.S.C. should be the sacrifice. 

20. Ba-Dako. Said to be the same as Ba-Dakuwa (18), 
but the latter may be a sister. 

21. Baddo. Not reported from N.N. 

22. Ba-Daure. Same as Sarikin Raft. 

23. Ba-Gobiri (28) . Said in N.N. to be the same as A ndi. 

It 

Fig. 47.— Ba- 
Absini's Rattle 

480 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

24. Ba-Gudu (30). The same a Mai-Lema, q.v. 

25. Ba-Gwakiya. Possibly connected with Na Ruwa 
Rmva (59). 

26. Ba-Jin-Chiwu. Not reported from N.N. 

27. Ba-Kabba. Ditto. 

28. Ba-Kabbi. The sune ;is Ibrahima. Not reported 
from N.N. 

29. Bakka Mashi (47). Not known in N.A. 

30. Ba-Larabe. Same as Yerima. 

31. Ba-Maguje (45). Actions somewhat different. 

32. Bar a j e. Poshibly the same as Sarikin Garke in 
N.A. Same as Sarikin Barde in N.N. (10), but move- 
ments slightly different. 

33. Ba-Toye. Not reported from N.N. 

34. Bebe (12). In N.A. does not cry. Said in N.A. 
to be the same as Kuruma. 

35. Bidda. Not reported from N.N. 

36. Biri (13). Does not climb in N.A. 

37. Bultu. The same as Kura. 

38. Buwaye (14). The same as Yerima. 

39. Bugu. The same as Musai. Not reported from 
N.N. 

40. Dafo. The same as Sarikin Makadda. 

41. Dakaki. The same as Mai-Ja-Chikki. 

42. Dan Galadima (24). The same as Yerima in N.A. 
Not a judge there. 

43. Dan Gozo. The same as Sarikin Rafi. 

44. Dan Hasumi. Not reported from N.N. 

45. Dangira. The same as Kaikai. 

46. Dan Jigo. Ditto. 

47. Dan Mayirg- (50). Not known in N.A. In N.N. 
the dancer covers his head and rolls imaginary string 
between his ringers. 

APPENDIX HI—COMPARISON OF THE B0R1 481 

48. Dan Manzo. Same as Manzo Karami. 

49. Dan Musa (52). Possibly the same as Mai-Ja- 
Chikki, q.v. 

50. Dan Nana (54). Not known in N.A. 

51. Dan Sariki (61). The same as Yerima. 

52. Dan Wawa. Not reported from N.N. 

53. Daudu (19). The same as Yerima. 

54. Dausa. The same as Kaikai. 

55. Dogon Daji (16). Should be Doguwa na Daji. 

56. Dogon Gida (27). Should be Doguwa na Gida. 

57. Doguwa (21). The actions are somewhat different 
in N.A. from those in N.N. 

58. Dubabi. Not' reported from N.N. 

59. Dundurusu. Ditto. 

60. Dungu. The same as Kuturu. 

61. Essiyako. Ditto. 

62. Farin Ba-Larabe. Ditto. The same as Mai- 
Kasosowa. 

63. Gajere Mai-Dowa. Ditto. Perhaps the same as 
Sarikin Bakka. 

64. Gajjimare. Not reported as a bori from N.N. 
See H.S.C., p. 112. 

65. Garaje (26). Not known in N.A. 

66. Garke Baba. The same as Jaruma. 

67. Garuje. Not reported from N.N. 

68. Gauraka. Ditto. 

69. Gimba. The same as Yerima. 

70. Gindema. Not reported from N.N. 

71. Giwa. Ditto. 

72. Gugaya. The same as Yerima. 

73. Gurugu. The same as Kuturu. 

74. Gwari (31). The same as Sarikin Gwari, q.v. 

75. Gwegwe. Not reported from N.N. „ 
2 H 

482 THE BAN OF THE BORI 

76. Hankaka. Not reported from N.N. 

77. Haukaciil Ditto. 

78. Ibrahima (33). The tseres are different. In N.N. 
the dancer growls and beats each elbow alternately upon 
the ground. 

79. Inna (34). Not known in N.A. 

80. Ismaila. The same as Almajiri. Not reported 
from N.N. 

81. Ismaila. The same as Magajin Yaura. Ditto. 

82. Ja-ba-Fari. The same as Jato, q.v. 

83. Ja Gaude. Not reported from N.N. 

84. Ja-Ja-Maiya. The same as Kulita. Not reported 
from N.N. 

85. Jam Maraki. Ditto. 

86. Janjarre or Janziri (35). The same as Jato, 
q.v. 

87. Jaruma. The same as Garke Baba. Not reported 
from N.N. 

88. Jato. The same as Janjare, but the actions are 
slightly different. 

89. Jigo. Not reported from N.N. 

90. Jihu. The same as Jigo. 

91. Kadda. Not reported from N.N. 

92. Kaikai (36). The same as Dangira and Dausa. 

93. Kaguwa. Not reported from N.N. 

94. Kandi. Not known in N.A. 

95. Kare. The same as Tsuguna (62) in N.N. 

96. Katalla. The same as Yerima. 

97. Kaura (38). The actions are different. 

98. Kugara. The same as Babam Mazza. 

99. Kulita. The same as Auta, Ja-Ja-Maiya, and 
Mai-Karewan Haifuwa. Not reported from N.N. 

100. Kumo. Not reported from N.N. 

APPENDIX III— COMPARISON OF THE BORI 483 

101. Kura. The same as Kure (39) in N.N., but actions 
are somewhat different. 

102. Kuri. The actions differ. 

103. Kuruma (40). The same as Bebe. 

104. Kuturu (41). The same as Dungu, Gurugu, 
Sari kin Kofa, and Uban Dowaki. 

105. Kuwara. Not reported from N.N. 

106. Kwolen Kwolma. Ditto. 

107. Kworo na Daji (17). Not known in N.A. 

108. Kworrom. Not reported from N.N. 

109. Kyambu (42). Not known in N.A. Said in N.N. 
to be the same as Sarikin Bakka. 

no. Lambu (43). Ditto. Ditto, 
in. Maba. Not reported from N.N. 

112. Ma-Dambache (44). The same. 

113. Magajin Yaura. Not reported from N.N. 

114. Magiro. No report of dance in N.N. 

115. Ma-Halbiya. Not reported from N.N. 

116. Mai-Aska. The same as Wanzami, q.v. 

117. Mai-Bakkin Rai (57). Not known in N.A. 

118. Mai-Bulala. Ditto. The same as Mai-Kurafu. 

119. Mai-Chibi. Ditto. The same as Mai-Zumbulku. 

120. Mai-Garin-Daura. The same as Sarikin Raft. In 
N.N. the doki sits down with his head covered, holding a 
piece of his gown in his right hand. Leans to right and to 
left. Then circles head with hand and pulls an imaginary 
beard to show that he is a chief. 

121. Mai-Fitilla. Not reported from N.N. 

122. Mai-Gangaddi. Ditto. The same as Sarikin 
Barchi. 

123. Mai-Gida-Biyu. The same as Doguwa. 

124. Mai-Gidan Goro. The same as Yerima. 

125. Mai-Gizzo. Not reported from N.N. 

.ts, THE BAN OF THE B0R1 

uo. Mai GWORJl (32). Probably the unc .1 fu/n. 
Name not known in N.A. 

1. .7. Mai I \.\a. Tin- same Do <wa. 

128, Mai |\ CiiiKKi (15). The same as Dakaki. 

i.:.i. Mai-Jan-Ruwa (58). Not known in N.A. Possibly 

r .c : ame a - /'<//'/i/. 

130. Mai-Kaki-.wax IIaiiiwa. The ame as Kuli/ii. 

1 ;i. Mai Kasosowa. No1 reported from X.N. 

Mal-Kokaiya. Ditto. Possibly the same as Son 
Bawa (11). 

133. MaI-KuKADA. Ditto. 

134. Mai-Kurufu. Ditto. The same as Mai-BuUdu. 

135. Mai-Lema. Tlie same as Ba-Gudu. In N.N. the 
a« dons of Alfanda are similar. 

136. Mai-Nassara. Not reported from N.N. 

137. Mai-Sassari. Ditto. 

138. Mai-Tumbutu. The same as Sarikin Raft. 

139. Mai-Wuka Biyu. A name for several spirits — e.g. 
Manzo. 

140. Mai-Wuka-Daya. The same as Yerima. 

141. Mai-Zumbulku. The same as Mai-Chibi. 

142. Makafo. The same as Sarikin Makafi. 

143. Makeri. The same as Sarikin Makera. 

144. Mako. Not reported from N.N. 

145. Mallam Alhaji (3). The same as Mallam Tsofo. 

146. Mallam Alkali. Not reported from N.N. 

147. Mallam All Ditto. 

148. Mallam Ali Geshe. Ditto. The same as 
Gadanga, Sarikin Diya, Sarikin Fushi, Sidi Alt, and 
Zakuwa. In N.N. the dancer covers himself entirely 
with his gown, then placing both hands upon his waist, 
and becoming rigid. 

149. Mallam Dan Kalgo. Not reported from X.X. 

APPENDIX III— COMPARISON OF THE BORI 485 

150. Mallam Dan Sangammi. Ditto. 

151. Mallam Duwatsu. Ditto. 

152. Mallam Mushe. Ditto. 

153. Mallam Tsofo. The same as Mallam Alhaji. 

154. Manzo Bab a. Not reported from N.N. 

155. Manzo Kakami. Ditto. The same as Dan Manzo. 

156. Marmarra. Ditto. 

157. Masaki (46). The same. 

158. Matan Sarikin Gwari. The same as Ba-Gwariya. 
Not reported from N.N. 

159. Mayanan Gobir (29). The same as Yerirna. 

160. Ma ye (48). A name for several of the bori — e.g. 
Mallam Duwatsu. 

161. Meramu (51). The same as Nana Mariyamu. 

162. Mijin Mazza. The same as Mai-Nassara. 

163. Murukushe- The same as Yerirna. 

164. Musai. The same as Buzu. Not reported from N.N. 

165. Musan Gaya. Ditto. 

166. Nakada (53). The same as Jato. 

167. Nana Ayesha Baba. Not reported from N.N. 

168. Nana Ayesha Karama (8). Actions slightly 
different. 

169. Nana Arzikki. Not reported from N.N. 

170. Nana Chediya. Ditto. 

171. Nana Durimi. Ditto. 

172. Nana Hassana. Ditto. 

173. Nana Magajiya. The same as Uwal Yara. 

174. Nana Mariyamu. The same as Meramu (51). 

175. Nana Medina. Not reported from N.N. 

176. Nana So-Jikki. Ditto. 

177. Nana Tsamiya. Ditto. 

178. Nana Tsiwa. Ditto . 

179. Na Ruwa Ruwa (59). Not known in N.A. 

486 III I BAN OF THE BORJ 

According to some in N.N., it is a piril which lives under 
the water and is unwilling bo i ome i<> the Burfai e, sini e if 
it looks upon u human being il will make the person si k. 
ibly connected with Bu-Gwariya. 

180. Rako. N<>t reported (rom X.N. 

181. Rinna. Ditto. 

182. Risana. Ditto. 

183. Ruba. Ditto. 

184. Ruge. Ditto. 

185. Sa'idi. Ditto. 

186. Sainya. Ditto. 

187. Salima. The same as Sari kin Raft. 

188. Sambo (60). In N.A. the same as San kin Filani. 
In some parts of N.N. the same as Sarikin Bakka. 

189. Samayi. Not reported from N.N. 

190. Sarikin Bahari. The same as Sarikin Raft. 

191. Sarikin Bakka (9). In Tunis said to be the 
same as Gajere Mai-Dowa and Alt. In some parts of N.N. 
said to be the same as Kyembo, Lambu, and Sambo. In 
N.N. his tsere is an iron bow about eight inches long stning 
with wire, to which is fitted an iron arrow some six inches 
in length, an iron hook keeping it fast to the bowstring. 
He has also a miniature axe eighteen inches in length like 
the N.A. koraiya. 

192. Sarikin Barchi. The same as Mai-Gangaddi. 

193. Sarikin Barde (10). The same as Baraje. 

194. Sarikin Diya. The same as Mallam Alt Geshe. 

195. Sarikin Faddamma. The same as Sarikin Raft. 

196. Sarikin Filani. In N.A. the same as Sambo. 
In some parts of N.N. not so. In any case, actions 
somewhat different. 

197. Sarikin Fushi (23). In N.A. the same as Mallam 
Ali Geshe. 

APPENDIX III—COMPARISON OF THE BORI 487 

198. Sarikin Garke. Possibly the same as Baraje. 

199. Sarikin Gwari. The same as Gwari (31), but 
actions somewhat different. 

200. Sarikin Kabbi. The same as Ibrahima (35), but 
tsere different. 

201. Sarikin Kofa. The same as Kuturu (41). 

202. Sarikin Kogi. The same as Sarikin Rafi. 

203. Sarikin Makadda. The same as Dafo. 

204. Sarikin Makafi. The same as Makafo. 

205. Sarikin Makera. The same as Makeri. 

206. Sarikin Masu. The same as Sarikin Rafi when 
he acts as a fisher. 

207. Sarikin Noma. The same as Ami. 

208. Sarikin Paggam (55). Not known in N.A. Possibly 
the same as Sarikin Faddamma. In some parts of N.N. 
said to be the same as Yerima. 

209. Sarikin Pawa. Not reported from N.N. The 
same as Sarikin Yanka. 

210. Sarikin Rafi (56). The same as Ba-Daure, 
Dan Gozo, Mai-Garin Daura, Mai-Tnmbiitu, Salima, 
Sarikin Bahari, Sarikin Faddamma (? and Paggam) 
Sarikin Kogi, and Zugu. 

211. Sarikin Yanka. The same as Sarikin Pawa. 

212. Shaiyu. Not reported from N.N. 

213. Shakali. The same as Yerima. 

214. Sidi All Ditto. The same as Mallam AH 
Geshe. 

215. Son Bawa (ii). Possibly the same as Mai-Koraiya. 

216. Taiki. Not reported from N.N. Possibly the 
same as Mai-J an-Ruwa (58) 

217. Tsaggi. Not reported from N.N. 

218. Tsuguna (62). The same as Kare. 

219. Uban Dowaki. The same as Kuturu (41). 

.}NN THE BAN OF THE BORl 

220. Uwal GWONA. The same as Uwar Dawa. 

221. UWAL Yaka. The same as Nana Magajiya. 

222. Uwar Dawa. The same as Uwal Gwona. See 
H.S.C., pp. 78, in. 

223. Uwar Dow a. The same as Doguwa. 

N.B. — The hull y and / an- inter hangeable. 

224. WANZAMI (63). The same as Mai-Aska. N<»f .1 
judge in N.A. 

225. Wula. Possibly the same as Bultu. Not reported 
from N.N. 

226. Wuruwa. Ditto. 

227. Ya Biyu. Ditto. 

228. Yakoba. Ditto. 

229. Yal Bawa. Ditto. 

230. Yal Kunama. Ditto. 

231. Yandu. The same as Kurt. 

232. Yar Maso. Not reported from N.N. 

233. Yaura. Ditto. 

234. Yerima. In N.A. the same as Abba, Alfanda, 
Buwayc, Dan Galadima, Daudu, Gimba, Gugaya, Katalla, 
Mai-Gidan Goro, Mai-Wuka-Daya, MurukusJic, and 
Shakali. In N.N. the same as Dan Galadima, Dan Sariki, 
Daudu, and Mayanan Gobir. 

235. Yerro. The same as Kurt. 

236. Yem-Yem. The same as Yakoba. 

237. Zaki (64). Actions somewhat different. 

238. Zakuwa. The same as Mallam AH Geshc. 

239. Zanzammo. Not reported from N.N. 

240. Zeggin Dan Galadima (25). Not known in N.A. 

241. Zugu. The same as Sarikin Rafi. 

INDEX 

Abba (a bori), 303, 478 

Abnormalities, 59 

Abiibakar (a bori), 368, 478 

Adam, 28, 429, 430, 448 

Adani (a bori), 381, 478 

Adduwa (a tree), 474 

Adoption, 95, 107, 440, 441 

Adultery, 122 

Afunu (Hausa), 418 

Ajuji (a name), 104 

Albaraka (virtue), 38, 41, 45, 50, 

53, 154, 163 
Albino, 388, 433 
Alfanda (a bori), 303, 478 
Alt (a bori), 479 
Alt Geshe (a bori), 306, 307 
Aljan (a jinn), 27, 243, 256, 405, 

406-408 
Allah, position of, 21, 28, 244, 323 ; 

name of, 244, 261 ; worship of, 

96, 176, 185, 186, 244, 252, 323, 

47i. 
Almajiri (a bori), 380, 479 
Altar, 284-286, 465 
Anakwanchc (a bori), 479 
Ancestors, 95, 238, 397, 398, 409, 

410 
Andi (a bori), 479 
Angazari (a bori), 363, 364, 479 
Angels, 136, 297, 345, 392, 393. 396 
Angulu (a name), 104 
Angulu (a bori), 104, 389, 390, 420, 

479 
Ant-hill, 49, 177, 445 
Antimony, 58, 237 
Aradu (a bori), 479 
Ari (a bori), 346, 347, 479 
Arifa (chief priestess), 30, 73, 150, 

151, 153, 228, 229, 250, 251, 273- 

278, 286-287, 290, 295 
Arifa Karama (Little Priestess) , 190 
Ami (a bori), 337, 479 
Arzikki Boboniya (a bori), 388, 389, 

479 
Astarte, 41 1-4 13 
Aula (a bori), 105, 359, 360, 479 
Authorities, 15-17, 21, 22 
Avoidance, 124 

489 

Ayashi (a name), 104 

Ayu (a bori, mannatee), 27, 387, 479 

Azumi (Fast), 109, 273-275 

Ba-Absini (a bori), 361-362 
Baal, 402-403, 415, 418, 479 
Baal Hammon, 157, 265-268, 415- 

418. 437 
Baba (a bori), 350, 479 
Babam Mazza (a bori), 339, 340, 479 
Baban Dammo (Iguana), 45 
Baban Salla (Great Prayer), 235-242 
Babbaku (black spirits), 328-353 
Bacillus, 148, 376 
Ba-Dako (a bori), 323, 479 
Ba-Daure (a bori), 310, 479 
Baddo (a bori), 386, 479 
Badufu (charm, beetle), 170, 205 
Bagaruwa (a shrub), 474 
Ba-Gobiri (a bori), 318, 319, 479 
Ba-Gudu (a bori), 366, 367, 480 
Ba-Gwariya (a bori), 388, 480 
Ba-Jin-Chiwu (a bori), 370, 371, 480 
Ba-Kabba (a bori), 386, 480 
Ba-Kabbi (a bori), 385, 480 
Bakka Mashi (a bori), 480 
Ba-Larabe (a bori), 480 
Ba-Maguje (a bori), 20, 337, 338, 480 ; 

(a pagan Hausa), 24, 211 , 241, 

428 
Ban, 24, 428, 429 
Baraje (a bori), 357, 358, 480 
Baraka (virtue). See Albaraka 
Barber, 60-62 
Ba-Toyc (a bori), 227, 250, 350, 351, 

480 
Bauje (a tree), 474 
Bazere (a plant), 95 
Beauty, 373, 467, 468 
Bebe (a bori), 364, 365, 480 
Bees', 91, 92 

Behaviour of children, 108. 124, 125 
Best man, 11 3- 119 
Bible in magic, 172 
Bidda (a bori), 339, 480 
Binni (a devil), 400 
Birds, 134, 135, 222, nj,. 245, 346, 

444. 445 * 

490 

INDEX 

Biri [a 1 >. .1 1 . ;-■) !-• ' 

Birmn Kudus (i ity of the South), 28 

I '.11 thm. u k .. 07 

Blacksmith, iao, 1-11,157,220,448 

Ble hi:;. 1 jq 

1 :1m. 1.1 and 1 mi 1 196, 199, 

. and ni.t 

I*.:. iSs. 339, 434; and 
RhoetS, 1 ;.-. m |, -•! ;. 157 

y>"Au (Medicine-Man), 73, 95, 132, 
135, [99, 157, -"'i 

/;<>/» (spu its), i"i , 402 

Bonet in magii ,184, 5ee S nil 

Bora (de pised wife), .•> , 

Bon, appearam e of, 243-247 ; 
associated. 250-251, 400; 
attrai bed and driven oit, 1 is, 204, 
2 y>. j )S, 2'><. 288, 423-42'. ; 
attack victims, 86, 87, of>, <c;, 141, 
148, 177-180, 272 ; classification, 
15, 20, 243-426; dancing, 227, 
228, 233, 247, 257, 268, 280-426, 
473; familiar, 19, 96, 136, 137- 
140, 395-398, 469 ; general, 20, 
25. 79. 86, 87, 123, 243-426, 461, 
470-472 ; imprisoned, 152, 153, 
198, 463, 464 ; incubus and suc- 
cuba, 19, 59, 66, 109, 118, 119, 

123. in-*$9' 302. 3J4. 325. 393- 
395. 4>2 ; in Sierra Leone, 400 ; 
in tests, 39, 150, 172, 208, 212; 
offerings to. 105, 262, 269-274, 
277, 280-281, 287; possession 
by. 45. 53- I48. 248, 288, 289, 420- 
426 ; sacrifices, 71, 72, 285 ; saint, 
421, 472 ; sect. Sec Masii-Bori; 
selling victims to, 141, 142; wor- 
ship of, 21, 23, 45, 72, 227-228, 
244. 252-253, 256-258 

Boundaries, 72, 214-215 

Branding, 92, 93 

Bread, 75, 76 

Bridesmaids, 114, 115, 117, 118 

Bude Dowa (opening forest), 207, 208 

Buffalo totem, 46, 47 

Bull worshipped, 413-418 

Bultu (a bori), 383, 480 

Bu Sadiy a (a bogey), 241, 271 

Butcher, 152 

Bitwaye (a bori), 303, 480 

Buzu (a bori), 364, 480 

Camel, 90 

Candidate for priesthood, 39-41 ; 

success, 208-212 
Candles, 105, 224, 228, 274-277, 290 
Cannibalism, 80-83, 200, 439 

t ap. 40 

1 .1 (ration 

1 a1 -r ■ I JO, - 17 

i attli 

( .ml, IOO 

< hakhara (a plani . Tt 

I h.illl'li on 

< ban >>.d, Bo, 1 1 <> 

I banns, agrii oltural, 84, 1 8 , 

1 liildlm th, ■/ ,. 96 [09, 2 } i. .).) 1 ; 

( bristian, 1 54, 156; from Bun, 217; 

general, 42, 53. °3. 254, 440 

in hunting, 201-207; love, 63, 

159-168; 1 eact, 171 , 174,-1 75, 
1 79, 183, 1 54 . for 'If 

preservation, 167-184, 240; 

against sickness, 50, 254 ; in war, 

200, 201 
Chediya (a tree), 474 
Child, immunity from harm, 57, 59 ; 

magic powers, 201 
1 bildbirth, 50, .421, 

422, 441, 442 
Chiwake (a name), 106 
Circumcision, 60-62, 267, 401. 

437 
Cleanliness, 54, 55, 74, 235, 236 

Clothes in magic, 67, 153, 458 
Clothing, 64-69, 94, 129, 153, \<>j, 

ijj, 189, 233, 234, 260, 402, 404 
Coffee, 76, 77, 85 
Colours, 253-255, 300, 303 
Continency, no, 129, 151, 1.S7, 196, 

231, 267, 275-277, 306, 404 
Cooking, 73-76, 438 
Corpse in magic, 165, 166, 167 
Coughing, 240 
Courtship, 161-164 
Crocodile, 63, 101, 416, 417, 434 
Cross-roads, 208 
Curse, 28, 173-179, 430 

Dabca (plant), 56, 57 
Dabgi (ant-eater) , 1 70 
Dafara (a plant), 89, 474 
Dafo (a bori), 315, 316, 480 
Dakaki (a bori), 328-329, 480 
Dakin Tsafi (Hut of Magic). See 

Medicine Hut 
Dambe (boxing), 210, 211, 240 
Dances, 17, 268, 280-425 
Dan Galadima (a bori), 303, 480 
Dangira (a bori), 379, 380, 480 
Dan Gozo (a bori), 310, 480 
Dan Hasumi (a bori), 365, 480 
Dan Jigo (a bori), 345, 480 
Dan Manzo (a bori), 362, 363, 481 

INDEX 

l«)i 

\dayiro (a ban), 480 
J >nii Musa (a bori), 40.S, 48] 
Dan Mutuni Mid tone (a plant), i(>i, 

474 

Dan Nana (a bori), 481 

Dan Sariki (a bori), 481 

Dan Wawa (a bori), 350, 435, 481 

Dan Wawa (a priest), 49 

Dan U'abi (child of mother who 
loses children), 104, 175 

Daudu (a bori), 303, 481 

Dauka (woman's headdress), 55, 150 

Dausa (a bori), 379, 481 

Death, 27, 100, 120-143 ; cere- 
monies, 87, 127-130, 433, 458 ; 
dance, 38, 333 ; fear of, 48, 49, 
297, 430 ; fees, 31 

Demon dancing, 392-426 

Devil, selling of, 142, 446 

Disease-demons, 247-426 

Distribution of flesh, 41, 200, 239, 

433. 454 
Divination (bori in head of Mai- 

Bori), 253, 257, 258-261, 357, 422, 

423 ; by entrails, etc., 36, 37, 

239, 240 
Dodo (a bogey), 385, 406, 407, 411, 

420 
Dogon Daji (a bori), 481 
Dogon Gida (a bori), 481 
Dogs, general, 90, 171, 203, 222, 

237, 266, 382 ; in magic, 90, 170, 

177, 180, 267, 439 ; men, 81-83 
Dogitwa (a bori), 38, 253, 270, 271, 

273.332-335.424.48i 
Doki (" horse "). See Masu-Bori, 

275, 417, etc. 
Dolls, 269, 271 
Donkeys, 90, 222 
Dorowa (a tree), 474 
Dreams, 131, 135-137, 144. *45 
Dubabi (a bori), 386, 481 
Dundu (a shrub), 102, 474 
Dundurusa (a bori), 352 
Dungu (a bori), 298, 299, 481 
Durimi (a tree), 109, 474 
Durubuka (drum), 283, 284 

Ear, 58, 59 

Earth, eaten, 80, 97 ; general, 128, 

165, 181, 182, 213 
Eating, 62. See Tabu 
Eclipse, 186, 217, 218 
Education, 107, 108 
Eel, 172 

Eggs, 79, 151, 328 
Elephant, 206, 382 

I'.liMi (il I. lie. [80 

Embolism, 140 

Fnnuwa (shadow), 131 

Essiyako (a bori), 38'., 

Ettabibi (Ar. /•.'/ Tabib, doctor), 150 

Evil eye, 57, 06, 78, 173-179, 328 ; 

influence, 20, 178, 462, 463 ; 

mouth, 173-177 ; working, 57, 

59, 61, 100, 118, 273, 274 
Eyebrows, 56, 57, 105, 114, 115, 

223 
Eyes, 58, 81-83, 98, 223, 275 
Excision, 60, 107, 401 

Fagge (fag), 190, 278 

Faith in charms, etc., 147, 449, 

450 
False Bride, 118, 119, 443 
Familiar bori. See Bori 
Fankasu (cake), 117 
Far in Da-Larabe (a bori), 481 
Farms, 72, 193, 194, 253, 264 
Faru (a tree), 34, 35, 474 
Fasting, 237. See Azumi 
Fatahiwa (ghost), 142, 143, 446 
Fattatakko (a bori), 301 
Feast, funeral, 130; marriage, 114- 

117; religious, 56, 186, 226-229, 

239, 242, 267, 268 
Fecundity and fertility rites, 110- 

112, 120, 189-192, 232, 455 
Female influence, 61, 73, 150, 205, 

220-222 
Fig, 470 
Fire, 51, 73, 74, 86, 87, 165, 190, 258, 

313. 3H 
Fish, 75, no, 116, 119, 173, 174, 

432, 443. 452. 464 
Fishing, 204, 206, 207 
Fittan Fura (fecundity rite), 110- 

112, 150, 195, 196, 268, 403, 442 
Flags, 189, 227, 272 
Flowers, 64, 130, 144 
Food, charms in, 161-166, 171, 176, 

177 ; in religious rites, 286, 290, 

291, 294, 295, 465 ; magical, 80 ; 

respect due to, 85, 295, 440, 466 ; 

ordinary, 73-80, 92, 93 ; tabus, 

79. 85 
Footprints, 181 
Footwear, 60, 64 
Foretelling future, 49 
Fowl connected with bori. 98, 99, 

212; general, 91 ; sacrificed, 71, 

105> 253. See also Sacrifice 
Freemasonry, 279, 464, 465 
Furniture, 71 * 

I''- 

WDEX 

Gadanga (a bori), p6 

(liitt'in Gtda (uiluTi t.nu e ')| bon ' 
263 

EM (a bori), 211, 240. 

Ml. ! Il 

Gajjimare (a bori), 5 1". 1 1 ' . 481 

!!»ll\d (.1 |>11'- [ 
( ..til lll.ldllcl . 140 

Game Laws, 206 

< tames, 208 212, 141, 142 

Cumjc (;i I roc), 1 85, 475 
('•iiiaic (a bori), 48] 

make 1 banners), 5 <, 
Gorki Baba (a bori | , 1 

i-tiiujf, (a bori), 360-301, 4.81 
Gauraka (a bori). 390, 481 

GuiiMiDii. See /' 0 (a pole) 

< .iiiii.il organs, 60 62 
Gestation, 98, 441 

Ghost, 129, [31, Sou Fataluwa 

Ghul (ghoul), -'41, 242, 400, 461 

Gidan Jama' a (House of the Com- 
munity). See Temple 

Gidan Kurt (House of Kuri). See 
Temple 

Gidan Tsafi (House of Magic). See 
Medicine lint 

Gidan Vara (House of Young Spirits), 
272 

Giniba (a bori), 303, 481 

Gimbirt (guitar), 283 

Gindcma (a bori), 227, 250, 346, 347, 
481 

Girdle a protection, 173, 211, 45* > 

Giwa (a bori), 384, 481 

Giya (beer), 84, 185 

Godiya (" mare "). See Masu-Bori, 
275, 417, etc. 

Grave, 127, 128, 451 

Guda (cry), 191, 412 

Gugaya (a bori), 303, 481 

Gunda (a bird), 92 

Gurugu (a bori), 298, 299, 481 

Gwari (a bori), 481 

Gwaza (a plant), 79, 475 

Gwegwe (a bori), 250, 346, 347, 481 

Hair, 55-57, 59, 104, 129, 162, 196, 

219, 236, 289, 432 
Hamira (yeast), 76 
Hand, 58, 69, 115, 126, 165 ; assign, 

09. 7*i 93. 174. 175. 452 
Hankaka (a bori), 390, 482 
Hankufa (a weed), 475 
Harvest, 190, 192, 194-196 
Ilaukachi (a bori), 301, 372, 373, 482 
Hausas, origin of, 411, 413-418 

1 [eaddress, 66, 4 1 1, 448 

I lc.it ! . |6, J, X7O, 24O 

I Icnn.i. •;•,. }8 1 1 |. 115, 117, I 18. 
[75,236,237,238 

1 lute of animal, u. is. \o, 49 

I lolv "1 H 

1 [oney, 76 

1 [orns, 1 75, ^' 6, 197, 428, 450 

1 lei .■ in bori, - 1". 410, 411, 471 ; 

general, -'■'■; racing, 

241 
1 lor . hoe, in. 175 
Hospitality, 150 

I louses, 70-73, [8l, 253 

Hunters, 201-207 

Hyena, [24, 129, 171, 203, 204, 382, 
407. 435 

IBLIS (devil), 24. nz. 243, 405 
Ibrahima (a bori), 385, 482 
Iguana, 45, 47 
Impotence, 118, 164, 107 
Incantation, 148, 248-252. j6l, 463 
Incense, 36, 46, 47, 72, 86, o< 

102, 105, 152, 189, 222, 228, 235, 

238, 288, 458. 459 
Incubus, 19, 59. See Bori 
Infanticide, 103, 106, 442 
Inna (a bori), 482 
Inoculation, 20, 425 
Intestines, 166 
Intoxicants, 84 
Invisibility, 169, 170, 196, 201, 205, 

206 
Iron, 51,62, 142, 176, 218, 261, 289, 

448 
I ska (wind), See Bori, 96, 243, 405, 

460 
Ismaila (a bori, Alraajiri), 250, 380, 

482 ; (a bori, Magajin Yaura), 

368, 369, 482 

Ja-Ba-Fari (a bori), 347, 482 
Ja-Gaude (a bori), 314, 315, 482 
Ja-Ja-Maiya (a bori), 359, 482 
Jama' a (community), 269 
Jam Maraki (a bori), 261, 336, 337, 

482 
Ja>i Gari or Garu (the bori city), 

255, 256, 262, 298 
Jan Kassa (the bori country), 247, 

255. 256 
Jaruma (a bori), 354-356, 482 
Jato (a bori), 22, 104, 141, 227, 241, 

249, 257, 268, 273, 285, 294, 347- 

349. 482 

INDEX 

!').> 

407. 

254 

196, 

Jato (the Money Tree), 199, 

454. 475 
Jews, 98, 99, 119, 120, 175, 220, 
Jibda Kassa (a creeper), 475 
JigO (a bori), 249, 344. 345. 482 

pole, or gausatni), 34, 111, 

205, 403, 433, 454 
Jihu (a bori), 344, 482 
Tint (pulse, blood), 139 
Jiujiriya (a tree), 55, 475 

Kabba (a tree), 169, 475 
Kadda (a bori), 386, 482 
Kaguwa (a bori), 391, 482 
Kaikai (a bori), 379, 482 
Kainya (a tree), 475 
Kalankuwa (a priestess), 278 
Kalgo (a tree), 109, 169, 475 
Kandi (a bori), 482 ; (a woman), 

80-83 
Kan-Gida (totem), 35, 44 
Kare (a bori), 384, 385, 482 
Karkur (heap of stones), 213-215 
Kashas (perforated pot), 74 
Kaskon tsoro (a pot), 99 
Katalla (a bori), 482 
Kauchin kalgo (a parasitic plant), 

169, 475 
Kaura (a bori), 369, 370, 482 
Kawo (a tree), 169, 475 
Keke Koma Mashekiya (a plant), 171 
Key, 144, 174 
Kinchiya (a plant), 79 
King-killing, 36, 42, 52, 53, 112, 

187, 433 
Kirari (nickname, etc.). 103, 248 
Kiriya (a tree), 33-34, 48, 193- 476 
Kirni (a tree) , 48, 476 
Knees, dancing on, 293, 294 
Knot, 162, 179 
Kola nuts, 76, 77, 113 
Kora (ball game), 190, 191 
Koraiya (cutting instrument), 208, 

209, 455 
Koran, 130, 146, 153, 172, 200, 229 
Kuba (dome over grave), 128 
Kugara (a bori), 339, 340, 482 
Knkiiiva (wrestling), 211, 212, 240 
Kiilita (a bori), 359, 360, 482 
Kumo (a bori), 341 
Kunu (gruel), 102 
Kura (a bori), 420, 483 
Kuri (a bori), 20, 71, 96, 105, no, 

247, 253, 260, 261, 271, 274, 287, 

330-332, 335, 365, 483 
Kuriya (stain for teeth), 55 
Karuma (a bori), 364, 365, 483 

Kuniwa (soul). Set- Soul, 1 j 1 136 
Kuturu (a l><>ri), 253, 262, 298, 

483 

Kuwara (a bori), 371, ^H^ 
Kwakiya (a snake), 45, 48, 50 
Kwollen Kwolma (a bori), 350, 483 
Kworo Na Daji (a bori), 4N3 
Kworrom (a bori), 342, 483 
Kyambu (a bori), 483 
Kyanit (pot holding charcoal), 73 

Labour, 99 

Lactation, 102, 103, 442 

Laiya (pi. laiyu) (charm), 45, 99, 159- 

212 
Laiyan zana (charm for invisibility), 

201 
Lambu (a bori), 483 
Laughter, 79, 89 
Legitimacy, 10 1, 122 
Lela (a dance), 242 
Leopard, 35, 41, 42, 80, 202, 204, 205, 

209 ; Society, 47, 434, 435 
Likafani (shroud), 127 
Lilith (an evil spirit). See Uwal 

Yara, 394, 469 
Lion, 35-37, 48, 80, 202, 204, 382 
"Little Spots" (young bori), 269- 

275.375-38i,42i,422 
Lizard, 44, 63, 304 
Lucky days, 218-220 
Lumfashi (breath), 139 

Maba (a bori), 373, 374, 483 
Ma-Dambache (a bori), 323, 324, 483 
Madambache (a cooking pot), 74 
Madowachi (a tree), 162, 476 
Magajin Yaura (a bori), 368, 369, 

483 
Magajiya (a bori). See Uwal Yara 
Magajiya (a priestess), 278, 476 
Magani (medicine charm), 248 
Magariya (a tree), 109 
Magazawa. See Ba-Maguje. 
Magic, 146-212 
Magician, 146-149, 446, 447 
Magimpa (a plant), 476 
Magira (King's mother), 264 
Magiro (a bori), 53, 112, 262-268, 

289, 290, 296, 298, 333, 410, 483 ; 

(a plant), 75 
Ma-Halbiya (a bori), 346, 483 
Mai-Aska (a bori), 261, 312, 316, 

317, 365, 483 
Mai-Bakkin Rai (a bori), 483 
Mai-Bille (an arifa), 151-153 
Mai-Bori. See Masu-Bori . 

m 

INDl V 

Mai Kulalu (;■ l>ori), 321, 322, 483 

Mot ( 'hibt (a bori 

Mot Fitilia (a ben i), |i | | u 

Mot ' .<i >.•;■. 1-/.// (.1 ban), < 18, < | 1 

ra i.t ban), ;i". 483 

M.u I I ( i, 483 

Mai ■ 103, 483 

.i/di Gimbiri (player on guitai I, 

Mai 1B3 

.\/<n Gtvotje. (a In 

Mai I 1 1 , 1 . 128, 258, 261, 

Is 1 
.\Lu lit i. hikki (a bori), 174, 17K, 

}, j. 17. 187, 328, 129, 40a. 484 
Mai /in. Ruwa (a ban), 484 
Mai Kortwan Iluifuwa (a bori), 105, 

484 
Mtti-Kasosowa (a bori), 388, 484 
Mai-Koraiya (a bori), 310-321, 484 
Mai-Kwada (a bori) ». 484 

Mot Kurafu (a bori), 321, 322, 484 
Mat l.r»ia (a bori), 366, 367, 484 
Mai-Nassara (a bori), 269, 381, 484 
Mai RiMva (water man), 278 
Mai Sassari (a bori), 353, 484 
M,u rumbu/u (a bori), 310, 484 
Mai-W'iika-Diyu (a bori), 484 
Mat-FPwAa-Z)aya (a bori), 303, 484 
Mai-Zumbulku (a bori), 364, 484 
Maiya. See Witch 
Maiye. See Wizard 
Ma;'« (a tree), 193, 476 
Makafo (a bori), 322, 484 
Maker i (a bori), 352, 484 
Mako (a bori), 484 
Malafa (straw hat), 153 
Malaika (pi. Malaiku) (angel), 131, 

132, 143, 144 
Mallam (priest magician), 95, 108, 

123, 132, 135, 143, 146-158, 167, 

169, 171, 181, 199, 257 
Mallam Alhaji (a bori), 151, 296- 

298, 310, 484 
Mallam Ali (a bori), 300, 484 ; Ali 

Geshe (a bori), 253, 306, 307, 484 ; 

Alkali (a bori), 300, 301, 484 ; 

Dan Kalgo (a bori), 308, 309, 484 ; 

Dan Sangammi (a bori), 305, 306, 

485 ; Duwatsu (a bori), 307, 308, 

485 ; Mushe (a bori), 381, 485 ; 

Tsofo (a bori), 274, 296-298, 485 
Mantowa (a plant), 162, 163, 476 
Manzo Baba (a bori), 358, 359, 485 ; 

Karami (a bori), 362, 363, 485 
Marabout (mallam), 96, 105, 140, 

I51- 299 ; (tomb), 105, 151 

Mdptntmu (a bori), ', 1 1 . ,w2. 485 
Marriage, 19. 13 " 

193 1 464 

VfoiaAi a bori) | ,-• ■ , . 
m.i iqneri 142 

1 \/6 
Main -Hi.. 1 . ol 1 '."i i 

sinK Mai Bori), 2 i, 119, 

■ ' I . - ' ■ • 257- 

-'•' 4x7 

Matan Sarikin • <88 

M.tb !.■ 

1 (a bori) jss 
Metis, 77, 78 

Meat, 74-77, 164, 189, 190, 383, 453 
Medicine 1 tut, 36- y>. 47, 150 
Medi inea, 147-150, 159 

bruation, i 
M>>ti»nt (a bori) 
Midwife, 58, 100 
Mtjiu Mazza (a bori), 381, 4X5 
Milk, 77, 88, 89, 151. [96 
Mohammedan S] U7 

Moon, 217 
Mountains. 213 
Mourning, 129, 130 
Mouse, 147, 165, 166, 451 
Mugun baki (evil mouth), 126, 173- 

179; ido (evil eye), 126, 173-179 
Murufn (cooking place), 73 
Murukushe (a bori), 303, 485 
Musan Gay a (a bori), 368, 485 
Musai (a bori), 364, 485 
Music, 248-252, 281-285 
Mutilations, etc., 58-63, 267, 291- 

293. 3o6< 466 

Nails, finger, 57-59, 162,219; hron, 
etc., 71, 143, 162, 214 

Nakada (a bori), 257, 347, 485 

Names, 61, 103, 104, 106, 164, 167, 
261, 262 

Namesakes, 159, 249, 250 

Namijin Gabbaruwan Kassa (a 
plant), 476 

Nana A yes ha Baba (a bori), 326, 
485 ; Karama (a bori), 377, 485 ; 
Arzikki (a bori), 310, 389, 485; 
Chediya (a bori), 327, 485 ; Durimi 
(a bori), 327, 485 ; Hassana (a 
bori), 377, 378, 485 ; Magajiya 
(a bori), 301, 485 ; Mariyamu 
(a bori), 250, 376, 377, 485: 
Medina (a bori), 314, 485; 
So-Jikki (a bori), 378, 485; 
Tsamiya (a bori), 3^7, 485 ; Tsiwa 
(a bori), 378, 485 

INDEX 

495 

Na-Ruwa-Rnwa (a bori), 485 

Nrilh, 4 1 1 , 416, 417 

Noah, 28, 29, 430-432 

Nonon Kutichiya (a plant), 89, iox, 

161, 476 
Nut, 179 

Oaths, 62, 218 

Offerings at grave, 128, 130, 444, 
445 ; in temple, 155, 156, 269- 
273, 277 ; to trees, etc., 155, 197, 
205 

Oils, 74-76, 80, 87, 436 

Omens, 220-223, 457 

One, Number, 160, 449 

Onions, 101 

Orchid, 199 

Ordeals, i33-*34 

Organisation, 30-32 

Origin of Hausas, 25, 29 ; of man- 
kind, 27, 28, 29 

Outline of enemy, 183 

Owl, 170, 222, 246 

Ownership, 92-93 

Painting, 56, 57, 63, 64, 68, 175 

Pairs, 222, 223 

Pepper, 76, 79, 165 

Pictures, 136 

Pins or needles in magic, 165, 167 

Poets, 145, 249 

Poison, 169, 203, 204 

Politeness, 78, 157 

Prayer, 82, 148, 185-189, 235-242, 

297 
Pregnancy, 96-98, 106, 137 
Presents, 31, 97. J43. 44L 444. 459 
Priests, 34-42, 49 

Priestly King, 35-42, 46, 48, 49, 53 
Prohibited degrees, 121 
Prostitutes, 68, 157 
Prostitution, 113, 157, 267, 276, 

404, 412, 464 
Proverbs, 109 

Qarina (companion), 138-139 

Rag Offerings, 155, 215 

Rago Mai-Kwolli (specially marked 

ram), 238, 300 
Rai (life), 19, 139-141. 321. 3", 393 
Rainbow, 218, 340 
Rainmaking, 185-193, 231, 286, 310 
Rako (a bori), 341, 486 
Rakumin Kassa (an ant), 162 
Ramtna (a plant), 172, 477 
Rawan Bori. See Bori, dancing 

Reflection, 182, 183 

Religion of Hausas. 21-24 

Rent, 73 

Restoration oi soul, eb , 134, 135, 

184 
Rijiyan Rai (Well of Life), 28, 132, 

140, 141, 393 
Rimi (a tree), 192, 477 
Rinna (a bori), 249, 346, 486 
Risaua (a bori), 253, 325, 486 
Rivers, 215, 234 
Rogon Daji (a plant), 79, 477 
Ruba (a bori), 326, 486 
Ruge (a bori), 349, 486 
Rumafada (a plant), 205, 477 
Riuihu (a plant), 102, 477 

Sa (bull), 413-418 
Sahara (a tree), 109, 477 
Sacrifice, animal, 33, 34, 40, 71, 72, 
185, 189, 190, 205, 229, 230, 238- 
240, 262, 266, 267, 273, 285, 291, 
296-391 ; general, 230-234, 267, 
438, 465-466 ; human, 263, 265- 
267, 399, 419, 423 
Sadaka (gift), 130, 231 
Sa'idi (a bori), 102, 370, 486 
Saints, invocation of, 22, 427, 428 
Sainya (a bori), 326, 327, 486 
Salanga (drain, etc.), 22, 55, 71, 91 
Salima (a bori), 310, 486 
Salla (prayer), 235-242, 275 
Salt, 76, 164, 175, 177, 452, 453 
Salutations, 93, 94 
Samari (bori), 366-374 
Satnayi (a bori), 341, 486 
Sambo (a bori), 317, 318, 486 
Sammo (poison, etc.), 169 
Sa-Na-Duniya (Bull of the World), 

213 
Sandan bagaruwa (a colour), 303, 

364 

Sandukan Kuri (the treasure chest), 
193, 271, 278, 279 

Sarau niya (chieftainess) . See A rifa 

Sariki (chief), 106 

Sarikin Bahari (a bori), 310, 486 ; 
Bakka (a bori), 205, 343, 344, 486 ; 
(chief huntsman), 204; Barchi 
(a bori), 289, 338, 486 ; Barde 
(a bori), 486 ; Bayi (Chief of 
Slaves), 30 ; Diya (a bori), 306, 
486 ; Dowa (Chief of the Forest), 
204 ; Faddamma (a bori), 310, 
486 ; Filani (a bori), 317, 318, 
486: Fushi (a bori), 306, 486; 
Garke (a bori), 357, 358,^487; 

496 

INDEX 

Sarikin Balkan conliimtd 

I l»i>! ii, 187, .1*7 ; Kabbi 
(aba (■ bar! |, 

li'ill), <!<>. 

487 . Afat) U (< hn-t W i/.nili 
I3S1 1 58 ; MahtiiliLt (a bori), 
Ho, 407 ; Mahaji (a boa L), <-j, 
, 487 ; Miik> i.i !.i I I 

IfiM (.1 bori), 31s, 4**7 ; 
voum (a bori), 137.487! I'aggam 
(a bori), 487 , I'diiia (a bori). 
. liuti (a bori), 20, 227, 
i to |I3, 402, 4 !'■ -in). 487 ; 
.sainun (an attendant), iyo, 278 ; 
\uiiku (a bori), 153, 487 

Si .illlK.itloilS. (>2, 63 

Scent, 55, 64, -'55. 459 
Scorpion, 101, 180 
Six, change of, 415-419 
Shadow {cnnuwa), 131. 133 
Shaivu (a bori), 32O, 487 
Shakali (a bori), 303, 487 
Shamowa (hornbill), 33-35, 44, 48 
Shanonc (snake), 88 
Sharru (whipping contest), 200, 210, 

317, 321, 455, 456 
Shaving, 55, 57, 219, 236 
Sheep, 88, 89 
Sidi Ali (a bori), 306, 487; Masari 

(a marabout), 224 : Sa'ad (a mara- 
bout), 224-230, 234 
Skull in magic, 36, 37, 432 
Snake and evil eye, 174 ; bori, 

49, 150, 151, 246, 408, 458; 

in magic, 172 ; general, 10 1, 139, 

206, 413-418 
Sneezing, 79, 288 
Son Bawa (a bori), 319-321, 487 
Songs, 248-252, 285, 297-391, 423, 

463 
Soul, external, 132 ; of animal, 

43. 53 : dan (Mafari), 43, 52, 53, 

434 ; person, 19, 96, 131-136, 430 
Spelling, 14 
Spittle, 144, 153, 161-163, 182, 185, 

188, 218 
Sports, 108 
Springs, 215 
Squint, 223 
Stars, 215, 216, 457 
Stepping over, 38, 182 
Sterility, 95, 96 

Stones, 131, 143, 213-215, 235, 431 
Stranger, 156 
Suda (a bird), 92 
Suffering, 148, 239 
Sugar, 76, 100, 113, 117, 120, 443 

Sun, 190, in. It6, 217 

■ mi l'li teeth), 55, 59, -• 17 
Sympathetii to 

I aim, clothing ''king, 

73. ; 1 : eating, yi, ; 1, 7V 79 
• <7. 124, 205, 239, j. v. 
460; general, 50, 51, 103, 117, 
276, {46, 429; speaking, 152, 205 
1 (a shrub), 477 
nana (a plant), 477 
/ dikt (a bori), 340, 487 
Tail 

1 ulna la dance), 189-191, 242 
Tamarind, 35, 48, 185, 300, 477 
Tanith, 63, 157, 175, 191, 265-168, 

411-413, 4'5-41'V. 437. 458 
1 aroro (a name), 106 
I am (a shrub), 477 
Tea, 76, 77, 85, 97 
Teeth, 55, 56, 59, 107. 175 
Temples, 20, 22, 72, 73, 190, 229 
Li s in magic, 46, 152, 434 
in magic, 39-41, 208-212, 455 
'I bieves, jo, 134, 170-171 
Thunder, 218 
Tombs, 96, 127-130 
Totem killed, 32-33, 36, 46, 47, 50, 

52. 112; marriage, 44, 123; 

origin of, 44, 52, 53, 382, 406-409; 

tree, 33, 34, 48, 52, 435, 436; 

worship, 32-53, 79, 102, 151, 433, 

434 
Transformation, 123, 124, 129, 206, 

430 
Transmigration, 133, 396 
Traps for game, 203 
Treatment of illness, 93, 146-150, 

160, 161, 180, 302, 447, 448 
Tree, bori in, 44, 193, 196-198; 

totem, 33, 34,48,51, 52,435.43r': 

magic, 199, 407 ; man, 52 ; 

worship, 196, 215, 228, 229, 234- 

235 
Tribal marks, 62, 63 
Trousers, 65, 66, 404 
Tsaggi (a bori), 356, 357, 487 
Tsamiya. See Tamarind 
Tsere (bori habitation), 20, 289 
Tsuguna (a bori), 487 
Tukuniya (pot), 73 
Tumfafiya (a shrub), 477 
Tumuli, 214 
Tundara (a snake), 105 
Turdi (a sect), 153 
Twins, 101, 138 
" Tying " a spouse, 164, 167 

INDEX 

V)7 

Ubau Dowaki (a !><>i L), a<3 

/ ban Farauta (Father o< Hunt), 

Ubau Yaki (general), 200 

I fmbdlicus, 9 '. k"j, 11 i 

I in Es St ' (At.). See Uwal 

Villi! 

Urine in magic. is". [83, 184 

ona (a bori), tio, 1 1 -\ 1 ;. 

204, 333, 1 |5, l88 
Uwal maganguna (a shrub), .',77 
Uival Yara (a bori), 20, 1 78-1. So, 

j I '. 301-303, 424, 461, 
Uwar Dawa (a bori), 195, 33], 
Uwar Dowa (a bori), 212, 333, 488 
Uwar Gida (totem, or Kan Gida), 35 
Uwar Sariki (a priestess), 278 

Vegetables, 75 
Veil, 65, 66, 68, n8, 119 
Vermin, 91, 203 
Violin, 284 

Waka (song), 248 

W'anzami (a bori), 316, 317, 488 

War, 200, 20 1, 216 

Wasa (entente), 31 

Washing, 34, 54, 55, 171,. 176, 177, 

193, 2x9, 235, 236, 437 
Water, 84, 182, 183, 258-260, 312, 

462 
Well of Life. Sec Rijiyan Rai 
Wells, 71, 84, 234, 235, 458 
Wigs, 56 

Wind, 218, 410, 441 
Witch, 17, 90, 126, 158 
Wizard, 126, 131-136, 140, 158, 247, 

407, 445, 449 
" Working Bee," 440 

\\ arid, origin of, - /. _ I, 439, 1 1<>. 

457 

1 1 1 
\\ n rtling, [83, [96 

Writing, 1 .•!. i' • 
Wuiii (,i bori), , - 1, 488 
1 bori), 3 1 1 , 4'S.s 

Ya Biyu (a bori), j7i . 488 
Yahoba (a bori), 387, 388, 488 
Yal Bawa (a bori), 379, 488 
Yid Kunama (a bori), 379, 488 
Yam Makaranta (bori), 375, 380-381 
Yam Mala (bori), 375-380 
i ' Dowa (bori), 382-385 
Yan (Uirke (bori), 354-365 
Yan Kurimi (bori), 387-301 
Yan Riga (bori), 296-327 
Yan Ruwa (bori), 385-387 
Yandu (a bori), 330, 331, 488 
Yar Maso (a bori), 325, 326, 488 
Yar Sarikin Pawa (a bori), 325, 326 
Yaura (a bori), 369, 370, 488 
Yawning, 79 
Yayan Jidderi (The "Little Spots "), 

105, 247, 259, 260, 275, 375-381. 

396 
Yem Yem (a bori), 20, 488 
Yerima (a bori), 253, 277, 301, 303- 

305, 312, 488 
Yerro (a bori), 330, 488 

Zaki (a bori), 382, 383, 488 
Zakuwa (a bori), 306, 488 
Zanzammo (a bori), 367, 488 
Zeggin Dan Galadima (a bori) , 48b 
Ziara (pilgrimage), 224-230 
Zitgu (a bori), 310, 416, 488 

2 1 

THE RIVERSIDE PRESS LIMITED, EDINBURGH 

Extracts from Reviews of 
" Hausa Superstitions and Customs v 

The Times. — "No one who has not undergone the exhausting labour 
of taking clown Stories in the vernacular from illiterate iiaii-.< '.hi 
appreciate the pal lent e and industry which Major Tremeai oe ha • ihown . . . 
the utmost pains have been taken to guard again •' any temptation to edit 
the stories. Folk-tales so collected are a valuable 'control' upon our 
knowledge of the customary law, the moral code, and the religious belief 
of a primitive race. . . . It is not surprising to find in these tales suggestions 
of the Uncle Rcmu«s stories, for Northern Nigeria may well have been their 
birthplace." 

The Athenaum. — "That indefatigable anthropologist . . . being 
faced by a difficult problem of method, has tackled it courageously in the 
only possible way . . . [he] is perfectly justified in making it his prime 
object to sketch the life of Hausaland under certain of its more general 
aspects, noting as he goes how in this respect or that the stories bear out his 
facts and interpretations. . . . The student . . . will be ready to acknow- 
ledge a debt to Major Tremearne for a most sincere and searching piece of 
work." — M. 

The Geographical Journal (R.G.S.). — " The student of folk-lore will 
at once recognise the great value of Major Tremearne's work ... a very 
thorough and trustworthy piece of work. ... It is of peculiar interest to 
find among the Hausa folk-tales parallels to many English and other nursery 
tales and to Biblical stories. . . . The figures in the text, illustrative chiefly 
of Hausa industries, are a valuable feature of the book," — F. R. C. 

The Morning Post. — " Major Tremearne adopts the good practice of 
telling us the methods he employed in collecting and writing the tales, 
and this gives the reader a confidence which is not misplaced. . . . The 
numerous illustrations of scenes, implements, utensils, and tribal marks 
further increase the interest and value of the book." — A. C. H. 

The Pall Mall Gazette. — " Major Tremearne has evidently brought to 
bear upon his subject knowledge of native character, enthusiasm, and a 
logical and scholarly intellect. We can congratulate him upon the result 
of his labours." — H. A. W. 

The Globe. — " The tales are often extraordinarily interesting. . . . His 
book is not only of great interest to all who care for ' fairy tales,' but of 
real scientific value. It is likely to be the classical work on African folk- 
lore." 

The Graphic. — " No 'prentice hand in the sifting of savage and barbaric 
lore, Major Tremearne adds to the services already liberally given 
in that department of anthropology by the volume under review." — 
Edward Clodd. 

499 

•■ M .i j. >i I i manners 

.m.i cnatoau in u •■ | Africa ante ■» fresh debt od gratitude to turn. 
\ \,-i\ ■ . • . • . i piece "i work. . . . Imoag the Q] the Duma 

drawings by M ' larke, Illustrative of ii.m • ! crafts, 

<i, . : (i word oi praise." 

•• Major Ti • ood « lain to 

in- oonaidered the Grimni bo their :v»i>im, . . . invaiuahii- i ■ 
.iini. nt nf t.iik '<n<- . . . \ not ontribution to the literature 

that in bracts European In African anthropolc 

r.— " • liana Superstition and I u toms' will 

add materially to the growing njuitat ion o! a writer who prom 

oneoi our most brilliant tudents of anthro] *6k raor< - 

be Idea being replete with cholarly ofa and written with 

authoritative knowledge, is one which thi readet will i. 

appreciate." 

The Western Mercury. — " Xo more interesting glimpse into the inner 
life oi a people lias been afforded tu than we obtain in tiiis important « 
Ear which all anthropologists and students of folk-lo I jorTrem* 

their heartiest thanks. These ' African Nights Bntertainmei ; 'may 

call them, continually remind us of such dear old friends as the yarns of 
Uncle Remus, the stories of the brothers Grimm, and even such native 
favourites of the British nursery as ' Little Red Riding Hood,' ' Jack the 
Giant Killer,' and ' Hop o' my Thumb,' . . . [which] make delightful 
reading. . . . It is difficult to overestimate the value of such a work." 

The Yorkshire Post. — " A particularly valuable feature of this book 
is that the stories are treated comparatively. . . . But much of Major 
Tremearne's collection is surely unique . . . this delightful book in which 
the general reader will find much amusement and the student much profit." 

The Glasgow Herald. — " Major Tremearne knows the tribes of the 
West Coast of Africa as few men do. . . . The tales reach a high level . . . 
their scientific interest is undoubted. . . . This book will certainly add to 
the reputation of the brilliant and unselfish scholar." 

The Publisher's Circular. — " A striking example of sympathetic 
study. . . . The legends, customs, etc., abundantly illustrated as they are, 
are not only of extreme value to the student of anthropology and folk-lore, 
but may be read with pleasure by the mere ' joy reader.' " 

La Dc'pi'che Tuuisiennc. — " M. le major Tremearne a pu obtenir ici et 
en Nigeria, sur les mceurs, les croyances, et le folk-lore de ces peuplades 
mysterieuses, de precieuses informations qui lui ont fourni dt-ja la mati.re 
de plusicurs ouvrages remarquables." 

500 

The Tailed Head-Hunters of Nigeria 

An Account of an Official's seven years' experiences in the Northern 

Nigerian Pagan Belt, and a description of the manners, habits, and 

customs of some of its Native Tribes 

Tin- Times.—" The work of a writer well qualified for hi i ta ik." 

The Standard. -" \ brillianl contribution to anthropology, written 

by a scholar who knows how to handle .1 magic pen. Nothing Like it has 
hitherto appeared, and, unless we arc greatly mistaken, its welcome on the 
broad scale is assured. Major Trcmearne not only knows the savages of 
Northern Nigeria at close quarters, in the actual manner of their life, but 
how to make them real to English readers." 

The Morning Post. — " We are grateful to .Major Tremcarnc for some 
really valuable matter." 

The Pall Mall Gazette. — " His account of native customs and beliefs, 
given with sympathetic insight into the negro's mind, deserves close study. 
. . . The book is a noteworthy addition to our ' Empire ' book-shelves." 

The Birmingham Gazette. — " A most fascinating study. . . . The 
whole book is full of the'glamour of mysterious Africa. . . . It is not easy 
to explain the fascination, but the book is alive with it." 

The Graphic — " . . . fascinating book. . . . His experiences . . . make 
the most exciting reading, and are amusing too, their narrator having a 
remarkable gift of unforced humour." 

United Empire (R.C.I.). — " Whilst nearly every chapter contains 
valuable information as to the manners and customs of the Northern 
Nigerian tribes, that on music and dancing is especially valuable." 

The Glasgow Evening Citizen — " The spirit of adventure permeates the 
pages. If you are young in heart you will read these books as you used 
to read Henty's novels. The narratives are engrossing . . . splendidly 
illustrated." 

The Nation. — " . . . There is a good deal of narrative and adventure 
in the book, but it is the scientific observation and the careful comparison 
of native types and customs that give it a peculiar value. ... Of all recent 
books this is among the very best." 

The Sketch. — " ... It has remained for Nigeria to show us actual 
women with tails. . . . That is not the least fascinating of the mam- 
subjects treated by Major Tremearne." 

501 

The Niger and the West Sudan ; The 
West African's Note- Booh 

A Vade-mecum containing Hints and Suggestions as to what is required 

by Britons in West Africa, 

together with Historical and Anthropological Notes 

/ II n i! "/ th 

unfa] iii.iini.il ... to the authoi • industry. . . . 

iiu- view . of .hi officer wh<> lus had much expa 

; with tlu-ir modi i of thai ireful consideration. . . . 

His hints are very much, to the poinl . . . the author's advice is eminently 
. . Probablj I most men who hereafter go to the 

i will im ludc a copy of this DOO 

Mm: (Royal Anthropological Institute). " Very useful little hook. . . . 

The compilations which Eorm the ethnographical pari are tin- work ol an 

industrious and careful student, and are well suited t" help tl 

intend to push inquiry forward. ... the 

tude of the West Coast natives for advocating th men1 

of their own civilisation instead of the systematic appli< atioii of Kuropean 
codes of honour, morals, and education all equally unsuited to them. . . . 
This chapter ought to be read by all colonial administrators." 

The Colonial Office Journal. — " It is fit and proper that in a book 
designed as a vade-mecum of a practical character, Captain Tremearne has 
given a good deal of space to the anthropology of West Africa, a subject 
on which he is an authority." 

The British Medical Journal. — " Captain Tremearnc's book is really 
remarkable in its way ; the amount of information respecting The Xigcr 
and the West Sudan that he has contrived to pack into a thin volume of 
moderate size is quite extraordinary. . . . The author's instructions and 
hints as to health, medicines and food seem generally \ cry good. . . . 
For those who serve in West Africa, whether in a medical, civilian, or 
military capacity, one can hardly conceive of a better ' guide, philosopher 
and friend ' than this little book of Captain Tremearne's." 

The Broad Arrow. — " There is little about West Africa that cannot 
be found inside the . . . covers of this admirable little book. ... [It] is 
certainly the most comprehensive work on a small scale we have yet 
seen." 

Travel and Exploration. — " It is practical, reliable, and thoroughly 
informative. . . . The author's style is natural and spontaneous, and his 
genuine love for the country . . . enables him to give reality and atmo- 
sphere to his description." 

502 

Fables and Fairy Talcs for Little Folk ; 
or, Uncle Remus in Hausaland 

B\ MARY AND NEWMAN TREMEARNE 

the Colonial Office Journal. — "The inexhaustible charm of tlie fairy 
laic, and especially of thai Earn af the fairy talc which makes animals act 
and reason like human beings, attaches scarcely less closely to the lull; 
stories of West Africa than it does to those of Europe. . . . The Sto 
are told with a simplicity and absence of affectation which are welcome." 

Journal "/ the Africa \y. — "Major Tremearne has colli. 

a large quantity of valuable folk-lore material during his residence in 
Northern Nigeria. . . . The present volume contains twelve stories retold 
in an attractive style for children, and illustrated with some very spirited 
and characteristic drawings." 

Nature. — ■" A popularised version of a series of folk-tales collected by 
Captain A. J.N. Tremearne, and published, with much useful information 
on the ethnology and customs of the Hausas, in the Proceedings of various 
societies. . . . Its quaint and humorous incidents of animal life will 
doubtless be fully appreciated in the nursery." 

The African Mail. — " Mrs Tremearne has put them into simple clear 
English so that the little folk may read and understand them. She has 
performed this task admirably . . . [she] has the art of telling an interesting 
story at her command." 

The Child. — " New ground has been broken for the student of child 
life and folk-lore. The tales . . . are full of human interest, and their 
description of the adventures of animals will fascinate children of all ages. . . . 
The whole of this volume manifests great skill and exceptional under- 
standing on the part of those responsible for its production." 

Morning Post. — " To those who are on the look-out for a new type of 
book to give to children we can recommend the Hausa tales. . . . Not 
only will the little ones rind them amusing, but ... it would be an 
experiment worth trying if teachers told stories of this class to older boys 
and girls as a part of school instruction. ... Or the child may just be Left 
alone to enjoy the tales, and give rein to wonder and imagination." 

The Dundee Advertiser. — " The dainty and excellently illustrated 
volume. . . . The tales absorb attention and carry the reader forward 
unresistingly. No child will fail to be charmed ... or to delight in the 
extravagance." 

5o3 

Some Austral-African Notes and Anecdotes 

Tht ■ 'i.ii< meai ni ... m.< tiin 

warmly, both •> writer and observer, when tu appi 
more. He givi as varied (are. Fii t, lomo delightfully ik h cha] 

00 .mi overwritten ubjed the Boei Wai . . . and tiu-n mor< matter 
equally Ere b though be bai himtftH wi Itten somuch on the subject, about 
wesl Mm'. i. . . . \>!\ amusing . . . His litcrarj genialit) lias d< 

.1 rhetorical artifice which is new to us. . . 
i with n i in. i' 

in one • hapter will i»- i I a dc ■ ription 

warfare; in ahothi i "i b punitive expedition a 

bi, ' the in onibals ' ; in ol . ible 

discussion ol the relatione between the officials and the mi 
Some oi the intisi enterta . deal w ith 

and the Native Correspondent' and 'Wesl African Journalism,' and give 
amusing examples i>i the educated native's literary Btj 

r. — "The writer . ■ . lias already won an 
Lished reputation as an authority on all ma ling with \v< t 

A In. a. . . . We warmly commend [this] volume to the careful attention 

01 all readers interested in the outlying parts of the Kni) 

The Western Press. — "This book, like its pri cannot fail 

to give a large amount of pleasure to readers. . . . What he saw, what he 
learned, native customs, personal experiences, and, more important still, 
Ins own adventures and deductions, arc all written in an engrossing style ; 
his diverse information, given in a cheerful and stimulating manner, 
throwing much ' light ' upon these little-known places." 

The Eastern Daily Press. — " A ready, but a very well-equipped 
writer, having, moreover, that cheerful optimism which transmutes what 
to some would be a catastrophe into a mere adventure. The vivid, and 
often very quaint, illustrations . . . largely help to explain the fascination 
and mystery, which in some degree seem to enthral all visitors to Africa. . . . 
He conveys to his readers some of the sense of wonder inspired by the \ 
African forest. . . . The anecdotes in this very live book bejewel many 
pages. . . . All lovers of travel and adventures — which we hope includes 
the bulk of us — will delight in this literary variety entertainment." 

The Western Mercury. — " There are amusing chapters which treat of 
it English' and 'West African Journalism ... with characteristic 
fairness, he admits that many of the coast journals are ' quite worthy of 
local support ' . . . some of the extracts are droll enough. . . . The 
earnest striving to be fair characterises the chapters on ' Missionaries and 
Officials in West Africa.' " 

The Yorkshire Observer. — " Looking at all with a mind which is 
singularly free from prejudice, his observations carry a good deal of 
weight. . . . He gives many amusing specimens of negro English, very 
grandiloquent and often very effective. . . . The book is exceedingly well 
illustrated.'' 

5°4 

DATE 

DUE 

GAYLORD 

PRINTED IN U SA 

WELLESLEY COLLEGE LIBRARY 

3 5002 03281 5883 

GN 653 . T68 1914 

Tremearne, Arthur John 
Newman, 1877-1315. 

The ban of the Bori
