'W

Of

%i

HH

CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY

BOUGHT WITH THE INCOME
OF THE SAGE ENDOWMENT
FUND GIVEN IN 1 89 1 BY

HENRY WILLIAMS SAGE

DG 552.8.G2T8l"'lTi':r ''"'""'

3 1924 028 276 685

Cornell University
Library

The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.

http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924028276685

GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

WORKS BY
GEORGE MACAULAY TREVELYAN.

GARIBALDI'S DEFENCE OF THE ROMAlV RE-
PUBLIC, 1848-9. With 7 Maps and numerous
Illustrations. 8vo, 6s. 6d. net.

GARIBALDI AND THE THOUSAND, May, 1859.
With 5 Maps and numerous Illustrations. 8vo,
7i. 6d. net.

GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY,
June-November, i860. With 4 Maps and numer-
ous Illustrations.

ENGLISH SONGS OF ITALIAN FREEDOM.
Chosen and arranged,' with an Introduction, by
G. M. Trevelvan. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. net.

ENGLAND IN THE AGE OF WYCLIFFE. 8vo,
6s. net.

CLIO, A MUSE AND OTHER ESSAYS, LITER-
ARY AND PEDESTRIAN. With Map. 8vo,
4s. 6d. net.

Contents: Clio, a Muse — Walking — George Meredith —
Poetry and Rebellion — Poor Muggleton and the Classics — John
Woolman the Quaker — The Middle Marches — It Napoleon had won
the Battle of Waterloo.

THE PEASANTS' RISING AND THE
LOLLARDS ; A Collection of Unpublished
Documents, forming an Appendix to ' England in
the Age ol Wycliffe '. Edited by Edgar Powell
and G. M. Trevelyan. 8vo, 6s. net.

LONGMANS, GREEN & CO.,
London, New York, Bombay and Calcutta.

ll-^X^

"J.IREK'IV IICKS NOT KAH. THOSE WHO ARE DKTEKMINEl) TO HAVE IT.'

GARIBALDI

AND

THE MAKING OF ITALY

JUNE— NOVEMBER, i860

GEORGE MACAU LAY T;^EVELYAN

LATE FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE

AUTHOR OF

'ENGLAND IN THE AGE OF WYCLIFFE,' 'ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS '

'THE POETRY AND PHILOSOPHY OF GEORGE MEREDITH,' ETC., ETC

WITH FOUR MAPS AND NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS

FIFTH IMPRESSION

LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.

39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON

NEW YORK, BOMBAY AND CALCUTTA

1914

All rights reserved

^HS"

TO
C. p. T. AND M. K. T.

PREFACE

A PREVIOUS volume entitled 'Garibaldi and the Thou-
sand ' described the landing at Marsala and the capture
of Palermo by that handful of men in May, i860. The
present volume traces the course of larger military,
diplomatic, and political events by which the original
achievement of the Thousand led in six months to the
formation of the Italian Kingdom.

I have once more endeavoured, in footnotes and ap-
pendices connected with a full bibliography, to indicate to
the curious my authority for any statement made in the
text. But in this as in previous volumes, considerations
of time and space have made it impossible to explain the
nature, limit, and degree of the value to be attached in
each case to each of the authorities cited in a given note.
And if any student ever has enough enthusiasm to visit
various public and private libraries, and so verify all the
references which I have given for any one important
event — e.g. the Battle of Milazzo, or Garibaldi's entry
into Naples — he will find that the authorities which
I have cited contradict each other on minor points.
Volumes would be required to explain in every case why
I have preferred one authority on one small point, and
another on another. In a few important cases I have
given my reasons for preferring one authority to another

vui PREFACE

{e.g. Appendix G), but more often I have merely
given a list of the authorities the collation of which
has led me to the conclusions recorded in the text.

As regards the estimates of the number of troops en-
gaged or losses suffered in a campaign or battle, they are
based on reports or calculations made by officers in com-
mand of the troops enumerated, never on the impressions
of the opposite side which are always worthless as evi-
dence—except, indeed, in the case of the capture of pri-
soners, for it is possible to count the enemy's forces when
you have captured them, though not before.

I have used the Neapolitan military sources, particu-
larly the documents printed in Franci for the Volturno
campaign, more than has hitherto been customary with
historians. In the light of the reports by Von Mechel,
Ruiz, and the Swiss officers, material modification is
necessary in the accounts usually given of the operations
round Maddaloni and Castel Morrone on October i.
Otherwise the commonly received story of the campaign
of i860 appears to me to stand the test of careful
scrutiny.

It has been a particular pleasure to me to unfold for
the first time the most intimate workings of British
diplomacy at the decisive crisis of the Italian question.
I have been able to do this, partly owing to the kindness
of the Foreign Office in opening to me the papers in the
Record Office, and the Consular papers in Italy, and still
more owing to the kindness of Lady Agatha and Mr.
RoUo Russell in placing the private papers of their father
Lord John at my disposal. The letters from which
selections are printed in Appendix A show us ' the
very pulse of the machine,' which is not always visible
in the official dispatches. And it is particularly gratify-
ing to have been able to establish beyond all question at

PREFACE

IX

the mouth of two or three witnesses, the most sen-
sational details of the story, told hitherto on Lacaita's
authority alone, of his strange commission from Cavour
to speak to Lord John Russell on the subject of
Garibaldi's passage of the Straits (pp. 104-105 and p.
315 below).

Again, as in the case of the former volumes, any
success of mine in collecting material has been very
largely due to the kindness and activity of scores of
people in England and in Italy, on whom I had in the
first instance no claim except as a would-be historian of
Garibaldi, though many of them are now my friends.

In Italy, my original debt to Mr. Nelson Gay and his
risorgimento library has been again increased. Like so
many other English students in Rome I have benefited
in many different ways by the indefatigable kindness of
Dr. Ashby of the British School, and as illustrations in
this volume show, I finally lured him far afield in the
tracks of Garibaldi. Sir Rennell Rodd has found time,
among his many more important activities, to take an
interest in my work and to find me new material. The
fact is that British students at Rome are just now in
clover, not only on account of their compatriots resident
out there, but also on account of the kindness of the
Italians. How much I have experienced this, from how
many people, and in how many ways it is impossible for
me to recount. But I must here record a special word
of thanks to some of those who have made my work in
Rome so pleasant and so profitable to me— Count Ugo
Balzani, Signor Carlo Segre', Count and Countess
Pasolini, Sindaco Nathan, Signor Menghini, and the
authorities of the Bibhoteca Vitt. Emmanuele, Senator
Cadohni, the authorities of the Ufficio Storico ol the
Stato Maggiore, and various officers of the regular army.

X PREFACE

The same kindness has been extended to me outside
Rome, at Milan by Signer G. Gallavresi and Signer
Gualtiero Castelhni, and the authorities in charge of the
archives in the Castello ; at Bologna by the authorities
of the Museum and by the Casa ZanicheHi ; at Genoa by
Aw. Pier Giuho Breschi, by Col. Sclavo and the whole
Municipio ; at Cremona by Professor Manacorda ; at
Mantua by Cav. Alessandro Luzio ; at Naples by the
Societk Storia Patria, and by our Consul, Mr. Churchill ;
at Monteleone, Calabria, by Marchese Gagliardi and
Signor E. Scalfari ; and at Staletti by my kind host the
late Achille Fazzari and his whole family ; at Salb and
London by the Countess Martinengo Cesaresco. Of
Sicily and the kind help I received there, I wrote at
length in the preface to the last volume.

Both in England and Italy I have had the advantage
of conversation with many of the actors in the drama
of i860. Some, like Tiirr, Canzio, Missori, and Fazzari,
have quite recently passed away ; others are with us
still. Their names appear in the Bibliography under the
heading, Notes of Conversations, but I wish here to thank
them collectively for their patience under interrogation.
Above all I must thank my friends Mr. Dolmage and Mr.
Patterson for their continuous efforts to enrich my know-
ledge by their memory.

I have during the last two years been constantly in
receipt of letters from Italy, America, and England, from
persons who saw or did things in Italy in i860. Some
of this correspondence I have utilised, noting it in the
Bibliography among the il/SS. belonging to private persons.
I heartily thank all those who volunteered to send me
information in this way.

In England those who have most assisted me by
placing documents or illustrations at my disposal are —

PREFACE xi

next after Lady Agatha and Mr. Rollo Russell— Mr.
Chas. Lacaita, Hon. W. W. Vernon, Miss Peard, Lady
Lockwood, Mrs. Osier and Mr. Malleson, Mr. Ingram of
the Illustrated London News, and the late Dr. Nelson of
Belfast.

I am indebted for valuable advice and assistance to
Mr. Thayer of Harvard, whose life of Cavour will be a
landmark in risorgimento history.

Three persons have been at the pains to read this
book in MS. or in proof: Mr. Hilton Young; my wife ;
and Count Balzani.

One who did much to make me in love with the
task which I am now bringing to a conclusion has
recently passed away — the late Lord Carlisle, who had
indeed a natural right to that title which I have heard
him arrogate to himself— the title of ' italiamssimo.'

June, 1911.

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION I

I. THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE CAPTURE OF PALERMO

IN NAPLES, PARIS, TURIN, AND LONDON 5

II. ENTHUSIASM IN NORTH ITALY — THE EXPEDI-
TIONS IN AID OF GARIBALDI — MAZZINI,
BERTANI, AND CAVOUR . . . -31

III. GARIBALDI AT PALERMO — THE RECONSTRUCTION

OF HIS ARMY — THE ADVANCE THROUGH THE
ISLAND 48

IV. THE BATTLE OF MILAZZO 69

V. SURRENDER OF MILAZZO CASTLE — THE CHECK AT

THE STRAITS — DIPLOMATS AND POLITICIANS. 9 1

VI. THE CROSSING OF THE STRAITS . . . I24

VII. THE MARCH THROUGH CALABRIA . . 139

VIII. THE ENTRY INTO NAPLES 1 66

IX. GARIBALDI'S MISTAKES IN NAPLES — THE CHECK

BEFORE CAPUA 1 86

X. CAVOUR INVADES THE PAPAL STATES WITH THE

ARMY OF PIEDMONT 203

XI. THE BATTLE OF CASTELFIDARDO AND THE FALL

OF ANCONA 217

XII. THE EVE OF THE VOLTURNO . .228

XIII. THE BATTLE OF THE VOLTURNO, OCTOBER 1-2 238

XIV

CONTENTS

XIV. THE MEETING OF GARIBALDI AND VICTOR

EMMANUEL ■ •

XV. THE RETURN TO CAPRERA ....

EPILOGUE

GARIBALDI'S HYMN

258

273

288

'299

APPENDICES —

A THE RUSSELL PAPERS

B EXPEDITIONS OF VOLUNTEERS FROM NORTH ITALY

WHO JOINED GARIBALDI
C THE RIVAL ORGANISATIONS THAT HELPED GARIBALDI
D STATE OF SICILY UNDER THE DICTATOR AND PRO

DICTATORS ......

E THE ARMS OF THE CAMPAIGN

F BATTLE OF MILAZZO .....

G DATE OF LANDINGS IN CALABRIA

H IMMEDIATE CAUSES OF THE EVACUATION OF SALERNO

J NUMBERS OF THE ARMIES ON THE VOLTURNO

K NUMBERS IN THE CASTELFIDARDO CAMPAIGN .

L AUTHORITIES FOR THE BATTLE OF THE VOLTURNO

BIBLIOGRAPHY: LIST OF PRINTED MATTER AND MSS,
CONSULTED BY THE AUTHOR
I. BOOKS, PAMPHLETS, AND MODERN JOURNALS
II. NEWSPAPERS AND PERIODICALS OF i860

III. MANUSCRIPTS .....

IV. NOTES OF CONVERSATIONS .
V. ITALIAN AND ENGLISH POETRY .

INDEX

305

316

321

323
326

331
336
338
341
346
348

351
351
369
370

373
374

375

LIST OF PLATES

' LIBERtX NON TRADISCE I VOLENTI ' . . Frontispiece

Photograph of Garibaldi taken in Naples, November, i860,
given by him with Autograph to Mrs. White; lent
me by Dr. Brock of Rome.

PAGE

GIULIO ADAMOLI, PIEDMONTESE RED-SHIRT, 1860 facing 32

From a Photograph lent me by Mr. Dolmage.

GIUSEPPE MARGARITA, MILANESE OF THE THOU-
SAND, i860. . . . . . . „ 32

From a Photograph lent me by Mr. Dolmage,

THE CAIROLI FAMILY, END OF 1860 • . . „ 37

From a Photograph.

DR. AGOSTINO BERTANI ,,38

From a Photograph in Dallolio's ' Spediziom tUi mille nelle
mtmorie Bohgnesi'. By kind permission.

GIUSEPPE MISSORI, 1860 „ 38

Prom a Photograph.

COLONEL DUNNE ,,64

Frofti a photograph.

FATHER PANTALEO, THE RED-SHIRT FRIAR, 1860 ,, 66

From a Photograph.

FRANCIS 11, LAST KING OF THE TWO SICILIES . „ ^^

From a Photograph in Captain Forbes' ' Campaign of Garibaldi',

COLONEL BOSCO, i860 » 73

From a Photograph lent me by Mr. Dolmage,

GIACOMO MEDICI, 1860 > 74

From a Photograph,

xvi LIST OF PLATES

PAGE

MILAZZO facing %7

From a Photograph,

MILAZZO CASTLE 8/

Prom a Photograph.

PIETRO SAN MARTINO, SICILIAN RED-SHIRT . „ 9^

From a Photograph lent me by Mr. Dolmage.

POLLACIE, SICILIAN RED-SHIRT, ^T. 12 . . ,, 9^

From a Photograph lent me by Mr. Dolmagt.

LORD JOHN RUSSELL , I07

From a Photograph lent me by Mr. Rollo Russell.

GARIBALDI AT THE STRAITS OF MESSINA . . „ HO

' Illustrated London News ; ' from Sketch of the Spot.

ALTIFIUMARA FORT (NOW ' FORTINO GARIBALDI ') „ 112
From a Photograph by Dr. Ashby.

BAGNARA AND COAST TO SCILLA POINT . . „ 112

From a Photograph by Dr. Ashby.

NINO BIXIO IN CIVILIAN COSTUME . . . ,,125

From a Photograph.

SPOT WHERE GARIBALDI LANDED IN CALABRIA . „ 1 27
From a Photograph by Dr. Ashby.

FAVAZZINA, WHERE COSENZ LANDED . . . ,, 1 27

Front a Photograph by Dr. Ashby.

ROCK AND FORT OF SCILLA . . . .,,141

From a Photograph by Dr. Ashby.

ANCIENT GREEK WALL AT MONTELEONE . . „ 141

From a Photograph by Dr. A shby.

CASTLE AT PIZZO WHERE MURAT WAS SHOT,

1815 .145

From a Photograph by Dr, Ashby.

BATTLE-FIELD OF MAID A, I806 . . . . „ 145

From a Photograph by Dr, A shby *

TIRIOLO ,,146

^ From a Photograph by Dr. Ashby,

LIST OF PLATES

xvii

SAN PIETRO

From a Photograph by Dr. Ashhy.

THE SURRENDER AT SOVERIA

' Wustratid London News ; ' from Sketch on Spot.

MONTE POLLING

From a Photograph by Dr. Ashby,

CAMPO TENESE

From a Photograph by Dr. Ashby.

ROTONDA

From a Photograph by Dr. Ashby.

BAY OF SAPRI

From a Photograph by Dr. Ashby.

NAPLES — GARIBALDI'S ROUTE ALONG THE QUAY

From a Photograph.

GENERAL TURR, i860

From a Photograph.

CASERTA PALACE

From a Photograph.

SANT' ANGELO VILLAGE AND CHURCH
From a Photograph by Mrs. Trevelyan.

SANT' ANGELO CHURCH, FRONT VIEW
From a Photograph by Mrs. Trevelyan.

SUMMIT OF MONTE TIFATA

From a Photograph by Mrs. Trevelyan.

CICCARELLI BRIDGE FROM THE SUNK LANE

BELOW

From a Photograph by Mrs. Trcvtlyan.

THE ARCHES OF THE VALLEY ....

From a Photograph.

CASTEL MORRONE ......

Prom a Photograph by Mrs. Trcvtlyan.

AMPHITHEATRE OF ANCIENT CAPUA .
From a Photograph by Mr. Julian Huxley.

FAOE

facing

• 146

»

148

»

iSS

))

155

»>

157

ff

IS7

»

183

»

187

»»

199

j»

238

))

238

)»

241

241

245
248
248

xviii LIST OF PLATES

PAGB

THE MAN IN POSSESSION facing 266

Punch,' October 6, i860.

THE RIGHT LEG IN THE BOOT AT LAST . 1 „ 266

Punch,' November 17, i860.

GARIBALDI » 286

From a Photograph in Countess Mariinengo Cesaresco's
' Liberation of Italy '. By kind permission.

GARIBALDI AND ENGLISH FRIENDS, ENGLAND,

1864 ,,290

From a Photograph given me by Mr. /, A . Bruce.

GARIBALDI IN OLD AGE ...... 293

From a Photograph.

LIST OF MAPS

374

I. BATTLEFIELD OF MILAZZO, JULY 20, 1860 . facing 8 1
For Chap. IV.

II. (a) garibaldi's route : THE STRAITS OF'
MESSINA AND LOWER CALABRIA
For Chaps. V-VII.

{b) GARIBALDI'S ROUTE : UPPER CALABRIA
BASILICATA, ETC.
For Chap. VII.

III. (a) ENVIRONS OF NAPLES (INSET, NAPLES
IN i860)

For Chaps. VII, VIII, IX, XII, XIV.

{V) BATTLE OF THE VOLTURNO
For Chaps. XII, XIII.

TV. ITALY AT THE TIME OF GARIBALDI'S CAM-
PAIGN, i860 (INSETS: I. BATTLE OF CASTEL-
FIDARDO, SEPTEMBER 1 8, i860; H. ITALY,
NOVEMBER, 1860, AFTER GARIBALDI'S RE-
TURN TO CABRERA) „ 374

For Chaps. I-III, X-XI, XIV-XV.

374

N .B. — Maps II, III, IV are folding maps at end of book, p. 374.
Map IV will be of assistance to the reader throughout the whole book.
Places in Italy mentioned in the text, but not marked in the other maps,
will be found there.

xlx

Seldom do we find that a whole people can be said to have
any Faith at all ; except in things that it can eat and handle.
Whensoever it gets any Faith, its history becomes spirit-stirring,
noteworthy. — Carlyle, French Revolution.

GARIBALDI AND THE
MAKING OF ITALY

INTRODUCTION

The choice of this title for a volume of which the
principal theme is Garibaldi's part in the events of June
to November i860 requires, not apology, but comment.
It is true that the ' making of Italy ' had begun two
generations before, when General Buonaparte crossed the
Alps with his hungry French Republicans, and was com-
pleted in 1870 when Victor Emmanuel entered Rome
after the news of Sedan : but i860 was the decisive year
in that long process, the year when Italy was made.
After considering whether I should call the book Gari-
baldi and the Fall of the Neapolitan Kingdom, I have rejected
any such title, not only because it would fail to cover
some of the most important events described — the battle
of Castelfidardo and the liberation of the greater part of
the Papal provinces — but also because the motive that
inspired Garibaldi from the first to the last moment of-
his great campaign in the South was less the desire
to destroy the Kingdom of Naples than the desire to
make the Kingdom of Italy. The reader's mind should
not be diverted from the national and constructive
character of the Italian revolution by the interesting but
subsidiary fact that the Bourbon system of government
in South Italy collapsed in i860 for the fourth and last
time. The revolution of that year differs from those of

2 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

the Napoleonic epoch and from those of 1820 and 1848,
in that it created a free State stretching from the Alps
to Sicily, which has since maintained its place in the
family of nations as securely as France, Spain, or the
German Empire. Although at the end of i860 the
Austrian was still in possession of his Venetian territories
and the Pope of the small province that contained the
city of Rome, the union effected between the other parts
of Italy rendered the absorption of Rome and Venice
merely a question of time.

This volume, starting from the accomplished fact of
the capture of Palermo by Garibaldi and the Thousand
described in a previous volume, narrates the events of
the following half-year which brought this new State
into being. The story has variety and scope enough.
It is a complicated tale of war, regular and irregular, of
diplomacy open and secret, of politics high and low. It
carries us into palaces and peasants' huts from one end
of Italy to the other and into half the capitals of Europe.
And it has all the interest of long protracted suspense.
For even after the taking of Palermo in June, it was by
no means certain that, when the winter snows descended
again on Aspromonte, four-fifths of Italy would be united
and free. The turn of complicated events brought this
result about, but in June it was no more a foregone con-
clusion than the break-up of Austria-Hungary or the
reconstruction of Poland, events which were confidentlj'
expected in Garibaldi's camp, and of which at least the
former entered as a probable contingency into the schemes
of Cavour.

In the following pages the reader will see by how
narrow a margin Italy in her great year escaped another
disaster like that of 1848; with what skill and fortune
she avoided foreign interference while she achieved her
union against the will of all the great European Powers
except England ; what gross political and military mis-
takes stultified the powerful resistance which the Pope
and the King of Naples might have set up ; how Gari-

INTRODUCTION 3

baldi's luck and genius and the psychological atmosphere
of a triumphant revolution again and again produced
military results contradictory to the known science of
war ; how the bullet that might, in any one of a hundred
scuffles, have reversed in a moment the fortunes of the
campaign, never passed nearer than through his poncho
or his felt hat ; how the first check to his career north-
wards, when Capua held out against him in September,
occurred at the very moment when the wiser friends of
Italy were beginning to pray that he might get no nearer
to the walls of Rome ; how in the contest waged for six
months between Cavour from his chamber at Turin and
Garibaldi from his shifting bivouacs on the Southern
Apennines, the divergent views of the two patriots as to
the utmost pace at which the redemption could be pushed
on were finally compromised exactly at the right point,
so as to secure the essential union of Italy without the
immediate attack on Rome and Venice which must have
imperilled all.

The mass of the nation supported both Cavour and
Garibaldi, and it was this that saved the situation. But
many of the principal actors were naturally forced to
group themselves behind one or other of the two chiefs.
If either party had completely got the upper hand, if
Cavour had succeeded in annexing Sicily in June, and if
he had been relieved from the competition of the revolu-
tionary bands, the great Powers would not have permitted
him to attack either Naples or the Papal territory. If on
the other hand the Garibaldini had succeeded in attacking
Rome, Napoleon III would have been forced to undo all
that they had accomplished for Italy. The principle of
audacity and the principle of guidance, both essential for
successful revolutions, had each in i860 an almost per-
fect representative. But the death of Cavour in 1861,
and the subsequent deterioration of Garibaldi, deprived
both parties of the splendid leadership of the great year,
so that the last stages of the Italian risorgimento were
shorn of their meed of glory. Venice and Rome were

4 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

ultimately acquired, but in a back-handed manner.
Between 1861 and 1870 the ship of Italy's fortunes drifted
and whirled amid shallow eddies, but was swept at last
safe into port, because in i86o, when bold and skilful
hands were still on board, the great flood tide had lifted
her over the breakers at the bar.

CHAPTER 1

THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE CAPTURE OF PALERMO IN
NAPLES, PARIS, TURIN, AND LONDON

' You've seen the telegiam ?
Palermo's taken, we believe.'

Mrs. Browning. Garibaldi.

In the first days of June i860, the news spread through-
out Europe that the capital of Sicily, guarded by 20,000
regular troops, by forts and artillery, and by the Nea-
politan fleet in the harbour, had been taken after three
days' fighting by Garibaldi and a thousand North-Italian
volunteers in plain clothes, aided by a mob of half-armed
Sicilians. How soon, men asked, and how far would the
revolution advance ?

When last Palermo had expelled its garrison in
January 1848, half Europe had followed suit. To the
excited hopes of patriots and exiles, to the indignant
fears of kings and their chancellors, Palermo seemed but
the first point fired in a train of gunpowder laid through
Messina and Reggio to Naples, through Naples and
Rome to Venice, through Venice and Pesth to Vienna,
through Vienna perhaps to Warsaw and back to the
Tuileries. It was in the interest of every monarch who
was not, like Victor Emmanuel, out for revolution, to
check by force or by diplomacy the progress of the red-
shirted portent. The ' filibuster,' having failed to be shot
in the authorised manner,^ seemed an incarnation of the

^ ' Le FlibusHve [sic] movement at Naples is very shameful. . . . Col.
Walker [the Nicaraguan filibuster] has been shot, and Garibaldi, who comes out
of that self-same school, is divinised.' The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria-
Nov. 2, i860, Queen's Letters, Vol. III.

5

6 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

improbable, and for a while aroused hopes and fears, of
which some were wildly extravagant.

' A Caesar he, ere long, to Gaul,
To Italy an Hannibal,
And to all States not free
Shall climacteric be.'

It was a case for a Holy Alliance of sovereigns to
restore order in Sicily, or, if that were no longer possible,
at least for a Concert of Europe to prevent the further
spread of mischief The first person to invoke the pro-
tection of the Powers by an appeal to the common
interest of all established governments, was the unfortun-
ate King Francis II of Naples, whose house was already
on fire at one end, and was packed from roof to floor
with combustible matter.'

The Neapolitan appeal for protection might take one
of two forms. Either it might be addressed primarily
to the powers of reaction, Russia and Austria, and would
in that case be accompanied by vigorous conduct of the
war in Sicily and by continued repression on the main-
land ; or else, as actually occurred, it might be addressed
primarily to the more Liberal powers, to England and
France, in which case efforts must be made to patch up
a truce with Garibaldi, and a constitution must be granted
on the mainland. As the latter course was the actual
path by which King Francis descended so rapidly to his
doom, it is easy to say now that the bolder policy would
have had a better chance of success. But the House of
Bourbon had twice before weathered the revolutionary
storms of the Bay of Naples by granting a charter, to be
set aside when the danger had passed by ; and no one in

' On June 7 Odo Russell, the British Representative at Rome, wrote to his
uncle, Lord John: 'The other day the young King of Naples was seized with
such a panic that he telegraphed five times in twenty-four hours for the Pope's
blessing. Cardinal Antonelli, through whom the application had to be made,
telegraphed the three last blessings without reference to his Holiness, saying
that he was duly authorised to do so. The Convents are awfully scandalised at
this proceeding.' Russtll, ii. 323.

THE POSITION AT NAPLES 7

the Neapolitan Camarilla had the nerve of a Strafford or
a Bismarck openly to continue in the reactionary course
with Garibaldi in Palermo. The only man among all
Francis II's counsellors was his Bavarian Queen, Maria
Sophia, and she, though ready, as she afterwards proved,
to fight for her crown behind the cannon of Gaeta,
honestly desired a constitution and a complete change of
system.^

Besides this, Russia and Austria, though more willing,
were less able to afford protection than either France or
England. Russia, who had dominated the European
situation in 1849, when she had invaded rebellious
Hungary on behalf of Austria, had since then had a fall
on the ramparts of Sebastopol. In whatever light the
Crimean war may be viewed from the standpoint of
British or near-Eastern interests, there is no doubt that
from the point of view of Continental Liberalism and the
freedom of action of independent States, it had done much
to secure the 'liberties_ aLEuraper the phrase inscribed
at Macaulay's suggestion on the monument to our
soldiers at Scutari. The great power of darkness had
been disabled and discredited in pan-European affairs,
and the new Czar had even begun the work of liberation
at home. Austria, too, who had the most immediate
reason to support the old governments in Italy, and to
check Garibaldi's advance, was in like manner recovering
from her Crimea, the Lombard war of 1859. She dreaded
that if she again moved to interfere in Italy the Hun-
garian rebels would rise behind her, this time without
fear of the Russian armies, for the ingratitude shown by
Austria to Russia during the Crimean War had dissolved
the political friendship of the two Powers. Napoleon
III and Cavour were both in constant communication

' For Maria Sophia see Garibaldi and the Thousand, pp. 126, 130. The
queen in Daudet's Rots en exit is admittedly based on Maria Sophia, but while
Daudet's queen was an ultra-royalist, Maria Sophia had Liberal inclinations, at
least while on the throne. Also the king in the Rois en exit has positive vices
which were wanting to the real Francis II.

8 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

with Kossuth, and Cavour had a Hungarian rising ready
primed to fire in case of an Austrian war.^

Partly for these reasons, and partly because the
Sicilian and Neapolitan situation was more easily com-
manded from the sea, it was necessary for Francis II to
appeal not so much to the Eastern as to the Western and
naval powers. In spite of the constant bickering between
France and England, the deepest line of diplomatic divi-
sion lay between East and West. The idea of an alliance
with the principles of Russian despotism, even for the
purpose of scoring a point against a near neighbour, was
abhorrent to Napoleon III on one side of the Channel,
and to Palmerston and Lord John Russell on the other.
In fact when Russia early in July proposed to join with
France in policing the Mediterranean against Garibaldi's
transports, the offer coming from that quarter was
promptly rejected.* If Napoleon interfered on behalf of
Naples, it would be in concert with Great Britain, and,
if possible, with Piedmont, and only on behalf of a re-
formed constitutional Kingdom.

The decision of the young King of Naples to adopt a
Liberal policy, to abandon the friendship with Austria
and Russia so long traditional in his family, to appeal to
Napoleon III for help, and to conciliate France, England,
and his own subjects by the grant of a constitution, was
taken in principle at Councils held on May 30 and June i,
[860. They were the first-fruits of Garibaldi's success.
On June i the King also sanctioned General Lanza's
proposal to retreat with 20,000 royal troops from the
Palace to the suburbs of Palermo, and on June 4 he
sanctioned his further proposal to capitulate with Gari-

' See Chiala's Pol. Seg. passim. In the Russell MSS. Hudson writes on
May I, i860 : ' Pulsky is in communication with Cavour, and yesterday in a fit of
enthusiasm he let out that Cavour and Kossuth are in correspondence, that the
revolution has commenced in Hungary, and Austria is on her last legs.'

^F. O. Sard. Hudson, No. 299, July 8, i860, and F. O. France, Cowley., No.
860, July g, i860. Br. Pari. Papers, vii. p. 27, Russell to Hudson, July 7.

FILANGIERI REFUSES TO HELP 9

baldi and to ship the whole royal army back from Palermo
to Naples.^

The chief promoter in the Council of these important
decisions was General Filangieri, the veteran Prince of
Satriano, who had served with equal fidelity the Na-
poleonic Kings of Naples, and the restored House of
Bourbon, who had reconquered Sicily for the Crown in
1849, and ruled it with wise moderation until recalled by
his reactionary enemies at Court. He had often and in
vain advised Bomba and his son after him to break with
Austria and the reaction, and to come to an understand-
ing with France abroad and with the Constitutionalists
at home.'' His advice, rejected year aftjr year so long
as it would have saved the throne, wa^ now adopted a
month too late, and was with his^^n full concurrence
coupled with the fatal policy of milffary surrender at
Palermo, at a moment when a renewed attack on Gari-
baldi and the rebel town, headed by General Nunziante
or by the King in person, would not improbably have
turned the tide of war.

It might have been expected that Filangieri, having
at length completely overborne his reactionary enemies
at the Council-board, would have helped to carry out the
hard task, which he had himself set to his royal master,
of changing horses in the bed of a roaring torrent which
had already swept them all off their feet. But he pre-
ferred to retire to his country-house near Sorrento,
whence at his ease he could watch the troubled city of
Naples across the full breadth of the Bay. When the
King sent General Nunziante to beg him to return to the
head of affairs and to revive the body politic by a con-
stitutional regimen, he replied with brutal frankness :
' Would you have me repeat the miracle of Lazarus ? I
am not Christ, but a miserable mortal.' His interlocutor,

^De Cesare, ii. 275-278. Filangieri, 317. Readers of Garibaldi and the
Thousand will observe that the last pages of that book and the first pages of this
one overlap chronologically.

• For Filangieri see Garibaldi and the Thousand, pp. 131, 146-147, 265-266,

lo GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Nunziante, hitherto a staunch reactionary, who had been
loaded with honours and emoluments by the late King,
and was esteemed and trusted by Francis II as the ablest
man in the Neapolitan service after Filangieri himself,
had recently consented to take up the command against
Garibaldi, and had drawn up plans for the reconquest of
Palermo, but he was so deeply impressed by these words
of Filangieri that he at once determined not to go to
Sicily, and then and there began to calculate how best
to desert the falling House of Bourbon, and to carry over
the army intact to the service of the House of Piedmont
and United Italy.^

Before the end of June the King himself crossed the
Bay of Naples to try his own powers of persuasion on
the recluse of Sorrento. When the royal yacht was un-
expectedly seen approaching the landing-place below the
villa, Filangieri fled to his bedroom and jumped into bed.
Not having time to take off his clothes, he drew the
blankets over him up to his chin, and received his royal
visitor so. Was ever monarch before or since received
in such fashion by the first subject in his kingdom ?

Francis II held an hour's private conversation by the
bedside of the malingerer, and then returned to Naples.
Filangieri, perhaps a little ashamed of himself, never dis-
closed even to his nearest and dearest what had passed
in that strange interview, but no one doubted that he had
again been pressed to form a constitutional Ministry, and
that, pleading his feigned illness, he had again refused.*

Early in August, Filangieri went into voluntary exile
at Marseilles. After the revolution was accomplished he
returned to Italy, and till his death in 1867 resided as
a loyal subject of Victor Emmanuel, refusing office and
honours from the new Government, but never regretting
the old. The ideal of his life had been an independent

' Nisco, p. 48. Franci, i. 63, 188-igi. De Cesare, ii. 307.

'D« Cesare, ii. 280-281. Filangieri, 319. In the latter work, the filial bio-
grapher does not relate that part of the incident referring to the bed, but the
evidence given in De Cesare seems convincing.

THE APPEAL TO NAPOLEON ii

South Italy, with a progressive and civilised Government
of its ovi^n, such as that which in his youth he had helped
Murat to conduct. After Waterloo the restored Bour-
bons and their subjects had left that path, and had
since failed in numerous attempts to return to it again,
in spite of the efforts of men like Poerio and Filangieri.
Poerio, convinced after 1848 that South Italy was by
itself incapable of maintaining a tolerable Government,
had quickly come to believe in the Union of all Italy as
a positive good ; and even Filangieri was at last forced
to admit, after the event, that Union was the least bad
of all practicable solutions.

Discouraged but not deterred by Filangieri's refusal
to lend a hand in carrying out his own policy, Francis

11 continued in the prescribed course. In the first days
of June he had frankly thrown himself on the protection
of France. De Martino had been sent as the bearer of
an autograph letter of the King of Naples to the Em-
peror. Accompanied by Antonini, the regular Neapolitan
Minister at Paris, he went out to Fontainebleau on June

12 to interview Napoleon.* The envoys met with a
chilling reception from the French courtiers. Even
Thouvenel, the Foreign Minister, though no friend
to Italian aspirations, was brutally rude to the repre-
sentatives of the falling cause, and before the conference
began was overheard by them saying in a loud voice
in the antechamber, 'Now I must go and hear what
lies the two Neapolitan orators will tell the Emperor.'
Napoleon himself, though courteous and humane, held
out no hope that he would actively interfere. He ex-
plained the difference between the claims of the King
of Naples on his protection and those of the Pope.
'The French flag,' he said, 'is actually waving on
the Pope's territory, and then there is the question of

1 For this interview, reported by Antonini himself in two dispatches of June
13, see Bianchi, viii. 897-301, and Bianchi's Cavour, 78, 105-107, and Liborio
Romatio, 144-150.

12 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

religion. The Italians understand that if they attacked
Rome I should have to act' But in the case of Naples
he declared that as the victor of Solferino and the liber-
ator of Lombardy, he was bound not to stultify his own
past by using his troops on behalf of an opposite prin-
ciple in South Italy. ^ Les Italiens sont fins,' he said;
' the Italians are shrewd ; they clearly perceive that
since I have shed the blood of my people for the cause
of nationality, I can never fire a cannon against it. And
this conviction, the key to the recent revolution, when
Tuscany was annexed against my wishes and interests,
will have the same effect in your case.' The King of
Naples' concessions, the offer of the constitution, failed
to impress him. ' It is too late,' he said. ' A month ago
these concessions might have prevented everything.
To-day they are too late.'

It was now June 12. On April 15 Victor Emmanuel
had written to his 'dear cousin' of Naples, suggesting
a mutual alliance on the principle of Italian nationality
and freedom, and ending with the words : ' If you allow
some months to pass without attending to my friendly
suggestion, your Majesty will perhaps experience the
bitterness of the terrible words — too late.'^ Eight weeks
had sufficed to fulfil the prophecy, and the ' terrible
words ' were now on the lips of Napoleon himself

But there was still, said the Emperor to the Neapolitan
envoys, one chance for their master. Let him humbly
ask for the Piedmontese alliance, which he had himself
rejected earlier in the year when Victor Emmanuel had
made the advances. ' Piedmont alone,' said Napoleon,
' can stop the course of the revolution. You must apply
not to me but to Victor Emmanuel' ' We French do
not wish,' he added, ' for the annexation of South Italy to
the Kingdom of Piedmont, because we think it contrary
to our interests, and it is for this reason that we advise
you to adopt the only expedient which can prevent or
at least retard that annexation.' For the rest, he would

' Garibaldi and the Thousand, pp. 185-186.

FRENCH ADVICE ADOPTED 13

be delighted if the Neapolitan Royalists proved able to
defeat Garibaldi and the revolution with the force of
their own arms, but he could not help them himself,
partly for the reasons which he had already given, and
partly because he was determined to do nothing con-
trary to the wishes of England.'

His advice therefore to the Neapolitan envoys at
Fontainebleau was nothing more than a reasoned re-
petition of the programme which his representative
Brenier had several days before urged upon the Court
at Naples,* namely : —

First, a scheme of Sicilian Home Rule under a Prince

of the Royal House of Naples.
Secondly, a Constitution for the mainland.
Thirdly, an alliance with Piedmont.

This triple programme was perforce adopted by the
Neapolitan Court, but the first item depended for its ful-
filment on Garibaldi and the Sicilians, and the third on
Cavour and the Piedmontese. The Constitution, indeed,
could be published by the King without the consent of
any other party, but whether it would at this twelfth
hour conciliate the population of the Neapolitan pro-
vinces still remained to be seen.

The question was soon put to the proof. A Council
of Ministers sat on June 21, and after Antonini's report
of the interview at Fontainebleau had been read to them,
decided by eleven votes to three to adopt the triple pro-
gramme laid down by the French Emperor. A short
while back the same men would have voted by an equally
large majority against any concession, but in these weeks
life-long opinions were changing with a rapidity peculiar
to the crisis of a great revolution. Since the taking of
Palermo most of the reactionary party, headed by the

1 Bianchi, viii. 664 top, Antonini's letter of June 16. This sentiment of the
Emperor's with regard to England as the tether of his range in Italian policy
this summer, is repeated in his letter to Persigny, July 27, printed in Mem.
Stor. Mil. ii. 186-187 and elsewhere.

2 F. O. Sicily, Elliot, June 8, i860, No. 256.

14 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

King's uncle, the Count of Aquila, had become ardent
Constitutionalists ; while the Constitutional party of
former years, headed by the Duke of Syracuse, another
uncle of the King (the Philippe Egalit6 of the Neapolitan
revolution) had turned against the dynasty, and were
working to bring in Victor Emmanuel. 'A year ago,
wrote Elliot, the British Minister, ' there was hardly an
annexationist to be found in this part of Italy, and now
pretty nearly the whole country is so for the moment.

But even after the Council of June 21 the feeble King
still hesitated. Although he would not go to Sicily and
lead on his troops against Garibaldi, he was almost
equally unwilling to publish the Constitution and to
declare for the Piedmontese alliance. All the pieties and
instincts of his dumb nature were averse to the change,
and he was upheld in his passive resistance by the
clamours of his stepmother Maria Theresa, 'the Aus-
trian woman,' whom he had been accustomed since boy-
hood to obey. But on the other side was his wife, Maria
Sophia, whose influence upon him was constantly grow-
ing throughout his brief reign, corresponding to a per-
ceptible increase of manliness on his part. For some
days after the Council of June 21a final struggle was
waged between the two Marias, ending in the victory of
the younger. Her demand for constitutional reform was
urgently supported by the King's uncle, the Count of
Aquila, and by the French Minister, Brenier, who were
now in close partnership.^ De Martino, meanwhile, had
been sent to Rome to obtain the Pope's leave for the
change of policy, which was grudgingly given on con-
dition that any alliance with Piedmont was not to be
made at the expense of the Papal territories or the privi-
leges of the Church. The Pope's consent turned the
scale in the King's mind, and on June 25 the Sovereign
Act was published recalling to vigour the Constitution of

^Elliot, 37, Julys.

^Russell MSS. Elliot, letters of June ii, July 23, Aug. 2. Liberia Romano,
6-8. De Cesart, ii. 283-289.

THE CONSTITUTION STILL-BORN 15

1848, granting Home Rule to Sicily under a Prince of the
Royal House, and announcing that an alliance would
be made with Piedmont — the complete triple programme
advised by Napoleon. The tricolour flag, symbolic of
Italian nationality, was hauled up on all the public build-
ings and on the ships of the fleet ; ^ the political prisoners
were let loose throughout the Kingdom ; the exiles re-
turned amid processions and rejoicings ; pending the
elections to Parliament, a Ministry of moderate Liberals
took over the authority of the State. As far as the
Government was concerned, everything was done in the
most approved manner according to the pattern of one
of those joyous Constitution-givings of the spring of 1848,
when monarchs and peoples had wept in each other's
arms. But on this occasion it was only the monarch who
opened his arms and embraced the empty air. When on
June 26 the King and Queen drove out in an open car-
riage to receive the ovations of liberated Naples, hats
were respectfully raised, but hardly a cheer was heard
in the whole length of the Toledo.*

The Constitution was still-born. In some upland ^
villages, especially in the district between Naples and
the Roman border, it was regarded as a Jacobinical
betrayal of religion ; while the great mass of the King's
subjects in the capital and in the provinces south of the
capital regarded it merely as a first step in the direction
of Italian unity, a means of freeing themselves from the
police and the censorship, so as to be better able to
welcome ' him ' when he came. ' He ' was at Palermo,
he would soon be at the Straits, and it was in that direc-
tion and not to the Palace of Naples that all men's
thoughts were turned. The newly granted liberties
were used to destroy the Government that had conceded
them. Newspapers sprang up by the score ; books,

1 Victor Emmanuel's flag, used by Garibaldi, was the tricolour with the cross
0/ Savoy upon it; that is now the flag of all Italy. There was no cross on the
tricolour of the short-lived ' Constitutional ' Kingdom of Francis II of Naples.

" Liborio Romano, 8. De Cesare, ii. 289-291.

i6 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

pamphlets, and proclamations appeared everywhere, and
nearly the whole output of the liberated press was anti-
dynastic. Its only disputes turned on the rival merits
of Cavour and Mazzini, of Federation and Annexation
and whether or not to await Garibaldi's coming before
beginning the revolution.

The new Ministry formed by Spinelli, with De Martino
in charge of Foreign affairs, consisted chiefly of mediocre
but honest men, desirous of working the Constitution
and saving the dynasty. But with one exception they
had neither influence nor popularity, at a time when the
mere possession of office lent but little authority to the
opinions of its holder. Yet even the Ministers, without
intending to do so, further undermined the stability of
the throne. For they busied themselves, as indeed it
was their duty to do if the Constitution was to be a
reality, in turning out reactionaries and putting in old
constitutionalists as prefects, magistrates, and police, re-
gardless of the fact that the old constitutionalists were
now for Garibaldi almost to a man. The expulsion of
genuine royalists from the public service alienated the
enthusiasm of the King's friends, without reconciling his
enemies, to whom it gave the civil power in every Pro-
vince from Calabria to Abruzzi. The bishops, more re-
actionary than their clergy, were the only persons in
authority who could not be summarily dismissed, but they
were watched by spies who reported their sayings and
movements to the Minister of the Interior : some of the
prelates fled from their dioceses in real or affected fear
for their personal safety. In every town the new au-
thorities formed and armed the National Guard, chosen
out of the middle class, which became in eff'ect a military
force prepared to support the coming revolution.

The army alone was loyal to the King, but as it still
consisted of about 100,000 well-armed and well-drilled
men, it might still defeat Garibaldi, and if it could once
drive the red-shirts in rout no one doubted that the
Constitution, the National Guard, the Ministry, the press.

POSITION OF THE MINISTERS 17

and the tricolour flags would all be huddled away in
twenty-four hours. After all, there had been a Constitu-
tional Ministry in 1848, and shortly afterwards the prin-
cipal Ministers were serving their time in irons. It was
this supreme consideration which made real loyalty im-
possible for any man, however much he cared for the
dynasty, if he also cared for the Constitution. No one
except the reactionaries really wished to hear of a victory
over the man who was in name the national enemy, and
in reality the national deliverer. It was for this reason
that the new Ministers were so unwilling to take the
offensive against him in Sicily. For no Cabinet can be
expected to conduct a war with vigour, when a decisive
victory would mean twenty years' penal servitude for
each of its members. General Pianell, the new War
Minister, was a faithful and honest man, but he erred in
accepting a post of which he could not, by the nature of
the case, heartily fulfil the duties.^

Don Liborio Romano, the new Prefect of Police, was
the sole exception to the rule that the Ministers had
neither popularity nor influence ; and he was also the
exception to the rule that they were passively loyal to
the King. ' Don Liborio,' as he was called in these days,
was a native of lower Apulia, skilled in the insinuating
manners and arts of political intrigue which the inhabit-
ants of the region between Taranto and Brindisi are said
to have inherited from their Greek ancestors. He had
been an active Liberal as early as 1820, and had often
suffered as such at the hands of the police. But he
belonged essentially to the world of Levantine intrigue,
rather than to the world of European revolution. For
this reason he was able from June to September, i860, to
preserve the confidence of the inhabitants of the capital by
a kind of masonic mutual understanding or sympathy of
character, which a more straightforward man would have
failed to establish with the Neapolitans. After his retire-

^De Cesare, ii. 292-322. Elliot, 34-42. Nisco, 50-54. 59-62. Salazaro,
47-52.

1 8 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

ment he always asserted that he had taken office, not in
order to save the dynasty, which he believed to be alreadjr-
lost, but in order to preserve his fellow-countrymen from
anarchy and civil war.^ This account of his motives, if
a considerable allowance be also made for his vanity and
ambition, is accepted by the most competent and un-
biassed authorities who knew the Naples of that day
well, and they are also of opinion that at the moment of
entering office he did actually achieve his purpose and
save the city and perhaps the whole Kingdom from a
terrible disaster.''

The circumstances were as follows. On June 27, two
days after the proclamation of the Sovereign Act, when
all the authorities of the old regime had lost their power,
but before the new Ministry was well in the saddle, and
before the National Guard or the new police had been
formed, disorders broke out in Naples. The police of
the old Government were hunted down, and their archives
burnt. Unless the mob was checked, anarchy would
soon prevail in its most hideous form. But there was at
the moment no armed force deriving its authority from
the Constitution, and if the regular army, aflame with
reactionary passions, had been called out to shoot the
mob, civil war would have begun at once. In the cir-
cumstances Liborio Romano was entreated to become
Prefect of Police, on the ground that no one else could
save Naples. He accepted the post on June 27, and on
the next day the Prefecture of Police, till then execrated
by every one, became the resort of the leading Liberals.
But the Liberals alone could not control the vicious and
non-political criminal class of Naples. The camorra,
hitherto in tacit league with the old Royal Government,'
had now turned against all government. Don Liborio,
to avoid the imminent social catastrophe, struck a bargain
with this secret association of criminals, in the name

^ Liborio Romano, 14, 26. Trinity, 232-233.

' Trinity, 233. De Cesare, ii. 294-295. Nisco, 53-54-

' Garibaldi and the Thousand, p. 132.

"DON LIBORIO" AND THE CAMORRA 19

of the new Government, or at any rate of its Prefect of
Police. The chiefs of the camorra were given places in
the new police force, along with other more respectable
members of society. The consequence was that there
were no more disturbances in Naples during the next
three months of turmoil, panic, and revolution, except on
occasions when the reactionary soldiers broke loose from
their barracks. In this ignominious manner Naples was
saved. The price paid by the Italian Government in
later years was high, but possibly not too high for the
escape of society from promiscuous bloodshed and
rapine.

Having thus tided over the immediate danger, Don
Liborio formed the National Guard from among his own
adherents in the respectable middle class. The National
Guard, the police, and the camorra were now at his dis-
posal, not only in Naples but throughout the provinces.
He was master of the situation and held the stakes until
either the King or Garibaldi had conquered. Through-
out July and August he was the real ruler of the country
for all domestic purposes except the command of the
army. Francis II hated and distrusted Don Liborio,
but dared not dismiss him.^

While the House of Bourbon was thus engaged at
home in clothing its enemies with authority and its
friends with confusion, the Piedmontese alliance, to
obtain which all these sacrifices were being made, was
eagerly solicited at Turin. Twice during the last twelve
months Piedmont had asked for an alliance and been
rebuffed by the counsellors of Francis II ; it was now
their turn to sue for the settlement which they had so
recently refused. The House of Bourbon was on its
knees, clad in the Constitution and the Tricolour for a
garb of penitence. But the record of its perjuries pre-
vented all confidence, and the record of its cruelties all

^Liborio Romano, 3, 8-21, a6. Nisco, 52-55. De Cesare, ii. 293-295, 301-
303i 305-307. Trinity, 219-224, 230-233.

2*

20 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

forgiveness. The ' Neapolitan prisoners,' ^ whose woes
Mr. Gladstone had made famous, the victims of Bomba's
dungeons, were now many of them residing in Turin,
several as Deputies in the North Italian Parliament
which was then in full session. Others, like Braico, had
gone to Sicily with the Thousand. When the news of
the fall of Palermo arrived, the Neapolitan exiles in
Turin met at the house of Mancini, one of their number,
and at the instance of Carlo Poerio declared for the
deposition of the Bourbons." When, some three weeks
later, there arose the question of the alliance of Piedmont
with Naples, the uncompromising attitude of these men
strengthened Cavour's hands to resist the proposal.
Poerio, the Conservative Minister of the late King dur-
ing the Parliamentary regime of 1 848, had been rewarded
for his undisputed loyalty to Crown and Constitution
by a sentence of twenty-four years in irons obtained by
notoriously false witness, at the instance of Bomba him-
self He had served eight years of that sentence, and
had come out of prison in 1859 converted to the pro-
gramme of Italian Unity. He and his friends now put
themselves at the head of the popular agitation in North
Italy, which made it impossible for Cavour, even if he
had so wished, to accept the alliance and to protect the
Neapolitan State from further invasion by Garibaldi.
On June 29 Poerio, from the tribune of the North Italian
Chamber, uttered sentiments which, coming from the
mouth of one so moderate, so reticent, and so just, carried
the full weight of their literal meaning.

' The Neapolitan Government,' he said, ' has the tradition
of perjury, handed down from father to son. That is why it
now offers to swear to the Constitution, because it is clear that
in order to be perjured it is necessary first to swear. I trust
that the Ministers of Victor Emmanuel will not stretch out
their hands to a Government which certainly is the most de-
clared of the enemies of Italian independence.'

The roar of applause that followed him as he returned

' Garibaldi and the Thousand, chap. iii. ' Mancini, 135-136.

CAVOUR AND THE PROPOSED ALLIANCE 21

to his seat showed that the North Italian Deputies had
already made up their minds about the proposed alliance.^

The Neapolitan exiles, while they held this language
in public, expressed themselves with no less vigour and
decision in their private correspondence. Writing to
Panizzi, the Librarian of the British Museum, and one
of the chief unofficial agents of the Italian cause in our
country, Poerio and his fellow-martyr Settembrini urged
that the hour had struck to weld Italy into one State,
and that if a truce were now patched up, when the
trumpets should be sounding the final charge, ' enthus-
iasm would cool with time ' and the principle of ' dualism
with all its terrible consequences ' would for ever divide
the Italian Peninsula.^

Cavour was from the first aware that it was impos-
sible to accept the alliance. On the very day of Poerio's
speech in the Chamber, he telegraphed to Villamarina,
the Piedmontese Minister at Naples : ' Take care to
render impossible an agreement between the King of
Naples and the national party. We must not allow
Italy to believe that by complaisance or weakness we
are ready to fraternize with the King of Naples.' ^ To
accept the Neapolitan alliance would, as he knew, mean
schism and possibly civil war in North Italy. And yet he
dared not at once close the door on a proposal initiated by
France, regarded by Austria, Russia, and Prussia as only
too liberal, and at present supported officially by Eng-
land herself As soon as Hudson had finished persuad-
ing Lord John Russell to accept frankly the idea oi
annexation and united Italy, a task upon which he was
busily engaged in a private and unofficial correspond-
ence,* Cavour might take a bolder course. But ' even if

■ F. O. Sard. Hudson, July 2, i860, No. 292. See also Manebrini, 46.

'^ Panizzi, 428-433.

' Chiala, iii. 277, June 29. That it was the real intention of Cavour and
Faiini to refuse the alliance is borne out by Farini's words to Spaventa on July
II {Spaventa, 295).

* Russell MSS. Hudson. Letters of May 31, July 16, 27, 31 ; see Appendix
A, below.

22 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

we were helped by England,' he wrote to Ricasoli on
July 8, ' we could not fight both on the Mincio and on
the Alps,' against both Austria and France. So he could
not 'reject scornfully a proposed settlement presented
under French auspices and by French advice.'^ He
determined, therefore, to entertain the Neapolitan envoys.
Manna and Winspeare, and to treat about the alliance on
such terms as were certain to be refused by King Francis,
making demands tantamount to the cession of Sicily and
the further partition of the Pope's territory for the
benefit of Piedmont.^

But the fear that the Italian people would suppose
even these negotiations to be serious constantly haunted
him. ' If we consent to the alliance we are lost. If we
reject it, what will Europe say ? In my life I was never
more embarrassed.'^ To retain the confidence of the
patriotic party Cavour more and more openly hastened
the equipment and departure of the expeditions of
volunteers to join Garibaldi, and that portion of the
press which he inspired was observed to be scornfully
hostile to the Neapolitan alliance.* At the same time
he tried to cut the knot of his difficulties by engineering
an immediate revolution in Naples. The Piedmontese
diplomatic representative, Villamarina, was the centre of
this movement and the Piedmontese Legation its house
of call. Even in April, under the old regime of repres-
sion, Villamarina's house, with its immunities against
police search, had been used for the meetings of con-
spirators, and the forwarding of their letters to North
Italy.' And now in July he was instructed to act with
Piedmontese agents of high character like Emilio Visconti-
Venosta, and with the best of the Neapolitan exiles like
Spaventa and Nisco, who openly cameinto Naples, some

' Ckiala, iii. 282.

''Ibid., iii. 273, June 27. Bianchi, viii. 305-312. Bianchi's Cavour,
108-114. Spaventa, 295.

3 Chiala, iii. 284, July 12.

'Chiala's Dina, 311-314, Opinione of June 29 quoted. •' Mancitii, 134.

CAVOUR AND THE ETHICS OF REVOLUTION 23

as naturalised Piedmontese subjects, others trusting to
the civil rights enjoyed under the new Constitution.
Some came with money supplied by Cavour and Farini to
start newspapers ; all came to talk to their old friends in
the army and elsewhere, and to stir up an annexationist
movement.^ Within a few days of his arrival in Naples,
Venosta wrote home to report that the army was Bour-
bonist in sympathy, and that the people only understood
the idea of revolution as connected with Garibaldi, for
whom they were waiting as for a second St. Januarius.^
But it was not until the end of August that Cavour could
be persuaded by his agents that a revolution without
Garibaldi was impossible.

It was indeed, neither a dignified nor an honest policy
to pretend to treat for alliance with the Government of
a country while arming bands of volunteers to invade
its provinces, and sending emissaries to excite a revolu-
tion in its capital. But that was the system pursued by
Cavour during July and August, because he believed the
alternative to be the Austrian bayonets in Milan and the
French in Turin. Danton once thundered out for all
the world to hear, Que mon nom soitfl^tri, que la France
soit libre. Cavour's intellectually aristocratic temper had
no such unsafe confidences for the people at large, but
he said quietly to his friends one day : ' If we had done
for ourselves the things which we are doing for Italy,
we should be great rascals.'* The magnificent integrity
of Cavour's private character and the entire disin-
terestedness of his public conduct, lends peculiar force
to this saying. It must indeed be confessed that he
bequeathed to the statesmanship of the new Italy the
old traditions of duplicity, which have sometimes become
low cunning in the hands of successors with neither his
virtues, his abilities, nor his dire necessities for their

^ Spavtnta, 292-298. De Cesare, ii. 364-365. Nisco, 70-73. Mezzacapo,
123-129.

^Conv. Venosta.

' Related in M. D'Azeglio's letter about the ethics of 1860-1, Persano, 463.

24 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

excuse. But before we condemn Cavour we must decide
whether without a large degree of duplicity he could,
supported by England alone, have made Italy against
the will of a hostile Europe— against the destroyers of
Poland, ' the man of December,' the Pope, and the per-
jured dynasty of Naples. This question I am unable
to answer, and I believe that no answer, however con-
fidently given, can be anything better than a reasoned
guess.

There were not wanting at the time well-informed
observers who believed that Cavour could have avoided
all this chicanery, that even in June he could have carried
out the bold and straightforward policy on which he
finally embarked in September. ' I wish,' wrote Elliot
to Lord John Russell on June 25, 'Victor Emmanuel
would throw off the mask like a man and go to war. It
would certainly be a very easy matter for him to roll
down this rickety dynasty, and he would be received with
enthusiasm by the nation.' ^ It was natural for the
British Minister at Naples to write in this confident
manner, for what Elliot had close under his own eyes
was the rottenness of the Government to which he was
accredited. But it was not any fear of resistance at
Naples that withheld Cavour ; it was the fear of counter-
attack from Vienna and Paris. There were many riddles
in the complicated problem which Cavour had to solve,
but the chief one was to guess the true colour of the
chameleon of the Tuileries, the Liberal protector of the
Pope, the friendly foe of Italian unity. If Cavour let
loose the nation straining at the leash, if he made legal
war on Naples and invaded the Papal Marches and
Umbria, would Napoleon merely protest, or would he
actively interfere ? Or if Austria attacked Piedmont
when she was engaged in liberating the South, on what
terms, if any, would Napoleon lend his protection ?

On this, the supreme problem of that summer, Cavour
obtained a decided opinion from the Emperor's cousin,

' Russell MSS. Elliot, June 25.

PRINCE JEROME'S ADVICE 25

Jerome.' This prince, a whole-hearted friend of Italian
unity, deserves more credit than he has got for his suc-
cessful efforts in 1859-60 on behalf of that policy, which
for ever cut him off from all hope of an Italian kingdom
in Tuscany or elsewhere. On June 30 he wrote to
Cavour that the time had come when he could attack
^'South Italy without fear of the Emperor's veto. The
letter is one of the most important in the history of
Italy, for it foreshadows the course which Cavour
adopted two months later.

' Italy,' wrote Prince Jerome, ' is in a supreme crisis. She
must emerge from it united under the sceptre of my father-
in-law [Victor Emmanuel] with Rome as her capital, or else
she will slide back under the oppression of priests and
Austrians, at Turin as well as at Naples and everywhere else
The die is cast. . . . Daring alone can save you to-day. Be
strong. Don't trust to yourself, no illusions, no vanity, you
have need of France and you can get her by means of
the Emperor. (// vous faut la France par I' Empereur.) Be
then completely open with him. No more finesse ; that served
your turn for Tuscany ; it will not serve your turn with Sicily,
Naples, and Rome. Explain to him your views of the future,
not only your end but your means and your conduct.' ^

Cavour did not at once adopt the course here pre-
scribed for him by the Prince, but he did so before two
months were out, when he opened his innermost counsels
to Napoleon, and mobilised the Italian army to invade
the territories of the Pope and of the King of Naples.
The question is whether he could safely have ventured
upon this policy in the first days of July, on receipt of
the Prince's letter, or whether in fact it was necessary,
as he judged, to wait until the unofficial revolution under
Garibaldi had spread from Palermo to the gates of Naples.
Perhaps Prince Jerome ante-dated the readiness of his
Imperial cousin to condone the making of Italy. It is
true that Napoleon at the end of August accepted it as
the only alternative to anarchy, but it was by no means

• On Prince Jerome see Garibaldi and the Thousand, p. 75 and note.
^ Principe Nap. p. 54.

28 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

tyrannies than had ever been known in England. In
this task Lord John was opposed by the Court, but he
was supported by the pubhc, by the press, by the peti-
tions of great municipalities, and by his two chief col-
leagues, Palmerston and Gladstone, both converts, at
different dates and for different reasons, from those
authoritarian principles in Church and State to which he
himself had sworn eternal hatred while he was still a boy.

The British Minister for Foreign Affairs was therefore
ready to take any step consonant with British interests
that would assist Italian freedom, and fortunately he had
for his advisers, at Naples and at Turin respectively, two
men of marked ability who sympathised with these aims.
Elliot and Hudson conducted a private correspondence
with Lord John behind their official dispatches, and so
enabled the British Minister to keep abreast of the rapid
development of the Itahan situation in 1859-60. It was
for this reason that British policy never fell seriously
behind the ever-increasing requirements of Cavour.

Before the middle of July i860 both Hudson and
Elliot had become converts to the idea of Italian unity.
And both of them began to write private letters to pre-
pare Lord John's mind to accept the annexation of the
whole Peninsula by Victor Emmanuel. But their sup-
port of this programme was due only to the Garibaldian
conquests. Union had not previously been favoured
even by Hudson himself

On May 18, while Garibaldi with his Thousand were
still in the mountains overlooking Palermo, Hudson
had argued in a long private letter to Russell that the
fusion of North and South Italy in one State was diffi-
cult because of the intervening Papal territories, and not
desirable because of the moral corruption of the South.
He had recommended as a compromise the possession of
the throne of Naples and Sicily by a cadet of the Royal
House of Piedmont.^ But the fall of Palermo at the end

' See Appendix A, below, for the important letters referred to in the remaining
paragraphs of this chapter.

HUDSON'S LETTERS TO LORD JOHN 29

of May converted him to the idea of complete Italian
unity. 1

Meanwhile Lord John had not taken up with any
warmth his suggestion of placing a cadet of the House of
Piedmont on the throne of Naples, and ' the tidal wave of
unity which the victory of Palermo set in motion carried
that idea to the frozen sea of diplomatic nostrums,' as its
author cheerfully acknowledged. Therefore on July 16
Hudson wrote to Lord John again, declaring himself this
time ' cordially and entirely ' in favour of Italian unity
under Victor Emmanuel, ' because now that the notion of
a Prince of the House of Savoy has been set aside by the
force of circumstances,' he saw 'very great danger to the
Balance of Power in the Mediterranean if France should in
the midst of the Neapolitan confusion find means to place a
creature of her own on that throne.' On July 27 he again
wrote in favour of annexation ' as less prejudicial to
British interests (of which you remind me) than the
anarchy of Sicily and Naples, and the discontent of North
Italy.' Finally on July 31 he wrote a long reasoned
letter to Lord John to prove that Italian unity was in
accordance with British interests. In this important
letter Hudson uses two main arguments. First that
annexation had now become the only possible form of
stable government for South Italy : ' are the respectable
classes of Naples to be subjected to the inconvenience
of being shot, plundered, burnt, and violated because the
Foreign Powers dislike Unity?' Secondly, when the
whole Peninsula was united in one State, it would be
strong enough to be independent of France, and would
naturally gravitate to friendship with England and the
German Powers. A good understanding between Aus-
tria, Prussia, Italy, and England, argued Hudson, would
rid Europe of the nightmare of French domination which
then oppressed her. ' It is my duty,' he concluded,
'under my instructions to support Duality, and I have

' ' I was then a dualist. I continued to be so till the capture of Palermo.'
Hudson's letter of July 31, Russell MSS.

30 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

done so. But I should greatly fail in my duty if I did
not point out to your Lordship the difficulties (1 may say
the impossibility) which prevent its accomplishment'

These arguments, in which, as will be seen, the fear
of French predominance was the chief, sufficed to per-
suade the British statesmen of i860 that their earnest
desire to help Italian freedom was compatible with the
material interests of Great Britain, and that it was not
only their pleasure but their duty to bring about the
union of the whole Peninsula under Victor Emmanuel.
Side by side with the love of Italy, the fear of France then
dominated Englishmen, and not least among them Lord
John Russell. He was in constant anxiety at this period
lest Cavour should purchase from Napoleon the right to
annex the rest of Italy by ceding the island of Sardinia
and the Genoese Riviera to France. The rumour was
in fact baseless. But although Cavour and Farini
hastened to deny it with the utmost solemnity, Russell
could not feel easy, remembering the protestations of
innocence that had preceded the barter of Nice and
Savoy. Hudson endeavoured to relieve his chiefs fears,
pointing out that Genoa was a vital part of Italy, whereas
Nice had been a mere outpost. At the same time, with
admirable skill, he turned Lord John's remaining fears
on this head into an argument that England herself
should support the Italian claims unconditionally, and
so outbid the French by doing the work for nothing.
'I perceive,' he wrote on May 31, replying to Lord
John's fears about the alleged cession of Genoa, ' that
the more you hang back the more easy do you make the
propagation of French notions in Italy.' It is difficult to
see where Lord John had been guilty of 'hanging back.'
In any case he was never seriously open to the charge
again, but made himself thenceforth a willing auxiliary
to the plans of Hudson and Cavour.^

' See Appendix A, below, the Russell Papers.

CHAPTER II

ENTHUSIASM IN NORTH ITALY. THE EXPEDITIONS IN AID OF
GARIBALDI. MAZZINI, BERTANI, AND CAVOUR

' Oh giornate del nostio riscatto 1
Oh dolente per sempre colui
Che da lunge, dal labbro d' altrui
Come un uomo stianiero, le udr^ I
Che a' suoi figli narrandole un gioino,
Dovra dir sospirando : io non c'era ;
Che la santa vittrice bandiera
Salutata quel di non avrib.'

Alessandro Manzoni.'

' Oh days of our country's ransoming I Unhappy for ever shall he be who
shall like a stranger hear of it from afar, from the lips of others ; who when he
tells the tale to his children on a time, must say sighing, " I was not there ; " who
shall not have hailed on that day of days our hcdy, conquering banner.'

A NEW nation cannot be made solely by the skill of a
great statesman playing on the mutual jealousies of
Foreign Powers. The making of nations requires the
self-sacrifice of thousands of obscure men and women
who care more for the idea of their country than for
their own comfort or interest, their own lives or the
lives of those whom they love. Cavour, with the help
of England's attitude of ' non-intervention,' could, at
best, only keep the ring while the revolutionaries struck
down the Neapolitan Kingdom. It remained to be seen
whether volunteers would go out in sufficient numbers
to enable Garibaldi to defeat the 100,000 Bourbon troops

1 From Manzoni's Ode ' Marzo, 1821,' dedicated ' To the illustrious mem-
ory of Theodore Koerner, poet and soldier of German independence, killed at
Leipsig, 1813. A name dear to all the peoples who fight to defend or to recover
a fatherland.' This ode was published by Manzoni first in 1848, and again in
i860. The verse printed above was frequently quoted by Italians in reference to
i860.

31

32 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

who, even after the fall of Palermo, refused to embrace
the national cause. The Italian revolution had pro-
duced martyrs by the hundred; could it now produce
effective soldiers by the thousand ? The active patriots
came from among all classes of the town population,
and from the leaders of the rural districts, but the com-
mon peasantry of the North, though most of them had
now been converted to the National cause, did not cross
the sea to join Garibaldi. A severe strain was therefore
put on the cities of North Italy, not at that date as
wealthy as they have since become, to supply at a few
weeks' notice, out of the civil population, a complete
army of volunteers. The strain was the more severe
because so large a portion of the patriotic youth of the
Peninsula had already enlisted in the regular army of
Piedmont, which, so long as Garibaldi was on the war-
path, was urgently required for home defence against a
possible attack from Austria. Yet within three months
of the capture of Palermo more than 20,000 volunteers
were shipped off south from Genoa and Leghorn.^

The great majority of these Northerners proved in
the battle of the Volturno that they could fight bravely.
And it is reasonable to suppose that nine-tenths of them
went to the war mainly from patriotic motives, for there
was no compulsion to enlist except public opinion, no
reward except mental satisfaction. The pay offered was
insufficient to supply their daily needs on a campaign
where the plunder even of food was punished by death,
and where the improvised commissariat was always in-
sufficient, and often non-existent When Garibaldi at
Palermo heard complaints of the irregularity of the pay,
he said to Bandi : ' What do you want with pay ? When
a. patriot has eaten his bowl of soup and when the affairs
of the country are going well, what more can any one
want ? ' However, he agreed to fix a scale, and thence-
forward officers received two francs a day, and privates
one franc or less. The Intendant General calculated two

' See Appendix B, below, Expeditions of Volunteers who joined Garibaldi.

> a,

SPIRIT OF THE NORTHERN VOLUNTEERS 33

francs per man as the average for pay and maintenance
combined, including both officers and privates in the
estimate.^

Neither was there any prospect that at the end of the
war the spoils would be divided among the actual victors.
For the South was to be liberated, not conquered ; and
furthermore the Garibaldini well knew that they were
fighting to win a kingdom for a Royal Government sus-
picious of them if not of their leader, and fully equipped
with place-hiinters of its own. Financially, far more
was given up than was gained by the Garibaldino —
though exceptions could be named. Physically, the
campaign was no holiday ; in the mountains of Sicily
and Calabria these town-bred youths of an unathletic
community were exposed to the utmost hardships of
hunger and thirst, heat, cold, and rain, and to the
thousand petty miseries of campaigning in a half-bar-
barous country, all of which, as privileges of a patriot's
life, the old South-American guerilla expected his fol-
lowers to enjoy as much as he did himself. All this
they endured, and the tortures of wounds treated in ill-
provided field hospitals, with an uncomplaining courage
which aroused the wonder of their British companions
in arms.

The difficulty of raising at a moment's notice a purely
volunteer army, and of leading it to victory over regular
troops, is one on which modern military authorities lay
ever-increasing stress. In the light of these doctrines
it will be seen that the improvised campaign narrated
in this volume, even when full allowance has been made
for the inferior quality of the Bourbon troops, remains a
remarkable feat. It proves that fine elements of character
were widely spread in the cities and market-towns of
North Italy, and were brought out and fused together
by the patriotic ardour of that year, when the best men

^ Bandi, '2IO-21I. Forbes, 163. Conv. Dolmagc. Milan MSS. Bruzzesi,
Notebook, August 1-2, and printed table of scale of pay, September 30, i860.
Risorg. anno iii. fase. 1-2, p. 88.

3

34 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

of a race too intermittent in its activities, and too un-
certain in its emotions, were wrought up to six montiis
of steady heroism by the appeal of the great simple
passions of liberty and country.

The work of raising and equipping these 20,000 volun-
teers was carried out equally by the Cavourian and by
the more advanced parties. Their rivalry for the affec-
tions of the people, and their quarrel for the right to
direct the revolution, had the effect of stirring each side
to greater activity on Garibaldi's behalf Since the
friends of Mazzini and of Cavour could not have sat side
by side in one office, there were three or more separate
organisations engaged in the work. First, there was
Bertani's Central Committee in Aid of Garibaldi, seated at
Genoa, conducted in the interest of the advanced groups ;
secondly, the more moderate National Society, seated at
Turin, of which Cavour's agent La Farina was now
President, in place of Garibaldi resigned;^ thirdly, the
Million Rifles Fund, with its armoury at Milan, founded
by Garibaldi but conducted from first to last under the
control of the Government.^ The Million Rifles Fund
did not, like Bertani's Committee and the National
Society, actually enlist and equip men, but it supplied
the National Society with a great part of its arms and
money, and was itself secretly supplied, to this end, with
large sums from the Royal treasury, which in this
roundabout manner helped to finance Garibaldi's opera-
tions in June and July.'

One or both of the rival organisations, Cavour's
National Society and Bertani's Committee, had local
branches and agents collecting money and enHsting men
in every chief town of free Italy, from Turin to Rimini,
from Brescia to Leghorn.*

1 For the previous history of the National Society, see Garibaldi and the
Thousand, pp. 65, 165, and index under heading Italy.

^ For the previous history of the Million Rifles Fund, see Garibaldi and the
Thousand, p. 165 and index.

^Luzio, Giorn. d' It. 5 May, 1907. Chiala, iv. p. clxiii, note.

* See Appendix C, i. below.

THE SPIRIT OF THE NATION 35

In the enslaved provinces there was more secrecy
but scarcely less activity ; the conspirators of the Papal
States were in constant correspondence with Mazzini
and Bertani, who urged them not to send their young
men to Sicily but to hold them in readiness for a rising
which Bertani pledged himself to assist with an invasion
of volunteers from the North.^ But from Austrian
Venetia, the liberation of which was not immediately
contemplated, several thousands of young men escaped
over the Lombard frontier by help of a committee that
sat for the purpose at Milan and sent them on by way of
Genoa to join Garibaldi.^

An English engineer named Denton who was travel-
ling on business through North Italy that summer, de-
scribed the excitement he found in every town and
village ; the patriotic newspapers read aloud at the
street corner to satisfy a ' rapacity ' for news ' astonish-
ing to an Englishman ; ' Garibaldi's name overheard
every moment ; Garibaldi's photograph seen in every size
and shape, from the shirt-stud to the ' big poster on the
town's walls ' ; the volunteers openly departing by the
light of day in their red shirts and kepis. When Mr.
Denton crossed into Austrian Venetia he found the flame
burning not the less intensely for being forced to smoulder.
He was able to see below the surface, because every
patriot thought it safe to open his heart to him, when no
stranger was by, on no other security than the fact that
he was an Englishman. One Venetian merchant, leaving
his home because the Austrian spies and police had at
length rendered his life unbearable, said to him : ' That
is my nephew, and he is going to join the ranks of the
future liberator of Venetia. He will make the fifth
nephew I shall have serving Garibaldi, and out of sixteen
young men I had in my counting-house ten have left
me ' for Sicily. ' So it will be,' he said, ' throughout

1 Milan MSS. A. B. Plico B, sec. G. Bertani, ii. 141-147. Rome MSii.
Mazzini letters, V.E. 2366, secret agent's report from Northern Umbria.
- Bertani Comp. 4.

3*

36 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Venetia ; there will not be a young man of spirit left at
home.'^

No class and no party and no district in North Italy
was behindhand in the offering of lives or of money.
Rich and poor sent their private offerings from all over
the country, in sums which to our English standards are
not immense, but which represented the widow's mite in
many straitened Italian households.'' The Cavourian
municipal bodies of great towns like Milan voted large
sums out of rates to the Million Rifles fund. Cremona
alone, a town well below thirty thousand inhabitants,
sent nearly a thousand volunteers and gave over 1 30,000
lire, partly by subscription, partly by a loan which the
municipality raised in order to aid Garibaldi's expedition.^

But Bergamo, Brescia, and Pavia were the chief
Garibaldian cities, next to Genoa herself In Pavia
the Cairoli exercised a supreme influence, based upon
nothing more material than the respect of their fellow-
citizens for their integrity and their leadership in patriotic
endeavour. The father. Carlo Cairoli, Professor of
Surgery, had been made Podesta of his native city in
1848, and had died soon after its re-occupation by the
Austrians, leaving his five boys to the influence of his
widow Adelaide. ' The mother of the Cairoli ' had first
lost Ernesto at Garibaldi's battle of Varese in 1859. In
i860 Benedetto and Enrico had gone with the Thousand
and were both lying wounded in Palermo, when Luigi,
aged twenty-two, threw up his commission in the regular
army and followed them to Sicily. In September he
died of typhus, the result of the hardships of the march
through Calabria. During the days when he was con-
tracting his fatal illness, he wrote a long and cheerful
letter to his mother and to his betrothed, from the remote
Calabrian village of Spezzano Albanese. ' Mama,' so the
letter ended, ' I must tell you one thing, which I have
tried to be silent about so as not to alarm your modesty,

' Times, August 31, i860, p. 7, Mr. Denton's letter.
' See Appendix C, ii. below. ' Cremona, 10.

THE CAIKOI.T FAMILY, K\Ii OF lS6o.

Benedetto, ''f tlie Thoii-^and, Gio\'anni, mortally woiiiiLled The mother Enrico, of the Thousand^

eldest, survived. at \'illa fllori, 1867 Adelaide. killed Villa Glori, 1867.

Absent from the group, Ernesto killed at Varese 1859, and Luigi died in Calabrian campaign 1S60.

THE CAIROLI FAMILY 37

but which I can no longer leave untold. Yesterday
evening my hosts asked me my name. You should have
seen the effect which it had on them to hear that I was
a Cairoli, or rather a son of the Cairoli mother, of Pavia.
And this is not the first time that it has happened to me.
Garibaldi's proclamation to the women of Sicily,' [in
which Adelaide's patriotic sacrifices were held up for
their imitation,] ' was greedily read in all Sicily and the
Neapolitan continent, and so your name is already vener-
ated by every good Italian of the South. . . . Good-bye,
Mama, good-bye, Adriana.' ^ Luigi died a fortnight after
writing this letter, but Benedetto and Enrico recovered
of their wounds. Seven years later Enrico, and Giovanni
the youngest of the five, received their death-wounds
from the Papal troops at Villa Glori, while attempting
at the head of a small band of men to force their way
into Rome. Benedetto, the eldest, and the mother
Adelaide alone survived the wars of liberation. The
story of the Cairol i, all bound together by ties of the
strongest affection, all devoted wholly to their country's
cause, all free from any taint of self-interest, of bombast,
or of violence, was revered by Garibaldi and his con-
temporaries, and has become traditional with posterity as
the most perfect example of that family life which fostered
the purest qualities of the Italian risorgimento.

The papers of Bertani's Central Committee in Aid of
Garibaldi have been preserved. The historian can turn
over voluminous masses of accounts, bills, purchases of
steamers, lists of arms, uniforms, and stores acquired and
despatched, besides many documents more poignantly
human. There are hundreds of letters for May, June,
and July offering service, or rather imploring to be
allowed to serve under Garibaldi.^ In many cases the
writer offers to throw up for life aome well-paid civil
or military post under Government, the Italian idea of
bliss, in order to be able to serve Garibaldi for six

' Catroli, 89-92, 349. ^ Milan MSS. A. B. Plichi xiii. xiv. xv.

38 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

months. Frequently the aspirant states his age to be
seventeen, apparently as the ideal age for a soldier.
Sometimes the letter speaks for a group of persons
preparing to come. Sometimes it serves to introduce
a would-be volunteer who brings it by hand. We can
imagine Bertani, his emaciated body propped up on the
pillows of his sick-bed, working night and day with the
light of fever, almost of madness, in his eyes ; his hand
shakes as he tears open one after another of these letters,
and dashes off a line of answer to each in an almost in-
decipherable scrawl. Racked by an incessant cough, un-
able to speak articulately, unable to swallow his food, he
had not in the middle of June the strength to leave or
return to bed except by his friends' help ; when they
told him he would die if he continued to work, he replied,
' What does it matter ? ' ^ To their surprise he recovered
as the summer drew on.

The misery of some who met with Bertani's point-
blank refusal to accept them as volunteers is depicted in
their piteous second appeals, refusing to be denied.^
Meanwhile Genoa was crammed full of volunteers who
had been duly forwarded by their local committees or
who had paid for their own journey thither on the chance
of getting a passage to Sicily ; all these complained
bitterly if they were not shipped south by the very next
steamer.

One important group of letters ^ proves that Bertani
faithfully carried out Garibaldi's instructions that officers
of the regular army should be restrained from sending
in their papers, and men from deserting the ranks in
order to join him. Garibaldi, when he sailed for Sicily,
had left behind him a proclamation exhorting Italian

^ Bertani, ii. 76-77.

'^ A girl of the Genoese working class writes to him confidentially on July 4 :
' Genoa and the world weary me, so far from the heroes of Italy. . . . My
parents may perhaps be adverse to my decision to go to Sicily, but you who are,
like Garibaldi, the incarnation of the Italian mind and heart, can find means to
persuade them.' Milan MSS. A. B. Plico xv. No. 180. Teresa Penco's letter.

* Milan MSS. A. B Plico xii. No. 13.

BERTANI AT WORK 39

soldiers to remain at their posts, and Bertani, as we find,
had a formula ready drawn out to the same effect, copies
of which were stacked in his office. When, as often
happened, he received an application from some officer
in the royal army, desirous of joining Garibaldi, it was
his custom to sign a copy of this formula and send it off
to stop him. He made some exceptions, but this was his
usual policy. In spite of it many royal officers, sergeants,
and corporals appeared in Sicily, not a few having been
sent out by the Cavourian agencies. Some had the tacit
consent of Victor Emmanuel or of the military authorities,
who knew that Garibaldi stood in need of drill masters ; ^
but others risked and in many cases lost their careers.^
Without such a stiffening of regulars, it is doubtful
whether the volunteers could have conquered. But if
Garibaldi and Bertani had not done their best to keep
the movement within limits, the discipline and numbers
of the royal army might have been dangerously weakened.

Meanwhile Mazzini was lying hidden in Genoa,
secretly exerting through Bertani and others an impor-
tant influence on events.

The great exile, who in the 'thirties and 'forties had
raised the Italian movement into a religion by which
thousands lived and died, had since 1848 remained behind
in his old position, while the national cause to which he
had given the first vital impulse rallied under other
leaders and moved forward to final victory. He was out
of touch with the new age. Even this year i860, which
saw Italy united in fulfilment of his dream dreamt
thirty years ago, seemed to him merely another chapter
of national shame and weakness. Since the sacrifice
of personal happiness was the soul of Mazzini's teaching
and character, there is artistic fitness in his life-long

1 E.g. Bandi, 60. Adamoli, Ti-li, 78-

^Conv. Dolmage. Mr. Dolmage talked with many of them and heard
their stories. These stories are indeed scattered thickly up and down Gari-
baldian literature.

^2 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

of Italian conspiracy. Indeed, from 'the friend's' first
arrival in Genoa early in May, Bertani entered with him
into the great plan for invading the Papal States.^

It was the intention of Bertani's Committee in Aid
of Garibaldi to send the volunteers whom they enlisted
for his service, not to join him at once in Sicily, but to
meet him at Naples, going by the land route, and liberating
Umbria and the Marches from the Pope on their way
south. The city and district of Rome, being garrisoned
by French troops, was to be avoided for the present, but
it was hoped that when Garibaldi from the south and
Medici from the north had met in triumph at Naples, the
enthusiasm for unity would overcome all obstacles, and
they would be able before the year was out to proclaim
Victor Emmanuel King of Italy from the Capitol. This
plan had not been entirely foreign to Garibaldi's own
intentions when he sailed for Sicily with the Thousand.
He had then assigned to Medici the task of leading the
next expedition, instructing him to send reinforcements
both to Sicily and also to the Papal Marches and Umbria,
where a rising was, said Garibaldi, about to take place.^
Whether Medici in person was to go with the reinforce-
ments to Sicily or with the invaders of the Pope's
territories, was left undecided in Garibaldi's letter.'

' Mario's Mazzini, 406 (chap, xxiii.). Fam. Crauford, 210, letter of May
13. Taylor MSS. letters xciii., clxvi.

' Presumably to be stirred up by Zambianchi.

' Garibaldi's letter (see Garibaldi and the Thousand, p. 204, and Medici, 5),
reads as follows : —

' Genoa, May 5, i860.

'Dear Medici, — It is better that you should remain behind, and you can
be more useful so. Bertani, La Farina, the Directors [of the Million Rifles
Fund] at Milan will furnish you, on the presentation of this letter, with all the
means you will require. \ou must not only make every effort to send reinforce-
ments of men and arms into Sicily, but to do the same for the Marches and
Umbria where there will soon be a rising and where soon it will be necessary to
support it to the utmost. Tell the Italians to follow you in entire confidence,
and that the time has come to make the Italy that we all yearn for.' In the
orders which Garibaldi gave to Zambianchi, he speaks of Medici going to the
Papal States as a possibility, but not as a certainty. See Garibaldi and the
Thousand, p. 216, Mario's Mazzini, 404.

DESIGNS TO ATTACK THE POPE 43

Such were the vague instructions which he left be-
hind, obviously requiring a good deal of interpretation.
Bertani, under the influence of Mazzini, decided to divert
practically the whole of the reinforcements to the Papal
States. Neither of them military men, they were both
under the delusion that Garibaldi could overrun Sicily
and cross the Straits with his Thousand alone, aided by
the islanders. ' Sicily is safe,' said Mazzini, ' let us think
of the rest. . . . You do not know the genius of Garibaldi
and the indomitable determination of the Sicilians to be
rid of Bourbon rule. Henceforth we must help Sicily
from Central Italy by way of the Abruzzi. Garibaldi
has with him a body of good officers,' who would suffice
to drill and lead the Sicilians. 'To the Centre every
one : Umbria and the Marches liberated, we will reach
Garibaldi across the Abruzzi.'^

The supposition that Garibaldi could have advanced
from Palermo without strong reinforcements from North
Italy was perhaps the crudest of the mistakes involved
in this scheme, and was, moreover, the only point where
the scheme deviated from Garibaldi's own instructions.
But it may further be doubted whether a few thousand
volunteers, under a chief other than Garibaldi himself,
would have sufficed to liberate Umbria and the Marches.
Mazzini told Bertani that all would go well because the
Papal troops would join the liberators in the hour of
battle.^ But the Pope's fighting regiments, his newly
levied Austrian, Irish, and French crusaders, were about
as likely to join the red-shirts as the red-shirts were to
join them. These Papal troops put up a gallant though
hopeless fight against the superior force of the Pied-
montese regular army in September, and there is no
reason to think that they would not have opposed a very
serious resistance to Medici's scanty volunteers in June.'

1 Mario's Mazzini, 404-405. See also a letter of his to Bertani prior to the
landing of Garibaldi : ' Collect money, but don't send it to Sicily. If Garibaldi
does not get there it is not needed ; if he gets there, it is equally not needed.
His presence there will suffice.' Rome MSS. Mazz. letters, 2343.

''Mazzini, xi. p. xcix. 'Cadolini in Mem. Star. Mil. ii. 176-180.

44 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Even if victorious in the field, how could an army of
irregulars without siege guns take Ancona ? But if the
plan to liberate the Marches and join Garibaldi at Naples
was to succeed at all, it must succeed completely and at
once.

For not only the Papal army but the Foreign Powers
had to be considered. Austria, who until 1859 had her-
self garrisoned the Marches for the Pope, had since the
beginning of i860 been pouring into the port of Ancona
thousands of Austrian subjects to be enlisted in the
Papal army. Would Austria, then, have watched un-
moved the capture of these districts by Revolutionary
bands ? And as to France, even if Medici had left Rome
untouched, would Napoleon have allowed the red-shirts
to do to Umbria in June what he allowed Cavour to do
in September ?

On May 7, the day after Garibaldi's departure, Medici
still regarded the invasion of the Papal States as his own
probable destiny ; ^ but when all these grave considera-
tions — the weakness of Garibaldi's military position in
Sicily, the strength of the new Papal army and the old
Papal fortresses, and the probable action of Austria and
France — were laid before his cool judgment by Cavour's
agents. La Farina, Amari, and Melenchini, he was not
long in deciding for Sicily. As early as May 12, even
before the news of Garibaldi's landing at Marsala had
arrived, Medici had been won round to Cavour and
common sense, and had declared that he would take his
expedition by sea to join Garibaldi.''

The quarrel that divided Mazzini and Bertani's Com-

1 ' I have remained behind to support the bold enterprise by a second ex-
pedition, or better still by a powerful diversion elsewhere.' Medici's letter to
Panizzi, May 7, Panizzi, 425.

2 La Farina, ii. 319, letter of May 12. Amari, ii. 83, letter of May 13.
Chiala, iv, p. cclxii. Bertani Comp. 6, After having helped before May 12 to
persuade Medici to take his men to Sicily, La Farina a few days later was foolish
enough to advise that no men but only money should be sent to Sicily — the men
apparently to go to Naples. See La Farina's letter of May 17, in Medici, 14-15.
Fortunately no one listened to him.

THE FORWARD POLICY 45

mittee on the one side, from Cavour, Medici, and the
National Society on the other, arose on this question of
the desti nation of the volunteers, not.oa the-^uestion of
KepubircorMT5narchy.-Onrthe latter point even Mazzini
had, for the time being, surrendered.^ But on the former
the quarrel was in full vigour even before the fall of
Palermo.^ It first arose on the question whether Medici
should go to Sicily or to the Papal States, and it was
revived in the same form over the departure of every
large consignment of volunteers that left Genoa in June,
July, and August.

If Bertani's plan of invading the Papal States had
been carried out. Garibaldi would have been left locked
up at Palermo for want of men, and Italy would probably
have met with a great disaster in the Centre. And yet
Bertani's policy, though it would have been fatal if put
into practice, proved invaluable as a stimulus to Cavour.
The constant threat of the advanced party to send
their own men into the Papal States, coupled with
Garibaldi's success in the South, finally drove Cavour
to invade the Papal States himself when the time was
ripe. Mazzini and Bertani, wrong in detail, were right
in their two general principles — first, that the Pope and
the King of Naples ought to be attacked this year while
the revolutionary enthusiasm created by Garibaldi's
success was at its height ; ^ and secondly, that they ought
to be attacked from both north and south at once.

' In one of his almost daily notes to Bertani, written in June, he says : —

' I have no republican intentions. I strive for nothing but the Unity. The
cry Viva la Repuhblica would seem to me a real mistake at this moment.' Maz-
zini, xi. p. xcvii.

Again in his letter to his republican friends, Nicotera, Mosto, and Savi, June
ig (ditto, p. cii), he writes that he would prefer the ' neutral banner ' and the
single cry ' Italy,' leaving the form of government to be settled by the nation
later. But if the leaders of the volunteer movement insist on Garibaldi's cry,
' Italy and Victor Emmanuel,' Mazzini will make no protest even against that,
and ' will follow the column in silence.'

^Amari, ii. 87-go. Risorg. anno i. fasc. 5-6, p. 993. Dallolio, 97-115, on
some fruitless attempts to heal the breach, made in the last half of May.

^Mazzini, xi. p. xcviii. 'Enthusiasm cannot go on increaiiing indefi-
nitely.'

46 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

At present Cavour was content to help Garibaldi.
Having won over Medici to abandon the Papal States
and to go direct to Sicily in Bertani's despite, the Govern-
ment was bound to fit him out and send him with all
possible speed. Medici's expedition, and the expedition
of Cosenz a few weeks later, were armed, clothed, and
shipped at the expense of the Cavourian National Society
and the Million Rifles Fund.^ Since these organisations
had no offices in Genoa, the port of departure, it was
necessary for Medici and Cosenz to set up there a Mili-
tary Office of their own, as they did not wish to be de-
pendent on Bertani's Committee.^ Dr. Bertani did,
however, fit out the ambulance for their expeditions, and
both of them, when they respectively sailed, parted from
him on speaking terms.*

The Bertani Committee also supplied the Military
Office of Medici and Cosenz with a good many of its
best recruits, in addition to the men whom the Cavourians
raised for themselves in Milan and elsewhere.* But the
steamers, the arms, and the money for the expeditions of
June and July came almost entirely from the Cavourian
agencies. It was only in August that Bertani and his
friends sent out the great expeditions which they them-
selves had paid for and equipped. In June and July
hundreds of thousands of lire were secretly supplied by
the King's Government to purchase the steamers and
equip the men for Medici and Cosenz.* Over 6000
firearms were obtained for them by Cavour from the
armoury of the Million Rifles Fund at Milan, which had
been closed to Garibaldi himself a month before by the
inconvenient scruples of Massimo D'Azeglio, the Gover-
nor of the city.* Cavour now eased D'Azeglio's con-
science by purchasing the weapons with the alleged

' See references in Appendices B (p. 320) and C, below, and Bertani Comp.
7-8 in particular.

^ Bertani Comp. 3-4. ^ Bertani, ii. 76-77, 91. ■■ Bertani Comp. 4, 9.

^ Lu2io, Giorn. d' It. May 5, 1907, Finzi's correspondence. See Appen-
dices B and C, below.

"Garibaldi and the Thousand, 182-183.

D'AZEGLIO'S SCRUPLES 47

intention of arming the National Guard, — and then sent
them to Medici at Genoa.'

In the course of the summer D'AzegHo gradually
discovered that he was being fooled. When in obedi-
ence to the ostensible orders of Government he tried to
put difficulties in the way of recruiting volunteers in
Milan, he found that all the neighbouring Governors gave
him the cold shoulder. Finally a private letter from a
highly placed official to one of D'Azeglio's subordinates
served to open the Governor's eyes : ' It seems,' said
the letter, ' that at Milan you are not much in touch with
the real intentions of the Government.' Finally D'Azeglio
retired, alleging the ground of ill-health. To the end of
his life he would never allow that Cavour's underhand
methods had been right.''

' Luzio, Corr. della Sera, Dec. 8, igog, letter of Farini to D'Azeglio, May
29. Bertani Comp. 7.

'^D'Azeglio, 306-308. Persano, 463-465.

CHAPTER III

GARIBALDI AT PALERMO. THE RECONSTRUCTION OF HIS
ARMY. THE ADVANCE THROUGH THE ISLAND

' Addio, mia bell' addio

L'armata se ne va ;
Se non partissi anch' io

Sarebbe una vilta.' '

' Farewell, farewell, my true love,

The army's on the move ;
And if I stayed with you, love

A coward I should prove.'

The three steamers which were to carry Medici and his
men to Sicily had been purchased from a French company
nominally on behalf of De Rohan, a Yankee devotee oi
the Italian cause. They had been hastily rechristened
the Washington, Oregon, and Franklin, and the United
States Consul at Genoa, accompanied by ' Garibaldi's
Englishman,' Peard, who was starting with the expedi-
tion, went on board the Washington and hauled up on it
the stars and stripes.^ A little before dawn on June lo
Medici sailed with the Washington and Oregon from a
spot a few miles west of Genoa, where a midnight em-
barkation had taken place, and on the same day the
Franklin sailed from the shore between Pisa and Leg-
horn, where she had taken on board the Tuscan volun-
teers.' These two parts of Medici's expedition met

1 There is always some popular song that is being suijg, whistled, and hummed
ad nauseam. In the Italian armies of i860 it was ' Addio, mia bell' addio.'

^ Peard, 813. D. News, June 26, i860, p. 4. (The latter, signed
' A. J. M.,' is clearly by Alberto and Jessie Mario, who were in the Washmg-
ton.) F. 0. Sard. Hudson, June g-io, Nos. 271, 277.

'Peard, 813. F. O. Sard. Hudson, June lo-ii, 15, Nos. 271, 273, 277, 281,
Mariotti, 417 419.

4S

MEDICI'S' EXPEDITION 49

safely at Cagliari, the port in Southern Sardinia which
became henceforth an important place of call for succes-
sive ship-loads of Garibaldini. But two other vessels,
the small Utile and the American clipper Charles and
Jane, which were also expected at Cagliari with another
thousand men, were captured on the way by Neapolitan
cruisers, and taken into the harbour of Gaeta. Medici,
after awaiting them for some time in vain, left Cagliari
with the Washington, Oregon, and Franklin, containing
2500 men, 6000 or 8000 rifles and muskets, and an im-
mense store of ammunition. This was the first aid
despatched to Garibaldi from the mainland, with the
exception of sixty men and a stock of arms and powder
which the Utile, since captured by the Neapolitans, had
run through to Palermo by way of Marsala on an earlier
and more fortunate voyage.^

Medici's three vessels left Cagliari early on the after-
noon of June 16. Shortly before nightfall of the following
day, when they were nearing the Sicilian coast and
entering the zone of greatest danger from the Neapolitan
cruisers, they saw a Piedmontese war-vessel steering
towards them. When she came alongside she turned
out to be the Gulnara, whose commander came aboard
the Washington to speak with Medici. He had orders
from his admiral, Persano, to conduct the expedition
safely to Castellamare,^ the landing-place agreed on
between Persano and Garibaldi. The commander of the
Gulnara also made in Persano's name a strange request
for the instant surrender of Mazzini. Medici was able
to assure him that, although the Republican Alberto
Mario and his English wife, Jessie White Mario, were
on board, Mazzini himself had not accompanied the ex-

1 See Appendices B and C, below. Medici actually arrived with 2500 men,
though he told Garibaldi that he was bringing 3500 at a time when he still
believed Corte's 1000 men would be able to join him. Persano, 41 note. This
led me to give the numbers wrongly in early editions of Garibaldi and the
Thousand, p. 325.

" Twenty-five miles west of Palermo : it must not be confused with the
Castellamare fortress at Palermo.

4

50 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

pedition.i A few hours later they reached Castellamare
and began to disembark before midnight. Garibaldi
came to meet them, and they marched in high spirits to
Palermo, arriving there on the 19th and the two follow-
ing days, just as the last of the Neapolitan garrison took
their departure under the terms of the capitulation.^
The new era in Garibaldi's enterprise had now fairly
begun.

-fe^

The demand made by the commander of the Gulnara
for the surrender of Mazzini out at sea was the end of a
curious story. Cavour, who after the fall of Palermo
had adopted the policy of aiding Garibaldi — upon terms
— instructed Admiral Persano to lend him what covert
help he could, but at the same time sent out a confidential
agent of his own to represent to the Dictator of Sicily
the wishes of the Government of Turin.^ Cavour's
choice for this purpose had fallen on the Sicilian, La
Farina, President of the National Society, who like
Bertani, had done much to bring Cavour and Garibaldi
together in old days, and like Bertani seemed now to
aim at undoing his own work. He was already an object
of dislike in Garibaldian circles when Cavour unwisely
chose him for this delicate task. Those of Cavour's
friends who knew Garibaldi foresaw inevitable disaster.*
La Farina arrived in Palermo during the first week of
June, and began almost at once to quarrel with the new
masters of the city. He turned his reports to Cavour
into a series of bitter attacks on the Dictator and his
administration, some just and some unjust, but all cal-
culated to alienate the two men on whose alliance the
welfare of Italy depended.^

> Persano, 34-48. Caraguel, 25-27. Peard, 815. BianchVs Cavour, 98
note. Chiala, vi. 564.

^ Garibaldi and the Thousand, 325-327. Peard., 815-817. Cremona, 39.

' Chiala, iii. 257. La F. Biundi, ii. 78.

" Valerio wrote to Castelli on June 3, ' For heaven's sake don't send La
Farina. Garibaldi and his friends detest him.' Castelli Cart. i. 3^5.

'' The degree to which La Farina's letters must be discounted, may be
judged from the fact that in November he wrote to Cavour from Naples that

CAVOUR MAKES A MISTAKE 51

On June 12 Cavour, misinformed by his spies at
Genoa as to Mazzini's movements, sent the following
message to Admiral Persano :—

'We are assured that Mazzini and Miss White [Jessie
Mario] have embarked on board the Washington that is taking
volunteers to Palermo. Send La Farina to Garibaldi to invite
him in the King's name to arrest Mazzini, and to give him into
your hands. He must tell him that Mazzini's presence in
Sicily would necessitate the recall of the squadron and ruin
the national cause in Europe. You will send Mazzini to
Genoa on board the Carlo Alberto. . . . Should Garibaldi
refuse to have Mazzini arrested you will immediately prepare
to depart with the fleet and will send the Authion to Cagliari
to receive instructions.' ^

This letter proves that there were limits to Cavour's
understanding of Garibaldi, though it was large com-
pared with Garibaldi's understanding of Cavour. It was
an error to expect Garibaldi to hand over to prison his
former master and honoured rival, now in the decline of
years and prosperity, and a folly to enforce the demand
by a threat to the liberator of Palermo in his hour of
triumph. Cavour had never had the chance of studying
Garibaldi and his friends at close quarters ; otherwise he
would have known that Garibaldi himself was above all
things a gentleman, and that Mazzini was regarded by
the whole world of exiles and advanced patriots, even
when they most differed from him, with a reverence
which to Cavour was foolishness.

La Farina flatly refused to carry out the mission,
saying that he had no influence with the Dictator, and
compelled the Admiral to take the message himself. Per-
sano, who was at this time popular with all parties, was
not ordered out of the room as La Farina would prob-
ably have been, but Garibaldi replied that he would
not arrest Mazzini unless he began to intrigue against

Mazzini was speculating for his private gain under cover of collecting money to
liberate Rome and Venice. For this vile charge and for its refutation see La
Farina, ii. 443. Ire Pol, g8-ioi.
' CJtiala, iii. 263.

4*

52 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

the monarchy of Victor Emmanuel. Persano, fully re-
alising Cavour's mistake in tactics, determined, instead
of making preparations to leave Palermo, to effect the
arrest of Mazzini before he landed in Sicily. That was
why he commissioned the commander of the Gulnara,
when he went to meet Medici, to make the arrest out at
sea. But since Mazzini was all the while in Genoa the
incident ended m fiasco}

The main object of La Farina's mission to Sicily was
to secure the immediate annexation of the island to
Piedmont. Cavour was unwilling to allow Garibaldi,
by prolonging his Dictatorship, to acquire a civil and
military establishment of his own, independent of the
Royal Government. It was necessary to send out arms
and men to Garibaldi, but it was impossible not to dread
some of the uses to which he might turn those arms and
his own immense popularity. Surrounded as he was in
great measure by the friends of Mazzini and Bertani, by
the Marios, by Crispi, by Nicotera, it was probable that,
while continuing loyal as ever to the monarchy, he might
grow less and less amenable to the advice of the King's
Ministers. Cavour was struggling to keep his feet in a
flood of diplomatic troubles which Garibaldi thought it
unpatriotic even to consider, and yet the Dictator's in-
dependent actions were the prime factor in the diplo-
matic situation of which he ignored the very existence.
There were also grave political dangers of an internal
character in a prolonged Dictatorship : Cavour was en-
deavouring to build up the unity of Italy on the only
possible basis, that of a constitutional monarchy, and if
the advanced parties were to get all the credit of the
revolution in South Italy and enjoy an indefinite tenure
of power in the Provinces which they liberated, it would
be a bad beginning for the principle of authority in the
new State as represented by the King's Parliamentary
Cabinet at Turin. Therefore Cavour desired as soon
as possible to dominate the revolution, and like the

' Persano, 36-48, 53,

CAVOUR'S MISCALCULATION 53

falconer to lure his hawk back after it had struck the
prey.

These motives, and these principles of action, were
sound in themselves, but there remains always the
question of particular application. If indeed the enemies
of Italy had already been struck down by Garibaldi, or
if Cavour had been prepared to strike them down himself
in open war, then no date would have been too early
for the annexation of Sicily. But the House of Bourbon
still reigned on the mainland, and could be overturned
by Garibaldi alone. When Cavour attempted to obtain
the annexation of Sicily in June and early July, he was
acting on the mistaken belief that an annexationist revo-
lution could be engineered by his own agents in Naples.^
He imagined that the rank and file of the Neapolitan
army was prepared to come over to the Italian cause,
and that a civil and military pronunciamento would
speedily bring the Bourbon dynasty to an end by the
act of the Neapolitans themselves. If such a revolution
had been possible, it would no doubt have been safer to
dispense with Garibaldi's further service as an indepen-
dent chieftain, and to bring him back to the place which
he had occupied in the war of 1859, as the leader of
volunteers fighting in front of the royal armies of Italy,
whenever they should next be led against Pope or
Austrian. But Cavour had yet to learn by experience
that the Neapolitans would effect no revolution for them-
selves, and that as he was not himself prepared to declare
war on Francis II, Garibaldi must be allowed to cross
the Straits of Messina if Italy was to be free.

If in June the Dictator had yielded to the cry for
immediate annexation which La Farina stirred up among
the Sicilians, the island would have passed officially into

1 For these agents and their mission, see pp. 22-23 above. On July 14
Cavour wrote to Admiral Persano : —

' On the one hand, we must at all costs prevent Garibaldi from passing on
to the continent, and on the other, we must provoke a revolution in Naples. If
this succeeds, the government of Victor Emmanuel would be proclaimed without
delay.' Persane, 88.

54 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

the hands of Piedmont, and before Garibaldi had marched
onward from Palermo, Victor Emmanuel would have
found himself completely responsible to the Powers for
every act of every red-shirt in Sicily. In that case Gari-
baldi, who even as it was came very near to being stopped
at the Straits of Messina by the Powers, would most cer-
tainly have been prevented from crossing to the mainland,
since Cavour could no longer have pleaded inability to
control his action. Then, when the Neapolitan revolution
had missed fire, the great statesman would have dis-
covered too late the flaw in his plans, and the Pope and
the King of Naples would have continued to govern
Central and Southern Italy.

All this was clearly foreseen at the time by not a few
Cavourians, including Michele Amari, the wise and
learned historian of the Sicilian Vespers, who was just
returning from exile to his own Palermo to work there
for Italian unity. Amari was certain that the Dictator
did right to refuse annexation in June, because annexation
would have confined him to the island ; but he was
equally certain that he was wrong to refuse annexation
when once he had crossed the Straits.^

For nearly a month La Farina laid siege to Garibaldi.
At his instigation, petitions were sent up by Sicilian min-
isters and municipalities, and demonstrations were held in
the streets of Palermo, which showed a genuine popular
desire for immediate annexation. The attitude of the
islanders was neither that of Cavour nor that of Gari-
baldi. They desired annexation at the earliest possible
moment, because they saw in it the best security against
reconquest by the Neapolitans and the quickest way to
a settled government. They cried Italia Una with no

' See Amari's letter of 1862, quoted in R. S. del R. anno 1S97, vol. ii. p.
136. See Mario Mac. 248 for Garibaldi's own views in June. Emilio Visconti
Venosta, an ont-and-out Cavourian, sent by Cavour to Naples in i860 to stir up
the revolution there, told me in 1910 that in his opinion Cavour made a mistake
in desiring the annexation of Sicily before Garibaldi had crossed the Straits.
Cadolini himself, politically the wisest and the most Cavourian of the red-shirts
of i860, expressed to mc the same opinion.

GARIBALDI AND THE SICILIANS 55

feigned zeal when they saw their protectors, the red-
shirts, and hoped for the Bersaglieri to follow, as averters
of Bourbon reconquest ; but they cared little whether
the hated Neapolitans were or were not brought into the
Union, and only the more enlightened individuals among
them strongly supported Garibaldi's project of crossing
the Straits.^ But while, from these selfish motives, they
favoured Cavour's plan of immediate annexation, on the
other hand, their devotion to Garibardi, who had come
to their rescue like a Paladin of old, was so powerful
a compound of superstition with pure human gratitude
and love that no difference of political opinion could wear
it away. As late as the middle of September, when
Garibaldi was clearly wrong in delaying the annexation
any longer, he had only to come to show himself in
Palermo, and although he was standing in the way of the
popular desire, all opposition was silenced in heart-felt
shouts of welcome and applause.^ When, therefore, in
June, La Farina represented the island to Cavour as being
already on the point of ' a terrible explosion ' of popular
wrath against the Dictatorship, he was writing nonsense
such as only an angry man can write.' Garibaldi said
in effect to the people of Palermo and to his Sicilian
ministers : ' I know you desire to vote the annexation at
once, but I desire to free the rest of Italy first. I have
freed you, and in return I ask you to wait while I free
your brothers. Fight first and vote afterwards.' They
consented to wait, less for the sake of their brothers than
for the sake of the man who asked of them this slight
return for all that he and his Thousand had done.

La Farina, in his letters to Cavour,not onlyrepresented
the Sicilians as more hostile to Garibaldi than they really
were, but he also represented the island as falling into
a state of anarchy, whereas in fact the disturbance was
merely such as war and revolution must necessarily

1 Bertani, ii. 86. Giiarneri. La Farina, ii. 341-350. Castellini, 48.
Bandi, 206.

2 See p. 230 below. " La Farina, ii. 347.

56 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

bring in their train among a population unaccustomed to
self-government. Bitter personal animosity to Crispi,
Garibaldi's factotum in the island, goaded on La Farina
to these exaggerations. The two Sicilians were deadly
rivals for the affections of their countrymen. La Farina
was so far right that Garibaldi was utterly unfitted to
cope with any purely political or administrative situation,
or to bring order out of the chaos of revolution ; but the
chaos was not of the kind which destroys society. La
Farina was right in saying that annexation was desirable
at the earliest date possible in the interests of administra-
tion in Sicily, and, as Amari pointed out, the gendarmerie
of North Italy were the only force capable of restoring
complete order in the island. Yet Sicily continued under
the Garibaldian rule for nearly six months without any
positive catastrophe. Nor, when Victor Emmanuel's
Government took over the administration, did the Cavour-
ians find it an easy task. For ten years the island was
in a continual state of unrest.^

The ' hermit of Caprera ' was the last man likely to
succeed as administrator or politician. Beyond the life
of the sailor, the poet, the farmer, and the soldier in active
service, he understood nothing of the ways of men. His
friend and biographer has justly said : —

'Finance, police, taxation, law courts, bureaucratic ma-
chinery were to him artificial and oppressive additions to the
life of nature, invented by the wickedness or i. raf of man ; if
he could, he would have swept them all away. x\s he could
not, he resigned himself to submit to them, but in his heart
despised and abhorred them. Now for one holding these
ideas, it is not easy to govern States well, or even to choose
the best men to govern them, and so it was with Garibaldi. . . .
One thing he saw with unerring vision during his Dictatorship,
from his landing at Marsala till his arrival in Naples, and that
was that he must put off the annexation of the Kingdom to
the Monarchy of Victor Emmanuel until the revolution, which
was to lay the foundations of Italian Unity, had become an
accomplished fact.'^

' See Appendix D, below. The state of Sicily. =" Guerzoni, ii. 134-125.

ILL-TREATMENT OF LA FARINA 57

Garibaldi endured La Farina for a month, and then
his patience gave way. He had always held high ideas
of the Dictatorial Power in times of crisis, when the
freedom of the country was at stake. He was deter-
mined to advance on Naples and make Italy, and if
Cavour's agent strove to lock him up in Sicily by arous-
ing there a movement for premature annexation, the
man must take the consequences. He decided to send
him back to his master.

On July 7 La Farina's house was surrounded by the
police ; he was made prisoner, taken on board the Pied-
montese flagship and handed over to Admiral Persano,
from whom La Farina's captors had the impudence to
demand a ' receipt ' for his person. Nor was this all.
A notice of his expulsion from the island was inserted in
the official paper of Sicily in terms of malignant insult.
La Farina was spoken of as expelled with two other
men, Griscelli and Totti. ' The three men thus de-
ported,' said the official journal, ' were in Palermo con-
spiring against the existing order of things.' Now
Griscelli and Totti were two of the meanest of mankind,
who had narrowly escaped execution on a charge of
plotting to assassinate the Dictator,^ and La Farina had
no more to do with them than he had with the beggars
on the steps of the Cathedral.^

For the decision to deport La Farina there was much
to be said. It restored political peace at Palermo, and

' They asserted that they had actually been paid and sent by the Bourbon
Government for this purpose. Griscelli, the ' first murderer,' was primarily a
police spy in the pay of Piedmont, and only secondarily a Bourbon agent, so he
revealed the alleged plot to his real masters, Cavour and Villamarina, who
warned Persano and Garibaldi. But the identity of Griscelli as a Piedmontese
secret agent was left in doubt at Palermo for more than twenty-four hours, and
he consequently had a very uncomfortable time before a Garibaldian council of
war. The truth was revealed in time to save this innocent but exceedingly
undesirable prisoner.

Since the complicity of the Bourbon Government in the assassination plot
rests on the word of these double-lived police agents only, I do not regard it as
proved. Crispi, igii, p. 231. Griscelli, 23-29, 210-218. Persano, 68-71.

''La F. (Biundi), ii. 87-97. Persano, T2.-T\. RaffaeU, 270. Bandi, 206.
For the La Farina incident see Crispi, igii, pp. 211-235.

58 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

cut short a controversy which could not safely be con-
ducted in the face of the enemy, who had still 20,000
troops in the island. But the manner of his deportation
was most offensive and leaves a stain on the chivalrous
character of Garibaldi. It is not known whether the
details were planned by him or by some ill-natured fol-
lower, but it is certain that he never punished or reproved
the gross insult offered to the emissary of the Royal
Government.

The expulsion of La Farina from Sicily, and still
more the manner of the expulsion, embittered the quarrel
of Cavourian and Garibaldian throughout the Italian
world. But the nation as a whole, with a political in-
stinct inspired by the supreme nature of the crisis, con-
tinued to regard Cavour and Garibaldi as partners in
the great work.^ The Dictator had now cut the knot
of Sicilian politics and was free to advance and cross the
Straits if he had the military strength. Indirectly he
had done Cavour a service, of which the latter was quick
to take advantage. The incident could be used as a
proof to diplomatic Europe that the Royal Government
had no control over the Dictator's actions. ' Cavour,'
wrote Hudson to Lord John Russell, ' says that the Gov-
ernment have no influence with Garibaldi, who has
ordered La Farina to quit Sicily.' ^

In spite of La Farina and the vexed question of
immediate annexation, June and July were full of happy
days for Garibaldi, for the Sicilians, and for the
voluiiteers who came pouring in by every steamer from
the North. All classes of the population of Palermo,
with priests and monks conspicuous among them, trooped
down to the harbour to work at dismantling the Castel-
lamare, the fortress whence the Bourbons had so long
held Palermo in awe. The Church in Sicily lost none
of its enthusiasm for Garibaldi on nearer view. The

^Chiala, iii. 283-290. Dallolio, 123-145. La l-iiriiia, ii. 355-383.
*F. O. Sard. Hudson, No. 300,

HAPPY DAYS IN PALERMO 59

Archbishop was friendly, and even consented to bless
the troops. In the nunneries of Palermo, where almost
every noble family had a daughter shut up for life, the
enthusiasm for ' Giuseppe ' and his young followers, who
had in several cases during the street fighting saved
them and their churches from the brutality of the
Neapolitan soldiers, was shown in many pretty and
pathetic ways.^ Garibaldi, writing to Ruggiero Settimo,
the veteran statesman of Sicily's former revolutions,
described the feelings which he shared so fully with the
people. ' This brave people is free. Joy is written on
every face, the country echoes with the glad cries of the
liberated.' ^

Garibaldi had good reason to be happy. He was
fulfilling, by his own methods and with'his own followers,
the dream of his life which had seemed foolishness to
the wise. The vision of all that he might some day do
for Italy had first risen before his mind's eye more than
twenty years before, as he rode over the Pampas leading
a few dozen partisans to nameless skirmishes in long-
forgotten wars. The vision had drawn near, only to
vanish again like a mirage on the walls of Rome. Dim
with fears of failure, it had yet given him strength to
endure in the marshes of Ravenna and in the trading
vessel on the far-away Pacific. It had cheered his farm
life at Caprera with a steadier glow of hope. And now
all Europe was watching this poet's daydream enact
itself in the world of living men.

Bixio and many other volunteers, ofScers and privates,
wounded and whole, lodged in the Trinacria, the famous
hotel looking out upon the esplanade. Its host, Ragusa,
a worthy Piedmontese, announced that for thirty days he
would dine any of the Thousand for nothing, but next
year he told an English guest that there had not been a
man of them but had insisted upon paying his bill.^

^ Red Shirt, 2-$. Arrivabene, i\. 62-63. Nievo, 360. Dc Cfja/'«, ii. 354-355.
Conv. Dolmage. Bandi, 202-203.

^ Ciamboli, 161, June vi. ^ Forbes, 76. Conv. Dolmage.

6o GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

The Dictator and his aides-de-camp lived at the other
end of the town, in the so-called ' Observatory ' of the
Palace over the Porta Nuova.^ It had two balconies, one
looking eastward down the mile-long Toledo to the sea,
the other westward across the Conca doro to the moun-
tains above Monreale. Its interior consisted of a modest
hall of audience with the beds of the four officers on duty
concealed behind screens in the four corners, and two
little bedrooms beyond for Garibaldi and his secretary.
The manners and way of life of the Dictator in the Palace
at Palermo, as afterwards in Naples and Caserta, were
in no way dififerent from those on ihis Caprera farm.
Formality there was none. Important visitors were sent
to him to have audience whatever he was doing. Not
infrequently they found him combing out his hair, to
which he still gave long and careful attention, although
the thick, flowing locks which had adorned the defender of
Rome no longer fell over his shoulders. On another
occasion, with more dispatch, he evacuated his red shirt
and grey flannels and retired into bed, still discussing
the business in hand with his astonished visitor.^

The terrace roof, connecting the Observatory, where
the General lived, with the main part of the Palace, was
a rendezvous, in the summer evenings, for the principal
Garibaldini, for the ladies of Palermo, and for the officers
of the Piedmontese and British navies. Eager question-
ings and endless stories about the battles and adventures
which had led them thither so far, were mingled with
confident prophecies of the coming campaign. All were
agreed that they would enter both Rome and Venice
before the winter. The perfumes rising from the gardens
of the plain, the sun setting behind the distant mountains
where the Thousand had suffered and fought, ' the place,
the time, the events produced a sort of delicious ecstasy

1 There is a photograph of it opposite p. 326 of Garibaldi and the
Thousand.

^ Red Shirt, 8. Uenghini, 153. Ashley Nat. Rev. 495. Elliof 120 121
Miller MS.

FROM DUNGEON TO BATTLE-FIELD 6i

which annihilated distances and transfigured facts. Nor
was this a mere effect of the southern temperature, for
English ofificers shared those emotions, those illusions,
those errors of enthusiasm.' ^

Among this happy crowd on the terrace appeared
one evening, like death at the feast, a group of young
men, prematurely aged and bent, looking about them
with eyes that seemed to gaze without seeing. They
were the eight remaining followers of Pisacane, who
had started with him three years before from Genoa on
his rash attempt to overthrow the Bourbon power.^
Since their defeat and the death of their leader and com-
panions, they had lain in the dungeons of the island of
Favignana, whence, only six weeks ago, they had seen
through the prison bars the Piemonte and Lombardo sail
past with the Thousand to Marsala.' The revolution had
now reached Favignana and set them free, and they had
come straight to Palermo to demand places in the fore-
front of Garibaldi's battles. The first person whom they
met on the terrace was the long-bearded Antonio Mosto,
leader of the Genoese Carabineers. As soon as he had
recognized his friends beneath the changes that misery
had wrought in them, he granted them the privilege,
sought by many in vain, of enlisting as privates in his
little company that fought in the van of the army and
bore the highest proportion of the losses. They were
then taken into the Observatory to see the General. He
was deeply moved. ' This,' he said, ' is a type of human
life. We, whom fortune favoured with victory, lodge in
royal palaces. These brave fellows, because conquered,
are buried in the vaults of Favignana. Yet the cause,
the undertaking, the audacity was the same. . . . The
first honours are due to Pisacane. He led the way and
these brave fellows were our pioneers.' Their leader,
Nicotera, who had been Pisacane's lieutenant, was sent

• Red Shirt, g.

^The Sapri expedition. See Garibaldi and the Thousand, pp. 68-70.

' Garibaldi and the Thousand, pp. 229-230.

62 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

to organize the new expedition of volunteers preparing
in Tuscany, where his incorrigible Republicanism soon
caused trouble. The others marched with Garibaldi,
and a few weeks later five out of the seven fell dead or
wounded on the field of Milazzo.^

But the terrace and Observatory were sometimes
besieged by less disinterested visitors. Even before the
capture of Palermo was complete, even before the Bour-
bon troops had signed the capitulation, no less than 3000
petitions for employment had been sent in, each petitioner
setting forth his own claims on the State in terms of
fulsome panegyric. If Garibaldi had placed Northerners
in the governorships and magistracies, these duties might
have been more effectively fulfilled, but in so disposing
of patronage he would have alienated the Sicilians.
This must be remembered by those who criticise the
undoubted maladministration under the Dictatorship.^
Many of the better sort of Sicilians, especially the return-
ing exiles, retired into private life, disdaining to advance
their real claims on the State, but the worst class of
petitioners set upon him like yelping hounds. He was
utterly unfitted to choose among the pack : ' The Dic-
tator saysjv^s to every one and leaves me to disentangle
matters,' complained Nievo the poet of the Thousand,
now Vice-intendant of the National forces in Sicily.
' Every one makes court to me,' he wrote in disgust,
' Princes and Princesses, Dukes and Duchesses by
shovelfuls, coveting salaries of twenty ducats a month.' ^
On the civil side Crispi made selection among his fellow-
islanders, for better, for worse. Garibaldi's only way of
dealing with this foul Levantine disease of State-syco-
phancy was to apply the ineffectual remedy of his own
example. The Dictator took ten francs a day for his
civil list, and did not add to it by any indirect means.

^ Red Shirt, g-n, ^g, Mario Mac. z^S-z^g, Nicotera, ^^-44. Ricasoli,y.
206-207. Bandi, 205.

^ Times, July 26, i860, p. 10, c. 2, See Appendix D, 5, below.
' Nievo, 253, 256. Castellini, 48.

THE HERO AND THE NOVELIST 63

Once when he burnt a hole in his clothes he was hard
put to it for a change. To Alexandre Dumas, who had
come over in his yacht to see historical romance in the
living reality, Garibaldi said one day : ' If I were rich I
would do like you, I would have a yacht.' Dumas was
much moved, for he had just seen him sign a cheque for
half a million francs of public money.'

It was fortunate for Garibaldi that North Italy was
so generous with the purse, and that by one of his usual
pieces of luck he had captured from the Neapolitan
Government an immense sum of ready money which had
been called in for re-coinage and lay in the mint at
Palermo.^ For by the middle of July the Sicilians had
subscribed voluntarily no more than ;£'5ooo : the British
Consul, who had seen them win and lose their freedom in
1 848-1 849, observed the same characteristics once more,
passion wreaked on the statues of the Bourbons and the
stones of the Castellamare, flags, shoutings, bombastic
processions, but no foresight, no fruitful fear of recon-
quest, no general and public self-sacrifice.' Since on this
occasion they had North Italy to protect them, their sense
of security was less ill founded. But Garibaldi's edict
of conscription remained a dead letter, and he was soon
induced by deputations from the upland communes to
suspend it ' until the agricultural work of the year was
over,' that is, until the Greek Calends.* Most of the
squadre, or irregular bands of peasants, went back to
their homes before or after the capitulation of Palermo.
But several thousands of Sicilians volunteering for more
regular service were formed into regiments and drilled
by native, by North Italian, and by English officers.
They proved far more efficient than the squadre, and
although the degrees of courage which they displayed

^ Monnier, 208-209.

2 Forbes, 59. Conv. Dolmage. Appendix C, ii. below.
■' F. O. Sicily, Elliot, Consul Goodwin's Political youmal, July ig-24.
Forbes, 78.

•> Turr's Risposta, 13. Crispi, 1911, pp. I72-I75'

64 GARIBALDI AND THP: MAKING OF ITALY

in the coining campaign varied from time to time, on
the whole they did credit, both in their own island and
on the mainland, to the officers who had in a few weeks
knocked them into soldiers.

Some of the upper class of the island behaved
poorly, refusing to serve unless they were at once given
commissions, although scores of the noble and wealthy
families of North Italy had sons doing the meanest
duties of the camp, and thinking a red shirt better wear
than epaulettes.' There were indeed many of the Sicilian
upper class who did their duty well,^ but the island
regiments consisted of the lower orders of the population
to a greater degree than did the regiments from the
North.

Dunne's ' English regiment,' ' in particular, was largely
recruited from the corner-boys of Palermo, who under
discipline and good influences behaved with marked
courage in Milazzo fight. Many of these lads had passed
a fortnight or three weeks in the ' Garibaldi Foundling
Hospital,' established and conducted on excellent mihtary
lines by Alberto Mario. Happy as they were in this insti-
tution, they deserted from it fast to join Dunne's regiment,
because they were told that under ' milordo ' they would
go sooner to the wars with Garibardi.^ Milordo himself
was one of the most romantic figures in the Garibaldian
camp. Dunne had a share of the mysterious power of
Nicholson or Gordon to inspire confidence, discipline,
and courage into untrained races. He had commanded
Turkish levies for the British Government in the Crimea.
Shortly before the capture of Palermo he accepted, at
Hudson's suggestion, a dangerous mission from Cavour
and La Farina to carry a political message through to

' Adamoli, 107-108. Forbes, 78-79.

^ E.g. Brancaccio, 261. De Cesare, ii. 357-358. Whitaker, 277-278 and
passim.

' Though it was so-called, only a part of the officers were English and the
men were Sicilian. It must not be confused with the British Legion that only
appeared at Naples in October.

• Red Shirt, 15-39. Fa^sio, 55-56. Conv. Patterson.

COLONEL DUNNE, i860.

DUNNE THE ENGLISHMAN 65

Garibaldi and to smuggle into Sicily the Cavourian
agent, Scelzi, disguised as his servant. Scelzi and
Dunne had landed in North Sicily, raised several hundred
squadre on their own account, skirmished with the Bour-
bon troops, and entered Palermo at the head of their men
a few days before the capitulation was signed. Dunne
then discarded his squadre and set to work to make a
real regiment out of apparently unpromising material.
Aided by Wyndham, an Englishman, formerly of the
Austrian army, by a dozen civilians just come from Great
Britain and Ireland for love of Garibaldi, and some ex-
sergeants of the Piedmontese army, he soon manufactured
a force of 600 young Sicilians whom the Dictator could
have ill spared in the coming battle.^

Whatever his political errors. Garibaldi had a firm
hold of the military situation, and did not waste a day.
On June 20, twenty-four hours after the departure of the
last Neapolitan troops, and while Medici's men were still
arriving in Palermo, a column under Tiirr started for the
centre of the island with orders to march by way of
Caltanisetta to Catania on the eastern sea. The force,
when it left the capital, numbered little more than 500
men, consisting chiefly of members of the original
Thousand, together with a small company of foreign
deserters from the Bourbon army, and a dozen Sicilian
gentlemen. This 'brigade,' as it was called, was the
more formidable in report because of two obsolete cannon
retrieved from the ignominious position of posts in the
streets of Palermo, remounted and dragged across the
island as ' artillery '. The foreign company had good
Enfield rifles, but the majority of the force, the remnant
of the Thousand, still had their old bad muskets. Am-
munition was procured on the way in the sulphur district
of Caltanisetta.

Being the first column to leave Palermo for the front,

^ Dunne MSS., Scelzi's letter, etc. Conv. Patterson. Conv. Dolmage.
Dumas, 120-121. Crispi, 1911, p. 168.

5

66 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Tiirr's ' brigade ' created great interest. It was accom-
panied by some of the best war-correspondents in Europe,
and by Alexandre Dumas with a female midshipman in
tow. The vain, good-natured, luxurious giant, liked by
some, disliked by others, and laughed at by all of his
companions on the march, left them half-way and re-
turned to head-quarters at Palermo. The expedition,
though romantic and picturesque, was uneventful. At
Misilmeri the population, which had shown fierce en-
thusiasm and sent its squadre for the attack on Palermo
when Garibaldi passed that way three weeks before,
was found to be sullenly hostile because of the edict of
conscription. When they learnt that it was to be in-
operative, they recovered their cheerfulness, and enjoyed
the eloquence of Garibaldi's friar. Father Pantaleo,^ —
which produced two volunteer recruits. Here Tiirr
fell dangerously ill and was forced to return to the con-
tinent for a few weeks to recover his health. The com-
mand of the column devolved on his fellow-Hungarian
Eber, who did not on that account give over his functions
as Times correspondent. Eber was a reserved and quiet
gentleman, known and respected in the English Lake
district, where he had passed many years of exile, and in
the best London society. He had neither Tiirr's military
experience and vigour nor his popularity with the troops,
but he had an easy part to play and fell into no capital
errors. Passing through the heart of the island by Enna
and the rock citadel of Castrogiovanni, which commands
the finest view in Sicily, Eber and his men skirted Aetna
on the South and entered Catania unopposed on July 15.
After Misilmeri they had been well received, in most
places with real enthusiasm, and they had put down
some incipient brigandage; but they did not pick up
many recruits in the course of their march from sea to

'See Garibaldi and the Thousand, pp. 249-250, 268.

2 See Map IV, below. Tiirr's Div. yg-ioi. Zasio, 66-67. Adamoli, 10^-131.
Abba Not. 160-190. Brancaccio, 261-276. Tiirr's Risposta, 13. Dumas, 142-

FATHER TANTALEO, lS6c.
The red-shirt friar of Sicily.

THE ADVANCE THROUGH THE ISLAND 67

On June 25, less than a week after the departure of
Turr's and Eber's column, Bixio left the capital with
another ' brigade ' of about 1200 men, consisting partly
of Sicilians and partly of Northerners under Caldesi, who
had come out in Medici's expedition.^ Passing through
Piana dei Greci, where he enlisted sixty of the warlike
Albanians, through Corleone and by the temples of
Girgenti, Bixio reached the southern coast, sailed along
it from Licata to Terranova, and marched thence straight
across country to Catania, where he joined Eber's column
in the latter half of July.''

Meanwhile, as will be recounted in the next chapter,
Medici with a far better organised, better armed, and
better disciplined force was moving along the north
coast towards Milazzo. This Northern detachment
could be most quickly supported by Garibaldi himself
with the reserves which he was busily forming in
Palermo. The columns of Eber in the centre and of
Bixio in the South were to a large extent stage armies,
not therefore the less effective in paralyzing the Bourbon
generals at Messina. Garibaldi justly relied on the in-
activity of those veteran warriors, or else he would not
have sent two weak columns to roam at large through
the island, and finally to unite at Catania, not far from
Messina, where lay fifteen to twenty thousand Bourbon
troops. Judged by the rules of ordinary war, the division
of the Dictator's slender forces into three appears an
absurd error. But under the actual conditions he was
justified in making the division, because, while the force
with which he intended to strike home on the north
coast was immensely the strongest and proved sufficient

182. Morning Post and Times, July, i860 (fassim). Notes and Memories,
James Cropper, for Eber in England, and Atkins' Life of W. H. Russell, i. 167-
168, for Eber in the Crimea. Conv. Dolmage (Mr. Dolmage was with the column ;
he does not think they got nearly as many as 1000 recruits during the march to
Catania, as stated by Adamoli, 107).

1 Medici (Pasini), 17.

'See Map IV, below. Tiir/s £»«». 81, 94, 97, 103. Bixio, log. Menghini,
144.

5*

68 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

for its purpose, the other two flying columns served to
alarm the Bourbon generals and to render them less
willing to advance from Messina and attack his real force
in front of Milazzo with the requisite vigour. ^ But the
chief purpose of the columns of Eber and Bixio was not
military but political. They established the authority of
the Dictator in three-quarters of the island, they nipped
in the bud the beginning of anarchy and brigandage, they
obtained several thousand recruits, mostly after their
arrival on the east coast,^ and they set up before Europe
the claim of Garibaldi to the real possession of the
island.'

But that claim had still to be made good in the battle
of Milazzo.

' The presence of Eber on the east coast was not the only reason why
Clary did not send more troops to Milazzo, but it was one of the reasons. See
p. 93 below.

' Adamoli, 125, 133.

3 Cf. Medici (Pasini), 15-16, and Tiirr's Div. 103, to Cuniberti, 94-95.

CHAPTER IV

THE BATTLE OF MILAZZO

' Who is the happy warrior ? Who is he
Whom every man in arms should wish to be ?
— It is the generous spirit, who, when brought
Among the tasks of real life, hath wrought
Upon the plan that pleased his childish thought :
Whose high endeavours are an inward light
That make the path before him always bright.

Whose powers shed round him in the common strife

Or mild concerns of ordinary life

A constant influence, a peculiar grace ;

But who, if he be call'd upon to face

Some awful moment to which heaven has join'd

Great issues, good or bad for human kind.

Is happy as a lover ; and attired

With sudden brightness, like a man inspired ;

And through the heat of conflict, keeps the law

In calmness made, and sees what he foresaw.'

Wordsworth.

By June 19 Palermo and most of the other garrison
towns in Sicily had been completely evacuated, but
there still remained 18,000 eflFective Bourbon troops in
Messina, 2000 in Syracuse, over 1000 in Milazzo, and 500
in Augusta.' On the mainland were some 80,000 more,
of whom large numbers could be shipped to the island
from Naples in a few hours. In these circumstances two
rational courses were open to the Royalists. Either
a vigorous counter-attack might be made, first on the
columns which Garibaldi was sending out from Palermo,
and then upon that city itself, before the three thousand
North-Italian volunteers had grown to ten, fifteen, and

^Nove Mesi, 2. Palmieri, 38-48. Of the 18,000 in Messina, 3000 or more
were seat under Bosco to Milazzo on July 14.

69

70 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

twenty thousand. Or else the opposite course might be
chosen, a course less ambitious indeed but more consis-
tent with the grant of the Constitution and the new diplo-
matic attitude adopted towards France, England, and
Piedmont : Sicily might be written off as lost, and the
troops in it confined to garrison work within the sea-
fortresses of Messina, Syracuse, Milazzo, and Augusta.
These places, if supplied and assisted by the fleet, could
not be taken by the means at Garibaldi's disposal.
Further fighting would thus be avoided in the island, and
a claim would thereby be established on the good offices
of England and France. The sea powers, pleased at such
moderation in the Court of Naples, might not improbably
use their fleets to stop Garibaldi at the Straits of Messina.
With or without such aid, the military defence of the
new constitutional kingdom could be reorganized on the
Calabrian shore of the Straits, with the citadel of Messina
as a hostage effectively held on the enemy's ground.^

If logically executed, either the offensive or the de-
fensive plan had a good chance of success, but since they
were mutually inconsistent, a clear choice had to be made
between the two systems. Any compromise between
them might easily lead to disaster.

The offensive system was favoured by General Clary
in command at Messina and by most of his subordinate
officers, by the King at Naples, and by those of his ad-
visers who were still reactionary at heart. But the new
Liberal Ministry, and above all the new War Minister,
General Pianell, wished to suspend operations in Sicily
and organize a diplomatic and military defence behind the
Straits. The Ministers had good reason to deprecate
further hostilities, for while a victory of Garibaldi would
overthrow the dynasty, a defeat of Garibaldi would over-
throw the Constitution, and their own position depended
on the maintenance of dynasty and Constitution together.

While the Ministers remained inactive and sought the

1 Pianell, I2, gives a clear statement of this defensive plan by its principal
advocate.

DISTRACTED COUNSELS 71

ways of peace, neither the King at Naples nor the General
at Messina had the nerve to wage a vigorous offensive
war in their despite. But the reactionary party was not
entirely without influence on events in June and July.
It had sufficient power in Court and camp to sow distrust
between the Ministers and the Crown, and to initiate in
Sicily a feeble and partial offensive movement under
Colonel Bosco, of which Garibaldi took advantage to
escape the danger of an armistice, to win the battle of
Milazzo, and thereby to create the panic among the
Bourbon troops on the Straits which enabled him to
march almost unresisted to Naples. Such, in brief, is the
significance of the events narrated in this chapter.

General Clary had distinguished himself on May 31
in suppressing an attempt of some local squadre to occupy
Catania. When, immediately after this little victory, he
was ordered to abandon Catania and retire to head-
quarters at Messina, he obeyed under protest. As one
of the very few Generals who had shown any spirit
during the operations in May, Clary was in June pro-
moted Marshal, and placed in command of the Royal
forces at Messina. A strong reactionary, he at once drew
up schemes for the reconquest first of Catania and then
of Palermo, and applied to Naples for approval. On
June 25 King Francis sent him orders to take the offen-
sive in accordance with his own proposals. But the new
Marshal, on whose brave words the reactionaries had for
some weeks been building their hopes, proved after all
to be of much the same calibre as the other Generals.
For as soon as he was ordered to advance, the tone of
Clary's reports changed wonderfully ; he began to write
of the unfitness and unwillingness of his troops, of the
necessity of remaining on the defensive, of the proba-
bility that if he left Messina with a part of his force,
Garibaldi would slip in behind his back, as he had slipped
into Palermo behind the back of Von Mechel. But again,
as soon as the Ministry countermanded the advance and

72 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

bade him remain on the defensive, Clary recovered his
courage and complained bitterly that such orders damped
the spirits of his men.^

Meanwhile King Francis was consulting his Generals
and Ministers at Naples on a proposal to send strong
reinforcements from the mainland to reconquer Sicily.
In a council held on July 13 the Ministers opposed it,
giving their voices in favour of armistice and diplomatic
action, and their arguments were supported by Generals
Nunziante and Pianell, the two best soldiers in the ser-
vice since Filangieri's retirement.'' The plan was there-
fore abandoned, and next day Pianell, in an evil hour for
his own reputation and peace of mind, was induced to
become Minister of War. An honest, cultivated, and
high-minded man, true to the dynasty and to the Consti-
tution, he failed to see that the one could now be saved
only at the expense of the other. He was fully persuaded
that Sicily could not be reconquered — perhaps he did
not dare to ask himself whether he wished it to be re-
conquered. He maintained that the island had been lost
because of the demoralised condition of the army, and
that it would be his chief duty as War Minister, while
passively defending the Straits, to revive the discipline
and military spirit of the Royal forces. A critic might
have urged that the only way to revive their spirit would
be to discard tricolour and Constitution, and bid them
march forward under the white flag of the Bourbons,
with the King in their midst, as was afterwards done
with some success at Capua a few months too late. No
troops could feel enthusiasm for the Constitution and at
the same time fight loyally against the man who was the
cause of the Constitution's existence.

But whatever Pianell's plan was worth, it never had
a fair trial, for on July 14 Marshal Clary sent Colonel
Bosco with 3000 picked troops along the north coast

^Cronaca, 170-171, 175, 182-186 (June 19-22, 25), Clary's messages of June
27-28, 30, July 4, 6, 9, 13. Franci, L 60-63. De C. ii. 360-362.
' Pianell, 12-13, 179. Liborio Romano, 35.

COLONEL BOSCO 73

from Messina, with orders to occupy the open country
between Milazzo and Barcellona. This half-hearted
measure, taken without the knowledge of Pianell, had all
the faults and none of the merits of the defensive plan
decreed by the Ministers, and of the offensive desired by
the King.'

Bosco was the fighting man of the army,^ and the
news that he had been sent into the open field with a
force of his own was regarded by every one as a bid for
the reconquest of Sicily. Yet the actual orders given by
Clary to the Colonel on the day before he left Messina
reflect the divided counsels of the Royalist camp. In
this document Bosco is reminded that the Ministry has
forbidden any fresh attack to be made ; he must therefore
leave it to the enemy to begin the fighting, but when
attacked himself he has the right to make a counter-attack
and dislodge the Garibaldini from their positions ; the
object of the expedition is defined as being to guard the
threatened garrison of Milazzo from a blockade — though
in fact this end could have been far more simply effected
by the use of the fleet ; for this purpose Clary advises
Bosco to occupy Archi and certain other places some
miles outside Milazzo ; he is not to proceed farther west-
ward than Barcellona, even if victorious, but is to await
orders there. ^ These instructions, which might be inter-
preted in many different ways, when thus placed in the
hands of a spirited officer, were certain to lead to a pitched
battle, for when Bosco left Messina, Medici, in command
of 2000 Garibaldini, had already for a week made Barcel-
lona his head-quarters, and had been scouting with his
friends on the mountains that tower above the plain of
Milazzo.*

Giacomo Medici, who had held the Vascello for four

1 Pianell, 12-18, 23, 180, Cronaca, 189. Move Mesi, 10-13. Liborio Rom-
ano, 35.

' Garibaldi and the Thousand, pp. 315-318.
' Paltnieri, 47-50, doc. i, or Nove Mesi, 10- 12.
* Peard's journal MS. Jnly 7-14.

74 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

weeks against the French army on the Janiculum,^ was
the friendly rival of Bixio for the first place among
Garibaldi's lieutenants. To him the General had en-
trusted the leadership of the most important of the three
columns now advancing through the island on Messina,
that one which was to keep the north coast and be sup-
ported in case of need by Garibaldi himself and the
reserves from Palermo. Medici left the capital with
1800 of the well-armed volunteers whom he had brought
from North Italy, Simonetta's Lombards and Malenchini's
Tuscans.^ The General's orders were that he should
occupy Castroreale {see Map II at end of book), a strong
position in the mountains above Barcellona, and there
await orders. But when he found the coast towns en-
thusiastic in the national cause, when he was joined by
several hundred local volunteers and bands from eastern
Sicily, he felt unwilling to retire into the mountains on
Bosco's approach, leaving his hosts at Barcellona to the
Bourbon vengeance. Such a retreat would inflict a
wound on the growing prestige of the Garibaldian armies,
which stood to them in the place of cavalry, artillery, and
big battalions. In order, therefore, to protect Barcellona,
Medici moved his head-quarters to Meri and there awaited
the enemy's attack, drawn up behind the broad fiumara,
or torrent bed of white stones, that passes in front of the
village on its way from the neighbouring mountain gorge
to the sea.' {See henceforth Map I p. %i below?)

On July 15 Bosco and his three thousand approached
by the high road from Messina to within a short distance
of the fiumara, where Medici's men lay eagerly awaiting
them ; the Royalists, however, wheeled off sharply to the
right, and marched across the plain to Milazzo.* It is
possible that Bosco declined battle on account of his

1 Garibaldi's Defence of Rome, igg-zoo.

^ The remaining 700 of those whom Medici had brought to Sicily, namely
Caldesi's battalion, had gone south in Bixio's column. Medici (Pasini), 17-18.
' Medici (Pasini), 17-19. Peard's journal MS. July 7-15.
*Peard, 819 (or foumal MS.), July, 15. Medici (Pasini), ig.

GIACOMO MEDICI, I S6o.

PRELIMINARY SKIRMISHES yt,

instructions from Clary not to initiate hostilities. On
his arrival in the town, beneath the precipice on which
the mediaeval fortress is perched, the inhabitants fled for
refuge into the thick olive groves that cover the hills of
the peninsula beyond, where they remained hidden dur-
ing the events of the following week.^ Bosco and his
army occupied the deserted town and put themselves
into communication with the garrison on the castled
rock overhead.

Medici, encouraged by Bosco's refusal of battle, sent
out detachments across the fiumara of Meri to occupy
Coriolo and Archi, hamlets sheltered among the olives
of the last foot-hills that overlook the plain of Milazzo.
Now one part of Bosco's instructions had been to occupy
Archi, and therefore, in spite of that other part of his
orders which forbade him to be the first to attack, he felt
justified in recapturing Archi now that a Garibaldian
outpost had occupied it and thereby cut off his connection
with Messina. He had passed through the village on
the 15th on his way to Milazzo, but had neglected to
leave any guard behind. And so, early in the morning
of July 17, he sent back across the plain four companies,^
with cavalry and artillery, under Major Maringh, with
orders to retake Archi. The hamlet and surrounding
hills were defended by 300 Lombards under Simonetta
and about seventy Sicilians. Maringh skirmished for
some time, used his cavalry well, captured a score of
prisoners, and then unaccountably returned to Milazzo.
Bosco placed him under arrest and sent out in the after-
noon six companies under Lieutenant-Colonel Marra,
who assailed Coriolo, and brought their artillery into

^ Forbice, ]-a\y 2i and 24, i860, letters from seat of war. Ziyilli, 18-22,
35-4.2, docs. 2-5. Piaggia, S4-55. In view of these documents it is clear that
the charges against the inhabitants of Milazzo of sympathizing with the Bour-
bon troops were mainly false. But the Milazzesi were not as helpful to the
Garibaldini as the people of Barcellona.

" A company in the Neapolitan army was supposed to be 160 men ; a bat-
talion was about looo men, and Bosco had three battalions of infantry. De
Sivo, iii. 121 -122.

y6 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

action. Medici sent up more men from Meri, includ-
ing Malenchini's Tuscans, and fierce fighting took place
in the street of Coriolo and along the fiumara above
which it stands. The street was taken by the Bourbon
troops and retaken at the point of the bayonet. Marra's
men tried to turn Medici's flank by penetrating up into
the mountains towards Sta. Lucia, but they were headed
off near S. Filippo. At the end of an arduous day
Coriolo remained in Medici's hands, and Archi in those
of the Royalists. But at midnight Bosco, who had come
out when the fighting was over to review the situation,
ordered a retreat to the town. He had been persuaded
that Medici had 7000 men, whereas in reality he had
scarcely more than 2000 all told.^

Although Bosco's deserved reputation for courage
saved him from wholly losing the confidence of his men,
his conduct on this day had been neither spirited nor
wise. He should have come earlier to direct the action
himself, and he should not have sent out such small
detachments if he seriously intended to occupy the slopes
of the mountains, and so debar the further advance of
the Garibaldini along the north coast. He had allowed
Medici to out-manoeuvre him, to drive him down off the
hills, to get between him and Messina, and to lock him
into the plain of Milazzo with his back to the sea. The
Garibaldini were elated at their success, and rejoiced over
an intercepted letter of Bosco's to Clary, written in the
usual querulous style of Neapolitan despatches : ' Maringh
basely betrayed me. I have him under lock and key.
I can't do more. I am left to do everything, everything,
everything (tutto, tutto, tutto). The officers are so many
nullities.' But if he were reinforced from Messina either

' Cronaca, 193-196, 200, 218-219, Nove Mesi, 13-15, 20-22, Palmieri, 30-40,
50-51, docs. 2-3, and De Sivo, iii. 310-311, contain Bosco's reports and other
matter on the Neapolitan side. Medici (Pasini), 20; Piaggia, 21-29; Mistrali's
da N. 611-614 (identical with Mattignana, 382-386) ; Times, August 4, p. 10,
cols. 1-2; Conv. Cadolini; Da Forio 619-620; Fonvidle, 110-119; Forbice,
July 23, letters of July 17.18 ; Veritas, 32-36 ; Pozti, 22 ; Menghini, 180, 196-199 ;
Peard, 820 ; Milazzo (G.B.Z.) 8, 9; Pungolo, Milano, July 27, letter of July 19.

MEDICI ASKS FOR HELP ;;

by sea or by land, he boasted that he would enter Palermo
'on Medici's horse.' ^ Those of his dispatches which
reached Messina, being signalled by semaphore, were
conceived in the same tone of complaint against his sub-
ordinates, and demanded fresh men and fresh officers,
although in fact he had in the cacciatori the best regiments
of the army.^ The feeling of the 15,000 officers and men
left idle in Messina was that they ought at once to be led
to the rescue of the gallant Bosco, who was far more
popular than Clary. But the Marshal, who had already
quarrelled with his subordinates at Messina as well as
with Bosco himself, sent him, not the reinforcements
which he demanded, but a Captain Fonsecca to make
excuses and to explain that there were not enough horses,
carts, or ships to carry an army by sea or by land to
Milazzo.' Clary's inactivity was in part due to the
telegrams which he received from the Minister of War
ordering him to remain on the defensive, and denouncing
Bosco in the strongest language for having resumed
hostilities.*

But although Medici had drawn a cordon round
Milazzo, it was a very thin line, and if Bosco discovered
that he was being contained not by 7000 but by 2000 men,
he might attack once more. In the telegram reporting
to the Dictator his success of July 17, Medici begged for
reinforcements.* Nor had he long to wait. Some troops
were already on the way. On the i8th there marched
into Meri Dunne's regiment of 600 Sicilians with its
English officers, and Cosenz with a first detachment of
the excellent troops whom he had just brought to Palermo
from Genoa.'

The Dictator, on receiving Medici's telegram in the

1 Milazzo (G.B.Z.), g. Piaggia, 30. Forbice, July 23. Brancaccio, 299.

» Nove Mesi, 14-15. Palmieri, 50-51, docs. 2-3. Bandi, 229.

s Nove Mesi, 15-16, 31. Cronaca, 219.

* Cronaca, 192, 196. ° Guerzoni, ii. 137.

o/Jo Forio, 620. Forbice, July 23. Medici (Pasini), 21. Nelson MS.
Peard's yournal MS. For Cosenz' expedition see p. 46 above, and Appendices
B and F, ii. note below.

78 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

small hours of the morning of the i8th, made one of those
sudden resolves, quick as the flash of a sword, that with
him always marked the end of a long period of suspense.
Breaking through all his engagements in Palermo, and
not even announcing his departure, he went on board an
old Scottish cattle-steamer called the City of Aberdeen that
had brought volunteers from Genoa a few days before
and happened still to be in the harbour. At four in the
morning he made arrangements for her use with her
Scottish crew and captain, who were passionately devoted
to his cause and person. He instantly put on board
the Carabineers of the Thousand, and those of his aides-
de-camp whom he could muster at a moment's notice.
Just as they were about to weigh anchor, there happened
to enter the port the steamer Amazon from Genoa bear-
ing Corte and his volunteers, captured a month before in
the Charles and Jane, and now released from their cap-
tivity at Gaeta by the Constitutional Ministers of King
Francis, as part of the policy of friendship with Piedmont.
They had been sent back to Genoa, but had instantly
sailed again for Sicily in another ship ; on account of this
adventure they were henceforth known as the ' Gaeta
battalion.'' Garibaldi ordered them not to land, but to
come on board the City of Aberdeen. The transfer of
men, arms, and ammunition was effected in half an hour,
and about eight in the morning the cattle-steamer left
Palermo with the whole expedition on board. She was
accompanied by the Piedmontese war-vessel Carlo Al-
berto, under orders from Persano to see them safely
landed.^ They disembarked at Patti before dawn on July
19. Leaving his men to march after him, the General
drove at a gallop towards Barcellona and Meri.^

1 See p. 49 above and Appendix B, below. For Corte's capture and release
see CastelUni, 26-29. Baroni. Menghini, 434-440. F. O. Sard. Hudson, June
30, Nos. 291, 301.

' Persano, 89.
For the departure and voyage from Palermo see Miller MS. Milassxo
(G.B.Z.), 6, 9-10. Rome MS. Savi. Red Shirt, 41. Times, August 4, p. 10,
col. 2.

GARIBALDI ARRIVES 79

At Barcellona the principal church was employed as
a hospital for Medici's wounded. As Garibaldi passed
through the town, the noise of his reception in the street
penetrated into the quiet of that gloomy hall, where a
gigantic crucifix looked down upon the sufferers. In an
instant they were struggling off their couches and crawl-
ing to the door on hands and knees. As they lay crowded
on the steps of the church, he waved his gentle salutations
and thanks to them, and passed on towards Meri. One
young Lombard who had been shot through the lungs
crawled to his bed again, fell back on it, and died.'

When Palermo discovered that the Dictator had gone,
the streets were filled with angry and inquiring crowds.
His departure was a complete surprise. The Palermitans
felt only half safe in his absence, and many of his old
followers and friends were aggrieved because he had left
them behind in the hurry of his departure. Such was
the eagerness to follow him that in a few hours nearly
all the North Italians in the Sicilian capital had thrown
up the civil or military posts which kept them from the
front. In many of these cases substitutes were found
among the wounded, who were unwilling to remain in
hospital at such a time. Those who could, set out post-
haste for Milazzo, and quiet was restored.^

There was little doing at Meri on July 19. Medici
and Cosenz were away scouting, and their men were
eating their dinners in the filthy houses of the village, or
beside the white stones of the fiumara, glowing in the
midday heat, when an open carriage was noticed coming
along the high-road from Barcellona. As it drew near
they saw whom it contained. In an instant all the camp
was in an uproar. The uneaten dinners were left smoking,
and the volunteers rushed to seize him as he stepped
from the carriage. It was his official birthday, being
celebrated at that hour in Palermo with flags and
speeches,* but he had come to spend it among friends in

' Veritas, 36-39. " Red Shirt, 32-37, 41.

' His real birthday was July 7, but they celebrated it on the 19th. Forhice ;
Giorn. di Sic.

8o GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

the field. Confidence and joy were in his looks, and
were reflected in the faces of the soldiers who pressed
round him. They now knew that on the morrow they
would fight and conquer. He did not linger in Meri but
took horse to find his old companions in arms, Medici
and Cosenz, and to spend the rest of the day riding
with them over the mountains of Sta. Lucia, surveying
through his spy-glass the plain below, where Bosco was
in the act of taking up a new and formidable position to
cover the approaches to Milazzo.^

The plain of Milazzo is enclosed to north and west
by the two sea-beaches, that converge on the town and
castle at the neck of the peninsula. To the south and
east the plain is bounded by the white fiumare of Meri
and of Coriolo and by the low hills covered with olives
that He between the mountains and the plains. The
ground on which the battle was fought, confined within
a radius of a mile and a half from the southern gate of
the town, was perfectly flat and almost on a level with
the neighbouring beach. On this seaward plain stood
farms, mills, and small hamlets, scattered about in a
manner foreign to the interior of the island, where the
whole population was housed at nightfall in hill-towns
of several thousand inhabitants each. These isolated
houses strengthened the Royalist position on the plain.
The ground was occupied by cornfields and vineyards,
or near the sea by brakes of canes, seven feet high, used
by the peasants for training their vines. The vineyards
and cane brakes were enclosed by thick hedges of cactus,
or by high white walls, which had been loopholed by
the Bourbon troops. These were formidable barriers
against an army of irregulars without artillery. The
only way by which Garibaldi's men could pierce the
enemy's line without scaling the loopholed walls and

^Milazzo {G.B.Z.), lo. Fonvielh, 128-129. Da Forio, 620. Piaggia,
32. MistraU's da N. 616. Peard, 820-821. Menghini, igg-200. Poxzi, 23.
Mariotti, 423. Castellini, 35, 37.

MAP L

Battlefield of Milazzo

July 20, i860

Scale, 1:50,000

a

%

I Mile

o 500 fooa Yards

C^^^ = Contours at intervals of 20 m^res = SS^feeH

^■^do'"^ ~ ^ifftsrmediate contours of 5 metres ^ W*4 Jbet

'* — "Ts"*^

o o o o _,.

t> O £J

Milazzo

dast^Blf ^.

Y y Y V

y^ Y ^ Vineyards

V y ■<- r

■jt f ¥> Ca^e brah&s

s- ".^ ¥- M.

CO iii;:t

^■^

f^

v»"

rSP

.■ti

u t'-'

Archi

y Casazza

2 GUNS;

CO 5;

-«;i:';

V T

r -*

>*,T -(

,-< ^ °%i ' W, ' ,.-.<, X-^'' ^-^5^" ^»o'' ' 9Src''^i>A

fi:/'',,'^ -r /•■■??""' ^^^3:^ *^.i?^^ "/"!/<,

Baronek • ^ \\ -^ ^ t/ >■ ^ J - =« y "^ -^

.Maria>. "^:^4^^,m^(o . .
^ -^ Comolo^* ^

.Marco

PV

Hmray WaB^r sc.

THE FIELD OF BATTLE 8i

hewing through the cactus hedges was to charge along
the two beaches and along the various roads converging
on Milazzo. But the roads, and the beach on either side
of the town, were remarkably straight and were swept
by the cannon of the Royalists. Against their eight
excellently served pieces the Garibaldini had nothing to
oppose except two useless carronades, dragged about by
hand, which were brought into action only to be with-
drawn after a few minutes.^ The one road that was not
straight enough to be swept by the Bourbon artillery
was a sunk lane that wound through the vineyards,
hollowed out by a water-course that finally entered the
side of the S. Palino road as a culvert, and issued into
the sea under the main road, beneath a little bridge 500
yards from the town gate.^ This bridge was chosen by
Bosco to be the scene of the final stand outside the town,
in case his more advanced positions were forced, and
here two of the cannon were placed. Two more stood
a mile in front near the ' angle ' of the high-road to
Messina. Beyond this ' angle ' the Bourbon left wing
occupied the Mills near the seashore, thus forming an
advanced post which could enfilade Garibaldi's advance
against their centre near S. Palino. Their right was
supported by the other four guns, which were placed at
Casazza and on the western beach.'

These formidable positions in front of the castle were
held, according to Bosco's own report, by 2500 excellent
Neapolitan cacciatori, the flower of the army, aided by
the eight guns and a squadron of cavalry. In the castle
on the rock overhead was the garrison, about 1000
infantry of the line, and over forty cannon of different
sorts, some of which were able to fire with effect towards

'Appendix F, ii. below.

'This water-course, dry in spring and summer, is called a fiumara in
Bosco's report and by some of the inhabitants to-day. But it is not a typical
fiumara as it is of brown earth only, not of white stones.

^Mem. 369. Palmieri, 44-45 (Bosco's report). Piaggia, 36-38, 40-41,
which shows among other things that when Bosco speaks of Casa Unazzo lie
refers to the place usually called Casazza.

6

82 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

the close of the day. In the peninsula behind the castle
Bosco had stationed another 400 cacciatori to prevent a
landing from taking place in his rear. The total of all
arms defending these positions was reckoned by the
Neapolitan staff at 4636 men and officers.^

Against this series of concentric lines of defence,
culminating in the precipice and castle, Garibaldi was
leading a force perhaps slightly larger in numbers than
that of Bosco,^ but altogether inferior if judged by the
normal military standards. He had no cavalry and until
late in the day no artillery. The infantry consisted of
North Italian and Sicilian volunteers, hastily raised
and regimented in so-called ' battalions ' of 300 to 900
each, many of which, like Corte's newly landed ' Gaeta
battalion,' had handled fire-arms only during the last
forty-eight hours and did not know the elements of
drill ; ^ while even Medici's and Dunne's men, who had
had a few weeks' drill, did not know how to use the
sights of their Enfield rifles.* But in most of the ' bat-
talions ' there was a large proportion of veterans of '48
and '59 ; of sergeants who had deserted, collusively or
otherwise, from the regular army ; and of officers of old
experience and in some cases of remarkable talent in re-
volutionary war. Above all, the whole force was inspired
by an ardour for their cause and for their leader which
did much to take the place of discipline, and made them
ready to endure the very heavy losses without which
even the first positions could not possibly have been
stormed.

Shortly after dawn on July 20 the Garibaldini moved
down to the attack off the hills of Olivarella and Coriolo.
In the centre, S. Pietro was occupied without opposition ;
on the east, Simonetta and his Lombards began their
attack on the enemy's advanced post at the Mills ; while
on the other flank Malenchini and his Tuscans, marching

' Appendix F, ii. below. " Ibid.

' Baroni. * Appendix E, 2, 5, below.

BATTLE OF MILAZZO 83

through S. Marco and S. Marina, developed the attack
on Casazza and along the western beach.^

The day began with a disaster. Malenchini carelessly
led his men up to the mouth of the Bourbon rifles and
batteries, which opened on them with terrible effect and
fairly drove them off the field. Garibaldi, who was
watching the first stages of the fight from the roof of a
wine-store on the edge of the plain, sent Cosenz with
fresh troops to rally the fugitives and to take over the
command of the left wing. Nevertheless the Royalists,
supported by cavalry and artillery operating on the broad
beach, advanced and drove back the Garibaldian left and
left-centre for nearly a mile. Although Malenchini and
many of his Tuscans returned to the fight, it was all that
Cosenz could do to hold the Zirilli farm and the western
approaches to S. Pietro.

The General himself, rightly confiding in the calm-
ness, authority, and military talent of Cosenz, had not
gone to rally the defeated left wing, but had bent all his
personal energies to effect an advance along the other
shore, at the head of the right wing under Medici. If he
could penetrate by way of the Mills and the ' angle ' of
the road as far as the bridge, he would be able to threaten
the rear of the victorious advance of the Royalists on the
west, which was in fact a dangerous move on their part
at so early a stage in the battle.

Garibaldi's method of sending his troops into action
on this day was to stand well exposed to the fire at some
spot by which the next detachment would have to enter
the battle, and to speak, almost in a whisper, some word
of encouragement to the young soldiers, of whom many
were then hearing the bullets for the first time in their
lives. In a small army of volunteers depending more
on individual courage than on discipline, the General's
exercise of his strange powers of fascination considerably
increased the chances of victory. As one section of

• Hitherto Malenchini's men had been part of Medici's force, but on the 20th
they fought, first independently, then under Cosenz' orders.

84 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Dunne's Sicilians with their English officers and cadets
filed by him into action up the ride of a cane-brake, he
kept repeating in a low voice Avanti ! Coraggio, uomini!^
When the veteran company of Genoese Carabineers,
destined to lose nearly half their number before nightfall,
were brought about ten in the morning to the place where
they were to enter the battle, they found the General there
before them, standing almost alone in the middle of the
road, a conspicuous mark at which the enemy were
directing their fire.^

The first success of the day was the capture of the
Mills by the Northerners of Simonetta's and of Specchi's
'battalions.' It cost a severe struggle, for Bosco was
there in person encouraging his men, and he had skil-
fully placed two guns near the ' angle,' one on the high-
road, the other in the Mill Lane. The latter, after doing
great execution, was captured through the devotion of a
volunteer named Alessandro Pizzoli, who, leaving his
comrades in ambush behind a wall flanking the Mill
Lane, himself sprang down a few yards in front of the
cannon's mouth in order to draw its fire. He was blown
limb from limb, and the next moment his comrades leapt
down after him and captured the piece. ^

Thus the Royalists were slowly pushed back on the
east flank from one vineyard and farm to another. But
the few positions gained by the red-shirts seemed to many
but little compensation for the long train of wounded con-
tinually passing to the rear, for the suffocating heat, the
thirst, the hunger, and, as the day wore on, the sheer
fatigue. Those who had no stomach for eight hours of
such work went off with the wounded and forgot to re-
turn. The better sort of men, getting together in groups
often irrespective of their proper ' battahons,' followed
any officer with a turn for leadership whom the chance

lil/S. Nelson.

^Rome MS. Savi. For a similar experience of the'Gaeta battalion ' see
Baroni.

^Piaggia, 43-47- Palmieri, 43-44.

BATTLE OF MILAZZO 85

of battle brought their way. Scarcely ever seeing the
enemy through the cane-brakes and behind the loopholed
walls, but always exposed to his shots, firing only at
close quarters, making headway by rushes and rallies, by
dashes down the sunk lane, here leaping over a wall and
there tearing through a cactus hedge into the flank or rear
of the enemy, they carried on the battle, which had now
become a mere test of individual prowess. And more and
more as the day went on the General himself appeared,
now here, now there, heading charges which behind him
never failed of success. One of our countrymen, a lad of
seventeen, who had left his home a few weeks before for
love of Garibaldi, found himself with a few of his com-
rades from Dunne's, and a number of men from other
battalions, standing at the end of a cane-brake through
which the Royahsts were firing at them from behind a
wall. The bullets were crashing through the tall canes
which snapped under the shower, the men were falling
fast, the position was untenable. Suddenly the English-
man was aware of Garibaldi galloping up to them, leaping
off his horse, and without a word or a look dashing up
the narrow ride between the canes, straight at a small
opening in the wall lined by the enemy's rifles. He did
not once look round to see if his men were following,
for he knew that none who saw him would linger. The
Bourbons stood to it to the last, and the bayonet was
used before the wall was cleared.^

By a series of such charges Bosco's cacciatori were
pushed back, well after midday, to their last position
outside the town. This was the bridge over the culvert,
where stood the two reserve guns commanding the
straight roads that converged on that spot. Close by, on
the shore, was a large factory for pickling tunny-fish.
Here the crisis of the battle took place. The General
sent Missori to fetch up a detachment of Dunne's Sicilians
which had not yet lost its identity in the melde. With

■^Conv. Patterson. Mr. Patterson was later in the day wounded at the
bridge, and Garibaldi made him lieutenant for his services that day.

86 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

these and some North Italians under Pilade Bronzetti, he
passed through a garden, climbed a wall, and dropped
down upon the two guns. One was captured, the other
limbered up and escaped into Milazzo. Bosco ordered
a handful of cavalry, who were standing near the town
gate, to rescue the lost piece. A score of them made
a spirited charge over the bridge, and Dunne's men
scrambled out of the road to let them pass. If Bosco
had followed up the charge with a body of fresh infantry
he might have won the battle, but his last reserves on
this side of the castle had been used by Colonel Marra
to support the advance of his right centre. As the
cavalry rode back from running the gauntlet through the
Garibaldian lines, Dunne's Sicilians emptied half a dozen
saddles, firing from behind the cactus hedge that lined
the road. But two men, who had not taken refuge
behind the hedge when the cavalry first charged by, were
still standing alone in the roadway, on the line of their
retreat. Of these two one was Garibaldi and the other was
his aide-de-camp, Missori, a handsome young Lombard oi
noted gallantry Both were on foot, and the horsemen,
unable to avenge their fallen comrades on any one else,
swarmed round, eager to cut them down. Missori shot
the horse of the Bourbon captain, who rose in the stirrups
as it fell and slashed at the Dictator. Garibaldi parried
the blow, and laying his hand on the bridle of the kneel-
ing animal struck the captain in the neck with his sabre
and killed him on the spot. Missori with his revolver
shot two more of the cavalry, and the half-dozen who
were still left alive galloped back through the gates of
the town.^

1 For a portrait of Missori see illustration, p. 38 above. I have given this
incident, including the details about Dunne's men and the guns, as it was told
me by Missori himself, about a year before his death. The story is confirmed
by many other authorities (see below). From Bosco's report we may deduce
that the name of the unfortunate Bourbon captain was Giuliani, and that his
lieutenant, Faraone, got back to the town with seven shot wounds. The only
question is whether the cavalry charged up the main road or the sunk lane or up
both. On this there are various opinions given. Piaggia, 50-51. Mem. 371.

MII.AZZO HARBOUR, TOWN, CASTI.F. ANII PENINSULA, FROM NEAR THE
TUNNY FACTORY.

MILAZZO CASTLE, SHOWINC. OUTER \YORKS AND KEEP.

BATTLE OF MILAZZO 87

The Garibaldini, having now occupied the bridge, had
turned Bosco's left flank and were threatening his rear.
The rash advance of his right wing would have to be
turned into a hasty retreat if the red-shirts could maintain
their newly won position. That was indeed no easy
task, for the cannon of the fortress, firing over the roofs
of the town, played full upon the bridge, while the
cacciatori below fired on it at close quarters from the
town gate and from the houses along the side of the port.
Garibaldi's men fell fast. One of his best and most
popular lieutenants, Migliavacca, was killed, and Corte
was wounded. An attempt to bring the two carronades,
the only artillery of the force, into action on the bridge
proved that they were perfectly useless, and in a few
minutes the General ordered them to be withdrawn.^
Seeing that an immediate advance on the town was im-
possible, he put most of the men for rest and shelter into
the tunny-factory and some wood stores near by, while
others kept up a fire against the walls of Milazzo from
the bridge and neighbouring gardens, and from behind
the fishing-boats on the beach. In particular, Peard,
Garibaldi's Englishman, whose long beard and fine head
reminded his comrades of King Lear, kept his company
of thirty men at the bridge, suff"ering severe losses, and
demonstrating that Colt's five-chambered revolving rifle,
with which they were armed, leaked fire at the breech,
woefully scorching the hand that used it, and had there-
fore no future in the history of modern armaments.^
During two hours in the early afternoon the aff'air con-
tinued in this state, the Garibaldini losing men, but
holding the position they had taken, and resting after the
fatigues of the morning's attack.

ViUari Cos f. yoi. TJ».«, August 4, p. 10, col. 3- Menghini, 23g-2ii. Palmieri,
45. Durand-Brager, 107. Conv. Patterson. Conv. Sclavo.

1 Appendix F, ii. , . ,■

> Garibaldi and the Thousand, 88, 96 for Peard. Peard, 821-822 and Append.x
E I below for Peard's company at the bridge and for the rifles. Mr. Patterson,
of Dunne's, who was wounded on the bridge, tells me the same about Peard's
rifles, which he saw being used there.

88 GARIBALDI AND THE INiAKING OF ITALY

Having thus established his men on the bridge, Gari-
baldi left them under Medici's command and rode off to
deal with Bosco's victorious right wing, which was still
pressing Cosenz near the Zirilli farm and S. Pietro. For
this purpose he made his way down with a few stafif
officers to the western beach, found a small boat, and
rowed out to the Tukory, a paddle-steamer of 400 horse-
power carrying ten guns ^ which had arrived on the scene
that very afternoon from Patti. This vessel, formerly
the Veloce of the Bourbon service, had recently deserted
to him at Palermo, and now composed his whole fighting
navy, over and above his transports and such help in
convoy work as was aflforded him by the Piedmontese
warships. His aides-de-camp watching from the shore
soon saw him swarm up the mast of the Tukory to
view the field. Taking her close inshore under fire from
the guns of the castle, he proceeded to bombard the
enemy's cavalry on the western beach. The victorious
right wing of the Royalists, feeling the fire of the Tiikbry
from the west, and learning that their rear had been
turned on the east, at length hastened to retreat. This
incident calls to mind the obvious truth that if the Nea-
politans had sent a part of the fleet to protect Milazzo,
their fire would have rendered it impossible for Garibaldi
to occupy or even to attack the town.^

Cosenz and his men, thus relieved by the retreat of
their assailants, followed up, and joining with Medici on
the bridge, stretched a line across the neck of the Penin-
sula, and invested the walls of Milazzo. Next after
Garibaldi, Cosenz had borne the burden of the day. He
came of a French-Neapolitan family, whose military and
patriotic traditions dated from the days of the Partheno-
pean Republic, of Marengo, and of Murat. But his friends
said that Enrico Cosenz seemed rather to belong to some
northern race, for his manners were imperturbable in
their calm. He was modest and retiring almost to a

'^F. O. Sicily, Elliot, September 30, No. 541.
'This is pointed out in the Forbice of July 26, i860.

THE END OF THE BATTLE 89

fault. He has been well called Garibaldi's good angel
in politics and war.^ This thin, quiet man in spectacles
had restored the courage of Malenchini's routed troops
and held them to their post all day. Now in the late
afternoon he was standing close under the walls of
Milazzo, in the hottest fire from the fortress, wiping his
spectacles with the deliberation of Mr. Pickwick, while a
breathless aide-de-camp from Garibaldi, waiting for his
reply to a message, wished that he would either make up
his mind more quickly, or continue his meditations in a
more secluded spot.^

Bosco might still have held out in the town with some
likelihood of success. By his own account he had lost
not more than 1 50 men, a fifth part of the loss confessed
by the victors.' But his troops were overcome with
exhaustion and discouragement at the end of their brave
but unsuccessful fight of eight hours under an almost
tropical sun, and the fear of Garibaldi, which Bosco alone
of the Bourbon officers had for a while conjured away,
returned upon them like a fate. He therefore marched
his cacciatori up into the castle to join the garrison there,
leaving only a few soldiers to keep up a fire from the
town walls.* When about four o'clock the Garibaldini
began to make their way into Milazzo, creeping in first
along the port-side where the walls no longer existed,*
they found to their surprise that the streets were empty.
Even when they advanced into the upper part of the
town, no enemy was there, although marksmen in the
fortress overhead opened fire upon them and wounded
Cosenz. Before sunset the whole city was occupied, and
the entrances of the streets were barricaded against the

' Cosenz, 10-13.

^ Con-v. Tedaldi (Tedaldi was the aide-de-camp in question).

3 Appendix F, iii. below.

* Zirilli, 41, Neapolitan officer's letter.

6 The walls of the town have now disappeared altogether, but in i860 they
existed along the west side and at the gate facing the bridge. Piaggia, 34 ;
Zirilli, 10; there is a sketch of the walls in the I' Illustration, reproduced in
Menghini, 234,

90 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

castle. Garibaldi chose for his head-quarters the steps
of a small church beside the sea ; there he sat giving his
orders, propped up against his South-American saddle,
which he always took off his horse with his own hands.
For a few hours at midnight he slept, as he liked best to
sleep, with his head upon that soldier's pillow, which had
served him when youth and love were still his, in lands
where man needed only sword and saddle for the free
rover's life upon the uplands.^

' For the authorities on which this account of the battle is based see Ap-
pendix F, i. below.

CHAPTER V

SURRENDER OF MILAZZO CASTLE. THE CHECK AT THE
STRAITS. DIPLOMATS AND POLITICIANS

' Garibaldi a une grande puissance morale, il exerce un immense prestige
non seulement en Italic mais surtout en Europe. ... Si demain j'entrais en
lutte avec Garibaldi, il est probable que j'eusse pour moi la majority des vieux
diplomates, mais I'opinion publique Europ^enne serait contra moi. Et I'opinion
publique aurait raison, car Garibaldi a rendu i I'ltalie les plus grands services
qu'un homme put lui rendre. II a donn^ aux Italians confiance en eux-memes :
il a prouv6 a I'Europe que les Italians savaient se battre et mourir sur le champ
de bataille pour reconqu^rir nne patrie. . . . Cela n'empSche pas qu'il ne soit
^minemment desirable que la revolution de Naples s'accomplisse sans lui.'
Cavour to an intimate friend, August g, i860 [Chiala, iii. 321.]

The castle of Milazzo, which Garibaldi had yet to take,
rose between the two seas on a granite precipice more
than three hundred feet high. Founded by the Saracens,
improved by Norman and Angevin, it had been finally
enlarged and beautified by the Emperor Charles V. A
place of importance throughout the Middle Ages, it had
in the war of the Vespers been occupied by Sicilians and
French in turn. In 1675 it had successfully sustained
a regular siege, and in the wars of the early eighteenth
century and again in the struggle with Napoleon, it had
been occupied by the British and their alhes. The
English cavalry barracks of fifty years back could be seen
on the shore below. When Bosco held it against Gari-
baldi, it was, as it still is to-day, a spacious and pleasant
place, unlike some of the featureless castle-prisons of the
Neapolitan mainland, of which the very style of architec-
ture seems to symbolize cruelty and crime. Below the
fine mediaeval keep lay grass plateaus a quarter of a mile
broad and long, enclosed by the outer works of Charles
V. Thence the defenders could view the Calabrian

91

92 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

coast ; the Lipari islands and the eternal smoke of Strom-
boh ; the gulf of Milazzo where Duilius with his grap-
pling-ironsdestroyed the fleetsof Carthage and made Rome
mistress even of the sea ; the plain where Garibaldi had
just triumphed in conflict man against man ; the bare
mountain ridges stretching away towards hidden Mes-
sina ; and near at hand a profusion of cactus, fig-trees, and
shrubs clinging to th e precipices of the castle rock. In the
silent midday heat the stronghold gives the impression,
not of decay, but of long unbroken peace. Its defences,
if antiquated, were in good repair, and could only be
breached by siege cannon, which Garibaldi did not
possess.^

To defend such a place against irregular troops would
have been an easy and even a pleasant task, if Bosco had
taken care to lay in provisions while his communications
were still open. But there was little food and that bad,
the water stank, and the dirty habits of more than 4000
soldiers, who would not even take the trouble to bury
the corpses of man or beast, soon rendered the whole of
that large area insanitary.^ The Royalists had fought
well in the battle, but defeat had destroyed their discip-
line, and when they were put on half-rations they
muttered threats about opening the gate. At the first
sound of mutiny the fighting Colonel himself lost his
nerve and began signalling to Messina the tale of his
distresses in messages on the semaphore which Garibaldi
and his officers read with delight.^ He enlarged on the
state of the provisions and water ; he complained that
the enemy had in the last twenty-four hours shot one
man dead on the ramparts besides wounding eight men
and three mules ; he declared that a breach for a storm-

^Symth, 103. Piaggia, 34. Conv. Sclavo. Zirilli, 22. Aman, G. del
Vesp. Sic. Personal observation.

' Forbes, 107-108. Medici (Pasini), 28. M. Post. August 9, p. 6. Cronaca,
208-209, 212-214. These reports, the first three by Garibaldini, the last by Bosco,
seem to me to outweigh the siatement of Zirilli, 22, that the place was pro-
visioned for 5000 men for more than a month.

' Forbes, 104. Times, August 4, p. 10, col. 4. Conv. Dolmage.

MORE DISTRACTED COUNSELS 93

ing party could be made in a few days. The latter pro-
position was undeniable as a piece of abstract military
theory, for the Windmill Hill, whence the Garibaldini
were sniping, was only 500 yards away, and was on a
level with the lower parts of the castle. But the practi-
cal inference was nil, because the assailants had no breach-
ing cannon, and the fortress was defended by forty pieces.
' The morale of the troops,' so ended Bosco's tale of woe,
'is destroyed.' And so, he might have added, was that
of their commander, who could no longer distinguish
between a real danger of starvation and imaginary
dangers of storm and battery.^

On July 21 Marshal Clary held a council of war at
Messina. His subordinates hated him and one another,
and the prevailing sentiment at the council was each
man's desire to throw upon his neighbour the responsi-
bility for disasters present and to come. The sense of
the council of war appears to have been that they were
bound in honour to march at once to relieve Bosco, but
that there were not enough horses and carts for the
transport service, and that a column of Garibaldini ad-
vancing northwards from Catania would step into Mes-
sina if any part of its garrison of 15,000 were rashly sent
to Milazzo. This fear was somewhat out of place, since
Eber's column at Catania as yet barely numbered 1000
men, and only two or three hundred had been sent as
far north as Taormina ; but this trivial reconnaissance,
as Clary's own dispatches show, seriously affected his
decision not to move to the help of Bosco.^

Once indeed, on July 22, Clary ordered three regi-
ments to embark, and signalled to Bosco that they had
already sailed to his relief But in a few hours he
countermanded the movement, either from fear of the
Garibaldini at Taormina, or else in obedience to orders
from the War Minister, Pianell.*

1 Cronaca, 208-209, 212-214.

2 See p. 68 above. Palmieri, ig-2S. Cronaca, 2IZ, 2ig. Tiirr's Div. 113.
Adamoli, 133-136. Conv. Dolmage.

^Cronaca, 214, 219-220. Nove Mesi, 28.

94 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

When first the news reached Naples that Bosco's
force was shut up in Milazzo, Pianell, much as he wished
to suspend all hostilities, felt that he must extricate the
rash Colonel before resuming the defensive. He there-
fore ordered a large expedition to be put on board the
fleet in the bay of Naples, to sail to the relief of Milazzo.
But the fleet, more liberal in political sentiment than the
army, refused to take the troops on board, and the
mutiny was encouraged by the Admiral, Count D'Aquila,
the King's uncle. The case was brought up for dis-
cussion before the Ministers, into whose willing ears
D'Aquila poured such effective arguments against a re-
sumption of hostilities in Sicily, that they decided to send,
instead of a relieving fleet and army, empty transports to
fetch away Bosco and his men. Following the transports
they dispatched a large part of the fleet, with a Colonel
Anzani on board, whose instructions from Pianell were
to negotiate the capitulation both of Milazzo and of the
garrison of Messina. But Clary, as soon as he was
assured that ,the Ministry did not require him to relieve
Milazzo, again assumed the part of aggrieved hero, and
refused to evacuate Messina on any account.^

On July 23 the approach of the Neapolitan war-
vessels to the port of Milazzo caused some anxiety among
the volunteers. If the town were bombarded from the
sea, it would be necessary for them to retire and to lose
the fruits of the victory which they had so dearly bought.
Garibaldi, as usual, showed a bold face and fitted up a
battery on the mole with cannon landed off the Tiikory.
The new-comers, however, proved to be intent on more
charitable thoughts. Colonel Anzani and the Dictator
soon signed a treaty of capitulation by which the troops
in the castle were to march out with their arms and half
the battery mules. The cannon and ammunition of the

1 Liborio Romano, 35-36. Pianell, 23-24, 182, Tiirr's Div. 398-399, doc. 32.
Cronaca, 220. Pianell (23) says that on July 20 he ordered Clary to march to
the relief of Bosco. Clary does not say so and implies the opposite. In any
case such orders were countermanded when Anzani was sent to make the
capitulation.

SURRENDER OF MILAZZO CASTLE 95

castle, the rest of the mules and all the horses were to be
left behind for the conquerors. Bosco had boasted that
he would enter Palermo on Medici's horse, so Garibaldi
had determined that Medici should enter Messina on
Bosco's horse, as shortly afterwards took place. ^

On the morning of July 25, when the Bourbon troops
were to march out of the castle, the Piedmontese fleet
appeared in the offing. Admiral Persano, seeing Nea-
politan war-ships lying off Milazzo, ordered his decks
to be cleared for action, presumably intending to save
Garibaldi from bombardment even at the cost of a rupture
with Naples. When he found how peacefully matters
had been settled, he contented himself with embracing
the Dictator, and congratulating him in the name of
Victor Emmanuel on his fresh victory for the common
cause.^

The Bourbon troops filed down to the point of em-
barkation, with the honours of war, between two lines of
ragged volunteers. Although they had full opportunity
to desert, and were loudly invited to fraternize and to
join the army of true Italians, few except among the
artillery answered the appeal.' At the tail of the column
walked Bosco, guarded as a prisoner, fuming and pulling
at his moustache. He was hissed by the townspeople,
who were beginning to return to their houses from their
hiding-places in the peninsula. It was an unpleasant
scene and moved the Garibaldini to sympathy for Bosco
in spite of his hectoring manner, which did not desert
him in this dramatic exit from before the footlights of
history.*

It soon became known why Garibaldi had caused
Bosco to be placed under arrest during the embarkation.

' Tiirr's Div. 399-400, doc. 33. Re Bosco's horse see Cronaca, 214, Anzani's
report to Clary; Brancaccio, 299; M. Post, August 9, p. 6; Conv. MissoH ;
Medici (Pasini), 28-29; Guerzoni, ii. 145-146; Conv, Sclavo ; Durand-Brager,
117 ; Castellini, 41-42 ; Risorg. anno ii. fasc. i, p. 18.

^ Persano, 94-97. ' Times, August 4, p. 10, col. 5.

* Forbes, 107. M. Post, August 9, p. 6. Brancaccio, 302. Milan MSS.,
Bruziesi, Evac. di Milazzo. Conv. Sclavo,

96 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

When Peard with a few of his fellow-countrymen and
others went to take possession of the abandoned castle,
they found the mules which had been surrendered under
the capitulation lying about dead on the turf, and many
of the guns spiked. They luckily detected, before they
had trodden upon it, a train of gunpowder hidden under
straw, thickly strewn with detonators and running under
the door of a magazine, which was intended to blow the
citadel and its new occupants sky-high.^

When Garibaldi, accompanied by Admiral Persano
and the Marios, came up into the castle, they found Bosco's
horses, abandoned and frightened, running round and
round the grass plateaus of the outer enclosure. The
Dictator took his lasso, and amused himself and his
companions by a display of the skill which he had acquired
in South America more than twenty years before.^

Alberto Mario and his English wife Jessie had arrived
from Palermo in pursuit of the army. They found a
number of truants from their ' Garibaldi Foundling Hos-
pital ' enlisted in Dunne's ranks, half a dozen of them
badly wounded. Although they had run away from the
institute they had not run away from the rifles of the
cacciatori. One little wounded Sicilian apologised to
Mario, stroking his hand as he said : ' Are you angry
with us, Signor Commandante ? So many of our brigade
are wounded and killed : Milordo the Colonel says that
after the battle of Milazzo no one can say again that the
Sicilians never fight.' Another boy of twelve suffered
amputation sitting in the lap of Jessie Mario, who said
that she cried more than he did.' These young scamps

' Mr. Dolmage, who was present at this discovery, writes to me (July 8,
igio) describing the incident, and adds : ' We afterwards heard that Garibaldi had
known of the slaughter of the animals and the spiking of the guns early in the
day, and that the disgrace of Bosco was the consequence. The gunpowder train
was our little find. But we never suspected that Bosco had to do with the stupid
act. It must have been the work of some understrapper. The Neapolitans did
not always play the game properly, and some of them were brutal enough.' For
other eye-witnesses see Peard, 823. Times, August 4, p. 10, col. 5. I.L.N.
August II, pp. 136, 138.

^ Mario Mac. 249. » Red Shirt. 38-40.

H

--^^

SHPPRfl

1

> ^, c 1J °

"^^"^ c f= ^

ij.id n " n

"^ i: 3 =

u " 3^ O-'-

a-5 rt "J S

S " g-= o

So"*

THE WOUNDED 97

off the streets of Palermo were not the only class who be-
haved admirably in hospital. Throughout the campaign,
in the ill-equipped ambulances, without chloroform or
proper dressings, the silent endurance of pain by Italians
of sensitive and cultivated natures aroused the admiration
of British military men. The terrible, and partly un-
necessary sufferings to which the patriots were exposed
by the absence of proper provision never moved them to
indignation or even to complaint ; they would bear any-
thing for Italy and for the General. In Milazzo, where
lay half the men wounded in the recent battle, there was
no straw to fill the bed-ticks which the Marios had
brought from Palermo. At Barcellona, which took in
the remaining 300, the inhabitants were more active and
things went better.^

Both here and later on at Naples and Caserta ' that
excellent creature of the Lord, Jessie White Mario ' ^ as
one of her patients called her, did her best to be the
Florence Nightingale of the campaign, though she had no
staff of trained nurses. Fanatical in her repubhcanism,
lacking in toleration and in charm of manner, she had the
Spartan virtues of her creed and a power of complete
self-sacrifice which she had learnt perhaps from her friend
and master, Mazzini. She was equally the friend of
Garibaldi, who knew well how much he owed to ' Jessie,'
and how many of his best followers were saved by her
ceaseless exertions. Superficially at least there was little
in common between this lady of fixed and fiery faith and
the comfortable citizens of her native island. But they
too were ready to praise her when they heard how she
attended the wretched pallets of hundreds of wounded
Italians, who blessed her in their pain and her country
for her sake.'

1 Conv. Dolmage. Caraguel, 68. Bertani, ii. io6. Piaggia, 56 note.
Red Shirt, 38. Menghini, 290-293, 225. F. O. Sicily, Elliot, Goodwin's Pol.
jfournal, August 3.

■^'Quella eccellente creatura del Signore che si chiama Jessie Mario

White.' Menghini, 293.

^ M. Post, August g, p. 6.

7

98 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Desiring to take advantage of the enthusiasm for his
cause prevailing in England, Garibaldi, while still
quartered in the castle of Milazzo, consulted his British
companions in arms, who had borne themselves so well
in the battle, as to the possibility of raising more of their
compatriots to come out and join him on the Neapolitan
mainland. The idea was suggested to him by Hugh
Forbes, the gentleman who, wearing a white top-hat, had
shared the perils of his retreat from Rome to the Adriatic
in 1849.^ In the interval between the two Italian
revolutions, Forbes had been in the United States,
where he had had some peculiar dealings with old John
Brown previous to the Virginia raid. He now appeared
at Milazzo. Garibaldi fell in with Forbes' proposal that
a British Legion should be raised, but refused to give
him the command, and left him behind as Governor of
Milazzo Castle. The scheme aroused little enthusiasm
among those who would have been best qualified to carry
it out. Mr. Dolmage, who was a British officer on leave
from Malta, refused to touch it, and Dunne himself, who
had quarrelled with his countrymen when he left the
Queen's service, angrily declared that he did not want
any more of them out there. He prophesied that a whole
regiment raised at a few days' notice among a civilian
population and shipped to a strange land would contain
good elements, but that, for disciplinary reasons, it v/ould
be more trouble than it was worth during the short period
that the war was likely to last. But Garibaldi, though
he knew that the British Legion would not come in time
to be of much assistance in the Neapolitan kingdom,
looked forward to a campaign in the Papal States, and
to the capture of Rome. He therefore sent to England
as agent for the raising of the Legion, a certain Styles,
who had behaved well in the battle of Milazzo, but who

1 See Garibaldi's Defence of the Roman Republic. Hugh Forbes must
not be confused with Captain C. S. Forbes, R.N., Peard's friend, who m ibbo
went in the van of the advancing army as a non-combatant, and whose book
is often cited in this volume.

MESSINA OCCUPIED 99

turned out no better than he should be, and soon
fell out with the disinterested committee who took up
the project in London.^

It was now evident that there would be no further
fighting in Sicily. Since Marshal Clary and his 15,000
at Messina had not moved to the relief of Milazzo, they
certainly would not take the field on their own account
now that it had fallen. Garibaldi's way lay open down
to the shore of the Straits. Medici, duly mounted on
Bosco's horse, led the vanguard into the streets of Messina,
and on July 28 he signed a treaty with Clary, by which
the citadel was to be held by the Royalist garrison and
the town by the Garibaldini. Hostihties between, them
were to be suspended by sea as by land, so that the citadel,
which completely dominated the entrance of the harbour,
might not fire a shot at the Dictator's vessels, even when
they sailed out under the muzzles of the King's cannon to
invade his Calabrian provinces. Such a treaty, extorted
without bloodshed from 15,000 men in an impregnable
fortress, was a great advantage for the inferior forces of
the volunteers, who would have had much diiBculty in
entering the streets of Messina if Clary had resisted their
approach on the mountain ridges above the town, and in
the forts designed for its protection. Nor could they
have remained in Messina if the citadel had been free to
open fire. The terms of this treaty are a measure of the
panic struck into the heart of the Royalist troops by the
defeat of Bosco, and a measure also of the ardour with
which the Neapolitan Ministers desired to avoid further

1 Convs. Dolmage and Patterson. Russell MSS. Misc. It., containing Hugh
Forbes' report dated November 28, i860 ; Forbes rightly says that Dunne, al-
though he signed the papers with which Styles returned to England, ' did so un-
willingly, objecting to any English coming there.' This is borne out by Mr.
Dolmage, to whom Dunne spoke freely. Holyoake, i. 243-256, for the London end
of the story. In Schwabe MS. 2, is a letter of De Rohan which says that Garibaldi
at Milazzo only intended individual volunteers to come out to him from England,
and that the idea of equipping a Legion was invented by the London Committee ;
but Hugh Forbes {Forbes MS.) writes : ' In Milazzo I proposed to General
Garibaldi the creation of an English Legion,' and Mr. Dolmage bears this out.

7*

loo GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

fighting in the island. The greater part of the garrison
were now withdrawn from the citadel of Messina to the
mainland.'

During the anxious month that followed the battle of
Milazzo, the politics of Europe turned on the question
whether Garibaldi could succeed in crossing the Straits.
Would the naval Powers interfere to prevent him ? And
even if they did not, could he cross in the face of the
Neapolitan army and fleet ?

The diplomatic part of the question was destined to
be settled in a few days by the secret activities of Cavour.
He was now fully determined to acquire the Neapolitan
kingdom for Victor Emmanuel, if possible without, but if
necessary with further aid from Garibaldi. On July 14
he had still believed that he would be able, before Gari-
baldi could leave Sicily, to engineer a revolution in Naples
by means of the agents whom he had sent there ; at the
critical moment the Piedmontese fleet was to appear in
the bay. Sanguine of success, he had written to Admiral
Persano : ^ ' We must at all costs, on the one hand
prevent Garibaldi from crossing the Straits, and on the
other excite a revolution in Naples. If this were to
succeed, the government of Victor Emmanuel would at
once be proclaimed there. In that case you would
immediately sail with your whole squadron for Naples.'
The plan presupposed some active disloyalty in the army,
and some power of initiative in the inhabitants of Naples.
Neither were forthcoming. A week after he had written
this letter to Persano, Cavour had become so far doubtful
of his ability to provoke an internal revolution, that he
decided to clear the way for Garibaldi's passage of the
Straits. His earnest wish to forestall the Dictator at
Naples no longer blinded him to the fact that the advance
of the red-shirts might prove after all the only means of
deposing the House of Bourbon. He continued, indeed,

^ Riistow , 2-23-22$. Cuniberti, 102-10$. Franci, \. yg-So, 213-21$. Castel-
lint, 43-44. Forbes, 120-122, 125.
"July 14. Persano, 88.

COUNT LITTA'S MISSION loi

until after the middle of August to work and hope for a
wholesale desertion of the Neapolitan army to the national
cause, which would remove the need for Garibaldi to
cross the Straits, and would place all authority at both
ends of the peninsula in the hands of the Ministry at
Turin.^

But meanwhile, not allowing himself to be duped by
these golden hopes, Cavour entered into a conspiracy
with Victor Emmanuel to open Garibaldi's way before
him, in spite of the threats of European diplomacy, to
which it was necessary all the while to appear subservient.
The King and his Minister, while publicly requesting
the Dictator to halt, secretly urged him to advance.
And while not daring to dispute, through regular diplo-
matic channels, the proposition that he ought to be
stopped at the Straits, they dissolved by a hint to Eng-
land the concert of naval Powers that was being formed
for that purpose. These two pieces of secret service,
Count Litta's mission to Garibaldi, and Sir James
Lacaita's mission to Lord John Russell, have only re-
cently been established as certain historical facts. Their
importance in the history of the crisis that made Italy
is very great.

At four o'clock on the evening of July 22, Count Litta
Modignani came by appointment to the Palace at Turin
to receive from the King's hands a written message which
he was to take to Garibaldi. Victor Emmanuel first
gave him a letter requesting the Dictator not to cross
the Straits — the ostensible royal message published to
the world to allay the threatenings of France. But here,
said the King to Count Litta, is a second note which you
will at once administer to Garibaldi 'to neutrahze the
effect of the first' So saying Victor Emmanuel handed
over a letter containing the following words in his own
handwriting : —

' See Cavour's letters of these weeks. Ricasoli,v. 196. Persano, loi, 123,
127, 134-135. Chiala, iii. 322.

I02 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

'To THE Dictator General Garibaldi.

'Now, having written as King, Victor Emmanuel
suggests to you to reply in this sense, which I know is what
you feel. Reply that you are full of devotion and reverence
for your King, that you would like to obey his counsels, but
that your duty to Italy forbids you to promise not to help the
Neapolitans, when they appeal to you to free them from a
Government which true men and good Italians cannot trust :
that you cannot therefore obey the wishes of the King, but
must reserve full freedom of action.'

With these two missives in his pocket, Count Litta
left the royal presence. The same day he saw Cavour
and Farini, who chaffed him on the ' Garibaldian part '
he was about to play. He sailed to Palermo and thence
to Milazzo, where he arrived on the morning of July 27,
just in time to catch Garibaldi before he started to over-
take Medici and the vanguard at Messina. As soon as
they were closeted together, the King's messenger pro-
duced the two letters in their order. At the second,
delivered by Litta with sly excuses for the first, Garibaldi
burst out laughing. He rose at once and went into his
bedroom, where Sirtori, Trecchi, and others were talking
so loudly that he was forced to say, ' Gentlemen, I have
got to write a letter, please don't make so much noise.'
So saying he sat down and wrote his answer to the King,
which thrilled the heart of Italy in the ensuing weeks.

' Sire,' he wrote, ' Your Majesty knows the high esteem and
love I bear you. But the present state of things in Italy does
not allow me to obey you, as I should have wished. Called
by the peoples {chiamato dai popoli) I refrained as long as I
could. But if now, in spite of all the calls that reach me, I
were longer to delay, I should fail in my duty and imperil the
sacred cause of Italy. Allow me then, Sire, this time to dis-
obey you. As soon as I shall have fulfilled what I have
undertaken, by freeing the peoples from a hated yoke, I will
lay down my sword at your feet and obey you for the rest of
my life.'

Litta hastened back to Turin, the public bearer of this

COLLUSION OF VICTOR EMMANUEL 103

famous reply. But the world knew nothing of the other
document which he safely carried back, the King's ori-
ginal draft, of which the Dictator's answer was but a
paraphrase adorned with a few Garibaldian touches.
That most compromising of documents has just come to
light after a discreet interval of fifty years. ^

It was easy thus, while saving appearances, to make
sure that Garibaldi would obey the law of his being and
go forward as fast and as far as he was able. But to
prevent the maritime Powers from stopping him at the
Straits was a harder task.

For the moment little was to be feared from Austria,
alienated as she was from the Government of Naples by
the nature of its appeal to England, France, and Piedmont.
The diplomatic representatives of Naples did not hesitate
to allege that if the western Powers would force a six
months' truce upon Garibaldi, their country would be able
to hold the elections to her new Parliament, and would
lend her regular army as soon as it was required for the
' inevitable ' war against Austria in Venice. Though
such promises were only the result of abject fear
and were unlikely to be fulfilled, they caused irritation,
if not alarm, at Vienna,'' and postponed the season of
Austrian intervention.

Napoleon, on the other hand, at that moment desired
to preserve the Bourbon dynasty on the mainland as a
constitutional State under French direction far more
ardently than he desired a month later to preserve the
Pope's Adriatic dominions. He was therefore most
anxious to stop Garibaldi at the Straits ; but he was no
less anxious to preserve good relations with England.'
Both these objects could be achieved by a naval combina-

1 Risorg. anno ii. fasc. i, pp. 1-48, Litta's diary, and photograph of the
secret letter. Risorg. anno ii. fasc. 3-4, pp. 651-662, in no way impairs the
truth of the story. Arrivabene, ii. 71-73, bears out some minor details of Litta's
diary.

^ Vitzthum, i. 95-96.

8 See his letter of July 27 to Persigny, Mem. Star. Mil. ii; 186-187.

104 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

tion of France and England to hold the Straits of Messina
against the passage of the Garibaldini, and this was pro-
posed by the French Ministers to Palmerston and Russell.
Lord John, in his English simplicity, supposed that Victor
Emmanuel and Cavour meant what they said when they
declared against Garibaldi's invasion of Calabria, and no
doubt felt that he could best serve Italy by acting in ac-
cordance with the publicly expressed wishes of Cavour.^

The British Ministers, therefore, were not indis-
posed to listen to the arguments of Napoleon when he
proposed that England and France should send the two
greatest fleets in the world to protect the Calabrian coast
against the red-shirts. Details as to the number of
ships to be employed were actually arranged at Naples
between King Francis' Ministers, Brenier, and the French
Admiral.^ The final consent of the British Cabinet had
yet to be received, but if Palmerston and Russell fathered
the scheme it would meet with no resistance from their
colleagues, who, except Gladstone, were less enthusiastic
than they in the Italian cause.

It was a moment full of danger, but Cavour was
warned just in time of the blow which the extreme
subtleness of his policy was preparing for him in the
house of his friends. The warning came, it is said, through
an indiscretion of one of his worst enemies. The story
goes that the French Empress in conversation with Nigra,
the Piedmontese representative at Paris, let drop a hint
of the negotiations with England, that Nigra extracted
the whole truth from her by pretending to sympathise
with the project, and sent on the news to Turin.^

Cavour, gravely alarmed, went straight to the British

^Russell MSS. Lord John to Hudson, July 23. ' I am told that the only
man who has influence with Garibaldi is the King. If he likes to send a message
to Sicily to desire Garibaldi to stay where he is and not to go to Calabria he
will have our full concurrence. Pray ask to see the King and tell him so, first
warning Cavour of the purpose of your audience.'

' Liborio Romano, 37.

' Villari's story, as he obtained it from Lacaita ; it is, of course, not first-
hand evidence. Villari Pasq.

LACAITA'S MISSION 105

Legation and asked Hudson point-blank how to prevent
Russell from being made an unconscious agent in the
ruin of Italy's best hopes. Hudson, happily inspired,
advised Cavour to send Sir James Lacaita, the intimate
friend of the Russell family, to explain the real situation
to Lord John.^

Giacomo Lacaita, a gentleman of Apulia and a lawyer
of Naples, had in 1850 been Mr. Gladstone's political
mentor during his famous visit. ^ Driven into exile for
this, he became naturalised in England and was knighted
as Sir James Lacaita for public services rendered to his

' Sir James Hudson's autograph letter to Lacaita written in 1885 to bear
witness to this event is in possession of Mr. Charles Lacaita, who has given me
a photograph of it. The letter, which runs as follows, at length puts the story
beyond all possible doubt : —

' Florence,

' 9 May, 1885.
' My dear Lacaita,

' I have a clear recollection of the circumstances connected with your
visit to Earl Russell in i860, and as far as the action of Count Cavour was con-
cerned I can declare, that he called upon me at the Queen's Legation at Turin,
and pointing out the dangerous complications which must arise if a stop was
not put to the negotiations then in progress between France and Naples, into
which it was hoped to induce England to enter (i.e. to exercise a direct armed
pressure upon Garibaldi), begged me to take such steps as I might deem practic-
able to prevent this mischief to the Cause of Italy.

' I told the Count that the only thing which occurred to me would be to
address you upon the subject desiring you to go immediately to Lord Russell and
explain to him the real bearings of the case — that I proposed yourself because
you were intimately known to the family of Lord Russell as a man of honour
and a Neapolitan Gentleman having a perfect knowledge of the whole case and
its deplorable consequences if not promptly checked : and, moreover, because
this was not a case where a Regular Diplomatic Agent could be of use, who, if
he acted at all, could only do so under Protest ; to which if no attention was
paid at the instant, would render the " agreement" between the Powers con-
cerned an " accomplished fact ".

' Therefore the success must lie entirely in the personal qualifications of the
gentleman employed in so delicate a conjuncture.

' Count Cavour agreed in this view of the case, and said he would telegraph
to the King's Minister in London to concert with you the steps to take.

' Your success on that occasion added one more to the many services you
had already rendered to Italy.'

' Yours sincerely,
' James Hudson.'

2 Garibaldi and the Thousand, pp. 48-49,

io6 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

adopted country. In July, i860, he was engaged in ex-
amining the candidates for our Indian Civil Service. On
the 23rd, the rain of an English summer's day gave him
a severe cold, and further to his distress, as he noted in
his diary, he heard that a special Neapolitan envoy, the
Marquis La Greca, had arrived in London and had been
closeted with Lord John. On the next day, Tuesday
July 24, he spent another chilly morning examining the
young men vivA voce, came home exceedingly ill, and took
to his bed. He was called up by an unexpected visit
from Emmanuel D'Azeglio, the Piedmontese Minister in
England, who, in obedience to Cavour's message, came
to request Lacaita to go at once to Lord John ' and put
him on his guard against an application he would receive
for intervention to force an armistice on Sicily '} In
spite of his illness, Lacaita dressed again, and disregard-
ing the protests of his family dragged himself into the
streets to obey the orders of Cavour, and, as it chanced,
to bring about the making of Italy.

Arriving at the Russells' town house ^ he rang the
bell. The servant who appeared knew him well as a
friend of the family. The conversation that followed
was to this effect : —

' Is Lord John at home ? '

' Not at home. Sir James.'

' Is he out or only busy ? '

' He's engaged, most particular, Sir James, with the
French Ambassador ; I've turned away the Turkish Am-
bassador, and I've strict orders to let in no one except
the Minister for Naples.'

' There's no time to lose,' thought Lacaita, and then
inquired : —

' Is Lady John at home, then ? '

'She's in bed, Sir James, ill.'

Then Lacaita took out a card and wrote upon it,

' Lacaita's jfoumal, MS.

'' Lady Agatha Russell writes to me : 'I think my parents were probably at
Chesham Place : they came to Pembroke Lodge Saturdays to Mondays.'

LOKI) JOHN RUSSELI.

IN THE BEDROOM AT CHESHAM PLACE 107

' For the love you bear the memory of your father ^ see
me this instant,' and sent up this strange message to the
lady of the house. In a few minutes he was by her
bedside. He persuaded her to send down to her husband
the simple message, 'Come up at once.' Thinking to
find his wife suddenly taken worse, Lord John left
Persigny, the French Ambassador, sitting there, rushed
upstairs, opened the door of the bedroom, and found
himself face to face with Lacaita. It was no time for
apologies or explanations. In a flood of impassioned
words the Apulian poured forth his soul to his English
friend. Was 1848 to be repeated ? Then Sicily had
revolted, then England and France had helped to pre-
vent the Sicilians from invading Naples, and then Sicily
had been reconquered. If Garibaldi crossed now Italy
would be made. If he was stopped, division, reaction
and disaster would ensue as before. Did Lord John
wish to be for ever loved or for ever hated by Liberal
Europe ? A violent paroxysm of coughing shortened
his eloquence. But he had said enough to show Lord
John what Cavour wanted England to do. ' Go to bed,'
he said to Lacaita, ' and don't be so sure that I am going
to sign the treaty yet.'^

Russell's mind was well prepared for these ideas, for
during the summer his wife had received letters from her
NeapoHtan friend Poerio, urging that the Bourbon must
be dethroned and Italy made, now or never ' ; and for a

1 Gilbert Elliot, second Earl of Minto, a great friend to Italy in public and
to Lacaita in private life.

"Such is the story told by Lacaita to Villari, printed in Villari Pasq. and
elsewhere. The story was first published in 1880 in an imperfect form in Pagan's
Life of Panizzi (ii. 207). Lacaita was annoyed at this, and Villari therefore
asked Lacaita for the real details, which Lacaita furnished. Villari's story is
Lacaita's authorised version. His son, Mr. Charles Lacaita, told me this. Sir
James told the story not only to Villari but to his son, and to various other
people. Lady Russell's journals for i860 are lost, but see Appendix A, p. 315
below, for complete evidence from Mr. Vernon's diary that she and her husband
acknowledged the truth of Lacaita's story. For the remarkable personality of
Lady John Russell, see the Memoir of her by Mr. Desmond MacCarthy and
Lady Agatha Russell (Methuen, igio).

^Ladv Russell MS.

108 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

fortnight past Hudson and Elliot, themselves new con-
verts, had been preaching the doctrine of complete
Italian unity in their private letters to the Foreign
Minister. Going downstairs, Lord John presumably
put off Persigny with what excuse he could, for two
hours later he sent round a messenger to Lacaita to tell
him to be of good cheer.^ And at the Cabinet held on
the afternoon of July 25 it was decided to reject the
French proposal with regard to coercing Garibaldi.^

Persigny was amazed at the volte-face of the British
Ministers, for, as he himself tells us, ' he had obtained
Lord Palmerston's promise ' to join in stopping Gari-
baldi.' On July 26 Lord John wrote to our Ambassador
at Paris a dispatch suitable for publication, no reader
of which would ever guess that the majestic current of
British foreign policy had just been deflected from its
course by one of the Civil Service Examiners. ' I in-
formed M. de Persigny,' writes Russell, ' that Her
Majesty's Government were of opinion that no case had
been made out for a departure on their part from their
general principle of non-intervention.' Her Majesty's
Government had only come to this conclusion within the
last forty-eight hours. ' That the force of Garibaldi was
not in itself sufficient to overthrow the Neapolitan Mon-
archy. If the navy, army, and people of Naples were at-
tached to the King, Garibaldi would be defeated ; if, on
the contrary, they were disposed to welcome Garibaldi,
our interference would be an intervention in the internal
affairs of the Neapolitan kingdom.' This was sound

' See Appendix A, p. 315 below.

' Br. Pari. Papers, vii. p. 40, No. 50. The Cabinet held on the afternoon of
the 25th (see Times) is the meeting referred to. The visit of Lacaita to Lord
John's house must have occurred some time between D'Azeglio's call on Lacaita
on the 24th, and this Cabinet on the 25th, vis. either in the afternoon of the 24th
or the morning of the 25th July.

s Persigny, 274-275. So also we read in Elliot, 48, under the date July 26,
' Brenier yesterday read me a dispatch from Thouvenel . . . saying that Lord
John, after having shown himself disposed to come to an understanding with
France with regard to Naples, had now announced the determination of the
English Government to abstain completely from all interference.'

SCILLA AND CHARYBDIS 109

doctrine. To come to the point : ' If France chose to
interfere alone, we should merely disapprove her course
and protest against it. In our opinion the NeapoHtans
ought to be masters either to reject or to receive Gari-
baldi.i

Napoleon was not prepared to take a course against
which England would protest, and the project of foreign
intervention fell dead.

Garibaldi had no longer anything to fear from the
French and British fleets, but he still had before him
a military operation of immense difficulty, to cross the
Straits of Messina through the midst of the Neapolitan
fleet and to land on the Calabrian coast in the face of the
Neapolitan army. The modern Odysseus stood on the
sandy cape of Charybdis, and gazing across at Scilla's now
castled rock, bethought him of his many devices.^ Other
heroes had striven in vain to become masters of this
event. Half a century before, the generals of the great
Napoleon, including Murat himself, had been baffled by
this same strip of sea, two miles wide at the narrowest
point, which had guarded Sicily from the French as safely
as twenty-one miles of northern ocean had guarded from
them a more favoured island.'

^Br. Pari. Papers, vii. p. 40, No. 50.

'The currents in the Straits, which had given rise in the sea-ports of
ancient Hellas to the fable of the Charybdis whirlpool, are so slight that they
caused but little inconvenience to Garibaldi's transport operations from the Faro,
although these were principally conducted in scores of row-boats, each one
smaller than Odysseus' ship. Times, August 20, p. 9, c. i.

'See yohnston (ii. ii8-iig, 239-242) for the two attempts of the French to
invade Sicily, in 1806 and 1810. On the second occasion ' the King of Naples
[Murat] arrived at Scilla on the 3rd of June, saluted by the ringing of bells and
by salvos of artillery that were re-echoed, but with solid shot, by the British
batteries on the further side. The Strait of Messina at this point appears little
more than a river viinding between hilly and picturesque banks. It gradually
widens from about two miles across at the Faro to eight or nine miles at Messina.
The troops of both armies were mostly encamped at the narrowest point, and so
slight was the distance between them that from the lofty rock of SciJla, 550 feet
above the sea, nearly all the British camps and intrenchments could be discovered.
From the further side the view was no less remarkable and clear, and one English
traveller claimed to have distinguished and recognised from the Faro through a

no GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

The lighthouse which gives its name of ' Faro ' to the
cape of Charybdis, and an old fort and battery by its side,
stand at the end of the spit of sand where the north and
east sides of the triangle of Sicily unite. On the sand
dunes behind the lighthouse the greater part of the Gari-
baldian army was bivouacked during the first three
weeks of August. The depth of the water round the
cape, which enables the tunny-fishers to row their boats
within a few yards of the pebbly shore, made it an ex-
cellent place for a great embarkation. Two salt-water
lakes near at hand gave safe harbourage to the larger
transports and to rafts which were being constructed to
take across horses and cannon ; while the flotilla of small
boats which Garibaldi collected from Messina and the
neighbouring fishing villages were drawn up along the
beach of the sea. The mean houses of Faro village
afforded useful shelter. It was on these sands that the
British had been encamped fifty years before, and the
remains of their trenches could still be seen. Garibaldi
had three new earth-work batteries erected, where he
mounted some indifferent cannon, taken from off his only
war-ship, the Tukory, and from the castle of Milazzo.
With these and the three small cannon in the fort beside
the lighthouse, he made pretence to command the Sicihan
side of the narrow waters.^

On the roasting sand between the lighthouse and the
lakes the volunteers lay encamped day after day, amid
scenes of nature and of man very different from the rainy
streets of London and the dim rooms in Chesham Place
where their fate had just been decided. The crowded
quarters soon became insanitary; the food and water
were insufficient ; on the open sands the sea mist soaked
them by night and the sun scorched them by day, and

telescope the person of the King of Naples.' Garibaldi was now using his
telescope from the spot where the ' British traveller ' had used his fifty years
before.

1 Morgan MS. Forbes, 124-125. Du Camp, 62. Milan MS. Bruziesi's
note-book, August g. Tiirr's Div. 119-120. Orsini, 51-52. Times, August 20,
p. 9.

5 rt

ON THE SANDS BY THE LIGHTHOUSE in

there was little to relieve body or soul except constant
bathing in the sea, drilling, and guessing how the General
meant to carry them across.^ Among Garibaldi's own
retinue the gaiety of the days in Palermo Palace and
Milazzo Castle had given place to a more serious mood.
Their chief was silent for hours together, passing about
between Messina and the Faro, sometimes mounting the
lighthouse to watch the coming and going of the Bourbon
ships, sometimes vanishing no one knew whither, con-
ceaHng even from Medici the plans that engrossed him
all day long, but keeping his telescope ever directed on
the Calabrian shore. ^

The eyes and thoughts of all men were fixed on the
coast opposite, so near and yet so far, the ground whence
one could march to Naples, to Rome, to Venice. The toe
of Italy ' has for its bone the enormous granite mass of
Aspromonte, ' the rugged mountain,' of which the plateaus
and spurs, clothed in forests of oak, pine, and chestnut,
and cut by deep caflons each paved with a dry fiumara
of stones washed white by flood, run down to the shores
upon which the Garibaldini were so covetously gazing.
Where the last steep precipices of Aspromonte overhang
the Mediterranean, a road crawls beneath them along
the narrow strip of shore, joining the crowded villages
of Bagnara, Favazzina, Scilla, and Cannitello. Along
that road the red-shirts could watch the enemy's columns
,moving to and fro.

The narrowest point of the Straits was commanded
from the Calabrian side by two small forts of Torre
Cavallo and Altifiumara, built on the hill-side about a
hundred yards above the road and the sea. If Garibaldi
could capture one of these forts, his guns would command
the narrowest part of the Straits from side to side, for he
would then have batteries on both shores. The Nea-
politan fleet would therefore be compelled to stand out

' Fonvielle, 202-203.

''Mario Mac. 249. Red Skirt, 43. Castellini, 47, 51.

2 See henceforth Map II, at end of book.

112 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

of the narrows, and he could pass his army across from
the Faro to the captured fort. It was on this basis that
he planned his first attempt.

On the night of August 8, a forlorn hope of 200 men,
picked out to capture the fort of Altifiumara, embarked
in row-boats at the Faro. Garibaldi himself, always to
the fore in any maritime operation, arranged and guided
the flotilla into mid-channel. He then returned to the
Sicilian shore where the rest of the army was embarking
in steamers and fishing-boats, ready to cross at dawn if
a signal from the opposite shore announced the success
of the enterprise. Meanwhile the 200, under cover of a
cloudy night, rowed through the middle of the Neapolitan
cruisers, and landed not far from the desired place.
Their leader, Musolino, a Calabrian, had visited his native
soil in disguise a few days before, and had arranged, as
he believed, that the gates of the fort should be opened
from the inside.^ But the alarm was given, their night
attack was repulsed, and they had no course left but to
escape into the mountains of the interior. At first they
ascended the fiumara that debouches beside the fort,
guided through the night by the glint of its white stones ;
later on they climbed the mountain walls in complete
darkness, dragging each other up the steepest places by
the muzzles of their guns.

During the next ten days these 200 men were the
only invaders on Neapolitan soil. They wandered about
the upper plains of Aspromonte at a height of over 3000
feet above the sea, suffering from intense cold by night
and August sun by day, sometimes starving in the
mountain desert, sometimes falling in with trains of
mules bearing ample provisions sent up for them from the
Liberal Committee of Reggio. Owing to the fact that

^ The fort in question was that of Altifiumara, now called fortino Garibaldi,
as is shown by the eye-witness, Alberto Mario, in his Red Shirt, 49, 54, and by
Arrivabene, ii. 88. Times, September 4, p. 7, c. 2. Mem. 373, and Forbes, 130.
Tiirr's Div. 123 incorrectly says that it was the neighbouring fort of Torre
Cavallo.

AI.TIFIUMARA FORT (XOW 'FORTIXO GARIRAI.DI ').
Left of Photograph on hill above coast road. View from the shore where Musolino's men landed.

BAGNARA.
And coast to Scilla point. Sicily in right background.

MISSORI ON ASPROMONTE 113

the new Intendant of Reggio appointed by Don Liborio
Romano was a ' constitutionalist ' in tacit sympathy with
the invaders, this rebel Committee acted with singular
publicity, in spite of the presence of the royal troops in the
town. The old Royalist militia — iheguardte urbane — had
just been disarmed by an order of Don Liborio from
Naples, and the new National Guard, Liberals to a man,
had been armed in their stead. The civil and local au-
thorities, therefore, no longer gave any support to the
regular army camped in their midst.^

The pitiful numbers of the invading force in Aspro-
monte were increased by small bands of Calabrian
peasants, hardy mountaineers in goat-skin sandals, knee-
breeches, shirt-sleeves, and brimless sugar-loaf hats orna-
mented with streamers of black velvet — the romantic
Calabrian costume which the opera-house and the picture
gallery of that era had made as familiar to cultured Europe
as the kilt of Sir Walter Scott's Highlanders. Their
leader was Plutino, a local magnate jealous of the fame
which his fellow-Calabrian Musolino had acquired in the
province as leader of this expedition. Both Musolino
and Plutino were feudal chiefs and political leaders
rather than expert military men, and the command of the
expedition was made over by consent to Missori, the
Lombard who had saved Garibaldi's life at Milazzo.
Under his spirited leadership these few hundred men
kept the Neapolitan army perpetually on the qui vive.
Every night they lighted a blaze of bonfires along the
heights, to show their friends on the Sicilian shore that
the insurrection was alive in Calabria. Once they came
right down to the coast, captured Bagnara, and held it
until driven out by several thousand troops. The Cala-
brians behaved well in this first skirmish.

In mountain hamlets like Solano and Pedavoli the
invaders learnt something of Calabrian local politics, the
blood-feuds which under the form of Liberal and Bourbon

' See pp. i6-ig above. Morisani, i6-ao. Salazaro, 49-51.

H4 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

faction-fights had devastated the villages in '48. Since
that year the course of events had so far alienated or
discouraged the Royalist party, that Missori's men were
almost everywhere assisted and were nowhere opposed
by the Calabrians themselves. This was the more re-
markable seeing that the country was still occupied by
the Neapolitan troops, and that for the ten days preced-
ing Garibaldi's crossing, Missori was being hunted like a
partridge in the mountains. On August 1 5 General Ruiz
with two battalions was sent up after him from the coast,
and pursued him in vain through the forest gorges, of
which the fantastic magnificence had more than once at-
tracted landscape-painters like Arthur Strutt and Edward
Lear to brave very real dangers of brigandage. The
Garibaldini escaped over the upper plains of Aspromonte,
many miles across, where only a few huts and sheepfolds
broke the monotony of the desert, and where ' the only
point visible on the horizon was Etna's purple cone. It
was impossible,' wrote Alberto Mario as he tramped
behind Missori through such scenes, ' even in the
hazardous project which absorbed us, not to be at times
subdued by a mighty awe.'^

After this first failure. Garibaldi was only the more
anxious to cross the Straits. The ' call of the peoples '
for his presence among them, of which he had spoken in
his letter to Victor Emmanuel, was growing daily more
insistent. Half Calabria, in anticipation of his coming,
was already in open revolt ; the liberty of the press, the
sympathies of the new ' constitutional ' magistracy and
police, made rebellion easy in any town or village not
actually occupied by the regular troops ; and the lower
clergy, in contrast to the bishops, often took the popular
side. In the toe of Italy the presence of 16,000 troops

'^ Red Shirt, 4^-107. Afrag-;ji«j, 446-450, 454-455. Fonvielle, 2oy. Zasio,
71. Ruiz, 9-10. Mem. 373. Milan MS., Bronzetti's note-book, August 9.
Tiirr's Div. 122-123. Atrivabene, ii. 88-93. Forbes, 130-131. Strutt and Lear,
passim.

THE RISING IN THE PROVINCES 115

prevented the insurrection from breaking out along the
thickly populated coast-line, and confined the movement
to the wanderings of Missori's bands in the heights of
Aspromonte. But the province of Cosenza in Upper Cala-
bria fell more or less into the hands of revolutionary
committees in the first days of August, and the Basilicata
followed suit on August 18. The movement in Calabria
had been stirred up by the great local proprietors — the
Plutino family, Stocco of the Thousand, and Pace of
Medici's expedition, whom Garibaldi had sent on to their
old homes to prepare the way before him. In the Basili-
cata a like part was played by Mignona, also commis-
sioned by Garibaldi. The leaders of the insurrection in
the provinces south of the capital showed both sense and
courage, and succeeded in overawing the troops in their
midst, such as the formidable garrison of Cosenza, who
remained passive spectators of the rebellion. If the
Northern provinces had been equally Liberal, and the
inhabitants of Naples equally bold, Cavour would have
got his revolution without need of furftier help from
Garibaldi.^

As the moment for invading the mainland drew near,
thp recently enlisted Sicilian bands, considering their
part in the affair completed, began to desert in hundreds
from Messina and the Faro. Many of them had fought
well for the deliverance of their own island, but few
shared the enthusiasm of their Northern Liberators for
the idea of Italian Unity. In so far as it meant protection
by Piedmont against the return of the detested Neapoli-
tans, Italian Unity was good ; but in so far as it meant
friendly dealings with the Neapolitans, it was nought.
Now that their own island was safe, they returned to
their homes.^ Only Dunne's regiment of six hundred
and a ' Sicilian brigade ' of eight hundred Cacciatori d
Etna, led by real enthusiasts Hke La Masa, Corrao, and

IDs Cesare's F. di P. cix.-cxxxviii., cxiiii. Mignona, 198-214.
^ Milan MS., Bronzetti's note-book, Angnst 2-4. CasUllini, ^S. Conv. Dvl-
maee.

8*

ii6 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

La Porta, of whom the last two were good soldiers, shared
the fortunes of the army until the end of the Volturno
campaign.^

If the Dictator had any doubts as to the real wishes of
the Court of Turin, they were removed by another secret
message which reached him at the Faro through the
hands of Victor Emmanuel's aide-de-camp Trecchi, the
regular medium of royal communication with Garibaldi.
The King's positive orders to the Dictator were to occupy
Naples, and thence to invade the Pope's territory of
Umbria and the Marches.^

It is not easy to judge whether or not Cavour was a
party to this message. On the one hand it was a habit
of Victor Emmanuel to carry on a policy of his own
through secret agents acting behind the back of his
Ministers. And certainly Cavour was on principle op-
posed to a red-shirt invasion of the Papal States. He
wished to keep the liberation of the Marches and Umbria
as a royal prerogative, and not to allow it to become a
new source of strength to the advanced parties, who, he
feared, would then dictate terms to the Monarchy and
attack the city of Rome at the risk of a war with France.

On the other hand, the King's message, though in
apparent contradiction to Cavour's policy, was perhaps
one of the subtlest moves in the Minister's game. In
order to interpret the royal words of encouragement to
Garibaldi, dictated on August 5, it is necessary to under-
stand that Cavour had already, four days earher, deter-

' Paolucci's Corrao, 144-145.

' Like the secret letter carried by Count Litta (pp. 101-103 above), it has only
just been made known to the world after fifty years {Nuova Antologia, June i,
igio, Trecchi papers). The text of the message in Trecchi's handwriting,
dictated apparently on August 5, runs thus : —

' Words dictated by Victor Emmanuel to be conveyed to Garibaldi. Gari-
baldi in Naples. Will regulate himself according to opportunity, either occupying
Umbria and the Marches with his troops, or allowing bands of volunteers to
go. As soon as Garibaldi is in Naples he will proclaim its union to the rest of
Italy as in Sicily. Prevent disorders which would harm our cause. Keep the
Neapolitan army in being, for Austria will soon declare war. Let the King of
Naples escape, and if he is taken by the people, save him and let him escape.'

CAVOUR'S INTENTIONS 117

mined in his own mind to invade the Papal States from
the north with the regular army of Piedmont. On
August I he had written to Nigra in Paris and to Em-
manuel D'Azegho in London disclosing to them this
secret, the key to all his subsequent policy, in 'ultra
confidential ' letters which were to be destroyed as soon
as read.^ The grounds on which he adopted this de-
cision, the greatest and boldest of his whole hfe, will be
discussed in a future chapter. The policy did not take
effect until September, and till then was not foreseen by
the world at large. It is, therefore, enough at this stage
to point out that by August i Cavour had secretly deter-
mined to invade the Papal States himself. He had,
therefore, the less objection to the further advance of
Garibaldi, because he now knew that the King would be
able at once to assist and to control the red-shirts, by
meeting them with the regular army either at Naples or
on the southern border of the Papal States. He was
not yet prepared to disclose this plan to Garibaldi, but
he was perhaps not sorry that the King should keep the
Dictator in good humour by talking about a Garibaldian
invasion of the Papal States from Naples, which would
now never really take place, since the royal troops
would forestall him in the Pope's territories. It was the
more necessary to tell Garibaldi that he might invade
the Papal States from Naples, because Cavour was at
this moment putting his veto on Mazzini's plan to invade
the Papal States direct from Genoa with Bertani's private
army.

Bertani's Committee in Aid of Garibaldi had not yet
sent out to him any large body of men. Throughout
June and July the expeditions despatched to Sicily had
been organised chiefly by the moderates and by the sup-
porters of Cavour.^ Although Bertani had been levying
and equipping volunteers ever since Garibaldi sailed in
May, he had hitherto held them in reserve for a blow at

1 Bianchi, Polit. de Cavour, p. 378 and note. " See p. 46 above.

ii8 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

the Papal States. Garibaldi had all along favoured such a
design, while at the same time demanding reinforcements
for himself in Sicily. On July 30 he wrote from the Faro
to Bertani : ' As to the operations in the Papal and Nea-
politan territories, push them on with all possible vigour.' ^
The time had now come to strike the blow. In the first
days of August Bertani had at his disposal 8940 volunteers,
who, unlike the men of the earlier expeditions, were
ready armed, uniformed, and organised for immediate
service in the field.^ Six thousand of them were at
Genoa, but some were at Florence under Nicotera, and
a few more in the Romagna. The detachments at Flor-
ence and in the Romagna were to invade Umbria and
the Marches respectively, while the main body were to
sail from Genoa, land in the Papal territories at a point
north of Civita Vecchia, and march by way of Viterbo to
join Nicotera and the others in the east. Rome and
Civita Vecchia, the only places occupied by French garri-
sons, were to be spared for the present*

There were grave objections to this plan. First,
Lamorici^re's newly levied army of Papal crusaders,
being superior in numbers * and not wholly inferior in
enthusiasm to Bertani's volunteers, could not be destroyed
with the rapidity which was essential if French and
Austrian interference was to be forestalled. Nine thou-
sand Italian volunteers under the command of Pianciani,
whom Mazzini and Bertani had chosen for his politics

' Ciamfoli, i68. The letter was delayed in transmission for a fortnight, so
it was of no use, except as a proof to the historian of Garibaldi's wishes at the
end of July. Mario Supp. 313. On July 30 he also wrote to Ricasoli asking
him to let the Tuscan volunteers cross the Papal frontier. Ricasoli, v. 171.

'F. O.Sard. Biovm to Hudson, from Genoa, August 11, i860, No. 317.
' The men are already formed into companies and regiments, and unlike the
previous volunteers are already equipped with uniforms. They are chiefly Lom-
bards, and are a fine, soldier-like body of men.' Bertani had paid for their
equipment, etc., chiefly out of the five million lire which he had received from
the Government of Sicily, through Garibaldi, see Appendix C, ii. below.

^ Riistoai Brig. Mil. 6. Guerzoni, ii. 155. Pittaluga, 126-120. Btirtani, ii.
143-144. Appendix B, below.

* Appendix K, ii. a. below.

BERTANI AND THE GOVERNMENT 119

rather than for his mihtary capacity, would not be worth
half the number under Garibaldi.^ Further, Garibaldi
was beginning to find, as August advanced and the
Sicilians dispersed to their homes, that he could not cross
the Straits in face of the NeapoHtan armies on the Cala-
brian shore until he received strong reinforcements from
the North. On August 1 1 he was expecting shortly to
be joined at the Straits by the volunteers whom Bertani
had organised at Genoa.^ But Pianciani was preparing
to lead them off to a wholly different part of the Italian
Peninsula, under the delusion that Garibaldi would have
6000 Sicilian soldiers to take with him across the Straits,
in addition to his Northern followers.*

Cavour, however, prevented this fatal mistake from
being made. He could not allow revolutionary armies,
organised by Mazzini and Bertani, to start from Genoa
direct for the Papal States. An invasion made under
such conditions must inevitably provoke French inter-
ference. He therefore sent to Genoa his principal
colleague Farini, to negotiate with Bertani about the
destination of Pianciani's force. Saffi, ex-triumvir of
Rome, was present at the interview. Farini told Bertani
that the King's Government intended itself to invade the
Papal States: 'before many days,' he said, 'our own
bugles will be sounding.' In any case the time was not
quite ripe, and therefore the Government must insist that
Pianciani and his volunteers should sail first to the Golfo
degli Aranci-in Sardinia, and thence to Sicily, where they
would necessarily become subject to Garibaldi's orders.
After touching at Sicily they might go to whatever part
their leaders wished, not excluding the Papal States, pro-
vided that they did not re-enter Piedmontese territory as
a base from which to attack the Pope. This compromise

1 Mem. Star. Mil. ii. 177-178, Cadolini's opinion. See pp. 43-44 above.

= CiimpoH, 175, Garibaldi's letter to Musolino. But he expected Nicotera's
men to invade the Papal States from Tuscany, see RicasoU, v. 171, and Bertani.
ii. 170.

* Pianciani, 204.

I20 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

was agreed upon by Farini for the Government, and by
Bertani for the volunteers.^

The clear intention of the authorities to use force
rather than permit the invasion of the Papal States direct
from the port of Genoa had compelled Bertani to tem-
porise. But he had no real thought of fulfilling his part
of the bargain by sending Pianciani's men to Sicily. The
Government had promised to let his volunteers sail for
the Golfo degli Aranci : he intended to persuade Gari-
baldi to come to meet them at the Sardinian port and
himself to lead them thence, not to Sicily, but to the
Papal States. With this object in view, he sailed to the
Faro, landed there at dawn on August 12 and laid his
proposal before the Dictator. Garibaldi took ship with
Bertani that very evening for the Golfo degli Aranci,
stealing away from the camp beside the Straits so secretly
that no one knew whither he had gone nor why. But
all felt that great events were in the air, and that when
next they saw him there would be an end of this weari-
some delay.

It is hard to know what were Garibaldi's intentions
on board the Washington, as it carried him and Bertani
on their hazardous voyage to Sardinia through the midst
of the Neapolitan cruisers. Bertani was under the
erroneous behef that the General would consent to lead
the volunteers straight from the Golfo degli Aranci to the
Papal States.^ But until the moment of Bertani's arrival
at the Faro, Garibaldi had intended to use the greater
number of them to assist his passage of the Straits of
Messina,' and he himself tells us that he rejected Bertani's
proposal to go to the Papal States, and was considering
instead whether he might not attempt a direct coup-de-
main on Naples.*

' Risorg. anno ii. fasc. i, pp. 29-30. Mazzini, xi. p. cxxx note (Saffis'
evidence). Bertani, ii. 151-153. Mario's Mazzini, 408.

^ Bertani, ii. 168. Ire Pol. 66-67. Pianciani, 211-213. Pianciani never
shared this delusion of Bertani's as to Garibaldi's intentions.

^ Ciampoli, 175, Letter of August 11.

* Mem. 374. In / Mille, 150-152, he does not even allow this, and is unfair
on Bertani. In these autobiographical works of a later day Garibaldi speaks

A FLYING VISIT TO CAPRERA 121

But the vigilance of the Piedmontese Government had
settled the matter beforehand. When at dawn of August
14 the Washington, bearing Garibaldi and Bertani,
steamed into the Golfo degli Aranci, only one part of the
fleet that had transported the volunteers from Genoa was
to be found in the bay. The rest had already been com-
pelled by Piedmontese war-ships to go on to Sicily, in
accordance with the agreement which Bertani had made
with the Government and was now plotting to evade. ^
He was wild with fury when he saw that he had been
frustrated. Garibaldi, on the other hand, fell back with-
out any serious loss of temper on the plan which he had
entertained three days before of using Pianciani's men to
force the passage of the Straits of Messina."

Since he had chanced to come so near to his island
home of Caprera,^ he went to pass a few hours there in
repose. With the poignant affection and delight of a
boy at home on his day's exeat in the middle of term, the
Dictator wandered amid the sweet-smelling shrubs and
the chaos of granite rocks, called his favourite cows up
to him by name and fed them from his hand.* Then he
took ship again for Palermo, where all Pianciani's ex-
pedition was soon assembled, 6000 strong.

with hostility of Bertani and the Mazzinians as ' these gentlemen ' who ' perhaps
felt repugnance to submitting themselves to obey the Dictatorship.' He may
have felt these suspicions of Bertani at the Golfo degli Aranci, or he may have
conceived them retrospectively in later years. In any case he was far indeed
from being the tool or dupe of the Mazzinian party : if anything he made ' these
gentlemen ' his dupes by using the troops they had raised for his purposes and
not for theirs.

^ Maison, 6-27. Madame Mario's suggestion (Bertani, ii. 168) that Bertani
meant Garibaldi and the volunteers to touch at Sicily first and thence sail for
the Roman States is not admissible. There is nothing about this in Bertani's
own words as published by Madame Mario, or in Ire Pol. 65-67, or'in Pianciani,
211. If that was Bertani's plan, why was he so angry at the volunteers being
sent to Palermo, and why did he drag Garibaldi to the Golio degli Aranci at the
risk of being caught by the Neapolitan cruisers ?

" Mem. 374. Ciampoli, 175.

' The need to coal took them from the Golfo degli Aranci to Maddalena.
Mem. 374.

* Guerzoni, ii. 159. Du Camp. 19-20. Bertani, ii. 169-170. Durand
Brager, 164-165.

122 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Even at Palermo, Bertani again implored him to lead
the men to the Papal States, but his mind was now once
more intent on the problem of the Straits of Messina.
Pianciani therefore resigned his commission and went
home, but Bertani remained at the seat of war, hoping
to use his influence upon Garibaldi in opposition to the
more moderate counsels of the soldiers, Medici, Tiirr,
Bixio, and Cosenz, who were well aware of the necessity
of avoiding a breach with Cavour.^

There still remained some 2000 volunteers in Tuscany
under Nicotera, who had not been specifically mentioned
in the terms of agreement between Bertani and Farini
at Genoa. Garibaldi, though requiring Pianciani's men
in order to effect the passage of the Straits, was still
willing that Nicotera should invade the Pope's territory
by land, and wrote to him to that effect.^ But Cavour
instructed Ricasoli, as Governor of Tuscany, not to per-
mit any such movement. After an embittered quarrel,
in which Ricasoli and Nicotera behaved each with small
consideration for the other, the Governor had his way,
and the last of the volunteers were forcibly shipped to
Sicily.' Thus the whole army which Bertani had pre-
pared against the Pope, more than 8000 in number, finally
swelled Garibaldi's force in the South, and was of indis-
pensable service to him in his occupation and subsequent
defence of Naples. They were almost the last volunteers
who joined him from North Italy. For Cavour, alarmed
by the constant threat of the advanced parties to invade
the Papal territory, and now fully determined to invade
it himself, prohibited on August 1 3 the further levy or
dispatch of volunteers under any pretext, and this time,
to the surprise of diplomatic Europe, actually enforced
his proclamation. There were no more departures en
masse from Genoa, though some hundreds of private

' Pianciani, 212-213. Mem. Star. Mil. ii. 182. Tiirr's Risposta, 15-16.

^Bertani, ii. 170.

^Pianciani, 313 et seq. (documenti M, N). Ricasoli, v. 171-224 passim.
Nicotera, 44-47. Nicotera was more republican in his expressions than even
Mazzini liked, see Mignona, 193. Appendix B, p. 319 below.

l<ORCES CONCENTRATED AT THE STRAITS 123

individuals went south with Government passports.^ In
all, Garibaldi had about 20,000 Northerners under him
in the course of the year,'' and at the Straits he already
had, at the time of his crossing, much the greater part of
this total, besides Sicilians. He was a match, even in
numbers, for the troops in the toe of Italy, provided his
transports could escape the enemy's fleet. But by all
ordinary calculation that was impossible.

^Pittaluga, 159-161. Mem. Star. Mil. ii. 179. F. O. Sard. No. 332. Brown
to Hudson, August 27, i860.
"Appendix B, below.

CHAPTER yi

THE CROSSING OF THE STRAITS

' Che volete, Signorini ; io sono un vecchio soldato, e percio m'attendeva
che Garibaldi m'attaccasse di fronte, ed invece m'h capitato alle spalle ! '

' What do you expect, gentlemen ; I am an old soldier, and so of course I
expected Garibaldi to attack me in front, and he came from behind instead ! '
General Gallotffs explanation of his defeat overheard by Arrivabene (ii. 112).

' Lu curaggio e nu donu di Dio, ed io nu I'aggiu.'

' Courage is a gift of God, and I have it not.' Saying attributed to a
Neapolitan soldier by the Garibaldini. Whitaker, 283.

Between the working of one great action and the
next, Nino Bixio was heard of chiefly through his deeds
of insane violence. After the taking of Palermo, ' the
second of the Thousand ' had distinguished himself in
the Sicilian capital by his quarrel with a brother in arms,
the self-sacrificing Agnetta, whom he struck in the face
for an imaginary insult. Since Garibaldi would allow no
duel on campaign, they did not fight it out until late in
the following year, in Switzerland. Bixio came tardily
and unwillingly on to the 'field of honour,' because he
of all men had scruples against duelling. Agnetta shot
him in the hand, crippling it for the rest of his life,
whereupon Bixio said, ' I am punished in the hand that
gave the offence.' He subsequently earned Agnetta's
gratitude by services of real friendship.^

Bixio was not present at the battle of Milazzo, for he
was leading his command through the south of the
island. When at the end of July all the Garibaldian
columns met near the Straits, he was sent by the Dictator

^Busetto, 23, 42. Whitaker, 292. Bandi, 191-192. Adamoli, 91-93.
Abba's Bixio, 102 105. Bixio, 306-207, 4^3. Bixio MSS. contain Agnetta's
letter of gratitude.

124

NINO BIXIO
(Civilian Costume.)

THE ITALIAN HOTSPUR 125

to suppress a predatory and murderous anarchist rising
under the western slopes of ^tna. There, at Randazzo
and on Nelson's old estate of Bronte, his summary
methods and manners soon terrified the wrongdoers into
submission at the cost of only a few actual executions.'
Bixio's own soldiers were always complaining of him.
' He is mad, he is intolerable.' ' Very well, under whom
do you wish to serve then ? ' * What ? Eh ? Oh, under
Bixio, of course.'^ At Bronte one morning some volun-
teers recently arrived from North Italy, and not ac-
customed to his ways, were late in turning out of bed.
He went into the houses after them with a horse-whip.
The older troops, who had marched under him and
learnt to love him, with difficulty saved his life from the
fury of the new men, who had come out to fight under
Garibaldi, not to be whipped-in like hounds.^

But now an action was in hand on which his rage to
be up and doing for his country could be spent to better
purpose.

The Dictator had been away in Sardinia and Palermo
for nearly six days, and no one at the Straits knew when
or whether he would return. The suspense on both
shores was terrible. On the morning of August 18 he
suddenly reappeared in the Faro camp, gave his orders,
left for Messina, and an hour afterwards was seen driv-
ing through its streets in a three-horse carriage along
the southern road. His movements were still as mysteri-
ous as ever, for he was again travelling away from the
scene of active operations at the Faro.* But in fact the
camp and flotilla beneath the lighthouse were to serve
during the next twenty-four hours only as a decoy to fix
the attention of the enemy's ships and regiments on the
narrow waters of Scilla and Charybdis, while the real

'SJ«o, 215-224. Bixio Sclavo, 22-2$, Fonvielle, 215-216,
^Abba Not. 213. ^Conv. Capurro.

* Peard MS. Journal, August 18. Forbice, August 26, letter from Messina
August 19 )-« passage of Garibaldi i8th. Foci«, 135, 147. Mem. 37^.

126 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

crossing took place at the broader part of the Straits,
thirty miles to the south.

On the afternoon of August i8 Garibaldi's carriage
reached the hamlet of Giardini, which stretches along
the beach between the wall of mountains and the sea, at
the southern foot of Taormina rock. Here Bixio's men
from Bronte and Catania had been secretly collected dur-
ing the last two days. Here the Torino and Franklin had
safely arrived, after steaming round the whole island from
the Faro in order to avoid the Neapolitan cruisers in the
Straits. The captain of the Torino, a man of peace, who
objected to the use of his transport vessel for an enter-
prise so hazardous as an attack on the Calabrian coast,
had been silenced and placed under arrest by Bixio. The
troops, 3360 in number, were already on board the two
steamers when Garibaldi drove up. When all was ready,
it was found that the Franklin had sprung a leak. The
hole could not be found, and Bixio proposed that they
should start with the Torino alone, but, when Garibaldi
took the matter in hand, the hole was soon found and
stopped. To judge by the space which he allots to this
operation in his Memoirs, the Dictator recalled it with
more interest than all his historic achievements during
the next fortnight. That he should cause 15,000 soldiers
of tyranny to lay down their arms seemed to him no more
than an inevitable fate, now that Italy's hour had struck ;
but to find and calk a hole in a ship which had baffled
the other seamen, was an action of which a man had
good right to be proud. ^

At nightfall the two vessels steamed out from below
the rock of Taormina. The distance to Melito, the point
chosen for the landing in Calabria, is thirty miles, and,
if at any point in the crossing the unarmed transports
had fallen in with a Neapolitan war-ship they could have
been sunk to the bottom. But the enemy were all away at
the narrows, watching the camp and flotilla at the Faro.

' Mem. 374-375. Menghinl, 451. Times, August 25, p. 9, c. 5. Arrivahene
ii. loo-ioi. Tost, 91. Bixio, 232. Forbes, 147.

SHORE N'F.AK MF.I.ITO WHERE GARIBAI.I>I LAXDKD IN CALABRIA.
Chapel of S. Maria di porto Salvo.

FAVAZ7,INA, WHERE COSEXZ LANDED.

GARIBALDI LANDS IN CALABRIA 12;

The night voyage was unbroken by anything more terri-
fying than the voice of Bixio from the Torino continually
shouting through his megaphone to the silent Garibaldi
in the Franklin}

When dawn revealed Etna's cone and the long
ranges of subject Sicilian mountains at her feet, the
Calabrian coast lay close ahead. Again, as at Marsala,
Bixio ran his vessel aground on the shallows. But the
men of both the steamers were taken off in the ships'
boats and landed on the desolate beach called Porto
Salvo, a mile from Melito village. There were no
houses near, but an old chapel with a cupola rose amid
the cactuses and aloes at the edge of the sea sand. The
flat country behind, though it bore olive groves and
scraps of cultivation, was arid for the most part, stripped
and scarred each winter by the torrents from Aspromonte.
The mountains themselves here stand back a mile or two
from the coast, but the Garibaldini as they landed saw
the pillar rock of Pentedatilo raising its five grotesque
fingers against the dawn.^

Garibaldi spent the whole morning of the 19th in a
vain attempt to salve the Torino. He was waiting also
for Missori's men to come down from the mountains
near San Lorenzo, whither he had sent them a message
to announce his landing. In the afternoon Neapolitan
war-vessels appeared from the direction of Messina, de-
stroyed the grounded and derelict Torino, and fired, not
without some effect, into the red-shirts on shore. The
Franklin had returned safely to Sicily. Towards evening
the vanguard of Missori's men appeared on the neighbour-
ing mountains, and the night of August 19-20 was spent
in bivouac not far from Melito.* For thirty-six hours

> Tost, 91.

^ Pentedatilo had been a favourite place of Edward Lear's during his paint-
ing tour in Calabria which was cut short by the revolution of 1848. Very few
others have visited Pentedatilo before or since ; Calabria is out of fashion now
even with painters, though safer and no less magnificent than of old.

' See Appendix G, i. below. Mem. 376. Mtnghini, 451-452. Bixio, 233
234. Tosi, 92. Red Shirt, 108,

128 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

many of the troops had neither food nor drink ; some of
them who were inland-bred dug holes in the sea-shore
and lapped the water that oozed up, in the desperate
hope that Neptune would lose his salt by filtering through
the sand.'

On August 19 the telegraphs and semaphores in the
Neapolitan kingdom had been wagging all day with
ominous rumours from the south, and before midnight
the Ministers at Naples knew that there had been a land-
ing in force a dozen miles beyond Reggio.^ There were
now some 16,000 Royalist troops in Lower Calabria.'
General Vial, their commander-in-chief, had his head-
quarters at Monteleone, too far removed from the scene
of operations. His regiments were scattered along fifty
miles of the road between Monteleone and Reggio. His
lieutenants, Melendez and Briganti, were guarding the
supposed points of danger opposite the Faro, but at the
moment of Garibaldi's landing there were no troops
south of Reggio, and in Reggio itself only some 1000
men, chiefly of the 14th line. When, forty-eight hours
later. Garibaldi fell upon the city, the numbers of its
garrison had not been increased by a single man. The
news of the landing at Melito ought to have caused an
instantaneous move in that direction on the part of each
of the columns scattered along the coast road, but neither
Vial, Melendez, nor Briganti stirred until it was too late
to save Reggio, in spite of a stream'of indignant telegrams
from Pianell at Naples. The War Minister had been
anxious to avoid fighting in Sicily, and had perhaps not
sent enough troops to guard the Straits, but his telegrams
show that he did his best to make the generals fight
Garibaldi when once he had landed.

Old General Gallotti, in command at Reggio, was the

•

' Conv. Tedaldi. " Pianell, 45-46.

' They are sometimes estimated at 12,000; but Garibaldi tool: 14,000 [1000
at Reggio, over 3000 at Piale and San Giovanni, and 10,000 at Soveria, pp. 131,
137, 148 below]. Besides these 14,000, we know that 1000 disbanded from
Monteleone and Pizzo, and 1000 more returned thence with Vial to Naples,
tee p. 141 below,

GARIBALDI ATTACKS REGGIO 129

most complete dotard of them all. When informed of
the landing at Mehto, he said that Garibaldi had taken
to the mountains and that Reggio could not be attacked
from that side, but only in front from the sea. He there-
fore made no preparations to defend the city. He forbade
the energetic Colonel Dusmet to take up a good position
near the castle, and compelled him instead to bivouac in
the middle of the Cathedral Square, a mere trap for those
who occupied it unless the entrances to the city were
strongly guarded. These, however, were confided to
the National Guard of Liberal bourgeoisie, whose loyalty
was more than doubtful. Gallotti himself remained in
the castle with a garrison. The castle of Reggio is a tall,
grim building, flanked by round towers, somewhat similar
in strength and appearance to the Bastille of old Paris,
though on a smaller scale. But unlike the Bastille it
does not rise clear above all possible assailants. For
Reggio is ^ built on the side of a hill, and since the castle
is only half-way up the hill, its battlements can be com-
manded by sharpshooters at the top of the town.

On the 20th the invaders marched from Melito, pass-
ing over the top of the sandstone cliff of Capo dell' Armi
— Leucopetra, whose ' white rock ' had been a famous
sea-mark to the sailors of the ancient world. The General
walked with his sabre over his shoulder, talking and
singing with the men. All were hungry but in high
spirits. Near Reggio they rested again, and at midnight
advanced to the attack. Garibaldi with Missori's men
entered the upper town by way of the hills, through
Spirito Santo. Bixio with the main column kept the high
road through Sbarre, and came in by the principal streets
below the castle. His men stumbled upon outposts at
the entrance of the city.

' Chi va la ? '

'Garibaldi.'

' Avanti ! '

'Or rather 'was.' Fuit Ilirm, But the castle has withstood the earth-
quake.

9

I30 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

It was the National Guard standing aside to let them
pass. They hurried on through the sleeping streets. In
the middle of the town they came upon other sentries.

' Chi va Id ? '

'Garibaldi.'

Bang !

They had come upon the loyal troops at last.*

A fierce struggle raged in the great Cathedral Square
until the morning. Colonel Dusmet and his son, not
yet of age, fell gallantly fighting in front of the Royalists.
Bixio's horses received nineteen wounds, and their rider
two in the arm to which he paid no attention till Garibaldi
sent him to bed the next night, saying, ' I suppose the
balls that reach you are made of puff-paste.' "

The odds were all against the 14th line, and Gari-
baldi's column was pouring in upon their rear from the
upper town. As day broke the red-shirts possessed
themselves of all Reggio except the castle, which was
provisioned for a month and could easily be defended
against its present assailants.

Later in the same day (August 21) Briganti ap-
proached Reggio from Villa San Giovanni with about
2000 men. Garibaldi led his troops out into the country
just beyond the northern suburbs and took up a position
to cover the town. After the exchange of a few shots in
a feeble reconnaissance, Briganti fell back, leaving Reggio
to its fate. Garibaldi afterwards wrote that if the attack
had been pressed, the Royalists might very possibly,
with the help of the garrison in the castle, have recovered
the town, and that in that case his own position would
have been desperate. Indeed the troops in the castle
had clamoured to be led out to attack him in the rear and

^ Conv. Tedaldi, his account of his own experience.

^ Bixio himself wrote afterwards to a friend : ' My horses received ten bullets
at Rome (1849), nineteen at Reggio in Calabria, three at Maddaloni (Volturno).
iVIy own carcase was honoured by three bullets at Rome, one at Palermo, two at
Reggio, and a fracture of the leg at the passage of the Volturno.' Bixio, 229,
note. Busetto, 49. Red Shirt, iio-iii. Bologna MSS. Bixio, Letter of August
24.

COSENZ CROSSES THE STRAITS 131

join hands with the relieving force. But Gallotti had
refused to allow a sally. Hitherto the Royalist garrison
in Reggio with the exception of Gallotti himself had
behaved well, but after Briganti's retreat they felt them-
selves deserted and began to lose courage. When sharp-
shooters placed by Garibaldi in the upper part of the
town commenced picking off the men on the battlements,
panic set in, and the castle, which might have held out
for weeks, was surrendered within twenty-four hours.
The taking of Reggio had cost the victors about 1 50 in
killed and wounded.^

On the same day another important event took place
to the north of the Straits. Garibaldi had left Cosenz
in command at the Faro with instructions that he was to
carry his troops across the water at the moment when
the Dictator himself attacked Reggio. There was a good
chance that Cosenz would be able to cross in safety
because the Neapolitan war-vessels had now, too late,
left the narrow waters and gone south to attend to
Garibaldi after his landing at Melito. Before sunrise
on August 21,^ to the sound of the distant firing
from Reggio, the flotilla of row-boats put out from
Faro, carrying between 1000 and 1 500 volunteers ; they
struggled successfully against the currents of Charybdis,
made a wide detour to avoid the cannon-balls from the
fort of Scilla, and landed the same morning on the strip
of flat shore beneath the wall of wooded mountains at
Favazzina. The Neapolitan war-ships, hastily summoned
back from Reggio, sank and captured a large number of
the boats as the fishermen were taking them back empty
to the Faro.

A few minutes after Cosenz and his men had landed

' Morisani, 65-98. Pianell, 45-55. Franci, i. 90-96. Mem. 378-379. De
Sivo, iii. 365-369. De Cesare, ii. 390. Bixio, 229-231. Arrivabene, ii. 108-112.
Red Shirt, ro9-iii. Zasio, 76. Turr's Div. 133. Menghini, 453-454. The
date of the surrender of Reggio Castle was the evening of the 21st, and not the
aznd as some have stated: see on this Ruiz, 32 ; Franci, i. 225-226, doc. 55.

' See Appendix G, ii.

9*

132 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

at Favazzina, they were attacked while crossing the coast
road by Neapohtan troops from Scilla on one side and
from Bagnara on the other. The enemy were repulsed
chiefly by the Genoese carabineers, the pick of Garibaldi's
original 'Thousand,' and the whole force proceeded
straight up the sides of Aspromonte by precipitous
tracks through the brushwood. At noontide the greater
part had reached the hamlet of Solano, 2000 feet above
the sea. Overcome by heat, thirst, and fatigue they took
their siesta in the houses, believing that all the RoyaHst
forces were far below them on the level of the shore.
From the precipice edge of Solano they looked back down
the gulf of an enormous ravine below, but the village is
itself closely overshadowed by other heights, covered
with chestnut woods, and in these a few hundred Nea-
politan troops were lying concealed. They were a de-
tachment of Ruiz' men who had not yet gone down off
Aspromonte from their vain pursuit of Missori's column.*
Though inferior in numbers to Cosenz, the Royalists
seized their advantage, surprised the sentinels and burst
into the village. The Garibaldini had an hour's hard
fighting before they could drive them out. Two little
companies of French and English volunteers distin-
guished themselves in the scuffle under the leadership
of De Flotte and of Goodall.^ De Flotte was killed in
the street at the head of his men. He was a French
Republican exile, who had played a part in Paris in '48,
and narrowly escaped Cayenne after Napoleon llL'scoup
dHat He had been loved by all his companions in arms,
English, Italians, and French ; and Garibaldi, when he
heard of his death, mourned for him as a true soldier of
liberty. They buried him where he fell, high up among
the granite gorges and the chestnut woods, far from his
fierce, gay city and the Boulevard lights.

After repulsing this attack, Cosenz' column mounted

' Morisani, loS-iog. See p. 114 above.

^Arrivabette, ii. 123, says : ' After De Flotte's death they were led by Captain
Goodall, a dashing young Enghshman.' Menghini, 278.

SUCCESS OF GARIBALDI'S STRATEGY 133

another 1500 feet to Forestali on the higher plains of
Aspromonte. There they received a message from the
Dictator bidding them march westward and join him
above Villa San Giovanni. Their sufferings on the
plateaus of Aspromonte were severe. Starved and sun-
baked all day, at night they were soaked with the dew
and chilled with the intense cold of the mountain, so
that Goodall and other useful soldiers were put out of
action.*

The movements of Garibaldi and Cosenz are a model
of combined action from two separate bases. Each had
enabled the other to succeed, by distracting the attention
of the enemy's naval and military force. And now they
were about to join hands at a spot above and in rear of the
enemy's main line of defence.

On August 22, the morning after the fall of Reggio,
the Dictator and Bixio moved northward to attack the
forts and regiments commanding the narrowest part of
the Straits. Again Bixio kept the coast road and Gari-
baldi the hills. On the evening of that day the Dictator
joined forces with Cosenz above Piale and Villa San
Giovanni. After this junction he had with him about
5000 men, and was for a while superior to the enemy
both in numbers and position. Down below, between
him and the sea, lay rather more than 3000 troops under
Generals Melendez and Briganti.^ The greater part of
this force was in Villa San Giovanni on the coast road,
under the command of Briganti ; but Melendez with
1200 men occupied Piale village, a mile up the hill-side.
Garibaldi was above them both at Campo Calabrese,
where Murat had pitched his tents when he threatened
Sicily with invasion. These seaward heights now oc-

' For Cosenz' crossing and Solano fight, Conv. Goodall, Conv. Patterson.
Pianell, 56. Caraguel, 115-132. Times, September 4, p. 7, c. 3. Maison,
44-50. Red Shirt, 130. Menghini, 276-279. Magni, 7-9. Mem. 379. Morisani,
105-iog.

'' There is no Neapolitan estimate of the numbers, though De Sivo, iii. 373,
says Melendez had 1200 men at Piale. Briganti's force below was larger, as all
agree. The Times and Morning Post correspondents, who were present at the
surrender on the 23rd, respectively estimate the haul at 3800 and 3500.

134 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

cupied by the red-shirts bore no resemblance to the
wooded and precipitous mountains below which Cosenz
had landed. It is a tumble-down land of broken mud
banks on which vineyards, fruit gardens, cactuses, and
houses maintain an ever precarious existence. The
landscape on this part of the Calabrian shore is more
weird than beautiful, but the view thence of the Straits,
of Sicily and of JEtna—Mongibello, 'the fair mountain,'
as the Calabrians call it — filled the Garibaldini with de-
light as they waited for the surrender of their foes. An
artillery duel between the Neapolitan ships and the
batteries at the Faro was watched by both armies as
from the seats of a theatre, of which the lower circles
were occupied by the Royalists.

On the 22nd Melendez and Briganti might still have
retreated to Scilla, for it was only during the following
night that the Dictator cut oflF their retreat by pushing
his advance guard down to the coast at Cannitello. But
they let the hours slip by in the vain expectation of
reinforcements from the north. Besides the men whom
they had with them, there were more than 10,000 Royalist
troops in Lower Calabria,^ and they naturally supposed
that Vial would lead these to their rescue. But the
commander-in-chief had no advantage except in point of
age over his dotard lieutenants. A pleasure-loving and
idle young man, raised by personal influences at Court to
a command for which he had no qualifications. Vial had
too much of the heartless flippancy of the Neapolitan to
be serious over even the gravest situation. He continued
to linger and amuse himself at Monteleone, saying that
he ' would give Joe a ducking ' ^ if he tried to cross the
Straits. When he heard that ' Joe ' had crossed, and
was taking Reggio, he still lingered with the greater
part of the troops under his command fifty miles from the
scene of action. At length, driven to the front by furious

' Franci, i. 97, places Vial's [= Ohio's] men at 10,000 for infantry alone.
' ' Avrfbbe pescato Pipparidlo.' {Pepparidlo = Giuseppe Garibaldi.) Dt
Cesare, ii. 390-391.

CONDITION OF THE BOURBON TROOPS 135

telegrams from Pianell, the War Minister, he sailed from
Pizzo on the morning of August 22, taking with him one
of his best battalions. He landed alone at Villa San
Giovanni, interviewed Briganti and Melendez, and ordered
them to hold out while he set this battalion ashore at
Scilla and led it to their rescue. He then returned to
Scilla, but as a sea had arisen which made the landing
of troops momentarily difficult, he hailed the excuse to
sail back with the battalion to Pizzo and Monteleone,
leaving his lieutenants to their fate without even warning
them that he had changed his plan and run away.

Meanwhile, Melendez and Briganti were expecting
aid not only from Vial, but also from General Ruiz, who
had at length descended from Aspromonte to the coast
road, and was hurrying along it to their rescue. Like
Vial, Ruiz came on alone in front of his column to take
stock of the situation. He visited Melendez and Briganti
up at Piale and then went down to the main road again
to bring up his column from Altifiumara. But on his
way back through Villa San Giovanni he could not fail
to observe that Briganti's men were in a state of complete
demoralisation. Red-shirts were going about among
them with impunity in caf^s and at street corners, exhort-
ing them not to prolong a useless and fratricidal contest ;
and it was only too evident that the men were listening.
There was little of active disloyalty or of political Lib-
eralism among the rank and file. But they had in August
small motive or encouragement to fight. They were at
once terrified and fascinated by the name of Garibaldi,
and after the taking of Reggio regarded him as uncon-
querable. During the last two months, ever since the
grant of the Constitution, they had been forced to march
under the tricolour flag, — the flag, as it seemed to them,
of their enemies. They witnessed, in every street down
which they passed, the enthusiasm of the populace for
the revolution and the open disloyalty of the new civic
authorities, who had proclaimed ' Long live the King ' as
a seditious cry. Their own officers were visibly shaking

136 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

with fear, muttering their doubts to each other, or pre-
occupied with private thoughts of which the character
was only too evident. Their General, Briganti, was
known to be in favour of negotiation. The enemy, it
appeared, was to be regarded as more than half a friend,
since no one prevented his emissaries from entering their
lines to talk sedition in the open street of Villa San
Giovanni.

As Ruiz rode through the town noting what he saw,
he judged that Briganti and his troops did not mean to
fight, and that he had best save his own men from shar-
ing in their surrender. A few miles further north, at
Altifiumara, he met his column hastening up, ordered it
to turn right about and before nightfall on the 22nd had
led it back to Bagnara. Like Vial, Ruiz was pursued by
indignant telegrams from the War Minister at Naples to
the effect that Melendez and Briganti were preparing to
die at their posts, while he basely deserted them. But
he knew better, and rather than face Garibaldi again, re-
signed his command. His successor, Morisani, on the
morning of the 23rd began to march back once more to
the relief of San Giovanni, but was met and turned back
for good and all by a messenger from Melendez himself,
who declared that it was now too late.'

In this fashion Melendez and Briganti, lured by false
hopes that Vial and Ruiz were marching to their relief,
had let slip the opportunity to escape out of their unten-
able positions on August 22. At daybreak on the 23rd
they saw that retreat was no longer possible. During
the night Garibaldi had drawn the net round them by
sending down detachments from Campo Calabrese to
Cannitello. They were completely surrounded with a
semicircle of sea on one side, and a semicircle of red-
shirts on the other. As the sun rose the Garibaldini
began to descend upon them from the hills. The Nea-

' Ruiz, 13, says that he had had only 1400 men in his commn. But Moris-
ani, 132- 134, and De Sivo, iii. 373, say that Ruiz had 3000 (21 companies), at
any rate when he handed over the command to Morisani.

THE SURRENDER AT VILLA SAN GIOVANNI 137

politan rifles and cannon opened fire, but the advancing
host made no reply. The slow, ordered, noiseless ap-
proach of their enemies affected the nerves of the
Royalists, as Garibaldi had intended that it should.
They opened negotiations. A Garibaldian parlementaire
with the white flag in his hand was shot dead, but General
Briganti himself came out to apologise. He explained
to the Dictator that he would have been a Liberal himself,
but that he had two sons in the Neapolitan army and so
felt gratitude to the Bourbons. ' Otherwise,' he said, ' I
would join you.'' He asked to surrender with the
honours of war. Garibaldi gave him and Melendez till
three o'clock to surrender unconditionally, and allowed
them to send out a messenger, who, as already relatedi
stopped the further advance of Morisani to their rescue-
Meanwhile, the Garibaldian army halted on the hill-
side and watched the confusion growing hour by hour
among their enemies below. When the appointed time
had run out the advance was resumed. As the red-
shirts drew the circle close upon them, the Royalists
threw away arms and knapsacks and fled in a mob along
the northern road. They were turned back by a volley,
and crowded together like driven sheep in the centre of
their position. Garibaldi rode almost alone into their
midst. ' Soldiers,' he said, ' you as well as my companions
are the sons of Italy ; remember that. You are at liberty.
Whoever wishes to remain with us may address himself
to General Cosenz, your countryman, who is charged to
enhst you. But whoever wishes may go home.' At
these words they rushed at him with cries of joy and
much to his disgust began kissing his hands, arms, and
feet Three thousand five hundred men, four field pieces,
and the fort of Punto del Pezzo with its artillery were
the prize of this bloodless victory. Very few of the men
chose to enlist under Cosenz, but as they scattered to
their homes they spread the news that Garibaldi's custom
was to send off his prisoners free, and this knowledge

1 Conv. Sclavo (eye-witness).

138 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

greatly increased the readiness of the troops under Vial
and Ruiz to follow the example set at Villa San Giovanni.

That example proved contagious along the vv^hole
road to Naples. The next day, August 24, the fort of
Altifiumara, which had resisted Missori's attack a fort-
night before, the neighbouring fort of Torre Cavallo, and
the more formidable castle on the rock of Scilla, armed
with twenty-two cannon, all opened their gates to the
outriders of the invading army, among whom Garibaldi
himself was one of the foremost. As soon as the batteries
of these forts had compelled the Neapolitan navy to sail
out of the Straits, Medici's regiments at Messina were
brought safely across to the mainland.

The race to Naples had now fairly begun. It was
led by Garibaldi and his staff, many hours ahead of the
van of their army, accompanied by Jessie and Alberto
Mario, and by some English gentlemen who liked fatigue
and had the luck and money to hire horses that could
keep the pace. There were more than 10,000 of the
enemy close ahead, but no one feared that they would
resist when overtaken. Basilicata and Upper Calabria
were already rising in arms. The Dictator and his com-
panions set out to ride unchallenged along the great
trunk road that stretches for 250 miles through mountains
and forests and fever-stricken plains from the foot of
Aspromonte to the foot of Vesuvius.^

^ Pianell, 48-81. Monsani, 120-139. Ruii, n-i8. Marra Oss. 38-41.
Arrivabme, ii. 115-129. Red Shirt, 112-147. Conv. Tedaldi. Forbes, 167-177.
Peard yournal MS. Conv. Goodall. Conv. Patterson. Menghini, 455-457.
De Cesare, ii. 390-392. Franci, i. 93-95. De Sivo, iii. 372-377. Times, Sep-
tember 4, p. 7, c. 5. M. Post, September 6, p. 5. Conv. Sclavo. Bologna USS.
Bixio, Letter of August 24 .

CHAPTER VII

THE MARCH THROUGH CALABRIA

' O how comely it is, and how reviving

To the spirits of just men long oppressed.

When God into the hands of their dehverer

Puts invincible might,

To quell the mighty of the earth, the oppressor.

The brute and boisterous force of violent men,

Hardy and industrious to support

Tyrannic power, but raging to pursue

The righteous, and all such as honour truth 1

He all their ammunition

And feats of war defeats.

With plain heroic magnitude of mind

And celestial vigour armed ;

Their armouries and magazines contemns.

Renders them useless, while

With winged expedition

Swift as the lightning glance he executes

His errand on the wicked, who, surprised,

Lose their defence, distracted and amazed.'

Milton. Samson Agonistes.

The Calabrian Liberals were not altogether unworthy of
such a deliverer. The Garibaldini, who had seen little
to admire in the inhabitants of Eastern Sicily in spite of
all the facile enthusiasm at Messina, declared that when
they had crossed the Straits they soon found themselves
among ' a staid, manly, and athletic population.' ^ Travel-
lers who to-day visit those remote but magnificent regions
notice with relief that the corruption of Naples has not
infected the whole South of the Peninsula.

The Calabrians of those days were not unaccustomed

^Forbes, 158. Du Camp, 163-164. Maison, 61, 64. Red Shirt, 106-107.
On September 3, Luigi Cairoli, after the march through Calabria, wrote to his
mother: ' quanto e bello, quanto degno dell' uomo italiano £ il carattere Cala-
brese.' Cairoli, 340.

139

I40 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

to war. For sixty years past they had from time to
time conducted guerilla campaigns for and against the
Bourbons. Some towns had always been on the side
of reaction, like Pizzo, whose fishermen had arrested
Murat among their nets on the beach, and handed him
over to his death ; while others, hke Monteleone on the
hill above, had no less constantly been Liberal. In the
period of those French and Enghsh wars, the prevailing
sentiment in Calabria had been reactionary, or at least
anti-French. But since Waterloo, forty years of ob-
scurantist inquisition into every household by spies and
police officers had left the restored Bourbons but few
zealous adherents, and had made every man of spirit and
intelligence their active enemy. In 1848 the Calabrian
peasants had upheld the national cause with a valour
that distinguished them among the populations of
Southern Italy. In the reaction that followed, the
leaders of the movement— doctors, professors, and landed
proprietors — had gone into prison and into exile. Their
day was now come. Francesco Stocco of the Thousand,
the principal landlord of the Catanzaro district, reap-
peared among his own people, with the wound which he
had received at Calatafimi yet unhealed. In 1 860 feudal
devotion was still strong in Calabria, and helped much
to make the rising effective.^ Even in exile Stocco had
been regarded as the real leader of the country, like a
Highland chief living across the water after 1745. And
now that he was among his people once more, they
answered to his call as to that of a tribal king, who inter-
preted the will of Garibaldi the racial deity. Fortun-
ately Stocco was a simple and disinterested man and
used his authority well.'*

^Conv. Faxtari. Plutino at Reggio, Morelli at Cosenza, Pace at Castro-
villari, played the same part as Stocco at Catanzaro.

2 Conv. Fazzari. Forbes, 197, 201. Stocco. The late Achille Fazzari (ob.
1910) was another, younger Calabrian leader in i86a A few months before he
died, he sent Dr. Ashby and me in a boat from his house at Capanello, near
Staletti, to visit the great sea-cave, a Cathedral choir of granite hollowed out in
the roots of Aspromonte, in which he had lain hid with a price on his head, under

THE ROCK AND FORT OF SCILT.A.

AXCIKM' CREEK WALL AT MONTELEONE.

RISING OF LOWER CALABRIA 141

On August 26 the citizens of Catanzaro proclaimed
the Dictator's government, while the town was still oc-
cupied by the Bourbon garrison. When it marched out
next day towards Nicastro, it was surrounded and dis-
armed by the people of that region two days before the
arrival of the Garibaldian vanguard.^ Meanwhile, the
mountain shepherds of Aspromonte, and the farmers of
the fruit-bearing hills that overlook the fever-stricken
plain of Maida, gathered to a head under Francesco
Stocco. They pitched their camp, several thousands
strong,^ on the plateau of Campo Lungo, above the bridge
of Angitola, and prepared there to cut off the retreat of
Vial and his 1 2,000 men. Vial still lay at Monteleone,
while Stocco thus blocked his road to the north, and Gari-
baldi advanced upon him from the south. Pianell had at
length ordered him to retreat on the capital, but the only
path left open was by sea, and he had only one steamer
lying off Pizzo. He used it to effect his own escape to
Naples, taking on board with him a thousand of his men.
The rest he bequeathed to General Ghio, with instruc-
tions that they should march back by land. A thousand
more disbanded, leaving Ghio with 10,000, the last Royal-
ists in Lower Calabria.

From the semaphore station on the heights of Monte-
leone, the grass-grown site of an ancient Greek city,
Ghio could watch through his telescope the bivouac of
Stocco's Calabrians on the table-land of Campo Lungo,
close above the high-road by which alone he could hope
to retreat. Seeing himself thus cut off he sent a flag of
truce to the Dictator and begged for a free passage to
Naples with the honours of war. On August 26 Ohio's

sentence of death, a month before Garibaldi's crossing. He then led his neigh-
bours to join the army of liberation, fought well at Volturno, became a friend of
Garibaldi, spent several years with him on Caprera, and received him as guest at
Capanello in 1882, a few months before the hero's death.

^F. O. Sicily, Elliot, Catanzaro, Sept. 2, i860, H.M. Vice-Consul's report.

^Fazzari, who was there, told me that Stocco never had 10,000 men, as is
sometimes said ; he never had more than 6000 in Calabria, and only managed
to induce 2000 to come as far as Naples. Conv. Fazzari.

142 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

messenger found Garibaldi at Nicotera, a town perched
on the sea-cliff, some miles off the great trunk road along
which the armies were moving. The Dictator had made
his way thither with two or three companions alone, in
order to superintend the disembarkation of Medici's
troops from Messina. Taking a short cut from Gioja he
and his friends had left their horses and walked seven
miles through the deep sand and marshes of the plain,
wading through rivers above the knee. He thus arrived
in time to welcome Medici's men as they landed on the
beach below Nicotera. Thence he sent back Ohio's
officer to Monteleone with a demand for the unconditional
surrender of the ten thousand.^

At dawn on the 27th the Dictator posted over the
hills to Monteleone, by way of Mileto, where he rejoined
the vanguard of his army coming up from Rosarno by
the great trunk road. Mileto, situated half-way up the
long rise out of the plain to the heights of Monteleone,
was famed for the numbers of its clergy and of its brig-
ands. The wealthy Bishop had fled, but the priests and
people welcomed Garibaldi and his men. In the middle
of the main street was to be seen a dried pool of blood
and the charred remnants of some large animal. On
that spot, two days before, the Bourbon troops had de-
tected their general Briganti, attempting to ride through
Mileto in civilian disguise. It was he who had so re-
cently surrendered at Villa San Giovanni. They fell
upon him with cries of ' Traditore,' and emptied their
rifles into his body, which they stripped and mutilated in
beastly fashion, while others killed and burnt his horse.
All this took place in the open street of Mileto, beneath
the eyes of the regimental officers, who drank shame to
the dregs, looking on at the murder with pale cheeks

^ Red Shirt, 148-151. Pianell, 81. De Cesare's P. di P. p. clxxvi.
Menghini, 458-459. Peard's youmal MS. August 26. There is some differ-
ence among these authorities as to whether Ghio or Vial sent the messenger to
Garibaldi, but in any case when the messenger returned to Monteleone, Vial had
sailed and Ghio was in command. Mario, in the Red Shirt, gives the true
nature of Garibaldi's reply.

MONTELEONE 143

and ineffectual murmurs of remonstrance. Some of the
soldiers boasted that they had killed the general because
he was a Liberal and a traitor, others because he was a
Royalist, others because they wanted his boots.'

Horrified, but encouraged by this evidence of the
utter demoralisation of his enemies, Garibaldi, after a
siesta in a garden at Mileto, drove on to Monteleone
the same day, hoping to receive the surrender of these
wretched men. On the afternoon of the 27th his car-
riage mounted to the edge of the green and prosperous
table-land of Monteleone, whence the moral and material
squalor of the towns down below seems to have been
banished by decree of nature, ever since the ancient
Greeks founded their city of Hipponium upon this
pleasant sward. The Garibaldini, like other travellers
before and since, were enchanted by the panorama of
the Mediterranean, Stromboli, Sicily, and nearer at hand
the long outline of Aspromonte; by the city with its
hospitable inhabitants, its free and cheerful life, its un-
expected treasures of statuary and architecture. Gari-
baldi himself, the first to arrive, was given a welcome
that is remembered in Monteleone as the greatest event
in its civic life. For sixty years its inhabitants had been
true to the cause of freedom, and for more than forty
of those years had been subject to cruel oppression ;
for weeks past their town had been the enemy's head-
quarters ; the day before they had narrowly escaped
massacre at the hands of the soldiery who had murdered
Briganti, and they had been saved only by the wisdom
and energy of the Marquis Gagliardi, the patriot leader
of the town. But now Garibaldi was among them,
standing in a balcony with arms crossed and head bowed,
looking long and in silence at the crowd below. ' Un-
worded things and old' seemed passing between him
and them by some mysterious sympathy of race. At
length he spoke : ' When a people replies as you have

^Times, September 8, p. 8, cols. i-2. Du Camp, 141-146. Arrivabene, ii.
149. Forbes, 187-188. Peard's Journal MS., August 27.

144 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

done to the call of freedom, then freedom is its due. The
destinies of Italy are secure, and no power on earth can
alter them.' But it was the silence and not the words
that dwelt most in the memory of some present.^

There was, however, one cause for disappointment.
Ohio's ten thousand, who had marched out of the town
shortly before Garibaldi's arrival, were allowed by Stocco
to march past him unchallenged. It appears that Sirtori
had sent Stocco a message which he interpreted to mean
that the Neapolitan troops had joined the national cause
and were to be treated as brothers in arms. They were
therefore allowed to file across the long bridge of Angi-
tola, and below the wooded precipice of Campo Lungo
under the eyes of Stocco's army, who stood at ease and
cheered them as they passed. But Ohio's men were, in
fact, still bearing arms against Oaribaldi, and he had
declared for nothing short of their unconditional sur-
render.^

The mistake, whether due to Sirtori or to Stocco,
called for instant remedy. If Ohio's men recovered their
morale, or fell in with Caldarelli's troops in Upper
Calabria, they might yet occupy one of the thousand
strong mountain positions that barred the road to Naples
and seriously delay the Dictator's advance. In any case
he did not want 10,000 more added to the Royalist
troops collecting for the defence of the capital. He
therefore left Monteleone on the 28th at a hand gallop to
ride down the fugitive army. He was partly accompanied
and partly pursued by the mounted portion of his staff
and by some English ladies ^ and gentlemen in a carriage.

^Monteleone, Peard's yournal MS. and Forbes, 187-189. Du Camp, 148-
149. Conversations at Monteleone.

^De Cesare's F, di P. pp. clxxvii-clxxix. Red Shirt, 150-151, 162. Gari-
baldi afterwards told Fazzari that he never remembered giving any order more
favourable to Ohio's men than the demand for their surrender (Conv. Fazzari).
Du Camp, 159. Forbes, 196-197. Arrivabene, ii. 153. Times, September 8, p.
8, c. 2. Some of Stocco's men appear to have skirmished with Ohio's column
near the Orazia bridge long after it had got through the dangerous pass below
Campo Lungo (Tiirr's Div. 139, 415. Franci, i. 97).

' Jessie Mario and Corte's wife. Bertani, ii. 177. Peard's yournal MS,

"Wsis^-

, . . ^.„ I ' i^ ' ' i. l4^;e: J:^^- ^ ' -H^

- txT

5^

CASTLE OF nZZO WHERE MURAT WAS SHOT, iSl;.

iea to left. The e\-eciition tOi.>k place in the small court-j-.ird concealed hy the lower part of the wall

in this photograph.

HATTI.E-FIELl) OF MAIDA, lSo6
As seen by Garibaldi in passing. Sea in centre liackground.

"OLD, UNHAPPY, FAR OFF THINGS" 145

There were as yet no cavalry, so the rest of his men,
with Stocco's bands well to the fore, were to come on
behind as fast as their legs would carry them.

The country through which the race now ran, with
its ever-changing views of mountain, plain, and sea, was
rich in memories of the last sixty years of feud between
revolution and reaction. First, they left behind them
Pizzo, hanging on a cliff over the beach, with its squalid
Httle castle where Murat had been shot, an eagle trapped
in a filthy cage and torn to pieces by vermin. At the
bridge of La Grazia they passed a battle-field of '48. ' Then
the road wound among low, fruit-laden hills, skirting the
campagna of Maida. On that seaward plain, half-covered
with brushwood and cut by sandy streams and white
fiumare, the British infantry, set ashore by our fleet in
July, 1806, had in half an hour of volley-firing proved
the superiority of the line-formation over the French
column, which had carried all before it since the revolu-
tionary wars began. 1 The grand mountains looking down
on the battle-field from north and east had been the
scene of the Calabrian rising against the French that
followed on the British victory, when the methods of the
reactionary bands so horrified our officers that many of
them were glad to be driven back to Sicily and swore
never again to let loose such devilry on the mainland.^
Following up the valley of the Amato, Garibaldi turned
into the heart of these mountains, where far other
poHtical sentiments now prevailed among the peasants,

' As Paul Louis Courier, who was in the battle, wrote : ' Avec nos bonnes
troupes, et k forces ^gales, 6tre d^faits en si peu de minutes ! Cela ne s'est
point vu depuis la revolution.' Courier, ed. 1828, iv. 113. For the great effect
of the lesson of Maida on our Peninsula tactics, see Mr. Oman's article, published
by the British Academy.

^Johnston, i. 127-128, 136. Paul Louis Courier thus describes the char-
acter of the war between the French troops and the Calabrian peasants : ' Ceux
que nous attrapons, nous les pendens aux arbres ; quand ils nous prennent, ils
nous brulent le plus doucement qu'il peuvent. Moi qui vous parle, Monsieur,
je suis tomb< entre leur mains. Pour m'en tirer, il a fallu plusieurs miracles.
J'assistai a une deliberation, ou il s'agissait de savoir si je serais pendu, brule ou
fnsille. Je fus admis ^ opiner.' Courier, iv. 128.

10

146 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

and, under his influence, far other methods of war-
fare. Those blood-feuds of Bourbon and Jacobin, those
marchings of foreign armies on the soil, belonged to
an era that was passing away, as the flag of Italy and
Victor Emmanuel brought the hope of an ordered
freedom.

Garibaldi and the best-mounted officers in his staff
were acting militarily as their own scouts, politically as
their own heralds. The first-comers of all their army,
they were enthusiastically welcomed by the peasants, who
saw with special delight that the Dictator was wearing
the conical hat of Calabria. He and his friends had no
baggage and no change of clothes ; each had one travel-
stained red shirt, which was sometimes washed at the mid-
day siesta, and put on again to dry as they rode forward
under the scorching sun. In this guise the small group
of horsemen climbed the steep ascent out of the Amato
valley to the ancient town of Tiriolo, that hangs on the
edge of the mountain-wall, 2000 feet above the Tyrrhenian
and Ionian seas. Besides this simultaneous view of the
two parts of the Mediterranean, the riders admired the
gorgeous Calabrian costumes of the women which, then
as now, were seen at their best in the neighbourhood of
Tiriolo. Thence the trunk road runs northwards for a
two days' journey to Cosenza, at an average height of
over 2000 feet, through an endless succession of oak and
chestnut forests, above the flanks of deep, wooded gorges,
down which even in August and September the clear
water went leaping and gurgling to the sea. In these
altitudes Garibaldi overtook Ghio's army. On the even-
ing of August 29, five miles beyond Tiriolo, he suddenly
came in sight of the tail of the enemy's column winding
round the flank of the mountain a few hundred yards in
front. Since he had only half a dozen companions with
him, he turned aside for the night into the neighbouring
village of S. Pietro, after sending to bid Stocco's Cala-
brians to come up with all possible speed. While the
staff" was at supper an earthquake shook the village, and

S. PIETRO.
From the road by which Gsribaldi approached it coming from Tiriolo.

THE CALABRIANS ON THE PASS TOP 147

all rushed out into the street, except only Garibaldi, who
remained seated as if he had felt nothing.^

At dawn he started on again to seize his prey. While
the rising sun flooded the peaks and valleys with light,
he followed the road along the crest of a wooded ridge,
which opened out after six miles into the high cultivated
table-land of Soveria. At the farther end of this plateau,
close beneath still higher mountains to the north, lay the
village of Soveria-Mannelli. In its long street and on the
flat corn-land around. Garibaldi saw bivouacked the whole
of Ghio's army of 10,000 men, packed like sheep in a fold,
without rear-guard or advance-guard, without sentinels
placed or out-posts occupying the surrounding heights.
The men were disconsolately cooking some stolen lambs ;
the officers were doing nothing ; there was no sign that
they intended to proceed with their march.

Ghio had in fact abandoned the idea of further retreat,
because he had learnt that the pass of Agrifoglio, five
miles to the north, was blocked against him by the men
of Upper Calabria. These bands from Cosenza and
Castrovillari, led by their feudal chiefs. Pace and MoreUi,
had already on August 27 compelled 3000 troops under
General Caldarelli at Cosenza to enter upon an agreement
to retreat with arms in their hands to Naples. The
rebels had next proceeded to occupy Agrifoglio pass,
fearing that if Ghio crossed the water-shed and marched
down into the district of Cosenza with 10,000 fresh troops
from the south, Caldarelli would throw over his agree-
ment and unite with the new-comers to strike another
blow for the royal cause. On the summit of this forest
pass, more than 3000 feet above the sea, were encamped
the Calabrian mountaineers in their theatrical costume,
armed with shot-guns, axes, pikes, and scythes. Among
them, superintending the defences of the pass, rode the
white-haired Altimare, with the medal of S. Helena and
the Cross of the Legion of Honour upon his breast. He

1 Bertani, ii. 177-178. Menghini. 459-460. Forbes, 195, igS-igg. Du
Camp, 171, 185-188. Arrivabene, ii. IS4-I55- R^<i Shirt, 156-157.

10*

148 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

had known colder work than these August days and nights
among the oak woods, for he had marched to Moscow
and back ; he had been one of the half-million combatants
in the Armageddon on the plains of Leipzig ; he had led
his fellow-Calabrians in 1820 and in 1848, and now his
eyes were to see the coming of Garibaldi. Under his
direction trenches were dug and trees felled across the
road lup which Ghio would have to march. But Ohio,
on being informed that Caldarelli had come to terms
and that the summit of Agrifoglio pass was thus forti'
fied against his own retreat, determined to proceed nO
farther, but supinely to await the arrival of Garibaldi at
Soveria.

There, throughout the morning of August 30, band
after band of Stocco's Calabrians came in from Tiriolo
and the south, exhausted with their forced march but
eager to be led into action. As fast as each arrived on
the plateau, Garibaldi led them up into S. Tommaso
village and the other hills to east and north of Soveria.
Down below, the Bourbon troops still sat cooking their
lambs, and watching Garibaldi's encircling movement
with the fixed indifference of despair. In the course of
the morning Mario, Peard, and the ex-priest Bianchi from
the camp at Agrifoglio, severally entered the village and
demanded the surrender of Ghio's army. They were
received with courtesy by the General, and by some of
the troops, while others were with difficulty restrained
from shooting them. Soon after midday Garibaldi found
himself at the head of 2000 of Stocco's Calabrians and a
few of Cosenz' red-shirts ranged in a circle round the
village below. He gave the word to advance, and the
Garibaldini silently and slowly moved down upon Ghio's
ten thousand as they had done upon Briganti's smaller
force at Villa San Giovanni a week before. There was
no resistance, and no formal capitulation. It was under-
stood that the men were free to go each his own way, and
that the officers were to be supplied with journey money.
They spontaneously gave up their 10,000 rifles and twelve

C "-CO

THE SURRENDER AT SOVERIA 149

cannon, and without more ado disbanded, each to his
home or to a life of brigandage.

Several thousand of the rifles were distributed among
the Calabrian bands of Stocco, Pace, and Morelli,
many of whom, thus armed, came on to Naples and took
part in the Volturno campaign. The captured horses
enabled Garibaldi for the first time since he had crossed
the Straits to mount a hundred cavalry. Hitherto his
Hungarian hussars had trudged all the way, trailing their
huge spurs and sabres through the dust. But when the
enemy's horses were made over to them at Soveria, the
gallant gentlemen sprang into the saddles with the alac-
rity of a cavalier race reared on the Magyar plains to
horsemanship and war. They seemed to the onlookers to
be suddenly transfigured from tired tramps into knights of
old romance galloping off joyfully into the forest in search
of dragons and giants and some glorious way to die.^

In the midst of these scenes of confusion and triumph
(n the squalid street of Soveria a messenger arrived from
Naples and handed a letter to Garibaldi. It was from
Alexandre Dumas, who had recently gone to the capital
in his yacht. He wrote that he had obtained an inter-
view with Liborio Romano, now the principal Minister
of the King and by far the most influential person in
Naples.^ ' Liborio,' wrote Dumas, ' is at your disposition,
together with at least two of his fellow-Ministers, at the
first attempt at reaction on the King's part. At this first
attempt, which will set him free from his oath of fidelity,
Liborio Romano offers to leave Naples with two of his
colleagues, to present himself to you, to proclaim the de-
position of the King and to recognise you as Dictator.'

^ De Cesare F. di P. clxvii-clxx, clxxvii-cxci, cxcix-ccii. Red Shirt, 158-
169. Franci, i. 97-99. Peard, 824-826. Arrivabene, ii. 154-156. Cairoli, 340-
341. Forbes, 199-201. Ciampoli, 177. I.L.N. October 13, i860, pp. 331-332.
F. O. Sicily, Elliot (Catanzaro Consul), September 2, i860. Adamoli, 150-151.
D« Camp, 179-180.

' See pp. 17-19 above.

^ Dumas, 285-288, 295, 308-311, 315. The interview of Dumas and Liborio
had been held on August 23.

ISO GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Garibaldi sped the messenger back to Naples to tell
Liborio that the Neapolitans ought to be prepared to rise
at any moment in case it should prove necessary, but
that they were, if possible, to postpone the decisive event
until he himself was at the gates. He set out to follow
the messenger as fast as horses could carry him, again
leaving his army days behind upon the road. Two fears
drew him on to the capital at his topmost speed : the fear
that anarchy, massacre, or civil war would break out be-
fore his arrival ; and the fear that Cavour and Victor
Emmanuel would seize the reins of power in Naples
and so bring to an end his Dictatorship and with it his
chance of invading the Papal States.

Meanwhile, the other detachments of his army,
scattered along the road between Scilla and Tiriolo,
were toiling after the vanguard by forced marches. It
was the hottest period of the year, cooled by occasional
thunder-storms. There was no proper commissariat,
and the food of the country was scarce, especially for
the rear-guard who followed where Ohio's 10,000 and
their own main body had already swept the villages clean.
Fruit was in season, and in some places on the route
abundant ; but few of Garibaldi's followers could, like
their leader, be satisfied with a bunch of grapes, a cigar,
and the thought of Italy as a substitute for a day's rations.
Everything taken was paid for at a good price, and
grape-thieves were liable to be shot. Once at least the
corpse of a red-shirt, laid out between the vineyards and
the road, warned the passing columns that the General's
discipline was still as severe in his hour of triumph as it
had been eleven years before during the disastrous re-
treat from Rome. ' When I remember the plundering
propensities of my own countrymen,' wrote an English
gentleman who had beheld this wayside portent, ' I
shudder to think what may be the consequences should
many join the army.'^ His fears were well grounded,

'Forbes, 178-179.

MISERIES OF THE FORCED MARCH 151

for two months later five members of the British Legion
were condemned to be shot for plundering on the north
bank of the Volturno, where they had been left on the
usual Garibaldian short rations, an intolerable' torture to
the hungrier Saxon race ; but their sentence was com-
muted for imprisonment.^

The liberated populations were enthusiastic in their
welcome, and profuse of all the hospitality which they
had to offer ; but in those days the material resources of
civilisation in Calabria and Basihcata were of the most
meagre kind." Hunger, exposure, and the ceaseless
forced march made the race to Naples one of the severest
physical tests of patriotic endurance. It took away from
the mother of the Cairoli another of her boys, Luigi,'*
who died of typhus contracted on the road ; and many
stronger men were left behind disabled. Both French
and English, who shared in the march, admired the en-
durance and self-restraint of the Itahan volunteers.*

The Dictator, at first on horseback, later in an open
carriage, was forging on ahead with a few companions.
Five miles above Soveria, on the top of the water-shed
of Agrifoglio which divides Upper from Lower Calabria,
he was greeted with wild delight by the Calabrians
who had blocked the pass there against Ohio's army.
Thence he galloped along the well-engineered road
which leads down the side of a forest gorge of Alpine
proportions to Carpanzano and Rogliano, and thence he
pushed on again the same afternoon to Cosenza. The
capital of Upper Calabria is built on the steep sides
of three separate hills above the meeting-place of two

'^A.Y.R. 200-201. And I have other first-hand evidence.

"Those Qaribaidini who had the fortune, good or ill, to be received into
the houses of the hospitable Calabrians, had to be prepared for an evil which I
will veil for the English reader in the decent obscurity of Luigi Cairoli's classical
Italian: ' Cimici aiTricani, piccoli e rossi, feroci divoratori di carne umana.'
Cairoli, 343. Indeed it was ' the season of the year ' for more than grapes.

^See p. 37 above.

* Du Camp, 145-146. Conv. Dolmage. Cremona MS. (Carasi). Utielli, 935-
937. Tosi, 94-96. Adamoli, 150-152. Caraguel, 152-153. Mariotti, 430-431.

152 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

mountain torrents, in one of which, the Busento, Alaric
the Goth lies buried. At nightfall on the last evening of
August, Garibaldi was welcomed into the streets of the
city lit up in his honour.^

There were memories at Cosenza. Here, sixteen
years before, one of Italy's forlorn hopes had perished :
the attack of a handful of idealists, led by Ricciotti and
the brothers Bandiera against the Bourbons in the pleni-
tude of their power, had here come to its tragic, pre-
meditated end, in order to teach Italians by example a
lesson which many had since learnt, how to die for their
country. Garibaldi well remembered how the news had
reached his penurious household in Montevideo, and how
Anita and he had named their second-born after Ric-
ciotti.^ The most sacred place in Cosenza was a nameless
slab in an aisle of the Cathedral under which the bodies
lay. The victors of i860 all went to do it honour. Gari-
baldi himself had not time to visit the other scene, four
miles distant in the mountains, where the execution of
the Bandieras had taken place. But after he had passed
on his way, when, some days later, the main body of his
followers began to arrive at Cosenza, nothing could re-
strain them from marching out, regiment after regiment,
to see the water-washed stones in the torrent bed below
Rovito, where their forerunners had dropped one by one
before the firing party, with the forbidden name of Italy
upon their lips. There the regiments stood bareheaded,
while Nino Bixio addressed his men in words of fire.'

During the short night that Garibaldi spent at Cosenza
he made important military dispositions, in consequence
of the arrival of Bertani, who had come up thither from
Paola on the coast. Bertani announced that he had
brought to Paola by sea 1 500 men of that large and well-

1 De Cesare, F. di P. cxc-cxciv.

^ See GaribaldVs Defence of Rome, pp. 38-39. I am glad to say that evi-
dence has come to hand that the Bandieras were not betrayed in any sense by
the British Government, as I stated in an early edition of that work ; see Times,
August 22, 1907, Lord Stanmore's letter.

' Menghini, 2gy-2gS. Abba Not. 232. Bawdj, 272-274. Nuvolari, -joy.

ON AGAIN FROM COSENZA 153

equipped force which he had organised to invade the
Papal States, but which Cavour and Garibaldi had be-
tween them diverted to Sicily and the south.i When the
Dictator learnt from Bertani that 1 500 men lay ready to
his hand at Paola, with transports at their disposal, he
sent Turr down to the coast to take over the command
and carry them forward by sea from Paola to Sapri. In
this way a force that Bertani had raised in the interest
of the advanced Mazzinian party passed under the con-
trol of Tiirr, the most Cavourian of Garibaldi's lieutenants.
Bertani, concealing his chagrin, attached himself to the
person of the Dictator, and began, after they had travelled
together for a few days, to recover the influence which
he seemed recently to have lost. Meanwhile Tiirr rode
down from Cosenza to Paola, took command of the troops
collected there and carried them by sea to Sapri, where
they arrived on September 2, twenty-four hours before
Garibaldi himself In this way these 1 500 men from the
rear became the vanguard of the advance on Naples,
owing to their good fortune in finding transports while
the others had to march by land.^

At three in the morning of September i. Garibaldi
with Cosenz and Bertani left Cosenza in an open carriage,
pursued and gradually overtaken by a second carriage
containing Peard with an English party. All morning
their wheels ploughed through twenty miles of sandy
high road along the desolate banks of the Upper Crati. On
each side the mountains shut in the long valley bottom,
a flat surface two miles broad over which the muddy
and rapid river spreads itself uncorrected in a hundred
irregular channels, hidden from the eye by dense brush-
wood, trees, and reeds of the marsh. This macchia, as

1 See pp. 120-122 above. They had crossed from Sicily to Tropea, marched
thence to Pizzo, and thence come by sea to Paola. Riistow's Brig. Milano,
11-16. Riistow, 299.

' Riistow, 299-300. Riistow's Brig. Milano, 11-18. Tiirr's Div. 147-149.
Forbes, 206. Bertani, ii. 179-184 (on p. 179, line 23, read Cosenza for Rotonda).
Peard MS. Journal. Turr who had been invalided from Sicily (see p. 66 above)
bad recently returned more or less cured from Aix-la-Chapelle.

154 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

the watery jungle is called, unreclaimed by man since the
beginning of time, seems fantastically out of place as the
sole occupant of a broad and well-watered valley, that
looks, when first seen from distant hills, to be another
Val d'Arno or Upper Tiber. But the sandy soil has
deterred Greek, Roman, and modern Italian alike from
introducing civilisation or agriculture into the upper
valley of the Crati. Even the hills around were thinly
inhabited and notorious for brigands. At length, at noon,
the trunk road led the travellers up out of this gigantic
ditch on to the heights of Tarsia and thence to Spezzano
Albanese, where the Albanian colonists, like their kins-
men of Plana dei Greci, near Palermo,^ greeted the
Dictator even more warmly, if that were possible, than
the Italian villages along the road. From the hill of
Spezzano, Garibaldi — and his army, when it followed
during the next week — gazed over the plain of Sybaris,
bounded on three sides by peaked mountains, and on the
fourth by the Gulf of Taranto. The view resembles
that of the Campagna from Tivoli, save that there is no
Rome. Like Anio and Tiber, the lower reaches of the
ancient Crathis and its tributaries still wander through
the vast plain to the sea ; but there is no city, no civilisa-
tion, and no history save the knowledge that somewhere
in that comfortless expanse, now breeding death. at night,
stood once Sybaris, mother of luxury. The site is un-
known ; Sybaris has disappeared as completely as Sodom
and Gomorrah, though not by any catastrophe of nature.
Only her name is left as a proverb of degeneracy, but
whether the Sybarites deserved such eternal censure
more than their neighbours who destroyed them, and the
civilisations that have succeeded them, remains a secret
guarded for ever in the memory of that silent plain.

From Spezzano, Garibaldi descended into the western
corner of the plain of Sybaris, and crossed it on a cause-
way through a marsh, out of which grew forest trees,
swarming with birds hke an English park. Thence he

' See Garibaldi and the Thousand, p. 158.

MONTE POLLIXO.
From road near Morano along which Garibaldi passed.

CAMPO TENESF,.

Looking l)ai:k smith from the road by which Garibaldi crossed the pass to Rotonda. On the right
is the road to Mormanno,

GARIBALDI ENTERS THE BASILICATA 155

mounted to Castrovillari, one of the pleasantest towns
south of Rome, a rival in importance to Cosenza, and a
great centre of revolution that year under the leadership
of Pace. Castrovillari stands in the midst of a fruitful
plateau, raised half-way between the plain of Sybaris
below and the Hmestone peaks of the Monte Pollino,
which tower above to a height of 7000 feet. The old
town with its mediaeval churches and palaces is built in
pleasing disorder round the edge of some precipitous
cafions which here cleave the plateau. But already in
1 860 the old town was falling into disrepair in favour of the
more cheerful modern streets, long, straight, and spacious,
in which stood Pace's house, the centre of the insurrec-
tion, and on this night the head-quarters of Garibaldi.

Next morning (September 2) he passed on across the
luxuriant plain that lies close at the foot of Monte Pollino,
rivalling Tuscany in wealth of vegetation, and thence
passed at once into the regions of naked limestone, the
heart of the mountains which divide Calabria from Basili-
cata. At the top of the first pass he entered the Campo
Tenese, a meadow 3000 feet above the sea, and several
miles in extent, enclosed on all sides by mountains.
Here in a snowstorm in 1806 the French had put the
army of the Bourbons to rout. At the far end of the
Campo Tenese Garibaldi climbed another pass,* and
thence descended out of Calabria into the Basilicata. The
first place which he reached in the new province was
the hill-town of Rotonda, where he found the National
Guard and all the paraphernalia of revolutionary auth-
ority already in being, as if it had been Paris, or Cosenza
at the least. ^

At Rotonda a change took place in Garibaldi's method
of travelling. Hitherto he had kept to the great trunk
road the whole way from the Straits of Messina. But
now, close in front of him on that road, were General

' Not by Mormanno, where the modern branch of the high-road from Campo
Tenese runs, but by the higher pass to the right.

^Bertani, n. 183-184. Peard's jfournal MS. September 1-2. Forbes, 207-
213. Arrivabene, ii. 158-162. Cairoli, 343-349. Raciopfi, 198-199.

IS6 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Caldarelli's troops, retreating on Naples with arms in
their hands according to the agreement which they had
made with the revolutionary committee of Cosenza. If
he proceeded farther, he would find himself at Castel-
luccio in the midst of these demoralised Royalist troops.
Their intentions were doubtful, perhaps even to them-
selves. At one moment Caldarelli sent a message to
Garibaldi at Rotonda saying, ' This army of yours puts
itself at your orders ; ' ^ at the next he was promising to
his soldiers the victory of the Bourbon cause through
the intervention of Austria.^ The Dictator's friends
wisely persuaded him not to trust himself defenceless
among these men, who might shoot him as readily as one
of their own generals, but to go round by the mountains
and the sea to Sapri, where he would find Tiirr's ijoo
men newly come from Paola. With them he could march
up to Lagonegro, present himself there in force upon
the line of Caldarelli's retreat, and negotiate with hira
under more favourable conditions.

So on the night of September 2, the General and six
companions, including Bertani and Cosenz, left the high
road at Rotonda and, mounted on mules, rode towards the
coast through the western mountains. Near Laino they
entered the trackless gorge of the Lao River and followed
it down by the light of the moon for several miles.
'Here we are,' cried Bertani, 'seven of us on seven
mules, going to conquer a kingdom.' Out of the Lao
valley they climbed once more into the highest part of
the mountains, and on the morning of September 3 struck
the coast at some point not far from Tortora and Maratea.
Thence a small boat took them on to Sapri. There is
no finer part in the whole coast-line of Italy than this
unvisited riviera, where the precipitous ridges run out
one beyond another and sink into the waves.' The

1 Bertani, ii. 184. Peard's journal MS. September 2.

'Forbes, 214.

^ There is not, and never was, a coast road, but since i860 a railway has
been driven along this coast. But those who pass through its tunnels to Sicily
have no idea under what magnificent scenery they are travelling.

RoroXDA.

SAl'RI.
The bay and town from a point just bej-ond the R( ,man villa.

IN THE BAY OF SAPRI 157

rugged coast is best seen from a boat, but Garibaldi,
exhausted by the night's ride, lay asleep in the prow,
while his friends covered him with a sail to protect him
from the rays of the noonday sun. Only as they entered
the bay of Sapri, they all stood up to gaze on the beauty
of the scene, and to honour the memory of Pisacane,
who, in 1857, had run into this bay to raise the Itahan
flag upon the mountains.^ On the beach where his fore-
runner had landed under the shadow of doom, Garibaldi
stepped ashore on the full tide of victory, welcomed as
^fratello GayibaldV by the people of Sapri, who three
years before had frowned on Pisacane and his more
questionable following. Here also the Dictator found
Tiirr's troops, who had sailed in the day before from
Paola.'

There is a fine beach, but no artificial landing-place
at Sapri. Only there may be seen in the clear water
the ruins of an ancient pier. It runs out from the founda-
tions of a palace built long ago by some magnate of
Imperial Rome, who discovered the beauty of the little
bay, and carried thither the whole apparatus of ancient
luxury, leaving less adventurous pleasure - seekers at
Puteoli and Baiae. Some modern Lucullus will imitate
him ere long. Meanwhile Garibaldi landed there and
spent the night in a straw hut upon the beach.

Next day the Dictator and Turr's 1500 men, mostly
Milanese, marched up all morning from Sapri by pre-
cipitous forest paths to a shoulder of Monte Cucuzzo,
and thence descended on the Lagonegro high-road, along
which Caldarelli and his men were retreating. The
road here runs at an average level of over 2000 feet.
The point where Garibaldi dropped down on it from the
west was the wayside tavern of II Fortino. Here, on
September 4, he was overtaken by Piola, an officer of
the Piedmontese navy, whom Depretis, his Pro-Dictator

' See Garibaldi and the Thousand, p. 6g.

^La Cava, 702. Bertani, ii. 184-185. Ire Pol. 71-72. Racioppi, 200.
Maison, 63-64. Riistoui's Brig. Mil. 18-19. Tiirr's Div. 149.

158 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

in Sicily, had sent on commission to persuade him to
permit the immediate annexation of the island to the
dominions of Victor Emmanuel. Tiirr and Cosenz, the
soldiers in attendance on the General, eagerly seconded
Piola, begging their chief to allow Sicily to be annexed
on condition that Depretis should for the present con-
tinue to govern it as Victor Emmanuel's lieutenant, and
that supplies of men and money should continue to be
sent from Sicily to the Garibaldian camp. Garibaldi
yielded to their entreaties, and had actually dictated to
his secretary the words, ' Dear Depretis, have the an-
nexation made whenever you like,' when Bertani came
in upon them from the other compartment of the tavern
and caught his Cavourian rivals in the act. ' General,'
said the agitator, ' you are abdicating ; ' and in spite of
all that TUrr and Cosenz could say, Bertani in a few
minutes persuaded him to rely for the further liberation
of Italy not on the co-operation of Cavour and the Pied-
montese Government, but on the men and money which,
so Bertani declared, would be supplied in unhmited
quantities by Sicily and by the provinces of Naples as
fast as they were liberated. The half-written letter was
torn up and another was sent, bidding Depretis delay
the annexation yet awhile.^

Bertani's triumph at this unlucky pothouse of II
Fortino opened the way for the struggle between Gari-
baldi and the Government of Turin, which during the
ensuing months marred with unseemly altercation the
solemn act of the Making of Italy. Depretis was right
The time had come to annex Sicily, if Garibaldi could
but have seen it. When in June he had refused to
allow annexation because it would have prevented him
from crossing the Straits, he had been right and Cavour
wrong.^ But in September he could have no object in
further delaying the annexation, except to keep himself

^Riistow's Brig. Mil. 20-22. Tiirr' s Div., 149-150. Ire Pol. 72-77. Ber-
tani, ii. 185-186. TUrr's Risfosta, 16.
'' See p. 54 above.

CALDARELLI'S FORCE DISBANDS 159

free to attack the cities of Rome and Venice or otherwise
to thwart and embroil the policy of Victor Emman-
uel's Ministers. It is possible that if at- II Fortino he had
known that Cavour was on the point of invading the
Papal territories himself, he might have rejected Bertani's
advice and consented to work hand in hand with the
Piedmontese Government.

Meanwhile, the military business in hand was to catch
Caldarelli and his three thousand.^ On September 3,
before leaving Lagonegro, Caldarelli had again assured
Garibaldi's emissaries that he and all his men intended
to desert to the side of the nation.^ He had, however,
continued his retreat on Naples, and had passed through
II Fortino a few hours before Garibaldi struck into the
road at that point. On September 5 he was finally
overtaken near Padula, where Pisacane had three years
before been defeated by the Royalist troops under Ghio.
There Caldarelli's column nominally came over to the
Garibaldian army, but the transaction was really a dis-
bandment rather than a desertion. Indeed, some of the
troops retained enough loyalty to attempt the murder of
their general for having betrayed the cause, but the Gari-
baldini saved him out of their hands.'

At Casalnuovo, on September 5, Garibaldi was met
by Mignona, Governor in his name of the Province of
Basilicata, which had declared for him more than a fort-
night before while he was engaged in crossing the Straits.
The ' Lucanians,' as the men of Basilicata called them-
selves in memory of classical times, sent through Mig-
nona a goodwill offering of 6000 ducats (25,500 francs),
and raised a ' Lucanian brigade,' which followed Gari-
baldi to Naples. Thence 900 returned home, but the
remaining 1200 took part in the Volturno campaign.*

From Casalnuovo the Dictator raced on in an open

'See p. 156 above. ^Forbes, 215-216.

'La Masa {Sic), pp. Ixxxv-lxxxvi, 204-206. Tiirr's Div. 150.

* Racioppi, 2iy. Mignona, 214-215.

i6o GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

carriage through the Province of Principato Citeriore.
As he drew nearer to the capital its corrupting influence
became ever more apparent in the moral degradation
of the people, and warlike volunteers were no longer
forthcoming. But south of Naples there were no signs
of reactionary feeling. All along the road the people
and the local authorities vied with each other in the
frenzy of their enthusiasm, which was compounded
of joy at dehverance from a cruel and inquisitorial
tyranny ; interested subservience to the rulers of the
hour ; and good human devotion, in which also supersti-
tion had a part, for the person of the almost mythical
Garibaldi.^

For several days, however, these semi-divine honours
were paid to the wrong person. Peard, ' Garibaldi's
Enghshman,' as he posted along the road from Sala Con-
silina to Eboli, was universally taken for the Liberator
himself. He was accompanied during this strange ad-
venture by Gallenga, one of the Times correspondents,
by Commander C. S. Forbes of the British Navy, and by
Fabrizi, who was commissioned by the Dictator to survey
the military positions in advance. These men, having in
the capacity of non-combatants passed through Caldarelli's
column prior to its disbandment, had kept the high-road
the whole way from Cosenza, and had thus gained fifty
miles on Garibaldi, who had been forced to go round by
the coast. In the afternoon of September 3, while the
Dictator was sailing into the bay of Sapri, Peard was
entering Auletta amid a scene of ' tremendous enthusi-
asm. The people,' he noted in his diary, ' thought I
was Garibaldi, and it was thought that it would do good
to yield to the delusion. It became a nuisance, for

^ One Garibaldi legend, seriously told and believed a few years later, was to
this effect. Once when his army was in need of water. Garibaldi fired a cannon at
a rock and water gushed out. This adaptation of a Bible story to modern con-
ditions is a curious example of the growth of hagiology. If Garibaldi and his
educated followers had been professional traders on popular superstition, it would
have been easy in the 'sixties to have set up a Garibaldian Lourdes in South
Italy, and to have worked profitable cures with red shirts.

THE PSEUDO-GARIBALDI i6i

deputations arrived from all the neighbourhood to kiss
my excellency's hand, and I had to hold regular levees.'
The town was illuminated and Te Deum sung in honour
of his arrival.

Next day, while the real Garibaldi was weaving and un-
weaving the web of his uncertain policy in the tavern at
II Fortino, Peard and Fabrizi, accompanied by National
Guard, brass bands, and people of Auletta, ascended to
the hamlet of Postiglione, where they found every one
'mad with excitement. At the Syndic's, one of the priests
(there were numbers of the fraternity present) went on
his knees,' writes Peard, ' and called me a second Jesus
Christ. I was not prepared for so excessive a bit of
blasphemy.' Postiglione hangs on the side of Monte
Alburno, commanding a view of the plain of Eboli with
the gulf and mountains of Salerno beyond. Somewhere
in that plain or in those mountains, as Fabrizi and Peard
well knew, Francis II. must fight for Naples, or else
abandon his capital without a blow. Twelve thousand
of his soldiers lay in Salerno and on the pass of Cava
behind it ; the plain of Eboli in front, patrolled by his
squadrons, had for several days past been considered as
the ground where the regular army, strong in cavalry
and artillery, would have the best chance of defeating the
Garibaldini. There were, at the lowest computation,
40,000 infantry and 4000 cavalry ready to hand in Naples
and its environs. The Dictator had with him only Turr's
1 500 men, recently landed at Sapri, but if he could afford
to wait for a fortnight, which was extremely doubtful, he
might hope to collect his full force of some 20,000 infantry
and 100 cavalry. If even on these terms a Royalist
victory was not to be won in the plains of Eboli, the
steep wall of mountains behind Salerno would still form
a natural barrier, protecting the approaches to Naples.^

Peard and Fabrizi determined to take advantage of
their strange situation to spread such reports as would

^ Franci,\. no. Palmieri, 85. Liborio Romano, 62, 66. De Cesare, ii.
395. Pianell, 82 87.

II

i62 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

strike panic into the enemy's head-quarters and lead to the
abandonment of these all-important positions. In pur-
suance of this design they hastened on to Eboli on the
evening of September 4, at some risk of being caught
there by the enemy's patrols or arrested by the local
authorities, who had not yet come within the sphere of
the advancing revolution. But the pseudo-Garibaldi
brought the revolution with him wherever he appeared.
' Within half an hour of our arrival,' wrote Commander
Forbes, Eboli 'was brilliantly illuminated, the entire
population besieging the Syndic's, brass bands banging
away in every direction, and the crowd roaring them-
selves hoarse and calling on the General to appear, re-
minding one more of an election than anything else, the
National Guard being all this time severely engaged on
the staircase in a vain endeavour to keep the inhabitants
out of the house. Deputations arrived ; first came the
Church, headed by a Bishop.' Forbes at one moment
tried to persuade some of the leading men that Peard
was not Garibaldi. ' Oh ! you're quite right to try and
keep your secret,' they rephed, 'but you know it won't
do ; we know.' The gigantic Enghshman did not, in
fact, resemble the Nizzard at all closely, but his greater
height and longer beard in no way impaired the belief of
the people that they had the hero among them.

Peard and his Italian companions of the jest decided
to turn the absurd situation to serious account. Shortly
before midnight they sent for the official in charge of
the telegraph, who appeared trembling before the ' Dic-
tator ' between a file of the National Guard. He reported
that the Neapolitan general commanding at Salerno had
an hour before wired for information about Caldarelli's
brigade and Garibaldi's movements. Peard dictated the
reply, announcing Garibaldi's presence at Eboli and ex-
aggerating to four or five thousand the number of troops
that he had close at hand. Above all, he announced that
CaldarelH's brigade had changed sides and was now
marching with the national forces. All these statements

THE ROYALISTS ABANDON SALERNO 163

were inaccurate, but they appear to have been believed
both at Salerno and in the capital. Gallenga, who was
with Peard, wired the same reports to private friends in
Naples closely connected with the Court and Ministry.
The belief, erroneous in fact, that Caldarelli's men had
gone over of their ow^n accord to the invaders, led every
one to expect that the troops at Salerno would do the
same, unless they were withdrawn before Garibaldi could
reach them from Eboli. Thus the misleading reports
circulated by Peard and Gallenga, and the presence of
the supposed Garibaldi at so short a distance from Salerno,
were among the influences which induced Francis II not
to fight for his capital. This decision was taken beyond
recall on the morning of September 5, when the com-
mander-in-chief at Naples telegraphed to Marshal Afan
de Rivera at Salerno, ordering all the troops at Salerno
to retreat by way of Cava to Nocera.^

Meanwhile, the pseudo-Garibaldi and his party, not
knowing that their bluff would succeed in scaring the
enemy away, escaped unnoticed from Eboli in the
small hours of the morning. Peard returned as far as
Sala Consilina to meet the real Garibaldi, who heartily
approved what he had done. When they heard that the
Royalists had evacuated their positions, Peard hastened
forward again at Garibaldi's request, and entered Salerno
in triumph at five in the morning of September 6. The
whole town turned out to welcome 'the Dictator,' who
received deputations in public all the morning, detected
by no one in authority or out of it, except by a single
officer who whispered him in the ear.

In the course of the morning the Piedmontese vessel
Authion appeared off Salerno and set ashore Evelyn
Ashley, son of the good Lord Shaftesbury, and private
secretary to Lord Palmerston. The young man, to the
intense delight of his chief, had gone out to spend his
holidays with Garibaldi instead of with the partridges.

'See Appendix H, below. Immediate Causes of the Evacuation oj' Salerno.

II *

i64 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

A few days before, Ashley had presented himself to
Cavour in Turin, with a letter of introduction from the
British Prime Minister, and had asked where he could
find Garibaldi. ' Garibaldi ! Who is he ? ' said Cavour,
with a twinkle in his eye. ' I have nothing to do with him.
. . . He is somewhere in the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies,
I believe, but that is not, you know, at present under
my King.' However, Cavour put Ashley on board the
Authion and sent him to search for himself He took with
him Mr. Edwin James, Q.C., and at Naples fell in with
others of his fellow-countrymen, with whom he continued
to coast southwards. Off Salerno they saw flags and
heard the shouting of a vast multitude in the town. On
being informed that it betokened the arrival of Garibaldi,
the Englishmen landed, only to find that it was in reality
Peard, by this time exceedingly anxious to be relieved
from his task of impersonation. He asked his compatriots
to go and meet Garibaldi and hasten his coming. On the
road the English party met hundreds of disbanded Royal-
ist troops, unarmed, starving, and in the last state of
misery, dragging themselves home along the road, or
lying prostrate by the wayside. Garibaldi had shared
with them all the money he had at hand, but their condi-
tion was pitiable. Arrived in Eboli, Ashley found the
Dictator, who greeted him warmly as England's emissary,
and allowed him to follow his staff as a non-combatant,
on the sole condition that the new-comer should wear
his simple livery, in order to be safe from maltreatment
in the confusion of the times. And so our Premier's
secretary donned the red shirt.

At five in the evening of September 6 the Dictator
and his staff entered Salerno in a string of open carriages,
two days' march in front of his nearest troops, the 1500
under Tiirr,^ and many days in front of the rest of the
army. Outside the town he was met by the Syndic, the
National Guard, and his English precursor, now deposed.
Viva Garibaldi! he cried, taking off his hat in mock hom-

' Turfs Div. 162. Riistow s Brig. Mil., 23-24.

GARIBALDI ENTERS SALERNO 165

age to Peard, and every one joined in the cry with shouts
of laughter and applause. Darkness fell as they forced
their way one step at a time into Salerno, amid the de-
lirium of 20,000 people, who seemed desirous to tear the
real Garibaldi in pieces. The town was illuminated, and
all the heights far away towards Amalfi and Sorrento
were ablaze with fires of joy. ^

On the same evening the last of the Bourbons and
his queen were leaving the Palace of Naples by the water-
gate and taking ship for Gaeta.

' Appendix H below. Peard'syournal MS.!indCornhiU,]une,igoS. Forbes,
219-231. Arriv^l"ne, ii. 168-169. Ashley, 492-496. Times, September 13, p.
10, c. 4 (James's letter;, September 15, p. 10, cols. 3-4. De Cesare, ii. 422-424,
Revel's da Ancona, 65. Elliot, 96. Persano, 206-207. Gallon, 22.

CHAPTER VIII

THE ENTRY INTO NAPLES

Venu e Galubardol
Venu e !u piu bel I

Neapolitan Song of i860.

The flight of King Francis from Naples on September 6
was but the final catastrophe in a process of dissolution
which had set in with the news of the fall of Palermo
and the consequent proclamation of constitutional rights
in June. Freedom of press and person had effectively
and instantly broken up the machinery of repression.
The police had, in Liborio Romano's conjuring hands,
been turned in a few days into an instrument of Liberal-
ism. The King had handed over the civil administration
to his enemies, and had gained nothing in return except
the diplomatic support of France that failed him at every
crisis. At home the constitution won over to him a few
individuals, but no class or party. The decadent nobility
of the capital, the peasants of certain districts in the
northern provinces, and the bulk of the army remained
loyal not because of the constitution, but in spite of it.
Every one else was looking to Piedmont. The perfidy
of his ancestors divided King Francis from his people.
Remembering the fate of the constitutions of 1820 and
, 1848, the citizens refused to enroll themselves on the
electoral lists, because in case of reaction the appearance
of their names on the register might be used against them
as evidence of treason.^ And when Garibaldi in August
came marching up through the constituencies, all talk of
holding elections for Parliament ceased.

» D'Ayala, 286.
i65

POLITICAL SITUATION IN NAPLES 167

The King suspected his Ministers, though most of
them were passively loyal. Above all and vi^ith good
reason he hated Don Liborio Romano. But Don Liborio,
like Lafayette in the autumn of 1789, was the man of the
hour with whom neither Court nor people could dispense :
he had at his beck and call the police, the National Guard
of respectable burghers, and the camorra of criminals. So
King Francis had to endure him throughout all July and
August, first as Police Minister.only and then as Minister
of the Interior also. In the latter half of August, Don
Liborio held confidential interviews on the subject of com-
ing events with the Dictator's friends in Naples,^ with the
Piedmontese admiral, Persano, and with the King's
uncle, the Count of Syracuse, who had already openly
declared for a change of dynasty. Persano wrote to
Cavour that Don Liborio was helping the cause of
national unity ' so far as he was permitted by his very
delicate situation ' as Minister of Francis 11.^

His object, however, was not actively to compass tht
destruction of his master, which he regarded as already
certain, but to prevent the fall of the dynasty from in-
volving in its ruin the public peace and safety. For this
reason, as well as for the satisfaction of his own vanity,
he had accepted office in June, and for this reason
he determined to remain in power during the days or
hours that must elapse between the fall of Francis II and
the establishment of any new form of government. If he
forced the King to accept his resignation, the camorra
would, he believed, break loose in the great city, which
contained a larger proportion of criminally disposed
persons than any other in Europe, the Royal troops
would begin to fight with the National Guard, and
disasters of the most appalling character might occur.
The respectable part of the citizens took the same view,
begging Don Liborio and his colleagues to retain office
under the Crown at any sacrifice to their own dignity or

^ Dumas, 285-287, see p. 149 above.

^ Persano's words to Cavour, Persano, 144-145, 175, 189.

1 68 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

honour. And those who knew best the Naples of those
days were the least inclined to deny the claim afterwards
put forward by the discredited politician that he saved
the capital from destruction.^

Meanwhile, the Cavourian agents were striving in
vain to precipitate a revolution.^ Villamarina, the Pied-
montese Minister at Naples, and Admiral Persano, who
arrived there with his fleet from Sicily at the beginning
of August, lent their aid to Finzi and Visconti Venosta,
to Nisco, D'Ayala, and Nunziante in their attempts to win
over the army and incite the civilians to resolute action.
But the army remained loyal, in spite of the propaganda
of the popular general, Nunziante, among his old com-
panions in arms, and in spite of the blandishments of the
Piedmontese Bersaglieri. Some companies of the latter
were allowed to land off Persano's ships and to show
themselves in the streets, partly in order to encourage
the population to revolt and partly in order to fraternize
with the Neapolitan troops, who replied by breaking
their heads.^

The citizens were more sympathetic but not more
active than the soldiers. The Neapolitans did not see
the use of doing at the risk of their own skins what
Garibaldi was coming to do for them. Moreover, the
Mazzinian ' Committee of Action,' which contained the
bolder and more energetic spirits, had resolved to wait
for the Dictator's arrival, fearing that if they rose before
he appeared on the scene, Naples would fall at once into
the hands of Cavour ; while the Cavourian ' Committee
of Order,' which would fain have seen a revolution
effected while Garibaldi was still on his way, consisted
of ' moderate men ' unfitted by nature to initiate a revolt.*

' Trinity, 232-233. D''Ayala, 319. Liborio Romano, 26, 67. Dumas, 367.
For Don Liborio and the camorra see pp. i8-ig above.

- See pp. 22-23 above.

'Persano, 143-145, 158. F. O. Sicily, Elliot, No. 450, 459, August 20, 24.
Nisco, 70-74. Russell MS. Elliot, August 20. D'Ayala, 305-307. Mezzacapo,
123-129.

' Persano, 185, 189. D'Ayala, 310.

CAVOUR'S POLICY 169

The motives of Cavour's policy throughout August
are relatively clear to those who will read them in the
light of two established facts : first, that he had, in the
last days of July, persuaded Russell to permit Garibaldi's
passage of the Straits;^ and secondly, that he had as
early as August i made up his mind to invade the Papal
provinces with the Piedmontese army.^ His desire was,
without more delay, to possess himself of Naples and
so to forestall a Garibaldian Dictatorship ; while at the
same time he would invade the Papal States and so link
up the north and south of the Peninsula in one free
monarchy. It was only because he feared that the
revolution in Naples would perhaps miss fire without the
help of the guerilla, that he had persuaded Russell to let
him cross from Sicily to the mainland. Even after he
had taken this step as a measure of insurance in case of
his own failure, he continued to work for the overthrow
of Francis II through his own agents, and since time was
needed for this experiment, he was not sorry to see the
Dictator kept waiting three weeks at the Straits. That
is the reason why in the first days of August he wrote to
Admiral Persano, ' Do not help the passage of General
Garibaldi on to the continent, but rather try to delay him
by indirect means as far as possible.' '

When the Dictator had safely crossed and was be-
ginning his march through Calabria, Cavour caused arms
to be landed at Salerno and distributed among the rebels
of the south ' in order to open out the way for Garibaldi's
advance.'^ But at the same time he made a last effort
to obtain possession of Naples for his own party, writing
to Villamarina on August 27, ' Do all you can to avoid a
Garibaldian Dictatorship, on which you count too much.'
He instructed Persano to accept the Dictatorship if it
was offered to him. Even now Cavour shrank from the
one sure method of avoiding the Garibaldian regime in
Naples, which he so much dreaded, namely, an open

^ By Lacaita's mission, see p. 105 above. "P. 117 above.

' Peisano, 123. ' Ibid. 157, 159, August 21, 23.

I/O GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

declaration of war bjr Pitdmont on King Francis, because,
as he told Villamarina, that would ' compromise us al-
together with Europe.' ^ By ' Europe ' he meant most of
all Napoleon, with whom he was at that moment secretly
negotiating for leave to attack the Papal territory.

A few days later he saw that he had lost the race for
Naples. On August 30, while the Dictator was receiving
the surrender of Ghio's ten thousand at Soveria, Cavour
wrote to Villamarina acknowledging defeat and bidding
him abandon all thought of forming a Government at
Naples independent of Garibaldi. ' You must act frankly
in unison with him, trying only to get the fleet and the
forts into our hands.' ^

Although Cavour failed actually to overturn Francis
II before the arrival of Garibaldi, the prestige of the
Royal family and of the Royalist party was rapidly melt-
ing away throughout the whole of August. The National
Guard, the police, the citizens, and the Piedmontese
agents were all in a tacit conspiracy against the King and
his soldiers, and whenever any of the latter gave vent to
their feelings by rioting in the streets, their bad discipline
was pointed to as proof that Francis II intended to
destroy the constitution by military force." A series of
half-hearted reactionary plots were unearthed by Don
Liborio's police and their details published to the further
discomfiture of the King. In one of these conspiracies
his uncle, the Count of Aquila, was supposed to be im-
plicated. Aquila had been for a few weeks an ardent
constitutionalist, but he had rejoined the ultra-Royalists
in the hope, it was said, of displacing his incompetent
nephew in their affections. On August 14 the Ministers
succeeded in driving him into exile, undercover of send-
ing him on a foreign mission.*

' CJiiala, iii. 347. Persano, 182. D'Ayala, 3111.

2 CAio/a, iii. 355-356. '■' Elliot, ^i. Nisco, 54.

* ' What led at last to the decision to ,iend him off was the arrival of three
cases of revolvers and one case of pictures of hinri' waving his hat, which have
fallen into the hands of the Government.' Elliot, 73. The real seriousness of

KING FRANCIS ADVISED TO ABDICATE 171

On August 20 Don Liborio presented to the King his
famous Memorandum, in which he tried to persuade his
master to retire from the Kingdom ' for some time,' leav-
ing as regent ' a Minister who would inspire public con-
fidence.' In this way alone, wrote Don Liborio, could
' the horrors of civil war ' be averted, seeing that mutual
confidence between the people and their prince ' has
become not only difficult but impossible.'^ Four days
after Francis had received this broad hint from his
principal Minister of State, he was made the target of a
public letter from his uncle of Syracuse, in which the
Count exhorted his nephew to sacrifice his throne on
behalf of the glorious idea of Italian unity. Such lan-
guage from a prince of the blood produced a very general
impression that all was now lost. Syracuse had shown
the letter to Persano in his flag-ship five days before it
appeared.^

The ever-shifting intentions and intrigues of the King
and his many rival counsellors during the last fortnight
of Bourbon rule in Naples are known to us at present
chiefly through the narratives of Liborio Romano and of
General Pianell and his wife. These represent the con-
stitutional party alone, and even so are inconsistent with
' each other on several important points. Unless other
documents come to light the historian will never be able
to trace confidently and in detail the story of those days
of cowardice, treachery, confusion, and panic. Only the
main outline of events is clear.^

It was agreed by all parties in the Palace that the

the plot is doubted by De Cesare, ii. 338-340, but see Liborio Romano, 49-51.
Nisco, 97-99. Mundy, 207-215.

iPcysano, 152-156. ^/ijd. 148.

^ Pianell's own narrative unfortunately stops at the end of the month. His
wife's goes on longer and is a contemporary journal, but on the other hand she
could only record what her husband told her each day. The Pianells are more
trustworthy witnesses than Don Liborio (see De Cesare, ii. 409), yet modern
histories have relied almost entirely on Don Liborio alone. Whitehouse's ex-
cellent book was written before the publication of the Pianell papers. What
we most want is some analogous narrative by a member of the camarilla or re-
actionary Court Party.

172 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

presence of the King himself in the field was necessary
if the demoralised troops were ever to face Garibaldi
again. It was also common ground that the Capital
should be spared and should not, like Palermo, be made
the scene of conflict. The main division of opinion be-
tween constitutionalists and reactionaries arose on the
question whether the King should go south to defend
the Capital in the plains of Eboli and the mountains of
Salerno ; or whether he should abandon Naples and re-
tire north with all the loyal troops in the Kingdom behind
the line of the Volturno. In the latter case he could
base his new position on the strongly fortified towns of
Capua and Gaeta, which might prove for him what the
quadrilateral had been to Austria in 1848, a rock of refuge
on which the rebels would vainly waste their strength,
until the time was ripe for a Royalist counter-attack and
a triumphal return to the Capital. Against Garibaldi,
who had no siege guns and no siege science, the plan
had a fair likelihood of success, as subsequent events
showed. It was a political as well as a military move,
for the retreat northwards would mean the abandonment
of the tricolour in favour of the old white flag of the
Bourbons, the burying of the constitution and a frank
return to reaction on the Bomba model. The removal
of the soldiers from the Capital northwards would enable
them to indulge their loyalist sentiments freely in a more
favourable atmosphere. Don Liborio and his colleagues
would remain in Naples, while the Queen-Dowager and
her reactionary clique were already at Gaeta waiting for
the King. The reactionary peasants of the Volturno
district were already threatening the lives of the local
Liberals. The Papal border and the Papal army were
close in the rear of Gaeta.

It may therefore be supposed that the advice to re-
treat behind the Volturno originated from the King's
secret advisers of the ultra-Royalist party.' As early
as August 27 his constitutional Ministers found that

'So Villamarina believed. Persano, 209-210.

LAST DAYS OF A DYNASTY 173

he was meditating such a retreat.^ But his purposes
wavered from day to day and from hour to hour, and
only the sound of the approaching footsteps of Garibaldi
could bring him to the point of a resolve.

On August 29 his Ministers for their part urged him
to go south and head the troops at Salerno in defence of
the Capital and the constitution, though it is difficult to
suppose that they wished him a complete victory.^

On the same day the reactionaries, headed by Count
Trapani, another of the King's uncles, were hatching a
plot to arrest the Ministers. The loyaHst proclamation
which was to have been published as the watchword of
this coup cPdtat was seized overnight by Don Liborio's
police, and produced at the council-board by the indignant
men against whom it had been aimed. King Francis, red
with mingled anger and embarrassment, gasped out that
he agreed with much in the proclamation, and gave
his Ministers to understand that he was to some extent in
the confidence of the conspirators who had plotted their
arrest.^ The Ministry, who had already attempted to
resign, now pressed with somewhat greater earnestness
for leave to be quit of the Royal service. But even now
the King refused to part with them, on the ground that
he could find no one else willing to form a Cabinet, and
when their friends of the National Guard warned them
that anarchy would break loose in the streets as
soon as their resignation became known, they consented,
all except Pianell, to continue awhile longer in office. *
Affairs remained in this suspended condition until the
night of September 4, when Peard's telegrams, the
supposed presence of Garibaldi at Eboli, and the reported
desertion of Caldarelli's troops^ brought the King's ir-
resolution to an end, and gave him the requisite energy
to carry out his plan of retreat to Gaeta.

^Pianell, gi. ^ Lihorio Romano, 62-63.

'Pianell, 88-89, 588-589. Russell MS. Elliot, September i. Elliot, 83-84.
* Russell MS. Elliot, September i. (Appendix A, below.) Pianell, go
193-195. Liborio Romano, 67. F. O. Sicily Elliot, No. 485, September 2, i860.
' See p. 163 above and Appendix H, below.

174 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Accordingly on September 5 Francis II announced
his approaching departure to the Ministers, the Mayor,
and the officers of the National Guard, to whom he com-
mitted the charge of keeping order in the Capital during
his absence. He spoke without bitterness, of which there
seems to have been singularly little in his mild and
foohsh nature. He excused himself for going : but ' your
Joe, I mean our Joe, is at the gates,' he said to these men,
whom he well knew to be preparing in their hearts an
enthusiastic reception for Garibaldi.^

On the same day he and his brave Bavarian Queen
went for their last drive in the streets of Naples. They sat
in an open carriage, like simple private citizens, and the
passers-by, who took off their hats to them in silence,
observed that they were laughing and talking together
as usual. The clumsy shyness of the King's demeanour
to his wife, which had distressed her in the early months
of their marriage, had now to a large extent passed away.^
A few yards from the Palace, at the busy entrance of the
Chiaja, their equipage was brought to a stand by a block
in the traffic, and they were forced to wait some moments
close to a gang of workmen who were taking down the
Bourbon lilies from over the shop front of the Chemist
to the Royal Family. Francis pointed out to Maria
Sophia the too significant nature of the men's task, and
husband and wife turned to each other and laughed.'

Next morning, September 6, the walls of Naples were
placarded with the King's proclamation of farewell to his
people. In restrained and dignified language he pro-
tested against the way in which he was being driven
from his Capital, in spite of his constitutional concessions,
and announced that he hoped to return if the luck of war
and politics favoured his claims. In the course of the
day the main part of the army marched out of the town
by the Capua road, indignantly refusing D'Ayala's in-

' ' li vnsiro — e nostra — don Peppino i alle parte.' De Cesare, ii. 408-409.
" See Garibaldi and the Thousand, pp. 126-128. De Cesare, ii. 29-30.
^De Cesare, ii. 408.

THE KING FLIES FROM NAPLES 175

vitation to fraternize with the National Guard and
desert to the side of Italy.^ A garrison of six or ten
thousand ^ was left behind to guard the fortresses of the
Capital, but their commanding officers were strictly
ordered by Francis II to remain neutral and to shed no
blood. Nothing was said to them about surrender or
evacuation, although if they were attacked they could
only hold the forts by shedding blood, which would
transgress both the letter and the spirit of the King's
commands. It is probable that he had not clearly
thought out what he wished them to do.' But it may
fairly be said that he adhered in an honourable manner
to his decision not to inflict the horrors of war on Naples,
and the rumour that he ordered the castles to bombard
the town, after he had gone, was pure fiction.

At four in the afternoon the constitutional Ministers
were summoned to the Palace to take their leave of the
King. There was no party in the State that wished
them to accompany him to Gaeta. They found him
courteous and cheerful, buoyed up by excitement at a
great change and by relief after long tension. He said
to Don Liborio, half in jest, half in earnest, ' Don Libo,
look out for your head,' referring no doubt to his own
prospective return. 'Sire,' was the unabashed reply,
'I will do my best to keep it on my shoulders.' The
Ministers were not invited to say farewell to the Queen.

Shortly before six in the evening Francis and Maria
Sophia walked down arm-in-arm from the Palace to the
dock which lay close under their windows. Both were
composed and cheerful. The Queen left her wardrobe
behind, saying to her maids, ' We shall come back again.'
The hundreds of Neapolitan grandees and officials who
had fattened on the Court for twenty years past were
notable by their absence. But the faithful Captain Cris-

' y. des D. September 15, i860, Letter of September 6. D'Ayala, 318.

"The list in Franci, i. 125-126, 244, reprinted in Tiirr's Div. doc. 52, makes
10,000. But De Cesare, ii. 413, says 6000.

^ Marra Oss. 45-50. Cava, log-iio, are, I think, the only first-iiand
authorities on this subject.

176 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

cuolo received his sovereigns on board the Messaggero,
a small ship of i6o horse-power and four guns. As she
steamed through the crowded port of Naples, she ran
up a signal for the rest of the fleet to follow, but not
one vessel stirred. The captains were already in league
with Persano, and the prevailing sentiment of the men
and still more of the officers favoured United Italy.^

The little ship, shunned by all her fellows, carried
the last of the Bourbons for ever out of sight of Vesuvius
and the Bay. At dusk she passed the island of Nisida
where Gladstone had visited Bomba's victims. A few
minutes later, off" Procida, she met another section of the
fleet, signalled again, and was again disobeyed. All night
she ploughed her solitary way under the stars, through
a tranquil sea.^

The interregnum of twenty hours that followed the
King's departure was outwardly the quietest, but in-
wardly the most anxious day that Naples had passed
for several weeks. Knowing that Bourbon garrisons
were still in the four great castles — Nuovo, S. Elmo,
deir Ovo, and Carmine — the population stayed indoors
until something decisive occurred. Fortunately the
authorities took the right steps. Liborio Romano still
continued to act and to sign himself as ' Minister of
Police and the Interior,' though under which King
seemed uncertain. His continued presence at the head
of aff"airs helped to preserve public confidence and
peace. He sent at once for the Mayor, Prince d'Ales-
sandria, and for De Sauget, the General of the National
Guard, and agreed with them that Garibaldi must enter
Naples as soon as fitting preparations had been made

' Some Spanish vessels escorted the Messaggero for a very short distance.
Two other small vessels, the Delfino and Saetta, and the sailing frigate Partenofe
were the only ships of the Royal Navy which later on joined the Messaggero at
Gaeta. The remaining thirty-five vessels of the fleet passed over to the National
cause. F. O. Sicily, Elliot, September 30, i860, full list. De Cesare, ii. 425.
Persano, 207-215.

''De Cesare, ii. 413-426.

GARIBALDI AT SALERNO 177

for his reception, and as soon as he had troops enough
at his side to ensure his safety against the Bourbon
garrison. Within an hour of the King's departure two
officers of the National Guard were sent off to Salerno
on what was then the only railroad south of the Capital ;
it ran along the coast past Vesuvius, turned inland by
Pompeii and ended at Vietri two miles outside Salerno.
On their way the two officers met a number of Bavarian
mercenaries retreating northwards from the abandoned
positions of Salerno and Cava. At Salerno, which they
reached by ten at night, they found the streets lighted
up, and groups of people still cheering 'disturbedly.'
Garibaldi had made his entry,^ and had gone to rest.
The envoys reported to Cosenz the flight of the King
and announced the intention of the Mayor and the com-
mander of the National Guard to come from Naples early
next morning.

Garibaldi, when he awoke on September 7, tele-
graphed to Don Liborio : 'As soon as the Mayor and
commanding officer of the National Guard arrive from
Naples, I will come to you : I am waiting for them first.'

Don Liborio wired back : ' To the invincible General
Garibaldi, Dictator of the Two Sicilies — Liborio Romano,
Minister of the Interior and Police.

'Naples awaits your arrival with the greatest im-
patience to salute you as the redeemer of Italy, and to
place in your hands the power of the State and her own
destinies. ... I await your further orders and am, with
unlimited respect for you, invincible Dictator,

' Liborio Romano.'

This exchange of telegrams barely preceded the ar-
rival at Salerno of the Mayor and General, who were at
once ushered into the presence of Garibaldi. He was sur-
prised to hear from them that Naples did not expect him
that day, and expressed annoyance at the suggestion of any
need to erect triumphal arches and to make official pre-

' See p. 165 above.
12

1/8 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

parations for his entry. More serious arguments for delay
were the presence of the Bavarians on the railway line
between Salerno and the Capital, the garrisons in the
four castles with cannon trained on the heart of the city,
and the absence of Garibaldi's own army. His nearest
force, Tiirr's 1 500, were still forty-eight hours behind, and
the rest of his 20,000 men were scattered along the roads
of Basilicata and Calabria at distances varying from four
to fourteen days' march. His staflF officers, Bertani, and
the emissaries from Naples, all besought him to wait at
least till Tiirr's force came up, and till the departure of
the Bavarians for Capua was completed. But Garibaldi,
hearing some talk of difficulties and dangers in the Capital,
swept all this aside. ' Naples is in danger,' he said, rising
to put an end to the conference. ' We must go there to-
day ; we must go this minute.' His friends were horror-
struck, but they knew better than to resist. His decision
was approved by the event, and indeed hesitation on his
part might have dispelled the illusion of his invincible
power and compromised his peaceful occupation of the
city. And thus he was able to enter, as he wished, not
like a conqueror surrounded by an army, but as a de-
liverer welcomed and protected by the people.

After despatching a telegram to the Capital announc-
ing their arrival for midday, the Dictator and his party
drove out of Salerno, at exactly half-past nine on the morn-
ing of Friday the 7th of September, amid another scene
of frantic enthusiasm.^ At the terminus station of Vietri
they boarded a special train, which was soon packed to
overflowing, first by Garibaldi, his staff, and personal
friends, and then by a score of the so-called National

' ' At half-past nine we heard the roar of vivas in the street, and, coining to
the window, saw Garibaldi himself passing in the direction of Vietri. One of
the crowd, while cheering in the most frantic manner, suddenly fell in a kind of
convulsive fit. 1 asked our landlady, a vivacious, black-eyed Calabrese
damsel, whether he had not been drinking the General's health. "No," she
said, " it is joy. Ah," in a tone of reproach, " you English, who have always
been free, cannot imagine the delight of deliverance." And she made a gesture
as if she were about to fly.' Galton, 23.

ON THE VESUVIUS RAILWAY 179

Guard of Salerno, and any one else who could wedge
himself through a door or climb on to a carriage-roof.
During the journey the Liberator was calm and quietly
radiant; so was that other fine soldier, Cosenz, who
smiled behind his spectacles at the thought that he would
in a few hours see his mother, from whom he had been
separated by twelve years of exile. The rest of the
company in the train, which included Palmerston's secre-
tary in his red shirt, W. G. Clark the Public Orator of
Cambridge University, Captain Forbes, R.N., and Edwin
James, Q.C., were for the most part in boisterous and
noisy spirits. The Italians kept singing over and over
again : —

' Siamo Italiani,

Giovani freschi,

Contro ai Tedeschi
Vogliam pugnar.
Viva I'ltalia !
Viva rUnione !
Viva Garibaldi !

E la liberti ! '

At Nocera the enemy's Bavarians, entrained for
Capua, were shunted to let the victors pass. A little be-
fore they reached Pompeii, Garibaldi, who sat by the
window on the side towards the mountain, said, ' Look
out, we shall soon see Vesuvius.' When its cone and
streamer hove in sight, Cosenz was visibly moved by the
familiar form of the mountain of his boyhood.

It was a day of scorching Southern sun. Beyond
Pompeii the train made slow progress even for an ex-
press south of Naples, for between Torre Annunziata and
Portici the line was occupied by tens of thousands of the
inhabitants of that densely populated coast. Fishermen
who left their nets on the beach, swarthy fellows naked
to the waist who had been winnowing corn on the flat
roofs of the houses, priests and monks leading their flocks,
men, women, and children in countless multitudes, rushed

12*

/8o GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

shouting on to the line, and swayed to and fro round
the train in their attempts to see and touch Garibaldi.

In his carriage the Mayor of Naples and the staff
officers were arranging the route which was to be taken
in the streets of the Capital. It was decided to go by the
centre of the town and not by the quay-side, lest they
should needlessly provoke the Bourbon garrison by
dragging the triumphal procession under the muzzles of
the cannon at the Carmine and Castel Nuovo. Beyond
Portici the train was stopped by a naval officer who
forced his way into the carriage in a state of frenzy,
crying out to the Dictator : ' Where are you going to ?
The Bourbon troops have trained their cannon on the
station of Naples.' Garibaldi replied unmoved : ' Bother
the cannon ! When the people are receiving us like this,
there are no cannon,' ^ and ordered the train to proceed.
As they went forward again the Commandant of the
National Guard questioned the young officer, and it soon
appeared that he was referring only to the cannon in the
Carmine Castle close to the station, a danger which they
had already taken into account.''

In i860 there were only two short railways in the
whole Neapolitan kingdom, connecting Capua and Vietri
respectively with the Capital.^ At that time both these

^ ' Ma che cannoni 1 quando il popolo accoglie in questo modo non vi son
cannoni.'

^ For this account of the journey from Salerno to Naples the best single
authority is Rendina's narrative in the Lega del Bene, from which De Cesare's
well-known account is drawn. It is wrong in two small points : Peard was not
in the train, for he tells us in his MS. journal that he drove separately. Also
the terminus station whence they started was at Vietri, no longer at Cava,
whence it had been extended that very year ; see Murray, 1862, p. xiii, and
Galton, 23; Times, September 15, p. lo, c. 4; Bertani, ii. 193. The narratives
ofW. G. Clark in Gallon, 23-25, of Lacava in Pungolo, September 8, 1904, of
Edwin James in Times, September 18, p. 7, c. 3, of Ashley (497), of Zasio (86-
87), of Bertani (ii. 193) and of Liborio Romano (73-79), and of Forbes, 232, should
be collated for the story of the train journey.

^ The first jf these had a branch line from Cancello to Nola and Sarno and
the second a still shorter branch to Castellamare. Murray, 1858, p. xlviii, and
1862, p. xiii.

THE ENTRY INTO NAPLES i8i

lines terminated in a small junction some few hundred
yards nearer to the sea than the present Central Station
of Naples.^ On the morning of September 7 the timid
silence of the streets was broken by Count Ricciardi, who
drove along the Toledo, standing up in his carriage with
the Italian flag and shouting out to the citizens that they
should assemble at the station to greet the Dictator, who
would arrive there at midday. But most men preferred
to wait and see if Ricciardi's prophecy would be fulfilled
before they committed themselves in face of the garrison,
and it was a crowd of relatively moderate proportions
that assembled at the appointed hour and place. Don
Liborio, however, and the National Guard were there to
represent the official world. An hour and a half passed
by, till at 1.30 the train was seen to approach, and the
Liberator stepped out on to the platform.

As fast as the news that he had come spread through
Naples, the whole city awoke as from sleep ; myriads
seemed to spring out of the ground, and before Don
Liborio had finished reading an address of welcome to
which no one even pretended to listen, an irresistible
multitude stormed the station, swept aside every official
barrier, swamped the lines of the National Guard, and
took Garibaldi to itself. Don Liborio was whirled off
on the flood and could not fight his way to the coveted
seat in the Dictator's carriage. Cosenz, who had an
equally good right to be next his chief, was borne down
another eddy, but secured a horse and rode off to see his
mother. After a few minutes' fierce battling. Garibaldi
found refuge in an open carriage, into which Bertani and
half a dozen of his old fighting companions managed to
climb after him,^ 'such fine old heads with whitened
beards, and all with their red shirts covered with purple
stains, like English hunting-coats which have been

' Murray, 1858 and 1862, maps.

" According to Zasio, who was one of them, the others were Bertani, Nullo,
Gusmaroli, Manci, and Stagnetti, while Cosenz and Missori went on horseback.
Zasio, 87,

1 82 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

through sundry squire-traps,' as a lady wrote who
watched the simple procession pass. At the back of the
carriage clung a Neapolitan artist named Salazaro hold-
ing over their heads an enormous tricolour with the horse
of Naples on one side and the lion of Venice on the other.
In this fashion, without official escort or guard of any
kind, ' did a son of the people,' to use Garibaldi's own
words, ' accompanied by a few of his friends who called
themselves his aides-de-camp, enter the proud Capital
acclaimed by its 500,000 inhabitants, whose fierce and
irresistible will paralysed an entire army.'

According to the official plan. Garibaldi was to have
entered Naples by the centre of the city in order to avoid
the forts. But outside the station, in what is now the
Corso Garibaldi, the mob turned to the left instead of to
the right, and in another minute they were passing under
the muzzles of the loaded cannon of the Carmine. The
soldiers were seen looking out at the carriage and its
occupants, whom they could have blasted to pieces by
moving a finger. Garibaldi stood up, folded his arms,
and looked them straight in the face. Some of them
saluted and no one fired a shot. It is true that they were
only acting in accordance with the pacific orders of the
King, but it is a matter of deep congratulation that no
one in that unscrupulous and ill-disciplined force was
tempted loyally to disobey.

The mob had now reached the water's edge, and as
the carriage turned to the right round the corner of the
Carmine its occupants were greeted by the most amazing
sight and sound. For a mile long, the broad quay-side
was packed by as many of the half-million inhabitants of
Naples as could find standing room, and all at first sight
of Garibaldi broke out in one protracted yell of welcome.
Along the north side of the quay, lined by tall commercial
buildings, every window was astir with faces and waving
arms and fluttering handkerchiefs. On the other side,
where lay the great port crowded with shipping of all
nations, every mast was loaded with sailors shouting or

T. ■"

THE ENTRY INTO NAPLES 183

singing songs of welcome in chorus. In middle distance,
far overhead, the tyrant's castle of S. Elmo looked down
upon the scene.

When the procession first left the station. Garibaldi
had ' sat for the most part apparently unmoved, but from
time to time he lifted his hat, and smiled, as it were, with
the eyes rather than the lips.' But as they began to pass
along the quay, he ' stood up,' writes Zasio of the Thou-
sand, who was with him in the carriage ; ' his head was
uncovered, and his face in token of reverence (in atto
riverenie) betrayed deep emotion.' The carriage moved
at a foot's pace on the long, open quay, and before it
reached the shadow of the Castel Nuovo his bared
features seemed to his companions in the carriage to have
bronzed visibly under the scorching rays of the sun,
' Did you ever see such a triumph ? ' asked Bertani of
Zasio. ' No, not seen it,' replied the veteran, ' but I have
often dreamt of it for the chief

At length they reached the Castel Nuovo, sinister of
aspect with its tall round towers of black tufa. Here
again they might have been blown to pieces, but here
again the enemy's sentinels saluted, and the guard turned
out to do him honour. Thence he was carried along the
side of the Palace, also occupied by a Bourbon regiment.

The Foresteria, an annexe of the Palace used for the
entertainment of Court guests, was the goal of the pro-
cession. It stood on one side of the Largo San Francesco
di Paola, an immense open space which was packed tight
' with spectators.^ From the windows of the Foresteria
Garibaldi looked out sideways on the front of the Palace
a few yards off with the enemy's soldiers in the gateway,
and straight below him on the heads of the vast multitude,
whom he addressed as follows : ' You have a right to
exult in this day, which is the beginning of a new epoch
not only for you but for all Italy, of which Naples forms
the fairest portion. It is, indeed, a glorious day and

' The Foresteria is now(igii) the Prefettura, and the Largo San Francesco
di Paola is called Piazza del Plebiscito.

1 84 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

holy— that on which a people passes from the yoke of
servitude to the rank of a free nation. I thank you for
this welcome, not only for myself, but in the name of all
Italy, which your aid will render free and united.' ^ His
speech showed clearly that it was of the union of Italy
that he was thinking as much as of the liberation of
Naples.

From the Foresteria he was taken to the Cathedral,
where he was again almost smothered by the embraces
of men and women. His fighting friar, Sicilian Pantaleo,
conducted the service, and the terrified canons showed
him the relics of St. Januarius, on the virtues of which he
maintained a judicious silence.^

Thence he was taken to the Palazzo d'Angri, now
chosen as his permanent head-quarters. It is a fine
private mansion, standing conspicuously, half-way up the
mile-long Toledo at the debouchment of another impor-
tant street, so that its balconies look down on both
thoroughfares. The people filed in endless procession
up and down the two streets, while Garibaldi showed
himself to them on one of the highest balconies of the
tall palace.

The inhabitants of Naples were now in full delirium,
gyrating through the streets like the dance of all the
devils on the witches' Sabbath. True joy at liberation
from tyranny moved the greater part of them ; the
feverish desire for the excitement of an unexampled /es/a
drove on the rest, many of whom had been Bourbonists
a few months before, and would be Bourbonists again
if the King returned. Men and women waved swords

' This is the version of W. G. Clark, an ear-witness (Galton, 26). There
are various others, to much the same effect.

' Next day (Sept. 8) he attended the popular religious festival of Piedigrotta,
which had always been attended by the Monarchsof Naples : he had said at the
Straits that he would be at Naples in time for that feast, and he kept his word.
On September 19 the Blood of St. Januarius duly liquefied for the benefit of the
Dictator's Government, following precedent, since it had liquefied for the benefit
of the atheist French Republicans in 1799, Garibaldi was not present at the
performance. Gallon, 29, 53-55. Zasio, 92.

'EGLT DORME' 185

which they would never wield in earnest, and brandished
daggers which they were more accustomed to employ.
As the night wore on, the various cries of Viva Garibardo,
Gallibar, Galliboard were finally shortened into Viva
^Board. When the voice gave out, a single finger was
held up in token of the union of Italy. Even after the
first rage was spent, the Saturnalia continued intermit-
tently for three days and nights in the thousand noisome
alleys which composed the Naples of that era.

But in the Toledo, while the crowd on the first even-
ing was shouting under the Palazzo d'Angri for the
Dictator to reappear, a red-shirt stepped out on the
balcony and laid his cheek on his hand in token that his
chief was sleeping. ^ Egli dorme,'' whispered the vast
multitude and dispersed in silence. During the rest of
that night's carnival the centre of the city was left as
noiseless and deserted as the streets of Pompeii.^

•The following are the authorities on which my account of the entry is
based. I consider the first seven of them the most important. Zasio, 87-91.
Galton, 25-28 (Clark's narrative). Lega del Bene, December, 1888 (Rendina's
narrative). Pungolo, September 8, 1904. Trinity, 236-242. De Cesare, ii. 430-
433. Times, September 13, p. 10, c. 3 ; September 15, p. 10, c. 5 ; September
18, p. 7, c. 3. Meuricoffre, 51-52. Nisco, 122. Dumas, 367. De Sivo, iv. 67.
D'Ayala, 320-326. Cosenz, 20. Liborio Romano, 79-80. Conv. Missori. Mem.
380. Monnier. 283. Menghini, 461. Salazaro, 54-55. J. des D. September
15, i860. Ashley, 499. Bertani, ii. 194. Colet, iii. 12.

CHAPTER IX

garibaldi's mistakes in NAPLES. THE CHECK BEFORE

CAPUA

' Tra qualche anno, di tutti questi piccoli guai, che ora ci preoccupano tanto,
chi si ricorderi ? D'una cosa sola ci ricorderemo tutti, e per sempre : ci ricor-
deremo che in questi due anni s'6 fatta I'ltalia I ' Manzoni's saying in the winter
of i860. {Venosta, 607.)

' In a few years who will recollect all these little troubles which now obsess
our minds ? One thing only we shall all of us remember for ever : we shall
remember that in these two years Italy was made.'

On September 8, the day after Garibaldi's entry, the
Bourbon commandant of the castle of S. Elmo sent
word that he could no longer restrain his men from
bombarding the city at their feet. 'Very well,' said
the Dictator, 'let them fire, and we will fire back.' He
had on that day no military force in Naples except the
National Guard, who were fit only for policing the
streets, but his fearless tone quelled the enemy's soldiers.
They did not open fire, and in the course of the next
three days handed over all the four castles to the National
Guard. None of the outgoing regiments would listen to
the invitations to desert that were showered upon them,
but marched off scowling at the people, full of zeal to
join their King and comrades in the last stand behind
the Volturno.^ The loyalty of the army to the Bourbons,
even stronger among the rank and file than among the
officers, defeated the calculations alike of Garibaldi and
of Cavour, who had each confidently expected that if the
revolution succeeded at all, the army would come over
wholesale to aid in the wars of liberation for the rest of
the Peninsula.''

1 Tiirr's Div. l6l. D'Ayala, 328. Munriy, 245. Forbes, 239-240.
^ Spaventa, 2gy-2gS. BoBdt, 268-269. Conv. Venosta.

186

CEN'KRAL TURK, lS6o.

TURR CRUSHES OUT REACTION 187

The loyalty of the soldiers was a measure of their
professional feeling and of their isolation from the com-
munity at large, to whom they had been related not as
defenders of the fatherland or representatives of the
national honour, but as the tyrant's body-guard kept
to repress the citizens. Therefore they were left un-
touched by the tide of popular sentiment for United
Italy, and while one-half of them rallied round Francis
II at Capua and Gaeta, the other 50,000 disbanded
and went sulkily to their homes or took to the hills as
brigands.

In the north of the kingdom, where a part of the
population itself was reactionary under clerical influence,
there ensued a state of sporadic civil war of which the
worst horrors had been spared to the southern provinces.
On September 8 news reached the Dictator from the
district of Ariano to the east of the capital that Generals
Bonanno and Flores with 4000 Bourbon troops had there
roused up the Royalist peasantry, who were robbing,
massacring, and raping in the houses of the Liberals.
The first 1 500 of Garibaldi's army who arrived in Naples
on the 9th were allowed only a few hours' rest before
they were sent off again to quell the insurrection. Tiirr,
who went in command, took them by train to Nola, there
put them into carts and carriages and drove with the
utmost speed to the scene of operations. Bonanno, in
spite of his superior numbers, agreed without a blow to
disband his force. It appears that conversations with
comrades returning to their homes from Calabria had
so much discouraged his men that he no longer dared
rely upon them to fight.

Tiirr acted not only with vigour but with clemency.
He shot two of the ring-leaders of the peasant massacre,
though the local Liberals who had suffered begged him
to shoot a round dozen, and dishked the practical appli-
cation of his doctrine that a new era of liberty and
brotherhood had dawned for all Itahans. The repression
of similar reactionary massacres in Molise and the

1 88 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Abruzzi, as conducted by General Cialdini and the
Piedmontese regulars in the later months of the year,
was on a scale of vengeance more calculated to satisfy
the local demand than anything that Garibaldi or his
lieutenants were ever known to permit'

The arrival in Naples of the rest of the army from
Calabria and Basilicata was accelerated by the help of
the newly acquired shipping of the port. Some of the
regiments in the rear were brought by sea from Paola
and some from Sapri, while others marched. The last
division under Medici reached Naples on September i $
and the following days. In the course of a quarrel at
Paola for the first passage on board a steamer, Nino
Bixio had broken the heads of several of his companions
in arms with the butt end of a musket ; as usual he re-
pented of his savage rage and made friends with the
victim whom he had nearly killed.^

Cavour was agreeably surprised by the Dictator's
first acts in Naples. On the evening of his entry, before
he lay down to rest, he had issued a decree generously
handing over the whole Neapohtan fleet to King Victor
Emmanuel, and placing it forthwith under the orders of
Admiral Persano, to the detriment of his own power and
authority. Three days later he invited a battery of
Piedmontese artillery and a battalion of Bersaglieri in
the harbour to land and co-operate with him in garrison-
ing Naples. He also chose Moderates and Cavourians
as his Ministers, among others, Liborio Romano, whom
he continued in the offices which he had held under
Francis II. These first steps, taken as Cavour knew
on the advice of the sage Cosenz, proved to all the world
that no thought lurked in Garibaldi's mind of any ultimate
settlement for Sicily and Naples except union under the

'FraB«, i. 103-104, 232-234. Tiirr's Div. 161-172. Tilrr's Risposta, i6-ig.
Rustow Brig. Mil. 27-33. Abba Not. 234.

''T»;-r'i Oil). 178-180, 514-515, and map. Castellini, 61-64. Bandi, 279-
282. Adamoli, 153-155.

GARIBALDI'S DESIGNS ON ROME 189

monarchy of Victor Emmanuel. ^ But he intended to
postpone that union until he could proclaim the King of
Italy on the Capitol, and he publicly announced that he
would march on Rome over the last ruins of the Neapoli-
tan army on the Volturno.

The desire to march to the deliverance of the Holy
City was inspired in his mind not by political calculation
but by poetic passion, by the memories of antiquity and
of his own defence of the Janiculum in '49. The romantic
element was the strongest in his nature and ruled him
for good or evil at all the great crises of his life. The
lover's passion for Rome was fostered in him by Bertani
and the other extremists, who saw in it a means towards
their own political ends. It was to them a method of
delaying annexation until it could be effected on terms
fatal to Cavour's continuance in office and dangerous to
the prestige of the monarchy, which would be reduced
to the position of accepting the crown of Italy as a
gift at the hands of the revolutionary leader.

Garibaldi and the Mazzinians were alike under a
delusion as to the practicability of taking the city of
Rome. They believed that the French people were on
the Italian side in this matter, and that the tyrant,
Napoleon III, when seriously challenged, would be
forced to withdraw his garrison from Rome for fear of
revolution in France. They were equally wrong about
prince and people : in reality the clerical and anti-Italian
feeling of the France of that day was the main reason
why Napoleon could not utterly desert the Pope, for
whom at heart he had little love.

Until, in the latter half of September, it became
apparent that the Bourbon forces rallied behind the
Volturno were strong enough to check Garibaldi's ad-
vance on Rome, Cavour was at his wits' end for ways
and means to prevent a complication which must involve
Italy either in civil war or in war with France. Know-

^ Persano, 222, 239. Savio, i. 323. Chiala, vi. 594. Cosenz, Guardtone, 55.
Elliot, 96, 102-103.

igo GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

ing that he had lost all influence of his own with the
Dictator, Cavour turned in every direction to find others
who could remonstrate with better chance of success.
At his instigation Kossuth wrote to Garibaldi, congratu-
lating him on his triumphs in the cause of freedom, and
imploring him not to embroil Italy with France in a
quarrel under the walls of Rome, that could only redound
to the advantage of Austria at the expense of Hungary
and of Venice.'

Cavour even commandeered the services of the Eng-
lish to remonstrate with their favourite. Lord Shaftes-
bury wrote from London to tell Garibaldi that he gave
thanks to God for his success, and to conjure him not
to imperil it by attacking the Pope too soon.^ Even
Edwin James, the barrister on a holiday, had been set
on to use his influence with the Dictator in favour
of immediate annexation.^ Persano implored Admiral
Mundy, for whom Garibaldi had conceived a great affec-
tion since the events of Palermo,* to persuade his friend
not to advance on Rome. Lord John Russell had in-
structed Elliot, the British Minister to the deposed King,
to remain at Naples, and if possible to dissuade its new
master from attacking Venice. Elliot and Mundy there-
fore arranged an unofficial meeting between themselves
and Garibaldi in the cabin of H.M.S. Hannibal. It took
place on September lo. Bertani, who followed the
Dictator about like his evil genius, had to be asked twice
to quit the cabin before he would leave his victim alone
with the two Englishmen. His fears on this occasion
were groundless, for Garibaldi, though cordial and
patient, was impervious to all representations of the
dangers into which his further advance would plunge
Italy. He repeated in a tone of enthusiasm that he

' Chiala's Pol. Seg. 129-142.

^ Mem. Star. Mil. ii. 188. The letter (September 17) is there wrongly attri-
buted to Lord ' Salisbury,' but the reference to ' my son Evelyn ' (Ashley) shows
the writer was really ' Shaftesbury.'

' Times, September 18, p. 7, c. 3.

' See Garibaldi and the Thousand, pp. 290, 311, 317-320.

GARIBALDI DEFIES CAVOUR 191

would first crown Victor Emmanuel in Rome, and that
then the task of liberating Venice would devolve upon
the King.^

The conduct of Bertani in Naples was unworthy of
his former great services to Italy. He who had once
done so much to bring together Garibaldi and Cavour
now worked only too successfully to divide them. He
became the mouthpiece of self-seeking politicians like
Rattazzi and his friends, who, hoping to step into Cavour's
ministerial shoes, were not ashamed to write that ' Gari-
baldi was the only person who could strike him down.'^
Urged on by such counsellors, Bertani daily inflamed
the Dictator's hatred against ' the man who had sold
Nice,' regardless of the fact that the man was now, in
consequence, liberating the Papal Marches.^ Garibaldi
published a letter stating that he could never again work
with Cavour,* and then sent a note to Victor Emmanuel
asking him to dismiss his great Minister.^ Bertani indeed
advised Garibaldi against this last step, not because he
wished Cavour to remain in office, but because he rightly
foresaw that the request would be refused, and Cavour's
position strengthened.^

Unlike Rattazzi, Bertani was at least disinterested ;
he was not seeking Cavour's place, but the union of Italy.
He had impaired his health and his mental balance by
working day and night on his sick-bed at Genoa, organ-

' Mundy , 238-244. F. O. Sicily, Elliot, September 8, Mundy's letter. Elliot
99-101. Persano, 240-241.

^ Luzio's article in Corriere delta Sera, March i, 1910, on the Archivio
Bertani.

^On September 11 the Piedmontese regular troops crossed the Papal
frontier and Persano started with his fleet from Naples for the Adriatic to
bombard the Pope's fortress of Ancona.

* Ciampoli, 181. F. O. Sicily, Elliot, No. 525, September 18.

'The note was delivered to the King by Trecchi late on September 23,
having been taken to Turin by Pallavicino — see the narrative of Pallayicino's
secretary, Caranti, i8-ig. This must not be confused with the mission of
BrambilJa and Trecchi to the King ten days before ; it was not then, as was
wrongly asserted, that the demand for Cavour's dismissal was made, see Bram-
billa, 42, Bertani, ii. 208-209. F. O. Sicily, Elliot, September 28, and above all
Bianchi, Polit. de Cavour, p. 384 and note.

' Bertani, ii. 219.

192 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

ising half the forces by means of which Garibaldi had
reached Naples. He had brought on Italian unity by
such giant strides that year, that he could not believe
it necessary to call a halt. He had by his rival activities
compelled Cavour to invade the Papal States himself,
and he could not see that, although, thanks to Cavour's
manipulation of Napoleon, Umbria and the Marches were
fair game, France still threw her shield over the city of
Rome. On September 19 he persuaded the Dictator to
send round 300 men under Cadolini to land at Terracina
in the Papal States in order to prepare the way for the
advance of the main Garibaldian army on Rome. The
orders for this fooHsh expedition were actually given,
but were rescinded at the advice of Sirtori.^ Garibaldi's
military lieutenants, Sirtori, Cosenz, TUrr, Medici, and
Bixio, were all opposed to the extravagant counsels of
the civilians Bertani, Crispi, and Mazzini.

For Mazzini, too, was in Naples. He arrived on
September 17^ and remained, not in hiding, but in ob-
scurity. A stranger, who met him one evening in a
private house without knowing at first who he was,
describes him as ' an old man with a sweet voice saying
wise and noble things ' to a group of Garibaldian officers
who listened to his words with profound respect* When
he touched actual politics, he was less happily inspired.
He wrote on September 23 to Garibaldi, saying that he
preferred not to come to see him in the crowd at the
Palazzo d'Angri, but that he hoped the Dictator would
offer these terms to Victor Emmanuel — immediate an-
nexation of Naples in return for the dismissal of Cavour
and war with the Austrians in Venetia.^ The Dictator
would probably have been better pleased if Mazzini had
stayed away, but since he had come, he would listen to
no suggestion for sending him back, and when the scum

' Mem. Star. Mil. ii. 182 (Cadolini). Ire Pol. 67-68 (Bertani).
'Fam. Crauford, 227. ' Paolucci's Corrao, 144.

* Letter published in GiornaU d'ltalia, June 6, 1907, from Achille Fazzari's
MSS.

MAZZINI IN NAPLES 193

of Naples shouted ' death to Mazzini ' under his windows,
Garibaldi protected him and rebuked the rioters.^

To the men who were making Italy, Mazzini's arrival
in Naples was an exasperating addition to the dangers
of the gamble on which their country's existence was
staked ; so long as he continued to play a part, and a
mistaken part upon the whole, in political affairs, it was
impossible for all men to give the father of Italian Unity
his meed of thanks, and to be always remembering that
but for his work in the 'thirties and 'forties there would
have been no i860. Throughout this year when his life's
work was being brought to fruition by others, Mazzini
was in a state of melancholy resignation, for although he
felt confident that the union of Italy was at hand, it was
not the idealist Italy which he had striven to evoke. He
sought no thanks for himself from the country which he
had made, and dreamt of no apotheosis, but only of a
speedy end to life in his English land of exile, now grown
dear to him. 'Unity,' he writes to Mrs. Taylor, 'you
may consider as settled, and so far, so good. The rest
is all wrong. And as for myself, don't talk of either
prosperity or consciousness of having done, etc. All
that is chaff. The only real good thing would be to have
unity achieved quickly through Garibaldi, and one year,
before dying, of Walham Green or Eastbourne, long
silences, a few affectionate words to smooth the ways,
plenty of seagulls, and sad dozing.'^

Except that there was less unanimity on behalf of
the National cause, the attitude of the people of Naples
after the entry of Garibaldi closely resembled that of the
people of Palermo three months before. In Naples as
in Palermo, devotion to the person of the Liberator was
deep and genuine, and did not grow less on closer ac-
quaintance. The southern populations found him far
more simpatico than they found other Northerners, and

''■ Mignona, 229. Mario's Mazzini, 413.
''King's Mazzini, 359-360. Fam. Crau/ord, 217, 227-229.
13

194 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

when he retired in November and left them to the Pied-
montese officials, they soon wished him back again.
But so long as he was with them, though they were never
tired of cheering him, they were annoyed by his pohcy
of postponing the annexation, in which alone they saw
a sure way of safety. The reason why the Neapolitans
shouted ' death ' under the windows of Mazzini was that
he opposed immediate and unconditional annexation.
They wished Victor Emmanuel to come at once to
give them security and peace.

The impatience of the Neapolitans with the interim
government of the Dictator was increased by faults of
administration. Many common convicts were let out of
prison on the ground that they were political prisoners,
and stabbing and crime grew more rife than ever.^ The
moderate Ministers whom Garibaldi had chosen on his
first entry found themselves overridden by the Dictator's
secretary, Bertani, who treated them as cyphers and
carried on the most important acts of government with-
out consulting them. On September 22 the Ministry
sent in their resignation ; five days later it was accepted,
and their places were taken by more passive tools of the
omnipotent 'Secretariat.'^ The despotism of Bertani
and of Crispi, who succeeded him on September 30 as
secretary without altering the policy pursued,^ would
have been endured gladly if it had meant order and a
peaceable transition towards the approaching regime of
Italian Unity. But it seemed rather to tend to anarchy
and maladministration. The hopes of the reactionaries
revived, and seditious correspondence was set on foot
between Naples and Gaeta.* Neither Garibaldi nor
Bertani had any conception of the proper limits to which
a Provisional Government should confine its work, and
many of their decrees made important changes in the

1 Russell MSS. Elliot's letter of October 8.

^Liborio Romano, 84. Ferrigni, 66-70. De Cesare's F. di P. ccviii-ccxv.
Bertani, ii. 217. F. O. Sicily, Elliot, No. 540, September 29.
"'Crispi, 191 1, p. 313. Bertani, ii. 222-224.
^ D'Ayala, 337-340.

GARIBALDI'S MISTAKES IN GOVERNMENT 195

principles of law, finance, and State machinery, which
should have been left to the mature decision of the
future Itahan Parliament.^

Europe was justly shocked by a Dictatorial decree
giving a pension to the mother of Agesilao Milano, the
idealist fanatic who had attempted to assassinate Bomba^
though it is possible to plead, in mitigation of Garibaldi's
offence, the flattery long bestowed on Milano's memory
by eminently respectable persons in England as well as
in Italy.

A more innocent act of patronage was more loudly
blamed in Naples. The Dictator nominated Alexandre
Dumas as honorary Director of the National Museum
and excavations. Dumas, who really loved the Italian
cause and had, in his swaggering way, done more for it
than was pleasing to the Government and the fashionable
classes of his own country, was ungratefully accused by
the Neapolitans of dipping his fingers into their public
purse. It was true that if he had not undertaken the
duties of the Directorate for nothing, it might have been
given as a paid post to some native. The appointment
of a foreigner was unwise, apart from all question of the
novelist's equipment as an archaeologist. But Dumas
was subjected to much undeserved abuse.'

All these political questions and quarrels revolving-
round the central problem whether or not annexation
should be immediate and unconditional, found their
solution in military events against which there was no
appeal — ^the check of Garibaldi before Capua and the
success of Victor Emmanuel's troops in the Papal States.

In return for the supreme sacrifice of his capital,
King Francis had obtained a new position of strength,
geographically and politically suited for a successful rally
of the Royalist element in the army and the kingdom.

^F. O. Sicily, Elliot, No. 512, September 15.
" See Garibaldi and Ihe Thousand, p. 67.
'Ber aid, ii. 209. Du Camp. Souvenirs, ii, 246-258.
T^ *

196 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Gaeta afforded a secure base of operation, and in the
event of defeat a last stronghold which could hold
out for months even against a regular army with siege
guns. But the front line of defence was the northern
bank of the lower Volturno, a deep, muddy river, fordable
at widely scattered points known as scafe or ' ferries.'
The only bridge was that which led into Capua. The
celebrated Monsieur Vauban, whose creations so often
baffled WiUiam III and retarded Marlborough, had de-
signed the defences of Capua, and they had been mod-
ernised and enlarged by a Russian military architect as
late as 1855. The bastions, well furnished withicannor,
proved strong enough to oppose a final limit to Gari-
baldi's career of victory. This impregnable Ute du pont
of Capua enabled the Bourbon troops to cross the river
whenever they wished, and to debouch on the cultivated
plain on the south bank, which was admirably suited for
the operations of regular troops against ill-disciplined
levies.

Behind these strong barriers raised by art and nature
the Royalists rallied round their King. There were
no longer any constitutional Ministers, any officers or
privates of doubtful loyalty to create an atmosphere of
division and distrust. The white flag of the Bourbons
was again unfurled, the tricolour and the constitution
were stowed away together and reactionary passions
were no longer discouraged and concealed. In the
course of September some 50,000 soldiers assembled in
the lines, some of them from distant parts of the kingdom,
all having come voluntarily and out of genuine devotion
to a fallen cause. The privates were still the most en-
thusiastic grade in the service, but disloyal officers were
no longer to be found in the camp.^ The fighting spirit
shown by the Bourbon troops in the battles of September
and October, after the Capital had been surrendered
without a blow, contrasts strangely with the manner in

' Cava, 13 note. De Sivo, iv. io6-no. Maria Sophia, 138-139. Conv.
Primerano. For the numbers see Appendix J, below.

ROYALISTS BEHIND THE VOLTURNO 197

which they had fled and disbanded in August, when the
royal cause had been in a far less desperate condition.
The change was partly due to the presence of the King
in their midst, and to the fact that they no longer had
half-hearted friends within and a hostile population
around. But there always remains something inscrutable
to Northerners in the vagaries of the Southern tempera-
ment.

The Volturno region was not only militarily but politi-
cally well chosen. The peasants were the most reac-
tionary in the kingdom, and the friendly border of the
Papal States was close in the rear. It was suggested in
high quarters that Lamoricifere, who commanded the
Pope's army of foreign crusaders in Umbria, should make
a forced march southward, unite with King Francis'
troops and carry him back in triumph to Naples. On
the advice of Persigny, the French Ambassador in London,
King Francis telegraphed from Gaeta to ask for the
Pope's consent to this plan.^ But the invasion of the
Papal States by the armies of Victor Emmanuel from the
north gave the Pope's generals plenty to do at home.

The Bourbon position on the Volturno was by no
means merely defensive. It threatened Naples, which
was divided from Capua by no more than eighteen miles
of flat ground, well supplied with country roads concen-
trating on the Capital. Garibaldi's nominal attack on
Capua soon became no better than a defence of Naples
conducted with great difficulty and peril before the gates
of Capua.

To the 50,000 Bourbon regulars gathered behind the
Volturno, Garibaldi by the end of September opposed
some 20,000 volunteers. Besides his own field army,
there were ' insurrectionary bands ' and private regiments
enlisted throughout all the provinces under his Dictator-
ship. When his forces were paid off in November it was

^ Persigny, 276-277. Did Napoleon know of his Ambassador's advice ? I
doubt it. I suppose that as he did things behind the backs of his Ministers and
Ambassadors, they took similar liberties with him.

198 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

stated officially that as many as 50,000 names appeared
on the muster rolls, but Garibaldi himself declared that
only a third of those enrolled ever came near the scene
of actual conflict. Sicily held seven out of the fifty thou-
sand, and besides those who v^^ere engaged in garrisoning
and patrolling the Capital, and the southern provinces,
thousands of ne'er-do-weels drew pay for trailing rifles
and sabres in the caffs of Naples and parading them-
selves along the streets in uniforms of many colours/

The force actually at the front, varying during
September and October from 15,000 to 20,000 men, was
mainly composed of Northern volunteers. But there
were among them 3000 Calabrians and Lucanians and
about as many Sicilians ; the city of Naples, so Tiirr
reported in the middle of October, had sent exactly eighty
of her half-million inhabitants to join the army protecting
her on the Volturno.^

Dispassionate observers of the Garibaldini in that
autumn agreed that they contained ' the cream and the
dregs ' of the nation.^ When the Thousand sailed for
Sicily in May there had been no dregs, but the pro-
cess of adulteration had been continuous ever since, the
bad element increasing in exact proportion to the success
already achieved, until after the occupation of Naples
the red shirt covered as much heroism and baseness as
has ever been concealed by cloth of any colour. Gari-
baldi's lifelong dream of the lev^e-en-masse of regenerated
Italians, which was to sweep French and Austrian back
across the Alps, wrecked itself on the realities of human
nature and the stern requirements of effective mihtary
organisation. Instead of the 1 50,000 men for whom he
had hoped, he got 50,000, out of whom perhaps not more
than half could look the enemy in the face. But of these
several thousands were of really heroic mould, and it was

1 Risorg. anno iii. fasc. i-2, pp. 87-88, and Appendix J, below. Orero, 106.
Revel's da Ancona, 114-117. Zasio, 104-105.
^ Russell MSS, Appendix A, p. 313 below.
3 ' Fiore efeccia.' Corsi's Rimembranze, 28,

I^gl -^^

i^Q^nii^H

sfi ji^=

»*«ii.*i:iauf -■r.ts;-? ■

ii li

»■«

"H

m ^'^

'"^'^P^Hs^^^^l

'11 p^

'~ t^.' , -^^^^^^^B

m-:f:mr 1

^. K ,^Jf^

g^HHB

l^&Wf:- TI^^^^^PBI

Wp^^nKt'^E*^ ' ^tt^^^^^^^^^^^^P^^ ^^^^fl

'|Psi^"nHHi

^E^pir--^! - ^^^I^H^H

M^^^S^fc.

^ '^i^H^^^I

I

[S 1 "^1

,^'
N

IP^

'T 5 *" ' J

J|fe£*t^

' ; s ■ '^ "^ "t^fl^l

: ipl.^?

'Hlfci'^^

' ^ ^r- ~' ^^H

Mprjit^

^' l''w ^'^^1

*

^K

pi |3 -f^M

4

1

^K^

i 1^ '^H

Ifesr'R- "^H

1

11

^ iTii^i iiiiiiiiiiiilP

r

CASERTA PALACE 199

these few who saved Italy on the Volturno.^ The further
supply of the best sort of fighters had been cut off by
Cavour, who since the middle of August had stopped
the exodus of volunteers from Genoa and the North.^
By cutting off the supply of men, Cavour secured his
object of rendering Garibaldi too weak to attack Rome,
but in so doing he nearly caused him to lose Naples.

Garibaldi's head-quarters were established in the
Palace at Caserta. This monotonous and gigantic edifice
is at least more pleasing than Versailles, in imitation of
which it was built by VanviteUi, architect to Carlos III,
Bomba's great-grandfather. It has been reared upon
the plain, but a mile behind it, at the end of the long
Palace garden, rises a steep mountain range of white
limestone, on the top of which can be seen in the distance
the ruined castle and hill-town of Old Caserta.' Out of
the mountain-side spouts and tumbles a force of water
conducted from twenty miles away into that arid region
by the great aqueduct of VanviteUi, which spans the
Maddaloni valley with a structure worthy of Imperial

' Mr. W. G. Clark gives the following account of his twofold impression at
Caserta (Gallon, 62-63) : —

' When I reached the railway station, I found a train of empty trucks and
cattle waggons just starting. A number of the red-shirted gentry demanded that
a carriage should be attached to it for their use. The stationmaster declared
that he had none, whereupon they threatened, hustled, and collared him,
and finally carried him off to the Palace to answer to some one for his con-
tumacy. . . . The train started without waiting for the issue of the dispute. I
got upon a truck with a number of common soldiers (Garibaldians), whose
behaviour presented a very favourable contrast to that of their officers. One
provided me with an inverted basket to sit upon, another compelled me to accept
a cigar, a third insisted upon ray taking a cartridge as a keepsake. One of them
had been an artist, he told me, and had abandoned his easel at Milan to carry a
musket in Calabria. Never, surely, was there such a motley array as this. It
contains men of all ranks, and of all characters. There are raen of high birth
and gentle breeding, Aere are also outcasts and vagabonds ; there are generous
and chivalrous enthusiasts, there are also charlatans and impostors, and unhappily
it is not always the former who fill the highest places.' From the mass of ether
evidence which I have read, I should not say that the officers were badly selected
in the better regiments. But see p. 246 below.

'^ See pp. 122-123 above. Mario Supp. 280.

' See Map III, B, at end of book.

200 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Rome. Below the cataract at Caserta the water glides
more gently towards the Palace, from basin to basin,
between groups of classical statues and dark groves of
evergreen. At such pains was this artificial river brought
to the King's country seat by the first and most popular
of the Neapolitan Bourbons, who reahsed the highest
ideal of kingship as understood under the ancien regime :
for he did not forget to send on the water to irrigate the
plain and to supply the Capital. Carlos III died the
year before the French Revolution began, and his de-
scendants failed to adapt themselves to the new era.
And so now, among these groves so long reserved for
princes, the Garibaldini were encamped, poaching the
Royal pheasants much to the subsequent scandal of Victor
Emmanuel's lackeys, who thought that the sacred birds
ought to have been kept till their master arrived to shoot
them.

While the advanced guard over against Capua held
Santa Maria and Sant' Angelo in Formis, the reserve
was bivouacked in the courtyards and gardens of Caserta
Palace, and on the great parade ground that lies between
it and the station. As in the Palace at Palermo, Gari-
baldi and his staff occupied some of the smallest rooms
they could find. The Dictator enjoyed this much of
kingly pomp, that wherever he appeared, in the field or
in the street, any band that perceived him at once struck
up ' Garibaldi's hymn.' ^ And he was now attended by
a body-guard of red-shirts, whom it amused him to arm
with a set of pompous halberds from one of the State
rooms of the Palace. The principal duty of the body-
guard was to save him from the hundreds of petitioners
who besieged his door day and night, clamouring for
offices and pensions and for revenge upon their private
enemies. Rival committees, mutually denouncing each
other as Bourbonists with the envenomed sycophancy of
the Levantine, revolted the soul of Garibaldi. He passed
them on as far as might be to Bertani in Naples, and was

1 Conv. Dolmage. For the music of the ' hymn ' see pp. 298-304 below.

GARIBALDI ON MONTE TiFATA 20t

glad to spend all the hours of daylight on horseback
upon the mountains, whither they could not follow him.
But when he returned to Caserta each night, he found
them still at their posts before his door.

His habit of retiring at nightfall and rising before
dawn saved him from prolonged contact with this human
plague. At Caserta he was always up and about before
his staff. Once, indeed, shortly after midnight, while
Nullo and Zasio were still sitting on in the outer room,
having held festival over some simple luxuries of the
camp, their chief came out from his bedroom, fresh
from sleep and booted for the day. He nodded and
smiled to them as he passed out, and they could only look
at each other foolishly enough and murmur, ' He gets up
too soon.'

Thus abroad betimes, he proceeded every day to visit
the outposts, travelling from Caserta to Santa Maria
by train or by carriage, and thence riding along the lines
to the village of Sant' Angelo, built at the foot of the
mountain out of the ruins of Roman pleasure-villas.
Thence he would climb on foot to the summit of Monte
Tifata or to the ruined chapel of San Nicola a few yards
below, where once a temple of Jupiter had overlooked
the rich Capuan plain.^ Monte Tifata, the most westerly
spur of the mountains that lie between the Caudine
Forks and Capua, is also one of the highest peaks of the
group. It rises almost two thousand feet sheer out of
the seaward level. Half its flanks are clothed with
forest and half are naked limestone with shrubs and
flowers breaking out between the white rocks. Arrived
at its summit, Garibaldi felt safe from sycophants and
political tormentors of every kind. Here he spent many
happy hours in the September sunshine watching
through his telescope the movements of his own and of

' On some days he took another route, riding up Monte Tifata direct from
S. Leucio by the charcoal-burners' path through the woods which clothe the
eastern slopes. It is possible to ride up this path, but on the steeper and barer
western side towards Sant' Angelo the mountain can only be ascended on
foot.

202 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

the enemy's columns. On clear days he had the view of
every winding of the Volturno from the ferry of Cajazzo
to the sea, and of each ribbon of road on the vast plain
stretching on all sides of Capua. It was from Monte
Tifata that Hannibal had watched, week after week, for
the glint of sunshine upon armour which might betray
to him some cautious move of Fabius in the plain below,
when they two matched wits and Capua was the prize.^
And now from the same rocks Garibaldi in his turn was
watching the red and blue pieces in the game of chess
to which he had challenged the Bourbon Generals.''

The proper strategy for the Royalists to adopt would
have been the very opposite to the delay by which Fabius
restored the fortunes of Rome. They should have at-
tacked in the middle of September, while Garibaldi's
position at Santa Maria and Sant' Angelo was still a
skeleton line. Marshal Ritucci, the commander-in-chief
at Capua, unlike the generals of Sicily and Calabria, was
neither a coward nor a fool, but he failed to grasp the
need for instantly taking the offensive. Overawed by
Garibaldi's unbroken record of victory, he preferred
Fabian tactics, being sure that he could hold Capua
against him." No doubt he calculated that when the
Dictator's advance was shown to be permanently checked,
his political hold on Naples and South Italy would relax
and his volunteer forces melt away. And there was talk
of help in a few months' time from Austria or the Pope.
Ritucci's plan was well laid, but he had forgotten Cavour.
It was the Piedmontese and not the Austrians, Victor
Emmanuel and not Lamorici^re, who arrived to decide
the well-balanced struggle on the banks of the Volturno.

' Ancient Capua was on the site of modern Santa Maria, where the amphi-
theatre still remains. The inhabitants of Capua moved to the present city on the
banks of the Volturno in the ninth century a.d.

2 Zasio, 96-104. Du Camp, 264-267. Arrivabene, ii. 233-234. Gallon, 52.
Colletta, i. 85-86. Forbes, 278. Sirtori, 223. Times, October 6, p. g, c. 3.

^ Fraud, ii. 216-217, 221-222.

CHAPTER X

CAVOUR INVADES THE PAPAL STATES WITH THE ARMY OF

PIEDMONT

' Sn le dentate scintillanti vette
Salta il camoscio, tuona la valanga
Da' ghiacci immani rotolando per le
Selve croscianti.

' Ma da i silenzi de I'effuso azzurro
Esce nel sole I'aquila, e distende
In tarde ruote digradanti il nero
Volo solenne.

' Salve, Piemonte I A te con melodia
Mesta da lungi risonante, come
Gli epici canti del tuo popol bravo
Scendono i fiumi.

' Scendono pieni, rapidi, gagliardi
Come i tuoi cento battaglioni e a valle
Cercan le deste a ragionar di gloria
Ville e cittadi.'

Carducci. Piemonte.

' Over the glittering, jagged summit
Leaps the chamois, sounds the avalanche
Off the cruel ice-beds rolling

Through crashing forests.

' Out from the silence, out from the encircling blue.
Floats in the sun the eagle, and extends,
In circles slowly earthward borne, his dark
And solemn flight.

' Hail, Piedmont I hail 1 to thee with melody
Sad, from afar resounding, like the songs
The heroic songs of thine own mountaineers,
Thy rivers fall.

' Down fall thy rivers, rushing, rapid, full,
Like thy battalions, in the plain below
Seeking the hamlets and the towns astir
With thoughts of glory.'
203

204 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

The States of the Church, stretching across the Penin-
sula from sea to sea, opposed a geographical veto to the
Union of Italy which Garibaldi's successes in the south
had brought into the region of practical politics. At the
moment of his entry into Naples the whole of Central
Italy from Ancona to Civita Vecchia, from Perugia to
Terracina, was still in the most literal sense subject to
priestly rule. In the Papal territories priests were the
legislators and the administrators, not, like William of
Wykeham or Wolsey, lending their abilities to the State
at the invitation of the lay power, but acting in their
own right divine. Both in theory and in practice priests
were the sole judges of what might be published, said,
or done by the millions of laymen who chanced to be
subjects of the Pope. There was no longer, as in 1848,
any attempt at reform from within or concession to the
laity. ' We are advised to make reforms,' said Pio Nono
(Pius IX) to Odo Russell, the British Resident at Rome ;
' it is not understood that those very reforms, which
would consist in giving this country a Government of
laymen, would make it cease to exist. It is called the
" States of the Church " and that is what it must remain.' ^
While many of the parish priests, as soon afterwards
appeared, shared the desire of their flocks to be ruled
by the King of Italy instead of by the Pope,^ the Roman
curia was implacable. At no period was the spirit of
priestly intolerance and interference exercised with
greater impolicy than in these years and months when
the threatened theocracy had its last chance of making
terms with the modern world. Up to the very day of
reckoning the hierarchy seemed to find a pleasure in
reminding every layman in Central Italy that he be-
longed to an enslaved class and must submit to any
humiliation or injustice that the Church was pleased to
impose. On August 22, i860, Odo Russell sent home to

^Queen's Letters, ed. 1907, iii. p. 311, January 14, 1859.
-Gregorovius, 106. F. O. Rome, Russell, No. 170, November 11, i860.

GOVERNMENT BY PRIESTS 205

Lord John an official dispatch narrating a characteristic
incident of Papal rule : —

' A respectable tradesman of Civita Vecchia died some days since, and
five young men, friends of the deceased, wishing to show the respect and affec-
tion they bore towards him, applied to the Ecclesiastical Authority for permission
to carry his coffin themselves instead of allowing it to be carried by the religious
Confiraternity on whom funeral functions usually devolve.

' The request was granted at Civita Vecchia but it appears not approved in
Rome, for after four days the young men were arrested in the night at their houses
by Papal Gendarmes and conveyed to prison, and the next day they were sent to
the State Prisons of Soriano beyond Viterbo, where they will in all probability
remain for some months and then be released without trial. The charge brought
against them is interference with Ecclesiastical Customs and Privileges.^

This system of government was perpetuated no longer
by the submissiveness of the Pope's subjects, but by the
presence of foreign armies. The troops of Napoleon III
held down Rome and the Patrimony of S. Peter. An
army of Austrians in the pay of Pio Nono maintained
order in Umbria and the Marches. In the summer of
1859 these Eastern Provinces had nominally been evacu-
ated by Austria, but the very same officers and men who
had composed the former garrison had been encouraged
by the Government of Vienna to go back 6000 strong
and enrol themselves in the Papal service.^

Thus the newly liberated Romagna was threatened
from the south by the Papal forces, of which these
Austrians were the main strength, and from the north by
the official army of Austria in the Venetian territory.
Cavour had no time to lose. He must overwhelm the
Pope's army in Umbria and the Marches and make Italy
one by joining hands with Garibaldi in Naples. If he
delayed it was clear that Austria, as soon as she had
recuperated her strength after her losses in the war of
1859, would reconquer North Italy in alliance with the

'Be. Payl. Papers, vii. p. 55.

^Merode, 136, says the Austrians were 'upwards of 6000.' Odo Russell
(F. O. Rome, Russell, August 31, i860) puts them at 10,000, and adds:
'The men and officers thus sent by the Austrian Government to General
LaraoriciSre are chiefly those who formed the Austrian garrisons of the Legations
before the war in Lombardy and also men who had served in that Province and
in Venetia. A de facto Austrian occupation is thereby gradually being re-estab-
lished in the Adriatic Provinces of the Holy See.'

2o6 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Pope. Cavour, well aware of the necessity for invading
the Papal States, knew that the indispensable condition of
success in an enterprise so repugnant to the interests of
Austria was the passive consent of the ruler of France.

The French Emperor had no goodwill for the
Austrians who were maintaining the Pope's temporal
power on the eastern seaboard of Italy, although he still
found himself compelled to do similar police work in the
west. Napoleon's throne depended on the support of
the Pope's followers in France, and the Pope's temporal
power in Rome depended on Napoleon's bayonets, so
each must perforce accommodate the other. But the
chain of their mutual dependence was galling, and only
made them hate one another the more. Napoleon, half
a Liberal and wholly a man of the modern world, de-
tested the obscurantist Government of which he was the
unwilling protector ; while the Pope and the curia, after
the Franco-Austrian war of 1859, recollected that the
Third Napoleon was the nephew of the First, and
thenceforward chose to regard him as the embodiment
of the European revolution. They entertained high
hopes of a Bourbon restoration in France, and began to
talk of the present occupant of the Tuileries in the
language which Cardinals and Papal Secretaries now
sleeping in silent Roman cloisters had used in their
day about Queen Elizabeth and Henry of Navarre. The
French Ambassador reported with amused indignation
that, according to His Holiness' Irish Chamberlain, Na-
poleon III was in league with the Devil and often con-
sulted Him on political affairs.^

Pio Nono considered that Napoleon had deprived
him of the Romagna by the war of 1859, and that he was
preparing at the earliest opportunity to rob him of
Umbria and the Marches.

' Caro mio Russell,' he said in his ' mild and benevolent
voice ' to the British Resident, ' you are mistaken if you take

' Tkouvenel, i. 275-276.

PAPAL MISCALCULATIONS 207

the present crisis in Italy for a national one. What is being
done now will be undone again in time. Piedmont is an in-
strument in the hands of the Emperor Napoleon, who thinks it
is his duty to carry out the ideas of his uncle. What his
ultimate objects are I know not, but whatever he establishes
will end with him as the Kingdoms of his uncle ended with the
Empire. The Italians are not a bad people, but they are
easily led astray by foreign agents, who revolutionise the
country for their own wicked purposes ; when they have
suffered more they will repent and return to us.' '

Misled in this fashion by the false historical analogy
of a bygone period, when France had imposed the
revolutionary system on Italy from without, the Pope
and his advisers persuaded themselves that no genuine
national movement existed in the Peninsula, and looked
forward to another 181 5, another fall of Napoleon, and
another restoration of the old Italian world. Even so
shrewd a man as Cardinal Antonelli, who shared but few
of the illusions of his rivals around the Papal throne,
declared that he was waiting for 'the 181 5 of the Second
French Empire,' after which the Pope would enjoy his
own again in the Romagna and elsewhere.^ The second
French Empire has indeed since then met with its
Waterloo, but it is not the Pope or the ancien regime
that has arisen on its ruins.

The Pope, having quarrelled with his bread and
butter in the shape of Napoleon's protection, was easily
persuaded in the early months of i860 to entrust his
fortunes to the Belgian fanatic De M6rode, whose grand
design it was to enlist an army of crusaders gathered
from all parts of Europe which should be strong enough
to defend the Papal territories, and so enable the Holy
Father to dispense with the degrading patronage of the
French usurper. Cardinal Antonelli, indeed, who saw
what was possible in this life as clearly as any other
worldling in Europe, argued that a mistake was being
made ' in trying to turn the Holy See into a military

' F. O. Rome, Ruisell, No. loj, July I2, i860.
^ Ibid. No. 145, September 2g, i860.

208 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

power.' ^ But his warnings were drowned in the clamor-
ous joy of the Church mihtant over the energy and zeal
of his Belgian rival. Antonelli was forced to bide his
time and allow the fatal experiment to be tried. The
hour belonged to Monsignor de M6rode, priest and War
Minister. All through the spring and summer of i860
the quiet piazze of old Papal Rome resounded with the
clash and tramp of regiments under arms, and the cries
of oflficers drilling recruits in all the languages of Catholic
Europe, while the French garrison, no longer the heroes
of the sacristy, stared at the ' crusaders ' with mingled
envy and contempt.

By September De M6rode's new army numbered not
less than 15,000 men.^ Of these the weakest regiments,
with the exception of one or two battalions, were the
native subjects of the Pope, enlisted for the sake of
the pay, without zeal for the cause, despised by their
foreign companions in arms, and conscious that they were
traitors to their own country.' The foreign troops were,
on the average, superior in quality. Six thousand
Austrian veterans and several hundreds of Irish recruits
were landed, enrolled, and drilled at Ancona. In
Rome there were more Irish, besides French, Belgians,
and other nationals. They were essentially crusaders,
not mercenaries. The Irish, as was justly observed,
could have obtained far better terms in the Queen's
service, and had come solely out of religious zeal.
Peasants straight from the soil of Ireland, they were
riotous and difficult to manage, but by the influence of
their priests rather than by the enforcement of strict
military discipline, they were at length reduced to order,
and presented a soldierly appearance in their green uni-
forms.*

' p. O. Rome, Russell, No. 145, September 29.

"Appendix K, ii. (a), below.

■' Castelli, 327. Poll, 116. Rome MSS. Br. Cons. Letter Book, p. 190.

^ Much information about the Irish will be found in Rome MSS. Br. Cons.
Letter Book, sub i860 passim, and in F. O. Rome, Consuls, vol. 81, June-Sep-
tember, i860, and F. 0. Rome, Russell, No. 100, July 10, i860, and in O'Reilly,

THE CRUSADERS 209

But the troops who attracted most attention in this
strange army were the French and Belgians of good
family, who assumed the title of ' Papal Zouaves.' They
were the men of the ancien regime, strayed into the wrong
century, who had at last found a cause for which they
could fight. They involved the whole army in the
atmosphere of their own extreme Legitimist principles.
Napoleon III was to them a usurper and a Jacobin.
They proclaimed a Royalist restoration as imminent, and
cheered for ' Henry V ' of France under the windows of
Napoleon's officers in Rome.^ In all this they were en-
couraged by the party now supreme at the Vatican, who
spared the Emperor no insult. De M6rode in March had
visited France and returned with a kinsman of his own,
the retired French General Lamorici^re, once a Republi-
can, now a Legitimist and Clerical, but always openly
hostile to the Napoleonic Empire. This man was put in
command of the army of crusaders, as if to show that
the Pope no longer valued Napoleon's friendship, and
had no more need for his protection. If Cavour had
been dictating the Papal policy by telepathic suggestion
he could not have wished for anything better. The
defenders of the Temporal Power behaved with the
light-hearted insolence of some king in ancient Greek
tragedy whom God has maddened that He may destroy
him.

The invasion of the Papal States in September, i860,
was the crowning act of Cavour's life, and the greatest
example of his political genius. He was hemmed in on
all sides, and he laid all his enemies at his feet by this
one stroke. It destroyed the league of reactionary Italian
powers that threatened the newly formed Kingdom in
the North, it liberated the populations of the Centre, it
garnered Garibaldi's harvest in the South, it decided the
rivalry between himself and the Dictator before it could
grow into a fatal quarrel, it restored the prestige of the

' F O. Rome. Russell. No. 82, June 8, i86o. Gregorovius, 83, 91.
14

210 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Monarchy as at once leading and controlling the revolu-
tion, and it made a United Italy stretching without a
break from the Alps to Palermo. But proportionate to
the possible advantages were the dangers of the course.
It was a defiance of Austria, of the whole Catholic world,
and of the whole diplomatic world except England. At
best Napoleon might be persuaded to wink at an invasion
of Papal territory, but he could not fight against Austria
in defence of the sacrilege, because his political sup-
porters, his soldiers, his ministers, his ambassadors and
his wife, would all be on the side of the Pope. And if
Austria chose to attack, Piedmont alone could not resist
her armies on the Mincio. Knowing all this, Cavour
decided to take the risk. Perhaps no other statesman
fully alive to the facts would have dared a venture so
hazardous, and certainly none could have carried it
through with such perfect nerve and skill.

Two men may claim to have advised Cavour before
the event. Prince Jerome Napoleon and Ricasoh. As
early as June 30, while Garibaldi was still in Palermo,
Prince Jerome had written urging Cavour to break with
Naples and the Pope, but to be careful first to take the
Emperor into his confidence, and to explain to him with-
out reserve the true necessities of the Italian situation.
Cavour waited for two months, until Garibaldi was at the
gates of Naples, before he followed the Prince's advice.
But he spoke of the invasion of the Papal States, when
it actually took place, as ' the plan of Prince Napoleon,'
and he gratefully acknowledged Jerome's services in
keeping his Imperial cousin friendly to the Italian cause,
and neutralising the hostile influence of the Empress and
the Ministers.^

The necessity for action was also impressed upon
Cavour in a series of vigorous letters from Ricasoli, Tus-
cany's ' iron baron,' whose fortitude and patience had
carried through the annexation of his province to the
territories of Victor Emmanuel. In July, i860, Ricasoli

» See p. 25 above. Principe Nap. 54-58. Chiala, vi. 617.

THE AGREEMENT AT CHAMBERY 211

wrote to Cavour again and again, pointing out in impas-
sioned language that the popularity and the prestige of
the Monarchy was passing over to Garibaldi and the
advanced parties who stood behind him, and that nothing
short of a war of liberation waged in Central Italy by the
Piedmontese regular troops could recover for the King
the moral leadership of the national movement. Ricasoli
never tired of repeating his formula, ' Our real Garibaldi
should be Victor Emmanuel.'^

On the first of August, Cavour announced his decision
to invade the Papal States, but only in the strictest
secrecy, to his representatives at London and Paris.''
During the whole month the world knew nothing of his
intention.

At the end of August, Napoleon III was at Chamb^ry,
enjoying the Alpine scenery of his new Province of
Savoy, recently acquired by the bargain with Cavour, as
the fruits of the Italian alliance.^ The place, the time,
his holiday humour, the constant news from Rome of
fresh insults cast upon him by the Pope and the ' cru-
saders,' all combined to induce this halter between two
opinions to lean for one moment to the Liberal side.
And that one moment in Cavour's hands sufficed.

On August 28 there arrived at Chamb6ry two Pied-
montese emissaries — Farini, the second man in the Cabinet
of Turin, and Cialdini, the brilliant officer known as ' the
Garibaldi of the regular army.' In a secret conference
with Napoleon they informed him of Cavour's intention
to invade Umbria and the Marches. The Patrimony of
St. Peter, containing the city of Rome, was to be left to
the Pope and the French garrison, provided that Napoleon
would confine his own troops to that province and leave
Lamorici^re with his Austrians and his Legitimist French
crusaders to try conclusions in Umbria with Cialdini's
Bersaglieri. 'The Emperor,' wrote Cavour, 'approved
of it all. Indeed he seemed greatly to relish the idea of

' Ricasoli, v. i6i, 173, 176 and passim. ^ P. 117 above.

' Garibaldi and the Thousand, p. i6g.
14*

2 12 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

seeing Lamorici^re sent to ... ' The Piedmontese emis-
saries reported that Napoleon discussed the mihtary
chances of the campaign in the most friendly manner,
' laying down the limits of the plan of operations for our
army,' and finally dismissed them with the words, ' Faites
vite' — what thou doest do quickly.^

The southward march of the Piedmontese battalions
could be truthfully represented in either of two aspects
— liberty or order. Cavour and his agents in explain-
ing matters to the Emperor were careful to lay most
stress on the restoration of 'order' as against Garibaldi. ^
When the interview took place at Chamb^ry the red-
shirts, still in the full career of victory in Calabria, had
not yet received their checki on the Volturno, and
Napoleon had grave reason to fear that they would soon
be knocking at the gates of Rome, unless Cavour inter-
posed the shield of the Piedmontese army. It was to
the interest alike of Napoleon and of Victor Emmanuel
that the Itahan monarchy should ' absorb the revolution '
before it came up north and involved the whole politics
of Italy and F'-ance in complications that might end on
either side of the Alps in civil war. Republican uprising,
or Legitimist restoration.

' Not being able to forestall Garibaldi at Naples,'
wrote Cavour to his Minister at Paris, ' we must stop him
elsewhere, that is to say, in Umbria and the Marches.
An insurrection is on the point of breaking out there,
and as soon as this occurs, in the name of order and
humanity, Cialdini enters the Marches and Fanti enters
Umbria. They pitch Lamorici^re into the sea, occupy
Ancona, but declare Rome inviolable." The name of

1 Chiala, iii. 353-354 ; iv. 3 ; vi. 582-583. Cialdini told the 'faites vite ' story to
at least three several persons that autumn, see Revel's da Ancona 23 ; Thouvenel, i.
237-238 and 252, and I see no more reason to doubt it than any other report of the
exact words used in a private conversation, v/hich are always a doubtful matter
afterwards. The evidence for the alleged 'faites vite ' letter mentioned by
Delia Rocca (180) may be as bad as De Cesare {Roma, ii. 57) argues : but the
'faites vite ' story rests not on the letter but on the evidence in Revel's and
Thouvenel's books, which De Cesare does not seem to have considered.

^Chiala, iv. 3, 12-13. ^Ibid. vi. 582-583.

NAPOLEON'S LIBERAL FRIENDS 213

' humanity ' was invoked in reference to the brutal con-
duct of the Pope's foreign mercenaries, who had re-
pressed the insurrection of Perugia the year before with
unnecessary slaughter. Cavour's emissaries represented
to Napoleon that it was obligatory to invade the Papal
States in order to prevent a repetition of such horrors
on a greater scale. An insurrection, they declared, was
inevitable in Umbria and the Marches, — and truly
enough the inhabitants of Urbino rose and held their
hill city for three days before Victor Emmanuel's troops
crossed the frontier to their rescue.^ Napoleon, in his
official version of the Chamb^ry interview, declared that
he had only promised his acquiescence because Farini
had undertaken on his side that the Piedmontese ' would
only enter the Papal States after an insurrection and to
re-establish order.' ^ Whatever Napoleon really said or
tried afterwards to unsay, he left no doubt in the mind
of the two Italians that he would not actively resist the
invasion.

Three days later, to make assurance doubly sure,
Cavour sent another emissary — Count Arese, the old
Italian friend of Napoleon, during the period of his
connection with the carbonari thirty years before.' An-
other tried friend of the adventurer now safely seated
on the throne of France, was Dr. Conneau, who had
aided him in his romantic and perilous escape from the
castle of Ham in 1846.* In the midst of priests and
reactionaries and courtiers, the Emperor never entirely
forgot Arese and Conneau or their liberal doctrines,
which had once been his own. These two intimates
of Napoleon were, at this crisis of Italian history, work-
ing in league with Cavour.^ Arese's instructions were to
seek out Napoleon and repeat the arguments of Cialdini
and Farini, of which Cavour sent him the following notes
for his guidance : —

> Cialdini Rap. 1-2. ' Thouvenel, i. ig2.

' Simpson, 131, 335. 362, and index.

< Ibid. 193-198, 241-254. ' Ckiala, iii. 360-361, vi. 582.

2 14 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

' Describe to him the Italian situation after Villafranca and
Nice. Underhand war continued after Villafranca by enlist-
ing of Austrians at Rome and Naples. Alliance as good as
formed between the Pope, Austria, and Bourbons. Feeling of
danger of this league very strong in all Italy. After cession
of Nice impossible to hold Garibaldi back. Confess that the
Government has tolerated and even supported him. But it
has energetically prevented Mazzinian expeditions. Impos-
sible to allow ourselves to be distanced by the demagogues at
Naples. Once annexation made we will try not to attack
Rome or Austria. Emperor will save Italy if he prevents an
attack on us before next spring. If necessary we will fight
alone against Austria. Sure the Emperor will not allow the
only ally of France (viz. Piedmont) to be destroyed by coali-
tion. Explain that it is not at Turin but at Paris that we are
blamed.'

These arguments prevailed once more, and the Emperor
repeated to Arese his undertaking not to defend the
Marches and Umbria with French troops.^

The history of these negotiations clearly proves that
but for Garibaldi's successes in the South, Cavour would
have had no chance of obtaining Napoleon's passive con-
sent to the invasion of the Papal States. Garibaldi's part
in the making of Italy was not confined to the geographi-
cal area of the regions which he liberated with his own
sword, for the influence of his victories in i860 was the
ruling fact in the dealings of Cavour with Napoleon and
with all Europe, to whom he was able to say, ' If you
won't take Victor Emmanuel, you may get Garibaldi.'
Hudson's comment when he heard that the Piedmontese
were about to invade the Papal States was, 'We see
now what the Garibaldi expedition has produced.'"

Thus reassured from the only quarter whence he
could hope to obtain assurance — except from England,
whose approval could be taken for granted without the
asking — Cavour staked the fortunes of his country on the
hazard. An ultimatum launched at the Pope's Ministers

' Chiala, iii. 360-361, iv. 3, 13. "Appendix A, p. 312 below.

CAVOUR STRIKES 215

on September 7, requiring the disbandment of the foreign
mercenaries, 'who suffocate in Italian blood every ex-
pression of the national will,' was followed up on Sep-
tember 1 1 by the invasion of the Marches and of Umbria,
and the sailing of Persano's fleet from Naples for the
waters of Ancona. Half the regular army was left on
the Mincio, to protect Milan and Turin against a blow
by the Austrians. The guard left was all too feeble,
but Cavour trusted that the ' internal condition of the
Austrian Empire ' would deter the statesmen of Vienna
from moving, or would ruin them if they moved.^ He
had already made arrangements with Kossuth and the
Magyar leaders for a Hungarian rising to be armed
and financed by Italy in case of war between her and
Austria.^ But his hope was that peace would be pre-
served with Austria until, early next year, he could face
Europe with the fait-accompli of United Italy.

The news that Victor Emmanuel's Bersagheri were
marching gaily along the high-roads of Umbria and of the
Marches, hailed with ecstasies of joy by the inhabitants,
and taking in the Papal fortresses at the rate of one a day,
dispelled in an hour the foolish dreams of De Merode and
his party. Now was seen how little confidence they had at
heart in the ' crusaders ' for whose sake they had thrown
away the friendship of Napoleon. At once the whole
tribe turned to the man whom they had been insulting
for months past, and demanded as a matter of course that
he should send the armies of France to save them from the
Piedmontese. The demand of the priests was supported
by Napoleon's own Ambassador at Rome, the Due de
Gramont, and by his Foreign Minister, Thouvenel, both
of them strong reactionaries and neither of them as yet in-
formed of the promise which he had given at Chamb6ry.'
He yielded to the clamours of the Catholic world so far
as to break off diplomatic relations with Turin, and to
protest that he ' opposed ' Cavour's act of aggressioa

' Chiala, iv. 5. 'Ckiala Pol. Seg. 115-129.

'' Thouvenel, i. 185-201, 209-217, 236-239.

2i6 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

But he refused to ' oppose by force,' although the Papal
Ministers, in their agony, added those two little words
to the obscure message which De Gramont had been
authorised to give them from his master. The priests
were accused of deliberate deceit in this matter by the
French diplomats, but it must be admitted that De Gra-
mont's over-sympathetic personal attitude at the time
made it very natural to attach a war-like meaning to the
message, which otherwise could have no purpose except
to save the Emperor's face.^

' For the long and embittered controversy on this subject see Giomale di
Roma, October 24, 31, i860. F. O. Rome, Russell, i860, Nos. irg, 126, 140, 145,
147, 156, and 161, especially the last, October 27 and enclosures. Thouvenel, i.
272-275. La Gorce, iii. 418-4x9.

CHAPTER XI

THE BATTLE OF CASTELFIDARDO AND THE FALL OF
ANCONA

'Hoi maidens of Vienna ; Hoi matrons of Lucerne ;
Weep, weep, and rend your hair for those who never shall return ;
Ho I Philip, send, for charity, thy Mexican pistoles,
That Antwerp monks may sing a mass for thy poor spearmen's souls.'

Macaulay. Ivry.

There were 33,000 men in the Italian army that crossed
the Papal border, vowed like the Frenchmen at Ivry to
deliver their countrymen from foreigners brought in by
priests. Lamorici^re, who had only half his opponent's
numbers, could not hope to win unaided, but he might
prolong the defence until France or Austria came to the
rescue of the Pope. He held all the fortresses in Umbria
and the Marches, including the formidable defences of
Ancona. The task imposed on the North Italian army
by Cavour was to destroy Lamoriciere, to take Ancona,
and to reach Naples all within a few weeks, under penalty
ol an Austrian attack upon Italy's rear. It was a race
against time.

General Fanti was the Italian commander-in-chief
One of his two corps, under Cialdini, crossed the
' Rubicon ' whence Garibaldi had been recalled ten
months before,^ and made straight along the Adriatic
coast towards Ancona, capturing on his way the Papal
fortresses of Pesaro and Fano with their small garrisons.^
The other corps under General Delia Rocca, accompanied
by Fanti himself, entered Umbria by the upper Tiber
valley at the point where Garibaldi long ago had crossed

' Garibaldi and the Thousand, pp. 119-123.
2 See henceforth Map IV at end of book.

2r7

2i8 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

it in his flight with Anita and the remains of the army of
the Roman RepubHc. From Borgo San Sepolcro the
deliverers followed down the poplared banks of the river,
amid the blessings of the Umbrian peasants, until they
reached the foot of the hill on which Perugia stands.
The slaughter perpetrated there in June, 1859, by the
Papal troops under Schmidt, was now avenged by the
liberation of the city and the capture of the foreign bully
and his 1500 men, after a sharp fight at the Sant' Antonio
gate. Delia Rocca sent Schmidt away by night under
an escort, lest the Perugini should effect their purpose of
tearing him to pieces.^

From Perugia a detachment under General Brignone
was sent to capture the garrison of Spoleto. The town
was not defensible, but the Rocca or mediaeval castle
on the hill above was in good repair. It contained a
Monsignore, the clerical governor of the district, and
a garrison of 800, of whom 300 Irish and a few score
Franco-Belgians were the fighting elements. The castle
could, however, be commanded by the artillery and rifle-
men whom Brignone sent to occupy the wooded moun-
tain on the other side of the gorge, beyond the Lombard
aqueduct. For twelve hours of September 17 the North
Italians bombarded the Rocca of Spoleto, and in the after-
noon attempted to storm its gate. Almost all the small
column of assault were killed or wounded. Both Irish
and North Italians, here, as a few weeks later at Ancona,
displayed the ferocious self-sacrifice of men fighting for
ideas. The assault was repulsed for that day, but when
night fell the castle was crumbling beneath the bombard-
ment, the ammunition was running out, and the Swiss
and Italian Papalists compelled Major O'Reilly and the
boys to open the gates.^

There is all history's profoundest irony and pathos in

1 Delia Rocca, 182-187. Fanti, 338-342.

^Corvetto, 250-251 (Delia Rocca's report). Fanti Campagna, 9. Fanti,
343-344- Lafond, 38. O'Reilly, passim. Rome MSS. Br. Cons. Book, pp. 180-
183, contains another report by O'Reilly. French and Italian witnesses on both
sides are unanimous as to the valour of the Irish.

THE IRISH IN ITALY 219

this tussle for an old fort ' in a gash of the wind-grieved
Apennine.' What quarrel lay between the Piedmontese
and the men of Munster that they should have come
together in this place of all others to slay each other
and be slain ? Or what did it profit the peasant of
Connaught as he dug his potatoes and paid his rack-
rent, that the vine-dressers of Umbria should remain
enslaved and without fatherland ? It is a strange thing,
this crossing of sea and land by these Irish, to die
for a Monsignor-Governor of Spoleto, bayed in the last
lair of his tyranny. It was to this that generations of
England's greatest warriors and statesmen had brought
it in their Protestant zeal. Thus does religious bigotry
everywhere defeat its own end : Cromwell had planted
the Pope's power firm and broad in Ireland, but Gregory
XVI and Pio Nono had destroyed it in Italy.

Meanwhile Lamorici^re, knowing that his field-force
could not give battle on equal terms either to Fanti in
Umbria or to Cialdini in the Marches, had determined to
shut himself up in Ancona. His arrival there with his
whole army would strengthen and encourage the garrison
to hold out until Austria or France should come to the
rescue. This plan might well have succeeded had a less
enterprising General been in command of the North
Italian column on the Adriatic coast. But Cialdini was
not called ' the Garibaldi of the regular army ' for noth-
ing. As soon as he heard that Lamorici^re was moving
eastwards by Tolentino and Macerata, he knew that the
issue of the campaign lay no longer in Fanti's hands but
in his own, and would depend on the rapidity with which
he could throw himself across Lamorici^re's path to
Ancona. He did not proceed any further along the coast
to Ancona, because he feared to be caught under its walls
between the formidable garrison within and Lamoriciere
coming from without. He decided to go round inland
by Jesi and Osimo and stop Lamoriciere near Loreto,
and he was therefore obliged to make great demands on
the speed and endurance of his men.

220 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Two battalions of the Bersaglieri, trained to the
quick, springy step that distinguishes their corps, led the
way in a forced march by Jesi to Osimo and thence on
to Castelfidardo and Crocette, which the vanguard entered
on September i6, prostrated with heat, hunger, and ex-
haustion. If the enemy had been able to attack them
that evening, they would scarcely have had the physical
strength to defend themselves. But Lamorici^re was
only beginning to arrive with half his force in Loreto,
three miles away on the other side of the Musone valley
His men, though they had not marched so fast as the
Bersaglieri, were almost as much exhausted, and the
other half of his army under Pimodan was not due until
the next day. On the 17th Pimodan came up, but too
late for any united movement before nightfall. Cialdini's
troops had now all arrived upon the scene. r And so
on the morning of September 18 the two armies were
still watching each other from the hills on either side oi
the Musone valley ; both had rested well and recovered
from the exhaustion of their forced marches.

The best that Lamorici^re could now aspire to do was
to creep into Ancona by the track along the coast, at the
expense of his baggage and probably of some part of his
army. He no longer hoped to march in by the high-road
through Camerano, for the North Itahans were planted
across it, 16,500 strong to his 6500.^ Cialdini, who was
holding the line of hills from Osimo to Crocette, had not
continued his line across the low ground between Monte
d'Oro and the sea, because he had been erroneously in-
formed by his staff officers that the Musone was unfordable
in its lower course near its junction with the Aspio.''
This fault in Cialdini's dispositions, if such it was, though
it seemed to give Lamoricifere a chance of slipping past
into Ancona, proved in effect the snare that lured him
to destruction.

Early on the morning of September 18 Cialdini awoke
in Castelfidardo, fully expecting to be attacked by way

' Appendix K, below.

2 Henceforth see inset map of battle of Castelfidardo, Map IV, end of book.

THE BATTLE OF CASTELFIDARDO 221

of the bridge and the high-road. At dawn he visited the
troops at Crocette and put all in preparation for defence.
With a beating heart he watched the sun suck up the
mists out of the Musone valley, hoping that when the
bottom was clear Lamoricifere's columns would be revealed
in the act of crossing. But the valley was empty. The
enemy were still on the hills above. After giving orders
for his men to pile arms and breakfast, he rode back to
Castelfidardo, saying to his staff that after all there would
be no battle that day.

But meanwhile in Loreto the crusaders, gathered to-
gether under the dome of the huge church of the pilgrims,
were kneeling round the famous shrine in the centre of
the building, the ' Virgin's house ' which, as many of them
believed, had been carried in the hands of angels from
Palestine to Italy. They were preparing in a very sober
mood for a desperate service. Pimodan's force, 3000
strong, was to cross the ford which had escaped the
knowledge of Cialdini's staff, storm the Monte d'Oro and
hold Crocette for a few hours, so as to enable the rest of
the army to hurry along the coast into Ancona.

More than an hour after Cialdini had returned to
Castelfidardo, the first files of Pimodan's column were
seen emerging from the woodlands below Loreto, and
making for the banks of the Musone by way of Arenici.

The North Italian army was taken by surprise.
Various Austrian battalions, another small body of Irish,
and the Franco-Belgian Zouaves splashed through the
river and fell with all the fury of religious zeal upon two
companies of Bersaglieri, who had been stationed as out-
posts in two farms near the river, known as the Lower
and Upper House. Some more lukewarm Swiss and
native troops followed up across the ford. The Bersagheri
held out in the farms, delaying the advance of the enemy
long enough to prevent them from reaching the top of
the Monte d'Oro before the troops at Crocette had been
brought up to its crest. W^hen the crusaders, having at
length stormed the two farms, began to push for the top

222 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

of the hill, they were met by rifle volleys from the wood
above, while a battery of artillery unlimbered and opened
fire on them down the slope.

When the first sounds of the distant battle were heard
in the streets of Castelfidardo, Cialdini mounted and
galloped back along the ridge. He found the Tenth
Line drawn up on the top of the Monte d'Oro. ' Colonel,'
he cried, so that all the ranks could hear him, ' pile knap-
sacks and charge with the bayonet' In another minute
the regiment swept like a wave over the edge of the hill
and flowed headlong down the side, bearing before it
like foam the gilded youth of Royalist salons, mingled in
the rout with the peasants of Bavaria and of Tyrol.

For the next half-hour the plain between the Upper
House and the ford of the Musone swarmed with con-
fused masses of Italians, French, Germans, and Irish,
trampling hither and thither, bayoneting each other in
the frenzy of rage and firing wildly in every direction.
Lamorici^re himself rode into the miUe, now far beyond
the control of a General Officer, only to find his gallant
lieutenant, Pimodan, dying in one of the farm buildings.
Some of the houses, defended to the last by the Papal
Zouaves, were finally set on fire with lighted straw.

Meanwhile, the head of the second column of 3500
men was drawing near the ford. Cialdini's batteries on
the hills above opened upon them, firing over the heads
of the regiments engaged on the north of the river. This
second column, though like Pimodan's it was composed
partly of foreigners and partly of Italians, appears to have
contained a smaller proportion of good troops.* They
were first brought to a stand because their own artillery
became entangled in the lane along which they were all

^ There is clear evidence that not all the Italian Papalists behaved badly,
and not all the German-speaking battalions well. The first battalion native
cacciatori behaved well, and many of the Svriss badly. But on the average the
Italians in the Papal army fought worst, the Germans better but not always
well, and the few Irish and Franco-Belgians best. But the Irish and Franco-
Belgians in the battle were only about 300 each ; the latter lost two-thirds of
their small number. See authorities cited in note p. 224 below.

ROUT OF THE PAPAL CRUSADERS 223

advancing, and when the round shot came crashing in
among them or flying over their heads, when the wounded
and the fugitives from the north bank of the river began to
stream back past them in terrified crowds, a panic seized
the regiments of the rear-guard. Before midday the
Pope's army, half of which had never fired a shot, was
running for dear life to the shelter of the wooded hills,
whence they had so recently emerged. Cialdini let loose
his lancers upon them. Four hundred were captured in
the valley and the rest climbed back to S. Mary of Loreto,
whose magnificent dome had been in sight of the com-
batants during all that disastrous morning.

Lamoricifere, when he saw the army break up under
his eyes, rode off with the staff to find his way into
Ancona, taking the coast track by which he had hoped
to lead 6000 men. He was accompanied for two
miles by a few hundred German-speaking infantry whose
officers had had the presence of mind in the rout to
make for the coast instead of retreating by the way they
had come. This remnant would have reached Ancona,
had not Cialdini seen them from the heights of Crocette
and sent off the Ninth Line at a double, to go round by
the Concio hill and cut them near Umana. As the Germans
were struggling along ankle-deep in the sand beside
the blue Adriatic, the Italians appeared over the rocks
at a few paces distance and began to fire into their
flank, literally driving them into the sea. The in-
fantry had no choice but to surrender. Lamoricifere
and forty-five horsemen alone escaped to Ancona,
and entered its gates between five and six in the even-
ing. The garrison, recognising the General for whom
they had been waiting all day, broke out into shouts
of joy, and the Governor, Quatrebarbes, came down
to welcome him. ' Here I am,' he said, 'but I have lost
the army.' There was no more cheering heard that night
in Ancona.^

' Part of the garrison had marched out earlier in the day to co-operate with
Lamoriciere, but being carefully watched by some of Cialdini's battalions, had
Teturned to Ancona.

224 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Meanwhile, Cialdini had crossed the valley of the
Musone and accepted the surrender of some 3000
crusaders around the shrine of Loreto. Two or three
thousand more flung away their arms and dispersed.
Most of these latter were natives who now attempted
to pass through the country-side, changing their clothes
and resuming their real character of Italian peasants.
But in the course of the next few days the greater
part of them were captured by Cialdini's flying columns.
Except the garrison of Ancona, and a few small bodies
nearer Rome, the crusaders had been wiped off Italian
soil.^

The utter catastrophe of Castelfidardo within a week
after the opening of the campaign acted as a strong
deterrent to Austrian designs of interference. But there
were still grave reasons for the invaders to take Ancona
with the least possible delay. The city was Austria's
traditional port of entry into Central Italy : until the year
before she had held it with her own troops, and even now
it was garrisoned by her veterans, diplomatically dis-
guised as Papal soldiers. Its fall would be felt at Vienna
as a serious blow. It would be easy and it was tempting
for Austria by use of her fleet to preserve the city from
capture, as a preliminary to more active interference.
Such, at least, were the fears entertained at Turin.^
Napoleon's ' Faites vite ' must still be the motto of the
campaign.

The siege was pushed with energy on the land side,
batteries were placed scientifically in position and the

' For this account of the battle, see Castelfidardo (passim) which contains
ofiScial reports of both parties and the clearest Piedmontese official account of
the battle. Other Piedmontese accounts : Cialdini Rap. 6-19. Orero, 38-76,
Prampero, 9-11. Fanti, 344-358. Fanti Campagna, 10-13. Other Papalist
accounts: Lamoriciere, 13-34. Rome MSS. Br. Cons. Book, pp. 189-203 (letters
from Papalist officers). Poli, 1 15-130. Lafond, 338-344. La Gorce, iii. 422-429.
Veuillot {passim) and Castelfidardo (passim), especially 64-75. The widely spread
but untrue rumours of treason on the field on the part of some of the Papal troops
are disposed of by Lamoriciere, 26-27 ; Poli, 117 ; and Sacchi Dam. 6-7.

" Conv. Venosta.

FALL OF ANCONA 225

bombardment began. At the storming of various outer
works both sides showed great courage, and Quatre-
barbes, the Governor of Ancona, was amazed by the zeal
of a small body of Irish under his command.^ But his
most vulnerable side was towards the sea. After a
week's delay, which the event seemed to prove un-
necessary, Persano on September 28 ordered his fleet to
steam in close to the fortifications of the harbour and
blow them to pieces. The order was gallantly executed,
and after a severe duel ending with the explosion of a
powder-magazine in the fortifications of the lighthouse,
the defence of Ancona collapsed. On September 29 the
formal surrender took place of Lamorici^re, Quatre-
barbes, and the whole garrison of four to six thousand
men. The Pope's Generals and soldiers were treated
with scrupulous courtesy by their captors, who knew
that all over the world jealous eyes were watching for
a chance to censure the conduct of the new Italian
State.''

Nothing now stood in the way of the entry of the
North Italian army into the Neapolitan Kingdom. The
Province of Abruzzi, contiguous to Umbria and the
Marches, had already risen and established a Provisional
Government in the name of ' Italy, Victor Emmanuel,
and Garibaldi Dictator.' The leaders of this provincial
rising showed both spirit and sense. Fearing a reac-
tionary movement in the form of anarchy and brigandage,
they petitioned Victor Emmanuel towards the end of
September to cross the Tronto and annex the Neapolitan
Kingdom without more delay. Similar addresses reached

1 He seems to have been much interested by their eccentric conduct, set off
by their valour. He says that when under fire they ' chantaient en choeur les
vieilles ballades de leurs montagnes [sic : nr .es of ballads not given], ou d^fiaient
i. grands cris les Pi^montais,' and that their officers had great difficulty in restrain-
ing them from constantly leaping over the battlements to hurl defiance at the
infidel or to applaud the work of the Papal artillery. Quatrebarbes, ig6.

'Fo««, 363-379. LomoWctw, 51-52. G««»o, 13-27. Quatrebarbes, 1^6-2^^
276. Persano (diary, September 11-30). Orero, 77-103. Corsi's Rimembranze,
29-32. Corsi's Vent. Anni, passim. F. O. Turin, Hudson, No. 394, Oct. 5, 1806.

IS

226 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

him from the inhabitants of Naples. These petitions
aroused Garibaldi's indignation because they contained
sharp criticism of his Dictatorship, and even spoke of
his friends as 'a stupid and incorrigible faction.'* And
besides, he still wished the annexation to be postponed,
because he had not yet ceased to hope that the military
situation on the Volturno would so far change for the
better as to enable him to march on Rome. But he
never for one moment entertained the idea of resisting
the advance of the North Itahan army, even if it were to
come sooner than he wished. His horror of civil war
between the patriotic parties was one of those simple,
fixed ideas that guided his sometimes too impulsive con-
duct throughout the whole course of his life.

Garibaldi's loyalty was soon put to the proof. On
September 23, Tripoti, who commanded the Garibaldian
force at Teramo in Abruzzi, asked for instructions in
case the North Italian vanguard appeared on the frontier.
Bertani sent back word from Naples : ' If the Pied-
montese wish to enter, say to them that before you
permit it you must ask instructions from the Dictator.'
Having dispatched this correct reply, the Secretary went
up to the lines next day to consult Garibaldi, who im-
mediately sent word to Tripoti : ' If the Piedmontese
enter our territory, receive them like brothers.' ''

On September 27, two days before the fall of Ancona,
and four days before the battle of the Volturno, Garibaldi
issued the following proclamation, characteristically in-
accurate, and characteristically loyal and generous : —

' De Cesare, ii. 435-450 ; ditto, F. di P. ccxii-ccxiii. Spaventa, 298-301. La
Cecilia, ii. 12-13.

' Bertani, ii. 266-269. Ire Pol. 87. A disgraceful story was invented by some
of Garibaldi's enemies to the effect that Bertani had wired to Tripoti, ' Receive
the Piedmontese with rifle bullets.' In a modified but still libellous form it was
repeated by Nisco, 139, whence it has unfortunately been transcribed into White-
house's generally excellent summary of these affairs. It is on a par for baseless-
ness with Bertani's own untruths about Cavour, see Garibaldi and the Thousand,
Appendix F, ii. Neither party among the patriots can clear itself of the charge
of calumny and injustice towards the other, and writers on this period would do
well to admit this frankly, whatever their own views may be.

THE BOURBONS' LAST CHANCE 227

' Our brothers of the Italian army commanded by the brave
General Cialdini are fighting the enemies of Italy and conquer-
ing. The army of Lamoricifere has been defeated by these
brave men. All ^ the provinces subject to the Pope are free.
Ancona is ours.^ Our brave soldiers of the Northern army
have passed the frontier and are on Neapolitan territory."
We shall soon have the good fortune to press these victorious
hands.' *

But the North Italian army had still to traverse some
200 miles of road before it could reach Capua. Nearly
another month was to pass before they arrived on the
scene, and during that month Francis II had still the
time, if he had the strength, to cut his way back to Naples
over the ruins of Garibaldi's army. If he had succeeded,
the moral effect of such a reversal on the public mind in
Italy, Austria, and France would have rendered it impos-
sible for Victor Emmanuel to turn him out once more,
and European interference would have supervened in
one form or another on behalf of a King who had won
his way back to the allegiance of his subjects. The fate
of Italy still hung on the issue of Garibaldi's defence of
his lines before Capua.

1 But the Patrimony of S. Peter was not freed till 1870.
' Premature by two days. ' Premature.

*Cidmpoli,iS5. F. O. Sicily, Elliot, No. $36, September xi, i860. Timn,
October 4, p. 7, c. 4, correepondent'i letter of September 29.

15*

CHAPTER XII

THE EVE OF THE VOLTURNO

'. . . Tifata, onde, aquila in agguato
spia presso e lungi tutto il fiume e il piano
di vastissiraa pugna incendiato.'

Marradi. Rapsodia Garibaldina.

' , . . Tifata's summit, whence, an eagle in ambush, he watches near and far
all the river and the plain far around ablaze with the fires of war.'

The military position on the Volturno was in itself an
additional inducement to Garibaldi to acquiesce in the
coming of Victor Emmanuel. By the middle of September
his observations from the summit of Monte Tifata ^ had
shown him not only the uselessness for the time being
of any attempt on his part to attack Capua, but the grave
danger in which his own army would stand if General
Ritucci ventured on a counter-attack. In order to dis-
tract the enemy's attention from any such design, he sent
a few hundred men under the Hungarian Csufady to the
north bank of the Volturno, with a roving commission to
join hands with Liberal insurgents anywhere between
Cajazzo and Rome. Some bands around Alife and
Piedimonte had been in arms for three weeks past.^
With their help Csufady was to threaten the line of
Ritucci's communications behind Capua, and so prevent
him from making a forward move. But Garibaldi had no
intention of attempting to hold Cajazzo or any other post
north of the river, still less of attacking the walls of
Capua.^

^ See pp. 20I-202 above. And see illustration, p. 241 below.
^ For this chapter see Map HI, at end of book.

' Du Camp, 263, 290. /. Mille, 278. Leg. Matese, 47-50, 85-89 and passim.
Castellini, jj-jS. TMj-ieZio, 223-224. 2 M»';''s Dii;. 182-184, 435-439. Benevento

228

THE AFFAIR OF SEPTEMBER 19 229

Such was the state of afifairs when he was called away
on September 16 to pay a political visit to Palermo.
The pressing demand of the Sicilians, headed by his
own pro-Dictator, Depretis, for immediate annexation
to Piedmont, required his presence. TUrr, whom he left
in command on the Volturno, ought not to have taken
any important new step in his absence, but Turr's fault
as a soldier was rashness, as he had shown the year
before at Treponti.i Finding himself in command for
three days, he formed the ambitious scheme ot occupying
and holding Cajazzo, a hill-town north of the Volturno —
a far more serious undertaking than the irresponsible
gyrations of Csufady's flying column. In order to dis-
tract Ritucci's attention from Cajazzo, Turr made a re-
connaissance in force against Capua on September 19,
the day after the battle of Castelfidardo.

The reconnaissance procured, indeed, the unopposed
occupation of Cajazzo, but was itself ill-conducted and
disastrous. At dawn Riistow's Milanese drove the
enemy's advance-guard into Capua, but then, instead of
retiring from before the walls, remained for two hours
round the railway station and on the open parade ground
exposed to the fire of the cannon on the bastions. They
retreated after severe losses, and the Bourbon troops
sallied out after them from the gate, led on by old General
Rossaroll who, though on the retired list, rode to the
sound of the firing and headed the advance in gallant
style, until he was carried off wounded. Riistow's men
made a stand at the cemetery and Cappuccini Convent
and drove the Royalists back to Capua. But the events
of September 19 had at least all the appearance of a re-
pulse for the Garibaldini, who had fired at the walls as
if they intended to take Capua by a coup-de-mam. In-
deed, some of the officers who served that day under
Riistow still believe that he was inspired by a secret

had thrown off the Papal yoke (it was an enclave of the Pope's territory) before
Garibaldi entered Naples.

' See Garibaldi and the Thousand, p. 105.

230 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

hope that the gates would be opened to him by treachery,
though he never confessed as much.^ The day cost the
Garibaldini 130 in killed and wounded.^

Meanwhile, the Dictator had settled affairs in Sicily.
The love the people bore to him overcame their strong
desire for annexation and their indifference to his pro-
jects on Rome. He had another magnificent popular re-
ception in Palermo on September 17. He replaced the
pro-Dictator Depretis by Mordini who had hitherto been
more opposed to Cavour. But Mordini was a man cap-
able of learning by experience, and although Crispi
tried to poison his mind with false rumours of treachery
on the part of Cavour,' the new ruler of Sicily had by
the middle of October discovered the absolute necessity
for the immediate annexation of the island to Piedmont.''

Garibaldi returned to the banks of the Volturno on
the afternoon of September 19, too late for the fighting
under the walls of Capua, but in time to join Turr in a
duel, which he was carrying on with the enemy's forces
on the other side of the river, across the ferry of Formi-
cola. There is no reliable evidence as to what he said
to Turr that day, but he afterwards wrote in severe con-
demnation of his lieutenant for the attack on the walls
of Capua and for the occupation of Cajazzo.'

The events of September 19, especially the sally of
the Bourbon troops under old General Rossaroll, gave
self-confidence to those forces, and suggested to them the

^Conv. Pedotti. Tiicr's Dj'o. 438-449. Rustow's Bri^. Mil. 3yi$. Arriva-
bene, ii. 236-241. Forbes, 271-272. Cava, 54, Palmieri, 98. De Sivo, iv. 165.
Gazzetta di Gaeta, No. 5, p. 17. Franci, ii. 11-20, 212-213. Times, September
27, p. 4, cols. 5-6. Tiirr, Ai A'liei Comp. 3.

'Sckwabe MS. 3.

' On September 28 Crispi wrote to Mordini (Rosi, 212) : ' The cession of the
islands of Sardinia and Elba is agreed on in favour of France. Sicily is said to
be promised to a Prince of the House of Bourbon. Victor Emmanuel will have
the mainland. As we cannot unseat Cavour we must organise our party to re-
sist these acts of violence.' There was not a word of truth in these stories.

* Crispi, 1911, 292-304. Rosi, 199-248. Nisco, 136. Nievo, 373, 376-377.
Irt Pol. 89-91. V.M. 17. Bandi, 291-292. Amari, ii. 133-135; iii. 209, 212.

' Bandi, 293-294. Turr's Div. 198-199. Turr, Ai Miei Comp. 3. Mem.
385. / MUU, 278.

CAJAZZO RETAKEN 231

idea that they might successfully take the offensive on a
great scale. That evening the Minister of War at Gaeta
sent Ritucci the King's orders, ' to march forv^^ard, seeking
to find and destroy the enemy and at the same time ad-
vance on the Capital' > Ritucci thereupon set before the
King a plan for an advance on the Capital by the country
roads to the west of S. Tammaro, which passing through
Arnone and Vico, Foresta and Casal di Principe, unite at
Naples on the side of Capodimonte. Garibaldi in his
memoirs declares that the enemy would in this way have
succeeded in reaching Naples if his own force had mean-
while been held in check by false attacks. But the plan
was rejected as too dangerous by its author Ritucci, who
opposed as still more rash the frontal attack on Santa
Maria and Sant' Angelo, recommended by the Royal
counsellors at Gaeta.^

All that Ritucci would as yet consent to do was to
recover Cajazzo. The Dictator made his one military
mistake of this year in not withdrawing from Cajazzo the
300 Bolognese under Cattabeni whom Tiirr had without
his consent placed in that isolated position across the
river. Matters were only made worse by the dispatch
of another 600 men under Vacchieri ; there were now
900 men collected in the hill-town to hold it against any
force that might come along the high-road from Capua.
On September 21 the best regiments in Ritucci's army —
the native cacdatort with a battery of guns, and a reserve
of three fine Swiss and German regiments — some 7000
in all, came to retake Cajazzo. After a gallant defence

' If this letter had been written on September 17 as Tiirr's friend Pecorini-
Manzoni erroneously states (Una Pagina, 6), it would go far to support his
suggestion that the Royalists intended to attack prior to the events of September
19, and that this attacl<, which would have been so dangerous to the unprepared
Garibaldians at that time, was postponed owing to Tiirr's occupation of Cajazzo
and his reconnaissance against Capua on September ig. But the real date of
the letter is September 19, and it was written in consequence of the encourage-
ment given to the Royalists by their success on the morning of that day.
Pranci, ii. 20, 213-214. The correction of date turns the whole argument
against Tlirr.

• Franci, ii. 20, 214-217. Mem. 393.

232 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

of several hours conducted by Cattabeni, who fell into
the enemy's hands severely wounded, the town was
stormed, sacked, and burnt by the Bourbon troops. The
victors confessed to a loss of over a hundred. About 250
of the Garibaldini were killed, wounded, or captured, and
the Swiss, who took no part in the sack, observed with
compassion that many of the wounded were mere boys.
Two-thirds of the defenders under Vacchieri escaped
with difficulty by fording the flooded ferry of Limatola.'

After the storming of Cajazzo, the Bourbon troops
were prepared for any adventure ; the spell that had so
long bound them was wellnigh broken, for they had
proved that they could defeat the red devils, at least
where the magician himself was not present. The King's
counsellors in Gaeta, who had learnt the disastrous news
of Castelfidardo, perceived that unless they could at once
cut their way back to Naples their position on the Vol-
turno, however impregnable in front, would be taken in
rear by the victorious armies of Piedmont. They there-
fore overruled Ritucci's objections, and compelled him
against his will to lead his eager troops to the general
attack on the enemy's lines. It was the one chance left
for the house of Bourbon on this earth, and if the attack
had been made within two or three days after the victory
of Cajazzo, before Garibaldi had erected his batteries at
Santa Maria and Sant' Angelo, and if Ritucci's whole
striking force had been directed in one solid mass against
those two villages, it is difficult to see how it could have
failed to succeed.

But again there was the delay of a week, and again
there was the division of forces. For both these errors
the counsellors at Gaeta were responsible. For although
they had done well in compelling Ritucci to fight, they
spoilt all by dictating to him a plan of battle of which he
rightly disapproved. They were unnecessarily alarmed

' Schweisertruppen, 537-539. CastelUni, 66-78. Campo, 146-149. Catta-
beni, 18-42. Leg. Matese, 82-104. Gazzetta di Gaeta, No. 4, p. 15 ; No. 5, p.
17. Forbes, 275-277. Times, October 2, p. 7.

BOURBON DELAY AND FALSE STRATEGY 233

for the safety of the rear and flank of Ritucci's position,
conceiving it to be threatened by the really negligible
activities of Csufady and the Liberal bands round Piedi-
monte and Roccaromana. The council at Gaeta therefore
compelled the commander-in-chief to send great forces
under Von Mechel to restore order in that district, and
thence to push them on to Amorosi and Ducenta. This
not only caused a week's delay but drew the Royalists
on to adopt the false strategy of attacking Garibaldi on
two sides — not only from Capua by way of Santa Maria
and Sant' Angelo, but also from Ducenta by way of
Maddaloni. It appears that after the storming of Cajazzo,
some of the advisers at Gaeta felt so completely confident
of victory and of a submissive reception in Naples, that
they were planning rather to make victory complete
than- to make it secure.' Misled by the golden hope of
surrounding the enemy's head-quarters at Caserta from
east and west at once, they took the unnecessary risk
of operating on an outer semicircle, of which the two
ends were not in effective communication. They thus
gave to Garibaldi with his smaller force the advantage of
acting on the inner ring ; or rather along the straight
diameter, while their communications ran round the cir-
cumference of the semicircle.^ This advantage he used
to the utmost on the day of battle, with the help of the
railway-line running from Maddaloni through Caserta to
Santa Maria.

The effect of this plan was to divide the Bourbon
army into two separate forces, one under Ritucci at
Capua, and the other under Von Mechel operating round
Ducenta. Von Mechel, the brave Swiss whose stupidity
in May had been one of the chief causes of Garibaldi's
capture of Palermo,^ was nominally under the orders of

^ See Antonio UUoa's letter of September 27, in Franci, ii. 236-239.

^ The Bourbon communications ran round from Capua through Cajazzo,
Amorosi, and Ducenta to their point of attack at the Arches of the Valley near
Maddaloni : Garibaldi's communications ran straight from Maddaloni through
Caserta to Santa Maria and Sant' Angelo. See Map III below.

' Garibaldi and the Thousand, pp. 281-282.

234 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Ritucci, but he chose to act as if he had an independent
command and left the commander-in-chief without news
of him for days together. On the 28th Ritucci in despair
rode out from Capua as far as Cajazzo in search of the
missing Von Mechel, and finally discovered that he had
on the 26th advanced southwards from Amorosi through
Ducenta as far as the cross-roads at Cantinella, and
thence had sent out cavalry who located Bixio's force
covering Maddaloni near the Arches of the Valley. Von
Mechel had thereupon retired again as far as Amorosi
on September 27. If he had on that day made a deter-
mined assault on Maddaloni while Ritucci in concert
sallied out in force from Capua against Santa Maria, they
would have had a good chance of meeting at Caserta that
evening. But owing to their entire want of communica-
tion, the great effort was postponed until the first of Oc-
tober. ' This delay,' wrote Ritucci to Von Mechel, when
at last he was able to renew correspondence with his
lieutenant, 'may well be fatal to our cause.''

Ritucci was sulky but prepared to carry out with
vigour the orders which he disliked.^ His men were
elated at the prospect of battle, and confident that they

'The foregoing paragraphs are based on the dispatches printed in Franci,
ii. 220-248, which must be studied by every serious student of the campaign.
See also Ruiz, 18-19. Tiirr's Div. 230-232. Palmieri, 100- loi. Marra Oss. 58.
Ponti della Valle, 7-8. The absurd excuse for defeat set up by some Bourbon
writers after October i, vii. that the attack of that day was only 'a reconnais-
sance ' is disproved by these dispatches before the date, «.»•. Franci, ii. 228, 248.

Garibaldi in his Memoric (387) writes " our line ol battle was defective, because
too far extended, from Maddjloni to Santa Maria ", But if he had not occupied
both Maddaloni and Santa Maria he must have been taken in rear from one
direction or the other: and if he had not held Sant' Angelo and M. Tifata,
he could not have held Santa Maria, which stands on the plain commanded by the
Tifata range. No one of his critics has ever yet pointed out which of his positions
was superfluous, in view of the double attack from Capua and from Amorosi-
Ducenta.

''Ritucci to the Minister of War, Capua, September 2g : ' Then the attack
will take place the day after to-morrow (October i) at dawn. I free myself from
all responsibility as to the wisdom of this action, because it is not due to my con-
viction but to the King's command and disposition; nor am I responsible for what
disappomtments may occur owing to Von Mechel not acting in unison with me,
since he has been detached from my base of operation with a strong column on
his own account.' Franci, ii. 248.

GARIBALDI FORTIFIES HIS LINES 235

would sleep in Caserta the first night and in Naples the
next. Their prospects were indeed bright, but they
would have been still brighter if the attack had not been
deferred till the beginning of October. On September
27 Garibaldi had only half a dozen field-guns and no
entrenched batteries in his lines against Capua, but in
the last three days of the month he and his men laboured
day and night at planting cannon that arrived from
Naples, and throwing up defences in their front. In
this they received skilled assistance from Dowling, a
British ex-sergeant of artillery, who had seen service
before Sebastopol,^ two ex-captains of Bourbon artillery,^
and twenty gunners of the Piedmontese regular army,
sent up from Naples on the night of the 29th, at the re-
quest of Garibaldi to Villamarina, and followed on the
next day by forty more of their number."

One of the new batteries was on the road between
Sant' Angelo and Capua; another was in the middle of
the scattered village of Sant' Angelo itself; a third, in-
tended to fire at the enemy's batteries across the river,
was erected on the top of the precipitous ridge of
San Jorio, whither the guns were dragged with great
labour and considerable engineering skill. Finally a
battery was placed at the entrance of Santa Maria, under
the ancient Roman archway which spans the road lead-
ing from old to new Capua. There were other mobile
trains of artillery on the road between Sant' Angelo and
Santa Maria.*

^Forbes, 292. Conv. Brown Young. Conv. Dolmage. A.Y.R. 105-106.

^ Matarazzi, 41. 'Mem. Star. Mil. i. 52-53, doc. v.

* Captain Deane, R.N. , who served on board H.M .S. Agamemnon in i860, tells
me that he and some middies on leave from that ship went too near the Bourbon
lines at Capua, were fired at, and ran for shelter to the nearest of the Garibaldian
eaith-works. They were pulled up the mound of the battery by a rope flung
over by friendly hands. When they were safely landed inside the battery a
moment of embarrassment followed, for the faces of the Garibaldian gunners
who had just helped them up were exceedingly familiar and indeed curiously
similar to those of some seamen who had recently been missing from H.M.S,
Agamemnon. It was a case for the old proverb, ' The least said the soonest
mended.' Captain Deane tells me that the enthusiasm for Garibaldi was perfectly

236 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

For the last time in his life Garibaldi had all his
ablest lieutenants with him : Avezzana, the former
War Minister of the Roman Republic, arrived just in time
to help his old friend to set his batteries round Sant'
Angelo ; Cosenz was doing his best to make bricks
without straw as War Minister in Naples ; Sirtori was
at the front as Chief of the Staff; Bixio was defend-
ing Maddaloni against Von Mechel ; Medici held Sant'
Angelo and M. Tifata ; Milbitz held Santa Maria. Tiirr
was stationed with the reserves at Caserta, ready to bring
them up by rail, either to Maddaloni or to Santa Maria
as need should require at the crisis of the battle. By
this last simple device Garibaldi obtained the full advan-
tage of being on the inside of the circle — of acting on the
diameter while the enemy moved round by the circum-
ference.

In spite of these preparations, which greatly streng-
thened his position in the last three days of September,
his army was still in evil case. ' Twenty thousand men,
the greater part of them ill-armed and worse drilled,'
many scarcely knowing how to use their rifles, had to
stand the shock of twenty-eight or thirty thousand regular
troops, coming on in the full confidence of victory.' Ex-
hausted with starvation, exposure, and overwork, many
of the best men were physically prostrated, while the
cowards were slinking back to Naples or preparing to
fly at the first onset. There was none of that certain
assurance of victory which had carried them through
Sicily and Calabria. In the coming battle Garibaldi had
to depend upon his own military genius, which was
seldom seen to better advantage than on that desperate
day, and on the resolve to die at their posts which his
presence inspired into the few thousand men who were
really doing the work of the whole army. The spirit in

universal in all ranks from Admiral Mundy downwards. (The desertions from
Agamemnon are mentioned by Elliot, 133, 145.) On the making of the batteries
see Afa<ora««, 41-43. Cam/o, 153-155. Afcm. 387. y.d«j jD. October 7, i860.
' Quertoni, ii. 187. For the numbers of the two armies, see Appendix J,
below.

EVE OF THE BATTLE 237

the Garibaldian lines on the eve of the Volturno is illus-
trated by a story told by the English preacher Haweis,
who a fortnight later met a young Milanese noble at the
siege of Capua : —

' He was poorly equipped and almost in rags ; he had
nothing but a sword and pistol. " What induced you," I said,
" to give up ease and luxury for this life of a dog, in a camp
without commissariat, pay, or rations." "You may well ask,"
he said. " I tell you a fortnight ago I was in despair myself,
and thought of giving up the whole thing. I was sitting on a
hillock, as might be here. Garibaldi came by. He stopped,
1 don't know why. I had never spoken to him. I am sure
he did not know me, but he stopped. Perhaps I looked very
dejected, and indeed I was. Well, he laid his hand on my
shoulder and simply said, with that low, strange, smothered
voice that seemed almost like a spirit speaking inside me,
' Courage ; courage ! We are going to fight for our country!
Do you think I could ever turn back after that ? The next
day we fought the battle of the Volturno." ' ^

' Haueis.

CHAPTER XIII

THE BATTLE OF THE VOLTURNO, OCTOBER 1-2

' Pure as the Archangel's cleaving Darkness thro',
The sword he sees, the keen unwearied sword,
A single blade against a circling horde,
And aye for Freedom and the trampled few.

' The cry of Liberty from dungeon cell
From exile, was his God's command to smite.
As for a swim in sea he joined the fight
With radiant face, full sure that he did well,

' Behold a warrior dealing mortal strokes,
Whose nature was a child's : amid his foes
A wary trickster : at the battle's close.
No gentler friend this leopard dashed with fox.

' Down the long roll of History will run
The story of these deeds, and speed his race
Beneath defeat more hotly to embrace
The noble cause and trust to another sun.'

GtORGE Meredith. The Centenary of Oaribaldi.

On the last day of September, by way of prelude to their
coming attack, the Royalists kept up a heavy cannonade,
and their infantry skirmished along the line of outposts
in front of Capua ; the hottest firing was at the ferries
below San Jorio ridge on which the Garibaldian batteries
had been mounted only the da}^ before. After sunset
all again fell silent. A mile to the south of the ferries,
on the lowest slopes of Monte Tifata, stands the village
of Sant' Angelo;^ its church, built a dozen centuries
ago out of the ruins of Roman villas and temples, was
the centre of Medici's position, filled that night with
sleeping soldiers and on the morrow with the wounded
and the dead. On the embanked terrace in front of the

' It is important to use Map III, section B, for this chapter.
238

c E S

THE SIGNAL AT NIGHT 239

church stood Garibaldi, with his back to the darkened
mountain, and his eyes fixed on the distant lights of
Capua. Suddenly, far away in the middle of the enemy's
lines, a tongue of flame leapt up and flared on the night
sky. He watched it for some time in silence, and then
turned round with a laugh. 'Sirs,' he said, 'we must
not sleep too heavily to-night.' Next moment he was
on his horse, riding back to Caserta to arrange the last
details with Bixio and with TUrr. ' He laughed — the
old lion,' said one of the group left upon the terrace ;
'that flame must be the signal for their attack."

After midnight a heavy fog crept over the Capuan
plain, and wrapped itself round the Bourbon regiments
as they issued one by one from the gate of the fortress.
In the Volturno region all the ground that does not rise
to a certain level above the sea is composed of dark,
volcanic tufa, soft and easy to cut. All above that level
is hard, white limestone rock. The village of Sant'
Angelo, on the lower slopes of the mountain, stands on
the junction of the two strata, and is built half of tufa
and half of limestone; while Santa Maria and all the
villages of the plain are built, like Naples itself, of the
black, spungy tufa of which the soil is composed, archi-
tecturally a sordid stone of discouraging and criminal
appearance. The highly cultivated plain between Capua
and Monte Tifata is traversed by the peasants and their
flocks by means of a network of lanes, sunk ten feet
deep in the soft tufa, and therefore invisible at more
than a few yards' distance. The road that leads from
Santa Maria to Sant' Angelo crosses by bridges over
four or five of these hidden lanes, up some of which
Bourbon columns penetrated before dawn on October i,
and thus obtained unobserved a footing inside Garibaldi's
line at its weakest point, the almost undefended space
between Sant' Angelo and Santa Maria.

Further to the south the fog served to hide the ap-
proach of other columns under Tabacchi, who surprised
and routed the defenders of the cemetery and of San

240 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Tammaro. Many of these first runaways fled by the
high-road to Naples, and arrived there before noon,
spreading panic like the first-comers from Waterloo in
the Belgian capital. D'Ayala, who commanded the
National Guard, called out the whole force and patrolled
Naples and the neighbouring villages to prevent a
reactionary movement. Knowing the impressionable
character of the Neapolitans, D'Ayala sent out premature
and exaggerated reports of victory to counteract the
tales of the runaways.^

Meanwhile, Tabacchi's men seized the railway em-
bankment and a large group of buildings called Sant'
Agostino, whence they enfiladed the trenches in front
of Santa Maria with cannon and rifle fire. Fortunately,
since Garibaldi had come out by an early train from
Caserta and was already at Milbitz' side, Santa Maria
itself was vigorously defended. Under the Roman arch-
way at its entrance two cannon, destined to be worked
that day by many successive relays of professional and
volunteer gunners, began their ten hours' duel with the
enemy's batteries and riflemen posted at Sant' Agostino.
The Sicilians held the amphitheatre of ancient Capua,
a fine defensive position in the plain just outside the
town ; while fifty Frenchmen, who still named their
company after their slain leader, De Flotte,^ held an
isolated farm in front of the amphitheatre with splendid
courage all day long. At Garibaldi's order Tiirr began
thriftily to feed Milbitz with portions of his reserve,
which he sent up from Caserta by rail and road. As-
santi's regiment was the first to arrive ; some of them
deployed in the open to the north of the amphitheatre,
while others restored the fight on the railway.^

Seeing that Santa Maria could hold out for awhile,
and hearing the noise of battle in the north, the Dictator,
with Canzio, Missori, and his staff, mounted into two
carriages and drove off towards Sant' Angelo. As the

^D'Ayala, 351-356. 'See p. 132 above.

' For authorities for above, see Appendix L, i and 5, below.

s as

GARIBALDI'S CARRIAGE AMBUSHED 241

mist rolled away they saw the road clear before them,
and never suspected that the enemy had already crossed
it by the sunk lanes and was lying in wait under the
Ciccarelli bridge. At Garibaldi's side sat a young officer
of the Piedmontese regular artillery going to serve his
guns at Sant' Angelo. He was Emilio Savio, one of a
noble pair of brothers who with their mother, the poetess,
were soon to be made famous by Mrs. Browning in every
household of Europe and America where English poetry
was read. Emilio as he sat by Garibaldi's side did not
yet know that, three days before, his brother Alfredo
had been 'shot by the sea in the east' in the trenches
beneath Ancona ; any more than that he himself was in
a few weeks' time, beneath the walls of Gaeta, to be
'shot in the west by the sea.'^

As the carriages drew near the Ciccarelli bridge, the
Bourbon infantry in the lane beneath came scrambling
up as if out of the bowels of the earth, and emptied their
rifles at the Dictator twenty yards away. The horses
dashed forward through the midst of them, and as they
ran the gauntlet the coachman and Cereseto of the staff
fell mortally wounded. A few yards on the further
side of the bridge one of the horses rolled over and the
carriage was brought to a stand. Garibaldi stepped out
into the road and drew his sword. A small group of
Medici's infantry from Sant' Angelo, who were fortunately
not far off, came running up, and led by the Dictator,
they charged and repulsed the enemy.^

After this incident, which had so nearly secured the
restoration of the Bourbon dynasty to Naples, Garibaldi
made his way on foot to Sant' Angelo, and spent the
whole of the morning and the early part of the afternoon
in heading charge after charge on the slopes of Monte
Tifata and in the streets of the village. The enemy, in
greatly superior force, had stormed the advanced battery
on the road to Capua, where Dunne fell wounded at the

' Mrs. Browning's poems, Mother and Poet.

'Appendix L, 2, below; and Appendix J, ii. (c), for Piedmontese artillery.

16

242 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

head of his Sicilians, and had poured into the lower part
of Sant' Angelo. At the top of the village Garibaldi's
cannon were planted on the terrace in front of the
church, and here the struggle raged hottest. Other
Bourbon troops crossed from the north bank of the Vol-
turno by the ferries and began to ascend Monte Tifata
through the forest of S. Vito.

Garibaldi was here, there, and everywhere, now on
horseback, now on foot, now at the church, now on the
summit of Monte Tifata, whither he led the Genoese
Carabineers of the Thousand. His criticism of the
Bourbon method of attack was that though they advanced
bravely, they advanced firing instead of charging with
the cold steel. The chief feature of his own method of
defence was a series of bayonet charges, each of which
drove back the Royalists and relieved the pressure for
awhile. Wherever one of these rushes was being made
in defence of Medici's position, whether on the rocky
mountain-side or on the plain below, there was Gari-
baldi organising and leading the charge. His presence
put courage into the most faint-hearted of Medici's 4000
men and made heroes of the bravest. Soon after noon-
day he began to cry ' victory ' wherever he went, and to
send off messages to all parts of the field reporting
'victory all along the line.' The phrase kept up the
spirits of his outnumbered force, though the veterans
muttered under their breath, ' victory ! What vic-
tory 7'^

In the attack on Sant' Angelo the Bourbon General,
Afan de Rivera, who was in command, incurred censure
for not appearing near the front.^ But in the attack on
Santa Maria General Tabacchi did his duty, and the
commander-in-chief, Ritucci, exposed himself all day in
a manner more suitable to the part of a divisional com-
mander. The knowledge that King Francis was in the
field, with his brothers, the Counts Trani and Caserta,

1 Appendix L, 3 and 6 below. = Franci, ii. 256.

COURSE OF THE BATTLE 243

and his uncle of Trapani, greatly encouraged the assail-
ants. Both sides, an observer noted, fought in silence,
with the intensity of an Italian vendetta. The Bourbon
cavalry made several charges on the plain to the north
of the amphitheatre, and the infantry penetrated as far
as San Prisco. Their guard regiments alone lost 400
killed and wounded, but the grenadiers of the guard
sulked and refused to advance a second time against
Santa Maria at a moment regarded by Ritucci as the crisis
of the battle. 1

The attack directed from Capua on Santa Maria and
Sant' Angelo was not the only part of the Bourbon
operations on October i. It has already been explained ^
how Von Mechel with 8000 men, acting from the base
of Amorosi, had orders to capture Maddaloni and thence
advance on Caserta, where it was hoped that they would
in the afternoon join hands with the victors of Santa
Maria coming from the opposite direction. This wide
division of the Royalist forces was a mistake in strategy
dictated to Ritucci by the Council at Gaeta. Von Mechel
now proceeded to make on his own account a further
mistake of the same character in the manipulation of his
8000 men. Instead of attacking Bixio's position before
Maddaloni with his whole force, he led only the 3000
German-speaking troops down the valley road from
Ducenta, and detached the 5000 native troops under Ruiz
to make a long circle through the mountains by Lima-
tola, Castel Morrone, and Old Caserta. Von Mechel
declares that he intended Ruiz and his 5000 to come over
the top of Monte Caro and fall from above on to the left
flank of Bixio's position near the Villa Gualtieri, at the
moment when his own frontal attack was engaging the
full attention of the Garibaldini at the Arches of the
Valley. But it was an error to employ 5000 men for a
flank attack which required speed and„mobility rather

' See the Bourbon authorities (starred) in Appendix L, 5, below.
' See p. 233 above.

16 *

244 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

than numbers, and to keep only 3000 for the main opera-
tion. Perhaps his Swiss pride inspired him to send
away all the Neapolitans and to fight a pan-German
battle in the valley. Whether from pride or sheer
stupidity, he pushed on his own attack with such haste
that Ruiz would barely have had time to make his way
round over the rocky and trackless mountains, even if he
had met with no resistance from bands of Garibaldini at
Castel Morrone or elsewhere.

But Von Mechel's worst mistake was that he never
gave Ruiz clear orders to cross Monte Caro and ap-
pear on the scene of conflict. He merely instructed
him to occupy Old Caserta and there to await develop-
ments. 'You must keep up communications,' so Von
Mechel wrote, 'between the column attacking Sant'
Angelo and my column attacking the Arches of the
Valley.'^ This cannot be read as constituting an order
to assist in the battle of the Arches of the Valley, and
yet Von Mechel conducted his whole operations there on
October i on the assumption that Ruiz would hasten to
his assistance, and after the event blamed him for ' ad-
hering too literally to his instructions,' instead of march-
ing to the sound of the guns.^ It may be pleaded in
favour of Ruiz that he heard guns firing on both sides of
him, at Sant' Angelo and at the Arches of the Valley,
and that the instructions given him by Von Mechel
were to 'keep up communications' between these two
battles eight miles apart. No doubt a Clive or a Blucher
would have marched off to decide one or other of the
two battles, or else would have seized the opportunity to
attack the enemy's head-quarters at New Caserta, but
Ruiz was an ordinary Neapolitan officer and was content
to carry out his actual instructions a few hours behind
time.

Von Mechel, therefore, at six in the morning of
October i, with only 3000 infantry and six mountain

'!?«»«. 46. ^Franci,u. 261-269 (Von Mechel's report).

BIXIO'S DEFENCE OF MADDALONI 345

guns, attempted to dislodge Bixio from a strong position
which he held with an equal number of guns and 5600
volunteers. This was the only part of the battle of the
Volturno in which the Royalists were inferior, not in
quality, but in numbers. The first of Von Mechel's three
battalions of foreign troops was composed of Austrians
and Bavarians, brave but ill-disciplined, and inclined to
be mutinous on questions of food and forced marches.
The second battalion consisted chiefly, and the third
entirely, of Swiss, many of whom had been in the Bour-
bon service for years in the old privileged Swiss regiments
disbanded in 1859.^ They had been accustomed, when
in garrison at Maddaloni, to field days in these mountains,
and knew every yard of the ground near the aqueduct.
Better troops could not have been found in all Europe
for the purpose Von Mechel had in hand.^

Bixio had chosen to defend Maddaloni at the point
where the valley connecting it with Ducenta narrows to
a gorge, spanned by 'the Arches of the Valley' — Van-
vitelli's colossal aqueduct that carries the water to Caserta
Palace. Along the top of the water-pipe runs a narrow
viaduct, some 200 feet above the valley bottom, and by
this aerial footpath Bixio was able to establish rapid
communication between his left wing on the slopes of
Monte Caro and his right wing on the slopes of Monte
Longano. His reserve was behind the left wing, on
Monte San Michele and at Villa Gualtieri.

The Swiss veterans of the third battahon, dragging
up with them a mountain battery, ascended the wooded
slopes of Monte Longano and stormed the Mills at the
eastern end of the aqueduct, driving in flight Bixio's
right wing, the ' brigade ' Eberhardt. Von Mechel's son
was killed at the head of the mountaineers of Uri and

1 Garibaldi and the Thousand, pp. I37-I38'

' Bixio was under the mistaken impression that he was attacked not only
by the foreign troops but by two regiments of Neapolitan line also. This is
clearly proved to be an error by the Bourbon authorities quoted below in
Appendix L, 4. Bixio's officer, Sclavo, of the Thousand, said to me, ' there
were no Italians against us ' at the Arches of the Valley.

246 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Unterwald. The attack at the bottom of the valley,
directed against the base of the great arches, was suc-
cessful in consequence of the victory on the hill-side
above. Several Garibaldian officers at the aqueduct,
apparently of Eberhardt's Genoese 'brigade,' led the
flight to Maddaloni. A few days later, at Bixio's request,
they were degraded in sight of the whole army, at a
review held in front of Caserta Palace, with the advice
from Garibaldi's own lips to beg for muskets and get
themselves killed in the next action.

But the left wing under Dezza and Menotti Garibaldi,
and the reserves under Fabrizi behaved so well that
even Bixio praised their conduct, especially that of the
Sicilians.^ Bixio, after his right wing had disappeared,
still held the western mountain wall of the valley, the
lower slopes of Monte Caro and the pass crowned by
the Villa Gualtieri, over which Von Mechel now at-
tempted to cut his way to Caserta in the plain beyond.
The Austrians and Bavarians tried to ascend Monte
Caro through the wood from the north, while the victori-
ous Swiss began to climb out of the valley-bottom up the
precipitous slopes to Villa Gualtieri, and to pour across
from Monte Longano along the top of the Arches of the
Valley. But the artillery got encumbered in endeavour-
ing to cross the narrow viaduct, and as the infantry
struggled up-hill through the sparse vineyards and the
limestone rocks, they were met by vigorous bayonet
charges and hurled back again into the valley-bottom.

Now was the time that Ruiz should have appeared
over the top of Monte Caro, but he was not in sight, and
the messengers sent to find him had failed in their mis-
sion. At midday, therefore, after six hours' fighting.
Von Mechel gave orders to retreat to Ducenta. He

' This praise is the more to be believed, because Bixio had been especially
contemptuous of the conduct of the squadre in Sicily. On September ig some
of the Sicilians (the Cacciatori d'Etna) had behaved badly. But on October i
the Sicilians behaved vi^ell, not only here under Bixio, but also at Sant' Angelo
under Dunne, and at Santa Maria under the Sicilian officers, Corrao and La
Porta. See Turr's and Avezzana's reports, Meng;hini, pp. 357, 373-374.

DEFENCE OF CASTEL MORRONE 247

acknowledged a loss of ninety men and one gun captured,
and over 100 men killed and wounded. Bixio lost no
prisoners, but acknowledged a loss of over 200 killed
and wounded.^

Meanwhile, Ruiz and his 5000 were wandering about
useless between the two battles, either of which could
have been decided by their presence. Their only orders
were to occupy Old Caserta. Arriving at Limatola at
dawn, they drove out a few hundred Garibaldian irregu-
lars,^ and followed the road southwards through the
hills on to the cultivated tufa plain that lies in the lap
of this group of mountains. On the plain stand half a
dozen villages around the foot of a conical mountain
crowned by the feudal ruin of Castel Morrone. In the
castle were stationed Pilade Bronzetti and 280 men of
Cosenz' brigade, and Ruiz turned aside to storm their
position. Bronzetti had expected the villages of Sant'
Andrea and I'Annunziata in the plain to be defended for
awhile by the bands who had retired thither from Lima-
tola, and by 1 50 of Sacchi's men who had come over from
San Leucio. But these all decamped without waiting
for the enemy, refusing even to retire up the hill so as
to join Bronzetti in the defence of the ruined castle.'

Bronzetti and his 280 men were therefore left alone
in Castel Morrone against Ruiz and his 5000. The attack
was delivered, first from the north only, and iinally from
all sides at once. The Bourbon General himself has re-
corded that this handful of Garibaldini held out for ' four
hours of fierce fighting.' Castel Morrone was a well-
chosen position for a determined body of men to resist

^ Appendix L, 4.

" De Sivo, iv. 201, confuses them with Bronzetti's men who never approached
Limatola.

3 Later on, another small body of Sacchi's troops came on the scene further
to the west and skirmished with Ruiz' men in the villages of Grottole and Casali.
But Sacchi himself and most of his i8oo men remained far away at San Leucio,
in accordance with Garibaldi's orders, which were to guard the communications
of Caserta with Sant' Angelo,

248 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

more than ten times their number. The lonely medi-
aeval keep, raised high above the modern life of the plain
below, has been inhabited for hundreds of years past
only by yellow hawks, darting in and out of the upper
windows, whence the robber Normans once watched the
traffic along the banks of the Volturno. The keep itself is
surrounded by a ruined parapet a few yards out, which
Bronzetti had caused his men to repair. From the foot of
this outer wall the mountain falls away on every side in
a smooth glacis for several hundred yards, and on the
south side the straight, bare slope continues for half a mile
as far as the villages of the plain. Only on the west is
there a neighbouring hill-top within long rifle range of
the castle.

Firing from behind the parapet the Garibaldini again
and again repulsed the enemy advancing up the glacis of
the mountain-side. At length their ammunition ran out,
but still they resisted, using the bayonet and hurling the
heavy blocks of limestone which lay everywhere to their
hands. When the Royalists at length burst over the
wall and into the chambers of the castle they found
Pilade Bronzetti sitting wounded on the ground, and
stabbed him to death while he was attempting to nego-
tiate the surrender of his men. He left a name as
memorable in Garibaldian story as that of his brother,
Narciso, who had been killed the year before at the foot
of the Alps.^ His men were all captured, but not be-
fore at least a third of them had been killed or
wounded.

In the latter stages of this four hours' siege, Ruiz
with a part of his force had been skirmishing at Casali
against a few of Sacchi's men, and had then begun to
push on towards Old Caserta. After the fall of Castel
Morrone his whole force proceeded southwards, ascended
the Lupara range over the western shoulder of Monte
Viro, and reached Old Caserta in the middle of the after-

' Garibaldi and the Thousand, pp. 103-106.

CASTLE >fORROXE.

From the glacis to N.W. ; the limestone blocks are characteristic of all the
mountains in the battle of Oct. i and 2.

^_

1

1

■

[

-^^

^

"JS.^

^ii^

f^!ls:Sfe&.^v,: .,

, 1 . .^^^^

Hi^

k^^^ ^-Cv:':.^

^

i^^i^^^^

rfllffiil!.

k^^J^^^^

V. ■■■"■'■

^K^^^H^^^^^

(lllljiij, > r;,,^'

* _\_;

i^Bs<ajM^g«iimm

^"--.^'i^^^^;

SS

£? .&M

i^^^i^

AMPHITHEATRF, OF ANCIENT CAPUA.
Outside S. Maria, houses of which are seen in background.

RUIZ AT OLD CASERTA 249

noon, three and a half hours after Von Mechel had
retreated from before Bixio at the Arches of the Valley.'

The appearance of Ruiz' blue-coats on the ridge over-
looking the great plain and the sight of the Bourbon flag
floating from the Castle of Old Caserta, were greeted with
the ringing of joy bells in the reactionary villages of
Casolla, Santa Barbara, and Tuoro at the foot of the
mountain, and struck terror into the Liberal inhabitants
of New Caserta. The head-quarters at the Palace were
now practically destitute of troops, for Tiirr, though with
some misgivings, had obeyed Garibaldi's orders and
started for Santa Maria about an hour before with the
last of the reserves.^ Ruiz, however, having no orders
to proceed farther than Old Caserta, remained on the top
of the mountain all the rest of the day, looking down on
the unprotected heart of the enemy's position, but never
striking the blow that might so well have proved fatal if
delivered in time.

The four hours' delay purchased by the heroism of
Bronzetti and his handful of men at Castel Morrone, very
probably saved Garibaldi from destruction. For if Ruiz
had arrived at Old Caserta before noon, he would either
have been in time to help Von Mechel to a victory over
Bixio ; or else he would, by threatening New Caserta in
the plain, have prevented the departure thence of Tiirr's
reserves for Santa Maria. In the latter case Santa
Maria and Sant' Angelo would have been taken before
nightfall.

At three in the afternoon, the last reserves from

'Appendix L, 7 and 9, below. Bronzetti's brave lieutenant, Giuseppe
Mini, thought that his commanding officer should have fallen back from Castel
Morrone and resisted on the range of mountains running out of Monte Viro.
Mirri, before he died, persuaded his friend, the fine old Garibaldian Senator
Cadolini, of the justice of this criticism of Bronzetti's wisdom. Senator Cadolini
has spoken to me about it, but I still venture to think that Bronzetti was right,
for although the position he took up ensured the ultimate capture of all his small
force, it also ensured a long delay to Ruiz, which was the all-important military
object. Except on the top of a smooth, conical hill 280 men could not have held
out for four hours against more than ten times theii number.

' Turr's Div. 241.

250 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Caserta, — the Hungarians,' Rustow's Milanese and
Eber's North Italians, — all picked troops, were brought
up by Tiirr himself to Santa Maria. Almost at the same
hour Garibaldi returned thither from Sant' Angelo. He
had been forced to ride round by a long and dangerous
circuit through Casapulla, for the whole plain, as far as
San Prisco, was occupied by regiments of Royalist foot
and horse. He found Santa Maria still holding out, but
more like a besieged town than a point in the line of
battle. The Frenchmen still held their farm-house, the
Sicilians the amphitheatre, and men and guns were still
lodged on part of the railway embankment. But every
one else in that part of the field was packed into the
streets of Santa Maria, which presented for hours to-
gether a scene of confused resistance and continual
slaughter. All through the day fresh men were found
ready to die beside the two cannon under the old Roman
archway. The town band of Santa Maria, whose 20,000
inhabitants were devoted partisans of the new order,
stood playing in the middle of the crowded street to
hearten their defenders.

Arrived in the middle of this welter, which would
have confused a less able soldier. Garibaldi took in the
situation on the whole battlefield, and saw that the op-
portunity of the day had come. He at once determined
to lead out northwards the last reserves whom Turr had
just brought into the town. In this way alone could he
relieve the pressure on Santa Maria and at the same
time clear the enemy off the line of communications
with Sant' Angelo. While he was giving his last orders
in the street before riding out to try the final issue of

'The foreigners fighting for Garibaldi on October 1-2 were about 200
Hungarian cavalry ; 200 Hungarian infantry ; about 50 French of De Flotte's
company; and 100 of Wolf s foreigners, deserters from the Neapolitan army.
Tiirr^s D:v. 454. The British Legion had not yet arrived, but a few score
English were fighting in various capacities. The foreigners in the Bourbon
army on October 1-2 were six times as many, for besides Von Mechel's 3000 at
the Arches of the Valley, a few companies of Swiss were fighting against Santa
Maria. Schweizertruppen.

THE DECISIVE CHARGE 251

his own and his country's fortune, his old friend, Jessie
White, Mario's English wife, came up to him with a glass
of water and some figs. He had tasted nothing all day,
and he gladly took food and drink from her hands. As
he did so, he observed that she was being followed about
|by a group of British sailors on the spree, with no officer
among them, on leave from H.M.S. Hannibal} Being
unskilled in Italian, they had fastened on their country-
woman and were imploring her to have them supplied
with muskets. ' What, Jessie ! you are helping these
sailors to desert their Queen ? ' said Garibaldi, good-
naturedly, as he sat on his horse eating the figs she had
brought him. 'They have only come to amuse them-
selves,' she said. They were not supplied with arras,
but stood by to bear a hand in some way more befitting
their country's attitude of benevolent neutrality.^

The decisive movement now began. Garibaldi, fol-
lowed by the Hungarians, by Eber's men and by the
Milanese, issued from Santa Maria along the northern
road and cleared the enemy off the communications with
Sant' Angelo. Eber, continuing up the road towards
the Ciccarelli lane and bridge where Garibaldi had
fallen into the ambush in the morning, relieved the
pressure on Medici. But the Dictator himself, followed
by the Hungarians and Milanese, wheeled to the left
not far outside Santa Maria, and swept the field in the
direction of Capua. The onslaught with fixed bayonets
of fresh and vigorous troops under such a leader could
not be resisted by the masses of the enemy, who had
been firing for hours past without making further head-

' Not to be confused with the deserters from the Agamemnon, who were
helping to fight the guns at Sant' Angelo, see p. 235, note, above.

"After the charge of Hungarian horse that followed a few minutes later,
ihe Royalist battery on the road near Sant' Agostino was seen lying dismounted
and derelict. A handful of Garibaldini rushed out from under the Roman arch
to drag off the enemy's guns, but they had not the skill to remount them. Then
the sailors from H.M.S. Hannibal, seeing that their time had come, ran up to
help, and the spectacle seen a few minutes later of sailors in British uniform
dragging two captured guns into Santa Maria was reported far and wide,
scandalised Royalist Europe, and became the subject of diplomatic correspondence.

252 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

way. The 200 Hungarian cavaliers, Garibaldi's only
mounted force, were at length let loose. They went
right over the batteries and on through regiment after
regiment. Too few to rout the whole army, they were
too brave, and too skilled with horse and sword, to
be stopped anywhere on this side the walls of Capua.
Singly and in small groups, as evening fell, the survivors
rode back, well satisfied that they had honoured the
Magyar name before the eyes of Europe.

Behind the 200 horsemen followed the ranks of
levelled bayonets with Garibaldi in the midst of them.
Two hundred Hungarian infantry and 600 Milanese,
deploying to north and south of Parisi farm-house, with
their faces towards Capua station, drove the enemy's
tired regiments before them. The Royalists, as they
retreated, turned round to fire, and still here and there
rallied for a stand under a covering charge of cavalry.
But Garibaldi still came on, and in the rear and on the
left of the men whom he was leading, came the defenders
pouring out from Santa Maria, men of Sicily, of Calabria,
of Tuscany, and of all the other provinces of United
Italy. Sant' Agostino had been deserted by the enemy,
and now the cemetery and the Cappuccini Convent were
stormed, and De Angelis farm to the north of the road.
Medici, too, relieved by Eber's advance, sallied out from
Sant' Angelo and recaptured the battery where Dunne
had been wounded in the morning. All the advanced
positions which had been lost at dawn when the Bourbon
army came out of Capua in the fog, were re-occupied
before sunset. The masses of the beaten Royalists, con-
verging from north and south upon the parade ground
before Capua, retreated sullenly through the gate whence
they had issued with such high hopes twelve hours be-
fore. While Garibaldi rode back to Sant' Angelo through
the dusk, his men lay down exhausted and hungry on
the ground, each man where he stood, knowing that
they had saved Italy.'

' Appendix L, 5, below.

AN EPILOGUE NEXT DAY 253

An epilogue to the decisive battle of the first of
October took place on the following day. Ruiz and his
five thousand on the hill-top of Old Caserta had spent
the afternoon and night in complete ignorance of the re-
sult of the fighting before Capua or at the Arches of the
Valley. Early on the morning of October 2 news reached
them of the double defeat of Ritucci and of Von Mechel.
Ruiz thereupon held a Council of War at which he de-
cided to retreat at once to the north bank of the Volturno,
while the way was still open. Nearly three thousand of
his men obeyed the order to retreat and escaped through
Limatola, but more than two thousand, seized by a sudden
impulse for battle and plunder, refused to obey their
General, and descended off the mountain, officers and
men together, to attack Caserta in the plain below. Part
of them advanced through the park and by way of the
cascade, driving a company of Sacchi's men before them
down the wooded hill-side. Others made straight into
Caserta town through Casolla and Altifreda. A panic
seized the few troops defending Caserta, and the Royalists
entered in triumph and commenced sacking the houses.

But all this while Garibaldi was throwing his net
round them with equal energy and skill. He had already
caused orders to be conveyed to Bixio bidding him come
over Monte Viro and cut them off from the north-east.
He himself with such of the troops from Sant' Angelo as
were not completely prostrated by their efforts of the
day before, crossed the tracks over Monte Tifata and
arrived at San Leucio, a little after nine in the morning.
Here he effected a junction with Sacchi and with some
troops just arrived by train from Naples, who had taken
no part in the battle of October i, namely, Stocco's Cala-
brians and a few companies of Piedmontese Bersaglieri and
other regulars. Led on by Garibaldi himself, the picked
troops of Victor Emmanuel's army in their round hats with
the cocks' feathers, climbed through the steep park in the
direction of Old Caserta, side by side with the red-shirts
and the gaitered Calabrians in their brigand costume.

254 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Before he himself began to mount the hill from San
Leucio, the Dictator had detached thence a few score of
Genoese Carabineers of the Thousand by the lower road,
to save the Palace and to clear the enemy out of Caserta
in the plain. The Genoese charged into the main street
of Caserta, singing Mameli's hymn of '48, and after a
sharp struggle in which a dozen fell on each side, drove
the horde of plunderers back out of the town and up the
hills towards Old Caserta. Meanwhile, the larger force
under the Dictator was shepherding the other flocks of
Bourbon infantry out of the park, and up towards the
same point on the hills above. Before long the whole
two thousand, emerging from brush-wood and the olive
groves below, were to be seen flying for their lives along
the stony flanks of the mountain towards Old Caserta.
At this moment Bixio's force appeared over the top of
Monte Viro, barring their flight northwards. The net
closed in upon them, and after another hour spent in
hunting detachments of various sizes over the great bare
plateau, 2012 men and ^^ officers were secured as
prisoners of war.^

Taking all parts of the battle of the Volturno together,
the Garibaldini officially acknowledged a loss on the two
days of 306 killed, 1328 wounded, and 389 missing. Of
these losses scarcely fifty can be attributed to the fighting
on the second day ; at Castel Morrone there were under
300 lost, most of them prisoners ; and at the Arches of
the Valley rather more than 200 killed and wounded.
It follows that some 1400 must have been killed or
wounded in the main battle of October i, in defence of
the line of Santa Maria and Sant' Angelo over against
Capua. The Bourbon Generals officially acknowledged
a loss in that part of the field of 1065 men — 260 killed,
731 wounded, and 74 prisoners; besides 200 more lost
at the Arches of the Valley on October the first, and

^ Appendix L, 8.

THE WOUNDED 255

2089 prisoners taken near Old Caserta on October the
second.'

Garibaldi had now nearly 1500 wounded on his
hands, besides large numbers of sick, disabled by con-
stant exposure and under-feeding at the outposts. As
the autumn drew on, long grey overcoats were served
out, which gave the army a more uniform appearance,
besides some chance of warmth at night. But the con-
ditions of service before Capua continued to be very
severe.

The Neapolitans did little or nothing to make life
more comfortable for their deliverers. Those of the
wounded who were sent back to the Capital fared
worse than those left at the front, for the usual peculation
and carelessness of the hospital officials and the con-
sequent dirt and absence of necessaries were not remedied
on behalf of the Garibaldini, except to some degree by
British help in the form of materials and money from
England and personal service by some of our country-
women in Naples. The field hospitals at Caserta and
Santa Maria, though far from perfect, were better, being
under the control of the medical staff of Tiirr's division,
and under the eye of Jessie White Mario herself The
English women in the hospitals of Naples were deeply
affected by the patience and gentleness of the North
Italian wounded, and by their complete unselfishness.
Indeed their only anxiety seemed to be not to give
trouble, by any complaints, however reasonable, to Gari-
baldi or to those who had volunteered to nurse them.
In spite of the pain and squalor of their lot, the
wounded were not unhappy, for there were days in
October on which Garibaldi was in the Capital, when he
never failed to visit them, stopping to speak to each one
and to make the dying envied by some special mark of
his gratitude and love.

'AH the men,' writes an English lady, 'when they
heard him coming, began to sit up in their beds and clap

' Appendix L, 9.

2 56 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

their hands and shout, Papd nostra, papa nostra ! They
long to be allowed coffee in the morning instead of grease
and water, so my sister said to one of them, " Now ask
the General to order that you have coffee." The young
man answered, " O lady, how could I trouble him with
that, when he has so much to see to, and when his very
presence gives us new life.""

The battle of the Voltumo, the last of Garibaldi's
great feats of war, differs from Como, Calatafimi,
Palermo, Milazzo, and the Crossing of the Straits, firstly,
because it shows him acting on the defensive, and
secondly, because it shows him handling some 20,000
men, a larger number than the handful of guerillas
which according to his critics was all he could command
with success. His defensive strategy on this occasion is
excellent, and proves that he had learnt much about the
conditions of European warfare since his defence of
Rome in 1849, on his return from the South-American
pampas. While the Bourbon generals on October i
went out of their way to divide their army and attack
him from east, north, and west at once. Garibaldi made
full use of the central position in which they thus placed
him. Communications between the various parts of the
assailing force were therefore lost, with the result that
Ruiz' division was of no practical use to Ritucci on the
great day and was destroyed in detail on October 2.
Garibaldi, on the other hand, took advantage of his
central position, and of his short line of communication,
strung together by the Maddaloni-Caserta-Santa Maria
railway, to keep his reserve under Tiirr at the central
point between the various battlefields until the very last
moment. He could thus postpone the vital decision as
to whether the reserve should be sent from Caserta to
Santa Maria, or from Caserta to Maddaloni, until events
showed where they were most needed. The arrival of
this body of fresh troops at Santa Maria, half-way

^ Appendix L, lo.

CAUSES OF THE VICTORY 257

through the afternoon, and the vigorous use which he
made of them to attack the enemy's tired regiments, de-
cided the even balance of the day. The success of the
National army in holding its own against greatly superior
numbers is therefore to be attributed, apart from the
valour of the volunteers, to three qualities shown on
this occasion by Garibaldi : the personal inspiration of
his presence at so many of the important points, the
combined caution and vigour of his offensive-defensive
tactics, and last, but not least, a sound strategy governing
the disposition of his men over the whole region of con-
flict from the Arches of the Valley to the gate of Capua.

17

CHAPTER XIV

THE MEETING OF GARIBALDI AND VICTOR EMMANUEL

' To watch the new Kingdom of Italy rising as it were by magic is a marvel-
lous sight. When time has veiled the events of the period and wiped away
all that is perfidious and adventurous, Cavour, Victor Emmanuel, and Garibaldi
will stand forth as heroes of this epoch. While I am writing of the struggles
and sufferings of Rome in the Middle Ages, the observation of the present,
which is realising the work of which centuries have despaired, is an experience
of inestimable value to the historian.' Gregorovius' Diary, Rome, November
7, i860.

The battle of the Volturno saved Naples from the Bour-
bons, but it did not deliver Capua to Garibaldi. It re-
dressed the balance of war which had begun to incline
against him, but it did not weigh down the scales on his
side. A condition of military stalemate continued for
more than three weeks of October, until Victor Em-
manuel's army arrived upon the scene.

During this period of waiting, the only military event
of interest was the expedition to Isernia. That town,
like most others in the Molise and in the neighbouring
province of Abruzzi, had been seized by the citizens in
the name of Garibaldi and Victor Emmanuel. But on
the day before the battle of the Volturno it was invaded
by peasants from the hills, authorised to act for the good
cause by their Bishop and by the authorities at Gaeta,
and led on by Royal gens-d'armes. During the following
week pillage, massacre, torture, and mutilation were the
lot of the inhabitants of Isernia and of other centres
of Nationalism in the neighbourhood. This system of
' reaction ' or ' brigandage,' accompanied by all the
bestial cruelty of which the half-savage peasants of the
South were still capable, afforded a last weapon for the

258

THE REACTION AT ISERNIA 259

expiring system of Church and State. Francis II, when
finally driven from Gaeta by Victor Emmanuel's army,
took refuge in Rome in 1861, and thence, under the pro-
tection of the Pope, continued to foster this kind of
' brigandage ' in his lost dominions in the Abruzzi for
nearly seven years to come. No such horrors were
committed on the other side by the Garibaldian peasantry
of Calabria, Basilica ta, Abruzzi or any other province of
the mainland, and the difference may fairly be attributed
to the higher ethical standard of the local Nationalist
leaders — men like Stocco and Pace, touched by the ideal-
ism of the risorgimento movement — as compared with the
reactionary clergy and the Bourbon officials, who had
been brought up in an evil school on frankly mediaeval
ideas of religion and government.

Early in October, Nationalist refugees from the neigh-
bourhood of Isernia arrived at Caserta, told the tale of
horror to Garibaldi, and assured him that if he would
send some of his officers into the Molise they would there
find 3000 peasants ready to place themselves under their
orders and suppress the reaction. The Dictator accord-
ingly sent NuUo, Mario, and Zasio in command of a few
hundred Sicilians and irregulars from the Alife district,
and a few dozen North Italians. But when they arrived
in the Molise, there was no sign of the 3000 friendly
natives who were to have joined them. The reactionary
peasants, backed by several battalions of Bourbon regu-
lars, fell upon them near Isernia on October 17, and
drove them out of the Molise with heavy loss.^ In the
Abruzzi the Liberals held their own, but eagerly awaited
the crossing of the Tronto by Victor Emmanuel.

On October 15 the British Legion, otherwise called
the 'Garibaldi Excursionists,'^ landed in Naples, over

^Isernia, 7-36. Leg. Matese, 108-111, 133-168. Zasio, 116-125. Red Shirt,
225-226, 234-264. Castelli, 331-332. Turk's Div. 282-286. Arrivabene, ii. 291.

'A thin pretence that such was their innocent character had been kept up
in England to save diplomatic appearances. The advertisement that enlisted
most of them ran as follows : ' Excursion to Sicily and Naples. All persons

17*

26o GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

600 strong. They looked a fine body of men as they
marched up the Toledo in their red tunics with green
facings, the muzzles of their Enfield rifles stuffed with
flowers by the admiring populace. Four days later they
gave a good account of themselves in a skirmish in front
of Sant' Angelo, conducted up to the walls of Capua,
where they lost two killed and eight wounded.^ But
the warning that Dunne had uttered when Garibaldi
consulted him at Milazzo as to the advisability of allow-
ing such a Legion to be recruited,^ was unfortunately
borne out by events. One part of the Excursionists con-
sisted of roughs principally from Glasgow and London,
who considered that they were out for a holiday at other
people's expense, and though they did not object to the
fighting, expected a maximum of food and good quarters
and a minimum of discipline. The other half, old soldiers,
'volunteers,' and generous enthusiasts of all classes from
a Duke's son downwards, could not, by their own better
conduct, save the Legion from acquiring a name for dis-
order similar to that which the Pope's Irish had acquired
in Rome. ' You see,' said the Italians indulgently, ' these
men are not accustomed to a country where wine is
cheap.' Peard, whom the Dictator set over them as
Colonel, was not so well qualified for this difficult com-
mand as for the individual knight-errantry which had
made him a well-beloved figure in the Garibaldian field
armies for eighteen months past. If the campaign had
been prolonged and carried to the walls of Rome, as the
Committee in London had expected when it raised the
Legionaries, there is little doubt that they would have

(particularly Members of Volunteer Rifle Corps) desirous of visiting Southern
Italy and of aiding by their presence and influence the Cause of Garibaldi and
Italy, may learn how to proceed by applying to the Garibaldi Committee at the
offices, No. 8 Salisbury Street, Strand, London.' Holyoake, i. 245.

'S<. Maur, 227 (Peard's report). Peard MS. journal, Oct. 19. Arriva-
bene, ii. 288-289. Menghini, 375-376. Conv. Ellis. Garibaldi wrote of ' the
brilliant courage they displayed in the slight engagements they shared with us
on the Volturno.' Holyoake, i. 255.

'See p. 98 above.

GARIBALDI ACCEPTS THE SITUATION 261

done us credit. As things were, although the Legion
came too late, the fame of our country had been upheld
throughout the campaign, and yeomen's service rendered
to the Italian cause by the English free lances, by Dunne
and Wyndham, by Peard and Bowling, and by others
who have survived them.

Garibaldi estimated accurately the limits of the
degree to which he had improved his position by the
recent victory on the Volturno. One day soon after
the battle he came to Mario with a letter from Mazzini
in his hand. ' Read this,' he said. ' Mazzini urges me
on to attack Rome. You know that I have long been
thinking of it. On the first of October we defeated the
enemy so that they cannot meet us again in the open
field. But I cannot advance on Rome leaving behind
me 60,000 men intrenched in Capua and Gaeta, who can
march into Naples the moment my back is turned.'^ He
fully accepted the political consequences of the military
situation. He abandoned all idea of advancing on Rome,
and prepared to welcome the immediate advent of Victor
Emmanuel.

Cavour, gravely anxious that Italy should present a
united front to the Monarchs of Austria, Prussia, and
Russia, who were about to hold an ominous conference
at Warsaw, desired above all else that the Dictator
should go out to welcome the King in the face of Italy
and Europe, and was much concerned lest he should sail
home to Caprera in dudgeon before Victor Emmanuel's
arrival. This, rather than any fears of actual civil war,
appears to have been the limit of Cavour's anxiety with
regard to Garibaldi, from the first days of October
onwards. ^ The Minister wisely sought counsel with

1 Mario Vita, ii. 3. Guerzoni, ii. 205.

' On September 24 he had feared a collision with Garibaldi {Chiala, iv. 15),
bat this fear had been removed by Garibaldi's manifesto of welcome to the Royal
troops a few days later, see pp. 226-227 above. On October 4, Augusto Vecchi
writes to Garibaldi : ' Cavonr sent me word to call on him. I will tell you about our
two hours' conversation. I laid bare to him all your noble heart. He regretted

262 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Garibaldi's oldest and best friend, Augusto Vecchi, who
had worn the red shirt beside his chief in South America,
who had fought shoulder to shoulder with him in the
midnight miUe when the French troops burst through
the defences of the Janiculum, and from whose house at
Quarto, Garibaldi had sailed with the Thousand for Sicily.
On October i Vecchi wrote to Garibaldi to implore him
to hasten the plebiscite for the annexation of Naples, and
to send a message inviting Victor Emmanuel to march
without delay into his new dominions. Three days
later Vecchi wrote again : ' Invite the King personally
by a telegram to come quickly to Naples. And go to
meet him. I ask this of you in the name of Italy, our
mother, for whose greatness we two swore many years
ago to make every kind of sacrifice.' ^

On the very day when Vecchi was writing in this
strain. Garibaldi had already yielded the point and was
inditing his famous letter to Victor Emmanuel, which,
besides many expressions of goodwill and desire for
unity, contained the following words : —

' Caserta, October 4, i860.

' Sire,

' I congratulate Your Majesty on the brilliant victories
won by your brave General Cialdini and on their happy re-
sults. . . . Since Your Majesty is at Ancona, you must make
the journey to Naples by land or by sea. If by land, as would
be best, Your Majesty ought to march with at least one
division. If I were informed in time, I would move forward
my right wing to meet you, and would come in person to pre-
sent my homage and to receive your orders as to the final
operations. . . .' ^

that you had not answered a letter of his. At the end of our interview, he told
me to accompany you to meet the King. And he ended by saying that Venice
would be ours six months sooner, if you did not separate yourself from Victor
Emmanuel, — to put it more clearly, if you did not obstinately retire to Caprera '
[viz. before welcoming Victor Emmanuel to Naples]. Fazzari MSS. If Cavour
had still thought there was any chance of civil war, he would have been only
too glad that Garibaldi should ' retire obstinately to Caprera.'

' Fazzari MSS. Vecchi's letters of Oct. i and 4, i860.

' Guerzoni, ii. 208-209. Ciampoli, 186-187.

PLEBISCITE OR ASSEMBLY 263

Cavour, therefore, as early as October 4 had gained
his point that Garibaldi should invite the King and go
out to meet him. But for another ten days there was
trouble on the further question of the plebiscite, a con-
troversy which became the storm-centre of the last politi-
cal crisis of the Dictatorship. The question at issue was
the proper method of obtaining the consent of the in-
habitants of the Neapolitan Kingdom to their absorption
in the Monarchy of Victor Emmanuel. Should they be
consulted directly by plebiscite, by a simple referendum
on the question of annexation, to which each elector
could answer by his vote, ' yes ' or ' no ' ? Or should
they place their fate in the hands of an assembly of
elected representatives, who might then propose con-
ditions on which the South would come into the Na-
tional union ? Such were the two alternatives, and the
choice between them was a question of more than mere
form.

If Italy had had no armed enemies to fear either with-
in or without the barrier of her guardian Alps, if she had
been in safe possession of her own house, then indeed
she ought to have gone about the difficult business of
setting it in order with long and careful deliberation.
If the union of North and South Italy, like the union of
North and South Britain in 1707, had been proposed in a
year when the two Kingdoms were immune from inva-
sion and revolution, then indeed a Parliament at Naples
and a Parliament at Palermo might reasonably have
sat for many months bargaining with the Parliament at
Turin. In such a case some of the evils that have actu-
ally resulted from a too close union might possibly have
been avoided. Those who know South Italy of to-day
deplore the rigid and mechanical application of the
Piedmontese laws and administrative system to a state
of society very different from that of the sub-Alpine
populations; and they deplore no less the immense
powers of self-government which under the constitution
of i860 have been committed to the backward communes

264 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

of the South.^ But this was the necessary price that
Italy paid for her existence. In the crisis of that autumn,
with war and revolution still in the bowels of the land,
with an Austrian army eagerly awaiting the word to
cross the Mincio and rush on Milan, with the French
Minister already withdrawn from Turin, and every great
European Power except England hostile to the unification
of Italy, it would have been the height of unwisdom to
waste two months in electing and calling together Nea-
politan and Sicilian assemblies, and half a year more in
bargainings and intrigues of every kind, public and per-
sonal, into which Southern Parliamentarians would in-
stinctively plunge and revel, if they found that they had
their country in their gift and Cavour on his knees to
them to hand it over. If Italian unity were to be accom-
plished at all — and all were agreed that there was no
other port of safety in sight — then it must be done at
once by direct acceptance of Piedmontese law and custom
for the whole Peninsula, not because that was best for all
but because that alone could be established everywhere
without delay. A plebiscite for unconditional annexation
could be held in a fortnight, but an assembly might sit
until it was dispersed by Austrian bayonets.

The men who in the second week of October be-
sieged Garibaldi with petitions for an assembly instead
of the plebiscite, were not, with the exception of the
' federalist ' Cattaneo, primarily interested in obtaining a
separate system of administration for the South. Their
opposition to the plebiscite was essentially factious.
Crispi and his friends desired an assembly where they
might hope to dominate, and they objected to a plebiscite
because it would in a fortnight's time bring to an end the
Garibaldian Dictatorship which, so long as it lasted, left
the executive power in their hands and kept out the
hated Cavour. They played on the Dictator's distrust of
the Minister. They cunningly reminded him that the
plebiscite had been the device by which Napoleon III

' De Cesare, ii. 142-144.

NAPLES ASKS IMMEDIATE ANNEXATION 265

had filched Nice and Savoy. There had arisen one of
those complicated situations through which Garibaldi
was least able to see his way in the light of the few
simple rules by which he guided his conduct. His mind
was darkened and he sat stupefied at the head of the
council-board while the rival parties of plebiscite and
assembly defied each other shrilly across the room.

Between October 11 and 13 a series of such councils
were held at Caserta and in Naples. Old Giorgio
Pallavicino, 'the martyr of the Spielberg,' the Austrian
dungeon where he had sat for fourteen years in the
early days of the risorgimento movement, was now Gari-
baldi's Pro-Dictator of the Neapolitan mainland. He it
was who stood in the breach against Crispi and Cattaneo,
on behalf of immediate Italian unity. On October 11,
at Caserta, Garibaldi decided for Crispi and an assembly.
Pallavicino at once gave in his resignation, and the city
of Naples rose in a great demonstration of protest in his
favour. On all doors, windows, carriages, coats, and hats
appeared cards inscribed si (' yes '), — the vote that all
desired to be allowed to give in plebiscite. Garibaldi
returned to the Capital to find the streets in an uproar.
He heard Pallavicino's name coupled with his own for
vivas, while morte was cried out against Mazzini, Crispi,
and the others who had persuaded him to summon an
assembly. All along the Toledo it ' snowed sis ' into the
carriage. Garibaldi was much perturbed by this clear
manifestation of the popular will, for obedience to the
people was one of the formulae of his creed, in accord-
ance with which he had long ago abandoned his repub-
licanism in order to be in touch with his fellow-citizens.

On the thirteenth another council was held in his
rooms at the Palazzo d'Angri. Pallavicino refused to
take back his resignation unless the plan for an assembly
were cancelled. In the middle of an angry dispute
between the Pro-Dictator and Crispi, Turr produced a
petition signed by thousands of hands in favour of the
plebiscite. Garibaldi bowed his head over it in melan-

266 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

choly silence, and for some minutes his face was hidden.
When he looked up the clouds had cleared away, and
he wore the ' serene gaiety ' of his happiest and gentlest
mood. ' If this is the desire of the Neapolitan people,'
he said, 'it must be satisfied.' ^ Caro Giorgio,' he said to
Pallavicino, 'we need you here still.' The same evening
Crispi resigned the secretariate, and his part in the
history of Italy came to an end for that year.^

The plebiscite was held on October 21. The elector-
ate had no choice but to vote jv^s or no to the following
proposition : ' The people wishes for Italy one and indi-
visible with Victor Emmanuel as Constitutional King,
and his legitimate descendants after him.' The result
was shortly afterwards declared as follows : —

Neapolitan mainland 1,302,064 yes; 10,312 no.
Sicily - - - 432,053 yes; 667 no.^

The voting was open,' and every one who voted 'no'
did so in the face of a disapproving world. No doubt,
therefore, the real minority was a very much larger pro-
portion of the citizens. But if the plebiscite exaggerated,
it did not belie the opinion of the people. Whether the
majority of the inhabitants of South Italy wished for
Italian unity on its own merits is fairly open to question,
but they had shown in more ways than one their earnest
desire for immediate and unconditional annexation as the
only security against the return of the House of Bourbon
and thei dreadful past from which Garibaldi had delivered
them.

Meanwhile, Victor Emmanuel was coming to take
possession of his new dominions. On the afternoon of
September 29 he left Turin * on his triumphal progress

> Coco«<«, 29-42. Cm/j, 1911, pp. 326-334, 360-362. TUrr's Div. 277-281.
F. O. Sicily, Elliot, i860, Nos. 569, 585, 627.

' In the Papal dominions the vote, held a few days later, went as follows : —
Marches 133,072 yes ; 1,212 no.
Umbria - 99,628 yes ; - 380 no.
'Mundy, 258. "F. O. Sard. Hudson, No. 384, Sept. 29, i860.

THE MAN

IK POSSESSION.' {Punch, Oct. 6, iSoo.)

'the right leg in the hoot at last.'

(Punch, Nov. 17, i860)

GARIPAI.DI A\n VICTOR EMSrANUEL.

VICTOR EMMANUEL MARCHES SOUTH 267

that was yet a most perilous adventure, hoping that when
he wanted to return he would not find his northern
capital occupied by Austrians or by French. Passing
through Bologna to the Ravennese coast he embarked on
October 3 for Ancona.^ A storm arose, the frigate was
in great danger, and the seamen declared that the safest
course was to run across the Adriatic towards Pola in
Austrian territory. But Victor Emmanuel, refusing to
be put into the hands of his enemies at such a crisis of
Italian affairs, came on deck to encourage the sailors, and
remained there throughout the storm, while his staff
officers were prostrated below. Towards evening the
sea went down, and before midnight they entered the
harbour of Ancona, where the King was welcomed ashore
by Fanti, Cialdini, Delia Rocca, and their victorious
troops.

Some delay occurred in starting from Ancona, but on
October 9 the great march began, the whole army moving,
with the King in the midst, along the road to Naples.
He passed near the battle-field of Castelfidardo, through
Macerata and Loreto and thence along the Adriatic coast.
He reached Grottammare, the last town in Papal territory,
on October 11, and remained there four days inactive,
probably from some cautionary reasons of diplomacy or
politics. These were the days during which the politi-
cal crisis on the question of the plebiscite was taking
place in Naples. Only on October 15, after Pallavicino
had triumphed over Crispi, did the King cross the Tronto
and enter the Neapolitan Kingdom.

After following the coast-road as far as the fortress
of Pescara, which had already come in to the national
cause, they turned inland by way of Chieti and Popoli
to Sulmona. Thus far, in Papal and in Neapolitan terri-
tory alike, the enthusiasm of the liberated people for their
new King had been abundantly shown. All classes, in-
cluding very many of the clergy, joined in the demon-

1 See Map IV at end of book for the King's route from Ravenna iouth-
wards.

268 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

strations, and triumphal arches and addresses of welcome
impeded the rate of military progress. It was felt that
no offence must be given to the King's new subjects, and
he showed as much rough graciousness as his impa-
tient nature contained. Other causes of delay were the
neglected state of the high-road, and the absence of
bridges over the innumerable dry torrent beds through
which the siege-guns and commissariat waggons had to
pass. For this was not a Garibaldian army ; it moved
slowly, but it was bringing with it the means to take
Capua and Gaeta.^

After they had passed Sulmona, the political sym-
pathies of the inhabitants were less unanimous. There
was still an enthusiastic ' Italian ' party to welcome them,
but at every turn of the road they saw fresh evidence oi
civil war and massacre. The ' good Italians ' came in
with stories, usually only too true, of massacre and
mutilation which their relations and friends had suffered.
Rough justice was administered on the road-side by
Piedmontese court-martials assisted by firing parties,
and a proclamation was issued that all peasants found
with arms in their hands would be shot. Even in this
district some of the parish priests showed themselves on
the national side.^

Cialdini with the vanguard was now two days' march
in front of the King. On October 20, near Isernia, where
a handful of Garibaldini had been repulsed only three
days before,^ he fell in with 5000 Bourbon troops under
General Scotti. Scotti neglected to send out scouts or
advance-guard, and marched his men in column right up
to Cialdini's hidden batteries. The Bersaglieri and line
regiments were let loose upon the enemy's surprised and
disordered mass, and the lancers of Novara charged
through the whole length of their column. In a few
minutes Scotti with nearly a thousand of his men had

' Castelli, 326-329. De Cesare, ii. 451-461. Orero, 113.
'Castelli, 330-331. De Cesare, ii. 462-463. Orero, 115-116
' See p. 259 above.

GARIBALDI GOES TO MEET THE KING 269

been captured, and the rest dispersed over the country-
side in hopeless disbandment.^

On October 25 Garibaldi crossed the Volturno by a
crazy bridge of planks a yard wide, supported on boats,
which had been flung across at the ferry of Formicola.
The Italians had failed to make any bridge at all with the
scant materials to hand, but the task had been accom-
plished by the British Legion with the expert assistance of
some ' handy men ' who appeared to be their fellow-
countrymen and showed a suspicious readiness for any
service connected with ropes and water.^ The making of
the bridge had been conducted under fire, but the Bourbon
troops, who had already abandoned Cajazzo, withdrew
towards Capua and did not attempt to dispute the
passage of the river after the bridge had been completed.

Leaving Medici to protect the lines at Sant' Angelo,
Garibaldi with a few regiments of Italians and the
British Legion advanced northwards through Bellona
and Calvi to meet Victor Emmanuel.' They bivouacked
on the night of October 25 to 26 in the broad valley
between the hills of Cajanello and Vajrano, where the
high-road then, as the railway now, debouches from the
gates of the wooded mountains into the flatter country
that soon broadens out into the great plains of Capua.
Most of the troops slept by the roadside below, but
some were stationed on the heights of Vajrano, whence
their watch-fires could be seen afar by three armies : for
below them lay the camp of their fellow-Garibaldini ;
close at hand to the south were Bourbon regiments ; and
a few miles to the north lay Victor Emmanuel's army,
the corps of Delia Rocca and of Cialdini side by side
on two converging roads, with the King's quarters be-
tween them

1 Orero, 122-124. Revel's da Ancona, 64-65. Isernia, 42.
^Conv. Brown Young (who with Dowling conducted the operation). Mario
Vita, ii. 17. Red Shirt, 273. Adamoli, 167. Times, Nov. 6, p. 9, c. 4.
'See henceforth Map III, A, at end of book.

270 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

On the morning of October 26 an Englishman among
the Garibaldian outposts, who was sleeping in a dry
ditch, was awakened by shouts of Viva il Re ! Accus-
tomed to hear ' Long live the King ' as the Bourbon
war-cry, he sprang up half-awake, thinking the enemy
were upon them. Next moment he saw his mistake.
Victor Emmanuel, King of Italy, was riding by."

About the same hour the Garibaldini on the hills of
Vajrano awoke to see the whole Italian army, in all the
panoply of war, move swiftly along the valley below
towards the camp of the red-shirts on the edge of the
great plain. ^

Garibaldi had overnight sent on Missori and Zasio to
the Royal camp to announce his presence and offer his
homage. At dawn he himself rode out with his staflF to
find the King, and stationed himself in front of the Toll-
bar Tavern {Taverna la catena) — 'a rustic cottage with a
few poplars near it ' — at the point of junction of the two
roads along which the Royal army was coming.'

The Dictator and his staff, including Canzio and
Mario, with Missori and Zasio who had now rejoined
them, dismounted in front of the tavern and took their
stand a little oflF the road along which the Northern
regiments filed past. Battalion after battalion went by,
gazing on Garibaldi, some with unmingled enthusiasm,
gratitude, and love, others with a greater or less ad-
mixture of professional jealousy and political distrust.
Generals Delia Rocca and Cialdini both greeted him
warmly that morning and were warmly welcomed in re-
turn, for neither of them was touched with that jealousy
of the volunteers which embittered Fanti and many
others among the regular officers. The victor of Cas-
telfidardo and the Liberator of Sicily and Naples were

' Conv. Dolmage.

'^ Bell MS. (letter of Mr. Bell, who was among the Garibaldini on the
hill).

' The modern railway-station of Cajanello- Vajrano is built within a few yards
of the historic cross-roads.

THE MEETING AT THE CROSS-ROADS 271

divided by no cloud of petty rivalry, and if Cialdini
instead of Fanti had been commander-in-chief of the
Italian army, Cavour's instructions to show gratitude to
the Garibaldini would have been heartily obeyed, muct
might have been forgotten and forgiven on both sides in
the enthusiasm of the meeting, and the Serbonian bog
of mutual reprisals and recrimination might have been
shunned.

So the early morning wore on, while regiment after
regiment of the Royal army marched past the Liberator.
It was a damp autumn air, and Garibaldi was not only
wearing his poncho, but had in homely fashion bound a
coloured handkerchief over his head. His staff, in their
war-stained red shirts, presented a curious contrast to
the brilliant uniforms that were filing by them hour by
hour. Suddenly the strains of the Royal march were
heard, and the cry arose, ' The King ! The King is com-
ing ! ' Garibaldi and his staff mounted their horses and
rode forward to the edge of the road. Victor Emmanuel,
on a prancing Arab, dashed up to meet them. The Dic-
tator, sweeping his hat off his kerchiefed head, cried
aloud — 'Saluto ilprimo Re eC Italia ' — ' I hail the first King
of Italy.' * The King stretched out his hand and the two
men clasped and held hands for more than a minute.

' Come state, caro Garibaldi ? '

' Bene, Maestd, e Lei ? '

^ Benone.'^

Then they rode on together, and the two staffs
behind them, red shirts side by side with resplendent
uniforms, crosses, and cordons of honour. It was an
epitome of the union of conservative and revolutionary
forces that had crushed the obscurantists and expelled
the foreigners. The constrained conversation between

• Missori was always very particular to say that the words he heard uttered
by Garibaldi were ' primo re,' not merely ' re.' Missori told me that Garibaldi's
idea was to make a kind of implied ' investiture ' or at least ' ceremony.' Ctmv.
Missori, and Risorg. anno. i. fasc. 4, p. 752. Castellini, 93-94 note.

' ' How are you, dear Garibaldi ? ' ' Well, your Majesty, and yon ? ' ' First
rate.' Red Shirt, 285. CasUlli (Solaroli), 333.

272 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

the two groups betrayed the heart-burnings on either
side and the grudging sacrifices that each was making to
the other. But although there was cold politeness where
there should have been enthusiasm, none the less that
ride together was the making of Italy, and seen down
history's lengthening vista, remains evermore a goodly
sight.

After a while Garibaldi and his men turned off the
road to the left and made their way back by country
lanes to Calvi, while the King held on to Teano. ' Gari-
baldi's countenance,' writes Mario, 'was full of melan-
choly sweetness. Never did I feel drawn to him with
such tenderness.' He said little that evening to his
friends. Next morning they met Jessie Mario, who had
crossed the Volturno to provide hospital arrangements
north of the river. 'My wounded,' said Garibaldi to
her somewhat sternly, ' are all on the south of the Vol-
turno.' And then, relapsing into his gentlest mood, he
added, ' Jessie, they have sent us to the rear ' (' ci hanno
messi alia coda '). During their ride together Victor
Emmanuel had told him in soft words the hard decree
that the Royal army would take over all the operations
of war and that the Garibaldini were no longer required.'

^ No doubt whatever as to the place and circumstances of the meeting can
remain in the minds of those who will study the following authorities, a collec-
tion of eye-witnesses outweighing tenfold the story told by Giuseppe Porta in
the Tribuna, Aug. 14, 1907. Mem. Star. Mil. i. 43-73 (alone sufficient to decide
the matter). Risorg. i. fasc. 4, pp. 751-752; fasc. 5-6, pp. 1109-1116. Castelli
(Solaroli), 333-334. Revel's da Ancona, 67-69. Mario, Vita, ii. i8-2i, and Red
Shirt, 273-290. Zasio, 126. Castellini, 93-94 note. Times, Nov. 6, p. 10, c. 3.
Canzio MS. (a statement of Canzio's contradicting Porta and bearing out all the
other evidence : in my possession). Delia Rocca, 193, and see Guerzoni, ii, 229
and note.

CHAPTER XV

THE RETURN TO CAPRERA

'Semplice in atti e semplice in parole,
Chi della Patria cavalier si cinse
Dona tutto alia Patria, e nulla vuole.'

Marradi. Rapsodie Garihaldine.

' Simple in act and word, his country's knight.
He gives his country all and nothing takes.'

That part of the enemy's force which had been in the
neighbourhood of the two national armies at the moment
of their junction on October 26, retired in the afternoon
towards Gaeta and effaced themselves behind the line of
Garigliano. On the morning of the 27th Victor Em-
manuel rode from Teano to Calvi in search of Garibaldi.
Finding that he had returned to the south bank of the
Volturno, the King pushed on alone with his staff in the
same direction, crossed the rickety little bridge, and
entered the Garibaldian lines at Sant' Angelo. The
volunteers came swarming out to welcome the unex-
pected visitor, with cries of devotion and enthusiasm
which showed how far a very little attention from the
official world would have gone to win the hearts of the
main body of Garibaldini. Unfortunately this surprise
visit was the last effort which His Majesty was per-
mitted to make by way of showing personal gratitude to
the rank and file of the volunteers.

Since Garibaldi was absent, not knowing of the King's
visit, Medici did the honours of the occasion, helped by
Nino Bixio's lieutenants. Bixio himself was in hospital
at Naples. At the crossing of the Volturno two days
before, whence he was to have accompanied the Dictator

273 18

274 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

to meet the King, Nino had headed a hue and cry after
a priest suspected of acting as spy, and riding furiously
after the man to arrest him had let his horse slip in a
narrow lane, and fractured his leg against a wall. He
lay, however, quite happy in the hospital at Naples, for
his wife came out from Genoa to nurse him, and since
the volunteers' part in the fighting was over he was
able to turn his mind to the docile family affections which
shared dominion in his heart with the rage for his
country's service.^

Victor Emmanuel, after having fraternised with
Medici's men, and ridden close up to the walls of Capua
at the greatest risk of being cut off by the enemy's out-
posts, recrossed the Volturno and returned to Teano.
His army was there divided into two, one part going on
towards the line of the Garigliano and Gaeta, and the
other under General Delia Rocca coming south to besiege
Capua. Delia Rocca had to negotiate a delicate situation
with Garibaldi. Although the red-shirts were no longer
to be allowed to take part in the serious operations of
the campaign, yet on October 28 their services were still
required for yet a few days longer to help guard the
lines for the royal siege batteries. Garibaldi, fearing
that his men might be annoyed at receiving orders from
Delia Rocca if they considered that a slight was being
put upon themselves or their chief, not only placed the
whole of his army at the absolute disposal of the Pied-
montese general, but was at pains to devise a plan
whereby Delia Rocca's orders were conveyed to the red-
shirts through Sirtori, as though they still came from
Garibaldi himself He strictly enjoined on his staff to
prevent the men from knowing that the orders did not
in reality emanate from him. Shaking his supplanter
warmly by the hand, he wished him luck, and rode off to
Caserta.^

Two days later Delia Rocca, who had been deeply

'Afeng'Am, 388-390. Caii^/Jj, 335-336. Red Shirt, 275.
'' Delia Rocca, 194-195. Revel's da Ancona, 6g.

FALL OF CAPUA 275

touched by Garibaldi's generous conduct, hearing that
he was ill at Caserta, went there to pay him a visit. He
found him in a little room over the guard-house of the
Palace, exactly above a large store of gunpowder.

' I begged him,' writes Delia Rocca, ' to move immediately,
and smiling he promised to do so. Propped up with pillows,
he was wrapped in a military cloak, a little cap on his head,
and a silk handkerchief knotted round his neck. As I entered,
he held out his hand, and seemed quite touched when I told
him I had only come to ask how he was. He was still more
pleased when I told him how well I got on with his generals,
Cosenz and Sirtori, notable personages and most excellent
men, and how I regretted the enforced absence of Bixio. . . .
Mine were no idle compliments. I meant what I said, and
I saw that Garibaldi was pleased that I appreciated his
friends.' 1

Meanwhile, Delia Rocca's batteries were being scien-
tifically erected by the engineers of the regular army, in
front of the Garibaldian lines. On November i, at four
in the afternoon, all was ready, and a red flag run up on
the summit of Monte Tifata gave the signal for the bom-
bardment. The enemy replied and the duel lasted on
through the night. Some of the houses in the town
were set on fire, and the Capuans, many of whom secretly
hated the falling dynasty, protested to the General of
the garrison the necessity for instant surrender. At
dawn of November 2 the officers on the terrace of Sant'
Angelo Church eagerly turned their telescopes towards
Capua, and saw the white flag hoisted on its walls. The
garrison of 10,000 men became prisoners of war, and the
fortress that had set a limit to Garibaldi's career at length
surrendered to the Italian army."

While Delia Rocca was taking Capua, Fanti and Cial-
dini were drawing the net round Gaeta. On October
29 a reconnaissance against the enemy's strong posi-

^ Delia Rocca, 197-198.

'Franci, ii. 176-179, who estimates the Bourbon garrison at 'about 11,000.'
Delia Rocca, 194-200. Menghim, 464-465. Genio, 106. Times, November 6,
p. 7, col. 3. Turr's Div. 297-298, 301, 304-306. Cava, 26-36.

18 *

276 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

tion on the hills behind the mouth of the Garigliano
was pushed too far, partly by the carelessness of the
generals, partly by the unwillingness of the Bersaglieri
to obey the orders to retreat. The action cost the Italian
army over fifty men and showed that their opponents
could still fight. But a day or two later, when the Italian
fleet opened fire on their flank and rear, the Bourbon
forces abandoned the position on the Garigliano and fell
back towards the great fortress. On November 2, the
day of the fall of Capua, a successful action at Mola di
Gaeta on the coast placed the Italian army in a situation
to besiege Gaeta in form.^

During the first ten days of November some 17,000
Neapolitan soldiers, closely pursued by Victor Emmanuel's
troops, escaped over the frontier into Papal territory at
Terracina, and were disarmed and interned among the
Alban hills by the Papal authorities and the French gar-
rison of Rome.^ The remainder of the Bourbon army
that had not already disbanded or surrendered, was now
shut up in the citadel of Messina, in one or two small
forts in Sicily and the Abruzzi, or with the ex-King and
Queen in Gaeta.

The siege of Gaeta was protracted all the winter, be-
cause Napoleon III kept the French fleet in those waters
with orders to prevent the Italian fleet from bombarding
the fortress. The siege operations had therefore to be
conducted entirely from the land side, and were not
brought to a successful issue until February, 1861. The
long siege enabled Maria Sophia, Francis II's young
Bavarian Queen, to display to Europe from the battle-
ments of the bombarded fortress a heroine's courage,
which illuminated with sunset glow the last vision of
that inglorious dynasty which had known no rays at
noontide.

^Franci, ii. 154-176. Orero, 127-H3. Castelli, 337. Delia Rocca, 195
note. Corsi's Rimembrante, 33-34. Mezxaeapo, 134-135.

''De Sivo, iv. 314-317. Franci, ii. 195-200, 386. And see Appendix J, I. (a)
below. Persano, 456-457. Castelli, 341.

NAPOLEON'S FLEET AT GAETA 277

Napoleon's action in stopping the war at sea while
allowing it to be carried to its conclusion on land, had
no permanent effect save to irritate Italians and to efface
from their minds all claims of gratitude for his recent
complaisance with regard to Umbria and the Marches.
It is difficult, at first sight, to assign a reason for an in-
terference at once so feeble and so exasperating. The
Emperor's biographer, unable as ever to understand his
sympathy with Italian freedom, supposes that he wished
to 'clear his personal honour' by this tangible protest
against Victor Emmanuel's piratical attack on the King-
dom of Naples.^ Such may be the feelings of a French
Clerical in face of the Liberation of Italy, but it is difficult
to suppose that they were those of Napoleon III, only
two months after he had given his consent to Cavour's
invasion of the Papal Marches. The secret agreement
which he had made at Chamb6ry was that the North
Italian army should invade and traverse the Papal terri-
tory, so as to arrive at Naples in time to stop Garibaldi
and ' absorb the revolution.' In making this arrangement
Napoleon did not imagine that Victor Emmanuel had
undertaken to put down Garibaldi merely in order to
restore Francis II to the throne. The Emperor did not
like the annexation of South Italy by Piedmont, but he
had agreed to it as the least of many possible evils.
Therefore his motive in sending the French fleet to Gaeta
was probably not so much genuine indignation at the
conduct of the King of Italy, as the perception that he
must appear to be angry for the sake of the French
Clericals, whose loyalty, so essential to his throne, he
had strained almost to breaking-point.^

On the 8th of October, Cavour had written to Farini,
the Minister in attendance on Victor Emmanuel : —

' If Garibaldi's army acclaims the King, it must be treated
well. We have to contend against the requirements and

'Lo Gone, iii. 448. "This is the view of Chiala (Star. Contemp. 12-13).

278 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

pedantries of the regular army. Do not give in. Reasons of
State of the first importance demand firmness. Woe to us if
we show ourselves ungrateful to those who have shed their
blood for Italy ! Europe would condemn us. In the country
there would be a great reaction in favour of the Garibaldini.
I have had a warm argument with Fanti on this point. He
spoke of military requirements. I replied that this was not
Spain, and that here the army had to obey.' ^

It vvras a great misfortune that Cavour was unable to
secure the fulfilment, in spirit as well as in letter, of his
wise and benevolent intentions. Victor Emmanuel, who
had hitherto been more enthusiastic for Garibaldi than
Cavour himself, fell at this critical moment under the
influence of Fanti and the military pedants. Garibaldi
and his troops had welcomed the King and his army,
and had taken the place assigned them in the rear, in a
manner which no one had been able to criticise, and
which had elicited the gratitude and praise of Delia Rocca,
the General most concerned. There was therefore not
the smallest provocation for the official insult to which
the whole body of Garibaldini were subjected on Nov-
ember 6. On that day they had been instructed that the
King would come to review them at Caserta. The Dicta-
tor was to present his Generals and his favourite officers to
their Sovereign, and the red-shirts were to march past.
Such a day might well have been a turning-point in the
life of the new-born nation. Old feuds, instead of taking
on fresh and more virulent forms, would have been
soothed or healed. The Garibaldini assembled at Caserta
with feelings of loyalty and pride. They were drawn
up in front of the Bourbon Palace in their picturesque
regiments- — good, bad, and indifferent, Sicilian and Cala-
brian, Northerner and Tuscan. They waited till after
the appointed hour and then learnt that the King had ^ ,
determined not to come.

No apology or explanation was sent, or has ever since
been offered. Further to point the moral, Victor Emman-

' Chiala, iv. 34.

GARIBALDI, FANTI, AND CAVOUR 279

uel did not even write an order-of-the-day thanking
the men who had won for him the crown of the Two
Sicihes. Still less would Fanti, the commander-in-chief,
put his name to such a document. It was signed by Delia
Rocca.^

The man who suflFered most from the consequences
of this ungracious conduct was the man who had vainly
striven to avert the folly. It was against Cavour that
Garibaldi turned his wrath ; his personal devotion to
Victor Emmanuel stood the shock. He persuaded him-
self that these acts of petty meanness had been specially
ordered by the Minister at Turin, though in fact they had
been suggested either directly by Fanti or indirectly by
the atmosphere of jealousy natural to a regular army in
the presence of volunteers. This jealousy, common to
every professional service in the world, and aggravated
at Naples by the fact that these volunteers had really
won their laurels, Cavour was unable to control from his
cabinet in Turin. Next spring, in the first session of the
first Parliament of United Italy, Garibaldi's pent-up wrath
boiled over in a misdirected and malicious attack on the
statesman who had been his guardian-angel throughout
the year of wonders.

Garibaldi was sometimes unjust, but he seldom missed
an occasion to be generous. And on the very afternoon
of the thwarted review he had a magnificent opportunity.
General Cialdini arrived at Caserta, commissioned to
obtain his promise to enter Naples on the following day
in the same carriage with the King. It was very desir-
able that the Dictator should appear at Victor Emman-
uel's side, for if it became known that he had absented
himself with a grievance, it was doubtful what sort of
reception the Royal party would obtain. There would
f indeed have been a fair case for him to refuse to enter
Naples with the King who had failed his appointment at
the review. But he liked Cialdini well, and after some

> Corsi's Vent. Anni, 507-509. Peard Journal, MS. Nov. 6. Du Camp,
349. AdamoU, 171. Guerzoni, ii. 231-232 note.

28o GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

demur, and a good deal of strong language against Fanti
and Cavour, he finally consented to go.^

On November 7 the first King of Italy entered his
southern capital, with Garibaldi sitting beside him in the
carriage. They were both out of temper, and it rained
in torrents. But the Neapolitans were again in a state
of frantic enthusiasm, which the rain could not damp,
although it ruined the triumphal arches and caused the
rows of paste-board allegorical figures to double up as if
they had been shot.

If the King had been permitted to use common courtesy
to the Garibaldian army in the matter of the review, and
had shown more imaginative sympathy with men per-
haps over-sensitive, little complaint could justly have
been made of the treatment accorded to their material
interests. In this matter Victor Emmanuel was firm
to see the right thing done, saying, ' I cannot show less
generosity than Garibaldi '. ^

It had been Cavour's original intention to divide the
Garibaldini into three sections : the first and far the
largest to be disbanded at once with a gratuity for each
man ; the second to constitute a separate volunteer
division of the army under the title of Cacciatori delle
Alpi; the third to consist of a small number of officers
to be given commissions in the regular army.' But this
plan was not carried out. It was decided not to con-
stitute a permanent force of volunteers attached to the
army, partly for fear of professional quarrels and political
complications that might arise out of the existence of such
a force, and partly because nearly all the genuine
volunteers who had done the fighting were anxious to
return at once to their families and their work in life.
The privates, therefore, were sent back each to his home
with a gratuity. The Hungarians alone, who had no
homes to which they could return, were taken into the
Royal service, and were engaged for many years in the

1 Cialdini e Garibaldi, 546-548. Castelli, 340.
'Delia Rocca, ig8. ^ Chiala, iv. 34-35.

GARIBALDI'S ARMY DISBANDED 281

inglorious but dangerous task of tracking down the re-
actionary brigands of Molise and Abruzzi.

There remained the question of the officers. Since
Cavour's scheme of a permanent volunteer force had been
abandoned, it was felt to be only just that a very large
number of Garibaldi's officers should be given posts in
the regular army. A military commission, on which
Sirtori, Medici, and Cosenz had seats, chose out the
officers most fit to be admitted into the King's service.
It was a difficult task, for there were six or seven
thousand so-called ' officers ' of all sorts, drawing Gari-
baldi's pay in Sicily and on the mainland in the first
days of November, about one ' officer ' to every seven
privates. Half or more of these must have been ab-
solutely unworthy of permanent commissions. In the
course of the next two years 1584 of the best men
were picked out and admitted as officers to the regular
army.^ Medici, Bixio, Cosenz, and nine others were
made Generals. These arrangements were regarded
with intense indignation by Garibaldi and his intimates
at Caprera, who had expected that the volunteers would
be kept in being as a permanent force, to form a nucleus
for the national lev^e en masse in the coming war for
Venice and Rome. But the settlement cannot, in a fair
review of all the circumstances, be called either impolitic
or unjust, although there were many individual cases of
harsh treatment of men who had deserved well of their
country.*

Although Victor Emmanuel was now in full posses-
sion of Naples, the half-formed Kingdom of Italy was still

' Turr's Div. 327. It is only fair to point out that one excuse for the sour
temper which Fanti showed to Garibaldi was his knowledge that Garibaldi
claimed to have the rank of all his officers recognized. This claim, if conceded,
would have rendered impossible Fanti's task, — sufficiently difficult already, — of
creating a National army out of the different military elements of North, Centre,
and South.

'Fa«««, 433-439. Fanti Apr. 1&61, ^f. ^-ij. Corsi's Vent. Anni, 511-515.
Tun's Div. 321-329. Revel's da Ancona, 114-119.

282 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

in grave danger. On October 22 Cavour had felt ' the
certainty that Austria will attack us.'^ Every day that
passed in safety added to the chances of peace and to the
meagre possibilities of resistance in case of war. But the
Emperors of Austria and Russia and the King of Prussia
had met in conference at Warsaw, an ill-omened gather-
ing of the murderers on the tomb of their victim, and
Europe looked on to see whether they would decide to
slay Italy as they had slain Poland. At this crisis the
Italian position was strengthened by the pronouncement
of the British Foreign Minister in favour of the right
of the Italians to settle their own affairs. Lord John's
famous dispatch was his own spontaneous act, a personal
proclamation of the principles of Charles James Fox,
the gospel by which Russell's life had been inspired
and guided. England, who has often supported these
principles and often opposed them, was in one of her
generous moods, and applauded to the echo her cham-
pion's defiance of despotic Europe. The first sentence
plunges in medias res : ' It appears that the late pro-
ceedings of the King of Sardinia [Piedmont] have been
strongly disapproved by several of the principal Courts
of Europe.' After telling some home-truths about the
character of the Papal and Neapolitan Governments,
Lord John announces that —

' Her Majesty's Government must admit that the Italians
are the best judges of their own interests.' ' It is difficult,' he
proceeds, ' to believe, after the astonishing events that we
have seen, that the Pope and the King of the Two Sicilies
possessed the love of their people.' Therefore ' Her Majesty's
Government can see no sufficient ground for the severe censure
with which Austria, France, Prussia, and Russia have visited
the acts of the King of Sardinia. Her Majesty's Government
will turn their eyes rather to the gratifying prospect of a people
building up the edifice of their liberties, and consolidating the
work of their independence.' ^

This dispatch, written on October 27 and made
public in the early days of November, was greeted with

^Chiala, iv. 6i. ^ Br. Pari. Papers, vii. pp. 125-127.

LORD JOHN'S DISPATCH 283

ecstasies of joy by the Italian people.^ Cavour, who
had recently been somewhat annoyed by Lord John's
insistent warning that Italy must not go to war to liber-
ate Venice, declared that he had now more than made
amends.^ Lord John's dispatch has sometimes been de-
preciated as a mere blowing of trumpets over the faii-
accompli of United Italy. But such was not the view of
the men who best understood Italy's needs. Hudson
wrote to Russell that when Cavour first read it, 'he
shouted, rubbed his hands, jumped up, sat down again,
then began to think, and when he looked up tears were
standing in his eyes. Behind your dispatch he saw the
Italy of his dreams, the Italy of his hopes, the Italy of
his policy.' Cavour himself wrote to thank Russell in
the strongest language for ' the immense service he had
rendered Italy,' and his trusted agent Villamarina said
the dispatch was worth an army of 100,000 men.'

The feeling of Cavour's countrymen for Lord John
Russell, as one of the chief instruments in their libera-
tion, was shown in many different ways during the re-
mainder of his life. Once, in 1869, when he and his
family were staying in a villa at San Remo, they found
the ceiling of the principal room frescoed with portraits
of four national heroes. The four turned out to be
Mazzini, Garibaldi, Cavour, and, to their surprise and
delight. Lord John himself! Neither had the house been
specially prepared for their reception.

It has of recent years been somewhat the fashion to
blame Lord John Russell for his failures, but never to
praise him for his triumphs. Fashions in history come

' See Appendix A, p. 314 below.

" Chiala, iv. p. cccxiii ; vi. pp. 634, 643. Br. Pari. Papers, vii. pp. 35-36, 50.
Lord John feared in i860 that a war for Venice, under the existing conditions of
Europe, would mean a renewal of Italian dependence on France, more Napoleonic
aggrandisement, and a general European war. He was not lukewarm in his
desire to see Austria quit Venetian territory, for when that happy event took
place in 1866 he went with his family to see and rejoice over the official act of the
liberation of Venice, and the entry of Victor Emmanuel up the Grand Canal.

^Appendix A, p. 314 below.

284 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

and go, more often the reflex of tendencies in the present
than the result of new knowledge of the past. It is
probable that very few British statesmen in the course
of their lives did as much to reinvigorate and secure
the institutions of our country as was done by Russell
in 1830-1832, or won for her as much well-deserved
gratitude and such enduring friendship abroad as was
secured by his action in 18 59- 1860. On the Italian
question England secured peace with true honour, and
has never since, either in point of interest or of con-
science, had reason to repent of her work.

On the day of their entrance into Naples and on the
following day, Victor Emmanuel and Garibaldi held
private colloquies. The out-going Dictator asked to be
continued in power for another year as the King's Lieu-
tenant, and to have the grade of all his officers recog-
nised. Such requests showed how utterly incapable
Garibaldi was of understanding the difficulties of ad-
ministrative and military reorganization that confronted
the new State.

On November 8 the throne-room in the Palace was
the scene of an imposing ceremony, the official presenta-
tion of the result of the plebiscite, and the investiture of
Victor Emmanuel with the Kingship of Sicily and Naples.
The new Monarch was seated on his throne. Garibaldi
and his friends stood in one group, the courtiers and
army officers in another, and small cordiality was shown
between them. But the act of annexation was duly
signed by all parties, and Garibaldi, formally resigning
the Dictatorship, left the room a private citizen once
more. His first act in that capacity was to publish a
letter calling on all Italians to rally round Victor Em-
manuel, and to be prepared to follow him next spring,
a million strong, against Rome or Venice. ' By the side
of the Re galantuomo,' he wrote, 'every quarrel should
disappear, every rancour be dissipated.' Garibaldi's
public utterances during this period of strained relations

GARIBALDI PREPARES TO LEAVE 285

were as loyal as if every demand he made had been con-
ceded by the King.*

Before nightfall he sent Missori to tell the British
Admiral that he would leave for Caprera early the
next morning, November 9, and would come aboard the
Hannibal to pay a farewell visit before he quitted the
Bay.^ He spent the night in the Hotel d'Angleterre (or
hole Britanniche) in the Chiaja, talking with Missori,
Mario, Canzio, Zasio, and others of his intimate friends.
As during all these last days, he was in a melancholy and
gentle mood, moving his followers to tears when he spoke
of their parting on the morrow. In spite of the brave
words of the proclamation in which he thanked his
soldiers, and called on them to be ready against the next
spring, all felt in their hearts the presentiment that their
day of glory was at an end. And so these men, who had
seized occasion by the forelock and had performed at the
appointed moment the miracle never to be repeated, sat
up all night in the hotel and talked sadly of what they
had done and left undone.^

Next morning, before dawn, they went down together
to the port. The city was still asleep, and there was no
one to witness the departure, which had been kept secret
from every one except the British Admiral. They took
a boat, rowed over to the Hannibal, and came up the
side of the great three-decker, between the darkness and
the first twilight. Admiral Mundy, still in his cot, was
told that Garibaldi was in the cabin, and turned out with
all haste to receive the strange man whom he had learnt
to admire and love, while still keeping the open eye of
common sense on his single-minded fanaticism. During
a long talk in the cabin. Garibaldi invited Mundy to be
his guest in his cottage at Caprera, ' and spoke much of

' Castelli (Solaroli), 345-346. Bianchi, Polit. de Cavour, 386. Delia
Rocca, 202. Turr's Div. 316. Conv. Canzio. Cosent Guardione, 38. Ciampoli,
197-198.

^ Mundy, 277. Casiellini, 97 note (Missori's evidence).

* Zosio, 77, 130. Turr's Div. 3iy. Red Shirt, 2gi.

286 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

the beautiful harbour between the island and the main,
where Nelson had once anchored for the protection of his
fleet.' As they passed up from the cabin to the quarter-
deck, Garibaldi saw the Admiral's visiting-book lying
on the small table upon which, six months before, at
Palermo, he and the Bourbon Generals had signed the
armistice, the source of such mighty consequences.^ He
sat down and wrote in the book in French : —

' G. Garibaldi owes to Admiral Mundy the most lively
gratitude, which will last all his life, on account of sincere proofs
of friendship with which he has been loaded in all kinds of
circumstances.' ^

As he went down the ship's side many of the officers and
crew of the Hannibal were deeply moved, and the ex-
pressions which some of them afterwards used about
' the look of intense love ' upon his face testify to the
unique effect of his presence upon men trained in no
sentimental school of thought or character.^

From the Hannibal he rowed to the Washington, the
steamer that was to take him home. On her deck he
parted from Canzio, Missori, Mario, and his other friends,
who returned to the quay. His last words to them were
'To meet again at Rome.' Only his son Menotti and one
or two persons of less importance sailed with him to
the island. He returned thither as poor a man as he
had left it in the spring. In the last two days Victor
Emmanuel had offered him an estate for Menotti, the
title of King's aide-de-camp for his younger son, a dowry
for his daughter, a royal castle and a steamer for himself.
But he had refused them all.* His secretary. Basso, had
borrowed a few hundred francs of paper-money from a
friend, for necessary expenses. He himself had stowed
on board the Washington a bag of seed-corn for his farm.

' See Garibaldi and the Thousand, p. 320. ^ Mundy, 280-287.

* Meuricoffre, 82-83, Captain Farquhar's words.
^ Bianchi, Polit. de Cavour, 385-386.

CARIBAI.DI,

THE RETURN TO CAPRERA 287

With these spoils the steamer, almost unobserved, left
port at break of day.

He was soon back at his old daily occupations of man's
primitive struggle with nature, at which, but for the call
of a great epoch and a great cause, he would so readily
have spent his whole life. Again the dawn and the twi-
light on the Straits of Bonifacio saw him at work among
the granite boulders, industriously putting seed into the
scrapings of earth which he called his fields ; sheltering
a few sad vines from the sweeping winds of the Straits ;
calling up his cows by name from their pasturage among
the wild, odorous brushwood ; and seeking the strayed
goats on the precipice-top. Under these conditions the
melancholy of his last days on the mainland soon left
him. When, a few weeks later, a visitor came on business
from Genoa, he found Garibaldi ' robust in health, and
radiant with a calm and serene joy.' ^ For when once he
had been left alone again with his mother Earth, between
rock and sea and sky, no disappointment could prevent
him from feeling in his heart the truth, that he had done
a mighty labour, and taken his share in a task which the
years would soon complete and the long generations
ratify — the Making of Italy.

1 Brsmbilla. 4.S.

EPILOGUE

I HAVE now told the story of Garibaldi for the two years
1849 and i860 that give him his title to enduring fame.
It is not my intention to carry any further the chronicle
of his life ; partly because the documents which alone
could unfold the inner history of the affairs of Aspro-
monte and Mentana are not available ; still more because
Garibaldi's actions after 1 860 are no longer the hinge on
which the fortunes of Italy revolve, but are merely im-
portant episodes in the movement to liberate Venice and
Rome, which was brought to fruition by- very different
forces. But I feel the need to add here a few pages of
summary, unnecessary to the student, but perhaps use-
ful to the reader unfamiliar with the bare outlines of
Garibaldi's subsequent career.

In 1861 the spell of Italy's amazing good fortune
was broken by the irreparable calamity of the death of
Cavour. If he had died two years before, it is not im-
probable that Italy might still at this day be divided and
enslaved; if he had lived ten years longer the young
country would have escaped many falls in learning to
walk.' Cavour was succeeded by smaller men, who made
it their custom to court popularity one day by flattering
Garibaldi's designs on Rome, and on the next to arrest
his movement in panic, when faced at close quarters
by the inevitable collision with the Pope's protector,
Napoleon III.

In 1862, with a body of volunteers hastily got together
in Sicily, he crossed the Straits of Messina and began

1 There is an adequate biography of this great man available for the Anglo-
Saxon public in Mr. W. R. Thayer's forthcoming Life and Times of Cavour (igii).

288

VISIT TO ENGLAND 289

his march for Rome. But on the plateaus of Aspro-
monte he was stopped by Victor Emmanuel's troops,
who opened fire at sight. Obedient to his cardinal
principle that civil war between patriots must not take
place, he walked up and down in front of his men for-
bidding them to return the fire, and while so doing was
wounded in the foot by an ' Italian bullet.' He was
carried down, a prisoner and in great pain, from the
mountain where two years before he had triumphed
over the Bourbon armies.

He had not fully recovered from the wound of Aspro-
monte when in 1864 he paid his famous visit to England.
Never has any foreigner, hardly ever any native hero,
been received as Garibaldi was received by our fathers.
The quiet square in front of Stafford House, near St.
James's Palace, is one of the rare places in modern
London which is still 'a haunt of ancient peace,' and few
of those who hurry across it on their daily avocations
would guess what scenes it witnessed when Garibaldi
was lodged there. When the Duke of Sutherland's
four-horse carriage, containing the son of the skipper
of Nice in his red shirt and grey blanket, struggled
in the course of six hours through five miles of London
streets, amid half a million of our people who had turned
out to greet him, the wild procession rnade its way at
length into this little square, startling its Royal and
Ducal sanctities with democratic clangour. Then, amid
a noise of shouting like the noise of the sea in storm,
Garibaldi stepped out of the carriage, as calm as in the
day of battle, into a circle of fair ladies and great states-
men on the steps of Stafford House, while the Duke's
carriage, in which he had come, literally fell to pieces in
the stable, strained to breaking-point by the weight of
thousands of strong arms that had snatched at and clung
to its sides as it passed through a London gone mad
with joy.

After the long interval following the Chartist collapse,
the tide of British Democracy was just beginning to stir

19

290 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

again with that peaceful but irresistible ground-swell
that resulted three years later, after the quietest of great
crises, in the enfranchisement of the working men. The
successful emancipation of Italy and the visit of Gari-
baldi had their part in stimulating this movement in
England. To the common people it was an unexampled
privilege to carry one of themselves in triumph through
London streets, as if he had been Wellington or Caesar.
But he won, no less, the hearts of the English upper
classes, at that time heartily antagonistic to continental
clericalism and despotism. The Duchess of Sutherland
drove him into School-yard at Eton, followed by boys
and masters shouting after him as if he had just won
them the match against Harrow.

While he was staying under Mr. Seely's roof in the
Isle of Wight, he went to visit his brother poet, always
an enthusiast for Italian freedom. They smoked and
repeated Italian poetry to each other with great fervour.
' What a noble human being ! ' wrote Tennyson when
he had parted from his guest. ' I expected to see a hero
and I was not disappointed. One cannot exactly say of
him what Chaucer says of the ideal Knight, "Asmeke
he was of port as is a maid." He is more majestic than
meek, and his manners have a certain divine simplicity
in them, such as I have never witnessed in a native of
these islands, among men at least, and they are gentler
than those of most young maidens whom I know.' In
worldly matters, Tennyson noted that he had ' the divine
stupidity of a hero.' ^

During the same month he saw much of Mr. Glad-
stone, his ' precursor,' as he called him, in the liberation
of Naples. Mr. Gladstone, though pained by his ' attenu-

' Tennyson, A Memoir, ii. 1-4. It was on this visit that Garibaldi planted
the tree which Tennyson long afterwards celebrated as —
• • • the waving pine which here
The warrior of Caprera set,
A name that earth will not forget
Till earth has roU'd her latest year '

GARIBALDI AND ENGLISH FRIENDS. ENGLAND, 1864.

THE WAR OF 1866 291

ated belief,' thus spoke of his visit in after years: 'We
who then saw Garibaldi for the first time can many of
us never forget the marvellous effect produced on our
minds by the simple nobility of his demeanour, by his
manners and his acts. . . . Besides his splendid in-
tegrity, and his wide and universal sympathies, besides
that seductive simplicity of manner which never de-
parted from him, and that inborn and native grace which
seemed to attend all his actions, I would almost select
from every other quality this, which was in apparent con-
trast but real harmony in Garibaldi — the union of the most
profound and tender humanity with his fiery valour.'^

In 1866 the quarrel of the two German powers en-
abled Italy to acquire her present North-Eastern frontier
without that barter of her independence to France which
Lord John Russell had always feared would be the price oi
Venice. While the Prussians defeated the main Austrian
army in the plains of Bohemia, their Italian allies un-
successfully attacked the Venetian quadrilateral. The
regular army under La Marmora and Delia Rocca was
repulsed by the Austrians at Custozza, owing to bad
generalship which failed to bring the great mass of the
troops into action. The naval disaster at Lissa, under
Persano, was much worse. The only glimmer of partial
success shone on the arms of Garibaldi and his volunteers
in the Trentine Alps, though Garibaldi scored no re-
markable victories such as he had won over the Austrians
in his Alpine campaign of 1859. His vigour was not what
it had once been. The regular army was preparing to re-
new the attack on Venetia when the war came suddenly
to an end. The complete Prussian victory at Koniggratz
had led to the surrender by Austria of her Venetian terri-

' Morley, ii. book v. chap. vii. ' The General's gestures,' wrote Bruzzesi,
one of Garibaldi's most discerning followers, ' are marvellous, and much more
perfect than his language. In his language he sometimes repeats himself, in
his gestures never. His language is not invariably good ; but his gestures
are always dignified, perfect. They are never comic, always dramatic. I
believe if he were not Garibaldi, he would be the greatest tragic actor known.'

19 *

292 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

tory. All Italy was now free, except Rome and the small
province in which it stood.

In the autumn of 1867 Garibaldi, now turned sixty,
headed another rush on Rome, with an ill-selected mob
of followers., very different from the thousand youth-
ful veterans who had been so carefully picked out to
follow him to Sicily seven years before. At Mentana
the intervention of the French troops on behalf of the
Papalists turned the day against the Garibaldini, part of
whom stood their ground and were mowed down by the
chassepots, while part ran, as Garibaldi said, like ' cowardly
rabbits.' Hedged by French bayonets, Rome remained
to the priests for three years more. Aspromonte and
Mentana had at least kept the country's passion fixed
steadily on Rome, and prevented the Government from
acquiescing in a state of things that appeared only too
likely to become permanent, though it could never have
given peace.

But the end came at last. The result of the first
battles in the Franco-Prussian war caused the with-
drawal of the French garrison from Rome, and on Sep-
tember 20, 1870, less than three weeks after Sedan,
Victor Emmanuel's Bersaglieri entered by the breach near
the Porta Pia. Garibaldi himself was kept away from
the scene till all was over, but his old friends Bixio and
Cosenz took part, as Royal Generals, in the final opera-
tions against Rome. Bixio made a feint against the Porta
San Pancrazio, which he had once helped to defend for
the Roman Republic, while Cosenz led the storming
party up the breach on the other side of the city. So fell
the Temporal Power, which Mazzini and Garibaldi had
defied on the Janiculum twenty-one years before. Italy
had her capital, and the risorgimento epoch came to an
^nd. Two years later Mazzini died.

In the winter of 1870, after the withdrawal of the
French from Rome, the deposition of Napoleon III, and
the proclamation of the Republic in Paris, Garibaldi's
sympathies went round to the side of France, whom he

C.ARIBALDI I\ 0L1> A(;E.

THE DEATH OF GARIBALDI 293

regarded in the later stages of the struggle as a free country
once more, despoiled and oppressed by a power represent-
ing the military and despotic principles of Eastern Europe.
The old man summoned his followers and went off to de-
fend the French Republic against the Prussians. Much
controversy has raged as to the part played by the gallant
Italians in that winter campaign. But whether it is true
or false that Garibaldi's powers were atrophied by ad-
vancing years, at least he had not grown old in generosity
to a sister nation or in his will to succour the oppressed.

After his return from France he lived on another dozen
years, to the age of seventy-five. He was nearly always
on Caprera, but occasionally he visited the mainland and
Rome. It is entirely to the credit of his countrymen
that they continued to regard him as a demi-god when
his star had paled for the rest of Europe, and when it
was only too apparent that this demi-god was no more
exempt than Tithonus from the ravages of age, and from
other weaknesses of mortal men.

The end came in his white house at Caprera, on a June
evening in 1882. The old sailor, farmer, and fighter was
propped up on the pillows to watch for the last time the
sunlight gilding the waves and the granite rocks. While
his life was slowly ebbing out, two little birds whom he
had taught not to fear him fluttered in from the moor, and
sat chirping on the window-sill. The attendants were
about to drive them away lest they should disturb him,
when that voice was heard once more by men, bidding
them let the little birds come in, and always feed them
after he was gone. And having given these orders, he
went upon his last expedition.

This year (191 1) Italy has been celebrating the fiftieth
anniversary of her birth, which she dates from the official
proclamation of the Italian Kingdom in 1861, the immedi-
ate outcome of the events narrated in this volume. After
the lapse of half a century it is possible to see whether
the men of the risorgimento were building on the sand or
on the rock.

294 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Nothing is more remarkable — though to believers in
nationahty and ordered hberty nothing is more natural —
than the stability of the Italian Kingdom. The oscilla-
tions of the structure that Cavour reared in the earthquake
of i860 went on for some forty years ; but the vibration
has now ceased, and the building is as safe as any in
Europe. To-day politics in Italy could be more easily
criticised for their stagnation than for any dangerous
tendency towards either revolution or reaction. The
foundations of human liberty and the foundations of
social order exist there on a firm basis. The growing
difficulties of the social problem, common to all Europe,
find at least mitigation in the free political institutions ol
a nation so recently created by the common efforts of all
classes. In some European countries, freedom and order
have not yet been secured, and until our fathers' times
there was no reason to suppose that these benefits would
accrue to Italy for many generations to come.

The power of this great national movement has
fortunately been directed only to the securing of Italian
liberty, and not to the oppression of others. No doubt
the reason of this is the fortunate fact that no alien race
dwells beside the Italian within the boundaries of the
Peninsula. There is no one for the Italian to oppress.
But the result has been the unstained purity and idealism
of patriotic emotion there, from the time of Mazzini's
Young Italy to our own.^ While English, French, German,
and Magyar freedom were all vindicated more or less at
the expense of some other race or races, there is no one
who can complain that he was enslaved in order that Italy
might be free. No other Power — certainly not Austria or
the Pope — is the worse off for having been forced to yield
the Italian soil to the Italian State. All diplomats now
recognise what our British statesmen foresaw, how great
is Europe's gain in peace and security by the success of
the risorgimenfo—m its own day the bugbear of diplomats.
In this way the ' Italian question,' for nearly four cent-
uries the most frequent cause of international disturb-

1 1 leave this sentiment as I wrote it in the early summer of 1911 when it
still appeared to be true. (N»te to Second Edition.)

THE RESULTS OF i860 295

ance and war, has been laid to rest once for all. Italy,
which ever since the wars of Francis I and Charles V,'
had been the arena wherein French and German am-
bition wrestled for supremacy, with England ever hover-
ing, an uneasy spectator, on the skirts of a conflict so
dangerous to the Balance of Power— Italy has 'now been
' neutralised ' as securely as Switzerland, to the immense
benefit of the cause of peace and goodwill among men.

In Italy herself it is the traditions of the risorgimento
that unite and elevate her children. All classes from
king to workman, all provinces from Piedmont to Sicily
are bound together by these memories of a history so
recent yet so poetical and so profound.

Nor has material progress been wanting, especially
of late years and in the North. In the South and in
Sicily brigandage has been stamped out. Justice and
order are far better in Italy than they have ever been, —
except under the Roman Empire, and then there was no
liberty. In the Middle Ages the Italians could paint
and build, and trade and write, but they murdered and
tortured and slaughtered each other like fiends. The
change towards humanity and freedom has been im-
mense. The evils of modern Italy are the result of two
thousand years' misgovernment and three hundred years
of foreign domination and national death. The good
is the revolt of the modern Italian against this ancient
heritage of evil, and the risorgimento, the ' resurrection '
as it is well called, was the symbol of that revolt.

The comparison by which modern Italy fails is the
comparison of her achievement with the ideals and the
character of the men of her own risorgimento. But if the
comparison be made, materially, morally, or intellectu-
ally with the Italy of the eighteenth century, or of the
restoration after Waterloo, the balance is so immensely
on the side of modern Italy that we feel that the men of
the risorgimento are justified and have essentially suc-
ceeded in their aim. Their sufferings and their deeds
are recorded, not only as a high example and inspiration

296 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

such as history too seldom affords, but because they
have had practical consequences of great and beneficent
import to succeeding generations.^

And what of Garibaldi himself? How will the Gari-
baldian legend — which turns out on examination to be
true — live in the minds of succeeding generations ?

Garibaldi is not to be judged as a professional soldier
leading modern armies, but as the greatest master that
the world has seen of that special department of human
activity known as revolutionary war. He could never
have commanded a regular force of 100,000 men, though
in his day he managed to defeat one. Owing to the size
and efficiency of modern conscript armies, there cannot
be another revolutionary war precisely of the Garibaldian
type in the Europe of the coming era. But history is
concerned with the past and not with the present or
future. In i860 Garibaldi was the right man in the
right time and place.

But Garibaldi's claim on the memory of men rests on
more than his actual achievements. It rests on that
which was one part of his professional equipment as a
soldier of revolution, but which surpasses and transcends
it — his appeal to the imagination. He was a poet, in all
save literary power. He was guided in political, and
somewhat even in military situations, by a poet's instincts
and motives. He is perhaps the only case, except Byron
for a few weeks in Greece, of the poet as man of action.
For most poets, if they ever take part in action, cease to
be poetical. While he was alive this quality was both
his strength and his weakness — ■ Samson's locks and
Achilles' heel. But now that he is dead, the poetry in
his character and career is all gain in his race for im-
mortal laurels. The history of events is ephemeral and

^ These half-dozen paragraphs, very slightly altered, are reprinted by kind
permission from a longer article on The Festival of Italian Unity, 1861-1911,
that appeared in The Times, March 27, 191 1.

GARIBALDI 297

for the scholar ; the poetry of events is eternal and for
the multitude. It is the acted poem that lives in the
hearts of millions to whom the written words of history
and the written words of poetry are alike an unopened
book. So Garibaldi becomes the symbol of Italia to her
children in all ages to come and on either side of the
Atlantic. ' As the centuries slip by, carrying into oblivion
almost all that once was noble or renowned, Mazzini's
soul and Cavour's wisdom will be forgotten by the Italian
who tends the vine or sweats beside the furnace, sooner
than the old grey cloak and the red shirt and that face
of simple faith and love. And to us of other lands, and
most of all to us Englishmen, Garibaldi will live as the
incarnate symbol of two passions not likely soon to die
out of the world, the love of country and the love of
freedom, kept pure by the one thing that can tame and
yet not weaken them, the tenderest humanity for all
mankind.

GARIBALDI'S HYMN

INNO GARIBALDI

(INNO DI GUERRA DEI CACCIATORI DELLE ALPI)
(Reproduced by kind permission of G. Ricordi <Sr' Cia.)

Trascrizione di LuiGI Truzzi

i^

4-

=3=

Tempo di

f

AI
To

I'ar -
arms !

==fe

^

:^r=zPz

^- -^.

^^^^

:f^ -^

-=H-

W.

Al - I'ar -
To arms !

i

Si
The

:2^:

z^ ^.

$-

^is>.

SCO

tombs

pron le torn
are un - cov

be,
ered.

si le -
the dead

va - no 1
come from

^^

299

300 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

i

'^-

^

&-

^

^=i

^sr:^zS=\-S-

l^EsEi

W

^

m

mor - ti, i mar - ti - n no - stn son

far, . . . The ghosts of our mar - tyrs are

e

:^=3e:^3eeee^3^;

^

:i:

ti ! Le spa - de

With swords in

nel
their

^

'^

^^

:1M=fc

pu
hands

m

gno, gh al - lo
and with lau

ri al
rels

le
of

chio
fame

^

la
And

-» — ^-

^n=S-

^

i

#==t

^r

-^ tti»-

:t=^J

,1 ^J

liz

piiq

f

-(»=^

^

fiam
dead

ma ed il
hearts

-w — -j— -
"1 ffpr-

-i-E^

no
glow

me d'l - ta
ing with It

lia
al

sul
y-s

GARIBALDI'S HYMN

301

~-^~

EEEiFfeHE?EEi£

m

_■! 0. 1 1^_

B

cor !

name.

Cor
Come

mo I cor

join them, come

ria

fol

mo I
low

Su, o
O

-cS=^=^=t?

T

. > a^ g f

^^^

i^--^^

E^iS^

m

gio - va - ni schle - re ! su al ven - to per

youth of our land . . . Come fling out our

ia

j* — u—

s=F

^=ta£^^

t?

S

jl;

m

eS^£^

^

tut
ban

to le no
ner and mar

stre ban - die - - re ! Su
shal our band . . . Come

^^^^^^^^^^

g

|teaj4=S

m

tt^- :ft

-£;

tut - - Ti col fer - - ro, su tut - ti col

all with cold steel and come all with hot

t=m-

^^^^

^^

.^

302 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

t

^

3

^--

1?^

I

i^:

fuo
fire .

su tut
Come all

ti col fiio •

with the flame

of

d'l-
I

W-

^

^

r^Szz

e1

'^^^

5p;

-c^

i^

^t

sSfet

f

rt

m

1/

ta - lia .
ta - lia's

nel cor.
de - sire.

^

^

«P^

Va fuo -
Be - gone
-(=2-

■:^J—-^-^^

^

=to=

f^

It

- ra
from

^m

d'l
I

- - ta

- - ta
Va fuo

lia,
lia,

va
be-

:t.-

i

■■^

S

fuo
gone

from

ch'e

1

I'o -

home .

Va fuo -

-[=--.tr

-fl

GARIBALDI'S HYMN

303

^

m

1^=:

lia, va fiaor d'l
lia, go from I

m

- ra, va faor d'l - ta
. . go from I - ta

- ra,

^

?"

^-

^^

6=t=

g

5

ta
ta

^^^iS

lia,
lia!

va fiio
O stran

i^

ig^y :

^ — sS — ^

H| 1

Fine.

g

ra, o stra
ger, be

nier !
gone.

304 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

GARIBALDI'S HYMN

Si scopron le tombe, si levano i morti,

I martin nostri son tutti risorti !

Le spade nel pugno, gli allori alle chiome,

La fiamma ed il nome d' Italia sul cor !
Veniamo ! Veniamo ! su, o giovani schiere !

Su al vento per tutto le nostre bandiere !

Su tutti col ferro, su tutti col fuoco,

Su tutti col fuoco d' Italia nel cor.

Va fuora d' Italia, va fuora ch'h V ora,
Va fuora d' Italia, va fuora, o stranier.

La terra dei fiori, dei suoni e dei carmi
Ritomi qual era la terra dell' armi !
Di cento catene ci awinser la mano,
Ma ancor di Legnano sa i ferri brandir.
Bastone tedesco 1' Italia non doma,

Non crescon al giogo le stirpi di Roma :
Piu Italia non vuole stranieri e tiranni,
Gik troppi son gli anni che dura il servir.
Va fuora d' Italia, va fuora ch'h V ora,
Va fuora d' Italia, va fuora, o stranier.

{Verses added after i860)
Se ancora dell' Alpi tentasser gli spaldi,

II grido d' air artni dark Garibaldi :

E s' arma alio squillo, che vien da Caprera,

Dei mille la schiera che 1' Etna assalt6.
E dietro alia rossa vanguardia dei bravi

Si muovon d' Italia le tende e le navi :

Gik ratto sull' orma del fido guerriero

L'ardente destriero Vittorio sprono.

Va fuora d' Italia, va fuora ch'^ I' ora,
Va fuora d' Italia, va fuora, o stranier.

Per sempre h caduto degli empi 1' orgoglio,
A dir-viva Italia-va il Re in Campidoglio :
La Senna e il Tamigi saluta ed onora
L' antica signora che torna a regnar.
Contenta del regno fra 1' isole e i monti
Soltanto ai tiranni minaccia le fronti :
Dovunque le genti percuota un tiranno
Suoi figli usciranno per terra e per mar.
Va fuora d' Italia, va fuora ch'fe I'ora,
Va fuora d' Italia, va fuora, o stranier.

LUIGI MERCANTINI.

APPENDIX A

THE RUSSELL MANUSCRIPTS

By the great kindness of Mr. Rollo Russell, to whom, as to his
sister, Lady Agatha Russell, I am much indebted for materials
for the history of 1859-60, I have been allowed to see the
private correspondence with Italy of Lord John Russell while
Secretary for Foreign Affairs. I have spoken on pp. 28-30
above of the very great importance of these private letters,
more particularly those of Henry Elliot, the British Minister
at Naples, and Sir James Hudson, the British Minister at Turin.
We see in them the process by which British statesmen were
induced during the course of Garibaldi's expedition of i860
to accept the idea of Italian Unity contrary to their previous
views and intentions. Russell, Palmerston, and Gladstone
had long been friends of Italian liberty, but they did not see
that unity was the condition of liberty until they were con-
vinced by events and by the letters of Hudson and Elliot,
who were themselves converted to the doctrine of Unity only
by Garibaldi's success in Sicily. The following extracts and
analyses will interest the student, and even, I think, the general
reader.

i860, May I. Hudson to Russell. From Turin. [Gari-
baldi still at Quarto, preparing to sail for Sicily.]

'I feel convinced that both France and Austria mean
mischief, France will not tolerate the substantial aggrandise-
ment of this country [Piedmont] and its institutions, and
Austria yet dreams of reconquest. If you abstain in Sicily
and at Naples, Italy, in my opinion, has not much chance of
being left to the Italians.'

May 4. Hudson to Russell [Two days before Garibaldi
sailed.] Hudson encloses a letter of Mr. Fenton's from
Florence dated May 2, narrating on fairly reliable evidence
that Victor Emmanuel at Florence had ' said that he would be
at Naples before the end of the year.' Hudson comments :
' I quite believe that he is capable of saying so, because when
he received a sword of honour from the Romans, he said

305 20

3o6 APPENDIX A

" anderemo al fondo," and because also he is in the habit of
blurting out just what happens to be present to his mind at
the moment'

May 1 8. Hudson to Russell. [Garibaldi in Sicily, not yet
in Palermo. Three days after Calatafimi.]

Hudson advises against the union of North and South
Italy, because — ' i. Naples cannot be ruled from Turin or
Florence with the Papal States intervening.' [This objection
of Hudson's was removed in September when the Piedmontese
overran and annexed the Papal Marches and Umbria.]

2. 'The Neapolitans are too corrupt and the entire civil
and military administration is so abominable that their junction
with North Italy, where honesty is the rule in public affairs,
would merely produce a social decomposition and then a poli-
tical putrefaction.' We must therefore, argues Hudson, find
a mezzo-termine in order to arrive at the end Russell desires,
viz. to check the Murat party and the French designs on
South Italy. The mezzo-termine recommended by Hudson is
a Prince of the House of Savoy on the throne of Naples and
Sicily, guaranteed by France and England. This is to be got
by ' amicable representation ' at Naples by France and England,
which would result in either the grant of a constitution, or an
abdication. Either would do, but the latter would be best, for
then a Prince of the House of Savoy might be put into the
vacant throne. ' I believe Cavour heartily desires an Anglo-
French intervention at Naples. I cannot go and speak to him
on the subject, but I have caused him to be sounded, and I
have myself sounded some of the best and wisest heads on the
matter ; — the above is the result.' Here we see that as late as
May 1 8, 1 86o, Hudson himself was not in favour of Italian
unity.

May 27. Hudson to Russell. [Day Garibaldi entered
Palermo.]

' I received your telegram this morning instructing me to
ask Cavour to stop any more expeditions from Genoa and
Tuscany. He told me some days ago he would not permit
any repetition of the Garibaldi expedition, and I believe him.'
[If so, Hudson was unusually credulous, for Cavour was at
that moment helping his friends to fit out the expedition of
Medici.]

May 31. Hudson to Russell. [First day of the armistice
at Palermo.]

Hudson discusses whether there is truth in the rumours

APPENDIX A 307

that Italy will make ' further concessions ' of territory to France,
in return for Venice or the South. Cavour denies it, and
Hudson believes him. ' For my part my belief is based not
upon Cavour but upon Cavour's necessities. . . . You speak
of Cavour as though he were Dictator. But he depends on
public opinion.' The deputies supported him in the cession of
Savoy, because they knew they must pay France for Central
Italy, and because the greater part of Nice is French in popu-
lation, and Savoy ' is as reactionary as Ireland or the Vatican.'
But he could not command fifty votes to give away Sardinia
or Genoa. ' The King told me that he had made the sacrifice
of Savoy and Nice with a heavy heart, but there was no means
of avoiding it. He added that he had paid his shot to France
and he would hang the first Minister who proposed to make
another cession. Supposing the King's word is worth no more
than Cavour's, why should Venice be worth Genoa ? In my
opinion Genoa is the real tite de pont of the King of Sardinia's
Dominions. To give Genoa means to give Spezia, in which
case there is no Italy at all, and the Italians have no intention
of changing an Austrian master for a French one.'

' Cavour and Farini were here with me for an hour last
night. They went over the whole question of Italy and her
independence. They came here with a telegram announcing
the fall of Palermo. I did not detect a word which smacked
of further concessions to France. But I perceive very clearly
that the more you hang back, the more easy do you make the
propagation of French notions in Italy. Upon whom can the
constitutional party in Italy lean save upon us ? And if we
refuse to allow them to lean upon us, you force them to lean
upon France. Consequently if you abstain from interference
in some shape or other in these Sicilian movements you leave
a free field to France.'

June 2. Elliot to Russell. From Naples [during armistice
at Palermo].

' It is extremely fortunate that the protest of the Admiral
[Mundy] against the bombardment' [of Palermo, see Garibaldi
and the Thousand, pp. 290, 31 1, 313] 'was not listened to, for
if it had been abandoned on that account the success of the
insurgents would indubitably have been put on our shoulders,
but nevertheless, as it was not listened to, I am delighted that
the protest should have been made. . . . I do not feel much fear
that the bombardment will be renewed, but it was charming
to see how its defence was taken up by the Nuncio who gesti-

308 APPENDIX A

culated in favour of shells and shrapnel, till his purple stockings
got almost scarlet with excitement'

July lo. Elliot to Russell. [More than a month after fall
of Palermo].

Elliot says he is favourable to complete annexation by
Piedmont, either by means of Garibaldi continuing his career
of victory, as he will do if the Sicilian settlement is delayed
till he has crossed the Straits : or else, as Elliot would prefer,
by Piedmont declaring open war on the House of Bourbon.
If Piedmont ' would come forward openly and say that she
intends to take up arms for her Sicilian brothers, I think it
would simplify matters much, for the whole concern would
probably tumble down without much further trouble, and it
would moreover be an infinitely more manly and creditable
course.'

The treaty ceding Sardinia and Genoa to France is apocry-
phal, and comes from Vienna. But false rumours, adds Elliot,
have often preceded such objectionable pretensions of France.

July 1 6. Hudson to Russell. From Turin. [Four days
prior to the battle of Milazzo.]

' The Unionists of North and Central Italy hold that policy
because they see in it their principal means of escape from all
foreign influence, and for my part I cordially and entirely
agree with them for the very same reason that heretofore I
advocated the annexation of Tuscany. Because now that the
notion of a Prince of the House of Savoy' [see his letter of
May 1 8 above] ' has been set aside by the force of circumstances,
I do see very great danger to the Balance of Power in the
Mediterranean if France should in the midst of the Neapolitan
confusion find means to place a creature of her own on that
throne or on both of the Sicilies. As to further compensation
to France in the event of annexation of one or both of the
Sicilies,' . . . Cavour 'exclaimed vehemently only last night —
" / will guarantee that nothing of the sort shall happen. I want
Italy for the Italians, not for the French." I replied, that you
were of opinion that if he only ran straight all would yet be
well, and to this he solemnly declared that he would run
straight!

July 22. Farini to Russell. From Turin.

Farini, Cavour's principal colleague, writes solemnly deny-
ing rumours circulating in Europe that Italy and France are
negotiating for a cession of Sardinia and the Ligurian coast
to France.

APPENDIX A 309

July 31. Russell to Farini. From Chesham Place.
(Reply to last.)

'Sir,

' I beg to assure you that I entirely believe your denial
of the sinister rumours which have been spread. But we know
that Count Cavour thought himself compelled to yield con-
trary to his declarations on the subject at Savoy and Nice.
So that many say what happened once may happen again.
For the present I entirely disbelieve in any secret treaty.'

July 25. Ricasoli to Russell. From Florence.

Ricasoli writes to thank Lord John for his support of the
Italian cause. ' La regeneration I talienne repose uniquement
sur son unit6. Veuillez bien en etre persuade, My Lord. II
n'y a de salut pour I'Europe que dans I'ltalie-Nation, et il n'y
a pas de Nation que dans I'unit^.'

July 27. Hudson to Russell. [Garibaldi's army, victorious
at Milazzo on the 20th, is arriving at Messina on the Straits.]

' To state what are the plans of Cavour would be to do that
which he himself would not dare to attempt, for my belief is
that he has no plan. He is a waiter upon Providence and the
chapter of accidents.' . . . ' The general aspect of afifairs is a
complete imbroglio for which there would, as a choice of evils,
appear to be no other remedy than annexation. If, therefore,
I am an advocate of that principle, it is rather because it
appears to me to be less prejudicial to British interests (of
which you remind me) than the anarchy of Sicily and Naples,
and the discontent of North Italy.'

July 28. Elliot to Russell. [Three or four days after
Lacaita's visit to Russell's house, see pp. 105-108 above.]

' De Martino [Neapolitan Minister for Foreign Affairs] is
evidently much vexed that you will not join in preventing
Garibaldi from crossing the Straits, though I scarcely think he
can have really expected that you would, as I have over and
over again told him not to reckon on any such help.'

July 31. Hudson to Russell. [Garibaldi still at Messina.]

A long reasoned letter to prove that the Unity of Italy is
in accordance with British interests. [For a synopsis of this
letter and some further extracts, see p. 29 above.]

' To constitute Italy under Duality is not easy with public
opinion opposed. I was then a Dualist. I continued to be
so till the capture of Palermo. I then proposed a Prince of
the House of Savoy. [See letter of May 18, above.] You

310 APPENDIX A

received the notion coldly and did nothing to promote it
The tidal wave of unity which the victory of Palermo set
in motion carried that idea to the frozen sea of diplomatic
nostrums.'

The Neapolitans are turning to Victor Emmanuel as to
the only man to save them from 'anarchy and civil war,
plunder and massacre, a licentious foreign soldiery, and a de-
graded mob.'

After stating many suggested solutions and the objection
to each, he writes, ' It is not then my sympathies with Italy,
but my sympathy with British interests which leads me in the
face of existing circumstances to advocate the least prejudicial
of these various issues, the Unity of Italy.'

'The interests of Italy turn, naturally, rather towards
Germany than France, provided Germany will allow her.
There is no reason why Austria should not give a real, efficient
protection to Italy ; they have great interests in common, and
they have a common danger, France. But then this protection
should be a moral one, not such an interest as Rudolf of
Hapsburg tried to create in Italy by a corrupt bargain with
Rome. It should be a protection shared by England and
Prussia, with no other guarantee, no other pact than that
which springs from natural necessities shared in common and
felt by all. ... If Austria would consent to cede Venice she
would find security, compensation, and safety. She would re-
establish her finances and gain a barrier on her Western
frontier which would be impregnable so long as England is
mistress of the sea.'

Such a league of Austria, Prussia, Italy, and England,
argues Hudson, would put an end to all our fears of French
hegemony.

[In view of the arguments used by Hudson in this letter in
favour of Italian Unity, compare the letter of Lord Palmerston
on January lo, 1861 {Queen's Letters, vol. iii.). ' Upon the
subject of Italy your Majesty reminds Viscount Palmerston
that he stated last summer that it would be better for the
interests of England that Southern Italy should be a separate
Monarchy, rather than that it should form part of a United
Italy. Viscount Palmerston still retains that opinion, because
a separate Kingdom of the Two Sicilies would be more likely,
in the event of war between England and France, to side, at
least by its neutrality, with the strongest naval Power, and it is
to be hoped that such Power would be England. But then it

APPENDIX A 311

would be necessary that the Two Sicilies as an independent
and separate State should be well governed, and should have
an enlightened Sovereign. This unfortunately has become
hopeless and impossible under the Bourbon Dynasty, and no
Englishman could wish to see a Murat or a Prince Napoleon
on the Throne of Naples. The course of events since last
summer (i860) seems to have finally decided the fate of Sicily
and Naples, and there can be no doubt that for the interest of
the people of Italy, and with a view to the general balance of
Power in Europe, a United Italy is the best arrangement. The
Italian Kingdom will never side with France from partiality to
France, and the stronger that Kingdom becomes the better able
it will be to resist political coercion from France. The chief
hold that France will have upon the policy of the Kingdom of
Italy consists in the retention of Venetia by Austria.']

August II. Elliot to Russell. [Garibaldi still on Sicilian
side of Straits of Messina.]

' Villamarina told me this morning, but again swore me to
secrecy, that Victor Emmanuel has just received a letter from
Prince Napoleon saying that the time has come for securing the
independence of Italy : courage on your part is all that is now
required' But Elliot adds that the Piedmontese Government,
frightened of the men around Garibaldi, have instructed Vil-
lamarina ' to do all he can to prevent Garibaldi from coming
over,' but without letting it appear as if Piedmont was doing
so. The object in this is to get a revolution in Naples for
annexation without a Garibaldian dictatorship. But Elliot
prophesies [correctly] that the Neapolitans have so little pluck
that the attempt to anticipate Garibaldi will fail.

August 20. Elliot to Russell. [Garibaldi just crossing the
Straits.]

' The only tolerable solution which I see remaining is that
there should be war between Naples and Sardinia. The former
dare not quarrel, and I am afraid the latter may continue to
think it more profitable to go on working underground. But
open war would be infinitely more creditable, and it would avoid
the dangers both of Mazzinism and reaction through which we
shall otherwise have to pass. If this were to be done, Naples
would be settled, but we should then have the affairs of Rome
and Venetia which must arise out of the annexation of Naples.
If the Neapolitans shook off their King for themselves it is per-
haps possible that they might be induced to be satisfied with
the second son of Victor Emmanuel ; but there is little chance

312 APPENDIX A

of their doing their work for themselves, and those who do it
will impose the new arrangement on them,' viz. annexation.

August 24. Hudson to Russell.

' The expeditions of Garibaldi have ceased, bond fide, and, as
the fine weather has set in, the country people are thinking more
of their harvest than of politics. Turin is deserted. The King
is in the mountains shooting chamois, and nearly all the diplo-
mats gone too.' [And Cavour was meanwhile making his final
arrangements for the invasion of the Papal States : I wonder
whether Hudson really knew this.]

September i. Elliot to Russell. From Naples. [Six
days before Garibaldi entered Naples.]

Narrates discovery of what is called Count Trapani's re-
actionary plot, which has led to the resignation of the constitu-
tional Ministers. But their resignation is not yet accepted.
The National Guards almost insist on the Ministry remaining
in, and say that if it does so the tranquillity of the town will
be guaranteed by them. But the Ministers, or rather De
Martino, insist on going, and say that if the King becomes
privy to plots for their arrest, which was part of the programme
of Trapani's plot, they cannot remain in to please the National
Guard, or to become the Government not of the King but of
the people. In a few hours it must be settled one way or other.

' 1 cannot yet give any true details of this plot, but the
French connection of the leaders both of it and of Count Aquila's
[plot of August 11] is a remarkable feature. The most pro-
minent man in the present one is Prince Castropiano, and
Prince Ischitella is also said to be in it, and both of these
men I pointed out to you as devoted to French interests.
It was also a Frenchman in whose rooms the compromising
papers were found, and I believe Brenier has called for his
liberation. In fact on all sides there is an atmosphere of in-
trigue that bewilders me.'

September 7. Hudson to Russell. [Day of Garibaldi's
entry into Naples ; a few days prior to Cavour's invasion of
Papal States.]

'Cavour must choose between one of the horns of his
dilemma. Either intervention with Victor Emmanuel, or
anarchy with Garibaldi. Of course he chooses for the former,
but we see now what the Garibaldi expedition has produced.
Cavour told me this morning that he would willingly have
avoided all this, but being determined not to let Garibaldi and
the Mazzinians get the whip-hand, he is forced to resort to

APPENDIX A 313

extreme measures in order to avoid the Venetia difficulty.
When I read your dispatch to him this morning he said : Be-
lieve me, Garibaldi shall not attack Venice ; — if Venice is ever
attacked it will be by an Italian army. I have no intention of
attacking Venice, and this Lord John may rely on. This ap-
pears to mean he will attack Venice when he is strong enough
to do so, but that day appears to me to be distant. '

October 16. Elliot to Russell. [A fortnight after the
battle of the Voltumo.]

' General Tiirr, who is Garibaldi's right hand, says that the
town of Naples furnished eighty fighting men ' [to Garibaldi's
army of 20,000 Italian volunteers at the front, protecting
Naples].

_ October 30. Elliot to Russell. [Last days of Garibaldi's
Dictatorship.]

' No change of any kind has taken place here since I last
wrote except that the necessity of having a Government becomes
daily more and more apparent, and each day adds immensely to
the difficulty that will be experienced in setting matters a little
straight, after the universal and wholesale plunder and con-
fusion, which is by degrees becoming a system.'

October 19. Hudson to Russell. [Victor Emmanuel ad-
vancing from Ancona to Naples.]

' The King has sent me through General Solaroli a message
to the following effect. That considering the jealousy with
which his constitutional system of government is regarded by
most sovereigns, and especially by Austria, Russia, and France,
and the lukewarm support of Prussia, he has no one to rely on
for moral support save England, and he would esteem it as a
favour if on his arrival at Naples he could be supported by a
British representative.'

[The 'moral support' was forthcoming in Lord John
Russell's famous dispatch of October 27 (No. 195 in the F. 0.
MSS. = No. 136, p. 125, in the Br. Pari Papers, vii.). It
contained the sentiment — ' It appears that the late proceed-
ings of the King of Sardinia have been strongly disapproved
by several of the principal Courts of Europe.' But ' Her
Majesty's Government must admit that the Italians themselves
are the best judges of their own interests.' See p. 282 above.
The publication of this dispatch produced in Italy the effect
recorded in the following letters.]

November 2. Hudson to Russell.

' Cavour begs me to make to }'ou his warmest acknowledg-

314 APPENDIX A

ments for your dispatch No. 195. . . . Yesterday it would
have done your heart good could you have seen him read your
No. 195. He shouted, rubbed his hands, jumped up, sat down
again, then he began to think, and when he looked up tears
were standing in his eyes. Behind your dispatch he saw the
Italy of his dreams, the Italy of his hopes, the Italy of his policy.'

November 12. Elliot to Russell.

' For the last week Naples, and I believe Italy, have been
more occupied about your dispatch to Hudson than about
anything else, and though you must have been in great
measure prepared for it, you can hardly quite have expected
the immense sensation it has made. Villamarina's first ex-
clamation was that it was worth more than 100,000 men, and
King Victor Emmanuel appears to have spoken to Admiral
Mundy in terms almost as strong.'

November r6. Cavour to Russell. Thanking him for the
dispatch.

' L'appui moral que vous nous pretez dans cette circon-
stance supreme, nous permettra, j'espiire, d'dtablir sur des bases
larges et solides I'^difice de la nation Italienne. . . . Ma vive
reconnaissance pour le service immense que vous venez de
rendre k I'ltalie.'

The following letter has already been printed in Spencer
Walpole's Russell, ii. pp. 328-329.

'Mr. Odo Russell to Lord John Russell.

' Rome, December 1st, i860.

' My dear Uncle,

' Ever since your famous dispatch of the 27th you are
blessed night and morning by twenty millions of Italians. I
could not read it myself without deep emotion, and the moment
it was published in Italian, thousands of people copied it from
each other to carry it to their homes and weep over it for joy
and gratitude in the bosom of their families, away from brutal
mercenaries and greasy priests. Difficult as the task is the
Italians have now before them, I cannot but think that they
will accomplish it better than we any of us hope, for every
day convinces me more and more that I am living in the midst
of a great and real national movement, which will at last be
crowned with perfect success, notwithstanding the legion of
enemies Italy still counts in Europe.

' Your affectionate nephew,

'Odo Russell.'

APPENDIX A 315

While this book is being printed (191 1) an important docu-
ment has come to hand, through the kindness of Mr. William
Warren Vernon,^ who finds in his diary under the date Febru-
ary 22, 1870, the following contemporary entry: —

' Reached the Hotel Vittoria at San Remo at 5. 30. We
dined with Lord and Lady Russell who live close by. Lord
Russell is looking very well. Lacaita, he, and Lady Russell
discussed how in July, 1 860, when Persigny was trying to induce
Lord John to stop Garibaldi's landing in Italy from Messina, he
(Lacaita) being very ill at the time, managed to see Lady John
who was ill in bed. She, however, received him and sent
for Lord John, who was mightily surprised to find Lacaita
there, who immediately attacked him on the treaty he was sup-
posed to be arranging with Persigny, to have an Anglo-French
fleet in the Straits of Messina to prevent Garibaldi from crossing
to Italy.

'After a long discussion which nearly exhausted Tino,
[Lacaita] who was very ill. Lord John said to him " go to bed,
and don't be so sure that I am going to sign the treaty yet ".
Tino went home to bed ; and two hours after, George Elliot,
then Lord John's secretary, came to him to tell him from Lord
John to be of good cheer. Tino took the hint, sent for
D'Azeglio and dictated a telegram to Cavour, implying that
the intended treaty was at an end. Garibaldi was accordingly
undisturbed. How few people knew that this was owing to
Lacaita. I myself heard Lord Russell confirm this story.'

This passage from Mr. Vernon's diary puts the story {q.v.,
pp. 103-109 above) beyond all possible doubt, by proving that
Lord and Lady Russell bore out Lacaita's account of it. With
the Hudson letter (see p. 105 above, note) the chain of evi-
dence is now complete.

^ It may be explained that Sir James Lacaita and Mr. Warren Vernon were
intimate friends, and in 1870 were travelling together to Tuscany by the Riviera.
Mr. Vernon was married to a first cousin of Lady Russell.

X!
Q

Ph
CM

<

g

w
H

H
H

c<

H
H

<!■

P
►J
<

2
o

Q

w

2

><

s

o S

o

X

>

<

H
Pi
O

s

o

14

w

H

?;;

o

>

o

en

o

Q
<

Vi

D
O
B
H

W
K
H

o

T3

E I

-^ r di "

■£ a

Cu ^ tS

05 cq^

J2 O

SZ

< S

■*- . S 2

" rt 5 C

ij (^ S ^ N
S ■ -=iS

5 '*^ . **-•

C h'

m o

C 0-= "^

Sl3 -u ■= ■"

O ^ ^ (U t-

o

a

<

^.^

's

>.

^

o

'^

•a

Pi

„

i-i

<a

»^

a.

■4S

o

•£. u

J3 O

e5

« «

'5 V s 'S

■S *■ ■ - 8

^ -a o _;

5 5 0"°

o

■a

c

. X 5 a
I O "O ^ ^s

■CO

J3
ro > -

M W Cl lO

:5Q

! «

.5 3

s .»

00

a g .ii .5 ^ »;

e '^ o S'C

S u

■« S

o u g'3"-i

„ S CO j= ,

a5°2cgS|i
=3^ g ojj S = B -

qj ri f\» 'itr-' n« ..**r;

"> ■> *" *-■ i-i .is

Y-. "
§ to

« (S o

-us

O m^

wis

' G c » '^

s

a -

■51

S u
£ CO

CU) l-i , •

o

to

o

ft;

~~''H'

'S

with
sard
oard)

•ax

c
1>

« u

"rt

T3 rt

s

M

-So

•S

° "1
o S.g

§^"

c

g ^^

diE

6

N

o

o

£ -

a

u ■<-■

feu"**

^^ OJ .

% a ^

O
H

§ cj

c

C

J o

3

n

•^ c

•— 1

Date of
Ge

ay 24.

he

•E

S

g

g

316

be

2

i-l

E

u o

C J3

S

.a
B

u

u o

5-1(53

"a*
U

'S

■a

c

f

O rt

SO
o

!»

•S e "^

-^ ,

^ ^ O

C " S g 01

^- 5 ? _ P.

S'S f^ o
O ^ o"

o,-

5iS

XM
S

3 K

o~ S » c
« s « 3

s^S.

«^Q'g.Q

>
o

c

o

o

B § ^

<u

■«u o

:a ^ .
5-1 05 ft,

O)

6§ .2

■« to

cq rt

<u

-a

;>

c

o

rt ^

^

rt

un

CO

' OJ

to

<u

CO

a'
3

S

s"

^

•So

ii

4J

1

s

O

S

8

. «

m

J3

I *^

d

q

'c5;

i,'

S

c ■

^,

o

t« u o
O a I?

C

•5

3

a

o
>

S
a
e

CO

■&.

m ^

g

2 O fe, o -

<" -o «■ o" S

^ c c w J;

•« 5j t^ . CO ^

■« c ■« O p

-8 E 2 M "3'"'

s .2 o CO g 'S

2. 2.

3

3 2

317

^ IS

is

I

o S S

(S cq cq TO

Q Q Q Q

K ^ ?». ^.

■a LS !S :a

ti tn s S

t» O •- ■

■" CO.

■S " « S 2 o o-S^M

B^e3 " § c a = "
■^■2= a g o S" a3 _

» S o o !

u o

u & c

Woo" b^'J^^

T w !r S

,S S 3 £ ii

a

Sta

ts

•M CO

;s u

K,

^ ^

tt3

cq g

■<i,

S «

1

^■^

rH

o

■S-^

od

Ss

bb

1

o»a

o

-*• >>

T

^H

«^

■g'a

o

Q

QS
J^ o

u

j^

t^

"k

*^ t;

<u

Is

.^53

!S

f^

h

o m ^

o

u

CO «

'c °

I -3

o .2 w

m- —

g,2 S

6^

< ^

o.. O rt.. .

^ >>

^ O

■o >

i 1

Z a

S d

d§

05

H

a>

CJ

S

^

9

a
<

.S*

> L»

ho C
rt M

S o

jj o 5^^ ."2

V

> s

•a

< hDO
O C O,

S « S

o _ o

a

ot-)".
as

M ■< ii

3 S «

<c3o :?

. g - s 2 s r.

CD

318

•"2
to

"3

•^ bo

bo bo

s s
< <

■I*

to

13
8

Q 'S ^ ■«

^a -S ■^ -a

-Is

o.y rt ?

«2

, . (^

■to a jtt ,

fe,to^to

s

o

•a

H g

an
CO

o
o
o

s

o

>

1^

to

s

to
S
.o

S g S « rt

c^ u

en ■" hoi„
c g .S °

•-So

< '3 o

- S _«i

•^-■s

»

SO

c S
a ■"

c

>5 -3 "

^ v« lu 2

o rS

u O o o
- o ^ ""

o

il

c
o

'^ •S

•3 O g T3
0)

«4-l O

•o .5

^ ^ .S rt " "

'<-' S =5 g ^
O o « fc -

o -
.Q

c -.
'S

S s

Sic .3

C4

lg

I '^
! O.

"IS

< o

« ?,

o "

° *! =

4>

« u ja 2 CO
> ~ go-"

« ^ S o ^

<u

•T^ ?^ ^ *«

53 *j u

d 5

J3 u

m

s « ■" 1

„- - ■;! ° <=

^ 3 .2 m" S

•2 5 I -a .« ffi
c

8

as

Q u V

_ s

a c

15.3

to '*-'

« 2 K
3 P 5

rt ChU o<

319

330 APPENDIX B

Besides the ships in the above list which took the men south,
there were many other ships engaged in carrying arms and
stores, as the large Queen of England (also called the Anita,
Durand Brager, 169) and the Independence, the small Ferret and
Badger which, together with the Weasel in the list above, were
the five steamers bought by Bertani's Central Committee {Ber-
tanis Reso. pp. 17-18). We also find mention of the ships
Spedizione and Colonello Sacchi taking out stores, in the Milan
MSS. Archivio Bertani, Plichi li-lv.

Guerzoni, ii. 126 note, Bertani Comp., La F. (Biundi), ii.
528, Bertani Reso. and Bertani, ii. chaps, xvi.-xvii., Luzio in
Giornale d Italia, May 5, 1907, and Corr. della Sera, August
23> 1907. prove that the expeditions of June and July, especially
those of Medici and Cosenz, were fitted out, paid for and sent
mainly by the Cavourian National Society, and by the Million
Rifles Fund, financed for the purpose by the Government itself.
But the expeditions of August {of Pianciani and Nicoterd) were
fitted out, paid for and sent mainly by Bertani's Central Com-
m,ittee and the more advanced parties, who also bought the
Queen of England, the Independence, the Ferret and the Badger,
steamers used only for carrying arms from Genoa, and therefore
not mentioned in above list.

APPENDIX C

THE RIVAL ORGANISATIONS THAT HELPED GARIBALDI

I. The list of seventeen cities where Bertani's Committee had
local Committees {Milan MSS. A. B. Plico, Ixxxix) runs as
follows : Modena, Parma, Forll, Bologna, Reggio, Ferrara,
Piacenza, Florence, Leghorn, Faenza, Ravenna, Rimini, Cuneo,
Brescia, Bergamo, Cremona, Milan. I do not think that the
list is complete, but it seems to show that the Committee was
active in Lombardy, Tuscany, and the Romagna, and to a less
extent in Piedmont.

The Cavourian National Society, whose seat was Turin,
was most active of all in the cities of Piedmont {Bertani Camp.
4), but it also had very active local Committees in the towns
of the Romagna (see Dallolio, 97-1 45), not excluding those
in which there were also local Committees of Bertani's. In
Tuscany the Committee initiated in May by Amari and
Malenchini worked hard in conjunction with La Farina and
Medici, quarrelling with Bertani ; see Amari, ii. 82-90 ,
Risorg. anno i. fasc. 5-6, pp. 989-993 ; Bertani Comp. 8 (note).

II. The accounts oi Bertani's Committee a.re given in Bertani
Reso. They were most scrupulously kept and stood the audit,
as Bertani's critics readily admit (Luzio, Corr. delta Sera,
March i, 1910). The total sum received vr&s 6,201,060 lire
13 cent. But of this sum five-sixths was sent to Bertani by
Garibaldi — 5,106,655 lire 45 cent from Sicily, and 201,632
lire 05 cent from Naples. In this way Sicily was made to pay
for the liberation of Naples, as the price of its own liberation,
for it was the 5,000,000 lire from Sicily that principally paid
for Pianciani's great expeditions in August, equipped by Bert-
ani. (See Rendiconto at end oi Bertani Reso. ' denari tratti dal
governo di Sicilia,' Onze 416,000 = 5,006,655 lire, and Luzio,
Corr. delta Sera, March i, 1910.) Garibaldi had been lucky
enough to capture from the Bourbon Government an immense
quantity of treasure in the zecca (mint) of Palermo, when he
took the town. They had, by great good luck for Garibaldi,

321 21

322 APPENDIX C

been calling in old money to make a re-coinage. A large part
of the five millions from Sicily came from this source. Forbes,
59. Conv. Dolmage.

The total of the private subscriptions received by Bertani's
Committee amounts to 851,735 lire 28 cent. The subscription
list, including sums from i -50 upwards, is given in full in Ber-
tani Reso. The Cavourian National Society and the Million
Rifles Fund probably drew subscriptions from richer classes
on the average, and were more patronised by the municipal-
ities voting rates to help Garibaldi. The National Society re-
ceived and spent over 1,000,000 lire. (See accounts given in
La F. {Biundi), ii. 527-529.) The Million Rifles Fund, besides
many thousands of rifles and muskets, supplied more than
2,000,000 lire (Bertani Comp . p. 24). Of these two millions a
large part was furnished by subscription or out of municipal
rates, and another large part by the Royal Government {Luzio,
Giorn.d'It. 5 May, 1907, Finzi's correspondence). The Royal
Government, through the agency of the National Society, itself
secretly paid for the arms brought to Garibaldi by Agnetta in
the Utile on its first voyage : since the Utile left Genoa on May
24 (see Appendix B) before the taking of Palermo, we have here
evidence that Cavour financially assisted Garibaldi's expedition
before its initial success was assured; Mr. Nelson Gay has
proved this from documents in his possession, in his article
in the Deutsche Revue, December, 1 910, p. 313.

APPENDIX D

THE STATE OF SICILY UNDER THE DICTATOR AND HIS PRO-
DICTATORS

This is an obscure subject, and I am not aware of any work
of careful historical research dealing with it. The noise that
was made about the outbreak of social war at Bronte shows
that these disturbances were local and exceptional ; they were
very promptly suppressed by Bixio. The history of the march
of Eber's column through the heart of Sicily from June 20 to
July 1 5, recorded in great detail in the Times, Morning Post
(correspondents passim), Adamoli, TUrr's Div., Abba Not., and
elsewhere, shows on the whole a peaceable state of society in
the villages considering that they were in process of revolution.
Some banditti complained of by the villagers were arrested by
the Garibaldini. But from Amari's letter of August 3, quoted
below, one would gather that the country grew more disturbed
near Palermo at the beginning of August

La Farina himself admits that ' in spite of the disorder the
taxes and duties are paid' {La Farina, ii. 340). But he is
no doubt right in complaining that there was still considerable
disorder and delay in the work of the magistracy, police, and
judicature of the island within a month of the taking of
Palermo {La Farina, ii. 350).

It will be well to record the impressions of several impartial
and well-informed persons.

I. The British Consul, Goodwin, who had been many years
in the island and was perhaps the man most generally trusted
there, reported to his Government that peace and order in
Palermo as early as June 11 were far better than the state
of things after the revolution of 1848, which he had witnessed.
In no subsequent passage in his Political Journal or official
corresportdence for the year does he complain of a lapse towards
anarchy, either in Palermo or in the island. (Goodwin's
Political Journal can be found both in the F. 0. Sard. Hudson,
passim, and in Palermo MSS. Br. Consulate)

323 21

324 APPENDIX D

2. Michele Amari, a most impartial observer, a moderate
Cavourian, who was in his native island from the beginning of
July onwards, writes on July 3 : 'In Palermo nothing is heard
of the thefts, homicides, and other violent acts of 1 848. I can
affirm this. They have, until a few days ago, continued to kill
some of the ex-police agents, but the case is exceptional. It
is bad certainly, but does not prove anarchy.'

On July 6 he writes : ' If I am not mistaken, the condition
of the country is far from anarchy, as some cry out seeing there
is neither the order of quiet times, nor authority in the proper
hands. In Palermo, though the week before I came one of
Maniscalco's ex-police agents was killed, there is complete
security of person and property. Business is conducted as
usual. People frequent the streets until late at night Up
country there are perhaps local parties with their quarrels and
revenges, but I have not heard recently of any spilling of blood,
and I hope that gradually order will recover its natural balance.'

A month later, on August 3, he writes less hopefully of
' every sort of disorder in the provinces, though in Palermo
there is security and tranquillity as in time of peace. ... In
the provinces the stupid local parties tear each other to pieces,
ambitious of power, vain and greedy. In some places they
come to blows, and the robbers ... let out from the prisons
feast and riot in the country-side, particularly in the district of
Palermo. There is ample provision under the laws, but who
enforces them ? The Governors of the districts and provinces
have done badly with a few exceptions. The National Guard,
through fault of the Governors or owing to municipal quarrels,
is powerless to combat the robberies and acts of violence.'

He very wisely says that nothing but a strong force of gens
d'armes from the North, ' neither Sicilian nor Neapolitan,' can
enforce order in the island ; this was one of the strongest argu-
ments for an early annexation {Amari, ii. 97-98, 109-I12).

3. Tiirr, though he served Garibaldi well, was almost as
much of Cavour's as of Garibaldi's party, and was bitterly at-
tacked by Bertani's friends. But in July he wrote to the papers
to protest against La Farina's interference in Sicily ; ' La
Farina,' Tiirr wrote, ' depicts Sicily in prey to anarchy and
declares that the setting up of the National Guard was opposed
in every way. This is false.' Tiirr says that there was no
ill-feeling between parties in Palermo till La Farina came and
stirred it up, and that it died down after his departure (Ber-
tant, ii. 108 note).

APPENDIX D 32s

4. Nievo, one of the Thousand, remained at Palermo from
June to December as Military Intendant, supplying Garibaldi's
armies. He saw the inside of Sicily all that year; he was
an honourable and an intellectual man, though he cannot, like
Amari and Tiirr, be called impartial as between Garibaldi and
Cavour. For whatever his opinion was worth, he wrote on
October 16:' Pay no attention to the talk about anarchy here.
Order is perfect, as it never was before in Sicily.'

5. The Times special correspondent (Eber the Hungarian)
writing from Castrogiovanni in the middle of the island on
July 10, says {Times, July 26, p. 10, c. 2): —

' Garibaldi, from the first moment of his arrival in Sicily,
has adopted the policy of leaving the internal administration
of the country in the hands of Sicilians, and every day shows
that he was right in this measure ; for in the general greediness
oi employes the nomination of any one but Sicilians would have
been looked upon as intrusion. ... It is only justice to say
that in spite of this office-hunt public tranquillity has not
suffered in more than three or four communes in the whole
island, and even in these the disturbances happened before the
regular Government was established. In all the rumours of
disturbances which you hear there is not a word of foundation,
and this is perhaps the greatest of all the wonders which
Garibaldi has achieved since his arrival in Sicily, for to his
prestige alone must this be attributed.'

6. See also V. M. 16, for a frankly Garibaldian account of
the government of Sicily from June to November.

APPENDIX E

THE ARMS OF THE CAMPAIGN

The following three statements can be made with confidence : —

1 . That practically the whole of the Bourbon infantry were
armed with rifles.

2. That the Thousand (except the Genoese Carabineers)
had smooth-bore muskets of an obsolete pattern.

3. That, after the arrival of Medici at Palermo, one part
of the Garibaldini had rifles and another part smooth-bore
muskets.

The doubtful problem is whether among the Garibaldini
the rifles were the general rule and the muskets the exception,
or vice-versA. I will place before the reader all the pieces of
evidence which I have been able to collect on this point.

I, My friend, Mr. J. A. Dolmage, an officer in the British
Army, both before and after i860, was on leave from his
regiment and travelling in Sicily in i860. He joined Gari-
baldi's forces in June, was unofficially attached to Tlirr's
Brigade, saw most of the fighting in the campaign, and was
professionally well fit to speak on its technical side. He sends
me the following notes : —

' SmootJt-bore. — The Thousand were armed with military
smooth-bore muskets. These had evidently been sold as
obsolete by Piedmont and other European countries; and
could be purchased very cheaply, I should think. The
Sicilian and Calabrian volunteers were armed with smooth-bore
muskets, many of these being weapons which had been dis-
posed of by our own Army and the East India Company.
They were purchased for, probably, from ten to fourteen
shillings a-piece.'

'The smooth-bore weapon was not at all an unsuitable
fire-arm for the tactics of Garibaldi, which was to get as
quickly as possible to close quarters with the enemy, when the
bayonet became of use. These muskets were sighted up to
300 yards. But after the first lOO yards or so it was quite a

326

APPENDIX E 327

matter of chance if men hit what they aimed at. On the other
hand, the rifle was not of service to a soldier until he had been
properly trained to use it' [See Captain Forbes' remarks
p. 329 below.]

' The Squadre (Sicilian irregular bands) had a very primitive
and curious gun of their own. It could make noise and kill
bird or man, but at no very great distance. It was not in any
way suited for a bayonet and was fired by means of a percus-
sion cap.'

' Rifle. — The men of Peard's Company were armed with
revolving-rifles. Colt, an American, the inventor of this
weapon, had presented 100 of these to Garibaldi.^ Not only
were they troublesome to load, but the user, in firing, would
sometimes have his left wrist badly scorched from the breech.'
[See p. 87 above. This explains why revolving-rifles have
never come into general use.] ' The Colt's revolving-rifle was
the only thing like a breech-loader in Garibaldi's army.'

' Medici's Expedition brought the first Enfield Rifles. — Major
Wolf received 1 3 5 of these for his Foreign Company, and they
were the only rifles of any kind with Eber's brigade in Sicily.'
[Mr. Dolmage was with Eber's brigade in its march through
Sicily, see p. 66 note 2 above,] ' Though it was of course a
muzzle-loader, the Enfield was an excellent rifle and was sighted
up to 900 yards. The men of Cosenz' Brigade, whom I met at
Milazzo, were in possession of Enfields.' [Mr. Dolmage came to
Milazzo bearing messages from Eber, a day or two after the
battle.] ' The English Legion had them also ' \viz. in
October]. ' I should say too that others had been placed in
the hands of the best Italian volunteers.'

'Neapolitan Army. — The Bourbon Forces were very well
equipped and armed. They were strong in cavalry, and had
excellent artillery also. At the operations before Capua they
had several rifled field-pieces, very unusual at that time. The
infantry soldiers were armed with a good serviceable minie
rifle, with a large bore. This bore struck me as so large that
I made inquiry on the subject, and was told that the weapons
were muskets which had been sent to Austria to have the
barrels grooved, and so converted into rifles. I do not, how-
ever, vouch for the truth of this story.'

1 See CidmfoU, 126 (letter of January 19), and Bertani, ii. 13 (letter of March
15), on the expected arrival of these 100 Colt's revolving-rifles from America.

328 APPENDIX E

' The Cacciatori — light infantry, sharp-shooters in fact —
had a shorter rifle, but with the same bore. There were several
regiments of Cacciatori which were looked on as picked troops.
It is possible that there may have been smooth-bore muskets
in the Neapolitan army, but I never saw any.'

' In Sicily, on such occasions as the surrenders at Palermo
and Milazzo, the Neapolitans marched out with their arms,
which they retained by agreement. In Calabria, however,
where many surrenders took place, the arms must have been
handed over to our people ; but I do not know what became of
them, nor whether any were given over for use to our volunteers.

' We took a large number of prisoners on the 1st and 2nd
of October, and several thousand stand of arms thus came
into the possession of Garibaldi's people ; but as Capua sur-
rendered during the first days of November following, these
came to us a little late for use.'

2. Mr. A. B. Patterson (aet. ly in i860, given a commission
by Garibaldi on the field of Milazzo ; since British I.C.S.)
writes to me : —

'Dunne's men [see pp. 65, 85 above] were certainly armed
with Enfield rifles, I remember my own perfectly. / believe
all the ^nen in Medici's command were so armed. It is im-
probable that Dunne's Sicilians (a regiment which of course
had little training) should have been selected for arming with
rifles in preference to the picked troops of which Medici's com-
mand was mainly composed. Most of these had seen service
in 1859 either under Garibaldi or in the Sardinian army. My
belief is that rifles were the rule at Milazzo. Probably only
the newly raised squadre, who were not, I think, engaged at
Milazzo, were armed with smooth-bores. I may add that
Dunne's men had no target practice at Palermo. They had
blank cartridge practice only. So they were not able to make
the best use of their weapons. But it did not matter much ;
everywhere the contest was decidedly at close quarters. The
enemy was so sheltered by walls, trees, etc., that we did not
see him till very near, and the firing was mainly at close
quarters. Success was obtained by the constant, determined
advance always under heavy fire and against a brave enemy in
a strong position, superior in numbers and of course in training.
Only the heroic leading of Garibaldi and his Lieutenants made
the victory possible. I venture to claim Dunne and Wyndham
among the best of these.'

APPENDIX E 329

3. In Times, August 4, p. 10, c. 2, the special corre-
spondent, who took part in the battle of Milazzo, says that
Medici's men were then armed with Enfield rifles.

4. Mariotti, a veteran of Malenchini's regiment, the Tuscan
part of Medici's expedition which came out in the Franklin,
in his detailed and generally accurate memoirs, says : ' Our
fire-arms {fucili) were those of the Million Rifles Fund, rifles
{rigati) come from America, small bore, with the barrels
varnished black ; they were technical perfection for that period '
(Mariotti, 420).

[Mr. Dolmage says these are clearly the Enfields, and that
Mariotti mistook in supposing they came from America ; they
came from England.]

5. Captain C. S. Forbes, R.N., who arrived at Milazzo
from Palermo within a few days of the battle, and was familiar
with Garibaldi and many of his principal followers, writes of
the victors in that battle : —

'Generally speaking the entire force was armed with
Enfields, but few knew how to develop the use of those deadly
weapons, the sights being deemed a superfluity.' But he adds:
' A musket or rifle, sixty rounds of ammunition, a water-bottle,
and for the most part an empty haversack, and you have the
impedimenta of a Garibaldian' {Forbes, 92).

6. Guerzoni, ii. 126, speaks of Medici as bringing with him
to Palermo in June ' 8000 carabine rigate {rifles inglesi) '.
But in a foot-note on the same page the list supplied by
Guastalla, the secretary of the Million Rifles Fund, we read of
d^Zi^O fucili francesi, 200 carabine enfield (query 2000?), 200
fucili di Liegi.

Now the word fucili may mean either rifles or smooth-
bores.

7. Finzi, a Director of the Million Rifles Fund, in his
letter of September 6, 1 869 (printed in Chiala, iv. pp. cxxvii-
cxxxi), says that the Directors ' had given the preference to
French fucili, model of 1842, which that Government had
abandoned, but which had done good service in the campaign
of 1859 — besides fucili of the Prussian army which had also
been changed. The Directors had also obtained a good
number ol carabine {Stutzen) and Austrian rifles (fucili rigati),
besides 2000 new Enfield carabine!

[This leads me to suppose that the statement in Guerzoni's
note about ' 200 ' Enfields is a misprint for 2000, especially
as in that case the numbers, 4850 -1- 2000 + 200 would

330 APPENDIX E

amount to something nearer the 8000 spoken of in Guerzoni's
text]

Later in his letter Finzi speaks of ' 200 excellent Austrian
rifles,' and '3744 Prussian fucili,' as the property of the
Fund.

8. Medici himself, in his letter to Garibaldi {Persano, 41)
and Medici {Pasini), p. 13, uses the ambiguous term 8000
fucili. But on p. 11 of Medici {Pasint), he speaks of ' 10,000
fucili e molte munizioni, oltre le carabine Enfie'd destinate ad
armare la niia spedizione', ' over and above the Enfield rifles
destined to arm my own expedition ' — which consisted of
2500 men.

9. In the letters of the Ministers to D'Azeglio about the
weapons in the Million Rifles Fund armoury at Milan, the
ambiguous vford fucili (or fusils) is employed (Luzio Corr.
della Sera, Dec. 8, 1909).

10. After the battle of Milazzo, the British steamer Queen
of England brought to Garibaldi's camp at Faro, on August
15) a few days before he crossed the Straits of Messina, 23,500
Enfield rifles from England in 1175 cases, and several rifled
cannon (Schwabe MS., Manifest for Queen of England {(Gib-
raltar, cleared 3 1 fuly, 1 860)). This bears out Times, August
25, p. 9, c. 4, and Forbes, 141. The rifled cannon were not
used in Calabria, but there were rifled cannon at the Voltumo
on both sides.

Putting together these various pieces of evidence, I am
inclined to believe that Medici's and Cosenz' men and Dunne's
regiment were at the battle of Milazzo armed with good rifles,
which they had not yet learned to use properly, but that most
of Eber's column and a great many of the Sicilians and sub-
sequently of the Calabrians were armed with smooth-bores.

APPENDIX F

BATTLE OF MILAZZO

I HERE give a list of the principal authorities which I have
studied for this battle. In traversing this and all my other
accounts of actions in the campaign, if critics find one or an-
other of these authorities going counter to statements in the
text, they must bear in mind that in points of military detail
even first-hand authorities and eye-witnesses contradict each
other, not infrequently, and that therefore I have been forced,
in collating the different accounts, to come to a separate con-
clusion on each incident, deciding in each several case in favour
of one authority and against another for reasons which it would
take a separate volume to set out in full. In the general aspects
of the strategy and tactics there is much less difificulty, especially
when the ground has been visited.

A. Bourbon first-hand authorities. — The first of Bosco's long
reports can be found in Cronaca, 207-209. A second, later
one, originally printed in the Neapolitan Rivista Militare,
August, i860, can be found reprinted in three places — Palm-
ieri, p. 30 text and 40-46 note ; Nove Mesi, 23-25 ; and Gaz.
di Milano, August 20-2 1 , 1 860, translated back again from a
French version. Zirilli, doc. 5, gives a letter from a Bourbon
officer. De Sivo, iii. 313-317, and Franci, i. 73-76, dite second-
hand, drawn from Bosco's report

B. Garibaldian first-hand authorities, q.v. sub loc. are
Mem. ; Medici {Pasini) ; Times, August 4, 1 860 ; Piaggia
(best authority of the topography) ; Zirilli ; Milaszo {G. B.
Z.) ; Mistrali's da N. ; Castellini ; Mario Mac. and Red
Shirt; Guerzoni ; Morning Post, August 9, i860; Milan
MS. Cosenz and Bruzzesi, and Bronzetti, i. 3 ; Nelson MS.
(in my hands); Rome MS. Savi ; Menghini ; Paolucci's

331

332 APPENDIX F

Corrao ; Peard's Journal MS. and Cornhill ; Brancaccio,
Bandi, Uzielli, Mariotti, and Fonvielle for Malenchini's defeat
on left wing; Pozzi ; Durand-Brager ; Forbice ; Magni ;
Forbes (arrived just after battle, as did Mr. Dolmage, Mario
and Piaggia) ; Milazzo {G. B. Z.\ Campo, 136-137, and Baroni
for Corte's ' Gaeta battalion '. I have also had the great ad-
vantage of conversations with Missori, Canzio, Tedaldi, and
Sclavo ; and my own countrymen Patterson and Dolmage.
See Appendix E above, on arms used in the battle.

Good second-hand authorities are Villari, Cosp. ; TUrr's
Div. ; Riistow.

II

The Numbers on Both Sides. — In no case may the numbers
be calculated from statements made by the opposite side. The
Bourbon Generals officially state their force in Milazzo at
122 officers and 4514 men {Nove Mesi, 2; Cronaca, 178;
Palmieri, 43-44). That was the total number of men against
whom Garibaldi had to act. But of those about looo were
the normal garrison of Milazzo Castle {viz. six companies of
the first infantry of the line, and a number of artillery, Palmieri,
34 note). The infantry of this garrison did not take part in
the fighting outside the walls of the fortress on July 20, but
lent 100 men to help carry off the wounded {Palmieri, 45).
Bosco's expeditionary force (making up the rest of the 4514
men and 122 officers, and therefore over rather than under
3000) consisted of three battalions of cacciatori (ist, 8th, and
9th regiments), the crack troops of the Neapolitan army, to-
gether with a mountain battery of eight pieces and a squadron
of cavalry ; all arms were first-rate troops and behaved well on
July 20 (Bosco's report; Palmieri, 34 et seq. ; Cronaca, 190).
If Bosco did not use all these troops of his own force (exclud-
ing the garrison) it was his own fault, and his statement
{Palmieri, 45) that only 1600 of them took part in the battle
is a quibble, for in the same sentence he admits that 900 more
formed the reserve and that some of these did actually ' fire a
few shots.' Also in both his reports {Cronaca, 208 ; Palmieri,
45) he complains that the reserve were sent into action too
early by Lt.-Col. Marra, so that he had no reserve at the
critical moment. Besides this reserve, he says that he also
kept 400 men on the Peninsula behind the town {Palm.ieri, 43).

To sum up, Bosco admits that 2500 men were under his

APPENDIX F

333

orders in the plain in front of the castle, of which 1600 were
in the front line and the remaining 900 the reserve, and
that the reserve was' all taken into action by Lt.-Col. Marra
(Palmieri, 45 ; Cronaca, 208). Above in the castle was a
garrison of looo infantry and gunners; the latter fired
effectively at the Garibaldini when they reached the bridge.
And there were 400 more cacdatori in the Peninsula, not
engaged.

The Garibaldini, whom Bosco reported sometimes at eight
sometimes at twelve thousand, did not on July 20 reach more
than 5700 at the highest serious estimate, and were probably
nearer 4000 or 5000. The best Garibaldian writers (e.g. Guer-
zoni, ii. 143 ; Riistow, 215) generally calculate the total as 4000,
or (like Piaggia, 39, and PaoluccHs Corrao, 136) as high as 5500
or 5700. It is impossible to tell which is nearest the truth,
on account of the absence of any official statistics, and on ac-
count of variety in the estimates made of the various bodies
of irregulars from North Italy and Sicily of which the army
was composed. Each of these bodies was usually called a
'battalion,' but no 'battalion' contained over 900 men, and
some were as low as 300 or less. The following table, which
mentions, I believe, every one of these bodies present at the
battle of Milazzo, will at least serve to show the difficulty of
calculating the numbers of the Garibaldian army. From these
lists I should be inclined to place it somewhere between the
two estimates 4000 and S5CX).

Number of Authority for numbers

Men. given.

Medici's force, with which 1800 according to Medici (Pasini), 18.
he left Palermo = Malen-
chini's and Simonetta's
' battalions '
Dunne's Sicilians - - 600 „ ,, Medici (Pasini), 21 ; Piaggia,

30 ; Paol.'s Corrao, 135 ;
Conv. Patterson.
Speeches so-called ' Ber- 400 ,, „ Medici Pasini, 22 ; Peard's

saglieri 1 battalion ' Journal MS.

Genoese Carabineers -82 or 85 „ ,, Forbes, 100; Rome MS. Savi;

Times, Aug. 4, p. 10, c. 4.
or 150 „ „ Medici (Pasini), 22; Piaggia, 39.

'Not ol course related to the Bersaglieri of the regular army. Pilade
Bronzetti was one of its principal officers. It was the only portion of Cosenz'
expedition (Appendix B, above) which arrived in time for the battle. The re-
mainder of the 1500 men of that expedition only reached Milazzo on July 21, see
Magni, 6. Cosenz had large bodies of other men under his command during the
battle, who had not formed part of his original expedition from Genoa.

334 APPENDIX F

Number oj Authority for numbers

Men. given.

Carte's ' Gaeta battalion 500 „ „ Camfo, 136-7, who fought in the

battalion ; Milasio (G. B. Z.)

or 600 „ „ Medici (Pasini), 22 ; Piaggia,

39-
(goo was the number of the original expedition
firom Genoa, captured at Gaeta, see Appendix B,
above, but some remained at Genoa after the return
from Gaeta. Conv, Pedotti.)
Peard's company (revolv- 30 according to Nelson MS.
ing-rifles ; too small ever
to be called a ' battalion ')
Sprovieri's ' battalion ' - 300 ,, „ Medici {Pasini), 22.

or 400 ,, ,, Piaggia, 39.

Vacchieri's ' battalion ' - 300 ,, ,, Piaggia, 39.

Borelli's and Montovani's "| No estimate is anywhere given of the numbers
' half battalions ' |^ of these four bodies, but they are spoken of as quite

Corrao's Sicilians 1 small. Corrao's men fought hard and had 20 casu-

Guerzoni's Sicilians J alties in the battle (Paol.'s Corrao, 140-141).

Besides these bodies, engaged in the battle, there were
Fabrizi's 300 Sicilians who were not on the field at all, but
were sent to guard the road from Messina against a possible
attack by the Sth cacciatori, who were occupying Gresso and
Rizzo {Palmieri, 36 note; Piaggia, 30 ; Medici, Pasini, 21).

Cavalry. — Garibaldi had none. Bosco had a squadron,
who played an important part on both wings.

Artillery. — Against Bosco's mountain battery of eight
pieces, all of which did great execution, and over forty pieces
of different kinds mounted on the castle walls. Garibaldi had
two ridiculous pieces, dragged by hand, which were brought
into action late in the day on the bridge for a few minutes, and
withdrawn as \xs€it.%i, (Forbes, 89; 5<2«afz, 238-239 ; Paolucci's
Corrao, 134; Baroni, p. 2; Peard, 821; Mistrali's da N.
620-621 ; Fonvielle, 103, 145). But the cannon on the Tiikory
assisted him towards the close of the day.

Ill

Losses. — There are no precise statistics, but the best-in-
formed Garibaldian authorities estimated their loss in killed
and wounded on July 20 at 750 or 800. Medici (Pasini), 29;
Mistrali's da N. 622; Rilstow, 219; Piaggia, 56, calculates
800, and gives an interesting list of those tended in Barcellona ;
Times, August 4, p. lo, col. 4 ; Menghini, 225 ; Cremona MS.
Carasi.

APPENDIX F 335

The Neapolitan loss every one agreed to have been much
less; Bosco placed it as low as ii6 killed and wounded
[Palmieri, 46 note), but in Cronaca, 208, he also mentions 31
missing, besides a dozen more killed and wounded.

It may be noted that the Genoese Carabineers had 44 men
killed or wounded in the battle (names given, Menghini, 2 1 8)
out of a total of 85 (or as some say 150, see above). Corte's
'Gaeta battalion' lost 14 or 17 out of 30 or 32 officers
{Menghini, 215; Campo, 137), and 190 out of 500 or 600
men {Campo, 137 ; Milazzo {G. B. Z.), 13).

APPENDIX G

DATE OF LANDINGS IN CALABRIA

I. Date of Garibaldi s Landing

Bixio's dispatch (Bixio, 232-233), by a slip of the pen, gives
the date of the crossing as the night of August 19-20, whereas
it was really the night of August 18-19. This has misled
many historians since, e.g. the author of Tiirr's Div. 132;
Castellini, p. 52 note 2, and De Cesare himself.

Bixio, in fact, makes his own error patent to any one who
reads his dispatch with special care, for the dispatch is not
consistent with itself. He says {Bixio., 234), that they entered
Reggio before dawn on August 21,^ after having passed in Cala-
bria two full days with a night in between them. Not only
Bixio but Garibaldi {Mem. 375-376) and other members of
the expedition {Menghini, 451-452) agree that after landing at
dawn they spent first one whole day, then one whole night,
and then another whole day before making the night attack
on Reggio. That attack was made on the night of August
20-21, after midnight.^ Therefore they must have landed at
dawn on August 19, not at dawn on August 20. That they
crossed in the night of August 18, landing at dawn on August
1 9, is expressly stated by the following first-hand authorities :
Menghini, 451 ; Peard MS. fournal, August 18, 19; Arriva-
bene, ii. loo-ioi ; Durand Brager, 171 ; Times, August 25,
p. 9, c. 5, where the correspondent writing on August 19
describes the departure from Giardini on the previous evening
(i8th); Castellini, 52 (text, the modern note being in error);

1 Bixio, p. 234. ' Alle 3 ant. del 21 si penetra in Reggio.' These words
have in the later edition of the report printed in Tiirr's Div. p. 413, doc. 46,
been most unjustifiably altered into ' alle 3 a.m. del 22 si penetra in Reggio.'
Yet the same version of the report (p. 414) speaks of the next day as the 22nd!
' La mattina del 22 il generale marcia per Villa S. Giovanni.'

^ This is proved by many authorities, especially by Neapolitan dispatches of
that very day (August 21) in Pianell, 54-55.

336

APPENDIX G 337

and the Neapolitan dispatches of the date, Pianell, 45-46,
which alone would be conclusive. When once the inconsist-
ency in Bixio's dispatch has been detected and the necessary
emendation made it may be said that all the first-hand
authorities who give any dates at all agree that the landing
was at dawn of August 19. The second-hand authorities are
mostly wrong, having followed the error in Bixio's dispatch.

II. Date of Cosenz' Landing

Cosenz crossed from Faro to Favazzina at dawn — on August
22 according to Orsini, 53, on August 20 according to Maison,
44. Both are wrong. He landed on the morning of the 2 1st,
while Garibaldi was taking Reggio. This is proved by the
date of the Neapolitan dispatches in Pianell, 52-56, by Mori-
sani, 105 ; Menghini, 276, and Times, September 4, p. 7, c. 3.
Some of these authorities describe the flotilla as starting over-
night, others at dawn, others not till eight in the morning.
The Times says that the boats left the Faro in two batches,
which may partly account for this inconsistency. What is
certain is that Cosenz' force landed at Favazzina on the
morning of August 21.

32

APPENDIX H

IMMEDIATE CAUSES OF THE EVACUATION OF SALERNO

The decision to recall the troops from Salerno was taken,
according to /?« Sivo, iv. 39, and Fraud, i. 113, not earlier
than the evening of September 5, and in consequence of the
complaints of Marshal Rivera ^ at Salerno to the effect that
Garibaldi ' would assail him the next day, and he was afraid of
being captured in his bed.' This is valuable as indicating that
Marshal Rivera's complaints of the situation at Salerno influ-
enced the decision at Naples. But the hour is not perhaps
quite accurate. The telegram (printed in Monnier, 272) from
the commander-in-chief in Naples to Marshal Rivera, ordering
him to retreat from Salerno, is dated ' Naples, 2 a.m.' (presum-
ably September 5) ; whether the hour of this important telegram
is correctly printed or not, it is certain the actual retreat was
begun in time for the Garibaldini to hear news of it ' whilst at
dinner at Auletta on the 5th ' {Forbes, 227, and Peards
Journal sub September 5 and 6).

It appears therefore that the final decision to abandon
Naples and to withdraw Rivera from Salerno was taken in the
morning of September 5, as a result of the telegrams, alarums,
and excursions of the night of September 4-5, during which
night a ' last reunion of Ministers ' was held all night ' until
dawn' {Pianell, 194-195, his wife's journal), and during which
Forbes and Gallenga were pouring their false telegrams into
Naples and Salerno. One of these is printed in Monnier, 273 : —

'Gallenga to [name of recipient not given]: Eboli, 1.30
a.m. September 5. Caldarelli's brigade has passed over to
Garibaldi : 4000 men commanded by Tiirr have landed at
Sapri. Other landings will be effected nearer to us.'

In Forbes, 225, and Arrivabene, ii. 168, Gallenga's other
telegram (to Ulloa in Naples) is given thus : —

'Eboli, 11.30 p.m. Garibaldi has arrived with 5000 of his

■ The officer commanding at Salerno was really Marshal Afan de Rivera, as
the dispatches (Monnier^ show, though Peard and others sometimes speak of him
as Scotti, and Pranci as Bosco.

338

APPENDIX H 339

own men and 5000 Calabrese are momentarily expected. Dis-
embarkations are expected in the Bay of Naples and Gulf of
Salerno to-night. I strongly advise you to withdraw the gar-
rison from the latter place without delay or they will be cut
off. And let me beg of you as a personal friend but a political
enemy to abandon a sinking cause which must be your ruin.'

Forbes, 226, writes : —

' On my subsequent arrival at Naples I learnt from one of
the ex-Ministers that the fact of the telegram being addressed
to Ulloa by a private friend (Gallenga) was what gave colour
to the whole proceeding.'

Peard's telegrams sent the same night (September 4-5) to
Salerno are also said to have caused Marshal Rivera to wire to
Naples demanding his own withdrawal from a position which
he regarded as untenable. De Martino, then Minister of
Francis II, told Arrivabene that such was the effect produced
by Peard's telegrams {Arrivabene, ii. 169).

Also in Revel's da Ancona, 65, we read a letter of Revel's
dated October 23, i860, hernia, setting down what a Bourbon
officer just captured there had told him. The evidence seems
first-hand and quite unprejudiced, as Revel knows nothing
about Peard or his adventures. The Bourbon officer, so Revel
writes, related to him that ' in the first days of September he
was with General Scotti at Salerno to resist the advance of
Garibaldi, when he received a telagram from the head of the
gendarmerie at Eboli which announced the imminent arrival
of Garibaldi with 3000 troops and 4000 insurgents, and the
defection of Caldarelli's brigade which had joined the Gari-
baldini. Scotti, fearing the attack of such superior forces and
still more the contact of Caldarelli's men with his own as the
harbinger of further defection, sent the news to the Ministers,
proposing to retire on Nocera or Nola, if there were enough
men in Naples. The Ministry sent him orders to retire to
Nola and thence to Capua. Later on he learnt that the
telegram had been sent by a staff officer of Garibaldi's under
the false signature of the gendarme, as a stratagem of war,
but he was so preoccupied that he had not thought of verifying
it. This explains how Garibaldi came to enter Salerno and
then Naples.'

As a matter of fact it was not Scotti but Rivera who was
in command at Salerno, though oddly enough Peard at the
time thought that he was telegraphing to Scotti (see Peard s
Journal).

22 *

340 APPENDIX H

In Monnier (273) the following telegram of Rivera is
printed : —

' Salerno. September 4, 1 1 in the evening. The electric
wire between Eboli and Salerno is broken. Two non-com-
missioned officers, returning from Calabria, have brought the
news that the main body of Garibaldian revolutionists and the
Caldarelli brigade have reached Auletta. ... I am sending
by rail the two non-commissioned officers, Neamburgo of the
fifteenth line and Guida of the fourth, to see Colonel Anzani.'

This telegram is at first sight puzzling ; it shows indeed
that the exaggerated rumours about the defection of Caldarelli's
Brigade, and the false rumours of the close propinquity of
Garibaldi and his men (due to Peard's game at Auletta and
Eboli) reached Marshal Rivera and deeply affected him. But
it says nothing about any telegrams from Eboli as the source
of this information (which is attributed to two Bourbon
sergeants), and the wire from Eboli is said to be broken an hour
before midnight. But the explanation is clear : Rivera at
Salerno wrongly thought that the wire was broken, because
after Peard's entry into Eboli the telegraph official was being
brought before Peard, and the Eboli office was no longer being
served. Peard's telegrams began to pour into Salerno half an
hour later, for the date of Gallenga's telegram to Ulloa
{Forbes, 225) is 11.30 that night, and his telegram to the other
friend in Naples {Monnier, 273) is as late as 1.30 the next
■morning. Peard's and Gallenga's telegrams were therefore sent
off shortly before and shortly after midnight ; this is quite con-
sistent with Peard's and Forbes' account of the matter, as they
say that they did not enter Eboli till after dark, nine o'clock
according to Peard, eleven o'clock according to Forbes. In
short, Rivera at Salerno, soon after the time (eleven o'clock)
when he had declared the wire from Eboli to be broken, found
the communication restored and received the telegrams dictated
by Peard.

APPENDIX J

NUMBERS OF THE ARMIES ON THE VOLTURNO

I. The Bourbon Forces
{a) Total Bourbon Force North of the Volturno

The late Senator General Primerano, who in i860 was an
officer in the Bourbon army, told me that there must have
been 50,000 behind the Volturno, including the garrisons
of Gaeta and Capua. After the reorganisation behind the Vol-
turno, the regiments, he said, were very full, often amount-
ing to 3000 each, viz. three battalions of 1000 each.

This impression is fully borne out by the following cal-
culation, based on Bourbon authorities only : —

Losses on Oct. i and 2, killed sind 2500 Franci, ii. 260, 271.

prisoners only (not wounded) -

Taken in Capua Nov. 2 - 11,000 or 8000 Franci, ii. 177, says 11,000;

Cava, 27, says 9000,

Interned in Papal States, Nov. 8 ' 17,000 De Sivo, iv. 314, 317

Took part in subsequent defence 21,000 De Sivo, iv. 323.

of Gaeta . - . .

These four categories are mutually exclusive, and added
together give a total of 50,000. If we consider that nearly
1000 more were captured with Scotti near Isernia on October
20 (see p. 268 above), and that at least some others must
have disbanded, unaccounted for under any of these categories,
it will seem rather an under-estimate to place the total force
north of the Volturno at 50,000.

The names of a large number of the regiments of which
this force was composed will be found in Franci, ii. 260-261,
271-276, 328-329.

% Total Bourbon Force Engaged in the Battle of October 1-2

Here there is perhaps more uncertainty. We can, how-
ever, calculate Von Mechel's force, the Bourbon left wing,

1 Lowest estimate : the British Consul at Rome reported the interning of
30,000 ; see Br. Cons. Rome, Letter Boo}t MS. p. 219.

341

342 APPENDIX J

accurately. The Swiss who attacked Bixio at Maddaloni
numbered 3000 {Schweizertruppen, 544; Ruiz, 19); and Ruiz'
men who took Castel Morrone and Caserta Vecchia on
October i, and lost 2000 prisoners on October 2, numbered
5000, enumerated by Ruiz himself {Ruiz, 19). This brings
Von Mechel's force, the Bourbon left wing, to 8000, as Ruiz
(19) himself tells us.

It is far more difficult to estimate the Bourbon right wing
under Tabacchi and Afan de Rivera (and Ritucci himself)
which attacked S. Angelo, S. Maria, and S. Tammaro. There
is no authoritative statement like that of Ruiz for the other
wing. De Sivo, iv. 184, 189, puts it at 4500 against S. Maria
+ 4500 against S. Angelo, + 1500 cavalry reserve, + two
squadrons of cavalry and cannon against S. Tammaro, = about
11,000 in all. But this is likely to be an under-estimate, just
as the Garibaldian calculations (not quoted here) are likely to
be over-estimates. Some attempt at real calculation can be
made from the official figures given by Franci. We there find
that this wing acknowledged a loss in killed and wounded of
about 1000 (Franci, ii. 260), and beyond all doubt it con-
sisted of five regiments and eight battalions of infantry, eight
regiments of cavalry and dragoons, and seven batteries of
artillery ; for every one of these made a return of losses under
fire on October i, see Franci, ii. 260. In view of General
Primerano's statement as to the fullness of the regiments and
battalions, it is difficult to see how five regiments + eight
battalions of infantry + eight regiments of cavalry could be
much below 20,000, and indeed it would be over 30,000 if
every battalion and regiment of infantry was really up to
strength.

But if we put the Bourbon right wing tentatively at 20,000
and the left confidently at 8000, we get 28,000 in all for the
battle of October 1-2. [Another Bourbon authority, Cava
(57), seeking to minimise, puts it at 18,000 or possibly 24,000.]
In view of the official document printed in Franci, ii. 260, and
Ruiz' statements, I think 28,000 a fair estimate.

II. The Garibaldian Forces

{a) Total of Garibaldian Forces in Sicily and the Mainland

We have official evidence that at the time of the disbanding
of Garibaldi's forces in November, 50,000 were paid off, viz.
7000 in Sicily and 43,000 on the mainland {Risorg. ann. iii.

APPENDIX J 343

fasc. 1-2, Nievo's accounts ; Revel's da An.wj, puts it at 1400
more). But of these 43,ooo on the mainland, only a third, so
Garibaldi declared {Orero, 106) were ever under fire. For with
regard to the 43,000 we must remember that—

1. Many were enrolled during October after the battle had
been fought.

2. Many regiments, even at the time of the break-up of
the forces in November, were only in process of formation, and
had never been actually under arms (Risorg. ann. iii. fasc. 1-2
p. 87).

3. These new enrolments in the autumn were going on
principally in Calabria, Apulia, and Basilicata, far from the
scene of action (Risorg. ditto).

4. The grand total includes everyone in Garibaldi's pay,
viz. all the troops doing garrison and patrol work in Naples
and the provinces.

5. The grand total was composed at least half of irregular
bands, forces raised by private persons, local militia, etc.
{Revel's da Ancona, 1 14.)

6. A large part of the nominal force was fraudulent ; men
put down their names merely to draw food and pay, or to be
able to swagger about in uniform. Garibaldi's own words
were, ' one-third were present in the hour of battle, and the
other two-thirds only at pay-day and the dinner-hour' (Orero,
106 ; Revets da Ancona, 1 14-1 17).

There is therefore no reason to suppose, on account of the
grand total 43,000 on the mainland and 7000 in Sicily, that
more than 20,000 men were ever at the front on the Volturno
Of the 20,000 volunteers from North Italy (Appendix B),
the backbone of the force, many were in hospital and more
in garrison or patrol work in the provinces, but it is reasonable
to suppose that well over 10,000 Northerners were on the
Volturno, and the names of the regiments engaged on Oct-
ober I confirm this view.

(3) Total Force of Garibaldini Engaged on October i

This is almost as difficult to calculate as the number of their
opponents. I think it is agreed on all hands that, except at
the Arches of the Valley, where Bixio had 5653 men against
the 3000 Swiss, the Garibaldini were outnumbered at all points.
In the mountains north of Caserta, Sacchi had 1800 men (very
slightly engaged) and Bronzetti at Castel Morrone had 283,
who managed to delay for four hours the advance of Ruiz' 5000.

344

APPENDIX J

S. Maria, S. Angelo, and all those regions on the Gari-
baldian left were defended against an attack of five regiments
and eight battalions of infantry and several thousand cavalry
— probably not less than 20,000 of all arms, and possibly far
more. The Garibaldian force in this part of the field, which
was, all agree, outnumbered, consisted of the men under Medici
defending S. Angelo ; the men under Milbitz defending S. Maria
and at first S. Tammaro ; and the reserves under Tiirr, brought
up from Caserta to S. Maria as the day went on. (Corte, in
command of some Lucanians at Aversa, took no more part in
the battle and is not therefore to be counted.)

The most probable enumeration of the Garibaldian forces
in the battle of October i seems to me as follows ; —

Under Bixio

at Maddaloni

Bronzetti at Castel

Morrone
Sacchi at S. Leucio

(Took little part in battle.)
Medici at S. Angelo

(Medici's own division,
Spangaro's and Dunne's
regiments.)
Milbitz at S. Maria

and S.

Tammaro
(Malenchini's Tuscans and
small bodies of men like
the French company,
Pace's Calabrians, Cor-
rao's Sicilians, etc.)

5653 (Bixio's report : Titrr's

D.v. 474.)
283 (G. Mirri's report: Castel

Morrone, 23.)
1800 (Sacchi's report : Tiirr'i

Div. 469.)
4000 (?) (Castellini, 83, 88 ; Tkrr's

Div. 234.)

3000 (?) (There is no estimate of their
number by Turr or any
other good authority. The
original forces under Mil-
bitz were fewer than
Medici's men at S. An-
gelo, and he required the
assistance of nearly all
Turr's reserve.)

Tiirr at Caserta

(Reserve brought up mainly
to S. Maria. Contained
Assanti's, Eber's, and the
Milano * brigades,' the
Hungarians, and part of
La Masa's Sicilians and
Pace's Calabrians.)

5600

20,336

(Turr'i Div. 230. This is
no doubt right, as Tflrr
was himself m command.)

Therefore, if I had to guess at the numbers engaged
on October i, I should say 20,000 Garibaldini and 28,000
Royalists.

{N.B. — Guerzoni, ii. 186-187, counts another 1000 men for
Milbitz at S. Maria, and 1000 less for Tiirr at Caserta. But as
Tiirr was gradually sending up men to Milbitz all day long,

APPENDIX J 345

this apparent difference of calculation is easily accounted for
and has no significance.)

{c) Garibaldian Force on October 2, and Piedmontese Assistance

In the fighting on October 2 Stocco's Calabrians and the
Piedmontese Bersaglieri also took part, having arrived at Caserta
from Naples after the end of the fighting on October 1 {D'Ayala,
354 ; Laracca Ronghi, 19 ; Conv. Fazzari; Leg. Mat. 145-146).
There had been several score of Piedmontese gunners helping
to serve the guns at S. Maria and S. Angelo on October i, but
no infantry, as has been sometimes erroneously alleged. The
regular infantry only came up for the fighting of October 2,
near Caserta ; (they consisted of two companies of Bersaglieri
and two companies of the first regiment of the Brigata del Re).
This is proved not only by all Garibaldian sources but by the
only official Piedmontese source, the reports printed in Mem.
Stor. Mil. i. 52-55. These troops had been sent to the Bay of
Naples on board Persano's ships as early as August, when
Cavour hoped they might be useful if a spontaneous revolution
took place in Naples before Garibaldi's arrival : see p. 168
above.

APPENDIX K

NUMBERS IN THE CASTELFIDARDO CAMPAIGN

I. North Italian Army

(a) Total Force

General Fanti says that his army consisted of 33,000 men
all told. This was the total expeditionary force that liberated
the Marches and Umbria, and includes Delia Rocca's and
Cialdini's corps (Fanti, Campagna, 6; Delia Rocca, 181).

(^) Present at Battle of Casteljidardo

The official return, with full details of every regiment, etc.,
given in Castelfidardo, pp. 34, 68-71, is as follows : —

Officers and Men. Cannon.
Present on the field - 16,449 + 42

Effectively engaged - 4,880 + 14

viz. 9th and loth line, nth,
1 2th, and 26th Bersaglieri, regi-
ment of lancers of Novara and
artillery.
Losses, 62 killed, 140 wounded. The lOth line bore
about three-quarters of these losses.

//. Papal Army

The exact enumeration of Lamorici^re's army is more
difficult, because there is discrepancy between the statements
of the Papal Generals as to the numbers they commanded, and
the statements of the Piedmontese Generals as to the number
of prisoners whom they took.

[a) Total of Lamoriciere' s Force

This may be calculated in three sections, the field army
the small garrisons, and the garrison of Ancona.

I. Field Army. — 8000 'bayonets' and 300 artillery, says
Lamoricikre (5-6) himself

346

APPENDIX K 347

2. Smali Garrisons (Pesa.ro, Fano, Perugia, Spoleto, Orvieto,
Viterbo, San Leo, Paliano, Civita CasteUana.) .—Lamorictere (5)
says ' 20 companies ' — say 3000 men, certainly not an over-
estimate, seeing that 1 500 were taken in Perugia alone {Delia
Rocca, 184; Fanit, 342), and 800 in Spoleto (CorveUo, 250;
Fanti, Campagna, 9).

3. Garrison of Ancona. — Lamoriciere (5) puts it at ' 2 bat-
talions,' but Quatrebarbes, the Governor of the place during
the siege, tells us he had, towards the end of the siege, 600 sick
or wounded and 3500 combatants. This official estimate of
4100 for the garrison of Ancona is the lowest possible. [Of
these less than fifty were refugees from the field army, brought
in by Lamoriciere after the battle of Castelfidardo, see La-
moricUre, 33.] The Piedmontese assert that they counted
6000 men and 348 officers as prisoners when the place sur-
rendered {Fanti, 378).

Accepting these data we arrive at a total of 15,000 or
17,000 men for the whole force commanded by Lamoriciere.
This is, I think, a more exact estimate than that of De Cesare
{Roma, ii. 66), who makes the total only 11,000, accepting
Lamorici^re's under-estimate of the garrison of Ancona, and
not noticing Quatrebarbes' admission that he had 4 1 00
soldiers in Ancona. In the clerical life of De M^rode (138)
the total is put at 18,000; and Fanti {Campagna, 23) says,
possibly with exaggeration, that he took 17,000 to 18,000
prisoners. It is admitted that he took all Lamorici^re's army
in the field and in fortresses, except two or three thousand men.

(3) Present at Battle of Castelfidardo

Of the field army of ' 8000 bayonets ' and 300 artillery
{Lamoriciere, 6), the very great majority were present at the
decisive battle, though not nearly all were effectively engaged.
The ' bulletin of the Pontifical army,' published in Castelfidardo,
85-87, estimates those present at 6550, Lamoriciere's own
division being 3500 and Pimodan's 3050. Lamoriciere (20)
reduces each of these totals and makes the whole force present
4600, but the bulletin is most likely to be right. It is quite
certain that 3094 prisoners (mostly foreigners) had been taken
by September 20 {Castelfidardo, 38, Qy, detailed list), and the
statement of Orero (68-69) and Fanti {Campagna, 13) that
3000 more, chiefly native Italians, disbanded after the battle,
of whom 2000 more were captured piecemeal in the following
week, is probably not far from the truth.

APPENDIX L

AUTHORITIES FOR THE BATTLE OF THE VOLTURNO

{The Bourbon Authorities are Starred)

(Two important authorities are the maps at the end of
Ansiglioni for the topography of i860, and the map at the end
of Tart's Div. for the position of the various Garibaldian regi-
ments.)

I. Eve of the Battle and First Attack at Dawn

J. des D. October 7. Matarazzi, 42-43. Du Camp, 300-
307 (Garibaldi at the Church of S. Angelo). Guerzoni, ii. 189.
Veritas, ^y-^ I. MariottiN. A. ^'il. Cidmpoli,ig2. * Fraud,
ii. 50-56. Mem. 388-389. Turf's Div. 235-236, 457 {As-
santi's report).

2. Attack on Garibaldi's Carriage on Road to S. Angela

Matarazzi, 48, defines the exact spot 'ponte Ciccarelli.'
Savio, ii. 1-17. Conv. Canzio. Arrivabene, ii. 253, 264, and
in D. News, October 23. Bandi, 303, 305, 311. M. Post,
October 12. Menghini, 2,2,9-140. Veterano. Cidmpoli, ig2-
193.

3. S. Angela and M. Tifata.
Tart's Div. 236-240, 247-250, 460-467 (officers' reports).
Menghini, 329, 342, 373-374- * Franci, ii. 54-64, 256. Campo,
153-154- Casiellini, 84-88 (unofficial report by some officer
under Medici, not by Medici himself, Cadolini tells me).
* Gazzetta di Gaeta, No. 6, p. 23. Zasio, 109- no. Pungolo
Milano, October 13. Du Camp, 309-322. Forbes, 291-293.
Mario, Vita, i. 273-275. Mem. Stor. Mil i. 53. Conv. Pedotti.
Matarazzi, 47-48, 51-55, 60. Conv. Cadolini. Times, October
9, p. 7 ; October 11, p. 7 ; cols. 3-4 (October 25, p. 7, c. 5, on
Dunne, good but for great exaggeration of numbers). CidmpoU,
193. Ansiglioni, d,o. Pozzi, ^^1-42- Savio, ii. \ 1-12.

348

APPENDIX L 349

4. Maddaloni and Arches of Valley.

* Franci, ii. 72-75, 261-271 (Von Mechel's report), * Sck-
weizertruppen, 530, 541-552, ^nA* Ruiz, 18-22, 46-5 3, are indis-
pensable. Turf's Div. 472-475. Bixio's report, 475-480,^3
officers' reports. Ponti della Valle, pp. 15-16, Ghersi's letter.
Conv. Sclavo. Abba. Not. 246-250. Menghini, 347-348, 367.
Red Skirt, 267-268. Times, October 19, p. 7, c. 4.

5. S. Maria.

Turf's Div. 235-236, 241-246, 457-459, 467-469 (reports).
* Franci, ii. 65-72, 260. * De Siva, iv. 195-198. * Marra, Oss.
55, 60. * Butta, ii. 111-113, quoting from * Palmieri, 99-117
{q.v.). *Cava,^$. Bandi, SoS-512. i?«j^w, 377-380. Ritstow's
Brig. Mil. ■^7-4.1. Matarazzi, 44-Si, SS-S9- Adamoli, 159-
163. Magni, lo-li. Forbes, 298-301,313-314. Conv. Dol-
mage. Mariotti (TV. A^, 433-434. Veritas, 53-56. Times,
October 9, p. 7 ; October 11, p. 7. Mem. Star. Mil. i. 51-53.
Cidmpoli, ig2-igi). Fazio, go-l 00. * Gazzetta di Gaeta, No.
6, p. 23. Mem. 388, 391-393. /. des D. October 7. Volturno.
Uzielli {Risorg.). Castellini, 88.

' La Flotte's ' French company : Elia, ii. 96. Una Pagina,
16-17. Arrivabene, ii. 256. Caraguel, 193-206. Matarazzi,

45-

Sicilians under La Porta, Corrao, La Masa : Forbice, October
II. Paoluccts Corrao, 144. Caraguel, 200-206. La Masa
{Sic) xci-xcv, 200-206. Turf's Div. 234-236.

British sailors' incident: Mario, Vita,\. 278. Forbes, 313-
314. Mufidy, 300-301. Elliot, 133. Br. Pari. Papers, viii.
8-12.

End of battle : Una Pagina, 20. Riistow, 380. Maison,
109. M. Post, October 9.

6. Garibaldi Encourages his Men by Spreading the Message,

' Victory along all the Litte ' early in the Afternoon, while
Victory was still in doubt.
Tart's Div. 463-464 (Spangaro's report). Castellini, 87.
Fazio, 98-99. Zasio, no. Tost, 103. Conv. Cadolini.

7. Castel Morrone, Deferu:e of; Rui^ and Sacchi's Movements

* Franci, ii. 75-76, 271, but see note, sec. 9, below, sub
'Losses.' * De Sivo,iv. 201 (inaccurate). * Marra, Oss. 57.
Turf's Div. 241, 250-254, 469-471. Conv. Cadolini. Mem.
394-395- Laracca Ronghi, 18. Castel Morrone, 10-30.

350 APPENDIX I.

* Ruiz, 19-23. Milan MSS. Bronzetti, 2. The three last are
the real authorities, together with Tiirr's Div. 470, for Sacchi's
men. It was not ' Perrone,' as Garibaldian authorities state,
but Ruiz who commanded this part of the Bourbon army.

8. Battle of October 2 round Old and New Caserta

Tiirr's Div. 465, 471-472, 474-475. * Ruiz, 23-27.

* Franci, ii. 76-78, 271. Rome MS. Savi (for Genoese Cara-
bineers). Leg. Matese, 134-136, 144-148. Ciampoli, 195-196.
Ansiglioni, 45-47. Mem. Star. Mil. i. 54-55 (for the Bersag-
lieri). M. Post, October 12. Times, October 11, p. 7, c. 2.
Laracca Ronghi, 18-20. Conv. Fazzari. Menghini, 344, 364.
lyAyala, 354 (departure of Bersaglieri from Naples). Forbes,
303-309. Mem.. 395-397. Conv. Dolmage. Red Shirt, 269.

* De Sivo,\v. 201-20$. Tiirr's Div. 2^,1 -2 ii4. And see above
Appendix J. ii. (c) on Piedmontese assistance.

9. Losses

Tiirrs Div. 256, 465, 474. * Franci, ii. 260, 271.

* Franci, ii. 76 and 271, reports a loss of only about 10
killed and wounded at Castel Morrone and practically none
on October 2, while acknowledging the loss of 2089 prisoners
on October 2. The accounts we have of both these actions
show that more must have been killed and wounded ; the
capture on October 2 of 2000 out of the 5000 men under Ruiz
is enough to account for this mistake in the returns of killed and
wounded, for no doubt a good many of the killed and wounded
were put down as prisoners, since they were all missing to-
gether en bloc.

10. Garibaldian Hospitals and Conduct of Wounded

Schwabe MS. 3 (Madame Mario's letter about the S.
Maria hospital). Meuricoffre, 61-72, and ditto, Macmillafis
Mag. iii. 15 2- 160. Colet, iii. 16, 21, 34-35. Conv. Dolmage.
Times, October 18, p. 11, cols, i, 2 ; November 6, p. 9, c 3 ;
November 9, p. 8, c. 3. Elliot, 124. Nelson MSS. (letters).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

LIST OF PRINTED MATTER AND MSS.
CONSULTED BY THE AUTHOR

Abbreviations in the notes explained

[The mark * means that the book or document so marked gives information
from Bourbon or Papal sources, and narrates events from the point of view of
defenders of the old monarchies. It will be seen by those who consult these
works, some of them now rather rare, that the official and other documents at
the disposal of the historian for the movements of the armies destroyed by the
national forces in i860 are plentiful and detailed, especially as regards the dis-
patches of the defeated generals.]

N.B. — The Bibliography in this volume is meant to refer only to events
beginning after the fall of Palermo (early June, i860) and ending with the return
of Garibaldi to Caprera early in November.

I have not repeated in many cases my remarks on books commented on in
the bibliography of Garibaldi and the Thousand, though I have in all cases
given the title and its abbreviation if the book has been used again as an
authority for this volume.

I. BOOKS, PAMPHLETS, AND MODERN JOURNALS

Abba's Bixio = Abba (G. C). La Vita di Nino Bixio.

Abba's ' Cose ' = Abba (G. C). Cose Garibaldine. 1907.

Abba's Not. = Abba (G. C). Da Quarto al Volturno, Noterelle d'uno dei Mille,

ed. 5.
About = About (Edmondo). Roma Contemporanea. 1861.

(A social study of Rome and the Papal States, shortly before i860.)
Adamoli = Adamoli (Giulio). Da San Martino a Mentana. 1892.

(Valuable narrative of personal experiences, and veracious portraits of his
companions in arms which I have heard praised by other survivors.)
Albo Com. = Alba Commemorativo del gran re Vitt. Em. II. Bologna. 1884.

(Contains, pp. 75-83, Lacaita's story as in Villari Pasq. q.v. below.)
Amari = Amari (Michele) Carteggio di. By A. d'Ancona. 1896 and 1907. 3
vols.

Cf. also Amari's important letter of 1862 printed in R. S. Del R. 1897, ii.
p. 136, giving an account of his opinions and actions in i860.

[This Michele Amari, Sicilian leader of 1848-1849, and exile since then,
the famous historian of the Vespro Siciliano, may easily be confused with
his namesake Count Michele Amari, with whom he corresponded and worked
in the crisis of i860, and whose pohtical views he shared.]

351

352 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ansigliani = Ansiglioni (Giuseppe). Memoria delta batt. del Voliurno. Torino.

1861. (With valuable map.)
^c«(! = Bonfadini (R.). Vita di Francesco Arese. 1894.

(Roux e C. Rome.)
Arrivabene = Arrivabene (Carlo). Italy under Victor Emmanuel. 1862.

(Vol. ii. contains personal reminiscences of Garibaldi's campaign : author
was Daily News correspondent.)
Artom = Artom (Ernesto). Cavour e la questione Napoletana. N. A. Nov. i,

igoi.
Ashley Nat. Rev. = National Review, i8gg. A Garibaldi Reminiscence. By
the Rt. Hon. Evelyn Ashley.

(Lord Palmerston's private secretary describes how he accompanied Gari-
baldi into Naples.)
A. S. Sic. — Archivio Storico Siciliano. Palermo. 1899-1904. Vid. Paolucci.
A. Y. R. = All the Year Round, a weekly journal conducted by Charles Dickens.
1 860- 1. Vol. iv.

P. loi (Nov. 10, i860) and p. 199 (Dec. 8, i860), articles describing service
before Capua, British Legion, Dowling, etc. (by Henry Spicer, says Mr.
Dolmage).
Bandi = Band! (Giuseppe). / iiille. Ed. 1906.

Baroni = Baroni (Primo). Da Genova a Gaeta e Milazzo. Published in the
Gaaetta del Popolo delta Domenica.' Torino. 1894, Dec. 9, 16, 30, and
1895, Jan. 6.

(Personal narrative for the capture of the Utile, etc., and for battle of
Milazzo, where author was wounded.)
Bersezio's V. E. = Bersezio (Vittorio). // r^no di Vitt. Em. 1878-1893.

(Careful, but nothing very new.)
Bertani = Mario (J. W.). Agostino Bertani e i suoi tempi. 1888.

(The best book written by the authoress. Especially important for Ber-
tani's correspondence with Garibaldi and other chief actors in i860, copiously
selected from the Archivio Bertani, Milan.)
Bertani, Comp. = Le spedizioni di volontari per Garibaldi. Cifre e documenti
complementari at resoconto Bertani. Genova. 1861.

(Written in reply to Bertani's Reso. (q.v.) to show what was done by the
National Society, the Million Rifles Fund, and Military Office respectively and
in common, apart from the work of Bertani's Central Committee in Aid of
Garibaldi, whose operations were described in Bertani's Reso. (q.v.). These
two pamphlets together give a fair notion of the amount of help received by
Garibaldi from Cavour's friends and Cavour's enemies respectively.)
Bertani's Reso. = Bertani (A.). Resoconto di. Genova. i860.

(Report of administration and accounts of the Cassa Cenirale, of the
Central Committee in Aid of Garibaldi. May to Dec. i860.)
Bianchi = Bianchi (Nicomede). Storia Doctimentata delta diplomazia Europea
in Italia. 1814-1861.

(A most important source of information.)
Bianchi's Cavour = Bianchi (Nicomede). II Conte Camillo Cavour. Docu-
menti editi e inediti. Torino. 1863.
Bianchi, Potit. de Cavour = Bianchi (Nicomede). Politique du comte Cavour.
Turin. 1885.

(Contains important letters of Cavour to Em. D'AzegHo.)

BIBLIOGRAPHY 353

Bixio = Guerzoni (G.). La Vita di Nino Bixio. 1875.

Bixio Sclavo = Col. Sclavo. Commemoraziofte: ai mani illusiri di Nino ed
Alessandro Bixio. (Fratelli Pozzo. Torino.) 1907.
(Letters of Bixio, 1859-1860.)
• Bosco = Bosco's report of the battle of Milazzo. Printed in various places ■

e.g. Gazzetta di Mtlano, Aug. 20, i860, see p. 331 above
Bourgeois = Bourgeois (E.) and Clermont (E.). Rome et Napoleon III 1907
(Deals vjrith 1849, 1864, and 1870, not with i860 in particular. But this
valuable work should be studied by all wishing to understand the true bearing
of the French occupation of Rome.)
Brambilla = Brambilla (G.). Ricordi, 1848-1870. Como. 1884.

(Agent of Bertani and the Comitate Centrale in i860.)
Brancocwo = Brancaccio (di F., di Carpino). Tre mesi nella Vicaria di

Palermo nel i860. Le Barricate. Milazzo. 2nd ed. 1901.
Br. Pari. Papers = British Parliamentary Papers (Blue Books).
Br. Pari. Papers VII. = Further correspondence relating to the affairs of

Italy, No. VII. (c. 2757). 1861. (Refers to May to Dec. i860.)
Br. Pari. Papers VIII. = ditto VIII. (Refers to June, i860, to March, i86j.)
Br. Pari. Papers IX. = ditto IX. (Refers to Jan. to March 1861.)

(For the papers not printed and laid before Parliament see F. O. MSS.)
Bruzzesi Mem. = Memorie del Colonello Giacinto Bruzzesi. Milano.

(For 1862 only. But his diary gives a living portrait of Garibaldi.)
Busetto = Busetto (Girolamo). // Generate Nino Bixio. Fano. 1876.
* Buftd = Butta (Giuseppe). Un viaggio da Boccadifalco a Gaeta. Napoli.
1882. 2nd ed.

(A reactionary history compiled partly from the primary authorities of his
side, partly from the author's imagination. Where he deserts such well-
known Bourbon authorities as De Sivo, Cava, Nove Mesi, Palmieri, Franci,
Marra Oss. (q.v.) he is nearly always misleading. He is the worst tem-
pered writer gf any party. He boasts of having been the chaplain in the
ergastolo on S. Stefano island, where Settembrini and Spaventa were
confined, and approves of their treatment there (ii. ig). By inventing a
notorious untruth about the attack on Palermo, he is able to achieve the
quite singular feat of accusing Garibaldi of cowardice (i. 57). In short, he
stands by himself among the authorities of the period, and must not be con-
fused with the really valuable Bourbon writers like Franci, Nove Mesi, and
Palmieri.)
Cadolini = vid. sub Mem. Star. Mil.

Cairoli — Rosi (M.). / Cairoli. igo8. (Bib. di Storia Contemp. No i.)
Campo = Campo (Marietta). Vita politica della famiglia Campo. Palermo
1884.

(Last part of the book relates to the Battaglione Gaeta and Vacchieri
regiment at Milazzo, Cajazzo, and battle of Oct. i.)
Cappelletti's V. E. = Cappelletti (Licurgo). Storia di Vitt. Em. 3 ,'ols. 1892-3.
Caraguel = Caraguel (Clement). Sou-venirs et aventures d^un volontaire gari-
baldien. (Paris. 1861.)

(Personal reminiscences of French volunteer of Medici's expedition. Good
for De Flotte's French company at Solano, through Calabria, and at the
Volturno.)

23

354

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Caranti = Caranti (Biagio). Alcune notizie sul plebiscito nelle frovincie napoli-
tane. Torino. 1864.

(Caranti was secretary to Pallavicino. Important for Neapolitan affairs
Sep. to Oct.)
Carosi = Carosi (Salvatore). La Battaglia del Voltuvno. 1905, tip. Francesco
Cavatta. S. Maria, Capua.

(Second-hand but well-informed.)
Castelfidardo = La Battaglia di Castelfidardo. Pubblicazione dell' nfficio
storico del Corpo di Stato Maggiore. Narrazione documentata. Roma.
1903.

(The best authority on the battle. The narrative is based on all the
known official documents of both sides, including those preserved in the
Archivio storico del Corpo di Stato Maggiore which are printed in full at the
end of the volume. These documents include the reports of officers en-
gaged in the battle, both National and Papal.)

* Castelfidardo [Narr.) = Narrazione delta Battaglia di Castelfidardo scritta da

un Romano, Italia. 1862.

(By a Papalist. Translated from the French, with some good critical
notes by the translator of the same party.)
Castelli = Chiala (L.). Ricordi di M. A. Castelli. 1888.

(Pp. 325-346 contain the very important diary of campaign of i860, by
Major-General Cav. Paolo Solaroli, as aide-de-camp at Victor Emmanuel's
side: see De Cesare, ii. 459 note.)
Castelli, Cavour = Castelli (IVI. A.). Ricordi. II Conte de Cavour. Editi da

Chiala.
Castelli, Cart. — Chiala (L.). Carteggio politico di M. A. Castelli.
Castellini = Castellini (Gualtiero). Pagine Garibaldiiie, dalle Memorie del.
Magg. Nicostrato Castellini, con lettere inediie di Mazzini, Garibaldi,
Medici c con carteggio di L. S. Mantegazza. 1909.

(Contains much valuable material for the campaign of i860.)
Castel Morvone — Ai Caduti di Castel Morrone, il x. Ott. i860. Tip. Vesuviana.
Portici. 1887.

(Contains Major Mirri's official report of the action and narrative of
' G. M.,' a survivor, who is clearly Giuseppe Mirri himself; it is an unofficial
and much more detailed narrative than his official report. Mirri afterwards
became Italian Minister for War.)
Cattabeni = Spadoni (Dott Domenico). / Cairoli delle Marche. La Famiglia
Cattabeni. Macerata. 1906.
(For Cajazzo.)
Cattaneo = Mario (Alberto e Jessie). Carlo Cattaneo. 1884.

* Cava = Cava (Tommaso, Capitano dello stato maggiore dell' esercito delle due

Sicilie). Difesa nazionale Napoletana. Napoli. 1863. Parte Seconda

Difesa Militarc.

(Neapolitan officer's complaints of his commanders' conduct. Valuable

documents, some of which are also in Marra Oss., Morisani, Move Mesi, etc.)
Chiala = Chiala (Luigi). Lettere edite ed inedite di Camillo Cavour. 6 vols.
Chiala' s Dina = ChiaXa. {L.). Giacomo Dina. i8g6.
Chiala's Pol. Seg. = Chiala (L.). Politica segreta di Napoleone III e di

Cavour. 1895.

(For relations of Kossuth and his agents to Cavour and Napoleon.)
Chiala's Storia Contemp. "c Chiala (L.). Pagine di storia contemporanea. 1892.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 355

Cialdini e Gar. = R. S. Del R. {q.v.]. 1896. Vol. i. Fasc. 5-6, pp. 546-548.

Mntue relazioni dei Generali Cialdini e Garibaldi.
Cialdini Rap. = Cialdini (Gen. Enrico). Rapporto a S. E. il gen. in capo sulle
operazioni del quarto Corpo di Armata delV ii Sett, al 29, i860, i860.
(Very important for Castelfidardo campaign.)
Cidmpoli = Ciampoli (Domenico). Scritti politici e militari di G. Garibaldi.
* Cognetti = Cognetti (Biagio). Suifatti politico-militari delta riv. Siculo-Nap.

nel i860. Napoli, Androsio. i86g.
Coht = Colet (IVIme. Louise). L'ltalie des Italiens.

(Memoirs of an impressionable literary lady, most sympathetic with Italy,

who was in the Peninsula, 1859-1860, and finally at Naples during the

Garibaldian occupation. Gives the rumours, talk, and atmosphere of the

time excellently, but is as often as not wrong as to facts.)

Colletta = Colletta (Gen. Pietro). History of the Kingdom of Naples, 1734-1856.

Translated by S. Horner. 185S.
Cornhill = Cornhill Magazine. See Red Shirt, Peard, etc.
Corr. Sera = Corriere della Sera.

(Contains important articles by Luzio and Mirabelli on Cavour's relations
to the expedition ; see below Luzio and Mirabelli. For the most important
article by Luzio on the Archivio Bertani, see March i, igio.)
Corsi's Rimembranze = Corsi (Carlo). Rimembranze di guerra, 1848-1870.
1896.

(All given in much greater detail in his Vent. Anni.)
Corsi's Vent. Anni — Corsi (Carlo). Venticinque anni in Italia. 1870.

(II. p. 391 et seq. for Castelfidardo campaign and junction with Garibaldi.)
Corvetto = Magg. G. Corvetto. La campagna di guerra nell' Umbria e nelle
Marche. Torino. 1861.

(Important account reprinted from Rivista Mil. Contains most of the
important reports and documents, including Delia Rocca's report re Spoleto,
and Fanti Campagna, q.v., and Cialdini Rap. q-v.)
Cosenz = De Cesare (R.). Commemorazione di Ennco Cosenz. igo'2.
Cosenz (Guardione) = Guardione (F.). Enrico Cosenz. Palermo. Reber, 1900.
CoMne)- = Courier (Paul Louis), ffiawfes, 1828, vol. iv. Lettres de France et
d'ltalie.

(For the Calabrian guerilla war of 1806 as described by that philosophical
observer and brilliant writer.)
Cremona = II comifaio di soccorso alia Sicilia costituto in Cremona. Frammenti
inediti pubblicati dal Prof. Gennaro Buonanno in occasione delle Nozze
Cottarelli-Mauri. i8go.

(Acts of the Committee at Cremona, i860, and private letters from the
front.)
Crispi = Crispi (Francesco). Scritti e Discorsi Politici. 1890.
Crispi, igii = Crispi (Francesco). / Mille, da documenti dell' archivio Crispi.
Treves, igii.

(Contains his diary, letters, and other documents for i860.)
* Cronaca = Cronaca degliavvenimentidi Sicilia da Aprile, i860, aMarzo, 1861.

Estratta da documenti. Italia. 1863.
Cuniberti = Cuniberti (Capitano, F.). La spedizione dei Mille. Studio Mili-
tare. Palermo. 1880.

Also a second edition, Roux e C, Roma, 1893, with slight alterations.
(Military criticism of strategy and tactics of both sides.)
23 *

3S6 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Da Foyio = Forio (G. da). La Vita di G. Garibaldi. Napoli (Perrotti).

1862.
Dallolio = Dallolio (Alberto). La sped, dei Millenellememorie Bolognesi. Zani-
chein. 1910.

(From the papers of the Museo del Risorgimento, Bologna, many of which
are printed here in full. A scholarly work, and full of political wisdom.
Gives facts about the relations of La Farina and Bertani to each other and
to the Committees organising the later expeditions.)
D'Ayala = Memorie di Mariano D'Ayala. Scritte dal figlio Michelangelo.
Torino. 1886.

(Important for annexationist intrigues in Naples, August-Sept, i860.)
D'Azeglio = Lettere inedite di Massimo D'AzegUo al nipote Emanuele. Torino.

1883.
De Benedictis = De Benedictis (Biagio). Difesa delta sua diserzione. Palermo.

June 16, i860.
De Cesare = De Cesare (R.). La Fine di un regno. 3 vols, new ed. igog.

(The new edition in three volumes of this well-known work contains much
additional matter on September and October, i860. I have been therefore
obliged to use it for references in the foot-notes to this volume of mine,
although the pagination is different from that of the earlier two-volumed
edition of De Cesare to which the foot-notes of my Garibaldi and the Thou-
sand referred.)
De Cesare's F. di P. = De Cesare (R.). Una famiglia dipatriotti. i88g.

(Contains the best narrative &om local sources of Garibaldi's march from
Reggio to Naples, and of the rising in Calabria.)
De Cesare's Roma = De Cesare (R.)- Roma e lo stato del Papa. igo?.

(History of Papal dominions from 1850-1870.)
De la Rive = De la Rive (W.). Le Comte de Cavour, recits et souvenirs. 1862.
Delia Rocca = Generale Delia Rocca. Autobiografia di un veterano. i8g7.

(References above are to the English translation, 1899.)
Depretis, Lettera A. ~ Sulla presente condizione della Sicilia. Lettera al depu-
tato Depretis. Torino, i860. Signed Palermo, 2 Ott. i860, by compilatori
del giornale ' // Regno d' Italia,'' Morello, Abbate, Nicolao, Mirone,
Virzi.

(Complains of one-man rule of Garibaldi, or rather of rule of faction that
rules him, of disorder in Sicily, and begs for instant annexation. Testimony
to Depretis' excellence while he was Prodictator.)
* De Sivo — De Sivo (Giacinto). Storia delle due Sicilia dal 1847 al 1861. Vols,
iii. iv. 1864-1867.

(An ill-natured and credulous author, but based upon the primary au-
thorities, and therefore useful for the movements of the Bourbon armies for
those unacquainted with those primary sources, which should be studied
preferably. Franci (q.v.) is a much better book, written firom the same
sources, many of which are printed in Franci's appendices.)
Du Camp = Du Camp (Maxime). Expedition des deux Sidles. 1861.

(For the march through the Calabrias and the battle of the Volturno. The
best of all the books of purely personal reminiscences, and good reading too.)
Du Camp Souv. Lit. = Du Camp (Maxime). Souvenirs Litteraires. 1883.
(Vol. ii. chap, xxii, 'En guerre' is excellent on Dumas al Naples in i860,
when Du Camp was much in his company. Du Camp writes not only well
but justly of the men and things of i860.)

BIBLIOGRAPHY 357

Dumas = Dumas (Elder). Les Garibaldiens. 1861.

(The latter half of the book relates the experiences and intrigues of the
author in Sicily and at Naples, June to October, i860.)
Durand-Brager = Durand-Brager (H.). Quatre mois de ^expedition de Gari-
baldi. Paris. Dentu. 1861.

(One of the best of the French books on the subject. Well written, sen-
sible, and first-hand. For Palermo, Milazzo, and Messina.)
Elia = Elia (A.). Ricordi di tin Garibaldino. Ed. 1904.

Elliot = Elliot (Henry). Diplomatic Recollections. Printed for private circulation.
Epistolario = Ximenes (E. E.). Epistolario di Giuseppe Garibaldi. 2 vols.

Milano. 1885.
Fabrizi = Mirone (S.). Cenni storici sul Gen. N. Fabrizi. 1886. Catania.
Fam. Crauford = Lettere di G. Mazzini a Aurelio Saffi e alia famiglia Crau-

ford. Bib. Star, del Ris. It. Serie IV. N. 7. 1905. Citta di Castello.
Fanti = Carandini (Federico). M. Fanti generate d'atmata. 1872.
Fanti, Apr. 1861 = Generale Fanti. Discorso del 18 Apnle, i85i, alia Camera
dei Deputati.

(Defence of Government action towards the Garibaldian volunteers and
the ex-Neapolitan army.)
Fanti, Campagna = General Fanti. Campagna di guerra nelV Umbria e nelle
Marche. Torino.

(Fanti's report to the King, dated Ancona, Oct. i, i860, with maps.)
Fazio = Fazio. Memorie giovanili. igoi.

(Autobiography of a Sicilian volunteer, from Palermo to the Volturno.
Good on battle of Oct. i.)
* F^r/'afi = Ferrari (Joseph). L^ annexion des deux Siciles. Paris, i860.

(French pamphlet, not valuable.)
Ferrigni = Villari (Luigi A.). Cenni e ricordi di G. Ferrigni. Napoli, tip.
Priore. 1895.
(Not important.)
Filangieri = Teresa Filangieri Ravaschieri. II Generale Carlo Filangieri.
Milano. Treves, 1902.

(By his daughter, from the family archives. Important.)
Finali = Finali (Gaspare). Le Marche : Ricordanze. Ancona. 1897.

(For the Castelfidardo campaign. The author was attached to the Royal
Commissioner accompanying the army. Better on political than on military
affairs.)
Fonvielle = Fonvielle (Ulrich). Souvenirs d'une chemise rouge. Paris. Dentu,
1861.

(Interesting personal narrative, very good for Milazzo. Author, a French
artist, was in Malenchini's regiment. In many details and stories agrees
with other independent authorities. The book is to be trusted.)
Forbes = Forbes (Commander Charles Stuart, R.N.). The Campaign of Gari-
baldi in the Two Sicilies. 1861.

(Excellent on this latter part of the campaign of i860, of which he was
an eye-witness, familiar with Garibaldi and his principal followers. He is
not always exactly informed about things which he did not see himself, but
he saw a great deal.)
*Franci = Franci (Giovanni delU, Uffiziale superiore dello stato maggiore dell'
esercito Napolitano). Campagna d'autunno del i860. 2 vols. Napoli.
1870,

358 BIBLIOGRAPHY

(The best account on the Bourbon side, both for fairness of mind and full-
ness of information. The documents, especially at the end of vol. ii for
September and October, render this work the equal of Tiirr's Div. {q.v.) in
importance as a source of accurate knowledge. Here we have the more
important dispatches of the Neapolitan head-quarters leading up to the
battles of Oct. 1-2, and the correspondence of Von Mechel, Ritucci, UUoa,
and the King. The documents which it gives ought to be more largelj' used
by Italian writers, e.g. Von Mechel's report of Oct. i, pp. 261-271.)

Galton = Galton (Francis). Vacation tourists in i860. Macmillan. 1861.

(Pp. 1-75 contain important narrative by W. G. Clark, Tutor of Trinity
College, and Public Orator, Cambridge, describing what he saw of Naples
and Garibaldi in i860.)

Garibaldi's Defence of Rome = Trevelyan, G. M. Garibaldi's Defence of the
Roman Republic. Longmans. 1907.

Garibaldi and the Thousand = Trevelyan, G. M. Garibaldi and the Thousand.
Longmans, igog.

Gar. Num. Un. = Garibaldi. Numero Unico. igo7.

(Prints the Dunne-Scelsi correspondence, see p. 65, above.)

Garibaldi Poema = Garibaldi (G.). Poema Autobiografico e altri canti. Zani-
chelli. igii.

(The part about i860 is disappointing.)

* Gamier = Gamier (Charles). Journal dii siege de Gaete, 1861. Bruxelles.

(Diary, Nov. i860 to Feb. 1861, kept inside walls of Gaeta.)
Gay (Deut. Rev.) = Gay (Nelson). Deutsche Revue. Dec. 1910. Cavour und

die Tausend. (See Appendix C, above, last sentence.)
Genio = II Genio nella campagna d'Ancona e della Bassa Italia; 1860-1. Pub-

blicazione autorizzata dal Ministero della Guerra. Torino. 1864.
Giorn. d'lt. = Giorjiale d'ltalia. (See sjib Luzio and Mirabelli.)

(Important letters to Mazzini of Sept. i860 to Jan. 1861, printed in issue
of June 6, 1907.)
Giorn. di Sic = Giornale di Sicilia, see Guarneri.

* Goumoens ~ Goumoens (Emmanuel de). La Campagne de Varmee NapoUtaine

du Volturne a Gaete. (Bibliotheque Universelle de Geneve. Vol. xi.
1861.)

(Goumoens declares he was on the staff attached to Ritucci's person.
But his book is great nonsense, e.g. he makes Cajazzo recaptured by Bor-
boni on Sept. 14, prior to its loss on Sept. ig. And he declares that Gari-
baldi and his men on Sept. 19 arrived by train at Capua station expecting
to enter town, and were fired on as they sat in the carriages I)

Gregorovius = Gregorovius (Ferdinand). The Roman Journals of, 1852-1874.
Translated by Mrs. Hamilton. 1907.

Griscelli = Colocci (Adriano). Griscelli e le sue Memorie. Roma. 1909.
(Relating to the incident recorded p. 57 note, above.)

Guarneri =■ Article signed L. F. in the Giornale di Sicilia, Feb. 28-29, igo8,
giving Senator Guarneri's recollections of the Ministry of June, i860, at
Palermo, in which he held a portfolio.

Guerzoni = Guerzoni (Giuseppe). Garibaldi Firenze. 1882. 2 vols.
(Standard life of Garibaldi.)

Hauieis = Newspaper cutting (anno 1888, name of journal not given) in family
papers of the late Rev. H. R. Haweis, giving his personal reminiscences of
Garibaldi and the Garibaldians in and near Naples, i860.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 359

Holyoake = Holyoake (George Jacob). Bygones Worth Remembering. 1905.

/ Mille = Garibaldi (Giuseppe). I Mille. 1874. 2nd ed.

/>-« Poi. = Bertani (Agostino). Ire politiche d'oltre tomba. 1869.

(Part of a famous controversy. Reply to La Farina, q.v. and see Turr's
Risposta.)
hernia = La reazione avvenuta nel distretto d'Isernia, 30 Sett, al 20 Ott.

i860. Napoli. 1861.
Italia Marinara = Naples maritime weekly paper.

(Contains interesting historical articles with a rather unusual standpoint.)
y. des D. = jfournah des Debats. i860.

Johnston = Johnston (R. M.). The Napoleonic Empire in Southern Italy. 1904.
King = Bolton King. A History of Italian Unity, 1814-1871. i8g8. 2 vols.

(Standard general history for the English reader.)
King's Mazzini = Bolton King. Mazzini. Dent. 1902.
Lacava = Lacava (Michele). Cronistoria delta Rivoluzione in Basilicata.
Napoli. Morano, 1895.

(Many documents and much information about the local risings.)
La Farina = La Farina. Epistolario. 2 vols. 1869.

(The unexpurgated publication of these vigorous and venomous letters after
the death of their writer called out in reply Bertani's no less characteristic
Ire Politiche, q-v.)
La F. (Biundi) = Biundi (Giuseppe). Di Giuseppe La Farina e del Risorgimento
Italiano. 1893. Palermo. 2 vols.

(Vol. ii. pp. 527-529, reprint of the summary of accounts of the National
Society, showing what it did for the help of Garibaldi in June, July, and
August, bears out Bertani Comp. q.v.)
* Lafond = Lafond (Edmond). Lorette et Castelfidardo. Paris. 1862.

(A chatty clerical account of the Castelfidardo campaign. Gives curious
details, illustrative of character of Papal army, as also does Poli, q.v.)
La Gorce = La Gorce (Pierre de). Histoire du second empire.
La Masa (Mem.) = Memoria documentata del Deputato Generate Giuseppe La
Masa sullaquistione chelo riguarda. (Torino. 1862.)

(Documents and defence of his conduct and that of the Cacciatori dell'
Etna, on the Volturno, Oct. i860. Contains little of value that is not also in
La Masa [Sic).
La Masa (Sic.) = Alcuni fatti e documenti delta Riv. dell' Italia Merid.
riguardanti i Siciliani e La Masa. Torino. 1861.

(The documents here collected together with some others in La Masa and
O. B.'s La Masa (q.v.) prove the courageous conduct of part of the Sicilian
forces at Reggio, and on Oct. i. See also Paolucci's Corrao.)
*La Moriciere = Rapport du General de La Morici'ere a Monseigneur de Merode.
Paris, i860.
(Official report by the Papal General of the campaign of Castelfidardo.)
Laracca-Ronghi = Laracca-Ronghi (E.). Caserta e le sue Reali delizie {con
cenni sulla campagna del Volturno. 3rd ed. Caserta, tip. Marino. 1898.]
Caserta. 1888.

(Contains local information about the attack on Caserta by Ruiz' column
at end of battle of Volturno.)
Lega Del Bene = Neapolitan Review.

(Nos. for Dec. 1888 to Jan. 1889 contain a narrative of Garibaldi's entry

36o BIBLIOGRAPHY

into Naples, Sep. 7, i860, by L. Rendina, who accompanied him. It is the
fullest account of it, and is the basis of De Cesare's narrative.)
Leggi della Dtttatura = Collezione delle leggi, decreti e disposizioni governative,

comfilate dall avvocato Nicolo PorceUi. Palermo, i860.
Leggi (Napoli) = Collezione delle leggi e de' decreti emanati nelle provincie con-

tinentali durante la dittatura da 7 Sett, a' 6 Nov. i860. Napoli. i860.
Leg. Mat. — Petella, Dott. Giovanni. La Legione del Matese. Citta di Castello.
1910.

(Careful study from local and other sources of the Liberal movement and
local military aid given to Garibaldi in autumn and winter i860 north of the
Volturno. It is in fact the best authority on all military and political events
north of the Volturno, as for instance for Csudafy's expedition, for Cajazzo,
etc., as it puts them in relation with the other proceedings in that district.)
L'Estrange = L'Estrange (W. D.). Under Fourteen Flags. 1884.

(Adventures of Henry Maclver, one of which was with British Legion in
Naples. Not very interesting and of questionable exactness.)
Liborio Romano. = Liborio Romano. Memorie Politiche. Napoli. 1873.

(His defence of his conduct. A very human document. Contains much
important information, though not entirely reliable.)
Litta, Risorg. = Risorgimento Italiano (Rivista Storica). Anno ii. fasc. i. pp.

1-48. Count Litta's diary, etc., see pp. 101-103, above.
Lochroy = Lochroy (fidouard). L'lle revoltee. 1877.

(Pleasant gossip by a French writer who was in Sicily during the revolu-
tion. Not authoritative.)
Luzio, Corr. Sera = Luzio's important article on Cavour's relations to the ex-
pedition; in the Corriere della sera of Aug. 23, 1907.
Another, ditto, Dec. 8, igog.
Luzio, Giorn. D'lt. = ditto in the Giornale d'ltalia of May 5, 1907.
Luzio, Risorg. = ditto in Risorg. (q.v.) anno iii. Nos. 1-2, pp. 81-108, Due tela-
zioni di Ip. Nievo e di G. Acerbi sulla gestione delV Intendenza generate dell
esercito Meridionale nel i860, for the accounts of Garibaldi's army.
Luzio, Mazzini = Luzio (A.). G. Mazzini. Milano. igo5.
Luzio's Projili = Luzio (Alessandro). Profili Biografici. 1906.

(Contains a sketch of Bixio, pp. 303-316.)
Luzio's Studi = Luzio (Alessandro). Studi e bozzetti di Storia lettcraria e

politica. 2 vols. Milano. 1910.
Magni = Magni (Alessandro). La 160 div. Cosenz nella campagna del i860.
Roma. igo2.

(By a survivor. For voyage, Milazzo, crossing of Straits, and Volturno.
Reliable.)
Maison = Maison (Smile). Journal d'nn volontaire de Garibaldi. 1861.
Paris.

(First-hand personal reminiscences.)
Malmesbury = Malmesbury, third Earl of Memoirs of an ex-Minister. 1884.
Mancini = Mancini (Grazia). Impressioni e ricordi. igo8.
Maria Sophia = Tschudi (Clara). Maria Sophia, Queen of Naples. Translated

from the Norwegian by Ethel Hearn. Sonnenschein. 1905.
Mario = Mario (Jessie White). Garibaldi e i suoi tempi. Milano. ed. 1905.
Mario, Mac. — Macmillan's Magazine, vol. 46, July, 1882. Alberto Mario's
Personal Reminiscences of General Garibaldi.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 361

Mario's Mazzini = Mario (J. W.). Vita di Mazzini (Milano. Sonzogno,

i8g6.)
Mario's Red Shirt = (vid. sub Red Shirt).
Mario, Supp. = Mario (J. W.). Supplement to English translation of Garibaldi's

Memoirs.

(Contains stray pieces of information not found elsewhere.)
Afario, Kite = Mario (J. W.). Vita di Giuseppe Garibaldi. Milano. Ed. 1882.
Mariotti = La seconda sped. Gar. del i860. Temistode Mariotti N. A. 1 Aug.

1909.
(Memoirs of veteran of Malenchini's regiment for Milazzo, Volturno, etc.)
* Marra Oss. = Osservazioni del Generate Bartolo Marra sulla storia di A. B.

Cognetti. Napoli. 1868.

(Answer to Cognetti's Pio IX e il suo secolo ; defence of Marra's conduct.

Gives important first-hand evidence and documents as to his own conduct in

Reggio, and that of Melendez and Ruiz at Piale ; his own conduct when

left by King in charge of forts of Naples Sept. 6 ; and the battle of Oct. 1 1-2

about which he quotes General Ritucci's narrative.)
Martinengo Cesaresco = Martinengo Cesaresco (Contessa). Patriotti Italiani.

Milano. i8go.
Latest English edition of this work (1901), Italian Characters contains

sketches of Bixio, Poerio, and others.
Martinengo Cesaresco's Cavour = Martinengo Cesaresco (Countess). Cavour.

(In the Foreign Statesmen Series.)
See also The Liberation of Italy, 1814-1870, by the same authoress, 1895.

An excellent brief history. English readers desiring to know the history of the

Risorgimento should begin with this book and then go on to Bolton King's

History of Italian Unity.
Marzo-Ferro = Marzo-Ferro (Girolamo di). Vn periodo di storia di Sicilia.

Palermo. 1863.
Massari's V. E. = Massari (Giuseppe). La vita di Vitt. Em. 1878. 2 vols.
Matarazzi = Matarazzi. Avvenimenti politico-militari dal sett, al nov. i860.

Napoli. 1861.

(Important. Full of detail, especially for battle of Oct. i.)
Mattigana — Mattigana (Piero). Risorgimento d'ltalia. Milano.

(Pp. 328-393 contain an account by a volunteer at Milazzo of the fight-
ing on July 17 and 20.)
Mazzini = Mazzini (G.). Scritti editi e inediti. 17 vols.

(Vols, ix.-xi. covering this period, are rendered of special value by Saffi's

Proemio (q.i>.))
Medici = Medici (Gen. G.). Una pagina di storia del i860. Palermo. i86g.
Medici (Pasini) = Pasini (Giovanni). La battaglia di Milazzo narrata dal

Generate Giacomo Medici al Capitano Pasini (Giovanni). Cremona. 1883.
(A copy of this rare but important pamphlet is preserved in the Museum at

Cremona. Professor Manacorda kindly called my attention to it. Medici's

letter of June 8, 1881, and Pasini's preface, show that it was seen and

corrected by Medici, and its matter bears the stamp of authenticity. It is

therefore of great importance, since Medici has nowhere else left a detailed

account of his operations before Milazzo.)
Mem. = Garibaldi (Giuseppe). Memorie autobiografiche. Firenze. igo2.

nth ed.

362 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Mem. Star. Mil. = Memorie Storiche Militari. (Comando del corpo di Stato
Maggiore. Ufficio Storico Roma.)

I. = fascicolo I. Gennaio, 1909. L'Incontro del re V. B. col Gen.
Garibaldi il 26 Ott. i860. Generale Del Bono. (Docs. 5-7 are official
Piedmontese reports of part taken by the regular artillery in Oct. i and by
the companies of Bersaglieri and regular infantry of the line on Oct. 2.)

II. = fascicolo II. Maggio, igog. Intorno alia ' Diversione.' Giovanni
Cadolini.

(Important).
Mengliini — Menghini (Mario). La spsdizione Garibaldina di Sicilia e di
Napoli, nei proclami, nelle corrispondenze, nei diarii e nelle illustraziom
del tempo. 1907.
Merimee = M^rim^e (Prosper). Lettres d M. Panizzi, 1881.
* Merode = Monseigneur Besson. Frederick Francis Xavier de Merode. His

Life and Works. Translated into English by Lady Herbert. 1887.
Meuricoffre = Josephine Butler, sister of Me. Meuricoffre. In Memoriam Harriet
Meuricoffre^ no date.

(Parts of these interesting memoirs were printed in Macmillan's Magazine
for i85o-i85i, vol. iii. 152-160, q.v., which contains some incidents not re-
produced in the book. The memoirs, from letters of the date, treat of the
entry of Garibaldi, Sep. 7, and of the hospitals where Me. Meuricoffre worked
among the Garibaldian wounded.)
Mezzacapo = Pesci (Ugo). II Generale Carlo Mezzacapo. Zanichelli. igo8.

(Acted as one of Cavour's agents in Naples in August.)
Mignona = Carbonelli (G. Pupino). Nicola Mignona. Napoli. i88g.

(Patriot and exile of Basilicata and friend of Mazzini. Useful for Mazzini's
action and for the Basilicata rising.)
Milazzo (G. B. Z.) — Remlniscenze della Battaglia di Milazzo, fatti narraii da
un combattente. Milano. 1862. The Introduction is signed by author
' G. B. Z.' = Capt. G. B. Zaffaroni, see Castel Morrone, p. 22.

(On Clemente Corte and the work of the battaglione Gaeta in the battle.)
Mirabelli = (i) Mirabelli (R.). Giornale d'ltalia, May 14, 1907, and Corriere
della Sera, July 29.

(Answers to Luzio on Cavour and the expedition.)

(2) By same author — Per la storia rivoluzionaria del Sessanta,
Bologna. 1886.
Mirabelli Trev, = Mirabelli (R.). Cavour, I Mille e lo Storico Inglese Macaulay-
Trevelyan. Biblioteca della Rivista Popolare, xxxv. Roma. 1910.
(Anti-Cavourian.)
Mistrali = Mistrali (Fr.). Le guerre d'ltalia da Villafranca ad Aspromotite.
Milano. 1863.

(Second-hand ; not much use.)
Mistrali's Da N. = Mistrali (Fr.). Da Novara a Roma. Istoria della Riv. It.
Vol. iv. 1862 et seq.

(Good on Milazzo, memoirs of one of Medici's men.)
Monnier = Monnier (Marco). Garibaldi. Rivoluzione delledue Sicilie. Trans-
lated from French by Rocco Escalona, who adds notes. Napoli. 1861.
(Diary of author, chiefly at Naples. Also many documents.)
Monteleone — Numero Unico. A Garibaldi, La massoneria di Monteleone.
Oct. 1908.

Interesting details about flight of Neapolitan and passage of Garibaldian

BIBLIOGRAPHY 363

army through Monteleone, and part played by the townspeople in Aug.
i860.)

* Morisani = Morisani (Cesare). Ricordi storici. I fatti delle Calabrie nel
luglio ed agosto i860. Reggio-Calabria, stamp, di Luigi Ceruso. 1872.

(Very important for Reggio and Briganti's surrender. From Bourbon
documents and local sources. Impartial, but inclined to attribute too
much to definite treachery, especially in the case of Pianell, cf. to Pianell
and Marra Oss. and Ruiz.)

Morley = Morley (John). Life of Gladstone, 1903.

Mundy = Mundy (Rear-Admiral Sir Rodney). H.M.S. ' Hannibal ' at Palermo
and Naples, during the Italian Revolution, 1859-1861.

Murray, 1858 = Murray's Guide to South Italy, edition of 1858.

Murray, 1862 = ditto of 1862.

N. A. = Nuova Antologia. See Artom, Mariotti, Orsini, Trecchi.

Nicotera = Mauro (M.). Biografia di Giovanni Nicotera.

Nievo = Mantovani (Dino). II poeta soldato : Ippolito Nievo.

(Life of the poet Nievo, one of the Thousand. Contains his delightful
letters to his family from Palermo. From June to November he remained
in Palermo as sub-intendant, organising the revolutionary armies that con-
quered Naples.)

Nisco = Nisco (Niccola). Gli ultitni Trentasei anni del Reame di NapoH, vol.
iii. Francesco II. Ed. 1894.

(Nisco was one of Bomba's ' Neapolitan prisoners ' ; an agent of Cavour
in Naples, August and September, i860 ; after the revolution he had access
to part of the Bourbon archives for the purposes of his history.)

*iVo« = No^. Trente jours d Messine. 1861.

* Nove Mesi = [Gaeta (Luigi) dello Stato Maggiore dell' esercito Napolitano].

Nove mesi in Messina e la sua Cittadella, per ' G. L. ' Napoli. 1862.

(Contains very important dispatches of Bosco and Clary, and other
officers' diaries, especially useful for Milazzo. The same important docu-
ments are mostly printed in Palmieri also.)

iVMt>o/on = Nuvolari (Giuseppe). Come la penso. Milano. 1881.

O.B.'s La Masa = Bonafede (Oddo). Cenno Storico sul Generate G. La Masa.
Verona. 1879.

(Defence of La Masa's conduct, with documents, by Oddo, author ot /
Mille di Marsala, who later took name of Bonafede. Most of the docu-
ments are also in La Masa (Sic.) q.v.)

Oddo = Oddo (Giacomo). I Mille di Marsala. 1863.

Oddo's Brig. = Oddo (Giacomo). // Brigantaggio. L'ltalia dopo la ditt. di
Garibaldi. 3 vols. 1867.

OZmm= 01ivieri(F.). ErrorierimedineW Italia meridionale. Pinerolo. 1861.

Ollivier = Ollivier (Emile). L'Empire Liberal.

* O'Reilly = O'Reilly (Major). The Irish Papal Brigade Vindicated. Dublin.

1861.

(For defence of Spoleto.)
Orero = Orero (Gen.). Da Pesaro a Ancona. Straglio. 1905.

(Important for Castelfidardo campaign and operations of regular army in
Neapolitan Kingdom.)
Orsini = Documenti inediti del Gen. Giordano Orsini, by Francesco Guardione.
N. A. July I, 1907.

(For the passage of the Straits.)

364 BIBLIOGRAPHY

* Palmieri = Palmieri (G., Brigadiere di Cav.). Cenno storico del 1859-1861.

(Neapolitan General. Like Luigi Gaeta in his Nove Mesi {q.v.) he prints
two documents of the first importance for the campaign and battle of
Milazzo, viz. (i) on pp. 47-50, the written instructions given by Clary to
Bosco on July 13, and (2) on pp. 30-46, Bosco's account of the campaign
and battle of Milazzo, published originally in the NeapoHtan Rivista
Militare of Aug. i85o, Nos. 5 and 6. See also for cavalry in battle of
Volturno.) The book was written in 1861, and probably printed then, but
there is no date or place of printing on my copy.

Panizzi = Letters ad Antonio Panizzi di uomini illustri e di amici italiani
1823-1870 : pubblicate da Luigi Fagan. Firenze. 1880.

Panizzi's Life = L. Fagan. Life of Sir A, Panizzi. 1880.

Pantaleoni = Pantaleoni (Diomede). LHdea italiana nella soppressione del
potere tcmporale del Papi. 1884.

(Cavour's confidential agent in Rome. Important for Cavour's attempted
negotiations with Pope and his ideas on Rome, i86o-i86i.)

Paolucci Corrao = Paolucci (G.). Giovanni Corrao. In A. S. Sic. igoo, and
reprinted separately.

Peard = Trevelyan (G. M.). War-journah of Garibaldi's Englishman. Publi-
cation of parts of J. W. Peard's journal of i860 in the Cornhill Magazine,
June, 1908.

(See also an article in same magazine, Aug. 1903, by Miss Frances M.
Peard, called Garibaldi's Englishman.)

Pecorini-Manzotii Pagina = Pecorini-Manzoni (Emilio). Una pagina di storia.
In omaggio alia memoria dei prodi niiliti di Gar. morti nella batt. del Vol-
turno il I Ott. i860. Santa Maria. 1905.

Perini = Perini (O.). La spedizione dei Mille. Milano. 1861.

Persano = Persano (Ammiraglio C. di). Diario privato, politico, Militare. 1880.
(Most important on Cavour's secret orders to the fleet. Persano was
necessarily one of Cavour's most confidential agents throughout i860.)

Persigny = Memoires du Due de Persigny. Paris. 1896.

Piaggia — Piaggia (G.). Deifatti d'armi di Milazzo. Palermo. 1876. 2nd ed.

(First edition was published in i860 a few days after the battle. Piaggia

had intimate local knowledge of Milazzo and he was on the spot in the

hospitals a few days after the battle. It is a most important authority, and

as trustworthy as an account of a battle can be.)

Pianciani = Pianciani (Luigi). DelV andamento delle cose in Italia, i860.

(Important for the acts and intentions of Garibaldi, Bertani, and Pianciani
severally in August and for the history of the Tuscan volunteers and the idea
of invading the Roman States.)

* PjaKeZ/ = Pianell (Generale). Memorie. Firenze. Barb&ra. igoz.

(Very important for Aug. i860.)

* Pianell, Confutazioni = Cav. Carlo Corsi, Maggiore delle artigliere Napolitane

Capitolato di Gaeta [not to be confused with Corsi (Carlo), see above in this
bibliography]. Difesa dei Soldati Napolitani ; Confutazioni alle Lettere del
Generate Pianell e ricordi familiari ecc. Napoli. 1903.

(Fierce attack on Pianell from reactionary point of view. Second-hand,
no new documents.)
^ianell. Vita = F^lissent (G. de). II Generate Pianell e il suo tempo. Verona.
igo2.

(Less important than his own Memorie.)

BIBLIOGRAPHY 365

Pittaluga = Pittaluga (Gen. Giovanni). La Diversione. 1904.
* Poll = Poll (Oscar de). Souvenirs du bataillon des Zouaves Pontijicaux {franco-
beiges). Paris. 1861.

(For Castelfidardo campaign. Throws interesting lights on the motives
and character of the Papal Zouave Crusaders, of whom the truly ingenuous
author was one.)
Ponti Delia Valle = At Ponti della Valle. i Oti. i860. Numero unico.
Maddaloni. 1899. (Portici.)

(Mostly reprinting of well-known documents but has a new article by

General Pittaluga on the general strategical aspects of the battle of Oct. i.

Also recollections of the battle by Ghersi, Bixio's chief of staff, and others.)

Pozzi = In Memoria dell' Aw. Cav. Francesco Pozzi, morto il 25 maggio, 1907.

La Famiglia riconoscente.

(Contains Pozzi's own ' reminiscenze suUa campagna delle due Sicilie
i860.' For Medici's division at Milazzo, march through Calabria, and
battle of Volturno.)
Prampero = Prampero (Senatore A. di). La BattagUa di Castelfidardo. Udine.
1896.

(Author present at battle, during which he received orders from Cialdini

in person. Shows Finali to be wrong in saying that the battle took place

in Cialdini's absence.)

Preda = Preda (P.). Le sommeil interrompu ou sans bruler une cartouche.

Souvenir de la Campagne de Sidle en i860. Novate, Miglio freres. 1885.

(For the operations of the Veloce as a Garibaldian vessel prior to the battle

of Milazzo,- by one who was on board her during some of the captures she

made in Straits of Messina.)

Principe Nap. = Vayra (Pietro). II Principe Napoleone e Vltalia. Torino.

1891.
Pungolo = II Pungolo. (Modern Neapolitan paper, not to be confused with the
Milanese Pungolo of i860.)

1. Sept. 8, 1904, contains recollections of Lacava, Col. Visani, and other
veterans, of Garibaldi's entry into Naples, Sept. 7, i860.

2. jfuly 5, 1907, contains letter of Medici to Cosenz, May 10, i860.

* Quandel-Vial = Quandel-yial (Ludovico, ex-Capitano di Artiglieria Nap.).

Annotazioni al libra ' Lettere del Gen. Pianell e ricordi familiari.' Napoli,
tip. degli Artigianelli. 1901.

(An attack on Pianell and a defence of Vial for the affairs of Calabria in
August: the former more successful than the latter.)

* Quatrebarbes = Le comte de Quatrebarbes. Souvenirs d'Ancone, siige de i860.

(Quatrebarbes was governor of Ancona during the siege. Impor-
tant.)

Quern's Letters = The Letters of Queen Victoria. 3 vols. 1907.

Racioppi = Racioppi (Giacomo). Moti di Basilicata. Napoli. 1867.

Raffaele = Raffaele (G.). Rivelazioni storiche della riv. dal 1848 al i860.
Palermo. 1883.

Rampone = Rarapone (S.). Mem. Pol. di Benevento dalla riv. del 1799 alia nv.
del i860. Benevento, tip. D'Alessandro.

Rass. Con. = Rassegna Contemporanea, ann. ii. fasc. ii. Feb. 1909. Lettere
inedite di Stefano Canzio.
(Not important.)

366 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Red Shirt = Mario (Alberto). The Red Shirt. 1865. (Smith, Elder & Co.)

(Important personal reminiscences of the campaign of i860. A part

had been published in Cornhill Magazine, June, 1864.)
Reggio = Sui prodi Italiani caduii martiri in Reggio il 21 Agosto, i860. Parole

di Basilio Lofaro. Reggio. i860.
(Not important.)
Revel's da Ancona = Revel (Genova di). Da Ancona a Napoli. Miei Ricordi.

Milano. 1892.

(Revel came south with the Piedmontese army.)
Ricasoli = Ricasoli (Baron). Lettere e documenti ptibb. per ciira di M. Tabarrini

e A. Gotti. Firenze. 1887-1895.
Risorg, = II Risorgimento Italiano.

(The Historical Review of Risorgimento History. First number, March,

igo8. To be distinguished from the Rivista Storica del Risorgimento

Italiano of 1895 and subsequent years (vid. sub R. S. del R.), a similar

periodical of anterior date. Risorg. contains Uzielli (?-».) and much other

very valuable matter.)
R. S. del R. = Rivista Storica del Risorgimento Italiano. 1895 et seq.

(See sub Amari, Cialdini e Gar., Turiello.)
Rosi = Rosi (M.). II risorgimento italiano e Vazione d'un patriota cospiratore e

soldato, 1906,

(A life of Mordini. Well documented.)
* Ruiz = L'antodifesa del generale Ruiz de Ballesteros. First published in Naples

in 1868, republished by his son, Col. Gaetano R. di B. Milano. 1910.
(For Lower Calabria in August, and the Volturno in October. A useful

corrective of De Sivo's wholesale charges of treachery, etc. Most im-
portant as the Neapolitan general's own account of Castel Morrone, and

battle of Oct. 2.)
Rusconi = Rusconi (Ferdinando). 19 anni di vita di un Garibaldino. 1870.
J?;<5j«H = Spencer Walpole. Life of Lord yohn Russell. i88g.
Russell {Lady) = Desmond MacCarthy and Lady Agatha Russell. Lady jfohn

Russell. A Memoir. Methuen. 1910.
Riistow = Riistow (W.). La Guerra italiana del i860 descritta politicamente e

militarmenie con 8 carte e piani. Versione dott. G. Bizzozzcro. Milano,

tip. G. Civelli. 1862.

(Is a translation of Riistow's Erinnerung aus dem italienischen Feldzuge

von i860. First-hand for latter part of campaign.)
Riistow's Brig. Mil. — Riistow (Wilhelm). La Brigata Milano nella campagna

delV Italia merid. del i860. Versione dal tedesco. Eliseo Porro. Milano,

tip. D. Salvi. 1861.

(Italian translation of Die Brigade Milano, i860. Riistow, a German

Liberal exile, commanded the Milan ' Brigade,' or rather small battalion,

originally of Pianciani's force, subsequently under Turr at Sapri and the

Volturno. Important.)
Sacchi Dom. = Sacchi (Prof. Domenico). Traduzione e Confutazione dell' optis-

colo intitolato * La Verite sur les choses dn Royaume d'ltalie,' par y. A.

ancien agent secret du comte de Cavonr. Torino. 1862.
Saffi's Procmio = Safli (Aurelio). Preface to the Scritti editi e incditi of Maz-

zini ((/.T^.)

Reprinted also in Saffi, Ricordi e Scritti.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 367

Salazaro = Salazaro (Demetrio). Cenni sulla Riv. It. del i860. Napoli.

1866.
Savio = Ricci (R.). Memorie della Baronessa Olimpia Savio. 1911.

(Mother of the Savio brothers : their letters from the front.)
* Schweizertruppen = Dr. Albert Maag. GeschichU der Schweizertrufpen in
N eapolitanischen Diensien, 1825-1861. Ziirich. igog.

(From Swiss sources. One of the most trustworthy books about the
Bourbon side of the war, though unfortunately limited to the action of the
Foreign Brigade. Important for Cajazzo and Arches of the Valley.)
Scrittori Manduriani = Gigli (Giuseppe). Scrittori Manduriatii. i8g6.

(Contains a short biography of Lacaita, including the story of the visit to
Lord John Russell's house as told by Pasquale Villari on Lacaita 's authority ;
see sub Villari Pasq. below.)
S>m/so» = Simpson (Rev. F. A.). The Rise of Louis Napoleon, igog.

(The early life of Napoleon III must be known before his Liberal action
with regard to Italy in 1859-1860 is understood. Mr. Simpson's fascinating
volume is the best record of the important and neglected facts of the pre-
tender's youth.)
Siracusa = De Benedictis (Em.). Siraciisa sotto la mala signoria degli ultimi
Borboni. Torino. 1861.

(Local account of events in Syracuse.)
Sirtori = De Castro (G.). Giuseppe Sirtori. Milano. Dumolard, r8g2.
SolaroU = vid. Castelli above.

Spaventa — Spaventa (Silvio). Dal 1848 al 1861. Napoli. i8g8.
Stamp. Off. = Stampati in fogli volanti editi negli anni 1860-1861. Parte
officiate.

(A fine collection of the official proclamations of the successive Govern
ments of 1860-1861. Collection Lodi, Arch. Stor. Patria, Palermo.)
Stiavelli = Stiavelli (G.). Garibaldi nella letteratura italiana.
Stillman's Crispi = StillrmLn(W. ].). Francesco Crispi. iSgg.

(Not documented.)
St. Maur Letters = Letters of Lord St. Maur and Lord Edward St. Maur.
Privately printed. 1888.
(Of the British Legion: kindly lent me by Mr. H. St. Maur.)
Stocco = number of La Nuova Stampa of Nicastro, 12 Feb. igio, devoted to
memory of Antonio Stocco, just deceased. He was nephew of Francesco
Stocco, under whom he served in Calabria, i860.
Slruti = Strutt (Arthur J.). A Pedestrian Tour in Calabria and Sicily. 1842.
Thayer — Thayer (W. Roscoe). Throne-makers. i8gg.

(Contains an excellent appreciation of Garibaldi.)
Thouvenel = Thouvenel (L.). he secret de VEmperevr. 1889. L^vy ed.

(Contains important private correspondence of Thouvenel, French Foreign
Minister, with Gramont, French Ambassador at Rome, i860.)
Tivaroni It. = Tivaroni (Carlo). L'ltalia degli Italiani.
Tost = Tosi (Raffaele). Cenni aufob. di un Garibaldino. Rimini. i88g.
Tosi, igio = Tosi (Raffaele). Da Venezia a Mentana. Ricordi pubblicati del
figlio.

(A later and slightly different edition of Tosi.)
Trecchi = Nuova Antologia. June i, 1910. Tlie letters of the marchese Gaspare
Trecchi for i860, pubhshed and commented on by Giuseppe Manacorda.

368 BIBLIOGRAPHY

(Of the first importance, especially the King's secret message to Garibaldi,
Aug. 5 (?) printed p. 426.)
Treitschke = Treitschke. // Conte di Cavour. Translated from the German.
Firenze. 1873.
(Excellent.)
Tyibuna = Journal, No. 225 et seq. igoy, for controversy on the meeting oi

Garibaldi and Victor Emmanuel at Teano.
Trinity = The Trinity of Italy, by an English Civilian for eight years in
official connexion with the Court of Naples. 1867. Edward Moxon & Co.
TroUope = TroUope (T. A.). What I Remember. 1887-1889.

(II. pp. 222-231 about Peard, Mario, and Garibaldi.)
Turiello = Turiello (P.). Ricordi. Dal 1847 al '67. R. S. del R. Anno i.

vol. i. fasc. ii. e iii.
Tiirr ai miei Comp. = Tiirr (Stefano). Ai miei compagni d'armi. Maggio.
1903. Roma.

(Answer to Bandi, pp. 293-295, re events of Sept. 19 and Cajazzo.)
Tiirr's Div. = Pecorini-Manzoni (Carlo). Storia delta z^a Divisione Tiirr.

1876.
Tiirr's Risposta = Turr (Gen.). Risposta alV opuscolo Bertani. Milano. i86g.
C/ho Pagina = Pecorini-Manzoni (Emilio). Una pagina di storia. In omaggio
alia memoria dei prodi morti alia battaglia del Volturno. i Ott. 1S60.
Portici. 1905.
(Does not contain much that is not in his Tiirr's Div. or elsewhere.)
Uzielli = Uzielli (Gustavo). Dai ricordi di uno studente Garibaldino printed
in Ri:org. anno ii. fasc. 5-6, pp. 913-952.

(Letters, memoirs, and other documents. Important for Malenchini's

regiment at Milazzo, and for the fight at the Porta Capua, S. Maria, Oct. i.)

Vcnosta = Venosta (G. Visconti). Ricordi di Gioventu. Milano. 1906. 3rd ed.

V.M. = Ventisette maggio 1S60; numero unico. Palermo. 27 maggio. 1885.

Veritas = Veritas {nom de plume of Doctor Giovanni Del Greco of Florence, see

StiavelH, rgS). Ricordi di un Garibaldino. 1888.

(Personal reminiscences of fighting on July 17, before Milazzo, and of
battle of Volturno, Oct. i.)
Veterano = II Veterano periodical. igo8.

(April 1908, contains two accounts of the fighting on road to S. Angelo
when Garibaldi in his carriage was endangered ; one by F. Bassani, then
sergeant in Cadolini's regiment, and another by Emilio Caivano, both of
whom took part in the affair.
* Veuillot = Veuillot (Eugene), he Piimont dans les ^tats de VEglise. Paris.
i86r.
(Clerical work on the Castelfidardo campaign.)
Villari Cosp. = Villari (Raffaele). Cospirazione e rivolta. 1881.
Villari Pasq. = IX Gennaio, pubblicazione commemorativa per ciira del circolo
universitario Vitt. Em. II. Bologna. 1882.

(Contains Pasquale Villari's narrative of the Lacaita-Russell interview
as told to him by Lacaita, see p. 107 above. Told also in Albo Com. and
Scritfori Manduriani, q.v.)
Vismara = Vismara (Antonio). Bibliografia di Garibaldi. Como, tip. C.
Franchi. 1891.

(Part of E, Motta's Collezioiw sforlca bibliografica.)

BIBLIOGRAPHY 369

Vitzthum = Graf Vitzthum von Eckstadt. (Saxon Minister in Great Britain.)

St. Petersburg tmd London, 1852-1864. Stuttgart. 1886.
Volturno = Pei Caduti al VoUurno. Numero Unico. S. Maria. 1905.
Walpole's Twenty-five Years = Walpole (Sir Spencer). History of Twenty-five

years.
Whitaker = Whitaker (Tina, n6e Scalia). Sicily and England, 1848-1870.

Constable. 1907.
Whitehouse = Whitehouse (H. K.). Collapse of the Kingdom of Naples. New

York. Bonnel Silver & Co. 1899.
Winnington-Ingram = Winnington-Ingram (Rear Admiral H. F.). Hearts of

Oak. 1889.
Zasio = Da Marsala al Volturno. Ricordi di E. Z. Padova. 1868.

(E. Z. = Emilio Zasio, one of the Thousand. A fine fellovir, of good

judgment and modesty as I have been told by his fellow-soldiers, and as his

book shows. He was at Garibaldi's side at the entry into Naples, the

meeting with the King, and on many other occasions.)
Zirilli = Zirilli (S.). Sulla conquista Garibaldina di Milazzo. Palermo.

1882. (Note e schiarimenti al manuale di storia contemp. di G. Weber.)
(Zirilli was leading citizen of Milazzo, an active Liberal, and was one of

the few Milazzesi who remained in the town during the battle. His work is

valuable for what he saw himself, and for doc. 5, the letter of a Bourbon

officer.)

II. NEWSPAPERS AND PERIODICALS OF i860

Arlecchino = L'Arlecchino. Sicilian newspaper, June 11, i860, et seq.

* Civ. catt. = Civilta cattolica. Clerical organ.
Corr. Merc. = Corriere Mercantile, i860. Genova.

(Cavourian. Contained article reprinted in 1861 as Bertani Comp. q.v.)
D. News = Daily News.

(Special correspondents' and private persons' letters on all the important
events. But not generally so good as Times and Morning Post. Arrivabene
was their principal correspondent: see his book, Arrivabene.)
Diritto = Italian democratic journal.
Forbice = Forbice, la. Palermitan newspaper for i860.

(Contains some letters from Milazzo, etc., of interest.)

* Gazzetta di Gaeta = Francis II's official newspaper after his leaving Naples.

First number, Sept. 4, i860. Last, Feb. 8, 1861.

(Contains official Bourbon accounts of Sept. 19, Cajazzo, and a very
inadequate account of battle of Oct. 1-2, which is described as a successful
' reconnaissance.')
Gazz. di Mil. = Gazzetta di Milano. May to Sept. i860. Ten supplements,
giving list of ' offerte per soccorsi nella Sicilia versate all' Associazione
Italiana.' The ten sheets are subscription lists of several hundred in-
dividuals, each sending between one and a hundred lire.
(Moderate — for Garibaldi and Cavour both.)
Giorn. Off. di Napoli = Giornale Officiate di Napoli, for i860.
Giorn. Off. Sic. = Giornale Officiate di Sicilia, 1857-1860.

(The paper begins again under the new regime at Palermo on June 7.
/. L. N. = Illustrated London News for i860.

(Pictures and reports of Garibaldi's campaign from the entrance into

24

370 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Palermo onwards. Their principal artist and war correspondent was Vize-
telly, who lived on intimate terms with many of the Garibaldini, from whose
narratives he made up his reports.)
y. des D. = yournal des debats.

(Sept. 15 for account of Garibaldi's entry into Naples, dated Sept. 7.
Oct. 7 for account of Volturno, dated Oct. 2.)
L'llhistration. = L'lllustration. Paris, i860.

(The French Illustrated London News. Accurate war-sketches from the
front, nearly all reproduced in Menghini, ?.».)
Mondo lUustrato = II Mondo Illustrato for i860.

(Italian paper on lines of our Illustrated London News. First two years
of it were 1847-1848, third year began July 7, i860. Its pictures are not very
good, but are fairly accurate.)
M. Post — Morning Post.

(Special correspondents' letters on march of Eber's column, Milazzo,
Faro, San Giovanni, Volturno. The principal correspondent, an excellent
one, was a Tuscan, as I have been told by those who went with him through
Sicily.)
Opinione = Ofinione.

(Cavourian : see Chiala's Dina for a reprint of many of its most im-
portant articles.)
Precursore = II Precursore.

(Sicilian newspaper from July, i860, onwards.)
Pnngolo Milano = // Pungolo, journal of Milan, i860.

(The Nostre corrispondenze from officers with Garibaldi are often good.)
Times = The Times.

(Eber, the Hungarian, continued to send excellent letters as 'special
correspondent ' even while in command of the column that passed through
the middle of Sicily to Catania. There were various correspondents during
the campaign, among others Gallenga. The account of the battle of
Milazzo, by a combatant [Times, Aug. 4, p. 10] is of great historical value.
Other communications of historical importance are to be found in the
Times of Aug. 20, 25, 31, Sept. 4, on Faro and crossing the Straits; Sept. 15
on the march through Calabria and Basilicata ; Sept. 13, 18, on Garibaldi's
entry into Naples ; Sept. 27, on action of Sept. 19 ; Oct. 9 and 11, on battle
of Volturno. And there is much else of interest.)
Un. It, = Unitel Italiana, Democratic.

III. MANUSCRIPTS
I. MSS. Belonging to Private Persons

Bell MSS. = Letter of W. Walpole Bell, of British Legion.

Canzio MS. = Typewritten account of meeting of Victor Emmanuel and Gan-
baldi by General Canzio, Garibaldi's son-in-law, who was present at the
scene. He gave me this document in Jan. 1908, as being his own authorized
account.

Dunne MSS. = Letters of Dunne to Countess Martinengo Cesaresco, and her
notes of his conversations. Collection of cuttings from English and Italian
newspapers about him at Milazzo and Volturno. Letter of Giacinto Scelzi
to Dunne, recalling their actions in Sicily, which has also been printed ir.
Gar. Num. Un.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 371

Fazzari MSS. = Original MS. letters to Garibaldi of Admiral Persano, Turr, and
Augusto Vecchi, summer and autumn of i860, kindly lent me by the late
Achille Fazzari of Staletti, Golfo di Squillace.

Forbes MSS. = Papers of Hugh Forbes, lent me by his daughter.

Lacaita MSS. = Papers of Mr. Chas. Lacaita referring to his father's interview
with Lord John Russell, July, i860. Letter of Hudson, 1885, and Lacaita's
journal for i860. See p. 105 above.

Miller MSS. = Narrative communicated to me by the Rev. Donald Miller, for
forty-one years Minister of the Scotch congregation in Genoa. In i860 he
was still in trade (aet. 22) in the firm of Henderson Bros., his uncles, of
Leghorn, and had important dealings with Garibaldi, relative to the City of
Aberdeen steamer, and also sold him military stores at cost price out of
sympathy with the movement. He became one of Garibaldi's friends.

Morgan MSS. = Letters of Charlton H. Morgan to author. (Mr. Morgan was
United States Consul at Messina in i860. He assisted Garibaldi at Faro
and fought for him on the Volturno.)

Nelson MSS. = Letters of and about i860, kindly lent me by the late Dr. Joseph
Nelson of Belfast, formerly of Dunne's regiment at Milazzo. They contain
letters of i860 from the camps of Sicily and Naples by Mr. Walker, of
Dunne's regiment and the British Legion.

Peard's Journal MS. = MS. journal for 1859, i860 of J. W. Peard, ' Garibaldi's
Englishman.' Kindly lent me by Miss Peard. Important.

Russell MSS. = For these very important papers see Appendix A.

Russell (Lady) MSS. = Letters of Poerio, Sir James Hudson, and others to Lady
John Russell, i860. In possession of Lady Agatha Russell, who kindly
allowed me to consult them.

Schwabe MSS. = Papers of late Mrs. Schwabe, kindly lent me by her daughter.
Lady Lockwood.

1. Medici's list of arms brought by Queen 0/ England to Messina.

2. De Rohan's letter re formation of British Legion.

3. Madame Mario's account of hospitals at Caserta.

4. Garibaldi's letter to Bixio from Caprera, Nov. 10, i860.
Taylor MSS. = Mazzini's letters to his English friends the Taylors.

(In possession of Mrs. Osier, Birmingham, and her uncle, Mr. Malleson,
who kindly lent me copies.)

2. MSS. IN Public Libraries, etc.

I. BOLOGNA MSS. (mUSEO RISORGIMENTo).

Comitato di prowedimento in Bologna per soccorsi a Garibaldi.

(Lists, accounts, and correspondence, showing great activity and large
number of volunteers raised in Bologna.)
Bixio MS. = Letter to his wife from Villa San Giovanni. 24 agosto, i860.

II. CREMONA MSS.

Cremona MSS. = MSS. in the Museum of Cremona, which Prof. Manacorda
kindly had copied for me.

(Memoirs and letters from the front, by Cremonese volunteers with
Garibaldi, i860; business letters of Cosenz and Bertani about enlistments
at Cremona.)

24 *

372 BIBLIOGRAPHY

III. GENOA MSS.

Bibl, Civ. = Biblioteca Civica.

MSS. Socc. Gar, = Soccorso a Garibaldi. Genova. Bibl. civ. D bis. 4. 4. 14.

Tiirr MS. = Letters of Tiirr to his friend Gen. Baja, written in last ten years
of his life, about Cajazzo and other affairs of i860. University Library,
Genoa. [The original of the Bixio MS. are also kept here : but in these
volumes I have referred to the MS. copies of the Bixio MS. at Bologna.]

IV. LONDON MS.

F. O. = Foreign Office Papers (MS.) in Record Office.

(The parts of the correspondence for Sardinia, Rome, and Sicily (= Naples)
which were not printed and published in Br. Pari. Papers {q.v.), 1860-1861,
I have been allowed to study by the kind permission of the Foreign Office.)

V. MILAN MSS.

The following important MSS. are kept in the Museo del Risorgimento, in
the Castello, in the famous Archivio Bertani, on which see Luzio's article, Corr.
Sera. March i, igio.

A. B. = Archivio Bertani (secondo elenco).
A. B., Plichi A. B. C. D. E. = Autografi. CeUbriid.
Plico B. sec. C. Dolfi's Letters.

Plico B. sec. G. Reports from conspirators in the Marches.
Plico B. sec. H. No. i, Buschi's letter.
A. B., Plico XII. No. 13. Dossier of offers of service, and replies. May, i860.
Nos. 24, 29, 31, 41, 42, 44 are interesting.

No. 38. Preparations for insurrection on mainland of Naples, June,
i860.
A. B., Plico XIII. May, i860. 133 letters, mostly of application to join Gari-
baldi.
A. B., Plico XIV. June, i860. Over 300 letters, ditto.
A. B., Plico XV. July, i860. Numerous letters, rfiWo.

(The subsequent innumerable plichi are chiefly the accounts, receipts,
orders, and all the business papers of Bertani's Cassa Centrale of i860.
Cosenz MS. = Dossier of letters by General Cosenz. Letters of i860 to Eleu-

terio Pagliano, about preparations for the expeditions.
Brunzetti MS. = Dossier of Narciso and Pilade Bronzetti, 1859-1860.

1. Letter of Giovanni Veneziani to Eleuterio Pagliano about Milazzo,

27 Luglio, i860.

2. Letter (1905) and Discorso (1885) on Castel Morrone by G. C.

Ferrario, one of the survivors.

3. Letter of Cosenz to Oreste Bronzetti, the third brother, about his

good conduct at Milazzo.

Bruzzesi MS. i. Notebook. Giacinto Bruzzeti's notebook of i860. Diary
in ink, from Quarto to crossing of straits (May to Aug.), filled in only
occasionally and slightly except after arrival at Faro, when it is fuller.
Contains also a more detailed account of voyage of Thousand and landing
at Marsala, in pencil, but done, as stated, some time after the event.

2. Pencil and pen jottings on little shps of paper of the voyage and Marsala,
evidently done on spot. Accurate sketch-map of hills round Calatafimi and
battle. Jottings about surrender of Milazzo.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 373

3. Elenco dei Morti nella battaglia di Milazzo.

4. Maps of Milazzo and Volturno battle-fields, latter on a large scale and showing

batteries.

5. Col. Giacinto BruzzesVs military correspondence for Sept. to Dec. i860.

VI. PALERMO MSS.

Br. Cons. MS. = Papers of the British Consulate, Palermo, i860. Official
letters of Mr. Goodwin to the British Minister at Naples, including his
' Political journal ' bora May ig, i860, onwards. Another copy of Mr.
Goodwin's political journal will be found sub loc. in the F. O. Papers,
Record Office, London, as Elliot forwarded copies to Russell.

VII. ROME MSS.

Savi MS. = Manuscript diary of Savi, a Genovese of the Thousand, kept on the
spot during the campaign, on separate sheets of paper of different colours
and sizes. Signor Menghini kindly allowed me to use this important
authority. For Genoese Carabineers at Milazzo and Volturno.

Br. Cons. Rome = British Consulate Rome, Letter Book of 1860-1872.

(Letters of the Consul Newton to Lord John Russell, i860, which I was
kindly invited to consult by Sir Rennell Rodd, with the permission of the
Foreign Office. Contains a good deal of value about the Castelfidardo cam-
paign, including in a letter of Oct. 16 two enclosures), viz. : —

* I. Letter from a German officer in the Papal service describing Castel-
fidardo, in which he took part.

* 2. Letter from a person resident near Ancona who was present at the
siege and collected many facts about the battle of Castelfidardo from Papal
officers and others present.

MS. Mazz. Letters, V. E. = Unpublished letters of Mazzini, 1859-1860, in the
Vitt. Em. Rome.

IV. NOTES OF CONVERSATIONS

In studying the history of fifty years ago, an important source ot evidence
besides books and MSS. is the oral testimony of survivors and of those who
knew the actors well. I have not neglected this source, and have made it a
practice to take down notes on the spot during the conversation, and if necessary
to write the notes out again carefully within twenty-four hours afterwards.

In the following list of 'Conversations' (Co«».), this practice has in each
case been adhered to, and I have notes taken at the time to show for every con-
versation used as evidence. In this list I have not put down my conversations
with modern historians, such as Signori Luzio, De Cesare, and Paolucci, useful as
those have been to me, but have confined the list to actors in or witnesses of the
events related.
Conv. Brown Young = Notes from conversation with (Capt.) Brown Young,

English officer of Garibaldi's army in the campaign on the Volturno.
Con. Cadolini = Notes of conversation with Senator G. Cadolini (veteran of

1849, '59, '60, and '66).
Conv. Canzio = Notes of conversations with the late General Canzio, one of the

Thousand, Garibaldi's son-in-law (see also Canzio MS. above).
Conv. Capurro = Notes of conversation with Gio. Batt. Capurro of Genoa, one

of the Thousand.

374 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Conv. Deane = Notes of conversation with Capt. Deane, R.N. (retired Com-
mander, 1894), was serving on board H.M.S. Agamemnon in i860.

Conv. Dolmage = Notes of conversations with Mr. J. A. Dolmage, an officer of
the British Army who was on leave from his regiment and travelling in Sicily
in i860. He joined Garibaldi's forces at Palermo in June and was, at first,
attached unofficially to Tiirr's brigade. He was present at nearly all the
actions fought during the campaign, and since he enjoyed the personal
friendship of Garibaldi and of many of his officers, his information is
interesting and important.

Conv. Ellis = Notes of conversation with Mr. H. Ellis of British Legion.

Conv. Fazzari = Notes of conversations with the late Achille Fazzari of Staletti,
Calabrian leader of i860 and friend of Garibaldi.

Conv. Goodall = Notes of conversation with Mr. G. Goodall.

(Valuable for crossing of Straits by Cosenz' expedition and action in Solano
village in which Mr. Goodall took part.)

Conv. Mainoni = Notes of conversation with General Mainoni d'Intignano of
the regular Piedmontese army, i860.

Conv. Missori — Notes of conversation with Giuseppe Missori, a year before he
died.

Conv. Patterson = Notes of conversations with Mr. A. B. Patterson of Dunne's
regiment at Milazzo, and subsequently of the British I.C.S.

Conv. Pedotti = Notes of conversation with Senator General Pedotti, formerly
of Pianciani's expedition, Tiirr's Division. Took prominent part on Sept. ig
before Capua, and fought on Oct. i. Long afterwards became Italian
Minister of War.

Conv. Pritnerano = Notes of conversation with the late Senator General
Primerano (Captain in the Neapolitan army, i860).

Conv. Sclavo = Notes of conversation with Col. Sclavo (Francesco), veteran of
Milazzo, S. Giovanni, Arches of the Valley, etc.

Conv. Sivelli = Notes of conversation with Signor Egisto Sivelli, one of Thou-
sand ; after Palermo, fought in Dunne's regiment at Milazzo.

Conv. Tedaldi — Notes of conversation with Col. Cav. Fr. Tedaldi, Sicilian
who went through the whole campaign.

Conv. Visconti Venosta — Notes of conversation with Marchese Emilio Visconti
Venosta, sent by Cavour on unofficial mission to Naples, July to Sept. i860.

V. ITALIAN AND ENGLISH POETRY

Garibaldi (Versi e prose). Giosue Carducci.

Rapsodie Garibaldina. II. Giovanni Marradi.

La Notte di Caprera. Gabriele D'Annunzio.

Poems before Congress. Last Poems (1862). Mrs. Browning.

Aspromonte and other Poems. Mrs. Hamilton King.

Songs before Sunrise. Algernon Swinburne.

ADDENDA TO THE BIBLIOGRAPHY

Cadolini Mem. = Cadolini (Senatore G.).

Memorie del risorgimento. igii.

Curdtolo = Cur^tolo (G. E.) Garibaldi, Vittorio Emanuele, Cavour. 1911.

(a)

\Cosenza

GARIBALDI'S ROUTE

The Straits and Lower Calabri

Scale, 1:825,000

la

, , 5

Eng-lish Miles
10 20

30

T YRRHENIAN
^Stromboli I.

SEA

''A.

MAP II.

s

^ o Nicastro

' / ~

'Jpiain

Gulf of-'^L

i__,- . J*^ o Maida

-/^Bridge of La Gatzia

Filadelfta

^ ^
^

Staletti" -Camp^nello

V

^Stilo

^

Jis Rizio VXVS!" „ , ^ Plain of

'*&. "%>' ' JSr3ii «» . r« fAcciarello o I Forestall , >

%% °s.Pietro Messina'^* , V /(s;,™«,-o,.f»

/-^ o "S.Filippo v\

S.Lucia ^ H^eg^O

o Castroreale ."^^^^^ Sbarrel i '"" ° *" "

SICILY °'"""^

o

lardiii! ■•••**

Pellaro o San Lorenzo

.Lazzaro

o Pentedatilo

-Melito

^

V

\

-^

<:i

\

TYRRHENIAN

GARIBALDI'S ROUTE

Upper Calabria, Basilicata etc

Emery Walker sc.

MAP HI.

^^Procida I.

Ischia I.

Torre AnnunziataV — "

Castellamman-y

■J\

J^ !*'

i^ SorrentP '

fy-

o . .

o , / ■--"".

Q,

/

, . ^.^_. —/Castel Nuovo

NAPLES
i860

■ ' Amali'i

liboii -

ENVIRONS OF NAPLES

i860

Scale, 1:600,000

Eng-Jish Miles
5 10 15

^ Meeting place of Victor Emmanuel and Garibaldi'

■i^asteUo DellOvo

\IPantuIiano

Vitulazio

Ferr*y of Lima/ofiS:

A^

CAPUA'

Briciff'

S.Tariimaro

; .r--^ K^A. ^,

^

A September a

^r.*

^'^^^^or<^_^

Station

BATTLE OF THE VOLTURNO

October i, i860
Approximate positions at noon

Garibaldini.

HH Bourbon troops...

Scale, 1:95,000

3 Miles

Forests and woods

Oliues |,*t* »".".'

.griT^^L

MaFciamse

|ir S.Maria

S.Nicola
via Strada^

■Emeri-"\yalker sc.

ITALY, at time of Garibaldi's Campaign of i860

MAP rv.

V?.

"■■•■•.

s

w

I

T

Z

E

R

L

A N

D

f-;

.•■■-

j^^

....••■.

■•..:■

Note;- Mng Violor Emmanuel's dominions ^^___^

during May, 7860, are shaded thus:- N?^

Route of Victor Emmanuel Oct. 2-26,

up to the fioint where he met Garibaldi -. _,

tmery Walker sc.

INDEX

Abruzzi :

'Brigandage' in, fostered by Fran-
cis II, 259; suppressed by Hun-
garians, 281
Nationalist insurrection in, 225, 258
Reactionary massacre in, 187-8
Agamemnon deserters, 235 note *, 25 1

note 1
Agnetta, 124 and note
Agrifoglio pass, 147
Alife, 228

Altifiumara fort, iii ; Garibaldian at-
tack on, 112 and note ; surrender

of, 138
Altifireda, 253
Altimare, 147-8
Amari, Michele, 44, 321 ; cited, 54 and

note, 56 ; quoted, 324
Amazon, 78
Amorosi, Von Mechel's activities at,

233-4, 243
Ancona :

Lamoriciere's effort to reach, 219-
23 ; his arrival, 223

Papal troops in, strength of, 347

Piedmontese siege of, 224-5 ! cap-
ture, 225

Victor Emmanuel's arrival at, 267
Antonelli, Card., 6 note ; attitude of,

towards papal policy, 206-7
Antonini, 11 and note
Anzani, Col., 94
Aquila, see D'Aquila
Arches of the Valley :

Bixio near, 234, 236

Von Mechel's attack at (Oct. i),

243 ff-

Archi, Bosco to occupy, 73, 75 ; oc-
cupation effected, 76

Arese, Count, 213-14

Ariano district. Loyalist insurrection
in, 187

Ashby, Dr., 140 note ^

Ashley, Evelyn, 163-4, 179

Aspromonte :

Cosenz' column on, 132-3
District of, nature of, 11 1
Garibaldi shot by Italian troops on
{1862), 289

Aspromonte (continued) :
Musolino's band in, 112-14
Stocco's following from, 141

Augusta, Bourbon troops in, 69

Auletta, Peard at, 160

Austria :

Cavour's defiance of, 210
Hudson's views as to, 305, 310
Irritation of, against Naples, 103
Papal crusaders from, 208
Papal States supported by, 44, 205

and note ^
Piedmont menaced by, 116 note '',

210, 214, 215, 217, 224, 264, 282
Position of {i860), 7
Prussian defeat of, 291
Romagna threatened by, 205
Venetia ceded by, 283 note ^, 291-2
Warsaw conference, 261, 282

Austrians in Bourbon troops, 20S, 245

Authion, 163-4

Avezzana, 236

Bagnara, 113
Bandi, — , 32
Barcellona ;

Garibaldi's arrival at, 79

Inhabitants of, attitude of, 97

Medici's head-quarters at, 73
Basilicata :

Declaration of, for Garibaldi, 115,
138, 159

Resources of, meagre, 151
Basso, 286
Battles and fights :

Cajazzo and Capua affair (Sept. 19),
229-30 ; (Sept. 21), 231-2

Capua, siege of, 274-5

Castelfidardo, see that heading

Coriolo, 75-6

Custozza, 291

Gaeta, siege of, 276-7 and notes

Koniggratz, 291

Lissa, 291

Mentana, 292

Milazzo, see that heading

Mola di Gaeta, 276

Solano, 132

Volturno, see that heading

375

ne GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Bertani, Dr., organisation of volun-
teers by, 34-5, 118 and. note''-, 122;
Committee of, see Central Com-
mittee ; strenuous work of, 38 ; dis-
courages volunteering by regulars,
38-g ; relations with Mazzini, 41-2 ;
plan of, for invading Papal States,
42-5 ; prohibited from sending invad-
ing army to Papal States, 117, iig ;
brings volunteers to join Garibaldi,
120 ; sails to Golfo degli Aranci,
120-1 ; frustrated, 121 ; remains with
Garibaldi, 122 ; brings reinforce-
ments to Paola, 152 ; influence over
Garibaldi, 153, 191-2 ; dissuades
Garibaldi from Sicilian annexation
policy, 158; arrival at Naples, 181 ;
highhanded procedure in Naples,
194; dispatch to Tripoti, 226 ani
note '^ ; Garibaldi's hostility to, in
I Mille, 121 note; otherwise men-
tioned, 156, 178, 189, 200

Bianchi, 148

Bibliography, 351-74

Bixio, Nino, march of, to Catania,
67 ; at Bronte, 125, 323 ; at Giardini,
126 ; the crossing, 127 ; error in dis-
patch of, 336 ; alteration of dispatch,
336 note ; taking of Reggio, 129-30
and note ^ ; at Rovito,i52 ; moderate
counsels of, 192 ; at Maddaloni, 234,
236 ; Von Mechel's attack on, 243 ff. ;
surrounds Ruiz' two thousand, 253-
4 ; in hospital at Naples, 273-4 ;
made general in the King's forces,
281 ; duel of, 124 ; at taking of Rome,
292 ; wounds of, 130 ; estimate of,
124-5, 274; violence of, 124-5, 188;
mentioned, 59, 122

Bomba (Ferdinand II), 20

Bonanno, Gen., 187

Bosco, Col., advance of, to Milazzo,
71-4 ; strength of forces with, 74, 75
note " ; attacks Coriolo and Archi,
75 ; orders retreat, 76 ; intercepted
dispatch of, 76 ; ministerial condem-
nation of, 77 ; dispositions about
Milazzo, 80; battleof Milazzo, 81-2,
84, 86, 89 ; capitulates, 94 ; treachery
and disgrace of, 95-6 and note'^;
estimate of, 73 ; cited, on battle of
Milazzo, 332-3, 335

Bourbon troops :
Arms of, 326, 327-8
Austrians in, 245
Bavarian mercenaries :
Estimate of, 245
Retreat of, on Capua, 177-9
Cajazzoand Capua affairs (Sept. 19),
229-30 ; (Sept. 2i), 231-2

Bourbon troops (continued) :

Caldarelli's agreement, 147 ; retreat,
156 ; capitiJation, 159

Companies in, strength of, 75 note ^

Demoralisation of, 142-3

Foreign element in, 250 note

Forward movements recommended
to, from Gaeta, 231

Gaeta, departure for, 174

Garigliano river, retreat behind, 273 ;
abandonment of line of, 276

Garrison left in Naples, instructions
given to, 175

Generals at Messina, attitude of,
67

Ghio's men, 142, 147-9

Inertia of (mid. Sept.), 202

Internment of, 'in Papal territory,
276, 341 and note

Loyalty of, 16,168, 186.7, 196-7

Numbers of — in Lower Calabria,
128, 134; at Piale and Villa San
Giovanni, 133 ; under Ruiz, 136
note; under Ghio after Vial's
escape, 141 ; in Naples and en-
virons, 161 ; behind the Volturno,
196, 197, 341-2; in battle of the
Volturno, 341-2

Rally of, behind the Volturno, 196

Retreat of — from Palermo, 8-9, 69;
from Messina, to mainland, 100 ;
from Salerno, 163, 338-40 ; from
Naples, 174, 177-9

Salerno, retreat fiom, ordered, 163 ;
causes of evacuation, 338-40

Scotti's disaster, 268-g

Swiss regiments, 245-6, 250 note

Unpopularity of, 170

Volturno battle, dispositions for, 233
and note ^, 239, 243 ; the battle,
239 ff. ; losses (Oct. 1-2), 243, 254-5,

341-5

Braico, — , 20

Brambilla, — , 191 note " ; quoted, 287

Brenier, — , triple programme of, 13 ;
policy of (June, i860), 14; opposed to
annexation, 26 and note ^ ; men-
tioned, 104, 312

Briganti, Gen., inaction of, 128, 130,
134; deserted by Vial and Ruiz,
135-6; strength of force with, 133
and note^; surrenders, 137; mur-
dered by his troops, 142-3

Brignone, Gen., 218

British Legion, 98, 279; estimate of,
259-60 and notes

Bronte, Bixio at, 125, 323

Bronzetti, Pilade, 86, 333 note ; at
Castel Morrone, 247-9, 343

Brown, John, g8 and note

INDEX

377

Browning, E. B., cited, 241
Bruzzesi quoted, 291 note

Cacciatori d'Btna (Sicilian troops),
115, 240, 246 note, 250

Cadolini, Senator, 192 ; cited, 54 note,
249 note '

Cagliari, 49

Cairoli family, 36-7

Cairoli, Luigi, 151 ; quoted, 139 note

Cajazzo, occupied by Tiirr, 229; re-
covered by Ritucci, 231-2 ; aban-
doned by Bourbons, 269

Calabria :

Character of inhabitants of, 139
Clergy's attitude in, 114
Garibaldini's landing in, 126-7, 336'7
Rising in (1806), 145 and note ^
Rising of Upper Calabria (Aug.

r86o), 138
Scenery of, 127 note "

Caldarelli, Gen., agrees to retreat, 147 ;
messages of, to Garibaldi, 156,
159 ; capitulation of troops of, 159 ;
Peard's misstatement as to, 162-3,
338

Caldesi, 67, 74 note '

Caltanisetta, 65

Calvi, 272

Campo Calabrese, 133

Campo Lungo, 141

Campo Tenese, 155

Cannitello, 136

Canzio, Gen., 240, 270, 285

Caprera, Garibaldi's visit to (Aug. 14),
121 ; his return to, 287

Capua :
Ancient migration to, 202 note '
Defences of, 196
Siege and surrender of, 274-5
Tiirr's operations against, 229-30

Carlo Alberto, 78

Carlos III, King of Naples, 199-
200

Carpanzano, 151

Casali, 247 note ', 248

Casalnuovo, 159

Casazza, 81 and note '

Caserta :

Bourbon designs on, 233
Defencelessness of (Oct. i), 249
Palace, 199-200
Reserves at, under Tiirr, 236
Ruiz' 2ooo's attempted sack of, 253 ;
their capture at, 254

Caserta, Count, 242

Caserta, Old, Ruiz' instructions to oc-
cupy, 244 ; the occupation, 248-9

Casolla, 249, 253

Castel Morrone, 247-8, 343

Castelfidardo, battle of, 221-4 and

note * ; numbers engaged, 347
Castelfidardo campaign, numbers in,

346-7

Castellamare, 49 and note ^-50

Castropiano, Prince, 312

Castrovillari, 155

Catania :

Bixio's arrival at, 67
Tiirr's arrival at, 66

Catanzaro district, 140

Cattabeni, 231-2

Cattaneo, 264-5

Cava cited, 342

Cavour, Count, in correspondence with
Kossuth, 7-8 and note ' ; refuses alli-
ance with Naples, 20-1 ; temporising
policy, 22 ; vigorous support of
Garibaldi, 22 ; attempts to foment
Neapolitan revolution, 22-3, 53 and
note, 100, 168-9; assists Garibaldini
volunteers, 22, 34, 46-7, 214, 306,
322 ; Bertani's influence on, 45 ;
diplomatic troubles, 52 ; sends La
Farina to Sicily, 50 ; demands sur-
render of Mazzini, 51 ; relations with
Garibaldi, 58 ; favours annexation of
Neapolitan Kingdom, 100 ; letter to
Persano quoted, 100 ; conspiracy with
Victor Emmanuel to help Garibaldi,
loi ; enlightens Russell, 104-5 > ^^-
termination to invade Papal States,
116-17, 119, 159, 169; prohibits
Bertani's attack on Papal States,
117, 119; prohibits Ricasoli's inva-
sion of Papal States, 122 ; prohibits
further recruitment of northern Gari-
baldini (Aug. 13), 122 ; risk involved
in this step, 199 ; interview with
Ashley, 164; extremists' machina-
tions against, 189, igi ; attempts to
dissuade Garibaldi from attacking
Rome, igo ; Garibaldi's request for
dismissal of, 191 and note ^ ; ar-
rangements with Kossuth, 215 ; in-
vasion of Papal States, 205, 209-13 ;
anxiety as to Garibaldi's behaviour,
261-2 ; urges cordiality towards Gari-
baldini, 271, 277-8 ; Garibaldi's rage
against, for slights upon Garibaldini,
279 ; plan for disposing of Garibal-
dini, 280 ; attitude towards Russell's
dispatch, 283, 313-14 ; letter to Rus-
sell quoted, 314 ; Garibaldi's alterca-
tions with, 158 ; Hudson's attitude
towards, 306-9 ; Russell's attitude to-
wards, 309 ; death of, 288 ; estimate
of, 23 ; policy of deceit, 23-4, 47 ;
Life of (W. R. Thayer), 288 note ;
otherwise mentioned, 31, 312, 315

378 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Cavourians :

Calumnious statements by, 226 note '
Embitterment of, by La Farina
affair, 58
Central Committee in Aid of Gari-
baldi :
Intentions of (June, i860), 42-3
Local committees of, cities possess-
ing, 321
Medici and Cosenz supplied by, with

recruits, 46
Organisation of, 34
Papers of, cited, 37-9
Volunteers collected by, strength ol,
117-18
Cereseto, 241
Chamb^ry interview with Napoleon

III, 211-13, 277
Charles and Jane, 49
Chiala cited, 277 note -
Church, Roman Catholic

Atrocities in the Abruzzi encouraged

by, 258-9
Clergy on nationalist side, 58-9,

161, 267, 268
Papal States, powers of priests in,
204
Cialdini, Gen., interview of, with
Napoleon III, 211-12; captures
Pesaro and Fano, 217 ; intercepts
Lamoriciere, 219; battle of Castel-
fidardo, 221-4 ; repressive measures
by, 188 ; Garibaldi's attitude towards,
262, 270-1, 279 ; success against
Scotti, 268-9; operations towards
Gaeta, 27s ; persuades Garibaldi to
enter Naples with the King, 279 ;
mentioned, 227, 267
Ciccarelli, 251 ; ambush at bridge, 241
City of Aberdeen, 78
Civita Vecchia ;

French occupation of, 118
Papal rule in, incident of, 205
Clark, W. G., 179; cited, 184 nofe^;

quoted, igg note '
Clary, Marshal, views of, on the situa-
tion, 70-2 ; instructions to Bosco,
72-3 ; unpopularity of, 77 ; apprehen-
sive of Eber, 68 note ' ; refuses to
relieve Bosco, 93 ; refuses to evacuate
Messina, 94 ; signs treaty with
Medici, 99
Colt's revolving rifles, 87, 327 and note
Coriolo, 75-6
Corleone, 67
Corrao, — , 115, 2^6 note
Corte, — , 49 note ', 78, 87
Corte, Mme., 144 note ^
Cosenz, — , arms of brigade of, 327 ;
brings reinforcements to Medici, 77 ;

in battle of Milazzo, 83, 88-g, 333
note ; crossing at the Faro, 13I1
337 ; surprise at Solano, 132 ; joins
Garibaldi, 133 ; advises Sicilian an-
nexation policy, 158 ; journey to
Naples, 179 ; arrival, 181 and note '
moderate counsels of, 188, 192 ;
War Minister in Naples, 236; on
military commission for selecting
Garibaldini officers for royal service,
281 ; made General in the King's for-
ces, 281 ; at taking of Rome, 292 ;
estimate of, 88-g ; Delia Rocca's esti-
mate of, 275 ; otherwise mentioned,
46, 122, 148

Cosenza :

Caldarelli's retreat from, 147
Garibaldi at, 15 1-3

Cosenza province, 115

Courier, Paul Louis, quoted, 145 notes

Crati valley, 153-4

Cremona volunteers, 36

Crimean war, effects of, 7

Criscuolo, Capt., 176

Crispi, Francesco, La Farina's ani-
mosity towards, 56 ; civil policy of, in
Sicily, 62 ; calumniates Cavour, 230
and note ^ ; succeeds Bertani as
Garibaldi's secretary, 194 ; plebiscite
plan opposed by, 264-5 ; mentioned,
52, 192

Crocette, 220, 221, 223

Csufady's flying column, 228-g, 233

D'Alessandria, Prince, Mayor of
Naples, 174, 176, 177

D'Aquila, Count, policy of (June, i860),
14 ; refuses to relieve Bosco, 94 ;
implicated in reactionary plot, 170
and note *, 312

D'Ayala, 168, 174 ; action of, during
Volturno battle, 240

D'Azeglio, Emmanuel, 106, 117, 315

D'Azeglio, Marquis Massimo, 46-7

De Cesare, Signor, cited 212, note ^
347

De Flotte's company, 132, 240, 250 and
note

De Grammont, Due, 215-16

De Martino, — , mission of, to French
court, 11; mission to obtain Papal
leave for Neapolitan constitution,
14; in Spinelli's ministry, 16, 312;
cited, 309

De M^rode, Monsignor, Crusaders of,
207-9

De Rivera, Marshal Afan, false dis-
patches received by, from Eboli, 338-
40 ; instructed to order retreat, 163,
338 ; in Volturno battle, 242

INDEX

379

De Rohan, 48

De Sauget, General of the National
Guard, 176, 177

De Sivo, cited, 338, 342

Deane, Capt., R.N., cited, 235 note ^

Delia Rocca, Gen., enters Umbria,
217 ; captures Perugia, 218 ; wel-
comes Victor Emmanuel at Ancona,
267; attitude towards Garibaldi,
271 ; siege of Capua, 274-5 ; Gari-
baldi's generous arrangements with,
274 ; visit to Garibaldi when ill, 275 ;
letter of thanks to Garibaldini signed
by, 279 ; defeated at Custozza, 291

Denton, Mr., cited, 35-6 and note '

Depretis, 158, 229, 230

Dezza, 246

Dolmage, J. A., discourages British
Legion scheme, g8 ; cited, 39 note ^,
67> 329 ; quoted, 96 note ^ ; quoted
on arms of the campaign, 326-8

Dowling, Serg., 235, 269 note^

Ducenta, Von Mechel's activities at,
233-4 ; attack from (Oct. i), 243 ff.

Dumas, Alexandre, 63, 66; letter to
Garibaldi, 149; hon. Director of
Naples National Museum, 195

Dunne, — , discourages British Legion
scheme, 98, 99 note, 260 ; wounded
in Volturno battle, 241

Dunne's " English regiment" (Sicil-
ians) :
Arms of, 328
Formation and composition of, 64

and note ^-65
Mainland campaign, in, 115
Medici reinforced by, 77
Milazzo, at, 84, 86, 96
Volturno battle, in, 241-2, 246 note

Dusmet, Col., 129, 130

Eber, — , march of, to Catania, 66 ;
strength of column of, at Catania,
93 ; Bourbon generals intimidated by,
67, 68 note ' ; at the Volturno battle,
251-2; estimate of, 66 and note'';
quoted, on Garibaldian administra-
tion in Sicily, 325

Eberhardt's brigade, 245-6

Eboli, Peard at, 162, 338-40

Elliot, Henry, letters of, to Russell,
quoted, 24, 26 note^, 307-9, 311-14;
importance of the letters, 108, 305;
interview with Garibaldi, 190-1

England, see Great Britain

Eugteie, Empress, 104

Fabrizi, Niccola, with Peard, i6o-i ; at
Milazzo, 334 ; Bixio's reserves under,
near Maddaloni, 246

Fano, fortress of, 217

Fanti, Gen., enters Umbria, 217 ;
welcomes Victor Emmanuel at
Ancona, 267 ; jealousy of, against
Garibaldini, 270-1, 278-g, 281 note ' ;
operations against Gaeta, 275 ; cited,
346-7

Farini, — , negotiates with Bertani,
119; interview with Napoleon III,
211-12; Cavour's letter to, regard-
ing Garibaldini, 277-8 ; correspond-
ence with Russell quoted, 308-g;
otherwise mentioned, 23, 30, 307

Faro, no; crossing by Cosenz at, 131

Farquhar, Capt., quoted, 286 note ^

Favazzina passage, 131

Favignana, 61

Fazzari, Achille, 140 note'^; cited,
141 note 2

Ferdinand II, King of Naples (Bom-
ba), 20

Filangieri, Gen., 9-11

Finzi, — , 168 ; quoted, 329-30

Flores, Gen., 187

Fonsecca, Capt., 77

Forbes, Capt. C. S., R.N., with Peard,
t6o, 162, 338 ; entrained for Naples,
179; cited, 150, 340; quoted, 162,
339 ; quoted on arms of Garibaldini,
329

Forbes, Hugh, British Legion scheme
of, 98 and note, gg note

Formicola ferry, 230 ; bridge at, 269,

273
France :

Fears as to predominance of, 29-30
Hudson's views as to, 305, 307-8
Naples failed by, 166
Papalist sympathies of, i8g, 210, 277
Prussian war (1870), 2g2-3
Republic proclaimed (1870), 292
Rome garrisoned by, 42, 118, 189,

192, 205, 2g2
Uncertainties as to policy of, 25-6,

44
Franci cited, 234 notes, 338 and note,

341
Francis II, King of Naples, appeals for
help, 6, 8; overtures to Filangieri,
9-10; triple programme adopted by,
13 ; grants Neapolitan constitution,
14; views of, on the situation, 70;
Victor Emmanuel's instructions re-
garding, 116 note"^; orders retreat
from Salerno, 163 ; Cavour's policy
regarding, 169-70 ; alternative cour-
ses open to, 172 ; vacillation of, 173 ;
attitude towards his ministers, 173 ;
to Don Liborio, ig, 167 ; decision
to retreat to Gaeta, 173-4 ; quits

38o GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Naples, 165 ; rally of reactionaries
to, ig6 ; in Volturno battle, 242 ;
takes refuge in Rome, 259 ; fosters
" brigandage " in the Abruzzi, 259
Franklin, 48, 126-7

Gaeta :
Advantages of, as base of operation,

172, ig6
Siege of, 276-7 and notes

Gaeta battalion, 78, 82

Gagliardi, Marquis, 143

Gallenga, — , 160, 163, 338-40

Gallotti, Gen., 128-9, 131

Garibaldi, Gen. Giuseppe :

Career, chronological sequence of —
attacked by La Farina, 50 ; de-
ports La Farina, 57-8 ; refuses to
surrender Mazzini, 51 ; opposes
premature annexation of Sicily,
53, 55-6 ; life in the Observatory,
60 ; civil policy in Sicily, 62 ;
military disposition of columns,
65, 67 ; sets out for Milazzo, 78 ;
battle of Milazzo, 83-8; after-
virards, 90 ; accepts Bosco's capitu-
lation, 94; disgraces him for
treachery, 95-6 ; at Milazzo Castle,
96 ; Count Litta's mission to, loi-
3; at the Straits, 109-11, 119;
guides force for attack of Alti-
fiumara, 112; receives secret mes-
sage through Trecchi, 116 and
note ^ ; accompanies Bertani to
Golfo degli Aranci, 120 ; at Cap-
rera, 121 ; masking movements,
125 ; repairs to the Franklin, 126 ;
the crossing, 127; taking of Reg-
gio, 129-31; joins Cosenz, 133;
at Campo Calabrese, 133 ; occupies
Cannitello, 136 ; addresses sur-
rendered Neapolitan troops, 137 ;
starts for Naples, 138 ; advances
against Vial, 141 ; at Nicotera,
142 ; demands Ohio's uncondi-
tional surrender, 142 and note,
144 and note ^ ; at Mileto, 142-3 ;
reception at Monteleone, 143 ; in
pursuit of Ghio, 144-8 ; hurries on
towards Naples, 150 ff. ; sends
Turr to command Bertani's 1500,
153 ; turns off towards Sapri,
156 ; decision at II Fortino, 158-9 ;
approves Peard's proceedings,
163 ; met by Ashley, 164 ; arrival
at Salerno, 164-5 ; exchange of
telegrams with Don Liborio,
177; entrains at Vietri, 178; the
journey, 179-80 and note ^ \ ar-
rival at Naples, 181-5 and note ;

bluffs commandant of S. Elmo,
186; hands over fleet to Victor
Emmanuel, 188 ; moderate policy
in Naples, 188; letters to, advis-
ing against attack on Rome, 190 ;
interview with Mundy and Elliot,
igo ; requests dismissal of Cavour,
191 and note ' ; administrative
blunders in Naples, 194-5 ; at
Caserta, 200-1 ; sends Csufady to
divert Bourbon attention, 228 ;
visit to Palermo (Sept. 16), 229,
230 ; censures Tiirr, 230 ; disposi-
tions for battle of the Volturno,
234 «oi« ^,235-6 ; eve of the battle,
239 ; in the battle — at Santa
Maria, 240; ambushed, 241; at
Sant' Angelo, 241-2 ; on Monte
Tifata, 242 ; cries " Victory ! "
242 ; back at Santa Maria, 250 ;
leads final onslaught, 251-2; sur-
rounds Ruiz' 2,000, 253-4 1 ^^
grades Milanese officers, 246 ;
despatches Isernia expedition,
25g ; letter to Victor Emmanuel
(Oct. 4), 262; the plebiscite con-
troversy, 265-6 ; sets out to meet
Victor Emmanuel, 269 ; the meet-
ing, 271, 272 note ; tells Jessie
Mario of the Royal decree, 272 ;
generous arrangements with Delia
Rocca, 274 ; visited by Delia Rocca
when ill at Caserta, 275 ;
claims as to officers' rank, 281
note ', 284 ; resigns dictatorship,
284 ; publishes a royalist rallying
call, 284; farewell visit to Adm.
Mundy, 285-6 ; returns to Caprera,
286-7 ; attempted march 0.1 Rome
(1862), 288-g; visit to England,
289-90 ; Trentine Alps campaign,
291 ; defeated at Mentana, 292 ;
aids France in war of 1870, 292-3 ;
death of, 293-4
Characteristics of:

Care for his wounded, 255
Frugality, 62-3
Generosity, 274, 279
Humanity, 297
Loyalty, 51, 226, 284-5
Military genius, 236
Patriotism, 188-9, 226, 297
Personal magnetism, 83, 85, 237,

242, 257
Simplicity, 57, 60
Enthusiasm for, 79, 235 note ', 255-6
Estimate of, 296-7 ; by Neapolitan
troops, 135 ; by Gladstone, 290-1 ;
by Bruzzesi, 291 note ; by Tenny-
son, 290 and note

INDEX

38i

Garibaldi, Gen. Giuseppe {continued) :
Flag used by, 15 note '
Generalship of, 236, 328
Hymn of, 200, 299-304
/ Mille cited, 120 note *
Legends relating to, 160 note
Letters of, quoted, 59, 118 and

note ^, 260 note ^
Memorie cited, 231, 336 ; quoted,

234 note 1
Neapolitans' criticism of, 226
Neapolitans' devotion to, 193
Political effect of successes of, 212,

214
Popularity of — in Great Britain, 26 ;
in N. Italy, 35 ; in Sicily, 55, 58-9
Victor Emmanuel's aifection for,
26, otherwise mentioned, 50, 283,
343
Garibaldi, Menotti, at Volturno battle,
246 ; accompanies his father to
Caprera, 286
" Garibali Excursionists " (British

Legion), 259-60 and notes, 269
Garibaldi Foundling Hospital, 64, 96
Garibaldini :
Arms of, 326-30
Aspromonte force, 112-14
Bertani's volunteers, total strength

of, 122
British among, 250 note ; officers,
61, 63-4; civilians, 65; sailors,

235 «of«*, 251 and notes, 269;
British Legion, 98, 259-60 and
notes, 269

Cajazzo and Capua, operations
against (Sept. 19), 229-30

Cavalry, see Hungarian

Cavour's assistance to, 22, 34, 46-7,
214, 306, 322 ; his efforts to secure
cordiality towards, 271, 277-8

Crossing of the Straits by, 126-7,

131. 138, 336-7

De Flotte's company, 132, 240, 250
and note

Delia Rocca's relations with, 274-5

Disbandment of, 280-1 and note '

Discipline among, 150-1

Dunne's " English regiment," see
that heading

Eber's men, see Eber

Estimate of, in Naples, ig8, igg
note^, 343

Expeditions of, from N. Italy, list of,
316-19

Foreign elements in, 250 note

Gaeta battalion, 78, 82

Genoese carabineers of the Thou-
sand, 61, 132, 254

Hungarian cavalry, see that heading

Garibaldini (continued) :

Leaders of, positions of, before the
Volturno, 236

" Lucanian brigade," 159

Malenchini's Tuscans, see that head-
ing

Mentana, defeat at, 292

Milanese six hundred, 252

Milazzo, battle of, see that heading

Missori's men, see Missori

Morelli's band, 140 note ' 147, 149

Naples, arrival of the rear in, 188

Nursing work among, 97, 255-6

Numbers and efficiency of N. Italian
volunteers (summer, i860), 32-4

Numbers of— at the Straits, 123 ; in
Sicily and mainland, 342-5 ; (end
of Sept.), 197 ; left in Sicily, 198

Officers of:

Proportion of, to privates, 281
Rank of. Garibaldi's claim as to,
281 nete \ 284

Official insult put upon, 278-9

Pace's band, 147, 149

Pay of, 32-3

Privations of, 133, 236-7, 255

Royalist commander's attitude to-
wards, 270-1,278-9, 281 note'^

Ships conveying, list of, 316-20

Sicilians, see Cacciatori d'Etna, and
Dunne's " English regiment "

Simonetta's Lombards, 74, 82, 84

Solano, scufBe at, 132

Spirit of, 236-7

Staff of, as advance party, 146

Strength of, see subheading Numbers

Tactics of, 326

Turr's 1,500 from Paola, 153

Victor Emmanuel's surprise visit to,
273

Volturno battle, at, 240 ff.

Wolf's foreigners, 250 note

Wounded, fortitude of, 97, 255-6
Garibaldi's Hymn, 200, 299-304
Garigliano river, 273, 276
Gay, Nelson, cited, 322
Genoa :

Cession of, to France, fears regard-
ing, 30

Volunteers collected at, strength

and character of, 118 and note^

Genoese carabineers of the Thousand,

61, 132, 254 , ., ^ .

Ghio, Gen., negotiations of, viith Gari-
baldi, 141-2 and note, 144 and note ^ ;

passes Stocco's men, 144 and note'' ;

pursued by Garibaldi, 144-8
Girgenti, 67
Gladstone, W. E., 28, 305 ; estimate

of Garibaldi by, 290-1

382 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Goodall, Capt., 132 and note', 133
Goodwin, Consul, cited, 323
Great Britain :
Garibaldi acclaimed in, 26 ; his visit

to, 289-90
Hospital comforts and personnel

supplied by, 255
Italian policy of (i860), 27, 30, 108

and note'^j 109
Italian unity accomplished, attitude

towards, 282, 284
Napoleon Ill's attitude towards, 13
and note ^ , 27 and note ^, 103 mid
note *, 109
Volunteers from, with Garibaldi, see
Garibaldini — British
Griscelli, — ■, 57 and note ^
Grottole, 247 note ^
Guastalla cited, 329
Guerzoni quoted, 329
Gulnara, 49
Gusmaroli, 181 note ^

Hannibal, H.M.S :

Garibaldi's interview on, with Elliot
and Mundy, igo ; his farewell
visit to, 285
Sailors from, at Santa Maria, 251
and note ^
Haweis, Rev. — , quoted, 237
Hudson, Sir James, 64 ; correspondence
of, with Lord John Russell — cited,
28-30 ; quoted, 58, 214, 283, 305-10,
312-13 ; importance of the corres-
pondence, 21, 108, 305 ; letter re-
garding Lacaita's secret mission
quoted, 105 note '
Hungarian cavalry :

Mounts for, first obtained at Soveria,

149
Italian Royal service, in, 280-1
Volturno battle, at the, 250 and note,
251 and note^, 252
Hungarians, Austria threatened by, 7-
8 and note '

/ Mille cited, 120 note *

II Fortino, 157-9

Irish volunteers in Papal army :
Ancona, at, 225 and note ^
Estimate of, 208 and note *
Spoleto, at, 218
Valour of, 218, 225 and note '

Ischitella, Prince, 312

Isernia :
Cialdini's success near, 268
Reactionary atrocities in 258-g

Italy :

Kingdom of, stability of, 294
Progress of, in last half-century, 295

Italy (continued) :

Tricolour flag of, 15 note ^
Unification of:

Bertani's attitude towards, 191-2
British attitude towards, 282, 284
Completion of, by taking of Rome,

292
Drawbacks arising from overclose-

ness of union, 263-4
Elliot and Hudson finally in favour

of, 308-10
Garibaldi's unswerving loyalty to,

184, 188
Mazzini's attitude towards, 193
Palmerston's views as to, 310-11
Papal States as affecting, 204
Italian National Society :
Districts worked by, 321
Funds of, 322
Organisation of, 34

James, Edwin, Q.C., 164, 179, igo
Jerome, Prince, see Napoleon

KoERNER, Theodore, 31 note
Kossuth, Louis, letter of, to Garibaldi,
190; Cavour's arrangements with, 215

La Farina, — , relations of, with Gari-
baldi in Sicily, 50-1, 54-5, 57-8, 324;
quoted on state of Sicily, 323 ; other-
wise mentioned, 34, 44, 321

La Gorce cited, 277 and note'^

La Grazia, 145

La Greca, Marquis, 106

La Marmora, Gen., 291

La Masa, — , 115

La Porta, 116

Lacaita, Sir James, interview of, with
Russell, 105-7 '*"^ ""'* ^ ; Vernon's
corroboration of, 315

Lamoriciere, Gen., Neapolitanschemes
regarding, 197 ; Austrian recruits of,
205 note ^ ; hostility of, to Napole-
onic Empire, 209 ; strength of forces
under, 118, 217, 346-7 ; makes for
Ancona, 2ig ; battle of Castelfidardo,
222 ; escapes to Ancona, 223 ; sur-
renders, 225

I'Annunziata, 247

Lanza, Gen., 8-9

Lear, Edw., 127 note''

Limatola, 247 ; ferry, 232

Litta, Count, 101-3

Lombard war (1859), effects of, 7

Loreto, 219-21, 223, 224

Lucanian brigade, 159

Maddaloni, Von Mechel's expedition
to, 233-4 ; his attack on, 243

INDEX

383

Maida, battle at (1806), 145 and note >

Maida plain, 141

Malenchini, 321

Malenchini's Tuscans — Medici's
column including, 74 ; at Coriolo,
76; at Milazzo, 82-3

Manci, 181 note''

IVIancini, 20

Manna, 22

Marches, Papal :

Piedmontese invasion of, see under

Umbria
Plebiscite for Piedmontese annexa-
tion, result of, 266 note ^

Maria Sophia, Queen of Naples, last
drive of, in Naples, 174 ; departure,
165. 175 ; at Gaeta, 276 ; estimate
of, 7 and note ; influence of, on her
husband, 14

Maria Theresa, Queen-Dowager of
Naples, reactionary influence of, 14 ;
at Gaeta, 172

Maringh, Major, 75, 76

Mario, Alberto, at Milazzo, g6; in As-
proraonte, 114; accompanies Gari-
baldi from the Straits, 138 ; farewell
talk with Garibaldi, 285 ; cited, 112
note ; otherwise mentioned, 49, 64,
148, 259, 270

Mario, Jessie White, on the Washing-
ton, 49 ; at Milazzo, 96-7 ; accom-
panies Garibaldi from the Straits,
138, iri^note ^ ; brings food to Gari-
baldi at Santa Maria, 251 ; field
hospitals superintended by, 255 ; told
by Garibaldi of Royal decree, 272 ;
estimate of, 97 ; cited, 121 note '

Mariotti quoted on arms of Garibaldini,

329

Marra, Lieut.-Col., skirmishing at Cori-
olo, 75-6 ; at Milazzo, 86, 332

Mazzini, Giuseppe, in Genoa, 39, 41-2 ;
plan of, for invading Papal States,
43 ; republicanism of, in abeyance,
45 ; surrender of, demanded by
Cavour, 49-52 ; La Farina's charge
against, 51 note; in Naples, 192-3 ;
Neapolitan hostility to, 193, 194 ;
death of, 292 ; estimate of, 39-40 ;
general estimate of, 51 ; influence of,
39-40; letter of, to Mrs. Taylor
quoted, 193 ; otherwise mentioned,
35. 97> 283

Mazzinians :

Calumnious statements by, 226

note ", 230 and note ^
Cavour's attitude towards, 214

Medici, GiaComo, Garibaldi's instruc-
tions to (May, i860), 42 and note '■' ;
decides to take reinforcements to

Sicily, 44 ; agencies equipping, 46 ;
arms of his force, 327, 328 ; sets sail,
48 ; arrives at Palermo, 50 ; at Bar-
cellona, 73 ; at Meri, 74 ; in battle of
Milazzo, 88 ; treaty with Clary, 99 ;
crossing of the Straits, 138, 142;
arrival in Naples, 188; moderate
counsels of, 192 ; at Sant' Angelo,
236, 238; recaptures battery, 252;
receives Victor Emmanuel at Sant'
Angelo, 273 ; on military commission
for selecting Garibaldini officers for
royal service, 281 ; made general in
the King's forces, 281 ; quoted on
arms of his expedition, 330 ; other-
wise mentioned, 122, 251-2, 269,
321

Melenchini, 44

Melendez, Gen., inaction of, 128, 134;
deserted by Vial and Ruiz, 135-6 ;
strength of force with, 133 and
note ^ ; surrenders, 137

Melito, 126-7

Mentana, 292

Meri, 74

Messaggero, 176

Messina:

Bourbon troops in ;
Citadel, in, 276
Generals, attitude of, 67
Strength of, 6g and note
Medici's arrival at, 99

Messina Straits:

Crossing of — to Melito, 126-7 ; Faro
to Favazzina, 131 ; Messina to
Nicotera, 138, 142 ; dates of
crossing, 336-7
Garibaldini at, strength of, 123
Nature of, 109 notes ^, ^

Migliavacca, 87

Mignona, 115, 159

Milano, Agesilao, pension to mother
of, 195

Milazzo :
Bosco's advance to, 71-4
Bourbon troops in, strength of, 69
Garibaldini's occupation of, 89
Inhabitants of, attitude of, 75 note'^
Plain of, situation of, 80

Milazzo, battle of:
Authorities on, list of, 331-2
Bourbon troops engaged in, strength

of, 81-2
Course of, 83-9.
Garibaldini in :

Carronades of, useless, 87
Composition of, 82
Losses in, on both sides, 334-5 ; of

Sapri expedition survivors, 62
Numbers in, on both sides, 332-5

384 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Milazzo, battle of {continued) :
Result of, 99
Site of, 80-1
Milazzo, castle of:

Bosco's defence of, 92 ; question of

relief of, 93-4 ; evacuation, 95
Garibaldini's occupation of, 96 and

note'^
Site and style of, 91-2
Milbitz, 236, 240
Mileto, 142-3
Million Rifies Fund :
Activities of, 322
Cavour's dealings vdth, 46-7
Government relations with, 34
Municipal bodies' support of, 36
Minto, 2nd Earl of, 107 note '
Mirri, Giuseppe, cited, 249 note '
Misilmeri, 66

Missori, Giuseppe, at battle of Milazzo,
85-6 and note ; leader of invaders in
Aspromonte, 113-14 ; joins Gari-
baldini near Melito, 127 ; at Gari-
baldi's meeting with Victor Em-
manuel, 270, 271 note'^; farewell
talk with Garibaldi, 285 ; otherwise
mentioned, 181 note? 240, 270
Molise :

Brigandage in, 281
Reactionary massacre in, 187, 258-9
Monnier cited, 338 and note, 340
Monte Caro, 243, 245-6
Monte d'Oro, 221, 222
Monte Longano, 245-6
Monte San Michele, 245
Monte Tifata :

Bourbon attack on (Oct. i), 242
Garibaldi's observations from, 201-2,
228
Monte Viro, 248
Monteleone :
Garibaldi welcomed in, 143
Politics of, 140

Vial's head-quarters at, 128, 141
Mordini, 230 and note ^
Morelli, 140 note ^ ; Caldarelli's agree-
ment with, 147, 149
Morisani, 136 ; cited, 136 note
Mosto, Antonio, 45 note ', 61
Mundy, Adm., protest of, against Nea-
politan bombardment of Palmero,
307; interview with Garibaldi, igo-
i; enthusiasm of, for Garibaldi, 236
note; Garibaldi's farewell visit to,
285-6
Murat, King of Naples, Sicily threat-
ened by, log note ', 133 ; fate of, at
Pizzo, 140, 145
Musolino, 112
Musone valley, 220-2, 224

Naples (see also Neapolitans) :

Bourbon troops in, strength of (Sept.
4), 161

Camorra chiefs enlisted in Constitu-
tional Police, 18-19

Carmine Castle, 182

Castel Nuovo, 183

Castles of, 176, 186. {See also their
names under Naples)

Francis II's departure from, 174-6

Garibaldi's arrival at, 181-5 and note

Ministry chosen by Garibaldi, 188 ;
resignation of, 194

Political attitude of inhabitants of
193-4

S. Elmo Castle, 186

Victor Emmanuel's entry into, 279-
80

Volunteers from, joining Garibaldini,
number of, 198, 313
Naples, kingdom of {see also Neapoli-
tans) :

Annexation of, to Piedmont {see also
Sicily — Annexation) :
Advocacy of, by Hudson and'

Elliot, 28-9, 308, 310, 311
Cavour's attitude towards project

of (July), 100
Mazzini's attitude towards, 192,

194
Opposition to, by France, 12, 26

Petitions for, 225-6
Plebiscite or assembly contro-
versy, 263-6
Army of, see Bourbon troops
Civil authorities in, under the Con-
stitution, 16
Committee of Action, 168
Committee of Order, 168
Constitutional rights, grant of
(i860) :
Popular fears regarding, 166
Result of, 15, 166
Corruption of, 306
D'Aquila plot, 170 and note *, 312
Defensive plan open to, 70
Fleet of, Bourbon cause deserted by

176
National guard formed in, 16
Offensive plan open to, 69
Piedmontese cadet as ruler of, sug-
gestion as to, 28-9, 306, 308, 309-
II
Policy of (Aug.-Sept.), authorities

on, 171 and note ^
Railways of (i860), 180 and note
Trapani plot (Aug. 29), 173, 312
Tricolour flag of 15,
Troops of, see Bourbon troops
Victor Emmanuel's entry of, 267

INDEX

385

Napoleon, Prince Jerome, letter of, to
Cavour, 25 ; quoted, 210

Napoleon III, Emp., in correspondence
with Kossuth, 7-8 ; attitude to
Russia, 8 ; reception of Neapolitan
envoys, 11-13 ; attitude to England,
13 and note ^, 27 and note ^, 103 and
note ', 109 ; Cavour confides in, 25 ;
Cavour's negotiations with (Aug.),
170 ; motive of, for protecting Rome,
189 ; Pio Nono's attitude towards,
206-7, 209 ; Chamb&y interview, 211-
13, 277 ; interview with Count Arese,
213-14 ; reply to Papal demands for
assistance, 215-16 ; interference as
to siege of Gaeta, 276-7 and note ^ ;
deposition of, 292

National Society, see Italian National
Society

Neapolitan troops, see Bourbon

Neapolitans :

British legion welcomed by, 260
Elliot's estimate of, 311
Garibaldi acclaimed by, 193-4
Garibaldi's dictatorship criticised

by, 226
Place-hunting by, 200
Wounded Garibaldini neglected by,

255

Nicotera, — , released, 61 ; organising
in Tuscany, 62 ; quarrel with Rica-
soli, 122 and note ^ ; volunteers
under, 118, 119 note^, 122; men-
tioned, 45 note ', 52

Nicotera (town), 142

Nievo quoted, 62, 325

Nigra, 104, 117

Nisco, 22, 168 ; cited, 226 note '

Nisida I., 176

Nullo, 181 note ", 259

Nunziante, Gen., interview of, with
Filangieri, 9-10; attempts to win
over Bourbon troops, 168

Old Caserta, Ruiz' instructions
to occupy, 244 ; the occupation,
248-9

Oregon, 48

O'Reilly, Major, 218

Orero cited, 347

Pace, — , Caldarelli's agreement with,
147 ; entertains Garibaldi, 155 ;
otherwise mentioned. 115, 140
»o<«i, 259
Palermo :

Bombardment of, by Neapolitans,

Mundy's protest against, 307
Bourbon troops' retirement from,
8-9, 69

Palermo {continued) :

Castellamare fortress, dismantling

of, 58
Fall of, effects of, 28 9 and note
Garibaldi's departure from, 78 ; his

visit to (Sept. 16), 229, 230
Medici's arrival at, 50
Pianciani's expedition at, 121
Pallavicino, Giorgio, igi note ^ ; on

the plebiscite question, 265-6
Palmerston, Vis., Italian sympathies
of, 28, 305 ; inclined to hinder Gari-
baldi, 104, 108 ; letter of, to Queen
Victoria quoted, 310-11
Panizzi, Anthony, 21
Pantaleo, Father, 66, 184
Paola, 152-3 and note ^
Papal States (see also Patrimony of

S. Peter and Umbria) :
Army of, see Papal troops
Bertani's plan for invasion of, 42-5
Bourbon troops interned in, 276,

341 and note
Cavour's project of invasion of, 116-

17, iig, 159, 169, 205, 209 ff.
Garibaldian invasion of, directed by

Victor Emmanuel, 116-17
Garibaldini volunteers from, 35
Garibaldi's views as to invasion of,

118 and note''-, 119 note^
Government of, nature of, 204
Napoleon Ill's assistance demanded

by (Sept.), 215-16 and note
Nicotera's projected invasion of, 122
Piedmontese invasion of (Sept. 11),

191 and note', 215
Troops enlisted from, for Papal

army, 208
Papal troops:

Crusaders of De M^rode, 43, 118,

207-9, 222 note, 346. {See also

Irish and Zouaves)
Strength of, in Castelfidardo cam-
paign, 346-7
Patrimony of S. Peter :

Bourbon troops interned in, 276,

341 and note
French protection of, 205, 211
Liberation of, date of, 227 note ^
Patterson, A. B., 85 and note, 87 note ^ ;
quoted on arms of the campaign, 32S
Peard, — , accompanies reinforcements
to Sicily, 48 ; arms of his company,
327; at battle of Milazzo, 87 and
note 2 ; at occupation of Milazzo
castle, g6 ; at Soveria, 148 ; with
Garibaldi en route for Naples, 153 ;
pseudo-Garibaldi, 160-4; telegraphs
false news, 162-3, 339-40 ; appointed
Col. of British Legion, 260

25

386 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Pecorini-Manzoni cited, 231 note^

Pedavoli, 113

Pentedatilo, 127 and note''

Persano, Adm., demands surrender of
Mazzini, 49, 51-2; at Milazzo, 95,
96 ; Cavour's letter to (July 14),
100 ; relations with Don Liborio,
167 ; Cavour's instructions to (early
Aug.), 169 ; given command of Bour-
bon fleet by Garibaldi, 188 ; sails
for Ancona, 215, 225 ; bombards the
fortifications, 225 ; defeated at Lissa,
291 ; otherwise mentioned, 168, 171,
190

Persigny, Count, 197, 315 ; negotia-
tions of, with Russell, 106^8.

Perugia:

Capture of, by Piedmontese, zi8
Insurrection of (1859), suppression
of, 213

Pesaro, fortress of, 217

Piale, 133

Plana dei Greci, Bixio's recruits from,
67

Pianciani, — , leadership by, of volun-
teers, 118-20 and note'; funds for
his expedition, 321 ; at Palermo,
121 ; resigns commission, 122

Pianell, Gen., impossible position of,
17; becomes Minister of War, 72;
pacific leanings of, 70 ; endeavours
to relieve Bosco, 94 ; efforts against
Garibaldi, 128, 135, 136; orders
Vial's retreat, 141 ; resigns, 173 ;
estimate of, 72 ; estimate of nar-
rative of, 171 note ■' ; cited, 70
)tote

Pianell, Signora, journal of, quoted,
338 ; estimate of narrative of, 171
note ^

Piedimonte, 228, 233

Piedmont ;

Annexation by, of Naples and Sicily,
see under Naples, kingdom of, and
Sicily
Army of, volunteers from, not en-
couraged by Garibaldi, 38-9
Austrian menace to, 116 note',
210, 214, 215, 217, 224, 264,
282
Umbria invaded by, see under Um-
bria

Piedmontese troops from Persano's
ships, 168

Piedmontese
Naples :
Garibaldi's invitation to, 188
Gunners from, at the Volturno, 235,

345
Ruiz' 2,000 chased by, 253-4, 345

troops garrisoning

Piedmontese troops invading Papal
States:
Castelfidardo, at, 219-24
Garibaldi's attitude towards, 226 and

note '
Marches invaded by (Sept. 11), 191

and note ^
Strength of, 217, 346-7

Piedmontese troops with Victor Em-
manuel :
Capua, siege of, 274-5
Gaeta, siege of, 276
Oct. 29 affair, 275-6

Pimodan, — , 220-1, 347

Piola, — , 157

Pisacane, Carlo, 157 ; surviving
followers of, 61-2

Pius IX, Pope, protected by Napoleon
III, 189 ; attitude towards Napoleon
III, 206-7, 209 ; protects Francis II,
259 ; quoted — on Papal rule, 204 ;
on the Risorgimento, 206-7

Pizzo, 140, 145

Pizzoli, Alessandro, 84

Plutino, — , 113, 140 note^

Poerio, Carlo, views of, on Italian
unity, 11; opposes alliance with
Naples, 20-1 ; advocates dethrone-
ment of Bourbon dynasty, 107

Postiglione, 161

Primerano, Senator Gen., cited, 341

Principato Citeriore, 160

Prussia :
Austria defeated by (i856), 291
Franco- Prussian war (1870), 292-3
Warsaw conference, 261, 282

Punto del Pezzo fort, 137

QuATREBARBES, Gen., 223, 225 ; cited,
347

Ragusa, 59

Randazzo, 125

Rattazzi, — , 191

Reggio, Garibaldini's capture of, 128-

31 and note^
Revel- — cited, 212 note''-; quoted, 339,

343

Ricasoli, Baron, Cavour's letter to,
quoted, 22 ; Garibaldi's letter to,
cited, 118 note ' ; quarrel with Nico-
tera, 122 ; urges Cavour to attack
Papal States, 210-11 ; letter of, to
Russell quoted, 309

Ricciardi, Count, 181

Ricciotti, — , 152

Risorgimento :

Ethical standard of leaders in, 259

Traditions of, 295

Work of, enduring nature of, 294-6

INDEX

387

Ritucci, Marshal, Fabian tactics of,
202 ; ordered to advance on Naples,
231; recovers Cajazzo, 231-2; re-
lations with Von Mechel, 234 and
note 2 ; dispatch of, quoted, 234
note^; in Volturno battle, 242

Rivera, see de Rivera

Roccaromana, 233

Rogliano, 151

Romagna, Austrian menace to, 205

Romano, Don Liborio, achievement
of, as Prefect of Police, 17-19, 167-
8; Francis IPs attitude towards,
19, 167 ; Dumas' interview with,
149 and note ^ ; relations of, with
nationalists, 167 ; Memorandum of,
171 ; estimate of narrative of, 171
note ' ; Francis ll's farewell to, 175 ;
procedure after the King's depar-
ture, 176; telegram to Garibaldi,
177 ; receives Garibaldi, 181 ; con-
tinued in office by Garibaldi, 188 ;
mentioned, 113, 170

Rome:
Francis II's flight to, 259
French protection of, 11-12, 42, 118,

189, 192, 205, 292
Garibaldi's passion for emancipation
of, 189 ; his idea of attacking,
abandoned (Oct.), 2S1 ; his at-
tempted march on (1862), 289
Italian capture of (1870), 292

RossaroU, Gen., 229, 230

Rotonda, 155

Rovito, 152

Royalist troops, Italian, see Pied-
montese

Royalist troops, Neapolitan, see Bour-
bon

Ruiz, Gen., hunts Missori, 114; sur-
prises Cosenz at Solano, 132 ; de-
serts Briganti, 135-6 ; resigns, 136 ;
detached by Von Mechel, 243 ; num-
bers with (Oct. 1-2), 342; defective
instructions to, 244 ; storms Castel
Morrone, 247-8 ; retreats north of
Volturno, 253 ; capture of 2,000 men
of, 253-4

Russell, Lady Agatha, 106 note ', 305

Russell, Lady John, 107 and note '

Russell, Lord John, attitude of, to
Russia, 8; Italian sympathies and
policy of, 27-8, 30 ; inclined to
hinder Garibaldi, 104 ; Lacaita's
mission to, 105-7 '""«' »"'' ^ ^^9 >
Vernon's corroboration of the in-
terview, 315 ; against attacking
Venice, 190 ; dispatch of, on ac-
complishment of Italian unity, 282-
3 ; effect of the dispatch in Italy,

25

313-14; Italian sentiment towards,
283 ; estimate of work of, 284 ;
letters of, quoted — to Hudson, 104
note ^ ; to Farini, 309 ; letters to,
quoted — from Hudson, 305-10, 312-
13 ; from Elliot, 307-9, 311-14; from
Farini, 308-g ; from Ricasoli, 309 ;
from Odo Russell, 314 ; from Cavour,
314

Russell, Odo, quoted — on Francis II,
6 note ; on Papal rule, 205 ; on
Austrian garrisoning of Papal
States, 205 note'; on Lord John's
dispatch, 314

Russell, Rollo, 305

Russia :

Position of (i860), 7, 8
Warsaw conference, 261, 282

Riistow's Milanese, 229-30

Sacchi, Col. Gaetano, 247 and note ',

253. 343
Saffi, Aurelio, 41, 119
Salazaro, — , 182
Salerno :

Bourbon evacuation of, 163 ; im-
mediate causes of, 338-40
Garibaldini's arrival at, 163-5
Garibaldi's departure from, 178 and
note
San Jorio, 235

San Leucio, 247 and note ', 253
San Prisco, 243, 250
San Tammaro, 239-40
Sanborn cited, 98 note
Sant' Agostino, 251 note^, 252
Sant' Andrea, 247
Sant' Angelo :

Bourbon attack on, suggested, 231

British legion in skirmish at, 260

Garibaldi's position at (mid. Sept.),

2CO, 202 ; his defences, 232, 235,

242 ; Garibaldi at, in Volturno

battle, 241

Ground between Santa Maria and,

nature of, 239
Situation of, 238, 239
Victor Emmanuel's surprise visit to,

273
Santa Barbara, 249
Santa Maria :

Bourbon attack on, suggested, 231
Fight at (Oct. i), 240, 250
Garibaldi's position at (mid. Sept.),
200, 202 ; his defences, 232,

235
Ground between Sant' Angelo and,
nature of, 239
Sapri :

Garibaldi's arrival at, 157
»

388 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

Sapri (continued) :

Pisacane's expedition to, survivors

of, 61-2
Site and scenery of, 156-7
Tiirr's arrival at, 153
Sardinia :

Cession of, to France, fears regard-
ing, 30
Golfo degli Aranci, 119-21
Savi, 45 note ^
Savio, Alfredo, 241
Savio, Emilio, 241
Savoy, tricolour flag of, 15 note '
Scelzi, — , 65
Schmidt, — ,218
Scilla, surrender of castle on rock of,

138
Sclavo quoted, 245 note '
Scotti, Gen., 268, 338 note, 339
Settembrini, Raffaele, 21
Settimo, Ruggiero, 59
Shaftesbury, Lord, letter of, to Gari-
baldi, 190 and note ^
Sicilians :
Annexation by Piedmont, attitude

towards, see tinder Sicily
Characteristics of, 63
Italian unity, attitude towards, 115
Place-hunting by, 62
Troops, estimate of, 63-4. (See also
Cacciatori d'Etna and Dunne's
" English regiment ")
Sicily :

Annexation of, by Piedmont, sug-
gested :
Elliot and Hudson finally in

favour of, 308-9
Garibaldi's decision against, at II

Fortino, 158-9
Mordini's advocacy of, 230
Plebiscite or assembly contro-
versy, 263 6
Premature efforts for, 52-6
Sicilians' attitude towards, 54-5 ;
their demand for, 229
Brigandage stamped out in, 295
Church in, attitude of, to Garibaldi,

58-9
Condition of, under Garibaldi's dic-
tatorship, 323-5
Conscription in. Garibaldi's edict

for, 63
Funds contributed by, towards

liberation of Naples, 321
Garibaldini garrison in, 198
Home rule proposed for, 13 ; granted,

15
Recruits from, 67 note, 68
Savoyard Prince for, suggestion as

to, 28-g, 306, 308, 309-TI

Sicily (continued) :
Squadre :
Arms of, 327
Disbandment of, 63, 65

c^imonetta's Lombards :

Medici's column including, 74
Milazzo, at, 82, 84

Sirtori, — , against attack on Rome,
192 ; Chief of the Staff, 236; assists
Delia Rocca, 274-5 ! on military
commission for selecting Garibaldini
officers for royal service, 281 ; men-
tioned, 102, 144

Solano, 113, 132

Solaroli, Gen., 313

Soveria-Mannelli, Ohio's capitulation
at, 147-9

Spaventa, Siivio, 22

Specchi, — , 84

Spezzano Albanese, 154

Spinelli, — ; ministry formed by, 16

Stagnetti, — , 181 note '

Stocco, Francesco, feudal devotion to,
140 ; strength of forces with, 141
and note " ; allovj^s Ghio's men to
pass, 144 ; at Soveria, 148 ; other-
wise mentioned, 115, 253, 259

Styles, — , 98

Sutherland, Duchess of, 290

Swiss mercenaries in Neapolitan army,
245-6, 250 note

Sybaris, plain of, 154

Syracuse, strength of Bourbon troops
in, 69

Syracuse, Count of, relations of, with
Don Liborio, 167 ; public letter from,
to King Francis, 171

Syracuse, Duke of (Philippe Egalit^), 14

Tabacchi, — , 239, 242
Talleyrand, M. de, 26
Taormina rock, passage from, 126-7
Taylor, Mrs., Mazzini's letter to,

quoted, 193
Tennyson's estimate of Garibaldi, 290

and note
Thayer's Life of Cavour, 288 note
Thouvenel, L., 11, 215 ; cited, 206 and

note, 212 note ^
Times — extract reprinted from, 296

7iote ; cited, 329
Tiriolo, 146
Torino, 126-7
Torre Cavallo fort, ui; surrender of,

to Garibaldi, 138
Totti, — , 57
Trani, Count, 242

Trapani, Count, 243 ; plot of, 173, 312
Trecchi, — , 102, 191 note ^ ; secret

message conveyed by, 116 and note''

INDEX

389

Tripoli, — , 226 and note "

Tiikory, no; off Milazzo, 88

Tuoro, 249

Turr, Gen., column under, for Catania,
65-6 ; invalided, 66, 153 note " ; pro-
tests against La Farina's interfer-
ence, 324 ; takes over Bertani's
1,500, 153 ; moderate counsels of,
192 ; quells Ariano insurrection, 187 ;
operations during Garibaldi's ab-
sence, 229-30, 231 note^; with re-
serves at Caserta, 236; reinforces
troops at Santa Maria, 240, 249,
250, 256 ; presents Neapolitan peti-
tion for annexation plebiscite, 265 ;
estimate of, 229 ; cited, igS, 313 ;
othervi'ise mentioned, 122, 158, 178

Ulloa, Antonio, 339, 340 ; cited, 233

note'^
Umbria and the Marches :

Austrian garrisoning of, 205 and

note'
Invasion of, by Piedmont :

Castelfidardo, battle of, 221-4 and

note'^
Cavour's presentment of, 212-13
Course of — Cialdini's successes,
217 ; capture of Perugia and of
Spoieto, 218
Estimate of, 209-10
French attitude towards, 206 ;
Napoleon Ill's attitude to-
wards, 211-13, 215-16
Papal troops, see that subheading
Promptitude necessary in, 205
Results of, to Francis II, 197, 202
Strength of combatants, 217
Plebiscite for Piedmontese annexa-
tion, result of, 266 note *
Union of Italy, see under Italy
Urbino, insurrection in, 212-13
Utile, 49

Vacchieri, 231-2
Vajrano, 269-70
Valerio quoted, 50 note *
Vanvitelli's aqueduct, igg, 245
Vecchi, Augusto, letters of, to Gari-
baldi (Oct. 4), 261 note ", 262
Venetia:

Gaiibaldini volunteers from, 35-6
Liberation of:

Accomplishment of, 283 note',

291-2
British attitude towards, 283
Piedmontese invasion of, Russell's
attitude towards, 190
Venosta, Emilio Visconti, 22-3, 168;
cited, 54 note

Vernon, Mr. William Warren, diary of,
quoted, 315

Vial, Gen., inaction of, at Monteleone,
128, 134; deserts Melendez and
Briganti, 135 ; escapes to Naples,
141

Victor Emmanuel, King, offer of alli-
ance proposed by, to Francis, 12;
secret letter to Garibaldi, 101-3 ;
secret message to Garibaldi, 116 and
note'; BrambiUa's mission to, 191
note ^ ; Garibaldi's letter to, request-
ing dismissal of Cavour, 191 and
note ^ ; desired to absorb the revolu-
tion, 211, 212, 214 ; Garibaldi's
letter to (Oct. 4), 262 ; marches
south, 266-8 ; meeting with Gari-
baldi, 271, 272 note ; dispenses with
the Garibaldini, 272; surprise visit
to Garibaldini, 273 ; fails in his ap-
pointment to review Garibaldini,
278-9 ; enters Naples with Gari-
baldi, 279-80 ; investiture with King-
ship of Sicily and Naples, 284 ; his
offers to Garibaldi refused, 286 ; his
affection for Garibaldi, 26 ; Gari-
baldi's loyalty and devotion to, 188-
9, 279 ; Hudson's views regarding,
305 ; flag of, 15 note ^ ; mentioned,

5,314

Victoria, Queen, letter to, from King
of the Belgians, quoted, 5 note ;
Palmerston's letter to, quoted, 310-
II

Villa Gualtieri, 243, 245-6

Villa San Giovanni, Bourbon troops
at, 133, 135-6 ; surrender of, 137,
142

Villamarina, Marquis, Cavour's in-
structions to (June 29), 21, 22 ; tries
to foment revolution in Naples, 168 ;
Cavour's instructions to (Aug. 27
and 30), 169, 170 ; cited on Rus-
sell's dispatch, 283, 314 ; otherwise
mentioned, 57 note''-, 235, 311

Villari cited, 107 note'

Volturno river :

Advantages of, as front line of de-
fence, 196, 197
Bourbon troops at, numbers of, 341-2
Garibaldi's bridge over, 269, 273

Volturno river, battle of the :
Authorities for, 348-50
Bourbon dispositions for, 233 and
note ', 239, 243 ; their confidence
before, 234-5
Conduct of, 243

Course of — at the cemetery, and S.
Tammaro, 239-40 ; Sant' Agostino,
240 ; Santa Maria, 240 ; Ciocarelli

390 GARIBALDI AND THE MAKING OF ITALY

bridge, 241 ; Sant' Angelo, 241-2 ;
Monte Tifata, 242 ; the Arches of
the Valley (Von Mechel's opera-
tions), 243-7 ; Castel Morrone,
247-g and note ' ; Old Caserta,
249; Santa Maria (3 p.m.), 250;
the decisive movement, 250-2

Estimate of, 256-7

Foreigners on both sides in, numbers
of, 250 note

Garibaldi's dispositions for, 234
note^, 235-6

Losses in — Bourbon, 243, 247, 254-
5, 341-2; Garibaldini, 247, 254

Methods of combatants in, 242

Numbers engaged in — Bourbon, 341-
2 ; Garibaldian, 343-5

Results of, 258, 261

Sicilians in, 240, 241-2, 246 and note,
250
Von Mechel, Col., expedition of, to

Piedimonte, 233 ; not in communica-

tion with Ritucci, 234 and nofe^; in
Volturno battle — operations from
Ducenta, 243-7 > strength of force of
(Oct. 1-2), 342

Warsaw, monarchical conference at,

261, 282
Washington, 48, 120, 286-7
Whitehouse, H. K., cited, 226 note ^
Winspeare, — , 22
Wolfs foreigners, 250 note
Wyndham (English officer), 65, 328

Zameianchi, — , 42 note ^

Zasio, Emilio, in the Molise affair
259; mission to Victor Emmanuel,
270 ; farewell talk with Garibaldi,
285; cited, 181 note^; quoted, 183,

Zouaves, Franco-Belgian ;
Castelfidardo, at, 221-2
Estimate of, 209

ABERDEEN : THE UNIVERSITY PRESS

RECENT HISTORICAL WORKS.

THE LIFE OF WILLIAM PITT, EARL OF CHATHAM. By

Basil Williams. With Portraits and Maps. 2 vols. 8vo, 25s. net.

NAPOLEON I. A Biography. By August Fournier, Professor of

History in the University of Vienna. Translated b
gravure Portraits and 7 Maps. 2 vols. 8vo, 21s. net.

THE MAID OF FRANCE : being the Story of the Life and Death of

Jeanne d'Arc. By Andrew Lang. With 3 Maps and 3 Portraits. 8vo, 12s. 6d. net.
Cheap Edition. With 3 Maps. Crown 8vo, 6s. net.

HISTORY AND HISTORIANS IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.

By G. P. GoocH, M.A. (Cantab.) 8vo, los. 6d. net.

THE REIGN OF HENRY VII. FROM CONTEMPORARY

sources. With an Introduction by A. F. Pollard, M.A., Professor of Consti-
tutional History at University College, London ; in Modern History in the Universities
of Oxford and London. 3 vols. Crown 8vo, los. 6d. net each.

Vol. L narrative EXTRACTS.

Vol. II. CONSTITUTIONAL, SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC HISTORY.

Vol. III. DIPLOMACY, ECCLESIASTICAL AFFAIRS AND IRELAND.

HENRY VIII. By A. F. Pollard, M.A., Litt.D. Crown 8vo,

4s. 6d. net.

ESSENTIALS IN EARLY EUROPEAN HISTORY. By Samuel

Burnett Howe, A.M., Head of the Department of History in the Plainfield High
School, Plainfield, New Jersey. With Coloured Frontispiece, i68 other Illustrations,
31 Maps and Plans (lo Coloured), and 8 Charts and Genealogical Tables. Crown 8vo,
7s. 6d. net.

A HISTORY OF EUROPE. By Arthur J. Grant, M.A., King's

College, Cambridge, Professor of History at the University of Leeds. With Maps and
Coloured Chart. Large crown Svo, 7s. 6d. net.

INDIAN HISTORICAL STUDIES. By H. G. Rawlinson, M.A.,

Professor of English Literature, the Deccan College, Poona. With Illustrations and

Map. Crown Svo, 4s. 6d. net.
Contents: Gautama Buddha — Asoka — Indo-Greek Dynasties of the Panjab — Chinese Pil-
grims in India — Ibn Batuta — Akbar — Sivaji the Maratha — Robert Knox — Ranjit Singh and the
Sikh Nation — Foreign Influences in the Civilisation of Ancient India.

THE FATE OF EMPIRES: being an Inquiry into the Stability of

Civilisation. By Arthur John Hubbard, M.D. (Dunelm). Svo, 6s. 6d. net.

ORGANIZED DEMOCRACY : an Introduction to the Study of
American Politics. By Frederick A. Cleveland, Ph.D., LL.D. Crown Svo,
los. 6d. net.

a history of WALES FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES TO

THE EDWARDIAN CONQUEST. By JoHK Edward Lloyd, M.A. With Map.
2 vols. Svo, 21S. net.

THE RISE OF SOUTH AFRICA : a History of the Origin of South

African Colonisation and of its Development towards the East from the Earliest Times
to 1857. By George Edward Cory, M.A., King's College, Cambridge, Professor m
the Rhodes University College, Grahamstown, South Africa. In 4 vols. Svo.

Vol. I. FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES TO THE YEAR 1820. With Map, Plans,
and Illustrations. 15s.

Vol, II. From 1820 to 1834. With 38 Illustrations and 2 Maps. Svo, i8s.

THE FIRST DECADE OF THE AUSTRALIAN COMMON-

WEALTH: a Chionicle of Contemporary Politics, igoi-1910. By Henry Gyles
Turner. Svo, 9s.

THE MAKING OF THE AUSTRALIAN COMMONWEALTH

(1889-1900). A Stage in the growth of the Empire. By the Hon. B. R. Wise, formerly
Attorney General of New South Wales. Svo, 7s. 6d. net.

LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO., 39 Paternoster Row, London
New York, Bombay and Calcutta.

THE POLITICAL HISTORY OF ENGLAND.

Edited by the Rev. W. HUNT, D.Litt., and
REGINALD LANE POOLE, M.A., LL.D.

8vo. 12 vols. 7J. 6d. net per volume.

Vol. I. FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES TO THE NORMAN

CONQUEST (to ioS6). By Thomas Hodgkin, D.C.L., Litt.D., Fellow of University
College, London ; Fellow of the British Academy. With 2 Maps.

Vol. II. FROM THE NORMAN CONQUEST TO THE

DEATH OF JOHN (1066 to 1216). By George Burton Adams, Professor of
History in Yale University. With 2 Maps.

Vol. III. FROM THE ACCESSION OF HENRY III. TO

THE DEATH OF EDWARD III. (1216 to 1377)- By T. F. Tout, M.A., Professor
of Mediaeval and Modern History in the University of Manchester, Fellow of the
British Academy. With 3 Maps.

Vol. IV. FROM THE ACCESSION OF RICHARD II. TO

THE DEATH OF RICHARD IIL (1377 to 1485). By C. Oman, M.A., LL.D., Chichele
Professor of Modern History in the University of Oxford; Fellow of the British
Academy. With 3 Maps.

Vol. V. FROM THE ACCESSION OF HENRY VII. TO

THE DEATH OF HENRY VIII. (1485 to 1547). By H. A. L. Fisher, M.A..
Fellow and Tutor of New College, Oxford ; Fellow of the British Academy. With a
Maps.

Vol. VI. FROM THE ACCESSION OF EDWARD VI. TO

THE DEATH OF ELIZABETH (1547 to 1603). By A. F. Pollard, M.A., Fellow
of All Souls' College, Oxford ; Professor of English History in the University of Lon-
don. With 2 Maps.

Vol. VII. FROM THE ACCESSION OF JAMES I. TO THE

RESTORATION (1603 to 1660). By F. C. Montague, M.A., Professor of History in
University College, London, formerly Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. With 3 Maps.

Vol. VIII. FROM THE RESTORATION TO THE DEATH

OF WILLIAM III. (1660 to 1702). By Richard Lodge, M.A., LL.D., Professor o(
History in the University of Edinburgh ; formerly Fellow of Brasenose College
Oxford. With 2 Maps.

Vol. IX. FROM THE ACCESSION OF ANNE TO THE

DEATH OF GEORGE II. (1703 to 1760). By I. S. Leadam, M.A., formerly Fellow
of Brasenose College, Oxford. With 8 Maps.

Vol. X. FROM THE ACCESSION OF GEORGE III. TO

THE CLOSE OF PITT'S FIRST ADMINISTRATION (1760 to 1801). By the
Rev. William Hunt, M.A., D.Litt., Trinity College, Oxford. With 3 Maps.

Vol. XI. FROM ADDINGTON'S ADMINISTRATION TO

THE CLOSE OF WILLIAM IV.'s REIGN (1801 to 1837). By the Hon. George
C. Brodrick, D.C.L., late Warden of Merton College, 0\ford, and J. K. Pothering-
ham, M.A., Magdalen College, Oxford ; Lecturer in Classics at King's College, London.
With 3 Maps.

Vol. XII. THE REIGN OF QUEEN VICTORIA (1837 to

igoi). By Sidney Low, M,A., BalHol College, Oxford; formerly Lecturer on History
at King's College, London ; and Lloyd C. Sanders, B.A. With 3 Maps.

LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO., 39 Paternoster Row, London.
New York, Bombay and Calcutta.

Sft

"«
