■:^iv^:

,/■  '^v^'^V  V^^^V"  ^'V^-'y  ,.  "^^

v5^

4  o

^*^°^

»  •  •  ^ ''b.

.^^

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2010  with  funding  from
The  Library  of  Congress

http://www.archive.org/details/garibaldithousan01trev

GARIBALDI IN EXILE.
(From  an  engraving  in  ttie  Britisli  Museum,  from  a  photograph. i

GARIBALDI

GARIBALDI AND THE THOUSAND

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

GARIBALDrS  DEFENCE  OF  THE  ROMAN

REPUBLIC

With  7  Maps  and  35  Illustrations.

8vo.  6s.  6d.  net.

ENGLAND  IN THE AGE OF WYCLIFFE.

8vo.  6s.  net.

Edited by  Edgar Powell and G. M.  Teevelyan.

THE PEASANTS' RISING AND THE

LOLLARDS:

A  Collection  of  Unpublished  Documents,  forming  an

Appendix  to  '  England  in  the  Age  of  Wychffe.'

8vo.  6s.  net.

LONGMANS, GREEN, & 00.

39 Paternoster Row, London,

New  York,  Bombay,  and  Calcutta.

GARIBALDI
AND THE THOUSAND

BY

GEORGE MACAULAY  TREVELYAN

LATE FKLLOW  OF  TRINITY COLLEGE,  CAMBRIDGE

AUTHOR  OF

ENGLAND  IN  THE  AGE  OF  WYCLIFFE '  'ENGLAND  UNDER  THE  STUARTS*

'garibaldi's DEFENCE OF THE  ROMAN REPUBLIC*

WITH FIVE MAPS AND NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS

SECOND IMPRESSION

LONGMANS, GREEN,  AND CO.

39  PATERNOSTER  ROW,  LONDON

NEW  YORK,  BOMBAY.  AND  CALCUTTA

1909

All rights reserved

/I

* /

V

'^■

V'

c^~

'r\

TO MY FRIENDS
GEOFFREY  AND  HILTON  YOUNG

PREFACE

izeration  of  Nap.r= -^;_ _

Izz  77^5-- :— r Gi-ibaldi  ani  ^

coinplr-i rir li-g.  Will  togethrr  trll :ir i: :
baidi's  parr  m  tJif  z^r.-z"^  e~f~~5  ::  i:  f  --  -
Italy/ His  r^  -  i::;  "li  ^--^7  ^ - --

h-v-  not  exasperated  it  in  :ni  ^^-7  7 F- '
1859  WIS  ^T  year  of  C^v:  ir  i~  1  :  17  iri"  ij-i

clctiies  or  in  red  sniri;?,  a]
^-^- i^i  Lirriator.  ^-Z

r..-.2l  of  tJL

au.%cj^!..— c^'

dreams  are  made  el  yet  invclv-i  -7r  -l.i  :  :i  :f  Italy^
has  a  char:::!  ^^:^  "— -  -  7^ 7-^^^  —  ^— -  -.  -=
reader  the  7^:^:-  in  ~— :n  it  :?  ^frr  ::  1 __t  .^  t.

the  larger  exTf^Ti::!? :: — .7^r\:^-L- :_: .i^^  : — -rr-

and  wider  charirter.  :iz::  *"_  :e  re"fr  ~ei:f  1  -Z  1  5<friri:r

viii  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

If  I  were  asked  why  I  attempt  to  write  the  history  of
events  so  recent  as  those  of  half  a  century  ago,  I  could
answer  that,  although  no  doubt  some  documents  of  great
importance  and  many  documents  of  slight  importance  will
become  available  in  the  course  of  the  next  generation,  the
mass  of  material  recently  printed  in  Italy  or  now  available
in  MS.  is  already  very  considerable  indeed  (see  BibHography
below,  pp.  348-376),  and  that meanwhile the  unwritten
sources  of  information  are  rapidly  drying  up. The  fact,  that
Generals  Canzio  and  Tiirr  both  died  within  a  few  months
of  the  time  when  I  was  privileged  to  converse  with  them
on  the  events  in  which  they  played  a  part,  is  significant  of
the  process  to  which  I  refer. In  some  respects  this  is  the
golden  moment  for  writing  the  history  of  i860. Fifteen
years  ago  there  was  not  enough  printed  matter  and  MS.
available,  and  fifteen  years  hence  there  will  be  nothing  left
except  these printed  sources. But oral  witness  has  its
historical  value. The  conversation  of  veterans  must,  of
course,  be hstened  to  with critical  vigilance  as well as
with  respect— I  have known  one  contradict  unwittingly
on  a  point  of  detail  what  he  had  written  in  his  diary  fifty
years  back. But  their  impressions  throw  fight  on  the  spirit,
opinions,  and  mutual  relations  of  the  men  and  parties  with
whom they worked. And even in matters of detail,
particularly in mifitary affairs, they often enable the
puzzled  historian  to  reconcile  or  choose  between  conflicting
statements in books, or to understand some incident
otherwise  unintelligible. You  cannot  cross-examine  a  book
or  a  MS.  ; that  is  the  weakness  of  written  evidence  which
the  presence  of  oral  evidence  rectifies  in  some  degree.

There  are  so  many  persons  in  Italy  and  in  England  whom
I  have  to  thank  for  help  received  in  collecting  the  materials
for  this  volume,  that  I  scarcely  know  where  to  begin  or

PREFACE

IX

where  to  end.  As  before,  I  have  had  the  free  use  of  Mr.
Nelson  Gay's  magnificent  Risorgimento  hbrary,  and  his
personal  assistance  on  many  points.  My  debt  to  Cav.
Alessandro  Luzio  of  Mantua  is  greater  than  before.  So  is
my  debt  to  Signor  Menghini  of  the  Vittorio  Emanuele
library  in  Rome,  and  with  him  I  must  couple  the  Sindaco
Nathan  in  thanks  for  access  to  the  Mazzini  papers.  The
names  of  Colonel  Eha  and  Colonel  Tedaldi  may  stand  for
those  of  many  other  veterans,  who  have  so  kindly  endured
and  answered  my  inquiries.  The  Countess  Martinengo
Cesaresco,  whose  books  convey  better  than  any  others  to
British  readers  the  high  spirit  of  the  Risorgimento,  has
told  me  many  things  that  cannot  be  found  in  books.
I  thank  for  their  kindness  to  me,  at  Bologna,  Signor
Cantoni  and  my  friends  of  the  Casa  ZanichelH ;  at
Milan,  Signor  G.  Gallavresi  and  Colonel  Carlo  Pagani ;
at  Genoa,  Aw.  Pier  Giulio  Breschi  who  obtained  for  me
the  kind  interest  and  services  of  his  friend  General  Canzio,
now  deceased  ;  at  Naples,  Professor  E.  Zaniboni,  and  the
members  and  President  of  the  Societa  Storia  Patria.

Above  all,  in  Sicily  the  success  of  my  researches  has  been
dependent  on  the  good  will  of  others.  Mrs.  Joseph  Whitaker
and  all  the  house  of  Whitaker  ;  Mr.  Churchill,  our  consul,
then  at  Palermo,  now  at  Naples  ;  and  my  kind  hosts  at
Marsala,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gray,  have  treated  me  as  a  man
loves  to  be  treated  by  his  countrymen  abroad.  I  had
even  less  claim  on  the  personal  assistance  of  native
Sicilians,  but  I  obtained  it  abundantly.  I  should  mention
first  Dott.  G.  Paolucci,  v/hose  work  on  the  subject  has  been
so  valuable  a  guide,  even  in  the  few  matters  where  I  have
ventured  to  differ  from  him.  Professor  Pitre  himself  was  also
most  kind  to  me.  So  were  Signor  Santostefano  Marches!  della
Cerda  ;  Cav.  Agostino  Rotolo  ;  Signor  Giuseppe  Campo  ;
Signor  Carlo  Albanese  ; Signor  Costatini  and  his  fellow

X  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

citizens  of  Piana  dei  Greci ;  Signer  Lipari  of  Marsala ;
Commendatore  Salinas ;  Senatore  Guarneri  ;  Senatore
Beltrani  Scalia  ;  Cav.  Giuseppe  Lodi,  whom  I  thank  for  the
use  of  his  valuable  collection  ;  Cav.  Uff.  G.  Travali,  and
the  authorities  of  the  Archivio  di  Stato  in  Palermo  ;  and
many  others.

In  England,  I  must  thank  Lord  Carlisle  once  more  for  the
loan  and  gift  of  books,  and  also  Lady  Mary  Murray.  Lady
Agatha  Russell  and  Mr.  Rollo  Russell,  Miss  Peard,  Miss
Margaret  Shaen,  Mr.  Charles  Lacaita,  Mr.  Arthur  Elliot,  Mr.
Herbert  Craig,  Lady  Lockwood,  Mrs.  Osier,  and  Mr.  Malleson
have  all  put  family  papers  at  my  disposal.  I  must  also
thank  Sir  Cecil  Spring  Rice,  Mr.  Marchetti  of  Halifax
(Garibaldino  of  1859),  and  others  whose  names  occur  in  the
notes  and  appendices  of  this  volume.

Four  persons  have  been  at  the  pains  to  read  the  volume
in  MS.  or  in  proof — Mr.  Hilton  Young  ;  my  wife  ;  Mr.
Thayer  of  Harvard,  one  of  the  foremost  scholars  of  Risor-
gimento  history  ;  and  Count  Ugo  Balzani,  whose  inex-
haustible kindness  to  me  is  one  of  the  many  reasons  why
it  is  so  pleasant  to  be  often  called  to  visit  Italy

G.  M.  TREVELYAN.

June  1909,

CONTENTS

CHAPTER

PAGE

INTRODUCTION .....'.  I

I. GARIBALDI  IN  EXILE,  1849-54 ....  8
II. CAVOUR AND THE CONVALESCENCE OF ITALY —

GARIBALDI AT CAPRERA 26

III.  THE NEAPOLITAN PRISONERS 3^

IV,  CAVOUR BRINGS THE DEMOCRATS AND NAPOLEON

III INTO HIS CAMP — PISACANE's EXPEDITION —
PLOMBIERES AND THE DECLARATION OF WAR

AGAINST  AUSTRIA — 1856-59 ....  63

V. garibaldi's ALPINE CAMPAIGN, 1859 ...  82

VI. VILLAFRANCA  AND  AFTER HO

VII. NAPLES, 1859 — MARCH 1860 T24

VIII. SICILY: THE REVOLT OF APRIL  4, 1860 — ROSOLINO

PILO AND THE HOPE  OF GARIBALDl's COMING .  I43
IX. THE ORIGINS OF THE EXPEDITION — NICE OR

SICILY 162

X. THE VILLA  AT QUARTO — THE PREPARATIONS  . .  I79

XI. THE SAILING  OF  THE  THOUSAND ....  I99

XII. TALAMONE AND  THE VOYAGE  .....  211

XIII.  THE LANDING  OF  THE  THOUSAND AT  MARSALA .  224

XIV.  THE BATTLE CALATAFIMI 245

XV. IN  THE  MOUNTAINS ROUND PALERMO . . .  265

XVI. GIBILROSSA — PALERMO ON  THE EVE . . .  283

XVII. THE TAKING  OF PALERMO 295

EPILOGUE 328

APPENDICES 329

A CAPRERA ...... . .  329

E NUMBERS AT  VARESE  AND  COMO  .....  33I

C THE  DEATH-BED OF  FRANCESCO RISO ....  332

xu

GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

APPENDICES — continued.

D  GARIBALDI IN  CAPRERA  IN  FEBRUARY  1860 .  ,

E  LAURENCE  OLIPHANT'S  STORY ....

F  BERTANl'S  TWO STATEMENTS  ....

G  THE  DECISIVE  INTERVIEW  AT  VILLA  SPINOLA, APRIL 30

H  CAVOUR  AND  THE  KING  AT  BOLOGNA  ON  MAY  2

J  FAUCHE AND  RUBATTINO .....

K  THE  FINANCES OF THE EXPEDITION  OF THE THOUSAND

L  WHY THE FRENCH  EVACUATION  WAS  STOPPED  ,

M  CALATAFIMI .......

N  THE NIGHT MARCH TO PARCO,  MAY  21-22 .  .

O  FROM  PIANA DEI GRECI TO MARINEO .  .  ,

P  THE ROUTE FROM  GIBILROSSA TO PALERMO .

333

334
335
337
338
340
340
342
342
344
345
346

BIBLIOGRAPHY  : LIST  OF  PRINTED MATTER  AND MSS.  CON
SULTED BY  THE AUTHOR .

I. PRINTED MATTER .  .  ,  .

n. MANUSCRIPTS .  .  .  ,  ,

III. NOTES OF CONVERSATIONS  .  ,

POEMS ......

348
370

374
375

INDEX

377

LIST OF PLATES

GARIBALDI  IN  EXILE Frontispiece

From  an  Engraving  in  British  Museum,  done  from  a  Photograph.

PAGE

CAVOUR facing 27

From  a  Contemporary  Print  in  Bianchi's  '  Cavour. '

GARIBALDI  AT GAPRERA „  33

From  an  Engraving  in  British  Museum.

THE FIGHT  AT  THE GANGLY  CONVENT,  APRIL  4,  1860 „ 155
From  a  Contemporary  Print  in  the  Museo  Nazionale,  Palermo.

CAPTURE  OF  RISO'S  PARTY,  AND  SACK  OF  THE  GANCIA

CONVENT, APRIL  4, 1860 „ I56

From  a  Contemporary  Print  in  the  Museo  Nazionale,  Palermo.

ROSOLINO PILO  .

From  a  Contemporary  Print.

BATTLE-FIELD OF CALATAFIMI — ^THE PIANTO DEI
ROMANI

From  a  Photograph  by  Mr.  Hilton  Young.

159

THE ROCK  AT  QUARTO — I ,, 203

From  a  Photograph  taken  in  the  'Sixties,  in  the  possession  0/
Lady  Agatha  Russell.

THE  ROCKS  AT  QUARTO — II ,, 204

From  a  Photograph  taken  in  the  'Sixties,  given  to  the  author  by
General  Canzio.

GARIBALDI  IN HIS '  PUNCIO,' 1860 •  •  .  . „ 205

From  a  Photograph  taken  at  Naples  in  the  autumn  of  i86o,

NINO BIXIO ,,222

From  a  Photograph  about  i860.

THE  LANDING  AT  MARSALA  ••••'„ 238

From  a  Contemporary  Oil  Painting  done  at  Marsala.

254

A '  TERRACE ' OF  THE  PIANTO DEI ROMANI .  . „ 256

From  a  Photograph  by  Mr.  Hilton  Young.

ANOTHER '  TERRACE  ' OF  THE PIANTO DEI ROMANI . „ 256
From  a  Photograph  by  Mr.  Hilton  Young.

XIV

GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

GARIBALDI

facing

From  an  Engraving  by  W.  Holl  from  an  Original  Photograph,
British  Museum.

CALATAFIMI

From  a  Photograph  by  Mr.  Hilton  Young.

PALERMO, CONCA

d'ORO AND

OUTSKIRTS OF

MOUNTAINS

From  a  Photograph  by  Mr.  Hilton  Young.

GIBILROSSA  MONASTERY AS SEEN FROM  THE  TOP  OF
THE  PASS ,..-••••

From  a  Photograph  by  Mr.  Hilton  Young.

GIBILROSSA MONASTERY

Nearer  View. From  a  Photograph  by  Mr.  Hilton  Young.

THE  SUMMIT  OF  GIBILROSSA PASS ....

From  a  Photograph.

PONTE dell' AMMIRAGLIO

From  a  Photograph  by  Mr.  Hilton  Young.

THE FIERA  VECCHIA, PALERMO  .  .

From  a  Photograph  by  Mr.  Hilton  Young.

THE  QUATTRO  CANTONI, PALERMO .  .  ^  .

From  a  Photograph.
THE FOUNTAIN OF  THE  PIAZZA PRETORIO,  PALERMO  .

From  the '  Album  Garibaldi,'  i860.
PATRIOTS  DEFENDING  A BARRICADE CLOSE TO THE
CATHEDRAL  .....••

From  a  Contemporary  Print  in  the  Museo  Nazionale,  Palermo.

BARRICADES OF PAVING STONES AT THE PORTA
MACQUEDA

From  the  '  Album  Garibaldi,'  i860.

THE ROYAL PALACE, PALERMO  .....
From  a  Photograph  by  Mr.  Hilton  Young.

VIEW FROM  THE ROYAL PALACE ROOF
From  a  Photograph  by  Mr.  Hilton  Young.

PALERMO CATHEDRAL

From  an  Old  Engraving.
THE CASTELLAMARE, PALERMO.  WITH  MONTE PELLE-

GRINO IN  THE DISTANCE

From  a  Photograph  by  Mr.  Hilton  Young.
INSIDE THE MONTALTO BASTION — ^MEDIEVAL WALLS

OF PALERMO

From  a  Photograph  by  Mr.  Hilton  Young.

PAGE

260

264
264

288

288

289
298

298

304
306

308

310

311
311
312

318

318

LIST  OF  PLATES  xv

PAGE

THE ARMISTICE  OF  MAY  30  .  .  •  •  facing 321

From  the  '  Ventisette  Maggio.'

SAN GIOVANNI DEGLI EREMITI, PALERMO  .  .  . „ 326

From  a  Photograph  by  Mr.  Hilton  Young.
THE  OBSERVATORY  OVER  THE  PORTA  NUOVA,  PALERMO „ 3^6

From  a  Photograph  by  Mr.  Htiton  Young.

LIST  OF MAPS

PAGE

I. CAMPAIGN IN THE ALPS, 1859 ....  facing QI
For  Chap.  V.

II, MARSALA,  MAY II, 1860 ..... f. ^33
For  Chap.  XIII.

III.  WESTERN SICILY. (iNSET OF BATTLE OF

CALATAFIMl) »» 37°

For  Chaps.  XIII-XV.

IV.  [a] ENVIRONS  OF  PALERMO ^

For  Chaps.  XV-XVII.  j- .  .  .  . „ 376

(&) PALERMO,  MAY  27, 1860J
For  Chap.  XVII.

V. ITALY AT TIME OF THE  SAILING OF THE

THOUSAND, MAY 1860.  (iNSETS OF ITALY

IN APRIL  AND AUTUMN  1859) •  .  ■ » 37^

For  Chaps.  I-XIII  inclusive.

N  B.— Maps  III,  IV,  V  are  folding  maps  at  end  of  book,  p.  376.
Map  V  will  be  of  assistance  to  the  reader  throughout  the  whole  book.
Places  in  Italy  mentioned  in  text,  but  not  marked  in  the  other  maps,
will  be  found  there.

Seldom  do  we  find  that  a  whole  people  can  be  said  to  have
any  Faith  at  all;  except  in  things  that  it  can  eat  and  handle.
Whensoever  it  gets  any  Faith,  its  history  becomes  spirit-stirring,
noteworthy.'— Carlyle,  French  Revolution.

GARIBALDI AND THE
THOUSAND

■-  INTRODUCTION

When,  on  New  Year's  Day  1859,  the  Emperor  Napoleon
III  startled  Europe  by  a  few  polite  but  ominous  words
spoken  to  the  Austrian  ambassador,  Italy  of  the  Italians
was  still  confined  to  the  small  state  of  Piedmont,  nestling
between  the  Alps  and  the  sea.  Strong  not  in  the  numbers
but  in  the  character  of  its  citizens,  it  enjoyed  the  respect  of
Europe,  the  sympathy  of  France  and  England,  and  the
wistful  affection  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  other  states  of  the
peninsula — sentiments  inspired  by  the  well-ordered  Parlia-
mentary government  of  King  Victor  Emmanuel  and  his
minister  Cavour.  The  rest  of  Italy,  still  partitioned
among  half  a  dozen  different  rulers,  was  exposed  to  the
absolute  power  of  priests,  of  foreigners,  or  of  native  despots,
bound  together  in  a  close  triple  alliance  against  the  rights
of  the  laity,  personal  freedom,  and  Italian  independence.
Two  years  went  by,  and  the  aspect  of  affairs  had  undergone
a  change  so  complete  and  sudden  that  many  would  not
believe  that  it  was  indeed  destined  to  be  permanent.  When,
in  November  i860.  Garibaldi  resigned  the  Dictatorship  of
Sicily  and  Naples,  and  sailed  back  to  his  farm  on  Caprera
with  a  large  bag  of  seed-corn  and  a  small  handful  of  lira
notes,  he  left  Victor  Emmanuel  acknowledged  as  constitu-
tional monarch  in  all  those  territories  that  we  now  know  as
the  Kingdom  of  Italy — with  the  exception  of  two  or  three
fortresses  where  the  Bourbon  flag  fjejw  for  yet  a  few  months

2  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

longer,  of  the  ancient  territories  of  the  Venetian  Republic,
still  guarded  by  the  Austrian  Quadrilateral,  and  of  that
narrow  '  Patrimony  '  of  the  earlier  Popes,  where  the  herds-
men and  vine-dressers  could  descry  the  cupola  of  St.  Peter's
floating  above  the  evening  mist,  like  the  ark  of  the  Church
above  the  tide  of  revolution.  In  the  winter  of  i86o~6i  a
patriot  could  have  travelled  from  Brescia  to  Reggio  and
Palermo  by  the  whole  central  chain  of  the  Apennines,
without  let  or  hindrance  from  any  anti-national  force  except
an  occasional  party  of  brigands  in  the  Neapolitan  provinces.
If  it  was  not  till  1866  that  the  Austrian  colours  were  lowered
from  the  three  great  flag-staffs  that  stand  in  front  of  St.  Mark's
at  Venice,  if  it  was  not  till  after  the  news  of  Sedan  that  Italy
could  wisely  dare  to  enter  Rome,  none  the  less  the  creation
of  the  new  State  was  already  an  accomplished  fact  when
Garibaldi  quitted  Naples  for  Caprera.

We  may  therefore  say  that  in  the  years  1859  ^^^  i860
the  Italians  acquired  their  national  independence,  their
civic  freedom  and  their  political  union.  This  profound  and
permanent  change  in  the  European  polity  was  effected  con-
trary to  the  expectations  and  wishes  of  nearly  all  the  rest
of  Europe,  and  under  the  guns  of  France  and  Austria,  who,
differing  on  so  many  points  as  regards  the  fate  of  Italy,
were  at  least  agreed  in  objecting  to  her  union  under  a  single
ruler.  To  neither  of  these  powers  could  she  have  offered
a  prolonged  military  resistance,  yet  she  attained  her
purpose  in  their  despite.

The  rapid  series  of  events  that  led  to  results  so  great,
and  apparently  so  improbable,  was  brought  to  fruition  by
the  supreme  political  genius  of  one  Italian,  and  by  the
crowning  achievement  of  another,  whose  name  is  to  the
modern  world  the  synonym  of  simple  heroism.  The  story  of
Italy  in  these  two  years  is  rich  in  all  the  elements  whereby
history  becomes  inspiring,  instructive  and  dramatic.  In  it
we  read  of  all  the  qualities  that  make  us  respect  or  despise
mankind  ;  here  the  heroism  and  there  the  cowardice  of  whole
populations  ;  the  devotion  of  individuals  and  of  families,
side  by  side  with  the  basest  egoism  ;  the  highest  wisdom

THE  MAKING  OF  ITALY,  1859-60  3

and  the  wildest  folly  ;  the  purest  patriotism  and  the  meanest
jealousy,  not  always  found  in  opposite  factions  or  even  in
separate  breasts.  We  watch  the  play  of  great  personalities  ;
the  kaleidoscopic  shifting  of  the  diplomatic  forces  of  Europe  ;
bewildering  turns  of  chance,  messengers  who  would  have
saved  a  kingdom  stopped  by  the  whim  of  villagers,  decisions
of  peace  or  war  reached  a  few  days  too  late  or  a  few  days  too
soon  to  turn  the  current  of  destiny,  hair-breadth  escapes  of
men  and  armies  on  whom  all  depended  ;  heroism,  tragedy
and  burlesque  taking  the  stage  of  history  together.  Finally,
we  witness  the  success  of  the  most  hazardous  enterprises  ;
the  fall  of  kingdoms  and  principalities  :  the  dismember-
ment of  the  most  ancient  and  terrible  Theocracy  of  the
western  world  ;  the  realisation  of  those  hopes  for  which
the  martyrs  of  Italy  had  suffered  and  perished  for  two
generations,  and  a  full  share  of  the  discontent  and  dis-
illusionment which  follows  when  the  dreams  of  the  noblest
of  men  are  carried  out  in  actual  fact  by  populations  just
set  free  from  the  corrupting  servitude  of  centuries.

It  has  sometimes  been  said  that  *  Italy  was  made  too
fast.'  It  has  been  argued  that  the  too  rapid  introduction
of  modern  political  machinery  and  the  too  rapid  unification
of  such  different  populations  as  those  of  the  north,  centre
and  south,  are  largely  responsible  for  the  shortcomings  of
the  Italy  of  to-day,  though  these  may  with  more  justice  be
ascribed  to  deep-seated  sociological  causes  stretching  back
through  two  thousand  years  of  Italian  history.  But  how-
ever this  may  be,  it  appears  highly  probable  that  if  Italy
had  not  acquired  her  independence  when  she  did,  and  as
rapidly  as  she  did,  and  in  the  form  of  complete  political
union,  she  might  never  have  acquired  it  at  all.  If  she  had
not  shaken  off  Austrian,  Pope,  and  Bourbon,  in  an  age  of
war  and  revolution,  she  would  scarcely  have  done  so  in  a
later  age  of  nations  perilously  armed,  but  afraid  of  war  and
impatient  of  all  questions  that  might  endanger  peace,
Italy  could  never  have  been  liberated  without  one  European
war  at  least.  Her  liberty  was  not,  in  fact,  fully  completed
short  of  three  European  wars,  those  of  1859,  1866  and  1870.

4  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

In  each  of  those  three  years  of  cataclysm  she  picked  her
own  advantage  out  of  the  clash  of  combatants  stronger  than
herself.  If  she  had  not  been  freed  before  1871,  nay,  if  she
had  not  been  three  parts  freed  before  the  death  of  Cavour
in  1861,  her  cause  would  not  improbably  have  declined  like
that  of  Poland.  Poland's  last  struggle  was  in  1863  ;  if
Italy  had  struggled  and  failed  in  i860,  the  golden  moment
might  never  have  returned.  In  the  last  thirty  years  of  the
nineteenth  century  no  country  would  have  gone  to  war
so  lightly  as  did  France  in  1859  on  behalf  of  oppressed
Lombardy,  and  anything  analogous  to  Garibaldi's  attack
on  the  Bourbon  would  have  been  prevented  by  the  Concert
of  Europe,  as  a  wanton  outrage  on  peace  and  order.  But,
in  July  i860,  England  broke  up  such  partial  Concert  of
Europe  as  then  existed,  and  refused  to  prevent  Garibaldi
from  crossing  the  Straits  of  Messina.  That  decision  of
Lord  John  Russell  and  Lord  Palmerston  is  one  of  the
causes  why  Italy  is  a  free  and  united  State  to-day.

Furthermore,  the  Risorgimento  movement  in  Italy
herself,  after  two  generations  of  ever  increasing  heat,  was
at  boiling  point  in  1859-60.  If  the  cause  had  failed  again
in  those  years  as  hopelessly  as  in  1848-49,  it  may  well  be
doubted  whether  these  ardours  would  not  have  cooled  and
frozen  in  despair.  The  '  disillusionment '  and  '  pessimism,'
of  which  we  hear  talk  in  modern  Italy,  would  have  been
more  widespread  and  of  a  far  more  deadly  kind  if  the  hopes  of
achieving  the  Risorgimento  had  perished.  The  Italy  of  the
twentieth  century  might  have  relapsed  into  the  Italy  of
the  eighteenth.  Again,  even  if  the  patriotic  movement  had
continued  unabated,  the  social  problem  would  have  arisen
to  complicate  and  thwart  the  political  movement  for  inde-
pendence, by  dividing  classes  which  were  united  for  the
national  object  in  the  Italy  of  fifty  years  ago.

In  short,  if  Cavour,  Victor  Emmanuel  and  Garibaldi
could  not  have  freed  their  land  in  the  days  of  Napoleon
III  and  Palmerston,  and  while  the  impulse  given  by  Mazzini
was  still  fresh,  it  is  doubtful  whether  anyone  would  have
been  able  to  free  her  at  a  later  period. She  could  not  afford

IMPORTANCE  OF  GARIBALDI'S  PART 5

to  await  the  slow  processes  of  an  uncertain  evolution  in  the
face  of  hostile  forces  really  stronger  than  she,  and  determined
to  crush  any  natural  growth  by  brute  force  ;  she  had  to
seize  the  opportunity  created  for  her  by  Cavour  before
it  went  by  for  ever.  Like  most  other  great  steps  that  have
been  made  to  ameliorate  the  human  lot,  the  Italian  revolu-
tion was  not  inevitable,  but  was  the  result  of  wisdom,  of
valour,  and  of  chance.

Only  outside  Italy,  and  by  persons  who  have  not  studied
Risorgimento  history  in  any  detail,  do  we  ever  hear  it  denied
that  Garibaldi's  great  expedition  of  i860  carried  on  the  main
work  of  Italian  unity,  at  a  time  when  no  other  means  could
have  availed  for  its  accomplishment.  All  schools  of  Italian
historians  are,  I  think,  agreed  that  the  Sicilian  and
Neapolitan  populations  had  proved  incapable  of  effecting
a  revolution  in  the  face  of  an  army  of  90,000  men,  without
external  help ;  that  Cavour  was  unable,  owing  to  the  attitude
of  Europe,  and  in  particular  of  France  and  Austria,  to  give
that  help  with  the  regular  forces  of  the  North  Italian  king-
dom ;  that  nothing,  therefore,  could  have  liberated  Sicily
and  Naples  except  an  irresponsible  '  raid  '  by  volunteers
of  the  revolutionary  party,  and  that  no  such  '  raid  '  could
have  succeeded  except  one  led  by  Garibaldi ;  finally,  that  it
was  only  the  Garibaldian  revolution  in  Sicily  and  Naples
that  put  Cavour  into  the  position  from  which  he  ventured,
in  the  face  of  Europe,  to  attack  the  Pope's  possessions  in
Umbria  and  the  Marches,  and  so  to  unite  the  whole  length
of  the  peninsula  in  one  continuous  state.  This  chain  of
reasoning,  which  establishes  the  supreme  historical  impor-
tance of  Garibaldi's  expedition,  has  been  fortified  by  the
patient  research  of  Italian  scholars  during  recent  years,
when  so  much  has  been  done  for  the  scientific  study  of  the
history  of  the  Risorgimento.

The  question  still  in  debate  among  Italian  historians
is  the  degree  of  credit  which  Cavour  can  claim  for  Garibaldi's
success. One  school,  of  which  Signor  Luzio  is  the  able

6  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

representative,  maintains  that  the  great  minister  aided  and
abetted  the  Sicilian  expedition  from  the  first,  not  under
compulsion  from  king  and  people,  but  as  a  part  of  his  own
policy  ;  the  opposite  school  seeks  to  deny  to  him  even  the
merit  of  goodwill.  It  is  possible  now  to  trace  many  of
Cavour's  principal  actions  in  the  matter,  but  his  motives
and  intentions  from  day  to  day  are  not  always  clear  and  are
still  in  some  cases  open  to  different  interpretations.  But
there  can  be  no  question  that  the  assistance  which  he  gave
was  absolutely  indispensable  to  the  success  of  the  enterprise.

The  technical  reputation  of  Garibaldi  as  a  soldier  depends
on  the  history  of  1859  ^-^^  i860,  when  he  himself  was  at  the
late  prime  of  his  powers,  and  in  command  of  an  instrument
suited  to  his  methods.  In  1849,  he  had  not  yet  fully
adapted  to  the  conditions  of  European  warfare  the  system
which  he  had  evolved  on  the  Pampas  ;  in  his  later  campaigns
of  1866,  1867  and  1870,  old  and  lame,  he  had  no  longer  the
ubiquitous  personal  energy  which  was  the  first  condition
of  success  in  his  method  of  war,  he  was  in  command  of  forces
of  mixed  quality,  and,  in  short,  neither  he  nor  his  men  were
any  longer

that  strength  which  in  old  days
Moved  earth  and  heaven.

The  generation  now  passing  away  has  judged  Garibaldi
overmuch  by  what  they  recollected  of  the  performances  of  his
decline  and  decadence,  which  his  partial  countrymen  have
praised  too  much.  But  his  ultimate  place  in  history,  not
only  as  a  soldier  but  as  a  patriot  and  magical  leader  of  men,
must  depend  primarily  on  those  great  achievements  which
I  shall  here  attempt  to  record.

There  is,  for  the  historian,  an  unique  interest  in  the
detailed  study  of  the  Garibaldian  epic.  We  can  make  no
such  minute  inquiry  into  the  lives  of  Wallace  and  Tell,
and  of  others  who  resembled  him  both  in  the  nature
of  their  work  as  liberators,  patriots  and  partisan  warriors,
and  in  the  romantic  and  old-world  circumstances  of  their

HISTORY  AND  THE  EPIC  7

achievements.  The  records  of  Wallace  and  the  dimmer
legends  of  Tell  are  so  meagre  that  they  leave  on  us  the
impression  of  the  heroic  figures  of  Flaxman's  outlines,
with  certain  noble  stories  attached  to  their  names.
Even  the  fuller  records  of  Joan  of  Arc,  to  whom
Treitschke  compared  Garibaldi,  date  from  a  time  so  far
back  in  the  infancy  of  historical  method,  that  in  our
day  the  learned  can  still  dispute  as  to  the  nature  of  the
influences  which  she  underwent  herself,  and  exerted  over
others.  But  the  records  of  the  Italian  national  hero  and
his  deeds  are  detailed  to  the  point  of  realism.  We  possess
such  a  mass  of  evidence,  official  and  unofficial,  printed,
written  and  oral,  of  his  friends  and  his  enemies,  his  followers
and  his  opponents  in  the  field,  that  we  certainly  do  not
lack  the  material  to  fill  in  a  living  picture  of  the  man  and  his
achievements.

How  then,  examined  in  so  clear  a  light,  do  the  legendary
exploits  of  Garibaldi  appear  ?  Does  the  surrounding
atmosphere  of  poetry  and  high  idealism,  when  considered
curiously,  evaporate  like  a  mirage  ?  Or  does  it  not  rather
take  shape  as  a  definite  historical  fact,  an  important  part  of
the  causes  of  things  and  a  principal  part  of  their  value  ?
To  my  mind  the  events  of  i860  should  serve  as  an  encourage-
ment to  all  high  endeavour  amongst  us  of  a  later  age,  who,
with  our  eyes  fixed  on  realism  and  the  doctrine  of  evolution,
are  in  some  danger  of  losing  faith  in  ideals,  and  of  forgetting
the  power  that  a  few  fearless  and  utterly  disinterested  men
may  have  in  a  world  where  the  proportion  of  cowards  and
egoists  is  not  small.  The  story  of  that  auspicious  hour
when  the  old-new  nation  of  Italy  achieved  her  deliverance
by -the  wisdom  of  Cavour  and  the  valour  of  Garibaldi  will
remain  with  mankind  to  warn  the  rash  that  the  brave  man,
whatever  he  and  his  friends  may  think,  cannot  dispense
with  the  guidance  of  the  wise, — and  to  teach  the  prudent
that  in  the  uncertain  currents  of  the  world's  affairs,  there
come  rare  moments,  hard  to  distinguish  but  fatal  to  let  slip,
when  caution  is  dangerous,  when  all  must  be  set  upon
a  hazard,  and  out  of  the  simple  man  is  ordained  strength.

CHAPTER  T

GARIBALDI  IN  EXILE, 1849-54

We  who  have  seen  Italia  In  the  throes,
Half  risen  but  to  be  hurled  to  the  ground,  and  now.
Like  a  ripe  field  of  wheat  where  once  drove  plough,
All  bounteous  as  she  is  fair,  we  think  of  those

Who  blew  the  breath  of  life  into  her  frame  :
Cavour,  Mazzini,  Garibaldi : Three  :
Her  Brain,  her  Soul,  her  Sword ; and  set  her  free
From  ruinous  discords,  with  one  lustrous  aim.  .  .  .

Georgk  Meredith. For  the  Centenary  of  Garibaldi.

Times,  July  i,  1907.

The  hopes  of  the  revolutionary  leaders  of  1848-49,  after  a
brief  period  of  fuhlment,  were  shattered  in  Italy  as  else-
where by  the  military  force  of  the  powers  of  reaction.
The  idealists,  patriots,  and  demagogues  who  had  for  a  few
weeks  borne  rule  in  half  the  capitals  of  Europe  were  crowded
into  prisons  or  huddled  into  nameless  graves,  while  in  little
towns  overlooking  the  waters  of  Swiss  lakes,  and  on  board
steamers  bound  for  America  or  England,  groups  of  emaciated
and  ill  clad  men,  their  faces  scarred  with  misery,  could  be
seen  dividing  among  themselves  scanty  sums  of  money  with
more  than  fraternal  affection,  and  imparting  in  whispers
some  new  tale  of  disaster  and  death.

The  most  memorable  of  the  closing  scenes  of  the  Euro-
pean tragedy  had  been  the  defence  of  the  Roman  Republic,
which  the  patriots  from  the  north  Italian  provinces,  led  by
Mazzini  and  Garibaldi,  had  inspired  with  heroism  and
invested  with  an  imperishable  glory.  From  the  moment
when  the  flag  of  the  degenerate  French  Republic  was  vic-
toriously planted  on  the  Janiculum  among  the  corpses  of
the  Bersagheri  and  the  Red-shirts,  the  Catholics  of  France
enjoyed that coveted occupation of Rome which was

s

ESCAPE  OF  GARIBALDI,  1849  9

destined  by  a  bitter  irony  to  involve  them  and  their  cause
in  irreparable  ruin  ;  and  Louis  Napoleon  commenced  to  drag
towards  the  final  catastrophe  of  Sedan  the  lengthening  chain
of  servitude  and  embarrassment,  which,  as  he  soon  found,
was  all  that  he  gained  from  his  protectorate  of  the  Pope.

Meanwhile  Garibaldi,  not  content  with  having  defended
Rome  long  beyond  the  last  hour  of  hope,  gathered  round
him  those  who  would  not  or  could  not  ask  grace  of  the
restored  Papal  government,  and,  carrying  the  lost  cause
into  the  Apennines,  eluded  during  the  month  of  July  1849
the  pursuing  armies  of  Naples,  Spain,  France  and  Austria,
until  his  last  forces  were  captured  or  disbanded.  Then,  in
the  marshlands  near  Ravenna,  his  wife  Anita  died  in  his
arms,  and  he  himself,  torn  away  from  her  death-bed  lest
the  Austrian  searchers  should  find  him  there,  escaped  across
Italy  after  a  series  of  perilous  adventures  in  company  of  a
single  follower.  Leggier 0.  At  length,  on  the  2nd  of  Septem-
ber 1849,  the  two  fugitives  embarked  in  a  fishing  boat
provided  by  the  patriots  of  the  Tuscan  Maremma.^  Some
ten  days  earlier,  the  surrender  of  Venice  and  its  heroic
defender  Manin  to  the  Austrians  had  brought  the  last
struggle  to  an  end,  and  '  order '  reigned  once  more  from
Sicily  to  the  Alps.

Before  we  turn  our  attention  to  Italy's  convalescence
under  the  skilful  treatment  of  Cavour,  it  will  be  well  first
to  follow  the  course  of  Garibaldi's  proscribed  and  wandering
life,  and  to  note  how  he  preserved  himself  for  his  country
through  years  of  banishment  and  grief,  without  acquiring
either  the  faults  usual  to  exiles  and  fallen  chieftains,  or
those  which  marred  his  own  later  life  after  the  successes
of  i860.  He  who  is  accused  of  being  the  most  impatient
and  headstrong  of  men,  showed  a  marvellous  patience  and
a  sound  political  instinct  for  awaiting  opportunity  during
the  years  of  his  life  when  he  had  most  to  bear,  and  most
temptation  to  grow  weary  of  delay.

The  first  occasion  for  the  display  of  this  spirit  of  patriotic

^  The  events  here  alluded  to.  including  tlie  siege  of  Rome,  are  told  at
length  in  the  author's  Garibaldi's  Defence  of  the  Roman  Republic,

10  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

self-restraint  arose  only  a  few  hours  after  he  and  Leg.iero
had  landed  on  September  5,  1849.  on  the  asylum  of  Pied-
montese territory.i The  presence of  the  military  chief
01  the  late  Roman  Republic,  who,  next  to  Mazzini  and
Kossuth,  was  in  the  eyes  of  Austria  the  most  obnoxious
o± all refugees, created a situation of embarrassment
and even of danger  for the only free  State in Italy
Piedmont, not yet  recovered from the consequences of
the  unfortunate  Novara  campaign  of  the  previous  March
could  not  too  boldly  defy  the  wishes  of  Austria. It  was
much  that  the  brave  young  king,  Victor  Emmanuel,  should
venture, m  the  face  of  the  twice  victorious  white-coats
camped on the Ticino, to preserve the Parhamentary
Constitution to which he had sworn, especially as the
Parliament  was  at  that  time  dominated  by  a  somewhat
hysterical  Democratic  party,  unwilling  frankly  to  accept
the  facts  of  defeat. France,  indeed,  was  the  ultimate  pro-
tection  from the insulting  demands of  Austria, but to
France  the  defender  of  Rome  was  as  hateful  as  he  was
to  Austria  herself. The  external  situation,  therefore,  made  it
dangerous  to  harbour  Garibaldi. But  the  internal  situation
rendered  it  no  less  dangerous  to  expel  him,  except  with  his
own  consent. For  in  the  towns  of  the  long  sea-board  of
Piedmont,  especially  in  Genoa,  the  hotbed  of  Repubhcan
democracy,  in  Chiavari,  whence  Garibaldi's  family  origin-
ated, and  in  Nice,  where  it  now  resided,  he  was  regarded
at  once  as  the  national  hero  of  Italy,  and  as  the  pride  of  his
own  Ligurian  coast. At  Chiavari,  where,  on  the  evening
of  September  6,  his  arrest  was  effected  in  the  most  poHte
and  friendly  manner  possible,  he  would  certainly  have  been
released  by  the  populace  from  the  Carahinieri  who  were  to
accompany  him  to  Genoa,  but  for  his  own  active  collusion
vvith  the  authorities.^ And  not  only  was  the  mob  on  his
side,  but  the  Parliamentary  majority,  moved  by  a  natural
'  This  took  place  on  the  morning  of  September  5,  at  Porto  Venere  at
the  north  end  of  the  Gulf  of  Spezia,  see  Guerzoni,  i  386,  587  •  mZ\To

*  Riv.  di  Roma,  July  1907,  p.  398.

EXPULSION  FROM  PIEDMONT  ii

and  praiseworthy  desire  to  do  honour  to  the  man  who  had
honoured  Italy  by  his  heroism,  and  moved  also  by  a  factious
desire  to  render  the  Moderate  government  odious,  passed
on  September  lo  the  following  resolution  :—

'  That  the  arrest  of  General  Garibaldi  and  his  threatened
expulsion  from  Piedmont  are  contrary  to  the  rights  assured  by  the
statute,  to  the  sentiments  of  patriotism,  and  to  the  glory  of  Italy.

Thus  supported  by  the  majority  of  the  Chamber,  the  claims  of
Garibaldi  to  residence  in  his  own  country  were  perilously
strong,  and  if  at  this  point  he  had  yielded  to  the  temptation
to  exploit  his  popularity  and  to  accept  the  flattery  of  a
party  at  the  expense  of  the  welfare  of  the  State,  he  might
have  caused  grave  hurt  to  Italy.  But  he  had  not  come  to
Piedmont  with  any  expectation  of  being  permitted  to  reside
in  her  territories.  He  had  preferred  it  to  a  British  ship  as
his  first  harbour  of  refuge,  only  because  he  desired  to  see  his
now  motherless  children  at  Nice.i  No  friendly  enthusiasts
could  persuade  him  to  resist,  or  even  to  resent,  the  deter-
mination of  the  Government  to  send  him  again  on  his  travels.
To  one  of  his  principal  champions  in  the  Piedmontese
poHtical  arena,  he  wrote  with  simple  gratitude  and  dignity  :—

'  I  sail  to-morrow  for  Tunis  with  the  Tripoli.  I  have  been
watching  all  that  you  and  your  generous  colleagues  have  done
for  me.  I  charge  you  to  convey  to  them  the  sense  of  my  grati-
tude. I  have  no  reason  to  complain  of  anyone.  The  present  is
a  time  for  resignation,  because  it  is  a  time  of  misfortune.'  2

Before  his  final  departure,  the  Government  allowed  him
to  spend  a  few  hours  at  Nice.  The  Httle  port  beside  whose
wharfs  he  was  bom  and  bred  is  closely  penned  in  by  steep
hills,  which  happily  still  shut  out  from  the  old  '  Nizza '  of
Garibaldi  the  long  modem  esplanade  which  is  the  'Nice '
of  the  visitor,—'  the  cosmopohtan  seat  of  all  that  is  cor-
TOpt,'  as  its  great  citizen  called  it  in  his  anger  after  it  had
been  ceded  to  France.  But  the  old  town  beneath  the
shadow  of  the  hill  was  all  alive  with  its  simple  sailor  life

»  Mem,  260.  2  cUmpoli,  48. Mem.  261.

12  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

on  the  September  evening  in  1849  when  Garibaldi,  having
given  his  parole  to  those  who  had  him  in  charge,  landed
from  the  steamer,  and  was  received  into  the  arms  of  his  own
people.  A  crowd  of  relatives  and  friends  of  his  boyhood,
at  the  head  of  the  enthusiastic  populace,  carried  him  to  the
door  of  his  sad  home.  As  he  entered  it,  his  old  mother  fell
on  his  neck,  while  little  Menotti  and  Ricciotti  clung  round
their  father's  knees  and  cried  out :  '  And  is  Mama  coming
too  ?  '  It  was  a  bitter  meeting,  and  yet  all  too  short.
When  he  was  gone,  his  mother,  who  was  eighty  years  old,
said  to  a  friend  that  she  should  never  live  to  set  eyes  again
on  her  son  who  was  so  great  and  good.^

Though  driven  from  Italy,  Garibaldi  still  hoped  to  remain
somewhere  on  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean.  The  Pied-
montese  Government  sent  him  first  to  Tunis,  but  the  Bey
refused  to  allow  him  to  land.  Thus  left  on  the  hands  of
his  native  state,  he  was  temporarily  put  ashore  on  Madda-
lena,  the  chief  of  a  group  of  small  islands  off  the  north
coast  of  Sardinia,  where  he  remained  for  a  month  as  an
honoured  guest  and  friend  among  a  patriotic  sea-going
population.  The  neighbouring  rock  ridge  of  desert  Caprera
is  divided  from  Maddalena  by  a  channel  only  a  few  hun-
dred yards  wide,  but  as  yet  no  thought  of  settHng  there
appears  to  have  crossed  his  mind,  and  no  dream  that
through  him  Caprera  would  become  a  name  in  history  and
in  song.2

On  October  24,  1849,3  he  was  taken  off  Maddalena  by
a  Piedmontese vessel  which conveyed  him  to  Gibraltar.

^  Mario,  178  ;  Mem.  9,261.

2  Risorg,  anno  i.,  iv.  590-598,  Gar.  da  Genova  a  Tangieri.  Falconi,
12-24,  local  authority  on  Garibaldi  at  Maddalena  and  Caprera.  At  Madda-
lena it  was  observed  that  Garibaldi  wore  a  '  mediaeval '  costume,  '  con-
sisting of  a  close-fitting  blouse  of  black  velvet,  trousers  of  the  same,  with
top-boots,  and  an  Italian  hat  with  brim  turned  up  and  feather '  {Falconi,
14,  19).  In  the  following  years  in  America,  England  and  Italy  he  wore  a
black  frock-coat  buttoned  up  to  the  neck  (see  frontispiece).  Only
on  the  famous  evening  of  May  5,  i860,  was  the  red  shirt  again  unpacked.

3  Falconi,  21,  22,  and  Risorg,  anno  i.,  iv.  602  give  us  this  date.
Guerzoni,  i.  394,  wrongly  speaks  of  the  date  of  departure  from  Maddalena
as  some  time  in  1850,

AT  TANGIER  13

There  the  British  governor  allowed  him  to  land  on  November
10,  on  condition  that  after  fifteen  days  he  should  go  to
England  or  to  some  other  land  of  refuge.  Garibaldi  was
hurt  at  this  notice  to  quit.  '  From  a  representative  of
England/  he  wrote,  '  the  land  of  asylum  for  all,  the  blow
cut  me  to  the  heart.'  1

But  he  was  not  entirely  abandoned.  At  this  nadir  of
his  fortunes,  he  received  a  welcome  invitation  from  the
Piedmontese  consul  at  Tangier  to  come  and  live  in  his
house.  There  Garibaldi  stayed,  from  November  1849  to
June  1850,  under  conditions  well  suited  to  heal  his  deeply
wounded  spirit.  For  he  was  a  man  of  the  old  world  and
of  the  open  air.  He  did  not  require  for  his  distraction  either
intellectual  stimulants  or  artificial  excitement,  but  found
the  medicine  and  food  for  which  he  craved  in  long,  solitary
gazing  on  the  sea  and  on  wild  nature  ;  in  severe  exercise
out  of  doors,  varied  by  some  quiet  handicraft ;  and  in  the
company  of  one  or  more  of  those  numerous  persons,
great  and  small,  wise  and  simple,  who  could  boast  the
title  of  '  Garibaldi's  friends.'  All  these  resources  he  had
at  Tangier,  as  afterwards  when  he  settled  for  so  many  years
at  Caprera.  At  Tangier  his  friends  were  Leggiero,  who  had
been  the  comrade  of  his  recent  adventurous  escape  across
Italy,  his  kind  host,  and  the  English  consul  Murray.  He
occupied  himself  in  making  sails,  fishing  tackle  and  cigars,
and  in  using  them  all  when  made.  Once  at  least  he  shot  a
wild  boar,  and  he  describes  himself  as  the  '  scourge  of  the
rabbits.'  Alone  with  his  dog  Castor,  to  whom  he  became
fondly  attached  and  who  died  of  grief  on  his  departure,  he
would  spend  days  together  in  the  wilds,  living  on  the  game
he  shot,  and  sleeping  out  in  the  southern  night  under  groves
of  magnificent  olive  trees.  It  was  thus  that  he  struggled
with  the  greatest  sorrow  of  his  life.

'  Tortured  by  certain  memories,'  he  wrote  in  February  1850,

1  iZfsofg,  anno  i.,iv.  598,  602.  Mem.  263.  The  British  islands  themselves
would  of  course  have  been  open  to  him,  as  the  Governor  himself  expr-essly
stated.  Also  he  had  fifteen  days'  notice,  not  six  as  he  wrongly  says  in  his
Memoirs.

14  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

'  and  by  the  low  condition  of  our  country's  affairs,  I  try  to
distract  myself  by  shooting  expeditions,  and  succeed — materially
at  least,  very  well.'

His  one  intellectual  employment  at  Tangier  was  writing  the
memoir  of  his  South  American  life,  which  still  remains
as  the  chief  source  of  our  knowledge  of  his  lost  Anita,  her
heroism  in  obscure  skirmishes  long  forgotten,  and  her  devotion
in  a  love  that  the  world  will  never  forget. ^

During  his  seven  months'  holiday  at  Tangier,  he  was
constantly  but  vainly  seeking  employment  as  a  merchant
captain.  He  had  already  refused  a  pension  for  himself,  offered
by  Massimo  D'Azeglio,  Victor  Emmanuel's  upright  premier,
but  he  had  accepted  one  for  his  old  mother,  and  he  had  also
received  sums  by  way  of  journey  money  for  himself — facts
significant  of  his  friendly  attitude  towards  the  monarchy  .2
The  education  of  his  children,  left  with  the  Deideris  and
other  kind  friends  at  Nice,  must  be  defrayed  by  the
labour  of  his  own  hands,  if  he  would  not  depend  on  the
abundant  charity  of  those  who  loved  him.  The  prospect
of  regaining,  after  sixteen  years  of  lawless  adventure,  his
youthful  footing  in  the  mercantile  marine  of  the  Mediter-
ranean faded  away  before  the  opposition  of  European
diplomacy,  determined  to  drive  him  back  across  the
Atlantic.^  In  April  1850  he  had  some  thoughts  of  returning
to  Monte  Video,  but  in  June  he  left  Tangier  for  North
America.*

Going  by  way  of  Liverpool  to  New  York,  he  was  seized  on
the  voyage  by  the  severe  rheumatic  pains  which  maimed
and  tortured  him  at  intervals  during  the  remainder  of  his
life.  '  I  was  lifted  on  shore  like  a  piece  of  luggage,'  he
writes.  His  hopes  of  obtaining  a  ship  for  himself  at  New
York  proved  illusory,  and  he  was  fain  to  work  as  a  journey-
man candlemaker  in  a  small  factory  just  set  up  on  Staten

1  Ciampoli,  49-60,  and  935. Mem.  263,  264.

2  Panizzi,  478  (D'Azeglio's  letter,  July  25,  1864).  Ciampoli,  50,  51,
59,  62. Risorg,  anno  i.,  iv.  598-600,

'  Ciampoli,  56.

*  For  these  dates,  see  letters  in  Ciampoli,  56,  59-61.

THE  JOURNEYMAN  CANDLEMAKER 15

Island  by  his  good  friend  and  compatriot,  Meucci,  M'ho
treated  him,  however,  not  as  a  mere  employee,  but  as  one
of  his  own  family.  In  company  with  another  Italian
labourer,  and  the  inevitable  Pat,  the  defender  of  Rome  and
the  future  conqueror  of  Sicily  and  Naples  might  be  seen

*  bringing  up  barrels  of  tallow  for  the  boiling  vat '  from
'  the  old  Vanderbilt  landing.'

New  York  was  at  that  time  full  of  political  refugees,
and  the  Americans  regarded  the  victims  of  '  feudal  Europe  '
with  the  sympathy  due  to  fellow  Republicans.  But  Gari-
baldi, unlike  Kossuth,  politely  refused  to  allow  the  '  leading
citizens '  to  fete  him  or  produce  him  in  public,  as  they
had  wished  to  do  on  his  first  arrival  in  their  midst.
He  lived  among  his  own  people,  melancholy  and  more
depressed  than  even  they  were  aware,  but  gentle  and
generous  as  ever.  His  spare  linen  and  even  the  red  shirt
in  which  he  had  defended  Rome  went  to  clothe  his  poorer
compatriots.

An  American  who  knew  him  at  this  period  noted  his

*  free  and  athletic  movements,  notwithstanding  ill  health
and  rheumatism  which  disables  his  right  arm,'  and  his
'  easy,  natural,  frank  and  unassuming  carriage/  '  his
freedom  of  utterance  and  the  propriety  and  beauty  of
his  language  '  when  he  spoke  in  French  or  Italian.  He
was  at  this  time  learning  English,  which  he  never  mastered
so  completely  as  the  various  Latin  tongues.  '  Although,'
says  the  same  American,  '  I  had  heard  men  speak  eloquently
and  impressively  before,  .  .  .  Garibaldi  raised  my  mind
and  impressed  my  heart  in  a  manner  altogether  new,
surprising  and  indescribable.'  1

But,  grateful  though  he  was  to  the  Meuccis  and  his  other
friends,  he  was  secretly  unhappy  and  yearning  to  be  once
more  on  the  ocean. '  One  day,'  he  writes, —

'  tired  of  making  candles,  and  perhaps  driven  by  my  natural
and  habitual  restlessness,  I  left  the  house  with  the  intention  of
changing  my  trade. I  remembered  that  I  had  been  a  sailor  3

*  Century,  June  1907,  174-184. Mem.  264-266. Mario,  206,  207,  note.

i6  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

I  knew  a  few  words  of  Englisfi,  and  I  went  down  to  the  Staten
Island  docks,  where  I  saw  some  coasting  vessels  loading  and
unloading.  I  approached  the  nearest,  and  asked  to  be  taken
on  board  as  a  common  sailor.  The  men  I  saw  on  the  ship
scarcely  paid  any  attention  to  me,  and  continued  their  work.
I  went  to  the  second  and  did  the  same,  with  the  same  result.
Finally,  I  went  to  a  third,  where  they  were  busy  unloading,
and  asked  to  be  allowed  to  help  in  the  work.  I  was  told  they
did  not  want  me.  "  But  I  don't  want  to  be  paid,"  I  insisted.
No  reply.  "  I  want  to  work  to  warm  myself."  No  use,
I  was  deeply  mortified.

*  I  retired,  thinking  of  the  day  when  I  had  the  honour  to
command  the  fleet  of  Monte  Video,  and  its  warlike  and  glorious
army.  What  did  all  that  serve  me  now  ?  I  was  not  wanted.
I  got  the  better  of  my  mortification,  and  returned  to  work  at
the  tallow  factory.  Fortunately,  I  had  not  made  known  my
intention  to  the  excellent  Meucci,  and  so  the  affront  and  dis-
appointment, being  my  own  secret,  were  less  bitter.'  i

At  length  his  merchant  friend  Carpanetto,  of  Genoa,
came  over  to  New  York,  and  some  time  in  1851  carried  him
off  on  a  business  tour  to  Central  America.  There  he  fell  ill
of  marsh  fever,  and  was  with  difficulty  nursed  back  to  life
by  the  devoted  care  of  Carpanetto  and  some  Italians  of
Panama.  He  then  travelled  along  the  Pacific  coast  to
Lima  in  an  English  ship,  recovering  his  health  on  board,
and  contrasting  the  scenery  of  the  Andes  with  the  Alpine
and  Apennine  shores  of  his  own  Liguria.  He  was  warmly
welcomed  by  the  Italians  of  the  South  American  ports,
who,  occupying  more  important  industrial  positions  than
those  of  New  York,  were  better  able  to  help  their  famous
compatriot.  At  Lima,  Pietro  Denegri  gave  him  command
of  an  old  sailing  ship  called  the  Carmen,  bound  with  a  cargo
for  China.  It  was  a  year's  voyage  there  and  back,  and  he
wished  for  nothing  better,  until  Italy  again  drew  her  sword
in  earnest.  Meanwhile,  he  would  listen  to  no  rumours  of  the
useless  revolts  which  the  Mazzinians  constantly  attempted
to  promote.  '  Many  see  Italian  risings  every  day,'  he
wrote  from  Lima  on  his  return  from  the  voyage  ; '  I  see

*  Mem.  265,  266.

VOYAGE  TO  CHINA  17

nothing  and  remain  a  sailor.'  1  In  the  life  of  the  sea  he
found  the  best  preparation  for  the  great  war,  when  at  last
it  should  come.  He  wished  that  all  the  other  exiles  would
join  him. '  A  man,'  he  said,

'  must  either  be  a  slave  or  let  himself  be  ruined,  or  live  peace-
ably in  England.  Settling  in  America  is  even  worse  :  for  in
that  case  all  is  over ;  that  is  a  land  in  which  a  man  forgets
his  native  country.  He  acquires  a  new  home  and  different
interests.  .  .  .  What  could  be  better  than  my  plan  ?  The
whole  emigration  assembled  round  a  few  masts,  and  traversing
the  ocean,  hardened  by  a  rough  sailor's  life  in  a  struggle  with
the  elements  and  danger  ;  that  would  be  a  floating  emigration,
unapproachable  and  independent,  and  ever  ready  to  land  on
any  shore.'  2

The  year's  voyage,  which  began  from  Callao  on  January
10,  1852,  was  prosperous  and  uneventful.  Garibaldi  was
happier  at  sea  than  he  would  have  been  anywhere  else,  but
there  too  he  was  pursued  by  memory,  and  by  a  fear  that  was
worse  than  memory  itself.

'  What  shall  I  say  to  you  of  my  wandering  life,  my  dear
Vecchi  ?  '  he  wrote  next  year.  '  I  thought  distance  could
diminish  the  bitterness  of  the  soul,  but  unfortunately  it  is  not
true,  and  I  have  led  a  sufficiently  unhappy  life,  agitated  and
embittered  by  memory.  Yes,  I  am  athirst  for  the  emancipa-
tion of  our  country,  and  you  may  be  sure  that  this  wretched  life
of  mine,  though  sadly  the  worse  for  wear,  would  be  again  honour-
ably dedicated  to  so  holy  a  cause.  But  the  Italians  of  to-day
think  of  the  belly,  not  of  the  soul,  and  I  am  terrified  at  the  likely
prospect  of  never  again  wielding  sword  or  musket  for  Italy.'  ^

This  worst  of  all  terrors  came  not  unnaturally  to  a  man  of
forty-six,  troubled  as  he  now  so  often  was  by  old  wounds  and
disease,  the  scars  of  his  conflict  with  man  and  nature  in  two
hemispheres  ;  the  fear  haunted  him  in  the  night  watches
on  the  broad  Pacific.  There,  too,  he  was  visited  by  a  strange
dream — of  the  women  of  Nice  bearing  his  mother  to  the

'  Ciampoli,  68,  69. Mem.  270. Guerzoni,  i.  397.

2  Rodenberg,  1.  214,  215. Athenaeum,  April  27,  1861,  568.

3  Ciampoli,  70,  omits  a  line  and  so  makes  nonsense  of  this  fine  letter,
but  see  the  real  text  in  Jack  La  Bolina,  96,

c

i8  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

grave — which,  as  he  declares,  came  to  him  on  the  very  day
when  she  died  far  off  on  the  other  side  of  the  world  of
waters. 1

Having  reached  the  China  ports,  and  done  business  for
his  employers  in  Hong  Kong  and  Canton,  he  returned  by  way
of  South  Australasia.  Passing  close  by  Tasmania,  he  put
into  one  of  the  Hunter  Islands  to  water.  It  was  a  lonely
and  beautiful  spot,  and  as  the  Italians  landed,  a  cloud  of
birds  rose  from  the  primeval  vegetation,  amid  the  murmur
of  the  clear  flowing  streams.  The  scene  chanced  to  make
on  the  mind  of  this  Ulysses,  who  had  seen  so  many  wild  and
beautiful  places  all  the  world  over,  a  profound  and  permanent
impression,  such  as  the  daffodils  "  along  the  margin  of  a
bay  '  once  made  on  Wordsworth.  Again  and  again  in  after
life,  in  moments  of  political  irritation  and  despair,  he
thought  of  the  lonely  island  with  a  sudden  joy.  His  atten-
tion and  sympathy  were  also  attracted  by  a  comfortably
fitted  house  and  other  traces  of  recent  settlement,  which
an  English  family  had  made  and  since  abandoned,  owing
to  the  death  of  their  comrade,  as  the  carving  on  a  solitary
tomb  bore  witness.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  memory
of  this  scene,  and  the  idea  of  setting  up  such  another  home
for  himself  and  his  children  on  such  another  desert  island,
helped  soon  afterwards  to  draw  Garibaldi  to  Caprera.^

Indeed,  he  was  now,  though  he  did  not  know  it,  home-
ward bound  for  Italy  by  slow  stages.  Shortly  after  his
return  to  Callao  and  Lima  in  January  1853,  he  was  sent  off
on  another  voyage,  rounded  Cape  Horn,  and  so  reached
New  York  in  the  autumn.^  Early  in  January  1854  he
sailed  for  Europe  as  captain  of  the  Commonwealth,  three
masts,  1,200  tons,  with  a  cargo  for  Newcastle,  whence  she

^  Guerzoni,  i.  398,  399  for  Garibaldi's  own  account.  Also  Basso,  his
devoted  friend  and  secretary,  who  met  him  in  New  York  and  remained
with  him  for  twenty  years,  and  who  was  with  him  on  board  the  Carmen,
told  the  Marios  of  the  extraordinary  effect  this  dream  produced  on  Gari-
baldi ; Mario,  Supp.  120. It  was  dreamt  on  March  19,  1852.

2  Mem.  272-274. Guerzoni,  i.  399,  and  Canzio  MS.

^  Canzio  MS.  Mem.  2j^,  275.  Ciampoli,  68,  69.  Cf.  Jack  La  Boltna,
95-97  for  testimony  by  Denegrl,  Garibaldi's  employer,  as  to  his  great
merits  as  captain  of  the  Carmen,

MAZZINI  IN  ENGLAND  19

was  to  carry  coals  to  Genoa.  The  crew  consisted  of  a  dozen
Italian  and  a  smaller  number  ot  English-speaking  sailors.
By  the  middle  of  February  they  were  in  London  docks,  and
Garibaldi  and  Mazzini  met  once  more.i

In  all  the  long  life  which  Mazzini  devoted  so  wholly  to
the  service  of  Italy  and  of  mankind,  there  were  only  four
months  during  which  he  found  himself  '  drest  in  a  little
brief  authority,'  and  they  ended  with  the  fall  of  the  Roman
Repubhc  in  July  1849.  The  ex-triumvir  returned  to  the
dingy  lodging  houses  of  London,  and  resumed,  until  his
death  in  1872,  the  part  which  was  his  as  by  right, — to  suffer,
to  meditate,  to  exhort,  and  for  ever  to  conspire.

In  the  summer  of  1852,  the  very  year  in  which  Garibaldi
in  mid-Pacific  had  been  troubled  by  the  dream  of  his  mother's
death  in  Nice,  Mazzini's  mother  also  died.  It  was  a  terrible
blow.  He  had  failed  in  the  ambition  of  his  '  individual
life,'  '  to  see  her  in  the  joy  of  triumph,  when  Italy  was  free.'
'  I  have  now,'  he  wrote,  *  no  mother  on  earth  except  my
country,  and  I  shall  be  true  to  her  as  my  mother  has  been
true  to  me.'  For  the  rest,  his  English  friends,  men  and
women  like  the  Ashursts,  the  Taylors,  the  Mallesons,  the
Shaens,  the  Stansfelds,  gave  him  an  untiring  devotion  and
all  the  little  that  henceforward  he  had  of  that  happiness
which  he  thought  it  man's  duty  to  despise.  The  natural
fitness  of  this  tender,  pure,  and  withal  quietly  humorous
man,  for  the  endearing  trivialities  of  home  life,  which  he  had
deliberately  foregone  at  the  call  of  a  still  higher  duty,
ensured  his  welcome  at  many  an  English  fireside,  not  only
as  a  teacher  who  raised  life  high  but  as  a  friend  who  made
it  cheerful  and  kind.^

He  had  need  of  such  an  atmosphere  to  protect  him  a
little  from  the  miseries  of  his  ever- frustrated  mission.
In  1852-53  the  conspiracy  of  Mantua  and  the  abortive  revolt
of  Milan,  followed  by  the  cruel  floggings  and  executions
with  which  the  Austrians  as  usual  avenged  themselves,  were

.*  Canzio  MS. Cihmpoli,  71. Risorg.,  anno  i.  3-4,  pp.  683-4.
^  King's  Mazzini,  144. Mazzini,  ix.  pp.  Ixv-lxxii.

20  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

laid  at  Mazzini's  door  by  the  exasperated  Liberals  of  Europe',
who  cried  out  that  the  time  for  hopeless  insurrections  on  the
principle  of  the  '  popular  initiative  '  had  now  gone  by.
The  horror  inspired  by  what  men  regarded  as  a  vain  waste
of  noble  lives  was  successfully  exploited  by  Cavour  and  the
Moderates  of  Piedmont  to  draw  over  the  youth  of  Italy
from  the  banner  of  Mazzini  and  the  Republic  to  the  banner  of
Victor  Emmanuel  and  the  monarchy.  That  this  political
concentration  was  necessary  as  the  next  step  towards
national  unity  cannot  be  doubted,  but  it  is  another  ques-
tion whether  the  Moderates  were  wholly  in  the  right  when
they  condemned  the  Mantuan  and  Milanese  movements
as  altogether  opposed  to  the  interests  of  the  cause.  As
revolutionary  movements  they  had  no  chance  of  success,
and  ought  not  to  have  been  undertaken.  But  as  the  pro-
test of  martyrs  they  had  a  great  effect  in  rendering  Austria
odious  in  England  and  in  France,  and  in  keeping  the  hatred
of  the  foreign  soldiery  hot  in  the  minds  of  the  very  men
who  cried  out  against  the  rashness  of  the  victims  and
the  criminality  of  Mazzini  as  the  supposed  instigator.i  The
workmen  who  were  hanged  from  the  red  brick  walls  of  the
magnificent  Castello  of  Milan,  in  sight  of  the  spot  where
Garibaldi's  statue  rides  to-day  ;  the  priest  and  the  band  of
gentlemen  who,  after  suffering  horrors  in  the  old  fortress
of  Mantua,  stood  at  last  under  the  gallows  outside  the  town
walls  and  gazed  undismayed  over  the  beautiful  and  melan-
choly landscape,  across  Virgil's  marsh  and  the  enslaved
plains,  to  the  heights  of  Monte  Baldo  and  the  towering  Alps
of  Verona — these  men  did  not  die  in  vain.

Indeed,  the  Government  of  Piedmont  well  knew  how  to  use
the  story  of  these  tragedies  against  Austria  no  less  than
against  Mazzini.

'  Last  night,'  wrote  Greville  ^  in  his  London  diary  for  March  i,

'  This  Is  the  opinion  of  such  a  strongly  Cavourlan  and  monarchist
historian  as  Signer  Luzio  himself,  e.g.,  Luzio,  Mazzini,  55,  56,  and  Luzio,
Belfiore,  293-294.  For  the  degree  of  Mazzini's  responsibility  for  the
Milanese  movement  see  Mazzini,  ix.  pp.  xliii-lxiii.,  De  Cristoforis,  chap.  vi.

"  Greville,  vli,  47,  48.

AUSTRIA  AND  PUBLIC  OPINION  21

1853,  '  the  Marquis  Massimo  d'Azeglio  came  here.  He  was
Prime  Minister  in  Piedmont  till  replaced  by  Count  Cavour,  and
is  come  to  join  his  nephew,  who  is  minister  here.  He  is  a  tall,
thin,  dignified  looking  man,  with  very  pleasing  manners.  He
gave  us  a  shocking  account  of  the  conduct  of  the  Austrians  at
Milan  in  consequence  of  the  recent  outbreak.  Their  tyranny
and  cruelty  have  been  more  like  the  deeds  in  the  Middle  Ages
than  those  in  our  own  time.  .  .  .  They  have  thrown  away  a
good  opportunity  of  improving  their  own  moral  status  in  Italy,
and  completely  played  the  game  of  their  enemies  by  increasing
the  national  hatred  against  them  tenfold.  If  ever  France  finds  it
her  interest  to  go  to  war,  Italy  will  be  her  mark,  for  she  will  now
find  the  whole  population  in  her  favour,  and  would  be  joined
by  Sardinia  .  .  .  nor  would  it  be  possible  for  this  country  to
support  Austria  in  a  way  to  secure  that  Italian  dominion  which
she  has  so  monstrously  abused.'

In  this  strangely  correct  prophecy,  made  by  a  man  who
was  as  far  removed  from  a  Mazzinian  as  a  typical  English-
man can  possibly  be,  we  see  the  connection  between  the
tragic  events  of  Mantua  and  Milan  in  1852-53,  and  the
battles  of  Magenta  and  Solferino  in  1859.  And  yet,  perhaps,
the  most  important  effect  of  those  events  was  to  diminish
the  prestige  of  Mazzini,  and  to  hasten  the  process  by  which
the  youth  of  Italy  withdrew  from  him  their  allegiance
and  transferred  it  to  Victor  Emmanuel,  to  Cavour  and  to
Garibaldi.

And  so  when,  in  February  1854,  the  captain  of  the
Commonwealth  landed  in  London  docks  and  went  to  find
his  old  friend  and  teacher,  Mazzini  was  in  fact  face  to  face
with  one  of  his  supplanters.  But  his  only  thought  was  at
once  to  use  him  and  all  that  his  name  was  worth  to  initiate
another  revolt.

'  Garibaldi,'  he  wrote  on  February  16,  '  is  here ;  ready  to
act.  Garibaldi's  name  is  all  powerful  among  the  Neapolitans,
since  the  Roman  affair  of  Velletri.i I  want  to  send  him  to

'  For  battle  of  Velletrl,  1849,  see  Trevelyan's  Car.  Rome,  chap.  viil.

22  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Sicily,  where  they  are  ripe  for  insurrection  and  wishing  for  him
as  a  leader.'  '

It  appears,  however,  that  Garibaldi's  '  readiness  '  to  go  to
Sicily  was  entirely  conditional  on  the  Sicilians  first  rising
themselves  and  catling  on  him  to  come  over  and  help  an
insurrection  already  afoot,'  These  were  the  conditions  on
which  he  absolutely  insisted,  both  now  and  on  every  later
occasion  when  the  scheme  was  proposed,  until  its  successful
execution  in  i860.  Indeed,  in  August  1854,  only  six  months
after  this  interview  with  Mazzini,  he  wrote  to  the  Italian
papers  to  warn  the  youth  of  his  country  against  '  rash
enterprises '  initiated  '  by  men  deceiving  and  deceived,
which  only  serve  to  ruin  or  at  least  discredit  our  cause.'  ^

But  whatever  really  passed  between  the  two  men  with
regard  to  Sicily,  the  most  significant  word  spoken  by
Garibaldi  to  Mazzini  at  this  time  in  London  was  that
related  for  us  by  an  ear-witness,  Alexander  Herzen.  It
would  not,  said  Garibaldi,  be  well  to  offend  the  Piedmontese
Government,  for  the  main  object  now  was  to  shake  off  the
Austrian  yoke,  and  he  doubted  greatly  whether  Italy  was  as
ripe  for  an  United  Republic  as  Mazzini  supposed.*

Garibaldi  spent  more  than  a  month  in  London,  making
some  close  friendships,  and  forming  those  strong  ties  of
mutual  attachment  which  ever  afterwards  bound  him  to
our  country.^

The  disinterested  affection  for  Italy  and  her  champions
that  grew  up  in  our  island  during  the  fifties  and  sixties,
left  a  mark  on  the  literary,  political,  and  social  life  of
Great  Britain.  Apart  from  the  unrivaUed  appeal  to  the
imagination  which  Italy  of  all  lands  can  make ;  apart
from  the  knowledge, then  so  prevalent among  educated

King's  Mazzini,  355  (from  the  Taylor  MSS.).

*  '  Nel  marzo  1854  Mazzini  avvertl  Fabrizi  che  Garibaldi  sarebbe
pronto  a  capitanare  una  spedizione  in  Sicilia,  se  ivi  fosse  iniziata  I'insur-
rezione  ed  egli  fosse  chiamato,'  Mario's  Mazzini,  367. King's  Mazzini,  173.

^  Ci^mpoli,  71,  72.

*  Rodenberg,  i.  214,  215. Athenaeum,  Ap.  27,  1861,  p.  568.

*  Mario  Supp.  125.

ENGLAND  AND  ITALY  23

Britons,  of  her  history,  her  hterature  ancient  and  modern,
her  art,  her  music,  her  cities  and  her  landscape  ;  apart
from  the  attractive  personal  qualities  of  her  champions,
who  captivated  the  Enghsh  as  no  other  body  of  refugees
ever  did  before  or  since,  there  were  other  special  causes
for  that  Itahan  enthusiasm  of  our  grandfathers,  which
now  began  to  be  an  important  factor  in  Garibaldi's  career.

In  the  first  place,  the  bulk  of  the  propertied  classes,
having  secured  their  position  against  a  narrow  oligarchy  by
the  Reform  Bill  of  1832,  and  being  no  longer  alarmed,  after
the  failure  of  Chartism,  by  any  serious  pressure  from  below,
could  afford  to  indulge  in  a  good  deal  of  speculative  Liberal-
ism. Social  reform  had  not  yet  become  a  leading  question,
and  Liberal  sentiment  ran  largely  into  anti-clerical  and
anti-despotic  feeling,  for  which  it  found  more  vent  upon  the
Continent  than  at  home.  Domestic  politics  were  in  an
unusually  stagnant  condition,  and  many  pubhc  spirited
men  had  therefore  ample  leisure  to  found  the  society  of
'  Friends  of  Italy  '  in  1851,  and  to  carry  on  the  work  of  its
propaganda  for  many  years  with  ever  increasing  success.
The  most  exciting  alleviation  of  the  dullness  of  Enghsh
politics  was  the  '  no-Popery  '  cry,  which,  how^ever  futile
and  misdirected  as  an  influence  on  our  home  affairs,  led  a
large  section  of  the  religious  world,  not  usually  very  prone
to  revolutionary  sympathies,  to  take  a  generous  interest
in  the  cause  of  freedom  in  Italy.  Lord  Shaftesbury  himself
lived  to  be  one  of  Garibaldi's  ardent  admirers.  The  fact
that  the  Irish  w^ere  on  the  side  of  the  Pope,  and  occasionally
disturbed  the  pro-Italian  meetings,  dispelled  the  last  doubts
of  the  average  Englishman  as  to  the  propriety  of  the
movement.

Furthermore,  when  the  revolutionary  governments  of  1848
were  replaced  in  one  country  after  another  by  absolutism
and  military  rule,  it  was  very  natural  that  we  should  begin
to  pride  ourselves  on  the  unique  position  occupied  by  Britain
as  the  only  free  country  among  the  great  powers  of  Europe.
We  were  to  the  whole  Continent  what  Piedmont  was  to
Italy. Because  we  harboured  the  exiles,  and  held  up  in

24  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

that  night  of  time  the  beacon  hght  of  an  ordered  freedom,
we  were  hated  whole-heartedly  at  St.  Petersburg,  Vienna,
Berlin,  Naples  and  Rome,  and  half-heartedly  and  with
secret  envy  by  the  would-be  Liberal  who  sat  discontented
in  the  Tuileries  under  the  protection  of  priests  and  bayonets.^
We  were  soon  made  aware  of  this  ill  feeling  and  its  cause.
Our  national  pride  thereupon  took  fire  for  freedom,  and
under  Palmerston's  spirited  lead  those  forces  and  passions
which  in  a  later  generation  were  termed  '  Jingo,'  were
enhsted  on  behalf  of  Continental  Liberahsm.  When  the
Austrian  General  Haynau  unwisely  came  over  to  England
in  1850,  a  personal  assault  was  made  upon  him  in  Barclay's
brewery  on  the  ground  of  his  barbarity  to  women  and  to
better  men  than  himself,  and  it  is  noticeable  that  not
only  Punch,  but  the  Foreign  Secretary,  Lord  Palmerston,
applauded  the  draymen's  undiplomatic  zeal.^  The  Crimean
war  was  regarded  by  many  as  an  attack  upon  the  arch-despot
who  had  aided  Austria  in  1849.  Not  only  the  Daily  News
and  the  Liberal  press  proper,  but  Palmerston's  organ,  the
Morning  Post,  were  strongly  pro-Italian.  The  Times  indeed
remained  Austrian  until  well  on  in  the  year  1859,  when  it
became  evident  that  the  Italian  cause  might  not  improbably
succeed.

While  many  of  the  propertied  classes  were  thus  growing
hostile  to  the  Italian  tyrannies,  the  only  part  of  the  working
class  which  then  had  any  political  consciousness  was  deeply
sympathetic  with  Mazzini  and  Garibaldi  as  the  champions
of  European  democracy.^  This  feeUng  was  specially  strong
on  Tyneside,  whence  Joe  Co  wen  sent  out  Mazzini' s  pro-
scribed literature  to  Italy  concealed  in  the  famous  bricks
which  he  manufactured  at  Blaydon.  He  brought  down
distinguished  exiles  to  instruct  industrial  Northumberland.
Here  Father  Gavazzi^  lectured  to  audiences  wholly  un-
famihar  with  the  Italian  tongue,  who  sat  enchanted  by  his
Demosthenic  gestures  and  delivery  in  a  style  unknown  in

•  Greville,  vii.  49-52.  ^  Ashley's  Palmerston,  i.  240,
^  Holyoake,  i.  210,  211.

*  For  Father  Gavazzi,  see  Trevelyan's  Gar.  Rome.  76,  77,

GARIBALDI  AT  NEWCASTLE  25

Northern  Europe,  and  applauded  loudly  when  he  was  under-
stood to  be  saying  something  against  the  Pope,  or  when  they
caught  the  words  '  Mazzini '  or  '  Garibaldi.'  When,  there-
fore, the  men  of  Newcastle  learnt  that  Garibaldi  was  coming
in  his  ship  to  fetch  away  a  cargo  of  their  coals,  they  bought
him  a  sword  of  honour,  and  since,  according  to  his  custom  at
this  period,  he  declined  to  attend  a  pubhc  reception  in  the
town,  they  sent  a  deputation  on  board  the  Commonwealth
to  present  it  to  him  as  he  stood  among  his  little  crew.  The
miners  tramping  about  the  deck  in  heavy  hob-nailed  boots
amused  the  Italian  sailors.

'  The  sword,'  said  Cowen  in  presenting  it,  '  is  purchased
by  the  pennies  of  some  hundreds  of  working  men,  contributed
not  only  voluntarily  but  with  enthusiasm,  and  each  penny
represents  a  heart  which  beats  true  to  European  freedom.'

Garibaldi  repHed  in  a  carefully  prepared  English  speech: —

'  One  of  the  people — a  workman  like  yourselves — I  value
very  highly  these  expressions  of  your  esteem,  the  more  so  because
you  testify  thereby  your  sympathy  with  my  poor,  oppressed
and  down-trodden  country.  .  .  .  Italy  will  one  day  be  a  nation,
and  its  free  citizens  will  know  how  to  acknowledge  all  the  kind-
ness shown  her  exiled  sons  in  the  days  of  her  darkest  troubles.'  1

It  is  doubtful  whether  this  brotherly  reception  of  the  pro-
scribed champion  of  a  ruined  cause  and  an  enslaved  country
by  the  working  men  of  Tyneside  and  their  middle-class
leaders  is  not  as  much  to  the  credit  of  England  as  the  por-
tentous uprising  of  the  whole  nation  to  welcome  the  same
man  in  1864,  as  the  world-renowned  liberator  of  Sicily  and
Naples.

I  Cowen,  8-16.  Risorg.,  anno  i.  3-4,  p.  685.  There  is  an  oil  portrait
of  Garibaldi  taken  on  board  the  Commonwealth  during  this  visit ;  it  is
now  in  the  Free  Library,  North  Shields.  Mr.  Herbert  Craig  has  kindly
sent  me  a  photograph  of  it.  It  represents  him  in  a  frock  coat  buttoned
up  to  the  neck,  such  as  he  wears  in  the  frontispiece  to  this  book.  For
the  facts  here  narrated  about  Tyneside,  I  rely  on  letters  and  oral  informa-
tion from  Dr.  Spence  Watson,  Sir  J.  Wilson  Swan,  Mrs.  Boyce,  and
others.

CHAPTER II

CAVOUR AND THE CONVALESCENCE OF ITALY. — GARIBALDI

AT CAPRERA

Italy,  what  of  the  night  ?  —

Ah,  child,  child,  it  is  long  !

Moonbeam  and  starbeam  and  song
Leave  it  dumb  now  and  darls.
Yet  I  perceive  on  the  height

Eastward,  not  now  very  far,
A  song  too  loud  for  the  lark,

A  light  too  strong  for  a  star.

Swinburne. — Songs  before  Sunrise  :
A  watch  in  the  night.

In  the  spring  of  1854  Garibaldi  returned  to  Italy  and
settled  down  to  live  at  Nice,  apparently  without  any  com-
munication with  the  Government  of  Piedmont.  The  fear
of  Austria  lay  less  heavy  on  the  land  than  five  years
before,  when  it  had  been  judged  dangerous  to  harbour  the
revolutionary  chief.  In  those  evil  days,  after  an  obscurantist
regime  lasting  for  a  whole  generation  (1815-48)  followed
by  a  brief  period  of  sudden  change  at  home  and  ill-
conducted  and  disastrous  war  on  the  frontiers,  the  ship  of
State  had  almost  foundered.  Destitute  of  many  of  the
accessories  of  modern  life,  with  ruined  finances  and  an
ill-organised  and  defeated  army,  threatened  by  a  reactionary
priesthood  on  the  one  side,  and  an  excitable  and  not  too
loyal  democratic  party  on  the  other,  the  Liberal  monarchy
had  just  escaped  destruction,  thanks  to  the  character  of  the
young  King  Victor  Emmanuel  and  the  services  first  of
the  honest  D'Azeglio,  and  then  of  the  great  Cavour.i This

1  The  best  brief  life  of  Cavour  is  that  by  Countess  Martinengo
Cesaresco  in  the  Foreign  Statesmen  Series  (Macmillan).  There  is  not  yet  an
authoritative  biography,  nor  have  all  his  papers  yet  seen  the  light,  though
the  collection  in  Chiala  is  most  valuable.  De  la  Rive's  life  is  that  of  a
close  friend  and  acute  contemporary  observer.

26

CAVOUR.

(From  a  contemporary  print  in  Bianchi's  Cavotir.'i

CAVOUR  27

marvellous  man,  hated  alike  by  Democrats  and  Reaction-
aries, and  disliked  personally  by  the  king,  had  imposed
himself  on  king  and  country,  by  astute  Parhamentary
manoeuvres  and  aUiances,  and  by  the  display  of  a
genius  for  government  which  both  king  and  country  had
the  sense  to  value  at  its  incalculable  worth.  Like  our  own
WiUiam  III  in  his  superiority  to  the  men  and  parties  who
disliked  him,  but  could  not  do  without  him,  he  too  was  not
invariably  scrupulous  in  the  means  by  which  he  baffled
the  yet  more  unscrupulous  champions  of  clerical  and
despotic  predominance  in  Europe.

Cavour  had  trained  himself— for  no  one  was  his  teacher—
in  what  was  then  the  British  school  of  politics.  Passionate
Itahan  as  he  was,  his  political  and  economic  ideas  were
based  on  acute  observations  made  in  England,  and  on  a
close  study  of  the  work  of  Grey  and  Peel.  Beheving  in
civil  and  rehgious  freedom  to  a  degree  unusual  among
Continental  statesmen  of  any  party,  he  regarded  freely
elected  ParUaments  as  the  essential  organ  of  government,
and  force  as  no  remedy,  except  to  expel  the  stranger  and  the
despot.  Any  fool,  he  said,  could  govern  by  martial  law.
According  to  him,  it  was  the  business  of  a  statesman  to
govern  by  Parliament,  not  indeed  obeying  every  behest  of
ignorant  partisans  and  corrupt  interests,  but  persuading  the
country  and  the  Chamber  to  take  the  right  course,  by  weight
of  the  authority  due  to  wisdom,  knowledge  and  experience.
This  ideal,  seldom  realised  in  any  country,  was  the  actual
method  by  which  Cavour  governed  Piedmont  in  the  fifties.
If  he  had  hved  to  govern  all  Italy  in  the  same  manner  during
the  sixties  and  seventies,  the  country  which  he  created
would  have  avoided  many  misfortunes  besides  those  oi
Custoza,  Lissa,  and  Mentana.  And  if  then  the  example  oi
Cavour  had  been  preferred  to  that  of  Bismarck  as  the  model
for  the  patriots  and  statesmen  of  modern  Europe,  the  whole
world  would  now  be  a  better  place  than  it  is.

Garibaldi,  having  settled  down  to  live  under  the  govern-
ment of  this  man,  soon  became  aware  of  the  stir  of  new
hopes  and  energies  in  the  changed  country  to  which  he  had

28  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

returned.  The  life  of  Piedmont  was,  during  this  decade,
enriched  by  many  thousands  of  exiles  from  the  other  States
of  Italy,  the  very  pick  of  the  land  which  they  were  all
sworn  to  make  into  a  nation.  As  soldiers,  statesmen,  jour-
nalists, business  men,  they  served  Piedmont  as  the  microcosm
of  the  Italy  to  be.  One  section  of  these  exiles,  still  clinging
to  the  Republican  faith,  and  only  half  pleased  with  the
Government  that  sheltered  them,  was  for  ever  striving  to
stir  up  Mazzinian  revolts  in  different  parts  of  the  peninsula.
But  the  other  section,  enthusiastic  supporters  of  Cavour,
ready  to  wait  for  his  initiative,  and  unwilling  to  compromise
his  deep-laid  plans  by  any  rashness  on  their  part,  had
accepted  the  monarchy  as  the  only  way  to  national  unity  and
independence.  This  party  was  increasing  its  numbers  by
conversion  from  the  Republicans,  and  to  this  party  Garibaldi
attached  himself.

When  he  first  returned  to  Italy  the  two  questions  of  the
day  in  Piedmont  were  the  suppression  of  the  monasteries,
and  the  participation  of  the  country  in  the  Crimean  war,
both  of  which  he  strongly  approved.  The  first  was  naturally
popular  with  the  Liberal  ^  parties  of  almost  every  shade,
though  fiercely  contested  by  the  influence  of  the  priests  and
reactionaries,  still  very  strong  among  the  peasantry  especi-
ally of  the  Savoyard  mountains.  The  Crimean  expedition,
on  the  other  hand,  had  few  hearty  supporters.  It  was
generally  regarded  as  a  folly  of  Cavour's,  a  waste  of  those
slender  resources  of  Piedmont  which  ought  to  be  carefully
husbanded  for  the  coming  struggle  with  Austria.  But
Garibaldi  was  from  the  first  almost  as  much  delighted  by
the  expedition  to  the  Crimea  as  by  the  suppression  of  the
monasteries.  The  suppression  was  the  first  thing  that  gave
him  confidence  in  Cavour. Of  the  expedition  he  said,  that

'  Italy  should  lose  no  opportunity  to  unfurl  the  Italian  flag

'  I  take  this  opportunity  of  explaining  my  use  of  the  word  '  Liberal '
in  this  book.  I  use  it  in  the  sense  In  which  it  was  used  in  the  Italy  of
that  day,  to  cover  all  the  parties,  Republican  or  Monarchist,  Federalist
or  Unitarian,  who  desired  to  see  changes  in  the  various  Italian  States  in
the  direction  of  liberty  from  autocratic  government.

GARIBALDI'S  RETURN  TO  PIEDMONT 29

on  any  battle-field  that  should  recall  to  the  remembrance  of
European  nations  the  fact  of  her  political  existence.' 1

Probably  he  did  not  understand  the  further  and  more  definite
object  of  Cavour,  which  was  to  prepare  the  way  for  an
aUiance  with  Napoleon  III,  or  with  England,  or  with  both,
against  the  Austrian  power  in  Italy.

But  however  much  Garibaldi  approved  of  the  war,
he  could  take  no  part  in  it,  for  the  French  would
have  considered  his  presence  at  the  front  in  any  capacity
as  an  insult  to  themselves.  The  17,000  Italians  whom
General  La  Marmora  led  to  the  Crimea  had  to  wait  long
for  an  opportunity  of  proving  to  Europe  anything  to  the
advantage  of  their  country,  except  that  their  commissariat
was  better  organised  than  that  of  their  British  allies.  At
length,  in  August  1855,  they  were  taken  into  battle  on  the
banks  of  the  Tchernaya,  and  behaved  well.  At  the  news
of  the  battle,  public  opinion  in  Italy  caught  fire,  and  Cavour's
Crimean  policy  was  at  length  endorsed  by  the  nation.

Garibaldi,  meanwhile,  used  the  immense  weight  of  his
influence  with  the  Democratic  party  to  discourage  prema-
ture movements  of  insurrection,  by  a  strongly  worded
letter  to  the  papers. 2  This  was  the  more  creditable  on  his
part  because  he  himself  had  the  best  of  all  reasons  to  be
impatient  : —

'  I  do  not  enjoy  good  health,'  he  wrote  to  his  old  friend
Cuneo,  in  January  1855,  '  and  I  wish  I  might  use  what  is  left
of  me  on  behalf  of  my  country  before  I  am  quite  broken  up.'  ^

Meanwhile  he  did  his  best  to  keep  himself  in  training.
Rising  at  dawn,  he  roamed  the  mountains  behind  Nice  for
four  hours  every  morning,  with  his  now  inseparable  friend
and  secretary  Basso,  in  pursuit  of  partridges.  The  middle
of  the  day  he  spent  in  teaching  his  younger  boy  to  write,
tracing  out  the  large  letters  in  pencil  with  his  own  hand  for

1  Mario  Supp.  132-134.  Mario,  210.  Jessie  White  (Mario)  saw
much  of  Garibaldi  at  Nice  during  this  period.

2  Ciampoli,  71,  72,  letter  to  Italia  del  Popolo,  August  4,  1854.
8  Ciampoli,  72.

30  GARIBALDI AND  THE THOUSAND

Ricciotti  to  cover  them  over  in  ink,  and  in  visiting  his
daughter  Teresita,  who  had  been  adopted  by  his  friends  the
Deideris.  The  evenings  he  spent  at  a  house  rented  by  an
Enghsh  widow  lady  to  whom  he  was  for  a  time  engaged.^
He  appeared  to  Jessie  White,  one  of  our  countrywomen
who  was  of  the  party,  as  '  a  quiet,  thoughtful,  unpretending
gentleman,'  very  ready  to  make  friends,  but  subject  to
childish  gusts  of  anger  that  passed  away  often  with  laughter,
and  always  without  bitterness,  as  when  the  ladies  mimicked
the  peculiarities  of  his  speech,  or  failed  to  learn  to  shoot
against  the  coming  of  the  holy  war,  or  praised  Mazzini  as
the  first  man  of  the  age.  This  was  when  he  was  ashore ;
but  he  often  went  on  short  cruises  in  command  of  the  screw
steamer  Salvatore  to  Marseilles,  Civitavecchia,  and  else-
where, taking  his  elder  son  Menotti  as  cabin  boy.^

In  the  autumn  of  1855  his  brother  Felice  died,  leaving
him  an  inheritance  of  1,400/.  (35,000  lire)  which,  together
with  a  smaller  sum  saved  out  of  his  own  earnings  as  a  sea-
captain,  placed  him  in  a  position  to  alter  his  mode  of  life.
Short  of  another  war  of  liberation,  the  thing  he  most  desired
was,  as  he  told  his  friends,  to  end  his  days  far  from  the
world,  in  communion  with  the  grand  solitudes  of  nature.
He  remembered  the  rocky  coast  and  islands  of  northern
Sardinia,  and  in  December  1855  he  sailed  for  that  region,
intending,  as  he  wrote,

'  to  traverse  the  Gallura,  where  I  think  it  will  be  possible
to  choose  a  place  on  which  to  make  a  settlement,  to  pass
some  of  the  spring  months  there  or  perhaps  to  stay  there
permanently  if  I  find  a  suitable  place.'

The  point  in  the  Gallura  which  he  had  in  view  was  the
Capo  Testa  (Santa  Teresa  di  Gallura),  a  headland  on  the
coast  of  Sardinia  running  out  into  the  Straits  of  Bonifacio.
But  when  he  touched  at  the  Island  of  Maddalena,  where
he  had  spent  a  month  in  1849,^  some  old  naval  friends  of

'  Mario  Supp.  125. Mario  Vita,  i.  143-145,  148.

^  Mario  Supp.  132. Mario  Vita,  i.  143-145. Jack  La  Bolina,  98-101,

'  See  p.  12  above.

CAPRERA  31

his  in  that  port,  particularly  the  Susini  family,  anxious  to
have  him  yet  nearer  to  themselves,  warned  him  that  if
he  settled  on  the  solitary  Capo  Testa  he  might  easily  be
carried  off  or  murdered  by  an  expedition  fitted  out  in
French  Corsica.  It  was  not  easy  to  frighten  Garibaldi,
but  he  believed  Napoleon,  '  the  man  of  December,'  capable
of  any  crime,  and  perhaps  also  he  saw  greater  convenience
as  well  as  safety  in  a  closer  neighbourhood  to  Maddalena.
Before  the  end  of  the  month  he  had  agreed  to  buy  the
northern  half  of  the  island  of  Caprera  for  about  £360.^

His  new  home  was  indeed  admirably  suited  to  all  his
purposes,  and  to  the  purposes  of  Italy  in  him.  Stationed
within  an  hour's  row  of  the  httle  port  of  Maddalena,  where
the  ships  of  the  Piedmontese  navy  often  touched,^  '  the
hermit  of  Caprera '  was  never  in  the  way  and  never  out  of
the  way  from  the  point  of  view  of  Victor  Emmanuel's
Government.  He  could  be  fetched  off  the  island  at  two
days'  notice  if  his  sword  was  wanted.  If  peace  was  made
and  he  was  angry,  he  could  retire  there  and  work  off  his
feelings  in  piling  up  the  granite  rocks  into  rough  walls,
or  taking  what  he  called  his  '  spade  bath.' '  Safely  back
on  Caprera,  he  was  less  in  the  mood  to  listen  to  politicians
and  makebates,  nor  did  they  find  it  easy  to  follow  him  to
his  lair,  since  the  ordinary  steamers  crossed  from  Genoa
to  Maddalena  only  once  in  a  month. ^  Thus  he  preserved
his  dignity  by  a  picturesque  seclusion,  and  his  vigour  by
a  healthy  and  hardy  existence.  In  the  great  years  1859  and
i860  Caprera  proved,  as  we  shaU  see  in  the  course  of  this

'  Falconi,  24-31.  Mario,  Vita,  i.  144.  L'Isola,  32,  33.  Guerzoni,
i.  401.  Canzio  MS.,  Convenzione  passata  tra  me  ed  i  propfietari  della
Caprera  il  29  December  1855.

^  Maddalena  had  been  the  scene  of  young  Bonaparte's  first  defeat  in
1792.  Later,  it  was  a  favourite  haunt  of  Nelson,  who  saw  in  it  a  future
naval  base,  and  coveted  it  as  such  for  Britain.  In  recent  times  it  has
been  put  to  that  use  by  the  Italian  Government,  and  already  when
Garibaldi  came  to  Caprera  it  was  inhabited  by  a  seafaring  population,
who  supplied  the  Piedmontese  navy  with  men  and  officers.  Mahan's
Nelson,  Index. O.  Browning's  Boyhood  and  Youth  of  Napoleon,  199-202.

*  '  Bagno  della  zappa.' Cidmpoli,  83.

*  Melena,  21  note. Melena,  1 861,  p.  189.

32  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

book,  an  institution  of  no  small  value  to  Italy.  And  even
after  i860,  when  during  the  last  twenty  years  of  his  life  he
regarded  himself  overmuch  as  a  privileged  being,  endowed
with  the  right  of  levying  war  on  his  own  account,  Caprera
saved  him  from  making  more  numerous  and  worse  mistakes.
The  island,  which  is  roughly  five  miles  in  length  and
fifteen  in  circumference,  appears  to-day  almost  ^  exactly
as  Garibaldi  left  it,  that  is  to  say  very  much  what  it  has
been  from  the  beginning  of  time.  And  so  long  as  the  State,
whose  property  it  now  is,  preserves  it  free  from  the  pro-
fanation alike  of  modern  improvements  and  of  national
monuments,  it  will,  in  the  rugged  grandeur  of  its  scenery,
and  in  its  untouched  record  of  what  has  been,  remain  in
itself  the  noblest  of  all  monuments  of  the  Italian  Risorgimento.
From  on  board  ships  working  southward  along  the  coast
of  Corsica  from  Genoa  and  Leghorn,  or  eastward  through
the  Straits  of  Bonifacio,  Caprera  and  its  white  house  are
seen  from  a  considerable  distance  out  to  sea.  From  the
base  of  the  rock  precipice  that  crests  the  top  of  the  island,
the  ground  on  the  western  side  inclines  somewhat  less  steeply
to  the  shore,  and  there,  shining  white  on  the  moorside,  a
quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  water's  edge,  appears  the  long
flat  roofed  house  of  one  storey,  built  by  the  labour  of  Gari-
baldi and  his  friends.  It  is  the  only  object  that  catches
the  eye,  amid  the  grey  rocks  and  dark  green  plants  that
share  the  island  between  them.  Caprera  is  still,  and  may
it  for  ever  remain,  a  desert  moorland,  only  to  be  traversed
on  foot  by  pushing  through  the  odoriferous  brushwood
and  leaping  or  climbing  from  one  granite  crag  to  another.
Every  cranny  in  the  rock  where  earth  has  lodged,  every
space  between  the  tumbled  boulders,  is  the  cradle  of  wild
vegetation — orchid,  lavender,  red  saxifrage,  the  stately
asphodel,  the  spurge  with  its  yellow  flower,  the  tamarisk
and  the  evergreen  lentisk  with  its  smooth  leaves.  But
more  than  all  else  the  cistus,  raising  its  white  rock-rose  to
the  traveller's  knee,  dehghtfully  impedes  his  progress  over

^  There  is  now  a  long  bridge  joining  Caprera  to  the  nearest  point  of  the
island  of  Maddalena. A  road  has  also  been  made  on  Caprera.

GARIBALDI AT CAPRERA.
(From  an  engraving  in  the  British  Museum.'

CAPRERA  33

the  greater  part  of  the  island.  Only  here  and  there  are
miniature  lawns  of  grass,  breaking  the  thickness  of  the  jungle.
The  trees  are  few,  stunted  and  hidden  among  the  rocks.
Indeed,  swept  as  it  is  by  a  peculiarly  fierce  and  persistent
wind,  Caprera  has  in  it  more  than  a  touch  of  the  feeling
of  our  northern  landscape.  Even  on  a  fine  day,  when  the
wind  has  dropped  a  little,  when  the  sun  brings  out  the
odours  of  all  the  aromatic  plants  together,  and  the  fraction
of  Mediterranean  waters  enclosed  by  the  little  archipelago
swells  gently  in  its  granite  basin — even  then,  if  cistus  and
lentisk  could  be  changed  into  purple  heath,  the  scene  would
pass  for  one  of  those  inlets  on  the  western  coast  of  Scotland,
where,  amid  shelving  moorland  and  jagged  heaps  of  rock

'  The  great  sea- water  finds  its  way,'

Such  an  island  is  not  altogether  characteristic  of  Italy,  but
it  is  altogether  characteristic  of  Garibaldi. i

When,  in  the  spring  of  1856,  Garibaldi  came  to  occupy
his  newly-purchased  property,  he  was  not  quite  the  only
inhabitant  of  Caprera.  During  the  period  of  the  Marl-
borough wars,  a  bandit  named  Ferraciolo,  pursued  by  justice,
took  refuge  with  his  wife  and  child  on  the  island,  which  they
found  completely  deserted,  though  there  are  traces  of  habi-
tation in  Roman  or  pre-Roman  times.  For  a  hundred  and
fifty  years,  generation  after  generation  of  this  wild  man's
descendants  perpetuated  their  race  on  this  lonely  spot,
living  as  goat-herds  and  smugglers  in  the  hut  which  their
ancestor  had  built  of  stones  and  mud.  In  Garibaldi's  time
the  Ferraciolo  of  the  day  still  continued  to  dwell  there
with  his  family,  on  excellent  terms  with  the  new-comer.
Half  a  dozen  other  herdsmen  kept  their  goats  on  Caprera,
one  or  two  housing  there  themselves  in  huts  or  in  natural
grottoes,  others  on  Maddalena.  Not  many  years  before
Garibaldi's  arrival,  an  eccentric  and  ill-conditioned  English-
man named  Collins,  together  with  his  rich  wife  whose
attachment  to  him  was  considered  at  once  romantic,
touching and inexplicable, had bought a  large part of

1  See  Appendix  A,  '  Caprera,'  i.,  below,

D

34  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Caprera  from  the  Piedmontese  Government,  and  built  a
house  upon  it,  though  they  lived  chiefly  in  Maddalena.
After  Garibaldi  had  bought  from  them  and  from  the
Ferracioli  the  northern  and  more  mountainous  half  of
Caprera,  his  relations  with  Mr.  Collins  became  strained.
The  Enghshman's  goats  and  pigs,  wandering  loose
as  of  old  through  the  brushwood,  soon  found  out  the
general's  potato  and  cabbage  patch  ;  the  cows  of  the  new
settler  retaliated,  and  international  complications  ensued.
Bjiit  Garibaldi  solved  the  problem  by  turning  out  with  his
friends,  and  building  a  rough  stone  wall  right  across  the
island  from  west  to  east,  along  the  border  of  his  property.
About  1859  Mr.  Colhns  died,  and  his  faithful  but  more
sociable  widow  made  friends  with  the  Itahan  colony.  In
1864  a  nimiber  of  Garibaldi's  wealthy  admirers  in  England
purchased  the  southern  half  of  the  island  from  Mrs.  Collins,
and  presented  it  to  the  hero  of  their  choice.  But  the
visitor  struggling  through  the  brushwood  of  Caprera  still
comes  unexpectedly  upon  the  now  useless  wall  half  hidden
by  the  tall  vegetation. 1

Wall  building  and  house  building  were  indeed  the  chief
occupations  of  Garibaldi's  early  years  on  the  island.  His
first  habitation,  in  1856,  was  a  tent,  which  the  winds  often
carried  away  at  night.  He  and  his  stalwart  son  Menotti
lived  under  canvas  until  they  had  run  up  the  still  existing
wooden  pent-house  in  which  to  receive  his  daughter  Teresita.
From  that  new  base  of  operations  they  then  proceeded,
with  the  help  of  Basso  and  some  other  friends,  to  build  the
pretty,  flat-roofed  mansion  in  the  style  of  the  architecture
of  Montevideo.  The  first  part  of  it  was  habitable,  after  a
fashion,  by  the  end  of  1857,  but  a  second  part  was  after-
wards added.  This  second  portion,  finished  in  1861,  had
an  ill-fated  upper  story,  which  was  taken  down  again  five
years  later  because  it  was  not  sufficiently  solid  to  resist  the
winds  of  Caprera.3

1  Conv.  Canzio  and  Canzio  MS.  LMsola,  37-41.  Caqnoni,  81,  89,  92.
Melena,  i86i,p.  234. Vecclii,  16,  25-28. SaccM's  Visit,  13. Mistrali's  Pell.

2  See  Appendix  A.,  '  Caprera,'  ii.,  below.

CAPRERA  35

Garibaldi  was  the  first  to  attempt  the  cultivation  of  the
island  soil  on  any  extensive  scale.  But  even  his  cornfield,
olive  yard,  and  potato  patch,  picked  out  from  among  the
stones,  was  the  land  of  a  crofter  rather  than  of  a  farmer.
He  was  first  and  foremost  a  shepherd  and  goat-herd,  rearing
a  particularly  fine  breed  of  goats,  which  he  imported  from
Malta  to  run  loose  among  the  rocks.  The  cows  were  each
known  by  name,  and  were  most  tenderly  treated.

'  He  is  as  kind,'  wrote  Vecchi,  '  to  the  brute  creation  as  to
man,  and  is  so  pained  to  see  an  animal  struck  that  he  never
permits  it  in  his  presence.  He  takes  a  special  delight  in  planting
and  cultivating  useful  vegetables,  and  is  highly  displeased  if  a
plant  be  trodden  on,  or  pulled  up  by  mistake. '  i

Garibaldi  himself,  in  a  curiously  emotional  description
of  his  own  gardening  operations  in  Caprera,  exclaims  :

'  The  soul  of  the  poor  plants  was  in  communion  with  mine,
as  I  know  when,  thrown  back  into  this  sea  of  misery,  far  away
from  them,  I  turn  my  thoughts  back  to  them,  and  feel  myself
cheered  and  exalted.'

He  himself,  the  plants,  and  the  butterfly  that  flits  around
them,  are  alike  '  part  of  the  soul  of  the  universe,  part  of  the
infinite,  part  of  God.'  This  thought,  he  tells  us,  '  raises
him  above  miserable  materialism.'  2

The  frugally  furnished  little  house  was  often  overflowing
with  guests,  who  gladly  took  part  in  the  gardening,  building
and  herding  occupations  of  the  day.

'  Here  is  liberty  in  all  things,'  writes  Vecchi  in  1861,  *  even
to  the  cellar,  although  the  General  drinks  nothing  but  water ;  .  .  .
for  supper  he  has  new  milk.  For  the  rest  there  are  salted  viands,
with  coffee,  tea  and  milk  at  discretion.  He  helps  his  neighbours,
beginning  with  the  women,  and  invites  his  distant  guests  to  take
care  of  themselves.  When  he  speaks  to  his  daughter,  he  says
"  Teresa  "  in  such  a  soft  voice  that  it  is  impossible  to  imitate  it.
If  he  is  in  good  spirits,  he  lights  his  cigar,  and — excited  by  some
name  or  deed  which  I  allude  to  on  purpose — he  narrates,  modestly

'  Vecchi,  8,  II. Helena,  24,  ^  CiUmpoli,  935,  936,

D 2

36  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

of  himself,  but  with  full  meed  of  praise  for  others,  the  great  feats
of  arms  in  America,  or  particulars  of  the  more  recent  events  in
Lombardy,  Sicily,  and  Naples.  ...  If  he  is  oppressed  by
gloomy  thoughts,  he  rises  immediately  from  table,  and  walks
out ;  for  he  constantly  suffers  from  the  feeling  of  desolation,
repeopling  in  thought  the  battlefield  with  fallen  friends,  and
those  who  died  for  the  noble  cause  for  which  he  has  ever  drawn
his  sword.' 1

One  evening,  as  Vecchi  narrates,  the  party  in  the  house
heard  that  a  new-born  lamb  had  been  lost  among  the  rocks.
Long  searches  by  lantern-light,  guided  by  Garibaldi  over  the
crags  and  through  the  brushwood,  failed  of  success,  both
before  and  after  supper.

'  It  was  nine  o'clock  and  raining,  and  we  were  very  tired,  so
we  once  more  returned  to  the  house,  and  went  to  bed.  An
hour  afterwards  we  heard  the  sound  of  footsteps  in  the  next
room,  and  the  house-door  opened.  .  .  .  About  midnight  we
were  roused  by  a  voice  :  it  was  the  hero  returning,  joyfully
carrying  the  lost  lamb  in  his  arms.  He  took  the  little  creature
to  his  bed,  and  lay  down  with  it,  giving  it  a  bit  of  sponge  dipped
in  milk  to  suck  to  keep  it  quiet,  .  .  .  and  he  spent  the  whole
night  caressing  and  feeding  the  foolish  creature.  ...  At  five
in  the  morning  we  found  him  planting  potatoes  in  the  garden.
We  took  our  spades  and  began  to  work  also.'  ^

The  qualities  which  endeared  him  to  the  simple  souls
who  lived  in  his  house  on  Caprera  similarly  won  the  hearts
of  the  most  critical  and  experienced  judges  of  men  in  Italy
and  England.  The  fond  simplicity  of  a  child,  the  sensitive,
tender  humanity  of  a  woman,  the  steady  valour  of  a  soldier,
the  good-heartedness  and  hardihood  of  a  sailor,  the  imposing
majesty  of  a  king  like  Charlemagne,  the  brotherliness  and
universal  sympathy  of  a  democrat  like  Walt  Whitman,  the
spiritual  depth  and  fire  of  a  poet,  and  an  Olympian  calm
that  was  personal  to  himself— all  plainly  marked  in  his  port
and  presence,  his  voice  and  his  eyes — made  him,  not  the
greatest,  but  the  unique  figure  of  the  age.  That  this
rare  creature  had  no  head  for  administration  or '  politics

*  Vecchi,  8,  g.  ^  Vecchi,  44,  45.

CAPRERA  37

need  cause  no  surprise.  That  he  had  an  instinctive  genius
for  guerilla  war  was  a  singular  piece  of  good  fortune.  Such
another  nature  will  never  be  bred  in  cities  or  by  the  typical
life  of  modern  times.  It  had  been  nurtured  in  the  solitudes
of  the  sea  and  of  the  Pampas,  and  was  preserved  intact  by
the  life  of  Caprera.  '  He  loves  solitude/  wrote  Vecchi,
'  and  the  sea,  itself  a  solitude,  conducive  to  dreams  and
deep  emotions.'  ^  He  used  often  to  climb  alone  on  to  the
rocky  crest  that  crowns  Caprera,  and  thence  cast  his  eye
on  all  sides  over  sea  and  mountain  and  moor  :  to  the  north,
across  the  strait,  he  beheld  the  magnificent  peaks  of  Corsica  ;
to  the  south,  some  of  the  lower  Sardinian  hills  ;  to  the
west,  close  below  him,  the  group  of  uncultivated  and  rocky
islands,  and  the  lodge  that  he  had  built  for  himself  in  that
wilderness.  But  to  the  east,  where  the  granite  crags
sloped  down  from  under  his  feet  so  ruggedly  and  steeply  to
the  sea,  that  its  murmur  round  their  base  was,  even  on  calm
days,  audible  on  the  summit,  no  attempt  at  human  habita-
tion had  been  made ;  only  the  wild  plants  clung  and  trailed
round  the  rocks,  the  eagle  cried  above  his  head,  and  the
deep  primeval  quiet,  undisturbed  by  man  since  the  begin-
ning of  time,  filled  him  here  with  the  breath  of  liberty,
the  utter  release  from  crowds  and  courts  and  officials  and
the  whole  scheme  of  modern  life,  to  which  he  was  always
in  mind  and  heart  a  stranger ;  and  this  liberty  would  have
sufiEiced  him  to  the  end  of  his  days  as  he  gazed  over  the
unbroken  surface  of  the  sea,  had  he  not  in  his  mind's  eye
seen  beyond  the  eastern  horizon  those  still  enslaved  Italian
shores. 3

^  Vecchi,  7,  "  Appendix  A,  '  Caprera,'  belcw.

CHAPTER  III

THE NEAPOLITAN PRISONERS

O  miseri,  o  codardl
Figliuoli  avral,  miseri  eleggl.

Leopardi,

'  Thou  Shalt  have  children  either  cowards  or  unhappy  ;  choose  then  the
unhappy.' — Leopardi. To  his  sister,  on  her  marriage,  1821.

It  was  the  work  of  the  French  Revolution,  and  of  the
many  national  movements  to  which  it  gave  rise  in  other
countries,  to  destroy  three  distinct  systems  : — the  feudal
rights  of  the  noble,  the  secular  privileges  of  the  church,
and  the  absolute  political  power  of  the  monarch.  In  no
country  of  Europe  was  this  triple  revolution  more  lament-
ably overdue  than  in  Naples,^  where  the  tyranny,  uncon-
trolled through  long  centuries,  of  priest,  of  noble,  and
latterly  of  king,  had  left  marks  of  devastation  not  only  on
the  welfare  of  a  few  passing  generations,  but  deep  in  the
national  character  itself.  In  the  Middle  Ages,  Campania
and  Apulia  knew  no  burgher  life  such  as  that  which  rendered
Lombardy  and  Tuscany  the  hearth  of  European  civilisa-
tion. Indeed,  the  feudal  rights  exercised  by  the  nobles  of
Germany  and  France  were  inferior  both  in  number  and  in
kind  to  those  acquired  by  the  Norman  adventurers  of
the  eleventh  century  and  their  degenerate  descendants  over
the  hill  towns  of  Southern  Italy.  In  those  miserable  abodes
of  fear,  poverty  and  superstition,  the  Dark  Ages  were  pro-
longed down  to  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  it
was  there  that  the  character  of  the  Neapolitan  people  was

1 1  have  left  over  to  Chapter  viii.  what  I  wish  to  say  about  Sicily,  the
other  half  of  that  Bourbon  State  officially  called  the  '  Kingdom  of  the
Two  Sicilies,'  which  was  overthrown  by  Garibaldi  in  i86o.

NEAPOLITAN  HISTORY  39

moulded.  It  is  then  scarcely  matter  for  surprise  that  the
mountain  shepherds  who  might  claim  to  be  the  descendants
of  the  Samnites  and  the  Bruttii  displayed  a  half-animal
savagery ;  the  tillers  of  the  plain  a  dull  helplessness  ;  and
that  the  cities  of  the  coast,  once  the  seat  of  Hellenic  civilisa-
tion, had  developed  the  vices  of  the  Graeculus  esuriens  into
the  proverbial  qualities  of  the  '  Lazzaroni.'  1

Then  suddenly  came  the  armed  inrush  of  the  French
Revolution,  sworn  to  '  shake  the  dead  from  living  man.'
The  Napoleonic  kings,  Joseph  Bonaparte  and  Joachim
Murat,  abolished  the  feudal  system  with  a  completeness
characteristic  of  that  epoch  of  reform,  but  with  an
equitable  consideration  for  all  parties  that  secured  the
permanence  of  the  change  after  the  Restoration  of  the
Bourbon  Monarchs.^

Feudalism,  which  had  in  fact  long  been  yielding  to  the
principle  of  Monarchy,  thus  disappeared.  But  the  rule  of
priest  and  king  was  not  so  easily  disposed  of,  and  when  Murat
had  been  shot,  and  Waterloo  had  decided  for  awhile  the
fate  of  Europe,  it  was  not  difficult  to  subject  once  more
to  the  obscurantist  despotism  of  the  Spanish  Bourbons  a
people  prepared  for  slavery  by  so  many  centuries  of  abject
oppression  at  the  hands  of  feudal  lords,  by  ignorance  and
poverty  still  almost  universal,  and  by  peculiarly  gross
superstition.3

Yet  there  were  other  elements  in  the  Neapolitan
kingdom.  At  the  first  coming  of  the  French  armies,  in
1799,  the  small  educated  class  which  alone  had  any  real
public  spirit  had  hailed  the  opportunity  of  progress,  and
though  the  lazzaroni,  under  a  protection  which  Englishmen
would  like  to  forget,  had  aided  their  royal  master  in  making
a  hideous  massacre  of  the  most  respectable  inhabitants
of  Naples,*  the  subsequent  rule  of  the  Napoleonic  kings
had  raised  and  encouraged  that  section  of  the  community.
After  five  years  of  restored  Bourbon  rule  (1815-20)  this
class  succeeded,  through  the  agency  of  the  secret  society  of

'  Johnston,  i.  1-38, 2  j^^  j_  221-223.

^  King,  I.  86-94.  *  Giglioli,  last  four  chapters.

40  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

the  Carbonari,  in  winning  over  the  military  forces  of  the
kingdom  and  extorting  from  Ferdinand  I.  the  famous  con-
stitution of  1820.  The  unexpected  news  thrilled  all  Italy,
and  for  awhile  many  observers,  besides  the  impatient  Byron
at  Ravenna,  believed  that  all  Italy  would  rise  in  arms.
But  another  generation  was  to  pass  before  the  time  was  ripe
for  such  a  national  movement,  and  meanwhile  the  Neapolitan
Liberals  did  not  know  how  to  use  the  power  they  had  so
easily  seized.  They  quarrelled  with  the  Sicilians,  who  had
also  revolted  against  Ferdinand  I.,  perorated  ceaselessly
in  their  Parliament,  made  no  effective  preparations  for
resistance,  and  fell  an  ignominious  prey  to  the  armies  of
Austria,  sent  down  by  Mettemich  and  the  Holy  Alliance
to  eradicate  from  the  European  body  this  plague-spot  of
constitutional  government.  Ferdinand  I.,  who  had,  ac-
cording to  the  family  custom  on  these  occasions,  sworn
to  the  constitution  and  then  brought  in  foreign  troops  to
put  an  end  to  it,  took  a  horrible  vengeance.  Henceforth
cruelty  and  espionage  became  the  leading  features  of  Bourbon
rule,  which,  from  1815  to  1820,  had  been  corrupt  and
obscurantist  indeed,  but  not  wantonly  tyrannical.

From  1821  to  i860  the  history  of  the  government  of
Naples  is  little  more  than  the  annals  of  the  police,  who
were  assisted  by  all  the  other  civil  functionaries,  by  the
remodelled  army,  by  the  priesthood,  and  by  innumerable
spies.  The  local  authorities,  chosen  by  the  central  government
from  among  the  fiercest  reactionaries  of  each  district,  were
primarily  delators  and  police-agents, — little  or  nothing  was
done  in  the  way  of  road-making,  public  works  or  local
improvements  of  any  kind.  The  whole  energies  of  govern-
ment, local  and  central,  were  devoted  to  repression.  Every
private  person  had  to  bribe  and  fawn  upon  the  Capi  Urbani
(mayors  and  headmen  of  villages),  the  police,  the  priests
and  their  innumerable  dependants,  or  he  would  incur  the
greatest  risk  of  being  ruined,  however  innocent  he  might
really  be.  There  was,  in  practice,  no  law  but  the  will  of
these  harpies  of  Government.  Sometimes  the  soldiery  put
in  their  oar ;  one  poor  wretch  in  the  province  of  Salerno

NEAPOLITAN  POLICE  SYSTEM  41

was  given  a  hundred  lashes  by  the  order  of  a  colonel  '  for

despising  the  authority  of  the  king.' The  comic  element

IS  never  long  absent  in  Italy  ;  to  wear  a  beard  was  considered

a  sign  of  Liberalism,  and  the  poHce  marched  men  off  to  the

barber  as  readily  as  to  prison. In  such  a  state  of  society

the  ridiculous  scrupulosity  of  the  censorship,  which  practic-

ally  barred  all  serious  modem  Kterature,  was  one  of  the

lesser  evils. It  caused  no  surprise  that  a  barber  of  Regffio

was  fined  1000  ducats  for  having  a  volume  of  Leopardi's

poems  m  his  shop. '  The  poHce,'  wrote  the  British  Minister

m  July  1856,  and  he  might  have  written  the  same  words

w^ith^  equal truth any time during the previous  thirty

'  the  police,  composed  as  it  is  of  the  most  brutal  and  reckless  set
of  mdmduals  who  have  the  power  to  imprison  and  maltreat
any  person  without  affording  him  the  means  of  defence  or
redress,  of  course  intimidate  individuals,  and  prevent  any  con-

the  svJ  '  "''""'  r  '^^  ^^"^  ""^  ^^-"Ption  introduced  by

the  system  is  so  great  that  nobody  can  trust  his  neighbour.'  1

This  system  was  so  humihating,  so  ubiquitous,  and  so
corrupting  that  men  of  any  pubHc  spirit  or  even  of  any
self-respect  became  actively  hostile  to  the  authorities.  The
mild  and  tender  Luigi  Settembrini,  one  of  the  most
sympathetic  characters  ever  produced  by  Italy,  thusrecords
the  reasons  why  in  1839  he  dehberately  abandoned  his
happy  and  idyllic  family  Hfe  and  the  easy  career  of  a
provincial  Professor  of  Greek  and  Rhetoric,  to  spend
the  best  twenty  years  of  his  manhood,  either  in  filthy
prisons  or  in  obscure  poverty  :

'  In  Lombardy  and  Venice,'  he  writes,  'there  was  the  foreigner
worse  than  any  native  tryanny ;  but  there  the  Austrian  was
strong,  not  stupid.  He  punished  ferociously  every  poIitS
crime,  but  favoured  good  administration,  and  was  [usf  o  aU
within  certain  hmits. In  the  North  there  were  two  kmps ;  In

'De  Cesare,  1.  45,  46,  92,  93,  121,  122,  197,  201; «.  no-ng and
capers,  2,  pp.  8,  9,  14. Castromediano, L,  84, 85. Posno,  21, note  2.

42  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

one  the  foreigner,  in  the  other  the  whole  people.  .  .  ,  But  we  in
Naples,  on  the  contrary,  had  fraternal  tyranny,  the  cruellest  of
all ;  and  it  was  not  Ferdinand  who  was  the  tyrant,  no,  it  was
the  priest,  the  gendarme,  the  royal  judge,  the  tax-gatherer,
every  employee  of  government :  these  men  left  us  no  hour  of
peace,  but  continually,  daily,  in  the  pubUc  square  and  in
the  private  chamber,  stood  by  us,  crying  like  robbers,  "Give,
or  I  strike."  Such  oppression  corrupts  a  nation  to  the
bones.' 1

The  embodiment  of  this  rule  was  King  Ferdinand  II.
(1830-59),  the  Bomba  of  Italian  and  English  history.
Like  other  exceedingly  bad  kings  he  had  a  fair  share  of
domestic  virtues,  and  he  was  not  devoid  of  a  queer  personal
attractiveness.  It  is  true  that  his  first  wife,  the  refined  and
lovable  Maria  Christina  of  Savoy,  the  representative  of  a
higher  type  of  civilisation,  was  miserable  at  Naples.  Whether
or  not  the  traditional  story  be  true,  that  he  pulled  away  the
chair  from  under  her  as  she  sat,  and  that  she  leapt  up  in
anger  and  called  him  the '  King  of  Lazzaroni,'  2 — he  certainly
was  bored  by  what  he  regarded  as  her  airs  of  superiority,
and  treated  her  with  scant  attention.  She  died  in  1836,
revered  as  a  saint  by  the  Neapolitans,  and  leaving  a
son  Francis,  feeble  alike  in  body  and  mind,  destined  to
forfeit  the  throne  and  end  the  dynasty.

Ferdinand's  second  wife,  the  Austrian  Maria  Theresa,
suited  him  better.  He  was  invariably  faithful  to  her.
They  lived  a  simple,  secluded  and  frugal  life,  somewhat
after  the  manner  of  George  III.  and  his  queen,  except
for  the  coarse  practical  jokes  which  were  Ferdinand's
delight.  It  would  have  been  well  for  him  if  he  had
been  of  a  more  widely  sociable  disposition.  A  few  jovial
words  spoken,  as  he  knew  so  well  how  to  speak  them
when  he  wished,  to  the  leading  men  of  the  kingdom,  a  few
more  court  ceremonies,  a  few  more  public  appearances,  a  few
largesses  and  smiles  to  the  mob  would,  in  the  opinion  of
those  who  knew  Naples,  have  done  much  to  establish  his

*  Settembrini,  1.  206,  207.

"  Settembrini,  i.  54. Trinity,  125. De  Cesare,  I.  213,  214,

KING  FERDINAND  II.  43

dynasty.  But  he  could  not  endure  either  court  functions
or  general  society.  He  would  not  even  have  the  clergy  as
his  companions,  though  he  was  superstitious  to  a  degree
that  was  remarked  and  ridiculed  even  in  Naples,  and  though
it  was  his  fixed  policy  to  increase  the  already  extravagant
privileges  of  the  Church.  When  he  chose,  he  could  fasci-
nate an  enemy  in  a  few  minutes'  conversation ;  but  there
was  often  a  malicious  humour  under  his  cordiality.  '  Keep
beside  him,'  wrote  one  shrewd  observer,  '  and  he  was  all  you
could  desire — lose  sight  of  him  for  a  moment  and  you  might
find  yourself  in  the  next  five  minutes  under  arrest.'  He
was  clever  with  the  cunning  of  a  Neapolitan  street  lounger,
but  ignorant,  and  proud  of  his  ignorance.  Men  of  educa-
tion he  always  spoke  of  as  '  scribblers  '  (pennaruli).  He
was  politically  a  complete  cynic,  disbelieving  in  all  public
virtue,  and  disliking  those  who  had  a  reputation  for  it,  as
tedious  fellows  who  would  not  play  the  game.  Deceit  and
tyranny  were  the  two  main  principles  of  the  art  of  govern-
ment which  had  been  taught  him  in  youth  and  to  which  he
adhered  all  his  hfe.

But,  though  unscrupulous  as  to  means,  he  was  faith-
ful to  what  he  regarded  as  the  ends  of  politics.  He  was
a  true  Neapolitan  patriot  :  he  disliked  the  idea  of  Italy
a  nation,  but  he  kept  Austria  at  arm's  length  more  than
his  predecessors  had  done,  refusing  a  strict  alliance  that
would  have  made  his  throne  secure.  He  knew  how  to
resent  with  spirit  the  hostile  interference  of  England  and
France.  He  was  abler  than  his  father.  He  reformed  and
strengthened  the  army,  within  the  limits  set  by  the  uni-
versal system  of  corruption,  which  he  made  no  effort  to
change  in  any  department  of  government.  He  worked
with  industry  as  the  head  of  an  over-centralised  system.
He  was  his  own  prime  minister  and  his  own  favourite.'

The  Bourbon  rule  was  odious  to  all  good  men,  even  to  the
few  who,  like  Generals  Filangieri  and  Pianell,  loyally  served
it  in  the  vain  hope  that  it  would  some  day  be  reformed,

'  De  Cesare,  i.  191-214.  Nisco's  Ferd,  ii.  366-371.  Trinity,  109-125,
167-17 1. Settembrini,  i.  52-54.

44  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

But  it  remained  unaltered  from  182 1  till  its  destruction  in
i860,  except  during  four  months  at  the  beginning  of  the
year  1848,  when,  owing  to  the  outbreak  of  the  revolution
in  Sicily,  the  Neapolitans  secured  from  Ferdinand  II.
another  of  those  constitutions  which  this  royal  house  was
ever  ready  to  swear  to  at  need.  The  story  of  1820  repeated
itself  with  a  difference.  This  time,  indeed,  as  all  Italy
rose,  and  the  national  war  against  Austria  was  waged  in  the
North,  there  was  no  Austrian  invasion  of  Naples,  and  the
reaction  there  was  effected  without  foreign  intervention.
In  May  1848,  while  the  fortunes  of  free  Italy  were  still  at
their  zenith  in  the  valley  of  the  Po,  while  Radetzky  was
still  at  bay  behind  the  Quadrilateral,  the  Neapolitans  suc-
ceeded in  forfeiting  their  newly  won  freedom.  There
was  a  general  want  of  experience,  and,  with  honourable
exceptions,  a  general  want  of  public  spirit.  Violent
counsels  and  cowardly  conduct,  the  impolitic  erection  of
barricades,  and  the  refusal  to  fight  behind  them  when  erected,
destroyed  the  Liberals,  and  enabled  Ferdinand  II.,  by  the
help  of  his  Swiss  regiments,  to  re-establish  his  despotic
power  on  Ma}?^  15,  1848.1  One  of  the  most  powerful
arguments  for  the  necessity  of  that  union  of  Southern  to
Northern  Italy  which  took  place  in  i860  was  the  utter
failure  of  the  Neapolitans  to  maintain  their  own  freedom
when  left  to  themselves  in  1848.

An  ill-supported  rising  of  the  more  spirited  Calabrian
peasants  was  speedily  crushed,  and  Sicily  was  more  gradu-
ally reconquered  (September  1848 — May  1849),  with  those
horrors  of  bombardment  and  sack  which  won  for  Ferdinand  II.
the  cognomen  of  BomhaJ'  The  Neapolitan  troops,  who
had  been  foolishly  insulted  by  their  Liberal  compatriots
during  the  excitement  of  the  days  of  freedom,  had  rallied
to  the  throne,  and  henceforth  hated  the  Liberals  of  the
mainland  hardly  less  than  they  hated,  the  Sicilians. ^
With  this  force  Ferdinand  was  strong  enough  in  the  spring

^  Nisco,  Ferd.  II.  176-184. Settembrini,  i.  282-302,
^  Short  for  Bombardatore,  '  the  bombarder.'
"  Settembrini,  i.  321.

THE  REACTION  IN  NAPLES  45

of  1849  to  conduct  a  crusade  against  the  Roman  Republic
on  behalf  of  his  guest,  the  exiled  Pope  Pio  Nono.i  But
the  only  result  was  the  defeat  at  Palestrina  at  the  hands  of
Garibaldi,  and  the  disgraceful  retreat  from  Velletri,  fatal
to  the  confidence  which  the  army  had  begun  to  feel  in
itself  after  the  Sicilian  victories.  Such  was  the  terror  in-
spired by  the  '  red  devil '  in  this  campaign,  that  eleven
years  later  the  mere  rumour  of  Garibaldi's  approach  could
unnerve  the  Neapolitan  regiments.

So  King  Ferdinand  returned  from  the  vain  pursuit  of
military  glory  to  a  task  for  which  he  had  greater  qualifica-
tions, the  persecution  of  his  subjects.  In  the  summer  and
autumn  of  1849,  the  prisons  of  Naples  and  the  provinces
were  rapidly  filled  with  men,  of  every  shade  and  variety
of  pohtical  opinion,  who  had  taken  part  in  the  movement
of  the  previous  year.  Some,  especially  in  Calabria,  had
risen  in  arms  against  the  reaction,  but  others  had  been  op-
posed alike  to  the  Calabrian  and  Sicilian  rebels,  and  were
guilty  of  no  more  than  trying  to  work  the  constitution
which  the  king  had  granted.  It  is  impossible  to  estimate
the  number  of  Ferdinand's  subjects  who  were  languishing
in  prison  for  political  offences  by  the  year  185 1,  because  the
Government  never  published,  and  probably  never  compiled,
hsts  of  any  except  two  very  restricted  classes  of  prisoners  •
but  the  number,  20,000,  which  Mr.  Gladstone  quoted  as
'  no  unreasonable  estimate,'  is  considered  as  probably
below  the  truth  by  Signor  de  Cesare,  the  impartial  and
well-informed  modern  historian  of  Naples. ^  This  high
figure  would  include  the  large  numbers  who  were  being
detained  year  after  year  before  trial,  or  after  acquittal,  or
'  correctionally,'  that  is  by  administrative  order.  But,
besides  the  prisoners,  there  was  an  equally  indefinite  number
of  attendihili,  or  suspects  under  police  supervision — estimated

1  Trevelyan's  Gar.  Rome,  chap.  viii.

2jDe Cesare' s  F.  di  P.  p.  Ixix. For  the  arguments  pro  and  con  see
Gladstone (Letter  i.) 7 ; Gladstone  Rass. 23-25 and  Appendices ;  Glad-
stone Exam.  24-30. De  Cesare  considers  Gladstone's  reply  in  the  Examin-
ation to  the  Rassegna  as  '  victorious.' See  also  Br.  Park  Papers,  15,  p.  2
and  Racioppi,  26,

46  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

by  Signor  de  Cesare  at  50,000 ;  these  men,  generally
the  most  intelligent  and  often  the  wealthiest  citizens  of
the  districts  where  they  severally  resided,  were  cut  off
from  all  civil  and  academic  functions,  were  forbidden  to
leave  their  houses  without  special  licence  from  the  police,  and
had  their  every  action  supervised  by  the  authorities,  who
found  pleasure  in  annoying  them,  and  profit  in  extorting
money  for  the  least  concession. 1

These  proceedings  of  Bomba,  as  our  grandfathers  almost
invariably  called  him,^  became  known  to  the  whole  world,
and  particularly  to  England,  in  their  true  colours,  without
the  decorous  coating  of  phrases  and  reticences  in  which  the
official  world  usually  drapes  such  matters.  Englishmen,
for  reasons  which  I  have  discussed  in  a  previous  chapter,
were  not  at  that  period  in  the  habit  of  finding  excuses  for
this  sort  of  tyranny.  So  the  drama  was  unveiled  to  England
and  to  Italy  not  only  in  its  horror,  but  in  its  strange  beauty  ;
for  the  leading  victims — Poerio,  Settembrini,  and  Castro-
mediano — were  men  of  such  lofty  idealism  and  gentle
but  resolute  character  as  must  qualify  the  sweeping
condemnation  so  often,  not  unnaturally,  pronounced  on  the
inhabitants  of  the  land  of  Vesuvius.  If,  in  the  terrible
words  wherein  Filangieri  unloaded  the  bitter  experience  of  a
lifetime,  '  it  is  often  a  great  calamity  to  a  man  of  honour
and  spirit  to  be  born  a  Neapolitan,'  ^  the  worst  consequences
of  that  calamity  have  been  endured  without  such  complaint
by  some  of  the  choicest  spirits  who  ever  adorned  the  history
of  a  people.

Carlo  Poerio,  a  man  who  held  what  would  in  England
be  called  Conservative  views,  had  opposed  every  sort  of

1  De  Cesare' s  P.  di  P.  Ixxi,  Ixxxl.  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  15,  pp.  2,  3,  9,  31,
32,  36. Elliot,  13,  14. Castromediano,  i.  39-59,  84,85. Racioppi,  34.

2  '  The  captain  of  an  English  merchantman  once  horrified  a  party  of
very  loyal  Neapolitans  by  saying,  on  seeing  the  portrait  of  Ferdinand,  in
what  he  meant  to  be  a  very  respectful  tone:  "  So  that  is  King  Bomba  !  'J
The  terror  of  his  audience,  who  thought  that  the  invisible  and  ever-present
poUce  would  at  once  swoop  down  on  the  auditors  of  such  a  treasonable
remark,  it  is  not  easy  to  describe,' Trinity,  118.

*  De  Cesare,  ii.  246.

CARLO  POERIO

4/

armed  insurrection  in  Sicily  or  elsewhere.!  This  man
whom  Mr  Gladstone  justly  compared  to  the  mo  t  u2
mmded  of  h.s  own  English  colleagues  and  rivals,  wasVv

heaZf  th':  ^,''^-;'-.-^-'^'"t--egarded  as  th;  natural
head  of  the  Constitutional  party.  He  had  been  one  of
Ferdinand  smimsters  under  the  constitution  of  1848  and
as  such  had  been  treated  by  his  master  with  even  more  tSn
usual  bonhom>e. Ferdinand  introduced  him  with  effusion

Tes  cig?r°F:fti'  'i?  '"IT'  ^°'  p^^-'^  -  "

t>est  cigars. For  the Kmg  of  Lazzaroni'  had  a  vervreal

tttnirt2rru!dnr:ntni'""  r-'-^

Poerio.  Settembrini  and  fortrothL  weTbrVtToTa:
m  June  1850  ;  the  case  lasted  till  February  185?  al  houTh
It  was  shortened  bv  the  fact  that  ti,=  „  •  aitnough

aUowed to bring Lir ^^L^Zr^^l  "Ze^

"idtTfurtt^'n-'^'  ^""^ '°  ^-f  -^  "-n
reserved  for  further  mvestigation,'  a  false  witness  named

Jervolino  was  set  up  to  swear  one  ridiculous  absurd  y
after  another  agamst  Poerio,  floundering  through  w  th  the
help  of  the  judges.  There  was  this  difference  letwei
JervoUno  and  Titus  Gates  that  „„  ■ "''^"'^'^ Between

word  he  saiH Ti, r ,  °  °"-'' '°  '^°"'^'  believed  a

wora  he  said This  formahty  sufficed  to  secure  for  tf,»

most  respected  subject  of  the  Crown  a  sentence  o twlntt

ouryearsmirons.  Whilethetragicfarceproceerd  pleriJs"
forty  fellow  prisoners,  mcluding  several  of  the  noblest  men
m  Italy  ooked  on  in  despair,  pre-doomed,  as  thevknertn
rum  and  long  years  of  horror.  One  of  the,  number  named
Leipnecher,  had  already  died  of  gaol  fever,  havL  bin

It  I'f /■  ^™"S"  °*  'he  oppressed, will  ex^ct

retnbution  for  this  man's  death,"  his  friend  Pirrni  cried
out  to  the  presiding  judge.  Little  did  they  dream  that
the  man  who  should  be  sent  to  avenge  them^  was  earnt

Neap:Sa'o^Lerr„efraSt^tfaS  ° V  ""»  '"^
connectioa  with  Ma^zini  {E«ssee„aJ^TZf  I  Tt ?"'°  °'  ^°"^"

^  Gladstone,  n,  12,  19.

48  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

his  daily  wage  in  carrying  up  barrels  from  the  wharves  of
Staten  Island.  Still  less  did  they  suppose  that  his  fore-
runner was  in  court  among  the  spectators.  But  there  on
the  public  benches  sat  an  English  visitor,  come  to  Naples
for  his  daughter's  health,  a  man  of  middle  age  but  with
more  than  the  fire  of  youth  in  his  eyes,  as  he  glowered  with
ill-restrained  indignation  at  the  wicked  judges  and  false
witnesses,  and  shook  to  think  that  this  was  perpetrated  in
the  name  of  order  and  of  religion. i

Mr.  Gladstone,  who  found  himself  at  Naples  for  reasons
entirely  unconnected  with  politics,  had  no  belief  in  the
idea  of  Italian  unity  and  nationality,  which  for  many
years  to  come  he  regarded  as  an  idle  dream.  So  far  from
sympathising  with  involution  he  was  still,  as  he  declared
on  his  return  to  England,  '  a  member  of  the  Conservative
party  in  one  of  the  great  family  of  nations,'  '  compelled  to
remember  that  that  party  stands  in  virtual  and  real
though  perhaps  unconscious  alliance  with  all  the  established
Governments  of  Europe  as  such.'  Any  man  so  situated,  and
made  of  ordinary  clay,  would  have  been  well  content  to  spend
his  time  at  Naples  in  '  diving  into  volcanoes  and  explor-
ing buried  cities.'  ^  But  in  this  man's  heart,  deeper  than
party  associations  and  personal  predilections  as  to  European
politics,  deeper  even  than  the  curiosity  of  the  classical  scholar,
and  far  deeper  than  the  desire  for  ease  on  a  well-earned
holiday,  flamed  the  disinterested  hatred  of  injustice  and
cruelty,  often  found  as  the  handmaid  of  other  passions,  but
seldom  thus  the  lord  and  dictator  of  the  soul.

At  the  British  Embassy  he  had  come  across  its  legal
adviser,  a  worthy  Neapolitan  gentleman,  shortly  afterwards
exiled  and  naturalised  in  England,  where  he  rose  by  public
service  to  high  estimation  as  Sir  James  Lacaita.^  He  told
Mr.  Gladstone  much,  and  showed  him  more.  Naturally
the  Liberal  clergy  were  sought  out  with  eager  sympathy,

>  Gladstone,  14-23.  Nisco,  Ferd.  II.  293-299.  Morley,  i.  389-391,
De  Cesare's  F.  di  P.,  p.  Ixv.

2  Gladstone,  4. Morley,  i.  389,  390,  401,  402.
For  details  of  his  career  see  Gigli's  Scrittori  Manduriani.

THE  NEAPOLITAN  PRISONERS  49

but  the  friend  of  Newman  acknowledged  with  a  sigh  the
connection  of  another  section  of  the  clergy  with  the  Govern-
ment, and  the  services  rendered  by  the  confessional  to  the
pohce.  Then  came  Poerio's  trial.  After  that  the  glories
of  the  most  beautiful  bay  in  Europe  lost  hold  upon  his
imagination,  and  when  he  looked  out  at '  the  picturesque
and  romantic  forms '  of  '  those  lovely  islands  scattered
along  the  coast,'  knowing  now  that  they  were  the  prisons,
he  could  think  of  nothing  but  '  what  huge  and  festering
masses  of  human  suffering  they  conceal.'  1  His  spirit,
shaking  itself  free  of  every  impediment  of  interest  and  old
association,  rose  in  its  native  majesty,  and  heedless  aUke
of  the  scandal  to  official  Europe,  of  the  discomfiture  of  his
own  colleagues,  of  the  triumph  of  Palmerston,  to  whom
he  would  be  forced  to  apologise,  he  determined  on  a
Hne  of  action  which,  as  his  friend  and  biographer  tells  us,
was  the  turning  point  of  his  own  life,  and  may  well  be
counted  as  the  turning  point  in  the  shrunken  tide  of  Italy's
fortune.^

Poerio  and  his  forty  companions,  except  a  fortunate
half-dozen,  were  condemned.  They  were  consigned  to
various  terms  of  imprisonment — in  the  case  of  the  principal
leaders,  for  life,  or  for  terms  of  years  which  it  was  thought
probable  they  would  not  survive.  Mr.  Gladstone  thereon
determined  to  visit  the  Vicaria  prison  in  Naples.  The
Government  was  so  confident  of  its  strength,  and  so
ignorant  of  the  visitor's  intentions  and  power,  that  he
obtained  entry.  The  horrors  of  the  Vicaria,  probably  the
best  prison  in  the  kingdom,  as  being  in  the  capital  and
therefore  more  exposed  to  inquiry  and  criticism,  Mr.  Glad-
stone was  accused  of  exaggerating.  But  when  an  English
friend  of  the  Neapolitan  Government  had  seen  it,  he  was

^Gladstone,  13,  41-48.  Morley,  i.  391.  Of  the  visits  to  the  Liberal
clergy  I  have  heard  in  Italy.

2  It  must  be  remembered  that  Mr.  Gladstone  was  recanting,  Glad-
stone and  Molesworth,  wrote  Lord  Palmerston  in  1851,  '  say  that  they
were  wrong  last  year  in  their  attacks  on  my  foreign  policy,  but  they  did
not  know  the  truth.l Palmerston,  i.  257.

B

50  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

obliged  to  confess  that  '  the  atmosphere  was  as  thick  as
in  a  London  fog  from  the  horrible  exhalations,'  that  the
prisoners  were  '  evidently  always  addressed  and  treated
as  brutes,'  and  that  '  human  Hfe  was  in  a  Hving  tomb,
assisting  at  the  spectacle  of  its  own  decay.' i  It  was
here,  then,  that  Mr.  Gladstone  saw

'  the  official  doctors  not  going  to  the  sick  prisoners,  but  the  sick
prisoners,  men  with  almost  death  on  their  faces,  toiling  upstairs
to  them,  because  the  lower  regions  of  such  a  place  of  darkness
are  too  foul  and  loathsome  to  aUow  it  to  be  expected  that  pro-
fessional men  should  consent  to  earn  bread  by  entering  them.'  ^

On  the  island  prison  of  Nisida,  whither  he  next  pro-
ceeded, he  found  Poerio  and  other  distinguished  men,  in
the  coarse  red  garb  of  convicts,  each  of  them  chained
either  to  a  fellow  sufferer  in  the  cause,  or  else  to  a
common  criminal.

'  The  prisoners  had  a  heavy  limping  movement,  much  as  if
one  leg  had  been  shorter  than  the  other.  But  the  refinement  of
suffering  in  this  case  arises  from  the  circumstance  that  here  we
have  men  of  education  and  high  feeling  chained  incessantly
together.'

The  couphngs  were  never  removed  on  any  occasion  either
by  day  or  by  night.

'  I  myself,'  wrote  Mr.  Gladstone,  '  saw  a  political  prisoner,
Romeo,  chained  in  the  manner  I  have  described  to  an  ordinary
offender,  a  young  man  with  one  of  the  most  ferocious  and  sullen
countenances  I  have  seen  among  hundreds  of  the  Neapolitan
criminals.'

Another  unfortunate,  by  a  refinement  of  cruelty,  was
chained  to  the  false  witness  named  Margherita,  who  had
been  suborned  against  him  at  his  trial. ^

'  I  must  say,'  wrote  Mr.  Gladstone,  '  I  was  astonished  at  the

1  Rassegna,  29,  30. Detailed  Exposure,  36-40.

2  Gladstone,  p.  12.

3  Castromediano,  i.  281,  says  Poerio  was  coupled  to  Margherita  in  Nisida,
but  Gladstone,  27,  implies  that  it  was  some  one  else.  Castromediano  was
not  in  Nisida,  so  Mr.  Gladstone's  is  the  better  evidence.

MR.  GLADSTONE  VISITS  THE  PRISONS 51

mildness  with  which  they  spoke  of  those  at  whose  hands  they
were  enduring  these  abominable  persecutions,  and  at  their
Christian  resignation  as  well  as  their  forgiving  temper,  for  they
seemed  ready  to  undergo  with  cheerfulness  whatever  might  yet
be  in  store  for  them.  Their  health  was  evidently  suffering.  .  .  .
I  had  seen  Poerio  in  December  during  his  trial,  but  I  should
not  have  known  him  in  Nisida.  He  did  not  expect  his  own
health  to  stand,  although  God,  he  said,  had  given  him  strength  to
endure.  It  was  suggested  to  him  from  an  authoritative  quarter,
that  his  mother,  of  whom  he  was  the  only  prop,  might  be  sent
to  the  king  to  implore  his  pardon,  or  he  might  himself  apply
for  it.  He  steadily  refused.  That  mother,  when  I  was  at
Naples,  was  losing  her  mental  powers  under  the  pressure  of
her  afflictions.' 1

This  lady  died,  in  fact,  in  September  of  the  following  year.
Her  other  son,  Alessandro,  of  more  fiery  temperament  and
advanced  politics,  had  fallen  fighting  for  Italy  in  Venice.
She  had  brought  them  up  for  such  service,  preferring  un-
happy sons  to  cowardly,  but  when  the  inevitable  end  came,
it  broke  her  heart. ^

It  wa-s  here  in  Nisida  that  the  chained  prisoners  implored
their  visitor  not  to  consider  the  further  penalties  which  any
public  action  on  his  part  might  bring  down  on  themselves,
but  to  consider  only  how  he  might  accelerate  the  Hberation
of  their  country.  Before  he  left  the  island  prison  he  had
agreed  with  Poerio  that  public  exposure  was  what  was
needed.  '  As  to  us,'  said  that  generous  man,  and  his  com-
panions re-echoed  him,  '  as  to  us,  never  mind  ;  we  can
hardly  be  worse  than  we  are.'  ^

Having  made  this  agreement  with  Poerio,  it  was  perhaps
a  mistake  on  Mr.  Gladstone's  part  that  on  his  return  to
Eiigland  he  persuaded  himself,  or  allowed  Lord  Aberdeen
to  persuade  himj-^^  to  delay  publication  until  the  elder
statesman,  *  as  an  old  friend  of  the  Austrian  Government '
in pre-Waterloo  times,  had  applied privately  to Vienna.

1  Gladstone,  26,  27.  ^  Martinengo  Cesaresco,  142,  143,  148,  156.

3  Nisco,  Ferd.  II.,  302. Morley,  i.  392,  393, Both  pieces  of first-
hand evidence  on  this  important  point,
■•  Morley,  394,  note. Aberdeen,  203.

E  2

52  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Lord  Aberdeen,  convinced  and  shocked  by  what  he  heard,
hoped  that  Austria,  as  the  patron  of  Ferdinand,  would  use
her  influence  to  obtain  '  some  improvement.'  ^  Two
months  elapsed  before  Schwarzenberg's  answer  came  to
hand,  and  during  the  interval  Mr.  Gladstone  not  un-
naturally became  impatient.  Early  in  July  1851,  two  days
before  the  arrival  of  the  Austrian's  reply,  he  published  his
famous  '  Letters  to  Lord  Aberdeen.'  He  should  have  done
so  two  months  before :  publishing  them  when  and  how  he
did,  he  slightly  offended  his  benevolent  and  honourable
colleague.  The  Austrian  negotiation  with  Naples,  unsym-
pathetically^  but  honestly  ^  undei^taken  by  Schwarzenberg,
was  from  the  first  predestined  to  futility  if  it  was  in  any
way  intended  to  fulfil  the  agreement  with  Poerio  and  his
companions  at  Nisida.  It  is  not  conceivable  that  Austria,
with  her  own  black  record  as  it  then  stood,  and  her  entire
policy  based  upon  repression  in  Italy,  would  or  could  have
obtained  from  Ferdinand — who  was  moreover  no  such
complete  slave  of  Austria  as  his  predecessors  had  been  "^ —
more  than  the  release  of  a  certain  number  of  prisoners.
The  question  was  not  of  a  few  dozen  men  but  of  many
thousands,  not  of  a  single  state  trial  but  of  a  political
system.

'  It  is  not,'  wrote  Mr.  Gladstone  in  his  first  letter,  '  it  is  not
mere  imperfection,  not  corruption  in  low  quarters,  not  occasional
severity  that  I  am  about  to  describe  ;  it  is  incessant,  systematic
violation  of  the  law  by  the  power  appointed  to  watch  over  and

*  Aberdeen,  204.  "^  Morley,  i.  396.

^  Lord  Stanmore  tells  me  that  the  reason  why  his  father.  Lord  Aber-
deen, was  left  so  long  without  an  answer  by  Schwarzenberg,  was  that  the
latter  had  written  to  Naples  to  get  private  assurance  that  Ferdinand
would  accede  to  the  Austrian  request  when  it  was  officially  made.  Lord
Stanmore  says  that  Schwarzenberg  had  got  this  assurance,  though  the
exact  nature  of  the  promised  concessions  is  not  ascertainable.  On  the
other  hand,  De  Cesare,  i.  65,  66,  says  that  the  Neapolitan  Ministry
absolutely  disregarded  the  warning  sent  them  by  Castelcicala,  their
representative  in  London,  of  the  forthcoming  publication  of  Mr.  Glad-
stone's letters  (of  which  Aberdeen  had  notified  him),  and  concealed  these
warnings  from  King  Ferdinand.

*  De  Cesare,  1.  197.

MR.  GLADSTONE'S  LETTERS  53

maintain  it.  ...  It  is  the  wholesale  persecution  of  virtue
when  united  with  intelligence,  operating  upon  such  a  scale  that
entire  classes  may  with  truth  be  said  to  be  its  object,  so  that  the
Government  is  in  bitter  and  cruel,  as  well  as  utterly  illegal  1
hostility  to  whatever  in  the  nation  really  lives  and  moves  and
forms  the  mainspring  of  practical  progress  and  improvement ;
it  is  the  awful  profanation  of  pubHc  religion,  by  its  notorious
alliance,  in  the  governing  powers,  with  the  violation  of  every
moral  law.  .  .  It  is  the  perfect  prostitution  of  the  judicial  office.
.  .  I  have  seen  and  heard  strong  and  too  true  expressions
used,  "  This  is  the  negation  of  God  erected  into  a  system  of
government."  '  2

This  terrible  invective,  and  the  yet  more  terrible  array
of  facts  supporting  it,  produced  a  profound  and  permanent
effect  on  the  sympathies  of  our  country.  It  moulded
English  opinion  on  the  subject  of  Naples,  as  Burke's  more
abstract '  Reflections '  moulded  it  on  the  subject  of  the  French
Revolution,  and  in  both  cases  the  pamphlet  was  the  more
persuasive  because  the  author  was  a  noted  adherent  of  the
English  party  least  inclined  to  the  views  advocated.  The
press,  almost  without  exception,  joined  in  the  outcry,
and  the  Times  gave  up  King  Ferdinand,  whom  it  had
supported  in  1848.

In  political  circles  abroad  the  letters  aroused  more  con-
troversy, but  scarcely  less  interest.  The  reply  of  the
Neapolitan  Government  convicted  Mr.  Gladstone  of  a  few
small  mistakes  which  he  readily  acknowledged,  but  only
served  to  demonstrate  by  its  silences  the  truth  of  the
bulk  of  his  accusations,  and  was  pounded  to  pieces  in  his
'  Examination  of  the  Reply,'  and  in  an  anonymous  '  Detailed
Exposure.'  The  hatred  felt  for  England  in  the  Papal  and
reactionary  world  rose  to  extravagant  heights.  One  of  the
principal  historians  of  that  party,  De  Sivo,  in  his  elaborate

1  The  constitution  granted  in  January  1848  was  never  repealed,  but
was  treated  as  a  dead  letter.  This  insolent  indifference  to  the  law  was
what  chiefly  offended  Mr.  Gladstone's  Conservative  instincts.

2  '  La  negazione  di  Dio  eretia  a  sistema  di  governo.'.  It  is  to  be  noted
that  this  famous  epigram  was  not  originally  Mr.  Gladstone's,  but  of  Italian
origin. Gladstone,  6.

54  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

'  History  of  the  Two  Sicilies,'  more  than  ten  years  later,
answered  '  Lord  Gladston '  by  saying  that  the  English
sold  their  wives  with  ropes  round  their  necks  for  a  few
*  pences,'  and  then  had  the  impertinence  to  complain  of
'  little  trials  in  Naples.'  Although  an  important  section  of
the  French  press,  especially  the  Catholic  papers,  loudly
defended  the  King  of  Naples,  although  high  Parisian  society
made  a  dead  set  against  England  and  Mr.  Gladstone,  yet
the  ultimate  effect  was  very  considerable  on  Napoleon  III.
and  his  subjects,  who  had  moreover  their  own  *  Murattist '
designs  on  Southern  Italy.  In  1856,  France  joined  England
in  withdrawing  her  minister  from  Naples  as  a  protest  against
the  royal  misgovernment,  and  in  the  supreme  crisis  of
Garibaldi's  fate  in  i860,  the  sense  that  the  Neapolitan
Bourbons  were  pariahs  prevented  Napoleon  from  inter-
fering on  their  behalf.  For  that  strange  man,  though  he
had  himself  committed  a  great  political  crime,  was  not,
like  the  despots  of  Eastern  Europe,  insensible  to  the  moral
responsibilities  of  diplomacy.  Mr.  Gladstone,  in  fact,
created  in  France  and  England  the  feeling  which  kept
the  international  ring  clear  for  Garibaldi's  final  attack  on
the  kingdom  of  the  two  Sicilies.  When,  in  1864,  the
Liberator  of  Naples  came  to  our  island,  at  a  great  re-
ception held  in  his  honour  at  Chiswick,  Mr.  Gladstone
stood  among  other  distinguished  men  to  receive  him
on  the  staircase.  As  he  came  up  in  his  red  shirt
and  puncio,  he  saw  the  friend  of  the  prisoners,  seized
his  hand,  and  said  with  deep  feeling  the  single  word:
'  Precurseur.'  1

But  the  most  terrible  sufferings  of  all — those  which  were
endured  in  the  mountain  fortress  of  Montefusco  and  the
island  of  San  Stefano — were  never  witnessed  or  described
by  Mr.  Gladstone.  Posterity,  however,  possesses  a  yet
more  lifelike  and  intimate  record  than  any  which  he  could
have  given,  for  these  experiences  were  narrated  by  the  chief

^  Argyll,  i.  118. Mor/ey,  i.  396-402. Panizzi's  Life,  ii.  96. Times,
Sept.  26,  1851. De  Sivo,  il.  259,  265. De  Cesare's  F,  di  P.  Ixix,  Ixx,

CASTROMEDIANO  55

victims  themselves,  in  the  Memorie  of  Castromediano  and
the  Ricordanze  of  Settembrini— memoirs  such  as  can  be
written  only  by  men  of  remarkable  character  and  intellect
under  circumstances  of  transcendent  interest.^

The  Neapohtan  nobihty  as  a  whole,  while  often  dis-
approving of  the  action  of  the  Government,  left  the  consti-
tutional movement  in  the  hands  of  the  class  just  below  them
in  the  social  scale.2  But  there  were  exceptions  to  this
rule : —

'  Sigismondo  Castromediano,  Duke  of  Morciano,  Marquis  of
Caballino,  lord  of  seven  baronies,  died  on  the  26th  of  August,
1895,  in  the  smallest  room  of  his  vast,  ruined  castle,  a  few  miles
from  Lecce.  He  left  no  heir  to  his  poverty.  With  him  dis-
appeared a  house  which  was  already  illustrious  and  ancient
when  one  of  its  members  fought  for  fair-haired  Manfred  of  Bene-
vento.  On  his  cofiin  were  placed  the  chain  of  a  galley-slave
and  the  red  jacket  worn  by  Neapohtan  convicts.  These,  he
used  to  say,  were  his  decorations.'  ^

The  man  whose  Hfe  history  is  thus  epitomised  was  more
an  antique  Roman  than  a  Neapolitan  Liberal.  He  had
the  quahties  of  that  aristocratic  and  stoic  ideal  adumbrated
in  the  characters  of  Plutarch.  His  pride  differed  from  the
pride  of  other  Neapolitan  nobles,  being  inward  not  outward,
moral  not  social ;  he  wished  for  no  approval  save  from  his
own  conscience.  But  he  knew  what  the  ancients  did  not
always  know,  that  the  true  pride  is  generous  to  enemies,  and
when,  in  the  hour  of  triumph,  Garibaldi  asked  him  for  the
names  of  his  unjust  judges,  he  replied :  '  I  have  forgotten
them.'  He  was  no  pohtician,  and  he  held  in  scorn  the
secret  societies  of  Southern  Italy  with  their  '  ridiculous
mystical  rites.'  He  had  no  ambition  save  to  hve  and  to
die  in  his  old  castle,  vastly  remote  from  the  world  in  the

*  Those  who  cannot  read  these  works  in  the  original,  will  find  the  two
stories  told  in  an  admirable  form  in  the  Italian  Characters  of  Countess
Martinengo  Cesaresco.  Only  the  later  edition  (igoi)  contains  the  essay
on  Castromediano.  I  take  this  opportunity  of  thanking  the  authoress  of
Italy's  book  of  heroes  for  the  many  services  which  she  has  rendered  to  m3
in  the  study  of  Garibaldian  history.

*  Gladstone,  48.  ^  Martinengo  Cesaresco,  1,

56  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

scorched  Apulian  wilderness.  There,  in  fact,  after  i860,
he  passed  the  remaining  thirty-five  years  of  his  long  life.
But  in  the  early  months  of  1848  he  felt  bound  to  take  his
proper  part  as  local  magnate  in  the  welcome  given  by  the
neighbourhood  to  the  brief  reign  of  liberty.  For  this  he
was  seized,  tried  and  condemned  by  the  provincial  court
of  Otranto  to  thirty  years  in  irons.i

In  the  prison  on  the  island  of  Procida,  where  he
was  first  confined  after  his  sentence,  the  camorra  ruled
among  the  prisoners  with  little  interference  from  the  gaolers.
The  criminals  had  knives  and  murdered  each  other  with
relative  impunity,  while  vice  of  every  kind  was  rampant
and  uncontrolled.  The  more  respectable  inmates  some-
times begged  to  be  confined  in  the  worst  penal  dungeons
of  the  place  in  order  to  avoid  this  terrible  and  dangerous
society.  But  Castromediano  was  treated  by  the  most
abandoned  wretches  with  the  awe  due  to  a  superior  being.
At  last,  one  day,  the  gaolers  burst  in  with  cries  of  '  Viva  il
Re! Liberty,  liherta,'  and  informed  the  'politicals'  that  they
were  released  by  the  clemency  of  the  king.  They  were
sorted  out  from  the  common  criminals  and  put  on  board
ship  for  the  mainland.  For  some  hours  the  pitiless  jest
deceived  many,  but  it  soon  appeared  that  they  were  only
being  moved  to  a  place  of  yet  more  cruel  torment.  On  the
way  thither,  they  were  joined  by  another  group  of  prisoners
from  Nisida,  including  Poerio  and  the  men  whom  Mr.
Gladstone  had  visited.  Poerio  was  hailed  by  them  all  as
their  father  and  chief.  Soon  it  was  whispered  in  their  ranks,
but  for  long  it  was  not  believed,  that  they  were  bound  for
the  up-country  fortress  of  Montefusco,  which  had  been  closed
seven  years  back  as  no  longer  fit  for  human  habitation.
In  the  damp  walls  of  this  medieval  ruin,  Ferdinand  had
determined  to  confine  fifty  of  the  principal  political  prisoners
under  harsh  rules  specially  approved  by  himself,  and  under
a  gaoler  who  was  the  incarnation  of  cruelty.  As  the  files
of  chained  prisoners, already fainting  with hunger and

^  Castromediano,  i,  18-20,  126. Martinengo  Cesaresco,  2

THE  DUNGEONS  OF  MONTEFUSCO 57

misery,  wound  up  the  mountain  road  to  this  dreadful  place,
a  gaunt,  half-naked  beggar  suddenly  rose  up  on  the  wall  of
a  town  beneath  which  they  were  passing,  and  waving  his
great  stick  cried  out  in  devilish  glee  :  '  Viva  '0  Re  !  Car-
bonari !  Jacobins  !  Montefusco  is  waiting  for  you.'  And
then,  breaking  into  song,  he  croaked  out :

'  Whoe'er  comes  back  to  life
From  Montefusco's  towers
May  boast  himself  twice  born
Into  this  world  of  ours.'

They  passed  on  with  sinking  hearts.  1

On  their  first  arrival  in  the  damp  and  vermin  haunted
dungeons,  they  were  almost  starved  to  death,  and  only
obtained  food  as  the  result  of  long  expostulations.  The
chief  gaoler  exhausted  every  device  to  aggravate  their
misery.  Though  they  were  all  men  of  refinement,  orderly
and  long  suffering,  they  were  daily  threatened  with  flogging,
which  was  actually  carried  out  upon  one  of  them.  Their
letters  were  not  only  read  by  the  gaolers  but  were  often  kept
back  with  cruel  insult,  except  on  those  frequent  occasions
when  the  death  of  some  broken-hearted  wife,  father,  mother,
or  sister  was  announced  ;  then,  indeed,  the  letters  were
handed  on  with  alacrity,  but  without  a  sign  of  compassion.
Many  of  them  were  permanently  ruined  in  health,
eight  died  of  disease,  and  none  were  '  bom  again  '  without
carrying  away  lasting  traces  of  their  entombment.  Castrome-
diano's  hair  turned  white,  but  he  and  Poerio,  though  both
shaken  by  illness,  supported  the  spirits  of  their  comrades,
which  were  indeed  of  metal  kindred  to  their  own.  The
song  of  a  nightingale  pouring  out  from  bushes  below  the
castle  gave  them  comfort  and  hope  ;  it  was  therefore  killed
by  the  gaoler.^

At  last  half  a  dozen  out  of  the  fifty  were  corrupted  and
oecame  spies  on  the  rest. They  were  perpetually  worried

*  Castromediano,  i.  229-233,  251,  252,  273-298,  306.
^  Castromediano,  i.  319,  326,  327;  ii.  194,  195. Martinengo  Cesaresco,
10-12. Nisco,  Ferd,  II.,  313-315. Poerio,  53.

58  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

to  sue  for  pardon.  Indeed,  it  is  probable  that  the  worst
severities  were  appHed  in  order  to  break  the  spirit  of  the
men  whose  names  now  stood  for  so  much  in  Italy  and  in
Europe,  and  induce  them  to  recant  and  humble  themselves
before  the  throne  so  gravely  imperilled  by  their  now  famous
sufferings  and  their  continued  defiance.  But  they  knew  they
were  in  the  forefront  of  Italy's  battle,  and  were  ready  to  die
at  their  posts. ^

Meanwhile  on  the  desert  island  of  San  Stefano,  ten
leagues  out  to  sea  off  Gaeta,  Luigi  Settembrini,  under  a
sentence  of  death  commuted  to  that  of  perpetual  imprison-
ment, was  shut  up  with  thirty  other  '  politicals  '  in  the
famous  ergasiolo,  among  eight  hundred  wretches  condemned
for  murder  and  other  more  abominable  crimes  to  hopeless
and  unending  punishment.  Over  a  doorway  opposite  the
prison-house  ran  a  Latin  inscription  :

*  Donee  Sancta  Themis  scelerum  tot  monsira  catenis
Vincta  tenet,  stat  res,  stat  tihi  tuta  domus."^

These  words,'  wrote  Settembrini,  '  were  not  read  or  not
understood  by  most  who  entered,  but  they  froze  the  hearts  of
the  political  prisoners,  warning  them  that  they  were  entering  a
place  of  everlasting  woe,  among  a  lost  people,  of  whom  they
themselves  were  to  become  part.  One  must  have  great  faith  in
God  and  in  virtue  not  to  despair.'

Here  no  one  was  chained.  There  was  in  fact  much  licence.
Drink  went  the  round  among  the  worst  of  the  inmates,
perhaps  alleviating  their  misery  and  certainly  shortening
its  term,  but  greatly  adding  to  the  discomfort  of  the  respect-
able prisoners.  Knives  were  common,  and  murder  was  an
ordinary  incident.  Ten  men  were  shut  up  together  in  each
cell,  the  political  prisoners  being  carefully  scattered  about
so  that  they  should  in  all  cases  be  physically  and  morally
at  the  mercy  of  their  dreadful  companions. '  Men  become

*  Castromediano,  11.  39-66.

2  While  sacred  Justice  holds  in  chains  so  many  monsters  of  crime,  your
wealth  and  house  stand  safe.

SETTEMBRINI  ON SAN STEFANO  59

beasts,  descended  to  the  utmost  depth  of  moral  degrada-
tion/ wrote  Settembrini,  although  he  succeeded  in  forming
close  human  and  spiritual  relations  with  one  or  two  of  these
children  of  unutterable  woe.^

The  diary  of  this  man's  agony,  written  in  the  gaol  of
criminals  condemned  for  life,  has  become  an  Italian
classic.

'  The  three  years,'  he  wrote,  after  that  time  had  elapsed,
'  are  for  me  as  one  sole  day — both  short  and  long.  I  turn  to
contemplate  this  lapse  of  time,  unmarked  by  events,  and  it
seems  brief  ;  one  day  does  not  differ  from  another  ;  one  always
sees  and  suffers  the  same  things.  Here  time  is  like  a  shoreless
sea,  without  sun  or  moon  or  stars — immense  and  monotonous.
Many  of  the  prisoners  who  have  been  here  for  thirty  years  say,
when  they  speak  of  what  they  did  or  saw  thirty  years  ago,
"  Not  long  since  I  saw  this,  I  did  that."  I  also  say,  "  Not  long
since  I  was  condemned  to  death."  But  when  I  look  upon
myself  and  my  soul  and  this  poor,  torn  heart,  when  I  reckon  up
my  woes  and  uncover  the  wounds  which  reach  even  to  the  depths
of  my  soul,  oh,  then  these  three  years  seem  to  me  infinite  !  I
cannot  recall  the  few  pleasures  and  the  many  griefs  I  had  before  :
the  griefs  of  these  three  endless  years  seem  all  my  life.  Three
years,  and  if  I  have  to  say  ten,  and  twenty,  and  thirty  ?  I  shall
never  say  it,  for  I  shall  not  live  so  long.

'  My  body  and  my  clothes  are  soiled  ;  it  is  of  no  use  to  try
and  keep  clean  ;  the  smoke  and  dirt  make  me  sickening  to
myself.  My  spirit  is  tainted ;  I  feel  all  the  hideousness,  the
horror,  the  terror  of  crime  ;  had  I  remorse,  I  should  think  I  too
were  a  criminal.  My  spirit  is  being  undone.  It  seems  to  me
as  if  my  hands  also  were  foul  with  blood  and  theft.  I  forget
virtue  and  beauty.

'  Oh,  my  God,  Father  of  the  unfortunate,  consoler  of  those
who  suffer,  oh  save  my  soul  from  this  filth,  and  if  Thou  hast
written  that  I  must  here  end  my  sorrowful  life,  oh  let  that  end
come  soon.  Thou  knowest  grief  does  not  frighten  or  subdue
me  ;  I  bear  my  cross  ;  even  on  my  knees  I  drag  it  after  me  ;
but  I  fear  to  become  vile,  I  fear  my  soul  growing  perverted  ;
even  now,  I  recognise  it  no  more.'  ^

•  Settembrini,  ii.  225-279. Nisco,  Ferd.  II.  316,  317,
^  Settembrini,  ii.  288-291. Martinengo  Cesar esco,  66.

6o  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

In  April  1854  he  wrote  to  his  wife : —

'  I  kissed  your  portrait,  my  beloved  one,  but  I  kissed  it  in
secret.  The  men  among  whom  I  live,  if  they  had  seen  me  would
have  laughed  at  me,  because  they  have  no  knowledge  of  virtue
or  of  love.  .  .  .  Were  anyone  to  read  the  words  I  write  to
you  he  would  laugh  at  me  and  at  my  love.  But  you  will  not
laugh,  my  beloved.  Those  who  have  not  suffered  as  we
have  suffered  cannot  understand  how  misfortune  strengthens
and  purifies  love.'  1

Settembrini  preserved  his  life  and  his  reason  in  this  hell
by  applying  his  mind  to  his  famous  translation  of  Lucian,
and  by  enjoying  the  friendship  of  his  fellow  prisoner  Silvio
Spaventa.3

In  the  winter  of  1854-55  the  political  prisoners  were  at
length  separated  from  the  criminals  and  confined  together
in  two  rooms  overlooking  the  sea.  Here  they  began
seriously  to  devise  means  of  escape,  concerted  by  secret
correspondence  with  their  Italian  friends  through  the
medium  of  Temple,  the  British  Minister  at  Naples.  Anthony
Panizzi,  an  exile  from  Modena  ever  since  1821,  famous  in
the  land  of  his  adoption  as  the  Librarian  of  the  British
Museum,  formed  a  plot  for  the  release  of  Settembrini  and
Spaventa.  Money  was  collected  for  this  purpose  from
Lord  and  Lady  Holland,  Mr.  Gladstone  and  others.  Sir
James  Hudson,  the  British  Minister  at  Turin,  who  had
already  earned  the  confidence  of  all  parties  of  Itahan  patriots,
from  Cavour  downwards,  introduced  the  English  conspira-
tors to  the  Democrats  of  Genoa,  well  knowing  that  they
were  better  suited  than  Moderates  and  Cavourians  for  an
enterprise  of  this  character.^  The  Italian  end  of  the  plot
was  therefore  placed  in  the  hands  of  three  men  :  Medici,
who  had  so  gallantly  defended  the  Vascello,  the  key  to  the
Janiculum,  in  the  siege  of  1849  »  Bertani,  the  head  doctor
of  the  Roman  hospitals  on  that  occasion,  now  the  chief  agent
and  friend  of  Mazzini  in  Italy  ; and  Garibaldi  himself —

1  Settembrini,  il.  323-325.  "  Spaventa,  156-160.

3  Cavour,  indeed,  knew  of  the  plot,  and  believed  that  Palmerston  knew
also. Castromediano,  1.  273,

PLOT  TO  RELEASE  SETTEMBRINI  6i

three  old  friends  who  were  destined  ere  long  to  organise  and
execute  a  more  important  but  no  less  hairbrained  adventure
than  the  release  of  Setterabrini  from  San  Stefano.  Gari-
baldi, all  agog  for  action  on  however  small  a  scale,  under-
took to  command  the  expedition,  and  a  detailed  plan  of
escape  was  arranged  with  the  prisoners.  But  the  ship,
purchased  by  the  English  sympathisers,  was  lost  off  Yar-
mouth in  October  1855,  before  ever  Garibaldi  had  set  foot
on  her  deck.  The  plot  never  fairly  recovered  from  this  blow,
though  Garibaldi  paid  a  flying  visit  to  Panizzi  in  the  British
Museum  in  February  1856.  But  Temple  had  long  thought
it  imprudent,  and  Panizzi  was  won  over  to  that  opinion.
By  the  end  of  the  year  even  Bertani  gave  up  hope.  So
Garibaldi  remained  on  Caprera,  and  Settembrini  on  San
Stefano  for  another  three  years.i

While  the  emissaries  of  this  abortive  plot  were  passing
between  Caprera,  Genoa  and  England,  the  stir  of  movement
began  again  in  the  Neapolitan  dominions.  After  1848  all
hope  had  been  dead,  and  even  indignation  had  been  muffled
by  fear,  until  Cavour's  Crimean  policy  encouraged  the
Italian  cause  in  general,  and  England  and  France  raised
the  Neapolitan  question  in  particular.  Finally,  in  October
1856,  the  two  Western  powers  withdrew  their  representa-
tives from  Naples  for  no  reason  in  the  world  except  that
the  king  sturdily  refused  to  listen  to  our  advice  as  to  his
methods  of  governing  his  own  subjects.^  This  action  of
Palmerston  and  Clarendon,  though  it  was  shrewdly  criticised
by  men  of  the  world  as  being  at  once  interfering  and  impo-
tent, had  real  effect  in  encouraging  King  Ferdinand's
rebellious  subjects,  who  saw  in  it  a  promise  of  help,  and  an
official  endorsement  of  Mr.  Gladstone's  accusations.  The
victories  of  the  Italians  in  the  Crimea,  and  the  importance
of  the  English  and  French  action  at  Naples,  were  both
greatly  exaggerated  as  rumour  passed  secretly  from  mouth

^  Milan  MS.,  Archivio  Bertani,  Plico  D.  Risorg.  anno  1.,  1.  22-65,
Cattaneo,  127,  128.  Panizzi's  Life,  il.  131-143.  Mario  Supp,  135.  Mario
Vita,  i.  147,  148.

Br,  Parh  Papers,  2,  p.  34  and  passim,

62  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

to  mouth  among  the  Sicihans  and  South  Itahans,  whose
ill-informed  and  easily  excited  minds  were  rendered  doubly
credulous  by  the  artificial  ignorance  imposed  by  the  censor.
The  era  of  hope  and  conspiracy  began  again. ^

But  in  order  to  understand  the  three  rival  policies
directed  against  the  King  of  Naples — the  Murattist,  the
Mazzinian  and  the  Cavourian — and  Garibaldi's  relation  to
each,  it  will  be  necessary  to  take  a  wider  survey  of  Itahan
affairs.

1  Greville,  viii,  60-65,  7^}  S9. De  Cesare's  F.  di  P,,  Ixxxii,  Ixxxiii,

CHAPTER  IV

CAVOUR  BRINGS  THE  DEMOCRATS  AND  NAPOLEON  III.  INTO
HIS  CAMP. — PISACANE'S  EXPEDITION, — PLOMBI^RES  AND
THE  DECLARATION  OF  WAR  AGAINST  AUSTRIA. —
1856-59

•  The  adhesion  of  Garibaldi  to  our  principles  Is  an  event  of  immense
importance.  We  must  make  the  utmost  of  this  event,  which  secures  for
us  the  sympathies,  and,  when  required,  the  active  assistance  of  all  the
youth  of  Italy.' — Letter  of  Pallavicino  to  Manin,  1857.^

The  Democratic  party,  in  which  resided  most  of  the
faith,  vigour  and  initiative  of  the  Italian  Risorgimento,  as
well  as  most  of  its  unwisdom  and  rashness,  had  in
the  summer  of  1849  come  into  deadly  conflict  on  the  walls
of  Rome  with  France  and  Napoleon  III.  Nothing  short
of  the  supreme  genius  of  Cavour  could  in  ten  years'  time
have  brought  these  irreconcilable  enemies  side  by  side  into
the  field  against  Austria.  Indeed,  Cavour  was  one  of  the
very  few  men  who  so  much  as  realised  the  necessity  for
this  strange  combination,  but  he  saw  from  the  first  that
the  Piedmontese  statesmen  and  soldiers  could  not  over-
come Austria  and  the  princes  dependent  on  her  in  Italy,
without  the  assistance  both  of  France  and  of  the  Italian
Democrats.  In  September  1856  he  made  his  pact  with
the  Democratic  leaders.  In  July  1858,  at  Plombieres,  he
made  his  pact  with  the  French  Emperor.  In  the  spring
of  1859  he  forced  on  the  war  and  the  revolution.

On  the  side  of  the  Italian  Democrats,  the  originators  of
the  alliance  with  Cavour  were  Manin,  the  creator  and
defender  of  the  Venetian  Republic  of  1848,  and  his  intimate
friend  Pallavicino. 2  The  immense  value  which  they
attached  to  the  adhesion  of  Garibaldi  to  their  new  policy

^  Manin  e  Pall,  312.  ^  Gioberti  e  Pall,  and  Manin  e  Pall.,  passim,

63

64  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

is  shown  by  the  words  which  stand  at  the  head  of  this
chapter.  That  adhesion  was  readily  given.  On  August  13,
1856,  Garibaldi,  introduced  by  Pallavicino,  had  his  first
interview  with  Cavour.  The  guerilla  chief  was  received  with
courteous  familiarity,  and  went  away  rejoicing  and  speaking
of  the  great  minister  as  '  his  friend.'  1  The  interview
was  secret,  but  Garibaldi  next  year  publicly  proclaimed
his  acceptance  of  Victor  Emmanuel's  kingship  as  the  basis
of  Italian  unity.  When  the  world  knew  that  the  defender
of  the  Roman  Republic  had,  at  the  instigation  of  the  defender
of  the  Venetian  Republic,  accepted  the  principle  of  Monarchy,
all  chance  of  further  disruption  in  the  Liberal  ranks  was
removed,  and  the  Italian  patriots,  with  a  few  important
exceptions,  were  united  under  one  flag.  Mazzini's  policy
of  the  '  neutral  banner ' — that  is,  the  policy  of  temporary
aUiance  with  Piedmont  against  Austria,  leaving  the  question
of  Monarchy  or  Repubhc  to  be  settled  after  the  war — was
now  repudiated.  Garibaldi  never  ceased  to  think  that  a
Republic  was  ideally  the  best  form  of  government,  but  he
remained  for  the  rest  of  his  life  actively  loyal  to  the  Italian
monarchy,  and  never,  though  often  under  severe  tempta-
tion, consented  to  raise  the  *  neutral  banner.'

To  this  great  decision,  the  most  important  and  the  best
political  action  of  his  long  career,  he  was  urged  by  many
motives.  Above  all  else  he  saw  that  the  Monarchy  would
unite  a  country  which  the  Republic  would  divide.  '  I  was
and  still  am  a  Republican,'  he  wrote,  '  but  I  have  no  belief
in  a  system  of  popular  government  so  uncompromising
as  to  impose  itself  by  force  on  the  majority  of  a  nation.'  2
Another  motive  perhaps  was  irritation  with  Mazzini,  the
legacy  of  their  quarrels  during  the  defence  of  Rome,  and
the  result  of  the  natural  incompatibility  of  their  characters. »

*  Manin  e  Pall.  172.  ^  Mem.  ■z-j-j.

^  When  Garibaldi  came  to  London  in  1864,  Mr.  John  Morley,  who
had  seen  his  triumphal  entry,  was  describing  it  in  the  erening  to  Mazzini.
Mazzini  asked,  '  Well,  Mr.  Morley,  have  you  ever  seen  a  lion  ?  '  '  Yes,  I
have,  at  the  Zoo.!  *  Have  you  noticed  the  face  of  a  lion  ?  Do  you  not
think  it  is  a  very  foolish  face  ?  Well,  that  is  Garibaldi's,?  I  have  this
story  at  first  hand.

THE  NATIONAL  SOCIETY  65

Another,  closely  connected  with  this  feeling,  was  his
soldierly  dislike  of  the  Mazzinian  method  of  undertaking
wars  with  undisciplined  and  insufficient  forces,  and  his
perception  that  the  regular  army  of  Piedmont  was  essential
tp  the  expulsion  of  the  Austrians.i  We  must  also  take
into  account  at  this  period  his  confidence  in  Cavour,  and
his  belief  that  Italy  was  on  the  eve  of  war  and  revolution,
stirred  up  this  time  '  from  above.'  2  He  had,  besides,
at  all  times,  a  vague  belief  in  the  uses  of  a  popular  Dictator
to  supplement  or  replace  ParHamentary  government,  and
this  theory,  which  ran  strangely  athwart  his  democratic
and  republican  principles  in  his  illogical  mind,  predisposed
him  to  accept  the  headship  of  Victor  Emmanuel.^  Last,
but  not  least,  we  must  count  his  personal  devotion  to
the  chivalrous  warrior  king.  Garibaldi's  belief  in  Victor
Emmanuel  survived  by  many  years  his  belief  in  Cavour,
and  was  ended  only  by  death.

In  the  summer  of  1857  the  leaders  of  the  new  '  National
party  '  formed  the  '  Italian  National  Society,'  modelHng
its  organisation  on  that  of  the  English  Anti-Corn-Law
League.  Italians  of  all  the  provinces,  free  or  enslaved,  were
invited  to  join,  and  did  so  in  thousands.  The  officers  of
the  society  were  converted  Republicans  ;  Pallavicino  was
president.  Garibaldi  vice-president,  the  SiciHan  La  Farina
secretary.  Manin,  in  his  exile  in  Paris,  signed  the  articles
of  the  society  on  his  death-bed  in  August  1857,  and  did  not
live  to  see  the  ripening  of  his  well-laid  scheme  for  the
liberation  of  Italy  .^

Hitherto  the  policy  of  the  House  of  Savoy,  even  when
patriotic  and  Liberal,  had  been  '  provincial ' — or  '  muni-
cipal '  as  the  Mazzinians  tauntingly  called  it — aiming  at
the  extension  of  the  boundaries  of  Piedmont,  not  at  the
creation  of  an  Italian  State  in  which  Piedmont  should
merge  its  own  existence.  Hitherto  the  '  men  of  the  revolu-
tion,' the  Democratic  party  inspired  by  Mazzini,  had  been

'  Mario,  212. Manin  e  Pall.  164. Ciampoli,  74.  "  Ciampoli,  76,

'  Ci&mpoli,  85,  952-954. Mem.  320,  344. Guerzoni,  1,  411,
*  Manin  e  Pall.  341-348. Cappelleiti's  V,  E.  i.  347,  348.

F

66  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

the  leaders  of  the  movement  for  national  unity,  which
had  seemed  a  chimera  to  Piedmontese  statesmen.  Cavour's
predecessors  and  many  of  his  colleagues  *  wished  to  annex
Lombardy  and  the  Duchies  but  not  to  make  the  nation.'  i
But  now  things  had  changed.  The  Prime  Minister  of
Piedmont  was  in  secret  alHance  with  a  society,  headed  by  ex-
Republican  chiefs,  whose  avowed  aim  was  to  place  the
crown  of  all  Italy  and  Sicily  on  the  head  of  Victor  Emmanuel.
Each  side  had  accepted  something  of  the  programme  and
spirit  of  the  other.

But  the  degree  to  which  Cavour  was  conspiring  with
Pallavicino  and  Garibaldi  against  the  Pope  and  the  King  of
Naples  had  to  be  concealed,  lest  Napoleon  should  take
alarm  and  so  the  other  conspiracy  against  Austria  in  the
North  be  utterly  frustrated.  For  Napoleon  would  not
allow  North  Italy  to  annex  either  Rome  or  the  South.
On  the  one  hand  he  was  protector  of  the  Pope,  and  on  the
other  he  had  designs  of  placing  on  the  throne  of  Naples
his  own  kinsman  Lucien  Murat,  who,  through  his  father
Joachim,  had  some  rights  of  memory  in  that  kingdom.  All
that  Cavour  dared  do,  to  thwart  these  Murattist  designs
so  dangerous  to  the  prospects  of  Italian  unity,  was  to
put  the  EngUsh  diplomats  on  their  guard.^  In  September,
1857,  he  explained  his  position  frankly  to  La  Farina,  the
Sicilian  secretary  of  the  National  Society : —

'  I  have  faith,'  said  Cavour,  '  that  Italy  will  become  one
State,  and  will  have  Rome  for  its  capital.  But  I  do  not  know
whether  it  is  ready  for  this  great  change,  for  I  do  not  know  the
other  provinces  of  Italy.  I  am  minister  of  the  King  of  Piedmont,
and  I  cannot,  I  ought  not,  to  say  or  do  anything  prematurely
to  compromise  his  dynasty.  Make  your  National  Society,  and
we  shall  not  have  long  to  wait  for  our  opportunity.  But  re-
member that  among  my  political  friends  no  one  believes  the
enterprise  (viz.  the  union  of  Italy)  possible,  and  that  haste  would
compromise  me  and  the  cause.  Come  to  see  me  whenever  you
like,  but  come  at  daybreak,  and  let  no  one  else  see  or  know.
If,'  he  added  smiling,  'I  am  questioned  in  Parliament  or  by

^Gioh.  e  Pall,  viii,  ix. Chiala,  ii.  144. ^  Chiala,  ii.  143,  296,  45S,  459.

CAVOUR  AND  LA  FARIMA  67

diplomats,  I  shall  deny  you,  like  Peter,  and  say,  "  I  know  him
not."  '

From  that  time  forward  La  Farina  regularly  visited  Cavour,
coming  up  to  his  bedroom  every  day  before  sunrise,  by  a
secret  stair.^

For  the  present,  therefore,  the  Piedmontese  propaganda
in  Naples  and  Sicily  had  little  open  support  from  the  Pied-
montese Government.  But  it  was  vigorously  pushed  by
Cavour's  Neapolitan  friends  living  in  exile  at  Turin,  like
Antonio  Scialoja,  as  also  by  La  Farina  and  the  National
Society. 2  It  was  also  favourably  regarded  by  the  men
who  from  the  Neapolitan  prisons  exercised  a  profound
influence  over  Neapolitan  opinion.  Poerio  managed  to
smuggle  out  from  the  dungeon  of  Montefusco  a  pencilled
note  with  the  words :  '  Let  our  pole-star  be  always  and
only  Piedmont.'  Both  he  and  Settembrini  condemned
the  French  Murattist  movement  as  anti-national,  and  the
action  of  the  Mazzinians  as  factious,  premature,  and  some-
times criminal.3  Por  the  Mazzinian  party,  though  it
did  useful  work  in  combating  the  Murattists,  *  attacked
the  Bourbon  rule  by  some  very  questionable  methods.
The  attempt  to  assassinate  King  Ferdinand,  in  December
1856,  made  by  the  soldier  Agesilao  Milano,  who  wounded
him  with  the  bayonet  during  a  review,  was  the  act  of  a
solitary  individual,  a  Mazzinian  fanatic  ready  to  sacrifice
his  own  life,  and  endowed  with  moral  qualities  which
explain,  though  they  can  hardly  justify,  the  high  esteem
in  which  his  memory  was  held  by  Italian  and  English
sympathisers. 5  But  to  Mazzini  himself  and  a  large
section  of  his  followers  must  be  assigned  the  praise  and
blame  for  Pisacane's  expedition  of  the  following  summer.

The  Mazzinians,  alarmed  at  the  progress  of  Murattism,
determined  on  immediate  action  in  the  south. A  plan

1  Chiala,  il.  144.  ^  De  Cesare's  Scialoja,  34,  35. Manin  e  Pall.  338.

*  Castroniediano,  il.  37,  38. De  Cesare's  F.  di  P.  p.  Ixxxlli. Poerio,
40-42,  52, Settembrini,  ii.  414-416,  434.

*  Mazzini,  ix.  p.  civ,  cv.  ^  De  Cesave,  i.  167-176.

F  2

68  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

was  formed  to  invade  the  Neapolitan  coast  from  Genoa,
the  sea-cradle  of  Italian  democracy.  Mazzini  himself  left
England,  and  came  disguised  to  the  base  of  operations.  But
the  resources  of  his  party,  after  the  recent  secessions  to  the
National  Society,  were  so  small,  the  reports  from  the  Nea-
politan capital  so  discouraging,  that  half  even  of  the  faithful
remnant  tried  to  persuade  their  chief  to  abandon  the  rash
project.  His  old  friend  Saffi,  who^  having  shared  his
triumvirate  in  Rome,  now  shared  his  exile  in  England,
and  Bertani,  his  agent  in  Genoa,  were  alike  opposed  to
the  design.  The  best  Neapolitan  soldier  among  the  exiles,
Cosenz,  afterwards  Garibaldi's  able  lieutenant  in  Sicily
and  Naples,  refused  to  lead  men  to  destruction. i  Gari-
baldi himself,  when  Jessie  White  Mario  upbraided  him
for  declining  to  join  the  expedition,  replied  to  her  with
kindness  and  good  humour,  but  declared  that  he  disapproved
of  sending  men  to  the  slaughter  '  to  make  the  canaille  laugh.' 2

But  Mazzini  found  men  of  the  right  temper  for  his
purpose  in  the  Neapolitan  Carlo  Pisacane,  the  Calabrian
Nicotera,  and  the  Sicilian  Rosolino^  Pilo.  On  June  25,  1857,
Pisacane  and  Nicotera  sailed  from  Genoa  in  a  small  steamer
named  the  CagUari,  taking  with  them  two  dozen  young
men  of  a  spirit  no  less  determined  than  their  own.  They
missed  Pilo,  who  was  on  the  look  out  for  them  with  a  similar
force  in  another  small  ship,  and  sailed  on  alone  to  meet  their
fate.

The  original  design  had  been  to  land  first  on  the  island
of  San  Stefano,  and  release  Settembrini,  Spaventa,  and  their
fellow  prisoners.  But  Spaventa,  whom  they  found  means
to  consult,  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  plan,  foi
fear  that  the  forcible  capture  of  the  island  would  involve
the  release  of  the  malefactors  as  well  as  of  the  political

^Bertani,  1.  242.  Sapri,  chaps,  i-vli.  Paolucci's  Pilo,  217..  Mazzini,
Ix.  p.  cxxx-cxxxviii.

2  This  letter  is  given  in  full  in  Mario  Supp.  139,  140,  where  its  real  date,
Feb.  3,  1857,  and  its  context  is  given.  The  date  of  the  letter  in  Mario,
Vita,  i.  149,  and  Ciampoli,  73,  is  incorrect.

^  Often  spelt  Rosalino,  but  Sicilian  writers,  notably  Signor  Paolucci,
spell  it  Kosolino.

PISACANE'S  EXPEDITION  69

prisoners.!  Pisacane  therefore  landed  instead  at  the
neighbouring  convict  island  of  Ponza,  which  the  little
force  captured  by  a  brilliant  stroke.  There  followed  the
disgraceful  scene  averted  from  San  Stefano  by  Spaventa's
unselfish  caution.  Pisacane  released  and  took  away  with
him  on  the  CagUari  some  200  common  convicts,  besides  a
dozen  '  politicals  '  and  a  hundred  old  soldiers  of  the  War
of  Liberation. 2  With  this  undesirable  force  they  landed  at
Sapri.  Some  of  the  Liberals  of  the  neighbourhood  tried  to
raise  the  cry  of  Viva  Murat,  but  the  cries  raised  by  the  in-
vaders were  Viva  I' Italia  and  Viva  la  Repuhhlica.^  As  they
marched  up  country  into  the  mountains  of  the  Basilicata,
they  found  the  peasantry  in  some  villages  neutral,  while
others  turned  out  to  defend  their  homes  against  a  force
which  they  justly  beheved  to  be  principally  composed  of
criminals,  although  Pisacane  was  able  to  repress  any
tendency  to  misconduct  during  the  short  time  the  expedi-
tion lasted.^  Reactionary  feeling,  stirred  up  by  the
village  priests,  was  not  wanting,  and  the  Liberators  found
themselves  opposed  not  only  by  Neapolitan  troops,  but  by
armed  peasants,  and  even  by  women  and  children.  After
two  severe  conflicts  with  the  troops  and  peasantry  at  Padula
and  Sanza,  in  which  the  convicts  bore  themselves  well,  the
Republican  force  was  overpowered.  A  pitiless  massacre
ensued,  for  the  peasants  were  mad  with  rage.  Pisacane
died  fighting ;  Nicotera  and  others  were  captured,  desper-
ately wounded.^

Meanwhile  at  Genoa,  Mazzini  plotted  to  surprise  and
capture  the  royal  arsenals,  in  order  to  fit  out  further  expedi-
tions in  aid  of  Pisacane.  The  Piedmontese  government  had
warning,  and  forestalled  the  attempt.  Thereupon,  by
Mazzini's  advice,  it  was  decided  to  abandon  the  project,  but
one  small  party  of  the  conspirators  proceeded  to  carry  out

1  Nisco,  Ferd.  II.  362.  The  Panlzzi-Garibaldi  plot  for  their  release
(see  p.  61  above)  had  involved  no  risk  of  freeing  the  common  convicts,  as
stealth,  not  force,  was  the  principle  of  that  plan.

^  Sapri,  156, Nisco,  Ferd..  II.  362.  ^  Sapri,  195. Nicotera,  15.

*  Sapri,  197, Nicotera,  15. ^  Sapri,  chaps,  xv.-xix. Nicotera,  15-22.

70  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

its  original  orders,  and  a  scuffle  took  place  in  which  a
Piedmontese  soldier  was  killed.  Throughout  the  peninsula
the  indignation  of  patriots  was  aroused  against  the  men
who  had  fired  on  the  national  uniform  and  wantonly  risked
a  civil  war  in  the  State  which  was  now  regarded  as  Italy  in
embryo.  Public  opinion  enabled  Cavour  to  indulge  to  the
full  his  lifelong  hatred  of  Mazzini,  which  contrasted  so
strongly  with  his  admiration  for  Garibaldi.  Mazzini
escaped  to  England,  but  was  condemned  to  death  in
his  absence,  and  many  of  his  followers  were  sentenced
to  long  terms  of  imprisonment.  His  prestige  had  received
an  even  more  severe  blow  than  that  which  it  had  suffered
from  the  affairs  of  Mantua  and  Milan  five  years  before.  His
party  was  in  ruins. i

Pisacane's  expedition  against  the  Bourbons  is  related  to
Garibaldi's  successful  expedition  three  years  later,  exactly
as  John  Brown's  raid  on  Harper's  Ferry  is  related  to  the
American  Civil  War.  Pisacane  was  at  the  time  condemned
by  almost  all  the  friends  of  freedom,  as  having  brought
discredit  on  the  cause,  but  a  few  years  later  his  name  was
the  watchword  of  that  cause  in  the  hour  of  its  triumph,
when  the  ghosts  of  the  forerunners  seemed  to  be  marching
in  front  of  the  triumphant  columns  of  liberation.  Like  John
Brown,  he  had  exacerbated  the  feud,  made  compromise  im-
possible, and  so  helped  to  bring  on  the  final  struggle.  Like
Brown,  he  had  committed  some  acts  that  were  criminal,  and
some  that  were  sublime,  and  above  all  else  he  had  known
how  to  die.  The  Genoese  part  of  the  plot,  the  attack  on
the  Piedmontese  arsenals,  had  scarcely  the  shadow  of  an
excuse,  but  its  failure  served  at  least  to  show  that  without
the  secret  connivance  of  the  Piedmontese  authorities  no
effective  expedition  could  sail  from  Genoa  against  the  Bour-
bons. In  i860  this  lesson  was  not  forgotten  by  Garibaldi —
nor  by  Cavour.

Although  Cavour's severe  reprisals  on  the  Mazzinians

1  Sapri, chap.  xiv. Chiala,  11.  168-173. King's  Mazzini,  174,  175.
Mazzini,  ix.  cxxxix-clv, Risorg.  anno  ii.,  ii.  p.  205,

ORSINI'S  ATTEMPT  71

for  the  Genoese  insurrection  incurred  some  censure  from
contemporaries,  and  more  from  posterity,  those  measures
were  thought  too  lenient  by  the  nervous  usurper  in  the
Tuileries,  who  denounced  Genoa  as  the  most  dangerous  city
in  Europe  and,  Hke  a  true  Bonaparte,  ceaselessly  complained
that  political  exiles  were  permitted  to  live  in  Piedmont,
and  that  the  press  there  enjoyed  a  relative  freedom.^  His
querulous  outcries  about  exiles  and  newspapers  were  treated
with  scorn  when  addressed  to  Great  Britain,  but  caused
grave  anxiety  to  Victor  Emmanuel  and  Cavour,  who  on
the  one  hand  could  not  abandon  the  system  of  liberty  in
Piedmont  without  sacrificing  the  newly-won  attachment
of  the  Democrats  throughout  the  Peninsula,  nor,  on  the  other,
offend  Napoleon  without  losing  their  last  chance  of  driving
the  Austrians  out  of  Milan.  From  this  dilemma  they
escaped  in  strange  fashion  through  an  event  which  seemed
certain  by  its  very  nature  to  precipitate  them  into  the
abyss.

On  the  night  of  January  14,  1858,  as  the  Emperor
Napoleon  and  the  Empress  Eugenie  were  driving  together
to  the  opera,  three  bombs  were  hurled  at  them  near  the
entrance  of  the  theatre.  The  horses  were  killed,  but  the
Emperor,  like  his  uncle  under  the  curiously  similar  circum-
stances of  the  royalist  plot  of  1800,  stepped  out  unhurt
from  the  ruins  of  the  carriage.  Around  lay  156  wounded,
of  whom  eight  expired.  When  Cavour  heard  of  this  wanton
slaughter,  equally  provocative  to  the  sovereign  who  had
been  the  intended  victim  and  to  his  people  who  had  been
the  actual  sufferers,  he  exclaimed  in  an  agony  of  apprehen-
sion— '  if  only  this  is  not  the  work  of  Italians  !  '  Soon  his
worst  fears  were  realized.  The  criminal  turned  out  to  be
Felice  Orsini,  ex-official  of  the  Roman  Republic  of  1849,
in  the  service  of  which  he  had  distinguished  himself  by
suppressing  terrorism  and  political  crime  at  Ancona.^
Since  then  he  had  lived  much  in  England,  seeing  Mazzini's
English  friends,  and  still  sharing  his  political  views.  Of
these  views,  perhaps  the  most  erroneous  was  a  fixed  belief

'  Bianchi,  vii.  381-384.  ^  Trevelyan's  Gar.  Fame,  104.

72  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

that  only  Napoleon  prevented  France  from  going  to  war  on
behalf  of  Italy,  whereas  the  exact  opposite  was  the  case.
Under  this  delusion  as  to  politics,  and  a  yet  worse  delusion
of  his  own  as  to  ethics,  Orsini,  who  had  at  this  time
quarrelled  with  Mazzini  over  some  private  affairs,  devised
his  plot  without  the  knowledge  of  his  old  associates,  but  with
the  help  of  some  mean  tools  of  his  own  finding.i

Austria  herself  could  not  have  wished  for  an  event  more
compromising  to  the  hopes  of  Italy,  except  for  the  one
circumstance  that  the  bombs  and  bomb-throwers  had
come  to  France  not  from  Piedmont  but  from  England.
The  anger  of  France  was  expended  against  '  perfidious
Albion,'  with  whom  a  long  and  complicated  quarrel  arose
out  of  the  affair.  At  first,  indeed.  Napoleon  was  scarcely
less  angry  with  Piedmont,  and  demanded  of  her  in  set  terms
the  expulsion  of  the  emigrants  and  the  silencing  of  the
Democratic  press.  The  moment  was  one  of  extreme  peril.
But  now,  as  on  several  later  occasions,  the  King  came  to  the
rescue  of  his  great  minister.  In  a  spirited  but  friendly
letter  Victor  Emmanuel  stated  the  position  with  a  wise
frankness.

*  If  the  Emperor  wishes  me  to  use  violence  in  my  kingdom,
let  him  know  that  I  should  lose  all  my  influence,  and  he  all  the
sympathies  of  a  generous  and  noble  nation.  .  .  that  he  has  no
right  to  treat  a  faithful  ally  in  this  fashion  ;  that  I  have  never
endured  violence  from  anyone ;  that  I  follow  the  path  of
honour  without  reproach,  and  am  responsible  for  that  honour
only  to  God  and  my  people  ;  that  our  house  has  carried  its  head
high  for  850  years,  and  that  no  one  will  make  me  bow  it  |  and
that  with  all  this  I  desire  to  be  nothing  but  his  friend.'

In  accordance  with  instructions  received,  General  Delia
Rocca  '  committed  the  imprudence '  of  reading  to  the
Emperor  these  words  which  would  have  goaded  the  first
Napoleon  to  some  outburst  of  vulgar  fury.  '  That  is  what
I  call  courage,'  was  the  generous  reply  ; *  your  king  is  a

^  La  Gorce,  ii.  212-224,  239.  King,  il.  45.  Mazzini,  x.  p.  xv.  King's
Mazzini,  165. Martinengo  Cesar&sco's  Cavour,  128.

KING  VICTOR  EMMANUEL  73

fine  fellow ;  I  like  his  letter.'  1  The  doubtful  and  weak-
willed  guide  of  Europe's  destiny  was  touched  by  the
undiplomatic  sound  of  truth,  purpose,  and  courage  ;  the
adventurer  was  held  in  envious  admiration  of  '  that  ancient
royalty  which  was  the  one  thing  he  could  not  purchase.'

And,  indeed,  the  fiery  little  warrior,  with  the  immense
moustache,  who  strutted  about,  head  in  air,  as  though  he
were  vainly  trying  to  overtop  his  courtiers,  was  '  every  inch
a  king.'  Victor  Emmanuel  came  of  a  royal  stock  so  ancient
and  so  honourable  that  it  could  afford  to  have  democratic
sympathies  without  losing  c^te.  Like  the  warrior  of
Navarre,  who,  two  centuries  earlier,  had  done  for  France
a  work  somewhat  similar  to  that  which  he  himself  was
doing  for  Italy,  he  had  been  nursed  to  hardihood  as  a  moun-
taineer and  hunter,  and  had  early  learnt,  by  the  discipline
of  evil  times,  to  estimate  men  and  things  as  they  were,  and
not  as  they  seemed  when  viewed  from  palace  windows.
Though  of  rougher  speech  and  blunter  manners  than  the
'  gentle  Henry,'  he  too  was  loved  by  the  common  people
whose  welfare  he  had  at  heart  and  whose  company  he  was
always  glad  to  share  in  war  and  in  the  chase.  He,  too,
hunted  women  with  as  little  rest  or  scruple  as  he  hunted
game.  But,  in  other  respects,  Victor  Emmanuel  had  great
virtues.  His  personal  and  family  pride,  perhaps  the
strongest  motive  in  all  his  actions,  took  a  noble  form,  for  it
was  his  first  rule  of  life  to  be  the  '  man  of  honour,'  the
galanUwmo  in  all  his  dealings — with  his  subjects,  to  whom  he
Imd  sworn  constitutional  oaths,  with  Napoleon,  with  expec-
tant Italy.  He  too  often  deceived,  or  allowed  Cavour  to
deceive,  perfidious  enemies,  but  those  to  whom  he  owed
an  obligation,  or  who  put  their  trust  in  him,  never  had
reason  to  repent  it.  His  courage  was  boundless,  his  good
sense  remarkable,  and  his  Italian  patriotism  stronger  than
his  religious  devotion,  with  which  it  so  often  came  into
conflict.

It  soon  appeared,  to  Cavour's  astonishment  and  joy,
that  not  c«ily  was  the  master  of  France  not  alienated  from

1  Delia  Rocca,  127-132,

74  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Italy,  but  that  he  had  now  at  last  decided  actively  to
befriend  her.  His  conduct  towards  the  man  who  had
tried  to  murder  him  is  one  of  the  strangest  chapters  of  the
fascinating  and  mysterious  book  of  the  psychology  of
Napoleon  III.  He  permitted  the  trial  to  be  so  conducted
as  to  become  rather  the  apotheosis  of  a  martyred  patriot
than  the  condemnation  of  a  criminal.  Though  Orsini
perished  on  the  scaffold,  it  was  in  the  odour  of  a  sanctity  cast
about  him  by  his  executioners.  The  letter  in  which  he
appealed  to  Napoleon  to  win  the  gratitude  of  twenty-five
millions  of  Italians  by  freeing  their  country  from  Austria,
was  not  only  allowed  to  be  read  in  the  most  impressive
manner  at  the  trial,  but  was  printed  in  the  French  papers,
and  even,  at  Napoleon's  special  request,  in  the  Piedmontese
Of&cial  Gazette.  Cavour,  who  had  no  sympathy  with
murderers  anywhere,  nor  with  conspirators  outside  dip-
lomacy, was  almost  shocked  at  Napoleon's  prostration
before  his  would-be  assassin,  but  since  the  publication  of
Orsini's  letter  was  a  direct  challenge  from  France  to  Austria,
he  gladly  printed  it,  and  it  remains  perhaps  the  strangest
document  that  ever  enlivened  an  official  newspaper.^

The  reasons  why  Napoleon  relented  to  Orsini  and  to
Italy  will  always  be  open  to  conjecture.  His  enemies  attri-
buted all  to  fear  of  assassination,  remarking  that  by  a
campaign  in  Lombardy  he  could  make  reparation  for  Rome,
and  so  sleep  at  nights  without  dreaming  of  that  single-
minded  Italian  ferocity  of  purpose  which  otherwise  would
dog  him  to  the  grave.  But  those  know  little  of  Napoleon
who  think  that  fear  or  any  other  single  passion  or  single
object  can  explain  his  conduct  in  anything. If  he  had

* '  Que  Voire  Majesie  se  rappelle  que  les  Italiens,  an  milieu  desquels  dtaii
mon  pire,  verserent  avec  joie  leur  sang  pour  Napoleon  le  Grand,  part-out  oit  il
lui  plut  de  les  conduire  ;  qu'elle  se  rappelle  qu'il  lui  furent  ftdeles  jusqu' a  sa
chute  ;  qu'elle  se  rappelle  que  tant  que  I'dtalie  ne  sera  pas  independante,  la
tranquillity  de  VEurope  et  celle  de  Votre  Majeste  ne  seront  qu'une  chimera,
que  Votre  Majeste  ne  repousse  pas  le  vcbu  supreme  d'un  patriote  sur  les  marches
de  I'echafaud  ;  qu'elle  delivre  ma  patrie,  et  les  benedictions  de  25  millions  de
citoyens  la  suivronf  dans  la  posterite.'  La  Gorce,  ii.  349-353.  BiancM,  vii.
403,  404, Chiala,  ii.  540,  541. Marfinengo  Cesaresco's  Cavour,  129,  130,

NAPOLEON  AND  ITALY  75

been  summoned  before  the  throne  of  Omnipotence  to  give
an  account  of  his  intentions,  he  could  hardly  at  any  moment
of  his  reign  have  given  a  clear  and  consistent  answer.  He
was  at  once  a  selfish  and  scheming  adventurer  who  murdered
liberty  in  his  own  country  and  protested  against  its  natural
manifestations  in  neighbouring  lands,  and  a  romantic
idealist  who  wished  to  extend  the  principles  of  the  French
Revolution  over  Europe.  The  liberticide  heard  the  cry  of
Poland  and  of  Italy,  which  rose  in  vain  to  the  ears  of  many
who  disapproved  his  tyranny  in  France.^  He  was  touched
by  the  spectacle  of  Orsini's  self-sacrifice,  and  remembered
the  day  when,  twenty-seven  years  before,  he  had  himself
conspired  and  revolted  on  behalf  of  Italian  freedom.  The
Buonapartes  were  of  ancient  Italian  origin.  The  founder
of  their  modern  fortunes  had  first  leapt  to  European  great-
ness by  his  Italian  campaign  of  1796,  and  perhaps  the
purest  and  best  result  of  all  his  mighty  activities  had  been
the  resurrection  of  Italian  life  after  two  centuries  of  death-
like trance.  Was  that  resurrection  now  to  be  completed
or  to  be  suppressed  ?  And  if  military  glory  was  to  be  one  of
the  bases  of  the  restored  Napoleonic  dynasty  ('  peace,'  of
course,  was  to  be  another),  where  could  it  be  better  won  than
in  the  plains  of  Lodi  and  Marengo,  and  in  sight  of  the  hills
of  Rivoii  ?  2

Such  were  Napoleon's  personal  aspirations,  encouraged
by  his  intimate  friend,  the  Italian  Count  Arese,  and  by  his
cousin  Prince  Jerome  Napoleon,  who,  with  all  his  faults,
felt  a  strong  and  disinterested  enthusiasm  even  for  the
extreme  idea  of  complete  Italian  unity.^  But,  for  the  most
part,  Napoleon  III.  was  served,  surrounded,  and  maintained

^  Greville,  viii.  219,  220.

2  Material  for  the  fascinating  study  of  Napoleon  III.  is  most  easily
available  in  La  Gorce'f  fine  work,  and  in  OUivier's  Empire  Liberal.

The  best  essay  or.  the  subject  in  English  is  Mr.  H.  A.  L.  Fisher's  Bona,
partism  (1908).

^  Afese  and  Principe  Nap.  I  call  Prince  Napoleon  {Plon-Plon)  '  Prince
Jerome,'  as  he  was  usually  called,  though  his  real  name  was  Joseph  ;
Jerome  was  also  the  name  of  his  father  (ob.  i860)  and  of  his  elder  brother
(Ob.  1847).

76  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

by  reactionaries  and  Clericals.  His  wife,  whom  he  had
married  for  love,  was  a  Clerical.  His  throne  depended
on  the  French  Catholics,  and  the  fixed  price  of  their  support
was  the  defence  of  the  Pope's  temporal  power  by  the  armies
of  France.  The  story  runs  that  Cardinal  Antonelli  was
asked  one  day — '  When  will  the  French  garrison  be  with-
drawn from  Rome  ?  *  '  When  I  withdraw  my  garrison
from  Paris,'  was  the  reply.  The  flagrant  contradiction
between  the  terms  on  which  Napoleon  held  his  throne  in
France  and  his  desire  to  liberate  Italy  involved  him,  during
the  remainder  of  his  reign,  in  weak  and  crooked  courses
which  led  him  to  ultimate  disaster.  If  he  had  been  more
far-seeing  or  less  generous  he  would  certainly  have  shrunk
from  stirring  up  the  Itahan  question.

It  was  characteristic  of  his  mind  and  method  that  when
he  entered  into  negotiation  with  Cavour  for  an  offensive
alliance  against  Austria,  he  did  not  dismiss  the  reactionary
Walewski,  but  was  content  to  deceive  him,  carrying  on  the
most  important  diplomatic  transaction  of  his  reign  as  a
profound  secret  behind  the  back  of  his  foreign  minister.
Through  the  agency,  first  of  Prince  Jerome  and  then  of
the  Emperor's  physician.  Dr.  Conneau,i  a  meeting  was
arranged  between  Cavour  and  Napoleon  at  the  quiet  health-
resort  of  Plombieres  during  the  holiday  season  of  1858.
On  July  21,  a  single  conversation,  protracted  for  nearly
eight  hours,  partly  indoors  and  partly  in  the  Emperor's
phaeton  among  the  wooded  valleys  of  the  Vosges,  sufficed
for  the  two  men  to  adjust  the  fate  of  Italy.  When  the
diplomatic  world  heard  that  Cavour  had  been  at  Plom-
bieres incognito,  there  was  some  uneasiness,  but  the  secret  of
what  he  had  done  there  was  well  kept.

The  result  of  that  long  day's  conversation  was  at  once
epitomised  by  Cavour  in  letters  to  General  La  Marmora
and  to  the  King.^  A  suitable  cause  of  quarrel  was  to
be  found  with  Austria,  to  give  colour  before  Europe  to  a
premeditated  attack. Then  200,000  French  and  100,000

1  Principe  Nap.  13. CMala,  ii.  556,  557,

2  Chiala,  ii.  568-584  ;  iii.  p.  xxxii.

THE  PACT  OF  PLOMBIERES

n

Italian  troops  were  to  drive  the  Austrians  from  Milanese
Lombardy  and  from  the  Venetian  Quadrilateral,  and  finally
to  dictate  peace  at  Vienna.  The  Cisalpine  domination  of
the  Tedeschi  was  to  come  to  an  end.  Liberated  Italy
was  not,  however,  to  be  united  in  one  state ;  Napoleon,
as  a  good  Frenchman,  could  no  more  tolerate  a  united  Italy
than  a  united  Germany — though  by  the  irony  of  fate  he
was  destined  to  be  instrumental  in  the  creation  of  both.
By  the  pact  of  Plombieres  Italy  was  to  consist  of  a  federa-
tion of  weak  States,  nominally  under  the  Presidency  of  the
Pope,  really  under  the  protection  of  France.  Of  these  the
strongest  would  be  that  of  North  Italy,  under  Victor
Emmanuel,  which  would  include  Piedmont,  Lombardy,  Venice,
and  the  Pope's  Adriatic  dominions.  His  Umbrian  dominions
would  be  added  to  Tuscany  to  form  a  Central  Italian  State,
while  he  himself  would  retain  Rome  and  the  province  in
which  it  stood.  Naples  must  be  reformed,  or,  as  Napoleon
did  not  attempt  to  conceal,  given  to  Lucien  Murat.  In
return  for  these  benefits  Italy  would  cede  to  France  Savoy
and  possibly  also  Nice,  and  Victor  Emmanuel  would  be  asked
to  give  his  daughter  Clotilde  in  marriage  to  Prince  Jerome.

There  were  two  miscalculations  in  this  great  plan.  One
was  that  the  French  and  Italian  forces  were  not  strong  enough
to  reach  Vienna  or  even  Venice.  The  other  was  that  the
French  Catholic  world  would  never  allow  the  Emperor  to
despoil  the  Pope  of  three-quarters  of  his  Italian  dominions.
Not  only  Napoleon  but  Cavour  was  still  under  some  delusion
as  to  the  attitude  of  the  Papacy.  A  month  after  Plom-
bieres, Cavour  sounded  Count  Pasolini,  the  old  friend  of
Pio  Nono  in  his  more  Liberal  days,  and  learnt  that  there
was  no  chance  at  all  that  the  Church  would  consent  to  sur-
render any  part  of  her  temporal  power.  And  if  she  would
not  consent,  Napoleon  dared  not  be  a  party  to  her  coercion.^

1  Chiala,  ii.  225.  Pasolini,  156-157,  i6g.  The  Pope,  In  January  1859,
told  Odo  Russell,  the  British  Resident,  plainly  that  he  would  not  even  con-
sent that  any  part  of  the  Papal  States  should  be  administered  by  laymen  :
the  '  States  of  the  Church  5  must  be  governed  by  priests.  Queen's  Letters,
vol.  iii.  397,  39S  (Jan.  14,  1859).

yB>  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

But  if  Cavour  did  not  at  first  realise  all  the  difficulties
of  executing  the  pact  of  Plombieres,  at  least  he  understood
all  the  dangers  that  would  arise  if  it  were  executed.  It
would  substitute  French  for  Austrian  supremacy  in  the
peninsula.  Cavour  desired  this  no  more  than  Garibaldi
or  Mazzini,  but  he  had  the  nerve  to  risk  the  new  danger  as
the  only  possible  way  of  getting  rid  of  the  old  incubus.  He
hoped,  not  without  reason,  that  he  would  somehow  be  too
clever  for  Napoleon  in  the  end,  and  that  Italian  patriotism
would  rise  to  the  level  of  the  occasion.  In  the  interval
between  Plombieres  and  the  outbreak  of  war  he  set  himself
to  cultivate  that  patriotism  in  its  most  uncompromising
forms,  partly  in  order  to  strengthen  his  position  against  his
too  formidable  ally,  and  partly  as  a  means  of  provoking
Austria  to  war.  For  this  dual  purpose  he  summoned  the
patriots  of  all  the  other  Italian  States  to  flock  to  Piedmont
and  enlist  in  the  National  forces.  A  secret  organisation
for  smuggling  young  men  over  the  frontiers  was  established
by  the  National  Society  in  almost  every  town  of  Northern
Italy.  Many  thousands  from  Austrian  Lombardy  and
Venetia,  from  the  Papal  States  and  the  Duchies  were
enrolled  in  the  Piedmontese  regular  forces,  and  in  March
and  April  1859,  3,ooomore  were  formed  into  a  small  volunteer
corps  called  the  Cacciatori  delle  Alpi,  to  be  commanded  by
Garibaldi.i

By  this  policy  of  the  enlistment  of  volunteers  from  all
Italy,  including  Austria's  own  subjects  escaped  from  her
odious  conscription,  Cavour  succeeded  in  provoking  the
war.  In  December  1858,  he  had  told  Odo  Russell,  who
happened  to  be  passing  through  Turin,  that  he  would  '  force
Austria  to  declare  war  about  the  first  week  in  May '  ;  he
kept  this  extraordinary  promise  with  a  week  to  the  good.2
He  kept  it  in  spite  of  the  most  adverse  circumstances.  The
first  four  months  of  1859  were  perhaps  the  greatest,  as
they  certainly  were  the  most  agonising,  of  Cavour's  life.

1  CMala,  iii.  liii-lvi,  Ixxxvii-xcv. Venosta,  411,  412. Biamhi's  Cavour,
64. Bianchi,  viii.  19. Arrivabene,  i.  9,
3  Quarterly,  July  1879,  p.  129,  note.

THE  CRISIS  79

On  January  i,  Napoleon  opened  the  ball  by  saying  to  the
Austrian  ambassador  that  he  regretted  to  find  his  relations
with  Francis  Joseph  not  as  good  as  he  could  wish.  Nine
days  later  Victor  Emmanuel  introduced  into  his  speech  to
the  Parliament  at  Turin  the  famous  words  suggested  by
Napoleon  himself  ^ — il  grido  di  dolore — '  the  cry  of  suffer-
ing that  rises  to  our  ears  from  so  many  parts  of  Italy.'  The
alarm  thus  fairly  given,  all  France  and  all  diplomatic
Europe  rose  up  in  protest  to  prevent  the  war.  Napoleon
found  himself  deserted  by  the  elements  in  French  society
on  which  his  dynasty  depended — the  Catholics  and  the
propertied  classes — while  the  Liberals  and  Republicans
could  not  be  expected  at  once  to  put  confidence  in  their  foe,
or  to  hail  the  prospect  of  his  triumphant  return  as  the  Csesar
of  a  victorious  army  .^  In  England  the  Conservative  ministers
of  the  day,  who  pleased  themselves  with  the  belief  that
Italian  grievances  could  be  remedied  without  the  expulsion
of  Austria,  placed  themselves  vigorously  at  the  head  of  the
peace  movement,  but  with  a  strong  Austrian  bias.  They
took  their  stand,  wrote  Lord  Malmesbury,  on  '  the  terri-
torial arrangements  of  1815,  which  have  ensured  the  longest
peace  on  record.'  Most  Englishmen,  though  more  sym-
pathetic with  Italy  and  less  well  disposed  to  Austria,  shared
the  ministers'  terror  lest  this  war  should  be  the  prelude  to
another  age  of  Napoleonic  conquest.  Hostility  to  France
at  this  moment  damped  our  enthusiasm  for  Italy,  just  as
six  months  later  it  served  greatly  to  enhance  it.^

'  Chiala,  p.  iii.  xxiii-xxv.

^  La  Gorce,  iii.  396-401.  Malmesbury,  148-153,  179.  Chiala,  Sioria
Contemp.  3,  4.

^  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  4,  and  Malmesbury,  147.  Elliot,  7.  This  terror  of
France,  with  whom  we  had  just  been  quarrelling,  explains  the  inconsistency
of  the  common  British  attitude  to  Italy  in  the  spring  and  autumn  of  1859,
so  amusingly  exposed  by  Matthew  Arnold  in  Friendship's  Garland.  Ruskin,
though  he  despised  the  Italian  Risorgimento,  despised  still  more  the  English
attitude  towards  the  war  of  1859.  He  writes  on  June  15  :  '  The  Italian
nation  is  unhappy  and  unprosperous ;  its  trade  annihilated,  its  arts  and
sciences  retrograde,  its  nerve  and  moral  sense  prostrated  together ;  it  is
capable  only  of  calling  to  you  for  help,  and  you  will  not  help  it.  The  man
you  have  been  calling  names,  with  his  unruly  colonels,  undertakes  to  help
it,  and  Christian  England,  with  a  secret  hope  that,  in  order  to  satisfy  her

8o  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

France  and  England  together  were  too  much  for  Napo-
leon's infirm  purpose.  He  shrank  before  the  storm  which
he  had  raised,  threw  over  Prince  Jerome  and  Cavour,  and
in  the  middle  of  April  joined  England  in  recommending
that  Piedmont  should  reduce  her  armies  to  a  peace  footing,
while  France  and  Austria  similarly  and  simultaneously  dis-
armed. Cavour  knew  that  in  the  state  to  which  patriotic
feeling  had  then  been  worked,  an  order  to  disarm  issued
in  Turin  would  mean  mutiny,  revolution,  anarchy,  and  the
disappearance  of  the  House  of  Savoy.  To  fall  fighting
Austria  single-handed  would  be  a  better  way  to  perish.
For  some  hours  Cavour  contemplated  suicide.  He  was
found  by  his  friends  burning  his  papers,  and  he  did  not
deny  that  he  had  had  ill  thoughts.^

But  meanwhile  he  had  left  no  stone  unturned.  There
was  still  a  desperate  chance  that  Austria  would  refuse  the
simultaneous  disarmament,  and  in  this  hope  he  had  himself
accepted  it — though  he  could  scarcely  have  intended  really
to  fulfil  the  agreement.  But  meanwhile  his  provocations
to  Austria,  consistently  prolonged  for  so  many  months,
had  at  last  broken  down  the  counsels  of  wisdom  at  Vienna.
Austria  refused  the  English  proposals  for  simultaneous  dis-
armament, and  on  April  23  her  couriers  arrived  at  Turin
bearing  an  ultimatum  with  three  days  of  grace.  Never
were  messengers  of  victory  or  of  peace  received  with  greater
transports  of  delight.  That  night  Cavour  dined  in  triumph
among  the  small  circle  of  his  intimate  friends.  On  April
27  Austria  ordered  her  troops  to  invade  Piedmont,  and
Napoleon,  with  the  sullen  acquiescence  of  England  and
amid  the  rising  enthusiasm  of  France,  came  to  the  rescue
of  the  peaceful  little  State  against  the  wanton  aggressor.
Bismarck,  in  1870,  may  have  equalled  but  did  not  surpass
this  masterpiece  of  Cavour. England,  angry  with  Austria,

spite  against  the  unruly  colonels,  the  French  Army  may  be  beaten,  and  the
Papacy  fully  established  over  the  whole  of  Italy — Christian  England,  I  say,
with  this  spiteful  jealousy  for  one  of  her  motives,  and  a  dim,  stupid,  short-
sighted, sluggish  horror  of  interruption  of  business  for  the  other,  takes  this
highly  Cliristian  position,'  &c.,  &c.  Arrows  of  the  Chace,  13.
1  Castelli,  82,  83. Chiala,  ill.  pp.  cxxviii-cxxx.

WAR  DECLARED  8i

angry  with  Napoleon,  retired  for  a  season,  soon  to  re-
appear under  a  new  government  and  in  a  very  different
temper.i

But  Italy,  rejoicing  in  her  opportunity  thus  snatched
frorh  the  claws  of  fate,  confident  in  such  a  group  of  leaders
as  few  nations  have  ever  had  at  the  crisis  of  their  history,
remembering  her  past  failures  only  as  lessons,  and  thinking
of  her  dead  as  arising  from  their  graves  to  watch,  entered
upon  the  two  years  of  war  and  revolution  which  secured
for  her  the  right  to  be.

'  Bianchi,  viii.  1-67,  482-490.  Bianchi's  Cavour,  63.  Principe
Nap.  19-27. Br.  Pari.  Papers,  4. La  Gorce,  ii.  425-449. Castelli,  84.

'  Though  it  is  originally  the  wicked  folly  of  Russia  and  France  that  have
brought  on  this  fearful  crisis,  it  is  the  madness  and  blindness  of  Austria
which  have  brought  on  the  war  now.' — Queen  Victoria  to  the  King  of  the
Belgians,  April  26,  1859.

CHAPTER  V
garibaldi's  alpine  campaign,  1859

Si  scopron  le  tombe,  si  levano  i  morti,

I  martirl  nostri  son  tutti  risorti !

Le  spade  nel  pugno,  gli  allori  alle  chiome,

La  fiamma  ed  il  nome  d'l  Italia  sul  cor  !
Veniamo  ! Veniamo,  su,  o  giovani  schiere,

Su  al  vento  per  tutto  le  nostre  bandiere  !

Su  tutti  col  ferro,  su  tutti  col  foco.

Su  tutti  col  foco  d'  Italia  nel  cor.

Va  fuora  d'  Italia,  va  fuora  ch'  e  1'  ora,
Va  fuora  d?  Italia,  va  fuora,  o  stranier.

The  tombs  are  uncovered,  the  dead  come  from  far,
The  ghosts  of  our  martyrs  are  rising  to  war,
With  swords  in  their  hands,  and  with  laurels  of  fame,
And  dead  hearts  still  glowing  with  Italy's  name.
Come  join  them  ! Come  follow,  O  youth  of  our  land  !
Come  fling  out  our  banner,  and  marshal  our  band  !
Come  aU  with  cold  steel,  and  come  all  with  hot  fire.
Come  all  with  the  flame  of  Italians  desire  !

Begone  from  Italia,  begone  from  our  home !

Begone  from  Italia,  O  stranger,  begone  !

Garibaldi's  Hymn.

Towards  the  middle  of  December  1858,  Cavour  summoned
Garibaldi,  who,  leaving  Caprera,  landed  at  Genoa  on  the
19th,  and  spent  the  evening  there  with  his  friends  of  the
Democratic  party.  Neither  he  nor  they  knew  of  the  pact
of  Plombieres,  but  they  already  scented  powder  in  the  air.
*  Write  me  a  hymn  for  my  volunteers,'  he  said  to  Mercantini.
The  result  of  this  commission  appeared  in  ten  days'  time,
in  the  shape  of  '  Garibaldi's  hymn,'  destined  in  the  coming
years  to  resound  on  the  battlefields  of  Italy  from  the  Alps
to  the  Sicilian  mountains,  and  to  become  in  effect  the
National  Anthem. ^

1  Guerzoni,  i.  417. Mario,  231.
82

CAVOUR  SENDS  FOR  GARIBALDI  83

On  December  20,  Garibaldi  proceeded  to  Turin and
was  taken  by  La  Farina, the  secretary  of  the  National
bociety, on  one  of  his  secret  visits  to  Cavour. It  was
probably  at  this  interview  that  Garibaldi  was  told  of  the
important  part  assigned  to  him  in  a  plot  of  Cavour's,  soon
afterwards  abandoned,  for  beginning  a  revolution  in  the
Carrara  district  in  order  to  provoke  Austria  to  war It
was  certainly  at  this  interview  that  Cavour  told  him  that
he  was  to  be  put  in  command  of  a  volunteer  force  to  be
raised  among  his  own  friends. Returning  to  Genoa he
at  once  commissioned  Bixio  to  begin  privately  enrolling
names He  sailed  back  to  spend  Christmas  at  Caprera
telhng  La  Farma  that  a  steamer  must  be  sent  to  fetch  him
when  he  was  wanted. A  few  days  later, at the New
Year,  came Napoleon's pubhc  warning  to  the  Austrian
ambassador.!

At  the  end  of  February  Cavour  sent  once  more  for  the
hermit  of  Caprera. The  design  of  the  Carrara  revolution
was  being  gradually abandoned  in favour  of  an easier
method  of  provoking  Austria,  the  enUstment  of  her  run-
away subjects  under  the  banner  of  Piedmont. Thousands
were  being  drafted  into  the  regular  army,  but  Cavour's
favourite  scheme  was  the  formation  of  Garibaldi's  corps  of
volunteers. On  March  a,  1859,  the  decisive  interview  on
this  subject  took  place. Garibaldi  had  reached  Turin  the
night before, and  in the  morning Cavour's confidential
valet  came  into  his  study  '  to  announce  that  there  was  a
man  demanding  to  see  Monsieur  le  Comte. "  What  i<,  hi.
name  ?  "  "  He  will  not  give  it ;  he  has  a  big  stick  and  a  bi^

le'com'te  ''  "<'lh\''  """J"^  '"  appointment  with  Monsieuf
1^  Comte.  Ah !  said  Cavour  rising,  "  bring  him  in  i '"  2
The  man  entered,  whose  appearance  had  so  much  astonished
the  valet.  His  skm  was  tanned  by  wind  and  weather
his  hands  were  hardened  with  daily  toil.  His  eyes
'  were  surrounded  by  a  network  of  fine  lines.  This  had  no  trace
•  Paolucci,  Pilo,  224,  225,  '  Giorgio'sJ  letter  of  December  2^ Gu...n.  ■  ,

G 2

84  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

of  cunning,  as  is  so  often  the  case  with  wrinkles  round  the  setting
of  the  eyes,  but  was  obviously  the  result  of  habitual  contraction
of  the  muscles  in  gazing  at  very  distant  objects.  In  short,
Garibaldi's  eyes,  both  in  this  respect  and  in  respect  of  a  certain
steadfast,  far-away  look  in  them,  were  the  eyes  of  a  sailor.'  i

All  was  soon  arranged  between  Cavour  and  his  visitor  with
regard  to  the  volunteers,  and  on  the  same  day  Garibaldi
was  taken  to  see  Victor  Emmanuel.  The  occasions,  of
which  this  was  the  first,  when  these  two  met  face  to  face
were  nearly  always  pregnant  with  fate  for  Italy.  And
whenever  they  met,  Garibaldi  left  the  king's  presence  with
an  increased  sense  of  loyalty  and  a  more  docile  spirit.^

On  this  occasion  indeed  he  required  no  royal  persuasion.
He  returned  that  night,  in  the  highest  spirits,  to  Genoa,
and  there  summoned  about  him  the  chiefs  of  the  old  Demo-
cratic armies,  the  Republican  and  Garibaldian  veterans  of
'48  and  '49.3  It  was  in  vain  that  Mazzini  denounced  the
war,  on  the  ground  that

'  if  successful,  it  will  give  Louis  Napoleon  a  greater  hold  than
he  has  ever  had  on  the  French  mind  through  military  glory  and
territorial  increase.  The  Lombardo-Sardinian  kingdom  will  be,
morally,  a  French  dependency.  Through  other,  more  southern
schemed  acquisitions,  the  Mediterranean  will  be  a  French  lake.'^

This  attitude,  though  it  had  much  influence  in  London
among  the  Italian  exiles,  had  little  in  Italy,  where  the  war
fever  was  at  its  height. ^  The  Garibaldini  did  not  deny  the
danger  pointed  out  by  Mazzini,  but  strove  to  provide
against  it  by  giving  to  the  ultra-patriotic  forces  an  inde-
pendent military  organisation  so  formidable  that  Cavour
would  not  feel  the  need  to  depend  on  France,  nor  the  power
to  betray  Italy  even  if  he  wished.  Hardly  one  of  the  old
fighting men but came to  Garibaldi's call. Even Dr.

1  TroUope,  ii.  230  ; cf.  Carrano,  163,  164.

2  Mem.  276-279,  Guerzoni,  i.  419,  420.  Chiala,  lii.  p,  Ixxxix-xciv,
Bertani,  i.  3.22,  323.

2  Bertani,  i.  323. Mem.  276-279. Chiala,  iii.  p.  xci-xcv.
*  Letter  of  Mazzini  to  Stansfeld,  January  30,  1859,  Shaen  MS,
'  Mazzini,  x.  238-242. Paolucci,  Pilo,  224-233.

FORMATION  OF  THE  CACCIATORI  85

Bertani,  who  had  so  long  been  Mazzini's  agent  in  Genoa,
undertook to organise the ambulance  for  the  Cacciatori
delle  Alpi,  as  he  had  organised  it  for  the  defenders  of  Rome
ten  years  before. Medici,  who  had  fought  in  the  red  shirt
on  the  Pampas  and  had  held  the  ruins  of  the  Vascello  for
three  weeks  against  the  French  army,  and Nino Bixio,
who  had  been  carried  back  from  his  wild  charge  up  the
steps  of  the  Corsini  and  laid in  the  hospital  beside  his
dying  friend  MameH,  were  both  again  ready  to  Garibaldi's
hand.i Cosenz, Neapolitan  by  birth  but  Northerner  by
temperament,  a  quiet,  modest  and  benign  gentleman in
spectacles,  as cool  in battle  as Bixio  was  hot, already
famous  as one  of  the defenders  of  Venice,  now  entered
Garibaldi's  service,  and  was  henceforth  his  good  angel  in
pontics and in war. The  Cacciatori  were organised in
three  regiments,  each  consisting  of a  full  thousand  men
and  each  divided  into  two  battahons. The  first  regiment
was  entrusted  to  Cosenz,  the  second  to  Medici,  the  third
to a less  able officer, Ardoino. But one of  Ardoino's
battahons  was led to battle, and would, if necessary,
have  been  driven  into  the  mouth  of  hell,  by  Nino  Bixio—
strangely  popular  with  his  men,  although  he  was  always
falHng  upon  them  with  the  fiat  of  his  sword  in  gusts  of
bhnd  anger  which  would  soon  have  earned  for  any  other
officer  a  bullet in  the  back.3 The  Kst  of  captains  and
heutenants  of  the  Cacciatori  delle  Alpi  is  filled  with  such
names  as  Bronzetti,  Sacchi,  Carrano,  Piva,  CadoHni,  famihar
in  the  history  of  the  sieges  of  Rome  and  Venice  and  of  the
last  stages  of  Garibaldi's  retreat.

In  allowing  Garibaldi  to  choose  his  own  officers,  Cavour
showed  that  he  was  not  afraid  of  ex-Republicans,  or  even
of  Republicans  who  were  ready  to  fight  for  the  king. It

^  Trevelyan's  Gar.  Rome,  177,  186,  199,  200,  213.

2  Nino  Bixio' s  constant  apologies  for  his  conduct  in  these  matters,
found  in  his  letters  to  his  wife  during  the  campaigns  of  1859-60,  show
that  that  lady  was  always  doing  her  duty  by  taking  him  to  task  on  the
subject.  Nino  was  adored  by  his  family,  among  whom  he  was  always  as
gentle  as  he  sometimes  was  with  his  soldiers.  See  Bologna  MSS,,  Bixio  ;
and  Risorg,  anno,  i.,  il,  338.

86  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

had  been  his  own  device,  suggested  to  him  by  no  one  and
opposed  by  many,  thus  to  create  a  force  which  should
represent  the  idea  of  the  national  uprising  as  distinct  from
Piedmontese  officialdom  and  the  French  alHance.  If
Garibaldi,  the  known  enemy  of  Napoleon  and  the  champion
of  ItaHan  nationaUty,  could  achieve  some  romantic  feats
of  war  in  the  Alps,  both  the  EngUsh  pubhc  and  the  Itahan
Democrats  would  feel  greater  sympathy  with  the  war  and
confidence  in  its  author,  Cavour.i  fhe  plan  succeeded  to
perfection,  owing  to  the  valour  of  the  Cacciatori  and  the
genius  of  their  leader,  which  made  up  for  the  lack  of  numbers,
artillery,  cavalry,  commissariat,  and  good  fire-arms.  For
of  these  advantages  the  volunteers  were  deprived  by  the
jealousy  of  the  War  Office,  of  which  General  La  Marmora
was  now  the  head.  Cavour  in  those  days  was  too  busy  to
see  to  everything,  and  2000  good  carbines  which  he  had
ordered  for  the  Cacciatori  were  sent  after  them  too  late,
and  distributed  by  a  foolish  official  among  the  civic  guard
of  Lago  Maggiore.2  No  horses  or  waggons  were  provided
for  the  ambulance,  so  that  Bertani  and  his  staff  of  able
doctors  had  to  rely  on  the  liberality  of  the  inhabitants  in
the  seat  of  war.  There  was  no  commissariat.  There  was
no  artillery,  except  a  mountain  battery  that  arrived  too
late  to  share  in  the  principal  achievements  of  the  campaign.
There  was  no  cavalry  except  fifty  guide,  or  scouts,  who  came
on  their  own  horses.  Another  similar,  though  probably
inferior,  corps,  raised  from  the  exiles  of  Central  Italy  and
called  the  Cacciatori  degli  Apennini,  was  deliberately  sent
off  under  another  command,  contrary  to  the  express  orders
of  the  king  that  all  the  volunteer  regiments  should  be
placed  under  Garibaldi.  One  good  thing,  indeed,  the  War
Office provided — the services of General Cialdini, most

^  Chiala,  iii.  p.  xciv.,  xcv,  Guerzoni,  i.  421,  422.  Venosta,  517.  It  is
remarkable  how  the  Times,  hostile  to  Italian  hopes  In  the  early  part  of  the
year,  on  account  of  its  fear  of  Napoleon,  at  once  took  up  Garibaldi  and
his  volunteers  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  war,  e.g.,  leading  article  on
May  28.  It  saw  in  Garibaldi  a  way  to  combine  friendship  for  Italy  with
hostility  to  France.

'  Carrano,  260,  261. Mario,  ■Z'^'j.

GYULAI'S  DELAY  87

enthusiastically  rendered,  to  organise  the  three  regi-
ments in  the  depots;  for  Garibaldi  himself  was  a  bad
organiser.!

Fortunately  these  raw  volunteers  and  their  veteran
officers  had  three  weeks  of  active  service  with  the  regular
army  before  they  were  called'  upon  for  any  great  effort  on
their  own  behalf.  When  war  was  declared  on  April  27,
Turin  was  in  the  greatest  danger.  General  Gyulai,  with
over  100,000  Austrians  ready  to  his  hand,  was  on  the  banks
of  the  Ticino,  while  the  French  were  far  away  across  the
Alps.  But  Gyulai's  not  very  acute  mind  was  distracted
by  the  precedent  of  former  wars  when  Austria's  safety  had
lain  in  the  defensive,  and  in  a  judicious  retreat  to  the
Quadrilateral.  He  crossed  the  Ticino  on  April  29,  and
wasted  three  weeks,  each  worth  an  army  corps  to  Austria,
in  futile  and  hesitating  movements,  while  regiment  after
regiment  of  French  infantry.  Zouaves,  and  cuirassiers
marched  down  the  winding  valley  from  the  frozen
summit  of  Mont  Cenis  pass,  or  came  steaming  up  by  sea
to  Genoa  and  thence  by  train  into  the  valley  of  the  Po.
During  this  anxious  period  of  waiting  for  the  French,  the
entire  forces  of  Piedmont,  60,000  all  told,  were  concen-
trated near  the  great  river  to  defend  the  heart  of  the
State.  The  Cacciatori  delle  Alpi  served  side  by  side  with
the  regular  troops,  occasionally  skirmishing  with  marked
success  on  their  own  account,  and  enduring  the  frightful
discomfort  of  the  rain  and  floods,  which  were  perhaps  one
of  the  minor  reasons  of  Gyulai's  inactivity.  Garibaldi,  as
a  subordinate,  proved  on  this  occasion  the  most  ready
and  obedient  of  men,  and  won  the  hearty  goodwill  of  his
superior  officers.^

When  at  last  the  French  had  arrived,  and  the  aUies  were

1  Carrano,  171-179,  187,  188,  206,  207,  236,  260.  Bertani,  i.  338,  341,
343,  348,  351.  Guerzoni,  i.  424,  425.  Pol.  295.  Mem.  278,  279.  De
Crisfo/oris,  267,  277.  Mario,  236,  237.  Conv,  Marchetti.  Peard  MS,  7.
Peard  (Cornhill,  January  1908),  107.

2  Hohenlohe,  6th,  7th,  and  8th  letters.  Camp.  d\  It.  E.  M.  Pr.  25,
Carrano,  iSo-226.  Guerzoni,  i.  429-435.  Peard  MS.  De  Cristoforis,
280. Riv.  Mil.  It,  December  1872,  p.  482  ; January  1873,  p.  214,  215.

88  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

in  a  position  to  take  the  offensive,  the  Cacciatori  were  sent
up  north  to  invade  Alpine  Lombardy  as  a  detached  and
advanced  left  wing  of  the  army.  Garibaldi  was  far  too
well  pleased  with  this  independent  command  and  the  chance
of  being  the  first  liberator  on  Lombard  soil,  and  he  was
moreover  far  too  good  a  soldier,  to  utter  in  his  men's
hearing  any  discouraging  complaint  of  the  unprovided
condition  in  which  they  were  being  sent  on  an  errand  so
hazardous.

The  force  which  he  led  into  the  enemy's  territory  con-
sisted of  just  over  3000 1  young  men,  each  with  an  abomin-
ably bad  old  pattern  musket  of  shorter  range  than  the
weapon  of  the  regular  army.  But  at  the  end  of  each
musket  was  fastened  a  serviceable  bayonet,  the  weapon
destined  to  win  the  little  campaign. ^  The  fifty  rifles  v/ere
the  private  property  of  as  many  crack  shots  from  Genoa,
'  gentlemen-merchants,  artists  and  professional  men,'  who
under  the  title  of  the  '  Genoese  carabineers,'  formed  a  fine
body  of  skirmishers,  always  in  the  forefront  of  battle.
There  was,  besides,  an  excellent  rifle  in  the  skilled  hands  of
the  gigantic  Peard — once  the  terror  of  the  Oxford  '  town  '
— destined  now  to  obtain,  without  seeking  it,  a  European
celebrity  as  *  Garibaldi's  Englishman.'  But  the  other
units  of  the  division,  not  only  miserably  armed  but  untrained
to  shoot,  and  unaccustomed,  as  townsmen,  to  the  mountains
or,  indeed,  to  great  physical  exertion  of  any  kind,  were
required  to  take  Alpine  passes  from  the  splendid  Tyrolese
sharp-shooters  and  well-drilled  Croats  and  Hungarians  with
rifles  and  artillery.  The  task  would  have  been  impossible
if  the  Cacciatori  had  been  of  the  ordinary  stuff  that
armies  are  made  of,  stirred  only  by  the  usual  passions
of  war.  But  their  ranks  contained  the  very  pick  of  the
first  families  of  Milan, ^  and  were  for  the  most  part  filled  by

^  Carrano,  236,  Mem.  281.  Cadolini,  10.  Hohenlohe,  i.  206.  My
rule  in  this  work  is  to  take  the  official  report  of  each  side  (whether  Italian,
Austrian,  or  Neapolitan)  of  its  own  numbers,  and  not  its  view  of  the
enemy's  numbers  which  is  generally  exaggerated.

2  Cadolini,  6. Peard  {Cornhill,  January  1908),  107.

'■^  Mrs.  Gurney  Buxton  tells  me  that  in  1881  the  following  patois  verse

THE  GARIBALDINI  OF  1859  89

Lombard  students,  artisans,  landlords,  professional  men,
and  runaway  school  boys.  They  had  been  selected  from
among  their  fellows  by  the  devotion  with  which  they  had
risked,  and  the  energy  by  which  they  had  saved,  their  lives
among  the  Austrian  watchers  on  the  frontier,  for  each  one
had  stolen  into  Piedmont  '  crossing  the  mountains  and
wading  the  rivers  on  St.  Francis'  horse'  (viz.  on  foot).
They  were  mostly  men  of  education  and  of  ideals.  Their
solid  English  comrade  was  astonished  and  touched  to  hear
them  round  the  camp  fires  entertain  each  other  with  long
recitations  of  Tasso,  Ariosto,  and  Alfieri.  No  youths  ever
went  to  battle  with  a  stronger  motive  to  conquer.  They
were  fighting  their  way  back  as  liberators  to  the  homes
from  which  they  had  lately  fled  like  hunted  criminals.
They  did  not  find  the  words  of  Garibaldi's  hymn  too  high-
flown  for  the  occasion.  They  were  to  make  their  country
and  to  avenge  at  last  the  long  catalogue  of  her  martyrs.
Privately,  too,  each  one  was  consumed  with  the  remembrance
of  some  story  of  injury  and  shame  wrought  on  his  family
or  his  dearest  friends  by  the  rough  and  stupid  soldiery  of
Eastern  Europe.  They  had  confidence  in  their  veteran
officers,  and  far  more  than  confidence  in  their  general,  who
was  the  god  of  their  idolatry.  The  fear  of  his  reprimand,
of  which  he  was  never  sparing  either  to  individuals  or  to
companies,  was  an  ever  present  terror,  while  the  hope  of
his  measured  and  lovingly  spoken  words  of  praise,  the
certainty  of  seeing  his  calm  face  and  hearing  his  low  pene-
trating voice  in  the  midst  of  the  decisive  charge  of  the  day
were  moral  forces  which  would  alone  have  made  them
superior  to  any  ordinary  regiment.  1

was  still  being  sung  by  the  peasants  along  the  shores  of  Lago  Maggiore,
celebrating  the  liberation  effected  by  the  Cacciatori  of  1859  : —
'  Evviva  Garibaldi  !
Tutti  i  sciuri  (signori)  di  Milano
Li  ong  fa'  scappa  i  Tedeschi
Coir  la  handler'  in  mang  '  (mano) .
'  All  the  gentlemen  of  Milan  have  driven  out  the  Austrlans  with  the
banner  in  hand.'*

'  Bertani,  i,  357. Venosta,  432-441,  542. Times,  July  26,  '  A  sketch
of Garibaldi,'' written from the Valtelline. Mario, 238. Cadolini, 5.

90  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

The  red  shirt  did  not  appear  in  this  campaign  ;  it  would
have  been  a  gratuitous  insult  both  to  Napoleon  and  to  the
Piedmontese  official  party.  Garibaldi  himself  was  properly
dressed  as  a  Piedmontese  general,  though  on  the  march  he
was  seen  to  change  his  '  tiresome  hat '  for  a  broad-brimmed
felt,  and  to  wrap  himself  up  during  the  rain  in  the  folds  of
his  American  puncio.^  But  in  the  king's  battles  he  always
displayed  the  king's  uniform.  His  men,  dressed  after  the
ugly,  conventional  pattern  of  the  line  regiments,  had  none
of  the  theatrical  picturesqueness  of  Rome  ten  years  before,
or  of  Sicily  in  the  following  summer.  But  on  the  eve  of
entering  Lombardy,  Garibaldi  made  them  leave  their  knap-
sacks behind  and  be  content  with  as  much  linen  and  pro-
visions as  could  be  forced  into  their  bread  bags  and  into  the
large  pockets  which  he  caused  to  be  sewn  on  to  their  coats.
He  thus  gained  that  mobility  which  was  the  first  principle
of  his  method  of  war,  but  increased  the  difficulties  of  the
commissariat  and  of  food  supply.^  Fortunately,  in  the
country  which  they  were  about  to  invade,  every  household
was  passionately  on  their  side.

The  Ticino,  which  divided  Austrian  Lombardy  from
Piedmont,  issues  from  the  Lago  Maggiore  in  a  broad,  swirl-
ing flood  that  no  regiment  could  hope  to  ford.  It  thus
offered,  in  continuation  of  the  lake  commanded  by  Austrian
steamers,  an  easy  line  of  defence  against  Garibaldi's  un-
supported infantry  advancing  from  Biella.  But  he  had  at  least
an  imitation  of  one  other  arm  of  the  service  in  the  fifty
mounted  scouts,  and  by  great  good  fortune,  their  able  leader,
Simonetta,  was  a  popular  landowner  in  this  very  district.
On  May  21  and  22  Simonetta  made  a  rapid  tour  in  disguise
along  both  the  free  and  unfree  shores  of  the  lake,  and
although  the  Austrians  laid  an  embargo  on  every  stick  that
could  float,  and  had  their  steamers  on  the  look-out,  he
skilfully  and  secretly  collected  a  number  of  barges  at  an

Conv.  Marchetti. Tupper,  6i. Peard  [CornhiU,  January  1908),  97,  107;
and  the  whole  literature  of  the  campaign.

'  Carrano,  195.

^  Venosta,  518. Cadolini,  14,  15. Carrano,  233.

PASSAGE  OF  THE  TICINO  91

appointed  place.  This  rendezvous  was  Castelletto,  on  the
Piedmontese  shore  of  the  Ticino,  three  miles  below  its
debouchment  from  the  lake,  and  one  mile  below  Sesto
Calende  on  the  opposite  shore,  where  lay  a  slender  detach-
ment of  Austrians.  At  Gallarate  lay  a  single  battalion,
enough  if  properly  used  to  have  delayed  the  passage  until
immense  numbers  had  been  brought  up  from  Milan.  But
the  Austrians  did  not  suspect  Garibaldi  of  intending  to
pass  the  river.  Their  delusion  was  maintained  by  one  of
his  most  customary  devices,  for  he  ostentatiously  ordered
provisions  for  his  troops  at  Arona  and  Meina,  as  if  he  intended
to  march  northward  along  the  Piedmontese  shore  of  Mag-
giore.  As  usual,  his  own  men  were  equally  deceived,  and
it  was  with  surprise  that  they  heard  the  order  given  on  the
night  of  the  22nd,  just  outside  Arona,  not  to  enter  the
town  but  to  turn  sharply  to  the  right.  They  proceeded
south  by  a  forced  march  under  cover  of  unusually  thick
darkness.  The  clock  of  Castelletto  was  striking  midnight
when  the  column,  still  ignorant  of  its  destination,  reached
the  top  of  the  high  bank  above  Simonetta's  barges,  and  saw
the  faint  gleam  of  waters  through  the  trees  below.  Only
then  did  they  realize  that  they  were  to  invade  Lombardy
before  dawn.  While  the  rear  companies  were  still  struggling
through  the  brushwood  of  the  steep  incline  down  to  the
river's  edge,  a  flood  of  moonhght  suddenly  burst  over  the
long  reaches  and  swirling  eddies  of  the  Ticino  and  lit  up
the  busy  and  memorable  scene.  By  that  time  the  first
companies,  already  on  the  opposite  bank,  were  marching
up  in  perfect  silence  and  order  to  Sesto  Calende,  where  they
captured  the  fifty  Austrians  in  their  beds.  In  the  grey  of
the  morning  the  remainder  of  the  division  crossed,  all  in
the  highest  spirits  at  being  the  first  liberators  on  the  soil
of  their  own  Lombardy.  The  inhabitants,  '  who  had  gone
to  rest  slaves  and  awoke  free,'  were  prodigal  of  thanks  and
of  such  hospitality  as  they  could  provide,  and  would  on  no
account  accept  payment. 1

^  Milan  MSS.  Simonetta,  15-17.  Carrano,  227-243.  De  Cristoforis,
285-292.  Peard  {Cornhill,  January  1908),  99,  100.  CadoUni,  16-18,
Mario,  238,

92  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Next  morning,  by  five  o'clock,  the  troops  were  already
on  the  road  for  Varese.  The  weather  was  the  loveliest  of
the  early  Italian  summer  ;  the  atmosphere  had  been  washed
bright  by  the  recent  rains  ;  the  landscape  and  the  people,
both  among  the  finest  in  Italy,  were  in  gala  to  greet  their
deliverers.  All  day  Garibaldi  guided  his  men  by  intricate
country  roads  winding  in  and  out  of  hills  green  with  chest-
nut, oak  and  fir,  across  rivulets  rushing  between  banks  of
flowers,  along  the  soft  and  richly  cultivated  southern  shores
of  Comabbio  and  Varese  lakes,  to  the  north  of  which  rose
the  great  mountain  ridges.  And  everywhere  as  they  passed
from  hay-fields  and  wayside  factories  and  entrances  of
village  streets,  there  poured  out,  with  shouts  of  Viva
Garibaldi,  Viva  V  Italia,  handsome  and  prosperous  looking
peasants,  a  cross  between  the  Italians  of  the  plain  and  the
men  of  the  higher  Alpine  valleys.  As  they  neared  the  foot
of  the  great  hill  on  which  Varese  stands,  the  summer  night
descended,  and  the  fire-flies  danced  among  the  moving
columns,  making  the  young  soldiers  laugh  as  one  tiny  spark
after  another  settled  in  the  bushy  beard  of  their  immense
Enghsh  comrade.  Then,  as  they  mounted  the  wearisome
ascent  to  the  ever-receding  city,  an  Alpine  thunderstorm
broke  in  splendour  upon  them.  Just  before  midnight  they
entered  Varese  under  a  deluge  of  rain,  but  it  fell  unheeded
on  the  frantic  joy  of  the  people,  who  embraced  the  Gari-
baldini  in  the  open  before  they  suffered  them  to  take  refuge
under  the  fine  medieval  colonnades  that  flank  the  street.
The  city  had  revolted  some  hours  before  their  arrival.
Many  a  banner  of  '48,  with  the  three  colours  long  faded,
like  the  dead  who  had  borne  them,  had  been  pulled  out  that
afternoon  from  holes  among  the  roof  tiles.  In  the  autumn
of  that  year  of  disaster,  when  Garibaldi  had  for  a  few  weeks
continued  the  lost  war  against  the  Austrians  in  this  very
district,  he  had  passed  through  Varese  on  his  way  to  the
skirmish  of  Morazzone.  That  now,  after  eleven  years,  it
was  Garibaldi  who  had  come  back  to  deliver  them  made
deliverance  itself  more  enchanting.  This  welcome  in  the
midnight  storm  at  Varese  was  the  first  of  a  thousand  such

SPREAD  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  93

scenes  to  be  enacted  in  the  next  two  years  round  Pied-
montese  or  Garibaldian  liberators  in  more  than  half  the
cities  of  Italy.^

The  revolution  was  spreading  on  all  sides,  and  far  in
front  of  the  Hne  of  march.  As  fast  as  the  news  arrived  that
Garibaldi  was  across  the  Ticino,  townsmen  and  peasants
ahke  along  the  shores  of  Como,  and  up  the  Valtelhne  to
the  very  foot  of  the  snows  of  Stelvio,  drove  out  the  Austrian
police,  formed  revolutionary  committees,  and  put  themselves
in  touch  with  the  King's  Commissioner,  EmiHo  Visconti
Venosta,  whom  Cavour  sent  after  Garibaldi  to  take  over
the  administration  of  the  liberated  districts.  These  patrio-
tic and  manly  populations  were  the  same  as  those  which,  in
the  spring  of  1848,  had  left  their  mountain  homes  and
marched  to  Milan  in  time  to  take  their  share  in  the  '  five
days.'  2  Now  again,  by  their  premature  uprising,  they
risked  and  in  some  cases  experienced  the  severe  reprisals  of
the  Austrians,  of  whom  they  were  not  fairly  quit  till  after
the  battle  of  Magenta.  These  popular  movements,  though
in  Cavour's  eyes  of  high  political  importance,  were  of  little
military  service,  owing  to  the  lack  of  weapons.  The  search
for  arms  had  been  the  main  part  of  Austrian  poHcy  for  ten
years  past  in  these  districts,  where  many  a  brave  fellow  had
been  shot  for  possessing  a  long  knife  or  an  old  gun.  Neither
had  the  Cacciatori,  themselves  so  badly  equipped,  brought
with  them  the  means  of  arming  the  revolution.^

Garibaldi  had  yet  to  make  good  his  challenge  to  fortune
in  thrusting  himself  far  across  the  Ticino  so  many  days  in
front  of  the  alhed  army.  He  saw  that  Varese  offered  an
admirable  defensive  position,  and  spent  May  24  and  25  in

1  Cadolini,  20.  Mem.  285,  286.  Carrano,  252-254.  Peard  [Cornhill,
January  1908),  loi.  Descriptions  of  scenery  in  this  book  are  a  compound  of
contemporary  accounts  with  my  own  notes  made  in  walking  over  tlie
ground  described.

-  Readers  of  Meredith's  Vittoria  will  remember  the  patriotic  mountain-
eers of  the  Valtelline  ;  the  description  of  their  action  is  quite  in  accordance
with  fact.

^ Venosta,  469-492,  517. Carratio,  260,  291,  292.

94  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

fortifying  its  approaches  and  resting  his  men.  General
Urban,  who  was  coming  to  dispose  of  him,  enjoyed  not  only
a  deserved  reputation  among  the  Italians  for  brutality,  but
a  name  among  his  own  countrymen  as  a  dashing  commander
specially  fitted  to  cope  with  the  famous  guerilla  at  his  own
game.  He  was  called  '  the  Austrian  Garibaldi,'  but  the
events  of  the  next  few  days  showed  that  he  was  a  very
Austrian  Garibaldi  indeed. i  As  soon  as  Gyulai  heard
that  the  Cacciatori  had  crossed  the  Ticino,  he  had  sent  this
officer  against  them  at  the  head  of  the  brigade  Rupprecht,
consisting  of  rather  more  than  3000  infantry,  and  a  full
complement  of  artillery  and  cavalry.  Urban  advanced
from  Como  by  the  Camerlata  road,  and  attacked  Varese
from  that  side  only,  after  detaching  a  column  over  the  hills
to  his  right  in  the  vague  hope  that  they  would  reappear  at
the  critical  moment  on  the  north  of  the  town.  But  they
were  not  seen  again,  so  that  Garibaldi's  force  present  in
Varese  was  actually  larger  than  the  2000  and  odd  infantry
who  attacked  it,  although  the  latter  had  the  advantage  of
bringing  artillery  into  the  field.^

The  scene  of  Urban's  attack  in  the  early  morning  of
May  26  was  Lower  Biumo,  a  suburb  lying  at  the  north-
eastern foot  of  the  group  of  wooded  hills  on  which  Varese
is  so  pleasantly  situated  amid  its  gardens  and  villas.  In
this  suburb  on  the  plain  Garibaldi  had  stationed  Medici,
while  he  himself  occupied  the  wooded  hill  of  Upper
Biumo  not  far  to  the  north,  the  direction  from  which  both
he  and  Urban  expected  the  approach  of  the  lost  Austrian
column.  Medici's  men  down  below  held  a  large  villa  and
its  little  walled  garden  along  the  south  of  the  Camerlata
road,  just  outside  Lower  Biumo  (the  house  is  easily  to  be
distinguished  to-day  by  a  bust  of  Garibaldi  on  its  outer
wall)  ;  on  the  other  side  of  the  road  were  some  smaller
houses,  and  a  few  trenches  which  had  been  constructed  the
day  before. The  Austrians  drove  in  the  Italian  outposts

1  Milan  MSS.  A.  B.  Migliavacca. Valle's  V.  G.  U.  108-113, Storia
Anedd.  119,  120. Avrivabene,  i.  46,  47. Carrayio,  352,

^  See  Appendix  B.  below. Numbers  at  Varese  and  Como.

BATTLE  OF  VARESE  95

from  Belforte  farm,  and  thence  advanced  through  a  plain
a  mile  long,  covered  with  mulberry  trees  standing  out  in
rows  above  the  high  corn.  Their  artillery  unlimbered  and
shelled  the  volunteers  in  Lower  Biumo  at  close  quarters
but  without  impairing  their  morale.  Indeed,  when  the
white-coats  advanced  to  the  charge,  the  young  Italians,
inferior  in  firearms,  but  superior  in  spirit  to  the  enemy,  leaped
from  the  trench  and  from  over  the  garden  wall,  and  fell  on
them  with  the  bayonet.  The  guns  limbered  up  and  were
not  seen  again  that  day.  As  the  sun  sucked  up  the  last  of
the  early  morning  mist.  Garibaldi,  having  satisfied  himself
by  careful  scouting  that  no  column  was  approaching
Varese  from  any  other  direction,  galloped  down  from  Upper
Biumo  and  headed  the  advance  ;  Cosenz  led  down  other
bodies  of  Cacciatori  from  the  hills  on  the  south,  and  turned
the  left  flank  of  the  Austrians.  They  retired  slowly,  halting
to  fire  behind  every  line  of  mulberry  trees,  and  making  a
last  attempt  to  rally  at  the  fine  old  group  of  farm  buildings
on  the  knoll  of  Belforte.  But  soon  the  last  of  the  white-
coats  had  been  cleared  off  the  ground.

The  battle  of  Varese  had  cost  the  mother  of  the  Cairoli
the  first  of  those  four  sons  whose  lives  she  gave  for  Italy.
It  was  Ernesto,  a  young  doctor  of  law,  fighting  as  a
common  soldier;  he  was  deeply  mourned  by  Garibaldi,
who  already  knew  and  loved  the  Cairoli  family,  the  leaders
of  patriotic  Pavia.  The  eldest  of  the  five  brothers,
Benedetto,  who  alone  survived  the  heroic  era,  though  not
for  lack  of  exposing  himself  in  the  forefront  of  Garibaldi's
wars,  became  prime  minister  of  the  country  ransomed  by
his  brothers'  blood.

The  Austrian  rout  was  complete,  but  there  was  no
cavalry  to  follow  it  up.  Part  of  the  Cacciatori,  unbreak-
fasted  but  eager  to  go  on  when  Garibaldi  asked  them  to
'  see  our  friends  a  little  further  along  the  road,'  pressed  on
with  him  over  two  more  miles,  down  through  wooded
ravines  and  water-courses,  up  again  through  Malnate
village,  and  across  the  cultivated  table  land  beyond  it.
They  were  brought  to  a  stop  by  the  Austrian  rearguard,

96  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

rallied  on  S.  Salvatore  heights  to  cover  the  further  retreat
of  the  main  body  through  Binago.i  A  deep  gorge,  with
sides  so  steep  that  it  was  not  possible  to  climb  them  except
by  clinging  to  the  bushes,  divided  the  Austrians  from  their
pursuers.  A  first  attack  was  repulsed,  but  the  position  was
finally  turned  from  the  north,  where  the  gorge  was  shallower.
While  the  enemy's  rearguard  was  evacuating  S.  Salvatore,
Garibaldi  gradually  withdrew  his  men  to  Malnate  and
thence  to  Varese,  as  rumours  that  the  lost  Austrian  column
had  been  seen  in  the  hills  to  the  north  gave  him  momentary
fears  for  the  safety  of  Varese.  At  midday  he  led  his  men
back  to  the  city,  all  in  the  highest  spirits.  Seeing  Peard,
who  had  used  his  rifle  well  in  the  thick  of  the  battle,  and
had  now  walked  the  skin  off  his  feet,  dragging  his  heavy
weight  along  the  road,  he  spoke  kindly  to  the  Englishman
and  made  one  of  his  staff  lend  him  his  horse.^

The  well-planned  defence  and  spirited  counter-attack  had
given  the  new  generation  of  Garibaldini  the  needful  self-
confidence.  But  the  battle  of  Varese,  though  a  faultless
piece  of  minor  tactics,  was  no  very  wonderful  feat  of  war.
Next  day,  however,  Garibaldi  was  to  display  his  peculiar
strategical  genius  at  its  best,  in  effecting  the  capture  of
Como  from  a  force  more  than  double  his  own.

On  the  evening  of  his  defeat  at  Varese,  Urban  telegraphed
to  headquarters  that  his  victorious  enemy  had  employed
7000  troops  that  morning — more  than  twice  the  real  number.^

•  Peard  (Cornhill,  January  1908,  103,  104)  makes  it  clear  that  this  was
the  nature  of  the  Austrian  operations.  Peard' s  account  talhes  exactly  with
the  ground,  and  is  quite  clear  when  once  the  reader  perceives  that  he  calls
the  village  Malnate  which  is  actually  Binago.  The  real  Malnate  is  between
Varese  and  S.  Salvatore.

-  My  authorities  for  the  battle  of  Varese  are — Milan  MSS.  Simonetta,
19-23;  Milan  MSS.  A.  B.  Plico  viii.  No.  120,  doc.  8,  the  three  narra-
tives (including  Migliavacca)  described  in  Bibliography,  p.  372  below;
Krieg,  i.  370,  371  ;  Camp,  di  Nap.  102;  Mem.  286-292;  Valle's  V.  G.  U.
65,  66;  Peard  {Cornhill,  January  1908),  102-105;  EIia,i.  229-233;  Sioria
Anedd.  121,  153;  Guerzoni,  i.  448-452;  Cadolini,  23,  24;  Carrano,
268-281.

3  Krieg,  i.  373.

AUSTRIAN  DEFENCE  OF  COMO  97

Gyulai  was  thoroughly  alarmed  as  to  the  effect  which  these
northern  operations  might  have  on  his  own  position  at
Milan. The  alHes  might  at  any  moment  attack  him  in  front
on  the  Ticino  with  their  main  force,  and  meanwhile  the
Alpme  districts  on his  flank  and rear were  rising, the
steamers  on  Lake  Como  had  been  seized  by  the  local  rebels  1
and  Garibaldi  would  soon  join  them  at  the  head  of  his
victorious  troops. Might  he  not  then  march  on  Milan  at
the  critical  moment  of  the  struggle  of  the  main  armies  on
the  Ticmo  ? And  would  not  Milan  then  rise  as  in  '48  ? It
was  necessary  to  dispose  of  Garibaldi. That  very  night
(May  26)  Urban  was  put  in  command  of  three  brigades—
that  of  Rupprecht  which  had  just  been  defeated  at  Varese
and  those  of  Augustin  and  Schaffgotsche,  amounting  in  all
to  over  11,000  men.3 In  the  course  of  the  morning  and
early afternoon of  the  27th, all  four  battahons  of the
brigade  Augustin had  come  up  by  train  from  Milan  and
joined  the  brigade  Rupprecht  for  the  defence  of  Como  city
Thus,  although  the  third  brigade  Schaffgotsche  was  still  on
Its  way,  Urban  had  eight  battalions  of  infantry, that  is
about  6400  men,  besides  artillery  and  cavalry,  with  which
to  hold Como  against  the  3000  Garibaldini, still  unpro-
vided with  cannon. 3

Como,  lying  low  by  the  lakeside,  is  guarded  from  approach
on  the  west  by  a  line  of  forest-clad  mountains,  so  steep  that
no  troops  can  cross  them  except  at  two  points,  the  pass  of  San
Fermo  on  the  north,  and  the  town  of  Camerlata  where  the
mountains  end  on  the  south.  All  that  Urban  had  to  do  was
to  hold  these  two  points  with  a  force  more  than  double  that
of  Garibaldi.  But  he  preferred  to  leave  part  of  the  brigade
Augustin  down  in  Como  city  on  a  level  with  the  lake,  where
It  was  absolutely  useless.  He  very  properly  massed  another
strong  force  to  defend  the  approach  to  Camerlata,  but  he
occupied  the  pass  of  San  Fermo  with only  one  or two

^  Carrano,  291,  292.

2  Hohenlohe,  i.  206. Camp,  d'  It.  E.  M.  Pr. ^7. Kriee \ q«-7 oSs
Krieg  {unofficial),  6z.  ^^ ^^^^g-,  1. 387, 388,

'  Kneg,  i.  387,  388  ;  and  see  Appendix  B,  below,

q8  garibaldi  and  THE  THOUSAND

companies  of Hungarians,  apparently  not  knowing  that  a
city  in  a  hollow  must  be  defended  on  the  hill  tops.^

Garibaldi,  advancing  on  the  morning  of  May  27  over
the  battlefield  of  the  previous  day,  marched  at  first  along
the  main  road  towards  Camerlata,  as  if  he  were  about  to
attack  the  defenders  of  Como  on  that  side.  And  there
they  continued  to  expect  him,  deceived  by  masking  opera-
tions of  Cosenz  at  Olgiate,  long  after  the  main  body  of  Caccia-
ton  had  turned  off  northwards  to  the  left.  Guided  by
small  country  roads  through  a  maze  of  wooded  and  vine-
clad  hills,  the  Italians  arrived  about  four  in  the  afternoon
opposite  the  ill-guarded  San  Fermo  pass  flanked  on  each
side  by  high  mountains.  As  the  Cacciatori  passed  through
the  village  of  Cavallasca  they  obtained  a  full  view  of  the
position  which  they  were  about  to  attack  :  a  little  valley  and
stream  lay  below  them,  and  beyond  rose  the  smooth  slope
of  a  hill,  on  the  top  of  which  towered  the  apse  and  campanile
of  the  old  church  of  San  Fermo.  This  building  on  one  side
of  the  road  and  a  little  wayside  inn  upon  the  other  were
both  crowded  with  Hungarians,  whose  rifles,  projecting
from  long  rows  of  loopholes,  commanded  the  ascent  from
the  stream.  Flanking  parties  went  out  to  right  and  left  to
capture  the  two  hills  commanding  the  church  and  village,
and  another  company  had  Garibaldi's  orders  to  charge  up
the  road  in  front  as  soon  as  the  firing  began  on  the  flanks.
The  leader  of  this  company  was  the  gallant  De  Cristoforis,
a  student  and  patriot  of  the  very  best  type  of  that  golden
age  of  Italian  publicists.  Although  he  had  already  dis-
tinguished himself  in  the  little  campaign,  unfortunately  he
now  neglected  to  deploy  his  men. 2  As  they  rushed  in
column  up  the  road,  they  were  checked  by  a  terrible  volley
from  the  church  and  inn.  De  Cristoforis  fell  mortally
wounded,  and  two  of  his  officers  were  laid  low  at  the  same
moment. But the flank attacks were meanwhile being

1  jffneg,  I.  387,  388. Milan  MSS.  A.  B.  Migliavacca, Storia  Anedd,
123,  124.

2  Milan  MSS.  A.  B,  Migliavacca, De  Cristoforis,  324  and  passim.
Ctierzoni,  i.  456,  note.

BATTLE  OF  SAN  FERMO

99

developed,  the  frontal  attack  was  renewed,  and  the  two
weak  companies  of  Hungarians  were  soon  bayonetted,
made  prisoners,  or  sent  flying  through  the  rear  of  the
village.

The  Garibaldini  had  thus  effected  a  lodgment  on  the
broad  neck  of  the  pass.  When,  now  too  late,  large  bodies
of  Austrians  came  hurrying  up  from  Como  and  from  other
directions,  a  series  of  confused  and  petty  actions  raged
among  the  vineyards  and  brushwood  on  the  pass-top,  and
on  the  slopes  of  the  wooded  mountains  at  either  side.  The
Italians  fought  chiefly  with  the  bayonet,  and  Garibaldi  was
everywhere  in  the  thick  of  the  fight.  The  officers,  ac-
cording to  the  Garibaldian  formula  for  successful  leadership
of  raw  volunteers,  exposed  themselves  in  the  front  of  every
danger.  Cosenz  led  on  his  men,  and  Medici  drove  another
division  of  the  enemy  southwards  towards  Camerlata.
Bixio  wrote  to  his  wife  next  day,i  '  Garibaldi  gave  his
orders  only  by  gestures,  and  our  men  cast  themselves  down
like  a  torrent.  I  am  living  in  a  world  of  poetry  {sono  nella
poesia) .'

At  last  the  Austrians  gave  way  and  fled  down  the  ravine
by  the  steep  zig-zag  road  that  falls  for  many  hundred  feet
from  San  Fermo  to  Como.  Halting  on  the  edge  of  the  pass
the  victorious  Garibaldini  could  see  the  reserve  of  Augus-
tin's  brigade,  like  httle  white  specks  far  below,  crawling
about  in  the  Piazza  d' Armi  outside  the  city,  and  their
unused  artillery  standing  in  limber.  Now  came  the  moment
for  one  of  Garibaldi's  great  decisions.  Was  he  to  bid  his
men  descend  the  mountain  side  and  enter  Como,  into
the  midst  of  a  more  numerous  but  demoralised  enemy  ?

'  For  some  time,'  writes  Peard,  '  a  steady  fire  was  poured
down  on  the  ravine  from  the  height  above,  and  just  as  the  sun
had  gone  down,  and  it  was  beginning  to  get  dusk,  the  whole  of
the  troops  on  our  left  were  collected  and  formed  in  the  high  road.

*  Bologna  MSS.  Bixio,  Como,  1859.  (June  4  Is  the  date  wrongly
given  in  the  Bologna  copy,  but  the  context  and  reference  In  the  next  letter
show  the  real  date  Is  May  28,)

H 2

100  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

'  After  a  short  time  Garibaldi  rode  to  the  front  with  his  staff,
with  the  peak  of  his  cap  pulled  down  close  on  his  eyes,  the  only-
indication  he  ever  gave  of  his  thoughts  being  more  intensely
occupied  than  usual.  It  was  as  usual  a  barometer  of  his  feelings,
as  the  working  of  the  stump  of  Nelson's  arm.  Slowly  our  whole
body  began  to  move.  As  we  descended  the  wide  road,  darkness
began  to  close  in.  Every  one  expected  some  hot  work  before
we  should  be  in  Como,  for  they  had  seen  the  formidable  column
that  occupied  the  Piazza  d'  Armi.  As  we  got  nearer  what  was
naturally  supposed  would  be  the  scene  of  a  hand  to  hand  struggle,
the  halts,  though  of  only  a  few  minutes'  duration,  became
frequent.  The  men  were  careful  in  arranging  the  position  of
their  canteens  and  anything  that  might  make  a  noise.  They
seemed  to  step  lighter  than  usual,  for  not  a  footfall  was  to  be
heard.  The  silence  became  almost  painful.  In  this  way  the
first  of  the  houses  of  the  suburb  were  reached.  The  inhabitants
instantly,  as  the  column  advanced,  showed  lights  at  their  windows.
They  began  to  cry  "  Viva  Garibaldi,"  but  some  one  would  run
over  immediately  and  beg  them  to  remain  silent.  We  were
rapidly  passing  the  suburb.  Where  were  the  Austrians  whom
we  had  seen  in  such  strength  an  hour  or  two  before  in  occupa-
tion of  the  place  ?  The  suburb  is  passed.  At  the  entrance  of
the  city  (Como)  is  a  dense  mass  of  figures  with  torches.  Lights
rapidly  appear  in  all  the  windows,  and  instead  of  a  storm  of
Austrian  bullets  the  troops  were  met  with  a  deafening  shout,
''  Viva  Italia  !  "  "  Viva  Garibaldi  !  "

'  The  people  were  wild  with  delight.  Men  with  torches
marched  on  either  side  of  his  horse,  and  old  and  young  rushed
forward  kissing  his  feet  and  clothes.  Old  men  with  tears
streaming  down  their  faces,  and  young  girls  threw  their  arms
round  our  necks  and  saluted  us  as  their  deliverers.  The  up-
roar was  immense.  The  sound  of  the  bells  which  were  ringing
in  all  the  campanili,  and  music  of  the  bands  were  drowned  by
the  cheering  of  the  crowds  that  were  assembled  in  the  large
Piazza.  Marshal  Urban,  with  eight  battalions,i  a  battery  of
guns,  and  some  squadrons  of  Uhlans,  had  evacuated  the  city
about  an  hour  previous  to  our  arrival.'

It  was  indeed  a  happy  night. Even  the  men  whom  Bixio
had  too  often  cursed  and  beaten  with  the  fiat  of  his  sabre,

1  He  had  not  really  eight  battalions  in  Como  itself,  but  he  had  eight
at  Como  and  Camerlata  together.

OCCUPATION  OF  COMO  loi

came  to  tell  him  they  loved  him  after  having  followed  him
in  battle  that  day.i

Urban  was  in  full  flight.  Como  and  Camerlata  were
both  abandoned  in  such  haste  that  large  stores  of  arms,
provisions,  and  money  fell  a  prey  to  the  victors.

'  Not  only,'  writes  the  famous  author  of  Letters  on  Strategy,
'  was  Garibaldi  allowed  to  occupy  Como,  but  the  Austrian  flank
and  rear  were  so  threatened  that  the  entire  first  Corps  was  ordered
to  Milan,  where  it  was  to  arrive  a  few  days  later.  .  .  .  Thus
Garibaldi  with  3000  partisans  contained  nearly  three  brigades
of  Urban's  and  the  whole  of  the  first  Army  Corps.'  2

Garibaldi  was  well  aware  that  Urban  would  shortly
be  able  to  rally  his  two  defeated  brigades  at  Monza  and
Milan,  join  them  to  the  brigade  Schaffgotsche  and  re-
turn against  him  in  overwhelming  numbers.  Meanwhile
he  had  secured  two  or  three  days'  respite  by  his  victory  of
May  27,  and  he  resolved  to  turn  the  breathing  space  to
account.8  After  conceding  a  needful  day  of  rest  at  Como,
he  led  his  men  back  on  the  29th  through  Varese,  leaving
the  defence  of  Como  city  and  lake  to  the  local  patriots  and
a  detachment  of  Cacciatori.  His  objective  was  a  secret  from
his  own  men  ;  he  gave  out  that  they  were  going  to  meet
the  small  mountain  battery  which  Cavour  had  sent  after
them.  But  when  these  guns  had  been  found  safely  arrived
at  Varese,  it  appeared  that  the  real  object  of  the
march  was  the  capture  of  the  port  of  Laveno  on  Lago
Maggiore. Laveno  was  the  base  of  the  system  of  Austrian

1  My  authorities  for  the  battle  of  San  Fermo  are — Milan  MSS,
Simonetta,  23-28 ;  Milan  MSS.  A.  B.  Plico  viii.  No.  120,  doc.  8,  especially
the  Migliavacca  MS. ;  Krieg,  i.  387,  388 ;  Mem.  292-297  ;  Peard  {Cornhill,
January  1908),  105-109;  Conv.  Marchetti;  Elia,  i.  234-238;  Cadolini,  24-29;
Carrano,  288-324;  De  Cristoforis,  318-338;  Bertani,  1.  377;  Guerzoni,
i-  455-458 ;  Bologna  MS.  Bixio,  Letter  from  Como  referred  to  above.

2  Hohenlohe,  i.  171.  The  Austrian  writer  of  Krieg  {unofficial),  64,
says  that  another  brigade  was  sent  to  secure  Bergamo  against  Garibaldi
on  May  28  :  '4  Brigaden,  also  ein  voiles  Armee-Korps,  werden  durch
3000  Alpenjager  paralysiert. '

^  Hohenlohe,  i._  179,

102  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

navigation  which  still  secured  the  waters  of  the  western
lake  for  the  black  and  yellow  flag,  while  on  more  eastern
Como  the  red,  white  and  green  already  held  the  waters  and
both  the  shores.  On  the  night  of  May  30  the  Garibaldini
attempted  to  surprise  the  little  fort  defended  by  590  men,
and  the  steamers  in  the  port  below.  One  of  the  columns
lost  its  way  in  the  darkness  and  the  surprise  failed.  The
morning  after  this  repulse  from  Laveno,  the  unwelcome  news
arrived  that  Urban,  with  his  three  brigades  complete— over
11,000  men— was  in  front  of  Varese,  whither  Garibaldi  was
retreating.  All  that  he  could  now  do  was  to  go  up  into
the  skirts  of  the  mountain  called  Campo  dei  Fiori— an
Alpine  '  Field  of  Flowers '  4000  feet  high— which  over-
hangs the  city.  Descending  as  far  as  S.  Ambrogio,  he
remained  there  to  protect  the  inhabitants  at  Varese,  who
had  fled  for  refuge  to  the  high  perched  village  and  pilgrim-
age shrine  of  S.  Maria  del  Monte.  From  that  point  of
vantage  the  unhappy  citizens  watched  Urban  bombard
their  empty  houses  in  Varese,  as  a  punishment  for  the
way  in  which  they  had  received  their  Hberators.'

Garibaldi  had  before  him  the  prospect  of  being  once
more,  as  in  1849,  hunted  like  a  partridge  in  the  mountains,
though  on  this  occasion  the  superior  morale  of  his  small  force
would  enable  him  indefinitely  to  protract  the  campaign  in
the  fastnesses  of  the  Alps.  It  would  be  a  sort  of  war  which
he  was  eminently  fitted  to  conduct,  but  3000  men  could
hardly  be  expected  to  defeat  11,000,  unless  Urban  con-
stantly repeated  the  error  of  dividing  his  force,  now  nearly
fourfold  that  of  his  adversary.  For  the  moment,  posted
as  Garibaldi  was  within  a  few  miles  of  Varese,  he  was  in
imminent  danger  of  being  overwhelmed.  So,  by  a  rapid
and  secret  march  over  mountain  tracks  on  the  first  night  of
June,  he  carried  back  his  force  to  Como  city,  which  had
remained  in  the  hands  of  the  patriots.  But  at  the  same  time
Urban  received  orders  partially  to  retire. For  on  May  30

1  Cavrano,  324-356.  Hohenlohe,  1.  179.  Guerzom,  i.  458-463.  Krieg,
I.  449-451,  Camp,  di  Nap,  104-106,  Nievo,  310,  311.  Mem,  298-300.
Valle's  V.  G.  U.  101-113.

ADVANCE  ON  BRESCIA  103

Victor  Emmanuel  and  General  Cialdini  had  triumphed  at
Palestro.  Urban,  though  recalled  from  the  close  pursuit
of  Garibaldi,  was  not  brought  down  to  the  main  scene  of
operations,  and  his  11,000  men  were  useless  on  the  decisive
day  (June  4)  when  Napoleon  crossed  the  Ticino  and  won  a
'  soldiers'  battle  '  at  Magenta.  After  the  hard-won  victory
of  the  French,  Gyulai  evacuated  Lombardy  and  fell  back
on  the  Venetian  Quadrilateral,  for  which  his  unadventurous
soul  had  been  yearning  during  the  days  when  he  should
have  had  no  thought  but  to  advance  on  Turin.i

Some  time  on  June  5  the  news  of  Magenta  reached
Ganbaldi at Como. Grasping  at  once  the  new  situation
created  by  the  great  battle,  he  started  on  again  that  very
night,  his  men  acting  as  the  detached  left  wing  of  the  allied
advance  across  Lombardy. During  June  6  steamers  crowded
with  the  Cacciatori  passed  along  the  shores  of  the  most
beautiful  lake  in  Europe,  while  the  peasantry  shouted  and
waved  greetings  of  wild  dehght  from  the  water's  edge  and
from  chestnut  woods  high  overhead. Rounding  the  point  of
Bellagio,  the  boats  discharged  their  freight  at  Lecco  before
nightfall,  and  Garibaldi  was  thus  already  across  the  Adda,
while  the  main  army  was  only  just  across  the  Ticino. From'
Lecco  he  pushed  on  to  Bergamo  and  Brescia  by  a  most
dangerous  route,  parallel  with  the  Austrian  main  army  as
It  retreated  towards  the  Quadrilateral. But  he  used  his
fifty  mounted  scouts  with  the  same  abihty  and  vigour  with
with  which  he  had  used  his  cavalry  in  the  retreat  of  1849.2
He cleverly  out-manoeuvred  the Austrians at  Ponte  S.
Pietro,  and  fought  a  spirited  Uttle  action  at  Seriate,  where
a  single  company  under  Narciso  Bronzetti  drove  in  rout
a  whole  battahon  of  Hungarians.s In  this  way  he  arrived

'  Hohenlohe,  i.  181-185,  200,  203. Carrano,  345-362. Riv.  Mil.  It
January  1873,  p.  228,  230.  '

*  See  Trevelyan's  Gar.  Rome,  242.

'Peard  MS.  87-94.  Carrano,  376-411.  Guerzoni,  i.  475,470
fho""'/"/^.^"^'-  .^^°°^^**^'^  extraordinary  feat  at  Seriate,  in  defeating
about  800  Hungarians  with  100  Cacciaiori,  may  be  partiy  accounted  fo?
by  the  pohtical  apathy  of  the  Hungarians  for  the  Austrian  cause Signer

104  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

safely,  first  at  Bergamo  and  then  at  Brescia,  the  twin  sub-
alpine  cities  which  shared  the  reputation,  earned  by  terrible
sacrifices  in  the  evil  years  gone  by,  of  being  the  most  patriotic
of  the  Lombard  towns.

On  June  ii,  in  Garibaldi's  headquarters  at  Bergamo,
Giovanni  Visconti  Venosta,  brother  of  EmiHo  the  Royal
Commissioner,  witnessed  a  curious  and  characteristic  scene.
Half  a  dozen  Austrian  officers,  captured  in  fight,  were
brought  before  the  General.  They  came  into  the  presence
of  the  *  red  devil '  with  the  constrained  resolution  of  men
prepared  for  death.  The  troops  whom  they  commanded,
the  ignorant  peasantry  of  Croatia,  used  to  tell  their  Italian
captors  how  they  had  seen  '  Garibalda  '  in  the  thick  of  the
fight  atVarese  and  Como,  with  the  bullets  leaping  off  his
coat  like  hailstones,  and  how  they  knew  he  ate  the  flesh  of
his  prisoners.!  Their  officers  did  not  share  these  supersti-
tions, but  they  fully  expected  that  the  fierce  guerilla,  whom
they  had  hunted  to  the  death  with  his  wife  and  friends
in  '49,  would  order  to  instant  execution  every  Austrian
whom  he  caught.  When,  instead,  he  rose  to  shake  each
of  the  six  prisoners  by  the  hand,  with  a  word  of  commend-
ation for  their  courage  and  of  pity  for  their  misfortune,
Venosta  saw  their  faces  change  to  profound  surprise  and
gratitude.2

On  the  night  of  June  12-13  a  dangerous  forced  march
was  made,  in  order  to  reach  Brescia.  While  Garibaldi,
skilfully  avoiding  Urban's  columns,  was  winding  his  way  in
the  darkness  by  a  small  track  along  the  slopes  of  Monte
Orfano,  he  suddenly  drew  rein  and  began  to  listen  intently
— for  the  distant  sound  of  horse  hoofs  or  of  cannon,  as  his
staff  supposed. But,  in  fact,  a  nightingale  had  just  broken

Marchetti  tells  me  that  they  found  the  Croats  in  this  campaign  always
held  out  longer  than  the  Hungarians.

1  Marchetti  Conv.  Valle's  V.  G.  U.  84  note.  Carrano,  282.  Cadolini,
14.  The  Austrians  called  him  the  rothteufel  in  1859  {Risorg.  anno  i,  v.
iioi  note),  although  he  wore  no  red  shirt  in  this  campaign.  The  name,
I  suppose,  referred  partly  to  his  hair,  and  partly  to  their  recollections  of
the  red  shirt  in  1848-49,

^  Venosta,  512,  513,

BATTLE  OF  TRE  PONTl  105

into  song  over  his  head,  and  in  a  moment  he  had  been  rapt,
in  that  moonht  hour,  into  another  sphere  where  the  inner
Ufe  of  his  soul  was  spent,

*  Some  world  far  from  ours,
Where  moonlight  and  music  and  feeling
Are  one.'

He  sat  long  motionless,  in  a  trance  from  which  his  followers
were  at  last  fain  to  wake  him.  In  the  morning  they  safely
entered  Brescia,  after  one  of  the  most  hazardous  marches
of  the  campaign.!

At  Brescia  Garibaldi's  independent  command  came  to
an  end.  During  the  approach  of  the  allied  armies  to  the
southern  end  of  the  Lago  di  Garda,  he  continued  to  act  as
their  advanced  left  wing,  but  under  Victor  Emmanuel's
orders,  no  longer  on  his  own  responsibility.  On  the  night
of  June  14-15,  he  was  instructed  from  headquarters  to
advance  on  Lonato,  and  informed  that  he  would  be  followed
on  the  road  by  four  regiments  of  cavalry  and  two  horse
batteries.  Proceeding  next  day  to  carry  out  these  orders,
he  found  the  Austrians  threatening  his  right  flank,  but
no  sign  of  the  promised  cavalry.  Pressing  on  himself  with
a  portion  of  his  force  to  Lonato,  he  was  obHged  to  leave
another  part  under  Cosenz,  Medici,  and  the  rebel  Hungarian
Tiirr  to  defend  the  line  of  communications  at  Tre  Ponti.
This  rearguard  was  shortly  afterwards  attacked,  but  after
a  successful  defence  it  advanced  and  drove  the  enemy
southward  for  two  miles  along  both  banks  of  La  Lupa
canal,  until,  arrived  at  Ponte  S.  Giacomo,  it  found  itself  in
the  neighbourhood  of  larger  bodies  of  Austrians.  Cosenz
very  properly  ordered  a  halt,  but  Tiirr  pressed  on  and
became  unnecessarily  involved  with  a  whole  Austrian
brigade.  The  gallant  Narciso  Bronzetti,  the  hero  of  Seriate,
one of the  finest of Garibaldi's officers, fell mortally

*  Dumas,  I,  66,67,  Stiavelli,  i8i,  182.  See  Luzio  in  the  Corriere  della
Sera,  September  15,  1907,  on  the  value  of  Dumas^  evidence,  for  such  stories,
based  on  Garibaldi's  own  MS.  Mem.  306,  with  Carrano,  492,  and  Peard  MS,
92,  show  the  date  and  circumstances  of  the  march.

io6  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

wounded.  A  hasty  retreat  began,  and  Garibaldi,  galloping
up  to  the  firing  from  the  direction  of  Lonato,  met  some
of  the  men  in  full  flight  along  the  canal.  His  terrible
anger  soon  recalled  them  to  their  duty,  but  though  the
battle  was  renewed  with  success  as  a  defensive  operation
on  the  Tre  Ponti  ground  originally  occupied  in  the  morning,
the  counter-attack  successfully  begun  from  that  position
had  ended  in  failure  owing  to  Tiirr's  rashness.  The  belated
arrival  of  the  regular  cavalry  removed  all  danger  from  the
situation.  At  this  battle,  as  at  Varese  and  Como,  the
Austrians  admitted  a  loss  of  between  one  and  two  hundred
men,  but  at  Tre  Ponti  the  Italian  loss,  counting  prisoners,
was  certainly  not  less  than  theirs.i

Garibaldi  was  next  sent  to  Salo,  standing  on  a  deep  bay
of  the  Lago  di  Garda.  Here,  in  full  sight  of  the  Veronese
Alps  and  the  heights  of  Rivoli  across  the  lake,  he  made
naval  preparations  for  the  passage,  expecting  to  march
through  Venetia,  as  he  had  marched  through  Lombardy,
the  advanced  left  wing  of  the  allied  armies.  His  forces
now  first  began  to  increase  rapidly,  and  in  a  short  month
they  rose  to  12,000  volunteers.  But  before  they  had
reached  that  number  his  high  hopes  had  been  dashed  to
earth,  by  an  order  from  headquarters  received  at  Salo,  on
June  20,  to  carry  his  force  out  of  the  seat  of  war  into  the
remote  Valtelline.  Whatever  the  motives  of  those  who
gave  the  order,  the  Cacciatori  were  furious  at  being  thus
sent  to  the  rear,  at  the  first  moment  when  they  were  becom-
ing formidable  in  numbers.  The  Austrian  invasion  of  the
Valtelline  was  a  chimera,  as  Garibaldi  rightly  supposed,
and  as  the  men  who  sent  the  order  perhaps  themselves
suspected.2  The  hostile  force  occupying  the  Italian  foot
of  the  Stelvio  Pass  did  not  require  12,000  Cacciatori  to
check  its  advance  down  the  valley. In  the  first  days  of

1  Carrano,  412-435,  Guevzoni,  i.  480-482,  Peard  MS,  95-99,  Mem.
307-309.  Krieg,  1.  371  ;  ii.  88-91,  Elia,  1.  272-279,  Mario,  242-244,
Milan  MSS.,  Simonetta,  48,

2  I  do  not  know  whether  the  order  was  given  in  good  faith  for  genuine
military  reasons,  or  to  get  rid  of  the  Garibaldini  from  motives  of  political
or  professional  jealousy, Is  there  any  real  evidence  as  to  the  true  motive  ?

IN  THE  VALTELLINE  107

July,  Medici  with  the  vanguard  easily  drove  them  out  ol
Bormio,  and  Bixio,  following  them  up  the  pass,  formed  a
chain  of  posts  on  the  eternal  snow,  where  during  the  brief
remainder  of  the  war  the  Italian  and  Tyrolese  patriots
stood  watching  each  other  on  the  vast  white  boundary  which
at  this  point  Nature  herself  has  set  to  divide  the  fatherlands
of  Hofer  and  of  Garibaldi.i

Giovanni  Visconti  Venosta,  himself  a  native  of  the
Valtelline,  who  had  been  named  as  Local  Commissioner
for  the  valley  under  his  brother  Emilio,  had  opportunity  to
observe  there  certain  phenomena  which  soon  became
common  throughout  Italy.

'When  Garibaldi  passed  through  a  village,'  he  wrote,  'al-
though he  was  not  now  wearing  the  red  shirt,  you  would  not
have  said  he  was  a  General,  but  the  head  of  a  new  religion  followed
by  a  crowd  of  fanatics.  The  women,  no  less  enthusiastic  than
the  men,  brought  their  babies  to  Garibaldi  that  he  should  bless
and  even  baptize  them.  To  these  crowds  that  thronged  him.
Garibaldi  would  speak  with  that  beautiful  voice  of  his  which
was  a  part  of  the  secret  of  his  charm — "  Come !  he  who  stays
at  home  is  a  coward.  I  promise  you  weariness,  hardship,  and
battles.  But  we  will  conquer  or  die."  These  were  not  joyful
words,  but  when  they  were  heard  the  enthusiasm  rose  to  its
highest.  It  was  a  delirium.  The  crowd  broke  up  deeply  moved,
commenting  on  what  the  General  had  said :  many  had  tears  in
their  eyes.*

The  mountaineers  of  the  Valtelline,  who  were  no  mere
shouters  like  some  of  the  more  southern  populations  over
whom  he  threw  the  same  spell,  enlisted  in  crowds, — 400
from  the  small  town  of  Morbegno  alone.  But  Garibaldi
himself  was  no  great  organizer.  Venosta  records  how  when
certain  contractors  came  to  the  General  for  his  signature  to
their  contracts  he  broke  out : —

*  What !  These  rascals  who  have  the  honour  to  clothe  our
brave  young  men  who  are  giving  their  lives  for  their  country,
while  they  themselves  are  playing  the  coward  at  home,  dare  to

'  Mem.  3 1 1-3 1 5,  Carrafio,  445-447,  453-496,  Peavd  MS,  100-119.
i\ievo,  314, Cadolini,  34,

io8  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

ask  for  contracts,  agreements,  signatures  ?  Is  not  my  order
enough  ?  Send  them  to  the  devil !  If  they  are  not  enemies,
they  certainly  are  not  patriots.'

They  got  their  contracts,  but  the  scene  depicts  the  nature
of  the  man.^

The  Garibaldini,  on  their  way  to  the  Valtelline,  had
heard  news  of  the  great  battle  of  Solferino,  in  which  they
thought  they  might  well  have  been  allowed  to  take  part.
The  Austrians,  who  had  retired  beyond  the  Mincio,  suddenly
recrossed  it,  and  on  June  24  fought  a  last  fierce  battle  for
the  recovery  of  their  Milanese  possessions.  After  a  terrible
carnage,  they  retreated  once  more  and  for  ever  out  of
Lombardy.  But  the  French  and  Italians  had  suffered
scarcely  less  than  they,  and  the  advance  against  the  for-
tresses of  the  Venetian  Quadrilateral  was  delayed.  A
fortnight  later  came  the  news  which  crushed  the  hopes
and  roused  the  fury  of  Italian  patriots  from  the  Garibaldini
in  the  Valtelline  to  the  farthest  Sicihan  conspirators  :  the
Emperors  of  France  and  Austria  had  met  at  Villafranca
and  arranged  terms  of  peace.

Garibaldi  and  his  volunteers  had  played  no  decisive
part  in  the  war  of  1859,  which  had  been  won  by  the  regular
armies  on  the  battlefields  of  the  Lombard  plain.  But  the
spirited  little  campaign  in  the  wooded  mountains  round
Varese  and  Como  is  a  story  dear  to  all  true  Italians,  for  it
moves  in  that  unmistakable  atmosphere  of  the  pure  poetry
of  the  Risorgimento.  Nor  is  it  wanting  in  technical  interest,
for  it  shows  how  far  Garibaldi  and  his  men  were  a  match  for
the  best  Austrian  troops  under  one  of  the  most  distinguished
Austrian  generals,  and  how  far  his  detractors  are  right  when
they  say  that  he  could  only  defeat  Neapolitans.  The
impartial  student  may  well  agree  with  the  Prussian  military
historian  in  his  admiration  for  the  leadership  which  enabled
3000  young  volunteers,  with  old  muskets  and  no  cannon,
to  defeat  twice  the  number  of  highly  trained  Austrians,

*  Venosta,  544-546. Rusconi,  67,

ALPINE  CAMPAIGN  REVIEWED  109

excellently  armed  and  fully  equipped  with  artillery,  and
thereby  to  draw  away  from  the  main  seat  of  war  three  whole
brigades  amounting  to  over  11,000  men.i

Yet  the  Alpine  campaign  is  perhaps  of  most  importance
as  being  the  field  where  the  guerilla  chief  trained  that
small  and  peculiar  force  with  which  he  accomplished  the
work  of  the  following  year.  It  was  in  the  Alps  of  1859  that
the  Garibaldini  acquired  those  fighting  qualities  and  that
unbounded  confidence  in  themselves  and  in  their  leader
which  enabled  them  in  i860  to  conquer  Sicily  and  Naples.

1  Hohenlohe,  I.  200.  He  speaks  indeed  of  Garibaldi's  '  3000  moun-
taineers and  riflemen,'  but  the  3000  were  in  fact  neither  riflemen  nor
mountaineers.

CHAPTER  VI

VILLAFRANCA  AND  AFTER

•  Peace,  peace,  peace,  do  you  say  ?

What !  With  the  enemy's  guns  in  our  ears  ?
With  the  country's  wrong  not  rendered  back  ?
What !  While  Austria  stands  at  bay
In  Mantua,  and  our  Venice  wears
The  cursed  flag  of  the  yellow  and  black  ?  '

Mrs.  Browning, First  News  from  Villafranca,

Napoleon  III.  cannot  justly  be  blamed  for  making  peace
after  the  battle  of  Solferino.  If,  indeed,  the  whole  strength
of  France  and  Piedmont  could  have  been  devoted  to
the  expulsion  of  the  Austrian  armies  from  the  Venetian
Quadrilateral,  there  would  have  been  a  good  prospect  of
success  after  a  bloody  and  protracted  campaign.  But
whatever  odds  might  be  taken  as  to  the  result  of  a  fair  fight
there  was  grave  reason  to  fear  that  the  ring  would  not  be
kept.  Prussia  was  considering  whether  she  should  seize
her  opportunity  and  invade  the  Rhine  frontier  of  France.
Russia,  whose  friendship  to  France  had  hitherto  held  Prussia
in  check,  had  been  aHenated  by  the  popular  risings  in
Tuscany  and  the  Romagna,  which  gave  the  war  a  revolu-
tionary character,  and  by  the  conspiracy  of  Napoleon,  Cavour
and  Kossuth  to  raise  the  Hungarian  nation  in  arms.  For
the  fortunes  of  Hungary,  which  the  troops  of  the  Czar  had
helped  Austria  to  suppress  in  1849,  always  affected  the
pohtical  barometer  in  Poland.  The  clerical  party  in  France
were  growing  openly  restive  at  the  course  of  events  in  Italy,
particularly  at  the  encouragement  given  to  the  rebelHon
of  the  Pope's  subjects  in  the  Romagna.  The  French
soldiers  were  discontented  with  the  small  amount  of  assist-
ance obtainable  from the  newly  liberated provinces  of

VILLAFRANCA  in

Italy.  Napoleon  knew  that  he  might  lose  his  throne  as
the  result  of  a  single  defeat,  and  even  if  he  had  been  ready
to  risk  that  personal  loss,  he  surely  had  no  right  to  expose
France  to  Prussian  conquest,  in  pursuance  of  schemes
which,  however  generous,  interested  himself  and  Italy  rather
than  France  herself.  Unnerved  by  the  heat  of  the  Italian
summer,  conscious  that  his  own  bad  generalship  had  hitherto
escaped  punishment  only  by  the  worse  generalship  of
Gyulai,  horrified  at  the  carnage  he  had  witnessed  on  two
hard-won  fields,  he  had  none  of  the  self-assured  and
callous  fortitude  of  the  victor  of  Eylau  and  Borodino.
Napoleon  III.  determined  to  avoid  his  Leipzig  and  Waterloo
while  there  was  yet  time.^

But  if  the  wisdom  of  making  peace  can  hardly  be  chal-
lenged, the  terms  hastily  and  secretly  agreed  upon  at
Villafranca  by  the  two  Emperors  were  monstrous.  By
those  terms,  not  only  was  Austria  left  in  possession  of  the
Venetian  territory  still  occupied  by  her  armies,  but  the  old
Ducal  and  Papal  despotisms  were  to  be  restored  in  Tuscany,
Modena  and  the  Romagna.  These  provinces  had,  during
the  last  three  months,  one  by  one  revolted  and  established
orderly  provisional  governments  under  the  protection  of
Piedmont.  The  foolish,  kind,  old  Grand-Duke  Leopold  of
Tuscany  had  never  been  forgiven  for  allowing  the  Austrian
occupation  in  1849,  though  he  had  managed  to  bring  it  to
an  end  seven  years  later.  When,  in  1859,  he  refused  to
join  in  the  national  war,  his  subjects  sent  him  off  in  a
carriage  to  the  frontier  with  good-humoured  cries  of  'a
rivederci  in  paradiso,'  'good-bye  till  we  meet  in  heaven.'
That  was  at  the  end  of  April ;  in  June,  after  Magenta,  the
fiercer  despots  of  Modena  and  Parma  fled  from  their  terri-
tories with  the  Austrian  garrisons,  and  the  simultaneous
withdrawal  of  the  white-coats  from  Bologna  was  the  signal
for  the  rising  of  the  Pope's  Romagnuol  subjects.  The
proposal  of  the  signatories  of  Villafranca  in  the  following
month  to  restore  the  old  rulers  involved  the  return  of  the

^  La  Gorce,  iii.  102-104. Ollivier,  iv.  217,  218. Bianchi,  viii,  142,  143.
Mirimee,  i,  52-56. Chiala,  Pol.  Seg.  for  Hungary,  &c.

112  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

armies  of  Austria,  for  a  liberticide  conquest  of  Florence  and
Bologna  by  French  troops  under  the  liberator  of  Milan  was
hardly  to  be  contemplated.  The  treaty  further  mocked
the  aspirations  of  Italy  by  a  proposed  Federation  of  Italian
States  under  the  presidency  of  the  Pope,  in  which  Austria
would  clearly  exercise  a  dominating  influence.  '  Perhaps,'
wrote  Napoleon's  shrewd  and  cynical  friend  Prosper  Merimee,
*  perhaps  peace  was  necessary,  but  we  ought  not  to  have
begun  so  well  merely  to  leav®  Italy  in  a  worse  mess  (gachis)
than  before.'  ^  If  Piedmont  had  accepted  these  terms  as
final  and  satisfactory  she  would  have  gained  Lombardy  and
perhaps  Parma,  but  would  have  forfeited  her  headship  of
the  patriotic  movement,  and  the  reversion  of  the  rest  of
the  Peninsula.2

When  Cavour  heard  that  the  French  and  Austrian
Emperors  had  made,  without  consulting  or  even  warning
him,  so  cruel  a  settlement  of  Italy's  claims,  a  life-time's
habit  of  self-restraint  fell  from  him  Uke  a  disguise.  The
astonished  world  had  a  vision  of  the  nether  fires  in  the  man,
the  furnace  that  drove  the  smooth  and  perfect  engine,  and
learnt  that  the  heart  with  which  he  loved  Italy  had  been
fashioned  on  the  same  scale  as  the  brain  with  which  he
served  her.  For  a  few  hours  Cavour  was  more  obstinate
and  frantic  in  the  face  of  accomplished  facts  than  Garibaldi
in  his  most  headstrong  mood.  He  advised  the  king  to  reject
the  treaty  and  to  carry  on  the  war  single-handed.  When
Victor  Emmanuel  refused  thus  to  commit  national  suicide
he  flew  into  a  rage,  and  after  a  violent  scene  between  the
two  men,  who  always  admired  but  never  loved  each  other,
he  left  the  royal  presence  gesticulating  wildly,  his  face  '  red
as  a  furnace,'  his  lips  trembling,  'a  singular  and  terrible
spectacle '  to  his  friends.  Victor  Emmanuel,  though  bitterly
mortified  by  Villafranca,  kept  his  head  during  the  perilous
days  of  Cavour' s  madness.  With  a  juster  perception  of
what  Napoleon  had  sacrificed  and  risked  for  Italy,  he  con-
tinued till  the  end  of  his  life  to  feel  a  personal  obligation  to

1  Olliviey,  iv.  136,  269. Tvollope,  ii.  217-222.
8  Bianchi,  viii.  154. La  Gorce,  iii.  108-112.

CAVOUR'S  FURY  113

the  man  who  had  crossed  the  Alps  to  fight  for  him  against
Austria.  1  Knowing  that  it  was  impossible  to  continue  the
war  alone,  he  put  his  signature  to  the  treaty,  but  added  the
significant  words  of  reservation—'  so  far  as  concerns  myself  '
{pour  ce  qui  me  conceme).  He  thus  made  it  clear  that  while
he  consented  to  peace  and  took  Lombardy  as  the  price  of
peace,  he  did  not  guarantee  the  clauses  which  provided
for  the  return  of  the  despots  to  the  revolted  provinces. 2

Meanwhile  Cavour,  still  in  the  heat  of  fury,  had  mastered
himself  enough  to  be  turning  that  fury  to  account.  He
had  gone  back  to  Turin,  where  on  July  14  he  met  Kossuth,
The  two  patriots  had  an  equal  right  to  complain  of  the
peace,  for  Napoleon  had  sprung  it  on  them  both  after
fostering  far  other  hopes.  But  the  Hungarian  was  over-
whelmed by  the  Itahan's  passion  and  carried  away  an
undying  recollection  of  the  terrible  emphasis  with  which
Cavour  had  exclaimed  : —

'  This  treaty  shall  not  be  executed.  If  need  be  I  will  take
Solaro  Delia  MargheritaS  by  one  hand,  and  Mazzini  by  the
other.  I  will  become  a  conspirator '  (striking  his  breast),  '  I
will  become  a  revolutionary.  But  the  treaty  shall  not'  be
executed. No  ! A  thousand  times  no  ! Never,  never  !  '  *

When  Cavour  said  'Never,'  the  negative  prophecy  that  falls
so  easily  from  the  mouth  of  smaller  men  was  likely  to  be
fulfilled.  He  had  already  sent  in  his  resignation,  but  while
the  king  was  seeking  a  man  to  take  his  place,  he  continued
to  organize  by  his  advice  and  encouragement  the  resistance
set  up  by  Tuscany,  Modena,  and  the  Romagna  against  the
return  of  their  old  rulers.  The  newly-Uberated  States  had,
according  to  French  accounts,  been  lukewarm  or  at  least
ineffective  in  sending  troops  to  the  front  during  the  war.
Modena  and  the  Romagna,  which  had  got  rid  of  the  Austrian

1  In  1870  he  wished,  out  of  sheer  gratitude  for  1859,  to  go  to  war  for
Napoleon  against  Prussia.  Here  we  have  the  chivalrous  and  even  quixotic
knight-errant,  whose  family  had  '  held  its  head  high  for  850  years.'

^  Chiala,  lil.  ccxvi-ccxx. La  Gorce,  iii.  115. Bianchi,  viii.  148,  159,

2  Leader  of  the  Clericals  in  the  Piedmontese  Parliament.
*  Chiala,  Pol,  Seg.  50-57,  62,  72.

I

114  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

garrisons  only  in  June,  had  not  had  time  to  levy  troops,
but  the  charge  was  in  some  measure  true  in  the  case  of
Tuscany,  where  the  population  was  not  warlike  and  the
conscription  was  unpopular  with  the  peasants,  as  it  had
been  in  1848.1  But  the  inhabitants  of  all  three  States  were
prepared  to  fight  rather  than  take  back  the  old  rigime.
The  Romagnuols,  under  the  Piedmontese  Commissioner
D'Azeglio,  began  to  organize  at  Bologna  a  force  to  repel  the
Pope's  Swiss  mercenaries,  who  threatened  to  reconquer  the
province  for  their  master.  Cavour's  friend  Farini  put
Modena  in  a  similar  posture  of  defence,  and  declared  that
if  the  Duke  tried  to  return  he  would  be  treated  as  a  public
enemy ;  on  July  17  he  received  the  following  telegram
from  Turin, — '  The  Minister  is  dead,  but  the  friend  greets
you  and  applauds  your  decision.'  At  Cavour's  personal
instigation  he  remained  at  his  post  in  spite  of  the  orders  of
recall  which  as  Piedmontese  minister  Cavour  had  been
forced  to  send  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  Villafranca.^
Cipriani  soon  succeeded  D'Azeglio  as  Governor  of  the
Romagna.  Neither  he  nor  Farini  were  now  Piedmontese
Commissioners  in  name,  but  as  Dictators  they  upheld  the
national  flag  until  the  time  should  come  round  when
Piedmont  could  venture  on  annexation.

Tuscany  adopted  the  same  policy  in  close  alliance  with
Modena  and  the  Romagna.  Soft  Tuscany  needed  a  man
to  hold  her  firm,  and  she  found  for  the  purpose  her  own  '  iron
Baron,'  Bettino  Ricasoli,  one  of  the  half-dozen  titanic  men
produced  by  the  Italy  of  that  period.  Not  unlike  a  Re-
publican of  our  own  Puritan  Commonwealth  in  his  personal,
religious  and  political  temper,  he  was  as  a  rock  planted,
and  Tuscany  clung  to  him  for  ten  months  till  the  long-
wished  for  day  of  annexation  and  union  came  at  last.^

^  Ricasoli,  Hi.  2-4,  letter  of  Lambruschinl,  April  28,  1859,  says  a  con-
scription will  lead  to  a  violent  reaction  for  the  old  Duke.  People  wiU  fight
against  him  if  he  tries  to  return  with  Austrian  troops,  but  will  not  endure
a  '  levy.' Ollivier,  iv.  177,

*  Chiala,  Hi.  p.  ccxxiii.  and  109,  112, Bianchi,  viil,  160-163.

'  A  fine  personal  account  of  Ricasoli  can  be  found  in  Countess
Martinengo  Cesaresco's  Italian  Characters,

CAVOUR  IN  RETIREMENT  115

Thus  Cavour,  before  quitting  office,  had  seen  to  it  that
Central  Italy  would  continue,  under  strong  but  moderate
leaders,  to  maintain  liberty  and  order,  and  to  demand  un-
swervmgly  from  diplomatic  Europe  nothing  short  of  union
with  Piedmont.  With  the  help  of  Ricasoli  and  the  people
of  the  Central  Provinces,  he  had  in  a  week  laid  down  the  lines
of  passive  resistance  to  Villafranca,  along  which  it  was  easy
for  his  successor  to  continue  during  the  next  half-year.

This  done,  Cavour  retired  for  five  months  into  private
life. He  spent  the  greater  part  of  August  1859  in  the  quiet
home  of  his  friends  the  De  La  Rives,  above  the  southern
shore  of  Lake  Geneva,  where  he  soon  recovered  all  his  old
sagacity  and  calm. '  His  normal  state  came  quickly  back
and  with  It  came  oblivion  of  the  past  now  useless  to  con-
template, new  hopes,  new  designs,  a  newpoHcy,  another  plan
of  campaign.' So  wrote  his  friend,  WilHam  De  La  Rive  who
watching  and  Hstening  day  by  day,  heard  Cavour  foretell
two  coming  developments  of  poHcy,  by  which  Villafranca
could  be  turned  from  a  curse  into  a  blessing. 'England  '
he  said,  '  has  done  nothing  yet  for  Italy  ;  it  is  her  turn  now' '
And—'  I  shall  take  Naples  in  hand.'  1

T^-^uT".'''/^^'^  England's  turn  now.  Jealousy  of  France,
which  had  damped  our  pro-Itahan  ardour  during  the  war
after  Villafranca  urged  us  to  outbid  Napoleon  for  Italy's  grati-
tude now  that  he  hung  back,  and  to  help  build  up  an  Italian
btate  strong  enough  to  be  independent  of  his  protection
It  so  happened  that  just  a  month  before  Villafranca  there
had  occurred  a  change  of  ministry  in  England  which  enabled
her  to  adopt  the  new  policy  fitted  to  the  new  situation
A  general  election  had  been  held  in  May  1859  but  the
result  of  an  appeal  to  the  country  in  those  days  was  not
always  apparent  till  Parliament  met,  because  many
members  m  that  easy-going  period  were  independent  of
party  ties  and  could  make  and  unmake  ministries  by  the
exercise  of  their  private  judgment.  The  war  was  still
raging,  and  the  precise  nature  of  England's  neutrahty  was

'  De  La  Rive,  400,  401,

X  t

ii6  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

open  to  question,  owing  to  the  Austrian  proclivities  of  the
Derby  Cabinet,  which  still  held  office  pending  the  vote
on  the  Address.i  Hence  not  only  England  but  France,
Italy,  and  Austria  waited  anxiously  to  hear  the  result  of
young  Lord  Hartington's  amendment  to  the  Address,  and
when  in  the  small  hours  of  the  morning  of  June  ii,  a
majority  of  thirteen  for  the  amendment  was  declared  to  a
crowded  house  of  over  630  members,  the  Piedmontese
minister  waiting  '  with  some  other  foreigners '  in  the  lobby,

'  threw  his  hat  into  the  air  and  himself  into  the  arms  of  Jaucourt,
the  French  attache,  which  probably  no  ambassador,  or  even
Italian,  ever  did  before  in  so  public  a  place.'

When  old  Lord  Palmerston  appeared,  grimly  radiant,  the
Italians  '  redoubled  their  vociferations.'  2  Their  conduct
wounded  the  feelings  of  the  defeated  ministers,  and  it
certainly  was  neither  proper  nor  considerate.  They  had  for-
gotten where  they  were.  They  were  not  thinking  of  the
'  ins  '  and  '  outs  '  of  Westminster,  but  of  a  tragic  land  of
which  only  a  few  of  that  great  crowd  of  free  and  comfort-
able Enghshmen  had  any  notion  ;  where  but  to  think  was
to  be  suspect,  to  speak  was  ruin,  and  to  act  was  death,
where  the  talk  at  every  table  was  hushed  by  the  terror  of
priests  and  spies  and  foreign  soldiers,  where  statesmen
were  chained  to  convicts,  where  women  were  flogged  and
men  were  shot.  They  were  thinking  of  Italy,  poor  fellows,
and  so  when  they  saw '  Pam  '  they  gave  him  a  cheer.  For
there  was  the  man  who  in  his  own  rough,  brutal  way  had
so  often  told  the  kind  of  truth  which  statesmen  and
diplomats  generally  conceal,  and  now  he  was  coming  into
power  once  more.  In  the  doubtful  twilight  of  that  summer
morning  in  the  heated  lobby  they  spied  a  dawn  of  hope  for
their  country.  And  indeed  she  had  won  by  that  division
more  than  they  knew,  more  than  '  Jaucourt  the  French
attache  '  guessed  or  wished.  That  had  been  the  parting
embrace  of  Italy  and  France.

1  One  of  the  last  acts  of  the  Conservative  ministry  was  to  send  Henry
Elliot  to  Naples  with  orders  to  dissuade  the  King  of  Naples  from  joining
Piedmont  In  the  war  against  Austria. Elliot,  7.  -  Malmesbury,  187.

LORD  JOHN  RUSSELL  117

A  month  later  came  the  news  of  Villafranca.  By  that
time  the  new  Liberal  ministry  was  well  in  the  saddle.  The
*  Triumvirate,'  as  it  was  called,  of  ruling  spirits  in  the
Cabinet  consisted  of  three  remarkable  men,  seldom  united
except  about  Italy,  which  was  now  their  chief  thought.
Lord  Palmerston,  Lord  John  Russell  and  Mr.  Gladstone
were  each  personally  predisposed  by  generous  Italian
sympathies  to  the  new  course  which  interest  and  circum-
stance mapped  out  for  our  country  after  Villafranca.  In
the  game  of  stealing  the  gratitude  of  Italy  from  the  French
who  had  shed  their  blood  for  her,  England  started  with
three  great  advantages  over  her  rival — she  hated  the  Pope,
she  desired  no  territory,  and  she  wished  to  see  a  really  inde-
pendent State  in  the  Mediterranean.  The  Queen  and  Court
and  most  of  the  fallen  ministers  were  ranged  in  active
hostility  against  the  pro-Italian  policy  of  the  *  Triumvirate/
and  the  majority  of  the  new  Cabinet  was  indifferent  to  its
leaders'  enthusiasms.  But  the  bulk  of  middle-class  opinion
was  strongly  pro-Italian,  and  so  was  the  more  influential
part  of  the  press.  The  Times  came  right  round  in  the
middle  of  1859  to  strong  and  lasting  Italian  sympathies.^

When  Pio  Nono  heard  of  the  new  ministerial  arrange-
ments in  England,  he  said  to  Odo  Russell  in  his  mild,  half-
humorous,  plaintive  way —

'  Well,  of  course,  you  belong  to  his  party,  but,  Poveri  noi!
what  is  to  become  of  us,  with  your  uncle  and  Lord  Palmerston
at  the  head  of  affairs  in  England  ?  .  .  .  .  Then  again,  Mr.
Gladstone,  who  allowed  himself  to  be  deceived  about  the
Neapolitan  prisoners.'  *

Lord  John  Russell,  the  new  Foreign  Minister,  was
destined  during  the  next  eighteen  months  to  be  one  of  the
principal  instruments  in  the  making  of  Italy.  His  part  in
that  work,  next  to  his  part  in  the  great  Reform  Bill,  stands
as  the  principal  achievement  of  his  life. Sir  James  Hudson,

^  Queen^s  Letters  for  1859  and  i860. Greville,  viii.  305,  311. Bianchi,
viii.  512-516. Russell^  ii.  312, Panizzi's  Li/e,  ii,  199.
2  Queen's  Lettei'S,  July  17,  1859,

Ii8  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

our  minister  at  Turin,  felt  with  joy  a  new  hand  on  the  rudder,
and  knew  that  the  home  government  would  now  at  last
co-operate  with  him  and  listen  to  his  sage  advice  for  the
good  of  Italy  and  for  the  honour  of  England.  After  Villa-
franca  Lord  John  at  once  took  up  the  cause  of  Tuscany,
Modena,  and  the  Romagna,  and  opposed  the  restoration
of  their  old  rulers.  During  the  half-year  of  Cavour's  retire-
ment the  diplomatic  struggle  went  on.  '  The  policy  of
Her  Majesty's  Government,'  Lord  John  laid  down,  '  was
not  to  interfere  at  all,  but  to  let  the  Italian  people  settle
their  own  affairs.'  In  consequence  of  our  protest  against
French  or  Austrian  interference  with  the  doings  of  the
populations  of  Central  Italy,  the  terms  of  Villafranca
could  not  be  enforced.  The  gratitude  of  Italy  was  up  for
auction,  and  England  ran  up  the  bidding.  Throughout
the  autumn  of  1859  Napoleon  became  ever  less  subservient
to  the  Pope,  and  more  angry  at  his  Holiness'  refusal  to
make  the  slightest  concession  in  the  Romagna  or  elsewhere.
The  restoration  of  the  old  rulers  in  Central  Italy  receded
into  the  region  of  the  impossible,  and  the  struggle  shifted
to  this  question,  whether  the  revolted  provinces  should
remain  independent  or  be  united  to  Piedmont.  On  this
point  Napoleon,  fearful  of  any  large  step  towards  the
union  of  Italy,  still  held  out,  declaring  that  he  would  never
allow  annexation.  But  Ricasoli,  Farini,  and  the  people
whom  they  ruled  would  accept  nothing  less.  Even  in
Tuscany,  with  its  strong  provincial  tradition,  the  passion
for  national  unity  became  almost  as  deep  as  the  passion  for
freedom,  thanks  in  no  small  degree  to  the  insulting  terms
originally  suggested  at  Villafranca.  The  deadlock  continued
all  the  autumn  and  winter  of  1859,  the  Italian  populations
showing  a  firmness  and  patience  which  do  not  always  go
with  exalted  patriotism,  and  which,  without  the  presence
of  Ricasoli  and  the  support  of  England,  would  have
degenerated  into  some  form  of  weakness  or  violence.^

^  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  6  passim,  8,  p.  2.  La  Gorce,  iii.  168-174,  Bianchi's
Cavour,  76,  77.  Bianchi,  viii,  387,  388,  514,  515,  628,  629.  Russell,  ii.
313. Ricasoli,  iii.  158,

GARIBALDI  IN  CENTRAL  ITALY  119

In  the  middle  of  this  long  period  of  ferment  and  inaction
an  important  incident  occurred  in  the  life  of  Garibaldi. In
August  1859  a close military  union  was  formed  between
Tuscany,  Modena,  and  the  Romagna,  and  the  forces  of  the
League  were  placed  under  the  command  of  Fanti,  a  Modenese
exile  who  had  risen  to  the  rank  of  General  in  the  service  of
Piedmont.  Fanti  named  Garibaldi  as  his  second-in-command.
The  primary  object  of  the  army  of  the  League  was  defensive.
In  June,  before  the  peace  of  Villafranca,  the  Papal  troops
had  reconquered  revolted  Perugia  and  so  kept  down  Umbria
and  the  Marches,  and  they  now  threatened,  in  close  alliance
with  the  armies  of  the  King  of  Naples,  to  invade  and  re-
conquer the  Romagna. The  need  for  Central  Italy  to  defend
herself was therefore obvious, but the question which
everywhere  divided  the  counsels  of  patriots  that  autumn
was  whether  the  army  of  the  League  was  merely  to  guard
the  frontiers; or  whether  it  was  to  invade  the  Marches
where  the  smouldering  insurrection  might  at  any  moment
break  out,  and  thence  to  sweep  over  the  Papal  and  Nea-
pohtan  dominions  with  the  irresistible  impulse  of  a  national
revolution. Passionate  hopes  were  aroused  when  it  was
known  that  Garibaldi  was  Fanti's  second-in-command  and
had  been  stationed  by  him  in  the  region  of  Ravenna  and
Rimini,  on  the  banks  of  that  '  Rubicon  '  which  now  again,
it  was  said,  divided  the  two  Itahes.i

Garibaldi  brought  with  him  from  the  Valtelline  Cosenz,
Medici,  Bixio,  and  large  numbers  of  his  volunteers,  eager  to
continue  in  the  Apennines  the  war  which  had  been  cut
short  in  the  Alps.  The  Garibaldian  programme,  wrote  Bene-
detto CairoH  on  September  25,  was  '  not  local  defence,  but
national  war.'  2  And  the  patriotic  ardour  of  the  Northerners
was  further  stimulated  by  contact  with  the  Romagnuols.
That  fierce  population  welcomed  with  transports  of  joy
the  man  who  had  owed  his  life  to  their  courage  and  fidelity.

1  The  ancient  Rubicon  was  either  the  Uso  or  the  Fiumiclno  ;  in  either
case  It  was  really  some  fifteen  miles  north  of  Cattolica,  the  border  town
which  actually  divided  the  Marches  from  the  Romagna,

2  Milan  MS.  A.  B.  Plico  X,

120  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

He  had  said  in  1849  that  he  would  return  in  ten  years,  and
now  he  kept  his  word,i  for  in  September  1859,  he  drove
through  the  pine  forest  and  the  marsh  lands  of  Ravenna
to  visit  in  their  cottages  the  peasants  who  had  saved
him  and  who  had  attempted  to  save  his  wife.  He  entered
the  farm  where  he  had  watched  Anita  die,  and  the
neighbouring  chapel  where  she  now  lay  buried.  Surely  the
time  had  come  to  avenge  that  day  worthily  by  carrying
the  flag  of  freedom  into  the  heart  of  the  Papal  provinces.
The  Romagnuols  and  the  volunteers  gathering  round  him
from  all  parts  of  Italy  called  on  him  to  lead  them  across
the  border.  Mazzini,  who  had  come  to  Florence  in  disguise,
sent  friends  to  urge  him  forward,  and  collected  English
money  to  buy  arms  for  the  impending  invasion.  The  great
conspirator  was  prepared  to  keep  himself  in  the  background,
and  even  to  forego  the  proclamation  of  the  Republic,  if
only  Garibaldi  would  advance  and  make  Italy.^

At  first  Farini  ^  and  General  Fanti  lent  themselves  to
the  forward  policy.  On  October  19  Fanti  sent  written
instructions  to  Garibaldi  that  in  case  any  province  or  city
of  the  Papal  dominions  rose  and  asked  for  help,  he  was  to
cross  the  border  at  once.  But  Ricasoli  from  Florence,  and
Cavour's  successor  Rattazzi  from  Turin,  represented  that
an  attack  on  the  Papal  territory  at  this  moment  would
mean  war  with  France,  or  Austria,  or  both,  and  the  ruin
of  Italy.  Farini  and  Fanti  withdrew  their  support  from
the  forward  policy,  and  urged  the  same  prudent  course  on
Garibaldi.  The  struggle  in  his  mind  was  terrible,  and  with
the  weakness  which  he  usually  showed  before  coming  to
one  of  his  iron  resolutions,  he  changed  his  mind  from  hour
to  hour  under  the  influence  of  those  who  had  been  with  him
last. On  the  night  of  November  12,  Farini  and  Fanti,  in

^  Trevelyan'iS  Gar,  Rome,  283.

2  Bianchi,  vill.  179.  Bixio,  139-144,  Fam.  Crauford,  180-190,
King's  Mazzini,  179-182,  Melena,  66-90,  Taylor  MSS.,  Mazzini's
letter  of  October  26.

^  Farini  this  autumn  became  Governor  of  Parma,  Modena,  and  the
Romagna,  united  under  the  title  of  Emilia,  because  the  Via  ^Emilia  ran
through  all  three.

THE  KING  AND  GARIBALDI  121

earnest  conclave,  extracted  from  him  a  promise  not  to
invade.  A  few  hours  later  they  received  a  telegram  from
him,  *  The  revolution  has  broken  out  in  the  Marches  ;  I
must  go  to  help  it.'  He  was  actually  on  the  march,  though
the  news  of  the  '  revolution  '  was  an  unverified,  and  in  fact
a  false,  report.  Farini  and  Fanti,  with  a  fine  promptitude,
successfully  countermanded  the  invasion.

Victor  Emmanuel,  indispensable  on  these  occasions,
sent  for  Garibaldi,  and  persuaded  him  of  the  necessity  for
patience.  He  laid  down  his  command  and  retired  to  Genoa,
issuing  a  manifesto  in  praise  of  the  king  as  '  the  soldier  of
national  independence,'  and  in  dispraise  of  the  '  vulpine
policy '  of  his  ministers.  Medici,  Bixio,  and  about  a  thousand
volunteers  retired  with  their  chief,  but  his  strenuous  appeal
prevented  a  general  disbandment.  The  king,  at  their
parting,  offered  him  his  shot-gun  and  a  generalship  in  the
Piedmontese  army.  Garibaldi  gladly  accepted  the  symbol
of  the  hunter-king's  friendship,  but  he  refused  the  general-
ship, though  it  would  have  relieved  the  poverty  of  his  life  as
the  gardener  and  shepherd  of  Caprera.  By  refusing  any
longer  to  wear  the  king's  uniform,  he  left  himself  free  for
the  great  enterprise  of  his  life  in  the  following  year,  which
could  not  have  been  undertaken  by  a  royal  officer.^

'  The  man,'  wrote  Mazzini  when  he  heard  the  news
of  his  surrender,  '  is  weak  beyond  expression  ;  and  by
subscribing  himself  "your  friend"  or  patting  his  shoulder,
the  king  will  do  anything  with  him.'  2  It  was  fortunate
that  it  was  so.  If  Garibaldi  was  as  weak  in  the  presence  of
Victor  Emmanuel  as  Chatham  in  the  presence  of  George  HI.,
there  was  this  happy  difference,  that  Victor  was  generally  right
and  George  generally  wrong.  Italy  had  narrowly  escaped  dis-
aster. It  was  impossible  to  attack  the  South  before  Tuscany
and  the  Romagna  had  been  annexed  with  the  acquiescence
of  France.  With  the  French  armies  not  yet  withdrawn  from
Lombardy,  it  was  madness  to  defy  their  master  and  the

*  Rava,  139-142.  Fanti,  287-296,  Guerzoni,  i.  491-505.  Ricasoli,
lii.  467-474. Panizzi,  404.

^  Taylor  MSS.,  letter  of  November  1859  (Ixxxiv.),

122  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Austrians  at  the  same  moment.  But  since  Piedmont
was  not  in  a  position  to  support  an  invasion  of  the
Marches,  her  statesmen  obviously  should  not  have  allowed
Garibaldi  to  take  command  of  a  revolutionary  force  on  the
banks  of  the  *  Rubicon/  a  river  which  he  could  seldom
resist  the  temptation  to  cross.  The  error  of  sending  him
there  can  be  compared  to  the  error  of  choosing  Gordon  to
effect  the  evacuation  of  the  Soudan.  The  English  and  the
Italian  hero,  as  one  who  knew  them  both  once  said  to  the
writer,  closely  resembled  each  other  in  many  of  those
characteristics  which  set  them  apart  from  common  men.
Inextricably  mixed  with  those  high  qualities  was  a  tendency
to  obey  the  call  of  the  spirit  rather  than  the  cautious  orders
of  any  mundane  authority.  Such  men  should  be  sent  to
the  front  only  when  the  orders  are  to  advance,  and  when
those  orders  are  not  going  to  be  recalled.^

Indeed,  it  appears  that  at  one  moment  Victor  Emmanuel
himself  had  contemplated  permitting  the  guerilla  to  invade
the  Marches  on  his  own  responsibihty.^  Although,  on
second  thoughts,  this  plan  was  judged  too  dangerous,  it  may
perhaps  account  for  the  original  mission  of  Garibaldi  to  the
Romagna.  No  doubt,  too,  his  exemplary  conduct  during
the  last  ten  years  had  given  the  Piedmontese  government
a  false  sense  of  security  in  their  dealings  with  him,  for  ever
since  the  autumn  of  1849  he  had  been  so  uniformly  wise,
moderate  and  obedient,  that  they  had  forgotten  his  earlier
history.  But  Villafranca  had  destroyed  his  confidence  in
statesmen,  and  he  now  believed  that  he  himself  must  some-
times take  the  initiative.  From  the  moment  of  this  quarrel
in  the  autumn  of  1859,  the  long  honeymoon  of  Garibaldi
and  the  cabinet  of  Turin  was  at  an  end.  There  reappeared
the  more  dangerous  and  intractable  Garibaldi,  whom  only
Cavour  had  the  ability  at  once  to  use  and  to  control.

1  Anyone  knowing  the  history  and  character  of  Garibaldi,  and  his
relation  to  the  Italian  people  and  Government  respectively,  who  reads
chapter  xxii.  of  Lord  Cromer's  Modern  Egypt,  will  be  struck  by  the
parallel.

2  Bertani,  1.  401,  402,  the  King's  letter  of  October  29;  Pam'm,  403^
Medici's  letter  of  December  29 ;  King,  ii.  105.

THE  FORWARD  POLICY  123

But  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  poUcy  common  to
Mazzini  and  Garibaldi  of  pushing  the  revolution  southwards
was  mere  folly.  It  is  true  that  the  year  for  liberating  the
Marches,  Umbria,  and  Naples  by  force  of  arms  proved  to
be  i860,  and  not  1859,  and  that  the  best  starting-place  was
Sicily,  not  the  *  Rubicon.'  But  Mazzini  had  reason  on  his
side  when  he  wrote  from  Florence  in  August — '  the  revolu-
tion that  stops  in  one  place  is  lost.'i  He  and  Garibaldi
were  right  in  saying  that  Naples  and  the  Papal  territory
should  be  attacked  before  the  revolutionary  ardour  now
raging  throughout  the  Peninsula  had  been  allowed  to  cool
down.  Garibaldi's  great  name  held  together  a  number  of
different  parties,  classes,  and  persons  all  bent  on  this  forward
policy,  and  without  that  policy  and  the  union  of  men  vowed
to  accomplish  it,  Italy  would  never  have  been  made  by  the
diplomacy  of  the  Turin  cabinet  alone.  No  one  was  more
convinced  of  this  than  Cavour.  Already  in  August  he
had  said  to  his  friend  De  La  Rive,  '  I  shall  be  accused  of
being  a  revolutionary,  but  before  all  else  we  must  go  forward,
and  we  will  go  forward.'  2

*  Fam,  Crau/ord,  i8i,  *  De  La  Rive,  401^

CHAPTER VII

NAPLES,  1859-MARCH  i860

'  It  appears  that  in  the  Kingdom  of  the  Two  Sicilies  the  authority
of  the  law  is  entirely  set  aside,  and  nothing  prevails  but  that  vague  and
uncertain  arbitrary  power  which  is  justly  said  to  be  the  sign  of  a  miserable
servitude.? — Lord  John  Russell  to  the  British  Minister  at  Naples,
November  28,  1859.

'  Que  voulez-vous  faire  avec  un  Gouvernment  comme  celui  de  Naples,
qui  s'obstine  h,  ne  pas  ^couter  aucun  consell  ? ' — Napoleon  III.,  May  i860,
(Biancht,  viii.  659).

Although  the  slight  wound  inflicted  on  Ferdinand  II.  of
Naples  by  the  fanatic  Milano  in  December  1856  ^  did  not,
as  has  been  sometimes  alleged,  cause  the  painful  disease  of
which  he  died,  yet  the  shock  to  his  nerves  and  mind  aggra-
vated during  the  last  two  years  of  his  reign  the  morbid
fancies  of  fear  and  superstition.  He  appeared  less  than
ever  in  public,  the  pohce  system  became  more  and  more
repressive,  and  he  showered  on  the  Church  privileges  which
aroused  resentment  among  even  the  most  loyal  of  his  lay
subjects.^

Meanwhile  he  steadily  refused  to  alleviate  the  lot  of  the
political  prisoners  at  the  request  of  the  English  Conservative
ministry,  who  desired,  if  only  he  would  meet  them  half-way,
to  compose  Lord  Palmerston's  quarrel  with  him  and  resume
diplomatic  relations.^  At  length,  in  the  winter  of  1858-59,
the  rumour  of  the  coming  Franco- Austrian  war  in  Lombardy
frightened  him  into  a  grudging  concession.  A  chosen  batch
of  sixty-six  Neapolitan  prisoners,  including  Poerio,  Settem-
brini,  Spaventa,  and  Castromediano  were  put  on  board  an

*  See  p.  67  above.

-  De  Cesare,  i.  175,  201,  202,  208,  441. Nisco,  Ferd,  II.  367-371.
»  Bianchi,  viii.  112,  113. Nisco,  Ferd.  II,  372,  373.

124

NEAPOLITAN  PRISONERS  IN  ENGLAND 125

old  sailing  vessel  to  be  taken  across  to  America  and  there
set  free  as  exiles  for  life.  The  chances  were  not  great  that
they  would  all  finish  that  long  journey  alive,  in  a  craft  no
less  ruinous  and  unsavoury  than  their  old  dungeon  at
Montefusco.  Fortunately  Settembrini's  son,  Raffaele,  came
on  board  in  disguise  as  scullion  to  the  negro  cook,  raised  a
mutiny,  and  turned  the  vessel's  head  to  the  British  Islands,
where  the  whole  party  landed  early  in  March  1859.  The
reception  of  the  men  whose  names  Mr.  Gladstone's  letters
had  made  household  words  amazed  and  melted  them  after
ten  years  of  brutal  usage.  In  the  shouting  crowd  that
thronged  them  in  the  streets  of  Bristol  a  poor  girl  thrust
her  last  shilling  into  the  hand  of  a  very  old  man  whose  grey
hairs  had  moved  her  pity ;  it  was  the  Baron  Vito  Porearo,
and  he  forced  back  upon  her  his  own  last  piece  of  gold.
Their  arrival  in  London  occurring  just  before  the  outbreak
of  the  war,  when  British  feeling  wavered  between  fear  of
Napoleon's  success  and  hopes  for  Italy's  freedom,  was  of
real  weight  in  the  balance.  '  Make  the  most  of  it,'  was  the
expressive  English  phrase  used  by  Cavour  in  his  letter  to
the  Piedmontese  minister  in  London.  That  spring  the
Italian  cause  became  fashionable  in  society.  Ladies  of
high  position  learnt  the  language  and  studied  the  history
and  literature  of  Italy,  while  their  husbands  from  West-
minster met  the  exiles  at  the  great  Whig  houses,  and  found
them  to  be  as  fine  fellows  as  Mr.  Gladstone  had  painted
them.  The  most  important  of  the  many  links  which  the
Neapolitans  formed  during  their  brief  residence  in  England
was  the  close  friendship  that  grew  up  between  Poerio  and
Braico  on  the  one  hand  and  Lord  and  Lady  John  Russell
on  the  other — a  friendship  destined  to  have  its  influence  on
the  crisis  of  the  following  year,  when  the  fate  of  Naples
was  decided  in  large  measure  by  Lord  John.i

King  Ferdinand's  policy  had  been  more  purely  Neapolitan

^  Settemhrini,  ii.  458-466.  Castromediano,  H.  198-202,  230-235.
Martinengo  Cesaresco,  72-74.  Lady  Russell  MS.,  her  correspondence  with
Poerio  and  Braico,

126  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

and  less  subservient  to  Vienna  than  that  of  his  predeces-
sors, but  he  knew  the  value  of  the  friendship  of  Austria,
and  was  especially  anxious  to  bequeath  it  as  a  support  to
his  foolish  and  feeble  successor,  his  eldest  son,  Francis.
He  therefore  determined  to  marry  him  to  the  Emperor's
sister-in-law,  Maria  Sophia,  daughter  of  Duke  Max  of
Bavaria.  It  was  her  eldest  sister,  Elizabeth,  the  most
beautiful  of  a  beautiful  family,  who  had  by  her  recent
marriage  become  Empress  of  Austria.

And  so  Maria  Sophia  of  Bavaria  and  Francis,  Duke  of
Calabria,  heir  to  the  throne  of  Naples,  were  married  at
Munich  on  January  8,  1859,  the  bridegroom  being  repre-
sented by  proxy.  The  bride  was  wisely  prevented  from
seeing  her  husband,  her  new  home,  or  her  new  relations,
until  it  was  too  late  to  repent,  for  the  two  were  as  ill-
assorted  a  couple  as  reasons  of  State  ever  brought  together
in  matrimony.  She  had  been  bred  with  her  four  sisters  in
a  simple,  free  and  happy  home  Ufe,  partly  in  the  Bavarian
Alps,  where  they  rode  and  climbed  the  hills,  and  partly  in
Munich,  where  it  was  their  custom  to  walk  unattended  on
their  own  errands.  A  girl  so  brought  up  might  have  been
happy  in  England,  but  never  in  Naples.  A  dashing  horse-
woman, gallant  and  free  in  all  her  ways  and  speech,  of  heroic
temper  in  war,  as  she  was  soon  to  prove  before  admiring
Europe,  she  was  no  mate  for  the  half  idiotic  youth  whom
Garibaldi  was  to  dethrone,  whom  twenty-three  years  of
hot-house  education  by  Neapohtan  priests  and  a  jealous
stepmother  had  deprived  of  any  rudiments  of  sense  and
manliness  that  he  may  have  inherited  from  his  Savoyard
mother.  Judged  even  by  his  father's  standard  of  strenuous
tyranny,  Francis  was  but  a  foolish  Ishbosheth.i

The  young  wife  was  brought  down  the  Adriatic  in  the
Neapolitan  war-vessel  Fulminante  from  Trieste  to  Bari  in
Apulia,  where  she  was  to  see  her  husband  and  father-in-law
for  the  first  time.  They,  meanwhile,  journeyed  from
Naples  to  Bari  to  do  her  honour,  crossing  the  mountains

1  Maria  Sophia,  41-44,  79. De  Cesare,  i.  197,  199,  342-344.

MARIA  SOPHIA  127

in  mid-winter,  over  the  bad  roads  covered  by  unusually
deep  snow,  with  the  result  that  the  king  fell  dangerously
ill. It  was  a  sorry  welcome  for  the  gay  Bavarian  bride  to
land  on  that  shore  of  a  dead  civilisation,  amid  the  fawning,
suspicious  crowd  of  priests  and  doctors,  courtiers  and  police,
whispering  round  the  royal  sick-bed  their  base  conjectures
of  poison,  and  their  sycophantic  hopes  and  fears  of  coming
change. The  dying  king  sought  and  won  the  affection  of
his  new  daughter,  but  she  had  httle  satisfaction  from  a
husband whose chief outward characteristic was '  the
peculiar  expression  of  hfelessness  that  made  him  rather  give
the  idea  of  an  image  than  of  a  man. It  was  a  wooden,  not
a  marble  statue,  that  his  features  called  to  mind.'  1 He
could  hardly  utter  a  word  to  her,  still  less  make  any  lover's
advances,  and  seemed  tied  to  the  apron-strings  of  his  step-
mother, Maria  Theresa. That  formidable  dame  was  not
long  in  conceiving  an  aversion  for  Maria  Sophia,  with  her
freedom  and  her  laughter. She  ordered  the  girl  to  observe
etiquette  more  strictly,  to  attend  the  religious  services  more
often, and  forebade  her  ever  again  to  ride  a  horse — an
accompHshment  of  which  her  husband  was  innocent. In
growing  misery  they  waited  some  weeks  at  Bari,  till  it
was  decided  to  return  by  sea  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the
capital,  where  the  king  could  more  easily  be  cured  or  more
conveniently  die.

It  was  a  tragic  shipload  that  sailed  on  board  the
Fulminante.  The  unrepentant  tyrant,  dying  in  the  agonies  of
a  loathsome  internal  disease,  lay  in  a  cabin  heaped  with
relics,  images,  and  superstitious  quackery  of  all  kinds,
gathered  at  his  earnest  desire  from  all  over  his  kingdom,  in
the  belief  that  they  might  help  him  where  nature  and  the
doctors  had  failed.  Above  on  deck,  in  the  air  and  the
sunlight,  the  lovely  girl  of  seventeen  sat  all  day  long  on  a
gun-carriage,  paying  httle  heed  to  the  feeble  attentions  of
her  husband,  but  gazing  at  the  sea,  at  Aetna  and  Aspromonte
and  all  the  passing  pageant  of  the  coast,  steeUng  her  heart

*  Trinity,  201 ;  cf.  Elliot,  g,  10,

128  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

to  the  knowledge  that  she  was  caught  and  caged  for
life.i

At  length  these  unhappy  people  reached  their  royal
palace  at  Caserta,  fifteen  miles  north  of  Naples,  and  there,
on  May  22,  1859,  Ferdinand  II.  was  gathered  to  his  fathers.
His  last  instructions  to  his  son,  which  had  an  undue  influence
on  that  conscientious  and  dependent  nature,  were  to  enter
into  no  belligerent  alliance  either  with  Austria  or  Piedmont
in  the  war  then  beginning  in  North  Italy,  to  continue
the  existing  policy  of  repression  at  home,  and  if  a  time
of  desperate  crisis  should  arise  to  trust  to  General
Filangieri,  the  conqueror  of  Sicily,  as  the  ablest  man  in
the  kingdom. 2

On  the  occasion  when  the  new  king  received  the  homage
of  the  grandees,  a  significant  incident  occurred.

*  As  the  Eeges  passed  before  him  they  kissed  his  hand,  which
he  did  not  take  the  trouble  to  raise,  allowing  it,  when  they
had  kissed  it,  to  fall  back  by  his  side  as  if  it  had  been  the
hand  of  a  doll.  ,  ,  .  One  very  infirm  old  man  caught
his  foot  in  the  carpet  and  fell  flat  on  his  face  to  the  feet
of  the  king,  who  neither  stirred  to  help  him  nor  allowed  a
muscle  of  his  face  to  move  while  the  poor  old  fellow,
awkwardly  and  with  difficulty,  scrambled  up  and  passed  him
without  a  word  from  the  king  of  condolence  for  his  mishap  or
inquiry  if  he  was  hurt.'

The  scene  left  a  painful  impression  on  the  Neapolitan  loyal'
ists  in  the  room,  and  the  British  Minister,  Henry  Elliot,
turned  and  said  to  his  neighbour,  '  That  young  man  will
finish  badly.'  ^

On  the  death  of  Bomba,  England  and  France  at  once
resumed  diplomatic  relations  with  Naples,  and  their  repre-
sentatives, Elliot  and  Brenier,  vied  with  each  other  for  the
ear  of  the  new  monarch.  Mutually  suspicious  and  hostile
as  were  the  two  diplomats,*  they  at  least  combined  to  urge
amnesty  and  reform  as  the  only  means  of  saving  the  Bourbon

1  De  Cesare,  i.  341-425. Trinity,  199-206. Maria  Sophia,  8,  79-83-

2  De  Cesare,  i.  435. Filangieri,  287.

s  Elliot,  10,  ■•  See  Elliot,  passim.

COUNT  SALMOUR'S  MISSION  129

throne.  Piedmont  also  was  at  hand  with  a  proposal  which
— were  it  possible  to  imagine  it  loyally  accepted — might
have  led  to  a  free  Italy  of  two  States  instead  of  one.  On
May  27,  1859,  five  days  after  Ferdinand  had  breathed  his
last,  Cavour  dispatched  Count  Salmour  to  the  court  of
Naples,  with  written  instructions  to  negotiate  an  offensive
alliance  against  Austria  for  the  purposes  of  the  war  then
raging  in  Lombardy.  He  was  to  point  out  that  this  adop-
tion of  the  national  cause  in  foreign  policy  would  imply  a
change  of  system  at  home,  an  amnesty,  and  adherence  to
the  constitution  of  1848,  which  had  been  long  ignored  but
never  repealed.  Cavour  recommended  that  the  internal
changes  should  not  go  too  fast,  and  that  only  men  devoted
to  the  dynasty  should  be  employed.  1

The  news  of  the  battle  of  Magenta  on  June  4  soon
followed  to  lend  weight  to  these  diplomatic  offers.  The
hopes  aroused  in  the  South  by  the  victories  in  Lombardy
took  shape  in  demonstrations  to  which  the  streets  of  Naples
and  Palermo  had  long  been  unaccustomed.  The  time  of
crisis  had  already  come,  and  Frajicis  II.,  mindful  of  his  father's
dying  words,  at  once  sent  for  Filangieri  and  made  him
President  of  the  Council  and  Minister  for  War.  But  unfortu-
nately the  views  of  the  new  Prime  Minister  were  entirely
inconsistent  with  the  other  parts  of  the  late  king's  '  political
testament,'  for  he  recommended  the  introduction  of  a
Liberal  constitution  which  would  enable  the  dynasty  to
lean  on  France  instead  of  on  Austria.  The  young  monarch,
thus  called  on  to  decide  for  himself  which  part  of  his  father's
self-contradictory  advice  he  should  prefer,  stood  in  helpless
distraction,  pulled  this  way  and  that  by  his  various  advisers,
male  and  female,  while  the  system  of  government  in  the
two  Sicihes  remained  as  he  had  found  it,  and  forces  both
within  and  without  the  frontiers  gathered  head  for  the  final
explosion.2

1  Bianchi,  viil.  517-524  ;  the  date  of  these  instructions  is  not  June  25,
as  given  on  p.  517,  but  May  27,  as  stated  on  p.  126  (note).  See  De  Cesare,
ii.  40  on  this  point.

-  De  Cesare,  ii.  5,  6,  39-43. Filangieri,  290-292,  303-306.

130  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

The  chief  personahties  whose  opposing  efforts  kept
Francis  for  so  long  in  this  fatal  state  of  equihbrium  were
Filangieri,  Bremer,  and  Elliot  i  on  the  side  of  reform  and
the  alUance  of  Naples  with  the  Western  Powers,  while  on
the  side  of  Austria  and  reaction  were  the  Queen  Dowager,
Maria  Theresa  (herself  an  Austrian  by  birth) ,  and  the  whole
court  camarilla  headed  by  Troja.  That  party  were  encour-
aged by  a  visit  of  Count  Buol,  the  late  Austrian  Minister
for  Foreign  Affairs.  Buol  told  Elliot  that  he  found  the
people  perfectly  contented,  that  there  were  no  grievances,
and  that  he  had  been  delighted  to  find  that,  after  all,  the
miracle  of  the  blood  of  St.  Januarius  was  genuine.  The
credulity  of  this  man,  supposed  to  be  one  of  the  most
experienced  diplomats  in  Europe,  is  a  testimony  to  the
school  that  bred  him.  But  the  English  diplomatists,  as
the  dispatches  of  men  like  Elliot  and  Hudson  show,
were  of  a  very  different  type,  and  were  not  accustomed
to  believe  what  they  were  told  by  foreign  governments
until  they  had  tested  it  for  themselves  by  some  knowledge
of  classes  and  parties  outside  the  walls  of  the  palace.  These
admirable  public  servants  poured  into  Downing  Street
from  all  the  courts  of  Italy  a  constant  stream  of  valuable
infomiation  and  just  comment. ^

The  young  queen,  Maria  Sophia,  was  a  Liberal  influence,
and  urged  her  husband  to  grant  a  constitution.  But  she
was  not  a  politician,  and  on  coming  to  the  throne  was  glad
chiefly  because  she  could  now  ride  as  much  as  she  hked,
laugh  when  she  was  amused  at  public  ceremonies,  and  defy
Maria  Theresa's  stepmotherly  advice.  With  better  treat-
ment and  greater  freedom  she  was  able  to  feel  some  dawn
of  affection  for  her  husband.^

In  political  affairs  the  Queen  Dowager  retained  over  her
stepson  a  great  part  of  her  old  influence,  although  she  had

1  Elliot  had  originally  been  sent  out  by  the  Conservative  government,
in  May  1859,  to  prevent  Francis  from  allying  himself  with  Piedmont,
but  next  month  the  advent  of  Russell  to  the  Foreign  Office  reversed  our
policy  on  this  matter. Elliot,  7,  8.

2  Elliot,  18-20,  on  Count  Buol. Br.  Pari.  Papers,  passim,

3  Maria  Sophia,  94-101. De  Cesare,  ii.  26,  27,  33.

FRANCIS  II.  AND  FILANGIERI  131

been  strongly  suspected  of  an  intrigue  to  place  one  of  her
own  sons  on  the  throne  in  his  stead.  Her  sinister  figure
presides  over  the  ruin  of  the  dynasty  and  of  the  ancient
kingdom ;  Maria  Theresa  finished  what  Mary  Caroline  and
Lady  Hamilton  had  begun.  With  the  help  of  Austria  and
the  court  camarilla  she  persuaded  Francis  to  refuse  both
the  constitution  and  the  alliance  with  Piedmont.

Like  other  weak  rulers,  Francis  still  hoped  to  please
both  parties. He  still  clung  to  Filangieri's  person,  while
rejecting  his  policy. General  Filangieri,  Prince  of  Satriano,
was  by  far  the  greatest  subject  in  the  kingdom. He  had
fought  with  honour  in  Napoleon  I.'s  great  campaigns,  he
had  served  Murat  well,  and  the  restored  Bourbons  no  less
faithfully. He  had  reconquered  Sicily  ten  years  before,
and  had  subsequently,  as  Governor  of  the  island,  attempted
to  introduce  a  milder  regime,  until  the  late  king  had  quashed
the  attempt. The  dynasty  could  still  have  been  saved,
and  Filangieri  was  the  man  who  could  have  saved  it. But
the  new  king  refused  to  adopt  his  programme  of  reform.
He  thereupon  offered  to  resign,  first  in  July,  and  again  in
September  1859,  but  as  Francis  would  not  accept  his  resigna-
tion, he  had  the  weakness  not  to  press  it. He  actually
retained  office  without  performing  even  its  ordinary  adminis-
trative functions,  which  were  deputed  to  others,  while  he
shut  himself  up  in  his  villa  near  Sorrento  and  refused  to  be
seen. Only  in  March  i860,  did  he  at  length  receive  his
formal  demission. 1

During  this  long  ministerial  interregnum  of  the  autumn
and  winter  of  1859-60,  while  the  man  who  was  nominally
chief  minister  had  retired  from  pubHc  Ufe,  and  the  king  was
in  his  usual  state  of  helpless  distraction  between  opposing
counsellors,  the  police  governed  the  country  on  the  estab-
lished Unes.  The  remonstrances  of  Brenier  and  Elliot
^^against  the  continued  misrule  availed  nothing,  but  the
stories which they  sent home incensed Napoleon and

'  Accepting  the  facts  given  by  Filangieri's  admirers  in  De  Cesare,  ii.
39-59,  and  Filangieri,  307-313,  one  may  still  think  his  conduct  weak.
See  Mazade,  527,  .528,  and  Nisco,  Fr.  II.  6-18.

132  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Lord  John  Russell  respectively  against  King  Francis,
and  thus  prepared  the  diplomatic  pathway  for  Garibaldi's
invasion.!

A  royal  decree  for  the  relief  of  the  tens  of  thousands  of
attendihili  under  police  supervision  -  was  promulgated  on
June  i6, 1859,  but  Elliot  discovered  that  it  had  been  followed
a  few  days  later  by  a  secret  letter  to  the  prefects  which
made  it  practically  inoperative. ^  The  police  terrorism  had
never  been  worse  than  at  the  end  of  1859  ^^^  ^^e  opening  of
the  new  year  which  was  to  see  the  downfall  of  the  system.
Members  of  respectable  families  unconnected  with  politics
disappeared  mysteriously — having  been  snatched  away  to
secret  prisons  merely  in  order  to  create  abject  fear.  And
indeed  no  one  dared  to  complain.  '  In  the  centre  of  the
typhoon  of  terror  '  there  was  a  '  dead  silence.'  *

It  might  be  thought  that  a  government  so  unscrupulous
in  its  use  of  arbitrary  power  would  at  least  deal  effectively
with  real  crime.  But  the  camona  was  no  less  feared  than
the  police,  who  themselves  cringed  before  the  dreadful
society.

'  If  a  petition,'  wrote  Elliot,^  '  was  to  be  presented  to  the
Sovereign  or  to  a  Minister,  it  had  to  be  paid  for  ;  at  every  gate
of  the  town  Camorristi  were  stationed  to  exact  a  toll  on  each
cart  or  donkey-load  brought  to  market  by  the  peasants  j  and,
on  getting  into  a  hackney  carrosel  in  the  street,  I  have  seen  one
of  the  band  run  up  and  get  his  fee  from  the  driver.  No  one
thought  of  refusing  to  pay,  for  the  consequences  of  a  refusal  were
too  well  known,  anyone  rash  enough  to  demur  being  apt  to  be
found  soon  after  mysteriously  stabbed  by  some  unknown  indi-
vidual, whom  the  police  were  careful  never  to  discover.'

The  Neapolitans  crouched  before  their  two  masters,
the  camorra  and  the  police  who,  as  yet,  acted  in  harmony.
The  distant  Calabrian  and  Sicilian  provinces,  where  alone

1  See  quotations  at  the  head  of  this  chapter,  and  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  15
passim.

2  See  pp.  45,  46  above.

'^  De  Cesare,  ii.  58. Elliot,  18. Br.  Pari.  Papers,  15,  pp.  3-9,  31,  32.
*  Times,  January  3.  i85o.  »  Elliot,  12.

THE  NEAPOLITAN  ARMY  133

the  spirit  of  rebellion  was  serious,  were  controlled  by  the
army,  now  fully  large  enough  to  secure  the  Bourbons
against  the  impotent  hatred  of  their  subjects.

It  will  be  well  here  briefly  to  describe  the  composition
and  character  of  the  Neapolitan  army,  since  the  tale  of  its
destruction  is  to  play  so  large  a  part  in  these  volumes.  In
1848  it  had  numbered  40,000  in  reality,  and  60,000  in  name.
But  in  the  early  spring  of  i860,  some  90,000  men  were
under  arms,  and  the  total  force,  if  the  reserves  were  called
out,  would  reach  130,000.1  This  increase  was  due  to  the
policy  of  Ferdinand  II.,  who  had  found  in  the  creation  of
a  large  army  a  safeguard  against  his  subjects,  and  an  occu-
pation for  his  leisure  hours.  Although  the  chances  of
battle  and  the  hardships  of  war  had  no  charms  for  him,  as
he  showed  at  Velletri,  the  pomp  and  circumstance  of  the
parade  ground  continued  to  delight  Bomba  from  the  cradle
to  the  grave.  As  a  boy  he  had  been  found  one  day  by  liis
grandfather,  Ferdinand  I.,  studying  a  new  uniform  for  the
troops  :  '  Dress  them  how  you  like,'  said  the  cheerful  old
man,  '  they  will  run  away  all  the  same.'  2

This  kingly  utterance  may  stand  as  a  criticism  of  the
younger  Ferdinand's  lifelong  efforts  at  military  organisa-
tion. His  troops  made  a  creditable  appearance  at  reviews.
The  uniforms  were  good,  the  horses  fine,  the  weapons
excellent.  In  the  army  that  obeyed  his  son  in  the  spring
of  i860,  rifles  vastly  superior  to  the  Garibaldian  musket
were  the  ordinary  weapon  of  the  infantry.  The  cavalry
were  not  only  well  mounted,  but  well  rehearsed  in  the  art
of  galloping  up  within  forty  yards  of  the  enemy  and
wheeling  smartly  round  again.

Indeed,  the  only  part  of  military  discipline  really  enforced
was  the  drill.  But  a  form  of  discipline  not  usual  in  camps
held  good  in  this  estabUshment — the  discipline  of  confes-
sion and  of  religious  practice. Bomba  was  as  careful  of  his

1  De  Cesare,  i.  153. Rustoiv,  142. Cuniberti,  18, L'  Ins.  Sic.  77,  78.
De  Sivo,  iii.  121.

~^  Ds  Cesare,  i.  154.

134  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

men's  souls  as  Cromwell,  with  this  difference  among  others
that  as  morality  was  not  a  necessity  to  salvation  in  the
NeapoHtan  scheme  of  things,  the  soldiers  were  too  often
accompHshed  rascals  as  well  as  hypocrites.  Although  the
military  floggings  were  of  an  unusually  cruel  and  humiliating
character,  the  men  were  kept  Httle  within  the  bounds  of
discipHne  in  time  of  peace,  and  in  civil  war  they  were
encouraged  to  fight  by  the  promise  of  free  looting.  In
Sicily  it  was  not  an  unknown  thing  for  a  soldier  to  take
advantage  of  his  excellent  rifle  to  hold  up  a  quiet  EngUsh
tourist  and  relieve  him  of  his  money.^  The  inhabitants
could  not,  like  the  Englishman,  get  redress  for  such  outrages.
But,  when  all  is  said,  the  Neapolitan  rank-and-file  were  not
without  natural  courage,  and  on  occasions  when  they  were
led  with  any  spirit,  as  by  Filangieri  and  Bosco,  they  showed
themselves  worthy  of  those  Neapolitan  troops  whom  Napo-
leon the  Great  had  praised  for  their  valour  in  the  battle  of
Lutzen.3

But  spirited  leadership  was  rare.  It  was  commonly
said  that  the  inefficiency  of  the  Bourbon  army  was  greater
in  each  rank  than  in  the  one  below,  till  it  culminated  in
the  total  incompetence  of  the  generals.  Non-commis-
sioned of&cers  were  found  with  great  difficulty,  owing  to
political  conditions  and  to  the  system  of  enlistment.  The
conscription  for  a  term  of  four  years  with  the  colours  and
four  more  in  reserve  was  so  unpopular  that  it  was  not
enforced  at  all  in  Sicily,  and  even  on  the  mainland  the
middle  as  well  as  the  upper  classes  were  allowed  to  buy
themselves  out.  The  peasantry  who  were  unable  to  escape
service  were  among  the  most  grossly  ignorant  in  Europe,
and  it  was  difficult  to  select  from  them  sergeants  who  could
read  and  write.  The  non-commissioned  officers,  therefore,
either  were  very  ignorant,  or  else  came  of  the  middle  class,
and  were  liable,  as  such,  to  Liberal  sympathies. It  was

1  Palermo  MSS.  Polizia,  No.  1237,  4,  175,  60.  Castelcicala's  Report,
March  31,  i860.

2  De  Cesare,  i.  159-162.  Pianell,  15.  Brancaccio,  209,  210.  Titnes,
June  21,  i860,  p.  9,  cols.  4,  5. Rustow 146-150. Muudy,  163,  164.

THE  NEAPOLITAN  ARMY  135

observed  in  June,  i860,  that  *  three-fourths  at  least '  of
those  who  came  over  to  Garibaldi  after  the  taking  of  Palermo
were  '  corporals  and  sergeants.'  1

The  same  difficulty  was  experienced  in  obtaining  com-
missioned officers.  The  nobility  was  partly  too  effeminate
and  lazy,  partly  too  Liberal,  to  take  pleasure  in  military
service  like  the  nobles  of  Piedmont.  The  better  men  could
feel  no  pride  in  belonging  to  such  an  army.  It  was  not  a
national  but  a  dynastic  force.  Its  object  was  less  to  protect
the  country  against  foreigners  than  to  police  it  against  rebels.
So  complete  a  breach  had  been  made  with  the  fine  military
traditions  of  the  Napoleonic  period,  that  the  men  and
the  families  who  represented  them  were  now  almost  all
outside  the  service  and  frowned  upon  as  malcontents.  The
spirit  cultivated  by  Bomba  in  the  army  which  he  brought
up  with  his  own  hand,  was  that  of  monks  and  police  spies,
not  of  soldiers.  In  other  services  besides  that  of  Naples
professional  efficiency  has  not  always  been  the  road  to
promotion,  but  scarcely  anywhere  else  has  the  commonly
accepted  standard  of  military  honour  and  spirit  been
positively  discouraged.  In  1848  a  young  officer  who  wished
to  go  to  the  front  a  second  time  was  introduced  to  the  king  :
'  You  have  been  to  Sicily  and  come  back  with  a  whole  skin,
and  now,'  said  his  Majesty  with  undisguised  astonishment,
'  you  want  to  go  and  risk  it  again  !  Madonna  help  you  !  '  ^
The  difficulty  of  obtaining  enough  good  officers  under  such
ccMiditions  was  insuperable,  and  the  difficulty  of  obtaining
enough  officers  of  any  kind  was  great.  Consequently  many
had  to  be  raised  from  the  ranks,  and  they  were  not  selected
on  any  wise  principle.  There  were  officers  who  could  not
read  and  write,  and  some  who  had  been  common  thieves.
The  average  age  of  the  service  was  far  too  high.  '  A  captain
not  grey-headed  was  quite  an  exception.'  ^  The  generals,
if  we  exclude  Nunziante,  Pianell,  and  a  few  more,  were  in

^  Racioppi,  33. De  Cesare,  i.  154,  and  F.  di  P,  ciii. Times,  June  21,
i860,  p.  9,  col.  5. RUstow,  144.
2  Brancaccio,  211,  212.
*  Times,  June  21,  i860,  p.  g,  col.  5.

136  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

their  dotage,  and  seemed  to  have  been  selected  on  account
of  their  notorious  incompetence.^

In  this  force,  conscious  of  its  unpopularity  with  the
inhabitants  of  the  land,  there  was  not  even  that  internal
harmony  and  sense  of  comradeship  often  bred  by  such
isolation.  Court  favouritism  and  personal  intrigue,  carried
on  in  the  Neapolitan  fashion,  destroyed  mutual  confi-
dence. While  merit  and  zeal  were  neglected,  '  the  greater
or  less  favour  of  superiors  or  of  the  sovereign  '  was  all  in
all.  '  Egoism,  envy,  jealousy,  intrigue,'  writes  Cava,  a
faithful  adherent  of  the  Bourbons  who  saw  it  all  from
inside  the  general  staff,  '  bore  rule  instead  of  the  spirit  of
mutual  support.  Criticism  degenerated  into  backbiting,
and  thence  into  calumny.'  And  not  only  were  there  division
and  mistrust  between  man  and  man,  but  in  a  marked  degree
between  the  various  ranks  and  branches  of  the  service.
Jealousy  and  ignorance  kept  apart  artillery,  cavalry,
infantry,  engineers,  and  staff  in  mutually  exclusive  worlds.
Privates,  sergeants,  and  officers  were  '  three  castes,  separate
and  inharmonious.'  Besides  the  divisions  of  army  rank,
there  were  the  divisions  of  social  status.  The  middle
class,  which  might  have  held  the  whole  together,  was
insufficiently  represented.  The  nobles  wrapped  them-
selves in  aristocratic  pride,  and  yet  the  peasants  had —
naturally  enough  under  the  circumstances — none  of  the
British  soldier's  contentment  at  being  led  by  '  gentlemen.'
Against  such  an  army  a  thousand  picked  men,  moving  with
a  common  impulse  under  a  chief  for  whom  each  would  gladly
die,  might  achieve  astonishing  results.^

In  the  year  that  intervened  between  the  death  of  the
old  king,  in  May  1859,  a-^^  Garibaldi's  expedition,  the
Neapolitan  army  was  brought  up  to  its  full  complement  by
fresh  levies,^  but  on  the  other  hand  it  was  weakened  in  two

1  Rilsiow,  i/[^,  145.  Cava,  ii.  7,  8.  De  Sivo,  ill.  118.  De  Cesare,  I.
154-156,  and  F.  di  P.  ciii.,  civ.

2  Cava,  ii.  4,  5. De  Sivo,  iii.  119. Racioppi,  33,

3  De  Sivo,  Iii.  120,  121.

MUTINY  OF  THE  SWISS  137

important  respects.  In  the  first  place  contempt  for  the  new
king  encouraged  the  revolutionaries  to  push  their  propa-
ganda in  the  army,  so  that  at  the  beginning  of  i860  lists
of  officers  supposed  to  be  well  inclined  to  Italy  were
circulated  among  the  patriotic  committees :  the  artillery  and
engineers  were  the  most  disaffected  branches  of  the  service.  1
Secondly,  the  Swiss  regiments,  the  best  in  the  army,  were
disbanded.

These  foreign  troops  were  an  integral  part  of  the  Nea-
politan as  of  the  Papal  system  of  government.  Monarchs
who  could  trust  few  of  their  own  subjects  thought  they  could
depend  both  on  the  loyalty  and  on  the  courage  of  Catholic
herdsmen  and  mountaineers  of  the  same  breed  as  those
immortal  mercenaries  commemorated  by  the  Lion  of  Lucerne.
The  Swiss  had,  in  1848,  taken  a  leading  part  in  the  success-
ful operations  in  the  streets  of  Naples  and  Messina.  They
were  treated  as  a  separate  force  with  special  privileges,  and
their  pay  exceeded  by  two-thirds  that  of  the  native  soldier.
Three  of  their  regiments  kept  guard  over  the  capital,  while
a  fourth  held  Palermo  in  awe.  But  at  the  time  of  the
accession  of  Francis  the  Swiss  Federal  Government,  grown
ashamed  of  the  connexion  between  their  free  State  and
the  worst  tyrannies  in  Europe,  requested  that  the  cantonal
crests  should  be  taken  off  the  banners  of  Swiss  troops  in
foreign  employ.  When  this  unwelcome  change  was  an-
nounced to  the  Swiss  in  Naples  a  thousand  of  them,  more
proud  of  their  native  land  than  of  their  paymaster's  service,
and  fearful  of  the  abrogation  of  their  other  privileges,  rose
in  mutiny  on  the  night  of  July  7-8,  1859.  They  were
quelled  with  promptitude  by  General  Nunziante,  with  a  loss
of  nearly  a  hundred  killed  and  wounded.  All  four  regi-
ments were  thereon  broken  up,  and  their  actual  departure
from  Naples  and  Palermo  in  August  raised  the  hopes  of  the
revolutionists  both  in  Sicily  and  on  the  mainland.^

1  De  Cesare's  F.  di  P.  cvi.,  cvii. De  Sivo,  iii.  ii8.

-  De  Cesare,  i.  156,  157;  ii.  15-20.  Filangteri,  294-301.  Rosi,  186.
Nisco,  Fr.  II.  12-14.  Palermo  MS.,  Br.  Cons.,  Goodwin's  letters,
August,  September  1859.

138  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

The  Swiss  had  been  disbanded  at  Filangieri's  advice,
but  during  the  autumn  and  winter,  when  he  had  ceased  to
attend  to  affairs,  the  court  devised  a  means  of  replacing
them  which  he  would  heartily  have  disapproved.  A  con-
spiracy was  formed  by  Naples,  the  Pope,  Austria,  and
the  expelled  rulers  of  Modena  and  Parma,  to  attack  and
destroy  Piedmont  and  the  League  of  Central  Italian  States.^
The  government  of  Vienna  ordered  the  Tyrolese  authorities
to  give  every  assistance  to  the  work  of  recruiting  in  their
valleys  for  the  Neapolitan  army  ;  and  Austrian  soldiers
who  had  served  out  their  time,  were  sent  by  sea  from
Trieste  to  Ancona  and  the  Neapolitan  ports,  and  drafted
into  the  armies  of  Pio  Nono  and  Francis  II.  They  were
not,  in  Naples,  accorded  the  old  privileges  of  the  Swiss,  but
became  part  of  the  regular  army.  They  were  known  as
the  '  Bavarian '  regiments,  a  diplomatic  euphemism  for
'  Austrian,'  which  would  have  been  the  more  correct
description  of  a  large  number  of  the  men.^

This  combination  against  the  newly-won  freedom  of
Upper  Italy  made  it  the  urgent  duty  of  the  rulers  of  Pied-
mont, in  self-defence  if  for  no  other  reason,  to  destroy  the
Papal  and  Neapolitan  kingdoms  now  leagued  with  Austria
for  their  destruction.^  Neither  party,  given  its  principles,
can  be  blamed  for  being  the  first  to  provoke  a  conflict  now
truly  inevitable.  Italy  could  not  remain  cleft  in  two  by
the  Rubicon,  *  half  slave  and  half  free.'  It  was  the  same
problem  of  '  a  house  divided  against  itself '  then  becoming
visible  in  the  United  States  of  America,  where  Abraham
Lincoln  had  recently  prophesied  that  one  or  other  of  two
irreconcilable  systems  must  extinguish  its  rival.  '  The
revolution  that  stops  in  one  place  is  lost,'  wrote  Mazzini,
and  the  advisers  of  Pio  Nono  and  Francis  II.  apphed  the
same  rule  to  reaction.

While  the  influence  of  Filangieri  diminished  daily,  and

1  Bianchi's  Cavour,  88-90. Bianchi,  viii.  279,  280. Mazade,  525.

2  Bianchi,  viii.  279.  Monnier  (Ital.),  96-98.  Mazade,  526.  Br.  Pari,
papers,  6,  p.  256  ; 7,  p.  9-1 1. Times,  June  21,  i860,  p.  9,  cols.  5,  6.

2  Treitschke,  182.

VILLAMARINA'S  MISSION  139

the  Neapolitan  government  drifted  ever  further  into  violent
measures  at  home  and  abroad,  the  statesmen  of  Piedmont
were  closely  on  the  watch.  Their  agents  kept  them  well
informed  as  to  the  real  possibilities  and  difficulties  of  the
situation  in  the  South.  On  August  29, 1859,  the  Piedmontese
Minister  at  Naples  wrote  home  at  great  length,  exposing
the  decadence  of  the  Bourbon  government  since  Ferdinand's
death,  and  the  relative  ease  with  which  it  could  now  be
overthrown  by  an  attack  from  without.  But  he  denied  the
probability  of  an  unaided  revolution  from  within.  The
people,  he  wrote  again  on  November  26,  were  *  cowed  and
disunited,'  though  hostile  to  the  government;  the  recall
of  Garibaldi  from  the  '  Rubicon '  1  had  delighted  the  court,
*  but  not  the  country,  which  puts  its  hopes  in  him,  lacking
confidence  in  its  own  power  to  revolt.'  2

In  January  i860,  the  Rattazzi  ministry,  seeing  that
Naples  was  becoming  the  storm  centre  of  Italian  poUtics,
sent  thither  one  of  the  ablest  of  Piedmontese  statesmen,
the  Marquis  Villamarina.  The  instructions  which  he  took
with  him  were  to  draw  King  Francis  into  a  nationalist
alliance  with  Piedmont  against  Austria,  on  a  basis  of  moderate
Liberal  reforms  at  home.^  It  was  the  same  offer  which
Count  Salmour  had  made  at  Cavour's  bidding  seven  months
before,  and  it  was  equally  unsuccessful.  The  Bourbons
refused  to  repent  while  there  was  still  grace.  The  time  was
fast  approaching  when  they  should  sue  to  Piedmont  for
this  same  alliance,  and  sue  in  vain.

The  mission  of  Villamarina  was  one  of  the  last  acts  of
Rattazzi's  ministry.  In  January  i860,  Cavour  returned
to  power  to  the  intense  joy  of  Italy,  of  England,  and  of
Liberal  Europe.  The  hour  had  come  and  the  man.  The
curtain  was  rising  on  the  second  act.  All  was  now  ripe  for
the  forward  policy  which  would  have  been  madness  a  few
months  before.  Cavour,  in  his  retirement,  had  watched
the  ripening  of events  —  the  passive resistance of Italy

'  See  pp.  119-121,  above.

2  Rosi,  184,  from  the  Turin  archives.

*  B'ianrh!,  viii.  274,  275,  643-650,

140  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

to  Villafranca,  so  impressively  and  patiently  prolonged,  the
help  rendered  by  England,  and  the  alienation  of  Napoleon
from  the  Pope.  The  non  possumus  attitude  of  Pio  Nono
towards  revolted  Romagna,  and  his  ostentatious  alliance
with  the  most  rabid  Legitimists  in  Europe,  and  particularly
with  those  of  France,  were  rash  acts  of  hostility  to  the
French  protector  of  Rome,  who  was  primarily  a  usurper
and  a  child  of  the  revolution,  even  if  he  required  the  Clerical
vote  to  consoHdate  his  power.  At  Christmas  1859,
Napoleon  punished  the  Pope  and  the  Clerical  party  by  the
publication  of  the  *  inspired '  pamphlet,  Le  Pape  et  le  Congres,
which  proposed  in  veiled  terms  to  confine  the  Papal  territory
to  Rome  and  the  surrounding  province  known  as  the
Patrimony  of  St.  Peter.

And  so  Cavour,  even  before  his  return  to  office,  had
often  exclaimed,  '  Blessed  be  the  peace  of  Villafranca,'  1  for
he  saw  rising  the  hope  of  an  Italy  larger  and  more  inde-
pendent than  that  which  the  Emperor  had  promised  him
at  Plombieres .

At  the  beginning  of  i860  Napoleon  had  moved  so  far  as
to  be  ready  to  sell  his  consent  to  the  annexation  of  Tuscany
and  EmiHa  (Parma,  Modena,  and  the  Romagna) .  The  price
would  be  Savoy,  and  perhaps  also  Nice,  the  territory  of  which
the  cession  to  France  was  to  have  purchased  Venice  accord-
ing to  the  unfulfilled  terms  of  Plombieres.  Cavour  was,
therefore,  fully  determined  that  the  first  great  step  of  his
new  ministry  should  be  to  annex  Tuscany  and  Emilia
at  once,  at  the  price  of  Savoy.  In  relation  to  Naples,
his  policy  was  less  definite.  He  would  wait  on  oppor-
tunity. But  unless  Francis  accepted  Villamarina's  offer
of  alliance,  he  would  certainly  have  no  scruple  in  over-
throwing the  Bourbon  dynasty  if  he  could  find  the
means.  In  a  few  weeks  it  appeared  that  Villamarina's
offer  was  refused,  and  Cavour  also  became  aware  that
Naples  was  forming  an  offensive  alliance  with  the  Pope
and Austria.2 At the same time he secured  the long

1  Chiala,  lii.  187.  -  Bianchi's  Cavour,  S8-91.

CAVOUR  AND  NAPLES  141

delayed  annexation  of  Tuscany  and  Emilia,  confirmed  by  a
plebiscite  of  their  inhabitants,  and  he  thereafter  felt  free,  as
he  had  never  done  while  that  matter  was  still  unsettled,!  to
hope  for  adventures  farther  south.  And  so  in  March  i860,
the  attitude  of  Piedmont  towards  the  Bourbons  underwent
a  final  change  for  the  worse,  clearly  revealed  to  posterity  in
Cavour's  secret  correspondence  mth  Villamarina.
On  March  30  he  writes  to  Villamarina  at  Naples  :

'  Evidently  events  of  great  importance  are  preparing  in  the
south  of  Italy.  .  .  .  You  know  that  I  do  not  desire  to  push  the
Neapolitan  question  to  a  premature  crisis.  On  the  contrary,
I  think  it  would  be  to  our  interest  if  the  present  state  of  things
continued  for  some  years  longer.  But  ...  I  believe  that  we
shall  soon  be  forced  to  form  a  plan  which  I  would  like  to  have
had  more  time  to  mature.'

He  therefore  asks  a  number  of  questions  as  to  the  relative
strength  of  parties  in  the  Bourbon  kingdom.^  The  just
analysis  of  the  situation  in  Villamarina's  reply  of  April  14,
1860,3  contains  the  significant  words,  '  the  king  has  the  army
on  his  side.  I  have  written  to  you  and  I  repeat,  the  govern-
ment is  strong,  very  strong  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  down
the  people.'

Such  was  indeed  the  case.  Force  from  outside  was
needed  to  defeat  the  Neapolitan  army.  But  since  the
Powers  of  Europe,  particularly  France  and  Austria,
would  prevent  Cavour  from  sending  the  Piedmontese
regulars,  the  external  force  to  be  applied  must  be  that  of
revolutionary  bands,  and  there  was  only  one  man  in  Italy
who  could  with  any  prospect  of  success  lead  a  revolutionary
raid  against  90,000  regulars  armed  with  good  rifles  and  can-
non. Fortunately  that  man,  unlike  some  of  the  advanced
Democrats  who  followed  him,  was  stubbornly  faithful  to  the
programme  of  union  under  the  Monarchy  of  Victor  Em-
manuel, and  while  the  fame  of  his  romantic  deeds  and

'  Chiala,  iii.  209. Letter  to  Villamarina  of  February  11,  i860,

^  Chiala,  Iii.  235,  236.

■^  Chiala,  iv.  pp.  cxxxv.-cxxxvii. Whitehouse,  181-1S5.

142  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

character  would  serve  to  disarm  much  European  indigna-
tion against  acts  of  international  piracy,  the  unbounded
enthusiasm  which  he  aroused  in  England  would  ensure  the
benevolent  neutrality  of  the  Power  who  could  open  or  close
at  her  will  the  pathway  of  the  Sicilian  waters.^

*  Mazade,  532,

CHAPTER  VIII

SICILY

THE REVOLT OF APRIL 4, 1860. ROSOLINO PILO AND THE
HOPE OF garibaldi's COMING

'  Fratelli  miei,  la  causa  propugnata  da  me  e  dai  miei  compagni  d'arml,
non  e  quella  di  un  campanile,  ma  quella  dell'  Italia  nostra,  da  Trapani  aU  -
Isonzo,  dal  Taranto  a  Nizza.  Dunque  la  redenzione  deUa  Sicilia  6  la
nostra,  e  noi  pugneremo  per  essa  con  lo  stesso  ardore,  con  cui  pugnammo
sui  campi  Lom.bardi  !  3

'  My  brothers,  the  cause  fought  for  by  me  and  my  comrades  in  arms  is
not  the  cause  of  a  parish,  but  the  cause  of  our  Italy,  from  Trapani  to
the  Isonzo,  from  Taranto  to  Nice.  Therefore  the  work  of  the  redemption
of  Sicily  is  the  work  of  our  own  redemption,  and  we  will  fight  for  it  with
the  same  zeal  with  which  we  fought  on  the  Lombard  battlefields.'

Garibaldi's  letter  to  the  Sicilians,  September  29,  1859,

The  island  destined  at  this  supreme  crisis  to  be  the
starting-point  for  the  making  of  united  Italy,  has  a  racial
and  social  character  of  its  own.  Besides  the  early  *  Sicani
and  Sicuh,'  of  whose  origin  little  is  certain,  the  elements
that  compose  the  Sicihan  people  have  come  in  historical
times  from  the  opposite  extremities  of  Europe,  from  Africa,
and  from  Asia.  The  inhabitants  of  the  eastern  end  of  the
island  are  in  part  descended  from  the  ancient  Greek
colonists,  whose  pastoral  Uves  and  loves  inspired  the
muse  of  Theocritus.  The  western  end — especially  the
district  between  Palermo,  Trapani,  and  Marsala,  the  scene
of  the  exploits  of  Garibaldi  and  the  Thousand — has  been
largely  peopled  from  North  Africa  and  from  Oriental  lands.
For  that  north-western  angle  of  Sicily,  where  Phoenician
colonists  were  settled  at  the  dawn  of  Mediterranean  history,
remained  as  the  last  stronghold  of  Carthage  in  its  struggle
for  the  island  against  Greeks  and  Romans. Possibly  the

143

144  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Phoenicians  left  little  behind  them.  But  the  Arab  occupa-
tion of  the  Dark  Ages,  which  succeeded  to  the  rule  of  the
decadent  Byzantines,  has  left  in  that  district  its  lasting
impress  not  only  on  architecture  and  irrigation,  but  on  the
music,  the  customs,  the  faces,  and  the  character  of  the
common  people. ^

In  the  ninth  century  Sicily  was  divided  between  the
Mohammedan  and  the  Byzantine-Greek  religions."  But,
as  a  result  of  the  Norman  conquest  which  took  place  not
many  years  after  the  similar  event  in  our  own  island,  the
Roman  Catholic  Church  gradually  won  ground. ^  In  modern
times  Sicily  has  remained  ardently  Roman  Catholic,  and
if  the  revolution  of  i860  had  come  thither  with  the  anti-
clerical programme  which  it  avowed  in  North  Italy,  it  would
have  received  but  little  support.  The  movement  against
the  Bourbons  was  shared  by  many  of  the  monks,  priests,  and
bishops,  for  it  was  the  rebellion  of  one  of  the  most  insular
of  peoples  against  the  foreign  domination  of  the  Neapolitans.

The  origin  of  this  feeling  against  foreign  mastery  of  the
island  goes  back  far  into  history,  to  the  days  of  the  Sicilian
Vespers,  that  fierce  event  of  which  the  memory  was  invoked
with  pride  in  the  commonplaces  of  patriotic  oratory.
Brought  up  to  believe  that  they  had  in  all  ages  been  wrong-
fully subjected  to  strangers — Byzantine,  Saracen,  Norman,
Angevin,  Spanish,  Neapolitan — the  Sicilians  had  something
of  the  Irishman's  inherited  quarrel  with  fate  and  govern-
ment. They  were  frondeurs  born  and  bred.  The  aptitude
of  the  leaders  for  weaving  nets  of  close  and  subtle  con-
spiracy, and  the  secret  understanding  of  the  whole  popula-
tion for  the  purpose  of  baffling  the  authorities,  were  even
more  marked  than  in  the  Italian  States  of  the  mainland.
At  times  of  crisis,  as  in  1820,  1848,  and  i860,  they  took  to
the  more  open  methods  of  street  fighting  in  the  cities  of  the
coast,  and  prolonged  guerilla  war  on  the  hills  of  the  interior.
But  they  had  a  hatred  for  regular  military  service  in  barracks

1  Freeman's  Sicily. Corsi,  15-23.

2  Amari  Mtis.  i.  197,  485-487.

'"^  Gaily  Knight,  25,  26,  124,  260-262,  332,  333.

INSULAR  FEELING  145

or  in  the  field,  whether  under  the  flag  of  the  oppressor  or  of
the  Hberator.  '  Better  a  pig  than  a  soldier/  was  a  Sicilian
proverb  of  the  time.i  The  Neapolitan  kings  dared  not
enforce  the  conscription  on  their  island  subjects,  so  that  in
i860  hardly  more  than  a  tenth  of  their  army  was  composed
of  Sicilians. 3  Consequently  the  garrison  in  the  island  was
Neapolitan,  hated  as  a  foreign  force  in  much  the  same  way
as  the  white-coats  in  Lombardy.

This  universal  hatred  of  the  alien  government  prevented
social  discord  among  the  natives  themselves.  Though
feudalism  had  been  nominally  abolished  in  1812,^  a  system
of  latifundia,  with  all  the  disadvantages  and  none  of  the
advantages  of  the  similar  system  in  England,  kept  the
peasants  in  abject  misery.  But  many  of  the  great  pro-
prietors joined  with  their  tenants  in  the  national  movement,
and  were  highly  respected  when  they  led  against  a  common
foe  the  popular  feeling  which  has  in  later  times  been  largely
directed  against  themselves.  Until  after  i860  there  were
no  purely  agrarian  troubles,  and  the  social  question  was
scarcely  posed.  For  although  the  poverty  of  the  island
was  noticed  then  as  now  by  every  traveller,  it  was  regarded
by  the  inhabitants  either  as  inevitable  and  natural,  or  else
as  the  result  of  Neapolitan  rule.*

The  revolutionary  programme  in  1848  had,  in  spite  of
some  Mazzinian  influence,  been  essentially  insular.  The
expulsion  of  the  Neapolitan  troops  after  the  street  fighting
in  Palermo  in  January  of  that  year  had  been  followed  by
a  declaration  of  the  independent  sovereignty  of  Sicily,
and  the  empty  throne  had  been  offered  to  a  younger  son
of  Charles  Albert  of  Piedmont.  His  refusal,  necessitated
by  the  Austrian  reconquest  of  Lombardy,  left  the  Sicilian
patriots  to  carry  on  a  provisional  government  as  best  they

'  Brancaccio,  248.

2  Rustow,  144,

"'  Large  farms  In  Sicily  are  often  called  ex-feudi.  Before  181 2  they
were  feudi.

^  De  Cesare,  i.  301-303.  Conv.  Tedaldi.  For  travellers^  Impressions
of  misery  see  Viollet  le  Due,  passim  ;  Venosta,  274-283 ;  Peard  MS.,  and
other  journals  of  Garibaldini  in  i860.

L

146  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

might,  amid  increasing  difficulties,  such  as  the  rooted  anti-
pathy'of  the  population  to  military  service,  the  cry  of  'the
Church  in  danger,'  the  unsuppressed  crime  and  disorder
throughout  the  island,  and  the  administrative  inability  of
the  high-minded  men  at  the  head  of  affairs.  When  at
length  Filangieri  entered  Palermo  at  the  head  of  his  victorious
NeapoHtan  troops  on  May  15,  i849>  though  he  was  hated
by  all  as  a  foreign  conqueror,  he  was  accepted  by  many  as
a  restorer  of  social  tranquilUty.i

That  able  soldier  and  statesman,  the  surest  prop  of  the
Bourbon  dynasty  if  it had .  only  been  content  to  lean  on
him,  was  made  governor  of  the  island  which  he  had  subdued,
and'he  might,  if  left  with  a  free  hand,  have  done  something
to  reconcile  the  Sicihans  to  their  fate. But  he  was  sub-
jected to  the  control  of  the  Minister  for  Sicihan  Affairs  at
Naples,  because  the  House  of  Bourbon,  ever  since  1816,  pur-
sued the  fatuous  policy  of  treating  as  a  subject  province  the
island  kingdom  which  had  been  so  loyal  to  their  shrunken
fortunes  during  the Napoleonic  period. Filangieri  found
himself  thwarted  at  every  turn. He  meditated  a  scheme
for  giving  to  Sicily— not  railways  indeed— but  roads. There
were,  in  1852,  just  750  miles  of  carriage-road  in  the  whole
island. Even  the  two  chief  cities,  Palermo  and  Messina,
were  not  linked  by  any  continuous  highway,  for  the  middle
part  of  the  connexion  was '  a  mule  track  42  miles  long.'  2
Travellers,  therefore,  went  from  the  east  to  the  west  of  the
island by sea, except a few of the richer and more
adventurous  English  tourists, who rode  over  the  rough
tracks, taking their own tents and provisions,  for the
food  and  lodging  that  could  be  obtained  from  the  natives
appear to have been more intolerable than they are
to-day.8 Filangieri  wished  to  amend  this  state  of  things,
but  his  intentions  were  frustrated  from  Naples,  and  road-
making  was  postponed  till  the  Piedmontese  era.

1  De  Cesare,  i.  2-5.

2  Palermo  MS.,  Br.  Cons.,  Mr.  Goodwin's  report  of  June  2,  1852.

3  VeHosta,  276-279,  the  atory  of  three  young  Lombards  who  tried  to
travel  in  Sicily  in  1853,

THE  RULERS  OF  SICILY

147
At  length,  in  1854,  completely  undermin^rl  k r
mtngues, he threw  ud h\^\rr. ^^^^rmined  by  Court
disgust.i  ^ ^''  governorship and retired in

But  he  had  temporarily  succepd^^  ,•«
policy  of  concihation M^L "Jff.^^^^  ^"  one  part  of  his

written  of  the  Sid  ian  triil  "L  or "*'  '"  ^'^i. have
Neapolitan, for the pScip^f  feX"  f '^^ -^^  °f 'ha
escaped  with the  Ughter  pLalty  of °1 't.  "  ^''"''
worthy  as  a  whole  of  the  hiehmnr»I,^fr ^''^'^  ">«"■
set  by  Anaari  and  Ru^ero  &H?m„ k"!!'"'*"^^*^"''^^'!
and  inexperienced  tofoyern  "tT', ^"T  *°°  ^™P'«
scorned  to  enrich  thenfseWes Men  at  the"; 'h'  '^  -^^-^
and  now  endured  the  miserielof  h= k ""^  °'  ^'^^*^^-
Paris,  Turin,  and  Malt^wS^^  un^'wTT  '"  ^°"''°"-

ciHa^  "SXcLlTrr  r  ^-  ^"^^  '^-^^  «*  -n-
cicala.  a  ™an  withoTa  poiiov ir'T'^P  "^^  ^^=*^'-
the  authorities  gave  no 'thought  to  ^vlt  ""  '"'  "^=''-
routine  of  repression and  th/r.  . f"^*""^  except  the
Maniscalco.  Director  of  Polil^ t. ''»'  '""^  '^'^"^  --^
whose  ability  Filangieri  had  disc^  red"ai7''"'^'  °*^^^'
promotion,  made  hhnself  the  termrof  ^r  r  7"'^"''  "'*
the  criminal  population,  who  wSe  tol  ofl ^'^''^  ^""^  "^^
the  unquiet  mountain  districts  rf  the ,°/ ^^^"'^'ated  in-
common  persecution  by  government M ''  7'°^  *°  "'^'^
useful  force  of  Sicihan  m'ountT;:Le  mo"  tlv  "  k"'"^''  ^
known  as  the  Compagni  d'armi  bPtw«Ti^  ex-bngands,
old  friends  than  wfr/the  N^t^om  frX^  "^^'^  *''-
The  count:,  was  effectively  gaggef^^,  „^^^^^^^^

'  -De  Cesare,  I.  12,  ja o,.,^ ^o
^908).  818,  819.  ^  ^^'  ^^^"^7.  57-59,  301.  P^a^rf  (Cornhill,  June

^  Whitaker,  2A<i et  ^i^n a^ ■ ^

L 2

148  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

was  allowed  to  circulate  except the  official  Gionwte  ii
SiciUa. The  real  news  had  to  be  obtained  by  borrowing
the  foreign  papers  from  the  Consuls  of  other  countries  who
alone  could  receive  them,>  or  by  assembling  cautiously  m
parties  of  two  or  three  at  the  chemist's,  the  usual  meeting
olace  of  the  Liberals.!^ The  scorn  of  even  the  Austrian
authorities  was  aroused  against  the  Southern  police who
hindered  or  prohibited  journeys  of  Itahans  m  Sicily,^  who
shaved  off  men's  beards  and  seized  their  black  Lombardy
hats  as  seditious,*  and  interfered  with  music  parties  of  five
or  six  persons.' Of  the  upper  class,  some  were  passively  on
the  side  of  Government,  but  another  and  more  active
section  put  themselves  at  the  head  of  the  artisan  and
peasant  classes,  who  were  universally  hostile  to  the  Nea-
nnlitan  rule There  was  no  reactionary  party  among  the
S  ants  t 'there  was  on  the  mainland. '  When  shall  we
be  rid  of  this  infamous  yoke  ? '  was  constantly  ejaculated.^

It  may  seem  strange  that  the  Unitarian  party  among  f.he
Sicilians  should  have  been  able  to  use  the  outraged  insular
pride  of  their  fellow-countrymen  as  the  means  of  creating
popular  enthusiasm  for  absorption  in  the  larger  Italy  and
annexation  to  the  crown  of  Victor  Emmanuel. But  the
experience  of  1848  had  taught  the  Sicihans  that,  since  they
3d  not  themilves  become  soldiers,  they  could  not'^P^
to  effect  their  own  permanent  emancipation  from  Naples.
They  therefore  began  to  look  to  Garibaldi  to  deliver  them,
and  to  the  Piedmontese  armaments  to  protect  them  from
^conquest. Neither were men like Amari, La Fanna,
Crisp'  and  the educated classes  in general,  exclusivdy
in  Sar  in  their  ideas. They  held  that  annexation  to he
new  Italy  would  satisfy  their  desire  to  participate  m  the

1  c-  .•„  ,8  Colonel  Tedaldi  tells  me  that  his  father  had  Wm  taught
Engli^T'orL  Ct  should  he  able  to  read  the  Morni.,  Fos,  of  the
British  Consul.

'": ¥L';»...-«. .. X87.  ff '-«•;/- ^°- "^'f,.S„,1l!x,.''^

Cesare,  ii.  i93-

THE  UNITARIAN  MOVEMENT  149

wider  Italian  culture,  which  was  after  all  the  most  valuable
element  m  modern  Sicihan  civilization,  and  the  real  influence
that  had  since  the  Middle  Ages  fused  into  one  the  different
races  mhabiting  the  island. They  rightly  supposed  that
union  with  Italy  would  give  that  culture  room  to  expand
when  freedom  of  press  and  person  had  once  been  estabhshed  •
that  It  would  yield  them,  at  least  in  some  degree,  the  sense
of  being  masters  in  their  own  island  ; that  it  would  bring
roads  and  railways,  attract  capital  and  commerce,  and  put
them  m  touch  with  the  outside  world  shut  off  from  them  by
the  Bourbon  police  system.  And  not  a  few  wrongly  supposed
that  these  benefits  would  be  obtained  without  higher  taxa-
tion and  mihtary  burdens,  and  would  at  once  relieve  the
moral  and  economic  poverty  of  the  land. But  the  desire  to
be  united  to  Italy  did  not  become  general  until  1859  ^

From  1850  to  1858  the  threads  of  conspiracy  throughout
the  island  were  in  the  hands  of  the  partisans  of  Mazzini. In
proportion  as  his  influence  was  superseded  in  Northern
Italy,  he  directed  the  efforts  of  his  remaining  friends  to  the
Sicihan  field,  neglected  by  other  parties. His  Unitarian
and  Repubhcan  ideas  inspired  Bentivegna,  who  gladly  gave
away  his  life  in  the  winter  of  1856  by  raising  a  hopeless
rebelhon  near  Cefalu.^ Mazzini's  principal  agents  for  the
affairs  of  the  South  were  the  Sicihan  exiles,  Crispi  and  Pilo
and the noble-minded Modenese,  Niccola Fabrizi Ever
since  1837  Fabrizi  had  made  Malta  his  headquarters,  and
there  devoted  his  life  to  guiding  the  movement  against
the  Bourbons  m  the  direction  of  Italian  unity. Early  in
the  fifties he  laid  in  a  secret  store of ammunition  and
hundreds  of  bad,  old  muskets— some  saved  from  the  wreck
of  the  late  revolution  in  Sicily,  others  purchased  for  Ago
by  Mazzini  in  England.3 Though  such  an  armoury  was

'M  f ■''!'''"''  ^^■'  ^'-  ^°"'-'  ^^'-  Goodwin's  letter  of  July  .  i8si
^nAArch.  dz  State,  Polizia,  No.  1212,  Castelcicala's  letter  of  March  7  18,7
on  the  Spirito  Pubblico.  '' ^''

'  Mazzim  Hi  p.  xxviii-xxx.  Pietraganzili,  i.  51,  52.  Villari,  291
Benttvegna  and  Sansove,  passim,  '

'  Villari  392,  393.  Shaen  MS.,  Mazzini's  letter,  Novemberi  7  iS-ii
Rass.  Naz,  January  1905,  p.  7.  '' ■^  •

150  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

illegal  in  Malta,  the  British  authorities,  benevolently  neutral
to  Bomba's  enemies,  made  no  effort  to  find  it.  The  rumour
of  its  existence  gave  Fabrizi  importance  among  all  Sicilian
parties.  The  government  at  Palermo  kept  spies  round
him,  who  periodically  reported  his  doings.^  There  was  a
constant  passage  of  conspirators  from  Sicily,  Genoa,  and
England  centering  at  Malta,  and  thence  threatening
the  Bourbon  rule.

Owing  to  this  ceaseless  activity  of  the  Mazzinians  during
the  years  when  other  parties  were  content  to  wait  for  better
times,  the  idea  of  United  Italy  came  to  be  closely  associated
in  the  Sicilian  mind  with  the  idea  of  revolt  against  Naples.
When,  towards  the  close  of  the  fifties,  the  islanders  began  to
hear  tell  of  Cavour's  policy,  supported  by  the  National  Society
under  its  secretary,  La  Farina  ^ — himself  a  Sicilian  exile —
their  minds  were  already  prepared  by  Mazzini  for  the  idea
of  amalgamation  with  Italy.  Nor  can  it  be  said  that  either
Mazzini  or  his  agents  actively  opposed  the  abandonment
by  their  Sicilian  friends  of  the  Republican  part  of  the  old
programme.  Fabrizi  himself,  following  Garibaldi,  gave  in
his  adhesion  to  the  main  principle  of  the  National  Society,
union  imder  Victor  Emmanuel's  crown.^

At  length,  in  thesummerof  1859,  the  news  of  the  victories
over  Austria  in  the  Lombard  plain  brought  about  a  united
movement  of  all  classes  and  parties  in  Sicily.  The  aris-
tocracy of  Palermo  had  not,  as  a  whole,  taken  part  in
Mazzinian  agitation  and  conspiracy,  but  Magenta  and
Solferino  kindled  their  patriotic  enthusiasm.  On  the  night  of
June  26,  1859,  a  few  young  men  improvised  an  illumination
in  the  '  Nobles'  Club,'  opposite  the  fine  statue  of
Charles  V  in  the  Piazza  Bologni.  At  first  the  lights  in  the
windows  puzzled  the  ignorant  populace,  who,  on  being  told
that  the  nobles  were  celebrating  '  Solferino,'  stood  whisper-
ing '  Chi  e  siu  sufrareddu  ? ' — '  What  is  this  Solferino  ?  ' The

*  Palermo  MSS.,  Polisia,  e.g.  No.  1212,  Note  di  Malta,  Marzo,  1857,
and  No.  1237,  5,  209-211,  60.

-  See  p.  65,  above.

*  Fabrizi,  39. Villari,  382-391.

THE  SICILIANS  INVITE  GARIBALDI 151

Neapolitan  sentry  at  the  foot  of  the  statue  looked  at  the
bright  hghts  and  laughed  gaily,  not  knowing,  poor  fellow,
that they were the beginning of many sorrows for
him and his comrades. But the authorities soon  ex-
plamed  matters. Maniscalco  himself, hot with passion,
stalked into the Club at the head of  his police, put
out the lights, shut up the house, and in the' next
few  days arrested  a  number  of  young  men  of the  first
famines  in  Palermo. These  undignified  and  violent  pro-
ceedings aroused  against  him  the  whole  aristocracy  of  the
capital,  and  drew  together  all  classes,  from  highest  to  lowest,
m  a  tacit  conspiracy  against  the  government,  which  never
abated  during  the  momentous  year  that  followed. The
enthusiasm  was  infectious :  young  men  of  family,  who  had
hitherto  had  no  idea  of  using  life  except  to  partake  of  its
less  active  pleasures,  were  ready  to  do  anything  in  order  to
be  marched  off  to  the  great  Vicaria  prison,  which  was  '  con-
sidered the  place  where  one  received  the  baptism  of  patriotic
regeneration.'  1

The  movement  at  once  turned  men's  thoughts  to  Gari-
baldi. The  conspirators  invited  him  to  come  to  Sicily  and
lead  the  revolution,  and  on  September  29,  1859,  he  repUed
from  Bologna  with  great  good  sense  :

'  Unite  yourselves  to  our  programme-//a/y  and  Victor
EmmawMg^-indissolubly  !  If  you  can  do  it  with  any  chance
Oi  success,  then  rise.  But  if  not,  work  at  uniting  and  strengthen-
ing yourselves.  As  to  my  coming  to  Sicily,  I  will  come  with
pleasure,  with  joy.  But  ere  that  we  require  a  more  intimate
communication  between  you  and  me  ;  we  need  stronger  connec-
tions and  we  must  find  means  for  this  and  make  them  effective
because  nowadays  we  must  not  risk  what  is  secure.'

His  correspondents  replied,  again  asking  him  to  come  over
and  lead  them,  or  if  he  could  not  come  himself,  to  send  a  man
enjoying  his  confidence,  because  all  parties  and  classes  in  the
island,  however  much  they  quarrelled  among  themselves
would  rally  round  the  name  of  Garibaldi. There  the  matter

*  Brancaccw,  11-22,  35,

152  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

was  left,  but  Garibaldi's  advice  and  his  conditional  promise
to  come  had  done  much  to  unite  and  encourage  the  Sicilians.i

Meanwhile,  in  August,  a  gentleman  in  spectacles,  going
by  the  name  of  Manuel  Pareda,  from  the  Argentine,  was
travelling  through  the  island  as  a  tourist.  He  duly  chmbed
Aetna  and  looked  down  the  crater  in  company  with  some
English  officers,  who  found  the  American  singularly  well-
informed  about  Sicily.  Pareda  was  in  reality  the  disguised
Sicilian,  Francesco  Crispi,  afterwards  the  celebrated  Prime
Minister  of  Italy.  At  this  time  he  was  forty  years  of  age,
and  already  appeared  to  some  who  knew  him  in  London  to
surpass  his  fellow  exiles  both  in  ability  and  in  the  spirit  of
personal  ambition.  But  he  had  sacrificed  to  the  Mazzinian
cause  all  ordinary  prospects  in  life,  had  been  expelled  even
from  Malta  and  from  Piedmont,  and  now  ventured  this
dangerous  journey  in  disguise  through  his  native  island
in  order  to  bring  the  conspirators  of  Messina  and  Palermo,
always  suspicious  of  each  other,  into  communication  for
a  projected  rising.  The  departure  of  the  Swiss  regiment
from  Palermo  served  as  an  encouragement,^  and  it  was
agreed  that  the  revolt  should  begin  at  the  capital  on  October
4,  1859.  But  when,  after  a  return  to  England,  Crispi  came
back  to  the  island  in  a  fresh  disguise  on  October  11,  he  found
the  plan  had  missed  fire.  Mazzini  and  his  friends  believed
that  Piedmont  had  sent  counter  orders  through  La  Farina
to  prevent  a  rising  in  Sicily  before  the  Central  Provinces
had  been  safely  annexed.  But  more  certainly  the  Sicilians
were  themselves  afraid  to  strike,  because  the  police  had  got
wind  of  the  plot,  and  arrested  several  of  the  leaders.  A  local
rising  at  Bagheria,  ten  miles  outside  the  capital,  led  by  the
impetuous  patriot  Campo,  was  easily  put  down.  The  whole
conspiracy  had  failed.^

'  Villari,  3Ti-H7-  Mazzini,  xi.  p.  xxxvii.  See  head  of  this  chapter
for  more  of  the  letter.

2  See  p.  137,  above.

•^  Crispi  (i),  233-255.  Mr.  Dolmage,  one  of  the  Englishmen  whom
Pareda met, independentlj' confirms Crispi's story of their meeting.

MAZZINI'S  LETTER  153

On  November  27,  Maniscalco  was  stabbed  at  the  door  of
the  Cathedral  of  Palermo,  whither  he  had  gone  with  his
wife  and  child  to  hear  Mass.  The  disguised  assassin  escaped,
and  it  is  not  known  whether  he  had  accomplices.  The
Director  of  Police  soon  recovered,  but  the  revolutionists  were
encouraged  by  the  temporary  disablement  of  the  man  whom
they  most  feared.i

During  February  of  the  year  i860,  a  Piedmontese  visitor,
named  Benza,  was  the  observed  of  all  observers  in  the  best
society  of  Palermo.  He  bore  secret  messages  from  La
Farina,  the  representative  of  Cavour,  to  the  effect  that  the
Sicilians  should  rise  if  they  were  sure  of  success,  that  owing
to  the  attitude  of  Europe,  Piedmont  could  give  no  help
until  after  the  revolution  was  accomplished,  but  that
she  would  protect  against  reconquest  a  Sicily  already  set
free.2

Mazzini  gave  the  same  advice.  On  March  2,  i860,  he
wrote  his  famous  letter  to  the  Sicilians  :

'  Brothers,  I  confess  I  no  longer  recognise  in  the  Sicilians
of  to-day  the  men  who  flung  down  the  challenge  in  '48.  ...
First  of  all  I  repeat  to  you  our  declaration  of  two  years  ago  :  It
is  no  longer  a  question  of  Republic  or  Monarchy  ;  it  is  a  question
of  National  Unity,  of  existence  or  non-existence.  ...  If  Italy
wishes  to  be  a  monarchy  under  the  House  of  Savoy,  let  it  be  so.
If,  at  the  end,  they  choose  to  hail  the  King  and  Cavour  as  libera-
tors or  what  not,  let  it  be  so.  What  we  all  require  is  that  Italy
should  be  made.  .  .  .  Wait  ?  For  what  ?  Do  you  really  think
Napoleon  or  Cavour  is  coming  to  set  you  free  ?  .  .  .  Dare,  and
you  will  be  followed.  But  dare  in  the  name  of  National
Unity ;  it  is  the  condition  sine  qua  non.  .  .  .  Garibaldi  is  bound
to  come  to  your  help.  I  believe  I  can  say  that  your  initiative
would  be  followed  by  the  advance  of  the  forces  of  Central  Italy.'

This letter, read in conclave by the revolutionary

Delia  Cerda  MS.  Conv.  Mrs.  Whitaker.  Stillmo.n's  Crispi,  51,  52.
Magzini,  xi.  p.  xxxvi-xxxviii.  De  Cesare,  ii.  153,  154.  Campo,  55-79.
Villari,  379-381.  Pietraganzili,  i.  218-231.  Paolucci,  Pilo,  238,  Riso,
5-8. Rome  MS.  Mazz.  Letters,  V.E.,  No.  3344,  to  Crispi,  1859.

'  Ciaccio,  34.  De  Cesare,  ii.  155,  156.  Pietraganzili,  i.  233-234.  Colonna,
93,  94.  -  Brancaccio,  82,  83. De  Cesare,  ii.  15S-160.

154  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Committee of Palermo,  made no small impression on
men  already  ashamed  of  their  own  inactivity.^

Urged  thus  by  Cavourians  and  Mazzinians  alike  to  act
first  for  themselves  and  then  look  for  support  to  Piedmont,
the  Sicilians  at  length  began  their  revolt.  But  it  is  doubtful
whether  they  would  have  screwed  their  courage  to  the
sticking  place  but  for  one  man,  Francesco  Riso,  a  master
plimiber  and  mason.  To  Riso,  in  spite  of  his  faults,  Italy
owes  a  great  debt,  for,  at  the  cost  of  his  hfe,  he  set  on  foot
the  local  rebellion  which  drew  Garibaldi  into  the  field,  and
so  led  in  eight  months  to  the  liberation  of  Sicily  and  Naples,
Umbria  and  the  Marches,  and  the  creation  of  the  Italian
kingdom.

The  conspirators  had  only  a  few  himdred  firearms  in  the
whole  of  Palermo  with  which  to  attack  a  garrison  of  nearly
20,000  men.  Under  such  conditions  it  is  easier  to  meditate
than  to  begin  revolt.  Baron  Riso  -  gave  '  constant  balls '  to
the  aristocracy  of  Palenno  '  on  the  first  floor  of  his  beautiful
palace  in  the  Toledo,'  where  '  dancing  served  as  a  cloak  to
meetings  of  patriots  on  the  floor  above,  men  in  evening  dress
shpping  upstairs  between  a  gay  valse  or  contredanse  *  to
help  in  the  making  of  cartridges  and  bombs  for  the  coming
revolution. 3  In  another  house  seditious  fly-leaves  were  struck
oft"  on  a  smaU  printing-press  made  to  pack  into  a  metal  box
that  fitted  into  a  flower  pot,  and  was  covered  with  earth  be-
tween whiles.*  The  gentlemen  who  laboured  at  the  press  and
manufactured  the  bombs  were  acting  with  courage,  but  a
more  reckless  daring  was  needed  to  go  out  into  the  street
and  be  shot  do\Mi  by  the  soldiers,  and  this  was  found  only
in  Riso  the  plumber  and  the  few  score  workmen  whom  he
inspired.

'  Mazzini,  xi.  p.  xlviii.-li.  PaoJucci,  PUo,  243,  Riso,  18,  19.  V.  M.
2,  note.

^  Not  to  be  confused  with  Riso,  the  plumber.

^  Whitaker,  273.  Brancaccio  81,  82.  The  bombs  were  to  be  used  not
for  murder  but  in  open  conflict,  and  were  so  used  on  April  4.

*  Reclamo  Melt.  Stamp.  Clan.  PiciragaziJi,  i.  447,  448.  The  metal
box,  in  size  and  shape  rather  like  a  hat  box,  is  to  be  seen  in  the  ^Museum  at
Palermo,  Risorgimento  section.

H< 2

RISO'S  REVOLT  AT  THE  GANCIA , 155

In  March  the  two  sections  of  conspirators,  plumber  Riso
and  the  workmen,  and  Baron  Riso  and  the  aristocrats,
drew  together.  Baron  Riso  and  his  committee  suppUed
the  workmen  with  the  bombs  and  with  means  to  acquire
some  firearms.  1  The  plumber  brought  into  the  town  a  little
wooden  cannon  and  a  meagre  store  of  blunderbusses  and
muskets,  hidden  under  cartloads  of  material  for  his  own
trade,  and  stored  them  in  the  Terrasanta,  a  building  annexed
to  the  old  Gancia  convent.  He  had  hired  the  Terrasanta
for  his  purposes,  under  cover  of  repairing  his  own  house,
which  stood  opposite  the  Gancia.  That  fine  building,  and
the  network  of  old,  narrow  and  romantic  streets  surrounding
it,  remain  to-day,  like  so  much  else  in  Palermo,  exactly  as
they  were  when  the  Italian  Revolution  of  i860  began  in
their  midst. 2

Under  strong  pressure  from  Riso,  who  was  fiercely
determined  on  action,  the  Committee  consented  to  April  4  as
the  day  for  the  rising. s  On  April  2,  Riso  told  his  friends
of  the  Campo  family  that  he  did  not  expect  that  the  nobles
would  actually  join  in  the  fighting  or  that  the  capital  would
rise,  that  he  expected  to  perish,  but  that  if  he  survived  he
would  take  a  bloody  vengeance  on  the  Moderates  and  the
aristocracy  for  having  failed  him  at  the  crisis.*

On  the  eve  of  the  appointed  day  this  desperate  man  and
seventeen  followers  sat  up  aU  night  over  their  pile  of  arms
in  the  Terrasanta  waiting  for  dawn.  As  the  morning  of
the  4th  of  April  grew  grey  upon  the  windows  they  heard
the  trampling  of  patrols  in  the  street,  which  told  them  that
their  plot  was  discovered.  They  had  not  been  betrayed
by  anyone,  least  of  all  by  any  monk  of  the  Gancia  convent,
though  both  patriotic  and  Bourbon  legend  has  often  said  so.
The  plot,  known  to  large  numbers  of  people,  was  almost
common  talk  in  Palermo,  and  came  to  the  ears  of  some

'  Ciaccio,  39. Paolucci,  Riso,  18,  19.
-  Marco,  121,  122. Paolucci,  Riso,  13,  14.
^  Campo,  Lettera,  6-9. Paolucci,  Riso,  18-20.

■*  Campo,  Riso,  12.  Paolucci,  Riso,  22  for  his  saj'Ing  on  April  4,
'  Tutti  quelli  che  ci  tradiscono,  noi  lifucileremo,  quando  saremo  vincitori.'

156  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

persons  of  governmental  sympathies,  who  were  justified  in
telUng  Maniscalco.i  'We  have  gone  too  far  now,'  said
Riso  when  he  heard  the  patrols,  '  we  have  no  choice  but  to
face  the  enemy  with  courage.'  At  five  o'clock  they  issued
from  the  Terrasanta,  arms  in  hand,  crying  Viva  V Italia,
Viva  Vittorio  Emanuele,  and  exchanged  shots  with  the
compagni  d'armi  and  soldiers  in  the  alley  between  the
Convent  and  Riso's  house.  Men  fell  on  both  sides.  Riso's
party,  joined  by  a  few  other  rebels  from  a  neighbouring
centre  of  the  conspiracy,  retreated  into  the  Gancia  itself,
where  the  soldiers  besieged  them.  In  vain  they  rang  the
tocsin  in  the  bell-tower  to  call  the  frightened  town  to  rise ;
in  vain  they  hurled  the  bombs,  which  failed  to  explode.
The  Neapolitan  troops  blew  open  the  doors  with  cannon
and  rushed  into  the  Convent,  killing  some  and  seizing  the
rest  as  prisoners,  including  Riso  himself,  who  had  fallen
mortally  wounded  near  the  door.  Wrongly  supposing  that
the  monks,  who  were  known  to  have  popular  sympathies,
had  participated  in  the  revolt  hatched  in  the  annexe  of  the
monastery,  the  soldiers  bound  them  in  couples,  and  gutted
and  sacked  their  church.

It  had  been  part  of  the  plot  that  two  other  parties  of
rebels — fifty-two  and  thirteen  men  strong — should  start
from  two  neighbouring  arsenals  of  the  revolt,  and  find  their
way  through  the  streets  to  join  Riso,  but  they  had  been
intercepted  by  the  troops  and  very  few  had  reached  the
Gancia.  The  authorities,  fore-warned,  were  in  such  com-
plete military  occupation  of  all  points  of  the  town,  that,  as
Riso  had  prophesied,  neither  the  populace  nor  the  aris-
tocracy took  part  in  the  fight,  although  Baron  Riso  and
other  nobles  went  about  the  streets  urging  people  to  rise,
and  promising  the  aid  of  an  armament  from  Piedmont  s
By.  eight  o'clock  all  was  over.^

^  Paolucci,  Riso,  20,  21. Marco,  128-130.

^  Palermo  MS.,  Polizia,  April  8,  letter  of  Castelcicala  to  Min.  for  Sic.

■^  Paolucci,  Riso,  20-25.  ^^  Cesare,  ii.  164-188.  Marco,  130-147.
Cronaca,  6,  7.  L'assartu,  4  Ap.  Palermo  MS.,  Br.  Cons.,  Goodwin's
report  on  April  4  and  letter  of  May  3.  Winnington  Ingram,  193,  194,  for
the  hours,  wrongly  stated  in  some  accounts.

^1

"::  s

RISING  IN  THE  INTERIOR  157

In  the  suburbs  shots  were  fired  at  intervals  until  night-
fall, and  the  Neapohtan  troops  seized  the  excuse  to  burn
and  pillage  wherever  they  chose,  and  to  murder  unoffending
women  and  children.i The  squadre  (as  the  bands  of  rebel
peasantry  from  the  mountains  of  the  interior  were  called)
had  failed  to  carry  out  the  difficult  part  assigned  them  by
the  committee  of  the  conspirators,  namely,  to  force  their  way
into  the  heart  of  the  town  and  join  Riso. But  some  of
them  came  down  armed  into  the  Conca  d'oro,  the  marvellous
plain  wherein  Palermo  Ues,  and  fought  there  in  the  streets
of the  suburbs,  and  in  the  surrounding  groves  of  lemon
and  orange. From  April  4  until  the  entry  of  Garibaldi,
parties,  varying  from  two  or  three  up  to  a  dozen  vagabonds,'
hiding  by  day  in  the  immense  fruit  forest,  prowled  about
every  night  and  let  off  their  guns  around  the  sleeping  city.2
But  the  real  strength  of  the  squadre  lay,  not  in  the
seaward  plain,  but  on  and  behind  the  steep  wall  of  beauti-
fully shaped  mountains  which  holds  the  Conca  d'oro  in  its
arms. Behind  that  barrier  stretches  southwards  a  high
undulating  plateau  of  open  cornland,  broken  here  and  there
by  precipitous  hills  and  rock-ridges,  on  the  summits  and
beneath  the  shadows  of  which  nestle  the  upland  towns—
Corleone, Calatafimi, and  others of less  note. In such
colossal  villages of  5000  to  20,000  inhabitants  the  Sicilian
peasants  have  from  time  immemorial  congregated  for  safety
at  night,  walking  and  riding  out  by  day  to  distant  labours
in  the  vast  open  cornfield  that  once  fed  Imperial  Rome.
This  strange  country,  the  heart  of  Sicily,  little  known  to
foreigners then  or  now,  had  never  been  occupied  in  an
effective  manner  by  the  Neapolitans  or  by  the  Spaniards
before  them. The  Arabs  of  old  had  built  castles  in  the
interior,  but  the  races  who  succeeded  them  in  the  possession
of  the  island  kept  no  garrisons  except  in  the  coast  towns.
Under  the  Bourbons,  while  Palermo  and  Messina,  Trapani

1  Palermo  MS.,  Polizia,  No.  1237,  4,  184,  60  and  249,  60,  statements
by  Henri  Bamberger  and  Tagliavia.

2  Mundy,  105. Signer  Tedaldi  tells  me  he heard shots  in  the  plain
every  night  from  April  4  to  May  27.

158  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

and  Girgenti,  were  always  full  of  troops,  and  were  constantly
being  searched  for  arms,  the  population  dwelling  inland  had
seldom  seen  a  brigade  of  soldiers  even  in  the  largest  towns,
and  still  possessed  their  sporting  guns  and  blunderbusses. ^
So  now,  at  the  signal  of  the  Gancia  revolt,  the  more
adventurous  or  patriotic — and  in  some  cases  the  more
criminal — of  the  young  peasants  in  the  north-west  of  the
island  followed  their  landlords  into  the  field,  inspired  by
a  last  after-glow  of  the  old  feudal  attachment.  Until  the
coming  of  Garibaldi  these  bands,  wandering  about  in  the
mountains,  sometimes  coming  into  the  villages  to  sleep,
skirmished  with  the  flying  columns  sent  out  after  them  from
Palermo.

During  the  fortnight  following  April  4  continual  en-
counters with  squadre  of  a  few  hundred  men  each  took
place  on  the  mountains  overlooking  Palermo,  at  Monreale,
Gibilrossa,  and  elsewhere.  The  royal  troops  were  usually
victorious,  and  the  result  of  the  final  conflict  at  Carini  on
April  18  bade  fair  to  disperse  the  last  of  the  bands. ^

Plana  dei  Greci,  an  Alpine  village  in  a  small  fertile
plain  enclosed  by  a  circle  of  magnificent  mountains,  was  the
hearth  of  freedom  in  Western  Sicily.  Though  only  ten  miles
from  Palermo  as  the  crow  flies,  the  intervening  mountain
barriers  rendered  it  remote  and  relatively  free  from  inter-
ference. It  had  been  peopled  at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth
century  by  Greek-Albanians  flying  from  trouble  in  their
own  country,  many  of  whose  descendants  preserved  in  this
fastness  of  the  hills  not  only  their  Greek  religion  but  the
sturdy  and  independent  character  acquired  by  their  ancestors
in  Balkan  warfare.  Hither,  on  April  19,  the  Albanian  leader
Piediscalzi  returned  with  a  small  and  dispirited  remnant

1  See  Maps  III.  and  IV.,  below.  Viollet  le  Dm,  63.  Fazio,  41.  I
think  that  the  only  Neapolitan  garrison  up  country  In  i860  was  that
of  Caltanisetta.  Certainly  there  were  no  troops  permanently  stationed
in  Plana  dei  Greci,  Alcamo,  Calatafimi,  or  Corleone.

*  Cronaca,  8-43.  Butta,  i.  12-15.  jP^'^w*  ^^i  Greci,  11-22.  Fazio,
23-45. De  Cesare,  ii.  155,  167.

RCSOLINO PILO.

With  tricolour  scarf  and  belt  bearing  arms  of  Sicily.

(From  a  contemporary  print,)

PILO'S  JOURNEY  159

from  the  Carini  fight,  intending  to  disband  his  followers
and  to  emigrate.  This  would  have  meant  the  end  of  the
revolt,  for  when  the  Albanians  laid  down  their  arms  no
other  community  was  likely  to  continue  the  struggle  for
long.i  But  on  the  evening  of  the  next  day  hope  suddenly
revived.  Rosolino  Pilo,  a  Sicilian  of  noble  family,  who
had  taken  a  leading  part  in  1848,  and  had  since  been  one
of  Mazzini's  closest  friends  in  his  English  exile,  unexpectedly
appeared  in  Plana  dei  Greci,  and  announced  himself  as  the
herald  of  the  coming  of  Garibaldi.

Pilo  and  his  companion  Corrao  had  left  Genoa  in  a  small
sailing  boat  on  March  25,  and  after  many  dangers  and
delays  landed  near  Messina  on  April  10.  Hearing  that  the
insurrection  was  in  progress  at  the  other  end  of  the  island,
they  travelled  its  whole  length  to  Plana  dei  Greci,  rousing
the  villages  through  which  they  passed  to  demonstrations
of  patriotic  enthusiasm,  and  everywhere  promising  the
speedy  advent  of  Garibaldi.  Towards  the  close  of  their
romantic  journey,  in  the  wild  and  solitary  oak-forest  of
Ficuzza,  they  had  fallen  in  with  the  compagni  d'armi,  who
gave  chase  and  captured  their  guide.

The  news  of  Garibaldi  which  they  brought  safe  through
so  many  perils  to  Plana  dei  Greci  prevented  the  total  extinc-
tion of  the  movement  initiated  on  April  4.  Pilo  was  playing
a  game  of  bluff :  he  had  gone  to  Sicily  to  keep  the  insurrec-
tion alive  in  the  hope  that  by  doing  so  he  would  induce
Garibaldi  to  follow  and  take  over  the  lead,  but  he  found
that  the  only  means  of  keeping  it  alive  was  to  announce
Garibaldi's  coming  as  a  thing  already  certain.  The  Albanians
at  once  sent  word  round  to  the  patriots  of  the  Sicihan
townships  to  take  the  field  again,  and,  although  their  own
village  was  speedily  occupied  by  royal  troops,  they  put
themselves  under  Pilo's  leadership  and  marched  off  once
more  to  the  other  side  of  Monreale.  There,  establishing  his
rough  camp  on  the  Inserra  mountains,  Pilo,  at  the  head  of

»  Termini,  which  sent  many  men  to  join  the  squadre,  was  occupied  by
Neapolitan  troops  on  April  22. Teymini,  5,  6.

t6o  garibaldi  and  THE  THOUSAND

the  partially  revived  insurrection,  watched  Palermo  in  the
plain  below  until  the  actual  coming  of  Garibaldi  relieved
him  of  a  heavy  responsibility. ^

Pilo's  arrival  as  earnest  of  the  approach  of  the  detts  ex
machine  entirely  changed  the  political  atmosphere.  In
spite  of  the  failure  of  the  revolt,  it  was  the  Sicilians  who
exulted,  the  soldiers  who  were  gloomy  and  anxious.  During
the  last  fortnight  of  April  and  the  first  few  days  of  May,  the
authorities  at  Naples  and  Palermo  were  perpetually  alarmed
by  false  reports  sent  them  by  the  Cardinals  in  Rome  and  by
their  own  agents  in  Genoa  and  Turin,  to  the  effect  that
Garibaldi  had  already  sailed. ^

The  confidence  of  the  Sicilians  of  all  classes  that  he
would  come  and  that  he  would  conquer  was  irrational  and
unbounded  ;  '  this  belief,'  wrote  the  Governor  Castelcicala,
on  May  3,  '  is  universal,  and  has  spread  to  the  remotest
villages  of  the  island.'  ^  In  Palermo  the  secret  press  was
often  taken  out  of  the  flower-pot  to  print  off  little
handbills,  beginning  Fratelli  vinceremo  ('  Brothers,  we
shall  conquer  '),  and  signed  //  Comitato  {'  The  Committee  ').
The  excitement  had  been  tense  ever  since  April  7,  when
Baron  Riso  and  five  other  nobles  of  the  first  families  in
Sicily  had  been  marched  through  the  crowded  streets  to
the  Castellamare  fortress,  bound  together  as  common  felons.
'  The  Committee  '  organised  impressive  demonstrations  of
the  unanimity  of  the  capital  and  its  obedience  to  orders.
One  day  a  vast  crowd  of  many  thousands  appeared  sud-
denly in  the  mile-long  Toledo  street  which  divides  the
town  in  half,  and  gave  one  universal  shout  of  Viva  Vittorio
Emanuele  before  the  astonished  police  knew  what  to  do.
Every  day  there  were  smaller  demonstrations  and  numerous

^  Plana  dei  Greet,  22,  23.  Paohtcci,  Pilo,  246-266.  Romano-Catania,
3-5.  Costantini,  chaps,  vii.  andx.  ForPilo's  voyage  see  MoWo,  or  Ma^it'wt',
xi.  pp.  liv.,lxix.,  clxiv.-clxx.  Risorg.  anno  i.,  iv.  711-714.  The  date  of
departure  was  morning  of  March  25,  see  Mazzini,  xi.  pp.  clx.  and  clxvii..
not  26th  as  stated  in  Paolucci,  Pilo,  248.

2  Palermo  MS.,  Polizia,  No.  1238,  passim.

3  Palermo  MS.,  Polizia,  No.  1238,  passim.  Letter  ol  May  3.  And
see  Brancaccio,  164,  167,  178.

DEATH  OF  FRANCESCO  RISO  i6i

arrests.  The  shutters  were  often  put  up  and  commerce  was
at  a  standstill.  The  Vicaria  gaol-fortress  in  the  northern
suburb  was  crowded  by  hundreds  of  pohtical  prisoners,
who  cast  in  the  teeth  of  the  gaolers  that '  Piddu  '  (Giuseppe
Garibaldi)  was  coming. i

Amid  the  gathering  of  these  thunder-clouds,  so  soon  to
break  over  Palermo  in  the  deluge  of  the  final  catastrophe,
a  strange  melodrama  was  being  enacted  round  the  death-
bed of  Francesco  Riso.  On  April  14,  thirteen  of  the  Gancia
rebels  had  been  executed  on  a  piece  of  waste  ground
near  the  port,  now  known  as  the  '  Piazza  delle  13  viiiime.'
Among  these  victims  was  Riso's  aged  father.  A  few  days
later  Maniscalco  came  to  the  bedside  of  the  son,  who  lay
dying  from  the  wound  received  at  the  Gancia,  and  offered
to  spare  the  life  of  his  father  if  he  would  reveal  his  accom-
plices. Riso,  full  of  pity  for  the  old  man,  whom  he  thought
to  be  still  alive,  and  perhaps  not  unwilling  to  expose  the
nobles  whom  he  held  to  have  deserted  him,  made  long
statements  on  April  17  and  22,  in  which  he  named  Baron
Riso  and  others  who  were  already  under  arrest,  and  Mortil-
laro  and  Pisani  who  were  still  at  large.  When  it  was  too
late  to  repent  of  his  weakness,  he  learned  from  the  Chaplain
of  the  hospital  that  his  father  had  been  shot  several  days
before.  He  procured,  by  the  help  of  the  sympathetic
Chaplain  and  of  a  medical  student  in  the  hospital,  a  pistol
with  which  to  avenge  himself  on  Maniscalco,  and  hid  it
under  his  bedclothes.  But  he  was  too  weak  to  use  it,  and
on  April  27  he  died,  in  no  Christian  frame  of  mind. 2

None  of  the  conspirators  whom  he  had  named  came  to
grief,  but  the  revolt  which  he  had  set  on  foot  continued  and
spread  until  it  became  the  Italian  revolution.  While  he
was  breathing  his  last,  his  countrymen  whispered  to  each
other  as  they  passed  in  the  streets,  '  He  is  coming  ! '
*  Garibaldi  ? ' '  Garibaldi.'

1  Palermo  MS.,  Polizia, 'Nos.  1237,  1238,  Castelclcala's  letters.  Paolucci,
Riso,  38.  La  Lumia,  66,  73,  Cronaca,  51,  60.  Brancaccio,  164.  Pietra-
ganzili,  1.  256-258.  Menghini,  17,  18,  414. Tiirr's  Div.,  doc.  5,  pp.  339-34J.

2  See  Appendix  C. The  death-bed  of  Francesco  Riso.

M

CHAPTER IX

THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  EXPEDITION. NICE  OR  SICILY  ?

'  Such  ties  are  not
For  those  who  are  cali'd  to  the  high  destinies
Which  purify  corrupted  commonwealths  ;
We  must  forget  all  feelings  save  the  one,
We  must  resign  all  passions  save  our  purpose,
We  must  behold  no  obj  ect  save  our  country,
And  only  look  on  death  as  beautiful,
So  that  the  sacrifice  ascend  to  heaven,
And  draw  down  freedom  on  her  evermore.'

Byron. — Marino  Falievo,  Act  II,  sc.  2.

The  expedition  of  Garibaldi,  that  led  in  six  months  to
the  liberation  of  the  whole  of  Italy,  except  Venetia  and  the
district  round  Rome,  was  not  the  work  of  one  party,  but  of
all  the  elements  of  Italian  patriotism.  Mazzini  and  his
friends  instigated  the  expedition  ;  Garibaldi  and  his  followers
accomplished  it ;  the  King  and  Cavour  allowed  it  to  start,
and  when  it  had  begun  to  succeed,  gave  it  the  support  and
the  guidance  without  which  it  must  inevitably  have  failed
midway.  It  is  true  that  the  fiercer  adherents  of  each  party
vilified  their  allies,  denying  to  them  their  just  share  of  credit.
But  these  partisan  and  personal  jealousies  have  at  least
helped  forward  the  investigations  of  the  historian,  by
inducing  controversialists,  like  Bertani  and  La  Farina,  to
give  to  the  world  documents  that  can  be  trusted  better  than
the  opinions  of  their  editors,  while  moderate  men  like  Sirtori,
Medici,  and  Bixio,  regretting  these  unseemly  squabbles,
have  come  forward  with  reliable  statements  of  what  they
themselves  saw  and  heard. 1 The  whole  truth  is  not  yet

'  A  good  example  of  this  will  be  found  in  the  report  of  the  important

162

CRISPrS  PROPOSAL  163

clear,  especially  as  regards  the  motives  that  prompted
Cavour's  action  up  to  the  time  of  the  sailing  of  the
Thousand,  but  it  is  now  possible  to  give  a  fairly  accurate
though  not  a  complete  narrative  of  the  origins  of  the
expedition,  and  of  the  preparations  made  for  its  armament
and  departure.

The  idea  that  Garibaldi  should  go  to  liberate  Sicily  was
as  old  as  March  1854,  when  Mazzini  had  suggested  it  to  him
in  London  at  the  moment  of  his  return  from  America  on
board  his  coal-ship. 1  In  September  1859,  the  Sicihans
had  themselves  invited  him. 2  On  both  occasions  he  had
rephed  that  he  would  gladly  go,  but  only  if  the  Sicihans
were  already  in  open  rebellion,  to  which  he  declined  to  incite
them  on  his  own  responsibility.  Since  he  always  adhered
strictly  to  this  formula,  it  became  the  task  of  the  Mazzinian
party  to  stir  up  revolt  in  the  island  in  order  to  hold  him
to  the  terms  of  his  promise.

In  December  1859,  Mazzini's  agent,  Crispi,  returning
from  his  unsuccessful  attempt  to  promote  a  rising  in  his
native  Sicily,-'^  repaired  to  Tuscany  and  Emiha,  the  newly-
liberated  States  of  Central  Italy,  which  were  not  yet  annexed
to  Piedmont,  but  still  under  the  provisional  government  of
the  Dictators  Ricasoli  and  Farini.  Here  he  sought  and
found  Fabrizi,  revolutionary  agent  in  Malta  for  the  affairs
of  Sicily  and  Naples,*  then  on  a  visit  to  his  native  Modena
after  an  exile  of  some  thirty  years.  The  two  friends  agreed
that  since  the  invasion  of  the  Papal  States  had  been  vetoed
from  Turin,  the  time  had  come  for  an  attack  on  the  Bourbon
kingdom.  Emilia  and  Tuscany  were  filled  with  Garibaldi's
volunteers,  unemployed  and  discontented  since  their  chief
had,  a  few  weeks  before,  been  recalled  from  the  '  Rubicon.'  ^
Let  these  men,  said  Crispi,  be  drawn  off  from  a  district

retrospective  debate  in  the  Chamber  on  June  19,  1863,  in  which  Bertani,

La  Farina,  Bixio,  and  Sirtori  all  took  part.

*  See  p.  19,  above.  2  ggg  p j^j^  abovg,

3  See  p.  152,  above.  *  See  p.  149,  above,

'  See  pp.  119-121,  above.

M  2

i64  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

where  they  are  only  a  source  of  embarrassment  to  the  author-
ities, and  let  them  sail  under  Garibaldi  to  the  liberation  of
Sicily.  Thence  the  revolution  would  spread  to  Naples  and
from  Naples  to  the  Papal  States  taken  in  the  rear.  Crispi,
introduced  by  Fabrizi,  laid  the  plan  before  Farini,  the
Dictator  of  Emilia,  who  was  residing  in  Modena.  Farini
entered  eagerly  into  the  plot,  and  sent  Crispi  on  to  Turin
to  obtain  the  consent  of  the  Piedmontese  Government.

Rattazzi  was  still  Victor  Emmanuel's  Prime  Minister,
but  was  already  tottering  to  his  fall.  Between  December  15
and  January  3  he  had  several  interviews  with  Crispi,  and
listened  with  sympathy  to  his  proposal.  The  project  was
also  laid  before  the  Sicilian  La  Farina,  Secretary  of  the
National  Society  and  Cavour's  confidant,^  whom  Crispi
found  more  disposed  than  the  Prime  Minister  to  raise  objec-
tions. Early  in  the  new  year  the  Rattazzi  government  fell,
and  Cavour  came  back  to  power  (January  20,  i860).  One  of
his  first  acts  was  to  drive  Crispi  out  of  Turin  under  the  old
order  of  expulsion  still  hanging  over  his  head. 2  Cavour  as
yet  only  knew  of  Crispi  as  one  of  Mazzini's  most  violent
followers,  and  he  was  moreover  determined  to  enter  upon
no  adventures  in  the  South  until  he  had  secured  the  actual
annexation  of  Tuscany  and  Emilia  by  a  bargain  which  he
was  now  on  the  point  of  negotiating  with  Napoleon.^

Meanwhile,  during  the  last  days  of  1859,  Garibaldi  came
to  Turin,  bent  on  obtaining  some  employment  for  himself
and  his  volunteers.  He  was  not  yet  thinking  of  Sicily,  though
Crispi  and  Rattazzi  were  at  that  moment  discussing  the
possibility  of  sending  him  there.  He  asked  for  a  free  hand
to  organise  the  National  Guard  in  Lombardy  as  a  force
under  his  own  command.  Through  the  influence,  probably,
of  Cavour,  this  was  refused,  although  the  king  as  usual
treated  Garibaldi  with  the  greatest  kindness,  and  sent  him

1  See  pp.  66,  67,  above.

-  Cns/?z(i),  300-303. Mazzini,  xi.  pp.  xxxix-xli. La  Farina,  ii.  269.
Mario,  Vita,  i.  195  (Crispi' s  letter).
^  Chiala.  iii.  209.

GARIBALDI'S  POLITICAL  FAILURE  165

away  from  the  interview  with  unshaken  confidence  in  the
Re  galantuomo.  His  anger  was  entirely  directed  against
Cavour.  While  he  was  in  Turin,  the  ministerial  crisis  came
to  a  head,  and  the  baser  friends  of  the  falling  Rattazzi
government  tried  to  save  the  situation  by  using  Garibaldi's
name  against  their  great  rival.  '  Our  poor  Garibaldi,'
wrote  his  wise  and  faithful  follower  Medici,  who  had  thrown
up  his  own  commission  in  order  to  be  at  his  service,

'  Our  poor  Garibaldi  .  .  .  allows  himself  to  be  persuaded  by
discredited  men  to  go  to  Turin  ;  he  comes  with  most  noble
intentions ;  but  Garibaldi  in  alliance  with  Brofferio  cannot
succeed  ...  he  ruins  himself  in  times  of  inaction ;  he  talks
too  much,  writes  too  much,  and  listens  too  much  to  those  who
know  nothing,' 1

Under  these  malign  influences  he  resigned,  on  December  29,
the  Presidency  of  the  National  Society, ^  which  was
closely  associated  with  Cavour  through  its  Secretary,  La
Farina.  On  December  31,  he  proceeded  to  form  a  rival
society  of  a  more  advanced  tendency,  to  be  called  the
'  Nazione  Armata.'  But  the  project  failed  to  enlist  support
and  was  dissolved  in  ridicule.  On  January  4,  i860,  by  a
happier  inspiration,  he  issued  an  appeal  calling  on  the
Italians  to  subscribe  instead  to  his  '  Milhon  Rifles  Fund  '
for  the  purchase  of  arms.  Although  the  name  betokened
the  ideal  rather  than  the  achievement,  the  Fund  was
destined  to  be  of  great  importance  in  the  history  of  the
Sicilian  expedition.  The  government  consented  to  allow
the  purchase  of  arms  by  the  Directors  on  condition  that
it  was  kept  informed  of  the  whereabouts  of  the  armouries.
To  this  Garibaldi  readily  agreed. ^

Cavour,  having  fought  his  way  back  to  office  in  spite  of
the  intrigues  of  his  enemies,  felt  no  resentment  against  the
simple  man  whom  they  had  made  their  tool,  no  pang  of
jealousy  against  the  rival  of  his  popular  fame,  and  none  of

^  To  Panizzi,  January  8,  i860,  Panizzi,  407,  408.

2  In  which  post  he  had  succeeded  Pallavicino  in  the  middle  of  October;
see  La  Farina,  ii.  222. For  the  National  Society,  p,  65,  above.
*  Ciampoli,  123-125.

i66  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

that  contempt  which  clever  people  of  the  second  order  so
often  feel  towards  men  of  great  but  not  strictly  intellectual
powers.  'Although,'  he  wrote,  on  February  lo,  'Garibaldi
allowed  himself  to  be  drawn  into  union  with  my  per-
sonal enemies,  Brofferio  and  Co.,  I  recognise  in  him  none
the  less  one  of  the  greatest  forces  of  which  Italy  can  avail
herself.'  i

Indeed  the  main  problem  for  Italy  in  the  coming  year  was
to  avoid  the  wrong  and  to  find  the  right  outlet  for  the  pent
anger  and  energy  of  the  Garibaldini,  now  growing  so  danger-
ous at  home.  The  suggestion  that  they  should  be  sent
to  liberate  Sicily,  made  in  December  by  Crispi  and  Fabrizi,
was  in  January  taken  up  by  Garibaldi's  own  friends,  Medici
and  Bertani,  who  on  the  19th  wrote  to  tell  their  secret  to
the  confidant  of  all  Italian  patriots  who  sat  in  the  British
Museum  Library. 2  '  English  policy,'  wrote  Bertani,  '  will
gain  by  the  scheme  :  Medici  and  I  will  set  to  work  to  per-
suade Garibaldi.'  Bertani,  who  later  in  the  year  was
extreme  in  opposition  to  Cavour,  in  January  still  understood
the  realities  of  the  situation,  which  he  himself  was  doing
much  to  develop  in  the  right  direction.

'  To  bring  together  Cavour  and  Garibaldi,'  so  he  wrote  to
Panizzi,  '  is  now  a  difficulty  but  still  more  a  necessity  for  our
cause.  Garibaldi  has  in  his  hand  the  people  of  Italy  and  the
King  ;  Cavour  could  supply  the  intelligence  and  the  guidance
that  both  require  through  dangerous  paths.  Cavour  with  the
King  and  Garibaldi  can  emancipate  himself  in  great  part  from
subjection  to  Napoleon.  .  .  .  You  do  not  know  perhaps  how
much  Napoleon  may  fear  and  ought  to  fear  Garibaldi,  the
only  man  able  to  disarrange  his  plans  and  force  his  hands.'

The  history  of  the  year  was  to  be  a  remarkable  fulfilment
of  all  these  words. ^

On  January  24  Garibaldi  replied  as  follows  to  Bertani's
petition  that  he  should  go  to  Sicily  : —

1  Chiala,  in,  208.  For  events  related  in  the  above  paragraphs,  see
Guerzoni,  i.  506,  507. La  Farina,  ii.  263-282. Chiala,  iii.  pp.  cccii-cccvi.

2  Bertani's  letter  to  Panizzi  of  January  19. Panizzi,  412.

3  Chiala,  iv.  pp.  xci,  xcii,  Letter  of  January  19.

GARIBALDI'S  SECOND  MARRIAGE  167

'  You  can  assure  your  friends  of  South  Italy  that  I  am  always
at  their  disposition  when  they  are  willing  really  to  act.'

and  indicated  that  the  weapons  now  being  purchased  by
his  Million  Rifles  Fund  might  serve  him  to  arm  an  expedition
against  the  Bourbons.i

On  the  very  day  when  he  wrote  this  letter,  which  we  may
regard  as  his  first  contribution  to  the  correspondence  of  the
Sicilian  expedition,  he  committed  the  most  foolish  act  of
his  private  life  in  marrying  the  daughter  of  Count  Raimondi.
At  a  critical  moment  in  the  Alpine  campaign  of  the  previous
summer,  news  of  the  Austrians  had  been  brought  to  him
across  the  mountains  by  a  young  lady,  whose  handsome
presence  and  daring  deed  appealed  to  his  facile  sense  of  the
romantic.  In  the  middle  of  December  he  became  her
father's  guest  at  Fino,  near  Como,  and  after  his  political
visit  to  Turin  he  returned  there  again  in  the  middle  of
January  i860.  That  first  month  of  his  great  year  brought
him  little  credit  either  in  public  or  private  affairs.  For-
getting his  fiifty-two  winters  and  her  youth,  and  much  else
that  it  behoved  him  to  remember,  he  proposed  marriage
and  was  accepted  by  her  and  her  family.  On  January  24,
i860,  the  ceremony  took  place  at  Fino,  but  before  nightfall
a  letter  was  put  into  his  hand  which  proved  that  she  was
in  the  habit  of  favouring  a  younger  man.  Full  of  '  bad
thoughts,'  but '  terribly  cool  as  to  his  demeanour,'  he  sought
the  house  through  till  he  came  to  his  wife's  room,  and  asked
her  if  she  had  written  the  letter.  She  confessed  it.  *  Then
see,'  he  said,  '  that  you  do  not  bear  my  name  ;  I  leave  you
for  ever.'  2

In  February  he  returned  to  dig  at  Caprera,^  bitterly
mortified,  and,  as  we  may  guess,  craving  to  find  oblivion  of
the  present  in  deeds  and  adventures  more  worthy  of  things
long  past.  As  he  moodily  broke  the  soil  in  the  cold  February
days  he  revolved  letters  and  messages  that  came  to  the

*  Cihmpoli,  127. Chiala,  iv.  p.  xcii.

2  Guerzoni,  i.  466,  508,  509. Melena,  83,  148, Mario  Sup  p.  450.

*  See  Appendix  D,  below,  sec.  I.

i68  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

island,  all  urging  him  to  go  and  liberate  the  South.  Mazzini
had  written  more  than  once  calling  on  him  to  aid  a  simul-
taneous attack  on  Sicily  and  the  Papal  States,  but  apparently
without  obtaining  an  answer. i  In  the  middle  of  February
Bertani  sent  to  Caprera  a  certain  Mignona,  a  Neapolitan
exile  of  Mazzinian  opinions,  to  arrange  for  an  attack  on  the
Bourbon  power.  Garibaldi  agreed  to  help,  on  the  condition
that  the  movement  was  strictly  monarchical,  and  wrote
on  February  20  to  the  effect  that  the  money  and  arms
collected  by  the  Million  Rifles  Fund  should  be  applied  to
this  purpose. 2

It  was  in  fact  almost  superfluous  for  Mazzini  on
February  19  and  28  to  write  from  London  beseeching
Bertani,  Medici,  and  Bixio  to  stir  up  Garibaldi. ^  They  had
been  successfully  at  work  upon  him  ever  since  January.
But  at  the  end  of  February  their  efforts  were  seconded  by
the  arrival  from  London  of  Mazzini's  Sicilian  friend,  Rosolino
Pilo,  a  still  unreconciled  Republican.  On  February  24
Pilo  wrote  to  Garibaldi  from  Genoa,  offering  himself  to
go  to  the  South  and  raise  a  rebellion,  provided  that
Garibaldi  would  promise  to  come  out  then  and  take  over
the  command.  On  March  15  Garibaldi  wrote  from  Caprera
in  reply  :

'  Arrange  with  Bertani  and  the  Directors  [of  the  Million  Rifles
Fund]  at  Milan  to  obtain  the  arms  and  requirements.  In  case
of  action  remember  that  the  programme  is  Italy  and  Victor
Emmanuel.

'  I  will  not  flinch  from  any  undertaking,  however  dangerous
it  may  be,  where  it  is  a  question  of  fighting  the  enemies  of  our
country.  But  at  the  present  time  I  do  not  think  a  revolutionary
movement  opportune  in  any  part  of  Italy,  unless  it  has  great
probability  of  success.'  *

This  famous  letter  is  no  more  than  a  repetition  of  the  con-
ditional promise  which  he  had  made  to  Bertani,  first  on
January  24  and  again  in  February  at  the  time  of  Mignona's

1 Bertani,  ii.  8,  9.  -  See  Appendix  D,  below,  sec.  II.

* Mazzini,  xi.  pp.  xlv-xlviii.  ^  Mario,  255,

CESSION  OF  NICE  AND  SAVOY  169

visit. 1  But  his  letter  of  March  15  was  addressed  to  a  man
who  took  him  at  his  word  and  started  off  then  and  there  for
Sicily  to  create  the  revolt  for  which  he  stipulated  as  the
preliminary  to  his  own  action.  On  March  25  Pilo,  with
his  companion  Corrao,  set  sail  in  a  fishing-boat  from
Genoa.  2

But  before  their  little  storm-tossed  bark  could  land  the
two  travellers  on  the  Sicilian  shore,  the  revolt  which  they
intended  to  stir  up  had  broken  out  at  Palermo  on  April  4
under  the  leadership  of  Riso  the  plumber.^  By  the  end  of
the  first  week  of  April  the  news  that  the  Sicilians  had  risen
reached  Turin,  at  the  moment  when  the  representatives  of
free  Italy,  from  the  '  Rubicon  '  to  the  Alps,  were  gathering
there  to  watch  the  unequal  Parliamentary  duel  between
Garibaldi  and  Cavour  on  the  question  of  Savoy  and  Nice.

For  now,  after  a  year  of  waiting,  Tuscany  and  Emilia
had  been  safely  annexed,  and  the  price  of  Napoleon's  con-
sent to  the  annexation  had  been  agreed  to  by  treaty.  On
March  24  Cavour  signed  away  the  provinces  of  Savoy  and
Nice  in  the  presence  of  the  French  Plenipotentiary.  *  Now,'
he  said,  rubbing  his  hands  together  in  a  way  that  he  had
when  pleased,  '  now  we  are  accomplices.'  *  Of  two  accom-
plices, one  is  certain  to  get  the  better  of  the  other,  and  Cavour
rubbed  his  hands  because  he  felt  sure  to  get  by  the  bargain
more  than  Napoleon  intended  to  give.  He  had  no  thought
of  being  contented  with  the  Central  Provinces  alone.  On
March  30,  six  days  after  he  had  signed  the  treaty,  we  find
him  writing  to  sound  Villamarina  at  Naples  as  to  the
practicability  of  a  Neapohtan  revolution.  He  would,  he
wrote,  have  wished  to  postpone  the  attack  on  the  South,
but  that  events  were  driving  him  forward.  And  indeed
the  offensive  alliance  just  formed  by  the  King  of  Naples
with  the  Pope  and  Austria  made  it  more  dangerous  for  him
to  sit  still  than  to  advance.  ^

1  Cihmpoli,  127. See  Appendix  D,  below,  sec.  III.

2  See  p.  159,  above.  ^  See  pp.  155,  156,  above.

*  Chiala,  iv.  p.  Ixviii.  *  See  pp.  138,  141,  above.

170  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

When,  therefore,  in  the  first  week  of  April  he  knew  that
the  Sicihans  were  in  revolt,  his  first  thought  was  to  send
them  aid.  He  could  hardly  at  that  moment  send  them
Garibaldi,  who  had  just  arrived  in  Turin  for  the  purpose  of
denouncing  him  as  the  traitor  who  sold  Nice.  But  on
April  6  the  War  Minister,  General  Fanti,  wrote  in  Cavour's
name  to  General  Ribotti,  then  in  command  of  the  royal
troops  at  Rimini,  to  ask  '  whether  if  the  revolution  breaks
out  in  Sicily  you  would  go  there,  first  resigning  your  com-
mission in  the  Army.'  Ribotti,  who  had  in  1848  commanded
a  brigade  of  Sicilian  revolutionists,  was  a  suitable  person  to
lead  the  insurgents,  but,  as  we  can  now  see,  no  leader  of
irregular  troops  except  Garibaldi  would  in  fact  have  had
the  least  chance  of  success  under  the  actual  conditions  in
Sicily.  Indeed,  when  Ribotti  arrived  at  Turin,  eager  to
be  sent  on  the  expedition,  he  found  Cavour  and  Fanti
already  hanging  back ;  they  expressed  to  him  their  doubts
as  to  the  seriousness  of  the  rising  in  the  island,  and  by  that
time,  it  must  also  be  remembered,  they  knew  for  certain
that  Garibaldi  was  preparing  to  go.  Ribotti,  disgusted
by  the  fickleness  of  statesmen,  returned  to  his  command
at  Rimini.  1

Garibaldi  meanwhile,  leaving  Caprera  on  April  i  and
visiting  Nice  on  the  way,^  arrived  at  Turin  as  one  of  the
duly  elected  representatives  of  his  native  city  to  protest
against  the  proposal  to  hand  it  over  to  France.  In  the
blackness  of  his  anger  against  the  man  who  had  '  made  him
a  foreigner,'  the  great  Nizzard  might  have  carried  his  pro-
test dangerously  far,  had  not  the  news  of  the  Sicilian  rising
of  April  4  reached  him  in  happy  time,  and  thenceforth
employed  more  than  half  his  thoughts  and  energies.  On
April  7  Crispi  and  Bixio,  who  received  the  news  at  Genoa
by  a  wire  from  Fabrizi  at  Malta,  started  for  Turin  to  inform
Garibaldi  that  Sicily  was  in  arms.  An  hour  before  mid-
night they  found  him,  and  claimed  that  since  the  conditions

1  Fanti,  320,321. Guardione,  ii,  419,420  {Calvino), Chiala,iv.Tp.cx.
*  King's  Mazzini,  184,  note. Guerzoni,  ii.  8,

GARIBALDI  AND  THE  KING'S  ARMY 171

of  his  often  repeated  promise  were  now  fulfilled,  he  was
bound  to  go  to  the  help  of  the  islanders.  He  consented  at
once,  provided  that  his  friend  Hudson,  the  British  Minister
at  Turin,  would  confirm  the  news.i  Next  day  (April  8),
having,  probably,  been  satisfied  by  Hudson,  he  wrote  to  the
Directors  of  the  Million  Rifles  Fund  at  Milan  to  send  the
arms  and  money  to  Genoa,  where  the  expedition  was  to  be
organised.  On  the  9th  he  applied  to  his  friend  Fauche,  the
paid  agent  of  the  Rubattino  Steamship  Company  at  Genoa,
to  procure  one  of  the  Company's  steamers — *  either  the
Piemonte  or  the  San  Giorgio,'  so  he  writes — '  to  take  me  to
Sicily  with  some  companions.'  2

These  '  companions '  were  to  be  chosen  principally
from  the  volunteers  of  1859.  Many  of  them,  including
Medici  and  Bixio,  had  retired  into  civil  life  with  their  chief
alter  his  recall  from  the  '  Rubicon '  in  November,  and  were
therefore  in  a  position  to  obey  his  summons  at  a  moment's
notice. 3  But  others  were  now  in  the  royal  forces,  being
chiefly  congregated  in  the  46th  regiment  of  the  line  under
Colonel  Gaetano  Sacchi,  a  veteran  who  had  followed
Garibaldi  in  every  campaign  since  1842.  Garibaldi's  first
idea  when  he  heard  the  news  of  the  Sicilian  rising  was  to
obtain  leave  to  take  with  him  Sacchi' s  regiment,  and
possibly  the  45th  as  well.  He  saw  Victor  Emmanuel,  who
was  sympathetic,  but  would  say  neither  '  yes  '  nor  '  no,'
probably  because  he  had  not  yet  asked  Cavour.  Garibaldi
thereupon  called  Sacchi  to  Turin,  divulged  the  plan  to  him,
and  sent  him  off  to  sound  the  old  Garibaldini  among  the
officers  of  the  46th,  who  went  nearly  mad  with  joy  at  such
a  prospect.  But  a  few  days  later  the  King,  having  con-
sulted Cavour,  not  only  refused  to  sanction  this  particular
plan,  but  told  Garibaldi  that  he  must  use  every  effort  to
preserve  the  discipline  of  the  Army,  and  must  not  carry  off
either  its  regiments  or  its  individual  members,  lest  while
he was conquering Sicily the country should be left

*  Crispi,  Diario,  i8, Guerzoni,  ii.  25. Fabrizi,  49,,

^  CiampoU,  132,  133.

'  Panizzi,  403, Medici's  letter  of  December  29,  1859.

172  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

defenceless  to  the  attack  of  Austria,  or  to  the  now
scarcely  less  dreaded  protection  of  France.  Garibaldi
sent  again  to  fetch  Sacchi  to  Turin,  and  in  the  presence
of  Trecchi,  the  King's  confidential  aide-de-camp,  told  him
the  hard  decision. i

In  this  vital  matter  Garibaldi  loyally  obeyed  the  general
spirit  of  the  King's  orders,  in  spite  of  great  temptation  to
wink  at  desertions.  Out  of  the  Thousand  who  first  sailed
for  Sicily,  only  five  were  royal  officers  ;  but  of  these  at  least
one,  Bandi,  was  deliberately  taken  by  Garibaldi  because  he
required  his  technical  experience  on  the  staff,  and  he  was
not  wrong  in  supposing  that  the  King  actually  wished  him
to  go. 2  But  great  numbers  of  privates  and  officers  were
refused  at  every  stage  of  the  expedition,  both  by  Garibaldi
himself  and  by  Bertani  and  the  agents  whom  he  left  behind
him  to  organise  the  reinforcements.  In  spite  of  the  ardent
desire  prevalent  in  all  ranks  of  the  service  to  go  to  Sicily
at  every  personal  sacrifice  of  promotion  or  career,  the
combined  efforts  of  the  authorities  and  of  Garibaldi's  friends
preserved  very  tolerable  discipline  in  the  Army,  and  so
saved  the  country  from  disaster.^

During  the  last  five  days  of  his  residence  in  the  capital
(April  8-12),  Garibaldi  was  torn  between  his  duty  to  Sicily
and  his  duty,  as  he  conceived  it,  to  Nice.  A  committee  of  his
fellow-townsmen  had  come  to  Turin  and  were  urging  him  to
save  them  from  France,  while  Crispi  and  Bertani  worked
hard  on  the  other  side,  telling  him  *  he  ought  now  to  think
of  nothing  but  Sicily.'  * The  powerful  advice  of  Sir  James

1  Guerzoni,  ii.  26,  27  and  note,  being  Sacchi's  own  evidence.  Cappel-
letti's  V.  E.  ii.  183,  184.  Turr's  Div.  11,  All  thestages  of  the  iacident  must
have  occurred  between  April  8  and  April  12,  for  Sacchi  says  he  was  on  both
occasions  fetched  to  Turin,  and  Garibaldi  was  not  in  Turin  after  April  12,
and  he  only  learnt  of  the  rising  in  Sicily  on  April  7,  midnight,

2  Bandi,  60,  61.

^  A  quantity  of  evidence  on  this  point,  for  May  i860,  will  be  found
collected  in  Milan  MSS,,  A^  B,,  Piico  xii^  No.  13,  Also  Ciampoli,  137,  and
Bandi,  64,  65,

"*  Crispi,  Diario,  19.

HUDSON'S LETTER  173

Hudson  was  thrown  into  the  Sicilian  scale.  The  British
Minister  at  Turin  understood  that  Savoy  and  Nice  were  the
necessary  price  of  Italian  unity,  and  he  made  it  his  business
to  prevent  Lord  John  Russell  and  Garibaldi  from  ruining
Italy  by  useless  resistance  to  Napoleon.  In  England,  then
nervous  of  every  increase  of  French  power,  the  feeling
against  the  cession  of  Nice  and  Savoy  was  very  strong,  and
Palmerston  talked  of  war  with  France.  Lord  John,  as
Foreign  Minister,  loudly  voiced  the  feehng  of  the  country.
But  Hudson,  who  saw  in  England's  attitude  a  danger  to
Italy,  wrote,  on  April  6,  to  his  friend  Lady  Russell  a  letter
which  was  certainly  intended  to  be  seen  by  her  husband,
and  is  more  artfully  calculated  to  convince  Lord  John  than
anything  which  its  author  could  well  have  put  into  the
diplomatic  language  of  a  dispatch.  The  abuse  of  Napoleon
III  may,  in  part,  be  set  down  to  the  desire  of  the  writer  to
win  the  confidence  of  his  readers,  and  the  rest  of  the  letter
may  still  be  read  as  one  of  the  best  statements  of  the
difficult  case  of  Nice  and  Savoy.i

Turin,  6  April,  i860.

'  My  dear  Lady  John,

.  .  .  You  mention  in  your  letter  the  name  of  that  scandal  to
royalty — Louis  Napoleon.  What  can  I  say  of  him  ?  Hypocrite
and  footpad  combined.  He  came  to  carry  out  an  "Idea,"  and
he  prigs  the  silver  spoons.  "  Take  care  of  your  pockets  "
ought  to  be  the  cry  whenever  he  appears,  either  personally  or
by  deputy.

'  But  do  not  I  beg  of  you  consider  and  confound  either  the
King  of  Sardinia  or  Cavour  as  his  accomplice.  Think  for  a
moment  on  the  condition  of  Sardinia,  who  represents  the  nascent
hope  of  Italy — think  of  the  evil  that  man  [Napoleon]  meant,
how  he  tried  to  trip  up  the  heels  of  Tuscany — establish  a  precarious
Vicarial  existence  for  the  Romagna,  and  plots  now  at  Naples ;
not  to  have  surrendered  when  he  cried  "  stand  and  deliver,"
would  have  been  to  have  risked  all  that  was  gained — would
have  given  breathing  time  to  Rome — reinforced  and  comforted

1  Printed  from  the  Russell  MSS.,  lent  me  by  Lady  Agatha  Russeil,
For  Britain's  attitude  on  the  question  see  Wal pole's  Twenty- five  Years
1.  274-278,  and  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  9,  ii. Palmerston,  ii.  190-192.

174  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Rome's  partizans  in  the  Romagna — have  induced  doubt,  fear,
and  disunion  throughout  Italy.  Judging  by  the  experience  of
the  last  eight  years  I  must  say  I  saw  no  means  of  avoiding  the
Rocks  ahead  save  by  a  sop  to  Cerberus.

'  But  do  not  lose  confidence  in  the  National  party.  Cavour
or  no  Cavour,  Victor  Emmanuel  or  another,  that  party  is  deter-
mined to  give  Italy  an  Italian  representation.  I  regret  that  the
Nizzards  (who  have  a  keen  eye  to  the  value  of  Building  Lots)
are  wrenched  from  us  by  a  French  filou — but  I  cannot  forget
that  the  Savoyards  have  constantly  upheld  the  Pope,  and  have
been  firm  and  consistent  in  their  detestation  of  Liberal  Govern-
ment in  Sardinia.  I  am  not  speaking  of  the  neutral  parts  please
remember.

'  Your  most  devoted  servant,

'  James  Hudson.'

The  writer  of  this  letter  was  equally  energetic  in  his
efforts  to  divert  Garibaldi  from  Nice.  We  know  from  Crispi's
diary  i  that  Garibaldi  consulted  the  British  Minister  in  these
critical  days  at  Turin,  and  Hudson  himself  used  in  after
years  to  describe  how  he  had  urged  his  friend  to  leave  the
inevitable  alone  and  to  go  where  he  was  really  wanted  ;
hoping  to  arouse  his  patriotic  emulation,  Hudson  told  him
that  another  expedition  to  help  the  Sicilians  was  being  fitted
out  by  an  Englishman. 2

Whether  this  adventurous  Briton  was  a  reality  or  a  bright
creation  of  diplomatic  fancy,  there  was  an  Englishman  of
flesh  and  blood  at  this  time  in  the  Piedmontese  capital
deeply  involved  in  another  conspiracy.  Laurence  Oliphant,
the  charming,  witty  and  eccentric  author  of  '  Piccadilly,'
who,  when  he  was  not  shining  in  London  society,  was
seeking  adventures  wherever  they  were  to  be  found,  from
Nicaragua  to  Poland  and  Japan,  managed  on  this  occasion
to  get  into  touch  with  the  Nizzard  Committee  at  Turin.
He  helped  them  to  persuade  Garibaldi,  who  attended  their
secret  meetings,  to  make  an  interpellation  in  the  Chamber  ;

^  Crispi,  Diario,  18.

2  I  have  this  from  Sir  Cecil  Spring  Rice,  who  had  it  from  Hudson's  own
lips.

GARIBALDI  INTERPELLATES  CAVOUR 175

but  if  that  failed  (as  Garibaldi  was  angrily  sure  that  it  would
fail,  having  no  faith  in  Parliamentary  proceedings  in  times
of  crisis),  it  was  agreed  that  he  should  go  to  Nice  and  make
there  some  demonstration  of  a  more  practical  kind.  On
April  12  the  famous  interpellation  took  place  before  a  large
and  excited  audience.  It  was  Garibaldi's  first  appearance
in  Parliament,  He  spoke  calmly,  repeating  the  constitu-
tional arguments  with  which  others  had  supplied  him,
but  his  best  point  was  a  well-founded  complaint  of  pressure
then  being  exercised  by  government  on  the  people  of  Nice
to  induce  them  to  vote  in  their  plebiscite  for  annexation  to
France.  He  asked  that  the  polling  day  at  Nice  should  at
least  be  postponed  from  April  15  till  April  22,  which  was  the
date  fixed  for  the  vote  in  Savoy.  Cavour  answered  courte-
ously and  effectively,  assuring  the  House  that  to  have
refused  to  sign  the  Treaty  of  March  24  would  have
endangered  the  State  newly  formed  by  the  annexation  of
the  Centre,  and  would  absolutely  have  destroyed  all  hope  of
further  advance.  '  Turn  your  eyes,'  he  said,  '  beyond  the
Mincio  and  beyond  the  confines  of  Tuscany.'  This  some-
what broad  hint  was  well  understood,  and  the  Chamber
escaped  from  the  subject  by  voting  a  non-committal
'  order  of  the  day.'  1

Garibaldi  left  the  Chamber  in  a  rage.  '  I  told  you  so,'
he  said  to  Oliphant :  '  that  is  what  your  fine  interpellations
and  Parliamentary  methods  always  come  to.'  That  night
the  Nizzard  Committee  met  once  more  and,  as  Oliphant,
who  was  there  present,  reports,  a  plan  was  decided  on  more
suited  to  Garibaldi's  taste.  All  knew  that  the  plebiscite,
manipulated  by  Government,  would  go  heavily  for  annexa-
tion if  taken  on  April  15.  It  was  therefore  decided  that
Garibaldi  should  '  leave  Genoa  in  a  steamer  to  be  chartered
for  the  purpose,  with  two  hundred  men,'  and,  sailing  to  Nice,
should  enter  the  town  just  after  the  vote  had  been  taken,
smash  the  ballot-boxes,  and  scatter  the  papers,  so  rendering

1  Cam. Dep., April 12, i860. Chiala, iv. pp. Ixxviii  -  Ixxxiv.
Guerzoni,  ii.  9. Oliphant,  166-171, Br.  Pari.  Papers,  ii,  p.  182.

176  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

a  new  ballot  necessary.  It  was  believed  that  this  demon-
stration by  Garibaldi,  followed  by  an  active  canvass  by  the
Nizzard  Committee,  would  so  change  public  opinion  that
when  the  new  plebiscite  was  taken,  the  result  might  go
against  the  wishes  of  the  government.  Garibaldi,  for  his
part,  having  smashed  the  ballot-boxes,  would  sail  for  Sicily
— but  with  very  little  chance,  after  such  an  exploit,  of
support  by  Cavour  or  of  toleration  by  Napoleon.

On  the  same  evening  (April  12),  Garibaldi  held  another
meeting  in  his  own  lodgings  in  the  Via  S.  Teresa,  with  the
Sicihan  Committee,  who  strongly  opposed  the  mad  Nizzard
project.!  There  were  present  Bertani  (who  had  come  from
Genoa  on  purpose),  Medici,  Bixio,  and  Finzi,  one  of  the
Directors  of  the  MilUon  Rifles  Fund.  It  was  agreed  that
Garibaldi  should  go  to  Sicily  with  200  men  armed  with
Enfield  rifles,  which  Finzi  undertook  to  supply  from  the
armoury  of  the  Fund  at  Milan. 2

Next  morning  (April  13),  Garibaldi  started  for  Genoa,^
with  the  Sicihan  and  Nizzard  plans  both  in  his  head.
Ohphant,  who  had  no  share  in  the  secrets  of  the  Sicilian
scheme,  travelled  with  him  in  a  reserved  railway  carriage.
They  held  scarcely  any  conversation  on  the  way,  because
Garibaldi  was  engaged  in  reading  an  immense  budget  of  letters
received  that  morning.  The  Enghshman  observed  him  tear-
ing each  of  them  into  httle  bits,  until  the  floor  of  the  carriage
looked  Uke  '  a  gigantic  waste-paper  basket.'  Ohphant
wondered  at  the  time  what  all  these  letters  could  be,  but
afterwards  learnt  that  they  were  answers  to  the  call  for
volunteers  for  Sicily.

Arrived  at  Genoa,  Oliphant  went  off,  at  Garibaldi's
request,  to  charter  a  dihgence  in  which  a  first  batch  of
conspirators  should  go  to  Nice  to  prepare  the  way  there
for  Garibaldi  and  his  two  hundred  ballot-breakers.  But
when  Oliphant  returned  from  the  coach  of&ce  he  found  the

1  Cnspi,  Diario,  19,  sub.  April  12.

"  See  Appendix  F,  sec.  I.,  below.

3  See  Appendix  E,  below,  for  the  date  of  his  return  to  Genoa,

THE  RETURN  TO  GENOA  177

whole  plan  abandoned,  once  and  for  ever,  as  being  likely  to
jeopardise  the  more  important  Sicilian  project.

'  I  repaired,'  he  writes,  '  to  the  hotel  which  Garibaldi  had
indicated  as  his  address,  and  which  was  a  rough,  old-fashioned,
second-rate-looking  place  upon  the  quay.i  There  was  no  doubt
about  the  General  being  there,  for  there  was  a  great  hurrying
in  and  out,  and  a  buzzing  of  young  men  about  the  door,  as  though
something  of  importance  was  going  on  inside.  Before  being
admitted  to  the  General,  I  was  made  to  wait  until  my  name  was
taken  in  to  him.  It  was  evident  that  precautions  were  being
taken  in  regard  to  admissions  into  his  presence.  After  a  few
moments  I  was  shown  into  a  large  room,  in  which  twenty  or  thirty
men  were  at  supper,  and  at  the  head  of  the  table  sat  Garibaldi.
He  immediately  made  room  for  me  next  him  ;  and  before  I  had
time  to  tell  him  the  result  of  my  mission  at  the  diligence  office,
accosted  me  thus  :  "  Amico  mio,  I  am  very  sorry,  but  we  must
abandon  all  idea  of  carrying  out  our  Nice  programme.  Behold
these  gentlemen  from  Sicily  ...  I  had  hoped  to  be  able  to
carry  out  this  little  Nice  affair  first,  for  it  is  only  a  matter  of  a
few  days ;  but  much  as  I  regret  it,  the  general  opinion  is  that
we  shall  lose  all  if  we  try  for  too  much."  '

Garibaldi  offered  to  take  him  to  Sicily  instead,  and  it
was  afterwards  the  regret  of  Oliphant's  life  that,  owing  to
engagements  at  home,  he  refused  the  chance  of  representing
England  among  '  the  Thousand.'  2

So  Garibaldi  accepted  the  cruel  severance  that  hence-
forth divided  his  old  home  from  his  country,  the  haunts  of
his  boyhood  and  the  house  of  his  parents  from  the  patriotic
ambition  of  his  life.  Those  of  us  who  have  never  undergone
this  bitterness,  and  yet  more  those  who  have  never  had  the
fortune  to  love  one  beautiful  place  out  of  all  the  world  with

^  I  have  no  doubt  this  was  the  Albergo  delta  Felicitcl,  a  picturesque  old
house  still  standing  high  above  the  quay,  on  the  top  of  the  shops  and  the
old  arcade,  nearly  opposite  the  Palazzo  S.  Giorgio,  in  the  heart  of  maritime
Genoa.  For  Canzio  told  me  that  he  well  remembered  Garibaldi  coming
there  on  the  day  of  his  return  from  Turin,  and,  entering  the  inn,  asking
him  (Canzio),  '  Will  the  Genoese  Carabineers  be  ready  for  Sicily  ?  '

^  Oliphant,  172-179. See  Appendix  E,  below,  Laurence  Oliphant's  Story.

178  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

the  love  that  is  rooted  in  the  memory  of  childhood,  may
censure  him  because  he  thought  too  fondly  of  the  little  har-
bour with  its  seafaring  folk  that  nestled  close  under  the
rugged  hill.  The  cosmopolitan  wanderer  who  wearies  of  the
glittering  esplanade  at  Nice,  on  the  wrong  side  of  that  hill,
will  not  understand  what  his  feeling  was.  Cavour  no  doubt
was  right,  and  Garibaldi  could  not  see  why,  because  he  did
not  understand  European  politics.  And  so  he  never  forgave
Cavour,  and  misinterpreted  all  his  actions  in  the  great  year
that  followed.  It  was  a  pity.  But  his  own  simple  words,
spoken  to  his  aide-de-camp,  Bandi,  a  few  days  before  they
sailed  together  to  Sicily,  carry  his  condemnation  or  his
apology  according  to  the  spirit  in  which  we  choose  to  read
them  : —

'  This  man,  you  know,  has  sold  my  fatherland.  Poor  Nizza  !
Well,  all  the  same  I  deal  with  him  as  a  good  friend  and  ask  him
to  give  me  a  thousand  firearms,  so  that  we  can  go  and  get  our-
selves cut  to  pieces  in  Sicily.  It  seems  to  me  not  to  be  asking
much,  eh  ?  '

Of  Victor  Emmanuel,  who  for  his  part  also  had  given  up
the  mountain  cradle  of  the  House  of  Savoy,  '  he  spoke,'  says
Bandi,  '  with  much  affection.'  i

1  Bandi,  3 1 .  Mrs.  Browning  put  the  pathos  of  the  situation  of  Garibaldi
and  Nice  into  the  famous  poem,  Garibaldi,  in  Last  Poems,  1862.

CHAPTER  X

THE VILLA  AT  QUARTO. THE PREPARATIONS

'  Degno  ei  senza  dubbio  di  essere  comparato  ai  migliori  romanl,  se  In  lul
il  senso  umano  non  fosse  piii  profondo  e  gentile  che  non  potesse  per  alcune
parti  e  per  molte  ragioni  essere  in  quelli,  se  egli  non  avesse  di  piii  quell'
istinto  di  cavalleresche  avventure  che  e  proprio  delle  razze  nuove  e  miste,'
— Carducci,  Per  la  morU  di  Giuseppe  Garibaldi.

'  Beyond  doubt  he  is  worthy  to  be  compared  to  the  best  of  the  ancient
Romans,  were  it  not  that  in  him  the  sense  of  humanity  was  more  profound
and  tender  than,  for  many  reasons,  it  could  be  in  them,  at  least  on  cer-
tain sides ;  were  it  not  also  that  he  possessed,  in  a  higher  degree,  the
impulse  towards  chivalrous  adventures  peculiar  to  young  and  mixed  races.'

In  the  oldest  district  of  Genoa  that  hangs  crowded  on  the
hillside  above  the  port,  the  deep,  sunless  alleys,  though  too
narrow  for  horse  traffic,  are  cheerful  with  the  hfe  of  an  active
and  prosperous  population.  Here,  in  the  centre  of  the
maritime  enterprise  and  democratic  patriotism  of  Italy,
Mazzini  had  been  born  and  bred,  and  from  his  lands  of  exile
he  had  long  exerted  over  his  native  town  an  influence  which
now  belonged  rather  to  Cavour  and  Garibaldi.^  Much
indeed  had  changed  since  Garibaldi  himself,  as  a  sea  captain
of  twenty-six,  had  sought  to  head  a  rebellion  in  this  very
city  against  the  House  of  Savoy,  and  after  waiting  in  vain
two  hours  in  the  open  street  for  any  one  to  join  him,  had
fled  over  the  mountains  for  his  life. 2

Genoa  was  Italy's  port  of  departure  for  the  Hberation  of
the  South. From  Genoa  the  unfortunate Pisacane  had

'  Chiala,  iv,  p.  cxll.

2  Trevelyan's  Gar^  Rome,  18,  19, Gtterzoni,  i,  41,  42.

179

N 2

i8o  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

sailed  three  years  before,  and  Pilo  in  March  of  the  current
year.  And  now  in  mid  April  preparations  were  making  for
a  happier  enterprise.  In  the  port  lay  the  Rubattino  Com-
pany's steamers,  of  which  the  agent  Fauche  had  promised
one  to  Garibaldi ;  and  up  the  hill,  in  Bertani's  house,  sat
the  men  who  were  organising  the  expedition.  Already
carefully  picked  volunteers  from  the  patriotic  cities  of  the
North  were  coming  by  invitation  to  report  themselves  to
the  Committee  and  to  take  up  lodgings  assigned  them  in
the  town.  During  the  three  weeks  that  elapsed  before  the
expedition  started  there  was  a  constant  increase  in  the
number  of  these  strangers,  and  in  the  excitement  of  the
Genoese  at  the  preparations  known  to  be  going  on  in  their
midst.  Secret  agents,  not  only  of  Cavour,  but  of  govern-
ments hostile  to  the  Italian  cause,  were  there  to  watch  the
game,  and  between  April  17  and  May  i,  the  Neapolitan
Foreign  Office  was  at  least  four  several  times  alarmed  by
premature  reports  of  the  departure  of  Garibaldi. 1

Within  a  day  or  two  of  his  arrival  from  Turin  upon  this
busy  scene,  Garibaldi  wisely  withdrew  himself  from  the  gaze
of  the  curious  to  a  villa  at  Quarto,  some  three  miles  outside
the  town,  along  the  eastern  Riviera.  The  Villa  Spinola,  as
it  was  then  called  (now  the  Villa  Cosci),  rises  within  its  own
little  walled  garden,  at  a  place  where  two  country  lanes  meet.
It  stands  in  a  district  of  vineyards  and  scattered  houses,  a
quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  rocky  sea-coast,  from  which  it  is
completely  cut  off  by  the  enclosed  woods  and  pleasure
grounds  of  the  Palazzo  Spinola.  The  Villa  Spinola  was  in
i860  a  yellow  painted  house  of  two  floors  above  the
rez-de-chaussee  ;  2  the  first  floor  only  was  inhabited — by  the
family  of  Augusto  Vecchi.  This  veteran,  one  of  Garibaldi's
dearest  friends,  was  no  longer  able  to  follow  him  to  battle,
but  in  1849  he  had  kept  close  to  his  side  through  that  fierce
melee,  prolonged  from  midnight  to  summer  dawn,  when  the
French  had  burst  over  the  last  defences  of  the  Janiculum.
He  now  received  no  notice  of  Garibaldi's  visit. He  and  his

1  Palermo  MS.,  Polizia,  No.  1238.

s  It  Is  now  painted  red,  and  another  storey  has  been  added.

THE  VILLA  SPINOLA  i8i

son  were  leaning  out  of  the  window  when  they  saw  a  carriage
drive  up  the  lane  from  Genoa,  and  a  man  in  the  ordinary
black  coat  of  civilisation  descend  from  it  at  their  door.  It
was  the  General  himself,  whom  they  rushed  down  to  welcome
with  transports  of  joy.i

From  the  northern  bedroom  in  Vecchi's  apartments  on  the
first  floor,  where  Garibaldi  slept  and  held  his  consultations,  he
could  see  across  the  neighbouring  vineyards  the  full  sweep  of
the  Genoese  mountains,  their  lower  slopes  clothed  in  wood
and  dotted  with  white  buildings,  the  upper  ridges  naked
against  the  sky-Une,  crowned  by  the  cross  on  the  top  of
Monte  Fascia,  and  by  the  old  forts  used  in  Massena's
defence  of  Genoa,  which  had  enabled  the  First  Napoleon  to
free  Italy  at  Marengo.  Here  for  the  three  weeks  before  the
sailing  of  the  Thousand,  Garibaldi  lived  secluded,  often  in
the  garden  playing  at  bowls  with  Vecchi,  or  digging  hard  to
ensure  his  health  for  the  coming  campaign.  But  he  seldom
went  outside  the  wall  of  the  enclosure,  for  all  around  lurked
spies  and  busy-bodies,  whom  the  General's  younger  followers
from  time  to  time  chased  down  the  lane,  not  without  un-
seemly violence,  especially  when  the  prowler  was  a  priest.
But  the  Villa  was  often  thronged  with  those  who  came  and
went  on  high  matters.  Day  by  day  the  organisers  of  the
expedition  appeared  from  Genoa  ;  sometimes,  too,  a
messenger  from  Sicily,  and  sometimes  an  emissary  from
Cavour.2

During  the  first  days  of  his  residence  at  the  Villa  Spinola,
Garibaldi  hourly  expected  to  hear  of  the  arrival  at  Genoa  of
200  good  Enfield  rifles  from  the  MiUion  Rifles  Fund  at  Milan.
He  was  determined,  when  these  had  come,  to  start  for  Sicily
with  200  followers  in  the  small  steamer  Piemonte,^  and  it  can
hardly  be  doubted,  from  what  we  now  know  of  the  real  state

^  Jack  La  Bolina,  114,  115.

2  My  account  of  the  villa  and  the  life  there  in  April-May,  i860,  is  partly
drawn  from  notes  taken  on  a  visit  which  I  made  there  with  Canzio  himself,
not  a  year  before  he  died.  Since  he  was  one  of  those  who  had  admission
to  the  villa  during  the  preparations,  he  was  able  to  tell  me  much.

^  Appendix  F,  below,  sec.  I.,  and  Luzio  Giorn.  d' It.

xSz  GARIBALDI  AST)  ri-II THOUSAND

of  Sidhr  after  the  rebel  defeat  at  Caiini  on  April  iS.  that
if  he  had  gone  with,  this  little  band,  they  TSTonld  tave  perished
Lr  in  ahucst  unaided  struggle  with  so.ckx)  regnlars.  Bnt  a
niir~er  of  aondenis  p'?stponed  their  sailing  ircm  day  to  day
and  from  "wreek  to  week,  till  a  some'vrhat  fnllei  kn:~-f  igr  of
tije  real  course  of  the  SidL&an  levolt,  and  the  ccnstant
streaiQ  of  eager  vclnnteer?  into  Gen:a. indnred h^~ to

—  ti " -t :  _7f  r^r.-mnm,  as  it  proved,  "with  which  rvfn  ne

7hf  nrst  of  these  hicky  delays  was  cansed  by  the  bqh-

im-ii  ::  the  2t:o  Enheids  iram  Mil?p.  Befrr?  l—^ing
r^_r_n  : :  r  ^noa  Garibaldi  had  ordered  Finzi.  thi  Z  nr : : :  r  :i
his  Milhon  RineE  Jnni  i:  IZilm  ::  seno  t: Z-:i  nfrs  Lni

beoinsr  the  news  tram  Sidiy  bad  been  so  bad  th=  t  he  th  :-:ght
:n -Oi lion SmlLlo: iririvro it  Ihse  "  eood '  r^ws

~"~  • inr-ri-.e.  on  A-p-i^  J.6,  at  xeiigtn  ijcnt  t^  o_r  z in_»

--^  -"- ::l  "'..''-""- —  "P^h^r^  P"-~—  --  T.-\  "htain  th—  2''y?-  ~. — -  ~= -  —  -^

S^ivtmn  ;1  Ihlm ::hiiie  any  :: the  Z2,ooo  nrearms  m

of  the  Fnnd.-5

It  has  often  besi  disputed  wbether  D'AzegHo  acted  in

^sryoK,  n.  52,33- Sj^siZBicx s  .'---

■Arofn-^  X.  DekTw.  sec  L X— -  . --  . :  _' .'•  ;_: ^ .-nr,  15,

THE  RIFLES  SEQUESTRATED  183

writing  to  Rendu  a  n:-*':i  la"rr  a-i  ~z  Ainir^  irrr^azio
two  months  later,  states  that  he  acted  on  Lie  .7:1  r  77.  rut-
'  I  had  in  my  hands/  he  writes,  *  12,000  firearz:  5  : :  the

Garibaldian  Subscription,  which  I  sis^ri^ti  t-L  r:  :z7:
quite  other  hands  than  his.'  The  fear  ~l=  ^ :  iT-iless  ;  r  izzL
the  Director  of  the  Fond,  who  made  lie  a7  7_:i7::7-  ~l5
a  friend  equally  of  Cavour  and  of  Garibalc:  i~  i  :T77i:7__7
his  presence  ought  t;  ':ia  .-3  ittz  5izi:::t:i7  r7i7i7:7rr  if  i-7.i7
any  Mazzinian  intngiie.  Zi:  Tir  I-:'~t7z:7  "is  in  :aci
taken  by  surprise  and  much  iisiizij  :  Sr  i  zy  1  7ts7  :z5-:ij.ty
as  unexpected  as  it  was  grave.i  Undrr  tJiT=c  ;:-ii7ions,
his  own  view  of  what  Piedmontese  policy  cngjit  to  be  li  ih
differed  profoundly  from  that  of  Cavour.  swavrd  his  ir : .-: : z
in  this  sudden  crisis.  An  upn^hT  —  iz  '"-^iire  r-rryT-.hmg
else,  D'AzegHo  felt  a  strong  averaon,  ai  li  :  -iTEi-ii  :r_  775
letters,  from  the  pohcy  of  arming  guerlli  zmii  iz^Tii:  77.r
Bourbons  in  Sicily  while  keeping  77  iij.i—iTi:  rtlaTiiiTi
with  their  court  at  Naples.  Atlz  :7_r7r::77  is  the  repre-
sentative of  government  on  tbe  sp::.  n-e  :;!:  :  i-znd  net  to
allow  the  Director  of  the  MiUion  Rifles  Fmi  7:  7i>r  77.r
arms  purchased  by  that  Fund  in  order  to  aTeaih  1  Tr.fzi-v
power.*

Meanwhile  the  Committee  at  Ge-:i  "rre  "i^^Iti^  iiiL-
patient  for  the  rifles,  and  on  April  17  Brrraii:  sent  Crispi  to
Milan  to  inquire.  He  found  Fiziz:  7J1777  :-  ijie  iSth,  and
heard  what  had  happened.  Ct:  77:7  7::7:  Finzi  and  Cri^
went  together  to  Turin.  aTii.  each  had  a  separate  interview
with  Farini,  now  Victor  ErTinaiiiiers  Minisier  cf  rhe  iTiterier.
Farini  had  in  December  last,  as  Dictator  cf  Ez77l7a  s'az':^
sympathy  with  the idea :: :he expediiira "hfTi Crlsri

s.r~  at  tiler  iniaview. See  J^:  _~ .

7 ,'  wfi.^  aofe^  fee  lyAzg-Z— :  ; -errrr Tr

- — ^  retwrtatioa  tfi»crf-.r ^  i

/  yaifi^Bsek;  :i5_i  _  7  ir\-
' ■? S^OSl  El  r " r  r ~ ;  1 j  ~
i  V  avcnr  ;  -ii:

Ht ;  :  7.ie  saTPe  x'r ^  ::  ^rr^.^^-

»  Such

VTiS

p_-.-^ :_

83.  84.

3  Fi-ir
Rendu : —

- -^ ■

X  -

ctmservrer.

le:

baWi  .  .

pcravair  ;;

: 17:

:: .;  ; ; ;

et  eii%-c've-

les  ;

._s_;  i_:--:  r

Now  Cavonr's

policv  al

repuviLares

2L5  c

Lishc-esi.

i84  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

broached  it  to  him  at  Modena.  Now,  however,  he  told
Crispi  that  he  disapproved  an  expedition  to  Sicily  at  this
juncture  of  Italian  and  European  affairs,  especially  since
the  squadre  in  the  mountains  round  Palermo  had  been  dis-
persed.i  To  Finzi,  however,  the  Minister  held  a  different
language,  suggesting  that,  although  he  could  not  in  Cavour's
absence  take  upon  himself  to  overrule  D'Azeglio,  Garibaldi
might  obtain  1500  guns  from  the  National  Society,  of  which
La  Farina  was  Secretary.^

Cavour,  indeed,  had  already,  before  departing  for
Tuscany  on  the  15th,  offered  these  arms  of  La  Farina  and
the  National  Society  to  aid  an  invasion  of  Sicily  by  Sicilian
exiles  under  La  Masa.^  La  Masa  himself  was  not  a  man
whom  Cavour  could  have  expected  to  lead  such  an  expedi-
tion with  success  :  a  popular  figure  at  Palermo  in  1848,  of  a
somewhat  theatrical  type,  he  was  devoted  and  active,  and
had  influence  on  the  lower  orders  in  the  island,  but  he  was
quite  devoid  of  military  talent.  It  can  hardly  be  doubted
that  Cavour,  when  he  told  La  Farina  to  act  with  La  Masa
and  supply  him  with  arms,  trusted  the  wit  of  the  two
Sicilians  to  call  in  the  only  man  who  could  save  their
country.  They  certainly  acted  at  once  on  that  assumption,
for  on  April  17th  they  both  came  to  Genoa  to  concert
measures  with  Garibaldi.  On  the  19th  Crispi  returned
with  the  news  that  there  was  no  hope  of  obtaining  the
Enfields  of  the  Million  Rifles  Fund.  On  the  20th  a  great
gathering  was  held  in  the  Villa  Spinola,  a  truce  was  called
to  all  personal  and  partisan  feuds,  La  Masa  and  the  Sicilians
gladly  put  themselves  under  the  orders  of  Garibaldi,  and
La  Farina  agreed  to  supply  the  weapons  of  the  National
Society  to  arm  the  joint  expedition.*  On  the  same  day
Crispi  wrote  in  cipher  to  his  friends  in  Sicily  : —

1  Crispi,  Diario,  19,  ^  Fauche  (P.),  85  (Finzi' s  letter).

^  La  Masa  (Sic),  iii.,  is  the  first-liand  evidence.  Oddo,  154.  Chiala,
Iv.  pp.  cxxii.,  cxxiii,  accepts  the  story.  The  letter  of  La  Farina  to  Cavour
on  April  24,  La  Farina,  ii.  313,  proves  Cavour's  complicity  in  the  handing
over  of  the  arms  of  the  National  Society.

*  Crispi,  Diario,  19.  La  Masa  [Sic),  iii-v.  La  Farina,  ii.  313.
Ber/atii,  ii.  32-34,

ARRIVAL  OF  THE  MUSKETS  185

•  About  the  25th  of  the  month  I  with  others  under  the  com-
mand of  Garibaldi,  having  arms  in  plenty,  will  come  to  Sicily  ;
be  sure  to  expect  us  between  Sciacca  and  Girgenti.'  1

But  again  there  was  a  fortunate  delay.  The  arms
ordered  by  La  Farina,  registered  as  cases  of  '  books,'  did  not
arrive  at  Genoa  station  until  the  24th.  Then,  by  the  com-
plicity of  the  Vice-Governor  of  Genoa,  Pietro  Magenta,  to
whom  Cavour  had  passed  the  word,  some  thousand  of  the
'  books  '  were  taken  by  Bixio  from  the  station  to  the  Villa
Spinola,  where  they  awaited  the  moment  of  embarkation. 3
When  Garibaldi  saw  the  volumes  unpacked  at  the  Villa,  he
was  deeply  disappointed  to  find  how  much  they  differed
from  his  fine  library  which  D'Azeglio  had  sequestrated  at
Milan.  They  were  smooth-bore  muskets,  rusty  with  age,
which  had  been  converted  from  flint-locks  into  percussion,
and  finally  sold  as  obsolete  by  the  military  authorities.
They  were,  he  bitterly  exclaimed,  so  much  'old  iron.' ^
But  since  nothing  better  was  to  be  had,  he  and  his  men  were
ready  to  face  the  Neapolitan  rifles  with  the  same  inadequate
type  of  weapon  with  which  they  had  faced  the  Austrian
rifles  in  the  previous  summer.

Meanwhile  Victor  Emmanuel  was  making  a  triumphal
progress  through  his  newly  acquired  territories.  At  the
moment  of  leaving  Turin  for  Florence  on  April  15  he  wrote,
by  Cavour's  advice,  a  remarkable  letter  to  his  '  dear  cousin  '
of  Naples  : —

'  We  have  reached,'  so  wrote  the  Northern  to  the  Southern
King,  '  a  time  in  which  Italy  can  be  divided  into  two  powerful

1  Paolucci,  Riso,  48,  49.

2  La  Farina,  ii.  313,  note.  Chtala,  iv.  p.  cxxiii,  note,  and  clxii,  note,
Bianchi's  Cavour,  94.  Biundi,  ii.  10.  Cam.  Dep.,  June  19,  1863,  Bixio's
own  statement.  On  what  day  Bixio  moved  tlie  arms  from  the  station  to
the  villa  I  am  not  certain;  according  to  some  accounts,  not  till  May  3,  4. —
Mazzini,  xi.  p.  Ixxvii.  They  were  moved  by  boat  through  the  port  of
Genoa. — Bianchi's  Cavour,  94.  Bertani  complained  that  La  Farina  would
only  let  1000  out  of  the  1500  be  taken— Ire  Pol.  53. Guerzoni,  ii.  38,  note.

3  Conv.  Eng.  Conv.  Canzio.  Zeusi,  132.  Baratieri,  403.  Mazzini,  xi,
p.  Ixxvii. Sampieri,  22,

)

i86  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

states  of  the  north  and  of  the  south,  which,  if  they  adopt  the
same  national  pohcy,  may  uphold  the  great  idea  of  our  times —
National  Independence.  But  in  order  to  realise  this  concep-
tion, it  is,  I  think,  necessary  that  your  Majesty  abandon  the
course  you  have  held  hitherto.  .  .  .  The  principle  of  dualism,
if  it  is  well  established  and  honestly  pursued,  can  still  be
accepted  by  Italians.  But  if  you  allow  some  months  to  pass
without  attending  to  my  friendly  suggestion,  your  Majesty  will
perhaps  experience  the  bitterness  of  the  terrible  words — too  late.'  i

Was  this  a  serious  offer  of  friendship,  or  an  ultimatum  to
serve  as  the  prelude  to  hostilities  ?  The  King  who  penned
the  letter  had,  a  few  days  before,  heard  Garibaldi's  plans
from  Garibaldi's  own  lips,  and  had  bade  him  only  not  to
take  the  royal  troops.  The  Minister  who  approved  the  letter
had,  nine  days  before,  asked  General  Ribotti  to  head  the
insurrection  in  Sicily,  and  had  yet  more  recently  arranged
that  the  muskets  of  the  National  Society  should  be  used
for  a  similar  expedition  under  other  leadership.  Possibly
if  Francis  II  had  repented,  Cavour  and  his  master  might
have  been  glad  to  act  in  the  spirit  of  their  proposal.  But
they  knew  that  he  would  not  repent,  that  he  was  plotting
for  their  destruction  with  Austria  and  the  Pope,  and  one
cannot  help  suspecting  that  the  letter  was  composed  rather
for  the  satisfaction  of  their  own  consciences,  and  for
the  edification  of  Europe  and  of  posterity,  than  for  the
benefit  of  the  Prince  to  whom  its  wise  words  were  so  vainly
addressed.

The  reception  by  the  Florentines  both  of  Victor  Em-
manuel and  of  his  Minister  showed  the  warmest  gratitude  and
enthusiasm.  But  Cavour  had  no  time  to  waste  in  enjoying
the  sweets  of  a  popularity  which  came  to  him  late  in  life  and
which  he  valued  chiefly  as  giving  power  to  his  hand.  On
April  21  he  left  the  King  in  Tuscany,  and  sailed  from  Spezia
on  board  Admiral  Persano's  flagship.  Next  day  he  landed
at  Genoa,  where  he  stayed  more  than  twenty-four  hours  to
take  stock  of  the  situation. 2

1  CMala,  iv.  pp.  cxx.,  cxxi.

2  Persano,  14,  15. Chiala,  ili.  240  ;  iv,  p.  cxl.

SIRTORI  SEES  CAVOUR  187

During  this  brief  residence  in  Genoa,  the  Prime  Minister
received  an  emissary  from  the  Villa  Spinola.i  Garibaldi
was  too  angry  with  the  man  who  had  '  made  him  a  foreigner  '
to  open  negotiations  himself.  But  he  and  his  lieutenants
recognised  that  their  success  depended  on  the  permission
and  in  some  degree  on  the  support  of  the  government,  and
Bertani  did  not  raise  objections  when  Sirtori  offered  to  go
and  call  upon  Cavour.2

Sirtori  is  one  of  the  most  attractive  figures  in  the  Gari-
baldian  epic.  Having  begun  Ufe  as  a  priest,  he  had  studied
and  doubted  in  Paris.  Soon  after  1840  he  had  become  a  lay-
man and  a  philosopher,  and  in  1848  a  soldier.  He  remained
all  his  life  a  mystic  and  a  Puritan.  His  emaciated  form  and
sad,  benevolent,  ascetic  face  marked  a  man  living  apart
from  his  fellows,  and  drawing  from  another  and  a  purer  world
of  thought  and  feehng,  the  power  which  enabled  him  to
dominate  them  in  council  and  in  war.  He  stands  with  Bixio,
Medici,  and  Cosenz  at  the  head  of  the  Garibaldini  for  military
talent ;  and  these  four  fine  soldiers  were  moreover  their
General's  best  advisers  in  politics,  on  which  they  looked  with
less  distorted  vision  than  those  civilians  whom  Garibaldi  was
accustomed  to  consult.  Sirtori,  who  in  his  youth  of  dreams
and  noble  illusions  had  been  a  more  ardent  Republican  than
Mazzini,  now  not  only  was  a  staunch  Monarchist,  but
realised  the  necessity  that  his  companions  in  arms  should
have  the  government  behind  them,  if  the  slender  chances
of  success  which  he  predicted  for  the  SiciHan  expedition
were  not  to  vanish  altogether.s

Sirtori  therefore  visited  Cavour  and  laid  the  whole  of
the  plans  of  the  party  at  Villa  Spinola  before  him,  em-
phasising their  lack  of  means  and  the  dangers  of  their
course.4 He  acknowledged  that  a  twofold  movement  was

1  Sirtori's  visit  was  probably  on  the  morning  of  the  23rd,  as  stated  in
Chiala,  iv.  p.  cxii.  Some  authorities  erroneously  assign  a  later  date,  but
Cavour  was  not  in  Genoa  except  on  April  22,  23,  and  we  know  that  the
interview  was  in  Genoa.

2  Cam.  Dep.,  June  ig,  1863. Sirtori's  speech.

^  Sirtori,  passim,  and  many  other  sources,  printed  and  oral,
*  Mazsini,  xi.  p.  Ixxxi.

i88  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

designed :  an  attack  on  the  Papal  territories  by  way  of  Um-
bria  and  the  Marches,^  and  an  expedition  led  by  Garibaldi
himself  against  Sicily.  Cavour's  reply,  reported  by  Sirtori,
is  clear  enough  : —

'  As  to  the  expedition  to  the  Marches,  he  said  absolutely :
"  No  ;  the  government  will  oppose  it  by  every  means  in  its  power."
As  to  the  expedition  to  Sicily,  Cavour  said  exactly  these  words  :
"  Well  and  good.  Begin  at  the  south,  to  come  up  again  by  the
north.  Whe?i  it  is  a  question  of  undertakings  of  that  kind,  how-
ever bold  they  may  be.  Count  Cavour  will  be  second  to  none."  Those
were  his  precise  words.  He  said  this  naturally  referring  to  aU
those  means  by  which  the  government  without  compromising
itself  could  help  the  expedition.  He  promised  to  help  it,  pro-
vided the  responsibility  of  the  government  was  completely
concealed.'  ^

Cavour  then  left  Genoa  for  Turin,  and  next  day  (April  24)
a  note  was  sent  after  him  by  La  Farina,  in  which  the  latter
described  the  coalition  of  himself  and  La  Masa  with
Garibaldi,  and  referred  to  the  muskets  which  he  was
supplying  for  their  enterprise.^  Yet  although  Cavour
was  prepared  to  arm  the  expedition  in  case  it  started,
he  was  not  eager  that  it  should  start,  because  he  greatly
feared  its  destruction.  The  melancholy  Sirtori,  who
always  told  Garibaldi  that  he  would  go  with  him,  but
that  he  thought  they  would  all  perish,*  could  not  have
described  the  chances  to  Cavour  in  very  glowing  colours.
Neither  was  the  Prime  Minister  deceived  as  to  the  collapse  of
the  rebellion  in  Sicily,  for  Pilo  and  his  compatriots  were  not
sending  to  him  those  exaggerated  reports  with  which  they
strove  to  draw  Garibaldi  to  their  island. ^  Failure,  then,
was  probable,  and  the  scandal  before  a  hostile  Europe  of
an  unsuccessful  buccaneering  expedition,  coupled  with  the

1  This  was  so. Bandi,  11,  12. Bertani,  ii.  33.

-  Cam.  Dep.,  June  19,  1863. See  Appendix  F,  below,  sec.  II,

2  La  Farina,  ii.  313,

*  Crispi,  Diario,  20,  notes  that  Sirtori  said  this  at  the  Villa  Spinola  on
the  2^rd,  which  was  the  very  day  when  he  saw  Cavour.

^  Ma,!zini,  xi.  p.  ixxiii. Paolucci,  Pilo,  251,  252,  Riso,  47.

THE  '  FIVE  HUNDRED  '  READY  189

appalling  catastrophe  of  Garibaldi's  death,  would,  as  Cavour
fully  reaUsed,  put  back  Italy's  hopes  for  years  to  come.
On  April  23  and  24  he  sent  Frappolli  and  other  agents  to  the
Villa  Spinola  to  try  and  persuade  Garibaldi  that  the  risks
were  too  great,  and  that  he  would  perish  as  Murat  and
Pisacane  had  perished  before  him.i  These  warnings  had
some  effect,  and  Crispi  found  the  General  hesitating  and
anxious  after  FrappoUi's  visit  on  the  24th.3  But,  a  day  or
two  afterwards,  the  28th  was  fixed  for  the  departure,  and
the  Vice-Governor  of  Genoa  duly  notified  the  fact  to  the
authorities  at  Turin.s  Everything  this  time  was  ready.
La  Farina's  muskets  had  arrived.  Fauche  had  been  induced
to  provide  a  second  and  larger  steamer,  the  Lombardo,  in
addition  to  the  Piemonte,^  and  the  volunteers  chosen  and
enrolled  in  Genoa  by  now  numbered  500.5  if  the  '  Five
Hundred  '  had  sailed  on  April  28,  instead  of  the  '  Thousand '
on  May  5,  history  would  have  had  a  sadder  tale  to  tell.

But  again  fortune  intervened  with  another  propitious
delay.  On  the  morning  of  the  27th  a  telegram  arrived  from
Fabrizi  at  Malta,  a  source  of  information  more  convincing
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Villa  Spinola  than  all  the  warnings
of  Cavour's  emissaries. The  telegram  was  deciphered  as

follows  : —

Malta,  April  26,  i860.

'  Complete  failure  in  the  provinces  and  in  the  city  of  Palermo.
Many  refugees  received  by  the  English  ships  that  have  come  to
Malta.'

Fabrizi  afterwards  declared  that  a  mistake  had  been  made
in  deciphering,  and  that  he  had  really  written  :—

'  The  insurrection,  suppressed  in  the  city  of  Palermo,  main-
tains itself  in  the  provinces.'  ^

1  Crispi,  Diario,  20. Mazzini,  xl.  p.  Ixxvi. Chiala,  iv,  p.  cxlvil,

2  Crispi,  Diario,  20.

3  Bandi,  17. Chiala,  Iv.  p.  cl.,  note.

4  Fauche,  6  and  Fauchi  (P.),  28-31,  show  that  the  second  steamer  was
obtained  shortly  before  April  28.

*  Bandi,  17.  Also  Bixio,  154,  speaks  of  '  three  or  four  hundred  '  ready
about  the  25th.

«  Bixio,  154,  155,  and  note. Fabrizi,  54.

igo  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

If  so,  the  misreading  represented  the  truth  rather  more
nearly  than  the  message.

That  morning  the  Villa  Spinola  was  crowded  with
patriots,  all  bound  in  one  agony  of  suspense.  All  eyes  were
watching  the  door  of  the  little  bedroom  behind  which  Crispi,
La  Masa,  and  Bixio  were  expostulating  with  Garibaldi.
The  two  Sicilians  were  ready  to  drag  him  to  their  island  at
any  hazard.  They  were  powerfully  supported  by  Bixio,
who,  though  he  completely  lacked  their  faith  in  Southern
promises  and  Southern  valour,  was  certain  that  Northerners
under  Garibaldi  would  not  fail,  even  though  the  Sicilian
rising  had  indeed  been  suppressed.  But  Garibaldi,  when  he
saw  Fabrizi's  telegram,  had  said,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  '  It
would  be  folly  to  go.'  The  decision  was  his  own.  He  weU
knew  that  the  responsibility  was  his  and  not  theirs ;
that  he  had  less  right  to  throw  away  the  fortunes  of  Italy
and  the  lives  of  her  bravest  sons,  than  they  had  to  offer
him  those  lives  for  the  sacrifice.

Before  long  the  two  Sicilians  came  out  of  the  bedroom  in
despair.  Bixio  stayed  on  alone  with  the  General,  but  at
last  he,  too,  burst  out  at  the  door,  possessed  by  one  of
those  fits  of  fury  which  made  all  men  save  one  shrink  from
before  him.  The  melancholy  word  was  passed  round  '  Non
si  parte  piu  '  {'  We're  not  going  '),  and  in  a  few  minutes  all
had  started  back  to  Genoa,  leaving  the  Villa  empty  save  for
its  residents  and  half  a  dozen  sea-captains  who  still  hngered
to  bid  a  sad  farewell  to  their  chief.  The  day  passed  slowly
in  the  house  of  Vecchi,  in  silence  and  in  gloom.  The  meal,
said  one  who  shared  it,  was  like  a  funeral.  A  dream,  the
fairest  ever  dreamed  by  patriots,  had  faded  from  the  hearts
of  all  who  sat  at  the  board.

After  supper,  a  deputation  of  a  dozen  young  men  from
the  rank  and  file  of  the  expedition  appeared  from  Genoa,
demanding  to  see  Garibaldi.  Bandi  was  sent  into  the  bed-
room to  tell  him.  '  What  do  they  want  ?  '  '  They  say  that
if  you  won't  go  to  Sicily  with  them,  they  are  going  without
you."

*  I  shall  never  forget,'  wrote  the  aide-de-camp,  *  the  terrible

THE  EXPEDITION  POSTPONED  igi

expression  in  the  eyes  of  the  future  conqueror  of  Palermo  at
hearing  my  words,  and  I  could  have  bit  my  tongue  off.  "I  am
afraid,  am  I  ?  "  he  said,  his  face  growing  as  red  as  a  furnace,
but  in  a  moment  he  mastered  himself  and  said  in  a  calm  voice,
"  Show  them  in."

'  They  came  in.  I  was  shaking  like  a  leaf.  I  would  not  have
been  in  their  shoes  for  all  the  wealth  of  the  world.  The  General
was  standing  up,  with  his  arms  crossed.  He  nodded  in  reply  to
their  salutations,  and  looked  at  them  one  by  one.  No  one  spoke
for  two  or  three  minutes,  which  seemed  to  me  an  age.  At  last
the  youngest  found  his  tongue — a  Genoese  tongue — and  began
to  perorate.  When  he  had  done,  another  and  then  another
held  forth.  Then  they  began  to  talk  altogether.  .  .  .
When  they  had  talked  and  shouted  enough  for  ten,  in  God's
own  time  they  came  to  an  end.  Again  for  a  short  while
no  one  spoke,  while  Garibaldi's  eye  spoke  more  than  a  hundred
tongues.

'  But  when  at  last  he  opened  his  mouth,  and  began  to  speak
to  them  in  that  voice  of  which  the  mere  sound  made  men  in  love
with  him,  the  poor  ambassadors  began  to  grow  pale,  then  red,
then  white  as  paper,  and  their  eyes  filled  with  tears.  Neither
did  Garibaldi's  eyes  remain  dry  j  dismissing  them  with  an
affectionate  wave  of  the  hand,  he  turned  round  quickly  and
went  to  lean  out  of  the  window.'  i

Meanwhile  at  Genoa  all  was  rage  and  confusion.  Many
of  the  volunteers  were  leaving  for  home,  others  crying  out
on  Garibaldi's  lieutenants  to  lead  them  in  his  stead.  Par-
tisans of  Mazzini  were  heard  saying  '  Garibaldi  is  afraid/
Heated  councils  were  held  among  the  promoters  of  the
expedition  as  to  whether  they  should  go  without  him.
La  Masa,  who  was  least  capable  of  conducting  such  an  enter-
prise, offered  to  lead  his  fellow  Sicilians  to  their  native  island.
His  compatriots  were  divided,  some  offering  to  follow  him,
others,  like  the  fine  soldier  Carini,  and  Amari  himself,  who
had  collected  money  for  Garibaldi's  expedition,  angrily
refusing  to  have  anything  to  do  with  such  folly.  Bixio  in
his  rage  offered  to  steer  the  ship  for  La  Masa  and  his  Sicihans,

1  Bandi,  18-23.  Bandl  says  he  cannot  remember  what  Garibaldi  said,
though  he  well  remembers  how  he  said  it.

192  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

though  if  he  had  started,  he  would  probably  not  long  have
remained  subordinate  under  such  a  chief.i

In  this  confusion  of  councils  Crispi  seems  to  have  kept
his  head  best.  He  induced  his  fellow  Sicilians  to  wait  a  few
days,  clearly  perceiving  two  things,  that  it  would  be  useless
to  go  without  Garibaldi,  and  that  Garibaldi  would  be  only
too  glad  to  go  if  a  '  new  fact '  could  be  provided. ^  Crispi  set
himself  to  obtain  this  '  new  fact.'  On  the  27th,  he  sent  a
cipher  telegram  to  his  friend  Agresta  in  Sicily  : —

'  Not  having  received  by  this  courier  any  letters  from  you
here,  there  is  hesitation,  and  I  fear  I  shall  not  succeed  in  getting
the  expedition  to  start.  The  news  received  by  this  steamer  is
no  better,  and  for  twenty-two  days  we  have  not  got  one  letter
from  Sicily  which  gives  any  precise  news.  Here  everything  is
ready,  even  the  steamer.  It  is  possible  we  may  end  in
coming.'  ^

On  the  evening  of  April  29  Crispi's  '  new  fact '  came  to
hand,  in  the  shape  of  certain  mysterious  telegrams,  letters,
and  dispatches.  It  has  been  said  by  some  of  his  comrades
in  arms  that  he  forged  them,  but  the  evidence  is  not  deci-
sive.4  Some  say  it  was  a  telegram  from  Fabrizi,^  others  that
it  was  news  from  Crispi's  correspondents  in  Sicily  whom  he
had  been  so  busily  dunning  for  good  news.  In  any  case  these
documents  described  the  insurrection  as  having  revived  in
the  mountains  above  Palermo,  a  statement  to  which  Pilo's
recent  action  after  his  arrival  in  Plana  dei  Greci  gave  some
faint  colour  of  truth. ^

With  these  papers  in  their  hands,  on  the  evening  of  the
29th,  Bixio  and  Crispi  in  Genoa  felt  so  sure  of  persuading

1  La  Masa  {Sic),  vi,  vii. Bandi,  23-25.

2  Bandi,  23. La  Masa  {Sic),  p.  vi.

3  Paolucci,  Riso,  50,  51.

*  Tiirr's  Risposta,  5,  6.  Bandi,  29.  Another  Sicilian  of  the  Thousand,
Campo,  suppressed  bad  news  and  put  about  false  good  news  in  order  to
get  Garibaldi  to  go,  and  this  was  recorded  as  a  meritorious  action  by  his
family. — Campo,  97,  98.  But  there  is  no  certain  proof  of  the  forging  of
documents.

3  Bertani,  ii.  46. Conv.  Canzio.

*  See  p.  159,  above. Paolucci,  Pilo,  264,  266.

THE  EXPEDITION  REVIVED  193

Garibaldi  when  they  saw  him  next  day  at  Quarto,  that  they
revived  the  preparations  for  the  expedition,  writing  to
Fauche  at  nine  that  night :  '  We  must  see  you.  The  news
is  good,  and  we  resume  business.  Bixio.'  1  Next  morning
Bixio  and  one  or  two  of  the  Sicihans  ^  went  to  Quarto,  and
found  their  chief  at  the  Villa  Spinola,  still  of  the  same  mind.
He  had  already  that  very  day  written  to  the  Directors  of
the  Million  Rifles  Fund  :  '  By  now  you  will  know  about
Sicily.  The  expedition  does  not  start.'  ^  But  the  '  new
facts  '  which  Bixio  brought  in  his  hand  took  instant  effect
upon  him.  '  We  will  go,'  he  said,  rising  from  his  seat,  his
eyes  flashing  and  his  voice  vibrating  with  sudden  gladness.
All  remembered  that  it  was  the  30th  of  April,  the  anniversary
of  the  day  when  he  had  defeated  the  French  before  the
walls  of  Rome,  and  the  Villa  was  decorated  with  laurels  to
celebrate  the  double  occasion  for  rejoicing.^

By  10.45  ill  the  morning  Bixio  had  sent  off  a  note  to
Fauche,  who  was  to  supply  the  steamers  : —

'  I  am  returning  at  this  moment  from  Quarto  ;  the  General
is  coming  to  Genoa  at  once,  and  will  be  waiting  to  see  you  at
Bertani's  house  as  soon  as  you  can  get  there.'  ^

At  this  council  of  war,  held  in  Genoa  round  the  sick-bed  to
which  Bertani's  exertions  had  already  confined  him,  the
decision  to  go  was  formally  taken.  Only  Sirtori  opposed  it,
saying  :  '  No,  I  disapprove.  I  do  not  believe  it  will  succeed  ;
but  if  Garibaldi  goes  to  Sicily,  with  many  or  with  few,  I  go
too.' Medici  next  day  expressed  similar  sentiments.^

The  whole  machinery  of  organisation  was  set  to  work
once  more.  Several  days  were  required  to  reunite  the
volunteers,  many  of  whom  had  left  Genoa  in  despair,  and
it  was  now  determined  to  raise  the  numbers  to  a  thousand.
For  the  next  five  days  men  worked  as  they  work  at  the
crisis  of  life. Bertani  in  his  bed,  his  handwriting  a  mere

1  Fauche  (P.),  32.  2  See  Appendix  G,  below,

^  Cictmpoli,  135,  136. Letter  of  April  30.

*  Bandi,  29,  30. Jack  La  Bolina,  120.  ^  Fauche  (P.),  32,  33.

*  Bertani,  ii.  47.  Mazzini,  xi.  p.  Ixxvi.  Pungolo,  July  5,  1907,
Medici's  letter  of  May  10,  i860.

194  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

scrawl,  dealt  with  heap  after  heap  of  letters  offering  service
of  every  sort  from  every  part  of  Italy.i  Bixio,  who  had  to
prepare  the  embarkation,  neither  ate  nor  slept,  but  uncon-
scious of  all  other  objects,  in  a  trance  of  sleepless  activity,
for  once  treated  his  family  with  the  same  brusque  inatten-
tion with  which  he  usually  treated  the  rest  of  mankind.^

Zeal  in  the  work  was  by  no  means  confined  to  the
Committee  in  Genoa.  Private  subscriptions  were  organised
in  town  after  town  by  '  Committees  for  the  succour  of  Sicily ' ;
at  Cremona  and  elsewhere  they  openly  placarded  the  walls,
and  almost  everywhere  collected  money  in  the  streets.^
The  Municipality  of  Pavia,  the  city  of  the  Cairoli,  voted  a
large  sum  out  of  the  rates  to  the  Million  Rifles  Fund
to  help  the  expedition.  The  Municipality  of  Brescia  made
a  similiar  contribution  direct  to  Garibaldi  himself.^  At
Pavia,  at  Milan,  at  Brescia,  at  Bergamo  and  elsewhere,  officers
of  last  year's  Cacciatori  delle  Alpi  were  choosing  out  the  best
young  men  of  the  place  and  sending  them  by  train  to  Genoa. ^
At  Bergamo,  on  May  4,  the  train  that  was  to  start  with  the
100  young  Bergamasques  for  whom  Garibaldi  had  asked
and  whom  Nullo  had  carefully  chosen,  was  boarded  by  300,
while  200  more,  after  a  fierce  struggle  to  get  in,  were  left
broken-hearted  on  the  platform.  At  Milan  Nullo  forcibly
got  rid  of  another  hundred  of  them,  but  not  fewer  than  160
from  the  little  Alpine  town  landed  among  the  Thousand  at
Ma¥sala.6

A  note  from  the  diary  of  Abba  describes  some  typical
experiences  of  a  volunteer  on  the  way  to  Genoa  : —

Parma, May  4.

'  We  are  starting,  seventeen  strong,  from  here,  mostly
students,  some  working-men,  three  doctors.  Of  these  latter,
one, Soncini,  is  a  veteran  of  the  Roman  Republic. They  say

^  Milan  MSS.,  ArcMvio  Bertani,  e.g.,  Plico,  xii,

*  Bixio,  157.

3  Cremona,  18-22.  Amari,  ii.  75-78.  Milan  MSS.,  A.  B.,  Plico,  xii.
e.g.,  No.  29.

*  Pavesi,  24. Bertani,  reso.,  23,  accounts,  note.

*  Bertani,  Comp.  2,  ^ V.  M.  33,  and  cf.  Elenco,

THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  THOUSAND 195

that  in  the  train  from  Romagna  we  shall  find  other  friends  of
the  best. They  are  coming  from  aU  parts.

'  Great  mystery  is  made  of  our  departure.  To  hear  some
people  talk,  not  even  the  air  knows.  .  .  .  Yet  everybody  is
aware  that  Garibaldi  is  in  Genoa  and  is  going  to  Sicily,  As  we
went  through  Parma  they  shook  hands  with  us  heartily  and
wished  us  luck.  .  .  .

(In  the  station  at  Novi).

'  There  are  some  infantry  here  waiting  for  a  train.  Their
sub-lieutenant  comes  up  to  me  and  says  :  "  Will  you  wire
me  from  Genoa  the  hour  when  you  start  ?  "  I  remain  silent.
The  officer  looks  me  in  the  eyes  and  says  smiling,  "  Keep
the  secret,  but  believe  me  I  have  not  asked  with  any  bad
intention."  '

This  young  officer,  named  Pagani,  deserted  next  day,  came
on  board  under  the  false  name  of  De  Amicis,  and  was  killed
fighting  at  Calatafimi.  He  was  one  of  the  five  ofiicers
who  deserted  and  went  with  the  Thousand.  There  would
have  been  many  more  if  the  organising  committee  had
allowed  it.i

The  North  was  rising  up  to  carry  Garibaldi  to  Sicily.
There  was  no  division  of  classes  or  of  parties.  Cavourian
Municipalities  were  voting  money,  the  leisured  class  was  as
forward  in  the  movement  as  the  working-men — the  pro-
fessional class  perhaps  most  enthusiastic  of  all.  Too  rarely
does  an  emotion  like  this,  pure  of  self-interest  and  far  above
blind  race-hatred,  sweep  along  with  it  a  whole  people,  lifting
common  men  into  an  atmosphere  which  they  seldom  breathe,
and  never  breathe  for  long.  Those  who  remember  the  day
speak  of  it  as  something  too  sacred  ever  to  return.  Italy
has  never  seen  the  like  of  i860  again,  but  fortunately  she
did  not  waste  it  as  she  had  wasted  '  '48.'

The  country  was  rising  up  ;  what  would  the  Govern-
ment do  ?  Would  it  wish,  and  if  so,  would  it  dare,  to  stop
Garibaldi  ?  When  on  the  last  night  of  April,  Cavour  heard
that  he  had  after  all  decided  to  start,  was  the  news  welcome
to  that  anxious  watchman  ? If  Garibaldi  had  hesitated  so

*  Abba,  Not_,  5-8,  53,  70. Elenco^ Re  deserters,  see  p,  171,  above.

o  2

196  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

long,  Cavour  could  not  be  sanguine  of  success.  The  Prime
Minister  had  no  Crispis  and  Pilos  to  deceive  him  as  to
the  real  state  of  the  Sicilian  insurrection.  He  may  weU  have
thought  that  the  chances  were  against  Garibaldi,  for  indeed
they  never  ceased  to  be  against  him  until  he  had  taken
Palermo.  The  open  preparation  at  Genoa  had  already
brought  down  on  Cavour  a  storm  of  diplomatic  protest.
Already  he  saw  the  threatening  shadow  of  Austrian  conquest,
of  French  interference.  Italy  had  but  one  strong  friend  in
Europe,  and  British  war-ships  could  not  sail  over  the
Lombard  plain.  Cavour,  moreover,  was  in  these  very  days
trying  to  induce  Napoleon  to  withdraw  his  troops  from
Rome,  an  advantage  which  it  would  certainly  be  worth
sacrificing  for  a  successful  attack  on  the  Bourbons,  but  not
for  the  sake  of  a  tragic  fiasco  with  Garibaldi  in  the  part  of
Pisacane.  Furthermore,  he  rightly  supposed  that  it  was
Garibaldi's  intention,  while  himself  attacking  Sicily,  to  send
a  revolutionary  force  against  the  Papal  provinces  of  Umbria
and  the  Marches,  a  step  only  too  likely  to  involve  Italy  with
France.

On  the  other  hand,  as  he  had  said  to  Sirtori  at  Genoa,  if
Garibaldi  could  indeed  conquer  Sicily,  and  thence  '  come  up
again  by  the  north,'  it  would  prove  the  means  of  Italy's
deliverance.  And  what  other  deliverance  could  he  hope  for
from  the  attack  now  threatened  by  the  close  alliance  of
Austria  with  Naples  and  the  Pope  ?  He  must  strike  ere  he
was  struck,  and  Garibaldi  was  the  only  weapon  he  could  use
at  once.  Lastly,  whatever  were  the  dangers  of  the  expedi-
tion, there  were  immense  dangers  in  trying  to  prevent  it
from  starting,  with  the  country  in  this  passion  of  enthusiasm.

In  such  a  conflict  of  calculation,  embracing  perhaps
these  thoughts,  and  doubtless  others  unknown  to  us,  Cavour
ordered  a  special  train  to  take  him  from  Turin  to  Bologna,
there  to  find  the  king  and  decide  once  for  all  whether  the
expedition  was  to  be  stopped  or  no.  The  line  was  scarcely
finished  in  places,  and  the  railway  officials  at  Bologna  were
surprised  to  hear  that  the  Prime  Minister  was  coming.  But
on  May  2  he  arrived  in  a  solitary  carriage  behind  the  engine,

THE  KING  AND  CAVOUR  DECIDE  197

and  drove  straight  up  to  San  Michele  in  Bosco,  where  Victor
Emmanuel  was  lodged.  The  day  before,  the  King  had
driven  with  relays  of  horses  from  Florence  to  Bologna,  over
the  Pass  of  the  Central  Apennines.  It  had  been  raining  in
torrents,  but  as  the  liberated  people  crowded  the  mountain
road  to  see  their  deliverer  pass,  he  would  not  let  the  carriage
be  closed.i  It  was  the  very  road  on  which  Garibaldi
had  been  so  nearly  caught  in  the  wayside  inn  in  September
1849,  and  no  doubt  Teresa  Baldini,  whose  courage  and  wit
had  saved  the  hero  from  the  Austrians,  now  saw  her  King
drive  past  the  door.^

So  Cavour  and  Victor  Emmanuel  met  in  the  rooms  of
San  Michele  in  Bosco,  to  decide  between  them  whether  the
expedition  should  be  allowed  to  start.  It  is  universally
agreed  that  the  King  was  the  more  eager  and  sanguine  of
the  two,  but  no  one  knows  what  passed  between  them.  A
writer  in  a  French  review  afterwards  asserted  that  witnesses
of  the  interview  had  told  him  that  Cavour  offered  to  go  and
arrest  Garibaldi  with  his  own  hands,  but  that  the  King  would
not  allow  it.  Since,  however,  no  one  has  shown  who  were
these  witnesses,  or  what  reason  there  is  to  suppose  that
any  third  person  was  present  at  all,  the  historian  will  do
well  to  be  sceptical.  All  that  is  known  is  that  at  this
interview  the  King  and  his  Minister  finally  agreed  to  let
Garibaldi  go.^

The  great  statesman  had  made  one  mistake  of  detail,
which  nearly  proved  fatal  to  Italy  and  to  him.  He  let  the
Thousand  start  with  La  Farina's  bad  muskets,  when  they
might  have  had  the  Enfields  from  the  Million  Rifles  Fund,
But  two  things  are  to  be  remembered. First,  that  in  all

1  Rass.  Naz.y  January  i,  1905.

2  Trevelyan's  Gar.  Rome,  310,  311. Teresa  died  in  igo8.

3  See  Appendix  H,  below,  for  a  further  discussion  of  Cavour's  probable
motives.  Some  light  on  the  attitude  of  the  Government  is  thrown  by  the
fact  that,  In  the  first  days  of  May,  Farinl,  Minister  of  the  Interior,  sent  a
message  to  Bertani.  through  the  Deputy  Finall,  to  the  effect  that  the
expedition  was  approved  by  the  Government,  but  that  assurance  was
required  that  no  attack  should  be  made  on  the  Papal  States.
N,A.,  April  1909,  pp.  503-504,  Finali.

igS  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

probability  Cavour  did  not  know  that  the  weapons  of  the
National  Society  were  bad,  since  even  Garibaldi,  who  had
been  President  of  the  Society,  only  found  that  out  when  he
saw  them  unpacked,  and  the  Secretary,  La  Farina,  had
most  hkely  cried  up  his  wares  to  Cavour.  Secondly,  that
after  the  misfortune  of  D'Azeglio's  sequestration  of  the  En-
fields,  a  fact  widely  known  and  commented  on,  it  would
perhaps  have  been  difficult  for  Cavour  afterwards  to  have
removed  the  embargo  without  openly  committing  the
Government  to  Garibaldi's  expedition  in  the  eyes  of  hostile
Europe.

I  have  now  given  some  account  of  Cavour' s  action  in
April  i860.  I  do  not  pretend  to  have  fathomed  his  motives.
Our  knowledge  of  his  correspondence  and  his  conversation
is  still  incomplete,  and  those  of  his  sayings  and  letters
which  we  already  know  contain,  in  the  same  week  and
even  on  the  same  day,  such  strange  contradictions  1  that
it  is  folly  to  dogmatise  as  to  the  nature  of  his  wishes  and
intentions  up  to  the  time  of  the  departure  of  the  Thousand.
I  will  only  venture  to  suggest  that,  until  the  moment  the
expedition  had  sailed,  Cavour  was,  at  least  in  some  degree,
an  opportunist  waiting  on  circumstance,  and  unwilling  to
commit  himself  or  his  country  till  the  latest  possible  moment.
Nor,  in  the  terrible  uncertainties  of  the  case,  can  he  be
blamed  for  refusing  to  take  a  more  decided  part  in  thrusting
Garibaldi  out  on  an  expedition  where  Sirtori  and  Medici
thought  he  would  fail,  and  Garibaldi  himself  could  not  at
first  believe  in  his  own  chances  of  success.

1  See  Appendix  H,  below.

CHAPTER XI

THE SAILING OF  THE  THOUSAND

'Breve  ne  I'onda  placida  avanzasi
striscia  di  sassi. Boschi  di  lauro
frondeggiano  dietro  spirando
eflSiuvi  e  murmuri  ne  la  sera.

*  *  *  *

Italia,  Italia,  donna  de  i  secoli
de'  vati  e  de'  martiri  donna,
Inclita  vedova  dolorosa,

#  #  *  *

quindi  il  tuo  fido  mosse  cercandoti
pe'  mari. Al  collo  leonino  avvoltosi
U  puncio,  la  spada  di  Roma
alta  su  r  omero  bilanciando,

stie  Garibaldi. Chieti  venivano
a  cinque  a  dieci,  poi  dUeguavano,
drappelli  oscuri,  ne  I'ombra
i  mille  vindici  del  destino,

come  pirati  che  a  preda  gissero  ;
ed  a  te  occulti  givano,  Italia,
per  te  mendicando  la  morte
al  cielo,  al  pelago,  a  i  fratelli.'

Carducci,  Scoglio  di  Quarto.

'  A  short  rock-rib  that  cleaves  the  placid  sea ;
Behind,  the  leafy  laurel  thicket  breathing
Odours  and  murmurs  on  the  evening  air  ;
. . . Thence,  Italy,  thou  queen  of  ages  past,
Of  prophets  and  of  martyrs  still  the  queen,
Famous,  unhappy,  widowed  lady  proud, —
Thence,  Italy,  thy  faithful  sought  thee  out
Across  the  sea. Around  his  lion's  neck
The  puncio  wrapped  ;  the  sword  that  flashed  at  Rome
Across  his  shoulder  balanced — so  he  came.
And  silent  came  his  shadowy  companies.
By  fives  and  tens,  then  vanished  in  the  gloom.
199

20O  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

The  Thousand,  destined  to  avenge  thy  wrong.
Like  pirates  to  their  prey  they  glided  down,
Hidden  from  thee  they  glided,  Italy,
Sea-beggars,  begging  death  from  sky  and  waves
And  brethren,  only  for  thy  service  sake.*

The  Rock  at  Quarto.

In  order  to  secure  the  passive  connivance  of  the  authori-
ties in  the  departure  of  an  expedition  which  they  would  be
forced  to  repudiate,  in  any  event  for  a  few  days,  and  in  case
of  failure  for  all  time,  it  was  necessary  to  act  with  a  formal
show  of  secrecy.  The  Government  had  taken  steps  to
indicate  that  the  embarkation  itself  must  not  take  place  in
the  port  of  Genoa.^  The  plan  of  operations  was  therefore
drawn  up  as  follows  : — The  two  steamers  were  to  be  seized
in  the  port  at  midnight,  and  as  quietly  as  possible,  by  a
picked  body  of  seamen,  under  Bixio,  who  would  take  the
vessels  empty  out  of  the  harbour.  Then,  as  they  sailed
eastward  along  the  Riviera,  they  were  to  meet  row-boats
from  Foce  and  Quarto  bearing  the  volunteers,  the  pro-
visions, and  the  cases  of  arms.  Finally,  the  bulk  of  the
ammunition  would  be  rowed  out  from  Boghasco.^  Men  and
stores  would  be  hauled  up  on  to  the  steamers  at  sea,  and
the  voyage  would  begin.

Much  of  the  plan  was  common  knowledge  in  Genoa  on
May  5,  the  busy  day  that  preceded  the  night  of  departure.
The  authorities  duly  kept  watch  at  Cornigliano  and  S.  Pier
d' Arena,  to  the  west  of  the  city,  leaving  undisturbed  the  real
places  of  embarkation  to  the  east.^  But  one  detail  of  the
conspiracy  was  still  a  secret.  Except  Bixio,  not  even  those
who  were  to  seize  the  ships  knew  which  those  ships  were
to  be.  The  truth  was  that  the  Piemonte  and  the  Lombardo
were  to  be  taken  without  leave  from  Rubattino  and  his

1  The  British  Consul,  Mr.  Brown,  who  watched  the  embarkation  with
great  interest,  next  day  wrote  to  his  government : — '  The  authorities  had
to  my  certain  knowledge  taken  measures  to  prevent  the  embarkation  from
taking  place  in  the  port.' Bv.  Pari.  Papers,  12,  p.  3,  and  16,  p.  i.

2  For  this  chapter  see  Map  V.  at  end  of  book,  route  marked.

3  Bianchi's  Cavour,  94.  There  were  indeed  the  usual  two  gendarmes
In  the  crowd  that  witnessed  the  embarkation  at  Quarto,  but  they  confined
their  action  to  an  ineffectual  protest  against  the  cutting  of  the  telegraph
wires  ordered  by  Garibaldi. Bandi,  39-41.

BIXIO  SEIZES  THE  STEAMERS  201

Company,  according  to  a  most  secret  agreement  of  Garibaldi,
Bixio,  and  Bertani  with  Fauche,  the  Company's  agent.
Although  arrangements,  afterwards  liberally  fulfilled,  had
been  made  to  compensate  the  Company  in  case  of  the  loss
or  injury  of  the  ships,  it  had  been  determined  not  to  confide
in  the  timid  patriotism  of  Rubattino  and  the  shareholders.
It  was  a  wise  caution.  For  so  little  did  these  men  care  for
their  country  in  proportion  to  the  security  of  their  profits,
that  in  the  middle  of  June,  when  all  Italy  went  wild  with
joy  over  the  taking  of  Palermo,  they  celebrated  the  occasion
by  dismissing  Fauche  because  he  had  enabled  Garibaldi  to  go
there.  The  expedition  of  the  Thousand  owed  nothing  to  the
class  of  mind  whose  patriotism  consists  in  a  calculation  of
the  profit  on  shares.  Cavour,  with  that  desire  to  do  justice
to  the  Garibaldini  which  distinguished  him  from  many  of  his
followers,  tried  to  open  to  Fauche  another  career  by  way  of
compensation  for  the  excellent  post  which  he  had  lost,  but
Cavour  died,  and  with  him  perished  the  hopes  of  Fauche,
and  of  many  more.  Rubattino,  who  was  erroneously
believed  to  have  given  the  steamers,  received  the  praise  of
historians  for  the  deed  of  the  man  whom  he  had  ruined  for
doing  it,  and  his  statue  stands  to-day  on  the  quay-side
whence  the  Piemonte  and  Lomhardo  were  taken  so  sorely
against  his  will.  Fauche  lived  many  years,  rich  only  in  the
love  of  so  poor  a  man  as  Garibaldi,  and  passed  away  '  poor
and  forgotten  in  the  civil  hospital  at  Venice.'  1

Before  midnight  on  May  5,  a  party  of  men,  chiefly  con-
sisting of  experienced  seamen  and  engineers,  had  assembled
one  by  one  on  board  a  hulk  named  the  Joseph  in  a  remote
corner  of  the  port  of  Genoa,  close  to  the  eastern  Hght-house.
At  the  right  moment  Bixio  appeared  among  them,  and
clapping  on  his  head  his  kepi  of  lieutenant-colonel,  said  in
his  masterful  voice,  '  Gentlemen,  from  this  moment  I  am  in
command  ;  listen  to  my  orders.'  Only  then  did  his  sub-
ordinates learn  the  identity  of  the  vessels  which  they  were
to  seize.  In  a  few  minutes  they  were  rowing  in  two  large
boats  towards  the  Rubattino  steamers,  which  lay  at  a  pier

*  Appendix  J,  below.

202  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

in  the  most  public  part  of  the  harbour,  opposite  the  main
fagade  of  the  town.  Bixio  assigned  the  Piemonte  to  one
boat-load  and  the  Lombardo  to  another.  Swinging  them-
selves noiselessly  on  board,  they  roused  the  crews  from
sleep,  presenting  their  pistols  for  form's  sake  at  the  drowsy
men.  As  soon  as  they  heard  the  name  of  Garibaldi,  all
gladly  submitted,  and  some  lent  a  hand  in  the  work.  The
'  piracy  '  was  regarded  as  a  good  joke  by  captors  and  captives
alike.  But  several  hours  passed  before  the  steamers  were
ready  to  move.  First  the  fires  had  to  be  lit  and  stoked.
Then  it  was  thought  necessary  to  wrap  the  chains  in  cloth
to  prevent  noise  in  hauling  up  the  anchors,  for  the  pirates
had  still  some  fear  of  the  government,  and  much  more  of
the  Company.  Their  accomplice  Fauche  watched  from  the
balcony  of  his  house,  almost  opposite  the  Rubattino  pier,
sickening  with  suspense,  as  the  night  waned,  and  still  the
two  masses,  motionless  at  their  place,  loomed  clearer  through
the  melting  shadows.  Then  it  was  discovered  that  the
engines  of  the  Lombardo  were  out  of  order,  and  the  Sicilian
engineer  Campo  had  to  be  sent  on  board  from  the  Piemonte
to  aid  his  compatriot  and  brother-engineer  Orlando  before
that  too  was  set  right.  And  even  then  the  Piemonte  had  to
take  the  Lombardo  in  tow  to  get  her  out  to  sea.  It  was
long  past  three  in  the  morning  before  Fauche,  with  a
deep  sigh  of  rehef,  saw  the  two  dim  shapes  begin  slowly  to
move  from  the  pier  and  vanish  in  the  darkness  of  the
harbour. 1

Meanwhile,  in  Bertani's  house,  high  up  the  hill  in  the
heart  of  Genoa,  the  night  had  passed  amid  grave  anxiety.
The  money,  without  which  the  Thousand  could  not  sail,  was
to  be  supphed  by  Finzi  out  of  the  Milhon  Rifles  Fund,  from

1  A  few  arms  were  put  on  board  in  port,  but  most  at  Quarto.  Span-
garo's  letter,^  wan,  ii.8o,8i.  Bz;vzo,  158, 159.  Elia,  ii.  7,  and  Ella's  letter  in
Jack  laBolina,  126-128, note.  Castiglia(La  Masa  (5zc.),xi,xii).  Mem.  337.
Conv.  Canzio.  Conv.  Campo.  Fauche  (P.),  35.  Elia,  who  commanded
the  Lombardo  under  Bixio  that  night,  told  me  that  no  representative  of  the
authorities,  high  or  low,  came  aboard  during  these  operations,  and  that
therefore  the  story  told  in  Becchio  is  untrue.  Canzio  also  denied  its
truth.

ON  THE  WAY  TO  QUARTO  203

which  Garibaldi  was  allowed  to  draw  anything  except  actual
weapons  of  war.  Besides  large  sums  already  spent  in  fitting
out  the  expedition,  90,000  lire  were  to  be  taken  to  Sicily,  of
which  30,000  had  reached  Bertani's  bed-side  that  day  en-
closed in  a  letter  from  Finzi,  and  the  remaining  60,000  were
due  to  arrive  by  the  last  train  from  Milan  about  ten  at
night,  in  the  hands  of  MigUavacca.  This  officer  reached
Bertani's  house  in  good  time  with  the  money,  but  more  than
half  of  it  was  found  to  be  in  the  form  of  a  draft  on  the  Bank
of  Genoa,  which  would  be  of  little  use  in  the  hill-towns  of
Sicily.  Migliavacca  was  sent  in  haste  to  rouse  some  of
Bertani's  rich  commercial  friends,  while  Nuvolari,  who  was
to  take  the  money  down  to  the  steamers  and  go  with  the
expedition,  waited  at  Bertani's  with  growing  impatience  as
the  minutes  passed.  At  length  Migliavacca  returned  with
the  change  in  so  many  hundred  gold  pieces  [marenghi)  in
time  for  Nuvolari  to  carry  safely  on  board  the  whole  of  the
90,000  lire.'^

Throughout  the  evening  of  May  5  the  volunteers  of  the
expedition  had  been  leaving  Genoa  by  the  Porta  Pila  and
walking,  singly  or  in  groups,  to  the  appointed  places  of
embarkation.  Some  forty  or  fifty  turned  off  to  Foce,  where
a  few  boats  awaited  them.  All  the  rest  followed  the  high-
way to  the  shore  below  Quarto.  For  the  whole  three  miles
the  road  was  lined  by  the  people  of  the  city,  who  stood  un-
covered and  in  silence  as  they  passed.  There  were  no  chants
de  depart,  no  flags  and  folly,  no  vulgar  revelry  and  boasting.
All  were  too  deeply  moved,  too  uncertain  of  the  event.

At  Quarto,  the  large  wooded  grounds  of  the  Palazzo
Spinola,  dividing  Garibaldi's  residence  from  the  sea,  were
this  night  flung  open  for  his  use,  and  the  Thousand,  as  they
arrived  there,  dispersed  themselves  in  groups  imder  its
trees,  or  sat  on  the  rocks  below,  watching  the  cases  of
muskets  being  piled  into  the  boats. On  the  embanked

^  See  Appendix  K. Out  of  this  sum,  70,000  lire  were  spent  on  cam-
paign up  to  the  time  of  the  capture  of  Palermo  at  the  end  of  the  month.

204  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

high-road  of  the  Riviera,  which  ran  close  along  the  top  of
these  sea-worn  rocks,  stood  a  dense  crowd  of  friends,  parents,
wives,  sisters,  and  sweethearts  come  to  witness  the  departure.
Some  kept  their  eyes  fixed  on  the  gate  of  the  Spinola  grounds
through  which  the  figure  of  Garibaldi  must  soon  emerge,
while  others  imparted  in  low  whispers  the  last  blessings  and
farewells  to  those  whom  they  only  half  expected  to  see  again.
Not  a  few  of  the  Thousand  themselves,  like  the  poet  Nievo,
undauntedly  shared  Sirtori's  view  that  they  would  none  of
them  return  alive.  Medici  himself,  though  he  was  of  much
the  same  opinion,  came  like  the  rest  to  embark,  but  on  the
shore  at  Quarto  a  letter  from  Garibaldi,  couched  in  affec-
tionate terms,  was  put  into  his  hands.  It  began,  '  It  is
better  that  you  should  remain  behind,  and  you  can  be  more
useful  so, '  and  asked  the  defender  of  the  Vascello  to  absent
him  awhile  from  a  soldier's  felicity,  in  order  to  organise
and  dispatch  reinforcements  both  to  Sicily  and  to  the  Papal
States.i

A  stranger,  coming  by  chance  upon  that  scene,  would
scarcely  have  been  able  to  distinguish  the  men  who  were
starting  for  the  war  from  those  who  were  there  to  see  them
off.  The  immense  majority  of  the  Thousand  had  no  arms
in  their  hands — for  the  muskets  were  to  be  dealt  out  during
the  voyage — and  they  were  dressed  in  the  peaceful  garb  of
artisans,  merchants,  gentlemen,  or  students.  A  very  few
wore  Piedmontese  uniforms.  It  was  only  on  the  voyage
that  fifty  red  shirts  were  distributed,  so  that  when  they
landed  in  Sicily  one  in  twenty  wore  the  famous  dress  that
they  all  adopted  after  the  taking  of  Palermo. ^  The
Genoese  carabineers,  about  thirty-five  strong,  could  be  dis-
tinguished at  Quarto  because  they  already  carried  the  rifles
which  were  their  own  property  ;  some  of  them  wore  a  grey
uniform,  but  others  were  in  plain  clothes.^

'  Medici,  4,  5;  Mazzini  XI.,  p.  Ixxvi.

*  Abba,  94. Sampieri,  22. Bandi,  68. Abba,  Not.  34.

s  Menghini,  77,  420,  421.  Abba,  66.  Abba,  Not.  16,  25,  283-290.
Canzio  told  me  that  he  was  in  plain  clothes,  but  that  most  of  the  other
Carabineers  were  in  a  grey  uniform.

THE ROCKS AT QUARTO — II.

(Frona  a  photograph  taken  in  the  'sixties,  given  to  the  author  by  the  late
General  Canzio.)

The  figure  seated  in  the  foreground  is  Augusto  Vecchi,  Garibaldi's  host  at  the  Villa
bpino  a.  The  trees  in  the  left  background  are  those  of  the  grounds  of  the  Palazzo
bpnio  a.  Garibaldi  passed  out  of  those  grounds  on  to  the  road  and  the  rocks,  thrcuah
the  little  gateway  visible  to  right  of  the  lodge. X  marks  the  point  of  embarkation.

GARIBALDI IN HIS 'PUiNCIO,' 1860.
(From  a  photograph  taken  in  Naples  that  autumn.)

THE  ROCK  AT  QUARTO  205

Meanwhile  in  the  Villa  Spinola  a  small  group  of  men  were
waiting  for  the  General  to  leave  his  bedroom. He  was
alone  effecting  some  change  in  the  black  garb  of  civilisation
which varied  by  the  Piedmontese  uniform  m  '59,  he  had
endured  for  the  last  decade. At  length  the  door  opened
and  they  saw  him  for  the  first  time  in  the  outfit  which  he
wore  for  the  rest  of  his  hfe,  whether  at  home,  in  Parhament,
or  in  the  field. Loose  grey  trousers  of  a  sailor  cut,  a  plain
red  shirt  no  longer  worn  like  a  workman's  blouse  as  m  '49,
but  tucked  in  at  the  waist,  and  adorned  with  a  breast-
pocket and  watch-chain,  a  coloured  silk  handkerchief  knotted
round  his  neck,  and  over  his  shoulders  a  great  Amencan
puncio  or  grey  cloak,  which  he  now  wrapped  about  him  as
a  protection  against  the  night  air. A  black  felt  hat  com-
pleted the  figure  which  will  be  familiar  to  the  Itahan  as
the  symbol  of  his  country  for  long  ages  to  come. His
face  was  radiant  and  his  bearing  elate,  for  now  that  after
long  hesitations  he  had  made  up  his  mind  to  go,  he  at  least
had  no  shadow  of  a  doubt  as  to  what  the  issue  would  be.

Carrying  across  his  shoulder  his  heavy  sword  with  the
belt  attached  to  it,  and  followed  by  his  staff  ofiicers,  he
stepped  out  of  Vecchi's  villa,  crossed  the  lane  into  the
grounds  of  the  Palazzo  Spinola,  walked  down  the  path
between  its  trees  and  shrubberies  where  many  of  his  men
were  waiting,  passed  through  the  little  gate  in  the  angle  of
the  wall,  and  so  emerged  on  the  open  road  beside  the  sea.
The  crowd  gathered  there  in  the  twilight  gazed  at  him  in
silence  as  he  crossed  to  the  rocks,  and  descended  by  a  Uttle
broken  foot-track  to  the  bottom  of  the  cliff.i  There  he
found  himself  standing  on  a  rib  of  rock,  beside  a  tiny  bay  a
few  feet  deep  and  two  or  three  yards  long,  into  which  boats
could  be  brought  one  at  a  time.  Here  the  embarkation  took
place.

1  The  foot-track  is  still  clearly  visible  on  the  west  side  of  the  present
memorial  pillar.  I  had  the  honour  of  going  down  it  with  Canzio  himself,
a  year  before  he  died  ;  he  said  to  me  on  this  path,  '  How  many  who  came
down  here  with  me  that  night  are  now  dead.'  The  silence  and  gravity  of
everyone  during  the  whole  of  the  dignified  scene  at  Quarto  was  remarked
on  by  eye-witnesses,  e.g.,  I.  L.  N.,  May  19,  i860,  p.  467.

2o6  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

It  was  about  ten  o'clock  that  Garibaldi  and  the  first
flotilla  put  out  half  a  mile  to  sea  to  await  the  steamers.
Many  of  the  Thousand  remained  for  the  second  journey,  as
there  were  not  enough  boats  to  take  all  at  once.  There  was
a  swell  upon  the  waters,  but  the  night  was  calm,  cold,  and
bright,  and  the  string  of  boats  could  clearly  be  seen  moving
out  in  the  track  of  the  moonlight.  The  beauty  of  the  night,
the  stars,  the  silence  of  men  and  Nature  deeply  affected
every  one.  Garibaldi,  wrapped  in  his  puncio,  sat  in  the
boat  immersed  in  silent  joy.  His  whole  being  expanded
once  more,  as  on  those  nights  on  the  pampas  when  he
had  ridden  and  slept  with  Anita  under  the  stars  they
loved.

'  O  night  of  the  fifth  of  May,'  he  writes,  '  lit  up  with  the  fire  of
a  thousand  lamps  with  which  the  Omnipotent  has  adorned  the
Infinite.  Beautiful,  tranquil,  solemn  with  that  solemnity  which
sweUs  the  hearts  of  generous  men  when  they  go  forth  to  free  the
slave.  Such  were  the  Thousand,  .  .  .  my  young  veterans  of
the  war  of  Italian  liberty,  and  I,  proud  of  their  trust  in  me,  felt
myself  capable  of  attempting  anything.  ...  I  have  felt  this
same  harmony  of  soul  on  all  nights  like  those  of  Quarto,  of  Reggio,
of  Palermo,  of  Volturno.

There  had  been  another  such  moonlit  night,  scarcely  to
be  forgotten  in  his  meditations  as  he  sat  there  off  Quarto,
floating  on  the  tide  that  was  to  carry  him  at  last  to  fortune.
He  must  have  well  remembered  that  on  such  a  night  as  this,
eleven  years  before,  on  the  upper  waters  of  the  Adriatic,  the
Austrian  squadron  had  discovered  Italy's  last  fugitives  by
the  light  of  the  August  moon.i

But  the  midnight  hours  wore  on,  and  still  the  belated
steamers  were, not  in  sight.  Among  the  men  who  had  been
four  or  five  hours  in  the  boats  tedium  succeeded  to  the  first

1  Trevelyan's  Gar.  Rome,  p.  287.  Of  the  night  of  August  2,  1849,  Gari-
baldi wrote — '  The  moon  was  full,  and  it  was  with  a  terrible  misgiving
that  I  watched  the  rising  of  the  mariner's  companion,  contemplated  by
me  so  often  with  the  reverence  of  a  worshipper.  Lovelier  than  I  had  ever
seen  her  before,  but  for  us,  unhappily,  too  lovely — the  moon  was  fatal  to  us
that  night.  East  of  the  point  of  Goro  lay  the  Austrian  squadron,'
Mem.  249.

THE  EMBARKATION  207

enthusiasm  of  embarkation,  and  even  Garibaldi  grew  im-
patient and  ordered  his  boat  to  be  rowed  on  towards  Genoa
to  find  Bixio.  The  morning  was  almost  grey,  and  the  earliest
peasant-girls  were  passing  along  the  high-road  to  market  in
Genoa,  ere  the  long-expected  signal  of  lights  in  the  national
colours  flashed  across  the  western  waves.  As  day  dawned,
the  two  steamers  hove  in  sight,  already  having  on  board  the
small  body  that  had  rowed  out  from  Foce.  Then  a  wild
scene  began.  Men  and  cases  of  anns  were  dragged  up  the
ships'  sides  pell-mell,  and  as  fast  as  each  boat  was  emptied
it  plied  back  to  the  shore  for  a  second  load.  It  was  a  fierce
scramble.  Men  clung  to  the  ship's  ladder  four  or  eight  at  a
time  and  struggled  as  for  their  lives  to  get  on  board,  for  the
long  delay  in  port  rendered  it  necessary  to  start  at  once,
even  at  the  risk  of  leaving  a  few  comrades  behind.  Gari-
baldi had  no  wish  to  be  found  near  Genoa  in  broad  day-
light. Good  haste  was  made,  but  the  sun  was  gilding  the
mountain  tops  before  the  Piemonte  and  the  Lombardo  moved
off  with  their  freight  of  men,  '  How  many  are  we  all  told  ?  '
asked  Garibaldi.  *  With  the  sailors  we  are  more  than  a
thousand,'  was  the  reply.  '  Eh  !  eh  !  quanta  gente  !  What
a  host  !  '  said  this  strange  general,  and  set  his  aide-de-camp
thinking.!

One  thing  was  not  yet  embarked — the  ammunition.
The  bulk  of  the  gunpowder  and  a  few  additional  firearms
had  been  entrusted  by  Bixio  to  a  score  of  young  patriots,
who  were  to  bring  the  precious  cargo  out  from  Bogliasco,
a  few  miles  east  of  Quarto.  Bixio  had  also  appointed  some
local  seamen  as  their  guides,  who  proved  to  be  a  very  bad
choice. The  whole  party  had  set  out  from  Bogliasco  early

1  The  description  in  the  text  from  p.  203  onwards  of  the  arrival  and
embarkation  of  the  Thousand  at  Quarto  is  the  result  of  collating  the
following  accounts  by  eye-witnesses  :  Conv.  Canzio,  Menghini,  415,  416,
420.  Bandi,  37-43.  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  12,  p.  3.  Capuzzi,  7,  8.  Conv.
Campo.  Times,  May  14,  i860,  quotation  from  Ricciardi's  letter  in  Sidde
and  from  letter  in  Opinione  Nazionale.  Tiirr's  Div.  15,  Nievo,  346,  354,
Abba,  Not.  15-19.  Abba,  24-31,  Mem.  338,  339,  Castiglta  (La  Masa,
{Sic.)  xii.,  xiii.).

2o8  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

in  the  night,  but  the  guides  had  insisted  on  rowing  in  front
of  the  heavy  ammunition  boats  in  a  hght  skiff  of  their  own,
showing  a  lantern  in  the  stern.  After  twenty  minutes  the
lantern  was  extinguished  and  the  rascals  made  off,  in  order
to  go  smuggling  on  this  propitious  occasion  when  the
authorities  had  deliberately  relaxed  their  watch  on  the
landing-places  between  Genoa  and  Portofino.  To  this  day
no  one  knows  whether  the  smugglers  felt  ill-will  towards  the
expedition,  the  success  of  which  their  treacherous  conduct
imperilled.  They  may  perhaps  have  thought  that  the
ammunition-boats  could  hardly  fail  to  sight  the  steamers  at
daybreak,  even  without  special  guidance,  and  indeed  if  the
young  men  had  been  content  to  wait  where  they  had  been
left  in  the  lurch,  off  Bogliasco,  they  would  almost  certainly
have  been  picked  up  by  the  expedition  as  it  passed  at  eight
or  nine  in  the  morning.  But  they  did  exactly  the  wrong
thing.  Not  knowing  that  theii  comrades  were  several  hours
late  in  starting  from  port,  they  rowed  westward  all  night  in
hope  of  meeting  them,  and  were  unfortunate  enough  to  pass
them,  unseeing  and  unseen,  probably  close  off  Genoa,  in  the
small  hours.  In  broad  daylight  they  saw  with  rage  and
despair  the  smoke  of  two  steamers  far  away  to  the  east,
making  round  the  promontory  of  Portofino. i

Garibaldi,  on  the  Piemonte,  alarmed  by  the  absence  of
the  ammunition-boats,  waited  half  an  hour  or  more  and  then
held  on  his  course,  hoping  to  find  that  the  Lomhardo,  which
had  gone  on  in  front,  had  taken  the  gunpowder  on  board
unnoticed.  The  Piemonte  could  soon  overhaul  its  more
slow-moving  companion.  At  Camogli,  near  Portofino
promontory,  Canzio,  of  the  Genoese  Carabineers,  was  sent
ashore  to  obtain  oil  and  grease  for  the  engines  of  the  two
steamers,  and  it  was  probably  during  this  halt  that  Garibaldi
hailed  Bixio  and  ascertained  that  they  had  set  out  to  con-
quer Sicily  and  Naples  without  ammunition. '  Let  us  go

1  Mazzini,  xi,  pp.  cliii-clix.  There  were  two  large  boats  xo  carry
the  ammunition  from  Bogliasco  supplied  by  Bixio  (see  Bologna  MSS.,
Bixio),  '  due battelli  di  carico^'

THEY  SAIL  FOR  TUSCANY  209

on  all  the  same,'  he  said,  and  directed  his  course  first  towards
the  Tuscan  coast. 1

Nearly  11 50  fighting  men  had  boarded  the  steamers.2
Garibaldi  commanded  the  Piemonte,  and  Bixio  the  slower
and  more  capacious  Lombardo.^  The  decks  were  crowded,
and  at  first  some  could  not  even  find  room  to  sit  down.
There  was  no  food  except  a  little  water  and  biscuit.  Gari-
baldi was  radiant,  feeling  his  foot  on  deck  once  more  and
enjoying  the  management  of  the  ship,  and  a  large  proportion
of  Genoese  and  others  were  equally  at  home  by  land  or  sea.
But  almost  all  the  Milanese  and  the  men  from  the  Alpine
cities  succumbed  on  that  first  day  to  the  heavy  rolling,
and  not  a  plank  of  Italy's  Argo  but  was  occupied  by  the
prostrate  forms  of  heroes  in  distress.*

Garibaldi,  while  in  the  villa  at  Quarto,  had  determined
that  as  soon  as  he  was  out  at  sea  he  would  run  straight  for
the  coast  of  Tuscany,  and  that  for  three  reasons.  In  the  first
place,  as  early  as  May  i,  he  had  warned  Zambianchi  that  he
would  detach  him  with  a  portion  of  the  expeditionary  force
to  invade  the  Papal  States  by  way  of  Orvieto  and  Perugia  ;
with  this  end  in  view  Garibaldi  had  caused  to  be  printed  at
Genoa  proclamations  calling  on  the  Pope's  subjects  to  rise,
and  had  brought  them  with  him  on  the  ship.^  In  the  second
place,  on  May  2  he  had  given  a  rendezvous  in  the  Straits  of

1  This  paragraph  is  the  result  of  collating  the  statements,  slightly
contradictory  as  to  time  and  place  of  events,  in  Castiglia  {La  Masa  {Sic.)
xii.,  xiii.)  Conv.  Canzio.  Menghini,  ^16,  417;  420  (Canzio's  diary).  Abba,
31,  32.  Cvispi,  Diario,  20.  Tiirr's  Da  Quarto,  4,  5.  Bixio,  162.  Ciampoli,
144. Mem.  339.

^  1089  landed  in  Sicily,  sixty-one  of  those  who  sailed  from  Quarto
were  left  at  Talamone,  and  four  or  five  new  men  joined  there.  {Elenco,
Pittaluga,  172. Bandi,  63-65.)

3  The  two  steamers  were  built  as  follows  : —

length breadth draught tonnage
constructed  metres metres metres tons  H.P,

Piemonte Glasgow,  1 851 50  7  3  180  i6o

Lombardo Leghorn,  1841 48  7-40  4.23  238  220

FaucM  (P.),  28,  31. Conv.  Canzio.

*  Amari,  ii.  81. Menghini,  416-418,  420. Bandi,  42.

^  Bandi,  34,  35.  Pittaluga,  16,  17,  49,  72.  Ciampoli,  139-142,  Rome
MSS.  V,.  E.  R,  M,,  225,  95, Canzio  MS.  4,  Relazione  about  Talamone.

,10  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

rrVtrir^e^ell  companies  and  captai^^^^^^^^^
one  or  two  drills  of  the  improvised  regiment. This  could
not  well  be  done  on  the  crowded  decks  at  sea_

Rnt  to  these  considerations  was  now  added  a  new  ana
siiJ^nUsit, W^enthey^^^^^^^^^^^

rn::mrn:trlhthicJ  to  a^ht  .  they  ever  reached
"'  tunniL  through  the  Straits  of  Piombino.  between  Elba

along  the  ^.d  coast  o^^b Tuscan^^^^^^^  .^  ^^^  ^^^^^_

^ft'S  t'he  end^'ofhS  adventurous  escape.  A  little  after
nL  tl  the  morning  the  Pie,nonte  came  to  anchor  off  the
miserable  coast  village  of  Talamone.*

1  Amari.  ii.  77- Fmlug.l4-^6 ^ZtlMim la.  that  he  changed
.  Garibaldi  afterwards  wrote  to  1"^  "°Jf '' '  f  *';  ^j^^  ^„thoritie,  cited

r/e^nMo  ar'op  larhiLchi  an/to  meet  Sgaralhno.

CHAPTER  XII

TALAMONE AND THE VOYAGE  1

r^.l^T/'T'^^  Stamp  Garibaldi  as  a  General  and  statesman  of  the  highest
rank  ;  defeat,  ruin,  and  death  will  canse  him  to  be  remembered  as  a  Oufx
otic  adventurer  of  dauntless  courage  but  weak  judgment,  who  ha  th?own
away  his  life  In  a  desperate  filibustering  attempt.  The  expedition  to  SicTlv
may  m  future  be  ranked  with  William  of  Orange's  landing  in  England  or
LTL X " ^-^^'^^-^-^^  -  Calabna..-r.-.4  leadinfartlcle:

-We  know  that  our  sympathies  and  the  judgment  of  history  will  dis-
tinguish between  the  cases  of  the  filibuster  and  felon,  and  that  ol  tTe  hero

1688.  -Lord  J.  Russell  m  the  House  of  Commons,  May  17,  i860.

As  the  engines  of  the  Piemonte  stopped  beside  the  quay
of  Talamone,  Garibaldi  went  ashore  to  win  over  the  official
world, clad  for  this  special  purpose  in  his  Piedmontese
General  s  uniform. No  sooner  was  he  gone  than  the  men
were  called  together  on  deck  to  hear  his  proclamation  read
At  the  same  hour  another  copy  was  being  read  on  board
the  Lomhardo,  still many  miles  behind  along  the  coast
The  proclamation,  which  identified  the  Thousand  with  the
volunteers  of  the  Alpine  campaign  of  the  previous  summer
ran  as  follows  : —  '

'The  mission  of  this  corps  will  be,  as  it  always  has  been
based  on  complete  self-sacrifice  for  the  regeneration  of  the  father-
land. The  brave  Cacciaiori  delle  Aipi  have  served  and  will  serve
their  country  with  the  devotion  and  discipline  of  the  best  kind  of
soldiers,  without  any  other  hope,  without  any  other  claim  than
the  satisfaction  of  their  consciences.  Not  rank,  not  honour  not
reward  have  enticed  these  brave  men. They  returned  to'  the

'  For  this  chapter  see  Map  V.  at  end  of  book,  route  marked.
211  =  -

212  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

seclusion  of  private  life  when  danger  disappeared.  But  now
that  the  hour  of  battle  has  come  again,  Italy  sees  them  once  more
in  the  foremost  rank,  joyful,  willing,  ready  to  shed  their  blood
for  her.  The  war-cry  of  the  Cacciatori  delle  Alpi  is  the  same
as  that  which  re-echoed  from  the  banks  of  the  Ticino  twelve
months  ago —

'  Italia  e  Vittorio  Emanuele,

and  this  war-cry,  from  your  lips,  wiU  strike  terror  into  the
enemies  of  Italy.'

These  words  inspired  the  hearers  with  sober  enthusiasm
and  pride.  Only  a  small  group  of  unreconciled  Mazzinians
heard  with  dismay  the  name  of  Victor  Emmanuel.  They
had  hoped  that  when  Garibaldi  once  got  to  sea  in  his  red
shirt,  the  old  Republican  instincts  would  revive  in  him,  and
that  he  would  hoist  the  '  neutral  banner,'  the  tricolour  of
Italy  unstained  by  the  cross  of  the  House  of  Savoy.  In  the
eyes  of  their  party,  the  object  of  the  Sicilian  expedition  was,
as  Mazzini  told  Karl  Blind,  '  that  the  movement  was  to  be
continued  up  to,  and  into,  Rome,  and  that  then  a  Consti-
tuent Assembly  was  to  be  convoked  there  for  the  expression
of  the  will  of  the  nation,'  which  might  haply  be  for  a  Re-
public. Garibaldi's  proclamation  ran  counter  to  these  hopes.
When,  therefore,  the  belated  Lomhardo  reached  Talamone,
a  council  of  Republicans  from  both  the  ships  was  held  on
board  her,  to  decide  what  they  should  do.  Antonio  Mosto,
the  bearded  Genoese  who  commanded  the  Carabineers,
Crispi,  Savi,  and  others  decided  to  go  on.  But  Onnis  and
one  or  two  more  of  the  pure  gospel  refused  to  fight  for  a
King,  and  walked  off  inland  out  of  the  page  of  history .1
Garibaldi,  v/hen  he  heard  what  had  happened,  expressed
bitter  resentment.  His  dislike  of  Mazzini  and  the  Mazzi-
nians had  not  been  diminished  by  his  recent  quarrel  with
Cavour.2  Mazzini  himself  was  at  this  moment  hastening
from  London  to  Genoa, in  the  hope  of  going  with  the

^  Abba,  Not.  22.  Abba,  35,  36.  Crispi  {Lettera),  322.  Mazzini,  xi,,
pp.  Ixxxiii.,  Ixxxiv. Blind,  57. Paolucci,  Pilo,  242. Menghini,  418.

2  /  Mille,  15.  Conv.  Canzio.  Bandi,  67,  '  disse  ira  dl  Dlo  contro
Mazzini  e  i  suoi  ciechl  seguaci.'

THE  GULF  OF  TALAMONE  213

Thousand.i If  he  had  come  in  time,  it  may  be  doubted
whether  Garibaldi  would  have  consented  to  take  him.

Except  these  few  Republicans,  the  Thousand  were  far
too  well  pleased  with  their  cause  and  their  leader  to  join  in
debating  his  proclamation. They  were  more pleasantly
employed  ashore  recovering  from  the  miseries  of  the  voyage.
It  was  a  clear  spring  morning. Some  bathed  in  the  sea,
some  searched  the  friendly  but  poverty-stricken  village  for
eatable  food,  while  many  of  that  learned  regiment  admired
the scenery and discussed  the antiquarian and Hterary
associations  of  the  Maremma.2 Close  at  hand  the  coast
ran  southwards  to  Orbetello,  through  unreclaimed  marsh-
land and  tangled  brushwood. The  low,  desert  shores  of  the
Gulf  of  Talamone  stretched  thus  for  ten  miles,  bounded  on
the  north  by  a  high  hill,  on  the  spur  of  which  Talamone
and  Its  old  war-tower  projected  into  the  sea,  and  on  the
south  by  the  promontory  mountain  of  Argentario,  on  the
side  of  which  Porto  S.  Stefano  was  clearly  visible.  'Among
the  lagoons  dividing  Mount  Argentario  from  the  mainland
lay  the  fortress  of  Orbetello. The  possibility  of  proceeding
to  Sicily  depended  on  securing  coal  from  the  government
store  at  Porto  S.  Stefano,  and  ammunition  from  the  fortress
in  the  lagoons.

At  this  crisis  Garibaldi  employed  a  wise  and  even  artful
diplomacy.  He  chose  as  his  principal  agent  Colonel  Tiirr
the  Hungarian.  Tiirr,  who  died  in  1908  full  of  years  and
honour,  began  his  career  as  patriot  when,  in  January  1849
he  deserted  the  hated  Austrian  flag  at  the  persuasion  of
some  Italian  officers.  During  the  war  of  1859  Cavour,  who,
together  with  Napoleon,  was  in  close  negotiation'  with
Kossuth  as  to  the  possibility  of  a  Hungarian  insurrection,
had  sent  Tiirr  to  join  the  Cacciatori  delle  Alpi  and  represent
among  them  the  unity  of  the  ItaHan  and  Magyar  cause
Partly  for  his  country's  sake,  partly  for  his  own,  he  was

\Rome  MSS. Mazz. letters, V. E., No. 2429. Letter  of  May  8
in  SicUia  ' ''''''^" ^"""^^  ^'^  ^  raggiungere  Garibaldi  per  andare  con  luj
=»  Capuzzi,  10,  12. Bandi,  51,  52. Menghmi,  418,  419, Abba,  Not.  26.

214  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

treated  with  special  favour  by  Garibaldi.  With  his  long
moustache,  his  fine  person  and  carriage,  his  disinterested
virtue  and  his  inconsiderate  valour,  he  was  the  perfect  type
of  a  Hungarian  cavalier.  He  had  not,  perhaps,  the  military
talent  of  Bixio,  Medici,  or  Cosenz,  but  as  a  diplomatist  he
had  no  superior  among  the  Garibaldini,  and  it  might  be
supposed  that  his  connexion  with  the  Court  and  the
official  world  would  be  known  to  the  commandant  of
Orbetello.i

That  officer,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Giorgini,  had  the  dull
round  of  his  garrison  life  broken  in  upon  at  about  two  in  the
afternoon  of  May  7  by  a  visit  from  Tiirr,  who  had  driven
along  the  coast  road  from  Talamone.  The  Hungarian  pre-
sented his  letter  of  introduction  from  Garibaldi,  explained
the  situation,  told  the  story  of  the  lost  ammunition,  and
asked  for  all  the  powder  in  the  fortress.  Never,  perhaps,
was  an  officer  who  wished  to  combine  his  military  with  his
patriotic  duty  placed  in  a  more  difficult  position.

*  You  are  a  soldier,'  he  said  to  Tiirr,  *  and  you  know  what  it
means  to  give  up  the  arms  and  ammunition  of  a  fortress  without
orders  from  one's  superior  officer.'

'  But  what,'  answered  the  resourceful  Magyar,  '  if  you  get
the  orders  from  the  King  himself  ?  It  will  be  enough  for  you  to
send  him  this  letter  which  I  will  write.'

Sitting  down  there  and  then,  Tiirr  wrote  to  Trecchi,  the
King's  Garibaldian  aide-de-camp  :

'  Dear  Trecchi, — Tell  his  Majesty  that  the  ammunition  des-
tined for  our  expedition  has  been  left  in  Genoa.  We  beseech  his
Majesty  to  order  the  Commandant  of  the  fortress  of  Orbetello  to
provide  us  with  all  that  he  has  in  his  arsenal.'

Handing  this  letter  to  Giorgini,  Tiirr  observed  that  as  there
was  neither  telegraph  nor  railway,  it  might  be  a  week  before
an  answer  could  reach  the  Maremma  from  Turin  ;  that  it
was  impossible  for  Garibaldi  to  wait  at  Talamone,  because

1  Mem.  Star.  Mil.  i.  p.  11.  Chiala's  Pol.  Seg.  31-47.  Adamoli,  117,
118.  Abba,  46.  Mario,  244.  My  estimate  of  Tiirr  as  a  man  and  a  soldier
is  based  upon  facts  and  conversations  too  many  to  be  cited  here  in  full.

TtJRR  GETS  THE  AMMUNITION  215

in  less  than  a  week  the  European  powers  would  have  inter-
fered and  the  Neapolitans  would  have  completed  their  naval
and  military  defences  against  a  raid  which  was  already
known  to  have  left  Genoa.  Therefore,  said  Tiirr,  Giorgini
must  send  the  ammunition  before  he  receive  the  King's
reply.

'  Colonel,'  the  other  answered,  '  you  place  me  in  a
terrible  situation.  But  since  you  assure  me  that  the
undertaking  has  started  under  the  auspices  of  the  King,
I  put  the  arsenal  at  your  disposal.'  So  saying,  Giorgini
went  to  Talamone  and  saw  Garibaldi,  who,  dressed  as  a
Piedmontese  officer,  heartily  thanked  his  comrade  for
helping  him  at  a  pinch.  The  commandant  of  Orbetello
was  shortly  afterwards  arrested  and  brought  before  a
court  martial,  by  whom  he  was  acquitted. ^

Meanwhile  several  wagons  were  loaded  up  and  the  stores
taken  from  Orbetello  to  Talamone.  The  ammunition  was
partly  in  the  form  of  cartridges,  partly  of  loose  powder
packed  in  pine-wood  boxes.  Even  now  there  was  not  really
enough  ammunition  for  the  muskets,  and  some  of  the  Thou-
sand went  through  the  campaign  from  Marsala  to  Palermo
with  no  more  than  ten  cartridges  a  man.2  Other  war-like
supplies  were  added,  including  bullets  used  by  the  Bersaglieri,
which  proved  a  bad  fit  for  the  muskets  of  the  Garibaldini,^  a
hundred  Enfield  rifles,  and  lastly  two  bronze  cannon  cast  in
1802,  and  an  old  culverin  {colubrina)  which  had  been  out  of
date  long  before  the  era  of  Napoleon.  These  three,  together
with  two  more  garrison  pieces  of  like  antiquarian  interest
found  by  Garibaldi  in  the  old  tower  of  Talamone,  were  taken
to  Sicily,  mounted  there  on  wooden  carriages  roughly  put
together,  and  so  dragged  about  and  occasionally  fired  as  the
field  artillery  of  the  Thousand.* The  fame  of  these  five

1  Tiirr's  Da  Quarto,  6-9.  Mem.  Stor.  Mil.  i.  1-34.  This  decision  of
July  5  was  annulled  on  appeal  on  August  29  by  the  Supreme  Military
Tribunal,  but  this  quashing  was  only  a  question  of  law  and  did  not  affect
Giorgini' s  immunity  from  punishment.

2  Mazzini,  xi.  p.  Ixxviii.,  note.  ^  Conv.  Canzio.

*  Sampieri,  ig-22. Tiirr's  Da  Quarto,  S. Bandi,^^. Orsini,  ^g  {N.A.).

2i6  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

veterans,  transformed  by  Southern  imagination  into  twice
as  many  '  rifled  cannon  '  carr^dng  for  '  four  miles,'  made  the
Sicihans  take  courage  and  the  Neapohtan  soldiers  take
thought,  and  had  no  small  moral  influence  on  the  result  of
the  campaign.!

The  7th  and  8th  of  May  were  busy  days  at  Talamone.
WTiile  the  organisation  of  the  main  force  destined  for  Sicily
proceeded  apace,  sixt\'-one  unfortunate  men  who  had  sailed
•with  the  rest  from  Quarto  were  formed  into  a  separate
company  and  sent,  together  \\'ith  the  Tuscan  detachment
from  Leghorn,  to  invade  the  Papal  States  under  Zambianchi.
This  expedition  is  called  in  Italian  history  '  The  Diversion,'
because  it  was  intended  to  attract  the  notice  of  the  Neapoh-
tan government  away  from  Sicily  to  its  northern  border.
But  it  was  not  intended  merely  as  a  diversion.  It  was  part
of  the  national  policy  of  1S60,  conceived  by  Mazzini  in
Februarj^^  and  carried  out  in  the  autumn  by  Garibaldi  and
Cavour,  of  placing  the  Neapohtan  and  Papal  pro\dnces
'  between  two  fires,'  kindled,  the  one  in  Sicily  and  the  other
in  the  Marches.

Zambianchi's  expedition  was  not  a  mere  diversion,  be-
cause it  was  meant  to  succeed.  His  men  were  armed  by
Garibaldi  with  good  rifles,  which  would  better  have  gone  to
replace  some  of  the  WTetched  muskets  distributed  among
the  Thousand.  Zambianchi  was  to  traverse  the  north  of
the  Papal  States  eastward  by  way  of  Orvieto  and  Perugia
into  the  Marches.  Garibaldi  had  made  inquiries  about  the
Liberal  Committees  of  those  districts  and  beheved  that  they
W'Ould  rise  at  the  signal  of  Zambianchi's  approach.  The
insurrection  was  then  to  be  aided  by  Bertani  and  ]\Iedici,
whom  Garibaldi  had  left  at  Genoa,  with  orders  to  organise
reinforcements  alike  for  Sicily  and  for  the  Papal  States.
Zambianchi's  orders  were  to  place  himself  under  the  com-
mand of  Medici,  if  Medici  came  to  his  help.  From  the
Marches  he  was  to  penetrate  southwards  into  the  Neapohtan

1  Paolucci,  Corrao,  130,  131. Ccnv.  Salinas.
'  Mazzini,  xi,  pp.  xlv-xl\'ii.

ZAMBIANCHI'S  EXPEDITION  217

kingdom.  Rome  was  for  the  present  to  be  left  alone,
though  Garibaldi  hoped  to  enter  the  capital  of  Italy  at  the
end  of  the  year,  when  he  himself  returned  north  by  way  of
Naples.

The  fate  of  this  worse  than  foohsh  expedition  under
Zambianchi  can  be  briefly  told.  He  marched  up  country'  to
Scansano  and  Pitigliano,  where  he  waited  several  days.  On
the  night  of  May  18-19  he  invaded  Papal  territory  and  pro-
ceeded a  few  miles  towards  Orvieto  as  far  as  Grotte  di  Castro,
where  he  made  his  first  halt.  The  men  were  taking  their
mid-day  siesta  in  the  houses  of  the  town  when  the  Papal
gendarmes  galloped  past  the  sentinels  into  the  market-place.
A  skirmish  followed  in  the  streets,  and  the  Garibaldini
repelled  the  attack.  But  they  were  now  thoroughly  dis-
heartened, they  distrusted  and  dishked  their  leader,  who
had  shown  neither  sense  nor  valour  in  the  fight,  and  they
scarcely  numbered  230  all  told.  Fearing  the  approach  of
the  Papal  army,  they  waited  in  Grotte  till  the  evening,  and
retired  by  night  across  the  frontier.  Next  da]/  they  were
disarmed  by  the  Italian  government.  They  were  not,
however,  placed  under  arrest,  and  were  able  to  go  out  in  the
later  expeditions  to  Sicily  and  share  Garibaldi's  victories  at
Milazzo  and  Voltumo.

Only  their  leader,  Zambianchi,  was  kept  in  prison  until
February  1861,  and  then  banished  to  America  ;  he  died
upon  the  voyage.  He  was  a  man  of  immense  physical  size
and  strength,  probably  a  sincere  patriot,  but  a  bully,  a
ruffian,  and  if  not  a  coward  at  least  an  incompetent  blun-
derer. Garibaldi  never  in  his  hfe  made  a  worse  mistake,  in
every  sense,  than  when  he  sent  this  man,  whom  he  knew  to
have  shot  priests  in  Rome  in  1849,1  to  invade  the  Papal
States  at  the  head  of  a  totally  inadequate  number  of  Gari-
baldini who  despised  his  mihtary  incapacity  and  want  of
initiative,  and  strongly  resented  being  placed  under  the
orders  of  a  murderer.  Lucidly  the  whole  scheme  was  so
absurdly  inadequate  that  it  did  not  by  partial  success  bring

1  Trevelyan's  Gar.  Rome,  150.

2i8  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

scandal  and  embarrassment  on  Italy  and  jeopardise  the
support  which  Cavour  was  able  to  give  Garibaldi  himself. i

Meanwhile  the  organisation  of  the  more  fortunate
Thousand  who  were  destined  for  Sicily  proceeded  during
May  7  and  8  by  the  seashore  in  and  near  Talamone.  Their
exact  number  was  1089.  Thirty-three  were  afterwards
officially  classified  as  non-Italians,  but  this  small  foreign
element  comprised  fourteen  Italians  of  the  Trentino,  and
Giuseppe  Garibaldi  of  French  Nice  ;  the  '  American  '  in  the
same  list  was  his  son  Menotti,  born  of  Anita  on  the  Pampas
in  the  war  of  the  wilderness.  Four,  including  Tiirr,  were
Hungarians.  The  greater  part  of  the  Thousand  came  from
the  cities  of  North  Italy.  Bergamo  headed  the  list  with
160,  Genoa  sent  156,  including  the  Carabineers,  Milan  72,
Brescia  59,  and  58  Pavesi  followed  Benedetto  Cairoli.
Among  the  exiles  Austrian  Venetia  was  well  represented.
Forty-six  Neapolitans  of  the  mainland,  and  about  as  many
Sicilians,  sailed  to  free  their  homes.  Seven,  including  Lady
Russell's  friend  Braico,  were  revered  as  being  among  the
'  Neapolitan  prisoners  '  who  had  suffered  for  ten  years  in
Procida  or  Montefusco.  It  was  noticed  that  they  spoke  but
seldom,  and  then  with  gentle  utterance,  seeming  to  desire
victory  not  for  the  sake  of  vengeance,  but  in  order  to  open
the  prison  doors  to  the  many  thousands  of  innocent  people
who  were  still  enduring  the  agonies  that  had  darkened  their
own  lives. 2

A  large  proportion  of  the  Thousand  were  students  from
the  Universities,  not  yet  engaged  in  earning  their  livelihood.
But  those  who  have  classified  the  Thousand  according  to
professions  which  they  followed  in  i860  or  embraced  in  later
years, roughly estimate the result at 150  lawyers, 100

1  Pittaluga,  passim.  Guerzoni,  il.  48-57.  Nuvolari,  122.  Medici,
4-6. Milan  MSS.  A.  B.,  Plico,  xii.,  No.  14. Bandi,  11,  12,  33-35,  55-57.

2  Elenco.  There  is  also  an  incomplete  list  in  Tiirr' s  Div.  346-372  ;
cf.  De  Cesare's  F.  di  P.  ccliii.-ccliv.,  to  Abba,  73-75.  The  main  body  of
the  Tuscans,  who  had  come  from  Leghorn  in  the  A  delina,  were  sent  with
Zambianchi,  and  for  this  reason  alone  Tuscany  does  not  figure  largely  in
the  list  of  the  Thousand.

THE  THOUSAND  219

doctors  (who  used  to  fight  until  the  battle  was  over  and  then
tend  the  wounded),  100  merchants,  50  engineers,  20  chemists,
30  ship-captains,  10  painters  or  sculptors,  3  ex-priests,  one
lady  (Crispi's  wife),  besides  gentlemen  of  private  means,
government  employees,  authors,  professors,  journalists,  and
many  small  tradesmen  such  as  barbers  and  cobblers.  But
perhaps  half  the  whole  number  were  workmen  of  the  towns.
There  was  hardly  a  single  peasant.  The  average  age  was
very  young,  but  there  were  a  fair  number  of  veterans,  and
practically  all  the  officers  and  the  majority  of  the  rank  and
file  had  fought  in  the  Alps  the  year  before,  or  in  one  of  the
earlier  campaigns  of  Italian  Liberation.  1

Such  were  the  men  whom  Garibaldi  now  divided  into
eight  companies  of  infantry,  the  staff,  the  artillery,  twenty-
three  scouts  (guide),  who  had  to  dispense  with  horses,  and
the  Genoese  Carabineers.  Each  of  the  eight  companies  had
its  captain  named  by  Garibaldi,  and  each  captain  chose  his
own  lieutenants  and  non-commissioned  officers,  subject  to
the  General's  approval.  The  territorial  principle  was  largely
observed  in  forming  the  companies  and  choosing  the  officers.
The  eighth  company  was  entirely  from  Bergamo.  The
seventh,  or  '  students','  company,  under  Benedetto  Cairoli,
contained  as  many  as  fifty-two  Lombard  students,  chiefly
from  his  own  University  of  Pavia,  besides  twelve  merchants,
thirty  proprietors  and  civil  servants,  and  thirty-six  artisans
and  workmen,  all  men  of  intelligence  and  education,  deeply
devoted  to  the  Cairoli  family  which  had  a  wide  influence  in
that  part  of  Lombardy.2  The  first  four  companies  formed
the  first  battalion  under  Bixio,  the  last  four  the  second
battalion  under  Carini,  an  able  and  daring  Sicilian  officer.^

Thus  rapidly  organised,  the  little  army  was  drilled  on  the
sea-shore,  and  Garibaldi  held  his  first  review.  On  the  night
of  May  7  they  slept  round  their  camp  fires.* But  on  the

^  Abba,  73.  Elenco.  It  Is  hard  to  distinguish  in  the  list  between
master  workmen  and  their  journeymen  employees.

^  Abba,  59. Adamoli,  1-9.

^  The  eighth  company  was  in  fact  formed  at  Porto  S.  Stefano,  the  other
seven  at  Talamone. Turf's  Div.  22, Bandi,  52. Menghini,  418.

*  Capuzzi,  II,

220  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

evening  of  the  8th,  the  second  day  ashore,  an  incident
occurred,  unimportant  in  itself,  but  highly  significant  of  the
difficulties  overcome  by  Garibaldi  in  imposing  the  discipline
of  war  and  the  authority  of  the  officers  on  men  who  regarded
themselves  as  free  volunteers  and  in  some  sense  the  equals
of  every  one  except  their  General.  Some  of  the  Thousand
behaved  rudely  to  the  inhabitants,  as  they  never  did  after
they  reached  Sicily.  When  their  officers  interfered  they
refused  to  obey.  These  officers,  of  whom  Nino  Bixio
could  certainly  not  have  been  one,  were  unwilling  to
draw  swords  on  their  men  in  the  streets  of  Talamone,  and
sent  Bandi  on  board  the  Piemonte  to  fetch  the  General.
When  he  heard  what  had  happened,  '  he  glared  at  me,'  says
Bandi,  '  with  the  eyes  of  a  wild  boar.'  He  went  ashore  and
in  speechless  fury  ordered  the  whole  army  aboard.  The
mutineers  withered  up  at  the  sight  of  his  anger,  which  was
in  fact  the  main  safeguard  of  disciphne  throughout  the
expedition.!

That  night  no  one  dared  to  approach  his  cabin,  for  his
wrath  was  prolonged  by  the  continued  absence  of  his  commis-
sary Bovi,  who  had  been  sent  to  Grosseto  to  purchase  food
for  the  voyage.  Garibaldi  chafed  at  the  delay,  for  every-
thing else  was  ready  for  their  departure,  and  he  knew  that
the  Neapolitan  cruisers  must  every  hour  be  strengthening
their  watch  against  him  round  the  coasts  of  Sicily.  He
retired  to  rest,  leaving  orders  that  when  Bovi  appeared
he  was  to  be  thrown  overboard.  Just  before  daybreak  he
arrived  with  the  provisions.  Garibaldi  came  out  of  his
cabin,  while  all  held  their  breath  to  see  in  what  temper  he
had  woken  up.  When  he  saw  the  culprit,  he  puffed  at  his
cigar  and  said,  '  Good  morning,  Bovi ;  you  made  me  very
angry  last  night.'  All  breathed  again,  and  the  faithful  Bovi,
who  was  in  fact  an  excellent  commissary,  wiped  his  eyes
with  his  one  remaining  hand  (for  he  had  lost  its  fellow  in

^  Bandi,  53,  54.  Abba,  82,  83.  Clearly  the  incident  occurred  on  the
night  of  the  8th,  as  Abba  says,  not  on  the  7th,  as  Bandi  narrates.  For
Capuzzi  and  other  authorities  show  that  the  Thousand  slept  on  shore  on
the  night  of  the  7th.

TO  SEA  ONCE  MORE  221

the  defence  of  Rome),  and  explained  the  difficulties  which
had  caused  the  delay.  The  General  heard  him  out,  and
dismissed  him  with  *  Eh,  va  bene.'  If  Garibaldi  had  not
been  feared  as  well  as  loved,  he  could  not  have  extracted,  as
he  always  did,  the  utmost  service  that  each  man  could
render  to  the  cause. ^

The  provisions  were  now  on  board,  and  between  three
and  four  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  May  9  the  Piemonte  and
Lomhardo  hauled  up  their  anchors,  while  the  inhabitants  of
Talamone,  who  bore  no  ill-will  for  the  incident  of  the  pre-
vious night,  cheered  them  and  wished  them  luck  as  they
departed.  They  sailed  across  the  gulf  to  Porto  S.  Stefano,  at
the  foot  of  Monte  Argentario.  There  they  landed  again  for  a
few  hours,  to  enable  the  steamers  to  coal.  A  deputation
was  sent  to  the  government  coal  store,  with  orders  to
negotiate  politely,  but  as  Nino  Bixio  was  in  the  party,  the
parleying  was  soon  cut  short,  and  the  official  in  charge  was
seized  and  shaken  until  he  gave  up  the  keys  of  the  shed.
The  steamers  were  next  invaded  by  a  large  body  of  Ber-
saglieri  who  had  deserted  from  the  garrison  of  Orbetello,  in
order  to  take  part  in  the  expedition.  Garibaldi,  though  he
felt  sorry  for  the  poveri  ragazzi,  fulfilled  his  pledge  to  the
King  and  had  them  all  hunted  off  the  ship,  except  three  or
four  stowaways  who  succeeded  in  escaping  the  chase.2

During  the  morning,  the  old  muskets  supplied  by  La
Farina  were  distributed  among  the  eight  companies,  and
called  forth  general  amazement  at  their  extreme  badness.
It  was  difficult  even  to  fix  the  ill-fitting  bayonets  securely
on  the  muzzles.3

Early  in  the  afternoon  ^  of  May  9  the  two  vessels  finally
stood  out  to  sea  and  steered  a  course  for  the  north-west
corner  of  Sicily,  avoiding  the  ordinary  routes.  The  men
had  now  been  divided  afresh  between  the  two  ships,  in  a

1  Menghini,  419. Tiirr's  Da  Quarto,  12. Bandi,  58-62.

2  Crispi,  Diario,  20. Menghini,  421. Abba,  83, Abba,  Not,  30-32.
Bandi,  63-65.

*  Baratieri,  403,  404. Abba,  84. Menghini,  421. Abba,  Not.  31.
•*  Crispi,  Diana,  20. Castiglia  (La  Masa  (Sic. xv.).

222  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

more  orderly  manner  than  had  been  possible  at  Quarto.
On  the  Piemonte,  besides  Garibaldi  and  the  staff,  sailed
most  of  the  artillery  and  the  seventh  and  eighth  companies
from  Pavia  and  Bergamo.  The  first  six  companies  and  the
Genoese  Carabineers,  amounting  to  650  or  700  men,  were  in
the  more  capacious  Lombardo  under  Nino  Bixio.i  This  Hot-
spur soon  established  his  authority  according  to  his  usual
methods.  At  a  reply  from  a  corporal  which  he  considered
impertinent,  he  threw  a  plate  at  the  man's  face,  and  sum-
moning every  one  on  deck,  addressed  them  with  a  ferocity
of  intention  that  subdued  and  even  captivated  his  audience.

'  I  command  here.  I  am  everything.  I  am  Czar,  Sultan,
Pope.  I  am  Nino  Bixio.  I  must  be  obeyed  like  God.  If  you
dare  to  shrug  your  shoulders  or  to  think  of  mutinying,  I  wiU  come
in  my  uniform,  sabre  in  hand,  and  cut  you  to  pieces.'

Everyone  knew  that  he  would  be  as  good  as  his  word,  and
liked  him  none  the  less.  Loud  cheers  greeted  this  extra-
ordinary speech.  When  the  applause  had  died  away,  the
Sicilian  La  Masa  jumped  up  and  began  delivering  a  florid
oration  in  praise  of  Bixio,  in  the  style  in  which  he  so  often
charmed  the  crowd  at  the  street  corners  of  Palermo.  But
the  northerners  paid  him  scant  attention,  and  Bixio  strode
angrily  away,  conceiving  for  La  Masa  a  bitter  contempt
which  grew  steadily  throughout  the  campaign.^

Next  to  Garibaldi,  Bixio  was  the  chief  cause  of  the
success  of  the  expedition.  He  well  earned  his  title  of  '  the
second  of  the  Thousand.'  For  the  danger  of  that  little
army,  strong  in  individual  valour  and  self-sacrifice,  was  the
lack  of  constraining  authority,  and  this  want  was  filled  up,
mainly  indeed  by  the  veneration  and  fear  felt  by  all  for
Garibaldi,  but  partly  also  by  a  wholesome  terror  of  Bixio's
half-insane  but  sometimes  well-directed  violence.

Meanwhile,  on  the  Piemonte,  the  able  Sicilian,  Giordano
Orsini,  whom the General  had  put  in  command  of  the

1  Bologna  MSS.,  Bixio's  Notes.

2  Abba,  Not.  34-36.  Menghini,  421.  Capuzzi,  15.  Zeusi,  133,
Bandi,  67. Bologna  MSS.,  Bixio's  Letters,  for  his  views  of  La  Masa.

NINO BIXIO.
(From  a  photograph  about  IhgO.)

THE  GENERAL'S  SONG  223

artillery,  set  up  a  laboratory  on  deck,  where  all  took  their
share  in  casting  bullets  and  manufacturing  cartridges.  At
dawn  of  May  10  no  sail  was  in  sight.  Only  a  shoal  of
dolphins  followed  the  ships,  while  the  work  on  the  am-
munition and  the  singing  of  the  songs  of  '48  beguiled  the
hours  on  the  lonely  by-paths  of  the  sea.i

Garibaldi,  who  had  once  more  discarded  the  Piedmontese
uniform  assumed  at  Talamone  for  the  red  shirt  and  puncio,
was  in  a  mood  of  unalloyed  and  radiant  happiness.  The
coming  struggle  for  liberty  was  to  be  fought  out  alone  by
him  and  his  chosen  band,  in  the  mountains  of  a  romantic
island  almost  totally  unknown  to  the  world,  under  con-
ditions making  real  for  once  that  poetry  of  war  and  patriotism
after  which  his  whole  life  was  one  long  aspiration.  His
aide-de-camp  Bandi  found  him  in  his  deck-cabin,  spectacles
on  nose  to  mark  the  hour  of  hterary  labour.  The  verses  which
he  was  composing  sang  of  tyranny  and  of  revolt,  though  not
in  such  melodious  numbers  as  Carducci  has  often  found  for
the  theme.  He  told  Bandi  that  he  wished  his  young  men  to
set  his  words  to  music  and  sing  them  as  they  charged  on
the  battle-fields  of  Sicily.  Bandi  returned  on  deck  with  the
General's  poem,  and  soon  collected  in  a  circle  the  literary
and  musical  talent  of  the  Piemonte.  All  were  in  high  spirits,
and  not  incapable  of  poking  fun— even  at  him.  The  con-
cert proceeded,  with  strange  sounds,  to  uncouth  tunes,  amid
suppressed  laughter,  until  Garibaldi's  head  appeared  out  of
the  cabin.  '  What  music  is  that  ?  Have  you  composed  it  ?  '
'  No,  General !  Not  I !  '  '  Eh,  diavolo  !  '—and  the  head
was  withdrawn. 3

>  CasUgUa{LaMasa  (Sic),  xv.), Bandi,  66,  70, Capmzi,  14.  Zasio,  30.
*  Bandi,  70-72. Zasio,  30,

CHAPTER  XIII

THE  LANDING  OF  THE  THOUSAND  AT  MARSALA

'  He  either  fears  his  fate  too  much,

Or  his  deserts  are  small,
That  dares  not  put  it  to  the  touch,
To  gain  or  lose  it  all.'

Montrose.

While  Garibaldi  was  still  at  sea  the  diplomatic  storm  had
broken  over  Cavour's  head.  Prussia,  though  she  had  held
apart  from  the  reactionary  league  formed  against  Piedmont
during  the  winter,  roundly  declared  that  had  she  any  vessels
of  her  own  in  Italian  waters  she  would  herself  stop  the
pirates.  Russia  held  similar  language,  protesting  that  only
her  geographical  position  prevented  her  active  interference.
But  Austria,  the  most  formidable  of  the  three,  would  promise
no  help  to  the  government  of  Naples,  though  expressing  the
strongest  sympathy.^  England  for  more  than  a  fortnight
gave  no  official  sign,  and  Lord  John's  first  communication  on
May  22  seemed  chiefly  concerned  with  the  rumour  that  if
Piedmont  acquired  Sicily  or  Naples,  France  would  obtain
Genoa  or  the  island  of  Sardinia,  as  she  had  obtained  Nice
and  Savoy,  in  return  for  her  protection  against  Austria.
When  somewhat  reassured  on  this  point  by  a  promise  from
Cavour,  our  Government  allowed  itself  to  take  the  same
friendly  interest  in  Garibaldi's  chances  of  success  as  the
British  public  had  taken  from  the  first  announcement  of  his
departure  on  so  sportsmanlike  an  enterprise. 2

France  was,  in  fact,  the  Power  from  which  Cavour  had

1  Bianchi,  viil,  291,  292,  658. Chiala,  iv.  pp.  clxxiv,  clxxv.

2  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  12,  pp.  17-28.

224

CAVOUR'S  EQUIVOCAL  ORDERS  225

most  to  fear.  Throughout  the  revolution  of  i860  Napoleon,
with  more  than  his  usual  uncertainty  of  purpose,  was  per-
petually vacillating  between  the  desire  to  protect  the
Neapolitan  government  against  the  movement  for  Italian
unity,  and  the  desire  to  reform  or  overthrow  it  by  some
Liberal  revolution  engineered  in  French  interests. 1  On
May  7,  before  any  other  Power  had  protested,  his  Ministers
sent  a  menacing  expostulation  to  Turin,  within  a  day
of  Garibaldi's  departure  from  Quarto. 2  And  they  followed
up  their  protest  by  stopping  the  projected  withdrawal  of  the
French  troops  from  Rome.  With  revolution  beginning  in
the  South,  Napoleon  could  feel  no  certainty  that  Rome
would  not  be  attacked  before  the  year  was  out,  and  when
he  had  proposed  to  withdraw  his  own  garrison,  he  had  by
no  means  intended  to  allow  the  Italians  to  occupy  the
Papal  city.3

On  May  7,  Cavour  telegraphed  to  the  Governor  of  Cagliari
in  Sardinia  : —

'  Garibaldi  has  embarked  with  400  volunteers  on  two  Rubat-
tino  steamers  for  Sicily.  If  he  enters  a  port  of  Sardinia  arrest
the  expedition.  I  authorise  you  to  employ,  if  required,  the
squadron  commanded  by  Count  Persano,'

Next  day  he  sent  a  further  explanatory  telegram  :—

'  Do  not  arrest  the  expedition  out  at  sea.  Only  if  it  enters  a
port.'  4

Cavour  afterwards  declared  that  he  sent  the  orders  to  arrest
Garibaldi  because  he  heard  that  the  expedition  was  to  be
diverted  against  the  Papal  States. ^  But  in  his  telegram  of
May  7,  he  had  mentioned  Sicily  as  being  Garibaldi's  destina-
tion, and  it  therefore  seems  more  probable  that  his  real
purpose  in  sending  the  message  was  to  save  his  own  position

1  Elliot,  31,  32,  43,  44.
"  Chiala,  iv.  pp.  clxxi.,  clxxii.

*  See  Appendix  L,  below.  '  Why  the  French  evacuation  of  Rome  was
stopped.'

^  Chiala,  iii.  245,  246.

'  Chiala,  iv.  p.  clxxvi.,  and  iii.  248  (Letter  of  May  14).

9

226  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

in  face  of  the  diplomatic  world,  by  enabling  him  to  declare
that  he  had  given  orders  for  the  arrest.  He  had  little  cause
to  fear  that  Garibaldi  would  be  so  foolish  as  to  sail  into  a
port  occupied  by  vessels  of  the  royal  navy,  and  none  to
suppose  that  the  Piedmontese  admiral  would  be  '  strict  in  his
arrest.'  Persano,  indeed,  received  on  May  9,  at  Cagliari,
these  strange  orders  to  stop  Garibaldi  if  he  met  him  in  a  port
of  Sardinia,  but  not  out  at  sea.  Suspecting,  partly  no  doubt
from  the  conditional  nature  of  the  order,  that  the  arrest  was
not  really  intended  to  take  place  at  all,  he  wrote  on  the  same
day  (May  9)  from  Sardinia  to  Turin  to  ask  Cavour  if  the
message  was  seriously  meant.  In  a  few  days  the  answer
came  back  by  wire  that  '  the  Ministry  had  decided  '  for  the
arrest.  The  Admiral,  choosing  to  assume  that  this  meant
that  Cavour  differed  from  the  rest  of  the  '  Ministry,'  tele-
graphed back,  *  Ho  capito,'  '  I  understand.'  It  mattered
little  what  he  understood,  for  by  that  time  Garibaldi  had
safely  landed  in  Sicily .^

Late  on  the  evening  of  May  10,  Cavour,  having  heard
that  Garibaldi  had  put  into  the  Gulf  of  Talamone,  and  there-
fore supposing  that  he  had  diverted  his  attack  from  Sicily  to
the  Papal  States,  gave  orders  that  a  war  vessel  should  go  to
Porto  S.  Stefano  and  arrest  the  Thousand  if  they  were  still  to
be  found  on  the  Tuscan  coast.  But,  as  we  have  seen,  they  had
left  Porto  S.  Stefano  for  Sicily  that  very  day.^  Once  assured
of  this  fact,  the  government  thenceforth  used  every  un-
official means  to  secure  the  success  of  the  expedition.  Its
policy  was  sketched  out  in  a  correspondence  between
the  two  greatest  Italian  statesmen,  the  Tuscan  and  the
Piedmontese.  On  May  15,  Ricasoli  wrote  to  Cavour  that
it  would  be  wrong  as  well  as  dangerous  to  oppose  obstacles
to  the  enthusiasm  of  the  country  for  Garibaldi's  patriotic
enterprise.

'  By  as  much  as  the  Royal  government  ought  to  impede  any

'  Persano,  17-20. Chiala,  iii.  247.

2  Chiala,  vi.  562.  La  Farina,  ii.  317-319.  See  also  Ricasoli,  v.  50.
Farini's  despatch  of  May  11  says  the  Navy  is  to  arrest  Garibaldi,  '  s'ils  le
trouvent  encore  dans  les  eaux  de  Rome  et  de  Toscane.'

A  NIGHT  ADVENTURE  227

attack  on  the  Papal  States  at  this  moment,  by  so  much  ought  it
to  tolerate  and  even  support  and  help  the  aid  given  by  Italians
to  the  Sicilian  insurrection,  if  that  can  be  done  covertly  and  at
least  without  compromising  ourselves  too  much.  We  cannot
sufficiently  proclaim  before  Europe  the  duty  that  binds  Italians
to  help  their  compatriots  who  are  subject  to  the  bad  governments'
{ai  mail  governi).

On  May  23,  Cavour  replied  to  Ricasoli, —

'  I  entirely  agree  with  you  about  Garibaldi's  expedition.  I
have  nothing  to  add,  except  that  we  must  save  appearances  so
as  not  to  increase  our  diplomatic  difficulties.  France  has  shown
less  displeasure  than  I  expected.'  1

Already  the  editors  of  the  Cavourian  press  had  hailed
the  expedition  of  Garibaldi  as  the  rallying  point  lor  all
sections.  He  had,  they  declared,  by  sailing  with  the  war-
cry  of  '  Italia  e  Vittorio  Emanuele,'  united  the  country,
and  put  an  end  to  party  strife. ^

On  the  night  of  May  lo-ii  the  Lomhardo  and  Piemonte,^
wholly  cut  off  from  the  world  which  the  news  of  their  voyage
had  stirred  to  such  conflicting  passions,  were  plying  their
way  through  the  darkness  of  the  northern  Sicilian  waters.
The  ships'  lights  were  extinguished,  and  all  were  on  watch
for  the  enemy.  Garibaldi  had  gone  ahead  in  the  more
swift-sailing  Piemonie,  in  the  hope  of  catching  sight  before
sundown  of  the  island  of  Marettimo,  the  outermost  of  the
JEgSides,  visible  in  clear  weather  at  a  distance  of  sixty  miles.
Darkness  fell  before  he  could  achieve  his  purpose,  and  he
was  fain  to  put  about  and  sail  back  to  find  the  Lombardo,
cursing  his  own  folly  for  having  lost  sight  of  the  ship  that
carried  two-thirds  of  his  fighting  force.  Bixio  meanwhile,
in  the  gravest  anxiety  at  losing  touch  with  the  Piemontc,
held  on  his  course  as  fast  as  his  crank  engines  would  allow,
growing  more  and  more  doubtful  whether  he  should  ever

*  Ricasoli,  v.  59. Chiala,  iii.  252.

2  Cory.  Merc,  May  10.

'  For  their  route  to  Marsala  see  Map  V.  at  end  of  book.

Q  2

228  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

see  Garibaldi  again.  Suddenly,  about  ten  at  night,  he  was
aware  of  a  vessel  coming  to  meet  him  through  the  darkness.
All  attempt  to  exchange  signals  failed,  and  Bixio,  desperately
resolving  that  it  was  one  of  the  enemy's  cruisers,  ordered
Elia  to  steer  the  ship  against  the  intruder,  and  all  hands  to
prepare  to  board.  As  he  lay  stretched  over  the  prow  of  the
Lombardo,  sweating  with  excitement  in  his  eagerness  to  be
the  first  on  the  enemy's  deck,  he  heard  a  well-known  voice
hail  him  across  the  waters,  '  Captain  Bixio  !  '  '  General !  '
'  Why  do  you  want  to  send  us  to  the  bottom  ?  '  So  ended
an  incident  which  caused  as  much  misery  to  the  actors  as
any  of  the  dangers  fromx  the  real  enemy  which  they  after-
wards encountered  on  land.  For  on  board  the  Piemonte
also  the  midnight  assailant  had  for  some  minutes  been  taken
for  a  Neapolitan  cruiser.  Garibaldi  had  seen  the  lights  of
the  enemy's  squadron  around  him — so  at  least,  he  believed,
but  whether  rightly  or  wrongly  it  is  impossible  to  say — and
for  that  reason  had  not  dared  to  show  the  arranged  signals
for  Bixio's  benefit. i

If  the  two  steamers  had  lost  each  other  that  night,  they
would  probably  never  have  met  again,  for  it  had  been
impossible  to  decide  on  a  rendezvous  where  the  disembarka-
tion should  take  place.  Palermo,  guarded  by  some  20,000
regular  troops,  was  the  objective  of  the  campaign,  and  its
capture  would  mean  the  instant  acquisition  of  the  western
half  of  Sicily,  possibly  of  the  whole  island.  Garibaldi  had  at
one  time  thought  of  running  ashore  as  near  to  the  capital  as
the  Gulf  of  Castellamare,  but  had  abandoned  the  plan  as  too
hazardous.  A  landing-place  was  required  within  a  few  days'
march  of  Palermo,  but  not  so  dangerously  near  it  as  Castella-
mare. It  had  therefore  been  decided  to  land  somewhere
between  Trapani  and  Sciacca — most  probably  at  Porto  Palo
or  at  Sciacca  itself.  But  the  place  and  hour  of  disembarka-
tion would  of  necessity  be  determined  by  the  position  and

^  Castiglia  {Sic.  e  la  Masa,  xvi.).  Bixio,  164-166.  Capuzzi,  16,  17.
Giusta,  5.  Bandi,  75,  76.  Ahha  Not,  36,  37.  Elia,  ii.  22-24.  Mem.
341,  342.  The  usual  slight  variations  in  detail  will  be  noticed  in  these
accounts.

SICILY  IN  SIGHT  229

movements  on  the  next  morning  of  the  dozen  NeapoHtan
cruisers  guarding  the  coast-Hne  of  Sicily  against  the  ex-
pected invasion,  of  which  no  fewer  than  four,  the  Valoroso,
the  Stromboli,  the  Capri,  and  the  Partenope  were  patroUing
the  thirty  miles  run  between  Trapani  and  Mazzara.i

At  dawn  on  May  11  the  first  beams  of  the  sun  touched
^Etna's  cap,  and  all  the  Sicilian  headlands  one  by  one,
until  in  the  west  the  ray  struck  on  the  bare  rocks  of  Monte
Pellegrino  that  overhangs  Palermo  city,  even  as  when
Hamilcar  the  Carthaginian  made  his  strange  encampment
on  its  summit ;  and,  last  of  all,  Eryx,  the  famed  acropolis  of
Astarte  and  of  Aphrodite,  that  looks  out  over  the  islands  of
the  iEgades  and  the  baths  of  ocean.

The  two  ships  that  bore  the  fate  of  Italy  were  still  far  out
to  sea,  but  drawing  nearer  and  nearer  to  those  guarded
coasts.  Before  daylight  many  of  the  Thousand,  crowding
on  deck  to  catch  the  first  sight  of  Sicily,  mistook  for  land  a
transitory  bank  of  clouds.  But  with  the  rising  sun  appeared
the  summit  of  the  island  of  Marettimo,  towards  which  they
were  steering,  and  ere  long  Sicily  herself  was  disclosed  before
their  eyes.^

They  sailed  parallel  with  the  coast  from  Cape  S.  Vito,
keeping  out  from  Trapani,  where  were  shoals  and  a  Bourbon
garrison.  Running  through  the  archipelago  of  the  .^gades,
'  almost  grazing  Marettimo,'  they  left  Favignana  on  the  east.s
In  the  prison  there  lay  Nicotera  and  the  other  surviving
leaders  of  Pisacane's  expedition.*  Garibaldi  and  his  men
knew  this  well,  and  gazed  at  the  island,  thinking  how
soon  either  they  themselves  would  be  dead  or  these  their

J  De  Cesare,  ii,  202.  Franci,  i,  175,  182.  Castiglia  {Sic.  e  La  Masa,
xvi-xx).  Mem.  342.  Pittaluga,  9,  10.  Tiirr's  Da  Quarto,  13.  Crispi,
(4),  646. Bandi,  77,  78.

-  Crispi,  Diario,  20. Bandi,  77.

^  Calvino  {Guardione,  il.  426).  Ella,  who  commanded  the  Lombardo
under  Bixio,  writes  to  me  that  they  steered  for  Marettimo,  '  leaving  on
their  left  the  island  of  Favignana.'  Marettimo  they  left  on  tlieir  right,  as
Tiirr  told  me,  and  as  all  authorities  imply.

■*  See  pp.  68-70,  above.

230  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

forerunners  and  comrades  be  released.  Nicotera  himself,  when
he  saw  two  vessels  go  by  flying  no  flag,  wondered  what
they  could  be.  *  Nevertheless,'  as  he  afterwards  told  his
deliverers  when  he  met  them  next  month  in  Palermo,  '  I
felt  in  my  heart  I  know  not  what,  and  a  strange  gladness
came  over  me.  Then,  when  later  I  heard  the  cannon
[from  Marsala],  I  suddenly  remembered  Garibaldi,  and
guessed  the  secret  of  those  two  mysterious  steamers.'  i

Garibaldi's  first  plan  had  been,  on  emerging  from  among
the  TEgdides,  to  keep  well  out  to  sea,  half  way  across  to
Cape  Bon  in  Africa,  in  order  to  avoid  the  cruisers  along  the
coast,2  and  later  in  the  day,  when  he  had  rounded  the
western  face  of  Sicily,  to  make  a  dash  for  Porto  Palo  or
Sciacca.  Various  persons,  including  Castiglia,  the  excellent
seaman  who  was  captain  of  the  Piemonte,  claim  to  have  been
his  advisers  in  the  change  of  plan  by  which  he  determined
instead  to  run  straight  from  Marettimo  to  Marsala.^

The  sight  of  two  war  vessels  anchored  off  the  port  of
Marsala  caused  only  a  momentary  hesitation,  for  Garibaldi,
after  examining  them  through  his  telescope,  pronounced
them  from  their  build  to  be  British.  In  this  belief  he  was
confirmed  some  minutes  later  by  some  Englishmen  on  board
a  sailing  vessel  northward  bound  from  Marsala,  who,  as  they
passed  the  Piemonte,  replied  to  inquiries  that  there  were
no  Neapolitan  vessels  at  the  port.  As  they  sailed  on  past
the  Lombardo,  Bixio,  after  trying  in  vain  to  throw  them
despatches  wrapped  in  a  piece  of  bread,  shouted  to  them  to
give  the  news  in  Genoa  that  Garibaldi  had  landed  at  Marsala.
They  answered  with  a  cheer,  and  their  well-built  craft  shot
on  over  the  water.

At  full  steam  ahead  Garibaldi  made  straight  for  port.
On  the  way,  about  noon,  he  fell  in  with  a  large  Sicilian

•  Bandi,  79,  205.  Nicotera,  43.  Abba,  91.  Calvino  [Guardione,
ii.  427).

-  He  must  already,  when  threading  the  iEgades,  have  narrowly  missed
falling  in  with  the  Valoroso,  which  was  cruising  '  among  the  islands  of
Trapani '  that  day. Castiglia  {Sic.  e  La  Masa,  xx.).

■'  Mem.  342.  Castiglia  {Sic.  e  La  Masa,  pp.  xvi-xix),  TUrr's  Da
Quarto,  13. Crispi  (4),  646. Bandi,  76-78.

MARSALA  231

fishing-boat,  which  he  took  in  tow,  as  it  would  serve  for  the
work  of  disembarkation.  The  master,  a  man  named
Strazzera,  came  on  board  shaking  with  fear,  but  when  he
had  tasted  a  glass  of  wine,  and  heard  his  own  language
talked  by  fellow-Sicilians,  he  recovered  enough  courage  to
give  what  news  he  had.  He  believed  that  a  battalion  of
Neapolitan  infantry  had  recently  left  the  town,  and  he  was
certain  that  the  Neapolitan  war  vessels  had  quitted  the  port
some  hours  before,  on  a  cruise  towards  Sciacca.  These
vessels,  indeed,  were  still  visible  not  many  miles  away  to
the  south-east  ai  Marsala,  and  were  already  turning  back
to  overhaul  the  new-comers.  If  they  could  return  and
open  fire  within  two  hours,  they  would  yet  be  in  time  to
stop  the  disembarkation  and  slaughter  Garibaldi  with  all
his  men. It  was  a  race  for  more  than  life  and  death. 1

The  modern  city  of  Marsala,  of  Arab  name  and  founda-
tion, was  the  successor  of  the  Phoenician  and  classical
Lilybaeum.  The  port  of  the  ancient  city  had  been  on  the
north  side  of  the  town,  and  tlie  shallow  modern  harbour  on
the  south  side,  with  its  long  mole  and  lighthouse,  was  an
entirely  artificial  creation,  due  to  the  enterprise  of  successive
generations  of  English  merchants,  who  had  settled  down  at
this  remote  and  half-civilised  spot,  to  doctor  the  country-
made  wines  of  Western  Sicily  into  their  excellent  '  Marsala.'
The  city,  still  in  i860  four-square  within  its  medieval  walls,
stood  a  few  hundred  yards  back  from  the  sea.  But  for  the
activities  of  the  English  merchants  it  would  have  had  little
claim  to  be  called  a  port  town  at  all.  Beyond  its  walls,
along  the  side  of  the  harbour  wharfs  and  further  to  the  south,
stretched  for  a  mile  or  more  the  imposing  bagln  of  the
English — Wood,  Woodhouse,  and  Ingham — and  of  the  one
native  wine  manufacturer,  Florio. A  baglio  at  Marsala  was

^  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  17,  p.  6.  Castiglia  {Sic.  e  La.  Masa,  xviii,  xix).
Menghini,  421.  Bandi,  79-81.  Conv.  Tiirr.  Tilrr's  Da  Qua/to,  15.
Abba  Not.  41.  Giusta,  5.  Riistow,  138.  Zeiisi,  132.  Brnzzesi.  11,  12.
Conv.  Canzio.  Crispi,  Diario,  20.  Calvino  (Guardione,  ii.  427).  Elta,  ii.
24. Crispi  (3),  597. Ca::ipo,  104.

232  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAXD

a  large  spizr  of  ground,  protected  fortress-%vi5e  by  high
MT-r :  i2i': '  f  ' :  Is,  withm  which  were  ranged  the  sheds  for  the
zii:iu;i::Mre  md  the  vaults  for  the  storage  of  the  wine,  be-
^des  in  some  instances  a  conrtyard  in  the  middle,  and  a
well-appointed  country  house,  where  the  comfort  and
hospitahty  of  an  English  home  stood  entrenched  in  a  foreign
land.  Hie  imposing  hne  of  these  mercantile  fortresses,  each
flying  the  British  flag  in  a  time  of  danger  and  disturbance,
was  more  prominently  in  view  than  the  city  itself  to  persons
approaching  Marsala  from  the  sea.

When  the  news  of  Riso's  revolt  at  the  Gancia  Convent  in
Palermo  reached  Marsala  on  April  6,  a  Liberal  demonstra-
tion took  place,  the  tricolour  was  carried  through  the  streets
=iid  the  Bourbon  arms  pulled  down.  But  the  news  of  Riso's
irziplete  discomfiture  quickly  succeeded,  and  a  month  of
iririil  expectation  er.s'-^a  till  on  Mav  6  a  column  under
tie  riers  :;  Ge-er  /.  It:  ;.  rr  ri  :r.  :  r  tDwn,  imprisoned
or  in-  r  ^  ly  t  .r  .riirrs  Lzd  iis^r-ied  the  inhabitants,
iri:--:i:r.r  t  ~ r  ?  r :.;ji  zolcny.  Bui  on  May  9-10  the  govem-
zie-T  '  .:._  r.  iTiible  foUy,  transported  Letizia's  force  from
Mars  ^n  :  ^ : .:  : :  7  ilermo,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  they  knew
G  ir. ;  G  i: : :  r.  i"  r  5  lile  i.  and  expected  him  to  land  on  exactly
n^t  ZLzz  : ;  '.di  ; :  is:  :o  the  north  of  Mazzara.  Indeed,  on
Met  6,  GenerG  LsjiG  vrltl  ;ji:Gier  force  was  sent  from
PGern.:  :r  land  into  the  same  district  to  await  Garibaldi,
It  -'z-r  '.'zry  time  that  Letizia  was  being  withdrawn  thence
: :  r  Germo  by  sea  Landi,  on  May  11,  had  scarcely  marched
as  tar  as  Alcan:  s:  that  Garibaldi  came  to  Marsala  at  a
zi:~r't  ~hen  there  "as  no  force  nearer  than  the  garrison
::  hrit  m  TGs  ~zs  the  hrst  ::  the  sehes  of  fatal  mflitary
mistakes  'z'_  a:  a  tai  I-:'v-emor  Cir.  h::iG  and  his  suc-
sessttE  5a::irded  iii  losing  the  Gland  iz  an  annament
ltLG:r:  asl:  inferior  to  their  own.^

The  Brnia  l:ny  in  the  baglii  of  Marsala,  alarmed  at
dndhig  thetasr  .  r=  deprived  of  their  arms  by  a  government

*  De  Cssare,  fi.  191,  19a,  200, G. . : z 7, Naples  MS.,  Landi.

THE  BRITISH  SHIPS  233

politically  hostile,  amid  a  population  socially  untrustworthy,
appealed  for  the  protection  of  their  own  country.  For  this
reason,  and  not,  as  was  afterwards  averred,  out  of  collusion
with  Garibaldi,  H.M.S.  Argus  and  Intrepid  were  detached
from  the  squadron  at  Palermo  at  nightfall  on  May  10,  and
arrived  at  Marsala  at  ten  on  the  following  morning,  about
three  hours  in  advance  of  the  Piemonte  and  LombardoA
The  Englishmen  found  no  other  warships  at  Marsala,  for
two  or  three  vessels  of  the  Neapolitan  squadron  had  started
on  their  cruise  towards  the  south  so  short  a  time  before  that
they  were  still  visible  in  the  offing  at  five  or  six  miles
distance.  2

The  British  officers  anchored  their  ships  well  outside  the
port,  the  Argits  two  or  three  miles  out,  and  the  Intrepid
nearer  in  shore,  but  still  '  three-quarters  of  a  mile  to  a  mile
from  the  lighthouse  at  the  end  of  the  mole.'  From  these
exterior  positions  they  did  not  move  during  the  exciting
events  that  followed,  and  consequently  offered  not  the
slightest  physical  impediment  to  any  operations  which  the
Neapolitans  wished  or  could  have  wished  to  carry  out.^

So  little  was  Garibaldi  or  any  other  thunderbolt  expected
out  of  the  blue  of  that  calm  and  dreamy  May  noontide  that
the  two  commanding  officers  were  on  shore,  being  shown
over  the  baglii  by  their  fellow-countrymen,  and  hearing  their
complaints  about  the  disarmament,  when  the  party  was
called  out  from  the  wine  stores  to  watch  two  strange
steamers  from  the  north-west  running  fast  for  port.  Cap-
tain Marryat,  of  the  Intrepid,  noticed  that  the  leading
steamer,  the  smaller  of  the  two,  had  a  boat  in  tow. There

>  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  17,  pp.  5,  6.  Winnington-Ingram,  172,  197.  The
A  rgus  is  described  as  a  steam-paddle  sloop,  six  guns,  and  the  Intrepid  as  a
gunboat.  The  English  warships  at  this  period  were  wooden  ships  of  the
old  build  with  both  steam  and  masts.

"  De  Sivo,  iii.  187.  De  Cesare,  ii.  192,  203.  Girolamo,  9.  Br.  Pari.
Papers,  17,  p.  2. Daily  News,  May  22,  i860,  p.  5,  col.  4.

•*  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  17,  pp.  2,  6,  7,  Winnington-Ingram,  197.  Italian
maps  of  the  affair  incorrectly  represent  the  British  ships  as  nearer  inshore.
But  the  separate  evidence  of  the  two  British  captains  is  explicit  and
unimpeachable.

234  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

appeared  to  be  armed  men  on  board  the  vessels,  and  as  they
approached  they  were  seen  to  hoist  the  Piedmontese  colours,
the  tricolour  of  Italy,  but  with  the  cross  of  the  House  of
Savoy  in  the  middle — not  Mazzini's  '  neutral  banner.'  i

The  sailors  on  board  the  Argus,  who  had  a  close  view  of
the  Piemonte  as  she  passed  under  their  stern,  saw  on  board
her,  men  in  red  blouses,  '  which  gave  them  somewhat  the
appearance  of  English  soldiers.'  The  sympathetic  Britons,
alike  on  the  ships  and  on  the  shore,  now  clearly  perceived
that  it  '  was  a  case  of  Viva  Italia,'  and  an  officer  in  a  red
blouse  with  a  feather  in  his  cap,  standing  on  the  bridge  of
the  Piemonte  beside  the  captain,  was  voted  by  some  of  those
on  board  the  Argus  to  be  Garibaldi  himself.  The  mouth  of
a  cannon  was  noticed  projecting  from  the  bulwarks.  The
larger  vessel  that  followed  was  seen  to  be  '  literally  crammed
with  men  like  herrings  in  a  cask  ;  some  in  red,  some  in  dark
green  like  riflemen,  but  by  far  the  greater  part  in  plain
citizens'  attire.'  They  made  straight  for  the  port,  the
Piemonte  anchoring  safely  inside  the  mole  among  a  number
of  small  English  merchant  vessels,  but  Bixio's  Lonihardo,
of  deeper  draught,  grounding  on  the  shallows  at  the  mouth
of  the  harbour,  within  a  hundred  yards  of  the  lighthouse.^

It  was  now  about  1.30  or  2  o'clock.  The  Neapolitan
vessels  had  perceived  their  prey  and  were  coming  back  in
the  utmost  haste  from  the  south.  The  sloop  steamer
Stromholi,  after  towing  the  sailing  frigate  Partettope  some
little  distance,  left  her  to  follow,  and  made  all  speed  for  the
scene  of  action. ^  With  destruction  thus  drawing  near  them
apace,  the  Thousand  began  to  disembark,  making  for  a
point  near  the  end  of  the  mole.

Garibaldi  sent  Tiirr  ashore  first  with  a  small  body  of  men
to  occupy  Marsala. Their  welcome  was  friendly  but  timid.

^  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  17,  p.  6.  Daily  News,  May  22,  i860,  p.  5,  col.  4.
I  have  seen  the  flag  of  the  Piemonte,  preserved  in  the  baglio  Ingham.

-  Daily  News,  May  22,  i860,  p.  5,  col.  4  ;  cf.  Times,  May  29,  '  A  corre-
spondent writes — '.  I.  L.  N.,  467  (May  19).  Elia,  ii.  25.  Br.  Pari.
Papers,  17,  p.  6.

*  Castiglia  [Sic.  e  La  Masa,  xxi). Sampieri,  14.

THE  LANDING  BEGUN  235

for  the  leading  citizens  had  fled  from  the  town  during  its
recent  occupation  by  Letizia's  punitive  column,  and  the
remainder  were  frightened  by  the  memory  of  that  event  and
by  the  approach  of  the  Neapolitan  war  vessels.  In  the
centre  of  the  town  some  junior  offlcers  of  the  Argus  and
Intrepid  were  surprised  as  they  sat  eating  ices  in  a  cafe  by
the  appearance  in  the  doorway  of  armed  men  in  strange
uniforms  ;  shortly  afterwards,  in  obedience  to  orders  sent
them  by  their  captains,  the  young  men  hastened  back  to
their  ships.  The  invaders  made  haste  to  seize  the  telegraph
office,  where  they  found  a  form  filled  in  with  a  message
evidently  just  dispatched  to  Trapani,  announcing  the
arrival  of  two  Piedmontese  steamers  with  armed  men  on
board.  From  Trapani  the  news  could  be  wired  to  Palermo.
The  new-comers  at  once  sent  another  message  : '  My  mistake;
they  are  two  of  our  own  vessels.'  Tradition  has  it  that  the
official  at  Trapani  replied  '  idiot !  '  {imhecille  !) }  but  in  any
case  the  authorities  at  Palermo  were  not  deceived,  and  while
the  disembarkation  was  only  beginning,  had  wired  to  Naples
to  announce  Garibaldi's  arrival,  and  to  ask  that  troops
should  at  once  be  dispatched  from  Naples  to  Marsala.^

Meanwhile  the  main  body  of  Garibaldini  was  disembark-
ing. The  ships'  boats  and  the  fishing  smack  which  they
had  towed  into  port  would  not  have  sufficed  for  a  rapid
landing,  especially  as  the  Lomhardo  had  struck  outside  the
harbour.  But  the  sailors  of  Marsala,  induced  by  political
sympathy,  by  promises  of  high  pay,  and  in  some  cases  by
revolvers  held  at  their  heads,  brought  out  swarms  of  small
boats  to  the  rescue. ^  The  rapidity  with  which  the  disem-
barkation was  effected  roused  the  professional  admiration
of  many  experienced  English  spectators. ^

'  Tiirr's  Da  Quarto,  15,  16.  Bruzzesi,  15,  16.  Abba  Not.  55.  Br.
Pari.  Papers,  17,  pp.  7,  8. Capuzzi,  18. I.  L.  N.,  467  (May  19).

2  De  Sivo,  iii.  193. De  Cesare,  ii.  224.

'  Girolamo,  10,  11.  Tiirr's  Da  Quarto,  19.  CastigUa  {Sic.  e  la  Masa,
XX.). Daily  News,  May  22,  i860,  p.  5,  col.  4. Campo,  104.

"•  '  Nothing  could  excel  the  able  way  in  which  the  landing  was  effected.'
— Letter  of  English  eye-witness  in  the  Times,  May  29,  i860.  See  also  Times,
May  25,  another  such  letter  :  '  The  landing  was  effected  in  gallant  style,
and  with  most  extraordinary  celerity  and  order,'

236  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

When  at  length  the  Stromboli  steamed  up  within  shot,
the  Piemonte  had  discharged  all  its  living  cargo  on  the  mole,
but  the  Lomhardo  had  still  three-quarters  of  its  men  on
board,  to  say  nothing  of  the  cannon  and  ammunition. i  A
fairer  opportunity  for  making  an  end  of  the  expedition  on
the  spot  could  not  have  been  desired  by  a  zealous  and  capable
officer.  But  Captain  Acton,  of  the  Stromboli,  though  his
family  was  British  Catholic  in  origin,  had  the  traditions  of
Neapolitan  service  ingrained  through  several  generations
of  connection,  honourable  enough  indeed,  with  the  history  of
the  House  of  Bourbon.  The  responsibility  of  that  hour
was  too  much  for  him.

'  It  was  in  his  power,'  wrote  Captain  Marryat,  who  was
watching  from  the  shore  through  his  telescope,  '  to  place  his
steamer (s  ?)  within  200  or  300  yards  of  the  Sardinian  aground
[the  Lomhardo'],  and  in  such  a  position  that  every  shot  fired  by
him  would  have  raked  her  from  stem  to  stern  while  the  deck  was
crowded  with  men,  and  one  may  feel  convinced  that  all  landing
by  boats  would  have  ceased.  ...  So  impressed  was  I  with  the
idea  that  the  Commander  of  the  Neapolitan  steamer  would  open
fire  an  hour  before  he  did  that  I  advised  the  removal  of  English
[merchant]  vessels  out  of  the  port.'

This  proved  impossible  because  of  a  head  wind,  so  that
the  merchant  vessels  remained  in  port  to  take  their
chance.

No  account  by  Acton  of  his  own  motives  has  ever  been
given  to  the  world,  but  we  may  perhaps  deduce  from  his
actions  that  his  principal  motive  for  hesitation  was  the  very
natural  though  quite  unfounded  suspicion  that  the  almost
simultaneous  arrival  at  Marsala  of  the  British  war-ships  and
the  invading  expedition  was  the  result  of  a  dark  English
conspiracy.  The  Neapolitan  Government  and  all  its
employees  were  rightly  convinced  of  the  hostility  of  Great
Britain,  but  erred  in  supposing  her  capable  of  every  kind  of
outrage.  Terror  of  the  British  war-ships  cruising  osten-
tatiously and  in  large  numbers  round  the  island  was
one  of  the  chief  causes  of  Neapolitan  miscalculation  and

1  Br.  Pari,  Papers,  17,  p.  6.

THE  NEAPOLITANS  OPEN  FIRE  237

panic  throughout  this  year  of  disaster.  Probably  Acton
was  no  wiser  than  the  government  he  served,  and  feared
that  the  moment  he  opened  fire  he  would  be  blown  out  of
the  water.  His  suspicions  were  the  keener  when  he  observed
among  the  invaders  a  number  of  soldiers  in  strange  red
uniforms,  which  he  took  for  British.  He  therefore  sent  a
boat's  crew  to  hail  the  Intrepid  and  inquire  whether  there
were  any  English  troops  ashore.  He  was  told  '  No,'  but
that  the  Commanders  of  the  two  EngHsh  men-of-war  were
on  shore,  and  a  few  other  naval  officers.  Even  then  he  did
not  begin  to  fire,  but  sent  again  to  the  Intrepid  to  ask  how
he  could  find  Captain  Marryat.  Meanwhile  that  officer,
together  with  his  colleague  Captain  Winnington-Ingrami
of  the  Argus,  who  had  known  and  admired  Garibaldi  four-
teen years  ago  at  Monte  Video,i  rowed  out  from  the  wine
stores  to  the  Stromboli  and  interviewed  Acton  on  board  his
own  ship.  Speaking  in  fluent  English,  but  appearing
'  excessively  nervous  and  agitated  about  the  affair,'  Acton
told  them

'  that  he  was  obliged  to  fire,  to  which  not  the  slightest  objection
was  made,  and  nothing  more  passed  than  a  request  from  us  that
he  would  respect  the  English  flag,  whenever  he  saw  it  flying,  which
he  faithfully  promised  to  do.  Whilst  we  were  on  board,  he  con-
tinued his  firing,  and  even  offered  a  kind  of  apology  for  the  shot
going  so  low  ;  but  he  said  he  did  not  wish  to  fire  into  the  town,
only  on  the  armed  men  marching  from  the  mole  to  the  city  gate!
As  we  left  the  steamer,'  adds  Captain  Marryat,  'the  frigate
[Partenope,  50-60  guns]  arrived  under  sail,  and  fired  a  useless
broadside.'

The  steamer  Capri  also  appeared  on  the  scene. 2

Garibaldi  in  his  memoirs  sums  up  the  situation  well.
There  was,  he  writes,  no  truth  in  the  rumour  that  the  British
helped  the  disembarkation  '  directly.'  But,  he  adds,  the
presence  of  their  ships  '  influenced '  the  Neapolitan  com-
mander in  delaying  the  bombardment,  and  so

•the noble flag of England once more on this  occasion

*  Trevelyan's  Gar.  Rome,  35,  note. Winnington-Ingram,  chap.  vii.

*  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  17,  pp.  2,  6,  7. Winninston-Ingram,  197,  198.  *

238  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

helped  to  prevent  bloodshed,  and  I,  the  Benjamin  of  these
lords  of  the  ocean,  for  the  hundredth  time  received  their
protection.'  i

The  bombardment,  witnessed  by  the  British  captains
from  the  deck  of  the  Neapolitan  steamer,  was  as  badly
aimed  as  it  had  been  tardily  begun.  Having  lost  the  oppor-
tunity of  raking  and  sinking  the  Lombardo  when  the  men
were  still  on  board,  the  three  Neapolitan  vessels,  if  they
could  have  shot  straight,  had  still  the  chance  of  inflicting
terrible  damage  on  the  Thousand  as  they  marched  in  column
along  the  whole  length  of  the  mole,3  and  thence  to  the  city
gate.  '  The  patriots  stood  fire  splendidly,'  wrote  Captain
Ingram,  '  and  appeared  to  be  altogether  a  fine  body  of  men.
But  we  only  saw  one  man  knocked  over.'  For  the  most  part
the  missiles  fell  short  in  the  open  sea,  but  one  or  two  passed
overhead  into  the  haglio  Woodhouse,  and  nearly  killed  the
English  manager's  wife.  Garibaldi  on  the  mole  was  in  high
good  humour,  chafhng  those  who  showed  any  signs  of
nervousness.  He  himself  remained  one  of  the  last  outside
the  sea-gate  of  Marsala  now  called  after  his  name  ;  as  he
stood  beside  it  with  Tiirr  and  young  Giorgio  Manin  (the  son
of  a  famous  father),  a  shell  burst  at  their  feet,  covering  the
whole  party  with  dust.  When  all  were  within  the  city  gate,
there  was  nothing  more  to  fear.  The  total  loss  of  the
invaders  had  been  one  dog  wounded  in  the  leg  and  one
man  in  the  shoulder.^

1  Mem.  343.

2  See  illustration  opposite.  The  landing  took  place  at  the  end  of  the
mole,  not  where  the  memorial  stone  has  been  erected.  Now  (1909)  the
mole  has  a  high  bulwark  on  its  sea  side,  but  then  the  bulwark  was  only  a
foot  or  so  high,  and  no  real  protection.  {Conv.  Minco  and  local  informa-
tion.) The  mole  was  therefore  rightly  called  '  molo  scoperto  '  by  Castiglia.

^  Besides  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  17,  and  Winnington- Ingram,  see  Times,
May  25  and  29,  i860,  and  Daily  News,  May  22,  for  letters  of  eye-witnesses.
Castiglia  {Sic.  e  La  Masa,  xxi.).  Tiirr's  Div.  25.  Girolamo,  14.  Men-
ghini,  24,  422.  Calvino  {Guardione,  ii.  428).  Perini,  127.  Bandi,  83-86.
Belloni,  84.  Conv.  Lipari.  Most  Italian  writers  say  that  no  one  was  hit
except  the  dog,  but  Garibaldi  left  in  the  hospital  of  Marsala  two  sick  men
and  one  wounded  in  the  shoulder,  see  Girolamo,  23,  note.  This  is  borne
out  by  Winnington-Ingram,  198,  200,  and  Times,  May  25  and  29.

B  a

H.ti

^  o

c

H  5

c

>~)

<

p.

^'T3

O nS

O

z

>>

D-tj

1-4 E  ^'R,

-c

^"

-^

^

^:;;

O

§

ri

ffi

~

">

Qs

ta3  D

J3

^

H

THE  LANDING  EFFECTED  239

By  4.30  everyone  was  safe  inside  the  town,  except  the
Genoese  Carabineers,  whom  Garibaldi  stationed  at  the  har-
bour to  prevent  the  Neapohtans  from  landing.  Nothing
had  been  left  on  board  the  vessels.  A  quarter  of  an  hour's
excellent  work  had  sufficed  to  land  the  five  old  cannon.
The  ammunition,  piled  on  the  mole,  was  all  brought  up  to
the  town  in  carts  and  on  mules,  under  a  hot  but  ill-directed
fire.  Last  of  all,  the  sea-cocks  of  the  two  steamers  were
opened  by  Garibaldi's  orders,  in  order  to  flood  the  ships  and
prevent  them  from  being  carried  off  by  the  enemy.  The
Lomhardo  was  thus  rendered  immovable,  but  the  Piemonte
was  that  evening  salvaged  and  taken  in  tow  by  the  Neapoli-
tans. They  clambered  on  her  deck  with  cries  of  exultation
and  victory,  vastly  to  the  amusement  of  the  Garibaldian
and  British  onlookers,  who  had  witnessed  a  previous
attempt  on  their  part  to  board  her  before  she  was  quite
empty  ;  on  that  occasion  the  boat's  crew  had  thought  better
of  it  and  ignominiously  turned  back  half-way. 1

Safe  within  the  walls  of  Marsala,  Garibaldi  summoned
the  Decurionato,  as  the  municipal  body  was  called.  Its
members,  who  showed  considerable  courage,  readily  obeyed
his  summons,  and  at  the  suggestion  of  Crispi,  who  from  the
moment  of  landing  in  his  native  island  acted  as  the  General's
political  secretary,  they  drew  up  and  signed  a  document
whereby  they  declared  that  the  Bourbons  had  ceased  to
reign  in  Sicily,  and  called  on  Garibaldi  to  assume  the
Dictatorship  in  the  name  of  Victor  Emmanuel.  *  I  accepted
the  Dictatorship,'  he  writes,  '  because  I  have  always  believed
the  way  of  safety  lay  there  in  times  of  crisis.'  2

1  Elia,  il.  25,  26.  Bixio,  i68.  Castiglia  {Sic.  e  La  Masa,  xxU.).
Turr's  Da  Quarto,  19.  Calvino  {Guardione,  ii,  428).  Menghini,  29,  422.
Sampieri,  14.  Bandi,  95-100.  Perini,  128,  129.  Bruzzesi,  16,  24,  29.
Bruzzesi  {dopo  25  anni),  30.  Daily  News,  May  22,  p.  5,  col.  4.  Giusia,  6.
Br.  Pari.  Papers,  17,  pp.  6,  7.

*  The  document  with  the  signatures  is  printed  in  full  in  Girolamo,  19.
Girolamo,  15-20.  Crispi,  Diario,  20,  21,  note.  Mem.  344.  La  Masa
(Sic.)  II.  Bruzzesi,  14.  All  these  authorities  show  that  the  Dictatorship
was  offered  and  assumed  first  at  Marsala,  not,  as  is  often  stated,  at  Salemi

240  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

A  simpler  demand  made  by  Sirtori,  the  Chief  of  Staff,
was  less  easily  met.  Before  the  expedition  left  Quarto  the
book-shops  of  Genoa  had  been  ransacked  in  vain  for  a  good
map  of  Sicily — so  little  in  those  days  was  known  of  the  island
by  North  Italians.  But  it  now  appeared  that  Marsala  was
equally  unable  to  supply  the  want,  although  the  Decurionato
produced  a  map  of  the  lands  of  their  commune,  of  which
Sirtori  at  once  set  his  officers  to  make  three  copies.  The
Marsalese,  moreover,  gave  verbal  descriptions  of  the  geo-
graphical and  physical  position  of  Salemi,  the  nearest  of  the
mountain  towns. i  Relying  perforce  on  such  slight  informa-
tion, Garibaldi  made  his  plan  of  campaign  that  night.  He
decided  to  march  with  all  speed  to  Salemi,  as  the  nearest
defensible  position,  where  he  could  defy  a  Bourbon  attack
from  any  direction,  rest  the  Thousand,  and  gather  round
his  flag  the  squadre  of  the  upland  districts,  who  could  be
trusted  to  show  more  martial  zeal  than  the  men  of  the  coast
towns.  But  he  had  no  thought  of  waging  for  long  a  defen-
sive or  guerilla  war  in  the  hills.  From  Salemi  it  was  his
intention  to  march  straight  on  Palermo. ^

Next  after  the  intoxicating  joy  of  having  landed  safely
with  all  their  warlike  stores,  the  feeling  that  prevailed  among
the  Thousand  that  night  was  disappointment  at  their  first
contact  with  the  Sicilians.  In  the  completeness  of  their
ignorance,  the  Northerners  had  expected  to  find  in  the
children  of  the  '  land  of  the  Vespers  '  equal  and  like-minded
comrades-in-arms.  They  found  instead  a  race,  whose
language  they  could  with  difficulty  understand,  who  were
indeed  politically  friendly  and  not  inhospitable  (except
for  their  habit  of  secluding  the  women  of  their  families
like  Turks),  but  who  seemed  for  the  most  part  unwilling  to
fight,  and  were  all  quite  unused  to  regular  warfare.  Gari-
baldi alone  was  contented  and  confident.  '  Patience !
Patience  !  '  he  said  next  day  to  those  who  complained  of
the  Sicilians, '  you  will  find  that  all  will  come  right.'  Indeed
if  he  had  felt  the  same  irritation  with  his  new  allies  as  was

'  Bruzzesi,  35. Girolamo,  15,  16.
^  Bandi,  108. Baiatleri,  390,  391.

THE  CHURCH  AND  THE  INVADERS 241

felt  by  Bixio  and  most  of  the  Thousand,  he  would  not  have
won  the  confidence  and  adoration  of  the  Sicilians  in  that
extraordinary  degree  which  proved  one  of  the  chief  causes
of  his  success.  The  quarrel  of  North  and  South  was  felt  in
the  patriotic  camp,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  from  the
moment  of  the  landing  at  Marsala,  but  it  was  not  felt  by
Garibaldi,  who  remained  the  very  personification  of  the  idea
of  national  unity,  and  succeeded,  where  a  cleverer  politician
would  have  failed,  in  drawing  North  and  South  along  together
until  the  game  was  won.i

His  affectionate  attitude  towards  the  Sicilians  was  due
to  a  mixture  of  shrewdness  and  simphcity,  difficult  to  analyse,
and  highly  characteristic  of  the  man.  The  same  may  be
said  of  his  friendly  attitude  towards  the  Church  in  Sicily,
resented  in  Hke  manner  by  many  of  his  Northern  followers,
and  in  like  manner  essential  to  the  success  of  his  enterprise.
Even  the  first  night  in  Marsala  proved  that  in  this  strange
island  not  only  the  priesthood  but  the  great  majority  of  the
rehgious  bodies  were  on  the  side  of  the  revolution,  though
they  pleaded  the  poverty  of  their  convents  as  an  excuse
for  supplying  so  few  of  their  champions'  wants.  Garibaldi,
would  allow  no  contributions  to  be  forced  from  anyone
except  the  reactionary  and  unpopular  Jesuits,  whom  he
soon  afterwards  expelled  from  Sicily.  On  this  first  night,
the  Jesuits  of  Marsala  were  obHged  to  disgorge  their  blankets,
by  throwing  them  unwillingly  and  gradually  out  of  the
window  to  the  officer  in  the  street  below.  But  Sirtori,  the
serious  and  ascetic  ex-priest,  was  sent  round  Marsala  that
night  by  Garibaldi  to  restrain  the  mangiapreti  ^  among  the
Thousand  from  offering  personal  insult  even  to  the  Jesuits.
Another  member  of  his  staff,  devotedly  attached  to  his  person,
Gusmaroh,  an  ex-priest  of  a  different  and  coarser  type,  could
not  understand  the  point  of  a  revolution  in  which  the  Church

1  Bandi,  114-116.  Bologna  MS.,  Bixio.  This  proposition  is  the  result
in  my  mind  of  so  much  evidence,  printed  and  oral,  and  the  key  to  so  many
recorded  incidents,  that  it  would  require  a  whole  essa  y  to  lay  out  the  proofs
of  it  in  full.

'^  '  Priest-eaters.'

242  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

was  spared.  But  the  fear  of  the  General  lay  heavy  upon  the
wildest  of  his  followers,  and  he  continued  to  the  end  to
receive  the  active  support  of  priests,  monks.  Bishops,  and
friars  '  True  they  are  enemies  to  modern  ideas  of  progress,'
he  said  to  one  of  his  followers  next  month,  '  but  above  all
they  are  enemies  to  the  Bourbons.'  i

At  dawn  next  morning,  May  12,  the  httle  army  started
for  Salemi.2  Garibaldi,  Bixio,  and  a  few  other  officers  were
mounted  on  horses  procured  in  Marsala,  but  some  of  the
staff  officers  and  some  of  the  cavalry  scouts  had  still  to
trudge  on  foot.^  It  was  a  joyful  scene  outside  the  landward
gate.  The  rising  sun  shone  on  Mount  Eryx  on  the  northern
horizon,  and  on  the  sea  where  the  baffled  Neapolitan  steamers
were  towing  off  the  Piemonte,  and  on  the  crowd  of  Marsalese
enthusiasts  who  had  come  to  wish  the  Thousand  God-speed.
Out  of  a  small  body  of  the  townspeople  who  actually  enlisted,
some  ran  off  that  same  day  with  the  firearms  that  had  been
lent  them,  while  others  remained  to  fight  and  bleed  at
Calatafimi.4  The  British  Consul,  Mr.  Cossins,  rode  some
little  distance  at  Garibaldi's  side,  and  took  charge  of  a  bag
of  private  letters  to  wives  and  families  of  the  invaders,  which
he  undertook  to  have  delivered  in  the  North. ^

All  in  the  highest  spirits,  the  Thousand  moved  off  through
the  flat  desert,  or  sciara,  as  it  has  been  called  since  the  days
of  the  Arabs,  that  stretches  for  some  miles  behind  Marsala.
After  that  they  entered  on  the  green  undulating  sea  of  corn
and  bean-fields  which,  in  alternation  with  uncultivated
prairie,  composes  the  interior  of  Sicily.  Houses  were
scanty,  for  cultivators  and  shepherds  dwelt  in  the  distant
and  crowded  hill-towns,  and  the  Garibaldini  with  South

1  Bandi,  103-107,  127-133.  Turr's  Div.  28.  De  Cesave,  i.  300,  301  ;
ii.  316,  317,  Menghini,  75.  De  Sivo,  iii.  252-254.  Elia,  ii.  29.  Mario
Mac.  247.

2  Henceforward  use  Map  III.,  Western  Sicily,  at  end  of  book.
^  Cf.  Bandi,  109,  115,  116,  to  Abba  Not.  46,  295.

■♦  Cf.  Bandi,  iii  to  Girolamo,  23,  24.

■'  Menghini,  24.  Bruzzesi,  dopo  25  anni,  30.  Bandi,  no.  Whitaher,
275. Abba  Not.  46-48.

THE  FIRST  BIVOUAC  243

American  memories  compared  the  scenery  to  that  of  the
pampas.  At  rare  intervals  the  large  farm  buildings  of  some
ex-feudo  1  afforded  water  from  a  well.  The  heat  and  thirst
that  day  were  terrible,  and  only  Bixio,  standing  at  the
fountains  revolver  in  hand,  prevented  the  men  from  en-
dangering their  health,  as  it  was  supposed,  by  drinking  too
deep.  At  the  farms  of  Chitarra  and  Butagana  they  made
their  mid-day  halt  and  obtained  wine  and  water.  After  that
point  the  high  road  ended  abruptly,  becoming  a  mere  track,
very  difficult  for  the  carts  that  carried  the  yet  unmounted
cannon,  which  were  brought  along  by  the  efforts  of  the  sailors
turned  artillerists.  Garibaldi  marched  a  great  part  of  the
day  on  foot,  talking  cheerfully  with  the  rank  and  file.  At
evening  the  Thousand,  fairly  exhausted  with  the  heat
reached  the  ex-feudo  and  medieval  tower  of  Rampagallo,
that  stands  in  a  solitary  place  amid  low  hills,  a  Httle  aside
from  the  rough  path  they  were  following.  Garibaldi  slept
under  a  tent,  and  his  army  around  him  in  the  open.  There
was  no  wood  with  which  to  make  camp  fires,  and  in  the
middle  of  the  night  it  came  on  to  rain.  The  miseries  of  war
had  begun. 3

That  evening  at  Rampagallo  they  were  joined  by  the  first
of  the  genuine  squadre — finely  built  farmers,  horsed  and  carry-
ing their  guns  across  the  saddle-bow.  Some  were  led  by
Baron  S.  Anna,  the  territorial  magnate  of  Alcamo,  others  by
Don  Alberto  Mistretta  of  Salemi  and  Rampagallo.  Garibaldi
soon  won  their  hearts,  and  sent  on  La  Masa  the  same  evening
to  Salemi  to  prepare  the  inhabitants  for  his  entry  next  day.
La  Masa,  in  his  real  element  as  a  street  orator  and  popular
leader  in  Sicily,  whence  he  had  been  excluded  for  eleven
years,  was  actively  assisted  by  the  priests  of  Salemi  in
rousing  the  popular  ardour  of  the  place.  When  next  day
(May  13)  the  Thousand  wound  up  the  mountain  track  ^

'  See  p.  145  and  note  3,  above,  on  the  '  ex-feudi.'

'  Girolamo,  24,  25,  note.  Abba's  Bixio,  88,  90.  Capuzzi,  20-24.
Crispi,  Diario,  20. Menghini,  422. Abba  Not.  48,  ^g. Bandi,  116-124.

3  There  is  a  road  to-day,  but  in  1S60  the  artillery  had  to  go  miles  round
to  the  south  in  order  to  get  up  the  hill  into  Salemi  at  all.  Bruzzesi,  dopo
23  anni,  32. Oliveri,  25.

244  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

between  sparse  olive  groves  towards  the  high  piazza  outside
the  castle  and  gate  of  the  old  city,  the  bells  of  the  campanili
rang  out  welcome,  and  the  population  came  down  the  hill
with  music  to  greet  their  deliverers,  shouting  for  Italy  and
Victor  Emmanuel  with  a  heartiness  that  removed  much
of  the  impression  of  the  timid  reception  at  Marsala.i

Safe  on  high-placed  Salemi,  whence  the  sea  and  the  low
southern  coast  are  viewed  in  panorama,  Garibaldi  had  again
won  the  race  against  his  tardy  foemen.  They  should  have
occupied  the  town  before  him,  and  so  kept  him  down  in  the
lowlands.  He  had  now  opened  up  his  connexion  with  the
centre  of  the  island,  roused  the  squadre  of  the  Sicilian  up-
lands, and  placed  himself  upon  the  road  to  Palermo.  But
in  order  to  open  that  road  before  him  he  had  still  a  battle
to  fight  with  General  Landi,  who  on  the  same  morning,
May  13,  had  marched  from  Alcamo  to  Calatafimi.^

On  the  evening  of  that  day  the  news  of  the  landing  at
Marsala  reached  official  circles  at  Turin.  An  hour  before
midnight  on  May  13  a  stout  gentleman  in  spectacles  passed
down  the  Via  Carlo  Alberto  to  his  own  house,  whistling  to
himself  in  meditative  glee  and  rubbing  his  hands  together.
He  turned  in  to  his  door  and  vanished,  but  not  before  a
passer-by  had  recognised  Count  Cavour.s

1  Captizzi, 25. La Masa (Sic),  xxv, xxvi, 14-16. Oliveri, 14-19,
Bandi,  125,  126. Menghini,  423.

2  Naples  MS.,  Landi. Baratieri,  390,  391.

^  Chiala,  iv.  p.  clxxviii.  (Cesana's  first-hand  evidence).

CHAPTER XIV

THE BATTLE OF CALATAFIMI

'  In  the  dark  perils  of  war,  in  the  high  places  of  the  field,  hope  shone
In  him  like  a  pillar  of  fire,  when  it  had  gone  out  in  all  the  others.' —
Carlyle's  Cromwell,  iii.  30.

The  news  of  the  landing  at  Marsala  passed  like  the  wind
over  the  uplands  of  Western  Sicily,  fanning  the  embers  of
the  insurrection  into  sudden  flame.  On  the  mountain  ridges
of  Inserra  that  look  down  over  Palermo,  Rosolino  Pilo
roused  his  faithful  remnant  to  fresh  activity  with  the  news
that  his  rash  promise  of  Garibaldi's  coming  was  at  length
fulfilled. 1  Far  away  in  the  interior  of  the  island,  near
Roccamena,  an  Albanian  band  from  Plana  dei  Greci,^  true
to  the  old  Balkan  instincts,  was  wandering  about,  vainly
exhorting  the  more  timid  Sicihan  rustics  to  join  them,  and
taking  their  firearms  when  they  refused.  This  forlorn
hope  learnt  the  great  tidings  on  May  12  from  a  solitary
horseman.  Instantly  marching  on  Corleone,  they  were
welcomed  by  the  inhabitants,  who  had  themselves  gone  mad
over  the  news,  and  were  forming  squadre  for  the  field.  On
the  13th  and  14th,  at  Salami,  Garibaldi  himself  was  joined
by  about  1000  men,  some  from  Alcamo,  but  most  from
Monte  S.  Giuliano,  the  village  perched  on  Mount  Eryx,  out  of
reach  of  the  garrison  of  Trapani.

The  members  of  the  squadre  represented  the  hardiest  type
of  rustic  ;  some  wore  their  untanned  sheep-skins,  but  the
more  well-to-do  farmers'  sons  came  mounted,  and  in  velvet-
eens, which  with  the  low  top-boots  of  the  Sicilian  countryman

*  See  pp.  159,  160,  above.  -  See  p.  158,  abov*.

245

246  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

made  a  picturesque  costume.  Most  were  armed  with  flint-
locks or  blunderbusses.  The  age  of  the  greater  number
of  them,  according  to  a  native  writer  who  saw  the  whole
movement,  was  scarcely  twenty,  and  they  had  therefore
been  nicknamed  the  picciotti,  or  '  little  fellows.'  They
knew  no  drill  and  acknowledged  no  discipline,  but  came
on  like  a  mob  behind  their  ex-feudal  chiefs,  just  so  far  as
they  felt  inclined  to  follow.  But  until  the  battle  of  Calata-
fimi  showed  their  unfitness  for  warfare  in  the  open  field,
great  things  were  expected  of  them  alike  by  friend  and
foe,  and  the  rising  of  the  Sicilian  peasants  had  important
military  consequences  in  the  moral  effect  produced  on  the
Neapolitans,  more  particularly  on  their  too  impressionable
commanders. 1

Before  Garibaldi  sailed  from  Quarto,  there  were  already
24,864  regular  troops  in  Sicily,^  of  whom  nearly  four-fifths
guarded  Palermo  and  its  neighbourhood.  Yet  the  aged
Governor  Castelcicala,  who  had  fought  in  the  English  army
at  Waterloo,  felt  no  security  even  within  Palermo  itself,  after
he  knew  that  Garibaldi  was  in  the  island. ^  On  receiving  the
news  of  his  landing  on  May  11,  he  had  wired  the  same  day
to  Naples  for  more  troops  to  be  sent  to  Marsala  by  sea,
in  order  to  co-operate  with  General  Landi  in  placing  the
invaders  between  two  fires,  as  near  as  possible  to  the  point
of  their  disembarkation.  The  plan  was  promptly  accepted
by  King  Francis  and  his  ministers,  and  on  May  11-12  a
force  under  General  Bonanno,  three  or  four  battalions
strong,  left  Neapolitan  waters  for  Marsala,  where  they  were
expected  to  land  within  twenty-four  hours.  But  on  May  14
they  had  not  yet  rounded  Cape  S.  Vito,  and  as  Garibaldi  had
long  before  escaped  into  the  hills  of  Salemi,  it  was  thought
useless  to  send  them  further  in  pursuit  of  him. They  were

1  Paolucci,  Pilo,  267,  268.  Plana  dei  Greet,  33-37.  Franciosi,  15,  16.
Conv.  Paternostro.  Corleo,  15,  16.  Fazio,  25,  26,  44.  Capuzzi,  28,  29.
Baratieri  [N.  A.),  394,  395- ^^^^  ^ot.  50,  51,  54,  55. V.  M.  20.

-  De  Sivo,  iii.  12.  Throughout  this  book  the  numbers  of  the  Neapoli-
tans are  taken  from  NeapoUtan  official  sources  only.

3  De  Cesare,  i.  64.  Nisco,  Fr.  II,  32.  Palermo  MS.  Polizia,  1238,  his
letters  of  May  13  and  15,

LANDI  REACHES  CALATAFIMI  247

landed  instead  at  Palermo  to  join  the  immense  force  already
protecting  the  capital. 1

Meanwhile  General  Landi,  himself  no  less  belated  than
Bonanno,  with  whom  he  was  to  have  co-operated  in
catching  the  invaders  near  Marsala,  was  slowly  and  half-
heartedly moving  away  from  his  base  at  Palermo.  He  was
seventy  years  of  age,  and  followed  his  troops  in  a  carriage.
In  six  days  they  had  marched  thirty  miles,  as  far  as  Alcamo,
where,  on  May  12,  the  aspect  of  their  artillery,  never  seen
before  in  the  upland  towns,  struck  a  damp  into  the  hearts  of
the  patriots,  who  wondered  whether  even  Garibaldi  could
fight  against  such  terrible  machines. 2  That  night  they
marched  to  Calatafimi,  a  squalid  town  built  on  the  slopes  of
a  hill,  of  which  the  conical  summit  was  crowned  by  the  ruins
of  a  Saracen  castle.  In  every  epoch  Calatafimi  had  been  a
position  of  strategic  importance,  because  it  commanded  the
junction  of  the  high-roads  from  Trapani  and  Salemi,  which
ran  on  through  Alcamo  to  Palermo.  In  i860  they  were  the
only  roads  in  that  part  of  the  island  that  could  bear  wheeled
traffic,  so  that  if  Garibaldi  wished  to  advance  direct  on  the
capital  with  his  famous  cannon,  he  must  pass  that  way.

Landi,  when  he  reached  Calatafimi  on  the  morning  of
the  13th,  was  in  command  of  only  one  battalion  besides
cavalry  and  artillery,  but  he  was  there  strengthened  by  two
more  battalions  from  Trapani,  which  had  been  sent  thither
by  sea  from  Palermo  in  order  to  join  him.  The  newcomers,
drawn  from  the  loth  line  and  from  the  fine  regiment  of  the
8th  Cacciatori,  under  Major  Sforza,  raised  Landi's  force  to
3000  regular  infantry,  with  a  full  complement  of  cavalry  and
guns. 3 He  was  aware  that  Garibaldi  lay  at  Salemi,  eight

'  Bonanno  is  said  by  De  Sivo,  iii.  193, 194,  and  De  Cesare,  ii.  222-226,  to
have  had  four  battalions.  A  battalion  in  the  Neapolitan  army  contained
seven  companies  {De  Sivo,  iii.  121),  or  sometimes  only  six  {Naples  MS.
Landi)  ;  a  company  contained  nominally  160  men,  but  often  in  practice
rather  fewer  {De  Sivo,  iii.  121,  122)  ;  so  that  a  battalion  was  about  1000
men.  But  Cronaca,  84,  speaks  not  of  twenty-four  but  onl}'  of  sixteen
companies  under  Bonanno.

^  Fazio,  41.

^  In  Naples  MS.  Landi,  he  himself  allows  that  his  three  battalions

248  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

miles  to  the  south,  but  he  was  ignorant  of  his  numbers,  and
unable  to  obtain  information  owing  to  the  hostility  of  the
population.  The  disturbed  state  of  the  countryside  daunted
him  to  an  unnecessary  degree.  Because  the  banditti  were
out  on  the  road  behind  him,  and  had  broken  the  electric
telegraph  and  the  semaphores  commumcatnig  with  the
capital,  he  was  already  anxious  about  his  base  and  his
retreat  on  Palermo.  He  remained  inactive  in  Calatafimi
until  the  15th,  sending  off  nervous  reports  to  Castelcicala,
who  was  scarcely  less  alarmed  than  he  at  the  occupation  of
the  roads  and  telegraphs  by  the  rebel  bands. 1

On  the  morning  of  the  15th  he  heard  that  the  enemy  was
moving  out  of  Salemi  and  advancing  towards  him  along  the
high-road  by  way  of  Vita.  The  choice  of  three  rational
courses  lay  before  him.  Either  he  could  assume  the
offensive  and  meet  them  half-way  ;  or  he  could  concentrate
his  battalions  under  his  own  eye  for  the  defence  of  Calata-
fimi ;  or  he  could  still  retreat,  inglorious  but  undefeated,  on
the  capital — and  indeed  he  declares  that  he  received  orders
to  do  so  that  very  morning  from  Castelcicala.^  But  not  hav-
ing the  sense  to  adopt  any  one  of  these  plans,  he  remained  in
the  hill  town  under  the  shadow  of  the  old  Saracen  castle,
while  sending  out  portions  of  his  force  in  different  directions
'  to  impose  morally  on  the  enemy,'  as  he  himself  expressed
it,  by  'marching  about  through  the  countryside.'  With  this
object,  the  battalion  of  the  8th  Cacciatori  under  Major
Sforza  occupied  the  high  hill  known  as  the  Pianto  del
Romani  whereon  the  battle  monument  stands  to-day  ;  it
happened  to  be  a  good  defensive  position,  though  it  had  not
been  selected  for  that  reason.^

contained  twenty  companies.  De  Sivo,  iii.  197,  also  estimates  them  at
3000  men.

1  Naples  MS.  Landi.  De  Cesare,  ii.  200-202.  Palermo  MS.  Polizia,
1238,  Castelcicala's  letters  of  May  13,  15.

-  Appendix  M,  below,  '  Calatafimi,'  ii.

■^  Naples  MS.  Landi,  borne  out  by  the  Neapolitan  Major,  in  his
letter  printed  in  Sampieri,  28.  Landi  wronglj'-  gives  the  name  of  the
neighbouring  Monte  Barbaro  to  the  Pianto  dei  Romani,  but  his  meaning
Is  quite  clear. I  have  kept  in  my  narrative  the  romantic  name  of  Pianto

GARIBALDI  IN  SALEMI  249

From  the  afternoon  of  the  13th  till  the  morning  of  the
decisive  15th  of  May,  Garibaldi  had  remained  in  Salemi,
There  he  rested  his  men,  who  were  made  welcome  in  the
monasteries  and  private  houses  ;  he  had  gun  carriages
hastily  manufactured  for  his  artillery  ;  he  procured  pikes  or
muskets  for  those  of  the  squadre  who  had  come  in  unarmed  ;
and  he  caused  himself  to  be  a  second  time  proclaimed
Dictator  of  Sicily  in  the  name  of  Victor  Emmanuel,  with
more  pomp  and  pubhcity  than  had  attended  the  hasty  and
unnoticed  proclamation  by  the  Municipahty  of  Marsala.
The  ceremony  of  assuming  the  Dictatorship  at  the  invitation
of  the  Decurionato  of  Salemi  was  conducted  in  the  buildings
of  the  old  municipio,  and  Garibaldi  then  showed  himself  at
the  balcony  above  the  stone  loggia,  to  the  enthusiastic
populace  in  the  little  square  below.  The  men  of  Salem
completely  lost  their  hearts  to  the  wonderful  stranger.  But
they  were  also  prudently  anxious  to  ascertain  that  the  great
King  Vittorio  was  really  supporting  him,  and  shrewdly
questioned  him  as  to  why  he  wore  a  red  shirt  instead  of  the
royal  uniform.^

His  first  act  after  assuming  the  Dictatorship  was  to
decree  a  conscription  for  all  Sicily,  which  remained  a
dead  letter.  But  the  volunteer  movement  of  squadre  was
spreading,  enhanced  by  reports  set  about  by  Sicilians  of
the  Thousand  deliberately  exaggerating  the  number  of  the
invaders,  and  by  the  oratory  of  La  Masa,  and  of  Father
Pantaleo,  a  friar  of  the  neighbourhood  who  attached  him-
self to  the  person  of  the  Dictator  at  Salemi.  Pantaleo  was
a  simple  and  whole-hearted  enthusiast,  who  proved  utterly
fearless in battle, and in spite of many subsequent

dei  Romani — '  the  wailing  of  the  Romans  ' — because  Garibaldi  and  his
men  were  struck  with  the  name  when  they  had  won  the  battle,  and  believed
the  legend  of  a  Roman  defeat  there.  But  actually  the  name  is  a  corrupt
Italian  version  of  the  Sicilian  chianti  di  Rumani — '  the  young  vineyards  of
the  Romano  family.'  CiatnpoU,  919.  Sampieri,  31-33.  Pistraganzili,
ii.  60. Abba,  129.

'  Leggi,  No.  I.  Oliveri,  29-43.  Corleo,  8-14.  Bandi,  139.  Sampieri,
2  \.  Corleo  is  not  to  be  trusted  on  all  points,  e.g.,  about  the  muskets,  p.  12,
he  is  wronsr.

250  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

opportunities  to  obtain  wealth  and  position,  lived  and  died
true  to  his  Franciscan  vow  of  poverty.  From  Salemi  on-
wards the  General  made  him  welcome  to  his  board.  '  Here,'
he  said,  '  is  our  new  Ugo  Bassi,'  and  related  again  how  his
own  life  had  been  saved  in  '49  by  the  good  priest  Don
Verita.  He  rebuked  Gusmaroli  and  the  more  ill-conditioned
members  of  his  staff,  who  frowned  to  see  a  Churchman  at
their  table,  and  like  bad  boys  showed  the  new-comer  gross
incivility  when  their  master's  back  was  turned. ^

On  the  14th  the  General,  accompanied  by  Tiirr,  his  chief
aide-de-camp,  rode  out  and  surveyed  the  ground  in  the
direction  of  Calatafimi,  whither  scouting  parties  and  spies
were  sent  to  watch  the  Neapolitans.  Finding  that  Landi
would  not  advance  against  Salemi,  Garibaldi  had  to  choose
whether  on  the  15th  he  should  himself  attack  the  enemy,  and
cut  open  the  direct  road  to  the  capital,  or  whether  he  should
take  the  tracks  leading  eastward  through  S.  Ninfa  and
Corleone,  whence  he  could  either  move  into  the  interior  to
play  a  waiting  game,  or  approach  Palermo  by  a  circuitous
route  through  the  mountains.  Sirtori  had  at  length  found
for  him  at  the  municipio  a  large  map  of  Sicily,  which  he
studied  intently  on  the  evening  of  the  14th.  It  is  probable
that  he  had  from  the  first  decided  on  the  bolder  course  of
giving  battle  at  once  in  order  to  win  the  prestige  of  victory,
the  only  magic  by  which  he  could  possibly  be  saved.  But
he  always  kept  his  own  counsel  on  vital  military  issues,  and
at  nightfall  on  the  14th  the  inhabitants  of  Salemi  still  feared
that  he  would  march  off  to  the  east  and  leave  them  to
Landi's  vengeance.  Even  the  General's  aides-de-camp  asked
themselves  as  they  turned  to  sleep,  '  Where  are  we  going
to-morrow  ?  '  2

Shortly  before  three  o'clock  on  May  15  Garibaldi  awoke
and  called  to  the  aides-de-camp  in  the  adjoining  room.

^  Tiirr's  Div.  28.  Bandi,  127-133.  L'Ora,  May  26-27,  ^Qoi-  Leggi,
p.  4,  No.  2. Corleo,  9. Campo,  106,  107, Franciosi,  16.

'  Bandi,  140,  141.  Corleo,  11,  15.  Baratieri,  392,  395,  396.  Tiirr's
Div.  29. Calvino  {Guardione,n.^3i-.\34). Oliveri,^!-^?,- Mengkini,  423

THE  REVEILLE  251

Bandi  went  in  to  take  his  orders.  '  Look  out  of  the  window,'
he  said  ;  '  is  it  raining  ?  '  'It  has  been,'  said  Bandi,  '  but
now  it  is  beautiful  {un  gran  hel  sereno).'  '  A  good  omen  !  '
said  the  General,  and  rose  from  bed.

When  the  young  officers  had  made  his  cup  of  coffee,  with
which  he  always  fortified  himself  for  the  day,  four  of  them
were  dispatched  on  various  errands,  to  waken  Sirtori  and
Tiirr,  and  bid  them  rouse  the  army  and  order  the  march.
Bandi  alone  remained  with  his  chief.  Garibaldi,  who  had
been  walking  up  and  down  the  room,  suddenly  broke  into
song.  The  battered  warrior  of  fifty-three,  about  to  attack
an  enemy  of  vastly  superior  numbers  in  a  contest  in  which
defeat  meant  death,  sang  like  a  lover  going  to  meet  his
mistress,  because  he  was  about  to  have  his  heart's  desire.
'  When  the  affairs  of  the  fatherland  go  well,'  he  explained  to
Bandi,  '  one  must  needs  be  happy.'

Next  moment  the  bugle  sounded  the  reveille  through  the
sleeping  town,  with  musical  variations  that  held  Garibaldi
listening  spell-bound.  '  I  like  that  reveille ! '  he  said  to
Bandi.  *  It  fills  me  with  a  kind  of  melancholy  or  gladness,
I  don't  know  which.  I  remember  I  have  heard  it  before,
the  morning  of  the  day  we  conquered  at  Como.  Run  and
fetch  the  bugler  here.'  The  bugler,  the  only  one  in  the
Thousand,  was  soon  in  his  presence,  and  said  that  he  had
learnt  it  in  last  year's  campaign  of  the  Alps,  and  that  it  was
indeed  the  reveille  of  Como.  '  Good,'  said  Garibaldi.  '  Al-
ways sound  that  one.  Do  you  understand  ?  Do  not
forget.'  1

In  an  hour's  time  the  little  army  had  assembled  at  the
top  of  the  town,  on  the  broad  platform  in  the  hill-side  which
forms  a  natural  parade  ground  outside  the  gate,  in  full  view
of  the  southern  sea-board  on  which  they  were  now  to  turn
their  backs  for  good.  It  was  a  spirited  scene.  Besides  the
armed  squadre,  the  whole  population  of  Salemi  had  come  to
cheer  them  on  their  way. All  now  knew  that  they  were

*  Bandi,  141-144.

252  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

going  to  battle,  and  raising  the  song  sung  by  '  the  volunteers
of  the  Lombard  Manara  '  at  the  siege  of  Rome,i  the  Thousand
began  to  wind  down  the  northern  road  into  the  bottom  of
the  deep  valley  up  which  they  had  to  pass  in  order  to  reach
Vita.  This  valley,  like  many  others  that  cleave  the  treeless
Sicilian  mountains,  is  itself  filled  with  stone  pines  and
cypresses,  fruit-trees  and  leafy  hedgerows,  mingled  with
oriental  aloe  and  cactus,  and  is  watered  by  a  clear  running
stream  beside  its  line  of  poplars.  In  the  bloom  of  the  early
Sicilian  summer,  the  vale,  fresh  from  the  last  night's  rain,
and  sung  over  by  the  nightingale  at  dawn,  lay  ready  to
exhale  its  odours  to  the  rising  sun.  Nature  seemed  in  tune
with  the  hearts  of  Garibaldi  and  his  men.  As  the  high-road
began  to  mount  the  head  of  the  valley  towards  Vita,  the
scene  changed  and  became  once  more  mountainous  and
treeless,  though  the  corn  on  the  open  hill-sides  made  their
slopes  show  green  in  May.^

Rounding  a  hill  the  Thousand  came  suddenly  into  the
bare  and  characterless  streets  of  Vita,  a  village  perched  on
the  plateau  or  watershed  dividing  the  streams  that  flow
south  towards  Salemi  from  the  streams  which  flow  north
towards  Calatafimi.  The  column  halted  in  Vita,  and  the
men  bought  and  stowed  in  their  pockets,  oranges,  lemons
and  other  food  which  served  them  well  that  hot  afternoon.
Garibaldi  meanwhile  rode  on  to  explore  the  heights  to  the
north-east.3

Later  in  the  morning  the  march  was  resumed.  Pro-
ceeding along  the  road  for  nearly  a  mile  beyond  Vita,  they
reached  the  northern  edge  of  the  watershed,  where  the  road
dips  down  into  another  valley.  At  this  point,  leaving  the
artillery  on  the  high-road,  they  turned  off  to  the  right  up  a
rough  foot-track  that  leads  to  the  top  of  the  north  face  of
the  Pietralunga,  a  high  hill  on  the  summit  of  which  they

1  Capuzz-i,  28.  Presumably  he  means  Mameli's  hymn.  See  Trevelyan's
Gar.  Rome,  186,  and  note.

-  Oliveri,  44,  correctly  describes  the  change  of  scenery.

•*  Calvino  (Guardione.  ii.  434).  From  this  point  use  the  inset  map  of
the  battle  of  Calatafimi  in  Map  III.,  end  of  book.

THE  BATTLE  RANGED  253

found  Garibaldi  and  his  staff  already  seated.  They  were
watching  various  bodies  of  Neapolitan  troops  '  marching
about  through  the  country-side  '  between  themselves  and
Calatafimi,  particularly  the  8th  Cacciatori  under  Major
Sforza,  who  happened  at  that  moment  to  be  on  the  top  of  the
Pianto  dei  Romani,  the  high  hill  opposite  to  the  Pietralunga,
from  which  it  was  divided  by  a  short  but  deep  valley.  1

Landi's  troops,  sent  out  by  him  that  morning  from
Calatafimi  to  '  impose  morally  upon  the  enomy,'  had  suc-
ceeded admirably  in  imposing  on  the  squadre.  The  Sicilians
had  withdrawn  on  to  the  hill-tops,  some  to  the  east  of
Pietralunga  and  others  to  the  west  of  the  high-road,  and
disposed  themselves  to  watch  the  battle,  like  spectators  in
a  Greek  theatre.  Only  some  200  of  the  squadre  followed
S.  Anna  of  Alcamo  into  the  thick  of  the  fight,  in  support  of
Garibaldi's  right  wing.  The  remainder,  perhaps  800  all  told,
fired  off  guns  in  the  air  and  shouted  on  the  hill-tops  in  the
middle  distance.  As  Enrico  Cairoli  wrote  to  his  mother  :
'  The  Sicilian  bands  are  not  accustomed  to  our  methods  of
fighting.  They  are  brave  behind  defences,  but  have  not  the
sang-froid  to  charge  with  the  bayonet.' "

Sforza  and  his  battalion  of  8th  Cacciatori  were  justly
counted  among  the  picked  troops  of  the  Neapolitan  army.
They  were  no  cowards,  and  seeing  before  them  on  the
Pietralunga,  instead  of  the  Piedmontese  uniforms  they  had
feared  to  see,  a  number  of  men  in  plain  clothes,  not  dis-
tinguishable at  a  distance  from  the  squadre,  and  others  in
red  shirts  which  they  took  to  be  the  red  uniform  of  convicts
broken  loose  from  the  galleys,^  Sforza  and  his  men  took  heart
of  grace,  and  fought  that  day  without  any  of  the  foreboding
of  defeat  felt  on  many  subsequent  occasions  by  their  comrades
engaged  against  Garibaldi.  Sforza  had  no  orders  to  engage,
but  only  to  *  march  about  the  country-side ' ;  being,  how-
ever, an  offtcer  of  a  very  different  spirit  from  his  dotard

^  For  these  movements  of  the  Bourbon  troops  see  p.  248,  above.
"  Cairoli, 331. Floriita,  70. Fazio,  43. Capuzzi, 34. EHa,  ii.  33.
Bruzzesi,  dopo  25  anni,  37. Riistow,  159.

•'  Sampieri,  29,  letter  of  Neapolitan  sergeant  present  in  battle.

254  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

chief,  who  still  lingered  in  Calatafimi,  he  determined  on
his  own  responsibility  to  sweep  this  riff-raff  back  to  Salemi.i

It  was  a  little  past  noon,  and  the  heat  of  the  day  was
terrible.  Garibaldi  was  still  seated  among  some  rocks  of
transparent  talc  which  glitter  on  the  summit  of  the  Pietra-
lunga,  and  near  him  waved  the  Italian  banner.  Close
beneath  him  on  the  broad  hill-side  his  homely  Thousand
were  ranged  in  order  of  battle  in  their  companies,  and  the
skirmishing  line  of  the  Genoese  Carabineers  was  half  way
down  to  the  valley.  On  the  steeper  hill-side  of  the  Pianto
dei  Romani  opposite,  he  saw  the  well-arrayed  Neapolitans
in  their  bright  uniforms.  Behind  them,  as  a  background  to
the  battle,  the  mountains  above  Alcamo,  Segesta  and
Castellamare  by  the  northern  sea  reared  their  bare  outlines
on  the  horizon.  No  shot  had  yet  been  fired,  and  the  two
armies  watched  each  other  across  the  valley.  When,  at
length,  Sforza's  trumpets  sounded  the  advance.  Garibaldi
bade  his  bugler  blow  the  reveille  of  Como.  The  unexpected
music  rang  through  the  noonday  stillness  like  a  summons  to
the  soul  of  Italy.

The  Neapolitans  began  to  descend  into  the  bottom  of  the
valley  to  the  banks  of  a  small  stream,  the  upper  course  of
which  lies  through  broken  and  rocky  ground,  the  lower  part
through  a  pleasant  grove  of  poplars.  They  fired  as  they
struggled  across  the  stream  and  began  to  ascend  the  lower
slopes  of  the  Pietralunga.  The  skirmishing  line  of  the
Genoese  Carabineers  at  length  opened  fire  with  their  rifles
and  laid  several  of  the  enemy  low.  Then,  by  a  spontaneous
impulse,  before  the  moment  intended  by  Garibaldi,  the
leading  companies  of  the  Thousand  leapt  to  their  feet  and
dashed  down  the  smooth  but  rapid  slopes  of  the  Pietralunga.
At  the  sight  of  the  avalanche  above  them,  the  skirmishers
of  the  8th  Cacciatori  halted,  wavered  and  fled  back  across
the  valley.  But  they  rallied  round  their  supports  on  the
lower  slopes  of  the  Pianto  dei  Romani,  and  prepared  to
defend  the  hill,  terrace  by  terrace  and  yard  by  yard.  The
Garibaldini,  in  their  turn  crossing  the  stream,  began  to

1  Naples  MS.  Landi.

THE  BATTLE  OF  CALATAFIMI  255

charge  up  the  heights  in  the  face  of  a  determined  enemy.
Throughout  the  heat  of  the  early  afternoon,  for  two  hours  or
more,  the  battle  raged,  like  a  heath  fire  painfully  ascending
a  hill  under  a  gusty  and  wavering  wind.

It  may  be  well  to  analyse  the  military  conditions  of  the
storming  of  the  Pianto  dei  Romani  before  narrating  the
dramatic  incidents  which  finally  decided  its  issue.  Probably
the  defenders  outnumbered  the  assailants  of  the  hill  in  the  pro-
portion of  five  to  three.  With  those  of  S.  Anna's  squadre  who
took  part  in  the  battle,  the  Garibaldini  were  about  1200  men.
Before  the  end  of  the  fight  some  2000  Neapolitans  were
actively  engaged  in  defending  the  hill,  for  although  Landi
himself  remained  in  Calatafimi,  he  sent  out  supports  to
Sforza  the  moment  the  firing  began,  till  fourteen  out  of  his
twenty  companies  were  actually  taking  part  in  the  battle.
His  fears  of  the  squadre  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  his
nervousness  about  his  line  of  retreat,  induced  him  to  keep
the  other  six  companies  as  a  reserve  in  Calatafimi  town.i

Besides  their  superiority  in  numbers,  the  defenders  had  a
yet  more  marked  superiority  in  weapons.  Every  Neapolitan
had  an  excellent  rifle.  The  smooth-bore  muskets  of  the
Thousand  were  sighted  for  three  hundred  yards,  they  fre-
quently missed  fire  altogether,  and  there  was  such  a  scarcity
of  ammunition  that  some  had  only  ten  rounds.  Conse-
quently, except  by  the  Genoese  Carabineers,  picked  marks-
men armed  with  rifles,  who  kept  up  a  telling  fire  in  front  of  the
battle  from  beginning  to  end,  there  was  very  little  shooting
done  by  the  assailants,  who  were  ordered  by  Garibaldi  to
reserve  their  fire  and  go  in  with  the  cold  steel.  Their  slender
stock  of  ammunition  was  not  exhausted  at  the  end  of  the
day.  The  weapon  was  the  bayonet,  the  sight  of  which
coming  up  from  below  at  a  few  yards  distance  generally
induced  the  Neapolitan  riflemen  to  seek  ground  higher  up
the  hill.3

1  Naples  MS.  Landi,  and  see  Appendix  M,  below,  '  Calatafimi,'  i.

2  Baratieri,  403,  404.  Floritta,  70,  72.  Abba,  120.  Mem.  347.  Conv.
Eng.  Conv.  Camio.  Mazzini,  xi.  pp.  Ix.wiii,  note  (Nuvolari),  and  Ixxxi-
Ixxxii,  and  note.

256  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Two  Neapolitan  cannon  were  planted  on  the  east  end
of  the  Pianto  dei  Romani,  apparently  on  the  hill-side
below  the  summit,  and  did  considerable  execution.  The
antique  artillery  of  the  Thousand,  under  the  able  command
of  the  Sicilian  exile,  Giordano  Orsini,  was  left  on  the  high-
road at  the  top  of  the  Vita  plateau,  to  defend  itself  behind  a
hastily  constructed  barricade  against  the  enemy's  cavalry.
Only  after  the  latter  had  withdrawn  could  Orsini  advance
down  the  road,  and,  elevating  his  aim,  fire  a  few  shots  with
a  high  trajectory  on  to  the  top  of  the  Pianto  dei  Romani,
where  they  produced  some  moral  effect  at  the  last  critical
moment.i

Both  sides  were  well  suited  to  their  respective  tasks ;  the
well-drilled  Neapolitans  to  stand  in  close  order  and  fire
rifle  volleys  down  the  glacis  of  the  hill-side  ;  and  the
Thousand,  with  the  individual  initiative  and  educated
intelligence  of  the  best  kind  of  volunteer,  to  fight  in  open
order,  rushing  uphill  singly  or  in  groups  from  one  tiny  bit  of
cover  to  the  next.-  The  circumstance  that  rendered  victory
just  possible  for  the  attacking  party  was  that,  although  the
slope  of  the  Pianto  dei  Romani  was  fatally  steep,  level  and
open,  with  nothing  on  the  greater  part  of  its  smooth  surface
but  corn,  vines,  beans  and  flax,  the  peasantry  had  made  some
terraces,  at  considerable  distances  one  from  another,  and
in  lines  neither  definite  nor  continuous,  cutting  them  out  of
the  soil  and  rock,  or  else  building  them  up  with  rough-hewn
stones.  Each  terrace,  though  only  two  or  three  feet  high,
afforded  a  kind  of  shelter  behind  which  the  Garibaldini
could  crouch  and  suck  lemons  and  recover  breath,  while
they  beckoned  to  comrades  below  to  come  up  and  form  a
party  for  the  next  rush  across  the  open.  Along  the  terrace
walls  grew  stray  olive  and  fig  trees,  bushes  of  aloe  and

1  Riistow,  i6o.  Orsini  {Cenno),  13.  Olivevt,  51,  52.  Baratieri,  406.
Tiivr's  Div.  33. Menghini,  48,  49.

2  The  principle  of  group  rushes,  subsequently  used  by  the  Prussian
armies  on  a  greater  scale,  is  sometimes  said  to  have  been  invented  by
Garibaldi,  whose  method  it  certainly  was.  But  in  fact  it  invents  itself
whenever  a  force  of  intelligent  and  severally  reliable  men  has  to  fight
under  certain  conditions. See  Baratieri,  400,  403,  and  Nicolosi.

M

mBi

pi'

H

^*

£^

^1  '^

iki^nM^.,

A 'terrace' of the PIANTO DEI ROMANI.
With  olive  and  cactus  iffco  d  India).

A 'terrace' of the PIANTO DEI ROMANI.
With  aloes.

THE  BATTLE  OF  CALATAFIMI  257

cactus,  hedges  of  grey  wormwood,  with  orange  vetch  and
multitudinous  flowers  and  weeds  adorning  these  break-
waters of  the  battle.

Sometimes  a  terrace  was  held  successfully  by  the  Neapoli-
tans, and  the  assailants  thrust  down  again.  Once  a  Gari-
baldian  banner  was  captured  in  hand  to  hand  conflict.
A  Neapolitan  sergeant  of  gigantic  size,  who  soon  afterwards
deserted  and  fought  in  the  ItaUan  ranks  at  Milazzo,  headed
a  charge  downhill,  killed  Schiaffino  of  Camogli,  the  bearded
sea-captain  who  carried  the  banner,  wounded  Menotti
Garibaldi  in  the  hand,  and  tearing  the  flag  from  its  staff
carried  it  ofl  in  triumph.^  If  the  Neapolitans  had  made
more  frequent  charges  of  this  kind  down  the  hill,  they  would
have  got  more  benefit  from  the  immense  superiority  of
their  position.

A  principal  feature  of  this,  as  of  all  Garibaldi's  battles,
was  the  degree  to  which  his  officers  exposed  themselves.
The  General  regarded  courageous  example  as  the  most  im-
portant of  all  rules  in  the  leadership  of  volunteers. 2  Bixio,
on  a  white  horse,  seemed  to  be  everywhere  at  once  along  the
side  of  the  steep  ascent,  leading  on  his  battalion  (ist  to-  4th
companies),  which,  after  forming  the  reserve  on  the  Pietra-
lunga,  became  the  left  wing  of  the  attack  when  the  battle
was  joined  in  earnest.  One  of  the  very  few  mounted  officers
on  the  Italian  side  in  this  battle,  he  was  able  also  to  pay
flying  visits  to  Garibaldi,  to  warn  him  in  vain  against  ex-
posing a  life,  the  loss  of  which  would  mean  instant  disaster
to  the  hopes  of  Italy,  and  extermination  for  the  Thousand.
Garibaldi,  wrapped  in  his  funcio,  had  descended  slowly  from
the  Pietralunga  on  foot,  carrying  his  sheathed  sword  over
his  shoulder.  As  he  ascended  the  Pianto  dei  Romani  he
drew  the  sword  and  began  to  lead  the  foremost  rushes. All

^  There  is  a  dispute  as  to  whether  it  was  the  principal  banner  of  the
Thousand  worked  for  Garibaldi  in  South  America,  or  only  a  tricolour
extemporised  for  company  leadership.  Tiirr's  Div.  33,  37.  Elia,  ii.  35.
Abba,  124.  Abba,  Noi.  66.  Crispi,  Diario,  21.  Holyoake,  1.  234,  235.
Bandi,  163,  175.  Menghini,  425.  Mazzini,  xi.  p.  Ixxxii,  note.  Campo,
109-111.

^  Adamoii,  406,  407.

s

258  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

that  his  staff  could  do  was  to  attempt  to  form  a  living  shield
for  him  in  front  and  flank  wherever  he  walked.  In  the
performance  of  this  duty  Elia,  the  sailor  of  Ancona,  fell
desperately  wounded  with  a  bullet  in  the  mouth  which
would  otherwise  have  hit  the  General,  as  Garibaldi  gratefully
acknowledged.  At  another  moment  it  was  Sirtori  who
saved  him,  when  he  was  surrounded  with  the  banner  in  his
hand.  '  It  was  the  best  moment  of  my  Hfe,'  wrote  the
reserved  and  stoical  Chief  of  Staff,  after  stating  the  fact  in
a  letter  to  his  brother.i

The  heat  of  the  ascent  was  terrible,  thirst  raged.  The
enemy  grew  more  numerous  above,  as  fresh  supports  arrived
and  drew  together  in  ever  closer  order  as  the  concentric
attack  narrowed  towards  the  top  of  the  hill.  On  the  other
hand,  the  ranks  of  the  foremost  assailants  grew  thinner  as
they  mounted ;  already  about  a  hundred  had  been  hit,  while
many  of  the  less  heroic  lingered  in  the  valley  or  lower  down
the  hill,  fatigued,  discouraged,  and  easily  dropping  behind
out  of  a  movement  in  open  order  on  the  broad  mountain-
side. To  experienced  eyes  the  battle  seemed  lost.  Bixio,
the  second  bravest  man  in  the  Thousand,  said  to  Garibaldi
what  others  may  have  thought,  but  no  one  else  could  say  to
him  :  '  General,  I  fear  we  ought  to  retreat.'  Garibaldi  looked
up  as  if  a  serpent  had  stung  him.  '  Here  we  make  Italy
or  die,'  he  said.^  Phrases  of  so  solemn  an  order  were  not
often  in  Garibaldi's  mouth,  and  this  one  was  no  flourish
of  rhetoric,  but  expressed  the  bare  truth  of  the  political
and  military  situation.  Garibaldi  was  a  cunning  old
guerilla,  who  knew  well  how  to  retreat,  dodge,  and  circum-
vent, but  he  perceived  that  on  this  day  of  all  days  in
his  hfe  retreat  would  bring  worse  disaster  on  his  cause  and
country  than  an  honoured  death  upon  the  field.  Retreat
would  be  the  certain  prelude  to  destruction  for  all  the

1  Elia,  ii.  36,  37,  40,  Garibaldi's  letter, Sirtori,  213. Elia  is  alive

to-day  (1909)-

2  Bixio,  176.  Abba's  Bixio,  93.  Mario,  262.  Abba,  123.  In  Bologna
MS.  Bixio  we  read;  'Garibaldi  non  voile  udire  di  ritirarsi  come  io
consigliai.'

THE  LAST  TERRACE  259

Thousand  in  an  ignominious  man-hunt,  and  would  cut  off
the  chance  he  still  saw  above  him  on  the  hill-top  of  a  bare
victory,  the  key  to  the  rapid  conquest  of  the  whole  island
and  of  the  mainland  after.  Once  beaten,  the  Neapolitan
troops  would  lose  their  morale.  The  squadre  on  the  heights
around,  and  with  them,  as  it  were,  all  Sicily  and  Italy,  were
waiting  to  take  their  cue  from  this  skirmish.  Onwards  lay
the  only  path  to  Palermo,  to  Naples,  to  Rome.

His  spirit  bore  uphill  the  fainting  battle.  On  the  ex-
treme right,  where  the  ascent  is  less  steep  near  the  head  of
the  valley,  the  7th  company  under  Benedetto  Cairoli,  aided
by  those  squadre  who  had  consented  to  follow  S.  Anna  into
the  battle,  pressed  hard  on  the  enemy's  left  wing.  Young
Enrico  Cairoli,  and  three  other  students  of  Pavia,  rushed  in
on  the  Neapolitan  battery  and  captured  one  of  the  cannon  in
position.!

At  length  Garibaldi  found  himself  standing  under  cover
of  the  last  terrace  below  the  summit  of  the  Pianto.  With
him  stood  about  300  men,  the  largest  group  of  those  still
left  in  the  firing  Hue,  including  Bixio,  Tiirr,  and  the
remnant  of  his  staff,  most  of  the  surviving  Carabineers,
and  the  students  of  Pavia.  A  few  yards  overhead,  on  the
top  of  a  steep  bank,  the  enemy's  immensely  superior  forces
were  ranged  in  close  order,  firing  down  in  regular  volleys,
but  fortunately  too  high.  They  were  so  close  that  Gari-
baldi's companions  could  hear  the  Neapolitan  officers
ordering  their  men  to  aim  lower.  At  one  moment  the
charge  was  sounded  above,  and  if  the  Neapolitans  had
come  on  with  a  rush,  they  must  have  swept  the  slender
line  of  patriots  down  the  hill  by  sheer  force  of  gravity.
But  the  charge  was  sounded  in  vain.

Here,  under  the  partial  cover  of  the  last  terrace.  Garibaldi
remained,  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  as  it  seemed  to  some
present,  resting  his  men  before  the  final  rush,  and  waiting
for  stragglers  to  come  up. During  this  interval  Bandi  and

'  Cairoli,  88.  Menghini,  31.  Baratieri,  403.  Tiirr's  Div.  34.  Riis-
tow,  159.

s  -i

26o  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

many  others  fell  beneath  the  volleys,  and  began  to  drag
themselves  down  the  hill  again  towards  a  hut  in  the  valley
where  the  wounded  collected  as  by  instinct,  with  none
to  care  for  them  since  the  numerous  doctors  were  fighting
in  the  front.

Under  the  bank  near  the  hill-top  the  young  men,  many
of  them  the  General's  closest  intimates,  pressed  round  him  :
'  General, '  they  said,  '  what  are  we  to  do  ?  '  '  Italiani,
qui  hisogna  morire'  ('Italians,  here  we  must  die'),  he
answered,  and  went  about  among  the  groups  encouraging
them  for  the  last  rush  with  words  more  stirring  than  any
sure  promise  of  victory.

Meanwhile  the  Neapolitans  above,  though  they  could
not  be  induced  to  charge,  were  conducting  the  defence  with
an  angry  ferocity  of  purpose.  Some  of  them  ran  short  of
ammunition,  and  plucking  up  stones  and  earth  began  to
hurl  them  down  the  bank.  Garibaldi  happened  to  be
leaning  forward  with  his  head  bent  towards  the  ground,  when
he  was  hit  on  the  back  by  a  large  stone.  Canzio  of  Genoa,
his  future  son-in-law,  who  was  standing  next  to  him,  used
afterwards  to  tell  how  he  heard  the  thud  of  the  stone,
and  next  moment  saw  Garibaldi  spring  to  his  full  height,
his  eyes  kindhng  their  strange  lights,  and  heard  him  cry
out,  '  Come  on.  They  are  throwing  stones.  Their  ammun-
ition is  spent.'  He  dashed  up  the  bank  sword  in  hand
and  his  men  after  him  against  the  serried  ranks,  who  in
fact  had  not  spent  the  whole  of  their  ammunition.  No
one  ever  pretended  to  remember  what  happened  at  the
top  of  the  bank,  but  when  the  red  madness  of  battle  subsided
the  victors  became  aware  of  the  Neapolitans  streaming  in
flight  across  the  plateau  of  the  summit,  and  rushing  head-
long down  the  other  side  of  the  hill  into  the  valley  that
divides  the  battle-field  from  Calatafimi.  And  there,  on  the
heights  of  the  Pianto  dei  Romani,  where  the  monument
stands  to-day,  the  Italians,  in  an  ecstasy  of  love  and
veneration,  pressed  round  their  chief  and  father .^

^  For  the  details  of  this  last  charge  my  authorities  are :  Conv.  Canzio.
Menghini, 425 (Canzio's  Diary). Mem. 348. Bandi, 164-170. Zeusi,

GARIBALDI.
(From  an  engraving  by  W.  Holl  from  an  original  photograph. British  Museum.)

THE  VICTORY  261

Utterly  spent  with  thirst,  heat  and  fatigue,  the  victors
lay  panting  on  the  hill-top,  and  as  they  cooled  themselves
in  the  breeze  of  evening,  watched  the  lines  of  fugitives
winding  across  the  deep  valley  and  up  the  hill  to  Calatafimi
town.  From  one  point  in  the  ravine  across  which  the
Neapolitans  fled,  could  be  seen  the  lonely  temple  of  Segesta,
diminished  to  a  toy  by  distance,  but  none  the  less  maj  estic  in
the  harmony  of  its  perfect  proportions.  On  the  morrow
many  of  the  Thousand,  tired  as  they  were  with  battle,  went
three  miles  out  of  their  way  into  the  wilderness  to  admire
this  symbol  of  the  wealth,  art,  and  dignity  of  the  men  who
once  inhabited  that  poverty-stricken  island.^

The  loss  on  the  victorious  side  amounted  to  thirty  killed
and  upwards  of  a  hundred  severely  wounded — probably  a
larger  loss  than  that  of  the  enemy.  Nearly  fifty  more
had  been  slightly  wounded,  but  most  of  these,  including
Sirtori  and  Menotti  Garibaldi,  continued  at  their  posts.
Of  all  the  cities  of  Italy  Genoa  claimed  the  heaviest
losses  ;  both  Bixio  and  Canzio  wrote  that  she  had  fifty-four
wounded.  The  sufferers  were  carried  first  to  miserable
quarters  in  Vita,  whence  some  were  moved  to  Salemi,
Calatafimi,  and  Alcamo,  being  taken  from  place  to  place
in  the  small  country  carts,  gay  with  medieval  carving  and
colour,  that still delight  every  visitor  to  Sicily. They

142,  143. Capuzzi,  32,  34. Belloni,  85. Tiirr's  Div.  34. Bruzzesi,  dopo
25  anni,  39,  41. Rilstow,  161.

Garibaldi's  impressions  of  the  battle,  as  written  to  his  friends  during

the  next  two  days,  are  worth  quoting. To  Bertani  he  wrote  on  May  16 : —

'  The  enemy,  who  yielded  to  the  bayonet  charges  of  my  old  Caccia-

tori  delle  Alpi  dressed  in  plain  clothes,  fought  valiantly  and  only  yielded

their  positions  after fierce  fighting hand to  hand {corpo  a  corpo).

The  battles  we  sustained  in  Lombardy  were  certainly  less  hardly

contested  than  the  battle  of  yesterday. The  Neapolitans  when  they

exhausted  their  cartridges  threw  stones  at  us  like  madmen.'

To  the  Directors  of  the  Million  Rifles  Fund  he  wrote  on  May  17  : —

'  I  must  confess  the  Neapolitans  fought  like  lions,  and  certainly
I  have  not  had  in  Italy  a  battle  so  fierce  nor  adversaries  so  brave.
.  .  .  From  this  you  can  guess  what  was  the  courage  of  my  old
Cacciatori  deW  Alpi  and  the  few  Sicilians  who  fought  with  us.' —
Ciampoli,  150.

1  Capuzzi,  35. Ahba,  126,  135,  136. Ahba  Not.  68.

262  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

fared  ill,  for  there  was  no  ambulance.  The  ItaHan  doctors,
after  doing  all  they  could  for  a  day,  marched  on  in  the
ranks  to  take  Palermo,  and  the  Sicihans  among  whom
the  wounded  were  left  had  no  great  resources  either  of
material  or  of  skill.i

Several  dear  comrades  were  lost  to  Garibaldi  by  the  day
of  Calatafimi.  Besides  the  good  seaman  Schiaffino,  his
friend  and  aide-de-camp  Montanari  was  gone,  a  stern
and  somewhat  impracticable  RepubHcan  ideaUst  of  the
old  school,  who  in  '49  had  followed  him  from  Rome  to
San  Marino  and  thence  to  the  sand-dunes  north  of
Ravenna,  where  at  Garibaldi's  express  command  he  had
parted  from  Anita  and  himself.  Struck  at  Calatafimi,
Montanari  died  at  Vita  on  June  6  after  the  amputation  of
his  leg.  The  staff  was  also  deprived  for  a  time  of  the
services  of  Bandi,  EHa,  and  young  Manin,  though  all  three
eventually  recovered.  Luigi  Biffi,  a  boy  of  thirteen,  whose
Alpine  home  Garibaldi  had  freed  the  year  before,  and
who  had  come  among  the  Thousand,  lay  dead  on  one  of
the  terraces  of  the  Pianto.^

When  darkness  fell,  the  victors  slept  on  the  hard- won
summit,  and  dreamed  of  home  and  of  those  who  would  hear
of  this  day's  work  in  the  cities  of  Italy.  And  the  stars  shone
down  on  them  and  on  their  leader,  who  wrapped  his  puncio
round  him  and  turned  to  sleep  like  a  child.

But  in  Calatafimi  there  was  terror  and  confusion  that
night.  The  defeated  troops  had  fought  bravely,  but  now
they  knew  that  it  was  indeed  Garibaldi  and  his  men  with
whom  they  had  to  deal,  and  that  there  was  only  too  much
truth  in  the  tales  told  of  him  in  every  NeapoHtan  barrack-
room  for  eleven  years  past.  Their  demoraUsation  was
completed  by  the  behef,  fostered  by  Major  Sforza,  that  Landi

1  Baratieri,  409.  Abha,  126,  137.  Tiirr's  Div.  35.  Crispi,  Diario,  21.
Menghini,  426.  Bandi,  169-171,  176-179.  Franciosi,  16.  Corleo,  16.
Adamoli,  89.

"  Abba's  Cose,  263-270.  Bandi,  209,  210.  Venosta,  chap.  xxx.
Elenco  sub  Biffi.

LANDI'S  RETREAT  263

had  betrayed  them  in  that  he  had  never  shown  his  face  on
the  Pianto  dei  Romani,  and  absurd  stories  were  soon  afloat
of  his  having  been  bribed  by  the  invaders.^  The  unhappy
old  man  was  bewildered  by  the  events  of  the  day  which  he
had  done  so  little  to  control.  That  evening  he  penned  a
dispatch  to  Castelcicala  in  Palermo,  of  which  the  first
words,  '  Help  !  Prompt  help  !  '  indicated  at  least  some
intention  of  yet  making  good  the  formidable  position  of
Calatafimi  hill  and  town  against  a  foe  stil  greatly  inferior
in  force.  The  dispatch  boasted  that  they  had  '  killed  the
great  captain  of  the  Italians,'  whose  name  he  seemed  afraid
to  write  down,  and  announced  more  truthfully  that  they  had
'  taken  his  flag.'  The  letter  was  waylaid  on  the  road  by  the
Sicilian  bands  and  brought  into  the  Garibaldian  camp,  where
its  odd  account  of  a  battle,  which  the  author  had  not  himself
witnessed,  caused  mingled  indignation  and  merriment.^

But  when  night  had  fallen  Landi  abandoned  all  idea  of
further  resistance,  fearing  as  he  tells  us  that  his  communi-
cations would  be  cut  by  the  rising  of  the  country-side,  and
alarmed  by  a  certain  shortage  of  food  and  ammunition.  He
had  also,  as  he  declares,  received  previous  orders  to  retreat
on  Palermo,  which  he  ought,  if  we  judge  by  his  own  account,
to  have  obeyed  that  morning  instead  of  allowing  Sforza  to
become  entangled  in  a  conflict  with  the  enemy.^  Now  that
the  battle  was  over  he  was  unnerved  by  defeat,  and  unable
any  longer  to  rely  on  the  morale  of  his  beaten  soldiers.  For
all  these  reasons  together  he  determined  to  retreat  on  the
capital.  At  midnight  the  Neapolitans  evacuated  Calata-
fimi, and  reached  Alcamo  at  two  in  the  morning  of  May  16.
Thence,  after  a  few  hours'  rest,  they  made  a  forced  march
on  Partinico,  where  the  inhabitants  fell  on  them.  In
that  last  vendetta  of  the  old  blood-feud  between  Nea-
politan soldiery  and  Sicilian  people,  the  horrors  perpetrated
on  both  sides  left  ghastly  traces  which  a  few  days later

*  De  Cesare,  ii.  211. De  Sivo,  iii.  201. Cava,  ii.  loi. Naples  MS.
Landi.

2  Tiirr's  Div.  36,  37.

^  Naples  MS.  Landi. Appendix  M.,  below, '  Calatafirai,'  ii.

264  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

sickened  the  senses  of  Garibaldi  and  his  Northerners,
when  they  marched  by  the  charred  remnants  of  houses
and  of  human  bodies.  From  Partinico  Landi's  men  fled
on  at  evening  by  the  mountain  road  through  Monte-
lepre,  near  which  town  the  exhausted  army  was  again
attacked  by  local  squadre,  and  lost  part  of  its  baggage.  At
dawn  of  May  17  they  dragged  themselves  into  Palermo  in
sorry  plight,  a  living  assurance  to  the  dehghted  populace
that  Garibaldi  was  indeed  in  the  island,  and  no  less  formid-
able in  fact  than  in  legend.  Landi  had  traced  back  in  a
little  over  twenty-four  hours  the  thirty-five  miles  of  road
that  divided  Calatafimi  from  the  capital,  which  it  had
taken  him  a  whole  week  to  traverse  on  the  way  out.i

On  May  16,  from  the  town  of  Calatafimi,  Garibaldi  sent
a  message  to  Rosolino  Pilo,  with  whom  his  communications
were  now  opened  up  along  the  route  of  Landi's  retreat.
He  announced  his  victory,  and  bade  Pilo  kindle  beacon
fkes  along  the  crests  of  the  mountains  surrounding  the
Conca  d'Oro,2  to  be  a  sign  to  the  inhabitants  of  Palermo  to
lift  up  their  eyes  to  the  hills,  where  their  friends  were  already
gathering  in  strength,  and  whence  they  would  soon  descend
to  bay  the  enemy  in  his  last  lair.  A  few  days  after  the
battle,  the  authority  of  the  Dictator  was  acknowledged  in
almost  all  Western  Sicily,  save  in  the  garrisoned  capital  and
its  Conca  d'Oro,  where  men  watching  the  hill-fires  night  by
night  were  consumed  with  a  silent  fury  of  expectation. ^

1  Naples  MS.  Landi.  De  Sivo,  iii.  200.  Abba  Not.  76,  77.  AdamoH,
90. Menghini,  38,  426. Capuzzi,  44. Mem.  351.

"  CiampoH,  149.

3  In  Trapani,  too,  there  was  a  Neapolitan  garrison,  but  its  power
did  not  extend  as  far  as  Monte  S.  Giuliano.

CALATAFIMI.

This  shows  the  Saracen castle,  as  seen  by  the  Neapolitans  on  their  fliglit  from  the  Pianto
del  Komani  to  Calatatimi. The  town  itself  is  hidden,  round  the  side  of  hill  to  right  of  picture.

OUTSKIRTS OF PALERMO, CONCA D'ORO, AND MOUNTAINS.

View  from  the  roof  of  the  Palace. The  road  on  the  left  leads  to  Porrazzi,  that  on  the
right  to  Monreale.

CHAPTER  XV

IN THE MOUNTAINS ROUND PALERMO

'  One  had  need  to  be  a  lion-fox  and  have  luck  on  one's  side.' — Carlyle,
French  Revolution,  III.  bk.  i.  chap.  iv.

Even  before  the  battle  of  Calatafimi  it  had  been  deter-
mined at  Court  to  withdraw  the  incompetent  Castelcicala
from  the  governorship  of  Sicily,  and  to  send  out  in  his  stead
a  viceroy  with  plenary  powers,  distinguished  by  the  lofty
title  of  the  King's  alter  ego,  or  '  other  self.'  Among  the
impressionable  populations  of  the  south,  this  new  move
might  have  done  much  to  counteract  the  spell  cast  over
them  by  Garibaldi's  name,  if  it  had  been  possible  to  find  a
man  with  sufficient  prestige  and  ability  to  fill  the  part.
There  was  only  one  such  man  in  the  kingdom.  Filangieri
was  summoned  from  his  retirement  to  a  Council  of  State
held  at  Naples  on  May  14,  at  which  the  ex-minister  had  the
satisfaction  of  hearing  his  reactionary  rivals  join  with  their
royal  master  in  imploring  him  to  forget  the  past  and  to  go
once  more  to  save  Sicily  and  the  kingdom.  But  Filangieri
would  not  go.  He  had  advised  reform  and  friendship
with  Piedmont,  his  advice  had  been  rejected,  and  the  conse-
quences which  he  had  prophesied  had  occurred.  He  refused
to  try  to  mend  what  his  opponents  had  marred,  pleaded
age  and  ill-health,  and  was  deaf  to  the  King's  repeated
entreaties.  But  when  Ischitella,  and,  it  is  said,  Nunziante,
had  in  turn  declined  to  go,  and  the  difficulty  of  finding  an
alter  ego  became  pressing,  Filangieri  so  far  relented  in  his
Achillean  wrath  as  to  advise  the  sending  of  a  most  incom-
petent Patroclus,  Ferdinando  Lanza.'

I  De  Cesare,  ii.  215,  216,  244,  245. Nisco,  Fr.  II,  33,
265

266  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

General  Lanza  was  a  Sicilian,  aged  seventy-two,  who  had
sensed  in  his  native  island  as  Filangieri's  Chief  of  Staff,  and
was  best  remembered  as  a  source  of  innocent  merriment  to
Palermo,  where  he  had  tumbled  down  with  his  horse  on  a
rainy  King's  birthday,  and  soused  his  magnificent  re\-iew
uniform  in  some  particularly  ample  puddles.  It  was  an
accident  that  might  have  happened  to  anyone,  but  it  had
seemed  specially  appropriate  when  it  befell  Lanza,  and  the
announcement  that  he  was  now  returning  as  the  King's
alter  ego  caused  more  amusement  than  alarm  among  the
Sicilian  rebels.^

On  May  i6  he  sailed  to  Palermo,  in  time  to  witness  the
entry  next  morning  of  Landi's  beaten  troops  and  the  general
panic  that  ensued  on  the  news  of  Calatafimi.  Thoroughly
unnerved  by  a  situation  that  was  in  fact  serious  enough,  he
began  on  May  17  to  send  home  alarmist  reports.  '  The
city,'  he  wrote,  '  is  in  great  ferment,  and  has  a  sinister
appearance.  ...  A  rising  seems  imminent.  AH  the  \-Lllages
round  Palermo  are  in  arms,  and  are  only  waiting  for  the
arrival  of  the  band  of  foreigners  to  break  into  the  city.'  -

TTie  alter  ego  wavered  between  two  plans  of  campaign
which  had  been  discussed  in  high  quarters  at  Naples.  The
first  plan,  which  was  to  hold  Palermo  and  send  out  strong
columns  to  take  the  offensive  against  Garibaldi,  was  favoured
by  the  King,  by  Nunziante,  and  by  the  majority"  of  the
Council.  But  Filangieri  had  put  on  paper  a  rival  poHcy,
namely,  to  leave  a  garrison  in  the  CasteUamare  fortress,  weU
\-ictualled  and  in  touch  with  the  fleet ;  evacuate  the  rest  of
the  capital ;  send  the  troops  thus  set  free  to  join  with  the
garrisons  of  Girgenti  and  Messina ;  make  a  real  occupation
with  these  forces  of  the  east  and  centre  of  the  island  ;  pro-
claim Liberal  reforms,  and  when  time  was  ripe  return  upon
Palermo  as  he  hin^elf  had  done  in  1849.^

Filangieri's  plan  appears  to  have  been  a  misreading  of
the  actual  conditions  of  1S60  by  the  false  analogy  of  1S48-49.

*  De  Cesare,  iL  217,  218.

-  PaUrmo  MS.  PoIi.iia,  letter  of  May  17  to  Minister  for  Sidly.

*  Franci,  u  49,  1S2-1S4. Cronaca,  302-305.

LANZA  AS  'ALTER  EGO*  267

If  once  the  Neapolitans  had  left  Palermo,  Cavour  would
have  seen  that  they  never  came  back.  The  abandonment
of  the  capital  before  the  mere  terror  of  Garibaldi's  name,
would  have  meant  a  blow  to  their  prestige  in  Sicily  which
only  Filangieri  himself  could  possibly  have  made  good.  And
as  he  refused  to  execute  his  own  plan,  the  proposal  of  it  only
served  further  to  confuse  and  weaken  the  mind  of  his  nominee
Lanza,  who,  while  actually  concentrating  his  troops  for  a
defence  of  Palermo,  argued  and  wrote  in  favour  of  a  retreat
to  Messina.i  No  real  confidence  was  placed  by  the  King  in
his  alter  ego,  even  at  the  moment  of  his  departure  from
Naples.  His  '  plenary '  powers  were  in  practice  as  restricted
as  those  of  former  governors  of  the  island.  Indeed,  as  early
as  May  18,  General  Nunziante  was  sent  to  Palermo  to  see
that  he  assumed  the  offensive  against  Garibaldi,  who  was
already  drawing  near  the  capital.^

Popular  Italian  art  usually  represents  the  Thousand  as  a
number  of  well-shaved  and  well-appointed  young  men  in
military  gaiters,  smart  kepis,  and  clean  red  shirts.  Such,
no  doubt,  was  the  impression  produced  at  certain  moments
by  some  of  the  regiments  of  volunteers  who  joined  Garibaldi
later  in  the  year,  but  the  Thousand,  when  they  marched  on
after  a  day's  rest  in  Calatafimi  town,  presented  an  appear-
ance more  resembling  that  of  a  Boer  commando  towards  the
close  of  the  South  African  war.  After  their  scramble  up  the
Pianto  dei  Romani,  the  plain  clothes  in  which  nine- tenths  of
them  were  dressed  were  falHng  off  them  in  rags,  their  boots  were
dropping  to  pieces,  many  limped  painfully  along,  and  many
had  head  or  limb  bandaged.  Before  they  stormed  Palermo
at  the  end  of  the  month,  forced  marches,  sleepless  nights,  and
merciless  exposure  on  the  mountains  to  semi-tropical  rains
and  sun  had  reduced  them  to  veritable  scarecrows. ^

But  if  their  legs  were  weary,  their  hearts  were  light,  not

^  Cronaca,  107. De  Sivo,  iii.  206,  208.

2  Cronaca,  107,  305. De  Cesare,  ii.  220. Nisco,  Fr.  II,  33.
'  Capuzxi, 35, 43. Abba, 137. Conv. Tedaldi. Calvino {Guardiotie
ii.  444). Times,  June  8,  p.  10,  col.  3.

268  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

indeed  with  the  assurance  of  victory,  but  with  the  sense  that
they  were  enviable  above  all  Italians,  that  their  unique
campaign  was  poetry  made  real.i  After  Calatafimi  they
knew  that  they  had  at  least  avoided  fiasco,  and  that  even  if
they  now  died  with  Garibaldi  they  would  be  well  remembered
in  the  annals  of  the  cause.  While  many,  like  Sirtori,  had
never  bargained  for  more  than  a  good  death,  many  began  to
complain  that  they  had  been  enticed  by  false  reports  as  to
the  fighting  power  of  the  Sicilian  rebels. ^  Others  shared
the  now  confident  hopes  of  the  native  population.  But  all
alike,  seeing  that  Garibaldi  was  among  them  and  was  well
pleased  with  them  after  the  battle,  were  happy  in  a  situation
characteristically  summed  up  by  Bixio,  who  said  to  his
battahon,  '  We  shall  soon  be  either  in  Palermo  or  in  hell  *
[a  Palermo  od  all'  Inferno).^

On  the  sunny  morning  of  May  17,  Garibaldi  and  his  men
marched  out  of  Calatafimi,  crossed  the  valley  of  the  Freddo,
and  ascended  the  high-road  to  the  city  of  Alcamo,  built  on  a
ridge  which  overlooks  the  gulf  of  Castellamare.  In  the  corn-
fields outside  the  town,  men  and  women  fell  on  their  knees
as  he  passed.  Their  primitive  minds  could  not  fail  to  attach
some  idea  of  supernatural  power  to  any  greatly  admired
object,  but  with  the  help  of  Father  Pantaleo  the  Dictator
found  a  means  of  diverting  this  embarrassing  idolatry
from  himself  into  its  natural  channels,  without  losing  the
help  of  popular  superstition  for  his  own  and  his  country's
cause.  He  consented  to  assume  the  part  of  crusader
sanctified  by  religion,  as  the  champion  of  the  Sicilian  clergy
and  people  against  the  foreign  tyrant.  When  the  Thousand
entered  Alcamo,  they  were  led  to  the  principal  church,
where  Father  Pantaleo  awaited  them.  The  Dictator  knelt
while  the  friar  blessed  him,  crucifix  in  hand.

1  E.g.,  Cairoli,  331.  '  Cara  Mammina,  t'assicuro  che  questa  spedizione
e  cosi  poetica  .  .  .  '  writes  Enrico  Cairoli.  Such  expressions  are  constant
in  letters  and  memoirs  of  the  Thousand.

2  E.g.,  Nievo,  346,  354. Abba  Not.  74,  75.

3  Bixio  really  said  it  at  Partinico  on  May  18,  see  Capuzzi,  45,  though
it  is  sometimes  put  into  Bixio's  or  Garibaldi's  mouth  on  the  heights  of
Gibilrossa.

THE  CEREMONY  AT  ALCAMO  269

Garibaldi,  who  was  at  this  time  of  his  life  somewhere  in
process  between  deism  and  pantheism,  had  no  belief  in  the
supernatural,  but  his  interpretation  of  nature  was  that  of  a
mystic  rather  than  of  a  materialist.  Strongly  anti-clerical,
he  was  not  by  temperament  anti-religious.  He  wished  to
see  the  world  purified  of  priests,  but  he  regarded  Christ  as
the  greatest  of  mankind,  who  had  delivered  his  brothers
from  slavery.  In  North  and  Central  Italy,  where  the  Church
was  predominantly  anti-national,  he  would  not  participate
in  ceremonies  conducted  by  priests.  But  finding  himself
suddenly  transferred  to  an  atmosphere  where  democracy
and  patriotism  were  religious,  and  where  the  priest  urged
the  people  forward  on  the  path  of  political  liberty,  he  was
at  once  impelled  by  instinct  and  drawn  by  policy  to
join  in  the  forms  of  popular  emotion.  The  rest  of  the
Thousand,  less  simple  than  he  in  his  equalitarian  love
of  mankind,  did  not  share  his  feelings  of  fraternity
with  the  Sicilians,  of  whom  for  the  most  part  they  enter-
tained a  low  opinion.  They  were  not  therefore  influenced
as  he  was  by  the  emotional  atmosphere  around  them,  and
looked  on  with  mingled  feelings  at  an  '  outburst  of
mysticism  '  which  they  recognised  as  genuine  on  the  part
of  their  chief.  1

After  the  religious  ceremony,  the  Dictator  applied  him-
self to  political  business.  On  the  advice  of  Crispi,  who  was
now  appointed  Secretary  of  State,  he  instituted  the  office  of
Governor  with  specified  civil  powers.  There  was  ultimately
to  be  a  Governor  for  each  of  the  twenty-four  districts  of
the  island,  and  for  the  present  Baron  S.  Anna,  who  had
fought  so  well  at  Calatafimi,  was  nominated  for  his  native
district  of  Alcamo,  and  Don  Alberto  Mistretta  for  the  dis-
trict of  Mazzara,  both  of  which  were  already  dependent  on
Garibaldi  for  the  maintenance  ©f  pubhc  order.  At  the  same
time  he  decreed  the  abolition  for  all  Sicily  of  the  macino,
or  excise  on  ground  corn,  a  concession  demanded  by  the

1  Ahha,  137,  138.  Capuzzi,  41.  De  Cesare,  ii.  316,  317.  Mario,  264.
Mario  Mac.  247,  252,  253. CihmpoU,  899,  900,  935,  936. Oddo,  270-272.

270  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

peasants  as  the  condition  of  their  support,  but  destined
before  long  to  prove  embarrassing  to  the  Dictator's  finance,
since  the  macino  suppHed  half  the  annual  revenue.i

On  May  i8  the  Thousand  made  their  first  long  day's
march  since  the  battle.  Leaving  Alcamo,  they  followed  the
high-road  eastward  across  the  uneven  lowlands  that  decline
towards  the  gulf  of  Castellamare,  cut  by  water-courses,  and
covered  with  vines  and  corn.  They  hurried  through  the
broad,  mile-long  street  of  Partinico,  to  escape  from  the
unsavoury  evidence  of  mutual  carnage  and  cruelty  which
marked  the  track  of  Landi's  retreat  through  a  hostile  popula-
tion. Immediately  outside  the  town  they  took  the  road  to
the  right,  abandoned  the  plain  and  mounted  to  the  hamlet
of  Borgetto  that  hangs  with  its  fruit  gardens  on  the  edge  of
the  first  steep  ascent.  There  Bixio's  battalion,  composing
the  rearguard,  bivouacked  amid  the  clamour  of  nightingales.^
But  the  vanguard  pushed  on  up  the  high-road,  by  the  side  of
a  gorge  of  Alpine  proportions  on  their  left,  until  at  nightfall
they  reached  the  top  of  the  pass  of  Renda.  There  they
encamped  on  the  watershed  dividing  the  streams  that
irrigate  the  Conca  d'Oro  of  Palermo  from  those  that  flow
westward  to  Partinico  and  the  gulf  of  Castellamare.  The
desert  spot  where  they  lay  down  to  sleep  was  called  the
altipiano  of  Renda,  a  fiat  plain  a  few  hundred  yards  long  by
the  side  of  the  road,  enclosed  by  knolls  of  grey  rock.  Here
their  head  quarters  were  fixed  during  three  days  of  almost
ceaseless  rain,  to  which  they  were  exposed  without  tents,
coats  or  other  shelter,  at  a  height  of  about  2000  feet  above
the  sea.^

On  the  morning  of  May  19,  during  a  respite  from  the

1  Leggi,  6-10,  decrees  3-8,  Alcamo,  May  17.  Palermo  MSS.  Br.  Cons.
Papers,  Mr.  Goodwin's  letter,  June  18.  Part  of  Filangieri's  plan,  see
p.  266,  above,  was  to  remit  the  macino. Franci,  i.  183.

"  Capuzzi,  43-47.

3  Henceforth  use  Map  IV.,  end  of  book.  The  altipiano,  clearly  dis-
tinguishable, is  now  under  vines,  but  in  i860  was  uncultivated,  as  I  was
told  by  a  local  peasant  who  claimed  to  have  lived  there  all  his  life,  viz.
since  1850. Abba,  141. Tiirr's  Div.  39. Paolucci,  Pilo,  272. Giusta,  8,  9.

IN  VIEW  OF  THE  CONCA  D'ORO  271

downpour,  the  Thousand  for  the  first  time  saw  Palermo.  A
few  hundred  yards  beyond  their  camping-ground  at  Renda,
the  road,  after  passing  between  a  group  of  grey-snouted
crags,  suddenly  comes  to  the  edge  of  the  mountains,  and
there,  as  if  startled  by  the  sudden  glory  of  the  prospect  dis-
closed, takes  a  rapid  turn  aside  and  then  plunges  steeply
down  to  Pioppo.  From  this  high  vantage  point,  known  as
Misero-cannone,!  the  Thousand  became  aware  of  the  theatre
of  mountains,  from  Monte  Grifone  round  to  Monte  Cuccio,  on
the  middle  part  of  which  they  themselves  stood  ;  while  down
below,  enclosed  between  these  stately  barriers  and  the  sea,
was  spread  the  Conca  d'Oro  itself,  one  vast  grove  of  oranges,
lemons,  olives,  and  cactus,  the  magnificent  legacy  to  modern
times  of  the  Arab  methods  of  irrigation.  There,  like  a
rich  jewel  set  in  the  '  shell  of  gold,'  lay  Palermo  on  the
edge  of  the  azure  sea ;  and  there  in  the  harbour  rode  the
warships  of  Naples  and  of  various  other  nations,  set  to
watch  the  issue  of  this  wild  adventure,  for  news  of  which
all  the  world  was  waiting.  In  plain  and  city,  that  seemed
asleep  and  dreaming  in  the  peaceful  distance,  a  disarmed
population  was  chafing  in  frantic  expectation  of  their
arrival,  and  21,000  soldiers  with  artillery,  fortresses,  and
all  the  panoply  of  war,  stood  ready  to  guard  the  city  from
their  assault.  Who  were  they,  a  band  of  forlorn  and  hungry
watchers  on  the  mountain  tops,  that  they  should  take  a
capital  from  a  kingdom's  army  and  fleet  ?  2

To  advance  direct  on  Palermo  and  attack  such  a  garri-
son in  face  would  be  certain  destruction.  Garibaldi's  only
chance  was  to  make  such  skilful  use  of  the  screen  of  moun-
tains as  to  be  able to  conceal  the  weakness  of  his  force

^  Really  '  MiseZ-cannone,'  a  name  of  Arab  origin,  like  Misilmeri.  At
this  point  also  another  road  goes  off  to  the  right  to  S.  Giuseppe  Jato.

2  Abba,  143.  Paolucci,  Pilo,  272,  273.  Pietraganzili,  ii.  93,  94.  No
one  would  mention  the  cactus  alongside  of  the  orange  and  lemon  as
characteristic  of  the  Conca  d'Oro  of  to-day.  Since  i860  the  iico  d' India,
or  prickly-pear  cactus,  with  its  pennyworth  of  fruit  for  its  intolerable  deal
of  fleshy,  amorphous,  antediluvian  shrub  (see  illustration,  p.  2S8),  has  been
largely  displaced  in  the  Conca  d'Oro,  as  throughout  all  Sicily,  in  favour  of
the  more  profitable  forms  of  agriculture  and  arboriculture.

272  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

and  to  effect  a  rush  into  the  city  at  some  ill-guarded  point.
If  once  he  and  his  Thousand  could  appear  in  the  heart  of
the  city,  the  population  would  rise  and  fight  in  the  streets  as
in  1848,  and  so  place  the  invaders  on  something  a  httle
nearer  equality  with  the  immense  forces  of  the  Neapolitan
garrison. 1

The  peaks,  ridges,  and  long,  deep  valleys  of  the  mountains,
among  which  Garibaldi  from  May  19-26  gradually  worked
out  this  the  supreme  military  problem  of  his  life,  resemble  in
size,  shape,  and  general  character  the  highest  part  of  the
English  Lake  District.  It  may  give  some  notion  of
the  character  of  the  ground  to  imagine  the  hills  between
Helvellyn  and  Scafell  with  all  their  water-courses  dried  up,
and  instead  of  an  universal  and  undying  plenty  of  wet  grass
and  moss  and  bracken  spread  between  one  precipice  and  the
next,  a  sparse  and  short-lived  crop  of  green  herbs  and  bright-
coloured  flowers  filling  the  interstices  of  the  grey  rocks  after
the  asphodels  of  spring  are  withered,  with  here  and  there
an  underwood  of  aloe  and  cactus,  and  in  valley  bottoms
a  sudden  wealth  of  olives  and  fruit-trees  in  some  rocky  Eden
loud  with  nightingales.

The  roads  in  this  region  were  very  few,  and  a  small  and
mobile  force,  prepared  to  abandon  its  cannon  and  traverse  the
wildest  recesses  of  the  hills,  with  the  aid  of  the  inhabitants
as  guides,  spies  and  transport  agents,  might,  under  a  great
leader,  achieve  some  masterpiece  of  strategy.  Calatafimi
had  been  a  soldier's  battle,  though  the  soldiers  had  fought
with  the  spirit  breathed  into  them  by  their  general  on  the
field  itself  ;  but  the  entry  into  Palermo  was  rendered  possible
only  by  the  genius  of  the  man  who  was  as  cunning  in  war  as
he  was  brave  in  battle.

Half-way  along  the  high-road  between  Renda  and  the
capital,  almost  at  the  foot  of  the  hills  and  close  above  the

1  The  lowest  official  Neapolitan  estimate  of  the  garrison  at  Palermo  on
May  23  is  20,861  men  ;  De  Sivo,  iii.  208.  Cronaca,  120.  But  Captain
Cava,  of  the  Neapolitan  General  Staff,  estimated  it  at  24,000 ;  Cava,  ii.
12,  84,  and  General  Marra  {Oss.),  13,  'never  more  than  24,000.'

GARIBALDI  AND  PTLO  273

orange  groves  of  the  Conca  d'Oro,  lies  Monreale,  famous  for
its  Norman  cathedral  encrusted  with  the  most  magnificent
mosaics  in  Europe.  It  was  so  strongly  occupied  by  an  advance
guard  of  the  garrison  of  Palermo  that  to  storm  it  would  have
cost  the  Thousand  more  than  they  could  afford  as  the  price
of  a  mere  outwork  to  the  enemy's  main  position.  Although
Garibaldi  was  ready  to  dare  anything,  he  was  equally
determined  to  waste  nothing.  If  he  spent  his  Thousand
prematurely,  he  would  be  a  beggar  indeed.  If,  however,  the
few  hundred  squadre  whom  Rosolino  Pilo  was  keeping
together  in  the  hills,  could  occupy  precisely  those  heights  at
the  foot  of  which  Monreale  lay,  its  garrison  would  then  be
forced  to  retreat.  Garibaldi  at  Renda,  and  Pilo  three  miles
north  at  Sagana  were  in  close  communication,  and  it  was
agreed  between  them  that  Pilo  should  advance  from  Sagana
to  support  his  outposts  at  the  Monastery  of  S.  Martino,  a
vast  edifice  buried  in  the  heart  of  those  wild  valleys.  Using
S.  Martino  as  his  head  quarters,  Pilo  was  to  occupy  in  force
the  heights  to  the  south-east  of  the  monastery,  especially
the  hill  of  the  Castellaccio,  an  old  ruined  castle  visible  from
afar  as  it  towers  above  Monreale.  Garibaldi  supported  this
movement  by  a  reconnaissance  along  the  high-road  through
Pioppo,  but  the  bulk  of  the  Thousand  remained  on  the
heights  near  Renda  until  the  result  of  Pilo's  operation  should
be  known.

The  Neapolitans,  however,  did  not  wait  to  be  attacked.
A  courageous  Swiss  officer.  Colonel  Von  Mechel,  with  an
energetic  subordinate,  the  Neapolitan  Major  Bosco,  had  been
sent  by  Lanza  with  3000  men  to  strengthen  the  garrison  of
Monreale.i  On  the  morning  of  May  21  they  took  the  offen-
sive, pushed  a  column  along  the  road  against  the  skirmishers
of  the  Thousand,  and  drove  them  back  along  the  flanks  of
the  mountains  from  Lenzitti  through  Pioppo  village,  back
on  to  the  heights  of  Misero-cannone  and  Renda.  In  this
affair,  in  the  Vallecorta,  was  killed  Piediscalzi,  the  spirited

^  Besides  the  3000  under  Von  Mechel  there  were  already  in  Monreale
three  battalions  under  Colonel  Bonanno,  who  took  a  not  very  active  share
in  the  events  of  the  subsequent  days. De  Sivo,  iii.  209.

274  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

leader  of  the  indefatigable  Albanians  of  Plana  del  Greci,  many
of  whom  were  now  fighting  side  by  side  with  the  Garibaldini.

Meanwhile  two  other  columns  were  dispersing  Pile's
bands  in  the  mountains  overhead.  One  column  moved  up
the  San  Martino  valley  to  occupy  the  monastery,  while
another  from  Monreale  climbed  the  steep  hills  of  Castellaccio
and  Giardinello,  and  before  the  squadre  were  aware  that  they
were  the  attacked  instead  of  the  attackers,  fired  down  upon
them  as  they  stood  on  the  lower  Neviera  hill.  Pilo,  who
had  seated  himself  among  some  rocks  to  write  a  letter  to
Garibaldi  asking  for  help,  was  shot  dead  with  the  pen
in  his  hand,  and  his  men  fled  over  the  mountains,^

The  brave  SiciUan  and  Italian  patriot,  who  thus  died  on
the  eve  of  the  consummation  of  his  life's  work,  would  readily
have  acknowledged  that,  in  his  own  and  Mazzini's  eyes,  the
real  object  of  his  mission  to  Sicily  had  already  been  accom-
pHshed  when  Garibaldi  had  landed  at  Marsala.  Yet  his
defeat  and  death  were  at  the  moment  a  severe  blow  to  the
cause,  and  not  only  checked  the  advance  but  endangered  the
position  of  the  Thousand.  For  the  camp  at  Renda,  high
placed  though  it  was,  lay  in  a  hollow  of  the  mountain- tops,
and  now  that  the  Neapolitans  had  disposed  of  Pilo's  force,
they  might  at  any  moment  appear  on  the  heights  com-
manding Renda  from  the  north-east.  Garibaldi  was
therefore  obliged,  as  the  result  of  the  fighting  on  May  21,
to  shift  his  camp  without  delay  .2

Thus  compelled  to  abandon  the  Partinico-Monreale  road
by  which  he  had  first  approached  the  capital,  the  General
determined  to  move  across  country  to  the  other  great  road
connecting  Palermo  with  the  interior,  which  runs  to  Corleone
through  Parco  and  Plana  dei  Greci.  He  would  there  enter
upon  a  new  sphere  of  operations  in  the  mountains  to  the
south-east  of  the  Conca  d'Oro,  which  were  already  occupied

1  Cronaca,  114-116.  De  Sivo,  iii.  208,  209.  Conv.  Armaforie.  Conv.
Vitali.  Calvino  {Guardione,  ii.  437,  438).  Paolucci,  Pilo,  272-282  ;  Riso,
57-62.  La  Lumia,  106.  Pietraganzili,  ii.  91.  Piana  dei  Greci,  38.  Giusta,
g. Cuniberti,  33.

2  Mem.  352j  354. Paolucci,  Riso,  62.

LA  MASA  AT  GIBILROSSA  275

by  squadre  under  La  Masa  more  numerous  than  those  that
had  followed  Pilo.  Immediately  after  the  battle  of  Calata-
fimi,  the  Dictator  had  wisely  detached  La  Masa  to  travel
through  the  island  and  rouse  the  people  to  arms.  Unlike
other  Sicilians  of  the  Thousand — such  as  Carini,  Orsini,
and  Calvino — La  Masa  had  no  marked  military  talent,
but  he  had  influence  as  an  orator  and  ability  as  an
organiser,  and  was  well  fitted  to  play  the  part  of  a  Sicilian
Danton.  With  less  than  half  a  dozen  comrades,  he  made
a  dangerous  cross-country  journey  from  Calatafimi  through
districts  still  infested  by  police  and  compagni  d'armi,
through  Roccamena  and  the  precipices  and  forests  of
Ficuzza,  till  he  reached  the  more  open  country  of  Mezzojuso
and  Villafrate.  In  that  region  and  along  the  coast  from  Ter-
mini to  Bagheria,  he  was  known  and  trusted  as  a  local  man
and  a  leader  of  1848,  His  appearance  among  his  own
people  dispersed  their  fears  and  uncertainties,  and  he
was  able  to  dissipate  a  strange  rumour  that  Garibaldi
had  not  really  landed  at  Marsala  at  all,  but  was  being
personated  by  a  Pole.  In  a  few  days  he  formed  a  camp  of
some  3000  squadre  at  Misilmeri  and  Gibilrossa,  and  extended
his  outposts  and  lit  signal  fires  at  night  on  the  top  of  Monte
Grifone.  He  was  much  indebted  to  the  patriotism  of  the
citizens  of  Termini,  who,  in  spite  of  the  NeapoHtan  garrison
holding  the  fort  and  bombarding  their  town,  supplied  his
camp  at  Gibilrossa  with  men,  food  and  such  arms  and
ammunition  as  they  could  provide.  Garibaldi's  desire  to
get  into  touch  with  La  Masa's  squadre  was  one  of  his  principal
objects  in  moving  from  Renda  to  Parco.i

This  difficult  operation,  to  be  effected  in  the  face  of  the
enemy  occupying  Pioppo  and  Monreale,  was  carried  out  with
secrecy  and  success  on  the  night  of  May  21-22.  It  was
necessary  to  march  round  the  head  waters  of  the  Oreto  across
the  stony  and  desolate  moor  in  which  it  rises,  some  miles
above  the  groves  of  the  Conca  d'Oro. Starting  along  the  road

1  Mem.  354.  La  Masa  {Sic),  pp.  xxix-xxxvi,  xxxix-xlii,  67-138.
O.  B's  La  Masa,  235-240,  Termini,  passim.  Pietraganzili,  ii.  109-115,
135,  152-159.

T  2

276  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

that  leads  back  from  Misero-cannone  towards  San  Giuseppe
Jato,  the  Thousand  turned  off  it  after  two  and  a  half  miles,
at  a  solitary  and  deserted  toll-bar  house  [Catena),  and  began
to  cross  the  moor,  at  a  height  of  some  2400  feet,  by  a  bridle
track  so  marshy  in  some  places  and  so  rocky  in  others  as  to  be
difficult  walking  even  on  a  fine  day,  and  almost  impassable
on  that  dark  and  windy  night  when  torrents  of  rain  seemed  to
carry  the  ground  from  under  their  feet,  *  Not  a  soldier  but
fell,'  wrote  one  who  made  the  march.  '  I  fell-  thrice,  many
others  ten  or  a  dozen  times.'  Thus  they  stumbled  and  rolled
in  single  file  along  a  path  of  much  the  same  general  character
as  the  passage  of  the  Esk  Hause  in  Cumberland,  from  the
top  of  the  Sty  Head  to  the  top  of  the  Rossett  Gill  Pass.
Close  above  them  to  the  right,  unseen  in  the  darkness,  were
the  precipices  of  Carpaneto  and  Moarda.  But  the  local
guides  were  faithful  and  competent,  walking  with  Garibaldi
in  front  to  feel  out  the  invisible  way,  and  on  the  early
morning  of  May  22  the  Thousand,  soaked,  bruised  and
utterly  exhausted,  many  of  them  without  shoes  on  their
feet,  staggered  down  into  Parco,  where  they  were  made
heartily  welcome  to  all  the  food  and  fire  that  the  inhabitants
could  supply.  The  cannon,  left  near  the  toll-bar  house
during  the  hours  of  darkness,  were  dismounted,  and  next
day  slung  on  poles  and  carried  by  Sicilian  mountaineers
along  the  same  path  which  the  infantry  had  traversed  during
the  night .^  By  this  difficult  march  Garibaldi  had  given  the
slip  to  Von  Mechel  at  Monreale  and  gained  a  full  two  days'
respite. 2

The  small  town  of  Parco  lies  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains,
on  the  very  edge  of  the  Conca  d'Oro.  Straight  above  its  roofs
the  Cozzo  di  Crasto  rises  to  a  height  of  about  2000  feet  above
the  sea,  and  presents  a  natural  fortress  of  immense  strength
against  an  enemy  approaching  from  Palermo.  On  its  rocky
summit,  attainable  by  means  of  the  winding  high-road  that
leads  towards  Plana  and  Corleone,  Garibaldi  fixed  his  camp,

1  Campo,  114. Couv.  Vitali  and  Conv.  Armaforte. Campo  and  Vitali
were  with  the  cannon. Mem.  354,  bears  out  their  statement.

2  See  Appendix  N..  '  The  night  march  to  Parco.'

THE  POSITION  ABOVE  PARCO  277

dug  trenches,  and  planted  his  ancient  artillery.  He  wrote
to  La  Masa  on  May  22  that  he  '  liked  the  position  well,  and
would  defend  it,  and  then  take  the  offensive  ' — no  doubt
against  the  capital  itself.  On  the  evening  of  the  same  day
he  sent  orders  to  La  Masa,  which  he  repeated  on  May  23,
bidding  him  descend  from  Gibilrossa  into  the  plain  and
attack  the  Neapolitans  in  flank  and  rear  as  soon  as  they
developed  their  expected  attack  on  the  Cozzo  di  Crasto.i

The  plan  was  not  ill-conceived.  An  action,  beginning  in
the  defence  of  the  formidable  position  above  Parco,  aided
by  La  Masa's  flank  attack  on  the  Neapolitans,  might  well
develop  into  a  counter-attack  which  should  lead  the  victors
into  Palermo  at  the  heels  of  the  defeated  enemy.  But  the
position,  which  it  was  proposed  to  defend  in  the  first  instance,
had  a  weak  point.  The  Cozzo  di  Crasto,  high  as  it  stood  and
steep  as  were  its  slopes  towards  Palermo,  was  only  a  spur
projecting  from  the  still  higher  range  of  Moarda  and
Rebottone.  Early  on  May  24  Garibaldi  became  aware  that
part  of  Von  MecheFs  four  battalions  were  moving  from
Monreale  across  the  head  waters  of  the  Oreto,  clearly  intent
on  occupying  the  Rebottone  mountains  above  and  behind
the  Cozzo  di  Crasto,  while  the  remainder  of  the  forces
occupying  Monreale,  joined  by  two  fresh  battahons  from
Palermo  under  General  Colonna,  were  to  make  a  frontal
attack  by  way  of  Parco,  To  save  himself  from  being  at
once  outnumbered,  surrounded  and  overlooked,  Garibaldi
ordered  the  Thousand  to  retreat  on  Plana  dei  Greci.  La
Masa's  squadre,  who  had  meanwhile  begun  to  descend  into
the  Conca  d'Oro  by  way  of  Belmonte-Mezzagno  to  attack
Colonna' s  flank,  fled  back  into  the  hills  in  panic  and  anger,
declaring  that  Garibaldi  had  deceived  them,  that  he  was
retreating  into  the  interior  and  that  all  Avas  lost.  La  Masa
with  difficulty  prevented  a  general  dispersion,  rallied  his
disheartened  forces  at  Gibilrossa,  and  wrote  next  day  to
implore  Garibaldi  not  to  retreat  to  Corleone,  but  to  join
him  at  Gibilrossa  for  a  united  attack  on  Palermo. 2

^  La  Masa  (Sic),  pp.  xlii-v. Paolucci,  Corrao,  129.

*  De  Sivo,  hi.  209,  210. Cronaca,  120. Fraud,  i.  53. Marra  Oss.  9.

278  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Meanwhile  the  Thousand  began  to  ascend  the  winding
mountain  road  from  Cozzo  di  Crasto  to  the  pass  that  leads
over  to  Plana  del  Greci.  To  cover  their  retreat,  the  Genoese
Carabineers  fought  a  rear-guard  action  with  the  Neapolitans
coming  up  from  Parco.  The  other  part  of  Von  Mechel's
column,  who  had  ascended  the  Rebottone  mountains  by  the
Portelle-PuzziUi  pass  and  threatened  to  head  off  the  retreat,
were  met  on  the  rocks  of  Campanaro,  more  than  3000  feet
above  the  sea,  by  a  smaU  detachment  of  the  vahant  Albanian
squadre,  supported  by  the  main  body  of  the  Thousand,  who
had  to  turn  off  the  road  to  repel  the  flank  attack.  At  sight
of  the  determined  front  of  the  Garibaldini,  the  Neapohtan
vanguard  shrank  back  and  let  them  pass.  Having  thus
cleared  the  way,  they  crossed  the  watershed  near  the
Madonna  del  Bosco,  and  descended  the  high-road  into  Plana
del  Greci,  on  the  side  of  the  mountains  facing  away  from  the
Conca  d'Oro  into  the  interior  of  the  island.^

On  the  evening  of  May  24,  while  the  Thousand  were  sadly
filing  into  the  street  of  Plana  del  Greci,  and  far  away  on
Gibihossa  La  ]Ma5a  was  doiag  all  that  oratory  and  gesticu-
lation could  do  to  prevent  the  dispersion  of  his  discouraged
squadre,  the  general  behef  was  that  the  revolution  was  at  an
end.  The  SicUians,  who  had  sincerely  wished  and  expected
Garibaldi  to  attack  Palermo,  could  hardly  beheve  their  eyes
when  they  saw  him  retreat ;  they  began  to  doubt  the
magical  powers  which  they  had  attributed  to  him,  and
took  offence  at  the  imperturbable  calm  of  his  demeanour
in  retreat,  which  they  declared  to  be  '  indifference.'  -  At
Plana  many  of  them  disbanded  and  made  off  for  their
homes.2  If  now  the  two  battalions  under  Colonna,  and  the
four  under  Von  Mechel;  had  pressed  hard  along  the  road
into  the  Albanian  village, it  would have fared  ill  with

La  Masa  (Sic.),  pp.  xlvi-xlviii. Mem.  355. Bologna  MS.  Bixio. Pietra-
gamili,  ii.  230-232.

1  Mem.  355.  Piana  dei  Greci,  40.  CapHzzi,  57,  58.  Bologna  MS.
Bixio.  Paolucci,  Riso,  67,  6S.  Conv.  Vitali  and  Armaforte.  Campo,
115,  116.

2  Paolucci,  Riso,  6S,  ^  Conv.  Paiernostro.

THE  ARTILLERY  SENT  TO  CORLEONE 279

the  hopes  of  Italy.  But  Colonna  returned  to  Palermo,^
and  Von  Mechel,  though  he  had  the  merit  so  rare  in  the
Neapohtan  service  of  taking  and  keeping  the  offensive,  was
no  less  slow  than  he  was  sure.  Consequently  Garibaldi
was  left  to  his  own  devices  at  Plana  dei  Greci  during  the
critical  evening  and  night  of  May  24,  and  was  able,  then  and
there,  to  carry  out  unobserved  a  plan  that  turned  the  tide  of
war,  and  caught  the  enemy  in  the  snare  of  his  own  success.

Plana  dei  Greci,  '  the  plain  of  the  Greeks,'  was  a  flat,
fertile  Alp,  about  two  miles  across  from  side  to  side,
lying  about  2000  feet  above  the  sea-level,  but  almost
entirely  surrounded  by  rocky  mountains  rising  from  one
to  two  thousand  more.  Its  well- watered  soil  had  for
nearly  four  centuries  been  cultivated  by  the  Greek-
Albanian  colonists,  who  lived  in  their  little  town  on  the
northern  edge  of  the  basin,  where  the  road  from  Palermo
entered  it.  To  the  east  of  the  plain  a  by-road  led  through
a  gap  in  the  circle  of  mountains  to  the  hamlet  of  S.  Cristina
Gela,  and  there  came  abruptly  to  an  end.  On  the  south,
the  high-road  wound  conspicuously  up  the  mountain
side,  leading  to  Corleone  and  the  interior  of  the  island.  If
Garibaldi  left  Plana  by  the  high-road,  it  would  mean  that
he  finally  turned  his  back  on  Palermo  and  abandoned  all
hope  of  success.  And  that  way  he  sent  his  baggage,  his  sick
and  wounded,  and  his  five  cannon  under  the  command  of
Orsini,  with  fifty  artillerymen  and  an  escort  of  about  150
squadre,  many  of  them  returning  to  their  native  Corleone.2
Before  darkness  fell  on  May  24,  this  column  was  clearly  seen
by  everyone  in  the  plain  winding  up  the  mountain  side  by
the  southern  road,  and  it  was  assumed  by  all  that  the
infantry  were  about  to  follow.

And,  indeed,  soon  after  nightfall,  the  Thousand  were

1  De  Sivo,  iii.  210.  Ctonaca,  128.  Cava,  ii.  88,  note.  Bonanno,  who
with  his  three  battalions  (eighteen  companies),  had  joined  Von  Mechel's
four  battalions  in  the  attack  on  Cozzo  di  Crasto.  returned  to  Monreale.
Cronara,  122,  123.

-  Narrative  by  Sampieri,  in  Tiiry's  Div.  384  and  Menghini,  71.  Com.
Pal&rnostro.

28o  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

mustered  in  the  street,  and  following  in  the  track  of  the
artillery,  crossed  the  plain  by  the  Corleone  high-road,
avoiding  the  by-road  to  S.  Cristina  Gela.  But  when  they
were  two  miles  from  the  town,  near  the  foot  of  the  southern
mountains  and  on  the  banks  of  the  river  that  waters  that
side  of  the  plain,  they  turned  off  the  road  at  dead  of  night,
unseen  by  friend  or  foe,  and  passing  by  the  water-mill  of
Ciaferia,  were  led  across  country  to  the  hamlet  of  S.  Cristina
Gela.  Skirting  its  southern  side,  they  took  to  a  rough  drove
road  that  led  eastwards  towards  Marineo,  across  rolling  hills
and  valleys.  Late  at  night  they  bivouacked  in  a  wood,
among  the  lonely  pastures  of  Chianettu.^

It  was  a  starry  night,  and  Garibaldi  gazed  at  the  un-
wonted brightness  of  Arcturus.  Half  in  jest,  he  told  his
aides-de-camp  that  Arcturus  was  his  star,  which  he  had
chosen  for  himself  when  he  was  a  sailor-lad,  and  that  its
splendour  foreboded  victory.  The  word  was  passed  round
the  camp  and  gave  joy  to  all,  not  merely  as  an  omen,  but  as
a  token  of  the  General's  happy  mood  and  the  renewed
prospect  of  an  attack  upon  Palermo. 2

Next  morning  (May  25),  descending  from  the  higher
prairie  land,  they  followed  one  of  the  most  lovely  foot-paths
in  Sicily,  across  rocky  ravines  filled  with  olives  and  fruit-
trees,  and  with  poplars  in  the  stream  bottoms,  until  they
reached  Marineo,  a  large  and  dirty  town,  planted  amid
nature's  fantastic  magnificence  beneath  a  precipice  pillar
resembling  the  Gibraltar  rock.

From  Marineo,  where  they  rested  for  several  hours,
a  paved  road  led  down  a  broad  and  fertile  corn  valley  to
La  Masa's  headquarters  at  Misilmeri  and  Gibilrossa.  The
General  sent  word  to  La  Masa  that  he  would  arrive  at
Misilmeri  on  the  following  day,  but  late  in  the  afternoon,
growing  impatient  of  delay,  he  ordered  the  weary  Thousand

1  See  Appendix  O.  From  Piana  to  Marineo.  There  are  few  trees  now
(igo8)  on  the  heights  of  Chianettu  (or  Pianetto),  but  the  bivouac  in  the
'  wood  *  there  is  mentioned  by  Bixio  {Bologna  MS.),  Perini,  199,  Garibaldi
{Mem.  356),  and  Canzio  {Menghini,  428).

2  Tiirr's  Risposta,  10. Ahha,  159.

THE  DOUBLE  BACK  TO  GIBILROSSA 281

on  to  the  road,  and  kept  them  afoot  till  they  entered  Misil-
meri  an  hour  before  midnight  on  May  25.  The  inhabitants,
in  the  wildest  dehght  at  the  resurrection  of  their  magical
Garibaldi,  illuminated  the  town  in  his  honour.  At  eleven
o'clock  he  sent  the  following  message  to  La  Masa  in  the
camp  of  the  squadre  at  Gibilrossa :  '  Dear  La  Masa,  I  hope  to
see  you  at  three  to-morrow  morning  to  make  important
arrangements  '  [per  comhinare  cose  importanti).  All  knew
that  the  combined  forces  would  now  fall  upon  the  capital.i

Not  only  had  Garibaldi  shaken  off  Von  Mechel's  pursuit,
but  he  had  deluded  that  officer  into  leading  three  or  four
thousand  of  the  best  troops  in  the  Neapolitan  army,  in-
cluding a  battahon  of  German  mercenaries,  upon  a  wild
goose  chase  into  the  middle  of  the  island.  The  troops
defending  Palermo,  with  whom  Garibaldi  was  about  to  try
conclusicais,  were  weakened  by  the  absence  of  the  bravest
officers  and  men,  and  were  put  off  their  guard  by  the  positive
belief  that  he  and  his  Thousand  had  fled  in  rout  to  Corleone,
and  would  never  trouble  them  again.

For  when  Von  Mechel  on  May  25  tardily  entered  Plana
dei  Greci,  he  had,  of  course,  been  told  that  the  Garibaldini
had  left  the  town  by  the  Corleone  road.  In  happy  ignorance
that  they  had  subsequently  doubled  back  to  Marineo,  he
sent  back  messages  of  victory  to  make  Lanza,  the  nervous
alter  ego,  feel  secure  in  the  capital,  while  he  himself  set  for-
ward (Mice  more  to  run  Garibaldi  to  earth.  But  though
determined  and  obstinate,  he  was  singularly  slow  in  pursuit,
and  about  the  time  that  the  man  whom  he  thought  he  was
pursuing  was  really  breaking  into  Palermo  city,  he  himself
had  only  reached  the  royal  forest  of  Ficuzza,  eight  miles
south  of  Plana.  There  the  King's  gamekeepers  gave  the
Neapolitan  officers  some  warning  that  a  division  had
been  effected  in  Garibaldi's  forces,  whereupon  Major
Bosco, at least according to his  own and  his friends'

>  Capuzzi,  59-62.  Giusta,  g,  lo.  Abba  Not.  106-108,  Paolucci,  Riso,
70-73. La  Masa  {Sic),  pp.  xlix,  1.

282  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

account,  urged  his  superior  either  to  return  at  once  to
Palermo,  or  else  to  march  on  Marineo  by  a  road  that
turned  off  thither  from  the  spot  where  the  discussion  was
being  held.  But  the  Switzer  was  obstinate ;  he  did  not
love  his  able  but  pushing  subordinate,  and  gave  orders
to  continue  the  advance  on  Corleone.  There  the  artillery
officer  Orsini,  to  whom  Garibaldi  had  given  the  powers  of
pro-Dictator,  with  instructions  to  take  every  occasion  for
making  a  display,  roused  the  populace,  and  on  May  27
fought  a  spirited  rear-guard  action  on  the  hills  behind  the
town.  The  Neapolitans  lost  some  men,  but  captured  two  of
the  five  cannon  ;  many  of  Orsini's  followers  dispersed.
Having  tasted  blood.  Von  Mechel  pressed  on  past  Corleone,
probably  still  hoping  that  he  was  on  the  traces  of  Garibaldi,
or  at  least  of  the  bulk  of  his  force.  Led  on  by  the  ignis
fatuus  of  three  obsolete  cannon  and  a  few  score  tired  men
and  horses,  he  passed  by  way  of  Campo  Fiorito  as  far  as
Giuliana  and  Chiusa,  within  fifteen  miles  of  the  south  coast
of  Sicily.  There,  on  May  28,  a  messenger  reached  him  with
the  news  that,  since  dawn  on  the  previous  day,  Garibaldi
and  his  Thousand  had  been  fighting  in  the  heart  of
Palermo.!  A  former  messenger,  sent  off  from  the  capital
on  the  morning  of  the  27th,  whose  safe  arrival  might  have
changed  the  fate  of  Italy,  had  been  arrested  by  the  Albanian
villagers  as  he  passed  through  the  street  of  Plana  dei  Greci.2

^  De  Sivo,  iii.  210-212.  Cronaca,  126  (Bosco's  report)  and  133.  De
Cesare,  ii.  233.  Marra  Oss.  10,  11.  Orsini  N.  A.,  July  1907,  pp.  46-50.
Orsini  (Cenno),  15.  La  Masa  (Sic),  p.  122.  Sampieri's  narrative  in
TUrr's  Div.  384,  385.  Cuniberfi,  42,  43,  is  a  good  account,  except  that
'  Von  Mechel  '  should be read  for  «  Cclonna.'

"  Piana  dei  Gyeci,  45. Reproduced  in  Oddo,  400,  401.

CHAPTER XVI

GIBILROSSA. — PALERMO ON THE EVE

'Spread  in  the  sight  of  the  lion,

Surely,  we  said,  Is  the  net
Spread  but  in  vain,  and,  the  snare
Vain  ;  for  the  light  is  aware.
And  the  common,  the  chainless  air,
Of  his  coming  whom  all  we  cry  on  ;

Surely  in  vain  is  It  set.

*  Surely  the  day  is  on  our  side,

And  heaven,  and  the  sacred  sun ;
Surely  the  stars,  and  the  bright
Immemorial  inscrutable  night ;
Yea,  the  darkness,  because  of  our  light,
Is  no  darkness,  but  blooms  as  a  bower-side
When  the  winter  is  over  and  done.'

SwiNBURNK, — Songs  before  Sunrise  :
Halt  before  Rome.

During  the  few  hours  between  midnight  and  dawn  on  the
26th,  the  Thousand  flung  themselves  down  to  rest,  some  in
:he  cafes  and  private  houses  of  Misilmeri,  others  in  the
:hurch,  which  Bixio  insisted  upon  using,  in  spite  of  the
amentations  of  the  inhabitants,  who  considered  its  occupa-
:ion  as  an  act  of  sacrilege  which  would  bring  bad  luck  on
;he  cause. 1  At  three  in  the  morning  La  Masa,  in  obedience
;o  Garibaldi's  summons,  arrived  in  the  town  from  his  camp
Dn  the  surrounding  hills,  and  at  dawn  a  council  of  war  was
leld  in  the  house  where  the  General  lodged. ^  Probably
Defore  leaving  Plana,  certainly  before  leaving  Marineo,
jaribaldi  had  already  determined  to  fall  on  Palermo,  but
seeing  that  he  was  about  to  ask  his  friends  to  stake  their

'  Capuzzi,  62. Ahba  Not.  108,  109. Giusta,  10.
2  La  Masa  {Sic),  pp.  li,  Hi. Paolucci,  Riso,  73-74.
283

284  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

lives  on  so  desperate  a  cast,  he  thought  good  to  lay  before
them  the  alternative  of  a  retreat  into  the  interior,  indicating
that  his  own  opinion  was  for  the  bolder  course.  La  Masa,
rightly  representing  the  feeling  of  the  Sicilians,  demanded
the  attack  on  the  capital  for  which  he  had  been  pleading
in  his  letters  to  the  Dictator  for  six  days  past.  No  serious
opposition  was  made  :  as  Bixio  said,  '  There  was  no  discus-
sion, there  could  be  none.'  ^  At  a  quarter  to  six,  the  final
decision  having  been  formally  taken.  Garibaldi  sent  off  a
dispatch  to  Corrao,  who  had  rallied  the  remnant  of  Pilo's
squadre  on  the  mountains  at  the  other  side  of  the  Conca
d'Oro,  bidding  him  break  into  Palermo  that  night  from  the
west.  Since  Garibaldi  himself  intended  to  enter  it  by  sur-
prise from  the  south-east,  we  may  suppose  that  he  wished
Corrao  to  divert  attention  from  the  side  where  the  serious
attack  was  to  be  made.  But  Corrao  started  nearly  twenty-
four  hours  late,  and  consequently  his  movements  in  no
way  helped  the  entry  of  the  main  force.^

About  seven  in  the  morning,  the  Thousand  marched  out
of  Misilmeri  to  the  other  side  of  the  low  hill  whereon  stands
the  dismantled  edifice  of  an  Arabic-Norman  castle.  There,
among  the  olives  and  vines,  they  encamped  during  the
greater  part  of  May  26,  on  the  east  side  of  the  Piano  della
Stoppa,  a  fiat  crater  bottom,  now  drained  and  highly
cultivated,  but  then  half  full  of  water  after  the  recent
rains. 3  Beyond  the  crater,  to  the  north-west,  rose  the
pass  of  Gibilrossa,  more  than  1000  feet  high,  the  lowest
point  of  the  Grifone  range  that  still  divided  them  from
the  Conca  d'Oro  and  the  capital.  They  were  to  mount
and  cross  those  heights  at  sunset, by  way  of the  little

1  Guerzoni,  il.  93,  note.  This  passage  and  Sirtori,  198,  206,  show  that,
In  spite  of  La  Masa's  assertions,  Sirtori  did  not  on  this  or  any  other  occasion
argue  in  favour  of  a  retreat  into  the  interior.  From  the  moment  the
expedition  had  been  undertaken  contrary  to  his  advice,  he  always  urged
an  advance  on  Palermo  as  the  best  chance.

2  Paolucci,  Riso,  73,  74,  Corrao,  127,  128.

'  Giusta,  10.  Times,  June  8,  p.  10,  col.  4  (Eber's  report).  As  Eber  only
arrived  during  the  morning  and  found  them  camped  on  this  spot,  he
•wrongly  supposed  that  they  had  slept  there  all  night.

ENGLISH  VISITORS  285

white-walled  convent  that  they  could  see  shining  amid
cactuses  and  olives  on  the  mountain-side  above  them.
Once  across  that  ridge  and  down  in  the  Conca  d'Oro  they
must  conquer  or  perish.  *  To-morrow,'  said  Garibaldi  to
his  friends,  '  I  shall  enter  Palermo  as  victor,  or  the  world
will  never  see  me  again  among  the  living.'  1

That  morning,  as  it  chanced,  a  carriage,  with  three
British  naval  officers  on  the  spree,  drove  out  from  Palermo
by  the  coast  road  through  Villabate  to  Misilmeri,

'  where,  to  their  surprise,'  as  they  afterwards  reported  to  Admiral
Mundy,  '  they  heard  the  great  national  chief  had  arrived  from
Parco,  only  a  few  hours  before,  and  was  then  at  dinner  in  a
neighbouring  vineyard.  The  General,  on  hearing  that  three
English  naval  ofdcers  were  driving  through  the  village,  sent  one
of  his  attendants  with  a  message  requesting  them  to  visit  his
head  quarters. They  accepted  the  invitation.'

Lieutenant  Wilmot  and  his  two  brother-officers  found
Garibaldi  standing  amid  a  group  of  men  dressed  for  the  most
part,  like  their  chief,  in  grey  trousers  and  red  flannel  shirts.
Beside  him  stood  his  son,  the  finely-built  and  good-natured
Menotti,  his  hand  still  bound  up  for  the  wound  he  had
received  at  Calatafimi,  and  there,  too,  was  the  priest,
Pantaleo,  who,  as  the  Englishmen  were  told,  had  fought  in
the  battle,  crucifix  in  hand.  Garibaldi  received  his  visitors
with  the  impressively  simple  courtesy  that  charmed  alike
the  men  of  all  races  and  of  all  ranks.  He  feasted  them  on
fresh  strawberries,  spoke,  in  good  English,  of  his  affection
and  respect  for  their  country,  hoped  that  he  should  soon
meet  the  British  Admiral — presumably  in  Palermo — and
related  how,  on  his  retreat  over  the  mountain-tops  to  Plana
dei  Greci  two  days  before,  he  had  witnessed  '  the  beautiful
effect  produced  by  the  royal  salutes  from  all  the  ships  of
war  in  honour  of  Her  Majesty's  birthday.'  His  guests
drank  his  health  and  that  of  Italy,  and  did  not  appear  at
all  embarrassed  by  the  interview.

Almost  simultaneously  with  the  Englishmen,  there  had

^  Perini,  221,

286  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

arrived  in  the  camp  two  officers  of  the  United  States  war-
ship Iroquois,  one  of  whom  gave  Garibaldi  a  revolver  which
he  carried  in  the  fight  next  day.  The  Anglo-Saxons  made
friends  with  the  Thousand,  and  drove  back  to  Palermo
laden  with  letters  for  the  post,  messages  that  might  prove
to  be  the  last  to  many  an  anxious  home  within  sight  of  the
circling  Alps.i

At  the  very  hour  in  the  morning  when  these  friendly
neutrals  were  visiting  head  quarters,  there  arrived  by  the
same  route  the  Hungarian  Eber,  acting  as  correspondent
for  the  Times,  which  was  now  strongly  pro-Italian.  Eber
had  made  no  secret  among  his  English  friends  in  Palermo
of  his  intention  to  seek  for  a  command  under  Garibaldi,^
and  he  came  out  to  Misilmeri  as  the  bearer  of  messages  and
information  of  high  importance.  The  Central  Revolu-
tionary Committee  of  the  capital  also  sent  two  other  repre-
sentatives to  Gibilrossa  in  the  course  of  the  day.^  Eber  gave
Garibaldi  and  his  staff  an  exact  account  of  the  location  of
the  Neapolitan  troops,  Monreale,  Parco,  Porrazzi,  and  the
Conca  d'Oro  in  the  direction  of  those  places,  he  reported  to
be  occupied  by  many  thousands  of  the  enemy.  Near
Palermo  itself  they  were  massed  yet  more  thickly  in
the  Quattro  Venti  and  behind  the  Palace,  that  is  on  the
northern  and  western  outskirts  of  the  town.  But  the
indecipherable  labyrinth  of  ancient  alleys  and  lanes,  that
constitute  the  heart  of  Palermo,  was  left  almost  unoccupied.
If,  therefore.  Garibaldi  could  penetrate  into  these  recesses,
he  could  call  out  the  inhabitants  to  barricade  the  narrow
arteries  of  the  city,  and  be  safe,  at  any  rate  for  a  while,
from  the  immense  forces  in  the  exterior  positions  of  the
Palace  and  Quattro  Venti.

But  how  was  the  entry  to  be  effected  ?  Palermo  was  a
loaf  with  a  soft  centre  but  a  hard  crust.  Eber,  however,
reported  that  the  easiest  way  to  force  an  entrance  into  the
city  would  be  by  the  south-eastern  gates. For,  strange  to

1  Mundy,  107,  108. Abba  Not.  iio-iii. Mem.  356. Times,  June  8,
p.  10,  col.  3. Zasio,  49. Capuzzi,  65.

-  Mundy,  103.  •>  Conv.  Guarneri.

THE TIMES' CORRESPONDENT  287

say,  Lanza  had  most  neglected  that  side  which  lay  towards
Gibilrossa  :  the  easily  defensible  line  of  the  lower  Oreto
river  was  guarded  only  by  a  weak  detachment,  and  Eber
described  in  detail  the  barricades  erected,  and  the  points
occupied  by  a  few  companies  of  infantry  and  two  guns
at  the  south-eastern  gateways  of  Termini  and  S.  Antonino.
Guided  by  this  accurate  information,  Garibaldi  wisely
decided  to  try  and storm  the  Porta  Termini.^

Having  formed  his  plan,  the  Dictator  convoked  the
leaders  of  the  Sicilian  squadre,  and  asked  their  concurrence.
Some  few  murmured  that  they  had  little  or  no  ammunition,
but  the  greater  part  cried  out  '  A  Palermo  !  A  Palermo  !  '
On  being  asked  which  was  the  most  direct  and  secret  route
to  the  Porta  Termini,  they  declared,  with  some  exaggeration
as  the  event  proved,  that  a  practicable  path  led  down  from
the  top  of  the  Gibilrossa  pass  into  the  Conca  d'Oro  in  the
direction  of  Ciaculli.  It  was,  therefore,  decided  to  go  by  this
route,  instead  of  by  the  circuitous  and  public  road  through
Villabate,  by  which  the  naval  officers  and  Eber  had  driven
out  that  morning.^

The  enthusiasm  now  shown  by  the  SiciHan  chiefs,  and
their  jealousy  of  being  sent  to  the  rear,  induced  Garibaldi  to
make  his  one  mistake,  destined  to  imperil  the  whole  enter-
prise. He  granted  a  change  of  plan,  to  the  effect  that  La

1  Such  is  the  information  which  Eber  reports  In  the  Times  (June  8,  p.  lo,
cols.  3,4)  as  having  reached  Garibaldi  at  Misilmeri ;  as  Times'  correspon-
dent, supposed  to  be  a  neutral,  he  naturally  does  not  say  in  so  many  words
'  I  brought  this  information.'  But  we  know  it  was  he  who  brought  it.
See  Tiirr's  Div.  49,  51.  Tiirr  said  to  me  in  conversation  that  it  was  Eber's
information  which  decided  Garibaldi  to  choose  the  Termini  gate.  Any
other  gate,  added  Tiirr,  even  the  neighbouring  Porta  S.  Antonino,  would
have  been  fatal. The  Termini  gate  was  the  least  strongly  defended.

^  Calvino  [Giiardione,  ii.  440).  Times,  June  8,  p.  10,  col.  4.  Both
Calvino  and  Eber  arrived  during  the  day  (26th)  and  did  not  therefore
know  of  the  original  council  of  war  held  in  Misilmeri  town  before  the
dispatch  was  sent  to  Corrao  at  5.45  a.m.  The  council  which  they  wit-
nessed, out  in  the  hills,  was  not  the  occasion  when  the  decision  was  taken,
but  only  a  meeting  to  hearten  up  the  chiefs  of  the  Sicihan  squadre,  and
hear  any  advice  they  had  to  give.  Tiirr's  Div.  49,  50.  La  Masa  {Sic),
pp.  li-lii.  Paolucci,  Riso,  75.  Eber  wrongly  calls  the  pass  of  Gibilrossa
the  '  pass  of  Mezzagna,*  see  Appendix  P,  below.

288  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Masa's  squadre  should  march  in  front  of  the  North  Italians.
There  was,  however,  to  be  a  vanguard,  consisting  of  the
scouts  and  a  body  of  men  picked  from  all  the  companies
of  the  Thousand,  who  with  the  local  guides  should  lead
the  whole  column. i

In  whatever  order  they  marched,  it  was  a  strange  under-
taking. What  with  sickness,  wounds,  and  the  absence  of
the  detachment  gone  to  Corleone  with  the  artillery.  Gari-
baldi's '  Thousand '  were  some  300  fewer  than  when  he  had
landed  at  Marsala.  With  these  750  musketeers,  or  more
properly  bayonet-men,  with  rather  more  than  3000  peasants
armed  some  with  blunderbusses  and  sporting  guns,  some
with  pikes  and  scythes,  and  with  the  prospect  of  such  help
as  he  could  hope  to  get  from  the  disarmed  citizens  of  the
capital,  if  he  could  ever  penetrate  into  its  streets.  Garibaldi
was  setting  out  to  attack  the  garrison  of  Palermo  and  the
Conca  d'Oro,  variously  estimated  by  its  own  chiefs  at  16,000
to  20,000  riflemen,  cavalry,  and  artillery,  not  counting  the
four  battalions  that  Von  Mechel  had  led  to  Corleone. 2

In  the  cool  of  evening  on  May  26,  the  Garibaldini
ascended  from  their  camping  ground,  near  the  Piano  della
Stoppa,  to  the  monastery  and  pass  of  Gibilrossa,^  by  a  track
running  up  the  mountain-side  between  gigantic  cactus
hedges  that  gave  an  oriental  character  to  the  scenery.
Halting  for  awhile  on  the  soUtary  platform  of  grey  rock,
whereon  the  picturesque  and  lonely  convent  hangs  perched
amid  oHves,  aloe,  and  cactus,  they  reached,  a  few  hundred

1  The  number  of  the  vanguard  is  variously  estimated  from  about
thirty  to  seventy-five.  Tiirr's  Div.  49,  50.  Mem.  357.  Conv.  Canzio.  La
Masa  (Sic),  Hit. Bixio.  199.

2  Marra  Oss.  13,  14.  Cava,  ii.  12,  84.  De  Sivo,  iii.  208.  Tiirr's  Div.
49  50.  Bixio,  198.  Paolucci,  Riso,  75.  Mundy,  108.  Bologna  MS.  Bixio
says  La  Masa  exaggerated  in  estimating  his  squadre  at  a  higher  figure  than
3000. A  few  hundred  squadre  had  followed  Garibaldi  from  Parco.

3  F.  M.  4,  5.  Bixio,  199.  Giusta,  10.  Capuzzi,  67.  Times,  June  8,
p.  10,  col.  4.  There  is  a  conflict  of  evidence  as  to  whether  the  bulk  of  the
squadre  were  all  the  time  up  near  the  monastery,  or  whether  they
marched  up  thither  from  below  with  the  Thousand.  Very  probably  they
were  scattered  at  different  points  on  the  mountain  in  their  different
bands.

GIBILROSSA MONASTERY.
As  seen  froni  ibe  top  of  Gibilrossa  Pass.

GIBILROSSA MONASTERY.

With  cactus  and  olives.

ON  THE  PASS  OF  GIBILROSSA  289

yards  further  on,  the  broad  moor  on  the  top  of  the  pass,
where  the  Gibihossa  monument  stands  to-day.  It  was  an
enchanted  hour  that  threw  its  spell  on  all.  The  ground
was  still  fragrant  with  the  last  flowers  of  spring,  and
there  lay  below  their  feet  the  evening  view  of  the
plain,  the  city,  and  the  sea.  There  were  the  navies  of  the
world  riding  at  anchor  in  the  bay,  and  there,  on  the  opposite
side  of  the  Conca  d'Oro,  the  shoulder  heights  of  Hamilcar's
Monte  Pellegrino  glowing  like  a  furnace  in  the  rays  of  sunset,
as  though  the  mountain  itself  were  alight  with  all  the  fierce
draughts  of  sun  that  it  had  drunk  through  unrecorded
seons  of  time.  Close  at  Garibaldi's  feet,  between  him  and
the  city,  was  spread  a  variegated  carpet  of  foliage,  masses
of  grey  olive  and  of  yellow-green  lemon,  broken  by  streaks
of  the  dark-green  orange  leaf.  The  Cathedral  and  the  Palace,
the  heart  of  the  enemy's  position,  rose  clear  above  the  city
roofs.  But,  whilst  he  was  still  gazing  upon  all  this  beauty,  the
soft,  green  masses  below  lost  shape  and  colour,  the  towers  and
cupolas  of  Palermo  were  merged  in  undistinguished  haze,
the  rosy  tints  upon  the  mountain-tops  grew  pale,  and  one
by  one  his  own  signal  fires  of  war  leapt  out  instead  along
the  circle  of  the  hills,  beckoning  him  to  descend  into  the
darkened  plain.

'  The  evening  gun  in  the  fort  had  been  long  re-echoed  by
the  mountains,  and  the  moon  had  risen  clear  and  bright,'
before  the  head  of  the  column  began  slowly  to  feel  its  way
down  the  rocky  clefts  of  the  gorge  that  fell  from  Gibilrossa
to  the  plain  of  Palermo. ^

The  condition  of  affairs  in  the  capital  and  Conca  d'Oro,
when  Garibaldi  descended  on  the  eventful  midnight  and
dawn  of  May  26-7,  is  faithfully  presented  in  Admiral
Mundy's  Journal  for  the  two  days  preceding  the  crisis.  On
May  25,  having  observed  several  Neapolitan  vessels  take
up  positions  with  the  apparent  object  of  being  ready  to
bombard  the  sea- front,  the  British  Admiral  went  up  town  to
find  Lanza  at  the  Palace. There,  in  the  spacious  chambers

*  Times,  June  8,  p.  lo,  cols.  4,  5.

290  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

overlooking  the  city  and  the  sea  beyond,  where  the  greatest
and  most  beloved,  but  not  the  wisest,  of  English  Admirals
had  given  the  Bourbon  royalties  very  different  advice  from
that  now  proffered  by  the  excellent  Mundy,  the  modem
representative  of  Britain's  power  along  the  coasts  of  the
world  expostulated  with  the  King's  alter  ego  against  beginning
a  bombardment  which  was  not  strictly  part  of  any  mihtary
operation.

'  The  reply  of  General  Lanza,'  continues  the  Admiral,  '  was
frank  and  decisive.  .  .  .  He  entertained  a  firm  hope  that  Palermo
would  not  become  the  scene  of  a  sanguinary  civil  struggle,  and
aU  his  endeavours  were  directed  to  remove  from  its  waUs  the
calamities  of  war.  He  should  oppose  the  foreign  invasion  out-
side the  city  ;  in  fact,  he  had  yesterday  dislodged  the  band  of
Garibaldi  from  their  strong  position  at  El  Parco,  seven  miles
from  Palermo,  and  had  pursued  them  to  the  summit  of  the
mountains  of  Plana  dei  Greci.  If,  however,  in  spite  of  his
endeavours,  the  rebels  should  make  the  city  rise,  the  fire  of  the
artillery  by  sea  and  land  would  concur  with  the  troops  in  the
repression  of  the  revolt.  .  .  .  When  General  Lanza  had  finished
his  address  I  rose  to  depart,  thanking  him  for  his  candid  state-
ment, but,  at  the  same  time,  remarking  that  there  was  a  vast
difference  between  the  indiscriminate  destruction  of  the  edifices
of  a  great  city,  and  the  use  of  artillery  against  a  people  in  revolt.
He  then  informed  me  that  two  Piedmontese  prisoners  i  had  been
brought  to  the  guard-house  in  the  morning,  who,  though  dressed
as  private  soldiers,  were  evidently  gentlemen.  I  asked  him  to
spare  their  lives,  which  he  said  he  would  do.

'  During  this  interview  Signer  Maniscalco  [the  Police  Minister]
and  Colonel  Polizzi  entered  into  the  discussion,  with  a  view  of
justifying  the  resolutions  which  had  been  so  clearly  expounded
by  the  Royal  Commissioner.  Unfortunately,  in  the  heat  of
argument  the  former  asked  Mr.  Goodwin  [the  British  Consul]
if  he  did  not  think  a  population  deserved  to  be  annihilated,
should  they  rise  up  in  insurrection  against  the  constituted
authorities.  To  this  unexpected  and  ill-timed  demand  Her
Majesty's  Consul  indignantly  replied  that  he  could  not  have
supposed  such  a  question  would  have  been  put  to  him;  but  that,
as  Signer  Maniscalco  had  chosen  to  do  so,  he  had  no  hesitation

*  Of  the  Thousand,  captured  during  the  retreat  from  Parco.

ADMIRAL  MUNDY'S  DRIVE  291

in  saying  that  when  a  people  were  tyrannised  over  they  had
an  inherent  right  to  take  up  arms,  and  to  fight  against
their  oppressors.  .  .  .'

On  the  afternoon  of  May  26,  while  Garibaldi  was  between
Misilmeri  and  Gibilrossa,  Admiral  Mundy  and  Mr.  Goodwin
went  for  a  drive  in  the  Conca  d'Oro,  and  visited  a  convent,
where  Mundy  was  surprised  to  hear  such  antiquated  people
as  the  monks  profess  themselves  ardently  on  the  side  of  the
revolution.  Shortly  afterwards,  at  La  Grazia,  the  carriage
was  held  up  by  some  members  of  the  squadre,  whose  appear-
ance did  not  edify  the  Admiral,  although  his  nationality
secured  him  their  respect. On  his  way  back,  he  writes : —

'  On  the  outskirts  of  the  city  I  gained  admission  into  a
mansion  once  occupied  by  the  Moorish  Governors  of  Sicily,^
from  the  lofty  turrets  of  which  I  witnessed  the  burning  of
several  of  the  country  palaces  of  the  nobility  who  were  supposed
by  the  soldiery  to  be  hostile  to  the  Royal  cause.^  In  whichever
direction  I  looked  over  this  vast  and  richly-cultivated  plain,  the
smoke  of  ruins  and  devastation  presented  itself  to  my  view,
while  the  constant  report  of  musketry  and  the  distant  sound  of
cannon  showed  that  armed  men  were  in  collision  on  the  slopes
of  the  hills.'

On  his  return  through  the  streets  of  Palermo,  the
Admiral  saw  with  indignation  a  procession  of  working  men,
handcuffed  and  led  to  prison  by  the  police,  because  they
had  visited  the  British  ships  on  their  Saturday  holiday  that
afternoon.  They  had  returned  with  nothing  more  com-
promising about  their  persons  than  tobacco  and  hard  biscuit ;
but  the  fact  that  they  had  visited  the  floating  fortresses  of
freedom  was  held  to  be  crime  enough.

Having  returned  to  his  flag-ship.  Admiral  Mundy  heard
from  Lieutenant  Wilmot  how  he  had  unexpectedly  found

1  The  Admiral  may  refer  either  to  La  Favara,  near  Brancaccio,  or
to  La  Zisa  or  La  Cuba,  nearer  to  the  town  and  Royal  Palace.

2  In  Mr.  Goodwin's  Political  Journal  of  this  week  {Palermo  MSS.,  Br.
Cons.  Papers)  we  read  that  the  soldiers  sacked  the  villas  of  the  nobility,
e.g.,  the  Villa  Marutta  at  Passo  Rigano,  under  pretence  of  searching  for
arms.

V  2

292  G-^RIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

"himself  in  Garibaldi's  camp  that  morning.  Clearly.  Gari-
baldi was  not  so  far  oS  as  Lanza  had  supposed.  In  the
evening,  about  the  time  that  the  Thonsand  were  preparing
to  descend  from  the  pass  of  Gibilrossa,  a  note  was  handed
to  the  Admiral  in  his  cabin,  just  before  he  tmned  in.  It
was  from  3-1  English  resident  in  the  city.

*  Dear  Sir,'  it  ran,  "  I  hear  that  a  rising  will  take  place  at  two
o'clock  to-morrow  raoming,  at  which  hour,  or  soon  after.  Gari-
baldi will  be  near  Porta  Sant'  Anton  in  o,  through  which  you
went  out  this  afternoon,  prepared  to  force  his  way  iato  the  city

with  the  tayonet/  ^

The  momenions  secret,  known  to  British  residents  and
British  authorities,  was  common  property  to  all  the
active  liberals  of  PalerniD.  A  Sicilian  gentleman  -  has
related  to  me  the  emotions  which  thai  night  disturbed  the
home  of  his  father,  Signor  Tedaldi,  in  the  beautiful  Quattro
Cantoni,  at  the  very  cenrre  :;  the  city.  To  the  grief  and
indignation  of  his  younger  brother,  it  was  decided  that
only  the  father  and  the  two  elder  boys  should  fight  next  day.
The  clothes  which  they  were  to  wear  were  laid  out  in  readniess,
consisting  of  velveteen  shooting  jackets  and  highland  caps.
These  were  decorated  "^th  tricolour  ribbons  and  cockades,
sacred  svmbols  which  their  mother  had  prepared  with  great
difficulty,  gathering  bits  of  red,  green,  and  white  out  of  her
own  hats,  for  no  one  dared  ask  for  the  forbidden  colours
openiv  in  the  shops.  They  had  no  weapons,  for  the  capiiii
had  been  repeatedly  searched  for  arms,  but  they  expected
to  be  able  to  obtain  them  from  the  Garibaldini.  Through
the  shutters  they  could  see  the  pohce  ia  the  square  below,
and  wondered  how  they  would  be  able  to  get  out  of  the  house
next  dav-  They  sat  up  late,  listening  to  stray  shots  in
the  Conca  d'Oro,  such  as  they  had  heard  every  night  for  the
past  m.onth,  and  wonderin.g  if  they  heralded  his  coming.

-  Ma.iJy,  9S— 109.

-  Ca-rsa.  TedaZdi.  Cokrod  Cav.  Francesco  Tedaldi,  for  many  years  past
rssidfiEit  cEi  tse  maml-atiri  In  iS5-D  he  did  Ms  fnli  patriotic  dtity  not  only
ia  the  £gii1±ig  at  Palsniio,  bat  at  Milazzo  and  acrt^ss  the  rrsits.

EXPECTATION  IN  PALER^^IO  293

At  last,  the  boys  were  sent  to  bed  for  a  few  honrs'  sleep,
while  the  father  sat  np  to  watch  for  dawn  and  GaiibaldL

In  the  great  Vicaria  gaol,  hundreds  of  political  prisoners
had,  on  the  morning  of  the  26th,  been  horrified  by  the  oScial
news  of  Garibaldi's  flight  to  Corleone,  but,  on  :':ir  s^rir
evening,  a  note  was  smuggled  in  among  them  bearing  the
words,  '  To-morrow  Garibaldi  will  enter  Palermo.'  1

That  a  secret  so  generally  known  was  so  well  kept  reflects
credit,  as  Garibaldi  said,  on  the  secrecy  and  faithfolness  of
the  Sicilian  people,^  It  seemed,  indeed,  as  if  the  anthorities
were  almost  the  only  pecple  completely  ignorant  of  the
intended  attack,  and  of  the  fact  that  Garibaldi  had  doubled
back  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Misilmeri.  As  late  as  12.30
noon  on  the  26th,  Lanza  telegraphed  to  General  Bonanno
at  Monreale,  '  Garibaldi's  band  is  retiring  in  rout  throogh
the  district  of  Corleone.  He  is  closely  followed.' ^  The
same  day  a  proclamation  to  the  Sicilians  was  issued  to  the
same  effect,  but  the  pubhc  now  no  longer  believed  in  the
defeat  of  the  '  Filibusters/  and  scornfully  tore  the  announce-
ment off  the  walls.-  Signor  Delia  Cerda  tells  me  that,  when
his  mother  was  reading  this  procLamaTi:-  a-  a  Mend's
house,  Cav.  Paolo  Amari  said  to  her,  'Si:~  riiii-g  that-
To-morrow  Garibaldi  wiH  be  in  Palermo.' '  Even  the  Nea-
poHtan  officers,  though  they  were  not  in  the  secret,  felt  by
no  means  at  their  ease.  Many  had  sent  their  families  and
goods  back  to  Naples,^  and  Colonel  Fileno  Briganti,  the  same
who  was  shortly  afterwards,  as  General,  murdered  by  his
own  troops  in  Calabria,  actually  consigned  his  furniture  to
the  care  of  his  Liberal  friends,  the Delia Cerda family,

'  Brancacdo,  189.

'  Mem.  356. C-aivino  {Guardiom,  a.  440).

'  Printed  in  the  Giom.  O^.  Sic,  Jnne  o.  1S60.  Frzn  z  crrv  ir  z:-  :-
writing  of  ilaniscalco.  found  in  the  Palace  of  Ministers.

*  Stamp.  Off.^  Bcdletirto,  i^y  26. La  Mas*  (5:.-  \  r  j ; . :— ?- :  I: : :
'  Con,  DeOa Cerda, See  Mexgkimi,  $^  c- t;t  1

May  26.

*  Times,  Jnne  i,  letter  frc—  Jilerr:!:  May  25.  '  The  Neaixditaiis  are
not  very  confident  about  their  %-irtc—-.  YesTeriiv  r-;  ^  r  '  -  ;;:
Naples  carr\-i:ig  o£  fcgitives  and  their
boat  was  seen  passing  full  ol  fnmitnre.'

5^-

294  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

sending  it  across  in  cart-loads  from  the  Castellamare  to  their
house  opposite,  as  though  a  patriot's  roof  were  a  safer  shelter
in  Palermo  than  the  chief  Neapolitan  fortress,  of  which  he
was  himself  at  that  time  commandant. i

At  headquarters  in  the  Royal  Palace,  the  energetic
Police  Minister,  Maniscalco,  together  with  General  Bartolo
Marro,  and  other  officers,  urged  Lanza  to  take  precautions
against  the  rebels  in  the  direction  of  Gibilrossa,  but  the
replies  of  the  alter  ego  were  evasive  or  contemptuous.
Even  when  a  man  came  post-haste  from  the  hil  Is,  announc-
ing that  he  himself  had  seen  the  red-shirts,  and  that  they
were  about  to  attack  Palermo,  he  remained  unmoved.
When  informed  that  the  city  was  on  the  eve  of  insurrec-
tion, he  would  only  repeat  what  he  had  told  Admiral
Mundy,  that  if  there  was  a  rising,  he  would  order  a  bom-
bardment. Since  he  took  no  measures  to  strengthen  the
slender  guard  on  the  line  of  the  Oreto  and  at  the  Termini
and  S.  Antonino  gates,  we  may  presume  that,  in  spite  of  all
warnings,  he  continued  under  the  spell  of  his  illusions  until
the  rude  awakening  on  the  dawn  of  Sunday,  May  27.-

1  Conv.  Delia  Cerda. De  Sivo,  iii.  218.

2  De  Sivo,  iii.  213-215.  Cava,  ii.  86.  The  situation  is  well  rendered
in  a  cartoon  issued  by  the  liberated  press  a  few  weeks  later,  in  which
Lanza  is  represented  as  presiding  over  a  peep-show  at  the  windows  of
which  his  soldiers  are  looking,  while  a  Palermitan  behind  winks  at  a
street  boy,  and  the  boy  makes  '  a  vulgar,  odious  sign  '  at  the  alter  ego.
Lanza  is  saying,  '  Walk  up,  gentlemen !  Here  are  the  Filibusters  of  the
Mediterranean,  led  by  Garibaldi,  flying  towards  Plana.  Further  on  you
can  see  them,  routed  at  Plana,  flying  to  Corleone.'  A  bystander  says,
'  Your  show  is  a  swindle.  I  see  nothing  of  the  sort.  I  see  Garibaldi
entering  Palermo  victoriously  at  your  heels.' Forbice,  June  14,  i860.

CHAPTER XVII

THE TAKING OF PALERMO  1

*  Chi  6  cestui  che  cavalca  glorioso
In  fra  i  lampi  del  ferro  e  del  fuoco,
Bello  come  nel  ciel  proceiloso
II  sereno  Orione  compar  ?

Ei  si  noma,  e  a  suoi  cento  dier  loco
Le  migliaia  da  i  re  congiurate  :
Ei  si  noma,  e  citta  folgorate
Su  le  ardenti  mine  pugnar.'

Carducci. — Sicilia  e  la  Rivoluzione.

'Who  is  this  riding  on  in  his  might
As  calm  amid  war's  flash  and  sheen
As  oft  in  tempestuous  night
Orion  in  glory  is  seen  ?

Cry  his  name,  and  whole  armies  shall  fear  it
And  fly  from  his  hundreds  afar  :
While  the  cities  they  blasted  shall  hear  it
And  rise  on  red  ruins  to  war.'

A  WELL-MADE  road  now  winds  down  the  mountain-side
from  the  Garibaldi  monument  on  Gibilrossa  Pass,  into
the  plain  near  Ciaculli.  But  in  i860  there  was  no  better
means  of  descent  than  a  straight,  precipitous  foot-track,
which  during  the  first  and  steepest  part  of  the  decline
followed  a  dried  torrent-bed  along  a  stony  gorge.  Garibaldi's
men  cHmbed  down  this  path,  of  which  the  gloomy  grandeur,
revealed,  rather  than  reUeved  by  the  moonlight,  put  some
of  them  in  mind  of  the  way  by  which  Dante  passed  from
the  upper  to  the  lower  circles  of  his  Inferno. 2  When  the
level  of  the  plain  was  reached  about  midnight,  the  rugged
track  continued  towards  Ciaculli,  along  a  stream  bed
between  olive-groves, of  which  the  low  walls  now  bear

1  See  Map  IV.  end  of  book,  both  parts.

2  Rome  MS.  Savi.

295

296  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

the  inscription  Discesa  del  Milk — '  The  descent  of  the
Thousand.'  1

Among  these  oUves,  far  from  the  enemy  or  any  human
habitation,  took  place  the  first  misadventure  of  the  night.
One  of  the  few  horses  in  the  column  began  playing  tricks,
a  cry  of  '  cavalry  '  was  raised,  and  a  panic  extended  to
a  greater  or  less  degree  along  the  darkened  line.  Some
muskets  were  let  off,  whereupon  all  the  dogs  of  the  Conca
d'Oro  invoked  one  another  with  frantic  bowlings.  Fortun-
ately such  alarms  had  been  so  common  for  every  night
of  late  that  the  noise  conveyed  no  warning  to  the  Neapolitan
generals  in  the  Palace.  Garibaldi  restored  order  and  the
march  was  resumed, ^

Once  more  they  advanced  through  the  silence  of  the
groves,  each  man  wrapped  in  his  reflexions,  or  listening
keenly  for  sounds  of  war  from  Palermo.  The  tinkling
of  a  far  distant  piano,  played  who  knows  why  at  that  dead
hour,  came  fitfully  down  the  breeze.  On  the  Monte  Grifone
to  their  left,  and  on  Gibilrossa  behind  them,  the  watch-
fires  blazed  bright,  fed  by  men  whom  Garibaldi  had  left
for  the  purpose,  lest  the  Neapolitans,  not  seeing  the  accus-
tomed nightly  signals,  should  divine  that  the  rebels  were
descending  into  the  plain. ^

Passing  the  hamlet  of  CiacuUi,  they  approached  the
half-ruined  palace,  called  La  Favara  or  the  Castello  di
Mare  Dolce,  beside  its  well-watered  garden  of  lemons,
where  once  the  Saracen  lords  of  Sicily,  and  after  them  the
great  Emperor  Frederic  II,  had  taken  their  learned  pleasure.
Here,  in  the  maze  of  paths  and  fruit-groves,  the  squadre  lost
their  way  and  fresh  confusions  followed.  The  leaders  of
the  various  local  bands  were  not  military  men  ;  indeed,  one
of  them,  named  Rotolo,  placed  in  command  of  the  front
division  of  the  squadre  that  night, was  a  parish  priest

1  See  Appendix  P. The  Route  from  Gibilrossa  to  Palermo.

2  Times,  June  8,  p.  lo,  col.  5. Abba  Not.  113-115. Bixio,  199. Rome
MS.  Savi. Perini,  226-228. Giusta,  10.

3  Abba,  167,  168. Times,  June  8,  p.  10,  col.  4. Rome  MS.  Savi. Mem.
357. Giusta,  10.

THE  NIGHT  MARCH  297

from  a  village  in  the  interior,  whence  he  had  led  one  hundred
men  to  the  camp  at  Gibilrossa.  Rotolo,  though  by  no  means
lacking  in  courage,  had  vainly  pleaded  to  Sirtori  and
Garibaldi  that  his  inexperience  should  disqualify  him
from  marching  at  the  head  of  his  fellow-countrymen.
La  Masa  himself,  the  chief  of  the  united  bands,  now  began
to  show  his  incapacity  as  shepherd  of  his  unruly  flock.
Bixio,  after  swearing  with  his  accustomed  energy  at  the
helpless  leader,  induced  the  Dictator  to  permit  Carini,
the  Sicilian  in  command  of  one  of  the  two  battalions  of
the  Thousand,  to  go  and  restore  order  among  the  squadre,
which  he  succeeded  in  doing  after  a  fashion  with  the  help
of  Father  Pantaleo.i

From  La  Favara,  the  column  appears  to  have  advanced
in  two  or  more  divisions,  some  passing  by  the  road  through
Brancaccio,2  others  across  country  to  the  main  road  at
Settecannoli.3  All  united  again  at  the  junction  of  the  two
roads,  known  as  the  bivio  delta  Scajfa,  where  a  few  of
the  enemy's  outposts  were  dislodged  from  a  mill.*

The  first  line  of  the  Neapolitan  defences  lay  along  the
banks  of  the  lower  Oreto  from  the  cemetery  above  Guadagna
down  to  the  bridges  near  the  hivio  delta  Scajfa  ^  and  at
these  bridges  a  body  of  some  strength  was  posted.^  The
Ponte  deir  Ammiraglio,  a  magnificent  relic  of  Norman-
Arabic  architecture  built  early  in  the  twelfth  century  by
King Roger's great Admiral, George Antiochenus, was

^  See  Appendix  P.  for  the  route.  Paolucci,  Riso,  75-77  ;  Conv.  Rotolo.
Bixio,  199  {Bixio  MS.  for  unexpurgated  version).  O.  B.'s  La  Masa,  365,
366. Times,  June  8,  p.  10,  col.  5.

2  Conv.  Arma/orte  and  Conv.  Campo,  speaking  of  the  way  they  them-
selves went.

^  Paolucci,  Riso,  78.  Conv.  Rotolo,  speaking  of  the  way  he  led  his
men.  He  says  they  halted  at  Favara  and  then  turned  off  to  the  right
till  they  got  into  the  road  at  Settecannoli.  The  halt  at  Favara  is  con-
firmed by  Campo,  117.

*  Menghini,  60. Giusta,  10. V.  M.  5.

^ V.  M.  5. Lorenzo. Giusta,  10.

^  Neapolitan  authorities  differ  as  to  the  size  of  the  force  posted  at
the  bridges.  Cava,  ii.,  p.  86,  says  a  battalion  of  the  6th  line  under
Major  Vincenzo  d'Aiubrosio  ;  De  Sivo,  ii.  216,  says  only  260  men  of
the  2nd  Cacciatori  under  Captain  Folio,  as  Franci,  i.  54,  also  says.

298  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

a  place  associated  in  the  minds  of  the  natives  with  the
ghosts  of  the  '  unfortunate '  victims  of  pubhc  justice,
whose  cemetery  lay  close  at  hand,  and  who  were,  strangely
enough,  supposed  to  be  beneficent  to  passers-by .1  The
arches  of  this  ancient  bridge  span  what  is  now  the  dry
course  of  the  old  Oreto.  A  few  yards  farther  on  the  modern
Ponte  delle  Teste  crosses  the  waters  of  the  actual  river.
The  Neapolitans,  massed  on  and  around  the  Ponte  dell'
Ammiraglio,  and  in  the  neighbouring  buildings,  were  ready
to  receive  most  warmly  the  head  of  the  column  as  it
approached  from  the  hivio  delta  Scajfa.  For  although
Garibaldi  had  succeeded  in  surprising  Lanza  strategically,
the  tactical  surprise  had  failed  altogether,  owing  to  Rotolo's
squadre,  who,  as  they  passed  through  Settecannoli  a  few
minutes  before,  had  shouted  and  let  off  their  guns  in  the
air  at  the  prospect  of  approaching  battle. ^

When  therefore  the  Hungarian  Tiikory,  leading  on  the
two  or  three  score  picked  men  of  the  Thousand  who  formed
the  vanguard,  dashed  against  the  Ponte  dell'  Ammiraglio,
they  were  received  by  such  a  volley  as  checked  their  advance.
A  panic  instantly  seized  the  3000  squadre  behind  them,
and  the  Sicilian  peasants  bolted  into  the  vineyards  and
fruit-groves  on  either  side  of  the  road.  For  a  few  critical
minutes  a  wide  gap  was  left  between  the  small  body  under
Tiikory  who  still  held  their  ground  in  front  of  the  bridge,
exposed  to  a  terrible  fire,  and  the  remainder  of  the  Thousand
in  the  rear  of  the  now  rapidly  dissolving  column. ^

A  minute's  hesitation  in  the  rearguard  might  have
been  fatal.  '  Avanti,  Cacciatori !  avanti !  Entrafe  nel
centro  ! '  cried  Garibaldi.  ('  Forward  !  Into  the  heart
of  the  town  !  ')  *  Thus  incited,  the  Genoese  Carabineers
and  the  two  leading  companies  of  Bixio's  battalion  came
tearing  along  the  road  from  the  bivio  delta  Scajfa,  between

1  F.  M.  21. De  Cesave,  li.  231.

2  Conv.  Rotolo. Paolucci,  Riso, 78. Times,  June  8,  p. 10,  col.  5.
Tiirr's  Div.  51,  52. La  Masa  {Sic),  liii.

^  Campo  Conv. Paolucci,  Riso,  78. Times, June  8,  p. 10,  col.  5.
Tiiyy's  Div.  52. Perini,  231,  232.
*  Conv.  Canzio.

PONTE DELL' AMPv-IIRAGLIO.
Behind  the  pine  tree  is  seen  an  Arab  water  tower,  a  familiar  sight  in  the  Conca  d'Or

THE FIERA VECCHIA.

With  the  figure  of  Palermo,  an  old  man  with  a  snake  sucking  his  breast,  removed  by  the
police  in  1849  as  seditious,  and  restored  in  1860  after  the  Revolution.

AT  THE  PONTE  DELL'  AMMIRAGLIO  299

the  garden  walls  over  which  the  squadre  had  so  nimbly
disappeared.  In  front  of  them  the  ghostlike  bulwarks
of  the  ancient  bridge  loomed  through  the  grey  twilight
of  dawn,  spitting  fire  at  them  as  they  advanced.  Joined
with  Tiikory's  vanguard  and  a  number  of  Sicilians  who
had  not  taken  shelter  with  the  rest,  the  newcomers  hurled
themselves  on  the  enemy,  who  after  a  fierce  struggle  turned
and  fled  for  Palermo.  A  body  of  cavalry,  who  had  come  down
as  far  as  the  Ponte  dell'  Ammiraglio,  retired  without  charging.
The  Ponte  delle  Teste  was  next  carried,  and  the  line  of
the  Oreto  passed.  Domenico  Piva,  who  ten  years  before
had  helped  Garibaldi  to  warp  out  the  boats  at  Cesenatico,i
was  the  first  officer  across  the  river,  if  it  was  not  Bixio
himself.  Rocca  della  "Russa  of  Mount  Eryx  and  two  other
Sicilians  lay  dead  or  dying  by  the  old  bridge,  and  several
of  the  Thousand  had  fallen. ^

From  the  Oreto  to  the  Porta  Termini  stretches  nearly
a  mile  of  suburban  road,  along  which  the  Thousand  hastened
at  full  speed. s  For  a  short  while  the  General  and  the
mounted  officers  of  the  staff,  together  with  a  few  Sicilians
of  the  Thousand  remained  behind  to  drive  the  squadre
out  of  the  gardens  where  they  had  taken  refuge,  and  induce
them  to  cross  the  bridges  which  were  still  exposed  to  a
heavy  cross  fire  from  the  direction  of  Guadagna.*

The  side  of  Palermo  which  the  Thousand  were  approach-
ing from  the  bridges,  was  not,  like  the  rest  of  the  city,
protected  by  its  walls  and  bastions,  for  a  row  of  houses
had  been  built  along  the  outer  side  of  the  fortifications.
But  as  these  houses  were  in  a  continuous  line,  an  entry
en  masse  could  be  effected  only  through  the  Porta  S.  Antonino
or  the  Porta  Termini.  There  was  no  longer  any  gate
at  the  Porta  Termini,  but  the  Neapolitans  had  erected

^  Trevelyan's  Gar.  Rome,  285,  286.

2  Cava,  ii.  86.  Risorg.  anno  ii.,  i.  125.  Bixio,  200.  Conv.  Canzio
Franci,  i.  54,  55.  Menghini,  429,  430.  Abba  Not.  115,  116.  Rome  MS.
Savi. Paolucci,  Riso,  78. La  Masa  (Sic),  liv.  (note).

^  Now  the  Corso  dei  Mille.

*  Tim^s,  June  8,  p.  10,  col.  5.  Paolucci,  Riso,  79.  Calvino  {Grtardione,
ii.  441,  442).

300  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

an  unusually  high  barricade  effectively  blocking  the  street,
near  to  the  place  where  the  gate  had  once  stood.  This
obstacle,  though  feebly  defended,  was  in  itself  physically
impassable,  and  therefore  sufficed  to  bring  the  charge  of  the
Thousand  to  a  stand,  while  Bixio  and  others  flung  them-
selves against  it  and  began  pulling  it  to  the  ground.  So
long  as  this  work  continued  the  Neapolitan  riflemen  and
their  two  cannon  posted  outside  the  Porta  S.  Antonino
in  front  of  the  church  of  that  name,  fired  down  the  broad,
straight  stradone}  into  the  left  flank  of  the  Thousand,
held  up  in  front  of  the  Porta  Termini  barricade.  From
the  opposite  direction  a  Neapolitan  war  vessel  fired  up
the  stradone  from  the  sea.  Here  fell  Benedetto  Cairoli —
yet  destined  to  be  the  only  one  of  five  brothers  to  survive
the  wars  of  liberation — and  Canzio  of  Genoa,  Garibaldi's
future  son-in-law.  Here  the  brave  Hungarian,  Tiikory,
who  had  led  the  vanguard,  fell  wounded  to  death.

At  this  critical  moment.  Garibaldi,  having  done  his
share  of  rallying  the  squadre,  galloped  up  to  the  Porta
Termini,  still  crying  aloud,  '  Avanti !  Avanti !  Entrate
nel  centro  !  '  Then  the  high  barricade  yielded  to  the  fury
of  Bixio,  undeterred  by  a  bullet  in  his  breast.  Nullo  of
Bergamo  was  the  first  man  to  enter  the  city,  and  after  him
the  tide  of  war  surged  over  the  fallen  barrier.  A  space
was  cleared  to  enable  Garibaldi  to  ride  his  horse  through
the  ruins,  and  all  that  remained  of  the  Thousand,  with
their  chief  aloft  in  the  midst  of  them,  roared  down  the
narrow  street  between  the  medieval  palaces  and  over-
hanging balconies  of  Palermo. ^

Meanwhile  the  squadre  were  following  up.  At  the
stradone  they  came  to  a  halt,  afraid  to  pass  over  to  the
Porta  Termini  across  the  open  road,  which  they  saw  slippery

1  Now  the  Via  Lincoln.

-  The  street  they  came  down,  in  which  the  Porta  Termini  had  once
stood,  is  now  called  the  Via  Garibaldi.  Conv.  Canzio.  Conv.  Turr.
Bixio,  190,  200.  Conv.  Campo.  Calvino  {Guardione,  ii.  441,  442).
THrr's  Div.  52.  Menghini,  430  (Canzio's  diary).  Risorg.  anno  ii.,  I.
pp.  123,  124.  Abba  Not.  117.  V.  M.  iS.  Abba's  Bixio,  97-98.  Mondo
Illustrato,  i860,  no.  i,  p.  23. Zasio,  52,  53.

IN  THE  FIERA  VECCHIA  301

with  the  blood  of  the  Thousand  and  swept  by  two  cross
fires  from  S.  Antonino  and  from  the  sea.  Eber  and  several
of  the  Thousand  who  had  been  left  to  bring  them  into
the  city  had  a  hard  task  to  accomplish.  The  only  way
was  to  show  them  how  badly  the  Neapohtans  were  in  fact
shooting.  For  this  purpose  Francesco  Carbone,  a  Genoese
lad  of  seventeen,  planted  a  chair,  with  a  tricolour  flag
floating  above  it,  in  the  middle  of  the  stradone,  and  himself
sat  down  on  it  amid  the  storm  of  ill-directed  missiles.
'  The  thing  took  at  last  decidedly,'  wrote  Eber ;  first
by  ones  and  twos,  then  in  larger  bodies  the  squadre  crossed
the  danger  zone,  some  even  halting  in  the  middle  of  the  road
to  fire  off  their  muskets.  Finally,  a  barricade  was  erected
across  the  stradone  to  cover  the  entrance  for  further  bands
from  the  mountains,  of  whom  many  penetrated  into  the
capital  by  this  way  in  the  course  of  the  following  days.
These  undrilled  peasants  learnt  to  behave  with  ever  increas-
ing courage  during  the  street  fighting  that  followed.  Eber
wrote  that  they  reminded  him  of  the  Bashi-Bazouks,
because  they  '  can  be  led  on  after  the  first  unpleasant  sensa-
tion has  passed  away,  especially  when  they  see  that  it  is
not  all  shots  that  kill  or  wound.'  1

Garibaldi  made  no  halt  until  he  reached  the  Fiera
Vecchia,  '  the  ancient  market,'  a  Httle,  triangular  space
at  the  end  of  the  long,  straight  street  by  which  he  had
entered  the  town.  Of  unknown  antiquity,  it  is  the  heart
of  the  popular  quarter  of  Palermo.  In  it  commenced  the
revolution  of  January  1848,  the  spark  that  lighted  the
European  conflagration  of  that  year.^  In  the  centre  of
it  stands  a  fountain,  adorned  by  a  statuette  of  the  genius
of  Palermo — an  old  man  feeding  a  snake  at  his  breast,
which  was  popularly  held  to  represent  the  Sicilian  capital
feeding  its  foreign  conquerors,  as  it  had  done  through
all  the  ages. In  1849  the  too  symbolic  image  had  been

1  Times,  June  8,  p.  lo,  col.  5. Conv.  Eng. Forbes,  45,  46. PietrO'
ganzili,  ii.  268.

2  The  Fiera  Vecchia  is  now  called  the  Piazza  della  Rivoluzione.

302  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

removed  as  seditious  by  the  police  ;  it  was  restored  in
June  i860,  and  stands  there  to-day. [Illustration,  p.  298.)

Here,  then,  in  the  Fiera  Vecchia,  at  about  four  in
the  morning,  Garibaldi  first  drew  rein,  and  began  at  once
to  organise  the  occupation  of  the  city.  Around  him
as  he  sat  giving  his  orders,  swayed  a  crowd  of  unarmed
Palermitans,  so  dense  that  there  was  no  room  to  move,
all  in  the  wildest  excitement,  struggling  to  get  near  and
kiss  the  hand  or  knee  of  the  impassive  horseman,  and
yelling  like  maniacs  *  Viva  la  Talia  e  Garihardi  amicu  I '  1
In  the  midst  of  all  this,  Garibaldi  embraced  Bixio,  pointing
him  out  to  the  ecstatic  gratitude  of  the  populace,  as  the
hero  of  the  day.  Bixio  was  at  the  moment  near  fainting
with  pain  and  loss  of  blood,  for  he  had  just  cut  out  with
his  own  Spartan  hands  the  bullet  that  he  had  received
in  his  breast  at  the  Porta  Termini.  He  had  no  thought  of
retiring  yet  from  the  fight  .2

From  the  Fiera  Vecchia,  the  Thousand,  ceasing  to  act
as  a  regiment,  went  out  in  small  parties  in  every  direction
through  the  narrow  labyrinths  of  the  great  city,  to  rouse
the  inhabitants  and  expel  the  enemy.^  During  the  three
days'  fighting  that  ensued,  most  of  the  important,  though
not  all,  the  operations  of  war  were  performed  either
by  small  parties  of  a  dozen  or  more  North  Italians,  or
else  by  bodies  of  squadre  and  citizens  under  their  leader-
ship. To  be  one  of  the  Thousand  was  to  be  recognised
as  the  commander  by  any  stray  group  of  men  in  any  part
of  the  city,  and  on  any  one  of  the  countless  barricades.

On  their  first  scattering  through  the  town  from  the
Fiera  Vecchia,  the  Thousand  complained  of  empty  streets

1  '  Long  live  La  Talia '  (Italia)  '  and  friend  Garibaldi.'  V.  M.  25,
Some  of  the  more  ignorant  Sicilians  thought  '  Talia '  was  a  princess,
married  to  Garibaldi.  At  least  so  the  Thousand  were  led  to  believe,
though  it  has  since  been  denied  by  some  Sicilians.  Belloni,  84.  De
Cesare,  ii.  228.  Pietvaganzili,  ii.  190.  For  the  scene  in  the  Fiera
Vecchia  see  Calvino  {Guardione,  ii.  442).  Times,  June  8,  p.  10,  col.  5.
Sampo,  Lettera,  14,  15.

-  Abba's  Bixio,  97,  98. Bixio,  194.

5  Nievo,  355.

THE  BOMBARDMENt  BEGINS  303

and  of  people  watching  timidly  from  behind  shutters.
The  citizens  had  no  firearms,  and  they  had  not  forgotten
the  failure  of  April  4.1  But  as  the  certainty  of  Garibaldi's
presence  in  Palermo  gained  ground,  the  populace  every-
where came  out  in  swarms,  men,  women,  and  children,  to
welcome  and  aid  their  deliverers.  They  had  nothing  in  their
hands  but  swords,  knives,  sticks,  or  bars  of  iron,  but  they
were  bursting  with  noise  and  fury,  and  inspired  by  a  fitful
activity  and  daring.  Men  rushed  up  the  campanili  and
fell  to  beating  the  toscin  on  all  the  bells  of  the  town,  with
hammers  since  the  clappers  had  been  carried  off  by  the
police.  The  rural  squadre,  as  they  poured  into  the  streets,
fired  off  their  guns,  indifferently  whether  at  the  enemy  or
in  the  air.^  Palermo  with  its  160,000  inhabitants  and
4000  friendly  invaders  clashed  and  roared  and  shrieked
and  banged  like  the  devil's  kitchen,  while  the  20,000
foreign  troops  on  the  outskirts  rained  shell  and  heated
shot  into  the  centre,  from  the  Palace  at  one  end  and  from
the  Castellamare  and  the  fleet  at  the  other,  setting  whole
streets  on  fire  and  killing  and  wounding  men,  women,
and  children.^

It  had  been  Lanza's  predetermined  poHcy,  that,  if  the  city
rose,  he  would  reduce  it  to  submission  by  bombardment,  in-
stead of  using  every  effort  to  occupy  it  with  his  immense
forces  of  infantry.  Against  this  expressed  intention  Admiral
Mundy  had  protested  beforehand,  in  the  interest  alike  of
humanity  and  of  the  great  quantity  of  British  property  in  the
town.^  But  fortunately  for  Garibaldi,  this  cowardly  and  in-
active programme  was  strictly  adhered  to.^  In  the  spirit  of
their  leader,  the  troops  stationed  near  the  Palace  began
burning  and  sacking  houses,  and  murdering  whole  families,

1  Conv.  Canzio. Conv.  Campo. Mem.  358. Abba  Not.  120. Abba's
Btxio,  98. Belloni,  86.

2  Lorenzo. Giusta, 11. Mem. 358. Times, June  8, p. 10, col. 5,
and  June  9,  p.  9,  col.  i.

3  Mundy,  111-115. Br.  Pari.  Papers,  13,  p.  2. Br.  Cons.,  Papers  sub.
May  27  and  28  ; Times,  June  8,  p.  10,  col.  5.

*  Mundy,  81-83,  88-91,  98-103. De  Sivo,  iii.  215.

*  De  Sivo,  iii.  218.

304  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

both  in  the  Albergheria  within  and  in  the  suburbs  without
the  gates,  instead  of  advancing  into  the  heart  of  the  city
and  crushing  the  invaders  before  barricades  had  time  to
spring  up.  The  desecration  and  robbery  of  churches  and
convents  was  so  large  a  part  of  the  activity  of  the
NeapoUtans  in  these  days,  that  the  devotion  of  the  clergy
and  superstitious  populace  to  the  well-behaved  Garibaldini
became  stronger  than  ever.i  '  Thus/  wrote  Captain
Tommaso  Cava  of  the  Neapolitan  General  Staff,  '  after
two  hours  of  bombardment,  and  several  more  of  plunder
and  arson.  General  Lanza  thought  he  had  done  enough,
and  became  almost  entirely  inactive,  while  Garibaldi
occupied  all  the  points  which  he  most  required.'  2

The  Dictator  himself,  at  the  head  of  one  of  the  small  groups
into  which  his  Thousand  were  now  divided,  advanced  from
the  Fiera  Vecchia  into  the  centre  of  the  town  in  the  direction
of  the  Quattro  Cantoni,  the  crossing  place  of  the  two  streets
of  Spanish  origin,  the  Toledo  and  the  Macqueda,  each  a  mile
long,  which  cut  Palermo  into  four  symmetrical  quarters.
As the invaders drew near, the Tedaldi family  ^  from

1  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  19,  p.  i.  Admiral  Mundy,  June  3,  writes : —
'  A  whole  district,  1000  yards  in  length  by  100  wide,  is  in  ashes  ;  families
have  been  burnt  alive  with  the  buildings  :  while  the  atrocities  of  the
Royal  troops  have  been  frightful.  .  .  .  The  conduct  of  General  Garibaldi
both  during  the  hostilities  and  since  their  suspension,  has  been  noble
and  generous.'  In  the  Morning  Post,  June  26,  p.  5,  col.  4,  the  corre-
spondent writes  on  June  6  from  Palermo  that  in  the  Albergheria  quarter
'  a  part  of  the  town  exclusively  inhabited  by  the  poorest  classes,  not  even
a  single  house  is  left  standing,  and  one  may  fairly  calculate  the  number
of  houses  at  about  200.  These  houses  were  not  destroyed  by  the  bombs
or  other  projectiles,  but  by  the  soldiers  themselves,  who  first  entered  and
completely  sacked  them,  and  on  leaving  set  fire  to  them,  and  heaven
knows  in  each  they  could  have  found  little  more  than  the  value  of  2s.
or  3s.'  Elliot  (p.  38)  tells  us  that  the  beaten  army  on  its  disgraceful
return  to  the  mainland  held  auctions  of  the  spoil  of  the  island  whence
they  had  been  driven.  See  also  Bixio,  198,  202.  Brancaccio,  216,  225  ;
Pietraganzili,  ii.  281,  282  ;  V.  M.  8,  9,  28  ;  Cava,  ii.  87.  Tilrr's  Div.  386
(doc.  18,  detailed  evidence  by  Swiss  Agent)  ;  Times,  June  28,  p.  9,  col.  4  ;
Durand-Braget,  45-47.

2  Cava,  ii.  87.  There  was  a  temporary  lull  in  the  bombardment
about  8  a.m.  on  the  27th,  Mundy,  iii.

3  See  p.  292,  above.

IN  THE  HEART  OF  THE  CITY  305

behind  the  shutters  of  their  house  in  the  Quattro  Cantoni,
saw  the  sentinels  below  bolt  up  the  Toledo  for  the  Palace.
Thus  set  free,  the  father  and  two  elder  boys  descended
unarmed  into  the  streets,  as  so  many  of  their  fellow-citizens
were  doing  at  that  hour,  to  seek  for  weapons  and  for  allies.
They  soon  met  one  of  the  Thousand,  Paolo  Scarpa,  almost
unconscious  from  prolonged  exposure  and  want  of  sleep.
They  helped  him  into  their  house,  where  he  dropped  on
a  bed  and  slept  where  he  fell.  When  the  servant  tried
to  remove  his  clothes,  which  he  had  not  taken  off  since
Marsala,  they  fell  to  pieces.  Armed  with  his  musket,
the  Tedaldi  went  out  again  to  the  fight.  When  Scarpa
awoke  many  hours  later,  he  was  in  despair  at  the  dis-
appearance of  his  weapon,  but  by  that  time  his  hosts  were
able  to  supply  him  with  another  musket  procured  on  a
barricade  from  one  of  the  squadre.^

Meanwhile  Garibaldi,  with  a  few  followers,  had  occupied
the  neighbouring  Piazza  Bologni,  from  which  important
position  Landi  of  Calatafimi  hastily  fled  with  his  troops
towards  the  Royal  Palace.^  The  Dictator  took  up  his
quarters  for  a  couple  of  hours  in  the  courtyard  of  the
Villafranca  Palace,  on  the  Piazza  Bologni.  It  was  noticed
that  even  at  that  moment  he  insisted  on  unsaddling  his
horse  himself,  according  to  his  custom.  As  he  placed  the
saddle  on  the  ground,  a  pistol  in  the  holster  went  off  and
missed  him  so  closely  that  it  carried  off  a  piece  of  his  trousers.
There  was  a  momentary  cry  of  '  He  is  assassinated.'  ^

While  the  Dictator  was  still  in  the  Piazza  Bologni,  he
became  aware  of  Bixio,  staggering  for  loss  of  blood  from
his  wound,  but  all  in  a  rage  because  the  citizens  had  not
yet  come  out  in  sufficient  numbers  in  that  part  of  the  town.
He  was  crying  out  that  they  would  certainly  all  be  killed  in
a  couple  of  hours  since  the  city  would  not  rise,  and  that  for

^  Conv. Tedaldi.

*  De  Cesare,  ii.  231,  322. Nievo,  355.

^  Calvino  {Guardione,  ii.  443).  Campo  Letfera,  15.  Cremona,  30.
Abba  Not.  119,  200.  Mem.  358.  The  two  latter  authorities  show  that
it  was  Garibaldi's  own  pistol  and  not  that  of  his  son  Menotti  that  went  off.

X

3o6  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

his  part  he  would  lead  any  twenty  men  who  would  follow
him  to  attack  the  headquarters  at  the  Royal  Palace.
Garibaldi  countermanded  the  feverish  plan,  calmed  his
worthy  lieutenant  and  finally  ordered  him  off  to  have
his  wounds  dressed,  as  he  should  have  done  several  hours
before.  Once  in  bed,  Bixio  was  unable  to  leave  it  during  the
next  three  days  of  battle,  during  which  the  absence  of
the  dreaded,  indefatigable  man  was  a  relief  alike  to  friend
and  foe.i

From  the  Piazza  Bologni  the  Dictator  recrossed  the
Via  Macqueda  to  the  Piazza  Pretorio,  or  municipal  square
of  the  capital,  and  fixed  his  head  quarters  here  during  the
next  three  weeks.  He  had  nominated  a  General  Committee
of  leading  Palermitans  to  govern  the  town,  subdivided
into  five  Committees  of  War,  Provisions,  Interior,  Finance,
and,  last  but  not  least,  Barricades. ^  With  these,  his
State  Secretary  Crispi  carried  on  the  Dictatorial  government
in  the  Pretorio  or  municipal  building,  where  Garibaldi
also  occasionally  worked,  and  took  his  modicum  of  sleep.
But  he  spent  most  of  the  days  of  battle  sitting  on  the
steps  of  the  great  fountain  in  the  square  below,  among  the
statues  with  which  it  is  decorated,  between  heaps  of  flowers
and  fruit  brought  to  him  by  the  people. ^  The  enemy  soon
discovered  his  whereabouts  and  aimed  the  bombardment
specially  at  the  Piazza  Pretorio.  Although  every  building  on
the  square  and  in  its  neighbourhood  suffered  greater  or  less
damage,  the  Municipality  itself  was  strangely  intact.  Simi-
larly, though  many  persons  in  the  square  were  hit,  Garibaldi
had  his  usual  luck.*  The  populace  cried  out  on  a  miracle.
At  some  hazard  to  themselves  they  would  stand  in  crowds
gazing  at  him  as  he  sat  on  the  steps,  as  composed  as  one
of  the  statues,  paying  no  attention  to  the  shells  and
abstractedly  twirling  round  and  round  the  string  of  a  little
whip  which  he  held  in  his  hand.  The  Palermitans  whispered
to  each  other  in  awe-struck  tones  '  Caccia  le  bombe  '  ('  He

1  Abba  Not.  120. Abba's  Bixio,  98,  99. Bixio,  200.  ^  y.M.  5.

3  Calvino  {Guardione,  ii.  443). Pietraganzili,  ii.  268.
■*  Mtindy,  128. Morning  Post,  June  26,  p.  5,  col.  4.

„ O :S

GARIBALDI  AT  THE  FOUNTAIN

307

is  keeping  off  the  shells  '),  beheving  the  whip  to  be  a  charm
which  he  thus  set  in  action. ^  In  habits  of  thought  and
imagination  the  modem  Palermitans  had  much  in  common
with  those  ancient  peoples  of  the  Mediterranean  for  whose
pagan  souls  the  followers  of  Christ  and  Mohammed  strove
with  the  sword.  When  they  saw  sitting  before  them  a  stranger
so  beautiful,  so  kind,  so  strong  to  deHver  and  to  slay,
they  felt  as  their  remote  ancestors  felt  when  some  god  or
hero  was  thought  to  have  become  the  guest  of  man.  And
so  during  these  days  the  belief  became  very  general  and
profound  that  the  Liberator  was  related  to  Santa  Rosalia,
the  patroness  of  Palermo,  who  doubtless  protected  her
kinsman  in  battle.  For  all  agreed  that  a  hero  named
Garibaldi  must  needs  be  descended  from  the  famous  Sini-
haldi,  Santa  Rosalia's  father.  So  they  looked  on  him
and  took  fresh  courage.^

Of  many  scores  of  street  fights  that  raged  throughout  the
city,  the  most  important  and  the  fiercest  of  all  was  the
contest  for  the  Toledo — the  broad,  straight,  level  street  which
connected  the  Neapolitan  head  quarters  at  the  Palace  with
the  centre  of  the  town  and  thence  with  the  sea.  At  the
marine  end  of  the  Toledo  the  squadre,  under  the  leader-
ship of  one  of  the  Thousand,  captured  the  Porta  FeHce
under  a  hot  fire.  But  that  did  not  prevent  the  warships
from  firing  through  its  arch  up  the  whole  length  of  the  town.^
An  immense  cloth  was  therefore  stretched  across  the
Quattro  Cantoni,  as  had  been  done  under  similar  circum-
stances in  1848,  to  prevent  the  Palace  and  fleet  from
communicating  by  signals,  and  to  hide  from  the  ships
the  fighting  in  the  upper  part  of  the  Toledo.*  For  it  was
there  that  the  battle  was  hottest,  Lanza's  troops  making
serious, if  belated  efforts  to  fight their  way down the

1  Told  me  by  Professor  Pitre,  the  famous  collector  of  Sicilian  folk-lore
and  traditions. He  saw  and  heard  this  himself  as  a  boy  in  Palermo.

2  Conv.  Pitvi. S.  Rosalia  died  about 1170,  but  her  bones  concealed
themselves  on  Monte  Pellegrino  till  a  plague  in  1624.

3  7.  L.  N.,  i860,  June  16,  pp.  577,  578. Lorenzo. The other  great
street,  the  Macqueda,  had  early  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  insurgents.

■•  Brancaccio,  220. Abba,  189.

X 2

3o8  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

great  street  from  the  Palace  into  the  heart  of  the  city,
and  the  rebels  to  v/ork  up  it  from  the  Piazza  Bologni.
The  palace  of  Prince  Carini,  ruined  by  the  bombardment,
and  the  Jesuits'  College  opposite,  were  the  sites  most  hotly
contested  during  the  27th  and  28th.  The  Neapolitans  easily
maintained  themselves  in  the  Cathedral,  round  the  east  end
of  which  the  fighting  remained  hot  and  evenly  balanced. 1

By  mid-day  on  May  27,  eight  hours  after  Garibaldi's
entry,  the  whole  city  was  in  the  hands  of  the  insurgents,
except  the  large  district  round  the  Palace,  and  the  two
isolated  positions  of  the  Castellamare  and  the  Mint  at  the
other  end  of  the  town."^  Outside  the  walls,  in  the  suburbs
known  as  the  Quattro  Venti  near  to  the  Vicaria  prison
and  the  barracks  along  the  northern  quays,  a  strong  body
of  Neapolitans  lay  under  General  Cataldo.  During  the
first  day's  fighting  they  were  cut  off  from  the  Palace  by  the
advance  of  the  citizens,  who,  having  taken  the  Porta
Macqueda  in  open  fight,  pushed  out  to  S.  Francesco  di
Paola  and  even  as  far  as  the  Enghsh  Gardens. ^

During  the  afternoon  of  the  27th  and  the  next  morning,
the  large  bodies  of  men  stationed  under  Bonanno  near  Parco
and  Monreale  were  recalled  to  head  quarters  at  the  Royal
Palace. 4  Lanza,  infatuated  by  the  apparent  safety  of  his
position  at  that  point,  conceived  the  false  strategical
notion  of  concentrating  there  all  his  forces  except  the
small  garrisons  of  the  Castellamare  and  Mint.  The  Palace
was  an  ill-chosen  spot  for  the  concentration  of  18,000
men,  because  there  they  were  cut  off  from  further  supplies
of  food  and  ammunition,  and  from  all  communication
with  the  shore  and  the  fleet,  except  by  means  of
semaphores  signalling  to  each  other  on  the  roofs  of  the
Palace  and  Castellamare.^

In  pursuance  of  this  bad  policy,  on  the  afternoon  of

^  Lorenzo. Cronaca,  132. Forbice,  June  19.

2  Muncly,  iii. Crcnaca,  132.

2  Lorenzo. V.  M.  20,  21. Cronaca,  132,  133.

^  Mundy,  115.  Cronaca,  1^1.  De  Sivo,ni.2i8.  Times,  June g, -p.  g,  col.  i.

^  Mundy,  120. Brancaccio,  219. De  Cesare,  ii.  322.

<  5
X  .
H .2

fo

aJ

w

F

o

n

t/5

to

H

THE  PRISONERS  BREAK  LOOSE  309

May  27,  the  alter  ego  sent  a  fatal  order  to  Cataldo  at  the
Quattro  Venti,  bidding  him  join  the  main  body  at  the
Palace. 1

Meanwhile  the  remnant  of  Pile's  squadre,  rallied  by  his
companion  Corrao  on  the  hills  to  the  north-west,  were
working  down  to  Palermo  by  way  of  Uditore  and  Lolli.
During  the  night  of  May  27-28  they  fell  on  the  Neapoli-
tans under  Cataldo,  who  had  not  yet  carried  out  the  order
to  return  to  head  quarters.  After  some  fighting  Corrao,
wounded  by  a  shell,  led  his  men  into  the  city  by  the  Porta
Macqueda,  and  at  dawn  on  the  28th  Cataldo  brought
his  troops  round  from  the  Quattro  Venti  and  the  Vicaria  to
the  Royal  Palace.^

The  second  day  of  the  fighting  in  Palermo  (May  28)
began  with  the  eruption  of  the  prisoners  from  the  gaol-
fortress  of  the  Vicaria.  The  gaolers,  a  detestable  set  of
men,  had  wisely  taken  themselves  off  even  before  the
departure  of  Cataldo's  infantry.  Early  in  the  morning,
as  soon  as  the  last  sentinels  disappeared  from  the  ramparts,
the  many  hundreds  of  political  prisoners  in  the  Vicaria
burst  their  cells,  and  the  foremost  of  the  crowd  began  to
attack  with  crowbars  and  naked  hands  the  inside  of  the
great  iron  door  that  denied  them  exit.  Minute  after
minute  its  strength  resisted  their  frenzied  efforts,  and
the  terrible  cry  was  raised  '  the  soldiers  are  returning.'
But  the  alarm  was  false,  and  finally  the  door  was  opened
from  the  outside  by  a  man  to  whom  the  departing  gaoler
had  confided  the  keys.  He  had  hastened  first  to  let  out
the  common  criminals,  among  whom  he  had  some  friends.
An  eager  mob  of  the  best  and  worst  men  in  Sicily,  some

1  Cava,  ii.  85,  gives  the  wrong  date  for  the  order  (May  26),  but
Cronaca  (pp.  132,  133)  says,  no  doubt  rightly,  that  Cataldo  received  it
about  4  p.m  .oa  the  27th.  De  Sivo,  iii.  218,  and  Paolucci,  Riso,  p.  82,  do
not  seem  to  be  aware  that  Lanza  sent  Cataldo  an  order  to  retire.  Marra
Oss.  15.

2  Paolucci,  Riso,  pp.  81,  82,  and  Lorenzo  differ  somewhat  as  to  the  scene
of  the  fighting.  Brancaccio,  198,  199,  proves  that  the  Neapolitans  had
not  abandoned  the  Vicaria  before  dawn  on  the  28th.

310  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

2000  all  told,  rushed  into  the  town  by  the  Porta  Macqueda,
and  flew  to  the  barricades. i

The  original  barricades,  which  on  the  first  day  had
been  improvised  of  carriages  and  household  furniture,
were  gradually  being  replaced  by  carefully-built  erections
of  the  flagstones  with  which  the  streets  of  Palermo  are
paved.  Many,  even,  were  loop-holed  for  musketry,  or  faced
along  the  top  with  sandbags.  The  Committee  of  Barricades
saw  to  their  scientific  disposal,  at  intervals  of  a  hundred
yards,  down  the  length  of  every  street,  until  the  whole
town  was  protected  from  the  centre  outwards  by  a  network
of  successive  lines  of  defence.  The  populace,  women  as
well  as  men,  was  ready  with  scalding  water  and  heavy
objects  to  hurl  from  the  balconies  on  to  the  troops  below.
The  noise  of  bells  and  the  clamour  of  the  multitude  was
appalling,  and  there  was  in  fact  every  physical  and  moral
discouragement  to  the  advance  of  the  enemy's  infantry
down  the  streets.^  On  the  other  hand  the  fits  of  lethargy
that  seized  the  Sicilians  from  time  to  time  were  the  despair
of  all  the  Northerners  except  Garibaldi ;  ^  the  small  quantity
and  bad  quality  of  the  firearms,  of  which  there  were  few
in  the  city  beyond  what  the  peasants  and  the  Thousand
brought  with  them  from  the  hills,*  and  still  more  the
shortage  of  ammunition,  which  the  squadre,  with  their
childish  love  of  noise  and  smoke,  wasted  in  the  most  heart-
rending manner,^  were  circumstances  which  left  the  final
success  of  the  patriots  still  dependent  on  their  amazing

1  Brancaccio,  105,  197-203,  212-218.

'  Mem.  359.  Leggi,  19,  no.  22.  Pictures  and  photographs  of  barri-
cades in  V.M.  and  Album  Garibaldi. Conv.  Tedaldi. Mundy,  129,  130.

3  '  Not  so  energetically  seconded  by  the  Palermitans  as  one  could
have  expected  from  their  enthusiasm.  There  is  a  semi-oriental  laissez-faire
about  them  which  only  produces  fits  of  activity.  .  .  .  Even  the  ringing
of  bells,  the  most  demoralising  sound  to  an  army  in  a  populous  town
can,  in  spite  of  all  injunctions,  be  only  kept  up  in  fits  and  starts.'  End
of  letter.  May  27  eve.  in  Times,  June  8  ;  see  also  do.  June  9,  p.  9,  col.  i.
Nievo,  p.  357. Belloni,  81. Bixio  MS.

*  Conv.  Tedaldi. Campo,  125. Brancaccio,  219-221,  227.

5  CoKv.  Canzio.  Mem.  359,  360.  Timss,  June  9,  p.  9,  col.  2,  letters
of  May  28-29.

a:  •■^"

td  ^

z  S

o  s

Z  :2

THE  ROYAL  PALACE.

VIEW  FROM  THE  ROYAL  PALACE  ROOF.

Palace  Square  in  front. On  the  left,  between  the  Square  and  the  Archbishop's  Palace, runs
the  Toledo,  which  continues  in  a  straight  line  to  the  sea. Cathedral,  middle  left.

THE  THIRD  DAY'S  FIGHTING  311

good  luck and on the continuance of  Lanza's  imbecile
conduct  of  affairs.

Early  on  the  morning  of  May  28,  the  alter  ego  opened
communications  with  the  British  Admiral  by  means  of
semaphore  messages  to  the  Castellamare ,  conveyed  on
board  H.M.S.  Hannibal  at  eight  o'clock  by  Captain  Cosso-
vich,  now  in  command  of  the  Neapolitan  vessels  in  the
harbour.  Lanza's  first  request  was  to  obtain  the  use  of  the
British  flag  to  enable  officers  from  the  Palace  to  pass
along  the  Toledo  and  hold  a  conference  with  the  commanders
of  the  fleet  and  Castellamare  on  board  H.M.S.  Hannibal.
The  use  of  the  British  flag  in  the  streets  of  the  town  was
refused,  but  Admiral  Mundy,  with  the  consent  of  Captain
Cossovich,  sent  Lieutenant  Wilmot, — the  same  who  had
shared  Garibaldi's  strawberries  at  Misilmeri, — to  find  the
Dictator  in  the  heart  of  the  besieged  city  and  ask  him
to  allow  the  Neapolitan  officers  to  pass  down  the  Toledo.
Garibaldi  consented,  but  Lanza  for  the  present  refused  to
accept  the  concession  as  coming  from  the  filibuster,  since
the  use  of  the  British  flag  in  the  town  was  not  to  be  obtained.
While  these  first  abortive  negotiations  were  pending.  Captain
Cossovich,  who  hated  the  service  assigned  to  him  of  de-
stroying a  splendid  city,  had  willingly,  at  Admiral  Mundy's
request,  suspended  the  naval  bombardment  for  several
hours,  though  the  Castellamare  and  the  artillery  at  the
Palace  continued  to  fire.^

May  29,  the  third  and  last  day  of  continuous  street
fighting,  saw  the  severest  conflict  of  all.  In  the  morning
the  Sicilians  and  the  Garibaldini  made  a  determined
advance  against  the  Cathedral,  which  the  men  of  Bergamo
succeeded  at  last  in  taking.  From  its  high,  western  cam-
panile they  were  able  to  pour  such  a  rain  of  bullets  down
on  to  the  Archbishop's  palace  that  this  also  became  untenable
by  the  enemy.  The  buildings  commanding  the  great
square  in  front  of  the  Royal  Palace  thus  fell  into  the
hands  of  the  insurgents,  and  Lanza's  headquarters  were

1  Mundy,  1 16-134. By.  Pari.  Papers,  13,  pp.  2,  3.

312  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

closely  threatened.  Driven  to  bay,  the  hosts  of  the  Nea-
politans rallied  after  mid-day,  and  from  the  Porta  Nuova
swept  their  assailants  back  again  through  the  Archbishop's
palace,  and  through  the  Cathedral.  As  Garibaldi  sat  on
the  steps  of  the  Pretorio  fountain  early  in  the  afternoon,
with  a  map  of  Palermo  spread  on  his  knees,  his  old  companion
in  arms,  Piva,  who  had  been  the  first  man  across  the  river
two  days  before,  rushed  up  with  the  news  that  the  Neapoli-
tans were  advancing  from  the  Cathedral  and  bade  fair
to  penetrate  to  the  heart  of  the  town.  '  I  must  go  myself,'
said  Garibaldi,  and  taking  Tiirr  and  some  fifty  men  who
happened  to  be  at  hand,  mostly  Sicilians,  he  walked  to
the  scene  of  action.  At  first  the  Neapolitans  stood  their
ground,  and  one  of  the  squadre,  shot  through  the  head,  fell
dead  into  Garibaldi's  arms.  But  when  he  ordered  his
bugler  to  sound  the  charge,  and  the  whole  party  dashed
forward,  the  enemy  fled  back  into  the  Cathedral.  The
east  end  of  that  magnificent  edifice  became  once  more,
as  in  the  morning,  the  boundary  of  the  Neapohtan  position.

In  these  fierce  fights  of  May  29,  for  the  possession  of
the  upper  Toledo,  the  members  of  several  Sicilian  aristo-
cratic families  behaved  with  distinction.  The  brothers
Pasquale  and  Salvatore  di  Benedetto  fell  dead  together
at  the  corner  of  a  street ;  a  third  brother,  Raffaele,
had  been  wounded  two  days  before,  and  was  destined  in
after  years  to  give  his  life  for  Italy  under  the  walls  of
Rome. The  Di  Benedetti  were  the  Cairoli  brothers  of  Sicily.i

The  revolution  had  scored  one  important  success  that
day.  In  the  morning  a  small  handful  of  men,  chiefly  of  the
Thousand,  North  Itahans  under  the  leadership  of  Sirtori
and  of  the  two  Sicilians  Ciaccio  and  Campo,  captured
the  gate  and  bastion  of  Montalto  and  the  neighbouring
buildings,  including  the  S.  Giovanni  degh  Eremiti.  The
latter,  with  its  cloistral  ruins  and  little  garden,  well  known
to  travellers  as  one  of  the  most  beautiful  relics  of  Arabic-

1  Turr'sHDiv.  60.  Times,  June  g,  p.  9,  cols.  2,  3.  Lorenzo.  Abba,  191.
Cronaca,  137.  V.  M,  23,  28.  Brancaccio,  72,  73,  228-230.  Paolucci,  Rise,
34-36-

X

h

'-'

<

1 1

1

O

CJ

S

*j

K

a

W

W

LANZA  THINKS  OF  NEGOTIATING  313

Norman  architecture,  was  retaken  in  the  afternoon  by  the
NeapoHtans  issuing  from  the  Palace.  But  the  Montalto
bastion  and  gate  remained  to  the  insurgents  as  the  one
soHd  gain  to  either  side  of  that  day's  fighting.^

On  the  night  of  May  29-30,  two  fresh  battalions  of
so-called  '  Bavarian  '  troops  (ist  and  2nd  leggieri),  German
recruits  of  a  rather  indifferent  quality  under  Colonel
Buonopane,  who  had  landed  near  the  Castellamare  off
two  steamers  recently  arrived  from  Naples,  marched
right  round  behind  the  scene  of  conflict  by  way  of  the
English  gardens,  and  coming  in  at  the  rear  of  the  Royal
Palace,  reported  themselves  in  the  isolated  and  over-
crowded headquarters,  where  the  scarcity  of  supplies
was  already  beginning  to  be  felt. 2

Throughout  May  29  Lanza  had  persisted  in  his  refusal
to  communicate  with  Garibaldi.  But  he  had  once  more
feebly  attempted  to  beg  the  use  of  the  British  flag  to  cover
the  passage  of  his  own  officers  through  the  town,  a  nego-
tiation of  which  the  only  results  were  to  irritate  the  British
Admiral,  and  to  give  to  the  humane  Captain  Cossovich
an  excuse  for  suspending  the  naval  bombardment  on
the  29th  as  on  the  former  day.^  But  during  the  night
of  May  29-30  the  alter  ego  began  to  reconsider  his  position.
The  failure  of  the  serious  effort  made  in  the  afternoon  to
penetrate  from  the  Cathedral  into  the  heart  of  the  town,
the  threatened  shortage  of  food,  and  the  state  of  the  eight

^  The  bastion  itself  has  now  disappeared,  but  the  curtain  of  the
older  medieval  wall  of  the  city  that  stood  inside  the  bastion  is  there  still,
see  illustration,  p.  318,  below.  Canipo,  126,  i-zj.  Cronaca,  i^y.  Tiirr'sDiv.
59.  De  Stvo,  iii.  221.  Cicaccio  Lettera,  only  partly  printed  in  V.  M.  22  {q.v.)
and  28.  Cf.  Campo  Lettera,  11-13,  and  Campo  Risposta,  23,  34.  Abba,
189. Sirtori,  208.

2  De  Sivo,  iii.  219.  Marra  Oss.  15,  21.  Frafici,  i.  56  (date  wrong).
Wittmngton-Ingram,  20^.  Mundy  (pp.  133,  138)  somewhat  confuses  their
movements  with  those  of  the  other  and  better  German  troops  (3rd  leggieri)
under  Bosco  and  Von  Mechel  who  returned  next  day  from  Corleone  by
way  of  the  Botanical  Gardens  and  Porta  Termini.

^  Mundy,  133-138. Cronaca,  i^iT- Times,  June  9,  p.  9,  col.  3.

314  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

hundred  1  wounded,  cut  off  from  all  necessaries,  most  of
them  suffering  under  his  own  eyes  in  the  Palace,  conduced
to  shake  his  infirm  resolution.  On  the  morning  of  May  30
he  awoke  prepared  to  treat  with  his  enemy  in  a  manner
unnecessarily  humihating  to  the  Royal  cause,  and  penned
the  following  letter,  of  which  the  address  alone  marked
his  changed  attitude  towards  the  '  filibuster.'

'General  Lanza  to  His  Excellency  General  Garibaldl

'  May  30,  i860.
'  Since  the  English  Admiral  has  let  me  know  that  he  would
receive  with  pleasure  on  board  his  vessel  two  of  my  Generals
to  open  a  conference  with  you,  at  which  the  Admiral  would
be  mediator,  provided  you  would  grant  them  a  passage
through  your  lines,  I  therefore  beg  you  to  let  me  know  if
you  will  consent  thereto,  and  if  so  (supposing  hostilities  to  be
suspended  on  both  sides)  I  beg  you  to  let  me  know  the  hour
when  the  said  conference  shall  begin.  It  would  likewise  be
advantageous  that  you  should  give  an  escort  to  the  above-
mentioned  Generals  from  the  Royal  Palace  to  the  Sanita,
where  they  would  embark  to  go  on  board.

'  Waiting  your  reply,

'  Ferdinando  Lanza.'

If  a  man  on  his  way  to  execution  were  asked  by  the
prison  authorities  whether  he  would  be  so  good  as  to
change  places  with  the  hangman,  he  would  feel  much  what
Garibaldi  felt  in  his  heart,  when  with  calm  and  serious
countenance  he  finished  reading  this  letter  in  the  presence
of  the  two  Neapolitan  officers  who  brought  it  to  the  Pretono.
The  fact  was  that  he  had  practically  no  ammunition  left.
He  secretly  sent  one  of  his  men  to  steal  across  the
harbour  in  a  boat  at  night,  and  beg  ammunition  from  the
Piedmontese  vessel  commanded  by  the  Marquis  d'Aste,
who  refused  to commit any  such breach  of neutrality.

1  During  the  armistice,  800  NeapoUtan  wounded  were  shipped.
Br  Pari.  Papers,  13,  P-  6,  May  31-  Br.  Cons.  Papers,  June  i.  The
Neapolitan  official  estimate  for  the  first  two  days',  fighting  was  a  loss
of  208  killed  and  562  wounded  {Cronaca,  140),  and  the  third  day's  fighting
was  perhaps  the  severest  of  all.

VON  MECKEL'S  TARDY  RETURN 315

Garibaldi  and  many  of  his  circle  remembered  this  against
Cavour,  whose  black  purposes  they  saw  in  the  '  correct '
attitude  of  a  patriotic  but  much  perplexed  naval  captain.^

So  Garibaldi  arranged  with  Lanza's  messengers  that
firing  should  forthwith  be  stopped  on  both  sides  and  more
particularly  that  an  armistice  should  commence  at  stroke
of  noon,  after  which  hour  the  parties  to  the  conference  would,
as  soon  as  possible,  proceed  on  board  the  British  flag-ship.^

Before  thus  sending  off,  about  nine  o'clock,^  his  petition
to  His  Excellency  General  Garibaldi,  the  alter  ego  had
received  a  piece  of  intelligence  that  would  have  made  any
commander  of  sense  and  spirit  postpone  all  thought  of
negotiations.  At  dawn,  the  look-out  on  the  Palace  roof
had  sent  word  that  he  saw  Von  Mechel's  four  battalions,
at  last  returned  from  Corleone  and  from  the  pursuit  of
the  phantom  Garibaldi.  They  were  on  the  edge  of  the
town,  between  the  Ponte  dell'  Ammiraglio  and  the  Porta
Termini.  Lanza  for  several  hours  neglected  this  significant
news,  and  when  it  was  forced  upon  his  attention,  instead  of
ordering  a  general  attack  in  co-operation  with  the  newly-
returned  column,  he  sent  his  letter  to  Garibaldi  none  the
less,  and  even  enclosed  in  it  an  order  to  Von  Mechel,  bidding
him  observe  the  armistice  that  was  about  to  be  concluded.^

*  If  Von  Mechel  had  returned  a  day  earlier,  we  should
have  been  lost.'  So  said  General  Tiirr,  the  year  before  he
died,  to  the  writer.  Von  Mechel  and  Major  Bosco  were
the  two  fire-eaters  of  the  army,  and  their  regiments  were
the  fighting  regiments,  especially  the  3rd  Light  Infantry,
a  battalion  of  Germans  of  much  finer  quality  than  those
recently landed under Buonopane.^ There can be no

1  Mem.  360,  363. Conv.  Canzio.

2  Mundy,  139-143  ; Marra,  Oss.  ig.

^  Cava,  ii.  89,  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  Mundy  heard  the  firing
cease  'shortly  before  ten'  {Mundy,  140),  and  by  Eber's  statement  in
letter  dated  May  30,  9  a.m.,  Times,  June  9,  p.  9,  col.  3.

■•  Cava,  ii.  88,  89,  where  the  story  is  most  clearly  and  fully  told.
Cronaca,  138,  says  the  news  of  Von  Mechel's  arrival  was  brought  to  Lanza
at  9.30,  but  this  was  not  the  first  time  siich  news  was  brought  to  him,  as
Cava's  narrative  shows.

'"  Marra,  Oss.,  17,  21.

3i6  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

doubt  that,  if  they  had  returned  on  the  29th,  the  officers
would  have  overruled  Lanza's  timid  counsels,  and  the
men  would  have  borne  themselves  well  in  battle.  The
reason  why  Von  Mechel  did  not  return  on  the  first  or
second  day  after  Garibaldi's  entry,  was  partly  that  the
messenger  sent  after  him  on  the  morning  of  the  27th
had  been  stopped  by  the  villagers  of  Plana  dei  Greci,i  and
partly  that  the  brave  Switzer,  whose  motto  was  '  slow
but  sure,'  had  no  idea  of  forced  marches.  On  the  latter
part  of  the  journey  back,  instead  of  taking  the  direct  route
across  the  Conca  d'Oro  from  Parco  to  the  Palace,  he  had
passed  along  the  foot  of  Monte  Grifone  by  way  of  S.  Maria
di  Gesu,  crossed  the  Ponte  dell'  Ammiraglio,  and  spent  the
night  of  May  29-30  near  the  Botanical  Gardens.  His
bivouac  there,  just  outside  the  Porta  Termini,  had  been
seen  before  sunset  on  the  29th  by  the  watchmen  on  the
Castellamare  roof,  who  did  not  however  semaphore  the
news  to  the  Palace.^

Late  on  the  morning  of  the  fateful  May  30,  many
precious  hours  after  dawn.  Von  Mechel  began  to  move
into  the  city,  outside  the  walls  of  which  he  had  been  content
to  camp  all  night  without  making  his  arrival  known  at
head  quarters.  It  was  not  until  a  few  minutes  after  the
stroke  of  noon,  when  the  armistice  had  just  come  formally
into  operation,  that  the  stillness  was  broken  by  volleys
from  the  Porta  Termini  and  the  Fiera  Vecchia,  which
announced  simultaneously  to  the  Dictator  at  the  Pretorio,
to  the  British  Admiral  on  his  flag-ship,  and  to  the  alter  ego
at  the  Palace,  that  Von  Mechel  was  forcing  his  way  into
the  town  by  the  very  route  that  Garibaldi  had  followed
three  days  before.^  Great  was  the  surprise,  confusion
and  rout  of  the  slender  guard  of  Sicilians  under  La  Masa,
thus  taken  in  rear,  in  time  of  truce,  and  almost  without

1  See  p.  2S2,  above.

2  Cronaca,  126,  138,  140;  Marra,  Oss.  17.  It  was  they  who  bivou-
acked in  the  Botanical  Gardens  this  night,  and  notBuonopane's  Bavarians
with  v/hom  they  are  confused  in  this  matter  in  Mundy,  138.

3  Mundy,  144.

VON  MECKEL'S  ATTACK  317

ammunition.  The  newcomers  occupied  the  Fiera  Vecchia,
and  would  have  pressed  on  at  once  to  the  Pretorio,  but  for
the  activity  of  Sirtori.  The  gaunt,  ill-dressed,  meditative
ex-priest,  poised  inexpertly  on  an  immense  horse,  his
trousers  perpetually  rising  up  to  his  knees,  was  during
these  days  in  Palerm.o  compared  by  his  comrades  in  arms
to  the  figure  of  Don  Quixote.  But  he  was  no  mere  filter
at  windmills,  and  in  this  moment  of  rout  and  dismay  the
Chief  of  Staff  rallied  enough  men  to  keep  the  Neapolitans
within  the  compass  of  the  Fiera  Vecchia,  until  the  peace-
makers had  time  to  come  on  the  scene.  He  did  it  at  the
cost  of  a  severe  wound,  the  third  which  he  had  received
since  he  entered  Palermo. 1  Carini,  the  finest  soldier  among
the  Sicilians  in  the  Thousand,  was  also  badly  hit  while
endeavouring  to  induce  both  sides  to  observe  the  truce. ^

One  of  the  next  to  arrive  on  the  scene  was  a  chance-
comer.  Lieutenant  Wilmot.  Having  been  sent  on  shore
again  to  make  final  arrangements  for  the  conference  on
his  Admiral's  flag-ship  that  afternoon,  he  was  going  round
by  what  he  thought  to  be  the  safest  route  to  the  Pretorio,
b}^  way  of  the  Fiera  Vecchia.  He  suddenly  found  himself
between  a  cross  fire  of  squadre  and  Bavarians.  Waving
his  handkerchief,  he  walked  straight  up  to  the  Royalist
troops,  and,  pointing  to  the  hands  of  his  watch  which
indicated  that  it  was  already  past  noon,  he  remonstrated
against  the  breach  of  a  truce  in  the  observation  of  which
the  honour  of  the  British  Admiral  was  involved.  The
foreign  officer  and  his  men  were,  however,  '  very  much
excited,'  and  seemed  to  be  on  the  point  of  advancing,
taking  the  indignant  Englishman  with  them  as  a  sort
of  prisoner,  when  the  two  Neapolitan  officers  who  had
carried  Lanza's  letters  to  Garibaldi,  arrived  on  the  scene
from  the  Pretorio  and  saved  the  situation — and  perhaps
Italy.  They  made  it  clear  to  the  unwilling  mind  of  Von
Mechel,  and  to  his  yet  more  eager  and  enraged  lieutenant,

1  Sirtori,  210.  Cremona,  30.  La  Masa  {Sic),  Ixiii,  Ixiv,  De  Sivo,  iii.
224. Cava,  ii.  89.

^  Mundy,  146. Times,  June  9,  p.  9,  col.  3.

3i8  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Major  Bosco,  that  an  armistice  had  indeed  come  into
force  at  noon,  and  that  Lanza  had  given  special  orders
that  the  newcomers  should  observe  it.i  Garibaldi  appeared
almost  immediately  afterwards,  furious  at  the  breach  of
the  truce,  and  had  an  angry  altercation  with  the  Royalist
officers,  who  consented  to  halt,  but  refused  to  retire  from
the  ground  which  they  had  occupied. ^

Meanwhile  in  the  Palace  the  alter  ego  and  his  Staff
were  eagerly  disputing  whether  they  should  advance  in
force  down  the  Toledo,  and  order  Von  Mechel  to  meet
them  at  the  heart  of  the  city.  Victory  was  in  their  grasp,
unless  honour  obliged  them  to  observe  the  truce  until  the
Garibaldini  had  time  to  hem  Von  Mechel  into  the  Fiera
Vecchia  with  a  network  of  barricades.  Good  faith  carried
the  day  in  Lanza's  mind,  aided  perhaps  by  the  natural
inertness  of  the  old  General's  disposition.  Much  to  the
disgust  of  several  of  his  Staff,  he  effectively  stopped  Von
Mechel's  advance,  and  gave  orders  for  Generals  Letizia  and
Chretien  to  proceed  forthwith  on  board  H.M.S.  Hannibal
to  the  promised  conference.^

When  Lanza's  two  delegates  drove  down  to  the  quay-
side at  the  Sanita,  Garibaldi  was  there  before  them,  signal-
ling with  his  handkerchief  across  the  inner  harbour  to  the
riflemen  in  the  Castellamare,  who  were  characteristically
trying  to  shoot  him  in  time  of  truce,  and  equally  char-
acteristically failing  in  the  attempt.  Generals  Letizia
and  Chretien,  who  had  hoped  to  deal  with  the  British
Admiral  alone,  were  disgusted  at  finding  themselves
literally  and  metaphorically  '  in  the  same  boat '  with  the
filibuster  ;  they  did  not  know  which  way  to  look  when
Garibaldi  stepped  in  after  them,  and  the  British  officer
cried,  '  out  boat-hooks  '  and  *  shove  off,'  before  they  had

1  Mimdy,  145,  146,  Cava,  ii.  89,  Times  (June  9,  p.  9,  col.  3),  De  Sivo,  iii.
224,  and  Marra  Oss.  20,  all  agree  that  there  were  two  Neapolitan  ofiicers
who  stopped  Von  Mechel,  not  merely  one  as  Wilmot  says,

2  Mundy,  145,  146.

3  Marra  Oss.  19,  20, De  Sivo,  iii.  224,

THE CASTELLAMARE WITH MONTE PELLEGRINO IN THE DISTANCE.
View  across  the  inner  harbour  from  near  the  Sanita.

INSIDE THE MOiNTALTO BASTION.

Part  of  tlie  medieval  walls  of  Palci'ino. In  1860  tb'iv  were  already  a  ruin,  and  nut  part
of  the  delences.

CONFERENCE  ON  THE  FLAGSHIP  319

time  to  protest.  They  were  none  the  better  pleased  when,
on  their  coming  aboard  H.M.S.  Hannibal,  the  guard  of
marines  saluted  Garibaldi,  again  dressed  for  the  occasion
in  his  uniform  of  Piedmontese  General,  with  the  same
honours  as  were  accorded  to  themselves  as  representatives
of  the  King  of  Naples. 1

In  the  Admiral's  cabin,  where  the  conference  began
about  2.15  in  the  afternoon  of  May  30,  Letizia's  ill-humour
burst  out.  He  objected  in  no  courteous  way  to  the  presence
of  the  French,  American,  and  Piedmontese  commanding
officers  (the  Austrian  Commodore  had  not  wished  to
come),  and  still  more  to  the  presence  of  Garibaldi.  He
argued  with  doubtful  logic  that  Lanza's  idea  in
proposing  the  conference  had  been  that  the  Neapolitan
officers  and  Admiral  Mundy  should  draw  up  terms  for
an  armistice,  which  the  rebel  chief  could  then  either  accept
or  refuse.  Garibaldi  and  the  Piedmontese  captain,  the
Marquis  d'Aste,  held  their  peace,  while  the  French  and
American  commanders  expressed  their  indignant  astonish-
ment at  Letizia's  language,  and  Mundy  made  it  clear  that
for  his  part  he  was  not  acting  as  mediator,  but  was  merely
offering  his  cabin  as  a  neutral  meeting-ground  for  the
convenience  of  the  two  parties,  who  must  confer  together
a.nd  on  equal  terms,  if  there  was  to  be  any  conference  at  all.

Letizia  gave  way  and  proceeded  to  read  the  terms
proposed  by  Lanza  for  the  armistice.  Garibaldi  made  no
objection  to  the  proposals  for  free  passage  of  the  Royalist
wounded  to  the  ships,  and  of  provisions  to  the  Palace.
But  when  Letizia  had  read  the  fifth  clause —

'  That  the  municipality  should  address  a  humble  petition
to  His  Majesty  the  King,  laying  before  him  the  real  wishes  of
of  the  town  ' —

he  thundered  out  '  No  !  The  time  for  humble  petitions
has  gone  by,'  and  then,  giving  rein  to  his  pent  indignation,
inveighed  against  the  recent  treacherous  attack  on  the
city  in  time  of  truce,  and  the  refusal  of  Von  Mechel  to
1  Mundy,  147-149,  161-163,

320  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

withdraw  from  the  positions  so  occupied.  The  conference
would  have  broken  up,  had  not  Letizia  been,  in  fact,  pre-
pared to  grant  everything,  in  spite  of  his  offensive  and
bullying  manner,  which  was  not  shared  by  his  amiable
colleague  Chretien.  After  some  bluster,  seeing  that
Garibaldi  appeared  quite  indifferent  as  to  the  failure
of  the  negotiations,  he  withdrew  the  clause  about  the
humble  petition,  and  an  armistice  was  signed,  to  last  until
noon  next  day.i

Thus  Garibaldi,  by  playing  out  to  the  end  a  game  of
dignified  and  courageous  bluff,  had  secured  twenty  hours
at  least  in  which  to  provide  himself  with  ammunition.^
Before  he  left  the  British  flag-ship,  he  took  aside  Captain
Palmer,  the  United  States  commanding  officer,  and  asked
him  to  assist  the  cause  of  freedom  with  a  supply  of  powder.
Probably  the  American  was  no  more  compHant  than
the  Piedmontese  captain,  and,  in  any  case,  he  could  have
spared  but  httle  from  a  slender  store. ^  As  Garibaldi
returned  to  land,  between  four  and  five  o'clock,  the  idea
of  a  retreat  to  the  mountains  crossed  his  mind,  though  no
one  would  have  guessed  it  from  his  imperturbable  manner.
But  the  populace,  whose  zeal,  though  fitful  and  unrehable,
was  proportionately  terrible  in  moments  of  exaltation,  after
being  much  depressed  while  the  conference  was  still  sitting,
showed  such  a  warlike  spirit  on  the  critical  evening  of
May  30,  as  to  put  confidence  into  Garibaldi  and  fear  into
his  opponents.  The  last  shadow  of  doubt  was  removed
from  the  Dictator's  inmost  soul,  after  he  had  addressed
the  Palermitans  from  the  balcony  of  the  Pretorio.  When
he  told  them  how  the  NeapoHtan  General  had  asked  that

1  Mundy,  143,  147-157.

2  Canzio,  the  year  before  he  died,  said  to  the  writer,  '  We  had  scarcely
any  ammunition  left.  But  for  the  armistice  we  should  have  been
destroyed.'

3  Cf.  Mem.  360  to  Gueyzoni,  ii.  113.  Winnington-Ingram,  203.  Mundy
(p.  161)  supposed  that  he  asked  the  Marquis  d'Aste  for  ammunition  at  the
same  time  as  he  asked  the  American  Captain.  But  from  Mem.  360,  363,
and  Conv.  Canzio  (p.  314,  above),  it  is  clear  that  he  had  applied  at  another
time,  sending  one  of  his  men  out  secretly  to  the  Piedmontese  vessel.

THE ARMISTICE.
Neapolitan  soldier  and  patriots  in  parley. (From  the  Ventiseite  Maggio.)

FIGHTING  SPIRIT  IN  THE  TOWN  321

Palermo  should  send  a  humble  petition  to  King  Francis,
and  how  he  had  refused  it  in  their  name,  the  roar  of  joy
and  rage  that  went  up  from  the  fountain-square  was  so
appalling  that  Major  Bosco,  who  happened  to  be  present
on  business  of  the  armistice,  grew  pale  and  trembled,
being  even  more  affected  than  the  Garibaldini  by  the
spectacle  of  popular  rage  which  he  knew  to  be  directed
against  himself  and  his  comrades.^

From  that  moment,  about  five  in  the  afternoon  of
May  30,  until  noon  next  day,  when  the  armistice  was  to
come  to  an  end,  the  whole  population  worked  with  a
will  at  the  manufacture  of  ammunition  and  arms,  and  at
the  erection  of  barricades  to  surround  and  isolate  Von
Mechel  in  the  Fiera  Vecchia.  Under  cover  of  darkness,
a  Greek  vessel  which  had  entered  the  port  with  a  cargo
of  powder,  sold  a  certain  quantity  to  Garibaldi,  together
with  an  old  cannon.  That  night  the  city  was  brilliantly
illuminated. 3  Discouragement  proportionately  set  in  among
the  Royalists.  Desertions,  especially  by  non-commissioned
officers,  began  to  be  frequent.  During  the  armistice
Neapolitan  soldiers  were  sometimes  inveigled  into  con-
versation, taken  into  the  town  and  treated  to  wine,  with
the  result  that  they  lost  their  rifles  or  came  over  to  the
ranks  of  Italy .^

At  nine  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  May  30  a  council  of
war  was  held  at  the  Palace,  at  which  it  was  decided  to
attack  next  day  at  noon,  the  moment  the  truce  had  expired.
Exact  orders  were  sent  to  Von  Mechel  and  given  to  the
other  heads  of  columns,  detailing  the  routes  by  which
they  were  to  penetrate  through  Palermo  and  meet  in  the
centre.  But  after  the  council  of  war  had  broken  up,
Colonel  Buonopane,  who  had  been  in  the  heart  of  the  town

'  Mem.  362.  Campo,  128.  Brancaccio,  233,  234.  Paolucci,  Riso,
85,  86.  Abba  Not.  129,  130.  /.  L.  N.  June  16,  23,  pp.  578,  593.  Times,
June  9,  p.  9,  col.  3  ; June  13,  p.  12,  cols,  i,  2.

2  Mundy,  159-161.  Mem.  360,  362,  363.  Brancaccio,  234,  235.  Times,
June  9,  Eber's  letter  of  May  30,  and  Times,  June  13,  ditto  of  May  31.

^  Marra  Oss.  22.  Mundy,  163.  Times,  June  13,  p.  12,  cols.  2  and  4  ;
June  21,  p.  9,  col.  5.

322  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

treating  with  Garibaldi  about  the  transport  of  wounded,
gave  Lanza  so  alarming  an  account  of  the  perfection
of  the  barricades  and  the  spirit  of  the  populace,  that  the
alter  ego  changed  his  mind  once  more.  The  Dictator  was
asked  to  prolong  the  armistice  for  three  days,  and  when
he  consented,  at  eleven  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the
31st,  the  elaborate  preparations  for  the  attack  were  all
countermanded.  Under  the  new  armistice,  the  isolated
position  of  the  Mint,  with  the  very  large  sums  of  money
which  it  contained,  was  handed  over  to  Garibaldi.^

It  is  perhaps  from  this  moment  of  the  signing  of  the
second  armistice,  that  the  chances  may  be  said  to  have
turned  in  favour  of  the  revolution.  For  every  hour  that
the  truce  lasted  made  it  more  difficult  to  recommence  hos-
tilities. General  Letizia  and  Colonel  Buonopane  were  sent
to  consult  the  Court  and  Ministry  at  Naples,  where  Buono-
pane's  account  of  the  miUtary  strength  of  the  revolted  city
frightened  the  King  and  his  advisers,  as  it  had  frightened
Lanza.  There  were  also  political  and  moral  considerations.
Great  odium  would  attach  to  the  young  king,  if  he  personally
gave  orders  that  the  bombardment  of  his  subjects  should
be  renewed,  after  his  generals  had  suspended  hostiUties
for  four  days.  It  might  so  far  alienate  England  and  France
as  to  compromise  his  chances  of  preserving  the  throne
of  Sicily,  or  the  throne  of  Naples  if  Sicily  were  already
lost.  It  was  felt  that  if  the  generals  had  wanted  to  renew
the  fight,  they  should  have  taken  the  responsibility  on  their
own  shoulders,  and  the  application  to  the  authorities  at
home  seemed  to  imply  that  those  on  the  spot  knew  that  ^ '
the  game  was  lost.i

Capitulation was the most obvious way out of  the  -
immediate  difficulties  in  which  they  had involved them- 1;
selves,  and  the  want  of  moral strength  and  purpose  ini:
the  men of the Bourbon  regime  allowed  them  to  grasp
at  it  for  want  of  any  alternative  pohcy. And  so,  by  the .,

1  Crowizcfl,  141. Mar/a  Oss.  22-24.  De  Sii/o,  iii.  226,  227. The  garrison  '
of  the  Mint,  136  men,  had  almost  surrendered  on  May  29  :  Br.  Cons,  Papers,
'  Crovaca,  306-311. De  Sivo,  iii.  229. De  Cesare,  ii.  242,  243.

THE  CAPITULATION  323

consent  of  the  Royal  Government,  after  another  temporary
prolongation  of  the  armistice,  a  final  capitulation  was
signed  on  June  6.  The  Neapolitans  were  forthwith  to
abandon  the  Palace  and  all  other  positions  in  the  city  except
the  Castellamare.  They  were  to  march  out  with  the  honours
of  war,  and  to  take  up  temporary  quarters  at  the  Quattro
Venti  and  on  the  great  plain  behind  it  that  stretches  to
the  foot  of  Monte  Pellegrino.  Thence  they  were  as  rapidly
as  possible  to  be  shipped  for  Naples.  When  they  were  all
gone  the  Castellamare  was,  last  of  all,  to  be  handed  over
to  Garibaldi,  together  with  the  six  State  prisoners  of  noble
Palermitan  family  which  it  still  contained. ^

If  the  Neapolitan  generals  had  known  the  thoughts  that
were  passing  in  the  mind  of  Nino  Bixio  during  the  first  days
of  June,  they  might  never  have  signed  this  humiliating
treaty.  '  The  second  of  the  Thousand  '  was  afoot  again
since  May  30,  and  from  what  he  saw  of  the  discipline
of  the  forces  defending  the  town  he  lived  in  constant
terror  of  another  attack.  The  Sicilians  could  not  be  relied
on  to  perform  regular  and  irksome  mihtary  duty.  The
squadre  were  many  of  them  going  home  to  their  villages.
The  conscription  decreed  by  the  Dictator  was  proving  a
flat  impossibility.  Many  of  the  island  warriors  were  in
the  habit  of  carrying  off  for  personal  use  the  muskets  of
the  Thousand  and  the  rifles  captured  from  the  enemy.
On  the  morning  of  June  7,  the  day  fixed  for  20,000  Nea-
politans to  march  defeated  out  of  the  city,  there  were
only  390  muskets  among  the  remnant  of  the  Thousand.
Those  who  survived  of  that  gallant  body,  now  all  dressed  in
red  shirts  to  give  them  distinction  and  authority,  were  the
one  reliable  element  in  the  situation,  and  they  had  con-
sequently to  do  continuous  duty  at  the  outposts,  partly  in
order  to  preserve  the  truce,  as  the  maddened  Palermitans
were  liable  to  insult  and  shoot  at  the  men  who  had  mur-
dered so  many  of  their  women  and  children.  Garibaldi
put  his  trust  in  the  rage  felt  against  the  soldiery  who  had

1  Tiirr's  Div.  388,  doc.  2Q.

Y  2

324  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

inflicted  such  horrors  on  the  town,  and  believed  that  if  the
Neapohtans  attacked  again  the  incensed  populace  would
fight  with  a  furious  desire  for  vengeance.  But  the  slender
and  irregular  character  of  the  military  defences  were  such
that  even  the  General,  according  to  Bixio's  observation,
was  '  sometimes  confident,  but  sometimes  anxious.'  ^

In  these  days,  when  there  was  little  sanction  for  law
except  the  personal  ascendency  of  Garibaldi,  the  safety  of
life  and  property  was  extraordinary  in  a  city  into  which
the  criminal  population  had  recently  been  emptied  from
the  Vicaria.  Some  of  Maniscalco's  spies  were  hunted  down
and  slaughtered,  although  Garibaldi  managed  to  save
most  even  of  these.  No  one  else  had  anything  to  fear,  and
the  British  Consul  praised  both  Government  and  people,
writing  home  that  public  order  was  far  better  than  in  the
first  days  of  liberty  in  1848.2

The  terms  of  the  capitulation  were  executed  without  a
hitch.  On  June  7  more  than  20,000  regular  troops  in  two
long  columns  under  Lanza  and  Von  Mechel  respectively,
evacuated  the  Palace  and  Cathedral,  and  the  Fiera
Vecchia  ;  passing  round  the  outside  of  the  town  they
marched  to  their  new  camping-ground  under  Monte
Pellegrino.  Von  Mechel's  column  passed  from  the  Porta
Termini  by  way  of  the  Marina,  where,  in  front  of  the  barri-
cade at  the  Porta  Felice,  sat  Menotti  Garibaldi  on  a  black
charger,  with  a  dozen  red-shirted  comrades,  while  before
them  filed  along  the  esplanade  an  army  in  battle  array.
It  was  as  though  Goliath  in  his  armour  were  surrendering
to  David  with  his  sling.  The  British  Admiral  and  his
captains  who  witnessed  the  scene  from  their  ships  were
filled  with  a  sense  of  mingled  exultation  and  disgust.  A
similar  scene  was  enacted  at  the  Porta  Macqueda,  where
Lanza  and  his  column  filed  off  before  Tiirr  and  another
group  of  red-shirts. 3

1  Bixio,  201-207,  and  Bixio  MS.  Times,  Eberis  letters  from  Palermo,
early  June. /.  L.  N.  June  23,  p.  599. Mem.  364.

2  Br.  Cons.  Papers,  June  6  and  11. Conv.  Tedaldi. Abba  Not.  124.

3  Mi<M(iy,  173,  174.  Winnington-Ingra)n,  206.  Bixio,  205,206.  Times,
June  16,  p.  9,  col,  6.

A  NIGHT  ALARM  325

Of  the  loss  of  the  victors  in  the  three  days'  fighting
from  May  27  to  May  30  there  is  no  estimate  available,  but,
comiting  the  victims  of  the  bombardment,  it  must  have
run  into  man}^  hundreds.  The  Neapolitans  had  lost  about
a  thousand — 800  wounded  and  over  200  killed.^

Twelve  days  passed  before  the  whole  army  of  twenty  to
twenty- four  thousand  soldiers  could  be  embarked  for  Naples
in  the  limited  number  of  transports  available.  After  a  week,
9000  still  remained. 3  As  the  Neapolitans  grew  weaker.
Garibaldi's  strength  increased,  till  even  Bixio  began  to  sleep
at  nights,  instead  of  constantly  patrolling  among  the
sentinels.3  Soon  after  the  enemy's  evacuation  of  the  Palace,
a  consignment  of  arms  and  ammunition  had  arrived  from
Genoa  by  way  of  Marsala  ;  and  on  June  18,  the  day  before
the  last  batch  of  Neapolitans  sailed,  Medici  with  the
'  second  expedition  '  of  3500  well-armed  men  landed  in  the
Gulf  of  Castellamare,  twenty-five  miles  west  of  Palermo. *
During  the  latter  and  most  dangerous  part  of  their  voyage,
between  Sardinia  and  Sicily,  a  Piedmontese  war  vessel
scouted  in  front  of  them — so  far  had  Cavour  already
dared  to  advance  in  the  benevolence  of  his  neutrality
towards  Garibaldi.''

On  the  night  of  June  18-19,  when  the  Dictator
himself  had  gone  to  meet  the  newcomers,  Palermo  was
roused  from  its  slumbers  by the  sound  of  heavy firing

1  See  note,  p.  314,  above.

"  Mundy,  175.

3  Bixio  MS.

■•  This  Castellamare  and  its  gulf  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  fortress
called  Castellamare,  in  Palermo.

5  Peard  MS.  Journal,  June  17,  18,  i860  (see  Cornhill,  June  1908).
Bianchi's  Cavour,  98,  note.  Persano,  34.  The  history  and  organisation
of  these  later  expeditions  I  leave  for  another  volume.

As  early  as  May  31,  Cavour  had  sent  the  following  orders  In  cipher
to  the  Marquis  d'Aste  in  Palermo  harbour  :  '  Follow  up  the  overtures
of  the  Neapolitan  Coinmandant  Vacca.  Assure  him  In  the  name  ol
the  Government  that  the  Neapolitan  officers  who  embrace  the  National
cause  will  preserve  their  rank  and  have  a  brilliant  career  assured  them.
A  pronunciamento  by  the  Neapolitan  fleet  would  make  the  complete
triumph  of  our  cause  certain.' Chiala,  iii.  254,  255.

326  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

out  at  sea.  Had  the  Neapolitans  broken  faith  at  the  last
moment  ?  Were  they  returning  in  force  ?  Were  they
wajdaying  Garibaldi,  who  was  expected  to  come  back
by  boat  along  the  coast  ?  The  whole  population  rushed
into  the  streets  at  midnight  and  flew  to  arms.  In  the
morning  it  was  discovered  that  the  disturbing  sounds  had
come  from  the  British  sailors,  practising  gunnery  by
night — the  eccentric,  indefatigable  men,  with  no  thought
for  the  nerves  of  a  city  recently  bombarded.^

On  the  morning  of  June  19  the  Dictator  returned  by
land  to  the  capital. It  was  the  day  appointed  for  the
sailing  of  the  last  of  the  Neapolitan  army,  in  twenty-four
ships  collected  ready  for  them  at  the  quays  beyond  the
Quattro Venti. All Palermo went down to see their ,.
hated  foes  take  themselves  off  for  ever. At  the  momenst  i
of  their  departure,  the Castellamare,  left  till  now  in  the
enemy's  hand,  would  run  up  the  tricolour  flag,  and  the
hostages  imprisoned  there  would  be  released. Since  these
were none other  than Baron Riso and  the  five  young
nobles arrested  on  April  7,2  the  most popular  citizens  in  c,
Palermo  since  that  hour,  it  would  clearly  be  necessary  to  (
carry  them  in  triumph  up  the  Toledo.

Everyone,  therefore,  had  gone  down  to  the  harbour ;
an  unusual  silence  reigned  in  the  upper  part  of  the  city,  and
Garibaldi  for  awhile  was  left  in  peace  in  the  new  lodging
which  he  had  chosen  for  himself  in  the  Royal  Palace.  This
M^as  one  of  the  humblest  rooms  which  he  could  find  there,
the  so-called  Observatory  over  the  Porta  Nuova,  at  the
extreme  north  wing,  almost  detached  from  the  main
building.'^  On  one  side,  his  windows  looked  down  the
mile-long  Toledo  to  the  sea  ;  on  the  other,  up  the  road
to  Monreale  across  the  Conca  d'Oro. It  was  his  first  day

1  Peard  [Cornhill,  June  1908).  Durand  Brager,  58.  Conv.  Delia
Cerda. Morning  Post,  June  30,  p.  5,  col.  4.

2  See  p.  160,  above.

•''  Perhaps  not  without  a  touch  of  good-natured  humour,  he  lodged
the  elder  Dumas  in  the  State  apartments,  when  the  uovelift  came  to  join
his  friend  the  Dictator.

THE  LIBERATOR  327

in  these  new  quarters,  and  he  stood  gazing  at  the  city  and
plain  which  he  had  freed  from  servitude  and  won  for  Italy.
Above  Monreale  and  Parco  rose  the  grim  and  splendid
mountains,  where  he  and  his  Thousand  had  dodged  with
death  ;  while  from  the  sea,  up  the  length  of  the  Toledo
gay  with  flags  and  flowers,  was  heard  ever  nearer  and
nearer  the  joyful  roar  of  the  people,  as  they  came  bringing
the  released  prisoners  to  present  them  to  the  Liberator.
When  the  young  men,  with  their  parents  and  families,  at
length  came  into  his  presence  in  the  little  room  over  the
gateway,  tears  stood  in  his  eyes,  and  it  was  some  minutes
before  he  could  find  voice  to  answer  their  words  of
gratitude. 1

'  Peard  MS.  Joiirnal.  Mem.  365.  Times,  June  29,  p.  12,  col.  2,
Forbice,  June  20.  Giorn.  Off.  Sic,  June  20.  Morning  Post,  June  30,
p.  5,  col.  4.

EPILOGUE

The  story  of  Garibaldi  and  the  Tliousand  down  to  the
taking  of  Palermo  has  an  historical  and  artistic  unity.  In
a  future  volume  I  hope  to  carry  on  the  history  of  the
following  six  months,  which  resulted  in  the  making  of  Italy.
The  occupation  of  eastern  Sicily,  the  battle  of  Milazzo,  the
crossing  of  the  straits,  the  march  through  Calabria  and
the  Basihcata,  the  entry  into  Naples,  the  battle  of  the
Volturno,  the  meeting  with  Victor  Emmanuel,  and  the
return  to  the  farm  at  Caprera,  constitute  the  rich  remainder
of  the  Garibaldian  epic  of  i860.  If  it  is  no  less  extraordinary
than  the  capture  of  Palermo,  it  is  of  a  different  character.
The  larger  numbers  and  better  equipment  of  the  volunteers,
never  indeed  equal  to  those  of  the  enemy,  differentiate
the  story  from  the  wild  adventure  of  the  Thousand.  The
entry  of  Victor  Emmanuel  and  Cavour  into  the  arena  of
the  war,  the  release  of  Papal  Umbria  and  the  Marches  by
the  Piedmontese  regular  troops,  the  diplomatic  history  of
Europe  at  the  decisive  crisis  of  the  ItaUan  question  are
large  matters,  though  they  all  have  their  origin  on  the
heights  of  Calatafimi  and  the  barricades  of  Palermo.

APPENDICES

APPENDIX  A

CAPRERA

I. The  Scenery  of  the  Island

My  description  of  the  scenery  of  Caprera  is  based  upon
personal  observation.  I  have  not,  indeed,  examined  carefully
the  southern  portion  of  the  island  where  Garibaldi  did  not  hve  ;
it  is  not  so  mountainous  as  the  northern  part,  but  is  of  the  same
general  character.  I  brought  back  specimens  of  the  plants,
the  names  of  which  were  identified  for  me  by  the  kind  help  of
Miss  Mary  Swan  and  Mr.  A.  D.  Hall.  The  prickly-pear  cactus
[fico  d' India)  is  not  common  on  Caprera,  though  there  are  some
specimens  near  Garibaldi's  house.  It  is  much  more  common  on
the  island  of  Maddalena. The  cistiis  is  locally  called  mucchio.

Garibaldi's  poem  on  Caprera  is  worth  quoting,  because  it
is  the  best  record  we  have  of  his  inmost  feelings  towards  the
island.  Though  the  poem  sometimes  bears  the  date  December,
1876,  some  of  it  is  quoted  by  Vecchi  (p.  116)  as  early  as  1861.

'  SuUe  tue  clme  di  granito — io  sento
Di  libertade  I'aura — e  non  nel  fondo
Corruttor  delle  reggie,  o  mia  selvaggia
Solitaria  Caprera — I  tuoi  cespugli
Sono  il  mio  parco — e  I'imponente  masso
Mi  dk  stanza  sicura  ed  inadorna
Ma  non  infetta  da  servili — I  pochl
Abitatori  tuoi,  ruvidi  sono
Come  le  rocce  clie  ti  fan  corona,
E  come  quelle  altieri  e  disdegnosi
Di  piegar  11  ginocchio — II  .sol  concenlo
S'  ode  della  bufera  in  quest'  asilo
Ove  ni;  schia\-o  n^'  tiranno  alberga.
Orrido  (•  il  tuo  sentier— ma  sulla  via
Deir  insolente  cortigiano  il  cocchio
Non  mi  calpesta,  e  I'incontaminata
Fronte  del  fango  suo  vil  non  mi  spru/.za.
lo  rinfinito  qui  contcmplo — sccvro

330  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Di  ogiii  vil  meiizogna — e  quando  I'occhio
Gia  preceduto  dal  pensier — le  immense
Cerca  vie  dello  spazio — alle  latebre
Del  vasto  azzurro  che  circoiida  i  mondi,
All'  infiinita  intelligenza — un  senso
Di  gratitudin  volgo  . .  .  (illeggibile)
Perche  mi  fe'  dell'  immortal  scintilla
Che  m'  imparenta  coU'  eterno — il  dono.'

G.  Garibaldi.

The  fact  that  the  rock  crest  on  the  top  of  the  island  com-
manding the  view  eastward  (p.  37,  above)  was  a  favourite  walk —
or  rather  chmb — is  established  by  Vecchi,  pp.  19,  20  (who  also
mentions  the  eagle),  and  by  Melena,  1861,  pp.  233,  234.

II. The  House

The  first  part  of  the  house  was  already  inhabited  when
Madame  Schwartz  [Elpis  Melena)  first  visited  Garibaldi  in  the
autumn  of  1857,  see  Melena,  1861 ,  p.  229,  and  Melena,  pp.  3,  10.
There  was  then  only  one  storey,  and  that  was  so  still  in  i860  and
in  January  1861,  see  Maison,  p.  26,  Sacchi's  visit,  p.  14,  and
Vecchi,  p.  3.  But  by  November  1861,  the  second  part  of  the
house  had  been  built  with  a  complete  upper  storey ;  for  Mrs.
Schwabe's  gardener,  Mr.  Webster,  writing  to  her  from  the
General's  house  on  Caprera,  November  26,  1861  (Schwahe  MS.),
speaks  of  it  as  '  a  new  house,  just  about  finished,  papering  it  now ;
four  rooms  on  the  ground  floor  and  four  upstairs.'  This  is  borne
out  by  the  picture  at  the  beginning  of  Vecchi  of  about  this  date,
where  the  house  has  two  storeys,  and  by  a  pen-and-ink  sketch
drawn  for  me  from  recollection  by  General  Canzio.  General
Canzio's  account  of  the  matter  runs  as  follows  :

'  About  1861  Garibaldi  had  a  second  house  built,  contiguous
to  his  old  house.  This  second  house  had  two  storeys,  of  which
only  the  lower  now  exists.'  As  to  the  upper  storey,  '  Garibaldi
himself  had  it  pulled  down,  because  it  was  badly  built  and
threatened  to  fall.  This  upper  floor  was  pulled  down  in
1866-67.'

The  little  '  iron  '  house  presented  him  by  his  English  admirers
was  little  if  ever  used. L'Isola,  pp.  72-6.

Fruscianti  told  Vecchi  that  Garibaldi  \\'as  '  good  for  nothing  '
as  a  working  mason.  '  He  tried  to  build  when  we  began  the
house,  but  the  master  mason  was  obliged  to  undo  and  rebuild
his  work,  and  asked  him  to  confine  his  labour  to  bringing  the
stones.' — Vecchi,  p.  38.  But  Garibaldi  bui^t  the  walls  on  the
island  very  largely  himself.

APPENDICES  331

APPENDIX B

NUMBERS AT VARESE AND COMO

I. Varese

At  both  these  battles,  on  May  26  and  27,  Garibaldi  had
practically  his  whole  force  of  three  half  regiments  of  infantry,
consisting  of  six  so-called  'battalions,'  amounting  to  scarcely
more  than  3000  men  in  all.  See  Carrano,  p.  236,  Mem,  p.  281,
Cadolini,  p.  10,  Hohenlohe,  i.  pp.  167,  206.

General  Urban  on  the  morning  of  the  26th  had  the  brigade
Rupprecht,  all  of  which  could  and  should  have  been  brought  to
bear  on  Varese.  The  brigade  on  the  26th  consisted  of  only  four
battalions  of  infantry,  with  their  complement  of  artillery  and
cavalry,  see  Krieg,  i.  p.  370.  An  Austrian  battalion  in  this  war
was  actually  about  800  men,  see  Camp  d'lt.  E.  M.  Pr.,  p.  11.
So  Urban  commanded  on  the  morning  of  the  26th  some  3200
infantry,  with  artillery  and  cavalry.  But  owing  to  the  futile
operations  described  in  Camp  de  Nap.,  p.  102,  he  only  brought
to  the  attack  of  Varese  at  Belforte  and  Biumo  Inferiore  two
and  a  half  battalions,  viz.  2000  and  odd  infantry.  The  remain-
ing 1000  were  wandering  somewhere  in  the  mountains  to  the
north  of  Malnate  and  Varese,  a  cause  of  anxiety  to  Garibaldi
both  during  the  defence  of  Varese,  and  during  the  action  later
in  the  morning  at  Malnate  and  S.  Salvatore.  Italian  writers
estimate  Urban's  force  at  a  higher  figure,  but  I  adhere  to  the
principle  of  accepting  the  official  statements  of  each  side  as  to
its  own  numbers.

II. Como [San Fermo)

On  the  following  day  the  whole  of  the  brigades  Rupprecht
and  Augustin  were  engaged  in  the  vain  attempt  to  defend  Como
against  the  Cacciatori.  This  is  stated  in  the  Austrian  official
account,  Krieg,  i.  pp.  387-8.  That  account  (pp.  370,  and  387-8)
makes  the  infantry  of  the  brigade  Rupprecht  consist  of  foui
battalions  (one  Szluiner-Grenzer  and  three  Kellner)  ;  and  the
infantry  of  the  brigade  Augustin  of  four  battalions  (one  Titlor-
Grenzer  and  three  Prince  of  Prussia's  Own).  I  accept  this  lowei
estimate,  because  it  is  Austrian,  instead  of  the  estimate  given
in  the  French  official  account  {Camp,  de  Nap,  pp.  104,  105),
which  assigns  five  battalions  of  infantry  to  each  of the  two

352  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

brigades.  If  Urban  had  really  only  eight  battalions  of  infantry
at  Como,  he  had  about  6400  infantry,  besides  cavalry  and
artillery,  against  3000  Cacciatori.

APPENDIX C

THE DEATH-BED OF FRANCESCO RISO

(See  p.  161,  above)

I  am  sorry  to  have  to  record  unpleasant  facts  about  Maniscalco
and  Francesco  Riso,  both  of  whom,  especially  Riso,  were  men
of  rare  courage  and  self-devotion.  But  I  do  not  think  that
anyone  who  studies  the  authorities  in  the  list  below  can  come
to  any  conclusion  but  that  Maniscalco  hid  from  Riso  the  fact  of
his  father's  execution  in  order  to  extract  information  ;  and  that
Riso,  in  the  weakness  of  his  last  days,  to  save  his  father,  gave
up  the  names  of  some  of  those  who  had  plotted  the  rising  with
him  but  not  actually  taken  part  in  it.  Riso  was  highly  incensed
against  those  who  had,  as  he  conceived,  failed  him  on  April  4
after  promising  to  help.  He  had  twice,  before  the  event,
threatened  vengeance  on  them  in  case  they  so  failed  him,
see  p.  155,  above,  and  Campo,  Riso,  p.  12,  Paolucci,  Riso,  p.  22,

The  authorities  are  : —

1.  De  Cesare,  ii.  pp.  179-188.

2.  Pietraganzili,  i.  pp.  254-274  (pp.  261-2,  Marchesano's
statement).

3.  Paolucci,  Riso,  pp.  41-46  (p.  46,  Chiarenza's  statement).

4.  Riassunto  del  Processo  pe'  fatti  del  4  Aprile,  in  Signer
Lodi's  collection  in  the  Archivio  Storia  P atria,  Palermo.

5.  Campo,  Riso,  p.  21  (confirms  Chiarenza's  statement  in
Paolucci,  Riso,  p.  46,  while  denying  that  Riso  made  any
confession).

Signor  Paolucci,  whose  labours  on  the  Sicilian  Revolution
are  so  invaluable  to  the  student,  defends  Riso  on  pp.  44,  45  of
his  work.

Unless  we  are  ready  to  think  that  the  Neapolitan  police  or
Pisani  forged  the  documents  of  the  confession,  the  facts  must
be  as  I  have  told  them  above.  The  motives  of  Riso,  and  the
degree  to  which  his  conduct  is  censurable,  are,  of  course,  open
to  various  interpretations,  and  no  one  is  inclined  to  judge  hardly
the  man  who  gave  his  life  to  make  Italy.

APPENDICES  333

APPENDIX  D

GARIBALDI  AT  CAPRERA  IN  FEBRUARY  1860

Section  I
(See  p.  167, above)

The  dates  of  his  letters  show  that  he  was  still  at  Fino  on
January  27,  at  Genoa  on  January  30,  and  at  Caprera  on  February
20.  Probably  he  left  Genoa  for  Caprera  nearer  January  30  than
February  20.

Section II
(See  p.  168,  above)

The  letter  of  Garibaldi  to  Bertani,  given  in  Beriani,  ii.  p.  10,
under  the  date  February  15,  is  really  of  the  date  February  20,
as  can  be  seen  in  the  MS.  in  the  Archivio  Bertani,  Milan.  There
is  also  on  the  back  of  the  letter  a  postscript  not  quoted  in  the
book  at  all. The  full  letter  and  postscript  run  as  follows  : —

20  febbraio.

Ho  veduto  Mignona  e  faro  con  lui  quanto  posso.  Faro
lasciare  a  voi  tremila  franchi,  come  porro  a  disposizione  vostra
i  fucili  che  si  potranno  tenere  in  deposit©  a  Geneva.

P.S.  (on  the  back).

Mignona  vi  ragguagliera  d'alcune  mie  idee  circa  a  Vapore,
armi  e  denaro,  e  per  le  stesse  cose  vorrei  vi  intendeste  con  Finzi.
Se  possibile  lasciare  a  disposizione  di  Cavour  il  meno  che  si  possa.

On  the  same  day  he  wrote  a  letter  (printed  in  Ciampoli,
pp.  128-9)  to  Finzi  and  Besana,  the  Directors  of  his  MilHon
Rifles  Fund,  containing  the  following  words  : —

'  La  vostra  risposta  al  Ministero  dell'  Interno  va  perfetta-
mente.  lo  sono  d'avviso  d'usare  la  maggiore  deferenza  ai
desideri  di  Cavour.  Ma,  siccome  accanto  a  lui  si  trovano  uomini
disposti  a  contrariarci,  ci  vorra  pazienza  e  coraggio  ed  accortezza
nel  lasciarci  metter  dentro  meno  possibile.  .  .  .  lo  sono
d'avviso  ci  sia  un  nostro  deposito  a  Genova,  incaricandone  il
dott.  Agostino  Bertani,  a  cui  ne  fo  parola  in  qucsta  stessa  data.
Di  piu  lascio  in  deposito  i  3000  franchi  venuti  da  Napoli  a
detto  dottore.'

334  GARIB-\LDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

From  these  two  letters  of  February  20,  and  the  statements
made  in  Beriani,  ii.  pp.  9,  10,  and  Crispi  [Letter a),  p.  322,  it  is
clear  that

(i)  Garibaldi  was  prepared  to  supply  arms  and  money  from
the  Million  Rifles  Fund  to  an  insurrection  stirred  up  in  Naples
or  Sicily  by  subjects  of  the  Bourbon,  through  Mignona's  agency  ;
if  such  an  insurrection  could  be  started,  he  was  prepared  to  come
himself  to  aid  it,  according  to  his  promise  given  to  Bertani  on
January  24  {Cidmpoli,  p.  127),  and  presumably  repeated  to
Mignona.  The  '  steamer '  mentioned  in  the  letter  to  Bertani
ma}'  have  been  intended  either  to  enable  ^lignona  to  take  the
arms  to  the  South  at  once  to  initiate  the  revolt,  or  else  to  cany
Garibaldi  himself  there  after  the  revolt  had  begun.

(2)  He  was  anxious  lest  Cavour,  or  one  of  Cavour's  under-
lings, should  seize  the  arms  of  his  Million  Rifles  Fund,  if  they
learnt  that  they  were  to  be  used  for  any  such  purpose.  This  is
in  fact  exactl}'  what  aftenvards  occurred  when  D'AzegHo  seques-
trated them  at  MHan  on  April  16.  But  apart  from  that  very
just  anxiety,  which  made  him  wish  in  vain  for  an  armoury  at
Genoa  under  Bertani's  supervision,  he  was  anxious  '  to  show
the  greatest  deference  to  the  wishes  of  Cavour.'

Section III
(See  pp.  168,  169,  above)

It  is  not  true,  though  Bertani  said  it  in  Ire  Pol.,  p.  50,  that
Garibaldi,  '  almost  forgotten  at  Caprera,'  was  urged  to  action  by
'  Pilo  alone.'  Bertani  is  here  unjust  to  himself  and  to  Mignona.
Crispi  writes  with  truth  in  his  Letter  a  [Crispi,  p.  322),  '  Garibaldi
since  February  had  promised  us  to  carry  to  Sicily  the  powerful
help  of  his  sword.  Repeating  this  promise  to  Pilo  in  a  letter  of
March  15,  he  soys,  Sec'

APPENDIX E

LAURENCE OLIPHAXT'S STORY

I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  Laurence  Oliphant's  story,  which  is

consistent  with  everything  else  that  we  know.  An  equally
detailed  stor\',  if  invented  or  elaborated  bj'  a  man  who  knew  as
little  as  he  (id  about  these  Italian  intrigues,  must  have  clashed
somewhere  with  other  facts  now  known  to  historical  research.

APPENDICES  335

Plis  stor}^  is  pro  ianto  confirmed  by  Crispi  and  De  la  Rive.
In  Crispi's  diary  for  x\pril  12,  i860,  we  read  :

'  To  the  Palazzo  Carignano  [where  the  Parliament  was
sitting]  to  find  Bertani.  As  there  is  a  rumour  that  Garibaldi
intends  to  go  to  Nice  to  make  an  anti-French  propaganda  there,
I  beg  Bertani  to  retain  him  at  Turin.  Bertani  agrees,  saying,
"  Henceforth  we  must  think  of  nothing  but  Sicily."  Garibaldi
makes  his  interpellation  in  the  Chamber  about  the  cession  of
Nice.' {Crispi,  Diario,  p.  ig.)

In  De  la  Rive's  Cavour,  pp.  410,  411,  we  read  :

'  Vers  le  milieu  du  mois  d'Avril,  Garibaldi  quitta  Turin,  se
rendant  k  Nice  afin  d'y  encourager  la  resistance  a  1' annexion
projetee.  .  .  .  Pour  aller  de  Turin  a  Nice,  il  faut  passer  par
Genes.  En  descendant  de  voiture,  a  Genes,  Garibaldi  fixa  un
rendez-vous  pour  le  soir,  a  un  ami  avec  lequel  il  comptait  pour-
suivre  son  voyage.  Le  soir  arriva,  mais  non  Garibaldi,  qui  fit
savoir  simplement  k  son  compagnon  de  route  qu'il  se  trouvait
retenu  a  Genes.'

Oliphant's  story  fixes  the  date  of  Garibaldi's  return  to  Genoa
at  April  13.  For  Oliphant  says  (pp.  172-3)  that  it  was  not  on
the  12th,  the  day  of  the  interpellation  itself,  but  '  a  day  or  two
afterwards.'  iVnd  it  was  certainly  not  more  than  one  day
afterwards,  because  we  know  that  Garibaldi  was  in  Genoa  on  the
13th,  by  the  date  of  his  letter  to  the  Municipio  of  Brescia
{Ciampoli,  p.  133).  Therefore  he  must  have  travelled  to
Genoa  on  the  13th.

APPENDIX F

BERTANl'S TWO STATEMENTS

In  the  great  debate  in  the  Italian  Chamber  on  June  19,  1863,
reported  in  Cam.  Dep.,  we  read  two  important  statements  by
Bertani,  the  first  certainly  true  in  essential  points,  the  second,  I
think,  false.

I.  The  first  statement  is  :

'  I  appeal  to  the  memory  of  the  hon.  Bixio,  and  will  ask  him
if  he  well  remembers,  twenty  or  more  days  before  May  5,  a
meeting  here  in  Turin,  in  a  little  room  where  General  Garibaldi
was  living,  present  General  Medici,  myself  and  the  hon.  Finzi.
The  latter,  together  with  another  gentleman  charged  with  the
subscription  of  the  MilHon  Rifles  Fund  and  the  deposit  of  the  arms
collected  by  it,  took  note  on  this  occasion  of  the  materials  which

336  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

he  was  required  to  supply  for  the  expedition.  Then  the  con-
ception was  even  more  audacious  than  later,  because  the  expedi-
tion was  to  be  composed  of  only  200  men.'

This  statement  relates  to  a  scene  at  which  Bertani  himself
took  part,  and  was  not  contradicted  by  Bixio  in  his  long  speech
that  followed.  It  is  further  substantiated  by  Signer  Cav.  A.
Luzio,  in  the  Giorn.  d'lt,  May  5,  1907,  where  he  fixed  the  date
of  the  meeting  as  April  12  (not  April  19  as  Bertani  wrongly  says
in  Ire  Pol.,  p.  51 — Garibaldi  not  being  at  Turin  on  April  19).

Signor  Luzio  also  prints,  in  the  same  article,  the  letter  in
which  Finzi,  at  that  very  meeting  of  April  12,  i860,  orders  those
in  charge  of  the  Million  Rifles  Fund  armoury  to  send  to  Genoa
the  requirements  for  the  expedition,  viz.  :

1.  200  Enfield  rifles.

2.  About  50  cavalry  revolvers.

3.  200  cartridge  boxes  and  200  bread-bags.

4.  100  caps  [cappdloUi)  for  the  Enfields.

Signor  Luzio  also  prints  another  letter  of  Finzi's,  which  shows
that  this  order  was  next  day  suspended  by  Finzi  himself  (presum-
ably after  Garibaldi's  departure  for  Genoa)  because  Finzi  judged
the  latest  news  from  Sicily  to  be  so  bad  that  Garibaldi  probably
would  not  go.  But  on  April  16  Garibaldi  was  still  eager  to  go
(see  his  letter  in  Bertani.  ii,  pp.  32,  33),  and  therefore  Finzi
asked  for  the  arms  at  Milan  on  that  day.

II.  The  second  statement  made  by  Bertani  in  the  session  of
June  19,  1863,  is  as  follows  :

'  Next  I  ask  the  hon.  General  Sirtori  to  tell  the  Chamber
what  answer  he  got  from  Count  Cavour  when  he  went  to  see
him  two  evenings  before  the  5th  of  May  1  on  his  return  from  the
festivities  in  Tuscany.  .  .  .  Count  Cavour  .  .  .  said,  "  I  don't
know  what  to  say  or  what  to  do,"  and,  in  the  sly  way  he  had,
ended,  rubbing  his  hands,  "  I  think  they  will  be  taken  "  '  [io
credo  che  li  prenderanno).

Cavour,  as  the  Chamber  well  knew,  used  to  rub  his  hands
when  he  was  pleased,  and  Bertani  implied  that  he  was  pleased
at  the  prospect  of  Garibaldi  being  taken  by  the  Bourbon  troops.
But  Sirtori  was  in  the  House,  and  shortly  afterwards  rose  to
answer  Bertani's  appeal  to  his  memory.  So  far  from  bearing
out  Bertani's  suggestion,  he  told  a  very  exact  story  of  an  entirely

'  Really  on  April  23,  see  note  p.  187,  above.  Indeed  the  words  'on
his  return  from  the  festivities  in  Tuscany '  would  alone  fix  the  date  as
much  earlier  than  May  3.

APPENDICES  337

opposite  character,  giving  Cavour's  words  as  I  have  quoted
them  in  the  text,  p.  i88,  above,  of  which  the  gist  was  that  Cavonr
had  expressed  strong  sympathy  and  had  promised  aid,  provided
they  went  to  Sicily  and  not  to  the  Marches.

After  suffering  this  fiat  contradiction  from  the  only  witness,
it  was  surely  improper  on  Bertani's  part  to  reprint  the  story  six
years  later  in  his  Ire  Politiche,  p.  6i,  whence  it  has  got  into  some
histories,  and  into  some  minds.  Bertani  states  in  the  Ire  Politiche
(i86g)  that  Sirtori  told  him  the  story  in  i860  on  his  return
from  the  interview  itself.  But  he  does  not  refer  to  or  explain  the
dementi  which  Sirtori  had  inflicted  on  him  in  the  Chamber  in  1863.
Sirtori  may  or  may  not  have  said  to  Bertani  '  Cavour  says  he
thinks  they  may  be  captured,'  but  he  could  not  possibly  have
wished  to  imply  that  Cavour  hoped  they  would  be  captured.
For  apart  from  what  we  know  of  Cavour's  feeling  for  Garibaldi,
such  a  wish  is  wholly  inconsistent  with  Cavour's  words  as
reported  by  Sirtori  himself.  If  Bertani  thought  what  he  never
ventured  to  say  outright,  that  Sirtori  lied  in  the  Chamber  in
1863,  even  then  how  would  he  explain  the  following  letter  of
Sirtori  to  Count  Giulini,  written  on  May  3,  i860  ? —

'  We  are  starting  on  an  enterprise  resolved  on  against  my
advice.  See  Cavour  and  do  not  let  him  abandon  us.  .  .  .  Some
days  ago  I  saw  Cavour  at  Genoa  ;  I  touched  on  the  insufficiency  of
our  means  ;  his  words  give  me  reason  to  hope  for  his  help  [mi  lascia
sperare  aiuto).' Guerzoni,  ii.  30,  note. Bianchi,  viii.  290.

Bertani  was  a  great  patriot  and  served  Italy  well  in  i860  in
spite  of  some  mistakes,  but  he  did  a  grievous  wrong  in  repeating
this  story,  after  it  had  been  contradicted  by  the  only  man  on
whose  evidence  he  pretended  to  rely  for  his  information — the
only  man  besides  Cavour  who  could  possibly  have  given  evidence
on  the  subject. No  modern  historian  has  a  right  to  repeat  it.

APPENDIX G

THE  DECISIVE  INTERVIEW  AT  VILLA  SPINOLA, APRIL  30

Slightly  varying  accounts  are  given  as  to  the  identity  of  the
person  or  persons  who  finally  persuaded  Garibaldi  at  the  Villa
Spinola  on  the  morning  of  April  30.  Crispi's  Diary  unfortunately
does  not  cover  this  week,  and  his  statement  in  Mazzini,  xi.
p.  Ixxvi.,  does  not  refer  to  April  30.  But  Bandi,  pp.  29-30,  says  it
was  Bixio  and  Crispi. In  La  Masa  {Sic),  pp.  vii-viii.,  it  is  claimed

338  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

that  it  was  La  Masa  who  saw  Garibaldi,  but  it  is  allowed  that
Bixio  was  in  the  house  and  partner  in  the  affair.  Jack  La
Bolina,  p.  121  (j-oung  ^'ecchi) ,  who  was  in  the  house  at  the  time,
says  it  was  Bixio,  who  had  brought  with  him  the  Sicilian  Orlando
(no  mention  is  made  of  either  La  Masa  or  of  Crispi).  Thus  all
aUow  a  share  to  Bixio,  and  his  letter  to  Fauche  of  that  morning
{Fauche  (P.),  pp-  32-33)  bears  this  out.  It  can  be  said  with
certainty  that  Bixio  \\-ith  one  or  more  of  these  three  Sicihans
(Crispi,  La  Masa,  or  Orlando) ,  persuaded  Garibaldi  by  shov^ing  him
the  documents  which  Crispi  had  taken  some  share  in  providing.

APPENDIX H

CAVOUR  AND  THE  KING  AT  BOLOGNA  ON  MAY  2

The  story  told  by  D'Haussonville  in  the  Revue  des  deux
Mondes,  September  15,  1862,  p.  420  ['  Si  personne  n'ose,'  dit-il
(Cavour)  au  roi,  '  j'irai  moi-meme  lui  mettre  la  main  sur  le  collet ']
is  accepted  by  Chiala  but  rejected  by  Treitschke  {Treitschke,
p.  182).  I  have  given  reasons  (p.  197,  above)  why  I  regard  it  as
needing  confirmation  before  it  can  be  regarded  as  evidence.  It
is  not  first  hand,  and  its  alleged  source  is  not  discoverable.

It  is  perhaps  worth  while  to  quote  what  two  of  Cavour's  most
intimate  friends  have  to  say  on  the  subject  of  his  decision  to  let
Garibaldi  go.  CasteUi,  who  had  been  consulted  on  the  subject
by  Cavour  at  Florence  in  April,  but  does  not  pretend  to  have
been  present  at  the  inter\dew  at  Bologna,  says  :

'  Garibaldi  himself  hesitated  ;  it  was  still  more  natural  that
Farini  and  Cavour  should  hesitate.  They  therefore  adopted
the  policy  of  laissez-faire,  of  standing  stiU  and  watching,  because
neither  one  nor  the  other  had  in  Garibaldi  the  confidence  which
they  knew  he  denied  to  them.  The  man  who  pronounced  himself
was  the  King,  who  alwaj's  ended  in  coming  to  an  understanding
vsith  Garibaldi,  just  as  the  General  always  felt  fascinated  by  the
frank  words  of  the  King.' {CasteUi,  p.  88.)

De  la  Rive  wTites  thus  of  his  friend's  action  at  this  period :

'  It  is  evident  that  Cavour  was  not  ignorant  of  and  did  not
prevent  the  expedition  of  Garibaldi.  Was  he  not  able  or  not
^^•iUing  to  prevent  it  ?  I  incline  to  think  that  his  ^nshes  com-
pleted what  his  fear  of  his  own  inability  to  stop  it  had  begun,
and  that  Cavour  felt  a  repugnance  to  the  idea  of  a  conflict  with

II

APPENDICES

339

Garibaldi,  behind  whom  he  saw  the  feeling  of  the  nation,  whilst
he  gladly  took  into  the  scope  of  his  political  combinations  the
eventual  faU  of  the  Neapolitan  Monarchy.' {De  la  Rive,  p.  411.)

Cavour's  words,  letters,  and  actions  in  April-May,  i860,
contain  many  contradictions.  This  is  perplexing,  but  not  sur-
prising, because  he  often  employed  deceit  as  a  part  of  his  method
in  times  of  grave  international  emergency ;  and  also  because
it  may  well  be  that  he,  Uke  Garibaldi,  changed  his  mind  once
or  more  during  this  very  difficult  and  doubtful  crisis.  For  an
instance  of  these  contradictions  :  immediately  after  his  interview
with  Sirtori  on  April  23,  and  while  he  is  permitting  La  Farina  to
supply  the  firearms  for  the  expedition,  we  find  him  writing  to
Farini  on  April  24 :

'  In  Genoa  I  found  spirits  much  disturbed  by  the  conduct  of
Garibaldi,  round  whom  the  followers  of  Mazzini  are  rallying  and
beginning  to  raise  their  heads.  The  unrest  is  increased  by  the
attitude  of  the  more  advanced  party  (not  Mazzinian),  which
openly  displays  the  banner  of  opposition  to  the  government,
taking  for  its  basis  of  operation  the  questions  of  Nice  and  of
Sicily.'

Nay,  on  the  evening  of  April  23,  the  very  day  on  which  he
saw  Sirtori  and  encouraged  the  idea  of  a  Garibaldian  expedition
to  Sicily,  he  wrote  :

'  On  veut  pousser  le  gouvemement  k  secourir  la  Sicile,  et  on
prepare  des  expeditions  d'armes  et  de  munitions.  Je  soupgonne
le  Roi  de  favoriser  imprudemment  ces  projets.  J'ai  donne
I'ordre  de  surveiller  et  d'empecher,  s'il  est  possible,  ces  tentatives
desesperees.' [Chiala's  Dina.,  p.  299.)

On  the  evening  of  the  22nd,  the  day  before  he  saw  Sirtori,  but
long  after  he  had  commissioned  La  Farina  to  hand  on  the  firearms
for  an  expedition  to  Sicily,  he  wrote  to  a  friend  in  Florence  :

'  Garibaldi  is  stiU  here  :  he  may  go  either  to  Sicily  or  to
Caprera.  He  says  he  is  waiting  for  the  King's  orders.  The
presence  of  Trecchi  in  his  Majesty's  suite  gives  weight  to  the
assertions  of  Garibaldi.  .  .  .  Certainly  this  is  not  the  way  to
hasten  the  departure  of  the  French  from  Rome.  Say  so  to  the
King.' {Chiala,  iv.  p.  cxli.)

A  statesman  so  much  in  the  habit  of  saying  one  thing  to  one
man  and  another  to  another,  covers  up  his  traces  from  the  his-
torian who  would  track  out  his  real  motives.

z  2

340  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

APPENDIX J

FAUCHE AND RUBATTINO

The  documents  in  Fauche  and  Fauche  {P.)  are  in  themselves
conclusive.  But  we  have  besides  the  testimony  of  Garibaldi  in
Mem.,  p.  336,  and  that  of  Castiglia,  v^^ho  commanded  the  Pie-
monte.  Castiglia  tells  us  [La  Masa,  Sic,  p.  xi.)  that  Bixio  even
on  the  morning  of  May  5  did  not  divulge  the  names  of  the  two
steamers  to  the  men  who  were  to  seize  them  that  night,  '  because
an  agreement  had  been  made  with  regard  to  them  between
General  Garibaldi  and  the  agent  Fauche  alone,  and  not  with  any
of  the  partners  in  the  Rubattino  Company  to  whom  they  be-
longed, and  because  rather  these  men,  grown  suspicious,  were
keeping  their  eyes  on  the  steamers  which  belonged  to  them  in  the
port. '  This  extreme  secrecy  up  to  the  last  moment  explains  why
so  little  was  known  about  the  matter  by  many  who  took  part  in  the
expedition,  and  why  Guerzoni  and  other  contemporary  historians
mistook  the  action  of  Fauche  for  the  action  of  his  employer
Rubattino.  General  Canzio,  who  from  his  inner  knowledge  of
Genoa  port  from  i860  onwards  is  as  good  a  witness  as  could  be
found,  told  me  that  Rubattino  knew  nothing  about  the  taking
of  the  steamers,  and  that  it  was  all  Fauche's  doing.

APPENDIX K

THE FINANCES  OF  THE EXPEDITION OF  THE THOUSAND

I.  The  expedition  sailed  with  90,000  lire  (francs)  on  board,  of
which  70,000  were  spent  on  campaign  up  to  the  time  of  the  cap-
ture of  Palermo.  Of  these  90,000  lire,  all  had  been  supplied  by
the  Million  Rifles  Fund  at  Milan  :  30,000  having  been  sent  by
Finzi  to  Bertani  enclosed  in  his  letter  of  May  5,  i860  (printed  in
Ltizio,  Giorn.  d'lt.,  May  5,  1907)  ;  the  remaining  60,000  being
brought  to  Genoa  by  the  last  train  on  May  5  by  Migliavacca,  see
p.  203,  above.  Of  these  60,000  lire,  36,000  were  in  paper,  and
had  to  be  changed  for  1800  marenghi  in  Genoa  itself.  [Niivolari,
p.  122.  Bertani,  ii.  pp.  51-53-  ^^&  Pol.,  pp.  53.  54-  Luzio,
Mazz.,  pp.  149,  150.  Finali  504-505,  not  quite  accurate  in
detail.)  Of  these  sums,  the  MiUion  Rifles  Fund  had  received
over  37,000  lire  from  the  Municipahty  and  other  contributors
of  Pavia,  sent  at  the  end  of  April. See  Pavesi.

APPENDICES  341

2 Other  sums  had  previously  been  spent  in  preparing  the
expedition  for  departure. These  sums  included  :

(a)  8000  /^>/given  by  La  Farina  on  May  4.  whether  as
coming  from  the  National  Society  or  from  Cavour  him-
self I  am  not  certain.  Jack  la  Bolina,  pp.  123,  124.
Mem.,  p.  336. Chiala,  iv.  p.  clxiii.  _ ^ , .  .

ih)  ^0000  lire  given  by  the  Million  Rifles  Fund  (makmg
^  ^  \To  000  in  all  from  that  source  if  we  add  the  90.000
taken  on  board  the  ships). Bertam,  Reso.,  p.  23  ot
accounts,  note  quoted  below,  and  Beriam,  11.  p.  42-
(c)  A  separate  large  subscription  from  Brescia  (see  below
here),  and  '  altre  migliaia  di  lire  '  received  by  Garibaldi
from  his  friends  in  America. Ire  Pol,  p.  53-
Here  is  the  list  in  Bertani's  Resoconto  (accounts,  p.  23.  note
referring  to  p.  7)  of  the  sums  that  passed  through  Bert  am  s  hands
prevLuf  to  the  departure  of  Garibaldi-viz.  the  total  cost  of
the  first  expedition  :—

lire.
From  the  Million  Rifles  Fund -  50,000 ^^^^^  ^^^^^^  ^  .^^  ^^^^  ^^^^^  ^^

I  the  ships,  but  all  the  other
Ditto  by  Migliavacca's  hands  -  60,000  f  ^^^^g  mentioned  in  this  Ust
Ditto  by  post - - - -  30,ooo  ( ^^^  ^^^^  spent  on the  pre-

) parations  prior  to  May  6.
From  General  Garibaldi - -  36,592-72
From  the  Cassa  Prov.  of  Brescia  -  98,000
From  the  Municipio  of  Brescia -  10,000
From  Parma  by  Borelli's  hands -  23,277.34
FromN.M.- - - " - 30oo
By  payments  of  General  Garibaldi

to  Messrs.  Profumo,  10,000,  and

Gazzolo.  1000  conto  corvente -  11,000

lire,  321,870.06  cent.

With  regard  to  the  story  told  in  Venosta,  pp.  585-587.  it  ob-
viously refers  to  the  financing  of  the  second,  not  of  the  first,
expedftion;  Signor  Luzio  remarked  this  to  me.  Garavigha^
^vriting  after  many  years,  was  confused  m  memory.  There  is  no
mention  of  a  sum  of  300,000  lire  from  Cavour  or  from  any  other
source  to  be  found  in  Bertani's  Resoconto  or  any  of  the  authorities
on  the  finance  of  the  expedition  that  started  on  May  5-6.  The
sum  in  question  was  presumably  paid  to  Medici  or  Cosenz  to  fit
out  their  later  expeditions  and  never  passed  through  the  hands
of  Bertani  or  of  Garibaldi

342  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

APPENDIX L

WHY THE FRENCH EVACUATION WAS STOPPED

Thouvenel,  i.  pp.  149-154.  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  12,  p.  8.
Ollivier,  iv.  428,  440,  450. La  Gorce,  iii.  pp.  372-384.

It  is  clear  to  me  from  these  authorities  that  the  reason  why
the  French  troops  were  not  withdrawn  from  Rome  was  the
general  fact  that  Garibaldi  had  gone  to  Sicily  to  begin  a  revolu-
tion in  the  South,  and  not  the  particular  fact  that  he  sent
Zambianchi  to  invade  the  Papal  States.  As  Earl  Cowley  wrote
from  Paris  to  Lord  John  Russell  on  May  18 :  '  The  news  of  the
success  which  has  as  yet  attended  the  expedition  of  Garibaldi  to
Sicily,  and  the  uncertainty  to  what  further  events  and  comphca-
tions  it  may  give  rise  have  caused  the  order  [to  evacuate  Rome]
to  be  suspended.'  Br.  Pari.  Papers,  12,  p.  8.  I  think  my  friend
Mr.  Bolton  King  was  wrong  in  saying  {King,  ii.  p.  142)  that  it
was  Zambianchi 's  expedition  which  stopped  the  withdrawal  of
the  French  from  Rome.  At  least  I  have  not  been  able  to  find
any  evidence  supporting  the  theory.  Of  course,  even  if  the
French  had  been  withdrawn,  they  would  no  doubt  have  been
sent  back  if  required  to  defend  Rome,  as  they  were  sent  back
in  1867  alter  their  withdrawal  under  the  September  Convention
of  1864,  so  that  neither  Garibaldi's  nor  Zambianchi's  expedition
can  in  any  sense  be  said  to  have  prevented  the  Italians  from
occupying  Rome.

APPENDIX  M

CALATAFIMI
I

As  to  the  number  of  the  Neapolitans  actually  engaged  in  the
battle  on  the  Pianto  dei  Romani,  we  know  from  Landi  {Naples
MS.  Landi)  that  fourteen  out  of  twenty  companies  under  his
command  took  part  in  the  battle.  '  Vennero  ad  impiegarsi  in
comhaitimento  14  compagnie,'  &c.  He  is  most  expHcit  on  the
point  that  he  sent  supports  to  Sforza  from  the  town,  in  fact
that  he  sent  all  he  had  except  six  companies.  This  is  borne
out  by  the  Neapolitan  major  and  sergeant  present  in  the  battle,
whose  letters  are  printed  in  Sanipieri,  29-30,  proving  conclusively
that  the  Carabinieri  as  well  as  the  8th  Cacciatori  took  part  in  the

APPENDICES  343

fight.  The  strength  of  a  Neapolitan  company  (nominally  i6o
men,  see  De  Sivo,  iii.  121)  was  a  variable  quantity,  sometimes
as  low  as  one  hundred  or  ninety  (see  Sampieri,  27).  But
as  we  know  from  Landi  that  fourteen  out  of  his  total  force
of  twenty  companies  were  engaged,  and  as  that  total  force  of
twenty  companies  is  reckoned  by  Neapolitan  writers  as  3000
or  more  {De  Sivo,  iii.  197,  says  3000 ;  De  Cesare,  ii.  210,  says
4000),  we  may  conclude  that  2000  actually  engaged  is  not  an
over-estimate.

In  my  account  of  the  battle  of  Calatafimi  above,  many
references  are  given  in  the  footnotes  with  regard  to  particular
points  that  seemed  to  require  the  citation  of  authority.  But  I
may  add  that  the  account  of  the  battle  as  a  whole  is  the  outcome
of  two  visits  to  the  scene  and  the  collation  of  the  following  authori-
ties sub  loc.  :  Naples  MS.  Landi,  Baratieri,  Bandi,  Capuzzi,
Abba,  Abba  Not.,  Sampieri,  Mem.,  I  Mille,  Belloni,  Zetisi,  Zasio,
Floritta,  Cihmpoli,  Bruzzesi  dopo  25  anni,  Orsini,  Oliveri,  Riistow,
Siriori,  Bologna  MS.  Bixio,  Campo,  [Guerzoni's)  Bixie,  Turr's
Div.,  Crispi  Diario,  Giusta,  Menghini,  especially  Canzio's  Diary,
423-425,  Conv.  Canzio,  Elia,  De  Cesare,  De  Sivo,  Cairoli,  Mario,
La  Masa  (Sic),  Elenco,  Calvino  [Guardione,  ii.  434-436),  Mazzini,
xi.  pp.  Ixxxii-iii,  note  (Bensaia's  narrative).

II

The  following  curious  statement  occurs  in  Landi's  Apologia  in

the  Naples  MS.  Landi  : —

'  And  here  I  must  add  that  on  the  morning  of  the  15th,  when
I  should  have  moved  against  Salemi  and  actually  remained  in
Calatafimi  on  account  of  the  news  [of  the  enemy's  advance]
which  reached  me  at  daybreak,  I  received  a  dispatch  from  the
Commander-in-chief,  informing  me  that  he  had  called  a  Council
of  Generals  who  had  decided  to  make  all  the  flying  columns  in
the  provinces  return  to  Palermo,  and  ordered  me  to  retreat  at
once.  That  was  the  first  cause  of  my  retreat  [after  the  Vjattle]  •
the  second  was,  as  I  have  explained,  lack  of  means  of  further
defence.'

Abba,  who  has  written  comments  in  the  margin  of  the  Naples
MS.  Landi,  pertinently  remarks  :  '  Why  did  he  not  obey  ?  '  and
'  The  retreat  made  after  the  battle  had  no  longer  the  same
character  as  it  would  have  had  if  made  in  the  morning.'

344  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

APPENDIX  N

THE NIGHT  MARCH  TO PARCO, MAY 21-22

The  route  taken  is  accurately  described  in  Cuniherii,  34-35
and  Paohicci,  Riso,  63.  Signer  Paolucci  spent  much  time  ascer-
taining the  exact  route  from  peasants  and  others  on  the  spot
who  had  been  there  at  the  time.  I  find  these  conclusions
confirmed  by  the  evidence  of  Bartoli  Vitali,  a  Sicilian  of  the
Thousand  attached  to  the  artillery,  and  Antonio  Armaforte  of
the  squadre  of  Parco,  both  of  whom  were  on  the  march,  and  who
explained  to  me  the  exact  route,  agreeing  with  each  other  and
with  Cuniherti  and  Paolucci.  I  afterwards  followed  the  route
and  found  it  indeed  the  obvious  and  only  way  to  Parco  from
the  heights  of  Misero-cannone  and  Renda.  It  is  an  error  of
Costaiini,  125-127,  to  say  that  they  marched  to  Parco  from
Lenzitti  by  way  of  Fiumelato,  for  the  mass  of  the  Thousand
never  went  near  Lenzitti,  and  even  the  skirmishers  had  been
driven  back  from  it  to  Misero-cannone  and  Renda  on  the  21st,
several  hours  before  the  march  took  place.  Although  Signor
Costatini  is  invaluable  on  matters  touching  his  native  town  of
Plana  dei  Greci,  he  is  not  so  sure  a  guide  on  events  that
happened  further  afield.

The  deserted  toll-bar,  near  to  which  they  left  the  high-road,
still  stands  on  the  west  of  the  road  close  under  Monte  Cannavera  ;
it  is  called  either  Catena  or  Barriera  di  San  Giuseppe  {Conv.
Armaforte,  Cnniherti,  34).  It  is  thus  described  in  Abba's  Not.
88:—

'  Having  gone  a  little  way  along  the  military  road,  we  came  to  a  building,
solitary,  dark,  half-ruined,  a  house  of  thieves.  There  they  made  us  leave
the  road,  as  fast  as  we  came  up,  and  we  filed  on  to  a  narrow  and  stony
track.'

Antonio  Armaforte  tells  me  that  they  then  passed  near  the  ex-
feudo  farm  of  Strasatto,  near  to  which  indeed  the  track  runs.

For  other  authorities  on  the  march  see  De  Sivo,  iii.  209,
Capuzzi,  53,  54,  Abba  Not.  87-92,  Mem.  354,  Bologna  MS
Bixio,  Cremona,  28.

APPENDICES  345

APPENDIX  O

FROM riANA DEI GRECI TO MARINEO

The  evidence  that  Garibaldi  marched  along  the  Corleone  road
as  far  as  the  stream,  and  turned  off  by  the  mill  of  Ciaferia  is  the
local  tradition  of  Plana  dei  Greci,  as  set  out  in  Costatini,  136.  I
have  talked  to  Signor  Costatini  about  it  in  Plana  dei  Greci,  and
I  have  also  discussed  the  question  with  the  leading  citizens  of
Plana  in  their  circolo,  where  a  very  intelligent  and  just  pride
is  taken  in  the  history  of  the  revolution  of  i860  and  the  highly
creditable  part  played  in  it  by  the  '  Albanians '  of  Plana.
Opinion  in  the  circolo,  on  the  evening  when  I  had  the  pleasure
of  being  its  guest,  was  unanimous  that  Garibaldi  went  out  by
the  main  road  and  turned  off  it  close  to  the  mill  of  Ciaferia
and  not  before,  in  order  to  deceive  the  Bourbon  spies  who  were
watching  his  departure  from  the  village.  In  S.  Cristina  Gela
the  inhabitants  told  me  that  Garibaldi  did  not  pass  through
their  hamlet,  but  skirted  its  south  side.  This  tallies  with  the
idea  that  he  came  thither  across  country  from  Ciaferia,  not  by
the  road  from  Plana  village.

The  fact  that  Garibaldi  thus  took  elaborate  pains  to  deceive
Von  Mechel  as  to  his  march  on  Marineo,  is  to  my  mind  a  strong
argument  that  he  already  had  in  view  the  idea  of  joining  La  Masa
at  Gibilrossa  and  falling  on  Palermo  while  Von  Mechel  marched  on
to  Corleone.  He  himself  says  that  this  was  his  object  in  making
the  turn  at  Plana  (see  Mem.  355,  356),  and  I  see  no  reason  to
disbelieve  him.  It  is  indeed  absurd  to  suppose  that  he  had,
at  the  time  of  his  arrival  at  Parco,  planned  the  move  on  Palermo
via  Piana,  Marineo  and  Gibilrossa  (see  Guerzoni,  ii.  go)  ,  and
possibly  he  had  no  such  idea  even  at  the  moment  of  entering
Piana  dei  Greci.  But  it  seems  most  natural  to  think  that  at
Piana  on  the  evening  of  the  24th  he  conceived  this  plan  of
snatching  victory  from  defeat,  though  Signor  Paolucci  [Riso,
69-73)  guesses  that  he  only  made  up  his  mind  to  go  to  Gibilrossa
after  he  had  reached  Marineo.  But  if  so,  why  did  he  go  to
Marineo,  an  exceedingly  difficult  march,  and  worse  than  objectless
if  he  had  wanted  to  rejoin  his  guns  at  Corleone  ?

Except  his  own  statement  in  Mem.  355,  356,  there  is  no
evidence  on  the  subject  of  the  growth  of  the  idea  in  Garibaldi's
mind.  x\t  all  important  crises  he  was  specially  secretive,  and
pulling  his  cap  over  his  eyes  indicated  to  his  staff  that  he  wished
to  be  left  alone. It  was  a  saying  of  his  that  '  if  his  own  shirt

346  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

knew  what  he  was  going  to  do  next  he  would  burn  it.'  {Conv.
Canzio.  Conv.  Ricciotii.  National  Review,  May,  1899,  p.  494.)
I  may  here  remark  that  a  weakness  of  the  good  General  Tiirr
in  later  life  was  to  believe  and  assert  {Tiiry's  Risposta  and  TUrr's
Div.,  passim)  that  Garibaldi  was  acting  on  his  advice  in  taking
all  the  most  important  and  original  steps  of  this  campaign,  such
as  the  march  to  Parco,  the  march  to  Marineo,  &c.  These  claims
were  most  indignantly  rejected  by  other  Garibaldini,  and  are
inconsistent  with  what  we  know  of  the  military  talent  of  Tiirr
and  Garibaldi  respectively.  I  am  glad  to  see  they  are  not
advanced  in  the  life  of  Tiirr  by  Pecorini  Manzoni,  1902.  The
brave  Hungarian's  services  to  Italy  will  be  gratefully  remembered
without  these  unnecessary  exaggerations.

APPENDIX P

THE ROUTE FROM GIBILROSSA TO PALERMO

Garibaldi's  route  was,  as  I  have  stated  in  the  text,  the
direct  route  by  the  foot-track  from  Gibilrossa  convent  and
pass  down  into  the  plain  at  its  nearest  point,  and  thence
through  or  near  Ciaculli  and  La  Favara  (Castello  di  mare
dolce).  The  route  was  not,  as  is  incorrectly  stated  in  so  good
an  authority  as  Ctmiberii,  46,  47,  by  Belmonte-Mezzagno
and  S.  Maria  di  Gesu.  The  idea  that  Garibaldi  descended  by
way  of  Belmonte-Mezzagno,  which  will  be  found  in  many  non-
Sicilian  authorities,  seems  to  have  arisen  owing  to  the  fact
that  Eber  in  his  articles  in  the  Times,  which  were  translated
into  Italian  and  well  known  in  Italy,  incorrectly  called  the
pass  of  Gibilrossa  by  the  wrong  name — viz.  the  '  Pass  of
Mezzagna.'  Yet  anyone  who  knows  the  localities  reading
Eber's  account  in  the  Times  will  see  at  once  that  the  pass
which  he  describes  is  that  of  Gibilrossa,  though,  as  a  new-
comer to  the  country,  he  gave  it  the  wrong  name  (e.g.  '  the
summit  of  the  pass  crowned  with  a  Church '  clearly  refers  to
the  convent-church  of  Gibilrossa  :  there  is  no  church  crowning
the  pass  of  Mezzagno;  and  there  is  no  mention  in  Eber's
detailed  account  of  passing  through  the  village  of  Mezzagno) .

Eber's  fellow-countryman,  Tiirr,  not  unnaturally  followed
him  in  making  the  same  mistake  of  nomenclature,  and  his
biographer  even  speaks  {Tiirr's  Div.  49)  of  their  '  descending '
to Mezzagno, which is absurd, as Mezzagno is  not  in  the

APPENDICES  347

plain  at  all.  Many  other  Italians  of  the  mainland  (as  Elia,
Cuniberti,  &c.)  have  followed  in  the  path  of  this  error.  But,
so  far  as  I  am  aware,  not  a  single  Sicilian  has  ever  said  that
Garibaldi  came  down  by  Mezzagno.  At  any  rate  the  consensus
of  Sicilian  opinion  is  overwhelming,  and  as  far  as  I  know  it  is
unanimous  on  the  point.

1.  The  following  Sicilian  gentlemen,  who  took  part  in  the
march,  have  expressly  told  me  that  they  came  down  on  the
Villabate  side  of  Monte  Grifone,  through  the  region  of  Ciaculli,
and  not  by  Mezzagno :  Signer  Gaetano  Principale  (in  La  Masa's
column) ;  Signor  Antonio  Armaforte  of  the  squadre  of  Parco  ;
Signor  Giuseppe  Campo,  one  of  the  best-known  Sicilians  of  the
Thousand  ;  Cav.  Agostino  Rotolo  {Padre  Rotolo  in  i860),  who
led  the  van  of  La  Masa's  squadre  that  night.

2.  The  Bulletin  issued  by  head  quarters  on  May  29  [V.  M.
4,  La  Masa  {Sic),  Iv.),  said:

'  La  notte  del  26  al  27  corrente  il  nucleo  delle  forze  italiane
e  le  squadre  dei  Comuni  della  Sicilian  girando  le  maremme  del
piano  di  Stoppa  faceano  un  alto  nel  convento  di  Gihilrossa,
donde  poscia  guadagnando  rapidi  i  sentieri  dai  Ciaculli  alia
Favara,  giungevano  al  bivio  della  Scaffa  ai  cui  molini  portavasi
I'avanzata  dei  regi.'

3.  Local  tradition  has  named  the  Ciaculli  route  (among  the
olives)  the  Discesa  dei  mille.

4.  Local  tradition  at  Mezzagno  absolutely  denies  that
Garibaldi  ever  passed  through  their  village  or  descended  by  the
pass  beyond  it.  Indeed  they  actually  point  you  back  to
Gihilrossa  as  the  place  of  the  descent.  (I  have  tested  local
tradition  myself,  and  Professor  Pitr6,  the  great  Sicilian
antiquary  and  collector  of  local  traditions,  tells  me  that  I  have
tested  it  rightly,  and  that  he  also  knows  local  tradition  to  be
unanimous  against  the  Mezzagno  route.)

5.  Among  other  printed  Sicilian  authorities  that  take  this
view  are  Campo,  117 ;  Paolucci,  Riso,  78  (who  speaks  of
the  route  by  Acqua  dei  Corsari,  meaning,  as  he  tells  me,  the
district  of  Villabate,  Ciaculli,  not  the  precise  place  called  Acqua
dei  Corsari  in  the  maps,  which  is  actually  on  the  sea) ;  Marzo-
Ferro,  399,  and  Signor  Enrico  Albanese  in  V.  M.  26.

It  does  not  appear  worth  while,  in  addition  to  all  this
evidence  of  Sicilians,  to  cite  those  Italian  historians,  such  as
Guerzoni,  who,  not  falling  into  Eber's  and  Tiirr's  error,  speak
of  CiacuUi  and  not  of  Mezzagno.

348  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

BIBLIOGRAPHY

LIST OF PRINTED MATTER AND MSS.
CONSULTED BY THE AUTHOR

Abbreviations  in  the  notes  explained.

[The  mark  *  means  that  the  book  or  document  so  marked  contains
matter  important  solely  for  events  unconnected  with  the  Sicilian  expedi-
tion, such  as  Garibaldi's  Life  at  Caprera,  Alpine  Campaign  of  1859,  or  the
History  of  Italy,  1 849-1 859.]

N.B. — The  Bibliography  in  this  volume  is  meant  to  refer  only  to  events
ending  with  the  fall  of  Palermo  at  the  end  of  May,  i860.

I. PRINTED MATTER

Abba  =  Khha.  (G.  C). La  Storia  dei  Mille,  1904.

(Artistically  the  finest  and  most  poetical  narrative  of  the  expedition

down  to  the  capture  of  Palermo,  based  on  the  reminiscences  of  the

author (see  his  Noterelle),  compared  later  in  life  with  other  more

recently  published  narratives.)
Abba's  Bixio  =  Ahha  (G.  C.). La  Vita  di  Nino  Bixio.
Abba's  '  Cose  '=Abba  (G.  C). Cose  Garibaldine,  1907.

{Articles  on  Cayitoni,  Leardi,  Siccoli,  Giorgio  Manin,  Montanari,  and

I  Trentini  dei  Mille.)
Abba's  AT'o^.  =:Abba  (G.  C.). Da  Quarto  al VoUurno,  Noterelle  d'uno  dei

Mille,  5th  ed.

(The  note-book  of  one  of  the  Thousand.)
*  Aberdeen  =  The  Earl  of  Aberdeen,  by  the  Hon.  Sir  Arthur  Gordon  (Lord

Stanmore),  Queen's  Prime  Ministers  Series,  1893.
A  damoli  =  Ada.mo\i  (Giulio)  Da  San  Martino  a  Mentana,  1892.

(Valuable  narrative  of  personal  experiences,  and  descriptive  por-
traits of  his  companions  in  arms  ;  I  have  heard  it  praised  by  other

survivors.)
Album  Garibaldi  — Album, Storico.  Artisiico.  Garibaldi  nelle due  Sicilie,

scritta da  B.  G.  con  dlsegnl  dal  vero,  le  barricate  di  Palermo,  &c.

Milano,  i860. (Interesting  pictures  of  street  scenes  in  Palermo.)
Amari  =  Am.a,Ti  (Michele). Carteggio  di,  by  A.  d'Ancona. 1896  and  1907.

3  vols.
A  mart  Mus.  =  Storia  dei  Musvlmani  di  Sicilia. Michele  Amari. 1854  ed.
Arese  =  'Boni3.dim (R.). Vita di  Francesco Arese. 1894. (Roux e  C,

Rome.)

BIBLIOGRAPHY

349

"Argyll  =  ATgyU,  Duke  of. Passages  from  the  Past. Hutchinson. 1907.

2  vols.
Arrivabene  =  KxiWaherxQ  (Carlo). Italy  under  Victor  Emmamiel. 1862.
A rtom  —  Attova. (Ernesto). Cavour  e  la questione Napoletana. N.  A.

Nov.  I,  1 901.
A. S. Sic.  =  Archivio Storico Siciliano. Palermo, 1899-1904. Vid.

Paolucci  and  Romano-Catania.
* AthencBum  =  A.th.endSiMvn.  Newspaper.

(April  27, 1861,  contains  a  translated  quotation  of  Herzen's  story  of

his  visit  to  Garibaldi  in  1854  from  Rodenberg,  q.v.)
Bandi  =  'Ba.ndi  (Giuseppe). /  Mille. 1906  ed.

(The  most  detailed  and  realistic  account  of  the  expedition  from  the

Inside. The  author  was  on  the  staff  and  closely  attached  to  the

person of Garibaldi. For some corrections about Marsala, see

Bruzzesi  and  Girolamo.)
Baratieri='Ba,rdi.ti&c\  (O.). Calatafimi. In  N.  A.,  1884. June i. (Vol.

XLV.)

(By  one  who  took  part,  among  the  artillery. Best  technical  mili-
tary account  of  the  battle,  but  for  criticism  as  to  important  facts

about  the  numbers,  &c.,  see  Sampieri.)
Becchio  =  'Becchio  (C). Un  punto  oscuro  della  spedizione  dei  mille. Pine-

rolo. 1893.

(Statement  as  to  alleged  boarding  of  the  two  steamers  by  port-
guards  of  Genoa  on night  of  May  5,  i860,  and  consequent delay.

But  both  Canzio  and  Elia  tell  me  no  such  incident  occurred.)
Be'doZ/z^re  =  Bedolliere (de  la). Naples  et  Paler >ne  ou  I'ltalie  en i860.

Paris, i860,

(Well  documented  but  second-hand.)
Be/Zowi  =  Belloni  (Ernesto). Scritti  Inediti. Treviso. 1866.

(One  of  the  Thousand. Letters  on  Marsala,  Calatafimi,  Palermo,

written  from  Palermo,  June  24.)
*Bentivegna  =  S-piT{done  (Franco). Storia  della  rivolta  del  1856  in  Sicilia,

organizzata  del  Barone  Francesco  Bentivegna. Roma. 1899.
(Story  told  by  one  of  the  survivors.)
Bersezio's  V.  E,  =  Bersezio  (Vittorio). II  regno  di  Vitt.  Em. 8  vols. 1878-

1893.

(Careful,  but  nothing  very  new.)
Bertani  — Mario  (J.  W.). Agostino  Bertani  e  i  suoi  tempi. 1888.

(The  best  book  written  by  the  authoress. Especially  important  for

Bertani's  correspondence  with  Garibaldi  and  other  chief  actors  In  i860.)

*Bertani's  Cacc.  =  Bertani  (Agostino). I  Cacc.  delle  Alpi  nel  1S59. In  the

Politecnico,  Milan,  i860.
Bertani,  Comp.  =  Le  spedizioni  di  volontari  per  Garibaldi,  cifre  e  documenti
complem.entari  al  resoconio  Bertani. Geneva. 1861.

(Written  to  prove,  as  against  Mazzini  and  Bertani,  that  the  volun-
teers were  of  all  parties  and  not  merely  the  friends  of  Mazzini  or  of
Bertani.)
Bertani's  reso.  — Bertani  (A.). Resoconto  di. Geneva, i860.

(Report of administration and accounts of the Cassa Centrale,
May-December i  Suo )

350  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

B ianchi  =  'Bianchi  (Nicomede)  Sioria  Documeniata  della  diplomazia  Europea
in  Italia,  1814-1861.

(A  most  important  source  of  information.)
Bianchi's  C av ottr  =  'Bmnchi  (Nicomede). //  Conte  Camillo  Cavour, Docu-
menii  ediii  ed  inediti. Torino. 1863.

(Important, especially for documents from the Neapolitan
Foreign  Office,  1859-1860.)
Biundi  =  'Bmndi  (G.). Di  Giuseppe  La  Farina  e  del  Risorg.  It. 1893.

Palermo. 2  vols.
Bmo  =  Guerzoni  (G.). La  Vita  di  Nino  Bixio. 1875.
Bixio,  Sclavo  =  Col.  Sclavo, Commemorazione  :  ai  mani  illustri  di  Nino
ed  Alessandro  Bixio. (Fratelli  Pozzo. Torino.) 1907.
(Letters  of  Bixio,  1 859-1 860.)
Bizzoni  =  'B\zzom  (Achille). Garibaldi  nella  sua  epopea, 3  vols.

(Beautifully  illustrated. Partisan  Garlbaldian.)
Blind  =  Blind  (Karl). Westminster  Review,  January  1904.

(For  republican  party  and  Garibaldi  in  spring  of  i860.)
Boggio's Guerra  =  Boggio (P. C). Guerra dell' Indipendenza Italiana,
1859-60. Torino. 3  vols.

(Useful  collection  of  common  documents.)
Borghese  =  Borghese  (F.  E.  G,). /  65  giorni  della  riv.  di  Palermo. Palermo.
June  i860.

(Contemporary  and  local,  and  very  fairly  accurate.)
Battalia  =  'Bottal\a. (Paul), Histoire de la  rivohUion  de i860  en  Sidle.
Paris. 1862. 2  vols.
(Clerical. Second-hand.)
Bowrgeojs  =  Bourgeois (E.) and Clermont  (E.). Rome  et  Napoleon  III.

1907.
i?raw6i7/a  =  BrambUla  (Giuseppe). Ricordi,  1848-1870. Como. 1884.

(About  the  patriotic  actions  of  the  men  of  Como.)
Brancaccio  =^BTanca.ccio  (di  F.,  di  Carpino). Tre  mesi  nella  Vicaria  di
Palermo  nel  i860. Le  Barricate. Milazzo, 2nd  ed.,  1901.

(A  narrative  of  personal  experiences.  Excellent  on  the  part  taken
by  the  more  energetic  members  of  the  Sicilian  aristocracy  in  the  events
of  1859  and  i860.  A  most  fascinating  book,  and  very  important.)
Br.  Pari.  Papers  =  Government  Papers  (Blue-books)  to  be  laid  before  the
Houses  of  Parliament.  Those  concerning  Italy,  1 856-1 860,  I  tabulate
as  follows,  for  purposes  of  abbreviation  in  my  notes.
Br.  Parl.  Papers.

1.  *  Correspondence  with  Sardinia,  1856.

2.  *Correspondence  relating  to  the  affairs  of  Naples,  1857.

3.  *Correspondence  respecting  the  '  Cagliarl,'  1858.

4.  *Correspondence  respecting  the  affairs  of  Italy,  1859.

5.  *Further  correspondence  respecting  the  affairs  of  Italy,  1859.

6.  *Correspondence  respecting  the  afiairs  of  Italy,  i860  (refers  to  July-

December  1859).

7.  *  Correspondence  relating,  &c.,  i860. Pt.  II. (refers  to  January-

February  i860.)

8.  *Correspondence  relating, &c. i860. Pt.  III.

9.  *Correspondence  relating, &c. iS&o. Pt.  IV,

BIBLIOGRAPHY  351

10.  *Correspondence  relating,  &c. i860. Pt.  V.

11.  *Correspondence  relating  to  affairs  of  Italy,  Savoy,  and  Switzer-

land, i860. Pt.  VI.

12.  Further  correspondence  relating  to  affairs  of  Italy. 1861. Pt.

VII.  (refers  to  i860,  May-December).

13.  Further correspondence, &c., 1861. Pt.  VIII. (refers to June

i860  to  March  i85i).
{Re  Adm.  Mundy  at  Palermo.)

14.  Further  correspondence,  &c.,  1861. Pt.  IX. (refers  to  January-

March  1 861).

15.  *Correspondence  respecting  the  affairs  of  Naples,  i85o.
(Correspondence of Mr. Elliot and Lord J. Russell, June

1859-March  i860.)

16.  Despatches  relating  to  departure  of  expedition  from  Genoa,  i860.
(Almost  identical  with  No.  12,  pp.  3,  4.)

17.  Correspondence  respecting  landing  of  Garibaldi,  i860.

18.  Further  correspondence  respecting  landing  of  Garibaldi,  i860,

19.  Papers  relating  to  affairs  of  Sicily,  i860.

20.  Correspondence  respecting  political  refugees  on  board  H.M.  Ships  of

War,  i860.
BronzeUi=^'Bevto\mi  (F.). T  Fratelli  Bronzetti.

(Part of Bertolini's Leiture popolari di storia del Risorgimento.
Milano. 1895.)
Bruzzesi  =  'Br:\izzesi (G.). Una parola sulle molte siorie Ganbaldine.
Lettera  a  G.  Bandi. Milano. 1882.

(Important  criticism  of  some  of  Bandi's  statements  about  Marsala  ;
first-hand  evidence.)
Bruzzesi's  dopo  25  artm  =  Bruzzesi  (G.). Dopo  25  anni. Arona. 1885.
(First-hand evidence about Salemi and Calatafimi ;  and about
Marsala,  for  which  also  see  Bruzzesi,  at  more  length.)
Bu^etto  =  'B>\\'S,etto  {G\ro\a.Tixo) . II  Generale  Nino  Bixio. Fano. 1876.
BM^/a  =  Butta  (Giuseppe). Un  viaggio  da  Boccadifalco  a  Gaeta. Napoli.
1882. 2nd  ed.

(Most  of  this  book,  for  the  period  up  to  the  fall  of  Palermo,  is  tatien
without  acknowledgment  from  De  Sivo,  q.v.  It  is  utterly  untrust-
worthy, and  crowded  with  the  most  obvious  errors.  The  personal
experiences  of  the  author  are  the  only  part  of  the  smallest  value.  It
has  not  the  same  merit  as  the  other  reactionary  histories  from  which
it  was  stolen  without  acknowledgment.)
Cadolini  =  Cai.do\im  (Giovanni),  i.  *I  Cacciatori  delle  Alpi.  N.  A.,  July  i,
1907.

(First-hand  evidence.)

2.  Garibaldi  e  I' arte  della  guerra. N.  A.,  May  i  and  16,  1902.
*Cagnoni  =  Cagnom  (di  Achille). Descrizione  di  Caprera. 1875.

(Describes  it  as  it  was  in  1863-4.)

Cairoli (i?osi)  =  Rosi (M.). I Cairoli. 1908. [Bib.  di  Storia  Contemp.,

No.  I.) Contains  Benedetto's  and  Enrico's  letters  from  the  front  to

their  mother.

Calvino  =  A. most important memoir of the expedition, by Salvatore

Calvino,  one  of  the  best  SiciUan  patriots,  on the  Staff  an  i clos-^

352  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

about  Garibaldi's  person. First-hand  evidence  by  a  man  of  intellect
and  judgment  who,  being  a  Sicilian  but  intimately  associated  with  the
Northerners,  is  above  the  provincial  prejudices  of  parties  among  the
patriots. Printed  in  Guardione  {q.v.),  vol.  ii.  419-445,  to  which  the
page  references  sub  Calvino  refer.
Cam.  Dep.  =  Atti  del  Parlamento  Nazionale,  Camera  dei  Depulati. Torino.
(Debate  of  June  19,  1863,  declarations  of  Eertani,  La  Farina,  Bixio
and  Sirtori,  is  one  of  most  important  authorities  on  relation  of  Cavour
to  the  expedition. See  also  debates  of  December  9,  10,  1863,  on
conduct  of  Sicilians  in  i860.)
*Camp.  de  Nap.  =  Campagne  de  I'Empereur  Napoleon  III  en  Italie. 1862.
*Camp.  d'lt.  {E.  M.  Pr.)  =  Campagne  d' Italie  en  1859,  ridigSa  par  la  division
historique  de  I'etat  Major  de  Prusse  :  traduit  de  I'Allemand. Berlin.
1862. (Said  to  be  by  Moltke.)
Campo  =  Campo  (Marietta). Vita  poUtica  della  famiglia  Campo. Palermo.
1884.

(Giuseppe  and  Achille  Campo  were  both  of  the  Thousand. This
book,  together  with  the  three  following  books,  give  the  family  account
of  the  expedition  and  of  the  Sicilian  events  leading  up  to  it.)
Campo,  Letter  a  =  C3im-po  (Marietta). Lettera  ai  compilatori  del  27  Maggie,
1S60. Palermo. 1885.

(Criticisms  of  Ventisette  Maggio,  q.v.)
Campo,  i?tso  =  Campo  (Marietta). Francesco  Riso. Palermo. 1886.

(Important. Represents  what  the  Campo  family  knew  of  their
• friend  Riso's  action  in  i860.)
Campo,  Risp.  —  Risposta  di  Marietta  Campo  agli  opuscoli  del  Doit.  Onofrio
di  Benedetto. Palermo. 1886.

(For  correspondence  between  Genoa  and  Sicily  in  March  and  April,
and  fighting  in  Palermo,  May  29,  i860).
CantU  =  Cantu  (Cesare) . Della  indipendenza  italiana  :  cronistoria. Torino.

Unione  tip.  ed.  1872-77. 3  vols.  (vol.  iii.).
Canzio's  Diary  =  The  diary  printed  in  Menghini,  419-432.
Cappelletti's V.  E.  =  Cappelletti  (Licurgo). Storia  di  Vitt.  Em. 3  vols.

1892-3-

(Fairly trustworthy, but  slight. The  life  of  Victor Emmanuel
remains  to  be  written.)
Capuzzi -Cz.^uzzi  (G.). La  Sped,  di  Garibaldi. Ferrara. 1861.

(Important  memoirs  by  one  of  the  Thousand. Preface,  9  June  1S60,
says  these  memorie  were  written  in  mezzo  alle  vicende  della  campagna.)
*Carrano  =  Ca,XT3ino  (Francesco) Cacciatori  delle  Alpi. i860.

(Best  authority  on  the  Alpine  campaign  of  1859. Indispensable.)
Casife/Zi^Castelli  (M.  A.). Ricordi. II  Conte  de  Cavour. Editi  da  Chiala.

(Castelli  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Cavour.)
CastigUa  =  Memorie relative al marino Castiglia. Quoted in La Masa
{Sic),  q.v.

(Most  important  for  the  voyage. Castiglia  commanded  the  Piemonie,
under  Garibaldi,  from  Genoa  to  Marsala.)
*Castromediano --Castroraediano (Duca Sigismondo). Memorie Lecce.

1885.
Cattaneo  =  Ma.no  (Alberto  e  Jessie). Carlo  Cattaneo. 1884,

BIBLIOGRAPHY  353

Cava = Cava  (Tonrmaso,  Capitano  deto  =tato  ii:ag.giore  deC'  esercit.-:  ceile
doe  Sicflie  . Difesa  narionale  SapcUtaHa. XapoiL i5c3.

(Important  anaiyis  of  mf^taa-cg;  of  'Ses.^lzzssz  ser^erali  Verr
good  oa  taking  of  Palem-.  Teiii3  t'  'r^  -:c  3^"5r=  -:t  — -"--  -  -  -Jie
few  valid  excnses. Ur :  ::  1;  i  i_  ! :  :i .:  ; 1  i  t  i: ^ i-

firrn. A fiist-rate  aut^;*:: >; : ti  ~_i_  :ii~:^ r  :r  l^  r.^: ij  ^
it  in  defsice  of  Marra.  e  ;  r  .  _
*C«i<ii7>' =  rA«  Century  TUis.::  :..  -  ll-z:^.^i.  1^=r^  Vtr^i: .'-"t  :;:7.
(Article  cm  Garibaldi  in  the  United  State- : >I  ti_— ^  I rtrJi
CAam&frs  =  QiaiQbeFS Xt-Jr:". G^r':-  -■ rr  -  :  — :^

(Not  valoalile  icr  ;::: ir^^  :i; — ^-" --  ^^ -  i-  ::i-t^  :

I  do  not  Umik  Ccl 11^— irrr .^-.iti;.;: i-Ii I^r  ;  l_  _ i^:^^ :.; :ir

bai^as  i860,  thttrJtlr  >^r~  r.:—  i^i  T^r  It^_i-  I  t-  : riT:.  , itr^
wdl  lator  cm.
Ciuria = Clriala  (1-tiigi. iMtert  ?i:U  idineHteiiCmT^.

(Tlie  rreiT  £ ;ir: r  :;  ^;^:~-r  ire  on  Cavoot)
CAiaia's  !>:>>-:=  -_ii 1 r. J :  :««>  Dwa. iSgi6.

~:tv  — i,£  1  ir.rti  ;;  1 1 :  it  sr  1  r-iitar  of  the  O^nnEHK.)
CHoia'j - -"  ; =  :^^i 1  -  f. -- :  -s  serrate  #f  Nmpoleame  III.  s  M

Ckiala' s  Stor . - _  . =  C_;^i. _iir. --:; ;  :  _ .  ;^

1S92.
*Ckies:i  =  Cimsa  (J-  ddla'. XxsreOe  Varssim. Vareie ::;f
Cjjccto  =  CiacciD 5  erEJt:!i:  . Ftto  ^  Awfymio  T  ommumco  C:^: : Jiler^o,
1865.

(Tnrpr— ---  :::  Atr.!  4,  i860.)
Ciacdo IMU .=  'i. . A.\ LsHsra mi DetL Cr;  i -  -.

Palennt

(Partlj  rttrtel ^ "  /  J^o^ia,  fjk ?e  '.te^ :;t— -? of

Mantalto  Ziiit t  Ifi :  '

Ct«ii^>ofo  =  Cii^t:: Z:-f-  i.  ..t  ./jtifics  «  anlAvt  AG _  :

psot  ai'ira.7;  :..;  i:;.:r  i;  t:  dates,  ±c,  and  ■rety  far  feoc:  ::--:;.
but  :?t:t3.ir3  ;:-f  ;:-rri  ;— itted  in  Ximfines*  Epistolaria.  i£^_  g-.vcs
tie  ;;-7-5t;  7  P^tLrUri,  of  wfakit  GaRranm  gave  saia|fcs.)

Ccj*-  - =  :::tf— 3 ;  S\ii  fsSi  poUticn  mnlrtmn  ieOa  ria.  Siai^

1  it;l:. Androsio. 1869.

C<  r  ^  _  lliahg  Sgs  limUgms.

..f- ::  :^ iT-pxessknaUf^ ofaservaat  lilaaty iaAf, ^ast

syrzii'lzz:.:  ::^  Italy,  who  was  ia  fbe  PeoiBsala,  aad  fiaaBy  at
Tsat  rr  :: /-:?5o.  It  is  difficiiit  to  kaow  how  omdi  ike  vaaoos
incii; :f  : :  tversatioos  are  *  wiiltun  i^p.' Tlat  of  Dv^ae  is

certsinlv  exx^iierated. Others  have  vensnaBitnde.)

CMosiu  =  Colorma  ^G.)-  C<tapin*ioms  H  Puht  1  aal  x86ol  Sseista
Sic^a  ii  scienxe  ietter^mwa  ed  awtL Palexmo. 1S69-1S71.

Co^  =  Coppi  (Abate  Aatooio). Amm^  ^liaUm, 1872.

CorUo  =  CQzieo,S.y  G^ribmidi g  i  MOh  im  Saigmi.  \.A.kKt886.  Mmj  i.
iBv  an  eye-witnesj

i\"

'SAND

3f5B*T  Jtf

:.  •  ma's

L^i  ^i±  ^••-•"i  n*  ac  Gezfbilfi

"  ^=Am  sssk^  .

^£:

JCi

Cl^c^flE^eCsEz^r

*W

"5-

^aaw.  Bsjzz:

Az-

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Wiknn
otUaBaa

iememewiS  Satm

s

Cf  Vf

^  (og.

356  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

*  Dumas'  Caus.  =  Dnraas  (elder). Causeries,  1885. Vol.  ii.  pp.  255-286,
Une  visite  a  Garibaldi.

(This  visit,  when  apparently  Garibaldi's  Memoirs  were  handed  over
in MS.  to  Dumas  (see  p.  282),  must  have  been  in  January  i860,  to
judge  by  the  reference  to  Peard's  visit  to  Fino,  via  Milan  (p.  274),
which  as  Peard's  journal  shows  us  was  on  January  12,  i860.)
Dumas'  Garibaldiens  — Dumas  (elder). Les  Garibaldiens. 1861.

(The  account  of  the  expedition,  especially  from  Calatafimi  to
Palermo,  is  not  inaccurate  on  the  whole  :  it  was  evidently  derived
from  Tiirr's  information  given  to  Dumas  in  June  i860,  in  Palermo.
It  answers  closely  in  many  particulars  to  Tiirr's  Risposta  (q.v.),  which
Tiirr  wrote  three  years  later.  Dumas  was  not  nearly  so  inaccurate
as  English  contemporary  writers  said.  But  it  is  only  the  latter  part  of
the  book,  relating  events  subsequent  to  the  fall  of  Palermo,  which  is
first-hand  evidence,  as  Dumas  arrived  in  Sicily  only  in  June.)
Durand-Brager —  Durand-^rager  (H.).  Quatre  mois  de  V expedition  de
Garibaldi. Paris. Dentu. 1861.

(The  best  of  the  French  books  on  the  subject. Well written,
sensible and first-hand. Various incidents not found elsewhere,
especially  about  Palermo.)
Dwight  =  'D\vig\\t  (Theodore). The  Life  of  General  Garibaldi  by  himself,
1859. New  York.

(First  edition  in  any  language  of  the  Memorie. Done  from  a  MS.
of  1850,  and  very  incomplete  as  compared  with  the  later  editions.)
Eber  -  Garibaldi  a  Palermo, narrata  da  un  testimone  oculare. Livorno.
i860. Prima  versione  daW  Inglese.

(Anonymous,  but  is  really  a  txanslation  of  Eber's  letters  as  Special
Correspondent  to  the  Times,  q.v.)
Elenco  =  Gazzetta  Ufjiciale  del  regno  d' Italia. No.  266,  November  12,  1878,
siipplement.

Elenco  alfabetico  di  tutti  componenti  la  spedizione  dei  Mille  di  Marsala.
(Made  up  from  earlier  lists  collated,  and  supplemented  by  latest
information. Gives  date  and  place  of  each  man's  birth,  and  where
possible  his  profession. States  where  each  of  those  slain  in  the  expe-
dition fell.)
Elia  —  'EMa  (A.). Ricordi  di  un  Garibaldino. Ed.  1904.

(One  of  the  Mille. Important  evidence  about  the  voyage,  disem-
barkation, and  Calatafimi.)
Elliot  =  T^\\iot (Henry). Diplomatic Recollections. Printed for private
circulation.

(Of  great  value. I  am  indebted  to  Hon.  Arthur  Elliot  for  the  loan  of
this  excellent  book.)
Epistolario  =  'K.iuvenes  (E.  E.). Epistolario  di  Giuseppe  Garibaldi, 2  vols.
Milano. 1885.

(See  sub  Ciampoli,  above.)
Fabrizi  =  MSvone  (S.). Cenni  storici  sul  Gen.  N.  Fabrizi. 1886.
*Falconi  =  Fa\com  (Dottor  Angelo). Come  e  quando  Garibaldi  scelse  pef
sua  dimora  Caprera. Cagliari. 1902.

(Valuable  local  information  on  Garibaldi  at  La  Maddalena  in  1849
and  1855-56.)

BIBLIOGRAPHY  357

Fam.  Crauford  =  Leffere  di  G.  Mazzini  a  Aurelio  Safji  e  alia  famiglia  Crau-
ford. Bib.  Stor.  del  Ris.  It.,  Serie  IV.  N.  7. 1905. Citta  di  Castello.

Fanti —  Carandini  (Federico). M.  Fanti,  generale  d'armato. 1872.

FaucM  =  Fanche  (G.). Una  pagina  di  sioria  sullasped.  dei  Mille. Roma.
Guerra  e  Mirri. 1882.

(Gives  the  real  facts  about  the  Rubattino  steamers,  and  the  relations
of  Rubattino  and  Fauche  respectively  to  the  expedition.  See  Appen-
dix J,  above.)

Fauche  (P.)  =  Fauche  (Pietro). Giambattista  FaucM  e  la  sped,  dei  Mille.
1905. Bib.  stor.  del.  Ris.  It.,  Serie  IV.  N.  8.

(Based  on  G.  Fauchd's  pamphlet  of  1882  which  it  confirms  and
expands.  Appendix  contains  Finzi's  important  letter  of  September
6,  1869  (misprinted  i860)  on  the  relation  of  Cavour  to  the  expedition
and  the  supplv  of  arms  for  the  Thousand.)

Fazio  =  Fa.zio. Memorie  giovanili. 1901.

(For  parties  and  classes  in  a  Sicilian  provincial  town — Alcamo — ■
during  the  revolution.)

Fa^^'an  =  Fazzari (Achille). Garibaldi da Napoli a Palermo. 1884.
(Description  of  Garibaldi's  farewell  visit  to  Sicily  in  1882,  by  his
companion.)

Filangieri  =  Teresa  Filangieri  Ravaschieri. //  Generale  Carlo  Filangieri.
Milano. Treves. 1902.

(By  his  daughter,  from  the  family  archives.)

FtMflZz'  =  Finali  (Senatore  Gaspari). La  Spedizione  dei  Mille. N.  A. Ap.  i,
1909. (Farini  and  the  expedition,  &c.)

Finzi.  =  For  the  correspondence  of  G.  Finzi,  see  Fauche  (P.)  and  R.  S.  del
R.  and  Luzio,  Giorn.  d'lt.,  and  Appendix  F,  above,  sec.  i.

Floritta  —  'B\oxitta  (E.). Rivoluzione  o  Tirannide. Palermo. 1863.

(Mostly  second-hand  ;  citations  from  La  Lumia,  Pian  dei  Greet,
&c. Good  account  of  Calatafimi.)

Forbes  — Fovhes (Commander  Charles  Stuart, R.N.). The  Campaign  of
Garibaldi  in  the  Two  .Sicilies. 1861.

(Always  attempts  to  be  accurate,  but  not  very  exact  knowledge  of
proceedings  of  the  Thousand  prior  to  the  author's  own  arrival  in
Sicily.  Map  of  battle  of  Calatafimi  inaccurate.  A  fairly  good
authority  for  Milazzo  and  the  later  part  of  the  expedition  which  is
not  dealt  with  in  this  volume.  Can  be  recommended  to  English
readers.)

Fon'o  =  Forio  (G.  da). La  Vita  di  G.  Garibaldi. Napoli  (Perrotti). 1862.

Franci  =  Franci (Giovanni  delli,  Uff.  superiore  dello  stato  magg.  dell'Es-
ercito  Nap.) Campagna  d'autunno  del  i860. Napoli. 1870.

Franciosi  =  Fiancio5i  (P.). II  15  Maggio,  i860. Palermo. 1889.
(In  praise  of  Palizzolo's  part  in  the  expedition.)

Gaily  Knight  =  ¥lenry  Gaily  Knight,  M.P. The  Normans  in  Sicily. 1838.
(One  of  the  first  and  most  readable  of  the  learned  modern  books
about  Sicily. The  account  of  the  Englishman's  travels  in  Sicily  in
1836  is  in  itself  interesting,  besides  being  full  of  historical  and  archi-
tectural information.)

GawrfoZ/i  =  Gandolfi  (A.). Garibaldi  Generale. N.  A.,  Jimo  1883.
(On  Garibaldi's  art  of  war. See  also  Cadolini  and  Nicolosi.)

358  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Gazzetta  =  Gazzetta  Ufficiale  del  regno  (see  Elenco).
*Giglioli  =  Gig\io\i  (Constance  H.  D.) Naples  in  1799

*Gioberti  e  Pa//.  =  Maineri (B. E.). II  Piemonte  negli  anni 1850-1-2  :
lettere  di  V.  Gioberti  e  G.  Pallavicino.
[Of.  Manin  e  Pall.,  below.)
Giorn.  d'lt.  =  Giornale  d' Italia.

(Contains  important  articles  by  Luzio  and  Mirabelli  on  Cavour's
relations  to  the  expedition. See  Luzio  and  Mirabelli.)
Giorn.  di  Sic.  =  Giornale  di  Sicilia.

(1901,  May  26-27,  anniversary  number.)
Girolamo  =  Marsala nelV 11 Maggio, i860. Ricordi storico-critici di
A.D.G. Marsala. 1890. ^ .  D.  G.  =  Andrea  di  Girolamo,  one  of  the
Decurioni  of  Marsala  at  the  time  of  Garibaldi's  landing.

(Corrections  of  Bandi,  q.v.,  and  much  first-hand  information  about
May  11-12  in  Marsala.)
Gms^a  =  Giusta  (Prof.  Giuseppe). Da  Talatnone  a  Palermo. (Casanova,
Torino. 1907.)

(Diary  of  one  of  the  Thousand.)
*  Gladstone  =  Gladstone,  Rt.  Hon.  W.  E. Two  Letters  to  the  Earl  of  Aberdeen
on  the  State  Prosecutions  of  the  Neapolitan  Government. John  Murray.
1851.
*Gladstone's  £;ram.  =  Gladstone,  Rt.  Hon.  W.  E. An  examination  of  the

official  reply  of  the  Neapolitan  Government. John  Murray. 1852.
*Gladstone,  Rass.—Rassegna  degli  errori  e  delle  fallacie  publicate  {sic)  dal
Sig.  Gladstone,  in  due  sue  lettere  al  Conte  A  berdeen. Napoli,  Stamperia
del  Fibreno. 1851.

English  edition. Review  of  the  errors,  &c.,  1851. (Brettel,  Rupert
Street.)

(A  French  version, announced  as  by  authority,  appears  in  the
Journal  des  Debats,  September  27,  28,  30,  1851.)
Grabinski  =  Giahmski  (G.). La  Fine  di  un  regno. Firenze. 1896.

(Sympathetic  criticism  of  De  Cesare.)
Gregorovius  —  GregOTOvms  (Ferdinand). The  Roman  Journals  of,  1852-74.

Translated  by  Mrs.  Hamilton. 1907.
Greville  =  Greville  Memoirs. Longmans. 1903. Silver  Library  Edition.

vols,  vii.-viii.
Guardione  =  Guavdione  (Francesco). II  dominio  dei  Borboni  in  Sicilia  dal
1830  al  1861.

(Prints some important documents, especially the memoir of
Calvino,  q.v.)
Guerzoni  =  GneTzoni  (Giuseppe). Garibaldi. Firenze. 1882. 2  vols.

(Standard  life  of  Garibaldi. The  author  took  an  active  part  in  the
Garibaldian  affairs  of  1859-60. An  excellent  book,  though  not  up  to
date  in  light  of  recent  research.)
Hansard  =  Hansard's  Parliamentary  Debates.

d'Haussonville  =  d''H.aMSSOXiWTl\e  (O.). Revue  des  deux  Mondes,  Sept. 15,
1862. M.  Cavour  et  la  crise  italienne.

(See  Appendix  H.,  above,  on  this  controversy.)
*Hohenlohe  =  General  Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen. Letters  on  Strategy. Edited
by  Capt.  W.  H.  James. 189S.

BIBLIOGRAPHY  359

Holyoake  =  Ho\yoake  (George  Jacob). Bygones  worth  remembering. 1905.
/  Mi7/e  =  Garibaldi  (Giuseppe). I  Mille. 1874. 2nd  ed.

(Half  a  history,  half  a  novel. Not  very  useful,  but  should  be  com-
pared with  his  Memorie.)
Irs  Politiche  =  'Bertam  (Agostino). Ire  politiche  d'oltre  tomba. 1869.

(Part  of  a  famous  controversy. Reply  to  La  Farina,  q.v.,  and  see

Tiirr's  Risposta.)
Italia  Marinara  (Naples  maritime  weekly — contains  interesting  historical

articles  with  a  rather  different  standpoint  from  the  usual.)
Jack  La  Bolina  =  Yecchi  (Vittorio  =  Jack  La  Bolina). La  Vita  e  le  gesta

di  G.  Garibaldi. 1882.

(The  son  of  Garibaldi's  intimate  friend,  A.  Vecchi,  and  saw  much  of

Garibaldi  in  private  life.)
*/oA«s^oM  =  Johnston  (R.  M.). Napoleonic  Empire  in  South  Italy. 1904.
i^m^  =  Bolton  King.  A  History  of  Italian  Unity. 1814-1871. 1898.  2  vols.

(Standard  general  history  for  the  English  reader.)
King's  Mazzini  =  'Bo\ton  King. Mazzini. Dent. 1902.
*Krieg  =  Der  Krieg in Italien, 1859, nach den Feld-acten und  anderen

authentischen  Quellen  bearheitet  durck  K.  K.  Generalstabs  Bureau  filr

Kriegsgerichten. Wien. 1872-76.
*Krieg  [unofficial) —Dev  Krieg  im  Jahre  1859. Nach  ofl&ziellen  Quellen

nicht  ofhziell  bearbeitet. Bamberg. 1894.
La-Cecz7ia  =  La-Cecilia  (Giovanni). Storia  degli  ultimi  rivolgimenti  Sicil-

iani. Firenze. 2  vols. (No  date.)

(Many  documents,  but  mostly  now  printed  elsewhere.)
La  Farina  =  1^3,  Farina. Epistolario. 2  vols.  1869.

(The storm-centre of more than one fierce controversy. See

Bertani's  Ire  politiche  ;  neither  book  can  be  trusted  without  collation

with  the  other,  besides testing by  the  evidence  of  less  interested

parties.) See  also  Biundi.
La  Gorce  =  La  Gorce  (Pierre  de). Histoire  du  second  empire. 1 894-1905.
(This  chef-d' oeuvre  of  the  distinguished  historian  shows  a  far  greater

knowledge  of  Italian  history  and  of  Italian  authorities  for  i859-i86o»

than  did  his  earlier  work,  Histoire  de  la  seconde  Republique  Frangaise,

for  the  affairs  of  Rome,  1849.)
La  Lumia  =  L,a  Lumia  (Isidoro). La  Rest.  Borhonica  e  la  riv.  in  Sic.  dal

4  Aprile  al  18  Giugno. Palermo, i860.
La  Masa  (Sic.)  =Alcuni  fatti  e  documenti  delta  Riv.  dell'  It.  Merid.  riguar-

danti  i  Siciliani  e  La  Masa. Torino. 1S61.

(Most  important  documents  for  the  Sicilians'  part  in  the  revolution

of  May-June,  the  basis  of  much  in  Oddo,  q.v. Map  of  La  Masa's  own

movements. Contains,  pp.  x-xxii,  long  quotations  from  the  Memorie

relative  al  marino  Castiglia,  important  for  the  voyage.)
L'assartu  4  Ap.  =Mirabella  (Vincenzo). L'assartii  di  lu  4  Aprili. Lu  veru

fatlu  storicu  cu  tutti  li  soi  particolarta. Palermo. 1885.

'  Quaeque  ipsa  miserrima  vidi
Et  quorum  pars  magna  fui.'

(Poem  in  Sicilian  dialect  describing  what  happened  among  the
monks  at  La  Gancia  that  day,  by  Prof. Vincenzo  Mirabelli. (See

36o  GARIBALDI  AXD  THE  THOUSAND

Paohuxiy  Da  Riso.  25.) He  was  a  novice  in  convent  at  the  time. It

T^^tg  therefore  more  Mstorical  value  than  the  other  poems,  as  being  fay

an  eye-witness.)
l.^gi  della  Dittahtra=Collexume  diUe  lesgi,  decreti  e  disposixiomi  govematitt,

compUate  daS  axmoceto  Nicold  PorceUi. Palermo,  i860,  ist  ed. ;  1861,

2Bd  ed.
L'ln,  Sic.=L'insurrezione  SicUutna, Per  c^ra  di  L.  E.  T. iliiano.  186:
(A  once  nsefol  collection  of  documents,  bnt  they  are  nearly  aU  now

pnbHshed  dsewhere.)
*I,'Js<«-a= Morals  (R.  T.). L'isola  sacra, 1907.

(With  introdnction  by  Canzio. A  modem  book  about  Capieza.)
L'Ora=L'Ora  (Siciiian  Joumal),  May  26-27.  ^90t.

(Biographical  notes  on  Pantaleo,  Castigiia,  FarinL)
Loreuso=IjX'eBzo  (Francesco  di). Piamta  topogreijica  deUa  citta  di  Palermo

col  rag^vaglio  deUe  Fasioni  di  guerra  seguiie  dai  4  ApriU  ai  19  Giugno

i85o. Dedi^aia  a  Francesco  Crispi  (Geuova).

(Tlie  text  attached  to  this  map.  which  can  be  foimd  in  the  Moseo

Nazionale  at  Palermo,  is  a  val-^rle  crnte— rorary  account  of  the

various  actions  in  city  on  May  2  7-30. .
Lu^o,  Biifiore  =  1.12210  {A.). I  mariiri  di  Bzl-.:r:. 2nd  ed. 1908.

(A strictly scisitiSc examination :r:— l::ument3 of the real

character of Austrian repressive meis/re; m Xorth Italy,  in a

famous  case. Ed.  i  (1005),  p.  394,  contains  a  letter  of  Finzi's,  im-
portant for  the  history  of  Cavour's  relation  to  the  Sicilian  expeditiosi,

1S60.)
Lvzio.  Corr.  Sera  =  Luzio'5  important  arrlrle  en  Cavcnr's  relations  to  the

Expedition  in  the  Corriere  deUa  5: " .  _  rnst  23.  1907.
Zjtsio,  Gion*.  «f/f.=  Ditto  in  the  Gia/t;: . :.:oiMay5,  1907.
LmHo,  Mtt»i«i  =  Luzio  (A^. G.  Mazzim. Miiano. 1905.
Luxio's  Prof.Ji  =  'L-zLo A.>. Prr-.'^i  Bi:^r3f-:i- 1906.

(Contains  an  excellrnt  thrn^h  very  slifht  sketch  of  Bixio,  pp.  303-

310.)
*J^3tsoi»=LIais:n ^mile,. Caprsrx. Les lyisirs de Garibaldi. Paris.

1861.
Jifai^Res&fcr>'=MaImesbary, tnirl Earl cl AfiwiaiVs of  an ex-minister.

1S84.
MaiKcini='iSaBiam.  (Grazia). Impressioni  e  ricordi. 1908.
Msmbrimi=Dociimenii deila  riv.  diNapoli.  1860-62.  A  Rcn22n:)->lan r'rrin.

NapolL 1864.
*Manin  e  PaC.=Maineri  (B.  E.). Mamn  e  Pailati::  .: Z .::

(For  the  junction  of  the  democratic  parties  tc  1 1 ; r  an  i  >I :  u?  1  :f

Savoy,  1S55-57,  cf.  Giobeni  e  Pali.  i<x  1S50-53.}
Jf«rco=ilarco Prof.  Emm.  de). La  SicOia  nel  decenido  avanii  la  spsd.

dei  MiUe. Catania. 1S97.

(Contains much  material, including valuable  documents about

April  4,  and  letts"  by  General  Rttaluga  on  details  of  Pflo's  death.)
Maria  So^i*a=Tschudi  (Clara). Maria  Scphia.  Queen  of  Xapies. Trans-
lated frcHn  the  Norwegian  by  Ethd  Heam. Sonnenschein. 1905.
Mafio= Mario  Qessie  White), Garibaldi  e  i  sttoi  tempi, MHano. Ed.

I9C  =

BIBLIOGRAPHY  361

(Not  always  safe,  but  contains  much  valuable  information.  She
knew  the  chief  actors  well,  and  her  book  is  a  deservedly  popular
history.)
Mario,  Mac.^Macmillan's  Magazine,  July  1882.  Alberto  Mario's  Per-
sonal Reminiscences  of  General  Garibaldi.
Mario's  Mazzini  =  'M^axio  (J.  W.).  Vita  di  Mazzini.  Milano.  Sonzogno.
1896.

(Not  impartial,  but  full  of  first-hand  information  and  documents.)
Mario,  Supp.  =  Ma.Tio  (J.  W.). Supplement  to  English  translation  of  Gari-
baldi's Memoirs.

(Contains  stray  pieces  of  information  not  found  elsewhere.)
Mario,  Fito  — Mario  (J.  W.). Vita  di  Giuseppe  Garibaldi. Milano. Ed.
1882.

(Less  full  than  her  Garibaldi  e  i  suoi  tempi,  q.v.)
M arr a  =  Maria.,  II  generate  Pasquale  :  documenti,  etc. Napoli. i86o(?).

(Answer  to  Cava's  attack,  q.v.)
Marra,  Oss.  =  Osservazioni  del  Generate  Bartolo  Marra  sulla  storia  di  A .  B.
Cognetti. Napoli. 1868.

(Answer  to  Cognetti' s  Fio  IX.  e  il  suo  secolo  :  defence  of  Marra' s
conduct.  Gives  important  first-hand  evidence  as  to  Lanza's  councils
of  war  in  Palermo,  May  27-31.  For  the  identity  of  the  brothers
Marra,  see  Cava,  ii.  p.  85.)
*Martinengo  Cesaresco  =  Martinengo  Cesaresco  (Contessa).  Patriotti
Italiani. Milano. 1890.

Latest  English  edition  (1901),  Italian  Characters,  contains,  besides

the  excellent  sketches  of  Bixio,  Settembrini  and  Poerio,  a  new  sketch

of  Castromediano  ;  the  page  references  are  to  this  edition.

Martinengo  Cesaresco' s  Cavour  =  M3,Ttin.evgo  Cesaresco  (Countess). Cavcur.

(In  the  Foreign-Statesmen  Series.)  The  best  English  book  en  Cavour

at  present.

(See  also  The  Liberation  of  Italy,  1814-70,  by  the  same  authoress,

1895. An  excellent  brief  history. English  readers  desiring  to  know

the  history  of  the  Risorgimento  should  begin  with  this  book  and  then

go  on  to  Bolton  King's  History  of  Italian  Unity.)

Marzo-Ferro  =  Ma.rzo-FeTro (da Girolamodi). Un periodo di storia di

Sicilia. Palermo. 1863.
*Massari's  Casi  =  Massari  (Giuseppe). I  Casi  di  Napoli. 1849.
Massari's  V.  £.  =  Massari  (Giuseppe). La  Vita  di  Vitt.  Em. 1878. 2  vols.

(Not  very  important. A  few  personal  stories.)
Mazade  =  Ma.zsLde  (Charles  de). Revue  des  deux  Mondes. Feb. i, 1861.
Le  roi  Francois  II.  el  la  rev.  de  Naples.

(Good  on  the  general  political  situation,  internal  and  external,  of
the  Neapolitan  kingdom,  1859-60.)
Mazzini  — 'Ma.zzinx  [G.). Scritti  editi  edinediti. 17  vols. Vols,  ix.-xi.,  cover-
ing this  period,  are  rendered  of  special  value  by  Saffi's  Proemio  {q.v.).
Meiici  =  Medici  (Gen.  G.). Una  pagijta  di  storia  del  1S60. Palermo. 1869.
(Medici defends  his action in i860 against Bertani's strictures.
Some  letters.)
Mf/etia  =  Melena  (Elpis),  i.e.  Marie  von  Schwartz. Garibaldi,  Recollections
oi  his  public  and  private  life. English  translation. 1887.

362  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Melena,  1861  =  Recollections  of  General  Garibaldi  ;  comprising  a  visit  to  the

Mediterranean  isles  of  La  Maddalena  and  Caprera. 1861. (Saunders,

Otley  &  Co.)

(Anonymous,  but  by  Elpis  Melena.)
Mem.  =  Garibaldi (Giuseppe). Memorie  autobiogvaiiche» Firenze. 1902.

nth  ed.

(See  note  in  bibliography  under  Dumas,  above,  for  the  character  oi

the  alterations  he  made  in  this  later  edition  of  his  memoirs. But  this

Italian  edition  is  the  only  one  for  the  events  of  t86o.)
Men^liini  =  M.engh.\ni  (Mario). La  spedizione  Garibaldina  di  Sicilia  e  di

Napoli,  net  proclami,  nelle  correspondenze,  nei  diarii  e  nelle  illustrazioni

del  tempo. 1907.

(Quotations  from  North  Italian  newspapers  of  the  time. Important

diaries  at  end  of  book. The  diary  on  pp.  419  ef  seq.  is  by  Canzio,  as  he

told  me  himself.)
Me'nme'is  =  Merimee  (Prosper). Lettres  a  M.  Panizzi. 1881.
Messmeo  =  Messineo (Pietro). Per la  commemorazione del  XXX  anni-

versario  del  4  Aprile  i860. Palermo. 1890.

(Paoluccl's account of April 4 is the more accurate  of  the
two.)
Mezzacapo  —  Pesci(\3go). II  Generate  Carlo  Mezzacapo. Zanichelli. 1908.
*Minnelli  =  Minnelli  (Domenico) . A  Ifio  Balzani,  or  Extracts  from  the  diary

of  a  proscribed  Sicilian. New  York. 1861.

(Autobiographical  notes  of  a  Sicilian patriot, 1 820-1 850  : some

names  are  changed.)
Mirabelli=i. Mirabelli (R.). Giornale d'ltalia. May 14, 1907, and

Corriere  delta  Sera,  July  29,  answers  to  Luzio  on  Cavour  and  the

Thousand.

2.  By same author — Per la storia rivoluzionaria del sessanta,

Bologna. 1886.
Mistr all  —  Mistrali  (Franco). Storia  popolare  delta  riv.  di  Sicilia,  sul  diario

di  un  cacciatore  delle  Alpi. June  i860. Milano.
(Of  no  use.)
*Mistrali's  PeW.  =  Mistrale  (Fr.). II  Pellegrinaggio  degli  Operai  a  Caprera.

Milano  (Sanvito). 1861.
Mowwi'er  =  Monnier (Marc). Garibaldi,  Histoire  de  la  conquite  des  deux

Sidles. Paris. 1861.
Monnier  {Ital.)  —  Italian  translation,  with  corrections  and  notes  by  Rocco

'E,sca\on3i.  =  Rivoluzione  delle  due  Sicilie.
Morley ^Morley  (John). Life  of  W.  E.  Gladstone. 1903.
Motto  =  Motto (Raffaele). Relazione esatta  delta  spedizione  di  R. Pile,

Pisa,  tip.  Citi. 1877.

(A  large  section  of  it  quoted  in  Saffi's  Proemio,  Mazzini,  xi.  p.  Iv,

et  seq. Borne  out  by  the  skipper,  Palmerini's  evidence,  do.  pp.  clxvl-

clxix.)
iVf MWiiy  =  Mundy (Rear- Admiral Sir Rodney). H.M.S. 'Hannibal' at

Palermo  and  Naples,  during  the  Italian  Revolution,  1859-61.

(A  detailed  and  peculiarly  reliable  account  of  the  affairs  of  Palermo

by  the  great  neutral  who  negotiated  the  armistice  preceding  the  final

departure  of  the  Bourbon  troops.)

BIBLIOGRAPHY  363

N.  A.  =  Nuova  Antologia.

See  CadoUni,  Gandolfi,  Orsini,  Corleo,  Baratieri,  Finali,  Rava,  Artom,
Romano-Catania.
*Nap.  III.  et  ritalie  —  L' Enipereicr  Napoleon  III.  et  I'ltalie. 1859.

(Inspired  pamphlet  of  February  1859. In  part  by  La  Gueronniere.)
Nicolosi  —  Wicolosi  (C). L'arte  militare  Garibaldina. Rivista  di  Fanteria,
1903,  pp.  468-508.

(On  Garibaldian  tactics,  Introduction  of  principle  of  '  rushes.')
Nicotera  =  'M.a.WLO  (M.). Biografia  di  Giovanni  Nicotera.
Nievo  —  Mantovani  (Dino). II  poeta  soldato  :  Ippolito  Nievo,  1 831-61.

(Life  of  the  poet  Nievo,  one  of  the  Thousand. Contains  important
letters  by  him  from  Palermo.)
*Nievo's Amori  =  'Nievo (Ipp.). Gli amori Garibaldini. Milano. i860.

(Nievo's  campaign  poems  of  1859.)
*Nisco's  Fr.  I.  —  Nisco  (Niccola) . II  Reame  di  Napoli  sotto  Francesco  /,

1893-
*Nisco's  Ferd.  II.  =  Nisco  (Niccola). Gli  ultimi  trentasei  anni  del  Reame

di  Napoli. Vol.  it. Ferdinando  II. 1897.
A'^wco's  JPr.  77.  =  Nisco  (Niccola). Vol.  iii. Francesco  II. 1894.

(Nisco's  history  is  very  good  for  a  history  written  by  a  contemporary:
and  he  had  access  to  many  of  the  Neapolitan  archives.)
Nwwo/an  =  Nuvolari  (Giuseppe). Come  la  penso. Milano. 1881.

(One  of  the  Thousand,  and  one  of  Garibaldi's  intimates  of  the
Maddalena-Caprera  group. Some  curious  incidents  recorded,  but  only
the  first-hand  parts  of  the  book  of  value.)
O.  B.'s  La  il7asa  =  Bonaf ede  (Oddo). Cenno  Storico  sul  Generale  G.  La
Masa. Verona. 1879.

(Defence  of  La  Masa's  conduct,  with  documents,  by  Oddo,  author  of
I  Mille,  who  later  took  name  of  Bonafede. Most  of  the  documents
are  also  in  La  Masa  {Sic.)  q.v.)
Oi^o  =  Oddo  (Giacomo). I  Mille  di  Marsala. 1863.

(Not  very  accurate. The best parts  of it  are  derived from  La

Masa  {Sic.)  q.v.)

Oliphant  —  Oli-phant  (Laurence). Episodes  in  a  life  of  adventure. 1887,

pp.  165  et  seq. An  episode  with  Garibaldi. See  Appendix  E.  above.

Oliveri  =  Ohvexi (G. M.). Una  pagina  alia  storia  dei  Mille. Palermo.

1876.

(Some  local  Sicilian  evidence.)
Ollivier  =  Ollivier  (Emile). L' Empire  Liberal. 1897.

(Interesting  on  diplomacy,  the  policy  of  Napoleon III.  and  the
things  he  knows  about,  but  his  account  of  Garibaldi's  expedition  most
inaccurate,  and  from  third-hand  authorities.)
Orsini  =  Documenti  inediti  del  Gen.  Giordano  Orsini,  by  Francesco  Guar-
dione. A^.  A.,  July  i,  1907.

(Important  for  the  diversion  to  Corleone.)
Orsini {Cenno)  =  Cenno  biografico  del  Generale  Giordano  Orsini. Palermo.
1906.

(Despatches passing between Garibaldi and Orsini during the
diversion  to  Corleone  and  Orsini' s  return  to  Palermo.)
Pa/n»er5/on  =  Evelyn  Ashley. Pabnerston.

364  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Panizzi  =  Lettere  ad  A.  Panizzi. 1880.

(A  fine  selection  from  his  correspondence  with  Italian  patriots  of  all
parties,  made  from  the  Panizzi  MS.  in  the  British  Museum,  q.v.)

Panizzi' s  Lif e^'Pa.mzzi  {Sit  K.). Li/e  0/,  by  L.  Fagan. 1880.

Paolucct,  Pi7o  =  Paolucci  (G.). Rosolino  Pilo. In  A.  S.  Sic,  1899.

Paolucci,  Corrao  =  Paojucci  (G.). Giovanni  Corrao. In  A.  S.  Sic,  igoo.

Paolucci,  i??so  =  Paolucci  (G.).  Da  Riso  a  Garibaldi.  Separate  reprint
from  A.  S.  Sic,  1904.

Also  partly  published  In  Riv.  di  Roma,  January  7  and  March  18, 1900.
(Signor  Paolucci' s  scholarly  work  is  quite  indispensable  for  the
proper  studj'  of  Garibaldi's  expedition.)

Paolucci,  Riv.  di  ffoma  =  Paolucci  (Giuseppe),  Rivista  di  Roma,  September
23,  1900.

(For  Sicilian  conspiracy  and  revolt,  1850-1859.)

*Papa  e  Congresso  =  La  Guerronniere  (sic)  (Di.  M.).  /  Papa  e  il  Congresso,
Milano. 1859.

Pasolini  —  Giuseppe  Pasolini,  1 815-1876,  memorie  raccoUe  da  suo  figlio.
Page  references  in  notes  above  are  to  the  English  translation  by  the
Dowager  Countess  of  Dalhousie. Longmans. 1885.

Pavesi  =  Lettere  di  Garibaldi  a  Cittadini  Pavesi. Pavia. 1907.

Peayc?  ==  Trevelyan  (G.  M.).  War-journals  of  Garibaldi's  Englishman.
Publication  of  parts  of  J.  W.  Peard's  journal  of  1 859-1 860  in  the
Cornhill  Magazine,  *  January  1908,  and  June  1908.

Pevini —  Vex'mi  (O.). La  spedizione  dei  Mille. Milano. 1861.

(Written  from  numerous  MS.  accounts,  diaries,  &c.,  of  the  Mille,
some  of  which  have  never  yet  been  printed — and  from  verbal  informa-
tion of  the  actors  themselves.)

Pf'f saMo  =  Persano  (Ammiraglio  C.  dl).  Diario  privato-politico-militave.
1880.

(Most  important  on  Cavour's  secret  orders  to  the  fleet  about  Gari-
baldi's expedition.)

Persigny  =  Menioires  du  Due  de  Per^igny. Paris. 1896.

Piana  dei  Greci —  Pettdt.  (Gioacchino) ,  Piana  dei  Greet  nella  riv.  Siciliana.
1 86 1. Palermo.

(Important  local  record,  but  author  was  at  Palermo,  not  Piaoa,
during  the  events  he  records.  Hence  certain  errors  noticed  by
Costatini,  q.v.,  pp.  48,  49,  who  was  in  Piana  at  the  time.)

Pianell  =  'Fh\{5SQnt  (G.  de).  //  Generale  Pianell  e  il  suo  tempo.  Verona.
1902.

Pianell,  TVfem.  =  Pianell  (Generale). Memorie. Firenze. Barbera. 1902.

Pietraganzili  —  Pietva.g3inzili  (Salvo  di).  II  Piemonte  e  la  Sicilia,  1850-60.
2  vols. 1902.

(An  active  patriot  of  Termini,  first-hand  evidence  on  events  in  that
town,  Camp  at  Gibilrossa,  La  Masa,  Riso  and  local  Sicilian  affairs.)

Pi7o  =  Venosta  (Felice). Rosolino  Pilo. Milano. 1863.
(Of  little  use.)

Pittaluga  —  Pitt3.\u%a.  (Gen.  Giovanni). La  Diversions. 1904.
(Important  for  Talamone  and  Zambianchi's  expedition.)

Po^no  =  Giudice  (A.  U.  del).  Liriche  i  Lettere  inediie  di  Alessandro  e
Carlo  Poerio. Torino. 1899.

BIBLIOGRAPHY  365

*Pol.  =  Politecnico (Periodical). Milan, i860. See pp. 284-308 for

Bertani's  Cacc,  q.v.
Principe  Nap.  =  Vayra  (Pietro). II  Principe  Napoleone  e  I' Italia. Torino.
1S91.

(An  important  statement  of  Italy's  debt  to  Prince  Jerome.)
Pungolo  =  Il  Pungolo  (Naples  paper),  July  5,  1907.

(Contains  letter  of  Medici  to  Cosenz  of  May  10,  i860.)
Quarterly  =  Quarterly  Review. 1879.

Queen's  Letters  =  The  Letters  of  Queen  Victoria. 3  vols. 1907.
Racioppi  =  Ra.cioT[>pl  (Glacomo). Moti  di  Basilicata. Napoli. 1867.

(For  the  general  condition  of  the  Neapolitan  army  and  provinces,
1849-1860.)
Raffaele  —  'Ra.&a.ele  (G.). Rivelazioni  storiche  delta  riv.  dal  1848  al  i860.
Palermo. 1883.

(Much  detailed  information  about  the  state  of  Sicily  under  Manis-
calco.  Statement  about  the  alleged  use  of  torture  in  Cefalu  prison,
for  which  see  also  Sansone,  pp.  145-180  ;  Marco  and  Guardione,  ii.
p.  252.  I  do  not  know  how  far  RafEaele  is  to  be  credited  on  the
sub]  ect.)
Rass.  Naz.  =Rassegna  Nazionale. January  i,  1905.

Che  cosa  fu  detto  in  un  colloquio  storico  ? Ugo  Pescl.
(On  the  interview  of  Victor Emmanuel  and  Cavour  at Bologna,
May  2,  i860.)
*i?aua  =  Rava  (Luigi) . Fanti,  Garibaldi  e  L.  C.  Farini, N.  A.,  Sept.  i,
1903.

(For  October  1859.)
Reclamo  Meli  =  Reclame  dei  tipografi  Meli  e  Carini. No  date,  but  appar-
ently i85o.

(Evidence  about  the  secret  press  in  Palermo  in  April-May  i860.)
*Reumont's  Capponi  =  Reumont  (A.) . Gino  Capponi  e  il  sua  secolo. 2  vols.
(For  Tuscany, 1848-9, and 1859-60, and  for  criticisms  by  pro-
vlnclalists  and  federalists  on  Italian  unity,  vol.  ii.  131-148.)
*Revel  —  'Re\re\  (Genova  di). //  1859  e  V Italia  Centrale. Miei  Ricordi.
Revel's da Ancona  =  'Reve\ (Genova di). Da  Ancona  a Napoli. Miei

Ricordi. Milano. 1892.
Ricasoli ^'Ricz.soli (Baron). Lettere e documenti  pubb. per  cura  di  M,
Tabarrini  e  A.  Gotti. Firenze. 1887-95.

(Is  to  Ricasoli  what  Chiala's  work  is  to  Cavour.)
Risorg.  =  Il  Risorgimento  Italiano. 1908.

(The  historical  Review  of  the  Risorgimento,  periodical,  from  March
1908.)
Riv.  di  Roma  =  Rivista  di  Roma  (periodical).
*Riv.  Mil.  It.  =  Rivista  militare  italiana. 1872-1877.

(For  able  technical  reviews  of  the  Austrian  official  accounts  of  1859,
Krieg,  q.v. See December 1872, January 1873, July  1874, April,
May, July 1876, and February 1877, the  latter specially about
Garibaldi's  operations  in  the  Valtelline.)
*Rodenberg  =  Rodenberg' s  Deutsches  Magazin,  vol.  I.  pp.  214,  215. 1861.
(Reminiscences of Garibaldi in London, 1854, by Alexander
Herzen.)

366  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Romano-Catania,  N.  ^  .  =  Romano-Catania  (G.). Rosolino  Pilo  e  la  riv.

Sic.  del  1848-9. N.  A.,  November  1904.
Romano-Catania,  A.  S.  Sz'c.  =  Romano-Catania  (G.)- D'un  dramma  sopra

Rosolino  Pilo. A.  S.  Sic,  1905,  fasc.  III-IV,  cf.  to  Paolucci,  Pile.
R. S.  del  R.=Rivista  Storica  del  Risorgimento. Vol. iil.  fasc.  3 (1898).
Lettere  di  Garibaldi  avanti  e  durante  la  sped,  dei  Mille  da  Angela  Vesen-
tini.

(Important  letters  to  Besana  and  Finzi  showing  connection  of
government  with  Sicilian  expedition,  through  medium  of  the  Dire-
zione,  Milione  di  fucili  ;  now  printed  in  Ciampoli,  sub-loc. ;  references
in  my  notes  are  to  Ciampoli.  For  Finzi' s  letter  of  September  6,  1869,
see  Fauche  (P.).)
i?osz  =  Rosi  (M.).  II  risorgimento  italiano  e  I'azione  d'un  patriota  cospiratore
e  soldato. 1906.

(A  life  of  Mordini. Quotes  the  secret  reports  of  the  Piedmontese
consul  in  Sicily,  from  the  Arch,  di  Stato,  Turin.)
Rusconi  =  Rusconi  (Ferdinando) . 19  anni  di  vita  di  un  Garibaldino. 1870.
i?«sse// =  Spencer  Walpole. Life  of  Lord  John  Russell. 1889.
*Riistow  i85g  =  Guerra  d' Italia  del  1859. Milano. i860.

Translation  of  Der  italienische  Krieg. 1859. Zurich, i860.
i^MSfozw  =  Riistow  (W.). La  guerra  italiana  del  i860  descritta  politicamente
e  militarmente,  con  8  carte  e  piani. Versione  del  Dott.  G.  Bizzozzero.
Milano,  tip.  G.  Civelli. 1862.

Translation of  Erinnerungen  aus  dem  italienischen  Feldzuge  von
i860.

(Riistow  took  part  in  the  later  events  of  the  expedition  after  the
taking  of  Palermo. He  is  a  competent  military  historian  even  for
the  early  part  which  he  did  not  witness.)
*Sacchi's  visit  =  ?>a.cchi  (Luigi). Una  visita  all'  isola  di  Caprera  del  pittore

Luigi  Sacchi. Milano,  Salvi. i860.
Sa;^  =  Saf&  (Aurelio). Ricordi  e  Scritti. 1892-1904.
Saffi's  Proemio  =  Saf6.  (Aurelio). Preface  to  the  Scritti  editi  ed  inedUi  of
Mazzini  [q.v.).

(Preface  to  Vol.  xi.  dealing  with  Sicily  and  i860  is  most  valuable,
a  mine  of  documents. Reprinted  also  in  Saffi,  Ricordi  e  scritti.)
Sampieri  =  Sampieri  (Generale  Domenico). Storia  e  storie  delta  prima  sped,
in Sicilia. Venezia,  tip. del  Tempo, 1887,  and  Roma,  tip.  FaUli,

1893-

(One  of  the  Thousand. Most  important  on  Marsala  and  Calatafimi,
containing  two  accounts  of  that  battle  by  Neapolitan  officers  present
Corrects  Baratieri  and  others.)
*5a»d  =  George  Sand. Joseph  Garibaldi. Paris. 1859.
(A  short  and  excellent  eulogy,  dated  July  4,  1859.)
*Sansone  —  'Sa.nsonQ (Alfonso). Cospirazioni  e  rivolte  di  Fr.  Bentivegna  e

compagni. Palermo. 1891.
*Sa/)n  =  Bilotti  (P.  E.). La  sped,  di  Sapri. {Da  Geneva  a  Sanza.) 1907.
Scrittori  Manduriani  =  Gigli  (Giuseppe). Scritiori  Manduriani. 1896,

(Contains  a  short  biography  of  Lacaita.)
*Settembrini  =  Se\XQvabx'im  (Luigi). Ricordanze  delta  mia  vita. 1881.

BIBLIOGRAPHY  367

Stracusa  =  'De Benedictis (Em.). Siracusa sotto la mala signoria degli

ultimi  Bovboni. Torino. 1861.
Sirtori  —  'De  Castro  (G.). Giuseppe  Sirtori. Milano,  Dumolard. 1892.

(Contains quotations from important  letter of Majocclie about

Calatafimi  and  Palermo,  Sirtori  and  Cavour.)
Sirtori  Com. —Sirtori  (Giuseppe). Al  Comitato  Italiano. 1851. Londra.
(Sirtori's  anti-Mazzinian  tract,  a  plea  for  unity. Shows  course  of

his  political  development.)
Sorbelli  =  ?>orbe\\i  (A.). II  Museo  Storico  dei  Mille  a  Bologna.
Spaventa  =  '?i^3kveT\.t3.  (Silvio). Dal  1848  al  1861. 1898. Napoli.
Stamp.  Cland.  — Stamps  clandestine  del  i860. Collection  of  the  proclama-
tions and  fly-leaves  issued  by  secret  Committee  of  Palermo  in  i860.

Collection  Lodi,  Arch.  stor.  Patria,  Palermo.
Stamp. Off.  =  Stampati  in fogli  volanti cditi  negli  anni 1 860-1. Parte

offlciale.

(A  fine  collection  of  the  official  proclamations  of  the  successive

governments  of  1 860-1. Collection  Lodi,  Arch.  Stor.  Patria,  Palermo.)
Stiav elli  —  StiaveWi  (G.). Ganbaldi  nella  letteratura  italiana.

(This  book  is,  as  it  declares  itself,  '  partly  an  anthology,  partly  a

bibliography.' Though  far  from  complete,  and  not  up  to  date  even

in  the  1907  edition,  it  is  valuable.)
Stillman's  Cns^i  =  Stillman  (W.  J.). Frauceso  Crispi. 1899.

(Not  documented.)
*Storia anedd.  =  Storia aneddotica politico-militare della guerra 1859.

Milano. 1859.
Termini  =  Rapidi  cenni  e  doc.  storici  della  rivohizione  del  i860  riguardunti  la

cittd  di  Termini. Sig.  A.  B.  e  M.  G. Palermo. 1861.
Thayer  =  Thayer  (W.  Roscoe). Throne-Makers. 1899.

(Contains  an  excellent  appreciation  of  Garibaldi  by  one  of  the  most

learned  of  Risorgimento  scholars.)
Thouvenel  =  T\i.ou^en&\  (L.). Le  secret  de  I'Empereur. 1889.

(Contains  important  correspondence  of  Thouvenel,  foreign  minister,

with  Gramont,  French  ambassador  at  Rome,  i860.)
*Tivaroni  ^ms^.  =  Tivaroni  (Carlo). L' Italia  durante  il  dominio  Austriaco

1892.
Tivaroni  It.  —  Tivaroni  (Carlo). L' Italia  degli  Italiani.
Trei'^scAfte  =  Treitschke. // Conte di Cavour. Translation from the

German. Firenze. 1873.
(Excellent.)
*Trevelyan's  Gar.  i?ome  =  Treve]yan  (G.  M.). Garibaldi's  Defence  of  the

Roman  Republic. Longman. 1907.
Trinity  =  The  Trinity  of  Italy,  by  an  English  Civilian  for  eight  years  in

official  connexion  ivith  the  Court  of  Naples. 1867. (Edward Moxon

&-  Co.)

(A  well-informed,  picturesque  and  thoughtful  study  of  the  condition

and  government  of  the  Neapolitan  provinces  just  before  and  after  the

revolution  of  i860.)
Tupper  =:Tu-pTpev  (Martin). My  life  as  an  author. 1886.

(For  Peard's  youth  at  Oxford  ;  see  also  Pycroft's  Oxford  Memories,

i.  p.  48.)

368  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Twr?' =  Pecorini-Manzoni  (Emilio). Stefano  Tilrr. igo2.

(Not  always  accurate,  e.g.,  says  Tiirr  was  present  at  Varese  and
S.  Fermo,  and  does  not  tell  ns  much  that  is  not  in  the  works  of  Carlo
P.  Manzoni  and  Tiirr  himself.  But  does  not  repeat  the  extravagant
claims  made  by  those  writers  on  behalf  of  Tiirr  as  Garibaldi's  military
adviser  between  Calatafimi  and  Palermo.)
*Turr's  Arrest.  =  Tnrx  (General).  Arrestatton,  prods  et  condamnation
raconUs  par  lui-meme. Paris. 1863.

(The  incident  of  his  arrest  by  the  Austrians  during  the  Crimean  war.)
Tiirr' s  Da  Quarto  =  Turr  (Gen.). Da  Quarto  a  Marsala.

(Tiirr's  own  account  of  events  at  Talamone  and  Marsala.)
Tiirr' s  Dz'y.  =  Pecorini-Manzoni  (Carlo). Storia  della  15a  Divisione  Tiirr.
1876.

(Contains  many  valuable  documents. Far  too  much  inclined  to
attribute  everything  to  Tiirr.)
Tiirr's Risposta  —  Tnxx (Gen.). Risposta all' opuscolo Bertani. 1869.
Milano.

(Reply  to  censures  in  Ire  Politiche  ;  a  description  of  his  own  conduct
on  the  expedition.)
Uzielli  =  \Jziel\i (Gustavo). Letters home, from Sicily, June i860.

Published  in  the  Veterano. 1908.
*ValIe's  V.  G. ?7.  =  Valle  (G.  Della). Varese,  Garibaldi,  Urban  nel  1859.

Varese. 1863.
Fa^ewMe  =  Varenne  (Louis  de  la). La  riv.  Sic.  et  I'expM.  de  Gar. Paris.
i860.

(A  good  historical  introduction,  followed  by  a  defence  of  his  Torture
en  Sicile,  q.v.  below.)
*Varenne's CAassewrs  =  Varenne (L. de la). Les chasseurs des  Alpes.
i860.

(Not  much  use.)
*Varenne's  Torture ^Yarenne  (L.  de  la). La  torture  en  Sicile. Paris, i860.
(This  much disputed  work  is defended by  him in Varenne,  q.v.,
above. But  Ra-ffaele,  pp.  317-310,  shows  the  weakness  of  his  defence.)
'^Vecchi's  Caprera  =  Yecch.i  (C.  Augusto). Garibaldi  at  Caprera. i86'?.

(The  home  life  and  intimate  talk  of  Garibaldi  in  1861,  by  one  of  his
oldest  and  closest  friends. My  references  are  to  the  English  transla-
tion, but  I  have  studied  the  Italian  Garibaldi  e  Caprera,  which  is  more
complete.)
Ven.  No.  i  —  No.  unico  Garibaldi. 1907. Venezia.

(Contains  a  letter  from  Tangier,  1850 ;  Garibaldi's  orders  to  Bixio
for  sailing  of  the  Lombardo  from  Talamone  to  Sicily ;  and  a  letter  od
Calatafimi.)
Fewosia  =  Venosta (Giovanni Visconti). Ricordi di Gioventii. Milano,
1906. 3rd  ed.
(A  delightful  and  valuable  book,  on  society  in  Milan,  the  Valtelline
and  Lombardy  in  general,  1 848-1 860.)
V.  M.  =  Ventisette  Maggio,  i860  ;  numero  unico. Palermo. 27  Maggio.
1885.

(See  Campo,  Lettere,  for  criticisms  of  parts  of  this  important  collec-
tion of  memoirs.)

BIBLIOGRAPHY  369

ViUayi  —  VU.\s,T\ (Raffaele). Cospirazione  e  rivolta. 1881.

(First-hand  authority  for  the  internal  movements  of  Sicily,  especially
at  the  Messina  end  of  the  island. For  Pilo's  landing,  &c. Contains,
pp.  373-375,  Garibaldi's  important  letter  of  September  29,  1859.)
*Viollet-h-duc  =  Wio\\et-\Q-d.VLC  (E.  M.). Lettres  sur  la  Sidle  a  propos  des
dvenemenfs  de  juin  et  de  juillet,  i860. Paris, i860.

(Written  and  published  i860,  but  based  on  notes  made  during  a  tour
in  Sicily  prior  to  1848.)
Vismaya  =  YismaTSL (Antonio). Bzbliografia di Garibaldi. Como, tip.
C.  Franchi. 1S91.

Part  of  E.  Motta's  Collezione  storica  bibliografica.
Walpole's  Twenty-Five  Years  =  Walpole  (Sir  Spencer). History  of  Twenty-
Five  Years. Vol.  i.

(Chap.  iv.  is  one  of  the  best  accounts  of  diplomatic  events,  1859-
1860.)
Whitaker  =  'Whxt3,'k.&T  (Tina,  nee  Scalia). Sicily  and  England,  1848-1870.
Constable. 1907.

(Details  of  Italian  and  especially  Sicilian  exiles  and  their  likes  in
England,  from  family  and  personal  knov/ledge.)
WM^eAoMse  =  Whitehouse (H. R.). Collapse  of  the  Kingdom  of  Naples.
New  York. Bonnell,  Silver  &  Co. 1899.
(Carefully  done  and  useful.)
fFwwmg'iow- iMgra/w  =  Winnington-Ingram  (Rear- Admiral  H.  F.). Hearts
of  Oak. 18S9.

(Memoirs  of  his  life. Chap.  xiv.  contains  important  evidence  about
the  rising  of  April  4,  and  the  landing  at  Marsala  and  capture  of
Palermo,  all  of  which  Ingram  witnessed.)
Zanichelli's  Cavoiir  —  Za.nichel\i  (D.). Cavour. Firenze. 1905.

(A  shrewd  summary  of  the  events  of  his  life.)
Zasio  —  Da  Marsala  al VoUurno. Ricordi  di E. Z.  =  Zasio, Emilio, a

Brescian,  one  of  the  Thousand.
Ze«si  =  Zeusi  (Goppelli) (  =  Giuseppe  Zolli,  one  of  the  Thousand). Gari-
baldi e  i  Mille. Venezia. i860.

CONTEMPORARY  NEWSPAPERS  AND  PERIODICALS
CONSULTED

Arlecchino  =  L'Arlecchino. Sicilian  newspaper,  June  11,  i860,  et  seq.

Civ.  catt.  =  Civilta  cattolica Clerical  organ.

Corr.  Merc-  —Corriere  Mercantile,  i860. Genova.

(Cavourian. Contained  the  article  reprinted  in 1861 as  Bertani
comp.,  q.v.)
D.  N.  =  Daily  News.
Diritto —  Italian  Democratic  journal.

Forbice  =  Forbice,  la. Sicilian  newspaper  of  June  i860,  et  seq.
Giornale  del  Regno  delle  due  Sicile. i860.
Giorn.  Off.  .Sic  — Giornale  Officiale  di  Sicilia,  1859-1860.

(The  paper  begins  again  under  the  new  regime  on  June  7,  i860.)

B  n

370  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

/.  I..  N.  =  Illustrated  London  News  for  iS6o.

(Pictures  and  reports  of  Garibaldi's campaign  from  the  entrance
into  Palermo  onwards. Their  principal  artist  and  war  correspondent
was  Frank  Vizetelly,  who  lived  on intimate  terms  with  many  of  the
Garibaldini,  from  whose  narratives  he  made  up  his  reports. )
L' Illustration. Paris, i860.

(Not  much  in  text,  but  good  and  fairly  accurate  sketches.)
Mondo  Illustrato  =  Il  Mondo  Illustrato  for  i860.

(Illustrated  paper  on  lines  of  our  Illustrated  London  News.  First
two  years  of  it  were  1847-8,  third  year  began  July  7,  i860.  Its
pictures  are  not  very  good,  but  are  fairly  accurate.  Its  text  includes
D.  F.  Botto's  account  of  the  taking  of  Palermo,  with  some  details  not
found  elsewhere.)
M.  Post  =  Morning  Post.

(Enjoyed  on  the  Continent  the  reputation  of  being  the  '  Giornale
Ofdcioso  del  Palmerston.')
Movimento.
Nazione.
Opinione.

(Cavourian. See  Dina,  for  a  reprint  of  many  of  its  most  important
articles.)
Times.

(The  Times'  special  correspondent,  Eber  the  Hungarian,  sent  over
long  reports  which  are  the  best  single  authority  on  the  taJnng  of
Palermo  on  May  27  and  the  following  days — an  operation  in  which
Eber  took  part.)
Un .  It.  =  Unita  Italiana. Democratic.

IT.  MANUSCRIPTS

I. M3S. BELONGING TO PRIVATE PERSONS

Canzio  M5S.  =  *i.  Copies  of Garibaldi's  letters  from December i860
onwards.
*2.  Accounts  kept  by  Garibaldi  of  his  farming  at  Caprera,
both  before  and  after  i860.
Account  of  purchase  of  part  of  Caprera  in  1855.
*3.  Accounts  kept  by  Garibaldi  of  his  expenses  and  receipts
on  voyages  of  1852-4.
4.  Relazione  sul  Progetto  di  Legge  per  estendere  ai  64  di
Talamone  la  decorazione  dei  Mille.
Delia  Cerda  M5.  =  Unprinted  lecture  by  Santostefano  dei  Marchesi  della

Cerda  on  the  Sicilian  Exiles,  1859  to  i860.
Elia  M.S.  =  Letter  of  A.  Elia  to  author,  absolutely  denying  alleged  boarding
of  Lombardo  by  Carabinieri  on  night  of  May  5  as  narrated  in  Becchio,
q.v.,  and  giving  details  of  course  from  Talamone  to  Marsala.
Mario  MSS.  —  Papers  of  Jessie  White  Mario,  kindly  shown  me  by  Mr.  T,  F.
Unwin.

BIBLIOGRAPHY  371

Peard's  Journal  MS.  =  MS.  journal  for  1859-60,  of  J.  W.  Peard,  '  Gari-
baldi's Englishman.'  Written  up  in  his  note-book  during  the  cam-
paigns, not  every  evening,  but  every  few  days.  Most  kindly  lent  me
by  Miss  Peard,  together  with  the  following  : —

*Peard  M5.=  MS.  narrative  of  Alpine  campaign  by  J.  W.  Peard,  1859.
Based  on  his  Journal,  q.v.

Rotolo  MSS.  =  Letters  and  dispatches  addressed  to  Padre  (comandante)
Rotolo,  now  Cav.  Agostino  Rotolo,  in  whose  possession  they  are.
Letters  from  Garibaldi,  Sirtori  and  La  Masa,  June  2,  i860.

Lord  J.  Russell  MSS.  =  Letters  of  Lord  John  Russell  to  Sir  James  Hudson,
i860.  In  possession  of  Hon.  Rollo  Russell,  who  kindly  allowed  me
to  consult  them.  Important  supplement  to  official  dispatches
published  in  Br.  Pari.  Papers  (q.v.).

Lady  Russell  M5S.  =  Letters  of  Poerio,  Sir  James  Hudson  and  others  to
Lady  Russell,  i860.  In  possession  of  Lady  Agatha  Russell,  who
kindly  allowed  me  to  consult  them.

*Schwabe  MSS.  —  Papers  of  late  Mrs.  Schwabe,  property  of  Lady  Lock-
wood,  who  kindly  lent  them  to  me.

Mrs.  Schwabe's  Journal  of  Visit  to  Caprera,  May  1861.

Account by  her gardener, Webster,  of his  visit to Caprera,

November  9,  1861.
Poem  of  Garibaldi  on  Caprera,  1863.

*Shaen  MSS.  —  Letters  of  Mazzini  in  possession  of  Miss  Margaret  Shaen,
who  kindly  lent  me  copies.  Includes  copy  of  letter  of  Mazzini  to
James  Stansfeld,  January  30,  1859.

Spring  Rice  ikfS5.=  Letter  to  author  by  Sir  Cecil  Spring  Rice,  reporting
stories  told  him  by  Sir  James  Hudson  re  secret  history  of  i860.

Taylor  MSS.  =Mazzini's  letters  to  his  English  friends  the  Taylors.  In
possession  of  Mrs.  Osier,  Birmingham,  and  her  uncle,  Mr.  Malleson,
who  kindly  lent  me  copies.

II. BOLOGNA MSS.

(Copies  of  the  Bixio  MSS.)

Bixio  MS.  DiiJtno  =  Journal  kept  by  Bixio  in  his  pocket-book.  May  5-
June  8,  i860,  beginning  with  jottings  with  regard  to  details  of  organi-
sation for  embarkation,  night  of  May  5.  Many  of  the  most  important
parts  of  this  diary  have  not  been  printed  in  Guerzoni's  Bixio  or  else-
where.

*Bixio  MS.,  Lettere,  1859  =  Letters  from  Bixio  during  campaign  in  the
Alps.

Bixio  MS.,  Lettere,  1860  =  Letters  from  Bixio  from  Sicily.  Partially
printed  in  Guerzoni's  Bixio  and  Bixio  Com.,  but  some  important  parts
have  not  been  printed.

III. GENOA MSS.

Bibl.  Civ.=Biblioieca  Civica.

MSS.  Socc.  Gar.  —  Soccorso  a  Garibaldi.  Genova.  Bibl.  Civ.  D  bis.  4.  4.
14. (Not  important.)

372  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

IV. LONDON MSS.

Panizzi  M5S  =  British  Museum,  addit.  1900-1905,  36714-36729

Correspondence  of  A.  Panizzi  with  Italian  patriots  of  all  parties  and
their  principal  English  sympathisers.  A  most  important  collection,
of  which  part  has  been  published  in  Panizzi  {Letter e),  q.v.

V. MILAN MSS.

The  following  important  MSS.  are  kept  in  the  Museo  del  Risorgimento,
in  the  Castello.  Except  the  first  two  [Simonetta  MS.  and  Libra  degli
or  dint),  all  are  in  the  famous  Archivio  Bertani.

*  Simonetta  MS.  =  Simonetta  (Francesco). Giornali  dei  Cacciatori  a  Cavallo
o  Guide  del  Generate  Garibaldi. 1859.

(On  this  important  MS. much  of  Carrano  is  based. Important
passages  from  it  will  be  found  quoted  at  length  in  De  Cristofons,  q.v.
In  my  notes  above,  the  pagination  refers  to  the  MS.  copy,  as  the
original  has  no  pagination  ;  both  are  bound  up  together.)
*Lihro  degli  ordini  :  Prima  Regg^o  Cacc>''  dell'  Alpi,  Campagna  1859.
A B.=  Archivio  Bertani  {secondo  elenco).

A.  B.,  *Plico  VIII.  no.  120,  doc.  8,  contains  three  unpublished  narratives,
by  participants,  of  the  battles  of  Varese  and  Como.
*i.  Cacc.  delle  Alpi. 20  regg.  8  compia.

(Story  of  both  battles.)
*2.  Relazione  delta  Battaglia  di  Varese.

(Also  of  S.  Fermo.)
*3.  Migliavacca.

(A  most  important,  too  much  neglected,  account  of  Varese  and
S.  Fermo  by  Filippo  Migliavacca,  captain  of  the  2nd  company  of
Medici's  batt.,  with  very  careful  detailed  maps,  which  were  repro-
duced in  Cadolini.  The  second  of  these  maps  (San  Fermo)  is
docketed  as  no.  loi  in  Plico  VIII.,  but  it  is  really  part  of  No.  120.)
A.  B.,  *Plico  VIII.  no.  120,  doc.  12  =  Carlo  Gorini  a  Bertani,  15 Feb.,  i860.

(Letter  telling  story  of  Varese  and  San  Fermo.)
A.  B.,  *Plico  IX.  1859  =  Carte  del  Servizio  Sanitario  Cacc.  delle  Alpi.
A.  B.,  *PlicQ  X.  1859,  no.  34. Lettera  di  Ben.  Cairoli,  September  25,  1859
A.  B.,  Plichi  A.  B.  C.  D.  E.^Autografi. Celebrita.
Plico  A.,  no.  II. Dumas'  Letter  re  Memorie.
Plico  B.,  sec.  c. Dolfi's  Letters.
Plico  B.,  sec.  G. Reports  from  the  Marches.
Plico  B.,  sec.  H. No.  i,  Buschi's  Letter.

*Plico  D. Dossier  of  the  plot  to  release  Settembrini,  1855-6.
A.  B.,  Plico  XII.  no.  12. Letter  from  Messina  conspirators,  March  26,
i860.

No.  13. Dossier  of  offers  of  service,  and  replies.  May  i860.

No.  14. Dossier  Zambianchi,  1861

No. 18. Statement  about  loss  of  the  ammunition on  May 5

(reprinted,  Mazzini,  xi.)
No.  19. Dumas' 'telegram  of  May  4,  i860.
Nos.  24,  29,  31,  41,  42,  44  are  also  interesting.
No.  38. Preparations  for  insurrection  on  mainland  of  Naples,
June  i860

BIBLIOGRAPHY  373

A.  B.,  Plico  XIII.  May  i860. 133  Letters,  mostly  of  application  to  join

Garibaldi.
A.  B.,  Plico  XIV.  June  i860. Over  300  letters,  ditto.
A.  B.,  Plico  XV.  July  i860. Numerous  letters,  ditto.

(The  subsequent  innumerable  pliclii are chiefly the accounts,
receipts,  orders  and  whole  business  papers  of  Bertani's  Cassa  Cenirale
of  i860.)
Garibaldi's  Letters  to  Bertani,  1851-60.

(Mostly  printed  in  Mario's  Bertani. But  some  are  not.)

VI. NAPLES MSS.

Landi  MS.  =Relazione  giUstificativa  su  le  operazioni  eseguite  con  la  colovna
mobile  agli  ordini  del  Generate  Landi  dal  6  al  ij  Maggio  i860.  In  the
Archivio  Storia  Patria  of  Naples  (93  Piazza  Dante).  Copy  presented
by  General  Pittaluga ;  with  pencil  notes  at  side  by  G.  C.  Abba  and
General  Pittaluga.

(Most  important  for  the  battle  of  Calatafimi.)

VII. PALERMO MSS.

Polizia  =  Archivio  di  Stato.  Minister 0  per  gli  affari  di  Sicilia.  Polizia.
i860,  Nos.  1237,  1238,  1239. *i857.  No.  1212.

(Most  important  collection  ;  correspondence  of  Neapolitan  Minister
for  Sicily  with  Castelcicala  and  Lanza  at  Palermo,  and  with
provincial  intendants  of  provinces.  Deals  with  matters  that  we
should  call  military  and  political  as  well  as  mere  police.  Some  of
these  documents  have  been  printed  by  Signori  Paolucci  and  Guardione
and  the  L'Ora  newspaper,  but  such  publications  form  only  a  very  small
proportion  of  these  very  rich  archives.)

Br.  Cons.  M55.  =  Papers  of  the  British  Consulate,  Palermo,  1850-60.
Official  letters  of  Mr.  Goodwin  to  the  British  Minister  at  Naples,
including  his  '  Political  Journal  '  of  Palermo,  May  19,  ef  seq. i860.

(By  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Churchill  and  of  the  Foreign  Office  at  home
I  have  been  permitted  to  study  these  important  papers.)

Sior.  Patria  MSS.  =  A  rchivio  Storia  Patria.  Collection  Lodi.  Case  con-
taining Manoscritti  varii  riferibili  agli  avvenimenti  Politici  di  Sicilia
ne'  secoli  XVIII  e  XIX.

(Mostly  of  the  date  earlier  than  i86o,  but  contain  two  letters  of
Pilo's,  April  18  and  May  18,  i860  ;  a  copy  of  the  Riassunto  del  pro-
cesso  pe'  fatti  del  4  Aprile  in  the  Arch,  di  Stato  ;  and  some  autographs
of  Garibaldi's  and  others,  mostly  rough  copies  of  Proclamations,  &c.,
elsewhere  published.)

Palermo  National  Museum.  Historical  Room.  Collection  of  proclama-
tions, pictures,  relics,  &c.,  of  i860,  and  old  maps  of  Palermo.

VIII. ROME MSS.

Savi  MS.  =  Manuscript  diary  of  Savi,  a  Genoese  of  the  Thousand,  kept  on
the  spot  during  the  campaign,  on  separate  sheets  of  paper  of  different
colours  and  sizes.  Signor  Menghini  kindly  allowed  me  to  use  this
important  authority.

374  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Mazz.  Letters  V.  £".=  Unpublished  letters  of  Mazzini  to  Bertani,  Grillenzoni,
Crispi,  Garibaldi  and  others,  1859-60,  in  the  Vitt.  Em.,  Rome  ;  Signer
Menghini,  who  is  now  carrying  out  the  work  of  publishing  the  national
edition  of  Mazzini's  immense  correspondence,  most  kindly  allowed  me
to  work  on  these.  I  must  also  thank  Signor  Nathan  for  his  part  in
granting  that  permission.

V.  E.  R.  M.=Biblioteca  Vitforio  Etiianucle  MSS. Risorgimento.

V.  E.  R.  M.  82  =  La  riv.  Siciliana  del  i860. Narrazione  storica.

(A  first-hand  account  of  Garibaldi's  entry  into  Palermo,  clearly  by
Eber,  whose  narrative  in  the  Times  is  almost  identical.)

V.  E.  R.  M.  193,  2  =  Copy  of  the  letter  given  in  CiampoU,  p.  129,  as
Marzo  5.  It  is  indeed  Marzo  5  in  the  copy,  but  most  obviously  the
original  was  written  on  Maggio  5,  as  the  whole  sense  shows.

V.  E.  R.  M.  225  =  Garibaldi  MSS.  225,  95,  Proclamation  to  Romans.
Copy  only,  date  Genova,  May  5.

Album  dei  Mille.  In  the  V.  E.  photographs  of  the  greater  part  of  the
Thousand,  the  impression  left  is  that  of  intellectuality,  character  and
cultivation.

III.  NOTES  OF  CONVERSATIONS

In  studying  the  history  of  fifty  years  ago,  an  important  source  of
evidence  besides  books  and  MSS.  is  found  in  the  oral  testimony  of  survivors
and  of  those  who  knew  the  actors  well.  I  have  not  neglected  this  source,
and  have  made  it  a  practice  to  take  down  notes  on  the  spot  during  conversa-
tion, and  if  necessary  write  out  the  notes  again  carefully  within  twenty-four
hours  afterwards.

In  the  following  list  of  '  Conversations  *  {Conv.),  this  practice  has  in  each
case  been  adhered  to,  and  I  have  notes  taken  at  the  time  to  show  for  every
Conversation  used  as  evidence.  In  this  list  I  have  not  put  down  my
conversations  with  modern  historians,  as  Signopi  Luzio  and  Paolucci,  useful
as  those  have  been  to  me,  but  have  confined  the  list  to  interviews  with
actors  in  or  witnesses  of  the  events  related.

Conv.  Armaforte  =  ]<iotes  of  Conversation  with  Antonio  Armaforte
of  the  squadre  of  Parco,  who  was  with  Garibaldi's  column.  May  21
onwards.  Important  for  Garibaldi's  exact  route  from  Renda  to
Palermo.

Conv.  B eltrani  —  Converssition  with  Senatore  Martino  Beltrani  Scalia,  of
Palermo.

Conv.  Cadolini  =  Notes  of  conversation  with  Senatore  G.  Cadolini  (veteran
of  1849,  '59,  '60,  and  '66).

Conv.  Calisti  =  l>iotes  of  conversation  with  Matteo  Calisti  of  the  Sicilian
squadre.

Conv.  Ca.mpo  =  Notes  of  conversation  with  Giuseppe  Campo,  of  the  well-
known  patriotic  Sicilian  family,  and  one  of  the  Thousand.

Conv.  Canzio  —  Notes  of  my  conversations  with  General  Canzio,  one  of  the
Thousand,  Garibaldi's  son-in-law,  taken  down  at  Iiis  dictation,  at
Genoa,  January  1907  and  January  1908.

BIBLIOGRAPHY  375

Conv.  Delia  Cerda ^Notes  of  conversation  with  Santostefano  dei  Marchesi

della  Cerda.

(In  i860  his  family,  well  known  in  Palermitan  Liberal  society,  lived

in  a  house  just  opposite the Castellamare,  whence he saw many

curious  things.)
Cow. £«§•.=  Notes  of  conversations  with  an Englishman, who  served

Garibaldi  in  Sicily,  after  June  i860. (He  modestly  desires  anonymity,

though  he  is  well  known  to  many  English  and  Italians  and  was  a

personal  friend  of  Garibaldi's  by  the  title  of  good  service  rendered.)
Conv.  iT^iffl  =  Notes  of  conversation  with  Elia  (A.),  one  of  the  Thousand.
Conv.  Guarneri  —  'Notes  of  conversation  with  Senator  Andrea  Guarneri.
*Conv. Marchetti  — Notes  of  conversation  with  Mr. Marchetti, now  of

Halifax,  a  veteran  of  the  Alpine  campaign,  1859,  who  ran  away  from

school,  aet.  15,  to  become  one  of  the  Cacciatori  of  the  Varese  and  Como.
Conv. Mineo  =  'Notes  of conversation with  Signor Giacomo Mineo  of

Marsala,  who  witnessed  the  landing  of  the  Thousand.
Conv. Paternostro ^Notes of conversation with Signor Paternostro, in

May  i860,  a  leader  of  squadre  of  Corleone ;  present  at  Renda,  Parco,

GibUrossa  and  Palermo.
Conv.  Pitrd  =  'Notes  of  conversation  with  Professor  G.  Pitre,  of  Palermo,

the  celebrated  Sicilian  antiquary,  who  was  a  boy  in  Palermo  at  the

time  of  Garibaldi's  entry.
Conv.  Principale  —  Notes  of  conversation  with  Gaetano  Principale,  Sicilian,

who  was  on  the  night  march  from  Gibilrossa  to  Palermo. Important

as  to  route.
Conv.  RiccioUi  =  1^0163  of  conversations  with  Ricciotti  Garibaldi  and  his

family.
Conv.  Rotolo  =  Notes  of  Conversation  with  Cav.  Agostino  Rotolo,  the  Padre

Rotolo  of  i860,  who  acted  as  an  officer  of  Sicilians  in  May  i860,  in

spite  of  his  cloth.
Conv.  Salinas  =  Notes  of  conversation  with  Commendatore  Salinas,  a  boy

in  Sicily  in  i860.
Conv.  Tedaldi  =  Notes  of  conversation  with  Colo,  Cav.  Fr.  Tedaldi,  who

was  a  boy  of  eighteen  in  his  father's  house  at  the  Quattro  Venti,

Palermo,  when  Garibaldi  entered  ;  fought  May  27-9  in  Palermo.
Conv.  Tiirr  =  Notes  of  conversation  with  General  Tiirr.
Conv.  FfMz  =  Conversation  with  Bartolo  Vitali,  a  Sicilian  of  the  Thousand

Important  for  march  from  Renda  to  Parco,  May  21.

SICILIAN POETRY ON EVENTS OF APRIL-MAY 1860

1.  Teodoru  e  Rosalba,  o  sia  la  rivoluzioni  di  lu  i860.

(An  epic  poem  in  fourteen  cantos. All  the  principal  incidents  and
personages  from  April  4  to  the  armistice  are  brought  in.)
Printed  in  Poesie  Sicilians  di  Carmelo  Piola.

2.  La  Trasuta  di  Garibardi  a  Palermu.

(Poem  on  May  27,  i860. Reprinted  in  Ventisette  Maggio,  q.v.)

3.  La  Vittoria  di  Garibaldi  in  Sicilia  e  la  caduta  di  Franciscu  Borbuni. Di

Giuseppe  Emma  da  Partinicu. Palermo. 1S83.
(Poem  o£  533  stanzas.'*

376  GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

4.  L'Assarlu  di  lu  4  Aprili  (see  above  ia  list  of  books).

(For  shorter  poems  in  Sicilian  dialect  written  during  i860  itself,  see
the  collection  Poesie  in  dialetto  Siciliano  stampate  durante  la  riv.  del
i85o,  in  the  collection  Lodi,  Afck.  Star.  Patvia,  Palermo.)

ITALIAN' AND ENGLISH POETRY

Garibaldi  (Versi  e  prose). Giosufe  Carducci.

Rapsodie  Ganbaldina. II. Giovanni  Marradi.

La  Nolle  di  Caprera. Gabriele  D'Annunzio.

Poems  before  Congress. Last  Poems  (1862). Mrs.  Browning.

Nicolera  (In  The  Disciples). Mrs.  Hamilton  King.

[Additions  10  the  Bibliography]

Mein.  Stor.  Mil. I.  =  Memorie  Stoviche  Militari. Fasc.  I.  gennaio,  1909.
Comando  del  Corpo  di  Stato  Maggiore,

(Official  documents  of  trial  ot  Giorgini  for  giving  the  ammunition
to  Garibaldi  at  Talamone.)

I

Gulf of
Caste  1 1  amare

irea

^alatafimi

AY  IS

xnto  del

r'  S.Ninfa

Partaiina

Gib'eUi

j^

^

:%

?

r'orto
Palo

C.S.Mi

3nc&  Co.,  Londoi

route  of  the  Thousand
roads  in  1860
tracks  in  1860
N.B.  Many  of  the  riuers  marked  contain  little  or  no  water  in  l/lay _

Green  &  Co.,  London.  New  York.  Bombay,  and  Calcutta.

MAY.26eve%<5;C

S..

fcgiiia

MAP  IV  (a)

Environs  of
PA  LERMO

Lougmaos,  Gi

Co.,  London,  New  York,  Bombay,  and  Calcutta.

Malta  fx

(British) ^■^

Scale,  i:4,5jOO,ooo
Eng-lish  Miles

Note:-  King  Victor  Emmanuel's  dominions

during  May,  1860,  are  shaded  thus:- I ' I

The  Quadrilateral  Fortresses  are  underlined

Emery  Walker  sc.

New  York,  Bombay,  and  Calcutta.

MAP  V ITALY,  at  time  of  the  sailing  ofthe  Thousand

do],  New  Vork.  Bombay,  and  Calcutta.

INDEX

Abba  quoted,  194-5,  343,  344

Aberdeen,  Lord,  51-2  and  note^

Acton,  Capt.,  236-7

Agresta, 192

Amari,  147,  148,  293

Antonelli,  Card.,  76

Ardoino,  85

Arese,  Count,  75

Armaforte,  Antonio,  cited,  344,  347

Arnold,  Matthew,  cited,  79  note  ^

Austria  :

British  attitude  towards,  20,  21,

79  ; Aberdeen's negotiations

regarding  Neapolitan  prisoners,

51-2  and  note  *

Ferdinand  II's  attitude  towards,

43,  52, 125-6
France,  war  with  (1859),  87,  103
Hungarian  attitude  towards,  103

note  ^
Naples  not  helped  by  (i860),  224
Piedmont :

Conspiracy with Naples and
the  Pope  against,  138,  140,
169,  186
War with (1859), see under
Piedmont
Austrians,  barbarities  of,  19,  21

Baldini,  Teresa,  197  and  note  2

Bandi,  — ,  wounded  at  Calatafimi,
259-60,  262  ;  quoted — on  Gari-
baldi's decision  not  to  go  to  Sicily,
190-1  and  note  ;  on  the  morning
before  Calatafimi,  251  ;  cited,  220
note  ;  otherwise  mentioned,  220,
223

Basso,  29,  34  ;  cited,  18  note  '

Bentivegna,  149

Benza,  153

Bergamo,  volunteers  from,  for
Sicilian  expedition,  218

Bersaglieri,  efforts  of,  to  join  Sici-
lian expedition  frustrated,  221

Bertani,  Dr.,  deprecates  Pisacane's
expedition,  68  ;  organises  ambu-
lance for  Cacciatori  delle  A I  pi,  85,
86  ;  justly  appreciates  the  situa-
tion (Jan.  i860) — letter  to  Panizzi,
166  and  note  2 ;  Garibaldi's  letter
to  (Feb.  20),  quoted,  168,  333;
discourages  royal  troops'  deser-
tions, 172  ;  organises  Sicilian  ex-
pedition, 180,  193-4;  instructed
to  aid  Zambianchi's  expedition,
2x6  ;  Garibaldi's  letter  to,  on
battle  of  Calatafimi,  261  note  ;
cited,  340-1;  quoted,  334;  state-
ments of,  as  to  Cavour's  attitude,
&c.,  162  and  note,  335-7  ;  other-
wise mentioiied,  60-1,  185  note^,
187,  201-3

Besana,  Garibaldi's  letter  to  (Feb.
20),  quoted,  333

Bibliography,  348-76

Biffi,  Luigi,  262

Bismarck,  27,  80

Bixio,  Nino,  commissioned  to  enrol
volunteers  for  Garibaldi,  83  ;
joins  the  Cacciatori  delle  Alpi,  85  ;
at  San  Fermo,  99  ;  in  the  Val-
telline,  107 ;  in  the  Romagna,
119;  retires,  121;  claims  fulfil-
ment of  Garibaldi's  promise  re-
garding Sicily,  1 70-1  ;  opposes
scheme  for  smashing  ballet-boxes,
176;  on  Garibaldi's  decision  not
to  go  to  Sicily,  190-1  ;  per-
suades Garibaldi  to  go  and  renews
preparations,  192-4,  337-8  ;  the
embarkation,  200-2  ;  arrange-
ments for  the  ammunition,  207-8
and  note ;  in  command  of  the
Lombardo,  209 ;  first  battalion
under,  219  ;  obtains  coal  at
Porto  S.  Stefano,  221  ;  attitude
towards  La  Masa,  222  ;  anxious
encounter  with  Piewovte, 228 ;

378

GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

disappointment  with  Sicilians,
241  ;  march  to  Salemi,  242-3  ;  at
Calatafimi,  257-9;  advises  retreat,
25S  and  note  - ;  at  Borgetto,  270  ;
at  Misilmeri,  283  ;  enraged  at  La
Masa's  incapacity  on  the  advance,
297  ayid  note  ' ;  at  the  Ponte  delle
Teste,  299  ;  at  the  Porta  Termini
barricade,  300 ;  wounded,  300,
302  ;  enraged  at  laxity  of  Sici-
lians, 305  ;  confined  to  bed,  306  ;
apprehensive  of  further  attack,
323 ;  reassured,  325 ;  political
capacity  of,  187  ;  military  talent,
1S7,  214 ;  ferocity  towards  his
men,  222  ;  family  relations,  85
note'';  cited,  162 aK^fwo/e, 261, 284,
288  note  -,  336  ;  quoted,  268  note  ^,
324  ;  otherwise  mentioned,  16S,
220

Blind,  Karl,  212

Bomba,  see  Ferdinand  II

Bonanno,  Gen.,  attacks  Cozzo  di
Crasto  and  returns  to  Monreale,
279  note  1 ;  misinformed  by  Lanza
(May  26),  293  ;  recalled  to  Pa-
lermo Palace,  308  ;  mentioned,
246-7  and  note  '

Bosco,  Major,  success  of,  near  Mon-
reale, 273  ;  vainly  urges  Von
Mechel  to  march  on  Palermo,
281-2  ;  returns  to  Palermo,  315  ;
enraged  at  truce,  317-18 ;  af-
fected by  Sicilian  vehemence,
321  ;  estimate  of,  134,  315

Bovi,  220-1

Boyce,  Mrs.,  cited,  25  note

Braico,  125,  218

Brenier  (French  ambassador  at
Naples),  128,  130-2

Brescia,  contributions  from,  towards
Sicilian  expedition,  218,  341

Briganti,  Col.  Fileno,  293-4

Brofferio,  165,  166

Bronzetti,  Narcisco,  103  and  note  ^,
105

Brown,  Consul,  200  note  ^

Browning,  Mrs.,  cited,  178  note

Buol,  Count,  130

Buonopane,  Col.,  313,  321-2

Buxton,  Mrs,  Gurney,  cited,  88
note  ^

Cacciatori  degli  Apennini,  86
Cacciatori  delle  A  Ipi  :

Equipment  of,  86,  88,  93

Formation  of  (1859),  78

Garibaldi' s  appreciation  of ,  2 1  i-i  2

Cacciatori  delle  Alpi — cont.

Genoese  carabineers  with,  88

Lombard  invasion  by,  91  ;  Var-
ese,  92-6  and  notes,  331  ;  San
Fermo  and  Como,  97-101  and
note  ',  331-2  ;  Laveno,  101-2  ;
crossing  to  Lecco,  103  ;  action
at  Seriate,  103  ;  from  Bergamo
to  Brescia,  104-5  ;  Tre  Ponti,
105-6  ;  ordered  away  to  the
Valtelline,  106

Ofificers  of,  85  ;  help  from,  to-
wards Sicilian  expedition,  194

Patois  verse  celebrating,  88  note  *

Personnel  of,  88-9

Strength  of,  88  and  note  ^

Tiirr  sent  with,  213  ;  his  rashness
at  Ponte  S.  Giacomo,  105-6

Value  and  estimate  of  work  of,
108-9
Cairoli,  Benedetto,  company  under,

on Sicilian expedition, 219  ;  at

Calatafimi,  259  ;  wounded  at  the

Porta Termini barricade, 300 ;

later  career,  95;  quoted,  119
Cairoli,  Enrico,  at  Calatafimi,  259  ;

quoted,  253,  268  note  ^
Cairoli,  Ernesto,  95
Calatafimi,  Landi's  arrival  at,  244,

247
Calatafimi,  battle  of:

Authorities  cited  for,  343

Beginning  of,  254

Conduct  of,  256  and  note  2,  257-
60  and  note,  272

Garibaldi's  impressions  of,  261
note

Losses  in,  261

Troops  engaged  in,  253,  255-6,

342-3

Caltanisetta,  Neapolitan  garrison  at,
158  note  1

Campanaro,  action  at,  278

Campo,  Giuseppe,  leads  rising  at
Bagheria,  152 ;  falsifies  news
from  Sicily,  192  note  * ;  captures
Montalto  gate  and  bastion,  312  ;
cited,  276  note  ^,  347

Canzio,  Gen.,  wounded  at  the  Porta
Termini  barricade,  300 ;  cited,
177  note^,  181  note^,  205  note,
261,  340  ;  quoted,  320  note  ^,  330

Caprera :

Condition  and  natural  features  of,

32-3,  329-30
Garibaldi's  purchase  of  northern

half  of,  31
Inhabitants  of,  33-4

Carbonari,  40

INDEX

379

Carbone,  Francesco,  301

Carduccl,  223

Carini,  — ,  second  battalion  of
Sicilian  expedition  under,  219  ;
restores  order  among  La  Masa's
squadre,  297 ;  wounded  under
truce,  317

Carpanetto,  16

Ca.stelcicala,  Gov.,  Neapolitan  repre-
sentative in  London,  52  note  ^ ;
governor  of  Sicily,  147  ;  military
mistakes  of,  232  ;  nervousness  of,
246,  248  ;  orders  Landi's  retreat
on  Palermo,  248,  263  ;  withdrawal
of,  decided,  265  ;  quoted,  160

Castelli  quoted,  338

Castiglia,  — ,  captain  of  the  Pie-
monte,  230,  340  ;  cited,  230

Castromediano,  Sigismondo,  trial
and  imprisonment  of,  56 ;  re-
lease of,  124  ;  death  of,  55  ;  esti-
mate and  career  of,  55-6  ;  cited,
50  note  ^ ;  Memorie  of,  cited,  55
and  note  ^

Cataldo,  Gen.,  308-9  and  note  ^

Cava,  Capt.  Tommaso,  quoted,
304;  cited, 315  notes'^-*

Cavour,  Count,  Crimean  war  policy
of,  28-9 ;  alliance  with  Demo-
cratic party  (1856),  63-4,  66-7;
the  Orsini  affair  (1858),  71-4  ;
secret  agreement  with  Napoleon
at  Plombieres  (1858),  76-8  ;  sum-
mons Garibaldi  (Dec.  1858),  82  ;
Carrara  revolution  scheme,  83  ;
interviews  with  Garibaldi  (Feb.
and  Mar.  1859),  83  ;  contem-
plates suicide  on  the  disarmament
proposal,  80  ;  provokes  war  with
Austria  (Apr.  1859),  78,  80 ;
policy  embodied  in  creation  of
Garibaldi's  volunteer  force,  86,
213  ;  conspiracy  with  Kossuth,
no  ;  invites  Naples  to  alliance
against  Austria  (May  1859),  129  ;
enraged  at  Peace  of  Villafranca,
1 1 2-1 3  ;  organises  nationalist
opposition,  1 1 3-1 5  ;  retirement
in  Switzerland,  115  ;  returns  to
power  (Jan.  i860),  139,  164  ;  ex-
pels Crispi  from  Turin,  164 ;
negotiations  concerning  annexa-
tion of  Tuscany  and  Emilia,  164  ;
advises  Sicilians  to  rise  (Feb.
i860),  153  ;  Garibaldi's  attitude
towards  (Feb.  15),  333-4  ;  corre-
spondence with  Villamarina  (Mar.
i860),  141,  169  ;  annexation  of
Tuscany  and  Emilia,  140-1  ;  ces-

sion of  Savoy  and  Nice,  169-70,
175  ;  Garibaldi's  quarrel  with,
165,  170,  178,  212  ;  invites  Ri-
botti  to  invade  Sicily,  170,  186  ;
offers  guns  from  National  Society
for  a  Sicilian  expedition,  184  and
note  ^,  1 86  ;  attitude  towards
Garibaldi's  Sicilian  expedition  be-
fore its  start,  5-6,  162-3,  188-9,
i95~7  '^^'^  "^0^^  ^  198,  336-9  ;  in
Genoa  (Apr.  22-3),  186-8;  inter-
view with  Sirtori,  187  and  notes -8
and  note  "',  336-7,  339  ;  interview
with  Victor  Emmanuel  at  Bo-
logna, 196-7 ;  policy  regarding  in-
vasion of  Papal  States,  216  ;  sup-
port given  to  Sicilian  expedition
after  its  start,  218,  226,  325  ;
diplomatic  difficulties  over  the
expedition,  224-7 ;  instructions
regarding  arrest  of  Garibaldi,
225-6 ;  correspondence  with  Rica-
soli  regarding  the  expedition,  226-
7 ;  reception  of  news  of  Gari-
laaldi's  landing  at  Marsala,  244  ;
Instructions  to  Marquis  d'Aste  as
to  winning  over  Neapolitan  navy,
325  note  ^ ;  efforts  on  behalf  of
Fauche,  201  ;  principles  and
achievements  of,  27 ;  policy  of
deceit,  27,  183  and  note  2,  339  ;
attitude  towards  Mazzini,  70 ;
towards  Garibaldi,  64-5,  70,  122,
165-6  ;  biographies  of,  26  note  ;
otherwise  mentioned,  i,  4,  7,  21,
173-4,  267,  315,  341

Cesaresco,  Countess  Martinengo,
cited,  114  note  ^

Chretien,  Gen.,  318,  320

Ciaccio,  312

Cialdini,  Gen.,  86-7,  103

Ciampoli  cited,  17  note  -^  et  passim

Clarendon,  Earl  of,  61

Collins,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  33-4

Colonna,  Gen.,  277-9

Como,  97  ;  battle  of,  98-101,  331-2

Conca  d'Oro,  271  and  note  -

Corleo  cited  as  unreliable,  249  note  '

Corleone  :

Garibaldi's feigned retreat to,

279,  281,  345
Orsinl's  rearguard  action  near,  282
Squadre  formed  in,  245

Corrao,  — ,  sets  sail  with  Pilo,  169  ;
Garibaldi's  dispatch  to,  284,  287
note  - ;  falls  on  Cataldo's  troops,

309
Cosenz, — , discountenances  Pisa-
cane's  expedition,  68  ;  joins  the

38o

GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Cacciatori  dcUe  Alpi,  85  ;  at
Vaxese,  95  ;  at  Olgiate,  98  ;  at
San  Fermo,  99  ;  at  Tre  Ponti,
105  ;  in  the  Romagna,  119  ;
estimate  of,  187  ;  otherwise  men-
tioned, 214,  341

Cossins,  Consul,  242

Cossovich,  Capt.,  311,  313

Costatini  cited,  345  ;  estimate  of,  as
an  authority,  344

Cowen,  Joseph,  24-5

Cowlej',  Earl,  quoted,  342

Cozzo  di  Crasto,  276-7

Craig,  Herbert,  25  note

Crimean  war  :

British  attitude  towards,  24
Piedmontese  contingent  in,  28-9,
61

Crispi,  Signora,  with  the  Sicilian
expedition,  219

Crispi,  Francesco,  Sicilian  tour  of,
in  disguise  as  Manuel  Pareda,
152  and  note  ^  ;  interviews  with
Fabrizi,  Fcirini,  and  Rattazzi,
163-4  ;  expelled  from  Turin  by
Cavour,  164  ;  claims  fulfilment  of
Garibaldi's  promise,  170-1  ;  in-
terview with  Farini  (Apr.  i860),
1S3-4  ;  on  Garibaldi's  decision
not  to  go  to  Sicily,  190.  192  ;  ob-
tains good  news  from  Sicily,  192,
338  ;  undeterred  by  Garibaldi's
monarchical  proclamation,  212  ;
Garibaldi's  political  secretary  in
Sicily,  259,  269,  306  ;  diary  of,
quoted,  335  ;  otherwise  men-
tioned, 14S,  149,  189

Croats,  104  note

Cuneo,  Garibaldi's  letter  to,  quoted,
29

Cuniberti  cited,  344,  346

D' AsTE,  Marquis,  refuses  Garibaldi's
request  for  ammunition,  314-15,
320  note  ^ ;  at  conference  on
H.M.S.  Hannibal,  319  ;  Cavour's
instructions  to,  325  note  *

D'Azeglio,  Marquis  Massimo,  offers
Garibaldi  a  pension,  14  ;  organ-
ises nationalist  movement  in
the  Romagna,  114;  sequestrates
arms  of  IMiUion  Rifles  Fund,  i  S2-3
and  notes, 185,  198,334;  Greville's
account  of,  21  ;  mentioned,  26

De  Cesare,  Signer,  cited,  46  et  passim

De  Cristoforis,  98

De  La  Rive,  William,  quoted,  115,
335.  338-9

De  Sivo  cited,  53-4
Deideris,  14,  30
Delia  Cerda,  Signor,  cited,  293
Delia  Margherita,  Solaro,  113
Delia  Rocca,  Gen.,  72
Delia  Russa,  Rocca,  299
Denegri,  Pietro,  16,  18  note  ^
Di  Benedetto,  Pasquale,  312
Di  Benedetto,  RaflEaele,  312
Di  Benedetto,  Salvatore,  312
Dolmage,  Mr.,  cited,  152
Dumas,  326  note  ^

Eber  (Times  correspondent),  vnsit
of,  to  Ga.ribaldi's  camp,  2S4  note  ^,
2S6  ;  cited,  284  not-e  ^,  287  notes,
315  note  ^,  346  ;  queted,  301

Elia,  — ,  commanding  Lomhardo
under  Bixio,  228 ;  wounded  at
Calatafimi,  258,  262  ;  cited,  229
vote  *

Elliot,  Henrj',  mission  of,  to  Naples,
116  «o<e  ^  130  note'^;  urges  re-
form on  King  Francis,  128,  130  ;
value  of  dispatches  of,  130,  131;
views  on  King  Francis,  128  ;
quoted,  132  ;  cited,  304  note  ^

Emilia  :

Annexation of, to Piedmont,
see under Piedmont — Central
Italian  States
Constituted  a  province,  120  note  '

Eugenie,  Empress,  71,  76

Fabrizi,  Niccola,  collects  arms  at
Llalta,  149-50 ;  has  interviews
with  Crispi  and  Farini,  163-4 »
announces  Sicihan  revolution,
170 ;  telegram  from  (Apr.  26,
i860), 189-91

Falconi  quoted,  12  note^

Fanti,  Gen.,  11 9-21,  170

Farini,  — ,  organises  nationalist
movement  in  Modena,  114,  118  ;
Governor  of  Emilia,  120  note^,
163  ;  forward  policy  of,  120  ;
subsequent  caution,  120-1 ;  inter-
views with  Crispi  and  Finzi,
1S3-4  ;  message  of,  assuring  Ber-
tani  of  Government's  approval
^lay  i860),  197  note*;  cited,
226  note '

Fauche,  — ,  negotiations  with,  171,
180,  193  ;  grants  Piemonte  and
Lonibardo  to  Sicihan  expedition,
189,  202,  340  ;  dismisscil  and  ruin
of,  by  Rubattino,  201

I

INDEX

381

Ferdinand  I,  King  of  Naples,  40,  133
Ferdinand  II,  King  of  Naples  {Bom-
ba),  constitution  of  1848  granted
by,  44-5  ;  attitude  of,  towards
Austria,  43,  52,  125-6  ;  barbar-
ous tyranny  of,  45—7  ;  attempted
assassination  of  (1856),  67,  124;
Elliot's  mission  to  (1S59),  116
note  ^  ;  batch  of  prisoners  liber-
ated by,  124 ;  army  policy  of,
I33>  135  ;  l^st  illness,  127  ;  last
instructions  to  his  son,  128 ;
death  of,  128  ;  estimate  of,  42-3  ;
nickname  of,  46  note  2
Ferraciolo,  33

Filangieri,  Gen.,  career  of,  131  and
note  :  reconquest  of  Sicily  (1848),
131,146-7;  Ferdinand's  estimate
of,  128  ;  advice  to  King  Francis,
129;  disregarded,  131;  diminish-
ing influence  of,  138 ;  refuses  to  go
to  Sicily  (i860),  265  ;  mistaken
mihtary  advice  of,  regarding
Sicilian  situation,  266  ;  quoted,
46:  otherwise  mentioned,  43,  134
Finall,  197  note  ^

Finzi,  — ,  opposes  scheme  for
smashing  ballot-boxes,  176  ;  re-
fused arms  for  Sicilian  expedi-
tion, 182-3  ^^^  '^'^^^  ^  '>  interview
with  Farini,  183-4 »  supplies
money  for  Sicilian  expedition,
202-3  '>  Garibaldi's  letter  to  (Feb.
15),  quoted,  333  ;  letters  of,  cited,
336
Fisher,  H.  A.  L.,  cited,  75  note  -
France :

Austria,  war  with  (1859),  87,  103
British  attitude  towards,  79  and

note  '^-81,  115,  224
Italian question, attitude to-
wards :
Garibaldi,  dislike  of,  29
Gladstone's  Neapolitan  Letters

as  affecting  (1851),  54
Minister withdrawn from
Naples  (1856),  54,  61  ;  diplo-
matic relations resumed
(1859),  128
Rome,  French  garrison  in,  see
Rome
Nice and Savoy ceded to, see

Piedmont — Cession
Prussian  menace  to  (1859),  no
Villafranca,  Pea,ce  of,  see  that  title
Francis  II,  King  of  Naples,  marriage
of,  126  ;  dying  instructions  from
his  father,  128  ;  incident  at  re-
ceiving homage, 128 ; refuses

alliances  with  Piedmont  (May
1859),  129;  helpless  vacillation
of,  129 ;  influences  affecting,
1 30-1  ;  rejects  Filangieri' s  advice,
131  ;  again  refuses  alhance  with
Piedmont  (i860),  139,  140  ;  con-
spiracy with  Austria  and  the  Pope
against  Piedmont,  138,  140,  169,
1 85  ;  Victor  Emmanuel's  letter
to  (Apr.  i860),  quoted,  185-6  ;
efforts  of,  against  Garibaldi's
Sicilian  expedition,  246  ;  action
regarding  the  Sicilian  situation,
265-7  ;  '  humble  petition  '  to,
refused  by  Garibaldi,  319-21  ;
frightened  at  accounts  from
Palermo,  322  ;  capitulates,  323  ;
estimate  of,  42,  126

FrappoUi,  189

'  Friends  of  Italy, '  Society  of  (1851),

23
Fruscianti  cited,  330

Garaviglia  cited,  341

Garibaldi,  Signora  (mother  of  Giu-
seppe), last  meeting  of,  with  her
son,  12  ;  death  of,  and  dream  of
Garibaldi,  17-18  and  note  \  19

Garibaldi,  Anita,  death  of  (1849),  9  ,
burial-place  of,  120  ;  Garibaldi's
memoirs  of,  14  ;  otherwise  men-
tioned, 206,  218

Garibaldi,  Felice,  30

Garibaldi,  Gen.  Giuseppe :
Appearance  of,  83-4
British  sentiments  towards, 22,

24
Career,  chronological  sequence  of
Retreat  from  Rome  (1849),  9
arrest  at  Chiavari  (1849),  lo-ii
visit  to  his  family  at  Nice,  12
wanderings,  12-13  ;  residence
at  Tangier,  13-14 ;  relations
with  Piedmontese  monarchy,
14;  goestoNe\vYork,i4;  severe
rheumatism,  14,  15  ;  work  in
candle  factory,  14-15  ;  tour  to
Central  America,  16  ;  illness
(marsh  fever),  16  ;  year's  voy-
age in  the  Carmen,  16-1S  and
note  '^  ;  sails  for  Newcastle  as
captain  of  the  Commonwealth,
18;  meets  Mazzini  (Feb.  1854),
19,  21-2  ;  presented  with  sword
of  honour  by  Tyneside  working
men,  25  ;  returns  to  Italy  and
settles  at  Nice  (1854),  26;
favours suppression of the

382

GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

monasteries  and  participation
in  Crimean  war,  28  ;  life  at
Nice,  29-30 ;  purchases  half
island  of  Caprera,  31  ;  life  and
occupations  there,  34-7  ;  Pa-
nizzi  liberation  scheme  (1855),
60-1  ;  alliance  with  Cavour,
64-5  ;  vice-president  of  Italian
National  Society  (1857),  65  ;
discountenances  Pisacane's  ex-
pedition, 68 ;  summoned  by
Cavour  (Dec.  1858),  82  ;  com-
missions Bixio  to  enrol  volun-
teers, 83  ;  spends  Christmas  at
Caprera,  83  ;  interview  with
Cavour  (Mar.  1859),  83-4  ;  first
meeting  with  Victor  Emmanuel,
84 ;  organises  Cacciatori  delle
Alpi,  85;  invades  Lombardy,
91;  enters  Varese,  92 ;  fortifies
its  approaches,  93-4  ;  battle  of
Varese,  94-6,  331  ;  San  Fermo
and  Como,  98-101  and  note  1,
331  ;  Laveno,  101-2  ;  crosses
to  Lecco,  103;  Ponte  S.  Pietro,
103 ;  Seriate,  103  ;  courtesy
to  Austrian  prisoners,  104 ;
from  Bergamo  to  Brescia,  104-

5  ;  under  Victor  Emmanuel's
orders,  105  ;  Tre  Ponti,  106  ;
sent  to  Salo,  106 ;  ordered
away  to  the  Valtelllne,  106  and
note ' ;  second  in  command
under  Fanti,  119  ;  at  Ravenna
— on  the  banks  of  the  '  Rubi-
con,' 120  ;  indecision  and  rash-
ness, 1 20-1  ;  retires  to  Genoa,
121 ;  relations  with  Piedmontese
cabinet,  122  ;  invited  to  help
Sicilians,  151,  163 ;  at  Turin
(Dec.  1859)— refused  organisa-
tion of  National  Guard  in  Lom-
bardy, 164  ;  indignation  at  ces-
sion of  Nice,  169-70,  172,  175-

6  ;  letters  promising  condi-
tionally to  go  to  Sicily  (Jan.
and  Mar.  i860),  167-9,  333  ;
second  marriage,  167  ;  returns
to  Caprera,  167  ;  advised  by
Hudson,  173,  174  ;  interpella-
tion in  the  Chamber  regarding
cession  of  Nice,  175  ;  scheme
for  smashing  ballot-boxes,  175-
7 ;  life  at  the  Villa  Spinola,
1 80-1  and  note  - ;  decided  by
Fabrizi's  telegram  not  to  go
to  Sicily,  189-92  ;  decided  by
'  new  facts  '  to  go,  i93>  337-8  ;
the  start  and  embarkation,  200

note  ^,  205-7 ;  the  voyage,
206-10,  223,  227 ;  leaving  of  the
ammunition,  208-9  ;  scheme
for  invasion  of  Papal  States,
209,  216-18  ;  arrival  at  Tala-
mone,  210 ;  proclamation  to
his  followers,  211-12  ;  defec-
tion of  republicans,  212;  organ-
ising his  followers,  219  ;  discip-
lining them,  220 ;  refuses  to
take  Bersaglieri  deserters  from
Orbetello,  221;  writes  song  of
tyranny  and  revolt,  223  ;  anx-
ious encounter  with  Lombardo,
228  ;  makes  for  Marsala,  230  ;
the  landing,  234,  238  ;  accepts
dictatorship  of  Sicily,  239  and
note  2 ;  demeanour  towards
Sicilians,  240-1  ;  march  to
Salemi,  242-3  ;  the  halt,  249  ;
assumes  dictatorship  at  Salemi,
249  ;  decrees  conscription  for
all  Sicily,  249  ;  intimacy  with
Father  Pantaleo,  250  ;  before
Calatafimi,  250-4  ;  the  battle,
257-60 ;  after  the  battle,  262,
264 ;  authority  as  Dictator
widely  acknowledged,  264 ;
religious  ceremony  at  Alcamo,
269  ;  appoints  civil  governors
and  abolishes  the  macino,  269-
70  ;  plan  for  Pilo's  occupation
of  S.  Martino,  273  ;  leaves
Renda,  274  ;  moves  to  Parco,
274-6  ;  plan  for  defence  of  the
Cozzo  di  Crasto,  277 ;  retreat
on  Plana  del  Greci,  277-8 ;
feigns  retreat  on  Corleone  and
returns  secretly  to  Misilmeri,
279-81,  345  ;  holds  council  of
war,  283-4  ;  visit  from  British
naval  officers,  285  ;  visit  from
United  States  naval  of&cers,
286  ;  receives  information
from  Eber,  286-7  ^^<^  *^<'^^  ^  '>
convokes  Sicilian  leaders,  287  ;
allows  squadre  a  front  place  in
the  attack,  287-8  ;  the  night
advance  to  Palermo,  297  ;  at
the  Ponte  dell'  Ammiraglio,
298  ;  rounding  up  panic-
stricken  squadre,  299  ;  at  the
Porta  Termini  barricade,  300  ;
at  the  Fiera  Vecchia,  301-2
and  note  1 ;  organises  occupa-
tion of  the  city,  302,  306  •
advances  towards  the  Quattro
Cantoni,  304  ;  occupies  Piazza
Bologni,  305  ;  accident  from  a

INDEX

383

Garibaldi — cont;

pistol,  305  and  note  ^ ;  calms
Bixio,  306  ;  head  quarters  at
Piazza  Pretorio,  306-7;  willing
to  permit  Neapolitan  com-
munications with  British
admiral,  311  ;  at  the  cathe-
dral, 312  ;  receives  Lanza's
letter  asking  armistice,  314  ;
efforts  to  obtain  ammunition,
314,  320  and  note'^;  shot
at  under  truce,  318 ;  indig-
nant at  Von  Mechel's  breach
of  truce,  318 ;  conference  on
board  H.M.S.  Hannibal,  319-
20  ;  obtains  ammunition  from
Greek  vessel,  321  ;  consents  to
prolong  armistice,  322  ;  main-
tains public  order,  324  ;  arrival
of  second  expedition  under
Medici,  325  ;  in  the  Royal
Palace,  326  ;  presentation  of
the  Castellamare  prisoners,  327  ;
return  to  Caprera  (Nov.  1S60),
I  ;  greets  Gladstone  as  Precur-
seur  (1864),  54;  presented  with
southern  half  of  Caprera  (1864),

34
Cavour,  relations  with,  64-5,  122,

165,  170,  178,  212,  333-4  ;  ad-
mired by  Cavour,  70
Characteristics  of  :

Calmness — in  battle,  89  ;  in  re-
treat, 278

Discipline,  power  of  exacting,
221,  242

Eloquence,  15

Loyalty,  64,  172

Modesty,  15

Mysticism,  269

Obedience  and  readiness  as  a
subordinate,  87

Organising  faculty,  lack  of,  87

Patience,  9

Patriotism,  9-10

Secretiveness,  345-6

Self-restraint,  9-1 1

Tenderness  to  animals,  35-6
Contributions of, in money to

Sicilian  expedition,  341
Dress  of,  12  note  2  ;  since  starting

of  Sicilian  expedition,  205,  249
Enthusiasm  for,  107
Estimate  of,  36
Gordon,  compared  with,  122  and

note  1
House  of,  at  Caprera,  34,  330
Hymn  of,  82
Influence of, with Democratic

Garibaldi — cont.

party, 21, 123 ;  influence on

public  order  in  Palermo,  324
Legendary  exploits  of,  7
Mazzini's  attitude  towards,  21-2,

64  note  *  ;  his  attitude  towards

Mazzini,  64-5,  212
Memoir  of  South  American  life  by,

14
Military reputation of, founda-
tion of,  6
Novel of — I Mille — cited, 210

note  2
Personation  of,  in  Sicily,  rumour

as  to,  275
Poem of, on Caprera, quoted,

329-30
Portrait  of,  at  North  Shields,  25

note
Superstitions current about, in

Sicily,  307  and  note  *
Victor Emmanuel, attitude to-
wards, 65,  84,  121,  165,  178
otherwise mentioned, 179, 247,
323
Garibaldi, Menotti, accompanies
his  father  at  sea, 30  ; work  at
Caprera,  34  ;  on  the  Sicilian  ex-
pedition, 218  ;  wounded  at  Cal-
atafimi,  257,  261  ;  at  the  Piano
della  Stoppa, 285  ; at Neapoli-
tan evacuation  of  Palermo,  324  ;
otherwise mentioned, 12, 305
'note  ^
Garibaldi,  Ricciotti,  12,  30
Garibaldi,  Teresita,  30,  35
Gavazzi,  Father,  24-5
Genoa  :

Albergo della Felicitd, 177 and

note  ^
Arsenal  plot  (1857),  69-70
Sicilian  expeditions  starting  from,

179-80
Volunteers  from,  for  Garibaldi's
Sicilian  expedition,  218
Genoese  Carabineers  :

Calatafimi,  at,  254-5,  259
Commander  of,  212
Marsala,  at,  239

Plana  del  Greci,  on  retreat  to,  278
Ponte  deir  Ammiraglio,  at  the,  298
otherwise  mentioned,  219,  222
Gibilrossa :

Garibaldi  on  the  Pass  of,  289
La  Masa's  camp  at,  275
Giorginl,  Lieut.-Col.,  214-15
Gladstone,  W.  E.,  in  Naples  during
political trials, 48-51  ; suDse-
quent action, 51-3 and notes;

384

GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

pecuniary support of liberation
scheme,  60  ; cited,  47  ; other-
wise mentioned,  117,  125
Goodwin,  Consul,  290-1
Gordon,  Gen.  C.  G.,  122
Great  Britain  :

Austria,  attitude  towards,  20,  21,
79  ; Aberdeen's negotiations
with,  regarding  Neapolitan  pri-
soners, 51-2  and  note  '•'•
France,  attitude  towards,  79  and

note  3-8i,  115,  224
Italy,  sentiments  towards,  22-4,
53, 196  ;  Minister withdrawn
from Naples (1856), 54, 61  ;
diplomatic relations resumed
(1859), 128; Italian cause
fashionable (spring  1859),  125
Liberal  Ministry  in  (1859),  115-18
Orsini  affair  (1858),  72
Papal  hatred  of  (1851),  53
Sicilian  expedition, attitude  to-
wards, 224  ;  effect of British
warships' proximity, 233,
236-8
Villafranca, Peace of, attitude
towards,  115,  11 7-1 8
Greville's  Diary  quoted,  20-1
Guerzoni  cited,  12  note  ^
Gusmaroli,  241

Gyulai,  Gen.,  inactivity  of,  87 ;
sends  Urban  against  Garibaldi,
94;  alarmed,  97;  evacuates  Lom-
bardy,  103  ;  bad  generalship  of,
III

Hall,  A.  D.,  329

Haynau,  Gen.,  24

Herzen,  Alexander,  cited,  22

Hohenlohe  quoted,  loi,  109  note

Holland,  Lord  and  Lady,  60

Holy  Alliance,  Neapolitan  Liberals

crushed  by,  40
Hudson,  Sir  James,  trusted  by
Italian  patriots,  60,  171  ;  rela-
tions with  Lord  John  Russell,
1 1 7-1 8;  urges  Garibaldi  to
choose  Sicily  rather  than  Nice,
173,  174  ;  letter  of,  to  Lady  John
Russell  quoted,  173  and  note  ;
value  of  despatches  of,  130
Hungarians  :

Attitude  of,  towards  Austria,  103

note  '^
Conspiracy of Napoleon, Kos-
suth, and  Cavour  regarding,  no
Hunter  Islands,  18

/ Mille cited, 210 note  ^ ; 212

note  '
Irish,  pro-Papal  attitude  of,  23
Ischitella,  265
Italy  :

British  sentiments  towards,  22-4,

53,  117,  125,  196
Federation  of  States  under  Papal

presidency,  proposed,  112
'  Friends  of  Italy  '  Society,  23
Independence  of  :

Achievement  of,  circumstances

of,  considered,  2-5
British  attitude  towards,  22-4
Italian  National  Society  :
Founding  and  officers  of,  65
Garibaldi  resigns  presidency  of,

165
Guns  from,  for  Sicilian  expedi-
tion, 184-5  and  note  2,  197-8,
221
Troops smuggled by, into
Piedmont,  78
Nazione  Armata,  165
Republic  y.  Monarchy,  Garibaldi's

views  as  to,  64
Riso-ygimento  :

Democratic  party  in,  Cavour' s

pact  with  (1856),  63-7
Mantua conspiracy (1852-3),

19-20
Milan  revolt  (1852-3),  19-20
Parma  revolt  (1859),  in
Pisacane's  expedition,  67-70
Poetic  atmosphere  of,  108
Sicilian revolution (i860),
see  Sicilian expedition, and
%mder  Sicily — Revolution  of
i860
Strength  of  (1859-60),  4
mentioned,  154  note  "^
Unification  of :

British  attitude  towards,  117
French attitude towards, 66,

77
Piedmontese  attitude  towards

(1857),  66
Sicilian attitude towards,

Jaucourt,  116

Jerome  Napoleon, Prince (Plon-

Plon) ,  75  and  note  ^,  80
Jervolino,  47
Joachim Murat, King of Naples,

39
Joseph  Bonaparte,  King  of  Naples,

39

INDEX

385

King,  Bolton,  cited,  342

Kossuth, conspiracy of, with

Napoleon and Cavour, no;

meeting  with  Cavour  after  Peace

of Villafranca, 113; otherwise

mentioned,  10,  15,  213

La  Bolina,  Jack,  cited,  338  et  al.

La  Farina,  — ,  secretary  of  Italian
National  Society,  65  ;  Cavour' s
communications  with,  66-7,  83  ;
advises  Sicilians  to  rise,  153  ;
attitude  towards  Crispi's  pro-
posals, 164  ;  offers  and  supplies
guns  from  National  Society  for
Sicilian  expedition,  184,  198,  221  ;
value  of  testimony  of,  162  and
note;  otherwise  mentioned,  148,
152,  188

La  Gorce  cited,  75  note  2  et
passim

La  Marmora,  Gen.,  In  the  Crimea,
29  ;  Cavour' s  letter  to,  on  Plom-
bieres  arrangement,  76  ;  dis-
plays official  jealousy  of  Gari-
baldi, 86

La  Masa,  — ,  on  Garibaldi's  refusal
to  go  to  Sicily,  190-1  ;  eulogises
Bixio,  222  ;  at  Saleml,  243  ;
detached  by  Garibaldi  to  rouse
the  Sicilians,  275  ;  forms  camp
of  3000  squadre  at  Gibilrossa,
275  ;  instructed  by  Garibaldi  to
descend  for  flank  attack,  277  ;
summoned  by  Garibaldi,  281  ;
at  council  of  war,  283-4  '>  ^^'
signed  front  ■pla.cewiihhis squadre,
287-8 ;  incapacity  to  control
his  squadre,  297  ;  attacked  under
truce  by  Von  Mechel,  316  ;
estimate  of,  184,  275  ;  cited,
284  note  \  337-8  et  passim  ;
otherwise  mentioned,  188,  249,
278

Lacaita,  Sir  James,  48

Landi,  Gen.,  march  of,  from
Palermo  towards  Marsala,  232,
244,  247  ;  nervousness  and  panic
of,  248,  255,  262-3  ;  ordered  to
return  to  Palermo,  263,  343  ;
sends  supports  to  Sforza,  255,
342  ;  retreats  through  Alcamo,
Partinico,  and  Montelepre  to
Palermo,  263-4,  270  ;  flies  before
Garibaldi  in  Palermo,  305  ;  cited
and  quoted,  342-3

Lanza, Gen, Ferdinando, sent  to

Sicily  as  the  King's  alter  ego,
265-6  ;  vacillations  of,  266-7  '•
dispatch  to,  from  Von  Mechel,
281  ;  neglects  defence  of  Pa-
lermo on  south-east,  287  ;  inter-
view with  Admiral  Mundy,
289-91  ;  determination  to  bom-
bard the  city,  290,  294  ;  believes
Garibaldi  routed  (May  25-6),
290,  293,  294,  and  note^;  becomes
inactive,  304  ;  concentrates
forces  at  the  Palace,  308  ;
communications  with  Admiral
Mundy,  311  ;  scornful  attitude
towards  Garibaldi,  311,  313  ;
letter  to  Garibaldi  requesting
armistice,  314 ;  instructs  Von
Mechel  to  observe  the  armistice,
315,  318  ;  refuses  to  break  faiih
on  Von  Mechel' s  arrival,  318;
resolves  on  general  attack  after
armistice,  321  ;  dissuaded  by
Buonopane's  alarmist  reports,
322  ; evacuates  Palermo,  324

Laveno,  101-2

Leggiero  (Capt.  Giovanni  Battista
Culiolo) ,  accompanies  Garibaldi
on  retreat  from  Rome  to  Pied-
mont (1849),  9  ; at  Tangier,  13

Leipnecher,  47

Leopold,  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,
III,  114  note  1

Letizia,  Gen.,  punitive  expedition
under,  at  Marsala,  232,  235 ;
transported  from  Marsala  to
Palermo,  232  ;  conference  on
board  H.M.S.  Hannibal,  318-20;
mission  to  Court  at  Naples,
322

Liberal,  signification  of  term,  as
used  of  Italian  parties,  28  note  ^

Lombardo  :

Bixio  in  command  of,  209
Dimensions,  tonnage,  &c.,  of,  209

note  ^
Elia  in  command  of,  under  Bixio,

229  note  ^
Flooding  of,  at  Marsala,  239
Grounding of, outside Marsala,

234
Seizure  of,  for  Sicilian  expedition,
200-2
Lombardy  ;

Austrian  rule  in,  41
Garibaldi's  invasion  of  (1859),  91
Louis  Napoleon,  see  Napoleon  III
Luzio,  Signer  Cav.  A.,  cited,  5-6,  20
note,^  336,  341

c  c

386

GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Maddalena :

Garibaldi's  stay  at  (1849),  12  and

note  2
Naval  uses  of,  31  and  note  2

Magenta,  battle  of,  103,  129

Malmesbury,  Lord,  on  Austrian-
Piedmontese  war  (1859),  79

Malta,  Sicilian  revolutionaries'  ar-
moury in,  149-50

MameH's  hymn,  252  note  ^

Manin,  — ,  defence  of  Venetian  Re-
public by,  9  ;  originates  alliance
with  Cavour,  63  ;  joins  ItaUan
National  Society  (i_857),  65

Manin,  Giorgio,  at  Marsala,  238 ;
wounded  at  Calatafimi,  262

Maniscalco  (Director  of  Police  in
Sicily),  policy  of,  147  ;  spies  of,
147,  324  ;  violence  after  Solferino
celebrations,  151  ;  stabbed,  153  ;
warned  of  Gancia  rising,  156  ;
tricks  Francesco  Riso,  161,  332  ;
provokes  Consul  Goodwin,  290  ;
urges  Lanza  to  take  active
measures,  294 ;  mentioned,  293
note  '^

Mantua,  conspiracy  of  (1852-3),
19-20

Manzoni,  Pecorini,  cited,  346

■^archetti,  Signer,  cited,  103
note  '^

Margherita,  50  and  note  ^

Maria  Christina  of  Savoy  (first
wife  of  Ferdinand  II  of  Naples),
42

Maria  Sophia  of  Bavaria,  Queen
of  Naples,  marriage  of,  126  ;
liberal  influence  of,  130

Maria  Theresa  of  Austria  (second
wife  of  Ferdinand  II  of  Naples),
family  life  of,  42  ;  attitude
towards  her  stepson,  126,  127,
130 ;  reactionary  influence  of,
130-1

Mario,  Jessie  White,  views  of,  on
Pisacane's  expedition,  68  ;  cited,
29  note  \  30

Marro,  Gen.  Bartolo,  294

Marryat,  Capt.,  233  ;  interviews
Acton,  237  ; quoted,  236,  237

Marsala  :

Decurionato of, offers Garibaldi

dictatorship,  239
Description  of,  231-2
Garibaldi's  landing  at,  234-8  and
notes: Cavour' s reception of
the  news,  244

Martinengo,  Countess  Cesaresco,
cited,  55  note  '

Mazzini,  Giuseppe,  risings  promoted
by,  16,  19-20  and  note  \  67-9;
Sicilian  conspiracies  of  (1850-8),
149-50  ;  death  of  his  raother,  19  ;
allegiance  of  his  followers  trans-
ferred to  Cavour  and  Garibaldi,
20,  21,  28,  68  ;  meeting  with  Gari-
baldi (1854),  19,  21  ;  '  neutral
banner  '  policy  of,  repudiated  by
Garibaldi  (1856),  64  ;  Pisacane's
expedition  (1857),  67-70 ;  Or-
sini's  quarrel  with,  72  ;  denounces
war  of  1859,  84;  at  Florence
urges  a  forward  policy  on  Gari-
baldi, 120  ;  letter  to  the  Sicilians
(March,  i860),  153  ;  instigates
Sicilian  expedition,  163,  168;
travels  to  Genoa  to  join  the  ex-
pedition, 212-13  '^^'^  '^f^^  ^ ;
scheme  of,  for  invasion  of  Papal
States,  216  ;  estimate  of,  19 ;
British  popular  sentiments  to-
wards, 24  ;  Garibaldi's  attitude
towards,  64-5,  212  ;  his  attitude
towards  Garibaldi,  21-2,  64  note^ ;
Cavour' s  hatred  of,  70 ;  birth-
place of,  179  ;  quoted,  21-2,  121,
123,  138,  212;  otherwise  men-
tioned, 4,  10,  60,  113,  162

Mercantini,  '  Garibaldi's  Hymn '
by,  82

Medici,  Giacomo,  in  the  Panizzi
liberation  scheme,  60  ;  joins  the
Cacciatori  delle  Alpi,  85  ;  at
Varese,  94  ;  at  San  Fermo,  99  ;
at  Tre  Ponti,  105  ;  at  Bormio,
107  ;  in  the  Romagna,  119  ;
retires,  121  ;  advocates  Sicilian
expedition,  166,  168  ;  opposes
scheme  for  smashing  ballet-boxes,
176  ;  pessimistic  about  Sicilian
expedition,  193,  198,  204 ;  left
to  organise  reinforcements,  204,
216  ;  arrives  at  Castellamare  with
second  expedition,  325  ;  estimate
of,  187,  214  ;  cited  162  ;  quoted,
165  ;  mentioned,  171,  341

Merimee,  Prosper,  quoted,  112

Metternich,  40

Meucci,  15

Migliavacca,  203,  340-1

Mignona,  168,  333-4

Milan  :

Revolt  of  (1852-3),  19-20
Volunteers  from,  for  Sicilian  ex-
pedition, 218

Milano,  Agesilao,  67

Million  Rifles  Fund  :
Establishment  of,  165

INDEX

Z^7

Million  Rifles  Fund — cont.
Sicilian  expedition  :

Finzi's  promise  of  two  hundred
Enfields  for,  176  ;  frustrated
by  D'Azeglio,  182-3  ^^^
notes,  185,  198,  334
Garibaldi's  suggestion  of  Funds
support  for, 167, 168, 171,

333-4
Money  supplied  for,  202-3  «>i^
note,  340-1

Misero-cannone,  271  and  note  ^

Misilmeri,  Garibaldi's  arrival  at
(May  26,  i860),  281,  283

Mistretta,  Don  Alberto,  243,  269

Modena :
Emilia, incorporated in, 120

note^
Peace  of  Villafranca  opposed  by,

113-14
Piedmontese protectorate over

(1859),  III
Union,  military,  of  Tuscany  and
the  Romagna  with,  119

Molesworth,  49  note  2

Montanari,  262

Morning  Post,  pro-Italian  attitude
of,  24

Morley,  John,  cited,  64  note  ^

Mosto,  Antonio,  212

Mundy,  Adm.,  interview  of,  with
Gen.  Lanza,  289-91  ;  informed  of
Garibaldi's  intended  attack  on
Palermo,  292  ;  refuses  Lanza  use
of  British  flag,  311  ;  grants  his
cabin  for  conference  between
Garibaldi  and  Neapolitans,  319  ;
disgusted  with  Neapolitans,  324  ;
quoted,  290-1,  304  note  '  ;  cited,
313  note  2,  316  note  2

Murat,  Joachim,  King  of  Naples,
39

Murat,  Lucien,  Napoleon's  Neapoli-
tan schemes  regarding,  54,  66,  77

Naples,  Kingdom  of :
Army  of  :

'  Bavarian  '  regiments  of,  138
Discipline  of,  133-4
Equipment  of, 133
Excesses of, in Sicily, 157,

303-4  and  note  ',  323-4
Intrigue  and disunion  in,  136
Liberals  hated  by,  44 .
Officers  of,  134-6
Revolutionary  propaganda  in,

137
Royalist  sympathies  of,  141

Naples,  Kingdom  of :  Army  of — con: .

Strength  of  (i860), 133

Swiss  regiments  of,  disbandeJ,
137,  152
British and French Ministers

wichdrawn  from  (1856),  54,  61  ;

diplomatic relations resumed

(1859), 128
Camorra  in  (1851),  56  ;  (1859),  132
Condition  of — in  Middle  Ages,  38;

(1821-60),  40-2
Constitution  of  1820,  acquisition

and  destruction  of,  40
Constitution of 1848, acquisi-
tion and  loss  of,  44  ; never  re-
pealed, 53  note  1
Francis  II's  accession  as  King,  128
Murattist schemes of Napoleon

III  regarding,  54,  66,  77
Piedmont :

Alliance with, proposed, see
under  Piedmont

Conspiracy  with  the  Pope  and
Austria against, 138, 140,
169,  186
Police  terrorism  In,  45-6,  152
Population  of,  characteristics  of,

39
Prisoners and attendihili in

(185 1), estimated  number  of,

45-6
Prisons  in :

Montefusco,  54,  56-8

Nisida,  50-1

Procida,  56

San  Stefano,  58-60

Vicaria  (Naples),  49-50

Vicaria (Palermo), 161, 293
309
Sicily :

Expedition of Garibaldi, see
Sicilian  expedition

Relations  with,  144-5,  148
Napoleon  I,  Emp.,  134,  181
Napoleon  III,  Emp.,  protectorate  of
the  Popes  assumed  by,  9,  66,  76  ;
attitude  towards  Great  Britain,
24 ;  Murattist  designs  of,  in
Naples,  54,  66,  77  ;  complains  of
political  liberty  in  Piedmont,  71  ;
the  Orsini  affair,  71-5  ;  clerical
influences  on,  76  ;  secret  agree-
ment with  Cavour  at  Plombieres
(1858),  76  ;  interview  with  Aus-
trian ambassador  (1859),  i,  79,
83  ;  throws  over  Cavour,  80  ;
Mazzini's  distrust  of,  84  ;  victory
of  Magenta,  103  ;  Peace  of  Villa-
franca, 108,  iio-ii  ;  Victor
c  c  2

388

GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Emmanuel's  sentiments  towards,
1 12-13  and  note  '  ;  relations  with
the  Pope  (Autumn,  1859),  118;
Brenier's  dispatches  to,  131  ;
alienation  from  the  Pope,  140;
Nice  and  Savoj^  ceded  to,  77,  140,
169  ;  negotiations  concerning
annexation  of  Tuscany  and
Emilia,  164  ;  Hudson's  letter  on,
quoted,  173  ;  attitude  towards
Sicilian  expedition,  225  ;  estimate

of,  74-5

Nice:

Cession of, by Piedmont, see

Piedmont —  Cession
Old  town  of,  II

Nicotera,  — ,  in  Pisacane's  expedi-
tion, 68-9  ;  in  prison  at  Favig-
nana,  229-30

Nievo,  204

NuUo  of  Bergamo,  194,  300

Nunziante,  Gen.,  quells  mutiny  of
Swiss  regiments,  137  ;  refuses  to
go  to  Sicily,  265  ;  sent  to  Palermo,
267  ;  mentioned,  135,  266

Nuvolari,  203

Oliphant,  Laurence,  174-7;  cited,

334-5
Ollivier  cited,  75  note  2
Onnis, 212

Orbetello  fortress,  213-15
Orlando,  338
Orsini,  Felice,  attack  on  Napoleon

by,  71-2,  74-5
Orsini,  Giordano,  on  the  Piemonte,

222-3;  sent  with  artillery  towards

Corleone, 279  ; action against

Von  Mechel,  282

Pagani,  195
Palermo  :

Calatafiml fugitives' return  to,

264
Castellamare fortress in, Rlso's
imprisonment in, 160 ; his
release, 326 [see also under
Palermo — Garibaldi's  attack)
Garibaldi's  attack  and  capture  of:
Ammunition — shortage  of,  314,
320  and  notes  2,  s  j  waste  of,
by squadre,  298, 303, 310;
manufacture  of,  321
Barricades,  306,  310  and  note  2
Bombardment  by  Neapolitans
— determined on,  290, 294,
303  ; effected,  300-1,  303-4

Palermo : Garibaldi's attack and
capture  of — cont.
and  note  "^j  ^06-8 ;  suspended,

311,  313
Buonopane's troops' arrival

(May  29),  313
Capitulation of Neapolitans,

322-3
Castellamare  fortress  :

Furniture removed from,
in  anticipation,  294

Garibaldi fired at from,
under  truce,  318

Isolated  position  of,  308

Rise's  release  from,  326

Semaphore messages from,

311
Surrender  of,  323
mentioned,  325  note  ■*

Cathedral — Neapolitan  defence
at,  308  ;  Garibaldi's  capture
of,  311  ;  severe  fighting  at,
312

Councils  of  war  preceding,  283-
4,  287  and  note  ^

Fiera Vecchia (Piazza della
Rivoluzione)  :
Garibaldi's  halt  at,  301-2
Von  Mechel' s  occupation  of,

317
Information  received  by  Gari-
baldi before the attack,

286-7  '^'"'d  note  1
Knowledge  of,  general  in  the

city  beforehand,  292-3
Losses — of Neapolitans, 314

and  note,  325  ;  of  victors,  325
Macqueda, 304 ; insurgents'

capture  of,  307  note  ^
Mint  handed  over  to  Garibaldi,

322
Montalto gate and bastion

captured, 312-13 and

note  ^
Neapolitan excesses, losses,

&c., see  Palermo — Garrison
Piazza Bologni, Garibaldi's

occupation  of,  305
Ponte deir Ammiraglio de-
fences carried,  297  and  note  *

-9
Porta Felice captured by

squadre,  307
Porta  Macqueda  captured  by

insurgents,  308
Porta  Termini  barricade,  299 ;

fighting  at,  300
Quattro Cantonl, 304 ; cloth

stretched  across,  307

INDEX

389

Palermo : Garibaldi's  attack and
capture  of — cont.
Quattro Venti, Neapolitans

isolated  in  the,  308
Route of advance (May 26),

295-7

Safety  of  life  and  property
under  Garibaldi,  324

Squadre  engaged  in — assigned
a  front  place,  287-8 ;  dis-
order on  the  advance,  296-7  ;
panic  at  the  Ponte  dell'
Ammiraglio,  298-9  ;  at  the
Porta  Termini  barricade,
300-1  ;  waste  of  ammuni-
tion by,  298,  303,  310  ;
Porta Felice captured by,

307
Toledo,  304  ;  severe  fighting  in,
307-8, 312  ; safe passage
down,  granted  by  Garibaldi,

3"

Vanguard  of attacking  force,

288  and  note  \  298
Vicaria  gaol,  political  prisoners

in,  293  ;  escape  of  (May  28),

309
Garrison  of  :

Capitulation  of,  322-3
Evacuation of the city by

(June  7,  i860),  324
EKcesses  of, 303-4  and  note  ^,

323-4
Location  of,  286-7
Losses  of,  314  and  note,  325
Strength  of (May  i860),  228,

246,  247,  272  note,  288
Uneasiness of, before Gari-
baldi's attack, 293 and
note  ^-4
Illumination  of  (May  30),  321
Riso's  revolt,  see  under  Sicily
Secret  press  in,  154,  160
Terrasanta, 155
Tyranny of authorities in,

291
Vicaria  gaol-fortress  in,  political
prisoners  In,  161,  293  ; escape
of  (May  28),  309
Pallavicino,  — ,  originates  aUiance
with  Cavour,  63-4  ;  president  of
Italian National Society, 65  ;
succeeded by Garibaldi, 165
note  2
Palmer,  Capt.,  320  and  note  ■*
Palmerston,  Viscount,  on Haynau
affair, 24 ; withdraws British
minister  from  Naples  (1856),  61  ;
returns to power (1859), 116  ;

refuses to prevent Garibaldi

from  crossing  Straits  of  Messina

(i860),  4  ; quoted,  49  note  ^
Panizzi, Anthony, scheme of, for

releasing Settembrini, 60-1, 69

note  1 ;  Bertani's  letter  to,  quoted,

166  and  note  2
Pantaleo, Father, valuable work

by,  among  Sicilian  squadre,  249  ;

intimacy with Garibaldi, 250 ;

ceremony  of  blessing  Garibaldi,

268-9 ; at the Piano della

Stoppa, 285  ; restores order

among  La  Masa's  squadre,  297
Paolucci  cited,  182  and  note  ^,  332,

344
Papal  States  :

Cavour' s  attack  on,  after  Sicilian
expedition,  2,  216

Garibaldi's  proposed  attack  on,
188  and  note^,  196,  197
note  ^,  337  ;  Cavour's  attitude
towards,  188,  196  note^,
337

Plombieres  pact  as  regarding,  77

Zambianchi's invasion of, 209,
216-18, 342
Parco,  Garibaldi's  move  to,  274-6
Pareda, Manuel [see also Crispi),

152  and  note  ^
Parma  :

EmiUa,  Incorporated  In,  120  note  '

Revolt  of  (1859),  III
Partinico,  263-4,  270
Pasolini,  Count,  77
Pavia  :

Contributions  from,  towards  Sici-
han  expedition,  340

Volunteers  from,  for  Sicilian  ex-
pedition, 218
Peard,  — ,  with  the  Cacciatori  delle

Alpi,  88-9,  96  ;  cited,  93  note  1,

96  note  1,  103  note  '^,  105-7  notes  ;

quoted,  99-100
Persano, Adm. Count, 183, 186 ;

instructions  to,  regarding  arrest

of  Garibaldi,  225-6
Plana  dei  Greci :

Garibaldi's  retreat  to,  and  secret
return  from,  to  Misilmeri,  277-
81

Messenger  from  Palermo  to  Von
Mechel  arrested  in,  282,  316

Piediscalzi's  return  to,  158-9

PUo  at,  159

Situation  of,  158,  279
Pianell,  Gen.,  43,  135
Pianto  dei  Romani,  247  and  note  ^
Piediscalzi,  158,  273

390

GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Piedmont [for  particular  towns  see
their names)  :
Annexation of Tuscany and
Emilia  by,  see  subheading  Cen-
tral Italian  States
Austria,  war  with  (1859)  :

Cacciatori, exploits of, see

Cacciatori  delle  Alpi
Declaration  of,  78,  80
Hungarian  apathy  in,  103  note  ^
Italians backward In giving
military  aid  in,  iio-ii,  113-

14
Magenta,  battle  of,  103,  129
Mazzini's  attitude  towards,  84
Palestro,  battle  of,  103
Solferino,  battle  of,  108,  150
Villafranca,  Peace  of,  see  that
title
Central  Italian  States (Tuscany
and Emilia)  :
Annexation  of,  by  Piedmont :
Accomplishment of (i860),

169
Demand  for,  by  the  States,

115,  118
Napoleon's terms for per-
mitting, I 40-1,  169
Negotiations  concerning,  164
Protectorate  over  (1859),  11 1
Cession  of  Nice  and  Savoy  by  :
Accomplishment  of,  169
Garibaldi's  indignation  at,  169-

70,  172,  175-6,  178

Napoleon's  demand  for,  77,  140

Conspiracy  of  Naples,  Austria  and

the  Pope  against  (1859), 138,

140,  169,  186

Crimean war contingent from,

28-9,  61
Garibaldi's presence an embar-
rassment to  (1849),  10
Genoese  arsenal  plot  (1857), 69-70
Monasteries,  question  of  suppres-
sion of,  28
Neapolitan  alliance :

Ferdinand's  instructions  to  his

son  against,  128
Proposal  of,  by  Piedmont,  re-
jected (May,  1859),  129;  simi-
lar proposal  rejected  (i860),
139,  140
Policy  of,  change  in,  under  Cavour

(1856-7),  65-6
Position of (1848), 26; I1854),

27-8; (1859), I
Sicilian  attitude  towards,  148-9  ;
Piedmontese  Government's  at-
titude towards  Sicily,  153

Piedmont — cont.

Troops of all Italy enrolled in
(1859),  78

Piemonte  :

Arrival  of,  at  Marsala,  234
Castiglia  the  captain  of,  230,  340
Dimensions,  tonnage,  &c.,  of,  209

note  ^
Flag  of,  234  note  ^
Flooding  of,  at  Marsala,  239
Garibaldi  in  command  of,  209
Neapolitan capture of, empty,

239,  242
Seizure  of,  for  Sicilian  expedition,
200-2

Pilo,  Rosolino,  Mazzini's  agent,  68
and  note  ^,  149  ;  Garibaldi's  letter
to  (March  15,  i860),  168  ;  sets
sail  for  Sicily  (March  25),  159,
169,  180;  in  Sicily,  159-60,  192,
245  ;  sends  reports  from  Sicily,
188  ;  kindles  beacon  fires  after
Calatafimi,  264  ;  plan  for  occupy-
ing S.  Martino,  273  ;  death  of,
274

Pio  Nono,  Pope,  Ferdinand's  cru-
sade on  behalf  of  (1849),  45  ;  atti-
tude of,  towards  surrender  of  any
temporal  dominions,  77  and  note  ;
Napoleon's  alienation  from,  118,
1 40  ;  conspiracy  of,  with  Naples
and  Austria  against  Piedmont,
138,  140,  169,  186  ;  Tyrolese  sol-
diers of ,  138;  quoted — on  change
of  ministry  in  Great  Britain
(1859),  117

Pironti,  47

Pisacane,  Carlo,  expedition  of  1857
undertaken  by,  6S-70,  179-80,
1S9,  196

Pisani,  332

Pitre,  Prof.,  cited,  307  note  ',  347

Piva,  Domeoico,  299,  312

Plombieres,  pact  of  (1858),  76-7

Poerio,  Alessandro,  51

Poerio,  Carlo,  trial  and  condemna-
tion of,  46-9  ;  imprisonment  of,
50-1,  57  ;  death  of  his  mother,
51  ;  attitude  towards  Piedmont,
67  ;  release  of,  124  ;  friendship
with  Lord  and  Lady  John  Russell,

125
Poland  :

Hungarian movements in rela-
tion to,  no
National struggle of, compared
with  that  of  Italy,  4
Polizzi,  Col.,  290
Porcaro,  Baron  Vito,  125

INDEX

'^9^

Porto  S.  Stefano,  221
Principale,  Gaetano,  cited 347
IrnSl Sicilian expedition con-
demned by,  224

Quarto  :

Rock  of,  205  a«c?  note  ^

Villa  Spinola  at,  180-1  and  note  -

Raimo>^di,  Count,  167
Rampagallo,j43^^^^^^^^ ^^^^^^

^fr,9)  120  ;'sends  Marquis  ViUa-
marina  to  Naples,  I39  ;  in  sym-
pathy with  Crispi,  164

Rendu,  D'Azeglio's  letter  to,  quoted,
183  and  note  ^

Ribotti,  Gen.,  170,  186

Ricasoli,  Bettino,  value  of  work  of
as  Dictator  of  Tuscany 114  «f'J
note^  115,  "8,  163;  deprecates
attack  on  Papal  territory 120
correspondence  with Cavour re-
garding Sicihan  expedition,  226-7

Rile,  Sir  Cecil  Spring,  cited, 174

Ri^r  Baron,  share  of,  in  SiciUai.
conspiracy  of i860, 154-6  .  ^^
prisonment of, 160 ;  denuncia-
tion of,  by  Francesco  Riso,  161,
032;  release  of  (June  19),  326
Riso Francesco,  conspiracy  ol,  m
Palermo (April, i860), 154-7  .
tricked  by  Maniscalco,  161,  332  ,
effect  at  Marsala  of  the  conspi-
racy, 232
^S?incorporatedin,,.o«<..
Peace  of  ViUafranca  opposed  by

113-14
Revoltof  (1859),  III  ^.

Union,  military,  of  Tuscany  and
Modena  with,  119 .
Rome, French evacuation ot--
scouted, 76; proposed, 196,
339  • abandoned,  225,  342
Romeo  (political  prisoner),  5°
Rotolo, Cav. Agostmo, 296-8,

Rubattino!  ignorance,  ^ostihty,  and
undeserved  rewards  of,  regarding
Sicilian  expedition,  200-1,  340

Rubicon,  River,  119  ^ote

Ruskin  quoted,  79  note  ■

Russell,  Lady  Jp^n-  cited  125,
note:  Hudson's  letter  to,  on
cession  of  Nice  and  Savoy  quoted,
173

Russell,  Lord  John,  Italian  policy
of  117-18;  friendship  with  Poerio
and  Braico,  125  ;  views  on  the
Sicilian  expedition,  211,  224;
refuses  to  prevent  Garibaldi
from  crossing  Straits  of  Messma
(i860),  4; quoted,  211

Russell,  Odo,  77  note,  78,  117

France,  attitude  towards  (1859),

Sicilian expedition condemned

by,  224

Sacchi,  Col.  Gaetano,  171-2
Saf&,  68  .

Salemi,  242-4  and  note  ■
Salmour,  Count,  129  ..-h ^,,  .

S Anna,  Baron,  squadre  with,  243  ,
■  at Calatafimi,  253,  259  ; nomi-
nated Governor  of  Alcamo,  269

IStS:iiaVe'gend,307-^-^^^

|avoy!cLsion  of,  by  Piedmont,  see

Piedmont— Cession
Scarpa,  Paolo,  305
Schiaffino,  death  of,  257
Schwartz,  Mme.,  33°  .^

Schwarzenberg,  52  and  note  ■
Scialoia,  Antonio,  67
Settembrini,  Luigi,  imprisonment  of

^Xry  quoted,  59-60;  condemns
Murattist  and  Mazzinian  raove-

lnts,67;Pifcane^-Pf^f;,°"e
intended  for  release  of,  68  ,  re  ease
of, 124; quoted— on  condition
of' Naples,  41-2 ,
Settembrini,  Raffaele,  125
Settimo,  Ruggero,  14?  . ^

Sforza,  Major  ]Oins  Landi,  247  . at
Pianto  dei  Romani,  248,  f  53  . at
Calatafimi,  253,  255,  342  ,  blames
Landi,  262
Sgarallino,  210

Shaftesbury,  Lord,  23 ^ ,y^  i/ij
Sicilian expedition of Garibaldi
and  the  Thousand  :

nrtf  ct  Wt  behmd, .07-8

and  note
Manufacture  of,  223,  321

Purchase  of,  321  orbetello

Requisitioning  of,  at  Orbeteno,

Shortage  of,  215,  3H.  32o  and

Wast"  of,  by  squadre,  29S,  303,
310

392

GARIBALDI  AND  THE  THOUSAND

Sicilian  expedition — conf.
Artillery  of  :

Corleone,  retreat  towards,  279  ;
engagement against Von
Mechel,  282
Description  of,  215-16
Renda to Parco, transport
from,  276  and  note  1
Banner  of,  captured  at  Calatafimi,

257  note  1

Calatafimi,  battle  of,  see  that  title

Cavour's attitude towards —

before its start, 5-6, 162-3,

188-9,  195-7 «w^  *^o<e  ^ 198,

336-9 ; after its start, 218,

226,  325

Coaling  of,  at  Porto  S.  Stefano,

221
Conditions  justifying,  demanded

by  Garibaldi,  22,  151,  163
Desertions  to  :

Neapolitan  troops,  from, 135,

321
Piedmontese  royal  troops,  from
— discouraged, 171-2, 195,
221  ; few  effected,  172, 195
Disappointment  of members  of,
with  Sicilians,  240,  302-3,  305,
310  and  note  ^,  323
Disciplining  of,  220
Dress  of,  204,  267
Embarkation of — preparations,
200-3  ; send-off, 203-5 and
note  ; start, 206  ; actual em-
barkation, 207  and  note
Enthusiasm  promoting,  195
European  attitude  towards,  224-

5.  227
Finances  of,  340-1
Genoese  Carabineers,  see  that  title
Jesuits  expelled  by,  from  Sicily,

241
Landing of, at Marsala, 234-8

and  notes
Methods  of  warfare  pursued  by
—bayonet  charges,  255  ;  group
rushes,  256  note  ^
Muskets  supplied to, 184-5  and

note  2,  197-8,  221
Neapolitan  defence  against  :
Military  and  naval  errors,  232,
236, 238, 244, 248, 278-9,
281-2,  308-9,  315-16
Numbers  engaged  in  :
Authorities  for,  246  note  2
Battalions and companies,
nominal strength  of,  247
note  '
Calatafimi,  at,  247  and  note  ^

Sicilian expedition  : Neapolitan
defence  against:  Numbers
engaged  in — cont.
Palermo, at,  see  Palermo-
Garrison
Preparations  for,  229,  235

Numbers  comprising,  at  the
start,  209  ;  at  Talamone,  209
note  2j  218

Organisation  of,  into  companies,
Sec,  219

Palermo,  see  that  title

Professions,  places  of  origin,  &c.,
of  members  of,  218-19

Renda,  encampment  at,  270  and
note  ■'-74

ReveilU  of,  251

Route  of,  by  land — Marsala  to
Salemi,  242  ;  to  Vita  and  the
Pietralunga,  252  ;  Calatafimi
to  Alcamo,  268  ;  Partinico,
Borgetto,  and  Renda,  2703
Renda  to  Parco,  274-6,  344  ;
Cozzo  di  Crasto  to  Plana  dei
Greci,  277-8 ;  Chianettu  and
Marineo  to  Misilmeri,  280-1,
345  ;  Gibilrossa  to  Palermo,
272, 295-7,  346-7

Route  of,  by  sea,  221,  227  and
note  ^,  229,  230

Ru;nours  as  to,  170,  180

Sq  ladre  joining  :

Albanians  at  Campanaro,  278
Ammunition wasted by,  298,

303>  310

Calatafimi,  at,  253,  259

Description  of,  245-6

Few  hundred  with  Garibaldi
from  Parco,  288  note  2

Increase  in  numbers  of,  249

La  Masa's  3000 — at  Gibil-
rossa, 275  ;  in  panic  at
Garibaldi's  partial  retreat,
277  ;  eager  for  attack  on
Palermo,  287  ;  assigned  a
front  place  for  attack  on
Palermo,  287-8  ;  disorder
on  the  advance,  296-7 ;
panic  at  the  Ponte  dell'
Ammiraglio,  298-9  ;  at  the
Porta  Termini  barricade,
300-1

Liadi  made  nervous  by,  248

M 'ndy's  encounter  with,
7.<n

Palermo,  engaged  in  attack
and  capture  of,  see  under
Palermo — Garibaldi's  attack

Rampagallo,  at,  243

INDEX

393

Sicilian  expedition — cont.

Volunteers  (Italian)  for,  eager-
ness of,  194

War-cry  of,  212,  227
Sic  ly  {for  particular  districts,  towns,
&-C.,  see  their  names)  :

Albanians  in,  158-9,  245,  278,
345;  death  of  their  leader,
274

Church  in,  attitude  of,  towards
Neapolitan  rule,  144,  241-2,
269,  304

Committees  for  the  succour  of,
194

Compagni  d'armi,  147,  159,  275

Condition  of  (1852),  146  and
note  ^-7

Conscription  in — islanders'  atti-
tude towards,  145  ;  ordered
by  Garibaldi,  249  ;  disregarded,

323

Garibaldi  invited  to  help,  151,
163  ;  his  willingness  to  rouse
and  aid  rebellion  in,  151,  334  ;
his  expedition  with  the  Thou-
sand, see  Sicilian  expedition

Inland  towns  of,  157-8

Jesuits  expelled  from,  by  Gari-
baldi, 241

Macino  abolished  by  Garibaldi,
269-70

Maniscalco's  rule  in,  147

Mazzlni's  conspiracies  in  (1850-8),
149-50

Military  service  hated  in,  144-5
[see  also  subheading,  Conscrip-
tion)

Neapolitan  rule,  attitude  to-
wards, 144-5,  148

Piedmont,  attitude  towards,  148-
9  ; attitude  of,  153

Poverty  and  misery  in,  145  and
note  "•

Racial  divisions  of  localities  in,

143
Revolution  of  1820,  40
Revolution of 1848, 44, 145  ;

reconquest by  Filangieri, 44,

131,  146-7
Revolution of i860 (see also
Sicilian  expedition)  :

Gancia  rising  (Apr.  4),  154-6,
158,  161

Instigation  of,  153-4

Pilo's  arrival  heralding  Gari-
baldi,  159

Squadre  in,  157-9  and  note  {see
also  under  Sicilian  expedi-
tion)

Sicily— co«/.

Ribotti,  proposed  expedition  of,

170,  186
Roads  in,  146,  247
Roman Catholicism of, 144

{see  also  subheading  Church)
Squadre in  revolution of i860:
April, activities in, 157-9

and  note
May, during, with Garibaldi,
see Sicilian expedition —
Squadre

Simonetta,  90

Sir  tori — career  and  estimate  of,
187;  interview  with  Cavour,  187
and  noies-8  and  note  *,  336-7  ;
pessimistic  about  Sicilian  ex-
pedition, 188  and  note  *,  193,  198,
204,  268  ;  at  Marsala,  240,  241  ;
at  Salemi,  250 ;  saves  Garibaldi's
life  at  Calatafimi,  258,  261  ;  ad-
vocates attack  on  Palermo,  284
note  1 ;  captures  Montalto  gate  and
bastion,  312  ;  withstands  Von
Mechel  and  is  wounded  a  third
time,  317; cited,  162  and  note

Solferino,  battle  of,  108,  150

Soncinl,  194

Spaventa,  Silvio,  friendship  of,
with  Settembrini,  60 ;  refuses
liberation  by  Pisacane's  expedi-
tion, 68  ; release  of,  124

Stanmore,  Lord,  cited,  52,  note  ^

Strazzera,  231

Susini  family,  31

Swan,  Sir  J.  Wilson,  cited,  25

Swan,  Miss  Mary,  329

Swiss  mercenaries  in  Neapolitan
army,  departure  of,  from  Sicily,
137, 152

Talamone,  210-13

Tedaldi,  Col.  Cav.  Francesco,  cited,

148  note  1, 157 note  ^, 292 and

note  "
Tedaldi  family,  292,  304-5
Temple  (British  minister  at  Naples),

60,  61
Termini :

Occupation of,  by Neapolitans,
159 and  note  ; bombardment,

275
Patriotism  of,  159  note,  275
Thousand,  the,  see  Sicilian  expedi-
tion
Times  :

Ferdinand II abandoned by
(1851),  53

394

GARIBALDI AND  THE  THOUSAND

Times — cont.

Pro- Austrian  attitude  of,  24
Pro-Italian tone adopted by
(May  1S59),  86  note  S  117

Trapani,  garrison  of,  245,  264  note  ^

Tre  Ponti, 105-6

Treaties  :

Piombieres,  pact  of,  76-7
Villafranca,  Peace  of,  see  that  title

Trecchi,  — ,  172  ;  Tiirr's  letter  to,
214  ; Cavour's  attitude  towards,

339

Treitschke  cited,  7

Tiikory,  298,  300

Tiirr,  Col.,  career  of,  213  ;  rashness
of,  at  Ponte  S .  Giacomo,  1 05-6 ;  ob-
tains ammunition  from  Orbetello
commandant,  213-15;  atilarsala,
234 ;  at  Calatafimi,  259  ;  in
Palermo,  312  ;  at  Neapolitan
evacuation,  324 ;  cited,  229
note  3,  287  note  ^,  346  ;  quoted,
315  ;  assertions  of,  as  to  his
advice  influencing  Garibaldi,  346  ;
estimate  of,  214  and  note  ;  other-
%vise  mentioned,  218,  250,  251

Tuscany  :

Annexation  of,  to  Piedmont,  see
under Piedmont  —  Central
Italian  States
Peace  of  Villafranca  opposed  by,

113-14
Revolt  of  (1859),  III
Union,  military,  of  Modena  and

the  Romagna  with,  iig
Volunteers from, for Sicilian

expedition, 210  ; detailed  for

attack  on  Papal  States, 216,

218  note  "^

Urban,  Gen.,  reputation  of,  94 ;
attacks  Varese,  94 ;  misstates
Garibaldi's  numbers,  96  ;  strength
of  troops  under,  at  Varese  and
Como,  94,  97,  331-2  ;  evacuates
Como,  loo-i  ;  bombards  Varese,
102  ;  ordered  partially  to  retire,
102-3

Vasca,  Commandant,  325  note  ^
Varese,  battle  of, 92-6  and  notes,

331

ValteUine  mountaineers,  93  and
note  2,  107

Vecchi,  Augusto,  180 ;  Garibaldi's
letter  to,  quoted,  17  ;  on  Gari-
baldi's life  at  Caprera,  quoted,
35-6  ; cited,  329,  330

Vecchi  the  Younger,  see  La  Bolina

Velletri,  21,  45

\'enetia  :

Austrian  rule  in,  41;  ended  (i  866),  2

Manin's defence of Republic

and surrender to the Aus-

trians,  9

Volunteers from, for Sicilian

expedition,  218

Venosta,  EmiUo  Visconti,  93

Venosta,  Giovanni  Visconti,  cited,
104,  107-8  ; quoted,  107

Victor  Emmanuel,  King,  bravery
and  loyalty  of  (1S49),  10;  the'
Orsini  affair — letter  to  Napoleon
III,  72  ;  Speech  to  Parliament,
(1859),  79 ;  Garibaldi's  first
inter\aew  with  (Mar.  1859),  84;
victory  at  Palestro,  103  ;  attitude
towards  Peace  of  Villafranca,
1 1 2-3  ;  sentiments  of,  towards
Napoleon  III,  11 2-3  and  note"^ ;
persuades  Garibaldi  to  patience,
121  ;  idea  for  Garibaldi's  in-
vasion of  the  Marches,  122 ;
attitude  towards  Garibaldi's
Sicilian  expedition,  162,  171,
186,  197,  338  ;  letter  to  Francis
II  of  Naples,  quoted,  185-6  ;
triumphal  progress  through  newly
annexed  territories,  185,  186,  197;
name  of,  in  war-cry  of  Sicilian
expedition,  212,  227 ;  Sicilian
dictatorship  assumed  in  name  of,
239,  249 ;  Sicilian  enthusiasm
for,  244  ;  pardons  commandant
of  Orbetello,  215  ;  acknowledged
as  King  of  Italy  (Nov.  i860),
I  ;  estimate  of,  73  ;  Garibaldi's
attitude  towards,  65,  84,  121,
165,  178;  otherwise  mentioned,
26,  76,  105,  173-4

Victoria,  Queen,  pro-Austrian  atti-
tude of,  117

Villafranca,  Peace  of  ;

British attitude towards, 115,

117-18
Circumstances  of,  iio-ii
Italian attitude towards, 108,

112-13,  115,  118,  140
Signing  of,  by  Victor  Emanuel,

113
Terms  of,  111-12

Villamarina,  Marquis,  mission  of,
to  Naples,  139  ;  Cavour's  corre-
spondence with,  quoted,  141,
169

Vltali,  Bartolo,  cited,  276,  note  \
344

INDEX

395

Von  jMechel,  Col.,  success  of,  near
Monreale,  273  ;  moves  to  occupy
position  commanding  Garibaldi's
camp,  277;  repeUed  by  retreating
Garabaldini,  278 ;  deluded  by
Garibaldi's  feint  arrives  at
Chiusa,  281-2  ;  return  to  Paler-
mo (May  30),  315  and  note  ■*,  316  ;
disregards  truce,  3 1 6-1 8 ;  ordered
to  attack  after  armistice,  321  ;
order  countermanded,  322  ;  eva-
cuates Palermo,  324 ;  estimate
of,  279,  281,  316

Walewski.  Napoleon's  attitude
towards,  76

Watson,  Dr.  Spence,  cited,  25

Webster,  Mr.,  quoted,  330

Wilmot,  Lieut.,  visits  Garibaldi's
headquarters  at  the  Piano  della
Stoppa,  285  ;  interview  with
Garibaldi  in  Palermo,  311  ;  pro-
tests against  Von  Mechel's  vio-
lation of  truce,  317  ;  cited,  318
note  1

Winnington-Ingram,  Capt.,  inter-
views Acton,  237 ;  cited,  156
note  ^,  233  notes  ^'  ^ ;  quoted,  238

Zambianchi,  — ,  Papal  invasion
under,  209,  216-18,  342 ;  estimate
of,  217

THE  END

PKTS'TED  BY

SPOTTISWOODE  AND  CO.  LTD^  LOSDOS

COLCHESTEE  AND  ETON

BT  THE

RT.  HON.  SIR  GEORGE  OTTO  TREVELYAN,  Bart.

HONORARY  FELLOW  OF  TRINITY  COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

THE  AMEEICAN  REVOLUTION.

Librai-y  Edition. Part  I.,  8vo.  {out  of  prinf). Part  II.,  2  vols.  8vo.

21s,  net. Part  III.,  8vo,  12s.  M.  net.
Cabinet  Edition. Vols. I.,  II.,  III. (comprising  Parts  I.  and  II.)

Crown  8vo.  5s.  net  each.

THE  LIFE  AND  LETTEES  OF  LOED  MACAULAY.

Popular  Edition. Crown  8vo.  2s.  &d.

'  Silver  Library '  Edition, uniform  with the  '  Albany '  Edition  of

Macaulay's  Works. Large  crown  Bvo.  3,?.  6^.
*^*  This  is  an  enlarged  and  Complete  Edition,  with  a  Nem  Preface

and  an  Additional  Chapter.
Cabinet  Edition. 2  vols. Post  8vo.  12s.
Student's  Edition. Crown  8vo.  6s.  net.
'  Edinburgh  '  Edition. 2  vols.  8vo.  6s.  each.
Library  Edition. 2  vols.  Bvo.  36s.

SELECTIONS  FEOM  THE  WEITINGS  OF  LOED

MACAULAY.  Edited,  with  Occasional  Notes,  by  the  Eight  Hon.
Sir  G.  O.  Tkbveltan,  Bart. Crown  8vo.  3s.  6d.

MAEGINAL  NOTES  BY  LOED  MACAULAY.  selected

and  Edited  by  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  G.  0.  Tkevblyan,  Bart.  8vo.  2s.  net

THE  EAELYHISTOEY  OF  CHAELES  JAMES  FOX.

Crown  8vo.  3s.  6d.
LONGMANS,  GEEEN,  &  CO.,  London,  New  York,  Bombay,  and  Calcutta.

CAWTSTPOEE. Crown  8vo.  3s.  6d.  net.

THE COMPETITION WALLAH. Crown  Svo,  3s.  6^.  net.
MACMILLAN  &  CO.,  Ltd.,  London.

INTEELUDES  IlTPEOSE^ND  VEESE.

Crown  Svo.  6s.  net.

BELL  &  SONS,  London.

BY GEORGE MACAULAY  TREVELYAN,

Late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

ENGLAND  IN  THE  AGE  OF  WYCLIFFE.  svo.  6s.  net.

DAILY  CHR  ONICLE.—^  Mr.  Trevelyan  has  at  one  bound  placed  himself  in  a  high  position
among  the  historical  writers  of  the  day,  and  has  given  promise  of  a  distinguished  future.  .  .  .
We  have  read  the  beok  with  delight  and  profit,  and  we  Isnow  of  no  monograph  which  sheds
more  clear  light  on  a  period  of  English  history  of  unique  interest  and  importance.'

THE  PEASANTS'  EISING  AND  THE  LOLLAEDS :

a  Collection  of  Unpublished  Documents,  forming  an  Appendix  to
'  England  in  the  Age  of  Wycliffe.'  Edited  by  Edgar  Powell  and
G.  M.  Teevelyan. Svo.  6s.  net.

GAEIBALDI'S  DEFENCE  OF  THE  EOMAN  EE-

PDBLIC. With  7  Maps  and  35  Illustial  ions. Svo.  6s.  M.  net.
TR  UTH. — '  I  have  never  read  in  tale  or  history  a  more  thrilling  story  than  that  Mr.  George
Macaulay  Trevelyan  tells  of  the  hero's  retreat  with  his  four  thousand  through  countiiea
swarming  with  implacable  enemies. Xeuophon's  retreat  of  the  ten  thousand  was  a  march
past  by  comparison.'

LONGMANS,  GEEEN,  &  CO.,  London,  New  York,  Bombay,  and  Calcutta.

THE  AMERICAN  REVOLUTION.

PAET III.

SARATOGA AND BRANDYWINE-V ALLEY FORGE-
ENGLAND AND FRANCE AT WAR.

BY THE

Rt.  Hon.  Sir  GEORGE  OTTO  TREVELYAN,  Bart.

With  3  Maps. 8vo. 12s.  Qd.  net.

DAILY  TELEGRAPH.— 'It  will  be

regarded  as  an  indispensable  authority
whenever  the  period  is  reconsidered  and
discussed.'

MORNING  POST.— 'Is  everywhere
bright,  readable,  interesting ;  and  few  who
take  up  the  volume  will  put  it  aside  till
they  hav:'  finislied  it.'

PALL MALL GAZETTE.— 'If Sir

George  brings  us  down  to  the  peace  nego-
tiations and  the  treaty  of  1783  with  the
same  success  he  has  hitherto  attained,
it  will  round  off  a  remarkable  contribu-
tion to  international  history,  worthy  of
a  house  that  boasts  three  generations  of
historians.'

S  T  A  N  D  A  R  D.— '  Englishmen  and
Americans  alike  must  be  grateful  for
what  Sir  George  Trevelyan  has  done.  No
writer  in  either  country  has,  so  far,  told
the  story  of  the  great  revolt  with  more
fulness,  impartiality  and  literary  skill.  So
much  of  our  modern  historical  writing  is
either  ponderous  or  slipshod,  that  it  is  a
pleasure  to  meet  with  a  serious  work  of
history  which  also,  and  essentially,  belongs
to  literature.'

SPECTATOR.— 'Sir  George  Trevelyan
proves  himself  an  admirable  military  his-
torian, showing  merits  of  lucidity,  arrange-
ment, and  criticism  which  his  earlier  work
had  not  prepared  us  for.'

TRIBUNE. — '  These  volumes  have  few
superiors  in  the  whole  range  of  English
historical  literature,  and  no  rival  as  an
English  history  of  the  American  Revolu-
tion.'

DAILY  NEWS.— 'Another  stage  is
reached  in  the  stately  progress  of  Sir
George's  work  on  the  American  Revolu-
tion, and  we  welcome  this  third  part  as
being,  like  the  other  two,  a  very  worthy
addition  to  its  class.  The  period  it  covers
is  small,  but  it  was  the  turning-point  of
the  war.'

SCOTTISH  REVIEW.— 'This  book
is  informed  by  a  union  of  history  and
literature,  too  often  unhappily  divorced
in  modern  writing.  Planned  on  a  large
scale  with  sound  architectural  qualities,
it  is  written  in  a  style  worthy  of  the  best
tradition  of  clear,  plain  and  forthiight
English.'

The  previous  Parts  of  this  Work  are  as  follows : —

LIBRARY  EDITION. Part  I.  8vo.  iput  of  print). Part  II.  (2  vols.)
8vo.  21s.  net.

CABINET  EDITION. VOLS.  I.,  II.,  III.  (comprising  PARTS  I.  and  II.).
Crown  8vo.  5s.  net  each.

LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.,  39  Paternoster  Row,  London;
New  York,  Bombay,  and  Calcutta.

LOED  MACAULAY'S  WOEKS.

AUTHORISED EDITIONS

HISTOEY of ENGLAND, from the  ACCESSION of

JAMBS  the  SECOND.

Popular  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  8vo.  5s.

Student's  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  8vo.  12s.

'  Albany '  Edition. With  6  Portraits. 6  vols,  large  crown  8vo.

3s.  6d.  each.
Cabinet  Edition,  8  vols,  post  Bvo.  48s.
Library  Edition,  .5  vols.  8vo.  £4.
'  Edinburgh  '  Edition,  4  vols.  Bvo.  6s.  each.

CRITICAL and HISTORICAL ESSAYS; with LAYS
of  ANCIENT  ROME,  &c.  in  One  Volume  :—

Popular  Edition,  crown  Bvo.  2s.  6d.

'  Silver  Library '  Edition,  crown  Bvo.  3s.  6d.

CRITICAL  and  HISTORICAL  ESSAYS:—

'  Albany  '  Edition,  4  vols,  crown  Bvo.  3s.  6d.  each.

Student's  Edition,  crown  Bvo.  6s.

'  Trevelyan  '  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  Bvo.  9s.

Cabinet  Edition,  4  vols,  post  Bvo.  24s.

Library  Edition,  3  vols.  Bvo.  36s.

'  Edinburgh  '  Edition,  3  vols.  Bvo.  6s.  each.

ESSAYS,  which  may be  had  separately,  price  6d. each

sewed.  Is.  each  cloth  : —

The  Earl  of  Chatham  (Two  Essays).

Addison  &  Walpole.
Frederick  the  Great.
Croker's  Boswell's  Johnson.
Hallam's  Constitutional  History.
Warren  Hastings.

Eanke  &  Gladstone.
Lord  Bacon.
Lord  Clive.

Lord  Byron,  &  The  Comic  Dramatists  of  the  Restoration.

The  Essay  on  Warren  Hastings,  annotated  by  S.  Hales,  Is.  6d.
The  Essay  on  Lord  Clive,  annotated  by  H.  COURTHOPE-BOWEN,  M.A.
2s.  Qd.

LAYS  of  ANCIENT  ROME.

Illustrated  by  G.  Scharf,  fcp.  4to.  10s.  6d.

Bijou  Edition,  iSmo.  2s.  6d.  gilt  top.

— Popular  Edition,  fcp.  4to.  6d.  sewed, Is.

cloth.
Illustrated  by  J.  R.  Weguelin,  crown  Bvo.  3s.  net,  cloth  extra,  gilt

edges.
Annotated  Edition,  fcp.  8vo.  Is.  sewed,  Is.  6d.  cloth.

LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.  39  Paternoster  Row,  London;

New  York,  Bombay,  and  Calcutta.

JD

LORD MACAULArS WORKS AND  LIFE.

AUTHORISED EDITIONS.

The  WORKS  and  LIFE  of  LORD  MACAULAY :— ■

'  Edinburgh' Edition. 10  vols. 8vo.  6s.  each. (Works,  8  vols. ;  Life,
2  vols.)

Vols.  I.-IV.  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.

Vols.  V.-VII.  ESSAYS ; BIOGRAPHIES; INDIAN PENAL CODE;

CONTRIBUTIONS  to  KNIGHT'S  'QUARTERLY  MAGAZINE.'
Vol.  VIIL  SPEECHES;  LAYS  of  ANCIENT  ROME;  MISCELLANEOUS

POEMS.
Vols.  IX.  &  X.  The  LIFE  and  LETTERS  of  LORD MACAULAY. By

the  Right  Hon.  Sir  G.  0.  Tebvelyan,  Bart.

THE  WORKS  OF  LORD  MACAULAY:—

'  Albany  '  Edition.  With  12  Portraits.  12  vols. Large  crown  Svo.  3».  Qd.
each.
Vols.  I.-VI.  HISTORY  of  ENGLAND,  from  the  ACCESSION  of  JAMES

the  SECOND.
Vols.  VII.-X.  ESSAYS  and  BIOGRAPHIES.

Vols.  XI.-XIL -SPEECHES; LAYS of ANCIENT ROME, &c. and
INDEX.

SPEECHES:—

People's  Edition,  crown  Svo.  3s.  6i.

MISCELLANEOUS  WRITINGS :—

People's  Edition,  crown  Svo.  4s.  &d.
Library  Edition,  2  vols.  Svo.  Portraits,  21s.

MISCELLANEOUS  WRITINGS  and  SPEECHES :—

Popular  Edition,  crown  Svo.  2s.  6^.
Student's  Edition,  crown  Svo.  6s.

Cabinet  Edition,  including  Indian  Penal  Code,  Lays  of  Ancient  Rome,
and  Miscellaneous  Poems,  4  vols,  post  Svo.  2'ls.

MARGINAL  NOTES. Selected  and  Edited  by  the  Right

Hon.  Sir  G.  0.  Teevelyan,  Bart. Svo.  2s.  net.

SELECTIONS  from  the  WRITINGS  of  LO.^D  MACAU-

LAY. Edited,  with  Occasional  Notes,  by  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  G.  0,
Teevelyan,  Bart. Crown  Svo.  6s.

The  LIFE  and  LETTERS  of  LORD  MACAULAY. By

the  Right  Hon.  Sir  G.  0.  Teevelyan,  Bart.
Popular  Edition,  crown  Svo.  2s.  'od.
'Silver  Library'  Edition,  crown  (Svo.  .3s.  &d.

*^*  This  is  an  Enlarged  and  Complete  Edition  {uniform,  with
the  'Albany  '  Ldition  of  the  Works)  with  a  New  Preface  and  an
Additional  Chapter.
Student's  Edition,  crown  Svo.  ^s.
Cabinet  Edition,  2  vols,  post  Svo.  12s.
'  Edinburgh  '  Edition,  2  vols.  Svo.  6s.  each.
Library  Edition,  2  vols.  Svo.  36s.

LONGMANS GREEN,  &  CO.  39  Paternoster  Row,  London ;

New  York,  Bombay,  and  Calcutta.

^,  12> '^'^

'^
^

■•  \/  .'Mix  %.**  =;

^ N.  MANCHESTER.
INDIANA  46962
