th

rH

See seeeee

ae OO
TRE LIB

RARY

WOMAN

0 632 662 5

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2023 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation

https://archive.org/details/englandunderstua0000geor_o5t5

A HISTORY OF ENGLAND

IN SEVEN VOLUMES
GENERAL Epiror: Sir CHARLES OMAN, K.B.E., M.P.

VOLUME V

ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

A HISTORY OF ENG EATRD

IN SEVEN VOLUMES

EDITED BY SIR CHARLES OMAN

I, ENGLAND BEFORE THE NORMAN CONQUEST. By
Sir CHARLES Oman, K.B.E., M.P., All Souls
College, Oxford. [Sixth Edition.

II. ENGLAND UNDER THE NORMANS AND ANGEVINS.
By H. W. C. Davis, M.A., C.B.E., Regius Pro-
fessor of Modern History in the University of
Oxford. (Eighth Edition.

II], ENGLAND IN THE LATER MippLe AGEs. By
KENNETH H, Vickers, M.A., Principal of Uni-
versity College, Southampton, Professor of Modern
History in the University ot Durham.

[Fifth Edition.

IV. ENGLAND UNDER THE Tupors. By ArtTuuR D.
INNES, sometime Scholar of Oriel College, Oxford.
(Seventh Edition.

V. ENGLAND UNDER THE Stuarts. By G. M. TRE-
veLyAN, M.A., late Fellow of Trinity College,
Cambridge. [Thirteenth Edition,

VI. ENGLAND UNDER THE HANOVERIANS. By C.,
Grant Ropertson, M.A., C.V.O., Principal of
the University of Birmingham, Fellow of All
Souls College, Oxford. [Seventh Edition.

VII. ENGLAND sINCE WATERLOO. By Sir J. A. R.
Marriott, M.A., M.P., Honorary Fellow, formerly
Fellow of Worcester College, Oxford.

[Seventh Edition.

ENGLAND UNDER
THE STUARTS

BY

GEORGE MACAULAY TREVELYAN

LATE FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE

WITH FOUR MAPS

THIRTEENTH EDITION

METHUEN & CO. LTD.
36 ESSEX STREET W.C.

LONDON

First Published
Second Edition
Third Edition
Fourth Edition
Fifth Edition
Sixth Edttion
Seventh Edition
Eighth Edition
Ninth Edition
Tenth Edition

Eleventh Edition .
Twelfth Edition, Revised
Thirteenth Edition

November 1904
September 1905
February 1908
August 1910
March 1912
April I9T4
February 1917
February 1919
October 1920
April 1922
January 1924
June 1925
1926

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

BY THE GENERAL EDITOR

N England, as in France and Germany, the main
[ characteristic of the last twenty years, from the
point of view of the student of history, has been that
new material has been accumulating much faster than
it can be assimilated or absorbed. The standard his-
tories of the last generation need to be revised, or even
to be put aside as obsolete, in the light of the new
information that is coming in so rapidly and in such
vast bulk. But the students and researchers of to-day
have shown little enthusiasm as yet for the task of re-
writing history on a large scale. We see issuing from
the press hundreds of monographs, biographies, editions
of old texts, selections from correspondence, or collections
of statistics, mediaeval and modern. But the writers
who (like the late Bishop Stubbs or Professor Samuel
Gardiner) undertake to tell over again the history of
a long period, with the aid of all the newly discovered
material, are few indeed. It is comparatively easy to
write a monograph on the life of an individual or a
short episode of history. But the modern student,
knowing well the mass of material that he has to collate,
and dreading lest he may make a slip through over-

vi INTRODUCTORY NOTE

looking some obscure or newly discovered source, dislikes
to stir beyond the boundary of the subject, or the short
period, on which he has made himself a specialist.

Meanwhile the general reading public continues to
ask for standard histories, and discovers, only too often,
that it can find nothing between school manuals at one
end of the scale and minute monographs at the other.
The series of which this volume forms a part is intended
to do something towards meeting this demand. His-
torians will not sit down, as once they were wont, to
write twenty-volume works in the style of Hume or
Lingard, embracing a dozen centuries of annals. It is
not to be desired that they should—the writer who is
most satisfactory in dealing with Anglo-Saxon antiquities
is not likely to be the one who will best discuss the
antecedents of the Reformation, or the constitutional
history of the Stuart period. But something can be
done by judicious co-operation: it is not necessary that
a genuine student should refuse to touch any subject
that embraces an epoch longer than a score of years,
nor need history be written as if it were an encyclopedia,
and cut up into small fragments dealt with by different
hands.

It is hoped that the present series may strike the
happy mean, by dividing up English History into periods
that are neither too long to be dealt with by a single
competent specialist, nor so short as to tempt the writer
to indulge in that over-abundance of unimportant detail
which repels the general reader. They are intended to
give something more than a mere outline of our national
annals, but they have little space for controversy or the
discussion of sources, save in periods such as the dark
age of the 5th and 6th centuries after Christ, where the

INTRODUCTORY NOTE vil

criticism of authorities is absolutely necessary if we are
to arrive at any sound conclusions as to the course of
history. A number of maps are to be found at the end
of each volume which, as it is hoped, will make it un-
necessary for the reader to be continually referring to
large historical atlases—tomes which (as we must con-
fess with regret) are not to be discovered in every
private library. Genealogies and chronological tables
of kings are added where necessary.

C. OMAN

PREFACE TO REVISED EDITION (1925)

GiNes this book comes of age in 1925 and still

remains in considerable demand, revision is perhaps
overdue. I have endeavoured to excise some of the
more glaring crudities of youthful style and opinion, and
I have made additions and corrections suggested by
important publications on the period that have appeared
since 1904, which are named in the Bibliography or
notes of this edition. In addition to Sir Charles Firth’s
continued elucidation of the period, the chief contribu-
tion of new fact and opinion has, perhaps, been made
by Mr. W. A. Shaw in his Calendar of State Papers,
Treasury Books. I have used and discussed some of
his findings on pp. 338, 365-7 below, and in Appendix E.
Mr. Feiling’s History of the Tory Party, 1640-1714,
also throws new light on the last years of William.
But it is difficult for a revision to embody new material
satisfactorily. I therefore call the student’s special
attention to these works, and for the same reason to
Vol. V. of Professor Holdsworth’s History of English
Law, particularly the last chapter on Coke.

G. M. TREVELYAN

viii

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTORY NOTE. By THE GENERAL EpiroR . : 5 , v
PRINCIPAL ABBREVIATIONS USED IN FOOTNOTES

INTRODUCTION , e . : . .

CHAPTER I

ENGLAND, 1603-40—THE UPPER CLASS; ITS LIFE, CULTURE
AND SOCIAL FUNCTIONS—LAW, POLICE AND HUMANI-
TARIANISM , ‘ ° ‘ : . ° . ° ‘ . c 4

CHAPTER II

ENGLAND, 1603-40—THE MIDDLE AND LOWER CLASSES IN
COUNTRY AND TOWN—INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE—THE
CONDITIONS FAVOURABLE TO POETRY AND TO RELIGION 35

CHAPTER III

JAMES I.—PURITANS AND CATHOLICS... ; : : - 73
CHAPTER IV
JAMES I.—PARLIAMENTS AND COURTIERS . : Perey ako
CHAPTER V
THE RULE OF BUCKINGHAM — WARS AND PARLIAMENTS,
1624-28 . , . ‘ ‘ . . = A : 2 : - 131

ix

x CONTENTS

CHAPTER VI
THE PERSONAL GOVERNMENT OF CHARLES L., 1629-40

CHAPTER VII
THE FORMATION OF PARTIES, NOV., 1640—AUG., 1642 .

CHAPTER VIII
THE CIVIL WAR, 1642-46 . ry ‘ ° . . ©

CHAPTER Ix
PARLIAMENT, ARMY AND KING, 1646-49 .

CHAPTER xX
THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS, 1649-60

© 2 .

CHAPTER XI
THE RESTORATION EPOCH, 1660-78

CHAPTER XII
THE REIGNS OF TERROR, 1678-85. .

CHAPTER XIII
JAMES IL., 1685-88 ’ ‘ ‘

CHAPTER XIV
WILLIAM AND MARY . ..

GENEALOGICAL KEY TO THE PROBLEM OF THE SPANISH SUCCESSION

e . ° e ° .

CHAPTER XV
THE REIGN OF ANNE, 1702-14

FAGE

156

195

225

272

292

331

383

427

446
404

408

GENEALOGY OF THE HOUSE OF STUART

LIST OF PARLIAMENTS, 1603-1715 .

CONTENTS

APPENDIX A

HOW AMERICA WAS PEOPLED BY THE ENGLISH

THE POOR LAW AFTER THE RESTORATION

APPENDIX B

APPENDIX C

° * e e 2

WHO KILLED SIR EDMUND BERRY GODFREY? . .

COMMERCIAL AND COLONIAL POLICY OF THE RESTORATION
ERA .

APPENDIX D

APPENDIX E

FINANCE UNDER THE RESTORATION

SETTLEMENTS

BIBLIOGRAPHY

INDEX

AND REVOLUTION

x1

PAGE
517

518

519

521

523

524

526

527

535

i  SEIBNGOR NBA -S
Pear wee

LIST OF MAPS

THE BRITISH COLONIES IN NORTH AMERICA AT
THE END OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY . To face page 357

SCENE OF THE BATTLE OF BLENHEIM . °

. ” 490
PART OF THE UNITED PROVINCES AND THE

SPANISH NETHERLANDS. . . . . : ” 495
ENGLAND AND WALES IN THE WINTER OF 1643-4 End of Book

EUROPE IN 1702 . . ° . ’ ‘ ° . .

xili

PRINCIPAL ABBREVIATIONS USED IN
FOOTNOTES

G. = Gardiner’s History of England, 1603-42 (ed. 1893).

G. (C. W.) = Gardiner’s Civil War (ed. 1894).

G, (C. & P.) = Gardiner’s Commonwealth and Protectorate (ed. 1901).

G. (Const. Docs.) = Constitutional Documents, 1625-60. Gardiner. 1899.

Ranke = Ranke’s History of England. Clarendon Press Translation. 1875.

Ludlow = Ludlow’s Memoirs. Ed. by C. H. Firth. 1894.

Hutchinson = Life of Col. Hutchinson by his Widow (ed. 1846).

Clar. = Clarendon’s History of the Great Rebellion (cc 1843). (Life = Life of
Clarendon, same edition.)

Carl.’s Crom. = Cromwell’s Letters and Speeches. Carlyle.

Firth’s C. A. = Cromwell’s Army. C€.H. Firth. 1902.

Firth’s Crom, = Oliver Cromwell. C.H. Firth. (Heroes of the Nations Series.)

Cunningham = Cunningham’s Growth of English Industry and Commerce. Modern
Times (ed. 1903).

Verney = Memoirs of the Verney Family, 1892-94.

Oppenheim = History of the Administration of the Royal Navy. M. Oppenheim.
1806.

Dowell = Dowell’s History of Taxation (ed. 1888).

Harl. Misc. = Harleian Miscellany (ed. 1808-13). 4to ed.

Gooch = English Democratic Ideas in the Seventeenth Century. G. P. Gooch.
1898 (Cambridge Historical Essays, No. x.).

Shaw = History of the English Church, 1640-60. W.A. Shaw. 1900.

Sprigge = Anglia Rediviva (England’s Recovery). By Joshua Sprigge,M.A. 1647.

Barclay = Inner Life of the Religious Societies of tre Commonwealth. R. Barclay.
1876.

Prothero = Statutes and Constitutional Documents, 1559-1625. G. W. Prothero.
1894.

Rushworth = Rushworth’s Historical Collections.

Leonard = Early History of English Poor Relief. Miss Leonard. goo,

Taunton = History of the ¥esuitsin England. E.L. Taunton. t1got.

Lord Herbert = The Life of Lord Herbert of Cherbury. Written by himself (ed.
1893).

Beste History of the Criminal Law of England. 1883.

Rous = Diary of ¥ohn Rous (Camden Society, 1856).

Stats. of Realm = Statutes of Realm.

Parl. Hist. = Parliamentary History (ed. 1806 et seq.).

Hamilton = Quarter Sessions from Elizabeth to Anne. A. H. Hamilton. 1878.

D. of Stettin = Diary of the Duke of Stettin, R. H.S., 1892, pp. 1-67.

Einstein = Italian Renaissance in England. UL. Einstein (Columbia University
Press, 1902).

ty

xvi PRINCIPAL ABBREVIATIONS

Hewins = English Trade and Finance. W. A. S. Hewins.

c.M. H. = Cambridge Modern History,

E. H, R. = English Historical Review.

H.M.C. R. = Historical MSS. Commission Report.

R. H. S. = Royal Historical Society, Transactions of.

Thurloe = State Papers. John Thurloe. 1742.

Corbett = England in the Mediterranean. Julian Corbett. 1904.

Stanhope = Reign of Queen Anne (ed. 1872). Earl Stanhope.

Lecky = History of England in the Eighteenth Century (ed. 1892).

Burnet = History of His Own Times, vols. i., ii. (ed. 1897, Airy); vols. iii.-vi. (ed.
1833.

Coxe = W. Coxe. Life of Marlborough (ed. 1818).

Airy = Charles II. Osmund Airy. tgor.

Pollock = The Popish Plot. John Pollock. 1903.

Grey = Debates of the House of Commons, 1667-94. Anchitel Grey. 1769.

First Whig = The First Whig (= William Sacheverell). 1894. Sir George
Sitwell (unpublished).

Christie = Life of Shaftesbury. 1871.

Marvell = Works of Andrew Marvell. 1776.

Ailesbury = Memoirs of Thomas Bruce, Earl Ap Ailesbury (Roxburgh Club). 1890

Bol. = Letters of Bolingbroke. 4 vols. 1798.

Wentworth = The Wentworth Papers, 1705-39. 1883.

ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

INTRODUCTION

NGLAND has contributed many things, good and bad, to the
history of the world. But of all her achievements there

is one, the most insular in origin, and yet the most universal in
effect. While Germany boasts her Reformation and France her
Revolution, England can point to her dealings with the House of
Stuart. Our Tudor Reformation, although it affected greater
changes in the structure of English society and the evolution of
English intellect, was but one part of a movement general through-
out Europe. But the transference of sovereignty from Crown to
Parliament was effected in direct antagonism to all continental
tendencies. During the seventeenth century a despotic scheme of
society and government was so firmly established in Europe, that
but for the course of events in England it would have been the
sole successor of the medizeval system. Everywhere on the ruins
of the old privileges and powers of city, Church and baronage,
arose the monarchy, firmly based on a standing army and a
service of bureaucrats. In the latter half of the century this
result was apparent and the theory of it accepted. The Spaniards
had long surrendered their ancient liberties to their Catholic
King; Italy had forgotten even the name of freedom; in France
Louis XIV. wielded to admiration the sceptre set in his hand by
the cunning Cardinals; the nobles and the heretics of Bohemia
had bowed, after a bloody contest, to their Imperial lord;
throughout Germany scores of petty princes, each within his own
estate, aped the Grand Monarch. The Swiss cantons retained
their liberty, and were no longer of any account in Europe ; the
provinces of Holland, which had so long shown that freedom

2 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

means power, at length were sinking before the advance of the
French monarchy ; they hesitated in painful choice between native
despotism and foreign conquest. For other choice there was none,
as all nations were beginning to agree. Military despotism was
the price to be paid for national unity and power. Thus the
white races of Europe and America, in whom the hope of man-
kind lay, were developing a political structure and a fashion of
public sentiment akin to those of Czarist Russia. But at this
moment the English, unaware of their destiny and of their service,
tenacious only of their rights, their religion, and their interests,
evolved a system of government which differed as completely from
the new continental model as it did from the chartered anarchy of
the Middle Ages. This system, unlike that of the Swiss and Dutch
confederacies of the day, was proved, in the final struggle of Marl-
borough with Louis, to combine freedom with efficiency, and local
rights with national union. It showed the world, by the example
of a great nation that was fast becoming a great Empire, how
liberty could mean not weakness but strength.

It is, then, to the history of England within her own borders
that we must look for the origin of this departure; we must trace
the island struggle; the rapid changes in methods and ideals; the
contribution of short-lived parties and men to the final result; and
not least of all the “magic hand of chance,” in deeds that after
generations attribute to inevitable cause.

But first, before we gaze into these events, the admired branches
of the noblest tree of all English history, we must search for the
spreading of its obscurer roots. We must examine the social,
economic and religious life of classes in England, contrast these
with the societies ruled by the continental monarchs, and mark
how deep was the difference underlying the superficial tie of a
common civilisation. Such an inquiry will be rewarded, not only
because the general conditions of English life are the root of
English political history, but also because those conditions deserve
to be studied for their own sake, For the England created by the
Elizabethans lasted with considerable development, but with little
change, down to the industrial and social revolution that ushered
in our own world a hundred years ago, It was a state of society
and economics, of thought and emotion, far from ideal, but so
healthy in its general influence that it made life strong and good

INTRODUCTION 3

for large masses of men and women, and produced out of a small
population a proportion of great men, unmatched either in the
earlier ages, or in our own generation as at present ordered.

Perhaps the period during which the conditions of life under-
went least observable change is to be found in the years 1603-
40. During this time no great alteration took place in institu-
tions, in ideas or in religion, comparable to the changes of the
preceding and of the following age. The English whom James
came from Edinburgh to rule were the same English as those
whom Pym, thirty-seven years later, took upon himself to lead; the
England which, resting from the great Elizabethan labour of State
construction and State defence, produced during a few brief years
a literature of human life perfect in unity as in vigour, was the same
England which, when presented with different problems, flew into
fratricidal factions, In the long intervening years a deep change
of temper had indeed taken place, due to great political events.
But in society, in economics, in the religious convictions of the
people, it is difficult to name any great differences between the
England of Shakespeare and the England of Pym.

The
English
gentry

CHAPTER I

ENGLAND, 1603-40.—THE UPPER CLASS; ITS LIFE, CULTURE AND SOCIAL
FUNCTIONS—LAW, POLICE AND HUMANITARIANISM

England, bound in with the triumphant sea.—Richard IT.

HE division in English society most nearly corresponding to
that chasm which on the continent divided the nobles
from the remainder of mankind, was not nobleman and commoner,
but gentle and simple. For the English Lords were little more
than a section of the gentry enjoying certain political privileges ;
they were, for all purposes of life and intercourse, still part of the
larger society which they claimed to lead.’ The laws of duel, and
the other obligations of noblesse, belonged in England to all families
of landowners who could show their coat-of-arms. Thus the class
who wore swords and had the right to demand satisfaction of an
Earl, included persons who differed from each other greatly in
income and in manner of life. ‘There exist to-day several widely
different popular conceptions of the English country gentleman in
the Stuart epoch, whether it be a vision of the high-souled and
eultivated Puritan squire of the type of Hampden and Hutchinson,
or of his brother the Cavalier, or Macaulay’s portrait of the bucolic
Tory squire of the period after the Restoration, growling over his
ale at the foreign proclivities of James I. or William III., in the
broadest accent of the country-side. The truth is that throughout
the whole Stuart epoch essential differences of wealth and manners
divided the gentry into not a few distinctive kinds.?
1This close relation of classes was accentuated by the policy of James I. and
his favourites in raising so many of their creatures to sit beside the haughty Tudor

Peers, who had forgotten how they themselves had been raised by the Henries to
a level with the yet more haughty Plantagenet nobles.

2 The unlettered country gentleman described by Macaulay, and the cultivated
country gentleman described by Sir George Sitwell (Old Country Life), probably
existed side by side, both in the early and in the later part of the Stuart period. I -
take the first opportunity of acknowledging the kindness of Sir George Sitwell in
lending me that book and The First Wiig, neither of which he has published,

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 5

In respect of religion and politics there was indeed a greater
variety among the landowners under James and Charles I. than was
to be found after 1660. It was only the events of the Great Re-
bellion that created a standard type of squirearchical opinion.
The country gentleman, if he did not belong to the strong
minority of Catholic squires, adhered to no separate party in Church
or State; the Englishman was not yet a creature of politics and
denominations. The leaders and representatives of the landed
class, and therefore presumably a large section of that class itself,
were more concerned to resist the encroachments of the Crown
than to support its sovereignty, which had not then been called in
question ; and the Puritan temper, which inspired many of their
own number, alarmed and disgusted them less than the novelties
which Laud was introducing into their Church.

County society was not a close caste. A poor gentleman was
sometimes glad to save his estate by marrying his sons to the
dowries which a wealthy yeoman could provide for his daughters.)
The descendants of clothiers, who purchased old lands with new
money, or of the richer yeomen who “ gentleised” their sons, were
sooner or later accepted into the circle of families, many of whom
had risen in the same way after the Black Death or the fall of the
monasteries. But the period of social probation was irritating to
such aspirants while it lasted, and is said to have been a frequent
cause of Roundhead proclivities in the Great War.?

The Court was a strictly limited circle, and beyond the precincts Residence
of the Court there was, in the earlier part of the seventeenth century, ‘te
no such thing as a “ London season”. In the reign of Charles I.
an attempt was made on the part of some ladies, who were tired of
the country, to take up their residence in the capital and parade in
fine dresses in Hyde Park, while their husbands disported them-
selves at the play-houses across the river; but a royal proclamation
from the most paternal of governments, enforced by some shrewd
fines in the Star Chamber, soon drove back these pioneers of fashion
to their rural duties. In times of “scarcity and want” James I.
had sent back even his courtiers to their places in the country-side,
The Bourbons encouraged the French noble to leave his rural home

1See the very amusing scene, Act I., sc, 2, of Dekker’s Witch of Edmonton, a
play which illustrates more than most the social and other aspects of rural life.
2Clar., p. 290. Hutchinson, p. 130. Cunningham, p. 542, note 2.

The
manor
house

6 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

and assert his place in society by living at Paris or Versailles ; but
the Stuarts, like all their English subjects, regarded the status of
country gentleman as a profession in itself. The Privy Council
looked to every squire to keep open house, relieve want, give em-
ployment, and so aid the working of the Poor Law, whose adminis-
tration was in the hands of justices selected from the same useful
class.}

Under the first two Stuarts the provincial capitals were social
centres frequently visited by the richer gentry of the neighbourhood,
according to a custom dating from time immemorial. But it was
chiefly in the country house life, in the round of visits paid in the
family coach or pillioned behind their brothers through the muddy
lanes, that young ladies became acquainted with the bridegrooms
selected by their parents. The small choice within a thirty-mile
radius was no doubt unfortunate, but there were corresponding
advantages in this confinement to rural society: for there both
the ladies and the gentlemen found the duties and realities of
life thick around them, in daily contact with other classes. As yet
they had not been attracted to an isolated life of fashion in
London, and the country house was still the scene, not merely of
relaxation, but of business. On the other hand, military barbar-
ism in castle and moat-house was already a thing of the past,
and the Renaissance civilisation introduced at the Elizabethan
Court had penetrated to the seats of the better sort of gentry.

These mansions were of every variety of size and style; there
were modest halls and manors, such as now serve as farm-houses or
even as barns; and lofty rural palaces of red brick and carved
stone, decorating wooded parks and retired valleys. ‘The increased
profits from land newly enclosed went chiefly to the pocket
of the landlord ; and at this period he was more ready to employ
money in raising a great Jacobean mansion than in further
improving his estate. In these halcyon days of pride in new
prosperity, when the final success of the Tudor rule seemed to
have secured the island from all chance of again becoming the
scene of military operations, houses were built for peace that were

? Leonard, pp. 145,146, On the other hand, many dissolute young gentlemen
came up from country without their families and squandered their estates in London
brothels and gaming-houses, affording a regular source of income to the professional

sharps and money-lenders of the capital. See old plays passim, e.g., The Enforced
Marriage.

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 af

yet to taste of war; mullions and gables rose from which the
sentinel would soon look forth; garden walks were laid out across
which the iron shot would tear; and carved oak adorned the stair-
case, on whose broad landings the pikes of the last defenders would go
down before the roar and the tramp of the rush that ends the day.
- The high vaulted dining-halls were hung with tapestry, armour, Its

weapons, and relics of the chase; the long, well-lighted galleries, pictures
which were then built for resort and conversation, were decorated
with the family portraits—dismal lines of black-painted boards
from which angular maidens and blanched youths looked down
out of their ruffs, relieved here and there by some great ancestor
standing as Holbein saw him, or by the heir in the style of Van-
dyke. ‘The only pictures in these English homes were the portraits,
In the great days of Dutch art our writers found fault with Holland,
because there “every man’s house is full of pictures, a vanity that
draweth on a charge”, Diaries and guide-books of travel in Italy,
written by scholars and men of cultivation, describe the treasures
of palaces and churches, and above all the monuments of antiquity ;
but scarcely a word is wasted on the pictures, even in detailed ac-
counts of Florence or the Campo Santo of Pisa. At Rome, Raphael
passes as unnoticed as his predecessors, though in the Sistine a
passing word may be spared to “that excellent artificial painter
called Michael Angelo Buonaretto”. But in spite of the fortunate
demand for family portraits which was filling the mansions in every
part of England with masterpieces of the Dutch and Flemish schools,
and in spite of the influence of King Charles, who was a true con-
noisseur, and of the Earl of Arundel, called “the father of vertu
in England,” it cannot be maintained that painting was intelli-
gently appreciated even by the upper class. On the other hand,
good taste in architecture, gardening, carving in wood, engraving in
metal, and other arts that minister to the uses of life, was then
natural and widely spread.

1 Harl. Misc., v., p. 18. Fynes Moryson’s Itinerary, ed. 1617, passim ; in his
fourth part (ed. 1902, Shakespeare's Europe), p. 106, he gives it as his opinion that ‘* we
may yield the Italians some pre-eminence of glory in fountains, aqueducts, gardens,
jewels, and some such permanent goods,”—not a word of pictures. Arber’s Reprints,
viii. Howell’s Instructions. Somers? Tracts, iii., p. 635. Nor does Dudley North, in
1661, or the guide in Hayl. Misc., v., pp. 1-42, show any advance on this view of paint-
ing. Evelyn, who travelled in Italy during our first Civil War, took with him an
appreciation of pictures quite exceptional in his day, though the Court of Charles I.
had by then done something to cultivate that taste. See also Einstein, pp. 148, 149,
202-7, and Life of the Earl of Arundel, by Mary Hervey, Cam. Press, 1921.

Hunting

8 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

After the mansion itself, the chief object of pride was the
park, where the deer were shut in by high palings, cut from the
old oaks of the glades in which they browsed. Sometimes they were
hunted slowly round the inside of this enclosure; the ladies and
their cavaliers caught glimpses of the sport from some point of
vantage, and listened critically to the cry of the hounds, whose
notes of different pitch were meant to harmonise like a peal of
bells! But a nobler form of the chase was to hunt “at force”
over the whole country-side. Although deer-hunting and deer-
poaching were at this time the ambition of all English sportsmen,
some of the smaller gentry had to be content with forms of the
chase more within their means. The otter was speared, the badger
trapped, the hare coursed and the fox hunted by squires who each
Jed out his own little pack, and confined the chase within the bor-
ders of his own estate and to the company of his own family and
guests. County hunts and long runs were unusual.? Some land-
owners recognised no other function in life save the daily hunt,
followed by the nightly carouse at the ale-house whither they re-
paired after dinner with the ladies of the family ; a scheme varied by
little else than the statutory church service on Sunday. ‘The round
of earthy amusements and besotted pleasures wasted the lives and
fortunes of many gentlemen not really above the common people
in their habits, who if they had but been classed as yeomen would
have worked hard upon their estates,’

1 This is the meaning of the lines in A Midsummer-Night’s Dream :—

« Slow in pursuit, but matched in mouth like bells,
Each unto each. A cry more tunable
Was never halloo’d to, nor cheered with horn
In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly.”

See Stuart Tracts (Firth), p. 61, and Diary of Master Will. Silence, 1897.
2In the excellent old song, The Old and Young Courtier, in Percy’s Reliques, the
old gentleman who had a great estate, ‘‘never hawked or hunted but in his own
grounds”. It is perhaps implied, though not stated, that the ‘‘ young courtier” of
King James who succeeds him, begins the modern habit of hunting over other
people’s ground.
+See Assheton’s Fournal (Chetham Soc., 1848) passim and note (3) on p. 1,
(1617) ‘‘May.2. Hunting the otter: killed one: taken another, quick, at Salley
Spent Vid,
May. 12. Father Greenacres, mother, aunt Besse, John, wyffe, self, at ale.
Sp. 1Vd,
June. 1t. Tryed for a fox, found none; rayne; wetthorough. Home agayne,
June. 15. Sunday Trin, Parson preached; toChurch, Aft. sermon; sp. VId.
Home. ‘To Church pson, preached.
June. 16, Fox-hunting.

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 9

Fowling stood in the same position of honourable rivalry to Fowling
hunting that it holds to-day. But fowling was then conducted,
not with gun, but with hawk or net. The art of netting and
luring birds by innumerable devices, was then much practised by
gentlemen; but the ride along the brook or across the meadows,
watching the professional movements of the hawk overhead, was at
once the most fashionable and popular mode of taking fowl. The
use of the shot-gun, which was destined to displace all other
methods of fowling, was still forbidden by an old law, of which the
penalties were sometimes exacted under King James. The two
birds principally mentioned in the game laws are partridge and
pheasant, then about equally wild. For the pheasant was not in
those days cross bred and reared by the keeper ; its remote ancestor,
the eastern bird of plumage, introduced by the Romans to adorn
their villas, had taken refuge during the lawless centuries that
followed the departure of the legions, in the depth of the medizval
forest. When Elizabeth died, game was so plentiful in the wastes
and woods of England that no great jealousy was felt of the sport-
ing instincts of ‘mean tenants and freeholders,” so that foreigners
noted with surprise that “peasants” were “permitted to hunt”
with big dogs. But the game laws of James’s Parliaments began
that series of squirearchical enactments, which before the century
ended had in effect taken from the small yeoman the right of sport-
ing over his own land, and had made the taking of game a privilege
of the larger landowners.!'

June. 17. I and brother Greenacres to Portfield (rayne), then to Whalley;

fox-hunting. Tothe pond: a duck and a dogg. To the Abbey: drunk
there. “Home.. .”.

June. 24. Tryed for ye fox; found nothing. Towler lay at a rabbit, and wee

stayed and wrought and took her.”

Fox-hunting in the reign of James I. was sometimes a sport for the smaller
gentry, sometimes a necessity for the country-side. It already had its own pro-
fessional rules and phraseology among sportsmen; yet often a whole village turned
out with clubs, nets and dogs to a general massacre in the woods. By the end of
the century this intermediate stage was past, and the fox was no longer regarded as
vermin but only as a beast of the chase (Assheton’s Fournal, p.14, note 1. Return
from Parnassus, pt. ii., Act II., sc. 5, circa 1606 (Clar, Press, 1886), Gentleman’s
Recreation, 1686, ‘‘ Hunting,”’ p. 87).

1 The restriction on the right of small landowners to kill game on their ground
was made because gentlemen complained that ‘‘mean tenants and freeholders
destroy game of partridges and pheasants”, The property qualification for taking
game wasiraised step by step in a succession of statutes beginning from r J. I., xxvii,
See 7 J. 1., xi.; 22-3 C. I].,xxv.; 4 W. and M., xxili, For illustrations of statements
in this paragraph, see Worc, County Records, i., pp. Ixvii-x., 50 (44), 195 (44).
Hamilton, 8g, 162, D. of Stettin, p. 47. Addison’s Spectator, No. 122. See p. 473
below.

Duelling

10 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

The duel was then beginning to come into prominence with
all its well-known modern characteristics. Offensive as it has now
become to common-sense, it was then a step in the direction of
humanity and law, for it took the place of the “killing affray ”.
In the fifteenth century, that golden age of bravoes, feuds begun
in the law-court or the dining-hall were brought to an issue outside
by open and murderous assaults. The hand of royal justice, be-
coming somewhat heavier under the Tudors, suppressed much of
this private war and “bridled such stout noblemen or gentlemen”.
But the work was still incomplete, and the law alone would have
been unable to suppress these butcheries, so long as they were still
condoned by public opinion. It was the new code of honour, which
insisted that man should stand up alone against man, with equal
weapons, that was now superseding that odious power of the grandee
to set upon a poor neighbour with a host of bullies and retainers.
But many characteristic stories of both town and country in the
reign of James I., show how long the old ideas lingered. A fencing-
master in London accidentally put out an eye of one of his patrons,
the Scottish Lord Sanquhar ; after brooding over it for seven years,
his lordship thought it essential to his dignity to hire assassins, who
wiped out the score in the blood of the man who had maimed him,
while he himself tried to conceal his share in the deed.1 The
memoirs of the reign are rife with stories of assassination as a point
of honour. One of the most remarkable is recorded in the auto-
biography of the philosopher, Lord Herbert of Cherbury. One
day, as he was riding through Scotland Yard behind the King’s
own residence of Whitehall, the safest place one would think in
the island, a gentleman, suffering from Othello’s complaint, rushed
out at the head of four retainers from behind a corner, and !et
drive at his adversary. Lord Herbert, though worsted for a
moment by the sudden and cowardly assault, continued to defend
himself against his five assailants, before the eyes of a score of
hostile spectators who had come to see the husband take his
revenge. ‘The four retainers, who were probably afraid of being

1G,, ii., pp. 131-33. He was partly instigated by Henry IV. of France, who
expressed surprise at hearing that the fencing-master “still lived”. As Sanquhar
was executed for the murder by English justice, we may suppose that his idea of
honour was more Scottish and French than English. Still, such a story throws
light on the reason why Laertes, ‘‘a very noble youth,” hopes to clear his honour
by treacherously murdering Hamlet with poison,

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 il

hung for murder, pressed the attack so feebly that their master
was finally dragged away in pitiable plight from under the knees
of the redoubtable sage. Such at least is the account, perhaps too
favourable to himself, which he gives of the matter. Public opinion
at Court, which had progressed since the days of York and Lan-
caster, condemned the assault as murderous and dishonourable ;
but the attitude of the spectators who had come to see Lord
Herbert stabbed, shows that the “killing affray” was not yet held
in universal abhorrence ; so the stricter customs of the duel were
likely to do more good than harm.’ Systematised duelling never
reached the excess of popularity which it enjoyed in France, where
ladies so encouraged it as the proper vocation of nobility, that
there was “scarce any man thought worth looking at that had
not killed some other man in a duel”. If it was never so in
England, the secret of the difference lay in this; the only business
of the French noblesse under the Bourbons was soldiering ; but as
the English gentry pursued peaceable callings, their social ideas
were eminently civilian. In contrast to the “swordsmen” who
swaggered about London streets, quarrelled on the “second cause”
of a point of honour, and ran each other through the body by the
rules of Italian fence, there were many country squires who could
give and take the lie direct in broad upland dialect, without feeling
bound in courtesy to kill one another.?

As there was more than one type of English gentleman, so Ladies
there were many types of lady, ranging from the heroines of alle- eas
gories and sonnets, from Mrs. Hutchinson, whose learning, taste tions
and intellect would have met the marital requirements of John
Milton himself, down to the housewife who dozed with the squire
over his ale, or the titled wanton and murderess who dominated
over the factions at Court. The ladies of that day were forced to
give a large part of their lives to household duties, and had less to
spare for society and culture. In the absence of country doctors,
it was the women of the house who practised the quaint lore of
the art of healing—in part medicine, in part charms and white

1 How desirable stricter custom was, and how much wanting at this period
even among the honourably disposed who met singly man to man, can be seen in
the horrible Sackville and Bruce duel, 1613. See Guardian (1713), Nos. 129, 133, and
Carlyle’s Historical Sketches, pt. i., chap. xii. .

2 Hutchinson, p. 38. Rous, p. 23. Lord Herbert, pp. 19, 72, 77, 92-96. Ein-
stein, pp. 68-76.

12 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

magic. Almost all the food, drink and delicacies of the landlord’s
family came off the estate, and in small manors the brewing of the
beer, the salting of the Martinmas beef and the daily cooking were
the province of the wife and daughters: even in fine houses it was
their business to preserve the garden fruit, and to sew for household
use or ornament during long hours that would now either be devoted
to more intellectual or more athletic pursuits, or else dissipated in
conyventionalities and distractions.!

While the daughters of the well-to-do classes were not yet
divorced from the active business of life, nor relegated to the
drawing-rooms to which Miss Austen’s heroines were confined, on the
other hand no professions or trades higher than manual were open
to women, and scarcely any education was provided for them save
that which each home could give. A very few clever women were
classical scholars; a somewhat larger number were Puritan theo-
logians, or students of English and even of Italian poetry.

Besides verses and plays there were but few other books to
amuse their leisure. Imaginative writing found its chief outlet
in the drama. There were indeed a few romances, in prose, very
popular among ladies. In the time of the civil troubles the old-
established monarchy of Lyly’s Kuphwes and Sidney’s Arcadia
yielded to the more intolerable usurpation of Mlle. Scudéri’s
French romance. Under the Commonwealth, even the witty and
unaffected Dorothy Osborne enjoyed the “tomes” of the Grand
Cyrus as light literature.?

Since painting was not yet practised by amateurs, ladies’
artistic skill was exercised on the domestic arts of tapestry, em-
broidery and gardening. But they carried music, especially in the
sense of singing to stringed instruments, to a high perfection ; the
art was encouraged by the fashionable habit of writing masques,

‘It is difficult to ascertain how much exercise ladies took. In the higher circles
of society they hunted and hawked so much that the deer-hunting parties ‘‘ were
usually arranged in honour of the ladies” (Duke of Stettin, p. 47). Yet I find little
evidence that in the average squire’s household they took part in the field-sports.
There is no means of ascertaining how much they walked and rode merely for

health or.enjoyment, but in days when roads were bad for carriages, riding was
a very common means of locomotion for both men and women.

*The publication of ‘‘vain books of Amadis de Gaul and of comedies” was
frowned on by the stricter Puritans, who thought Laud could have better exercised
his censorship in that direction, instead of against evangelical literature (Somers’
Tracts, v., p. 17. Jusserand’s English Novel in the Time of Shakespeare, 1899, pp.

140, 141, 262. The English Novel, Walter Raleigh, 18 . 86-88,  Doroth
Osborne’s Letters, passim). Bly OS, PP orothy

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 13

verses and love songs, and the extraordinary power of writing them
well, which was then so profusely spread among a generation of
unpretentious and unprofessional poets.

The usual age for the marriage of ladies was thirteen to Marriages
eighteen, and of gentlemen from fifteen to twenty-eight. Some-
times, for one or two years after the ceremony, the husband
travelled abroad with a tutor, or resided at the University, to
complete his education.? Since many men and nearly all women
were married before they had reached an age when the soul is
mistress of her choice, parents were generally able to arrange
matches without incurring resistance. It was considered the
business of a good father to find husbands and wives for his chil-
dren, by negotiating family treaties in which portion was carefully
weighed against income. After the preliminaries were settled, the
young man was sent to pay his addresses, often to a lady whom
he had not yet seen; and it was but seldom that the affair was
broken off at this stage. One good result of this bad system was
that a very small proportion of eligible men and women remained
unmarried. It may also be argued that when barbarous social
custom required people to be married for life while they were still
boys and girls, a wise parental choice was likely to lead to the
least unhappy results possible under such conditions. The memoirs
and letters of the time show that some, at least, of these arranged
marriages resulted in real affection. But it is significant that much
of the love poetry, in which the period was so prolific, bore no
more relation to marriage than did the sonnets of that accepted
model to the age, Sir Philip Sidney. Moralists were already
beginning to denounce the miseries of “enforced marriages”; it
is clear from the memoirs, letters and stage-plays of the time that
love matches were sometimes tolerated by the parents; that in
many families the daughter had the right, not of choice, but at
least of veto; and that the secret love marriage and runaway
match were not uncommon. In this epoch, if not indeed in earlier
times, the great battle of Gretna Green had already been joined,
which after long generations of strife secured the liberty of youth,

1Comus was set to music by Lawes; indeed, the poem was written partly at
the instigation of the musician. :

2Lord Herbert, pp. 38, 39. It was solely by way of “family treaty,” and in
order to acquire estates, that he was married at the age of fifteen to a woman of
twenty-one, He records it as a thing by no means ont of the way.

Schools:

14 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

Of the habits of the middle and Jower classes in these matters we
have less information. But it is probable that in grades of society
where portions and income were less considered and the sons looked
for support more to what they could earn than to what they could
inherit, marriages, though equally early, were more often made by
free choice. Thus the honest yeoman in the Witch of Edmonton*
declares that his daughters “shall choose for themselves by my
consent ”,

England was already ahead of other countries in the liberty
allowed to women, and the freedom of social intercourse between
the sexes, on which both Germans and Italians remarked with
surprise,”

The education of gentlemen’s sons varied more according to

mixture of their intended profession, than in these days when all are found

classes

together in the “public school”. Many a younger son destined
to the apprentice’s apron, many an heir destined to hunt the
coverts and exact the rentals of a small patrimony, were taught
little beyond their letters. But a good education was attainable
in more than one class of academy. In those frugal days, the sons
of leading county families were sometimes sent first to the village
school and afterwards to the grammar school of the neighbouring
market-town, as John Hampden was sent to Thame. There, sitting
on the bench with the cleverest sons of farmers and townspeople, the
young gentlemen learnt many things more useful to the future
governors of a country than the aristocratic tone and exclusive
ideas of a modern public school. In this way the middle and
upper classes came to understand each other, with great mutua}
advantage, and the gentry were fitted to take part in municipal.
magisterial and Parliamentary life. The belief that higher edu-
cation can only be bought at a heavy price, and is therefore the
monopoly of the rich, had not yet penetrated the English mind;
it was therefore the custom of parents in more than one class to
send the clever boy of the family at the smallest possible charge
to school and college, where, as he well understood, he was to pre-
pare for his future profession. In education, as in after life, the rich

1 Act I, sc. 2.
* Duke of Stettin, p. 65. Einstein, pp. 223, 224.

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 15

were less cut off from personal contact with other classes than they
are to-day.!

But besides these grammar schools, the more exclusive West- Education
minster, Winchester and Eton, existed then as now. Also persons Bee
born to high position were sometimes brought up in their own
homes by private tutors; and often, by a tradition coming down
from the Middle Ages, the households of Lords and county magnates
received specially favoured sons of neighbouring gentry into their
homes, partly as scholars, partly as pages or companions. In
these lordly mansions the young men unconsciously imbibed the
Cavalier ideal of life, in all its folly and in all its charm. It was
in this way that the manners and literature, and as the Puritans
observed, the profligacy and extravagance of the Court, spread to
families that never saw London.? ‘This kind of school, involving
intimate connection with the great, attracted the ambitious, the
greedy and the imaginative; for it was only through patrons that
unknown men were introduced into Court or Parliament. Every
great Lord who played with Raleigh, Somerset or Bacon for the
prizes of the world, brought with him to flaunt in the corridors
of Whitehall a train of his country gallants glittering in unwonted
pearls and gold; and the understanding that the patron would
finally provide for each of these clients out of his own or out of the
public purse, ruined many noble houses, embittered the scramble
for pensions and places, and made the government of the country,
as long as it was seated in the Court, an affair of personal factions,

Oxford and Cambridge, inferior to what they have since be- Univer-
come as seats of learning, already discharged as places of education *"°S
much the same functions as in the nineteenth century. ‘They were
a national institution, a training for the ideas, manners and char-
acter. ‘Their degrees gave the world assurance of a class of man
rather than of ascholar, From the great country houses the younger
son was sent up to obtain, not a learned, bat a liberal educa-
tion; while his elder brother, who was to inherit the estate, had
no thought of fitting himself for a profession, but regaided his

101d Country Life, Sir G. Sitwell, pp. 49,50. The foundation of endowed
schools was going on more rapidly between 1600 and 1650 than between 1500 and
1600, though the Tudor period has been wrongly accredited with an educational
advance more properly due to the first half of the seventeenth century (English

Schools at the Reformation, Leach, E.H.R., xv.,. pp. 58-72 (Watson)),
2 Hutchinson, p. 78.

Class dis-
tinctions
at college

16 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

undergraduate career, either as a preparation for public life, or as
a pleasant means of throwing away time and money among his
equals, These types, encouraged by the college authorities as
“future benefactors,” became under the later Tudors a much
larger proportion of the students than they had been in the Middle
Ages) The idea if not of scholarship, at least of residence at a
University, had become connected with the Elizabethan idea of
gentleman and courtier. This change, stimulated by the frequent
residence of King James’s Court in the colleges, probably helped
to decrease the learned, and to increase the literary and political,
character of Oxford and Cambridge.

But the Universities also afforded training to persons of lower
rank, whose facility at Latin grammar or clumsiness at handling
the plough had marked them out for masters or clergymen in the
eyes of discerning parents. The teaching and clerical professions
were largely recruited from the middle class, though no longer
from the lower grades of peasantry, who had often filled the
parsonage in the days of the Plantagenets. During the Stuart
period, the sons of yeomen, farmers and tradesmen, chosen out for
these careers, had somehow to be forced through the portals of
the University on insufficient means; they were often engaged as
“‘servitors ” to their fellow-students, who there as at home stood
upon their rank. ‘The life of the servitor and sizar was often hard
as well as degrading. ‘ Bed-making, chamber-sweeping and water-
fetching ” were “‘ doubtless great preservatives against too much vain
philosophy.” ? Yet this custom of observing ranks, though often
abused, was not in itself considered an abuse, for it enabled many
to live at college on the only financial and social footing that was
possible for them. So long as society was based not on competition
but on patronage, social distinctions that have now vanished from
the Universities were a necessary condition of their existence. And

1 One reason why the learning of the Dons was scarcely worthy of so great a
nation in so great an age, was the custom of giving fellowships, etc., largely to the
sons of patrons, rich men, and lawyers who worked for the college; this nepotism was
openly pursued as a necessary policy in that age of patronage (Harl. Misc., i., p.
495. W. Harrison’s Description of England, ed. Furnivall, p. 253).

2Eachard’s Contempt of the Clergy. The distance between fellow-commoner
and pensioner was observed, as well as the distance between pensioner and sizar.
Thus as late as 1667, Roger North, though in straitened circumstances and not

himself heir to the family peerage, was “tied up by quality from mixing” with the
““common scholars” at football (Autobiography, sec. 20),

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 17

it seems that in those days a large proportion of poor men were
to be found at Oxford and Cambridge.

The college career of the poor scholar, generally dependent on prospects
the whim of some private person, was often cut short. In any case So sae
he was liable at the end to be turned out upon the world, the most
helpless and despised of the unemployed, if no living, private
chaplaincy, tutorship or grammar school had fallen to him in the
indecent jostle for the favour of hard and venal patrons. The
prizes were indeed but poor rewards for devotion to learning: yet
they might by good fortune be secured, though not always by the
worthiest. Every year youthful clergy and schoolmasters, knowing
little besides Latin grammar, and whether they were Puritan or
Laudian, were sent down from the Alma Mater on the top of the
carrier’s waggon, to take up life-long residence in remote country
hamlets. Yet it is probable that the education, abilities and
number of University men in training for these professions, however
insufficient, had improved since the days of Edward VI., when Hugh
Latimer had told his fellow-Protestants some home truths on the
subject, in his famous sermon On the Plough. And although the
person of the parish priest was no longer, as in Catholic times, fenced
about by superstitious awe, his social position was more distinctly
above that of the peasant than it had been before the Reformation,
and it perhaps continued to rise during the seventeenth century, as
it certainly rose with much increased rapidity in the eighteenth.

There was no organised athleticism among the students. But
exercise was recognised as necessary for health in the “ beastly air
of Cambridge”; so the ordinary undergraduate who was not a
sporting man, diverted himself in the afternoon with “ walking in
the fields,” bathing in the river, bell pulling, jumping, running,
bowls, pitching the bar and football, which last was little better
than an excuse for a fight between the general body of two or
more colleges.’

The progress of study at the English Universities since the time cjaccicas
of their foundation, has been a series of rapid advances followed learning
by long and sometimes untimely halts. The first sixty years of
the century were not a period of change. Bacon’s work scarcely
affected the schools. The crabbed systems of logic, philosophy and

4See D’Ewes’ College Life,

Its value

18 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

physical science had not yet been inspired with new life by the
genius of Descartes and Newton, or by the academical activity of
Barrow. ‘he classical teaching, though based on the reforms
effected a hundred years back by the Renaissance scholars, was as
much below the notice of Casaubon when he visited the Univer-
sities, as the old medizval classics had been below the notice of
Erasmus in former days. The undergraduates in the reign of —
James I. learnt a mere smattering of the Greek tongue and nothing
of Greek literature, except when individual zea! supplied the defects
of teaching. But the Latin course was most thorough. Latin was
still the medium of ordinary instruction, and often of friendly con-
versation ; Latin was the language of oratory, and of original
compositions in prose and verse, by which eager rivals for the
favour of the Muse cultivated scholarship, ingenuity and taste
more than by any other academical exercise. ‘There were, however,
at Cambridge cliques of poetical undergraduates who composed
verses and wrote and acted whole dramas in the mother-tongue,
aspiring to become playwrights at the capital, or literary hangers-
on to some great Lord at the Court. But the taste even of these
modern aspirants was, in the opinion of London stage managers,
too much soaked in the phraseology of the Latin poets.

Under James I. classics had almost a monopoly of attention
at the Universities. Law and medicine flourished elsewhere, at the
Inns of Court and the College of Physicians. Controversial theo-
logy, however, was not neglected by the academicians, at a time
when the theological views which they inculcated decided the fate
of Churches, dynasties and realms. But the classical studies reacted
even on politics and religion. When Milton was an undergraduate,
just as again when Mazzini was a schoolboy, familiarity with the
great pagan names and stories suggested to young patriots, as
Royalist writers observed with regret, the civic ideals of the ancient
republics, Classics saved young theologians, who had in them any
spark of poetry latent, from complete absorption in controversial
divinity. Although the Arts course was well constructed to draw
off the mind into less heated channels, theology, neglected in the
lecture-room, was none the less the atmosphere breathed by the
sons of learning. The doctrines of Papist, Arminian and Calvin-
ist, the best sermon that Sunday, the views of the new Dean,
were the talk of all serious-minded students, Most of those who

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 19

came up to the Universities had some kind of patronage to beg or
to bestow ; and the bestowal of patronage was largely guided by
the politico-religious controversies of the day. The quarrel deeply
affected the society of the undergraduates, among whom the
Puritans of a stricter way condemned their profligate comrades
as “atheists,” a catchword of party abuse transferred to the whole
Cavalier side at the outbreak of the war.)

The curriculum of the schools necessarily followed the require- Its mono-
ments of Oxford and Cambridge. Classical scholarship enjoyed a Py
monopoly that was not even questioned. For it was as yet the
most intelligent and humane part of the education of an age
slowly emerging out of medieval ideas. It was only in the
rationalistic epoch of Charles II. that critics ventured to inquire
whether a little reading “of innocent English authors,” the writ-
ing of “English exercises,” and “the principles of arithmetic,
geometry and such alluring parts of learning,” might not be made
part of a boy’s school education.

But if instead hereof, you diet him with nothing but with rules and ex-
ceptions; with tiresome repititions of Amo’s and rimra’s setting a day also
apart to recite verbatim all the burdensom task of the foregoing week (which
I am confident is usually as dreadful as an old Parliament Fast) we must
needs believe, that such a one thus managed, will scarce think to prove im-
mortal by such performances and accomplishments as these. You know very
well, sir, that lads in the general, have but a kind of ugly and odd concep-
tion of learning ; and look upon it as such a starving thing, and unnecessary
perfection, (especially as it is usually dispenc’d out unto them) that Nine-pins
, and Span-counter are judged much more heavenly employments; and there-
| fore what pleasure, do we think, can such a one take, in being bound to get
|| against breakfast two or three hundred Rumblers out of Homer, in commenda-
| tion of Achilles’s toes, or the Grecians’ boots? Or, to have measured out
| unto him, very early in the morning, fifteen or twenty well laid-on lashes, for
| letting a syllable slip too soon, or hanging too long upon it? Doubtless,
| instant execution upon such grand miscarriages as these, will eternally engage
him to a most admirable opinion of the Muses. (Eacuarp.)

|
1 For what has been said in the preceding paragraphs, see Wordsworth’s
| Schole Academica. Mark Pattison’s Casaubon. English Universities, Huber and
_ Newman, vol. i., pp. 315-68; ii., pp. 1-74. Burton’s Anatomy, i., 2, 3, 15, “* Why
‘the Muses are Melancholy”. Hobbes’ Behemoth (1889), p. 3. Babington, Mr.
Macaulay's Character of the Clergy (1849), pp. 40, 41, 51, 52. Royal Hist. Soc., xvi.,
| pp. 164, 187. Masson’s Life of Mtlion. Visitation of Oxford (Camden Soc., 1881),
‘Mr. Burrows’ introd., pp. xi-xxx. And lastly, the Pilgrimage to and Return from
Parnassus (Clar. Press, 1886), the most intimate account of University men in the
days of Shakespeare that we possess.

Younger
sons of
gentry in
commerce

Service in
foreign
wars

20 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

Such questions were raised ten years after the Restoration only
by the eccentric Eachard, afterwards Master of St. Catherine’s, Cam-
bridge, and in Queen Anne’s reign by the unpopular Bishop Burnet ;
but in our own day they excite more general attention.’

While the English custom of primogeniture forbade the younger
sons to live on the family estate, they were not forbidden, like the
children of noble houses on the continent, to seek their fortunes in
commerce. Large families were brought up in the country houses
of the gentry, in spite of the terrible death-rate among the children
of the upper classes, greater, probably, than the death-rate among
the children of the poorest to-day ; and the numerous cadets of the
family were sent to swell the river of national life with a stream
of high-spirited adventurers, ‘The boy who was sent as prentice
to the city, had before him the prospect of new activity leading to
plebeian honours; while behind him lay the memory of days spent
afield round the manor house, carrying the nets or the falcon for
his elder brother. Some of these gentlemen prentices “did affect
to go in costly apparel and wear weapons”. When we read of
the proud spirit in which the shopkeepers of London claimed to
be heard in Church and State, and faced the royal soldiers in
street riot and on battlefield, it must be remembered that there
was a leaven among them of the sons of gentlemen brought up
in the country-side.? The English townsfolk were in blood and
temper a blend of the two classes. Accordingly, the squires
regarded neighbouring cities, where they watched their sons rising
to wealth and fame, with none of that jealousy which in other
lands divided a nobility, proud in arms, from a rival plutocracy of
pure burgher blood. If such a feud had existed in England, the |
Civil War, however begun, would have resolved itself into a strife 1
between town and country, from which the Prince would have
emerged, as from the revolt of the Spanish Communeros and the _
Knights’ War in Germany, an umpire with powers supreme. |

But other roads besides the lowly path by which the prentice |
rose to civic honours were open to the “ younger son”, Man
went to the Bar, or obtained the best preferments of the Church,

) Eachard’s Contempt of the Clergy, 1670, Burnet, vi., p. 213. 4

“Cunningham, p. 126. See also, for apprenticing sons of gentry, many old i

plays and ballads, ¢e.g., Eastward Hol, and the Bailif’s Daught Isli
and Verney Papers (Camd. Soc., 1853), pp. 6, 12. fs Che SCE

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 21

The adventurous sought the German wars. Although the officer-

ing of the militia, the only armed force in England, was left to very

civilian magistrates, there were Englishmen renowned in foreign

camps for long service in the van of Protestant war, The Dutch

service always, and later the Swedish and Palatine, attracted a con-
| tinuous flight of island volunteers; some were noblemen seeking

the experience of a year’s service under a famous chief, but more

were landless men following the profession of arms.

While his brethren were carrying the colours by the Scheldt The elder
_ and the Danube, or building up their fortunes in the city, the heir >rother
of the estate was fitting himself for his future place. After the
University a short course of legal training was the fashion, both to
prepare a man for his duties as Justice of Peace, and to give him a
sight of London from the good society of the Inns of Court. The
more wealthy finished their education with the grand tour, which
often brought with it knowledge of the language, and acquaintance
with the courtiers and sages, of Italy, or of France, or even of
Spain. It was largely by this custom of travelling in Italy and corre-
sponding with friends made there, very common under Henry VIII,
that the Renaissance culture had been introduced into Eng-
land. In the reign of James I. the peace with Philip III. caused Foreign
a revival of English travel in Spain and the Italian states under ‘@v¢!
Spanish and Papal government, where in Elizabeth’s reign even a
clever linguist from our island dared scarcely ride in disguise for fear
of the Inquisition. The noble societies and learned academies that
were then to be found in every Italian capital, gladly welcomed young
Englishmen of high fortune and promise, who quarrelled among
themselves as to whether it were treason to kiss the Pope’s toe and
to visit one’s Popish cousin at the Jesuit College; stared through
Galileo’s “ optic glass”; inquired how the Duke of Tuscany raised
his “ Dutch guard”; sung midnight canzonettes in the gardens of
| Siena; and at last returned home to their several duties in England,
|| never again to leave her shores save as old and sorrowful exiles for
Parliament or King.’

ey in. v pia GET Unik who savellel in VeneGan tent
tory in Elizabeth’s reign, rode through the wooded spurs of the sub-Aipine country,
- carrying an umbrella as he rode to keep off the sun, and preceded by a mounted

attendant blowing a horn; see the curious picture of the events of his life in the
Elizabethan room, National Portrait Gallery, which gives a lively portraiture of the

22 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

Though the landlords of this period did little to help their
tenants, many small squires farmed their own estates ; and many
great proprietors kept a portion in their own hands, interesting
themselves in new methods of tillage, or, like Sir John Harrington,
in their “oves and boves” ; others were content to discharge the
ordinary duties of a landlord, or to neglect them in favour of drink-
ing, hunting and gambling.

Justices Another task to which many devoted their lives was local

of Peace government. The administration of each district was conducted
by certain of the local gentry, selected by the Crown as unpaid
Justices of Peace. The rural districts were therefore governed,
neither by the feudal rule of the landowner in his own estate and
in his own right, nor by royal bureaucrats sent down from the
capital. ‘The magistrate’s authority derived from the Crown, and
yet it was in effect local government and squirearchal power. This
mutual dependence of the central and provincial administrations
is the key to the history of the Stuart epoch. The institution of
unpaid local magistrates ensured both the ill-success of the repub-
lican propaganda, and the failure of the Stuart Kings to establish
a despotism without possessing a bureaucracy. For while the
majority of the squires always rallied to preserve the sovereignty
of the Crown, whose service had been from father to son the chief
pride of many ancient families, on the other hand the same class
was able in 1640 and in 1688 to maintain views of policy and
religion against the will of kings from whom they derived neither
income, lands, nor social esteem. The policy of the Crown de-
pended for its execution on the active consent of magistrates, who
again depended for their own social position on the good-will of
the neighbouring squires, and were on such friendly terms with
the middle class in town and country, that magisterial resistance
to the Crown might at moments become one with the resistance of
the whole nation: and it was these moments which decided the
fate of England.

‘Adminies During the early years of James I. the Justices of Peace were

oe the willing instruments of Government in continuing the home

ig policy of the great Queen. As administrators they were chiefly

typical education and career of a rich gentleman: Oxford, continental travel, low
country wars, etc., and some minor customs of the age, such as the elaborate marriage
masque and funeral,

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 23

engaged in executing the poor-law scheme by which the Elizabethan
legislators had propped up the tottering foundations of economic
society, and rendered them stable for two centuries of political
progress and colonial expansion. In the generation following the
destruction of the monasteries, the depopulation of corn country
for pasture had thrown upon the roads thousands of able-bodied
husbandmen, at a moment when no organisation existed for their
relief. England was like a kingdom terrorised by disbanding armies,
and the chronic disease might at any moment come to a head in
social revolt. To meet this danger, Elizabeth’s Parliaments had
erected a system of charity and control of which the poor-law
was the central provision. To replace the doubtful benefits of
promiscuous relief at the Abbey Gate, they instituted the legal
obligation of every parish to maintain its own poor. This great
principle saved society, though it could not abolish pauperism.
But the principle would have stood as vainly on the statute-book
as did the penal laws of that day against swearing oaths and
tippling ale, if it had net been rigorously enforced on recalcitrant,
selfish and impoverished parishes by an elaborate system of checks,
The Justices of Peace in the shire were held responsible by the
Privy Council in London for the levy of the hated poor-rate, and
the Judges on circuit acted for the central government as inspectors
of the magistrates’ conduct.

The Assizes were at this time more than a mere gaol delivery. Assizes
They were made the occasion for an informal meeting of the shire
for every imaginable purpose. The fashionable young squire came
to air his new doublet, and the cut-purse to relieve him of its rich
trimmings ; the magistrates to make their reports ; the yeomen to
form the juries, and at times of political crisis to present petitions ;
all to hear and discuss the news of the great world. It was on
these high occasions that the Judge made solemn inquiry into the
administration of the county, lectured the awe-struck assembly,
explained the policy of the nation and the large interests of society
to those whose ideas were bounded by the petty interests of the
parish and the local prejudice of the shire. If the magistrates had
through fear or favour neglected of late to ransack the houses of
their Catholic neighbours, if the ale-houses had been allowed to
become dens of disorder, if the wool trade had declined owing to
the state of the roads, if two parishes had a point in dispute about

Various
magis-
terial
functions

24 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

the assessment of the rate, the Judge had words of reproof, com-
mand and advice for all. Under the stimulus of this inquisition,
the local magistrates learnt to carry out in detail the general policy
of the State.

Private vested interests, other than land, had then little chance
of defying society so armed in its own defence. Ale-houses, in
which no one had interest except the ale-wife or publican, who
brewed what they sold, were often suppressed without pity or com-
pensation. Corners in wheat were broken up by fixing a maximum
price, an expedient then found practicable, at least in time of
famine.! Youths without employment, save that of wandering
round the palings of the deer-park, or camping out on the common
with a cow, were forcibly apprenticed to some honest tradesman,
or compelled to take service with some farmer who had applied to
the magistrates to find him in hands. The sturdy beggar was
flogged at the whipping-post of every town on the road till he was
glad to return to his native parish, as the only place where the law
ordered persecution to be stayed and public charity to be extended.
Such squirearchy must have seemed rich man’s law to many a “rogue
forlorn,” as he lay hungry and bleeding by the roadside, cursing the
Quarter Sessions in the spirit of Lear. None the less squirearchy
still had its uses in the era of the Stuarts. It preserved society
from confusion and the poor from death by hunger, while at the
same time it saved England’s local liberties, and thereby in the
long run her Parliamentary institutions.

The Justices of Peace were not only administrators but judges
and police magistrates. ‘The State depended on their willingness
to execute the harsh laws that kept the Catholics down, and main-
tained the fabric of Elizabethan England secure. But the greatest
amount of their magisterial work consisted in the enforcement of
the law against ordinary criminals, the management of the police,
the examination of prisoners, the drawing up of indictments for
the Judges of Assize, the dispensing of petty justice at their own
sessions, and the control of prisons.

The clumsy machine of English police, judicature and punish-
1 Even in ordinary times, one of the many duties of the J.P.’s was to fix the
price at which wheat was to be sold and the wages which each kind of labourer

should receive. How far their decisions were enforced, or how far they influenced
wages and prices, will probably always be a matter of dispute among historians,

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 25

ment maintained social order through the political convulsions of the Mis-
century, but at the expense of the continual escape of the guilty, Soa
and in all probability of the condemnation of the innocent, besides :
horrible sufferings that the law inflicted confessedly on the merely
unfortunate. Men of that less sensitive generation were more in-
different to the fate of others, partly because they were more ready
themselves to endure pain and injustice. These they regarded as
irremediable evils of human life. The natural right of “Fortune”

to dispense death or ruin, shame or reward, with blinded eyes and
wanton favour, was the constant theme of poets; who, when they
were not contemplating “ Mortality,” were railing at “Fortune,” to

an audience only too familiar with the fickleness of “the jade,” in
the vagaries of the law. These defects of justice were left un-
altered, partly from want of the humanitarian, but still more from
want of the scientific spirit, a defect which showed itself alike in
the organisation of police, in the treatment of evidence, and in
the system of punishment.

The severity of the judicial and penal systems was partly caused Police
by the defects of the police. Only a small proportion of criminals
were caught, and even when arrests were made, but little evidence
was collected. ‘The officers, so far from being scientific, were not
even properly professional. For although the constable of each
village, and the watchman of each town were paid to guard peace and
property, they were yet neither specially fitted nor trained for that
employment. In the towns, men superannuated from other trades
were chosen to play the part of Dogberry and Verges. In a country
village the case was even worse. For there the magistrates could
only afford to hire the part-service of a farmer-constable, who spent
his day in agriculture, and left the plough to lead the hue-and-cry
as far as the parish bounds. When the chase reached those limits,
Master Constable was as like as not to sit down and thank God
they were well rid of a thief, while the criminal pursued his way,
feebly followed by officers of other parishes, ever less interested in
his arrest as he drew farther from the scene of his crime. Under
such conditions, when a district became notoriously infested by
thieves, and the magistrates, after a severe lecture from the Judge,
were aware that more men must somehow be hung at the next
Assizes, the village constable too often made haste to seize the
innocent on general rumour or manufactured evidence. But it was

26 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

yet more common that the guilty thief remained unprosecuted,
spared by the charity of his poor neighbours, “‘who would not
procure any man’s death for all the goods in the world” ; such was
one result of capital punishment for theft. There was no public
prosecutor, no county police, and no national detective force,
except Cecil’s political spies. The inefficient character of the
constabulary was due, like so much else in the infancy of the rating
system, to want of money to hire a professional staff; and the bad-
ness of its organisation to the want of a larger police area.’

The energy of Elizabeth’s magistrates, helped by improved econ-
omic conditions, had at last got the upper hand of the sturdy
beggars who in her father’s day rendered high roads and lonely
farms unsafe; but law-breakers more formidably armed had still
little to fear. The watchmen and constables, diligent in harry-
ing the plague-stricken and the vagrant, shrank aside before the
companies of sword-wearing ruffians and broken gallants—the
Roaring Boys, Tityre Tues and Bravadors, who made night un-
safe in many an English street.

Judicature The improbability of arrest was not the sole encouragement to |
crime. The English judicial system, like a lottery where tickets
were drawn for life or death, let a certain proportion of the arrested
slip through its clutches, irrespective of their guilt or innocence. |
If the indictment was wrongly drawn by a word, the accused went
free as Barabbas. All who, being able to read, claimed “benefit |
of clergy,” for the first offence escaped punishment in the case of |
many common crimes such as petty larceny. When the prisoner
had friends among the jury, or when from corruption, ignorance or
prejudice the countrymen were in the mood to thwart the law, he |
was acquitted in spite of protests from the Bench. The English |
jury system, while it protected our liberties, by no means always |
increased the fairness of trials; and verdicts inspired by terrorism, |
favour and folly would have been even more frequent, but for the
wholesome fear now felt for the Judge. A proper respect for the
Bench had been strengthened under the Tudors by the backing it
had received from the Privy Council and the Star Chamber.

The great number of criminals, who, owing to the faults of the

_ ,' There was a High Constable for the Hundred or the Franchise (areas midway
in size between parish and county). But the High Constables do not appear to
have been very different from the Parish Constables as regards efficiency,

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 QT

police, the law, or the juries, were never brought to a genuine
trial, made men unwilling to try other prisoners fairly, Anxious
lest the law should lose its terrors, the courts, with the approval of
society, retained rules framed to secure the conviction of the guilty
rather than the safety of the innocent. ‘The prisoner had no counsel
either before or during trial; the nature of the evidence for the
prosecution was concealed from him till he came into court; he
could not arrange beforehand that the proper witnesses should
appear in his defence; he had no books or notes before him, but
spoke from memory or on the spur of the moment; if, not being a
lawyer, he ventured to quote Bracton, the prosecutor denounced
him for surreptitiously receiving counsel in prison. While any
hearsay evidence was listened to with attention, he could not
claim to have the real witnesses brought into court, or the
original documents produced. In an age when scientific methods
ef valuing evidence were quite unknown, the prejudice of the
court against the prisoner led to results like the condemnation
ef Raleigh for a crime he would have abhorred to commit, and
of hundreds of witches for crimes no one can commit at all.?

The net results of these methods of judicature was that, while Penal
the proportion of unjust convictions was probably large, the pro- Code
portion of convictions to crimes was certainly small. Hence the
severity of the penal system: for if there were several hundred
thieves in a county, of whom only fifty could be caught and thirty
convicted in a year, it seemed good to the wisdom of our ancestors
that the gallows should rid the world of at least a score. The rate-
payers could not then afford the money, either for the employment
of highly-trained officers to watch, catch, imprison and release the

1Qne custom was perhaps in favour of the accused, if innocent. In the early
Stuart period trials were decided more by examination of the prisoner than by
evidence of witnesses. The prisoner was compelled to answer any question put to
him, first, at the preliminary examination before the J.P., or in cases of treason
before the Privy Council; afterwards, if he had been unable to satisfy those authori-
ties of his innocence, he wrangled in court with his prosecutors. These examina-
tions, though they helped to convict the guilty, gave the innocent their best chance
of escape in days of unscientific methods of taking evidence. Helpless as an
unlearned prisoner was in altercation with a well-primed magistrate or a couple
of lawyers, innocence would have been still more helpless if the verdict had
depended solely on evidence heard, when that evidence was chiefly at second-
hand, and nearly all against the accused.

The best authorities on police and judicature of the period are Mr. Lee’s
History of Police, rg01, and Stephen’s History ef Criminal Law. See also Hamilton’g
Quarter Sessions from Elizabeth to Anne,

Prisons

General
effects of
the poor-
law

28 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

same person twenty times over; or for the maintenance of gaols
large enough to lodge the criminal population. The prison was
regarded neither as a reformatory nor as a place of vindictive
punishment, but as a house of detention for political prisoners,
debtors, accused awaiting trial, and persons of these classes who had
been unable on the order for their release to pay the gaoler his
fees. When a large number of condemned felons had their capital
sentence commuted to imprisonment, the gaol was overcrowded,
starvation and pestilence afflicted its regular occupants, the debtors,
and complaint was made that the prisons were being put to an
improper use.!

The prison was the house of misery and misfortune, not of
crime. But the misery of the unfortunate was then greater than
the misery which we now think right to inflict on the criminal. For
the magistrates, being bound to maintain the prisons out of the
rates, yet wishing to diminish this charge on the community, in
effect farmed out the business to gaolers, who not only covered the
expenses of the public by exacting the legalised fees, but extorted
fortunes for themselves out of their victims, under penalty of blows,
starvation and foul lodging. When one of these bad men retired,
he often sold his lucrative post to another wretch equally prepared
to speculate in the woes of mankind. If the ordinary punishment
for theft had been imprisonment, these gaols would have become a
heavy charge ca the rates, since they must needs have been greatly
enlarged. But the punishment was hanging or flogging; and so
the gallows or the whipping- post saved the thief from the worse
fate of the penniless prisoner. He, poor wretch, rotted in dung Peon
for the remainder of a life which was seldom long, if once it to the
gaoler to a charge.

In this period, when there was still no effective police, the
security of life and goods and the maintenance of public order
would still have been as bad as in the Middle Ages, but for the
sound administration of the poor-law. ‘The householder, un-
willingly forced to contribute to the poor-rate, got back more than
his money’s-worth. ‘The panic terror that in Plantagenet and
Tudor days rushed through every room in the lonely farmstead
and every house in the hamlet when the growling of the watch-

' Court and Times of Charles I., ii., p. 244.

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 29

dogs proclaimed that “the beggars were coming to town,” had
_ become a memory and a nursery tale. In this century of civic and
religious feuds, the law-abiding character of the English survived,
not entirely by reason of our racial temperament, but also because
the community had secured itself by making provision for the
destitute.

Upon the whole, as compared with other periods of our history,
this was an age when the poor were well treated by the public
action of the community, because in the preceding age the “sturdy
beggars” had frightened society into active and beneficial measures
for their relief. In dealing with the problems of poverty, the reign
of Elizabeth was the period of creative legislation, and the reigns
of her two successors was the period of effective administration.
Now administration was nine points of the poor-law; the same
principle of poor relief was proclaimed by law in France and Scot-
land, but remained a dead letter for want of a proper combination
of central and local machinery, and for lack of public spirit in the
upper and middle class. In England alone the King’s Council
supervised, and the magistrates under that supervision executed
the unpopular legislation. The early Stuart monarchy did one
great and good thing for England; it secured that the provisions
for the relief of the impotent poor should never again fall into
disuse ; and in its own day it even did a little to alleviate the lot
of the unemployed.! But without the active and intelligent co-
operation of the gentry and Justices of Peace in each shire, the
central government could have done nothing.

No accusation is more petulantly bandied about between rival
races and rival generations than that of inhumanity. Each con-
siders itself humane, because its anger is easily aroused against the
cruelty of other places or times; yet the circumstances in every
case must be carefully examined before this feeling of self-satisfied
superiority can be rightly indulged. A few facts relating to our

1 The legal responsibility of each parish had some bad economical effects. It
prevented the fluidity of labour, because each parish refused to admit fresh hands to
settle in its boundaries, lest they should become fresh mouths. And it prevented
the increase of population, because, from the same fear of an increased poor-rate,
parish authorities often forbade the erection of new cottages. On the whole sub-
ject of the poor-law, see Miss Leonard’s excellent book, Unglish Poor Relicf, and
App. B, below.

Disuse of
torture in

England

30 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

ancestors’ humanity, in the sense of unwillingness to inflict physical
pain and discomfort, may interest the speculator in the inexact
science of comparative morals.

In the early disuse of torture as a means of extracting confes-
sion, English law and custom led the world.’ Torture for this
purpose was unknown in our common law, and the Tower rack was
regarded as the special political privilege of the Crown, whereby
the Privy Council alone might extort information for want of
which the State might be imperilled. Yet even the butcher’s last
plea of Salus Publici became obsolete in the reign of James I.
The torture from which Guy Fawkes had been lifted up to die,
shattered in all save his Promethean spirit, was twenty years later
pronounced illegal, and was not used to compel the murderer of
Buckingham to incriminate the King’s Parliamentary enemies.
Nor in the utmost height of Royal or Roundhead despotism was
it again employed. It is impossible to account for this definite
change except by the growth of humanitarian sentiment.

In other lands, torture to extract evidence was an important
part of the judicial system swept away by the French Revolution,
and torture as an accompaniment of capital punishment held a
high place in continental codes. The common criminal was broken
on the wheel, the witch and the Socinian were burned alive. In
Spain, the roasting of the victims of superstition, though necessarily
rarer since the extinction of Protestantism, was regarded by the
populace as a special delight, and by the priests as an offering to
their Pantheon, among whose principal attributes were those of
Moloch, But in England ordinary criminals were never put to
death by torture. In the reign of James I. two heretics, who denied
the doctrine of the Trinity, closed the fiery roll of Smithfield martyr-
dom. ‘These two brave men, braver than Ridley and Latimer in
that no great party pitied their fate or embraced their creed, were
the last persons to die for heresy in England. Our statesmanship
was at once too humane and too timid to put Catholics to death
for their religion even at the block, much less at the stake.

1The torture of feine forte et dure (namely, pressing-to death) was still used in
the seventeenth century to force a man to plead. But this was a comparatively
rare incident. ‘he disuse of torture as a means of extracting evidence had taken
place in English common law in the Middle Ages, partly perhaps because the
English of that period did not require evidence of guilt before hanging a man, but
were content with the belief prevalent among his neighbours (Stephen, i., p. 222),

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 31

“English people,” says Sir James Stephen, “were reckless about
taking life, but they have been usually averse to the infliction of
death by torture.” ?

When Civil War at last broke out in the midst of our peaceful English

island, its conduct contrasted well in every point of humanity with ne ange
the uncontrolled destruction that was laying waste the continent.
For the English were not a military population; the state of war
was rare and unpopular; the combatants were men of the same
race, and the religious animosity less intense than in Holland,
France and Germany; the violence of armed Episcopalian and
Puritan was as much milder than the devilries of Alva and Tilly,
as the Bishops of the High Commission Court were more mild than
the Inquisitors of Spain.

But while the English, by their very insularity, drew ahead of Cruelty in
others in their methods of conducting war, and in the disuse Niece ots
torture as a means of extracting evidence or inflicting capital
punishment, there were several respects in which their humanity
was low. In their treatment of coloured races, and of white i
peoples whom they reckoned inferior in civilisation, the English
were no better than the Dutch and French, or, except for the In-
quisition, than the Spaniard. Of the state of our prisons, and of
the use of torture as a means of punishment other than capital,
we have already spoken. Since corporal punishments were the only
alternative to the gallows or the living death of the prison,? they
were perhaps less abominable for their cruelty to the victim than
for their brutalising effect on others as everyday spectacles, But

1See also Harrison’s Description of England, ed. Furnivall, pp. 237, 238, for con-
temporary opinion and practice. Although the punishment for treason was hanging
and disembowelling, those who investigate the hideous subject will be thankful to
find that the Jesuit and the regicide scarcely suffered pain for more than a few
seconds, The legal punishment of women for treason was the more painful death
at the stake; but they were in practice usually, though not always, strangled before
the straw was lit. Petty treason, punishable thus, included then the murder of a
liusband, master or mistress. The execution of women for political treason had long
fallen into disuse with English Governments and parties, when James II. revived it
to put down the sheltering of fugitives. Hanging, before the principle of the drop
was adopted, unavoidably lasted many minutes. Though it was not meant as a
torture, a more humane generation would haye found means of making death
instantaneous,

2Some few convicts were transported to Virginia as ‘‘ servants,” but not those
of the worst kind. The custom wasjresisted, with partia] success, by the colonists.
Between 1649 and 1685 a much greater number of political offenders were trans-
ported to Virginia and the West Indies (Economic Hist. of Virginia, Bruce, 1896,
ly pp: 596-612).

Yhe witch

hunt

32 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

while we condemn our ancestors for flocking to see the thief faint
in the pillory under the shower of filthy missiles, and women suffer
agonies under the lash, we must remember that we are ignorant
what proportion of the populace went to these sights, and in what
spirit. Negro-burning in the United States at the present day
may, for all we know, afford keener pleasure to a larger number of
spectators,

But the most scandalous blot on English humanity was witch-
finding. ‘The inhabitants of continental Europe, brutalised by
the continual presence of war, torture and murder, which rival
priesthoods blessed, frenzied by doubt as to the true escape from
the lively vision of hell, and taught to see powers of evil in every
common event, fell with maniac cruelty upon a class of persons whom
old tradition pointed out as the devil’s servants. In countries of
either faith, old and solitary women perished by thousands amid
agonies of torture. Across the guardian waters that divided Eng-
land from the atmosphere of religious wars, this loathsome infection
of the mind was wafted like a plague-blast ; but since the material
and intellectual causes were less marked, the vile panic was never
here quite so horrible or so extensive. ‘The sceptical Elizabeth,
perhaps with some pity for her sex, had refused to yield when the
pamphlet press called on the Government to enact fiercer laws “not
suffering a witch to live”. The outburst came with the accession
of a Scottish King, who, though he rejected the best part of the
spirit of Knox, was crazed beyond his English subjects with the
witch-mania of Scotland and the continent. His first Parliament
enacted new death-laws; at once the Judges and magistrates, the
constables and the mob, began to hunt up the oldest and ugliest
spinster who lived with her geese in the hut on the common, or
tottered about the village street muttering the inaudible soliloquies
of second childhood. Many pleaded guilty, and described the coven-
ants they had formed with black dogs and “ goblins called Tibb ”:
some had undoubtedly taken to what they believed to be black
arts, to repel or requite the malevolence of their neighbours, or to
win money and reputation from their credulity; but many were
beaten or terrified into fictitious confessions, or perished denying
their guilt to the last. Educated men soon perceived that not a
few of these unfortunate creatures were innocent, but this acuteness
of perception in no way disturbed the belief of any such observers

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 33

in the general prevalence of witchcraft.) This black business cul-
minated during the Civil War under the rule of Presbyterianism,
when systematic though illegal tortures were successfully applied
by scoundrels like Matthew Hopkins to obtain the death of
scores of women. A reaction took place about the time of the
rise of the Independents to power, and the practice disappeared
during the Rationalist movement which found refuge under the
banner of the Anglican Restoration.? But in its origin the witch-
hunt was stirred up by no section; it arose out of a profound and
universal belief. Learning, headed by the pedant King, was master
_ of the hounds; science with Bacon, and law with Coke pointed the
trail; imagination and poetry blew the horn with Shakespeare and
his brother play-wrights; religion blessed the chase that she had
set on foot; while the discordant pack of vulgar beliefs, fears and
hatreds came yelling on their prey. Still it is worth remark that
in England the witches were nearly always hung and not burnt,
and that while confession was in too many cases exorted by cruelty
which amounted to torture, such use was at least illegal.
Unwillingness to take life or to inflict physical pain is so far Votan den
from being the whole of morality that it is only one part of human of humani-
kindness. ‘Thus the Scots of that epoch burnt, tortured and slew @1sm
more readily than the English ; but they were still a kindly race, and
perhaps had stronger affections than their more humane neighbours,
Neither does it condemn our English ancestors for a lack of the higher
emotions, to admit that the Stuart epoch in England was unmarked
by any public movement of a philanthropic nature. ‘The state of
the prisons, the treatment of inferior races, passed without protest
from any section. The causes of this apathy are not far to seek.
1“ Many are unjustly accused for witches. Sometimes out of ignorance of
natural and misapplying of supernatural causes; sometimes out of their neighbours
mere malice, and the suspicion is increased if the party accused be notoriously ill-
favoured; . . . sometimes out of their own causeless confessions, being brought
before a magistrate they acknowledge themselves to be witches, being themselves

rather bewildered with fear or deluded with phancy” (The Profane State, bk. v.
chap. iii.). But Fuller goes on to show that he believed the charges in many case
to be true. , ; i nein

It is right to say that there was a real witchcraft in the line of poisoning and
drugs (though not nearly so common as on the continent); perhaps also attempts
were made to injure by mesmerism or hypnotic suggestion. att =

2Lecky’s Rationalism, chap.i. Article on Matthew Hopkins in Twelve Bad
Men. Mx. Firth thinks, judging from the actual records, the numbers of witches

i h been exaggerated.

ne erne lerasedle of the Independents of the Commonwealth period against the
' tortuous ungodly jungle” of the English law, was rather utilitarian than humani-

An age of
religion

34 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

Other great principles and noble aspirations absorbed the atten-
tion of parties and men. And there had not yet begun that
Rationalist movement, which, as Mr. Lecky has pointed out, was
in no small degree a cause of modern humanitarian activity.’
Religion was in that age almost the sole intellectual and moral
influence, and while the nobility of thought and conduct which
it then breathed into some of its chosen has hardly since been
equalled, humanity was no part of its special teaching. It must
indeed be allowed that religion was then associated with the rack,
the stake, the burning town, the massacre of women and children,
the hate that never dies, the wrongs that can never be avenged.
‘he greatest mass of mental suffering and physical pain that Europe
has undergone since the barbaric ages was brought about by the
partially successful struggle of the Catholic reaction to recover
revolted Christendom. In England the worst horrors were spared ;
but here, too, religion meant the ransacking of Catholic houses, the
haling of Puritans to gaol, the rabbling of Anglican curates, the
shouts of the crowd as demented women, who were persuaded they
had sold themselves to eternal fire, were dragged screaming to the
gallows. If in that age there had existed a man whose prime
motive and sole object had been humanitarian, he would have
shuddered at the name of religion, and regarded its omnipotence
with despair. Our second Puritanism, the Evangelical revival,
in many ways a weakly imitation of the first, had this great merit
of its own—humanitarian activity. For in the interval the Ration-
alist movement had shaken the persecutor’s sword from the hand
of Faith, and Religion had been to school with her rival, Reason.
From Cromwell to Wilberforce the road lay through Voltaire.

tarian. While they proposed to abolish peine forte et dure and the burning of women
for treason, they allowed the number of capital crimes to be increased by one. Crom-
well, indeed, who was ahead of his own and all other parties in this matter, took
steps to abolish hanging for all offences except murder. “To hang a man for six-
and-eightpence,” “to see men lose their lives for petty matters is a thing God will
reckon ”’ (Firth’s Cromwell, p. 349).

1 History of Rationalism,

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 35 -

CHAPTER II

THE MIDDLE AND LOWER CLASSES IN COUNTRY AND TOWN—INDUSTRY
AND COMMERCE—THE CONDITIONS FAVOURABLE TO POETRY AND TO
RELIGION

Well, Your Majesty, is not this world a catholic kind of place? The
Puritan Gospel and Shakespeare’s plays: such a pair of facts I have rarely
seen saved out of one chimerical generation.—Historical Sketches, CARLYLE.

ne the opening of the twentieth century England may be com- Aspect of
pared to a garden, a ground cut up for purposes of cultivation Ragland

by hedgerows and lines of trees. The regularity of this garden is what pays

pleasantly broken by woods and coppices artificially maintained >estist8!y

by man for his use or pleasure. But through this fertile territory,

the new economy of industrialism is pushing out its iron claws,

changing vast tracts of garden into town, and altering the character

and appearance of the rest by introducing, even in agricultural

districts, materials and houses of uniform type. That part of the

population which lives permanently under the influence of industrial

sights and sounds, is larger than that which lives in the garden;

and even the inhabitants of the rural districts have lost their own

characteristic ideals of life under the all-pervading influence of

the towns. One condition of modern times is, that what pays

best is generally ugly, and that whatever man now touches for a

purely economic reason, he mars.

At the beginning of the seventeenth century the reverse of Aspect of
every one of these conditions prevailed. The bulk of the acreage os peeea
of England was not a garden but an open country; one part Stuarts
wilderness of heath, turf or marsh; the other part unenclosed
plough-fields like those of France and Germany to-day. But the
bleakness of this open land was broken by great tracts of brush-
wood and tall trees, wrecks of the old English forest that the hand

of man had never planted. Over this wide surface, in every

SS

What paid

best was
beautiful

Enclosure
of fields

36 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

direction, the new economy of enclosure was pushing out its green
regularity of hedgerow and planted tree; the garden of England
was slowly being made; this work of enclosing the open fields began
underithe Tudors and was completed only in the nineteenth century.
When James I. ascended the throne, the little population of Eng-
land (somewhere on its rise from two and a half to five millions)
was scattered throughout the cultivated country in fairly even
distribution. 'The most marked variations in thickness of inhabi-
tants were caused, not by congestion in great cities, but by vast
tracts of wilderness in all the Northern and several of the Southern
shires. The cities, though they drew to themselves the busiest and
best tithe of English humanity, and led the nation in its noblest
undertakings, were so small in size and so isolated by the imperfect
means of communication, that town influence scarcely affected the
lives of the great majority of Englishmen.

It happened, too, that economic progress in that day uncon-
sciously involved esthetic improvement. The garden of England,
created by the new system of enclosure, was more beautiful than the
wilderness or the bare plough-lands to which it succeeded. Land
could then be most cheaply enclosed, not by barbed wire, but by
planted hedgerows; cowsheds and barns could be erected most
quickly, not with corrugated iron, but with timber from the forest
and thatch from the field. Even the habitations of man improved
the appearance of nature, for hedges and orchards rose round new
houses, and the buildings themselves were pleasing to the eye.
This was not because every village mason was a born artist, but
because the materials with which he had to work were beautiful,
and the structural forms that were most suited to his limited
resources and knowledge were more picturesque than regular, The
gable and lattice window were adopted at least as much for econ-
omic as for esthetic reasons. But there was no one monotonous
type of structure or of material. Manor house and cottage varied
pleasantly in every district. Some were of oak-beam and plaster,
others of stone or red brick ; some were roofed with thatch, others
with stone-slab, according to the natural products and the im-
memorial tradition of each country-side.

The appearance of the country was being gradually changed
from open landscape to enclosed fields by the substitution of
modern for medizval tillage. The evolution of all villeins and

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 37

serfs into freemen of the status of farmers, yeomen or agricultural
labourers, had in the Tudor epoch been completed without strife
and almost without notice. Side by side with this great legal and
social evolution, a corresponding change in methods of agriculture
had begun to take place, more slowly, more painfully, and with
more noise and rumour. ‘This was the enclosure of the land.

In medizeval England the corn land of every township consisted
of an immense open field, neither divided nor enclosed by hedges;
it was cultivated by the common labour, implements and cattle of
the whole village. At harvest each man took the crop off that
part of the field which belonged to him. During the Tudor period
many of these open fields were broken up and surrounded by
hedges, suffering conversion into arable or pasture farms of the
modern type. Yet it is probable that in the reign of the first
two Stuarts more than half the acreage under corn was still open
land, cultivated by the common efforts of the villagers, after the
methods pursued by their ancestors in the days of Wat Tyler.
The great corn growing districts of the midlands were still unen-
closed. And the whole acreage of pasture and corn, enclosed and
unenclosed, scarcely equalled the wilderness still unreclaimed.*

The change from the common cultivation of open strips of field The
to individual responsibility for pieces of enclosed ground, brought jr7ant:
to the front two figures characteristic of English agricultural his-
tory—the tenant-farmer and the yeoman. ‘These two classes
existed under the old system, but wherever the new order was
established they gained a new importance. For on the farmer and
the yeoman rested the first opportunity for initiative in those
improvements which compact farms and hedges had at last ren-
dered possible. Individual farmers could do nothing to introduce
new methods of agriculture on that half of the corn land of
England which was still unenclosed, and cultivated by the common

1Gregory King calculated that in the reign of William III., out of thirty-nine
million acres in England, one million was water and road or roadside, ten millions
were ‘“heaths, moors, mountains and barren lands,” three ‘“‘ woods and coppices,”
three ‘‘forests, parks and commons” (Political Observations, 1696, Chalmers’
ed, 1810, p. 52). The comment of his friend Davenant (Balance of Trade, 1699),
that ‘anno 1600” ‘there were more forests, woods, commons, coppices and waste
ground” than in their own day, is correct (see Nisbet’s Our Forests and Woodlands,
1900, pp. 72-80). Indeed as early as 1662 the spread of tillage, and of manufacture by
furnaces, had excited the alarm of the Dockyard Authorities and of the Royal
Society, and Evelyn wrote his Sylva to recommend them to make plantations by
way of supplying the ground lately lost by natural forest. On the whole subject see

Gonner, Common Land and Enclosure, 1912.

The

yeomen

38 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

efforts of the whole village. On the newly enclosed lands the
farmers of the seventeenth century had some power of improve-
ment, but not ona large scale. For it was not yet the fashion,
as it became in the next century, for landlords to sink great
sums of capital in scientific improvements, and the farmers, left
to themselves, had little capital and less education. The great
day of the tenant-farmer was yet to come; and in the Stuart epoch
he was neither wealthy, independent nor interesting.

The yeomen, who were computed to be more numerous than
the tenant-farmers,! were at least their match in agricultural enter-
prise, and were not, like their rivals, discouraged by the prospect of
raised rents and fines on their improvements. What little advance
in methods was made at this period was due either to the wealthier
members of the yeoman class, or to gentlemen who, like Cromwell,
worked their own land. But the want of capital and the want of
education delayed any such general improvement in methods as
might have been expected to follow at once, wherever the system
of common tillage was abandoned.?

But while in the eye of the pure economist the yeoman was
scarcely in advance of the farmer, his social standing was far more
enviable. In an age when no one even pretended to think it wrong
for a man to enforce political and religious conformity among those
over whose fortunes he had control, the yeoman reaping his own
field enjoyed an independence denied to many pursuing more
lucrative and more cultivated professions. To be counted as a
yeoman a man must be able to spend 40s. a year derived from his
own freehold land.* This was also the qualification for the Parlia-
mentary franchise in the counties, a privilege which the yeoman ex-
ercised with more complete freedom than some tenant farmers and

1 } ] °
aver FETT Sap eeainsied the yeomen, atthe end ofthe Stuart period when
of families inthe country ; the farmers at 150,000 families, His table calculating the

numbers of each class can be found in his own Observations, 1696, and in Davenant’s
ce aap of Trade, 1699, p. 23, where the number of yeomen families is placed at
,000.

? Methods of cattle-breeding were improved, and root crops introduced to feed
the cattle. But turnips were only introduced in some places, and even then
were badly cultivated. Artificial grasses were discussed but not introduced. Little
was done to improve the cultivation of cereals, partly perhaps because the Dutch
whose methods were most studied and imitated, knew more about cattle roots
and grasses than about corn (Cunningham, pp. 545, 546, 549, 550). :

_ #And yet some of the more privileged copyholders of the North of England
like the Cumberland “ statesmen,” must be counted in the yeomen class.

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 39

field labourers in our own day. So far from desiring the protection
of secrecy at the poll, the yeomen took a jolly pride in voting, as
eventually in fighting, on the opposite side to the neighbouring
squire,

The yeomanry (wrote Fuller in the reign of Charles I.), is an estate of
people almost peculiar to England. France and Italy are like a die which
hath no points between sink and ace, nobility and peasantry. . . . The yeoman
wears russet clothes, but makes golden payment, having tin in his buttons
and silver in his pocket. . . . In his own country he is a main man in Juries.
He seldom goes far abroad, and his credit stretches further than his travel.
He goes not to London, but se-defendendo, to save himself a fine, being returned
of a Jury, where seeing the King once, he prays for him ever afterwards.

Such pious and simple yeomen were the backbone of Charles’s
cause in the Western shires when the hour of need came; but in
East Anglia the prayers of the yeomen were sent up less often for
the King’s health than for the King’s conversion.

There are few things in the history of Europe so unaccountable Abeyance
as the ebb and flow of political agitation among the peasantry. eit aed
At the close of the Middle Ages the tillers of the soil rose in among the
revolt against feudal society, first in France and England during P°*S¢"Y
the Hundred Years’ War, then towards the beginning of the
Lutheran movement, in Germany and in the Hungarian Kingdom.

Yet after these strange outbreaks, the peasantry of the continent
relapsed into a long quiescence under wrongs which they had once
refused to endure, until the great Revolution in French society
aroused in the ancient villages of many distant lands, hopes and
passions that had been buried for centuries in the soil. Nor
was there in England any agitation among the peasantry during
the Stuart epoch. In the reign of Edward VI. the enclosures
had caused local assemblies of armed peasants, not wholly unlike,
in theory and in spirit, to the more general rising of 1381; but
from these last stirrings of medizval revolt down to the time of
Cobbett, the social agitator was almost unknown on the village
green. Even during the Commonwealth, when 30,000 political
pamphlets were issued, and all men were invited by the spirit of
the age to question the very basis of social conventions, there was

1 The Holy State, bk. ii., chap. xviii,

40 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

no important movement among the peasantry on their own behalf
But although these centuries of social peace in England corre-
sponded in time with the same phenomenon on the continent, the
English peasant was not resting in the same status as his brother
across the channel. The French and German peasant was a serf;
the English peasant was now, by law, a freeman. The French
peasant was preparing a bright future for his descendants by ac-
quiring land, but for the present his own position was unenviable:
the wars of religion in France and Germany, followed by the endless
campaigns dictated by the proud policy of the House of Bourbon,
reduced the tillers of the soil to a state of misery such as in a
former age had caused the terrible outbreak of the Jacquerie to
interrupt the wars of Froissart. But in peaceful England the
economic effect of the brief war between Charles and his Parlia-
ment was to raise the wage of the agricultural labourer. English
travellers were shocked at the “wooden shoes and straw hats” of
the foreign peasantry, and the “grass herbs and roots” which was
too often their only food.?

But though the English field labourer was ahead of the German
and French in economic and legal position, we must not ascribe
the abeyance of rural agitation so much to the absence of rural
grievances, as to the division of class interests and the want of
leadership from above. ‘The farmers and yeomen were now more
divided off from the agricultural labourer, and more contented with
their own economic and social position than in the days of Wat
Tyler. These two classes, thus already ranged on the side of
social conservatism, formed in the Stuart epoch a far larger pro-
portion of the whole agricultural community than they form to-day.
Society in England was based on the stable and prosperous founda-
tion of a very large number of small farms and small estates. The
evils inseparable from private property in land, the loss of liberty
which it too often inflicts on those who have to live and work on

1The score of “diggers on St. George’s Hill” initiated an interesting but
wholly powerless communistic movement in 1649 (see Gooch, pp. 214-25, and p. 282,
note, below). The only other stirring of peasant revolt throughout the Stuart period
was some unimportant rioting in 1607 in Warwickshire and Leicestershire, where
enclosure for pasturage was still in progress after it had ceased elsewhere, and
where the fashionable rage for deer-parks made further inroads on agricultural land.
But though the peasants pulled down some fences, the affair scarcely amounted to
a rising.

2 Arber’s Reprints, viii, Howell’s Instructions, p. 74.

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 41

the land of others, were in those days limited by the high propor-
tion of landowners to the total population.

But even then the agricultural labourer for hire represented the The agri-
most numerous class. The English peasant, though badly paid, was ees ate
in some cases well fed by his employer. The “servant in husbandry ”
only went into a separate cottage when he married. Until then
he boarded in the farm-house, and partook freely at the family
table of the staple dish of meat, though not always of the puddings
and delicacies. There was a closer contact between master and
men than now; most of the farmers and yeomen were small and
unpretentious people, living on intimate terms with their servants,
whose families had often been on the same farm for generations.

The food of the farm-house, which the unmarried “servant in Seasons
husbandry” shared, varied according to each season of the year, and feasts
with its traditional fasts and feasts. In Lent all ate fish—fresh, if
near seas and rivers, but salted, if in dry and upland districts. For
meat was prohibited, both by immemorial custom, which must in
many places have still been in part religious, and by the statutes
of Protestant Parliaments. Those shrewd legislators continued to
enforce the observance of Lent, not, as they were careful to state,
for superstitious reasons, but to encourage the fisheries as the great
school of seamanship and national defence. But the chief reason
why the Lenten fast was still observed was because the ordinary
rural! household had no meat to hand at that time of year except
the flitch of bacon and the beef that had been slaughtered and
salted last Martinmas Day (11th November). At midsummer fresh
beef and mutton was killed amid general rejoicings, and continued
to grace the tables until winter. At Christmas, during “the
twelve days” of the year when least was to be gained by labour in
the fields, the agricultural world made holiday, feasting on collars
of brawn, fowls, turkeys, mince-pies and plum-pottage, besides
nameless dishes, which the park-forester was not invited to share
unless he came to court the honest yeoman’s daughter ; the roast-
ing piece of beef was stuck with rosemary, and though Jeremiah
Carpenter standing by the spit testified concerning meats offered
to idols, yet notwithstanding surely he ate thereof. Compared
to other sorts of food, there was abundance of meat to be had

1Town butchers sometimes killed by stealth in the forbidden season (Ct. and
Times of C. I., ii., p. 72).

Abun-
dance of
meat food

Village
rights

Employ-
ment of
women

42 ENGLAND. UNDER THE STUARTS

in old England, for besides flocks of sheep, and herds of cattle and
pigs, the country-side swarmed with rabbits, hares and birds of
all kinds, which, as the game laws then stood, were the legitimate
prey of the yeomen over whose land they strayed. The farm,
which had to supply all the food of its inmates except perhaps a
little bad fish during Lent, could boast of a few vegetables in the
garden but none in the fields. Fruit was more common ; straw-
berries, raspberries and gooseberries had been grown in farm-
gardens fifty years before James came to the throne.’

But the abundance of meat food procurable off the farm is not
the only reason why it is unsafe to judge of the real condition of
the agricultural labourer solely from the statistics of wages and
prices.2 Common land for pasturage of cows, pigs and poultry,
common rights of collecting fuel and fowling on moor and waste,
were an important part of the cottagers’ livelihood, though already
encroached upon by deer-parks, and destined to extinction
in the great era of enclosure for arable at the close of the
eighteenth century. Moreover, the wages of the head of the cottar
family might be augmented by those of his wife and children, who
were often separately employed and paid by the farmers. In hay-
time and harvest the whole population turned out; and the mothers
worked, putting their babies to play together in a corner of the busy
field. At most other times throughout the year the unmarried girls

were employed, as now, at certain kinds of agricultural labour, but_

not at the more severe ditching and carrying. That last sacrifice
of poverty was spared. English gentlemen going out to join Prince
Charles at Madrid, were shocked at the sight of the Spanish women
staggering under loads, and going through that round of labour
which brought the women of some of the most beautiful races of
Europe to premature old age.*

1 Cunningham (ed. 1892), p. 193. Hewins, pp. 88-96. Hamilton, p. 14. Al
Tusser’s rhymes in Somers’ Tracts, iii., for an intimate account of farmn life in the
Se of ciiperras period, ieugry was so common that foreigners in the year
1602 remarked with surprise that the English rejected th trail
Ait ike or ode Bean g j e entrails and feet for the

2 Agricultural wages were generally somewhere between 3s. and «s
(when food was not given), but rose slowly throughout the aie Wheat, pi
ing very greatly from year to year and county to county, was generally between 20s.
and 5o0s., the average price, 1600-10, being 348. 93d.; and 1620-30 being 43s. o$d.
(Leonard, pp. 145, 301, 198, 199. Hamilton, pp. 12-14, 163. Hewins, p. 86. Thor
old Rogers, Six Centuries, pp. 391-94, 426, 427).

5Verney, i., p. 78.

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 433

But besides their work in the fields, country women were largely
employed in industry. The cloth manufacture was organised by
the “clothiers” of the towns; but much labour was carried on
in distant cottages, each of which was visited by the clothier on
his periodic rounds. The old wool-pack inns of England recall
the time when it was common to meet, round the turning of a
country lane, a train of horses laden with sacks of wool hanging to
the ground on either side, or a clothier riding into market with
pieces of cloth upon his saddle-bow. In this and other employ-
ments boys and girls were set to work at an early age. Although
the state of things among the families of the continental! peasantry
was perhaps worse, yet English women and children were overworked
long before the era of the factory system.

Under the first two Stuarts all classes who lived on the land, sanitary
and yet more those who were gathered in the towns, were in per- conditions
petual terror of plague. Disease and infant mortality prevented
the rapid increase of the population. Medicine, as commonly
practised, was a formulated superstition rather than a science;
rules of health were little understood ; sanitary habits were free
and filthy among rich as well as poor. Our ancestors washed little,
and their standard of public decency in trivialities was that of some
modern. nations which we now readily condemn, Prudery was rare
even among Puritans; and cleanliness even among courtiers, who
compounded by free use of oils and scents. Drinking-water was
often contaminated, and the danger seldom recognised. Little
value was set on fresh air indoors. The population, though thinly
scattered on the soil, was closely packed in the houses. Servants
and apprentices generally slept in holes among the rafters, and
industry was often conducted in the crowded dwelling-rooms of the
family. Many of the worst conditions of slum life existed in a
small and chiefly rural population, who had, however, the supreme
advantage of open air and the beauties of nature outside their door.
It is not possible to know whether the general standard of physique
was higher or lower than it is in the present day under conditions
so much better and so much worse.

Although the cities of England contained in the seventeenth The towns
century but a small part of the population, they were destined in

The
prentice
laws

44 ENGLAND. UNDER THE STUARTS

that epoch to take the lead in almost every branch of national
activity. And the services rendered by the English towns to arts
and crafts, reason, literature, politics and science, were fortunately
not accompanied by the open feud between town and country, by
the war of municipal privilege against central power, which had
been the price paid for the yet greater contributions of Italian and
German burgherdom towards human progress.

Few as were the inhabitants of the towns, they were on the
whole select. A rigorous limit was set to the influx from the
country of wastrels and untrained hands, while every craftsman who
worked within the city bounds had received a technical education.
The Statute of Apprentices forbade any one to set up trade, or even
to work for wages as a journeyman artisan, until he had served
seven years of apprenticeship; and it was not easy to evade this
raw, enforced as it was by craft-guilds and municipalities, who saw
their own interest both in limiting the number and in maintaining
the quality of craftsmen within the bounds of their jurisdiction.
Another provision of this famous statute forbade any one withdrawn
from agricultural pursuits to be apprenticed to an ordinary craft in
any town; this prevented the field labourer from changing his em-
ployment, and in effect made the country districts instead of the
cities the receptacle of surplus population. Another clause, which
forbade merchants and shopkeepers in towns to take as apprentice
any one under the rank of yeoman’s son, shows the high standard
of blood and breeding maintained among even the employees of
commerce, which must have exalted the general average of life and
intelligence in the towns.

Such laws had manifest disadvantages. As administered by
jealous corporations they checked the fluidity of labour and the
growth of population ;1 they hindered adventurous men from em-
barking in trade, or drove them to set up business in rural districts
where the apprentice laws only partially applied. Seven years was
a needlessly long period for a universal rule, since many occupations
could be learnt in half the time. Yet for all its faults the

1 No doubt these apprentice laws greatly increased the difficulty of the rural
parishes in disposing of their poor, and drove them to those efforts, not wholly
unsuccessful, to prevent the growth of the population (see Appendix B.).

Also the apprentice laws caused great distress by preventing men thrown out of
their own trade from obtaining employment in any other. ‘In our own time a

sudden falling off in trade causes great hardship to the workmen, and in the seven-
teenth century the hardship was thus far greater ” (Leonard, p. 155).

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 45

apprentice system maintained the best trade traditions, supplied
domestic discipline at an age when it is usually most wanting,

trained the hand, the eye and the mind, and afforded a technical
education on a natural economic basis which no diminution of the
revenue or of the rates, and no lapse of educational enthusiasm,

could in the slightest degree affect.

In the Middle Ages the inhabitants of each town regarded Municipal

themselves as a separate community, almost a separate race, at2"4

national
commercial war with the rest of the world. Only a freeman of the policy

city could be bound apprentice; and the freedom of the city was phere
but grudgingly bestowed on “ foreigners” or “ aliens,” as the people tion
of the neighbouring towns and villages were called. This idea of
the civic community was now gradually yielding to the idea of the
national community, and to the broader aspects of economic and
racial policy introduced by the discovery of America and the
struggle with Spain. But the old ideas still lingered. Throughout
the seventeenth century York refused to admit “ foreigners,” English
or Dutch. The cathedral city, starved of new blood, gradually
yielded its old supremacy in the northern cloth trade to Hull and
to the western dales. Butin many other towns a more liberal policy
brought its due reward. In London and Norwich, the first and
_ second cities of England, the sons of gentry and yeomen from all
parts of the island were welcomed as apprentices. Even race hatred
was often overcome by religious sympathy. The Huguenots of
France, Flanders and Holland were made welcome in Puritan towns,
for their sufferings and for their skill. The 'Tudor and Stuart Govern-
ments generally allowed these strangers the privilege of separate
religious organisation, for which pure-born Englishmen clamoured
in vain; though Laud, in his narrow jealousy, would fain have put
a stop to the freedom of worship for which they or their fathers
had come to our island. By adopting a more liberal policy, England,
from the reign of Elizabeth to the reign of Anne, shared with
Holland the advantages which the Most Catholic and the Most
Christian Kings threw away by the expulsion of the Jews and
Moriscoes from Spain, and the Protestants from Flanders and

France.!
Industry was conducted under what is now known as the

1 Dr. Cunningham, C. M. H., i, pp- 494-531. #. H. R., xii, pp. 437-47.
Lecky, i., pp. 235-40. G., viii, pp. 120, 121,

The
domestic
system

The coal
and iron
trades

46 ENGLAND- UNDER THE STUARTS

“domestic” as distinguished from the “factory” system. In the
country clothing trade the employee worked in his own cottage.
In town his master’s house served for all purposes,—residence,
factory, warehouse and retail shop. The apprentices, when the
seven years of board and service under their master’s roof had come
to an end, either continued there for wages as common journeymen,
or left to set up in business on their own account. In favoured cases
they were admitted into partnership with their master, often under
seal of marriage with the daughter of the house; this transaction,
which in rude, popular rhymes made an unfailing appeal to the
sentiment of the street audience, in many actual cases contained as
much of business as of romance. The conditions of life and work
in these shops varied according to the circumstances and character
of the head of the house. The jolly pictures of friendship between
masters and men, the humours and freedom of apprentice life, which
were continually put on the stage of the Southwark theatres to
draw the city groundlings across London Bridge, had reality at
least in the houses of many prosperous craftsmen. But the per-
sonal relation could have been little more than personal bondage,
under an ill-tempered master trying to check the decline of his
small business by truck payments, long hours, hard words and
cruel blows. For the employer had complete control, legally of
his apprentices, economically of his journeymen. Under the do-
mestic system there was no Government inspection of conditions of
employment, and combinations of workmen were not easily carried
out. This human and personal relation between employer and
employed, living and working in the same house, was sometimes
better and sometimes worse than the modern “cash nexus” of
formal treaty between the employer in his villa residence and the
workmen in their street. In old England there was more distinction
of class; but on the other hand all classes lived more together.
Industry, under these conditions, was making rapid progress ;
but as yet, with the great exception of the cloth trade, it was almost
entirely for home consumption. The slow unconscious advance of
our ancestors along the path that led towards the modern industrial
revolution, may be measured by the condition and mutual relation
of the coal and iron trades. Caldrons from the famous Tyne pits
were the common domestic fuel in London and other towns where
the “sea-coal,” as it was called, could arrive by barge. But coal

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 47

had not yet replaced wood in manufacture. The smelting furnaces
of the Sussex and Kentish weald that made iron for the capital,
and of the Forest of Dean that supplied raw material for the hard-
ware trades of Warwickshire, Worcestershire and Staffordshire, were
growing fast, fed on the primeval forest, where glades that had
harboured the stags and the outlaws of twelve centuries rang to
the sounds of axe and forge.

The English cloth manufacture, unlike our other trades, depended The cloth
on the foreign market. The clothiers were said to provide our 44¢
commercial men with far the greater part of the goods which they
exported. ‘The weaving industry, which had sprung up during the
Middle Ages in East Anglia, had in Elizabeth’s reign been greatly
improved and stimulated by the influx of skilled Flemish and French
weavers flying from the sword of Alva and Guise. Yet now, in spite
of the great wealth of Colchester and Norwich, the Eastern clothing
counties were slowly yielding to the competition of Western rivals.
The clothiers of Yorkshire, shut off in their steep dales from contact
with the manners and social history of the South, were inaugurating,
on a model of life and custom all their own, the slow transmutation
of North England from a barbarous and feudal borde’ province, to
the land of industrial enterprise and democracy ; while in the plain
to west of the Cotswold sheep-runs, and in the valleys of Devon
and Somerset, village-looms supplied the great merchant-cities of
Gloucester, Bristol, Exeter and Plymouth with the sinews of trade

beyond the sea.

Our maritime commerce was conducted by companies, each Trading
holding by charter from the Crown the exclusive right of trading 704't7n°s
to some particular part of the world. The system derived from lopers
the privileges of the Merchant Adventurers’ Company, who had
pushed our cloth trade by monopoly in North Europe during the
Middle Ages. But when, in the reigns of Elizabeth and James, new
markets and new continents were opened out beyond the Indian
Ocean, the Baltic and the Atlantic, new companies, with correspond-
ing monopolies, sent out ship after ship to explore, fight and trade in
the snows of Archangel, the forests of Virginia, and the treacherous

1 In James I.’s reign Dudley attempted to use coal for smelting furnaces, but
was ruined rather by the jealousy of other iron-masters than by real economic causes.

After this attempt the use of coal in manufacture remained slight until the eighteenth
century—until, in fact, the great forests had been used up (Ashley, pp. 12-17.

Cunningham, pp. 522-30).

East
Indian
trade

48 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

waters where Turk and Spaniard, Dutch and Portugee guarded the
treasures of the East. The danger of these enterprises, the loss of
ships in storm and battle, the expense of maintaining consuls and
provisioning forts, all fell upon the traders themselves, in days when
Government made little pretence of protecting British subjects be-
yond the ocean. Indeed, from the death of Elizabeth to the time
when the Long Parliament assumed control of the navy, the royal
ships failed to protect commerce even in the Channel against pirates
from the Turkish ports. A well-managed company, whose doors
were open to all merchants wishing to invest in the trade, protected
Englishmen in a particular part of the world at its own cost of
blood and money, and so fulfilled the functions of a state: such a
company claimed in return that no Interloper should drive an
independent trade in those waters. But unfortunately many of
the monopolist concerns were ill-managed, and many refused to
admit new members. The most energetic merchants, the young
blood of commerce, would have been shut out from commercial
venture if they had not found vent in illicit trade. The debt
of English commerce to the Interlopers of the seventeenth cen-
tury is scarcely less than its debt to the great companies which
they defied. From the beginning to the end of the Stuart epoch,
remote seas and shores resounded to obscure and unreported con-
flicts, not only of English with Dutch, Spaniards, and natives, but
of English traders with each other; while at home the partisans
of old and new companies, of Monopolists and Interlopers, disturbed
the public with rival clamours for its gratitude, and passed shares
and gold into the hands of lords and statesmen, at first in the
galleries of Whitehall, and at the close of the century, when the
control of commerce passed to Parliament, in the walks and lobbies
of Westminster.}

The East Indian Company, chartered in 1600 to carry on all
our commerce in the Far East, discovered by painful experiment
that the ports most favourable to English trade were neither among
the Spice Islands of the Indian Archipelago, nor in the fabled China
seas, but along the coasts of Hindoostan, where the Mogul Em-
perors welcomed white merchants with the lordly patronage of secure
power, and protected those of the weaker nations from the malevo-

: * Cunningham, pp. 214-84. Hewins, pp. 24-73. Oppenheim, pp. 198, 199, 274-
7° 345°

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 49

lence of their rivals. The chief event which decided our settlement
on the mainland of India, was the massacre of Amboyna in 1623,
when the Dutch freed themselves from the presence of the English
on the principal Spice Islands by the most summary of all methods.
So short was the arm of the State, so strict the line drawn between
international relations in Europe and in Asia, that the event
scarcely disturbed the friendly relations of London and the Hague,
and no compensation was extorted till in the next generation the
Protector made it his policy to wipe out all scores left standing by
the kings }

But other tales of cruel outrage committed by Spanish priests, Contact
admirals and custom-house officials on our merchants in the Penin- Spats
sula and Mediterranean, reached England more quickly and more
often than news from beyond the Malacca Strait, affected a larger
number of traders than the select shareholders of the East Indian
Company, and so kept alive the deadly national animosities of the
Elizabethan war by means of that very renewal of commercial
intercourse whereby James had hoped to see them allayed. The
Protestant zeal of the sea-going population, which during the
struggle with Philip had grown into the most constant political
sentiment upon which English statesmen could calculate, in no
way diminished during the forty years of peace that preceded the
Civil War. Along the coasts of Europe and America there was
still a freemasonry for defence and offence between all Protestant
sailors, whether they hailed from Plymouth, Amsterdam or Roch-
elle, a fellow-feeling kept alive by forecastle yarns illustrating the
pride and extortion of corrupt Spanish officials, and by stories that
stirred the blood, of comrades mysteriously disappearing in the
streets of Spanish towns. Drake’s Pelican still lay in the Thames,
like Nelson’s Victory at Portsmouth, the symbol of a great past
and the hope of a like future. Adventurers, setting out on long
voyages, had their farewell “supper brought aboard Sir Francis
Drake’s ship that hath compassed the world,” since “some good
spirits of the waters should haunt the desert ribs of her”. These

1 The expulsion of the Portuguese from their trade and settlements in the East
by the Dutch and English cannon, was one of the chief features of this period of
English peace with the Spanish Empire, of which Portugal was then a part. Fora
fine page of writing on this episode of our history, see Carlyle’s Historical Sketches,
pt. i., chap. ix., pp. 90, gr.

2 Chapman’s Hastward Ho!, Act IIL., sc. 2,

50 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

simple and wholesome traditions were the creed of the seafaring
men, who at once protected the isolation and enlarged the outlook
of England. The short life of danger and hardship that was the
mariner’s lot in those days of piracy and battle, scurvy and starva-
tion on board frail sailing ships that had no strength against the
tempest, gave the seaman a peculiar character which reacted power-
fully on the whole people, to whom he now stood in the place of
the soldier as the type of national hero. To the commercial and
maritime population of the new age, pride of race, pursuit of gain,
love of adventure, and a sturdy personal independence were all
associated with the idea of the Protestant religion.

Contact By taking to the sea, the English fell under the influence of

a the Dutch. As friends or as enemies, as partners or as rivals, men
of the two nations were now in perpetual contact. Holland
affected every department of English life, more, perhaps, than any
other nation has ever done by the mere force of example. ‘The
little republic, which from 1600 to 1650 maintained its territory
as a safe and prosperous oasis in the midst of the wilderness of fire
and destruction around, was during those years the leader of man-
kind in most of the sciences and arts. She was the school of scientific
war, agriculture, gardening, finance and trade, and of numberless
arts and crafts; the academy of painting; the home of theology
whence Calvinist and Arminian alike drew their theories; the
asylum for philosophy and free speculation ; and last hut not least,
the example to our merchants and our politicans of community
which had attained prosperity, enlightenment, and power by re-
bellion against a legitimate Prince.

Municipal But of all the conditions which formed the political character

a of the English merchant class, the most important was self-govern-
ment. None of the monarchs of England before Charles II.
attempted to interfere with the management of the towns by freely
elected Mayors, Aldermen and Bailiffs. The Kings of France and
Spain had lately replaced the old burgher magistrates by Royal
Commissioners. But in the English towns the system of autonomy
survived in a great variety of forms from the Middle Ages. The
municipal bodies were sometimes close, co-optive corporations ;
sometimes they were elected by all the burgesses. In some towns
the burgesses themselves were a small minority of the inhabitants ;
in others, a system almost of household suffrage prevailed. Civic

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 51

freedom was secure because the formidable militia of each great
city was in the hands, not of the king, but of the municipality
itself.

The causes that produce genius in individual men, and out-
bursts of activity in nations, are mysteries which only become more
impenetrable as one theory after another is flung out to account
for that which is beyond knowledge. But though he may make
no pretence of having penetrated the laws of the spiritual world,
the historian is bound to describe the manner of life and the in-
tellectual atmosphere which shaped and coloured, whether or not
they occasioned, greatness of deed and mind. Something has been
said above on the manner of life in England under the early
Stuarts, but little yet of certain general conditions of life which
may have had influence upon imagination. The most obvious
of these was the perpetual contact of man, in the ordinary course
of his work and recreation, with the force and beauty of nature.

With the single exception of London, the largest cities were pjrect
still country towns, where the central market cross was never a Contact
mile from the orchards and fruit gardens that clustered outside shee
the grey stone battlements, filled the empty moat, encompassed
the new white suburb beyond, and led down by pleasant paths to
the open cornfield country.!_ The recreation of the city dweller
was by the hedgerows and river banks, riding and hunting if he
were rich, if poor, walking in the fields, fishing, or joining in games
and sports. ‘The ungarnished streets, noisome with plague-breeding
smells, and vexed with petty discomforts to the passenger, were yet
neither ugly nor monotonous to the eye, but were varied with every
kind of gable and projection, decorated on the house fronts with
oak carving, and over the doors with quaint signs, such as the Black
Swan, the Three Pigeons and the Cross Keys, which then distin-

1 See maps of the cities of the time, e¢.g., those of the county capitals, in Speed’s
Atlas, ‘Lhere is no exact calculation of the town population in James I.’s reign, but at
the Restoration London contained over 400,000; Bristol and Norwich under 30,000,
and no other city over 10,000, Creighton (History of Epidemics, i., p. 660; ii., pp.
42-43) estimates London in 1603 at 250,000, Unlike the other cities of England, it was
surrounded by extensive slum districts outside its walls known as the “ liberties,”’
where vast multitudes not only of respectable workmen but of the broken population
that collects round a great capital, were herded in conditions of squalor, misery and
disease that made London famous for its plagues, and terrible in riot and revolution,

See p. 359 below.

52 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS.

guished each shop of every trade. And the inhabitants of these
towns, though

4

Long in populous city pent
Where houses thick and sewers annoy the air,

had the country ever near at hand for them

Forth issuing on a summer’s morn to breathe
Among the pleasant villages and farms
Adjoined. (Par. Lost., ix., 1. 445.)

But the country was the actual home of the great majority of
men. ‘The south English feared, as strangers fear, the mountainous
districts which they seldom visited; but they have recorded their
delight in their own land of hedgerow, lawn and copse, song of bird
and fall of mill-stream. The love of nature received conscious and
reiterated expression in the verses of pastoral, dramatic, epic and
lyrical poets, of whom the most notable are Spenser, Shakespeare,
Herrick, Marvell and Milton. Nor did the rural Pan breathe only
on those who speak of his power and acknowledge his influence.
Nursed on the breast of nature, the Cavaliers drew their charm
from the fields, and the Puritans their strength from the earth.

A love of beauty, since disappeared, was native to the English
of every class. In each village, oak furniture for farm and cottage
was carved into pleasing forms, which now win the admiration of
connoisseurs. ‘The commonest objects—the family-coach, the beer-
jug, the lintel of the door, or the sign that hung over it—had the
touch of natural taste, and often of true artistic effort. But the
sense of beauty was perhaps best shown in the pleasure taken by all

Songs and Classes in a native music. Songs and airs, composed all over the

music

country by persons in every walk of life, were constantly sung,
whether by Bunyan’s Pilgrim or Shakespeare’s Autolycus, in roads,
lanes and streets which their descendants traverse in noisy silence.
Foreigners noted the “beautiful music of violas and pandoras, for
in all England it is the custom that even in small villages the
musicians wait on you for a small fee. In the morning about
wakening time they stand outside the chamber playing religious
hymns.” Minstrels wandering through the land with their pipes
and fiddles, were welcomed in ale-houses, farms and rich men’s
mansions, and maintained in all classes a wholesome and natural

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 53

taste, enshrined in sweet old songs, both sad and merry. Since
bell-ringing was regarded with great favour by the youth, both as
an art and an exercise, parishes “spent much money in harmoni-
ously sounding bells, that one being preferred which has the best
bells ”.2

The way for the high triumphs of imagination that marked Unscien-
this age, was left open by the exclusion of science from all the es .
ordinary affairs and occupations of life. ‘There were some learned the age
but no scientific professions. Though good work was being done
by a few savants of the College of Physicians in London, there
was no large body of medical men at practice in the ordinary
towns and villages of England. Engineers there were none, except
those who used petards for military purposes, Most of the ways
and means by which ordinary business was conducted—manufac-
ture, building, navigation—were learned not as sciences but as arts
and crafts. The study of political and other statistics, like so
much of exact knowledge, hardly began before the Restoration.
The idea of regular law guiding the universe was unfamiliar to the
contemporaries of Francis Bacon. The fields around town and
hamlet were filled, as soon as the day-labourers had left them, by
goblins and will-o’-the-wisps ; and the woods, as soon as the forester
had closed the door of his hut, became the haunt of fairies; the
ghosts could be heard gibbering all night under the yew-tree of
the churchyard; the witch, a well-known figure in the village,
was in the pay of lovers whose mistresses were hard to win, and of
gentlemen-farmers whose cattle had sickened. If a criminal was
detected and punished, the astonishing event was set down as
God’s revenge against murder; if a dry summer threatened the
harvest, the parson was expected to draw down rain by prayer.
The charms that ward off disease, the stars of birth that rule
fortune, the comet that foretold the wars in Germany, the mystic
laws that govern the fall of the dice, were the common interest
of ordinary men and women. In a soil that imagination had so
prepared, poetry and Puritanism were likely to flourish loftily
among lofty men, basely among the base. ‘The better kind of
men were full of ardour, fancy and reverence. The ignoble were

1Duke of Stettin, pp. 7, 63. For the wandering minstrels, see old plays,
pictures and records passim.

The
English
language

Condi-
tions of

54 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

superstitious, ignorant and coarse. The world was still a mystery,
of which the wonder was not dispelled in foolish minds by a daily
stream of facts and cheap explanations. He who, comparing the
types of mind produced by different ages, studies the commonest
and the lowest records of old English life, will find much that is
coarse and brutal, but will search in vain for what is vulgar. The
ale-house songs, the hedgerow and the street ballads, were often
exquisite literature, sung now in drawing-rooms by the cultured
classes; and even those that were worthless or lewd, were simple
and natural, innocent of the knowing leer and artificial preten-
tiousness of the modern musical comedy,

Since thought among common people had now reached a
momentary perfection for the purposes of religious and imaginative
literature, the English language was for those purposes perfect.
Whether in the Bible, the play-book, the street ballad, the broad-
sheet or report of the commonest dialogue of daily life, it was
always the same language, ignorant of scientific terms, and instinct
with a poetical feeling about life that was native to the whole
generation of those who used it. Its fault, corresponding to the
state of thought in that age, is want of exactness and of complexity
in ideas, that renders it unfit for psychology or for close analysis
of things either material or spiritual.?

The great religious writers and the yet greater poets who

. exploited the English language in the short day when for their

authorship

ends it was perfect, worked under conditions favourable to the
fullest and purest employment of what genius each possessed.
The difficulties of locomotion that isolated men for months to-

Our ancestors, when the century opened, were still in some respects the
“ primitive, vigorous sons” of mother-earth. They were nearer to her than we, for
evil as well as for good. The barbarous primeval superstitions even of the upper
class, only two generations before Newton and the Royal Society, are sometimes
startling. Thus, on 18th January, 1604-5, the Master of Requests noted in his
journal that “ Mr. Harley my host at Huntingdon told me this night, supping with
me, that he being before a farmer and 24 horses for plows 12 horses and 30 cattle
were bewitched and died in 2 days, suddenly sick, crying and grinning and staring;
in the end was advised to burn a sick horse alive and so did, and after had no more
died: another did so by his sheep by Harley’s advice: none after died. And Harley
said a known witch advised him to burn the heart by roasting ona spit, and the
A would come to the door before the heart was roasted” (Camden Misc., x.,
p. 09).
j If Mill or Darwin, Browning or Mr. Meredith had tried to express their ideas
in the English of the seventeenth century they would have failed. The extreme
simplicity of Hamlet’s thought is only concealed by the obscurity of his motives and
the richness of his poetical diction.

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 55

gether, the absence of distractions and mental luxuries to dissipate
thought, long days without company and long weeks without
news, gave the individual time and freedom to be himself, called
up the powers of fancy and contemplation, and induced the under-
taking of works loftily conceived and leisurely fulfilled. The
writers of books could not then hope to make a livelihood by
their sale. Some authors were also engaged in more lucrative
professions ; some were men of independent means; and those who
wrote to gain a subsistence speculated not on the sale but on the
reputation of their works, seeking less to please the public than to
attract the notice of the Court when the King was a man of
learning, of the Bishops when religious controversy was the key
to high preferment, or of some lord of fashion when poetry was
fashionable. But the reading public, in the bookseller’s sense,
was but a small fraction of a small population; the number of
great writers was in inverse ratio to the number of readers.!

The writing of plays for the theatre was influenced by condi- The
tions not wholly dissimilar from those of writing books for the isdebee
press. ‘The theatre depended in part on a keen-witted but ill-
educated popular audience, and in part on patrons of the most
refined taste and exalted position. It was saved from falling
either into silly coarseness or into artificial preciosity, by the need
to place popular comedy side by side with choice poetry, without
exciting disgust by the one or derision by the other.”

The conditions of theatrical patronage were governed by the
local history of the capital, where three societies formed, together
and in rivalry, the heart of the body politic. These were, first the
commercial population resident within the gates of London;
secondly the officials, lords and fine gentlemen of the Court who
lived in mansions or lodgings in the city of Westminster ; and lastly

- 1Some idea of the solid reading of an ordinary man, not specially literary or
poetical, but anxious to instruct himself, may be gathered from the following list,
recommended by an old gentleman (born 1580) to his grandson, as having formed
the library of his youth (Hazl. Misc., ix., p. 592). After the Bible he recommends
Hooker’s Ecclesiastical Polity, Sit W. Raleigh’s History of the World, Plutarch’s
Lives, Camden’s Brittania, “ my friend Sir Richard Baker’s Chronicle,” Xenophon’s
Cyrus, Tully’s Offices, James I.’s Basilicon Doron. Lastly, he adds: ‘‘ When I was
young it was a defect not to be versed in” Sir Philip Sidney. Indeed while Shake-
speare and even Spenser are not mentioned, the old gentleman says: ‘To refresh
yourself with poetical stories you may take Sir Philip Sidney instead ofall”. —

2 The difficulty felt by playwrights in catering for a popular audience with a
classical subject is treated by Ben Jonson in the puppet play of Hero and Leandes
at the end of Bartholomew Fair,

56 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

the lawyers of the Inns of Court who formed, geographically,
socially, and politically a link between the other two. ‘The most
adventurous and the most talented young men came up from the
country to complete their education or to seek their fortune in one
or other of these three social camps. But besides the busy politicians
of Whitehall, the industrious merchants of Cheapside, and the
keen-eyed lawyers who drove daily from the Temple to Westminster
Hall at four for a shilling in the new hackney-coaches, each of these
societies had its drones. Foppish courtiers and idle law students who
set the fashion, and apprentices too good for their trades who aped
it, all rezarded the capital as a place in which to see life. A common
ground where these runagates of the different classes could assemble,
admiring and admired, was afforded by the playhouses on the South-
wark bank of the Thames, where they found the freedom, the
entertainment, and the female society which they desired. The
theatres were under the ban not only of Puritan pulpits, but of the
city fathers. Indeed, the municipal authorities would have stamped
out the drama from England, for the purposes of police as much as
for the salvation of souls, had not the courtiers intervened.

Great lords and ladies were accustomed to the drama both at
the King’s Court and in their own country houses, where strolling
players were made as welcome as at Elsinore, and where marriages
were celebrated and winter nights enlivened by pageants and masques
—a form of drama in which it was easy for amateur actors to hide
their want of histrionic skill beneath the splendour of allegorical
costumes and aristocratic dignity of carriage. Nor was this
passion for private theatricals the only cause predisposing the
leaders of society to patronise the Southwark plays. Poetry as
well as drama had a home in the court of Elizabeth and the early
Stuarts. The English renaissance had at last taken up the work
of continental grammarians and artists, and converted it freely to
the use of English literature. ‘“'The pageant of renascent human-
ity to which the English were invited by Italians, Spaniards and
Frenchmen, our predecessors in the arts and studies of two centuries,
stimulated the poets of the race to their dramatic triumphs.”! The
leaders of the renaissance in its English literary form were courtiers

1Symond’s Shakespere’s Predecessors, pp. 26, 27. For the influence of the
Italian Renaissance in England, see Lewis Einstein’s scholarly work on that subject
(1902). :

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 57

and noblemen attached to the corrupt official world of Whitehall,
who loved to be rowed across the Thames for a breath of human
life among the poets and players in the tiring-room, and to sit in
all their magnificence on the stage, the admiration or the jest of
the sixpenny mechanics in the yard below. The would-be courtier
and gallant, trying to pass himself off as the Sidney of his day,
misquoted Romeo and Juliet to his mistress, slept with “ Venus
and Adonis under his pillow,” and hung up “sweet Mr. Shake-
speare’s” picture in “his study at the Court”.

Thus it came about that the success of authors, managers and The
players depended on their ability to interest two kinds of audiences London
c ‘ theatres
in one play. An unlettered crowd paid the bulk of the gate-money ;
but Court lords and Temple gallants, proud of their taste and learn-
ing, shielded the theatres from invectives of the clergy and the
official action of the respectable middle class, and relieved with
liberal gifts the hard life of the actor and playwright. It is
possible to trace the effects of this dual patronage in the very
various kinds of drama introduced into one play and even into one
scene, and in the frequent appearance of such characters as the
spendthrift law student, the sweaty-capped artisan, the close-fisted
merchant, the scented fop, the politician with his smirk and curtsey
to his “sweet lord”; alternating with the honest citizen, the jolly
prentice, the gallant gentleman and the polished courtier: these
topical portraits seem drawn sometimes to set one part of the house
laughing at the other, sometimes to flatter the class pride of the
groundlings or of the stools on the stage. In this strange scene
and company, amid jewelled silks and leather aprons, there met
together the best and worst, the wisest and most foolish of the
land; and hither, to this fortunate isle of space and time, came
the greatest of all mankind ; small wonder, then, that the world of
his creation was as various and as free from rule as the crowds
that laughed and clamoured about the old playhouse for a while,
had their brief, glad day there, and departed.

The excellence of the English theatre was as short-lived as Puritan.
other great literary movements. Some twenty years before the jp? se re
Puritans closed the theatre doors at the outbreak of the Civil War,
our plays had been deserted by the genius of poetry, and had for
the most part become bad prose drama cut up into halting blank

1 Return from Parnassus, pt. i., Act IIL, sc. 1, and Act IV., se. 1,

58 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

verse! The Puritans did more harm by permanently fixing the
stigma of frivolity upon the stage than by temporarily closing its
doors. By teaching so many serious and respectable families in
England to avoid the playhouse as they would avoid a brothel, they
brought it about that the Anglo-Saxons do not take that serious
and religious interest in the drama that is due to the first of arts.

Puritan- Dramatic authorship in the days of Shakespeare only escaped

een destruction because the triumph of its enemies was deferred until
the silver age; poetry, on the other hand, obtained from the
Puritans themselves that force of spiritual imagination, without
which the most ingenious art parades but futile elegance. The
genius and the reality which had ennobled the English literary
renaissance in the days of Sidney and Spenser, was already cold,
when a young Puritan breathed into the learned service of Eng-
lish verse, perpetually chanted round the shrine of the classical
pantheon, his own enthusiasm for active virtue—that saving grace
common to all Puritan sects. The masques and minor poems of
Milton, written before the Civil War had divided all things
excellent into hostile camps, and taught Cromwell’s secretary to
treat the gods of Greece with the distance proper to disguised
demons,—those few hundred verses, scarcely influential in their
own day, have proved of the highest importance in the history of
the English race. The literary tradition which they inaugurated,
associating the deepest and most religious feelings with lyrical verse
and unfettered fancy, survived the long triumph of the French
school from Dryden to Dr. Johnson, and from the days of Cole-
ridge and Wordsworth have had no small share in the revival
of English poetry.

Not an While the unscientific character of the age perhaps stimulated

of . . . . BY . .
ecligious men’s poetical instincts, their religious beliefs were not yet modified

doubt by the conception of regular law guiding the universe. No
serious attack was directed against the doctrines of orthodox
Christianity. From the time when Marlowe’s death in a tavern

__7It is a matter of opinion whether there was very high value in the plays
written between 1620 and 1640. I am glad to be able to shelter my own view of
that question behind the authority of Symonds, Prof. Dowden, Prof. Raleigh
and Gardiner (see Shakespere’s Predecessors, pp. 2-7. Puritan and Anglican p. 2.
Prof. Raleigh’s Milton, pp. 189, 190. G., vii., pp. 327-38). et

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 59

brawl had illustrated God’s judgment on the impious, till the rise
of “Mr. Hobbes the Atheist” to notoriety, there was scarcely
one known sceptic in the island. No rationalistic analysis was
directed against faith by the literary men; though Raleigh was
falsely accused of atheism, and Shakespeare wavered, according
to the poetical impulse of the moment, between the imagery of
religion and the suggestions of a contemplative humour curiously
eyeing the lot of man. These children of fancy and freedom might
sometimes wander into fairylands, where truth was not disguised
in creeds, but if recalled to earth by an accusation of unorthodoxy
they were well able to deny the charge.

Nevertheless, the popular conception of the mates of the Limita-
miraculous was becoming more limited. The partisans of the old Fg oe
and of the new religion held in common the belief in witchcraft, of the
fairy-circles, and other manifest activities of evil or indifferent nebees
spirits, but the miraculous working of the power of good was
less universally acknowledged. The Catholics indeed) whose
numbers and influence haa long been on the wane, upheld the
credit of relics and sacred places, and comforted themselves in
the hour of oppression with stories of miracles vouchsafed on
behalf of the Jesuit martyrs; but the adherents of the incoming
religion of Protestantism laughed at these stories, not only as
politically treasonous but as naturally improbable, and believed
little in the special sacredness of one material object more than
another, or in visible interference by God in the course of nature.
Instead of the medizval miracle, the Puritan believed in the secret
management of human affairs by Providence, in ways that the
godless might lightly attribute to chance. Angels did not visit
his house, but he recognised a judgment if he fell off his horse,
and a “mercy” if his ship returned safe from Ternate. God no
longer divided the waters of the Red Sea for Israel to go over
dryshod, but it was expected of Him to send a fair wind to take
the Swedish army across the Baltic. Cromwell would have been
much astonished if the sun had stood still over Marston while
he completed the rout upon the Moor, but he wrote to tell the
Speaker how his retreat to Dunbar had been covered, when “the
Lord by His good Providence put a cloud over the moon”.’ ‘The

1 Carl.’s Crom., Letter cxl.

Puritans
not of one

type

Bible
reading

60 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

Puritan, in fact, applied logically, continually and imaginatively the
belief that prayer is effective ; but he did not believe in miracles.

Thus rationalism had achieved an advance on the old concep-
tion of the miraculous. But as no materialist view of the uni-
verse existed even in germ, and as no idealist philosophy had yet
learnt to deny revelation or to dispense with a personal God, all
that minority of mankind who thought seriously about life was
genuinely Christian. Under these conditions, the type of thought
and feeling that most frequently had attraction to men of strong
character or of deep emotions was that which we know as Puritanism.

That word, so variously and often inaccurately defined, will be
used throughout this book to signify, according to its original
meaning, the religion of all those who wished either to “ purify”
the usages of the Established Church from taint of Popery, or to
worship separately by forms so “purified”.! The many various
sects and persons who fall under this definition, were usually
characterised both by an aversion from gaiety and by a passionate
love of civic freedom. But they had little else in common. While
some of them were more inclined to persecution than Laud him-
self, others were the first of all Englishmen who objected to the
theory of a State Church, and who desired to give as well as to
receive religious freedom. Some again were far more dogmatic
than the Anglicans, but others regarded the system of Calvin as
a barrier created between the human spirit and the Divine light.
Prynne and Milton, Cartwright and Cromwell, Baxter and George
Fox, the Covenanters and the Unitarians were all products of the
Puritan movement.

Before the rise of the Quakers, the vitality of Puritanism in all
its branches was derived from the imaginative study of the Bible.
While other literary movements, however noble in quality, affected
only a few, the study of the Bible was becoming the national
education. Recommended by the King, translated by the Bishops,
yet in chief request with the Puritans, without the rivalry of books
or newspapers, the Bible told to the unscholarly the story of
another age and race, not in bald generalisation and doctrinal
harangue, but with such wealth of simple narrative and lyrical

_ | See this, the proper definition and meaning of the word, in Prof. Maitland’s
article (C. M. H., ii., p. 590)—the finest and most authoritative account of the
origins of the English Church settlement.

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 61

force that each man recognised his own dim strivings after a new
spirit, written clear in words two thousand years old. A deep
and splendid effect was wrought by the monopoly of this book
as the sole reading of common households, in an age when men’s
minds were instinct with natural poetry and open to receive the
light of imagination. A new religion arose, of which the mythus
was the Rible stories, and the pervading spirit the direct relations
of man with God, exemplified in human life.

And while the imagination was kindled, the intellect was freed
by this private study of the Bible. For its private study involved
its private interpretation. Each reader, even if a Churchman,
became in some sort a Church to himself. Hence the hundred
sects and thousand doctrines that astonished foreigners, and opened
England’s strange path to intellectual liberty. The Bible cultivated
here, more than in any other land, the growth of individual thought
and practice.

Puritanism was not an ecclesiastical system. From the reign Puritans
of Elizabeth onwards, it covered at least three rival views on pak le
Church government. ‘There were, first, those Puritans who wished govern-
only to modify the usages of the Established Church, preserv-™°"
ing government by Bishops, subject to some measure of lay
control. Secondly, there were those who wished for Puritan
coercion under a Presbyterian régime. When James ascended
the throne the first class was more numerous than the second.
Cartwright’s Presbyterian agitation under Elizabeth had failed
for want of support among the Puritans. Throughout the reign
of James I. the bulk of them stood by the principles of their
Millenary Petition of 1603, desiring to modify, but ready to accept
Episcopate and Prayer-book as the background of their own domestic
worship and daily life. It was only the severity of Laud’s persecu-
tion and the Catholicising tendency of Charles I.’s Bishops which
turned the majority against Episcopal government in 1641: and
it was only the Scottish military alliance which forced them two
years later to adopt a strict Presbyterian system.1 But there
was also a third class of Puritans. Ever since the early years of
Elizabeth there had been sectaries persecuted by the Bishops and
hated by all strict followers of Calvin: men who desired to abolish

1 Shaw, History of English Church, passim, and Manchester Classics (Chetham
Soc., 1890), pp. xiii-xvii.

62 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

the coercive power of the Church, whether Anglican or Presbyterian,
and to leave individuals free to form congregations at will. These
Free Churchmen, who increased in power as time went on, especially
after the outbreak of the Civil War, were themselves divided ; there
were those who, like Cromwell, would tolerate all sorts of Puritans,
and there were those who, like Baptists and Quakers, would tolerate
all sorts of men.!

Puritans Puritanism can not be defined by a creed. It was not divided

saa ae from Anglicanism by any shibboleth like the belief in predestina-
tion. All English Protestants, including King James and his
High Church Bishops, were Calvinists on that point of doctrine,
until Laud’s school adopted the contrary theories of the Dutchman
Arminius, for no reason apparently relative to the religious contro-
versy in our island. Meanwhile the orthodoxy of Calvin had been
rejected by many of the Baptist and other sects, and their revolt
was followed in a later generation by that of the Quakers and
Unitarians. ‘Those indeed—and they were at first the majority—
who Jaid great store on Puritan dogma, had to be satistied with
dark tomes of theology unlighted by the literary genius that saves
the Anglican doctors from oblivion. ‘The power of the Puritan
writers lay elsewhere than in theology. Plgrim’s Progress and
George Fox’s Journal tell of the immediate experience of the soul.
For indeed the peculiarity of the Puritans, in the lowest and in the
highest rank of life, lay in the intensity with which they felt that
“God is a Spirit,” and must be worshipped neither by ritual nor
by doctrine, but by feeling and conduct. Cromwell expressed the
motive of his life when he said, “ The true knowledge is not literal
or speculative ; but inward and transforming the mind to it”.

The history of the leadership of the Commons from 1600 to
1640 presents, in an era when public life was specially corrupt and
unprincipled, the spectacle of prolonged, heroic, unselfish and well-
advised action by the representatives of the English country gentle-
men, such as is rare in the politics of any age and was wholly
wanting in the struggle of the Whig Parliaments against Charles II.
But Eliot, Hampden, Pym and their colleagues were Puritans.

At this time when Puritanism was eminent as the religion that
inspired the leaders of the landlord class, it was already pervading

1 See Shaw, Barclay and Gooch passim,

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 63

those humbler ranks where its strength survived the Restoration.
Its influence brought seriousness of thought to thousands, and
induced them to put that restraint on their luxuries and that
vigour into the performance of their duties, which all religions en-
join, but which few enforce against the dead weight of social custom.
It is not likely that the influence of Hooker, or of Laud, could have
done as much as the Puritans did to thin the ranks of the thought-
less, the gross and the indifferent.

The conversion of the people to an intelligent Protestantism, Need for
which alone could secure and excuse the violent overthrow of ue jae!
Romanism effected by the Tudors, had already taken place in ganda
the great towns, in the home counties and among the sea-going
population ; but no substitute for proscribed Catholicism had yet
been established, except in name, in the country districts of the
North and West. The parish clergy, who two generations before
had passed from Catholic to Protestant, or from Protestant to
Catholic, with every change of Government, were still very generally
of the same type of careless shepherds, anxious only to retain their
seats at the shearer’s feast, devoid of learning or enthusiasm to fulfil
their duties, which they often relegated to substitutes too like
themselves. ‘The Church service was read on Sunday as a State
test ; attendance proved loyalty, and non-attendance involved fine.
Sermons were rare; house visitation and religious instruction were
neglected. The country people, deprived by law and police of the
Catholic ministry, still retained memories of ancestral rhymes of
which the sense was becoming obscure. In 1608 a clergyman, who
was more alive to his duties than most of his fel low-labourers
complained that his flock “superstitiously refuse to pray in their
own language with understanding,” and contented themselves with
such wreckage of the old religion as the following :—

Creezum zuum patrum onitentem creatorum ejus amicum, Dominum nos-
trum qui sum sops, virgini Mariae, crixus fixus, Ponchi Pilati audubitiers,
morti by Sunday, father a furnes, scerest ut judicarum, finis a mortibus.

or again—
White Pater-noster, St. Peter’s brother,
What hast i’ th t’ one hand? white book leaves.
What hast i’ th t’ other hand? heaven gate keys.

Such ignorance could never have been dispelled by the neglectful
methods of tithe-loving parsons, but offered a fine field of useful

Puritan

censorship

of morals

64 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

labour for the zeal of the Puritan, who, whether cleric or layman,
made it his business to preach the Gospel in his own household and
among his neighbours, and, as far as in him lay, to make the
Protestantism of London and the seaports the religion of all Eng-
land. The upland English considered the religious duties of the
day fulfilled if they muttered the Creed or Hail Mary as they
tumbled into bed, and showed no more natural desire to study the
Bible than to make any other effort of an intellectual order. It
was only by the sustained personal effort of Puritans in every part
of the island, during the period when they were still within the
official Church, that family prayers and Bible reading became at
all customary. These habits, which remained as the staple of
English education for generations after official Puritanism had
been crushed out of the Church, were being slowly established
during the reigns of James and Charles I. by the patient work of
exhortation and instruction carried on by thousands of zealous men,
each in his own sphere of life.’

Another side of Puritan activity inseparable from the invitation
to prayer and study was the reproving of sin. From some con-
temporary accounts it might be supposed that the time of the
early Stuarts was the most immoral of all ages, but it is never easy
to tell in such cases whether abnormal licence caused the denuncia-
tion of the reformer, or whether an unusual movement of reform

. drew special attention to a degree of vice common to all epochs.

But certainly vice was not in those days compelled to dissimulate
its popularity and prevalence. The Court of James I. was notori-
ously corrupt in morals, and the country houses of many great
lords, the pattern to the gentry of whole districts, were little better.
Many noble families, as Clarendon remarked, had desperately
compromised their finances by luxury and ostentation when the
Civil War came to complete or repair their ruin. If we add to
this that the coarseness of ordinary language was as yet unre-
strained by conventions of propriety, that drunkenness was the
acknowledged national fault, and that the upper classes had no
shame on that score, it will appear that the Puritans were at least
not without provocation to the combat with vice which finally cost
them so dear.

1 Baxter, Life, and True History of Church Councils. G., i., pp. 148-503 viii.
pp. 124-62, Notes and Queries, I., viii., pp. 613, 614. ;

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 65

Common men, finding their habits assailed, turned against the
precisians the talk round the market cross and the laugh on the
ale-house bench. Baxter thus describes the experiences of his
boyhood in a western village about the time of the death of
James I, :—

When I heard them speak scornfully of others as Puritans whom I never
knew, I was at first apt to believe all the Lies and Slanders wherewith they
loaded them. But when I heard my own Father so reproached, and perceived
the Drunkards were the forwardest in the reproach, I perceived that it was
mere Malice. For my Father never scrupled Common-Prayer or Ceremonies,
nor spake against Bishops, nor ever so much as prayed but by a Book or
Form, being not ever acquainted then with any who did otherwise. But
only for reading Scripture when the rest were Dancing on the Lord’s Day,
and for praying (by a Form out of the end of the Common Prayer Book) in
his House, and for reproving Drunkards and Swearers, and for talking some-
times a few words of Scripture and the Life to come, he was reviled commonly
by the Name of Puritan, Precisian and Hypocrite: and so were the Godly
Conformable Ministers that lived any where in the Country near us, not
only by our Neighbours, but by the common talk of the Vulgar Rabble of
all around us. By this experience I was fully convinc’d that Godly People
were the best, and those that despised them and lived in Sin and Pleasure,
were a malignant unhappy sort of People: and this kept me out of their
Company, except now and then when the Love of Sports and Play enticed
me.

Many Puritans were more offensive people than the Baxter pyritan
family, although most were no less “conformable” to the Church coteries
service. In the towns they sometimes lived in exclusive coteries of
mutual admiration, speaking of each other as “ brother This” and
“sister That,” and directed by some favourite clergyman who
dispensed the common funds for charitable objects. We gather
from the descriptions left by playwrights and satirists, that these
societies were not wholly unlike the Evangelical cliques of the early
nineteenth century, in the relations of the members to each other,
to the Established Church, and to the world.

The talk of the godly ran into cant phrases, of which the most
pronounced were “surely,” “ verily” and “yea verily”. “Very
likely,” says Ben Jonson’s Puritan, “exceeding likely, very exceed-
ing likely”. Their dress was studiously out of the fashion; when
ruffs were superseded by the beautiful lace collar, the wives of
Puritan citizens were still known by their “little ruffs”. Many of

1 Baxter, Life (ed. 1696), pp. 2, 3.
5

Puritan
self dis-
cipline

Puritan-
ism and
the cus-
toms of
the age

66 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

the men wore sad-coloured and simply cut clothes, which were as
much more tasteful than the gaudy and ill-shaped caricatures of
finery which were the rage under James I., as they were less elegant
than the exquisite grace of fashion under his son. Brethren of the
stricter discipline cut their hair short, but left “so many little
peaks as was ridiculous to behold,” with the sole object of making
hideous protest against the “unloveliness of love-locks”. But such
eccentricities were chiefly confined to the merchant and industrial
classes, who felt a touch of pride in condemning the habits and
appearance of ranks to which they could not aspire. In higher
circles it is not easy to distinguish by dress the portraits of
Cavalier from those of Puritan leaders. Eliot, Hampden, Crom-
well, Milton wore their hair falling over their shoulders; and
the Puritan lady, Mrs. Hutchinson, was never tired of casting
ridicule on the personal appearance of her allies, the Presbyterian
bourgeois. When fortunes were being sunk and estates mort-
gaged in order that men should wear jewels and dress in coloured
silks, some protest against fashion was required; yet few need
agree with

Mistress Scruple and her husband, who
Do verily ascribe the German war

And the late persecutions to curling,
False teeth, and oil of talc.}

The Puritans, while they abhorred the confessional, encouraged,
as their private journals disclose, the more virile practice of self-
examination; and while they regarded with suspicion the fasts on
Fridays and at stated Church seasons, they had fasts of their own,
on occasions selected from time to time by Parliament, congrega-
tion or individual. By self-imposed discipline, they endeavoured,
in the very thick of worldly business, to preserve self-control and
unquenchable devotion to the ideal of duty.

The call on men to abandon drunkenness and immorality, and
devote their hours of leisure to religious study, raised the question
of public sports and festivities, which, even when innocent in their
own nature, were rendered incompatible with the new life, by the
day of the week chosen for their celebration and by the circum-
stances which attended them. But the religious idealists did not

‘Mayne’s City Match (Dodsley), Act IL., sc. x. Hutchinson, pp. 120, 121.

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 67

stand alone in this question. During the first forty years of the
century, Parliamentary statutes, royal ordinances, and administra-
tive acts of municipalities and of Quarter Session benches, again
and again interfered with popular customs in the supposed
interests of decency and public order. The controversies relating
to the control of popular amusements, on which Puritanism took
up so decided an attitude, involved other aspects of life besides
religion, and were so various that each has to be considered on
its own merits.

The two national vices that were classed together in the de-
nunciations of moralists were “drunkenness and swearing”. The
latter sin was held in abhorrence, not as a vulgar but as a
blasphemous habit, likely to compromise the nation with the
powers of the other world, and to draw down heavy reprisals. ‘The
third Parliament of James I. passed an Act to “prevent swearing
and cursing”; it was drafted in a spirit of decided optimism with
regard to its effect, for we read that, If any person or persons shall
herinafter offend, he shall pay twelve pence to the poor for each
offence. ‘The Act was not essentially Puritan, for in 1635, at the
height of the Laudian supremacy, Charles I. endeavoured to en-
force its provisions by royal ordinance. But fines for swearing
were seldom actually levied until the rule of the Saints began. A
similar Act of the same Parliament of James I. to prevent “tip-
pling” was probably less effectual than the suppression of riotous
ale-houses, which was then a constant and excellent feature of local
administration.

Before the introduction of tea and coffee, strong drink was in Drinking
a very different relation to human life from that which it occupies habits
to-day. In an age when there were few other luxuries and no
other stimulants, it was regarded as the staff of life from the cradle
to the grave. Even in sober households, where the children’s
drinking tastes were not encouraged by invitation to share the
wines, they “were indulged fu!l liberty of drinking small beer,”
and even took their medicine concealed or diluted in the “stone
bottle” of the nursery.’ For adults the need for something in the
course of each day to stimulate bodily and mental vigour, rendered
total abstinence an ideal necessarily foreign even to the temperate

1 Roger North, Autobiography, secs. 2, 3.

68 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

and censorious Puritans. But while they never thought of demand-
ing the suppression of the ordinary sale of liquor, they had no
tolerance for the public feasts and village merry-makings at Church
Ales, Bride Ales, and Wakes, where custom prescribed and religion
sanctified assemblies generally ending in drunkenness and often in
grosser forms of debauchery.

Village Besides those junketings there were many more delectable

cae customs, which, in illiterate and isolated communities had stood
for unrecorded generations in place of other interests and amuse-
ments; these also were regarded by the Puritan as obstacles to
the new life of prayer and Bible study. Christmas and 'Twelfth-
night had their holiday and feast. Marriage was the occasion for

Pomp, and feast, and revelry,
With masque and antique pageantry.

St. Valentine’s Day had quaint privileges and customs; and on
May Day, before the earliest light, the young men and maidens
rose up in town and village and went into the woods, returning as
the sun rose with the spoils of the forest, to hang the doors and |
windows with garlands—a mode of worshipping mother-earth as |
pagan in its charm and licence as if Christianity had not for so
many hundred years been proclaiming other gods. Even from the
vast labyrinth of narrow streets that composed the City and
Liberties of London, the apprentices escaped into the country to
celebrate May Day with full rural rites. In other towns the
country lay at men’s doors. On holidays, or in honour of the
arrival of a distinguished stranger, rude masques and allegorical
processions were fitted out, with weeks of preparation, such as the
wealth and wit of each village or city could supply. Bell-pulling,
at which men often fell fainting, wrestling where limb and even life
were at stake, jumping, pitching the bar, dancing, and nine-pins
were sports of which one variety or another was native custom
in every village. But the acknowledged king of games was
football, at this time far more general than it afterwards be-
came. ‘The husbandmen, when the fat swine were killed on the
approach of winter, “ got the bladder and blew it great and thin,”
and “ tried it out at football with the shins”. The simplest of all
games, it was played with local rules suited to the nature of the
ground, often across the stream and up the length of the village

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1608-40 69

street. An officious magistrate occasionally tried to revive the
moribund archery laws, which forbade husbandmen and labourers
to play at football; and King James forbade it at Court as “ meeter
for the laming than the making able” of his liege subjects. But
all classes commonly joied in the scrimmage, to the good old cry
of “all fellows at football”.

The commonest popular spectacles were bull and bear-baiting.
These were regarded with particular aversion by authority, as
being the centres of disorder, and for this reason stood among the
very few pastimes declared unlawful on Sunday by the Book of
Sports, although the royal author of that declaration himself loved
to see Sackerson tear up his chain and break with a roar among
the scattering dogs. But the sport was in some quarters arraigned
on higher grounds. A few of the more sensitive divines, Anglican
as well as Puritan, without raising strictly humanitarian objections,
pronounced it unworthy of man’s high calling to be “a common
barrator to set the animals at discord ”.

The fact that these various entertainments were usually arranged Sabbatar-
for the first day of the week, when alone most hands were free, in-'*™'*™
creased whatever objection the Puritans might otherwise have taken
to the influence of plays, ales, dances and sports ; and on the other
hand, the offensive nature of some of these pastimes assisted the
rapid spread in respectable circles of the new doctrine that all
amusement on Sunday was sinful. ‘The fathers of continental
Protestantism had held no strict Sabbatarian views. Calvin, it
is said, was found by John Knox playing bowls on Sunday; and
Knox in his turn had allowed the cold light of his countenance to
shine upon festivities on the Lord’s Day, holding that what little
was right on week days was not wrong on Sundays. But the
English and Scottish Puritans had since evolved a new doctrine
of the first day of the week, which they called the Sabbath, in
order to take advantage by a name of the commandment delivered
on Sinai. For the claim of the Sabbatarians was fortunately
extended to the prohibition of work as well as of play, and here
there was much need for their new doctrine. One of Elizabeth’s
Injunctions had urged people to work after the service on Sunday,
as on other holidays, if they wished.!. Business men used Sunday

1 Hessey, Bampton Lectures, 1860, pp. 268-70, and lectures vi., vii. passisn,

70 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

to clear off arrears of clerical work left over from the week; the
King’s Council chose it as their day of meeting; waggoners, drovers
and carriers continued their slow journeys along the roads, and
held markets where they came; much regular buying and selling
was done even in London, and in western towns less subject to
Puritan influence shops were regularly open and men at work: the
temptation to gather the harvest on a fine Sunday was nowhere
resisted, until these habits were materially altered by the new
Sabbatarian ideas, which taught the British, above all other peoples,
to regard work on that day as a sin.’

But the change effected by Sabbatarians in old custom was
greatest, perhaps, in regard to sports. At the period of James I.’s
accession, the inhabitants of each parish, having satisfied the law
by hearing the Common Prayer read on Sunday morning, streamed
out from church eager for the ale to flow and the rebecks to sound
on the green, and spent the rest of the day and much of the night
in roaring and dancing through the village in wanton revels; to
the envy of the “married man” condemned by a jealous wife to
“sigh away Sundays”. This noisy method of spending Sunday was
as unfavourable to religious study and meditation, as the Puritan
system, which so rapidly superseded it, was unfavourable to healthy
life of body and mind. When the Long Parliament met, public
opinion had already in many places enforced the discipline of what
is now known as the “English Sunday”; after the Restoration
the Sabbatarian idea was hardly challenged. It is extraordinary
with what success the religious minority imposed their view of the
matter on the worldly majority. But in this question at least, the
Puritans, though they were fighting against the love of pleasure,
had time and change on their side; for as the generations came and
went, improved means of intercourse stole their ancient sanctity from
the peculiar sports, festivals and rites of each parish ; while the print-
ing press gradually drew away from the common merry-making the
increasing number of those who could read, to the study of religious
and political controversy, and of literature good and bad. The
hard-pressed economic unit in the modern world of Anglo-Saxon

_ 7 On the other hand, Puritan influence helped to make people work on great
Saints’ days occurring in the middle of the week. They regarded respite from
neler on those occasions ‘as encouraging a mythology which they were trying to
eradicate.

STATE OF ENGLAND, 1603-40 71

industrialism, owes the secure enjoyment of his Sabbath—that
humane charter which even commercial greed dare seldom violate—
to the same stern influence which long forbade him to make his
day of rest a day of physical exercise or of honest “schooling in
the pleasures ”.

Such was Puritanism as a social and spiritual influence inside Import-
the pale of the Church, before persecution made it a sect in religion ee
and a party in politics. How would the royal government regard ment atti-
these aspirations towards social and spiritual reformation ? Would sates
it favour, tolerate or try to suppress them? On the reiations ofism
the iohatchy to Puritanism depended not only the religion but,
by a coincidence in time, the liberty and institutions of the
English, and the future supremacy of our race in the Western
Hemisphere. The policy, though strongly indicated by Elizabeth,
was not when she died irrevocably fixed by the course of past
history or by any general prejudice of the governing class, and the
decision, so vast in its ulterior consequences, rested entirely on
the caprices and theories of a stranger from Scotland, who had
been bred a Presbyterian, had married a Catholic, but was in

heart and mind a scholar.

We have now given some account of those features which, at Summary
the opening of the seventeenth century, differentiated England from
the other countries of Europe. Owing to these characteristics, it
was still possible that, if our island could for a while remain isolated
from continental affairs, we might evolve some new kind of state,
more free but not less highly organised than the military and
bureaucratic despotism, which otherwise bade fair to become the
one type of civilised government. For England was a land of local
government, local armaments, local feeling, where the life of the
shire, the parish and the city was vigorous, yet where no feud
existed between country and town; where ranks were for ever
mingling; where the gentry intermarried with the middle class,
and shared with them the commercial and professional careers.
Bureaucrats and soldiers were almost unknown; the King depended
for the execution of his mandates on an unpaid magistracy, and
for his defence on the loyalty of his subjects. The religion which
most inspired the best and ablest men, did not depend, like the

;

72 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS

Protestantism of Germany or the Catholicism of France, on a State
Church or a Church State, but referred the individual to his own
intellect and his own conscience, and inspired him to defend his
spiritual liberties. And this country, when Elizabeth died, was
entering on a period of peace and isolation favourable to internal
activities, while the nations on the continent again embarked on
a series of gigantic wars. Whether in such a land, liberty had
still a chance of survival ; or whether the universal tide of monarchy
in Europe would not after all prove irresistible even in England,
now that feudal traditions were lost and no republican ideals had
taken their place, was soon to be decided by the hazard of events,
and by the prejudice and passion of men whom fortune would
raise above their fellows, not to guide the world whither they
themselves would, but blindly to impel it down courses which
neither themselves nor any other had foreseen.

1608] JAMES | 73

CHAPTER III
JAMES IL—PURITANS AND CATHOLICS

He feels himself as an immense brood-fowl set over this England, and
would so fain gather it all under his wings.—Historical Sketches, Cantyun.

N the grey hours of morning, 24th March, 1603, watch and ward Death of
was kept in London streets; and in all the neighbouring” !i7#beth
counties mea who had much at stake in time of crisis, dreamed
uncertainly of the thousand chances that day might bring. For
the last and greatest of the Tudor race had at length turned away
to die, leaving to its own devices the world which her patient
valour had led into the forward path. Her death would bring
about one of those rare occasions when the platitudes of national
loyalty and unity, which have imposed on secure men for a whole
generation, are put to the test of the event. It would now be seen
whether all was really as officials asserted it to be; whether the
new England had been built to stand for ages; or whether, after
all, the party of the old religion and society was large, united, and
determined enough to throw all once more into confusion.

When day broke two horsemen were far on the northern road, Accession
each spurring to forestall the other at Holyrood with homage °% Jamesl.
impatiently expected by the first ruler of the British isles. At
a more leisurely pace the Elizabethan statesmen were riding in
from Richmond, where their mistress lay dead, to Whitehall gate,
where at ten in the morning they proclaimed King James I. By
employing as their spokesman Robert Cecil, who personified the
late Queen’s system in Church and State, the Lords of the Council
showed themselves agreed that there should be no revolution.

The decision was silently endorsed by a grateful nation. In city
and manor house men laid aside their arms and breathed again,

Royal
progress
from
Scotland

Ideas and °

character
of James

"4 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1608

Fast as the news spread, all consented and most rejoiced. ‘The
Puritan sailors, who had taken out their ships to guard against
Popish invasion from the Flemish coast, put back to port; and
the borderers who kept watch on Naworth turrets, learned from
their mild Catholic Lord, Belted Will Howard, that, since Eng-
land and Scotland had one King, the northern sky-line was no
longer the territory of a foe. So the work of Elizabeth stood the
test of real consent, and the English people invited the royal line
of Scotland to come and fill her place.

The first of these four Stuarts, who have left their indelible
negative impression upon England, ushered in the tragedy of King
and people with a pageant of royal progress from Berwick to
London, which then excited to ecstasies the loyalty and curiosity
of a simple nation, and has since, in the reflex light of all that
followed, become a theme for the irony of historians. For a month
of spring weather James rode south. The land seemed bursting
into bud to welcome him, growing greener each day as the ever-
increasing train of courtiers wound slowly down out of the north
country into the midland valleys; through shouting market-places
where the masque of welcome and the corporation with its address
were lost in the press of men; by ancient steeples rocking with the
clash of bells; along open roads hedged with countrymen who
had come on pilgrimage across whole counties. There was hunting
of the stag through the neighbouring parks, when His Majesty
might learnedly discourse to the foresters on the art of venery,
and show how your Scotchman will blow a mort; while at night,
in private mansions, the regal entertainment witnessed to the solid
magnificence and free loyalty of England.

The man on whom the English thus first set eyes was by no
means contemptible in person, in spite of grossly coarse manners.
In the prime of life, over middle height, a good horseman, devoted
to the chase, drinking hugely but never overcome by his liquor:
he employed a pithy wit and a wealth of homely images and learned
conceits in free and familiar discourse with all. Nor during the
progress did he dispel the prejudice in his favour.

Above all he gave satisfaction by keeping Robert Cecil as his
chief counsellor. He had, in fact, determined to maintain the system
of Elizabeth, with this good change—that henceforth the royal
policy should display an acutencss and a largeness of mind worthy

1603] JAMES I 15

of a man of uncommon penetration and learning, who knew by
theory how to outwit the Pope, manage the King of Spain, convert
the English Catholics by proclamations, and guide his other
subjects on the path of unity and wisdom. The English people
having been loyal even to Elizabeth, probably from their sense of
the obedience due by right divine to all rulers, would be doubl y loyal ,
to one like himself, the living symbol of justice and reconciliation,
the “Restorer,” as he loved to hear, “ of perpetual peace in Church
and Commonwealth ”.

His naturally authoritative temper in politics was flattered
both by his theories and his experience. His dogma of the
divine right of Kings was gleaned from the new theory of State
now in favour among the monarchies of the continent, better known
to him than to his more ignorant and insular English subjects ;
while his experience of Scottish kingship had led him, during the
years of life when opinions are formed, to see how necessary is
royal authority to tame a fierce baronage and a frantic clergy.
But he had devoted none of his studious hours to the department
of learning that now most concerned him. He knew nothing of
the peculiar laws and liberties of England, either in the spirit
or the letter; he began by ordering a cut-purse, who had been
caught preying on the crowd as he passed through Newark, to be
hanged without trial. When, too late in life to profit by new
knowledge, he discovered the existence of constitutional custom and
Parliamentary privilege, he set them down in his logical mind as
tiresome anomalies hampering government in its benevolent course.
Nor would he consider local sentiment and English national jealousy,
except to despise them as forces disintegrating his plans of peace
and union.

As a man, James was one whom it is easy to love or to despise,
but impossible to hate. Though every inch a pedant, he was
human—far more human than his more noble and reserved suc-
cessor. His instinct to sympathise warmly, except when annoyed
or prejudiced, with any one who spoke to him, led to rapid and un-
conscious vacillations in his conduct. The more intimate friendships
which were a necessity to his life, counteracted yet more disastrousl y
his excellent intentions as a ruler. Choosing his favourites for no
other merit but their charm as companions, he was too fond to
deny them anything. Their power for evil was the creater, because

16 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1603

he himself hated the details of administration, and loved to live in
the abstract heights of a general scheme, oblivious of the monstrous
distortions to which a plan is liable in action, und the terrible
wrongs for which even a love of justice, if it despises diligence, can
easily be made the cloak.

Beneath all his carelessness as to the ordering of his Court,
and in seeing to the execution of his commands, lay a will stubbornly
adherent to a main course of a policy through years of ominous
failure, when once he had persuaded himself that king-craft re-
quired a certain attitude, whether towards Spain, towards the
Puritans or towards Parliament. Opposition, even if couched in
reverent terms, aroused neither his admiration nor his curiosity, but
only his spleen. Of cruelty, indeed, he had none. An opponent,
especially if a subject, was a pitiable thing to be lectured and set
aside. If, as in the case of his later Parliaments, opposition became
too strong, he would resort to concession, but not to conciliation or
to a change of front.

His most fatal defect was that, in spite of great acuteness and
some originality in discovering points of vantage for himself and
detecting weakness in his adversaries’ position, he could never tell
a good man from a rogue, or a wise man from a fool; still less
could he distinguish the great currents of opinion and the main
tide of political force, from the bright, shallow eddies that catch
and please a monarch’s eye. The patriotism of Eliot repelled him ;
the large political wisdom of Bacon appeared to him a rushlight
rival to his own royal beam; the daring and unquiet genius of
Raleigh was opposed alike to his peaceful instincts and his pedestrian
intellect. ‘Turning from all this varied wealth of excellence, he
deliberately chose Carr and Villiers. One who thus judged of
persons, was not likely to understand the real problems with which
his king-craft had in fact to deal; to penetrate the soul of Puritanism,
or to recognise any purpose beyond that of thwarting good govern-
ment, in the turbulent faction of the House of Commons.

Fatal con- ‘In the first three years of James’s English rule, each of the great
ania peohicms of the coming century took an irrevocable turn. Against
acts of the Puritans and against Parliament the King adopted in 1604 a posi-

reign tion from which his stubborn character afterwards forbade him to

1603} JAMES I 77

retreat, and, by the time his son succeeded him, the continuous
traditions of a long reign had established this principle as the
very first of royal policy. In the same year, 1604, by making
a wise peace with Spain,’ he prepared the way for his foolish
friendship with Catholic powers which soon alienated nationalist
feeling from the throne. In the winter of 1605 his attempt to
secure the loyalty of the Papists by holding out alternately the
olive-branch and the sword ended in the Gunpowder treason ; the
event gave only a momentary impulse to the ever-vacillating conduct
of the Stuart monarchs towards their Catholic subjects, but it
excited popular imagination to a panic that lasted with slight
intermissions for more than a century. Thus all the main causes
that twice combined to drive the Stuarts from the throne, were in
three fatal years set in motion by an overwise King.

Already during his progress from Scotland the new King had The
been met by the “ Millenary Petition,”? presented by several ieee
hundred conformist Puritan clergy, in the hope that the doubtful 1603’
toleration afforded them within the Elizabethan establishment,
might under the new régime be changed for a secure and legalised
comprehension. ‘They were serving the Episcopal Church with
sufficient loyalty to her form of government and her Prayer-book
service, and with a missionary zeal and a pastoral energy to which
no other section could pretend. In return they now asked, not
for supremacy, but for security. The petitioners suggested that
a clergyman should be allowed to choose for himself whether he
would wear cap and surplice, and that he should not be required
to declare his belief in the absolute truth of the whole Prayer-book,
provided he signed the Articles and used the service. The royal
reply would be a test of much besides: if the new King was
ready to tolerate Puritanism within the pale of the National
Church, he would be ready to leave these points optional.

Other items of the Millenary Petition—the disuse of the sign of
the cross in baptism and the bowing at the name of Jesus, the
abridgement of the service, the simplification of music and chanting,

1See p. 115 below, note.

2 The ‘‘ Millenary ” Petition was so called because it pretended to express the
opinion of a thousand clergy of the Established Church.

The
Hampton
Court Con-
ference,
Jan., 1604

78 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1604

the encouragement of preaching and sermons, the prevention of
ecclesiastical pluralities and sinecures, the observance of Sunday,
the non-observance of saints’ days—were such as a wise monarch
might have refused or left unanswered, on the ground that any
strict order favouring the Puritans on these points would give
offence to many clergy and to many congregations. But the
moderation of even these requests, so different from the demand for
the abolition of the episcopate haughtily advanced thirty years
before, show the humble and conformist spirit of Puritanism at
this auspicious moment, which James the peacemaker was fated
to throw away.

In January, 1604, the King presided at Hampton Court over a
conference summoned to consider the Petition. ‘The Bishops came
up determined to oppose all compromise. As the death struggle
against Catholicism gave ever more apparent promise of triumph,
the Protestant zeal originally shown by Elizabeth’s Bishops had
begun to cool; and when Cartwright had made his Presbyterian
attack on their authority, they had grafted on to their Erastian
pride of Church office under the Crown the yet loftier pretension
that episcopal government is of Divine origin. Bancroft, Bishop of
London, the champion of the new theory, took the lead at Hampton
Court. On the second day of the session, when the principal
demands of the Millenary Petition were to be discussed, he began
by asking James to silence the Puritan divines on the high ground
that Canon Law forbade schismatics to be heard against their
Bishops, and then tried to raise a silly laugh against the “Turkey
gowns” in which the good men had thought fit to appear at the
conference. But James was not going to lose the chance of a
disputation. Rebuking Bancroft’s unfairness, he assumed the part
of the good-humoured and talkative umpire of debate, hearing all
in full, but deciding point after point against the Puritan spokesman,
Dr. Reynolds. 'The session, however, came to a more stormy close.
Reynolds proposed that the lower clergy should have the right of
meeting in conference, and that the Bishop should consult the Synod
of his diocese. At the word “Synod,” redolent to James of the
daily humiliations of his youth among the rude lieutenants of
Knox, the petulance which was always chafing under the crust of
his learning and wisdom, burst out in loose native fury.) Tf you
aim at a Scottish Presbytery,” he cried, “it agreeth as well with a

1604] JAMES I "9

monarchy, as God and the Devil.” Seizing up his hat to dismiss
the assembly, he poured out, in a strain of colloquial epigram, the
secret of the personal passion that dictated his policy. “ How
they used the poor lady, my mother, is not unknown, and how they
dealt with me in my minority. I thus apply it... . No Bishop, no
King. . . . Well, Doctor, have you anything more to say?” “No
more, if it please your Majesty.” “If this be all your party hath
to say, I will make them conform themselves, or else will harry
them out of the land.” “In two minutes,” as Gardiner says, “he
had sealed his own fate and that of England for ever”.

On many points James was not out of sympathy with the James's
Puritans. Unlike Charles I., he was not brought up in the roe
atmosphere of Anglicanism; he cared nothing for ritual, he was a
Calvinist in doctrine ; and when he first entered England he was
anxious to promote in his half-Catholic kingdom the pastoral and
missionary propaganda which the Puritans alone carried on, in
spite of episcopal discouragement. He had wished to settle endow-
ments for the maintenance of preachers, until Archbishop Whitgift
persuaded him that much preaching was a dangerous innovation.)
But the one point on which he differed completely from the Puritans,
was the relative authority of the bishops and their clergy. It
was in fact not for speculative or religious, but for political, reasons
that he disliked the Puritans. He saw in them the sect that in
Scotland had made his youth one long humiliation, his manhood
one long struggle—men who would take the Lord’s Anointed by
the sleeve and call him “ God’s silly vassal”. The English Puritans
were at this stage of their career of a milder temper: but the
policy of suppression by which James thought to “ harry them out
of the land” served to arouse in them the instincts which he most
feared, and led them indeed to abolish Bishops and to put his son
to death.

When his first Parliament met in the spring of 1604, the House
of Commons supported the Millenary Petition and the arguments

1 This was in 1603 (see G., i., p. 151). But in 1604, at Hampton Court, James
had already adopted the opinion expressed by Bancroft that there ought to be a
“praying,” not a “preaching ministry”; because, although “in a Church newly
to be planted, preaching is most necessary, not so in one long established,” like
the Church of England, which Bancroft regarded as having already completely con-
verted the Catholic population. That was the Anglican, as opposed to the Puritan,

view of the religious situation in England and of the duties attaching to the cure of
souls.

80 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1604

Effecton of Dr. Revnolds. It escaped the King how ominous was the
Puritanism s}liance; how considerable the fact that the flustered divines who

of the
King’s
hostility

Three
hundred
Puritan
clergy
ejected,
1604

had picked up their Turkey gowns and scurried from his presence
amid the laughter of Bishops, represented the religion of the gentry
and the towns of England. Such considerations gave him no pause.
It was enough for him to lecture Parliament on “ Puritans and
Novelists,” } “which I call a sect rather than a religion,” “who do
not so far differ from us in points of religion as in their confused
form of policy and parity”. In that sentence James summed up
the mistake of his life. Because the Puritan leaders of the previous
generation had desired a Presbyterian “policy” of Church govern-
ment, andia “parity” of clergy with their Bishops, therefore the
services and merits of all Puritans were to be overlooked, they were
at once to be deprived of their benefices, and finally, together with
all their lay adherents, “harried out of the land”. James did not
perceive that if they were allowed to continue their work in the
Church and to take their fair place on the episcopal Bench, the
desire for “parity” would be kept in the background; while on
the other hand, if they were driven out by the Bishops, the Presby-
terian “ policy” would revive, with the arm of the House of Com
mons for its support.

As soon as Parliament had risen in July, the King informed the
clergy by proclamation that unless before December they were
ready to conform to all existing rules of Church service, they
would then be deprived of their livings. When the fatal month
came round, Bancroft himself, elevated to the See of Canterbury
as a new iocu to sweep the Church clean, eagerly set himself
to carry out the orders of the King’s Council. All curates and
unbeneficed preachers were required to sign a statement that the
Prayer-book contained nothing contrary to the Word of God; and
the beneficed clergy, while excused this severer test, were required
to obey the rubric in every detail. Three hundred refused and were
ejected. Many of the most influential and conscientious of the
servants of the Church were driven into the position of Sectarians.
Till then, the only schism from the English Church had been the
voluntary secession of the Brownists and a few other proto-martyrs
of the Congregational system, who were hated by the average
Puritan almost as much as by the Bishops. But now an important

+ Novelists, #.e,, Innovators,

1604] | JAMES { 81

group of Churchmen, forcibly expelled, gathered round them large
congregations of admirers. ‘The “silenced brethren,” as they were
called, became a living reproach to the numerous Puritan clergy
who remained in the Church, a witness of the honours of martyrdom
and the injustice of episcopal government. ‘This, the first of the
great ejections for conscience’ sake that mark the history of the
reformed English Church, began a cycle of revolutionary tests,
which, after weeding out in turn the more scrupulous champions
of Puritanism and of Anglicanism, at the end of a hundred years
left the Vicar of Bray as the type of an English clergyman in the
eighteenth century,

Although the Bishops had applauded and fostered the royal Bacon in
design, the ejections of 1604 were as much the act and choice of Mes
James as the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes was the act and hension
choice of Louis XIV. The English monarch’s responsibility is,
however, the less of the two, because intolerance was in his day not
a retrogression, but the accepted theory of religion and of state-
craft. Among his political advisers, Robert Cecil, who hated the
Cathclics and in no way shared Bancroft’s high Anglican views,
considered the expulsion of the silenced ministers as a necessary act,
conservative of the Elizabethan tradition. Men did not recognise
that there were vigorous variations in English religion ; that either
the Church must be widely comprehensive, or else cease to be the
National Church of all English Protestants. Bacon, alone of
statesmen, favoured the comprehension of the Puritans without
being himself of their persuasion ; for he alone, with his broad
philosophic scope, could foresee the results of breaking up the
unity of the Protestant national life. Vainly he presented his
scheme to a King whom he thought wise, in the hope that it
might at once save the nation and bring to himself favour and
high employment. When his advice had been scorned and the
fatal proclamation issued, the philosopher sadly watched the
chemical elements of opinion, disturbed by the new injection, fer-
menting and suffering change into new and ominous combinations
and gathering into heads of explosive matter. What if the first
discharge should blow sky-high none other than this wary and
keen-eyed chemist, so quick to mark the mistakes and dangers of
all except himself ??

1See p. 124 below,
y)

The
Catholic
reaction

The
English
Catholics

82 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1603

The threat of the Catholic reaction to destroy in every
country of Europe all governments and institutions, whose exist-
ence guaranteed the future development of the human intellect,
was at that time the gravest of all perils. Again and again the
shout of Catholic victory rose throughout the world, when great
princes were converted, brave populations silenced, and old estab-
lished churches overthrown. Everywhere on the ruins of the re-
formed faiths rose a machinery of persuasion and repression, never
since shaken off by any religious community on which it was then
imposed. And again and again the boast was heard that this
island would be neither the least nor the last victim. Meanwhile,
among the English dwelt a Catholic population whose real num-
bers and common purpose were a mystery to themselves and to
their countrymen then, and remain a mystery to us now. But
as the organisers of universal reaction always appealed confidently
to these English Catholics to stand in readiness “until that time,”
men’s hearts were set hard as flint against their papist neighbours,
through constant apprehension of an hour which might always
strike, and of a domestic foe who could never be numbered. How-
ever much the strength and intentions of this mysterious and in-
tangible body of English Catholics may have secretly altered in
the course of long years, however much their condition and _pros-
pects ostensibly fluctuated from time to time, yet during the
Stuart epoch they underwent no essential change in regard to the
classes and districts where their strength lay, the parties and policies
which divided them internally, and the kinds of persecution to
which they were subjected. An account of how these matters
stood at the time of the Gunpowder Plot will serve to throw light
on each successive crisis of English history in which the Catholic
question reappears, down to the year 1688, when it decided the
wavering balance of many vast destinies.

When Elizabeth died, Protestantism was so firmly rooted in
the intelligence and the passions of the city populace that there
was not an important town in England where a Catholic priest
could prudently have shown himself in the streets; but the Ene-
lish rustics, especially north of Trent and west of Avon, had as yet
little prejudice and less understanding on the great relig’ous ques-
tion that divided Europe, and were ready to swallow any opinion
provided for them by their betters. The translated Bible, the

1603) JAMES I 88

Church service and the Puritan propaganda had not had time to do
their work, and if now the Catholics had been able to neutralise the
towns, the gentry and the machinery of law, they might perhaps
have drawn back the rural population into the ancestral forms of
piety, which still lingered in the memory and the love of simple
men. But under the arrangements of the Protestant régime, these
indifferent classes, being just those which could least afford to pay
for the expensive privilege of “recusancy,”! year by year imbibed
the atmosphere and association of the new Church to whose ser-
vices they had at first to be driven like schoolboys. Even those
among the yeoman farmers and labourers who decidedly preferred
the old forms of worship, were deprived of their rites and their
ministers, and ruined by spies, pursuivants and bad neighbours,
who carried off their goods under cover of collecting recusancy fines,
till one by one they gave up the struggle and conformed. Some,
indeed, sought refuge in areas specially protected by a Catholic
squire or nobleman. The influence of the landlord, as yet un-
challenged on social grounds, could easily have eliminated Pro-
testant tenants from all lands owned by Catholics, if the State
had not interfered on behalf of the religion which it favoured.
To save England from forcible recovery by Rome, the only alterna-
tive to Penal Laws would have been the confiscation of Catholic
estates. In spite of all legislation, there could be found scattered
throughout the island whole villages adhering to the old religion,
under the protective and coercive influence of the neighbouring
manor house. In some of the counties of the North, where the
feudal relation and the Catholic faith still flourished, half the
landowners secretly attended Mass, and, in the day when war made
each man free to confess his heart’s allegiance, half the rural
population of Lancashire marched to storm the Puritan clothing
towns, arrayed under the banners of their lords as open recusants.
The ancient halls which the Catholic squires maintained as Catholic
asylums of the faith, were each filled with a great “family” of seme
serving-men and dependants, who, in their Siforeedl isolation from
the pursuits and prizes of the great world, cherished an intense
devotion for the religion that held the household together. It was

1 Recusant meant a Catholic who refused to attend church. I have always
used it in this, its proper sense. But it was sometimes used to denote any kind
of Roman Catholic,

Priests in
hiding

Persecu-
tion
irregular

~

84 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS {1603

not without reason that their Protestant neighbours, armed with
writs from vigilant magistrates, came again and again to burst open
cupboards and tap wainscoats in the search for arms. But the
pistols and corselets were safely stowed with the pyx and chasuble
in the passage between the great chimney and the outer wall.
hither the priest also retired, until the search party had clattered
off down the avenue, and he could again walk freely through the
house, honoured of all the inmates, and welcome by night under
the thatch of the cottages around. The head of such a house was
often, as the Jesuits themselves reported, “either by his own posi-
tion or by the good esteem of his neighbours, superior to the
action of the laws”. But in seasons when persecution was more
severe, as after the Gunpowder Plot, the breaking of the Spanish
maich, or the meeting of the Long Parliament, the freedom of such
households was curtailed, the priest walked at night and vanished at
cock-crow, and the old serving-men who could be trusted to sleep
through a Protestant homily were sent to Church on Sunday
morning.

In other families, where the neighbourhood was more hostile, or
where part of the servants were heretics, such precautions were the
standing rule even at times when the enemy was least vigilant. The
presence of the priest in a remote garret of the great house among
the chimneys and gables, was kept a secret from several score of
persons whom he could hear moving through the courts and
chambers beneath, as he pored over Parsons’ Apologia and the Life
of Mary of Scots, gazed wistfully at the tree tops and the flying
clouds, or paced delicately along the great beam in the floor that
he could trust not to betray his existence by a creak. At night
he could use no lamp, lest the forester should see that the garret
was inhabited. For months, though in his friend’s house, he lived
alone, except for that hour when, each day, hasty steps were heard
and figures slid silently in as he celebrated Mass at the altar behind
his bed. More fortunate were those Jesuits who moved from house
to house, mixing disguised with the world, at the price of increased
danger of imprisonment or death.!

The system of persecution, which prevented the recovery of
power by the Catholic party, was remarkably irregular in its work-

1 For these details, see the Jesuit report, 1616, printed in Taunton, Pp- 362-64,

a605} JAMEST 85

ing. As embodied in the letter of the Penal Code, it was at no
moment in the century completely enforced ; nor was it ever before
the Great Rebellion in complete abeyance. The degree of its en-
forcement varied continually in respect to persons, places and times ;
Catholicism meant for one man ruin; for another a certain pictu-
resque distinction, In one district it was the pass to the highest
county society ; in another it was the butt of intolerable injuries
and insults. One year it brought social infamy and political pro-
scription; the next, Court favour and the attentions of all the
time-servers of the land.

The object of the loosely administered Penal Code, passed by The Penal
Elizabeth’s Parliaments, was three-fold. First, in order to prevent 14Ws
the papal party from seizing political power, or spreading the
personal authority of Catholics in the country, recusants were made
to confine their activity and influence to their own estates, by laws
which excluded them from any post in national or local govern-
ment, and even forbade them to travel five miles from their place
of residence without licences signed by neighbouring magistrates.!

The second object was to penalise even those Catholics who
stayed quietly at home, by fines for not attending church. The
desire to avoid these ruinous tolls was calculated to outweigh with
many the influence of their landlord and the exhortations of their
priest. The fines were collected in different ways from different
classes. A dozen of the richest men in England were liable to pay
£20 a month for the privilege of staying away from church on
Sunday; lesser Catholic landowners, who would be ruined by
such a charge, could purchase the same immunity by giving up two-
thirds of their yearly rental; but heavy fines were also collected
from farmers and cottagers, by pursuivants who broke into the
house, carried off the spoils from barn and kitchen at a scandalously
low valuation, and often indulged in wanton uproar, insult and
destruction. And yet the levy of these fines was very irregular
and in many districts quite unusual, Even in 1606, a year of
panic when persecution was at its height, only 162 gentlemen paid
the two-thirds of their rental, and less than £5,000 from all classes
together reached the treasury. In other years Government realised
scarcely a quarter of this sum. ‘The fines actually fell only on a

1 The latter rule was sometimes, though seldom, enforced (see Trevelyan Papers
(Camden Soc.), iii., pp. 231, 232):

Real
strength
of the
Catholics
unknown

86 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1603

small proportion of those who absented themselves from church,
for the lists returned by the authorities as the basis of the levy
were always incomplete, and often, through fear, favour or negli-
gence, scarcely one recusant in five was named.’

The third method by which the spread of Catholic principles
was checked, was the proscription of the Mass and priesthood.
But here the laws served nominally for one purpose, and were
actually used for another. While every priest who exercised his
functions in England, and every layman who abetted him, were
doomed by the statute to die the death of traitors, in practice these
bloody laws were kept suspended over the heads of the priests and
their congregations, serving only to check the boldness of their
propaganda and the publicity of their worship. While no Catholic
service was openly held, except in the chapels of the foreign am-
bassadors at the capital, every day Mass was heard in garrets and
libraries by hundreds of little congregations, none of whom had to
fear the penalties incurred, as long as they did not parade their
breach of the law. Similarly, no systematic attempt was made to
hunt the priests out of England. When in 1604 King James heard
that his Judges had taken upon themselves to hang several priests
and their abettors in Western counties, where the Catholics had
seemed to them too prominent, he at once put a stop to these
legalised atrocities, and would not allow them to be renewed even
after the Gunpowder Plot. But as long as the laws themselves
remained unrepealed, every zealous Catholic, holding his life and
property at the mercy of the Government, felt the restraint im-
plied; and a mission, that might otherwise have competed with
the Puritan propaganda and the Established Church, was de-
prived of publicity and vigour.

The numerical strength of the Catholics, often and variously
estimated, was quite unknown. ‘The returns of “recusants” were
well understood to represent those whom their neighbours thought
it necessary to persecute, and not the whole body of those who
refused to attend church. The lists themselves were incomplete,
and in any case the “recusants” were only one part of the Catholic
body. ‘The “Church Papists,” as those were called who consented
to attend the national worship, could not legally be distinguished

'G., i, pp. 228, 229. Worcester County Records, vol. i., pp. ccxv-xviii,

1603) JAMES I 87

from the Protestants, and were therefore a wholly incalculable
force. Some, like the Howards, prominent in the King’s service
and deep in his counsels, might in an hour of need betray the
new religion as readily as they had deserted the old; while others
made no pretence of loyalty to the established order, attended
church merely to avoid the fines, walked out ostentatiously before
the sermon, and alarmed their Protestant gossips with blood-curd-
ling announcements that the good times of Queen Mary were
coming back, when “faggotts should be deere” yet.1_ On the other
hand, many of these “ Church Papists” were slowly adapting them-
selves to the English communion.

The political strength of the Catholics as a danger to the State Catholic
was even more hard to calculate than their numbers as a religious abe
body. For on the question of loyalty to the State they were Seculars
divided between two parties and policies, and none knew to which
side the bulk of the laity, recusant and conformist alike, would
in the hour of trial adhere. The two parties were the Jesuits
and the secular clergy. Although their quarrel was, in one aspect,
a selfish struggle for the privilege of governing the Catholic body
in England, their rival claims to authority coincided with rival
policies of State. In the middle of Elizabeth’s reign, the secular
priests, then in sole charge of the English flock, had bowed to the
storm and sought safety in diminished vigour ; but it was then that
the Jesuits had landed in England, and imposed themselves on
clergy and laity alike, by their zeal as missionaries, and their author-
ity as the Pope’s messengers; their influence was further enhanced
by their connection with the Spanish political conspiracies, and the
reputation they consequently won as the Tyburn martyrs, famous
throughout the whole Catholic world. When their policy of re-
bellion, assassination and foreign conquest brought down the Penal
Laws upon the whole Catholic body, increased persecution sup-
plied a fresh argument to the Jesuits for the need to overthrow
the heretic State; while on the other hand it served to convince
the seculars of the folly of political agitation.

At the moment of James I.’s accession, this struggle for authority
was at its height. The nominal head of the English Catholics was
the so-called “ Archpriest,” Blackwell, who stood in matters of policy

1 Trevelyan Papers (Camden Soc.), ii., p. 218} iii., p, xxii.

88 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1603

half-way between the two parties, but who owed his position to the
Jesuits, Their influence at Rome had obtained the establishment
of his strange office, as an alternative to the episcopal control for
which the secular clergy petitioned as a means of emancipating
themselves from the Jesuit yoke. Appeals to Rome were in these
years frequent on both sides, but as yet Parsons, the founder of
the Jesuit power in England, had the oracle on his side and secured
the discomfiture of his rivals. The animosity with which this man
of iron pursued the adherents of his own faith, matched the steady
determination with which he assailed the independence of his own
country! When he died in 1610, he had, by thirty years of un-
tiring effort, imposed on the English Catholics an internal feud
between two embittered factions, and an external system of re-
liance on the armed enemies of England, that resulted in the final
catastrophe of 1688, when Petre completed what Parsons had
begun.

The Jesuit Historians, looking rather to the results than the motives of

ea of action, take the part of the loyal English Catholics, who having
abandoned the attempt to convert the island, only asked to be left
in peace, but who were forced to undergo two centuries of un-
merited persecution because the foreign-hearted Jesuits pursued
desperate counsels, doomed after all to failure. Yet the Jesuits’
plan was both politic and right, if once their premise be granted
that the Catholic is infinitely preferable to the Protestant religion.
How should the peace of a few small and ever-dwindling Catholic
congregations be compared to the least chance of converting the
island, of saving the souls of innumerable millions of Englishmen to
come? ‘That conversion could be effected in no other way than by
the overthrow of the State and the use of war and persecution.
The final choice between the two religions, made by every nation
of the old Latin communion, was in many cases dictated, as none
knew better than the Jesuits, not by a nation’s preference for the
religion most suited to its genius, but by the chance turns of

1E.g., in a tract called A Manifestation of Great Folly and Bad Spirit of
certain in England calling themselves Secular Priests (1602), Parsons thus gently
admonishes them: “And here now the very multitude of these outrageous libels
with the immensity of hatred, hellish spite and poisoned entrails, discovered therein,
do force us against our former purpose to cut off and stay all further passage and
proceeding, in this horrible puddle of lies, slanderous invectives, and devilish

detraction”’ (Taunton, pp. 493, 494). Such was the unity of spirit in th i
: , t
Church at the time of James's accession, Y P Pcie

1603] JAMES I 89

politics and war. If their native religion would involve all the
English in damnation, was it unpatriotic to save them by intro-
ducing Spanish spearmen into their homes, and driving James from
the throne in favour of a Catholic Prince ?

Similarly, from the point of view either of Protestantism or of The Pro-
English national life, it would have been suicide to allow the Sint cs
Catholic propaganda to continue unchecked, when so many land- view
owners were ready to force it upon their tenants, and so many
foreign enemies to assist them in a civil war. For the Jesuits had
connected the Catholic reaction on the continent with Catholicism
in this island. It was unsafe for Government to rely on the
loyalty of the secular priests, for though their leaders opposed the
Jesuit schemes, nearly all the rank and file who had now rep'aced
the old Marian priesthood had been educated within King Philip’s
territories, in seminaries controlled by the Jesuits, had forgotten all
native sympathies and learned the Spanish theory of propaganda
by sword and stake.1 The results that followed Catholic victory
over a Protestant people could be seen in other lands, and no
pretence was made that England would be more gently treated.
The development of intellectual and of political life would both be
crushed. Parsons thus describes the double use that would be
made of victory. First,

Public and private libraries must be searched and examined for books, as also
bookbinders’, stationers’ and booksellers’ shops, and severe order and punish-
ment appointed for such as shall conceal these kind of writings; and like
order set down for printing of good things for the time to come. What
form or manner of inquisition to bring in, whether that of Spain (whose
rigour is misliked by some) or that which is used in divers parts of Italy
(where coldness is reprehended by more). . . is not so easy to determine;
but the time itself will speak, when the day shall come, and perhaps some
mixture of all will not be amiss for England.

As to politics, the restored Catholic Bishops were to have the
power to negative or confirm elections to the House of Commons.?

The Church (says Gardiner) which these men joined was pledged to
change the moral and intellectual atmosphere in which Englishmen moved
and breathed. Neither freedom of thought nor political liberty had as yet

1Soon after the Gunpowder Plot the Benedictines began to compete with the
Jesuits as educators of the English secular priesthood. This blow at the Jesuit
monopoly restored the balance and embittered the strife of the two parties,

2’Taunton, pp., 485, 486,

A vicious
circle

Catholic
hopes of
the new
King

90 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1602

reached their perfect development in England, but it was beyond doubt that
the victory of the Papacy would extinguish both. Even the received maxims
of the nineteenth century would hardly be proof against a demand for
toleration put forward by a community which itself refused toleration to all
those principles on which our society is based, if it had any chance of acquir-
ing sufficient strength to employ against others that persecution which in its
own case it deprecated.!

Here was a vicious circle. The Jesuit policy induced statesmen to
prevent the spread of Catholicism by the Penal Laws; but the
Penal Laws, because they prevented the spread of Catholicism,
could well justifiy to any whole-hearted Catholic the Jesuit policy.
So strong was this chain of necessity, that until Protestantism was
either overthrown or irremovably established, premature attempts
at toleration would defeat their own ends. The first of these
attempts was coincident in time with the accession of the House of
Stuart.

During the years when Elizabeth was known to be sinking to
the grave, the conduct of James had not been wanting in dignity
and common-sense, for Robert Cecil, in a correspondence kept
secret from his jealous mistress, had indicated the attitude proper
to assume at Edinburgh towards men and parties in England.
But there was one party whom the secretary knew not how to
approach. James, perceiving that his new friend had no dealings
with the Catholics, saw in that direction a fair field open for
himself to exercise his own broader philosophy and more adaptable
methods of king-craft. He renewed diplomatic relations with the
Pope. He was heard to utter promises of relief to the Catholics.
Strictly interpreted his words can be reduced to a promise of
toleration and State preferment for “Church Papists,” but they
were reported in Catholic households as a pledge to remit the fines
for recusancy. ‘This rumour secured for him, during his progress
to London, an enthusiastic welcome from the moderates and
seculars. The Jesuits acquiesced for a very different reason.
Garnet, the provincial head of the society in England, had shortly
before the Queen’s death received breves from the Pope directing
him if possible to oppose James’s accession, and the Spanish King
had promised military aid to the English Jesuit envoys sent to
Madrid in 1602. But Philip III. drew back, in the hope, soon

DF ley Ps 23k.

1603] JAMES I 91

afterwards justified, of obtaining international peace from the
unwarlike James. So Garnet burnt the breves and joined in the
national acclamations.

The new King had scarcely reached London before the eyes of Watson's
the seculars were opened to their delusion. The fines were still !t '©°3
to be collected from the recusants. A secular priest named Watson,
who had preached acquiescence as the sure high road to a tolera-
tion, was so enraged to find himself deluded, that he organised a
plot among his own friends to seize the person of James and
force him to carry out his promise. The plot was in every way
characteristic of the seculars. It was not bloody or treacherous
in its means; it did not propose the total overthrow of Protes-
tantism and English institutions as its end; and it was wholly
impracticable. The Jesuit party, who had never been so foolish
as to expect toleration from a heretic King, laughed to see their
disappointed adversaries take refuge in the unfamiliar mazes of
conspiracy, and scored a point for their own faction by under-
mining the whole plot and betraying it to Cecil. The result of
this comedy, with all the parts so strangely inverted, was a
rapprochement between James and the High Catholics. It was a
moment propitious for his schemes of toleration. 'The recusancy
fines were almost entirely remitted, and the priests went about
their work without fear of the gallows.

But though the moment was propitious for toleration, the age Toleration
was still hostile to its success. The plan conceived by James was extended

: Be one and with-
to tolerate the private exercise of religion, on condition, first that drawn,
all the Catholics should transfer their loyalty from Pope to King ; 1°34
secondly that there should be no increase in their numbers. This
ideal solution was far superior to anything aimed at by the Eliza-
bethan statesmen, but it could not be realised. The two proposed
conditions were alike impossible. For though the Jesuits had
amused themselves by betraying Watson, they had not the least
intention of becoming loyal; and from the moment that toleration
was granted, the skeleton army of Catholicism resumed an appear-
ance of its full strength. As soon as the recusancy fines were
remitted, familiar figures were missed from the back benches in
many a Parish Church, and now that the laws against the Mass
were no longer enforced, whole neighbourhoods were alarmed by
great gatherings of Catholic devotees. These avowals of long

Gun-
powder
Plot,
1604-5

The con-
spirators

92 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1604

concealed opinion were denounced by the Protestant party as
recent conversions due to the renewed activity of the priests.
James, terrified at the phantoms his first stroke of king-craft had
conjured up, rushed back into Cecil’s arms. In February, 1604,
a proclamation appeared ordering all priests to quit the country ;
in August several were hanged by the Judges on Circuit, though
without instructions from Government; in November the levy of
fines from lay recusants was vigorously resumed ; in December five
men were mining a tunnel from a neighbouring cellar to the
wall of Parliament House.

The Gunpowder Treason was conceived by Robert Catesby.
That form of assassination was then a familiar idea: the Kirk o°
Field had been blown up on the mysterious night that Darnley lay
under its roof; and in a book written shortly before the death of
Elizabeth, the Jesuit author, illustrating a point of casuistry, takes
the case that a criminal has placed gunpowder “under a certain
house, and that unless it be removed the house will be burnt, the
sovereign killed, and as many as go in or out of the city destroyed ”.
Catesby saw that the method was peculiarly suited to the large
needs of the English Catholics. To destroy the King would be
useless if the heads of the Protestant party survived to assemble
in their Parliament, an institution spoken of by the plotters as
the true source and security of the Protestant régime. But the
disorganisation that would follow the death of King, Lords and
Commons together, would create a moment during which the
Catholics could rebel with some chance of success. Nor would the
most backward be able to let that moment go by, since the rage
and panic of the Protestants would compel all to defend themselves
from massacre by resort to arms. No one who is acquainted with
the national rejoicings at the assassination of Buckingham, or with
the plots of the Cavaliers and Royal family to murder Cromwell
and the regicides, will suppose that horror at the deed would have
prevented the Catholics from seizing their advantage. Catesby
knew that if Parliament could be blown up, as fast as the news
spread the men of the two religions would mount and ride to cut
each other’s throats, without leaders and without law.

It was no group of obscure fanatics who laid so terrible a plot
to force the hands of their co-religionists. Catesby and the friends
to whom he dictated his resolves, were already known men, as the

1605} JAMES I 93

agents of the Jesuit party. In 1602 they had consulted with
Garnet, the head of the society in England, as to the desirability
of a foreign invasion, and one of their number had been sent,
together with the Jesuit Greenway, on embassy to the Spanish
King. But unlike their clerical chiefs, they were pure from self-
interest and love of power. ‘The fierce eye of universal hatred that
has been fixed on them for three centuries, has in fact detected
no stain upon their conduct, except the one monstrous illusion
that murder is right, which put all their virtues at the devil’s
service. Courage cold as steel, self-sacrifice untainted by jealousy
or ambition, readiness when all was lost to endure all, raises the
Gunpowder Plot into a story of which the ungarnished facts
might well be read by those of every faith, not with shame or
anger, but with enlarged admiration and pity for the things which
men can do.

They hired no cut-throats to do their work. All who laboured The cellar
at the mine “were gentlemen of name and blood”. Guy Fawkes,
the professional soldier whom they brought back from Flanders out
of the ranks of the English Catholic legion, was a man who had
enlisted in the Spanish service after selling his Yorkshire property
for religion’s sake, and soon proved himself a conspirator equal
even to Catesby in all the sterner virtues. This man, who had
learnt the sieger’s art in mines and countermines where Dutch
and Spaniards wrought like moles after each other’s lives, could
show his friends how to drive a tunnel safely through the earth,
from the cellar of the building which they had hired as the basis of
operations, to the foundation wall of the Parliament House. But
when they began to attack that nine feet of stone wal! the labour
became excessive. One day in March, 1605, as they plied their
noiseless daily task, they heard a “rushing” rather above their
heads. A dreadful fear of discovery struck them all still, But
Fawkes, who in the part of serving-man to Percy went everywhere
and did everything, strolled round to examine the unknown danger,
and returned with joyful news that it was a woman moving her
sea-coals in the long lumber-room immediately under the House of
Lords, and that the use of the room might perhaps be had for
money. In these new premises, obtained on lease by Percy, Fawkes
stored thirty-six barrels of gunpowder, strewed them with great
bars of iron to break the roof in pieces, and concealed the whole

‘The Jesuit
fathers
informed

Other ac-
cessories ;
prepara-
tions in
the
country

94 —~NGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1605

under piles of firewood. ‘The useless mine below was left unfinished,
and the conspirators dispersed for six months.

If the half-dozen men who placed the materials for the explosion
had kept the secret to themselves, their part of the design might
have proved successful. But, thinking it wise that some of the
Catholic chiefs should be prepared for the coming death struggle,
they enlisted two classes of persons as accessories to the great
crime.

First, as a matter partly of conscience, partly of policy, they
consulted their friends the Jesuit leaders, both in and out of con-
fession.! The fathers were much perturbed. It was not their plot
in origin, but it derived from their teaching and influence, and now,
much against their will, they were required to pronounce whether
it was right or wrong. Father Greenway, who was the first to
learn the details of the design, probably encouraged it, for he
afterwards joined the conspirators in their abortive rising, as one
“that would live and die with them”. But Garnet himself adopted
a middie course. Even according to his own account, he made but
feeble protestations when Catesby informed him that some violence
was intended, and when he learnt the whole terrible truth from
Greenway he made no serious efforts to dissuade his friends, avoided
their company, gradually retired from the neighbourhood of London
as the fatal autumn session drew near, and during the week when
he knew the matter was to be put to the touch, lay concealed in a
remote manor house on the borders of Worcestershire. Thus the
Provincial of the English Jesuits acted like a coward. Either he
half-approved of the design, or else the prospect of withstanding
Catesby to the face terrified from his duty the one man who could
successfully have forbidden the conspirators to proceed.

Although by informing their spiritual advisers the assassins
were preparing a grave scandal for the Catholic religion, their re-
solve to disclose their design to another class of persons proved yet
more disastrous. ‘They determined that there must be arms, horses
and men ready on the day of the destruction of Parliament, in
order that the truceless war might open with some notable advan-
tage to their cause. It was easy to make general preparations for

‘Garnet states, first, that he had obtained ‘(a general knowledge of Mr.
Catesby’s intention,” not in confession, and acknowledges himself “highly guilty,
and to have offended God” in not revealing it. Secondly, that he learnt the full
details of the plot from Greenway, “not in confession but by way of confession”,

1605] JAMES I 95

a rebellion among many large households, threatened with economic
ruin by the reinforcement of the Penal Code in the summer of 1605,
and only restrained from flying to arms on their own account by
the pacific injunctions which the Pope at this time transmitted to
them through the Jesuit Fathers. But some link was needed to
connect the general discontent with the Gunpowder Plot. For this
purpose, three rich men—Rookwood, who owned a stud of horses
famous throughout the midlands, Sir Everard Digby and Tresham
—were admitted as accessories, not to handle the gunpowder, but
to prepare a rising to coincide with the explosion. Rookwood and
Digby answered to the call. Through their agency numerous
mansions lying between the Avon and the Severn were converted
into places of arms, the resort of mysterious horsemen by day and
night.

Within an easy ride of several of these centres of treason, Clop- Shake-
ton House lay on the edge of the broken dingles and low hills that ® arid ,
look down from the north over Stratford ae This convenient pourtioad
station was hired shortly before Michaelmas, at Rookwood’s ex- pt
pense, and here Catesby, himself a native of that district, and other ators
arch-conspirators met to concert their plots. Adjoining Clopton
were the Welcombe lands, where Shakespeare had lately formed
for himself a freehold estate, among the unforgotten hills of his
boyhood. ‘That very summer he had been investing yet more of
his London winnings in the purchase of part of the Welcombe
tithes.! In the autumn, in his passage to and fro upon the London
road, in Stratford streets, or even among his own fields adjoining
the very house of conspiracy, he might well have had speech with
these new neighbours, gr eeted young Rookwood in his “ Hungarian
riding cloak, lined all in velvet exceeding costly,” raereal what
business or pleasure brought so many galliats to Clopton, and so
passed on—

For every man hath business and desire,
Such as it is.

But the last of the three accessories admitted to the secret lacked Tresham
the spirit of Digby or Rookwood. ‘Tresham, who had a few years ae the
back been as deep as any in the treasonable counsels of the Jesuits,

1 For the full details of this curious coincidence in time and place, see Fraser’s
Mag., April, 1878. See also Sidney Lee, Shakespeare's Life and Work (ed. 1900),
pp. 103, 143, for Shakespeare’s purchases.

Arrest of

96 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1605

had lately succeeded to great wealth, he was related to several peers
in the doomed House of Lords, and he lacked the pure zeal to
contemplate undismayed so horrid a massacre. He entered into
conspiracy with his Catholic brother-in-law, Lord Monteagle, to
prevent the whole design without sacrificing the lives of those who
had trusted him. A letter, carefully composed for this purpose, was
conveyed to Monteagle and by him passed on to the Government,
after a little preliminary farce which successfully notified to the
conspirators that the plot was being revealed.’ It is probable that
Cecil, now Ear! of Salisbury, received his first warning from this
famous letter. It is certain that he had no source of detailed
information as to who the traitors were, for he made no attempt
to arrest them. They lingered safely in the capital till the 5th
of November; then fled unquestioned into the country; and if
they had not there betrayed themselves by raising open insurrec-
tion, the whole gang would have escaped, except their devoted
sentinel, Guy Fawkes.

At three in the afternoon of the 4th of November, the eve of the
day on which Parliament was to meet and be destroyed, the Earl of
Suffolk looked in for a moment upon the solitary watchman, and
asked him to whom the faggots belonged. After such an interview,
any man of human mould would have fled. But Fawkes, though
he knew that Government had received the warning letter, that
the ]umber-room was not the usual promenade for members of
the Privy Council, and that the name of Percy as the owner of
the faggots would scarcely allay any suspicions that might have
prompted so strange a visit, chose rather to face the nine chances
that he would be seized and tortured, than to lose the one chance
that he might still be left to do the deed. At ten o’clock one ot
his friends stole in, to bid him Godspeed, and left him a watch

1 Monteagle had the letter brought to him while he was at supper, and caused
it to be read aloud before all the attendants by a gentleman in his service, who was
intimately connected with the conspirators, and who, in fact, immediately informed
them. The important part of the letter was as follows: ‘‘I would advise you as
you tender your life, to devise some excuse to shift your attendance at this Parlia-
ment; for God and man hath concurred to punish the wickedness of this time. And
think not slightly of this advertisement but retire yourself into the country, where
you may expect the event in safety, for though there be no appearance of any stir,
yet I say they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and they shall not see
who hurts them.” Whether James or Salisbury guessed that the last sentence
meant a gunpowder plot, or whether Monteagle dropped some hint of it when he

handed over the letter, is immaterial to the fact that the Government was still left
in absolute ignorance of the names and whereabouts of the conspirators,

1605} JAMES I 97

to tell the fateful hours. At eleven o’clock he was standing
outside. Strange men came round him. Some went in to examine
the faggots. When they came out again he was knocked down,
fiercely struggling, and bound with his own garters,

Early the next morning the other conspirators could have been Flight of
seen galloping into the country, at top speed, to raise the now ti seas
desperate rebellion. A few score of rebels joined their cavalcade, 5th Nov.
but they found that the ardour of many, who a few days back had
been eager for the fray, was chilled by the news that a murderous
plot had failed. Catholics closed their doors upon them; Pro-
testants swarmed out to hunt them down. From house to house
they fled before the sheriffs and men of the western shires. At
Holbeche House in Staffordshire, wearied with their furious ride
through the island, broken with despair, wounded by an avenging
accident with their own gunpowder, they sank down, crying that
their plot had all the while been a great sin, which they must now
expiate by staying to die in that place. In a few hours the chase
came up, and men fired into the house as into a den of wild beasts,

Catesby and others were killed on the spot. The survivors were
carried off, several bleeding from mortal wounds, to trial and death
in London.

Meantime, in the Tower, when silence could no longer save his
friends, Fawkes under repeated tortures was day by day yielding up
to the Council the story of the Plot, while around, from every wharf
and labyrinth of the great city, rose the hum of terror, and rage,
and triumph, deep and earnest as the heart of man.

On the Ist of February, 1606, Fawkes was carried up the steps of Trials and
the scaffold. In the spring, Garnet, dragged after many days from &*¢cutions |
his lair behind the chimney in Hindlip House, was brought up to his
famous trial at Guildhall. In an age when the rules of evidence
were the rules of probability interpreted by prejudice, Government
was able to persuade itself, and all good Protestants, that the
Provincial of the English Jesuits had himself fostered the plot;
modern historians confine his fault to misprision of treason and
acquiescence in that which it was his duty to prevent. Greenway,
the Jesuit, who had taken a more active part, escaped oversea.

The Catholic world, by a plausible though strained interpretation

of a doubtful case, raised the cry that Garnet suffered death for

concealing what he had learnt in confession, and rejoiced in the
7

Conse-

quences of

Gun-
powder
Plot

98 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1606

story of an image miraculously imprinted by his blood upon a straw
of the scaffold.

If Watson’s Plot had drawn the Government into better rela-
tions with the Jesuits, the Gunpowder Plot, traced to their in-
fluence and punished by the execution of their English Provincial,
revived the feud beyond all healing. Together with new Penal
Laws, an attempt was made to distinguish between the adherents of
the Jesuits and of the seculars, with a view to relieving the latter
from the savage penalties enacted against disloyal Catholics. All

"were required to take a new Oath of Supremacy, renouncing the

doctrine that the Pope could depose Kings. The test did in fact
very nicely distinguish the two factions, for while Paul V., instigated
by the Jesuits, charged men, on the safety of their souls, to refuse
an oath so contrary to his pretensions, the party of the seculars,
led on this occasion by the Archpriest Blackwell himself, were in
favour of swallowing the test to secure peace and good-will. This |
bitter quarrel, added to all the former causes of division, rendered
Catholicism powerless for years to come.

Those who took the oath became, not legally but practically,
exempt from the recusant fines. But those whose conscience
forbade them to disregard the Pope’s express order, were for the
next dozen years subjected to an active though always irregular
persecution. Some escaped by favour or obscurity ; more by pay-
ing blackmail to the rascally courtiers of King James; others
from time to time were cast into prison, were driven from their
houses for months together, or suffered temporary sequestration of
their lands. About the year 1619 a new era of relief began for
the English Catholics, when the advanced stage of the Spanish
match put the whole body under royal protection. But ere that
day they had suffered irreparable loss. The cruel but somewhat
idle threatenings of the statute book for 1606 and 1610, were not
the only outcome of the Gunpowder Plot : its more important conse-
quences were that for a dozen years the King allowed some of the
Penal Laws to be partially enforced ; that Popery became at last
unfashionable in the hall and more than ever unpopular in the
street ; that for a hundred years to come the religion of Guy
Fawkes and the Jesuits was regarded as a creed so dark and
murderous that any man who made political alliance with the
Catholics, imperilled the adhesion of his supporters, or even the

1606) JAMES I 99

loyalty of his subjects. Such was the issue of the new state-craft,
by which James had calculated to reconcile the English of all re-
ligions in common devotion to the throne.!

1¥For this account of Gunpowder Plot, see chiefly Rev. J. Gerard’s What was
Gunpowder Plot? (1897), and Gardiner’s conclusive reply, What Gunpowder Plot
was (1897). Father Gerard’s rejoinder, The Gunpowder Plot and the Gunpowdey
Plotters (1897), carries the controversy very little further,

100 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1604

CHAPTER IV
JAMES I.—PARLIAMENTS AND COURTIERS

*Le Roy s’avisera, the King wili take thought of it:” really he should !
—Historical Sketches, CARLYLE.

Origins HE forms and functions of the English Parliament derived

and de- from medieval origins. ‘The baron, able, when he chose, to

et ne let war loose over the land from his castle-yard, consented to spare

Houses his country so long as he was compensated with an hereditary
share in the counsels of State. The gentleman, the burgess and
the yeoman, in days when the central power could do little to
strengthen the hands of the tax-collector against the passive re-
sistance of a scattered population, consented to fill the royal
treasury, so long as they were consulted as to the amount and
reassured as to the necessity of the royal demands. Such was the
original meaning of the House of Lords and of the House of
Commons.

The Tudors retained the forms but altered the significance
of our Parliamentary institutions. By destroying the barons and
their armies, the King removed the only political power that could
presume to name his Ministers or dictate his policy. Having thus
enslaved the Lords, he could safely make use of the Lower House.
Urged and directed by the Tudor monarchs, the Commons
entered into a career of legislative activity for which there had
been no scope in the more conservative ages gone by. As the
royal instrument of religious and social reconstruction, they gained
prestige more than they lost independence. At a time when the
Hapsburgs and Valois were jealously trenching on the ancient
liberties of their Cortez and Etats Généraux, the English Pazlia-
ment preserved its privileges and increased its functions by becoming
part of the new English Monarchy, ‘The Crown in Parliament”
became omnipotent in the State,

1604] JAMES I 101

In the days of the Plantagenet and Lancastrian dynasties,
Parliament often acted as opposition. But in those days it had been
the Peers who stirred up the Commons to criticise the King’s
finance, and protected them when they impeached his servants.
When, therefore, the military power of the Lords had been de-
stroyed in the Wars of the Roses, the element of opposition
disappeared from both Houses together. During the century that
divided the battle of Bosworth from the defeat of the Armada, the
Commons, while they forgot how to resist the King, learnt to be
independent of the Lords. In the last years of Elizabeth, signs
of a revival of opposition came not from the Upper but from the
Lower House; under the management of James, the Commons
developed a new tradition of political resistance, under a new class
of leaders, and created constitutional precedents more novel in
reality than they were in law.

The House of Commons represented all the independent Classes
classes, not as separate and jealous “estates,” but as friendly UP, ;,
partners in a common political heritage. The farmer and agri- the Com
eultural labourer, since they enjoyed no social independence, ™°"S
exercised no political franchise. But yeomen freeholders, though
they seldom if ever aspired to sit in Parliament, decided by their
votes between the knights, squires and baronets, who courted them
hat in hand on market days, when the writs were travelling down
from London. The yeomen were devotedly attached to the privi-
leges of Parliament, and the principle of no taxation without
representation: these watchwords were specially associated with
their class pride as freeholders. As Fuller quaintly expresses it,
the yeoman
hath a great stroke in making a Knight of the shire. Good reason, for he
makes a whole line in the Subsidy book,! not caring how much his purse is
let blood, so it be done by the advice of the physicians of State.’

But the feature most distinctive of the English Parliament was Borough
the method of mutual accommodation by which the gentry and the and ?
burgesses shared between them the anomalous crepreent tie repre! !
system. The life and the wealth of England was to be found sentatives
- chiefly in the farm and the manor house, yet the Chamber that

represented her opinion contained only 92 members for the counties,

1The tax-collector’s book. *The Holy State, bk, ii, chap. xviii,

Char-
acter of
the
members
of Parlia-
ment

.only find the names of a score of “ merchants,” “‘ aldermen,

102 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1604.

and some 400 members for the towns.! And yet, in practice, the
country gentlemen were well represented, for it was they who sat
for the boroughs. In the official returns of each Parliament we
” “re.
corders” and “mayors”; the remaining 350 and odd borough
members, with the exception of a few “sergeants-at-law,” are
entitled “baronets,” “knights,” “esquires” and “ gentlemen”.
Although a certain number of the boroughs were Cornish villages
in the hands of the Crown or of private landowners, the propor-
tion was not in the seventeenth century large; the bulk of the
elections were genuine contests. Corruption of voters by money
was not so general as it afterwards became, but the power of
great neighbouring families was felt in the smaller towns, some-
times, probably in a very sinister manner. But in many cases
the English burghers deliberately preferred to look outside their
own class for a member. Except the men_of London, Bristol
and Plymouth, who usually chose one of their merchant princes,
the shopkeepers considered that the privileges of Parliament were
treated with more respect, and their own interests with more
attention, when the market-towns of Buckinghamshire sent up
such neighbours as the Verneys and the Hampdens, and the
cities of Yorkshire spoke through a Wentworth or a Beaumont,
a Cholmeley or a Fairfax. Nor did the English gentleman, like
the French noble, scorn the political alliance of the “third estate” ;
but rather, in the pursuit of social estimation among his own
equals, valued, next to representing the yeomen as county member,
the scarcely inferior honour of sitting for the capital of the shire.
So long as this mutual accommodation prevailed, the English
chambers would not perish, like those of continental states, by the
division of classes.

The pick of the country gentlemen, sent by far-distant com-
munities to act together for a few weeks in St. Stephen’s Chapel,
came up uncorrupted by previous contact with Vanity Fair.
Except the lawyers resident at the Inns of Court, the members
knew no more of London than that the merchants were honest
men, and no more of Whitehall than that the courtiers were false
knaves. ‘The character and public spirit of the Commons under

1The English shires and boroughs sent up two members each
one. The numbers of the House rose during James's reign, rie ba

1604] JAMES I 103

James and Charles I. were higher than in those subsequent
periods of our history, when the Parliament men began to reside
for a large part of each year on the scene of their more protracted
labours, instituted a “London Season,” haunted the Court and
aspired to posts under the Crown. Until the Long Parliament the
members had no thought of obtaining office. The edge was not
taken off their patriotism by fear of losing favour at Court, nor was
the spirit of inquiry smothered by that indifference to scandals and
to blunders which is fostered by fashionable society and by official
routine. As an opposition, no assembly of men at once so shrewd
and so stalwart ever met to resist the abuse of power. But this
homely ignorance of the great world, while it fortified their
character as men, limited their outlook as politicians. They knew
so little of the details of foreign affairs, of the cost of wars, of the
preparation of armaments, that while they justly condemned they
were unable to correct the haute politique of Buckingham. Fortun-
ately, what the time required of them was not an alternative
national policy, but the protection of national liberties; for that
task the English squires were fitted by their birth, their traditions,
and the freshness of mind with which they came to each new
Parliament from hunting deer, interviewing bailiffs and assessing
poor-rates. Hundreds of forgotten men, who during the Parlia-
ments of forty years succeeded each other on the benches beside
Coke, Eliot, Wentworth, Hyde and Pym, brought to the help of
England a type of character that never reappeared in our history,
marked by directness of intention and simplicity of mind, the
inheritance of modest generations of active and hearty rural life,
but informed by Elizabethan culture and inspired by Puritan
religion.

English local life was the source and safeguard of English liberty, partia-
which Parliament only concentrated and expressed. During the eee
abeyance of Parliamentary opposition, the caprice of the Tudor in the
monarchs had been restrained by the knowledge that any one country
shire could assert its cause by a rebellion, and that, since no
standing army existed, such a rebellion could only be suppressed
if the other districts were in a temper to march to the aid of the
central Government. In the reign of James I. the House of Com-
mons again became the focus of local opinions, which otherwise
would never have united into a national policy. The isolated

The Com-
mons con-
scious of
their his-
torical
position

104 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1604

communities of England, divided from each other by days of riding
on steep and muddy roads, uninformed by newspapers, and per-
plexed by strange tales about poisoners and papists at the Court,
could only rely, for credible information and sober opinion, on the
men whom they sent up to Parliament to inquire into these matters
on the spot. The Norfolk parson, who distrusted “light scoffing
wits not apt to deeper search,” records in his diary that he would
have been “free from all harder censure” of the Duke of Buck-
ingham, “but that the Parliament did so oppose him”? The
Commons knowing their speeches to be the sole voice and their
resolutions the sole instruction of a politically minded nation,
would not even compromise on the greatest of the privileges of
Parliament—free speech within the walls of the House. And
very free speech it was. Foreigners, accustomed to the secret
intrigues of Paris and the silent obedience of Madrid, censured
the boldness but envied the impunity of the Opposition, when
some country gentleman, who had ridden up a few days before from
his home beyond the Dorset Downs, rose in his seat to abuse the
highest Minister of State, and was suffered to walk back unmolested
through the darkening streets to his lodgings in Holborn. It was
only when the session had ended that the King dared to lay by
the heels a few of the boldest speakers.

The Commons well knew what had happened to representative
bodies in other lands. Foreign ambassadors lodged complaints of
the abuse showered upon their masters, who were described in the
House as “ overthrowing the Parliaments throughout Christendom,”
and reducing their subjects by arbitrary taxation to “wear only
wooden shoes on their feet”.? “England,” cried the member for
Somerset, “is the last monarchy that yet retains her liberties. Let
them not perish now!” 'The Commons therefore knew that they
must look, not to the “rights of nations” or to any theories of
government prevalent in that age, but to definite laws and customs
peculiar to England. As historians they unearthed a period in
English history from the thirteenth to the fifteenth century,
when Parliament had controlled the counsels of the Crown; and as.
lawyers they pleaded statutes of the same period, which forbade
the encroachments of royal power in specific matters, such as the

1 Rous, p. 30, 2 Rushworth, i., p. 573.

1604] JAMES I 105

imposition of particular kinds of taxation. Thus an antiquarian
revival, instituted by several hundred of the most hard-headed men
in the country, decided the future of our island. The partisans of
absolutism pleaded the equally valid Tudor precedents, and demon-
strated that even in the Middle Ages the custom of the Constitution
had by no means always followed the statutes, in which the Parlia-
ments had but recorded claims never heartily allowed by the King,

The theoretical basis and the legal limits of Parliamentary
privilege and royal prerogative, questions wisely left to sleep by
the late Queen and her loving subjects, occupied the full attention
of James’s first Parliament, which after sitting for four sessions
over a space of six years, was “broken” in 1610 to make way for
the first long period of unparliamentary Stuart despotism.

The King was the first to open the high debate. The light phe com-
head of the scholar was turned by the new wine of an absolutist mons chal-
theory of government, as alien to the medizeval English Constitution, ie see
as were the later theories of “ King Pym” fads “Freeborn John Hes
Lilburne”. ‘The claim of the Pope as Vicar of Christ to depose Renate
sovereigns had driven the champions of Protestant monarchies to
invent a rival dogma. A Divine Right was asserted to be inherent
in Kings: not acquired, as the Jesuits taught, by clerical or by
popular consent, but by heredity. James, as Divine hereditary
sovereign, made haste to state his claims to an authority that
would have flattered the pride of the Castilian monarch.

The state of monarchy (he told his first Parliament) is the supremest
thing upon earth: for Kings are not only God’s lieutenants upon earth and
sit upon God’s throne, but even by God Himself they are called gods.

Hence there was no place for constitutional discussion of a pre-
rogative that had no limits.

As to dispute what God may do is blasphemy, so it is sedition in subjects
to dispute what a King may do in height of his power. I will not be content
that my power be disputed on.

The House of Commons, so he told its members, “ derived all matters
of privilege from him”; it sat, not in its own right, but of his grace.

The sudden challenge was taken up at once and by the hole
House. There was no Royalist party in St. Stephen’s before the
Long Parliament; nor, beyond the King’s own servants, did any
section of any-class in ‘the country believe in the theory of Divine

Efficiency
and free-
dom

Question
of Union
with Scot-
land,
1604-7

106 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1604

Right as applied by James. The members of his first House of
Commons, with unanimity recorded their solemn dissent from the
royal utterances. When in the first session His Majesty asserted that
Parliamentary privilege was not of right but of grace, they told him
that he had been “ misinformed,” and when in the last he challenged
their right to discuss the limits of his prerogative, they replied :—

We hold it an ancient, general and undoubted right of Parliament to debate
freely all matters which properly concern the subject and his right or state ;

which freedom of debate being once foreclosed, the essence of the liberty of
Parliament is withal dissolved.

The new claims of personal authority advanced by the Stuarts
were connected with new plans for national efficiency. Their best
servants, Salisbury, Bacon and Strafford, saw, like Richelieu, that
a country must be equipped with the machinery of centralised
government and of productive taxation if she was to keep her
place in the modern world. James and Charles I. aimed at union
with Scotland, a good army, and a new system of finance. In every
one of these objects they were defeated, partly by their own lack
of economy and administrative talent, partly by the resistance of
the Commons, who opposed the strengthening of the central power
as dangerous to local and Parliamentary rights. That danger passed
away as soon as the central power became representative. In the
reigns of William III, and Anne the Whig Ministers carried out
the schemes of James J.—united, taxed and armed Great Britain,
and so enabled her in the eighteenth century to take a place in the
world’s politics higher than that of countries which had purchased
a brief period of efficiency by a lasting sacrifice of their freedom.

The issue came up under various forms in the Parliament of
1604-10. A Royal Commission appointed to consider James’s
favourite project—the closer union of England and Scotland—had
recommended free-trade in commerce, and the naturalisation of all
Scots born after their King’s accession to the English throne. The
House of Commons rejected both proposals, though the latter came
into effect in spite of them, by the workings of the common law.}

1The naturalisation of the “ post-nati” (Scottish subjects of James born after
his accession to the English throne) was effected by a decision of the English law
courts in the case of the infant Colvill (born at Edinburgh, 1605), or “ Calvin” as
he is called in the English law books. Thus the judges, rightly interpreting the
common law, overrode the policy of the Commons, who wished to keep the Scots
as aliens,

1607] JAMES I 107

Commercial fears of free-trade, national ignorance and hatred
of Scotchmen, were combated in vain by the wisest man in the
House. When Sir Francis Bacon assured his brother members that
the Scots were “in their capacities and understandings a people
ingenious, in labour industrious, in courage valiant,” the members
listened with an incredulous smile to praises lavished by the Court
aspirant on barbarians as poor, and therefore as despicable, as
the wild tribes of Ireland. 'The Puritan House of Commons had
yet to learn, in an hour of dire need, the true qualities of their
“brother Scots”. None the less, Parliament had good reasons for

its decision. The innocent proposals which they rejected were
steps towards such a fusion of the laws and Governments of the
two nations as would have rendered the King independent alike of
Scottish nobles and of English Parliaments. James by a character-
istic figure expressed his desire for this further union :—

Iam the husband and all the whole Isle is my wife. I hope, therefore, that
no man will be so unreasonable as to think that I, that am a Christian King
under the Gospel, should be the Polygamist and husband to two wives.

But the members of the House of Commons, fearing for British
freedom, refused in 1607 to countenance an Union, which in 1707
their successors passed under changed conditions, as the surest
guarantee of those very liberties.

But it was impossible to neglect for a hundred years the need Finance
for a more productive system of taxation, a problem which, after
the death of the parsimonious Queen, continually returned to vex
and embroil Kings with their Parliaments. Elizabeth had waged
the most serious of England’s wars with a revenue no larger than
that which James exhausted in time of peace. At slight expense
to herself and her subjects, she had presided over a Court, corrupt
indeed, but famous to all ages for wisdom in politics and for ex-
cellence in literature ; James, at a vast charge to the nation, main-
tained a Court no less corrupt, but notorious for folly and lack
of taste. When-the King realised that he was spending at the
rate of from £500,000 to £600,000 a year, and thereby incurring
an annual deficit of from £50,000 to £150,000, he was the more

1 Elizabeth’s receipts Mich, 30 Eliz. to Mich. 31 Eliz. (1588-89) were £344,931
19s. 84d. (Pell’s Declarations). In 1597-98 they were £414,311 78. 114d. James’s
revenue was between £400,000 and £500,000 (see G., i, pp. 294, 295; G., ii., pp.
113, E14),

108 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1610

willing to exert to the utmost all the prerogative rights of the
Crown which could bring in a revenue.

Imposi- The regulation of trade with foreign countries, by Impositions of

ee duties at the ports, and by the grant or sale of trading monopolies,

case, 1606- was a power that rested, by the custom of the Tudor Queens, not

va with Parliament but with the Crown. It had hitherto been regarded
rather as an administrative function than as a financial advantage,
but the increasing volume of English trade enabled the needy James
to find in it a source of large and independent revenue. The Book
of Rates which he issued, was an attempt to systematise the import
duties on many various articles ; and the commercial and financial
policy involved in the tariff was determined by the Privy Council
Commissioners of Trade, afterwards turned by Charles I. into a
Council of Trade.1 In 1606 the resistance of a merchant named
Bate to a new form of these duties, brought the whole question of
impositions before the Judges, who decided that the King had acted
within his legal rights. ‘The Commons, not yet aware of all the
points at issue between themselves and the Crown, paid no attention
to the matter in the following session of 1608; but in the two
sessions of 1610 they realised that the power of the purse, the chief
safeguard of their liberties, would slip from them as trade increased,
unless this right to lay Impositions was at once challenged. A
vigorous controversy ensued. Statutes of Edward L., clearly pro-
hibiting the levy of duties without consent of Parliament, were
quoted in the House; while the Crown lawyers advanced Tudor
precedent, and Tudor statutes that implied the existence of the
right.? The question, still undecided, became merged in all the
other questions at issue between Parliament and King.

The Great Side by side with the controversy over Impositions, a friendly

os al negotiation was being conducted to put the whole financial system
on a new footing. ‘The Great Contract, which Salisbury attempted
to make with Parliament, was to commute the antiquated and
vexatious feudal rights of the Crown for a permanent settlement of
£200,000 a year, which together with the other sources of income
should have met the annual expenditure of £600,000. Both sides
were desirous of coming to such terms as would at once supply the

1 Cunningham, i., pp. 200, 201, 221 note, 289; ii., pp. goo-12,
2 Prothero, Ixxiii-vi. He thinks the Commons were technically on doubtful
ground, Gardiner (ii., p. 79) holds the opposite view,

1611] JAMES I 109

financial needs of England, and put an end to the use of preroga-
tive powers to raise money without Parliament: for James would
on these terms forego his right to Impositions.

But at the last moment religious and political misunder-
standing prevented financial agreement. As early as 1604 the
Commons had protested against the deprivation of their favourite
clergy, the 300 silenced Puritan pastors. As the sessions came and
went, the complaints on this head were strengthened by others,
touching all the points of the religious question—the imperfect
enforcement of the Penal Laws; non-residence, so common with
the inefficient type of incumbents favoured by the Bishops; and
the swelling pride shown by those prelates to all classes of men in
their ecclesiastical courts. James, always in arms to defend the
episcopal power, was still more indignant to find his Parliaments
seeking to interfere in his own management of the Church. The
Great Contract was broken off through mutual suspicion, the dis-
pute on Impositions was left undecided, and finally, in February,
1611, the Houses were dissolved. The King determined henceforth
to carry on affairs free from the vexatious cavilling of a Parliament.

The dissolution of James’s first Parliament marks the moment Breach
when the “establisher of perpetual peace in Church and Common- Were
wealth” had fairly set on foot the three great feuds of Stuart dissolu-
England—the Constitutional, the Catholic, the Puritan. The'2?
first nine years of King James, the seed-time of our politics, had
proved the harvest season of our literature, the fruitful autumn
of the Elizabethan age. The production of Hamlet fitly honoured
the last year of the great Queen, but Othello, Macbeth and Lear
ushered in the new reign; and only in the year 1611, when James Retire-
broke the Parliament, did Shakespeare retire to Stratford, and peri es
to the silence that he maintained till his death (1616). speare,

r611

From February, 1611, to January, 1621, no Parliament met, Character
except during the two months of 1614, when the “ Addled ” Parlia- cae es
ment expressed the anger, but demonstrated the impotence, of the Govern-
electoral classes. For a whole decade public affairs were aban-™"
doned to the chance intrigues of a Court, so managed as to exclude
from its precincts the many able and conscientious men whom

England then contained. As there was no organised Civil Service,

Salisbury

110 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS vy ARTOLE

and, during the abeyance of Parliament, no political life outside
the circle of the Palace, the public servant had to purchase his
position by a life of bribery and sycophancy. Bacon, with his
eye fixed on lofty public ends, overlooked the baseness of the
means. Archbishop Abbot, after long trying, like William Penn
in later days, to combine infldehioee at a bad Court with the
conscience of a good man, fell into honourable disgrace. The
more self-respecting of the Lords preferred the retirement of their
mansions, or the society of famous men in Italy, France and Spain,
to Court masques, in which ladies were too drunk to perform their
parts,! divorce cases and adulteries favoured by the sovereign, and
the whisper, scarcely hushed, of scandals yet more vile. Others,
who might have served the country well, were kept at home by
the lavish expenses fashionable at the Court of Elizabeth’s successor,
when political aspirants were expected to give feasts at £1,000
apiece, present costly hangings, horses and jewellery to all officers
and favourites according to their degree, and sit down to dicing-
tables where parks and manors were thrown away. Only the rich
were able, and only the mean were willing to seek State employ-
ment on such terms. English politics were then more a matter
of personal relations than they have ever been before or since. A
time had been when hereditary prestige and military power had
secured for each baron his place by the throne; a time was to
come when, under the supremacy of Parliament, great principles
and great interests involved the fortunes of statesmen. But at
this epoch the royal government, not even systematised as a
bureaucracy, was a chaos of personal intrigue. The change from
a wise Queen to a foolish King removed all the good, and brought
out all the bad which this most elastic type of polity rendered
possible.

Until 1612 the worst influences at Court were kept in partial
restraint by the presence at the head of affairs of Robert Cecil,
become Earl of Salisbury and Lord Treasurer. He owed nothing
to favourites, but held office by his own prestige as chief minister
to the late Queen, and prime negotiator of the peaceful acces-
sion. Though far from a great, he was by no means an unworthy

1G.,, i, p. 300,

1603] JAMES I 111

man; he continued to regard the Puritan and Parliamentary
questions with the eyes of an Elizabethan official, but he would
never, like the impatient doctrinaire whom he served, have
willingly brought the quarrel to a head. Though far from
scrupulous, he was absolutely honest to his cause: like most of
his colleagues he received a secret pension from the King of Spain,
but his policy remained firmly anti-Spanish. So long as he lived,
the Stuart House was never caught in the fatal net of alliance
with Catholic powers ; and even the domestic government, though
less under his control, was more respectable and cautious than it
became when he was no longer there to restrain the favourites.
In everything he maintained the Elizabethan tradition, hostile to
Spain without and to the Catholics within, but desirous of peace
and unfavourable to the Puritans. This had been the school
founded by his father, William Cecil, and to this the son would
still have adhered though he had lived to be a hundred.

The other and less orthodox school of Elizabethan statesman- Raleigh
ship, the war party that desired to seize the Spanish colonies, was
represented by Sir Walter Raleigh. James from the first moment
of his accession turned to the safer policy and the less brilliant
man, Raleigh, warned from the royal presence, lost all footing in
the heartless Court; his froward genius had made for him many
enemies, and few admirers outside the taverns, where seafaring men
celebrated the epic of the Spanish main. ‘The conduct of the dis-
graced and angry courtier aroused false suspicions: his friend, Lord
Cobham, no less disgusted with the distribution of favours at the
new Court, had trifled criminally with the idea of placing James’s
cousin, Arabella Stuart,! on the throne. Cobham’s plot had gone goppam’s
little further than abortive negotiations with Spanish agents ; plot, 1603

1This poor lady, who resembled Lady Jane Grey in her gentle character, her
claims upon the English throne and her sad resulting fate, had not, like her
predecessor in misfortune, any party of her own. Her fate was as undeserved and
as unnecessary as it was pitiful and romantic. She refused to head the Catholics,
who at first had looked towards her; and Cecil acknowledged that she had given
Cobham no encouragement in his folly. She therefore escaped, for six years, the
jealousy of her royal cousin, and lived quietly and innocently at his Court, until she
had the unique misfortune to love and to be loved by the one man in all his king-
doms whom James would not allow her to marry, This was William Seymour,
also a claimant to the throne. In 1610 they married secretly, were imprisoned by
the King, escaped severally, and tried to fly to the continent to meet there and live
beyond the range of Courts and politicians. William reached Ostend. Arabella
lingered for news of him and was taken at sea. She died in prison after four years’

misery.

112 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1612

Raleigh, though he may have heard more than was safe from his
dangerous friend, was certainly not implicated. When the story
came before the Privy Council, Cobham, contradicting and retract-
ing his own evidence at every turn, accused Raleigh of having led
him into the mischief. So little was the hero whom posterity cele-
brates understood by his contemporaries, that he was brought to
trial on the charge of concocting this treason with his life-long foe,
the Spaniard. “Thou hast a Spanish heart, and thyself art a viper
of hell,” cried Coke, the most brutal Attorney-General who ever
served the Stuarts, though afterwards the proudest Judge who ever
withstood their usurpations. The friendless prisoner, entrapped in
the meshes of a legal procedure that required him to prove his inno-
cence alone against a hostile tribunal, was mewed up, a condemned
traitor, in the Tower of London. Cecil had taken little part in the
persecution of his rival. It was not till after the Lord Treasurer’s
death, and after the triumph of the Spanish party, abhorrent to all
schools of Elizabethan statesmanship alike, that Raleigh, let out
like a bird from the trap to soar towards the sun, was struck
down dead out of the sky.
Death of The Elizabethan tradition, which could not wholly pass away _
ae while Salisbury still lived, seemed likely to renew its youth when- |
1632 % ever Prince Henry should succeed to his father’s throne. There
was every reason to expect that the monarchy would then again be
vigorous, popular, actively Protestant in foreign affairs, perhaps
even warlike. But a game of tennis and a fever changed the fate
of England and removed Henry Stuart from the scene before he
had begun to play his part. The same year, 1612, saw the death
of the old counsellor and the young Prince who would both have
checked James in his unseemly attachment to favourites and in
his unfortunate alliance abroad.
Govern- When Salisbury and Prince Henry were dead, the King entered
coed without restraint on a course of conduct and policy towards which
he had long been drifting. He deprived the Privy Council Board
of its functions as a consultative body; and left the great Lords
who sat round it to discover, with increasing chagrin, that they
were confined to the mechanical details of administration. Mean-
while, at some country seat within a day’s ride of London, under
the trees after the deer had been pulled down, or at the table
after the last bottle had been emptied, James arranged the outline

1613] JAMES I 113

of high policy in familiar discourse with a single favourite, whose
claim to advancement was neither birth nor wisdom, but beauty
of face, and graceful though discourteous manners. Consequences
followed of grave import to the system of monarchy in England.
The House of Lords was alienated from the Crown by the
affront to the dignity of birth, which was only made worse when
the upstarts became Earls and Dukes. Individual Peers, no
less affronted in their dignity as men, nursed the feelings, and
one day espoused the cause, of political revolt. The common
subjects of the land lost that respect for the “Lords of the
Council” and for the whole system of monarchical administration,
which no mere difference with the religious or foreign policy
of their sovereign had ever shaken under the virile rule of the
Tudors.

This new system of government was soon implicated in a scandal Carr and
such as often precedes the fall of dynasties. The Howards were Far od
the most worthless of the political nobility of that day. While 1613
the fit representative of their great name, Belted Will, the watch-
man of Naworth, was guiding the Border through the generation
of anarchy that intervened between the centuries of unbroken war
and the centuries of final peace, the Howards of the Court, deserting
in public the old religion to which they still adhered, served King
James with sycophancy and evil counsel. ‘Though they held among
them many of the highest offices of State, they saw that, to secure
their position with the fond King, they must enter into a treaty
with the young Scotchman, Robert Carr. The favourite himself,
anxious to cement an alliance of such great mutual advantage,
cast about to marry Lady Francis Howard, daughter of the Earl
of Suffolk. Since the lady loved Carr as intensely as she hated her
husband, the Earl of Essex, the confederates determined, without
blasting her character, to secure her divorce. The King, in whom
the sense of personal dignity was weaker than the sense of personal
obligation, took a gracious interest in the unedifying details of the
case. ‘The divorce was obtained by royal influence, in spite of the
stand made by Abbot, the Puritan Primate. Essex retired, not
for ever, into private life. Carr, created Earl of Somerset, to
celebrate the occasion, led his hard-won bride to the altar, in
the smile of royalty, and amid the congratulations of an envious
Court. Seldom had a triumph, so shamefully won, been so openly

8

114 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1616

celebrated. But worse remained behind, such as even James could
not stomach. After leading the Court for two years, the Countess
Fall of of Somerset was cast headlong by the appalling revelation that she
ae had secured her divorce by the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury.
1615-16 James, who was not a wicked man, insisted that the trial of his ill-
chosen friends should be a spectacle no less public than their
marriage. Husband and wife were both condemned, the latter
justly, the former with less certain justice. The lives of both
were spared. The revealing flood of these events did much to
disgust common men with the royal government; yet more it
filled Puritan households in remote halls and farmsteads with the
dark indignation of the righteous suppressed. Such, they saw,
were the men whom the King delighted to honour; these were
they who, concealed papists themselves, were permitted to trouble
Israel and cast out the godly preaching pastors.
Ricool On the ruins of Carr’s fortune rose a more splendid and stable
See edifice. Though it was solely by charm, wit and beauty that
George Villiers, afterwards Earl and Duke of Buckingham, first
found favour with the King, a certain magnanimity, combined
with some talent for administration, soon fixed his power at a
point far above that reached by his predecessor. As early as 1619
he was more than favourite, he was sole ruler of the land; he
did not need to seek the alliance of great families, but taught
the highest to come to him as the sole fount of honour. The
Howards made a last attempt to attract the attention of James
to another youth, whom they prepared by washing “his face
every day with posset curd”, But every device failed, and they
were driven from all the offices of State. This change of ministry
rendered the public service less bad and wasteful, for Buck-
ingham could conduct the ordinary routine of domestic affairs.
His talents rendered his monopoly of power more absolute,
and drove further from all hope of advancement every man
who would not come, cap in hand, to flatter his strongest
passion, vanity. Efficient as an administrator, as a statesman
he was below contempt. Without one political conviction be-
yond the belief in his own right to supreme power, he moved
in a perpetual atmosphere of excitement and change, adopting
with equal passion each side of a question in turn, as pique or
ennui dictated.

1617] JAMES I 115

The peace with Spain, negotiated by James and Cecil in 1604,} Relations
was the first condition of English development in the seventeenth pace Spais
century. A great war, for which Parliament and the Puritans
often clamoured without counting the cost, would have swallowed
up all the resources, all the attention, and all the enthusiasm of
the English ; would perhaps have strengthened monarchy here,
as did the wars of Gustavus in Sweden; and would certainly
have drawn away the meagre flow of our colonisation far from
the yet uninhabited shores of Virginia and New England, to
South American conquests, where climate, gold mines and
coloured labour would have prevented the healthy and vigorous
development of our race. Unfortunately, from the death of
Salisbury, the last of the orthodox Elizabethans, to the death
of his master twelve years later, there was no middle party at
Court between those who wished to wage war on Spain, and those
who were willing to conduct our foreign policy in close concert
with advices from Madrid. The fall of Carr, who had been hand
in glove not only with the Catholic Howards but with the Spanish
Ambassador himself, was the signal for a great effort by the war
party to consummate their purpose. The first step was to per-
suade the King to loose Raleigh upon Spanish America on some
ostensibly neutral mission, as in days of old Drake had been loosed,
in peace the harbinger of war. Villiers, the rising hope of the
war party, at first supported the scheme. But the light wind of
his favour had shifted round to the Spanish quarter, even before
Raleigh had set sail.

Never did an expedition set out under worse auspices. The Raleigh’s
prisoner from the Tower had nothing but splendid memories and ses
utter desperation to drive him on. Hatred and treachery waited 1617-18
for him at home, and sailed with him in his fleet. Even the
mariners he was able to enlist were a “scum of men”; the right
breed shrank from so hopeless an enterprise. He had pledged him-

1This peace was one of Cecil’s best strokes of statesmanship, and one of the
few cases in which James’s practice of king-craft was not worse than his theory. We
refused to admit the illegality of our trade with Spanish America; and we refused
to give over carrying Dutch goods in our capacity as neutrals, or to prevent the
Dutch from paying English subjects to fight for them against Spain. Thus, while
securing in permanence all the advantages of peace, we gave up nothing of our own
interests, or of those of our allies the Dutch, who chose to go on fighting for a few
years longer, until they realised that they could not conquer the Spanish Netherlands.
The final truce between Holland and Spain was in 1609.

The Span-
ish match

116 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1618

self to the King to find and work a gold mine in Spanish Guiana
without fighting the Spaniards. He ended by fighting the
Spaniards without finding the gold mine. While he remained
in the ships, watching against the coming of the Spanish fleet,
a party of his men went up the Orinoco to explore. The first
thing they came across was a Spanish settlement barring their
progress up the river. ‘They were soon overpowered in the dense
forest by the Spanish marksmen, and fell back in rout to the coast,
bringing back to Raleigh the dead body of his son. He sailed
home to meet his fate. He had disappointed the war party; the
favourite was against him; the Spanish Ambassador demanded his
head. Even Elizabeth would only have forgiven his attack ona
friendly power if he had brought back plunder to share with her;
and he was coming back empty-handed to James. He was exe-
cuted under the unjust sentence of treason passed on him a dozen
years back. Raleigh died a victim, not so much to the sacred cause
of international peace, as to the King’s now fixed resolve to divert
the whole policy of England to the hard task of propitiating Spain.
From this moment forward, until the crisis of 1624, James, by the
advice of Buckingham, adhered to the policy of the Spanish match.

To marry the heir to the throne with a princess from the
Escurial, would involve an immediate revolution in the existing
system of Church and State. Our foreign policy, the essence of
which was that we should be regarded as the reserve champion of
Protestantism if all others were beaten to their knees, would be
abandoned, and perhaps reversed. At home the establishment of
the Spanish Infanta as the English Queen would convert the most
privileged and not the least influential wing of the Palace into an
office for the Jesuit emissaries, an asylum for the great English
Catholics, and a school where future Ministers and favourites would
learn that Catholicism was fashionable in society and profitable in
politics. The terms of the Queen’s residence would lift the threat
of the Penal Laws from her co-religionists in every corner of the
land; and both the House of Commons and the Spanish Am-
bassador expressed the opinion that a free Catholic propaganda
would render possible, in course of time, the re-establishment of
Catholic supremacy. Last, but not least, there would be every
prospect of a long succession of Catholic kings. The influence of
the Catholic mother, Mary of Medici, over her children had, on the

1618] JAMES I 117

death of Henry IV., ruined the Protestant cause in France; the
influence of Henrietta Maria over her children was destined, after
the death of Charles I., to endanger it in England. In the age
before the Great Rebellion had set limits to the royal prerogative,
it was regarded as certain that the heir to an unbounded sover-
eignty, if brought up in the atmosphere of Spanish Catholicism,
would attempt in England the reaction which the sword of Tilly
and Wallenstein effected in equally Protestant countries abroad.

For such reasons, rightly or wrongly, our ancestors estimated National
that the Spanish match might some day bring down in ruin, long ine
_ prepared, our national life and institutions, which were wholly

incompatible with the Catholic system. England was threatened
by her kings with the establishment of an alien influence that
might undermine both public rights and private property. More
than any other part of James’s schemes, more than his ejection
of the Puritan pastors, far more than his desertion of the con-
tinental Protestants in their hour of need, this project of the
Spanish match made the ordinary man a Puritan at least in his
politics. Selfish as well as generous passions were enlisted. The
holders of Abbey lands were alarmed. Over this matter concurred
those who feared for their estates, those who feared for their
country, and those who feared for their religion.

The sentiment of nationalism has in its nature no political
affinities either with liberty on the one hand or with tyranny
on the other; it can be turned by some chance current of events,
or by the cunning or clumsiness of statesmen, to run in any channel,
and to work any wheel. In the course of the world’s history it has
lent to many different causes, some good and some bad, a power
which they would never otherwise have obtained. For a hundred
years the foreign policy of the Stuarts drove the forces of nationalism

to aid the cause of Protestant enthusiasm and civic freedom.
Prince Henry had grasped the objections to a Catholic marriage

as firmly as if he had foreseen the ruin it was destined to bring upon
his House. When James proposed to marry him to a French
Catholic, he was so “resolved that two religions should not lie
in his bed,” that he prepared to fly to the continent and marry a
German Protestant. But he was dead now, and his brother
Charles was not of the same mould.

118 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1619

Position of | When the Spanish match, so often before contemplated and

Hel oe de laid aside, became, after Raleigh’s execution, the principal motive

improved, of policy, toleration had to be extended to the English Catholics.

zig The twelve black years which had brought such miseries on those
who refused to take the oath prescribed after the Gunpowder Plot,
were succeeded by twenty years white in the annals of English
Catholicism. The evil race of pursuivants were warned off the
victims on whose fears and miseries they fed; the unwilling judges
were commanded to release the Catholics from every prison in
England ; the recusancy fines dwindled to an insignificant part of
the revenue. The persecution continued only in districts where
the Justices of Peace were indifferent or hostile to the influence of
the central Government. From 1619 until the meeting of the
Long Parliament, except during a brief period of reaction in 1625,
the great majority of Catholics remained in comfort on condition
of seeking obscurity, while a few obtained an ostentatious influence
which brought jealousy on all.

Gondomar ‘This new phase of royal policy permanently altered the relations
of the Catholics to the Crown. ‘The memories of 1605-6 were obli-
terated, and the Stuarts henceforth had no more faithful servants
than the party which they shielded from so much rage. But the
new policy of toleration alienated the Catholics yet further from
their fellow-subjects. It was recommended to the nation in
the first instance, not as mercy shown to Englishmen, but as
a favour done to Spain. Spanish pride was incarnate in her
Ambassador, Gondomar. This man, at once the terror and delight
of James, acquired, next to Buckingham, the most powerful voice
in English affairs. But above all he was lord and champion
of the English recusants. On his visit to Spain in 1618, he
made a triumphal procession from London to Dover, with a train
of a hundred priests whom James liberated from prison to do him
honour. When he returned, the great English Catholics waited
upon him in the anterooms and worshipped in the chapel of the
Spanish embassy, till the French Ambassador, who maintained a
rival asylum of the faith, jealously complained of their neglect.
Caricatures, lampoons and sermons directed against Spain were,
at Gondomar’s instigation, punished by the Privy Council.

The sight of England ruled by the advice of a Spaniard aroused
the coarse brutality of the London mob. The cruelty of their

1620] JAMES I 119

feelings towards the Catholics were regulated by the rise and fall of Popular
the royal clemency. At the time of the final crisis of the marriage peas
negotiation (1623), the quiet of Puritan Sunday in London was dis- Catholics
turbed by the crashing fall of an upper storey, in which a hundred i London
devotees had secretly met to listen to the exhortations of a Jesuit ;

a crowd at once assembled round the ruins, but not to relieve those

who still suffered or to disentangle the heaps of dead ; the prentices

stood raising angry cries at the discovery of this nest of Jesuits,

while their masters went home to cheer the Sabbath evening with

pious discourse on the clear judgment of God. Bickerings in the
streets with Gondomar’s servants led to serious riots. Once the
embassy was assaulted, and the inmates only saved from massacre

by the strength of the doors and the timely arrival of the popular

Lord Mayor (1618). James was compelled to override the magis-

trates in order to secure punishment of the offenders, Three years

later, on a similar provocation, he came down in person to Guildhall

to champion the honour of Spain, threatening to put a garrison in

the city and suspend its charter. For sixty years London had been

the home of anti-Spanish and of anti-Catholic feeling, but it was

a new thing that those two fiercest passions of Cheapside, so long

the test of loyalty, should now be directed against the Crown.

In 1620 events took place in the upland countries of continental The Bo-
Europe which complicated the relations of maritime Spain and Se gaeeee
England, altered the significance of the proposed marriage treaty, tinate
brought to a head English discontent with the King’s policy, and Geestions
forced him at last to summon a Parliament in which that discon-
tent could find voice. Bohemia was occupied by the Austrians and
the Rhenish Palatinate by the Spaniards, Both these territories
were seized in the interest of Catholicism, and at the expense of
Frederic, Elector Palatine, husband of James’s daughter Elizabeth.

The claim of the Palatinate Prince to the throne of Bohemia had
been the invitation of its rebellious nobles and people, who called
him across Europe to defend feudal anarchy against Imperial des-
potism, and religious rights, won long ago by Ziska’s dreaded sword,
against the oncoming tide of Jesuit reaction. At this summons,
the uncounselled Frederic had left his safe patrimony on the banks
of the Rhine to become the leader of an outlandish people in a
cause which was only injured by his championship, and which was
to involve his family and his heritage on the Rhine, the Protestant

120 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1621

religion and the German people, in the irrecoverable disasters of
the Thirty Years’ War. James correctly refused to support his
son-in-law in Eastern Europe. The conquest of Bohemia by the
Austrians, and the suppression of Protestantism within its ancient
mountain barriers, could not deeply concern our island people, who
knew no reason to smile when seamen were represented at the
London theatres as landing in the “deserts of Bohemia”.1 But it
concerned us more nearly that the Spaniards, from their base in
James _ the Netherlands, had overrun the Rhenish Palatinate. James, who
ae had a Scotchman’s sense of duty to his kindred, would not let the
rightful heritage of his grandchildren be taken from them, least of
all by the chiefs of a victorious Catholic confederacy. To obtain
a restoration, it was necessary to make Spain and Austria believe
that England would, in the last resort, send great armies on to
the Rhine ; but unfortunately, the Cabinet of Madrid, informed by
the astute observation of Gondomar, regarded James’s character as
sufficient security against effective intervention. The impression
that James was not in earnest, was confirmed when he attempted
to persuade Philip voluntarily to evacuate the Palatinate as a con-
dition of the proposed marriage of Prince Charles to the Infanta.
So long as they could lead James astray in the vain pursuit of his own
marriage project, the Spaniards felt perfectly secure of their position
in the Palatinate; while the English were enraged to see the dis-
asters of continental Protestantism, which should at least have
delivered them from the hated “Spanish match,” only serve to
bind their ruler more obstinately than ever to his projected outrage
on their national independence.
A Parlia- But James was sufficiently alive to the necessity of preparing
eee ok war, to feel bound to summon Parliament. For ten years he had
1621 governed without its help, and during all that time had been in
want of money even for his peace establishment. After “ breaking”
the Addled Parliament of 1614, before it had either passed laws or
voted taxes, he had attempted to fill the exchequer by raising
“‘ Benevolences,” or free gifts of money from his subjects. Al-
though the judges on circuit were employed to solicit contribution,
the smallness of the sum collected in the towns and shires even by
those formidable missionaries of the central power, shows how uni-

1The Winter's Tale, Act III., se. 3.

1621} JAMES I i 121

versally the rustic English, ignorant as they were of so much else,
understood the constitutional issue. Passive resistance had its re-
ward, for seven years later the occupation of the Palatinate
rendered the King’s needs imperative; he had no choice but to
summon Parliament to meet in January, 1621.

During the period of unparliamentary government (1611-21), Coke

the rights of the subject had been defended by a lawyer.
What Parliament could not assert on behalf of the nation, a
single Judge had asserted on behalf of himself and of the law
of England. Sir Edward Coke, one of the most disagreeable
figures in our history, is one of the most important champions
of our liberties. At a dangerous period in the development
of the constitutional struggle, it was he who first revived the
theory that the law was not the instrument but the boundary
of royal prerogative, and that the Judges were not, as his
rival Bacon declared, “lions under the throne,” but umpires
between King and subject. His ferocious power of self-asser-
tion, working through the medium of a legal learning, memory
and intellect seldom equalled even on the English Bench,
caused his brethren, who were almost equally afraid of Chief
Justice Coke and of King James, to break for a season with
the Tudor traditions of their office. At this time the law
of the Constitution was not yet interpreted by an established
custom of the Constitution, and it lay with the courts to decide
many questions arising between King and Parliament, or between
King and subject. As the law was often obscure and the precedents
contradictory, a very slight political bias could, without scandal,
be decisive of grave issues. Hitherto the bias of the Judges had
been Royalist. ‘They had pronounced for the King in the question
of Impositions, in the year that Coke became Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas (1606). Under his influence their decisions soon
began to take a different colour. In 1613 Coke was punished by being
moved, much against his wishes, to preside over the King’s Bench,
But still in one question after another James met with attempts
to thwart his authority from the quarter where his predecessors
had found the most ready support. At last the exasperated King
claimed the right to interview the Judges in his own chamber,
whenever they were called to decide a question affecting his pre-
rogative. Coke, knowing that this concession would destroy both
the independence of his brethren as a body and his own power to

Dismissal
of Coke,
1616

Coke and
his family

122 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1616

dictate their decisions, refused to give way, even when all the rest
had capitulated. His obstinacy cost him his seat on the Bench,
and even at the Council Board. In the course of the whole reign,
no measure that James took to strengthen his authority succeeded
half so well as the dismissal of Coke. The Judges at once relapsed
into servants removable at the King’s pleasure, and sure defenders
of his prerogative. But Coke had not striven in vain. He had
enlisted the professional pride of the students of the common law
against the rival systems of law specially favoured by the Crown in
the Star Chamber, the Admiralty and the Ecclesiastical Courts. He
had turned the minds of the young gentlemen of the Inns of Court,
who watched him from afar with fear and reverence, to contemplate
a new idea of the constitutional function and of the political
affinities of their profession, which they were destined in their
generation to develop in a hundred ways, as counsel for England
gone to law with her King.

Coke had scarcely ceased to be Chief Justice when his enemy
Bacon received the Great Seal. The fortunes of these two men,
like everything else in England, were in the hands of Buckingham.
In 1617 the fallen Judge, who had in him much of the antique
Roman, consented to repurchase, by the sacrifice of his daughter,
the favour which he had deliberately forfeited to preserve his own
self-respect. Coke offered up his child, together with a large
dowry, over which he haggled longer, to Sir John Villiers, the
idiotic and weakly brother of the favourite. Although the girl
shrank from a forced union, which was indeed destined to be her
ruin, she could not, under the social laws of the time, have made
resistance herself, but for the interference of her mother, who hated
old Sir Edward as he deserved. My lady carried off her daughter
to a house in the country. But no place could afford refuge from
the coming storm. Followed by his son, “fighting Clem Coke,”
and a train of armed serving-men, the ex-Chief Justice illustrated
the patria potestas by seizing up a log, breaking in the door
with his own hand, and dragging his daughter into the coach.
Bacon, uninformed as to the wishes of James and Buckingham, who
were absent in Scotland, concluded that it would be safe to take
sides against the fallen patriot, and agreed with the rest of the
Council to summon Coke before the Star Chamber for riot. But

1621] JAMES I 123

they soon learnt their error. The favourite, it appeared, only
regarded the affair as the means of making a settlement for his
brother. ‘The loathsome marriage was performed; Coke was re-
called, not indeed to the Bench, but to the Council Board; and
Bacon, marked out for sacrifice by the cowardly whisperers of
Whitehall, was in grave danger of losing his newly won honours.
Complete submission, however, at length appeased the wrath of
Buckingham.

After this breeze had blown over, for four years Bacon enjoyed Bacon
the worship of the world, subject to Buckingham’s good-will. Yet ae
all the while he was but mocked with the semblance of power. ‘
His political wisdom, which might have saved the State, was not
consulted. He judged, he administered, but did not advise. The
King’s ear was for Buckingham alone. For these four years
Coke was silenced; and Bacon, perhaps, was satisfied. Then, in
January, 1621, the Parliament met.

At first, a reconciliation rather than a struggle seemed impend- Meeting
ing. ‘The members did not come up in the angry temper usual to of Parlia
a Parliament long postponed, for they knew that James was pre- 1621
pared cheerfully to admit their interference as domestic reformers,
and they wrongly supposed that by a similar change of foreign
policy, he had at last determined to lead them on a Protestant
crusade. They little suspected that, three days after the opening
of Parliament, while they were still busy making acquaintance with
each other, and asking what could be done for the Protestant
cause throughout the world, James, with his usual unconscious
duplicity, was pouring into the ear of the polite but incredulous
Gondomar protestations of lifelong attachment to Philip, and
plans to reunite Christendom by admitting the Pope as spiritual
head of the Church.

The Commons, almost encouraged by the King, fell fiercely on yonopo-
the courtier tribe. ‘ Monopolies” were the first object of attack, lies
It was the undoubted right of the Crown, challenged by Parliament
rather as inexpedient than as illegal, to grant by patent to any
company or person the monopoly of selling a particular class of
goods by retail. These monopoly patents were employed for a
variety of purposes ; sometimes to reward invention ; sometimes to
supervise the quality of wares, or to control in the public interest

Impeach-
ment and
fall of
Bacon,
1621

124 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1621

the distribution of special kinds, such as gunpowder ; sometimes to
enrich a favourite or his clientéle out of the purse of the general
consumer; and afterwards, in the reign of the needy and ingenious
Charles I., as a kind of indirect excise to raise a revenue for the
Crown. But whatever the purpose of the grant, the monopolist
always enhanced the price. Though the public had no feeling
against the reward of inventors by patent, the strongest passions
were aroused against a tax placed on articles of common necessity,
such as glass or soap, to reward a knight for his handsome face, or
a nobleman for his Scottish accent; nor, when the monopolies were
made an important part of the royal revenue, did indignation
subside among a people who regarded every form of “gabelle” or
excise as the special badge of slavery among nations less fortunate
than themselves.! Parliament now fell on the patentees who had
most obviously abused their privileges ; they were lodged in prison
or fled oversea. But when the Houses proceeded to inquire who
had recommended them for patents, and what forces had been at
work behind the throne, the King apologetically interfered, and
after an ostentatious declaration against the system of monopolies
had been mouthed by the favourite himself, further proceedings
against individuals on this score were abandoned by consent.
The man to whom the stifled inquiry had seemed to point was
Chancellor Bacon. The Houses had met with no desire to call
him to account, but his mean-spirited master, Buckingham, had
offered to thrust him forward as the scapegoat in the matter of
monopolies, and his lifelong enemy, Coke, as member for Liskeard,
had assumed the leadership of the delighted Commons in a work of
general and particular vengeance which he well knew how to direct.
It is not therefore surprising that, when the attack on patentees had
been diverted, men boldly came forward to accuse the Chancellor
of receiving bribes in the administration of justice. No political
interference was available, and no legal defence possible. Bacon,
impeached by the Commons before the Lords, confessed himself
“ouilty of corruption,” and was condemned to financial ruin and
public disgrace. The severity of the sentence was ere long remitted.
With characteristic pettiness he continued for the last four years

1Arber’s Reprints, viii, Howell’s Instructions, p. 74. Such are the “ gabels of
Italy,” that ‘one cannot bring an egg or root to the market but the Prince his
part lies thereinna”’,

1621] JAMES I 125

of his life to keep up a great retinue, and to petition Buckingham
for fresh public employment; and with magnanimity yet more
characteristic, to bring forth the fruits of philosophy and science
by the exercise of that divine diligence, which neither the toils of
office nor the self-inflicted tortures of his retirement could ever
compel him to forgo.

In England during the Elizabethan age, as in some countries
at this day, the transaction of business in almost every department
of life was sealed, either before or after conclusion, by gifts from
the favoured party. At the Court and at the Bar, in houses of
business and in the domestic circle, in the camp and even in the
schoolroom, favours, appointments and the adjustment of personal
relations were accompanied by the giving and taking, not merely of
the recognised fees, but of presents ; of these some were secret and
others open, some known to be wrong and others regarded as right.
Whether the gift had the effect of a bribe probably depended
more on the relations and character of the individuals concerned,
than on the nature, pretext and time of the present. One gift,
though made secretly before the event, might yet prove of no
avail; while another, though openly made after the decision, might
none the less be part of a corrupt bargain. If this custom of receiv-
ing bribe, commission, gratuity or present has in England been
eliminated from several departments of life, the change has been
largely due to a long series of public protests, of which the im-
peachment of Chancellor Bacon was one of the earliest and most
famous. Such acts of reformation have often been effected by the
genuine indignation of one corrupt class against the form of cor-
ruption usual in another. Thus many of Bacon’s accusers were
accustomed with a good conscience to accept very questionable gifts
in their own administration of county business. When Herbert
of Cherbury, more nice than Bacon in his sense of those things to
which philosophy obliges her servants, refused, as sheriff of Mont-
gomeryshire, to accept thankofferings from the under officers whom
he appointed, he was going against established local custom.’ But
the country gentlemen, when they came up to Parliament, having
no connection with the Court, had no familiarity with such practices
in central Government, and genuinely desired to purify the fountain-

1Lord Herbert, p. 65.

Corrupt
customs
of the day

Bacon’s
fault

Parlia-
mentary
interfer-
ence in
foreign
affairs

126 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1621

head of that stream of justice, which some of them at least sullied
in its lower channels.

Though it did not concern Bacon’s judges to inquire, it is a
pleasure to posterity to believe, that his decisions were not affected
by the bribes which he too often received while the cases were
pending. Attempts were in vain made to overset his decrees in
Chancery, even after his own condemnation had made them most
obnoxious to attack. He had taken money without scruple, but
he had not put up justice to sale. His fault in this, as in all his
public career, was not wickedness, but the absence of any lofty
ideal of personal conduct. Having conceived a national policy too
broad for acceptance either by Parliament or King, he never
practised that which alone can give reality to the scheme of the
theorist—the courage and self-sacrifice of the politician. The ad-
vancer of human learning could not read in the book of human
life ; love, friendship and virtue were little more than names to him;
so he turned the abundant energies of his mind to pursue the obvious
ends of gold and pomp and honours. Yet, bruised and wearied by
the strain of that lifelong shadow-hunt, he never deigned to taste
of rest or pleasure, lest time should fail for his other enormous task
of discovering knowledge, which no mean-minded man, however
great his genius, would on such terms have undertaken and in such
a spirit have fulfilled.

In domestic affairs the Commons had won a victory all the
more important because it had been uncontested. They had revived
the ancient right of ruining ministers by impeachment before the
Lords, and the whole Court had learnt once more, as in the days
of John of Gaunt and Piers Gaveston, to fear Parliament as the
nation’s watch-dog.' But could it, besides avenging the wrongs,
dictate the policy of the State? Had it the same control over
foreign as over domestic affairs ? This more doubtful constitutional
issue was now forced on by the immediate necessity of choosing
between war and alliance with Spain. The three years’ struggle
that ensued between nation and King on the Palatinate and

1 There had been no Impeachment between 1459 and 1621. Its place had
been taken in Tudor times by Bills of Attainder, which were a handier method of
political proscription when King and Houses were agreed. But now that the Houses
Once more wished to act independently of the King, the old judicial method of

inet before the Lords, which did not require the King’s participation, was
revived,

1621] JAMES I 127

marriage questions, came also to involve the power of Parliament
in foreign affairs, and thereby its freedom of debate.

James wished, by alarming Philip with a display of the warlike
ardour of Parliament, to obtain a marriage treaty, of which the
restoration of the Palatinate was to be one condition. Parliament
wished to break off all alliance with Spain, and to recover the
Palatinate by war, or by the severe threat of war. James had so
wrought that the only apparent alternative to the Spanish match
and the disasters in which it would involve the English for genera-
tions to come, was war with Spain. And apart from all insular
motives, the desire for war to rescue the Protestants of Europe
from cruel oppression was the dominant passion both in Parlia-
ment and in the city. Common men of that hard but imagina-
tive generation, though they would have scorned a humanitarian
appeal to abandon the slave-trade or to interfere with the atrocities
of the Turk, were deeply moved by the spectacle of true
religion, in town after town and province after province oversea,
extinguished for ever by the children of darkness. The new
Puritanism of the upper and middle classes gave rise, for the
first time in England, to a sense of moral responsibility in foreign
affairs, which was neither sentimental nor hypocritical. Impelled
by their own and by the national enthusiasm, the Commons, fresh
from their triumph in domestic politics, urged the cause of war.
The King was treated in their speeches with the deep respect
that Englishmen still felt for his office, but his foreign friends
learnt what could be said of them in a free country. Coke raved
at Spain and the Spaniards as if they had been prisoners up for
trial and he once again Attorney-General. Gondomar haughtily
complained. James ordered the House not to debate foreign affairs.
The members urged in reply the privilege of free speech within
the walls. It was true that this right was theirs beyond all
question, but it was equally true that it had not formerly been
exercised to impose a reversal of foreign policy upon the sovereign.
The Commons put themselves on their strongest ground, when they
entered in the journals of the House a just and sober Protestation
of their privilege to speak freely on all subjects. James put him-
self as much as possible in the wrong when he sent for the book
and tore out the page with his own hand. It was decided at the
next Council Board to dissolve Parliament. Buckingham, with

128 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1623

Dissolu- unnecessary baseness, hastened to salute the Spanish Ambassador
ai o with the joyful tidings. There was good cause to congratulate the
ment, | enemies of England, and of the reformed religion, for all hope of
Jan., 1622 alliance between King and people had perished, and with it all hope
of our interference abroad. “It is the best thing,” wrote Gondo-
mar to his master, “that has happened in the interests of Spain
and the Catholic religion since Luther began to preach heresy, a
hundred years ago.”
The In the next two years the marriage project, to which James had
cone sacrificed the fortunes of his kinsfolk and the love of his subjects,
Feb., 1623 was diplomatically demonstrated to be absurd. Buckingham and
young Prince Charles, to whose affections the favourite was laying
careful siege, grew weary of delay, and wrung leave from the King
to go themselves to fetch the Infanta from Spain. They took ship
secretly, galloped in disguise across France, and presented them-
selves in the astonished streets of Madrid. Charles, though he was
not permitted by Spanish ideas of decorum to speak to the poor
Princess, imagined that he had fallen in love at first sight. Without
a thought for the public welfare, he offered to make every conces-
sion to English Catholicism, to repeal the Penal Laws, and to allow
the education of his children in their mother’s faith, ‘The Spaniards,
however, still lacked a guarantee that these promises would really
be fulfilled, and still refused to evacuate the Palatinate. Mean-
while a personal quarrel arose between Buckingham and the Spanish
nation. The favourite, who in his manners was a caricature of the
proverbial Englishman abroad, observed neither Spanish etiquette
nor common decency, The lordly hidalgos could not endure the
liberties he took. “We would rather,” they declared, “put the
Infanta headlong into a well than into his hands.” The English
gentlemen, who soon came out to join their runaway rulers, laughed
at the barren lands, the beggarly populations and the bad inns
through which they passed, and boasted of their England. They
were not made welcome to Madrid, and fancied themselves pestered
by the priests. Even Sir Edmund Verney, the good knight without
fear and without reproach, from whose dead hand the royal standard
was wrenched at Edgehill, struck in the face a Jesuit who at-
tempted to reconcile one of them to Rome. They began to hate
the Spaniards and to dread the match. Buckingham was sensitive
to the emotions of those immediately around him, and he soon

1623] JAMES I 129

imparted the change of his own feelings about Spain to the silent
and sullen Prince.

For some time after their departure, James delighted himself
with the thought of Steenie and Baby Charles sallying forth like
“‘dear adventurous knights worthy to be put in a new romanso”.
He sent after them the robes proper to be worn on the feast of St.
George, “if they come in time, which I pray God they may, for it
will be a goodly sight for the Spaniards to see my two boys dine
in them”, But as the months wore on he began to feel uneasy.
The “romanso” rivalled Amadis de Gaul for tediousness and Don
Quixote for realism; the presence of the Fairy Prince had failed
to release the Lady, and the Magician was quarrelling with the
Dragons. Opinion at home was divided as to whether Charles
would be murdered or converted. Meanwhile, James was separated
from the two beings without whom he could not accustom himself
to live. At last, still hoping to complete the treaty over here,
he called them back to England. What an England it was to
welcome home men who had had more than enough of foreign
ways! When it was known that the Prince had come back from

The re-

Spain, a live man, a Protestant, and a bachelor, London broke out turn to

into rejoicings that could scarcely have been more hearty if he had

been bringing the whole Spanish fleet up the Thames as prize of
war. Debtors were released, thieves were set free from the Tyburn
- death-cart, each steeple vied with its neighbour in that city of bells,
mobs roared round the Prince’s coach, and at night the bonfires made
one continuous line down the middle of the winding streets. The
_ outburst was a monster demonstration against the Spanish policy, yet
in a form that could not fail to please the Prince and the favourite.

The object-lesson, on which those two ill-fated men looked out
that day from the windows of their coach, was not entirely lost
upon Buckingham. He had had enough of the people’s hate, and
_he found this popularity, which had fallen to him by accident, too
| sweet to be thrown away; rather he would abandon the scheme, to
secure which he had, a few months back, been promising foreigners

to alter the politico-religious system of England. He rushed,
headlong as ever, in the new direction. He caused the King to

summon Parliament, and appeared before it as the champion of
English nationality and the appointed hero of a war with Spain.
| 9

London,
Oct., 163

Failure of
James I.

130 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1624

When the Houses met in February, 1624, the personal rule of
James was over. ‘Too old to struggle for peace against his favourite,
his son, and his Parliament, yet unwilling to put himself at the head
of the war which he detested, he practically made over the govern-
ment to Buckingham. For four years the Duke, as he was now
called, was King in all but name. For the first of these years James
lingered on, little regarded. The buoyant self-conceit of his busy
brain could not hide from him how completely he had failed to
make England the peaceful arbiter of the continent. But it was
not given him to see how, by his failure in foreign policy, he had
deprived the English king-ship of its ancient “right divine”. As
his subjects watched him year after year dragging England and
the Protestant interest through the mud, they forgot their pride
in the throne that Elizabeth had filled, and began to contemplate
with other feelings the estate of kings upon earth. The doctrine
of the sovereignty of Parliament was still unknown, even’ to Mr.
Pym, whose reasoned harangues against the Catholics were already
favourite hearing with the House; but the old glad confidence in
royal sovereignty was gone for ever. A scurrilous popular writer,
assuming the name and functions of “'Tom Tell-Troath,” impudently
assures James that his name is a jest in all companies, even of
dicers ; that ten healths are drunk to his son-in-law before one to
him ; that
they make a mock of your word ‘‘Great Britain,” and offer to prove that

it is a great deal less than little England was wont to be, less in reputation,
less in strength, less in riches, less in all manner of virtue.

For a whole generation before the Civil War, common men were
accustomed in every ale-house, where the news of the capital was
retailed, to take their tobacco over such half-treasonable talk ;
and accordingly, when at last the Puritan idealists rode out to
battle against the King, they were followed by neighbours Pliable
and Worldly-wiseman, who had come to imagine by force of long
political sympathy that they themselves were Puritans,

1624] BUCKINGHAM 131

CHAPTER V
THE RULE OF BUCKINGHAM—WARS AND PARLIAMENTS, 1624-28

The man whom the King delighteth to honour.—Book of Esther.

HE last Parliament of King James was the only Parliament,
held between the death of Elizabeth and the Civil War,

in which the programme laid by the Court before the Houses
was identical with that laid by the Houses before the Court. The
first of a rapid succession of four Parliaments, to which Charles
and Buckingham appealed for support in their wars, it was the
only one whose members took the two young men at their own
valuation. Every good design was imputed to a silent Prince, of
whom nothing was known, and a specious favourite, who gave an
account of himself that was radically false. Summoning Lords and
Commons to wait on him at Whitehall, as if he were King, the Duke
unrolled to them the story of what he now imagined to have been
his motives and conduct in the Spanish journey. Parliament, un-
willing to compromise the prospect of a fair future by prying too
closely into a doubtful past, accepted the tale, laid hold of his prof-
fered alliance, which a single offence to his vanity would shatter, and
therewith smote off from England the chains of Spanish diplomacy,
Both Houses petitioned James to tear up the treaties still on foot.
Their recommendations were carried by the Duke into the royal
closet, where they received an assent no more voluntary than that
which Walpole long afterwards gave to another breach with Spain.

Prospect
of national
unity, 1624

The old King was the only co-operator who was not also an peath of
enthusiast in the movement of national revival; and after an-James,
other year he was removed by death. England might well have Back:
expected a period of unity within and success without. Yet in four 1025.

. 4 egies A Forecast {
years of war with Catholic powers nothing was achieved abroad, of the

while at home the quarrel between Crown and Parliament broke eae.

28 |

English
army
under
Mansfeld
lost, Feb.-
March,
1625

132 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1625

out more fiercely than in the days when Gondomar was dictating
the policy of James. The causes of our failure abroad were the
military inefficiency usual with England after a long peace, the
ignorance of the Parliament men about foreign affairs, but above
all else the incompetence displayed by Buckingham. Six times
in these four years English fleets or armies were sent out on
expeditions, diplomatically ill-conceived and militarily unsound,
and six times they returned home with shame. After the first
disaster, the Commons refused to throw away money on the war
until it was taken out of the Duke’s hands. Charles, refusing
to part with his friend, was reduced to carry on the war by in-
sufficient and unconstitutional taxation. At the same time the
Puritan Parliaments discovered with horror that King and favourite
were under the influence of a new school of High Churchmen,
whom even James had kept at arm’s length. Fear and indigna-
tion on both sides flamed up in a crisis, ending with the murder _
of the Duke and the resolve of Charles to abolish Parliaments in
England.

After the readiness to use Buckingham as national leader, which
had characterised the last Parliament of James, the determination
to drive him from power, with which the first Parliament of Charles
assembled, needs to be explained by two intervening events—the loss
of Mansfeld’s army and the French marriage. The first in the
series of disasters which constitute the history of our arms at this
period, sufficed to warn the civilian islanders how unfit they were
to take the field, and how regardless of the clearest principles of
diplomacy and war was the man whom they had accepted as their
chief. Under command of the foreign soldier Mansfeld, twelve
thousand English foot, or rather “a rabble of raw and poor rascals,”
torn straight from civil employments by the press-gang, were
landed on the coast of Holland with five days’ provisions, without
money or credit, and with orders to march on the Palatinate and
defeat the veteran armies that had been mustered for its defence
from beyond the Alps, the Pyrenees and the Bohemian Forest.
Not only did Buckingham neglect to plan the co-operation of a
sufficient force from France, Denmark, or any other of the powers
friendly to our object, but he disregarded till too late the ex-

1625] BUCKINGHAM 133

pressed wishes of the Dutch, at a moment when we were landing
on their shore an armament so strangely dependent on their gener-
osity for equipment and even for subsistence. Cast away, like their
descendants on the Isle of Walcheren, the army perished of cold,
starvation, and plague. “ All day,” wrote one of the colonels, “we
go about for victuals and bury our dead.” The survivors, too few
to venture out against the enemy, lingered in Holland till nine-
tenths of their number had deserted or died.

Our men had been sacrificed to the Duke’s latest fancy to marry Fatal
Charles to a Princess of France. Fearing that the Houses, if they riage Ge
met before the ceremony had taken place, would declare against Charles I,
it as effectually as they had declared against the match with Spain, May, 1625
he had persuaded James not to hold the intended autumn session of
1624. Rather than go to Parliament for supply at the crisis of the
new marriage treaty, Buckingham thought it a light thing to wage
war without money and to fling twelve thousand Englishmen naked
on the shores of Holland, as a gambler flings dice upon the board.
Thus when England was about to strike her first blow in the battle,
he wrenched from her uplifted hand the magic sword, without which
it was decreed that she could not conquer—the union of Crown
and Parliament. The fatal marriage of Charles I. with Henrietta
Maria, sister of the King of France, celebrated by proxy in front of
the doors of Notre Dame de Paris, before his first Parliament could
meet to forbid the banns, ensured that this severance of Crown
and Commons would be perpetuated from generation to generation.
Buckingham, the evil match-maker, had prepared twofold ruin for
the House of his friend. For as soon as Charles had ceased to
mourn for the murdered Duke, and learnt to love his wife, she led
him in silken bands the straight way to the scaffold. Nor could
the Spanish match itself have bien more fatal in the end; for when
the children born of this French union were called back to sit on
their father’s throne, it was not any longer Spain, but France
under Louis XIV. that persecuted Protestantism and threatened
England ; and so because the second Charles and the second James
clave to their mother’s people and to their mother’s gods, the House
of Stuart forfeited a second time the allegiance of the English.

The girl of fifteen who landed in June as Queen of England,
gossipping to her French women of the dances and duels of their
land, and aglow with virtuous recollections of her confessor’s precepts

Charles’s
first Par-
liament,
June-Aug.,
1625

Refusal of
supplies

134 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1625

for conduct among heretics, looked or felt no more like a Queen of
tragedy than did Marie Antoinette on her way from Vienna to
Versailles. Yet Henrietta Maria was bringing into England the
feud of parties yet unformed, the wild terrors of the Popish Plot,
the furies of the Exclusion Bill, and the wrath that should unite
bitter foes to drive back her son James II. to the land whence now
she came.

In the first Parliament of the new reign, the old quarrel broke
out afresh. Charles had some cause to feel incensed ; under the
leadership of Sir Robert Phelips, the Commons refused supplies for
a war which they had demanded fifteen months back, and named
as unfit for his post the man whom they had then hailed as
“saviour”. Such inconsistency Charles could only attribute to the
spirit of faction. But the members saw good reason for a change
of attitude: last autumn, when Parliament was most needed, its
summons had been postponed, in order that the nation might be
tricked into a Catholic marriage, which it was now disloyal openly
to assail, but unpatriotic not secretly to resent. The first fruits
of this alliance had been, not the recovery of the Palatinate by
French aid, but the loan of English ships to reduce the Huguenots
of Rochelle, the port where for fifty years, in peace or war, English
sailors had been welcomed as brothers in arms. And meanwhile
Mansfeld’s regiments had perished of want. All these disasters
were the work of the Duke, from whom, therefore, the Commons
were right to withdraw their misplaced confidence.

Their conduct in curtailing supplies for a war which they had
instigated is less easy to judge. It was indeed not without reason
that they refused supply, until some check was put upon the power
of the incompetent Duke, and until the King and his Minister
consented to give some general indication of the purposes for which
they intended to use the grant. But one motive that prompted
the Commons to close their purses was less reasonable. They com-
plained that they were drawn into a general war on the continent,
when they had contemplated a maritime duel with Spain. Far
from indifferent to the fate of the German Protestants, they were
so ill-informed as to imagine Spain the only bar to the restoration
of the Palatinate Prince. Ignoring Austria, they supposed that
a blow to the Spanish shipping on the Atlantic coasts would be

1625] BUCKINGHAM 135

seriously felt on the Rhine. It was a mistake natural to country
gentlemen whose instruction in current foreign affairs was confined

to conversations with merchants of the seaports, and whose stock

of general history was limited to the Elizabethan epic of how
England had saved Europe on the sea, The minister whose duty

it was to instruct them from the level of an informed and responsible
diplomacy, would lay no plans or explanations before Parliament,

and was himself as deeply ignorant as its members of the real
conditions of success abroad. Charles, seeing that he could not Dissolu-
obtain supplies without first giving security for their employment, tee AEB H
only waited till Buckingham was named in debate, to dissolve the
Houses for interfering with his choice of servants.

The six months that intervened between his first and second The Cadiz

Parliament were marked by fresh follies in diplomacy and fresh Sere
disasters in war. An expedition which was sent to capture Cadiz, 1625
the emporium of Spain and America, would, if successful, have
gratified the desires of England, but not have efeeiéd the celtel of
the Palatinate. The city had thirty years before been carried at a
rush by the sea-dogs who sailed with Raleigh into its harbour, and
the hardened veterans who followed Essex and Vere over its walls.
But on this occasion it was perfectly safe when assailed by crews
prostrated by sickness and starvation, mismanaging rotten ships
under the orders of captains ignorant of the sea, and by ploughmen
and footpads suddenly collected according to the principles of Sir
John Falstaff to do duty as English soldiers. ‘The expedition was
perhaps the lowest point ever reached by our warfare on sea and
Jand.}

Meanwhile, the Duke, not content to wage unsuccessful war on Breach
Spain, deliberately sacrificed the friendship of France, to pur- ous.
chase which he had already by the royal marriage paid away the
good-will of Parliament and mortgaged the future of England.

An understanding with Richelieu, if steadily cultivated, would
have led to active alliance and the recovery of the Palatinate.
But because the Cardinal refused to commit France instantly to a
war dependent on two such weather-cocks as Charles and Bucking-
ham, the Duke conceived the same personal grievance that had
led him two years before to break with Spain. It is said that he

1Qppenheim, pp. 219-21. Firth’s C. A., pp. 3, 4.

136 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1626

marked his change of attitude by making love openly to the French
King’s wife. ‘The quarrel between Buckingham and Louis XIIL.
was enhanced by a coolness between Charles and Henrietta Maria.
A short-lived revival of persecution against the Catholics, in direct
contravention of the terms of the marriage treaty which the husband
insisted on regarding as an insignificant formality, gave large scope
for conjugal recrimination. Louis, incensed as a man at Charles’s
breach of faith to his sister, and perhaps also by the addresses
of Buckingham to his wife, was called upon as King to protect the
shipping of his subjects, still neutral towards Spain, from confisca-
tion by English searchers. England and France drifted into a war
that stultified the general European policy of both combatants.
The moment that we began hostilities with the French, all hope
that either country could effect anything against Spain or Austria
was at an end; this fact was so patent that the Duke could not
blind Parliament to the truth, even by undertaking, with huge
Protestant bluster, the relief of those very Huguenots whom he had
been helping Richelieu to suppress.
Charles's The quarrel with France had not reached the stage of war
Site when Charles convoked his second Parliament. The Duke’s atti-
ment, tude to our Parliamentary institutions was more friendly than
Feb.-June, the implacable sullenness of the King, or the far-sighted hostility
of Strafford. The first prolonged attempt to govern without
summoning the estates of the realm had been adopted as a policy
by James before Buckingham’s rise to power, and the second was
only instituted after his assassination. ‘The Duke’s vanity and
love of applause made him a constant victim to the delusion that
he could yet, by some great stroke of diplomacy or war, convert
the Commons to acclaim him as the greatest of warrior statesmen.
In this hope, bright to the very last, lived and died the most
incompetent of all English war ministers. Instead of imprisoning
the leaders who had thwarted him in 1625, he had them pricked
as sheriffs, so that they were disqualified for the House in 1626.
This device, which kept Coke and Sir Robert Phelips from their
accustomed seats, thereby brought to the front a patriot of loftier
mind than the old dragon of the law, and of even higher ability
than the knight of Somerset who had led the last Parliament.
Sir John Sir John Eliot, the squire of St. Germans and Vice-Admiral
Eliot of Devon, had watched the Cadiz armament leave and return to

1626] BUCKINGHAM 137
\

Plymouth; he had seen the bad food, the rotten ships, the tackle,

some of which had been used in the chase after the Armada, the

English sailors starving in port, and the English soldiers robbing

from farm to farm in their own country. Bound though he was

to Buckingham by old service and friendship, Eliot determined

that it would be his duty, if he were sent up to Parliament, to

remove that man from his place. By undertaking this task, which

he conceived specially incumbent on him as a private member,

he stepped at once into the informal leadership left vacant by

Coke and Phelips. He instituted the impeachment of the Duke Impeach-

before the Lords, this being then the only means of obtaining Sn
ie g

change of minister. ‘The Commons showed, by frequent advances, ham and

that they would be satisfied if the Duke retired from office; but igh

when Charles refused to consider their resolutions, they could only Parlia-

enforce their complaint of incompetence by converting it into Ohno

charge of crime. Yet Buckingham could not be proved guilty,

unless folly becomes criminal through excess. The confusion of

the royal accounts baffled inquiry into the charges of peculation ;

but it is probable that he was innocent, for the favourite had no

need to acquire money by stealth. Charles, who loved Buckingham

as he never loved Strafford, took up his cause with passion. To

save the Duke he dissolved the Parliament.

After the dissolution England continued to drift rapidly into war Charles,
with France. If Buckingham was to blame for the first set of the a ae
current in that direction, Charles was chiefly responsible for the final French
catastrophe. He claimed that France should recognise him as the ¥ing
official Protector of Louis’ armed Huguenot subjects ; he refused to
consider a compromise on the shipping dispute, which Richelieu
would willingly have found ; so little did he think apology due to
his wife and his brother-in-law for ignoring the terms of the
marriage treaty, that he embittered their resentment by chasing
out of the country the French attendants of the Queen. In all
this he gave not a thought to the feelings of his wife, or the pride
of the French King, nor yet did he consider the consequences of
war between the two countries, or the expectations which his written
undertaking to relieve the English Catholics had of course aroused.

He tried the situation solely by the touchstone of his own honour.
This honour, as he conceived, lay not in the strict observation of
his faith as a man, still less in the fulfilment of his duties as a

Expedi-
tion to
Rochelle,
1627

The
Forced
Loan,
1626-27

138 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1627

King, but in the exaction of all to which, as King or as man, he
felt himself entitled. Faithful and just only to the very few who
won his personal affection, he pursued through long years this ideal
of a selfish honour, utterly regardless of the rights, the wishes or
the resisting force of those with whom he dealt ; till at the end of his
life, surprised and indignant to the Jast, he was brought face to
face with the failure that is almost invariably the lot of one who
judges others solely by their relation to himself.

When the war finally broke out in 1627, an expedition was sent
to seize the Island of Rhé off Rochelle as a basis for English com-
merce and privateering at the expense of France, secured by the
neighbourhood and alliance of the great Huguenot port. Bucking-
ham himself went in command. He showed personal courage,
vigour, industry, and fair talents as a commander, but he had
already prepared ruin for his generalship by his folly as a diplo-
matist, a war minister, and a politician. The engagement in
hostilities at once with France, with Spain, and with the Catholics
of Germany, rendered success in any quarter impossible ; the troops
he had prepared for himself to lead to Rhé were beggarly, untrained
and mutinous ; England, that should have volunteered to support
his efforts, was alienated by his politics, and torn by a fierce.struggle
with the King’s officers over the Forced Loan. As the whole system
of government was out of gear, the fleet that should have rein-
forced the Duke on the Isle of Rhé never arrived; the French
army came across from the mainland, attacked the English as they
attempted to re-embark, and slaughtered them without resistance.
Forty English flags were hung up in Notre Dame de Paris. With
less than half the eight thousand who had sailed, Buckingham
came home from a disgrace which stung to fury a proud nation,
already in conflict with its governors.

Since the dissolution of 1626, Charles had been driven, by the
cost of so many wars, into a measure which brought violence and
misery into the homes of all classes of his subjects, and taught
them by personal experience to dread the approach of a despotic
system. ‘The refusal of a Free Gift led to the extraction of a
Forced Loan. It differed from taxation in nothing but name; the
payments were assessed like a subsidy, and enforced by severe
punishment. In the preamble of the Commission for its levy,
Charles urged the state of the continent ; the destruction at Lutter

1627] BUCKINGHAM 139

of the last hope of Protestantism, the Danish Army; the impend-
ing advance of Wallenstein to plant the banners of the Catholic Alli-
ance along the shores of the Baltic and the Northern Sea; the need
of immediate interference, if we would not see the whole continent
closed to our goods and armed for our destruction. But the appeal
to religion and to commerce was made in vain. Merchants saw
their interests in no other war save the maritime attack on Spain ;
Puritans were agreed that Buckingham could not, even if he would,
save the German Protestants ; all detested the French war, to which
in fact every other object was being sacrificed. The future was to
show that our ancestors better served the Protestant cause, whose
present need the Swedish champion would supply, by preserving
England from despotism and bringing the central government
under the control of popular feeling, than they would have done
by waging futile war such as a nation, in bonds but not yet
reconciled to despotism, is likely to wage under incompetent
masters.

Commissioners for the Forced Loan were appointed in each

/ county, with power to summon their neighbours, assess them man
by man, and send each case of resistance before the Privy Council.
Many, to escape ruin, paid with wrath in their hearts; but others
preferred to suffer. Some eighty gentlemen were imprisoned ; poor
men, to whom the laws of England were no less dear, were pressed
into the army, that their families might beg in the streets, while
French and Austrian did execution on their bodies. The agitation
and resistance specially convulsed East Anglia, London and its
neighbourhood, and the south-western shires.

Meanwhile, the condition and conduct of the troops newly levied Martial
for the foreign expeditions, added to the general suspicion and ee
distress. In the reign of terror that followed in every district on

the establishment of the Loan Commission, men saw a new and

sinister meaning in the mutiny law by which the new recruits were
held together, they resented as a despot’s revenge the licence of
the starving soldiers, and detected a design to enslave the country
in the system of billeting which a penniless and incompetent war
ministry had no alternative but to adopt. Thus the question of
the Forced Loan became closely connected in the popular mind
with the question of Martial Law.

Charles struggled for more than a year to carry on war by

140 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1628

Failure of continental methods of despotism, but without the continental

Charles’s
first at-
tempt at
desp
1626-27.

Charles’s
third
Parlia-
ment,
March,
1628-
March,
1629

Temper
of the
nation

conditions for success. He employed no trained bureaucracy, and
his subjects were without traditions of obedience. The Commis-

otism, sioners of his Loans, suddenly chosen out to oppress neighbours

whose interests they shared and whose friendship they valued, had
in many cases themselves refused to pay: they were very different
men from Richelieu’s Intendants. The gentry who bearded the
Privy Council and marched off indignantly to prison, bore little
resemblance to the nobles of the Fronde. The common people
who refused the loan at the risk of being sent to die oversea, were
not the “ taillables,” or “taxables,” as the peasantry were called
who for century after century paid with their blood and sweat for
all the follies of France. Even Charles and Buckingham began to
realise that it was hardly with such material so managed that they
could conquer at the same instant, France and Spain, the Baltic
and the Palatinate. The attempt had only produced anarchy at
home. Charles had two alternatives: either to wage war by consti-
tutional methods, or to make peace as a preliminary to despotism ;
to summon Parliament, or to change his foreign policy. In 1628
he chose the first alternative, though it was not to be long before
he adopted the second. So in March the Parliament met that was
to pass the Petition of Right.

The English were now roused to lay claim to that privilege
which for so long afterwards distinguished them from other
nations—the right of the individual to free enjoyment of person
and property, up to limits fixed by known law. Under James I.
rulers and ruled had confined their quarrel to religion, finance, and
foreign affairs. Occasional arbitrary imprisonments had escaped
the censure of men who had seen the popular Elizabethan system
secure itself against suspected traitors by like acts of authority.
But now the practice of arbitrary imprisonment had been abused :
it was being applied on a far more extensive scale, not in defence
of the State but in an attack on the property of all classes. These
measures had indeed failed as part of a war policy, but they might
succeed in time of peace, unless they were at once branded with an
official stigma of national disapproval, and unless the existing laws,
protecting a man from restraint and violence at the pleasure of his
rulers, were interpreted beyond all doubt by a new statute. The
passage of such a law through Parliament would be neither easy

1628] BUCKINGHAM 141

nor safe. The leaders well knew that their privileges would pro-
tect them from Charles’s vengeance only until the dissolution,
which might well be as sudden as those of 1625 and 1626. So
long as the Commons had no voice in the selection of the King’s
Ministers—and until 1640 they had no voice whatever—every man
who spoke against the Government on the floor of the House was
not talking himself into office but into prison. The Petition of
Right could only be carried if the House were led by men who had
neither private ambitions nor private fears, who were prepared to
sacrifice liberty, happiness, and life, for the freedom of others.
Fortunately, at the elections of 1628 the constituencies ‘had very
generally at their command a type of candidate now long vanished
from the world—the Puritan squire.

When the gentlemen who had refused the Loan were released The men
from prison, they and their like were carried to the head of the® wks
poll as representatives of the townsmen and of the yeomen, no less
than of their own class. They were accustomed to mix in daily
converse with all, and had at heart the interests and passions of all
ranks save the agricultural labourer. Yet they themselves were
aristocrats.

The House of Commons (writes a contemporary) was both yesterday and
to-day as full as one could sit by another. And they say it is the most noble,
magnanimous assembly that ever those walls contained; and I heard a lord
estimate they were able to buy the Upper House (His Majesty alone excepted)
thrice over, notwithstanding there be of lords temporal the number of 118.
And what lord in England would be followed by so many freeholders as some
of those are? ?

The House of Lords was composed partly of the unpopular
nouveaux riches who had risen by sycophancy at James’s Court, and
partly of the heirs to great old houses ruined by the prodigal
expense which custom then imposed for the maintenance of their
dignity: they let the initiative pass to the Commons Chamber,
which was filled with men of wealth and prestige who yet pos-
sessed the popular sympathies, the refinement, and the self-control
of that generation of our Puritans. These were not the fierce
partisans who in 1643 tried to force Presbyterianism on England,
But, being themselves Puritan, they maintained the Puritan in-
fluence in the Church of England, and the Puritan spirit in the

1 Court and Times of Charles I.,i., p. 33%.

The Peti-
tion of
Right

142 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS | [1628

State; while their enemies, the High Churchmen, were already
preaching the absolute power of the King and the sinfulness of
refusing the Forced Loan. In this Parliament the issue of slavery
and freedom was treated by men whose speeches combined culture
with simplicity, religion with common-sense, and democratic lean-
ings with aristocratic dignity of sentiment and utterance. Even
Coke, in such an atmosphere, forgot to hope or fear for himself,
forgot all save his great love of the laws of England. In the stately,
simple, poetical English of the time, Wentworth, Seymour and
Selden, Phelips, Eliot and Pym pleaded the cause of posterity,
while Hampden, Cromwell and hundreds more listened with a
passion that sometimes broke forth in tears.’

To secure the rights of the individual to person and property,
the Commons left aside all questions of State which might confuse
the issue or imperil the result, and drew up a Petition of Right,
in terms as brief and expressive as those of Magna Carta, on the
four cardinal points—Billeting, Martial Law, Arbitrary Taxation
and Arbitrary Imprisonment.

Billeting and Martial Law had perhaps caused the greatest
quantity of actual distress. Unable to feed and control the raw
levies at the ports of embarkation, Buckingham had left them

1 Examples of their oratory may not be uninteres ting to a posterity which owes
them such a debt.

Eliot, speaking of the importance of the question of the Forced Loan, says: ‘ Yes
it is of more; more than is pretended; more than can be uttered. Upon this dis-
pute not alone our lands and goods are engaged, but all that we call ours. These
rights, these privileges, which made our fathers freemen, are in question. If they
be not the more carefully preserved, they will I fear render us to posterity less free,
less worthy than our fathers, For this particular admits a power to antiquate the
laws” (G., vi., p. 233).

Phelips, speaking of the decision of the Judges in favour of arbitrary imprison-
ment, says: “I can live, although another without title be put to live with me (viz.,
billeted on me); nay I can live though I pay excises and impositions more than I
do; but to have the liberty which is the soul of my life taken from me by power,
and to be pent up in a gaol without remedy by law, and to be so adjudged to perish
in gaol; O improvident ancestors! O unwise forefathers! To be so curious in
providing for the quiet possession of our lands and liberties of Parliament, and to
neglect our persons and bodies, and to let them die in prison, and that durante
beneplacito, remediless. If this be law, why do we talk of our liberties?”? And
again: ‘ Let the House consider to prepare our grievances fit for His Majesty’s view
—not to make a law to give us new liberties but declaration with respective penalties ;
so that those which violate them, if they would be vile, they should fear infamy
with men. And then we shall think of such a supply as never Prince received, and
with our moneys we shall give him our hearts and give him a new people raised
from the dead. Then I hope this Parliament will be entituled the Parliament of
Wonders, and God’s judgments diverted, and these beams of goodness shall give
us life, and we shall go home to our Countries (Counties), and leave our Posterities
as free as our Ancestors left us” (Rushworth, i., pp. 504, 505).

1628} BUCKINGHAM 143

scattered about through the inland counties; and having no
money to pay inn-keepers, had made them chargeable on the in-
habitants. The soldiers not only robbed and insulted the hosts
on whom they were quartered, but broke loose in companies upon
the country-side to pillage, rape and murder; in some parts the
highways and markets were deserted, and men durst not venture
to church on Sunday, lest in their absence their homes should
become a prey to bandits, armed at the King’s expense and
clothed in something of the King’s authority. The attempt to
restrain these rascals by Martial Law only incensed the jealous
population. Men heard with alarm that the soldiers who had
robbed them had been hanged by Courts Martial, which might
next be employed to punish all who resisted the Government ; for
the jurisdiction of these courts was not confined to the military,
but had already been extended to cases lying between soldier and
civilian. In these cases the officers were accused of partiality.
When a countryman, who had seen his thatch fired and his horses
carried off by a company of pikemen, appeared before the Court
Martial with the tale of his wrongs, and was dismissed with scant
courtesy by a harassed colonel whose troops had disappeared and
who did not understand his dialect, he went home in no humour
to regard Martial Law as a necessity, or Billeting as a privilege.
The sound prejudice of the English against militarism, silently
grown up during a hundred ‘years of peace and civil life under the
Tudors, now caused an outbreak of public feeling, which found
voice at Westminster. The members recalled in their speeches
how Rome had perished through the “insolency of the soldiers,”
and what the Turkey merchants reported of the Janissaries. And
so the charter of the most civilian nation of Europe was laid down
in the Petition of Right. Statutory form was given to the principles
that no man can be punished except by the ordinary civil tribunals
of the land, and that “no man is forced to take soldiers, but inns
and they to be paid for them”. By this great Act not only was
arbitrary Government deprived of powers which it would soon
have learnt to use as a political weapon, but the civilian nature
of life under the British flag was secured till the present day. The
Stuarts never obtained leave to become military despots ; Cromwell,
who insisted, thereby ruined his cause. When at last a standing
army was found imperative, the annual mutiny bill secured contro}

144 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1628

by Parliament, and the countryman saw without alarm the inns
crowded with the red-coats of King William or King George, pay-
ing their bills like common travellers. Best of all, the King could
not empower military commissions to put his subjects to trial.+

But if Billeting and Martial Law had caused most distress,
Arbitrary Taxation and Arbitrary Imprisonment had aroused most
agitation. For while grievances under the first head might be
accounted the act of an incompetent war ministry struggling with
its difficulties, those under the second were clearly the act of a
Government feeling its way to a system of despotism. ‘Therefore
the Petition of Right, after recalling the statutes and precedents
of Plantagenet times prayed that—
no man hereafter be compelled to make or yield any gift, loan, benevolence,
tax or such like charge, without common consent by Act of Parliament.
But most of all had feeling been stirred by the imprisonment
without trial of the eighty gentlemen for refusing the loan.
It was Richelieu’s system of lettres de cachet. The Petition
exposed how
divers of your subjects have of late been imprisoned without any cause
showed, and when for their deliverance they were brought before your Justices,
by your Majesty’s writs of Habeas Corpus, there to undergo and receive as the
court should order, and their keepers commanded to certify the causes of their
detainer ; no cause was certified, but that they were detained by your Majesty’s
special command, signified by the Lords of your Privy Council, and yet were

returned back to their several prisons, without being charged with anything
to which they might make answer according to the law.

Wherefore the Petition prays that

no freeman, in any such manner as before mentioned, be imprisoned or
detained.

Such were the four points of the Petition—Martial Law, Billet-
ing, Arbitrary Taxation, Arbitrary Imprisonment. It is remarkable
that, though one of the chief grievances was compulsory enlistment
in the army of men who had refused the Loan, nothing was said
in the Petition to forbid pressing. For all knew that, so long as
no standing army was allowed, the press-gang must be used in
emergencies to fill the ranks of the hasty levies by which England
then waged war.

In 1569 Queen Elizabeth had allowed 600 of her rebel subjects to be executed
by military commissions (Stephen, i., P- 210).

1628] BUCKINGHAM 145

The Lords, after one attempt to make the meaning of the terms The Lords
less clear, endorsed the Petition as it stood. There was a Court Pe aha
party among the newer peers; but the old families of England tion
regarded the supremacy of Villiers as an insult to themselves; and
it was neither their social nor political interest to allow a system
of despotism to be established, which would reduce the hereditary
influence of all whom it did not admit into its counsels. The Peti-
tion, together with a bribe of five subsidies, was offered by both
Houses to the King. He had to choose between accepting the
terms and dissolving Parliament ; between money for a constitutional
war policy and a beggared despotism of peace. For a week he
hesitated, and on one day seemed to have decided for a breach.

But the attitude of the Lords and his own desire to avenge his
honour on France, outweighed his resentment. He made the Charles
Petition a statute of the realm. London and all England broke alae
into rejoicings which recalled the night of the return from Spain. 1628”
For men believed that the King’s heart was softened, or his reason
convinced ; on the night of the bonfires it was believed that he
had sent the Duke to the Tower. But that heart was never
softened, that reason was never convinced; and the blood of his
friend was soon to flow, a dividing stream, between the King and
his people. England was at the beginning, not at the end, of the
struggle for the principles of the Petition of Right. But its
acceptance had put law on the side of personal freedom, and in
those days the law was, next to the Bible, the learning of English-
men.

The apparent reconciliation did not last a week. ‘The Commons, Remon-
who regarded the Petition of Right as a digression that ought never Perey

; gains
to have been made necessary, proceeded at once to deal with all the Bucking-
current questions of Church and State. Of these the most pressing fees trth
was the continuance of the Duke’s rule over a nation that detested
him. In their Remonstrance of 11th June, the Commons enumer-
ated his shortcomings and prayed for his removal. Charles replied
by proroguing Parliament and sending down Buckingham to Ports-
mouth with every mark of honour, to put himself at the head of a
last expedition to relieve Rochelle. But the Remonstrance was not
without effect: for the terms in which it denounced the Duke had
suggested. to a fearless mind the terrible error of Brutus and of
Ravaillac.

10

146 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1628

Murder of | Waggoners, wending through the August harvests in the dust
Pees of the Portsmouth road, gave friendly lifts to a needy and impatient
am, 231 z * D

Aug. 1628 pedestrian, lieutenant of the late army of Rhé, but unpromoted,
unpaid and starving, and seemingly oppressed with melancholy.
In this way Felton reached the city where our ships rode waiting
for the wind for France, found the Duke, and stabbed him dead at
a blow.

England burst into rejoicings. Men drank the murderer’s
health in the London streets. Popular songs were composed and
sung in his honour.! To avoid outrage from the mob, the Duke’s
body received secret interment in the Abbey; at the false funeral
next day, the city train-bands, who protected the hearse, shouldered
arms and beat up their drums, as if they were marching to a
Coronation.

Obvious causes can be assigned for this shameless approval of
murder. Buckingham had been saddled on England, and her
repeated efforts to throw him had been defeated ; the honours with
which the men of Athens perpetuated the memory of Harmodius
and Aristogiton, are always liable to find a counterpart in modern
civilisation when a proud people is governed against its will by one
whom it detests. Moreover, though the long Tudor peace had
tamed, it had not eradicated the murderous instincts of the Middle
Ages. The Englishman already had less frequent recourse to sword
and knife than the men of more military nations, but there still
lurked in him something of the savage. Even in the later part
of the century, one side plotted the murder of the regicides and
of William III., and the other undertook the assassination of
Charles II.

The echo of these brutal rejoicings penetrated to the Palace,
where the King was struggling with the greatest sorrow of his life.
With that dignity wherein his real virtue lay, he dissembled the
violence of grief and rage ; but it cannot be that he ever forgave
or forgot the joy of his people at the murder of his friend. After

1E.g., Awake, sadde Britaine, and advance at last
Thy drooping heade; let all thy sorrows past
Be drownde and sunke with theire owne teares, and nowe
O’erlooke thy foes with a triumphant browe.
Thy foe, Spaine’s agent, Holland’s bane, Rome’s frend,
By a victorious hand receivde his ende.
Live ever Felton, thou hast turned to dust
Treason, ambition, murther, pride, and lust.—(Rous, p. 29.)

1628] BUCKINGHAM 147

Buckingham he never loved any man; he had many good servants,
but never again one that was dear to him.

So the fleet sailed without the Duke. When they arrived off Second

Rochelle and saw the mole that the war-like Cardinal had piled ee
across the harbour guarded by the gallant gentlemen and disciplined Rochelle,
mercenaries of France, the pressed merchantmen, of which the Eng- oo
lish armament chiefly consisted, refused to go into action. The
surrender of Rochelle within sight of our mutinous fleet was a
fit ending to the most disgraceful period of our military annals.
Charles, anxious to lay aside all weights in his contest with Parlia-
ment, hastened to make peace with France, Spain and the German
Catholics. He was beginning to feel the wounds to his honour at
home even more acutely than the wounds to his honour abroad.
His subjects were on their side not unwilling that he should make
peace. The war-fever had died down. Men felt what they scarcely
liked to confess, that long years of apprenticeship would be needed
before England recovered her ancient mastery of the craft of war.
In four years articled to Buckingham she had learnt nothing.

England paid by occasional periods of inefficiency for the high Causes of
social and political privilege of being the most civilian country in Military
Europe. She had no continuous school of military traditions, not ficiency
even the nucleus of a standing army, no gentry or burgherdom
proud in arms and trained in private wars. When a force was
needed to cross the seas, martial ardour was so faint that the
regiments had to be created by the press-gang ; nor would public
opinion suffer any but rogues and weaklings, whom their neighbour-
hood could well spare, to be carried off on ill-managed expeditions
on which it was usual for the greater part to perish. This system,
which Shakespeare ridiculed and Cromwell reformed, Buckingham
could only accept.

Nor could England make up in quantity what was lacking in
quality. She resembled all countries of that age in being poor ;
but she differed from France and Spain in not being large and
populous. Like every one else, the English were agriculturists,
whose wealth could not easily be realised in money; but unlike
the French and Spaniards, they were extremely jealous of paying a
~ moderate proportion of their money in taxes to the King. For
these reasons the size of our force in war, under Elizabeth and the
first Stuarts, was ludicrously small. But in Elizabeth’s day it had

Book of
Sports,
1618

148 -£NGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1618

been unequalled in quality, because, in time of nominal peace, a
decade of piracy at sea and volunteering in the Netherlands had
prepared a large navy and a very small army for the death struggle
with Spain.’ To the civilian English such a training was indis-
pensable ; and so, because James had given us twenty years of real
peace (1604-24), at the outbreak of the second Spanish war the
island that contained the best material for an army, sent out what
was actually the worst military force in Europe. The generation
whose fathers had served under Drake, Raleigh and Vere, whose
sons were to follow Blake, Rupert and Cromwell, were themselves
the jest of Spanish cloisters and French guard-rooms.?

The final rupture of Charles with Parliamentary institutions,
which took place when the Houses reassembled after the murder
of Buckingham, was largely due to the religious situation. James L.,
after the fatal expulsion of the 300 Puritan clergy with which
he inaugurated his reign, had made no further assault on Pro-
testantism within the Church. His issue of the Book of Sports,
the Declaration in which he authorised but did not command the
continuance of the old English Sunday games, was in no sense a
persecution. He published it only in one diocese; and even there,
he did not, like Charles and Laud in 1633, force recalcitrant clergy
to read it under pain of deprivation.? Meanwhile, the Puritan
Abbot had succeeded Bancroft as Primate. The doctrinal part of
Calvin’s system was taught, universally at Cambridge and still very
generally at Oxford, to the rising generation of parish clergy ; and
before the time of Laud, alienation from foreign Protestants was
no part of the teaching of the English Church, whose repre-

1 The English regiments in Dutch service, borrowed by Elizabeth for the famous
expedition to Cadiz, were the only first-rate soldiers whom she had at her disposal
(see Vere’s Commentaries, 1657). She was no more able than willing to dismember
the Spanish Empire.

2 Firth’s C. A., chap. i. Oppenheim, pp. 184-301,

3 For the general aspect of the question, see p. 69 above, and L. A. Govett’s
The King’s Book of Sports (1890). A genuine common-sense breathes in the quaint
phrases and quainter provisions of that Declaration. James there ascribes two
evils to the Puritan Sabbath—‘“the one, the hindering of the conversion of many
(Catholics), whom their priests will take occasion hereby to vex, persuading that no
honest mirth or recreation is lawful or tolerable in our Religion. . . . The other
inconvenience is, that this prohibition barreth the common and meaner sort of
people from using such exercises as may make their bodies more able to war, when
we or our successors have occasion to use them. And in place thereof sets up filthy

tipplings and drunkenness, and breeds a number of idle and discontented speeches
in their Ale-houses,”

ie

1620] BUCKINGHAM 149

sentatives were sent over by James to the Calvinistic Synod of
Dort.

Besides this official sanction of the dogmas of continental Spread of

Calvinism, the spirit and practice of English Puritanism was ae
making its own way without any such encouragement. In many restrained
villages and in every town a few zealous men, of whom the parson pa
was sometimes but not always one, were gradually training their
neighbours in the habits of Bible reading and private prayer. As
the law and the Bishops prohibited conventicles and meetings
outside the regular service, these practices the more readily assumed
a domestic or individual nature; the Englishman’s house became
his church, and his family the congregation. ‘These customs and
the accompanying habits of thought and imagination, which were
for long the heart of English religion, more even than the sacra-
mental system, were fixed during this period by the efforts of
“conformist Puritans”. ‘These men did a work which the sacra-
mentalists were never afterwards able, as many of them have never
been willing, to eradicate. Thus an active propaganda, indifferent
rather than hostile to Episcopacy, began to secure England against
the possibility of Roman reaction, by creating in a large proportion
of the population a genuine zeal for Protestant religion. Mean-
' while, the pressure of the Penal Laws from 1605-20, drove to
church all but the richer or the more determined Catholics; the
forced recruits found no attraction in the domestic worship of their
Puritan neighbours; but in the antique glamour of the village
church, where for generations uncounted their ancestors had bowed
to Host and Rood, they listened with mingled feelings to the piety
of early and medizval Christendom revealed in the stately English
of the Book of Common Prayer.

Thus while there was no toleration there was a fairly wide
comprehension. James's reign was a “peace of the Church,” and
brought forth the fruits of peace. But he had already sown the
seeds of future disruption. The 300 ‘‘silenced brethren,” the
stalwarts of Puritanism expelled in 1604, remained in the eyes of
the gentlemen of the Lower House a grievance unredressed, and
formed a nucleus round which dissent and rebellion would surely
gather, if any further attack were made on the position of the
_ conformist Puritans who remained in the Episcopalian Church.

About the year 1620 the storm began to brew. Strong Pro-

Attack on
Puritan-

ism in the
new reign

The High
Church-
men are
Erastians
and Ab-
solutists

150 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1625

testants of all sections were drawn together by a vague sense of
approaching peril, which thenceforward inspired every word and
action of the House of Commons. Domestic persecution had not
yet actually arisen, but the Catholic victories on the continent, the
threatened Spanish match, the relaxation of the Penal Laws as
an earnest of that policy, tended to identify nationalist with
Puritan feeling. So James I., when he died, left Protestants
angry and suspicious, and bold in the consciousness of represent-
ing general opinion.

In the first years of Charles’s reign, while the Catholic reaction
still gathered force on the continent and rolled daily nearer to our
shores, an internal danger suddenly arose to threaten the position
of Protestants in the Church of England. The most advanced
leaders of the High Church school obtained the ear of favourite
and King, and established at Whitehall their personal influence,
which had long dominated certain Colleges at Oxford. Both sides
perceived that the truce observed by James was at an end, that an
attempt would at last be made to drive out of the Church the dis-
tinctively Protestant element. But to expel from the Church was
in those days to expel from England, for no one contemplated the
recognition of Nonconformist bodies. Charles, if he listened to
Laud’s views of Anglicanism, would have to fulfil his father’s
threat against the Puritans, and “harry them out of the land”,
The Parliaments determined to strike before they were struck, and
in the sessions of 1625-29 attacked individually the High Church
protégés of the Court. Both sides entered on a war of extermina-
tion in self-defence, which ended in 1689 with the nobler victory of
toleration.

What, then, were the tenets of the small band of High Anglican
divines who, weak in popular sympathy, but strong in their control
of the executive power in Church and State, undertook the de-
struction of Puritanism in England?

In the first place they were Erastian in Church affairs, and
Absolutist in politics. They tried to realise their conception of
the English branch of the Catholic Church, not by apostolical
methods, but by inviting the personal interference of the King in
the details of ecclesiastical government. In return, they main-
tained his authority, even in matters purely political. The High
Churchmen whom Charles’s early Parliaments attacked, had used

1627] BUCKINGHAM 151

the pulpit and the religious press to urge the payment of the
Forced Loan as a Christian duty, and to vindicate anti-legal
theories of prerogative.

If (wrote Manwaring) any King shall command that which stand not in
any opposition to the original laws of God, nature, nations, and the Gospel
(though it be not correspondent in every circumstance to laws national and
municipal), no subject may, without hazard of his own damnation in rebelling
against God, question or disobey the will and pleasure of his sovereign.

Laud, with more moderation, was content always to interpret
statute and custom favourably to the King. So, too, it followed
that, because Archbishop Abbot was a Puritan, he refused in spite
of Charles’s repeated command to license the publication of a
treatise on royal power, utterly subversive of the laws. He was
suspended from his jurisdiction, which passed, through the con-
trivance of a commission, chiefly into the hands of Laud, Bishop
of London.

The High Churchmen cared no more for the spiritual inde- Laud’s
pendence of the Church, than for the political liberty of the State. eile :
The King was their factotum. To him they applied for advice of his
on all questions, and for support in every act of power. Laud, tied E
writes Creighton, “took no other view of his right to exercise his
office, either of power or jurisdiction, than as derived from the
Crown, and exercisable according to law”. ‘The discipline over
morals, which he exercised in the ecclesiastical courts with a vigour
worthy of the Scottish Kirk, he regarded so little as a spiritual
function that he sometimes consulted Charles about the punish-
ments he should award for sin. In the curious document entitled
the “ Annual Account” of his Province, rendered to the King after
his elevation to the Archbishopric, he asks and obtains orders on
details of Church government. The royal will is expressed in
notes running along the margin, signed C. R. Sometimes they
signify mere assent, as “Do so”. Sometimes they go further, as
“Let me see those exemptions and then I shall declare my further
pleasure”; or, “So that the Catechising be first duly performed, let
them have a Sermon after that if they desire it”. When the dis-
tressed Primate relates his difficulties in the suppression of Puritan
pamphlets, “ what the High Commission cannot do in this,” answers
the royal commentator, “I shall supply, as I shall find cause, in a
more powerful way ”. le

152 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1627

If the King was not Head of the Church in Anglican theory,
he was so in Anglican practice. Had High Churchmen succeeded,
they would have crushed out the right of the individual conscience,
only to substitute a mundane Church State; they would have
taken the heart out of English religion, and reduced it to the like-
ness of French or German State religion under Louis XIV., or the
Lutheran Electors,

The High In the second place these men were Catholics as well as Protes-
pape tants. True religion, to them, involved inclusion in the Catholic
Sacra- Church, which they conceived not as a vague Communion of
ee Saints, but as a visible and law-established body, of which the
dotalists English Church was one branch, the Roman another. But this
theory did not prevent Laud from glorying in the name of Protes-
tant in his frequent and whole-hearted controversies with Roman
antagonists. To the Catholic the Laudians called themselves
Protestants, to the Protestant they called themselves Catholics.
Closely connected with the importance they attached to the
Church was their reverence for her Sacraments. And from their
sacramental conception of religion followed their love of ritual and
their view of the nature and position of the altar. So also the
priest was exalted by virtue not of his personality but of his office,
The habit of private confession to priests was encouraged. Laud
undertook the duty of confessor to Buckingham. Unstable in
religion as in politics, the Duke kept his friends in perpetual fear
of his conversion to Rome, and only remained in the English com-
munion on condition of enjoying there the substantial comforts
which such minds require.
Bases of In the first half of the seventeenth century, a few lovers of
Ay ae) truth, of whom Descartes was the most favoured, indifferent rather
tan theory than hostile to the dogmatists whom they were in no position to
provoke, were obscurely preparing paths by which many have since
made exodus into healthier regions of rational philosophy and
religion. But except these few, no man dared openly seek truth
by his own instinct or reason; each believed that he accepted his
premises from some external authority and drew his conclusions
from some written system of theology. While the Catholic took

: pataey of Anglo-Catholic Theology, Laud’s Works, vol. v., pt. ii., pp. 323-70.
rok aaa aud Commemoration, 1895, pp. 21-64, essays of Creighton and Professor
ollins, ; ;

1627} _ BUCKINGHAM 153

his premises from the Church and his conclusions from the long
and imposing array of her doctrinal pronouncements, the Protes-
tant had for authority the Bible, and for exposition two rival
systems, laboriously manufactured by dull Germans out of Luther’s
word, and out of Calvin’s logic by his Dutch disciples. In the
reign of James I. it might have seemed that the Calvinistic system
of theology, patronised by Crown and Parliament alike, would
stifle thought in England. Yet nothing was in reality less prob-
able. For hidden in the brave heart of English Puritanism was
germinating a principle not to be found in the books of continental
pedants, the right of individual interpretation, which shattered
the Puritan Church in the hour of her victory into a hundred
sects, and destroyed the whole system of Protestant dogmatics.
But in so far as there would have been danger to free-thought
in the unchallenged triumph of Puritan theology, that danger was
now removed by the increased prominence of a rival system. The
Anglican doctors honoured the Bible as one authority, and the
Church as another; they looked for exposition of the ecclesiastical
polity to the acts of Elizabeth and the writings of Hooker, and
for a dogmatic system to the early fathers. They thereby rejected
not only the government of Presbyter and of Pope, but all modern
systems of theology, the cumbrous output of Trent, Geneva and
Wittenberg. ‘They looked for Church government to the Crown,
and for truth to antiquarian research.!

James had upheld the ecclesiastical polity of the High Church- Arminian.
men ; Charles took under his protection their doctrinal system. ‘*™
About the time of his accession, the Anglicans, whose defence of
English insularity was based upon a profound study of the early
fathers, adopted the theories of a contemporary Dutchman. ‘The
doctrine of Free Will promulgated by Arminius was encouraged
by Laud, Charles and Buckingham, because to reject Predestina-
tion was to ruin Calvin’s whole logical structure. The excitement
produced seems now almost incredible. A generation that was
theological as well as religious supposed that all their deepest

1The learning of the Anglicans is much praised, but it was not so much their
antiquarian learning as their freedom from the doctrine of exclusive salvation, that
saved them from some of the Puritan vices. To the Anglican, the jaws of hell were
less wide, and breathed perhaps less material fire, than to the Puritan. Puritanism
and Anglicanism each contained a principle superior to contemporary theologies of

the continent. The one encouraged individual judgment, the other a certain
breadth of mind. ;

Neither

Bide con-
templates
toleration

Session,
2oth Jan.-
and
March,
1629

154 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1629

beliefs and feelings depended on the dispute. ‘The problem which
in every age baffles or divides the acutest metaphysicians, supplied
the catchwords of the two parties in Church and State. Prentices
hooted down the street after the Arminian rogues; courtiers damned
the Predestinate crew. Our ancestors might understand even less
of what they were disputing than did the mobs who massacred one
another for the doctrine of the Homoousion in the cities of the
Eastern Empire ; yet much that every Englishman could appreciate
was for the time involved in the fate of the rival dogmas. The
victory of Free Will would establish a coercive and despotic govern-
ment, a sacramental and priestly religion; while Predestination
implied privilege of Parliament, liberty of person, Protestant
ascendancy, and the agreeable doctrine of exclusive salvation.

So long as Parliament was continually meeting, it was impossible
to begin a vigorous persecution of Puritanism, but every preparation
for such an attempt was being made at Court. Manwaring and
Montague, the clergymen whom the Commons had attacked by
name for their Arminian and absolutist utterances, were rewarded,
the one with a rich living, the other with a Bishopric. Laud,
perpetually closeted with King and favourite, drew up at their
request a list of the leading clergy, marking each name “P” or
“O,” (Puritan or Orthodox), as a guide to the exercise of royal
patronage. ‘The Commons were rightly convinced that the High
Churchmen were striving to acquire not a share but a monopoly.
Indeed, neither side contemplated either a comprehension within, or
a toleration without the Church. If the sovereign power of the
Crown remained untouched for another generation, the Puritans
would have to leave England ; if Parliament became sovereign, the
High Anglicans would no less certainly be crushed out. Thus the
desire for liberty of conscience, then hopelessly involved with the
right to persecute, drove Laud to become Erastian, and changed
the gentlemen of the House of Commons into unconscious aa
tionists. In the brief session of 1629, after the Duke’s murder
the members attempted to dictate an ecclesiastical policy for fhe
kingdom, and thereby proposed in effect, though not yet in name
the sovereignty of Parliament—a doctrine as strange to the ar
stitution as the prerogative theories of Charles.

Tonnage and Poundage were closely connected in their minds
with Predestination and Free Will. If the King was not to have

1629] BUCKINGHAM 155

his way in Church and State, he must depend for supply upon the Tonnage
Houses, He was already prevented from waging war without or =
their consent, for the Petition of Right forbade him to levy direct tion
taxation—“any gift, loan, benevolence, tax or such like charge
without common consent by Act of Parliament”. They now
proposed, by granting him Tonnage and Poundage for one year

only, to make him dependent on them for indirect taxation also;

he would then be unable to carry on prerogative government even

in time of peace. But Charles refused to accept the grant unless

it was given him for life, as it had been given to his father. Mean-

while he continued to levy the duties, relying on the decision which

the Judges had made in Bate’s case, that indirect taxation was
within the power of the Crown.! The House of Commons fell

back upon the doubtful argument that indirect taxation was
covered by the terms of the Petition of Right.

The business of the session of January to March, 1629, can be
read in the famous Three Resolutions :—

Whosoever shall bring in innovation in religion, or by favour seek to extend The Three
or introduce Popery or Arminianism, or other opinions disagreeing from the Resolu-
true and orthodox Church, shall be reputed a capital enemy to this kingdom en
and the commonwealth. 1629

Whosoever shall counsel or advise the taking and levying of the subsidies
of tounage and poundage not being granted by Parliament, or shall be an
actor or instrument therein, shall be likewise reputed an innovator in the
government, and a capital enemy to this kingdom and commonwealth.

If any merchant or other person whatsoever shall voluntarily yield or pay
the said subsidies of tonnage and poundage, not being granted by Parliament;
he shall likewise be reputed a betrayer of the liberty of England, and an
enemy to the same.

Such were the Three Resolutions of the last and greatest day of
Eliot’s Parliamentary career, passed by the shouts of the angry
members, thronging and swaying round the chair into which they
had forced back the frightened Speaker, whilst the blows of the
King’s officers without resounded on the fastened door. When
they had so voted, they flung all open and poured out flushed into
the cold air of heaven, freemen still and already almost rebels.

1 See p. 108 above,

No Parlia-
ment,
1629-40

156 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS | [1629

CHAPTER VI

THE PERSONAL GOVERNMENT OF CHARLES I., 1629-40

Precurse of fierce events,—
As harbingers preceding still the fates,
And prologue to the omen coming on.—Hamlet.

VER since the accession of James, the Commons had been
fighting to recover that indirect influence on the Govern-
ment which they had enjoyed under the House of Lancaster, and
to wring from the Crown the dismissal of Ministers odious to
themselves and to the nation. But at last they had wearied of
the useless struggle and made a bid for direct power. The Lower
House on its own authority had issued ordinances politically
though not legally binding on the nation; for such in effect were
the Three Resolutions. They were declarations of constitutional
revolt. Conservative Puritans like D’Ewes shrank from participa-
tion in the new policy; Wentworth, who though no Puritan, had
opposed Buckingham and supported the Petition of Right, was
a convinced adherent of the King on the question of sovereignty ;
while others who had actually shouted for the Resolutions on that
morning of hot blood, were glad to get safe home and felt
little obligation to abide by what they had done.

On his side, Charles was ready to have Parliament as counsellor,
not as master. But the House of Commons had declared that it
would no longer be contented with the part of a counsellor whose
counsels were always neglected, and as the King was unwilling to
take any part of their advice, he had no alternative but to govern
without Parliaments, until some far distant day when the nation
and its representatives should have come round to his views. Such
was his intention when he dissolved the Houses in March, 1629,
expressed in his memorable proclamation :—

1629) CHARLES i 157

Whereas for several ill ends the calling again of a Parliament is divulged,
however we have showed by our frequent meeting with our people our love
to the use of Parliaments; yet the late abuse having for the present driven
us unwillingly out of that course, we shall account it presumption for any to
prescribe any time unto us for Parliaments, the calling and continuing of
which is always in our own power, and we shall be more inclinable to meet
in Parliament again, when our people shall see more clearly into our intents
and actions, when such as have bred this interruption shall have received
their condign punishment, and those who are misled by them and by such
ill reports as are raised in this occasion, shall come to a better understanding
of us and themselves.

As these words foreshadowed, the State had entered on ‘a period
of probation; at the end of it one of three things would occur.
Either Parliament would meet again in unchanged humour and
win the disputed sovereignty; or the King would so far modify
his politics as to conciliate a conservative people and obtain a
friendly consultative Parliament on the Elizabethan model; or
lastly, he would, like the monarchs of Spain and France, levy a
permanent and well-disciplined army, override all law and custom,
and never again summon the Estates.

Charles might, with considerable chance of success, have directed Charles’s
his policy during the eleven years of probation to bring about one Policy of

half meas-

or other of the two last-named results. He might have conciliated ures
opinion, or he might have prepared absolutism. But he preferred
to adhere to a policy which alienated all the doubtful and the
conservative, while he still tried to keep within the letter of the
old laws, and made only belated and feeble efforts to establish the
army on which Wentworth designed to build the new State. The
origin of this error is indicated by the proclamation itself, where
Charles confidently anticipates the day when his opponents shall
voluntarily come round to his side without any change of attitude
on his own part. None but a self-centred and unobservant man
would have expected such a day to arrive.

Charles, determined as ever to retain the right of punishing his The Peti-
political opponents at will, wished to enjoy that despot’s luxury Right
within the apparent forms of English law. His recent consent to circum-
the Petition of Right made it difficult to continue the system peated
of prolonged imprisonment without trial. And why should he
override a law which he could easily, by the help of the Judges,
circumvent? Lettres de cachet were no longer necessary to the

Members
1m-
prisoned

158 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1629

monarch whose father had got rid of Coke, and who had himself
twice dismissed a Judge for political reasons. Nine members of
the late Parliament were called to account before the Privy Council
for their conduct in the House of Commons. Most of them, after
a considerable period of imprisonment, dissembled their real con-
victions, apologised and were sent home. The remainder, among
whom was Eliot, were after infinite delays and hardships brought
up before the Judges of the King’s Bench. But that Court could
not rightfully take cognisance of words spoken within the walls
of the House of Commons. The prisoners, standing firm for the
privileges of Parliament, refused to plead before an unlawful juris-
diction. They were condemned to pay fines, and to lie in prison
till they chose to apologise to the King for their conduct in the
House. Eliot, Strode and Valentine, refusing to make any sub-
mission, were consigned to prison without any hope of release.
These proceedings showed that even should the letter of the
Petition of Right be always observed, it could not vindicate per-
sonal liberty, which nothing but a revolution in the State could
secure.

Resistance | Meanwhile, the Council had to deal with the financial problem

of the

merchants,

March,
1629

created by the last Resolution of the House of Commons, by which
any one voluntarily paying Tonnage and Poundage was branded as
“a betrayer of the liberty of England”. In strict obedience to this
unauthorised injunction, the whole body of London merchants
preferred to give up buying and selling goods, rather than submit
to duties which it was illegal to impose and unpatriotic to pay.
“The obstinacy,” as a contemporary observed, “lies not only in the
merchant’s breast, but moves in every small vein through the king-
dom.” Indeed, if a man attempted to move his goods into the
custom-house, the city mob hooted him as a traitor and threatened
him with the fate of the Duke’s astrologer, Dr. Lambe, whom
they had a short while before knocked on the head as he was
passing home down the street. For nearly six months the trade
of the capital was almost suspended. ‘The Council rightly foresaw
that this extraordinary protest could not be indefinitely maintained,
but wiser men would have considered that, when all classes of a
great emporium where the trade of the country is concentrated,

? Hence the still surviving schoolboy expression “to lamb” a person, meaning
“to hit” him.

1632] CHARLES I 159

deliberately forgo the profits of commerce for several months,
solely to vindicate their reading of the laws, a great political
party has proved its existence and solidarity, and given warning of
its spirit and intentions.

The merchants of London were not going permanently to Chambers
suspend their trade, any more than the members of the House of
Commons were going to rot for life in prison rather than make lip
submission. During the summer business was gradually resumed.
But just as Eliot, Valentine and Strode suffered for the whole
body of gentry, a man named Chambers suffered for the merchants ;
he was reduced to beggary and lay six years in prison rather than
once retract his expressed opinion about the tax. It is not the
function of whole classes to suffer ruin and extinction in mere
passive resistance, but to preserve their strength together with
their opinions against the hour of fight, when sacrifice will lead
to immediate victory. Martyrdom is for individuals. But the
class which cannot produce a few martyrs will never produce many
fighters.

| Eliot knew this well. When he heard in prison that the land Eliot dies
seemed sinking to its rest, he was neither shaken in his own purpose Tome
nor chagrined by the different course followed by his friends. His 1632
letters, speeches and actions in the Tower reveal a spirit of cheer-
fulness and even of humour, admirable in one who knows that he
has chosen to die in prison in the hands of victorious enemies. In
1632 he contracted consumption from his cold and unhealthy
quarters. He in vain petitioned the King for a change of air.
Charles had determined that if he would not retract he might die.
_ A month later he was dead. His son asked to be allowed to con-
vey his body to Port Eliot. “Let Sir John Eliot be buried in the
church of that parish where he died,” answered the pitiless man,
who was one day himself to appeal for pity to all peoples and
ages.
3 But though the church by the Cornish estuary does not hoid
-Sir John Eliot, the manor house that stands beside it contains a
_worthy and curious memento of his last hours. A few days before
he died, he sent for an artist to the Tower to paint his picture.
' He stands in a white frilled dressing-gown, with a comb in his
hand and hair falling over his eyes, a cheerful invalid not asking
for our pity. He left to his descendants that one patient, humorous
appeal against the tyranny that took away his life.

Legal
methods
of raising
revenue;
their un-
fairness

Revival of

mono-
polies as
corpora-
tions

160 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1630

The financial policy of the new régime was to raise money by
all ways and means, which could with some show of reason be pro-
nounced legal by the biassed but learned opinion of the royal
Judges. The resistance to the Forced Loan had made it clear that
manifestly illegal taxes could not be levied, until a well-disciplined
standing army was present to coerce the subject. But the new
legal taxes soon caused discontent more deep, if less widespread,
than the old illegal methods. For owing to their necessarily
narrow scope, the legal taxes fell heavily, unfairly and unex-
pectedly on individuals and on small classes. In order to keep
within the law, it was necessary to distort it. If the whole com-
munity was to escape assessment, those few who could be brought
within the fiscal net would be despoiled without any assessment at
all. Now those individuals who were put under contribution for
the rest, were the haughtiest leaders of society; the very class
whom Charles might have hoped to attract to the ideals of anti-
popular despotism ; from whom he would have most to fear if they
became the heads of a democratic rebellion.

He revived obsolete medizeval laws so as to tax or fine certain
of the gentry. First he exacted heavy fines from all persons holding
estates by military tenure who had neglected to receive knighthood.
Then he revived claims long ago dropped or commuted by his
Plantagenet ancestors on old forest land which had now for genera-
tions borne corn-fields instead of oak-copses, and populous villages
instead of the ranger’s lonely lodge. Several of the greatest nobles
and richest commoners in the kingdom were fined at some ten or
twenty thousand pounds apiece before they could recover lands
which their predecessors had held without challenge through all the
stormy revolutions of the Tudor epoch. If these proceedings were
technically more legal than the Forced Loan, they were less equit-
able and more dangerous to property. Their operation was less
wide, but they were more keenly felt by the aristocratic class.
When the Long Parliament met, there was no Cavalier party, and
even after one had been formed at the outbreak of the war it did
not contain all the nobility or much more than half the gentry of
England.

The professional courtiers alone were at all times Royalist, for
they had their reward. The financial policy that drove Charles
to such hard dealings with some of his most powerful subjects,

1633] CHARLES I 161

put him in collusion with the favourites of Whitehall. For his
own as well as for their benefit, he revived the system of granting
monopolies of trade in particular articles after the manner of King
James, But the more thrifty son sold these favours at a higher
price, and so turned them into an important source of revenue.
The last Parliament of James had, during its brief alliance with
Buckingham, succeeded in passing an Act to prevent the grant
of trading monopolies to individuals other than inventors. This
law was evaded by forming the purchasers of royal favour into
corporations. These Court bargains always aroused commercial,
and sometimes religious, opposition. When in 1633 a new Soap
Company, patronised principally by the Roman Catholic party, now
fully restored to favour at Court, was given the right to test and
condemn the commodities offered by all rivals, the “Popish Soap”
became the terror of the country; it was agreed that its use
would certainly corrupt the body and perhaps the soul.

Every age has methods of its own peculiarly attractive to those
who prefer to intrigue for a fortune rather than to work for a
living. In those days a young man of more wit than modesty had
only to attach himself to some Lord at the Palace, be found by
the King in raptures in his picture gallery, and by the Queen in
thoughtful attendance in her antechapel, and he might soon look
for shares in a monopoly that was the hope of the ‘l'reasurer and
the despair of the City. A Parliament man, speaking the mind of
the nation in the day of reckoning, thus describes the patentees of
this period :—

It is a nest of wasps, or swarm of vermin, which have overcrept the land,

I mean the monopolers and polers of the people. These, like the frogs of
Egypt, have got possession of our dwellings, and we have scarce a room free

from them: they sip in our cup, they dip in our dish, they sit by our fire;
we find them in the dye-vat, wash-bowl and powdering-tub; they share with

————_—_"”

the butler in his box, they have marked and sealed us from head to foot.
. . . They have a vizard to hide the brand made by that good law in the
last Parliament of King James; they shelter themselves under the name
of Corporation?

~“
Such ways and means were legal but not popular. The Composi-

- tions for Knighthood, the Forest Courts, the Monopolies, were all
_ causes why Charles’s personal government became obnoxious to those

1 Parl. Hist., ii., p. 656.
11

162 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1630

many men who, without real religious or political preference, strenu-
ously took sides according as they conceived that they themselves
had been fairly or unfairly used. Britain has always boasted such
sturdy citizens, who have often served her in avenging themselves ;
but they are not always deserving of the praise accorded them by
history as “thoughtful men”’ and “restorers of the constitutional
balance”.

Insignifi- Until the adoption of the expedient of Ship Money, which was

rater fot itself merely an extension of the same antiquarian and petty-fogging

Europe. finance, these methods staved off bankruptcy and Parliament. But
they did not suffice to maintain an army or to give the Crown
weight in the counsels of Europe. England was doomed to inter-
national insignificance until Parliament had either gained control of
her policy, or given place to a despotic machinery wholly independent
of popular opinion. It was fortunate for our interests abroad and
for our liberties at home, that there was no call for vigorous action
oversea such as could not safely be postponed. It was the period
that lay between the decline of the empire of Philip and the rise
of the power of Louis XIV. In that interval, when the House of
Austria was the tyrant, Europe, not England, felt the danger ; and
for Europe another champion was now at hand. While Sir John
Eliot was still alive in the Tower, his fellow-countrymen were
watching, with even more attention than they accorded to the de-
spotic proceedings of their own Government, the march of Gustavus
and his Swedes through the cities of Germany. For many years past
Englishmen had witnessed the gradual extinction of Protestantism
from the face of the earth: every effort made to withstand the
armies of Rome had seemed under a curse. Well might our
ancestors exult on behalf of their brethren so long oppressed,

When God into the hands of their deliverer
Puts invincible might.

Charles had no share in these feelings. He had no interest in the
survival of Protestantism. He saw in the last agonies of Europe
only a series of situations by means of which the Palatinate might
be recovered for his kinsfolk. For this end, he hawked his unvalued
friendship round the Courts of Europe. Now he negotiated with
France, now with Gustavus, who knew the worthlessness of the
English alliance, as well as he knew the value of English volunteers,

1634] CHARLES I 163

Next, without any sense of inconsistency, Charles sought the friend-

ship of Spain, and proposed to that power the partition of the

Dutch Republic. Sixty years after Alva’s repulse, he proposed Charles
to open the gates of the cities of Holland to the spearmen of the fo hoi
Catholic King; to destroy what was then the centre of political, tion Hol-
intellectual and industrial progress in Europe, reversing the central 274 1°34
idea of British policy, and outraging every aspiration of the people

whose sole leader and representative he declared himself to be.
Fortunately the Spaniards would not trust him.!

During the decade when Government policy at home and abroad Discon-
continued in exact contradiction to the general sentiment, the pegs
absence of all forms of agitation is most remarkable, if we consider expres-
the violence of the ern when once it broke. A hundred years sory. a
back such discontent would have caused armed risings like the
Pilgrimage of Grace or Wyatt’s rebellion. But the Tudor peace
had done its work. The inhabitants of an island where there was
neither an army nor a police force capable of quelling a single mob,

_ were now, by custom, civil and obedient to law. Until Parliament

met again, and again gave the semblance of authority to the
national cause, there seems to have been no rioting against the
unpopular taxation and the yet more unpopular ecclesiastical courts.
And when Parliament was not sitting, there was no method of con-
stitutional protest possible, except the merely passive resistance of
Hampden. There was no party organisation, no right of public
meeting, no freedom of the press. If meetings had been held, they
would have been suppressed as seditious riots; when political
writings by chance escaped the censor, their authors were punished
for libel. Words against the royal policy spoken at the ale-house,
the market-place or the dinner-table would be punished if spies
reported them at Whitehall; the only practical safeguard for
private conversation was that the hand of the central Government
was short, and that the local magistrates were unwilling to become
busybodies on its behalf. Since the last of the fighting Barons
had perished, no subject who happened to disagree with his King
had the right of free speech, either in theory or in custom. Liberty
of speech within the walls of Parliament, unknown in other countries

and now violated here by the imprisonment of Eliot, was the limit

1G., vii., pp. 367-69.

Right of
free

speech un-

known

The Star
Chamber;
its two
capacities

164 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1632 |

of an Englishman’s right to talk against his rulers. ‘The methods

of espionage and repression, to which Pitt reverted at the height |
of the anti-Jacobin panic, were indisputable Government rights in
the time of Charles, and were frequently exercised against indi-
viduals without causing general surprise or offence. For example,
when Buckingham returned with his routed army from the Isle of
Rhé and the whole nation was seething with suppressed rage at
the disaster, a grocer’s prentice was laid by the heels for having
in his pocket a “Prophecy of Evil to befal the Kingdom,” and a
woman for saying that the Isle of Rhé was now the Isle of Rue.?

This state of things, which would now seem quite intolerable,
would probably never have been altered if the people as a whole
had not quarrelled with the Government on general policy. Until
that quarrel came to a head under King Charles, there was no
personal sympathy for the victims of authority, unless they were
champions of the popular cause. Even in much later times it has
been shown how little freedom of speech, in press and person, is
valued, in cases where popular opinion is on the side of central
power. In time of excitement there are few who will go about to
defend the rights of political opponents. It is therefore highly prob-
able that, if Parliament had peacefully and imperceptibly succeeded
to the functions of the Crown, the Parliamentary leaders would have
inherited from the King the customary ideas of administrative rights
in these matters, and might even have continued the Star Chamber
as the weapon of the national will. It was during the eleven years
of unparliamentary government that this famous tribunal and the
whole system of repression connected with it, came, fortunately for
the progress of the world, into conflict with popular feeling.

The Petition of Right had not aimed at securing Sivcortdun
of speech, nor succeeded in securing freedom of person. The
royal Judges could still use the ordinary courts to condemn the
King’s opponents; while the Star Chamber was an engine even
more expressly fashioned and more formidably armed for the
same purpose. ‘That court consisted of the whole body of Privy
Councillors, aided by the two Chief Justices; they had the power
to summon before them any subject whom they chose, and to
judge him without observing the rules of procedure and evidence

1 Court and Times of Charles I., i., pp. 305; 317.

1632] CHARLES I 165

which protected the prisoner in ordinary courts; their punish-
ments were fine, imprisonment or mutilation, without any reference
to customary or statutory limitations. The very men in whom
the political power of the State resided, sat as judges and gave
decisions solely by their own sense of what was just and expedient.
So powerful a court could not fail to do great good or great harm.
It sat in two capacities, practically though not technically distinct :
as a high-handed court of equity, and as the sword of political
power. In Tudor times it had been indispensable in both ca-
pacities. As a court supervising all other tribunals, it had made
law and justice strong in an age of social disruption, and had tamed
the manners of quasi-military barbarism. As the Revolutionary
Tribunal of royalty, it had again and again saved the tottering
State from murderous plots and armed rebels.

In the reign of Charles I. society had changed, but the Star
Chamber had not moved with the times. As a court of equity
it was still useful but no longer indispensable. The ordinary
tribunals were now strong enough to execute justice, so far as any
court was capable of so doing when there was no detective force
and no understanding of the laws of evidence. Juries were no
longer overawed, or corrupted wholesale by great lords. Judges
no longer sat in fear of riot or resistance. Indeed, throughout
the seventeenth century, the courts erred much more on the side
of bureaucratic tyranny than of subservience to local interests.
The Star Chamber of the Tudors had secured respect for the
Assize Court of the Stuarts. A careful study of the non-political
cases in the Star Chamber in the time of Charles I. shows good work
being done by an unnecessarily powerful instrument of State. We
do not find cases of the defiance of ordinary justice, nor generally
of violence, and scarcely ever of such violence as the ordinary
tribunals would have feared to correct; the Star Chamber in its
latter years dealt principally with libel actions, challenges and
poaching disputes between silly gentlemen, forgery, perjury, fraud
in commercial or domestic life, petty acts of malice or violence
among the middle orders of society. If there was little reason

1F.g., among the thirty-one cases that came before the Star Chamber from the
Easter Term, 1631, to the Trinity Term, 1632, as many as twenty-nine could clearly
have been left to the ordinary courts of the land. In only two cases is there any

question of force or influence such as might have intimidated or corrupted the Judge
and Jury. One concerns the riotous resistance of the fen population to the draining

Laud

166 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1633

why such a jurisdiction should be abolished, there was less why
it should be prolonged.

The Star Chamber fell, not because of its work as a court of
equity, in which nine-tenths of its time was engaged, but because
of its more rarely exercised but far more important political func-
tions, the abolition of which was the first step towards free speech.
There could indeed be no more complete and dangerous example of
merging the judiciary with the executive. The Privy Councillors
were themselves the judges of their politica] antagonists. Such a
jurisdiction becomes hurtful the moment it ceases to be indispens-
able. Yet the English were so well accustomed to the control of
the Government over the expression of political views, that the Star
Chamber would quite possibly have survived the Great Rebellion,
if it had not interfered in ecclesiastical matters, and become the
instrument of the Erastian Bishops for the punishment of their
libellers, at a moment when all England would have been glad to
have a hand in the libels.

To all ephemeral discontents, popular humours, and infant
aspirations towards political liberty, was added the grand passion
for freedom of conscience. That which called the noblest men
into public life and the contemplative into the world of action,
which made Cromwell a soldier and Milton a pamphleteer, was
not the intrigue of priest or presbyter to gain some petty advantage
over other creeds, but the last struggle of the individual to main-
tain his own spiritual existence, and to prevent the extinction upon
earth of the lights by which he reads her meaning. This passion,
the only one that ever drove the English into the paths of revolu-
tion, was aroused by William Laud.
of the fens. The other case, where Lord Saville with a great company and drawn
swords interrupted the sport of Sir John Jackson on land where the Free Warren
was in dispute, is the only case which approaches to the violence of an armed and
riotous aristocrat. Nor is it by any means certain that the ordinary courts could not
have dealt even with this case (see Cases in the Courts of Star Chamber and High
Commission (Camden Soc., 1886)).

The exception that proves the rule is the necessary and warrantable interference
of the Star Chamber in the ordinary course of Irish justice; in Ireland society still

resembled English society in the fifteenth century, and the courts were subject to
violence and corruption (see Rushworth, ii., pp. 203, 204).

1633] CHARLES I 167

During the years when his opinions and character were formed,
Laud’s experience of life was confined to a University, and all his
knowledge of religion was gathered from theologians. In the
narrow hot-bed of college personalities he learned to hate a set of
men who were not improbably odious—the Puritan divines then
dominant in Oxford. For many years they tried to suppress him ;
but in 1611 he rose in spite of them to be the President of St.
John’s. A reaction set in, and he was able to purify Oxford, largely
by the help of that college discipline and influence, which had, two
hundred years before, weeded out Lollardry from its ancient home.
A few colleges alone retained their Puritan character; in the
cloisters and river walks of Magdalen, Hampden and his Bucking-
hamshire neighbours imbibed those principles which they after-
wards maintained in arms, when theyheld the Chiltern Hills as the
outwork of London against the Oxford Cavaliers.

As a middle-aged man Laud was called into a larger sphere
to take part in the government of Church and State; and when at
last he became Primate in 1633, he still conceived that all Puritans
were like the clerical pedants over whom his first victory had been
won. England was to him another Oxford, a place whence Puritan-
ism, at first blustering and assertive, could soon be driven out by
methodical application of college discipline.

Discipline indeed and order were to him not only a large part
of the essence of religion, but the only means by which it could
outwardly be expressed. 'Thus because he did not find “order ” in
the churches on his northern journey, he concluded that there was
“no religion” among the Scots, and proceeded to manufacture one
for the use of that nation. The religion that dictated every action
of his own modest, unselfish and conscientious life, was genuine, but
cold, orderly and formal.

If he is called upon (writes Gardiner) to defend his practice of bowing
towards the altar upon entering a church, he founds his arguments not on
any high religious theme, but upon the custom of the Order of the Garter.
To him a church was not so much the Temple of a living Spirit, as the
palace of an invisible King.

The spirit that cries and tears itself and goes out into the wilder-
ness to pray; the mind that, rapt and silent under the sense of the
eternal mystery, rejects as trivial impertinences all forms and
shows of worship ; the free, strong, self-dependent and self-control-

168 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1633

ling life of a practical and simple religion, were all alike to be
“harried out of the land” by this excellent man.?

Laud was not cruel. He put no one to death, and corporal
punishment was not his favourite method. Systematic and universal
inquiry, deprivation, exile, imprisonment, were his regular weapons ;
and they would have been used with equal readiness by most of
the Puritans, But Laud and not his enemies had the power to
put an end to that comprehension which had so long held English
Protestants together in one Church. And he, more than any other
Anglican leader of that day, was ready to use the power to the full.
By strict inquiry and coercion he abolished a working system of
local variations in religion and imposed the will of the Bishop on
that of the congregation. But neither he nor the bitter generation

_ of enemies whom persecution raised up to defy him, could perceive
that if there is no comprehension within the Church there must
be toleration without. Though many would have wished to con-
tinue the practice of comprehension, no one even stated the theory
of toleration: that great doctrine, in which expediency and mercy
triumph over logic and passion, was taught to England, during
fifty years of war and faction and terror, by the miseries with
which the justice of events is wont to punish the stupid intoler-
ance of creed or race.

The plan adopted by Laud was to stop up every hole through
which Puritan feeling could find vent in the press, the pulpit, the
influence of the clergyman, the legal services of the Church, or the
illegal worship of conventicles. He was able almost single-handed
to accomplish his work of universal repression, because of the
prestige he enjoyed and the fear he inspired as the King’s confi-
dant ; and because the parish system and the Church Courts gave the
Primate much more authority to interfere in local religion than the
King possessed in local government. But no other one of the High
Churchmen of that day would have been at the pains to use those
powers with such unwonted stringency. His two chief instruments
were the High Commission Court and the Metropolitical Visitation.

The Court ‘The Court of High Commission was a mixed body of clergy
oe and laity to whom the King delegated the ecclesiastical power of the
sion Crown. Though the bishops swayed its decisions, it was Erastian

1See G,, ii., p. 126; vii., pp. 125-28, 301, 340, 341}; Viii., pp. 106-29. Though
Carlyle did not understand Laud, he understood the real effect of Laud’s eres
admirably (see his Historical Sketches, pt. ii., chaps. xiv. xvi.).

1634] CHARLES I 169

not only in origin but in spirit. Its members were in close touch
with the politicians and the Court. It had long been well and
deservedly hated. Even under Elizabeth it “savoured of the
Roman Inquisition,” as the sage and moderate Burghley declared.
Under James, Coke questioned the legality of its jurisdiction,
and Parliament exposed its abuses.) The unpopularity of the Star
Chamber was a late reflex of this old-established feeling against
the High Commission. ‘The secular tribunal only fell into disgrace
under Charles, and then chiefly because it undertook the rough
work of the ecclesiastical court by punishing the Bishops’ libellers.
The Star Chamber seldom dealt with political cases, but the High
Commission in its ordinary daily work dealt with matters in the
highest degree controversial. Authors and printers, lecturers and
clergymen, congregations of churches and conventicles, were coerced
or punished at its bar. The trials? were often cut short by the
refusal of the prisoners to take the “ex officio oath,” by which the
court compelled its victim to bear witness against himself. This
odious power with which the royal prerogative had endowed the
Commission, was resented not only by individual prisoners, but
by the lawyers of the lay courts and by all Englishmen.

The other chief weapon of Laud’s reform, the Metropolitica] The
Visitation, was of his own device. He revived a claim of his ccs

medieval predecessors to visit, in person or by deputy, every Visitation

parish not only in the diocese, but in the whole province, of
Canterbury. He thus established his personal authority through-
out the greater part of England, and was enabled to make his
inquiries, and to enforce his own rules, in the territories of less busy
Bishops. Nothing could now escape the eye of the master. A
supervisory system, such as the State could not boast, was
established for the Church by this Richelieu of religion.®
Armed with these powerful weapons, the fearless and energetic
mau set to work to silence the religious voices of England. As
early as 1628 men had been forbidden to discuss Free Will and
Predestination. Free Will had not yet enough supporters, even
among the Anglicans, to claim the monopoly in a Church whose
Thirty-nine Articles had been drawn up by men of the opposite
1 Prothero, pp. xl-xlvii, 302-7, 404-7.

3See Camden Soc., 1886, for full reports.
3G., viii., chap. lxxvili. Laud’s Works, v., pp. 419-35.

Episcopal

170 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1683

party. But Laud, who had a natural antipathy to speculation,
had seized on the plan which James had initiated, of prohibiting
the whole discussion.! The Predestinarians, as had been declared
on their behalf by the House of Commons, wished to close the
mouths of their adversaries; Laud imposed silence on both sides.
It is difficult to say which plan would have proved most fatal
to free-thought.

But on other matters, for which they cared far more than for

censorship dogmatic speculation, the Anglicans were encouraged to talk,

of the
press

while the Puritans were silenced. The censorship of the press was
then not in civil, but in episcopal hands. A decree of the Star
Chamber in Elizabeth’s reign had decided that no book might be
printed without the leave of an Archbishop or of the Bishop of
London. Under this rule Laud diligently prevented the Puritans
from speaking in print. The High Commission maintained the
rights of episcopal censorship by severe punishments, and even
prevented the importation of Calvinist theology from abroad. In
proportion as open controversy was suppressed, the libels put
secretly into circulation grew more violent, and at the same time
more popular with an angry people. The channels of genuine
political and religious speculation were choked, until the Great
Rebellion loosed the pent flood of books and pamphlets which
covered the land for twenty years, cutting far and wide new river-
beds in which the thought and practice of our own day now run, and
leaving when it subsided not a little of pure gold on the sands of
the spent deluge. Laud’s system of episcopal censorship would, if it
had survived to afflict later ages, have distorted the development
of English literature and poetry, of which one essential excellence
lies in the profundity and freedom of treatment given to historical,
speculative and spiritual truth.

In those times the press was scarcely of greater importance than
the pulpit. 'The Sunday sermon, afterwards the chief means of
Tory propaganda, was in the days of the first Charles used with
most vigour by the Puritans. Those Anglican clergy who were
genuine disciples of Laud and Andrewes, preferred catechising to
preaching, and ritual to dogmatics; while the great body of
indifferent and old-fashioned parsons, with whom Laud was forced

1G,, vii., pp. 20-22, 43. Rushworth, ii., pp. 140-42.
2 Camden Soc., 1886, p. 274.

1633] CHARLES I 171

to be content for want of better, the “blind mouths” of Milton’s
Lycidas, could only spell out the Prayer-book service, and then
dismiss their congregations to keep Sunday round the May-pole.
The English Bishops, in their jealousy of Puritan influence, had
even in the reign of Elizabeth been anxious to restrain long and
frequent sermons, not considering how necessary it was to preach,
if a Catholic population was to be converted to a vital and intelli-
gent Protestantism. But it was only under Laud’s primacy that
this long meditated design was put into effect. Deprivations of
the clergy for Puritanism had been few since the great “outing
of the ministers” in 1604. In 1633 King James’s Book of Sports
was reissued, and on this occasion the clergy who refused to read
it were turned out of their livings.1 Thus a manifesto which under
James had been an act of toleration for the laity, became under
Charles a persecution of the clergy. Others, challenged on points
of ritual or of teaching, were forced to choose between ruin or
submission. In the Eastern Counties, Wren, Bishop of Norwich,
carried on a vigorous campaign of visitations and suspensions,
independent of Laud’s activity. On one charge or another, some
of the most enthusiastic preachers were either deprived or put to
silence. The great majority, against whom no proceedings were
taken, dared no longer preach freely for fear of some inquiry by
their Bishop, a visitation of their parish, or a summons before the
High Commission.

In trading and market towns, when the incumbent was un- Chaplains

ave : * . ° ona and~
willing to preach or his Puritan audience to listen, the munici- i"...

pality hired unbeneficed clergymen to “lecture” after the service forbidden

had been read. ‘The profession of lecturer, though practised within
the walls of the church, was a near approach to Nonconformity ;
but when powerful classes were unanimous, such a plan was the
only alternative to disruption. Gentlemen often employed private
chaplains for a similar purpose. But Laud now made it almost
impossible for corporations to engage Puritan “lecturers,” and
forbade private gentlemen to keep chaplains at all. Two proud
classes were wounded in their liberties and self-respect, and all
strong Protestants saw disappear the last means by which their
religious feelings could find expression within the pale of the

1G,, vii, p. 322. Govett’s Book of Sports, pp. 117-24.

Ritualism
enforced

Conventi-
clers per-
secuted

172 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1633

Church, which thereby lost for one eventful. generation the loyalty
of moderate men.}

The manner in which the Prayer-book services were conducted
was also made the subject of inquiry in every parish. The table
was moved into the east end and treated as an altar, often against
the expressed wishes of the people. The Puritan clergy were
being gradually superseded by ardent ritualists, or by time-servers
who took the ritual path to promotion. The worst grievance was
not that in a few churches a native ceremonialism sprouted into
gorgeous excess, but that in many churches a moderate ceremonial
was being forced on unwilling congregations, who were not per-
mitted to meet for worship elsewhere. The only legal form of
worship, beautiful and orderly as it had now become, appeared an
intolerable triviality to many of the most imaginative and intel-
lectual, and, as events proved, the most forcible men of every class.
Such conditions were, in the phrase of the day, “too hot to last”.

On these terms the service to which, ever since the accession of
Elizabeth, the Government had succeeded in driving four-fifths of
the nation, became in many parishes as unedifying to Protestants
as it had long been to Catholics. Many indeed who afterwards
attested their Puritanism in council and in war, continued to
attend church in sullen discontent. Some twenty thousand fled
to America. Others met secretly in woods and in garrets to
preach and pray. The frequenters of these conventicles were men
of mean station; for the Puritan squires and merchants before
the Civil War preferred either to conform or to leave England
altogether. ‘The trials for active dissent under Laud are the records
of the poor, seized at their worship and confronted with the might
of Church and State in the High Commission. Their love of Eng-
lish liberty and their steadfast adherence to the light within them,
more than atone for the want of that learning which had never
been within their reach.2 Men and women such as these—more
than Bastwick, Burton and Prynne, more than Hampden himself
—are worthy to stand with Eliot as pure confessors of liberty and
religion. The apologists of Laud argue now, as the Bishops urged
then, that persons so poor and ignorant as the conventiclers could

1G., vii., pp. 130-32, 304, 305. Book of Sports, chap. vi. Rushworth, ii., p. 7.
Laud’s Works, v., pp. 328, 329; 349, 350.

2See Camden Soc., 1886, passim, for the verbatim reports of the dialogues be-
tween the Bishops and the conventiclers.

1633] CHARLES I 173

have had no real capacity to make religion for themselves. Even
if such an argument could ever be true, it was certainly false when
applied to men of that period, when the lower classes of society had
high imagination and opportunity for the noblest spiritual life.
The meanest of English trades then produced John Bunyan;
and George Fox was a shoemaker’s man. But if Laud’s war on
Puritanism as the religion of the poor and ignorant had met with
success, the tinker could never have given his Pilorim’s Progress
to the world; and the founder of the Friends could never have
left his master’s shop to revive in the most spiritual of its thousand
_ forms the religion of the Carpenter’s Son.

If proof were needed that Laud’s rule was a persecution, it Puritan
P P : emigra

would be found in the fact that many thousand religious refugees

of all classes abandoned good prospects and loved homes in Eng- America

land, to camp out between the shore of a lonely ocean and forests
swarming with savage tribes. Laud was the founder of Anglo-
Saxon supremacy in the new world. Previous to the nineteenth
century, the exodus from Britain due to purely economic reasons
was limited, though by no means negligible. The island as a whole
was underpopulated, although there was congestion in some centres
of population like London, and in some rural parishes, relieved by
organised emigration.’ ‘The colonists sent out to Ireland and to
the tobacco plantations, were drawn from both town and country
districts. Some were emigrants escaping from overcrowded parishes,
while others were attracted to Virginia by the ease of the climate
and soil, and to Ireland by the opportunities for rapid money-
making and for advance in social status afforded by political and
racial conditions.’

But it was with the New England colonies that the future
of American institutions was mainly to he. Religion was indeed
the main, but it was not the only, motive of emigration to New
England under Charles I. Even in Massachusetts only a minority
of the colonists were ‘‘ church members”. With many the desire
to have land of their own was as strong a motive as the desire
to exercise their own religion, Hard times in East Anglia

1 Cunningham, pp. 345-47. Leonard, p. 229. Economic Hist. of Virginia, Bruce,
‘ Pr Harland, founded 1633 for the benefit of Catholics, became mainly Puritan.
Pennsylvania, founded after the Restoration for the Quakers, became a home for
_ religious refugees of all countries and all sects. These two were “ Middle Colonies”
as opposed to New England in the North and Virginia in the South. They

approximated more to the northern type of society, economics and religion. See
Map of American Colonies, p. 357 below.

174 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1633

appear to have been one cause of the determination to emigrate
on the part of the yeomen and small squire class in that peculiarly
Puritan district. Yet we can safely argue, from the records of the
emigration and its English patrons, that without the religious
motive and the Puritan leadership and organisation the inhospit-
able climate and thin soil of New England would never have been
the scene of successful colonisation on a large scale.) In 1620 a
few score of emigrants in the May Flower had shown the way.
To this new home, suggested rather than prepared by these
original Pilgrim Fathers, 20,000 Englishmen fled from Laud’s
persecution between 1628 and 1640. With the triumph of the
Puritans the stream of emigration was stopped, and even began to
turn back, till 1660. If chance had directed the course of religious
strife differently, New England would not have been peopled by
our race. Canada would then probably have remained French,
and the Middle Colonies Dutch, in language and institutions.
For our Virginia tobacco-growers, who from the first established a
system of ‘“‘ indentured servants” that prevented all social equality,
and who became negro slave-owners in the eighteenth century,
could never have made their form of society and politics supreme
throughout North America. Economic emigration from Great
Britain in the nineteenth century, if it had then turned to the
West at all, would not have found it ready prepared with Anglo-
Saxon institutions.? :

Charles, less fanatical than Louis XIV. when he revoked the
Edict of Nantes, put no serious bar on the emigration of the
Puritans, though he sometimes tried feebly to restrain it; in spite
of a protest from Laud, he allowed them to establish their own
religion as the exclusive faith of their new settlements. The
rulers of England consented that a new world should be called
into existence, if they might have the fashioning of the old; they

did not forsee that by this arrangement the balance would ever be
redressed.

Religious persecution was not the only means by which Laud
contributed to his master’s downfall. Immersed in medigeval pre-

? Truslow Adams, Founding of New England, chap. vi.
* See Appendix A, “ How America was Peopled by the English”,

1635] CHARLES I 175

cedents and in Canon Law, regarding the Tudor reform not as the
Creation but only as the Deluge, the successor of Anselm and
Becket ignored the social and political revolution of Henry VIII,
and attempted to revive the power of the priest over laymen, A
return to clerical government in society and politics alienated some
who regarded alteration in doctrine and worship with indifference.
The Church courts, which had for a hundred years been cowed Jurisdic-
by fear of the emancipated laity and the prospect of further tO" $v"
confiscations, were inspired once more with a conceit of their revived
authority and traditions. Laud, who feared the anger of the rich
as little as he respected the feelings of the poor, used the same
tribunals which punished the conventiclers to chastise the adultery
of influential men, who might otherwise have been his powerful
friends. The Church courts still retained the power to punish
sin. In the last two centuries of Catholicism this jurisdiction had
been odious and venal; under the Tudors the terrified clergy had
let it fall into abeyance ; and now a few honest men tried to revive
what no large body of people were willing again to tolerate. The

only result was to unite the loose-liver with the precisian in common
hatred of the ecclesiastical courts; until, on the eve of the Civil
“War, fear of the approaching rule of the saints drove back Comus
and his crew into the arms of mother Church. Both religious
parties in this epoch made a fearless effort to put down immorality
by force, and both paid dearly for the error. But whereas the rule

_of the saints was an inquisition of laymen over laymen through the
agency of Puritan magistrates and Major-Generals, Laud’s method

was the jurisdiction of the priest.

_ By another piece of clerical interference, very unpopular at Secular
‘the time, Laud prohibited the secular use to which customs of Aree
‘immemorial antiquity had put the House of God. Within striking prohibited
distance of the Scottish border squat church towers had been con-
\structed for defence in war, while in the South the body of the
church had served a hundred needs of peace. These habits survived
‘the Reformation. In the Gothic nave of old St. Paul’s, well known
‘as “Paul’s Walk,” friends made and kept appointments ; merchants
drove and sealed bargains ; serving-men waited by a certain pillar
for offers of employment; courtiers strolled for an hour before

the midday meal; the news of the continent, the ocean and the

town was brought fresh to Paul’s and canvassed with a ain of

The new
Laudian
clergy
and the
squires

176 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1635

voices; while through this noisy crowd of business and pleasure,
a stream of burdened porters fought their way across the tran-
septs, a recognised short cut through the heart of London.
Rural villages, seldom furnished with any other public buildings,
transacted parish business in the church. Laud reformed this
altogether. Breaking with both medieval and Protestant tradi-
tion, he originated a new view as to the use of sacred buildings,
which was imposed in his own day by order and coercion alone,
but which won its way into popular custom after his death, as public
halls, clubs and secular institutions of every kind rose to serve
instead of the church as places of assembly.

By every form of patronage and encouragement Laud brought
to the front a small school of ritualists,) who in zeal and learning
were very different from the old-fashioned Anglican incumbent.
The new Laudian clergy had high notions of the respect due to
them and of the powers which they ought to enjoy in the parish;
but these the gentry were unwilling to concede. Previously to the
rise in the value of tithe in the eighteenth century, the clergyman
was often of a lower class, a fact which even a higher education could
not always efface. The squire was thus accustomed to admit no
copartner in his rule, and had not yet formed with the parson the
Holy Alliance against Dissent, which ever since the Restoration has
been the one almost certain factor in English politics. The village
quarrel, which in ever-fresh for ms of class rivalry or personal pique,

1“ The times’ new Churchman ” is thus described by a Puritan parodist of the
year 1635 (Rous, pp. 78, 79).

A ceremonious, light-timbred scholler,
With a little dam-mee* peeping over his collar;
With a Cardinal’s cap, broad as a carte wheele,
With a long coate and cassocke down to his heele.
See a newe Churchman of the times,
O the times, the times’ newe Churchman!

His gravity rides up and downe,

In a long coate or a short gowne;

And sweares, by the halfe football on his pate,
That no man is predestinate. See, etc.

His divinity is trust up with five points,

He dops, ducks, bowes, as made all of joints
But when his Roman nose standes full East,
He fears neither God nor beast. See, etc.

“Dammy, from the soldier’s band, who usually sweareth God dam me,
—Marginal note,

1636] CHARLES I i

has been going on in every English hamlet since before Domesday
Book was compiled, often assumed under Laud the form of bad
blood between parson and squire ; the landlord, constrained by fear
of the ecclesiastical courts to dissemble his anger for years together,
was heartily willing to vote for Mr. Pym’s friend at the elections
of 1640; and two years later it was lucky if he did not turn the
unhappy clergyman out of the vicarage, and arm his own serving-
men for the Parliament, under the curious delusion that he had
adopted Presbyterian principles,

While the parson was driving the squire to radicalism, the The
Bishops were performing the same office for the lawyers. The as
increasing pretensions of the Church courts, no less than the lawyers
absolutist doctrines of the High Church party, aroused the jealousy
of a profession which always loves the laws, though not always the
liberties of England. The rising generation at the Temple, nursed
on the principles and precedents of Coke, were observed to be
growing steadily more hostile to the royal prerogative. Their
resistance to the Ship Money, and the vigour with which they
threw themselves into popular politics after the Long Parliament
met, was due in part to the jealousy which they felt as lay lawyers
to the revived activity of clerical jurisdiction.

Fears that priestly power would recover its old position in Bishops
society and in law, were borne out by the sudden elevation of" se
Bishops to leadership of the Privy Council and to high secular
offices, which their order had not enjoyed since the breach with
Rome. When in 1636 Juxon, Bishop of London, was put at the
head of the Treasury, Laud noted in his diary that no churchman
had held the post since the days of Henry VII. The Archbishop
himself had his hand deep in the details of secular administration,
and more than any other Councillor, could influence Charles on the
larger questions of State. The laity were alarmed at this revival
of priestly rule; while lords-in-waiting and would-be successors of
Buckingham murmured that the avenues of promotion were choked
up by lawn-sleeves.’

The King’s party was neither intelligent, zealous, nor united. Laud’s
Although the patron of Rubens and Vandyke made the Court, for Pe@ton

; é e at Court
the last time in English history, a true school for the nation in art,

1Bishop Williams had held the Great Seal 1621-25, but he was not Laudian,
and as Gardiner says (iv., p. 135), he ‘‘ was a clergyman only in name”,

The
Catholics
again
favoured

178 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1636

culture and manners, he took no better pains than his father that
it should be “replenished with choice of excellent men.” While
he saw nothing of the future Roundheads, he did not introduce
into his Council the better sort of Royalists. His Cottingtons,
Westons and Windebanks were an ignoble tribe, very different
from the Hydes and Falklands, the Verneys and Langdales who
rallied in the hour of danger to a cause of which they only
half approved. When Laud wrote to Wentworth in Ireland, “I
am alone in those things that draw not profit after them,” he was
scarcely exaggerating the truth; and the old Oxford tutor had not
the courtier’s art to conceal from his selfish and venal coadjutors
his dislike of their proceedings. Laud and Wentworth were almost
the only honest men at the head of affairs, though they were also
the two most earnest contrivers of despotism in Church and State.
The courtiers hated them for their virtues, and the people for
their faults. They had no party. ‘They held their ground only
by the King’s favour. This they were able to enjoy, but were
compelled to share it with men and women who were not of their
confidence.

Laud did nothing to secure himself by feminine influence
against masculine dislike. In personal intercourse he was unable
and unwilling to please. His religion, calculated rather to control
Protestant than to stimulate Catholic ardour, was too little
imaginative to become the inspiration of England, too little
sensational to become the toy of Whitehall. Throughout the
country the women of England, whether Puritan or Anglican, were
Protestant and not Ritualist! The ladies of the Palace were
given over to frivolity, and those who wanted ritual as a pastime,
went straight to the more splendid and ancient source of those
delights. In his dealings with the strong Roman Catholic ring at
Court, Laud came to grief, because his influence over Charles,
greater than that of any other man, was incomplete. Henrietta
Maria was against him.

Since the death of Buckingham, Charles had fallen in love with
his Catholic Queen. He now treated her as much too well as he
had formerly treated her too ill. In 1626 he had destroyed his
foreign policy by the fatal French war, because he chose, in violation

1G,, vii, pp. 340, 34%.

1636] _ CHARLES I 19

of his marriage treaty, to persecute his Catholic subjects ; after 1629
he destroyed his home policy, because he chose to please his wife
by showing those subjects dangerous favour. The period of the
Spanish match seemed to have returned. Again in the country the
Penal Laws fell into general, though never into complete, disuse ;
again at the Palace Catholicism became the fashionable if not the
dominant creed. Residence under his uncle’s roof had the effect of
very nearly making the young Prince Rupert a Catholic, to the
intense indignation of his mother, the Electress Palatine.! Such
was the atmosphere of the house from which England was governed.
Papal legates came over, were received with every mark of welcome,
and concluded from what met their eyes at Court that the country
was on the way back to Rome.

Laud was in a difficult position. He had no antipathy to Laud
Roman Catholics, whose company he sought while he avoided that ee
of Puritans. Both parties misconstrued this simple prefer ence.
When he became Primate, the Pope seriously offered him a
Cardinal’s hat; when he persecuted conventiclers, his victims
supposed that their sacrifice was designed to prepare the Roman
triumph. Indeed, when avowed conversions became numerous,
especially among the rich and most of all among the courtiers,
and when the strongest Protestants were sailing in thousands for
America, the danger was not fanciful that the Catholics might
regain social and political power. If the Elizabethan settlement
was to be maintained, either the Puritans must be tolerated, or the
statutes against the Romanists must be enforced. In 1637 Laud
made an honest but insufficient effort to enforce the Penal Laws,
The Queen was too strong for him and he gave up the attempt.
He had not the wisdom to see that he must therefore give up that
other part of his policy which drove the chief opponents of Catholi-
cism across the sea.

As Laud was known to be the King’s adviser in the treatment
of the Puritans, it was naturally supposed that he was equally re-
sponsible for the treatment of the Catholics. All men saw that
the enemies of Rome were being crushed, and that her friends were
daily growing in wealth, power and self-assertion. Though his
contemporaries were in part mistaken as to the motives of Laud’s

lEva Scott, Rupert, Prince Palatine, p. 30

180 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS 1636

policy, they were by no means mistaken as to the results that must
have ensued from its indefinite continuance.

Charles In August, 1636, Charles I. held high festival at Oxford. It

ae. was the culminating triumph of Laud, whit received his royal friends,

Aug., 1636as Chancellor of the University which he had conquered and re-
formed. Lords and Ladies partook of magnificent feasts in the
college halls; they admired in the chapels the new decorations,
and in the gardens the new architecture, which were in no small
degree the work of Laud. A new play was given in Christ Church
Hall, where the Puritan with his short cloak, and Prynne with his
short ears, were caricatured on the boards before the rulers of
England. That was how the King knew the Puritans. If he had
had eyes for men in the flesh half so keen as for men on canvas, he
would have looked first at the real Puritans, in the streets even of
loyal Oxford, through which he had just passed without a cheer;
he would have seen the sad faces and closed lips of many who were
neither cowards nor hypocrites. ‘That autumn festival was the last
careless hour of the old English monarchy. The troubles began
before another year was out. Seven times the trees were to bud
on the banks of Cherwell, and again these Lords and Ladies would
inhabit these same colleges of Oxford, acting plays, composing
sonnets, aiming epigrams, fighting duels and making love. But in
1643 the Puritans were no longer the fools upon the stage, but
myriads of armed and angry men weaving far and wide over
England the net of destruction for Oxford and its inhabitants.

The year 1637 is the first of the revolutionary epoch. The
demonstrations round the pillory in Palace Yard, the universal
interest in Hampden’s Ship Money case, and the rising of Scotland
against the Prayer-book, form in an ascending scale of importance
the first three steps of the popular movement which brought
Charles to the scaffold.

Prynne, Prynne a lawyer, Burton a clergyman, and Bastwick a doctor,
ene had composed and secretly put into circulation violent attacks on
wickin the Bishops. They were condemned by the Star Chamber to be
aerate pilloried, to lose their ears, and to suffer solitary confinement for
life. ‘The cruel mangling and branding, which idle crowds watched
with cheerful interest when inflicted on cheating tradesmen or

sturdy beggars, were on this occasion resented as an indecent out-

1637] CHARLES I 181

rage on the three liberal professions to which the victims belonged.
Prynne, indeed, had once before bled unpitied in the pillory for a
fanatical attack on stage plays called Histriomastixz ; but three
years had passed since then, and the libeller of Laud was now the
hero of the nation. London poured out to Palace Yard, and held
round the scaffold a monster reform meeting which Government
had no soldiers to disperse. ‘The orators, with their heads through
the pillory, spoke much of their faith in Jesus, of legal precedents,
and of the ancient liberties of Englishmen. In the great crowd
below many wept aloud, and the rudest were moved to honest
English anger at cruelty inflicted on the brave. When the hang-
man sawed off Prynne’s ears a yell arose to which Charles should
have listened in Whitehall, while yet it was heard there for the first
time. It was a new sound even in old riotous England, for it was
not the voice of faction or of plunder, but the cry of deeper mutiny
from brain and heart. Often in the coming years that sound would
roll through the tembling Palace, across galleries where courtiers
stood in silent groups, and secret chambers where ladies knelt in
terror before the crucifix.

It was many years since a political demonstration had been held,
and it is for this reason that the story of these libellers is great in
history. ‘The incident must be read not as the cause, but as the
result, of the unpopularity of the Church.

The State, too, met its Prynne in the more attractive personality John

of John Lilburne. “ Freeborn John” now began at about the age of 5

twenty-one his life-long confession of liberty ; before he died in the
last years of the Protectorate, he had defied, in the same interest
of English law and personal freedom, four arbitrary Governments
of widely different political complexions. But the first was the
most cruel. Six months after Prynne’s sentence, he refused, as a
prisoner before the Star Chamber, to take the oath to answer all
questions put to him by the court. For this offence, though he
was a gentleman born, Lilburne was whipped at the cart’s tail from
the Fleet to Palace Yard, pilloried, gagged, and deliberately starved
almost to death in prison. Again, men observed with indignation
that classes hitherto exempt from corporal punishment were being
degraded by a jealous absolutism. Peers and apprentices alike
felt, not that democracy was being vindicated by even justice, but

ilburne,

e€c., 1637

Inefficient
state of
the navy

182 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1637

that honourable custom was being trodden in the mud by an en-
croaching and un-English tyranny.!

By ingenious expedients, which were perhaps good law but
certainly bad custom, Charles had collected enough revenue for the
small wants of his happy island. But forest courts, monopolies
and fines for knighthood, even when added to the rapid automatic
increase of the Customs duties in a time of growing trade, would
not suffice if England desired to recover that supremacy of the
ocean which she had held under Elizabeth, in whose reign the mon-
strous but declining Spanish power alone challenged our supremacy
on the waters. Since then, two more antagonists had come
into the field. France was obtaining at the hand of her cardinal
a royal navy and a commercial policy, which her wars of religion
had long postponed. Holland had outstripped us already. The
merchantmen of the little Republic carried more than half our
trade in and out of our own English ports. In 1620 it was said
that owing to Dutch competition London-owned shipping was only
half its former tonnage. The Dutch merchants not only carried
goods at the cheapest rates, but enjoyed, on every coast to which
the white man traded, the protection of the finest war navy and
the best admirals afloat. The Dutch State existed by commerce,
and for the protection of commerce. But the English Government,
between the death of Elizabeth and the seizure of power by
Parliament in 1642, was out of touch with merchants and their
needs. ‘Though our armed trading ships showed stout fight
against pirates of every nation, the royal navy did almost nothing
to protect them even in the Channel. Between 1609 and 1616
Turkish pirates from Algiers, guided by English renegades, took
466 of our merchant vessels; in 1625 they carried off 1,000 of
our seamen as slaves, and took twenty-seven vessels in ten days.
Even the shore itself was not safe from insult. Pirates rode,
ravaging and kidnapping, up the wooded creeks of Devon and
Cornwall, where Drake and Raleigh had prepared the death of
Spain. ‘Trinity House had the light on-the Lizard extinguished,
because it guided the pirates of Sallee, one of whom was captured
in the Thames itself. Nor was the “Turkish enemy” the only
danger of our merchantmen in home waters. The pirates of

1 Rushworth, ii., pp. 468, 469,

1637] CHARLES I 183

Dunkirk, from the coast of Spanish Flanders, were scarcely less
dreaded.}

James and Charles were responsible for this state of affairs.
James had permitted Mansell’s official peculation to ruin the navy
left by Elizabeth, although after 1617 the worst sort of abuses
were remedied by Cranfield’s vigilance in the public service. But
the personnel of the navy continued in a most miserable condi-
tion, chiefly owing to the poverty of kings who had quarrelled
with their Parliaments. The sailors, famished when they were
not poisoned, seldom clothed and hardly ever paid, were kept
together by flogging, keelhauling and other sea tortures, on men-
of-war which were often little better than ill-managed convict
hulks and ill-supplied plague hospitals. Charles never attempted
to remedy this, the true source of the weakness of our wooden
walls. But he rightly determined at least to keep up the number
of the royal ships.”

For this end he revived and extended an obsolete power, by Ship
which the Plantagenet monarchs had in times of need called out Moy
the merchantmen in the English ports to war. In Tudor times,
also, merchant-ships had been pressed into the service, but in small
numbers and at irregular intervals. Yet in 1634 Charles exacted,
not ships, but money to build a royal fleet ; and in the two follow-
ing years he extended the demand from the seaports to all the
shires of England. 'The exigencies of a bye-gone system of marine
defence were transformed into a new method of direct taxation, by
which the Petition of Right would be evaded, if not violated, the
King would be made independent of Parliament, and the existing
system of Church and State would become perpetual. It was cer-
tainly necessary that England should control the sea. But she
could never hope to do so under a Government deprived of the
popular support which gave strength to Elizabeth, and not possessed
of the machinery which enabled Richelieu to despise opinion. 'The
present form of monarchy could never be efficient. If only for the
sake of external power, choice must»ere long be made between
popular Government and despotism absolved from law. Fortu-
nately, there was no need hurriedly to decide in favour of absolute

1 Oppenheim, pp. 198, 199, 274-78. G., iii., pp. 64-68; v., pp. 79, 428. D’Ewes’
College Life, pp. 91, 92. Rushworth, i., p. 176. Stats. of Real., 16 Car. I, xxiv,
2Oppenheim, pp. 184-301 passim. Corbett, i., pp. 66-80,

Hamp-
den’s case,
1637-38

The Eng-
lish un-
willing to
rebel

184 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1637

monarchy, for the fear of immediate invasion, which might have
necessitated the payment of Ship Money, could not be pleaded
in time of peace with all European powers.

John Hampden was therefore consulting the greatness as well as

the liberty of his country when he refused to pay Ship Money. His
case was brought before the Exchequer Court, and argued out at
full length in its antiquarian aspects before an expectant people.
The Judges decided for the King by seven voices to five. But the
nation had been persuaded by St. John, Hampden’s counsel. The
pronouncement of Finch, one of the Royalist Judges, was still more
injurious to his master’s cause. He had the audacity to declare that
Acts of Parliament to take away his Royal power in the defence of his
kingdom are void. They are void Acts of Parliament to bind the King not
to command the subjects, their persons and goods and I say their money too,
for no Acts of Parliament make any difference. ‘
These words, everywhere bruited and everywhere discussed, con-
vinced the most unwilling that, by a strained interpretation of the
laws, the laws were being overthrown; and that nothing but a
restoration of the power of Parliament could preserve the individual —
in his person and goods.

As yet the antagonism of the many found no expression
beyond the passive resistance of the few. Some went to prison
and more fled oversea, but no one headed a riot or plotted a
rebellion. No collector of the unpopular taxes met with violence ;
no ecclesiastical court was stormed by the mob; no country gentle-
man assembled his friends with arms and horses to raise the shire.
Such things had happened in the barbarous centuries gone by;
they were to happen again during the hundred factious years
dividing the Short Parliament from the battle of Culloden. But
the peaceful endurance of Charles’s tyranny showed that the
Tudor rule had completed its work of civilisation. The English
in 1637 did not know how to move against Government, because
the custom of raising war had gone out, and the art of political
agitation had not come in. The last of the fighting nobles had
been executed by Elizabeth, but the first of the party leaders had
not yet discovered their calling. Harry Percy’s spur was cold, but
the more politic methods of Pym and Shaftesbury had yet to be
invented. So the hour belonged to Charles and his counsellors,

But if men were unwilling to overturn the Government, they

1637] CHARLES I 185

would not raise a hand to prevent its ruin. Would Wentworth
find time to build for monarchy a foundation independent of the
subjects’ support? Or would it fall too soon, at a touch from a
little nation, less tender of law and more accustomed in daily life
to the primitive methods of self-defence ?

In the days of Elizabeth of England and Mary of Scotland, a England

common religious policy had drawn the two peoples together in pie PEON:

. friendship after a blood-feud of three centuries. But since the
Union of 1603 their relation had been less intimate. The real
leaders of Scotland, who refused to leave their country to serve as
favourites to King James, were no longer, as in the days of Eliza-
beth, courted by embassies and messages from English statesmen.
In the border country itself, the chivalric relations so long fostered
by aromantic and traditional warfare, disappeared, without at once
giving place to any larger intercourse of trade or intellect. The
heart of English civilisation, then lying south of the Trent, was
separated by 150 miles of high moors and bad roads from a
country of which less was known on Paul’s Walk, during the wars
of Gustavus, than of Sweden or Brandenburg. So the English
Puritans forgot for a while, that beyond the Catholics of the
north country dales, lay a nation as Calvinist as Holland or
Rochelle. But now, in the last years of Charles’s personal govern-
ment, England and Scotland again began to work out their
religious and political destiny in common,

The two countries were well fitted to supplement each other,
The Scots could boast no great representative institutions, no spirit
of obedience to good laws; the English were so fondly attached to
their laws and institutions that they feared to draw sword on their
behalf. England knew neither democracy nor feudalism ; Scotland
presented a formidable interfusion of both those fighting spirits,
The English peasant took his religion from his betters and knew
neither learning nor politics; the Scottish peasant, nominally less
free, actually worse fed and housed, had yet acquired an active
spirit of equality in thought, religion, and even social practice.
England was led by squires, a peaceful class, slow to violent
courses, though capable when aroused of producing great states-
men and warriors. Scotland was led by nobles and lairds, ready
on good occasion to fight their Stuart King, like the Douglas of

186 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1637

old. That nobility, which the Crown had never crushed, it now
ventured to provoke.
Scotland Laud was encouraged by his master to reconstitute the medieval
and Laud society of Scotland, so far as the relations of Church and State
were concerned. Now the Scottish nobles, much as they feared a
revival of the power of the Presbytery, were yet more jealous to
preserve the wealth and influence which they had won at the Re-
formation. They suspected Charles of intending to restore the
Church lands which their grandfathers had seized; they saw him
place the Bishops on the Council at Edinburgh, and hand over to
these interlopers much of the secular administration. In large
questions of national policy, the new King of Scotland never deigned
to consult the nobles, who could if they wished call out against him
the fighting power of the land. The English people knew nothing
of Scottish affairs, but the English Government was, after James’s
death, scarcely better informed. For if Charles had not been
grossly ignorant, how could he have expected that, in consequence
of an order from London, the whole population of Scotland would
troop to the Kirks one Sabbath morning, eager to take part in a
service which until that moment had been regarded by them as the
Mass was regarded by the English ?
Laud’s James, who shrewdly declared that Laud “knew not the
ere stomach of that people,” “if he hoped to make that stubborn Kirk
» ™°37 stoop more to the English platform,” had used the episcopal system
in Scotland to limit the power of the clergy in the State, and to
protect moderate men in the Church against the fanatical party ; but
episcopacy under James VI. had been consistent with Calvinist
doctrine and ritual, and with democratic government of the village
kirks. But in 1637 Charles and Laud ordered the universal
adoption of a Prayer-book based on that of the English Church, in
place of Knox’s Book of Common Order. Neither nobles, people
nor clergy had been consulted in the destruction of their national
worship, ‘The new ritual, drawn out by the help of four Scottish
Bishops, had received the finishing touches at Lambeth, and been
sent down ready-made for use, like a sack of English goods, It
was an order in no veiled terms that Scotland should be Scotland
no more.
The new service could nowhere be read. The few attempts
made, were signals for riot which there was no force in the
kingdom to suppress. In the winter of 1637-38 the Scots entered

1639] CHARLES I 187

into a Covenant for defence of their religion. Nobles, lairds, clergy,
burghers, peasants, all took part in this national act, as active and
intelligent co-operators. There was no division yet either of party
or of class. Montrose was shoulder to shoulder with Baillie and
Argyle. There were no Episcopalians and no Royalists south of
the Highland glens where wild tribesmen still bowed their heads
before the Host. After spending the year 1638 in vain negotiations
to bring back the revolted nation to its duty, Charles determined
to conquer Scotland by arms.

The immediate cause of the fall of Charles’s tyranny was the First
want of a military system. If Wentworth had been the King’s ae =
English adviser from 1632-39 he might have formed the nucleus
of a standing army, or at least have made such provision as would
_ have ensured the levy of a few trustworthy regiments in the day
of need. But during all those precious years he had been struggling
_ with the chimera of races and religions in Ireland, and there alone
| was such a force to be found when his master’s troubles began.
) In England the only two means of warfare available to the sovereign
_ were still, as in the days of Elizabeth and Buckingham, militia
} train-bands which had not been trained, or pressed recruits whose
) first object would be to escape. In the spring of 1639 Charles
) tried to form an army out of the train-bands of the northern
4 counties. The peasants of those parts were not Puritans; but
| they had neither experience, discipline nor enthusiasm. To lead
| this army and to give counsel in war and politics, Charles summoned
) the nobles of England round him as he advanced through Yorkshire.
) Many of them had long avoided Court, or had appeared there with-
| out being able to acquire influence. They now assembled, fearing
{) the success of the expedition to Scotland which they were called
/ to conduct: for it would lead to the establishment of despotism in
)) England, and to the further reduction of their own rapidly diminish-
4' ing power in the State. Meanwhile, across the border, a nation in
{) arms, officered in part by the feudal chiefs of each district, in
| part by veteran Scots returned from the armies of Sweden and

Holland, was laagered on Dunse Law under a discipline which
_ would have borne inspection by Gustavus, and with a zeal which
+ would have won the approval of Knox. Below them, in the
‘meadows of the T'weed, among untrained, ill-provisioned husband-
‘men, only longing to be back at the plough with whole skins,

188 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1636

lay a foolish King, separated from his few faithful servants, and
surrounded by a draft of unwilling nobles. The Scots, who could,
by attacking, have avenged Flodden within sight of its haunted
hills, chose more wisely not to provoke against themselves the
fighting spirit of the larger kingdom. In the negotiations that
were soon opened between the camps (June, 1639), the Covenanters
showed a moderation and loyalty in their demands which favourably
impressed the conservative English nobles ; while a closer knowledge
of their objects and ideals prepared the way for that understanding,
not yet formed, between the Puritans of North and South Britain.
Charles was forced to concede for the time the wishes of the Scots,
to disband the militia and to return home.

Strafford So ended the First Bishops’ War. By adopting the daydreams

comes to of the priesthood as the policy of the State, Charles had suffered a

the rescue :

Sep., 1639 reverse, from the consequences of which he could only be delivered
by a stronger man than Laud. In September, Wentworth hastened
over from Ireland, and was at last installed as the chief counsellor
of the King. In January next he was created Earl, and first
assumed the immortal name of Strafford. In the fourteen months
that elapsed between his arrival in London and his arrest by the
Long Parliament, he was, for the first and last time, the brain of
the monarchy. The fear which in that short while he inspired
among the defenders of freedom, was greater than the hate which
in a dozen years Laud had gathered round his own less impressive _
personality.

Went. Strafford was essentially “the man from Ireland”. It was by

ears stories of the imperious conduct of the great Deputy towards Irish
juries, councillors and parliaments, that the English knew what
to expect when he returned to their own shores. In Ireland
though Pym never understood it, there was indeed some use fot
the policy of “thorough”. A state of society so backward and
so distracted could be best ruled as India was afterwards ruled by
its English governors. Wentworth cleared his way through the
opposition of self-seeking officials such as Mountnorris and Loftus
crushing them by methods akin to those used by Hastings apainst
Nuncomar and Francis. He saw the impracticability of a free
jury system, where the English never did justice to the natives,
and where the natives, in terror of their chieftains’ vendettas
would never do justice to each other. He often made light of the

1640] CHARLES I 189

letter of the law, where the law was an organised chicanery to help
the powerful in schemes of spoliation. At Council-board and in
Parliament he overrode all opposition by sheer force of his character
and will. .

Upon such acts were founded the charges afterwards brought
against him by Pym at the impeachment. But no one in England
made it a crime against him that he had ill-used the Catholic
Irish. Former Deputies had tried to drive them to the services of
the English Church, by levying, from rich and poor, ruinous fines
for recusancy. Wentworth recognised that the policy had failed.
For the churches which the inhabitants were to attend, were lying
in ruins ; the parsons who were to preach and pray, did not know
_ the language of the people, and were not unusually absentees ; the
Bishops and their officers spent their time, not in converting the
recusants, but in amassing fortunes from them by the laws of the
State and the machinery of ecclesiastical courts. Celtic Ireland
| would have gone back to heathendom but for the illegal ministra-

)) tions of the wandering Catholic priests. Yet though Wentworth

did something to mitigate the lot of the recusants, he continued

} the general anti-Catholic policy of his predecessors. He encouraged

_ the Dublin lawyers to cheat the native Irish of ancient lands and

) tribal rights for the benefit of the Crown and the Protestants. In

) 1609 a great seizure of land from the natives, known as the Planta-

i tion of Ulster, had taken place, when Scottish and English colonists

) had settled on the lands of the Catholic tribes in the North. But

| in Wentworth’s day there was still a Catholic merchant class in the

i port towns of the East, and Catholic landowners still possessed

| the greater part of the island. Pestered, persecuted, and uncertain

| of the future, they regarded the English law as a machine de-

i signed to deprive them of their property. Strafford did nothing to

l,alter this state of feeling or to remove the causes for a great
‘rebellion, which the fear inspired by his presence still relegated to

| the future.!

|| Strafford’s object, on his return to England, was to establish strafford’s
«| the absolute sovereignty of the Crown, by partisan interpretations English

* of law and custom, enforced by swift punishment, and backed by ed
{armed power. Thus Ship Money would be preferred to subsidies

|
i 1G,, i., pp. 358-441; Viii., pp. 1-66, 183-98; ix., pp. 71, 723 X-. PP. 43) 44+

190 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1640

as a means of taxation, because its legality could be maintained
with better face; but Hampden, according to Wentworth’s written
advice, unheeded at that earlier time, ought to have been “ well
whipt into his right senses” for going to law against the royal
claims. Strafford’s love of despotism derived from no theory of
Divine Right, but from the desire to see England strongly governed.
His Irish experience had taught him to regard all resistance to the
Crown as factious or corrupt, and to see the only hope for public
peace and prosperity in an unquestioned absolutism, coercing all
sects, races and persons into obedience. Blinded in part by his
own ambition, and in part by the false analogy of Ireland, he did
not remember, as the old antagonist of Buckingham should have
done, that in England the royal administration had for forty
years been so weak and foolish, that even the material interests
of the country could no longer be trusted to such a system. It
was a more pardonable error that he did not understand how a
debating assembly of 500 uninstructed squires could ably conduct
the policy of a kingdom, and succeed where the Court had failed.
He was too proud to perceive in his compatriots the political genius
of the English race; and he could not foresee the reconciliation
which the Cabinet system would afford to the rival claims of
executive and representative. But his worst error lay in this—
that to perfect the mere machine of government, he purposed to
abandon for ever the noblest aim of all rule and all society, the
freedom of individual men in speech and act.

The problem with which Strafford’s year of power began and
ended, was how to raise a force for the conquest of Scotland. It
was his design to create for this purpose two armies, one in Ireland
and one in England, raised by the Parliaments of the two kingdoms.
In March, 1640, he went over to deal with the Irish politicians.
The official vote in the Dublin Parliament held the balance between
Catholics and Protestants. Reversing his previous policy, Strafford
threw it on to the side of the Catholics, preached a crusade against
Presbyterians, and so obtained a vote of four subsidies, whereby he
proceeded to raise an Irish army for the suppression of the Scots
in Ulster and in Scotland.’ Returning in haste to England, he

1G,, ix., PP: 95, 96.

1640] CHARLES I 191

was in time for the meeting of the “Short Parliament”. 'That The Short
assembly had been called by his advice. So little did he know his Pies
own countrymen, that he thought it possible to obtain in England, 13th April-
as he had obtained in Ireland, an obedient assembly ready to arm ae
the King against his Scottish subjects. As soon as the Houses

met, bargaining was begun; it was proposed to sell to the nation

the royal claim to Ship Money. But the more fundamental issues

were not long avoided. Pym, in a great speech of the unusual

length of two hours, exposed all the grievances of Church and

State, and proclaimed that “the powers of Parliament are to the

body politic as the rational faculty of the soul to man”. He was

about to organise a petition against the Scottish war, when the

King dissolved the Houses. They had been summoned not to
dispute, but to support, the royal policy. They had raised, though

in moderate and loyal language, the question of sovereign power.

Strafford had failed to establish absolute monarchy through Its effect
Parliament. He now turned to establish it, “loose and absolved pee
from all rules of government”. But that task had been made
more difficult by the fact that the Short Parliament had come
and gone. The Scots had learnt that they were fighting, not a
united nation, but a divided Court. The popular party in Eng-
land had discovered its strength, brought together its leaders, and
proclaimed its policy. For eleven years there had been no popular
party, but only private discontent in every locality and every
class. There had been no newspapers, no knowledge of what men
thought in other parishes and shires. The secret circulation of
scurrilous pamphlets, the rhymes posted at night on doors ia the
street and on trees by the wayside, had fostered but not revealed
the strength of opinion. Hence Strafford had been deceived and
his opponents left uncertain as to the general temper of the nation,
till the Short Parliament exposed the facts. After its dissolution,
riots, unknown for years, broke out in various parts of England.
Round London, mobs of prentices went about seeking the life of the
Archbishop. Government punished the ringleaders with death,
and for a few months drove these manifestations underground.

During the summer of 1640 undisguised absolutism tried its Absolut-
strength against a nation now thoroughly aroused. Members of yay ‘6ct.
the late Parliament were arrested and flung into gaol. Convoca-
tion issued a new set of High Church Canons, and proposed, on the

Second
Bishops’
War.
Scots
occupy
Northum-
berland,

Aug., 1640

192 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1640

model of the Covenant, an oath to defend the existing establishment
of the Church; it was a false step, a sign of fear that encouraged
the Puritans, and of hostility that irritated them. But the real
business of the hour was the attempt of Strafford to raise an English
army, by force, since he could not by consent. Ship Money, and its
military equivalent Coat and Conduct Money, though proclaimed
illegal in the late House of Commons, were again extorted. A Forced
Loan was set on foot in the city, and four aldermen who refused
to subscribe were thrown into prison. But the passive resistance
of the taxpayer, and the fear of provoking local outbreaks before the
intended army was in being, rendered all these expedients useless.
Though he knew that failure meant ruin, Strafford was unable, by all
the efforts of his will and genius, to extort enough money to pay for
one army, from a nation which soon afterwards bore, without falling
under the burden, the cost of a score of Roundhead and Cavalier
armaments, besides all the loss which their ravages could inflict.

If there was no money, the men at least were being mustered
to fight the Second Bishops’ War. In 1639 the militia had been
called out in the North; but in 1640 a regular army was raised
by the press-gang in the South. The northern train-bands had
proved harmless to the Scots; the southern recruits now proved
dangerous to the King. ‘Though drawn from a rural class too low
to have much knowledge of politics, many were Puritans, and all
deeply resented their forced enlistment. In East Anglia they
broke into churches and pulled down the altar rails; in the West
they chased away Catholics who had been set over them for

want of Protestants whom the King could trust, and at least one —

officer was murdered. A Gloucestershire captain thus describes
how he managed to preserve discipline :—

The Puritan rascals of the country had strongly possessed the soldiers
that all the commanders of our regiments were Papists, so I was forced for
two or three days to sing psalms all the day I marched, for all their religion
lies in a psalm. . . . Every morning when I first come amongst them they

shake me so heartily by the hand that I was once in doubt I should have
my arm shook off in courtesy.

In all parts of England whole companies deserted, and could not
safely be dragged back to the colours, from the midst of a popu-
lation itself on the verge of revolt.

1 Treaty of Ripon (Camden Soc., 1869), pp. xx-xxiii, G., ix., pp. 159, 160,

1640] CHARLES I 193

As the wrecks of the army which was to have subdued two
kingdoms moved mutinously northwards, the Scots, now under-
standing the English people to be on their side, boldly crossed the
Border, cut up a small Royalist vanguard at the ford across the Tyne
at Newburn, seized Newcastle as their headquarters, and sat down
in occupation of Durham and Northumberland. The military situa-
tion invited them to advance on the capital. But they wisely
preferred to sell their advantage for all it was worth. Halting at
the Tees, they sent Commissioners to negotiate at Ripon.

Meanwhile, Strafford’s lieutenants in Ireland had failed to levy Strafford
the army which the Dublin Parliament had voted him for use $788*sts

; ; : ~~ the up-
against the Scots. The eye of the master was wanting; and in rooting

that poverty-stricken island less enthusiasm was shown in paying oe
than in voting subsidies for the extirpation of heresy. In October plantation
Strafford proposed to revive the warlike ardour of the Irish Catholics

by letting them loose at once upon the Scots in Ulster. He was
willing to do what James II. afterwards did in the campaign of
Londonderry—-to associate the royal with the Catholic cause, and
kindle the flames of racial and religious war. When we remember

that Strafford had no sympathy with Irish nationality or religion,

and that he considered the Protestant interest to be the true interest

of Ireland, his sudden proposal to uproot the Ulster plantation can

only be regarded as a proof of his fierce determination to establish
despotism in the British Islands at all costs.’

As this evil scheme did not meet with support, Charles had no Treaty of
other choice than to surrender to the Scottish Commissioners at prion ane
Ripon. He had not only to concede all their political and religious of Parlia-
claims, but to buy them out of England at the price of a high ae
indemnity, and a daily allowance for their soldiers, who were to
occupy the northern counties until the lump sum was paid down.

The extortion was a policy not of avarice but of state-craft, for there
was only one way in which the English Government could meet a
demand for gold. After long weeks of debate and confusion at
York, surrounded by a divided Court and a mutinous soldiery,
Charles, at the instance of popular petitions organised by Pym and
his friends, and at the advice of the Great Council of Peers,
consented to save England from bankruptcy and invasion by
summoning her Lords and Commons to the rescue.

1G,, ix., pp. 155-57, 213, 214.
13

Arrest of
Strafford,
11th Nov.,
1640

194 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1640

The Short Parliament had been called to pay for the conquest
of the Scots, but its more famous successor was called to buy them
out of England. As regards both English and Scottish politics,
the summons of the Long Parliament was a surrender.

But one man was not prepared to lay down arms. Strafford’s
first instinct, while the members were assembling in London, was to
remain in Yorkshire, carefully nursing Royalism and discipline in
the army, and waiting till time and chance should bring round
an occasion which his genius might snatch to recover what was
now lost. But Charles, with light promises of safety, summoned
him unwilling to London. The Parliamentary leaders began, at
first fairly and cautiously, to take measures against him. A com-
mittee, on which one of his intimate friends was placed, was appointed
to inquire into the late government of Ireland ; a long preliminary
investigation was meditated. But events suddenly swept aside all
fairness and all caution. For Strafford, seeing that if he sat still
he would be caught before long in the toils, persuaded Charles to
arrest the Parliamentary leaders on a charge of plotting treason
with the Scottish rebels. ‘The King was to review a body of troops
in the Tower on the day fixed for the arrest, and overawe resist-
ance by force. At the last moment the plan was abandoned, but
not before the fatal rumour of it was abroad. The Commons,
meeting in terror on the day of the intended blow, listened
behind locked doors to Pym’s urgent counsels of self-defence,
drew up an improvised impeachment, and carried it up then
and there, in hasty procession, to the Lords. Strafford, hearing
what was done, hurried to the same spot a little after his accusers
had arrived. At that supreme moment, as Strafford moved scowl-
ing up the floor of their House, the Lords were judge between two
systems of government for England. In that hour all the personal
and class insults which the House of Stuart had heaped on the
nobility, all the ungracious manners of Laud and Strafford, all the
social ties and national sentiment which bound the English nobles
to the class whence their families had risen, stood our country
in good stead. He whom no man had yet safely withstood to
the face, was stopped before he reached his seat by the cry of
his angry peers—“ Withdraw, withdraw”. He obeyed, and was
soon called back to kneel a prisoner before the risen majesty of

England.

1640] FORMATION OF PARTIES, 1640-2 195

CHAPTER VII
THE FORMATION OF PARTIES, NOV., 1640—AUG., 1642,
When civil dudgeon first grew high.—Hudibras.

EVOLUTION is the historian’s touchstone, by which to try Character

the quality of a race or age. It may succeed or fail, oes

pass or stay ; but it will in any case reveal the worth or vileness of revolution
the soil whence it springs. ‘That most rare of human events, a
revolution loftily enacting lofty ideals, can occur only in a State
where wealth is well distributed, classes fairly balanced and kindly
related, the common intellectual food wholesome, the imagination
alive, and the moral standard high. It is seldom that all these
conditions are fulfilled ; it is yet more seldom that the politics of so
fortunate an era demand a revolution. Yet for this once in history
all causes for the unique event were found together. It has been
shown in the first two chapters that when Charles and Laud began
to play the tyrant in England, she was rich in native excellence.
The character and function of the various classes, gentleman and
yeoman, merchant and apprentice; the sports, traditions, customs
and character of every shire and village, which gave even to the
poor a part and a joy in life; the conditions of labour and leisure
in country and town; the charm of our mother-tongue as then
written and spoken by common men; the Elizabethan culture dis-
tilled in life and manners; the Protestant religion expressed in life
and conduct; all these things together, when warmed by the breath
of revolutionary ardour, gave us our Cavaliers and Roundheads.
Excepting the Reformation in Holland and in some continental
cities, history perhaps records no revolution so noble as this, because
no other nation in time of revolt was sound in its material and social
fabric, yet alive to the appeals of intellect and quick to hear the
restraining voice of conscience, At the overthrow of the decayed

Change
in the
methods
of the
popular
leaders

196 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1640

society of France, ideals served as ensigns borne along before an
army of material hungers. Hence the dark story of their savage
vindication ; hence, too, the victory of ideals and hungers together,
in modern France of the equal laws. The French revolution
appealed to the needs as well as to the aspirations of mankind.
But in England the revolutionary passions were stirred by no class
in its own material interest. Our patriots were prosperous men,
enamoured of liberty, or of religion, or of loyalty, each for her
own sake, not as the handmaid of class greed. This was the secret
of the moral splendour of our Great Rebellion and our Civil War.

In the first weeks of the Long Parliament, the policy of those
who fought the battle of Protestant supremacy and political free-
dom, underwent a change, sudden as when the wind shifts, but
permanent as when the flood leaps down into lands below its former
level. From the accession of the House of Stuart to the breaking
of the Short Parliament the patriots had studied no art but the
legal definition of rights, and the fearless presentation of grievances.
But from the meeting of the Long Parliament to the accession of
the House of Hanover, through all changes of men and measures,
of high and low ideals, the first thought alike of Roundhead and
Whig was the manipulation of forces. Former Parliaments had
spoken for the people, but never called upon the people to protect
them. Hence the purity and charm of Eliot’s life and death; he
registered the claims. Pym was the master of another art,—to
seize the power. Pym first called in clubs and broadswords to
protect this Parliament from the fate to which all its predecessors
had submitted. At his word, ignorant fanaticism and mob force
came to guard religion and liberty, whose cause had looked so fair
when only the chivalrous gentlemen of England were its long-
suffering champions. And yet the gain was great, for in this way
English liberty and religion survived. And in this way English
liberty. came to include more than the narrow legalism of the
Parliament men, English religion more than the stiff gentlemanly
Protestantism of the earlier patriots. For the inhabitants of
street, and farm, and village, called in the hour of need to acting

16 40] FORMATION OF PARTIES, 1640-2 197

partnership with the Puritans of the manor house, added not only
to the fighting power, but to the spiritual and intellectual content |
of the cause. Behind the mobs who hooted the King’s §half-
pay captains in Palace Yard and knocked down papists at the
street corners, moved the humble men who were to found Quakerism,
and the practical visionaries who were to inspire democracy with its
best peculiar hopes and ideals.

The time had come when British freedom might be secured, if
skilled hands would boldly snatch for it; but it was by no means
the inevitable outcome. The course which the world has since
taken depended upon this;—that the one English Parliament
which sat protected for the moment by the Scottish pikes and by
the union of the whole people against the Government, should
throw aside long traditions of isolated respectability, and be ready
to foment and lead the revolutionary forces of the land. But
how should five hundred members, collected by the hazard of
unorganised elections, have courage, skill or union for such pro-
ceedings? This Parliament, it cannot be doubted, would have run
a higher course than its predecessors in constitutional votes and
high-sounding declarations, only in the end to have fallen in deeper
ruin, had not the leadership of Lords, Commons, and country
together, been seized by a band of self-elected tribunes, who had
the courage and talent to execute plans formed in the council
chamber of intimate family friendship. During the eleven years’ The party
tyranny, though the existence of a party had not been notified by chiefs
any organisation or any public action, a group of friends, containing
several of the richest peers and highest commoners in England, had
formed the habit of living together for months under one roof to
watch and discuss events. ‘This home conspiracy, the true origin
of our party system, was hatched far from London in deer parks
and on garden terraces; its chief members were Pym, Hampden
and St. John; the great Earl of Bedford; the hot Puritan Lord
Saye and Sele; Lord Mandeville, heir to the Earldom of Man-
chester; and his wife’s father the Earl of Warwick, colonist
and sailor, whose jolly yarns, smelling of the Spanish main, made
the persecuted preachers, with whom he filled his hospitable house,
laugh like pluralists at their Bishop’s table.

When the session of the Short Parliament had revealed, and its
dissolution aggravated, the mutinous temper of the country, these

198 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS — [1640

careful watchmen saw that the time for action had come. On the
eve of the Second Bishops’ War, seven English peers signed a
letter to the Scottish rebels, in which they recognised a common
cause, promised all constitutional aid, ‘but deprecated invasion and
refused to give help in arms.1_ Such a document, even if no verbal
message of more treasonable import was sent with it, was not a
really serious discouragement to the plan of invading the northern
counties. Again, when the Scots had crossed the Tweed, and Charles
was hesitating at York, Pym organised petitions for a Parliament,
both from Peers and people. When the general election was taking
place, he went a riding tour with Hampden through the towns of
England, urging men to choose known Puritans, and forming in
distant counties those ties of personal connection and mutual
agreement which leaders must have in hand before a great agita-
tion in the provinces can be organised from the capital. So, when
the Long Parliament assembled, this small group of Lords and
commoners were already recognised, not only as the successors of
their friend Eliot in the informal leadership of the Commons, but
as the authors of a policy outside its walls which came as near to
technical treason as any word or deed of Strafford.

Yet these innovators were revolutionaries only in their means.
In the ends which they sought, they wished to be conservative,
although they evoked force to preserve what they conceived to be
the old Constitution. In November, 1640, they did not contem-
plate the expedient by which the two Houses, a year later, them-
selves assumed administrative power. They did not recognise that
they would soon be forced to transfer the sovereignty of England
from the King to his subjects. They only intended by the punish-
ment of the greatest men in the land so to illustrate the power,
and by a series of new laws so to define the rights, of Parliament,
that no Privy Council would ever again find the courage or the
legal pretext to govern Church and State contrary to the will of the
Houses and the Protestant feeling of the nation.

When in November the gates of the Tower closed upon Strafford,
a sense of their own security and omnipotence inspired the Commons,
for two months, in the work of general retribution; while despair and

‘Bedford, Essex, Warwick, Saye, Mandeville, Savile and Brooke (sce: Gonix,
pp. 178, 179).

1640] FORMATION OF PARTIES, 1640-2 199

panic spread among their destined victims. The impeachments Flight of
avenged in the person of the highest delinquents each of the various yee and
kinds of wrong which England had so long endured. Windebank, bank.
the Secretary of State a8 had done most to give a Catholic bias toy eens -
our policy at home and abroad, fled to France, and was there recon-

ciled, before he died, to the Church whose interests he had so well
promoted.’ Finch, the Judge who at Hampden’s Ship Money trial

had first roused Englishmen to their senses by pronouncing that

their property was not their own but the King’s, escaped to Hol-

land, the first of the long series of political refugees, who in rapid
mutations of Cavalier and Roundhead, Tory and Whig, were for

fifty years seen daily by the inhabitants of the Hague pacing the
avenues with the restless strides of hunger, and misery, and hope.

But the predecessor in exile of Charles II. and of Shaftesbury,

found Holland already inhabited by the humbler exiles not of

State but of Church. Brownists and Anabaptists from our country

had thriven in Amsterdam, and were shrewd or kindly enough to
supply this new flight of unfortunates with a comfortable home

and an English table. In the following August Evelyn found

Finch and a whole household of Cavaliers living en pension in the
houses of these strange bedfellows.? Laud himself, too old and

brave to fly, was carried to the Tower, where he lay unfeared and
unregarded, till four years later his enemies did all that could be

done to vindicate his policy to mankind, by illustrating in his
execution the malignant spirit that always haunted and sometimes
possessed the temple of English Puritanism.

Thus the chiefs of the old Court party, who had so long silenced
every voice in England but their own, were for ever broken and
scattered, many months before the King’s later Cavalier friends had
divided their fortunes from those of Warwick and Pym. The
Queen and a few swashbucklers were left, for a while, alone against
ail England. Men who had curried favour with the Privy Council
by exacting Ship Money from their neighbours, and had now to
ear the mercy of Parliament, spoke and voted for Pym’s measures
in the House, and some of these even drew sword in the Civil War

1 He had in May, 1640, joined the Queen in her appeal to the Pope for men and
money to subdue England (G., ix., p. 135). Such were the men and women to
whom Charles I, committed our interests.

2Evelyn’s Diary, August, 1641.

London,
the work-
shop of
the
revolution

200 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1640

faithfully to their new allegiance! For in the winter of 1640 a
new world had come into being.

The change was first and most clearly seen in the City. No
royal police, no municipal despots fettered the early revolt of the
capital. Self-governing London was in a state of uncontrolled
freedom the moment that her citizens ceased to fear Lambeth
and Whitehall. She had been restrained from without, rather by
moral than physical force. Merely by ceasing to obey the Court
and Bishops she had already, before the day of Strafford’s arrest,
become a free republic of political thought and writing, the work-
shop of the English revolution. The episcopal censorship, in the
hands of academic pedants such as in all ages hate intellectual
vigour of any class but their own, had long stifled the growth of
mind. But now the time had come for free interchange of ideas.
Pamphlets on religion and government were daily piled on the stalls,
and daily disappeared down streets and through doorways, each
on its mysterious mission, making creeds, wars, systems, men. In
courtyard, chamber and pulpit, sermons were delivered day and
night to excited and interpolating audiences, like speeches in some
well-contested election. ‘The old Gothic churches, in which the
City was then so rich, saw many a strange scene that Christmas ;
in some the congregation raised psalms to drown the Prayer-book
service ; in nearly all they carried back the communion-table into
the nave. But besides these busy reformers of the Church, a score
of sects, seeming to spring in as many days out of the earth, and
numbering many thousand Londoners, scorned the “ steeple house ”
and met in the largest rooms they could find, no longer as thieves
by night, but daily visited by inquiring multitudes.

Onwards for many years from these first days of November,
1640, London was great and wonderful as Paris in 1789. The
centre of revolution, the curb of the neighbouring Court, and the
rude protector of the neighbouring Parliament, it produced in
fierce intellectual ferment a new world of thought and action, to
guide the coming centuries. But the likeness to the Paris ot
1789 marks the difference. Our English theorists spoke for the
most part of religion, Church government and individual con-
science; and the London mob was not the wreckage of a ruined

Hutchinson, pp. 127, 128, case of Sir John Gell. Clar., p. 73.

1640} FORMATION OF PARTIES, 1640-2 901

society, drifting into the capital on the search for bread to eat and
finding only victims to slay, but was largely composed of and wholly
guided by prosperous shopkeepers and apprentices, many of them
descended from gentle families! The popular passion to which
our Parliamentary leaders trusted, had for motive not hunger but
religion. ‘The mob howled under the doors not of bakers but of
Bishops. 'The hatred of Catholicism, the rumour of papist massacre
often as wild as the silliest story that ever gulled Marat’s Paris, the
wiser fear of real army plots and possible Cavalier conquest, these
were the furies that drove the blind multitude to battle on behalf
of nobler men and higher projects than any of which they them-
selves were aware.

In this atmosphere the Scots Commissioners, whose treaty busi- The Scots
ness had been moved from Ripon to London, and who had taken pgeeoee
care to come up well supplied with preachers and theologians, soon London
conceived the new hope that England would adopt the ecclesiastical
system of their country. The guests of the City, visited by the
greatest Peers, consulted beforehand on every move by the organ-
isers of agitation, preaching on Sundays to a great audience on
the merits of Scottish religion and the demerits of “his little
grace of Canterbury,” they were for a few all-important weeks the
favourites of the town. “Gramercy, good Scot,” was the refrain of

_ popular street ballads. For the English were not ungrateful to
the army which had first opened the house of their bondage, and
which still secured the continued session of Parliament by occupying

_ Northumberland. “No fear yet of raising the Parliament, so long
as the lads about Newcastle sit still,” Baillie wrote back to his
Scottish countrymen. The same idea was openly expressed in

- debate by some members of the House of Commons. ‘The invaders’
friendship was retained by occasional doles towards their daily
allowance, while their presence on this side the Border was pro-

| longed by the unwillingness of the House to pay the full indemnity.

Its extravagant amount was to some members a real reason, to
others a welcome excuse, for delay. The financial demands of the

' Scots Commissioners, and the rude persistence with which they now

1See p. 20 above. Yet a large proportion of the followers in the ‘ prentice”
mobs, probably consisted of the slum dwellers from the “liberties” outside the city
proper. See note p. 51 above. But these had no social end of their own to serve

_ and simply became a political force in the hands of their betters.

202 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1640

claimed the abolition of Episcopacy in England, had by the end
of February lost them all favour with one section of the English
patriots.
Question For while Strafford still gazed from the Tower window, sick with
cee pet the plethora of intellect cut off from knowledge, and of energy with-
Nov.,1640-held from action; while his Irish enemies, eager to bear witness
Ben oa against him, were still tossing along the coast of Wales ; the men who
were agreed to compass his destruction were already dividing on
another issue. During the long preparations for the great trial,
the City and the House of Commons were agitating the question
of the future—were Bishops to be reformed or abolished? In the
country, where men impatiently scanned their letters for the news
that his head was off, Church settlement did not begin seriously to
attract study or to divide opinion till many eventful months had
intervened. But where the voice of inquiry and debate arose round
the London bookstalls, where members with bent head and knit
brows paced Westminster Hall between the scaffoldings erected
against the day of the Earl’s impeachment, the learned argument
ran high on apostolic succession and the usage of the primitive
Church. But other influences had more weight than that intermin-
able and uncertain antiquarian controversy, in the decision which
each of the future leaders of England now made for or against
the retention of a modified Episcopate.
Of the various groups which it was Pym’s art to unite for action,

Unpopu- i :
larity of the strongest in wealth and numbers, to which he himself be-
poe longed, made objection to Episcopacy on purely practical grounds.

almost The great body of Englishmen had neither sympathy with
universal the Sectarian’s demand for religious freedom, nor interest in
the Presbyterian system advocated by their own doctors and by
their Scottish allies, but they were convinced that the abolition
of Episcopacy was now the only means of securing for ever the
Protestant character of the State Church to which they intended
that all men should still be forced to belong. They were true
successors of the men who defended Elizabeth’s system against
Catholic and Presbyterian attacks. The political and religious
action of the Bishops since the death of the Queen had altered
their view, not of the State Church, but of the Bishops’ office.
Laud had revived Anti-episcopalianism in England, not now as
an ecclesiastical ideal, but as a political and religious necessity,

1640} FORMATION OF PARTIES, 1640-2 203

In 1640 it required an effort of memory or imagination to picture
a Bench of truly Protestant Bishops. The prospect of ever again
obtaining such a Bench was small, since the appointments at that
time lay, not with Parliament, but with the obstinate man who
was the husband of Henrietta Maria, the patron of Windebank, and
the friend of Laud. The Bishops were hated not only by the City
mob but by the whole body of gentry, on whose political, social and
religious feelings they had so long trampled. Episcopacy had
defenders in the Long Parliament, but the Bishops themselves had
none. In a speech delivered in defence of their office, the Cavalier
Digby declared himself “so inflamed with the sense of them,” that
he was ready to cry out “Down with them! Down with them! even
unto the ground.” Falkland, who followed on the same side, ad-
mitted that some of them “had laboured to bring in an English
Popery”. Pym differed from Digby and Falkland, because he
believed that nothing short of the abolition of the office itself
would be more than a temporary safeguard against a revival of
Catholicism in the bosom of the English Church.

It is probable that the moderate Cavaliers would not long have The
posed as defenders of men whom they detested, had not the fate of coe
another institution, which they loved more heartily, been involved popular
in the fate of the Episcopate. The proscription of the Prayer- Bebone
book service was eventually the ruin of the Puritans. The in-
tolerant and offensive zeal with which they pursued it, is explained
but not excused by two considerations. First, the Prayer-book had
become under Laud’s régime associated in practice with ritualism.
Secondly, no one beside the Sectarians contemplated the permission
of any system of Nonconformity, and therefore all who conscienti-
ously desired for themselves a different service from the Prayer-
book, were forced to prohibit its use to others. It soon became
apparent how difficult it was to supply a good alternative service
every Sunday in every church. Country gentlemen and their wives
who had supported Pym and the Puritan cause, were often dis-
gusted when they had to listen in their own parish to “a very
strange service, and in such a tone that most people do nothing
but laugh at it”.1 The Puritans were no more able than the
Anglicans to take over the whole machinery of religious life in

England.
> Verney, ii., p. 258.

No

204 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1640

The resolution to abolish Episcopacy “with all its roots and

scheme of branches,” that is, with all those upper ranks of clergy whose office

reform
agreed
upon

Three
Puritan

schemes of

Church
govern-
ment

Erastian

and tradition were inextricably associated with a Catholic con-
ception of the Church, was the policy that bound together men
who differed in a hundred different ways as to the proper form of
Church settlement. And if the views of those who wrote and
spoke were divergent, the views of those who thought and kept
silence were vague. “I can tell you, sirs, what I would not have ;
though I cannot, what I would,” answered Mr. Cromwell, to the
bewilderment and scandal of two Episcopalian members who had
asked what system he proposed to substitute for theirs.’ But to
Milton, whose ecstatic vision of his regenerated country, moved
him at last to descend in the stately measure of his poet’s prose
among the assemblies of common and secular spirits, it seemed,
as he wrote his immortal pamphlet, Of Reformation in England,
that only libertines dreading the correction of their sins had reason
to fear the establishment of Presbyterian discipline. The gods
laughed, and gave him to drink the bitter cup of his ideals realised.
On a lower scale of intelligence and feeling, thousands were uncertain
as Cromwell and changeable as Milton.

If, then, it be remembered that comparatively few persons were
Erastian, Presbyterian, or Independent with any consistency, it is
safe to distinguish the main features of the three rival schemes.
They had indeed one common element, besides a sternly Protestant
faith and worship; all three proposed to introduce democracy into
the Church. The priest was to be subjected to some measure of
election and control by the people. This change would require a
high spiritual level throughout the country, and a democracy of
intellect such as the Presbyterian system had found or fostered
in Scotland. Could the English villagers be raised to the same
height? If not, Puritanism would again give place to the old
Church establishment, more compatible with squirearchy and more
suited to a population whose mass lacked intelligence and en-
thusiasm.

1. The scheme adopted by Pym and the Parliamentary majority
which he came to command, was that of a Puritan State Church,
not tolerating dissent either of Anglicans or of Anabaptists,

1Sir P. Warwick’s Memoirs (ed. 1703), p. 177%

1640] FORMATION OF PARTIES, 1640-2 205

but controlled by Parliamentary Lay Commissioners in the place
of the Bishops. Such was the anti-clerical system planned out by
the representatives of England. Laud himself had not been more
Erastian.!

2. The “true blue” Presbyterian scheme, recommended as Presby-
infallible by the Scottish people and by a few English divines, 2"
though it also would have established a democratic ecclesiastical
organisation in each village, would have unified all under a system
of clerical synods and Church councils, and would rigorously have
enforced the orthodoxy of Geneva. This scheme was rejected by
the Long Parliament in 1641-42, and was only adopted in 1648 as
the necessary price of the Scottish alliance in an hour of deadly
peril. The Parliamentary majority of Puritan Erastians only con-
sented to become Puritan clericals in the middle campaign of the
war.

3. But the scheme most characteristic of England herself and Sectarian
of her future history, was now put forward in London by the
Sectarians, who demanded not only a congregational system, but
liberty of worship and belief. Here lay the true road of Puritan
development in England; here was the only possible solution of
Anglican and Puritan rivalry; here, too, lay the road towards
free-thought.

The Sectarians had read the secret of the future, but the
present was for their rivals. As yet there was hardly a man in
the House of Commons who would have risen in his seat to aver
in clear language that toleration ought to be allowed outside the
Established Church. The supporters of a Puritan State Church
were for the moment the standard-bearers of freedom. Patriots, led
by Pym, rallied to support this system, careless of its basis in theory,
and ignorant of its meaning in practice. Of these men thousands
were soon to join the sects; thousands more were to return to the
Anglican worship. The Puritan State Church was the improvised
fighting organisation of Protestant religion and constitutional
liberty. It fought, conquered, and dissolved again into its com-

onent parts.

On 11th December, 1640, “a world of honest citizens in their
best apparel” came to the doors of the House of Commons with

1G,, ix., pp. 407, 408. Shaw passim.

206 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1641

Root-and- a petition, signed with 15,000 names, for the abolition of Episcopacy
saci “ with all its roots and branches”. The well-dressed crowd waiting
Dec., 1640in Westminster Hall was the first official announcement of a new
platform in Church policy, known from that day as Root-and-
Branch. It was also the first sign that the City intended to play
a part in politics as third to King and Parliament. The reception
of the citizens showed that Pym’s friends in the House welcomed
their interference and relied on popular demonstrations. Although
on this first occasion the petitioners came “in a very modest way,”
their coming was the prelude to rougher work in Palace Yard.
Debate on Two months later, the Commons got so far as to debate whether
the Peti- they should refer this terrible petition to a committee; it lay on

ice a ” their floor like an apple of discord that all would fain let lie un-

touched. This first debate was a friendly exchange of opinion —

between men still acting together like brothers in a struggle for law,
liberty and life; but on whichever side each leader spoke about
the treatment of the petition, on that side he afterwards fought in
the Civil War. Yet there was much even in Church affairs on
which the whole House was agreed. All vied in abusing the existing
Bishops ; the future Cavaliers were eager to reduce their coercive
power and to make them serve, though by what means none could
tell, as instruments no longer of King but of Parliament. The
revived medizeval theories of the priestly office, the legal and social
pretensions of the Laudian clergy, were more than the Church
laymen of that day could swallow. A ceremonial interpretation of
the Prayer-book was odious to the great majority of its defenders.
The whole House was at one in requiring that the table in Saint
Margaret’s, Westminster, where they attended service, should be
moved down for their use to the body of the church. And so,
when the Root-and-Branch Petition was debated, nothing was
heard about the Catholic Faith or the Apostolic Succession; but
men spoke out their dread of Presbyterian discipline, of altera-
tions in the Prayer-book, and of popular interference in religious
questions.
Affinities It was significant that Digby protested not only against the
in political matter but against the manner of the petition; he deplored
ligious “irregular and tumultuous assemblies of people, be it for never
Spmion so good an end”. He clang fast to the old ideal of Eliot, by
which Parliament was regarded as a thing apart, acting on behalf

1641] FORMATION OF PARTIES, 1640-2 207

of the people, but not with them. Much as Digby, Falkland
and Hyde loved the law and hated Strafford, none of them had
ever shown such bitter hostility to the Court as the Puritan
leaders; none of them had shared in those family gatherings
where the deliverance of England had been planned ; or had taken
part in those mysterious activities which led to the summons of
the Long Parliament and to the election of so stout-hearted an
assembly. When Hampden and Saye were resisting the levy of
Ship Money, Hyde was a busy practising lawyer known and
favoured at Court, and Falkland was discoursing with poets and
divines in his rustic academy at Great Tew. Affinities appeared

between religious and political opinions too subtle for analysis, but

demonstrated by innumerable particular examples to be general
laws. The Catholics and Ritualists were the friends of despotism ;
the Protestant Churchmen were staunch for legal rights, but dreaded
popular support ; the Puritans alone would go all lengths in the
defence of political liberty.

—7_—_

The debate on the petition was the first, but it was also for Necessity
many months the last, held by the prudent Commons on me ae
religious differences that threatened to divide them. The Scottish 2 death
Commissioners, now in full cry after a Presbyterian settlement for
both countries, were with difficulty persuaded by friendly Peers
to cease their clamour for a while, in order that English patriots
might unite to secure their own laws, lives and liberties, by putting
Strafford out of the world. Not revenge but fear drove the Parlia-
mentary leaders to strain the law and convulse the State in order
to bring a fallen minister to the block. Although they did not
foresee the future step by step, they had a just premonition that
this one man might yet find means to undo them all. If Strafford
had escaped to join the King during the Civil War, he might have
led the Western Cavaliers to the sack of London, hung up King
Pym in front of the Banqueting House, relegated Falkland and
Hyde to the pursuit of philosophy and law, driven 100,000 refugees
across the Atlantic, and established here, over the remnants of the
English race, a continental despotism based on pike and musket.

The Commons having determined that he ought to die, had
little doubt that he could be found guilty before the law of

Impeach-
ment of
Strafford,
March-
April, 1641

208 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1641

technical treason. They supposed that his impeachment would
be carried through, much as other political trials had always been,
and were long afterwards, conducted. But on this occasion they
reckoned without the judges. The Lords were not, like the
Commons, a party in the State. Bedford and his Puritan friends
were the most active political group in the Upper Chamber, but
their intrigues did not induce the Peers as a body to adhere con-
sistently to either side. The Lords, having instead of a policy a
sense of dignity and tradition, determined to do justice to the
case on its legal merits. Such pedantry, thought the Commons,
was ridiculous in politics and treacherous in a time of crisis. But
the previous action of the Peers in ordering the arrest of Strafford at
the moment when the balance of power was still in their hands,
and their subsequent passage of the Bill of Attainder that took
away his life, show that their impartiality as judges at his impeach-
ment was genuine, and not the cloak of subtle partisanship.

The case for the impeachment was opened in Westminster Hall
on the 23rd of March by Pym and the other managers for the Com-
mons, in the presence of the rest of the Lower House, the accused
and his counsel, his judges the Peers in their robes of State, the
King seated unofficially behind a lattice, and a world of onlookers,
many of whom paid large sums for admission. The charges were
of two kinds—acts of tyranny in his own government of Ireland,
and advices to the King tending to the overthrow of the laws and
liberties of England. ‘The actions in Ireland that were proved
against him illustrated his arbitrary temper and his contempt for
the letter of the Jaw. But none of these charges, even if it had
been possible to prove what he had said in council and in closet,
would have brought him under the laws of treason, framed to
defend the power and person of the King. Pym, therefore, ingeni-
ously tried to show that he had endangered the royal dignity and
life, because those lands where the ruler was “free and absolved
from all rules of government,” as Strafford had said that he wished _
Charles to be, were lands “frequent in combustions, full of mas-
sacres and the tragical ends of Princes”, These words of the bold
Commoner fell on that hushed audience with a thrill like the voice —
of prophecy, and were heard by Charles himself trembling with anger
behind his lattice ; in eight years’ time that very hall was to witness
if the words were true. But carrying the argument into a yet broader

1641} FORMATION OF PARTIES, 1640-2 209

plane, Pym showed that to destroy the customs of the land and the
liberties of the subject was in itself treason against the State which
the King represented, and that treason against the whole Common-
wealth was indeed the highest treason of all. The argument, true
and noble in spirit, was false and dangerous in letter. It was good
reason why a new law should be passed to punish Strafford, but
nothing could be good reason why existing laws should be strained
to bear meanings which their words did not express. Day after
day the Lords heard evidence and arguments on both sides with
exasperating fairness, till at last, at a flagrant instance of imparti-
ality that boded ill for the verdict, the patience of the accusers
gave way. Several hundred members of the Commons, who sat
crowding the high scaffoldings reared up to the roof on either
side, rose with loud shouts to depart ; from floor to rafters all was
welter and tumult in the vast hall, there was a roar of confused
inquiries, cries and counter cries, while in the midst rose the proud
face of Strafford lit with the smile of victory.

But the Commons had only shifted the battle from the field of Bill of

justice to the field of legislation. An ancient custom of the Con- ea
stitution, much used by the Parliament-loving tyranny of the Strafford,
Tudors, allowed King, Lords and Commons to pass, like any other PT) 1641
Bill, an Act of Attainder to put any subject to death without
trial. It was the last safeguard of the State, and now, if ever, was the
moment for its just employment. So thought the more violent of
the Commons, led by Sir Arthur Hazlerigg and Henry Marten, the
- first English republican. For once they carried their fellow-mem-
bers with them against the advice of Pym and Hampden. These
two clung so fondly to the high theories on which they were con-
ducting the impeachment, that they failed to see how completely
it had broken down. But after the Bill had been read a first
time, the leaders whom the House ordinarily preferred to Marten
and Hazlerigg, came in to the new policy and finally carried the
, Attainder up to the Lords.
No one knew what treatment the Bill would receive from this
handful of noblemen, sensitive to every passing gust of sentiment
and of rumour. Some chance event of the hour would decide
the Earl’s fate among his peers. At present they were plainly
under the influence of ill-humour with the Commons for the scene
in Westminster Hall, and of natural pity for fallen greatness,
14

Henrietta
Maria

210 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1641

Even Bedford was against the death penalty; though Essex now
took his stand on the side of Parliament, and told Hyde that
“Stone dead hath no fellow”. In the last week of April and the
first of May the tide was rapidly turned by outside events, which
showed the moderates that their own lives and liberties were at
stake.

Henrietta Maria, who after the death of Buckingham had
gained her husband’s affections once for all, was allowed to carry on
a policy of her own supplementary to that of the State. Her inde-
pendent action began with the Scottish troubles, when she raised
money from the English Catholics and appealed to the Pope for
military aid. But her efforts became touched with frenzy when
the Long Parliament renewed the persecution of her co-religionists,
the inevitable consequence of the favours which they had so long
and so openly enjoyed. As soon as power had shifted from
Whitehall to Westminster, districts which had for years omitted
to compile the official tale of recusants, or had reported only two
or three noted papists in each parish, produced alarming lists
of scores and of hundreds who abstained from the State wor-
ship. ‘The priests dived into their old recesses behind panel and
chimney, pursued by the terror of the Penal Laws, once more
an unsheathed weapon in the hands of Protestant magistrates.
Against such proceedings Henrietta Maria would have welcomed
an alliance with the Grand Turk himself. She bribed the House
of Orange, by giving in marriage her daughter Mary to the Dutch
Prince William. She again implored the Pope to rescue his suffer-
ing people. She appealed to Richelieu; but the politic Cardinal
refused to allow the daughter of France even to visit her native
country. Foiled for the moment in foreign intrigue, she found an
instrument to her hand in England. The army lying at York was
growing daily more hostile to Parliament. The officers had been
from the first the pick of English Royalism. Of the men, the
Puritans deserted soonest, or were the most quickly dismissed.
All ranks were offended at the comparative favour shown by the
Houses to the Scots, and by the money chests passing by to New-
castle and never stopping at York. 'The officers agreed to march
on London, release Strafford and dissolve Parliament. One of the
chief conspirators was the dissolute and unprincipled Goring. It is
uncertain how far the plot was intended only to restore the shaken

1641] FORMATION OF PARTIES, 1640-2 Qi

balance of the Constitution. But it is certain that it was regarded The Army
by all England as a 5th of November conspiracy to destroy Pro- pers
testants and Parliaments together. Wherever the Queen’s hand May, 1641
was detected, plain men saw only one issue, Protestant against
Catholic, liberty against servitude.

The Army Plot brought Strafford to the scaffold. The Court
could keep no secret; the officers in Yorkshire openly displayed
their sympathies; and the air was soon charged with rumour and
suspicion. The last stage was reached when Pym, on the 5th of
May, gave the House details which Goring had basely betrayed to
the Parliamentary leaders a month before. All over England, the
thought of Strafford still alive, and about to be placed at the head
of a military force, raged in men’s blood beyond the medicine of
words. ‘The City closed its shops in panic, and masters and men,
set free from business, came day after day to threaten the lives of
the “ Straffordians,” as they called the recalcitrant Lords, and the
fifty-nine who had voted against the Attainder in the Commons.

Tt was then a grave breach of privilege to publish division lists,
but the unpopular names had on this occasion been posted by some
treacherous member.

The Lords, not unmoved perhaps by these demonstrations, and The Lords
themselves profoundly alarmed at the intended military violence to Bill, ae
Parliament, united with the Commons in a series of self-protecting May
measures, which diverged far from the line of constitutional pro-
priety. They sent up to the King a Bill to prevent the dissolution
of the present Parliament without its own consent, and the Peers
took upon themselves to issue administrative ordinances to protect
the kingdom. The members of both Houses bound themselves
together by oath, in a “ Protestation” to defend the privileges of
Parliament and the Protestant religion. To crown all, on Saturday
8th May, the Bill of Attainder passed the Lords.

The King’s assent, as all men knew, could only be extorted by Execution
force. During the night after Strafford’s Attainder had been of acne
accepted by the Upper House, a mob surrounded Whitehall. The May
voice of wrath terrible in numbers, heard there once before in
distant unregarded warning from round the pillory of Prynne, now
shook the frail walls of the old timbered Palace. The courtiers
confessed themselves to the Queen’s priests, and marked on stair-
cases and at passage-turnings where men could makea stand. But

St.
Stephen’s
Chapel

212 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1641

the outlook from the windows took away all desire of a battle, from
those who thought how many women were in the upper chambers.
Far away in houses along Strand and Holborn, Lords and Commons
lay with uneasy consciences, listening through bedroom windows to
the rise and fall of the distant roar. Dawn broke upon the piti-
less siege, and all day long fresh congregations came up hot from
Sabbath gospellings in the City churches. Charles was in agony ;
he consulted the Judges and Bishops, who were divided in opinion.
At nine on Sunday evening he gave way. Noise had conquered,
as when the Bastille fell. Three days later 200,000 persons witnessed
on Tower Hill the death of “ Black Tom the Tyrant”.

He served England well, for he dignified her history. He
showed that the cause of tyranny did not fail among us, first of
all great nations, because among us it lacked princely intellect or
royal valour.

Between the Strangers’ Entrance of the present House of
Commons and the Central Lobby, men quicken their pace to run
the gauntlet of two opposing rows of marble statesmen, who still
harangue and gesticulate unappeased across the narrow floor, though
Falkland, with head bent sadly over the sword which he would never
stain with English blood, protests for his part that the less now said
about the past the sooner a bad business will be forgotten. Few
linger in this passage to realise that it represents in situation and
dimensions St. Stephen’s Chapel, the old House of Commons, on
whose vaulted foundations it was rebuilt after the fire of 1834.
Pent in that narrow measure was the whole wisdom and wrath of
the Long Parliament. Westminster Hall, together with a small
lobby lying between it and the Chamber, was used by members
for those anxious consultations which precede and direct action in
the House. Where the modern Parliament buildings stretch out
on piles into the Thames, was then nothing except a small garden
with its wall and water stairs. Over these Cavalier and Roundhead
looked out from a large Gothic wi ndow behind the Speaker’s back,
across to the green aon fields, and the barges on the gay river
carrying their friends to the City or their enemies to the Tower. At
the other end of the long room, facing the chair, was a wooden gallery,
reached from below by a rude ladder near the door: this primi-

1641} FORMATION OF PARTIES, 1640-2 213

tive means of ascent was one day obstructively monopolised by an
honourable member, till Speaker Lenthall called to him “not to sit
upon the ladder as if he were going to be hanged: at which many of
the House laughed”. Overhead, the pointed arches of St. Stephen’s
Chapel were hidden from sight by a flat roof, which reverberated
English eloquence from the days of Wentworth and Eliot to those
of Canning and Peel. Along the length of the room, seats rose on
either side in tiers. The chance shape of the chapel helped in later
years to keep English politicians divided into two parties, one on
each side of the House. Already the few courtiers and the many
Episcopalians usually sat on the north side, and the Root-and-
Branch men on the south, but this general rule had certainly
some, perhaps many, exceptions. The seats near the Speaker’s
chair were already reserved by custom for “ Privy Councillors and
men of distinction,”! but the chiefs of the parties did not occupy
that position. Pym and Hampden sat inseparable near the foot
of the ladder. Opposite, also near the bar, sat the no less insepar-
able Hyde and Falkland.

One effect of the smallness of the room was to discourage that Thin
full attendance which the Parliaments of James and Charles I. ale one
sometimes tried to enforce by fine. The crowded benches, on manage-
which Sir Ralph Verney could sometimes find no elbow-room to ™®"
take his journal of the events he witnessed, were less attractive to
many who had never before visited the capital than were the theatres
across the water, and the bowling-alleys of the City gardens. Party
organisation only grew up after Strafford’s death, when equal
division arose within the walls of the House, and it had to be
decided by counting heads, which party should proscribe and banish
the other. But even in that last struggle which drove the
Cavaliers, so barely outnumbered, at last to yield the House and
fly to the tented field, there was no systematic “whipping”. In
the division on the Grand Remonstrance itself, only 307 members
voted out of some 500. ‘The less contentious Attainder of Straf-

1 Verney’s Notes of the Long Parliament (Camden Soc., 1845), p. 156. In January,
1642, a member of no distinction ‘‘to the great scandal of the House” did “seat and
place himself near the Speaker’s chair” in place of his betters; and there giving vent
to his political feelings, ‘cried ‘Baw!’ to the great terror and affrightment of the
Speaker, and of the members of the House of Commons, and contrary to his
duty and the trust reposed in him by his country”. He appears to have been a
Cavalier member protesting against the proceedings of Parliament with regard to the

militia.

Parlia-
mentary
customs

214 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1641

ford had passed by 204 to 59. The number who usually voted
on an important division was scarcely more than half the assembly.
Since “pairing” was not then a custom, these small divisions in a
time of intense public excitement, show that many members waited
to see which party would be victorious, and that many cared little
for great questions of State. Probably not more than half had
been chosen on any definite political understanding with their con-
stituents. An ordinary member, once he had taken his seat, was
irresponsible and independent as no politician is to-day. Those
who had elected him never heard how he voted, or whether he
voted at all; and he was under no obligation, real or implied, to
act with any of his colleagues. The steps taken by Pym and Hamp-
den to rectify these conditions were important and novel. Their
riding tour through England at the October elections secured that
at least a large proportion of members were carefully chosen, and
impressed with a sense of allegiance to a cause. In the House
the leaders secured that this chosen band should act as a party,
and find means to recruit its numbers from the timorous and the
indifferent.

The sittings began at eight or nine in the morning. At noon
the hungry members—especially, as Falkland laughingly com-
plained, the lukewarm defenders of Episcopacy—“ran forth for
their dinners” to the neighbouring taverns, leaving the Speaker to
starve in the Chair, and a handful of patriots, who had swallowed
some bread and cheese in the hall, to push through in an hour
business that would have taken days if properly discussed. Several
times the House sat on after dusk. Debates, sometimes taking the
form of a scuffle for the candles, were held to decide whether lights
should be placed upon the clerk’s table. Even when these symbols
of permanent session flickered in the middle of the room, the note-
takers along the benches must have put up their tablets in despair,
unless, like the imperturbable pedant Sir Simon D’Ewes, they boldly
spread out their writing materials on the table itself.’ Disorder

1 Important political conversations, in which the statesmen of this Parliament tried
to win each other over, were sometimes held walking up and down the churchyard
round the Abbey, or ‘‘riding together in the fields between Westminster and Chel-
sea”. Pym, Hampden and their friends kept common table at Pym’s lodgings
behind Westminster Hall. Here they held their longer consultations, and “ in-
vited”’ thither those of whose conversion they had any hope; they often “im-
portuned” Hyde to dine with them (Clar., Life, i., pp. 936, 937).

1641] FORMATION OF PARTIES, 1640-2 215

and breach of privilege were punished rather at the will of the
majority than by the ruling of the chair; a few days of confinement
in the Tower was the usual form of suspension.

The unanimity of the Commons did not end at once with star
the life of Strafford. Constitutional changes, which it would have Seti a
been useless to put on paper before he had been removed from the Carpe
world of action, were formulated during the summer, in laws passed ee oti
without debate by the Houses and signed without thought by the x64:
King. The means of unparliamentary revenue—Ship Money,
Forests, Knighthood, Tonnage and Poundage—were made illegal
beyond further dispute. Another Act destroyed the Star Chamber
and its kindred courts of Wales and the North. Thus were ex-
tinguished the judicial powers of the Privy Council, by the terror
of which its administrative sovereignty could alone be maintained
in a rebellious age. With the sovereignty of the Council fell the
State system of the Tudors. Their Church system fell at another
stroke, which ended the Court of High Commission, the coercive
power of the Bishops as derived from the Crown. When next the
tyranny of Anglicanism over men’s souls and bodies revived, it was
armed not by the King but by Parliament (1661). The work of
this summer was never undone. It became the basis of the Restora-
tion Settlement, and even the Second Stuart despotism of 1683-88
had to find other forms than those which had been ready to the
hand of Charles I.

But all these reforms, though final, were only negative. They
deprived Crown and Council of sovereignty, but they did not
transfer it to Lords and Commons. They left the King dependent
on Parliament, and Parliament on the King. Government could
only be carried on if both parties were willing to work the two-
handed machine together. But since in 1641 there was no
suitable William of Orange in whose favour Charles could be de-
posed, the constitutional compromise was only a constitutional
deadlock. In 1642 men were forced to choose between the com-
plete sovereignty of the Crown and the complete sovereignty of
Parliament, though few wished for either one or the other. When

1The Bill perpetuating the present Parliament till it chose to dissolve itself,
had received his indifferent assent, when he gave way on the greater issue of
Strafford’s execution,

216 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1641

at last even men like D’Ewes and Falkland found that the choice
had to be made, each made it according to his religious sympathies,
for that generation had also to choose whether the Anglican or the
Puritan worship should be proscribed. Before England could be-
come a land of settled government, two things were required—the
doctrine of religious toleration, and a King who could be trusted.
Charles’s For several months after Strafford’s execution, Charles was
Se ready to make almost any concession demanded by Parliament,
ealing ‘ vue 5 :
and to entertain almost any plan of violence suggested by his wife.
In the morning he could plot with Catholic agents and army
officers; in the evening he could sign, with a glow of virtuous
constitutional pride, laws destructive of monarchical power in
England. With the same light-hearted magnanimity does the
spendthrift sign every paper brought him by the Jew, whom he
sometimes intends honourably to pay, sometimes justifiably to kill.
Charles’s double-dealing, the despair alike of his friends and foes,
was that of a stupid and selfish, not of a clever and treacherous
man. Even his plans of violence were not mutually consistent.
All the summer he was in close correspondence with the Pope’s
agent Rossetti and the Catholic world ; while in the same months
he was preparing to cast away the last shred of Laud’s Scottish
reformation, for which he had ruined the monarchy, in the hope of
winning the hearts and using the swords of the best Pope-haters in
Europe. He appears to have thought that the disciples of John
Knox, and of Parsons the Jesuit, would forget old quarrels and sink
individual interests, in order to share the privilege of serving
Charles Stuart.
The Thus, while he signed bill after bill, he failed to win the con-
ae fidence even of Episcopalian members, because he could not dis-
Scotland, Sipate the rumour of the now chronic Army Plot, and because he
Aug. 1641 declared his purpose to visit Edinburgh in person. The Scottish
Commissioners, already grown impatient with their English friends
in proportion as they had at first been too sanguine, were negoti-
ating an alliance with their native King, whose duplicity they had
not yet fathomed. ‘The visit paid by Charles I. to his northern
kingdom was to the English what the flight of Louis XVI. was to
the French. But the person of a King was still sacred, and no one
of the Londoners who clamoured round his coach, imploring him to
turn back, dared to lay hand upon the reins.

1641} FORMATION OF PARTIES, 1640-2 Q17

The departure of the King, for a while stopped the Root-and- Partia-

Branch Bill, and united the bu parties for the last time in a sense 7CPt ries
of danger still common to both. Lords and Commons issued
ordinances for the security of the stores at Hull, the Tower, and
other strong places of the kingdom. This illegal assumption of
administrative power by the Houses, in which Falkland and Cul-
pepper took a share, and which even the law-ridden Hyde did not
oppose, proves that the moderate Episcopalians would have fought
for Parliament if the King had raised his standard in August, 1641.
They broke the Constitution in that very way which six months
later they reprobated as treason. Yet even now they gave their
support to the ordinances only as a temporary measure of defence
during the Scottish journey ; they never grasped, like Pym and the
Puritans, the necessity for a permanent settlement of sovereign
power on the House of Commons. On the constitutional issue, if
they made fewer mistakes than Pym, they had less courage in
supplying the needs of the present, and less foresight in dis-
tinguishing the hopes of the future.

The King was absent in Scotland from the middle of August Root-and-
to the latter end of November. During those three months the oa
Episcopalians became Royalists. The Reetandé Branch Bill for the division of
abolition of Episcopacy had been introduced in the summer, in the co
first instance by a small body of enthusiasts, including Oliver Crom- Noy., 1641
well. But it was soon adopted as the platform oft Pym and the
working majority in the House, themselves neither Presbyterians
nor Sectaries. The occasion of this great party move, that
moulded the future of English religion and politics, was the
refusal of the Lords to exclude the Bishops from the Upper
House ; but its cause was the need to take religion out of the hands
of royal nominees, under whose guidance the Church was becoming
an academy of absolutist doctrine and of Catholic sentiment. If
Charles had been a Protestant in the sense in which Falkland was
a Protestant, the proposal to abolish Bishops would never have
obtained more than fifty votes in the House of Commons. ‘The
Bill, as amended in the Lower House, was not framed on any
Presbyterian model. It proposed to give all ecclesiastical jurisdic-
tion to a committee of nine laymen nominated by Parliament.

No cleric was to be allowed a place on the committee. This
thoroughly English proposal pleased many of the best Puritans,

218 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1641

adverse to the rule of clergymen whose doctrines they approved but
whose persons they despised; and it even won the support of
Episcopalians like Selden, who loved neither presbyter nor priest.’
But Erastianism, however useful as an expedient in revolution,
would scarcely have afforded a permanent settlement.
Proposal The question of Church government involved the question of
e a Church worship, to which Englishmen were less indifferent. The
Prayer- alliance of Pym’s partisans ithe the Root-and-Branch men involved
ee them, before they were well aware, in an attack upon the Prayer-
book. When at the close of the summer session, soon after
Charles’s arrival in Scotland, ordinances were being passed with
apparent unanimity to suppress ritualism and to move the tables
down into the naves, a member suggested changes in the Service
itself. The Prayers were at once defended with an affectionate
warmth which no one had expressed for the Bishops. The question,
not decided before the Houses adjourned on 9th September, was
the thought which members carried away with them on their
month of well-earned holiday, and digested as they sat far from
party strife in the cool atmosphere of the drowsy old parish
church, or followed the dogs through the stubble for the last of
many pleasant seasons with the old game nets or the new shot-gun.
When the Houses reassembled for the autumn session, many
who had swelled Pym’s majority in the summer could no longer
be found by their friends. The smallness of the average dicta
alarmed the popular leaders.? Still more disquieting was ic changed
political allegiance of the moderate Episcopalians. Their fear of
Pym’s “godly thorough reformation” of the Church, had at least
outgrown their fear of Charles’s muddled proceedings in Scotland.
Men who had voted for the disloyal military precautions on the
King’s departure in August, looked forward to his return in
November as to their own deliverance. But before he arrived,
news came from oversea which divided the two factions, as it
would a few months before have united them.
The Irish Land spoliation, social inequality and religious persecution,
wg tilk which had so long been the lot of the Irish Gathalics at length,
1641 "when the strong pada of Strafford was withdrawn, produced he
inevitable explosion. The general uprising of a half-barbarous

1G,, ix., pp. 407, 408. Shaw passim.
?Forster’s Grand Remonstrance, pp. 163, 164, (ed. 1860),

1641} FORMATION OF PARTIES, 1640-2 219

people, maddened by the loss of tribal lands and rights, and led
by an upper class more civilised indeed but goaded to frenzy by
religious persecution, could not but result in terrible atrocities.
Some four or five thousand Protestants perished by massacre»
and a still greater number from cold, hunger and ill-treatment.
Rumour, crossing the channel, told tales yet more ghastly than
the truth. While England was celebrating the memory of Guy
Fawkes, she learnt that the Catholics of Ireland had massacred the
Protestants. All Englishmen, equally ignorant of Ireland, were
agreed that the task which Cromwell long afterwards accomplished
must be set about at once. Both parties concurred to raise an
army of reconquest and revenge, and to pay for it by the assign-
ment of two and a half million acres of Irish land to the State’s
creditors. But while Pym dared not for his neck allow men to
be enlisted except by officers nominated by Parliament, the Episco-
palians already saw with alarm how easily their opponents could
create praying regiments, to

Decide all controversy by

Infallible artillery ;

And prove their doctrine orthodox

By Apostolic blows and knocks. (Hudibras, i., 1. 197.)
On this vital question of the command of the Irish army, the
followers of Hyde and Falkland voted Royalist.

The Parliamentarians, shaken in their hold on the House, and The
dreading the imminent return of Charles to head his new partisans, seine
could still hope to appeal to the country, where Protestants in their strance
rage and terror attributed the Irish St. Bartholomew to the Queen Betray
and her husband, and regarded it as the rehearsal for a like tragedy
in England. An appeal to the people was made in the Grand
Remonstrance, a long history of the wrongs endured by the nation
at the hand of its present King, followed by suggestions of reform.

Chief among these, stands the far-seeing proposal of Pym, that
ministers must be “such as the Parliament may have cause to
confide in” (secs. 197, 198). The Remonstrance, like the strife
which it focussed, is at least as much constitutional as ecclesiastical,
But not the least significant part of it is found in those clauses
where the members declare their purpose to effect great changes in
the Church, and desire that a synod of English and foreign divines

1G., X., Pp» 43-69.

Charles’s
return

Faction-
fights at
Westmin-
ster.

‘* Cava-
liers ” and
“ Round-
heads,”
Dec., 1641

220 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1641

be summoned to discuss the bases for the “intended reformation”
(secs, 182-87). ‘The appeal to forces had come; the defenders of
Parliament called to their aid the living Puritan spirit, and the
defenders of Anglicanism conjured with the magic name of King.

The Grand Remonstrance was passed in committee clause by
clause, carried on 22nd November by eleven votes, and ordered to
be printed and published. The result of that close division decided
that Parliament should remain in the hands of the faction that
was still ready to defend its claims. So much was achieved in a
fortnight of set debates, ending in scenes of wild passion, that nearly
stained the sacred floor with blood. In that fortnight the House
of Commons ceased for ever to be a party, and became the battle-
ground of parties.!

On 25th November Charles arrived home from Scotland. The
shrewd nation, whom he had intended to yoke with the Catholics to
the chariot of his fortunes, had taken all and given nothing. His

failure was eagerly used by the Episcopalians to do duty for his

innocence, Feeling against him so far subsided on the day of his
return, that he was cheered in the London streets, on his way to
feast with the Royalist Lord Mayor. But if on that evening the
Crown was again within his reach, he had long ago bound his own
hands by the Act depriving himself of power to dissolve the present
Parliament. Before Christmas he had taken measures to restore
“King Pym” in the hearts of his fellow-countrymen.

Though on the two questions of the hour—the Church and the
army—Charles had the letter of the law, and half the Lords and
Commons on his side, he chose as his champions at this fearful
crisis the officers of Strafford’s regiments, lately disbanded in York-
shire and now waiting for commissions in Ireland, and the portion-
less younger sons who daily drifted into Whitehall with lean purses
and long swords—that vulture portion of the upper class which
regards the solid parts of the community as its prey, and is in
return justly feared and despised. ‘These first “cavaliers,” whose
nickname was a few months later shared by more honourable men,
came all too welcome to the luckless King. He found in them
much-needed guardians of his Palace against the outrageous mob
that had forced him to kill Strafford. But he tried also to throw

‘ Forster’s Grand Remonstrance, passim, The famous document is printed in
G. (Const. Docs.), pp. 202-3

1642] FORMATION OF PARTIES, 1640-2 221

the terror of them over the City, by naming their debauched

and ruffianly chief Lunsford to the command of the Tower itself,
_ After it had done his cause untold harm, Charles abandoned the
plan. Lunsford was withdrawn from the Tower, and had to con-
_ tent himself with leading out his companions to angry parle with
the “roundhead” apprentices near the Houses of Parliament.
On 27th December a dozen officers chased the mob out of West-
minster Hal] at the sword’s point, not sparing to draw plebeian
blood. More frequently, the citizens held both Palace Yards, and
| made roaring lanes down which Lords, Commons, and as many
Bishops as dared run the gauntlet, passed under rude inspection
to their duties. The Commons, at Pym’s advice, refused point
blank “to dishearten the people”. After that turbulent but
cheerless Christmas, it was impossible for citizens to resume
_ business under the shadow of imminent massacre. Shops were shut;
and men of both parties furnished themselves privately with arms
for self-protection. But to organise the public defence was the
legal right of the King alone. Would some strange event make
over the moral right to his foes?

On 3rd January (1641-42) the Attorney-General rose in the Attempted
House of Lords on behalf of the King to impeach five members of sae ah
the House of Commons—Pym, Hampden, Hazlerigg, Holles and the Five
Strode—on charges of high treason, The Lords did not conceal Seg
their amazement and horror. The part they had chosen, now as 1642
during the struggle for Strafford’s life, was to defend the letter of
_ the law and the peace of the land. Now, as then, they were

rapidly becoming Royalist ; but now the impeachment of the five
members, as then the Army Plot, drove them back to the other
side. An impeachment brought before them by the King as
accuser was unconstitutional ;1 and the opening, under any form,
of a bloody proscription was exactly what they were determined
_toprevent. Their Lordships, who had perfected the political art of
| doing nothing in particular, as their favourite refuge in these
_ stormy times, declined to order the arrest until they had inquired
whether the Attorney-General was acting according to law. Digby,
the Episcopalian whom Charles had just raised to the Upper House
and so removed from the wiser neighbourhood of Hyde and Falk-

|

1Stephen, i., p. 160. Bristol had been unconstitutionally impeached by the
King in 1626, But at least his arrest had been left to the Peers.

Prepara-
tions for
their
arrest

Charles
enters the
House,
4th Jan.

222 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1642

land, rose from his seat and hastened out, muttering that the King
had been ill advised. Yet he himself had been the King’s adviser,
and again that evening he joined the Queen in giving the worst
counsel that Charles ever received.

The impeachment of the members on the 3rd had been a blow
to legality and peace; but the attempt to arrest them on the 4th
was more certainly illegal and incomparably more violent. It was
an infringement of the undoubted right, dearly cherished by the
Peers, to order or withhold ‘the arrest of impeached persons; and
the method of its execution was a threat, on the least sign of
resistance, to massacre the Commons in their House.

All morning the “Cavaliers” gathered at the Palace by com-
mand, scenting prey; the stir at Whitehall was viewed with
apprehension by Fiennes, the member for Puritan Banbury, strolling
warily at the dinner hour. But while the Commons were still
ignorant of his purpose, Charles continued to debate it with the
Queen. It was three in the afternoon before his long-expected
figure was seen on the staircase, descending among an excited crowd
of 400 gentlemen in arms. Calling on all “faithful subjects and
soldiers” to follow, he stepped into a coach. Surrounded and
hampered by the sea of “red-coats,” the carriage moved at a foot’s-
pace from Whitehall to Westminster, far outstripped on the short
journey by flying rumour. A Frenchman arrived panting at the
door of the House. Fiennes stepped out to him, and at once
carried back to the Speaker his news of the approaching procession.
The Commons, who had known for two hours, by a message from
the Queen’s ill-chosen confidante, Lady Carlisle, what such a procession
would mean, sent off the five members by water to the City. Then
came a cry and scuffle of frightened tradesmen closing their booths
in Westminster Hall; the noise of an armed multitude entering
confusedly with shouts heralding the approach of its chief; a rush
of steps and clank of swords across the great hall and up the stairs
into the lobby; last of all, as the door of the House of Commons
itself was flung open, a King’s voice bidding his followers stand
outside on pain of death. Then Charles, with the young Elector
Palatine behind him, entered the room. He passed to the Speaker’s
chair between rows of silent, standing members. From that
point of vantage he soon satisfied himself that his “birds were
flown,” and after no discourteous language walked back as he had

1642] . FORMATION OF PARTIES, 1640-2 223

come, while the cry “ Privilege, privilege,” rose behind him as he
went. All this time the door had been, with insolent sugges-
tion, held open from without, displaying a crowd in the lobby
armed to the teeth, cocking pistols and uttering wanton threats of
slaughter.

Pym had known how to wait; he knew now how to strike. The City
Lords, Commons and City entered that week into the triple al- Provects
liance which fought the Civil War. A Committee of the Commons ment
sat for safety within the walls of London. The King’s friends
were for several days ashamed to open their mouths. The
majority of the Lords voted the illegal ordinances, which a week
before or six months later they would have opposed. For the
need to defend Parliament from massacre was no longer regarded
as a, bad excuse to prepare rebellion, but as a stern reality. ‘The
train-bands of London, the only effective regiments at that moment.
in the kingdom, were called out on a war footing. Four thou-
sand armed squires and freeholders, from the Thames valley and the
wooded hills of Buckinghamshire, rode in to protect their Hampden,

The mariners of the Royal Navy marched up to the Guild Hall,

where the Commons sat in committee, cheering for the sailor Earl

of Warwick, and offering the King’s stores to defend the Parlia-

ment. On the 10th of January Charles and his swordsmen fled Flight of
from Whitehall, resigning the capital and its neighbourhood to Seas
his enemies ; on the 11th the Commons returned to Westminster

in gala barges, with high military and civic pomp by land and

water.

For eight months both sides slowly prepared a civilian nation Prepara-
_ for war; the King by Commissions of Array; the two Houses Diperas al
nee iitational faites ordinances. Gradually the Royalists in Aug. 1642
_ both Houses summoned courage to protest ; but they were too late
to oppose. ‘The scene of Royalist resistance had shifted to York.

_ There Hyde had joined Charles, and was busily composing specious
and persuasive proclamations which showed the King as the de-
_ fender of the “ known laws of the land” and the “ never-enough-com-
mended Constitution”. One by one, members took the North Road
with their servants and horses, till a great majority of the Peers and
a respectable minority of the Commons were with the King. But
| because the attempt on the Five Members had caused the Lords in
| their corporate capacity to set the seal of their approval on rebellion,

224 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1642

the true Parliament of England was found in the 300 Commoners
and the thirty Peers who remained at the seat of government to
organise war.!

1Mr. Firth (Cromwell, p. 69) calculates that thirty Peers supported Parliament,
eighty the King, and twenty remained neutral, while 300 of the Lower House were
for Parliament, 175 for the King.

:

1642] THE CIVIL WAR 225

CHAPTER VIII
THE CIVIL WAR, 1642-46

To Thee, dear God of Mercy, both appeal,

Who straightway sound the call to arms: Thou know’st;
And that black spot in each embattled host,

Spring of the blood-stream, later wilt reveal.

Now is it red artillery and white steel ;

Till on a day will ring the victor’s boast,

That ’tis Thy chosen towers uppermost,

Where Thy rejected grovels under heel.—Grorcz Merenirtu.

HE First Civil War is the decisive event in English history. Probable

outcome

2 Wie ; of a royal
institutions to triumph. victory

The defeat of the King’s armies alone enabled Parliamentary

For if Charles had won, those who could keep alive resistance
to Anglican and royal absolutism must have sailed for America.
The men who formed the strength of the anti-monarchical and
the Puritan part of the community, were always contemplating
emigration. England sent enough of these elements to found a
new world ; but if the war had gone differently, she would have sent
out enough to ruin herself. The most adventurous merchants,
the most skilled artisans, the Lords and gentlemen who took
counsel for the liberties of their country, the ploughmen who saw
visions, the tinkers who dreamed dreams, were perpetually thinking
of New Engiand, whither twenty thousand Puritans had already
gone. The Roundhead armies were raised by men of the merchant
class, and were led by landed gentlemen of the type of Cromwell,
who were not, like the Cavaliers, deeply attached to the soil, who

regarded their estates merely as assets in the money market,
who had here no rest for the spirit or home for. the heart, who
so long as they were sojourners upon earth, lived “in Mesheck.

Most of
the nation
adverse to
war

226 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1642

which they say signifies Prolonging ; in Kedar which signifieth Black-
ness”) Such men would have emigrated rather than live under
the military despotism of an Anglican King. Thus defeat in the
field would have ruined for ever the cause of Parliament, and would
have driven the Puritans out of England. freedom in politics
and religion would never have been evolved by the balance of
parties, for one party would have left the land. Without its
leadership, the mass of Englishmen, indifferent as they showed
themselves to the result of the Civil War, would never again have
risen in revolt against a royal Church and a royal State. The
current of European thought and practice, running hard towards
despotism, would have caught England into the stream. America,
strengthened by the influx of all who could change their country
but not their religion, might perhaps have proved unconquerable,
and gone on her way alone. But England would then have
become a mere outlying portion of the State system of Europe,
had she not, by the campaign of Naseby, acquired her independent
position between the old world and the new, and planted freedom
in the deep fruitful soil of antiquity. The flowers of genius and
the fruits of life that have since flourished upon that tree, could
not have shown their heads under the shadow of tyranny, nor
could they have so quickly bloomed to perfection in the thin soil
of a newer land.

The great issue was decided in a war waged by two small
minorities. When Edgehill was fought, not half the nation, nor
half even of the gentry, had been induced to support the war
whether for King or Parliament.?- Except in London, there was
no rush to arms. The tale of foot was on both sides filled up
with pressed men. But since the two factions divided between
them all the leaders and all the sources of power and law, the
peaceful majority could only look on in despair, unled, unauthor-
ised, and without a policy. There was indeed no middle party:

1Carl.’s Crom., Letter ii., anno 1638. Cromwell twice meditated emigration;
once under Laud when he sold his land; and again when the Grand Remonstrance
was in danger of rejection by the Commons. On the subject of Puritan and Cavalier
Emigration, see Appendix A. below.

*The small size of the armies in October, 1642, and the immense difficulty in
recruiting even by help of the press-gang, prove that as Clarendon wrote (p. 347):
“It fared in those counties as in all other parts of the kingdom that the number of
those who desired to sit still was greater than of those who desired to engage in
either party”’,

1642] THE CIVIL WAR 227

every man was a little for the King or a little for the Parlia-
ment; though few were willing to be sequestrated for the sake of
the one, or plundered for the sake of the other. The utmost that
such men of peace could attempt was to keep the war from their
own doors, by short-lived “County Treaties,” which preserved
neutrality in Yorkshire, Cheshire and other shires for a few uneasy
weeks,

As the war dragged on, neutrals were everywhere forced to Treatment
abandon their neutrality by the particular attention they received cet
from both parties, In the opinion of the Roundhead Committees,
“Neuters deserved neither respect nor protection from Church
or Commonwealth”; preachers directed against them the curse
which the Angel of the Lord pronounced against “Merosh,” and
every passing troop made itself the instrument of God’s exceeding
wrath, Nothing but avowed adherence to the Parliament could
secure a man’s house against plunder in Middlesex and Kent, or
save his horses from requisition by the Cambridge Committee in
the better disciplined Eastern Association, Within the Cavalier
lines, where Goring and Rupert rode, neutrals had no hope, for
even Royalist houses were lucky to escape the visits of Captain
Ferryfarm and Quartermaster Burndorp.|| And while the neutral
was most frequently plundered, he was also liable to be most
heavily taxed. By the severe assessment of those who would not
take up arms, County Committees ingeniously contrived to recruit
at once their credit and their cavalry. Before the end of the war
all the gentry and most of the yeomen and merchants had declared
themselves, each on the side which he most favoured or most feared.

But the hired labourer in the field remained neutral to the end. Conduct
In a few villages he enlisted under Puritan influence; in many he ee eee
followed his landlord to war ; in all he was the victim of the press- classes:
gang. But he had not the inducement of his wealthier neighbours ade
to barter his allegiance for protection, for his allegiance could not
command so high a price. When he took up clubs, it was to save
his goods from the soldiers of both parties; and when at last he
realised that the presence of the New Model Army was a security
against plunder, he joyfully hailed, even in the Cavalier districts of
the West, the march of victors who brought peace to the cottage.

1The names given by the Cavalier soldier Lacy to the Royalist officers in his
play, The Old Troop, vide Lacy’s Dramatic Works, 1875.

228 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1642

As Cornwall was not an English La Vendée, so there was no rural
district even in the East where the tocsin could have brought out
the countryside from their beds, to resist the armies or to arrest
the flight of the King.

The For it was not, like the French Revolution, a war of classes.

gentlemen Ng class stood to win or lose property or privilege, until under the
Commonwealth the gentry were rallied to the fallen throne by a
sense of their own diminished importance. But during the first
Civil War a large minority of the gentry in every shire headed the
Parliamentary cause, and almost alone officered its numerous
armies. ‘The most devotedly Royalist were the largest owners of
land: the Catholic Earl of Worcester, whose munificence alone
saved Charles from bankruptcy in June; the Earl of Derby, who
possessed more truly than either Parliament or King the allegiance
of one-half of Lancashire ; and many others of less name who main-
tained in their great country houses an almost feudal state, and in
their lofty isolation scented with quicker alarm than their neighbours
the first breath of coming democracy, these were the most con-
spicuous adherents of the Crown. Among the Roundheads were
found many at least of the smaller squires, led by those who had
acquired influence in the county rather by public service than by
broad acres or ancient name, who had none of the sympathies of a
noblesse, who had lived among yeomen and townspeople, feeding fat
cattle, hearing long sermons, judging rustic causes, and who had
finally been sent up to represent their neighbours in Parliament.

Farmers The tenant-farmer was in no position to avow any political or

cate religious faith but that of his landlord. But the yeomen free-
holders, partly from a desire to show their independence as
individuals and their cohesion as a proud and honourable class,
were solid for the “good Parliament” in East Anglia and the
Midland counties ; but in districts beyond Severn, where Puritanism
was only known by evil report as the new religion of the cockneys,
they were the backbone of the royal cause.

Towns- The towns were the strength of the Roundheads, although in

— every town there was a Cavalier party, and in many, especially in
cathedral cities, it prevailed. The part usually played by the
tradesmen was attributed by Baxter to that “correspondency with
London” which had long cultivated their general intelligence and
their Puritanism, and which Pym had lately been at pains to increase

1642] THE CIVIL WAR 229

in a political direction. But it was only in Lancashire that the war
degenerated into that feud between the urban and rural popula-
tions, which had done so much to ruin the development of Germany,
Flanders and Spain. In most districts, gentlemen of the shire like
Hampden, Cromwell or Hutchinson, with their local knowledge
of town and country alike, acted as a link between the citizens
in the market-town and the yeomen on isolated farmsteads, com-
bined under their own leadership forces that had no other point
of union, and therewith captured the county town, the militia,
and the stores, before the neutrals could protest or the enemy
unite.

While most men sat still, some hoping that war would not begin,
- others raking dim family traditions of St. Albans and Barnet for a
hint how war was to be begun, the fate of a whole city or district
was often decided by the energy of one man. For the local forces
were nowhere unequally matched, except in East Anglia and
Middlesex, and in the counties along the Welsh and Scottish
borders. Indeed, in the heart of the Eastern Association itself the
Royalist party was only kept from arming by the ubiquitous activity
of Cromwell; to that officer the Parliament’s Commission in his
pocket seemed from the beginning warrant enough to disarm any
of his neighbours whom old acquaintance taught him to suspect.
But it needed two pitched battles between the local forces in the
West, before the genius of Sir Ralph Hopton could do for the
King in Cornwall and Devon what Cromwell did bloodlessly for
Parliament in Suffolk and Cambridge.

It was, on the whole, a war of North and West against South A war of
and East.!. But the North never felt that it was engaged in a death principle
struggle with the South, nor were East and West roused to battle
by conscious intention to subdue one another. In every shire there
were two parties, of which the weaker only waited opportunity
to join hands with an invading force from the other side of Eng-
land. For in motive it was a war not of classes or of districts, but
of ideas. Hence there was a nobler speculative enthusiasm among
the chiefs and their followers, but less readiness to fight among
the masses of the population, than in other contests that have
torn great nations. The French Revolution was a war of two

1See map of England at end of book. Places mentioned in this chapter are
marked there,

Humane
character
of the war

Why it
was
humane

230 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1642

societies; the American Civil War was a war of two regions; but
the Great Rebellion was a war of two parties.

This war, as compared to nearly all that preceded it and to
nearly all that during two centuries followed it, was eminently
humane. ‘There was much plunder, sometimes accompanied by
arson. But no part of England was burnt to a desert, like all
Germany of that day: towns were not reduced to half their
size; villages did not disappear wholesale. Indeed, the population
was not even noticeably diminished. Economic progress, though
checked for perhaps a decade or more, yet received no such injury
as was caused by contemporary events in Ireland and on the
Continent. Cases of cruelty and treachery were proved, and
more were charged, against both sides. But plunder was the only
crime that was general, and even plunder was very exceptional in
the later Roundhead armies. A civilian nation in arms relaxed the
rules of war so as to save combatants from unnecessary bloodshed,
and disregarded military customs so as to save noncombatants from
vilest outrage.1 There were many reasons why the contest was,
by comparison, humane. Two minorities were fighting under criti-
cal inspection for the favour of all England, and when rivals duel
they take care not to wound their mistress. Classes, professions,
neighbourhoods and families were so divided in this war of ideas,
that there was usually found, among the spoilers or conquerors of
the hour, some one who was bound by affection or interest to save
the persons of the conquered and the properties of the spoiled.
Again, the combatants were of one race and one nation. And
lastly, the English were thoroughly civilian in habits and tempera-
ment. Wherever these conditions were absent, the war was more
cruel, The worst deeds were done by those Cavaliers who rode
under professional soldiers, trained in the German military rules of
storm and plunder; and by those Roundheads who came across
Welsh pikemen in the hour of battle, and Irish camp-followers in

1 The troops were often given “ storm-money ” in addition to their pay, instead
of the plunder they would have obtained if the places stormed had been given to
sack according to continental rules of war (Firth’s C. A., pp. 193, 194. G.(C. W.),
ii., p. 97). Inthe matter of sack, the Cavalier armies sinned most often. They sacked
Birmingham (1643), Leicester (1645), without massacre; Bolton (1644) was sacked by
Rupert with massacre, but this was cried out against as exceptional, and was largely
due to the local feud of Catholics and Puritans in Lancashire. The New Model
sometimes sacked castles and houses taken by storm, as Sherborne and Basing,

1642} THE CIVIL WAR 231

the hour of victory. Contemporary war in Ireland and in Scot-
land was not humane at all.

It may perhaps be asked why this war of religion was not
distinguished by the cruelty which is the hall-mark of other
such contests. But it was not a war between two definite creeds.
The mass of both parties were Protestant. And where Catholic
met Puritan, the furies of Alva were unloosed in the streets of
Bolton, and retaliated in the chambers of Basing.

Neither was it a war between two fierce fanaticisms. The
Cavaliers were fighting to prevent the excess of religion; their
enemies sometimes called them “ Baalists,” but more often
“atheists”; and many were kept from joining their noisy camps
by the marked discouragements offered to any outward form of
piety. The Roundheads indeed were enthusiasts, but they were
enthusiasts for Calvinism, the religion of self-restraint. As their
armies became more Calvinist, they refrained more and more from
plunder. When the Puritans triumphed, they declined to bring
their conquered enemies to the scaffold by scores; in granting

_ terms of surrender, the fanatics showed themselves more merciful
than the politicians. Last of all, from the heart of the Puritan
sects sprang the religion of the Quakers, in which many a war-worn
soldier of the Commonwealth closed his visionary eyes.

In the eight months that intervened between the attempt on Wise con-
the five members and the opening of the Edgehill campaign, ee =
Charles, at York, for the first and last time in his life behaved York, Jan.-
with prudence. ‘To every one of his slender band of followers was peks, xP4a
assigned a suitable task. The Queen was sent out of England
to tout for money and arms among her relations in France and
Holland. Prince Rupert was summoned from fighting for the lost
heritage of his brother in the Palatinate to teach others to fight for
the lost heritage of his uncle in England. Constitutional Hyde was
employed to indite manifestoes, in which the King appeared as the
guardian and his enemies as the destroyers of law. Charles himself

1 They that maintain,” wrote Chillingworth, “the King’s righteous cause with
the hazard of their lives and fortunes, but by their oaths and curses, by their drunken-
ness and debauchery, by their irreligion and profaneness, fight more powerfully
against their party than by all other means they do or can fight for it, are not, I fear,
very well acquainted with any part of the Bible” (Chillingworth’s Works (1820),

iii,, p- 14).

The in-
stinct of
loyalty

232 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1642

refused, at the cost of military efficiency, to arrest by illegal warrants
the Fairfaxes and other suspected gentry of Yorkshire. Fair words,
for once not belied by foul deeds, won for the King the favour
of many moderates! They noted the contrast with the con-
temporary proceedings of the two Houses, who were vigorously
preparing for war, crushing the legal voice of opposition in the
home counties, and prematurely threatening to seize the estates
“of the malignant and disaffected party in the kingdom”. .

Men had been willing to resist the King’s encroachments on
their properties and laws; but when the standard was raised, when
the word came round to ride to battle, the case seemed different.
Something deeper, if less rational, was touched by the call to arms
—the claim of ultimate authority. Obedience to the King was
still in the age of Pym, as the worship of the Saints had still been
in the age of Latimer, an instinct inborn in every child of the race
at that stage of its evolution, wrapped in a thousand mysterious
associations with a remote and still unbroken past, transmitted
from father to son through thirty generations, since the Kings of
the Heptarchy had crushed their rebel thanes in ages which, though
long forgotten, still had their influence on ideas unconsciously
inherited. No other picture of war then lurked in the mind’s
eye of the Englishman than that of following the King’s banner
to Hastings, to Crecy or to Flodden. He had been taught no
other connection between religion and public duty but the old
text, then painted upon the walls of so many manor houses—“ Fear
God, honour the King”. Those two duties could not have been
divided in men’s minds, except by the new Puritan faith. What
a task had Pym !—to replace the old-world ideals and associations
of kingship by some stronger emotion which had yet taken no
form, and had yet no history or tradition. That would require
all the progressive impulse of a great race at the zenith of its
energy. Without the Puritan religion it could not, in that age
at least, have been accomplished.

Mighty still was the name and office of King. Shakespeare,
child of a day of which the aftershine still glowed in the West,

1The ** Oxford Crowns,” coined by Charles in 1642, 1643, bore the inscription
RELIG PROT LEG ANG LIBER PAR, “The Protestant religion, the laws of England,
the liberties of Parliament” (Hawkin’s English Silver Coins (1841), p. 165. See

pe Handbook, Coins of Great Britain, H. A. Grueber (1899), plates xxvi.,
xxvii.)

1642] THE CIVIL WAR 233

had known no symbol of the public weal grander than this of
royalty. And to many the world seemed still the same as in the
noontide of Elizabeth. “I cannot contain myself,” wrote Cornish
Sir Bevil, grandson of the Grenvile who had fought the Revenge
for his Queen through that famous summer night, “I cannot
contain myself when the King of England’s standard waves in the
field upon so just an occasion.” Sir Edmund Verney had grown
old and sad since as a young man in Prince Charles’s train he
struck the priest in Madrid ;! the standard-bearer of a master
whose every action he disapproved, Verney loved the Bible and
Parliament well, but he loved honour more. “I have eaten the
King’s bread,” he declared, “and served him near thirty years,
and will not do so base a thing as to forsake him; and choose
rather to lose my life—which I am sure I shall do—to preserve
and defend those things which are against my conscience to pre-
serve and defend; for I will deal freely with you”—(he was
speaking to Hyde)—“I have no reverence for Bishops, for whom
this quarrel subsists.” ?

Much as they differed one from another in politics and in
character, all the Royalists of England took arms, not as clients
but as freemen, not to recover at the expense of the nation odious
and forfeited privileges of their own, but to risk their all for a
King. Therefore they have become for all ages the type of pure
loyalty; therefore, even in the horrid hour of fratricide, their
worthiest champions were respected by their foes. “My affections
to you,” wrote Sir William Waller to Sir Ralph Hopton on the
eve of battle, “are so unchangeable that hostility itself cannot
violate my friendship. We are both upon the stage, and we must
act the parts assigned us in this tragedy. Let us do it ina way
of honour and without personal animosities.”

There was little of this feeling exchanged between the de-
bauchees and the hypocrites that disgraced their respective parties.
Among the first to take arms for the King and Bishops were the
ale-house rabble of Western towns, led by roystering gentlemen
whom no decent householder would allow his son to follow to the
wars, or his wife to admit to quarters for a single night. “ Almost
all these drunkards,” as their neighbours observed with satisfaction,

1See p. 128 above, Verney, i., pp. 82, 83,
2Clar., Life, bk. ii., pt. il., p. 954.

234 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1642

“were quickly killed, so that scarce a man of them came home
again and survived the war.”?
The stan- Yet while the elements good and bad of which Charles’s armies
Slag were afterwards composed, were slowly beginning to bestir them-
tingham, selves in local affairs for the control of castles, stores and militia
a Aug» regiments, no central army gathered round his own person so long
as he depended on the hard-headed and peace-loving Cavaliers of
Yorkshire. At Nottingham on the 22nd of August it was a slender
band that greeted the erection of the royal standard with a cheery
shout of “God save King Charles and hang up the Roundheads”.
In September, without arms, money or munitions, they moved off to
try their fortune in the West, caparisoned rather like strolling
players than like a King and the prime of his nobility going forth
to war.
Initial ad. Essex had already taken the field with a well-appointed army
ae of'{he Houses would have been no better able than the King to raise
ment the country at this early stage, had not London, containing ten
times the population and more than ten times the ready money of
any other city in England, supplied recruits by the thousand, wai
loans to any quantity and at any moment, and the best weapons
that England or the Continent could furnish for money down.
The navy While both sides had to create an army and to learn the art of
ot the war on land, a fine navy, whose sailors only needed regular pay and
humane treatment to make it once more the finest in the world,
was ready to the hand of Parliament. The royal men-of-war which
had defeated the Armada, had been maintained at fair nominal
strength by the Ship Money despotism. But it was a common
saying among seafaring men, that the galleys were preferable to
the King of England’s service. Unpaid, unfed, unclothed, his
sailors continually deserted to foreign flags. The year after Felton
had brought Buckingham’s naval administration to an end, a
despairing admiral declared that, unless great changes were made,
Charles would “lose the love and loyalty of his sailors”. When
the Civil War broke out the prophecy was fulfilled to the letter.
Moreover, the professional traditions of the service, which Haw-
kins had created and Drake had led to glory, were interwoven with
the rough breezy Puritanism of those who go down to the sea in

1Baxter, Life (ed. 1696), p. 42. ® Oppenheim, p. 235.

1642] THE CIVIL WAR 235

ships. In James’s reign, the King, the Prince, and the favourite
who had sought the friendship of the cruel idolators of Spain, had
never been forgiven by the forecastle hands. They had tried to
lynch Buckingham, and they still pined for leaders with the old
hatred of Popery and the old cunning in war. By his sympathy
with these traditions, the sailor Earl of Warwick had won all
their hearts. When he was appointed admiral by the Houses, the
few captains who refused to obey the Earl were haled before him
by their own mutinous crews. Along all the coasts of England
one small warship alone remained true to the royal service. The
wholesale defection of the navy was a fit reward to the Government
that had deserted the Elizabethan tradition, and refused sympathy
in the hour of deadliest need to Protestantism oversea. The gain
to Parliament was immense. Some approach to regularity in their
pay kept the delighted sailors enthusiastic Roundheads throughout
the struggle, when a Royalist blockade of the Thames would have
sealed the fate of London and of Parliamentary institutions. The
“foreign mart for implements of war” was almost closed to the
King by the hostile activity of his own ships round the few
second-class ports over which his flag still waved. His prestige
among foreign nations and English merchants passed over to the
men who wielded the whole external power of the island. The
Customs revenues became a fruitful source of income to Parlia-
ment. Commerce, the life-blood of London, was little diminished
during a war of which scarce an echo was heard at sea. From the
naval bases of the Thames and Portsmouth, the fleets supplied all
the military needs of Plymouth and Hull, impregnable garrisons in
the enemy’s territory, which in the hour of danger prevented the
advance of West and North on London.!

Some thirty Peers retained their seats at Westminster, half Essex
oi them because in August Parliament seemed certain to win; but
the other half, like Essex, Warwick, Brooke and Mandeville, now
Earl of Manchester, because, though deeply jealous of the en-
croaching power of the Lower House, they remained faithful to
the common cause of political liberty and Puritan religion. These
few Lords, by their social position and personal character, made re-
bellion respectable. When men stopped on the brink of treason

1 Oppenheim, pp. 184-301, for treatment of navy by James and Charles I,

Charles
moves
into the
West,
Sep., 1642

236 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1642

to look round for company, Essex “broke the ice,” and “by his
very name commanded thousands” all over England into the service
of Parliament. In London itself he was specially popular. His
quiet Puritan manners, formed in long retirement from the court
of princes who had so grossly insulted his honour as a man and a
husband ;! his brief words; his tobacco-pipe from which the dignity
of office could not part him, won the hearts of the citizens, many
of whom sent each his favourite apprentice, with a pocketful of
money and a scriptural blessing, to follow Essex through the war.
The formula of rebellion in these early months was the oath “to
live and die wit: the Earl of Essex”. But the good Earl was only
a figure-head, not a motive power. He belongs to that type of
man, faithful and honourable, who is put at the head of armies
when a civil war begins, but has to be removed before it can
end, He shrank unconsciously from beating up the royal camp,
and this political instinct was not counteracted by the promptings
of an active military genius. In the last week of August and the
first fortnight of September, Essex delayed to march on Notting-
ham at the head of a regular force, against which Charles had then
nothing to oppose save a few thousand horsemen without discipline,
and a few hundred pikemen without pikes.

The royal army was saved by moving in time to a happier
recruiting-ground. ‘The remote shires bordering on Wales had
lived through the long accumulative discontent of the rest of
England with the policy of James and Charles, in plain, homely
loyalty to the name of two Kings whose actual doings scarcely
reached them in report. ‘The last twelve months had been full of
peril for isolated Puritans in Salop, Hereford and Worcestershire.
“Every drunken sot that met any of them in the streets, would
tell them ‘we shall take an order with the Puritans ere long’.”?
Murderous riots against them had preluded the outbreak of war,
When, three weeks too late, Essex arrived in pursuit of Charles
on the banks of Severn, his Londoners found themselves in a
country where they had little in common with the natives. Old
and New England looked each other in the face with some dis-
approval and more astonishment. Sergeant Nehemiah Wharton,
writing to his friends in the capital, describes the choral service in

1Sce p. 113 above. 2 Baxter, Life (ed. 1696), p. 42.

1642] THE CIVIL WAR 237

Hereford Cathedral on the first Sunday morning in October: “The
pipes played and the puppets sang so sweetly that some of our
soldiers could not forbear from dancing in the holy choir; whereat
the Baalists were sore displeased”. On the way back through the
streets it was the turn of the cockneys to be shocked. The
shops were open and men were at work, “to whom we give some
plain exhortations”. The army chaplain preached “two famous
sermons which much affected the poor inhabitants, who, wonder-
ing, said they never heard the like before; and I believe them”.

By this time the King was at the head of several thousand foot, Edgehill,
many of them from the hills of Wales; and the hard-riding Eng- 8 ve
lishmen whom Rupert was training in the usages of war, were no
longer inferior in numbers to the town-bred cavalry whom the
Parliament officers were teaching the rudiments of horsemanship,
The royal army turned East and headed a race for London. On
the top of Edgehill ridge, far-seen from Shakespeare’s Avon, Charles
turned to face his pursuers. In the plain below a drawn battle was
fought, which proved that both armies were too badly organised
and disciplined to receive or obey commands on the field; that
Rupert’s cavalry could not at present be resisted; but that some
regiments of London foot, and a few troops of country horse, who
were distinguished for their piety, had in them the making of
fine soldiers. Cromwell, who stood through the thickest of the
fight, formed a notion as to the proper method of recruiting
cuirassiers, recommended it vainly to Hampden for the reform of
the main army, and returned to his local work in the East deter-
mined there to carry it out for himself.

But to one tender and gallant knight the Civil War had ceased
already. Struck through by the Puritan sword that he would
himself so gladly have wielded, the body of the King’s standard-
bearer lay under Edgehill between the lines of midnight watchfires,
unclaimed by the two armies, as they crouched silent after their
day of wrath. Formed on that noble type of character—the
Puritan Cayalier—which had flourished for two generations and
was now to fall extinct, Sir Edmund Verney lay slain, like the oak
fallen first among its fellows, though all will soon be crashing in
the gale that lays the forest low, When our civil storms at length

1 Archa@ologia, xxxv., for the sergeant’s journal, a most remarkable document.

Royalist
head-
quarters at
Oxford

Turnham
Green,
Novy., 1642

238 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1642

subsided, the ground was cleared indeed: public life in the age of
Whig and Tory was no longer adorned by men like this, honour-
able almost to excess, shunning power and despising gain, Puritan
in thought and practice, but laying no restraint upon others, and
pitiful of all woes but their own.

Since the King’s army had not been routed under Edgehill,
he was able to continue his advance through the Midlands. On
29th October he entered Oxford, fixed there his staff, his arsenal
and his Court, and so determined the strategical character of the
whole war. The Royalist headquarters were now a fortified out-
post far in advance of the three bases of their recruiting strength—
the North, the Welsh border, and the South-west. Not sixty miles
of road divided the Oxford quadrangles, swarming with play-actors
and peeresses, Jesuits and Privy Councillors, from the London
Artillery-Garden where officers from Sweden and Holland put the
City apprentices through their drill under the eyes of their masters
and sweethearts. ‘The Thames valley, thus become the seat of the
central war, was kept in perpetual alarum by the passage of rival
armies, which were never strong enough to lay siege to the earth-
works now hastily flung up to enclose and protect the old walls and
new suburbs of Oxford and London. Sometimes Hampden and his
troopers pounced down from his wooded Chilterns on to the plain
below; or Essex wound in slow pomp of horse, foot and artillery
over the uplands south of Thames. More often Rupert, issuing from
the fortress of Magdalen College at the Bridge-head, where he was
quartered with the hardest riders of the army, could be seen by the
first light of morning high on Shotover Hill, galloping towards —
glory and plunder afar.

But the struggle in the Thames valley was decided by other
wars and other warriors in distant North and South. For it was
early proved by experience that London could not be overpowered
by a frontal attack. When in November Charles advanced to
take it by a coup de main from Oxford, the commercial world
mustered for the week at Turnham Green a well drilled and bril-
liantly equipped army of militia, over 20,000 strong. So small was
the chance that this weighty shield could be broken through by the
light field-army of the King, that Milton wrote a jesting sonnet
“When the assault was intended to the City”; he would have
been in no mood to trifle with such a prospect, if he had really

1643} THE CIVIL’WAR 239

expected the fate of Magdeburg to befall the island capital, where
freedom had found her strong place of refuge.

After the bloodless repulse from Turnham Green, the last im- The
portant operation of 1642, the Cavalier strategists went about by Pie **
more scientific approaches to the same objective—London. By the London,
plan of campaign on which they founded their operations in 1643 1543-44
and 1644, three forces were to advance concentrically, each from
a different base, corresponding to the three districts where armies
were most easily enlisted and equipped for the King. The Ear! of
Newcastle, with the men of the Northern counties, was to pierce
through the hostile Eastern Association and appear on the Essex
shore of the Thames. Hopton was to lead the men of Devon and
Cornwall to the opposite bank, unmuzzling the Royalist half of
Kent on the way. If the rebel merchants had not the sense to
surrender as soon as they found the Thames navigation cut off
below the wharfs, the King could lead the Oxford army, recruited
in Wales and the middle West, to join Newcastle and Hopton in a
united attack on the starving and isolated capital. The plan was
sure of success if the three districts of England which were
strongest in local feeling as well as in loyalty—the North, the
middle West and the South-West—would put love of King before
love of home, and march hundreds of miles into the land of
“foreigners,” to whose welfare they were indifferent rather than
hostile.

Until June, 1645, the Roundhead leaders had not, like their
opponents, any clear conception of their own strategical objects.
They sent out their armies through the length and breadth of
England, often on useless and sometimes on disastrous errands,
like a pugilist who sends his slow heavy blows astray, and some-
times overreaches and falls.) To whom are we to attribute the
superior strategy of the Cavaliers? It is impossible to know which
of the generals and nephews who frowned at each other across the
King’s council board, sharing military authority by the most
whimsical arrangements, and securing favour in irregular alterna-
tion, was the real father of a plan worthy of Wallenstein or Gustavus,
Perhaps it was Rupert’s. By tireless work and fierce infectious valour
he had in a few weeks produced, out of a mob of grooms and hunts-
men, a cavalry fit to charge and conquer, and he knew also how to
sketch in theory the plan of a whole campaign. But he lacked the

Oxford

240 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1643

arts that lie between cavalry leadership and strategy, the arts of
conducting the campaign which has been sketched, and of fighting a
battle of all arms together. It was here that the Cavaliers failed.
The jealousies of their generals, which did not prevent the forma-
tion of the grand design, gravely impeded its execution.
Indeed, no military virtue except dashing valour was stimulated

ee the hy the atmosphere of Oxford. A gentleman who had no pay but

Parties
at Oxford

plunder, and no discipline but honour, could not be called to account
if he chose to spend one month in the field and one at Court; if he
volunteered on a forage with Rupert because the lady was cruel or
the husband inquisitive, and came galloping back in mid campaign.
Fashionable women, the despair of army reformers in every age,
held sway in the college rooms, disturbing Aristotle’s reign over
the spiders of three centuries, and making gaol delivery of the
Lares and Penates of celibate learning. Plays were written and
acted, sonnets dedicated and admired, satires laughed over and
avenged ; fashions in dress and manners came in and went out,
gallants kept assignations at nightfall, and swordsmen brushed the
morning’s dew from the meadows of Thames and Cherwell. To be
as different as possible from the ascetics and hypocrites, with whom
they had at last come to death-grips, seemed more than ever the
duty of a Court which had been, from the days of Queen Elizabeth,
the centre of corruption and good taste.

Above all, political intrigue in its most personal form raged
at Oxford as fiercely as if the Royalists had already nothing to
do but to divide up England among themselves. ‘There were as
many parties as there were men and women. All Protestants were
against the Queen and her Catholics, who had secured commissions
in the army in full proportion to their large numbers, great wealth
and devoted loyalty; and among the Catholics themselves their
own obscure divisions only multiplied under stress of war. All
the civilians in Oxford were against the professional soldiers. But
among the civilians, the courtiers taunted the solemn Privy Coun-
cillors with turning loyal at the eleventh hour; and among the
Privy Councillors, constitutional Hyde and Falkland were opposed
by Digby, who had recommended the arrest of the five members,
Among the soldiers, the old and official were plagued by the
licensed impertinence of the young; and among the youths, the
good soldier Rupert was at deadly feud with Goring and Wilmot,

1643} THE CIVIL WAR 24)

whose drunken bestiality prepared and solaced defeat. Amid such
clamorous confusion of counsels, the man whose business it was to
control them had no one person in whom he confided, and no one
plan on which he had determined. During the war Charles pur-
sued simultaneously a dozen secret intrigues and public policies,
opposed in spirit one to another, and none carried through to
the end.

But on the whole the constitutional elements inevitably lost
ground. Hyde got the Cavalier members summoned to a Parlia-
ment at Oxford, but no Parliament could flourish in that uncon-
genial soil. The English and Rhenish soldiers, who cared equally
little about English law, gradually encroached on the counsels of
the Crown; and the most favoured rivals with whom the various
military cliques had to contend, were not the constitutional states-
men, but the ultra-royalist Digby and the Catholic Queen.

If the dilatoriness of Essex had thrown away the initial advan- Greater

tage which the power to raise loans from the City merchants had fnancial
| given to Parliament, the resources on which those and all later of Pariia-
loans were secured outlasted the wealth at the disposal of the ™&™
King ; and, after three years of balanced power, gave the Round-
head armies for the second time a superiority, of which the New
Medel was more quick to make use (1645). These resources were
of a regular nature, and increased as the war went on. ‘The
Houses, fighting in the King’s name, used against him the re-
venues which he had enjoyed, as well as the taxes which they had
the power to levy in their own right. They collected the rents of
all the royal estates within their lines; and the port duties, under
Parliamentary manipulation, gave a largely increased return. Much
of the indirect taxation came out of the pockets of upland Cava-
liers, obliged to pay enhanced prices for goods that could only
reach them taxed from Roundhead warehouses.

Still larger sums were realised by the adoption of new financial Pym’s Ex.
methods. No widening of the basis of taxation had been at-°°
tempted for the last fifty years by Parliaments more anxious to
control than to supply their sovereign. Now that Parliament was
itself the executive, experiments leading from mediaeval to modern
finance were introduced by the ready statesmanship of Pym. An
_ Excise on the sale, first of drink and victuals, and finally of most

16

{

The New
Assess-
ment

242 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1643

articles in common demand, was established on the newest prin-
ciples of the Dutch statists, and levied in the first instance at the
sword’s point. The English, who would never willingly have con-
sented to its first introduction, submitted to its retention as an
established part of the national finance under the restored monarchy,
but did not cease to nurse a suspicion of the name Excise that
broke out into madness under Walpole.

Direct taxation also was reformed. ‘The old method of levying
a subsidy, nominally an ad valorem charge on lands and move-
ables, had declined under Elizabeth into a fixed charge on each
district in England, amounting to £70,000 in all, and not increas-
ing with the increasing wealth of the country. This had seemed
to the Commons good enough for the King’s needs. But when
the war began, they ordered a New Assessment of all England to
be made monthly; the total amount required every month was
fixed by Parliament with reference to the momentary exigencies of
the campaign, and the rating of each individual proprietor was
made the business of the County Committees, which, before the New
Model, were the chief instruments of all military and financial

business. The New Assessment was not only more profitable in

results but more fair in incidence than the old, even if the Com-
mittees seldom neglected to be as hard as possible on neutrals
and suspected Royalists. Like the Excise, the New Assessment
was continued by the statesmen of the Restoration, and was de-
veloped into the Property and Land 'Tax which paid for our great
wars with France?

The successful levy of taxes so odious that Strafford never dared
to suggest them during the despotism, or Charles to impose them
on his own West in time of war, shows how complete was the
military occupation of the East by Parliament. It suggests also
that many, who cared little for the result of the war provided it
came to an end, were so accustomed to think of the Commons and
not the King as the rightful imposers of taxation, that they paid

4 Strafford, who understood better than his contemporaries the evil effects of
port duties, had wished to forestall Walpole by taking steps in Ireland towards “‘ an
excise, which although it be heathen Greek in England, yet certainly would be
more beneficial to the Crown, and less felt by the subject, than where the imposi-
tions are laid upon the foreign vent of commodities inward and outward” (1633,
G., viii., p. 39). 5

2 Dowell, i., pp. 150-59; ii., pp. I-14, 47-51, 61, 68, 79, 128, 129.

1643] THE CIVIL WAR 243

the Assessment and the Excise with a mechanical indifference, which
they had not shown when the Royal Commissioners came round for
the Ship Money.

The classes and the districts put under contribution by Parlia- Financial
ment were not only comparatively willing but fairly able to pay edeidd
for much of their wealth was in ready money. Wiihin the of the
Royalist lines the case was different. Charles had no commercial *'"8
centres where he could negotiate loans, even if he could have
offered the security of taxation. He had to fight the war on
plunder and free gifts. The Cavaliers offered their own wealth to
the King, and their neighbour’s goods to themselves. But in spite
of this liberal disposition, the average Royalist had in 1642 little
ready money, in proportion to the sum for which he was forced to
compound his estate in 1646: he could not realise his wealth be-
cause it was in land. There were only two things which he could
offer to the King—his plate and one year’s rent.

Plate was ies a larger part of the national assets than The melt. .
it is to-day. In the generation preceding the establishment of Bene

' banks in England, the savings of all classes brightened the shelves, *
or were red up with the beef and ale. Por 150 years silver
plate had been accumulating undisturbed by war, during a period
when the art of the silversmith was as exquisite as it was widely
spread. Every cobbler in London, wrote Sir Philip Warwick,
drank out of his silver beaker, “so rife were silver vessels among
all conditions”. In 1642 one of the noblest arts of the European
Renaissance disappeared down the King’s melting furnaces ; just as
the medizeval saints from the church niches, and the purple robes
of Pilate in the windows, came clinking down under the Puritan
hammer on to the heads of laughing mobs.'

Even before the fighting began, gentle families who had helped
_ the King were not only eating off pewter, but were hard pressed to
purchase the ordinary necessaries of life. And as the war went on,
| the rent which the Cavalier could collect off his estate to share

1But the Cavaliers were not the only people who melted down their plate for
| the war. Thus in Hudibras, canto ii.:—

‘Did Saints for this bring in their plate ?
And crowd as if oe, came too late?
And into uilees aid musqueteers
Stampt beakers, cups and porringers?”

The
Catholics
and the
Crown

Private
armies
and local
wars

244 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1643

with his master became smaller every year. The rise in wages, the
unwillingness to take farms, the constant plunder and arson, brought
down many rentals in Cheshire and Gloucestershire to one-half.

The foremost to share their wealth with the King were his
Catholic subjects. The loyalty of the gentlemen of the old
religion, naturally cool during the dozen years’ persecution after
the Gunpowder Plot, warmed to, James when he relieved them
against the will of his Parliaments, and had now become with
most an instinct and a passion, whatever reservations might lurk
in the subtle brains that guided the Jesuit intrigue. During the
wars and rebellions of the next hundred years, the Stuart, whether
crowned King or wandering outlaw, could count on the swords and
rentals of the Catholics, at times when Churchmen would only
send him messages and drink him healths. In 1642 a quarter of
a century had passed away since the legal penalties and fines had
been regularly inflicted on the recusants, and it was for this reason
that they were both willing and able to save Charles from financial
ruin. Protestant fears were so far well grounded, that the Catholics
were a rich community. The Earl of Worcester, reputed the
greatest monied man in England, had an annual rental of £24,000.
He gave it almost wholesale to the King.

Such were the royal resources. But they were not regular, and
they were certain to diminish.

Owing to the poverty of Charles, and the bad organisation of
the Roundheads before their New Model reforms, most regiments
on either side consisted of private companies and troops, and many
campaigns of private sieges and wars. At a time when about
140,000 men were under arms in England, it was seldom that
either party brought more than 9,000 to 15,000 into line of
battle. Marston Moor was the only occasion on which as many as
20,000 men were fighting on one side, and that was because the
Parliamentary generals had united three separate armies on the
field. The great majority of the combatants were engaged in
small local wars, which seldom had influence on the main result, at
any rate after 1642. Gentlemen who never took part in larger
operations, except for a few days while Rupert or Essex passed
through their country on the road to bigger game, were eager to
wage war on each other, at the head of their servants or tenantry,

1G, (C. W.), iii., p. 196. Verney, ii, pp. 88-go.

~ 1643) THE CIVIL WAR 245

strengthened by a few soldiers wandering from the colours in
search of higher pay.

England was at that date full of Plantagenent castles, still in
good repair as dwelling houses, though their battlements now
peered over the mossy roofs of outhouses and the waving tops of
trees, whose age told how many generations had gone by since the
inhabitants last expected the approach of besiegers. These veteran
strongholds which had seen our Kings go forth to Normandy, and
the palaces of red brick whose mullioned windows recalled the
peace of Elizabeth and her successor, were alike put into a state of
defence, and supplied with 50 to 300 men apiece. The garrison
system proved the ruin of the King. As the means to provision and
pay his armies in the field diminished, regiments that had better
have been dismissed at once, were left behind at free quarters,
each with a district assigned for its maintenance. Living in garrison,
they ate up the country-side; and, so long as there was anything
left to plunder, would not shift to ground where they were really

_ needed. “I'll fight,” says Tom Tell-Troath when he turns Cavalier
in Lacy’s play, “partly for love, partly for mine own ends. [ll
fight bravely for a battle or two, then beg an old house to make
a garrison of, grow rich, consequently a coward, and then, let the
_ dog bite the bear, or the bear the dog, I’ll make my own peace.”
Some regiments in the field were raised and officered by private
| persons, but paid by King or Parliament to serve in the main
army. Others were both raised and paid at the expense of the
' Colonel, and went on whatever service he chose. Of the soldiers in
| receipt of public money, some were paid by special local contribu-
, tions, others out of the general taxes; some were paid by the King
| or Parliament direct, others by the Committee of the County, or of
_ the Associated Counties. Many were not paid at all. Some were
| engaged permanently, others for single expeditions.
| The appearance of the men was as motley as the methods of
levying them were various. On both sides a regiment would
| be dressed in red or blue, white or green, each according to the
‘taste of the man who had raised it. The colour of his servants’
livery was often selected. At last, under the unifying influence
of the New Model organisation, red began to predominate, ap-
parently because red had been the favourite colour in the Eastern
‘Association, To distinguish themselves from the Cavaliers, many

The garri-
son system

Methods
of levying
the armies

Uniforms,
badges
and flags

Cavalry

246 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1643

of the Roundhead officers and some of the men appeared from first
to last in orange scarfs. But friend or foe were more usually dis-
tinguished through the smoke drifts of the mélée by challenging
for the password—“ God with us,” or “ Have at you for the King,”
—and by badges specially assumed on the day of battle. At New-
bury the Roundheads wore green twigs, like the assailants of
Dunsinane ; at Marston, white handkerchiefs or pieces of paper
in their hats; at some onslaughts of towns, the “forlorn hope”
quaintly left their shirts hanging out behind, for the better
guidance of their own supports through the night... The in-
numerable flags, without which no army in that age thought of
taking the field, were often of fanciful design. The armorial
bearings of the Colonel, the crest of the town, an emblem or a
motto, a political cartoon of Bishops, or of the little dog Pym
biting the lion’s tail, rejoiced the hearts of the troop when it
marched out, and of its captors when it laid down its arms.?
The military art which English amateurs had now to master
in the school of experience, was propounded to them by books on
Swedish tactics, and by officers flocking home from various schools
of war on the Maas, the Danube and the Rhine. Dutch and
German horse usually charged in columns, deep in inverse propor-
tion to the discipline and courage of the troop. The squadrons
riding up in phalanx to exchange sneaking pistol-shots and fly,
with whose cowardly attitudes the artists of the Thirty Years’
War have loaded so much canvas in the picture galleries of the
Continent, are the type of our Roundhead cavalry before the rise
of the Ironsides. But the Swedish horse, taught by their great
Gustavus, fought in line three deep, never halted to fire, reserved
their pistols and carbines for the mé!ée, and charged straight in
with flourished steel. Rupert perhaps found it all the easier to
train his chivalry after this improved pattern, because in 1642 few
of them had any firearms to let off. As Charles filled his war-chest
with plate from the cupboards of loyal squires, so he was fain to
fill his armoury with trophies off their walls. When the firearms
seized from the militia had gone half the round of the musketeers,
the horsemen had to be contented with old corselets, headpieces
and swords, some of which may have been taken down on the night

Hence a night attack was called a ‘* camisado ”—shirt-fight,
* Firth’s C, A., pp. 45, 175, 232, 234, and chap. ii. passim,

1643] THE CIVIL WAR 247

of the Armada beacons.'| Yet no more than this was required for
a charge home.

The private in the cavalry seldom came from the ranks of
hired agricultural labour, A trooper involved an outlay of
capital, Sometimes he had invested the savings of his own farm
or shop in a horse and armour, speculating on a return in the
shape of plunder or religious liberty. Sometimes he had been
equipped by his landlord, or by subscription among the “ young
men and maids” of the neighbouring Puritan town.? His pay,
when he got it, was three times that of his poor brother of the
foot.

The infantry were more than half of them pressed men, Infantry
generally from the lowest classes. The cavalry, socially, physically
and intellectually superior, “pillaged and wounded” the linesmen
on their own side when the war began,’ and instructed them in new
policies and new religions when it drew to a close, It was seldom
thought worth while to sink good men and money in improving
the foot, before the invention of the bayonet enabled them to make
better resistance to the horse. A regiment of foot contained only
half as many pikes as muskets; but the former was still accounted
the more honourable weapon. Ifa gentleman volunteered to fight
on foot, he trailed “the puissant pike”. In a combat between
infantry, the musketeers were ranged on the two flanks; when
they had delivered their shot, if possible into the enemy’s pikemen,
the men of each successive rank wheeled. round and formed up
again in the rear of the long column, to reload while the others
kept up the fire in turn. But the victory was finally decided
“at push of pike” in the centre. If cavalry appeared while the
regiment was drawn up in this order, all was lost. Only when,
like the London train-bands at Newbury, they had time to form
square with the musketeers kneeling under shelter of the long pikes,
could the best infantry in the world hope to drive off a charge of
horse.

The comparative value of horse and foot would have been re- Relative
versed, if England had then been, as she is now, a country chequered bse sos
with hedgerows. But the enclosure of land that marked the foot
agricultural change in the Tudor times had stopped far short of

'Clar., p. 305.  ?Carl,’s Crom., Letter xiii, ° Arch@ologia, xxxv., p. 321

Cavalier
success,

1643

248 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1643

completion. Midland English scenery was coppice, moor and waste,
alternating with broad naked plough-field, like that of continental
lands to-day. When Rupert swept across the battle-fields of
Edgehill, Marston Moor and Naseby, they were as open as the
field of Waterloo ; a single hedge is a marked feature in the maps
of contemporary historians. Whenever armies met in enclosed
fields like those of Newbury, or orchards like those round Wor-
cester, all depended on the courage with which the pikes and
musketeers contended for each mound and hedge; but on open
ground the infantry of the time were helpless, ‘The proportion
of foot to horse employed in the field armies was not more than
two toone. Yet for all purposes of siege, occupation, storm, and
warfare in broken country, infantry were essential; Charles lost
the North because the foot were destroyed at Marston, and the
South because they were destroyed at Naseby. ‘The horse escaped
from both fields, but could not alone carry on the war.!

Under such general conditions, the conflict, for which the
combatants had only taken position in the autumn of 1642, began
in earnest before the next spring.

In the first year of war, when only well-known statesmen or
professional soldiers had any claim to high command, the rebels
lost two chiefs, who rivalled Essex in political and social position
and surpassed him in military daring. ‘The death of Lord Brooke
in March, 1643, by a bullet from the beleaguered Cathedral of
Lichfield, and of Hampden in June on Chalgrove Field, left
Parliament perforce content with Essex, Waller and Manchester,
until men of no political fame or previous military experience had
time to force their way to the front by sheer talent for war. But
it seemed likely that all would be lost before time and chance
revealed the great soldiers. The Roundheads, who by holding
the towns had at first seemed to hold the country, lost their grip
on North, West and Midlands by a series of disasters so rapid that
in August, 1643, the preparations for the advance of the three
Cavalier armies on London seemed almost complete. One by one
the Roundhead organisations of counties associated for military
defence, were dissolved, and each shire was either governed by its

>See Firth’s C, A. passim for preceding paragiaphs about horse and foot,

1643] THE CIVIL WAR 249

own separate Committee or overrun by the Cavaliers. Cromwell’s
Eastern Association alone remained, henceforth known as “The
Associated Counties,” par excellence. On the break up of the Mid-
land Association, Royalist armies and garrisons were everywhere
intruded, neutralising central England. But in North and West
their successes were more striking and more complete.

The seat of the struggle for Northern England was South The war
Yorkshire. In the East Riding, the great military depét of Hull, re
the first town to close its gates on Charles, was still held from the 1643
sea, and communicated across the Humber with Cromwell in North
Lincoln. In the West Riding, above the steep valleys of Calder
and Aire, a population, leavened by refugees from Flanders and
Holland, dwelt in stone-roofed cottages on the moors, exposed to
every wind, praying and weaving cloth, which they sent on pack-
horses across the grey hills to the Puritan towns of Halifax, Bradford
and Leeds. But between rebel Hull and the rebel clothing district
lay the garden of loyalty—the agricultural plain encircling the
Cathedral City of York. This balance of local power was upset
by armies coming from afar.

From Ripon to the Border, Northern England was Cavalier, and
_ between the departure of the Scots in 1641 and their return in
1644, was free to show its colours. Industrialism, Wesleyanism
and Presbyterianism had not yet arisen in Durham and North-
_ umberland, nor the Quaker influence in Cumberland. Probably
_ half the population was Catholic, and all still lived and moved in
' bygone ideals and memories enshrined in the Border ballads. The
, actual lite of the Borderer was more sordid but scarcely less exciting
than in the old days of the Scottish wars, Moss-troopers descend-
- ing from the head-waters of Redesdale and Tyne “into the low
, countries, carried away horses and cattle,” and were hung sometimes
by scores together at Newcastle and Hexham. Private disputes,
| with a great part of the population, were still decided not by law
| but by single combat.! In such an old world society the Marquis
| of Newcastle enlisted for the King’s service fighters of the right
' Border breed, moormen who won their hay at Lammastide with
sword ever ready to hand. With his “ Northern Papist Army,” con-

taining “ Newcastle’s White Coats,” perhaps the best foot regiment

1, 1 Harl. Misc., iii., pp. 283, 284 (Survey of Newcastle, etc., 1649).

East
Anglia
invaded

Cromwell

250 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1643

raised in the war, the Marquis plunged among the balanced forces
of South Yorkshire, overran the clothing district, chased out the
Fairfaxes (the old Lord, Ferdinand, and his son Sir 'Thomas), and
shut them up within the walls of Hull. The gallant father and
son now held no foot of ground outside the sea stronghold, but they
retained in the hour of defeat the affections of the Yorkshire
Puritans and the confidence of Parliamentary soldiers throughout
all England.

In Midsummer, 1643, Newcastle led his Northerners into the
Associated Counties, through which lay his road to the rendezvous
on the banks of the Thames. But as soon as he entered Lincoln-
shire, he found himself confronted with the small beginnings of
great things.

When Cromwell had returned from Edgehill to resume his
local work, he produced in miniature every part of that system
that was afterwards copied on the larger scale of the New Model
Army. As the agent of the Associated Counties Committee,
which owed the survival of its organisation to his energy alone,
he secured comparatively regular pay for the soldiers—the prime
condition of all other reforms. As the leader of the Puritan
laity in East Anglia, he personally attracted into his service men
to whom religion was not only the cry of party but the passion of
life. As Colonel of his regiment, he would not suffer the Pres-
byterian orthodox to apply dogmatic tests to any soldier of
Puritan temperament, and he insisted that his men should ob-
serve a discipline unknown alike to their enemies, who made
licence a proof of loyalty, and to their fellow-Roundheads, among
whom psalmody was but the shibboleth of common men, living
as common men live. In Cromwell’s strange regiment, plunder,
drunkenness, wenching, even swearing, were abolished by penalties ;
but these penalties only enforced the public and private opinion of
the soldiers, for otherwise such rules would have been as impotent as
they proved when the victorious army attempted to impose them
on the civil population. These horsemen were frecholders or sons
of freeholders. Many of them rode their own horses, in which they
took a special interest. They learnt from Cromwell, as easily as
the gallant Cavaliers learnt from Rupert, to fight in line, to reserve
their fire, and to charge home sword in hand. They learnt also
what the younger man never taught his impatient and ill-dis-

1643) THE CIVIL WAR 251

ciplined squadrons, to halt when the foe scattered, to face about
when he pursued, and to wheel to the support of other troops
when the day was still in doubt. Rupert could only lead, Oliver
could handle, cavalry, and he who could handle cavalry could
win the war.

The war was won, because the pick of East Anglian yeomen,
uncompromisingly hostile to royal power in the State and to any
form of enforced orthodoxy in the Church, volunteered to serve
together in a few troops of horse, under a man who commanded
their confidence for every reason—political, religious, military and
personal. Victory would probably not have fallen to Parliament,
and would certainly not have fallen to the Independents, if Crom-
well had really, as poets sing, spent his early manhood “in his
private garden,” “reservéd and austere”. On the contrary, when
war broke out, he had already for long been the man best loved
and hated on the banks of Ouse and Cam. ‘Love of justice, that
soon turned to hot anger in his working brain, had made him the
people’s champion in days when it was dangerous to be popular.
The property of the poor and the land of the community were
then often seized by “enclosers,” sometimes to enlarge their own
parks, sometimes for real economic improvements, but always with-
out just compensation. The right of the rich man to seize

‘whatever common land he coveted, was a maxim on which the

Star Chamber and the great Parliamentary Lords were agreed,

But Cromwell had stood out on behalf of classes so poor and so
» numerous that the “sacredness of property ’’ was not held to apply

!
i

to what they possessed. On three several occasions, with loss and
danger to himself, he pleaded for those who had no other to plead
for them.!

These services he made dearer to the middle and lower class
by a rough, kindly directness in speech, and a fraternal sympathy
in manner. When the outbreak of war turned him into the
leader and friend of a cavalry formed by voluntary enlistment

among these neighbours of his, he retained a “familiar rustic
) carriage with his soldiers,” and was as full of vivacity and humour

“as another man is when he hath drunken a cup of wine too

1 For the details of Cromwell’s championship of common rights in 1630, 1637
and 1640, see Firth’s Crom., pp. 31-34. For the Star Chamber and enclosures for deer
parks, see Court and Times of Charles I., ii., pp. 60, 61, 181, 182.

252 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1643

much”. In religious conversation the same qualities, playing on
the surface of deepest faith and doubt, prolonged melancholy, and
rare outbursts of joy, won him the hearts of many who laughed at
the frigid, omniscient superiority of the Presbyterian clerics.
It was for these reasons that, when Newcastle entered the
Associated Counties, he found himself opposed by a remarkable
kind of cavalry.
Cavalier The Parliamentary men in London, terrified at Newcastle’s
a Ses advance and pleased at the amount Cromwell had done with
rom the A 6 swicki
North scanty material, as attested in July in a cavalry skirmish near
eee? ; Gainsborough, saw that they ought at once to raise a main army
, for service in East and North. ‘They sent down Manchester into
the Associated Counties to raise there, with the help of Cromwell’s
local knowledge, an army of 10,000 foot and 5,000 horse, to be paid
out of the national taxation. But before the end of harvest enabled
the force to be raised, Newcastle had already turned back. The
slight resistance that Cromwell’s regiments had offered had been
enough to discourage the Northerners, who had not begun with
any strong desire to march far from their homes. The officers on
whom Newcastle most depended, refused to advance on London, so
long as the garrison of Hull was left behind ready to pounce out
on their estates. To besiege this fortress, Newcastle returned to
Yorkshire before the end of August. But Manchester and Cromwell
soon advanced north with their newly raised force, secured the
hold of the Associated Counties on Lincolnshire by another cavalry
action known as “ Winceby-fight ” (October, 1643), and joined hands
with the Fairfaxes across the Humber. These operations not only
made Hull as safe as London, but prepared the way for the recovery
of the North in the following year. On this line, the Cavalier
march on the Thames had failed, owing to Hull, Cromwell, and
the purely local character of Newcastle’s force.

The ad- The Western war of 1643 has the same story as the Northern,
Leann except that there was no Cromwell. Hopton and his Cornish-
West, men overran Devon, Wilts and Dorset as Newcastle and his
1643 Northumbrians overran Yorkshire. Taunton fell like Halifax;

Bristol and Exeter like Leeds and Sheffield. But Plymouth, like
Hull, was maintained by the fleet; and so long as the garrison of
Plymouth threatened their homes, the gallant men of Cornwall and
Devon refused to pursue their unbroken career of victory into

1643] THE CIVIL WAR 253

Hampshire and Kent. Therefore, the farthest point of their
success was Roundway Down, outside Devizes, where they helped
the cavalry from Oxford to cut Waller’s army to pieces (13th July).

On the third line of advance through the Midlands, the force The ad-
in Wales similarly refused to march till Gloucester fell. The throweh
royal strategists saw that, before their three-fold attack on London the Mid-
could take place, the three local armies who were to carry out this ie
great plan must first be satisfied by the capture of the Roundhead
fortresses at their own doors—Hull, Plymouth and Gloucester.

So the King in person sat down before Gloucester (10th August).

The siege was regarded by his followers as a brief, unnecessary Parlia-
delay in the course of a victory no longer doubtful. The renegade hae ae
Lords, who in the middle of August deserted the sinking fortunes 1643
of Parliament and appeared in the Oxford quadrangles to court the
pardon of the fashionable world, were awarded the contemptuous
reception of men who have changed sides too late to affect the
balance of fortune. In the capital Pym and his committee-men
were struggling in deep waters. They could not prevent Parlia-
ment from debating terms that amounted to surrender. On one
day the mob filled Palace Yard to demonstrate against this betrayal
of the public cause (7th August); but on the two following days
women, and men disguised as women, battered at the doors of the
House of Commons, with shouts of “ Peace, Peace,” “ Give us that
dog Pym,” and were only dispersed when the cavalry rode in among
them with drawnswords. The perpetual defeats, the monthly assess-
ments almost amounting to wholesale confiscation of property, the
dislocation of internal trade, made all Londoners frantic to obtain
peace—some by victory, some by compromise, some by surrender.
While such was the divided feeling of the capital, it is likely
that if Gloucester had fallen the provinces would have rallied
to the side that seemed able to end the war, and the advance
on London would have been resumed with every chance of success.

Such at least was the opinion at Westminster. Every hazard The _
must be run to relieve Gloucester, for its fall would involve tie eee ce
fall of London. A last appeal for the “good old cause” wasrelieve
made, and not made in vain. ‘The peace party, finding compromise @!0ucester
impracticable, was not yet in the mood for capitulation. The
Gloucester crusade was preached to the great City wild with
religious zeal, Every shop was closed by order, and the London

Relief of
Glou-
cester,
5th Sep.,
1643

First
battle of
Newbury,
20th Sep,,
1043

254 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1643

prentices marched out in their train-bands. Hitherto only a small
number of the famous City militia had been employed at any
distance, for in their absence London’s trade, the sinews of the
war, must languish. Their campaign at Turnham Green had been
a few days’ holiday. But now they were to follow Essex across
England. If Parliament was to be saved, he must bring them back
soon, and bring them back victorious.

Meanwhile, in Gloucester the Puritan minority, having overawed
their less zealous fellow-townsmen, were valiantly conducting an
almost desperate defence. The end was only delayed because
Charles was hampered at this crisis of his fate by want of muni-
tions and engines of war, the result of want of money and of sea
communication. When it was known that the prentices were
coming to the relief of Gloucester, the infantry and guns were
left im the trenches to press the siege, and Rupert was sent with

the cavalry to prevent the passage of the Cotswold Hills. The

Royalist horse swept that upland cloth district of its thousand
flocks, as they had already on less occasion swept many other
sheep runs in the West, winning for the King’s cause the hostility
of loyal populations. ‘The citizen soldiers had therefore to advance
without provisions over an open plateau, where the agricultural
land was “all champion,” that is, unenclosed by hedges, and where
consequently they were subject to fierce attacks from Rupert’s
cavalry. But Essex had troops of all arms, including on this
occasion an infantry, who were not rascals gathered by the press-
gang, but “citizens of good account”. Arrived at last on the
steep edge of the Cotswolds above Cheltenham, they saw across
the plain the roofs and towers of Gloucester in the morning light,
and the long columns of besiegers winding away from their burn-
ing camp."

The object of the great march had been achieved, but it re-
mained for Essex to bring the citizen army home. The Cavaliers,
in full force, blocked his retreat at Newbury. Already short of
food, he must cut his way through, or surrender in a few days.
As the fields round this town were much enclosed, a fierce soldiers’-
battle was fought in the lanes and ditches at push of pike all day
long, until the enemy could be detected only by the flash of his

1Clar., pp. 421-27 (and p. 985, ale iii.). G. (C. W.), i, pp. 184-86, 202-6,
King’s Pamphlets, B.M., 126, E.

1643] THE CIVIL WAR 255
musket through the darkened hedge. Then both sides flung

themselves down to sleep among the slain, each regiment in the
ground it held. Not to have conquered meant destruction for the
Roundheads. Their generals waited uneasily for dawn. But if
Essex was short of bread, Charles was short of powder. At dawn
the royal army had disappeared. On the 25th of September,
scarcely five weeks after they had marched out, the prentices re-
turned to their sweethearts in triumphant array.

On the heaths and under the hedgerows of Newbury many
chiefs of the Cavaliers, and sons of grand old houses lay cut off in
their prime. Among the hundreds slain whom memory has long
forgotten, one is mourned by imagination still. Falkland, who could
not endure to see England wasted year after year in endless war,
to be crushed at last under the tyranny of rebel and Puritan, nor
yet to witness the triumph of despotism with the cause he had
chosen but never loved, adopted the dress and manners of Hamlet
in his melancholy, and sought death every day beneath the walls
of Gloucester, At last at Newbury he rode alone into a Round-
head regiment, not to slay but to beslain. Hyde lived on, to bear
for thirty years the weight of miseries which Falkland had refused
any longer to share; and raised to the memory of the friend
who had gone so long before him, a lasting monument of English
prose.!

But on the side of Parliament the noblest men desired the
completest victory. Cromwell was no more than Falkland a
stranger to doubt and melancholy, but they were not the lords of
his soul; and it was not’his own death that he squeht amid the
enemy’s ranks.

The Parliament men were the nationalist party—a fact by which The Scot-
they gained many adherents against the King, who was always beh oe 4
in correspondence with Dutch, tenes: French, Powe and Catholic ne ce
Irish, for military aid which his detractors could always announce ae ES
to be coming, but which never came, The King was defeated by 1643
these phantom armies which he himself invoked. Yet his nationalist
enemies, in the hour of their extreme need, sought one foreign
alliance and secured it with decisive results. During the Gloucester

1 Clar., pp 430-44.

/

256 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1643

campaign the Parliament had come to terms with “their brethren
of Scotland”. The Scots were then looked on as foreigners, and by
no one more than by the opponents of the House of Stuart. The
Puritan Parliament had refused to be led by James I. into a union
of the two kingdoms. In later years Cromwell declared that Eng-
land had better be conquered by her own Royalists than by the
Scottish Puritans. Yet, again and again, fear of despotism drove
the patriots to restrain their natural sentiments and to hail the
Scots as fellow-countrymen, until the repeated process had so far
altered public sentiment that the Whigs under Queen Anne carried
the Act of Union.

The English subjects of the House of Stuart had first observed
the real political and religious character of the Scottish nation at
the time of the Bishops’ Wars (1639-40). In the early months of
the Long Parliament the Scots had been popular, so long as
danger, novelty, gratitude, and mutual ignorance continued to
combine the two peoples. Security and closer acquaintance soon
brought about a coldness, which lasted from the paying off of the
Scottish army of occupation, until the late summer of 1643. In
that season of peril, Puritans on both sides of the Tweed saw that
if they were to survive severally, they must unite once more. In
return for the military assistance of Scotland, the English Parlia-
mentarians bound themselves by a Solemn League and Covenant
to maintain the Church in Scotland as now established, and to
reform religion in England “according to the word of God” and
“the example of the best reformed Churches”. How far they
hereby gave up their own liberty will appear in the sequel. But
it may be observed that during the first year of war they had
preferred to run great risks rather than put themselves again
under any form of obligation to “their brethren of Scotland”.

Death of Pym’s last work was done. He had formed a compact English
ee ies party, prepared to fight for the sovereignty of Parliament and the
~ Puritan religion. He had guided that party through the disastrous
summer of 1643, when the presence of a capable and trusted leader

had been needed to ward off destruction. In the autumn, he pre-

pared by the Scottish alliance for offensive operations which should

turn the scale at the opening of the next year. In December he

died, and was buried with State honours in the Abbey of the Kings.

Yor his colleagues knew that it was he who had saved Parliament.

1644] THE CIVIL WAR 257

But they did not know that he had saved it to be the mother of
Parliaments, and to be the origin of many liberties more free than ©
_that Puritan liberty for which he had caused the sword to be
drawn, though surely of none more deeply loved or more bravely
won.

In January the Scottish army entered Northumberland. In the Scots
spring they forced their way into South Yorkshire,i where their 78°",
arrival created a revolution as sudden as that caused by the incursion England,
of the northern Cavaliers twelve months before. As Fairfax had J" 1°44
then been shut up in Hull, Newcastle in his turn was besieged in
York. The all-important question whether Manchester and Crom-
well could be spared to join the Scots in the reduction of the North,
depended on the opening of the campaign in the South, where the
Royalists were preparing to advance into the Home Counties.

Their prospects seemed good, until, owing to the indiscipline of

their colonels, which increased as the war went on, they were drawn

into battle at a tactical disadvantage near Cheriton in Hampshire

(29th March), and there received a check from Waller, which
encouraged Parliament to send their East Anglian forces north of

the Humber. The Scottish and Yorkshire armies were therefore Siege of
joined in the trenches before York by the army of the Eastern Meg ie
Association under Manchester and his great lieutenant. But the 1644
men who next summer broke day by day into castles and walled

cities and rejoiced greatly when they went up against the breach,

had not yet mastered the arts of siege and storm. Again and

again they were hurled back from those medizval battlements of
York, of which one long curtain still looks out over the river

gate, towards the meadows where the Roundheads planted their
cannon in vain.

Meanwhile, Rupert, at the height of his reputation, was coming
to the rescue, with an army very different from the prentices who had
raised the siege of Gloucester. Half his forces were cavalry. For
| as he passed northwards through the West, men of spirit, who could

still anywhere find horses, swords and pistols, flocked in from dull
_ garrisons, and from households that had long been neutral, each
gentleman burning for the honour to be one of Rupert’s Cavaliers.
His route led him through the scene of the Lancashire war, where,
isolated from the strategic, religious, and social conditions of the
_ larger conflict, the Puritan clothing towns were holding down the

17

258 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1644

Rupert in rural districts and their Catholic inhabitants. Rupert’s passage

ee brought momentary deliverance and revenge to the papist squires.

May-June According to the law of storm that was the rule of war on the
Continent, but not the custom of war in England, except where
the contest lay between a Catholic and Protestant population, the
Cavaliers massacred the defenders of Bolton, and indulged them-
selves at the expense of the inhabitants in the worst horrors of sack.
Followed by the curses and prophecies of the Bible readers of
Lancashire, they rode off over the low mountain passes by Skipton,
and entered the plain of York.

Marston Rupert outmanceuvred his formidable enemies, and succeeded

ia in relieving the city without a battle. The besiegers struck camp.
But, as might be expected, the all-victorious general of three-and-
twenty followed up their retreat, and offered them the battle which
they so much desired on the moor by Long Marston, eight miles
west of York. Never before or after did either King or Parliament
put such numerous forces into one field. The Roundheads brought
into line three armies—those of Scotland, of North England, and
of East Anglia. Together they numbered 20,000 foot and '7,000
horse. Rupert and Newcastle had 11,000 foot and about 7,000
splendid cavalry, who, until that fatal summer evening, could boast
themselves invincible. Yet Rupert himself had listened with re-
spect to strange tales from those who had met the East Anglian
troopers in their own country. “Is Cromwell there?” he asked,
as he viewed the Roundhead line. After the battle, with the
loving familiarity which one good soldier often assumes with the
person of another, he bestowed on his conqueror the immortal
nickname of “ Ironsides ”.

The sun was falling low, the Puritans had struck up the evening
psalm, Rupert had retired to supper, and Newcastle to his coach
to smoke, when suddenly the three Roundhead armies rolled down
off the high corn lands where they stood, on to the moor, where the
strength of monarchy in England had been gathered to a head and
exposed at one stroke to ruin. On the Royalist left, Goring drove
Fairfax’s horse off the field. In the centre, the Yorkshire foot gave
way. With them went half the ten regiments of Scots; but the
rest stood firm in the rout. Shoulder to shoulder still, each man

1Chetham Soc., Civil War in Lancs., pp. 188-98 and passim; and Lancashire
Lieutenancy, ii., passim.

1644] THE CIVIL WAR 259

grasped his pike, the ancient weapons of Scotland that the
descendants of the men of Bannockburn and Flodden, else little
skilled in modern war, well knew how to use. Not in vain they
stayed to die for Christ’s Crown and Covenant, for their stand
decided the fate of the two kingdoms.

Far on their left wing, beyond the tide of routed foot, Cromwell
was leading 2,500 of his own horse, followed by 800 ill-mounted
Scots. Both sides were well accustomed to charge home; only
after long hacking of swords on armour, man to man, were Rupert’s
cavalry driver. from the field. Wheeling round to the relief of
the Scottish pikemen, Cromwell, by a series of well-planned charges,
cleared the moor, as the last glimmer of daylight followed the sunken
sun. ‘The Border Whitecoats fiercely rejected quarter from the
Scots and died to a man, as though it had been some old day of
pride between Douglas and Percy. When dawn came up again
after the short summer night, thrilling the weary victors with ex-
ultation, the yet unuttered thought then first, perhaps, had birth
among some whom Cromwell had enlisted, that God had called
them not merely to be troopers for Parliament in their own fen
country, but to deliver England from kings, and themselves from
all priests and all Churches.

Rupert, gathering 6,000 horse, escaped out of Yorkshire by
the Western dales. The rest of the army had dissolved. York
surrendered. England north of Trent was recovered at a stroke.!

Although a large proportion of the upper classes had by this
time been compelled to choose sides, the want of enthusiasm which

The sur-
render at
Lost-

the bulk of the population had shown in the first year of the war, withiel,

developed during the third year into hatred of the rival taskmasters.
The assessments which maintained the army of Parliament, the
plunderings on which Cavalier troops and garrisons subsisted, as
they grew ever more oppressive, alienated the good-will of all save
the strongest partisans. In such a state of feeling, victory, and
with victory the loyalty lavished on the peace-bringer, can be
snatched by a comparatively small body of able men who love their
cause the more as the enthusiasm of others declines. But in the
summer of 1644 there were not enough of such men in Southern
England. Neither Essex nor his troops had the spirit of those who

1 For the numbers, value and position of the various troops at Marston Moor,
see Mr. Firth’s article, R. H, S., 1898, pp. 17-78,

and Sep.,
1644

Need for
reorgan-
isation

apparent

260 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1644

had turned the day at Marston. After the great news came from
the North, instead of seizing the moment to destroy the royal forces,
he sought to overrun the royal territories. He led his men into
Cornwall, the one part of the West where the population would still
turn out to defend King and County. His means of subsistence and
his communications with London were soon cut off. Seeking to
re-establish them by sea, he marched his hungry troops towards
the long tidal creek of Fowey, whose reaches of sheltering woodland
were well known to merchants homeward-bound, as a safe refuge
from the storms and pirates of the Channel. On the moors above,
and among the steep lanes sloping down to the water side, Charles
and his Cornishmen established a circle of posts round the rebel
army. Essex himself escaped by taking ship to London; his
cavalry had broken through the line of blockade at Lostwithiel,
and ridden off by night; but his foot were starved into the sur-
render of their arms and munitions. If the disaster had befallen
him twelve months before at Newbury—as it so nearly did—the
balance of war might then have been decided. It was now only
restored.

The unavailing efforts made by Parliament to prevent the ca-
tastrophe had served to show the weakness of their military system.
Waller had been called on to save Essex. His utmost endeavours
had failed to raise a mobile force. ‘The men pressed for his service
by the various County Committees ran off as soon as they had seen
the bottom of his war-chest. Hundreds of soldiers wandered about
from shire to shire, from regiment to regiment, from Roundheads
to Cavaliers, and back from Cavaliers to Roundheads, in search of
more regular pay or greater licence to plunder. The system of
short enlistments, effected through the agency of County Committees
or private individuals, had broken down. The failure to relieve
Essex was the crisis which forced on the remedy of the disease. It
was Waller who first told the Houses that they could not win,
until they had a standing army “merely of their own”. In the
winter this suggestion of a New Model was pushed through by
Cromwell, It was his first and last appearance as a Parliamentary
leader on the floor of the House, but none of England’s lords of
debate ever produced in one session more decisive results.

In all effective movements of army reform, the adoption of a
new organisation goes with the employment of a new type of man.

1644} THE CIVIL WAR 261

And because the New Model turned on a question of men, it also Army re-
raised and decided the question of religion. For the men who ca
made the best privates, and the officers who were best fitted to differences
carry out the proposed reorganisation, claimed a liberty of worship
which their less efficient comrades, led by the clergy and the peace
party, were unwilling to grant. The split among the Puritans
on the question of toleration was as old as the reign of Elizabeth.
First the Brownists and the Mennonites, then the Independents
and the Baptists, had declared against the existence of a State
Church, and in favour of freedom of thought and worship. In
England the Bishops had persecuted them to the death, and the
official Puritans had refused to receive them in Massachusetts.
But these men, who alone among their contemporaries deserve
the name of Free Churchmen, had multiplied by hundreds a week,
from the moment that the meeting of the Long Parliament had
abolished the power of the old Church without setting up the
new. England was for a few years alive with many things other

than the orthodox religions.
The official Puritans were driven frantic with rage by this

mutiny on board the good ship Reformation, just as she was coming
into harbour. Yet even among the State Churchmen who were
agreed not to tolerate dissent, there was grave difference of opinion
as to what it was that they ought to force upon the nation. In 1641
Pym and his majority had deliberately rejected the Presbyterian
scheme jand voted for an Erastian State Church governed by Par-
liamentary Commissioners. The disappointed Presbyterians had
denounced the Parliamentarians as lawyers and worldly-wisemen,
“extraordinarily aflrighted to come under the yoke of ecclesiastical
discipline”. But since the beginning of the war the clerical party
had recovered ground. The Westminster Assembly of Divines,
summoned to give Parliament specialist advice on the true methods
of Reformation, had been a strong influence in favour of profes-
sional theology and the clerical element. ‘The Covenant, swallowed
in 1643 as the price of Scottish military alliance, bound Parliament
morally, though not verbally, to establish the Presbyterian system
which it had once rejected. For the Scots at least interpreted the
promise made by their allies, to follow “the example of the best
reformed Churches,” to mean clerical synods and the discipline of
Geneva. Therefore, from the taking of the Covenant, history

Military

career of
Indepen-
dents en-
dangered

Attitude of
the Com-

mons

262 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARIS [1644

applies the name “Presbyterian” to the majority of the House of
Commons, and to the English party that supported a Puritan
State Church, although two-thirds of its members would have been
regarded by all true followers of Knox as rank Erastians.

Thus in the autumn of 1644, though nothing had yet been
decided by the two Houses, there was a clear intention of erecting
a Presbyterian form of Church government, without any inside or
outside place left either for Anglican or Independent. 'The ten-
dency of the hour at Westminster reacted in the camps and gar-
risons of Parliament. On County Committees the Presbyterians
applied the test of orthodoxy to candidates for the public service,
while the Independents could only press the claims of their friends
on the poorer plea of efficiency. In the Eastern Association alone
could the sectarians get fair promotion, and there even their strength
lay not in numbers but in ability and character. The clergy and
officials were in most places combined against them. Cromwell
and the Hutchinsons saw day by day, in field and garrison, how the
common cause was being wrecked by the imbecile pedantry of the
orthodox. At the crisis of a siege, some gunner who had stayed
away from Church, or spoken against tithes and steeple-houses,
would be put under arrest ; or some Anabaptist corporal, who had
been caught preaching, would be sent home to his farm. If next
morning the gun was less well pointed, or if a dozen of the best
troopers went off after the corporal, it in no way troubled the
Presbyterian clergy and their maintainers, who had learnt to
comfort themselves for want of success by talking wise nonsense
about an “accommodation with his Majesty”.

And so, if the Independent chiefs failed to carry Parliament
with them in the winter session of 1644-45, the next spring would
probably see the dismissal of the soldiers of all ranks who were
most able and most willing to finish the war. The majority of the
House of Commons held a middle position ; Presbyterian though
it now was in name, it still hated Scottish orthodoxy as much as
English heresy, and clerical rule as much as sectarian toleration,
The members hoped, as soon as the war was over, to gratify the
keen sense of their own virtue and importance by persecuting
sectaries through their own Commissioners; but they had no wish
that the black-coated tribe, whom they themselves had rescued from
poverty and persecution under Laud, should in the hour of danger

1644] THE CIVIL WAR 263

weed the fighting regiments of all the best men. Since the war
began, the House of Commons, like all assemblies of simple-minded
countrymen to whom the disposal of great wealth and power is

suddenly committed, had grown to exceed in worldly wisdom.
From Speaker Lenthall downwards, many of the degenerate suc-
cessors of Eliot, Hampden and Pym, dipped their hands in bribes,
and in the rich spoil of their enemies that should have gone to
relieve the over-burdened public. Such men were determined not
to risk the sweets of power for the pleasure of persecuting the
sects; they knew that unless they commissioned Cromwell to beat
Charles, they would too late regret their folly, at the foot of the
gallows or in the hold of the emigrant ship. To escape the
vengeance of the Cavaliers and the interference of the Scots, they
armed the sectaries, intending, however, to throw them over as
soon as they had finished the war.

The New Model debates were ushered in by a personal attack Cromwell
on Manchester. Since Essex had returned wholly discredited ae ‘
from Cornwall, Manchester was the chief representative of the old Catia in
school of society, politics, religion and war, which had begun but ment,
which could not end the Great Rebellion. At the second battle Nov--Dec.,
of Newbury at the close of the last campaign (October, 1644), sity
the unwillingness of Manchester to fight had prevented the de-
cisive victory, which the activity of his lieutenants had prepared.
Cromwell, therefore, rose in his seat to accuse his superior of
backwardness to fight, deriving from unwillingness to defeat the
King. The Scots supported the Earl, and demanded the dis-
missal of “the darling of the sectaries”. The few Lords who
still represented their order at Westminster were Presbyterian,
and were further alienated by the disrespect which Cromwell
openly expressed for rank and social position; the fellow judged
soldiers only by their service, and was ready to accept on his merits
any “ plain russet-coated captain, who knows what he fights for and
loves what he knows”. Their Lordships felt that the air around
them, especially in the neighbourhood of this man, was becoming
tainted with a spirit dangerous to hereditary pretensions. The
Commons, on the other hand, were doubtfully inclining to the side
of the best soldier. A rupture between Lords and Commons,
between Scotland and England was imminent. Cromwell saw that
to crush Manchester on such terms would be a Pyrrhic victory,

The Self

264 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1645

He therefore withdrew the charges just as they were on the point
of success. But they had done their work. ‘The personal attack
was only dropped on the tacit understanding that a real measure
of Army Reform should be passed, in which the Independent chiefs
should have a secure footing. ‘To this the Lords sullenly con-
sented.

A Self-Denying Ordinance, by which members of either House

Denying were to resign all military commands (without however being pre-

Ordinance

and New Cluded from reappointment), was chosen as the most complete and

Model,
Dec,
1644-
March,
1645

Change
not com-
plete

the least offensive method of getting rid of all the old gang. The
younger Fairfax combined the reputation which he had won in the
North as a dashing soldier with that of a politician who had com-
mitted himself to neither section: he was made commander-in-chief.
The post of lieutenant-general, which involved the command of the
horse, was left open till the moment was ripe for the appointment
of his friend Cromwell. As the right of promotion was at the
same time vested wholly in the commander-in-chief, the position of
sectarian soldiers in an army so commanded was safe enough.

Not less important than the selection of generals was the
formation -of the New Model Army which they were to command.
A great standing army paid by Parliament itself, and absolutely
under the control of one commander, was substituted for various
local forces, ‘The remaining soldiers who had not yet deserted the
standards of Waller, Essex and Manchester were merged into this
unit, and 8,000 fresh men were raised by the press-gang. The
New Model, thus constituted, contained 22,000 out of some 80,000
men who were fighting for Parliament in the year 1645. Financial
arrangements were made by which more regular pay was secured,
as the first condition of more regular discipline. Success in the
central campaign of the war would not in the coming year depend
on the personal jealousies and whims, the religious intolerance and
the political apathy of local magnates and County Committees, nor
on the unwilling adhesion of vagabond soldiers to a cause that
appealed neither to their hearts nor their pockets.

Yet for all these immediate improvements, more than half the
infantry of the New Model, in the first year of its formation, were
pressed men. And not half of its total force were Independents.
A whole regiment of foot mutinied when their sectarian colonel
was moved to speak a few words to their condition. But preach-

1645] THE CIVIL WAR 265

ing officers found more willing audiences among the cavalry. The
old troopers of the Eastern Association, who formed the greater
part of the horse in the New Model, had enlisted to win themselves
civil and religious freedom, and they had in them a spirit which
soon leavened the whole army. Two years afterwards, when the
other Parliamentary forces were disbanded, the New Model remained
as the instrument of the Independents and the Republicans.

Thus in the year 1645, when Presbyterianism was first officially
announced as the State religion, its real power received at that
very moment a blow which prevented it from ever obtaining force
in England.

The spring was spent in getting the new army under weigh.
In the summer it fairly entered into the war under conditions at
last favourable to a decisive issue. At last the civilian English, who
had begun the war like landsmen rigging out a ship, had learnt, in
their own favourite school of experience and practical necessity,
how to evolve a perfect fighting machine, which was soon to show
itself superior to the professional warriors of Europe. But in 1645
the change had only begun. As yet but a fourth part of the
forces in the service of Parliament had regular pay, good discipline,
good organisation and fine generals. But the other side had no
such force at all. ‘The Cavaliers, though they might at one time
have hoped to carry London at a rush and so end the war, could
never have created such a machine as the New Model. ‘They had
not the money with which to buy discipline, nor the public spirit
with which to effect reorganisation, They had loyalty, courage and
private ambition, but not the sense of commonweal, which caused
Lords and Commons, English and Scots, Presbyterians and In-
dependents, Cromwell and Manchester, to sink private ambitions
and quarrels until victory was secured, and to compromise differ-

ences far more grave than those which divided Digby and Rupert.

At the beginning of the war there had been little to choose
between the two sides in the matter of plunder and ill discipline.
But the Royalists, for want of money and self-restraint, had

_ become steadily worse; the Puritans, especially those of the New
| Model, were becoming rapidly better.

= — —S—— |
—_—

1 For the preceding paragraphs, see Barclay, Gooch, Shaw, Hutchinson passim,
Firth’s Crom., pp. 112-23, and C. A., pp. 30-36, 55, 56, 318, 319. G, (C. W.), ii,
pp. 23, 58-59, 82-84, 177-96.

Round-
heads and
Cavaliers;
new
prospects

Naseby,

266 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1645

Those under the King’s commanders (Clarendon observed with stern
regret) grew insensibly into all the licence, disorder, and impiety, with
which they had reproached the rebels ; and they again, into great discipline,
diligence, and sobriety; which begat courage and resolution in them, and
notable dexterity in achievements, and enterprises. Insomuch as one side
seemed to fight for monarchy, with the weapons of confusion, and the other
to destroy the King and Government, with all the principles and regularity
of monarchy.

In the summer of 1645 even the superiority in plan of campaign

14th June, went over to the Roundheads. Hitherto the Cavaliers had had

1645

the advantage of a general plan of advance on London. London
was their objective. ‘To take it would end the war. The Round-
heads had no such objective. To take Oxford would be to capture
an outpost. Essex, Waller and Manchester had wandered about
aimlessly enough, sometimes as far as Cornwall. But the generals
of the New Model saw that their true objective was the King’s
army in the field. If that were once defeated, all his garrisons
could soon be taken, and all his recruiting-grounds overrun.
The strategy that led to Naseby was no more based on geographical
considerations, than was Nelson’s hunt for Villeneuve and his “ fleet
in being” through all the waters of the world. During the first
few weeks, indeed, the politicians of Westminster directed the
movements of the New Model, as they had done those of Essex,
in accordance with the old territorial ideas of strategy. But in
June, frightened by the unimpeded activity of the King’s troops,
they at length gave their commander-in-chief the complete military
freedom that he and his successor ever afterwards enjoyed. Fairfax
at once sought out Charles, who was wandering about in the
Midlands uncertain whether he dared march north to effect a
junction with the victorious Montrose; the New Model came upon
the King in the rolling uplands of Northamptonshire, between
Market Harborough and Naseby. Superior in numbers, in cavalry,
and in leadership of cavalry, the Roundheads scattered one wing
of the Royalist horse, while the other, under Rupert, went far in
wild pursuit. The deserted foot stood firm for awhile against a
fierce onslaught from all sides, until Fairfax and Cromwell them-
selves led the way into the thick of the pikes. All the King’s
infantry and all his munitions of war were taken.

1Clat., p. 444.

1645] THE CIVIL WAR 267

The result surprised many Cavaliers and many Roundheads ;
for it had been well known that the infantry of the New Model
were mostly raw recruits, of whom the best were supposed to
have deserted from the royal standards. Yet the event had been
in less doubt than the sway of battle on Marston Moor, and had
been more confidently expected in the breast of one who knew the
veterans of the cavalry :—

When I saw the enemy (wrote Cromwell) draw up and march in gallant
order towards us, and we a company of poor, ignorant men, to seek how to
order our battle: the General having commanded me to order all the horse,
I could not, riding alone about my business, but smile out to God in praises,
in assurance of victory, because God would, by things that are not, bring to
naught things thatare. Of which I had great assurance, and God did it.!

Though he had lost everything else, Charles had brought off his Charles's

cavalry strangely intact from the field, And he still had a force of PPsiHon
all arms engaged, under Goring, in the plunder of friend and foe Naseby
in the South-west. He ought never to have separated from that
army, and now his last hope was to unite his remaining troops.
But the false strategy of retaining the area of occupation un-
diminished had taken such a hold on his mind, that he carried the
survivors of Naseby to the Welsh border, and even refused to call
into the field the scores of petty garrisons with which his generals
had saddled the country at a time when foot soldiers had been
plenty. He thus condemned himself and his large body-guard of
horse to a year of futile wanderings, which declined by insensible
steps into the flittings of a fugitive.

Trusting the Scots to watch the King’s movements, Fairfax Langport,
carried the New Model into the South-west to deal with the last Sele
royal army. He came upon Goring in a strong position at Lang-
port. The Cavaliers were drawn up on the crest of a steep hill,
covered by the marshes of the Yeo, across which ran a deep, narrow
ford. If Goring had kept his guns, he could not have been driven
out of the position, but with the plunderer’s instinct he sent off his
train to safety in Bridgewater. The fire of the Roundhead artillery
was able to cover the passage of the ford for about six hundred
horse. They struggled up the hill by a deep lane into the middle
of Goring’s position, and charged. After a brief strnggle the army
in battle array turned and fled before them. The infantry were

1 Carl.’s Crom., App. 9.

Siege —
operations
of the
New
Model

The Cava-
liers ready
for peace

268 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1645

overtaken and surrendered. ‘The victors broke out aloud into
prophecies and raptures: it seemed to them that God had put
fear into the hearts of their enemies, causing the strong men to
throw away the spear, and the men of war to fly before a troop.
Clearly the Lord had chosen them as His instruments for some high
purpose. ‘The idea of a special call, which inspired them when the
war was over to such strange political activity, took strong hold
on the cavalry that day. But the panic really signified the utter
demoralisation to which a long course of plunder, and despair of
winning the war, had brought the once gallant Cavaliers.

The King’s last field army was no more. The horse took refuge
beyond the Exe and the Tamar, where their enemies wisely left them
alone for six months, till they had plundered the very Cornish out
of their loyalty. 'The New Model turned back to North and East.
At last the time had come for them to reduce piecemeal the gar-
risons and territories of the King. They soon discovered that
they had a special call to siege operations. Though they might
have found difficulty in conducting the year-long approach to
scientific fortresses like Breda, no army in the world could have
reduced a greater number of walled towns and a larger tale of
castles and manors in a Jess number of weeks. Before the walls of
a city like Bristol or Winchester their method was a summons,
followed if necessary by battery; then as soon as the breach
appeared, another summons, which the governor, under pressure
from the burghers, generally accepted ; if he did not, the stormers
burst in before the next morning’s light. For the siege of a manor
house, it was generally enough to blow in the gate by a petard,
or to storm the parish church, whose tower often commanded the
patron’s roof at a few yards’ distance. Though Langport was the
only battle of the war in which the result had been largely affected
by field artillery, the excellent siege-train which Parliament pur-
chased for the New Model shortened the war by many months.!

During these operations the Cavaliers were seldom in a mood
to throw away their lives in useless resistance, or the Roundheads
to refuse them terms of safety and honour. Even at Basing House
(14th October, 1645), after a bloody assault, more than half the gar-
vison, who had deliberately chosen death, were spared; although,

1 Firth’s C. A., pp. 164, 170,177. Sprigge passim.

1645) THE CIVIL WAR 269

as the defenders of Basing were Catholics, both sides showed an
animosity that was quite exceptional at that stage of the war.
The Protestant Cavaliers desired peace. Rupert, who if he was a
_ bad constitutionalist was a good soldier, and was becoming a good
Englishman, had as early as July, 1645, advised the King to capitu-
late. He spoke the sense of the party which he had taught to
fight, the gallant gentlemen who were now everywhere surrendering
their manor houses at the second summons, or sorrowfully paying
off their soldiers with good wishes and old campaigning jokes.
For the fierce Royalist sentiment which nothing could appease
after the sequestrations, the King’s execution, and the rule of the
major-generals, did not yet exist in the minds of the gentry. Most
of them had not yet suffered sequestration, and hoped to escape it ;
at least they could save their estates from further ruin in war by
placing them under the orderly protection of the New Model. And
at this moment there was no popular sympathy among the masses
to give their Royalism an atmosphere in which to thrive. 'The Club- The Club-
men, as the infuriated peasants of Somerset and Devon were called, ™°"
who turned out to defend their cattle against both parties, did most
harm to the stragglers of Goring; under the firm and equitable
treatment of Fairfax and Cromwell, they soon learnt to welcome
an army that paid its way. In Dorset, Wilts and Hants the
Clubmen were more under the influence of the Cavalier gentry,
because the royal troops no longer infested those districts.2 But
everywhere Englishmen were ready to accept peace from the men
who held it in their hand.

At the same time nationalist feeling was more than ever
alienated from the King, whose captured infantry turned out to
be Welshmen, whose only hope lay in the conquest of English-
speaking Scotland by Celtic tribesmen under Montrose ; and whose
letters arranging for the importation of Danish, French and native
Irish armies, one after the other fell into the hands of Parliament
during the last year of the war. The Cavaliers themselves had no
wish to fight with such allies. The Roundheads outraged human-
ity, but not popular sentiment, when they refused quarter to Irish
Catholics found in arms in England. The brute instincts of the

1 Civil War in Hampshire (1882), pp. 234-46.
2 Clar., pp. 556-59. Civil War in Hampshire, pp. 216-20. G. (C. W.), ii, pp.
264, 265, 273, 305, 313:

270 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1646

natural man, which the Puritan warrior thought that he had
tamed within his breast, were often aroused in special forms by the
very religious principles which restrained him from indulging the
greed, cruelty and lust of the ordinary soldier. The victors of
Naseby massacred 100 Irish women whom they found among the
baggage, and gashed the faces of the English harlots. ‘The Round-
heads found it their duty and pleasure to slay any Catholic priest
who fell into their hands, and when they scented a witch, they were
sometimes capable of putting a woman up against the nearest wall
and blowing out her brains without trial or law.’ But women whose
nationality, character, or dealings with Satan did not render them
suspect, had nothing to fear ; non-combatants welcomed the arrival
of the New Model; and its chiefs granted such easy conditions to
the vanquished that the laying-down of arms assumed almost a
friendly character.
Reduction | When at last Fairfax turned to the reduction of Devon and
Jae ke Cornwall, the ex-Royalist population helped him to secure what was
March, left of the Cavalier bands. The poor fellows for the most part had
ae of no ambition but to get safe home, whither they were sent off, each
June, 1646 with a present of twenty shillings in his pocket. On 20th June
Oxford capitulated on generous terms, by which Fairfax and
Cromwell saved many Royalist grandees from the revenge of
more malignant foes.”

Thus, in little more than a year, all that soldiers can do to lay
the foundations of peace by victory, justice and mercy, had been
done by the New Model. The spirit of Puritan warfare could not
do more than this, it could not effect a settlement where all the
conditions of a settlement were wanting. But it had secured for
ever that monarchy in England should not be a despotism. Our
island had been cut free from the political history of the continent.
No King should ever triumph here by the sword. When royalty
was restored, it was restored by the restoration of Parliament.
And because under a Parliamentary rule, however intolerant it may
be for awhile, every religious and political party has hope of
asserting sooner or later its place in the national life, there never

1G, (C. W.), ii., p. 364. King’s Pamphlets, 126, E. 69, for the witch of New-

jury.
2G, (C. W.), ili., pp. 58-69, 79-81, 108, 109. Firth’s Crom. vt 1
pp. 582-85. For Oxford terms, see Sprigge, pp. 260-83. TE hae ae sae

1646) THE CIVIL WAR 271

has been that exodus of freemen from England, that abandonment
of the hope of liberty, which must .haye followed the armed victory
of Charles I.

When the Civil War was brought to an end under the com-
mand of Fairfax, Cromwell was not yet “our chief of men,” but it
was due to him that the Civil War had been won. And so, in our
own day, men have agreed to let his statue stand on guard out-
side the doors of the Parliament which he saved, holding the Bible
and the sword, the two instruments by which that salvation was
wrought. English freedom had been won by wisdon, by valour,
and by chance.

272 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1646 |

CHAPTER IX
PARLIAMENT, ARMY AND KING, 1646-49

— by industrious valour climb
To ruin the great work of time,
And cast the Kingdoms old
Into another mould.—(Ode to Cromwell), Manveuu.

Strange HE government of civilised nations, especially of England, has
eee often been the government of custom, opposed alike to brute
life,

force and to rational reform. A civilised nation rides safe above
the two enemies of custom, Constraint or Necessity on the one
hand, and Free Will upon the other; it detests both the Tyrant
and the Innovator. The most successful politicans are men of
talent who hold by the common ways of thought. But between
the end of the First Civil War and the Restoration, the governors
of England were men of a different type; they desired to pursue
ends not customary, and they held power by no prescriptive right.
The rule of Kings was dead, and Parliament failed to establish its
new claim to obedience. As a vacuum was thus left in sovereignty,
strange things rushed in. Toleration, Republicanism, abolition of
tithes and State Church, Universal Suffrage, the “Career open to
talents,” the rule of the Saints—ideas opposed by the King, Parlia-
ment and nation—were advocated by the men who grasped supreme
power ; while underneath the tumult, the Quakers, in the same spirit
of change and novelty, though by far other means, won many to
new ways of thought and life. It seemed that we were to be
governed by the Free Will and rational choice of the few strongest
men, who by a rare coincidence happened also to be the few most
active thinkers,

But Free Will had to share the throne that she had usurped
from custom, with her own arch foe Necessity. The prime need of

1646-60

1646] PARLIAMENT, ARMY AND KING 273

man to avert social chaos and utter destruction, continually rose to
thwart each attempt to establish the ideals. The rival claims of
Necessity and Free Will give an appearance of double dealing to
the actions of all who have been pushed off the middle path of
use and wont. In the mind of Cromwell we see this constant war
between Need and Principle, but it raged in every town and village
of the island that he held coerced. Poor lazy custom seemed
trampled dead in the dust of that fierce strife.

This joint rule and mutual antagonism of the two primeval
forces so seldom present in the government of civilised nations,
appeared again in the French Revolution. But Free Will then
was the will not of the few but of the great majority. So there,
after horrible convulsions, Necessity was subdued, and Free Will
established a new régime, somewhat according to her own thought
and fancy. In France the old custom was really trampled
dead.

But in England the ideals that grew up in the minds of the
victors of Naseby, and had their day of power, were utterly swept
away again, when it had been proved that a few enthusiasts could
not evoke a settlement either out of brute force or out of their
own divided counsels of perfection, The English thereupon went
back to many of the old ways, and the spirit of custom resumed
its reign. Only, in restored custom, Parliament loomed larger
than before.

That Parliamentary sovereignty did not at once succeed to Intoler-
royal sovereignty, that room was left for a while to the enthusiasts seats
and breakers of custom, was due to the want of constructive states- Parlia-
manship among the members of the Long Parliament. Pym and =
Hampden had known how to organise the struggle, but not how
to settle and conciliate. Now even Pym and Hampden were gone.

The second-rate politicians who succeeded them, murmured at the
liberal terms of surrender so often conceded by their soldiers to
bring the war to an end. They did not understand that if the
sovereignty of the two Houses was to become the settled principle
of England’s Government, they must not only hold together all
who had fought for the “good old cause,” but must render life
tolerable to their defeated foes,

18

Anglican-
ism pro-
scribed

Com-
poundin
of Cava-

Q74 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1646

The Cavaliers had surrendered in a spirit open to conciliation.
Two things were requisite—to allow some form of toleration for
the Prayer-book service, and to leave untouched all their property
that had escaped the ravages of war. If these two things had been
done, the Cavaliers would certainly not have risen in revolt, and
perhaps if the King had refused to come to terms, one of his
family would sooner or later have accepted the new position of
constitutional monarch. But the idea of granting religious tolera-
tion and financial immunity at the end of a fierce civil contest, was
not considered to be in the region of practical politics. Such a
course was dreamed of here and there by a theorist. But serious
statesmen and men of the world knew better.

All true professors agreed that the Prayer-book had in these
latter days become the most abominable idol in the land, “and that
it was high time therefore to remove this brazen serpent and grind
it to powder”. As the first result of conquest, some 2,000 Anglican
clergy were expelled from their livings, each with a small pension.
The Prayer-book service was forbidden by law, as the Conventicles
had been under the High Commission. ‘The quarrel between
squire and parson, which Laud had created, was soon adjusted
by the busy zeal of the Puritans. Common sufferings gave the
gentry an entirely new attachment to the Anglican clergy. The
rites which they administered obtained in the eyes of the English
upper class a new set of political associations, which has never since
been lost.

Parliament could not resist the temptation to solve its financial
difficulties by laying the burden of the war on the estates of the

lier estates conquered. Besides those excepted from pardon, all who had

assisted the King were forced to compound for their “ delinquency ”
by huge fines, varying from half to a sixth of the value of their
estates. Confiscation had begun during the war, wherever the
armies of Parliament had occupied hostile territory. But months
and years after the last shot had been fired, Royalist gentry were
still cutting down their trees, mortgaging and selling their estates
in a fallen market, and sending up their wives to soften the Round-
head Committee-men in London, with meed of bribes and tears
for the lords of the hour. It was a time not to be forgotten by
these poor men and women. Fear and poverty reigned in many
homes where party feeling would otherwise soon have died out.

1646} PARLIAMENT, ARMY AND KING Q15

In one respect the Parliament men chose well. They were not
shedders of blood. In a mean spirit of revenge they had brought
the old man Laud to the block, after a trial that made as little
show of legal justice as any in the century (January, 1645). But
after that bad deed they stayed their hands.

Though bitter complaints were made of particular cases of
injustice and hardship, scarcely a voice was raised against the
general policy of intolerance and confiscation. The victims them-
selves felt resentment but not surprise. Common-sense and public
opinion regarded such a policy as the inevitable logic of war.
Posterity should not perhaps find it hard to forgive these men
because they took the course always so obvious to victors in
occupation, and did not see the bitter feuds and the terrible
reaction that they were preparing for the future. But they can
be less easily excused for not seeing the actualities of the present.
The persecution of the Cavaliers was a natural error; but the
persecution of the Independents was an egregious folly. The
members of the Long Parliament were too proud to recognise that
at that instant they held their supreme power in fee from the
crusaders of the New Model. ‘They could not realise that if the UIbseeate
Puritan party was going to trample on the interests and the fe aeos
conscience of all Cavaliers, it must be held together by tolera- 1646-47
tion within its own borders. They could not even see that if they
wished to suppress the Independents of the army, they must at
least divide the ordinary soldier from the sectarian enthusiast by
a prompt settlement of material interests common to the whole
force. They proposed to disband the bulk of the New Model
without the payment of its arrears, and at the same time to
institute that vigorous persecution of Nonconformists, which they
had been careful to postpone so long as Baptists were needed to
stem the tide of battle, and Seekers to find their way up the
breach.

Such ingratitude and blindness require to be explained. It
must be remembered that the Commons, at the time they were
deprived by death of their great leaders, had become possessed of
the sole authority to issue commands in England; confused by
this height to which they had suddenly been raised, they made the
quite illogical deduction that any commands that they chose to
issue would be obeyed. Their orthodox Presbyterian platform

276 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1647

was indeed supported by the City mob and the City magistrates,
whose alliance had hitherto sufficed to see them safe through every
danger. ‘The new leaders of Parliament, men like Stapleton and
Waller, whose military careers had been cut short by the Self-
Denying Ordinance, could not avoid a personal jealousy of the
New Model soldiers, that warped all sense of justice and even of
expediency. But the most rational motive for their conduct was
the wish to appear as the friends of order. It was time to show
that there were limits to innovation. So they sought to conciliate
the moderate Cavaliers, the common sober citizens, and the King
with whom they were in treaty, not indeed by tolerating the
Prayer-book, but by persecuting the sects.

They established the Presbyterian system of Church government,
so far as it could be set up by paper decrees. At last they con-
sented to borrow the system of Synods, Classes, Lay Elders and
Church Discipline from their insistent Scottish allies. But in spite
of this great surrender of English Puritanism, the new establishment
would be wholly dependent on the votes of the Houses,—“a lame
Erastian Presbytery ”.

Bills to This newborn Church, the child of political treaty by military
pede he need, claimed full powers over the conscience of every English
ism, Sep.- Subject. In September, 1646, while the King’s flag still waved from
Dec., 1646 his last fortresses in Wales, the House of Commons ventured to
read without a division, bills by which Unitarians and free-thinking
heretics could be put to death, and Baptists and other sectaries
imprisoned for life, solely on account of their dogmatic opinions ;
in December they voted that no laymen should be permitted to
preach or expound the Scriptures. A prospect of intolerable
dreariness was opening for the speculative and religious life of
England. Even Milton’s invective was not too bitter to describe
a tyranny equally crushing to the exercise of brain and spirit,
sacrificing all to a foreign system which in England had the merits
neither of the best Anglican nor of the best Puritan religion.
Soldiers As a preliminary to the effective persecution of the sects, the
ordered to F{ouses ordered the New Model to disband—but without its arrears
disband E 4 se
unpaid, Of pay. ‘The soldiers hesitated, petitioned and remained in camp.
e/a May, Instead of paying them off, while they were still ready to go
home on receipt of their wages, the Parliamentary leaders, in the
spring of 1647, entered on a great political and military intrigue,

1647} PARLIAMENT, ARMY AND KING 277

They determined to coerce the New Model, in the name of the
King, and in part alliance with the Royalists. Charles had fled
to the Scots, but had been given up on the payment of money due
to them, and was lying, in the power of Parliament, at Holmby in
Northamptonshire. The New Model was not the only force in
the pay of Parliament. Many garrisons and regiments, largely
consisting of ald Cavaliers, were kept undisbanded in the West,
on purpose for the new service, The City Militia, freshly weeded
of all Independents, was to hold the South of England ; while the
Scots and another English army were to advance from the North.
The train of artillery at Oxford and the King at Holmby were
to be brought up to London.!’ But the Independent chiefs,
against whom the Parliament men were plotting, combined a
; Houble portion of their adversaries’ astuteness with a straight-
forwardness of purpose and a genius for action that was all their
own.

Cromwell had for months honestly striven to keep the peace. ae
From his seat in the House, and from his quarters in the camp at hopes
Newmarket, he had urged Parliament to pay the soldiers, and
the soldiers to obey Parliament. He had been willing to dis-
band the army, at the risk of the religious freedom for which he
most cared, because he fully understood that the country could
only be settled by peaceful and constitutional means. ‘“ What we
gain in a free way,” he said, “is better than twice as much in a
forced way, and will be more truly ours and our posterity’s.” The
mutiny of officers and men had been stirred up by others. He
was the last to put himself at its head; but once he had decided,
he became the foremost in action. On 31st May he despatched
Joyce on a high errand. The Cornet was to forestall the Parlia-
mentary agents sent down that day to seize the artillery at
Oxford; he was then to go on to Holmby House, similarly to
secure the King from removal to London.? Unless the soldiers
were willing to surrender both their just pay and their liberty
of conscience, they could not have delayed action against Parlia-
ment another twenty-four hours.

1 Mystery of two Funtoes (Sele Tracts on the Civil War, 1815, ii.). G.(C. W.),
iii, p. 265. Firth’s Crom., p. 162.
2 Not, however, to carry him off, as Joyce did—into the midst of the army at

Newmarket (Clarke Papers, xxvi.-xxxi.).

278 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1647

Holmby When Joyce presented himself at Holmby, Charles had for some
House, months been playing at negotiation with Parliament. But he was
prorat l ble to try a hand with the army. At sight of the
June, 16470 less agreea y :
Cornet’s “well-written” warrant of 500 troopers, he changed his
plan of rising to the throne on the shoulders of the Presby-
terians, and accepted the same help from the Independents. In
either case he would kick away the ladder. Besides, his new
friends were more courteous, did not interfere with his private
devotions, and seemed less zealous enemies of the Prayer-book.
The poor gentleman, to whom all men were the same, did not see
that these kindly titans, sprung of old earth, had pent in their
breast tumultuous fires and floods, of which Presbyterian pedantry
was void.
By the refusal to part with the guns and by the seizure of the
King, the soldiers conveyed a warning, well calculated to bring
the members to reason without actually violating their sanctity as
representatives. ‘Two months of negotiation followed. The army
drew nearer to London. The Houses, to avoid the presence, yielded
to the approach of military force. Enraged at the surrender of the
Houses to the army, the City prentices broke in upon the debates,
held the Speaker down in the chair, and forced the members
to vote at dictation of the mob things which they would have
voted freely but for fear of the sword (26th July). At that news
the army marched on London. Many of both Houses, including
the two Speakers Manchester and Lenthall, were so disgusted by
the weak violence of their Presbyterian friends that they came out
to join the advancing force. With the officials of both Chambers
in their camp, the soldiers had about as much legal right as the
Military City, and moral right had been theirs throughout. ‘The English
occupa- capital has had a fortune almost peculiar to itself, in that its
tion of ; : 5 :
London, ‘Streets and environs have never been the scene of warfare in time
6th Aug. of civic revolution: when the army arrived, the City Militia dared
BAe not fight, and Hyde Park was occupied without a battle. Eleven
Parliamentary chiefs were expelled from their seats. On these
terms the leaderless Fresbyterian majority was permitted to resume
power on sufferance. 'The army retired and all seemed as before.
All hope Yet in fact all was lost. The Roundheads were now irreparably
5 Se eth at feud, not only with their opponents, but with each other. For
many years to come a general election for a new Parliament would

1647] PARLIAMENT, ARMY AND KING 279

but confound confusion. And the existing assembly had failed
to settle the constitution, or even to maintain its own freedom
against City and Camp. Now if Parliament had not been able to
reconstitute the English polity on the basis of general consent, no
other power self-chosen from among the fragments of the Round-
head party could possibly succeed in that task. Law had given
place to force, and agreement to coercion. Henceforth, the history
of the Interregnum is a series of experiments in political theory and
political necessity, interesting and noble, but foredoomed to failure.
“ Whatever we get by a treaty will be firm and durable, it will be
conveyed to posterity ;” “that which you have by force I look
upon it as nothing”: so Cromwell had said on 16th July, depre-
cating the march on London. A fortnight later the violence of the
City mob compelled him to lead that march. For the next eleven
years he strove to put his own prophecy behind him, in order to
retain hope under the burden of gigantic tasks. Desperate of all
rational expectation, he could only keep repeating to himself and
to others, that his God would not allow so great a work to perish.
When the brave and the clear-sighted dull their vision with
spiritual drugs, it is because the pain of sight which they cannot
endure is intense beyond the apprehension of posterity.

But however fatal the use of force may have proved, the The army
soldiers had been compelled to defend themselves against the Bue
basest ingratitude. Like cheating hucksters, the men whom they
had saved denied them all things, material and spiritual, for
which they and their dead comrades had risked their lives in the
field. In defending themselves from gallows and prison, the
Independents defended freedom of thought in England. The
liberty which was proclaimed in Milton’s Areopagitica (1644), in
Jeremy Taylor’s Liberty of Prophecying (1647), and in all that
should spring from them and every other new source of light, had
been foredoomed to destruction in the scheme of Presbyterian in-
tolerance. It is easy to say that such a scheme could never have
been maintained in England ; it was not maintained, because men
were found who did not allow it to be set up.

Parliament, when it defied the army, probably calculated that Conver-
some Presbyterian feeling would show itself in the ranks. In the Bee
New Model, at its formation two years before, there had been the Inde-
zealots among the cavalry who were generally sectarians ; but in Pendens

280 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1647

the infantry, ordinary men were serving by impressment or for the
sake of hire. The pikemen and musqueteers were many of them
Puritans, but unlearned in the quarrel that divided their party,
and somewhat prejudiced by vague Presbyterian talk against ‘“ an-
tinomians and blasphemers”. ‘The private soldiers might easily
have been led into the stricter way, if the orthodox chaplains had
stayed with the regiments, and if Parliament had paid the men
their arrears. But the Presbyterian clergy had hurried back from
the hardships of campaign to secure the tithes and rectories from
which the Anglicans were being turned out. By the time of Nase-
by, the soldiers seldom heard a sermon except from latitudinarian
clergy like Hugh Peters, or from the very captains and colonels
who had led them to victory. ‘The influence of these latter over
their men was naturally very great. Until the period of active
war ended at Worcester (1651), the officers were nearly all gentle-
men by birth; and already in June, 1647, three-quarters were Inde-
pendents.! Thus professional feeling, comradeship in victory, and
above all the refusal of Parliament to meet their just financial
claims, rallied the ordinary soldiers to the side of the theorists.
The zeal of the cavalry was contagious throughout the camp, and
their arguments for liberty in Church and State appealed straight
to plain men unlearned in theological sophistry.
Change in ‘The improvement in quality, and the change in political
Soa’ opinions of the infantry of the New Model, received fresh impetus
the in- from the events of 1647. Volunteers of a higher type came for-
fanuy ward in good plenty. Impressment became rare, and after 1651
ceased altogether. The victories of Preston and Worcester, the
conquest of Ireland and Scotland, victories not so much of Parliament
as of the army and its chiefs, enhanced the professional pride and
religious enthusiasm of all ranks and of all arms. The infantry
became what the cavalry had always been. After Dunbar Oliver
declared “it would do you good to see and hear our poor foot go
up and down making their boast of God”. When all other forces
had been disbanded, and when the soldiers of the New Model had
become the favourites and in some sense the masters of the State,
the profession of pikemen and musqueteers attracted men of good
position and character, especially those who held advanced

1In that month only 167 officers had gone over to Parliament, followed by a few
hundreds of men (Firth’s C, A., p. 319).

1647] PARLIAMENT, ARMY AND KING 281

religious and political views, These views also gained by the dis-
missal of those Presbyterian officers who had taken the side of
Parliament in June, 1647. Thus it came about that ali arms of
the service gradually approximated to the political, religious and
military type, that had once been peculiar to certain regiments of
cavalry and to certain officers of foot.)

During the two years when this transformation was most Birth of
actively in progress (1647-48), the modern conception of democracy Bee
was evolved by the most active minds in the army, and adopted cratic
by the elected agents of the rank and file. This movement °P!'™"
was greatly stimulated by their victory over Parliament in
August, 1647. When that event made it clear that the soldiers
would have the last word in any proposed settlement, they deter-
mined that the first word also should come from the camp; and
they had a word to say which would not come from any other
quarter. ‘They produced in forms of English thought and speech
the democratic ideas which seemed to perish with them, until, after
a century and a half, Frenchmen made these same aspirations the
common heritage of all the white races of the world.

Two analogous but distinct parts of the democratic idea can be « Caree.
detected in the demands of the soldiers as clearly as in the pro- aye
paganda of the French Revolution. The first is what we now call
equality of opportunity, or “the career open to talents”. The
actual elevation of new men at that moment called for some such
theoretical explanation, parallel on the secular plane to the Rule of
the Saints. The country gentlemen, yeomen and craftsmen who
composed the officers and sergeants of the omnipotent army, finding
the House of Peers bitterly hostile to their power, naturally asked,
“what were the Lords of England but William the Conqueror’s
Colonels? or the Barons but his Majors? or the Knights but his
Captains?”? They declared that they would set themselves and
their heirs free from the usurped superiority of the Norman race,
who had now lost the power of the sword, their only title to rule

1Firth’s C. A., pp. 37, 38, 46, 47, 319. G. (C. W.), ii., pp. 319-26. Baxter,
Life (ed. 1696), p. 51. Carl.’s Crom., Letter cxl, ; ;

As early as the Preston Campaign, 1648, the best Royalist leaders wished to
avoid fighting in enclosed ground, because they feared the superiority of Cromwell's
“ firemen” (Carl.’s Crom., Letters Ixiii.-vi.),

2 Baxter, Life (ed. 1696), p. 51.

Universal
suffrage

The
Levellers
in the
army

282 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1647

over the English.1 King and Lords must go. Individual merit
should be the sole road to greatness.

But they also forestalled the second principle of democracy,
that all the inhabitants of a land ought to share in the framing of
the laws. Every man born in England, the poor man, “ the meanest
man in the kingdom,” had a right to elect his rulers. ‘To support
this claim, which really lay in the needs of the future, they pleaded
the laws of an imaginary past. “Before the Conquest,” they said,
all Englishmen had a voice in the Government; it was “the old
birthright” of Englishmen—“ our inheritances which have been
lost”. Translated out of English into the larger utterance of hu-
manity, this plea of a lost birthright becomes Rousseau’s Rights of
Man. Colonel Rainborough had already taken this step into a wider
atmosphere. He looked not so much to the supposed national
customs of the remote past, as to an eternal and universal right.
“The poorest he that is in England,” he told his fellow-officers in
council, “hath a life to live as the greatest he. And therefore,
truly, Sir, I think it’s clear that every man that is to live under a
Government ought first by his own consent to put himself under
that Government.” He appealed straight to the “law of God” and
“the law of Nature,” to prove that every man ought to have “the
choice of those who are to make the laws for him to live under”.
On surer ground, he then pleaded that the continual oppression of
the poor by the rich could only be remedied by an equal franchise.?

These ideals could be realised by Republicanism, Universal Suf-
frage and Religious Toleration. Such were the demands of Lilburne
and the Political Levellers,? who from 1647 to 1649 dominated

1 Harl, Misc., vi., pp. 36-423; viii., pp. 95, 102; ix., 90-94. Clarke Papers, i., pp.
235, 318, 368, gor.

2 Clarke Papers, i., pp. 235, 300, 301, 305, 309, 311, 353.

3 The Social Levellers, comparatively unimportant in the history of forces in
this period, have their place in the history of thought throughout the ages. Win-
stanley founded English Communism, and the idea of restoring the land to the
people (Gooch, pp. 206-26, Clarke Papers, ii., pp. 215-24. The Social Problem
in the Days of the Commonwealth ; and Single-Tax Review, 15th July, 1902, articles
by L. H. Berens). Winstanley in his pamphlet (1652), The Law of Freedom in
a Platform (programme), says: ‘‘ Before they are suffered to plant the waste land
for a livelihood, they must pay rent to their brethren for it. Well this isa burden
the creation groans under.”’ ‘I have an equal share in the earth which is now re-
deemed as my brother, by the law of Righteousness.”’

In the New Law of Righteousness (1649) he writes: “And this is the begin-
ning of particular interest, buying and selling the Earth from one particular hand to
another, saying, ‘This is mine,’ . . . as ifthe Earth were made for a few and not
for all men,” ‘All the men and women in England are all children of this Land;

1647} PARLIAMENT, ARMY AND KING 283

opinion in the ranks, Deceived by their own omnipotence of an
hour, they did not see that Republicanism and Universal Suffrage,
unlike Religious Toleration, could only be attained by the active
consent and participation of the majority. But the majority did
not wish for these changes; the first use it would make of that
Universal Suffrage would be either to restore the old system, or to
plunge England into a new strife of parties where all sight of the
new ideals would be hopelessly lost. Yet it is to the credit of
these men that they desired, though in vain, to abdicate in favour

and the Earth is the Lord’s, not particular men’s who claim a proper interest in it
above others.” In the same pamphlet appears his practical suggestion: “If the
rich still hold fast to this property of Mine and Thine, let them labour their own
land with their own hands. And let the common people that say ‘The Earth is
ours, not mine,’ let them labour together upon the commons.”

The “ Diggers,” as the score of Social Levellers called themselves, who began
digging and ploughing the soil on the common, St. George’s Hill, Surrey, on com-
munistic principles, were led by Winstanley, and were interrupted by the neigh-
bouring gentry and parsons (1649). They hada song, “Stand up now, Diggers All,”
almost certainly by Winstanley, of which the following verses describe the social
condition of England :—-

«The gentry are all round, stand up now, stand up now,
The gentry are all round, stand up now.
The gentry are all round, on each side they are found,
Their wisdom’s so profound, to cheat us of our ground.

‘ Stand up now, stand up now.

“The clergy they come in, stand up now, stand up now,
The clergy they come in, stand up now.
The clergy they come in, and say it is a sin
That we should now begin, our freedom for to win,

Stand up now, Diggers all.”

Their principles were, however, Tolstoian and Quakerish; they were opposed
to physical force.

* To conquer them by love, come in now, come in now,
To conquer them by love, come in now.
To conquer them by love, as it does you behove,
For He is King above; no power is like to love.
Glory here, Diggers all.”

The Diggers warned the Regicide Government that the political revolution
would not stand its ground unless it was based on a social revolution. ‘“ We know
that England cannot be a free Commonwealth unless all the poor Commons have a
free use and benefit of the land.” They rightly said that the “‘ Lords of the Manors”’
were really in the ‘‘ Cavalier” interest. Winstanley knew that he would very probably
fail. A verse of his prophesies the Restoration :—

‘In thee O England is the Law arising up to shine, _
If thou receive and practise it, the crown it will be thine,
If thou reject and still remain a froward son to be,
Another land will it receive, and take the crown from thee.”
=—Clarke Papers, ii., pp. 215-24.

284 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1647

of the people. It was not their wish, but their fate, to become,
for a while, a new “noblesse of the sword,” in place of the
“ Conqueror’s barons ”.

Cromwell well understood that the true method of progress is
to realise the best which can obtain general consent, rather than
to establish the very best by force. Together with his son-in-
law, Commissary-General Ireton, he undertook a hard double task,
to restrain the army and to bring Charles to terms.

The de- At a series of formal debates held at headquarters in Putney,

saree the elected Agents of the army laid their proposed democratic

Oat Now Constitution before the generals, and demanded that it should at

1647 once be put in force. Cromwell and Ireton withstood the demand,
and declared that the army had no power to legislate. They con-
sented, however, to argue acrcss the table with the “ buff-coats” and
the radical colonels, as to the real nature of the “ contract” on
which society was based. They urged the law of the land against
the “law of Nature”. Ireton pleaded that Republicanism and
Universal Suffrage were never to be desired, Cromwell that they
could not at present be obtained,

‘¢How do we know,” he asked the eager assembly, “‘if whilst we are
disputing these things, another company of men shall gather together, and
ese shall put out a paper as pate ays as this?”

i Acid not oul Siete, sd au vie but many fe tits kind, ‘ad if so,
what do you think the consequence would be? Would it not be confusion? >
Would it not be utter confusion?” ?

The The two Generals had for their part tried to solve the problem
als by coming to terms with the King. The treaty known as the
with Heads of the Proposals, which Cromwell and Ireton laid before
eae Charles, would have afforded a noble and permanent settlement.
Sep., 1647 It would have been the settlement of 1689 with a larger flavour of
democracy and of Puritanism. The protection of Cavaliers’ estates
from ruinous sequestration, the retention of the Episcopate shorn
of all coercive power, and the use of the Prayer-book in Church by
those who wished, stood to reconcile one-half of England ; while
religious toleration for all, equal electoral districts, large security
for The control of royal power by Parliament, should have satisfied

the democrats, if they had been wise enough to approach their
1 Clarke Papers, i., pp. 237, 226-418, Ixvi,

1648} PARLIAMENT, ARMY AND KING 285

ends by sure, slow steps from generation to generation. The
scheme was wrecked by its very merits. It was drawn up to
conciliate all parties; but it came too late; all parties were now
inflamed, and it displeased all alike.

Even if parties had been reasonable, there was one person who Flight to
must have marred it all. Charles was only playing with the men as
who had gone beyond anything he could hope, in offering restora- cath Nov.
tion to himself, amnesty to his followers, and a fair position to his 147
Church. On 15th November he fled from Hampton Court to
Carisbrooke Castle in the Isle of Wight. From that retreat he
spent the winter and spring in summoning Scots, Presbyterians
and Royalists to rise and destroy the sects.

The negotiation had only served to alienate the army from the
two Generals. Their treachery was exposed by John Lilburne, the
_ friend of the people. The “ Grandees,” it was said, were bartering
the hardly recovered heritage of England, re-establishing the fallen
_ power of Kings, Lords and Prelates.

Deserted by both King and army, Cromwell saw that his treaty
was a failure, and concluded that it had been a sin. At the
summons of the false wizard of Carisbrooke, by whose wiles he had
allowed himself to be ensnared, the war clouds were scudding up
again from Wales and Scotland, from Essex and Kent, from land
and sea. Once more all lives were to be put to the hazard; once
more the land was to be filled with blood, this time without a hope
that any true settlement could follow the victory of either faction.

A noble rage filled the soul of the man who had striven so hard

to make sure the footing of peace. On the Ist of May, 1648, The
Cromwell attended a prayer-meeting of the army leaders in ezine at
Windsor Castle. ‘Tears of sorrow and disappointment stood in Windsor,

their eyes, as they agreed that the troubles rising on them were ae wih

the punishment of God for their late negotiations with the King ;
| while many declared unrebuked their resolution “if ever the Lord
. brought us back again in peace,” “to call Charles Stuart, that

man of blood, to an account for the blood he had shed”. In such
fierce exaltation the military saints again rode forth to war, carrying
with them their chiefs, made captive to their doctrines against
"reason and against will, by the force of fate and the irretrievable

event.
The Second Civil War was a strange combination of oppressed

286 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1648

The Cavaliers with that very Presbyterian party whose stupid refusal
ae to give truce to their religion and estates had brought them into
May-Aug., the frame of mind for this revolt. What sort of agreement
Ning among themselves the two most intolerant factions supposed that
they could make, after they had finished hanging the sectarians,
was a subject on which every man was for once allowed to think
what he liked, provided nothing at all was said. 'The only rallying-
cry permitted was “God save the King”. Half the Presbyterian
gentry and merchants who had organised the Great Rebellion had
already become Royalist, although not till 1660 were they fain to
become Anglican and Cavalier. The process of evolution was gradu-
ated for them by a stubborn belief that they could convert Charles
into a Presbyterian King. But the other half of the Presbyterians
cared just enough for the “good old cause” to sit still and sullen,
watching the sectaries again deliver them from the common foe.
Such, on the whole, was the attitude of the Commons. But the
select body to whom they delegated their executive functions, was
more heartily on the side of the Independents; the Derby House
Committee! acted with saving vigour, as if Pym were still among
them, and Rupert again at the gates.
“God save the King” was the cry that suited the various
_ English and Scottish factions that had sworn to extirpate the
New Model. It was a good cry, for it was becoming popular.
Out of the welter of confused issues, out of the dim negotiations
and intrigues of which the truth has now been revealed by historical
research, but was then lost in flying rumours, one fact rose clear to
the mind of the common sentimental man—the captivity of the
King. For the first time since the fighting had stopped, the ballad-
monger and the ale-house politician found a theme which every one
could understand, One of the great motifs of the drama of popular
English history —the sufferings of King Charles—was already
beginning to play upon men’s emotions. A popular atmosphere,
in which Cavalier feeling could revive and flourish, was being
created. ‘The democrats, as they rode to battle, knew more of
the needs and rights than of the mind and character of the people,
and utterly refused to respect a wave of sentimentality, which on

1So called from holding its sessions at Derby House. In January, 1648, it had
succeeded to the powers of the old Committee of Both Kingdoms which had fought
the First Me War—the Scots Commissioners being sent home (G. (C. W.), iv.
PP. 5%, 52).

1648] PARLIAMENT, ARMY AND KING 287

their home-coming they converted by the great deed into a national
tradition of pity, strong as the Englishman’s pride in Magna Carta
or wrath at Gunpowder Plot.

But the Second Civil War was, even more marked]y than the First,
not waged by the people at large. Presbyterian soldiers in charge of
places of strength declared for the King. Cavaliers of good family
rode fast and far to reinforce the revolted garrisons, or to raise the
country-side, But except the New Model, no one stirred to put
them down ; except the men of Kent and Essex, no one ventured to
join their ranks. The people of England looked on in bewildered
neutrality. Fairfax in Kent and Essex, Cromwell in Wales
dashed down upon the gathering revolt (May-June). The Cavalier
horsemen scattered and vanished ; the revolted garrisons were shut
up in close siege. But a fourth part of the fighting navy had de-
clared for the King, the Scots army was on its way, and the issue
still hung as uncertain as the minds of men.

The promptitude of the New Model sufficed to prevent the
English Royalists from organising a campaign with a regular head-
quarters. It had been the wise policy of the conquerors in the First
Civil War to dismantle captured fortresses by blowing a gap in
the walls. The object was not to wreak revenge or devastation,
but to save the expense of garrisoning every place which, if left
derelict in a defensible condition, might again be occupied by
Cavaliers. ‘This foresight now had its reward. The Second Civil
War might have gone better for the King if there had been many
garrisons to revolt, or many castles in a state to make resistance.
For Colchester alone kept Fairfax’ great army before its walls,
and the siege of Pembroke delayed Cromwell six long weeks, when

every day was a fresh danger to the State.

Cromwell was scarcely set free from before Pembroke when Preston,
England was invaded by a large Scottish army, under leaders from iaherae
both sides of the Border, who, while claiming the Presbyterian
alliance, scarcely tried to conceal their Cavalier sympathies. ‘They

passed southward by the route that lies between the Yorkshire hills
and the coast of Lancashire. If these Scots were not crushed before
they debouched into the Midland plain, their strength would be a
~ nucleus for local revolt, sufficient to alter the whole character of the
_-war in England. Gathering his veterans in the Yorkshire valleys,
' Cromwell dropped down from a pass of the Pennine Range on to

—_

The last
negotia-
tion, Sep.,
1648

Pride’s
Purge,
6th-7th

288 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1648

the centre of the Royalists’ line of march where it straggled south-
wards through Preston. In a running fight of three days he
overtook and captured all their infantry, as, driven by panic, they
splashed along the soaking roads; their horse was scattered north
and south, in fugitive parties of whom few stole safely back to
Scotland.

At that terrible stroke the war fell dead. Colchester at once
surrendered to Fairfax. But the friendly feeling that marked the
close of the First Civil War had now given way to exasperation and
revenge. Cromwell divided the rank and file of the Scots prisoners
into two classes—the pressed men, whom he sent home, and the
volunteers, whom he shipped across to the Barbadoes. The soldiers
who had defended Colchester were sent by Fairfax to a similar fate,
and two Cavalier officers, Lucas and Lisle, were shot by court-
martial. ‘Transportation was an advance on the practice of Queen
Elizabeth, who hanged her poorer subjects by the hundred after
the suppression of the revolt in the North ; but it was a decline from
the merciful conduct of these same victors two years before. The
transportations of 1648 became the unhappy precedent followed
by all our Governments in times of rebellion, as late as the year
1715.

Freed from the fear of an armed Cavalier Restoration, Lords
and Commons again made haste to cheat the men by whom they
had again been saved, and pushed forward for the last time the
negotiations with the King. Charles, still at Carisbrooke, pretended
to make concession to the Presbyterians—“ merely in order to my
escape ”—as he confided to his friends. The Penal Laws against
heretics, passed by the two Houses in May last, had given the
soldiers fair warning what to expect from a Presbyterian mon-
archy ; when they heard of a new treaty between King and Parlia-
ment that might render them in very fact subject to the power of
such laws, they determined to be rid both of Parliament and King.
They no longer showed the moderation that marked their first dis-
pute with the Houses (1647). Officers and men had come home
from the war in a fierce mood, prepared to commit any violence.
Colonel Pride and his musqueteers, stationed at the door of the
Commons, excluded some hundred members, and carried off nearly

Dec., 1648 fifty more to prison. On the 4th of January, 1649, the Rump

that remained, not one hundred strong, passed this resolution :—

1649] PARLIAMENT, ARMY AND KING 289

That the people are, under God, the original of all just power: that the
Commons of England, in Parliament assembled, being chosen by and repre-
senting the people, have the supreme power in this nation; that whatsoever
is enacted or declared for law by the Commons in Parliament assembled, hath
the force of law, and all the people of this nation are concluded thereby,
although the consent of the King or House of Peers be not had thereunto.

In logical accordance with these new principles, it was voted a few Abolition
weeks later that the House of Lords was “useless and dangerous, Naat of
and ought to be abolished”. The King disappeared from the Lords, 6th
constitution by a yet more signal and symbolic act. ‘We will cut aes
off his head,” said Cromwell, “ with the crown upon it.”

By the “dark lantern of the spirit” Cromwell saw that the
Providences of God, the preordained victories in Essex, Wales and
- Lancashire, pointed the road to a deed for which there was no
human law. He did not, like many of his colleagues, think a
Republic necessary to civil and religious freedom; he had long
striven to preserve monarchy ; but once persuaded of the practical
necessity and Divine sanction of a new order, he led the revolution,
and carries through all time the responsibility which he then ac-
cepted without fear and bore without remorse.

The Commons appointed a Commission to try Charles Stuart.
Unless the theoretic declaration of the omnipotence of the Lower
House held good by “ the law of Nature,” this Commission had no
legal power. Furthermore, Charles had committed no legal crime.
Law and pity would both plead on his side. His own outward
_ dignity and patience made his appeal to pity and to law the most
effective appeal in that sort that is recorded in the history of
England. Law and pity were known of old to Englishmen; the
ideas ranged against these two powerful pleaders were new and
strange. ‘The sovereignty of the people and the equality of man
with man in the scales of justice, were first ushered into the world
of English politics by this deed. Against them stood the old-world
ideals, as Charles proclaimed them from the scaffold with his dying
breath :-—

For the people (he said, as he looked out into eternity) truly I desire
_ their liberty and freedom as much as anybody whatsoever ; but I must tell
_ you, their liberty and freedom consists in having government, those laws by
which their lives and their goods may be most their own. It is not their
having a share in the government; that is nothing appertaining to them,
A subject and a sovereign are clear different things,

19

290 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1649 |

That, indeed, was the issue. Those who sought to substitute |
a better theory of government for that proclaimed by Charles as |)
his legacy to England, did not pause to consider that the people, Ik
for whose new-born sovereignty they struck, was heart and soul |)
against the deed. By the side of this objection, the charge }j
that they acted “by no law” shrinks to insignificance. ‘They \\
were striving to make a new law of democracy, and could not jj
be expected to effect this by observing the old laws. But their \
fault lay in this, that the new law by which they condemned |
Charles, while it claimed to derive from the people of England, |
Execution did not, save in theory, derive from that source at all. When the \
Kargpee bleeding head was held up, the shout of the soldiers was drowned
1649 in the groan of the vast multitude. |
If there was any chance that the establishment of a more }}
democratic form of government could gradually win the support |}
of the people at large, that chance was thrown away by the execu- ||
tion of the King. ‘The deed was done against the wish of many |
even of the Independents and Republicans; it outraged beyond
hope of reconciliation the two parties in the State who were strong
in numbers and in conservative tradition, the Presbyterians and the ©
Cavaliers; and it alienated the great mass of men who had no
party at all. Thus the Republicans, at the outset of their career, |
made it impossible for themselves ever to appeal in free election to ||
the people whom they had called to sovereignty. Their own fall, |
involving the fall of democracy and of religious toleration, became _
therefore necessary to the re-establishment of Parliamentary rule.
The worship of birth, of pageantry, of title; the aristocratic claim |
to administrative power ; the excessive influence of the large land- |
owner and of inherited wealth; the mean admiration of mean |
things, which became so powerful in English society after the |
Restoration—all these gained a fresh life and popularity by the |
deed that was meant to strike them dead for ever.
It is much easier to show that the execution was a mistake than |
to show what else should have been done. Any other course, if |
considered in the light of the actual circumstances, seems open to
the gravest objection. It is not possible to say with certainty that |
if Charles’ life had been spared Cromwell could have succeeded in |
averting anarchy and the disruption of the empire until opinion
was again ripe for government by consent.

This was that memorable hour
Which first assured the forcéd power :—

1649] PARLIAMENT, ARMY AND KING 291

that was the verdict on the King’s execution privately passed by
Cromwell’s secretary, Andrew Marvell, a man of the world if a
poet ever was such, who in thesame poem wrote the lines we all still
quote in praise of Charles’ conduct on the scaffold. The situation
at the end of 1648 was this—that any sort of government by con-
sent had been rendered impossible for years to come, mainly by
the untrustworthy character of the King, and by the intolerant
action of Parliament after the victory won for it by the Army.
Cromwell, in the Heads of the Proposals, had advocated a real
settlement by consent, only to have it rejected by King, Parlia-
ment and Army alike. The situation had thereby been rendered
impossible, through no fault of his. But he was not the man
therefore to return to his private gardens and let the world go to
ruin. He took upon his massive shoulders the load of obloquy
inherent in a situation created chiefly by the faults of others,
Those Herculean shoulders are broad enough to bear also the
blame for a deed pre-eminently his own, inscribed like a gigantic
note of interrogation across the page of English history.

292 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1649 }

CHAPTER X
THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS, 1649-60

But thou, the War’s and Fortune’s son,
March indefatigably on ;
And for the last effect
Still keep the sword erect:
Besides the force it has to fright
The spirits of the shady night,
The same arts that did gain
A power, must it maintain.
—(Ode to Cromwell), Marveun.

The new LL Revolutionists, the moment they undertake the actual
eal 4 responsibilities of government, become in some sort conser-

the vative. Robespierre guillotined the Anarchists. The first admin-
Levellers i trative act of the Regicides was to silence the Levellers. By the
mere act of acquiring sovereignty the Independent chiefs arrayed
against themselves that very party whose insistence on first
principles had driven them to the brink of regicide and usurpa-
tion. John Lilburne, having thrust Cromwell over the precipice,
himself stopped short, and called mankind to witness what a falling
off was there. For many months his pamphlets were more danger-
ous to Government than even the loud wail of Royalism over the
murdered King; for Democracy, to which the Levellers appealed,
was still the active spirit of the hour, and was the only spirit by
which disaffection could be conjured in the ranks of the New Model.
Throughout the year 1649 England’s spokesman was “Freeborn
John,” and her heroes were the democratic mutineers of the army.
In April one of these soldiers was executed in front of St. Paul’s
door ; his corpse was followed to the grave by a countless multitude
of London’s citizens, who had strangely decked their respectable
hats with the green ribbon of the Levellers, In May three regi-

1649} THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 293

ments mutinied at Salisbury. The infection seemed likely to Campaign
spread ; and if the army revolted the new State would fall. Fair- nt sagan
fax, who had lost all political position by neutrality during the mutineers,
great events of the winter, consented to serve though not to My 149
support the Republic. Seconded by Cromwell, he chased down

the mutineers in a brief campaign in the valley of the upper
Thames, and captured them by a midnight attack on Burford.

Meanwhile, the rage against military despotism that was common John Lil-
to Cavaliers, Presbyterians, Levellers and ordinary Englishmen, °°
was concentrated in the defence of John Lilburne’s remarkable
personality. Many who cared little for his democratic theories
saw that individual liberty was in danger. The press was gagged,
the pulpits silenced on political topics, by the very men who two
years before had saved liberty of thought. Lilburne stood for
the property and freedom of the individual. Himself a political
leveller, he disowned the communistic theories of the social
levellers who were demanding the restoration of the land to the
_ people. He thus retained the sympathy of the proprietary classes.

Within two months of the King’s execution “Freeborn John”
was standing before the Council of State, refusing to take off his
hat in the presence of a company of gentlemen who, as he observed,
had no more legal authority than he had himself. Then, affecting
to perceive for the first time some members of Parliament at the
board, he ostentatiously uncovered in their honour. Removed for
a moment into the adjoining room, he heard through the door the
voice of Cromwell raised loud in anger, “I tell you, Sir, you have
no other way to deal with these men but to break them, or they
will break you”. In August, twenty file of musqueteers, sent to take
Lilburne alive, shrank back in fear from the formidable presence,
and yet more formidable language, of the prophet of England’s
liberties. His sacred person seemed fenced about by the Majesty
of the People. When in October the great pamphleteer was at eee
last brought into court, he bullied the Judges as he had bullied 0 ches
the Councillors and the musqueteers. It required a Jeffreys to put
down a Lilburne, and Jeffreys was not yet old enough to scold
anybody except his nurse. At this famous trial, the prisoner at
the bar ruled that it lay with the jury alone to decide whether his
writings had contravened the law. He had written that the
Government was a tyranny and a usurpation, and to write thus had

His
second
trial, 1653

294 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1649

been made treason by an Act of the Republican Parliament. The
issue in law was clear, but it was freely left to the decision of the
jury by the brow-beaten Judges. A verdict of acquittal, boldly
defying the new law and the new Government, called forth “such a
loud and unanimous shout as is believed was never heard in Guild
Hall, which lasted for about half an hour without intermission ;
which made the Judges for fear turn pale and hang down their
heads”. Such a demonstration in the presence of a tribunal backed
by the political power of Government, had been a thing unknown
in England in the time of the Tudor and Stuart Kings.

In 1652 the Rump passed a special Act banishing Lilburne on
pain of death. Next year he was home again, declaring that the
law which banished him had been beyond the powers of Parlia-
ment. That Parliament had then ceased to exist, but Cromwell
and the Barebone senators were no more willing than the Rump to
have Lilburne always on their flank. He was at once put on trial
for his life. The excitement was again intense. Six thousand
spectators attended his second trial. ‘Tickets were thrown
about,” inscribed with the well-known refrain of popular pro-
tection :—

And what, shall then honest John Lilbourn die?
Three score thousand will know the reason why.

Nor was this held to be an idle threat. Soldiers were massed to
prevent the outbreak. But when Lilburne was again acquitted in
the face of the evidence, the very soldiers beat their drums and
blew their trumpets, and the public rejoicings displayed a triumph
at the judicial defeat of a detested Government, analogous to that
which followed the acquittal of the Seven Bishops and of Hone
the Radical.

Lilburne’s two trials had established that juries were judges
of law as well as of fact, and could even set aside an unpopular
law by their verdict. An increase in the political freedom and
judicial power of the subject had been won under Governments
apparently more despotic than their predecessors. Nothing shows
more clearly how deep was the change registered by the First Civil
War in the attitude of the subject towards the Government. That
attitude was but little affected by the Restoration.

1 State Trials, 1649-1653. Stephen, i., pp. 365-68. Thurloe, i,, pp. 367, 441.

1649} THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 295

That Lilburne could make Cromwell look ridiculous was due Position
to the illogical position of the usurpers. When in the name of alia
the people they had seized power, they found not only the active ment,
champions of democracy, but the people itself—whatever definition ang
be given to that term—bitterly hostile to their rule. Yet they
could not retire from the false position. Their enemies were still
so divided among themselves that the fall of the Regicides would
have been followed, not by a Restoration, not by Parliamentary
Government, but by a state of anarchy that would have destroyed
all political landmarks. It might have ended in economic and
social chaos from which feudalism itself might have reared its head.
But England was held together by force, till after twelve years her
factions and her people were all agreed to accept one particular
form of free Government.

This gaoler’s work, which necessity imposed on the idealists,
was only part of a larger duty. To prevent anarchy in England
was not enough; they had also to prevent the disruption of the
British Empire. Scotland and Ireland, and half the Colonies
across the Ailantic, had proclaimed another Government. The
mastery of the sea was challenged: a fourth part of the war
ships had revolted to the new King; and privateers harbouring
in the Royalist Scilly and Channel Islands, and in the Isle of
Man, preyed upon English commerce almost at the mouth of our
ports. So unlikely did it seem that England, divided against her-
self, would be able to recover her lost heritage, that the City
merchants, instead of lending more money for the reconquest of
Ireland, betted twenty to one that Cromwell would never even set
sail. ‘The sovereigns of Europe refused to recognise a Government
whose principles they abhorred and whose power they as yet
despised. Our ambassadors were murdered,! our merchants were
robbed, our goods were everywhere seized on the open sea. It
seemed in 1649 that one of two things must happen. Either the
British power would be dissolved into its component parts, and the
advance of our race, so far as it depended on political union, would
be checked in either hemisphere; or else the King would re-
conquer his father’s throne by the sword and by foreign aid, and
would build up the British Empire again as a regal despotism.

1 Dorislaus in Holland, and Ascham in Spain, by exiled Cavaliers.

296 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1650

Crom. | Cromwell prevented both the disruption of the British Empire and

well’s task its reunion by Cavalier conquest. It is this supreme consideration
that takes the sting of irony from the failure of so much heroic effort,
spent in enterprises so often ill-conceived: that renders not vain in
the eye of history the truceless war of plague-stricken and hungry
men spearing each other on the islands of the Irish bogs; the
smoke of Blake’s cannoneers hanging in the sunlight of the Spanish
seas; and the fury of the radical saints as they scatter their
fellow-Puritans over the edge of the Lowland moor, or come
thundering in upon the flight through the tumultuous streets of
Worcester.

Charles The task of recovering the Empire would have been impossible if

re ate the enemies of the English Government had combined. But the
events of the last decade had divided Catholics and Protestants in
Ireland, and the followers of Argyle and Montrose in Scotland, by
blood feuds more bitter even than the memory of the English wars
which set enmity between the City Presbyterian and the Western
Cavalier. A common devotion could be simulated, just so long as
its object was an unknown quantity. For a few months after his
father’s death the young King, flitting shadow-like between the
Channel Islands and the Dutch port towns, seemed all, things to all
men. It was the boast of the Irish Catholics that he had asked and
received the support of the Pope; of the English and Scottish
Cavaliers that he knelt to receive the communion by the rites
for which his father had died; of the Scots that they would
manufacture him into a Covenanted King.

Cromwell It was well for his chance of reigning at Holyrood or White-
eekese hall that he never elected to go in person to Ireland, but left to
1649- faithful servants the task of uniting its distracted factions. Or-

May, 165° mond, the Lord-Lieutenant, used the first revulsion of feeling
caused by the regicide, to combine the Irish who had perpretated
the rebellion of 1641 with the English and Scottish colonists who
had suffered by it, and with the troops who had from time to time
been sent over for its suppression. These combined forces held
all Ireland, except Londonderry and the capital, and threatened
England with an Irish invasion. Dublin itself would have fallen
_but for the victory won almost under its walls by the Republican
commander Jones, when the first regiments from England arrived
to his relief. A few days later (15th August, 1649) Cromwell

1651) THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 299

not break, Cromwell left the road to England open. Charles,
accompanied by his most devoted followers, started in the race for
London. Presbyterian Argyle, jealous of the Cavaliers, refused to
accompany the uncovenanted leaders across the Border. Charles
marched onwards by the Lancashire route, down which four Royalist
invasions of England have passed in procession to their ruin (1648,
1651, 1715, 1745). Cromwell raced back through Yorkshire to
head off the invaders. The militia of the Western shires turned
out at the summons of Parliament; while Charles obtained few
recruits, although the Earl of Derby himself tried to raise Lanca-
shire. Englishmen disliked the Government much, but they dis-
liked the Scots more. The Presbyterians would not join an army
in which the Cavalier nobility was supreme, nor the Anglicans
and Catholics die for a King who still with his lips proclaimed
the Covenant. The prey was hunted down and surrounded in
Worcester city. After fierce fighting on both sides of the Severn, Wor-
the Royalists were driven in from east and west. When the battle es
rolled into the town, the slaughter and rout ended in a general 1651
surrender. The cavalry alone fled out by the northern gate, but
few even of the horsemen escaped the man-hunt that raged next
week through the country-side. Worcester streets were foul with
carnage; and the vast Cathedral served as a loose-box, in whose
aisles and neglected chapels wandered and reposed in various at-
titudes of dejection several thousand prisoners of all ranks, creeds
and parties in the two kingdoms. Among the few who escaped,
pursued by proclamations and rewards for capture, was a dark-
haired young man “above two yards’ high”, Passed on, a solitary
fugitive, from one Catholic house to another, Charles reached the
coast and disappeared, bequeathing to the Cavaliers another great
national legend, of the loyalty of subjects and the escape of a King.
Scotland was now speedily reduced. ‘The “crowning mercy” of The Re-
Worcester put an end, during Cromwell’s lifetime, to all movements oe
of revolt in Great Britain. But they would have been kindled
once more, if the Empire of the sea and of the Colonies had not at
the same time been recovered. In the Second Civil War, out of
forty-one ships in commission, eleven had revolted from Parliament,
though several of them had soon voluntarily returned to their
allegiance (1648). ‘The complaints of the mutineers had referred,
not to bad food and bad pay as they would have done at any

Cromwell
in Scot-
land, July,
1650

Dunbar,
3rd Sep.,
1650

998 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1860

he ever reached Whitehall by way of Holyrood, it was certain that
he would enter it with the same feelings towards Presbytery as
those which his grandiather had brought from the same school.
The unlucky effect of the Kirk discipline on the mind of James I.
had not been taken to heart by the taskmasters of Charles II.
The Don Juan of Jersey was not permitted in his northern king-
dom to “walk in the fields” on the Sabbath, or to indulge in
“ promiscuous dancing”. He partook of the sober vanity of golf in
the company of staid persons. He was made to bewail the sins of his
father, and the idolatries of his mother in solemn and public fasts.
On one of these occasions, in which, after the chastisement of Dun-
bar, the whole nation had been called on to join in their King’s
lamentations, the victim was heard to remark: “I think I ought to
repent too that ever I was born”.

A month after Charles had landed in Scotland Cromwell was
in arms at the gate. He tried to persuade the Kirk party that
they were ruining their own cause. More clearly than they, he
saw that the fate of their Kirk was involved in the common fate of
Puritanism in Great Britain. He seems to have taken the measure
of the Scottish clergy: “I beseech you,” he wrote, “in the bowels
of Christ, think it possible you may be mistaken”. But he was
baffled in negotiation and strategy alike. His “army of heretics
and blasphemers” was penned up between the sea and the track-
less Lammermuirs, on whose edge the Covenanted army lay unas-
sailable. But the Scots descended too soon from their post of
vantage, and were broken to ruin in the famous sunrise of Dunbar.”

After the destruction of its army, the Kirk party could no
longer maintain its exclusiveness. All Cavaliers who would sub-
mit to the idle form of “repentance,” were readmitted to share in
the defence of Scotland; and Charles obtained some political
freedom in return for unabated religious hypocrisy. Cromwell,
who had occupied Edinburgh as a result of Dunbar, was unable
to force his way much farther. The new combination of unrecon-
ciled enemies, so long as it sat still, could prevent his advance ;
but if it moved it would fall to pieces, 'To dissolve what he could

1 Airy, pp. 57-65.

2See Carl.’s Crom. for the most poetical and vivid, and Firth’s Crom., pp.
280-84 (and map), for the most accurate, account of the greatest feat of Puritan
warfare.

1651) THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 299

not break, Cromwell left the road to England open. Charles,
accompanied by his most devoted followers, started in the race for
London. Presbyterian Argyle, jealous of the Cavaliers, refused to
accompany the uncovenanted leaders across the Border. Charles
marched onwards by the Lancashire route, down which four Royalist
invasions of England have passed in procession to their ruin (1648,
1651, 1715, 1745). Cromwell raced back through Yorkshire to
head off the invaders. The militia of the Western shires turned
out at the summons of Parliament; while Charles obtained few
recruits, although the Earl of Derby himself tried to raise Lanca-
shire. Englishmen disliked the Government much, but they dis-
liked the Scots more. The Presbyterians would not join an army
in which the Cavalier nobility was supreme, nor the Anglicans
and Catholics die for a King who still with his lips proclaimed
the Covenant. The prey was hunted down and surrounded in
Worcester city. After fierce fighting on both sides of the Severn, Wor-
the Royalists were driven in from east and west. When the battle ya ok
rolled into the town, the slaughter and rout ended in a general 1651
surrender. The cavalry alone fled out by the northern gate, but
few even of the horsemen escaped the man-hunt that raged next
week through the country-side. Worcester streets were foul with
carnage; and the vast Cathedral served as a loose-box, in whose
aisles and neglected chapels wandered and reposed in various at-
titudes of dejection several thousand prisoners of all ranks, creeds
and parties in the two kingdoms, Among the few who escaped,
pursued by proclamations and rewards for capture, was a dark-
haired young man “above two yards’ high”. Passed on, a solitary
fugitive, from one Catholic house to another, Charles reached the
coast and disappeared, bequeathing to the Cavaliers another great
national legend, of the loyalty of subjects and the escape of a King.
Scotland was now speedily reduced. ‘The “crowning mercy ” of The Re-
Worcester put an end, during Cromwell’s lifetime, to all movements publican
of revolt in Great Britain. But they would have been kindled
once more, if the Empire of the sea and of the Colonies had not at
the same time been recovered. In the Second Civil War, out of
forty-one ships in commission, eleven had revolted from Parliament,
though several of them had soon voluntarily returned to their
allegiance (1648). ‘The complaints of the mutineers had referred,
not to bad food and bad pay as they would have done at any

Rupert
and Blake.
Recovery
of the
ocean
and the
Colonies,
1650-52

800 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1650

other period between the days of Drake and Nelson, but to the
treatment of the King and to the practice of putting army officers
in command of ships. The fanatic Rainborough was specially and
personally detested by the Presbyterian sailors. But three-quarters
of the fighting navy was actively loyal to the Independents, and
some at least of the seamen had concurred in the army petition
for “justice” on the “grand author of our troubles”. Though
Rainborough was removed, the Republicans continued to put lands-
men in command of ships and fleets. But the colonels of the
Commonwealth army were better able to learn the craft of war
at sea than the courtiers who, both before and after the inter-
regnum, begged or bought naval commands from the Stuart Kings.
Indeed, the element thus imported of military discipline and
tactical skill in close combat, was of great value in developing
the traditions of the fighting navy as distinct from the merchant
service! Blake had, perhaps, made voyages early in life as a
Bridgewater merchant, but his training in war had been the re-
nowned defence of the inland city of Taunton. After the execution
of the King, this good soldier, who was to become so great a sailor,
was put in command of the fleet on active service.

Meanwhile, the revolted ships had been reorganised in the Dutch
ports under the command of Prince Rupert. If possible with less
experience of the sea than his rival, Rupert proved as heroic and
resourceful in piracy as Blake in admiralty. The English Presby-
terian sailors in Holland were replaced and overawed by the refugee
Royalists, and the Cavalier party invested the wreck of its fortunes
in a fleet which was expected to bring in a good percentage at
the expense of regicide commerce.? In 1650 Blake chased Rupert
round the shores of the Iberian Peninsula, teaching Portugal and
warning Spain that Kings could not with impunity harbour the
foes of the English Commonwealth. It was by these operations
against the Cavalier fleet, which had chanced to take refuge among
the Catholic states of the Western Mediterranean, that Poctnanl
was drawn to send her fleet into that sea, and to oa the
politics of Europe by acquiring Mediterranean power.® Rupert
9 ee Mahan, Sea Power, pp. 125-30. Corbett, i., pp.

2 Warburton’s Rupert, iii., pp. 256 64.

3 Corbett, i., pp. } 3 , ce - 3 <
he had failed, PP. 199, 200 and 110-33, James I,’s expedition against Algiers in

1651} THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 301

then fled across the Atlantic. The islands of the English and Irish
Channels were reduced to submission, and the Republicans following
the Prince across the ocean, by a mere display of power, brought
back Virginia and the Barbadoes to the English allegiance (1651-
52). Rupert’s last ship, without consort or harbour, wandered
forlorn upon the waters.

The reconquest of the Empire, thus happily completed by Naval
Blake in his first three years of naval warfare, had forced Re- Power and

: . , its tempta-
publican England to increase her martial strength at sea out of tions
all proportion to her commerce. In 1649-51 the navy had been
doubled by the addition of forty-one new ships of war. Charles L.,
though he had neglected the crews, had kept up the numbers of
the fleet ; but the Commonwealth had now far surpassed his efforts
not only in the treatment and quality of the sailors, but even in
the numerical strength of the ships.! If this great maritime force
had been used solely to preserve peace, prestige and commerce,
England might have known rapid economic recovery, and such
political reconciliation as prosperity can give to a divided State.
Unfortunately, the abnormal size of the fleet at their command
tempted the rulers in their pride, first to match themselves with
the yet unchallenged strength of Holland, and then to take
advantage of the weakness of Spain. In consequence of the Dutch
and Spanish wars, foreign nations, who had just learnt from Blake
to respect the regicide flag of St. George, again fell foul of our
commerce, and the period of England’s great naval strength was
not a period of commercial welfare. At home the taxation neces-
sary for war, collected by arbitrary power, was injurious alike to
the wealth and to the freedom of the subject; above all, it was
made to fall severely on the Cavaliers, whose property the warrior
Republic came to use as a reserve fund. Thus the Dutch and
Spanish wars helped to bring about the fall of the Commonwealth.?

In the middle of the seventeenth century it might have been The
predicted, that the abnormal share of the Dutch skippers in the hls en
carrying trade of England and her Colonies could in no case 1651
last another fifty years. An eminent economic historian of our
own day doubts whether this natural development of English as
against Dutch shipping was in fact very greatly accelerated by the

1 Oppenheim, pp. 302-7. 4
3 [bid., pp. 302-7, 308-70. Cunningham, pp. 178, 179, 186-90.

302 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1651

Navigation Act of 1651, although contemporaries attributed to the
action of this law the marked expansion of English commerce
between the Restoration and the Treaty of Utrecht. But whether
the Rump really conferred, or only seemed to confer, great benefits
on our shipping by the passage of the Act, the Dutch War of
1651-54 was an evil in itself, and did not arise as an inevitable con-
sequence of the Navigation Laws. The Dutch Government had
protested against those laws, but was prepared to submit to their
operation, partly because they could not be completely enforced.
War would not have broken out if the Rump had desired peace.
Foreign affairs were now for the first time in the hands of Parlia-
ment men, who were more sensitive than kings and courtiers
to the aspirations and prejudices of the commercial world:
they held that wars ought to be made not to help dynasties but
to help commerce, and that a sea war with Holland was therefore
required. ‘The usual quarrel arose over the right of search, and
the traditional claim of the English, that all ships should salute
their flag in “the British seas”, These claims were rudely en-
forced by the simple and ignorant sailors, who hated all foreigners,
and now for the first time felt themselves strong enough to pay off

The Dutch old scores against the Dutch. The Parliament men knew that the

War,
1651-54

war was disliked by the soldiers of all ranks from Cromwell down-
wards, but they hoped that it would be popular in the city, as it
certainly was in the fleet. But the burden of taxation and the
capture of merchant ships soon turned opinion strongly against the
war, and still more strongly against the Government. The prosperity
and stability that had seemed in its grasp after Wocester, again
passed away.

But much as the English suffered, their enemies suffered more,
The two war fleets were nearly equal, but the merchant navy of
Holland was larger and therefore less well protected. Holland, as

1 Cunningham, pp. 479, 603, 209-13. The policy of the Navigation Laws of 1651
was not new; their principles had been adopted as early as the reign of Richard II., and
frequent attempts had been made to enforce them by the Stuart Kings. It was not
found possible to enforce the provisions of the Act of 1651 at all regularly. That
Act “ prohibited the introduction into any territory of the Commonwealth of produce
of any country in Asia, Africa or America, except in vessels owned by Englishmen
or by the inhabitants of English Colonies and manned by crews of which more than
one-half were of English nationality. Imports from any part of Europe might be
brought in only in English vessels, or in vessels the owners of which belonged
to that nation in which the goods were manufactured or produced,” :

1653) THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 303

the Dutch complained, presented to the attacks of her adversary a
mountain of gold, England a mountain of iron. It was calculated
that seven-eighths of the inhabitants of Holland lived by industry

or commerce. And the bulk of her industry and commerce de-
pended on the transit of great fleets along the British Channel, as
they passed out into the open sea, bound for Africa and Ceylon,
Smyrna and Venice, the Spice Islands, China and Japan. Never
yet, since the beggars of the sea, with the good-will of all true
English mariners, had founded the Dutch State upon the barren
shore, had navies hostile to Holland inhabited our ports and con-
trolled the narrow Channel through which lay her daily passage to

the ocean. She was now at the height of her wealth and power,
but she could not survive on her own resources, when the possession

of the Channel was successfully disputed. Starvation reigned in the
most civilised region on the surface of the globe. Mobs of hungry
workmen roamed out over the country, while grass grew in the
streets of Amsterdam. The masts of whole fleets were seen idly
rocking on the Zuyder Zee, like a decaying forest of innumerable
trees; while amid other sights and sounds, in the still unbroken
quiet of the empires and anarchies of the far and farthest East, the
Dutch settlers searched the sky-line morning by morning in vain for

the gleam of expected sails. Holland could still defy, Spain and Peace
France when her land was under the waves, but could not make He Yo
head against the men who took from her the command of the sea. April
She yielded to the starvation that followed the partial and hard-* 054
won victory of Blake over Van Tromp in the grandest sea war that

the world had known. So a treaty of peace gave to the English
Commonwealth the barren honours of a conflict to which it had

in fact sacrificed its last chance of political stability,

But before the Dutch peace a change had taken place in the Army,
Government of England. The recovery of Great and Greater Sohal 4
Britain, and its unnecessary sequel, the war with Holland, had Council,
been the common achievement of all who had consented to the 49°53
King’s death. But this party was itself divided into at least two

sections. ‘The three or four score members still regularly attending

1 Mahan, Sea Power, pp. 37, 38 G.(C. & P.), ii., passim.

The Army
gomangs a

new Par

304 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1653

the House of Commons had brought about the Dutch war, and |

}

were so anxious to prolong their own power, that they foresaw —

more clearly than others the dangers of holding a general election.
The soldiers, on the other hand, disliked the Dutch war ; clamoured
for more reforms in Church and State; were tired of the oligarchy
of lawyers in the Parliament House ; and failed to perceive that
when they had removed this last pale shadow of representative
Government, they would still be unable to appeal, as they wished,
to the suffrages of an alienated and divided nation. Between
the army and the Parliament stood the Council of State. It
was composed of the best men of both parties. Here Vane and
Cromwell, with forty others, members of Parliament and officers
together, worked side by side in the Government of Britain. The
bribery and favouritism that so often marked the proceedings of
the Rump could not be charged against the Council of State,
whose republican virtue was the wonder of unfriendly foreign
envoys. Legislation, and the power of extraordinary justice, and
therefore the direction of general policy, lay with the House of
Commons; but the administrative work of the Council had sufficed
to save the State.!

As soon as the State was saved, the inevitable quate came to
a head. The soldiers clamoured for a dissolution, and were only

liament, held in check by Cromwell. Now, as six years before, he strove

1653

to the last for union between the army and the civil power, well
knowing the dangers of the course down which he was again fated
to be pushed as leader. The Rump replied to the agitation of
the army by introducing a Bill to perpetuate its own existence
and the almost unlimited powers of its members, and even to
provide that they should in effect choose the men who were to sit
in future Parliaments. Cromwell, who was still for compromise, ex-
tracted over night (19th April,) from Vane and other leaders of Par-
liament a promise that the Bill should not be pushed on the next day.
But when morning came, the rank and file of the House, who were
more corrupt than their own leaders in the Council of State, and
had therefore more reason to fear an inquiry into their past conduct,
proceeded to hurry through the Bill for their own perpetuation,
before Cromwell should hear what they were about. Fairfax was

1G, (C. & P.), i., pp. 4-10, 349, 350; ii., PP. 143, 144, 205. Firth’s Crom., pp.
%O2, 303, 234, 245, 246. Cunningham, pp. 182-84.

1653) THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 305

to be made general in his place, to head a reaction against the
fanatics and the military chiefs. Vane sat still, and made no
attempt actively to redeem his promise of the night before. Crom-

well was surprised by the news in his lodgings at Whitehall. In

his plain morning dress, but with a body of soldiers behind him,

he hastened to Westminster by the road down which Charles,

with another troop of armed men, had passed to the arrest of

the Five Members. Hot with newly-roused passion against the
promise-breakers, and stirred to his military manner by the need

for instant action to prevent the conspiracy, he used against the

only representatives of legal power in England, words and gestures

that would have suited better if he had surprised Lilburne pre-

siding over a meeting of mutineers in camp. The man who had Cromwell
saved Parliamentary government in our country, compared the mace rae
to a jester’s staff, and with hat on head stamped up and down zoth April,
the middle of the floor, drove out the members with twenty file of 7°53
musqueteers, and locked behind himself the magic doors, which close

at the touch of force, but which force cannot reopen.!

At first men were delighted when they heard what “brave The Bare-
Oliver” had done. But his popularity, which was only a reflex of Paved '<
the universal hatred for the Rump, did not outlast the nine days’ July-Dec.,
wonder. Now that the way was cleared for the free democratic 7°53
election which the army had sought over the bodies of so many
Governments, all that Cromwell would do was to summon an as-
sembly of choice spirits from the Independent congregations,

selected partly by their fellow-worshippers, and partly by the

officers themselves. This nominated Parliament, which has been
posthumously nicknamed after the name of one of its members,

_Praise-God Barebone, was guided in its decisions by a minority,

more well-intentioned than politic, who attended with a regularity

_ that gave them the control of the House. Chosen from the Non-
| conformist congregations, these men proposed to abolish tithe and

:
:
:
|

patronage, and to set up a voluntary Church system. An equally
sweeping measure to abolish the Chancery Court was proposed,

but had not been thought out in any practical form, for the

lawyers were not taken into the counsels of the just. The pro-
prietary classes were gravely alarmed. Cromwell, who under the

1E, H. R., viii., pp. 526-34. G. (C. & P.), chap. xxv. Firth’s Crom., pp.

315-25. But see also remarks in Morley’s Cromwell, pp. 346-49.
20

Cromwell
becomes
Protector,
Dec., 1653

306 - ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1653

short-lived influence of Major-General Harrison, had, in his opening
speech to the Assembly, gone into exaltations and prophecies at the
approaching rule of the Saints, lost all enthusiasm when he perceived
how few Saints were as politic as he was himself, and was well pleased
when the moderates rose early one morning and, before the others
knew what they were about, voted an abdication of their powers.

But it is easy to laugh too much at the Barebone Parliament.
Tithe when it was paid in kind, and the Chancery Court then
and for long generations to come, caused widespread misery and
injustice. Neither is it self-evident that patronage is the best
method of choosing clergymen. And in other respects this
Assembly was on the path of true reforms, to which there was
even then no practical objection. They provided for the proper
care of lunatics and for the relief of imprisoned debtors. And
they showed the secular and anticlerical leanings of advanced
Puritans by passing an Act which established Civil Marriage
before a Justice of the Peace, according to the usage now prevail-
ing on the continent. This could scarcely have been the Act of
an Assembly of religious bigots.

After the failure of the Nominated House, the officers took
upon themselves to draw up the “ Instrument of Government ”—
the Constitution under which Cromwell began his rule as Protector,
with powers carefully divided between himself, a perpetual Council
and an occasional Parliament. Thus the general election, which
men had expected as the immediate sequel of the expulsion of the
Rump, was only permitted after the new Constitution had been
established.

Unlike the Barebone Assembly, the elected Parliaments of the
Protectorate in some sort represented public opinion, at any rate
of the middle class. The Cavalier gentry were indeed excluded
from election, but the Cavaliers were a small community, whose
wrongs already excited indignation, but whose policy could not yet
obtain support. Men upheld the Puritan rule from 1653 to 1658,
for the reason that they upheld the Cavalier rule from 1660 to 1666,

1G, (C. & P.), ii., p. 242, H. A. Glass, The Barbone Parliament, 1899, pp.
99-101, for the full text of the Act. It was done partly to facilitate registration.
Some Puritans were uncommonly clerical, but some, without being the less zealously
religious, were strongly secular and anticlerical, as this Act, an indefinite number
of centuries in advance of its age, bears witness, Such civil marriages actually
took place, as parish registers show.

1654, THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT'S 807

because their first desire was peace and settled government; only
they thought the government ought to be settled at the outset by
themselves and not by the soldiers.. The representatives of the
nation refused to endorse the new Constitution, not because it
kept the King from his own, but because it had been drawn up
by the red-coats. It was not the Cavaliers, but the civilians and
the Republicans who between them wrecked the scheme of a con-
stitutional Protectorate. In the same way, although there was no
popular movement of Anglican revival, the Puritan supremacy
became odious when the rule of the Saints, to which the army had
once put a stop when it appeared as the rule of the Presbyterian
clergy, took new shape in the rule of the Major-Generals. People
found that the warrior saint was no more to be endured than
the priest, because if he was more tolerant he was also more
powerful.

At the polling for the first Parliament of the Protectorate, First Par-
candidates who had sat in the Barebone Assembly were generally Hoge of
defeated, and the conservative Puritans were sent up in force. tectorate,
Oliver asked them to ratify the Instrument of Government. fits ns
He was willing that they should alter it in “circumstantials,”
but they saw need for alteration in “fundamentals”. They sat to
defend the rights of the nation against the army, and in pursuit of
this end they were naturally drawn on to claim for themselves the
sovereign powers of the Long Parliament. Rejecting two “funda-
mentals” of the Instrument, they threatened to revive religious
persecution, and to take the control of the armed force out of the
hands of Council and Protector. Oliver was determined to save
England from religious intolerance and from the omnipotence of
an irresponsible Assembly. The members were determined to save
her from despotism and military rule. He would not suffer England

again to tread the weary round of Long Parliament tyranny ; they
| would not suffer her to be ruled by the sole will of a Puritan
Strafford. He knew that war and anarchy would raise their heads
if, while factions were still so divided, he resigned to an Assembly
the power of the sword. They knew that as long as he retained it,
constitutional government was a farce. Both were right. There
was no escape from the situation which the Long Parliament had
created when it refused to reconcile parties after the first Civil
War. Until there was again a united body of nationa! opinion,

308 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1655

there was no real sanction for the powers either of irresponsible
assembly or of military dictator.

The Oliver dissolved the Parliament, intending however still to rule

epee ;, by the laws of the land, and by the Instrument of Government.

Aug., 1655 But, in a few months, Cavalier conspiracies of rebellion and assas-
sination drove him for awhile into another course. He divided
England into military districts, each under the special charge of a
Major-General. The Justices of Peace were sternly held to the
performance of disagreeable duties by these military overseers.
While the fear of an immediate rising lasted, scores of Cavalier
gentlemen were put under arrest, by way of precaution. But
even after the first panic was over, race-meetings, cock-fights
and bear-baitings were prohibited, partly on political grounds, as
likely to be made the scene of seditious assemblies, and partly
for the moral welfare of the community. Unnecessary public-
houses were suppressed in large numbers. Rogues and jolly com-
panions; wandering minstrels, bear-wards and Tom Goodfellows ;
tipsy loquacious veterans, babbling of Rupert and Goring; and
the broken regiments of stage-players whose occupation was now
gone; all the nondescript population that lived on society in
olden times and repayed it in full by making it merry England,
were swept up before the military censors, and if they failed to
show their respectability and means of livelihood, were sent to
prison or to banishment. These proceedings were not only unjust
but illegal. Thus, the rule of the Saints in its latest stage was
not a clerical, but a military and magisterial inquisition, conducted
partly “to discourage and discountenance all profaneness and un-
godliness,” but partly also “for the preservation of the peace of
the Commonwealth,” “breaking the designs of the enemies there-
0)

Special To maintain the system of military police and to conduct the

texation of Spanish war, special taxes, known as “decimations,” were exacted

655 from all men of estate who had formerly been Cavaliers. Oliver,
aggravated by the plots of their faction, and forgetting his old
principles of individual justice and national solidarity, persuaded

In another aspect, the rule of the Major-Generals was an isolated attempt to
set up an efficient system of police, and so to diminish the shameful number of
highway robberies and other crimes which disgraced England until the establish-
ment of a civilian police in the nineteenth century.

1656] THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 309

himself that the Cavaliers had an interest hostile to that of the
nation, and might be treated as a class apart. It was a grave falling
off. In the days when the small estates of ex-Royalist squires had
been sold up by the Rump to pay for the Dutch war, he had seen
with pity and indignation the threadbare rustic coats and bewildered
glances of the “ poor men” “ driven, like flocks of sheep, by forty in a
morning to the confiscation of goods and estates; without any man
being able to give a reason why two of them had deserved to forfeit
a shilling”.’ Now he himself repeated the very injustice which he
had censured in the Long Parliament.

The special taxation of the Cavaliers was not only unjust but
impolitic. At the stage which social and economic development
had then reached, the gentry were the class most firmly planted in
the land and institutions of the country? Parliaments and Pro-
tectors might harry and fine and dragoon them for a season, but
not root them up from the ancient soil where they grew. ‘The
poor gentlemen had now very little following, but if ever the day
came when Royalism should prove the only road back to civilian
and settled government, these men whom Cromwell was filling with
hatred of all that he most desired to perpetuate in England, would
again be the ruling class in the State. It was because of the treat-
ment meted out first by Parliament and then by Protector to the
general body of rural Cavaliers, that Puritanism was allowed no
religious or civil status in England at the Restoration.

The second Parliament of the Protector met in a state of grave second
discontent. The cry was “no swordsmen”. But Oliver himself Parlia-
was already sickened by methods contrary to his really generous Ger e

he Pro-
nature. The rule of the Major-Generals was stopped. The Com-tectorate.

mons showed a very proper spirit in throwing out a finance bill for es wee
the continued “decimation” of Cavaliers. But the impression 2655-June,
1657

made was never to be effaced.

The new Parliament before long produced a new Constitution
known as the Humble Petition and Advice. It further exalted the
powers of the Protector over his Council, for the majority of the
Commons wished to revive the civil power in the person of Oliver.
They made common cause with him against his soldiers. They
looked for his help to restore the ancient civil Constitution. They

1Carl.’s Crom., Speech III. G. (C. & P.), ii., pp. 141, 142.
3 See Appendix A. as to the small quantity of Cavalier emigration, 1645-1660,

Second
session,
Jan.-Feb.,
1658

Success of

Oliver’s

ecclesiasti-

310 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1658

would even have made him King but for the opposition of the army ;
and they actually succeeded in creating a House of Lords.

Oliver had secured the Parliamentary recognition of his powers,
which four years back he had sought in vain. At last he seemed
nearing the port of constitutional government. The incoming tide
of regret for all the old things which he had helped to destroy had
been strangely turned in his favour. But that regret was less uni-
versally felt in the Puritan party on which his system rested, than
in the nation at large. The unquiet spirit of Lilburne, who had
been carried to his grave by his latest friends the Quakers, was still
ranging for revenge. In the second session of the second Parlia-
ment, owing to the calling up of so many supporters of Government
to the new House of Lords, the Republicans could no longer be out-
voted. ‘They opposed Oliver in the Commons, while in City and
country they intrigued for his overthrow with Levellers and Cavaliers.
To render the State secure from a conspiracy of which the House
of Commons was the centre, the Protector dissolved his second
Parliament. He himself had now only seven months more to live?

From the beginning to the end of his public career in England
and Scotland alike, it was Cromwell’s first object to maintain a

cal polity united Puritan party in affairs both of Church and State. Yet in
among all the end Holles and Harrison, Lilburne and Ludlow, scarcely hated

Puritans

Charles Stuart worse than they hated him. As Protector, he had
quarrelled with two Puritan Parliaments, even after a hundred duly
elected members had in each case been turned back at the door.
But the union which he failed to secure in politics he accom-
plished in religion. The wisdom and justice of his ecclesiastical
system vindicated itself in the end to all Puritans. Milton and
Baxter, Hugh Peters and George Fox, were alike constrained to
praise the tolerant and conservative guardian of the interests of
the Lord’s people. He succeeded in reconciling all, because, while
he put down persecution, he maintained endowments. The Pro-
tectorate meant to one party defence from the blasphemy laws of
orthodox Parliaments, to another safety from the spoliation of
Barebone Assemblies. The country-side swarmed with enthusiasts

? Professor Firth thinks that if he had lived he would, very soon after Sept., 1858,

have been able to accept the Kingship. Opinion was rapidly maturing in that direc-
tion, even in the army. Last Years of Protectorate, ii., pp. 278-9.

1655] THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS all

denouncing a “hireling priesthood” to applauding audiences of
tithe-payers ; but as long as Oliver lived, the parson knew that
he would still be able to venture into the fields of the retired
corporal, and humbly carry off his lawful sheaves, at risk of nothing
worse than ironical inquiries where he was at Worcester fight, and
whether he had read Matthew xxiii. 13. But the old soldier
and his co-religionists on their side were not ungrateful to the chief
who had won for them the liberty to worship God in conventicles,
and to rebuke the parson ; while the Quaker, when he was periodically
delivered from gaol by colonels and magistrates still fuming with
rage, divined that they were acting not by their own light, but
through the power of the Lord’s servant, Oliver Cromwell.

The endowed parsons represented the three largest sects—Pres-
byterian, Independent and Baptist—into which Puritan religion
was in those years divided. But around the consumers of tithe,
were scattered innumerable free congregations, either supporting
their own ministers, or dispensing with ministers altogether. Pro-
vided the Prayer-book was not used, any form of Protestant
worship was openly practised. Cromwell’s was in fact a congrega-
tional system, partly endowed and partly unendowed. Scandal
and anarchy were prevented by his Commissions of Triers and
Ejectors, whose business it was to weed the Established Church
of disorderly and unlearned servants. They exercised their power
so honestly and tolerantly that the inquisition won the applause
of all parties, and kept up the education and usefulness of the
endowed clergy to a level which there is no reason to think inferior
to the level reached under Laud.1

Under these conditions of free competition, the unorthodox Rapid
gained fast on the orthodox forms of doctrine and worship. Now eo
was proved how little hold Presbyterianism had over the English dox sects
Puritan mind. Now were formed the free religious communities in
which the Nonconformist spirit survived through the Restoration
period, and took its final shape in English society. Now was
shown what Laudism and Presbyterianism had repressed, the
wealth of imagination, the depth of emotion, the vigour and
variety of intellect that were to be found among the poor. The
thousands that were awakened to the use of their minds by
Bunyan and Fox, were too near the prime needs of body and spirit

1 Firth’s Crom., pp. 357-60. G. (C. & P.), ii., pp. 320-26,

George
Fox

312 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1655

to be interested in theologies and Church systems.' ‘To the poor
also the Gospel was preached, sometimes in crude and coarse forms :
but in one form at least that was as pure as it was simple, and as
hostile to the degrading superstitions as to the indifferent ethical
practice of the more respectable churches. ‘The rise of the Quakers
was rendered possible, because Cromwell prevented the annihilating
persecution which would have fallen on such a sect at its first ap-
pearance under any other régzme ; and because this was the period
of religious and intellectual stirring among the English common
people. By the time of the Restoration, the Society of Friends
was sufficiently well-rooted to survive any increase of persecution.
The ideas of Quakerism came from many sources, foreign and
English, but the formation of the Friends’ Society was due to
one man. George Fox, the weaver’s son, apprentice to a shoemaker
and dealer in wool, had little book-learning beyond the Bible; but
he had as a young man acquired first-hand knowledge of varieties
of religious experience, by walking through the Midlands to seek
out and converse with “ professors” of Puritanism in all its forms.
Thus trained, he was better suited to found a new religion that
should satisfy the desires of the soul, than if the academic study of
Hooker and Calvin had accustomed him to regard the organisation
of Churches and the details of dogma as matters of spiritual im-
portance. His views, which he drew from obscure corners of his
own country, had come from distant lands and ages. He gathered
up, certainly from the General Baptists, perhaps also indirectly from
the Family of Love and the Diggers, ideas which had in the course
of long generations travelled to England from Silesia and far
Germany, by way of the Mennonite communities of Holland.
These ideas, of which perhaps he did not understand the full intel-
lectual bearing so well as Winstanley, or some of his own followers,
he alone was able to impress upon a large portion of mankind, by
the fire of his living genius. He had an overwhelming, perhaps an
hypnotic, power and presence, like one of the ancient prophets. To
hear Fox preach once in the churchyard as he passed through the
town, or to spend an evening with him by the fireside, often was
_ 7“ Your word-divinity darkens knowledge. You talk of a body of Divinity, and
of Anatomysing Divinity. O, fine language! But when it comes to trial, it is but

a husk without the kernel, words without life. The spirit is in the hearts of the

people whom you despise and tread under foot” (Winstanley, New Law of
Righteousness, see p. 283 above, note),

| 1655) THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 313

enough to change a persecutor into an enthusiast, to emancipate a
man from the intellectual habits and social customs of a lifetime.
The views to which he converted the common people of his day
were not those of the religious revivals which for 300 years have
constantly recurred in lower English society. ‘The religion which
he did so much to spread was a mystical and Christian free-thought.
The success of such a movement, which, before the founder died in
1691, counted its followers by tens of thousands, is witness to the
intellectual richness of the soil in which such seed could spring up
to so plentiful a harvest. His followers were largely recuited from
the various sects, and from the individual enthusiasts belonging to
no community, who abounded in Cromwell’s England. Unorthodoxy
running almost to pantheism, as in the case of Winstanley, then
often went with all the signs of intense religious exaltation.

The Episcopalian and Presbyterian training tended to fix the Methods
mind far from such thoughts and feelings; and the rule of Bishop as
or Presbyter would have prevented by force the free teaching of such ganda
blasphemies. But under Cromwell the Quakers enjoyed through
the action of the central government the opportunity to teach their
doctrines in public; and this right would have been allowed with-
out any qualification, if they had not abused it by peculiar and
disorderly methods of propaganda. It was their custom to enter
into churches at service time, and denounce the parson to his
parishioners as a “dead dog,” a hireling receiver of tithes, and a
preacher of superstitions as false as those which enslaved the spirits
of the heathen. The strange words often brought sudden con-
viction to a few men and women in corners of the church, but
stirred the rest there and then to a murderous rush against the man
who insulted them. The cheerfulness with which on such occasions
the Quaker stretched out his arms and neck to the kicks and blows,
gave to his offensive tactics of propaganda partial justification and
complete success. Where Fox himself went, people were converted by
scores and sometimes by hundreds at atime. And these conversions
were not the mere passing swell of a vulgar ecstasy and remorse.
Those whom the Society of Friends took into the bonds of its close
but free community, seldom chose to return out into the world,

$14 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1655

Quaker Quakerism corrected the worst faults of those Puritan sects out
doctrine of whose midst it grew. It was not for nothing that Fox had spent
so many years studying “ professors”. Instead of the military spirit,
he proclaimed the wickedness of all war. Instead of the reliance
on force, he enjoined martyrdom. Instead of the suppression of
vice, the influence of example. In place of the religion of gloom
and reprobation, he opened the inner well-springs of constant Joy.
In place of the hell waiting the sinner in the next world, he taught
men to unfold the heaven that each carried hidden within himself
on earth. From the Bible which the Puritan had made the sole
authority, he appealed, not back to the Church, but forward to the
individual. ‘The doctrine of “inner light”—that inspiration comes
from within each man, not from without—was the centre of his
system. The individual interpretation of the Bible had long been
preparing the way for this idea. The “inner light” was at once
the outcome and the countercheck of the Puritan Bible-worship.
Quaker On the whole, Quakerism was more a development than a re-
Practices action from the spirit of the sects. The Quaker’s objection to
gaiety of dress and luxury of life, though not so cheerless and
morose as that of the Puritan “professor,” was yet more severe.
The democratic scorn of the pomp and circumstance of worldly
authority, then widely felt among the sectarians, was stereotyped - |
by the Quakers in their well-known rules of speech and behaviour.
Above all, the religious appeal to the mind and spirit was made
more simple and direct than ever; not only was there no ordinary
service or ritual, but the rites of Baptism and of the Lord’s Supper
were disused, and the special priesthood was abolished. Every man
and every woman, Fox declared, was a priest. In thus rejecting the
organisation by which other Christian bodies maintain their numbers
when the spirit has fled, the Quakers, when the missionary zeal of
the first two generations was over, lost the power of propagating
their religion, but on the other hand did not lose their spiritual
intensity and freedom.
Protectors § The usurper and the restored monarch were both personally
es favourable to them; Oliver from enthusiasm, Charles II. from
ofthe indifference. Charles’s first act at his Restoration was to save the
Quakers Quakers from Puritan rage in his American colonies. But in
England Cromwell’s protection was the most effective ; the severest
persecution on this side of the Atlantic, “the great and general

1655] THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 315

imprisonment of Friends,” was at the hands of the Anglicans,
subsequent to the abortive Rising of the Fifth Monarchy men
in 1660.

The Presbyterians hated Quakerism because it threatened to
take away their tithes; the Baptists because it actually took away
their congregations ; and the Episcopalians because it was further
removed than any other sect from the ideas of ritual and Church
government. But most of all the Quakers were hated by the
magistrates and officers, who could extort no sign of outward
respect, and by the ordinary man who could not get the small
change of politeness, without which he will refuse to take the most
precious gifts. The hatred with which the Friends were at first
regarded, the rules, in themselves absurd, which they observed in
order to escape the contagion of worldliness and the stifling influ-
ence of conventionality, drew them into so close a communion with
each other for purposes of intermarriage and habits of life, that they
resembled in this as in many other ways some mystical sect of the
Fast. The founder, in whom ecstasy and common-sense, violence
. and peacefulness were strangely blended, tamed the frenzy of his
first disciples by the discipline of silent worship and by his own
invincible power to calm as well as stir the soul; he saw prevalent
before he died that quietness of manner and spirit which thence-
forth was regarded as the truest symbol of the inner light and of
the blessedness that it gives.!

At the time of Restoration of Charles II. there were as many Limit of
as 60,000 Friends in England, drawn principally from the trading oe
and yeomen classes. The persecution which they had to endure tectorate
at the hands of the Cavalier Parliaments put a check on their
propaganda; their leaders were kept in prison for years together,
and many thousands emigrated to America, especially to their own
eclony of Pennsylvania. When at length under William III. the
period of permanent toleration set in, their propagandist fervour
had spent itself, and the Quaker body passed into its “‘quietist’” era.

Oliver’s ecclesiastical system, though it did lasting work in
sheltering the infancy of the Nonconformist sects and the Society
of Friends, was based on a principle which ensured its own downfall.

1 Fox’s F¥ournal, passim. Barclay, passim. Gooch, pp. 270-82. G.(C. &. P.),
ii, pp. 19-24; iii., pp. 106-11, 210-16. Westcott’s Social Aspects of Christianity.

Miss Stephen’s Quaker Strongholds. Braithwaite’s Beginnings of Quakerism. Sir
Alfred Lyall pointed out to me the similarity of the early Quakers to an Eastern sect.

316 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1655

Its toleration was limited to Puritanism. Cromwell himself would
have wished to tolerate the use of the Prayer-book, but the majority
of those on whom he depended had made up their minds otherwise.
Even he, as his political and financial methods made the hatred of
the Cavaliers more bitter and their conspiracies more frequent,
thought it necessary to prevent them from gathering in powerful
religious assemblies. They were not systematically dragooned and
spied upon, and the public exercise of their religion was often winked
at, though it was often interrupted.

Under the Protectorate the majority of religious people in Eng-
land were Puritans of one sort or another.? There was no popular
movement on behalf of the Prayer-book. But whereas the adhesion
of the landed gentry to the new order of things was necessary for its
permanence, a large proportion of that small but important class
was being driven into sympathy with Anglicanism by social, politi-
cal and financial oppression. And even if the bulk of the religious
people of England were Puritan, the bulk of the non-religious were
now as heartily against the Puritans as they had formerly been
against Laud. The rule of the Major-Generals, the closing of the
theatres, the frequent interference with sports, the occasional punish-
ment of vice, the arbitrary arrests, imprisonments and banishments,
the effacement of the old leaders of society, the ubiquity of soldier
and saint, and the Englishman’s latent sense of humour, were all
secretly preparing an incredible resurrection of things killed and
buried.

Puritanism threw away its best chance in England, because all
its parties—even the democrats—assumed as an axiom that no one
who was not a Puritan was to share in the Government. With this
idea they had gone into the war; with this idea they had tried
to settle the nation in the first hour of victory; and with this
idea Cromwell ruled. Even in the minds of, those who thought
religious toleration right in itself, the prohibition of the Prayer-
book worship followed as a deduction from this axiom of political
exclusiveness, just as in later years the yet more cruel enforcement
of the Conventicle and Five Mile Acts followed as a deduction from
the axiom that no Puritan should sit in Parliament or serve on a
Corporation.

1Clarke Papers, iii., pp. 130-31. Firth’s Crom., p. 361,
1G, (C. & P.), tix, pp. 323-24, a

1655] THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 317

If the Roman Catholics had reason to regret the personal rule Condition
of the Stuart Kings, they were at least better off in the hands of oats
the Independent chiefs than in the hands either of Presbyterian .
or of Cavalier Parliaments. The recusancy Acts had been repealed
in 1650, and though the Catholics were not allowed publicly to
exercise their religion, they were not otherwise molested under the
Protectorate.

It was natural that during the decade when Old Testament Return of
sympathies and theoretical religious toleration inspired the governors ‘ Jews
of England, the Jews who had been expelled in the day of medizval
Extfolidism should find the road of return opened to them by the
enemies of the Inquisition. Indeed the popular prejudice against
which Oliver had in this matter to contend was due to commercial
jealousy rather than to any other feeling.

In spite of so many disturbing Shoe the years 1640-60 Educa-
represent one of our great Berinds. of educational enthusiasm and oe a
improvement. In the fifty years from 1601-51 as many schools
were founded, as had been founded in a century of Tudor rule.

The movement reached its climax under the Puritans. The same
utilitarian social enthusiasm, which had been only too pronounced
in the Barebone Assembly, took more practical forms in the educa-
tional policy of Parliament and Protector. The national duty of
education was eagerly taken up by the Long Parliament in 1641,
and though war caused them to abandon their design of a complete
system, donations from the confiscated Church lands were continually
made for the maintenance of schools and schoolmasters. Treasury
grants in aid of education were frequent in the period of Puritan
rule. The expulsion of the Episcopalian dons from Oxford and
Cambridge was an unfortunate result of the system then prevalent
in both parties of mixing up learning with religion and politics, but
the zeal of the new Government, and the abilities of the men whom

they substituted for the old, led to results the excellence of which

i

even Clarendon had to acknowledge. It is difficult to say whether
the Universities were best under the restrictive system of Laud, or
under that of the Parliamentary Commissioners; but the schools of
England certainly benefited by the Great Rebellion.’

1E, H. R., xv., pp. 58-72. Firth’s Crom., pp. 353-57. Visitation of Oxford
Camden Soc., 1881). ;

Last
stages of

the war in

Ireland,
1650-52

318 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1652

After Cromwell returned from Ireland in the spring of 1650,
Ireton, Ludlow and Fleetwood completed her subjugation in two
years of guerilla war. When the Tories took refuge in the oozy
isles of the bogland, and defied pursuit, the English hunters sent
the unsubstantial hounds of famine down the watery ways to throttle
them in their last lair. All Ireland was devastated of food: its last
defenders lay down to die unseen among their hills, and wailing
rose faint in many a secret place with only the birds of the air
to hear it. Others came out to die in battle in yelling hordes.
The Puritans themselves drooped with starvation and disease as —
they plied the pike, wearily now and in grim silence, They rose
victorious over the horrors of that war by the discipline and self-
restraint which they brought from the English field; but they
left their human kindness in their own country. Like all the
English who touched that fatal shore, they were degraded to-
wards the level of the bands that had wasted Germany for the
woeful Thirty Years. When Ireland at last lay dead at their feet,
one-third of her inhabitants had perished by the sword, pestilence
or famine.!

Then followed the settlement.

When at the dissolution of the medizval system of polity on
the continent, England saw France and Spain arise as nations,
and set themselves against each other and against herself, her
governors felt the need that Ireland should be occupied in force.
From Henry VIII. to Cromwell three methods of holding the
country were tried in succession, each more potent as a means of
military occupation, but more unjust and fatal as a political settle-
ment, than that which it superseded.

First, under the early Tudors an attempt was made to rule the
tribes of half-savage Irish by English military governors, respecting

? The Tories were “ irregular bands who robbed and massacred without being
enlisted in any regular force”. Major Morgan describes himself and his colleagues
as engaged in the destruction of three kinds of beasts: ‘‘ The first is the wolf, on
whom we lay five pounds ahead and ten pounds if a bitch. The second beast isa
priest, on whose head we lay ten pounds. The third beast is a Tory, on whose
oe if he be a public Tory, we lay twenty pounds ; and forty shillings on a private

ory.

: j omits Sin ds
Paid for taking Wolves. Shi : © 93,847 ~5 0
aeere »  JLories and wood kernes . a 25T4Q) UF
» Popish Priests . ‘ Ging) 3

La) ” : ° ° Ves)
E. H. k., xiv., pp. 108, 703, and see Ludlow passim.

1655) THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 319

their traditions and their interests as those of the sole inhabitants, The

but leading them by peace and order to more civilised forms of life. Lee o
If this plan had been carried out, Ireland would have prospered. Ireland
But England had then neither the money, nor the soldiers, nor the
trained service of proconsuls requisite to confer Imperial Govern-

ment on foreign provinces; and at that moment the Reformation

came to divide the rulers from the ruled.

Experience under Elizabeth showed that the English hold on system
Ireland could only be maintained by large classes settled there for bee the
economic reasons. This second plan, attempted under James I., was Stuarts
worse for the natives, because it involved dispossession from ae
districts, and the creation of a new interest hostile to their own,
which the Government was thenceforth bound to consult. Ulster
(1610), and some smaller colonies in the South, were planted. But
except in those places where a large English or Scottish population
was settled thickly, the land was left to the old possessors, and
Celtic society was not disturbed. Under the early Stuarts, Catholic
Ireland was still alive, though fettered by Penal Laws and caged
in by Protestant colonies.

The rebellion of 1641 showed that these colonies were insuf- The
ficient barriers. The settlers had usurped the land and the sae
political and religious rights of the Irish, enough to exasperate, Settle-
but not enough to suppress. All agreed that Hine the reconquest oe
they must nine be eee neced. But instead of increasing 1652-56
the colonies by clearing the Irish from whole new districts, a third
policy was now introduced, of leaving the poorer Irish everywhere
on the soil, and giving the landlord-rights in three-quarters of the
island to English emigrants. This policy, announced by Parliament
in 1642 as the security for the Irish war loan, and adopted by the
Rump in the Act of Settlement of 1652, was approved and executed
by Cromwell. Ultimately the worst of the three policies, it was at
| the time the most practical. It held down the old inhabitants and
secured the island against the invasion of Catholic powers. It lasted
two centuries and a half. But it deprived the Celtic nation of its
natural leaders by destroying the Catholic upper class.

The new landowners themselves came to little good. Some of
them were the capitalist “adventurers,” who had found the money
for the Irish wars; others, the officers of the conquering army.

_ But the scheme of settlement had further provided for a great

Crom-
wellian
Settle-
ment of
Scotland

320 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1655

middle class of Puritan yeomen, consisting of the private soldiers
who had won their lands with their own swords. As the Holy
Land was divided among the conquering tribes by lot, so by lot the
counties and districts were assigned to each regiment, company and
troop. But the accumulative and squirearchical trend of English
society was too strong even among those democratic bands. The
officers bought up cheap their men’s reversionary claims, and out of
these they formed for themselves great estates, while the poor silly
soldiers went off with a little ready money in their pockets. Those
few who remained to be yeomen, too thinly scattered among an
alien population, yet dissevered by social caste from the Protestant
squires, found the loneliness of their position intolerable, and in a
few generations became merged with their Catholic neighbours by
marriage, feeling and religion. The larger landowners, utterly dis-
severed from the native farmers, became like the noblesse of the
continent, a class foredoomed soon or late, by violence or by
purchase, to be swept off the land, as clean as a silk cloth is
swept off a deal table. Ulster, the older garrison that had roots
in the lower and middle class of town and country, has survived.
But Cromwell’s landlords will soon be a memory of the past.

The failure of the Protector’s plan would have been less com-
plete if his free-trade policy had been continued after his death.
He did all that could be done for the Protestants of Ireland,
regarding them, as he regarded all Englishmen the world over, as
citizens of one State. The Tory and Whig politicians of later days,
regarding them as a dependent class to be sacrificed to English
economic jealousy, ruined Protestant and Catholic together by pro-
hibiting their most important trades. But they maintained Oliver’s
land settlement with little change, as the only means then known
of preserving the English Protestant State from continual danger
of attack by its foreign and domestic foes.!

Oliver made both Scotland and Ireland part of the British
Empire, but by very different means. In Ireland, his conquest was
the prelude to the destruction of a class, the slavery of a race, and
the proscription of a creed ; in Scotland, it was a friendly occupa-
tion, to protect the common Puritan interest until such time as its
Scottish leaders should “ think it possible they might be mistaken”.

1Cunningham, pp. 120-24. G. (C. & P.), chap, xliv. Firth’s Crom., chap,
xiii, ; C. A., pp. 202-8. E, H. R., xiv., pp. 700-34. oshua xiv.-xix,

1655] THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 321

The Kirk was left untouched, save that it could no longer govern
the State, and no longer enforce its fundamental doctrine of perse-
cution. The Scots were treated on an equality, and invited to a
fraternity with their English brethren. Free trade with England
gave them a solid advantage, while representation in the Parlia-
ment at Westminster, if it did them little benefit, at least pro-
claimed in principle that Great Britain had been formed. Nor
was the Union all that Scotland lost when Charles Stuart returned.
_ Within her own borders, the utilitarian and democratic soldiery
conferred great but short-lived benefits on the population. Vassal-
age, servitude and hereditary jurisdictions, which still disgraced
a country essentially popular in spirit, were done away. ‘The
subjugation of the Highlands, that first condition of Scotland’s
progress, which she was too poor ever to have fulfilled for herself,
was carried out by the English regiments as never before, and
never again till after Culloden field. The Great Britain of the
- Hanoverian régime was already established by Oliver, in all save
the one thing needful for its permanence, the consent of the two
peoples. ‘Therefore, his Scottish reforms died with him. A long
course of troubles, and the slow education of a century, were needed
before the same settlement of religion and politics, commerce and
_ public order, society and law, was again step by step erected for
/ Scotland, under the less heroic but more persuasive influence of
| the Whigs.

In the comity of great nations, England was then both weak Puritan
} and vulnerable. The English, while they were still a small people ahead
compared to the French and the Spaniards, and a poor people com-
pared to the Dutch, already had an Empire beyond the ocean to
protect. Whenever the English were divided against themselves,

as in the reign of Elizabeth, as again from 1640 to 1715, their
\scattered territories were exposed to foreign invaders, in part alliance

with some domestic faction. It was the danger of invasion that
drove our ancestors, in an age when all their natural tendencies

were peculiarly peaceful and insular, unwillingly to wage wars
‘beyond the sea, and to attain a new position in the world by broken

steps of Protestant foreign policy under Elizabeth, under Cromwell,
under William and Anne. The trade rivalry was with Holland ;

‘but the danger of military conquest came always from the Catholic

21

Origin of
the war
with Spain

322 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1654

and absolutist power of Spain or of France. For this reason Eng-
lish nationalism appealed more strongly to the Puritans and to the
Whigs, and became in them an overbearing imperialism ; while in
the Cavaliers and Tories it remained a passive provincial exclusive-
ness.

Cromwell held, with his secretary, that God had revealed him-
self “as His manner is, first to His Englishmen”.’ ‘The Protector’s
mind could never logically separate this idealised patriotism from
his Protestant and Free Church sympathies. He outstripped
even Puritan sentiment in his championship of England’s quarrel
with the Catholic world, and injured shipping and finance by the
pertinacity of his commercial and colonial wars. As general, he
recovered the Empire; as Protector, he held it together and
made the great powers bid for its friendship ; but the defect of his
qualities and of the machine by which he had accomplished this
task, caused him, when all was done, to drag his still bleeding ~
country into a war with Spain.

Between the outbreak of the Civil War and the end of the
Protectorate, the navy had, as we have seen, been doubled in
numbers and more than doubled in fighting power. The Puritans,
inspired by their aggressive nationalism, and supplied by revolution-
ary finance, had both the will and the means to maintain the British
fleet as the greatest in the world. But the authors of this root
principle of modern English policy, which happily survived their
own downfall, had failed to comprehend its noblest and most
necessary condition. ‘To them an invincible navy was not a per-
manent insurance for peace, but a perpetual stimulus to war. Men
were so little accustomed to the possession of a great fighting force
actually afloat, that they could not bear to see it sail idly protect-
ing our commerce and enforcing our diplomacy ; they itched to use
it in battle. Just as the fleets, which had been trained in the
recovery of the Empire for the regicides, had then been turned by
the Parliament against the Dutch; so the yet greater fleets which
had brought Holland to its knees, were used by the Protector against
Spain. “ Providence,” said Oliver at his Council board (20th July,
1654), “seemed to lead us” to the attack on the Spanish Indies—

Having 160 ships swimming ; most of Europe our enemies except Holland,
and that would be well considered also: we think our best consideration had

1 Milton’s Areopagitica,

1655] THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 323

to keep up this reputation and improve it for some good, and not lay them up
by the walls. . . . This design would cost little more than laying by the
ships, and that with hope of great profit.)

The raid to which Providence so plainly pointed (on the great San Dom-
island of San Domingo, then known as Hispaniola), proved the ic.
one military fiasco of Oliver’s life. Despising the enemy, the April-May,
author of the New Model made preparations worthy of Bucking- 7°55
ham. ‘The worst soldiers of the various regiments, hastily drafted
together, augmented by recruits taken off the streets, and impro-
perly equipped for the tropics, were sent to San Domingo to sicken
with dysentery and to run away before a charge of half-breed
cowboys armed with cattle-lances. Jamaica, whither they sailed
to retrieve their disgrace, being thinly peopled by Spaniards,
surrendered without resistance. Oliver would have been willing
to retire with the disgrace and the spoil of the West Indian raid,
but the incensed statesmen of Madrid declared regular war in every
part of the globe. He was therefore constrained to accept the
alliance of the Catholic, but as yet tolerant, power of France.

The expedition to San Domingo, and the Atlantic and Oceanic The Eng-
war with Spain to which it led, were the more to be regretted be- en ee
cause Oliver had already discovered a more profitable use for the ranean
English naval power. Immediately after the Dutch war, our ships,
which had some years back passed through the Straits of Gibraltar
in pursuit of Rupert, were again sent under Blake to police the
Mediterranean, and by their presence there to terrify the Catholic
powers on the French, Spanish and Italian coasts into accordance
with the wishes of Oliver. ‘Thus the idea of the Mediterranean
fleet, the true method by which England can make her will
felt abroad, was first discovered by the great Protector. The
Christian powers of Europe respected Blake and his master; and
next year the Bey of Tunis saw his ships destroyed beneath the
guns of his stronghold (1655). When the Spanish war broke out,
the energies of England were again turned principally to the
Ocean ; yet even so, the Protector still maintained a British fleet
permanently stationed in the Mediterranean.’

The great Spanish war colours the history of the last three
years of the Protectorate in several different ways.

1 Clarke Papers, iii., p. 207. * Corbett, chaps. xvi., xvii,, xviii.

Battle of
Dunkirk,
June, 1658

The
Jamaica
planters

324 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1656

As a Protestant war it was useless, because it had no distinctive
object. It was the ill-luck of the Reformed religion on the con-
tinent, that the period when England was governed by a man
willing and able to play the part of Gustavus, was the period
when Spain and Austria had ceased, and France had not begun,
to attack the old established liberties of Protestant populations.
With scornful joy Puritan sailors sank galleons flaunting the pen-
nons of the Virgin and the names of the Saints, and it was a
good sight for our French allies when the red-coats scrambled
up the sliding sand-dunes of Dunkirk and drove before them the
embattled hosts of the Idolators, “our strongest soldiers and officers
clubbing them down”. But no Protestant worshipped God more
freely for all this glorious bloodshed. The armed diplomacy by
which Oliver bettered the lot of a few Waldensians in their Alps
(1655) was, in his day, a more effective means than a grand war, to
extend England’s protection over the Protestant communities of
the world.

As a colonial war, the struggle with Spain succeeded where it
seemed to fail. In Jamaica, seized by his men on their repulse from
San Domingo, Cromwell found scope for a work peculiarly his own.
By efforts often disappointed, but never abandoned, he artificially
planted the island with Englishmen. More than the Irish land
settlement, our West Indian Empire was the result of his personal
wishes and efforts. But it was fortunate that his Jamaica planters
did not come from the place whence he first attempted to procure
emigrants: with more zeal than the statesmen of his era for the
spread of the English race, but with no more knowledge of the true
conditions for its eventual success, he tried to divert the further
expansion of New England from Delaware Bay to his new land of
promise in the summer seas, and vainly sought to persuade the
Northern colonists “to remove themselves or such numbers of them
as shall be thought convenient, out of those parts where they now
are, to Jamaica”. So little was the Anglo-Saxon plantation of the
North American continent due to the deliberate action of statesmen,
or to any man’s foreknowledge of the vast destinies, that Charles I.
gave the New World to the Puritans by attempting to suppress them
in the Old; while Cromwell, in his greater eagerness to spread the
Gospel and the British race, attempted a State policy of removal,
which, if it had been carried through, would have ruined or at least

1657] THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 325

diminished the colossal expansion prepared by individual energy and
religious persecution.!

As a commercial war, the breach with Spain proved a bad in- The war
vestment. The justifying cause of the attack on San Domingo (ton.
had been that the Spaniard claimed and exercised the right to merce
seize our ships anywhere in the West Indian seas, even if they were
only trading with our own Colonies. Our quarrel on this issue was
a just one whenever we chose to take it up, but at that moment
English finance and commerce required a period of retrenchment
and recovery after fifteen years of almost continual war. In his

anxiety to protect British shipping from Spain in the Caribbean Sea,
_ Oliver exposed it to injury from all nations in all quarters of the
globe. Much of our great trade with European Spain fell per-
manently into the hands of neutrals. Everywhere our merchant ships
were preyed upon by enemies who took advantage of the Spanish
war to wreak their hatred on a Commonwealth feared by all but
loved by none. In the Western counties, merchants were half-ruined
by the Spanish frigates waiting off Land’s End. In London, monied
men cursed the war and turned their backs on the Protectorate.”

As a naval war it was altogether glorious, and in one respect The war
useful, As a sequel to the Civil and Dutch wars, the Spanish war a sao
gave our seamen a long period of active work, and thereby per- dition
manently fixed the new traditions and institutions of the service
that now first became truly professional. For nearly twenty years
the ships were constantly at sea; the officers and men had continual
employment from the State. The professional feeling and ex-
perience that now first separated them in habits and in ways of
thought from both merchant crews and landsmen, stood the country
in good stead when “ Oliver’s captains” fought the great sea wars
of the restored monarchy. And only by the help of this splendid
service could our commerce have survived the number of enemies
whom Oliver’s policy aroused in his own day. Under him the
Turkish pirates could not reappear in the Channel ; and the old
haunt of the Christian buccaneers of Dunkirk, so long the terror of
our Eastern ports, was occupied by red-coats. The Mediterranean
was policed by our ships. In the Canaries the Spanish galleons

1Thurloe, iv., pp. 130, 634; v., p. 510, Clarke Papers, iii., p. 205, Memoirs of
Sir W, Penn, ii., pp. 585-89. x
*Corbett, i., Chaps. xvi., XVil., XVill,

Blake de-
stroys
Spanish
fleet at
Santa
Cruz,
2oth April,
1657

Financial
difficulties
become
acute,
1658

326 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1658

could find no safety even in the guarded waters of Santa Cruz; for
like the man who five generations later lost his arm in that twice-
famous harbour, Blake could trust his gunners and his captains so
well, that he initiated the English tactics of silencing shore batteries
from the sea, and destroying fleets who had sought shelter under
their protection. Thus, though commerce suffered, the navy
flourished ; and the pride of the English in England and the respect
shown her by the rest of the world, was remembered in after days
when the commercial distress had been long forgotten."

By the end of the Protectorate, the prosperity and therewith the
security of the Puritan rule had at length been undermined by
continuous war. ‘The merchants were at last alienated by their
loss at sea, as the landowners had long been alienated by their loss
of broad acres and social influence. On both classes the pressure
of war taxation fell so heavily as to cause a reduction in the
standard of living. ‘The maintenance of a great army and a great
navy together, and a perpetual state of war, was much more than
England could then afford. The price of a military empire was
becoming as embarrassing to the governors as it was unendurable
to the governed. In the last years of the Protectorate, the navy
itself began to decline from want of money. Yet the united ser-
vice, always under the Cromwellian régime the first charge on the
treasury, had long been involving the country in debts with which
even confiscations and arbitrary taxes were unable to cope. The
financial problem, which the Puritan statesmen trained in the easy
school of revolutionary finance had never learnt to regard with
proper reverence, was rising to take its revenge on the party, when
the death of Oliver destroyed the political stability of their system,
and gave the speed of panic to a reaction that economic causes had
done much to set on foot.?

1In laying due stress on the financial and commercial distress of the period
consequent on the Dutch and Spanish wars, it must always be admitted that the
tradition of this distress did not survive in the national memory. Thus Swift in
arguing for the fleet as against the army was able to say in The Conduct of the
Allies: ‘The usurpers had almost continual war with Spain or Holland; but
managing it by their fleets, they increased very much the riches of the kingdom,
instead of exhausting them”,

? Oppenheim, pp. 303, 304, 342, 355, 368-70. Corbett passim. G. (C. & P.),
chaps. xlv.-xlviii., and Firth’s Cyvom., chaps. xviii., xix. Cf. Gardiner’s Cromwell's
Place in History, pp. 97-101, with Firth’s Crom., pp. 434-36. Seeley’s Growth of
British Policy, vol. ii., pp. 1-107. And cf. Cunningham, pp. 178-93, and Macmillan’s
Mag., November, 1902, pp. 72-80, with Beer’s Cromwell’s Policy in its Economie
Aspects (Pol, Sci. Quarterly, vol. xvi.-xvii, and reprint).

1658} fHE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 327

On the 3rd of September, 1658, the anniversary of Dunbar and Death of
of Worcester, Oliver went to his rest. “ Let us all,” he hac once said, SS n
“be not careful what men will make of these actings. ‘fhey, will 1658 :
they, nill they, shall fulfil the good pleasure of God, and we shall
serve our generations. Our rest we expect elsewhere: that will be
durable.” }

The trust in God that had been his strength had also been his
bane. In all that he did of good and of evil in the three kingdoms,
it was too much his way to trust that the Lord would support him
in everything that he undertook. What he judged to be necessary
for the present, that he thought to be predestined for the future.
His victories seemed to him, not the result of the means which
he employed, but proofs that his policy was also the will of Heaven.
It was from Ireland that he wrote to the Speaker—

Sir, what can be said of these things? Is it the arm of the flesh that
hath done these things? Is it the wisdom and counsel, or strength of men?
It is the Lord only. God will curse that man and his house that dares to
think otherwise. Sir, you see the work is done by a Divine leading. God
gets into the hearts of men, and persuades them to come under you.?

Hence, it was easy for him to think that the Irish themselves
would be converted by “assiduous preaching,” when their priests
had been removed to penal settlements. In England and Scotland
he made, though in a less degree, the same mistake of trusting God
to reconcile public opinion.

Yet in England and Scotland, at least he had no obvious Oliver's
alternative. Early in his political career, he had striven hard for Peny*
conciliation and consent. But he soon found that there was no achieve
general consent to be had in England to any plan, either Royalist, ™°"“
Presbyterian or Independent. ‘There was no active agreement of
public opinion between 1641 and 1660; and no human being who
ever lived could have made a permanent settlement out of the
situation left by King and Parliament in 1648. In that general
wreck of powers and parties, Oliver saved the British Empire from
partition, the civil liberties of England from Royalist reconquest,
the Free Churches and free-thinkers from destruction by those of
the narrow way. ‘Those deeds outlived him, and the lovers of
England, of civil liberty, and of free-thought will for ever be

1Firth’s Crom., p. 253. 2Carl.’s Crom., Letter cxvi.

828 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1659

grateful for such benefits, though all else for which he fought
perished with him.

His char- But to value men solely by uncertain calculations of their

Sener achievement, is to disinherit the human race. If some who have
done great things were only men with better opportunities or more _
of common talent than the rest, others, like Cromwell as his com- _
rades knew him and as modern learning has let us know him again,
show to what height the plant Man can sometimes grow. In the
agony of war, in the interminable crisis of revolutionary state-craft,
he kept his noblest qualities of mind untired. He was always fresh
from nature, open to new spiritual desires and human joys. In the
hardest years of his last solitary struggle against unyielding destiny,
a meeting with George Fox could move him first to tears, and on
another occasion very seasonably to laughter." He sought always,
and often with deep questioning, what was right and noble in every
choice of action. He could not bear the stiff and dry: in all human
relations, his tenderness, his humour, his fellowship were always
striving to burst through. For while he aspired to heaven, he had
his roots deep in earth.

Richard More than a year and a half passed between the death of Oliver
bie fall (September, 1658) and the Restoration of Charles II. (May, 1660).
May, 1659 In that period, England fell into the power of generals, who like

the generals of old Rome, made and unmade Governments at their
will. It did not take them long to dispose of the New Protector,

1« Many more words I (Fox) had with him (Cromwell), but people coming in,
I drew a little back; and as I was turning, he caught me by the hand, and with
tears in his eyes, said, ‘Come again to my house, for if thou and I were but an
hour a day together, we should be nearer one another’ ”’ (1654). ‘‘ Whereupon I rode
to his coach-side; and some of his life-guards would have put me away, but he for-
bade them. So I rode by with him. . . . When we arrived at James’s Park gate, I
left him; and at parting he desired me to come to his house. Next day, one of his
wife’s maids, whose name was Mary Saunders, came to me at my lodging, and told
me her master (Cromwell) came to her, and said he would tell her some good news.
When she asked him what it was, he told her, George Fox was come to town. She
replied that was good news indeed (for she had received truth). . . . The power of
the Lord God arose in me, and I was moved in it to bid him (Cromwell) lay down his
crown at the feet of Jesus. Severaltimes I spake to him to the same effect. NowI
was standing by the table and he came and sat upon the table’s side by me, and said
he would be as high as I was; and so continued speaking against the light of Christ
Jesus; and went away in a light manner” (1656), George Fox's ¥ournal (ed. 1901,
i., PP« 210, 332, 333):

1660] THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENTS 329

Oliver’s eldest surviving son, “’Tumbledown Dick” as he was called.
One Constitution after another was set up and overthrown by the
soldiers,
Oliver had ruled by civil power. Starting from the Instrument
of Government, he had striven ever more earnestly, if not success-
fully, towards constitutional growth. But the generals had no deal-
ings with the classes and parties whom their great predecessor had
courted. Lawyers and judges, merchants and gentry, Presbyterians
and Republicans were nothing to the soldiers, each striving to
realise by force his own personal ambition, or some visionary reign
of Christ. In its last stage the military rule contained no power
of evolution or principle of settlement.
Oliver had protected property and civil peace. Strong govern-
- ment by an omnipotent army had been a bad, but not the worst con-
ceivable, form of polity. England now seemed a victim to a worse fate,
the weak but violent rule of soldiers, united indeed against civilians,
but divided against themselves. Skirmishes between the regiments
of rival chiefs, between cavalry and infantry, between veterans and
recruits, had already begun. In addition to this, a general civil
war between the militia and civilians on the one hand, and the
regular soldiers on the other, was on the very point of breaking out
when it was prevented by the “happy Restoration”. ‘There were
several reasons why the great change took place without war: one
part of the soldiers, Monk’s army of occupation in Scotland, joined
the party of the civilians; the troops quartered in England were
divided under different chieftains and into different factions ; many
even of Lambert’s section of the army shrank from plunging the
country into blood, in order to establish they knew not what; the
officers had lost the love and confidence of the men by trading on
their financial necessities,! while the King promised a full payment yonk de.
of arrears; and last but not least, Monk was a strong, patriotic clares for
3 A a ‘‘ free
and unselfish man. He occupied London and declared for a “ free Partia-
Parliament”. The assembly freely elected under his protection ae
5 : arch,
called back Charles II. Though their own disbandment was y660
certain to follow on a Restoration, the veterans yielded at the last
moment to the general voice, and consented to take part in the
1Firth’s C, A., pp. 202-8. See p. 335 below, note. For the history of 1658-60,

see Firth’s Crom., pp. 445-49, and Julian Corbett’s Monk, though the effect attributed
to the Portuguese incident in pp. 179-82 in the latter book is very doubtful.

Landing
of Charles
II., 25th

330 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [2660

reception of Charles into London. For, soldiers as they were,
they were the very pick of Englishmen ; and fanatics if they were,
they loved their country hardly less than their God. Of all that
they had done for England’s welfare and liberty, nothing is more
to their credit than that they voluntarily laid down their power
when they perceived that they had begun to abuse it.

No one will ever know how far the great reaction in sentiment was
caused by Puritan supremacy, or by military rule under Cromwell,
or how far it sprang up after his death to avoid permanent anarchy
and immediate civil war. This only is certain, that the Restoration
of Charles was necessary as the only form of government on which
all parties could agree. After twenty years of national division,
a consensus of opinion came about for this one act of recalling
Parliament and King together, because the alternative was a new
civil war without an aim. But when once the Restoration had
been agreed upon in fear and doubt, a chord in men’s minds
snapped with long tension and sudden relief, and all, save the very
few, rushed delirious into old memories and new desires. 'The joy
of men just escaped from a fearful danger, gave electric force to
the reviving passion for all that was old.

On the 25th of May the English world stood crowded on Dover
beach, to see what kind of angel was this deliverer for whom they

May, 1660 had sent. A man stepped out of the boat, whose thick, sensuous

lips, dark hair and face of a type more common in Southern
Europe, confessed an origin and temperament in every way the
opposite to those of the English squire who had grown up among
the Puritans of Huntingdon. The Mayor of Dover put the English
Bible into the strange hand. He of the thick lips declared that
“it was the thing that he loved above all things in the world”
The worthy Mayor was enchanted at so honest an answer, for he
did not perceive that the comic spirit had landed on our coast.
The wittiest company of comedians that history records had come
to tread the stage for a while, as little appreciated on the whole by
the English people as were the great tragedians who had played
their piece and were departing, undismayed by the howling and
the fury, wrapped in the dignity of self-dependent virtue,
Republicans without fear, without repentance, without hope.

1660] THE RESTORATION 331

CHAPTER XI
THE RESTORATION EPOCH, 1660-78.

Change, the strongest son of Life—Grorez Merrepira.

N the 29th of May the King entered his capital. The new The royal
Government at once took up all its functions. Monk re- hehe

commended to the King for Privy Councillors a long list of estab-
Presbyterians, which struck a momentary terror into Charles; but ished
the lord of the army had no ambition to be Mayor of the Palace,

and acquiesced when the King selected from his Roundhead nominees

only Ashley Cooper and one or two more. Charles put the real
power of the Council into the hands of an inner circle, where old
Cavaliers of the exile, like Ormond and Secretary Nicholas, de-
liberated under the presidency of Chancellor Hyde. Monk, created

Duke of Albemarle, became a great Lord and courtier often in the
highest employment, but gradually dropped out of the more
intimate counsels of his sovereign. He was regarded to the day

of his death (1670) as a great and honourable man, the father of

his King and of his country.!

Though secure in the affections of the people, the Government The army
was not completely safe until in the autumn of 1660 the old army disbanded
had received its just arrears of pay and been disbanded. Charles
and Hyde did what Parliament might wisely have done in 1647;
they paid on the nail, and the red terror walked soberly off to
set up trade with the money in its pocket.?

In Scotland there was no more resistance to the change than in Restora-
England. North of the Tweed, the Restoration meant the restora- tion in

= Scotland
tion of national independence ; for a while it was regarded as a

lAiry, p. 111. Julian Corbett, Monk, pp. 192-221.

2 The only Cromwellians not disbanded were the Coldstreams and part of the
garrisons of Dunkirk and Tangier; others were sent to fight for our allies the
Portuguese against Spain (R. H. S., xvii., pp. 106-10),

The two
Restora-
tions,
1660 and
166%

The Con-
vention
Parlia-
ment
April-
Dec., 1660

The social
restora-
tion, 1660

352 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1660 |

minor matter that the Presbyterian form of Church government |
was replaced by the Episcopalian, and that the men at the head of |
the State “were almost perpetually drunk”.’ It seemed better to
be ruled by Scottish drunkards than by the soberest men from
England ; and if they were Episcopalians, their predecessors had
been Sectaries. As symbol of the establishment of the Cavalier
order of things, the great Presbyterian chieftain, Argyle, was duly
executed.

There were two Restorations in England. First, in 1660 were
restored Parliament and King, the non-military state, and the
dominance of the hereditary upper class; secondly, in 1661 was
restored the persecuting Anglican Church. The first Restoration
was made by the Presbyterians, the second by the Cavaliers; the
first by the Convention Parliament, the second by the Cavalier
Parliament. The political and social restoration fixed its roots
permanently in the character and institutions of the English.
The religious restoration, though substantially modified in 1689,
has formed the religious and political character of the various
strata of our society on lines fixed indeed, but very different from
the uniform national religion contemplated either by the men of
1640 or by the men of 1661.

The first, the largest, and the most lasting of the two Restora-
tions, was the work of the free Parliament elected under Monk’s
protection in the turbulent spring of 1660. It was by the letter
of the law no true Parliament, because the King did not summon
it; on the contrary, it summoned the King. Hence, it is known as
the Convention Parliament.

This assembly in nine months restored not only the political
rule of Parliament and King, but the social rule of the upper class.
In every town and village the Republicans and Democrats, who had
so long governed by their self-granted charter of the “career
open to talents,” sought refuge in private life; while Lords and
gentlemen, lawyers and parsons, and all the old world of hereditary
caste and ancient custom, everywhere resumed the functions from
which their Royalist or Presbyterian opinions had so long debarred
the great majority. From this social restoration proceeding in

1 Burnet, i., p. 220.

1660] THE RESTORATION 333

every corner of England, the Cavaliers derived strength out of all
proportion to what was gained by their Presbyterian allies.

The year 1660 was the triumph of Presbyterian over Sectary,
of Constitutionalist over Republican, of the hereditary social order
over the democratic ideal. It was these things, rather than the
still dissembled triumph of Anglican over Puritan, that were sym-
bolised in the execution done upon the bodies of the regicides, dead
and alive, whereby England repudiated the one great digression of
her history, and vainly sought to wipe out from the just calculation
of her worth, the deeds that her sons had done without her commis-
sion, but in her name for ever. It was by the order of the Conven-
tion Parliament that the bodies of Cromwell, Bradshaw and Ireton
were dug up, dragged on sledges to Tyburn, hanged in sight of the
people till sunset, and buried at the gallows’ foot. There, if
anywhere at this hour, is “Imperial Caesar, dead and turned to
clay”. Over him the English pass, day after day and generation
after generation, and no longer fear priest, presbyter or King.

So too it was by the sentence of Cavalier and Presbyterian gyecution
judges sitting together, that a dozen of the regicides suffered death. a ccliags
The gallows and butchery were set up in Charing Cross, in sight of B60 :
the place before Whitehall where the scaffold had been dressed for
Charles; as the hangman cut the king-killers to pieces, their heads
and hearts were shown reeking to the people, whose shouts testified
that on this occasion they felt neither pity nor respect. Hugh
Peters had scarcely the strength to face so terrible a scene, and
came staggering on to the scaffold. But Cook the lawyer, Harrison
and the other soldiers and politicians proved worthy of their cause
and of that hour. And none died better than Sir Harry Vane (1662),
proclaiming the principles of liberty to the last ; like Peters, he had,
though no regicide, been marked for death by party vengeance.
Others fled oversea, dogged by the assassins sent after them by the
House of Stuart. Ludlow found refuge among the kindly Repub- Ludiow at
licans on the shore of Lake Geneva, where alone in Europe the Geneva
~ deeds in which he had played a part were not then regarded with
execration. ‘There, in sight of the mountains as stern as his own
soul, he lived in silence for thirty years, and there by the Lake of
Calvin and of Rousseau he died, the last of the English Republicans.

1Mr, Firth (Crom., p. 452) calculates that it is “* where Connaught Square now
stands, a yard or two beneath the street”,

334 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1660 |

Once, when the old man heard how William had delivered England, |
he returned to serve the country that he loved , but even in that
year of public salvation, he was again expelled with universal horror
by Whigs and Tories, to whom his half-forgotten name suggested, _
not new hopes for mankind, but an old tale of crime and tyranny
told them by their fathers. No stronger proof could be given that
the ideas of which he was the last representative had perished
when his comrades died upon the scaffold.
Act of In- The regicides served a national purpose as scape-goats for other
es ,tebels. Their blood sealed up the past. The best opportunity
Settle. that informers and terrorists ever had in our island was
ment, fortunately disallowed. Since the Restoration had been absolutely
1660 :
one of consent, and not in the least degree one of conquest,
since it had been initiated by the Presbyterians under no con-
straint from the Cavaliers, the Convention Parliament, consisting
for the most part of men of Roundhead families, took measures
for the personal safety and even for the financial interests of
the Roundhead partisans. Here they were supported by the
wise state-craft of Charles and Hyde, who were determined to
associate the rule of the restored House of Stuart with the
sense of universal security for person and goods. A combination
of courtiers and old Parliamentarians was strong enough to
disregard the outcries of the Cavaliers, who complained that the
Act of Indemnity and Oblivion meant Indemnity for the King’s
enemies and Oblivion for the King’s friends. Royalists who had
suffered exile and direct confiscation of estates, recovered what
they had lost. But a far greater number, in order to pay to the
usurping Governments the heavy fines by which they had “com-
pounded for delinquency,” had been forced to sell portions of their
land in a fallen market: and these obtained no compensation. As
to the purchasers who continued in possession of such estates, it is
not known what element in religion and politics was most strongly
represented in that fortunate class; but probably most of them
had been Presbyterians, who were now about to turn Anglican for
convenience, and perhaps some day to become Whig by conviction.
Members of the Independent and Republican party must upon
the whole have fared less well. For it was principally they who
had shown confidence in the Regicide Government by investing

1660] THE RESTORATION 335

money in the purchase of Church and Crown lands, which were at
the Restoration resumed without compensation to the purchasers.
This unlucky class largely consisted of the officers of Cromwell’s
army. Like all others who had bought up the spoils of Church
and Crown, the officers sank back to the social status whence they
had striven so hard to rise. The Independent aristocracy was
ruined. But in Ireland—on condition of turning Anglican—it
became the landlord caste.)

The Convention Parliament settled everything except religion. Settle-

On this subject alone the dominant parties were divided. There Reon
was much discussion of “ Bishop Usher’s model,” the compromise postponed
by which twenty years before that good man had proposed to re-' 1660
concile incensed factions, on the basis of alterations in the Prayer-
_ book, and limitations of the episcopal power by a council of
Presbyters. ‘The King chose chaplains from among the Presby-
terian divines, and might probably have supported their compre-
hension in the National Church, if they had consented to outbid
Episcopalians for his favour by an offer of toleration to Catholics.
But the Lord Chancellor Hyde was even more bitter in his Angli-
_ canism now, than when as plain member for Saltash Borough he
had quarrelled with Pym over the Root-and-Branch; Hyde saw
the Cavaliers gaining strength every day as the social restoration
proceeded, and laboured to put off the ecclesiastical settlement
until after a new general election.

The Presbyterians did not foresee that a restoration in religion Error of
would follow from the restoration in society and politics. They ree
did not know that in re-establishing squirearchy they were setting
up a persecuting Anglicanism ; for the squires whom they remem-
bered had been haters of parsons and Bishops. Nor did they
suspect that in realising at last their cherished ideal of a monarch
controlled by a free Parliament, they were layiny firmer than
Laud the foundations of an Anglican State Church; for their
recollections of a free Parliament recalled groups of angry gentle-
men shouting approval while Eliot demanded the suppression of
Arminians, or while Pym declared that Prelacy had been tried

1 Many of the officers had, with little consideration for the interests of their
men, bought up from the rank and file their “‘ debentures,” or claims on the Church
and Crown lands allotted them in December, 1647, for the security of deferred pay
(Firth’s C. A., pp. 202-8). At the Restoration they lost these lands.

Rising of
the Fifth
Monarchy
Men,
Jan., 1661

The
Cavalier
Parlia-
ment,
May, 1661-
Jan., 1679

336 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1661 |

and found wanting. Absorbed in hatred of the sects, the orthodox |
Puritans did not consider that the class for whom they were now |
forging power, was led by men whose religion and estates they had
themselves proscribed at the close of the first Civil War,—men who |
for their part had not forgiven the rule of the Long Parliament,
because it had been followed by the rule of the Major-Generals.
The Presbyterians little suspected that in a year’s time their own
Church would be swept out of England for ever, while the sec-
taries, whom they thought to be slain by the stroke which slew the
Republicans, would inherit and carry on the Puritan work.

The few divines and politicians who in 1660 represented the
Presbyterian cause, were leaders without an army. The great host
which had fought for England’s liberties under the banner of the
Puritan State Church, had now dissolved again into its component
parts—the gentry to a Protestant type of the Anglican faith, the
middle and lower classes to sectarianism or to religious indifference.
Thanks to Cromwell, the future of the Puritan faith lay with the
sects, of which Presbyterianism itself was to become one.

But the sects succeeded to this inheritance only on condition
of becoming civilian. Military Republicanism, the form in which
they had first secured their right to exist, was put down for ever in
January, 1661. In that month the rising of the Fifth Monarchy
Men gave Government the opportunity to kill off the few score of
veterans who had not accepted the new order of things. The
“lion sprawled its last,” when after a fierce encounter the maddest
of the soldiers were shot down or disarmed by the children of this
world in an ale-house near Cripplegate. The panic created by this
last venture of the men of war caused a furious persecution of the
pacific Quakers, who were haled to prison by thousands. It also
helped the return of violent reactionaries at the polling that
immediately followed for the famous Cavalier Parliament.

The new members were “of loyal families, but young men
for the most part, which being told the King he replied that
was no great fault, for he would keep them till they got beards”.
Charles was as good as his word. Well knowing that his people
would never again give him such a Parliament, he kept it for
eighteen years. These men, by the first acts of their lewd and
insolent, youth, gave to English religious life its perennial character,
basing it on the cleavage of party and of class; when they came to

-e_-7-

1661) THE RESTORATION 331

years of ambition they secured and perpetuated as custom of the
country the control of the House of Commons over the direction of
affairs; and when they passed the threshold of middle age, they
evolved among themselves the two national factions which the
deeds of their own early youth had prepared, and suffered change,
in all but name, from a Cavalier to a Whig and Tory Parliament
of the right English breed.

The Second Restoration (1661) was politically the child of the Character
First (1660). In May, 1661, the Cavalier squires were masters of neuen
the State, by right of election to a free Parliament, not by foreign polity
arms or by civil war. If under the Protectorate, or during the
Anarchy after Cromwell’s death, any one of the dozen plots for a
rising, backed by Spanish or French invasion, had placed the King’s
partisans in power by force of arms, their triumph could only have
been rendered secure by assimilating the English monarchy and
the English military system to those of the Continent. Brought
_ back by victorious soldiers, Charles would have been absolute and
militarist. But events had given his friends almost all their desire,
by means of a Parliament and in despite of unconquered battalions.

So the Cavaliers in 1661 were no less favourable to Parliamentary
power and to local independence, no less hostile to a standing army,
_ than the Presbyterians in 1660. But one thing of their own they

added to the work of the Convention Parliament—the destruction
of Puritanism. On these principles the most loyal of Parliaments
~ built up a new political system.

There was to be no standing army. Not the least beneficial No stand.
result of Oliver’s rule was that the party most favourable to Kingly '"8 *™Y
_ power henceforth was least favourable to the instrument by which
_ Kingly power is maintained ; no loyalist captain of militia could
see a company of regulars straggling friendlessly from their bad
quarters in one public-house to their grudging welcome in the next,

_ without twinges of bitter memory and jealous fear. The rising
of the Fifth Monarchy Men gave Charles the excuse to keep some
hundreds of Household Guards, which he strove not without success

to develop intoasmallarmy. But the Cavalier Parliament watched
_ its every increase with alarm. Only at rare intervals, when the
_ Houses were preparing for war, was it put on a footing to repel
' invasion, and on those occasions the 10,000 red-coats on Blackheath

338 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1661

soon caused more genuine panic than the 100,000 blue-coats over

the water. To resist foreign conquest, the county militia was the

normal provision; to resist a rising of London City, no force was
provided at all.

Financial There was to be no financial independence on the part of the

depend- Crown. In the utmost intoxication of loyalty the Cavalier Parlia-

ibe oes ment never consented to fix upon Charles a permanent revenue suffi-

on Parlia- cient to defray the ordinary expenses of Government. On his return

ce to England £1,200,000 a year had been settled upon him in per-

petuity, but in effect not half this sum was derived from the sources

assigned.! On little more than half a million a year, a Sully or a

Frederic the Great would have found it difficult to carry on the

machine of English Government. Charles was therefore compelled

throughout his reign, even in time of peace, to sell the control of

his policy either to the English Parliament or to the French King,

except on those occasions when by some masterpiece of cunning he

obtained money under false pretences from one or both of the pur-

chasers. But never once did he venture to tread the path that had

led his father to ruin, to levy unparliamentary taxes that would free

him directly from all control. ‘The excise and the new assessment

of the land tax—those revolutionary expedients which Pym had

introduced to fight the war—were soon found by the Cavaliers to

be indispensable as the basis of the new national finance. Since

the land tax fell largely on the squires, they had more interest in

keeping down taxation than the nobility of continental countries

where the peasants paid the “taille”? The Parliament men had

therefore personal as well as public motives to keep the Government

close, to inquire into accounts during the Dutch wars, and to be

scandalised when the money that came out of their own estates

was spent by the Court on pleasures in which they were seldom

invited to take a share. The supposed expensive character of the

King’s domestic arrangements put enmity between Court and

Parliament, at a time when Puritan scruples were as much out of

fashion in one as in the other. Yet modern investigation of the

: reine Bes = ibe :

DBF nd Center of Tyicainy, Brake vor Wa Cee

? It is none the less true that as the Expenses of Government increased from the

Restoration onwards, the two Houses of Landowners unduly shifted the burden of

taxation off the land, beginning from the day when they put on to the Excise the
redemption of the Feudal Dues, 1660.

1661} THE RESTORATION 339

Royal accounts has revealed that there was no truth in the general
belief that a large part of the national revenue was poured into
the lap of the King’s mistresses,
There was to be no more pride of clergy. The Church passed Depend-
out of the hands of King and into the hands of Parliament. The 7° of the

$ rc, é Church on
Court of High Commission was not revived. The Bishops who Parlia-

had formerly been allowed to persecute by favour of the King in see

despite of the House of Commons, were now allowed to persecute
by favour of the House of Commons in despite of the King. Owing
to this change in the nature of her dependence, the Church was
less insolent than in the time of Laud. Laud’s attempt to revive
the medieval pretensions of the priest in society had not been a
success. Made wiser by the sectarian and radical interregnum,
the parson was careful never again to set himself up against the
squire, while the squire vowed he would never again fall foul of the
parson. ?

There was to be no more droit administratif. The abolition of
the Star Chamber held good; and the Privy Council, even in the
exercise of its remaining functions, was no longer an irresponsible
organ of the King’s will. The result of the Civil Wars had rendered
it impotent to override either the political decrees of the Commons,
or the administrative indolence of local authorities. It soon found
that it could not set aside statutes by proclamation ; and it no longer

attempted to enforce the Poor Law on recalcitrant magistrates and

parishes with the strict inquisition that had been so beneficent in
the days of Charles I.’ Critics of Government policy can hardly
be said to have had any liberty of person or speech guaranteed to
them under the old Tudor and Stuart régime, except in the case of
defined privileges, uncertainly enjoyed, within the walls of Parlia-

ment; but after the Restoration men no longer talked in whispers.

The principles of the Habeas Corpus Act of 1679 were already to
some extent recognised in 1661, although, owing to occasional viola-
tions by Clarendon and Danby, they still needed to be fenced round

"by stricter legislation. The law of the land judged impartially all

cases between officials and private citizens, and there was no longer
a prerogative law and a special court to which Government could,
as in other lands and in earlier times, appeal.

1 Shaw, Calendar of Treasury Books, 1660-7, p. xxvi.

2G, (C. W.,), iii., pp. 136, 137. ;
3 See pp. 22, 23, 28, 29 above, and Appendix B below.

No droit
adminis-

tratif

How Eng-

land ap-

peared to ,

340 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1661

“This Government has a monarchical appearance because there
is a King, but at bottom it is very far from being a monarchy.” So

the French in 1664 wrote De Cominges, the French Ambassador in England,

Ambassa-
dor

The
Clarendon
Code
passed,
1661-65

to Louis XIV. The emissary of returning civilisation, sent over to
an island so long cut off by unmentionable deeds from the knowledge
of polite communities, rendered his master in these early years of
the restored kingship an account of our uncouth institutions, which
informed and prepared the French Foreign Office for its subsequent
astute interference in English politics. ‘The members of Parliament,
wrote De Cominges, “are not only allowed to speak their mind
freely, but also to do a number of surprising, extraordinary things,
and even to call the highest people to the Bar”. Power and energy
dwelt in the Commons, who, when summoned to hear the King’s
speech, “rushed tumultuously into the Upper House, as the mob
does in the hall of audience at the Paris Parliament, when the
ushers have called”. Indeed, to the suave courtier of the Louvre,
the whole of this mad country seemed to whirl in a “tumultuous
rush”. In spite of the Clarendon Code, the capital was buzzing
with the strangest sectaries—Kakers, Anabaptists and millénaires.
Persons of all ranks publicly discussed affairs of State. The
Thames boatmen “want the mylords to talk” about politics as
they row them to Westminster stairs. Riots were of such frequent
occurrence, and the Government was so powerless to suppress them,
that even the punctilious Ambassador, whose special business it was
to maintain the dignity and precedence of the French Crown, con-
sented to the periodical breaking of his windows as custom of the
country. All was free, vigorous, barbaric life. England, emanci-
pated by the Great Rebellion, was “rushing tumultuously,” in a
manner very different from the ordered march of the dragooned
and priest-ridden civilisation of the Grand Monarch. 'That the day
would ever come when France herself would “rush tumultuously,”
never occurred either to Louis or to his servant.

By the Restoration settlement the landowners bore rule in
England, as against Puritan and soldier, Bishop and King. The
Cavalier squires, however loyal they might be in profession or even

in feeling, were so enchanted by the sweets of power tasted during
Q ®

14 French Ambassador at the Court of Charles II., Jusserand, 1892, pp., 99,
TOO, 104, II5, 144, 146,

1661] THE RESTORATION 841

the early years of their Parliament, that they set themselves
steadily to maintain and enlarge their own supremacy, and to
enforce upon all other classes the type of religion and politics with
which it was now associated. This was the policy afterwards
known as ‘Toryism; till the rise of the Whigs fifteen years later
there was no one to oppose Tory supremacy, except the King and
the Catholics of the Palace. By the “Clarendon Code” the squires
closed the ranks of their class, imposing on all the shibboleths of
Anglicanism, which few, at any rate of the upper ranks of society,
ventured to refuse.

In the first five years of its hot youth the Cavalier Parliament
passed the great Code, called in history after the name of Chancellor
Hyde, now Ear! of Clarendon—those Penal Laws which broke for
ever the pretensions of Puritanism to political supremacy, reduced
the quantity and purified the quality of its religious influence, con-
fined its social sphere to the middle and lower classes, and created
the division of England into Church and Dissent.

By the Corporation Act (1661) the membership of the muni-
cipal bodies who ruled the towns and usually controlled the elections
of their Parliamentary representatives, was confined to those who
would receive the Communion by the rites of the Church of Eng-
land,

By the Act of Uniformity (1662) 2,000 Puritan clergy were
expelled from livings in the Established Church, for refusing to
assert their “unfeigned consent and assent” to everything in the
Prayer-book.

By the Conventicle Act (1664) attendance at meetings for
religious rites, other than those of the Established Church, were
punished by imprisonment for the first and second offence, and
transportation for the third, on pain of death if the criminal re-
turned,

By the Five Mile Act (1665) no clergyman or schoolmaster
was to come within five miles of a city or corporate town, unless he
declared that he would not “at any time endeavour any alteration
' of Government either in Church or State”. As the Puritan con-
: gregations were principally seated in the towns, the great body of
dissenters were hereby cut off from even private education or
domestic encouragement in their faith, The Act must have
hastened the great decline in the numbers of Puritanism and the

The

Clarendon ,,

Code
enforced

Alteration
in char-
acter of
Presby-
terianism

342 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1661

consequent decay of religious zeal in England, which was so evident
when the century closed. And perhaps it had a worse effect upon
educational progress than anything the Puritans ever did.

These terrible laws were not left suspended, a mere threat to
restrain activity of propaganda, as the yet more terrible laws against
Catholics had been suspended by the action of Charles I. Under
his son, Parliament had power to insist. that the statutes which it
framed should be executed without Royal mercy or Court favour.
Until the Revolution of 1689, with a few brief intervals, the Claren-
don Code was vigorously enforced. Its execution was entrusted to
the Justices of Peace, and of that body the most violent members
became, by a natural process of selection, the principal agents of
violent laws. In each county a few magistrates, who were filled with
the bitterest rancour against their late oppressors, made revenge the
chief duty of their office. Under their patronage there was room
for an increase in the numbers, enterprise and professional spirit of
the tribe of paid informers, who, when the party strife stirred up
by this persecution took new unhappy forms, only needed the
example of Oates to rise from audacity to genius of conception, to
transfer their activity into a new political atmosphere, and to trim
with each shrieking blast in the hurricane of rage and fear. Some
magistrates spent a good part of their lives surprising midnight
conventicles; trapping teachers and clergymen who had strayed
out of bounds; crowding the plague-stricken gaols with hundreds of.
priests and prophets, and thousands of men and women; creating
day by day the martyrology of dissent, and the political tradition
that has handed down through long generations of English Puritans
an attitude of vigilant criticism and protest towards the powers
that rule society and the State.

Thus the Presbyterian Church was hurled down into the
common clay of other sects, and compounded therewith under the
heel of the Cavaliers. In politics, the distinction of Presbyterian
from Sectary disappears; and even in religion, the Presbyterian’s
distinguishing mark of orthodoxy gave way after a generation of
company with the heretics; at the beginning of the eighteenth
century, the Unitarian movement made its home in what had once
been the most dogmatic of all the Protestant faiths. Presbyteri-
anism, in the old sense of the word, was dead. Indeed, except to a
few divines, that word had never in England meant more than an

1661} THE RESTORATION 343

artificial organisation of Puritanism with a view to capturing the
Established Church. When that attempt was finally abandoned,
Puritanism took the free congregational forms more natural to its
English genius.

The fundamental cause of the Anglican triumph was economic Social

and social. The Church systems of Presbyterian and Independent eo
had this in common, that they were both democratic. Presby-
terianism required an atmosphere of comparative equality among
the congregation, and an eldership chosen from the middle class,
This was uncongenial to the semi-feudal life of the English village.
In the economic and social history of England the squire was still
in the ascendant, the yeoman freeholder was about to decline, and
the agricultural labourer could not, like the Scottish peasant, rise
to the height of the argument of human equality, and attain through
a democratic Church to self-reliance and self-respect. The com-
plete failure of the Presbyterian, and the part failure of the con-
gregational system in the English village, perpetuated the aristocratic
rule of the squire and his dependants, which did so much to
depress English rural life and to drive so many of the best men to
the more liberal atmosphere of the towns.

The permanent result of the Clarendon Code was to prepare Social
the way for a most important feature of modern times, “ the strict eeaeR
and remarkable influence of class on religious observance in Eng-
land”! The Puritan gentry, unwilling to forfeit their political
rights and social status, hastened to conform to the established
religion ; the local chiefs of the Whig party were afterwards drawn
from the numerous families up and down the country who had
chosen this unheroic course. ‘These men never again attempted
either to destroy or to secede from the Anglican Church, but only
to restrain her power of persecuting their political supporters.
But in the middle and lower classes, although many conformed
solely to avoid ruin, there was found a large body, led by a devoted
band of ministers, that refused to abandon the Puritan worship.
Though some crossed the seas, the majority remained to endure for
Jong years the bitterest persecution. If Charles I. had triumphed
sword in hand, they could only have escaped by flight to America
- from an Anglican absolutism really and finally established, But

1 Chas. Booth, Life and Labour in London; Religious Influences, vol. vii., p.
47. ts Va .

344 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1661

absolutism had fallen, and their faith in Parliamentary institutions
was not destroyed by the elections of 1661. ‘They confidently
waited the day when some ambitious statesman, playing for power
at Westminster, would voice their grievances and bid for their
support. Persecution under a Cavalier Parliament was, so long
as it lasted, more thorough than persecution under the vexed and
straitened monarchy of Charles I.; the Bishops, with their
Church Courts and officers, had not harried Nonconformists with
half the regularity which the squires were able to ensure, by use of
the more formidable machine of local administration and national
justice. The present under Clarendon was worse than the past
under Laud. But the future was now full of hope. For under
the new régime it was only a matter of time before an oppressed
but influential section of the community could make its weight felt
in the even balance of a free party system.

Dissent was strong among the merchants and shopkeepers ;
| indeed the injury done to trade by the ruin and terror spread
among them under the Clarendon Code, became a stock argu-
ment for Toleration. If Presbyterianism was strongest among the
richer merchants, other forms of dissent were rife in the lower-
middle and working classes. The secular and anti-Puritan reaction
in the higher ranks was less marked among small traders and
workmen. The Quakers endured their martyrdom or fled to
America; and the books which Bunyan wrote in Bedford gaol re-
presented religion to thousands of the poor. Thus the Church of
England, while she enfolded all the genuine piety of the Protestant
upper class, and the unnumbered host of indifferents of all classes
who had their statutable Church duties to fulfil, put outside her

borders the largest sections of religious enthusiasts.
Puritan- Yet Puritanism left deep marks on the laity of the Established
cd Church. In the reign of Charles II. the whole people, Whigs and
onthe ‘Lories, were passionately Protestant. The altar was again moved
laity to the East; but the ritual movement of Laud made but little
further progress. ‘To the devout Englishman, much as he might
love. the Prayer-book service and hate the Dissenters, the core of
religion was the life of family prayer and Bible study, which the
Puritans had for a hundred years struggled not in vain to make
the custom of the land. The self-restrained and melancholy
strength of individual purpose which armed the English to surpass

1661] THE RESTORATION 345

all nations in economic and industrial enterprise, the struggle to-
wards purity, the deep and continuous affections which freed and
ennobled family life, these habits of body and mind were not wholly
cast aside by the people, whatever might be the case with their
governors at Whitehall. The defects of the Puritans survived with
their qualities, and their sad Sabbath became the Englishman’s
Sunday. Even when the passions of the hour and the policy of
the State were united to restore all things Anglican, the people
did not choose to make the very small effort that would then have
sufficed to recover their day of pleasure and recreation, but con-
tinued to offer up to an ascetic ideal the weekly sacrifice of joys
deliberately forgone.

Meanwhile, in the ancient churches where Presbyterian and
Baptist had lately debated knotty points of regeneration before
bewildered audiences of rustics, the restored clergy preached week
after week, and year after year against rebels and Dissenters. Their
frequent and unanswered denunciations at length sank some way
into the English mind. Yet on the benches close under the pulpit,
where the families of yeomen sat with decent pride, and in most
parts of the town congregations, there were many who while they
listened with half-approval, were still half-Puritan at heart.
Without the help of these Churchmen the Whig party could not
have been formed at a time when active Dissenters enjoyed but few
political rights.

But in the upper class the proportion of these conformists with
Puritan tendencies was not large, and the number of actual Dis-
senters was negligible. The Clarendon Code and the tyranny of
social custom left no place for a Puritan squire. The type of
manor-house religion which had supplied England with Eliots,
Hampdens and Cromwells, was not seen again until the time
when the Evangelicals raised up within the borders of the Church
herself another Puritan gentry to rule India and to free the slave.

The desertion of the whole upper class, and the legal prohibition
of Nonconformist schools and colleges, injured the natural develop-
ment of Puritan thought, by divorcing it from many sources of
culture which had been open to it in the days of Milton. But,

1See a most interesting opinion as to the Puritan influence on industrial de-
velopment and family life, in Professor Marshall’s Principles of Economics (ed. 1891),

PP- 34-36.

quarrel of
Church
and
Dissent

Growth

of indiffer-
ence and
of ration-
alism

346 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1661 |

if the Clarendon Code forcibly cut off the Puritans from learning —

and literature, it drove them into a situation where their moral
service to the country was enhanced. A large body of the most

conscientious and enthusiastic men became political critics and |

social reformers by profession, for their own wrongs sharpened their
sensibility to the wrongs of others, and their own position never
permitted them to fall into the sleep of those to whom the world is
an easy bed.

The division of the religious world into Church and Dissent
made freedom of thought a possibility for the future. The English
could not be argued into toleration by their reason, but they could
be forced into it by their feuds. In a country where the pro-
portion of really devout persons is so large and their spontaneous
activity so great, it would have been dangerous if all the principal
forces of religion had been accumulated in one State’ Church.
If the zeal of the Anglicans who enforced the Clarendon Code had
been united to the zeal of the Presbyterians who passed the Blas-
phemy Laws, English popular religion would have become hardly
less intolerant and far less assailable than the hierarchy which
Voltaire undermined ; for in England no Voltaire could have at-
tacked Christianity with any chance of political success, Fortun-
ately, a settlement was made under which the persecutors would
rage unceasingly against each other. The rivalry of Church and
Dissent forced both sides to overlook, to tolerate, and sometimes
even to court, any third party. The Dissenters needed deliverance
from oppressive laws too much to inquire whether Shaftesbury or
Charles Fox were in a state of grace; the Church made no attempt
to invigilate over the proceedings of the Royal Society, and
could not effectually silence Hobbes, when Lords of the Council
were plotting with mob leaders to marshal against her the rallied
forces of fanaticism ; nor, in an age of milder measures, could she long
oppose herself to Darwin, in the midst of another flood of political
Dissent. Thus the laws of the Cavalier Parliament, which were meant
to dragoon al] England into one religion, have helped to secure
freedom for a hundred religions, and a thousand ways of thought.

If, however, the new era had wrought nothing more than a
political and social redistribution of the old religious forces that
had met upon Naseby Field, intellectual freedom could not have

been secured. solely by the mechanical division of Dissenters from

1661} THE RESTORATION 347

Churchmen. But a new spirit was abroad. Secular feeling was
now sometimes to be found in the provinces, while in the capital
it was already a fashion and almost acreed. Among the politicians
of Westminster, the statesmen and courtiers of Whitehall, and the
wits who set the tone in the coffee-houses where all met on common
ground, the reaction against the Puritans took the form, not of
Anglican devotionalism, but of indifference to religion. Of all the
statesmen who guided the fortunes of the new era, scarcely one was
highly religious, except Clarendon, whose ideas dated from before
the deluge; and perhaps half were suspected of greater or less de-
grees of infidelity. Buckingham and Rochester, Halifax and Temple,
Sidney, Essex and Peterborough lightly bore imputations of a kind
which in an earlier age would have been enough to destroy the —
political career of Pym, Hampden or Falkland. And it is well told
that Shaftesbury, who in old days had sat a keen-eyed politician
among the Barebone Saints, replied to a fair inquirer, “ Madam,
wise men are of but one religion”.—Which one was that P—
“Madam, wise men never tell.”

Much of this fashionable scepticism was mere froth, and for the The
most part foul, left by the spent waves of strange events and vey
terrible emotions now moaning at low tide far out at sea. But the
deep had cast up its treasures also. The secular reaction among
the libertines of life and politics at the capital would not have
outlasted the generation that had suffered under Oliver, if it had
not become joined to the more solid and respectable influence of a
scientific movement springing up in the same time and place. The
Royal Society was Royal in more than name. It was closely allied,
not indeed with the politics, but with the social life of the Court.
Charles I. had extended an intelligent patronage to art, but in an
age too soon, when English painters were inferior and the English
art public small; the Puritans had sold away his Titians and
Vandykes for money down. Charles II. extended an. intelligent
patronage to science, when the time was ripe; bigotry could never
exile nor years efface the native achievements of Newtonian dis-
covery ; while the idea of the rule of Jaw in the universe slowly
penetrated downwards from class to class, remoulding by unopposed
and unsuspected influence the unconscious forms of thought, and
even of religion itself.

In the Restoration era the common people still firmly believed

Persecu-
tion of
witches
declines

The idea
of law in
the Uni-
verse

348 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1661

in the presence of witchcraft. On one occasion at the Exeter _
Assizes the clamour of the populace for the condemnation of two
old women was so terrible, that an outbreak was expected if the
thirst for blood had not been gratified. But the movement no
longer found Jeaders among either the dominant clergy or the
governing class. ‘The witch-hunt had been set on foot by James
I. himself, backed by a credulous Parliament, Magistracy and
Bench. The sport had reached its height during the Civil War
under the Presbyterian rule, but had been mitigated under that
of the Independents. Now the Puritan influence was reduced,
and the restored Anglican clergy showed much less of the abomin-
able zeal that “ would not suffer a witch to live”; while men of the
professional and official classes were rapidly getting rid of the grosser
superstitions which their ancestors had handed down unchallenged
from the ages of barbarism. No longer in the reign of Charles IL,
as in the reign of his grandfather, would a high law-officer of the
Crown soberly discuss over the supper-table whether the best way
to cure disease among horses were to burn one of them alive, or to
roast its heart on a spit in the presence of a witch.’ The Judges
on Circuit, who in previous reigns had thrown the weight of
magistracy and learning on to the side of panic and superstition,
now sometimes laboured to obtain acquittals by exposing the
flimsy evidence, such as in former times had passed muster with
courts where every soul present believed in witchcraft. But the
task required caution as well as skill. For if once the country
jurymen detected a London sceptic on the bench, they would cry,
“<This Judge hath no religion, for he doth not believe in witches,’
and so, to show they have some, hang the poor wretches”. Under
these conditions, without controversy and almost without notice,
the persecution of witches died out of England—and its death was
the first triumph of the humanising spirit of Rationalism?

Thus the English Protestant world, which had long ago ceased
to expect miracles from God, gradually ceased to expect them from
the devil. The principles of Descartes now first began to get a hold
on English thought, and gentlemen like Roger North, who had
studied his philosophy at Cambridge, began to “aim at a system of

1p. 54 above, note. Camden Misc., x., p. 60.

*Lecky’s Rationalism, i, (ed. 1866), pp. 108-37, Life of Lord Keeper Guilford,
sects, Igt, 192, and of Roger Norih, sects. 163, 164,

1661} THE RESTORATION 349

nature upon the Cartesian or rather mechanical] principles, believing
all the common phenomena of nature might be resolved into them ”
The influence of the new spirit was felt even in religious circles.
Though the rural clergy continued to urge their fanatical crusade
against fanatics, some of the great divines of the capital, who
preached in the classic temples which Wren constructed on the site
of the old Gothic Churches, proclaimed the principles of Toleration,
while some waged war on the immorality of Court and stage, and
others began to appropriate the idea that divine power was mani-
fested through unbreakable law, and was best argued by the
evidence of design. It has been well said of Tillotson that “ after
the orgies of the Saints and the orgies of the sinners, he made
sanity acceptable to a whole generation”.? The same Rationalism
which was driving some Presbyterians to deny the Trinity, was
driving some leaders of the Church of England to inaugurate
the ideas and spirit that were to dominate the eighteenth century.
The conception that regular law was the guiding principle of all
things, began to affect speculation, literature, and politics.

The history of the years 1661 to 1678, though crowded with a
sequence of famous events and a mob of brilliant men, is yet so
lacking in unity and so barren of decisive result, that it has most.
significance when regarded as prologue to the revolutionary strife
of parties and religions which raged in this island from 1678 to 1689,
and decided the future of England and of Europe. The ministry
of Clarendon and the Cabal, the Dutch wars and the Triple
Alliance, the Dover Treaty and the Test Act, the conversion of
James and the marriage of Mary, Danby’s tenure of office and
Shaftesbury’s commencement of opposition—these were events
which served only to neutralise each other and to create a state of
teusion such as men can seldom endure without breaking at last
into madness.

The history of this period, which is essentially one of intrigue, The _
was conditioned by the moral atmosphere of Whitehall. The osha
difference between the old Cavalier Court and the new was apparent Restora-
from the very first moment of the Restoration. On the very night "°"

1 Roger North’s Autobiography, sects. 21, 26,
2 Dowden, Puritan and Anglican, p. 339.

850 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1661

of the Happy Return, the restored wanderer showed his gratitude
to heaven by taking Barbara Villiers for the ruler of himself and
his Court. Except Clarendon and a few of the older men, no
party at Whitehall resented on moral grounds her splendid and
outrageous domination, or the presence of whole suites of ladies
with whom she shared the King’s favours. The Puritans, in re-
venge for the civil disabilities which they had legally imposed on
all Anglicans, found themselves excluded for ever from the govern-
ing class, and from fashionable Society; and as a result of the
similar disabilities which they had practically imposed on all
except rigidly moral persons or hypocrites, they saw Society and
government given over for one generation at least to open profli-
gacy. But Restoration vice was not merely a reaction against
the rule of the censorious; it was also due to the folly of suc-
cessive Puritan Governments, in striking the homes of the Cavaliers
with fiscal penalties. The resulting poverty had prevented the
resumption of the old manner of life when the war was over. The
family life of the rural gentry, that had produced generation
after generation of Verneys, Hydes and Hampdens, had now for
twenty years been broken up; its traditions were therefore un-
known to the younger generation. While his sisters had been
living in a corner of the sacked manorhouse under the charge of
the steward, the heir had been seeking bread for his mouth among
the bullies and sharpers of low life in Dutch port towns, or sponging
on the vicious nobility of France and Spain. If youth and ob-
scurity had enabled him to remain at home, without parents or
without money, he was often brought up among the grooms, with
no instruction in morals and dignity of conduct beyond salt stories
of Puritan hypocrisy, in which the defeated veterans found solace and
revenge. Whether spent at home or abroad, his youth had been
necessarily divorced from the education, religion and morals of his
own land. It is not then surprising that when at the Restoration
“debauchery was loyalty, gravity rebellion,” there were many loyal
courtiers and few grave. Outside the Court it is probable, though
there is less evidence on the subject, that a temporary decline in
morals took place throughout the upper class.

Character. | The man who presided over the Court was destined in the last

and Court years of his life to prove himself one of the greatest politicians who

H ea ever succeeded in the struggle for power in England. But it was

1662] THE RESTORATION 351

only when driven to defend himself against dangers incurred by

the intriguing but lazy policy of the first fifteen years of his reign,

that Charles at the last bestirred himself to use his true political

ability ; and even then, half his art was to prevent his adversaries

from discovering till too late that he had any political ability at all.

The consideration that constantly overruled all his other plans,

was how to avoid business ; till at last the day came when he had to

consider how to avoid the loss of his kingly prerogatives. “It was

resolved generally by others,” said one who knew him well, “whom

he should have in his arms, as well as whom he should. have in his

councils, Of a man who was so capable of choosing, he chose as

seldom as any man that ever lived.” His love had “as little mix-

ture of the seraphic part as ever man had”.! But of all his mis-

tresses only one or two at a time presided over the Court and

enjoyed control over affairs of State. Throughout the early years

of the reign none of them seriously challenged the political rights of

Barbara Villiers, Countess of Castlemaine. But it was necessary to
introduce a Queen, not indeed to preside in any real sense over

Castlemaine’s Court, but for purposes of State to bear legitimate

children. Catherine of Braganza, an unfortunate little woman from

a Portuguese cloister, was brought over, married and held up to

ridicule by her husband, who compelled’ her in spite of tears and

fainting fits to employ the Castlemaine as her own lady of the bed-

chamber. But she had her revenge: she failed to fulfil the purpose

for which she had been made Queen, and so laid up for her husband

an old age of the thing he most hated—business. The game of

dark intrigue, in which the great forces of English Protestantism

and continental Catholicism fought for England through all the
next generation, turned on the fact that Charles’s wife bore him no

children, so that his brother James Duke of York remained heir to

the throne.
| A shrewd combination of English designs on the trade of Marriage

tropical Empires, with French designs on the sovereignty of “e4ty
| European Provinces, had sent our statesmen to seek this unlucky Portugal
Queen in a nunnery of Portugal. France had brought the era of 38

her Cardinals to a victorious close by the treaty of the Pyrenees 1661-62
(1659), which ended her twenty-five years’ war with the Spanish

1 Halifax, Character of Charles II.

352 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1662

Crown, and left her a short breathing space of peace before her
career of aggrandisement under Louis XIV. The one danger to
the policy of France was that in this breathing space her ally
Portugal might be overwhelmed. In time of war France had
easily protected the House of Braganza in its secession from the
Empire of the Philips; but who would now save the rebel kingdom
from the retarded vengeance of Spain? Louis XIV. saw the man
for his purpose in the King of England ooking for a wife. The
first and least nefarious use of French influence and gold in the
counsels of Charles, was the negotiation of the Anglo-Portuguese
marriage treaty by Louis. The bargain proved a good one for
England. <A little money and a few troops sufficed to preserve
Portugal independent, without seriously embroiling us with Spain.
In return, we obtained an alliance which remained a nearly constant
condition of politics for more than a century and a half; in days
when we had many enemies, the Portuguese trade and harbours
remained open to our manufactures and ships of war, and proved
in our later wars with Louis XIV. and Napoleon a basis secured
upon the sea for operations against the continental armies of
France. The Portuguese also conceded to us, as Catherine’s dowry,
two colonial possessions, Tangier and Bombay. In the outpost of
Christendom, among the barren mountains round Tangier, the
King kept up regiments of foot whose existence was regarded as
a menace by Parliament and nation, and who finally were indeed
brought home to practise on the peasant followers of Monmouth
cruelties learnt in long warfare with the Moors.’ The occupation
of Tangier as a naval base was the sign that the Restoration
Government would continue Cromwell’s policy of sending our ships
into the Mediterranean.? Not less valuable was the trading island of

_ It is curious to remark that “ Kirke’s Lambs” (the Second or Queen’s) was
originally composed in large part of the old Cromwellian regiments who had beaten
the Spaniards in Flanders (R. H. S., xvii., p. 108. Hist. Records of British Army
(1837), 2nd Foot, p. 2). Some old sergeant may have served both at Dunkirk and
at Sedgemoor. , If so, he had seen great changes in the “tone” of the regiment
though not in its fighting qualities. The bad character of the soldiers when they
returned from Tangier on its abandonment in 1683, had been particularly developed
by the character of the last governor, Kirke (see, besides Macaulay, Corbett, chaps
XxiV., Xxv.). : Les

*Commercially Tangier was valueless. But before our occupation of Gibraltar
(t704) it would perhaps have been dangerous to allow any other power to occupy
Tangier, and so close the entrance to the Mediterranean, to the command of which
we now aspired (see Corbett, li., pp. 7-10, 110-13, and for the expert contemporary
opinions of Mr, Love and Sir W. Temple, see Grey, viii., pp. 14, 15, 18, IQ).

1665] THE RESTORATION 353

Bombay. Bombay, Madras, and the station on the Hoogli, together
formed for us the three points of the triangle whence the East Indian
Company was one day to advance over the length and breadth of
India.

As a set-off to its new responsibilities and burdens at Tangier, Sale of
Government broke up Cromwell’s Dunkirk garrison and sold the ao
place—not indeed back to Spain, but on to France, the broker of
the marriage treaty. The sale, though unpopular among the
City merchants, aroused no general agitation at the time, for the
Restoration Government was still popular and prosperous.!

The four years of peace and retrenchment that ensued on the

fall of Cromwellian imperialism were naturally a period of com-
mercial recovery and enterprise; this movement was fostered by
the interest which Prince Rupert and the Duke of York took in
merchant adventure along Hudson’s Bay and the Guinea coast.
The patronage extended to the most pushing commercial explorers
by the prominent men at Court recalled the reign of Elizabeth;
while the state of private warfare in time of public peace which in
those days had existed between the English and Spanish merchants,
was renewed between the English and the Dutch. The Dutch
seized the ships of our African and East Indian Companies, and
stirred up the native populations to drive us from their lands.
The English landed a force and seized the New Netherland colony
in America (1664), which they rechristened New Jersey and New
York. The merchants of both nations grew tired of peace on such
terms; Charles and his brother hated the Republican Government
of Holland, which kept their relatives of the House of Orange
from enjoying monarchical power ; and the Republican Government
hoped by successful maritime warfare to outbid the military faction
by which the Orange pretensions were upheld. ‘Thus both’ Govern-
ments, and both peoples, were responsible for the official declaration
of war between England and Holland in March, 1665.

The second Dutch war (1665-67) resembled the first in the size The
and character of the combatants. It was another battle of giants. cen
If the victory of England was less decisive than in Blake’s war, this war,
was due to administrative corruption and shortage of war supplies 1665-67
for political reasons on shore, rather than to any falling off in fighting

1 Bugnet, i., pp. 303-4, note by Mr, Airy.
23

Three
classes
of naval
officers

King,
Parlia-

ment and

the war

854 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1665

quality at sea. The great battle of the Four Days, as its name
suggests, was a marvel of physical endurance and courage in both
fleets, and was famous, especially on the English side, for the
discipline, regularity and skill with which the whole line executed
the orders of the Admirals. The Dutch Captains were perhaps the
better sailors, and they often surpassed in deeds of daring. But they
were less trained to common action, and if some excelled, some
few fell short of their duty. The reason of this difference is not
far to seek. The traditions of the Dutch navy were developed
almost entirely out of the merchant service, those of the English
by a combination of maritime and military ideas. In the second
Dutch war “ Oliver’s Captains” were sent to sea again.

There were in fact three elements among the Captains of the
Restoration navy. First, ignorant and incompetent young men
of fashion who had begged or bought commissions at Whitehall.
Secondly, the “tarpaulins,” or old sea-dogs, who lived and died at
sea, and knew the management of a ship in all weathers and on
every coast. ‘These two classes were mutually exclusive. But there
was a third class, whose existence has sometimes been overlooked in
history, perhaps because it is merged with the tarpaulins at one
end and the favourites at the other. This third class consisted of
men who had seen military service on land, but who adapted them-
selves to sea warfare, and helped the tarpaulins to fight the battles
and evolve the traditions of the English navy.?

The cause of our less marked success in the second Dutch war,
was the want of one political authority controlling all departments
of the executive, and commanding all sources of taxation. England
was richer in 1665 than in 1654, but she was no longer a milch cow
for the purposes of Government. Complete accord between Parlia-
ment and King was the condition of effectual war supply under the
political system established at the Restoration, and although King
and Parliament were equally anxious to humble the enemy, they
fell out with each other in the course of the struggle, for reasons of
temperament rather than of policy. Charles was lazy and spend-
thrift ; the Commons were interfering and suspicious. These faults
aggravated one another. ‘The more lazy and spendthrift the
Commons found Charles to be, the more interfering and suspicious

1 Mahan, Sea Power, pp. 125-30. Corbett, i., pp. 181-94.

1666] THE RESTORATION 355

they themselves became; they voted money in large sums, but
voted it too late, after long debates and recriminations. Many of
the sources of taxation, especially the King’s fixed revenues, were
bringing in scarcely half what was estimated; this fact, not then
fully realised, added to the difficulties of an incompetent War
Ministry, and to the rage of a suspicious Assembly. Charles,
whenever there was not money enough to go round, preferred that
his seamen rather than his mistresses showin lack ; and the Commons
again could only mark their disapproval of this choice by further
delaying their vote of supply, to call for inquiry and appropriation
at the very crisis of the war.!

The result was understood and deplored by a few excellent public
servants, who in spite of the inefficiency of their colleagues in the
Admiralty, in spite of their own low standard in handling public
money, and in spite of the disheartening political donditicns. did
not a little to reform naval institutions i the course of this extra-
ordinary reign. Pepys, who was the best judge of the matter in
the country, declared that the personal interest taken by the King
and the Duke of York in naval affairs had restored the streneth
of the fleet, which the Protectorate in its last years of bankruptcy
had allowed to decline once more. But Pepys also attributed the
ill-success of the war itself to the habits of the royal brothers.
They “mind their pleasures and nothing else,” so that “we must
be beaten”. When pressing letters arrived from the dockyards or
the fighting fleets, Charles might be out walking at four and a half
miles an hour, or idling in bed, in the tennis-court, in the dis-
section-room, with Lady Castlemaine, or in any retreat but the
council chamber. If at last he was caught and brought into
council, he played with his dogs and let the others talk unheeded.
The war administration fell out of gear, and precious days and
weeks slipped idly by at Chatham and Portsmouth, while Charles
“employed his lips about the Court,” or the officials of the Ex-
chequer waited for the money to come in.

When the head of the administration would only work by fits 7.
and starts, when the war-chest was tardily filled and dishonestly Dutch in

the Med-
emptied, contracts could not be executed, and the sailors’ wages got way, June,
twenty to fifty months in arrear. ‘Towards the end of the war the 1667

1 Owens College Historical Essays, Shaw, pp. 392-401. Pepys, 31st Dec., 1666;
7th Jan., 24th April, 1667.

The
Treaty
of Breda,
3rd July,
1667

356 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1667

unpaid crews ran riot in London streets. In June, 1667, as the
negotiations for peace were far advanced, Government laid up the
ships, for want of money to keep the men on board. De Ruyter
sailed up the Thames and burnt a portion of the fleet where it lay
in the Medway. An attack on London was expected, the city
militia were under arms, and men sent their families and money
out of town for safety. The plague and the fire had ‘lately taught
them to expect portentous calamities as natural and likely events.
It was everywhere said that the Court had sold England to the
papists, that a French army was about to land, and the general
massacre of Protestants to begin at last. Thus fear betrayed the
real thought of the nation, that it was not the Protestant Dutch
who were the worst enemy. In that hour of panic and disgrace,
patriotism was less strong than mutual distrust and indignation
with Government. Many of the brave men who had fought
the battle of the Four Days and burnt the Dutch shipping in
“Flie harbour” the year before, refused to stir a finger to save
our ships from destruction in the Medway, until their tickets
of arrears were cashed by the Admiralty officials. From the
decks of the victorious Dutch vessels English deserters were heard
talking in their mother-tongue, shouting messages to their friends
on shore, and boasting that whereas in the King’s service they
had fought for tickets, in the Dutch service they fought for
dollars.

There was nothing to be done but to conclude the peace. The
English plenipotentiaries at Breda ceded the still outstanding
points of dispute. The treaty was a compromise, more disgraceful
to the English than to the Dutch, because of the events that had
hastened its signature, but not on account of its terms. We
acquired from Holland Delaware, New Jersey and New York.
These additions to our Empire were not at the time regarded as
outweighing the cession of Poleroon, because Europeans had not
then learnt by the experience of centuries the immensely superior
value of white men’s territory over tropical stations. But, in the
light of subsequent events, we can see that in the history of British
settlement in the United States, the Breda Treaty takes the next
place to the planting of Virginia and the Bae of the Pilgrim

‘Pepys, 31st Oct., 1665; 8th and roth Dec., 1666; then: 17th, June, 166
E. H. R., xii., pp. 17-66, 679-710 (J, R. Tanner), i hE ite a

35

30

VIRGINIA
& cmes Richmond,

NORTH

SQUTHIE *
CARQLIINA)/

ie te ae ee

YY - Roanoke I.

nd 5
nae: t i

bo $f
ah Ss
| o-ftharleston
£ BRITISH COLON
be IN NORTH AMERICA
ce AT THE
, END OF THE 17th CENTURY
ai English Miles a a
New England Colonies Ez)
FRORIDA The Middle » a
TheSouthern ,, [|
WN

Longituile West'15 of Greeroich

Jim Bartholomew & Son Ita Edinburg

London: Methuen & Co., Ltd., 36 Essex Street, Strand. W.C

1667} THE RESTORATION 857

Fathers; for now, joining the Puritans of New England to the
Royalist slave-owners of the South, stretched a third group of
English Colonies. These ‘“ Middle Colonies” were inhabited The
partly by the Dutch population, soon reconciled to the new flag ee
by the tact and statesmanship of Governor Nicolls, who refused
to establish British race ascendancy or to interfere with the Dutch
language and institutions; they were also rapidly filled up by
fresh floods of immigrants from Old and New England, and
from the Protestant populations of the Continent. In the
twenty years of Puritan supremacy at home, as many persons
perhaps had returned from New to Old England as had gone
out from Old to New. At the Restoration, individual clergy
and Republican leaders took refuge in the Northern Colonies,
but with no large number of followers. Under a Parliamentary
system the mass of Puritans elected to stay in England, for
they could still hope to win toleration in the end. But since
that hope, though not eventually disappointed, was long de-
ferred, the Clarendon Code soon began to drive away many,
especially Quakers, to the new Middle Colonies. At the same
time, the Northern Colonies bred so fast that they sent down
south a stream of Puritan emigrants of the old school to live
among the Quakers and the Dutch. These regions became the
asylum of different races and religions, English Quakers, New
England Puritans, Scottish Presbyterians, and continental victims
of the revived Catholic reaction. Sheltered behind the war-
like sea-front of Delaware, New Jersey and New York, the
Quakers of Pennsylvania could dwell at peace with white men,
and traffic on brotherly terms with the Red Indians of the woods.
In religious character these four Middle Colonies resembled the
tolerant Rhode Island of Roger Williams, rather than the persecut-
ing Massachusetts of Cotton Mather; for in communities containing,
besides English-speaking Puritans, Swedes, Dutch, Finns, Hugue-
nots, Palatines, Scots and Quakers, Toleration rather than Puritan
citizenship necessarily became the basis of political rights. But
subject to this beneficent alteration, the prevailing temper of the
Middle Colonies resembled the Puritan democracy of the North;
while Maryland and Carolina, though they also attracted by
religious toleration a large variety of races and creeds, were

The

Plague in
England,
1347-1665

The
Plague of
London,

June-Dec.,

1665

858 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1685

doomed by their soil and climate to join the social and political
civilisation of the slave states.

In the middle of the war, the Plague and the Fire of London
had occurred. ‘The Fire was an unique event; the Plague was
merely the last, and not perhaps the worst, of a series of outbreaks
covering three centuries. Between the campaigns of Crecy and
Poitiers, the Black Death had first swept over Europe from some
obscure and terrible source in the Far East, with the ubiquity and
violence usual to the incoming of a new disease. The obscurest
hamlet had little chance of escape. It is thought not improbable
that half the countrymen of Boccaccio and of Froissart, half the
subjects of Edward III., perished within three years. The Black
Death remained in the soil of England, and became known as “ ‘The
Plague”. It never again swept the whole country at one time,
but it perpetually broke out in different localities. In London
under the Lancastrian and Tudor Kings it was for long periods
together endemic and nearly continual; under the Stuarts it came
in rare but violent outbursts, as though the Death itself were in
the spasmodic agonies of dissolution. For after 1665 England
knew it no more.

The rejoicing in London for the accession of James I. had been
cut short by an outbreak of the Plague that carried off 30,000
persons; the accession of Charles I. was the signal for another no
less destructive, attended by horrors at least equal to those of the
great plague described by Defoe. In 1636 a slighter attack occurred.
Then followed thirty years of comparative immunity, during which
other events took place calculated to make men forget in their talk
the plague horrors that their fathers and grandfathers had endured.
So when the last outbreak came in 1665, although it did not
destroy a much larger proportion of the Londoners than some of
its predecessors had done, it struck the imagination more, for it
came in an age of greater civilisation, comfort and security, when
such calamities were less remembered and less expected, and it was
followed close, as though at the Divine command, by another
catastrophe to which there was no parallel in the most ancient
records of London.

1Goldwin Smith’s United States (1893), pp. 48-63. J. Winsor’s History of
America, vol. iti, C. M. H., vii., pp. 38-58. See also App. D, p. 525 below.

1666} THE RESTORATION $59

The Great Fire raged for five days and destroyed the whole The
City proper between the Tower and the Temple; yet it probably isbe a
did not unroof more than half the population of the capital. The and-7th,
“Liberties” beyond the walls were only in part touched, and these °°?"
contained by far the greatest portion of the inhabitants. London —
had been increasing with immense rapidity in the last sixty years.

It was about 40,000 short of half a million; about fifteen times

the size of the second city in the Kingdom. In all other cities of
England the townsfolk still lived within breath of the country,
under conditions of what we should now call country-town life.!

In London alone the conditions of great-city life were growing up, The slums
in many respects in a peculiarly odious form. The poor were round
crowded out of the City into the slum districts of the ‘“ Liberties”
beyond—St. Giles’s, Cripplegate, Whitechapel, Stepney, West-
minster, Lambeth—where they multiplied exceedingly in spite of

an enormous death-rate among infants. In earlier centuries the
constant presence of the Plague—the “ Poor Man’s Plague,” as it

was sometimes called—had helped to relieve Society of the pro-
letariat, carrying off as its first victims the starving, the unem-
ployed and the unemployable. Now that the Plague had ceased

to be continuous, the numbers of the London poor made them a
terrible force. This force had first made itself felt during the
gathering of that revolution which overthrew Laud and Charles I.;

and Shaftesbury, with the utmost deliberation, organised it during

the Popish Plot to begin a second revolution in the State.

The housing and the general condition of the poor in London
were so little improved by the building alterations consequent on
the Fire, that although the Plague never returned, the average death-
rate scarcely decreased.? For only a small part of the “ Liberties”
were burnt, and that part was rebuilt much after the old fashion.

In 1722 Defoe declared that “ they were still in the same condition
as they were before”. Finally, in 1780, the inhabitants of these
districts, under Lord George Gordon, burst out into a last diabolic

1 See p. 51 above. ’ ; ;
2 Annual averages of deaths in London (Creighton, in Social England, ivy
470) i—
Bute) 1653-1665 including year of the Great Plague 19,946
1666-1678 ‘ ‘ ° : 5 > 17,990
1679-1691 . . . ° ° 22,237
But some allowance must be made for increase of population.

360 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1666

orgy of anti-popish rage, in which they far surpassed the barbarism
of Shaftesbury’s “ brisk boys”.

Changes The seat and origin of the Plague had always been in these

ee slum districts outside the City. Now as these districts were not
burnt down and rebuilt on improved principles, it is certain that
the rebuilding of London after the Fire was not the reason why the
Plague disappeared from England.1 The portion of London that
was changed by the Fire was the residential and business quarter
in the heart of the City itself, the great commercial houses where
the merchants with their orderly and well-fed households lived,
worked and slept. These pleasant palaces of commerce had
gardens behind and courtyards within, but still presented lath and
plaster walls to the narrow and crooked streets, and the old
English gables sometimes protruded so far that the prentices in
their garrets could shake hands across the way. Only in the few
places where the racing Fire met brick walls, was it forced to
linger and to fight. The merchants took the opportunity to
rebuild their houses of better material, and in a more wholesome
if less picturesque relation to the street. Eighty-nine churches,
including the old Gothic St. Paul’s, had perished; if they were to
perish at all, no better year could have been chosen for their de-
struction, for Christopher Wren was beginning to be known at
Court. The Court was a good patron to him, but the Fire was the
best patron ever man had.

Political The Plague and the Fire affected the atmosphere of politics for

ere twenty years to come. The Rationalism setting in among the

and Fire educated had not yet conquered the middle and lower classes.
They regarded the Plague, the Fire, and the Dutch in the Med-
way as a triple manifestation of God’s anger against their governors.
It could not escape notice that the prophets who had gone through
the plague-stricken streets crying, “Yet forty days and London
shall be destroyed,” had only erred in their reckoning by one year.
To the popular mind the Fire was the vengeance of God, but none
the less the work of the French. Louis XIV. was in a state of
passive alliance with Holland against us, and though the French
did nothing effectual by sea or land, they were regarded by our

1Creighton, Hist. of Epidemics, i., pp. 202, 651-80; ii., pp. 34-43. De Foe,
Fournal of the Plague Year (ed. 1835), p. 344. Clar., Life, p. 1186, Cunningham,
PP» 314-17.

|
}

|

1667} THE RESTORATION 561

people as the most dangerous enemy of the two. For they were
‘“‘Papists”. Catholicism was the power secreted behind the En-
glish throne, and of this fact the nation had somehow become
dimly aware. When the Fire broke out (accidentally, as there is
no doubt at all) the rage of suspicion was turned in a significant
direction. The papists were said to be throwing “fire-balls” into
the houses. Catholics and Frenchmen who appeared in the streets
were seized by the mob, and roughly handed over to the authorities,
but according to a good tradition of the English rioters of this
epoch, not one of them was murdered. A general massacre of
Protestants by French help was expected to follow on the Fire
which the Papists had kindled. Here we have the symptoms and
ideas revived ten years later at the Popish Plot. It was largely
the Plague and Fire that unsettled men’s reason, made their
imaginations foul, and charged the political air with thunder.
Indeed, after the two catastrophes that had really befallen the
capital, what events were too enormous, too terrible to expect?
If these strange misfortunes had not occurred, half Oates’ stories
would never have been believed by a nation of whom even Charles I.
had said, “they are a sober people ”.

Thus the Puritan feeling revived on a wave of popular super-
stition and political discontent. After the Dutch had been in the
Medway, men everywhere began to “reflect upon Oliver,” “what
brave things he did, and made all the neighbour princes fear him”.
Even playgoers, returning from Ben Jonson’s Bartholomew Fair,
admitted that “the business of abusing the Puritans begins to grow
stale and of no use, they being the people that at last will be found
wisest”. Another decade was to pass before this revived feeling
was organised by Shaftesbury into the Whig Party. At present
men accepted the fall of the chief minister as a sop, not as a satis-
faction.

Clarendon’s position was so exalted as to attract the jealousy of Fail ot
all, so isolated as to enlist the sympathies of none. The marriage reese e
of his daughter Anne Hyde with James Duke of York (1660) had’
raised him above his fellow-subjects, as the father-in-law of the pro-
spective King. His interest in the succession of James laid him
open to unjust suspicions for his part in the unsuccessful Portu-

1Clar., Life, pp. 1185-87. Pepys, 12th July, 1667; 4th Sept., 1668,

362 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1667

guese marriage, and the changes of British territory that had
accompanied it.
Three sights to be seen
Dunkirk, Tangier and a barren Queen,

had been written up against his door by the mob that broke his
windows when the Dutch were in the Medway. ‘The disasters of
the fleet were more justly attributed to him, for while he scarcely
bestirred himself to see that the money voted was properly spent,
he had embroiled Charles with the Commons by refusing to let
them supervise the expenditure themselves. 'To the people at
large he was the type of much bad government and the cause of
many calamities. To resurgent Puritanism. he was the chief
persecutor. To the regiment of women, wits and panders at
Court, he was the Cavalier of the old school, who upheld the
solemn manners and proprieties of an earlier age; without the
protection of a sense of humour, he was a prey to the mimicry of
Buckingham, who by the help of the fire-shovel and bellows for the
mace and great seal, used to imitate the Chancellor’s strut, to the
uncontrolled delight of a master more grateful for the amusement
of an hour than for the devotion of a lifetime. 'To the Commons
he was the representative of royal prerogative, which no one ex-
pected the lazy King of his own initiative to defend; it was
Clarendon who had resisted the claim of Parliament to examine
accounts and to appropriate supplies, as “an introduction to a
Commonwealth, not fit for a monarchy”. But to Charles he was
the leader of the factious Parliament; it was Clarendon who had
incited the Houses to resist the King, whenever he attempted to
ease the lot of his Catholic and Nonconformist subjects. By repre-
senting King against Parliament in matters of money, and Parliament
against King in matters of religion, Clarendon incurred the hostility
of both, and fell between the two stools on which it was his con-
stitutional theory that every minister should sit. Yet though he
clung with the honesty of an earlier age to his political principles
of Anglican intolerance and royal prerogative, he was too ready
to sacrifice his dignity as a man in order to retain his office as
a Chancellor. In his sly and curious method of defending his
daughter’s honour when James hesitated to acknowledge her as
wife, in his dealings with the Queen, in his love of splendid living
and of high place, he recalls the sordid side of Coke or Bacon. It

1670] THE RESTORATION 363

had been his fate to live too many years among mean men. Claren-
don had lost the nobility of Hyde. But when, again in exile, he was
thrown back on the resources of his own virtue and intellect, and
again set himself, an old and broken man, to complete the great
literary work of his life, he seemed once more to enter the pure
presence of the friend who had deserted him on the field of New-
bury, of whose love he had once been worthy and was again worthy
at the end.

Since the attack on Clarendon had come from Parliament and The situa:
from country, Charles gained credit for yielding to the wishes of eee
his subjects. Yet it was the King and not the Houses who gained don’s fall
by the change. Charles could now choose ministers of his own
liking, to pursue his own policy, so far at least as they could avoid
the inquisition of Parliament. He could intrigue with the great
officers of State for the Toleration of Dissenters and Catholics.

The Privy Council, by whose advice the Tudors had ruled the
land, still retained important executive functions, but had ceased
to be the consultative oracle of the Crown. 'The existence of an
inner circle of the more important ministers had long been officially
recognised, and was often spoken of as the “Cabal”. The Cabal
of the seventeenth century was a step towards the Cabinet of the
eighteenth. But it was formed and held together solely by the
King. Its members were not responsible for one another’s actions,
or dependent on the support of Parliament. The theory of
ministerial responsibility was still the same in the days of Clifford,
Arlington and Buckingham as it had been in the days of Finch,

Laud and Strafford. So long as the King wished to retain their
services, their ministry could not be brought to an end by the vote
of the Commons, except by some direct form of personal attack,
Parliament drove Clarendon from office only by the threat of im-
peachment, and his successors only by passage of a Test Act (1673)
which legally disqualified some of them for service under the Crown.

The most famous of Cabals, which soon succeeded to the The
powers vacated by Clarendon, was entirely the King’s choice, and its fetes
members, though in principle less devoted to the royal prerogative,

1The King compelled him to resign the Great Seal, August, 1667, Parliament
impeached him, he fled and was banished, November, 1667-April, 1668. He re-
mained in exile till his death at Rouen in 1674,

364 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS {1670

were in policy more opposed to Parliament than the fallen minister
himself. Clifford, Ashley, Buckingham, Arlington and Lauderdale,
whose names by a strange coincidence spelt “Cabal,” were all of
them perfectly unscrupulous as to means. But some of them
adhered to principles in choosing their ends. Clifford was passion-
ately Roman Catholic. Anthony Ashley Cooper, afterwards first
Earl of Shaftesbury, was a sceptic who believed in civil liberty and
religious Toleration for all Protestants; through all changes of
Government, through all the shifting arts of his criminal career,
Ashley followed those two public ends, and his own personal am-
bition. Sometimes the servant, sometimes the enemy of Cromwell
and of Charles IJ., he was always the servant of civil freedom and
the enemy of a persecuting State Church. Buckingham, who slew
in duel the man whose wife he had seduced, was the friend and
patron of the Independents, whose religious views he sometimes
embraced, Arlington inclined to Catholicism. Scottish Lauder-
dale had no principle; he was a Covenanter at heart, a Prelatist
and persecutor in act. ‘Thus there was not one sound Anglican in
all the Cabal.
Parlia- In this congenial company, hiding the thought of his own heart
aoe and the object that for him underlay the design, Charles laboured
persecu- to break down the Anglican monopoly. He spoke to Presbyterians
tion, 1670 of Comprehension within the Church, to Independents of Toleration
without, Neither did he by any means exclude the Catholics from
hope of the royal mercy. The intrigue provoked a fierce and
effectual demonstration. In 1670 the members of the Cavalier
Parliament met in a rage. It was not to weaken the policy of the
Clarendon Code that they had overthrown Clarendon. They re-
newed the expiring Conventicle Act by large majorities. Yetalready
there was a sign of a new era in thought and politics; for the first
time in the history of an English Parliament, the debating talent
in both Houses was displayed on behalf of the theory and practice
of Toleration. The cause of Puritanism had become the cause of
the sceptics, humanitarians and moderates, and the day was slowly
coming round when sceptical, humane and moderate men would
look big. A new platform of Toleration for Puritans had been
brought into existence in the Cabinet closetings of the King and
his unscrupulous ministry at Whitehall. But so long as the new-

1670} THE RESTORATION 365

born party of Dissent was still wrapped in the swaddling-clothes of
Royal prerogative, it could not make appeal to its natural and ulti-
mate sources of strength in the country at large. Charles and his
ministers knew that a general election in 1670 would produce a
strong Protestant Parliament, with a touch of old Roundhead
feeling against the Court, prepared indeed to tolerate and even
to encourage Dissent, but determined to pursue the Catholics with
the sharpest edge of the law. It was significant that after some
hesitation the King decided to continue the life of the Cavalier
Parliament that thwarted his designs, rather than exchange it for
an Assembly dominated by the well-wishers of Puritanism, with
whose interest he was to outward appearance allied.

For in fact, ever since 1662, his intrigue for the temporary
Toleration of Dissent had been the by-play of his plot for the
permanent restoration of Catholicism. The secret motive of
Charles's actions, lay in his design to erect a Second Stuart Despot-
ism, based on Catholicism and the presence of French troops in
England,—if it could be done safely and without too much trouble,

It was not indeed in his character to carry through such a design,
and he soon relinquished it, but the consequences of his aberration
were lasting.

The plan of the Second or Catholic Stuart Despotism was long Plan of
thought to have been due to the personal insanity of James He oe
for he alone put it in force; but Charles originated the idea, and Despotism
though he afterwards abandoned it, he handed it on to his less able
brother. It was based on Catholicism, Toleration, a standing
army and the French alliance. Herein it differed from the First
Despotism of Laud’s and Strafford’s master, who had been hostile
both to Popery and Toleration.

The King’s intention as regards the Anglican and Roman Catholi
Catholic Churches is known to us from the records of his negotia- ‘'*™
tions with the Pope in 1662-63 and with the Pope and Louis XIV.
in 1669-72.!_ Charles II. offered these two foreign powers to alter

1 Ranke, iii., pp. 397-400, 493-95, 518. Home and Foreign Review, i., pp. 153-55
| 158-161, Secret Hist. of Charles II. (by Lord Acton). The accepted theory of Charles
II.’s relations with France has been challenged by Mr W. A. Shaw in his admirable
work in the Calendars of Treasury Books, 1904-13. He tells us that “so-called histories

366 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1670

the doctrines of the Church of England into those held by the
Church of Rome; and to make a similar change of ritual, except
for the retention of communion in both kinds and some English
hymns to be interspersed with the Mass. The State Church thus
remodelled was to preserve a considerable independence under the
Papal Suzerainty, not unlike the position of the Gallican Church
for which Louis XIV. was then contending with the Pope.
The analogy of France was also before the King’s eyes in the
matter of Toleration. France was still, nominally, the land of the
Edict of Nantes. For a few years longer she was still distinguished
among the States of Europe as a place where the rights of Dissent
were acknowledged in theory, though her practice was beginning to
be very different. In the past at any rate, the royal power and the
Catholic power had grown up by the alliance of the House of
Bourbon with the principle of Toleration: and now the happy
result had been reached that the tolerated were too weak to insist
upon their privileges. The recent history of his own realm also
pointed the would-be despot of England in the same direction.
Since the days of Laud and Charles I., Cromwell had shown that
Toleration of sectaries was not only practicable, but even useful in
keeping turbulent elements in the community content under a
military despotism. Charles II. was ready, as a temporary means
to a greater end, to relieve the Puritans from the laws on which
Bishops and Parliaments insisted. He would thus make the Dis-

are one and all false throughout”. According to Mr, Shaw, Charles could not have
meant to change his religion under the protection of French troops, and the clause to
that effect in the Secret Treaty of Dover was “never taken seriously by Charles,” be.
cause his financial position was so desperate that the plan could not have succeeded. It
is true that Mr. Shaw has brought out, in his own admirable manner, the straits to which
Charles was reduced by the wholly inadequate Parliamentary supply from 1660 onwards
But the flaw in Mr, Shaw’s argument appears to me to be this: the Treaty of Dover
was obviously not the result of financial calculations on the part of Charles, for it in-
volved the second Dutch War which, as Mr. Shaw himself has shown, was bound to
lead to bankruptcy and did so. Is it not probable that Charles was chiefly guided not
by financial, but rather by religious and political considerations in making the secret
treaty? His offer to Louis to change religion in 1670 is in a straight line with the
offer which he made to the Pope in 1662 to reconcile England to Rome. It is true
that he shrank from carrying out the religious part of the Treaty of Dover because he

found it too dangerous and Parliament too Protestant. But that does not prove that
he had never seriously meant it.

1670} THE RESTORATION 367

senters vassals of the Crown, and grant them terms; but he would
not, by dissolving the Cavalier Parliament, allow their friends to
get possession of the House of Commons, and thence grant terms
to him.

The forced conversion of the Anglican Church to communion French
with Rome, by an alliance of the Crown with the factions most '!P
hostile to Popery and tryanny, was too uncertain a venture in
politics to be accomplished without the backing of military
force.

Charles looked to France, because France was the only State
willing and able to supply him with gold pieces and trained veterans
for his purpose, and also because he himself, the son and companion
in exile of Henrietta Maria, was half a Frenchman by birth,
sympathy and training. With skill and good-nature that de-
ceived all who saw him so lightly tread the boards, he could act
the part of the happy English King, proud to preside over the
sects and factions of a living body politic; but in his southern
heart he pined to sit on the throne among a submissive and well
ordered people. Small wonder! For even the Cavalier Parliament
had thwarted his religious policy and scandalously starved his ad-
ministration by refusing adequate supply. The eccentric English
plan of dividing power between Crown and Parliament was leading
to anarchy. Catholicism and despotism, in their natural altiance
against all liberty of action and thought were in these years
regarded as the ideal polity, in Italy, in Austria, in Spain, in
many of the German states, but most pre-eminently in France.
In 1670 this system in Church and State was everywhere trium-
phant, and till the Marlborough wars revealed the power of
England to the world, was held to be the secret of strength.
In these years Louis took the rising sun for his emblem, and
Nec pluribus impar for his motto. The prevailing literature
of the world was French Catholic; military glory and diplo-
matic success belonged to France; the ideal of a Government,
of a society, of a Court, was looked for nowhere but at
Versailles. Each petty ruler of Germany and Italy, whether
his troops were purchased to fight for or against the Grand
Monarch, worshipped the type of perfection which he held up
before the eyes of all Europe.

English
hatred for
the ancien
régime of
France

Catholics

368 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1670

In England too the monarch adored ; but the people looked
askance. “Republican Ludlow, when he flea to Switzerland at the
Restoration, had “loathed ” as he passed through France

to see such number of idle drones, who in ridiculous habits wherein they
place a great part of their religion, are to be seen in every part, eating the
bread of the credulous multitude, and leaving them to be distinguished from
the inhabitants of other countries by thin cheeks, canvas clothing and wooden
shoes.*

This notion of “Popery and wooden shoes,” the cant term for the
French polity, was almost as familiar to Ludlow’s English enemies
as to his English friends. From the English Restoration down to
the French Revolution, “ Popery and wooden shoes” was the lead-
ing political idea common to all Britons, Tory as well as Whig.
Whoever would know the feeling that inspired the terror of the
Popish Plot, the expulsion of James II., the Marlborough wars,
and in a less degree the wars which the Pelhams and the elder Pitt
waged against France in three continents, should look with care at
Hovatth’s picture of Calais Gate in the National Gallery. Though
dently a hundred years had gone by, Hogarth only repeated on
canvas the very words of Ludlow. ‘That was how the English
people thought of France under her old régime.

The passion of mingled fear and contempt of France had con-
tinually appeared in the votes of the Cavalier Parliament, and in
the actions of the mob in London streets, ever since the accession
of Charles. When, after being eight years on the throne, he
entered on his great scheme, without regard to the existence of
this passion, he put the fortunes of the House of Stuart a second
time at stake.

The great majority of the English Catholics would never will-
ingly have consented to take part in the King’s plot. For two
good reasons they prayed to be left at peace; they had not yet
recovered from great losses, and they had stil] much to lose.
Catholicism, now nearly extinguished in the classes of field labour
and of trade, was the religion of landowners and their households,
who had many of the goods things of life still left them to enjoy.

1Ludlow, ii., p. 298.

1670] THE RESTORATION 369

But the Civil Wars had been to them a terrible lesson not to
appeal to force. It has been calculated that one-third of the
gentry who had died in arms for the King were Catholics. Their
castles had been sacked, their priests slain, their estates confiscated.
If they no longer numbered, as before the Civil Wars, some of the
wealthiest subjects in the land, like the old Earl of Worcester or
the owner of Basing House; if many ate off pewter whose fathers
had been served on plate, it was because they had ventured to rise
for an Anglican King, who had half the statute book in his favour
and half the nation on his side. If, therefore, they could now have
made themselves heard by his Catholic son, they would not have
urged him to a forlorn hope against the fundamental laws and the
whole people of England. But there was no way in which they
could make themselves heard either by the King, by the public, or
even by one another. The Catholic squires were not, like the
Anglican squires and the dissenting tradesmen, the ultimate judges
of the policy of their own party. They had no representatives and
no centres. ‘They lived in rural mansions, far from the world and
_ from each other, prevented by the laws of their country from taking
part in her public life, and by the custom of their Church from
framing a religious policy for themselves. Even the secular clergy,
_ who on the whole joined in the desire of their flocks for peace, had
been ousted from the control of English Catholic policy. The
_ Jesuits, victorious in the struggles that had divided the persecuted
Church in the days of the Gunpowder Plot, still acted for the Eng-
lish Catholics whom they did not represent ; and had now won the
ear of the royal brothers, who might otherwise have been good
Catholics and better Papists, without ceasing to be good English-
men.
This same division between the pacific and the intriguing, the Quarrel
secular and the Jesuit parties, held good all over Catholic Europe. between
The Jesuits had ceased to be the militia of the Pope, and had cee
lattached themselves to the rising fortune of France! Their Jesuits
enemies, therefore, found some support with the Pope, who was
hostile to the liberties of the Gallican Church, the foreign policy
of Louis, and the independence of the Jesuit Society. The Pope,

1That is the French Jesuits and their allies the Jesuits in England. The
Jesuits in Rome were loyal to the Pope.

Abortive
negotia-
tion of
Charles
with the
Pope,
1662-63

The
Triple
Alliance,
Jan.-Apr.,
1668

370 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1668

though he by no means wished Toleration to be extended into
new spheres, no longer aspired to attack prescriptive and legal
rights of established Protestant communities. But the Jesuits re-
tained the crusading spirit of their founder so well, that for two
generations after the Treaties of Westphalia (1648), which had been
supposed to end the wars of religion, Europe was kept in a state
of unrest by fresh intrigues for the extension of Catholic ascendancy
by force. They used the arms and gold of Louis of France as they
had once used the arms and gold of Philip of Spain. ‘To the Jesuits
and the Grand Monarch, not to the Pope or the House of Haps-
burg, was due the aggression of Catholicism against Holland and on
the Rhine, the scheme of the Catholic Stuart Despotism, and the
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes.

Charles II. had first applied to the Pope. In 1662-63 he had
propounded to the Vatican his scheme for the conversion of the
Anglican Church to the Roman doctrine and ritual. He seems to
have met with little encouragement. The Pope, probably, was no
more willing to concede to Charles an Anglican claim to half inde-
pendence, than he was to concede the Gallican claim to Louis; nor
did he wish to be embroiled once more with the terrible English
Parliament. The Jesuits still dealt with England in the spirit of
Parsons, but the relentless zeal of the Pope who excommunicated
Elizabeth no longer inspired the counsels of the Vatican.?

It was not till six years after this abortive negotiation with the
Pope that Charles applied to the French for help in his Catholic
Plot. For six years he had been forced to bow to the alliance of his
Anglican minister with his Anglican Parliament; the Dutch war
occupied as much of his attention as he chose to give to public
affairs; in that war France was England’s enemy, and when it
came to an end, our first action was to combine with Holland
against Louis. The Triple Alliance of England, Holland and
Sweden, to check the advance of the French armies in the Low
Countries and on the Rhine, showed that Holland had changed
the policy of a hundred years, and gone round from the side of
France to that of Spain. it was no Jonger in the interest of her own

1The House of Hapsburg, in Silesia and Hungary, persecuted Protestants,
5p not in so novel or so atrocious a manner as Louis XIV. and the French
esuits.

* Ranke, iii., pp. 397-400. Home and Foreign Review, i., pp. 153-55.

1669) THE RESTORATION 871

safety, as in the days of Henry IV. and the Cardinals, to divide up
the Spanish Netherlands between France and herself, but rather to
preserve them as a buffer state. Holland’s new policy, which finally
triumphed at Blenheim, Ramillies and Utrecht, she could only hope
to carry out by the help of England. For though Spain had once
been formidable as an enemy, she was now almost useless as an ally.
The Triple Alliance made Europe suppose for a few months that Eng-
land was already prepared to assume the required part. And indeed
if our foreign policy had been directed either by the prejudices of
the squires in the House of Commons, or by the wisdom of Sir
William Temple in diplomatic circles, the career of Louis’ am-
bition would have been checked at the outset, and Europe would
have been spared an age of blood and destruction. But the Triple
Alliance was no more than a forecast of the policy resumed with
steadier purpose after the coming of William to the English throne.
For while the ministers who had succeeded Clarendon regarded the
anti-French Treaty as an easy high-road back to popular esteem,
while Temple saw in it the security fer European peace and
English interests, Charles only consented to it in order to make
France the mortal enemy of the Dutch, and to induce her to put
a high price on the English alliance which he was now in a position
to offer her for sale.

In April, 1668, while the Swedish plenipotentiaries were putting Charles
their names to the Treaty of the Triple Alliance, Charles was Ags
trying to form a secret understanding with the French Ambassador. Catholic
Louis, sore at the curb which the Triple Alliance placed on his oe
claims at the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle (April-May, 1668), hesitated
before trusting himself to a King who must certainly be deceiving
one side or the other. At this stage, perhaps, Charles had not
decided to tack his old religious design on to his new dealings
with France ; for the Catholic-minded Arlington still hotly opposed
the French connection. But early in the year 1669 the face of
things had changed. James, Duke of York, had thrown in his
political fortunes with the Catholic intriguers of the Court over
which he was one day to preside; and Charles himself, had dis-
closed to Clifford and Arlington, in strict confidence, that he adhered
to the Roman faith, and was seeking means to put himself in a
position to abjure the political ties that bound him to the Pro-
testants. For until the King of England and his brother James

Charles’s
sister and
eldest son

372 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1606

would separate themselves from the heretical worship, the Catholic
Church would not permit them to participate by stealth in her
sacraments.!

Under these conditions the alliance with France was sought out
again for a new and larger purpose. With Clifford and Arlington
the King entered on the great intrigue, of which the other members
of the Cabal were to be the dupes and the English nation the
victim.

The Franco-Catholic policy of the Second Stuart Despotism
was the result of the marriage long ago of the first Charles with
Henrietta Maria of France. In exile, in Catholic countries, after
the death of her Protestant husband, the Queen had sought by
every means of persuasion and even of unkindness to convert her
children to her own faith. Young Charles alone had been shielded
from her efforts by his dead father’s strict command, by Clarendon’s
care, and by his own impatience of his mother’s control in anything.
She did not convert him. But she had given him her French
Catholic blood which in good time worked its own effect ; and
she left him his sister Henrietta, Duchess of Orleans, whom he
tenderly loved, a devout Catholic.

This lady now became the principal agent in the secret of
the King’s reign. In 1669 and 1670 she induced her brother
to make with Louis the secret Treaty of Dover, by which
England and France joined to partition Holland, and Louis
promised money and soldiers to Charles to enable him to declare
his own conversion to Catholicism, with a view to establishing that
religion in Eneland.*?, Thus the lady of whom nothing but what
was gentle was ever reported, obedient to the training of confessors
who had made her think such deeds to be works of mercy, set on
parties, churches and nations to slay each other and be slain, and
then herself passed suddenly into the Court of death.’

} Ranke, vi., pp. 37, 38. James took the final step probably not earlier than the
year 1672; Charles only on his deathbed in 1685.

? Lingard, xi, Appendix for terms of the secret Treaty. For its intention, see
Clarke’s Life of Fames II., i., p. 442, ‘for the setting of the Catholic religion in his
Kingdoms”. Lord Acton, H. and F. R., i., pp. 169-74; Ranke, iii., pp. 495-504;
Atheneum, Ap. ist, 1905. And see note on p. 366 above on Mr. Shaw’s views.

*The Treaty was signed 22nd May (0.8.), 1670. Before the end of June
Henrietta was dead.

1670) THE RESTORATION ; 378

The secret Treaty of Dover, signed in May, 1670, by the Eng-
‘ish Catho ic ministers, was covered next year by a sham Treaty
of Dover, solemnly negotiated for the benefit of tle Protestant
members of the Cabal who were not in the real secret. The sham
Treaty was nearly the same as the real Treaty, except that Catholi-
cism was not mentioned. England was to be subsidised by France,
and the Dutch State was to be destroyed. The Catholic ministers
affected to hesitate, but Buckingham and Ashley were all im-
patience. Charles laughed to himself as he fooled Ashley, and in
the spirit of the jest raised him to be Earl of Shaftesbury (1672) and
Lord Chancellor; but the man who made a fool of Shaftesbury was
running risks for the future.

In March, 1672, the Treaties had effect, and war with Holland
was duly proclaimed. But the King postponed his declaration of
Catholicism ; Louis did not press him, preferring to destroy Holland
while he could, rather than to stake his ripe plans on the doubtful
chance of converting England. Charles and the Cabal, who had
fraudulently obtained war supplies from the Commons by pretend-
ing to adhere to the Triple Alliance, and money from the national
creditors by the stop on the Exchequer, began the war on slender
means without asking leave of Parliament. ‘They hoped to make
the enterprise popular after it had begun, by raising the cry to
avenge the Medway and the Amboyna massacre. As long ago as
1623 the Dutch traders in the Spice Islands had massacred the
English in Amboyna, and retribution had never been fully exacted.
The English had left the islands to the Dutch and concentrated
their own trading operations on the mainland of Hindustan. The
Dutch were still our chief rivals in world trade and maritime supre-
macy. Commercial greed and national pride might have answered
to that appeal if we had been fighting alone against Holland. But
in this “destruction of Carthage,” of which Shaftesbury in his new
Chancellor’s robes boasted to the unresponsive Commons, France
clearly played the part of Rome. The French alliance made the
Dutch war suspect. Already it was rumoured that the heir to the
throne was a Papist ; Popish schemes were scented in every act of
Government.'

1 For the commercial rivalry with Holland in the Indies, see The East India
Trade in the Seventeenth Century, Shafaat Ahmad Khan, 1923.

Third
Dutch
war, 1672

Revolu-
tion in
Holland
1672

The
Cavalier
Parlia-
ment and
the Crown

374 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1672

If the English ministry had refused to join in the partition of
Holland, Louis would never have dared to attack the Republic,
for his commerce would have been swept off the seas. Now the
French and English fleets sailed together against the Dutch, but
together scarcely obtained more advantage than the English alone
had obtained in former wars. The Dutch nation once more was
terrible when at bay for its life. Neither on land were the great
traditions forgotten. The river-dykes were opened and the un-
rivalled host of 100,000 French soldiers whom Louvois had prepared
for his master’s purpose, were checked by the waters as the Spanish
spearmen had been checked before. Young William of Orange was
called from his private gardens to save his fatherland. The De
Witts were moved out of the path of his ambition by the murderous
frenzy of the mob. The quasi-monarchical government of the Stadt-
holderate was revived in his person. He soon showed that he was
able to fill the ancestral place, and to make Holland once more
the capital of the liberties of Europe. In 1673 his diplomacy
brought to the rescue of his country the great Catholic powers of
Austria and Spain. The Pope’s hostility to Louis and to the
Gallican Church rendered possible this strange alliance against the
Jesuit power. Thus already was sketched out the great coalition
which after forty years brought Louis to his knees. But England
had not yet joined its ranks.

Holland was less obnoxious to Charles when the Republican
Government had been overthrown, and his kinsman of the House
of Orange restored. The revolution that established the Stadt-
holderate prepared the way for peace with the English Court. But
the power that actually insisted on the peace of 1674 was not the
Crown but the Parliament.

The history of the Cavalier Parliament that sat from 1661 to
1678 is the history of a House of Commons elected in a frenzy of
loyalty, rising by a series of struggles with the King, to acquire a
control of his accounts, a negative voice in the selection of his
ministers, and the power of veto on his policy at home and abroad.
Clarendon’s ideal of a loyal Parliament and a gracious King working

- together, each within the limits allotted by the Constitution, the one

initiating legislation, the other free to administrate, was shown once
more, as Pym had long ago perceived, to be a dream. Clarendon’s

1673] THE RESTORATION 815

two co-ordinate powers were perpetually coming into contact, either
of rude hostility or of corrupt union ; and on one of these occasions
he himself was crushed between them. Government was reduced to
anarchy by the constant friction ; no policy could be carried on for
many months together without reversal. England would soon be
again compelled, as in the days of Charles I., to choose between an
absolutism or the sovereign power of Parliament. Charles II., with
his usual cleverness, had seen, when he made the Treaty of Dover,
that unless the King got help from abroad, the sovereignty was more
likely to pass on to Parliament than back to the Crown. The Civil
War had reversed the relation of Whitehall and Westminster. The
members now feared nothing from Court, but the courtiers feared
much from Parliament. Government no longer dared invade the
privilege of the House, or lock up the more outspoken members in the
Tower. When Sir John Coventry alluded to the King’s pleasures
in open Parliament, Charles could find no means to revenge the
royal honour on his subject, save to permit a band of rascals to
wait for him by night in the Haymarket and slit his nose. The
House replied by banishing the offenders for life, and making the
slitting of all noses felony without benefit of clergy ; and Charles
could do nothing to protect his servants. The drozt administratif
had been weakened in England by the Civil War, or rather was in
some sort passing over to the Commons, who were well able to
avenge themselves on their enemies. The King’s effective weapon
of defence was not force but corruption.

On the eve of the Restoration the Republican philosopher
Harrington is reputed to have said :—

Let the King come in and call a Parliament of the greatest Cavaliers in
England, so they be men of estates, and let them sit but seven years, and
they will all turn Commonwealths’ men.?

If indeed Harrington said, “Let them sit but seven years,” he
showed peculiar shrewdness. For it was the long life of the
Cavalier Parliament that enhanced the claims of its members to
political sovereignty. The royal power lost as well as gained by
Charles’s unwillingness to force a dissolution. In the short Parlia-
ments and infrequent sessions of old Tudor and Stuart Kings, the
squires came up each time unknown and unknowing to the capital,

1 Hallam (1884), ii., p. 355 note,

376 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1673

to transact the business of their localities, to criticise the policy of
the Crown, perhaps to impeach a minister, to vote or refuse money,
and to return to their rural pursuits. They had no time to acquire
the habits of administration or of corruption. ‘The Puritans who
had cheered Eliot and locked the doors against Black Rod, were
“countrymen,” without acquaintance at Court, or ambition to
share in a Government which it was then their sole duty to
intimidate. When, therefore, the great revolutionary statesmen of
1642 seized all administrative power for the House of Commons, its
blunders were a measure of its inexperience. And just as the
Roundhead Long Parliament (1640-60) gradually turned one set of
members into professional politicians, so the Cavalier Long Parlia-
‘The Court ment (1660-78) had the same effect upon another set. In the course
eet of nineteen sessions, the members became habitual residents in
London. Their persons and prices were well known at Whitehall.
Neither George III., nor Walpole, nor even Danby was the first to
protect the position of ministers by purchase of votes in the House.
The system was introduced during the struggle over the accounts
of the Dutch war of 1665-68, by the statesmen of the new style.
Clarendon indeed saw with anger and disdain the country members
thronging Whitehall stairs, and going off with pensions and places
to vote against their conscience. The contemporary of Laud and
Hampden denounced such intimacy between legislative and execu-
tive as ‘contrary to all former order,” well remembering the sharp
line, as of caste, that used when he was young to divide the well-
ordered Court from the pure and patriotic Parliaments,}
Limita- When the antediluvian Chancellor had fallen, the Cabal made
ean free use of the system of corruption. But what with his soldiers,
his sailors and his mistresses, the King had little money left for his
faithful Commons; the number of places was limited, and the
number of members was large. Even when some two hundred had
been “taken off,” as the word then was for corrupting members,
a majority was not secure.? Those who could get nothing, in-
vigilated unceasingly over the accounts, and clamoured of Popery.
And there were two things which even gold could not buy in that
House—friendship towards the Catholic religion and towards the
French Crown.

1 Clar., pp. 1121-22, Burnet, i., p. 4863 ii., pp. 80-81,
* Burnet, i., p. 486% ii, p. 79 and notes.

1673] THE RESTORATION 3TT

When the Cavalier Parliament met for its twelfth session in Jealousy
March, 1673, all that men knew fell far short of the truth, that 28@inst
Charles was bound in treaty with Louis to put down Protestantism ee as
in England by French military force. But the visible indications
of danger loomed all the more big and black, because what lurked
behind them was unseen. The unnatural alliance with France to
destroy the Protestant State of Holland, the presence of a stand-
ing army under officers whose religion was suspect, the ill-concealed
Romanism of the Duke of York, who commanded our fleets, and of
Clifford, who controlled our counsels, the abeyance of the Penal Laws
throughout the country and the “flaunting of Papists” at Court,
all combined to create a panic which for a few weeks overcame
the desire of pensioners to earn their reward, of Dissenters to enjoy
the Declaration of Indulgence, and of Anglicans to persecute Dissent.

The alleged royal power to dispense with the execution of the
laws against Catholics and Dissenters had been exercised by De-
claration in 1662, and again with better hope in 1672 when there
was no longer a Clarendon to interfere. ‘The prisons were opened,
the preachers and congregations assembled, and thousands of the
best men in England enjoyed another short respite from ruin,

Yet fear of Catholicism was stronger than personal interest. In
March, 1673, the Dissenters in the country, and their friends in
Parliament, denounced the Declaration of Indulgence as a cloak

for bringing in Popery. While the Puritans thus rejected the

royal mercy and the Catholic alliance, the Anglicans showed a zeal
against the Roman religion that left no hope that any large section

of High Churchmen would favour reunion when the King’s plot

came to light. That plot was now vanishing into air. Charles

began to see that his foreign education had led him to misconstrue

the psychology of both sections of English Protestantism. Angli-

cans and Puritans united to unmask the hidden Catholics at Court

and in the army, and to expel them from the service. ‘The famous

Test Act of 1673, the black charter of English Protestantism, Test Act
forbade any one who would not take the sacrament by the rites at
of the Church of England to hold civil or military office under of the
the Crown. The Bill was in part the result of an intrigue within ae.
the Cabal against itself. Arlington, who though Catholic at heart

was ready to take the Test, and Shaftesbury, who began to sniff
Popery under the royal methods of Toleration, combined to forward

Peace with

Holland,
1674

Charles II.
learns
wisdom

878 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1673

the bill which would drive the scrupulous Clifford from office.
They succeeded, and the Cabal was dissolved. The religion of
Clifford, and of James, Duke of York, was unmasked. Rupert,
the good Protestant and hater of Frenchmen, succeeded James in
the Admiralty of that great fleet from whose guns he had once fled,
a much daring pirate, through so many waters.

Meanwhile, the Nonconformists, who supported the Test Act
though it excluded the more scrupulous of their number from
the service of the Crown, were rewarded by a prospect of Parlia-
mentary and Protestant Toleration. So great was the fear of
Popery, that a Bill for the “Ease of Protestant Dissenters” was
passed through the Cavalier House of Commons, and only stopped
in the Lords by the inveterate malignity of the bishops. Change
was in the air, and Shaftesbury from his seat on the wool-sack
darted his cunning eyes on the shifting scene. Before another
year had passed, he was out of office and at the head of the
Opposition.

Thus in the month of March, 1673, fell the domestic policy of
Charles and the Cabal. In the winter session following, their foreign
policy was reversed. The Commons forced the Crown to make
peace with Holland, by refusing supplies for an army which they
expected soon to be used against themselves.

The work of Parliament in 1673-74 had been to destroy every
piece of the artificial structure on which the King balanced his
French Catholic plot. The Dissenters had refused the royal Tolera-
tion, the High Churchmen had proclaimed their loathing and fear
of communion with Rome, the Cabal had dissolved into its com-
ponent parts, the Catholic ministers and officers had been driven
from their posts, and the French alliance itself was no more.

Charles learnt the lesson of 1673. The lacuna of his foreign
education was filled up. Henceforth, though in politics he had not
one English feeling of his own, he understood admirably how much
and how little could be done with the national sentiment, and could
play some tunes upon that pipe with the right Tudor touch. Not
even in the last triumphant year of his reign, when the Whig
chiefs had perished in exile and on the scaffold, when England lay
at his feet in self-chosen abasement, did he forget the lesson he
had Jearnt. He never again used Catholicism either as a means or
as an end in his politics. But he had roused suspicions which could

1674] THE RESTORATION 879

not be allayed, and launched a French Catholic intrigue in this
country which was not stopped by his own defection. His brother
could learn nothing. In 1674 James stepped into the place of
Charles as the prime agent and patron of the Jesuit plot.

Charles politically abandoned Catholicism, but not absolutism, Alliance of

harles

He would have preferred to found a Catholic monarchy on the with An.
French model; he was perforce content to reign as a professing 8licanism,

Protestant, but he could still aspire to free himself from the in-
quisition of Tory squires in Parliament, and from the lowering face
of Dissent in the country. ‘The man for his new purpose was the
Yorkshire cavalier, Sir Thomas Osborne, whom he made Earl of
Danby and first minister of the Crown. From the failure of Charles’s
Catholic Plot to the coming of Oates, in that confused interval of
four years that divided the King’s crime from its punishment,
Danby ruled England, like the younger Pitt, by reconciling the
lately divorced affections of Parliament and King. Appealing to
the old Cavalier principles of intolerant Anglicanism and royal
prerogative, he built up in the last years of this old Parliament the
new Tory party, by the aid of wholesale bribery out of the public
revenue, and distribution of the spoils of office on lines of strict party
tests. In hot opposition on the floor of both Houses, Shaftesbury
and Sacheverell were building up the Whig party on the principles
of Toleration and Parliamentary supremacy; but at present they
had little money for distribution among their followers except such
as came from the French Ambassador, who was forced to enter into
strange friendships during this confusion of politics.

The peculiar strength of Danby’s position, so far as Charles
allowed him to have his way in the matter, was hostility to France.
Danby wished to make the Tory party a nationalist party, in spite
of the royal brothers. He carried through the marriage of Jaines’s
daughter Mary to William of Orange, thereby strengthening the
reversionary claim of Europe’s Protestant champion on the English
throne, and pledging the House of Stuart to friendship with
Helland. Indeed, from 1674 onwards, Louis’ diplomacy could
aim at little more than to keep England neutral, while his armies
devoured the Low Countries and the Rhine. Over here, Parlia-
ment and people clamoured for war. Danby, at a public banquet,
gave the indecent toast, “Confusion of all that were not for a war

1674-78.
Danby

Danby
hostile to
France.
Marriage
of William
and Mary,
Nov., 1677

The Non-
Resisting
Bill, 1675

Shaftes-
bury tries
to force a
dissolu-
tion

380 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1676

with France” ;1 the Tory minister hoped to efface in a continental
struggle with the Jesuit power the accumulated suspicions that
divided the nation from the throne. To Charles himself the pre-
tence of a war policy, in which he had no intention really to engage,
was useful. On this pretext, he could obtain as large an army
as he wished, and then use it to establish an absolute monarchy
in alliance with Cavalier sentiment. Thus the same danger of
a standing army, which threatened Louis, was no less terrible to
the friends of civil and religious liberty in England. So long as
the English monarch adhered to the principles of absolutism, it

‘was impossible for the Whigs to be a war party. Until 1688

they could bark against France, but never bite. ‘They could cry a
note louder than Danby about Popery and wooden shoes, but they
could not vote supplies.?

If the Cavalier members were delighted to be given their head
against France, they were even more delighted to have the Puritans
once more at bay. All thought of “Ease for Protestant Dis-
senters” vanished from their minds when the fear of Popery re-
ceded, and from the King’s mind when he abandoned his hopes for
a Catholic ascendency. Danby cried on the pack. The Clarendon
Code was set in full vigour, and a Non-Resisting Bill was intro-
duced. It wasa Test of political opinion drawn up so as to exclude
from either House of Parliament all but the high-flying Anglicans
and Cavaliers: no one was to sit as a legislator until he had sworn
to alter nothing in Church or State. The future Whig party would
thus have been excluded by law from political life. The Tories,
fearing the result of the next election, determined by this means
forever to prevent a free appeal from being made to the people. The
iniquitous measure was fought by the Opposition with the energy
of men who see the whole future to be at stake. But its passage
into law was prevented only by a timely quarrel between the two
Houses. Violence and faction were becoming the order of the day,

The hopes of Shaftesbury and the new Country Party, thus
schooled to desperation and revenge, lay in the constituencies. In
the present Parliament they were a powerless though vociferous
minority. But they justly calculated that the yeomen and towns-
people were eager to reverse the electoral decision of 1661. All the

1 Burnet, ii., p. 128, * Airy, pp. 210-219 on foreign politics, 1677-78,

®

1677) THE RESTORATION 381

politics of Europe turned on the question whether Charles could be
forced to dissolve. William of Orange was Danby’s partisan, hoping
that England would declare immediate war; while Louis, anxious
to see civil discord arise in England before she broke the chain at
which she was tugging to fly at the throat of France, supported the
movement for a general election, and filled the hands of many Whig
members with gold.’ In February, 1677, Shaftesbury made a false
move. In his rage to see the King’s will stand alone between his
party and the power that an election would bring to them, he
made a strained interpretation of an obsolete statute enjoining
annual Parliaments, and accordingly moved in the Lords that the
present Parliament was no longer a lawful Assembly. For this
offence he was committed to the Tower by his Peers, and remained
there a whole year.

When he came out the fortunes of his party seemed at a low
ebb. Since their attack on the existence of the present Parliament,
the leaders had been as unpopular at Westminster as at White-
hall. The men in office, by the system of spoils for the
victors, had bought up the Pensionary Parliament, as it was often
called, and every means had now been tried in vain for its dissolu-
tion. If it had lasted seventeen years it might last twenty-seven.
Meanwhile, the cruel laws cruelly enforced were “ extirpating dis-
sent”; in ten years’ time an appeal to the electors might be too late.
Trade was again prosperous, and the country, after a sort, contented.
The King had armed forces on foot in England, Scotland, Tangier
and in foreign service on the Continent. An Anglican monarchy,
backed by an efficient army, by the whole Church, and a large pro-
portion of the squires, seemed to be fastening its chains on England,
by the wisely directed violence of Danby’s faction. ‘The only hope
for religious and civil liberty in England was that the “ French and
Pepish counsels ” of the Court would be detected in spite of Danby’s
vigilance. The history of the Secret Treaty of Dover might at any
moment come to light. Even now Charles, who openly left 10,000
English troops in French pay, secretly took gold from the French
Ambassador as the price of this favourable neutrality. In still more
dreadful secret, on the 24th of April, 1678, the English Jesuits held
their provincial Congregation in the rooms of the heir to the throne,

1 Shaftesbury, Russell and probably Sacheverell were above taking bribes; not so
Algernon pigney., and many of the rank and file (First Whig, pp. 24-26).

Prospects
of the
Country
Party,
1678

$82 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1678 |
in St. James’s Palace. If Shaftesbury could have laid his hand on |

some one of the innumerable mysteries of the backstairs, of which

two or three have been revealed to posterity, he could therewith have ©

blasted Danby and created another revolution. ‘The Dissenters, at
death-grips with their fate, were prepared to save themselves by des-
perate measures; the well-organised Parliamentary opposition was
mad with the rage of a baffled and ill-used faction; in the mind
of the common man, twelve years of misgovernment, disaster and
betrayal had still to be revenged, and the long tension of a chronic
fear in the Protestant mind had not yet found relief in frenzy.

The truths that would have saved the Whigs remained hid, but
a liar came to their deliverance. In the autumn of 1678, Titus

- Oates deposed that the Jesuit Congregation had met on the 24th

of April in the White Horse Tavern and taken counsel to murder
the King. The position of Shaftesbury and his followers was not
one in which they could afford to look a gift horse in the mouth.

|

1678} THE REIGNS OF TERROR $83

CHAPTER XII
THE REIGNS OF TERROR, 1678-85

Must hate and death return >—SuHeELury.

A a OATES, whose father had been a Baptist and Chaplain Titus
to one of Oliver’s regiments, at an early age became a clergy- Oates
man in the restored Anglican Church, and in 1677 was reconciled
to Rome. He belonged really to the mendicant order of scoundrels
who flourished as bullies and spies under the patronage of the more
respectable Churches. The informers of the Restoration epoch,
used first by the Anglicans against the Dissenters, then by the
Whigs against the Catholics, and again by the Tories and Catholics
against the Whigs, cannot claim Oates as their Founder; but it
was he who made their sordid trade imaginative and magnificent,
attacked the highest persons in the State, and let loose over
England the revolutionary passions of the decisive decade in her
history.

In youth he had been guilty of false witness against the inno-
cent, and of other crimes scarcely less foul. His conversion to
Rome was prompted by the hope of gaining reward, either as an
agent of Catholic intrigue, or, if chance offered, as the betrayer of
his patrons. During his residence in the English Jesuit Colleges,
first at Valladolid in Spain (1677) and then at St. Omers in the
Low Countries (1678), the loathsome and unpopular novice gleaned
from the talk of his associates that King Charles was now held to
stand in the way of the conversion of England which he had once
undertaken ; that high hopes were fixed on the survival and suc-
cession of James, and on the aid of the French King; that much
passed through the hands of the Duke’s busy secretary Coleman
and of Louis’ confessor, Pére La Chaise. He learnt in particular
that the Jesuit Congregation or “consult” in England was held on

384 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1678

24th April, 1678, but unfortunately he did not learn that it was
held in the rooms of the heir to the throne.

Two months after that secret meeting had taken place in St.
James’s Palace, Oates was expelled from the Flemish College, as
he was always sooner or later expelled from every society into
which he thrust himself. He returned to London, penniless, but
with raw material that could be manufactured for the market.
He sought help in the Protestant section of Grub Street, joined
himself to a miserable fanatic scribbler named Tonge,! and drew up
with him, in a copious manuscript of eighty-one sections, the
imaginary details of a plot; lists of the conspirators were added,
including several score of the English Jesuits and their friends,
and a few Catholic nobles and others who were not of that faction.
Oates deposed that he had discovered, during his residence among
the Jesuits, “a hellish plot” to fire the City, raise the Catholics
in Ireland, conquer England by French and Irish arms, massacre
every Protestant who refused to recant, and murder the King ac-
cording to arrangements made at the Congregation of 24th April.
At that famous “consult” Oates asserted himself to have been

present.?
Oates This tale the informers laid before the King and ministry ; they
lors eae also lodged a copy of the declaration with a good and fearless magis-

28th-30th trate, Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey, that he might publish it if the
Sep. 1678 Court strove to “stifle the Plot ”.2 But the Court did no such
thing. The monstrous fiction did not seem absurd to a generation
that had well in memory the true tale of the Gunpowder Plot, and
a distorted version of the Irish massacre of 1641, and had seen the
City totally destroyed by a fire falsely attributed to the Catholics.
In very fact a King was on the throne who had signed treaties to
convert England by French arms; and the cruel and unprovoked
extirpation of the peaceful Protestants of France was yet to take
place. In such an age the tale told by Oates was not deemed
impossible. And since Councils of State and Courts of Law were
accustomed, for want of a professional detective force, to use the

1 Whether before or after his residence in the Jesuit Colleges is uncertain
{Pollock, pp. 9, 10).

® State Trials, vi., pp. 1433-72, for the eighty-one heads of the charges.

®The use Godfrey made of the information was, however, to warn Coleman.
Though politically a stout Protestant, Godfrey had a personal feeling for many
of the Catholic intriguers,

1678} THE REIGNS OF TERROR 385

evidence of low-class informers whom no one expected to tell an
ungarnished tale, the inquiry was not abandoned, even after the
shrewd King had twice caught Oates lying in his answers before the
Privy Council. Though Court and ministry had every reason to
avoid a fierce Protestant agitation, they did not dismiss the matter
as absurd. After each examination, on three consecutive nights,
Oates ranged the City with warrants from the Council against
the Jesuits whom he had named. As the result of his information,
Danby had Coleman arrested and his papers seized; a box was Coleman’s
discovered behind his chimney containing treasonable correspond- ae
ence with the Papal Nuncio and the French King’s confessor, Pére 30th Sep.
La Chaise. Drawing his bow at a venture Oates had brought
down a royal quarry. The movement for the exclusion of James
from the throne originated from these written proofs of his secre-
tary’s treason.

The discovery of Coleman’s letters saved Oates from the im-
mediate exposure that threatened him, and created a disposition,
for a while almost universal, to believe in the rest of the plot. A
fortnight later, on the murder of the magistrate with whom he had
deposed his evidence before going to Court, the creed of the plot
became a raging panic. On 17th October the corpse of Sir
Edmund Berry Godfrey, whose disappearance had for some days
been the talk of the town, was found in a ditch under Primrose
Hill beyond Marylebone, with marks of strangulation on the neck
and breast, and his sword thrust through the heart.1 When the
news was passed round the coffee-houses and workshops of the Panic
City, multitudes flocked out across the fields to the scene; the Lae
concourse was still greater when the corpse made State entry into Godfrey,
London. There Godfrey was laid out in the open street, in dumb Oye
appeal to his fellow-Protestants, who for two whole days defiled
betore him with clenched hands and oaths of vengeance. At
last he was attended to the grave by a train of a thousand
nobles, gentlemen and clergy (1st Nov.). When they reached his
parish church, a bishop preached vengeance to this notable congre-
gation from the text: “Died Abner as a fool dieth?” while the
countless multitude outside swayed and hummed with passion and
with fear. The Whigs, it is said, inaugurated these fierce pageants,

1 See Appendix C, Who killed Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey ?
25

386 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1687

Cesar’s funeral rites roused no such ecstasy, for the Romans who
cried for vengeance in the Forum had no thought that Brutus
meditated a massacre of all the Quirites. But terror of death took
hold of the 500,000 inhabitants of London. It was thought that
the execution of the plot which Oates had detailed had already
begun, and that Godfrey had been the first victim. Night after
night each householder lay down half-expecting to be awakened by
the alarm of fire or massacre. The cheerful tramp of the train-
bands echoing down the frosty streets as he lay awake, seemed to
him the only reason why that mad Christmas passed in safety.
When his prentices came in from patrol duty at dawn, he rose
and prayed that all the household might be preserved that day
from sudden death. The women carried daggers or pistols; and
for the men, enterprising Whig tradesmen invented the “ Protest--
tant flail,” a hard-striking weapon, small enough to “lurk perdue”
in the capacious cross pockets of the long coats then in fashion.
The This terror, very genuine among the common people, lasted
hide Seg “ not for a few weeks or months only but for a great while together ”.
It was not ignorance alone that prolonged the panic. A large
number of the cleverest men, who should soonest have come to
their senses, were busy fanning the flame. The Whigs knew that
so long as the terror lasted they had power. Their artifices now
seem grotesque enough. One of the most acute Whig lawyers
sent a special message to town to have the billets of wood moved
to the back of his house, where the “fireballs of the Jesuits” could
not reach them. Some went to their business clad in silk armour,
warranted to turn pistol bullets. The “ Protestant flails” proved
needless against papist assassins, but in elections and street fights
were brought into action against the Tory partisans.!
1 aat But it was above all by the votes of the House of Commons that
session the triumphant party excited the terrors of the multitude. On
of the : :
Cavalier 21st October the Cavalier Parliament met for its last session. That
ga week, when men were thronging to view the corpse of the murdered
30th Dec., magistrate, the panic caught hold in the House even on Danby’s
1678 pensioners, If any member doubted the plot, to utter his thought
would have been to brand himself as a concealed papist, and to
run risk of figuring in Oates’ next edition. The leaders of the

1 North’s Examen, pp. 201-5, 572, 573. Life of Lord Keeper Guilford, sec. 70
Burnet, li., pp. 164, 165. First Whig, pp. 138-39, note. Pollock, gh 103, ae

1678] THE REIGNS OF TERROR 387

Whig minority became leaders of the House. A resolution was
carried without one dissentient voice in either Chamber that
there has been, and still is, a damnable and hellish Plot contrived and carried
on by Popish recusants, for the assassinating and murdering the King, and for
subverting the Government and rooting out and destroying the Protestant
religion.

As the Court and ministry were suspect, committees of Lords and
of Commons, presided over by Whig politicians, took over the
examination of prisoners, witnesses and documents. Charles, who
alone of Englishmen was in a position to avow his disbelief in the
plot against his own life, was compelled by the addresses of
Parliament to call out the militia, enforce the Penal Laws, fill the
prisons with hundreds of Catholics, plant cannon round Whitehall,
and issue a proclamation commanding all Popish recusants to
depart ten miles from London. Guards were placed in those ancient
vaults where Fawkes had once stood to his post beside the faggots.
The Test Act of 1673 had excluded Catholics from service under
the Crown; this winter they were excluded from sitting in either
House of Parliament, by an Act which remained in force till the
days of O’Connell and Wellington.

To all these measures, arising out of a belief in the plot and in Coleman’s
Godfrey’s murder by the Papists, there was no opposition. But eee
the proposals arising out of the examination of Coleman’s letters plicated
divided the two parties. Oates had not dared to bring charges
against the heir to the throne. But now the letters and confessions
of the Duke’s secretary ! implicated his master in treasonable designs
hatched with foreign powers against the Church of which he was
soon to be the head and protector. Coleman had destroyed most of
his own later correspondence, but the Houses were in possession
of his letters for the year 1675. ‘Those letters contained a corre-
spondence with Pere La Chaise about a plan for the complete over-
throw of Protestantism, to be begun by putting the Catholics on an
equal footing with Anglicans. To accomplish this, Louis is asked
to give a sum of money that will enable Charles to govern without
Parliament, and hand over to James the chief influence in the
State. Finally Coleman writes thus to the French King’s con-
fessor :—

11 speak of Coleman as the Duke of York’s secretary, because that was still
his business and position in reality. It had once been his office in name also, but
it had latterly been thought prudent to call him secretary only to the Duchess.

The real
Popish
Plot

Sachever-
ell first
suggests

388 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1678

We havea mighty work upon our hands, no less than the conversion of three
kingdoms, and by that the subduing of a pestilent heresy, which has domi-
neered over a great part of this northern world a long time ; there was never
such hopes of success since the death of Queen Mary as now in our days,
when God has given us a prince who is become (may I say a miracle) zealous
of being the author and instrument of so glorious a work. .. . That which
we rely upon most, next to God Almighty’s providence and the favour of my
amaster the Duke, is the mighty mind of his most Christian Majesty (Louis),
whose generous soul inclines him to great undertakings, which being managed
by your Reverence’s exemplary piety and Prudence, will certainly make him
look upon this as most suitable to himself and becoming his power and thoughts.
So I hope you will pardon me if I be very troublesome to you on this occasion,
from which I expect the greatest help we can hope.

Well-informed French Catholic onlookers did not deny that Cole-
man had been detected in treason.!

The unfortunate secretary, when examined before a Committee
of the Commons, confessed that his master knew and approved his

Exclusion, correspondence. ‘The Whig leaders at once began their attack on

4th Nov.,
1678

James. On 2nd November Shaftesbury, Halifax and Essex in the
Lords, and two days later Lord Russell in the Commons, moved that
the Duke of York should be withdrawn from the King’s presence and
councils. Russell’s motion gave rise to a long debate, analogous to
the debate on Root-and-Branch in February, 1641, which had fore-
shadowed the impending division of men still united by a common
peril. The future Tories spoke of the reverence due to royalty,
the future Whigs of the danger to the Protestant religion. To-
wards the close of the debate, William Sacheverell, the brain of his
party in the House of Commons, rose to ask “the Gentlemen of
the Long Robe” “whether the King and Parliament may not dis-
pose of the succession of the Crown?” No one present had the
courage to speak after him on that issue. But before many months
were out, his proposal to change the succession had been adopted
as the policy distinctive of the Whigs. For it was soon clear that
the motion of Russell and Shaftesbury was a false and dangerous
step, unless they were prepared to exclude from the throne the
revengeful man whom they thus insulted. Indeed, the safety not

1 Coleman’s letters, George Treby’s Collection, 1681, pp. 116-18. Pollock, pp.
44, 45, note. So strongly does Ranke feel the guilt and importance of Coleman’s
letters that he even says “it cannot be affirmed that all they (Oates and his col-
leagues) alleged was mere invention”, Ranke thinks that in consequence of the
state of things revealed by the letters, the question of Exclusion “ from a kind of
necessity came to the front” (iv., pp. 60-64),

1678] THE REIGNS OF TERROR 389

only of the Whigs but of all England was involved. Sacheverell’s
plan was the one measure of precaution which Parliament ought to
have adopted in that crisis. It alone involved no cruelty to the
great body of Catholics, while it alone could secure the Protestant
religion. The Exclusion policy, associated as it was for the next
ten years with a sequence of errors, crimes and catastrophes scarcely
equalled in the history of English parties, was nevertheless adopted
as a national necessity at the Revolution of 1688,

The Whig party—as it came to be called in the heat of the The Whig
Exclusion struggle—was a combination of part of the aristocracy P@"y
with the middle class to wrest political power from the Crown, and
to force the squirearchy and the bishops to grant toleration to
dissent. To obtain these ends the Whigs played upon the popular
fear of Catholicism, which they themselves shared.

A party with this platform was perhaps a natural outcome of Shaftes-
the social, religious and political institutions of the day; but its nel

1 Grey, vi., pp. 121-49. Events showed that the Whigs in no way exaggerated
the degree to which James was undesirable asa King. But events also showed
that they greatly exaggerated the force, numbers and violence of the Catholic popu-
lation as a whole. ‘The fear of an immediate rising of the Popish recusants was of
course ridiculous, but we only know that after the events of 1678 and 1688. The
error was certainly no worse than the error of Pitt and the reactionaries of 1794, in
supposing that there was danger ofa Jacobinrevolutionin England. In those days,
when there were no statistics, and when large numbers of people concealed their
religiousjopinions in order to avoid persecution, there was great uncertainty at the back
of men’s minds as to the real stability of Protestantism. Sir Thomas Meres, speak-
ing in the House of Commons (Grey, vi., p. 138) on Lord Russell’s motion of 4th
November, thus puts the case as it appeared to many of his contemporaries: ‘* We
changed religion pretty well in Henry VIII.’s time, and Edw. VI., and in Queen
Mary’s time all the clergy turned Popish except an hundred and sixty. About
forty years ago the Church was at its height; and then we had changes in the late
times of rebellion, and now we have a Church of England again if we can keep it.
We are a mutable people, and the Papists number is great. We see an army of
20,000 men listed in the Plot; I am really afraid that when such a day comes, that
two-thirds of the nation will stand neuters, and so about one-third part will engage
for the Protestant religion.” Except for Oates’ lie about the Army of 20,000 men,
these arguments are not absurd, although they proved to be a miscalculation.
Coleman thought exactly the same as Meres, and had said so in his letters, which
were then occupying the attention of the House. This miscalculation accounts
both for the activity of the Jesuit intriguers, and for the absurd terror of the Pro-
testants during that winter. As the Whigs thought that Meres’ analysis was very
probably correct, it would have been criminal in them to allow James to succeed to
the throne. And although the calculation was incorrect, James’s succession proved
dangerous and mischievous to a degree which the Tories had wholly failed to fore-
see. Thus both Whig and Tory leaders made a miscalculation, and it is easy to
forgive them for that; but it is hard to forgive them for the violence and criminality

of their political methods.

The Whig

Lords

890 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1678

actual formation was the work of Shaftesbury. As courtier and
Cabal minister, Ashley had intrigued against Parliament in the
cause of Toleration ; but the King, with his Secret Treaty of Dover,
had delved a yard below his mine. Driven from office in 1673, the
Earl of Shaftesbury, as he had now become, sought revenge at the
head of a small clique of great nobles, including Buckingham and
Halifax, who opposed Danby in the House of Lords. He was the
first of these nobles to perceive, that if they sought to break down
Anglican intolerance and royal supremacy, they must demean
themselves to agitate, and to organise those classes who would
elect the next House of Commons—the townspeople with their
dissenting sympathies; the yeomen with their dislike of parsons
and hatred of Catholics; and the Roundhead elements among the
gentlemen in the existing House of Commons, and in the Courts of
Law. ‘This union of peers and people was the essence of the Whig
party. The Earl wooed the City of London as John Pym had
done before, but with even more pains and success. He moved his
town house from the fashionable quarter near his old friends at
Whitehall, to Aldersgate in the heart of the merchant world.
One of the common sights of the city was the jolting of the great
noble’s coach through the narrow streets, amid the shouts of a
bodyguard armed with clubs and flails, and decked with green
ribbons; while at the carriage window appeared, beneath the
spreading brim of a round felt hat, a face wasted with disease, but

Politic as tho’ one eye i
Upon the other seemed to spy.

When he arrived at Westminster, his daily task was to unite the
opposition in both Chambers in a course of action pre-arranged by
himself. ‘To his enemies in Lords and Commons he seemed the
“fairy fiend that haunted and deluded both”. ‘Thus, if he lured
his party to ruin, he first brought it into existence.}

He was a master of debate, when the debates in the Upper
House rivalled those of the Lower House in importance, and sur-
passed them in art, wit and intellectual power. The Peers of that
generation formed a small assembly of some of the cleverest men
our island has ever produced, In such a House the bishops were
little able to defend themselves, and the poor men got no more

1 Ranke, iv., pp, 12, 166, 167, Traill’s Shaftesbury, p, 129,

1678} THE REIGNS OF TERROR 391

mercy from Buckingham and Shaftesbury than they themselves
showed to the Dissenters. King Charles often came in, partly to
hear the sport, and partly to overawe the Opposition. He used to
stand listening and joking by the fire, incognito, but plainly visible
to al]. He was known in the pamphlets of the day as “the fire-
side”. The proud Whigs, who were not for nothing called the
King’s Peers, would turn undismayed towards the stranger by
the chimney, and attack his measures and his Government with
polished sarcasm. Charles, who declared it was as good as a
play, would join sometimes in the laugh against himself. In a
country where men love to be Jed by their superiors in rank and
fortune, such aristocrats were in some respects better fitted than
Pym and Cromwell to lead a great attack on regal power. They
were high enough to bend for popular favour, without seeming to
the gentry to lose caste. More witty, less scrupulous and less
Puritan than their fathers, these Peers had succeeded to the
traditions of the Essexes and Bedfords of 1640 who had called
Laud and Strafford to account. In the Lower House, though
Sacheverell was the first in counsel and debate, Lords Cavendish
and Russell, heirs to the titles of Devonshire and Bedford, were
the official leaders whom the party loved to put forward.!
Yet there were also many gentry in the Whig ranks. These, The Whig

and the nobles who Jed them, all conformed to the Anglican Church ; demo-

eins : c ? cracy and
some were free-thinkers ; others indifferentists; few were Puritans, the Whig

But they led the yeomen, merchants and shopkeepers who were Beane
avowed Dissenters, and the still greater number of those classes who
had no objection to attend the Anglican service, but who were
Puritan in general sentiment. Most of the lawyers were Whigs, for
the Roundhead leaders of the profession, retaining their position and
practice under the Act of Indemnity, had influenced the rising
generation against the Court.? The whole of this formidable
party aimed, not at overthrowing the Church, but at forcing her
to tolerate dissent. Since the religious forces in the country were
now organised from London by managers who had no personal
attachment to any faith, but considerable breadth of intellectual
grasp, the fanatics, when rallied under the Whig name, were taught

1 Christie, ii., pp. 206, 380. Marvell, i, p. 516. Burnet, ii., p. 83 note.

Airy, p. 236.
2 Examen, p. 513.

Exclusion
and
Divorce
schemes

Attack on

the Queen,
Nov., 1678

392 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS {1678

to lisp the word Toleration, of which Pym hated the very sound,
and of which Cromwell had only half understood the meaning. In
politics the party aimed at depriving the Court of its administra-
tive freedom, and subjecting the King’s will to that of ministers
chosen from the Whig nobles, and from those gentry who best
represented the middle class electorate.

In the winter and spring of 1678-79, the Popish Terror de-
tached the Cavaliers from the Court. For six months there was
no movement among the squires against the Whig efforts to snatch
all power into the hands of Parliament. But the King, left alone
with a small knot of unpopular counsellors, refused to yield. He
only bowed to the storm so far as to sign the death-warrants of
Oates’ victims, while he told his friends that Oates was lying.!
He refused to surrender the militia to the Houses; he refused to
be guided by the advice of Whig councillors ; above all he refused
to take part in changing the succession. The question of the
government of England on Charles’s death became the test question
on which the command of the present situation was felt to turn.
The Whigs adopted Sacheverell’s Exclusion policy. But when they
came to decide the further question, who was to take the place of
James, they would not adopt the cause of the legitimate next heirs,
English Mary and Dutch William, because William had courted
the friendship of Danby. In looking for a man to preside over
the whole English race, the Whigs sought one who would be the
puppet of their own faction. This was their error and their crime,
which they were bitterly to expiate. In the winter of 1678-79 they
had not yet fixed their choice on the bastard Monmouth, but were
still strong for a divorce. Indeed, as late as October, 1680, long
after Monmouth’s claims had been advanced, Shaftesbury was pre-
pared to throw him over, if the King would take a Protestant wife.
For if Charles married again, had a child, and died before it came of
age, a Protector would be needed during the minority. Shaftesbury
might well hope to win that post, and make the Whigs supreme.?

So on 24th November, 1678, Oates, in flat contradiction to his
original evidence, swore personal knowledge of a plot, in which the
Queen and her physician Sir George Wakeman had conspired to

1 Ailesbury, p. 96.

2 Christie, ii., ‘Pp. 379-81. Mr. Pollock (pp, 228-31) takes a different view ot
Shaftesbury’s motives in this matter from that which I have advanced.

1678} THE REIGNS OF TERROR 393

poison the King. Whether or not Oates was directly suborned by
Shaftesbury, the leader and his faction took up the wild tale with
greed and clamour. If noise enough were made, they did not think
that Charles would stake his Crown rather than put away a woman
he had already so grossly injured. But their scheme failed, because
he had still a certain standard of honour; and because he knew
that his whole system of government, for which he cared a great
deal, was involved in the defence of his wife, for whom he hardly
cared at all. The Whig estimate of Charles was as great an error
as the Tory estimate of James.

If the King held fast to the weapon of executive government, The Green

the Whigs were the first in the field with a party organisation. ¢
Since their strength lay in the people, they invented the art are
digging channels for the streams of popular opinion. All over
England elections were arranged, petitions and demonstrations set
on foot, political literature handed round in print and manuscript,
by agents sent down from the headquarters, the Green Ribbon Club.
That Club occupied the King’s Head Tavern at the west side of
Chancery Lane End, opposite to Inner Temple ; it was named after
the new party colours that had succeeded to “ Presbyterian true
blue”. Before the Club was founded in 1675, no party in England
ever had a local habitation, beyond such as was afforded by the
private hospitality of individual chiefs. Certainly no party ever
before showed such organising power as the Green Ribbon men.
When a display of force was needed, Southwark and Wapping
were called out by the Club, like the Faubourg St. Antoine by the
Jacobins. Although in the streets of London the mob might only
massacre priests in effigy, the work of the Green Ribbon was no
child’s play, and resembled that of the Jacobin Club in many of its
functions. Its missionaries were sent out to form the opinion of
the country; at its private debates, policy was discussed and Parlia-
mentary eloquence rehearsed ; in its upper rooms, motions for the

~ next day’s session in either House were drawn up and the proposers

assigned. Shaftesbury was President of the Green Ribbon; but it
had not the lofty and aristocratic atmosphere of Brooks’s in the

time of Fox and Grey. Besides Lords and Commons from West-

minster, the list of its members included City Aldermen like Bethel,

~ Roundhead veterans like Romsey, professional plotters like Fergu-

son, hired poets like Shadwell, and pamphleteers like Blount.

Parlia-
ment,
Nov.-

394 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1678

Young lawyers, who went to Hobbes for their religion, but to_
Harrington for their politics, came in at evening from their
chambers over the way; young men of estate, just come up to
town, were brought round to the Club, to be won for the Whig
cause by a word in confidence from the President, or a reminiscence
of life at St. Omers from the favourite member. Oates, secure in
his promise of a Bishopric from the party, and already enjoying
‘“‘an influence more than episcopal,” was driven down by the first
nobles in the land, to carry elections by lifting up at the hustings
the light of his hideous countenance. In the rooms of the Green
Ribbon Shaftesbury discussed the latest version of the plot with the
cloud of witnesses suddenly arisen from the slums and gaols;

Cavendish was argued over to support the Exclusion Bill; poli-

ticians debated with Dissenting ministers the rival advantages
of Toleration and Comprehension ; and Monmouth was lured by
toasts and flatteries to his fate. Of the thousands who to-day
are hurrying into the City by the site of Temple Bar, intent
on such different errands and engrossed in thoughts so alien to
those dead passions of their ancestors, scarcely one knows of the
old inn, which there faced the street ; or imagines how at nightfall’
the Lords and gentlemen, perjurers and patriots, spies, lawyers,
saints, atheists and poets, leaving their perruques inside, swaggered
out of the reeking wine-room, pipe in hand, on to the long balconies,
to chaff in cant terms the mobile vulgus packed in the street below,
to lead the groan at the name of James, and the cheer when Mon-
mouth or Oates was seen among them, or when the waxen Pope
was emptied from his throne on to the bonfire.!

The Cavalier Parliament became the instrument of the Whigs
for driving the plot home. When Bedloe, the witness who hunted

Dec., 1678in leash with Oates, complained at the bar of the House that

he had “many great men his enemies,” the Speaker told him that
“he had the House for his friend”. Nor did the Tory squires
show less Protestant zeal against the standing army and against

) First Whig, pp. 74-93, 197-203. This decade of turbulent faction enriched our
language with the word ‘‘mob,”—generally written in full as mobile vulgus in
Shaftesbury’s day, then sometimes as ‘‘ mobily,” turning about the time of the
Revolution into ‘‘ mob ’’,

? 18th November, 1678, Grey, vi., p. 210, State Trials, ix., pp. 654-59.

1678] THE REIGNS OF TERROR 395

the dealings of the Court with France. These two questions of
the day, never out of men’s minds since the last Dutch war, were
raised by strange events in the winter of 1678, at the moment when
every suspicion was inflamed by the Popish Terror.

A standing army was equally unpopular with both parties. Parlia-
Even at the height of Danby’s supremacy, Parliament had de- ee
manded either its disbandment or an immediate war with France. the army
In April, 1678, the servant riding behind the coach of Sir John
Coventry, who had formerly suffered in his own person for the
privileges of Parliament, had his head broken by an ill-disciplined
company and its captain. At the word “soldiers” the House was
all agog. One after another the angry members leapt to their
feet, crying: ‘These men are raised for an imaginary war”; “these
red-coats may fight against Magna Charta”; “drums ought not
to be beat here, nor red-coats to be about the Parliament, in
terrorem populi”. Such was their sensitiveness even in normal
times. When, six months after this incident, the terror of the
plot broke out, the army, which if it had been in the control of
Parliament, would have removed all fear of a Catholic revolution,
being in the King’s hands was itself an additional cause of panic.
Nor were these fears as idle as Oates’ tale. The King had a force
in Scotland, estimated at 20,000 men, specially raised by Lauder-
dale “to march into England upon call”. There were troops in

Tangier, Ireland and England. Worst of all, 10,000 British
‘subjects, pressed for the French service in Flanders, won his battles
for Louis, but were always “within summons” of England; many

Catholic officers, driven from the home army by the Test Act of
1673, were now in command of these hard-fighting regiments. Even
the forces in the British islands were rightly or wrongly believed by
the House to contain a heavy proportion of Papists and Irish both
among the officers and in the ranks. Therefore, one of the few
sensible measures of protection against the Popish Plot which
Parliament demanded, was the disbandment of the regular army.
_“Popery and slavery,” Shaftesbury told the Lords, “like two sisters

go hand in hand”. The Tory squires were at present as little
enamoured of the one as of the other.

1 Grey, v., pp. 285-88; vi., pp. 268-70. Marvell, pp. 508, 515. Burnet, ii,
pp. 124, 125 and notes. Parl. Hist, iv., p. 1116.

\

|

Betrayal
and fall of

Danby,

Dec., 1678

Cavalier
Parlia-
ment

396 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1678

The question of the army was intimately connected with the
question of France. In the spring of the year, when troops had at
Danby’s instance been voted and raised for a war against Louis, why
had no such war been begun? At the height of the Popish
Terror the answer came out. Charles had, in March, 1678, ne-
gotiated a secret treaty with Louis in return for a yearly pension
of £300,000 in French gold. In that transaction Danby had
been an unwilling agent. In order to retain office, he had con-
sented to do the bidding of his master, and sell our policy for the
time being to the King whom it was his chief object to thwart.
Louis, who knew Danby to be the foe of France, betrayed to the
Whigs the transaction which made him appear her friend. The
agent in the betrayal of the Tory minister was Montagu, the Eng-
lish representative at Paris. Louis paid him 50,000 livres to publish
the instructions which he had received from Danby for this infamous
sale of British interests ; Charles had written on the manuscript: “I
approve of this letter, C. R.”. In collusion with the French Am-
bassador Barillon, and the Whig chiefs, Montagu on 19th December
gave these letters to the Speaker, who read them aloud from the
chair. When the reading was ended, there was an interval of silence
and astonishment. Then the Whig orators leapt to their feet.
“This agrees well with Coleman’s letters,” they cried. Coleman’s
letters had shown that the payment of French money to Charles
was to be the first step to the overthrow of Protestantism in England.
And now the King himself, the intended victim of another Popish
Plot, was detected as a willing participant in the first half of Cole-
man’s scheme. Henceforth a Protestant people could put confidence
in no one inside the Palace walls. The party in total opposition to
Court alone seemed to offer a chance of security to the nation. The
prestige of the Whigs again rose by as much as it had risen a month
before, on the day when the corpse of Godfrey was discovered ;
though if the truth had been known, they, more than the disgraced
minister, were Barillon’s pensioners and confidants. A pretence was
made in public speaking to shield the real traitor, Charles, in order
to crush the instrument Danby under the full weight of the charge.
The responsibility of ministers was established at Danby’s expense,
and his Tory plea that it had been his duty to obey the King was

ee rejected. His impeachment was voted, and his head was in great
Jan., 1679 danger if the Houses sat another month. He therefore persuaded

1679] THE REIGNS OF TERROR 397

Charles to dissolve the Cavalier Parliament, nearly eighteen years
after it had first met. At last the Whigs had forced the King’s
hand.

During these last wild weeks of the old Royalist Parliament, The trials

and on through the wilder sessions and prorogations of the three het
Whig Parliaments that followed, the Law Courts in Westminster 1678-81.
Hall and Old Bailey beheld a series of historic and terrible scenes.
One traitor and a score of innocent men were done to death by
false swearing, amid shouts of triumph in the crowded court
and at the foot of Tyburn shambles, while half a dozen more were
saved by the resolution of Judge and jury in the face of such a
storm as few tribunals have ever dared to defy. The various trials
of the Popish Plot differed one from another both in criminality of
_ the participants and in result to the accused.

The first trial for the plot proper was that of the Duke’s secretary, Convic-
Coleman. His letters, read in court, showed him guilty of treason pees
in trying “to subvert the Protestant religion as it is by law 27th Nov.
established,” “by the aid and assistance of foreign powers”. “ Mr. 1678
Coleman,” said Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, “ your own papers are
enough to condemn you.” But Oates and Bedloe added a false
accusation that he had conspired to assassinate the King. After
sentence had been passed, Coleman, though still denying his guilt,
confessed that the court had allowed him “all the fairplay imagin-
able”. He was an enthusiast who had staked his life in the cause of
his religion, and lost.

A few weeks later the blood of the innocent began to flow. convie.
First Oates and his accomplices swore away the lives of a batch oe. Lae
of Jesuits for the imaginary plot against the King’s person (17th men
Dec.). Next three innocent men were convicted for the murder
of Godfrey, chiefly on the evidence of Prance, who was perhaps
not lying when he claimed to have had a share in the deed himself
(5th February, 1679).

In June another batch of Jesuits, and the Catholic lawyer
Langhorn, were convicted for the assassination plot, although
Fe ah ant este hera ehaanied > toa be keaproeeagedee

in place of the less decisive original, “I approve of this letter”.
2 Stephen, i., p. 393. Pollock, pp. 117-166. But see also Lang’s Valet’s Tragedy,

chap. iii, See Appendix C. below.

398 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1679 |

sixteen witnesses came over from St. Omers and bore evidence that —
Oates was with them at the seminary on 24th April, the day when
he claimed to have been present at the famous “consult” in the
Strand. But mob, judges and jury attached no weight to the
oaths of Jesuits, for all believed them to hold the casuistic doctrine
that it was pardonable to lie in the interest of the Church.
Acquittal In July came the first acquittals. Three Benedictines were on
of Wake- trial, together with the Queen’s physician, Sir George Wakeman,
man, 18 j J - ; 4
July, 1679 Who was charged with conspiracy to poison the King. It was in
effect the Queen’s trial also. The divorce policy of the Whigs was
at stake. A witness from the Privy Council came into court, and,
referring to the whole Council for the truth of his statement,
exposed Oates as a liar. “My Lord,” cried Wakeman in an
ecstasy of sudden hope, “‘this is a Protestant witness too.” Oates
prevaricated, then lost his head and abused the Privy Council.
But the bully had his match on the Bench. “You have taken a
great confidence,” said Scroggs, “I know not by what authority,
to say anything of anybody.” For the first time the Whig
champion was put to silence. Then Scroggs, after he had abused
the Popish religion in terms more scurrilous than were usual even
from his mouth, felt safe in instructing the jury that they might
disbelieve the evidence for the prosecution. Oates was still in a
state of collapse, but Bedloe’s croak was heard: “My Lord, my
evidence is not rightly summed up.” “I know not,” said Scroggs,
“by what authority this man speaks.” And so, to the rage of the
spectators, the prisoners were acquitted. It was a memorable
i triumph of the respect for law and public authority which alone
can overcome the natural instincts prompting mobs in every
age and in every civilisation to lynch those of whose guilt they are
convinced. ‘The courts had in some cases been deceived into
unjust convictions. But that was a less evil than if the law had
been dictated by the popular will, or had given place to massacre.
Scroggs The acquittal of Wakeman and his friends was long regarded
Whig as a perversion of justice by the influence of the throne. The
patty | Whigs still led through London streets, in their Pope-burning
pageants, the figure of the Queen’s physician with a bottle of
poison in his hand. But their worst fury was let loose on Scroggs.
A foul-mouthed and drunken voluptuary, like so many able men of
that day, he was no difficult mark to hit. But the arrows aimed

1679] THE REIGNS OF TERROR 399

at him were somewhat broad in the head. Oates undertook to
prove that he had danced naked. He was libelled, he was assaulted,
he was impeached. It was said even by Tories that his motive for
treating Wakeman fairly had been the desire to stand well at
Court. But whatever the motives, this coarse and courageous
_ Judge and gallant jury had saved many other lives besides the four
at stake that day. Wakeman’s acquittal stemmed the flood.
During the next year, not only were Gascoigne and Castlemaine
acquitted, but the number of persons brought to trial fell off in
the most marked degree.'

The Catholics took courage and tried to turn the tables on their The Meal
assassins. ‘Through the agency of the infamous Mrs. Cellier, the ae 2 ree
personal friends of the Duke of York found an instrument in ”
Dangerfield, an inhabitant of Newgate prison, took him out, gave
him money, and set him to spy on the Whigs. He soon produced
a Presbyterian plot. But in the hour of peril he deserted to the
safer ranks of the Protestant perjurers. The fraud of the “Meal
Tub Pilot” was exposed, and the exposure renewed the popular
belief in the criminality of Catholics.

The credibility of Oates was not yet denied on all points, even
by his political opponents. More than a year after the rejection
of his evidence against Wakeman, the Tory Lords, who had thrown
out the second Exclusion Bill, accepted his testimony against one
of the most honourable of their own number, and sent Lord Staf-
ford to death (Dec., 1680). Even as late as the summer of 1681,
after the fall of the Whigs had removed all pressure on the Govern-
ment to shed more blood, Plunket, the Catholic Archbishop of
Dublin, was found guilty, and was left to execution by the un-
scrupulous King, who had from beginning to end let his friends know
that he “believed not one word of what was called Oates’ Plot ”.*

Plunket was the last victim of the Popish Terror. Times had Unscrupu-
changed, and several of the witnesses who had formerly supported chorea ;
Oates were brought into court to swear away the lives of Shaftes- al! creeds
bury and their old employers. Either, therefore, the Tories still sous
thought these men trustworthy witnesses ; or, as is more probable,
they cared no more than Shaftesbury, and no more than the

1 State Trials, sub. loc. First Whig, p. 104. Pollock, pp. 354-58.
2 State Trials, vii., pp. 1043-68. Pollock, pp. 204-213.
3 Ailesbury, i., p. 96.

General
conditions
of the
trials

4.00 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1679

patrons of the Meal Tub Plot, how they contrived the death
of enemies of whose general turpitude they were convinced. The
Whig, Tory and Catholic politicians, and the King, all proved to
be rogues, Despairing historians turn for honesty to the famous
Trimmer: Halifax indeed voted “ Not Guilty” in Stafford’s trial,
because he had the sense to believe that the Catholic gentry had
“not put off the man in general, nor the Englishman in particular Oya
but such was his fear and hatred of the Jesuits that he told Sir
William Temple “the plot must be handled as if it were true,
whether it were so or no,” and wrote to Henry Savile that “the
notoriety of the fact is evidence enough of the plot”.?

When the well-informed expressed an almost universal opinion,
it cannot be imputed as a crime to the ignorant that they shared it
with more complete sincerity. But the conduct of the mob was
mosthorrible. At the trial of Langhorn they assaulted the witnesses
for the defence outside the doors of the Old Bailey, beat one of
them within an inch of his life, and apparently prevented the others
from ever reaching the box. When prisoners could put no com-
pulsion on witnesses to attend, such demonstrations were, to say the
least, a serious discouragement to volunteers.”

The innocent Catholics were injured to some degree by conditions
peculiar to their trials—the unscrupulous zeal of the politicians, the
prejudice of the mob, the abusive harangues of the Judges against
their religion—but they were injured far more by the unscientific
treatment of evidence common to all the trials of that and every
previous age. Under the system of justice established under the
House of Plantagenet, every man’s life had been at the mercy of
common rumour ; that system had been reformed, but still every
man’s life was at the mercy of two false witnesses. One witness was
thought as good as another, provided he had taken the oath, to
which every one in court, except the swearers themselves, attached
a superstitious reverence. Critical analysis of evidence was not
understood by any one. The Catholic prisoners were no more able
than the Judge or the Counsel for the prosecution, to point out
reasons why the evidence against them should be disbelieved. As
we read the State Trials with modern eyes, we see them losing one

ee Works (1770), ii., p. 506. Foxcroft, Life of Halifax, i., p. 163; ii,
= 3rc,
2 State Trials, vii., p, 463.

1679] THE REIGNS OF TERROR 401

chance after another of establishing their innocence. In that
generation there were only two admitted tests of incredibility in
_a witness—a previous conviction for perjury, or flat contradiction
by some other witness on points raised by the trial on hand. These
common rules were adhered to in perfect good faith in the case
of the Catholic prisoners, except that once the rebutting evidence
was most unjustly disregarded because it was given by Jesuits. On
this system Stafford was condemned and Wakeman acquitted.

When such was the conception of evidence, the innocent were
frequently convicted, not in political cases alone. ‘The injustice of
the trials for witchcraft, wherein hundreds of the generation
previous had perished, has been revealed to posterity solely by the
accident of a change in our religious beliefs. And there can be
no reasonable doubt that at the common Assizes, mute, inglorious
Staffords perished in the ordinary course for murders and robberies
which they had never committed. Informers of the lowest type
were encouraged to do for society the needful work now done by
trustworthy detectives; as they ran no risk of exposure before
courts ignorant of the rules of evidence, there is grave reason to fear
that the informer was, as often as not, a perjurer as well.

Besides this supreme disadvantage, there were many others be-
setting any accused person, which Catholics suffered in common
with Protestants. In a century when the State perpetually feared,
and several times suffered, overthrow, the Courts of Law were citadels
against treason, rather than asylums for innocence. The Judges,
as Bacon had put it, were “lions under the throne”. For the
political prisoner, whether guilty on the charge or not, was known
to be, in general, the King’s enemy. The judicial theory was only
expressed in an exaggerated form by the Mayor of Hastings, who
said, when retailing the alarming news of Wakeman’s acquittal, that
if he had not been guilty, he never would have been put on his
trial.2 Therefore, no counsel was allowed for the prisoner; his
witnesses could not be compelled to attend, and were not permitted
to take the oath; and he did not know until he came into court of
what he was about to be accused. Yet, severe as were these con-

1 Thus why did not Langhorn, himself a lawyer, ask the hostess of the White
Horse Tavern who had really visited her house on 24th April, 1678? (State Trials,
vii., p. 464). .

2 Ailesbury, 1., p. 31.

26

at the

4D2 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1679

ditions under which the victims of the Popish Plot were tried, they
were less severe than the procedure under which Guy Fawkes and
Raleigh had been condemned. For the Puritan Revolution had
enlarged the liberty of the accused subject against the prosecuting
Government, as the trials of John Lilburne had shown in Cromwell’s
time. Questions of Jaw as well as of fact were now left to the
Jury, who were free to acquit without fear of consequences ; the
witnesses for the prosecution were now always brought into court
and made to look on the prisoner as they spoke ; witnesses for the
defence might at least be summoned to appear; and the accused
might no longer be interpellated by the King’s Counsel, entangled
in a rigorous inquisition, and forced to give evidence against him-
self. Slowly, through blood and tears, justice and freedom had
been advancing. And if, as we may reasonably suppose, the
eventual exposure of Oates’ perjuries produced a profound effect
on the readiness of ordinary courts to accept evidence, and helped
forward the legislation by which special advantages were conceded
to prisoners in trials for treason (1696), the innocent Catholics did
not shed their blood wholly in vain, as did thousands of innocent
persons who without pity and without record had for countless
ages perished with undeserved ignominy under the hangman’s
hands.!

The incidents of each trial connected with the Popish Plot,
eagerly watched and construed according to the needs of the hour

elections, by all the rival factions of the State, affected public opinion from
Feb., 1679 day to day in the long three years’ struggle for power between the

Whig party and Charles II. If the King and Danby had hoped
by dissolving the Cavalier Parliament to gain anything more than
time, they were soon undeceived. At the elections of February,
1679, the Whigs swept the country. The organising powers of
the Green Ribbon Club gave to this Genera] Election the character,
which such contests have ever since retained, of a victory won by a
disciplined party on a national issue. The historical origin of the
House of Commons in local selection of fit men to speak for their
neighbours, was now but little reflected in the proceedings of the
candidates nominated by their respective parties. With this step

1 Stephen, i., pp. 325, 326, 333-35, 358, 360, 36 1 390-402 -16, 426
Pallant be 266.68, seeace ’ 35% 3 397; 3741 399-402, 414-10, 420, 427,

1679] THE REIGNS OF TERROR 403

forward in the sense of national unity, essential to any land before a
monarchical can be replaced by a Parliamentary government, came
attendant evils. As the power of the House of Commons over
the executive increased, men were ready to invest fortunes in the
acquisition of seats, which in the days of Eliot and Hampden had
been posts of danger, but were now stepping-stones to honour and
emolument. Bedfordshire cost the Whigs £6,000, roughly equiva-
lent to £60,000 in our own day. The price of votes was higher
than ever before; the electors, who when they last exercised the
franchise, eighteen years back, had been content to be made drunk,
now claimed also to be carried to the poll at the candidate’s expense.

But the principal reason of the Whig success was the panic Tempor-
of the country, and the temporary abeyance of Cavalier and Tory te a
sentiment. At the Restoration, Anglican and Catholic gentry, who Royalist
had shared the command of regiments at Naseby and waited to- Sentiment
gether on the Committee of Sequestration, were bound to one an-
other by personal feeling, on the continuance of which the Jesuits
had counted too much. These common memories were now for-
gotten. When Dissenting ministers appeared in defiance of the
law, and stirred the voters to fury against the Catholics and the
Court, the parsons and the country gentlemen let them be, and
made little effort to resist the consequent Whig success at the polls.
For the Tory squire owned Abbey lands, and the Tory parson
collected parish tithes, which in the undying memory of the Roman
Church were still her rightful property. Thus the class and the
profession whose members were least ardently Protestant, and who
much preferred, man for man, a Catholic gentleman to a Dissenting
shopkeeper, were most bound by self-interest to oppose any move-
ment to restore the Roman Catholic religion. Whenever, therefore,
it was believed that the Court was meditating such an attempt, as
in the spring of 1679 and the autumn of 1688, the Tories would
not move a finger to suppress the Puritans or to help the King.

But this abnormal state of politics could never last long. In
1679, and again in 1688, it lasted for a few months together. But
whereas in 1688 those months were employed to effect a settlement
of our polity which has been proof against time and chance, in
1679 the golden opportunity was let slip. For when the Whig
Parliament met in March, the Protestant leaders, who had the
whole nation behind them, and could have passed almost any

Quarrel of

Shaftes-
bury and
Halifax

Exclusion
or Limita-
tions

First
Whig
Parlia-
ment
meets
March,
1679

404 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1679

measure to which they had agreed to give their united support,
began a quarrel over policy which was soon aggravated into a
fierce personal contest between two self-willed statesmen.

The dispute between the Earls of Shaftesbury and Halifax at
first concerned rather the nature than the extent of the revolution
which both thought necessary for the State. Shaftesbury had
adopted Sacheverell’s scheme of excluding James from the throne.
Halifax wished to keep him as nominal King, but to “limit” his
power by law, handing over to Parliament his executive functions.
If this plan of Limitations had been carried into effect, it would
virtually have turned England into a republic, governed by two
co-ordinate and rival Polish Diets, the Lords and Commons. No
worse arrangement could have been devised than to charge two
debating assemblies with the direct executive authority, instead of
vesting it in ministers serving the King but responsible to Parlia-
ment. The Whigs indeed objected to this scheme of government,
not because they thought it would work ill, but because they feared
it would never be allowed to work at all: James would not
submit to it, and it could therefore only lead, on his brother’s
death, to a civil war in which the Whigs would appear as Round-
heads, fighting against the name and office of King. It is indeed
hard to say whether Exclusion or Limitations was most likely to
end in an appeal to arms. But Shaftesbury’s proposal, abstractly
considered, was nearer than that of Halifax to the lines of future
constitutional development; for Shaftesbury urged the absolute
necessity for England to have a Protestant monarch, who could be
trusted to exercise the functions of royalty in a constitutional spirit.
His bad choice of such a King soon compromised his Exclusion
policy. But in March, 1679, Monmouth’s candidature was not yet
very prominent, and it is possible that at that date the Exclusion
scheme was as likely to be generally accepted as Halifax’s Limita-
tions. Both were fraught with great dangers. But to devise a
scheme that was not fraught with great dangers would have passed
the wit of man.

Such were the two proposals canvassed at Westminster at the
meeting of the first Whig Parliament. The representatives of the
great Whig houses at first favoured the Limitations proposed by
Halifax. But when Shaftesbury and he quarrelled, and men had to
choose which of the two leaders to follow, Russell and Cavendish

1679] THE REIGNS OF TERROR 405

enlisted, as men of uncertain opinions and strong party spirit

always do, under the most hard-fighting captain. The dividing
currents were too strong for any one remaining in politics to take

up ground exactly of his own choosing. A conscientious and in-
effectual man like Temple would soon retire. Halifax, the
“Trimmer,” was fast becoming a courtier. Shaftesbury before long

carried the party over to Exclusion. But when the first Exclusion First Ex-
Bill was introduced in May, 1679, its principle was still opposed by Bill bay,
several prominent Whigs who next year took charge of the second 1679
Bill themselves.

The moment when any well-framed scheme for Exclusion,
Regency or Limitation could have been put through without a
civil war was rapidly passing away. While the enemies of the
Court were dividing, its friends were beginning to unite. It was
the object of Charles to gain time. By consummate political
ability he gained two years, and in those two years the reaction had
gathered head. By making many concessions he avoided any
surrender. With imperturbable joviality he spent his days fishing
and sauntering, as if nothing were amiss. His natural easiness and
good-nature helped him to play without effort the subtlest of
political games. By never losing his temper he at last enjoyed his
revenge.

His first move, in the spring of 1679, was suggested by a scheme Temple’s
of Sir William Temple. That excellent man, who held it a states-P vat ale
man’s business to be a scholar in his own profession, had by long April. ’
study and thought discovered the true interest of Britain at home Jaly,:3679
and abroad. But though well able to serve her in the cool at-
mosphere of diplomacy, the author of the Triple Alliance was
utterly unfitted to leave the impress of his wisdom on our warring
domestic factions. Just before he retired in despair to the con-
genial refuge of his books and his garden at Sheen, he persuaded
both parties to adopt a plan whereby the King and his subjects
could carry on the Government together. On Temple’s advice
Charles altered the composition of the Privy Council, and re-
vived its powers, which had been gradually passing over to the
smaller Cabinet. He made thirty of his principal friends and
enemies into the new Privy Councillors, and promised to take no
action except by their corporate advice. This body was to stand
as an umpire between ministers and Parliament, and between Tory

(May),
dissolved

(July),
1679

Habeas
Corpus
Act, May,
1679

406 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1679 |

and Whig. It was expected to represent a moderating third party, |
but in fact it was only important because it was composed of the
most prominent partisans of both sides. The Whig Lords took
their seats beside their deadliest foes, and their leader Shaftesbury
consented to be President of the Council; but, meanwhile, they
continued to push on their agitation in Parliament and country
with unabated violence. Charles, on his side, was equally disloyal
to the spirit of Temple’s compromise ; he never took the new Privy
Council seriously, except as a means of gaining time. ‘“ God’s
fish!” he said to his friend Bruce, “they have put a set of men
about me, but they shall know nothing, and this keep to yourself.” ?
He formed his resolutions after the meetings were over, in private
conversation, sometimes with Halifax or Temple, and sometimes
with Lauderdale, though hatred of Lauderdale was the one point
on which all the others were united. The end of Temple’s Privy
Council as a real organ of Government came when, against its
advice, Charles prorogued and then dissolved the first Whig Parlia-
ment, in order to prevent the passage of the Exclusion Bill.
Shaftesbury, blind with rage, cried out that he would have the lives
of the men who had counselled the prorogation. Among these was
Halifax. Already the statesmen were playing for each other’s
heads.

Though the times were growing tragic, comedy put her healing
touch on everything that passed. ‘The iron age of politics was the
golden age of wit. Charles was specially jovial and friendly to the
Whig Lords whenever he had secretly resolved on some crushing
stroke, such as to prorogue or dissolve their Parliament. The Act
of Habeas Corpus itself, the one great measure which he had given
them time to enact, had only passed the Upper Chamber because
the tellers in jest had counted a fat Lord as ten, and had failed to
rectify their figures.’ It was the best joke ever made in England.
Individual liberty would have been at an end during the ten years
of violence that followed, if persons obnoxious to Government had
not possessed the new machinery for availing themselves of the
Englishman’s old right of a speedy trial or release. The fat Lord’s

vote secured that even James II. could not imprison his subjects at
pleasure.

1 Airy, p. 240, ? Burnet, ii., p. 264 and note 1, Airy, p. 239.

1679] THE REIGNS OF TERROR 407

In the summer of 1679 the star of Monmouth rose. The son Mon-
of Lucy Walters, one of Charles’s mistresses in the early days of mouth
exile, he had been treated since the Restoration as a favourite, but
never as a legitimate, scion of the Royal House. He was a weak,
bad, and beautiful young man. Though popular, good-natured
and charming as his reputed father, he had once, in a drunken
frolic, helped to murder a watchman, while the unoffending
wretch had begged for mercy on his knees.! Monmouth was, per-
haps, too light to be accounted criminal. He was born to be the
tool of others.

The opportunity for those others had now come. ‘The violence
and corruption of Lauderdale’s government of Scotland had put
all that kingdom in smouldering discontent, and the dragonades of
Claverhouse had set one corner actually ablaze. The Whigs of the
South-west were up in arms, under the old terrible banner of Christ’s
Crown and Covenant, and had scattered their persecutors at Drum-
clog. Shaftesbury’s followers, mindful by what means the King had
been forced to consult Parliament in 1640, began an agitation in
England on behalf of their Scottish brethren. The popular feeling
was so strong against the use of English troops to suppress the
Covenanters, that Charles would not have dared to order his army
to march north, if he had not bought leave from Shaftesbury by
sending Monmouth as commander-in-chief. Charles was playing
a dangerous hand. Monmouth conquered the rebels at Bothwell Bothwell
Brig, won by his clemency the heart of Scotland, and returned to cas pei
Court, possessing the love and commanding the armies of the two yee
kingdoms. At this unlucky moment Charles fell ill. His death
was hourly expected. The Whigs prepared to keep James out of
the kingdom by use of the royal forces which chance had put into
the hands of their champion. James was an exile in Brussels,
whither Charles had compelled him to retire, that the fear and
hatred of him might be allayed by his absence. The Tories were
scattered, without a leader and without a cause ; the Whigs were
armed, led, united; the great majority of Englishmen sat still in
dull terror of what the next hour would bring. James was sum- Danger-
moned back by the “Triumvirate,” Halifax, Essex and Sunderland, Sa
with his brother’s consent to his brother’s death-bed ; he crossed the eond hag.
sea and travelled to Windsor in disguise. He might well have 1°79

1 Marvell, i., pp. 195, 416,

408 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1679

expected to find, in halls hung with black, the last of the panic-
stricken courtiers debating whether to hold the castle against
Monmouth’s Guards, or fly to unfurl the standard in the West;
but he was greeted instead by a cheerful convalescent, expressing
well-feigned brotherly surprise at the exile’s unexpected return.
Charles had recovered, and England breathed again.

The accident by which the Whigs had so nearly won all, had
turned to their loss. England had had a fright, and those who
had frightened her must pay. A few days of terrible anxiety had
burnt it on the minds of men that the Whig plans meant civil war,
and that the King stood between his subjects and a sea of troubles.
Charles began almost to be popular with those who care more for
peace than for politics, while the Tories saw in the supremacy of
Monmouth and his faction, from which they had escaped by a
hair’s breadth, a danger to their interests more immediate than the
secret intrigue of the terrified and proscribed Catholics, who were
crowding the gaols in every shire. If the ‘Tories had not yet
arrived at regarding James as their party leader, they already
turned their utmost efforts against his rival. ‘They were further
alarmed and disgusted by the language of the Nonconformists, who
poured out the vials of long pent wrath through pamphlets and
broadsides, avenging eighteen years of martyrdom on the general
reader. As the censorship of the press had fallen into abeyance
on the sudden dissolution of the last Parliament, great masses of
literature went out to spread the passions of both parties among
the common people. The Tory pamphleteer, Roger L’Estrange,
retaliated ferociously on the Nonconformists, and in his weekly
Observator called on the Church to defend herself. The clergy
mounted the pulpits and rantea against fanatics. The word was
passed round that “forty-one” had come again: the Church was

in danger.
Mon- Encouraged by these symptoms, Charles ordered Monmouth to
es lay down the military command with which he had threatened the

James public peace. With most one-sided impartiality he exiled both
Paneer 5 the claimants. Monmouth, whose advantage it was to show his
handsome face among the shouting crowds, was ordered off to
Holland ; while James, whose presence at home kept the magistrates
in perpetual fear of an uprising of the Protestants, was in his own

best interest sent off to Scotland, till the pamphleteers had im-

1679] THE REIGNS OF TERROR 409

pressed upon the mind of the English Tories an unreal picture of
the mild, long-suffering exile.

Meanwhile, the general election was taking place. In spite of Second
the efforts of the parsons and the rural Cavaliers, the counties ae
were held solid for the Whig interest by the yeomen, and only the ment pro-
results in some of the smaller boroughs represented the fact that Be.
the King again had a party. Charles saw forces in the far distance Oct., 1680
gathering for his relief, but he knew that for many months the
siege would be close. Therefore, he must risk everything to gain
time. Sure in his own mind of this, he prorogued the newly elected
Parliament, against the moderating advice of Halifax, Essex and
Sunderland. The support and counsel of the Triumvirate were
thought to be his only hope. But when at last he was at grips
with fate, he relied on no judgment but his own. For a whole
year, during which he refused to allow the triumphantly elected
Whigs to assemble at Westminster, they battered like madmen
against the closed portals of the Constitution. Infuriated by the
Prorogation policy, which even Halifax condemned, the Opposition
resorted to methods of such violence as must either beat down
resistance or recoil on those who use it.

The custom of symbolical processions and public masquerades, Pope-
which, coming down unbroken from medieval times, stil] gladdened peoune
the jolly festivals of the English, and the ruder ceremonies with sion, 17th
which Guy Fawkes was yearly committed to the flames, together plete 1070
suggested to the genius of Whiggery a superb and costly pageant
of hate and fear. On Queen Elizabeth’s Accession Day, as soon
as the early November twilight had closed upon the City, a splendid
torchlight procession of Cardinals and Jesuits, allegorical and
political personages, wound slowly through the expectant streets.

A bellman, chanting dolefully at intervals “Remember Justice
Gcdfrey,” was followed by the effigy of the murdered magistrate,
in his familiar camlet coat. The Londoners had often looked
on that well-loved figure in life, and once in death. A Jesuit
riding on a white horse held the body upright before him; in that
fashion al] believed him to have been carried from the scene of his
murder to the ditch on Primrose Hill. In the glare of torches,
the glamour and the press of men, the scene was infernal, appalling.
The City population was strained to the highest pitch of emotional
excitement. At ten o’clock, when the Pope and his courtiers

Mon-
mouth’s
return

410 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1679

arrived beneath the balconies of the Green Ribbon, where the |
Whig aristocracy awaited their arrival, the chanting of a tr- |
umphant Protestant pzan beneath the statue of Elizabeth, look- |
ing down on the scene from Temple Bar, preceded the final con-
flagrations :—

Your Popish Plot, and Smithfield threat,
We do not fear at all ;

For lo, beneath Queen Bess’s feet
You fall, you fall, you fall.

By midnight the vast mob was so highly wrought that many
supposed the proceedings had been designed to end in a revolution
before the dawn."

November had not gone out when another spectacle kept
Londoners from their beds. Monmouth, returning from Holland

Nov., 1679 against the King’s orders, made entry, while lines of bonfires roared

in the streets, and the steeples rocked at midnight. Next year
he made his progress through the West (1680) ; won the ill-starred
love of the yeomen and weavers of Somerset; and assembled the
Whig gentry at hunts and race meetings, as much suspect to
Government as the similar gatherings of Cavalier sportsmen had
been under Cromwell. He struck the baton sinister from his arms,
claiming legitimacy. The story was put about by the Whig
understrappers that a certain Black Box contained the contract of
marriage between his mother Lucy Walters and the King. But if
real investigation had been made into a subject so obscure, the
world would perhaps have discovered with surprise that so far from
being a legitimate Prince, he was not even a royal bastard. It
is by no means certain that his father was not Robert Sidney, a
paramour of his mother’s, whom he himself closely resembled.?
The official policy of the Whigs was still Divorce, in spite of
Wakeman’s acquittal. In their party songs they still taught the
people to sing :—
Then down with James, and set up Charles
On good Queen Bess’s side ;

That all true Commons, Lords and Earls
May wish him a fruitful bride.®

1 First Whig, chap. vi. *Clarke, ¥ames IT.,i., p. 492. Ai
3 First Whig, p. 106. f Sa ie Ms

1680} THE REIGNS OF TERROR 411

But the pathetic and fatuous devotion of the common people to
Monmouth, and the fact that the wretched creature had broken all
ties at Court and become the puppet of their faction, at last
attracted these unprincipled statesmen to support his candidature
in all but name.

Meanwhile, pressure was brought on Charles to call the elected Peti-
Parliament together. The first of a series of petitions to this effect Bees
was carried up ste him by seventeen Whig Peers (Dec., 1679), headed horrers:
by brave old Prince Rupert. Rupert’s religion had not been affected Ba be
by the atmosphere of the Restoration Cotirt’ Still as stout a Pro-
testant as he had first become at his mother’s knee and in the old
Rhenish wars of his early youth, he had since grown, during his long
residence in England, to be a good Englishman and a good Parlia-
mentarian. The Lords’ example was followed, and monster peti-
tions came up from the towns and shires. All over the country
the names were collected by house-to-house canvassing of “agitants
and sub-agitants,” often, as the Tories averred, by fraudulent
methods. But the conduct of these “petitioners” who would con-
strain the King’s free choice was “abhorred” by the rising Cavalier
sentiment, which was embodied in the following February in
counter-addresses of “abhorrence”. But in the course of the
year 1680 the names of Abhorrer and Petitioner were changed for
those of Tory and Whig. England owes her greatest party names
to Titus Oates. He used to croak “Tory” at any man who dared
to question the plot, and his admirers took up the word. And as
soon as one side thus called its opponents after the Catholic bandits
who waylaid the Saxon settlers among the Irish bogs, it was an
obvious retort to hurl back the name of the Covenanted “ Whigs ”
who murdered Bishops on the Scottish moors.

It was now war to the knife. On the 26th of June, 1680, Shaftes- Essex,
bury, accompanied by Russell, Cavendish, Oates and a great com- ee ee
pany, entered Westminster Hall, to present James to the Grand Madam
Jury as a Popish Recusant; and to indict as a “common nuisance ” pean
Louise de Querouaille, Duchess of Portsmouth, the King’s Popish the
mistress. Chief Justice Scroggs, who had gone too far in saving ,6g, Peuee
Catholic prisoners to hope for pardon if the Whigs ever came to
power, dismissed the Grand Jury before they could “find a true bill.

But the demonstration was not without effect. Madam Carwell, as

the English called De Querouaille was thoroughly frightened. She

The
Second
Whig
Parlia-
ment,
Oct., 1680-
Jan., 1681

Second
Exclusion
Bill re-
jected by
the Lords,
Nov., 1680

412 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1680

and her master Louis, who, since she had succeeded to Lady Castle-
maine’s political influence, regarded her as his most influential
agent, began to expect the victory and to fear the vengeance of the
Whigs. Carwell entered into an agreement with them, that, in
return for a sum of money and the abandonment of all proceedings
against her, she would win over Charles to accept Exclusion and
any successor whom Shaftesbury should name. Her desertion
carried with it that of Sunderland, always seeking a quiet place on
the strongest side, while Essex, who was at heart a Whig, at
length passed over to the innermost counsels of the Opposition.
Thus two of the Triumvirate had deserted the King. But when
the rats left the ship, Halifax once more came on board. Since
Charles had, against his advice, prorogued the newly elected Parlia-
ment, he had been living in seclusion. But when the Houses at
last met in October, 1680, he came out again to defend the inherit-
ance of James, whose person and policy he detested, rather than
subject himself and his country to Shaftesbury’s factious rule,

The second Whig Parliament had all the characteristics of a
revolutionary assembly, except power to execute its violent will.
Headed by Russell, and accompanied by the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen, the Commons “with a mighty shout” carried the Ex-
clusion Bill into the Upper Chamber. ‘There the battle was fought
out. The Lords held the balance of the Constitution, and no one
knew how they would decide. Charles and his faithful Commons
watched the debate hour by hour in painful anxiety. Monmouth
felt constrained by piety to speak for the Bill, as necessary to
stop the plots against his father’s life ; “the kiss of Judas,” Charles
was heard to exclaim. Halifax, at bay against all the famous
orators of the House, in fifteen debating speeches of consummate
ability, carried the waverers against the combined efforts of Shaftes-
bury, Essex and Sunderland. The Bill, instead of naming the
Princess Mary to replace her father James, was purposely worded
by Monmouth’s friends so as to leave the succession uncertain;
and thus the friends of William of Orange, who all through this
period had his agents and correspondents among the English _poli-
ticians, were lost to the Whig cause. The Bill was rejected by
63 to 30.

Then the Commons broke loose in rage. Every day some
person was attacked or some violent resolution passed. Halifax

1680] THE REIGNS OF TERROR 413

was impeached on “common fame” that he had dissolved the last
Parliament. “Had not that Parliament been dissolved,” said one
member, “Sir George Wakeman had not been saved, nor the King’s
evidence reproached.” “TI would rather have Halifax’s head,” cried
another, “than any Popish Lord’s in the Tower ;” yet the meaner
prey was all that they could secure. Scroggs and North were
impeached for their conduct on the Bench. Private Tories through-
out the country were wrongfully arrested by the Speaker’s warrant.
One member was expelled the House for having promoted an
address of “abhorrence,” and another for having “proclaimed the
Popish Plot no plot of the Papists”. It was in vain that he denied
the words and assured the Speaker, “I ever did and ever shall
believe this to be a Popish Plot, as sure as you are in the Chair”.
Finally, a Bill for a Protestant Association, to put the civil and
military power into the hands of the Duke of Monmouth, was
introduced. But with Lords and King against them, the Commons
could effect nothing for all their fury.!

One sacrifice was made by the upper powers to divert their wrath. Trial of
Viscount Stafford, the most venerable of those five “ Popish Lords Sarita
in the Tower” who had been lodged there in consequence of the 7th Dec.,
first depositions made by Oates, was singled out to be impeached 198°
by the Commons before his Peers. As in the trial of Strafford forty
years before, the scaffoldings for the spectators of the great event
had been set up in Westminster Hall, “to the shortening the prome-
nade of the lawyers and the severe oppression of the shops,” which
ordinarily occupied its floor. For seven days the wooden galleries
were crowded up to the roof with ambassadors, great ladies, and
row above row of Commons; while: the judging Lords, the wit-
nesses, the counsel, the prisoner and the executioner beside him
with the axe, held the floor below. Charles could be seen in one
gallery; and in another Madam Carwell dispensing smiles and
sweetmeats among a crowd of gallant politicians, who six months
ago had entered the same Hall to indict her as a “common
nuisance”. Before this audience Oates and Tuberville performed.

As usual, what was sworn against the prisoner was believed,
because it was not, as in Wakeman’s trial, rebutted by counter-
evidence. Some Peers were biassed by a desire to conciliate the

1Grey, vii., pp. 384, 385; vili,, pp. 22-24.

The
Third
Whig

(or Ox-
ford)
Parlia-
ment,
21st-28th
March,
1681

414 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1681 |

Whigs for the rejection of the Exclusion Bill, and as the Plot was |

still widely credited in Tory circles, they were able to vote for his

death with the comfortable belief that his guilt was proved. The |
good old Lord’s last words were disbelieved by the mob on Tower |
Hill, and when his white head was held up to their gaze, it was |

greeted with yells of delight.’

On the 10th of January Charles prorogued Parliament, and after |
a few days dissolved it. The new elections took place amid scenes |

of great enthusiasm on both sides. But again the Whig gentlemen,
in spite of the frantic efforts of the majority of their own class,
were returned by the freeholders of the towns and counties. It
was mooted among the chiefs of the party, whether, if the King
dissolved this Parliament as he had dissolved its predecessors, they
should continue to sit in defiance of the law. Charles, knowing
that such a revolutionary assembly would be protected by the
train-bands and the Pope-burning population of the capital, called
the Houses together at Oxford. ‘The Whig members could not
bring up with them the London mob, but they rode into the loyal
city with bands of retainers, heavily laden with swords and pistols,
and gay with blue streamers bearing the legend “No Popery, No
Slavery”. John Locke, the intimate friend of Shaftesbury, was
commissioned to find lodgings for his patron. Most of the Ex-
clusionist Lords took up their quarters together in Balliol, where
the governing body, in return for a high rent, allowed their college
to be made the Whig citadel. No less war-like was the guise of
the squires of Oxfordshire, who accompanied Charles in military
order to the gate of the City, crying at his coach window “The
devil hang up all Roundheads”. The militia of the county
joined in the ominous demonstration. The King lodged in Christ
Church, where he was surrounded by his own Lifeguards, and had
at hand those of the undergraduates who had not been rusticated
to make room for Court and Parliament. The bells of the city
rang and the undergraduates cheered in honour of “ Charles the
Great,” and at night bonfires blazed along the streets, loyally fed
with faggots, “rumps” and “cropt ears”. The Whigs could

1Clarke, ¥ames II., i., p. 640. State Trials, vii., 1294-1559. First Whig,
pp. 140, 141. Examen, p. 217. Pollock, pp. 367-70 and note 5, p. 370. Lord
Acton also rejected the more pleasant story of the popular remorse at Stafford’s
death-scene,

1681] THE REIGNS OF TERROR 415

scarcely raise a cheer from town or gown, but they came up strong
and insolent. So the blue and red ribboners vapoured against each
other in the streets and quadrangles,}

The third Whig Parliament was composed of much the same
elements as the last two, but almost every member of the majority
was on this occasion pledged to his constituents to accept nothing
short of Exclusion. Charles therefore cheerfully offered an alter-
native which he would have been most unwilling to concede. -He
proposed, with regard to the succession, that James should be
banished, and William or Mary of Orange made regent to govern
in his name. But this excellent plan, far superior to Halifax’s first
scheme of Limitations, was not really the policy of the Court
party, who eagerly expected its rejection, ‘They were not dis-
appointed. Shaftesbury interpellated the King, openly requiring
him to recognise Monmouth as his successor. The regency pro-
posal was rejected by the Commons. “God be praised,” wrote
one of the courtiers, “God hath blinded them.”

For the Whigs felt certain that the want of money would leave
Charles no choice but surrender, unless indeed he was prepared to
begin a war, with his exchequer as empty as his father’s before
Edgehill. ‘The last Parliament had refused supply, and declared
that all merchants who should lend money to the King should
answer for it to the Houses. The King’s soldiers, sailors, and civil
officers were unpaid and mutinous; his cannon were unmounted,
his magazines empty; his own table was with difficulty replenished.

It seemed that in a few weeks Government must capitulate, or else Louis
anarchy would usher in Civil War. But the Whigs calculated avin
without Louis. They naturally supposed that the Conn Monarch March,
was still on their side, as he had been three months back. He had 168!
given money not only to members of Parliament, but to influential
Presbyterian preachers and City magnates. But in fact, though he

had eagerly stirred up the Houses to put the King into difficulties,

he had no desire to establish the supremacy of statesmen who would

keep terms with France only until the day when they had acquired
power. On the other hand, Charles, from the day when he should

break Parliament and establish absolute rule, must become

1 London Gazette, 14-17th March, 1680(1). Christie, ii., pp. 391-401. College
Histories, Balliol, H. W. Davies (1899), pp. 162-63. Wood's Life and Times,

ii., pp. 524-27.

416 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1681

financially dependent on France. With the utmost precautions for
secrecy, the English King met the French Ambassador in the
Queen’s bedroom; standing between the bed and the wall, they
negotiated a verbal treaty. Since the betrayal of Danby’s letter,
Charles had had enough of signing documents. He would not
even give receipts for the gold. Louis, however, had all the security |
he wanted in the slender nature of Charles’s unparliamentary in-
come. So, when the King faced the Commons at Oxford, he had a—
promise of three years’ supply from the French King, and they did >
not know it. This is the key to his action and to theirs.! |

The Whigs, unconscious of the trap that had been laid for
them, were in high spirits. They too thought that “forty-one” |
was come again. Cartoons of pulling down the King, and doggerel |
catches such as

Halloo ! the Hunt’s begun
Like Father, like Son!

were popular among the lower class of scribblers and partisans who |
had been brought from London. Rash men like College, “the |
Protestant joiner,” ate, sang and even slept with the perjured |
informers of the Popish Plot, who noted what they saw and heard |
in Whig company, and prepared to bite the hands that fed them. |
The Third Meanwhile, the leaders in the Commons hurried through the |
en Exclusion Bill. The University buildings had been made ready for |
the use of Parliament. The Commons sat in Convocation House,
and the Lords in the Geometry School ; the rest of the Schools
were given up to the various Parliamentary Committees. The |
quadrangle was alive every morning with the buzz of politicians
and grandees. On the eighth day of the session the King appeared
suddenly in the House of Lords. He had come in a sedan chair,
closely followed by another, of which the drawn curtains presumably |
concealed some attendant Lord. The Commons hastily summoned |
to the Upper House, expecting to hear the King announce his |
surrender, came rushing tumultuously across the quadrangle,
crowded up a steep and winding staircase, jostled through a
narrow door, and passed down some steps into the body of the hall. |
Charles with a gay face watched his enemies defile. At length they
stood there, as many as could fight their way in, below the throne, |

|
i
i
f

i
\
|
\
|

iH
i

1 Airy, pp. 253-55. Burnet, ii., p. 286, note 2, Christie, ii., p. 403. |
* State Trials, viii., pp. 595-602, First Whig, p. 145. Examen, pp. 100-2, }

1681] THE REIGNS OF TERROR 417

panting, a close-headed mob. The King was in the robes of State Scene at
—ihe real contents of the second sedan. In those robes alone al
could he dissolve Parliament. He spoke the fatal words and left 28th
the room, while the Commons trooped back the way they had come, i
with “dreadful faces” and “loud sighs”. The secret had been

kept so well that the Whigs had no plan of action. A couple of
hours’ warning might have served to organise resistance, as it had

served to save the Five Members, But now Shaftesbury in vain

sent his messengers round the town to induce the Parliament men

to stay together. A panic seized the undisciplined and braggart

host that had ridden into Oxford. They believed that if they
stayed Charles would send his guards to “pull them out by the
ears”. ‘The price of horses doubled, as in a city about to be
entered by a victorious foe. The roads to Banbury, Witney and
Shotover were thick with men, in coaches and on horseback, flying

for their lives, each to his far country home.!

The Whigs never came together again in force till William of
Orange summoned the Convention. Their party had no medium
except Parliament. But there indeed they had an almost unfair
advantage. At three successive elections they had defeated the
Church and squirearchy at the polls. Owing to the peculiar con-
stitution of the House of Commons, this result was inevitable
whenever the middle classes were led by a competent minority of
Lords and gentlemen; a disproportionately large majority of the
seats belonged to the boroughs, and even in the counties the
franchise was the privilege of the independent freeholding classes,
and not of the tenant-farmer and agricultural labourer who would
have been compelled to obey the landlord. Therefore, after the The
lesson of the years 1679-81, the Cavalier party adopted notions of ee

on the
royal prerogative, which had been much in abeyance during the aes of
long years of the Cavalier Parliament. It is significant that Me
Filmer’s works in defence of the absolute authority of Kings, 1681-86

though written before the Restoration, were not published till

lAiry, pp. 254-57. Examen, pp. 104, 105. Ailesbury, i., pp. 56, 57. Woods,
Life and Times, ii., pp. 524-31. I have studied on the spot, and with the kind
assistance of Mr. Madan, the question of the locality of this remarkable scene.
There does not appear good reason to suppose that the Lords had adjourned from
| the Geometry Schools, where they certainly met on the first day of session. There
' is no record of any such change, which could hardly have escaped notice in some
document or other.

418 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1681 |

twenty years after it, when their popularity was such as would have |
astonished its author if he had still been alive. ‘The Tories made |
themselves the theoretical champions and the political agents of des- |
potism, carried on in the interest of their Church and class, because
the Whigs had used the House of Commons at the dictation of
other classes and in the interest of other Churches. The Tories |
ceased to be Parliamentarians and became Courtiers. ‘This aberra- _
tion, which, but for James II.’s madness, would have enslaved
England, took the theoretic form of the doctrine of “non-resist- |
ance”. Men who turned purple with rage when the Dissenters
asked them for Toleration, and when the yeomen outvoted them |
at the polls, knew so little of their own high temper that they
vowed that if Nero were hereditary King of England, they
would let him take their lands, their tithes, their laws, their very _
lives, without raising a hand against him. The Universities of
Oxford and Cambridge, and the Anglican clergy throughout the
land, regularly proclaimed these astonishing doctrines. ‘The Court
was crowded with gentlemen, divines, grand juries and corporations,
bearing to the throne Addresses of such fulsome loyalty that one
of the ministers in disgust declared that the Whig Petitioners only
spat in the King’s face, but the Addressers spat in his mouth. Yet
even Charles seemed too mild a monarch for subjects in this mood.

Popularity His popularity waned before that of his brother, whose health was

of James
with the
Party,
1681

now everywhere drunk with the loud “Huzzah,” the cry of the
Tory partisans. The “tantivy parsons” made it a test of loyalty
to rejoice in the prospect of a Catholic successor; they preached
with fury against Dissenters, but thought it indecent to speak
against the religion of the heir to the throne.!

These excesses on the part of the upper class were rendered
possible by a change in sentiment lower in the scale of society, where
men began to dread the close prospect of a civil war, and the old
unhappy round of rebellion ending in Major-Generals. Yet the
ministers of the Crown knew that the Tory temper among the
townspeople and middle class was not yet universal and violent, as
it became two years later after the Rye House Plot. Every means,
therefore, was taken to crush the Whig party before it could rally
from the panic of its flight from Oxford, and to goad its leaders

Airy, ii., p. 259. Burnet, ii., pp. 290, 302. Examen, p. 617

1681} THE REIGNS OF TERROR 419

to violence that now would certainly lead to their ruin. When Proscrip-

Parliament was not sitting, the ministers had complete executive ee
freedom ; and the full executive power was then a truly formidable in the
weapon m party warfare. The favourite minister after Sunder- oem
land’s secession was Hyde, whose very name was indicative of 1681

his exalted views of royal power. Great changes were made in

the magistracy and militia of every shire. The ee ustices of Peace

who had zealously hunted Catholics, were replaced by men who
would zealously hunt Dissenters, This process was assisted by
the seizure, among Shaftesbury’s other papers, of two lists of
local magnates prepared for his own use; one of “worthy men”;
the other of “men worthy,” in the opinion of the Whigs, to be
hanged. To turn “worthy men” off the bench, and to put “men
worthy” in their place was a task of which Charles could ap-
preciate the full humour,

With the militia and magistracy in its hands, the Tory party Persecu-
enforced the Clarendon Code with the utmost cruelty and rigours p20 Or
The gaols were again crowded with the bolder of the Non-con-
formists, and the Parish Churches with the more timorous. The
persecution was probably as fierce as any which the Catholics had
ever endured, and more fierce than that which the Anglican
laity had suffered under the Long Parliament. Such religious
persecution is the strongest provocation to rebellion that the subject
can undergo.

The Whig politicians, no less than their Nonconformist fol- Trials of
lowers, were put in fear for their own persons. ‘The first blood shed Auer
was that of College, an understrapper of the Green Ribbon Club ; and

he was found guilty of treason, amid yells of delight in the Sean os ea

house of Oxford, on the evidence of his own Geis the quondam hae Ds

witnesses of the Popish Plot. ‘The same men were ready to swear’
against the Whig chief himself, and the Tories had no scruple
whatever in hiring their service. But Shaftesbury could not

- legally be tried outside London; and there no jury would convict

him. The rejoicings by which the City celebrated his acquittal
occasioned the last Whig demonstration of this period. The
courtiers consoled themselves by reading Dryden’s Medal, the

successor to his Absalom and Achitophel.

Provoked by the result of Shaftesbury’s trial, the Royalists began

| their attack on the self-government of London. The election of

420 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS res.

Election two Tory sheriffs was carried against the majority by a mixture of |
rns fraud and violence.! As the sheriffs appointed the juries, and the
for Lon- juries could dispose of the life and liberty of every man obnoxious |
ae wae to the Court, the Whig leaders feared a general proscription and,
in an evil hour, determined to appeal to arms. |
The ta In the autumn months following the election of the Tory |
surrection sheriffs, two separate schemes of violence were formed by the |
Gas ea leading members of the Green Ribbon and their friends. Shaftes-
Plots, bury and a Council of Six, consisting of Monmouth, Essex, Russell,
16a Sidney, Hampden and Howard, discussed a general Insurrection ;
while their subordinates, with the help of two old Cromwellians,
Rumbold and Rumsey, planned an assault upon the persons of
Charles and James. The official heads of the Insurrection, with |
the possible exception of Shaftesbury, were not actively engaged in _
the Assassination Plot. But it is by no means certain that they —
were ignorant of a scheme, hatched in the Green Ribbon Club,
where many of them resorted, by their own agents, who lived with
them on terms of intimacy, and at a time when the larger scheme
of Insurrection was common talk among both sections of plotters.
The attack on the King’s coach and lifeguards, though it alienated
the sympathies of the bulk of the English middle class, was by no
means outside the moral latitude of the politicians of that age; it
was not so basely murderous as the plots formerly approved by
Clarendon and the royal brothers against the regicides ; and it was
the same, in all except time and place, as the plot which James II.
afterwards approved against the life of William III.2 Of Shaftes-
bury and the Council of Six, Russell and Essex are the only two
whose characters afford the least presumption that they would have
stood boldly out against such a design.

But whatever their relation may have been to the Assassination
Plot, the chiefs soon found that their own scheme of Insurrection,
if less criminal, was no less rash. The very conditions that goaded
them on to violence: their own growing unpopularity; their
adversaries’ control of the executive, and of the military force
throughout the three kingdoms; the absence of any legal machin-

1 Examen, pp. 597-617. Burnet, ii., pp. 335-37. Airy, p. 263.
2G. (C. & P.), ii., p. 453; iii, pp. 166, 167. In 1683 Archbishop Sancroft re-
ceived and forwarded to the Council of State a letter from a Tory spy, offering to
assassinate Sir W. Waller (Christie, ii., p. 454 and note). No doubt Sancroft dis-

approved, but the fact that such an offer was made at all to the Primate, shows
bow such matters were viewed in that age.

1682] THE REIGNS OF TERROR 421

ery to reassemble the hosts that had fled from Oxford, indicated
how different was their position from that of the armed Lords
and Commons of 1642. The Whigs had no authority and no
strength except when Parliament was sitting. The real analogy

to their present position was that of Sir John Eliot and his friends

in 1629. Even Monmouth, in his second Western tour (Sep.,
1682), perceived that, though the people of Cheshire shouted

for him, they were not ready to rise in arms. On the 30th of
September London itself passed into the hands of the Tories, in

the persons of the incoming Mayor and Sheriffs. That night
Shaftesbury left his house in Aldersgate Street, and hid in the
slums of the City that had once been his own. Yet even now he

fell foul of Monmouth and Russell when they refused to begin

the Insurrection at once. All was wrangling, intrigue and confu- Confused
sion among the conspirators. No one knew in what name war was ce urs<!s
to be raised. Many were still for Monmouth; yet Monmouth’s Whig
closest friend, Russell, had been in close communication with soe
William of Orange when he had visited England in the previous
summer, Essex and Sidney were for an aristocratic Republic, like

old Rome; but Rumbold and the veterans looked for a democratic
Commonwealth, like that over which they themselves had kept

the armed watch for Cromwell. But all sections were united in
suspicion of Shaftesbury, who, racked by pain and failing health,

was working with fevered energy on the flank of his ewn partisans,
neither reposing nor receiving confidence. Some said that he had
thrown over the cause of his protégé, and would declare for a
Republic; that he was pushing the Assassination in order to
divide his party for ever from monarchy and from Monmouth.
Thus the ranks of both the conspiracies were filled with suspicious,
intriguing men, of whom not a few were only waiting for the time

to betray their comrades. There was little here of the self-sacrifice

and mutual confidence that are needed for desperate undertakings.
Those who drew their inspiration from the models of the ancient
world, should have known that it was not by such a company that
Tarquin was expelled or Cesar murdered.

The customary papal pageant on Queen Elizabeth’s Accession Flight of
Day (17th Nov.), which according to one plan was to be the signal eae
for the Insurrection, was prohibited by Government; the waxen Nov.,
courtiers of the Pope were carried off under arrest, to the vast 1082

422 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1683

entertainment of the mob, which a year before would have torn the
interfering officers to pieces. Fearing for his safety, Shaftesbury
fled oversea. His departure relieved, but did not reunite, his
partisans. Both plots were postponed till the spring. Then both
were again resumed. The Insurrection indeed still hung fire, but
the day when Charles should return from Newmarket was selected for
The Rye the assassination. The place was Rumbold’s Rye House, command-
House ing the road. An accident alone prevented the King’s journey.
April, | But Ferguson the plotter afterwards declared that he and Rumbold
would in any case have prevented the blow from being struck ; accord-
ing to his own account, Ferguson had only remained in the counsels
of the plot at Monmouth’s special request, in order to prevent the
murder of Charles and James, on which Shaftesbury had set his
heart. It is impossible to say how far, if at all, the plotter spoke
the truth; but it is highly probable that the scheme would in any
case have been betrayed by one or other of the two score rascals
who would have been necessary for its accomplishment.
The Plots In June both plots were betrayed to Government. Instantly
Fe tess there was keen competition among both Lords and Commons for
’ “the honour of being employed as evidence for the Crown. Half a
dozen of the Assassination conspirators came forward and swore
away several of their comrades’ lives. ‘The popular fury even in
the towns was turned against the Whigs, and particularly against
the Green Ribbon Club, where the plots had been hatched. Its
two long balconies now looked down upon Temple Bar, forlorn and
empty, like the Hall of the Jacobins when the Terror went out of
fashion ; those of its members who were not under arrest, would
have had their neighbours forget that ever they had been seen near
its noisy doors.

Death of Meanwhile, the President of the Club, the founder and ruiner
Ro a aces the Whig party, had died a miserable refugee in Holland—the

1683 land whose very existence he had striven ten years before to sacrifice
to his own ambition, and whose chief he had but lately sought to
disinherit ; the land which he had always regarded as a mere
counter in English politics, not seeing—as Temple, Halifax and
even Danby had seen—that it was the natural and indispensable

_ .) Ferguson the Plotter (1887), passim. Ferguson’s own account will be found
in Appendix I. to that biography. See also First Whig, pp. 88, 89, 154-58, and
State Trials, sub loc. i

1683] THE REIGNS OF TERROR 423

_ ally of the religion and liberties of England. In Holland Shaftes-
bury died, “after having cast some very deep sighs”. The hatred
of the English Court was let loose in indecent outrages on their
dead enemy. In allusion to the painful disease against which he
had struggled for long years, an abscess which required to be drained
by a tap fixed in his body, the name given by the Tories to the
factious Earl was “The Polish Noble, Count Tapski”. After his
death, Dryden’s Albion and Albianus, produced for the delectation
of the royal brothers and their servile Court, was set on the stage
with a huge picture of

a man with a long, lean, pale face, with fiend’s wings, and snakes twisted

round his body, accompanied by several fanatical rebellious heads, who suck
poison from him, which runs out of a tap in his side.}

The other chiefs of the Whigs were not suffered to die in their gyecution
beds. Even in the high circle of the Council of Six, Government ofa eed
could find a traitor for its purpose. Lord Howard, dragged tremb- Sidhey.
ling and crying from his hiding-place behind a chimney, offered to eee ),
disclose all. Russell and Sidney were convicted and executed for *”
the Insurrection Plot, chiefly upon his evidence. While the miser-
able man was telling his story against Russell, the news came into
court that Essex had cut his throat in the Tower. The trials of
Russel! and Sidney were conducted before packed juries, and the
law perhaps was strained to obtain their conviction. Yet there is
little doubt that they had actually plotted the Insurrection. Sidney
delivered from the scaffold a speech breathing the contemptuous forti-
tude with which the boni of old Rome, men no less rapacious and
unscrupulous than himself, regarded the tyrant and the mob, when
in the hour of Imperial victory they were called upon to die.
Russell, with a gentle courtesy that disarmed even the revengeful
passions of that hour, refused to purchase the life that was so sweet
to him by a declaration that subjects may not resist their sovereign.

Soon people forgot his cruel pursuit of Lord Stafford’s life, and his
plots of Insurrection ; and remembered only how Lady Russell had
sat below him in court to take the notes for his defence, and how
he had chosen death rather than deny the principles of freedom.
Thus these two men, on whom all eyes were turned in the days of
the blackest ruin and shame that ever befel the cause of freedom

4 Christie, ii., p. 437. Wilkins’ Political Ballads, i., p. 250,

Local self-

govern-
ment

424 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1683

in England, showed to the world, in spite of the guilt and violence
with which they themselves had helped to associate that cause, that
liberty is a religion for which men who most enjoy life and love
and power, can cheerfully lay down all these, because without
liberty they are nothing.

Such is the legend that was rightly handed down to remote
generations of Whigs as the most instructive lesson of their great
defeat. The party had fallen, because its leaders had been ill-
advised, selfish and violent in the methods they chose; but not
because they lacked faith in its principles of Parliamentary govern-
ment and religious Toleration, or because those principles were
unsuited, like those of the regicides who had suffered twenty years
before, to the social conditions of the age and the temper of the
English people. And therefore the new party did not perish on the
scaffold with Sidney and Russell.

It now remained to be seen what the Tories and the Monarchy
would make of England. Their first step was to destroy local

abolished, self-government. The charters of many of the principal cities were

1683-84

Free
speech

up-
pressed

challenged and declared forfeit on frivolous grounds by Chief Justice
Jeffreys; while numbers of other towns, great and small, hastened
to prevent the confiscation by the voluntary surrender of their
privileges. ‘lhe King restored the charters in new forms, which
put the municipalities into the hands of his own nominees. No
such thing had ever happened before in England. While the
Hapsburg and the Valois monarchs had been setting their own
Commissioners to rule in the free cities of Spain and France, the
Tudors had continued to respect the medieval privileges of our
towns. It was no part even of Strafford’s policy of “thorough,”
that the power of the sovereign should be extended to municipal
affairs, or to the nomination of members of Parliament. But now
the towns would be governed, and the borough members chosen,
by the King’s party alone. Local government and Parliamentary
independence, which had been secured afresh at the Restoration,
were suddenly brought to an end, and the last strongholds of inde-
pendent political opinion were in the King’s hands.

No protest was made while the most ancient liberties of Eng-
land were surrendered. The Tories approved ; and no Whig could
raise his voice in speech or writing without imminent danger of

(1684) THE REIGNS OF TERROR 425

being brought up for sedition or libel, and ruined by packed juries
and new Judges who had been put in the place of predecessors not
sufficiently servile. The censorship could not be re-established till
1685, when Parliament met again, but meanwhile there was no more
freedom of the press than in the days of Laud. Whig pamphlets
only appeared by stealth, and words uttered in private and in public
were more guarded than in the days of the Star Chamber.

The second Stuart despotism had come into being. It was Nature
based, as Charles had designed in 1670, on a standing army and on Beate
the financial help of France. Yet he had realised only half the f
ideas of the Dover Treaty. For the supreme power which he
enjoyed was connected, not with Roman Catholicism and the pur-
chase of Nonconformist support, but with Anglicanism and ferocious
persecution of Dissent. The King had bought the Tories at a
price. If Charles’s successor would continue to pay that price, to
extirpate the Nonconformists and depress the Catholics, the
despotism wielded in the interest of the squires might be confirmed
by time and become the established constitution of the realm.

But if an attempt were made to convert it into a Catholic despotism,
there would be hope for England yet.

Charles had earned his rest. For the last two years of his life Last years

he again sauntered free from care; he was more than ever tired of v Nees

business, and glad to leave the administration to his solemn brother 1685
and his wrangling ministers. James, restored to office in defiance
of the Test Act, had the strongest party among the courtiers,
headed by Hyde, now Earl of Rochester; they feared that if a
Parliament, however loyal, were summoned, it would lead to a war
with France, and so open the floodgates of Protestant feeling.
They therefore made common cause with the French Ambassador,
Barillon, and with Madam Carwell; that lady had once more come
‘back with her attendant Sunderland to the Tory camp. ‘This com-
bination persuaded Charles to violate the Act of 1641, by leaving
Parliament in abeyance for more than three years. Against them
was Halifax, as hostile as ever to France; he urged that no harm
could possibly come of a Parliament chosen after the remodelling
of the corporations, and that a vote of supply would render Govern-
ment independent of Louis, and able to check his rapid advance in
Luxemburg and on the Rhine. But the French Ambassador and

4.26 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1685 |

the French mistress kept the King of England true to his foreign -
allegiance.

Death of In February, 1685, Charles was again taken ill. His splendid |

i om constitution, which for forty years he had been constantly ruining |

Feb., 1685 by excess and repairing by athletics, at last gave way. At his
death-bed, Rome no longer denied him the rites which he had |
never dared to earn before by publicly declaring his faith. He —
died, after receiving the sacrament from the old priest who had |
saved him in the flight from Worcester. <A fitting epitaph over
this King can only be spoken by the one among his subjects who |
matched him in wit. Halifax saved his throne, but in return had
the humour to leave to posterity a Character of Charles II. Its
last words are these, “Let his Royal ashes then lie soft upon him, |
and cover him from harsh and unkind censures; which though —
they should not be unjust, can never clear themselves from being |
indecent ”.

1685) JAMES Ii 427

CHAPTER XIII
JAMES IL., 1685-88

What struggling confusion, as the issue slowly draws on ; and the doubt-
ful hour, with pain and blind struggle, brings forth its certainty, never to be
abolished !—French Revolution, Can.y.x.

HE powers wielded by the Tudor Kings, who changed religion position
in England, were in some important respects less than those °f James
to which James II. succeeded. ‘They had chosen the rural magis- pcedesita
trates ; he also chose the town corporations. They had appointed
their own ministers; his friends selected the House of Commons.
They had named the officers of the militia ; he had besides a regular
army of his own. And this despotic organism was animated, if not
by the love of the whole people, at least by the partisan devotion
of the omnipotent Tories. Whigs and Dissenters were every-
where trying to efface themselves from the notice of the laws, the
magistrates and the juries—now become the mere instruments of
party vengeance.

If Elizabeth, or even Charles I., had come into such a
heritage, despotism might perhaps have been established upon a
permanent footing. But James owed his extraordinary position to
a personal misunderstanding. As Duke of York he had wor-
shipped God in private, and had said little in public about his
religion; it was not yet known that the Jesuits had held their
congregation under his roof. Churchmen therefore believed that
he would always treat his creed as a private matter. It was on
this supposition that they had placed a Popish Prince on the
throne, and armed him with greater powers than had been enjoyed
by his Protestant predecessors. But the illusion was not confined
to one side. James also had been deceived as to the character of
the Church which had chosen him for her protector. For five years

4.28 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1686

her clergy had directed all their controversial powers against the |

Nonconformists, regarding it as disloyal to decry the faith of

the heir to the throne: how much more, then, would they favour |

Catholicism when it was the religion of the King himself. So at
least James must have argued. He supposed that High Churchmen

were half Catholics, who would allow their Church to be assimilated |
to Rome by a process of evolution like that contemplated by the |
Papal emissaries in the days of Charles I., and by Charles II. himself |

at the Treaty of Dover. Here James was wrong. The High
Churchmen who followed Sancroft had even less call than the High
Churchmen who followed Laud, to ally themselves with the old
religion. For whereas the Arminians of 1630 had depended, for
power to keep down the Puritans, on the King and the Catholic
squires, the Tantivy parsons could now depend for that purpose

on the Parliament and the Protestant squires. The devoted Angli- _

can now felt a broader basis than the throne underpropping his
creed.

Cruel One bad passion still united Church and King. The accession

religious of James was the signal for yet more cruel treatment of Protestant

Fon Nonconformists. In England they were imprisoned, fined and
ruined ; in Scotland men were shot and women drowned. In this
persecution James was following the desire of his heart; it was
only when the breach with Episcopacy drove him to dissemble,
that he took into his mouth Penn’s noble doctrine of universal
Toleration. Nothing but the quarrel of Bishops and King saved
the Nonconformists from extirpation.

Punish- The fate of one eminent champion of the Nonconformists is

bes regarded with mingled feelings. ‘Titus Oates, brought to trial
May, 1685 for perjury, could not legally be condemned to death for an
offence of that nature. But he was sentenced to be flogged twice
through the streets of London, in a manner which the Judges
probably intended to be fatal. The grotesque man survived his
horrible and famous punishment, and lived to enjoy in obscurity
a small pension, with which the Whigs at the Revolution thought
necessary, in accordance with the invariable rule of their party
managers,’ to reward one who had been faithful to them. If each

rah The Tories are not noted to stick so fast to their friends as the others” (the
Whigs), (1710, Wentworth, p. 156). The solidarity of the Whig party was one of
its attractions to neophytes.

16857 JAMES II 429

sin deserves its punishment, and if it is the task of justice to
turn earth into a well-regulated hell, Oates deserved more than his
3,000 stripes. But his scarcely legal sentence became the prece-
dent for similar cruel floggings for political offences of a very
different character from his, until the bad custom ended with the
bad reign.

During his brother’s last years, James had prevented the sum- A packed
mons of Parliament. But he had now a double use for the Tory ote
nominees misrepresenting the constituencies of England, whom he May, 1685
called together in May, 1685. He wished them to ce on him a
large revenue for life; and to relieve the Catholics from the Penal
Laws. They gratified his wishes in the first respect ; but before he
had time to come to grips with them on the Catholic question,
Monmouth landed in the West.

No stroke of chance could have rendered successful the double Expedi-
attack of the Whig exiles on the throne of James. Argyle’s ex- ce
pedition in the Highlands was little more than the hunt, capture (May-
bud execution of a chief who knew’ how to'die, -Monniouth’s levy (une) and
of the South-West acquired for a few weeks the character of a mouth
regular campaign. Landing at Lyme Regis with a few followers jin" 1685
(11th June), he gathered round him the peasants of Dorset and
Somerset as he advanced across country to the west coast. At
Taunton, where the Puritan inhabitants were rendered desperate
by religious persecution, he was proclaimed King. At Bridgewater
he fixed his headquarters, whither, after a futile advance on Bristol,
he retreated again. He had now little hope. The royal forces were
gathering fast, nominally under command of Lord Feversham, but
really under the care of John Churchill, a rising courtier, who had
served his military apprenticeship under Turenne. ‘They were en-
camped a few miles from Bridgewater, on the flat wastes of
Sedgemoor reclaimed from the neighbouring ocean. There on the
5th of July the Royalists were carousing in joyful expectation of
an easy rebel hunt. Yet Monmouth’s rustic army very nearly per-
formed that most difficult of military operations, a night surprise.

Even when the alarm had been given and they were exposed to
the fire of the regulars over a ditch which they could not cross, Battle of
they stood their ground in the midnight battle till their powder was moe bth
spent, with the veteran constancy of religious zeal. By the early July, 1685
glint of summer dawn, their chief, who had fled betimes on to

Social
signifi-

cance of <
the Rising any such levée en masse of the lower orders of a country-side took |

of the mass of the people only in the towns. ‘Taunton was no less |

430 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1685 |

the hills that border Sedgemoor, saw his too loyal subjects break at |
last in rout across the distant plain.’

This rising of the peasantry of Somerset is a remarkable and |
puzzling phenomenon in social history. We have no evidence that |

place in the period of the great Civil War, not even in East Anglia, |
where Cromwell enlisted his famous troops of horse.” For in those |
earlier days an intelligent and devoted Puritanism had taken hold |

devoted to the “good old cause” when Blake defended her against
the Cavaliers, than when forty years on she welcomed Monmouth ;
but the readiness of the rural population to turn out and die for
their faith was a new thing in Somerset, and in England.

For these peasant followers of Monmouth, the dark Puritan
faith glowed in all the colours of personal romance; they loved
the young man more than they loved their lives. Of Monmouth,
as of Napoleon, tales were told at nightfall beneath the thatch,
and his return was still expected long after he was dead. As
the march of the man from Elba through the valleys of Dauphiné,
so the march of King Monmouth through the lanes of Somerset
is to the historian full of social as well as political significance. The
record of this brief campaign is as the lifting of a curtain; behind
it we can see for a moment into the old peasant life, since passed
away into the streets and factories, suffering city change. In that
one glance we see, not rustic torpor, but faith, idealism, vigour,
love of liberty and scorn of death. Were the yeomen and farm
servants in other parts of England like these men of Somerset, or
were they everywhere else of a lower type? ‘The curtain falls;
and knowledge is hidden for ever.

One thing is certain, that only in an age when the class of
freehold yeomen formed a large proportion of the population, and
employed a part at least of the hired labour, could any district
have thus risenyin arms against the will of the squires. The land
of England was not then owned by the few.

The revenge taken by James upon his subjects went far beyond

1The account of the campaign by Macaulay should be read with that by Lord

Wolseley (Life of Marlborough, chaps. xxxvii.-ix), whose remarks on the military
aspects of the battle have authority.

? Possibly the rising of the Cornishmen for Charles I, partook of this character :
but there the movement was organised by the gentry, :

1685) JAMES II 431

expectation and precedent. It was perhaps natural that 800 rebels The
should be sent to forced labour in the Barbadoes. The Crom- heed
wellians in 1648, and the House of Hanover in 1715, committed Sep., 1685
the like cruelty. Transportation was the fate which the common
rebel might customarily expect if taken in arms. But death had
for fifty years past been regarded as the punishment proper for the
leaders alone, when James II. reverted to the more barbarous
methods of Elizabeth and the medizval kings. Not content with
the long tale of military executions by Kirke and Feversham in the
days immediately following the battle, he allowed over 300 of the
peasants to be hanged by Jeffreys in the Bloody Assize. He also
allowed one woman, Alice Lisle, to be beheaded for exercising
common charity to fugitives who had implored food and shelter ;
and another, Elizabeth Gaunt, to be burned alive for saving one of
the conspirators of the Rye House Plot. In the spirit of the hour,
Cornish, one of the most influential and honourable of the Whig
_merchants of London so bitterly hated by the Court, was singled out
and murdered on a false charge of treason. These horrors appealed
_the more forcibly to the imagination of all, because the highways
_and public places in town and country were elaborately desecrated
_ with the corpses and hewn quarters of the well-loved dead ; because
_ Jeffreys on the bench of justice shouted, swore and iaighed over
| his victims; and because the sufferers were religious men who went
to the gallows and butchery glorifying God. The analogy of the
| Marian persecution was the first thing to strike a generation
brought up on Foxe’s Book of Martyrs. The horror excited among
the Tories themselves is the best comment on the conduct of
| Jeffreys and his master. The Bloody Assize did not shake James’s
throne, but it lent to the opposition provoked by his subsequent
action the character and the enthusiasm of outraged humanity in
revoit. When Jeffreys, in his last dreadful days on earth, was
sheltered by the walls of the Tower from a nation of men seeking
to kill him with their own hands, he was hiding not fyom the Whig
‘mob but from the human race.

One rebel, at least, richly deserved his fate. Monmouth, after Execution
begging his life on his knees and with abject tears, before the King % an
himself, suffered death at the hands of Jack Ketch, the executioner ely, 1685
who flourished in this heyday of his profession, of which he became
the eponymous hero,

432 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1685 |

Conca: The Western Rebellion produced great and immediate effects on |
phe the course of English history. 'The removal of Monmouth reconciled |
Western the House of Orange to the Whigs, for their Exclusion scheme |
Rebellion could no longer be carried out in favour of the bastard against the |
legitimate claims of William and Mary; the way was cleared for |
the acceptance by all English Protestants of William as their only |
champion. And the demand for a champion was soon created, |
as a direct consequence of Sedgemoor. For the subjection of the |
rebel West by the regular army made James believe that he could |
Romanise England in a shorter time, and by more arbitrary |
methods, than those which he seems to have contemplated in the |
first months of his reign. }
Jamesand ‘The root of all his errors in method was the complete reliance |
his army placed by him on his soldiers. Monmouth’s rebellion enabled him |
to become a military despot. The regulars in England were raised
from 6,000 to nearly 30,000. A great camp of 13,000 was formed _
on Hounslow Heath to overawe the capital. Such a host of |
red-coats had not been seen together since Charles, on the day of |
his Restoration, had timidly reviewed the last of the old and
terrible army. But these were a different sort of soldiers. The
lowest of the people, they were subjected to what we should now
regard as the laxest discipline. In the neighbourhood of Sedge-
moor, some regiments, encouraged by commanders who were not all —
as humane as Churchill, had shown fierce cruelty. In the neigh-
bourhood of London, robberies and murders were plentifully laid
at their door. Reports were readily believed against them, for
civilians of all parties hated the camp at Hounslow, rightly re-
garding it as a menace to their liberties and their religion. But it
escaped the notice of James, that though the soldiers were ready to
fight against the liberties, they were not ready to fight against the
religion of England. They were not indeed religious men. But
hatred of Popery had sunk so deep into the nation, that the classes
most removed from the influence of religion were, in a negative sense,
fervent Protestants. A wooden chapel was set up within the lines,
and horse, foot and dragoons were encouraged to attend the Mass.
Priests went to and fro among the tents, But the Protestant
soldiers refused to be converted. Indeed, now that they were
collected in great camps, they were better able to see that, in spite
of alarming rumours, the King had not yet had time to introduce

1685] JAMES Iii 433

enough of his own religion to put the Protestant soldiers in a
minority; they were therefore the more bold to encourage each
other in the faith.!. The faith of the British army was no longer
that which Milton held, but that which inspired Kirke. It con-
sisted of a profound belief that papists deserved to be hanged
scarcely less than rebels.

But meanwhile in Ireland, James was forming a really Catholic
army, under the orders of his Popish Lord-Lieutenant, Talbot,

Karl of Tyrconnel. On these soldiers, regarded by his other
subjects as foreigners and serfs, he was ready to depend, in the last
resort, for the coercion of the English Protestants.

Thus magnificently but perilously armed, James proceeded to Tory
Catholicise England. In October, 1685, Halifax was dismissed from se
the Government for opposing the breach of the Test Act. And by Jacob-
the High Tories scon found their position in office as precarious as tee.
that of the Trimmer. A tribe of Jacobite statesmen, some devout 1685-87
Catholics like Father Petre, some self-seeking scoundrels like Jeffreys
and Sunderland, saw that the time had come to overthrow their
Tory colleagues and reign supreme. The hunt had first begun
when, at the opening of Parliament, the highest Court in the king-
dom had resounded with scorn and outrage poured by Chief Justice
Jeffreys on Francis North, Lord Guilford, the Tory Keeper of the
Great Seal, under colour of reversing some of his Chancery decrees.
Guilford was harried to his grave, and Jeffreys, returning from the
Bloody Assize, was made Lord Chancellor in his place. A like
intrigue soon led to a like change in the Palace and at the Council-
board, where Sunderland pursued Rochester with animosity less
noisy but scarcely less venomous. The advice of the Tory
minister was seldom taken after the autumn of 1685, and in
January, 1687, Rochester was at length driven from office as a direct
consequence of his refusal to change his religion, Roman
Catholicism, which was a bar to service under the Crown by law,
was rapidly becoming a condition of it in practice. Sunderland,
though he did not announce his conversion till the summer of 1688,
early showed that he had an open mind on the great controversy ;
he, therefore, with Jeffreys, the Jesuit Petre and some Catholic
Lords, remained as the counsellors who cheered James on to his
ruin.

1 Burnet, iii, pp. 163, 164, 286. Wolseley, chap. xli. Macaulay, chap. vi.

28

James
quarrels
with and
prorogues
Parlia-
ment,
Nov.,
1685

Court of
High
Com-
mission,

4BA ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS * [1686

In the winter of 1685 a second session was held of the Parliament
which Monmouth had interrupted. The House of Commons was
little better than a nominated Assembly, but the members had been
selected on the assumption that a high Tory would serve the King’s
ends. In the second session this had ceased to be the case. A
great standing army, largely officered by Catholics, was now in
existence, and the Houses, in real alarm, wished the army reduced
in accordance with custom, and the Catholic officers dismissed in
accordance with law. The King, on the other hand, wished the
officers’ position to be legalised by the repeal of the Test Act. In
this Lords and Commons refused to be assistant. James, therefore,
prorogued Parliament, and proceeded on his three years’ course, in
defiance of those laws which he had in vain attempted to have
changed.

Now that the Catholic propaganda was publicly revived, and
that heavy rewards were offered for apostasy, the Church of Eng-
land was forced to look once more to her defences on the side which

July, 1686 she had so long left exposed. But James ordered her controversial-

Magis-
tracy and
army put
into
Catholic
hands,
1686-87

ists to be silent. One of them, named Sharpe, continued to preach
to his parishioners on the errors of Rome. The King called on his
Bishop, Compton of London, to suspend him. Compton neglected
to obey. James formed a Court of High Commission, of which
Sunderland and Jeffreys were the leading spirits. This tribunal
suspended the bishop from his functions. The High Commission
was illegal, for the law which had abolished its predecessor had
forbidden the creation of any similar authority. Meanwhile,
vacant Bishoprics were either left empty, or filled by men who were
Roman Catholics in feeling; one of these, Parker, the new Bishop
of Oxford, was expected, as the King wrote, to “bring round his
clergy”. ‘Thus, in the revolutions of time, a Catholic King made
use of the ecclesiastical powers which the Tudors had appropriated
from the papal armoury, in order to carry back to the papal al-
legiance the Anglican Church which had rashly chosen him as her
defender.

But the chief efforts of the King were directed to filling up the
civil and military offices with Catholics. Since the Test Act could
not be repealed, he declared that his prerogative enabled him to
dispense with its provisions ; he dismissed the Judges who refused
their assent to this doctrine, and so obtained the famous decision

1687] JAMES Ii 435

in the case of Hales (June, 1686) in favour of the dispensing power.
Roman Catholics were then freely placed upon the bench of magis-
trates ; the whole government of the country was passing into their
hands. A hundred years earlier such a policy might well have
succeeded, but now it was difficult to find men for the posts. The
Catholic gentry, who by family tradition and personal experience
well knew their countrymen, were many of them unwilling to be-
come instruments for the folly of the Jesuits. A Catholic middle-
class hardly existed. ‘The King, therefore, had to seek alliance with
some section of his Protestant subjects, in order to fill up the cor-
porations, and to pack a new Parliament, as hostile to the Church
interest as the last Parliament had been devoted.

Never in English politics was there a volte-face so immediate and James
so complete as when James sought the alliance of Dissent. But he imetsa?
could not wade back through all the blood he had shed. The Dissent,
bulk of the Nonconformists refused the hand of their bitterest °°”
persecutor, the more readily as the Church, awakened by peril to
remorse, was beginning to offer them friendship and Toleration.

Suddenly ali parties were talking Toleration. The eccentric
doctrine of the Whig statesmen and philosophers, that all Protest-
ants should be allowed the public exercise of their religion, was
proclaimed in rivalry by both Tories and Jacobites. The King
offered the Dissenters instant release by an Act of royal abso-
lutism ; the Church offered them the distant prospect of legal and
Parliamentary Toleration.

The full fury of the tyrant now fell on the Anglican Church. The
As her leaders had refused to lend her influence on behalf of his Fe ie
Catholic propaganda, he determined instead to seize her property dalen,
for that purpose. In those days the Universities belonged to the a7
Establishment. The King illegally converted two Oxford Colleges
into Popish seminaries, turning the Fellows of Magdalen adrift on
the world to make room for Catholic successors. The attack on
freehold property roused against the King all those conservative

1 How much the Tories really hated the idea of Toleration, is shown by some
of their writers, who taunt the Whigs with the word even as late as the trial of the
Seven Bishops.

“ From freedom of conscience, and Whig Toleration,
For ever, good Heaven, deliver us!”
sings an anti-Jacobite Tory poet, summer 1088 (Wilkins’ Political Ballads, i,
p. 256).

William
Penn

The two
Declara-
tions of
Indulg-
ence, Apr.,
1687, and
Apr., 1688

436 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1687 |

instincts which Burke long afterwards aroused against the French |
Revolution. The parson had now real reason to fear that his tithes |
and his vicarage, and the squire that his abbey lands, would be
taken from him without compensation and without law. The
priests and monks were already gathering round the spoil, and
were singled out to general observation by their fantastic costumes,
which in that generation were known to the English only from
prints of foreign countries and of Smithfield fires.

James had at his side no good counsellor, and only one good
man. William Penn would have been ungrateful if he had not
been a Jacobite. The House of Stuart had saved the Quakers
from complete destruction at the hands of the Anglicans in England,
and of the Puritans in America. Nevertheless, the Friends had,
since the Restoration, endured terrible sufferings, with a cheerful
indifference that did far more than Rye House Plots and Monmouth
rebellions to render the persecuting laws odious, and to prepare the
era of Toleration. As these sufferings had been inflicted by the
Cavalier Parliament and by the Episcopalian party, Penn felt no
affection for Parliament or Established Church. But he hoped to
persuade the King to extend Toleration to the Quakers and to all
other men.!_ Largely at Penn’s instigation, though certainly not in
Penn’s spirit, James issued the two Declarations of Indulgence.

These Declarations, by an Act of royal authority which Charles
II. had exercised in 1672 and had been forced to abandon as illegal,
gave freedom of worship to Dissenters and Catholics, and suspended
all laws by which they were debarred from civil and military
office. James’s first Declaration was in April, 1687. The prisons

1 Penn was working, consciously and enthusiastically, for universal freedom of
religion, to which all other parties were being pushed by the mere force of events
and the needs of the hour. He approached Toleration by a different road, both of
philosophic theory and of political action. Thus when he is accused, most justly,
of indifference to the English Constitution as usually defined, it must be remembered
that to him the fundamental laws of England meant the property and freedom ot
the individual, which had been unconstitutionally violated by Penal Laws and
Clarendon Codes. He thought it was ultra vires for Church or Parliament to
coerce the conscience of man, ‘ Nothing,” he wrote, ‘is more unreasonable than to
sacrifice the Liberty and Property of any man (being his Natural and Civil rights)
for religion. . . . Religion under any modification is no part of old English Govern-
ment” (England's Present Interest Considered), This is true English talk, as much
as the Bill of Rights itself.

The same a priori view of the right to Toleration in religion is found in Burnet,

/ who says (v., pp. 108, 109; vi., p. 189): ‘“ I have long looked on liberty of conscience

as one of the rights of human nature, antecedent to society”. In this view of
Toleration, the much-abused Whig Churchman was as far ahead of his contempor-
aries as the equally hated Tory Quaker.

1688] JAMES Il 437

were opened to thousands of the best men in England, and every-

where public worship was freely resumed by congregations who

have never since been forced to close their doors. Penn had not
become a courtier for nothing ; the year 1687 dates the beginning

of religious freedom in England. The Nonconformists could not

but be grateful, and many of them wavered in their allegiance to

the national cause. But twelve months later the Second Declara-

tion of Indulgence brought the struggle of King and nation toa

crisis. The first gratitude of the Dissenters for release from prison

had had time to cool, and the question had become one rather of

Tests for office than of Toleration for worship. The Second Declar-

ation, while repeating the provisions of the First, differed from it

in boasting of the appointment of Catholics to civil and military
command ; and in that light the Second Declaration was read by

all. James ordered the clergy to publish it from their pulpits.
Unless the whole profession stood together in their refusal, in-
dividual delinquents would be ejected by the High Commission,

as the Fellows of Magdalen had been ejected. Fortunately, the
whole Church, and indeed the whole nation, was now united.
Encouraged by Nonconformist sympathy, seven Bishops under-

took to petition James against the Declaration ; by so doing they
concentrated on themselves the vengeance of the King, which could

crush Fellows and parsons, and even individual Bishops, but not
perhaps seven of them headed by the Primate. He instituted
proceedings against them for seditious libel. If the King had

not been stirred almost to madness, he would have stopped the
prosecution of the petitioners, when he heard that the whole
population of London, the headquarters of Whiggery and Dissent, Birth of a
had given the fathers of the Church on their way to the Tower eons
the same fierce ovation as their grandfathers had given to Prynne and trial
in+the pillory. But at last, almost beyond hope, a son had been Bisheos
born to him by his second wife Mary of Modena. Thinking that (2gth-3oth
heaven was working for his cause, he ordered the prosecution to aoe)
proceed. So the Seven Bishops were tried and acquitted, and the

army cheered on Hounslow Heath.

The birth, which had encouraged James to proceed, showed the witiam,
English that they must act. Passive resistance had been the England,
hope of many, so long as the next heirs to the throne were Mary Europe
and Anne, the Protestant daughters of James by Anne Hyde. But

Revoca-

tion of the
Edict of

Nantes,
1685

438 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1685

with the birth of a male heir, son of the Italian princess, the
prospect opened out of a long succession of Jesuit-loving and foreign-
hearted Kings. Mary, whose peaceful succession to her father was
now impossible, had for husband William of Orange, Stadtholder of
Holland, armed champion of the Protestants of Europe, and leader
of the papal enemies to the French and Jesuit power. ‘Thus
the struggle for the English throne became the pivot of European
politics, at one of those rare crises which from time to time decide
the trend of civilisation.

The English were ignorant of the details of foreign affairs,
but they knew that an attempt to extinguish the Protestant
communities of Western Europe was being made with every pros-
pect of success. They could not be persuaded that James and
his Jesuits were overthrowing the English Constitution merely
in order to establish religious Toleration, when they saw what
Louis and his Jesuits were doing in France. Ominously, in the
year of the Bloody Assize, many thousand Huguenots took re-
fuge on our shores, and during the three years of James’s reign,
stories of sickening cruelty done abroad were told by the suf-
ferers themselves to hundreds of thousands of English men and
women. ‘The view of the Catholic character, which the exposure
of Oates had shaken, was reconfirmed by the indisputable pre-
sence in our land of a population driven forth from its own, by
one of the most barbarous and unprovoked persecutions in all
time.

Under Louis XIV. the Huguenots were the most industrious
part of the French nation, corresponding socially to the Puritan
Nonconformists in England; but they were less formidable, and no
longer took part in political life. As harmless and retiring as the
English Catholic squires, they were more fortunate in that they had
no intriguers at Court to embroil the good name of their religion
with their fellow-countrymen. There was no political cause for the
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, such as there was for the
Clarendon Code and for the Popish Terror. On this innocent
population a whole army, as cruel as the regiments of Claver-
house and Kirke, was let loose, with orders to convert the
recalcitrant. Robbery, torture and the insult of women were the
portion of households distinguished among the surrounding Catho-
lics for morality, industry and education. The Bishops incited and

1885] ' ‘JAMES I 489

often accompanied the soldiers;! there was no escape, save by
conversion, from unbearable bodily anguish. The neophytes were
taken by their executioners from the torture to the communion.
Finally, the Edict of Nantes was revoked, at the instigation of the
French clergy and Jesuits, by the ungrateful grandson of Henry
of Navarre. By anexcess of cruelty the Protestants were forbidden
to emigrate ; the roads and ports were watched against the families
flying by night. They must stop and worship idols, while their
children were torn from them and educated by priests and nuns.
The bulk of the Protestant population disappeared for ever out
of France; in the course of time 400,000 effected their escape,
settling in large numbers in England, Brandenburg and Holland,
and inciting those powerful States to the crusade of self-defence
against the civilising influences of the Grand Monarch. The fate
of those who failed or neglected to escape was terrible. The
hearts of many women were broken in unrecorded martyrdom, in
nunneries where they lay entombed for life. The men who were
sent to die of hardship among common criminals in the galleys had
perhaps the easiest lot. Thousands of men and women, who
refused to abjure their faith, were crowded into damp and loathsome
prisons and pestiferous “hospitals,” where, assailed with stripes,
ill-usage and insult, and exposed to the company of diseased and
criminal wretches, they suffered things as horrible as depraved
ingenuity could invent. ‘“’Touched with so many marvels,” cried
Bossuet in a celestial rapture, “let our hearts go out to the piety
of Louis. Let us raise praises to heaven and say, .. . ‘ Heresy is
nomore. God alone could have done so marvellous athing. King
of heaven, preserve the King of the earth, it is the prayer of the
churches; it is the prayer of the Bishops.’”? So spoke the clergy
of France by the mouth of one who is held up as a model of Catho-
lic virtue, humanity and moderation. Is it strange that, in spite
of the innocent life of the ordinary English Catholic, our ancestors
nurtured prejudice against the Catholic faith, and determined to
exclude its professors from office ?

1B tudes sur la Révocation, Puaux et Sabatier, p. 81 and notes.

2Bossuet, Oraison funébres (ed, 1874), p. 219, (Michelle Tellier). Hist. Univ.,
Lavisse et Rambaud, vi., pp. 281-302. Hzst. de la Reformation Fr., F. Puaux, livre
xxxviii., caps. i-vili, Félice, Hist. des Prot. de France, livres iii., iv. Puaux et
Sabatier, Etudes sur la Révocation (1886), proves up to the hilt the responsibility of the
French clergy and Jesuits. Z

440 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1688

Danger of | Such was French religion, now threatening to overrun in arms

vias the shores of the Lakes of Geneva and Neuchatel, the Rhineland

1685-88 and the cities of Holland. James would hold England in leash

while the Protestants of these lands succumbed to the armies of ©

the great persecutor. But it was the predestined task of William,

and of Marlborough after him, to free England and lead her into

the war, to show that the monster power of Louis had feet of

clay, and to destroy the prestige of all that order of society and
government.

William In consequence of the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, the

eee European struggle from 1688 to 1713 was as much a war of religion

Catholic as the last part of the Thirty Years’ War. The populations

aes fthreatened by French conquest, England, Holland, the Rhenish

Protestants and the Huguenot refugees, were, like the soldiers of

Gustavus, fighting for their religion. But just as Gustavus had,

at the critical moment of the struggle against the persecuting

power of Spain and Austria (1630), been assisted by Catholic

France, and by the Pope, so now at the critical moment of the

struggle with the persecuting power of France, William was

assisted by the Pope and by Catholic Austria and Spain. In the

year 1688 the Austrian armies were already marching to defend

German interests on the upper Rhine; the Spaniards were still more

closely allied to William, though they were not yet actually at war

with France ; and the Pope’s secretary of State was in the secret of

the conspiracy that launched the Protestant Armada against our

shores. Innocent XI. himself urged all faithful Catholics to aid

the heretics and the Holy See against their common enemies, the

French Jesuits and the Gallican Church. For the temporal, and

to some extent the spiritual, authority of the Bishop of Rome has

always depended on the balance of power in Europe and in Italy.)

Meanwhile, the Protestant State of Brandenburg-Prussia, lately

established by its Great Elector as one of the powers of Europe,

joined Holland in defence of common religious interests on the

lower Rhine. Thus a league against France of both religions was

forming fast ; but in order to succeed, the allies must have England

as paymaster and protagonist. And to attain that end it was their

1 Ranke, Hist. Eng., iv., pp. 373-84; V., pp. 4-9, and Popes (ed. 1847), ii., pp. 276,
277° e ‘ é v Pi

1687] JAMES II 44]

common interest to effect the necessary revolution within the
English state.

For some time after the execution of Monmouth, William’s william’s
attitude on our domestic questions remained uncertain. As Mary ia
had not then ceased to be heir to the throne, her father, James, Duint
playing on her husband’s well-known love of Toleration, tried to 24 Penn
persuade the pair to endorse his policy and to pursue it when he
was gone. If William had fallen into the well-laid trap he would
have been lost. But he seldom made mistakes from want of accurate
information about the internal affairs of foreign countries. He was
besieged with contradictory advice on English politics by two equally
zealous champions of Toleration—Penn, generally regarded as com-
missioned by James ; and Burnet, commissioned by himself. Though
Burnet was forward and loquacious, and William as reserved as his
famous ancestor, they had much in common; the exiled Broad
Church divine was an Anglican in the same spirit in which William
was a Calvinist: both were primarily Toleration men and Protes-
tants. The Prince, Juckily for his future, came to the conclusion
that Burnet knew more than Penn about the real state of England.!

He publicly replied to his father-in-law, that he hoped to see

the Penal Laws reduced, and freedom of conscience secured for William
Catholics, as well as freedom of public worship for Protestant Dis- Leneane
senters ; but that he would not support the abrogation of those tion and
Tests which excluded members of the Church of Rome from office. See
This famous manifesto against persecution and in favour of Tests

was translated into several Janguages, and was widely circulated in
England. It prepared the way for the great combinations of 1688.

The Pope and the anti-Jesuit section of the Church all over Europe,

and the peaceable English Catholics, were satisfied with an offer

which would save them from reprisals for the Jesuit policy. The
Dissenters learnt that they would secure Toleration. The Church

was assured that the dykes which penned out the Roman flood
would again be repaired. Thenceforth, William’s agents were

in active concert with Whigs, Tories and Trimmers. Before the

news of the Second Declaration of Indulgence had reached Holland,

1 Ranke, iv., pp. 389-94. On the value of Burnet’s history, see the admirable
critique of Ranke, vol. vi., where also the value of the various portions of Clarke’s
Life of Fames II.isestimated, See p. 436 above, note, for the views of Burnet and
Penn on Toleration.

442 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1688

he had agreed to the principle of an armed expedition to England
(April, 1688). The birth of the Prince of Wales and the trial
of the Seven Bishops induced the conspirators to act at once. On
the day the Bishops were acquitted, the written invitation demanded
Theinvita- by William was signed by Shrewsbury, Devonshire, Danby, Lumley,
10 z, Russell, Sidney and Compton, Bishop of London. These men were
igned, Gene ° qe A one ° i. .
3oth June, risking their lives in legitimate rebellion against a King whose
nese measures they had openly opposed. But the great conspiracy was
extended among scores of courtiers and army officers, who still
crowded into the Palace to offer expressions of service and devotion
to the man whom they had marked for doom. At the head of
these traitors was Churchill. To him, foremost among Englishmen,
the success of the Revolution was due.

Louis, Though secure of the good-will of both parties, William refused
ey ees to sail without a Dutch force, large enough to protect him against
Aug.-Oct., the fate of Monmouth, and to mask James’s great army so that the
is counties of England could be free to rise in revolt. His military
and naval preparations for the attempt went on throughout the hot
months of the year. The rumour of an impending attack on
Holland by England and France after the manner of 1672, made
his jealous countrymen unwontedly eager to forward whatever
warlike preparations he advised for their defence; and the same
rumour screened from friend and foe the real destination of these
armaments. In August, Louis took alarm and warned James. All
would ‘have been frustrated, if the infatuated man had accepted
the French alliance, or if Louis had taken on himself to throw his
troops into the Spanish Netherlands, and threaten the safety of
Holland. But instead of that, Louis in September declared war
upon the Empire and sent his forces on to the middle Rhine, so
giving William two months in which to cross the Channel, before
winter set in. Freed from immediate, but by no means from pro-
spective, fear of French invasion, the Dutch gave their consent to
the desperate bid for their own national security. Without that
voluntary consent, the ruler of a free nation could not have carried
off her fleets and armies to the rescue of England.
Struggle James’s refusal of French help in August had been largely due
Leeaa to the advice of Sunderland, who had lately turned Catholic. There
land and will always be dispute as to what this entirely selfish counsellor

eae intended to bring about by dividing his master from Louis. It

1688] JAMES II 443

is not impossible that his object was to stave off the threatened
revolution by a return to an English and Parliamentary policy ;

and this reading of Sunderland’s motives is quite consistent with

the fact that he was communicating with the Prince of Orange, in
order that his head might be safe even if, in spite of his efforts, the
revolution took place. In the last fortnight of September Sunder-

land persuaded James, who was at last thoroughly frightened, to
make large concessions and to hold out promise of a Parliament
from which Roman Catholics should be excluded. But the conces-
sions came too late, and were too obviously the result of the stir in

the dockyards of Holland. Meanwhile, the French and Jesuit clique

had broken with Sunderland; Petre well knew that the summons

of a Protestant Parliament must lead to his own downfall, even

if it saved the head of his slippery convert, and kept off the
Dutch invasion. So in the last days of October, when William

was already embarked, Petre had his way and Sunderland was
dismissed from office. These vacillations in the presence of danger

lost the advantages both of French interference and of genuine
cone2ssion. Owing to James’s management, the Prince left Holland Vacilla-
without fear of the French army, and crossed the sea without fear ou
of the French navy ; the concessions had encouraged al] willing but policy
timid rebels, by revealing that Government had more reason to
expect defeat than in 1685; and yet, since the King was governing

by Petre’s counsels when William landed, the Bishops could not be
induced to issue a manifesto against resistance, such as would have
puzzled and restrained the conscientious Tories.

To secure the alliance of that large and important class, the The « Pre-
statesmen who had signed the invitation persuaded William to Sane of
come to England with a falsehood in the forefront of his appeal to Wales ”
the nation. It was everywhere put about by politicians, and
generally believed by the populace, that the new Prince of Wales
was not really the Queen’s son. James had indeed neglected to
summon thoroughly satisfactory witnesses to the birth, and some
excuse can be made for a nation in the agonies of its fate grasping
too blindly at a belief which smoothed the way to the union of
parties. Conscientious men and women can be named who genuinely
believed that James had practised a fraud. But it is not likely
that all the responsible persons who used the story had examined
it, or that the patrons of Oates, on their sudden return to politics

444 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1688

and power, cared very much whether or not the Prince of Wales
were indeed a Pretender.

William Every political and military combination of the last three years

rie on either side of the British Channel, had worked as by magic in

Ys “ é “ :

sth Nov., favour of this almost impossible enterprise. And now, even the

4086 winds kept William clear of the English fleet, and landed him in
Torbay on the very day of the year when the nation was wont to
celebrate its deliverance from the Gunpowder Plot. The landing
of the Prince with a force that could not instantly be overpowered,
among a people so well prepared to receive him, made it certain
that a free Parliament must be called. But whether that Parlia-
ment was to be called under the auspices of James or of William,
it was still in the power of James to decide. Fortunately, while
he was as strongly determined as his father never to be a con-
stitutional King, and never to give up the interests of his religion,
he had not his father’s patience to play off armed enemies against
each other by deceptive promises and intrigues. His refusal to
summon a free Parliament on William’s landing led to the long-
premeditated desertion of Churchill, Kirke and other officers; the
consequent demoralisation of the whole army; the rising of the
civilian population all over England; and the unresisted advance |
of William on London. The Irish troops on this side of St.
George’s Channel, on whom alone he could depend, were too few
to do anything but exasperate the people and alienate their com-
panions in arms.’ Within a month of the landing at Torbay,
James was, from a military point of view, as much at his rival’s
mercy as Richard II. had been at the mercy of Bolingbroke, or
Charles I. at the mercy of Cromwell. Yet even then he could still
have prevented his own deposition, if he had accepted the terms
which William was forced to offer. For Tory principles, and
indeed Tory interests, would not have allowed him to be deposed
if he had not himself abdicated the throne. If he had consented
to remain in England as constitutional monarch, we could not
have obtained that union of parties, and that strong monarchical
administration on behalf of national and Parliamentary ideals,

1 The famous Revolution song, Lillibulero, whose author was said to have ‘“ sung
James out of Three Kingdoms,” turns entirely on Tyrconnel and the Catholic Irish
who are to ‘‘cut de Englishman’s troate”. It has less than no merit as literature,
(Wilkins’ Political Ballads, i., pp. 275-77.)

1688] JAMES II 445

on which depended the future progress of England and the im- James
mediate salvation of Europe. The battle of Blenheim could not ae
have been fought, nor the House of Hanover called in, if James mise and
had not sent his family out of the kingdom, and himself followed ae
to appeal to the national enemy to restore him by force of arms, Dec., 1688

He was lodged at St. Germains as the French candidate for the
English throne.

Che Inter-
regnum.
Danger of
anarchy

446 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (i688

CHAPTER XIV
WILLIAM AND MARY

For therein stands the office of a King,
His honour, virtue, merit, and chief praise,
That for the public all this weight he bears.—MuxTon.

HE days that followed the flight of James saw even greater
confusion in England than the months which preceded the
Restoration, or those which ushered in the Civil War. Then there
had been too many claimants to legal authority; now there was no
legal authority at all. Travellers were searched upon the roads
by no warrant save that of public safety; villages were held by
mounted men, the town gates by militia, in no name save that of
the Protestant religion. The gentry and middle classes were up in
arms, expectant of the unknown, while mobs were sacking Catholic
chapels and mansions, as the first rite in a saturnalia of thieves.
A great English army, legally disbanded by James as his last royal
act, stood in distracted and angry regiments, on the worst of terms
with the civil population, and distrusting as Catholics or as
Williamites even those officers who had not deserted them. A
smaller force of Irish Catholics were drifting about in search of
safety, terror-struck but inspiring terror, starting midnight alarms
a hundred miles off by the mere rumour of their march. English-
men were drawn out as for war, armed, excited, in the grip of panic,
ready to plunge the sword into one another at a word. Order and
set purpose were found only upon those western roads converging
on the capital, where warriors drawn from all the chief Protestant
races of Europe, side by side with a few regiments of red-coats and
an enormous staff of Lords and gentlemen, moved under the flag
of William of Orange. But that Prince possessed and claimed no
right to issue commands outside his own camp. If, before some

1689] WILLIAM AND MARY 447

one authority was established to confine the course of this drifting

chaos, the inevitable quarrels were to break out between Tories The

and Whigs, Dissenters and Churchmen, English and foreigners, the pains
whole land would instantly fall a prey to civil war, as aimless and undertake
confused as that strife of multitudinous factions which Cromwell’s joe a¢o0"
tyranny had once been called on to avert. Therefore, the Lords Dec., 1688
and an informal Assembly of the old Commoners of Charles II.’s
Parliaments, hastily convened in London in December, 1688, un-
animously voted the civil and military administration into the

hands of the Prince of Orange. For if they had hesitated, England

would have been in flames at the New Year.

Under the provisional government of the Prince, the Estates of The Con-
the Realm were summoned, free and orderly polling took place, ee
and a Convention, elected like an ordinary Parliament, was held Crown to
forthwith. There the Tory party vainly strove to prevent the eae
inevitable solution of the problem on Whig principles; first a Feb., 1689
regency in James’s name, then the sovereignty of Mary alone as
hereditary monarch, were discussed and rejected. For William
refused to become regent, and Mary refused to reign by herself.
The Whig majority was firm, and the Tory minority dared not be
obstinate with anarchy and invasion at the gates. The same needs
which had forced the Tories to give William the temporary ad-
ministration in December, compelled them in February to make
him the permanent and legal sovereign. William and Mary were
proclaimed together (13th Feb.), and the administration was con-
ferred on the husband during his life.

Like the proclamation of the Commonwealth forty years back,
the proclamation of William and Mary was dictated by the neces-
sities of the moment. But it chanced that, on this latter occasion,
the necessities of the moment coincided with the strongest tendencies
of the age and the best possibilities of the future. It was needful
to a lasting and happy'settlement, that the Tories should surrender
their principles and the Whigs forgo their vengeance. Yet so
fierce was party passion, that nothing short of the need to preserve
society would have compelled the Tories to abandon hereditary
right and religious persecution, and the Whigs to let their dead
sleep without the atonement of blood. They both learnt their
lesson, but could not forgive their Dutch schoolmaster.

Tories as well as Whigs were now, both in retrospect and in

448 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1689

Declara- prospect, jealous of the prerogative power. By the Declaration of
une, Right and the Bill of Rights the tenure of the Crown was made
(r688) strictly conditional. All the outstanding disputes between King
eiaate? “and subjects were decided against the King, before the new —
(1689) - monarchs were invested with their shorn authority. By this
beneficent Revolution, the liberty of the subject and the power of
Parliament were finally secured against the power of the Crown.
William The tradition of ages was snapped. In the eyes of no section
roe § on in Of bis subjects did William succeed to the majesty that had hedged
England the ancient Kings of England. While few felt affection for his
person, none felt reverence for his office. Tories and Whigs agreed
to think of him as temporary caretaker for the English people.
Loyalty to him was binding as a patriotic duty, not as an inalien-
able allegiance. In return for such loyalty, William was expected
to do whatever was required of him by every greedy nobleman who
had tried to rob him of his heritage in favour of Monmouth, or
had betrayed James at the eleventh hour; in case of refusal, a
personal grievance had arisen to justify communications with the
exiled Court of St. Germains.

William never attempted, as his predecessors would have done,
fraudulently to resume the prerogatives which he had signed away
at his accession. He preserved the compact. But he acquired con-
siderable power over the internal, and yet more over the external
policy of England, by playing off the two parties against each other.
By means of an admirable outsider’s understanding of English
politics and politicians, he left the imprint of his personal will on
our foreign policy, even while he'introduced a new era of constitu-
tional monarchy and party government.

Long un- The rule of England by the contests of the two parties now
cerfai, began in earnest, no longer complicated by a struggle for supremacy
Succes- between Parliament and King. The Tories no longer tried to carry
— out their ecclesiastical and social ideals by making themselves the
instruments of the Crown, but struggled against the Whigs to
possess the Crown as their instrument. From the flight of James
to the accession of George III., there was no doubt as to the
limitations of the power of the Crown, but grave doubt as to who
would wear it; and on that largely depended the question whether
Whigs or Tories should be Mayors of the Palace. No one ever
knew who would be on the throne in five years’ time—whether

1689] WILLIAM AND MARY 449

Mary or William, Anne or some Hanoverian Prince, or the Pre-
tender turned Protestant. This uncertainty made it hard for
English statesmen to cease to be knaves. Ministers and ex-
ministers, Tories and Whigs, admirals and generals, regardless of
the fidelity they had sworn to the reigning monarch, corresponded
with St. Germains as well as Hanover, so that their fortunes should
in all events be secure.

But short of foreign conquest, there would never be absolute Party

monarchy again. A restoration, other than by French bayonets, Listes :
could only fe a restoration of the Clarendon Code and high Parlia-
mentary Toryism. But as the balance of parties was kept by
William and Anne, party strife came to impregnate all English
life. Party spirit was the spirit of the age. Its coarse, free,
vigorous breath kept the nation heartily alive. It pervaded the
worlds of high society, commerce, and even of scholarship ; it in-
spired literature, religion, finance ; it guided diplomacy and war.
It was the motive power of our great achievements: it founded
the Bank and the National Debt; it carried through the re-coinage ;
it evoked the genius of Swift; it effected the union of England and
Scotland ; it won the wars of Marlborough and it made the peace
of Utrecht.

At last the time had come when English Protestants were ready The
to let one another worship God. All their parties were exhausted WG
with fifty years of revolution, bloodshed and terror, culminating in
the recent narrow escape of their common religion. Like dogs fiat
have been flogged off each other, Anglican ead Puritan lay down
and snarled. The best characteristic product of Restoration society
had been the sceptical Whig Lords and philosophers, who had
prescribed for the State the unpopular regimen of Toleration.
First the Dissenters, because they were hopeless of supremacy and
crushed by persecution, had allowed their powerful friends to in-

scribe Toleration on the party banner. And now in the year 1689
the political situation compelled the Church to follow. For
William, a Calvinist and a Latitudinarian, though he was ready
to attend the communion of the Establishment, would not consent
to reign unless freedom of worship were conceded to the Puritans ;
the pledge of legal and Parliamentary Toleration made to the
Dissenters by the Bishops themselves in the hour of peril under
James, could not be broken without shame te the Church and
29

The
Tories
prevent
religious
equality,
1689

450 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1689

danger to the State; and the Catholic invasion impending from
France preserved among English Protestants some sense of common
interest. Yet even under these favourable conditions, Toleration
was introduced as a practical necessity, not as an accepted principle.
By the Toleration Act of 1689, no Nonconformist minister might
exercise his functions unless he subscribed thirty-four out of the
Thirty-nine Articles ; but the Quakers, who had no ministers and no
politics, were allowed to meet on less severe conditions. The result
of this curious and illogical compromise was to relieve all sects
except the Unitarians and the Catholics. Yet even those strange
bed-fellows in misfortune were not in practice left to the rigour of
the laws. William, the ally of Spain, of Austria and of the Pope,
was the sworn protector of the English Catholics. 'The remarkable
fact that no papist had lost his life in the months of Revolution
was due to the exertions of William, to the comparatively humane
character of the English mobs and clergy when contrasted with
the French, and to the peaceful conduct of the Catholic gentry,
who gratefully sought and acknowledged the clemency of the
Prince of Orange. For the same reasons, when the new régime
had been fully established, the Penal Laws were laxly enforced
on this side of the Irish Channel. Mass was said regularly in
private houses ; there were many well-known Catholic chapels and
some monasteries ; the priests conciliated opinion by passing about
in disguise, but were seldom hunted and imprisoned. Periodic out-
bursts of Protestant zeal took the form of fresh Penal Laws that
were not enforced. Thus Catholics and Unitarians, though denied
the exercise of public worship, were saved from cruel persecution,
owing to William’s temperament, England’s European alliances, and
the spirit of humanitarianism, rationalism and indifferentism now
pervading high places and infecting public opinion.!

This grudging and partial step towards religious tolerance was
not accompanied by any legislative advance towards religious
equality. Within certain limits, it was no longer criminal to preach
and to pray. But the Test and Corporation Acts, which kept
Dissenters as well as Catholics out of civil and military office, were
preserved by the Tories against the wish of the Whigs and in spite
of the efforts of the King. Nonconformists continued for many

} Lecky, i., pp. 349-63.

1689] WILLIAM AND MARY 451

generations to be shut out of national administration and local
government. Sometimes, indeed, Dissenting merchants took the
sacrament to qualify for municipal office. But except for this
practice, known as “occasional conformity,” which highly incensed
the bitter jealousy of the Tories, the Church maintained her social
and political monopoly intact. Every member of the governing
class had to remain within her communion. In return for this
immense advantage secured to her by the State, it was just and
necessary that statesmen should interfere in her government,
enough to check tendencies dangerous to the public peace, and to
the new religious concordat. A very great majority of the clergy,
known as the High Church party,! who completely dominated the
Lower House of Convocation, were only half loyal to the reigning
sovereigns, and were wild with hatred of Dissent. Government
was able to set bounds to their disturbing influence, by putting
the small but able minority of Low Churchmen and Latitudin-
arians in possession of the Bishoprics and chief places of the
Church.

This process was effected with rapidity, owing to a remarkable The Non-
secession that took place in the first three years of William and ieee
Mary. Six of the “Seven Bishops” honourably adhered to their
old doctrines of non-resistance and hereditary right, refused to
swear allegiance to the usurper, and together with four hundred
of the most advanced High Churchmen were deprived by Act of
Parliament.? These Non-Jurors long maintained a private Church
dear to the Anglican Jacobites. ‘Their exodus left the field open
for the elevation of men like Tillotson and Burnet, as overseers of
a flock that hated them. The appointment of Latitudinarian
Bishops was the chief grievance of the ‘Tories against William.
But it was only thus that the religious peace could be kept in
England against the outcries of the country parsons and the
intrigues of the High Church party, which was in that age distin- —
guished, not by ritualistic practices, but by the desire to go back
on the Act of Toleration.

1The terms High and Low Church first came in at the beginning of Anne’s
reign, but the distinction existed as strongly under William. : ;

2 William characteristically wished to let the Non-Jurors stop in the Church, in
return for admission of Dissenters to civil and military office. But the Whigs and
Tories in Parliament agreed to have two persecutions rather than none (16869),
(Mac., chap. xi. Burnet, iv., pp. 12-16).

452 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1690

Whig The Tories had prevented religious equality for the future;
pelea the Whigs tried to exact political revenge for the past. ‘They
Jan., 1690 hoped to see the shambles set up as in 1661; they hoped that
exile and confiscation would be the lot of those by whose agency so
many hundreds of Whigs had been hanged, beheaded, flogged, fined,
imprisoned and exiled. They refused to pass the Act of Indemnity
repeatedly demanded by William, and pushed forward the new
Corporation Bill in a form to exclude from municipal office for seven
years all who had been concerned in the surrender of the town
charters to Charles II. The Bill was not more unjust than the
existing Corporation Act excluding Dissenters from office, but owing
to the strength of the Tory party it was more inexpedient. The
Whigs revived a slumbering feud in time of utmost peril to the
State, when France and Ireland threatened invasion of our distracted
land. William was not to be thus trifled with. He was King of
the English, not King of the Whigs. Reviving the part of Charles
II. rather than of Monmouth, he came down suddenly to the
House of Lords and dismissed the Convention Parliament with
the same dramatic circumstances with which the merry monarch
Dissolu- had routed the Whig members at Oxford. Like Charles, William
pe ae watched the “faces an ell long” of those who had thought to dis-
Tory turb his kingdom with impunity. But unlike Charles he appealed
eiihee: at once to the country and to the moderate Tories. A Tory
William, majority was returned to the new Parliament, which thankfully
Mae cone buried the past by accepting the Act of Grace presented to it by
William, and voted him supplies for the reconquest of Ireland.
Ireland The scheme of land proprietorship by which Cromwell had
hoped to make the Protestants of Ireland strong enough to defend
themselves, had failed from its inherent faults of principle! The
middle class of Protestant yeomen, who were to have been the
backbone of the settlement, had been too few from the first,
because the officers bought up the farms allotted to their soldiers
to swell their own estates; it dwindled still further because the
aristocratic pride of the gentry, who held themselves aloof from the
other classes, had driven the smaller Protestant freeholders to live and
to marry among the Catholic population. A severe blow had been
struck at all the Protestant settlers together, when the Cavalier
Parliament, at the instigation of the graziers of England, had

1 See. pp. 319-22 above.

1690} WILLIAM AND MARY 453

deliberately ruined Irish cattle-breeding, by forbidding the export

of cattle to England and her Colonies. Thus weakened by their

own social and economic divisions, the English in Ireland were
unable to resist the blows struck by James II. at their interest.

He had placed the civil and military power in the hands of the
Catholics, not intending to destroy, but only to subordinate or to
convert the English settlers. But when his throne fell, the native
population rose in his name and settled Ireland according to their

own ideas. When in 1689 James arrived in Dublin, to head the

Celtic insurrection, with arms and officers supplied him by Louis,

he could do little to defend the interests of his English subjects,

or to prevent the wholesale resumption of the land from the Saxon
usurpers. ‘The Protestants were driven to bay behind the walls of Relief of
Londonderry. ‘Though they could defend the place against storm, Pee
they were only relieved by the English ships breaking the boom in 28th July,
the Foyle at the very Jast moment, when they could no longer hold 1°89
out against starvation.

The racial war for the possession of the island involved the William
fate of England and of Europe. Before Britain could send her seen
armies to fight France on the continent, she had first to secure her Ireland,
own shores. ‘The Protestants of England, France, Holland, J" ae
Germany and Scandinavia poured over under their deliverer to
strike down Louis XIV. in Ireland. All who rejoice that the
Protestant communities of Europe maintained their freedom against
Louis and destroyed the prestige of his system on the fields of Blen-
heim and Ramillies, must read with thankfulness the story of that
initial passage of the Boyne, which first gave stability to the The
Revolution settlement. When it was known in England that the Eat.
Irish army had been scattered in rout, our politicians calculated 1690
that a restoration would be a matter of years rather than of
months, and each man trimmed his policy to suit.

Yet the deliverance of Europe was turned, on the scene where Treaty of
it was enacted, into a terrible oppression. The final surrender (fay
at Limerick of Sarsfield and the last Irish army, to the generals 1691
whom William had left behind him, was the enslavement of a race.
William made as much and as little effort to save the Catholics of
Ireland as James had made to save the Protestants.! But the two

1 Ranke, iv., p. 542; V+, pp. 215-19.

Ruin of
Ireland
completed
by bad
laws

454 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1691

forces on which his power depended were set against all mercy and
all justice; the Protestants in Ireland and the Parliament in Eng-
land were bent on complete spoliation and cruel persecution. 'The
English Parliament, which had become by the Revolution settlement
the ultimate authority on Irish questions in place of the King,
enabled at the same time the Irish Protestants to crush the Irish
Catholics, and the English clothiers to ruin the Irish Protestants.
England, while she made every Catholic her deadly enemy by en-
forcing the Penal Laws, prevented the growth of a large Protestant
population by stopping the export of Irish cloth, in the interest of
her own West-country clothiers (1698). And in order that every
curse known in England should flourish in Ireland without the
accompanying blessings, the Anglicans, numbering about one-third
of the Irish Protestants, were permitted not only to keep all the
spoils of Church and State for themselves, but even to prevent the
exercise of Nonconformist worship. The Toleration Act was not
extended to Ireland. The Presbyterians who had manned the walls
of Londonderry, though they mizht now kick the papists into the
gutter, were not themselves allowed to worship God. The net
result of this economic and religious jealousy was that over 20,000
of the best Protestant stock in the world left Ulster, and the
American backwoods were peopled with dour Scotsmen, who had
even less reason than the descendants of the Pilgrim Fathers to
love the English State.

With the murdered cloth industry perished the last hope of
Ireland. Even in the ten distracted years that followed the
Revolution, it had given promise of employing a vastly increased
Protestant population, and of bringing the Catholics into indus-
trial relation with the English world. But, as it was, the laws
had abolished all the old forms of secular life for the native Irish,
destroyed their upper class, deprived them of lands and employ-
ments, schools and universities, and prevented the growth of
new interests in place of the old; the peasants had nothing left
to render bondage endurable but memories and religion kept alive
by the priests, to extirpate whose influence these frantic statutes
had been passed. Under a legal code that left them no choice
except to be disloyal and priest-ridden, the native population
multiplied and took real possession of the soil, of which they had
in the eye of the law been deprived; while the landowners soon

1692] WILLIAM AND MARY 455

dwindled to a small caste of noblesse, living on the plunder of
the land and divorced from the soil and its inhabitants.

Scotland in the first year of the Revolution had been more Killie-
happily settled on a national and Presbyterian basis. AnotherSt@nkie:
; F sat mM. 27th July
invasion of the Lowlands by clans hostile to the reviving fortunes 1689
of the house of Argyle, flickered out more quickly than the similar
undertaking of Montrose in 1644-45, owing to the death of Claver-
house at the very moment when the red-coats broke before the
claymores at Killiecrankie. Deprived of the only warrior with
authority enough to lead and unite their jealous chieftains, the
barbarians retired to their valleys before the year was out. No
attempt to bring the Highlands within the pale of civilisation and
law was made until 1746, but a cordon of forts and troops was
established to protect the Lowlands, and the chiefs were kept
quiet by gifts of money from their new sovereign, whom they
were on these terms content to acknowledge (1691). One small
clan, inhabiting the valley of Glencoe, was late in taking the
oath of allegiance. The opportunity was seized by their Scottish
enemies as an excuse to perpetrate a massacre among the mists,
by wiles as basely treacherous as those wherewith, under brighter
skies, rulers of the blood of Medici or Borgia lured their guests
to death. In Glencoe it was the guests who rewarded hos- Glencoe,
pitality by midnight slaughter. The story makes it clear *%°9
that the cruelties done upon the Covenanters by the statesmen
of the Restoration and by the soldiers of Claverhouse, resulted
not from the greater wickedness of one party, but from the
general state of political civilisation in Scotland. Yet even in
Scotland, where the age of barbarism was at last coming to an end,
the breach of hospitality and the deliberate slaughter of women
and children aroused universal horror, William, though ignorant
of the base means that were to be employed, had in general
terms consented to the “extirpation” of the clan of barbarian
robbers. The man who gave this evil order, the man who failed to
bring the murderers of the De Witts to justice, was the same man
who, by Czesarean clemency in the midst of traitors and assassins,

1Cunningham, pp. 370-79. Lecky (ed. 1878), ii., pp. 220, 221 and passim.
Froude, English in Ireland, book ii.

War of
the
League
of Augs-
burg,
1688-97

English
in the
Nether-
lands,

1691-97

First
Invasion

Hogue,
May, 1692

456 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1692

introduced the new régime of humanity and toleration into English
government.

The establishment of his authority over the British Isles enabled
William, in the third year of his reign, to lead the British troops
across the sea. The war of the League of Augsburg saw Dutch,
Austrians, Spaniards, Savoyards and Germans fighting Louis along
al] the frontiers of France. But the result of the struggle turned
chiefly on those seven campaigns in defence of the Spanish Nether-
lands, wherein William trained our army to surpass on the field those
of all the other nations whom he led to battle, moulding with his own
hand the splendid instrument that he bequeathed to Marlborough.
If we remember the want of skill, leadership and organisation with
which our civilian ancestors invariably began great military opera-
tions after any long interval of peace,—if we recall the expeditions
of Buckingham, the opening of our own civil wars, and even in a
more military age the opening of our wars against the French
Revolution,—then, such defeats as we suffered at Steinkirk (1692)
and Landen (1693) will appear necessary and not inglorious pre-
ludes to the great victories of the next reign. The result of
William’s seven campaigns was all that he could have hoped, with
treason and division at home, and unwillingness and jealousy among
his allies, The Spanish Netherlands were successfully guarded against
Louis. If Namur was lost in 1691, it was retaken in 1695. But
the real outcome of the war was that the Revolution settlement in
England passed safely through the fire. Twice an invasion of Eng-
land, concerted by Louis with the Jacobites, was attempted and
failed. On both occasions the Tories and Whigs rallied to the
defence of the King, and the property of Non-Jurors was in some
danger from mobs who usually attacked Nonconformists.

The importance of the first invasion scheme was naval. In 1690,
when William was reducing Ireland, the French fleet, after a
victorious encounter with the English and Dutch off Beachy Head,
had held the Channel and even landed a regiment of French troops
in Devonshire for a few hours. In 1692 preparations were made to
send across a great army. The plan, which had much the same
chance of success as those of Philip II. and Napoleon I., was
frustrated by the same means. The French fleet was defeated on
the open sea, chased into the harbours of Cherbourg and La Hogue,
and burnt as it lay in port, At La Hogue the conflagration took

1693] WILLIAM AND MARY 457

place under the eyes of James II. and the army of invasion. From
this battle dates a change in the maritime conditions of the struggle
against Louis XIV. During the rest of the wars of William and
Marlborough, the English and Dutch fleets held the sea. Until
the peace of Utrecht the ocean was a safe pathway for the military
operations of the allies, and French commerce was annihilated.
As Louis had chosen to engage himself in land wars on his Flemish,
Rhenish, Alpine and Pyrenean frontiers, he could no longer afford
to repair the losses of La Hogue, and the waste of time and
weather. William and Marlborough revived the policy of Crom-
well in maintaining a British fleet to command the Mediterranean,
a policy which had for a while been neglected by Charles II. and
his brother, when the want of money involved in their autocratic
policy had compelled them to abandon Tangier (1683), and to be-
come the vassals of France.?

On the land frontiers, where evenly matched armies marched and
counter-marched under wary generals, the victory in the war of the
League of Augsburg would be to that Prince who could last raise
money from his impoverished subjects. In the contest of endurance
between the credit of France and the credit of England, the genius
and policy of the Whig financiers affected the fortunes of all Europe.

For the conduct of the war fell more and more upon the Whigs. William
Experience gradually taught the first of our post-revolutionary Whigs
monarchs, to obtain unity in the public service by selecting his Cabinet
ministers from one of the two parties; and to prefer that one piewes
which at the time had the majority, to carry ministerial measures
through Parliament.? Now in time of war the Whigs were pre-
ferred both by the electors and by the King. They were more
irreconcilably hostile to James, and to French ideals of Church and
State. And, in spite of the incident of the dissolution of 1690,

1 Corbett, chaps. xxv.-xxx., and p. 313. } ae

2 This principle of closer connection between the executive and legislative, un-
known to Charles II., and not laid down in the terms of the Revolution settlement,
was adopted as of practical utility, rather than granted as of constitutional right.
In this limited sense William originated Cabinet government. But he did not
govern solely by the advice of his Cabinet. Often in home affairs and nearly always
in foreign affairs he acted without the advice of his ministers and sometimes against
their wishes. Again, he often consulted, on questions of the highest policy, men
who were not in the Cabinet of the day and who were detested by the House of
Commons, as Dutch Bentinck, and the repentant renegade Sunderland. Neither
ministers nor Parliament could complain of his practice in these respects, for it was
strictly constitutional. It was not prohibited by the Bill of Rights or by custom.

458 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1694

the Tories became ever more unfriendly to William. They could
never heartily accept the change of dynasty, in which they had
acquiesced to the destruction of their own political monopoly.
Their hereditary allegiance, which they could not render to James
Death of and his son, seemed due only to his Protestant daughters. Mary
cert ee reconciled them to the present, and Anne to the future. So
when Mary unexpectedly died of smallpox, their hostility to the
Dutch King became more marked.
The Marl- But owing to the same pitiful misfortune, William and the war
re party received one great accession of strength. On her sister's
recon- death, Anne was reconciled by her political advisers to the widowed
ciled to : : ;
William, King, whom she was almost certain to survive and now almost
1695 certain to succeed. Sarah Churchill controlled the will of the
Princess, and her husband’s great fortunes were staked on those of
Anne. John Churchill, nominally a Tory but really a political
eclectic, had brought about the complete and bloodless triumph
of William’s invasion. In return, the new King had made him
Earl of Marlborough, and left him authority and patronage in the
army, which he was well able to use both for his own and his
country’s benefit. He had, however, while Mary stood between
Anne and the succession, intrigued with St. Germains, betrayed
military secrets to France, and tried to manipulate English jealousy
of the Dutch favourites into a treasonab'c movement, ostensibly
in favour of James, but probably in the real hope of benefiting
Anne. On the unexpected death of the Queen, this group, which
may almost be said to have held the balance of power, went over
to William and the war party. ‘Thus early was formed the union
of the Whig party with Anne, the Marlboroughs and their friend
Godolphin ; it continued intermittently, until in the next reign it
had destroyed the power of Louis.
Bank of The great achievement of the Whig ministers was the institution
yoga of the modern system of finance with which England has since fought
National all her great wars of European security and colonia] expansion. The
ee Bank of England was established in connection with the National
Re-coin- Debt, against the opposition of the Tories, who were jealous of the
age, 1699 monied interest. A regular method of Government borrowing was
thus set up, which enabled a King who could not tax his subjects at
will, to outlast in resources a despot whose subjects had but little
left for him to take.!

1 See Appendix E below.

1695] WILLIAM AND MARY 459

The yet more difficult task of a re-coinage was carried through
in danger and difficulty, at a time of war and genera] depression,
by the same set of statesmen who formed the Bank.

The Whig leaders of the rising generation, Somers and Montague,
in close consultation with the Whig philosophers, Newton and
Locke, effected these great measures, which they had devised by
their own science and wisdom, and carried through by the strength
of party spirit in the City and the House of Commons. Under
this new leadership, the wisdom of the Whigs saved the State which
had so often been shaken by their folly.

Yet these great financiers were behind those of the opposite The
party in one important respect. A false theory of the Balance Whigs
of Trade, common to both sides, was held in a more extrme form Protec-
by the Whigs than by their opponents. Burnet declared that oe
“‘we lost every year a million of money by our trade” to France. Tories
This state of opinion was partly due to the dependence of the
Whigs on the trading interest, which believed in monopoly and
high protection ; while the Tories were the Landed interest, which
so long as it had its Corn Bounties was suspicious of trade, and
indifferent to the means by which men generally supposed that it
could be fostered. But besides this ignorant multitude of squires,
the Tory party contained economic thinkers like Dudley North,
Child and Davenant, who were already tending towards free-trade
theory. There was also another reason for the difference in
economic creeds. It was the traditional policy of the Whigs to
stop commerce with France, as a measure of antagonism to the
great Catholic monarchy ; while the Tories, as Bolingbroke after-
wards expressed it, thought that “when once our people have felt
the sweet of carrying on a trade with France, under reasonable
regulations, the artifices of Whiggism will have less effect amongst
them”. In 1678 the Whigs had employed their first Parliamentary
supremacy to pass an Act absolutely prohibiting the French
trade; under the Tory reaction commerce was resumed, but in
1689 the trade was again prohibited, as a measure natural to a
time of war.!

At the elections of 1695 the Tories, who had already lost the
confidence of the King, proved to have lost the confidence of the
country. And in the following year Whig power and popularity

1W., J. Ashley, Surveys Historic and Economic (1900), pp. 268-303. Bol. iv.,
pp. 153, 196-97. Burnet, vi., pp. 156-58. See also p. 511 below.

460 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1697

Second was confirmed by the second invasion scheme of Louis. With the
eer recapture of Namur the slow tide of war had turned against bankrupt
and Ass- France; as a last snatch after departing victory, Louis prepared
ae another army to invade England. To clear the way for the landing
of the French, the Jacobites laid a plot to murder the King in his
coach, curiously similar in its details to the Rye House Plot. It
was detected only just in time. A deep, though transient, emotion
of loyalty and gratitude to William burst out in all classes. ‘The
triumph of the Whigs who served him was complete, but it was
' short-lived.

Treaty of Next year the war was brought to an end. As regards Europe,
coer aes the Treaty of Ryswick was little more than a cessation of arms; for
though Louis gave up Luxemburg and Lorraine, the general balance
of power had not been finally decided. But as regards England, the
contest had been decisive of much: the King of England was at
last acknowledged at Versailles. The ship of the Revolution had

come safe to port, with the fortunes of William on board.

Peace The most dangerous years of his life were now behind, but

as the most vexatious and humiliating were yet to come. Louis had

ofwar, granted the terms of Ryswick only because he saw looming in the

1698-1700 immediate future the contest between the French and Austrian
candidates for the succession of the Spanish Empire. ‘That contest
would be decided by the attitude of England, Holland and Spain.
If the fateful hour when Charles II. of Spain died, had found all
Europe still at war with France, and Spain herself still in armed
alliance with the Austrian Emperor, then by no possibility could a
Prince of the House of Bourbon have been placed in possession either
of the Netherlands, or of any other part of the vast inheritance.
Louis, therefore, had hastened to make peace. William, thankful
as he was for the secure and honourable position which he obtained
by the treaty, knew that a greater struggle on a new issue was at
hand, unless it could be averted by previous arrangement. The
King of France, aware that his country had been ruined by the last
two wars, was equally anxious to avoid another breach. Twice in
three years (1698-1700) Louis and William formed a secret agree-
ment, against the death of Charles II., for the Partition of the
Spanish dominions in a manner least calculated to disturb the
balance of power.

1698] WILLIAM AND MARY 461

But meanwhile the English people, taking it for granted that A Parlia-
foreign affairs were well settled, were revelling in a holiday of tea 3
domestic faction. Strengthened by the elections of 1698, the William,
Tories and the Independent Whigs broke loose from the bonds of ToD a
loyalty to the Government which the war had imposed upon them. 1700
The Whig ministers did not dare to call their own party to heel.!

In the sessions that followed the peace, the most important debates
emanated from the action of private members and from the general
opinion of the House. The ministry merely tried to avoid the
blows. In spite of the protests of William, who knew that another

war could be prevented only by war-like preparations, the Commons

cut down the army to 7,000 men (1698-99) ; for hatred of red-coats

was an old English principle, that appealed to both sides of the
House. In particular, William’s Dutch guards, for whom he felt

a love which was an offence to his English subjects, were sent back
across the sea. ‘Lhe King was also deeply hurt when the grants of
forfeited Irish land made by him to his Dutch servants were can-
celled by Act of Parliament (1700). Yet there was something to

be said from the English point of view for both these decisions.

At the elections of January, 1701, the Tories were returned in A Tory
strength enough to take party vengeance on the Whig ministers eal
themselves. When the first Partition Treaty came to light, it Nov., 1701
was made an excuse to impeach Somers and Montague (March,
1701). These ministers, having aroused more jealousy than
eratitude by the success with which they had guided the nation
through the perils of the last war, were now in danger because

they had consented to the wise efforts of William to prevent the

next; charges of peculation were also trumped up to strengthen

the case against Montague, the financial saviour of England.’

In the four years intervening between the wars of William Anti-mon-
and the wars of Marlborough, the English people and the English feat
Constitution of that day were seen in their most free and charac- the age
teristic mood, at their worst and at their best. The action of
the Tory House of Commons, though in some respects very unwise,

1 The House of Commons then had an independent will of its own; the majority
was in the highest degree jealous of the ministers, who were invidiously known as
‘‘placemen”. So little did men foresee the present form of the English Constitution,
that a Place Bill actually passed the House of Commons in this reign, to prevent
‘‘placemen” from sitting in the Lower Chamber at all. In the long interregnum
between Royal autocracy and Cabinet autocracy, the House of Commons was always

free and often showed itself both irresponsible and tyrannical.
* Parl, Hist., v., pp. 1258-1315.

Freedom
of the
Press,

1695

462 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1701

showed that their party, under the growing influence of the mod-
erate Harley, was wedded to Parliamentary life and the Revolution
settlement;! that England was not becoming militarist or for- |
getful of her own domestic traditions in the course of the con-
tinental struggle; and that the new prestige and functions acquired
by the Whig House of Commons, session after session, during the
war, were to become permanent in our national life, whatever party
was in fashion. Since the House of Commons had waged and won
the war, had found supplies and instituted the new financial policy,
its functions had multiplied and its prestige had increased in all
quarters. ‘The old power of the Crown over commercial affairs had
passed to the Commons; English and Irish clothiers, Old and New
East India Companies, came no longer begging and bribing to
Whitehall, but to Westminster, where the fateful tariffs and
bounties, that made and ruined merchants, were sold for money or
for political support.? Even Ireland, the garrison of prerogative
power ever since the days of Strafford, had at last been brought
under direct cognisance of the House. And again, it was in
accordance with the anti-monarchical spirit of the age that the
House refused to renew the Licensing Act, and so finally freed the
English press from the action of the Censor.

But though the House of Commons feared neither King nor
Cabinet, there was still one power that could call it to account.
It was never for more than three years together independent of
public opinion, as it afterwards became in the days of Wilkes
and North. Many boroughs were rotten, but not yet rotten
enough to prevent the sense of the upper and middle classes from
making itself felt at the frequent elections held under the Triennial
Act.2 Behind the evenly balanced parties of this period, there
always stood, cudgel in hand, the independent electors, imbued
in this generation with a remarkable instinct both for home and
foreign affairs, and well able to keep both parties in order, with
alternate blows.

1This was proved when the Tories introduced and passed, with the hearty
concurrence of the Whigs, tbe Act of Settlement of 1701, securing the Crown to the
House of Hanover, in case William and Anne should both die without leaving
children. Mr, Feiling’s History of the Tory Party is very good on this period.

2 Cunningham, i., pp. 403-10. This control of Parliament over the course of

trade was made clear in 1678 when the Whigs prohibited the trade with France.
5 Passed 1694, repealed by the Septennial Act, 1716.

1701] WILLIAM AND MARY 463

As one of the periodic waves of High Church feeling against
Dissenters and Toleration had now set in, it is probable that the
Tory Saturnalia of 1701 would have been allowed to proceed to
great lengths in the first years of the century, if another European
crisis had not suddenly threatened the independence and commerce
of Great Britain. In November, 1701, the electorate, again ap-
pealed to by William as the last act of his life, cut short the
Parliamentary revels, and insisted that the whole energies of the
country should be turned to meet the danger from abroad. The
French troops were in occupation of the Spanish Empire.

The War of the Spanish Succession (1701-1713) is the only The
example in history of a struggle between the principal powers of dageay
Europe for the possession of a great Western Empire, unable to sion
defend itself and scarcely consulted as to its own fate. Yet only
a hundred years before the Spanish Empire had been the terror,
and almost the ruin, of those who now fought over its division.

Spain had already begun the long penance for her crimes. The
expulsion of the Jews and Moors had been followed by the deca-
dence of the Christians ; clericalism had led to the impotence of
the great Catholic power; the attempt to monopolise the riches of
the world by preventing exchange, had ended in economic ruin;
despotism and centralisation had led to the collapse of the central
authority. Yet the multifarious possessions in both hemispheres
held together under the tyranny of Spain, had not yet been torn
from her, though she was equally unable to resist external attack or
to suppress domestic insurrection. For thirty years past her Empire
had been defended from foreign annexation by Jeagues of power-
ful allies, and from internal disruption by the inertia of her subjects,

If the spirit of Van Arteveldt, of Mazzini, or of Bolivar, had been

stirring in that dead time, Flanders, Italy and America could with

ease have thrown off their effete Castilian governors. Portugal

alone had rebelled, and Portugal was again an independent State.

And now Charles IJ. of Spain was dying without heir. The The Parti-
Partition Treaties arranged by Louis and William broke down. Treaties,
The first Treaty (1698) was annulled by the death of the Electoral 1698-1700
Prince of Bavaria, the neutral heir who had been named as more

464 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1701

acceptable than the Austrian or French candidates.’ ‘The second
Death and Treaty, which divided up the inheritance, failed because neither
Testa- Spain nor Austria would consent to any Partition. Charles II.
roe in his will offered the whole Empire to Philip, the cadet of the
IL, Nov., House of Bourbon, if his grandfather Louis XIV. would support
Kae him in possession by French arms. If Louis refused, the whole
Empire was to go to the Austrian candidate, the Archduke Charles,
the cadet of the House of Hapsburg. On the death of Charles IL.,
Louis, knowing that, if he refused, Austria would accept the offer,
and that neither Holland nor England would fight to enforce
Partition for the benefit of France, threw over the Treaty he
had made with William, and accepted the whole inheritance for
his grandson—now Philip V. of Spain (Nov., 1700). In Philip’s
name the French troops took possession of all the fortresses of
the Spanish Netherlands up to the borders of Holland, and poured
unresisted over the Alps, to guard for him the plains of Milan and
of Naples against the Austrian. Ina few weeks Louis had come
peaceably into occupation of whole countries for whose outlying

1 GENEALOGICAL KEY TO THE PROBLEM OF THE SPANISH
SUCCESSION

Philip III. of Spain, d. 1621.
|

| | |
Louis XIII. == Anne of Austria. Philip IV., d. 1665, Maria == Emperor Fer-

of France, dinand III.
d, 1643.

| | |
Louis XIV.== Maria Charles II, Margaret== Emp. Leo- — Eleanor
d. 1715. Theresa. d. childless, Theresa. | poldI1.,d. | of Neu-
1700. 1705. burg.

d. 1711. of Bavaria.

Louis, Dauphin, Max Emanuel, iii Malla |
| Joseph Ferdinand, Elec-

| | toral Prince of Bavaria,
Duke of Bur- Philip (French candi- candidate of rst Parti-
gundy, d. 1712. date, and finally tion Treaty, d. childless,
Philip V. of Spain), 1699.
Louis XV., d. 1746.
d. 1774 PE, a ee eee a

Emp. Joseph I., Archduke Charles,

d. childless, 1711. Austrian _ candidate,
sometime Carlos III.
of Spain; in 4711
Emp Charles VI1., d.
£740.

1701) WILLIAM AND MARY 465

posts he had waged three long and ruinous wars. In the spring of

1701 he was in a position from which nothing could dislodge him

but the prolonged efforts of a coalition stronger than the League of
Augsburg. Of such a coalition there appeared no prospect. The

Dutch and English peoples viewed the change with complacency,

fondly hoping that Louis would soon withdraw the French troops Louis in
from the Spanish dominions, and sever his connection with Philip V. Seige
The Tory squires were rejoiced to hear that Louis had vexed Spanish
William by tearing up his precious Treaties of Partition. The Sn
new King of Spain was acknowledged by England and by Holland.

So long as the maritime powers remained neutral, the French

could easily ward off sulky Austria, who could not reach the
Netherlands, and who vainly attempted in 1701 the task of re-
covering Italy with her own armies. The work of William’s life

seemed undone.

But Louis himself came to the rescue of his enemies, and aroused
against France the old hatreds and the old alliances. While Charles
was dying, Louis had trod carefully. But when the prize seemed
to him secure, his natural instincts of pride and insolence awoke
too soon for his fortunes. By a series of violent acts he showed
Kurope that he was still the same Grand Monarch who had burned
the Palatinate, dragooned the Pope, and revoked the Edict of
Nantes, but now twice as strong and therefore twice as dangerous as
he had ever been before.

He seized the Barrier towns! of the Netherlands from the Mistakes
Dutch: Holland saw that she must again fight for her life. He oe
declared that Philip was not incapacitated from the French succes-
sion: Europe was again overshadowed by the phantom of a Uni-
versal Monarchy. He proclaimed that France would be treated as
the most favoured nation in trade with the Spanish-American
Colonies: England and Holland saw that they would be excluded
from the riches of the new world, which were no longer to be
used only by effete Spain, but also by France herself, the one rival
whom the maritime powers had to fear in the world across the
ocean,

Louis had been encouraged to commit these premature acts of

1 Fortresses which the Dutch had been allowed to garrison in Spanish territory,
as a safeguard against French invasion of Holland through the ill-defended dominions
of Spain.

30

Agitation
for war
begins in
the
country,
Apr.-
June, 1701

Grand
Alliance
formed,
7th Sep.,
1701

Louis
acknow-
ledges

the Pre-
tender,
17th Sep.,
1701

Elections
of Nov.,
1701

Death of
William,
8th March,
1702

466 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1701 |

violence by the, spectacle of Parliamentary England baiting her
King, and by the belief that the Tories were able and willing to
keep peace at any price. But when it was realised in England that
Louis intended to exploit the Spanish Empire as an appanage of
France, an agitation for war arose outside the doors of the Tory
House of Commons, The majority within were angry at being dis-
turbed in the more attractive programme of impeaching the Whig
statesmen, and when the famous “ Kentish Petition” called on them
to adopt a more loyal and patriotic attitude in the face of foreign
danger, they imprisoned the gentlemen who brought it, for breach
of privilege. It was the first battle in the long war between the
House of Commons and the constituencies, with which the annals
of the next hundred years are so full. But as yet the electorate,
when roused, was stronger than the House. The Tory majority was
forced into war by King, Whigs and nation. Thus armed by
England, William went abroad and formed the Grand Alliance
which was destined to humble Louis.

But the Tories, still in a majority in a Parliament only six
months old, could be trusted to show little zeal in waging a war to
which they had unwillingly consented. While war loans were to
the advantage of the Whig monied men, war taxes were to the
disadvantage of the Tory squires. It was the policy of their party
to confine our operations as much as possible to the sea. But again
Louis cleared the last obstacle from the path of his enemies, Stand-
ing by the death-bed of James II. among the English exiles, who
adored him as their patron and champion, his heart swelled with
that private generosity and pity which in him took the place of
generosity and pity for nations. Against the advice of his ministers,
he proclaimed James’s son, the Pretender, to be King of England.

William, like a victorious race-horse that is to die at the goal,
rose to one last effort while breath was still in his body. He
hastened over for the last time to England and dissolved the new
Parliament. Indignation against Louis was for the moment al-
most universal. The elections took place amid scenes of warlike
enthusiasm ; the Whigs were muck. strengthened, and the Tories
pledged to vigorous prosecution of the war.

During the winter that closed the eventful year 1701, Europe
was 1inging with preparations for the greatest war the world had
ever seen. With the spring, the armies everywhere shook them-

1702] WILLIAM AND MARY 467

selves and began to move on the Meuse, the Rhine, the Danube
and the Po. But William was dead. The fierce clear light that
had so long flickered in the frail lamp of his body was at last ex-
tinguished. But the great machine he had set in motion rolled
irresistibly on. In charge of it, in Flanders, appeared the man
whom he had chosen for that place ; because, though he knew his
treasons, he understood his motives and had detected his genius.
Marlborough was going to the war.

Outside his own people and his own country of Holland,
William never sought the love of contemporaries or of posterity,
and he has not obtained it; but he sought their welfare and
freedom, and these he achieved. His Calvanism was the garb in
which his age and country dressed the temper of a Stoic, who
serves God for duty, not for joy or fear. He scorned to be popular.
He scorned to be cruel. His wisdom was indefatigable. His
patience was like the patience of the gods.

Protes-
tantism

and Par-

liament-
ary
govern-
ment
secure

468 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [i702

CHAPTER XV
THE REIGN OF ANNE, 1702-14

While strength upholds the free.—BowEn

HEN Charles II. landed at Dover, it had been decided
beyond all future appeal that the Puritans were not to

rule the State, and that England was not to be a republic; but
when William marched from Torbay, it was decided no less
irrevocably that the Catholics were not to rule the State, and
that England was not to be a despotism. Under Queen Anne the
supremacy of the Protestants was never once threatened by the
Catholics, nor the liberties of the subject by the monarch; and
even if!on her death Bolingbroke had restored the Pretender, that
prince would have been bound to the High Churchmen and Tories
as helplessly as George I. was bound to the Latitudinarians and
Whigs. But the Revolution, like the Restoration, had drawn
with it some by-consequences, which many of those who supported
its main provisions did not intend to become permanent. ‘These
accidents of the Revolution were Toleration for Dissenters, the
growth of a monied interest in close alliance with Government,
a system of national credit, and a standing army. All these were
necessary conditions of the great land war with France, into which
the events of 1688 had plunged the nation. While William lived
to protect the Dissenters, and while the country was daily threatened
with conquest and starvation, the Tories, who were quite as violently
patriotic as the Whigs, though in a different way, curbed their
passions and made no serious effort to overthrow the new domestic
system. But in 1702 their opportunity seemed to have arrived.
A High Church Queen ascended the throne; and if the danger to
Europe was greater than before, now that the French infantry
were garrisoning the towns of Flanders and Italy, the danger to

1702] THE REIGN OF ANNE 469

England was less obvious than ten years before, when they had been Tolera-
crowding the ports of embarkation along the Norman coast. ‘The ht he
Tories felt encouraged by the new monarch, and justified by the system
new situation, in beginning a reactionary movement against that "S°cU"e
part of the Revolution settlement which concerned the treatment

of the Dissenters and of the commercial classes. This policy en-
couraged among its advocates a readiness to confine our operations
against France chiefly to naval warfare, an indifference to the fate

of Holland and the other States of Europe, and no “ very settled
resolutions” on the question of the Hanoverian succession!, The
Whigs, on the other hand, in their zeal for Toleration and for the
monied men, would be at any pains to secure the success, but at

none to secure the termination, of a war whose continuance was,

under a Tory monarch, the only safeguard of the domestic interests

under their charge.

It was the good fortune of England, in this glorious reign, to The
get all that was good out of both parties, when a few turns of paeris
chance would, as often happens, have given her all that was worst. best of
When Anne died (1714), the Whigs had, by a vigorous war on ne
land, restored the safety of the States of Europe, broken for ever
the prestige of the persecuting Catholic despotism of France,
established in its place that of the tolerant Protestant constitu-
tionalism of England, and thereby prepared the way for the
intellectual and political downfall of the ancien régime on the
Continent ; they had passed the Union with Scotland ; they had
secured the Hanoverian succession ; and in doing these things they
had rendered secure for the future the monied interest and the
Toleration of Dissent. These great achievements, the starting-
point of European and English development in the coming
centuries, were party measures taken to defend certain classes of
the island community. The Tories, on their side, though they
failed permanently to secure their other objects, garnered for us
by a lasting peace the fruits of the Whig war. Their Treaty of
Utrecht (1713) was a measure to promote the interests of their
party, just as the campaign of Ramillies, the Union with Scotland,
and the bringing over of George I., were designed to protect the
other. Thus out of the contests of two factions was snatched the
welfare both of England and of Europe.

1Bolingbroke’s Letier to Sir W. Windham (ed. 1753), p. 22.

The Age
of Anne

Whig
party
under
Anne: its
composi-
tion

470 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1702

This game of rise and fall, played out for the dozen years of
Anne’s reign by the chiefs of a small people scarcely more
numerous than the inhabitants of London at the present day,
decided the trend of European civilisation. But in order to
understand the turns and chances of this game, it is necessary
first to appreciate the forces, interests and principles which had in
recent years taken possession of the Whig and Tory parties respec-
tively, as a result of the reign of William and the French wars.

The Whig party, in the reign of Anne, was, as its adversaries
loved to observe, “patched up of heterogeneous, inconsistent
parts” :} a small majority of the House of Lords, where the balance
was held by the Whig Bishops of William’s creation; the officers
and veterans of the army; the trading classes, especially the great
monied men of the City and the Bank, who financed and therefore
advised the Revolution Government; the yeomen in the southern,
eastern and south-western shires; the whole body of Dissenters ;
and the “several gradations of free-thinkers”—more talked of in
this than in the succeeding reigns—Latitudinarian Bishops, Quakers,
Unitarians, deistic philosophers, and blasphemous libertine aristo-
crats of the type of Wharton. These classes were bound together
by common fear of the Tory reaction, which, as press, pulpit, and
coffee-house loudly proclaimed in the opening years of the century, .
had marked them for common overthrow and persecution. They
were united not only by a common fear but by a set of principles,
intelligently and heartily understood by all classes of Whigs,
except perhaps by the soldiers, whose affections, like those of
Corporal Trim, were centred on the persons of William and
Marlborough, and who were Whigs only because the Whigs were
the war party. The principles that bound the rest of the coali-
tion together were the doctrines of Locke, confirmed and enlarged

by experience. ‘They are stated by Swift under three principal
heads, as follows :—

1, They do not think the prerogative to be yet sufficiently limited ; and
have therefore taken care (as a particular mark of their veneration for the
illustrious House of Hanover) to clip it still closer against the next reign,

1Swift, Examiner, No. 35.

1703] THE REIGN OF ANNE 471

This jealousy of the powers of the Crown was indeed always the Its
central point of Whig theory; but it had also been the Tory principles
practice under William. On the accession of Anne the old state

of things was restored. For while the Tories could lead, the Whig
ministers had to drive the Queen. In the middle of her reign the

Tories could point to Anne as another Royal Martyr in the hands

of the army, the fanatics and the Parliament.

2. As to religion (continues Swift) their universal, undisputed maxim is
that it ought to make no distinction at all among Protestants. . . . Union
in discipline and doctrine, the offensive sin of schism, the notion of a Church
and hierarchy, they laugh at as foppery, cant and priestcraft. They see
no necessity at all that there should be a national faith; and what we
usually call by that name, they only style the veligion of the magistrate.
This is a perfectly fair account of Whig principles, if it be borne
in mind that no attack on the emoluments or position of the Church
was suggested, but only a partial and gradual admission of some of
the Dissenters to civil office, and a defence of their right to educate
their own children.!

3. Swift adds “another acknowledged maxim in that party,
and, in my opinion, as dangerous to the Constitution as any I have
mentioned ; I mean, that of preferring, on all occasions, the monied
interest before the landed”.? This meant that the Whig ministers
under Anne continued the financial system that Montague had
begun under William, basing the policy of the country on public
borrowing. It was therefore necessary for Government to retain
the good-will and consult the wishes of the capitalists of the City,
organised in the Bank of England, undeterred by the fact that
many of them were Presbyterians. ‘The Whigs perceived the true
lines on which British power and wealth could be developed in the
coming century.

The Tories claimed to represent the more solid interests in the Tory
nation, because in their opinion no interest was solid but that of ape
the landowners. ‘Their party consisted of most of the country Anne. Its
gentlemen and nine-tenths of the country clergy, together with the eae
large classes wholly dependent on the manor house, such as family
servants, tenant-farmers and their employees. The agricultural

1See the statement of the Whig majority in the House of Lords on the Oc-
casional Conformity Bill, 1702, where not even complete civil equality is claimed for

Dissenters (Parl. Hist., vi., pp. 76-91).
2Swift, Examiner, No. 35.

The
squires
and the
yeomen

472 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1702

labourers, then the vast majority of the English nation, had no
voice in politics; but as they trooped off meekly to the parish
church, and as there was then no social agitation on foot against
squire or farmer, it may be presumed that all except those employed
by the yeomanry would count as Tories at a pinch. Both parties
could, at favourable seasons, excite to riot the rabble of the large and
small towns. In the reign of Anne the Tories succeeded in this
more often, in spite of the advantage possessed by the Whigs as the
war party; for there were more Dissenting than Catholic chapels
at hand to be sacked.

The Tory party desired not to overthrow but to modify the
Revolution settlement. They wished not to raise the Catholics,
but to depress the Dissenters; not to restore absolutism, but to
extend squirearchy. It was their ambition to monopolise power
for the landowning class.

We supposed (wrote Bolingbroke to Windham) the Tory party to be the
bulk of the landed interest, and to have no contrary influence blended into
its composition. . . . We supposed the Whigs to be the remains of a party,
formed against the ill-designs of the Court under King Charles II., nursed up
into strength and applied to contrary uses by King William III., and yet still
so weak as to lean on the Presbyterians, on the bank and other corporations,
on the Dutch and other allies. . . . The view, therefore, of those amongst us
who thought in this manner, was to improve the Queen’s favour to break the
body of the Whigs, to render their supports useless to them, and to fill the
employments of the kingdom, down to the meanest, with Tories. We
imagined such measures, joined to the advantages of our numbers and our
property, would secure us against all attempts during her reign ; and that we
should soon be too considerable not to make our terms in all events which
might happen afterwards: concerning which, to speak truly, I think few or
none of us had yery settled resolutions.?

The spirit of the Tory party was the jealousy of the old world
against the new; the wish to restrain the growth of new classes
and new ideas. But there was one bit of old England that was
on the side of the Whigs. The great days of the yeomen were
over. Doomed economically to a slow extinction, they were only
able to maintain their political influence against the neighbouring
squires by alliance with the more flourishing classes of the Whig
union—the Lords, the monied men and the shopkeepers. It would
appear that the Tory creed did not regard the small freeholder as

 Bolingbroke’s Letter to Sir W. Windham (ed. 1753), p. 22

1702] THE REIGN OF ANNE 473

one of those “ possessors of the soil,” who, according to Swift, “are
the best judges of what is for the advantage of the kingdom” ; for
Tory legislation under Anne excluded the yeoman, as well as the
mere merchant, from the right of sitting in the House of Commons.}
In the same spirit, the legislation of former reigns had excluded all
freeholders of under a hundred pounds a year from killing game
even on their own lands.? Game preserving had, all through the
seventeenth century, been increasing the antagonism of the squire
to his yeoman neighbour, the only person on the country-side who
was not at his mercy. The jealousy even of the good Sir Reger de
Coverley is half-aroused against the

“‘ yeoman of about an hundred pounds a year” who “ would bea good man if |
he did not destroy so many partridges”’. “‘ He is just within the game act, and
qualified to kill an hare or a pheasant: he knocks down a dinner with his gun

twice or thrice a week; and by that means lives much cheaper than those
who have not so good an estate as himself,”

Thus the game laws passed by the gentry had robbed the poorer
yeomen of an important part of their means of livelihood, because,
in the eyes of these defenders of property, the private inheritance
of a poor man was as little sacred as the common lands and rights
of the village. ‘The greater eagerness about game preserving which
marks the legislation of the seventeenth century was partly due to
the shot-gun, which had come into general use since the reign of
James I., had largely displaced hawking, and had caused a more
rapid destruction of birds. In William III.’s reign, the grouse and
blackcock were first mentioned in the game laws; and about this
time it gradually became the custom to “shoot flying ”.®

The class jealousy of the squires was directed not only downward The
against the yeomen but upwards against the Lords. Squire Western cig
declared that he would not try to marry his daughter to one of the Lords
great fortunes of the kingdom, for “most 0’ such great estates be in
the hands of lords, and I heate the very name of themmum”. A
Whig Peer—(half the Jay Peers and more than half the Bishops
were Whigs)—was independent of county opinion ; he lived a great

1 Swift, Letter to Pope, roth January, 1720-21. Stats. of Realm, g Anne V.

2 Stats. of Realm, 22-23 C. Il, xxv.; 4 W. and M,, xxiil.

3 Gentleman’s Recreation, 1685, p. 125. Spectator, No.122. Stats. of Realm, 4
and 5 W. and M., xxiii., sec. 9. See p.9 above. Addison’s Tory Foxhunter says
the game law is the ‘‘ one good law passed since King William’s accession to the
throne” (Freeholder, No. 22).

The

parsons
and the
soldiers

Tory
crusade
against
Dissenters

474 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS {1702

part of the year in his town mansion ; he liked the company of the
great political, literary and mercantile world of the capital, with
which his rural neighbours were unfamiliar; at election time he
came down in his coach to help the handful of Whig gentry to
organise and encourage the yeomen, Dissenters, and smal] townsmen.
This social offence was the more resented because the lordly offender
was beyond the reach of resentment. To add insult to injury, he
was often of no better family than the neighbours over whom he
took precedence. A great part of the Lords of either party were,
like Somers and Montague, Harley and St. John, Churchill and
Godolphin, “new men” raised to the peerage for service done.
They had attained their rank in the State, and their leadership in
their respective parties, by talent, not by birth. But at a time
when the forces of democracy were still too weak to stand by them-
selves, such leaders were of even greater importance to the Whig
than to the Tory side.

Another class for whom squire and parson felt a natura! dislike was
the army officer. Many men acquired riches, and still more acquired
position, popularity and insolence, as the heroes of two long wars
with France. The praises of William and Marlborough were always
on their lips, together with other language scarcely more palatable
to a Tory parson. Swift describes how he encountered a red-coat
sitting in a coffee-house near two gentlemen, who were engaged in some
discourse that savoured of learning. This officer thought fit to interpose,
and professing to deliver the sentiments of his fraternity, as well as his own
(and probably he did so of too many among them) turned to the clergyman
and spoke in the following manner: ‘‘ D——n me, doctor, say what you will,
the army is the only school for gentlemen. Do you think my Lord Marl-
borough beat the French with Greek and Latin? D——n me,a scholar when
he comes into good company, what is he but an ass? D nme, I would be
glad by G——d to see any of your scholars, with his nouns and his verbs, his

philosophy and trigonometry, what a figure he would make at a siege, or
blockade, or rencountering. D——n me” (Essay on Modern Education).

The army men were not all like this hero of Swift’s, nor were all
the squires like Addison’s Foxhunter ; but neither were they all like
Corporal Trim or Sir Roger de Coverley,

But, most of all, the spleen of the Tories was roused by their
old enemies the Dissenters, and by the Dissenters’ new allies, the
free-thinkers. ‘To extirpate these heresies by legislative interference
was the avowed object of the Tories, who, as Swift confessed,

1703] THE REIGN OF ANNE 475

cannot agree that the truth of the gospel and the piety and wisdom of its
preachers are a sufficient support, in an evil age, against infidelity, faction and
vice, without the assistance of secular power. . . . I believe they venture to
go a little further, and think that, upon some occasions, they want a little
enlargement of assistance from the secular power against atheists, deists,
socinians and other heretics (Public Spirit of the Whigs).

Thus spoke the pious author of the Yale of a Tub; his most
religious leader, Bolingbroke, wrote that the intention of the Tory
party was not to distress the consciences of the existing generation
of Nonconformists, but to prevent any fresh generation from being
brought up inerror.' For this purpose they passed the Schism Act
(1714), to prevent the Nonconformists from educating their own
children. These sentiments among the literary and political chiefs of
the party interpreted an amount of frenzied prejudice on the part
of the rank and file such as it is hard for our generation to realise.
The press poured out on the Nonconformists, as hypocrites, rebels and
regicides, invectives which in that generation had neither truth nor
excuse. ‘The Quakers, who were now driven for shelter under the
Whig banner, were held up to execration as the vilest and most licen-
tious of mankind.? Addison’s Tory publican “had not time to go
to church himself, but . . . had headed a mob at the pulling down
of two or three meeting-houses,” while his patron, the Foxhunter,

had learned a great deal of politics, but not one word of religion, from the

parson of his parish ; and, indeed, he had scarce any other notion of religion,
but that it consisted in hating Presbyterians.

To sum up in the words of Lecky :—

The facility with which this atrocious Act (the Schism Act of 1714) was
carried, abundantly shows the danger in which religious liberty was placed in
the latter years of the reign of Queen Anne. There can indeed be little
doubt that had Tory ascendancy been but a little prolonged, the Toleration
Act would have been repealed.*®

The same fierce spirit was turned against the Low Churchmen, Tories
who were regarded as traitors in the camp, and, what was worse, "4 the
traitors in command. “'There is scarce a Presbyterian in the whole Church.
county,” says the F oxhunter, “except the Bishop.”* Their™"

1 Letter to Sir W. Windham (ed. 1753), pp. 22-25. See also Wentworth, p. 389,
where also it is confessed without shame that the object of the Schism Act is to
extirpate Dissent in the coming generation. _ 4

2See Ned Ward’s popular Hudibras Redivivus, cantos xv.-xvii., and passim.
Prints and Drawing, B.M., 1417, 1418, 1502, 1509, 1536.

SLecky, i., p. 120. Freeholder, Nos. 22, 37, 47. * Freeholder, No. 22,

Tories
and the
religious
refugees

476 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1702 |

orders were, however, little obeyed. ‘The most pronounced Episco- |
palians were distinguished by their insolence to the Bishops, who, |
ever since rPNloisn held the See of Canterbury (1691-94), had
been fairly hunted by their flocks. The hatred felt for Bishop |
Burnet in no way abated with time, and in the reign of Anne
and her successor it was equalled by the violence of the Lower
House of Convocation against the Latitudinarian controversialist,
Hoadley. The Low Churchmen, as this small band of town clergy
were called in their own day, would in our time be better described
as Broad. In fact, they had little in common with the modern
evangelical, except friendliness to the Dissenters. It is not perhaps
necessary to commiserate the lot of these excellent men, since their
real crime was that they annexed the loaves and fishes ; but those
few of them who were sensitive to abuse had much to endure. The
fact that the majority of the Bishops spoke and voted in the Lords
against the measures of persecution urged on behalf of the Church,
was one of the chief causes why the Occasiona] Conformity and the
Schism Acts could not be passed until the end of the Queen’s reign,
and were repealed under her successor.

The same spirit of persecution was turned, though in a milder
form, against the Calvinistic and Lutheran refugees. Those who
choose to go into exile for their faith are generally superior in
mind and character to those who stay behind, and it was the good
fortune of England that such men were now coming to her shores
by the thousand. As soon as they were naturalised here, their
vote was certain for the Whigs and the war party. The Whig
Lords made great personal efforts to settle them in England, in
Ireland and in America. But the improvement of our silk trade by
the French Huguenots failed greatly to impress squires who held that
“trade would be the ruin of the English nation” ;} the Tories made
capital out of the popular clamour raised against the Palatine re-
fugees, whom the Whig ministry welcomed in 1709. England, it
was said, was being turned into a Holland, a mercantile republic,
based on religious tolerance and foreign immigration. Finally, in
1711, the Tories passed a Bill to prevent the naturalisation of foreign
Protestants, which was fortunately thrown out by the Lords.

1 Freeholder, No. 22.

*Lecky, i., pp. 52, 233-40. Stanhope, ii., pp, 209, 210. Wyon’s Queen Anne,
ii., pp. 157, 158. Parl. Hist., vi., pp. 999- -1000. Wentworth, p. 96. Swift,
Examiner, No, 21, and Sentiments of a Church of England Man.

1702} THE REIGN OF ANNE 477

The Tory belief that England was being turned into another Tories
Holland was inspired, not only by the toleration extended to ae
domestic sects and foreign immigrants, but also by the growing im- interest
portance of the “ monied interest”.

Let any man (wrote Swift) observe the equipages in this town, he shall

find the greater number of those, who make a figure, to be a species of men
quite different from any that were ever known before the Revolution; con-
sisting either of generals and colonels, or of those whose whole fortunes lie
in funds and stocks (Examiner, 18).
These monied men were exerting influence through two channels,
In the first place, they bought up constituencies, contesting by
wholesale bribery. the territorial influence and intimidation which
was the strength of the Tory gentlemen in the small boroughs.
Secondly, they exacted terms from the Government, whose war
policy they financed through the agency of the Bank and Nationa]
Debt. Since they were mostly Dissenters or Low Churchmen,
their war loans were practically conditional on the abeyance of
persecuting legislation, as Marlborough and Godolphin discovered
very early in the reign of Anne. “Must our laws,” wrote Swift,
“from henceforth pass the Bank and East Indian Company, or
have their royal assent before they are in force?” Some merchants
throve on contracts for the armies in the field and the ships at
sea; few of them felt the war taxation as severely as the squires.
The landowners complained that, under the existing financial
system, land paid more than its share, and that the money went
to support wars which benefited only the mercantile class. The
Tory leaders, when they came into full power towards the close
of the reign, hastened to make a peace which freed Government
from bondage to capitalists, and passed a law preventing any
merchant or soldier, who did not draw at least three hundred
pounds a year from land, from sitting in the House of Commons
(1711). Bolingbroke, if his party had remained longer in power,
would have relieved land, and burdened industry with more taxa-
tion, and would perhaps have withdrawn the trading privileges of
some of the Whig companies, or remodelled theni on a Tory basis.
If the Pretender had been restored, it was generally feared in the
City that Government would not satisfy the National Creditors.’

1 Examiner, Nos. 13, 35, 37. Letter to Sir W. Windham (ed, 1753), pp. 20-23,
45-29. Spectator, No. 3. Lecky,i., pp. 247-51.

Tories
and
passive
obedience

War

of the
Spanish
Succes-
sion,
1701-13

478 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1702 |

Such were the various projects of religious, social and political

reaction, all tending to prolong artificially the old monopoly of |
power by one class against the new forces of the time. This scheme |

of domestic policy was assisted by the favour of the Queen, tempered,

in her case, by a desire to keep the peace among her subjects and to |

beat Louis to his knees. But the new Tory platform was weakened,

because it still stood in theory on those absolutist doctrines on which |

the first Tory platform had been reared at the time of the Exclusion
Bill. Passive obedience and non-resistance were still an essential
part of Church of England teaching, ratified by the Lower House
of Convocation in 1705 in opposition to Hoadley, and taken up
as the war-cry of the squires in the Sacheverell controversy five
years later. The position of zealots for passive obedience who

upheld the Revolution settlement, was so clearly illogical,! that |

the appeal of the Tories to the plain man was made under a great
disadvantage ; their protestations of loyalty to the Hanoverian
succession were coldly uttered and incredulously received. So long
as the doctrine of passive obedience was in being, the Whigs were

able to argue, in perfect good faith, that the restoration of the ©

Pretender would be the restoration of absolutism ; although prob-
ably his return would have involved no more than religious persecu-

tion, squirearchy, and perhaps the repudiation of the National

Debt.
But the influence that most affected the fortunes of the Tories
and their scheme of domestic reform, was the course of foreign

affairs. There were only two English statesmen of the first rank —

who regarded home affairs as subsidiary in importance to foreign,
but these two—Marlborough and Godolphin—when the reign
opened, held the balance between parties, and, secure in the Queen’s
favour, possessed the keys of office.

The war of the Spanish Succession (1701-13) was the last and
decisive stage of the struggle of European liberty against Louis
XIV. At the outset, the Allies had less apparent chance of success
than in any of the former wars. For Louis was now the man in

1“ For my part,” says the Tory Foxhunter, in 1716, “I and my father before

me have always been for passive obedience, and shall be always for opposing a

prance wee makes use of Ministers that are of another opinion” (Freeholder,
0. 22).

1702) THE REIGN OF ANNE 479

possession of the Spanish Empire. In the fatal spring of 1701 his
troops. had become masters of provinces for whose frontier strong-
holds he had been striving all his life with varying fortunes,
His grandson, Philip V. of Spain, called in French garrisons to
guard the Netherlands and Italy; and French troops would
be welcomed in Spain itself, the moment that an attack was
threatened there against Bourbon interests. To crown this tre-
mei.dous edifice of power, an alliance with Bavaria enabled Louis,
in 1703, to penetrate into the very heart of Germany.

The war of the League of Augsburg (1688-97) included four Four seats

distinct wars on land—those on the Flemish, the Rhenish, the Alpine, of war
and the Pyrenean frontiers of France. The war of the Spanish
Succession included the same four wars, but the seat of each had
been removed by Louis far into the enemy’s country, from the
borders of France to those of Holland; from the valley of the
Rhine to that of the Danube; from the Alps to the valley of the
Po; from the Pyrenees to the coast-line of Spain, the border of the
British power. ‘Thus the Allies had again to undertake the same
four wars, no longer as wars of defence but as wars of recovery.
The whole of the Latin peoples were united under the Bourbon
despotism; Amsterdam and Vienna were no longer divided by
buffer States from the attack of French armies. Napoleon’s scheme
of conquest was greater than that of Louis only by its extension
into Prussia and Russia, and was in many points of detail and
method a close imitation. Indeed the balance of power in 1704
is curiously comparable to that a hundred years later, though the
results of Austerlitz and of Blenheim were different.

It did not seem likely that Austria, Holland, England, and a Task be-
few of the small and mercenary States of the German Empire, ree
would defeat France, Spain, Savoy and Bavaria so signally as to
drive Louis’ troops out of the Spanish Empire. It was even doubt-
ful whether they could save Holland and Austria from destruction.

For William was dead. The coalition, which in former years he
alone had kept together by his European reputation and _ his
knowledge of Europe, by his tact, his genius, and his sole devotion
to the common cause, had only just been able to defend the Spanish
Empire; how should it now, without him, recover that Empire, by
the divided counsels of ignorant English parties and selfish con-
tinental princes? ‘The despotism of Louis seemed on the point of

The Marl-
boroughs

Compari-
son of
Marl-
borough
with
William

Godolphin

eee

Aliacs

480 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1702

becoming at jast the “universal monarchy,” whose slow approach
statesmen had been watching with alarm for thirty years.

But chance had raised up a new deliverer. At her accession,
Anne had not yet discovered that she disliked her old pap
Sarah, Countess of Marlborough, the companion of her filial dis-
obedience at the Revolution, anil of her clouded fortunes under
William. Sarah’s husband, therefore, was allowed by the Queen to
guide her policy and lead her armies. Without his wife’s help, it
would have been worse than useless for Marlborough to remind
Anne that William, in the last years of his reign, had marked him
out to succeed to the headship of the coalition. The late King had
perceived in Marlborough qualities even more suited than his own
for the fina] stage of the struggle. Indeed, in a few years, the new

chief acquired a knowledge of Europe only second to that of his
predecessor, and a European reputation that gave to him at Vienna,
Berlin and the Hague an influence never before surpassed. His
word was always given for the course dictated by the common
interest, which would otherwise have escaped the notice of the
crowd of mean princes whom he led and flattered. Marlborough
was superior to William in tact; his manners were winning, axe
his personal beauty and presence the most attractive of any to
be found among the crowd of gentlemen who had whispered their
way to fortune in the Court of Charles II.; a certain indifference
to his own dignity, which was partly common-sense and partly
meanness, enabled him to flatter with the more unction a prince
who would not send his troops to a campaign, or a genera] who
would not lead them to the attack. More than once, when he
saw his long-prepared plans countermanded on the field of battle
by Dutch burgomasters, he showed a patience surpassing the
almost invincible patience of William. The Englishman also
was of iron, but he had set his features not in a frown but in a
smile. Above all, if in the highest realms of state-craft and
diplomacy he fell below William, he surpassed him in far greater
measure as a winner of battles and a taker of towns.

At home, Marlborough stood firm in the Queen’s favour, which,
together with his own nominal Toryism, kept the Tories from
openly thwarting his policy in the early years of the war, until the
Whigs were strong enough to be his sole support. Godolphin,
knit to the fortunes of the Marlboroughs by the marriage of his

1702] THE REIGN OF ANNE 48]

only son to one of their daughters, presided over the Treasury, and
found without a murmur the money for the great plans which he
himself helped to form. Never, even by Chatham, was British gold
better spent. Not only the victories of our own armies on the
Danube and in Flanders, but the no less decisive victories of the
Austrians in Italy, were largely paid out of the pockets of English
squires, who, when they discovered what had happened, cried out
that they had been robbed.

In three out of the four seats of war, Marlborough became Outcome

master of the event. The French were driven out of Germany Ses
(1704), out of Italy (1706), and out of the Netherlands (1706-8).
But it was not found possible to dislodge the Bourbons from Spain.
The Peninsular War of 1702-13, though memorable for the ex-
ploits of Peterborough, is important chiefly as the pivot of naval
operations.

The naval side of the war was not dignified by great battles, but Naval
by great results. In the reign of Anne, the overwhelming char- el
acter of our naval supremacy in modern times was first established
as against both France and Holland ; and in the reign of Anne, the
Mediterranean became the principal and permanent arena for the
activity of our fleets.

Owing to the expense of his land wars, the French King could
seldom in this period afford to put his ships to sea. Holland,
similarly preoccupied and exhausted in the anxious defence of
her land frontier, failed to supply her due proportion of ships to
the allied fleet, and trusted her naval defence to Great Britain,
more than in the last war. Little complaint was made over here
of this part of the failure of the Dutch to fulfil their obligations
as Allies, for both our parties wished the British fleet to be superior
to that of any other nation. When peace was restored, Holland
was no longer the rival, but the dependant, of British naval sup-
remacy. ‘Thus, by means of a close alliance, we destroyed the naval
_ power which had defied Blake, Monk and Rupert. Our fleet
grew, and no one complained of the burden. ‘The Tories wished
England to wage war as a mere auxiliary on land, but as a prin-

- cipal at sea ; while the Whigs wished her to take the lead on both
elements.

Marlborough, with his broader vision of European politics, saw
not only that a large fleet was necessary, but that it should be
31

482 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1702

stationed in Mediterranean waters, as a means of making British
influence felt in the capitals of Europe. This policy was originated
by Cromwell; revived by William; but enlarged and fixed by
Marlborough. It has remained ever since, through all other
changes, long after the policy of his Danube and Netherland
campaignings had served its day and been discarded. Our opera-
tions in Spain (1702-13), involving a necessity to supply and to
connect our two bases of Lisbon and Barcelona; the recovery of
Italy (1706); and the attack on Toulon (1707), kept the British

’ fleet as active in those waters as in the days of Nelson. The

Opening
of the war

capture of Gibraltar (1704) and of Port Mahon in Minorca (1708)
were the results of Marlborough’s Mediterranean policy, and the
security for its continuance in after years.

The employment of the fleet round the coasts of Spain drew it
away from operations against French and Spanish Colonies. Indeed,
the support that we gave, after 1703, to the pretensions of
the Archduke Charles to the Spanish throne, made it impossible
for us to filch for ourselves the territories he thereby claimed in
South and Central America and in the West Indies. But the
policy of Marlborough won us prizes in colder latitudes worth more
to us than all the lands near the Equator. Nova Scotia, New-
foundland and Hudson’s Bay—long in dispute between the British
and French colonials, were finally ceded to us at the peace, as a
result partly of Blenheim, partly of our supremacy at sea.)

In 1701 Austria began in Italy the war of the Spanish Succes-
sion. Eugene, with great skill, introduced the Imperial forces over
the Eastern Alps, and maintained them in the plain of the Po, face
to face with the larger armies of France. The next year saw the
struggle joined by England and Holland, and extended to Flanders,
the Rhine, and the coasts of Spain.

In March, 1702, Anne met the Houses, and made known her
intention of waging war on a grand scale both by land and sea,
The announcement, awaited with uncertainty, caused intense relief
to the princes of the Grand Alliance, who might otherwise never
have taken the field, and to the English Parliament, which con-
sisted of Whigs and moderate Tories chosen in the last relon as an

1Corbett, chaps, xxx.-xxxiii., especially vol. ii., pp. 313-
Power, Mahan, chap. v. bet : PRS ao Teo Jase

1702] THE REIGN OF ANNE 483

expression of the popular demand for war. Rochester expostulated
in the Privy Council against the continuance of the late King’s
policy, but the other Tory ministers fell into line behind Marl-
borough and Godolphin. War was declared in May, at London
and at the Hague, and Marlborough crossed the sea with a British
army containing many who had been trained in William’s wars for
the great services which they were about to perform.

The French had already pushed into Dutch territory, and were Flanders,

encamped on both banks of the lower Maas. But the Anglo-* his and
Dutch armies, under their new chief, crossed the river and forced -
the enemy to retreat upon the lines of the Dyle and its tributaries.!
There they remained, strongly entrenched, for over three years,
covering the Flemish towns. This campaign of 1702 established
the European reputation of Marlborough, and justified the Queen
in raising him that winter toa Dukedom. It had put heart into
the Grand Alliance ; and if the rout of the French armies in the
Netherlands was postponed till the year of Ramillies, this was due
to the repeated refusals of the Dutch Field Deputies to allow their
troops to be taken into a decisive action. ‘These gentlemen were
the counterpart in position, and the opposite in spirit, to the Re-
presentatives in Mission who plagued the generals of the French
Republic ninety years later. Their object was to put Marlborough’s
genius to their own uses, and to render the territories of Holland
safe at a smaller expenditure of their costly armies than would have
been necessary under a less brilliant captain. Again and again
they prevented him from fighting a decisive action.

In August, 1702, the British fleet under Sir George Rooke, with gpain and
a detachment of troops under the Duke of Ormond, failed in an Portugal,

1702 and
attack on Cadiz as disgracefully as their predecessors in the days of 1703
Buckingham. ‘Three months later, by a feat of arms as brilliant as
any in the annals of our united service, they stormed the forts and
broke the boom of Vigo Bay, where lay the treasure galleons from
the West Indies with a score of French and Spanish warships. ‘The
memory of that night, on which the great fleet was burnt to the
water’s edge in spite of the efforts of the English sailors to save
their prizes, was handed down among generations of seafaring men,
who loved to spin yarns about the twenty millions of pieces of eight,

1See map opposite p. 495 below.

1703, the
Allies’
change of
policy

General
election,
July, 1702

The
influence
of the
Crown

484 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1702

and devise means to fetch up the fabled treasure from the bottom
of Vigo Bay.

This fierce proof of what sea-power means, encouraged the King
of Portugal to declare his true sympathies, to defy the House of
Bourbon, and to trust his kingdom’s defence to the English ships
and the soldiers whom they brought to defend his frontier. In 1703
he broke off his alliance with Louis, and signed Mr. Methuen’s
famous Treaty, by which the old system of alliance between Portu-
gal and Britain, initiated at the marriage of Charles II., was
renewed for another and a longer lease of life. In war, Lisbon be-
came the English place of arms for the conquest of Spain. The
accession of Portugal lured on the Allies to attempt to place the
Austrian Archduke Charles on the throne of Madrid, as Carlos III.
The original object of the Grand Alliance of 1701, which had
been to leave Philip crowned in a kingdom shorn of its external
dependencies, was abandoned in favour of the ignis fatuus of “no
peace without Spain”.

Meanwhile, much was taking place at home. In spite of the
protests of the Duchess, who was more of a Whig than her husband
was a Tory, the Queen had remodelled the ministry on a Tory
basis, as a preliminary to the dissolution of William’s old Parlia-
ment. The general election had the opposite result from that of
the former year, and the Tories came in with a large majority. So
great was the power of the Crown, that the mere fact of Anne’s
accession had caused, not only a change of ministry, but the ac-
ceptance of that change by the votes of the nation. Between the
years 1702 and 1715 there were six general elections; three were
won by the Tories and three by the Whigs; but in every case the
decision was in favour of the existing ministry and the influence of
the Crown. 'This result was in part due to the great number of
officers in the civil service—Lords-Lieutenant, Sheriffs, Justices of
the Peace, tax-gatherers, and coastguards—all of whom, “down to
the meanest,” as Bolingbroke boasted, were liable to be changed
with a change of ministry. Many lost their places, but more,
probably, changed their politics for fear of dismissal, and courted
the powers of the day at election time, when, alike in their official
and their private capacity, they had many opportunities of in-
fluencing the poll. Hence the significance of the fact that in
1702, 1710 and 1714-15, the change of ministers took place before

1702) THE REIGN OF ANNE 485

and not after the general election, and was the cause, not the
effect, of the electoral decision. In 1702 the power of the Crown,
which could make and unmake ministers at will, was further
strengthened by the reviving tide of loyalty that gathered round
a Queen whose heart, as she boasted to the delight of the Tories,
was “entirely English”.

The new Tory Parliament hastened to trample on the memory The new
of the Dutch King. It was voted that Marlborough had “signally Satie
retrieved the ancient honour and glory of the English nation”. Oct., 1702
An inquiry into the alleged peculation of William’s Whig mini-
sters was held at great length, but with little success. Vexatious
and only half-honest in purpose, it was useful in effect; for
such charges, brought almost as a matter of course against ex-
ministers by the opposite party, kept the public service more pure,
especially in its higher branches, than if there had been no fear of
investigation. The passions of Church and Dissent, the hatred
between Whig and Tory, prevented that corrupt understanding
between two parties, which arises when politicians are divided by
nothing more fundamental than rivalry for the spoils. At the end
of the reign the Tories failed to bring home to Marlborough any
serious charge of peculation, but no one knows what use the gallant
miser would have made of his command of the army, if he had not
had before his eyes the almost certain prospect of his worst enemies
sitting some day in committee on his accounts.

The attack on the Dissenters, which occupied the Tories through- Occasion-
out the reign, was opened with a Bill to prevent ‘“ Occasional Con- pea
formity”. It punished with ruinous penalties any man who, having Bill, 1702
qualified for State or municipal office by taking the sacrament in
Church, afterwards attended a place of Nonconformist worship.
Occasional Conformity had been defended on religious grounds, by
Baxter and other moderate Presbyterians whose differences from
the Establishment were not deep; as a means of obtaining
office, it was perhaps less worthy of praise, but legislators who had
made the sacrament a State test had no right to call the practice
indecent. In 1702 the persecuting Bill was passed by a Jarge
majority of the Commons, to be lost in the Upper House, in spite
of the influence of the Queen and her ministers. But Marlborough
soon learned that if his war measures were to be carried through,
he must fall into line on this point with the City and the Whigs.

486 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1703

The high Tory chiefs in the Council—first Rochester, and, when he |
had been dismissed (1'703), Nottingham—obstructed a vigorous war |
policy, and urged the reasoning, afterwards so formidable in the
hands of Swift, that British interests did not call for our interference |
as principals on the Continent. But unless it was a British interest
that the French should occupy Vienna, it was becoming necessary |
to interfere.as principals more decidedly than ever. In 1703 the —
French armies pushed through Bavaria to the Austrian frontiers.
That winter the Duke secretly planned his great march on the |
Danube, which alone could save the Empire and the Grand Alliance
from disruption. This march, he knew, would make an irreparable
breach between himself and the Tories. If he failed, they would |
impeach him ; even if he succeeded, he must thenceforth depend on |
the opposite party. The Duchess brought him overtures from her
Oceasion- friends of the Whig Junto. So in the session of 1703-4 he allowed
a 6 Bil, his influence to be used secretly against the Occasional Con-
Dec., 1703 formity Bill of the year, while he voted for it in person. It was
defeated in the Lords more signally than twelve months back.

Turning- The turning-point of the war of the Spanish Succession was the
idee attempt of Louis, in 1703-4, to break up the Grand Alliance at
1703-4 one blow by the capture of Vienna. This plan, almost successful in
1703, ended in the next year on the field of Blenheim, not merely
in repulse, but in disaster that affected the conditions of the
struggle in all the other seats of war.
The It began with nothing less than the Napoleonic design of a com-
ae bined advance on Vienna, down the Danube from Bavaria, and over
Vienna, the Alps from Italy. In May, 1703, Villars, the most capable of
1703 the French Marshals, led an army past the feeble watch on the
Rhine maintained by German princes in the lines of Stolhofen,
crossed the Black Forest, and joined the forces of the Elector of
Bavaria on the banks of the Danube. War had not been carried
on by combinations and marches of this sort since the days of
Gustavus. The scheme was indeed too gigantic; for if, in the
summer of 1703, the Franco-Bavarian armies had been content to
hold on straight down the Danube, without waiting for Venddme to
join them from Italy, Vienna must have fallen. But the Elector of
Bavaria, whom the French had bribed to desert the cause of
Germany by the offer of the Austrian Tyrol, marched into those

1703) THE REIGN OF ANNE 487

mountains, partly to secure his new territories, and partly to join
hands with Vendéme as he came up the Brenner from Italy. The
Tyrolese, whose loyalty to the House of Austria then, as in the days
of Andreas Hofer, partook of the nature of mountain freedom,
drove back the new lord whom France had set over them, in such a
plight that he refused to accompany Villars a step further towards
Vienna that year.

Neither did Vendéme reach the top of the Brenner Pass. Italy, Savoy
after close on two centuries of slavery to the Spaniards and the pee
Jesuits, still contained one Italian State. The Duke of Savoy, autumn,
Victor Amadeus II., the persecutor of the Vaudois, would have had *7°3
little sympathy with the liberalism of his descendants, but he was
at least a good Italian, in so far that he maintained the political
independence of Savoy against Spain, Austria and France. By
perpetually changing sides in the wars of Louis XIV., he had kept
up in those regions a balance of power which gave importance to
his small State. In pursuance of this policy, he now deserted his
too-powerful French ally at the very crisis of the war. Venddme,
who had got as far as Trent only to find that the Bavarians had re-
tired to the Danube, hurried back when Savoy rose on his com-
munications. The territories of Victor Amadeus were occupied
by the French, and his fortresses besieged. Thus, at the end
of 1703, Italy and Bavaria were still French ground, but the doom
of Vienna had been averted for a year.

In 1704 the French would resume their march down the prospects
Danube, this time without aid from Italy, but with the no less for the
formidable aid of the Hungarian Protestants under Ragotzi. Jae
Maddened by religious persecution, to which the recent expulsion
of the Turks by the Austrians had subjected them, the Magyar
horsemen were swarming over the Emperor’s dominions; a truce-
less war of creeds and races was raging, from castle heights among
the beech-clad Transylvanian mountains, almost to the gates of
Vienna, where sat Eugene, struggling with the ineradicable evils
of the Austrian War Office. Without men or money to save the
Empire, he had at least the winter months in which to solicit help
from some other quarter of Europe.

England and Holland alone could send aid sufficient; but if
any man had openly suggested in either country to send the
national army to the Danube, popular indignation would at once

488 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1704 |

The plot have put a stop to the scheme. There was hope only in one man. —

eae ee Perhaps Marlborough could, if he dared, cheat the two nations into

borough, saving the Empire and the Alliance. Fortunately his view of the |

1703-4 —_ situation was so broad that he could see from London what no one |

else could see except at Vienna. He entered into a plot with Eugene |

to steal the English and Dutch armies, ‘There were two other |

accomplices, to whom part of the scheme was revealed: Heinsius, —

William’s old servant, who helped to deceive the Dutch, and

Godolphin, who undertook the management of the Queen and

Cabinet. Early in 1704 the Emperor sent a letter to Anne,

begging for help. By means of this letter Marlborough obtained

an instruction from the Cabinet to concert with Holland measures

for the safety of Vienna (April): nothing was said or intended about

the British troops, but vague instructions are the opportunity of the

determined man. He had next to cheat the Dutch. Crossing to

Holland, he there announced that he would begin the year with a

campaign on the Moselle. By the help of Heinsius, the Dutch

were induced to grant him for this purpose a large army of foreign

troops in their pay, on the understanding that they were not taken

further away from Holland than that region. When, however, he

had reached the Moselle with the Anglo-Dutch forces, he threw off

the mask, fled up’the Rhine to Mainz, and then struck across

Germany. ‘The Tories swore they would have his head; the Dutch

made a virtue of necessity and accepted the fart accompli. The

consternation among the French Marshals was great. Where would

The Marlborough strike—on the Moselle, in Alsace, or on the upper

pee on Rhine? The French armies, that should have been half-way to

Danube, Vienna, were kept on the west bank of the Rhine in dreadful

yoyo expectation. By the end of June it was known throughout Europe
that the red-coats had appeared in the distant plains of Bavaria.

On their way to the Danube, the Anglo-Dutch forces had been

joined by a German army, under Prince Louis of Baden. To

establish themselves in Bavarian territory it was necessary to capture

Donauwerth, protected by the heights of the Schellenberg, behind

whose trenches lay an army of French and Bavarians. Marlborough

ee and Louis of Baden held command on alternate days. Early ona

berg morning that was his to use, the Duke ordered the assault of the

stormed, Schellenberg. It was carried after a desperate fight, in which the

July, 2nd :
1704 allies lost over five thousand men. Bavaria was now theirs. All

1704) THE REIGN OF ANNE 489

the open towns fell to the victors, who laid waste the country in
order to coerce or punish its ruler. Marlborough’s fame was spread
over the world. “I must tell you,” so Shrewsbury wrote to him
from Rome, “ that in this holy, ignorant city they have an idea of
you as of a Tamerlane; and had I a picture of old Colonel Birch
with his whiskers, I could put it off for yours; and change it for one
done by Raphael.” ?

But France was preparing to recover all. The great army
under Marshal Tallard, who succeeded this year to the more com-
petent Villars, at last crossed the Rhine and entered Bavaria.
Eugene, who had been left to guard the lines of Stolhofen, hastened
back eastward with part of his forces by a parallel line to 'Vallard,
and was joined by Marlborough near Donauwerth. Louis of Baden
was induced to undertake the siege of. Ingoldstadt, and so to leave
the two great generals unhampered at the supreme moment of
their lives. The united armies of Tallard and the Elector of
Bavaria were also north of the Danube, only ten miles away to the
west. On the 12th of August (N.S.), Marlborough and Eugene
rode out to Dapfheim, climbed the church tower, and saw the
Franco-Bavarian army taking up camp between Blenheim and
Lutzingen (see map, p. 490). ‘They determined to join battle next
day, before the spade could render the new position impregnable.

That night 36,000 men from Denmark, Prussia, Holland, The eve
Austria, Hanover and Hesse, and 9,000 Englishmen, were camped Bae.
round Dapfheim village, knowing that at break of day they would
be led to a memorable attack? That evening, at Marly, the Grand
Monarch feasted two persons whom it pleased him to call “ the
King and Queen of England,” at a “sumptuous repast with new
services of porcelain and glass, on tables of white marble without
cloths”. ‘“ At nightfall, drums, trumpets, cymbals and hautbois
announced that the fireworks were about to begin.” 'The triumphal
arch was magnificently illuminated. “After supper the King and
Queen of England returned to St. Germains.” But till midnight
the gardens were thronged with delighted courtiers.’

About the time that the last revellers by the Seine were slinking
to their beds, the English trumpets woke the sleepers by the

1Coxe, i., p. 268.
2 Coxe, i., pp. 289, 292, notes. The enemy were a few thousand more, about

56,000.
3 ¥ournal du Marquis de Dangeau, 12th August, 1704.

490 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1704 |

The Danube. Early in the morning Tallard learned that the Allies had

battle of
Blenheim,

broken camp at two o’clock ; but he was deceived by a rumour of |

13th Aug. the country that they were retreating to the north. While he was |

e204 writing home this welcome news, a light morning mist hid from his

view the defile, two miles in front of the French position, where -
the wooded hills came close down to the river, or he would have

seen the armies of Marlborough and Eugene wending towards
him in nine long columns. At seven the mist cleared, and the
French saw their enemies debouching into the plain before them.
Wooded hills on the north, the Danube on the south, and the

marshes of the Nebel stream in front, protected the position of |

A eee
; ; Ts Te WZ

Oy UES

SCENE or tue BATTLE |
of

‘ Scale of Uiles = cient

eshuen &

the Franco-Bavarian armies. But they were badly disposed ;
most of the cavalry, and only nine battalions of infantr y, were

stretched along the centre; while the foot were massed in the |
villages of Obergian and Lutzingen to the north, and Blenheim |

on the Danube Baus The line "or battle was five miles long ; it |
was afternoon before Eugene had led his men to their northern
positions.

At one o’clock the attack on the villages commenced. Cutts, |

|
|
|
|

| |

;

the fighting man of William’s old army, nicknamed the Salamander |

for its valent where fire was hottest on the breach, and known to

|

posterity as the subject of the most brutal of all Swift’s satires,
directed the English attack against the fortified front of Blenheim,

1704} THE REIGN OF ANNE 491

Again and again they were driven back from the stockades, defended
by the flower of the French army. Far to northward, at the foot of
the wooded hills, the Danes and Prussians under Eugene struggled
all afternoon, with slow success, for Lutzingen and the posts held
by the Bavarian troops.

The day was decided in the centre. Under cover of some British
infantry, who crossed first by the bridges at Unterglau, Marlborough
passed his cavalry over the marshy ground of the Nebel. Some
waded, some crossed over planks and fascines. The enemy’s nine
battalions of foot were too few; his horse charged too late to
prevent the crossing, and then charged ill. The British cavalry came
on, sword in hand, without firing ; the French, who in the last war
had been famous for their sole reliance on cold steel, halted to fire,
wavered, and galloped off the field’. The centre was swept away
in one triumphant roar; the deserted infantry were ridden over
and cut down; Tallard was taken and lodged in Marlborough’s
coach ; the cavalry were chased far beyond Hochstadt or herded
towards the south and driven over the steep river-bank, where
hundreds found refuge or death in the wilderness of marshy shore
and reedy island, divided by the broad, deep currents of the
Danube.

In that storm of flight the messengers were lost, who should
have carried timely orders of retreat to the defenders of Blenheim ;
consequently they made no efforts to withdraw from the angle of
the Danube that shut them in, until the British infantry, coming
up victorious from the central battle, had closed the trap upon the
village. Lord Orkney stormed into it from the rear, cheering on
his red-coats at the high stone wall of the churchyard, but was
stormed out again. Thinking that the French were about to make
a desperate sally to cut their way out through his tired troops, he
beat a parley, and the handsome young Brigadier Denonville
surrendered with the two nearest battalions. Orkney learned from
his prisoners that there were 10,000 men still under arms in the
village. This staggered him, for he knew that no further assault
could be made, either by his own men, who had broken the French
centre, or by Cutts’ men on the further side of the village, who
had all been repulsed five times thatday. Blenheim could probably

1 Dangeau, 29th August, 1704,

492 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1704

hold out till nightfall, when some of its occupants might perhaps
escape: at least they could sell their lives very dear. With
admirable presence of mind, Orkney swaggered to Denonville,
and sent him back into the village with an English aide-de-camp to
demand the capitulation of his superior, Blansac. Instead of
addressing Blansac, Denonville rode up to the troops themselves,
and exhorted them to surrender. Before the officers could drag him
away, his words had taken the heart out of all the soldiers, except
those of the Regiment of Navarre. Discouraged by the attitude of
his troops, Blansac consented to come out of the village and see
the rea] state of things for himself. Orkney showed him that the
rest of the army had indeed fled, and by dint of “a little gasconade”
induced him to sign a capitulation. The Regiment of Navarre,
with tears of rage, burnt the colours and buried the arms which
they were not accustomed to yield to the foe.t
Gibraltar ‘For a full week after his sun had set for ever on the banks of
Bere Bs the Danube, Louis hunted and prayed, disturbed by no news worse
1704 than that the English fleet had put some men ashore at Gibraltar,
who had climbed the rock and taken the castle. “It is impossible
to imagine how careless the Spaniards are,” said the courtiers. It
was only on the morning of the 21st that “the King going to
Mass told us that he had sad news of the army of Mons. Tallard”.
Letters from prisoners taken at Blenheim had been forwarded to
Versailles by the Imperialists in the lines of Stolhofen. The evidence
left no room for hope or doubt. But no one could “ understand
how twenty-six French battalions could have surrendered as prisoners
of war”. It was not the sort of news one brought to Versailles.?
Conse- All Bavaria fell at once to the Allies. The wrecks of the
poe. enemy’s force, reduced by 40,000 men, never halted till they reached
the Rhine; for the rest of the war that river again became the
scene of uneventful operations between the French and Imperial
troops. When the news reached England, every one went mad with
joy, except the politicians. The Tory House of Commons, in its
Address to the Throne, invidiously coupled the victory of Blenheim
in the same sentence with the naval action of doubtful result fought

1 Compare St. Simon’s narrative (iv., pp. 125-28, 140, ed. 1885), based on that
of Blansac, with Lord Orkney’s letter (E. H. R., xix., pp. 309, 310). They tally toa
cemarkable degree.

* Dangeau, 14th-21st August. St. Simon, iv., pp. 130-32,

1705) THE REIGN OF ANNE 493

by Sir George Rooke off Malaga.!. The Tories used all forms of
detraction to render Blenheim less popular; such another success,
they declared, won by Marlborough, and “the Constitution of
England would be ruined”; on the other hand, “it was true a
great many men were killed and taken, but that to the French
King is no more than to take a bucket of water out of a river”.
Marlborough, who never showed a mean jealousy for fame, was at
last nettled. ‘This vile, enormous faction of theirs,” he wrote,
“vexes me.” And again, in a finer spirit: “I will endeavour to
leave a good name behind me in countries that have hardly any
blessing but that of not knowing the detested names of Whig and
Tory ”.?

Whatever name Marlborough has left behind on the Continent,
he had in fact opened for many nations the way to the blessings
of freedom, for he had destroyed on one famous field the glamour
and prestige of despotism in Church and State. If the battle of
Blenheim had been won by Louis, no Voltaire could have made
his system look ridiculous, no Rousseau could have made it seem
irrational. Marlborough himself knew that his victories were
opening the way to a new order in France. On one occasion he
seriously proposed to Godolphin that, when the Queen could dictate
peace, she should “insist upon putting the French Government

»3

upon their being governed by the Three Estates”.

In the winter session of 1704-5, the high Tories tried to force The
the Occasional Conformity Bill through the Lords by “ tacking” it “tack,”
to the financial measures of the year, but the “tack” was defeated ae
in the Commons by the efforts of the ministerial Tories under
Harley and St. John. The Bill came up as usual, to be thrown
out in the Lords, and this time Marlborough and Godolphin voted
openly against the measure which they had supported only two
years before. At the general election next spring, the influence
of the Crown and of the victor of Blenheim was used in favour
of the Whig candidates against all “tackers,” to whom, as Marl-

1The consequence of this unwise comparison was that Rooke, the hero of Vigo
Bay and Gibraltar, was next year removed from the command of the fleet and suc-
ceeded by Sir Cloudesley Shovel, perhaps as good a sailor, but certainly a better

hig.
2 Parl. Hist., vi. p. 357. Coxe, i., pp. 340-43, 404. x
3 Marlborough to Godolphin, 7th June, 1709. Coxe Papers, B.M., xxviii., 9105,

494 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1705 |

borough expressed it, “no quarter” was to be given at the polls.’ |
Whig The Whigs secured a small majority in the new House over the |
victory ** Tory party thus divided against itself. Using the lever of their |
tions, 705 predominance in both Houses, and aided by the sleepless insistence |
of Sarah on their behalf with her husband and with the Queen, |
the Whigs in the next three years forced a way for their leaders, |
one by one, into the ministry. Anne, whose political ideal was a —
mixed Cabinet with a predominance of moderate Tories, resisted |
each step to a pure Whig Government. But she kept no Court, )
like Charles II., to aid and abet her resistance; her husband was |
a fool, and she had no one about her person except her ministers |
and their friends. Sometimes Godolphin would fain have taken |
her side, but, as Wharton put it, the Whigs “had the Lord
Treasurer’s head in a bag”. The league to coerce the Queen’s —
wishes had to be joined by all her servants, except only two. |
Harley and St. John retained office, making constant and fulsome
asseverations of fidelity to the Marlborough interest, which did not
impose upon Godolphin. They would, he perceived, renew relations
with the high Tory party, as soon as they had won for themselves
the confidence which the Queen was gradually withdrawing from
all her other ministers. But the coalition of Marlborough and the
Whigs with Harley and St. John, served the Queen and country
well while it lasted; it recovered Italy and Flanders, and carried
through the difficult negotiations resulting in the Union of Great

Britain.
Union The Scottish Parliament, by the Act of Security (1'704), had
aaa! refused to accept the Hanoverian Succession. The danger of a
1707 Stuart reigning in Holyrood in time of war, made the Union of the

two Crowns and the two Parliaments appear as a necessary measure
of self-defence to most Englishmen, though the high Tories outside
the Cabinet looked askance at an Act that secured the Scottish
Presbyterian Church. Scotland, where public feeling was against
the Union, had the whip-hand of English politicians, who could not
afford to see the negotiations fail. Good financial terms and Free
Trade with England were therefore granted to North Britain, at a
moment when racial and commercial jealousy in the south of the
island dared not make itself heard, for fear of breaking off the
Treaty.

1 Coxe, i., pp. 381-404. Stanhope, i., p. 195.

et

uayooye

¢| QNVTIOH
i OL
{| gyozse0y

‘ ebnagnoy
in o monotone sauualoya/n4
egy se ? yee
“F104.
s
2 | wow
Wen se9nnaqT

x

ujmanoy

N

Oo

anv1igH =

ong aj siog

diomjuy

s[essnigee

ie ve awe y puouzapueg, 7 71

usjnyonog

ge

roaquing

RUpUA

nog BD

sua7®
eunyzege

aIvT° ee

UOoJaUuID AA

P Se 824d f

ayOOuUy

—
saudng

quodnaiyy

> puajzsoQ

OF Or

Ts
riyung

Oe
sony ysroug

sauin, SNU} Peuy[zepun oe
SIL} JO SUMOL Aofddeg OUL
ZOLt

TELE ES

GHL CNV

1706] THE REIGN OF ANNE 495

Meanwhile, the whole nature of the war was altered by the prospects
events of 1706. The timidity of the Dutch Field Deputies pre- fr the x
vented Marlborough from doing anything in 1705, except to drive shipae
back the French from their carefully constructed lines on the sources
of the Gheet. But he could not dislodge them from the line of the
Dyle without a battle. Marlborough, in despair of ever being
allowed to use the large bodies of troops which the Dutch paraded
under his command, designed to cross the Alps in 1706, and repeat
on the banks of the Po his exploits on the Danube. But a lethargy
seemed to have fallen on the Alliance. He could induce neither
Prussia, Denmark nor Hanover to send their troops to Italy. It
seemed that the Duke of Savoy must be left to his fate, for Austria
could not supply Eugene with men or money to relieve Turin;
when it had fallen, the French supremacy in Italy would be secure.

Marlborough took the field this year with the belief that ramitlies

nothing would be accomplished. But the Dutch had instructed (23*4 ji
their Deputies to leave him a freer hand, and Villeroi, the worst pein
and most favoured of Louis’ Marshals, gave him the battle he! Sh ae
desired on the field of Ramillies. The French were routed with ae
the loss of 15,000 men, but the panic that fell upon them, and 17°
most strongly upon their incompetent general, was out of all pro-
portion to their defeat. Brabant and half Flanders were evacuated
without a blow. ‘“ We have done in four days,” wrote Marlborough,
“what we should have thought ourselves happy if we could have
been sure of it in four years.” Even when Vendéme superseded
Villeroi, he found “every one ready to take off their hats when
they name the name of Marlborough”.' Before the year was
out, Louvain, Brussels, Antwerp, Ghent, Bruges, Ostend, Menin,
Oudenarde and many smaller places were in the hands of the Allies.
The French occupation of the Netherlands was brought to an end
almost as quickly as it had come into being five years before.

The news of Ramillies put fresh heart into the Alliance. The Battle of
King of Prussia and the German Princes listened to Marlborough’s ¢ Turin (7th
urgent petitions, and at last sent their troops over the Alps.’ With a Con-
armies thus provided by English diplomacy and paid by English ce ae 06
gold, Eugene, in an admirable campaign, relieved Turin, defeating
the French under its walls, so that they evacuated Italy as rapidly

1 Stanhope, i., p. 247. Coxe, is p. 38. 3 Coxe, ii. pp. 36, 82.

Toulon
Expedi-
tion, 1707

War in
Spain,
3705-10

496 — ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1707 |

as they had evacuated Bavaria and the Netherlands. Savoy re-
covered its independence, and the Austrians won Naples and Milan.

In 1707 the Allies cressed the Alps into France, and attacked |
Toulon, in conjunction with the English fleet. The plan was
Marlborough’s; the money came from the British treasury; the |
real object was to secure England’s Mediterranean supremacy by |
destroying the French arsenal. In such an enterprise the Austrians
showed little zeal; Eugene let his military opportunities slip by, |
and soon retreated into Italy. Thenceforth the war in those parts
resolved itself into a watch on the top of the Alpine passes. The
war on the side of Italy, and the war along the Rhine, both went to
sleep. The interest was confined to Spain, and to the Netherland
frontier of France.

After 1706 Louis was no longer the man in possession of the |
Spanish Empire. Italy and the Netherlands had been recovered ; _
it only remained to drive the Bourbons from Madrid. This was —
attempted in two ways: directly, by the occupation of Spain itself; _
and indirectly by penetrating the French frontier from the base of |
Flanders, and so dictating terms to Louis. The conquest of Spain —
could be seriously undertaken after the romantic capture of Barce- _
lona, accomplished by Peterborough in contravention of all the
maxims of siege-craft (1705). This town was the capital of the
Province of Catalonia—then, as now, the thorn in the side of the
Spanish monarchy, The Catalans rallied round Peterborough,
and accepted Charles III., in order to recover their fueros, or
provincial liberties, which Philip V. denied to them; in Valencia
also there was a popular feeling for Charles. The real strength of
the Allies lay in the 15,000 guerillas of Catalonia and Valencia, who
held the east coast in the most effective manner. From these two
provinces on one side of the Peninsula, and Portugal on the other,
with the British fleet and its base at Gibraltar to keep up the
communications, it was possible to set about the reduction of Spain.
In 1706 the English and Portuguese entered Madrid. But the
task of policing the territory and subduing the spirit of the Spanish
people, which proved too vast for the armies of Napoleon, was not
to be achieved by a few thousand soldiers, who marched about,
merely fighting battles and taking towns. Before long Philip
recovered Madrid, and the marchings of the English and Portuguese
were temporarily brought to an end by their total rout at

1708} THE REIGN OF ANNE 497

Almanza (1707). A few years later the marchings were resumed ;
in September, 1710, Madrid was again occupied ; but in December
the capitulation of Stanhope’s army at Brihuega brought the war to
anend. The Whig formula of “no peace without Spain” would
mean “no peace till Doomsday ”.

On the side of the Netherlands, the task of capturing the Oudenarde
fortresses went on more slowly after 1706. The victory of Ouden- ae
arde led to the siege and capture of Lille, the greatest of the
French strongholds on that frontier. France was exhausted and
famine-stricken. Her armies had lost hope and courage. The
barrier of fortresses between Marlborough and Paris was growing
thinner every year. In the early months of 1709 the Grand
Monarch, as a suppliant, begged terms of the Allies, offering almost
everything that it was in his power to give.

The chances of peace at this most favourable moment, were Triumph
compromised by further changes that had recently occurred in Whigs
English politics. In the year 1708 the last step was taken, and complete,
the Whigs at length obtained complete control of the Government. 17°
Godolphin Bnsoverdd what he had long suspected, that Harley
treacherously used his position as minister to win the Queen’s con-
fidence away from his colleagues, and to insinuate a rival favourite
to the Duchess of Marlborough—one Abigail Hill, become by
marriage Mrs. Masham. Originally a protégée of the Duchess, she
supplanted “Mrs. Freeman” in the love of “ Mrs. Morley,”? and
used her influence for the High Church and Harley, against the
Whigs and Marlborough. In February, 1708, the General and
Treasurer, by the threat of their own resignation, forced the Queen
to dismiss Harley ; but it was impossible to get rid of Mrs. Mas-

ham, or to remove Anne’s bitter resentment against all her remain-
ing ministers. Thus, in the year 1708 the principle of party
unanimity within the Cabinet was finally established, in spite of
|the wishes of the Crown. In the general election that summer,
the ministers had their power confirmed at the polls. When, early
in 1709, the negotiations for peace were opened in Holland, the
Whigs seemed to have Louis and the Tories at their feet, with Anne,
“Marlborough and Godolphin, as the half-unwilling instruments of
their supremacy. In the pride of newly acquired power, they were’

1The names of endearment used by Sarah and Anne in chets private corre-
spondence.

498 ENGLAND UNDER ‘THE STUARTS [1709

not in the mood to take a wise and broad view of Europe’s need
for peace. The one fear that haunted their triumph was that a
Tory reaction might quickly follow if the war came to an end.
Louis’ Louis offered the whole of Spain and its dependencies, Strass-
een burg, and the best of the French fortresses along the Nether-
May-June, |ands frontier. If William had been alive to receive such pro- —
ae posals, he would have known how to coerce the Allies into closing |
with Louis’ offer, as he had done at the time of the Treaty of Rys- _
wick. But Marlborough, though he could make the Princes of —
Europe wage war, had not skill to make them accept peace. The >
terms were rejected; Louis was told that he must lend his own
armies to expel his grandson from Spain, and that unless he succeeded
in that odious task the Allies would be at liberty to renew the war —
against France. ‘The excuse put forward for making an offer so ab-
surd was that no trust could be reposed in Louis’ good faith; but —
the real reason was that no one knew how to expel Philip from Spain.
The actual state of things in the Peninsula was not in accordance —
with the proposed basis of settlement.
The The guilt of all who protracted the war is greater or less, accord-
a ene ing as they had or had not expectation of ending it shortly in a more
ing Paris satisfactory manner. We do not know what the Whig leaders said
to each other on this point in the private meetings of their Junto;
but there is negative evidence that they did not seriously and fre-
quently question Marlborough about the possibility of an advance |
on Paris. In the military and political correspondence of the |
period, the word “ Paris” hardly ever occurs in connection with the |
military prospects of the Allies,’ and the invasion of France is only |
spoken of in vague terms. A letter of Godolphin’s, in June, 1709,
shows him expecting that the war would go on for many years, and
that we should gradually reduce France by the process of exhaus-
tion |

1Torcy’s Memoirs, passim. Articles four and thirty-seven of the Preliminaries |
of May were the point at issue. Marlborough thought that there were securities —
enough against Louis’ playing false, without threatening him with a ba of the
war. Godolphin and the Whigs thought otherwise (Coxe, iii., pp. 40, 4

2 The only case which I can recall is in Defoe’s report to Godolphin of a letter
rumoured to have been written by Lord Orkney to friends in Scotland, to the effect
that, if Marlborough had sent 20,000 men to the frontier immediately after
Oudenarde, “he could have gone to the gates of Paris with them” (Hist. MSS.
Com. Report, viii., 1, p. 44

3“ We shall be less able to support the war every year than another, but I bee ©
lieve we shall ok be better able to do it than either our enemies or our neigh.
bours” (to Marlborough, June x4, 1709. Coxe Papers, B.M., xxviii.).

}
:

1709} THE REIGN OF ANNE 499

Marlborough, on the other hand, whether or not he expected
to reach Paris, had the design of invading France, which he had
urged on Eugene immediately after Oudenarde. Again, in June,
1709, he wrote to Godolphin: “There is no doubt a battle in
the plains of Lens would put an end to this war”.1 We may
suppose that this hope of dictating terms at the end of another
campaign, was one reason why he did nothing to force the Whigs
and the Allies to accede to Louis’ proposals. Yet, since he himself
in the same week admitted great uncertainty as to the chances
for the success of the invasion,’ it is probable that he ought to
have insisted upon peace. One reason of the poor part which he
and Godolphin played this year, was that they were now wholly
dependent on the Whigs, having no longer, after the dismissal of
Harley, any hope of recovering favour either with the Tories or
with the Queen.

The Dutch had followed the Whig lead in breaking off the Barrier
negotiation, because they were offered a price. Ever since the eo
beginning of the war, but most of all since the battle of Ramillies,’
Marlborough, Godolphin and the Whigs had been in constant
fear that the Dutch would make a separate peace with France.
Louis had more than once approached the States of Holland with
offers of a “Barrier,” if they would conclude a separate treaty.
As the only object for which they were waging war was to obtain
territory and strong places in the Netherlands and France, sufficient
to render them secure from French invasion in the future, there
was every probability that they would some day accept these offers
from Louis. Nothing remained for those of the Allies who wished
the war to continue, except to buy the loyalty of the Dutch at a
higher price ; this was what the Whigs did in 1709. The Barrier
Treaty, signed between England and Holland, promised that
Guelderland and the towns of Newport, Furnes, Ypres, Menin, Lille,
Tournai, Condé, Valenciennes, Maubeuge, Charleroi, Namur, Hal,

17th June, 1709. Coxe Papers, B.M., vol. xxviii. It is in this letter that he
suggests reviving the Estates-General in France as part of the terms of peace, to
follow the ‘‘ battle in the plains of Lens ”’.

2«*Tt is impossible for me to express the apprehensions I have that we shall not
find wherewithal to make the army subsist, especially if we enter France, so that it
were to be wished the peace had been agreed” (to Godolphin, 13th June, 1709.
Coxe Papers, B.M.., vol. xxviii.).

3 Godolphin to Marlborough, 17th May, 1706, and July 5, 1708. Coxe Papers,

M,

Renewal
of
hostilities,

500 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1709

the Castle of Ghent, and Dendermond, should, at the peace, be
placed permanently in the hands of the Dutch as a “ Barrier”
against France. They were to be allowed, not only to put garrisons
in these places, but to levy taxes, and impose extra tariffs to the
disadvantage of Austrian and English merchants, who bitterly
complained. In return, the Dutch promised to send over troops to
Great Britain to fight for the Hanoverian Succession, if required’.
Secure of this immense accession of power and wealth whenever the
Whigs chose to make peace, the Dutch followed them blindly in
the policy of continuing the war. Marlborough had Jong contem-
plated some way of binding the Dutch to the war policy, but he
considered the concessions of the Barrier Treaty too large, and
refused to join the Whig Ambassador, Townsend, in signing it.
In the same spirit, unworthy of his great position, he blamed the
breaking off of the negotiations for peace, without doing anything
to prevent the rupture. It was not by avoiding responsibility for
the fall of Vienna and Turin that he had become the saviour and
guardian of Europe.

Holland and Austria, Marlborough, Godolphin and the Whigs
had all sinned against peace, and they were all to be punished by

June, r7ogevents springing as direct consequences from their misconduct.

In June, 1709, the negotiations at the Hague were broken off,?
and Louis, in desperate straits, deigned to take his subjects into
his confidence. It was a new thing for the Grand Monarch to put
out a manifesto, recounting what sacrifices and humiliations he had
vainly offered to undergo as the price of peace, and appealing to
the patriotism of his people. ‘The spirit was roused which the
French have so often shown in defence of the sacred soil. An im-
mense army, more hungry and ill-clad than ever, but filled with
fresh ardour and justly reliant on their new commander Villars,
were drawn up in the trenches of Malplaquet, guarded on either
hand by deep forests. Marlborough and Eugene, who had just

1 Swift's Remarks on the Barrier Treaty. The object of the Whigs in offering
such high terms was not to obtain Dutch aid against the Pretender ; that could have
been obtained at a lower price, as was shown by the Barrier Treaties and events of
1713 and 1715 (see map, p. 495). The real object of the Whigs was to bind the
Dutch to the war. This stands out clearly in the correspondence of the time, but by
far the best demonstration of it is to be found in Mr. R. Geikie’s analysis of the
Barrier Treaty negotiations, unfortunately not yet published.

2 They were temporarily renewed early in 1710 at Gertruydenberg, when Louis
made his last offer—Alsace,

1709] THE REIGN OF ANNE 501

taken the great fortress of Tournai, confidently delivered an assault

on the face of this position. Ninety thousand men of the various Malpla-
nationalities belonging to the Grand Alliance, moved to the attack Be ean
against an equal number of Frenchmen; twenty thousand of the 1709 -
Allies had fallen, and nearly fifteen thousand of the defenders,

before Villars beat a slow and well-ordered retreat. In spite of

the Field Deputies, the flower of the Dutch army, which they had

so often saved up when it might have been well spent, had at Jast

been thrown away in vain. The heart was taken out of the war.

Mons fell to Marlborough in the winter, and Bethune, Aire and

St. Venant next year, but the allied armies were in no condition

to advance on Paris, until great political changes in England had
rendered such a movement impossible.

The Whigs miscalculated, if they thought that the periodic wave Trial of
of High Church fury would be kept back so long as the war con- bre
tinued ; and they hastened the event by a false step in home affairs. March,
Sole champions as they were of religious Toleration, they had little *7*°
more conception than their opponents of the right of free speech in
politics, and had inherited from the Stuart despotism which they
had overthrown, some bad notions of governmental prerogative.

At the advice of Godolphin, who had served James II., and who
still had hankerings after coercive methods, the Whigs impeached
Dr. Sacheverell before the House of Lords, for a sermon against
Revolution doctrines. During the trial, the worship of the ridiculous
parson rose to a level with that of Charles the Martyr or the Seven
Bishops. All the good and bad passions of Englishmen were aroused
against the prosecuting Government. Even in their own London,
the Whigs could make no counter-demonstration against the frenzied
multitude who accompanied the Doctor’s coach and the Queen’s
sedan to the doors of Westminster Hall. Inside, the scaffoldings
were again erected, as for a great historic scene; Anne came day
after day, like Charles to the trial of Strafford; and the Tory ladies
rose before seven each morning “to see and be seen at the trial,”
and importuned the “ young lords” of their acquaintance to “ make
a bustle to have their full number of tickets, eight apiece”.' The
eloquence of the Whig orators was chilled by the roaring of the
crowd outside the great doors; at night, meeting-houses all over

1 Wentworth, pp. 112, 113.

Fall of
the
Whigs,
June-

502 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1710 |

London were sacked, and the ministers had to borrow the Queen’s |
bodyguard from St. James’s to save the homes of Bishops and
Dissenters from similar destruction.

The light sentence passed upon the Doctor,—he was to be
suspended from preaching for three years,—showed that the
Whigs were awed by the storm which they had provoked. The

Septs 1710 Tories and the Queen took heart. The war was growing unpopular :

Discipline
of the
Whig
party,
1710-14

the Barrier Treaty seemed to show that we were losing thousands
of men every year in siege operations, to win an Empire for the
Dutch. The name of Marlborough, who had foolishly asked the
Queen to make him Captain-General for life, aroused more jealousy
than enthusiasm among civilians. In the summer of 1710, Anne,
at the instigation of Mrs. Masham, finally broke with Sarah, and
dismissed Godolphin and the Whigs from office. They fell the —
more easily, because they did not stand together: the Lords of the |
Whig Junto! did not recognise either the General or the ‘Treasurer
as one of themselves, and Marlborough hoped to keep the military
command even under a new ministry. A Cabinet was formed by
Harley and St. John, and in September a]l was ready for a general
election, with the influence of the Crown and its servants thrown |
into the Tory scale. Swift, who had come over from Ireland on
ecclesiastical business, intending to return the moment it was done,
found himself in the more congenial atmosphere of a political
revolution. “ Everything,” he wrote to Stella, “is turning upside
down. Every Whig in great office will, to a man, be infallibly put
out; and we shall have such a winter as hath not been seen in
England.”? Indeed, since the winter of 1688, no change had
taken place in public affairs so rapid and so complete.

The result of the general election was to send back the Whigs in
a hopeless minority. With Crown and people both against them,
their case might almost seem as bad as it had been when Charles II.
had dissolved the Oxford Parliament. But on this occasion the
spirit of the rank and file was not broken, nor did the thoughts of
the leaders run to desperate courses. The Lords of the Junto
kept their heads and worked with cold calculation, first to stop the
Peace, and when they had failed in that, to secure the Hanoverian
Succession. The whole party moved under their orders like a

?The Junto consisted of Somers, Wharton, Halifax. (Montague), Orford
(Russell), and young Sunderland (Spencer).
2? Letters to Stella, 2nd and gth September, 1710,

1710) THE REIGN OF ANNE 503

regiment, forward or in flank movements, and sometimes right-
about; at the end of five years they marched to complete and
final victory.

Very different was the case of the Tories. The party of the land- The
lords, larger and more homogeneous than the various classes who ie
sought refuge under the Whig banner, was less disciplined and Jess Hariey
intelligent. Harley and St. John lacked able lieutenants to stand ser
between themselves and the swarm of ignorant and eager country
gentlemen, who came up to London victorious from the polls and
clamouring for vengeance on the Whigs. Vengeance was their one
cry—they hardly knew for what; only they knew that 1681 had
come again, and that rebels and fanatics were at last to meet their
deserts. ‘These stupid men found their leader in the most brilliant
politician of the age: for St. John made himself the demagogue
of squires. Harley, on the other hand, the nominal head of
the Government, was suited to play the complementary part of
moderate man; uncertain of what he ultimately wanted, yet
cunning to obtain his immediate ends by deception, it was his
business to keep the destined victims in play with fair words,
while St. John hounded on the pack. Having begun public life as
a Whig, Harley was able, at the time of the change of ministry,
partly to separate the Junto from Marlborough and Godolphin by
private promises that “a Whig game was intended at bottom”.
Coming of Nonconformist family, he was able to win some Presby-
terian support at the elections by assuring “their preachers that
there shall be nothing this Parliament done against them, but their
Toleration kept inviolable”.1 ‘The one promise was as false as the
other, but neither was altogether without effect.

These two chiefs, so opposite in temperament and methods that swift
they were sure to fall out in the end, in the first month of their
ministry attached to themselves a common friend. Swift, who had
just written to Stella that Godolphin “received me with a great
deal of coldness, which has enraged me so, I am almost vowing
revenge,” was in this humour asked to dine by Harley and flattered
to the top of his bent. He became the constant boon companion
of the new ministers, who primed him over the bottle with tacts
and arguments; his pamphlets became the terror of the Whigs ;
he thought no more of returning to Ireland, but took lodgings

1 Wentworth, p. 151.

Pamphlet-
eering

504 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1710 |

near town in the riverside village of Chelsea. After his nights with

Harley and St. John, his walks home under the stars were made
perilous by the bands of “ Mohocks,” sons of Belial, rumoured to

be of the Whig persuasion, who were said to have vowed to slit |

the parson’s nose; he sought safety in hiring a chair,}

Addison and Steele, less frequently and with more moderation, —
wrote for the Whig party. Before shorthand reporting enabled |
the orator to address himself to all England, the pamphleteer and |

literary man had to be enlisted at a high price by the politician.

They had also to be well protected. No one in that age could |
write freely on politics, if he was not sheltered behind one or |

other of the great parties: for although there was no longer a
political censorship, the freedom of the press was not in effect com-
plete. Government prosecutions for libel, and proceedings in either
House of Parliament, made it necessary even for Swift and Steele

to publish anonymously, and small fry had no quarter. Early in |

1714, while Steele was being expelled from the Tory House of
Commons for writing The Crisis, the Whig House of Lords had
fallen foul of the pamphlet in which his great rival had answered
him, had got the printer and publisher in custody, and were only

seeking evidence of authorship to attack Swift himself. Sometimes —

St. John had a dozen booksellers and publishers under arrest at the
same time. Swift used to urge on his patrons to ruin his meanest
Grub Street enemies. ‘“ We have the dog under prosecution,” he
once wrote to Stella, “ but Bolingbroke is not active enough ; but
I hope to swinge him. He is a Scotch rogue, one Ridpath.”? The
appearance of any important pamphlet was a great event, talked of
and heralded for weeks before; and the place where the politicians
met to read and discuss it was the “ coffee-house,” the centre of the
vigorous politico-literary civilisation of the day.

Thus, in the last years of Queen Anne, “the town” became
the theatre of a closely balanced party conflict, between tacticians
as able and writers as gifted as any who ever struggled for power in
Athens, Rome or Paris. Literary genius was then valued at its
proper worth, but only because it consented to come down into
the forum and hire itself out as a servant to political power.

‘ Letters to Stella, 9th September, 7th October, 1710, and 12th and 26th March,
1712.
*Tbid., 24th October, 1711, and 28th October, 1712,

1711) THE REIGN OF ANNE 505

The Tories thought that they would not be secure in office Secret
until they had made peace. And if a Treaty were not signed aS
before the Queen died, the House of Hanover might come in, recall between
the Whigs, and resume the war with the old vigour. By January, a a
1711, St. John was in close communication with Torcy, the Foreign France,
Minister of Louis. For the next eight months these two carried Snes
on secret communications between London and Versailles, largely
through the agency of the poet Prior. When the preliminaries
of peace, assigning the disputed States in Europe and America to
the various combatants, had been arranged between France and
England, a conference was summoned for next year at Utrecht,
where the other Allies were to be compelled to accept the terms
dictated by the two principals.

Until August these negotiations with France were buried in
absolute secrecy, and even then were only disclosed, owing to the ac-
cidental detention of Prior by Custom-house officials on his way back
from France. Swift himself had known nothing, and St. John had
repeatedly denied to friend and foe that he was treating separately.!

The proceedings had been concealed as carefully as Charles II.’s
Treaty of Dover, though this time there was no crime to cloak.

The two main principles of these negotiations—treating apart St. John’s
from the other Allies, and the abandonment of Spain—were necessary ee
in order to obtain peace. The Allies were so obstinate, each for the two
his own claims, that a conference at Utrecht might have sat for pnieiplcs
twenty years unless one of the Powers had previously agreed on the
terms with Louis, and had come prepared to coerce the others into
acceptance. William III., who best knew the needs of Europe and
can hardly be accused of partiality for France, had made the Treaty
of Ryswick in precisely this way, by preliminary private agreement
with his great enemy. Whether the negotiations of the Tory
minister need have been secret as well as separate, is another
question. Certainly he need not have lied so often and so heartily
as he did.

The abandonment of Spain was no less essential for peace.

Philip could not be expelled. About the time that the negotiations
were beginning, Stanhope’s surrender at Brihuega put out the
last hope in that quarter. In April, 1711, the death of the

1 Letters to Stella, 24th August, 1711. Bol., i., pp. 66, 108, 123, 124, 141, 142,
372-74

Attitude
to France
too sub-
servient

English
withdraw
from the
war, I712

506 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1712

Emperor Joseph without children added another reason for leaving
Spain to the House of Bourbon: Charles now became Emperor ;*
he was in possession of Austria, Italy, the Netherlands, and if he
were also to be King of Spain and the American Indies, he would
revive the dreaded Hapsburg supremacy of Charles V.

But although the proceedings leading to the Treaty of Utrecht
were right in their main principles, our negotiators approached the
French in a spirit too friendly and even subservient. ‘The Tories
had so Jong been arguing that Holland was a more dangerous rival
to us than France, that when they came into power they could
not help acting as if it were true. Their political ideas, and the
society in which they moved, made them glad to be rid of a de-
grading alliance with the tolerant and mercantile republic, and
rendered them sensible to the flattery of the Grand Monarch and
his courtiers. Prior and St. John, on their diplomatic visits to
Versailles, accepted without hesitation the applause accorded to
them as the saviours of France, and even Swift writes: “I took it
very well of” the Spanish Ambassador, when he declared that “his
master and the King of France were obliged to me more than to
any man in Europe”. 23

Actuated by this spirit, the Tories withdrew palit pressure
from Louis. Early in 1711 they had sent an expedition against
Quebec, and it had failed ; but Quebec might perhaps have been won
nearer home. ‘That year Marlborough made some progress, but
could not march into France, partly because Eugene was engaged in
the domestic affairs of the Empire. But in the spring of 1712,
when Eugene came to the Netherlands with a large army, an ad-
vance might have been made that would have compelled Louis to
yield all points still in dispute at Utrecht. Harley and St. John,
however, had dismissed Marlborough from the command of the
army (3lst December, 1711), and they now withdrew the English
troops from active operations (June, 1712). The Tory defence for
deserting our Allies in the field was that nothing else would have
made them accept the peace. It is hard to say whether or not
this was true. In any case the Dutch and Austrians suffered defeat
at Denain when the English troops had been withdrawn, and the
Dutch soon afterwards signed the treaties.

1See p. 464 above, note.
3 Letters to Stella, 21st December, 1712,

1711) THE REIGN OF ANNE 507

But the causes of the dismissal of Marlborough were domestic The crisis
rather than international, and must be sought in the Parliamentary e ea
session of Christmas, 1711, when the Whigs made their great effort Christmas,
to prevent the peace. Every possible alliance at home and abroad *7**
was sought out and exploited by the Junto. The Dutch and
Austrian envoys expostulated with the Queen; Eugene, though he
came too Jate, was invited over to back their remonstrance. Marl-
borough was again brought to the front to declare that his victories
gave no security to Kurope if Spain were left to the Bourbons. The
London mob, which had recovered from its fit of High Church zeal,
was to be stirred up by the traditional Whig methods; prepara-
tions for a great Pope-burning procession were only frustrated by
the arrest of the waxen images by Government, on the eve of Queen
Bess’s Accession Day. Above all, a coalition was formed with those
great Lords who, without being Whigs, were out of office and in-
censed against the ministers; Somerset and Nottingham used their
influence with the Queen to induce her to change her servants. Ifa

' new ministry could once be formed, no doubt was felt that, with the
influence of the Crown, the next elections could be “managed ”,!
But while the Whigs could only hope for the Queen, they felt sure
of the House of Lords. Nottingham, the melancholy, dignified, re-
ligious leader of the High Churchmen, nicknamed “ Dismal,” made
an unprincipled bargain with the Whigs in the House of Lords, by
which he was to propose a motion for “no peace without Spain,”
and they were to let the Occasional Conformity Bill pass into law.
It was an odd affair. Nottingham, who had always before opposed
on high Tory grounds the vigorous prosecution of the war, now
moved to prevent the peace; while in the disciplined Whig ranks
hardly a murmur was heard against the Occasional Conformity Bill.
The Dissenters were told that if the ministry fell the persecuting
Act could soon be repealed; “ Jack,” as the Tory satirists put it,
had been induced to hang himself on the promise that he would
soon be cut down. ‘The Bill went unresisted through the Lords,
where it had so often been lost. Meanwhile, on the 7th of December,
Nottingham’s motion of “no peace without Spain” was carried by
sixty-two Peers to fifty-four. ‘The ministerialists did not pretend
that with the Upper House against them they could go on with

\ Letters to Stella, gth December, 1713,

508 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1713 |

the peace. Prior expected his friends to resign the next week,
and Swift told Harley that “I should have the advantage of him ;
for he would lose his head, and I should only be hanged, and so |

1

carry my body entire to the grave”.

31st Dec., But the two ministers were silently preparing a constitutional
7711, , coup @état, In spite of the influence of the Duchess of Somerset, —

of Peers who threatened to be a new Sarah, the Queen was still on the side
rricree of Harley and St. John. On the last day of December she created
of Marl- twelve Tory Peers to carry the peace. The Whigs were beaten, ©
borough snd knew it. Wharton could only jeer at the new jury of Lords, |
asking them whether they intended to vote singly or by foreman.
On the same day that the patents were issued for the twelve Peers,
it was announced that Marlborough had been removed from the —
head of the British army. |

Treaties Effective resistance to the peace was no longer possible in |

ie England; and the defeat of the Dutch next summer as a conse-

and quence of the withdrawal of our troops, was soon followed by the

Rastadt submission of the statesmen of Holland. On the 11th of April (N.S.),

1713, England, Holland and the minor powers signed the Treaty of —

Utrecht with France. The Emperor Charles VI. thought that he |

saved his dignity by waging another year of unsuccessful war; in —

1714 he signed the Treaty of Rastadt, acquiescing in the terms

arranged for him three years before by Torcy and St. John.

A sound The Treaty of Utrecht was, except in minor points, a good

settlement settlement, and stood the test of time better than most diplomatic
edifices. As it did not leave great popular forces and aspirations
out of account, like the treaties made on the fall of Napoleon, it
gave to the polity of European states not only freedom, but
stability for eighty years.

France France was not dismembered. If Marlborough’s infantry had
piled arms along the quays of Paris, the Allies would probably have
taken back all the acquisitions of Louis and the Cardinals—
Alsace, Franche Comté, and Artois. But Louis was allowed at
Utrecht to keep what he had won in the earlier years, before the
bait of the Spanish Succession had lured him to his defeat. Though
his territories were left as great as in the time of William IIL,
except for a few towns along the Netherland border, Europe

1 Letters to Stella, 8th and 15th December, 1711,

1713) THE REIGN OF ANNE 509

was no longer afraid of him. The prestige of France was gone and
her fighting power exhausted. Since she had been deprived of the
rich recruiting grounds of Flanders and Italy, her own resources
would not for a long time be again equal to the conquest of
Europe. She proved unable ever to renew her strength under the
discredited system of society and government, once her glory, but
now beginning to appear to philosophers as the cause of her misery
and degradation. It was not long before Montesquieu pointed to
the constitutional government of England as the secret of pros-
perity and power.

There was only one fear left from the French quarter. If the
sickly child who was to be Louis XV. were to die, Philip V. of
Spain might disregard the provisions of Utrecht and claim also to
become King of France. In that case Europe would perhaps have
to fight again to prevent the union of the two Crowns. But it
was better to run the risk of an uncertain event, than to overset
the balance of power by making the Emperor Charles VI. ruler of
Spain. So thought the English Tories, and they were right.

Holland was left secure from French aggression. The danger Holland
that had sprung upon her so suddenly at the Treaty of Dover, and
governed for forty years her whole domestic and foreign policy,
passed away at Utrecht. Not only was France exhausted, but the
buffer State that lay between her and Holland was now occupied
by Austria, instead of by the decadent power of Spain. Further,
the Dutch were allowed to garrison a barrier of their own in the
Austrian Netherlands, as formerly in the Spanish.1 Holland had
won her safety, but she had bought it at a price. The long
struggle had exhausted her scarcely less than France; and her
economic strength being more artificial, could never be recovered
when once it was lost. She has continued to be happy and pros-
perous, but after 1713 she was no longer one of the great powers.

Austria had contributed less than Holland to the armaments
that had won the war, but she made greater acquisitions at the Austria
peace. Of these, she succeeded in preserving the Netherlands, Milan = he

nor

and the hegemony of Italian politics, until the revolutionary powers

1The Barrier Treaty of 1709 was torn up, but it was replaced by new treaties
of 1713 and 1715. The towns that Holland obtained from the Tories were not so
numerous and important as those which she had been promised by the Whigs, but
they were sufficient. (They will be found marked upon the map of the Netherlands

at p. 495.]

Great
Britain

British
acquisi-
tions

510 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1713 |

epoch. Savoy, Prussia and Portugal came off well at Utrecht, for
the Tory jealousy of the Allies did not extend to monarchs of the
second rank. The Catalans, however, were infamously betrayed :
in spite of England’s pledges, their fueros were not secured to them, |
and we stood by while Philip suppressed in a cruel war the aspira-
tions which we ourselves had rekindled through the agency of Peter- |
borough. For the Tories thought that none but English squires |
had a right to protect their liberties against a legitimate King.’
Great Britain was the power that gained most by the war and
by the peace. In William’s time, she had done little more than
stand on her defence against Louis and the Jacobites; William
rather than England had been head of the League of Augsburg.
But in the Marlborough wars, Britain held the Grand Alliance
together ; she financed the other nations; her fleet had almost a
monopoly of the ocean ; her soldiers, for the first time since Agin-
court, decided the fate of Europe on famous fields; the great
general of the Alliance was an Englishman ; and British ministers
dictated the terms of peace. England was more powerful under
Anne than under Elizabeth, for the maiden Queen had been content
to prevent Philip from being the arbiter of Europe, and had never
attempted herself to be the arbitress. But the glories of Anne
offer a still more striking contrast to the shifty and despised
international position of the Stuart Kings. The change was partly
due to the rapid growth of our resources, but still more to the
greater national unity consequent on the participation of the people
in the policy of the Crown. Parliament had ceased to be the op-
position and had become the government. England’s civil troubles
had for a hundred years handicapped her in the race between
nations, but now that they were over, the effect of them had been
to leave her supple and strong. In the eighteenth century, a really
national life and policy gave Britain advantage over the more
populous but less vigorous dominions of Spain, Austria and France.
St. John took care to provide against the Whig argument that
he was selling our interests, as well of those of our Allies. In

at Utrecht return for opposing the Austrian claim on Spain, Britain obtained

very full compensation for herself. We kept Gibraltar and Port
Mahon as the bases of our Mediterranean power; according to the

 Lecky, i., pp. 156, 157.

1713] THE REIGN OF ANNE 511

Whig proposals of 1709, these would have had to go back to our

ally Charles, as King of Spain. In America we acquired from
France the outworks of Canada—the Hudson’s Bay territory and

Nova Scotia ; the French claim on Newfoundland was also abandoned,
although the fishing rights off the coast were compromised. And
finally we obtained, by the Assiento Treaty with Philip, the sole

right of supplying Spanish America with slaves, The acquirement

of a monopoly in the slave trade was approved by all parties as a

sound piece of mercantile policy ; but the proposal to renew com-
merce with France by a reduction of tariffs on both sides, ran
counter to the prevailing economic ideas of the merchant com-
munity, especially of the woollen industry and the East Indian
merchants. By the Methuen Treaty with Portugal, and the
prohibitive duties against French wines, the course of trade had

been deflected in one direction, and vested interests had been created

which helped the Whigs to resist the Tory proposal to renew com- June,
merce with France. They succeeded in defeating the free-trade Tory nie:
clauses of Utrecht, even in the Tory House of Commons. St. John posals
and Prior were unable to re-establish the commercial] intercourse, aes
which, as they hoped, would have softened the animosity against France
the French King, and have created for party purposes a mercantile pcteaion
interest hostile to the Whigs.)

The stroke inflicted upon the Whigs by the dismissal of Marl- Unpopu-
borough and the creation of the twelve Peers, proved irremediable mek ops
so Jong as the question of the day was that of peace or war. The borough
country wanted peace, and the soldiers were no longer the favourites, *7**
The charges of peculation brought in Parliament against the late
Commander-in-Chief served the Tory purposes for a while; ? Mar]-
borough was hooted in the streets with cries of “stop thief” ; scores
of vile scribblers abused him as an incompetent though fortunate
gereral, a traitor, a coward, a Cromwell]. ‘Threatened with judicial
proceedings, he retired to the Continent, where he was received with

enthusiasm.

1 See App. D, pp. 525-26 below, for Mr. Meredith’s remarks. BBol., iv., pp. 153,
196, 197. Parl. Hist., vi., pp. 1221-23. _Burnet, vi., pp. 156-58, 161. Ashley.
Surveys Hist. and Ec., pp. 271-303. Cunningham, pp. 458-62. See p. 459 above,
Addison represents his Tory Foxhunter as calling a man “ one of the rump,” “tan old
fanatical cur,’ because ‘he spoke twice in the Queen’s time against taking off the
duties upon French claret” (Freeholder, No. 22). Wy.

2 A strict examination revealed that the great man had observed caution in fill-
ing his coffers, and had not gone beyond the custom of the service in that day (see

p- 485 above),

The Suc-
cession
question
saves the
Whigs

Fatal error

of the
Tories

512. | ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS 71s

It was only when the signature of the treaties in the spring of
1713 had rendered peace secure, that the Whigs were able to change
the issue to one of immense advantage to themselves: the Queen
was sinking to her grave, and the Hanoverian Succession was de-
clared in danger. Although the question had not come to the front
enough to cause the defeat of the ministers at the general election in
the autumn, the minority came up next spring (1714) to the new
Parliament in high spirits. For their chiefs had succeeded, by de-
putations and letters to Hanover, in convincing the Electress Sophia
and her son George, that the Whig, not the Tory party was the
friend. This impression had been created at the price of forfeiting
all chance of a return to royal] favour at present ; like Elizabeth,
Anne could not forgive those who provided for her death and talked
of the next reign. “I cannot bear,” she had once told Marlborough,
“to have any successor here though but for a week.”’ Furthermore,
the daughter of James II. was inclined to look favourably on her
brother’s claim, if only he would turn Protestant. But the Whigs
could no longer afford to humour her, as they had done in former
years, when they were themselves in office and when there was no
expectation of her immediate death. They now made motions in
Parliament for putting a price on her brother’s head, and proposed
to bring over the Electoral Prince while she was alive, to look after
the interests of his family (April, 1714). So little did they hope
or fear from Anne, that on Princess Sophia’s birthday in October,
1712, some of their party had lit a bonfire near St. James’s Palace,
and sung round it with drawn swords “ Hanover, haste away over”.

The Tories fell into the trap. To secure themselves in the
favour of Anne, they were cool in their protestations to the Court
of Hanover. 'To enjoy the present, they shut their eyes to the
future. When they saw what the Whigs were about, they should
have outbidden them at the German Court, which would hardly
have ventured to favour an unpopular opposition against the actual

1 Conduct of the myles. p. 153. See £.H. R.,i., 0-506, A. W. W;
on Electress Sophia. H. M.C. R., viii., 1, p. 52. ee ame 5
2 Wentworth, p. 302. T he ordinary version of the chorus ran thus :—

“Over, over, Hanover, over,
Haste and assist our queen and our State,
Haste over, Hanover, fast as you can over,
Put in your claims before ’tis too late.”’
Wilkins’ Political Ballads, ii., p. 113,

1714] THE REIGN OF ANNE 513

Government, if only those in office had shown the same zeal for the

Protestant Succession. But the opposite course was the line of

least resistance for Anne’s ministers and for the party that upheld

Sacheverell’s doctrines, and down that course the Tories drifted

throughout the years 1712 and 1713, without definitely intending

to become Jacobites, and without seeing the terrible danger towards

which they moved. Early in 1714 they suddenly became aware

that, after a few months more of inactivity on their part, the
throne would be occupied by a new monarch, filled with a prejudice,

now ineradicable, against their whole party. At the same time

they recognised that their rivals were again in favour with al] good

Protestants ; for while the Tories kept silence about the Succession,

the Whigs had been busy feeding the popular mind with a mingled

fear and contempt for “Perkin,” as the Pretender was called by

their ballad-mongers.

Who'eer is in place I care not a fig,

Nor will I dispute between High Church and Low,
Tis now no dispute between Tory and Whig,

But whether a Popish successor or no.}

Such was the Whig pose, and it carried the day. “'The generality,”
wrote one Tory Peer to another in March, 1714, “thinks of nothing
after the Queen, but the House of Hanover,” ‘there is such an
_ aversion to Popery.”? Ruin stared the Tories in the face, for the
_Electress and her son had at length come to regard them all as

enemies. The perilous situation, once realised, was a touchstone

to reveal the epposite temperaments of the two Tory leaders, and
the long postponed quarrel between them burst at last into fury,

splitting the party from top to bottom.

St. John had been jealous of his colleague in office almost from Quarrel of
the beginning. In the spring of 1711, a half-mad Frenchman, cin
Guiscard, had stabbed Harley at the Council board; the victim Boling.
| had, on his recovery, naturally become the favourite of Queen and broke
nation, and had been raised at once to the Earldom of Oxford.

It was more than a year later that St. John was moved up to the
'Tords, and then, to his rage and mortification, only as Viscount

Bolingbroke. Yet it was solely owing to his energy that the

1 Wilkins’ Political Ballads, ii., p. 113. 2 Wentworth, p. 361. P
3 Bol., ii., pp. 484, 485. “1 own to you that I felt more indignation than ever in
my life I had done.” ‘TI remain clothed with so little of the Queen’s favour as she
' could contrive to bestow.”

514 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS [1714 |

negotiations for the peace had been carried through. He continued |
for yet another year to chafe under the sluggish and secretive ways
of his senior colleague. But when, in the winter of 1713-1714 he |
perceived that the Fabian tactics which he despised and resented
were paving the way for the certain downfall of the whole party,
Bolingbroke thought the time had come to be rid of Oxford.

Anne’s By this time Swift and the bulk of the party were for Boling- |
cae ,. _ broke, since in his policy alone lay any hope of safety. He soon
ment, won the favour of Anne, who was beginning to find Oxford a |
1714

careless servant. Mrs. Masham entered Bolingbroke’s service, and
was most pitilessly kept to her task as favourite; when her son was
dying, Swift stormed at her for nursing him instead of attending
the Queen. When the new Parliament met in February, Boling-
broke made a bid for the leadership by constituting himself the _
champion of the High Tory members and their “October Club”. |
For more than three years these men had been calling for severer —
legislation against the Dissenters, and for the reconstitution of the ©
Civil Service and army on a High Tory or Jacobite basis. These ©
measures, in deferring which Harley had had the support of many
moderates, now seemed necessary if the party was to be saved from
destruction on the Queen’s death. If the Whig “supports,” the —
Dissenters and monied men, were crushed, and if the High Tones
were in complete control of every governmental force in the country,
there would be good hope either of bringing back the Stuarts, or of
dictating terms to the hostile House of Hanover. Which candidate
for the throne Bolingbroke would select when the moment came,
he would let the future decide. At present he was content if,
before the Queen died, he could crush the Dissenters and place all
civil and military posts, “down to the meanest,” in the hands of
High Tories and Jacobites.”

Schism In May and June he hurried through the Schism Act, a large step
io be, towards the renewal of the Clarendon Code: its effect was to pro-
hibit Dissenters from the education of children, even those of their
own religion, It was openly avowed that the object was to extirpate
Dissent in the next generation. The Bill rallied the Tories to
Bolingbroke, who now declared war to the knife on all Whigs and
moderates. On the 27th of July he induced the Queen to dismiss

} Letter to Mrs. Dingley, 1oth April, 1714.
* Letter to Sir W. Windham (ed. 1753), p. 22. See p. 472 above.

1714] THE REIGN OF ANNE 515

Oxford. Then at last he was free to take what measures he would.

But Anne was sinking fast. It was a race against her death. In

six weeks, he calculated, he could put the army and the State into

the hands of men who could seéure the Tory interest in the next

reign, choose who was to be the new monarch, and dictate the terms

of his accession ; six weeks was all he asked, but he did not get six Death of

days. “The Earl of Oxford was removed on 'T uesday,” he wrote to ose

Swift ; “the Queen died on Sunday. What a world is this! And rst vere 4

how does fortune banter us! ”! phe
During the week that the poor woman lay dying, her subjects

had no time to think how good she had been, or to weep for her

loss. Bolingbroke had forced all England to enter for a sweep-

stakes as to the date of her death. When the doctors reported her

better, the stocks fell; when she died, they rose. On the Sunday

of her death some Dissenters, who had come to pray together and

prepare each other’s minds for a long period of renewed persecution

under a Catholic King and a Tory minister, burst out into a psalm

of thanksgiving in their meeting-house when the news was told.?

Bolingbroke, unprepared to resist, made a virtue of necessity, and

joined with Shrewsbury, Somerset and Argyle to proclaim King

George.’

So the principle of religious Toleration triumphed in England, Conclu-
though many generations pacer before it developed into that of
mous equality. Under George I. the Whigs were strong enough
to ei the Schism and Occasional Conmanipy Acts, but dre did
not even attempt to abolish the Sacramental Test. Neither the
parson nor the squire had really anything to fear from the states-
men whom they regarded as their enemies. ‘Though persecution
was warded off from Nonconformists and Freethinkers, the Church
was not a penny the worse. Though the merchant classes remained
high in favour with Government, though the nation continued
to borrow from the monied men for her wars of Imperial expansion,
yet squirearchy flourished in the eighteenth century as never perhaps

1 And again: ‘ Fortune turned rotten at the very moment it grew ripe” (Letters
to Swift, 3rd August, 1714, and 24th June, 1727).
2 Lecky, i., pp. 207, 258, 259.
3 His mother, the Princess Sophia, died two months before the date when she

would have become Queen of Great Britain.

516 ENGLAND UNDER THE STUARTS (1714

before ; the yeomen disappeared, and the law by which the Tories had
prohibited all except large landowners from sitting in the House: of
Commons (1711) was not repealed by their successors. For the
arrival of the House of Hanover and the long rule of the Whigs that
followed, was the triumph, not of Puritans or democrats, but of
“moderate men,” as they loved to call themselves. Indeed, a more
democratic government would soon have been swept away by the
forces of Toryism, which were really the most powerful principle
in the economic society of that time. If England made no further
political progress till after the Industrial Revolution, it was be-
cause she had, by sheer good fortune in the years 1688 and 1714,
already advanced beyond the point guaranteed by her social
structure and political education. Only cautious conservatism
like that of Walpole could have staved off a violent reaction.

At a time when the Continent was falling a prey to despots, the
English under the Stuarts had achieved their emancipation from
monarchical tyranny by the act of the national will; in an age of
bigotry, their own divisions had forced them into religious Toleration
against their real wish; while personal liberty and some measure
of free speech and writing had been brought about by the balance
of two great parties. Never perhaps in any century have such
rapid advances been made towards freedom. Whether in the sweat
and anguish of that great battle and victory, the English lost
certain finer spiritual qualities, whether the Whigs were inferior to
the Puritans and the Tories to the Cavaliers, whether the value of
life was greater among the contemporaries of Shakespeare than
among those of Swift, it is profitable to inquire, provided we do
not expect a final answer. The more honestly we attempt to com-
pute the number and quality of the things wherein the value of life
consists even in our own generation and at our own doors, the
more complex and difficult does such a calculation appear. How
much less then, shall we be able to pluck out the innumerable
secrets of the past, count them, weigh them, and so find the total
value of some dead century. Hundreds of untold stories may be
no less noble and significant than the one story which, being famous
in its own day, was enshrined in some superficial and imperfect
record, whence now we drag it out and make it into history,

“LOST “qo ‘y10X Jo eyng ‘S8Z1 °q0 ‘1epueqorg *“sunod parp ‘s19y430 pue
[wurpaey ‘Aruoyzy SunoX oy} “preapg sopreyD ‘19qSOONOTX) JO oN “WRITE A,
| eae FEOT
‘FILL “qo “qo ‘opAyy
“99LT *40 “gg9T *q ‘euepoy jo ‘opAy] ouuy jo‘p ‘ZOLT ‘QO = euUY jo "p
Arey Jo wos ‘19pU9je.1g P[Q ey} ‘sous ‘yArwuued jo esi0eg + ouuy usend “TT arena "yy Acer

| |
|
“AOARG JO soyNG

| ‘FOOT “GO “BOLT “G0
*£oaeg jo r0y91,-Louuy ‘y] Srey“ yy] wera

“OY9T “qo “Buapoyy
“SUBITIQ | “OL9T “Go ‘esueIG Jo Jo Arey (Z) | ‘1oLT ‘qo "989L “qo
“mreqezita (2)=Jo dyryg—eyormey (1) ‘Ty wep A-Aweypy pd yy ounry (T)-/-]] sourep

‘Tl solTeyO

“LBLI “qo “] e820aH | | | | | |

“aeA0uey] JO | ‘PILT “40 “Z99T “40 “ZB9T "qo ‘ourzETEg I0,90/q

1Oj0eTY “sourg=-erydog ‘eoqaneyy “qaodny es sepreqy
| | |
~ “6S9T “qo | “SOUeLT JO ‘6F9T “qo
‘euneleg 10,001q ‘olroperg—-yroqezt[q "AI Azueyy Jo *p ‘eyorzu0zy=—_-7 sepzeyg “SI9T “qo ‘Aruezy
ae | |

| -2zor "qo ‘puelsugq jo *]
*‘yivurUe”] Jo ouuy=—‘pueyzo00g Jo "TA soup
"GIOT “qo “qaunqg eljoqery

"189T "qo = []eMNIOg Jo [req ‘sourer (e)
‘xouueyTy JO [rey ‘Aoyareq piory “ane 81008 Jo Ale  eouvy JO “]] souery (T

‘xOUUOT JO [Leq=—=sE[snog yorwSiepy “GFT “qo © A souep—-estny Jo Arepy

‘snduy jo [egy | ‘purpsugy Jo “TTA Sruogg Jo *p | ‘gtgq “qo ‘puepyoog yo
‘sepSnog preqryory (Z) + ‘qoresiv yy] “AI sewer ({)

SLUVOLS FHL

PARLIAMENTS, 1603-1715

Assemblies not legally summoned by the King are in italics

Character of Majority in

First Met. Dissolved. Name. House of Commons.
1. Mar., 1604—Feb., 1611 Puritan
2. Apr., 1614—June, 1614 The Addled Parliament Puritan
3. Jan., 1621—Jan., 1622 Puritan
4. Feb., 1624—Mar., 1625 Puritan |
5. June, 1625—Aug., 1625| First Parliament of Charles I. Puritan
6. Feb., 1626—June, 1626 Puritan |
7. Mar., 1628—Mar., 1629 Puritan |
8. Apr., 1640—May, 1640 Short Parliament Puritan |
g. Noy., 1640—Afr., 1653 Long Parliament Puritan |
10. Fuly, 1653—Dec., 1653 Barebone ‘‘ Parliament” Independent Puritan }
nominated |
11. Sept.,1654—Fan., 1655| First Parliament of the Pro- | Anti-military Puritan
tectorate
12. Sept., 1656—Feb., 1658 | Second Parliament of the Pro-| Anti-military Puritan |
tectorate
13. ¥an., 1659—Apr., 1659| Richard Cromwell’s Parlia- | Anti-military Puritan
ment
14. May, 1659—Mar., 1660| Restored Long Parliament
15. Apr., 1660—Dec., 1660 Convention Parliament Presbyterian-Royalist
16, May, 1661—Jan., 1679| Cavalier, Long, or Pensionary | Anglican-Cavalier
Parliament
17. Mar., 1679—July, 1679 Whig
18, Oct., 1680—Jan., 1681 Whig
(elected Aug.-Sep., 1679)
19. Mar. 21—Mar. 28, 1681 Oxford Parliament Whig
20. May, 1685—July, 1687 James II.’s Parliament Tory
21. Fan., 1689—Feb., 1690 Convention Parliament Whig
22. Mar., 1690—Oct., 1695 Tory
23. Novy., 1695—July, 1698 Whig (Ministerial)
24. Dec., 1698—Dec., 1700 Malcontent Whig,
and Tory.
25. Feb., rzo1—Nov., 1701 Tory
26. Dec., 17o1—July, 1702 Whig or Moderate
Tory; for war
27. Oct., 1702—-Apr., 1705 Tory; but strong for
war
28. Oct., 1705—Apr., 1708 | The First Parliament of Great Whig
Britain (after 1707) ,
29. Nov., 1708—Sept., 1710 Whig
30. Nov., 1710—Aug., 1713 Tory
}31. Feb., 1714—Jan., 1715 Tory
32. Mar., 1715. First Parliament of George I. Whig

(518)

APPENDIX A
HOW AMERICA WAS PEOPLED BY THE ENGLISH

HERE were indeed many ordinary Englishmen, and many
Cavaliers, in Virginia and the Barbadoes, gone thither solely
for economic reasons. But the Puritans in New England were more
numerous and bred faster ; and, on account of geographical and climatic
conditions, were engaged in the ordinary occupations of a white man’s
land, e.g., fishing and corn growing; the Virginians, on the other
hand, who grew tobacco, had a system of indentured “ servants,” which
from the outset prevented social equality, and in the following century
gave place to negro slavery (Economic History of Virginia, Bruce, 1896,
ii, pp. 572-73).

The Cavalier leaders in England, who largely consisted of those
country gentlemen who were most attached to the soil, were less
willing to emigrate than the Puritans. Thus, whereas the persecution
of Puritanism (1620-40) sent many thousand Puritans to America, the
persecution of Anglicanism and Royalism (1640-60) caused no corre-
sponding exodus of Cavaliers; a few only went out to Virginia. Those
leaders of the Cavaliers who feared for their lives, took refuge in the
towns of the Continent, waiting for better days. No permanent emi-
gration was attempted by men whose habits and traditions did not
incline them to start life afresh in a new country, with no attraction
save the possible attainment of wealth by long and hard labour. No
effort was made by the Cavaliers to find a new permanent abode for
themselves in any part either of Europe or of the globe. The
Anglicans felt they must live or die in England.

In the same way the large body of Catholics, though suffering severe
intermittent persecution in England throughout the whole century,
yet tailed to make a success of their refuge colony, Maryland, which
gradually lost its predominantly Catholic character. For the Catholics
in England, even more than the Anglicans, were the non-industrial

part of the population, They consisted almost entirely of country
(519)

520 APPENDIX A

gentlemen and their retainers—the part of society least inclined to
emigration.

In 1643 Massachusetts is calculated to have contained 15,000 in-
habitants; Connecticut 3,000; Plymouth 3,000; New Haven 2,500.
These were the four principal confederated colonies, known as New
England. In 1636 Rhode Island had also been founded by Roger
Williams, as a refuge colony for unorthodox Puritans fleeing from the
rigorous theocracy of the other colonies.

In 1648 Virginia is calculated to have contained 15,000 white men
(of whom only 118 were Dissenters from the Anglican worship) and
only 300 negroes.

For these calculations, see Justin Winsor’s History of America, vol.
iii., pp. 147, 148, 279, 312. Palfrey’s History of New England, i., pp.
584, 585 and notes. For the latest historical views on early New
England colonisation and society, see T'he Founding of New England,
by James Truslow Adams. (Boston, 1921.)

The settlers in New England brought with them the habit of the
large township or nucleated village characteristic of the eastern
counties of old England whence they had migrated. But they left
behind them the squire, or at least the idea of squirearchy. They
submitted instead, for two generations, to the rule of the clergy and
“church members,” generally a small minority of the township and of
the colony. After the Restoration of 1660, the battle of the un-
theocratic majority of the New Englanders was to some extent fought
by the English Crown against the clerical theocracy. After the sur-
render of the Charter of Massachusetts at the end of Charles II.’s
reign, the Revolution of 1689 restored the liberties of New as well as
of Old England. But the renewed Charter of 1691 very properly pro-
vided for the liberty of the whole colonial community, and did not
restore the political monopoly of a particular theological faction.
“Thanks to England,” writes Mr. Adams, “the final death-blow had
legally been dealt to the theocracy, and the foundation laid for genuine
self-government and religious toleration”. The special importance
of the affairs of early New England lay in this, that the New Eng-
land township and its ideas of religion, politics and society spread ever
westward, and, in gradually more diluted forms, extended across the
whole vast continent. Fortunately the School had been a part of the
original idea of the New England township.

APPENDIX B
THE POOR LAW AFTER THE RESTORATION

HE constant invigilation of the Privy Council over the )oca!
authorities did not revive at the Restoration. The regulation

of prices in time of famine, and the rigorous enforcement of the
Elizabethan Poor Law, by the supervision of the central power, had
for ever come toan end. This class of Privy Council activity had not
been made a political question, and resistance to it had not been
connected with any set of opinions in Church and State. Therefore
the decline of this function of the central government passed unnoticed
in its own day. Yet one cause of its decline, probably, was that
monarchical power in England was much diminished ; and another, that
society no longer lived in constant dread of the wandering bands of
beggars. The Poor Laws had to some extent done their work in
relieving the well-to-do from fear of a social revolution. As that fear
declined, the interest in the condition of the poor declined also. One
reason why the Poor Laws had not required vigorous enforcement
under Long Parliament and Protector, was that high wages and regular
employment had resulted from the state of war. During that period
the custom, enjoined by the Poor Law, of employing able-bodied
paupers out of parish stock set apart for the purpose, fell into disuse

and was never revived. The other half of the Poor Law, the relief of

the impotent poor out of the rates, had become and still continued the
custom of the country, largely as a result of the vigour shown by the
Privy Council under the early Stuarts.

After the Restoration, though the magistrates and the parishes

supported their impotent poor, the heavy rates were paid grudgingly and

on conditions. The parishes richer in ratable property or in common
land, complained that undesirables came out of the poorer districts to

squat on their commons, destroy their woods, and eventually claim

_ poor relief from the community on which they had fastened. So in
_ 1662 the Cavalier Parliament passed the Act of Settlement: this

(521)

522 APPENDIX B

unfortunate measure enabled the authorities to prevent a labourer from |
moving into a parish, even if he had obtained employment within its |
bounds, if they feared that he might some day in the future come
upon its poor-rate. The power granted by the Act was frequently
and stupidly exercised by jealous ratepayers, the fluidity of labour
was checked, and the working class deprived of personal and economic
freedom for over a hundred and thirty years. It was the condition on
which the upper and middle classes consented to fulfil their duty, that _
had now become traditional, of maintaining the impotent poor,!

1 Leonard, pp. 132, 274-77, 296, 297. Cunningham, pp. 563, 570,571. Adam
Smith, Wealth of Nations, bk. i., latter part of chap. x. |

APPENDIX. C
WHO KILLED SIR EDMUND BERRY GODFREY?

NLESS new evidence rather unexpectedly comes to light, the
murderers of Godfrey will remain for ever undetected. I think
the evidence (as stated by Mr. Pollock, The Popish Plot, pp. 100, 101
and note) precludes the theory of suicide, though Mr. Lang thinks there
is still the shadow of doubt. The closest and most ingenious study of
all the evidence as to the murder is to be found in Mr. Pollock’s book.
His theory is that Prance was really an accomplice, and told (roughly)
the true story, but named the wrong men, wishing to shield the real
murderers or instigators of the murder, the Jesuits about the person of
James. The Rev. J. Gerard, S.J., author of What was Gunponder Plot ?
has attacked Mr. Pollock as a romancer (see his pamphlet The Popish
Plot and its Newest Historian). He has done much to clear the Jesuits
of St. Omers of the implication of perjury in June, 1679, but on the
larger issues he has said very little. Mr. Andrew Lang, however (The
Valet’s Tragedy, 1903, chap. iii.), has met Mr. Pollock in the face on the
main issue. The student can form his own opinion on the debate.
Nothing has been proved either way. I remark, however, that Mr.
Pollock has laid too much stress on one particular motive which he
has ascribed for the murder: there may have been any number of
motives, personal or public, in an affair of which we know so little.
Mr. Lang, on the other hand, has not explained why Prance was
not flogged with his betters in 1685, and why he fled in company with
the Jesuits in 1688. Until those facts are explained, Mr. Pollock’s
theories must at least be treated with respect,

(523)

APPENDIX E

FINANCE, UNDER THE RESTORATION AND REVOLUTION SETTLEMENTS

HE immense addition to national efficiency made by the National |
Debt, the Bank of England, and more generally by the better |
relation between King and Parliament caused by the Revolution
Settlement, are brought into very high relief by Mr. W. A. Shaw’s |
revelation of what had previously been the lamentable conditions of i
national finance, as shown in his Calender of Treasury Books for |

Charles II.’s reign. Mr. Shaw shows that before Parliament obtained
control of policy in 1689, even the most loyal of Parliaments—the
Cavalier Parliament—had kept the King ludicrously short of money
while “there did not exist at the time in England any proper machinery

for anticipating revenue”, This is so true that it is scarcely possible |

seriously to blame Charles for the “‘ stop on the Exchequer” in 1672. |

“From the first day he set foot in England at the glorious and happy

Restoration his government was financially doomed.” . . . “He could |
not have escaped bankruptcy.” Mr. Shaw has proved this up to the hilt. |

Financially as well as politically the Restoration settlement, giving
Parliament control of the purse without control over policy, was utterly
unworkable. The Revolution settlement was a financial necessity, to
enable England to thrive in peace or to conquer in war. For another
part of Mr. Shaw’s argument which I am inclined to question, see p. 366
above note.

(526)

BIBLIOGRAPHY

The following lists have been compiled with the double purpose of assisting the
general reader to books which he will care to read, and of pointing out to the student
of the period some works where his studies can profitably commence. But see also
notes to text above. In each of the following lists some books are recommended
for ee pen others more specially to the student. The latter are distinguished
thus—(st.

I.— BOOKS FOR 1603-1660
(a) POLITICS AND WAR
MopERN

S. R. Gardiner. History of England, 1603-42. Civil War. Commonwealth and
Protectorate. ‘Together constitute the authority on the period for both general
readers and students. See also Gardiner’s What Gunpowder Plot Was. 1897.
(st.). A conclusive answer to Father Gerard, S.J.. What was Gunpowder
Plot? 1897. (st.)

S. R. Gardiner. Cromwell’s Place in History. 1897.

John Morley. Oliver Cromwell. 1g00.

Frederic Harrison. Oliver Cromwell. 1888. (Twelve English Statesmen Series.)

C. H. Firth. Oliver Cromwell. (Heroes of Nations Series.) The highest authority on
the subject.

C. H. Firth. The Last Years of the Protectorate. 1656-58. 2 vols.

Carlyle. Historical Sketches (Reigns of fames I. and Charles I.). 1899. A pos-
thumous work, less known than it deserves. Picturesque and philosophic
descriptions of men and events. __

Macaulay. Essays on Hampden and Milton, :

D. Masson. Life of Milton. 6 vols. 1859-80 (new ed, 1881). (st.) Collection of
data throwing much light on the period.

Lord Nugent. Memorials of Hampden. 1832. (st.) - . ;

H. D. Traill. Strafford. Julian Corbett. Monk. (English Men of Action Series.)

(Bacon.) J. Spedding. Letters and Life of Bacon. 7 vols. (st.). Throws much
light on the life of the period, and controverts Macaulay’s Essay on Bacon (q.v.).
For an impartial summing up, see R. W. Church’s Bacon (1884). (English
Men of Letters Series.) :

H.A. Glass. The Barbone Parliament. 1899. (st.). Best monograph on subject.

John Forster. Sir ¥. Eliot, 1864. Statesmen of the Commonwealth. 1840. Grand
Remonstrance. 1860, Arrest of the Five Members, 1860. Forster led the way,
together with Carlyle, in the study of this period, and his works are still very
readable monographs, and full of matter valuable to the student. _

(Ireland.) Gardiner (History, passim, and E. H. R., xiv., pp. 700-34) is the safest
authority. Froude. English in Ireland. Prendergast. Cromwellian Settlement.

st.) J. T. Gilbert. Confederation and War in Ireland. (st.) 2 vols, 1882,
Padlon. Memoirs,
(5217)

528 BIBLIOGRAPHY

(Navy.) M. Oppenheim. History of the Administration of the Royal Navy. 1896.
(st.) Julian Corbett. England in the Mediterranean. 1904. Vol. i.

(Civil War.) C. H. Firth. Cromwell’s Army. 1902. The best book and the most
learned authority on the military side of the war; and throws much light on
society, politics and religion. G. Godwin. Civil War in Hants, for details of
a county war, and of Basing House. Civil War of Lancashire and Lancashire
Lord-Lieutenancy, Il, (Chetham Soc., 1844, 1859). (st.) Webb. Civil War in
Herefordshire. 1879. (st.) R. W.Cotton. Barnstaple during the Civil War. (st.)
C. R. Markham. Life of Fairfax. 1870, for the anti-Cromwellian view of mili-
tary operations.

CONTEMPORARY

Carlyle. Cromwell’s Letters and Speeches. The Letters and Speeches speak
for themselves and are of the highest value; as to Carlyle’s running comment,
he was the first modern who understood the character of Cromwell and the
spiritual content of Puritanism, But he fails to understand the motives of all,
whether Puritan or not, who opposed his hero. He shows, therefore, in this
great poetical biography, a less catholic grasp of the whole period than even
that shown in Historical Sketches. ‘There is now an invaluable critical edition
by Mrs. S. C. Lomas, 1904; the introduction by C. H. Firth is the best comment
on Carlyle’s book, and should be read by all intending to study either Carlyle
or Cromwell.

Clarendon. History of the Great Rebellion. Full of noble writing, contemporary
colour and valuable information, but full also of misrepresentations and mis-
statements. Fullest account of the inner counsels and quarrels of the Cavalier
party. See Ranke, vi., pp. 1-29, and Firth, E. H. R., xix., pp. 26-54, for analysis
and estimate of its various parts. Clarendon State Papers. 1767. 3 vols.
The documents used by him in composing his history.

Clarke Papers. (Camden Soc., 1891, 4,9.) Introduction by C. H. Firth. Vol. i.
contains shorthand reports of debates of Cromwell, his officers and soldiers, on
settlement of nation and political theory in 1647. These should be read by all
who wish to know about the ideals of the interregnum.

Ludlow. Memoirs. 1894. Gives the strict Republican (anti-Cromwellian) point
of view and type of character. Irish wars in detail. Valuable introduction by
C. H. Firth,

Col. Hutchinson, Life of, by his Widow. Gives the point of view of the upper-class
Independents, and is the most interesting personal story of all the memoirs ot
the period.

Bulstrode Whitelock, Memorials, 1860. Swedish Embassy. 1855, gives the point
of view of a Puritan lawyer and constitutionalist, very much at sea under Crom-
well and trying to serve his country in strange times.

Acts and Ordinances of the Interregnum. 1642-60. Edited by Firthand Rait. 2 vols.
Igtr  (st.)

Ss. R. fae! Constitutional Documents, 1625-60 188g. (st.) G. W. Prothero,
Statutes and Constitutional Documents, 1559-1625. 1894. (st.) Selected docu-
ments with valuable introduction.

Court and Times of Fames I., and Court and Times of Chas. I., 1848. (st.) Gossip
of period, as it appeared to contemporaries, from day to day.

Rushworth. Historical Collections. 7 vols. (st.) For period 1618-48.

Thurloe. State Papers. 7 vols. (st.) For Republican period.

Cases in the Courts of Star Chamber and High Commission. (Camden Soc., 1886.)
With introduction by S. R. Gardiner. (st.)

King’s Pamphlets. Collection, British Museum. (st.)

Baillie’s Letters and Fournals. (Bannatyne Club, 1841.) For picturesque account
of relations of Scottish and English Puritans, and Strafford’s trial.

Sir Philip Warwick’s Memoirs. Cavalier.

Verney. Notes of the Long Parliament. (Camden Soc., 1845); and for fuller reports,
The Fournal of Siy Simonds D’Ewes. Notestein. (Yale, 1923.)

BIBLIOGRAPHY 529

Cromwell’s Soldier's Catechism. Reprinted. (1900, Elliot Stock.) Tract for Round-
head army, illustrating Puritan attitude during the war. Nothing really to do
with Cromwell.

Letiers of Sergeant Nehemiah Wharton in Archeologia. XXXV. Journal-letters of
a London prentice serving in Essex’s army, to his master’s family. Amusing
and instructive as to character and condition of the first armies raised.

Lacy’s play The Old Troop. Friendly satire on Cavalier soldiers by one who had
served with them.

Sprigge. Anglia Rediviva. 1647. Semi-official history of operations of New
Model, 1645-46. It contains a valuable map of Naseby, (st.)

Clement Walker. Mystery of Two Funtoes and History of Independency. Anti-
Republican narrative of contemporary events, 1646-49. (st.)

A. Marvell. Hovatian Ode upon Cromwell's Return from Ireland. This fine poem
shows ‘ how it struck a contemporary” (Golden Treasury, or Marvell’s Poems),

John Walker. Sufferings of the Clergy. 1714. (st.) A biographical dictionary of
many of the Anglican clergy persecuted, 1640-60. Not always reliable.

(b) RELIGION AND POLITICAL SPECULATION
MopDERN

Lecky. History of Rationalism. Especially chap. i. on Witchcraft.

E. Dowden. Puritan and Anglican. 1go0. Essays and biographical studies,

J. N. Figgis. Divine Right of Kings. 1896.

Archbishop Laud Commemoration. 1895. Edited by W. E. Collins. Essays on
Laud by Bishop Creighton and others.

L. A. Govett. The King’s Book of Sports. 18g0. (st.) Monograph on the subject.

W. A. Shaw. History of English Church, 1640-60. 1900. (st.) History of English
Puritanism as an Established Church and its relations to Presbyterianism.

Neal. History of the Puritans. 5 vols. 1822. (st.)

G. P. Gooch. English Democratic Ideas in the Seventeenth Century. 1898. Should
be read (together with Clarke Pafers, vol. i.) by all who wish to understand the
political and ecclesiastical ideas of the interregum.

R. Barclay. Inner Life of the Religious Societies of the Commonwealth, 1876. (st.)
For origins of the ideas of Quakerism and the most advanced sects.

Caroline Stephen. Quaker Strongholds. 18g0.

W. C. Braithwaite. Beginnings of Quakerism. 1912

Hessey. Bampton Lectures, 1860. Lecs. vi., vii. on the origins of Sabbatarianism.

CONTEMPORARY

Laud’s Works (Library of Anglo-Catholic Theology).

Ben Jonson’s Bartholomew Fair. Butler’s Hudibras, satires on Puritans.

Works of Andrewes, Chillingworth, Bunyan and Hobbes.

Fuller. Church History.

Baxter’s Life, by himself. The early part gives a picture from inside of Puritanism
before the Civil War. Later, the point of view of a moderate Presbyterian.

George Fox’s ¥ournal. One of the greatest spiritual autobiographies in the world.

Life of Thomas Ellwood, by his own hand, (Methuen, 1900.) A disciple of Fox.
The early part gives an intimate and lifelike picture of a conversion to
Quakerism—its ideals, and the social sacrifices and family ruptures it involved.

Milton’s Prose Works, especially Aveopagitica and Of Reformation in England.

(c) SOCIAL
MopDERN

Lady Verney. Memoirs of the Verney Family. 3 vols. 1892-94. _Charmingly
told story of the domestic life of a family actively engaged in politics and war
under Charles I. and the Commonwealth. See also Verney Papers. (Camden

Soc., 1853.) (st.)
34

530 BIBLIOGRAPHY

College Life in the Time of Fames I., from Diary of Sir Simon D’Ewes, 1851.

Mark Pattison. Casaubon, Life of, and E. H. R., xv., pp. 58-72, and books men-
tioned p. 19 above, note, for state of learning and the Universities.

D. H. Madden. Diary of Master William Silence. 1897. For sport, time of
Shakespeare. -

L. Einstein, Italian Renaissance in England. 1902.

J. A. Symonds, Shakespere’s Predecessors. 1884.

CONTEMPORARY

Fynes Moryson, Itinerary (ed. 1617), and Fourth Part (ed. 1902, called Shakespeare's
Europe), is the best of the books descriptive of English travel on the con-
tinent in the Elizabethan and early Jacobean period. See also books mentioned

. 7 above, note.

Lord Herbert of Cherbury’s Autobiography. Illustrates very amusingly the customs
of the upper classes in England and in France respectively, especially as to
duelling.

Ww. Blundell. Crosby Records. A Cavalier’s Notebook. {st.) Especially for con-
dition of Catholics.

Stuart Tracts (Firth), 1903, and Arber’s Reprints, and Percy’s Reliques for specimens
of popular prose, poems and ballads.

Evelyn’s Diary.

Diary of F¥ohn Rous. (Camden Soc., 1856.) How things appeared from day to
day to a country parson of some intelligence.

SFournal of Nicholas Assheton. (Chetham Soc., 1848.) How things appeared from
day to day to a country gentleman of little intelligence.

D’Ewes’ Autobiography. 1845. 2 vols. Diary of Walter Yonge. (Camden Soc.,
1847.) (st.) Typical Puritan gentlemen; D’Ewes is more personal and intimate ;
Yonge records the sort of daily news that reached and interested a Puritan
Justice of Peace in Devonshire under JamesI. The interest in foreign affairs
from a religious point of view is very marked.

Dorothy Osborne’s Letters, rivals Col. Hutchinson’s Life in personal interest, and
light thrown on ordinary life of the period. See Macaulay’s Essay on Temple.

Diary of the Duke of Stettin. R. H.S., 1892. How English customs struck a
foreign visitor about the time of James I.’s accession.

Thomas Fuller. Holy and Profane State. Quaint descriptions of the various classes
of the community.

Worcester County Records. Vol.i. (st.) Excerpts illustrating the ordinary business
of courts and officials in an English county.

The Plays of the period illustrate most fully London life, as Ben Jonson’s Comedies,
Mayne’s City Match, Chapman’s Eastward Ho! Dekker’s Shoemaker’s Holiday,
Beaumont and Fletcher’s Knight of the Burning Pestle. But some represent
the classes of country life, as Dekker and Ford’s Witch of Edmonton ; and some
the universities, as Pilgrimage to and Return from Parnassus. (Clarendon Press,

1886.)
II.— BOOKS FOR 1660-1714
(a2) POLITICS AND WAR
MopDERN
Neer eee: of England. Essays on Temple, Addison and War of Succession

Osmund Airy, Charles II. A most entertaining and authoritative history of
Charles’s life and reign by a master of the documents of that period.

W.A. Shaw. Calender of State Papers, Treasury Books from 1660 on. (1904-1913.)

eo ls (Onno). Der Fall des Hauses Stuart.

eiling. History of the Tory Party 1640-1714. (1924.) Specially good for the reigns

of William and Anne and the eaetitGden & fallen” Ah: 3h

John Pollock. The Popish Plot. 1903. For a brief notice of the controversies
aroused by this interesting and scholarly book, see the The Popish Plot and its
Newest Historian, Rev. J. Gerard, S.J.; The Valet’s Tragedy, A. Lang, chap.
iii, ; and Appendix C. above.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 531

Acton. Secvet History of Charles II. No.1, Home and Foreign Review, But see
also A. Lang’s The Valet’s Tragedy, chap. viii.

Sir G. Sitwell. The First Whig. 1894 (unpublished). A most learned and
entertaining description of Whig electioneering and party methods, temp. C. II.

Sir James Stephen. History of Criminal Law in England, (st.) Consult especially
for his opinion of the various State Trials, temp. C. II.

W. P. Christie. Life of Shaftesbury. 1871. (st.) H.C. Foxcroft. Life of Halifax.
1898. (st.) Valuable letters and documents.

H. D. Traill. Shaftesbury. (English Worthies Series.) 1888, An appreciation
of his importance in English political development.

O, Airy. English Restoration and Louis XIV. 1888, Best short text-book for
1660-78, especially for foreign affairs.

F. W. Head. The fallen Stuarts. 1901. (st.)

V. Barbour. Henry Bennet, Earl of Arlington (1914.)

Viscount Wolseley. Life of Marlborough. 1894.

Ferguson the Plotter. 1887. (st.) For the Rye House Plot.

Lecky. History of the Eighteenth Century. Vol. i. The best book about the
domestic history of Anne’s Reign.

F. W. Wyon. History of Great Britain under the reign of Queen Anne. 1876.
An excellent book and the fullest history of the reign.

W. Coxe. Memoirs of Marlborough.

Atkinson (C. T.) Marlborough and the rise of the British Army. 1921

Stanhope. ' Reign of Queen Anne. 2vols. Generally trustworthy and readable, but
not exhaustive,

Churton Collins. Bolingbroke. 1886. A brilliant essay, and perhaps the best
appreciation of Bolingbroke. Its view of his career and character should be
contrasted with that of W. Sichell, Bolingbroke, 1go1. (st.)

Leslie Stephen. Swift. (English Men of Letters Series.)

W. J. Ashley. Surveys Historical and Economic, 1900, pp. 268-303. The Tory
Origin of Free Trade.

(Spain.) Col. A. Parnell. History of War of Succession in Spain. 1888, (st.),
and E. H. R., vi., pp. 97-151 (st.), exposing worthless nature of Carleton’s
Memoirs. W. Stebbing. Peterborough. (English Men of Action Series.) Stan-
hope’s Reign of Queen Anne, and Macaulay’s Essay on War of Succession in
Spain, must be cautiously read in the light of Col. Parnell’s discovery.

(Navy.) Capt. Mahan, Influence of Sea Power upon History, chaps. ii.-v. J. R.
Tanner’s Introduction to Descriptive Catalogue of Pepysian MSS., 1903. (Navy
Records Soc.) (st.) Pepys’ Diary. Social England, v., pp. 377-88. Julian
Corbett. England in the Mediterranean. 1904. Vol. ii.

CONTEMPORARY

Clarendon. Life. His own account of his ministry and fall, See Ranke, vi.,
pp. 24-29, for critical estimate of the book.

Pepys’, Evelyn’s and Narcissus Luttreil’s Diaries,

Anchitel Grey. Debates of the H. of C., 1667-94. 10 vols. 1769. (st.)

Burnet. History of His Own Times. Vols. i., ti., in ed. 1897, with O, Airy’s
critical notes, form an authority on the reign of Charles II. Vols. iii.-
vi., ed. 1833. For a just estimate of the value of this much-disputed work,
see Ranke, vi., pp. 45-87, and Mr. Airy’s Preface, pp. v-ix.

Clarke. Life of famesII. 1816. (st.) In partstantamount to James’s own memoirs.
See Ranke, vi., pp. 29-45, for critical estimate, and Macpherson Papers, vol. i. (st.)

Francis North’s Examen, and Roger North’s Lives of the Norths. (Bohn, ed. 1890.)
Contemporary Tory view of events, and the Norths’ views of persons, 1678-85.
Full of colour; throws great light on society of the time, especially the lawyers.

532 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Clarendon (2nd Earl). Correspondence and Diary. (Temp. 1676 to Revolution.) |

2 vols. (ed. 1828). (st.)

Marvell’s Works, i. Growth of Popery. (st.) A fine pamphlet, which throws light l

on causes provocative of the formation of the Whig party.
Dryden. Absalom and Achitophel, the great political satire on Shaftesbury and

the Exclusionists. The Medal. Satire on Shaftesbury at time of his acquittal. _

Hind and Panther. Satire in favour of Catholicism. (Temp. J. II.)

Sir W. Temple’s Memoirs. (st.)

Memoirs of Thomas Bruce, Earl of Ailesbury. (Roxburgh Club, 1890.) A personal
friend of C. II. during the Exclusion agitation.

J. Macpherson. Original Papers. 1775. (st.) Courts of St. Germains and Han-
over, and relations of English statesmen to them.

Coxe Papers MSS., in B.M. (st.), for large masses of political correspondence (temp.
Anne) still unprinted; see also Hist. MSS. Com. Report, viii. (st.)

Conduct of the Duchess of Marlborough. By herself. 1743.

Marlborough’s Despatches. (st.)

Lettres Historiques. (st.) Impartial. Till 1710 written by Dumont. Printed at the

Hague. Excellent on the internal affairs of England, as well as European !

affairs.

Boyer’s Annals, (st.) Whig. .

Torcy. Memoirs. 1757. (st.) 2 vols., and Bolingbroke’s Letters. 4 vols. 1798. (st.),
together are the authorities for the secret negotiations which led to the
Treaty of Utrecht. See also Torcy for the conferences of 1709-10.

Works of Swift, especially Conduct of the Allies, Barrier Treaty, Public Spirit of
the Whigs, fournal to Stella, Last Four Years of Queen Anne.

Arbuthnot’s History of ohn Bull. Tory satire on the foreign wars.

Works of Addison, and Spectator, Tatler, Guardian.

E. Ward. Calves Head Ciub and Hudibras Redivivus, ‘Tory satires,

(8) RELIGION AND POLITICAL SPECULATION
MopERN

Leslie Stephen. History of Eighteenth Century Thought. Hobbes.
Lecky. History of England. Vol. i., chap. i.
H. Foxe Browne. Locke. 1876. 2 vols.

CONTEMPORARY

Eikon Basiliké (then believed to be by Charles I.), and Butler’s Hudibras. The
two most popular works among the Anglicans,

Swift. TaleofaTub. Defence of the Anglican position against Rome and Geneva.

Works of Locke, W. Penn, Jeremy Taylor, Hoadley (st.), third Lord Shaftesbury (st.)

Filmer’s Patriarcha. Statement of the Tory political creed as accepted 1680-87,
though written during Civil Wars,

History of the Quakers. W. Sewell. 1725.

(c) SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC
MopDERN

Macaulay. History. Chap. iii, should be compared with Sir G. Sitwell’s Old
Country Life, rgor (unpublished), and Babington’s Mr. Macaulay’s Character
of the Clergy, 1849. Lecky (History of England, chap. i., pp. 93-98, ed. 1892)
appears to take Macaulay’s view of the condition of the clergy,

J. Ashton. Social Life in Reign of Anne. 1882. 2 vols.

CONTEMPORARY

Pepys and Evelyn. Diaries.
Defoe. London to Land’s End, and his works of fiction.
Hanviton, Grammont’s Memoirs (for Court of Charles IL).

BIBLIOGRAPHY 533

Comedies of period (Wycherley, Congreve, etc.), and Jeremy Collier’s Short View
of the Immorality of the English Stage.

Eachard. Contempt of the Clergy. Complaint of the poverty and low social status
of the clergy, temp. C. II., perhaps exaggerated.

Works of Swift, Addison, Steele.

(Sport.) Gentleman’s Recreation. 1686, With many interesting illustrations,

III.—BOOKS REFERRING TO BOTH THE PERIODS
(1603-1660 AND 1660-1714)

(a) GENERAL HISTORIES

Holdsworth (W. S.) History of English Law (especially vol. v. on Coke.)

Ranke. History of England principally in the Seventeenth Century. (Translation
1875.) One of the great histories of our country, too much neglected. The
cause and growth of English parties in their wider aspect are luminously ex-
posed, as also foreign relations.

Green. History of the English People (sub loc.). Its qualities as a general account
of the period are too well known to need comment.

Hallam. Constitutional History of England (sub loc.). Excellent on the general
history of parties and politics, as well as on the constitutional points which it
treats at length.

Hume Brown, History of Scotland vols. ii.-iii.

Andrew Lang. History of Scotland vols. iii.-iv.

Lingard. History of England (sub loc.). Avery readable history of the old school,
told with candour and impartiality by a moderate Catholic. But a good deal
has been discovered since Lingard wrote in the first half of the nineteenth century.

Mathieson. Politics and religion in Scotland from 1550 to 1695. 1902. Scotland and
the Union. 1905.

(Foreign policy and war) Corbett. England in the Mediterranean. 2 vols. 1904
Seeley. Growth of British policy, 2 vols. 1895, is An Historical Essay on the
external relations of Britain and their connection with her political and religious
development, from Elizabeth to William II.

H. E. Egerton. A Short History of British Colonial Policy

Bagwell, Richard. Ireland under the Stuarts. 3 vols. 1909-1916.

(6) ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL

Alfred Marshall. Principles of Economics (1891), chap. iii.

W,. Cunningham. Growth of English Industry and Commerce. Modern Times, i.,
ed, 1903. (st.) At present the highest authority on this subject, which is, how-
ever, in a state much further removed from finality and certainty than the
political history. See also the old edition.

Thorold Rogers. Six Centuries of Work and Wages. 1884. (st.) History of
Agriculture and Prices. 1866-87. Vols. v., vi. (st.) Largest collection of
statistics, and much interesting comment.

W. A. Hewins. English Trade and Finance, chiefly in the Seventeenth Century
1892. (University Extension Series.)

H. O. Meredith. Economic History of England. Bk. iii.

Lady Verney. Memoirs of the Verney Family. 1899.

Pearsall Smith. The English Language. (Home Univ. Lib.)

Miss Leonard. Early History of English Poor Relief. goo. (st.)

A. H. Hamilton. Quarter Sessions from Elizabeth to Anne. 1878. (st.) Illustra-
tions of the ordinary business of quarter sessions.

G. Dowell. History of Taxation in England. Ed, 1888. (st.)

«584 BIBLIOGRAPHY

}

Social England. Vol. iv. 1895, (st.) Articles and bibliographies on various aspects :
of English life, by well-informed writers. 1

MacPherson’s Annals of Commerce. 1805. |

McCulloch’s Select Tvacts on Commerce. i

(Population.) Gregory King. Political Observations. 1696. |

(Health.) C. Creighton. History of Epidemics. 1891. Defoe. Yournal of the |
Plague Year.

(Justice and Police.) Sir James Stephen. History of Criminal Law in England.
3 vols. 1883. Melville Lee. A History of Police in England, 1901.

(Army.) J. W. Fortescue. History of the British Army.

(c) WORKS OF REFERENCE AND ORIGINAL AUTHORITIES

The Harleian Miscellany, 1808, and Somers’ Tracts are the two collections of
pamphlets, etc., on all subjects, political, religious and social, most easily obtain- |
able by, and most valuable to, general readers and students.

Reports of Historical MSS. Commission. For numerous collections of private and |
official letters, etc.

Statutes of Realm. (st.) Fournals of House of Lords and House of Commons. (st.)
Parliamentary History. (st.) Calendar of State Papers. (st.) |

State Trials (Cobbett). Verbatim reports of the great State Trials of this period; —
presents the most life-like picture of seventeenth century politics that we possess, _
See especially the trials in the reign of Charles II. |

Dictionary of National Biography. |

Sir W. Anson. Law and Custom of the Constitution. 1892.

OM pt BIS ‘Jeers messy

Sanquy ‘apg 4
TPOITOGUIPT PIT Ws yp Momoprrpre gar

gc" PUT SOK)! xy TONY .OT TOpwoT

TL Puan) /0WPT AIABUT Cy YnVabe1y Jo rey apmnbuocT Lt
1 ie a2 VA ¢ S gol
| psezirT oul ‘9 I 3
og = i / Ay OS gs
fe ON i e os"
5 H S bug spyey
269 ‘PH fyovog *
uo}dureyynos
1s - ue RAY Ose :
/FOysoyourM + I¢
Aragzomey Vs sorspen wee “osnoy Bujsng
: pinog
© DYy}0Y, uozduny
figuynd : %, fangmayy
SOUT, “Wy | Sioyusny 5 3
‘ NOQNO7 :
BE ~ e
pjaly anoskynyp E
z ae b PAQXO, ae .
es al : es 2 ie Sie
re SG N1VY Ek BO g we "
poem [-UO-AdI M19 : Gyn gt CLOL F /
Pa Biag |jamyzpgx : fp’
: | sot HOUNSNIGS TST JN ; ae
ADq Uy St :
9¢ if | Wy | Y ff Si
: - : : f ie
i z v g 9

Joke Bartholomen fe SonIed Edinburgh

INDEX

AssoT, Archp., 110, 113, 148, 151.
Act of Settlement (parochial, 1662), 521, 522,
Act of Settlement (of crown, 1701), 462 n.},
Addison, Joseph, 504.
Addled Parliament, 109, 120.
Agriculture—
Labourers in, 41, 42.
Methods of, 38 and n,?,
Women employed in, 42.
Aix-la-Chapelle, Peace of, 371.
Albemarle, Duke of (Gen. Monk), 329, 331.
Ale-houses, Suppression of, 24.
Alexander VII., Pope, Charles II.’s negotiations with, 370
Almanza, 496.
Alsace, 500 n.?, 508.
American Colonies—
Emigration to, 173 and n.?, 174, 225, 226, 519 520,
Rs Middle Colonies,” 357+
Quaker persecutions in, 315.
Seizure of, from the Dutch, 353-
Stuart influence on, 324.
Anglican Church—
Bishops—
Arrogance of, og.
Episcopacy question, 202-6.
First Bishops’ War (1639), 187, 188.
Latitudinarian, 451, 470, 475, 476.
Lawyers’ attitude towards, 166, 167.
Lords’ refusal to exclude, from Parliament, 217,
Non-Jurors, 451 and 7.3,
Persecutions by, 339.
Press censorship by, 170, 200.
Protestant Toleration Bill rejected by, 378.
Second Bishops’ War (1640), 192, 193.
Secular offices held by, 177.
Sermons restricted by, 171.
Seven Bishops, trial of, 435 1., 437.
Unpopularity of, 202, 203, 206.
Charles II.’s attitude towards, 364, 366, 367, 370; alliance with, 279, 38
Clergy—
Gaynirest attitude towards, 166, 167.
Status of, 17, 176.
Comprehension or toleration, necessity for, 168, 205.
Courts of, jurisdiction of, over morals, 175.
Democratic Government of, proposed, 204.

(535)

536 INDEX

Anglican Church—
Dissenters—
Overtures to, 435.
Persecutions of, 345, 346, 418, 428.
Dort, Synod of, represented at, 148, 149.
Ejectment of 300 Puritans from, 80, 81, 109, 149; Of 2,000 (1662), 341.
Erastianism, 150-152.
High Church Canons (1640), 191, 192.
High Church party—
Aims of, 154.
James I.’s support of, 153.
Name, origin of, 451 n.}.
Power of, 451.
Sacheverell, Dr., trial of, 501, 502.
Tenets of, 150-152.
High Commission Court, 168-70; abolition of, 215; re-appointment of (1686),

434.
James I1., attitude towards, 428.
Learning of, 153 2.
Lecturers, 171.
Low Church party, 475, 476.
Metropolitical visitation, 169.
Non-Jurors, 451 and .?.
Passive obedience, doctrine of, 478.
Patronage, 306.
Prayer Book—
Alteration of, proposed (1641), 218.
Cavalier championship of, 203.
Proscription of, by Parliamentarians, 274.
Protectorate, position under, 316.
Scottish revolt against, 186, 187.
Puritan Clergy ejected from (1604), 80, 81, 109, 149; (1662), 341.
Restoration of (1661), 332.
Ritualism in, 172.
Sermons in, 170, 171.
State interference with, justification of, 451.
Test Act (1673). See that title.
Westminster Assembly, 261.
Anne, Queen, reconciled to William III., 458 ; accession of, 468 ; Whig Party in reign
of, 470, 471; Tory Party in reign of, 471, 472; relations with Marlborough,
480; War of Spanish Succession, 482; General Elections in reign of, 484;
loyalty to, 485; Tory sympathies of, 494; ‘Mrs. Morley,” 497 and n.;
Sacheverell trial, 501, 502; dismisses the Whigs, 502; creates twelve Tory
Peers, 508; Hanoverian Succession question, 512-515; death of, 515.
Apprentices—
Forcible apprenticing of, 24.
Gentry as, 20.
Status of, 44, 46, 201 and n,
Statute of, 44.
Argyle, Archibald, 8th Earl of, 187, 299 ; execution of, 332.
Argyle, Archibald, 9th Earl of, capture and execution of, 429,
Arlington, Earl of, 364, 371, 372, 373.
Arminianism, 153-155.
Army—
Civil War. See that title.
Test Act (1673), effect of, 395.
Ashley. See Shaftesbury.
Assassination Plot (1682-3), 420-422,
Assassination Plot (1696), 460.

INDEX 537

Assessment, New, 242.
Assiento Treaty, 511.
Assizes, 23, 24; Bloody Assize, 431.
Associated Counties, the, 249, 250, 252,
Atheists, 19, 231.
Attainder, Bills of, 126 x,
Augsburg, League of, 456, 479, 510.
Austria—
Bohemia occupied by, 119, 120,
Charles VI., Emperor, accession of (1711), 506,
Holland—
Alliance with (1688), 440,
Assistance to ier 375.
Rastadt, Treaty of, 508, 509.
Spanish Succession question, 465, 479, 482, 486-92, 496, 500, 506.
Authorship, conditions of, 54, 55.

Bacon, Francis (Baron Verulam and Viscount St. Albans), deprecates persecution
of Puritans, 81; favours union with Scotland, 107; appointed Lord Chan-
cellor, 122; cringes to Buckingham, 123 ; impeachment of, 124; justice not
sold by, 126.

Baillie, the Covenanter, 187, zor,

Bancroft, Archp., 78, 80.

Bank of England, 458, 459.

Baptists—

Endowment of, 311.
Quakerism hated by, 315.

Barbadoes—

Emigration to, 5.9,
Recovery of, 301.

Barcelona, capture of, 496.

Barebone Parliament, 294, 305, 306.

Barrier Treaty, 499, 500 and 7.}, 502, 509 n.

Basing House, 268, 269.

Bastwick, sentence against, 180,

Bate (merchant), case of, 108, 155.

Baxter, Rev. Richard, on Puritans, 65 ; on Cromwell’s Ecclesiastical polity, 310; on
Occasional Conformity, 485.

Bedford, Earl of, 208, 210.

Bedloe, William, 394, 397, 398)

Beggars, 24, 26, 29, 521.

Bell-ringing, 53.

Benefit of Clergy, 26.

Benevolences, 120.

Bible-reading, 60, 61, 149, 344.

Bibliography, 527-34.

Bill of Rights, 448, 457 1.

Billeting, 142, 143.

Bills of Attainder, 126 7.

Blackwell, Archpriest, 87, 98.

Blake, Admiral, against Rupert, 300 ; against Van Tromp, 303 ; in the Mediterranean,

23.

Blenheins, battle of, 486, 489-92 and m.},

Bloody Assize, 431.

Bohemia, Austrian occupation of, 119, 120.

Bolingbroke, Viscount (St. John), on Dissenters, 475; views on taxation, 477;
on Civil Service posts, 484; position innew Government, 502, 503; peace
negotiations, 505 ; Treaty of Utrecht, 510; raised to the Peerage, 513 and .° J
quarrel with Oxford, 513, 514; Schism Act, 514; proclaims King George L,
515; otherwise mentioned, 474, 493, 494, 511. .

538 INDEX

Bolton, massacre at, 230 #., 258,

Bombay, 352, 353-

Book of Sports, 148, 17%.

Borderers, 249.

Bothwell Brig, 407.

Boyne, the, battle of, 453.

Bradshaw, exhuming and hanging of, 333.

Breda, Treaty of, 356.

Brooke, Lord, 248. : ’

Buckingham, (George Villiers, rst Duke of, of the second creation), rise of, 114;
fickleness of, 115, 129; relations with Gondomar, 127, 128; visit to Spain
(1623), 128, 129 ; supremacy of, 130; incompetence of, 132, 134-136; shielded
by Charles, 132, 135, 137, 145; promotes the French marriage, 133 ; parlia-
mentary disapproval of, 134; attitude towards parliament, 136; impeached,
137; Rochelle expedition, 138; billeting and martial law policy, 142, 143;
Peers’ attitude towards, 145; Remonstrance against (1628), 145; second
Rochelle expedition, 145; murder of, 146; Laud the Confessor of, 152.

Buckingham, (George Villiers, 2nd Duke of), Clarendon mocked by, 362; Treaty
of Dover, 374; supports Shaftesbury, 390.

Bull-baiting, 69.

Bunyan, John, 173, 311, 344.

Burnet, Bp., views of, on toleration, 436 ”.; relations with William of Orange, 441;
unpopularity of, 476.

Burton, Rev. Henry, sentence against, 180.

CaBAL, the (1670-3), 363, 364; dissolution of, on the Test Act, 378,
Cabinet Government, 457 and n.?, 497.
Cadiz expeditions (1625), 135-137; (1702), 483.
Calvin, 69.
Calvinism— |
Official patronage of, under James I., 149, 153. |
Puritan views of, 60, 62.
Roundhead enthusiasm for, 231,
Scottish, 185, 186, 205.
University teaching of, 148.
Cambridge University—
Episcopalian dons, expulsion of, 317,
Non-resistance doctrine, 418.
Carlisle, Lady, 222.
Carr, Robert (Earl of Somerset), 113, 114,
“* Carwell,” Madam (De Querouaille), Duchess of Portsmouth, 411-413, 425.
Castlemaine, Countess of (Barbara Villiers), 350, 351.
Catalans, 496, 510.
Catesby, Robert, 92, 94, 95, 97.
Catherine of Braganza, Queen, 351, 352; Oates’ attack on, 392, 393.
Catholics. See Roman Catholics.
Cavaliers—
Atheism attributed to, 19.
Compounding of estates of, 274.
Degeneracy of, 350.
Emigration of, to America, 521.
Execution of the King, attitude towards, 290,
Financial disadvantages of, 243, 244, 265,
First so-called, 220, 221.
Restoration a triumph for, 332, 333.
Sacking of cities by, 230 m., 258.
Strategy of, 239.
Surrender of, to Commonwealth, spirit of, 274,
‘Taxation of, for maritime wars, 301, 308, 309,
Upbringing of, 15. ay

INDEX 539

Cavendish, Lord, 391, 404, 405,

Cecil, Robert. See Salisbury.

Cellier, Mrs., 399.

Chalgrove Field, 248.

Chambers (merchant), case of, 159.

Chancery Court, abolition of, proposed, 305, 306.

Charles I., King—

Career, Chronological Sequence of: visit to Spain (1623), 128, 129; shields
Buckingham, 132, 135, 137, 145; French claims, 137; dissolves Parliament
(1626), 137; the Forced Loan, 138; Petition of Right, 145 ; murder of Bucking-
ham, 146 ; the Three Resolutions (1629), 155, 156; proclamation on summoning
of Parliament, 157; unfair taxation, 160; insignificant position in Europe, 162;
Scottish policy, 186-188, 216; dissolves Short Parliament, 191; desertion ot
Strafford, 212; visit to Scotland (1641), 216-218, 220; attempts on the Five
Members, 221, 222; at York, 223, 231, 232 ; moves west, 236; Edgehill, 237;
headquarters at Oxford, 238, 240, 241; Roman Catholic support, 244; siege of
Gloucester, 253; Naseby, 266; at Holmby, 277, 278; negotiates with Inde-
pendents, 278; Heads of the Proposals negotiations, 284, 285 ; flight to Caris-
brooke, 285; popular feeling, 286, 287; negotiates with Presbyterians, 238 ;
trial, 289; execution, 289, 290.

Characteristics—

Dignity, 146,
Double-dealing, 216, 241, 285, 288,
Self-centredness, 137, 138, 157.

Court of, 177, 178.

Charles II., King—

Career, Chronological Sequence of : movements after his father’s execution, 296;
takes the Covenants, 297; starts for London, 298; battle of Worcester and
escape from England, 299; protection of Quakers, 315 ; Restoration, 329, 330;
execution of regicides, 333; Act of Indemnity, 334; Cavalier Parliament, 336;
patronage of science, 347 ; marriage, 351, 352; fall of Clarendon, 363 and z.;
the Cabal, 363, 364; ecclesiastical policy, 364-367, 370, 371, 379; Triple
Alliance, 371; adherence to Roman Catholicism, 371 ; summons his son from
Italy, 372, 373; secret Treaty of Dover, 373; Oates’ Plot, 387, 399; debates
in the Lords, 391; the divorce question, 393; treaty with Louis XIV. (1678),
396; Temple’s Privy Council, 405, 406 ; temporising policy, 405, 409; danger-
ous illness (1679), 497 ; sends Monmouth to command in Scotland, 407 ; exiles
Monmouth and James, 408; Petitioners and Abhorrers, 411; dissolves second
Whig Parliament, 414; summons and dissolves Oxford Parliament, 414-17;
proposal as to William of Orange, 415; financed by Louis XIV., 415, 416;
Rye House Plot, 422 ; despotism (1683-5), 425; last years, 425; death, 426,

Characteristics—

Laziness, 350, 351, 354; 355» 362.
Statecraft, 350, 365.

Court of, 349-51.

Charles, Archduke (1711, Emperor Charles VI.), claim of, to Spanish throne, 464,
482, 484; becomes Emperor, 506; Treaty of Rastadt, 508; Tory policy re-
garding, 509.

Church buildings, secular use of, prohibited, 175, 176.

Churches—

Anglican. See that title.

Free, 261, 311.

Puritan. See Puritanism and Puritans.

Roman Catholic. See Roman Catholics.

State Church, opposition to theory of, 60,

Churchill. See Marlborough.

Civil War—

Aloofness of majority towards, 227-9, 287,

Armies of—

Cavalry, 246-8, 251,

540 INDEX

Civil War—

Armies of—

Infantry, 247, 248.

Levying of, 245.

New Model—
Character of, 265, 266, 279, 280.
Creation of, 260, 264.
Disbandment of, proposed, 275, 276.
Sacking of castles and houses by, 230 and n.
Siege operations of, 268.

Press-gang. See that title,

Small size of, 226 n.?, 244.

Cavaliers. See that title.

Chronological Incidents of : Royal Standard raised at Nottingham, 234; Navy
declares for Parliament, 234, 235 ; Edgehill, 237; Charles enters Oxford, 238;
Turnham Green, 238; Gainsborough, 252; Winceby Fight, 252; campaign in
the West, 252, 253 ; siege of Gloucester, 253, 254; first battle of Newbury,
254, 255; Parliamentarian Alliance with the Scots, 255, 256; siege of York,
257, 258; Scottish invasion (1644), 257; Cheriton, 257; massacre at Bolton,
258; Marston Moor, 258, 259; Lostwithiel, 260; second battle of Newbury,
263; Naseby, 266-77; Langport, 267, 268; siege operations of New Model,
268; siege of Pembroke, 237; Preston, 288,

Clubmen, 269.

County Treaties, 227.

East Anglians, Cromwell’s, 250.

Garrison system, 245.

Gentry’s attitude towards, 228.

Humane conduct of, 31, 230.

Labourers’ attitude towards, 227.

Neutrals, treatment of, 227.

“ Newcastle’s White Coats,” 249.

Parliamentarians. See that title.

Principles involved in, 229.

Private and local affrays in, 244.

Roundheads. See Parliamentarians.

Townsmen’s attitude towards, 228.

Clarendon, Edward Hyde, 1st Earl of, attitude of, towards illegal ordinances, 217;
at York, 231; advocates Parliament of Oxford, 241; tribute to Falkland, 255;
tribute to the New Model, 266; Anglicanism of, 335; Code of, 341-6; fall of,
361-3; exile of, 363 .; constitutional ideal of, 375; on purchase of votes,
377; otherwise mentioned, 207, 213, 331, 350.

Clarendon Code, 341, 342; social effects of, 343-6.

Classes—

Close relations of, 4 and n.}, 14, 15, 46, 71, 102.

Distinctions observed by, 16 and n.2, 46,

Farmers, separation of, from labourers, 40.

Claverhouse, John Graham of, Viscount Dundee, 438, 455.

Clergy—

Squires’ attitude towards, 166, 167.

Status of, 17, 176.

Clifford, Thomas, Lord, 364, 371, 372, 377, 378.

Clothiers, 43, 47.

Coal trade, 46.

Cobham, Lord, rrr.

Coke, Chief Justice, as Attorney-General, 112; resistance to James I., 121; dismissal,
122; family affairs, 122; attitude towards Spain, 127; excluded from Parlia-
ment of 1626, 136; otherwise mentioned, 123, 142, 169.

Colchester, siege of, 287, 288.

Coleman (Duke of York’s Secretary), papers of, seized, 385, 387, 388 and nn., 389 n.,
396; examination of, 388; conviction of, 397; otherwise mentioned, 383, 384 7.3,

INDEX 641

College, Stephen, 416, 419.
Commerce. See Trade.
Commissions of Array, 223.
Committee of Both Kingdoms, 286 ».
Commons, House of. See under Parliament.
Companies, trading, 47, 48.
Compton, Bp., 434, 442.
Comus, 13 n.}.
Conventicle Act, 316, 341, 364.
Conventiclers, 172, 173. :
Cooper, Anthony Ashley. See Shaftesbury,
Cornish, Henry, judicial murder of, 431,
Corperation Act, 341, 450.
Corporation Bill (1690), 452.
Corruption, universality of, 125,
Council of State, 304.
Country—
Residence in, 6; influence of beauty consequent on, 51, 52.
Towns not in rivalry with, 20, 44, 71.
County Committees, 227, 242, 260, 262.
County Militia, 338.
Court, The, limits of, 5.
Coventry, Sir John, 375, 376, 395.
Coverley, Sir Roger de, 473, 474.
Cromwell, Oliver—
Career, Chronological Sequence of: as a landowner, 38, 251; in the Parliament

of 1628, 142; on Episcopacy question, 204; supports Root-and-Branch Biil,
217; emigration contemplated by, 226 n.1; activity in East Anglia, 229; at
Edgehill, 237; military reforms, 250; championship of poor landowners, 251
and n,; at siege of York, 257; at Marston Moor, 258, 259; advocates creation
of New Model, 260; attacks Earl of Manchester in Parliament, 263 ; at Naseby,
266, 267; at Langport, 267, 268; views on disbandment, 277; marches on
London, 278, 279; Heads of the Proposals negotiations, 284, 285 ; Windsor
Prayer Meeting, 285; siege of Pembroke, 287; Preston, 288; determines on
Charles’s fall, 289; views on Levellers, 293; Lilburne’s defiance, 293, 295;
policy outside England, 295, 296; in ireland (1649), 296, 297; Dunbar, 59,
298; Worcester, 299; Irish policy, 319, 320, 452; dissolves the Rump, 305;
becomes Protector, 306; first Protectorate Parliament, 307, 308 ; appoints the
Major-Generals, 308 and ”.; oppression of Cavaliers, 308, 309 ; Second Parlia-
ment, 309, 310; ecclesiastical polity, 310; Scottish policy, 320, 321 ; war with
Spain, 322, 323; French Alliance, 323 ; protects Waldensians, 324 ; death, 326,
327 ; exhuming and hanging, 333.

Capital punishment, views on, 34 7.
Characteristics of, 251, 252, 327, 323.
Statesmanship of, 284.

Cromwell, Richard, 328, 329.

Crown—
Power of, in Anne’s reign, 484, 485.
Prerogative of—

James I.’s views of, 75, 105-8.
James II.’s use of, 434.
Whig attitude towards, 470, 471.

Culpepper, John, 217.
Cumberland “ Statesmen,” 38 7.°.
Cutts, Lt.-General, the ‘‘ Salamander,” 490.

Dansy, Earl of (Sir T. Osborne), policy of, 379-82; betrayal and fall of, 396; fraud

by, 397 .1; otherwise mentioned, 390, 392, 422.

Dangerfield, Thomas, 399.

542 INDEX

De Cominges on British Government, 340,
D’Ewes, Sir Simon, 156, 214, 216.
De Ruyter, Admiral, 356.
Debtors, imprisonment of, 28, 306.
Declaration of Right, 448.
Delaware, 356.
Democracy, rise of theory of, 281, 292.
Denonville, Brigadier, 491, 492.
Derby, Earl of, 228, 299.
Derby House Committee, 286 and .
Descartes, 152, 348.
Digby, George, and Earl of Bristol, on Root-and-Branch petition, 206 ; on the Five
Members question, 221, 222; otherwise mentioned, 203, 240, 241.
Digby, Sir Everard, 95.
Diggers, 40 7.1, 283 n.
Dissenters—
Anglican persecution of, 345, 346, 418, 428; overtures to, 435.
Bolingbroke’s attitude towards, 514.
Charles II.’s policy as to, 364, 365.
Clarendon Code, effects of, 344-6.
Declarations of Indulgence (1672), 377, 378 ; (1687-8), 436, 437.
Disabilities of, 450, 451.
James II.’s overtures towards, 435.
Non-Resisting Bill, 381.
Occasional Conformity Bill. See that title.
Pamphleteering by, 408.
Schism Act, 475 and 7.1, 476, 514.
Social position of, 344.
Toleration principal accepted by, 449.
Tory persecution of, 419, 425, 463, 514.
Whig policy towards, 391, 471 and x.
“ Divine Right” theory, 75, 105, 106, 130, (See also Crown.)
Dover, Secret Treaty of, 373 and n.8,
Drinking, 8, 67, 68.
Duelling—
Classes concerned with, 4.
Regularised, 10, 11 and n.},
Dunbar, battle of, 59, 298.
Dunkirk—
Battle of, 324.
Sale of, to France, 353.

EACHARD, Rey. John, on classical education, rg.
East Anglia, Newcastle’s invasion of, 250, 252.
East India Company, 48, 49.
Eastern Association, 249, 262.
Education—
Classical scholarship, 18, 19.
Five Mile Act, effect of, 341, 342.
Private tuition, by, 15.
Progress in, 317.
Schools, in, 14, 15.
Universities, at, 15-19.
Elections, parliamentary—
Anne, Queen, in reign of, 484.
Conduct of, 102.
Organisation of, 402, 403.
Table of (1603-1715), 520.
Electorate, strength of, 462, 466.

INDEX 543

Eliot, Sir John, impeaches Buckingham, 136, 137; on the Forced Loan, 142 and n.;

a ea of, 158, 159, 163; death of, 159; otherwise mentioned, 155, 196,
206.

Elizabeth, Queen—
Accession anniversary of, celebrations on, 409, 421.
Army under, 147, 148 and 2.},
Death of, 73.
Finance of, 107.
Military executions of, 144 m,
Poor Law of, 23.
Rebels, treatment of, by, 288.
Emigration, 173, 174, 225, 226 and n.!, 519. 520.
Enclosure of Common Lands, 36, 37, 40 n,}, 251 and #.
England, aspect of, modern, and in Stuart period, 35-37 and n,
English language, 54.
Episcopacy, question of, 202-6,
Equality of opportunity, 281.
Erastianism, 150-2, 204, 205, 217, 218, 261.
Essex, Earl of (Robert Devereux), divorce of (1613), 113 ; against Strafford, 210; popu-
larity of, 236; relief of Gloucester, 254 ; inefficiency of, 260; discredit of, 263.
Essex, Earl of (Arthur Capel), moves exclusion of Duke of York, 388; summons
Duke of York, 407; opposes prorogation, 409; joins Whigs, 412 ; Insurrection
Plot, 420; republican ideal of, 421.
Eton School, 15.
Eugene, Prince, 487-91, 495, 496, 500, 506, 507.
Evangelical revival, 34.
Evidence, unscientific treatment of, 27, 400, 401.
Exclusion Bill, First, 405; Second, 412; Third, 416,

FarrFax, Lord (Ferdinando, ob. 1648), 250.
Fairfax, Lord (Thomas), 250; made commander-in-chief of the New Model, 264;
at Naseby, 266; Colchester surrenders to, 288; reduces Devon and Cornwall,
270; Oxford capitulates to, 270 ; otherwise mentioned, 250, 287, 304.
Falkland, Lucius Cary, 2nd Viscount, against the Bishops, 203; supports illegal
ordinances, 217; death of, 255; otherwise mentioned, 207, 213, 216,
Farmers, tenant, 37, 38 and n.},
Fasts and Festivals, 41.
Fawkes, Guy, 30, 93, 96, 97.
Felton, John, 146.
Feversham, Lord, 429, 431.
Fiennes, Nathaniel, 222.
Fifth Monarchy Men, 315, 336, 337+
Filmer, Sir Robert, 417.
Finance—
Charles I., under, 160.
James I., under, 107-9.
Whig, 457-9, 471-
Finch, Judge, 184, 199.
Five Mile Act, 316, 341, 342.
Fleet. See Navy.
Fleetwood, 318.
Flogging, 429.
Food of the peasantry, 41, 42.
Football, 68, 69.
Forced Loans (1626-7), 138, 139, 151, 160; (1640), 192
Foreign possessions, 321.
Fowlin :
Fox, Bsr carats of, 312, 313, 315; interviews with Cromwell, 328 and n.; othez-
wise mentioned, 173, 310, 311.

544 INDEX

France—
Aix-la-Chapelle, Peace of (1668), 371.
Augsburg, War of League of, 456, 457.
Breach with (1625), 135, 136; War (1627), 138; Peace (1628), 144,
British attitude towards (1667), 360, 361; (1670), 368; (1672), 374.
Charles II.’s alliance with, 367, 373.
Classes in, 39.
Cromwell’s alliance with, 323.
Danby’s policy regarding, 380.
Duelling in, rx.
Dunkirk, battle of, 324.
Edict of Nantes, revocation of, 438, 439.
Example to Europe, 367, 368.
Holland, British treaty for partition of, 373, 374.
Jesuit party in, 369, 370 and n.).
Marriage project of Buckingham, 133, 134.
Peasantry of, 40, 140.
Poor Law in, 29.
Pyrenees, Treaty of (1659), 351.
Revolution in—
Foreign countries, effect in, 39.
Free Will principle in, 273.
Nature of, 196, 229.
Richelieu, under, 182.
Roman Catholic alliance against, 440.
Spanish Succession, War of, 478, 479, 486-92, 495-501 ; peace negotiations, 50§
Toleration in, position of, 366,
Trade with, prohibited, 459, 462 1.”, 5x1.
Utrecht, Treaty of, 508.
Franchise. See Suffrage.
Frederic, Elector Palatine, 119.
Free Churchmen, 261, 311.
Free Speech—
Incompleteness of, 504.
Parliamentary, 104, 127, 163, 39%.
Suppression of (1683), 424.
Free Trade, 459, 511.
Free Will, 153, 154, 169.
Freethinkers, 346, 470, 474, 515.
Friends, Society of. See Quakers.
Furniture, beautiful forms of, 7, 52.

GAME, 9, 473.
Game laws, 9 and n.}, 42, 473.
Games, 68, 69.
Garnet, Henry, Jesuit, attitude of, towards James I., 90, 92; action regarding Gun-
powder Plot, 94 and n.; trial and execution of, 97, 98.
Gaunt, Elizabeth, 431.
Gentry—
Anglican sympathies of, under Protectorate, 316.
Civil War, attitude towards, 228.
Clergy, attitude towards, 166, 167.
Commercial careers of younger sons of, 20,
Cromwell’s policy towards, 3ng.
Game laws passed by, 473.
Roman Catholics, attitude towards (1679), 403.
Social position of, 71,
Taxation of, by Charles I., 160,

INDEX 545

Gentry—
Types of, 4 and n.?,
Younger sons, occupations of, 20, 21.
George I., King, 515.
Germany—
Peasantry of, 40.
Wars in, an opening for English younger sons, 22.

Gibraltar, acquisition of, 482, 492, 510.

Glencoe, 455.

Gloucester, siege of, 253; relief of, 254.

Godfrey, Sir E. B., 384 and n.?; murder of, 385, 397, 523.

Godolphin, Sidney, 1st Earl of, views of, on foreign policy, 478; relations with
Marlborough, 480, 481; privy to Marlborough’s plot with Eugene, 488;
under subjection to Whigs, 494, 499; advises impeachment of Sacheverell,
501; dismissed by Anne, 502; otherwise mentioned, 458, 474, 4775 493, 497»
498 and nn.) 2,

Gondomar, Spanish Ambassador, 118, 120, 123, 127, 128.

Gordon Riots, 359, 360.

Goring, Lord, plot of, to release Strafford, 210; at Marston Moor, 258; at Lang-
port, 267; otherwise mentioned, 227, 240, 269.

Grand Alliance—

Britain’s importance to, 482.
Change of policy of, 484.
Formation of, 466.

Obstinacy of members of, 505.
Ramillies, effect of, on, 495.
Tory jealousy of, 510.

Grand Remonstrance, nature of, 219, 220 and m.; numbers voting on, 213.

Great Britain contrasted with little England, 130.

Great Contract, the, 108, 109.

Green Ribbon Club—

Foundation, functions and membership of, 393, 394.
Insurrection and assassination plots, 420-2.
Whig victory at elections (1679) organised by, 402-3.

Greenway, Father, 93, 94, 97.

Guilford, Lord (Francis North), 413, 433.

Guinea coast, 353.

Gunpowder Plot (1604-1605), 92-98,

Gustavus Adolphus—

Cavalry tactics of, 246.
Charles I., estimate of, 162.
French alliance of, 440.

Haseas Corpus Act (1679), 406.

Hales, case of (1686), 435. : }
Halifax, (George Saville) Earl and Marquis of, moves exclusion of Duke of York,

388; quarrels with Shaftesbury, 404, 406, 412; summons the Duke of York,
407; Opposes prorogation, 409; effects rejection of second Exclusion Bill,
412; impeached (1680), 412, 413; against French influence, 425 ; estimate of
Charles II. by, 426; dismissal of, 433; otherwise mentioned, 390, 400, 422.

Halifax, (Charles Montague) Earl of, financial achievements of, 459, 461, 471; im-
peached (1701), 461; social importance of, 474; in the Junto, 502 n.}.

Hampden, John, schooling of, 14; at Oxford, 167; refuses ship-money, 184; party
organisation by, 214; attempted impeachment of, 222; death of, 248; other-
wise mentioned, 142, 163, 198, 209, 213.

Hampden, John, the younger, 420.

Hampton Court Conference (1604), 78, 79»

Hanoverian Succession—

Accomplishment of, 515.

35

546 INDEX

Hanoverian Succession—

Act of Settlement for, 462 #.!.

Scottish attitude towards, 494.

Tory attitude towards, 462 n.1, 469, 513, 514

Whig efforts to secure, 502, 513, 514.

Harley. See Oxford.

Harrington, James, 376.

Harrington, Sir John, 22.

Harrison, Major-General, 306, 310, 333.

Hawking, 9g.

Hazlerigg, Sir Arthur, 209, 221, 222.

Heads of the Proposals Treaty, 284, 285.

Heinsius, 488.

Henrietta Maria, Queen, consequences of Charles I.’s marriage with, 133, 134;
against Laud, 178, 179; intrigues of, 210; leaves England, 231; attempts to
convert her children, 372; otherwise mentioned, 199, 222.

Henry, Prince, 112, 117.

Herbert of Cherbury, Lord, ro, 11, 125.

High Commission Court. See under Anglican Church,

Highway robbery, 308 ,

Hoadly, Rev. Benjamin (afterwards Bishop), 476, 478.

Holland—

Agricultural methods adopted from, 38 .%.

Amboyna, massacre of, 49.

Austria— |
Alliance with (1688), 440. |
Assistance from (1672), 375.

Barrier towns seized by Louis XIV., 465 and x,

Barrier Treaty (1709), 499, 500 and .}, 502, 509 7.

Breda, Treaty of, 356. |

Dorislaus murdered in, 295 n.

Field Deputies, 483, 495, 501.

Hostilities, private, with, 353.

Influence of, on England, 50.

Maritime supremacy of, 301 ; surpassed by Britain, 481.

Maritime trade of, 182.

Monmouth exiled to, 408.

Partition of, proposed by Charles I., 163; Treaty for (1670), 373, 374.

Refugees, political, in, 199, 422.

Revolution in (1672), 374, 375.

Roman Catholic Alliances of (1688), 440.

Rupert’s re-organisation of a fleet in, 300.

Shaftesbury’s death in, 422, 423.

Spain—

Alliance with (1688), 440.

Assistance from (1672), 375.

Change of policy regarding, 370, 37%.

Peace with (1609), 115 ”.

Succession, War of, 479, 481-3, 488, 495, 497, 499-501, 506.

Tory attitude towards, 506.

Triple Alliance, 370, 371.

Utrecht, Treaty of, 508, 509.

Wars in, an opening for English younger sons, 21.

Wars with (1651-1654), 301, 303; (1665-1667), 353-6; (1672), 374.

Holles, Denzil, 221, 222, 310. &

Hopkins, Matthew, 33.

Hopton, Sir Ralph, in the West, 229, 252; Waller’s friendship for, 233; advance on
London by, 239.

Hounslow Camp, 432.

INDEX 547

Lea 36; country, 6, 7.
oward, Lord, concerned in Insurrection Plot, 420; betrays
Howard, Belted Will, 74, 113. oS sharin iin ys
Howard, Lady Frances, 113.
Howard family, 87, 113, 114.
Hudson’s Bay—
Acquisition of, 482, 511.
Rupert’s interest in, 353.
Huguenots—

Edict of Nantes, revocation of, 438, 439.

Settlements of, in England, 45.

Silk trade in England improved by, 476.
Hull, Parliamentarian stronghold at, 249, 252.
Humanitarianism, 29-31 and n.}, 33, 34.
Humble Petition and Advice, 309.

Hungary, 487.

Hunting, 8 and nn,

Hutchinson, Mrs., 11, 66.

Hyde, Anne, 437.

Hyde, Edward. See Clarendon,
Hyde, L. See Rochester.

IMPOSITIONS, 108,
Imprisonment, arbitrary, 140, 144, 192.
Independency, endowment of, 311.
Independents—
Buckingham the friend of, 364.
Charles I., negotiations with, 278.
Ireland, Landlord caste in, 319, 320, 335 and nn.
London occupied by, 278.
Parliamentary persecution of, 275.
Penal code, dealings with, 33, 34 ”
Presbyterian persecution of, 262.
Restoration, the—
Acceptance of, 329, 330.
Ruin by, 335 and x.
Toleration advocated by, 26r,
Unpopularity of, 295.
India—
Bombay, acquisition of, 352, 353.
East India Company, 48, 49.
Industry, domestic system of, 46.
Informers, 342, 401.
Innocent XI., Pope, 440.
Instrument of Government, 306.
Insurrection Plot (1682), 420-22.
Interlopers, 48.
Ireland—
Boyne, the, battle of, 453.
Courts of Justice in, 166 ”.
Cromwell’s policy in, 297 and m., 319, 320; failure of, 452.
Emigration from, 454.
Emigration to, 173.
Landlords, alien, introduction of, 319, 335 and n., 452.
Limerick, Treaty of, 453.
Ormond in, 296, 297. r
Protestants in, trade of, ruined by England, 452, 454.
Rebellion in (1641), 218, 219.
Strafford in, 187-9.

548 INDEX

Ireland—
Subjugation of (1650-2), 318.
“ Tories,” 318 and m., 411.
Trade of, ruined by English, 320, 452, 454.
Tudor System in, 318, 319.
Tyrconnel in, 433.
Ulster—
Emigration from, to America, 454.
Plantation of, 189, 193, 3ly.
William III.’s grants of land in, to Dutch, 461.
Ireton, Commissary-General, at Putney negotiations, 284 ; subjugation of Ireland by,
318; exhuming and hanging of, 333.
Iron trade, 47 and n.
Italy—
Classes in, 39.
Excise imposts in, 124 m.
Travel in, 21.

Jamaica, acquisition of, 323, 324.

James I., King—

Career, Chronological Sequence of : progress from Scotland, 74; at Hampton
Court Conference, 78, 79; ejects Puritan Clergy, 80, 81 ; attempts conciliation
of Roman Catholics, 90; adopts rigorous measures against them, 92, 98 ; dis-
solves Parliament (1611), 109 ; the Essex divorce, 113, 114; Addled Parliament
and system of Benevolences, 120; claims to interview judges, 121; summons
Parliament of 1621, 121 ; intrigues with Gondomar, 123; general failure, 130;
death, 131.

Characteristics—

Appearance, 74.
Discernment, lack of, 76, 80.
Favouritism, 75, 113.
Obstinacy, 76.

Pedantry, 75.

Religious sympathies, 79.
Witch-mania, 32, 33, 348.

Book of Sports by, 148, 171.

Court of, corruption of, 64, 98, 107, 110.

Financial state of England under, 107-9.

High Church Party supported by, 153.

Navy mismanaged by, 183.

Scottish ecclesiastical policy of, 186.

James II., King (Duke of York), interest of, in Hudson’s Bay adventure, 353; mar-
riage with Anne Hyde, 361; Roman Catholic intrigues (1669), 371, 377 ; treason
of, discovered in his secretary’s papers, 387, 388 and m. ; Succession question,
388, 389 and %., 404, 412; summoned from Brussels, 407, 408; question of
Limitations, 404, 415; sent to Scotland, 408; restored to office (1683), 425;
position on his accession, 427; Monmouth’s rebellion, 430, 431; attempts
military despotism, 432, 433 ; demands repeal of Test Act, 434; policy towards
Roman Catholics, 434, 435, 437; seeks alliance with Dissenters (1687), 435;
vengeance on Anglicans, 435; Declarations of Indulgence (1687-8), 436, 437;
birth of a son, 437; vacillation, 443 ; landing of William of Orange, 443, 444;
flight to St. Germains, 445 ; English intrigues with, after flight to France, 448,
449; in Ireland (1689), 453; approves plot against William III., 420, 460;
death of, 466.

James Stuart (son of James II.), birth of, 437; proclaimed King by Louis XIV.,
466; entertained on eve of Blenheim, 489; Anne’s attitude towards, 512;
Whig attitude towards, 513.

INDEX

549

Jeffreys, Chief Justice, City Charters declared forfeit by, 424; Bloody Assize, 431 ;
made Lord Chancellor, 433 ; on Court of High Commission, 434; otherwise

mentioned, 293.
Jesuits—
“Charles II., under, 369.
France, in—
Edict of Nantes, revocation of, 439.
Influence wielded by, 369, 370 and 2.3.
Gunpowder Plot, action regarding, 94.
Godfrey, Sir E. B., supposed connection with murder of, 523.
Policy of, 88, 89.
Pope, quarrel with the, 369, 370.
Popish plot trials, 397-9.
Provincial Congregation of, in St. James’s Palace, 382, 333.
Risks of, 84.
Seculars, rivalry with, 87-89, g1, 98, 369.
Watson’s plot betrayed by, gr.
Jews, positicn of, under Protectorate, 317,
Jones (Republican commander), 296,
jJudges—
Power of, 121.
Subservience of, 122, 157, 184.
Judicature, 26.
Jury system, 26.
Justice, miscarriage of, 25-27, 400-402.
Justices of Peace, status and duties of, 22-24.
Juxon, Bishop, 177.

‘“KENTISH PETITION,” 466,
Ketch, Jack, 431.
Killing affrays, 11.

Kirke, Col. Percy, “‘ Lambs” of, 352 2.1; military executions by, 431; supports

Prince of Orange, 444; otherwise mentioned, 433, 438.
Knox, John, 69.

La CualsE, Pére, 383, 385; Coleman’s correspondence with, 387, 388.
La Hogue, 456, 457.
Labour (see also Apprentices)—
Agriculture, in, 41, 42.
Apprentice Laws’ effect on, 44 and n.
Poor-law provisions’ effect on, 29 ”., 524.
Ladies, occupations of, 11, 12.
Lambe, Dr., 158.
Lancashire, town and country feud in, 229.
Land—
Enclosure of common lands, 36, 37, 40 ”.', 251 and n,
Multiplicity of landowners, 41.
Nationalisation of, 282 2.°.
Taxation of—
Incidence of, 338 and .?,
Tory view of, 477.
Tenure of, 22.
Landen, 456.
Langhorn, Richard, 397, 400, 401 #.1.
Langport, 267, 268.
Language, simplicity of, 54.
Latin, position of, 18,

550 INDEX

Laud, Archp., intolerance of, 45, 60, 61; Arminianism of, 62; Royalist policy of,
151; Erastianism of, 151, 154; tenets of, 152; feeling of, for order, 167;
attitude towards Puritans, 167, 168; methods and policy of, 168-76; per-
secutions by, 61, 168, 173; position at Court, 178, 179; Scottish policy of,
186 ; imprisonment and execution of, 199, 275; otherwise mentioned, 150,
154, 339.

Lauderdale, 364, 406, 407.

Law—

Reverence for, 163.
Universal, idea of, 348, 349.

Lawyers, Whiggism of, 391.

Lecturers, 171.

Lent, observance of, 41.

Lenthall, Speaker, 213, 263, 278.

L’Estrange, Roger, 408.

Levellers, Political—

Demands of, 282-4.
Regicides, attitude towards, 292, 293.
Levellers, Social, 282 n.°, 293.
Lilburne, John, cruelties against, 181; tenets of, 282; exposes Cromwell, 285;
blames the regicides, 292; trials of, 293, 294; hatred of Cromwell, 310,
Lille, siege of, 497.
Lillibulero, 444 n.
Limerick, Treaty of (1691), 453.
Lisle, Alice, 431.
Literature—
Ladies’ reading, 12.
Puritan influence on, 58,

Local self-government—
Abolition of (1683-4), 424.
Forms of, 50, 51.
Vigour of, 71.

Locke, John, 414, 459, 470, 471.

London—
Apprentices of, 45, 201 and n.
Fire of, 356, 359, 360.
Gordon Riots, 359, 360.
Independents’ march on, 278.
“ Liberties” of, 51 ”., 201 n., 359.
Literary centre of, 504.
Merchants of, resistance by, to Tonnage and Poundage, 158, 15
Panic in, under Oates’ Plot, 386.
Parliamentarian strength in, 234.
Plague of, 356, 358, 360.
Pope-burning procession in, 409, 410,
Population statistics of (1603), 51 ”.; (1666), 359.
Revolutionary centre in, 200, 201.
Riots in (1640), ror.
Royalist advance on (1643-4), 239.
Scottish Commissioners in, 201,
‘* Season,” efforts at inauguration of, 5,
Seven Bishops, ovation to, 437.
Slums of, 51 #., 201 n., 359.
Tory Sheriffs elected for (1682), 420, 421,
Train-bands of, 223, 247, 254.
Turnham Green (1642), 238.
Undesirables in, 6 n.

Londonderry, relief of (1689), 453.

Lords, House of. See under Parliament,

INDEX 551

Lostwithiel, 260.

Louis XIII., King, 136, 137.

Louis XIV., King, passive alliance of, with Holland, 360; negotiations with Charles
II., 365, 366, 373; persecution of Protestants, 370 n.!; aims at British
neutrality, 380; betrays Danby, 396; treaty with Charles II. (1678), 396;
attitude towards Madam Carwell, 412; finances Charles II., 415, 416; re-
vocation of Edict of Nantes, 438, 439; warns James against Prince of Orange,
442; War of the League of Augsburg, 456, 457; Treaty of Ryswick, 460;
secret agreement with William III. on Spanish Succession, 460, 461, 463;
supremacy (1701), 465 ; proclaims the Pretender King of England, 466; War
of Spanish Succession, 478, 479, 486, 492, 496, 497, 500, 501, 506; the eve of
Blenheim, 489 ; begs for terms, 497, 498; terms offered by, 500 and n.”.

Louis, Prince, of Baden, 488.

Loyalty, instinct of, 232.

Ludlow, Edmund, subjugation of Ireland by, 318; exile of, 333, 334; on French
Society, 368; Cromwell hated by, 310,

Lunsford, Thomas, 221.

MAGISTRATES, Status and duties of, 22-24,
Major-Generals, rule of, 308 and 7., 316.
Malaga, naval action off, 492, 493.
Malplaquet, 500, 501.
Manchester, Earl of, at Winceby fight, 252; at siege of York, 257; attacked by
Cromwell in Parliament, 263 ; joins the army, 278.
Manor houses, 6, 7, 36; Roman Catholic, 83, 84.
Mansfeld’s army, fate of, 132, 133.
Manufactures, wood fuel for, 37 ”., 47 2.
Manwaring, Rev. Roger, 151-4.
Marlborough, Duke of (John Churchill), at battle of Sedgemoor, 429, 430; invites
William of Orange, 442; supports him, 444; intrigues of, 458; William
III.’s appreciation of, 467; social importance of, 474; views of, on foreign
policy, 478; naval policy of, 481, 482; (becomes Duke, 1702) ; war of Spanish
Succession, 482, 483, 486-93, 495-501, 506 ; coalition with Hailey and St. John,
494; Ramillies, 495 ; rejects Louis XIV.’s terms, 498; on Barrie; Treaty 500;
at Malplaquet, 500, 501; jealousy against, 502; dismissed from command,
506-8; unpopularity of, 511; characteristics of, 480.
Marlborough, Duchess of (Sarah Churchill), influence of, 458, 480; Whiggism of,
484; ‘Mrs. Freeman,” 497 and n.
Marriage, age and arrangement for, 13 and n.?.
Marston Moor, 258, 259; numbers engaged at, 244, 258; Roundhead badges at, 246.
Marten, Henry, 209.
Martial Law, 139, 142, 143.
Martyrs, last, dying for heresy, 30.
Mary of Modena, Queen, son born to, 437. (
Mary of Orange, Queen, marriage of, 380; refuses to reign alone, 447; death of, 458.
Maryland, 173 and n.?, 521.
Masham, Mrs., 497, 502, 514.
Meal Tub Plot, 399.
Medicine—
College of Physicians, 18, 53.
Condition of, 43.
Feminine practice of, 11.
Mediterranean Fleet, 323, 457, 481.
Mediterranean power, acquisition of, 300.
Meres, Sir Thomas, on strength of Roman Catholics, 389 »
Methuen Treaty, 511.
Metropolitical visitation, 169.
Military inefficiency, 147.
Millenary Petition, 61, 77 and n.?, 7Q

552 INDEX

Milton, John, early poetry of, 58; on Presbyterianism, 204; on Parliamentary intol-
erance, 276; otherwise mentioned, 238, 310.

Miracles, general attitude towards, 59.

Mohocks, 504.

Monk, Gen. (Duke of Albemarle), 329, 331.

Monmouth, Duke of, Whig support of, 392; early career of, 407; at Bothwell Brig,
407; exiled to Holland, 408; returns, 410; supports second Exclusion Bill,
412; Protestant Association Bill, 413; Insurrection Plot, 420; in Cheshire,
421; Rebellion (1685), 429-31 ; vengeance wreaked on followers of, 352, 430,
431; execution of, 431.

Monopolies, 123, 124, 161.

Mons, fall of, 501.

Montagu, Ralph (British representative at Paris), 396.

Montague, Bp., 154.

Montague, Charles (Earl of Halifax). See Halifax.

Monteagle, Lord, 96 and n,

Montesquieu, writings of, on English Government, 509.

Montrose, Marquis of, 187, 266, 297.

Morals, Church Courts’ jurisdiction over, 175.

Morgan, Major, on Irish ‘“‘ Tories,” 318 n.

Municipal Government. See Local Self-Government.

Music, 12, 52, 53-

Namur, 456, 460,
Nantes, revocation of Edict of, 438, 439.
Naseby, 266, 267.
National Debt, 458, 459; repudiation of, by Pretender feared, 477, 478.
Nationalism—
Imperialist, among Puritans, 322.
Power of sentiment of, 117.
Navigation Act (1651), 302 and n,
Navy—
Charles I.—
Condition under, 183.
Desertion of, 234, 235.
Support of, by part of the fleet (1648), 287, 295, 299.
Four Days, battle of, 354.
Imperialist view of, 322.
Increase of (1649-51), 301.
Mediterranean Fleet, 323, 457, 481.
Restoration, under, 354-6.
Ship Money. See that title,
Spanish Succession, war of, 481-4, 492, 493.
Spanish War under Protectorate, influence of, 325, 326.
New Jersey, 353, 356.
New Model. See under Civil War, Armies.
New York, 353, 356.
New Zealand, 163, 164.
Newbury—
First battle of, 254, 255 ;] Roundhead badges at, 246; London train-bands at, 247.
Second battle of, 263.
Newcastle, Marquis of, advance on London, 239; ** White Coats” of, 249, 250;
invades East Anglia, 250, 252 ; besieged in York, 257; at Marston Moor 258.
Newfoundland, acquisition of, 482, 510. j
Newton, Sir Isaac, 459.
Nicholas, Secretary, 331.
Nonconformists. See Dissenters,
Non-Jurors, 451 and m.?, 456.
Non-resistance, doctrine of, 418,

INDEX 558

Non-resisting Bill, 38z.

North, Dudley, 459.

North, Francis (Lord Guilford), 413, 433.
North, Roger, 348.

Norwich, municipal status and policy of, 45.
Nottingham, Royal Standard raised at, 234.
Nottingham, Earl of, 486, 507.

Nova Scotia, acquisition of, 482, 5x0,
Novelists (Innovators), 80.

OaTEs, Titus, career of, 383; plot of, 382, 384, 387, 399; attack on the Queen by,
392, 393; patronised by nobility, 394; gives false evidence against Coleman,
397; Stafford condemned on testimony of, 399; party name “ Tory ” origin-
ated by, 411; at Stafford’s trial, 413; punishment of, 428, 429; otherwise
mentioned, 342, 361.

Occasional Conformity, 451.

Occasional Conformity Act, repeal of, 476, 515.

Occasional Conformity Bill—

(1702), 485.

(1703), 486.

(1704-5), “tacking” scheme for passing of, 493.
(1711), passing of, 476, 507.

Orange, Prince William of, marriage of, with Princess Mary, 210.

Orange, Prince William of (William III.). See William III,

Orford, Edward Russell, Earl of, 502 .1.

Orkney, Lord, 491, 492, 498 1.2.

Orleans, Henrietta, Duchess of, 372, 373.

Ormond, 331; in Ireland, 296, 297.

Ormond, Duke of, Cadiz expedition under, 483,

Osborne, Sir Thomas. See Danby.

Oudenarde, battle of, 497.

Overbury, Sir Thomas, 114.

Oxford—

Capitulation of, to Fairfax, 270.

Charles I. at (1636), 180; (1642), 238.
Parliament at (1643), 241; (1681), 414-417.
Royalist headquarters at, 238, 240, 241.

Oxford, Earl of (Harley), raised to Peerage, 474; opposes Occasional Conformity
Bill, 493; courts Marlborough, 494; underhand dealings of, 497; Cabinet
formed by, 502; political career of, 503; Bolingbroke’s quarrel with, 513,
514; dismissed by Anne, 514, 515.

“ Oxford Crowns,” 231 .

Oxford University—

Episcopalian Dons, expulsion of, 317.

High Church party at, 150.

Laud’s career at, 167; his visit to, as Chancellor, 180,
Magdalen Fellows, James II.’s ejection of, 435.
Non-resistance doctrine at, 418.

PaLaTINATE, Spanish occupation of (1620), 119-21, 127, 128,
Pamphleteering, 504.
Parker, Bp., 434.
Parks, deer, 8.
Parliament— P
“ Addled”’ (1614), 109, 120.
‘‘ Barebone,” 294, 305, 3060.
Bill of Rights (1689), 448, 457 .7.
Cavalier (1661-1679)—
Act of Settlement passed by, 521, 522,
Army, terror of, felt by, 394, 395-

554

INDEX

Parliament—

Cavalier (1661-1679)—
Character of, 336, 337.
Corruption of, 376, 377, 382.
Country Party, 381, 382.
Dissolution of, 397.
Duration of, effect of, 376, 377.
Evolution of, 337, 375-
Persecution reinforced by, 364.
Quakers persecuted by, 436.
Charles I.’s proclamation as to summoning (1629), 157.
Commons, House of—
Boroughs, representation of, in, 101, 102, 417.
Customs of (1641), 214, 215.
“ Divine Right ” theory challenged by, 105, 106,
Divisions, smallness of, 213.
Elections for. See Elections.
Executive, power over, 376, 403, 457 2.”.
Freedom of speech in, 104, 127, 163, 391.
Great Contract, 108, 109g.
Humble Petition and Advice, 309.
Influence of, in the.country, 104.
James I.—
Character of House under, 102, 103.
Privilege, question of, raised by, 105.
Temper of House under, 123.
Kentish Petition, 466.
Long Parliament. See that subheading.
Merchants excluded from, 473, 477.
Millenary Petition supported by, 79.
_ Opposition to the Throne by, ror.
Origin of, roo.
Party organisation, 213, 214.
Petition of Right. See that title.
**Placemen ”’ in, 461 2.1.
Privilege, question of, raised by James I., 105,
Qualification of members for, 473, 516.
Roman Catholic designs on control of, 89.
Seats of members in, 213 and x.
Taxation, views on, ror, 108, 144.
Three Resolutions, the (1629), 155, 156.
Yeomen excluded from, 473, 516.
Convention, the (1660), 329, 332; (1689-90), 447, 452.
Executive power of, 376, 403, 457 7.7.
Finch on Acts of, 184.
Freedom of speech in, 104, 127, 163, 391.
Long— --—
Duration of, Bill securing, 215 n.
Five Members, the, impeachment and arrest of, attempted, 221-223.
Grand Remonstrance. See that title.
Illegal Ordinances issued by (1641), 217, 223.
Parties in (1642), 224.
Pride’s Purge, 288.
Root and Branch Petition, 206,
Rump—
Corruption of, 304.
Dissolution of, 305.
Lilburne banished by, 294.
Navigation Act passed by, 302,
Resolution passed by (Jan., 1649), 288, 289.

INDEX 555

Parliament—
Long—
Self-denying Ordinance, 264.
Summoning of, 194.
Lords, House of—
Abolition of, by the Rump (1640), 289.
Bishops, refusal to oe) ae 3
Character of (1628), 141.
Charles II. at debates of, 391.
Exclusion Bill, second, 412.
Favourites, royal, attitude towards, 113.
Five Members of Commons, attempted impeachment of, 221.
Habeas Corpus Act, passing of (1679), 406.
Illegal Ordinances voted by (1642), 223.
Impeachment before, 126 and n., 194, 208, 209.
Occasional Conformity Bill rejected by, 485, 486, 493; passed, 507
Origin of, 100.
Parties in (1642), 224.
Petition of Right endorsed by, 145.
Strafford’s impeachment before, 194, 208, 209.
Whigs, intellectual supremacy of, 390, 391.
Oxford, at (1643), 241; (1681), 414-417.
Party government, inauguration of, 448, 449.
Party organisation, 213, 214.
‘“‘ Pensionary,” 382.
Place Bill, 461 m.}.
Roman Catholics—
Control of House of Commons the aim of, 89.
Exclusion of, 387.
Rump. See under subheading Long.
St. Stephen’s Chapel, 212, 213.
Septennial Act (1716), 462 7.8.
Short (1640), 191.
Table of Parliaments (1603-1715), 513.
“ Tacking,”’ 493.
Trade, control over, 462 and x.?,
Triennial Act (1694), 462 and .°
Parliamentarians—
Divisions of, 278, 279.
Financial resources of, 241.
Intolerance of, 273, 275, 276.
New Model. See under Civil War—Armies.
Scotland, alliance with, 255, 256.
Social status of, 225.
Parsons, Robert, 88 and x., 89, 370.
Party government, 448, 449.
Party organisation, 213, 214.
Patronage, 15, 16 and 2.}, 19.
Paul V., Pope, 98.
Peasantry—
Food of, 41, 42.
Quiescence of, 39, 40.
Pembroke, siege of, 287.
Penal Code. See Punishments.
Penal Laws. See under Roman Catholics.
Penn, William, 436 and x., 441.
Pepys, Samuel, on Restoration navy, 355. , ‘
Peters, Rev. Hugh, execution of, 333 ; otherwise mentioned, 280, 310.
Petition of Right, 140-5, 155; circumvention of, 157, 158.

556 INDEX

Petitioners and Abhorrers, 411.
Petre, Father, 433, 443.
Pheasants, 9.
Phelips, Sir Robert, 134, 136, 142 and n.
Philip III. of Spain, go.
Philip V. of Spain, claim of, to Spanish Throne, 464, 465; policy towards Catalans,
496, 510; expulsion of, demanded, 498; Assiento Treaty, 511 ; otherwise men-
tioned, 479, 498, 505, 509.
Pictures, British attitude towards, 7 and n.!.
Piracy, 182, 183, 300, 325.
Place Bill, 461 x.}.
Plague, The, 356, 358, 360.
Play-writing, 55 and m.?.
Plunket, Archp., of Dublin, judicial murder of, 399.
Poetry, Puritan influence on, 58.
Poleroon, 356.
Police, defective system of, 25, 26 and 2,
Poor Law—
Administration of, 6, 23, 2y.
Effects of, 28, 29 and n.
Provisions of, 23.
Restoration, after, 523, 524.
Pope-burning procession, 409, 410.
Popish Plot, 388; trials, 397-99.
Population—
Distribution of, 36.
Growth of, hindered—by Poor Law, 29 ”.; by Apprentice Laws, 44
Statistics of, 51 ”., 359.

Port Mahon, 482, 510.

Portraits, 7.
Portsmouth, Duchess of. See Carwell.
Portugal—
panes alliance with (1661), 351, 352; in war of Spanish Succession,
484. .

Independence of, 463.
Methuen Treaty with, 511.
Portuguese, expulsion of, from settlements in the East, 49 n.},
Prayer Book. See under Anglican Church,
Predestination, 153-5, 169, 170.
Prentices. See Apprentices.
Prerogative, royal. See under Crown,
Presbyterianism—
Change in character of, 342.
Church government under, 205.
Covenant an engagement to adopt, for England, 261, 262,
Endowment of, 311.
Independents’ resistance to, 279.
Official announcement of, as State religion, 265, 276.
Pym’s rejection of, 205, 261.
Presbyterians—
Execution of Charles I., attitude towards, 290.
Quakerism hated by, 315.
Short-sightedness of, 335, 336.
Witch-hunting by, 348.
Press Censorship—
Abeyance of, 408, 425.
Abolition of (1695), 462; incomplete freedom obtained, 504.
Episcopal, 170, 200. :
Press-gang, 132, 139, 144, 147, 226 .?, 264,

INDEX 557

Preston, battle of, 288,
Pride, Col., 288.
Prior, Matt., 505, 506, 508, 511,
Prisoners, trial of, 27 and n.
Prisons, 28.
Privy Council—
Charles II., under, 363.
Examination of treason prisoners before, 27 1,
James I.’s policy towards, 112,
Temple’s scheme, 405, 406,
Torture permitted to, 30,
Protection, doctrine of, 459.
Protectorate—
Education under, 317.
Establishment of, 306.
Popular attitude towards, 307.
Toleration under, limit of, 315, 316,
‘* Protestant flails,”’ 386,
Prynne, William, sentence against, 180, 181,
Punishments—
Code of, 27, 28, 30, 31 2.1,
Corporal, nature of, 31, 32.
Theft, for, 26, 28.
Torture, 30 and n.
Transportation, 31 1.2, 288, 431.
Treason, for, 31 n.1, 34 n.
Puritanism—
Anglicanism contrasted with, 153 #.
Destruction of, 337.
Free Church representatives of, 62.
Influence of—on literature, 58 ; on the general community, 63, 64; permanence
of, 344, 345-
James I.’s sympathy with, 79.
Puritans—
Censorship of morals by, 64, 66, 67.
Church government schemes of, 61, 204, 205.
Civil marriage legalised by, 306 and x.
* Conformist,”’ 149.
Dogmatic differences of, 60, 62.
Eccentricities of, 65, 66.
Ejectment of clergy (1604), 80, 81, 109, 149; (1662), 34%.
Emigration of, to America, 521.
James I.’s dislike of, 79.
Laud’s attitude towards, 168.
Millenary Petition of, 61, 77 and n.?-79.
Miracles, attitude towards, 59.
Nationalism of, 322.
Oxford, at, in Laud’s time, 167; Oxford caricatures of, 180.
Persecutions by, social result of, 350.
Persecutions of, under Clarendon Code, 342-4; revulsion of feeling, 36.
Private judgment among, 153 and #.
Revolutionary zeal of, 207.
Sabbath of, 345.
Sermons, use of, by, 170.
Theatre, attitude towards, 58.
Three main divisions, 311.
Toleration, views on, 261.
Toleration limited to, under Protectorate, 326,
Putney, Army Debates at, 284.

558 INDEX

Pym, John, against Roman Catholics, 130; in the Short Parliament, 191; force
wielded by, 196; Church government scheme of, 204, 205, 261; Strafford im-
peached by, 208, 209; party organisation by, 214; foresight of, 217; attempted
impeachment of, 221, 222; attempted arrest, 222; taxation experiments, 241,
242; difficulties with his followers, 253; work and death of, 256; otherwise
mentioned, 142, 194, 1y8, 213.

Pyrenees, Treaty of, 351.

QuaKERS—

Calvinism rejected by, 62.

Cromwell’s protection of, 311-313, 315.

Doctrine of, 314.

Enemies of, 315.

Increase in, 315.

Methods of, 313, 314.

Persecution of (1661), 336; by Cavalier Parliament, 315, 344, 436.

Rise of, 312.

Toleration for, 450,

Tory abuse of, 475.

Otherwise mentioned, 231, 272, 310.
Quebec, expedition against (1711), 506.
Querouaille, Louise de. See Carwell.

RaGoTzi, 487. |
Rainborough, Col., 282, 300. |
Raleigh, Sir Walter, in disgrace, 27, 111, 112; American expedition of, 115, 116. |
Ramillies, 495. |
Rastadt, Treaty of, 508, 509.
Rationalism—
Classes embracing, 360. |
Effect of, 34, 348. |
Growth of, 33, 347. }
Puritan, 60.
Reading—
Bible, of the, 60, 61, 149, 344.
Scope of, 55 and z.},
Re-coinage, 459.
Recusants, 83 and m., 1.
Regicides—
Execution of, 333. |
Levellers’ attitude towards, 292, 293.
Religion (see also names of various religions!—
Not humanitarian, 34,
Unscientific character of, 59.
Restoration, the—
Accomplishment of, 329, 330.
Poor Law under, 521, 522.
Revolution, French. See under France.
Revolution of 1642—
Character of, 195, 196.
London the centre of, 200, 201.
Revolution of 1688, consequences of, 468.
Reynolds, Dr., 78.
Richelieu, Cardinal, Buckingham’s relations with, 135; Charles I.’s relations with
; 137; Henrietta Maria’s appeal to, 210; otherwise mentioned, 140, 144.
Ripon, Treaty with Scots at, 193.
Ritualism—
Enforcement of, 172.
Prayer Book associated with, 203,

INDEX 559

Rochelle, English attack on Huguenots of, 134; Rh iti :
ise sedican, nas, inten 34 é expedition (1627), 138; second
Rochester, Earl of (L. Hyde), in favour with James II., 419, 425; driven from office,
4333 On war of Spanish Succession, 483, 486.
Roman Catholics—
Anglican gentry’s attitude towards (1679), 403.
Animosity of London populace against, 119.
Benedictines, 89 x.1.
Charles I.’s relations with (1630), 178, 179; his intrigues with, 216,
Charles 11.’s policy towards, 365-9, 371, 377-9.
‘Church Papists,”’ 86, 87.
Declarations of Indulgence (1687-88), 436, 437.
Divisions among, 87-89, 91, 98, 240, 369, 370.
Formule of, corruption of, 63.
Gunpowder Plot (1604-5), 92-98.
Henrietta Maria’s intrigues with, 210.
Intolerance of, go.
Treland, in, 189.
Irish, in England, Roundhead brutality towards, 269, 270.
Irish Rebellion (1641), 218, 219.
James I.’s conciliation of, go; his rigorous measures against, 92, 9&.
James II.’s policy towards, 434, 435, 437.
Jesuits. See that title.
Laud’s attitude towards, 179.
Laws against. See subheading Penal Laws.
Maryland, Colony of, a failure, 519.
Meal Tub Plot, 399.
Miracles, attitude towards, 59.
Numbers of, in England, unknown, 82, 86, 87, 389 x.
Penal Laws, the, 24, 83, 85, 86, 89, 149, 450.
Persecutions against, 83-85, 210; respite during Spanish match negotiationg
118.
Popish Plot, the, 388; trials, 397-9.
Protectorate, under, 317.
Protestant point of view of, 89.
Recusants, 83 and n., gt.
Royalist cause supported by, 244.
Secret worship of, 83, 84, 86.
Soap company supported by, 161.
Spanish match project, effect of, 118.
Strength of, in northern districts, 83.
Toleration Act as affecting, 450.
Trials of, 400-2.
Watson’s plot (1603), gr.
William III., attitude towards, 450.
Rooke, Sir George, 483, 493 and n..
Rookwood, Ambrose, 95.
Root-and-Branch Bill, 217.
Root-and-Branch Petition, 206.
Roundheads. See Parliamentarians.
Royal Prerogative. See Crown.
Royal Society, the, 347.
Rumbold, Conspirator, 420-2.
Rumsey, Conspirator, 420. :
Rupert, Prince, at Oxford, 238; cavalry work of, 239, 250, 251; harasses Essex’s
march on Gloucester, 254}; in Lancashire, 257, 258; Bolton sacked by, 230 %.,
258; at Marston Moor, 258, 259; advises capitulation, 269; successes in
piracy, 300; succeeds Duke of York in the Admiralty, 378; petitions for
summoning of Parliament, 411; otherwise mentioned, 179, 227, 231, 353+

560 INDEX

Russell, Edward. See Orford.

Russell, William Lord, moves exclusion of Duke of York, 388; supports Shaftesbury
404, 405; Insurrection Plot, 420; communications with William of Orange,
421; execution of, 423, 424; otherwise mentioned, 381, 391, 412.

Rye House Plot, 422, 431.

Ryswick, Treaty of, 460, 505.

SABBATARIANISM, 69, 70.
Sacheverell, Dr., trial of, 478, 501, 502.
Sacheverell, William, on Duke of York’s succession, 388, 389 ; eminence of, in Par-
liament, 391 ; otherwise mentioned, 380 and n.
St. John. See Bolingbroke.
St. Stephen’s Chapel, 212, 213.
Saints, Rule of the, 307.
Salisbury, Earl of (Robert Cecil), position of, under James I., 74; attitude towards
Roman Catholics, 90; warned of Gunpowder Plot, 96; the Great Contract,
108 ; character and policy of, 110, 111 ; Spanish policy of, 115 and .; death
of, 112; otherwise mentioned, 73, 81.
San Domingo, 323, 325-
Sancroft, Archp., 420 n.?, 428.
Sanitary conditions, 43.
Sanquhar, Lord, ro.
Savoy, position of, under Treaty of Utrecht, 510,
Savoy, Duke of, 487, 495. °
Scepticism, 347.
Schellenberg, storming of, 488.
Schism Act, 475 and z.}, 476, 514; repeal of, 515.
Schools, 14, 15.
Science, position of, 53, 58.
Scotland—
Charles I.’s visit to (1641), 216-18, 220.
Charles II.’s troops in (1678), 382, 395.
Charles Stuart in, 297.
Covenant, inception of, 187; Solemn League and Covenant, 256
Cromwell in (1650), 298 ; his policy in, 320, 321.
Dissenters in, persecution of, 428.
England—
Contrasted with, 185.
Union with, effected by Whigs, 106 and u., 107, 256, 469, 494.
Glencoe, 455.
Killiecrankie, 455.
Kindliness in, 33.
Lauderdale’s misgovernment in, 407.
Monmouth’s popularity in, 407.
Poor Law in, 29.
Prayer-book conttoversy in, 186, 187,
Restoration accepted in, 331, 332.
Solemn League and Covenant, 256.
Union with. See subheading England.
William III.’s settlement of, 455.
Witch-mania in, 32.
Scots—
Bishops’ War—First, 187, 188; Second, 192, 193.
Charles I. surrendered by, 277.
English Peers’ letter to, 198 and n.
London, Commissioners in, 201.
Northumberland invaded by (1644), 257.
Parliamentarian alliance with, 255, 256.
Preston, battle of, 288.
Unpopularity of (1651), 299.

INDEX 561

Scroggs, Lord Chief Justice, at Coleman’s trial, 397; at Wakeman’s acquittal, 398;

abuse of, 399; on indictment of Madam Carwell, 411; impeachment of, 413.
Seamen, 50.

Sectarianism, demands of, 205,

Sectaries. See Independents.

Sects, unorthodox, rise of, 311.

Sedgemoor, battle of, 429, 430 and n.},

Selden, John, 218.

Self-denying Ordinance, 264.

Self-government, See Local self-government.

Sermons, 170.

Seymour, William, 111 7».

Shaftesbury, 1st Earl of (Anthony Ashley Cooper), on wise men’s religion, 3473
aims of, 364; Treaty of Dover, 374; Test Act, 378; imprisoned in the
Tower, 381; moves exclusion of Duke of York, 388; Whig party founded by,
390; on royal divorce question, 392; President of Green Ribbon Club, 393;
quarrel with Halifax, 404-6; on the Scottish Rebellion (1679), 407; action
against James and Madam Carwell, 411; at Oxford, 417; lists by, of
“worthy men” and “men worthy,” 419; trial and acquittal of, 419; In-
surrection Plot, 420, 421; distrust of, 421; flight and death of, 422, 423;
outrages against, 423; otherwise mentioned, 331, 380, 414.

Shakespeare, 95, 109, 232.

Ship money—

Exaction of, 183, 184, 192-
Opposition to, 243; by lawyers, 177.

Shovel, Sir Cloudesley, 493 n.).

Sidney, Algernon, corruptibility of, 381 ”.; in Insurrection Plot, 420; republican
ideal of, 421; execution of, 423, 424,

Sidney, Sir Philip, 13.

Silverplate, 243 and x

Singing, 12.

Slave trade, British monopoly in, 511.

Slavery in Virginia, 174, 519.

Smithfield martyrs, last, 30.

Society, elements and environment of, 5, 6.

Somers, Lord, financial achievements of, 459; impeachment of, 461; otherwise
mentioned, 474, 502 2.

Somerset, Duke of, 507, 515.

Somerset, Duchess of, 508.

Somerset, Robert Carr, Earl of, 113, 114.

Songs, 52-54.

_ Sophia, Electress of Hanover, 512, 515 n.3.

Spain—

Ascham murdered in, 295 n.

Cadiz expeditions (1625), 135-7; (£702), 483.
Cecil’s peace with, 115 and n.

Decadence of, 463.

Gibraltar, British acquisition of, 432, 492, 510.
Holland—

Alliance with, (1688), 440.

Assistance to (1672), 375-

Charles I.’s offer regarding, 163.

Peace with (1609), 115 ”.

Policy of, change in, 370, 371. i =pah ’
Marriage project of James I., 116-20; Prince Charles’s visit to Spain, 128 129.
Operations against (1651), 301.

Palatinate occupied by (1620), 119-21, 127, 128,
Pyrenees, Treaty of (1659), 351.
Succession question—

36

562 INDEX

Spain—

Succession question—
Death and will of Charles II. of Spain, 464.
Genealogical key to, 464.
Philip V. succeeds, 464.
Secret agreement as to, between France and England, 460, 461, 453.
War of (1701-13), 478, 479, 481-4, 486-92, 495-501.

War with (1654), 322-6.

Women employed in agriculture in, 42.

Spencer, Charles, Earl of Sunderland, 502 n.1,

Spencer, Robert. See Sunderland.

Spies, social, 163, 164.

Sport, 8, 9, 69, 473.

Squires—

Class jealousy of, 473.

Influence of, in eighteenth century, 515

Status and duties of, 6.
Stafford, Viscount, trial and execution of, 399, 400, 413, 414 and »,
Stage, the—

Position and patronage of, 55-57.

Puritan influence on, 58.

Stanhope, Earl of, 497, 505.

Stapleton, Sir Philip, 276.

Star Chamber—

Abolition of, 215.
Functions of, 164-6.
Unpopularity of, 169.

Steele, Richard, 504.

Steinkirk, 456.

Strafford, Earl of (Thomas Wentworth), royalism of, 156; position at Court, 178;
created Earl, 188; Irish policy of, 188, 189; despotic tendencies of, 190; in
Ireland (1640), 190; suggests uprooting Ulster Plantation, 193; impeached,
194, 208, 209; Bill of Attainder against, 209, 211, 213, 214; execution of,
212, 297; taxation proposals of, 242 n.},

Strode, William, 158, 221, 222.

Stuart, Arabella, rrr and x.

Stuart, House of, genealogical tree of, 517.

Stuart, James. See James Stuart.

Suffolk, Earl of, 96.

Suffrage, Parliamentary—

Qualifications for, 38.
Universal, 282.

Sunderland, Earl of (Charles Spencer), 502 n..

Sunderland, Earl of (Robert Spencer), summons the Duke of York, 407; opposes
prorogation, 409; joins Whigs, 412; returns to Tories, 425; in favour with
James II., 433; on Court of High Commission, 434; dissuades James from
ae French aid, 442; dismissed from office, 443; consulted by William

+9 457 Me

Superstition, 53, 54 and. (See also Witches.)

Swearing, 67,

Sweden—

Gustavus Adolphus. See that title.
Triple Alliance, 370, 371.

Swift, Dean, relations of, with Harley, 303, 304; on dismissal of Whigs 502;

supports Bolingbroke, 513; otherwise mentioned, 506, 508, i :

TALLARD, Marshal, 489, 490.
Tangier—
Abandonment of, 457.

INDEX 563

Tangier—
Acquisition of, 352 and nn.
Troops in, 352 n.}, 382, 395.
Taunton, Blake’s defence of, 300; Monmouth proclaimed King at, 429.
Taxation—
Decimations, 308.
Forced Loans—(1626-27), 138, 139, 151, 160; (1640), 192.
Impositions, 108,
Land, of, 338 and m.?3,
New Assessment, 242,
Parliamentary views on, Ior, 108, 144.
Popular attitude towards, 147.
Pym’s Excise, 242, 243.
Strafford’s proposals as to, 242 n.?
Tonnage and Poundage, 154, 155, 158.
Unfair methods of, under Charles I., 160.
War (1651-54), 301, 302, 308, 326.
Temple, Sir William, Privy Council scheme of, 405, 406; otherwise mentioned,
371, 422.
Tenant-farmers, 37, 38 and n.}, 228.
Test Act (1673)—
Effect of, in the army, 395.
Provisions of, 378.
Repeal of, demanded by James II., 334.
Tory maintenance of, 450.
Whig maintenance of, 515.
Tests, William of Orange declares for, 441,
Theatre. See Stage.
Tillotson, Archp., 349, 476.
Tithe, proposed abolition of, 305, 306.
Toleration—
Anglican advocacy of, 349.
Dissenters’ acceptance of principle of, 449.
France, in, 366.
General acceptance of, 435, 515.
Growth towards, 364.
Limit of, under Protectorate, 315, 316.
Necessity for comprehension or, ignored, 168, 205,
Parliamentarian lack of, 273-6.
Penn’s view of, 436 and 2.
Puritan divergence as to, 261.
Triumph of principle of, 515.
Whig advocacy of, 391, 392.
William of Crange declares for, 441.
Toleration Act (1689), 449, 450; Ireland excluded from, 454.
Tonnage and Poundage, 154, 155, 158
Torcy, Louis’ minister, 505, 508.
Tories, Irish, 318 and n., 411.
Torture, 30 and n., 33.
Tory party— A
Charles II.’s alliance with, price of, 425.
Composition and objects of, in Anne’s reign, 471, 472.
Despotism championed by, 417, 418.
Dissenters persecuted by, 419, 425, 463, 514.
Hanoverian Succession, attitude towards, 512, 513.
Inception of, 380.
Low Churchmen, attitude towards, 475, 476.
Monied interest, attitude towards, 477.
Name of, origin of, 411.

564 INDEX

Tory party—
Geipter Club, 514.

Passive obedience doctrine of, 478 and n,

Protectionism of, qualified, 459.

Reactionary movement by (1702), 469.

Religious refugees, attitude towards, 476.

Schism Act passed by, 475 and n.1,

Test and Corporation Acts maintained by, 450.

William III., support of (1690), 452; hostility to, 458.
Toulon Expedition (1707), 496.
Towns—

Advancement of, 44.

Charters of, confiscated (1683-84), 424.

Country, not in rivalry with, 20, 44, 71.

Country blood in townsfolk, 20.

Isolation of, 36, 45.

Parliamentarian strength in, 228, 229.

Parliamentary representation of, roz and 1., 417,

Population statistics of, 51 7.

Protestantism of, 63, 82.

Self-government of. See Local self-government,
Trade—

Coal, 46.

Companies for maritime trade, 47.

Domestic industry, system of, 46.

Gentry apprenticed in, 20. |

Manufactures, wood fuel for, 37 2., 47 *. |

Parliamentary control of, 462 and #.?, |
Train-bands, 187; London, 223, 247, 254.
Transportation, 31 .?, 288, 431.
Travel, foreign, 21. |
Treason—

Examination for, 27 n.

Punishments for, 31 n.1, 34 7.
Tresham, Francis, 95, 96.
Trials, legal, conduct of, 26, 27 and 7., 400, 40%, }
Triers and Ejectors, 311. : }
Trim, Corporal, 470, 474.
Triple Alliance (1668), 370, 371.
Tyrconnel, Earl of, 433, 444 m.

Unirormiry, Act of, 341.

Unitarianism, 342, 450.

Universities. (See also Cambridge and Oxford,}
Class distinctions at, 16 and 1.3,
Education at, 15-19.

Unton, Sir H., 21 .

Usher, Bp., 335.

Utrecht, Treaty of, 508-11 ; a Tory measure, 469.

VALENTINE, Benjamin, 158.

Van Tromp, 303.

Vane, Sir Harry, 304, 305, 333.
Vendéme, Marshal, 486, 487, 495.
Verney, Sir Edmund, 128, 233, 237.
Verney, Sir Ralph, 213.

Vienna, French attempt on, 486, 487,
Vigo Bay, 483, 484.

Village rights, 42.

INDEX 565

Villars, Marshal, 486, 487, 489, 500, 501.
Villiers, Barbara, Countess of Castlemaine, 350, 351.
Villiers, George. See Buckingham,
Villiers, Sir John, 122.
Virginia—
Allegiance of, to England restored, 301,
Economic conditions in, 521,
Emigration to, 173.
Slavery in, 174, 521.
Transportation to, 31 1.?,

WAKEMAN, Sir George, 392, 398, 309, 40%,

Wales, Parliamentary representation of, 102 ”.

Waller, Sir William, message of, to Hopton, 233; Roundway Down, 253; Cheriton,
257; advocates standing army, 260; attitude towards the New Model, 276,

Waller, Sir William, the younger, scheme for assassination of, 420 7.4

Walters, Lucy, 407, 410,

Warwick, Earl of, 197, 223, 235.

Watson (secular priest), gt.

Weaving industry, 47.

Wentworth. See Strafford.

Westminster Assembly of Divines, 26r, »

Westminster School, 15.

Wharton, Thomas, Marquis of, 470, 494, 502 n.!, 508

Wheat, fixture of price of, 24 and x.

Whig party—

Anne, Queen, union with, 458.

Composition of, 389, 391; in Anne’s reign, 470, 471.
Financial successes of, 457-9, 471.

Green Ribbon Club. See that title.

Hanoverian Succession, attitude towards, 512, 513.
Inception of, 380, 390.

James, Duke of York, exclusion of, from Succession demanded by, 388, 389 and .
Junto, 502 and n.}.

Name of, origin of, 411.

Non-Resisting Bill, 381.

Oates’ Plot panic fomented by, 386.

Orange, House of, reconciled to, 432.

Organisation of, 502, 503.

Pamphleteers of, 504.

Pope-burning procession, 409, 410,

Principles of, 470, 471.

Protectionism of, unqualified, 459, 511.

Supporters rewarded by, 428 and n.

Survival of, after 1683, 424.

Toleration the policy of, 391, 392.

Triumph of, at elections (1679), 402.

Vengeance desired by (1690), 447, 452. : : ‘

William III., King—Revolution in Holland, 374, 375; marriage with Princess Mary,
380; Whig attitude towards, 392; visit to England, 421; agents of, in Eng-
land, 412; Charles II.’s proposal regarding, 415; position of, in Europe,
438; Roman Catholic alliances of (1688), 440; English policy of, after Mon-
mouth’s execution, 441; invitation to England, 442; lands at Torbay, 444;
invested with the administration, 447; English attitude towards, 448; en-
forces toleration, 449-50; dismisses Convention Parliament, 452; battle of
the Boyne, 453; Cabinet government, 457 1.*; plot against, 420, 460;
acknowledged at Versailles, 460; secret agreement with Louis XIV. on
Spanish Succession, 460, 461, 463; Parliamentary hostility to, 461; forms
Grand Alliance, 466; death of, 467; characteristics of, 467.

566 INDEX

Williams, Bp., 177 2.
Winchester School, 15.
Windebank, Secretary, 178, 199 and n.},
Winstanley, Gerard, 282 n.3, 312, 313 and n.
Witch of Edmonton, cited, 5 n.}, 14.
Witches, 27, 30, 32, 33 and nz., 53, 54 ».1, 348, 401.
Women—
Agricultural employment of, 42.
Burning of, for treason, 31 ”.}, 34 m.
Flogging of, 32.
Industrial employment of, 43.
Liberty of, 14.
Marriageable age of, 13.
Occupations of, II, £2.
Witches. See that title,
Wood fuel, 37 ., 47 n.
Worcester, battle of, 299.
Worcester, Earl of, 228, 244, 369.
Wren, Bishop, 171.
Wren, Sir Christopher, 360.

YEOMEN—
Anne, Queen, position in reign of, 472, 473,
Civil War, attitude towards, 228.
Disappearance of, 516.
Statistics as to, 38 7.}.
Status of, 38 and n.*, 39.
Strength of (1685), 430.
York— |
Army Plot at, 210, 211.
Charles I. at (1642), 223, 231, 232, i
“ Foreigners ” excluded by, 45.
Siege of (1644), 257, 258.
York, Duke of. See James II.
Yorkshire, growth of industrialism in, 47.
Younger sons, 20, 21.

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS,

METHUEN’S GENERAL LITERATURE

A SELECTION OF

Messrs. METHUEN’S
PUBLICATIONS

This Catalogue contains only a selection of the more important

books published by Messrs. Methuen.

A complete catalogue of

their publications may be obtained on application.

PART I.

Allen (R. Wilberforce)
METHODISM AND MODERN WORLD PROB-
LEMS. Crown 8vo 7s. 6d. net.

Bain (F. W.)

A Dicit oF THE Moon. THE DESCENT
OF THE SuN. A HEIFER OF THE DAWN.
IN THE GreaT Gop’s Hair. A
DRAUGHT OF THE BLUE, AN ESSENCE
OF THE Dusk. AN INCARNATION OF
THE SNow. A MINE OF FAULTS. THE
ASHES OF A GoD. BUBBLES OF THE
Foam. A SYRUP OF THE BEES. THE
LIVERY OF EvE. THE SUBSTANCE OF A
DrEAM. All Feap. 8vo. 5s. net. AN
EcHO OF THE SPHERES. Wide Demy
8vo. 10s. 6d. net.

Baker (C. H. Collins)
CroME. Illustrated.
net.

Quarto. £5 5s.

Balfour (Sir Graham)
THE LIFE OF RoBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.
Twentieth Edition. In one Volume.
Cr.8vo. Buckram, 7s. 6d. net.

GENERAL LITERATURE

Belloc (Hilaire)
PARIS. ‘THE PYRENEES. Each 8s. 6d.
net. ON NOTHING. HILLS AND THE SEA.
ON SOMETHING. FIRST AND LAST.
THIS AND THAT AND THE OTHER. ON.
ON EVERYTHING. ON ANYTHING.
Each 3s. 6d. net. MAarif ANTOINETTE.
18s. net. A HisTORY OF ENGLAND. In
4 vols. Vols. land II. 15s. net each.

Birmingham (George A.)
A WAYFARER IN HUNGARY.
Crown 8vo. 8s. 6d. net.
A Book oF Essays.

Illustrated.
SPILLIKINS:
Feap. 8vo. 5s. net.

Bowen (Frank C.)
THE KING’s Navy.
4to. 7s. 6d. net.

Illustrated. Fceap.

Bowles (George F. S.)
THE STRENGTH OF ENGLAND,
8vo. 8s. 6d. net.

Demy

Brinton (Selwyn)
THE GOLDEN AGE OF THE MEDICI.
15s. net.

Illustrated. Demy 8vo.

Messrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS 3

Bulley (M. H.)

ART AND COUNTERFEIT. Illustrated.
Demy 4to. 15s. net. ANCIENT AND
MepievaL ArT: A SwHorT History.
Second Edition, Revised. Crown 8vo.
los. 6d. net.

Burns (Robert)

THE PoEMS AND Soncs. Edited by
ANDREW LANG. Fourth Edition. Wide
Demy 8vo. tos. 6d. net.

Campbell (Olwen Ward)

SHELLEY AND THE UNROMANTICS.
Illustrated. Second Edition, Revised.
Demy 8vo. 16s. net.

Chandler (Arthur), D.D., late Lord
Bishop of Bloemfontein

ARA CcELI. 55. met. FAITH AND EXPERI-
ENCE. 55. met. ‘THE CULT OF THE PASS-
ING MOMENT. 6s. net. ‘THE ENGLISH
CHURCH AND REUNION. 55. net. SCALA
MunpI. 4s. 6d. net.

Chesterton (G. K.)

THE BALLAD OF THE WHITE HOnrsE.
ALL THINGS CONSIDERED. ‘'TREMEN-
DOUS TRIFLES. FANCIES VERSUS FADs.
CHARLES Dickens. All Feap. 8vo.
3s. 6d. net. ALARMS AND DISCURSIONS.
A MISscELLANY OF MEN. ‘THE USES OF
DIVERSITY. ‘THE OUTLINE OF SANITY.
All Feap. 8vo. 6s. net. A GLEAMING
CoHortT. Feap 8vo. 2s. 6d. net. WINE,
WartER, AND SONG. Fcap. 8vo. 1s. 6d. net.

Clutton-Brock (A.)

WHAT Is THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN ?
Essays ON ART. SHAKESPBARE’S HAM-
LET. Each 5s. net. Essays ON BOOKS.
More Essays ON Books. ESSAYS ON
Lire. EssayS ON RELIGION. ESSAYS
ON LITERATURE AND Lire. Each 6s.
net, SHELLEY, THE MAN AND THE POET,
7s. Od. net.

Cowling (George H.)

A PREFACE TO SHAKESPEARE. I\lustrated.
Crown 8vo. 5s. net.

Dolls’ House (The Queen’s)

’

Tue BooK OF THE QUEEN’S DOLLS
House. Vol. I. THE House, Edited
by A. C. BENSON, C.V.O., and Sir
LAWRENCE WEAVER, K.B.E. Vol. II.
Tue Liprary, Edited by E. V. Lucas.
Profusely Illustrated. A Limited Edi-
tion. Crown 4to. £6 6s. net.
EVERYBODY’s BOOK OF THE QUEEN’S
Do.tts’ Housg. An abridged edition
of the above. Illustrated. Crown 4to.
5s. nel.

Edwardes (Tickner)
THE LorE oF THE HONEYBEE. Thir-
teenth Edition. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.
net. BEEKEEPING FOR ALL. Crown
8vo. 3s. 6d. net. ‘THE BEE-MASTER OF
Warritow. Third Edition. Crown
8vo. 7s, 6d. net. All Illustrated. BEE-
KEEPING Do’s AND DoNn’Ts. Feap. 8vo.
2s. 6d. net.

Einstein (Albert)
RELATIVITY : THE SPECIAL AND GEN-
ERAL THEORY. 5s. net. SIDELIGHTS
ON RELATIVITY. 3s. 6d. net. THE
MEANING OF RELATIVITY. 55. net.
THE BROWNIAN MOVEMENT. 55. met.
Other books on the Einstein Theory.
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE THEORY OF
RELATIVITY. By LYNDON’ BOLTON:
Crown 8vo. 5s. net.
THE PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY. By
A. EINSTEIN, H. A. Lorentz, H.
MINKowskI and H. WeyL. With
Notes by A. SOMMERFELD. Demy 8vo.
12s. 6d. net.

Write for Complete List

Forrest (H. Edward)
THE OLD Houses OF STRATFORD-UPON -
AVON. Illustrated. Crown 8vo.
7s. 6d. net. Also an edition limited to
250 copies, Fcap. 4to. 21s. net.

Fyleman (Rose)
FAIRIES AND CHIMNEYS. THE FAIRY
GREEN. THE FAIRY FLUTE. THE
Rainsow Cat. E1cHT LITTLE Pays
FOR CHILDREN. Forty G0OOD-NIGHT
TALES. FAIRIES AND FRIENDS. ‘THE
ADVENTURE CLUB. Forty Goop-Mor-
NING TALES. Each3s.6d.net. A SMALL
CRUSE, 4s.6d. net. THE ROSE FYLEMAN
Farry Booxk. Illustrated. tos. 6d.
net. LETTY. Illustrated. 6s. net. A
CHRISTMAS Book. Illustrated. 2s. net.

Gibbon (Edward)
THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ROMAN
EMPIRE. With Notes, Appendixes, and
Maps, by J. B. Bury. Illustrated.
Seven volumes. Demy 8vo. 15s. net
each volume. Also, unillustrated.
Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. net each volume.

Glover (T. R.)
THe CONFLICT OF RELIGIONS IN THE
EaRLY ROMAN EMPIRE. POETS AND
PURITANS. VIRGIL. Each tos. 6d. net,
FROM PERICLES TO PHILIP. 128. 6d. net.

Gotch (J. A.)
OLD ENGLISH MHousss. Illustrated.
Demy 8vo. 16s. net. Also an edition
limited to 50 copies, £2 2s. net.

—

4

Messrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS

Graham (Harry)

Tue WorLtp we LauGH IN: More
Deportmental Ditties. Illustrated by
“Fisu.” Sixth Edition. Feap. 8vo.
5s. net. STRAINED RELATIONS. Illus-
trated by H. Stuart Menzigs and
HeENDy. Royal 16mo. 6s. net.

Grahame (Kenneth)

THE WIND IN THE WILLows. Nine-
teenth Edition. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.
net. Also, Illustrated by NANCY
BARNHART. Small 4to. 10s. 6d. net,
Also, Illustrated by H. Stuart MEN-
ziES. Fcap. 8vo. 5s. net.

Hadfield (J. A.)

PsYCHOLOGY AND Moras. Sixth
Edition, Crown 8vo. 6s. net.
Hall (H. R.)

THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF THE NEAR
East. Sixth Edition, Revised. Demy
8vo. £1 1s. net. THE CIVILIZATION
OF GREECE IN THE BRONZE AGE. Ilus-
trated. Demy 8vo. tos. 6d. net.

Hamer (Sir W. H.), and Hutt (C. W.)

A MANuaL oF HYGIENE. Illustrated.

Demy 8vo. £1 tos, net.

Hewlett (Maurice)

THE LETTERS OF MAurIcE HEWLETT.

Edited by LAURENCE BINYON. _ Illus-
trated. Demy 8vo. 18s. net.

Hind (A. M.)
A CATALOGUE OF REMBRANDT’S ETCH-
iNGs. Two Vols. Profusely  Illus-
trated. Wide Royal 8vo. £1 15s. net.

Holdsworth (W. S.)

A History oF ENGLISH Law. Nine
Volumes. Demy 8vo. £1 5s. net each.

Hudson (W. H.)

A SHEPHERD’Ss LIFE.
8vo. 10s. 6d. net.
Feap. 8vo.

Illustrated. Demy
Also, unillustrated,
3s. 6d. net.

Hutton (Edward)

CITIES OF SIcILY. Illustrated. ros.
6d. net. MILAN AND LomparDy.
THE CITIES OF ROMAGNA AND THE
MARCHES. SIENA AND SOUTHERN T'US-
CANY. VENICE AND VENETIA. THE

CITIES OF SPAIN. NAPLES AND
SOUTHERN ITaLy. Illustrated. Each,
8s. 6d. net. A WAYFARER IN UNKNOWN

TuscANY. THE CITIES OF Umbria.
CouNTRY WALKS ABOUT FLORENCE.

ROME. FLORENCE AND NORTHERN Tus-
CANY. Illustrated. ach, 7s. 6d. net.
Imms (A. D.)

A GENERAL TEXTBOOK OF ENTOMOLOGY.
Mllustrated. Royal 8vo. £1 16s. net.

| Inge (W. R.), D.D., Dean of St. Paul’s

CHRISTIAN MysTIcIsM. (The Bampton
Lectures of 1899.) Sixth Edition.
Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

Jackson (H. C.)

OsMAN_ DIGNA. 12s. 6d.

net.

Demy 8vo.

Kipling (Rudyard)

BARRACK-ROOM BALLADS.
sand,

THE SEVEN SEAS.
THE Five NATIONS.

DEPARTMENTAL DITTIES.
sand.

THE YEARS BETWEEN. 95th Thousand.
Four Editions of these famous volumes
of poems are now published, viz. :—
Crown 8vo. Buckram, 7s. 6d. net. Feap.
8vo. Cloth, 6s. net. Leather, 7s. 6d. net.
Service Edition. Two volumes each
book. Square Fcap. 8vo. 35. net each
volume.

A KIPLING ANTHOLOGY—Verse. Fcap.
8vo. Cloth, 6s. net. Leather, 7s. 6d.
net.

TWENTY POEMS FROM RUDYARD KIP-
LING. 423rd Thousand. Feap. 8vo.
Is. net.

A CHOICE OF SONGS.
Feap. 8vo. 2s. net.

241st Thou-

180th Thousand.
138th Thousand.
111th Thou-

Second Edition.

Lamb (Charles and Mary)

THE COMPLETE WorKS. Edited by
E. V. Lucas. A New and Revised
Edition in Six Volumes. With Frontis-
pieces. Feap. 8vo. 6s. net each.

The volumes are: I. MISCELLANEOUS
Prose. II. ELIA AND THE Last Essays
oF Evia. III. Books FOR CHILDREN.
IV. PLAYS AND Poems. V. and VI.
LETTERS.

SELECTED LETTERS.
by G. T. CLaPToN.
net,

THE CHARLES LAMB Day _ Book.

Compiled by E. V. Lucas. Fcap. 8vo.
6s. net.

Chosen and Edited
Feap.8vo. 3s. 6d.

Lankester (Sir Ray)

SCIENCE FROM AN Easy CHAIR. SCIENCE
FROM AN Easy CHAIR: Second Series.

DIVERSIONS OF A NATURALIST. GREAT
AND SMALL ‘THINGS. Illustrated.
Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. net. SECRETS OF

EARTH AND SEA,
8v0. 8s. 6d. net.

Illustrated. Crown

MEssrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS 5

Lodge (Sir Oliver)
MAN AND THE UNIVERSE (Twentieth Edi-
tion). ‘THE SURVIVAL OF Man (Seventh
Edition). Each Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.
net. RAYMOND (Thirteenth Edition).
Demy 8vo. 10s. 6d, net. RAYMOND
REVISED. Crown 8vo. 6s. net. RELA-
TIVITY (Fourth Edition). Fcap.8vo. 1s.net.

Lucas (E. V.)
THE LirE OF CHARLES LAMB. 2 Vols.
£1 1s. net. EDWIN AUSTIN ABBEY,
R.A. 2 Vols. £6 6s. net. VERMEER
OF DELFT. tos. 6d. net. A WANDERER
IN Rome. A WANDERER IN HOLLAND.
A WANDERER IN LONDON. LONDON
REVISITED (Revised). A WANDERER IN
Paris. A WANDERER IN FLORENCE.
A WANDERER IN VENICE. Each tos. 6d.
net. A WANDERER AMONG PICTURES.
8s. 6d. net. E. V. Lucas’s LONDON.
£1 net. INTRODUCING LONDON.
2s. 6d. net. THE OPEN ROAD. 6s. net.
Also, illustrated. 10s. 6d. net. Also,
India Paper. Leather, 7s. 6d. net.
THE FRIENDLY TOWN. FIRESIDE AND
SUNSHINE. CHARACTER AND COMEDY.
Each 6s. net. THE GENTLEST ART. 6s. 6d.
net. And 'THE SECOND Post. 6s. net. Also,
together in one volume 7s. 6d. net. HER
INFINITE VARIETY. GOoD COMPANY.
ONE Day AND ANOTHER. OLD LAMPS
FOR NEw. LOITERER’S HARVEST,
CLOUD AND SILVER. A BOSWELL OF
BAGHDAD. ’T'wIxT EAGLE AND Dove.
THE PHANTOM JOURNAL. GIVING AND
RECEIVING. LUCK OF THE YEAR. EN-
COUNTERS AND DIVERSIONS. ZIG-
ZAGS IN FRANCE. EVENTS AND EM-
BROIDERIES. 365 DAYS (AND ONE More).
Each 6s. met. SPECIALLY SELECTED.
5s. met. URBANITIES, 75. 6d. net. Each
illustrated by G. L. STAMPA. YOU KNow
Wuat PEOPLE Are, _ Illustrated by
GEORGE Morrow. ss. net. THE SAME
Star: A Comedy in Three Acts. 3s. 6d.
net. 'THE BRITISH SCHOOL. 6s. net.
LitTLE Books ON GREAT MASTERS.
Each 5s.net. ROVING EAST AND ROVING
WEST. 5s. net. PLAYTIME AND COMPANY:
7s. 6d. net. See also Dolls’ House
(The Queen’s) and Lamb (Charles)
Lynd (Robert)

THE Money Box. THE ORANGE TREE.
Tue \Litrte ANGEL. Each Fcap.
8vo. 6s. net. THE BLUE LION. THE
PeaL oF BELLS. Each Feap. 8vo.
3s. 6d. net.

Marie Louise (H.H. Princess)
A CHOICE OF CAROLS. Feap. 4to.
2s. 6d. net, LETTERS FROM THE GOLD
Coast. Illustrated. Demy 8vo. 16s. net.

McDougall (William)
AN INTRODUCTION To SocIAL PsycHo-

LeGy (Twentieth Edition, Revised),
tos. 6d. net. NNATIONAL WELFARE AND
NaTIONAL Decay. 6s. net. AN OuT-

LINE OF PSYCHOLOGY (Second Edition).
12s. net. AN OUTLINE OF ABNORMAL
PSYCHOLOGY. 15s. net. BODY AND
MIND (Fifth Edition). 12s. 6d. net.
ETHICS AND SOME MODERN WorLD
PROBLEMS (Second Edition). 7s. 6d.net.

Mackenzie-Rogan (Lt.-Col. J.)

Firty YEARS OF ARMY Music. Illus-

trated. Demy 8vo. 15s. net.
Maeterlinck (Maurice)

THE BLUE Birp. 6s. net. Also, illus-

trated by F. CayLey ROoBINSON.
tos. 6d. net. MARY MAGDALENE. 5s.
net. DEATH. 3s. 6d. net. OUR ETER-
NITY. 6s. net. THE UNKNOWN GUEST,
6s. net. POEMS. 5s. net. THE WRACK
OF THE STORM. 6s. met. THE MIRACLE
OF ST. ANTHONY. 3s. 6d. net. THB
BURGOMASTER OF STILEMONDE. 5s. met.
THE BETROTHAL. 6s. net. MOUNTAIN
PATHS. 6s. net. THE STORY OF TYLTYL.
£1 1s, met. 'THE GREAT SECRET. 75. 6d.
net, ‘THE CLOUD THAT LIFTED and THE
POWER OF THE DEAD. 7s. 6d. net.
Masefield (John)

ON THE SPANISH MAIN. 8s. 6d. net. A
SAILOR’S GARLAND. 6s. net. SEA LIFB
IN NELSON’S TIME. 55. net.

Methuen (Sir A.)
AN ANTHOLOGY OF MODERN VERSE.
117th Thousand.
SHAKESPEARE TO HarDy: An Anthol-
ogy of English Lyrics. 19th Thousand.
Each Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, 6s. net.
Leather, 7s. 6d. net.

Milne (A. A.)
Not THAT IT MaAtTTers. IF I May.
Each 3s. 6d. net. WHEN WE WERE VERY

YounNG. Illustrated by E. H. SHEPARD.
Fourteenth Edition. 129th Thousand.
7s. 6d. net. Leather, ios. 6d. net.
WINNIE-THE-PooH. Illustrated by
E. H. SHEPARD. 7s. 6d. net. Leather,
tos. 6d. net. FOR THE LUNCHEON
INTERVAL. ts. 6d. net.

6 Messrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS

Milne (A. A.) and Fraser-Simson (H.) ; Raleigh (Sir Walter)

FOURTEEN SONGS FROM ‘ WHEN WE Tue LETTERS OF SIR WALTER RALEIGH.
WERE VERY YOUNG.” (Tenth Edition.) Edited by LapyY RALEIGH. Two Vols.
TEDDY BEAR AND OTHER SONGS FROM Illustrated. SecondEdition Demy 8vo.
“WHEN WE WERE VERY YOUNG.” £1 108. net.
Words by A.A. Milne. Music by H. Ridge (W. Pett) and Hoppé (E. O.)
Fraser-Simson. Each Royal 4to. 7s. 6d. LONDON TYPES: ‘TAKEN FROM LIFE.
net. THE KING’s BREAKFAST. Second The text by W. Petr RIpcE and the
Edition. Music 4to. 3s. 6d. net. 25 Pictures by E. O. Hoppf&. Large
Montague (C. E.) Crown 8vo. tos. 6d. net.
DRAMATIC VALUES. Cr, 8vo. 7s. 6d. net. | Smith (Adam) ;
Morton (H. V.) THE WEALTH OF NaTIONs. Edited by
THe HEART OF LONDON. 3s. 6d. net. EDWIN CANNAN. 2 Vols. Demy 8vo.
(Also illustrated, 7s. 6d. met.) ‘THE £1 5s. net.
SPELL OF LONDON. THE Nicuts oF | Smith (C. Fox)
Lonpon. Each, 3s. 6d. net. THE SaiLor Town Days. SEA SONGS AND
LONDON YEAR. Illustrated. 7s. 6d. net. Batiaps. A Book oF Famous SHIPS.
Newman (Tom) SHip ALLEY. Each, illustrated, 6s. net.
How To Pray BILLiaRDs. Second FuLt SatL. Illustrated. 5s. net.
Edition. Illustrated. Cr. 8vo. 8s. 6d. net. TALES OF THE CLIPPER SHIPS. 55. ‘Bets
BILLIARD Do’s AND DoN’TS. 25. 6d. net. THE RETURN OF THE “ CUTTY SARK.
Oman (Sir Charles) Illustrated. 3s. 6d. net. A BOOK OF

A HISTORY OF THE ART OF WAR IN THE SRNETO Tt. Ode Nets |
MIDDLE AGES, A.D. 378-1485. Second | Sommerfeld (Arnold) |

Edition, Revised and Enlarged. 2 Vols. ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL |

Illustrated. Demy 8vo. £1 16s. net. Lines. £1 12s. met. ‘THREE LECTURES |
Oxenham (John) ON ATOMIC PHYSICS. 2s. 6d. net.

BEES IN AMBER. Small Pott 8vo. 2s. | Stevenson (R. L.) |

net. ALL’s WELL. 'THE KING’s HIGH- THE Letrers. Edited by Sir SIDNEY |

way. THE VISION SPLENDID. ‘THB CoLvIN. 4 Vols. Feap. 8vo. Each

Fiery Cross. HIGH ALTARS. HEARTS 6s. net.

Couraceous. ALL Cigar! Each | Surtees QR. S.)

Small Pott 8vo. Paper, 1s.3d. net. Cloth, HANDLEY CROSS. Mr. SPONGE’S |

2s. net. WINDSOF THE DAWN, 2s. net. SporTING Tour. AsK MAMMA. Mr. |
Perry (W. J.) Facey Romrorp’s HounDs. PLAIN OR

THE ORIGIN OF MAGIC AND RELIGION. RINGLETS ? HILLINGDON HALL. Each

THE GROWTH OF CIVILIZATION (Second illustrated, 7s. 6d. met. JORROCKS’S

Edition). Each 6s. net. THE CHILDREN JAUNTS AND JOLLITIES. HAWBUCK

OF THE SUN. 18s. net. GraNGE. Each, illustrated, 6s. net.
Petrie (Sir Flinders) Taylor (A. E.)

A History oF Ecypt. In 6 Volumes. PLATO: THE MAN AND His Work.

Vol. I. FROM THE Ist To THE XVITH Demy 8vo. £1 Is. net.

Dynasty. Eleventh Edition, Revised. | Tilden (W. T.)
125. net, THE ART OF LAWN TENNIS. SINGLES

Vol. II. THe XVIITH AND XVIIITH AND Dovus.es. Each, illustrated, 6s.
DYNASTIES. Seventh Edition, Revised. net. 'THE COMMON SENSE OF LAWN
Qs. net. TENNIS. Illustrated. 5s. net.

Vol. III. _XIXTH TO XXXTH Dynas- | Tileston (Mary W.)
TIES. Third Edition, 12s. net. DAILY STRENGTH FOR DalILy NEEDS.

Vol. IV.  Protemaic Ecypt. By 32nd Edition. 3s. 6d. net. India Paper,
EDWYN BEVAN. tos. 6d. net. Leather, 6s. net.

Vol. V. Ecypt UNDER ROMAN RULE. | Underhill (Evelyn)

J. G. MiLne. Third Edition, Revised. MystIcisM (Eleventh Edition). 15s. net.
12s. net. THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT AND THE LIFB
Vol. VI. €&cyprT IN THE MIDDLE AGEs. oF To-Day (Sixth Edition). 7s. 6d.
STANLEY LANE PooLe. Fourth Edition. net. CONCERNING THE INNER LIFE.

los. net. (Second Edition). 2s. net.

Vardon (Harry)
How To Pray Go tr. Illustrated.
19th Edition. Crown 8vo. 5s. net.

Waterhouse (Elizabeth)
A LittLte Book oF Lirz AND DEATH.
22nd Edition. Small Pott 8vo. 25s. 6d.
net.

Wilde (Oscar).

THE Works. In16 Vols. Each 6s. 6d.
net.

I, Lord ARTHUR SAVILE’s CRIME AND
THE PortralT OF Mr. W.H. II. THe
Ducuess oF Papua. III. Poems. IV.
Lapy WINDERMERE’Ss FAN. V. A
Woman oF No Importance. VI. AN
IpEAL HusBaNp. VII. THE Impor-

Messrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS 7

TANCE OF BEING EARNEST. VIII. A
Houskg OF POMEGRANATES. IX. IN-
TENTIONS. X. DE PROFUNDIS AND
PRISON LETTERS. XI. Essays. XII.
SaLome, A FLORENTINE TRAGEDY, and
La SAINTE CourTISANE. XIE. A
CRITIC IN PALL MALL, XIV. SELECTED
PROSE OF OscAR WILDE. XV. ArT AND
DECORATION. XVI. For Love OF THB
KING. (5s. net.)

William II. (Ex-Emperor of Germany).

My Earry Lire. Illustrated. Demy
8vo. £1 Ios. net.

Williamson (G. C.)

THE BooK OF FAMILLE Rose. Richly
Illustrated. Demy 4to. £8 8s. net.
Also a limited edition, £12 12s. net.

PART II. A SELECTION OF SERIES

The Antiquary’s Books
Each, illustrated, Demy 8vo. tos. 6d. net.
A series of volumes dealing with various
branches of English Antiquities, com-
prehensive and popular, as well as
accurate and scholarly.

The Arden Shakespeare
Edited by W. J. Craic and R. H. Case.
Each, wide Demy 8vo. 6s. net.
The Ideal Library Edition, in single
plays, each edited with a full Introduc-
tion, Textual Notes and a Commentary
at the foot of the page. Now complete
in 39 Vols.

Classics of Art
Edited by J. H. W. Lainc. Lach, pro-
fusely illustrated, wide Royal 8vo. 153.
net to £3 35. net.
A Library of Art dealing with Great
Artists and with branches of Art.

The ‘* Complete ’’ Series
Demy 8vo. Fully illustrated. 5s. net
to 18s. net each.
A series of books on various sports and
pastimes, all written by acknowledged
authorities.

The Connoisseur’s Library
With numerous Illustrations. Widz
Royal 8vo. £1 11s. 6d. net each vol.
EUROPEAN ENAMELS. FINE BOOKS.
Guass. GOLDSMITHS’ AND SILVER-
SMITHS’ WorRK. IvoRIES. JEWELLERY:
MEZZOTINTS. PORCELAIN. SEALS.

The Do’s and Dont’s Series
Feap. 8vo. 2s. 6d. net each.
This series, although only in its in-
fancy, is already famous. In due course

it will comprise clear, crisp, informative
volumes on all the activities of life.
Write for full list

The Faiths

Edited by L. P. Jacks, M.A., D.D.
LL.D. Crown 8vo. 5s. net each volume
The first volumes are:

THE ANGLO-CATHOLIC FAITH (Rey.
Canon T. A. LAcEY); MODERNISM IN
THE ENGLISH CHURCH (Prof. P. GARD-
NER) ; THE FAITH AND PRACTICE OF THE
Quakers (Prof. R. M. JONgs);
CONGREGATIONALISM (Rev. Princ. W. B.
SELBIE).

The Library of Devotion

Handy editions of the great Devotional
books, well edited. Small Pott 8vo.
3s. net and 35. 6d. net.

Little Books on Art

Well Illustrated. Demy 16mo. Each
5s. net.

Medern Masterpieces

Feap. 8vo. 435. 6d. each volume.
Pocketable Editions of Works by A. A.
MILNE, JOSEPH CONRAD, ARNOLD
BENNETT, G. K. CHESTERTON, E. V.
Lucas, HILAIRE BELLOC, KENNETH
GraHAME, W. H. Hupson, ROBERT
Lynp, R. L. STEVENSON, JACK LONDON
AND E. V. KNox.

Sport Series

Mostly [llustrated. Fecap. 8vo. 2s. net
to ss, net each.

Handy books on all branches of sport by
experts.

8 Messrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS

Methuen’s Half-Crown Library
Crown 8vo and Feap. 8vo.

Methuen’s Two Shilling Library
Feap. 8vo.

Two series of cheap editions of popular
books.

Write for complete lists

The Wayfarer Series of Books for

Travellers
Crown 8vo. ‘75.
illustrated and with maps.
umes are :—Alsace,

6d. net each. Well
The vol-
Czecho-Slovakia,

The Dolomites, Egypt, Hungary, The
Loire, Provence, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Unfamiliar Japan, Un-
known Tuscany.

The Westminster Commentaries

Demy 8vo. 8s. 6d. net to 16s. net.
Edited by W. Lock, D.D., and D.
C. SIMPSON, D.D.
The object of these commentaries is
primarily to interpret the author’s mean-
ing to the present generation, taking
the English text in the Revised Version
as their basis.

THE LITTLE GUIDES

Small Pott 8vo.

Illustrated and with Maps

4s, net mostly
THE 62 VOLUMES IN THE SERIES ARE :—

BEDFORDSHIRE AND HUNTINGDONSHIRE

BERKSHIRE

BRITTANY

BUCKINGHAMSHIRE

CAMBRIDGE AND COLLEGES

CAMBRIDGESHIRE

CATHEDRAL CITIES OF ENGLAND AND
WALES 6s. net

CHANNEL ISLANDS 5s. net

CHESHIRE 5s. net

CORNWALL

CUMBERLAND AND WESTMORLAND 6s. net

DERBYSHIRE

DEVON

DorseT 5s. 6d. net

DurHAM 6s, net

ENGLISH LAKES 6s. net

ESSEX 5s. net

GLOUCESTERSHIRE

Gray’s INN AND LINCOLN’S INN 63. net

HAMPSHIRE

HEREFORDSHIRE 45. 6d. net

HERTFORDSHIRE

IsLE OF MAN 6s. net

IsLE OF WIGHT

KENT 55. net

KERRY

LANCASHIRE 6s, net

LEICESTERSHIRE AND RUTLAND 5s. net

LINCOLNSHIRE 6s. net

LONDON 55. net

MALVERN COUNTRY

MIDDLESEX
MONMOUTHSHIRE 6s, net
NORFOLK 5s. net

NORMANDY 5s. net
NNORTHAMPTONSHIRE
NORTHUMBERLAND 7s. 6d. net
NorTH WALES 6s. net
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE

OXFORD AND COLLEGES
OXFORDSHIRE

ROME 5s. net

St. PauL’s CATHEDRAL
SHAKESPEARE’S COUNTRY
SHROPSHIRE 5S. met

SICILY

SNOWDONIA 6s. net
SOMERSET

SouTH WALES
STAFFORDSHIRE 5s. net
SUFFOLK

SURREY 5s net

SUSSEX

‘TEMPLE

WARWICKSHIRE 55. net
WESTMINSTER ABBEY 55. net
WILTSHIRE 6s. net
WORCESTERSHIRE 6s. net
YORKSHIRE EaST RIDING 55. net
YORKSHIRE NorTH RIDING
YORKSHIRE WEST RIDING 7s. 6d. net
YORK 6s. net

METHUEN & Co. Lrp., 36 Essex STREET, Lonpon, W.C.2.

1026

Se
