Tristan and Iseult, Vol. II
Gottfried von Strassburg (c. 1210)
Rendered into English prose by Jessie L. Weston (1899) (New York: New Amsterdam)
Source: Internet Archive
Rights: Public Domain
Note: Middle High German romance in English prose; Weston's introduction included. OCR-derived from 1899 edition, lightly cleaned.

Original from


Digitized by Google INDIANA UNIVERSITY


eee


7 ROW Ti e uk
=
Sse al ‘
Ye,
a€
ss


oO

U


NIN Ft seem yy we
ey Ket ah PL wy om kos
+ we


Tee a,


ARTHURIAN ROMANCES


‘Unrepresented in Malory’s
“Morte d’Arthur”


- ower 5


Noe. Ll


Sristan and Jseuft
Vol. Il
a
oO
le

U


wake


CPF Reet pee ey


CES ORI
Ba NGEN Ce Sann
Oe EM wD
NM ome) Za \ het)


Se.


DANCES


pecnyeeed) Tie
e lov fay


flow the quent


pvr. be


vouva
2


Pov.ae
ds +


aa


as a3
3a7


esa ara2a
dard


fe


we Mee
~


Tristan and Iseuft 3
2 HE while that Tristah and

his folk made them ready
for the journey did the
wise Queen IseuJt, with
much thought and care,
prepare a love potion of!
such power and magic ‘
that did any two drink
thereof they must needs,
without will of their own,

love each other above all

things from that day forward ; death and
life, sorrow and joy, were sealed within
that little flask of crystal. Then the queen
took the drink and spake softly to Brangoene: Of the
“‘Brangoene, my kinswoman, let not my i sha
words grieve thee: thou must go hence fove po-
with my daughter, therefore hearken and tion, and
heed what I say unto thee. Take thou the ,
this flask with the drink within it, and keep doatge to
it in thy care. ‘Treasure it above all thy Bran-
treasures, see that none know of it, above scene
all that none taste of it; but when Iseult
and King Mark be come together, then do
thou pour out the drink as if it were wine,
nd see that the twain drink of it. Nor
sinalt thou share in it thyself, for ’tis a love
tion, forget not that. I commend to thy
4 Tristan and Iseufs


care Iseult, my dearest daughter; my ve
life doth hang on her. She and I alike do
commend to thee on peril of thine eterngi
welfare—methinks I have said cca
“ My very true and dear lady,” said Bran-
goene, “if this be the will of ye both, then
will I gladly go with Iseult, and watch over
her honour and her welfare as best [


ee |

hen Tristan and his folk departed with
much joy for the haven of Whiteford, and
for the love of Iseult, king and queen and all
their household accompanied them thither.
Weeping, her steadfast friends surrounded
the princess; her father and mother filled
the short space left to them with their
lamentations ; many eyes were red and
tearful, and many hearts weighed down
with sorrow for the loss of their life’s de-
light, fair Iseult.

But the two Iseults, the sun and her
rosy dawn, and the stately moon, fair
Brangoene, when they three must part
asunder, the one from the twain, thien
indeed was woe and wailing! Sad was
_ the severance of such true companionshijp.
‘Many a time and oft did the queen moth
‘kiss them both.
‘stan and Jseuff 5


Yow they of Cornwall, and the men of
and the young queen’s followers, were
-ady aboard, and had taken their leave ;
istan was the last to enter the ship,
ding by the hand the fair young Queen
eult, the flower of Ireland ; sad and sor-
wful she went with him. Then the two
snt in greeting towards the land, and
rayed God’s blessing be on it and on its
tk. They pushed off from the shore,
nd with a loud voice one and all sang:
‘So sail we forth in the name of God.” |
Thus they departed from Ireland.

By Tristan’s counsel they set apart a
Pivate cabin for the queen and her maidens,
wherein none might join them, save only
at times Tristan, who now and again would
go thither to comfort the young queen as
she sat and wept, for she bemoaned hersel

sorely that she must thus perforce part from
her land where she knew all the folk, and!
from the friends who were dear to her, and

Journey with an unknown folk to a land

she knew not. Then Tristan would com-;

fort her as he best could, and take her inj

is arms gently, even as a knight might his %
lady and the wife of hislord. But as"

often as he laid his arm around her, fair
How
seuit
would
chide


with
Tristan


6 Eristan and —


Iseult would bethink her of her uncle’s |
death, and chide with him, saying: “ Let
be, sir; take thine arm away, thou art a
weariful man ; wherefore dost thou touch
me?”

“Do I then vex thee so sore, fair lady?”

“Yea, forsooth, since I hate thee.”

“But wherefore, sweetest lady ? ”

“ Thou didst slay mine uncle.”

‘For that have I made my peace.”

“‘ May be, yet I love thee not, for ere I
knew thee had I neither sorrow nor care ;
thou alone with thy craft and courage
hast brought this sorrow upon me. What
brought thee from Cornwall to Ireland to
my hurt? ‘They who brought me up from
my childhood, from them hast thou reft
me, and bearest me I know not whither !
What price hath been paid for me I know
not, nor what shall befall me.”

“Nay, nay, fair Iseult, be at peace ;
wouldst thou not rather bea rich queen
among strangers than poor and weak.
among thine own kin? Honour and:
wealth in a strange land, and shame in th
father’s kingdom, they weigh not equal,
think me!”

“Yea, Sir Tristan,” said the maide
P rs:

ee
: an and Jseuff 7
** but say what thou wilt, I would have the .
lower lot with love and pleasure, rather |
than displeasure and trouble with great!
riches.”

<¢’Thou sayest true,” answered Tristan ;
“but where one may have riches and
pleasure alike, the two good things pass
better together than either of the twain
alone. But say, were it come to that that,
thou must needs have taken the seneschal :
for thine husband, what then? I wot well |
that would have made thee glad! Hast no
thanks for me that I came to thine aid, and
freed thee from him?”

“Too late,” quoth the maid. “I might
well have thanked thee then, when thou
didst deliver me from him, but since then
hast thou heaped such sorrow upon me
that in sooth I had liever have wedded the |
seneschal than have sailed with thee!.
How worthless soever he may have been,’
had he dwelt but a short while with me.
then had he laid aside his evil ways, for this’

| [know ofa truth, that he loved me well.”

7 Spake Tristan: “ This tale seemeth me

! over-strange ; ’twere great labour indeed for
aman to act worthily against his nature.

The world holds it for a lie that a worth-
8 Tristan and niet 7
less knight should do worthy deeds. Be ag
content, fair lady; in a short while will I Le
give thee for lord a king in whom thou t a
shalt find henceforth virtue and honour, @ch
riches, joy, and fair living.”

So they sailed onward with a favouring |?”
wind and a fair sea; but Iseult and her *;
maidens were not wont to be exposed to,
the water and the wind, and ere long they
were sorely in need of rest. Then Tristan
‘bade them put to land fora little space, 4


and as by good luck they came near a
haven they ran the ship therein, and madelp

: it fast, and the more part of the folk wentfiat
. ashore to refresh themselves. But Iseulg to
- remained aboard, and Tristan went into th
cabin to greet his liege lady, and sat hi
down beside her, and the twain spake of t
this thing and of that, till Tristan became :
thirsty and bade them bring whereof heq |
might drink.

Now, beside the queen was there no one |
on board save little maidens, and one spie
the flask where Brangcene had laid it, an
said: ‘See, here is wine in this flask.”
But it was not wine that was therein
though like unto it, but bitter pain an
enduring sorrow of heart, of which th


as
eg ee ‘


ys > sun and Jseult (GJo2—>.
twain at last lay dead. Yet the litt How
maiden might know nought of this, so sHe/ ae t
' took the flask from its hiding-place, and ae |
‘~brought it to Tristan, and he gave forth ing drank)
>}with of the drink to Iseult. She drank of of the love
it unwillingly enough, and after a spacePoto? /
= passed the cup to Tristan, and he too drank \—“”
of it, and neither knew that it was other _
° than wine. And even as it was done
Y. Brangcene entered, and saw well what had
chanced. For very terror she became
“>'white as death. Cold at heart, she took
that vessel of ill chance, and bearing it
i forth flung it into the wild and stormy sea.
1. “Woe is me,” she said within herself,
ul€ «that ever I was born into this world!
“a Miserable that I am, I have lost mine
B ¢ honour and failed in my trust. Would to
©” God I had never come on this journey. I
me must ever bemoan that death took me not
"tre I pledged myself to sail with Iseult on
e this evil voyage. Alas, Tristan and Iseult,
myfor this drink shall be your death ! ”
Now, when the man and the maid,
#1 ristan and Iseult, had drunk of the potion,
Love, who never resteth but besetteth all |
earts, crept softly into the hearts of the —
th twain, and ere they were ware of it had she


j Google


XN


10 Tristan and Soeur
planted her banner of conquest therein, !
and brought them under her rule. They
were one and undivided who but now were
twain and at enmity. Gone was Iseult’s
; hatred, no longer might there be strife be-
tween them, for Love, the great reconciler,
) had purified their hearts from all ill will,
and so united them that each was clear as a
mirror to the other. But one heart had
they—her grief was his sadness, his sadness
Of the her grief. Both were one in love an

aie sorrow, and yet both would hide it in
their love Shame and doubt. She felt shame of her
love, and the like did he. She doubted ot
his love, and he of hers. For though both
their hearts were blindly bent to one will,
yet was the chance and the beginning
heavy to them, and both alike would hide

their desire.

When Tristan felt the pangs of love,
then he bethought him straightway of his
faith and honour, and would fain have set
himself free. ‘ Nay,” he said to himself,
“let such things be, Tristan; guard thee
well, lest others perceive thy thoughts.”

: So would he turn his heart, fighting against
his own will, and desiring against his own
desire. He would and would not, and, a
ere


Se tae


‘Cristan and Jeeuft II


prisoner, struggled in his fetters. ‘There
was a strife within him, for ever as he
looked on Iseult, and love stirred his heart
and soul, then did honour draw him back.
Yet he must needs follow Love, for his
liege lady was she, and in sooth she
wounded him more sorely than did his


: honour and faith to his uncle, though they


strove hard for the mastery. For Love
looked smiling upon his heart, and led
heart and eyes captive; and yet if he saw
her not, then was he even more sorrowful.
Much he vexed himself, marvelling how he
might escape, and saying to his heart:
“Turn thee here or there, let thy desire
be other, love and long elsewhere.” Yet


, ever the more he looked into his heart the
. more he found that therein was nought but
_ Love—and Iseult.


Even so was it with the maiden: she
was as a bird that is snared with lime.
When she knew the snare of love and saw
that her heart was indeed taken therein,
she strove with all her power to free her-
self, yet the more she struggled the faster
was the hold Love laid upon her, and, un-
willing, she must follow whither Love led.
As with hands and feet she strove to free
12 Cristan and Iseult


herself, so were hands and feet even more!
bound and fettered by the blinding sweetness
of the man and his love, and never half a
foot’s length might she stir save that Love
were with her. Never a thought might
Iseult think save of Love and Tristan, yet
she fain would hide it. Heart and eyes
strove with each other; Love drew her
heart towards him, and shame drove her .
eyes away. ‘Thus Love and maiden shame
strove together till Iseult wearied of the
. fruitless strife, and did as many have done
‘ before her—vanquished, she yielded herself
ibody and soul to the man, and to
; Love.

Shyly she looked on him, and he on her,
till heart and eyes had done their work.
And Tristan, too, was vanquished, since Love.
would have it none otherwise. Knight

{and maiden sought each other as often as
| they might do so, and each found the other
‘fairer day by day. For such is the way of
‘Love, as it was of old, and is to day, and
shall be while the world endures, that lovers
please each other more as love within them
waxeth stronger, even as flowers and fruit
are fairer in their fulness than in their
beginning; and Love that beareth fruit
w-


Tristan and Iseult 13


waxeth fairer day by day till the fulness of
time be come.


Love doth the loved one fairer make,
So love a stronger life doth take,

Love’s eyes wax keener day by day,
Else would love fade and pass away.


So the ship sailed gaily onwards, even
though Love had thus turned two hearts
aside, for she who turneth honey to gall,
sweet to sour, and dew to flame, had laid her


‘burden on Tristan and Iseult, and as they


looked on each other their colour changed
from white to red and from red to white,


even as it pleased Love to paint them.
Each knew the mind of the other, yet was
‘their speech of other things.


In right maidenly wise Iseult questioned
Tristan of his doings; they spake of how
he came aforetime, wounded in a barque,
to Dublin, how her mother had taken him
in her care, and how Tristan had taught
her Latin and the lute. And much she
praised his valour when he slew the dragon,
and she told how she had known him in the
marsh for the minstrel Tantris, and later
for Tristan. Then they spake together
and Iseult said: “Ah, how was it that I
-


|
14 Sristan and Iseuft


thought better of my purpose, and slew
thee not, that day? Had I known then
what I know now, methinks it had been
thy death.”

“Wherefore,” he said, “fair Iseult?
What troubleth thee? what dost thou
know?”

How “What I know, that troubleth me;
Pir what I see doth bring me sorrow. Sky’
confessed and sea weary me, life weigheth heavily on.
their love me.’

mae She stirred a little, and leant seat
** him, and the springs of her heart-sorrow
rose to her lips and weighed down her

head.

Then Tristan laid his arm around her
gently, and spake softly: “Ah, fair and
sweet, tell me what troubleth thee, of what
dost thou make thy plaint?”

And Iseult spake, riddling: “ L’Amer,””
she said, “doth trouble me, it weigheth
down my soul, and bringeth me sorrow.’

Then Tristan bethought himself of her
words, and saw well how she spoke with a
threefold meaning. L’ Amer might alike;
mean love and bitterness, and the sea ; and '
of the first would he say nothing, so he
made answer :
} ®


Sristan and Iseuff 15


“T ween, fair Iseult, that the sea and the
wind troubleth thee ; the sea, and the salt
sea wind; thou dost taste them, and they
are alike bitter to thee.”

“Nay, nay, what sayest thou? I taste
nor wind nor sea. L diner alone doth ;
trouble me.”

And Tristan whispered: Of a sooth,
sweetheart, so doth it me. JL’ Amer and

‘thou, ye are my sorrow! Heart’s lady,
sweet Iseult, thou and the love of thee have
turned my heart aside; so far have I
wandered that nevermore may I find the
right path. All that mine eyes behold is
but weariness and sorrow, weakness of
spirit and heaviness of heart; in all the —
world is there nought that my heart doth
love save thee only.”

Iseult spake : “ Even so is it with me.”

So the twain made their confession ot
love each to the other; he kissed her, and
she him ; and each drank of the sweetness }
that the heart may offer. Yet they kept
the matter secret, that none in the world }
might know their hearts’ desire. ”T was |
enough that each knew the will of the
other. .

But the wise Brangoene, she watched
16 Cristan and 4 seurt


them in silence, and saw well what they
would fain keep hid, and she thought
within herself: “ Alas! now see I well how
love doth begin.” And when she saw how
day by day trouble of heart wrought upon
them so that they grew pale and thin, a fear
came upon her that this love might in truth
be their death ; and she said in her heart:
“ Now be of good courage, and learn what
may be the truth of this.”

A as they sat together one day she

How the spake, saying: ‘Here is no man save we
shor three alone, tell me, ye twain, what doth
Bove ont. ail ye? I see ye hour by hour sigh and
dence to weep and make lamentation.”
Bran’ Lady,” said Tristan, “an I dared I
goené would tell thee.”

“Speak on, Sir Knight, tell what thou
wilt.”

“‘ Nay, that may I not, saving that thou'
dost first swear an oath to be a friend to:
us, otherwise are we lost.”

Then Brangcene sware an oath that
she would truly and faithfully do their
bidding.

“ Dear lady,” quoth Tristan, “ have pity
alike on me and on the princess : what ha
chanced to us we know not, but a madness
Ervistan and Iseuft 17.


hath come upon us, we die of love! Aid
us, we pray, for our life and death are in
thine hands.”

Then Brangcene spake to Iseult: “ My
princess, is it even as Sir Tristan saith ?

And Iseult answered: * Yea, friend of
my heart.”

Brangoene quoth: “ Woe is us, for the
devil hath made sport of us! Now see I
well that I must deal for mine own sorrow
and your shame ; for so must it needs be ir
I would not let ye die. Yet hear my
counsel: let this shame be kept secret |
between us three, it strikes at your honour,
and if another know it ye are lost, and I
with ye. Heart’s mistress, sweet Iseult, °
thy life and thy death they rest with thy-
self alone. Have no fear of me, but do
even as thou thyself shalt think best.”

And that night Love, the physician, ,
led Tristan to Iseult’s side, and bound the ,
twain together with such master skill and .
wondrous power that nevermore in all ,
their lives might the bond betwixt them
be loosed.

So they sailed on their journey, blissful
in each other’s love, yet fearful lest any
should espy their secret ; and sad at heart

VOL It "
How
Iseult
thought to
deceive


Ki
Mark


18: Tristan and Jseul't


when they thought how fair Iseult must
needs be the bride of one whom she loved
not. When they saw the coast of Corn-
wall, and all on board were ie ous that
their voyage was well-nigh ended, Tristan,
and Iseult were heavy at heart, for if they |
might have had their will never again’
would they have looked on land, but!
sailed the seas together for evermore.

As they drew near to shore, Iseult be-;
thought her of a ruse. She sought out:
Brangeoene, and prayed her that she would, |
on the marriage night, take the place of;
the queen—for Brangoene was fair and a.
maiden, and Iseult had it in her heart to
belong to none but to her lover Tristan.
So she spake on this wise to Brangeene, who
kept silence a space, and then answered :

‘Dear lady, thy mother, my liege lady
and queen, committed thee to my care;
*twas my part on this ill-fated voyage to
have kept thee from this very sorrow.
Through my carelessness have sorrow and ©
shame come upon thee, so may I not
complain if I must needs share the shame
with thee, ’tis but right that I should take
my part therein. God ! how came I to
be thus forgetful ?”


Go gle


Tristan and Iseuft dig D>

“Dear cousin,” said Iseult, “ wherefore
reproach thyself? I know not of what thou
speakest.” :

“ Lady, ’twas but the other day I cast a
crystal flask into the sea.”

“Tis true, but why should that so
trouble thee ? ” .

“ Alas! that same flask, and the drink
that was therein, twas the death of ye
both |”

“ How may that be? What is this wild
tale?”

Then Brangcene told the twain the
story, from beginning to end, even as it
had chanced.

“ Now in God’s name,” quoth Tristan,
“were it death or life, the poison was
sweet ! I know not what may come of it,
but such death it pleaseth me well! Shall
fair Iseult indeed be my death, then would
I die daily !”

And yet, however sweet love may be, a
man must at whiles bethink him of his
‘honour, and Tristan knew well that he
‘owed both faith and honour to Mark, who
had sent him to fetch his bride, and the
twain fought hard with his love, and vexed
heart and soul between them, yet was it of
20 Cristan and. Jeeult


no avail, for since he had chosen Love,
Honour and Faith alike must needs be put
to the worse.

Then Tristan sent messengers in two
boats to the land, to bear tidings of the
coming of the fair Princess of Ireland; and
Mark sent forth a thousand messengers
through all the kingdom, to bid his knights


How prepare a fitting welcome for their comrades,


Iseult ;
landed in 204 the strangers who came with them, and


Ireland Mark himself received the twain even as


shee


a man welcomes that which he holds the
dearest upon earth.
Then King Mark bade all his barons


- assemble at court within eighteen days, to
_witness his wedding with Iseult, and they


.came together, many a fair company of
_knights and ladies, all eager to behold fair
Iseult, of whose beauty they had heard
such tales. And when they had looked
upon her, there was but one thought and
one voice among them: “Iseult the fair
is the marvel of all the world. ’Tis true
what we have heard of her, she is even as
the sun rejoiceth the hearts of men; never
did any kingdom win so fair a maiden.”

So King Mark and Iseult of Ireland were
wedded, and the kingdoms of Cornwall and
Sristan and Iweutt 21


ngland were laid in her hands, with the

ledge that if she bare no heir to Mark,
then should Tristan inherit them, and so

as homage done to her. :
; When night fell, then were matters
‘wrought even as Iseult had planned. When
the queen put out the lights in the bridal
ichamber, then Brangoene, in the royal
robes, lay down beside the king; but when
the king asked for wine, that men were
wont to drink on the bridal night, Brangoene
arose, and when T'ristan bare the lights and
‘the wine, ’twas Iseult sat beside the couch.
But the drink that she and Mark should |
have shared had been drunk long since, and
the flask lay in the depths of the sea.


Google = interaraet al Teor


Original from


Digitized by Google INDIANA UNIVERSITY


SES
\ ZAP Xo Vd
ea Ae AAS NF (a
Ane | {


Original from


Digitized by Google INDIANA UNIVERSITY


Tristan and Iseuft 25


Aow King Mark and all

his folk, and the people

of the land, loved and
honoured Queen Iseult,

for the grace and the
courtesy that they found

in her, and no man but

spake her praises; and

none knew how the
matter stood betwixt her |

and Tristan, or thought !

evil of them. With that there came a
thought into the queen’s mind, since none

but Brangoene knew aught of the deceit

‘that she had practised toward King Mark, Iseult
‘might it not be for her safety that she fears lest
‘should live no longer ? Were she no longer (onc
there, there would be little fear of any man should be-
discovering aught against the queen’s ttay her
honour. And if it were so that Brangoene

had any love or friendship for King Mark,

might it not be that she would reveal his

shame unto him? And in this did the

queen make clearly manifest that men fear\:
shame and mockery more than they fear,

God, for she sent for two squires, strangers '

of England, and made them swear an oath, |

on peril of their lives, to do her bidding :


a
)
eR


26 Sristan and Jseuft


without question. And when they had
sworn she said: “ Now mark well my mind:
I will send a maiden with you, and ye three
shall ride swiftly and secretly till ye s come
to some wood, near or far, even as ye shall
deem best, but apart from all dwelling-place
of man. There shall ye smite off the
maiden’s head. And mark well all her
words, and what she saith, that shall ye tell
She lays me, and bring me back her tongue. And
od be ye sure of this: if ye do my bidding well
ran- On the morrow will I make ye knights, and|
goene’s give ye lands and riches so long as ye shall:
life live.* And all this did they swear to do.
Then Iseult took Brangoene aside, and
said: “ Brangoene, look at me well; am I
not pale? I know not what aileth me, but
mine head doth pain me sorely. Thou,
must go forth and seek me herbs and roots, |
a must take counsel, else I fear for my _
ife. :
The faithful Brangoeneanswered: “Lady,
thine illness grieveth me sore; let us not
delay. But say, where may I find that which
may do thee good?”
“See, here are two squires, ride with
them, they will guide thee aright.”
“ Gladly will I go, lady.”
Eristan and Jaeuft 27


Thus the three rode forth together, and
they came to a wood, where was great
plenty of herbs, roots, and grass, and Bran- \
goene dismounted from her steed. Then
the squires led her deeper into the wild
woodland, and when they were far from all
haunts of men the two seized the faithful
maiden and threw her on the ground, and '
drew forth their swords to sla he.

Brangoene was so terrified she lay still
on the ground, trembling in every limb.
Fearful, she looked up to them: “Sirs, of
your pity, what will ye do to me?”

“Thou shalt die here ! ”

“ Alas! wherefore? Tell me, I pray you.”
And then one said: “ What hast thou
done to anger the queen? She bade us |
slay thee, and it must needs be so. Iseult, |
our lady and thine, she hath commanded |
thy death.”
Brangoene folded her hands, and spake,
weeping: “Nay, sirs, for God’s sake, of
your mercy delay a while, and let me live ‘
till I have answered ye ; after that slay me |”
if ye will. Know yourselves, and hereafter :
tell my lady the queen, that I have done |
nought to lose her favour, or that should
bring her hurt, save perchance this one
28 Eristan and Iseuff


thing, and that I scarce believe it may be.
When we twain sailed from Ireland we had
each of us a garment white as snow, fairer
and better than our other garments. When
_we were on the sea so great was the heat of
Of Bran/ the sun that the queen might not bear her
earey robes, but did on this white robe, and ware
aie 7 that only, and she ware it till it was soiled
| and stained and its whiteness marred. But
‘I had hid my garment within my coffer,
‘and its white folds were all unsullied. And
when my lady came hither, and took my
lord the king for her husband, on the bridal
;night would she wear her white robe, but
(twas no longer so fair as she would have it,
so prayed she the loan of mine. Yet at
first I forgot my duty and refused it to her,
but at the last did I do even as she prayed.
If it be not this that hath angered her, then
T know not what it may be. God knoweth
‘never at any time did I transgress her will
‘and her command. Now do what ye will
‘with me. Greet my lady from me as is
fitting from a maiden to her mistress. Ma
‘God in His goodness preserve her in li
and in honour, and may my death be for-
given her. I commend my soul to God
and my body to your will.”
Crisfan and Iseult 29


Then the squires looked pitifully the
one on the other, they had compassion on
the maiden and her bitter weeping, and
repented them much that they had sworn The
to slay her, for they could find no fault in ‘ache
her, nor anything that was worthy of death. on the oe

, They took counsel together, and determined, maiden
' happen what might to them, they would let
‘her live. So they bound the maiden to a
tree, high up, that the wolves might not
\touch her before they could come to her
gain, and took one of their hounds and slew
t, and cut out its tongue, and rode thence.

Then they told Queen Iseult how, with
sorrow and pain, they had obeyed her
commandment, and shewed her the tongue,
and said it was that of the maiden. And
Tseult said: ‘ Now tell me, what did the
maid say toye?”

Then they told her all from the begin-
ning, even as Brangcene had told them, and
forgat no word.

“Yea,” quoth the queen, “said she no Offseult’s
more ? ” repent-

“ Nay, lady.” ee

Then Iseult cried: “Alas for these
tidings! Wretched murderers, what’ have

~yedone? Ye shall hang, both of ye!”


.


’
a
30 Tristan and Iseuft
“Lady,” they said, “most gracious
a seult, what dost thou say? Didst
ou not beseech us, and lay pressure upon
us, that we should slay her ”
“J know not what ye say of prayers. I
' gave my maiden into your care that ye
: should guard her on the road, that she
' might bring me back that which I desired.
Ye must restore her to me or your lives
are forfeit. Cowardly death-dealers, ye
eas hang, both of ye, or be burnt on a
' pyre!

Me Nay,” spake one of them, “lady, thy
heart and thy mind, they are not pure and
single, thy tongue is double indeed! But
rather than lose our lives we will give

‘ thee thy maiden again, whole and in good
‘ health.” ‘
; Then Iseult spake, weeping bitterly:
' © Lie to me no more: doth Brangoene live,
or is she dead? ”
“She liveth, gracious Iseult.”
“ Ah! then bring her back to me, and
I will keep the promise I sware to ye.”
“ Lady, it shall be done.”
Iseult bade one squire remain with her,
_ the other rode thence to the spot where he
' left Brangoene, and brought the maiden
Tristan and Iseuft
eo?


again to Iseult. And when she came


the queen’s presence Iseult clasped her in


her arms, and kissed her lips and her cheek


_over and over again. ‘To the squires she


fave for payment seventy marks of gold
on the promise that they should keep the
matter secret.


an
py"
re


Ue.
Now that Queen Iseult had tested The a


Brangcene, and found that. she was faithful £&


and true, even to death, and that her anys oe


courage was steadfast, even as gold tried in Bran-
the furnace, the twain were henceforth so scene
-one in heart and mind that nought could
‘befall the one but it touched the other as
nearly. The court was full of Brangoene’s


praise, all loved her, and she bore ill will to
no man. She was trusted alike by king
and queen, nought was done in the counsel-
chamber but Brangoene knew it. Also
would she serve Iseult and her lover
Tristan even as they might command her.
But this was done so secretly that no man
in the court had any suspicion. None
dreamed what were the thoughts and
words of Tristan and the queen.

And as the days passed on they learnt,
even among the folk around them, to speak
to each other by glances and hidden words,
32 Tristan and Iseuft


as is the way of lovers. And as they grew
bolder even through their open speech
there ran a meaning, known but to them-
selves, love working in their speech, even
as a gold thread running through silken
tissue. None saw more in their words
than was fitting betwixt near of kin, for all
knew the love and confidence that were
betwixt Tristan and King Mark.
Yet even that love and confidence turned
to the king’s undoing, for therewith did
Love ply her hidden game, and Mark held
their yea was yea, and their nay, nay ; but
alas! ’twas far otherwise.
. So they passed the hours gaily, some-
: times glad, sometimes sad, as lovers are
i, wont to be. At whiles they were wroth
: with each other, but without ill will ; for
Of the so the way of Love—she kindleth anger in
bt A of the hearts of lovers, but the pain of anger
ove . . ° :
is swiftly forgotten in the bliss of pardon,
when love is as it were new born, and
trust greater than it was before. Ye all
know well how anger ariseth and how
peace is made for but little cause, for lovers
are lightly prone to think that there is
: another nearer and dearer than they, and a
_ small suspicion they make occasion for
Tristan and Joeuft 334
great anger—out of a little grief they win
arich atonement. Thus did Tristan and
Iseult, even as all lovers have done before
them, and shall do while the world en-
dures.
Now, Tristan loved all valiant deeds of
knighthood, but when such might not be
had he would spend his days in hunting
and hawking, and often ride far afield—as
it chanced even at this time.
For in these days a ship came to Mark’s The
haven in Cornwall: and there landed from @miag of
a : andin
it a knight, a noble baron of Jreland,—
-hamed_Gandin ;_ he was rich, handsome,
and courteous, so manly and strong of
limb that all Ireland spake of his valour.
Fairly clad, without shield or spear, he
, came riding to the king’s court. On his
* back he bare a lute adorned with gold and
peo stones, and strung as a lute should


He dismounted, and entered the palace,
and greeted Mark and Iseult in fitting
wise. Many a time and in many ways
had he served the queen in her own land,
through his knighthood, and the great love
he bare her, and for her sake had he jour-
neyed hither from Ireland.


VOL IZ c
34 Srisfan and Iseult


Then Iseult knew him, and greeted him
courteously : “God save thee, Sir Gandin.”

“ Gramercy, fair Iseult, fair, and fairer
than gold in the eyes of Gandin !”

Iseult spake softly to the king, saying
who the knight was and whence he came ;
,and Mark hearkened, wondering much
‘why he bare a lute, and in sooth so did all
the folk, for such was not the wont of
‘wandering knights. Nevertheless would
‘Mark do him all the honour he might, both
for his own sake and for that of Iseult,
since he was the queen’s countryman ; so
he bade the stranger sit beside him, and
spake to him of his folk and land, and of
gare deeds.

hen the feast was ready, and water

was brought round to the guests to wash
, their hands, then did the courtiers pray the
ponee to play the lute before them.
“The king and the queen said nought, they
would leave it to his own will; and when
he took no heed of their prayers, the
courtiers mocked him, calling him “ ‘The
Knight of the Lute,” “ The Prince with
the Penance ”; and Gandin said nought, .
\but sat beside King Mark, and ate and
\drank, and heeded them not.
Sristan and Iseult 35


When the feast was over and the tables
borne away, then King Mark prayed him,


{ an he could, to pleasure them awhile with


; “Sire, I may not, save that I know what


:


:
t
i
:
!


his skill on the lute ; but Gandin answered :


; my reward may be.”


“Sir Knight, what meanest thou? Dost Gandin
thou desire aught of my possessions? _ If coe
so, "tis granted; let us but hearken thy yan”
skill, and I will give thee whatever thou who
desirest.” promises

“So be it,” spake the knight of Ireland. §°.8'¥¢

Then he sang a lay which pleased them whatever
all well, so that the king desired him to he may


' sing another. The traitor laughed in his **


heart. “Tell me,” he said, *‘ what thou wilt,
that I may play even as shall please thee.”

Now, when he had sung another lay
Gandin arose and stood before the king,
holding the lutein his hand. “Sir King,”
he said, “bethink thee of what thou didst
promise me.”

And Mark answered: “Of good will
will I doit. Tell me what wilt thou?” -

“ Give me Iseult,” quoth the knight. He will

“Friend,” said Mark, “whatever else ea —
thou desirest thou shalt have, but this may queen


’ not be.”
36 Srisfan ond Iseult

“Verily, Sir King,” said Gandin, “I
will neither much nor little, but Iseult
alone.”

The king spake: “ Of a truth that shall
not be!” -

“ Sire, wilt thou then break thy promise ?
If thou be thus forsworn, henceforth shall
men hold thee unworthy to be king of any
land. Bid them read the right of kings,
and if this be not so, then will I renounce
my claim. Or dost thou, or any other,
_ say that thou didst mot swear to give me
os I asked, then will I assert my right
' against thee, or against whomsoever the
' court may choose. My body shall be

overcome with fight ere I renounce my
claim. Choose thou a knight to ride in
‘the ring against me, and I will prove by
combat that fair Iseult is mine.”

The king looked all about and on either
side if he might find one who would dare
, to uphold his cause ; but there was no man
: who would set his life on such a wager,
“nor would Mark himself fight for his
queen, for Gandin was so strong and
valiant that none durst take up his chal-
lenge.

Now, Tristan had ridden forth to the
PUNT Re ee ay ee mer ee


Sristan and Jaeuff 37


woods to hunt, and as he came homeward
to the court, he heard on the way the
news of what had chanced. "T'was all Tristan
true ; Gandfn had led the queen, weeping ae the
and lamenting bitterly, from the palace to mat
_the sea-shore. On be shore was pitched
. a tent, rich and costly, wherein he led the
: queen that they might wait till tide and
river rose and floated the barque, which now
lay high on the sand.
When Tristan had heard the tale from
beginning to end, he mounted his horse
and took his harp in his hand, and rode
swiftly, even to the haven. ‘There he
turned aside, secretly, to a grove, made his
horse fast to the bough of a tree, and with
his harp in his hand took his way to the
tent. The knight of Ireland sat there,
armed, beside the weeping queen, whom
he strove hard to comfort, but little might
it avail, till she saw Tristan and _ his


harp.
He greeted Gandin, saying: “God save
thee, fair minstrel ! ”
“Gramercy, gentle knight.”
, Sir,” he said, “I have hastened hither.
\Men have told me thou art come from
‘Ireland ; I too am from thence. I pray
—=—— Ee Pew


38 Cristan and Iseuflt


thee, of thine honour, take me back to
mine own land.”
Of Tr The Irish knight made answer: “ That
tan's rusé will I do ; but sit thee down, play to me,
‘and if thou canst comfort my lady, whom
thou seest weeping so sorely, I will give
thee the fairest garment that is in this
: tent.”

“°Tis a fair offer, Sir Knight,” said
Tristan, “I have good hope that I ma
do so ; an her grief be not so great that it
will stay not for any man’s playing she
must needs be consoled.”

| Therewith he harped so sweetly that
‘the notes crept into Iseult’s heart and bare
ther thoughts so far hence that she ceased
weeping, and thought but of her lover.
' Now, when the lay was ended the water
had come up to the pane and it floated,
so that they on board cried to the haven:
“Sir, sir, come aboard ; if my lord Tristan
comes whilst thou art yet ashore, we shall
have but an ill time! Folk and land alike
are in his power—also he himself, so they
say, is of such wondrous daring, so valiant
and strong, he will lightly do thee a mis-
chief.”

This was unpleasing to Gandtn, and he
=
Ce eee erent


Tristan and Iseult 39


said angrily : “ Now may Heaven hate me
if I stir hence a moment earlier for that !
Comrade, play me the lay of Dido, thou
dost harp so sweetly that 1 must needs love
thee for it. Now, play and banish my lady’s
sorrow. Out of love for thee will I bear
thee hence with her and me, and will give
thee all I have promised thee, yea, and
more ! ”

“So be it,” quoth Tristan.

The minstrel touched his harp again ;
and he played so sweetly that Gandin
listened eagerly, and Iseult was all intent
on the music. And when it had ended
the knight took the queen by the hand,

, and would lead her aboard, but by now was
. the ttde so high, and running so strong,
‘that no man might reach the barque save
on horseback. ‘ What shall we do now?”
asked Gandin; “how may my lady come
aboard?”

“See, Sir Knight,” quoth the minstrel,
“since I am sure thou wilt take me hence
with thee, I think but little of what I have
here in Cornwall. I have a horse near by,
: I ween he shall be tall enough to carry my
: lady, thy friend, over to the barque without
: the sea wetting her,”
F


40 Tristan and Iseult
' Gandin said: “Good minstrel, haste,
bring thy horse hither, and take also che
robe I promised thee.”

‘Tristan fetched his horse swiftly, and
when he came back he swung his harp
behind him, and cried: “ Now, knight of
Ireland, give me my lady, I will carry her

' before me through the water.”

: Nay, minstrel, thou shalt not touch

‘her; I will carry her myself.”
, “Nay, sir,” said fair Iseult, “’tis need-
‘less to say he shall not touch me. Know
of a truth I go not aboard save the minstrel
bear me.”

Then Gandin led her to Tristan. ‘‘Com-
rade,” he said, “have a care of her—carry
her so gently that I shall be ever grateful
to thee.”

Now, as soon as Tristan held Iseult he

i spurred his steed forward, and when Gandin

How saw it he spake in wrath: ‘* Ha, fool, what

cane dost thou ? ”

ber ee “¢ Nay, nay, fool Gandin,” quoth Tristan,
seult “*’tis thou who art befooled ; what thou
didst steal from King Mark by thy lute,
that do I bear away with my harp. Thou
didst betray, now art thou betrayed.
Tristan has followed thee till he has befooled


cee ee
Sristan and Iseult 4t


thee! Friend thou hast indeed given me
| arich garment, even the richest that thy
, tent did hold! ”

With that Tristan rode his way, leaving
Gandin beyond measure sorrowful, his loss
and his shame cut him to the heart; mourn-
ing he returned over-seas.

Tristan and Iseult rode homeward, re-
joicing in their love; and when they came
to the palace Tristan led the queen to King .
Mark, and spake bitterly: ‘Sire, God and re-
‘knoweth if thou dost hold thy queen so
dear as thou sayest, ’tis a great folly to give Mar
ther up lightly for mere lute or harp eee for his
The world may well mock! Whoever folly
saw a queen the chattel of a lay? Hence-
forth bethink thee, and guard my lady
better!”
Google


(ery)
7
Tristan and JseulE 45


these days had ‘Tristan

a companion, a noble ©
knight, who held his
lands from the king, and \
was chief seneschal at :
court; he was named -
Marjodo. The same-
bare Tristan love and Of Mar-
honour for the sake of jodo
the queen, whom he loved
secretly, though no man


was ware of it.

The two knights had their lodging in|
common, and were fain to be of each}
other’s company. It was the seneschal’s;
custom to have his couch spread by Tris-'
tan’s at night, that they might speak freely
to each other, and he be solaced by Tris-
tan’s fair speech, |

One night it chanced that the two had
spoken long together ere Marjodo fell
neat and when at length he slept soundl
the lover Tristan arose softly, and stole
secretly on the track that led to much:
sorrow for him and the queen.
thought himself unmarked as he trod the
ms that had often led him gladly to

soult’s side; snow had fallen, and the
j
'


*


46 Tristan and Jseulf


moon shone clear, but Tristan had no care
to conceal his steps.

When he came to the queen’s chamber
Brangoene took a chess-board, and leant it
against the light so that the chamber was
darkened, and then she laid her down to
sleep; how it chanced I know not, but she
left the door undone, whereof came sorrow
and trouble.

Now, as the seneschal Marjodo lay and
slept, he dreamed that a fierce boar came


- out of the forest and ran into the palace,


foaming, and gnashing his tusks, and over-
setting all in his way, so that no man durst
withstand him. Thus he came even to


ithe king’s chamber, and burst open the


idoor and tare the couch to pieces, tossing
‘it hither and thither; and Mark’s men


‘ beheld, but none dare lay hands upon him.


5
&
4

fs


- would fain tell Tristan his dream; so he


With that the seneschal awoke, and


called on him by name, and when he
answered not he called again, and felt with
his hands, and knew the bed to be empty.
Then he bethought him that Tristan was
gone forth on some secret errand, not that he
had any thought of his love for the queen,
but he was somewhat vexed that, such
Sristan and Iseult 47


friends as they were, Tristan had not told

him his secret. So he arose and did on his
! garments, and stole forth softly, and looked
‘ around, and saw the track made by Tristan
. in the snow.

He followed the path through a little
lorchard till he came to the door of the
queen’s chamber. ‘There he stopped, trem-

‘bling, for a strange doubt fell on him when

he found the door undone. He stood

awhile and gazed on Tristan’s footprints,

and thought now one thing, now another.

One moment he deemed that Tristan had How he
come hither for the love of one of the parca
queen’s maidens ; and then again he deemed fave of
’ewas surely for love of the queen herself; Tristan
so he wavered ’twixt one thought and and the
another. iat

At last he went forward softly, and found
neither taper nor moonlight; a taper was
burning, yet he saw but little of it for the
chess-board that was set over against it.

Yet he went forward still, feeling with his
, hands against the wall till he came near the
‘queen’s couch, and heard the lovers as they

spake softly to each other.

- Then was Marjodo sorrowful at heart,

for he had ever loved and honoured Queen
-_


48 Srisfan and Iseult


‘Iseult, but now his love was overcome of
‘anger. He hated and envied the twain, yet
knew not what he might do in the matter.
He bethought him of this and of that; he
was so wrathful for the treachery that he
fain had revealed it, but the thought of
Tristan, and the dread of his anger should
he do him a hurt, restrained him. So he
turned him about, and went his way back,
and laid him down again as one who had
been sorely wronged.

In a short space Tristan came back
softly, and laid him to bed again. He
spake no word, nor did Marjodo, which
was little his custom. From his silence

' Tristan misdoubted him, and bethought
- him to keep a better watch over his speech
and actions; but ’twas too late, his secret
was his no longer.

and bee ‘Then Marjodo spake secretly to the
Frage king, and told him how a rumour went
the king about the court touching Tristan and the
queen, that was but ill pleasing to the folk,
and he counselled the king to look into the
matter, and do as should best beseem him,
ifor ’twas a thing that touched his wedded
‘honour. But he told bim not the true

‘story as he himself knew it.
|


Sriztan and Iweuft 49


The simple-hearted king, who was him- Kin
self true and faithful, was much amazed Mar ts
and heard him unwillingly, for the guiding {$ {o#t? fo
star of his joy in Iseult would he not suffer Tristan’s
lightly to be belied. Yet in his heart was treachery
he ill at ease, and could not but watch them
secretly to see if he might find aught un-
fitting in their speech and bearing; yet
‘could he find nought, for Tristan had
:warned Iseult of the seneschal’s suspicions.
Then the king bethought him of a ruse, How the
and one evening when he was alone with Kin
_ the queen he spake on this wise: Lady, he se
, I have a mind to go on a pilgrimage and
,may be long on the road; in’ whose care
wilt thou that I leave thee?” .
“My lord,” answered Iseult, “ where-
fore ask me? In whose care shouldst thou
‘leave thy folk and thy land save in that of
ithy nephew Tristan? He is valiant and
‘wise, and can guard them well.”
This saying misliked the king, and he
watched even more closely, and spake to
the seneschal of his suspicions; and Mar-
jodo answered:
“Of a truth, sire, ’tis as I say. Thou
canst thyself see that they may not hide
the love they bear to each other. ’Tis a
D


VOL Il
OF Bran- -


goene’s
wise
counsels


50 Eristan and Iseuff


great folly thus to suffer them. Much as
thou dost love thy wife and thy nephew,
thou shouldst not for thine honour endure
this shame.”

The matter vexed Mark much, for he
could not but doubt his nephew, yet might
he find no ground for his doubt.

But Iseult was joyful, and told Bran-
cene, laughing and with much glee, of her
bird's pilgrimage, and how he had asked her
in whose care she would be left. Then
Brangeoene said: “ My lady, lie not to me,
but tell me truly,—whom didst thou
choose?” And Iseult told her all, even as
it had chanced.
’ “Ah, foolish child!” said Brangcoene,
“why didst thou say so? Of a truth
‘twas but a ruse, and the counsel was
the seneschal’s—herewith he thought to
take thee. If the king speak to thee again
on the matter, do a shall tell thee, and
answer thus and thus.” So she counselled


sat:

hen now king and queen were alone,
Mark took Iseult in his arms, and kissed
her many times on her eyes and on her
lips, and spake : “Sweetest, I love nought .
beside thee, and now that I needs must
rininnaing


+” silence


Eristan and Iseuft | 31
leave, God knoweth it lieth heavy on my
heart.”

Then the queen said, sighing: ‘* Alas and
alas, my lord! I deemed thy speech was but
in sport; now I see thou wert in very
earnest.” And she began to weep so bitter-
ly that the simple king felt all his doubts
vanish ; he could have sworn that she spake
from her heart (for in sooth women can
weep without cause, and without mean-
ae so oft as it seemeth them good so to

0).

Then, as Iseult still wept, Mark said:
Dearest, tell me what vexeth thee, why
dost thou weep ? ”

“Well may I weep, and much cause
have Itolament. I am but a woman, and
have but one body and soul, and both have
I so given over to thee and to thy love
that lca care for none beside. And


_ know for a truth that thou dost not love
me as thou sayest, or thou couldst not


have the heart to journey hence, and leave
me all alone in a strange land; by this I
know thou lovest me not, and t must
needs be sorrowful.”

“But wherefore, fair Iseult ? thou hast
folk and land in thine own power, they are
How

t
misled the
king


52 Erisfan and Iseulf


thine even as they are mine, thou art mis-
tress, and what thou dost command, that
shall be done. And while I am on my
journey shalt thou be in the care of one
who can guard thee well, my nephew
Tristan: he is wise and of good counsel,
and will do all he may for thine honour and
happiness. I trust him well; thou art as
dear to him as I may be, he will guard thee
alike for thy sake and mine.”

. © Tristan!” said fair Iseult, “I were
‘liever I were dead and buried than left
‘in his care. He is but a flatterer who is
ever at my side telling me how dear he
holds me! Yet I know well wherefore he
‘doeth so: he slew my uncle and doth fear
my hatred! For that alone doth he ply
me with flatteries, thinking to win m
friendship, but it helpeth him little! Tis
_true, I have spoken to him oft with lying
‘lips and friendly glances, and laid myself
‘out to please him, but I did it for thy
‘sake, and lest men should bring against me
the reproach that women aye hate their
,husband’s friend. Ofttimes have I deceived
him with my friendly words, so that he
would have sworn they came from my
heart ! Sir, leave me not in the care of thy
Sristan and Jseult 83


nephew ‘Tristan, no, not for a day, if I
may persuade thee ! ”
Thus Iseult by her soft words soothed
Mark’s heart, and laid his doubts to rest ;
and he told the seneschal how that the
queen had contented him. But Marjodo
; would not rest till he had persuaded the
: king to test Iseult once more.
i So on an even, as they sat in their How
chamber, Mark said: “ My lady queen, nine ,
since I must journey hence I would fain the nieen
see how a woman may rule a kingdom. ye
All my friends and kinsmen who owe ‘ther
aught to me must needs treat thee with all
honour, but any who have not found favour
:in thine eyes will I send out of the land, I
: will no longer love those whom thou lovest
‘not. Otherwise live free and happy, and
do as shall best please thee. And since m
nephew Tristan displeaseth thee, I will
shortly send him hence, he shall return to
: Parmenie, and see to his own land ; ’tis
: needful alike for him and the country.”
“TJ thank thee, sire,” said Iseult, “ thou
dost speak well and truly. Since I know
now that thou art so swiftly displeased with
those who trouble me, it seemeth to me
that I should strive, in so far as I may, to


ra
54 Tristan and Iseule€


honour those who are pleasing in thine
eyes. "Tis neither my mind nor my
‘counsel that thou shouldst banish th
:nephew from court, so were I dahenoared:
for all the folk would say that I had
‘ counselled thee to do it, in revenge for the
death of mine uncle, and that were shame
to me and small honour to thee. Also
bethink thee well, who shall guard thy
two kingdoms? Shall they be safe in a
woman’s hand? I know none who may
Sete them so well as thy nephew Tristan,
, he is thy nearest of kin, and shall be best
| obeyed. Should he be banished, and war
»come upon us, as may chance any ay,
‘and we be put to the worse, then would
-men reproach me, saying: ‘If Tristan
had been here, then should we not have
had such ill success;’ and all will blame
-me, so shall I forfeit alike my honour
and thine. Sir, bethink thee better ; either
let me go with thee, or bid Tristan guard
the kingdom ; however my heart may be
: towards him, ’tis better he guard us than
another shame us.”
Now the king saw truly that Iseult’s
heart was set on Tristan’s honour, and he
fell again into doubt and anger. Iseult
Sristan and Iseuft 55


also told Brangoene all that had passed, and

it vexed the wise maiden that she had
spoken thus, so she counselled her again as

to what she should say. And when the

king held her in his arms and kissed her,

she said : “Sire, wast thou in very earnest By Bran-
when thou didst speak of sending Tristan gcene’s
hence for my sake? If it were true, then fisdoubts
would I be grateful to thee, and in sooth I are laid
know I should trust thee, yet my mind 4t test
misgave me that thou saidst it but to try

me?! If I might know certainly that thou

dost hate all who are my foes, then should I

be assured of thy love for me. Of a truth

had I thought thou wouldst hearken, I
should ere now have made my request to

thee to send thy nephew hence to his own

land, for I misdoubt me much, should evil

befall thee on thy journey, that he will

take from me the kingdom; he has the
‘power to do so. If then thou wert in
earnest it might indeed be well to send him

‘to his own land, or to take him with thee

von thy sada and bid the seneschal
‘Marjodo guard me while thou art absent.

Or if thou wilt but let me journey with

thee, then mayest thou commit the

land to whomsoever thou wilt.” So she
56 —s-—s Tristan and Iseuft


caressed and flattered her lord till she had
driven all doubt from his soul, and he held
the queen for innocent, and the tale of her
love for Tristan a dream, and Marjodo
himself but a liar—yet had he spoken the
truth.

When Marjodo saw he could not bend
the king to his will, then he tried in other
wise. ‘There was a dwarf at court, named

How:Melot of Aquitaine; the tale went that he
igdbvoael was learned in hidden lore, and could read
sel with the stars, but I will say nought of him
Melot save what is writ in the book, and that
telleth nought save that he was clever,
cunning, and ready of speech. He was in
; the king’s confidence, and had free entrance
: to the queen’s apartments. With him Mar-
* jodo took counsel, and prayed him when he
was in the company of the women to take
close heed of ‘Tristan and the queen, and if
he were so fortunate as to find sure proof of
the love betwixt them, then would he win

great reward from King Mark.
_ So Melot went his way, and dealt cun-
-ningly—early and late he watched the two,
‘till he saw well, by their sweet ways to
each other, that they were lovers, ‘Then
he went his way to King Mark, and told
Sristan and Iseult 57


him what he had seen, and the three,
{ Mark, Melot, and Marjodo, counselled
iwhether it were not better to forbid |
‘Tristan the court.
‘ Then the king prayed his nephew, on
:his honour, to refrain from visiting the
f queen’s apartments, for he said tales went
about the court, and ’twere well he should
be careful, lest perchance slanders should
arise concerning him and the queen. From
-henceforth Tristan avoided any place where
:the queen and her maidens chanced to be
‘alone. But the courtiers were not slow to
note his altered bearing, and. spake of him
in no friendly wise; so that. his ears were
full of their chatter.

The time passed but sadly for the lovers. Tristan
They were sorrowful for Mark’s suspicions, 4% eet
more sorrowful that they might no longer yowful for
meet and converse together as of yore. their
From day to day each began to lose heart ne oad

_and strength, and to wax pale and thin.
‘The one suffered for the other, Tristan for
Iseult, Iseult for Tristan. Nor was it
great marvel, for they had but one heart and
soul betwixt them ; their sorrow, their joy,

itheir death and their life, they were inter-

‘woven the one with the other. The sorrow
58 Sristan and Jseuflt


of heart they bare in common was so mani-
fest on their faces that few might doubt
their love who saw the whiteness of their
cheek.

When this had endured so long that
‘Mark knew surely they would seek to
‘meet did he but give them occasion there~


How to, he laid his plans warily, and commanded


Mark that the huntsmen should make themselves


laid
snare for wou
the twain


ready, and announced in the court that he

13 ride forth hunting for the space of
‘twenty days, and that all who loved the
sport, or would ride with him for pastime,
should make them ready. Then he took
leave of the queen, and bade her do
according to her own pleasure, and be
joyful and glad at home; but secretly he
commanded the dwarf, Melot, to keep


. watch upon Tristan and Iseult, and, if it


might be, aid their meetings. So he
departed to the wood with a great com-


pany.
i But Tristan abode at home, saying to
‘his uncle that he was sick—in sooth he
thought to hunt other game! He and
jIseult cast about in their minds how they
might meet secretly, so that none should
know of it, but at first they could think of
Mrs fe


Tristan and Iseuft 59


no way. Then Brangoene went to Tris-
tan, for she knew well what ailed him, and
they made great lamentation together.

‘© Ah, dear lady,” he said, “canst thou
find no counsel in this pass? For surely
if we may not meet, ’twill be the death of
Tseult and myself !”

“What counsel may I give?” quoth
Brangeoene. “ Would to God we had never
been born | We have all three lost our joy

and our honour; never again shall we be

free as of yore. Alas, Iseult! alas, Tristan !

would that mine eyes had never seen ye,

for all your sorrow is my doing! I know

neither ease nor counsel whereby to aid ye,

et I know ’twill be your death and mine

if this endure longer. See, since it may Bran-

not better be, do this: take the twig of an goene
‘olive, and cut it lengthwise, mark nothing poet
: thereon save on the one side a T and on
; the other an I. Then go thy way into
‘the orchard. Thou knowest the little
stream that floweth from the spring hard
‘by the queen’s chamber? ‘Throw thy
twig therein, and let it be carried past the
chamber door,—there do we sit ofttimes
) and weep, the queen and I. When we
see the twig float past, then shall we know


!
i
i
i


|


60 Tristan and Iseult |


that thou art by the spring, beneath the
olive-tree ; there wait till Iseult may come
to thee, my lady and thy beloved, and I
with her, if it be thy will The while I
have to live am I thine and my lady’s;
might I but buy ye one hour of joy by a
thousand hours of life, I would pledge all


- my days to lessen your sorrow!”


“I thank thee, fair lady,” said Tristan.
“<I doubt me not of thy truth and honour,
never were the twain more deeply planted
in any heart. Should any good fortune
chance to me, then should it turn to thy
gladness.”

With that he kissed her on the cheek.
“ Farewell, lady,” he said: “do as shall
seem best to thee, and commend me to my
queen, fair Iseult, and bear us in thine
heart.”

“That will I, Sir Knight. But now


_would I go hence: do as I have counselled


wan eer ®


thee, and grieve not too sorely.”

With that Brangoene departed, sad at
heart.

Then Tristan did even as Brangoene
bade him,.and threw the twig into the


‘streamlet, and he and his lady Iseult met


‘by the spring and under the shadow of the
(! Tristan and Joeufe 61


/tree with such secrecy that they had met

» | sane times in eight days ere any was ware

| of it.

/ But it chanced one night as Tristan
went thither that Melot spied him (I know
not how it so fell out) and crept after him.
And he saw him go to the tree; and ere he
thad stood there long a lady came to him,
‘and he took her in his arms; but who the
lady might be, that could not Melot tell.

The next day, a little before noon, How
Melot came secretly to Tristan with false- Melot
hood on his lips, and said: “Alas, my ap
lord! with peril have I come to thee, thou Tristan
art so beset with spies that I have had
much pain to steal hither, but my heart is
{heavy for Iseult, the noble queen; she

‘sorrows sore for thee, and hath sent me to
,thee since she would have none but me to
iknow of the matter. She greets thee, and
iprays thee to come to her at the place
‘where thou didst meet her of late (I know
not where that may be), and at the same
hour at which thou art wont to come. I
know not of what she would warn thee;
but wouldst thou believe me, never did I

rieve for any one’s sorrow as for thine, Sir

ristan. An thou biddest me, I will take
62 Erisfan and Iseulft


what message thou wilt to her, but I dare
not stay with thee, for if the courtiers
knew mine errand harm would befall me.
They believe of a sooth that all that has
chanced ’twixt thee and the queen has
come about through me, yet was it none
of my counsel.”
ap riend, thou dreamest!” quoth Tris-
tan. ‘ What fable wouldst thou tell me?
' Are the courtiers mad? What have I and
: my lady done? Out! to hell with thee!
' Know in truth that an I did not think it
beneath mine honour to touch thee, thou
shouldst have no chance of telling thy
dreams in court henceforward!”
How; Then Melot gat him swiftly to the
Mark and: woodland to King Mark, and told him
laid in that he had at last found out the truth and
wait fox of the tryst by the spring. ‘Thou canst
the lovers see the truth for thyself, sire, an thou wilt.
Ride with me at nightfall, ’tis the better
way; they will surely meet to-night, and
thou canst thyself see their doings.

So the king rode with Melot to await
his sorrow, and they came to the orchard
at nightfall, but they saw no place where

they might well hide themselves. Beside
the spring was an olive-tree none too high,


_
Tristan and Iscult 63


yet with spreading branches; thither they
,betook themselves, and climbed into the
_branches, and there they sat and held their
speace.

As it grew dark Tristan stole forth into
the orchard; he took his messenger in his
hand and dropped it where the waters
gushed forth, and saw it float away—’twas

; token enough to Iseult that her lover was
at hand. - hen Tristan crossed the spring
where the shadow of the tree fell on the
grass, and stood there, awaiting her who
was his secret sorrow.


. And as he stood there it chanced that Tristan.
‘he spied the shadows of Mark and Melot, a the
for the moon shone through the boughs s0 6n the.
that he could well distinguish the shadows grass


of the two men; and a great terror fell
upon him, for he saw their ruse and his
danger.

“Ah God,” he thought, “protect us!
If Iseult see not the shadows in time she
will come to me, and if she do ’twill be
sorrow and shame for us both. Have us
in Thy keeping, guard Iseult’s footsteps,
warn my queen betimes of the trap they
have laid for us, ere she speak or act so
that men think evil of her. Have mercy
64 Tristan and Iseuft


on us both, our life and our honour are in
Thy hands to-night!”

Meanwhile Iseult the queen, and Bran-
goene, awaited his summons in the little
garden where they had so oft bewailed
their woe. They walked up and down,
Iseult speaking ever of her love-sorrow.
Then Brangoene saw the token floating in
the stream, and signed to her lady, and
‘Iseult took the twig and looked on it, and
ssaw the T and I on either side. With that
she took her mantle, and drew it over her
head, and stole through grass and flowers
to the olive-tree beside the spring.

How. But when she came so nigh that each
Iseult was could see the other, Tristan stood still,
wef the Which he was never wont to do, for never
snare set aforetime did she come towards him but he
for them went to meet her.
Now, Iseult wondered much what this
might mean, and her heart grew heavy
within her. Timidly, with head bent
down, she came towards him, fearing much
\ for what she was doing. As she drew
. thus slowly nearer the tree, her eyes on the
: ground, she espied the shadow of three
“men, and knew there should be but one.

With that she understood her danger, and
Tristan and Jseuft 65


sid meaning of Tristan’s bearing towards
er.

‘Ah, murderers !” she thought ; “what
may this be? Wherefore this ambush?
I fear me my lord is hidden near at hand.
I see well we are betrayed, Blessed
Trinity shield us! Help us to depart
hence with honour, he and I!” Then
she thought again: “Doth Tristan know
this ill chance or not?” and again she felt
assured he knew it by his bearing.

Then she stood afar off and spake: “Sir How
‘Tristan, it grieveth me much that thou Iseult re
‘shouldst so count on my simplicity as to Frian
deem I would come and speak with thee
here! That thou shouldst guard well
thine honour as against thine uncle and
myself, that indeed would befit thee well,
and would better accord with thy faith and
my honour than to pray of me so late and
so secret a meeting! Now say, what
wouldst thouf I came here with fear
and trembling, for Brangoene would not
have it otherwise. When she left thee
_to-day she prayed and counselled me to
come hither and hear thy plaint ; yet have
-I done wrong in that I have followed her


counsel. Tis true that she sitteth near at
VOL I! z
66 Ervistan and Iseuft


hand, yet, though I know myself to be
safe, for fear of evil tongues I would give
one of my fingers from off my hand ere
any should know that I have met thee
here. Folk have told such tales of us
, twain! ‘They sware that we were sick
: and sorrowful by reason of our treasonable
love to each other! The court is full of
“such fables. God knoweth how my heart
standeth toward thee. I will say no more
save that I speak the truth of my feeling
toward thee, and that God is my witness
_ I never gave my heart to any man, hereto-
- fore, or to-day, save to him to whom I
: gave the first blossom of my maidenhood.
i lord King Mark doeth ill to suspect
: me for thy sake, Sir Tristan, for he himself
well knoweth my mind toward thee. They
who whisper such tales of us in his ear are
but evil counsellors. A hundred thousand
times have I shewn thee a friendly bearin
through the love I bear to him whom
ought to love,—never for falsehood !
Whether he were knight or squire, "twas
but right I should shew kindness to one
_ who was my lord’s kinsman, Now men
will turn that to my hurt! Yet will I
not hate thee for their lies. Sir Knight,
Evistan and Iseuft 67


what thou wouldst say to me, that say,
and let me go hence; I may not stay here
longer.”
_ “Dearest lady,” spake Tristan, “no How
doubt had I as to thy feelings towards me. Tristan 4
I knew well thou wouldst do as befitted geceding
\, thine honour. Give no ear to the liars who to her
have slandered thee and me, and brought speech
jus, innocent, out of our lord’s favour ;
God reward them! My lady queen, I
pray thee counsel my lord that the wrath
and rancour he beareth against me_ be
{ hidden, and that he be courteous to me for
‘but eight days more—till now have ye both
‘borne yourselves as if ye loved me—so will
I within that time make ready to depart
hence. We shall be dishonoured, the
king, thou, and I alike, if ye bear your-
selves thus towards me ere I depart, for all
men will say: ‘ Of a truth was there some-
what in that tale. Mark ye how Sir
Tristan has fallen out of the king’s favour,
and is departed hence ?’”
“Sir Tristan,” said Iseult, “I would
rather die than that I should pray my lord
to do aught against thee for my sake.
Thou knowest well that because of thee he
‘ has this long while past been ill. disposed
68 Eristan and Jeeufet


. towards me; did he know that I had met
_ thee here, alone and by night, henceforth
_ would he shew me neither love nor honour.
If things may so chance, alas! I know not.
But I wonder much how my lord came
, thus to suspect me? I know not who
-hath slandered us, but matters stand ill
‘ nough for us both. May God look upon
the thing and better it. Now, Sir Knight,
give me leave, I must go hence; do thou,
too, depart. Much do I grieve for thy
, sorrow and trouble; I had much against
. thee, yet will I not count it to thy wrong
‘ that I should hate thee ; sorry enough am
I that thou shouldst thus be troubled for
no cause. I will think the matter over ;
and, Sir Knight, when the day comes that
I must go hence, then may the Queen of
Heaven have thee in her keeping. If I
thought there were any power in my
prayers or my counsel, then would I do
I might for thee, though it should bring
me ill, Yet, since thou hast thought no
treason against me and my lord, will I do
thy bidding as best I may.”

“J thank thee, lady,” said Tristan ; “if
thou winnest favour or not I pray thee let
me know straightway. But if I hear
Eristan and Iseuft 69


nought, and must needs go hence without
delaying, so that I see thee not again, what-

ever be my lot, gracious queen, thou must

needs be blessed, for a truer lady never trod

this earth. My queen, I commend thy

soul and body, thine honour and thy life, to

the care of God.”

Thus they parted. The queen went her
(rays sighing and lamenting, sorrowing
secretly in heart and soul. Tristan also
‘departed, sad and weeping. But King How
ark who sat up in the tree grieved even me .

;more, It went to his heart to think that thought
ihe had so sorely wronged his nephew and him he
his wife, and a thousand times with heart bad =
and lips he cursed those who had brought his qua
him to this pass. Bitterly he reproached and Sir
‘the dwarf Melot for having deceived him Tristan
and slandered the innocent queen. They
‘descended from the tree, and rode back to

the hunt heavy at heart—Melot, that he

had ever meddled in the matter, and Mark

for the suspicion which had wronged his
nephew and his wife, and his own self yet

more, and which had caused such ill talk in

the land.
Digitized by Gox gle


Original from


INDIANA UNIVERSITY


Wee


‘| 42
45
: AE
: 1S


| 1 pe ENE i
= ete 4


—


i.
4!
by


Digitized by Google


Original from
INDIANA UNIVERSITY


Sristan and Iseuft . 73

N the morning the king
bade the rest of his
company continue the
hunt, but he himself re-
turned to the court, where
he sought Iseult. ‘Say,
lady queen, how hast
thou passed the time in
mine absence ? ”

“Sire, my idleness was
undeserved sorrow; my
labour, harp and lyre.”

“Undeserved sorrow?” quoth Mark.
“What was that, and how did it chance?”

Tseult smiled a little. ‘ However it
chanced, it chanced and doth chance to-day

, and every day. Sorrow and vain reproaches
‘are my lot and that of all women, therewith
cleanse we our hearts and enlighten our
eyes. Yet ofttimes do we make a great
sorrow of nought, and forget it as quickly.”
Thus she mocked him.

But the king marked her words and
said : “Now, lady, tell me, does any one
here, or dost thou, know how matters are
with Tristan? They told me he was sick
when I departed.”

‘?’T'was true, sire.”
/ Teg-


74 Eristan and Iscult


“How dost thou know? Who told
thee ?”

“T- know nought, save that Brangoene

: spake to me of his sickness a while back.
‘ She saw him yesterday, and prayed me that
‘I would make his plaint to thee, and pray
_ thee not to think aught against his honour,
- but hide thy displeasure for these eight days
‘longer, when he will make him ready so
‘that he may leave thy court and thy land
‘in all honour. That he prayed of us
both.”

So she told him all Tristan’s will even
as he had spoken it by the spring, and as
Mark himself had overheard.

But the king said: “ My lady queen, ill
luck may he have who caused me to think
ill of Tristan ; I repent me sore of it, for
in these last days have I learnt his innocence,
and my ill will is at anend. Dear lady, by
the love thou dost bear to me I pray thee
,to lay aside thine anger, do as thou wilt, but
‘make peace betwixt me and him.” ~

““ Nay, to what good, my lord?” said the
queen, “for even if thou dost lay aside thy
, suspicion to-day, to-morrow wilt thou take
\it to thine heart again.”

“Nay, of a truth, lady, never more. I
Tristan and Iseuft 75
will never {again think aught against his
honour and thine, my queen. Show favour
to him if thou wilt.” Thus he swore to
her.
Herewith Tristan was sent for, and the
suspicion laid to rest between them. Iseult
‘ was commended to Tristan’s care, that
: henceforth he should be the keeper of the
: queen’s chamber.


So for a while Tristan and his lady Iseult Of the
led a happy life; their joy was their ee +
desire was granted them after much sorrow. and Iseult
But not for long might it endure, for do as and how


they might Tristan and Iseult might not


guard themselves so well but that the king oncemore
should find fresh matter for suspicion, misdoubt-


uspected both, yet would suspect neither ;

e thought them true, yet deemed they lied
to him; he would not have them guilty,
‘yet would not speak them free of guilt.
This was a heavy load on the heart of the
' doubter.

At last he bethought him he would call
his lords together, and take counsel on the
matter; so he summoned all those in whom
he might trust, and laid all his trouble bare
to them, telling them of the tale which went


bsp Mark knew not what to think: he e ain
eir


76 Tristan and JseuleE


about the court, and which so_ nearly

touched his honour, and how, do what he

might, he could not lay his doubts to rest.

But now was the tale so spread abroad in

How the the land that it seemed to him alike for [his

king be- sake and the queen’s ’twas time that her

oct innocence should be made clear in the sight

of his of all men. He besought their counsel as

lords to how the matter should be cleared up.

Then the lords, his friends, bade him

semble a great council at London, in

ngland, and there make known to all the

bishops, who knew well the law of the

church, the doubt and sorrow in which he

found himself. The council was therefore

summoned without delay to meet at London,

after Pentecost, on the last days of May.

Of priests and lay folk a great number came

together by the king’s command, and there-

, to came King Mark and Iseult his queen,

‘heavy at heart, and in much fear and

‘trembling: Iseult feared greatly lest she lose

her life and her good fame, and Mark also

feared lest his gladness and his honour be
shamed through his wife Iseult.

{Then Mark sat at the council, and laid

; bare to all the princes of his land how he

was troubled and perplexed by this tale of
Sristan and TIseult 77


‘scandal, and prayed them earnestly for
God’s sake that they would bethink
sar of some means by which the matter
might be fairly judged, and, for good or for
ill, an end put to it. And some said one
thing and some another, till many men had
spoken their minds.

; Then there stood up one of the princes,
who by his age and wisdom was well fitted
cE give good counsel; a man noble and

ncient, gtey-haired and wise, the Bishop of ‘The
‘Thames, ; He leaned on his staff and spake: Beene

“My lord king, hear me. Thou hast gives the
called us princes of England together that king

we may aid thee by our counsel as thou hast “ounsel

need. Sire, I am one of these princes, and

well advanced in age; I think I may well

take upon me to speak my mind in the

matter ; if thou thinkest my counsel good

thou canst follow it. My lady the queen

and Sir Tristan are suspected by many of

having betrayed thee, yet can nought be

proved against them—so do I understand
‘the matter. How then mayst thou pass
. judgment on thy nephew and thy wife, since
- none have found them offending? No man
"can accuse Tristan of it but he is ready with

an answer to the charge ; even so is it with
ra


\78 | Tristan and Jscuft
_ thé queen. Thou canst prove nought.
But since the court holdeth them so
,strongly in suspicion, I counsel thee that

thou forbid the queen thy bed and th
board till the day that she can shew herself
\._ Free of offence against thee and against the
‘\. Iand. The tale is spread abroad, and men
Bt speak of it daily, for alas! to such scandals,
: be they true or false, men’s ears are ever
“ wont to be open, and whatever evil be in
the story, of that will they make the worst.
, But whether true or false the mischief and
the scandal are so widespread they must
needs injure thee and be held amiss by the
court. Therefore I counsel thee to call the
‘queen hither that all present may hear her
‘answer to the charge, and see if she be ready

to give open proof of her innocence.”

S his counsel seemed good to King
Mark, and he bade them summon Queen
Iseult, and she came to the council-
chamber. When she was seated the grey-
haired Bishop of Thames arose, and Sake
as the king bade him:

“Lady Iseult, gracious queen, be not
wrathful at my speech; the king my
master hath bid me speak, and I must
needs obey him. God is my witness, I
Tristan and Iseute (79>
would fain say nought that could reflect on The
thine honour and on thy fair fame. My rm op
lady queen, thy lord and husband hath bid the king’s
me speak to thee of a charge openly will to
brought against thee. I know not, nor aan
may he know, how it hath come about, he
knoweth only that court and country alike yf


couple thy name with that of the king’s
nephew, Sir Tristan. I pray God, my


lady queen, that thou art innocent of this


‘sin—yet doth the king doubt; the court


eee


is so full of the rumour. My lord himself
hath found in thee nought but good; ’tis
not his thought but the talk of the court
that hath brought this suspicion upon thee.
Therefore doth he call thee hither that his
friends and councillors may hear thee, if
perchance by their aid an end may be p


to this slander. Now methinks it were


well that thou shouldst make answer to
the king in this matter, here, in presence


of us all,”


Then Iseult, the quick-witted queen,
seeing that it fell to her to speak, arose and
answered: “My king, my lord bishop, Queen
lords of the land and all ye courtiers, ye lseult’s
shall all know well that I deny my lord’s *°¥*
shame and mine, and [ shall deny it both
80 Sristan and Jseult


now and at all times. Ye lords all, I know
well that this accusation hath been brought
against me, it is now over a year, both at
court and abroad ; yet ye yourselves know
that no man may be so fortunate that,
however well he may live, evil shall never
be spoken of him. ‘Therefore I marvel
not if such chance should also befall me.
I may never be left in peace, I must ever
be slandered and misjudged since I am here
a stranger, and have neither friend nor
kinsfolk in the land—there are but few
here whom my shame may touch. Ye all
and each, whether rich or poor, believe
readily in my misdoing! If I knew now
what I might do, or what counsel I might
follow whereby I might prove mine
innocence, and win again your favour and
my lord’s honour, I would readily agree to
it. What would ye have me do? hat-
ever judgment may be passed upon me
thereto will I readily submit, that your
suspicions may be laid to rest, yet even
more that mine honour and that of my
lord may be maintained.”

Then the king spake: “ My lady queen,
hereby shall the matter be set at rest.
I may pass judgment upon thee as thou
/ ie


«Tristan and Iseult


hast prayed us to do, thus shalt thou give
us certainty: submit to the ordeal by red-
hot iron, as we here counsel thee ! ”

This the queen did; she sware to Iseult
undergo the ordeal even as they should promises
ordain, six weeks hence, in the town of {° serene
Czrleon. et by

Thus the king and the lords departed red —
from the council.

Iseult remained alone, sorrowful and sore
dismayed at heart, for much she feared
that her unfaithfulness must now be made
manifest, and she knew not what: to

: do. So with prayer and fasting she made
supplication to Heaven to aid her. Anda
‘thought came into her mind. She wrote
.a letter to Tristan, bidding him be at
\Czrleon early on the morn of the day she
must arrive there and await her on the
shore. And this Tristan did, journeying
thither in pilgrim’s guise, his "face stained
land soiled, and his appearance changed.

Now, Mark and Iseult came thither by Oft he
water, and as they drew to shore the queen dues queen’s
saw Tristan and knew him. As the ship “**
cast anchor in the stream Iseult commanded
‘they should ask the pilgrim if he were
‘strong enough to carry her to antes | for on

VOL II


BY
~


82 Sristan and JIseuff |


that day she would have no knight to bear
her.

Then all the folk cried: ‘* Come hither,
thou holy man, bear our lady the queen to
‘Jand.”

Tristan came at their call, and took th

queen in his arms and bore her to the
shore ; and as he held her Iseult whispered
\in his ear that as he set foot on land he
ishould fall with her. And this he did;
‘as he stepped out of the water on to the
‘shore the pilgrim sank down on the earth
as if he could not help himself, so that .the
\queen fell from his clasp and lay beside
‘him on the ground.

; ‘Then the folk came swiftly with sticks
and staves, and would do the pilgrim an
harm. ‘Nay, nay, let be,” cried Iseult,
2 the pilgrim could not help himself, he is
isick and feeble, and fell against his will.”

Then they all praised her much that she

was not wrathful with the pilgrim, but
Iseult spake, smiling a little: “Were it
then so great a wonder if the pilgrim had
thought to mock me?” And as Mark
, Stood near and harkened, she spake further :

“Now I know not what shall befall me,
for ye have all seen well that I may not
Eristan and Iseuft 83


swear that no man save the king ever held
\ me in his arms or lay at my side ! ”
Thus they rode gaily, jesting the while
of the palmer, till they came into Czrleon.
There were many nobles, priests, and
' knights, and of lesser folk a great crowd.
Bishops and prelates were there, ready to
do their office and bless the ordeal. ‘They
\ had all things in readiness, and the iron
‘| was brought forth.
: The good Queen Iseult had given in The
' charity her silks and her gold, her jewels °"eal
; and all she had, horses and raiment, praying
i that Heaven would look favourably on her,
' forgive her what she had done amiss, and
: preserve her honour. Herewith she came
to the Minster with good courage to face
_ her ordeal. ,
; She wore next her skin a rough garment
‘ of hair ; above it a short gown of woollen
: stuff, a hand’s breadth above her ankles ; her
: sleeves were rolled up to her elbows, and
- her hands and feet bare. Many hearts and
many eyes beheld her with pity.
Herewith they brought forth the relics,
and bade Iseult swear her innocence of this
sin before God and the world. Now had
Iseult committed life and honour to Heaven,
The


84 Tristan and Iseuft


so hand and heart did she proffer reverently
to the relics and the oath.
Now were there many there who


quee’s would fain from ill will have had the


queen’s oath turned to her shame and


downfall. The envious seneschal, Marjodo,


, trove to harm her in every way he might ;
‘while there were many who honoured


te ee eee te,


sme 8


Iseult, and would fain see her come off
scatheless ; so there was great strife among
them as to the manner of the queen’s oath.

“My lord the king,” spake Iseult,
“whatever any may say, I must needs
swear in such wise as shall content thee.
Say thyself what I shall speak or do. All
this talk is too much. Hearken how I
will swear to thee. No man hath touched
this my body, hath held me in his arms, or
lain beside me other than thou thyself, and
this man whom I cannot deny, since ye all
saw me in his arms—the poor pilgrim!


So help me God and all the saints, to the


’ happy issue of this ordeal! If this be not


enough, my lord, I will better mine oath as
thou shalt bid me.”
“Lady,” said King Mark, “methinks


, *tis anes Now take the iron in thine


hand, an


God help thee in thy need.”
Trisfan and Iseuft gs aa
“Amen,” said fair Iseult. Then “The, :
| God’s name she seized the iron, and carried | 1
| it, and it burnt her not. )
; And so, had men but known it, they -*
, might have seen that God at whiles doth
\ let the wrong triumph, since He turned
. not this oath, which was true in the
letter yet false in spirit, to the confusion of
| the queen, but ruled matters so that she
: came forth from the ordeal victorious, and
‘was held in greater love and honour b
‘Mark and his people than ever before ; all
his thoughts and all his heart were truly
set upon her, and his doubts had passed
away.
: BESS PA)
FE XA : tae yh
ij N .


Vas
vA
‘
wf ma \
he
SA5 Z


PERS,
’ a
RG Sh TANK
y Ren ¥

’ nw We Y


=e


MGS
Gy
AS


re
K
Tristan and Iseuft “ 9)


ow Tristan when he had How
borne Iseult to the shore Jase
at Czerleon ireiay a the court
cretly from England, and ©
ht to Wales, to the Glan
court of Duke Gildan. He}
was a noble prince, un-:
married, young and rich,
free, and light of heart.
There was Fristan a wel-
| come guest, for GilAn had‘
heard great marvels of his valiant and.
knightly deeds, and did all in his power to
honour him and give him pleasure; but
Tristan was ever sorrowful, plunged in
thought over his ill fortune.
One day it chanced that Tristan sat by
Gildn, sad, in deep thought, and sighing |
often ; his host noticed this, and bade men |
bring him .his little dog, Petit-criu, his :
heart’s delight and the joy of his eyes,
that erewhile came to him from Avalon.
As he bade, so was it done: a rich purple
cloth was laid upon the table, and the dog \


placed upon it. “T'was a fairy dog, as I:
have heard tell, aad had been sent to the '
duke from the land of Avalon, as love
token, by a fay. -


=>


N L/S . ih
; 4
‘ay
SSS


y


a.


y


SSS
OLE


\;
‘M
go Crisfan and Iseuth | |
The dog No tongue could tell the marvel of it;
Petit-criu "twas of such wondrous fashion that_no__
man might say of what colour it was. If
~one looked on the breast, and saw nought
‘ else, one had said "twas white as snow, yet
‘its thighs were greener than clover, and its
_ sides, one red as scarlet, the other more
yellow than saffron. Its under parts were
even as azure, while above ’twas mingled,
so that no one colour might be distin-
guished; “twas neither green nor red,
white nor black, yellow nor blue, and yet
‘was there somewhat of all these therein;
twas a fair purple brown. And if one saw
this strange creation of Avalon against the
lie of the hair there would be no man wise
enough to tell its colour, so manifold and
changing were its hues.
Teenie Around its neck was a golden chain, and
I }Kerefrom hung a bell, which rang so
Sweet and clear that when it began to
‘chime Tristan forgot his sadness and his
sorrow, and the longing for Iseult that lay
heavy at his heart. So sweet was the tone
of the bell that no man heard it but he
| straightway forgat all that aforetime had
troubled him.
Tristan hearkened, and gazed on this


x


%
‘ i n
Tristan and Iseuft co 9h)
wondrous marvel; he took note of the dog
and the bell, the changing colours of the
hair, andthe sweet sound of the chimé;
and it seemed to him that the marvel of
the dog was greater than that of the music
which rang ever in his ears, and banished
all thought of sorrow.
‘ He stretched forth his hand and stroked
the dog, and it seemed to him that he
handled the softest silk, so fine and so
smooth was the hair to his touch. And
the dog neither growled, nor barked, nor
shewed any sign of ill temper, however
! one might play with it; nor, as the tale
; goes, was it ever seen to eat or to drink, _
hen the dog was borne away Tristan’s
sorrow fell upon him as heavy as before,
and to it was added the thought how he


ight _by any means win Petit-criu, the
Vary does eee Tay the queens that
ithereby her sorrow and her longing might
be lessened. Yet he could not see how
this might be brought about, either by
craft or by prayer, for he knew well that
Gilan would not have parted with it for
his life. This desire and longing lay
heavy on his heart, but he gave no out-
ward sign of his thought.
o- Jj \
‘g ) Tristan and Iseuft


if the\ TAs the history of Tristan’s deeds shows
wath there was at that time in the land of
*8¢9' Wales a giant named Urgan, who had!


x
— re


‘his dwelling by the sea shore. Gilin and °
his folk were under the lordship of this .
giant, and must pay him tribute that se
might dwell in peace. In these days tid-
ings were jab a to the court that Urgan
had come, and demanded his tribute of
cattle, sheep, and swine.

Herewith Gil4n began to tell Tristan

_how this tribute had been laid upon him by

’ force at the first.

“Now tell me, friend,” said Tristan, ,
“if I can help thee in such wise that thou }

; shalt shortly be free of this tribute for all ;

‘ the days of thy life, what wilt thou give ;
me?”

“Of a truth,” said Gildan, “I will give
thee whatever I possess.”

Tristan spake further: *Sir Duke, if thou!
wilt swear that, then will I on my part
promise shortly to free thee for ever from
Urgan, or to lose my life in the trial.”

“Of a truth, Sir Tristan, I will give
thee whatever thou dost desire,” said Gian.
“What thou askest, that shall be done,” and
he gave him his hand upon it.
Tristan and Iseuft 93


Then Tristan sent straightway. for How
horses and armour, and bade the folk tell eens
him whither that devil’s son, Urgan, would fo fight
journey with his spoil. ‘Then they shewed the giant
him how that the way of the giant lay
through a wild wood which bordered on his
own lands, and by a bridge over the which
he must needs drive the cattle.

The giant came thither with his spoil,

but Tristan was before him, and would let
the cattle go no further.
s When Urgan saw there was a foe on
the bridge he came swiftly, with a long
isteel staff in his hand, which he brandished
‘aloft.

But when he saw the knight so well
armed he spake, saying: “Friend on the
horse, who art thou? Why dost thou not
suffer me and my cattle to pass? Since
thou hast so done thou must die, or yield
thee captive.”

Then the knight on the horse answered :

“ Friend, men call me Tristan, know that
_well; and I fear neither thee nor thy staft
"a straw! Turn thee aside, for know surely
«thy spoil goeth no further.”

“Yea,” said the giant; “Sir Tristan,
thou vauntest thee of having slain Morolt
ST SSS A aR ED


94 Tristan and Iseuft


of Ireland, with whom thou didst most un- |
justly fight, and whom thou didst slay by

thy pride. Nor is it with me as with that
knight of Ireland whom thou didst mock,

and stole from him that fair lady Iseult,
whom he rightly claimed. Nay, nay, this

shore is mine, and I am Urgan; out of my

path swiftly !”

‘ Herewith he dealt a sweeping blow at
_ Tristan, and had taken his aim so well
' that had he smitten him he had been slain
. forthwith.

Ofthe ‘Tristan swerved aside, yet not so swiftly
et but that the giant’s blow fell on the steed
Tristan and cut it in twain.
andthe The monster shouted aloud, and cried

giant laughing to Tristan: “ God help thee, Sir

Tristan! Ride not away, but grant me

my prayer, if I may make request unto

thee. t my tribute pass in peace and
honour !”

Tristan, seeing his horse was slain, dis-

mounted, and took his spear in his hand,

| and smote Urgan with it so that he

{ wounded him in the eye; and as the giant

- Stretched out his hand to take his staff

‘again, Tristan drew his sword, and smote

‘off his hand so that it fell to the earth.
Eristan and Iseult 95


Then he smote him another blow on the
leg, and drew back. But Urgan seized
the staff in his left hand, and ran upon
Tristan, and chased him hither and thither
under the trees,
But now was the flow of blood from
his wound so great that the giant feared
\ his strength would fail him. He left the
' knight and the cattle, and took up his hand
‘as it lay on the grass, and fled to his fortress.
' Tristan stood alone in the wood with
the spoil, not a little troubled that Urgan
had departed thence alive. He sat him
_down on the grass, and bethought him
what it were best to do. For the regain-
ing of the tribute alone he cared not a jot;
: if the giant lived he might scarce claim the
‘fulfilment of GilAn’s promise. So he
‘turned him about, and followed the blood-
stained track which Urgan had left on
grass and shrubs. Thus he came to the
castle, and entered, and sought Urgan
hither and thither, but found neither him
nor any living man, for the tale saith that
the giant had laid his severed hand on the
table in the hall, and gone forth from his
castle in the valley to the mountain to seek
herbs of healing for his wound. For he
}


(/ Crisfan and Jseuff
ew well their virtue, and that if he could


lay the hand to his arm skilfully, ere it
grew cold, he should be healed.

But this might not be; for Tristan
,came thither and spied the hand, and as he
found no man there, he took it and bare it
ag! with him.

’ hen Urgan came back, and saw he
had lost his hand, he was wrathful indeed,
and casting aside the healing herbs, he


_ pursued after Tristan, who had already


Nee we


crossed the bridge, and knew well that the
1 giant was on his track. He took the hand
jand hid it ’neath the trunk of a tree, and
;for the first time he began to fear the
monster, for he saw well that the matter
must be the death of one or other of them.
Then he turned him back to the bridge,
and met Urgan, and smote him with his.
spear so fiercely that it brake in two; and
as he did so the giant struck at him with
his staff. Had the blow fallen on Tristan
he must have perished, had he been made
of brass ;. but in his wrath and haste Urgan
overreached himself, and the blow fell
beyond Tristan, and ere he might draw
<back his staff Tristan had smitten him in
the other eye.
<r


Eristan and Iseuft


Then Urgan laid around him fiercely
all sides, as a blind man may, and Tris
fled from him, and let him deal blows
around. At last he came within reach,
and the knight put forth all his might, and
,with both hands thrust him off the bridge,
‘so that he fell, and was crushed by his own
‘weight on the rocks below.

' ‘Then the victor, Tristan, took the giant’s
hand, and fared homewards, and full soon
he met Gilan the duke riding towards him,
for it had grieved him much that Tristan
had taken this venture on himself, for he
had little thought that he might escape as
he had done. When he saw him running
towards him he cried: ‘“ Welcome, wel-
come, gentle Tristan. Say, friend, how is
it with thee? Art thou whole and un-


‘wounded ?”


Forthwith Tristan shewed him the dead
hand of the giant, and told him how good
luck had been his portion.

At this Gilan was greatly rejoiced. He


rode straightway to the bridge and saw the


shattered corpse of the giant, even as
Tristan had told him, and marvelled much
at it. Then they returned gaily, driving
the cattle before them ; and the tale went
_ WOLO 8
98 Cristan and Iseuft


abroad through all the land of Wales, and
men praised Tristan, so that never more in
that land did men win a third part of the
praise that was sung and spoken of him.
But Tristan and Gilan returned to the
duke’s palace ; and as they spake of their
_ good fortune Tristan said: ‘My lord
- duke, I would remind thee of thy promise
_ and of the oath that was sworn betwixt us
: ere I set forth,”
: And Gildn answered : “That oath will I
> keep willingly. ‘Tell me, what dost thou
desire ? ”
. Duke Gildan, I pray thee, give me the
‘ dog, Petit-criu.”
Quoth Gilan: “I would counsel thee
better.”
“Let me hear what thou wouldst say.”
\ Leave me my little dog, and I will
give thee my fair sister, and with her the
balf of my kingdom.”
‘ Nay, nay, my lord duke, bethink
thee of thine oath. "T'was J should choose,
and neither land nor riches will I have. I
slew Urgan the giant for nought else but
to win Petit-criu.”
“ Alas ! my lord Tristan, if that be indeed
thy will, I will keep faith with thee and do
Tristan and Iscuft (99. _


thy pleasure. Neither craft nor cunning
am I minded to use. Though it be greatly


against my will, yet what thou desirest that ;/-~


shall be done.”

' Herewith he bade them bring the little
dog. ‘ See,” he spake, “I will tell thee,
and swear to thee on my eternal bliss, that

/1 have nothing and may win nothing so

| precious (save life and honour) that I

would not rather give thee than this m

' dog. Now take him, and God grant it
may be for thy happiness. ‘Thou hast in
truth taken from me the greatest delight of
jmine eyes, and much of my heart’s joy.”

But Tristan was more joyful at having
won the little dog than if Rome and all its
riches, nay, all the kingdoms of the world,
had been his. In comparison with Petit-
criu he held them all not worth a straw.
at had he been so glad, save when with

Iseult.


A eae,


: should bring joy to the Queen Iseult. He

hid the little dog cunningly within a lute,
‘ and bade the minstrel bear letters to the
: queen, telling her why and by what means
‘ he had won the dog for her.
we a


ristan


zZ


i: Then secretly he called to him a mind 1 ay
; strel of Wales, and counselled him how he sendsft to


6


St

Joo. tristan and Iseuft
\ The minstrel went his way, even as
stan had commanded, and came without
misfortune or ill hap to King Mark’s
castle at Tintagel. ‘There he sought out
Brangoene, and gave letter and dog into
her charge, that she might bear them to
i Iseult. The queen marvelled much at the
‘little dog, and gave the minstrel for reward
iten marks of gold. She also wrote a letter
/ ‘that he might bear back to Tristan, telling
( jhim that King Mark was well disposed
“~. towards him, and had never held him in
} greater favour than now. She had so
managed the matter that he might well

return to court.

Tristan did as she prayed him and
returned forthwith ; king and court, folk
and land, held him in honour even as here-
tofore ; never had he been in higher favour,
.even so much so that both Marjodo and the
dwarf Melot must perforce shew him
honour — if that may well be said to be
honour that cometh not from the heart,
but from the lips only.
we Sty < S)
NK Sys

. Zi

%


ZAK, oe ELH


si


Original from


Digitized by Google INDIANA UNIVERSITY


Eristan and Iseult 103


Ragan OW Iseult the queen told
i. her husband that the dog
had been sent to her by


2,


57 ce


‘ URSA) her mother, the wise
D So Queen of Ireland. She
: 4 a) We vi \; bade them make for it a
WS SG ay fair little house, of gold
is y Ww NE and cunning work, with
Ba S ich silk wh it
Fi AIS a rich silk whereon


me lie, and ever, night

and day, would she have it

in her sight. Wherever she went, whether

,on horse or afoot, there the dog must be with

her. Yet she did this, not for the lessening

of her sorrow, but for the love of Tristan

‘who had sent it to her. In sooth no other
profit might she have of it, for when the
dog was first brought to the queen, and How
she heard the bell ring softly, and through oe tf
the sweet chime forgat ‘her grief, she the bell
bethought her how her lover Tristan was from the
still i es down with sorrow for her seein
sake, and she said to herself: “ Alas, alas | ***"™
and shall I be joyful? *T'were faithless
indeed did I rejoice the while be sorrows,

‘ who hath given over life and happiness to
grief and heaviness for my sake! How
may I smile when Tristan knoweth no
a Tristan and Iseuft
: ess apart from me? He hath nothin
Bere save my love. Can I live glad and
joyful while he is sad? God forbid that I
should know happiness apart from him.”
y \Herewith she brake off the bell, leaving
\,° {the chain round the dog’s neck. But when
4 _,, {the bell was thus broken off it lost all its
FP 4° «magic power; it might ring henceforth, but
never might it bring peace to the heart of
man more. Yet so had Iseult willed it,
that true and faithful lover, apart from
Tristan would she not be joyful, for all
her heart and life had she given unto him.

So were Tristan and Iseult once more
together ; once more held in honour by all
the courtiers, and beloved by King Mark ;
and once more it behoved them to keep
their secret hidden from all, in so far as
love might do so, for it is but blind—and
was their companion at all times.

But now are the seeds of love and sus-
picion alike: where they be sown, there
they take root, and bud, and bring forth
fruit ; and thus suspicion began ere long to
make sport of Tristan and Iseult—in their
Jooks and gestures men saw the assurance
af their love. For however lovers may
guard their speech, yet are they gladly in


wet
ed
*
Tristan and Jseuft 105


each other’s presence ; the eye follows the
heart, the hand the pain. Thus they built
- up suspicion by many a soft glance and
stolen hand-clas. And King Mark
watched them closely, and saw their love
written in their faces, though otherwise he
i mig find but little assurance of it.
: et their glances were so soft, so sweet, Of the
‘so full of longing, that they went to his love of
heart, and such anger awoke therein, such .) 522
hatred and envy, that his senses were and the
bewildered, and he knew not what to do. wrath of
For the thought that his heart’s beloved, ya}
Iseult, should love another better than
himself wrought in him deadly rage.
However wrathful he might be, Iseult was
dearer to him than his life, and yet, dearly
as he loved her, he could think of nought
but his anger. So betwixt the two was
King Mark sore perplexed, till at length,
for very anger, he cared not a jot which
side the truth lay.
Thus blinded by passion, he summoned
them both to the palace court, where all
the courtiers were met together, and he
, spoke thus to Iseult : “ My Lady Iseult of
| Ireland, ’tis well known-to all the folk and
, the land that for long while, and at many
{
a,
ae)


v


‘glances have
sever your love. I have borne it too long,


1965 Tristan and Iseuft
( ximes, thou hast been under heavy suspicion


with my nephew Tristan. Many ways
have I tried, openly and in secret, to lead
thee for my sake to put aside this folly, yet
to no purpose. I am not so foolish nor so
besotted but that I can see that openly and
secretly thine eyes and thine heart are set
upon my nephew. Thou shewest greater
‘kindness to him than to me; by thine
‘actions and bearing I see well that he is


, dearer to thee than I. No precautions I


may take towards thee or towards him may
cavail; all I do is done in vain. [I have
‘separated ye in body so long ’tis a marvel
your hearts are Pe soat one. Your sweet

severed, yet I may not


herewith will I make an end. The shame
and scandal ye have brought upon me will
I share with ye no longer. I suffer this
‘dishonour no more from henceforth. Yet
will I not revenge myself upon ye, as I well
have the right to do. Nephew Tristan,
my wife Iseult, that I should put ye two to


a death, or do ye any hurt, for that do [ love


7


a


. do me, so be ye with each other henceforth,


ye too well. But now since I see clearly
that ye each hold the other dearer than ye
dagad


Sristan and Iseuft fox,


nor have further fear of me. From
time forward I meddle with ye no mofe.
‘Take each other by the hand and leave{ my {shed
. court. If ye wrong me, I will neither\see{from
'- nor hear it. We three can no longer kkep\©ou"t
_ companionship. I loose me from the bond ~
and leave ye twain. Such fellowship is ily”
—the king who knowingly doth company ™,
with lovers doeth foolishly. Go forth, ye /
two, love and live as it shall please ye; of ,/
our fellowship are ye no more.” "
"T'was done even as King Mark said.
Tristan and his lady Iseult, cold at heart,
bowed to the king their lord, and to the
courtiers ; then the faithful lovers took
each other by the hand, and passed from
the court. They bade farewell to their
friend Brangoene, and bade her abide at
court till she might hear how matters
went with them. Tristan took twenty
marks of the queen’s gold for their needs,
and bade men bring him what he desired
for the journey, harp and sword, crossbow
and horn, and one of his hounds called
Hiudan, which he had chosen from among
‘the others. He commended his men to
.God, and bade them return to their own
land, to Rual his father, save Kurwenal


c
~
108 Eristan and Jseuft


only, him would he take with him. He
bade him carry the harp, while he himself
took crossbow, horn, and dog (Hiudan, not
Petit-criu). Thus the three rode from
court.
, Brangoene abode alone; the sorrow and
' grief of their ill venture and the parting
- from her friends went so near to her heart
; "twas a marvel she died not of sorrow.
Tristan and Iseult, too, grieved much at
parting from her, yet they hoped that her
wit might find means to make peace once
more betwixt them and King k.
They So the three rode towards the wilderness,
pareieared two days’ journey, through woods and over
wilder Now, Tristan aforetime knew of a cave
ness'in a wild hill, which he had once chanced
‘upon while hunting. ‘This same cavern in
‘the old days of heathendom, when giants
were lords of the land, had been hewn by
them in the hillside. *T'was there they
were wont to resort secretly for love-
dalliance, and when any such were found
they were shut in with brazen doors and
named Love Grottoes.
The cavern was round, large, and lofty ;
the walls snow-white and smooth ; the vault
ee


ors


Cristan and Jseuft 109


above bare in the centre, at the keystone, a
crown richly wrought in metal work and
adorned with gems ; the floor below was of
polished marble, its hue green as grass.


In the centre was a couch, carved out of The love
-a crystal stone, with letters engraven al] grotto


? around, saying twas dedicated to the God-


Mee,


dess of Love. High in the wall of the
cavern were little windows hewn in the
rock, through which the light might enter.
Before the entrance was a brazen door, and
without there ee ee and no
more ; but all around the hill and towards
the valley were countless trees, whose
boughs and foliage gave a fair shade. On
one side was a little glade and a spring of
water, cool and fresh and clear as sunlight,
and above the spring were again three
lindens, which sheltered it alike from sun
and rain; and all over the glade the bright
blossoms and green grass strove with each
other for the mastery, each would fain over-
come the brightness of the other.

In the branches the birds sang sweetly,
so sweetly that nowhere else might one hear
the like. Eye and ear alike found solace.
There were shade and sunshine, air and soft
breezes. |
110 Crisfan and Jseult


From this hill and this grotto for a good
day’s journey was there nought but
rocks, waste and wild and void of game.
Nor was the road smooth and easy, yet was
lit not so rough but that Tristan and his
itrue love might make their way thither and
‘find shelter in the hill.
- Now when they had come to their
journey’s end, and thought to abide there,
they sent Kurwenal back, bidding him say
at the court that Tristan and Iseult, with
much grief, had sailed thence to Ireland to
make their innocence plain to all ; and he
had thought it best to return straightway
to court. Then they bade him seek out
Brangoene and give her tidings of her
friends, and learn from her how it stood
with King Mark, and if he had lent an ear
to evil counsels, and purposed any treachery
against the life of the lovers. He was thus
ito watch how matters went for Tristan and
_ iIseult, and once in every twenty days bear
ithem tidings from the court.
, What more shall I say? Kurwenal did
‘as he was bade, and Tristan and Iseult
remained alone to make their dwelling in
this wild hermitage.

Many have marvelled wherewith the
Tristan and Jscuft aT


twain might support their life in this wilder- Of the
ness, but in truth they needed little save life of he
each other, the true love and faith they bare pe
the one to the other, such love as kindles wilder-
the heart and refreshes the soul, that was 2¢ss
_ their best nourishment. They asked but |
rarely for other than the food which
: giveth to the heart its desire, to the
“eyes their delight; therewith had they
* enough.

Nor did it vex them that they were thus
alone in the wild woodland ; what should:
they want with other company? They
were there together, a third would but have
made unequal what was equal, and oppressed
that fellowship which was so fair. Even
good King Arthur never held at his court
a feast that might have brought them
greater joy and refreshment. Search through
all the lands, and ye might not have found
a joy, however great, for which these
twain would have bartered a glass finger


ring.
They had a court, they had a council
which brought them nought but joy. Their
courtiers were the green trees, the shade
and the sunlight, the streamlet and the
spring ; flowers, grass, leaf and blossom,
112 Eristan and Iseult


which refreshed their eyes. ‘Their service
was the song of the birds, the little brown
nightingales, the throstles, and the merles ;
and other wood birds. ‘The siskin and the
ring-dove vied with each other to do them
pleasure ; all day long their music rejoiced
ear and soul.

Their love was their high feast, which
brought them a thousand times daily the joy
of Arthur’s Round Table and the fellowship
of his knights. What might they ask
better ? The man was with the woman and

, the woman with the man, they had the
| fellowship they most desired, and were
: where they fain would be.

How In the dewy morning they gat them
S itenr forth to the meadow where grass and
- + flowers alike had been refreshed. The
theirdays glade was their pleasure ground — they
wandered hither and thither, hearkening
each other’s speech and waking the song of
the birds by their footsteps. Then they

turned them to where the cold clear sprin

rippled forth, and sat beside its stream, an
watched its flow till the sun grew high in
heaven, and they felt its heat. Then they
betook them to the linden: its branches
offered them a welcome shelter, the breezes
Cristan and Joeufe 113


were sweet and soft beneath its shade, and
the couch at its feet was decked with the
fairest grass and flowers.

There they sat side by side, those true
lovers, and told each other tales of those
who ere their time had suffered and died

_ for love. They mourned the fate of the
\ sad Queen Dido; of Phyllis of Thrace; and
‘ Biblis, whose heart brake for love. With
‘such tales did they beguile the time. But
‘when they would think of them no more
they turned them again to their grotto and
ak the harp, and each in their turn sang
to it softly lays of love and of longing; now
‘Tristan would strike the harp while Iseult
sang the words, then it would be the turn
of Alscalt to make music while Tristan’s
voice followed the notes. Full well might
it be called the Love Grotto.
‘ At times they would ride forth with the
‘crossbow to shoot the wild game of the
! woodland, or to chase the red deer with
‘their hound Hiudan, for Tristan had taught
him to hunt hart and hind silently, nor to
give tongue when on their track. This
would they do many days, yet more for the
sake of sport and pleasure than to supply
themselves with food, for in sooth they had
VOL II KD
|

YI4 Eristan and Jeeuf—

| no care save to do what might please them

i best at the moment.

’ While they thus dwelt in the woods,
King Mark in his palace was but sorrowful,
for he grieved ever for his honour and for
his wife, and his heart grew heavier day by |
day.

How in these days, more to solace himself
King than for love of adventure, he bethought
rode forth him to ride forth to the chase, and by
to the chance he came into that very wood where
chase Tristan and Iseult had their dwelling. The

; huntsmen and their dogs came upon a herd

' of deer and separated a strange stag from

: among them. He was white, with a mane

‘ like to that of a horse, and larger than stags
are wont to be. His horns were small and
short, scarce grown, as if he had but lately
shed them ; and they chased this stag hotly

‘till evening, but he fled from thence to the
-wood of the Grotto, whence he came, and
thus escaped.

King Mark was greatly vexed, and the
huntsman even more, that they had lost
the quarry (for the beast was passing
strange in form and colour), and they were

i all ill pleased. So they turned not home-
: ward, but encamped in the wood for the
t ‘

,

| ,Sristan and Iseuft 115
inight, thinking to take up the chase on the
: morrow.

Now, Tristan and Iseult had heard all
day long the sound of the chase, for the
wood rang with the horns and the baying
_of the hounds. They thought it could be
‘no one but Mark, and their hearts grew
‘heavy within them, for they deemed they
“were betrayed.

The next morning the chief huntsman
arose ere the flush of dawn was in the
sky ; he bade his underlings wait till the
day had fully broken and then follow him.
In a leash he took a brachet, which served
him well and led him on the right track.
It guided him onwards through man
rough places, over rocks and har prounit
through barren lands and over grass where

estereven the stag had fled before him.
he huntsman followed straight on the
track till at last the narrow path came to
an end, and the sun shone out clearly; he

was by the spring in ‘T'ristan’s glade.
| That same morning had Tristan and his
lady love stolen forth, hand in hand, and
come full early, through the morning dew,
to the flowery meadow and the lovely
vale. Dove and nightingale saluted them


Go gle


.


116 Tristan and Iseuft
sweetly, greeting their friends Tristan and


Iseult. ‘he wild wood birds bade them
welcome in their own tongue,—'twas as if
they had conspired among themselves to
give the lovers a morning greeting. They
sang from the leafy branches in changeful
wise, answering each other in song and
refrain. The spring that charmed their
eye and ear whispered a welcome, even as
did the linden with its rustling leaves.
The blossoming trees, the fair meadow,
the flowers and the green grass, all that
bloomed laughed at their coming ; the dew
which cooled their feet, and refreshed their
heart, offered a silent greeting.
When the twain had rejoiced them
enough in the fair morning air they betook
_-~. them again to their grotto, fearing lest the


(hunt might come their way, and one of the


‘; hounds discover their hiding-place. After

_; awhile they laid them down on the couch,

£ apart, and Tristan laid his unsheathed
{' sword between them—so they fell asleep.

Now, the huntsman of whom I spake

but now, who had followed the trail of the

, stag to the springs, he spied in the morning

‘ dew the track left by Tristan and his lady

‘and he bethought him ’twas but the trial
Cristan and Iseuft 117


he was following. So he dismounted and

: followed, till he came to the door of the
‘grotto ; "twas fastened with two bolts, so
| that he might go no further.

Marvelling much, he turned aside, and The
sought all around and over the hill, till by bunts:
chance he found a little window, high up the Love
in the wall of the grotto. Fearing greatly Grotto
he looked through, and saw nought but a 2nd

: =. olds

man and a woman. Yet the sight moved ¢he Jovers

him to wonder, for he thought that of a

truth the woman came of no mortal race,

none such had ever been born into this
world. Yet he did not stay long at gaze,

for he spied the unsheathed sword, and

drew back in terror—he deemed that here

was magic at work, and was affrighted to
remain. So he made his way down the

hill and rode back towards the hounds.

Now, King Mark had become aware
that his chief huntsman ‘had ridden forth
after the stag, and had hastened to meet
him.

“Sir King,” said the huntsman, “I will He tells
tell thee a marvel; I have but now found Rice
a fair adventure ! ” Mack
* , “Say, what adventure ?”

{ “T have found a Love Grotto!”
Se) Cristan and Joeuft (
~~ Where and how didst thou find it?”
“Sire, here, in this wilderness.”
“What? Here, in this wild woodland ?”
“Yea, even here.”
“Ts there any living soul within?”
“Sire, a man and a goddess are within. ‘
They lie side by side on a couch and seem
. to sluinber, he man is even as other
( men, but I doubt me for his companion,
} jif she be mortal! She is more beautiful
<. than a fairy. Never was any so fair of
j mortal flesh. And between them lieth a
' sword, bare, bright, and keen. I know
~ not what it may betoken.”
The king quoth: “ Lead me thither.”
The master huntsman led him forthwith
on the track of the game to the spot where
he had dismounted. The king alighted on
the grass, and followed the path the
huntsman shewed him. So came King
Mark to the door, and turned aside and
climbed the hill even to the summit,
making many a twist and turn as the
| huntsman had told him. And he, too,
‘found at last the window and looked
: through, and saw the twain lie on the
} crystal couch, sleeping as before; and he
saw them even as the huntsman had said,
Eristan and Iseult /A1g


apart, with the naked sword blade between King
them, and knew them for his nephew and bea r
his wife. | ieee
the lovers
_ His heart grew cold within him for and
-sorrow, and e’en for love, for the strange shen
.chance brought him alike grief and joy—*
‘joy, from the thought that they were
Indeed free from guile; sorrow, since he
‘believed what he saw.
And he spake in his heart : “ Nay, what
may this mean? Are they indeed guilty
~ as I deemed, then what doeth the sword


Oe da ge


?_ One would ‘say oy are in truth’
no lovers. Are they verily guilty or not?”
And one while his heat said Tea ‘and _

“another while Way- ae
~—~Then Love, the Reconciler, crept near to yz 2.44 “
King Mark, and laid the golden lie before..6@ 7
_his eyes, and the Nay’shone in_fair. colours e+“ “~~
into his heart; but the Yea, the very truth,
it pained him so sore he would not look
upon it, for the tempting vision of their
' golden innocence drewhim onto the Easter-
‘day of gladness, where in the light of dawn
‘lay all his joy.
He gazed on his heart’s delight, Iseult,
and deemed that never before had he seen
her so fair. She lay sleeping, with a flush as
y 12675 Tristan and JIseult


~~of mingled roses on her cheek, and her red

and glowing lips apart ; a little heated by

her morning wandering in the dewy

meadow and by the spring. On her head

was‘a chaplet woven of clover. A ray of

sunlight from the little window fell upon

her face, and as Mark looked upon her he

longed to kiss her, for never had she

seemed so fair and so loveable as now.

He And when he saw how the sunlight fell

abields upon her he feared lest it harm her, or

s

slumbep'4waken her, so he took grass and leaves
and goés'and flowers, and covered the _ wi

his Way therewith, and spake a blessing on his love

and commended her to God, and went his

y, weeping.

A sorrowful man, the king returned to
the huntsman, and bade him lead his
hounds homeward; he would hunt no
more in that woodland.

\ Scarcely had the King departed when
: Tristan and Iseult awoke from their
‘Slumber. ‘Then they looked around them
-and marvelled to see that the sun shone in
‘but at two windows, and not at three, as it
was wont todo. And when they saw the
third was darkened they arose with one
accord and went out of the grotto, and
Cristan and Iseuft C 1a


found the window covered with grass J
and flowers. Then they looked on the
sand before the doorway, and found there
the tracks of men’s footsteps, and feared
greatly lest Mark had been there, and had
discovered their hiding-place. They might
in no wise be certain, yet it comforted
them to think that even if he had seen
them, there would have been nought to
rouse his anger.

Then King Mark, when he had returned, Kis if
-called his kinsmen and his council toge- |
‘ther, and told them what he had found, and cciares
said henceforth would he believe nothing 'inno-
against Tristan and Jseult.” His lords saw cence
how it stood with the king, and that
his desire was to recall the twain, so like
wise men they gave counsel according
to the desire of the heart, and bade him
send messengers to: fetch his wife Iseult
and his nephew Tristan, since they had
done nought against his honour, and he
would henceforth believe no evil of them.

So they sent for Kurwenal, and bade him
ride to the woodland and say that the king
“sent greeting and love to Ti tan and the
queen, and bade them come again, and” ~
— hone should speak evil of them.


ee on


—
122 Eristan and Iseuft


So Kurwenal rode thither and bate
Mark’s message, and the lovers were glad |
at heart, more that men should again hold
them in honour than for aught else.
They took their journey back to court as
before, yet never again in all their days
were they so happy as they had been afore-
time, nor might they again find solace and
bliss in each other’s love.
RS A NESE

AAO AE GNOS DL INAVZONRS
> —
(


l
iS
¢


IZ Ze, 6

At SAV
Ly Y, = \\
b{u CS y it
Wi. Ca
—


Tristan and Iseuft y25/
mow King Mark and his


courtiers were in all
things anxious to do them
honour, yet they might
no longer be _ openly
friendly as before, for
Mark, the doubter, prayed
them straitly for God’s
sake, and for his, to keep
a watch on their looks
and words, and no longer
to shew each other favour and confidence
as of yore; and this grieved the lovers
sorely.

But King Mark was joyful: he had as Of the’
much happiness as his heart desired with folly of:


his lady Iseult; he would that all should Se


—
‘)
(83
~
‘,
;
iS
Ay


7 PAS > Ty eh
SO ppl >


, shew her open honour, and nothing re-


joiced him more than that she should be


hailed as queen and lady wherever he was


king and lord. *Tis the blindness of love
that will close its eyes to that which i
would not see. For in truth he knew that S,
his wife’s heart and soul were given to
Tristan, yet would he not know it. /
To whom then shall the shame of
his dishonour be given? For in truth
"twere wrong to say that Tristan and Iseult
|


“or whose hearts and eyes are blind. Man


) Eristan and Jseulf


deetived him; he saw with his eyes, and
knew, unseeing, that she loved him not;
and yet he loved her!

; Alas! many a Mark and many an Iseult
;doth one see to-day—men who are blind,


are there who hug their blindness, and will
not see that which lieth before their eyes,
but hold for a lie that which their heart
knoweth to be the truth. And would we
look upon it fairly, then ought we scarce to
blame the woman, if she fet the man see
.that which she doth think and do. For so
soon as a man seeth the shame, then is he


,i{no longer deceived, but hath at his own


‘ will turned his back upon the truth. And


. 7in truth the wondrous beauty of Iseult had


so fettered King Mark’s eyes and senses
that he could not see in her aught that
should displease him, for he loved her so
well that he overlooked all the sorrow she
a cause him.

ut to Iseult separation from Tristan
‘was even as death; the more her husband
forbade her to shew favour and kindness
towards him the more her heart clung to
him. For this is ever the way of women;
children of Mother Eve are they all; ’twas
Sristan and JIseult 127


she who brake the first commandment.
For our Lord God bade her do as she
would with fruit, flowers, and grass, all
that was in the fair garden of Paradise save
one tree only (and the priests say "twas the
fig-tree), the which was forbidden her on
peril of death. Yet she plucked the fruit,
and brake the commandment, and lost
Paradise.

h Now is it my firm belief that Eve would
mever have desired to eat of that tree had it


4,


‘not been forbidden to her. Even so the
‘first thing that she did shewed of what
‘mind she was, for twas the thing that she
was forbidden. Of every fruit might she
eat at her pleasure, yet would she have
none save that for which she must pay so
heavily.

Yet what greater honour may 2 woman
have than that she fight against her love
and her desire for the sake of honour?
For in sooth the strife shall end in that her
womanhood and her honour alike be justi-
fied; and he who is beloved of such a lad
findeth himself elect to all bliss. He hat
Paradise in his heart, and need vex himself
with no fear lest the serpent be hidden
amongst the flowers, or that a thorn will
ea


8 Tristan and Iseuft


pierce his hand if he pluck a rose, for thorns
and thistles alike are banished from that
den.

But alas! such happiness was not for
Tristan and Iseult; the watch they must
keep upon their words and looks was bitter
to them both, and never had they sought
so earnestly for means whereby they might
_ come together; yet when they found them

“twas but to their sorrow and bitter grief.

- , The fast It was midday, and the sun shone hotly,
H meeting so that the queen would no longer abide in
+ tanang'the palace, but took her way forth to the
BY tlorchard. There,.under the cool shade of
' _4-” Fa tree, she bade her maidens prepare a couch
; that she might rest awhile. ‘This they did,
‘ spreading the couch with purple and fine
linen, and Queen Iseult bade them leave
her, all save Brangcoene alone.

Then, since the place was lonely, and
none were abroad at that hour, she sent
Brangeene secretly to Tristan, bidding him
come and speak with her. ‘This she did,
and Tristan did even as Adam when Eve

roffered him the fruit—he took it, and ate

eath thereof with her,
. But Brangoene went away sadly, bidding
the chamberlain see that none enter the
Tristan and Jseuft Z


queen’s apartments, and sat hersélf down
by one of the doors, sorrowing to think
that her caution and her counsel might not
serve her lady better.
Scarcely had the chamberlain taken his
-stand before the door ere King Mark came
- towards him, and asked impatiently for the
queen.
“She sleepeth, sire,” answered her
maidens; and Brangcene, as she sat, hid
her face in her hands, for her heart failed
her.
But the King said: “Where doth oe ee
queen sleep?” And they told him, in the rire
garden. And Mark went thither and the fevers
, found his heart-sorrow, for there lay’ his and
| wife and his nephew, clasped in each other’s aertiag the
‘arms, cheek to cheek, and lip to lip.: So
‘were Mark’s doubts at an end—he sus-
‘pected no more, for he knew.
Silently he turned and went his way,
and calling the lords of his council, told
, them how Tristan and the queen were
even now together, and bade them go, and
take the twain, and judge them according
\to the law of the land.
But even as Mark turned to go Tristan


awoke, and saw him, and said within him-
VOL Z


‘


ee coe
Pad :
(rag,
i Da


lo 7 Google


130 Tristan and Iseuft


self: ‘* Alas! what hast thou done, faithful
Brangoene? I wot well this shall be our
‘death! Awake, Iseult, unhappy love,
- heart’s queen, we are betrayed!”
: “Betrayed?” she spake, “how may
that be?”
The fare-. My lord the king stood but now above
ge eee tas he saw us, and I saw him. Now hath
:he gone to bring witnesses, he worketh for
ur death. Heart’s lady, fair Iseult, now
ust we part, never again may we rejoice
in each other as aforetime. Now bethink
thee of the true love that hath been betwixt
us, and see that it remain ever steadfast,
let me not out of thine heart! For what-
ever befall mine, thou shalt never depart
from it. Iseult must ever dwell in ‘Tris-
tan’s heart! See, love, that neither time
‘nor distance change thy mind towards me.
Forget me not, whatever befall. Sweet
love, fair Iseult, kiss me, and bid me
farewell!”

She stepped a little back, and spake,
sighing : “Our hearts and our souls have
been too long and too closely knit together
that they may ever learn forgetfulness.
‘Whether thou art far or near, in my heart
phall be nothing living save Tristan alone


Google {


Eristan and Iseult 131


—my love and my life. Body and soul
have been thine this long while ; see that
no other woman ever separate thee from
me, so that our love and our faith be not
ever steadfast and true as they have been
‘betwixt us these many years. And take
‘thou this ring, let it be a token to thee of
faith and love, that at any time if thou
lovest other than me thou mayest look
upon it and remember how thou abidest in
imine heart. Think of this parting, how
‘near it goeth to heart and life! Remember
the many heavy sorrows I have suffered
through thee, and let none be ever nearer
to thee than Iseult! Forget me not for
‘the sake of another! We two have loved
and sorrowed in such true fellowship unto
this time, we should not find it over-hard to
. keep the same faith even to death. Yet
methinks ’tis needless to remind thee thus.
If Iseult were ever one heart and one faith
with Tristan, that is she now, that must
she ever be. Yet would I fain make one
prayer tothee : whatever land thou seekest,
have a care for thyself—my life ; for if I be
robbed of that, then am I, thy life, undone.
And myself, thy life, will I for thy sake,
not for mine, guard with all care. For
132 Tristan and Jseult


thy body and thy life, that know I well,
they rest on me. Now bethink thee well
of me, thy body, Iseult. Let me see my
life in thee, if it may well be so, and see
thou thy lifein me! Thou guardest the
life of both. Now come hither and kiss
me. ‘Tristan and Iseult, thou and I, we
twain are but one being, without distinc-
tion or difference. This kiss shall be a
‘seal that I thine, and thou mine, remain
‘even to death but one Tristan and one
“Tseult | ”
How Now that they had set the seal on their
Tristan covenant, Tristan departed thence, with
from bitter sorrow ; his self, his other life, Iseult,

- Iseult remained weeping sorely. Never aforetime
had their parting been thus sorrowful.
_ Herewith came the king, and with him
a company of his lords and counsellors, yet
they came too late, for they found but
‘Tseult alone.

Then they drew the king aside, and
said : ‘Sire, herein hast thou wronged both
thy wife and thine honour. Now, as many
see before, hast thou accused the queen
needlessly and for nought. Thou wrongest
thyself. How canst thou be joyful the
while thou dost shame thy wife, and make


— Google


Srisfan and Iseuff 133


her and thyself the mock of the land?
Yet hast thou found no wrong in her.
Why slander the queen who hath not be-
trayed thee? For thine own self and
, thine honour do so no more.” Thus they
‘counselled him ; and Mark held his peace,
[and went thence unavenged.


2
5
Google


7 SRSLY
Opp wy US<GeY)
WA) 2S, C


—_


ee
IEMA LAL


LLL_ SS —— ae
Crisfan and Iseuft 137
SRE EREDE\RISTAN betook him to his How
CQSA) lodging, and bade his folk Tristan
Ss NS make ready and come fo.

tf with him swiftly to the Cornwall
\) haven. There he went
= \\\) aboard the first ship he
¥Z] found, and sailed with his
men to Normandy. But
there he abode not. long,
for he sought a life that
should bring him some
comfort for his sadness. He fled from
death that he might seek death, and so free
him from the death of the heart—his
separation from Iseult. What profit to
flee from death if he bare death with him?
What profit if the torment that drave him
forth from Cornwall yet lay, day and night,
upon him?

He bethought him that if his sorrow
were ever to be lessened it must needs be
by deeds of knighthood ; so hearing that
there was war in Almayne, he journeyed
thither, and served sceptre and crown so
faithfully that the Roman Empire never
won under its banners a warrior who
wrought such mighty deeds. Many an
adventure had he, the which I will not
138 Tristan and Iseult


recount, for if I were to tell all the deeds
that have been written of him, the tale
would indeed be marvellous! But the
many fables men tell of him I cast to the
winds ; tis toil and labour enow to record
the truth.

Tristan’s life and death, the fair-haired
Tseult, she had sorrow and grief enough.
Her heart well nigh broke as she watched
- his ship sail thence ; but his life kept her in
life—apart from him she might neither live
nor die. She watched the sail flutter in |

the wind, and spake in her heart: “ Alas,
How alas! Sir Tristan, my heart clingeth tothee, _
Iseult my eyes follow thee, and thou speedest —
lamenta. from me! Why go thus quickly? ,
tion Knowest thou not that thou dost flee thy
life in fleeing from Iseult? ‘Thou canst
no more live a day without me than I can
‘live without thee. Our lives are so inter-
woven that thou bearest my life with thee ;
and though in sooth thou leavest thine, yet
may neither of us rightly die nor fully live !
So am I, poor Iseult, henceforth neither
dead nor living! What may I do, alas?
I am here, and I am there, yet am I in
neither place. I see myself on the sea,
and know myself on the land. I sail hence
See and Jseuff 139


with Tristan, and sit here beside King
Mark!” So she bemoaned herself.

When Tristan had been half a year and Of Tris-

more in Almayne he became heavy at tats,
heart, hearing nought of his lady, and lags =
thought to return to the land where he
might hear some rumours of her doings.
So he gat him back to Normandy, and
from thence to Parmenie, thinking that he
would find comfort and counsel with Rual.
But alas! he and his wife were both dead,
‘yet his sons welcomed Tristan gladly, and
were joyful at his coming. ‘They kissed
his hands and feet, eyes and mouth, many
atime. ‘ Lord,” they said, “in thee hath
God given us back both father and mother.
Now abide here with us, and take again all
that was thine, and let us serve thee even
as our father served thee, who was thy
man, as we would gladly be! Our father
and mother are alike dead, but God hath
looked upon our need, and sent thee back
to us!”

Then they shewed Tristan the tomb,
and he stood and wept awhile beside it, and
said: “Now if faith and honour may be
_ buried in the earth, here do they lie en-

_ tombed. Yet if faith and honour are aught
140 Tristan and Iseuf |


akin to God, as men say, then doubt I no
that these twain are now crowned abov
even as the children of God are crowned.’

The sons of Rual, even as their father,

. laid themselves and all they had at Tristan’s

service, and vexed themselves in all things

‘to do his will; and thus he abode with

- them many days.

_ Now was there a dukedom, betwixt
_ Brittany and England, which was called
. ‘Arundel and lay upon the sea coast. The

ruler of the land was an old man, but a
_ brave and courteous. The story saith that
-his neighbours had made war upon him,
and had robbed him of possessions by sea
and land. Right willingly had he avenged
himself, but as yet he lacked the power to
do so. One son and one daughter had the
, duke. The son had received knighthood
' three years past, and had won much praise
and honour for his valiant deeds. His
, sister was a fair maiden, Iseult of the white
‘hand was she called, and her brother’s name
was Kahedin. ‘The duke’s name was
Jovelin.
A rumour came to Parmenie that there
was fighting in the dukedom of Arundel,
and Tristan, thinking thereby to forget
|


fy *


Sristan and Jseuff 141
‘his sorrow, journeyed thither, and found


/ the duke in his castle of Karke. Thither
“ went he with all his friends, and the duke
received him with the welcome befitting a


noble warrior, for he knew Tristan well by
report—all the islands of the Western Sea
were full of his fame. The duke was
joyful of his coming, and Kahedin, his son,
{was minded to show him all the honour he
‘might, and would ever be in his company.
‘Friendship was sworn betwixt the two,
‘and they kept that oath faithfully, even
‘unto their death.
' ‘Tristan bade the duke tell him how
matters stood with him ; what was the
might of his enemies, and where they most
straitly beset his land; and when he knew
that they had in truth a mighty force
against them, he sent secretly to Parmenie,
to Rual’s sons, telling them he was in need
of aid; and they came swiftly, with five
hundred men, and great store of food and
drink, for the duke’s foemen had laid the
land waste.
When Tristan knew of their coming he
went to meet them, and led them under


' cover of night into the land. One half he


bade abide at the castle of Karke, and keep
How

Tristan
came to
Arundel


¥
142 Eristan and Jseud


their presence secret till he and K
had need of them. With the other half he
_ rode to a castle which the duke had bidden
| him guard, and commanded them to lie
| hidden, even as those at Karke.
Tristan With the daylight Tristan and Kahedin
Ee inne rode to the border, burning and sacking
foes and every fortress on their path, so that the cry
winsback went abroad through all the land that
the land Kahedin had ridden forth openly to dare
‘the enemy. And when the former heard
this they gathered their men together and
came out to meet them, and fell in with
them beneath the walls of Karke. When
,the battle was at its height Tristan’s
knights who had lain hidden within the
castle fell upon them suddenly, and thus
taken by surprise, the foe could do nought |
‘but fly, or yield themselves prisoners, or die _
on the field. |
When they had thus taken the leaders
captive, Tristan and Kahedin, with all |
their knights, rode into the enemy’s land.
There was no fortress so strong that it
might resist them, and all the goods and all
' the prisoners they won they sent to Karke,
till the land was once more in their power,
and the duke was well avenged.
wot


"e oO

Tristan and Jseuft (143
Then Tristan bade Rual’s sons returt-to”

Parmenie, and thanked them much for the

aid they had given him. ‘The prisoners he

bade receive their lands again from the

hands of Duke Joveltn, and swear to remain

his men, and abstain henceforth from

making war upon him; and to this all

the princes agreed. Hereafter was Tristan
held in great honour at court and through
all the land, and all men alike were fain to
do his bidding.

- Now Kahedin’s sister, Iseult of the Of Iseult
white hand, was a fair and noble maiden, ° the
the flower of the land for beauty and virtue. Pang
As Tristan beheld her the old sorrow
awoke in his heart. She reminded him of
the other Iseult, the Princess of Ireland ;
hor might he hear or speak her name but
that his sorrow might be read in his face.

Yet he loved the grief that lay at his heart,
and saw the maiden gladly, in that she
called to his mind the faith he had swore
to the fair-haired Iseult. Iseult was alike
his sorrow and his joy ; she brought him /

_ comfort, and she vexed him sore. The

more his heart yearned for the one Iseult,

the more gladly he beheld the other. g.
And he said in his heart: “Yea, God,,
144 Tristan and Jseuft
Tristan how the name doth lead me astray ! truth
is grieved and falsehood betray alike mine eyes and
at heart : eee ee
and sore My soul. Jseu/t rings laughing in mine ear
perplexed iat all times, yet know I not who Iseult
imay be—mine eyes behold her, and yet
ithey see her not. Iseult is far from me,
and yet is she near. Once more am I
\ bewitched, and Cornwall hath become
‘Arundel ; Tintagel, Karke; and Iseult |
‘hath taken the form of Iseult! I deemed
i when men spake of this maiden as Jseult,
that I had found my love again—and yet
was I deceived. Over-long do I desire the
sight of Iseult; now am I come where
Iseult is, and find her not! I see her da
by day, yet see her not, therefore make
my moan. I have found Iseult, yet not
the fair-haired Iseult, who was so kindly
cruel, The Iseult who vexeth thus my
heart is she of Arundel, not Iseult the fair ;
she, alas! mine eyes behold not. And yet >
she whom I now behold, and who is sealed
\ with her name, her I must ever honour
; and love, for the sake of the dear name
: that so oft hath given me joy and gladness
. unspeakable.”
_ So Tristan spake oft with himself, and
the maid, Iseult of the white hand, marked
Pee 4


Tristan and Iseuft 145


his troubled glances, and saw how they
\rested upon her, and her heart went out
towards him, for she heard how throughout
: the land all men praised him ; and her eyes
strove to answer the thought in him, till
the man began to marvel in his heart
whether here he might not find an ending
to his woe.

Then he upbraided himself for falsehood.
“ Ah, faithless Tristan! wouldst thou love

lees Iseults, when thine other life, Iseult,
will have but one Tristan? She will have
none other love but me; shall I woo
another? Woe to thee, Tristan, lay aside
this blind folly, and put the thought far from
thee.”

: Sowas his heart turned again to the love

‘ that was his true heritage, and he thought

: but of his old grief.

Yet was he ever courteous to the maiden
Iseult, and whatever her pleasure might be,
that would he do. He told her knightl
tales, he sang for her, and wrote and rea

en as she bade him. And in those days
ht made the noble “Lay of Tristan,”

hich men in all lands love and prize, and

shall prize while the world endures. For

often it chanced when all the folk sat to-
VOL II kK
146 Cristan and Jseuft


gether, Tristan, Iseult, and Kahedin, the

duke and the duchess, with all the lords

and ladies of the court, that he wove fair

Nishi and roundels, and courteous songs,
d ever he sang this refrain:


“TIseut ma drue, Iseut m’amie,
En vous ma mort, en vous ma vie!”


How But since he was so fain to sing thus, all
Fregier ro who hearkened deemed that he meant their
_ Mae wats lady, the maiden Iseult, and were beyond
loved measure joyful. And none more than
Tristan Kahedin. Many a time and oft did he set
Tristan beside his sister, and she, when
she smiled on Tristan, and gave him her
’ hand, did it as if to pleasure her brother—
yet was it to pleasure herself.
‘" Yet day by day Tristan’s sorrow grew
: heavier; he desired but one Iseult, Iseult
‘ of Ireland; and Iseult of the white hand,
she would have none but Tristan. Her
heart and soul were his, his grief was hers,
and as she saw him grow pale and sigh for
sorrow, so she herself sighed and grew
pale, till at length she shewed her love to
| him so openly, in sweet gestures, looks, and
| words, that he scarce knew what he might
: do, and his heart was tossed on a sea of doubt.


Google .


Se et ame tee at


j


Cristan and IJseuff 147


And as time passed on, and never word
or message came from Queen Iseult, he
began to think whether his sorrow and his
faith were not all in vain.

“ Ah, sweet friend, love Iseult!” he said, How
“now is our life too far apart. "Tis no lender
longer as erewhile, when we had but one tive Iecuft
joy, one sorrow, one love, and one life loved him

tween us. Now is our fate unlike. J 20 more
, am sad, and thou art joyful. My heart
‘ yearneth for thy love, but thy longings for
me, they are methinks but feeble. Alas!
alas! that which I have lost for thee dost
thou hold; thou art at home with thy lord
Mark, and thy friends around thee, and I
am alone, a stranger in a strange land.
‘Little comfort may I have henceforth from
thee, and yet my heart cuneeth to. thee.
Little need hast thou of me! Why dost
thou ask not what befalls me? Ah! sweet —
Queen Iseult, hadst thou departed from me
as I from thee, surely had I sent to learn
tidings of her who was my life. And yet
it may be that she hath sought me, and

und me not, for he who seeketh a wan-
erer hath no fixed goal for his search.
She may well have sought secretly through
(Zornwall and England, through France


waeemmne


‘ Google


at |


f
8 Tristan and Iseuft
.~/and Normandy, even to my land of Par-
menie, and finding me not, she thinketh of
me no more.” *
{ Thus his doubt of Iseult of Ireland, and
the love shewn him by Iseult of the white
hand, wrought on Tristan’s heart, and
yexed him day and night, till at last, for
the friendship he bare to Kahedtn, and for
the sweetness and beauty of Iseult the
maiden, he determined to wed her. So the
duke proclaimed a great feast, and the


folk came from far and wide, and I of |
the white hand dS a eee oa |


How man_and wife by the bishop of the Jand, in
Tristan"the Minster at Karke. And yet, for the
Iseult of love which he bare to Iséult of Irelan

the white which. might not be stilled, was she but his
an¢wife in name....Yet none but they two
“knew of it, and Iseult’s doubts were laid at

rest, for Tristan told her how he had made

, @_yow, many a year agone, should he ev

iwed, toleave his wife a~maiden for ja


Sli eleatetiatted wee ere


‘year...

Now Kahedin, Iseult’s brother, ha

-loved, from his youth up, a lady of t

‘and, and she, too, loved him well; yet h

parents, against her will, had given her i
* End of Gottfried’s poem,
Festan and Jseuft 149


‘sbarriage to another knight, the lord of
: Qamaroch, which lay near to the land of
undel. And there, in his castle of
maroch, did her husband keep her strictly
, guarded, for he knew well that she loved
‘him: not; nor would he go abroad save
that he bare the keys of the castle with
him.
Then Kahedin in his sorrow took coun- Of Kahe-
sel with Tristan, and Tristan bade him, if din’s love
he could by any means win speech with aves
his lady from without, to pray her to make evil end
i moulds in wax of the keys while her hus-
‘band slept, and throw the moulds into the
‘moated ditch below the castle wall. This
she did, and with the aid of a cunning
smith they made keys that would fit the
: locks.

_ So when next Nampotenis, for so was
the knight called, rode abroad, and left his
‘wife in guard, Kahedin and Tristan came
ysecretly, and unlocked the castle gates, and
entered. The lady received them with
uch joy; but as they crossed the moat
the wind loosened the circlet from
, Kahedin’s helmet and it fell to the ground;
{but neither of the twain were ware of
4 tse Tristan and wi

“__ ThenKahedinand his lady spake togeth
through the hours of the night, and ‘Tris
‘kept watch without till the dawning. W_'
‘the morning light they rode away, sod
deemed that none knew of their coming.

But when Nampotenis came again in the
morning, he beheld in the moat the circlet
that had fallen from Kahedin’s helmet, and
knew well it was none of his or of his
knights’, and deemed that forsooth his wife's
‘lover had been with her. Then with stern
‘words he bade her confess the truth, and
because she greatly feared his wrath and
cruelty she told him all; and Nampotenis
forthwith called his men together, and put-
lsued after the two knights, and overtook
‘them in the forest.

They had no thought that they wer¢
pursued, and were taken at unawares, “an
ere they wist their foes were upon the

’ Nampotenis fell on Kahedin and ra

. him through the body with his spear,

: that he fell dead. But Tristan in wrat

: drew out his sword and ran upon Nam

* tenis and smote him dead, and put all h

s men to flight. Yet ere they fled had on
. ,% _ of them-smitten. Tristan through the thig


S ; ¥ with a poisoned spear. With great sorrow


|
 Sristan and Iseuft 151


did Tristan bear his dead comrade back
to Karke, and they buried him in the
minster.
Iseult of the white hand dressed ‘Tristan’s
; wound, and bade the leeches of the land do
/ what they might to heal him, but nought
‘ that they might do was of any avail, for the
: venom was so potent their skill might not
: prevail against it. |
Then Tristan saw well how it stood with
| him, and he said to himself: ‘‘ Now might
‘I but send to my lady Iseult, methinks she
‘would cure me now, even as her mother
did aforetime, otherwise must I die of this
hurt.” Then secretly he sent for Kur-
‘wenal, and prayed him to go with all speed
to Tintagel and seek out Iseult the queen.
{e Bear with thee this ring, and shew it to
‘ her as a token from me, and say how that
I lie sorely wounded, and must needs die an
she come not to mine aid. And if. for love
of me she will come, then I pray thee to set
a white sail to the ship; but if she cometh
not, then let the sail be black, for I shall
know she loveth me no more.”
Then Kurwenal departed, even as Tris-
‘tan bade him, and came to Tintagel, and
.¢ told Iseult the queen secretly all that


> -:
OF ‘Tris-
tan’s

y
wound,
and how
he sent
for Iseult
the queen
to heal
him


eo
a


a a —e |


“ 6
R527 Tristan and Iseuff

i Tristan had bade him say. She made ready
in haste, and wrapped her in her veil, and
stole to the harbour, and sailed away ere
any might know of it.

_ Now Tristan bade them bear him day
by day to the shore that he might watch
for the ship from Cornwall till his weakness
grew so great he might do so no longer ;
_then he bade his wife, Iseult, watch from
\ the window of his chamber and bear him
:tidings when Kurwenal should return.

But Iseult of the white hand had hear-w’

kened secretly when her husband spake tof

' Kurwenal, and her heart was hot withing.

: her for anger ’gainst the other Iseult, fore |
- she knew well who it was that Trista
‘loved. So when at last she spied the shi

that bare Iseult the queen thither, she sai

to her husband: “ Yonder cometh the ship P
wherein Kurwenal sailed hence.” :
“What manner of sail doth it bear?”

spake ‘Tristan. oe Sena org ae aero t |

. Tis black as night” answered Iseult ¥ {

\ * of the white hand, yet she lied, for the sail |

¢ __was white as snow. —~ |
yi i .. Then Tristan spake no word, but turned i

* = his face to the wall, and said in his heart:

ce God keep thee, my love Iseult, for I '
SCristan and Iseuft ass


shall look on thee no more,” and with that Ofthe ~
he loosed his hold of the life he had held death of /
till then, an qul departed. ~~ me
-# Now the ship wherein was Iseult of

Ireland drew nigh to the haven; and as

they came to shore they heard the bells toll

from the Minster and the chapels, and the

voice of weeping and lamentation in the

streets. ‘What meaneth this woe?” asked

Iseult the queen, “and wherefore do ye toll

the bells?” ‘Then an old man answered, and

said: ‘Fair lady, a great misfortune hath

befallen our land. Tristan, the bravest of
_ knights, he who drave out our enemies and

estored our duke to his own, is but now

Head. He hath died of a wound from a

Doisoned spear; but now have they borne
Nis body to the Minster.”
# ‘Then Iseult answered no word, but turned How
er on the way to the Minster, and went lseult the
hither swiftly ; and all looked upon her, come too
d marvelled at her beauty and her woe. late to
nd when she came to the Minster Tristan ar
ay dead on the bier, and beside him sat jiving

seult of the white hand. Then Iseult of

A reland looked upon her: ‘Why sittest
fthou here beside the dead, thou who hast
fslain him? Arise, and get thee hence!”
_


154 Tristan and Iseuft
And how And Iseult of the white hand arose and
pores drew aside, for she feared the queen.
canted But Iseult of Ireland spake no word
this life:more, but laid her down on the bier by her
‘lover, and put her arms around him, and-
sighed once, and her soul departed from her-
tbody. “ a ea
Now tidings had been brought to King
Mark how that Iseult the queen had fle
with Kurwenal, and he took ship and pu
sued after her swiftly, but ere he came t
shore at Arundel she lay dead beside Tristan}.
How And there Kurwenal_told_Mark all tha
King had chanced,and the secret of the_love'
learnt the Potion, and how. it-was_by.no-will of theif!
truth and own but through. the magic of the lov@
of the drink that the twain +had_wronged inh’ .
tristan, And Mark spake, weeping: “Alas! Tristan} |
and Iseuly hadst thou but trusted in me, and told mi,
tall the truth, then had I given Iseult t |
‘thee for wife.”

Then he bade them embalm the bodie
and he bare them back
gel, and laid_them

either sideof the chapel wherein the kingit


eae lay buried. _And_by the tom


{


‘and by that of Iseult a vine, and the _twd


re
hee


| Ertsfan and Iseuft 155


| reached towards each other across the chapel, _
: ‘and wove-—branches-afid ‘afid root so closely _

‘Together -that™ no man _— _man— hereafter might
‘separate them, them. =~


Explicit “ Tristan and Iseult.”
Motes


Pace 3.—The love potion. ‘There is no doubt that theq
early tellers of this story had a firm belief in the fatal power,
of the love potion, and practically regarded the lovers af
blameless. This queen-mother, with her skill in spells ang k |
potions, recalls the queen-mother of the Volsunga Sagawe.
It has been suggested that this mother and daughted§
bearing the same name and alike skilled in healinggj}
show traces of the influence of Northern legend. It wif’.
be remembered that Grimhild, the name of the mother
the Volsunga Saga, is in the Nibelungen-Lied the name
the daughter.

Pacr 27.—Brangene’s parable, In the prose versions {||
Brangeene speaks a lily, not of a white robe, The vergt},
sion in the poem is evidently the more primitive as it is the
more dramatic.

Pace 33.—Gandin, The story of the abduction of
TIseult by the knight of Ireland may be compared wi
Hartmann von Aue’s version of the Charrette adventure
where he represents Meleagaunt as gaining possessio
of Guinevere by a similar ruse, In Crestien’s poem thid’
feature of the réle is assigned to Kay. In each case thal)
queen is rescued not by her husband but by her lover.

Pace 59.—‘ Take the twig of an olive.” In some of th
versions the stream flows tirough and not past the queen’s
Hotes 157


chamber, thus indicating, as M. Gaston Paris points out, a
very primitive state of society and culture, .The incident
of the snare laid for the lovers appears to be part of the
original story, and to have enjoyed considerable popularity.
Several pictured representations of this scene have been
preserved, principally in the form of stone or ivory
carvings.

Pacr 75.—Here occurs an incident which I have
‘omitted in the translation, where Mark is led to suspect
the lovers by the traces of blood on the bed-clothes. This
may be paralleled by the well-known episode of the

| Charrette poem, where Launcelot, wounding his hands
with the bars of the queen’s window, brings suspicion
alike on Guinevere and on Kay. A similar episode
slightly differing in form occurs in the prose Tristan.
_ Not all Gottfried’s skill could make this incident other than
| Unpoetical and distasteful to modern readers.
! Pace 84.—Tihe ordeal, The episode of the ordeal and
seult’s successful ruse is evidently of late introduction.
rofessor Golther (Die Sage von Tristan und Isolde,
. 13) gives a list of variants of this story, drawn from
idely different sources, and traces it ultimately to India,
is I have noted above, the original tellers of the story
eally regarded Tristan and Iseult as irresponsible victims of
Kf’ «ate, and evidently saw no incongruity in their appeals
itt to heaven to demonstrate their innocence. Gottfried was
far too shrewd (and too modern) really to share this view,
though he reproduces it faithfully ; but the issue of the
ordeal is evidently a little too much for him, and he in-
‘dulges in most sarcastic remarks as to the manner in which
‘the Deity may be duped, and become the accomplice of
sinners, These remarks I have slightly modified.

Pace 90.—Petit-crin. With this description of the
‘fairy dog from Avalon may be compared that of the hound
jin Sir Libeaus Desconus, which was ‘‘ as many coloured as
‘the flowers that blossom betwixt May and Midsummer ”’ ;
also the brachet in the pursuit of which Schionatulander


ms.
u


158 Qotfes —


met his death ; (Titure) and the horse given by Guivret
le Petit to Erec in the poem of that name,

Pace 107.—The banishment of the lovers, This poetical
episode, so charmingly described by Gottfried, evidently
formed part of the original story. As we see by the poet's
remarks (p. 110), the state of society therein pictured was
more primitive and Arcadian than that of his day. Inthe
prose Tristan we are told that the lovers find a maison
constructed by a knight of Cornwall for his lady, who
was versed in magic, and could by her spells make the
dwelling invisible to all save they two alone. Professor
Golther sees in this a hint of the origin of Gottfried’s
Love-Grotto, but I should rather be inclined to detect the
influence of the Merlin legend, and to assign the Grotto!
to the Venus story. It was surely to some such dwelling’
that the goddess invited Tannhauser? Gottfried gives =
lengthy and mystical interpretation of the details of thy:
Grotto; this 1 have omitted. It introduces a discordanq\
note into the simplicity of the story, which belongs to an
earlier date than the artificial elaboration of Gottfried’s
love symbolism.

Pace 111.—King rthur, ‘This, and the passage on
the following page, are the only allusions to Arthuria
romance found in the poem. None of the heroes
Arthur's court are mentioned throughout.

Pace 130.—The parting of Tristan and Iseult. In thefl\
different continuations of Gottfried’s poem, and also in
other versions of the story, the lovers meet more than
once after this, Tristan returning to Tintagel in various
disguises ; but it is difficult to determine whether these
incidents really belong to the genuine story or not. There
may have been one meeting, but it seems probable tha
several of those related are but variants of one original
episode, So far as Gottfried is concerned I find it difficult
to believe that he would have weakened the effect of this
powerful and pathetic parting by bringing the lovers
together again in life. As he recounts no such meeting


Google .


Motes 159
I have thought myself justified in passing at once from the
conclusion of his poem to the closing scenes.

Pace 153.—The meeting of the two Iseults. This
dramatic incident appears only to be preserved by Ulrich
von Tiirheim, It may be a later introduction, due to the
Siegfried tradition, but it appears to me fine enough to
be recorded, and I have therefore introduced it here,
though otherwise I have not followed Ulrich’s version,


Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & Co."
London & Edinburgh
Google
Google


Original from


Digitized by Google INDIANA UNIVERSITY


AF et veRitas ~)


~


eg


joe


wn
<
=
-
w
>
oe
~
