Tristan and Iseult, Vol. I
Gottfried von Strassburg (c. 1210)
Rendered into English prose by Jessie L. Weston (1899) (New York: New Amsterdam)
Source: Internet Archive
Rights: Public Domain
Note: Middle High German romance in English prose; Weston's introduction included. OCR-derived from 1899 edition, lightly cleaned.

ARTHURIAN_ROMANCES,


\ Unrepresented in Malory’s
“Morte # Arthur oa


SH
LT


Ny. I


Srisfan and Iseuft
Vol, I


<A


"
bs * awn


SLVR tke Foy
~ RARVARD COLLEGE LIGRARY
_ BOUGHT FROM
DUFLICATE MONEY


x om nF
ae | ey Mae a
= nema





“Ich weiz wol, ir ist vil gewesen,
Die von Tristande hant gelesen;
: Und ist ir doch niht vil gewesen
. Die von im rehte haben gelesen.”
GorTtTrrizp von StrassBurG.—ll, 131-134.


“Full well 1 know many there be

| Who have the tale of Tristan read,

Yet well I know that few there be
Who Tristan’s tale aright have read.”
N“
Introduction


THE poem of which the following pages
offer an English prose rendering is the
work of Gottfried von Strassburg, one of
the most famous of German medizval
poets, and was composed about the year
1210.

Of the poet himself we know practically
nothing ; he does not, like Wolfram von
Eschenbach, reveal his own name, or his
position in life ; and we look in vain in his
work for those quaintly suggestive asides
by which Wolfram takes his readers into
his confidence, and reveals himself while he
unfolds his story. But while the vigorous
viii Introduction
‘and original personality of Wolfram von
Eschenbach, his depth of thought and lofti-.
“hess of ideal, have stamped the Parzival
with a character that has rendered it the
masterpiece of German medizval literature,
and incomparably the finest romance of the.
Grail cycle, it must be conceded that
Gottfried was the superior in literary skilk
—and knew it. 2°

In a notable passage in the Tristax
(omitted in the translation as having no
bearing on the story) the writer. passes ir
review his literary contemporaries, living
and departed, placing in tlie first rank
Hartmann von Aue, whom he praises highly
for the ease and “crystal” purity of his
style ; while he sarcastically alludes.to one
whom he leaves unnamed, as: so obscure
that a commentater is needed to make his
meaning clear There has never been any
doubt that the poet thus pilloried was:
Wolfram, and. that it is to Gottfried’s:
strictures Wolfram alludes in the Willehalm.
|





Introduction. ix

And. we must admit that Gottfried
justifies himself as a critic. As a master of
language he is infinitely the superior of his
contemporaries. Truly he had an inspiring
story to tell, a story of which the poignant
pathos and enduring charm have captivated
the fancy and thrilled the hearts of count-
less generations, ‘There is no nation that
does not know the story of Tristan and
Tseult ; no important European literature
of which it does not form a part ; and to.
Gottfried von Strassburg belongs the honour
of having most adequately told the world’s:
greatest love-tale.

Doubtless a large measure of his success.
was due to the fact that he had before him.
a version of the story differing in some.
respects from that popularised by the-
wandering minstrels, ‘and the work of a
man of superior genius and real literary
skill. The fragments of the poem of
Thomas of Brittany (the Anglo-Norman.
writer who was Gottfried’s source) which.
x Introduction
have descended to us are marked by much
beauty of thought and style : in the Tristan
of Gottfried we have that rare combination,
the work of a true poet translated by one
who was himself a greater poet. Never
did a fine story fall into hands more capable
of doing it justice.

Unhappily Gottfried did not live to com-


plete his work, and of those who at a later |
date essayed the task * not one was his


equal in literary skill. We know, how-
ever, from the concluding portion of
Thomas’s poem that in his version the
story ended in the manner of the other
poems, not in that of the prose version
‘represented by Malory; and we cannot but
regret that we have not Gottfried’s version
-of the great closing scene. We can only

* We know of three: Ulrich von Tiirheim (a writer
who apparently had a “ lust of finishing” and little regard
for differences of style, as he undertook to complete Wolfram
von Eschenbach’s Willehalm) ; Heinrich von Freiberg; and


-an unknown writer. Of these Heinrich is distinctly the
better poet.
,


% Paeee | K n o


Introduction xi
imagine what his genius would have made
of that most pathetic situation in medieval
romance.

A brief introduction such as this does
not afford opportunity for a discussion of the
problems of the Tristan legend. ‘They are
many and complex. ‘The very popularity
of the story has tended to make the elucida-
tion of its origin and growth more than
usually difficult ; it has passed through so
many hands, and become compounded of
so many elements. As we have it now we
can detect Keltic names and _ localities,
incidents derived from Northern and
Germanic sources; loans from classical
tradition ; survivals of Aryan folk-lore,
shared alike by all nations of the same
stock ;—all these elements welded into a
coherent whole by French genius.* To
disentangle the threads forming so complex

* I do not wish to prejudge the question of Thomas's
nationality or of his source, but merely to emphasise the
fact that, so far as we know at present, the story first
assumed coherent shape in the French-speaking world.
xii Introduction
a fabric is a work requiring much time
and careful study, nor is it yet complete.

This much we know, that the great
body of Tristan literature is divided, or
rather. divides. itself, into two distinct
families ; M. Gaston Paris designates them
respectively as the French and the English
versions; Professor Golther as the AZinstref
and the Courtly. To the former, by far
the larger group, belong the fragments
classed together under the name of Beroul,
probably the work of different minstrels ,
the German poem of Eilhart von Oberge ;
the various prose versions (including
Malory) ; and, it is generally supposed, the
lost poem of Crestien de Troyes. In this
version the Tristan story has come into
contact with Arthurian legend. ‘Tristan is
more or less closely connected with Arthur’s.
Court ; Mark is a base and contemptible
character ; and the effect of the love potion
is limited in duration, only extending over
three or four years.
ae 4 oe fn ; ;


Introduction xiii

The second group is represented ex-
clusively by the poem of Thomas of
Brittany, and his translators — Gottfried
von Strassburg, and the compiler of the
Northern Tristram Saga. Here the tale is
entirely independent of the Arthurian
cycle. King Mark is an honourable and
upright character, deceived through his
very virtues; and the effect of the love
potion endures even to death.

Unhappily this, the finer version of the
story, is the less known. In English
literature, so far, the story of ‘Tristan in its
entirety has not yet been told; to the
English public as a whole it is only known
in an inadequate or incomplete form.
Malory’s version, which is the most widely
known, only represents the latest and most
corrupt tradition ; and of The Last Tourna-
ment, founded upon Malory, it can only be
said that it stands at the opposite pole to
the work of Gottfried von Strassburg : it is
incomparably the worst version of the story
xiv Introduction
ever given to the world—a gross libel alike
on the lovers and on King Mark. For
Tennyson’s own sake it should be excluded
from any future edition of his works: it is
little to his credit, either as man or as poet,
that in the most famous love-tale of all
time he could see nothing but the lowest
and most sordid of intrigues.

Swinburne’s poem, beautiful as it is, only
deals with a small portion of the story ;
and the same may be said of Wagner’s
famous music drama, though both alike,
within the limits they have set themselves,
have done full justice to their theme. .

But the early portion of Tristan’s story,
before his meeting with Iseult, is also well
worth telling, and this consideration has
encouraged me to attempt a translation of
Gottfried’s famous poem. No one can be
more sensible than myself of the inadequacy
of any attempt to render the full beauty
and charm of the original. The very per-
fection and polish of Gottfried’s style forbid
Introduction xv
literal transcription ; he is a master of his
material and loves to play upon words in a
manner no translation can reproduce. He
frequently repeats himself (this is also a
marked feature of his source), giving the
same ideas several times over in slightly
varying words. Such repetitions I have,
where practicable, avoided, my aim having
been to tell the story as exactly as pos-
sible in Gottfried’s words, but avoiding all
unnecessary amplification. These little
volumes do not contain the whole of Gott-
fried, but what they contain is entirely his —
work, The concluding portion has been
condensed from the version of Heinrich von
Freiberg, the most successful of Gottfried’s
continuators, with the exception of the
dramatic incident of the meeting of the
two Iseults, which is given by Ulrich von
Tiirheim. I have preferred the version of
Heinrich for the reason that here the
messenger sent to summon Iseult to her
lover’s sick-bed is Kurwenal, and it is he
xvi Infroduction
who reveals the secret of the potion to
King Mark. This seems to me more in
harmony with the rest of the tale than the
version assigning the ré/e either to Kahedin
(who generally predeceases Tristan) or to
a hitherto unknown merchant.

It may be hoped that this’ tale, once so
famous, will in its new guise again find
favour with many ; the lovers of Wagner’s
great tone-poem, to many of whom the
original poem must remain a sealed book,
will doubtless find some welcome for this
attempt to render accessible. the work
whence the poet-musician originally drew
his inspiration.


Bournemouth, Fuly 1899.





uctiorn (OGXEE
tion tl
nore If
nan the
ahedit
) or to


—


a

<b

Ss

9 IN

= ~ \) WA c
ye AN \ ANAS
GH C7) : 4
OS Co i, cae > M


Ps
S
AN)
aS


=, "
SA
S—=>


OE


VIE


OVean


© A nn =
DX NY
aN


SELB


CSS


Zoe


_—


Ww
i


——_—


“aaa


SS
aa)


QI =
ESQ ASE
SSO GEENA ESHER.


~~
a





Tristan and Iseuft 3
FESS) N the olden days there
(Z <7 lived in the land of Par-
menie* a young knight
of royal birth named
Rivalin, who held his land
of acertain duke named
Morgan. He was fair
both of face and limb;
rich, freehanded, bold and
faithful. Now when he
had been three years a
knight, and was well practised in all
knightly skill (whether because his lord Of Rival-
had wronged him, or because he longed to ae of
try his fortune in war, the chronicle does parmenie
not say), he raised an army and marched
into Morgan’s land, and laid siege to his
castles, many of which fell into his hands.
On his side Morgan gathered his men
together and did much harm to Rivalin ;
and many valiant deeds of knighthood were
done, and the land wasted with fire and
sword, before they made a year’s truce with
each other, and Rivalin returned home
glad at heart, and with much booty which
he shared freely among his knights,


* Probably the Angle Kingdom of Bernicia, in the
North of England.
4 . Tristan and. IJseufft
_ But the time was weary to him that he
was not fighting, and he longed to win
more honour ; so, since he had heard men
speak of the young King of Cornwall,
Mark, that he was both courteous and
valiant, he bade them make ready a ship,
and provision it well, and set sail south-
wards, that he might pass the year of truce
at King Mark’s court. For it seemed to
Rivalin a wise and fitting thing for a
prince to learn the customs and courtesies
of other lands. And while he should be
absent from his kingdom he gave his lands
and all that he had into the care of his
marshal Rual, whom men called the
Faith-keeper, for he knew he might trust
him well ; and with no more than twelve
companions he set sail for Cornwall.
When Rivalin came to the Cornish land


tho cons he heard that King Mark held his court at
of King the castle of Tintagel, and he and his men
Mark of clad themselves in their richest robes and
Cornwall made their way thither; and Mark


received them so courteously that the
youns knight thought to himself: ,“I
ave done well in coming to this folk.
All that I heard of Mark is true; he is a
good and gracious king.” Then he opened
Tristan and Iseuff 5
all his heart to his host, and told him where-
fore he had come; and Mark answered
him, “ Body and goods, all that I have are
at thy service to do even as thou wilt with
them.” So Rivalin dwelt at the court,
aid all men loved him.

Now the time for the yearly high feast ’
came round; for every year through the
month of May Mark held high court, and
the knights from Cornwall and England
came and brought their ladies with them,
and all was mirth and rejoicing. The
tents were“pitched in a meadow nigh to
Tintagel, where’ there was everything to
delight eye and ear: the birds sang in the
thicket, the green grass was studded with
flowers, a stream rippled through the
meadow, and the linden boughs waved in
the soft summer wind. The guests
lodged each one as it pleased him best:
some in pavilions of silk, some in bowers
woven of the green summer boughs ; they
rode knightly jousts, and danced, and made
meiry all the day long.

But of all the fair maidens there was
none so fair as the king’s sister Blanche-
fleur; the’ sight of her face made many a
noble. heart beat high for gladness. And
6 Eristan and Jseuft


of all the knights there were none so

valiant as King Mark and his guest

Rivalin. All who saw the young knight

praised his courage and skill and fair

appearance ; and as the maiden Blanche-

fleur watched the knightly sport, the love

How the of the stranger prince crept into her heart,

Erincess and though she hid her secret from all men,

fleur yet she knew him to be her chosen lord.
loved And one day he saw her as she sat
Rivalin alone, and greeted her, saying: “God
keep thee, sweet lady.”

“ Gramercy,” said the maiden, and spoke

shyly. “God give thee all good fortune,

Sir Knight; and yet methinks I have
somewhat against thee.”

“ Ah, sweetest lady, what have I done?”

And she said: “’Thou hast made me

sorrowful for a friend, the best I ever had.”

Then the knight thought to himself,

“What is this? What can I have done

to lose her favour?” For he thought that

surely she spoke of some kinsman or friend

whom perchance he had overthrown and

wounded in a knightly joust. But the

maiden was thinking of her own heart.

And as the youn Enight thought upon

her words, how she spake, and how she
.'


ot


SCristan and Iscuft 7


looked, love was lsindled in his heart too,
and though no word passed between them,
yet their eyes told the tale, and each knew
that they loved the other more and more
as the days went on.

When the feast had come to an end and
the guests had gone to their own homes,
tidings came to King Mark that one of
his foes had ridden into his land and was
laying it waste with fire and sword. Then

ark collected a great army and rode
against him, and in a great battle defeated
him with such slaughter that he might
well account himself fortunate who escaped
with his life. But Rivalin was wounded How
in the side with a spear, and his men bare iva
him back to Tintagel, as they deemed, sorely
dying. At first the rumour went about wounded
the court that he was slain, and great
lamentation was made, for all men thought
great pity that so fair and brave a knight
should die so young, and Blanchefleur in
her chamber wept, and tore her hair, and
was ready to die for grief. She sent for
the mistress of her court, and pravs. i -
to order things so that she iris.c ™.
Rivalin once more, even wo,“ were


already dead.
8 Tristan and IJseuft

Then the mistress thought, ‘Little
harm can come of this, though the knight
be not dead, yet if he live to the morning
tis all he may do, and if I give my lady
her will now she will love me the better
henceforward.” So she said: ‘ Dear
princess, I will do all that I may, have no
doubt of that; but it will be better that I
go first alone and see how the matter
stands.” |

Then she went her way to Rivalin’s
chamber, as if she had come to tend him,
and secretly she told him that her lady
desired to see him; and it rejoiced the
knight greatly. ‘Then she gave out that
she ould bring a wise woman—one skilled
in the virtue of herbs—to wait on the
wounded prince; and going her way to


And how Blanchefleur, she dressed her in a waiting-


the twain
made


woman’s robe and hid her face in a veil,


known and so brought her, none knowing it was
their love the princess, to Rivalin’s side. And when


to ea


» the maiden saw her love lie there, pale and


to all seeming lifeless, she fell down swoon-.
res Pn. She raised him in her arms and
kessed Po over ond over again, till her
mutes Leek fon. bark to life and her
love gave him ste0. 2. to dee.
Tristan and Iseuft 9

So Rivalin recovered ; but the two still
kept their love secret, for they had little
hope that Mark would give his sister to a
stranger, and none but the princess’s faith-
ful lady knew of the matter, or deemed how
often the lovers met.

But alas! news came to Rivalin that his
foe, Morgan, had broken the truce and
marched into his kingdom, and Rual
prayed that his lord would return in haste
and defend his lands. So he went his way
to tell Blanchefleur the ill tidings, and she
fell to weeping piteously.

“‘ Alas, alas!” she said, “woe is me !
what may I do, left here alone? For
when my brother learns, as he sure will do
some time, that I have given my love
without his will, he will disinherit me
and take all my lands and money from
me!”

“What wouldst thou have me do, Of the
sweetheart?” said Rivalin. ‘Shall I flight of
abide here with thee, and lose my king- .54
dom? Or wilt thou fly with me now by Blanche-
night to mine own land? I will do
whatever shall please thee best.”

“Then will I come with thee,” said
Blanchefleur. So that evening, when
How hey
were wed-
and
died


10 —s-C Sriatan and Jseulet
Rivalin went to bid farewell to King
Mark, the princess disguised herself, and
stole down through the twilight to the
ship—and they set sail and fled together
from Cornwall.

But when they came to Rivalin’s
country they found that Morgan had

thered together a vast army, and all the
and was in terror for him. But first, ere
he gathered together his men and went
forth against his foeman, by Rual’s coun-
sel Rivalin wedded the princess with great
state in the minster, in the presence of all
his nobles, so that if harm should befall
him in the war all should know that
Blanchefleur was his wedded wife and
their liege lady. And for a time they
were happy in each other’s love. But


- when the army was raised, then Rivalin


f


'
i
4


must needs go forth with it; and the war
was fierce and terrible—till at last a great
battle was fought, in which many a valiant
knight was slain, and, alas! among them
the brave and gallant Rivalin. And when


they brought the news to Blanchefleur she
i sale


e no word and shed no tear, but for
four days she lay without speaking, and on
the fourth day she bare a fair son, and died.
eee | ;
a


] re gy


f


Sristan and Iseuff 11


And when the faithful marshal Rual And how
saw that both his lord and his lady were ee
dead he knew he must needs make peace was
with Morgan, yet he feared greatly lest he brought
should harm the child who was rightful up by
heir to the lands. So he caused it to be Faje.
proclaimed abroad that the babe had died keeper
with its mother, and secretly he bare it to
his wife, and said that she had borne him
another son.

So Rivalin and Blanchefleur were buried ./
in one grave, and all thought that their 7
child lay with them; but the babe was
safe in Rual’s care, and he named him
Tristan, and brought him up as his own


Till he was seven years old Tristan
dwelt with the wife of the marshal, and
had no thought save that she was his
mother, for she loved him well; and when
he was seven Rual gave him into the.
charge of a wise and learned man named ;
Kurwenal, that he might journey with him
into foreign lands, and there learn the lore
of books, and foreign tongues, and all the
skill that should befit a prince. For seven
years did he dwell abroad, and when he
came again to his own land all men were
12 Tristan and Iseuft
loud in his praise, he was so well-grown a
lad, so fair to look upon, and courteous in
his speech and bearing. es ;
Of the Now, after Tristan had dwelt some time |
Reming of in his home, a ship from Norway, laden
the snip with all kinds of merchandise, put in at the
way port, and the men displayed their wares
before’ the castle. News was brought to
Tristan that there were some goodl
falcons on board, and his brothers, Rual’s
sons, prayed him to go with them to their
father and win leave to go down to the
ship and themselves see the birds, and if
need were, purchase them. And inasmuch
as Rual never denied Tristan anything on
which he had set his heart, he said that he —
himself would go with the lads, and see
what the merchants had brought. So they
all went together to the ship and found
there all that heart could desire—jewels,
silk, and fair raiment. Nor was there any
lack of birds; peregrines, merlins, and
sparrow-hawks—all that could be needed
for the chase—and Tristan bade them
purchase hawks for himself and also for
his brothers.
When they had bought all they desired
and-were about to leave the ship, as ill luck
a
|
Cristan and Iseuft 13
would have it, Tristan spied a chessboard
that hung on the wall, and beside it chess-
men cunningly carved in ivory. ‘Then he
turned to the master of the ship, and said
in the man’s own tongue, “ What, noble
merchant, canst thou play chess ?”

The merchants looked keenly on the
youth when they heard him eek in their
tongue, which but few folk in that land
knew, and they thought they had never
seen a fairer lad, nor one of more courteous
manner, and one of them answered:

“Yea, friend, there are many among us
who are skilled in the game ; if it so please
thee, I myself will play a match with
thee.” |


the two sat down to the board.

Then said the marshal, “ Tristan, I will
e’en return to the castle ; if thou wilt thou
canst remain here; thy brethren shall
come with me, and I will leave Kurwenal
to guard thee.” |

o the marshal and his folk went back
to the shore, and Tristan and his governor
remained alone on the ship. And if the
* story tells true never was there a nobler
lad than Tristan, or one of truer heart and
we


Tristan answered, “Let it be so,” and ;


14 Eristan and Jseuft


more courteous bearing; and Kurwenal
himself, who had taught the boy all he
knew, was a good man and true.
Howthe Thus Tristan sat and played chess with
men of the strangers, and they looked upon him,
Norway and marvelled much ‘at his gentle and
Tristan courteous ways, and yet more at his-skill
from his in tongues, for scarcely might they tell of
home. what land he came, so many foreign
tongues he spake. All the terms of chess
fell readily from his lips, and he taught
them much they knew not before. Also
he sang to them strange sweet melodies,
with a cunning refrain, till the strangers,
listening, thought it would be a good thing
‘for them could they take the boy with
- them—his skill would bring them both
: gold and honour. So secretly. they..bade
the oarsmen draw up the anchor, and put
to sea, and this they did so quietly that
neither Tristan nor Karwerl knew aught
of the matter till they were a good mile
from shore.

At last Tristan won the game, and
looked up, and took note of what was
‘around him, and when he saw how he had
‘been entrapped, never was any lad more
‘sorrowful. He sprang to his feet, crying,


Ata pte 9
Tristan and Jseuf— - 15


“ Ah, noble merchant, what means this?
What will ye do with me? Whither are
ye taking me?”

Then one of them spake: “ See, friend,
thou canst do no otherwise but must even
come with us. Beat ease, and make merry.”

But Tristan began to weep and lament,
and Kurwenal with him, till the merchant
and the crew waxed wrathful. So the
took Kurwenal and placed him in a little
boat, with oars and food, and bade him go
where he listed, but Tristan should stay
with them. So they set him adrift, and by}
good hap the current bare him homewards, ‘
and he came to the marshal, and told him.
what had chanced ; and Rual and his wife ;
were sorely distressed, and ran, weeping,
with all their folk to the sea shore. And
as night fell, and they could see nothing,
and knew not whither the ship had taken
its course, they cried lamenting: “ Fair}
Tristan, courteous ‘Tristan, we commend!
thy fair body and soul to God; may He
guard and protect thee!”

Thus the men from Norway bare
Tristan away with them, and deemed they
had got all their will. But as they sailed
there arose a great tempest, and a mighty
16 Eristan and Iseuft


storm-wind blew the ship hither and thither,
so that they could not hold on their course,
but drifted even as the wind drove them.
How the And the great waves now tossed them up
storm to the heavens, now drew them down to
“feree the depths, so that none might stand on
they were their feet. “This they did for eight days
forced to and eight nights, and at length one spake
set Tris- : g Eee ota
tanashore and said: “Surely this is God’s doing, and
a judgment on us for stealing Tristan from
his friends ”—and the others answered of a
truth they deemed it wasevenso.: . - .
So they took counsel together, and de-
termined if the wind and the waves would
‘abate so that they might put into any port,
‘whatsoever it might be, they would touch
ie: the first land they came to, and there
t Tristan ashore, to go whither he would.
And even as they had made their compact
the winds fell, and the sea grew calmer, and
the sun shone once more.
Now, in their eight days’ drifting the
_” had come nigh to the coast Sf Corwall
and, seeing they were near to land, they
drew in, and set Tristan ashore, and gave
him bread and other food, saying: ‘* Friend,
God give thee good fortune.” Thus they
blessed him and went on their way.
FN


Tristan and Jreult 17


Now what did Tristan do? At first he How
sat him down and wept, for he was but a er og,
boy, andall alone ia a strange land. Then Cornwall
he knelt down, and held up his hahds to
heaven, and said, * Dear God, I pray Thee
that Thou wouldst look upon me, and be
gracious to me, and shew me how I may
come where I shall find folk. Here I am
all alone, with no living soul near me, and
I fear me much for this great wilderness,
for I see nothing but wild rocks and sea,

_ and I fear for the wolves lest they devour
me, for the day draws towards eventide.”

Then he bethought him that he would
climb one of the cliffs which were near at
haiid, if by chance from the summit he
might see something of human life, or see
some shelter where he might pass the night.
Now Tristan was richly dressed in a robe
and mantle of silk, green as the grass in
June, and furred with white ermine. He
drew up his robe higher through his girdle,
and folded his mantle, laying it across his
shoulders, and so set out inland.

The way was rough, and there was
neither path mor road hand and foot were
both needed to make his way. So he
climbed over stock and stone till he came

VOL I B
18 Erisfan and Iseuff


out upon the hilltop, and found a curving
path, narrow, and overgrown with grass.
He followed this down to the valley, and it
brought him out on a fair road, wide, and
good for traffic.

The boy sat him down by the roadside
and wept, for he was weary and lonely, and
his heart turned back to his friends and his
country, where he knew the folk and loved
them. “Ah, God,” he said, “I have lost

_both father and mother. Alas! had.I-but
‘left my foolish chess, which I shall hate for
evermore! III luck betide ye all, falcons,
hawks, and merlins! Ye have taken me
from my father, my kin, and all who wished
me well, and now are they all in sorrow for
me. Sweet mother, I know well how thou
art mourning, and thou, too, father! Could
I but let them know that I am living and
in good health! But I know well that
neither they nor I may be joyful till we
have tidings one of the other !’


And met As he sat thus lamenting he saw coming
with two towards him two pilgrims, well on in years,


with long hair and beard. ‘They were clad
in linen garments, with a hood, and scallop
shells and suchlike tokens sewn upon them.
They were barefooted, and held staves in
nm


SY


4


Cristan and Joeuft 19


their hand, and on their back were palm
branches ; and as they went they chanted
their prayers and psalms. As they drew
near to Tristan, and he saw what manner
of men they were, he said joyfully: “ Now
thanks be to Thee, O God. Of these good
folk need I have no fear.” He waited till
ne were so Close they needs must see him,
and then went towards them courteously,
with outstretched hands.

The pilgrims greeted him in kindly wise :
“God save thee, fair friend, whoever thou
mayst be.” :

hen Tristan bowed to the old men, and
said, “ God bless such holy company,” and
they looked on him and said, “ Dear child,
whence art thou, and who has brought thee
hither ?” ; ee ue

Now Tristan was wise and prudent for
his years, and he thought it might be well
not to say what had really chanced.
“ Dear sirs,” he answered, “ I am a native
of this land, and this morning I rode forth
hunting in the wood with my comrades,
and outrode huntsmen and hounds. They
knew the wood-paths better than I, and so /
it chanced that I took a path that led me
astray. I came over this hill, and thought
20 Tristan and Iseult


to lead my horse downwards, but he wrested
the bridle from my hand, and fled back
into the wood. Then I struck this path
that led me hither, but now I know not
where I am, nor whither I should go.
Good sirs, tell me whither ye may be
bound ?”

“Friend,” they answered, “we hope to-
nighe to sleep in the city of Tintagel.”

hen Tristan courteously prayed them
to let him go with them. |

“ Dear child,” said the pilgrims, “ come
with us an thou wilt.”

So he turned with thetn, and they went
on together, and Tristan talked with the
old men, and answered them so readily and
so courteously, that they wondered much
seeing his fair face and his rich dress, atid
said within themselves: ‘Who may this
lad be, who has such courteous manners ? ”
Thus they walked on a tile or so.

How he Now, even as they went, it chanced that
hin ined the hounds of King Mark had that morn-
the men ing chased a stag and slain it by the road-
of King side. The hunters had come up with
Mark them, and were blowing gaily on their
horns. When Tristan saw them he said

to the pilgrims : “Sirs, these be the hounds,
Se


$< —-————— RR


Srisfan and Jseuft 21


the stag, and the folk I lost earlier in the /
day. With your leave I will rejoin
them.”

“God bless thee, lad,” they answered,
“ thou goest to good fortune wherever thou
goest.”

“Fair thanks, good sirs, God keep ye,”
said Tristan courteously, and turned
towards the hunt.

When he came up they were even about
to quarter the stag.

“ Halt!” cried Tristan ; “what wood-
craft is this?”

“**Tis the custom of our land,” said the -:
huntsman. “Canst thou shew us a °
better ?”

“Yea, forsooth,” said Tristan. “In
my land we skin the stag and take out the
entrails ere we cut it up.”

The huntsman looked on the lad, and
saw. he was richly clad and of noble bear-
ing, and being himself courteous, he said,
smiling: ‘See, if thou wilt, thou canst
shew us how these things are done in thy
land. I and my: fellows will gladly! aid
thee.”

Then Tristan laid aside his mantle, and
rolled up. his sleeves, and tucked his flow-
22 Erisfan and Iseufel


And ing curls behind his ears, and bent down
seh over the stag, and shewed the huntsman
sundry how in his northern land they skinned the

secrets of quarry and cleaned it, and cut it up into
cratt its several parts. And when he had
finished, he bade them lay all the pieces
in order on the skin, and take the head in
their hand, and so bear it to their lord.
Then because they were mightily pleased
with his skill and courtesy, they prayed
: him to ride with them to court, and
Tristan said: “’That may I well do.

Take up the stag, and let us hence.”

As they rode together the huntsmen
asked him who he was and whence he
came. And Tristan said: “Far to the
north lies a land, Parmenie—there my
father is a merchant, and hath riches
sufficient to live right well in merchant
wise. A brave man and good is he, too,
and made me learn all that I might.
Often there came to us merchants from
foreign lands, and I learned their speech
and their ways, till at last a desire came
upon me to see the folk and the countries
of which I had heard, and I thought
thereon early and late, till at last I
ran away from my father and came
a eee 8


-—


I a


Tristan and Iseuft 23
a with merchants. Now ye know

‘“°”T’was well done, lad,” said the hunts-
men, “for life in a strange land teaches
men much. Surely that land is blest of
God where a merchant bears such a son as
thou art; no king could have trained his
son better. ‘Tell us, fair youth, how did
thy father call thee?”

“Tristan,” he answered. ‘Tristan is.
my name.” |

“ Nay,” spake another, “ what made him*
call thee thus? Surely thy fair and smiling |
youth might have been better named.”

Thus they rode on, cra. Sai till
they came in sight of the Burg. ‘Then
Tristan brake two boughs from a linden,
and wove them into chaplets for himself
and the chief huntsman.

“Tell me,” he said, “what is yon
castle?” |

“Tintagel,” said the other.

“God keep thee well, Tintagel, and all
the folk within thee,” quoth Tristan.

“A good wish, fair lad, and may fair
befall thee within our walls.”

As they came near to the castle gates
Tristan bade them ride in order, two and
24 Existan and Jseuft


two, and give him a horn that he might
blow a blast thereon. So they passed
through the gateway in fair order, and
Fristan blew a melody on his horn the
like of which they had never heard before,
and all joined in, so that the courtyard rang
again.

How ‘When the king and his courtiers heard
Bees the strange notes they. were startled, and
owing made their way to the palace door to see
tohis who this folk might be, and marvelled
neces much to find that they were but their
own people. And when King Mark saw
Tristan his heart went out to him, though
he knew not that he was of his own blood
and his own kindred, and he greeted him
kindly ; and Tristan answered again in
such wise that Mark wondered, and called

up the huntsmen, and said: |
© Who may this lad be who speaks thus
courteously ??
“Lord,” answered the other, “he is a
( Parmenois, and he says his name is
Tristan, and his father a merchant, but
that I may not believe, for what merchant
would ever have brought up his son in
such courtly wise? He is learned in the
chase, too, and hath shewn us how to skin
7


Eriatan and Ineuft a5
and divide the quarry in such eunning
fashion as, we never knew: before.”

Then the king bade the younger eour-
tiers fetch Tristan into the palace and
bring him before the throne, and he said :

“Tristan, thou must needs do me a
favour, and I will not have it otherwise.”

“It shall be as thou wilt, my: lord.”

“Thou shalt be maaster of my hunt, :
Tristan.”

Then all around laughed gaily, and the
lad answered: “Command me as thou
wilt, lord. Huntsman and servant will I
be to the best ot my power.”

“Then let it be so,” said King Mark. ‘,

Thus Tristan, all unknowing, had come’
to his own people and his mother’s home, .
and yet deemed himself a stranger in a‘
strange land.

King Mark bade the men of his coust
treat the lad kindly, which they were will-
ing enough to do, and he himself loved him
dearly, and wherever ke went would have
Tristan at his side.

One even after meat they sat in the hall,
aad a hagper sang a lay before the king.~-
Tristan listened to. the sweet notes till he
could no loager keep silence.
26 Tristan and Jeeutt ™


OfTris “Master,” he said, “thou harpest well, [ame int


tan’s skill +i; even so that the lay should sound ; peat
in music » 35 made by Britons of Guriin and his isbreis
lady.” :


oth ;
he harper said nothing till the lay was “ad. bry


ended, and then he turned him to the lad


seis
and said: ‘What dost thou know of the —
lay, fair youth? Canst thou sing it? ” And

“Yea, good master,” said Tristan; “DT ite 4, h
was taught it aforetime, but so little skill 14, skill
have I, if dare not play before thee.” x


“Nay, friend,” said the harper, “take " .
this harp, and let us hear how men play in ae g
thy land.”


«
“Is it thy will that I play?” said ae
Tristan. , d
“Yea, fair comrade, harp on.” whic


So Tristan took the harp in his hands} Ha,

that were well skilled to such a task, and a
struck the notes softly, and sang the lay of hen
Graalent and his proud lady ; and Mark aan
sat on his throne and listened, and mar- rand,
velled much at his skill, for indeed, as the’ *' the
old romances tell us, there was no knight | {gue
in those days who could touch the harp 1 They
or make songs and sing them as Tristan ;


could ; and even to this day we have some ‘eek
of the lays he sang. All the courtiers Hh
uh


Google / t






Jseulfvigtan and Iseuft 27


st well, kame into the hall and drew near to
sound; fnearken, for they knew not which was the
and his sweetest, his harping or his singing. And


lay was
the lad} other is there in all this land who can be
y of the} compared with him.” |

2” And King Mark said: “Tristan, may


this skill, and thou with him. Thou shalt
play to me when the night falls; it will
keep thee from slumber, and rejoice us
both.”

“That will I gladly,” said the lad.


Mark.
“That can I of a truth,” said Tristan.
Then all the strangers at court drew
near—men of Norway, Scotland, and
Ireland, Danes and Germans—and to all
jou { of them Tristan spake in their own
gs the | tongue.


night Then King Mark said: “Tristan, in }


, hap | thee is all that I need in my friend;
‘gta? | henceforth will we be comrades. Robes
sot | and horses, as many as thou wilt, canst
ties | thou have, and take here this bracelet and


<l t
1 | ee


they said, each to the other: “ Who is this .
ad who is dwelling among us? For none :


he be honoured of God who taught thee


“And canst thou speak all these tongues And his


: : >” 4 kn
in which these lays be made?” said; per nha


strange
tongues


Ow-
g


ee


28 Tristan and Iseuf
_ this golden horn; dwell here with us, and
be joyful.”

g5 Tristan abode at King Mark’s court,
and was loved of all men. And mean-
while the marshal, Rual, sought through the
wide world to find him.
a > K .
Ne . Pe S ZY; <~ = > <>


—





Tristan and Jseuflt 31


; not return till he might
bring back his young
lord, Tristan. He came
to Norway, and went
y| through the whole land,
s seeking for the boy, but
could hear no tidings of
him. Then he sailed to Ireland, and
sought him there, but in vain; and when
he found his money was well-nigh spent,
he sent his folk home, and sold his horses, ’
and went himself on foot through the
country, till at last, when he had spent all
he had, he was forced to beg his bread
from place to place. Yet he never rested, .
but wandered on from land to land, ever |
hoping to find the boy.

At length, in the fourth year, he came
to Denmark, and as he went from town to
town, asking all he met if they had seen





oR Rual, the marshal, the How
Faith-keeper, had set sail, Sears =eiy
with much money in his sock Trise
ships, vowing he would tan


his young lord, he fell in with the two And how
pilgrims whom Tristan had met in Corn- he fell in


wall, and they told him how they had seen
even such a lad as he described ; and they
$e Tristan and Iseult
told him the time they had seen Aim, and
how he was clad, the fashion of his dies,
his face and his speech, ahd Rual knew
well it could be none other than his foster-
son. And when he heard where they had
parted from him, in Cornwall, and nigh
to Tintagel, he said to himself: *'This
‘surely is the hard of God, for if Tristan
‘be indeed in Cornwall, then has he come
‘to his own land and his own folk, for
Mark, the king, fs his uncle, his mother’s
brother. Now God prosper my journey,
for I must needs seek Cornwall without
delay.”

So he bade farewell to the pilgiims,
thankiiig them for theif guod tidings, and
took itis jourfey to the sea-coast, scarce
resting on his way. But when he care
thither, there was ho ship bound for Corn-
wall, aiid he must it¢eds wait a while.
-And when he found a ship it took hit not
into Cornwall, but to Britain, aid he had
a long journey on foot before he foutid the
place he sought.


Aadeame It was on a Saturday, early in the doy
Pr decoedey that he came to Tintagel, eré the fo


went to Mass, and he took his stand out-
side the Mirster. He would fain have
—j 1.


Sristan and Iseufft 33


asked tidings of the folk around him, but
deemed they would disdain him, being so
worn and travel-stained.

Then King Mark came with a goodl
following to Mass; and Rual looked well
on them, and saw not him whom he
sought. So he took courage, and when
the king left the Minster he spake to an
old man of courtly bearing, and said:
“Sir, of thy good will I pray thee tell me


a


oad


if there be here at court a boy named —


Tristan ?”
“A boy?” said the other. “ Nay, but


eae


there is a young squire, shortly to be made :
a knight, whom the king loves much.


He is courteous and skilled in all knightly
ways; a well-grown youth with brown
curling hair and fair face, a stranger, and
we call him Tristan.”

“Sir,” said Rual, “art thou of the
court ?”

“Yea,” said the other.

“Then I pray thee of thy courtesy do
this thing for me. Say to T


ristan that a


poor man, one of his fellow-countrymen, ;


would fain speak with him.”
So the courtier went his way and told
Tristan, and he came swiftly, and when
vor, ¥ ¢
34 Sristan and Iseul


Of the he saw who it was that sought him, he
joyful cried ; “ Now, blessed be God, father, that
betwees 1 see thee once more!” and laughing for
Rual and joy, he ran to him and kissed him, even as
Tristan 4 ‘son should ; and, indeed, no father on
earth might do more for his son than Rual

had done.

“Tell me, father,” said Tristan, “ how
fares it with my mother? And my
brothers, are they well?”

“In sooth, my son, I know not, for
‘since the day I lost thee I have not set
foot in mine own land, nor seen any
{whom I knew.”

' What dost thou mean, father? And
now I see thee thou art thin and worn,
and poorly clad.”

| Tis for thy sake, son, and for seeking
thee.”

“Then will I repay thee all thy toil.
Come now to the court with me.”

“‘ Nay, son, that may I not. ‘Thou seest
well I am clad in no courtly wise ! ”

“Nevertheless thou must needs come,
that my lord the king may see thee.”

Then Rual thought within himself that

/when King Mark heard all that he could
_tell him, and knew Tristan to be his
Tristan and Iseule€ 35


nephew, he would care little for his torn
clothing ; a messenger who bears good
tidings is ever well clad! So the two
went together to the court, and King
Mark said to Tristan; “Say, Tristan, who \
may this man be? ”

“Tis my father, sire,” said Tristan.

“Ts that so?” asked the king.

“Yea, of a truth.”

“Then shall he be welcome here.”

And with that all the courtiers came
and greeted him kindly, for they saw that
though Rual’s clothes were torn and
threadbare, yet he was tall and stately to
look upon, and had the manner of one well
used to courts.

The king bade them give him fitting |
robes, and made him sit and eat at his own ‘
table, and bade Tristan wait upon him;
but Rual’s greatest pleasure was to look on
the lad whom he had found again. Then
after meat the king questioned Rual as to
how he had come thither, and of his country.

“Lord,” said Rual, ‘’tis four years and
a half since I left my own land, and since
then I have asked tidings of nothing save
of that which I sought, and which hath
brought me hither.”


“~~
30 Trisfan and Jscuff

“ And what may that be?”

“Tristan, my lord, whom thou seest
here. And in sooth I have three sons, by
God’s grace, at home, who are dear to me
as sons may be; were I at home now they
would all be knights, yet had I suffered for
these three one-half ae what I have suffered
for Tristan, who is no son of mine, I had
done much.”

“No son of thine?” said the king.
“How may that be? He calls himself
thy son.”

Rual ree “Nay, lord, mine is he not, yet I am
ree his, for I am his servant.”
Tristan’s l[ristan gazed at him, startled at his
birth to words, and Mark said: “Tell us, why
ixing hast thou left thy wife and thy children,
and suffered so much for him if he be not
thy son?”
And Rual hesitated, wondering if he
might dare tell the truth, and said: “I
might indeed tell thee that which should
; make thee marvel much, yet know not if
_ I dare.”
“Speak on, good friend,” said Mark
kindly. “Say who és Tristan.”
Then Rual’ spake: “Sire, dost thou
remember Rivalin, who came from afar,
i


co


Tristan and Iseuft 37


and dwelt in this court, and how he won -
the love of thy sister Blanchefleur, and
she fled with him? They were wedded
indeed, as I know well, for I was Rivalin’s
man, and should be. now were he living.
But, alas! he fell in fight with his foe,
Duke Morgan, as. thou hast doubtless
heard. And when the tidings came to my
lady her heart brake, and she bare a son,
even Tristan who stands here, and died.”
And ‘Rual burst“into tears’ and wept as he
thought of all the bygone sorrow.

And King Mark himself wept when he }:.
heard of his sister’s death; but Tristan }*

rieved most to think that he might no :
fence: call Rual his father.

Then the marshal went on to tell them
how he had hidden the truth that his}
young lord lived for fear lest Morgan:
should slay the child, and how he had -
named him Tristan for his mother’s 7
sorrow, and brought him up as his own. —
And he told them how he had sent him to
foreign lands to learn all that befitted a
prince, and how he had been stolen by the
merchants, and had come, without know-
ing, to his mother’s land. Then he cw}


alps


from his finger a ring, and gave it to
$8 Sristan and Iseuft


\ Mark, and when the king saw it he knew
it again as one that his father had given
him, and that he had given to his sister
Blanchefleur, and he said :

“Tristan, come hither and kiss me. So

; long as I live will I be a father to thee,

i and thou shalt be mine heir. And for thy

father and mother, God rest their souls,

‘they were true lovers.”
| Then he praised and thanked Rual for
his fidelity, and all the courtiers strove to
shew him honour, but Tristan himself was
but ill pleased.
“This is a wonder, and no great
pleasure,” he said. ‘I hear my father sa

' my father is long since slain, so now am

. fatherless who had two fathers. ‘To-day I
rejoiced, thinking I had found my father,
and now he whom [I had found sobs me of
two—of himself and of him whom I had
never seen |”

} Nay, nay, my son,” said Rual, “thou

‘hast lost nothing. I am thine as I ever
was, and thou hast gained a father in my
lord thine uncle. I would pray that he
make thee knight speedily, and help thee
to win. back thine own lands.”


Mark thought this good counsel, so he °
a








Tristan and Jseult 39
made a great feast, at which Tristan and \


thirty of his comrades were made knights, |
and bade him go back to his own land, and
win it again from Morgan, and then return
to Cornwall. —

So Tristan sailed again northward, and How
all the folk were indeed joyful when they Tristan
saw their lord return with his son, and still aien
more joyful when they knew the truth Parmenie
that Tristan was indeed their rightful
prince, and son to Rivalin, whom they had
loved.

Then Tristan and his comrades dealt |
cunningly, for they learnt where Morgan :
was to be found, and then they rode forth ‘
as if to hunt, but under their hunting
dress they were well armed, and Rual and
his men-at-arms were not far from them.

And as they had purposed, they met the

Duke, and Tristan told Morgan who he ‘

was, and prayed him to yield up the lands |

he had taken. But this Morgan was no And slew
ways minded to do, and he answered Morgan
Tristan scornfully, saying he was no right-

ful prince, for his father and mother had

not been lawfully wedded. At this insult,

which he knew for a lie (since Rivalin

and Blanchefleur had been wedded in the
40 Cristan and Iseuft


\ Minster before Rual and all the nobles),
| ‘Tristan waxed wrathful, and drew his
sword upon Morgan, and smote him
through helmet and head, so that he fell
And wod dead from his steed. Then Morgan’s men
back his attacked Tristan fiercely, but Rual came
kingdom +, his master’s aid, and they beat back
Morgan’s men, and so Tristan became lord

of his own lands once more.

But now his heart was torn in two, for
he loved Rual and his own country, and
yet he longed for Cornwall and _ his
mother’s folk. And he thought how he
had promised to go back to his Uncle
Mark, and be to him son and heir, and it
seemed him well that he should give Par-
menie to Rual to be his and his son’s after
him. And though his people prayed him
to abide with them, yet he held to his
purpose; but ere he sailed away he made
Rual’s two elder sons knights, and com-
mended them to the loyalty of his vassals,
but Kurwenal and twelve of his comrades
would he keep with him, and so he took
ship again for Cornwall. a

Now, when Tristan came again to his
uncle’s kingdom he found all the land’ in
dismay, for Morolt, a mighty champion
Tristan and Iseult 41


from Ireland, had landed in the country,
and demanded from King Mark the tribute
due to Gurmun, King of Ireland.

The story of the tribute was this : Of the
Gurmun of Africa had, with the favour of coming of
the Romans, won Ireland, and defeated 309 the
the men of England and Cornwall while tribute to
Mark was yet a youth. As tribute from Ireland
the defeated. lands he claimed the first year {

a hundred marks of tin, the second year a‘
hundred marks of silver, and the third a
hundred of gold. The fourth year came
Morolt, Gurmun’s brother-in-law, and de-!
manded thirty lads of noble birth, or else a °
champion to fight with him in ‘mortal
combat. But since Morolt was known far
and wide as the fiercest warrior of his time
no man was willing to fight with him.
King Mark sent an embassy to Rome to
pray counsel of the senate, but they could
give him no aid. So whenever it pleased
Morolt to come into Cornwall and demand :
this tribute, little as Mark liked it, the lads ,
were forced to go.

Tristan had heard tell of this when he
dwelt in Cornwall, and now, when he
came back to Tintagel, he found all the -
city in mourning, for the nobles had been
42 Sristan and Joeuff


summoned to court to cast lots and see on
whom the tribute should fall. So when
Tristan came they had but little heart to
give him welcome, for all, from the king
downward, were overcome with grief.
How But for that Tristan cared little; he
Jee made his way boldly into the hall to where
thenobles men drew the lot, and King Mark and
for their Morolt sat side by side. ‘ My lords,” he
coward- said, “all ye here who draw lots and sell
your own children, have ye no shame for
the disgrace ye bring on this land?
Nobles are ye all by birth and bearing;
jyow country should be honoured rather
; than dishonoured by your deed. Yet here
have ye bound yourselves foot and hand
with this shameful tribute. Your children,
who should be your joy and delight, ye
give and have given for slaves and servants,
and can shew but one man who forces ye
to this! For no other necessity is there—
et not one of ye can be found to risk his
ife upon the chance of a combat! For
see, if ye die, death is but short, and soon
over, but this shame and sorrow are en-
during, so the two may not be weighed
the one against the other. And if ye con-
quer and the wrong is vanquished, then have
Sristan and Jseult 43


ye the greater reward in heaven and the |
greater honour on earth. Surely a father |
should give his life for his child, who is his
own life? °*Tis dead against God’s law {
that he should sell his child into slaver
that he may himself live in freedom! If
ye take my counsel, following the laws of '
God and of honour, ye will choose out a |
man from among ye to fight for ye, and
leave the issue of the combat to God.
Morolt may indeed be strong and skilful, 2
but God never yet forsook the man who’;
fought in a rightful cause! Do not this
dishonour to your country and your noble
birth.”

“ Ah, sir,” said they all, “but this man
is not as others: none may prevail against
him.”

Then Tristan answered, “ Let such
talk alone! Do ye forget that ye are all
of noble birth, the equals of king and
kaiser, that ye sell and barter your noble
children, who are even as ye are, to be
body-slaves and thralls? But if indeed
there be no man among ye who dares to
fight for the right in God’s Name against
this ofie man, and ye care to leave the
chance to God and to me, then will / set
44 Tristan and Jseuft
my ljte on this venture. If I fall no man
of ye is one jot the worse, your need is
, neither less nor more than it was; and if I
/ conquer, then may ye thank God and not
ime. For with God and the right on my
side are we three against one, and though
I know not much of knighthood, yet I
trow I may well hold my own!”
“s Now, Morolt heard all this as he sat
| beside King Mark, and was angered at
| heart that Tristan, who looked such a
youth, should speak so valiantly, and he
hated him bitterly.

Then Tristan said again: “Speak, lords
all, what is it your will that I shall do?”

“Sir,” they said, “if it might be that
the chance you have given us come to
good, it would profit us all greatly !”

“Then, since it seems good to ye, I
will e’en try my fortune, and see if God
favoureth me or no.”

Then King Mark rose up and came to
him, and prayed him not to risk his life on
so dangerous a venture; but Tristan would
hearken neither to commands nor to
prayers; he turned to Morolt as he sat, and
spake aloud: “Sir, tell me what dost thou
desire here ? ”
ee, eee:


ener sien


Crisfan and Iseuft 45


“Friend,” said Morolt, “what need to
ask? Thou knowest well what I do here,
and whom I demand.”

Then Tristan said: “Listen, my king
and ye lords. Sir Morolt, thou art rghe— |
I know well why thou art come hither,
and hold it for a shame and a disgrace. !
The tribute has been paid over long. In are
the days when thy folk wasted our lands Morolt
and destroyed our castles and slew our
men, it might not be otherwise; but now
are our lands flourishing, and our men |
many, and we can come with our armies /
and take back that which hath been taken!
from us. If my counsel be followed all
that thy king holds. of ours shall be
restored to the last ring—yea, our tin shall
be paid back in gold! Stranger things
and more unforeseen have come to pass
ere this! God grant me this, for in His
Name do I demand it, and with mine own
hand, if need be, will I carry this banner
into Ireland.”

But Morolt said scornfully : “Sir T'ris- \
tan, the less thou sayest the better for thee.
Brave words may be spoken here, but they
shall not hinder us from taking that to
which we have a right.” Then he turned
FO eens


46 Tristan and Iscult


to the king and said, ‘* King Mark, and all
ye who are here present to settle with me
the tribute, say, am I to take the words
Sir Tristan has spoken as your will, and
your answer to my claim?”

Then they all answered, “Yea, Sir
Knight, what he shall say or do, that is
our will, our pleasure, and our counsel.”

Quoth Morolt: “Ye have broken the
compact, and the oath sworn to my king
and to me !”

““ Nay,” said Tristan, “ thou speakest ill,

Sir Knight ; no faith is broken here. An
oath and a compact was there that tribute
should be sent yearly to Ireland, or that the
matter should be settled by single combat
or by battle. So long as the compact be
kept by tribute or by combat are we
within our rights. Now, Sir Morolt, say,
ishall the matter be settled between us by
lsingle combat or by our armies? Choose
‘which thou wilt : the tribute shalt thou have
no longer.”

And Sir Morolt said: “Sir Tristan, my
choice is swiftly made. Few men have |
with me, too few to fight a pitched battle.
I came here peaceably, as I have come
aforetime, and deemed not that matters
A |


n


Tristan and Iseuft 47


should go otherwise than of yore. I
thought to go hence in all good will, and
with what was rightfully mine. Now hast
thou challenged me to battle, and for that
am I unprepared. But I am no child to
be terrified by thy rough words and threats.
Such pride and boasting have J heard full
often ; we two will.. -It.out, here, and
settle whether thou or I be in the right.”

Then Tristan drew off his glove and —
gave it to Morolt, saying : “ My Ba King
Mark and all ye here present are witnesses
that I demand this combat. I will main-
tain with my hand and sword that neither
Sir Morolt here, nor his king who sent |
him hither, nor any other, hath a right to |
demand tribute of this kingdom ; and may \'
God avenge on this knight here all the
shame and dishonour which this land hath :
suffered.”

Then from many a noble heart there |
went up prayers to heaven that God would |
look upon their sorrow and need, and free |
them from their trouble. But though they
took the combat thus seriously, it seemed to
Morolt but a small matter. ith haughty
countenance he proffered his gage to
Tristan ; in truth the combat was much
48 Sristan and Jeeuft


to his liking, for he held himself bound to
come off victor. .

Ofthe The time was fixed for the third day,
greatfight and as the news spread through the country

between ia ek ng
Tristan the folk came from far and near, till it was
and as if the city were girded about with a
Morolt mighty army. But King Mark was sad
at heart ; rather would he have paid the
tribute all the days of his life than that
Tristan should be slain, yet he scarce saw

how he might escape. And when the da

came he himself, with Kurwenal’s ai.
would arm his nephew for the fight. They
clad him all in white armour, and gave him
a shield white and shining as silver, with
the device of a black boar upon it, and they
brought him a gallant steed, with trappings
all of glistening white, like the armour.
So he came to the place fixed for the com-
bat; "twas a little islet in the sea, near
enough to the city for the folk to see what
went on, but none save the two champions
might set foot upon it. There were two
small boats ready, each of which might
carry an armed man and his steed. Morolt
had already entered one, and taking the
helm sailed over to the island. Landing,
he made fast the boat, and mounted his
Sristan and Iseuff 49


steed, making it prance and caracole on the
strand.

Then Tristan came to his boat, and
stepped in, holding shield and _ spear.
“ King Mark,” he said, “sorrow not so
sore, here must we trust in God. It will
help us naught to be downcast ; our victory
lies not in the chances of knighthood and )
warlike skill, but in the hand of God.
Trouble not for me, for I may well be
victor, I feel so strong of heart. Be thou
the same. Full often things fall out other
than one forebodes. And however it may
be, thy folk and thy land which thou hast
entrusted to me, thou hast trusted them
rather to God Who goeth with me. He
will bring right to the right. It is not I,’
but God, Who goeth to conquer, or to be ;
conquered.” /

With that Mark gave him his blessing,
and he pushed off from land. As he came
to the shore he let his boat float whither it
would, and mounted his steed, careless of
its fate.

“What doest thou?” said Morolt.
“Why hast thou set thy boat adrift ? ”

“Why?” quoth Tristan. ‘“ Here of a
truth be two men and but one boat, but it

VOL I D
50 Cristan and Joeuff


/ may be we shall both abide here, and if not

; both, of a surety one shall lie here dead, and
methinks he who remaineth victor shall find
the boat that brought thee over enough
for his return ! ”

“ Of a truth,” said Morolt, “ if the fight
go on it may not be otherwise, but if thou
wilt withdraw thy challenge, and yield me
my right of tribute over this land, so that

\we leave this island as friends at peace with
‘each other, it will be to thy profit. Other-
ine I shall slay thee, and that were a pity,
for never saw I a knight who pleased me
better.”

Then the valiant Tristan answered : “ If
we are to be at peace the tribute must no
longer be paid.”

“ Nay,” said the other, “I will have no
peace at such a price; the tribute must go
with me.”

“We waste o’ermuch time in idle talk,”
quoth Tristan. ‘ Morolt, since thou art
so certain of slaying me, look well to thy-
self, for fight we must.”

With that they set spurs to their steeds,
_and with lance in rest rode straight at each
| other, and each smote the other so full on
the shields that the spears splintered into a


an,
= aa


Tristan and Iseuft 51


thousand pieces, and the knights drew Of Tris
forth their swords, and fought fiercely even *@0’s P
as they wereon horseback. Each had as it Y°"
were the strength of four men, and but for |

his good shield Tristan might scarce have ;
escaped Morolt’s onslaught. As it was, in
defending himself he held the shield too

high, and Morolt’s sword cut through the
armour, and laid_Tristan’s thigh bare, so

that the blood’spurted forth. “"

“How now!” said Morolt, “wilt thou
yield? See’st thou one cannot defend the
wrong, and thou art in the wrong, as this |
wound well shews. Think, too, how thou
wouldst be cured of thy hurt. For I teil A
thee, Tristan, this wound shall be thy
death, for .the sword was poisoned with a
deadly poison, and no leech nor leechcraft. _
can heal thee, saving only my. sister Iseult, &-
the Queen of Ireland. She knoweth the ©
virtues of all plants, and many secrets of
healing ; she can heal thee, but none other
‘on earth can. Yield thee to me, and grant
my right to the tribute, and my sister the
queen shall heal thy wound, and I will
share with thee, as a true comrade, all that
I possess, and refuse thee nothing on which
thou mayst set thine heart.”
52 Tristan and Jseuft
, But Tristan spake: “ My train and my
! honour will I give up neither for thee nor

/ for thy sister. I have here, in my free
: hand, the freedom of two lands ; they shall
go hence with me, or I must first suffer
greater harm, or even death. I am not
driven to such straits by one wound alone
that I should yield me here and now!
> The strife between us is yet undecided,
; and the tribute. is thy death or mine—nor
may be otherwise.”

: ‘Then, confident in God and the right,
/ Tristan’s courage waxed anew : he spurred
‘ his horse against Morolt, and smote him

with such force that knight and steed fell

to the ground; and as he strove to rise

Tristan was on him, and smote his helmet

from his head. But Morolt was strong
‘ and skilful, and he sprang free from the

fallen steed, and ran to Tristan and smote
his horse a blow that brought it to the
earth, for he thought to give himself time
to remount and rehelm. So he cast his
shield on his back and took his helmet in
one hand, and with the other he caught
hold of the saddle-bow, and set his foot in
the stirrup to mount. But ere he could
do so Tristan was upon him, and smote
-}


oA i ag 2


Cristan and JIseuff 53


him so fiercely that the hand that held the
sword fell with a clang of metal to the
ground, and he smote him again on the
head, so that the sword clave through the
steel cap, and as he drew it back with a
mighty heave a piece of the blade brake,
and remained sticking in the skull, the
which afterwards brought much sorrow to
Tristan, and had well nigh been his death.
Morolt staggered and fell, weaponless and
powerless. .
“How now? How now?” said Tris- And the
tan. ‘Say, Morolt, dost know the token ? death of
Methinks thou art sorely wounded ; it Morclt
goeth ill with thee, I ween! However it
may be with my wound, thou needest good
leeching |! Whatever skill thy sister Iseult :


if


may have, thou hast need of it all wouldst |


uy ee ad


thou recover. God hath shewn the right,
and made manifest thy wrong ; let the rest _
be in His care, but now is thy pride fallen.” .
With that he came nearer, and took his _
sword in both hands, and smote off Morolt’s '*.
head.
Then he gat him to the shore, where he
found Morolt’s boat; he entered and rowed
toward the haven and the folk who awaited
him. There by the sea he heard great joy
ne,


54 Tristan and Jsceuft
and great lamentations—joy fot his victory,


for it was a blessed day to the men of


Cornwall. They clapped their hands, and
praised God, and sang hymns of victory to
heaven. But the stranger folk, they who
had come with Morolt from Ireland, they


‘wrung their hands, and wept aloud for
grief. They thought them ’twas time to


betake them to their ships; but as they
came to the haven they met Tristan, and
he said: “Sirs, turn aside, and take the
tribute ye see yonder on the meadow.


Bear it with ye to your king, and say that
‘my uncle, King Mark, and his land, send


him this present, and therewith make
known to him that if it be his will to send
his messengers hither for such tribute, we,
on our part, will not let them return
empty-handed, but will send them hence
with such honour as we have done to


i Morolt.” And as he spake he held his


shield so that the bloody signs of his wound
were hidden from the strangers—and that
hereafter stood him in good stead.

So the men of Ireland departed from the
land, and sailed first to the island, where


they found but a mutilated corpse for their
-lord, and they took up the doleful gift they
A i re = meg


Tristan and. Iseuft 55


were bidden to bear to their king, Morolt’s How the
body, his head and hand, and with wailing men of
and lamentation set sail for their own Bin
country. When they came to Ireland they back to
delivered the corpse to King Gurmun, their own
even as they were bid, and the king was Orde. :
wroth, and sorely grieved, for in this one wrath of
man he had lost heart and courage, strength cuenime
and counsel. But the queen, Morolt’s Sorrow of
| Sister, her grief and lamentation were even Queen
“greater; she and her daughter Iseult lseult
‘mourned even as is the way of women”
when they have a sorrow that goeth near

to their heart. They kissed the head and
the hand that had made so many lands
tributary to them, and looked well on the
deadly wound in the head. And as they
looked the wise queen saw the splinter of _
the sword yet fast in the skull, and she
drew it forth, and she and her daughter
wept over it, and laid it aside in a iittle
casket—and that same splinter thereafter.
brought Tristan in deadly peril. So
Morolt was buried, and the King Gur-
mun caused a decree to be _ published
throughout all Ireland that whoever should

land on the Irish shores from Cornwall, man

or woman, should be slain ; and though
56 Tristan and Iseuff
they should offer gold as a ransom for their
life, no ransom should be taken—yet that
was little use, since Morolt lay dead,
and no decree might bring him to life
again.
i Cena ay


Go gle


Sristan and Iseuft 59


ow when Tristan set foot

again on the shore the

people came to meet him

in their thousands, on

horse and afoot, and wel-

comed him gladly ; *twas

the fairest day king and
4 kingdom had ever known,
for their sorrow ~ and
shame were done away,
and he had won them
honour in their stead. And they lamented :
over the wound that Morolt had given him, -
but Tristan made light of it and said it How
would soon be healed. So they led him Sti
into the palace, and disarmed him, and laid Wiohe in
him on a soft couch and sent for physicians no wise
to heal him. But to what end? Though be healed
they summoned the most skilful leeches
from all the lands around, not one of them
had skill enough to aid him, for the poison \
was of such subtle venom that they could :
not bring it from the wound, but it spread
all over his body, and his colour and his
look were so changed one might scarce
know him.

Little by little Tristan learnt the truth

of Morolt’s words, and indeed he had heard
60 Sristan and JIseuft


Saforetime of the beauty and wisdom of
/ Queen Iseult, for the fame of her had
spread into all countries, and men spake of
her as “Jseult the fair, Iseult the wise,
bright as the dawn in eastern skies.”

So Tristan began to turn the matter
over in his mind: he saw well if he were
to be cured it could only be by the skill of

So he be- the Irish queen, and yet how he might in
gcooeeet safety come to her he knew not. Yet
to Ireland though he knew ’twould be a question of
and seek his life, he said to himself: “ Better be in
peril, or even dead, than live in this misery
of and torment.” So he set his mind firmly
the queen that he would seek the queen, let hap what
might. Then he sent for his uncle, King

Mark, and told him everything, from be-

ginning to end, as a friend does to his

friend, and told him how he purposed in

his heart to take Morolt’s counsel, and seek
healing at the hand of Queen Iseult. And

i the king liked it both ill and well, for one

‘ must put up with trouble if needs be, and

of two evils a man will choose the least ;

but they were at one mind between them

as to what it were wisest to do if he took

this journey, that they should keep it secret

that he went to Ireland, and say that he


at
Sriafan and Jseuft 61


had gone for a while to Salerno, and would
abide there till his wound was healed.

Then they sent for Kurwenal, and told ~
him what they purposed, and Kurwenal :
thought it good, and said he would go with !
Tristan, and die with him if need be. So
when it was evening they made ready a
bark for the journey, and provisioned it
well, and bare Tristan to the ship with |
many tears, and as much secresy as they
could, so that few knew anything of his
going. He commended all his folk to the
care of his uncle, King Mark, and bade
him see that none departed ere tidings came
of how he had fared, and he took his harp
with him and nothing more.

So he set sail, with but eight men who
had set their lives upon the venture ; and
Mark looked long and sadly after them, for ;
all the joy of his life had sailed hence with |
Tristan.

Then Tristan sailed night and day, till
they drew near to the shores of Ireland ;
and when the land was well in sight he
bade the captain steer for the chief city,
Dublin, for there he knew the queen had )
her dwelling. And when they were near
enough to see it well the captain spake:
OF Tris-
tan’s
coming to
Ireland


62 Eristan and Iscuft


“ Master, I see the city: what dost thou
counsel ?”

And Tristan said: ‘“ Let us anchor here
till evening be past and the night well
advanced.” So they cast anchor and rested
through the evening.

When night came he bade them row
closer to the city, and when they were but


half a mile from shore Tristan bade them


clothe him in the poorest garments they
could find in the ship, and set him in the
little boat they had brought with them, and
give him his harp and enough victuals to
ast three or four days. And when all this
was done he called Kurwenal and the
sailors to him, and said: ‘ Friend Kur-
wenal, take thou this ship and this people
for thine own, and care for them well and
kindly for my sake, and when thou art
come again reward them well, and bid
them keep secret what has happened here.
And do thou return home, and greet my


‘uncle, and tell him that I am living, and
. trust, P| God’s grace, to be made whole.
l


‘He sha


a
oe


in no wise grieve for me, for if all
go well I shall see him again within this
year. But say in the court and abroad
that on the way hither I died of my. sick-
; Ee et eer aT eN: CENCE
2. oo — - a


Cristan and Iseult 63


ness. And as for my folk who are there,
see thou keep them together, and wait for
the year’s grace, and if I come not in that
time then take my men and get thee home
to Parmenie, to Rual my dear father.
Tell him from me that I pray him to
reward my love and faith in him by his |
love to thee; and for all that have served
me faithfully pray him to give them thanks
and reward according to their service.
Now, dear friends, I commend ye all to
God; go your way and set me afloat; I
must throw myself on God’s grace. ”Tis |
time ye save life and limb by flight, for it
draweth near to morning.”

So with many tears and lamentations
they set him afloat on the wild sea; never
was there a sadder parting! He who has
won and lost a faithful friend will know
how deep was Kurwenal’s sorrow; yet, |
though his heart was heavy, he must needs
sail homeward even as his lord bade him.

And Tristan was left all alone, floating .
hither and thither till the morning light; ’
and when the day broke and the men of
Dublin saw the rudderless boat tossing on
the waves they bid men put out from the
haven and see what it might be. When
64 Svistan and Iseuft


they drew near there was no man to be
, seen, but from the boat came the sound of
| harping and the sweetest singing they had
ever heard, and they rested on their oars
to hearken. Yet, sweet as the song was,
Tristan’s heart was not in it, but he sang
as a martyr, out of his sorrow and
suffering.

When the music stayed the ship drew
nearer, and the men caught hold of the
little boat, and looked, and saw him lying
therein, ill clad and worn with sickness,
and marvelled much that he could make
such sweet music; and they greeted him
kindly, and prayed him to tell them who
he was and how he came thither.

How he. Then Tristan said: “I was a minstrel,
see sart and well skilled in all kinds of music, and
anuinstre| in such jests and sport as are the manner

of courts, and thereby I won much money,
and having much desired yet more. So I
\ turned my thoughts to merchandise—
' which thing has undone me. For I took
a comrade, a rich merchant, and we two
loaded a bark in Spain and would sail to
‘Brittany ; but on the sea a robber-ship
jassailed us, and slew my comrade the
merchant, and all our people, great and
Cristan and Iseult 65


‘small, so that I alone escaped, living, but
with this wound. And this was by virtue
of my harp, for when I told them how
that I was but a minstrel they gave me for
my prayers this little boat, and food
whereon I have lived till now. Forty
days and forty nights have I floated, in
much pain and suffering, wherever the
winds drove me or the waves bare me, and
I know not where I may be, nor what it
were best todo. Now, sirs, I pray ye help
. me, and may God reward ye.”

“Friend,” said the messengers, ‘thy
sweet voice and thy music shall bring thee
to profit, thou shalt no go ad float without
comfort or counsel. hatsoever hath
brought thee hither, whether it be the
guidance of God or the chance of wind
and wave, we will bring thee to where
thou shalt find folk.” And so they did,
for they towed him into the harbour, and
made the boat fast, and said: “Sir Mins-
trel, look well on this castle and this fair
town beside it; dost know what town
it is?”

“ Nay, sirs, I know not what it may be.”
“So will we tell thee; thou art at
Dublin in Ireland.”


VOL z
ee


ttt heen


eee eer


66 Sristan and Iseuft


“Then praises be to God, who hath
brought me to a kindly folk, for surely
there will be some among ye who will aid


- me in my need.”


With that the boatmen began to tell
their fellows all that had chanced ; how,
as they drew near to the boat, they had


-heard so sweet a harping and song that


the choirs of heaven could scarce be
sweeter, and how it was but a poor min-
strel, wounded even to death. ‘ Ye may
see from his look he can scarce live over
the morrow, and yet in all his suffering
he has so brave a courage that one might
search through all lands without finding a
heart that would bear so heavy a misfortune
as if it were so light a matter.”

So the citizens went and spake with
Tristan, and he answered them even as he
had answered the sailors, and they prayed
him to sing to them, and he did after their
bidding. And when they saw how, in


’ spite of his deadly wound, he could yet


play and sing so sweetly, they were moved
with pity, and they bade bring him from
his ship and bear him to a physician, and
say that he should take him into his house
and do all he might for his healing, and
Sristan and Iseulf 67


they would pay the cost. And this the
did; but though the physician put forth all
his skill it helped Tristan but little.

Now, the tale of the coming of the How
minstrel, of his deadly wound and his tidings of
sweet singing, was spread abroad through Sunded
all the city, and among those who came to minstrel
see the stranger was a certain priest who bahpobalan
was himself skilled in all manner of music, the queen
and knew many a foreign tongue. He}
was of the queen’s household, for he had
taught her from her youth, and from him ‘
she had learned much of her skill, and she ;
would now have him to teach the Princess |
Iseult, her only child. When he saw how
courteous ‘Tristan was, and what a skilled
musician, he pitied his suffering, and went
his way to the queen, and told her that
there was a minstrel in the town, sorely
wounded, and dead even while he lived,
yet that never man born of woman might
equal his skill in music, or his courage.

“ Ah, noble queen,” he said, “could we
but bring it about that thou shouldst see
him, for ’tis nothing but a marvel that a
dying man can harp and sing with such
sweetness when he knows that no skill or
counsel can aid him. For cured he may
68 Eristan and Iseuft


not be; the physician who has had him in
his care has now ceased to do aught for
him—skilful as he is, ’tis a case beyond his
wisdom.”

“See,” said the queen, “TI will tell my

~ chamberlain, if he may still bear it, and
can endure that man handle him and move
him, that he have him carried up here to

us, and we will see if any skill can aid him,
or if he be past cure.”

This was done even as the queen com-

_ manded ; and when she saw Tristan, and

| beheld his wound and his appearance, she

«knew the poison, and cried: “Ah! poor
minstrel, thou art wounded with a poisoned
weapon !”

“T know not,” said Tristan, “I cannot
say what it is; but hitherto no skill of
leechcraft has profited me. I know not
what I can do more, save commit myself

-~ to the care of God while life may last.
But may He reward all who shew me
kindness in this my need, for indeed I
need help sorely. I live, and yet am
dead.”

Then the queen asked him: “ Minstrel,

. what is thy name ?”
 J.adv, my name is Tantris.”


wee
SL ae
RN


Tristan and Iseuft 69

“Tantris, now trust thyself to me, I
myself will be thy physician ; be of good
courage, and thou shalt do well.”

“T thank thee, sweet queen. May thy
lips ever be young, and thy heart never
know sorrow ; may thy wisdom endure to
give help to the helpless, and thy name be
honoured on earth.”

“'Tantris,” said the queen, “if thou art
not too feeble, which would be no marvel, |
wounded as thou art, I would fain hear .
thee play on the harp; in that I have heard
thou art most skilful.”

“¢ Nay, lady, my wound hinders me not;

I will do right willingly what becomes thy
servant.”

With that they brought his harp, and
sent for the fair young Princess Iseult that |
she might hear this skilful minstrel ; and :
indeed ‘Tristan played and sang better than
ever he had done before, for he hoped that
now his suffering was well-nigh at an end ;
and he sang with such a good courage and
so brave a spirit that he won the hearts of
all who heard him.

Then the queen said: “Tantris, it may ,
be that I can heal thy wound, and on my
side I would ask somewhat of thee. Here
70 Sristan and Iseuft


How the is my daughter Iseult, she is but young,

queen but already has she learnt some measure of

Peo heal(SKill in music and poetry. ‘Teach her what
Tantrisithou knowest, for thou canst do so better
ithan her master or I can, and I in pay-
ment will give thee back life and limb,
whole and sound, for both are in my
hand.”

“ Yea,” said the minstrel, “if it be so
that I may be healed by my singing, then,

the help of God, healed id will be!

air queen, if it be indeed thy will that I
should teach thy daughter, then I think I
shall do well, for I have read much, and I
know well that no other minstrel of m

ears is as skilled in many instruments as I.
hat thou desirest of me is done, so far as
lies within my power.”

So the queen prepared for him a chamber,
and therein every day she caused him to be
carefully tended and nursed. And now
Tristan profited by the wisdom _and_fore-
sight that had bidden him hide his wound

\ beneath his shield from the eyes of the
strangers, so that none of Morolt’s men
when they sailed from Cornwall had an
thought that he was wounded. For if
they had known the truth of his wound,


oasis
Cristan and Ioeuft 71


as they knew of that which slew Morolt,
it had scarce gone so well with the
knight ! 3
he wise queen set all her thought and
her skill to work to see how she might
bring about Tristan’s healing. She tended
him day and night, and yet she hated him l
more than she pee her own life. But
she had no thought that this was her foe,
and the man who slew her brother ; had |


o~


™!.


she known she would rather have helped
him to death than to life. |

Thus, not to make my tale too long, . .
within twenty days the poison had gone «
forth, and the wound was healing ; and
every day the young Princess Iseult came Of the
and sat beside the minstrel’s couch, and bien eae
learned of him all he might teach of music aap
and song. And the princess knew much
already ; she could speak both French and
Latin, beside her own Irish tongue, and
play on the lute and harp and sing ee
but under Tristan’s teaching she grew daily
more skilful, and more learned in courteous
' ways ; till by the time he had dwelt among
them half a year all the land spake of the
beauty and wisdom and courtesy of the ,
Princess Iseult ; and all the strangers who '
72 Tristan and Iseuft


came to her father’s court listened in
wonder to her sweet singing, for there was
no secret of song or carol, pastoral or
roundelay, in which she was not versed.
; But now Tristan’s wound was healed,
ys and his strength and beauty had come back
to him, and day by day he was vexed with
fears lest some one of the Irish should
know him again ; and he turned it over in
his mind how he might with courtesy take
leave of the queen and princess, for he mis-
doubted him much that they would not let
him go, and yet he knew that he only
abode there at risk of his life. So he de-
termined what he would do, and one day
he went and knelt courteously before the
queen, and said : “ Dear and gracious lady,
may God in His eternal kingdom reward
thee for all the help and aid thou hast
given me. Thou hast dealt with me so
well and kindly that wherever I may be I
will sing thy praises, and be thy servant as
long as I may live. And now, my queen,
let me with thy good will go forth to mine
own land, for my matters stand so that I
dare no longer be absent.”
The queen laughed, and said: “Th
flattery goeth for naught, Tantris ; I will
Cristan and Iseulf 73


~ not grant thee leave. Know that I let
ge ene, oh the full year be ~.
sped.

“* Nay, noble queen, bethink thee of the
rights of marriage and of true love ; for I
have at home a wedded. wife, whom I love
as my own soul, and I know well that she
deems me of a surety to be dead, and what
I fear is, lest, thinking me to be dead, she
be wedded by her parents to another—then
shall all joy and gladness be over for me.”

“Of a truth,” said the queen, “ T'an- How the
tris, thou hast cause for care, and it doeth ee
thee honour ; husband and wife none should genare,
part. Loath as I am to lose thee, yet I from Ire-
el not withhold my consent ; go freely, !and
and I and my daughter Iseult will ever be
thy friends ; and for thy journey will we
give thee two marks of good red gold.”

Then the minstrel folded his hands in

homage, to both mother and daughter.
“God give ye both favour and honour ;”
and without more words he left them and
took ship for England, and from England
he made his way home to Cornwall.
Digitized by Gox gle


Original from


HARVARD UNIVERSITY


‘\


E aeeeren





How Cascay salen ¢
che secowa Time Wee
<i rede sa slew
e dragon é shamca
the seyeschal se WoL
the priicess Iseulc
be Cyt Many ’s Oniae





4 Jey LNs
gs Fd \hy,


5 ee Wig So Po
- r = 6 ~


Digitized by Goc gle


Original from


HARVARD UNIVERSITY


NY


Cristan and Iseult 77


(RGR OW when Mark his uncle, How
® as yi) and all the folk of the Tristan
INK WA; |

, SE, )


















land, knew that Tristan a cay


had returned safe, and wall and
healed of his wound, bare
there was great joy and iebeae
gladness throughout the of the
kingdom. Princess
The king asked him seult
how it had chanced, and
he told him all the story
from beginning to end, and they laughed
and made great jest over his journey to
Ireland, and his healing at the hand of his
enemy, and said ’twas the most marvellous
tale they had ever hearkened. And when
they had laughed over it well they asked
him of the Princess Iseult.
“Tseult,” he said, “she is so fair a’
maiden that all that we hear of beauty is \
but as an idle tale compared to her. No
child nor maiden of woman born was ever
so fair to look upon. Erewhile I read that
Aurora’s daughter, and her child fair Helen,
were the fairest of all women, that in them
was gathered all beauty, as in a flower.
Such a tale do I believe no longer. Iseult
has robbed me of all faith in it. The sun
78 Eristan and Jseult


of beauty dawned not in Greece, it hath
risen in our own day, and the hearts and
eyes of all men turn to Ireland where the
sun is born of the dawn—lIseult, daughter
of Iseult. From Dublin doth it shine
forth to gladden all men. Nor does her
beauty lessen that of other women, rather
through her fairness is all womankind
honoured, and in her fame all women are
crowned.”

And all who heard Tristan speak telt
their heart refreshed within them, even as
the May dew refreshes the flowers.

Of the So Tristan took up his life again, for it
jealousy was as if new life had been granted to him,
mon of and he was as a man new born. But little
Cornwall:by little envy crept into the hearts of the
courtiers, and they waxed jealous of the
‘honour and love in which Tristan was held,
and a whisper went round among them
:that he was a sorcerer, and his victory over
‘Morolt and his good luck in Ireland had

been brought about by magic.

“Tell us,” they said, “ how did he escape
from so fierce a foe as Morolt? How did
he deceive Iseult, the wise queen, so that
she tended him diligently with her own

_hand till his wounds were healed? A sor-
Cristan and Iseuft 79


cerer is he who can thus blind the eyes of \
men, and bring toa good ending every-
thing to which he sets his hand ! ”

So they took counsel together, and be- ‘'
sieged Mark early and late with their .
prayers beseeching him to take to himselt |
a wife, so that he might have an heir, |
whether son or daughter.

But Mark said: “God hath given us a
valiant heir already ; may he live long!
Know ye that while Tristan is alive there
shall be neither queen nor lady at this my
court.”

Then was their envy and hatred greater |,
than before, so Cen that they could no |
longer hide it from ‘Tristan, but often ;
threatened him by word and gesture, till he
feared for his life at their hands. And at
last he spake to his uncle Mark, saying he
would do well to give the lords their will,
else sooner or later they would surely slay
him by treachery.

But the king said: ‘ Be silent, nephew
Tristan, that will I never do. I ask no
heir but thee ; and as for thy life, have no
fear of that. What is their ill-will to thee?
Such is ever the lot of a brave man. For
worth and envy, they are even as mother


me
80 Eristan and Iseuff


; and child, the one must needs give birth to
' the other. Who is more hated than the
(lucky man? ’Tis a poor fortune that
never saw envy! Go thy way, and know
thou shalt never be free from envy: if
thou wouldst have the bad love thee, then
must thou sing their song, and deal their
dealing, so will they cease to hate thee !
Counsel me no more to that which may
turn to thine own harm ; in this will I
follow neither them nor thee ! ”

“Lord and uncle,” said Tristan, “give
me leave to withdraw from court, for in
sooth I see not how to shield myself from
their ill-will, and rather than have a king-
dom the holding of which shall cost me so
much care and thought will I be landless!”

Then when Mark saw he was fully in
earnest, he said : °° Nephew, I had fain have
kept faith with thee, but thou wilt not
have it so. Now, whatever chances here-

_ after, shalt thou hold me guiltless. I am
ready to do all thou wilt; say, what dost
' thou require of me? ”
_ And Tristan said: “Call together thy
‘council, who have aided thee hitherto, ask
them what they deem good for the present
need and do after their advice.”
Tristan and Jaeuff 81


So this was done, and the lords came to-
gether and took counsel among themselves,
and said that the king should wed the \
Princess Iseult, for by the fame that had How the
gone abroad of her wisdom and beauty they men of
deemed her a fitting wife for their king. ne silailore
Then they chose a spokesman who should Kin
declare their wishes, and he said: ° Sire, we Mark to
have heard tell of the Lady Iseult of Ireland, Po
how that she is a maiden in whom all Iseuie
womanly beauty finds its crown. Yea,
thou thyself hast heard how she is perfect
alike in soul and body. If it may so be
that she become thy wife and our queen,
we ask nothing better on earth.”

And King Mark said: “* How may that ;
be, my lords? Even if I desired her as a:
wife, how might it be brought about!
Ye know well how matters stand between
the two countries: Gurmun hates me from),
his heart, and with good reason, for so do
I hate him. How then may there be so
close an alliance between us?”

“Lord,” they said, “it doth often
happen that when two lands are at strife
peace is brought about through the chil- }
dren, and a great friendship groweth from
a bitter enmity. Think the matter over,

VOL I Fr
82 Tristan and Jseuft


for it may well be that Ireland becometh
thine. here are but the three there ; the
king and queen have no heir save Iseult,
she is their only child.”
« Then Mark answered: “Of a sooth
Tristan has made me think much of the
‘maiden ; since he praised her so she has
often been in my mind, and ’tis true that
the thought of her pleases me above all
other maidens. I swear if I may not have
«her to wife I will have no other woman on
vearth!” Now, Mark said this not be-
| cause he really desired Iseult, but because
he thought there was little chance that the
marriage should be brought about.
Then the councillors spake further :
“‘ My lord king, if it please thee that Sir
Tristan here, who knows the court of
_ Ireland well, serve as thy messenger, then
:the matter will surely be brought to a good
:end. He is wise and skilful in such
‘matters, and, what is more, fortunate in all
he takes in hand. He knows all tongues,
and will bring to an end what should be
ended.”
= “Ye counsel ill,” said Mark; “ye are
\too jealous for Tristan’s peril and hurt.
He has been well-nigh dead once for ye
Cristan and Joeuflt 83


and your children, and ye would now slay
him again. Nay, men of Cornwall, go
ye yourselves, I send my nephew no
more |”

“Sire,” said Tristan, “herein they do
not speak amiss. “Iwere fitting that I
should be more ready and willing to such a
task than another man, and ’tis right that
I should go. Uncle, bid me go, and none
will do thine errand better than I. But
do thou command that these lords, too, go
with me, that together we may watch over
thine interest and thine honour.”

“‘ Nay, since God hath sent thee home
safely, thou comest no more into the land
or the power of thy foes.”

“Uncle, it must needs be so; and,
whether for good or for ill these lords must [A
needs go with me and see if it be my blame’ ©
that thy kingdom is without an heir!
Bid them make ready, and I will myself be
steersman and guide them to that happy
Ireland, and to Dublin, whence shines
forth the sun in which the joy of many a
heart is hid. Who knows if the maiden
be ours? And, sire, if thou dost win fair
Iseult twill be little loss to thee if we all
die on the quest.”
How
Tristan
and the

nobles set


84 Tristan and Iseuft

When Mark’s councillors heard how
Tristan spake, never in their lives were
they so sorrowful; but ’twas too late: the


sail for thing was and must be so. ‘Tristan bade
Ireland to them choose twenty of the king’s most


woo the
princess


wae He,


valiant knights, and of the folk of the land
and strangers he hired sixty, with twenty
lords of the council, so that the whole
company numbered one hundred; and
they provisioned the ships well, and set
sail over sea.

But the barons were ill pleased at the
journey, and heavy at heart. Many a time
they wished that they had said no word of
Ireland and the Princess Iseult, for now


their own lives were in danger, and they


saw no way of escape. They had but the


Choice of two things: to carry the matter


through either by daring or by cunning ;
and they liked neither: Nor could they
think of any fitting ruse, but they said
among themselves: “This Tristan hath
wisdom and courage enough, and good
luck too. If he will but put a curb on his
blind rashness he may escape, and we with
him. Yet is he so bold and so daring, he
cares not a jot either for our lives or his
own. Still, our best chance is in his good
Cristan and Jseuff 85


fortune ; his wit must find a way out of ~~
this peril.”

Now they drew near to the coast of Of their
Ireland, and one told them that the king coming to
abode in the harbour of Whiteford. So !¢land
Tristan bade them cast anchor far enough |
' from the haven to be out of bowshot;_
and the lords prayed him earnestly to tell
them how he would set about his wooing,
for their lives were in danger, and they
would fain know what was in his mind.

And Tristan said: “Have a care that ,
none of ye be seen by the landsfolk, save ’
the serving-men and seamen only; they
must remain on deck, but do ye abide in
the cabin and keep hidden. t will shew
myself, for I know their tongue; the
citizens will send out and question us, and
I must lie to them as I best can, for if ye
bé’seen, then shall we have strife straight-
way, and none of us will get to land.

And while I am absent on the morrow,
for I think to ride forth early and see what
may chance, Kurwenal, and another who
knows the tongue, will keep guard over ye.
But mark this: two days, or perchance’
three, shall I be absent ; after that, if I;
come not, wait no longer, but flee away


oe
™.,


7 ee


86 Eristan and Iseuff


over seas and save yourselves, for I shall’
have paid for my wooing with my life.
Then can ye counsel your lord to wed as
ye may like—this is my thought and my
purpose.” |

Now the marshal of the King of Ireland, /
under whose care both town and haven lay, |
came down in full armour, with a body of
men, as the decree bade him, that he might
ask of all new comers to the haven if they
were from King Mark’s land or no, and if
they were, to put them to death. When
Tristan saw them he put..on such a
hood asa man might wear on a journey,
that his face might be the better hidden,
and took a cup of red gold, worked in the
English fashion, and entered a little boat,
with Kurwenal to row him, and made for
the shore, greeting them with courteous
gestures,

When the folk saw the boat they all ran
together, shouting: “To land! to land!”

‘Tristan put into the harbour, and said :
“Good folk, what mean this roughness,
and these threatening gestures? I know
not what I have done amiss. If there be
any one in authority here I pray that he will
speak with me,”
Tristan and Iseulf 87


“Yea,” said the marshal, “here am I, |
and I must needs know whence ye come
and whither ye go ve

“Of a sooth,” said Tristan, “an thou How
wilt bid this folk keep silence so that I may Tristan
be heard, I will tell thee mine errand eae
gladly.” And when they were silent, he
went on: “Sir, we are merchants, I and
my fellows, and..come..from Normandy.
Our wives and children are with us in the
ship, and we go hither and thither, from
land to land, buying such things as we have
need of. Within this thirty days I and
two other merchants set sail to go to Spain,
and about an eight days agone a storm arose
which sae us, and drave me north-
wards, I know not how the others have
fared, whether they be living or dead; I
had much ado to escape with my life.
Yesterday at noon the wind fell, and I
knew the look of the coast, so came
hither to rest me. And at daybreak I
made for Whiteford, for I know the town,
and have been here aforetime with mer-
chants. But if this folk will not be at
peace with me I must perforce set sail '
again, though I have much need of rest. -
Yet if thou wilt let me land, then what
88 Sristan and Iseuft


good fortune I may find will I freely share
with thee, that I and mine may remain in
peace while I seek my friends ashore, and
see if I may here do some trading. Bid
thy men beat peace, for they are all putting
off in boats, wherefore I know not. Other-
wise, I go back to my men, and fear ye all
not one straw.”

Then the marshal bade his men return
to land, and said to the stranger: “ What
will ye give the king if I protect your lives
and goods in this land?”

“Sir, whatever our gains may be, I will
; give a mark of red gold for each day we
sojourn in the land ; and thou thyself shalt
have this golden cup, if indeed thou art able
to assure me of safety.”

“Yea,” said they all, “that can he, for
he is the king’s marshal.”

Then he gave them the cup, and the
marshal thought it a rich and precious gift,
and bade him come ashore, and sware
that he and his should be in peace and
surety. And for that did they win rich
payment in royal red gold; red gold for the
king’s tribute, red gold for the messenger’s
fee—and ’twas good too for Tristan, since
it won him peace and favour, ~
Eristan and Iseult 89


Now, the story tells us that there was at Of the
that time in Ireland a monstrous dragon ce
which devoured the people and wasted the cavaned
land ; so that the king at last had sworn a the land
solemn oath that whoever slew the monster
should have the Princess Iseult to wife ;
and because of the beauty of the maiden
and the fierceness of the dragon many a
valiant knight had lost his life. The land
was full of the tale, and it had come to
Tristan’s ears, and in the thought of this
had he made his journey.

The next morning, ere it was light, he |
rose and armed himself secretly, and took .
his strongest spear, and mounted his steed —
and rode forth into the wilderness. He
rode by many a rough path till the sun was
high in the heavens, when he turned down-
wards into a valley, where, as the geste
tells us, the dragon had its lair. ‘Then he
saw afar off four men galloping swiftly over *
the moor where there was no road. One
of them was the queen’s seneschal, who
would fain have been the lover of the
Princess Iseult, but she liked him not.
Whenever knights rode forth bent on
adventures the seneschal was ever with
them, for nothing on earth save that men
go Tristan and Jseuft


_ might say they had seen him ride forth, for
* never would he face the dragon, but would
return swifter than he went.

How Now, when Tristan saw the men in
aaises flight he knew the dragon must be near at
with the hand, so he rode on steadily, and ere long

dragon he saw the monster coming towards him,

breathing out smoke and flame. from its
open jaws. The knight laid his spear in
rest, and set spurs to his steed, and rode so
swiftly, and smote so strongly, that the
spear went in at the open jaws, and pierced.
through the throat into the dragon’s heart,
and he himself came with such force against
the dragon that his horse fell dead, and he
could scarce free himself from .the steed.
But the evil beast fell upon the corpse and’
partly devoured it, till the wound from the

_ spear pained it so sorely that it left the
horse half eaten, and fled into a rocky
ravine. >

Tristan followed after the monster,

which fled before him roaring for pain till
the rocks rang again with the sound. It
cast fire from its jaws and tare up the earth
around, till the pain of the wound over-
came it, and it crouched down under a wall
of rock, Then Tristan drew forth his
Tristan and Iseuft =)


sword, thinking to slay the monster easily,
but ’twas a hard strife, the hardest Tristan
‘had ever fought, and in truth he thought it
would be his death. For the dragon had
as aids. smoke and flame, teeth and claws
sharper than a shearing knife ; and the
knight had much ado to find shelter behind
the trees and bushes, for the fight was so
fierce that the shield he held in his hand
was burnt well-nigh to a coal. But the
conflict did not endure over-long, for the
spear in the vitals of the dragon began to
pain him so that he lay on the ground,
rolling over and over in agony. Then
Tristan came near swiftly, and smote with
his sword at the heart of the monster so
that the blade went in right to the hilt;
and the dragon gave forth a roar so grim
and terrible that it was as if heaven and: And
earth fell together, and the death-cry was'Slew !t
heard far and wide through the land.:
Fristan himself was well-nigh terrified, but
as he saw the beast was dead, he went near,
and with much labour he forced the jaws
open; and cut out the tongue, then he
closed the jaws again, and put the tongue
in his bosom. He turned him again to the
wilderness, thinking to rest through the _


Go Sale” .


92 Srisfan and Iseuft


day, and come again to his people secretly

in the shadows of night; but he was so
overcome by the stress of the fight and the

And went fiery breath of the dragon that he was well-
ieee hic nigh spent, and seeing a little lake near at
own life hand into which a clear stream flowed from
the rock, he went towards it, and as he

came to the cool waters the weight of his
‘armour and the venom of the dragon’s

| tongue overpowered him, and he fell sense-

less by the stream. Pode |

But the seneschal, who would. fain be

the princess’s lover, as he rode bomeward,

heard the death-cry of the dragon, and be-
thought him what it might mean ; he said

to himself: ‘‘’The beast is either dead or

sorely wounded ; now is my chance if I

work warily.” So he stole away from his
companions, and rode quietly down a hill

to the valley, then he turned his bridle to-

ward the place whence the sound came, and -

rode swiftly till he found the carcase of
Tristan’s horse, and there he halted, for his

heart misgave him. Then as he heard and

saw nothing he took courage and rode still

fearful and trembling along the track made

by the grass and broken underwood, and

ere he knew he came right on the dragon
Sristan and Iseuft 93


lying dead. Overcome by terror at the
sight, he turned his bridle so swiftly that
horse and man alike. stumbled and fell over
a little hillock, and when he sprang to his
feet he was so terrified he durst not wait to
remount, but fled on foot. Butas he found
the dragon did not move he took heart, and
stole back trembling ; he led the horse to a OF the
fallen trunk and remounted, and then rode aaery
with caution nearer to the dragon to see qyeen’s
- whether it were alive or dead. And when seneschal
he saw that the monster was in truth dead,
he cried aloud: “ Now by God’s grace I
have come hither in a happy hour !’
With that he laid his lance in rest and
rode gaily toward the dragon, crying:
** Now art thou mine, my Lady Iseult!” ~~
and smote with such force that the spear
went through the dragon’s jaws, and re-
miainéd there. This he did out of pure
cunning, for he thought: “If the knight
who has slain the dragon be living he will
not be able to deny that I have aided him.”
Then he turned, and sought all about to
find the knight, for he thought if he were,
as well might be, sorely wounded, then he
could fight with him, and slay and bury
him, and no man be aught the wiser. And.
94 Evisfan and Iseuff


/' when he found him not he said: “ Well,
‘let him go ; whether he be living or dead I
am the first here, and I have kinsmen and
friends enow, so that if any man would take
the credit of this deed he shall but lose by
it.” So he rode back to the dragon, and
with his sword he gashed the carcase here
and there. He had fain hewn off the head,
but the neck was so thick he might not
come at it. ‘Then he took his spear, and
brake it in two over the trunk of a tree,
\and stuck the pointed end in the monster’s
jaw, as if it had been broken in a joust.
Having thus as he deemed made all safe,
he rode back to Whiteford, and bade them
go with a waggon and four horses to bring
back the head of the dragon, and told
every one what he had done, and the sore
peril he had been in. ‘See, see,” he cried,
“ what a man of brave heart and steadfast
courage can do for the sake of the lady he
loves. I marvelled, and marvel still, how
I escaped the danger which beset me ; had
I been as soft as was another man I had
never done it. I know not who he was,
an adventurer, who for his cowardice, ere I
came up, had met with an evil end. Both
man and horse are dead and devoured ; the
Tristan and Iseuft 95


horse still lies there half eaten. I have
dared more for the love of a woman than
ever a man before me! ”

Then he called his friends together, and How the
went again to the dragon, and bade them ee
look again on the wonder, and bear testi- 1o°cciain
mony to what they saw. ‘The head they the
cut off and brought again in the waggon, 4tagon,
and he fixed a day for them to ride together “i; med
with him to the court, and claim the fulfil- the hand?
ment of the king’s promise. of he

Now, the tale was speedily brought to P™"*S
court, and told in the women’s chambers,
and never were tidings more unwelcome !

To that fair maid the Princess Iseult it _
was bitter as a death-blow ; never had she .
seen asadder day. But her mother spake: ~
“Nay, sweet daughter, nay, let it not
trouble thee so; we will see first whether
this be truth ora lie.. God forbid that the
thing should be so! Weep not, my
daughter ; thy bright eyes should never be
reddened for so small a grief!”

“ Ah! mother,” said the maiden, “in-
sult not thy birth and thyself ; ere I be that
man’s wife I will thrust a knife through
my heart. Neither wife nor lady shall he
have in Iseult, unless he have her dead.” _-
96 Sristan and Iseuft


“Nay, nay, fear not, sweet daughter ;

whatever the truth may be, thee has he

. lost, for if all the world were to swear it
.. thou shouldst never wed the seneschal.”

Of the When the night fell the queen wove
wisdom cunning spells, the virtue of which she
ia Send ll, for her daughter’s sorrow, so
uit Knew well, fo daughter's s :

that in a dream she saw all the truth and

knew that the seneschal had dealt falsely;
and as the day began to dawn she spake to

Iseult: ‘ Daughter, art thou waking ? ”

‘Yea, mother mine. ”
“Then let thine heart be at peace: I

- have good tidings for thee. The seneschal

‘ slew not the dragon. *I'was a stranger

knight—I know not what brought him
hither—who did the deed. Come, let us go
thither quickly, and we will see for our-
selves how the truth may be... Brangoene, -
~ rise up softly and bid the squire Paranise
saddle our horses ; we must ride forth, we
. four, I and my daughter, thou and he.
Bid him bring the horses as quickly as may
be to the little postern where the orchard
opens on to the moorland.” |
When all was ready the little company
mounted, and rode to the spot where they
had heard that the dragon was slain, and
Sristan and Iseuft 97


there they found first the carcase of the
horse, and beheld the trappings, and knew
that never in Ireland had they seen thelike; *
and they said to each other that whoever
the man might be who rode the horse, ’twas
hé~and no other who slew. the dragon.
~Fhen they rode further and came on the
monster as it lay, and it looked so grim and

so ghastly in the dim morning light that
the women grew pale with dread. The
queen said to her daughter : * Now of one
thing am I sure: our seneschal never dared =~
face that monster! We may lay aside all
care; and, daughter, whether the man be
living or dead, methinks he is hidden some-
where near by; let us go and seek him. God
grant we may find him, and with hisaid over-
come the dread that oppresses thine heart.”

So they parted asunder and began to seek How
hither and thither, but ’twas the Princess Tristan
Iseult who first found that which they ilar aa
sought, for she saw a helmet shining from Princess
afar, “and called to her mother, saying : Iseult
‘¢ Hasten hither, mother, for I see something
gleaming there beyond: I know not what
it may be, but methinks ’tis like a helmet.”

“ So think I,” said her mother. ‘ I ween


we have found that which we sought.”
VOL I G
oe


98 Zristan and Iseuft
With that they called the other two, and


rode forward together. But when they
came nearer and saw how the knight lay


they deemed he was dead, and Iseult cried: -
“We are undone! the seneschal -hath
_ treacherously murdered him and borne him
. to this bog!”


They dismounted, and all four drew
him out of the water to land; they did off
his helmet and the steel cap beneath, and
the wise queen saw that he yet lived, but
that his life hung by a single hair.

“ He is living,” she said; “let us disarm
him quickly. If he be not mortally
wounded all may yet be well.”

Then the three fair women bent over


. the knight and began to disarm him with
‘ their white hands, and behold, the dragon’s


tongue fell out from his breast. ‘ What
eh that be, Brangoene, fair kinswoman,
aS pegeesat

“ Methinketh ’tis a tongue!”

“Thou speakest true, Brangoene,—a
tongue it is, and I think me well ’twas once
in the dragon’s mouth! Sweet Iseult,
daughter mine, of a truth we have come on
a happy journey. °Tis the venom of. this


*, fongue that has bereft him of his senses.”
mM


Jet Tristan and Iseuft 99
When they had disarmed the knight and And


ae found no wound upon him they were all sel
oth! joyful, and the queen took an antidote to gucents
1 the poison and poured it between his lips, wisdom
* and when she saw signs of life, “ The
ti man will recover,” she said: “the venom

of the tongue is yielding, he will speedily
is regain sight and speech.” And in sooth,


ere long Tristan opened his eyes and
| looked around him.

Ty A When he saw the fair women bending
i over him, he knew them, and said in his
heart: “ Now God hath surely thought


dot


japt

alk upon me, and hath sent me the three
- fairest lights the world doth hold—lIseult |
ne the sun, her mother Iseult the fair dawn,
ates pipet Sandee stately moon.” With
ae that he sighed softly: “Ah! who are ye?


he and where am I?”
“Canst thou speak, knight?” said the


” queen. “We are aiding thee in thy
need.”

ee “ Yea, sweet lady, but I know not how

ie my strength should have vanished in so

Short a time.”

tee “’The younger Iseult looked on him;


bis “°Tis the minstrel. Tantris, if ever I
beheld him id said she.


| wages ARE eR Om


spo


ee


100 Sristan and Iseuft


“Ts it thou indeed, Tantris?” asked
the queen.

“ Yea, lady, ’tis I.”

“Then say, whence hast thou come
hither, or what dost thou seek here ?”

‘Sweetest lady, I am yet so feeble I
cannot tell thee all as it were fitting, but
bid them bear me to some shelter where I
may abide in secret a day and a night, and
when I have once more recovered m
strength, then will I gladly tell thee al
that it behoves thee to know.”

Then between them they helped Tristan
on to a steed, and brought him secretly to
the palace by the postern door, so that
none knew of his coming, and made ready
for him a couch and all he needed. Nor
did they forget the dragon’s tongue, nor his
harness, but brought all with them.

And the following morning the queen
said to him: “ Tantris, thou knowest I
have ever been thy friend; I tended. thee
and healed thee of thy wound: tell me
truly by the faith thou owest to thy liege


; lady, when didst thou come to Ireland, and


‘ how didst thou slay the dragon ?”


“‘ Lady,” said he, “’tis three days since
that I came to Ireland with other mer-
al


Cristan and Iseuft 101


chants, and as we came to the harbour
robbers boarded us, and, had I not bought
them off, would have taken my life and m
goods. ‘Then, since we wished to dwell
here in this strange land, and I had heard
the tale of the dragon, it came into m
mind that as the people were but. ill-
disposed towards us, if I could but slay the
monster I should find favour and peace in
the sight of this folk.”

“Favour and peace shalt thou have to How the
thy dying day,” quoth the queen: “ thou queen
hast come hither in a happy hour for thy- SW2%¢
self and us. Ask whatever thou desirest of with
my lord or of me, and it shall be done.” i tari

“I thank thee, lady. I would put pinning
myself and my ships in thy protection. I the
prithee let me not rue the day that | minstrel
trusted life and.goods to thy faith.” anne

‘Nay, forsooth, Tantris, have no care
for thy life or thy goods: see, I give thee
mine hand upon it that none shall. touch ~~
thée or thine in Ireland as long as I live,
and all thou askest of me will I do. But
now I would take counsel with thee on a
matter that nearly touches mine honour
and my happiness.” ,

With that she told him of the seneschal,
102 Sristan and Joeuft


how he would fain lay claim to the prin-
cess’s hand, and how with lies and falsehood
he made belief to have won her.

“Dear lady,” said Tristan, “have no
care. Thou hast given me back life and
strength, both are at thy service to with-
stand all danger at thy will.”

“God reward thee, Tantris. Gladly
will I take thine aid, for if this thing should


' come to pass ’twould be the death of me
_ and of my daughter Iseult.”


ety


. tale of the dragon — how it


“‘ Have no fear, lady. But tell me, what
of the tongue that was in my bosom, didst
thou leave it there, or what?”

“ Nay, I have it here ; my fair daughter
Iseult and I, we brought all that belonged
to thee with us.”

“Tis well,” said Tristan. ‘ Now, sweet
queen, trouble no more, but help me to my
strength, and all shall go as thou desirest.”

Meanwhile the comrades whom Tristan
had left upon the ship were in much trouble
and sorrow when he came not again at the
end of the three days, and they heard the

had slain a


' stranger knight and his horse. They said :


“ Of a truth this must be Tristan ; were he
alive he had returned ere now.” So they
Sristan and Iseult 103


took counsel, and sent Kurwenal ashore How
that he might see the carcase of the horse ; Sorat
and when he came there he knew the steed Geemed”
and the trappings for Tristan’s, but of he was
Tristan himself there was no sign. HeS&
found the remains of the dragon, but not a
sign of his lord’s armour or of his raiment,
and he knew not what to think. “Ah, |
Sir Tristan,” he said, “art thou living or *
dead? Alas, Iseult, that the fame of thy |
beauty ever came to Cornwall, if it have ;
brought so noble a knight to so evil a fate ! ”

Then he returned, weeping, to the ship,
and told his comrades what he had seen,
and they were sorrowful at the tidings,
though, in their heart, some of them were
not ill pleased. Thus the twenty lords who
had come with him were of one accord that
they would wait his coming no longer, for '
they were in haste to be gone from Ireland, :
but the others would not listen to their ©
counsel, but said they would not leave the
land till they knew whether their lord was
really dead, and that they would await him
for at least two days longer, and the twenty
lords must needs yield to their will.

Meanwhile the day had come that King:
Gurmun had set for redeeming his pledge
a. as


104 Tristan and Jseuft


to the seneschal, and all the knights were
gathered together for counsel, and the queen
had also come thither, for the king trusted
much to her wisdom. And before the
council he spake with her in secret:
“© What counsel canst thou give, my wife?


For ’twere bitter as death to give our
: daughter to the seneschal.”


“Be at peace,” said the queen; “ that
will we never do; I have well foreseen the
matter.”

““ How, lady? Tell me quickly, that we
may rejoice together.”

“See thou, our seneschal never slew the
dragon as he saith, but I know well who
did, and when the time is ripe I will declare
the matter. Go thou to thy lords, and say
that when thou art well assured of the
truth of the seneschal’s word thou wilt be
ready to keep thine oath. Then sit thou
on thy judgment-seat, and bid thy knights
to judge with thee, and let the seneschal
bring his plea and say as he will, and when
the time is ripe then will I come with
Iseult, and will speak for thee, for her, and
for myself. I will now seek her, and come
again swiftly.” |

So the king went back to the palace and
Sristan and Joeult 105


sat on the judgment-seat, with all the
barons round him, and a great company of
knights and nobles, for all were fain to }
know what should be the end of the |
matter. And when the queen and prin- ,
cess entered they said among themselves: |
“’T'were good fortune for the seneschal }
who hath never had good fortune to win /|
such a maid as this! All men might well
envy him.”
We Then the seneschal came forth and stood How the
{before the king, and Gurmun arose, and $@9


said kindly : “Speak, what dost thou re- poy pee
quire of me?” to wife


“Lord king,” he answered, “I pray
only that thine honour and thy plighted
word be not broken. Thou didst swear
that whosoever slew the dragon to him
wouldst thou give thy daughter Iseult to

/ wife, and this oath of thine hath slain many.
But I recked little since I loved the maiden,
and I risked my life more often and more
valiantly than any man, till at length for-
tune befriended me, and I slew the monster.
See there the head where it lies, I brought
it for a token. Now fulfil thy pledge, for
the king’s word and the king’s oath, they
should be holy.”
106 Sristan and Iseuft


; “Seneschal,” said the queen, “’tis too

‘much, by my troth, to desire so rich a prize
:. as my daughter Iseult, when thou hast not
‘won it!” sven

‘Quoth the seneschal: ‘Thou doest ill
to speak thus, lady. My king, 4e shall
decide. He can speak for himself ; let him
answer me.”

But the king said:. “ Lady, do thou
speak for thyself, for Iseult, and for me.”

Andhow That will I, my lord. Seneschal, thy
the queen love may be true, and thou be .avaliant
answer to man, worthy a woman’s love ; but-he-who
him claimeth a great reward which he-hath
never merited doeth ill, I trow. Thou
hast taken to thyself a deed and a manhood
that, as I am well advised, belong not to

thee.”

“Lady, I know not what thou sayest ;
I have here a proof of my words.”

“Thou hast brought a head, so might
another man if he thought to win Iseult by
it; but she is not to be so lightly won.”

_ Nay,” said the younger Iseult, “it
-needeth greater labour for my winning.”

“Ah, princess!” said the seneschal,
‘dost thou count as naught all the perils I
have dared for love of thee ?”


mes
Erisfan and Iseuft 107


“That thou hast loved me may per-_


chance be reckoned to thee for good, but I
never loved thee, nor looked on thee with
favour—nor shall I ever.” —_
‘°‘Yea,” said the seneschal, “I know well
thou doest as all women do: they love
those who hate them, and hate those who
love them; the crooked they account
straight, and the straight crooked. Love
is the most uncertain game a man ma


play at, and he is but witless who risks his ©
life for any woman if he hold not a pledge :


from her first. And yet whatever thou
or my lady the queen may say, the thing
must go according to my word, or the king
hath broken his oath.”

But the queen spake: ‘ Seneschal, me-
thinks thou knowest women so well thou
hast become as one of them, for see, thou
thyself lovest one who hateth thee, and
désirest one who will naught of thee. If
that be but the way of women, why do even


love
sire her who desireth thee. We have heard
over-much of thy love for Iseult; she loveth
thee not, and that perchance she hath from
me, for I loved thee never! And as for
as ae Deal thou rather as a man, and ,
e maiden who loveth thee, and de-.


ee Sd


od


108 Srisfan and Joeuft


the king’s oath, I tell thee thou didst never

slay the dragon ; another slew it; and if

thou askest me, ‘Who was he?’ I answer
that I know him, and will bring him hither
at the fitting time.”

; “Lady, there is no man shall falsely
‘deprive me of my right and my honour.
’ Tf he lay claim to it, then must he stake life
and limb upon it, band to hand, before
this court, ere I waive a tittle of my right.”
_ §°*T is well,” spake the queen, “ I will my-
, self be his surety ; the knight who slew the
' dragon will I bring hither on the second
day from now.”

Then the king and the council said:
“°T is enough. Seneschal, go thou and take
measures for the fight, and, my lady the queen,
do thou see to thy champion.” ‘Then the
Sth took pledges from either side, and they
made fast the fight for the third day.

_ So the queen and the princess went their
. way and told all to their minstrel, for by
: now Tristan’s health and strength had come
back to him ; and the ladies looked upon
him, and secretly they thought it a strange
thing that one so fair in face_and so noble
in bearing should be but a wandering min-
strel, seeking his bread from land to land;
Tristan and Iscuft 109


and they said between themselves: “” T'were
more fitting that he should be king and
lord of some country; many a folk has a
less kinglike ruler, Of a sooth, his looks
and his lot match each other but ill.” The
queen bade her squire, Paranise, look well
to the knight’s harness, and see that it was
well polished and in fair order; and this he
did and laid all the pieces together. Now, How the
as chance-would have it, the princess came Princess
and looked upon the armour. as it lay, for Seut was
her heart was heavy within. her. for the her
coming conflict, and she took up the sword paste s
and drew it out of the scabbard, and gazed *“¥**
on it long and earnestly, and as she did so
her eyes fell on the splinter that was lacking.
She thought within herself: “Now God
help me! I ween.that the splinter that
should be here is in my keeping.” ‘Then
she ran to the casket wherein lay the splin-
ter that her mother had drawn from Morolt’s ~
skull, and fetched it, and laid it on the ~
blade, and lo! it fitted as if it were butone, *
as in truth it had been not two years back.
Then the maiden’s heart. grew cold
within her, and her colour changed from
red to white, and she said: “ Ah, unhappy
that I am! how came this fatal weapon
iO Tristan and Iseuft
hither from Cornwall? With this sword
+ was my uncle Morolt surely slain, and
« “twas Tristan slew him. Who gaveit to the
’ minstrel Tantris?” And as she thought,
suddenly it was.as if she saw...the -name
before her, Tantris, Tristan, and she knew
_ the one was but the other.read backwards,
: and she cried aloud: “ Ah! my heart forbode
: this falsehood and this treachery, for since
I have looked upon him well and marked
_ his face and bearing, I have known he must
be of noble birth. But how dared he come
hither with: his deadly Wound? And we
have cherished and healed him! Healed ?
nay, not yet, for. this sword shall be-his
death ! - Hasten, Iseult, avenge thy wrongs.
If he be slain with the sword that slew thine
uncle thou hast repaid him well !”
And Then she took the sword in both hands
fal sic and ran swiftly to Tristan’s chamber,. and
slain stood over him as he lay. “Yea,” she said,
Tristan “ art thou Tristan?” ~
_ © Lady, nay, Iam ‘Tantris.”

_- ©T hat I know well—Tantris and Tristan
; they are but one traitor. “The wrong Tris-
- tan did me shall be avenged on Tantris ;

‘ thou must pay for my uncle’s death.”
““Nay, nay, sweetest lady, what wouldst
Tristan and Iseuft | 111


thou do? . Think of thine own honour and
thy fairname. ‘Thou art woman and maid.
If-men may accuse thee of murder, thy
beauty will be for ever dishonoured, the Sun
of Ireland that rejoices so many hearts will
have set. . A’ sword becomes not those
white hands | ears

As he’ ‘spake, the queen her sriotigr en- But the
tered. - “ How.now?” she cried. “What Sear
meaneth © this?.: What. doest thou, _my baba pa
daughter ?: Are these. -womanly ways? Art _
thou beside’ thyself ? What wouldest thou -
with that sword? © Is this jest or anger ?.”. ©

“ Ah, lady mother, ’tis our heart-sorrow. o
See, this is the murderer Tristan, who slew
thy brother ; now may we avenge ourselves.
Lét us smite him through with this sword.
A‘ better chance shall we never have.” —

“ This Tristan a How dost thou —
daughter ?”

“Tknow it well. He is Tristan.
This sword is his; look well on it, and see
here the splinter, see how the two fit
together! As I laid one on the other I
saw well they were but one blade.”

“Ah!” cried the queen, “ Iseult, what
hast thou told me? If this indeed be


? Tristan, then have I been sorely betrayed!


ete See
=
|


112 Sristan and Iseuft (€
Iseult lifted the sword again, and drew |

nearer. “Stay, Iseult, stay!” cried the |‘

queen, “dost thou not remember how I


am pledged tohim?” th
~~ ©T care not, he shall die.” he


“ Mercy, fair Iseult!” quoth Tristan. | br
“No mercy shalt thou have, traitor!’’ |
said the maiden, ‘I will have thy life.” no
“Not so, daughter,” said the mother. |
. © We may not take vengeance on him lest __ fir
‘;we break our troth and our honour. He.
is under my protection, life and limb, with
all that belongeth to him. I have taken
him into my peace, come what may.”
“T thank thee, lady,” said the knight.
“ Forget not that I entrusted myself and all |
I had to thine honour; my life is in thy {
keeping.”
. ©T hou liest!” said the maiden, “I
, know well what passed, and life and shelter
.-did my mother never swear to Tristan.”
With that she would have raised the sword
again, but her mother stayed her hand.
And in sooth even had Tristan been bound
and alone with her she would scarce have
slain him, for her womanhood fought hard
with her anger, till at length her gentle
heart conquered, and she cast the sword


if Tristan and Iseuft 113


iy from her, and fell a-weeping. ‘ Alas!” she

te cried, “that ever I saw this day!”

;| But her mother said: “ Daughter mine,
thy sorrows are my sorrows, and even
heavier are they for me. Morolt was my

__ brother, nearer to me than to thee, and he

” is dead. That was my sorest sorrow; but
now I have another. I tremble for thee,

“, daughter, and in that sorrow I forget the

wt first; better one grief than two. Howof

y. that wretched man who claims thine hand? --

If we have no champion to overcome him, ~

» then thy father and i are dishonoured with

. thee, and may never more be joyful.”
t ~°Fhen Tristan said: “ Fair ladies both, ted
| itis true I have caused ye sorrow, yet it cima


7 was forced upon me. If ye will, as ye eae


Bete


may, remember it, then know I was in wrath
peril of death, and a man defends his life as
he best may. For the present, as concerns
the seneschal, I can bring that to a good
end, if ye will let me live. Queen Iseult,
' and Princess Iseult, I know ye well, that
ye are wise and gracious; if I might speak
freely, and ye would moderate your wrath
against me and this ill will ye have so long
borne to Tristan, I would tell ye good
} tidings.”


VOL I H


as ER eae





_- oa


a.


oa oe S.
114 Eristan and Iseule


The queen looked upon him, and her
eyes filled with tears. ‘“ Ah!” she cried,
“ now I hear and know of a truth that thou
art Tristan: I doubted me much -before,
but now hast thou owned the truth un-
asked. Alas, alas! Sir Tristan, that ever
thou camest in my power, since I may not
use that power as were most fitting. Tis
a manifold thing, this royal power, and I
ween I might use it against my foe if I

, would, and do evil against the evil. Shall
-~I withhold my hand ?...I.trow so.”
As she spake Brangcene.came into the


Seabirs pa


chamber with a smiling face, and saw the |


sword lying on the ground, and the women
with tearful eyes. ‘‘ What is this?” she
said. ‘What troubles ye all three, and
what does the sword here?” -—

“‘ Brangoene, kinswoman,” said the queen,
“we have been tricked and betrayed, we
have cherished the serpent for the night-
ingale, our foe who deserved death at our
hands have we tended as.our friend. This
is none other than Tristan! Say, may we
avenge ourselves ?”’

“ Nay, nay, lady, thine honour is worth
more than the life of thy foe. Avenge
thyself thou canst not, but leave him now,


Eristan and Iseuft 115
and take counsel as to what we may
best do.” |
So the three went apart, and the queen
spake: “Tristan said even now, that if we
would lay aside the ill will we had borne;
him, he would give us good tidings—what :
may that mean, Brangoene?” i
And Brangcene answered : “ Perchancehe
may mean well by ye both. One must
turn one’s mantle as the wind blows, and And peace
who knows but what he be come hither was
for your honour? We may well be thank- eiween
ful that God brought him hither at this them
time to prove the seneschal’s falseness.
Had we not found him when we did it had
been the worse for thee, my princess !
Treat him kindly, for he is nobly born,
and both wise and courteous: whatever
thine heart may feel towards him, let thy
speech be gentle, for ’tis no light matter
that hath brought him hither again.”
Then the three went back to Tristan,
and when he saw them he knelt before them
saying : “ Peace, fair ladies. I pray ye grant
me my life; since ’tis but for your honour
and profit I have come hither.” =
"Fhe queen bade him rise, and each
_ proffered him the kiss of peace, though
116 Tristan and Jseulff


Iseult the princess did it but unwillingly,
and they sat down together.

«My queen,” said Tristan, “wilt thou
be my good friend, and aid me to persuade
thy jaaghter whom thou lovest, to take

as husband a noble ‘king, one well fitted
-to-be~her lord’; fair, and free of hand; a
valiant knight, of a royal race, and richer
than her father?”
“Were I sure of the truth,” said the
queen, “I would even do my best.”

How. ‘ Yet it is so, lady, for since I was here
Tristan aforetime I have spoken ever in praise and

unci’s Honour of thee and thy daughter to my
wooing uncle King Mark; and ’tis he who hath sent
ait me hither, for we are both at one accord to
ee Prine pray that thy daughter become his wife and
cess Iseult aa, and Queen of Cornwall and England.”
‘ Yea, but if I counsel my husband to
a peace with King Mark, shall I nat.do
ill?”

. Nay, lady, he must needs know all the
' tale, only I prithee see that he be friends

with me.”
“ Of that have no fear,” said Queen Iseult.
Then the queen sent for the king, and
prayed of him.a_boan, saying it lay near to

er heart and to that of her daughter.
Tiere? MRS Py TE at RS ay CS Ie ca cenny tnt TTI titi
ee ee


Cristan and Iseuft 117


“Thou shalt have what thou desirest,” | _


said the king.

“Then, bid I pray thee to pardon
Tristan, who slew my brother Morolt; he
is here in my keeping.”

“Nay, that is more thy matter than
mine. Morolt was thy brother. If thou
hast pardoned Tristan, then so have I.”
~ ‘Then the queen told her lord the whole
matter, and Gurmun thought it good, and
bade Tristan come before him; and he
came and knelt, saying: ‘‘ Grace, my lord
the king.”

“ Rise, Sir Tristan,” said Gurmun, ‘and
kiss me, for though I were unwilling to
pardon thee, yet since my wife hath done
so I may not do otherwise.”

“Lord,” said Tristan, “with me thou dost
pardon my king and both his realms ? ”

“ Yea, sir,” said Gurmun. .

Then the king bade Tristan sit beside
him, and asked him of his errand; and
Tristan told him all he had told the queen,
and of his fight with the dragon and all
that had chanced.

“How may I know, Sir Tristan, that
thou speakest truth ?” asked Gurmun.

“My lord, I have twenty of King
———


118 Tristan and Iseuft
Mark’s barons with me, they will be surety
enough.”


Then Tristan bade Paranise go to. the


ship, and seek out Kurwenal, and bring


_ him to the palace in secret. And when
: Kurwenal saw ‘his lord he was greatly
' rejoiced: Sir, we feared thou wast slain,
and with great difficulty did we keep the
lords here; they have sworn to sail hence
to-night.”

“That they must not do,” said Tristan.
“Go hence, tell them I have done all for
which I came hither, and bid them to-
morrow clothe themselves in their richest
attire, and make ready to ride to court
whenever I send a messenger to summon
them.”

So Kurwenal departed and told the barons
the good tidings: but they in their envy
said: “ Now surely this man is.a sorcerer,
see how he brings to a lucky end every-
thing to which he sets his hand.”

Now the day had come on which the
single combat was to be fought, and a
great folk had come together, for_all won-

ered who should fight with the seneschal
for the maiden Iseult; and each man asked
his fellow: “Who may he be who claims
nme


RIS ricer re "EEE At, iti een ey“ ata tor ee onan eiaimaenteeemencen neta


Tristan and Jseuft 119


to have slain the dragon ? ” and the question How alt
was passed from one to another, but none the folk


could give ananswer. Meanwhile Tristan’s
comrades had come from the ship clad in
their finest raiment, and he himself robed
him as became his royal birth ; and when
the queen and Princess Iseult saw him they
said to themselves ; “ Truly this is a gallant
knight ; methinks our cause is in good
hands.” Seats were set for the barons in
the halls, and the people gazed on them,
and marvelled at their rich attire and their
silence, for there was not one of them that
knew the speech of the country.

Then a messenger came from the king
to call the queen and the princess to the
court, and she spake : © Rise, Iseult, and we
will go. Sir Tristan, do thou abide here,
and when I shall send for thee, come thou
with Brangeoene,”

“ Gladly, my lady queen.”

So came Queen Iseult, leading with her
her daughter, even as the dawn that brings
with it the rising sun. With measured
pace the maiden walked beside her mother,
clad in a robe of brown samite, and a
flowing mantle furred with ermine, which
she held together with the fingers of her
came to-
ether to
ow the
end of the
sene-
schal’s
matter


120 Tristan and Iseuft


right hand. On her head was a circlet of
gold set with jewels, and but for the gleam-
ing stones one would scarce have known
that the circlet was there, so golden were
her shining locks.

So the fair women passed up the hall,
greeting all as they came, the mother with
word, the daughter with gesture. When
they had taken their seat by the king the

fseneschal stood: forth, and said : “ My lord

? the king, I demand my right of battle.

“ Where is the man who thinks to deprive
me of mine honour? My friends and
kinsmen are here, and my cause is so good
that if this council do justice all must go
well with me. Nor do I fear force, that
be far from thee.”

“‘Seneschal,” said the queen, “if this

{ combat may not be averted I scarce know

' what I may do. ”’Twere well if thou
wouldst leave thy claim on my daughter, and
set her free; ’twould be to thy profit as
well as to hers.” .

_-.“Free?” said the seneschal, ‘ yea, lady,
thou wouldst fain throw up a game that is
already won! But I should have put
myself in much peril for little profit if I
now gave up thy daughter. Lady, let there
Eames cee RR eo OE areas ~ a et YX


Erisfan and Jeeuft 121


be an end of it —I will wed the princess,

or do thou bring forth the man who slew

the dragon.”

‘*Seneschal, I hear what thou sayest, and
I will prove my truth.” She signed to her
squire: “ Bring hither the man.” |
All the nobles looked one on the other, Of the

and a murmur ran round the hall, question coming of
and answer—all asked who the man might © "#9
be, but none could tell. But now Bran-
goene entered, tall and stately, leading by

the hand Sir Tristan. He was richly clad

in a robe of purple silk, all inwoven and
embroidered with gold, that glittered as he
moved, and on his head was a gold and
jewelled circlet. His bearing was frank

and fearless, and, as he drew nearer, all

made way for him. But when the men of
Cornwall saw him they sprang to their
feet, and came forward, greeting him Jjoy- '
fully; and taking him and Brangoene by :
the hand, they led them up to the high dats -
where sat the king and queen, and Tristan
bowed low before them. ‘Then as the folk
clustered round, gazing at the strangers,
the hostages from Cornwall saw that these
were verily their kinsmen, and at
made their way through the crowd,
122 Tristan and Iseuft
laughing and weeping, and greeted them
gladly.

The king bade Tristan take his place
beside him, and commanded silence to be
made, and when all were still, he said:
“Seneschal, what dost thou demand?”

“Sire, I slew the dragon.”

The stranger rose and spake: ‘Sire, he

slew it not.”

“Sire, I did, and I will prove it here.”

“What proof dost thou bring?” said
Tristan.

“See this head, I brought it hither.”

“ My lord king,” said Tristan, “ since
he brings the head as proof, bid them look
within the jaws; if the tongue be there I
withdraw my claim and renounce the
combat,”

Then they opened the jaws, and found
nothing therein; and, as they marvelled,

. Tristan bade his squire stand forth with

, the tongue. “See, now, if this be the

: dragon’s tongue or no.” And all looked,
and saw that it was in truth the tongue—

all save the seneschal, who stood there

and knew not what to say, nor whither ‘to
turn.
“Lords all,” said Tristan, “ mark this
Cristan and Iseuff 123


marvel. I slew the dragon, and cut this ,
tongue from out the jaws, yet this man i
afterward smote it a second time to :
death !”

And all the lords said: ‘ One thing is
clear, he who came first and cut out the
tongue was the man who slew the
monster.” And never a man said nay.

Then when the truth was clear, Tristan And the
said: “ My lord the king, I call thy cove- shaming
nant to mind; thy daughter falleth to me.” ° Ue

And the king said: “Sir Knight, thou
hast redeemed thy pledge, I will fulfil
mine.” .

But the seneschal cried: “Nay, he ,
speaketh falsely! Sir King, I demand my /
right of combat ere I be robbed of mine —
honour.”

“Why should he fight with thee, sene-
schal?” quoth the queen. “ He has won
what he would of my daughter. He were
wnore foolish than a child did he fight with
thee for nought.”

“Tf he think I have done him wrong,
lady,” said Tristan, “I will fight with
him; let him but go and make ready, and
I will arm myself.

When the seneschal saw it would come
te


124 Tristan and Iseuff


to a combat he called his friends and kins-
folk aside to take counsel with them, but
he found little comfort, for they thought
the matter a shameful one, and they said:
‘© Wherefore fight in an unrighteous cause?
*T were but foolish to throw thy life after
thy lost honour. Since the devil hath
tempted thee to thine undoing, keep thy
life at least.” a

“What would ye have me do?”

“Go thou, and say to the king that at
thy friends’ counsel thou dost withdraw thy
challenge.”

Then he did as they badehim. And the
queen said mockingly : “Seneschal, never
did I think to see thee give up a game that
was already won.” And throughout the
palace, from the highest to the lowest,
all made sport of the seneschal, till he
scarce durst show his face for shame—so


_ his falsehood brought him to an evil


end. e
Now wheri the matter was ended, King


* Gurmun made known to all his nobles the


_ errand on which Tristan had come, and
_ how he had granted his prayer, and solemnly


in their presence he gave his daughter to
Tristan’s care, that he might lead her to
Tristan and Iseuft 125


Cornwall as bride to his uncle King How
Mark. King Gur-
Then in the face of them all did Tristan fi, °°
take the princess by the hand, and he spake: daughter
“King, since this lady is now my queen {nto ris-
and my liege lady, I pray thee to deliver ~~ =s


to her all the hostages thou dost hold of
Cornwall, for now they are become her sub-
jects, and "tis but fitting that they should
journey with her to her kingdom.”

And Gurmun was willing; so with much
joy the hostages were released.

Then Tristan bade them prepare a ship,
such as should please both Iseult and him-
self, and assemble together all the men of
Cornwall who were in the land that they
might set sail with him. :
Mofes


Pace 3.—Réwalin. The names of Tristan’s parents
differ considerably in the varying versions of his story.
In the prose Tristan they are Meliadus and Helyabel, and
Tristan’s kingdom is Leonois, or Loonois. Malory calls his
mother Elizabeth, and the kingdom Liones (Lyonnesse).

Pact 11,—Tristan. Gottfried, like the other writers
of his day, who only knew the story of Tristan from a
French source, naturally gives the name of the hero a
French derivation, connecting it with the adjective ¢riste.
The more probable derivation, however, is from the Pictish
Drustan or Drostan. Professor Zimmer regards both
Tristan and his uncle as ninth-century Pictish chieftains,
and Iseult as the daughter of the Viking King of Dublin.

Pacr 21.—I have omitted the lengthy description of
skinning and dissecting the stag.

Pace 26,—Gurin and Graalent, The Breton dais were
deservedly famous, and medizval writers drew largely upon
them for the incidents of their romances; certain of the
medizval romances are no more than /ais amplified, or
connected with each other. The Anglo-Norman poetess,
Marie de France, translated a number of these Breton Jais
which have come down to us, among them is this very /ai
of Graalert and his proud lady. It isa version, more archaic
in form and probably older in date, of the well-known
QO wJew er ey Wh Sy Oo Fy wo


— cee Ree


: 1, ,wet
sunt Be
ue


of bee
Hevexlé
[ylary bi?
Lanne

thet we
a TE
the bet:
ective
, phe Pict
ers ©
“chiel
of Dut
cripott *


Qofes 127


story of Launfal, There is little doubt that the story of
Tristan was originally enshrined in such detached /ais, and
sung to the accompaniment of music. We still possess
certain /ais which tradition ascribes to Tristan himself.

Pact 43.—Morolt, It has been suggested that this
redoubtable champion of Ireland was, in the first instance,
a sea monster, and that his name was a compound of the
Keltic Mor = the sea. The prose versions call him /e
Morhout. The fact of his close relationship to the fair
Queen of Ireland, famous for her beauty, seems, however, to
militate against this theory. Professor Golther suggests
that the name is derived from the German Mér-walt,
** Ruler of the Moor, or Marsh.” This would account
for the employment of the definite article, and indicate
that the hero was known rather by his official desig-
nation than by his own proper name. It may perhaps
also give a clue to the introduction of the dragon story.
If the early tellers of the tale knew that such had been the
champion’s office, they might well have thought to em-
phasise the result of his death by the introduction of a
monster which would doubtless have been promptly
despatched had Der Mér-walt been living. Malory’s Sir
Markaus is apparently a corruption of the French Morhout,

Pace 48.—’Twas a little islet in the sea. ‘This resort to
an island for combat is one of those points of contact with
Northern practice and tradition which help to complicate
the Tristan story. Such a custom was common among the
Northmen, and was known by the name of the Holm-gang.
The island is generally identified as the Isle of St. Samson,
one of the Scilly group.

Pact 61.—Salerno was one of the famous medical
schools of the Middle Ages. It will be remembered that
it is thither that the hero of Hartmann von Aue’s Der
Arme Heinrich (Longfellow's Golden Legend) repairs with
the devoted maiden who would offer her life for his

ng.

Pace 79.— God hath given us a valiant heir.” \f
128 Cotes


Professor Zimmer be right in his theory, and Tristan and
his uncle were Picts, then, inasmuch as Pictish descent was
reckoned through the morker, and not through the father,
Tristan was in any case the lawful heir, and no son born
to King Mark could have invalidated his claim. In this
account of the hero’s departure to woo Iseult for his uncle,
Gottfried alludes contemptuously to a story found in some
of the versions, according to which a swallow flies into the
king’s hall bearing a golden hair in its beak, and Mark
vows he will wed none but the maiden from whose head
it was plucked. (An Aryan folk-lore feature).

Pact 89.—The fight with the dragon. The story of a
hero overcoming a monster and being robbed of the credit
of his exploit by a traitor who claims the hand of the
princess as his guerdon is a wide-spread Aryan folk tale.
Mr. Hartland in his Legend of Perseus (vol. iii.) has fully
examined the story, and published a tabulated list of the
principal variants. Strangely enough the Tristan variant
has escaped his notice. A similar adventure is ascribed to
Lancelot in Le Cerf au pied blanc, and also in the Dutch
poem of Morien, This latter has some veryclose points of
affinity with the Tristan story. Most probably this episode
did not originally form part of the Tristan legend (I have
suggested above a motive for its introduction) though it
was added to it at an early date. It has slipped out of
most of the prose versions, only one out of the twenty-four
MSS. preserved in Paris, and only three of the printed
versions have retained it (Loeeth, Le Roman en prose de
Tristan),


Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & Co.
London & Edinburgh
