STATE  SOCIALISM  AI^  ANARCHISM


STCRAGt-lTEM
IAIN - LPC

LP9-F22G

U.B.C.  LIBRARY


B.R. Tucker


HX68

T78

1911


THE  LIBRARY


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF
BRITISH  COLUMBIA

Gift  of
H R.  MacMiWan


THREEPENCE NETT

STATE  SOCIALISM
AND ANARCHISM

BY  BENJ.  R.  TUCKER


LONDON  1  A.  C.  FIFIELD,  i  j  CLIFFORD'S  INN,  E.C.


Anarchism

By

Dr.  Paul  Eltzbacher

Gerichtusseitor  and  Privatdozenten  in  Halle  an  der  Saale
Translated from the German  by

Steven  T.  Byington


An  elaborate  comparative  study  of  the  doctrines  of Godwin,  Proud!
Stirner,  Bakunia,  Kropotkin,  Tucker,  and  Tolstoi,  with
excellent  portraits  of  all  save  Stirner  (of  whom
no  authentic  likeness  exists).


"Dr.  Eltzbacher's  scientific  exposition  is  all  the  more  valu-
able because  he  is  not  an  Anarchist.  He  is  a  scholar,  who,
seeking  to  know  Anarchism  scientifically,  has  produced  a  work
which  the  translator,  who  is  an  Anarchist,  describes  as  *  the
most  complete  and  accurate  presentation  of  Anarcliism  that
ever  has  been  given,  or  ever  will  be  given,  in  so  short  a
space.* " — Chicago  Public.

"  Never  was  so  impassive  a  critic  of  a  subject  which  custom-
arily invokes  the  most  tempestuous  passions.  Revolutionary
fervour  and  self-devoted  idealism  leave  him  cold  as  granite  in
his  observant  attitude  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  assassination,
massacre,  and  civil  war  arouse  no  indignation.  So  utterly  does
the  analyst  supersede  the  partisan  that  even  a  careful  reader
remains  in  some  doubt  as  to  Dr.  Eltzbacher's  real  position.  . .  .
A  distinct  monument  in  a  neglected  department  of  sociology."

Philadelphia  Evening  Telegraph.

"  Every  public  library  should  have  some  representative  of
this  school  of  thought,  and  this  volume  presents  it  in  its  most
authoritative  and  least  objectionable  form."

New  Tork  Independent.

330  pages. Silk  and  linen,  marble  edges,  six  portraits

LONDON  :  NEW  YOKK  :

A.C.FIFIELD,i3Clifford'sInn,E.C. E.CWALKER,a44WKSTi43SD.  St.
Price  61.  6d.  net  Price  ?i.50,  post-paid


State  Socialism  and
Anarchism

How Far They Agree
Vherein  They  Differ


By


Benj.

R.  Tucker

'^■.

Sixth  Edition,  luith  a  Postscript

The

Tucker

Series

London

A.  C.  Fifield, 13  Clifford's  Inn,  E.G.

I911

Uniform  with  this  :
Non-Governmental  Society,

By  Edward  Carpenter.

id.  nett,  postage  vd,  (U.S.A.  ed.  lO  cts.).


WILLIAM BRENDON AND SON, LTD. PRlN<rERS, PLYMOUTH


State  Socialism  and
Anarchism''

How Far They Agree
&  Wherein  They  Differ

PROBABLY  no  agitation  has  ever  attained  the
magnitude,  either  in  the  number  of  its  recruits  or
the  area  of  its  influence,  which  has  been  attained  by
Modern  Sociahsm,  and  at  the  same  time  been  so  little
understood  and  so  misunderstood,  not  only  by  the  hostile
and  the  indifferent,  but  by  the  friendly,  and  even  by

*  In  the  summer  of  1886,  shortly  after  the  bomb-throwing  at
Chicago,  the  author  of  this  essay  received  an  invitation  from  the
editor  of  the  North  American  Review  to  furnish  him  a  paper  on
Anarchism.  In  response  this  paper  was  sent  him.  A  few  days  later
the  author  received  a  letter  announcing  the  acceptance  of  his  paper,
the  editor  volunteering  the  declaration  that  it  was  the  ablest  article
that  he  had  received  during  his  editorship  of  the  Review.  The  next
number  of  the  Revieiv  bore  the  announcement,  on  the  second  page  of
its  cover,  that  the  article  would  appear  at  an  early  date.  Month  after
month  went  by,  and  the  article  did  not  appear.  Repeated  letters  of
inquiry  failed  to  bring  any  explanation.  Finally,  after  nearly  a  year
had  elapsed,  the  author  wrote  to  the  editor  that  he  had  prepared  the
article,  not  to  be  pigeon-holed,  but  to  be  printed,  and  that  he  wished
the  matter  to  be  acted  upon  immediately.  In  reply  he  received  his
manuscript  and  a  check  for  seventy-five  dollars.  Thereupon  he  made
a  few  slight  changes  in  the  article  and  delivered  it  on  several  occasions
as  a  lecture,  after  which  it  was  printed  in  Liberty  of  March  loth,  1888.


4 State  Socialism  and  Anarchism

the  great  mass  of  its  adherents  themselves.  This  un-
fortunate and  highly  dangerous  state  of  things  is  due
partly  to  the  fact  that  the  human  relationships  which
this  movement — if  anything  so  chaotic  can  be  called  a
movement — aims  to  transform  involve  no  special  class
or  classes,  but  literally  all  mankind  ;  partly  to  the  fact
that  these  relationships  are  infinitely  more  varied  and
complex  in  their  nature  than  those  with  which  any
special  reform  has  ever  been  called  upon  to  deal ;  and
partly  to  the  fact  that  the  great  moulding  forces  of
society,  the  channels  of  information  and  enlightenment,
are  wellnigh  exclusively  under  the  control  of  those
whose  immediate  pecuniary  interests  are  antagonistic  to
the  bottom  claim  of  Socialism  that  labour  should  be
put  in  possession  of  its  own.

Almost  the  only  persons  who  may  be  said  to  com-
prehend even  approximately  the  significance,  principles,
and  purposes  of  Socialism  are  the  chief  leaders  of  the
extreme  wings  of  the  Socialistic  forces,  and  perhaps
a  few  of  the  money  kings  themselves.  It  is  a  subject
of  which  it  has  lately  become  quite  the  fashion  for
preacher,  professor,  and  penny-a-liner  to  treat,  and,  for
the  most  part,  woeful  work  they  have  made  with  it,  ex-
citing the  derision  and  pity  of  those  competent  to  judge.
That  those  prominent  in  the  intermediate  Socialistic
divisions  do  not  fully  understand  what  they  are  about
is  evident  from  the  positions  they  occupy.  If  they  did  ;
if  they  were  consistent,  logical  thinkers ;  if  they  were
what  the  French  call  consequent  men, — their  reasoning


State  Socialism  and  Anarchism 5

faculties  would  long  since  have  driven  them  to  one
extreme  or  the  other.

For  it  is  a  curious  fact  that  the  two  extremes  of  the
vast  army  now  under  consideration,  though  united,  as
has  been  hinted  above,  by  the  common  claim  that  labour
shall  be  put  in  possession  of  its  own,  are  more  dia-
metrically opposed  to  each  other  in  their  fundamental
principles  of  social  action  and  their  methods  of  reaching
the  ends  aimed  at  than  either  is  to  their  common  enemy,
the  existing  society.  They  are  based  on  two  principles,
the  history  of  whose  conflict  is  almost  equivalent  to  the
history  of  the  world  since  man  came  into  it ;  and  all
intermediate  parties,  including  that  of  the  upholders  of
the  existing  society,  are  based  upon  a  compromise
between  them.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  any  intelligent,
deep-rooted  opposition  to  the  prevailing  order  of  things
must  come  from  one  or  the  other  of  these  extremes,
for  anything  from  any  other  source,  far  from  being
revolutionary  in  character,  could  be  only  in  the  nature
of  superficial  modification,  such  as  would  be  utterly
unable  to  concentrate  upon  itself  the  degree  of  attention
and  interest  now  bestowed  upon  Modern  Sociahsm.

The  two  principles  referred  to  are  Authority  and
Liberty,  and  the  names  of  the  two  schools  of  Socialistic
thought  which  fully  and  unreservedly  represent  one  or
the  other  of  them  are,  respectively.  State  Socialism
and  Anarchism.  Whoso  knows  what  these  two  schools
want,  and  how  they  propose  to  get  it,  understands  the
Socialistic  movement. For,  just  as  it  has  been  said  that


6 State  Socialism  and  Anarchism

there  is  no  half-way  house  between  Rome  and  Reason,
so  it  may  be  said  that  there  is  no  half-way  house  between
State  Socialism  and  Anarchism.  There  are,  in  fact,
two  currents  steadily  flowing  from  the  centre  of  the
Sociahstic  forces  which  are  concentrating  them  on  the
left  and  on  the  right ;  and,  if  Socialism  is  to  prevail,
it  is  among  the  possibilities  that,  after  this  movement  of
separation  has  been  completed,  and  the  existing  order
has  been  crushed  out  between  the  two  camps,  the  ul-
timate and  bitterer  conflict  will  be  still  to  come.  In  that
case  all  the  eight-hour  men,  all  the  trade-unionists,  all
the  Knights  of  Labour,  all  the  land  nationalizationists,
all  the  greenbackers,  and,  in  short,  all  the  members  of
the  thousand  and  one  different  battalions  belonging  to
the  great  army  of  Labour,  will  have  deserted  their  old
posts,  and,  these  being  arrayed  on  the  one  side  and  the
other,  the  great  battle  will  begin.  What  a  final  victory
for  the  State  Socialists  will  mean,  and  what  a  final
victory  for  the  Anarchists  will  mean,  it  is  the  purpose  of
this  paper  to  briefly  state.

To  do  this  intelligently,  however,  I  must  first  describe
the  ground  common  to  both,  the  features  that  make
Socialists  of  each  of  them.

The  economic  principles  of  Modern  Socialism  are  a
logical  deduction  from  the  principle  laid  down  by  Adam
Smith,  in  the  early  chapters  of  his  "  Wealth  of  Nations,"
— namely,  that  labour  is  the  true  measure  of  price.  But
Adam  Smith,  after  stating  this  principle  most  clearly
and concisely, immediately abandoned all further


State  Socialism  and  Anarchism 7

consideration  of  it  to  devote  himself  to  showing  what
actually  does  measure  price,  and  how,  therefore,  wealth
is  at  present  distributed.  Since  his  day  nearly  all  the
pohtical  economists  have  followed  his  example  by
confining  their  function  to  the  description  of  society  as
it  is,  in  its  industrial  and  commercial  phases.  Sociahsm,
on  the  contrary,  extends  its  function  to  the  description
of  society  as  it  should  be,  and  the  discovery  of  the  means
of  making  it  what  it  should  be.  Half  a  century  or  more
after  Smith  enunciated  the  principle  above  stated,
Sociahsm  picked  it  up  where  he  had  dropped  it,  and,
in  following  it  to  its  logical  conclusions,  made  it  the
basis  of  a  new  economic  philosophy.

This  seems  to  have  been  done  independently  by  three
different  men,  of  three  different  nationalities,  in  three
different  languages :  Josiah  Warren,  an  American ;
Pierre  J.  Proudhon,  a  Frenchman ;  Karl  Marx,  a
German  Jew.  That  Warren  and  Proudhon  arrived  at
their  conclusions  singly  and  unaided  is  certain  ;  but
whether  Marx  was  not  largely  indebted  to  Proudhon
for  his  economic  ideas  is  questionable.  However  this
may  be,  Marx's  presentation  of  the  ideas  was  in  so
many  respects  peculiarly  his  own  that  he  is  fairly  en-
titled to  the  credit  of  originality.  That  the  work  of  this
interesting  trio  should  have  been  done  so  nearly  simul-
taneously seems  to  indicate  that  Socialism  was  in
the  air,  and  that  the  time  was  ripe  and  the  conditions
were  favourable  for  the  appearance  of  this  new  school
of  thought. So  far  as  priority  of  time  is  concerned,  the


8 State  Socialism  and  Anarchism

credit  seems  to  belong  to  Warren,  the  American, —
a  fact  which  should  be  noted  by  the  stump  orators
who  are  so  fond  of  declaiming  against  Socialism  as  an
imported  article.  Of  the  purest  Revolutionary  blood,
too,  this  Warren,  for  he  descends  from  the  Warren  who
fell  at  Bunker  Hill.

From  Smith's  principle  that  labour  is  the  true  measure
of  price — or,  as  Warren  phrased  it,  that  cost  is  the  proper
limit  of  price — these  three  men  made  the  following
deductions  :  that  the  natural  wage  of  labour  is  its  pro-
duct ;  that  this  wage,  or  product,  is  the  only  just  source
of  income  (leaving  out,  of  course,  gift,  inheritance,  etc.)  ;
that  all  who  derive  income  from  any  other  source
abstract  it  directly  or  indirectly  from  the  natural  and
just  wage  of  labour ;  that  this  abstracting  process
generally  takes  one  of  three  forms, — interest,  rent,  and
profit ;  that  these  three  constitute  the  trinity  of  usury,
and  are  simply  different  methods  of  levying  tribute  for
the  use  of  capital ;  that  capital  being  simply  stored-up
labour  which  has  already  received  its  pay  in  full,  its  use
ought  to  be  gratuitous,  on  the  principle  that  labour  is
the  only  basis  of  price ;  that  the  lender  of  capital  is
entitled  to  its  return  intact,  and  nothing  more  ;  that  the
only  reason  why  the  banker,  the  stockholder,  the  land-
lord, the  manufacturer,  and  the  merchant  are  able  to
exact  usury  from  labour  lies  in  the  fact  that  they  are
backed  by  legal  privilege,  or  monopoly ;  and  that  the
only  way  to  secure  to  labour  the  enjoyment  of  its  entire
product,  or  natural  wage,  is  to  strike  down  monopoly.


State  Socialism  and  Anarchism 9

It  must  not  be  inferred  that  either  Warren,  Proudhon,
or  Marx  used  exactly  this  phraseology,  or  followed
exactly  this  line  of  thought,  but  it  indicates  definitely
enough  the  fundamental  ground  taken  by  all  three,
and  their  substantial  thought  up  to  the  hmit  to  which
they  went  in  common.  And,  lest  I  may  be  accused  of
stating  the  positions  and  arguments  of  these  men
incorrectly,  it  may  be  well  to  say  in  advance  that  I  have
viewed  them  broadly,  and  that,  for  the  purpose  of  sharp,
vivid,  and  emphatic  comparison  and  contrast,  I  have
taken  considerable  liberty  with  their  thought  by  re-
arranging it  in  an  order,  and  often  in  a  phraseology,  of
my  own,  but,  I  am  satisfied,  without,  in  so  doing,
misrepresenting  them  in  any  essential  particular.

It  was  at  this  point — the  necessity  of  striking  down
monopoly — that  came  the  parting  of  their  ways.  Here
the  road  forked.  They  found  that  they  must  turn  either
to  the  right  or  to  the  left, — follow  either  the  path  of
Authority  or  the  path  of  Liberty.  Marx  went  one  way  ;
Warren  and  Proudhon  the  other.  Thus  were  born
State  Socialism  and  Anarchism.

First,  then.  State  Socialism,  which  may  be  described
as  the  doctrine  that  all  the  affairs  of  men  should  he  managed
by  the  government,  regardless  of  individual  choice.

Marx,  its  founder,  concluded  that  the  only  way  to
abolish  the  class  monopolies  was  to  centralize  and  con-
solidate aU  industrial  and  commercial  interests,  all
productive  and  distributive  agencies,  in  one  vast  mono-
poly in  the  hands  of  the  State. The  government  must


lo  State  Socialism  and  Anarchism

become  banker,  manufacturer,  farmer,  carrier,  and
merchant,  and  in  these  capacities  must  suffer  no  com-
petition. Land,  tools,  and  all  instruments  of  production
must  be  wrested  from  individual  hands,  and  made  the
property  of  the  collectivit3^  To  the  individual  can
belong  only  the  products  to  be  consumed,  not  the  means
of  producing  them.  A  man  may  own  his  clothes  and
his  food,  but  not  the  sewing-machine  which  makes  his
shirts  or  the  spade  which  digs  his  potatoes.  Product
and  capital  are  essentially  different  things  ;  the  former
belongs  to  individuals,  the  latter  to  society.  Society
must  seize  the  capital  which  belongs  to  it,  by  the  ballot
if  it  can,  by  revolution  if  it  must.  Once  in  possession
of  it,  it  must  administer  it  on  the  majority  principle,
through  its  organ,  the  State,  utilize  it  in  production  and
distribution,  fix  all  prices  by  the  amount  of  labour
involved,  and  employ  the  whole  people  in  its  workshops,
farms,  stores,  etc.  The  nation  must  be  transformed  into
a  vast  bureaucracy,  and  every  individual  into  a  State
official.  Everything  must  be  done  on  the  cost  principle,
the  people  having  no  motive  to  make  a  profit  out  of
themselves.  Individuals  not  being  allowed  to  own
capital,  no  one  can  employ  another  or  even  himself.
Every  man  will  be  a  wage-receiver,  and  the  State  the
only  wage-payer.  He  who  will  not  work  for  the  State
must  starve,  or,  more  likely,  go  to  prison.  All
freedom  of  trade  must  disappear.  Competition  must
be  utterly  wiped  out.  All  industrial  and  commercial
activity  must  be  centred  in  one  vast,  enormous,  all-


State  Socialism  and  Anarchism 1 1

inclusive monopoly. The remedy  for  monopolies  is

MONOPOLY.

Such  is  the  economic  programme  of  State  Socialism
as  adopted  from  Karl  Marx.  The  history  of  its  growth
and  progress  cannot  be  told  here.  In  this  country  the
parties  that  uphold  it  are  known  as  the  Socialist  Labour
Party,  which  pretends  to  follow  Karl  Marx ;  the
Nationalists,  who  follow  Karl  Marx  filtered  through
Edward  Bellamy ;  and  the  Christian  Socialists,  who
follow  Karl  Marx  filtered  through  Jesus  Christ.

What  other  applications  this  principle  of  Authority,
once  adopted  in  the  economic  sphere,  will  develop  is  very
evident.  It  means  the  absolute  control  by  the  majority
of  all  individual  conduct.  The  right  of  such  control  is
already  admitted  by  the  State  Socialists,  though  they
maintain  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  individual  would
be  allowed  a  much  larger  liberty  than  he  now  enjoys.
But  he  would  only  be  allowed  it ;  he  could  not  claim
it  as  his  own.  There  would  be  no  foundation  of  society
upon  a  guaranteed  equality  of  the  largest  possible
liberty.  Such  liberty  as  might  exist  would  exist  by
sufferance,  and  could  be  taken  away  at  any  moment.
Constitutional  guarantees  would  be  of  no  avail.  There
would  be  but  one  article  in  the  constitution  of  a  State
Socialistic  country :  "  The  right  of  the  majority  is
absolute."

The  claim  of  the  State  Sociahsts,  however,  that  this
right  would  not  be  exercised  in  matters  pertaining  to
the  individual  in  the  more  intimate  and  private  rela-


12 State  Socialism  and  Anarchism

tions  of  his  life  is  not  borne  out  by  the  history  of  govern-
ments. It  has  ever  been  the  tendency  of  power  to  add
to  itself,  to  enlarge  its  sphere,  to  encroach  beyond  the
limits  set  for  it ;  and  where  the  habit  of  resisting  such
encroachment  is  not  fostered,  and  the  individual  is  not
taught  to  be  jealous  of  his  rights,  individuality  gradually
disappears  and  the  government  or  State  becomes  the
all-in-all.  Control  naturally  accompanies  responsibility.
Under  the  system  of  State  Sociahsm,  therefore,  which
holds  the  community  responsible  for  the  health,  wealth,
and  wisdom  of  the  individual,  it  is  evident  that  the
community,  through  its  majority  expression,  will  insist
more  and  more  on  prescribing  the  conditions  of  health,
wealth,  and  wisdom,  thus  impairing  and  finally  de-
stroying individual  independence,  and  with  it  all  sense
of  individual  responsibility.

Whatever,  then,  the  State  Socialists  may  claim  or
disclaim,  their  system,  if  adopted,  is  doomed  to  end  in
a  State  religion,  to  the  expense  of  which  all  must  con-
tribute, and  at  the  altar  of  which  all  must  kneel ;  a
State  school  of  medicine,  by  whose  practitioners  the  sick
must  invariably  be  treated  ;  a  State  system  of  hygiene,
prescribing  what  all  must  and  must  not  eat,  drink,  wear,
and  do  ;  a  State  code  of  morals,  which  will  not  content
itself  with  punishing  crime,  but  will  prohibit  what  the
majority  decide  to  be  vice ;  a  State  system  of  in-
struction, which  will  do  away  with  all  private  schools,
academies,  and  colleges ;  a  State  nursery,  in  which  all
children  must  be  brought  up  in  common  at  the  public


State  Socialism  and  Anarchism 13

expense ;  and,  finally,  a  State  family,  with  an  attempt
at  stirpiculture,  or  scientific  breeding,  in  which  no  man
and  woman  will  be  allowed  to  have  children  if  the  State
prohibits  them,  and  no  man  and  woman  can  refuse  to
have  children  if  the  State  orders  them.  Thus  will
Authority  achieve  its  acme  and  Monopoly  be  carried
to  its  highest  power.

Such  is  the  ideal  of  the  logical  State  Socialist,  such
the  goal  which  lies  at  the  end  of  the  road  that  Karl
Marx  took.  Let  us  now  follow  the  fortunes  of  Warren
and  Proudhon,  who  took  the  other  road, — the  road  of
Liberty.

This  brings  us  to  Anarchism,  which  may  be  described
as  the  doctrine  that  all  the  affairs  of  men  should  he  managed
by  individuals  or  voluntary  associations,  and  that  the
State  should  be  abolished.

When  Warren  and  Proudhon,  in  prosecuting  their
search  for  justice  to  labour,  came  face  to  face  with  the
obstacle  of  class  monopolies,  they  saw  that  these  mono-
polies rested  upon  Authority,  and  concluded  that  the
thing  to  be  done  was,  not  to  strengthen  this  Authority
and  thus  make  monopoly  universal,  but  to  utterly  uproot
Authority  and  give  full  sway  to  the  opposite  principle.
Liberty,  by  making  competition,  the  antithesis  of  mono-
poly, universal.  They  saw  in  competition  the  great
leveller  of  prices  to  the  labour  cost  of  production.  In
this  they  agreed  with  the  political  economists.  The
query  then  naturally  presented  itself  why  all  prices
do  not  fall  to  labour  cost ;  where  there  is  any  room  for


14 State  Socialism  and  Anarchism

incomes  acquired  otherwise  than  by  labour  ;  in  a  word,
why  the  usurer,  the  receiver  of  interest,  rent,  and  profit,
exists.  The  answer  was  found  in  the  present  one-
sidedness  of  competition.  It  was  discovered  that
capital  had  so  manipulated  legislation  that  unlimited
competition  is  allowed  in  supplying  productive  labour,
thus  keeping  wages  down  to  the  starvation  point,  or  as
near  it  as  practicable  ;  that  a  great  deal  of  competition
is  allowed  in  supplying  distributive  labour,  or  the  labour
of  the  mercantile  classes,  thus  keeping,  not  the  prices
of  goods,  but  the  merchant's  actual  profits  on  them,
down  to  a  point  somewhat  approximating  equitable
wages  for  the  merchant's  work  ;  but  that  almost  no
competition  at  all  is  allowed  in  supplying  capital,  upon
the  aid  of  which  both  productive  and  distributive  labour
are  dependent  for  their  power  of  achievement,  thus
keeping  the  rate  of  interest  on  money  and  of  house-rent
and  ground-rent  at  as  high  a  point  as  the  necessities  of
the  people  will  bear.

On  discovering  this,  Warren  and  Proudhon  charged
the  political  economists  with  being  afraid  of  their  own
doctrine.  The  Manchester  men  were  accused  of  being
inconsistent.  They  believed  in  liberty  to  compete  with
the  labourer  in  order  to  reduce  his  wages,  but  not  in
liberty  to  compete  with  the  capitalist  in  order  to  reduce
his  usury.  Laissez  faire  was  very  good  sauce  for  the
goose,  labour,  but  very  poor  sauce  for  the  gander,
capital.  But  how  to  correct  this  inconsistency,  how  to
serve  this  gander  with  this  sauce,  how  to  put  capital


State  Socialism  and  Anarchism 15

at  the  service  of  business  men  and  labourers  at  cost,  or
free  of  usury, — that  was  the  problem.

Marx,  as  we  have  seen,  solved  it  by  declaring  capital
to  be  a  different  thing  from  product,  and  maintaining
that  it  belonged  to  society  and  should  be  seized  by
society  and  employed  for  the  benefit  of  all  alike.  Proud-
hon  scoffed  at  this  distinction  between  capital  and  pro-
duct. He  maintained  that  capital  and  product  are  not
different  kinds  of  wealth,  but  simply  alternate  conditions
or  functions  of  the  same  wealth  ;  that  all  wealth  under-
goes an  incessant  transformation  from  capital  into
product  and  from  product  back  into  capital,  the  process
repeating  itself  interminably  ;  that  capital  and  product
are  purely  social  terms ;  that  what  is  product  to  one
man  immediately  becomes  capital  to  another,  and
vice  versa  ;  that,  if  there  were  but  one  person  in  the
world,  all  wealth  would  be  to  him  at  once  capital  and
product ;  that  the  fruit  of  A's  toil  is  his  product,  which,
when  sold  to  B,  becomes  B's  capital  (unless  B  is  an
unproductive  consumer,  in  which  case  it  is  merely
wasted  wealth,  outside  the  view  of  social  economy)  ;
that  a  steam  engine  is  just  as  much  product  as  a  coat,
and  that  a  coat  is  just  as  much  capital  as  a  steam
engine ;  and  that  the  same  laws  of  equity  govern  the
possession  of  the  one  that  govern  the  possession  of  the
other.

For  these  and  other  reasons  Proudhon  and  Warren
found  themselves  unable  to  sanction  any  such  plan  as
the  seizure  of  capital  by  society. But,  though  opposed


1 6 State  Socialism  and  Anarchism

to  socializing  the  ownership  of  capital,  they  aimed,
nevertheless,  to  socialize  its  effects  by  making  its  use
beneficial  to  all  instead  of  a  means  of  impoverishing  the
many  to  enrich  the  few.  And  when  the  light  burst  in
upon  them,  they  saw  that  this  could  be  done  by  sub-
jecting capital  to  the  natural  law  of  competition,  thus
bringing  the  price  of  its  use  down  to  cost, — that  is,  to
nothing  beyond  the  expenses  incidental  to  handhng
and  transferring  it.  So  they  raised  the  banner  of
Absolute  Free  Trade ;  free  trade  at  home,  as  well  as
with  foreign  countries ;  the  logical  carrying  out  of  the
Manchester  doctrine ;  laissez  /aire  the  universal  rule.
Under  this  banner  they  began  their  fight  upon  mono-
pohes,  whether  the  all-inclusive  monopoly  of  the  State
Socialists,  or  the  various  class  monopolies  that  now
prevail.

Of  the  latter  they  distinguished  four  of  principal
importance  :  the  money  monopoly,  the  land  monopoly,
the  tariff  monopoly,  and  the  patent  monopoly.

First  in  the  importance  of  its  evil  influence  they
considered  the  money  monopoly,  which  consists  of  the
privilege  given  by  the  government  to  certain  individuals,
or  to  individuals  holding  certain  kinds  of  property,
of  issuing  the  circulating  medium,  a  privilege  which  is
now  enforced  in  this  country  by  a  national  tax  of  ten
per  cent,  upon  all  other  persons  who  attempt  to  furnish
a  circulating  medium,  and  by  State  laws  making  it  a
criminal  offence  to  issue  notes  as  currency.  It  is  claimed
that  the  holders  of  this  privilege  control  the  rate  of


State  Socialism  and  Anarchism 17

interest,  the  rate  of  rent  of  houses  and  buildings,  and
the  prices  of  goods, — the  first  directly,  and  the  second
and  third  indirectly.  For,  say  Proudhon  and  Warren,
if  the  business  of  banking  were  made  free  to  all,  more
and  more  persons  would  enter  into  it  until  the  com-
petition should  become  sharp  enough  to  reduce  the
price  of  lending  money  to  the  labour  cost,  which  statis-
tics show  to  be  less  than  three-fourths  of  one  per  cent.
In  that  case  the  thousands  of  people  who  are  now
deterred  from  going  into  business  by  the  ruinously  high
rates  which  they  must  pay  for  capital  with  which  to
start  and  carry  on  business  will  find  their  difficulties
removed.  If  they  have  property  which  they  do  not
desire  to  convert  into  money  by  sale,  a  bank  will  take
it  as  collateral  for  a  loan  of  a  certain  proportion  of  its
market  value  at  less  than  one  per  cent,  discount.  If  they
have  no  property,  but  are  industrious,  honest,  and
capable,  they  will  generally  be  able  to  get  their  individual
notes  endorsed  by  a  sufficient  number  of  known  and
solvent  parties ;  and  on  such  business  paper  they  will
be  able  to  get  a  loan  at  a  bank  on  similarly  favourable
terms.  Thus  interest  will  fall  at  a  blow.  The  banks
will  really  not  be  lending  capital  at  all,  but  will  be
doing  business  on  the  capital  of  their  customers,  the
business  consisting  in  an  exchange  of  the  known  and
widely  available  credits  of  the  banks  for  the  unknown
and  unavailable,  but  equally  good,  credits  of  the
customers,  and  a  charge  therefor  of  less  than  one  per
cent.,  not  as  interest  for  the  use  of  capital,  but  as  pay


1 8 State  Socialism  and  Anarchism

for  the  labour  of  running  the  banks.  This  facility  of
acquiring  capital  will  give  an  unheard-of  impetus  to
business,  and  consequently  create  an  unprecedented
demand  for  labour, — a  demand  which  will  always  be
in  excess  of  the  supply,  directly  the  contrary  of  the
present  condition  of  the  labour  market.  Then  will  be
seen  an  exemplification  of  the  words  of  Richard  Cobden
that,  when  two  labourers  are  after  one  emplo3''er,  wages
fall,  but,  when  two  employers  are  after  one  labourer,
wages  rise.  Labour  will  then  be  in  a  position  to  dictate
its  wages,  and  will  thus  secure  its  natural  wage,  its
entire  product.  Thus  the  same  blow  that  strikes  interest
down  will  send  wages  up.  But  this  is  not  all.  Down
win  go  profits  also.  For  merchants,  instead  of  buying
at  high  prices  on  credit,  will  borrow  money  of  the
banks  at  less  than  one  per  cent.,  buy  at  low  prices  for
cash,  and  correspondingly  reduce  the  prices  of  their
goods  to  their  customers.  And  wth  the  rest  will  go
house-rent.  For  no  one  who  can  borrow  capital  at  one
per  cent,  with  which  to  build  a  house  of  his  own  will
consent  to  pay  rent  to  a  landlord  at  a  higher  rate  than
that.  Such  is  the  vast  claim  made  by  Proudhon  and
Warren  as  to  the  results  of  the  simple  abolition  of  the
money  monopoly.

Second  in  importance  comes  the  land  monopoly,  the
evil  effects  of  which  are  seen  principally  in  exclusively
agricultural  countries,  hke  Ireland.  This  monopoly
consists  in  the  enforcement  by  government  of  land
titles  which  do  not  rest  upon  personal  occupancy  and


State  Socialism  and  Anarchism 19

cultivation.  It  was  obvious  to  Warren  and  Proudhon
that,  as  soon  as  individuals  should  no  longer  be  protected
by  their  fellows  in  anything  but  personal  occupancy
and  cultivation  of  land,  ground-rent  would  disappear,
and  so  usury  have  one  less  leg  to  stand  on.  Their
followers  of  to-day  are  disposed  to  modify  this  claim
to  the  extent  of  admitting  that  the  very  small  fraction
of  ground-rent  which  rests,  not  on  monopoly,  but  on
superiority  of  soil  or  site,  will  continue  to  exist  for  a  time
and  perhaps  forever,  though  tending  constantly  to  a
minimum  under  conditions  of  freedom.  But  the  in-
equality of  soils  which  gives  rise  to  the  economic  rent
of  land,  like  the  inequality  of  human  skill  which  gives
rise  to  the  economic  rent  of  ability,  is  not  a  cause  for
serious  alarm,  even  to  the  most  thorough  opponent  of
usury,  as  its  nature  is  not  that  of  a  germ  from  which
other  and  graver  inequalities  may  spring,  but  rather
that  of  a  decaying  branch  which  may  finally  wither  and
fall.

Third,  the  tariff  monopoly,  which  consists  in  fostering
production  at  high  prices  and  under  unfavourable
conditions  by  visiting  with  the  penalty  of  taxation
those  who  patronize  production  at  low  prices  and  under
favourable  conditions.  The  evil  to  which  this  monopoly
gives  rise  might  more  properly  be  called  w^susury  than
usury,  because  it  compels  labour  to  pay,  not  exactly
for  the  use  of  capital,  but  rather  for  the  misuse  of  capital.
The  abolition  of  this  monopoly  would  result  in  a  great
reduction  in  the  prices  of  all  articles  taxed,  and  this


20 State  Socialism  and  Anarchism

saving  to  the  labourers  who  consume  these  articles
would  be  another  step  toward  securing  to  the  labourer  his
natural  wage,  his  entire  product.  Proudhon  admitted,
however,  that  to  abolish  this  monopoly  before  abolishing
the  money  monopoly  would  be  a  cruel  and  disastrous
policy :  first,  because  the  evil  of  scarcity  of  money,
created  by  the  money  monopoly,  would  be  intensified
by  the  flow  of  money  out  of  the  country  which  would  be
involved  in  an  excess  of  imports  over  exports ;  and,
second,  because  that  fraction  of  the  labourers  of  the
country  which  is  now  employed  in  the  protected  in-
dustries would  be  turned  adrift  to  face  starvation  with-
out the  benefit  of  the  insatiable  demand  for  labour
which  a  competitive  money  system  would  create.  Free
trade  in  money  at  home,  making  money  and  work  abun-
dant, was  insisted  upon  by  Proudhon  as  a  prior  condition
of  free  trade  in  goods  with  foreign  countries.

Fourth,  the  patent  monopoly,  which  consists  in  pro-
tecting inventors  and  authors  against  competition  for
a  period  long  enough  to  enable  them  to  extort  from  the
people  a  reward  enormously  in  excess  of  the  labour
measure  of  their  services, — in  other  words,  in  giving
certain  people  a  right  of  property  for  a  term  of  years  in
laws  and  facts  of  nature,  and  the  power  to  exact  tribute
from  others  for  the  use  of  this  natural  wealth,  which
should  be  open  to  all.  The  abolition  of  this  monopoly
would  fill  its  beneficiaries  with  a  wholesome  fear  of
competition  which  would  cause  them  to  be  satisfied
with  pay  for  their  services  equal  to  that  which  other


State  Socialism  and  Anarchism 2 1

labourers  get  for  theirs,  and  to  secure  it  by  placing  their
products  and  works  on  the  market  at  the  outset  at  prices
so  low  that  their  lines  of  business  would  be  no  more
tempting  to  competitors  than  any  other  lines.

The  development  of  the  economic  programme  which
consists  in  the  destruction  of  these  monopolies  and  the
substitution  for  them  of  the  freest  competition  led  its
authors  to  a  perception  of  the  fact  that  all  their  thought
rested  upon  a  very  fundamental  principle,  the  freedom
of  the  individual,  his  right  of  sovereignty  over  himself,
his  products,  and  his  affairs,  and  of  rebellion  against
the  dictation  of  external  authority.  Just  as  the  idea  of
taking  capital  away  from  individuals  and  giving  it  to
the  government  started  Marx  in  a  path  which  ends  in
making  the  government  everything  and  the  individual
nothing,  so  the  idea  of  taking  capital  away  from  govern-
ment-protected monopolies  and  putting  it  within  easy
reach  of  all  individuals  started  Warren  and  Proudhon  in
a  path  which  ends  in  making  the  individual  everything
and  the  government  nothing.  If  the  individual  has  a
right  to  govern  himself,  all  external  government  is
tyranny.  Hence  the  necessity  of  abolishing  the  State.
This  was  the  logical  conclusion  to  which  Warren  and
Proudhon  were  forced,  and  it  became  the  fundamental
article  of  their  political  philosophy.  It  is  the  doctrine
which  Proudhon  named  An-archism,  a  word  derived
from  the  Greek,  and  meaning,  not  necessarily  absence
of  order,  as  is  generally  supposed,  but  absence  of  rule.
The Anarchists are simply unterrified Jeffersonian


2  2 State  Socialism  and  Anarchism

Democrats,  They  believe  that  "  the  best  government
is  that  which  governs  least,"  and  that  that  which
governs  least  is  no  government  at  all.  Even  the  simple
police  function  of  protecting  person  and  property  they
deny  to  governments  supported  by  compulsory  taxation.
Protection  they  look  upon  as  a  thing  to  be  secured,  as
long  as  it  is  necessary,  by  voluntary  association  and
co-operation  for  self-defence,  or  as  a  commodity,  to  be
purchased,  like  any  other  commodity,  of  those  who  offer
the  best  article  at  the  lowest  price.  In  their  view  it  is
in  itself  an  invasion  of  the  individual  to  compel  him  to
pay  for  or  suffer  a  protection  against  invasion  that  he
has  not  asked  for  and  does  not  desire.  And  they  further
claim  that  protection  will  become  a  drug  in  the  market,
after  poverty  and  consequently  crime  have  disappeared
through  the  realization  of  their  economic  programme.
Compulsory  taxation  is  to  them  the  life  principle  of  all
the  monopolies,  and  passive,  but  organized,  resistance
to  the  tax-collector  they  contemplate,  when  the  proper
time  comes,  as  one  of  the  most  effective  methods  of
accomplishing  their  purposes.

Their  attitude  on  this  is  a  key  to  their  attitude  on
all  other  questions  of  a  political  or  social  nature.  In
religion  they  are  atheistic  as  far  as  their  own  opinions
are  concerned,  for  they  look  upon  divine  authority  and
the  religious  sanction  of  morality  as  the  chief  pretexts
put  forward  by  the  privileged  classes  for  the  exercise
of  human  authority.  "  If  God  exists,"  said  Proud-
hon, "  he is man's enemy." And,  in contrast to


State  Socialism  and  Anarchism 23

Voltaire's  famous  epigram,  "  If  God  did  not  exist,  it
would  be  necessary  to  invent  him,"  the  great  Russian
Nihilist,  Michael  Bakounine,  placed  this  antithetical
proposition  :  "  If  God  existed,  it  would  be  necessary
to  abolish  him."  But  although,  viewing  the  divine
hierarchy  as  a  contradiction  of  Anarchy,  they  do  not
believe  in  it,  the  Anarchists  none  the  less  firmly  believe
in  the  liberty  to  believe  in  it.  Any  denial  of  religious
freedom  they  squarely  oppose.

Upholding  thus  the  right  of  every  individual  to  be  or
select  his  own  priest,  they  likewise  uphold  his  right  to
be  or  select  his  own  doctor.  No  monopoly  in  theology,
no  monopoly  in  medicine.  Competition  everywhere
and  always ;  spiritual  advice  and  medical  advice  alike
to  stand  or  fall  on  their  own  merits.  And  not  only  in
medicine,  but  in  hygiene,  must  this  principle  be  followed.
The  individual  may  decide  for  himself  not  only  what  to
do  to  get  well,  but  what  to  do  to  keep  well.  No  external
power  must  dictate  to  him  what  he  must  and  must  not
eat,  drink,  wear,  or  do.

Nor  does  the  Anarchistic  scheme  furnish  any  code
of  morals  to  be  imposed  upon  the  individual.  "  Mind
your  own  business  "  is  its  only  moral  law.  Interference
with  another's  business  is  a  crime,  and  the  only  crime,
and  as  such  may  properly  be  resisted.  In  accordance
with  this  view  the  Anarchists  look  upon  attempts  to
arbitrarily  suppress  vice  as  in  themselves  crimes.  They
believe  liberty  and  the  resultant  social  well-being  to  be
a  sure  cure  for  all  the  vices. But  they  recognize  the


24 State  Socialism  and  Anarchism

right  of  the' drunkard,  the  gambler,  the  rake,  and  the
harlot  to  live  their  lives  until  they  shall  freely  choose
to  abandon  them.

In  the  matter  of  the  maintenance  and  rearing  of
children,  the  Anarchists  would  neither  institute  the
communistic  nursery  which  the  State  Socialists  favour,
or  keep  the  communistic  school  system  which  now
prevails.  The  nurse  and  the  teacher,  like  the  doctor
and  the  preacher,  must  be  selected  voluntarily,  and  their
services  must  be  paid  for  by  those  who  patronize  them.
Parental  rights  must  not  be  taken  away,  and  parental
responsibilities  must  not  be  foisted  upon  others.

Even  in  so  delicate  a  matter  as  that  of  the  relations
of  the  sexes  the  Anarchists  do  not  shrink  from  the
application  of  their  principle.  They  acknowledge  and
defend  the  right  of  any  man  and  woman,  or  any  men
and  women,  to  love  each  other  for  as  long  or  as  short  a
time  as  they  can,  will,  or  may.  To  them  legal  marriage
and  legal  divorce  are  equal  absurdities.  They  look
forward  to  a  time  when  every  individual,  whether
man  or  woman,  shall  be  self-supporting,  and  when  each
shall  have  an  independent  home  of  his  or  her  own,
whether  it  be  a  separate  house  or  rooms  in  a  house  with
others :  when  the  love  relations  between  these  in-
dependent individuals  shall  be  as  varied  as  are  individual
inclinations  and  attractions ;  and  when  the  children
born  of  these  relations  shall  belong  exclusively  to  the
mothers  until  old  enough  to  belong  to  themselves.

Such  are  the  main  features  of  the  Anarchistic  social


State  Socialism  and  Anarchism 25

ideal.  There  is  wide  difference  of  opinion  among  those
who  hold  it  as  to  the  best  method  of  obtaining  it.  Time
forbids  the  treatment  of  that  phase  of  the  subject  here,
I  will  simply  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  it  is  an  ideal
utterly  inconsistent  with  that  of  those  Communists
who  falsely  call  themselves  Anarchists  while  at  the  same
time  advocating  a  regime  of  Archism  fully  as  despotic
as  that  of  the  State  Socialists  themselves.  And  it  is  an
ideal  that  can  be  as  little  advanced  by  the  forcible  ex-
propriation recommended  by  John  Most  and  Prince
Kropotkine  as  retarded  by  the  brooms  of  those  Mrs.
Partingtons  of  the  bench  who  sentence  them  to  prison  ;
an  ideal  which  the  martyrs  of  Chicago  did  far  more  to
help  by  their  glorious  death  upon  the  gallows  for  the
common  cause  of  Socialism  than  by  their  unfortunate
advocacy  during  their  lives,  in  the  name  of  Anarchism,
of  force  as  a  revolutionary  agent  and  authority  as  a
safeguard  of  the  new  social  order.  The  Anarchists  believe
in  liberty  both  as  end  and  means,  and  are  hostile  to
anything  that  antagonizes  it.

I  should  not  undertake  to  summarize  this  altogether
too  summary  exposition  of  Sociahsm  from  the  stand-
point of  Anarchism,  did  I  not  find  the  task  already
accomplished  for  me  by  a  brilliant  French  journalist  and
historian,  Ernest  Lesigne,  in  the  form  of  a  series  of  crisp
antitheses  ;  by  reading  which  to  you  as  a  conclusion  of
this  lecture  I  hope  to  deepen  the  impression  wliich  it  has
been  my  endeavour  to  make.

"  There  are  two  Socialisms.


2  6 State  Socialism  and  Anarchism

"  One  is  communistic,  the  other  sohdaritarian.

"  One  is  dictatorial,  the  other  Hbertarian.

"  One  is  metaphysical,  the  other  positive.

"  One  is  dogmatic,  the  other  scientific.

"  One  is  emotional,  the  other  reflective.

"  One  is  destructive,  the  other  constructive.

"  Both  are  in  pursuit  of  the  greatest  possible  welfare
for  all.

"  One  aims  to  estabhsh  happiness  for  all,  the  other
to  enable  each  to  be  happy  in  his  own  way.

"  The  first  regards  the  State  as  a  society  sui  generis,
of  an  especial  essence,  the  product  of  a  sort  of  divine
right  outside  of  and  above  all  society,  with  special
rights  and  able  to  exact  special  obediences  ;  the  second
considers  the  State  as  an  association  like  any  other,
generally  managed  worse  than  others.

"  The  first  proclaims  the  sovereignty  of  the  State ;
the  second  recognizes  no  sort  of  sovereign.

"  One  wishes  all  monopolies  to  be  held  by  the  State  ;
the  other  wishes  the  abolition  of  all  monopolies.

"  One  wishes  the  governed  class  to  become  the
governing  class  ;  the  other  wishes  the  disappearance  of
classes.

"  Both  declare  that  the  existing  state  of  things  cannot
last.

"  The  first  considers  revolution  as  the  indispensable
agent  of  evolution  ;  the  second  teaches  that  repression
alone  turns  evolution  into  revolution.

"  The  first  has  faith  in  a  cataclysm.


State  Socialism  and  Anarchism 27

"  The  second  knows  that  social  progress  will  result
from  the  free  play  of  individual  efforts.

"  Both  understand  that  we  are  entering  upon  a  new
historic  phase.

*'  One  wishes  that  there  should  be  none  but  proletaires.

"  The  other  wishes  that  there  should  be  no  more
proletaires.

"  The  first  wishes  to  take  everything  from  everybody.

"  The  second  wishes  to  leave  each  in  possession  of
his  own.

"  The  one  wishes  to  expropriate  everybody.

"  The  other  wishes  everybody  to  be  a  proprietor.

"  The  first  says  : '  Do  as  the  government  wishes.'

"  The  second  says  :  '  Do  as  you  wish  yourself.'

"  The  former  threatens  with  despotism.

"  The  latter  promises  liberty.

"  The  former  makes  the  citizen  the  subject  of  the
State.

"  The  latter  makes  the  State  the  employee  of  the
citizen.

"  One  proclaims  that  labour  pains  will  be  necessary  to
the  birth  of  the  new  world.

"  The  other  declares  that  real  progress  will  not  cause
suffering  to  any  one.

"  The  first  has  confidence  in  social  war.

"  The  other  beheves  only  in  the  works  of  peace.

"  One  aspires  to  command,  to  regulate,  to  legislate.

"  The  other  wishes  to  attain  the  minimum  of  com-
mand, of  regulation,  of  legislation.


28 State  Socialism  and  Anarchism

"  One  would  be  followed  by  the  most  atrocious  of
reactions.

"  The  other  opens  unlimited  horizons  to  progress.

"  The  first  will  fail ;  the  other  will  succeed.

"  Both  desire  equality.

"  One  by  lowering  heads  that  are  too  high.

"  The  other  by  raising  heads  that  are  too  low.

"  One  sees  equality  under  a  common  yoke.

"  The  other  will  secure  equality  in  complete
liberty.

"  One  is  intolerant,  the  other  tolerant.

"  One  frightens,  the  other  reassures.

"  The  first  wishes  to  instruct  ever3^body.

"  The  second  wishes  to  enable  everybody  to  instruct
himself.

"  The  first  wishes  to  support  everybody.

"  The  second  wishes  to  enable  everybody  to  support
himself.

"  One  says :

'"The  land  to  the  State.

"  *  The  mine  to  the  State.

'"The tool  to  the  State.

"  '  The  product  to  the  State.'

"  The  other  says  :

"  '  The  land  to  the  cultivator.

"  '  The  mine  to  the  miner.

"  '  The  tool  to  the  labourer.

"  '  The  product  to  the  producer.'

"  There  are  only  these  two  Socialisms.


State  Socialism  and  Anarchism 29

"  One  is  the  infancy  of  Socialism ;  the  other  is  its
manhood.

"  One  is  already  the  past ;  the  other  is  the  future.

"  One  will  give  place  to  the  other.

"  To-day  each  of  us  must  choose  for  one  or  the  other
of  these  two  Socialisms,  or  else  confess  that  he  is  not  a
Sociahst,"

POSTSCRIPT

Twenty-five  years  ago,  when  the  foregoing  essay  was
WTitten,  the  denial  of  competition  had  not  yet  effected
the  enormous  concentration  of  wealth  that  now  so
gravely  threatens  social  order.  It  was  not  yet  too  late
to  stem  the  current  of  accumulation  by  a  reversal  of  the
policy  of  monopoly.  The  Anarchistic  remedy  was  still
applicable.

To-day  the  way  is  not  so  clear.  The  four  monopohes,
unhindered,  have  made  possible  the  modern  development
of  the  trust,  and  the  trust  is  now  a  monster  which,  I  fear,
even  the  freest  competition,  could  it  be  instituted,  would
be  unable  to  destroy.  As  long  as  the  Standard  Oil  group
controlled  only  fifty  millions  of  dollars,  the  institution
of  free  competition  would  have  crippled  it  hopelessly ;
it  needed  monopoly  for  its  sustenance  and  its  growth.
Now  that  it  controls,  directly  and  indirectly,  perhaps
ten  thousand  miUions,  it  sees  in  monopoly  a  convenience,
to  be  sure,  but  no  longer  a  necessity.  It  can  do  without
it.  Were  all  restrictions  upon  competition  to  be  removed,
concentrated  capital  could  meet  successfully  the  new


30  State  Socialism  and  Anarchism

situation  by  setting  aside  annually  for  sacrifice  a  sum
that  would  remove  every  competitor  from  the  field.

If  this  be  true,  then  monopoly,  which  can  be  controlled
permanently  only  by  economic  forces,  has  passed  for
the  moment  beyond  their  reach,  and  must  be  grappled
with  for  a  time  solely  by  forces  political  or  revolutionar3^
Until  measures  of  forcible  confiscation,  through  the
State  or  in  defiance  of  it,  shall  have  abolished  the  con-
centrations that  monopoly  has  created,  the  economic
solution  proposed  by  Anarchism  and  outlined  in  the
foregoing  pages — and  there  is  no  other  solution — will
remain  a  thing  to  be  taught  to  the  rising  generation,
that  conditions  may  be  favourable  to  its  application
after  the  great  lev^lhng.  But  education  is  a  slow
process,  and  for  this  reason  we  must  hope  that  the  day
of  readjustment  may  not  come  too  quickly.  Anarchists
who  endeavour  to  hasten  it  by  joining  in  the  propaganda
of  State  Socialism  or  revolution  make  a  sad  mistake  in-
deed. They  help  to  so  force  the  march  of  events  that  the
people  will  not  have  time  to  find  out,  by  the  study  of
their  experience,  that  their  troubles  have  been  due  to
the  rejection  of  competition.  If  this  lesson  shall  not
be  learned  in  season,  the  past  w^ill  be  repeated  in  the
future,  in  which  case  we  shall  have  to  turn  for  consola-
tion to  the  doctrine  of  Nietzsche  that  this  is  bound  to
happen  anyhow,  or  to  the  reflection  of  Renan  that,  from
the  point  of  view  of  Sirius,  all  these  matters  are  of  little
moment.  B.  R.  T.

January  6,  191 1.


THILOSOPHIC  ANARCHISM

Anarchism  and  Other  Essays.  By  Emma  Goldman.  With
a  biographic  memoir  and  a  portrait.  Cloth,  277  pages.  4s.  6d.
nett,  postage  4d. (The  latest  authoritative  work  on  Anarchism.)

Anarchism.  By  Dr.  Paul  Eltzbacher.  330  pages,  Cloth.
6s.  6d.  nett,  postage  4d.  (A  summary  of  the  doctrines  of
seven  international  anarchists,  with  six  portraits.)

The Anarchists. A Story. By John Henry Mackay.

315  pages,  wrappers,  2s.  nett,  postage  3d.

The  Tucker  Series  (edited  by  Benj.  R.  Tucker) :

1.  The  Seven  that  were  Hanged,  By  L.  AndreiefF.  Wrappers,
6d.  nett,  postage  id. (U.S.A.  15  cents.)

2.  State  Socialism  and  Anarchism.  By  Benj.  R.  Tucker.
New  Edition,  with  Postscript  by  Author.  3d.,  postage  id.
(U.S.A.  10  cents.)

Non-Governmental  Society.  By  Edward  Carpenter.  Wrap-
pers, 3d.  nett,  postage  ^d. (U.S.A.  10  cents.)

Walden :  or,  Life  in  the  Woods. Thoreau. Post-free  yjd.

A  Vindication  of  Natural  Society.  By  Edmund  Burke.
Wrappers,  6d.  nett,  postage  id.;  \  cloth,  is.  nett,  postage  2d.

On  the  Duty  of  Civil  Disobedience.  By  H.  D.  Thoreau.
Wrappers,  3d.,  postage  |d.  ;  cloth,  6d.  nett,  postage  id.

God  and  the  State.  By  Michael  Bakunine.  Wrappers,
6d.  nett,  postage  id. (New  Edition,  Tucker's  trans.)

Penny  pamphlets  by  Kropotkin  (postage  id.  each).

Anarchist  Communism.  Anarchist  Morality.

Anarchism  :  its  philosophy  and  ideal. The  Wage  System.
The  State  :  its  Historic  Role.  Expropriation.

The  Commune  of  Paris.

Penny  pamphlets  by  William  Morris  (postage  id.  each).
Monopoly  :  or.  How  Labour  is  Robbed.
Useful  Work  versus  Useless  Toil.

The  Ego  and  his  Own.  By  Max  Stirner.  500  pages.
Cloth.  Four  copies  only  in  print.  The  first  two  15s.  nett.
The  last  two  much  higher.

London  : A.  C. Fifield, 13 Clifford's Inn,  E.C.


HERETICAL  BOOKLETS

No  Votes  for  Women.  A  Reply  by  Lady  Constance
Lytton. 3rd  Edition. Post-free  l\d.

On  the  Duty  of  Civil  Disobedience.  By  Henry  David
Thoreau. Post-free  '^\d.

Life  without  Principle.  By  Henry  David  Thoreau.  Post-
free  3^^.

A  Siding  at  a  Railway  Station.  By  James  Anthony  Froude.
Post-free  l\d.

True  and  False  Life By  Leo  Tolstoy. Post-free  '2^\d.

The  Gospel  of  Simplicity.  By  Godfrey  Blount.  Post-
free  3^^.

Culture,  and  Education.  By  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson.
Post-free  'l\d.

Man,  the  Reformer.  By  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson.  Post-
free  3^^.

Unto  this  Last. By  John  Ruskin. Post-free  4//.

The  Influence  of  Women  in  the  Progress  of  Knowledge.
By  Henry  T.  Buckle. Post-free  id.

The  Woman's  Calendar.  By  Dora  B.  Montefiore.  Post-
free  id.

Socialism  and  the  Family. By  H.  G.  Wells. Post-free  id.

Sayings  of  Tolstoy. Post-free  id.

The  Seven  that  were  Hanged.  By  Leonid  Andrieif  (on
Russian  tyranny). Post-free  id.

Walden :  or  Life  in  the  Woods.  By  Henry  David  Thoreau.
Post-free  id.

The  Defence  and  Death  of  Socrates. Post-free  id.

Articles  of  Faith  in  the  Freedom  of  Women.  By  Laurence
Housman. Post-free  yd.

London : A. C. Fifield, 13 Clifford's Inn, E.G.


62894b

The  Anarchists

A  Picture  of  Civilization  at  the  close
of  the  Nineteenth  Century

By

John  Henry  Mackay

Translated  from  the  German  by

George  Schumm

"  *  The  Anarchists '  is  one  of  the  very  few  books  that
have  a  right  to  live.  For  insight  into  life  and  manners,
for  dramatic  strength,  for  incisiveness  of  phrase,  and  for
cold,  pitiless  logic,  no  book  of  this  generation  equals  it."

New  JTork  Morning  Journal,

"  The  book  is  a  prose  poem." — St.  Louis  Republic.
3 1 5  pages. Portrait  of  the  author


LONDON  :  NEW YORK  :

A.  C.  FIFIELD,  E.  C.  WALKER,

13  Clifford's  Inn,  E.C.  244  West  143RD  Street.

Price  zs.  net  Price  50  cenis^  post-paid


^


Now  Ready

AndreiefFs extraordinarily affecting st

The  Seven  that  were  Har

By  Leonid  AndreiefF

80  pagest  6d.  nettf  by  fost^  7</.  ( C/.S.J.,  1 5  centSf  postage,

"  If  my  truthful  itory  about  seven  of  the  thouianda  who  were  ha
help  toward  destroying  one  of  the  barriers  which  separate  one  ns
another,  one  soul  from  another  soul,  I  shall  consider  myself  happy."

Ti

*'  Nothing  can  gire  an  Idea  of  the  penetrating  emotion  of  this  reci
unfolds  itself  so  simply,  without  any  attempt  at  morbid  effects  or
revolt,  without  the  least  explosion  of  hatred  or  indignation.  ^
sorrowful  sobriety  it  constitutes  the  severest  and  most  definite  an
of  Tsarism." — Let  DQuveUety  'Parit.

"  The  narrative  is  simple  and  unstrersed,  and  extraordinarily
Everything  reads  like  fact,  and  what  Mr.  AndreieflF  calls  his  <  truti
must  make  a  profound  impression  on  any  humane  person.  .  .  .  We
fortitude  in  undress,  nobility  on  the  rack." — tPKanchester  Guardian.

"  In  this  book  we  have  not  merely  an  account  of  the  last  moment
people  who  were  hanged,  but  an  illuminating  revelation  of  the  chaotic
ness  of  a  whole  society. ...  It  is  not  a  pleasant  picture  ;  these  Russi
do  not  see  the  world  through  rose-coloured  glasses ;  but  it  is  a  pict
grips  the  imagination  powerfully." — QUugoiu  O^nvs.

•'  The  story,  which  is  written  without  political  bias,  appeals  to  t
camps.  It  is  simple,  moving,  sincere.  .  .  .  Imperfect  as  it  is,  it  i|.^j
the  English  reader  who  is  not  too  preoccupied  in  preserving  MHJjjii
should  read  for  himself.  "—7<iff  :>(ation.  ^^H

**  AndreiefF  is  one  of  that  amazing  group  of  modern  Russian*^
have  almost  supernatural  powers  of  visualising  the  tragedy  of  hi
especially  in  its  ironic  struggle  against  human  despotism,  Tbt  Seven
Hanged  is  an  excellent  example  of  the  work  of  this  modem  Russi
possessing  all  its  qualities  of  clear  and  concise  realism — in  its  w
masterpiece."— -^/<»f*  and  ff^bite.

••The  experiment  of  constructing  a  novel  entirely  out  of  spiritual  t
processes  was  a  bold  one  ;  but  it  has  wonderfully  succeeded,  for  the  1
compelling  and  as  interesting  as  it  is  impressive." — Liverpool  Courier.

*<Each  of  these  human  beings  might  be  writing  his  own  memoir,
innermost  thoughts,  so  real  and  so  graphic  are  the  pages."

Manchetter

**  We  understand  that  the  sale  in  Russia,  where  it  was  published  a
ran  into  several  millions  of  copies."— Ddi^  !f^ev/t.

London  : A.  C, Fifield, 13 Clifford's  Inn


I


University  of  British  Columbia  Librar

DUE  DATE
