ud = Dic AAA ATI. So AT
NOT TO-BE-SSUED OUT
WiTHOUT PERMISSION
be dibs. a
v eb de SN PN SS ae 7 a
0014330
LRA OCDE PLE PEPE LPP EPP OOO
THE ;
|
ASIATIC SOCIETY OF BOMBAY
=)
Town Hall, Bombay.
(CEPR OES
CRRBI RRR BPAERARR
K—RAG 5
Digitized \wath fi ice from
PAYA 1 ear ees
THE
POEMS OF TUKARAMA
VOL. I
THE
POEMS OF TUKARAMA
\
LF kof’
TRANSLATED AND RE-ARRANGED,
WITH NOTES AND AN INTRODUC:
TION, BY J. NELSON FRASER, M.A,,
INDIAN EDUCATION DEPART.
MENT, AND K. B. MARATHE, B.A,,
LL.B. LATE OF THE BOMBAY
JUDICIAL SERVICE,
Vor. I
143308
THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE SOCIETY
LONDON, MADRAS AND COLOMBO
1909
ESTED ET

00143308


PREFACE


The translation here offered to the public
aims at presenting Tukarama’s poetry in read-
able English ; and accordingly it has not been
made on strictly ‘“ scientific” principles. Literal
translation has oftén been replaced by accurate
‘paraphrase ; and religious expressions peculiar
to the Hindu system have been rendered by
the nearest equivalents. It is believed this will
not mislead a scholar, while others, who might
take a passing interest in  Tuka’s spiritual
experiences, will not be repelled from this
version by unnatural English.

No attempt has been\made to settle the
text of Tuké. We have simply followed the
edition of S. P. Pandit, published at the Indu
Prakash Press in\1869, occasionally preferring .
an alternative reading in the foot-notes.

The life of Tuka is an abstract of that printed
in the same edition. Should I be able to do so,
T hope to collect some day all accessible informa-
tion regarding him, and to publish it along with
a study of his poetry. In the meantime I may
say, for myself and my collaborator, that we
hope critical readers will. pardon occasional
mistakes in our translation and will treat with
consideration cases where they will find we
have chosen a rendering which they would have
rejected. The many difficulties and obscurities
of Tuka’s old Marathi leave ample room for
error and difference of opinion.


J. NELSON FRASER.


CONTENTS


PAGE
THE LIFE OF TUKARAMA tty
sagt ABHANGA
I, AuropiogRaPHy—
(i) Thoughts about the
world 1 i)
_ Gi) Humility, sin, and
misery 13 9
(iii) Prayers “gs 19 «12


(iv) How he awoke... 30 16
_ (v) His own Gees
cations >», - 388 18
(vi) His motives ve 46 21
(vii) The nature of his


, mission acs 53-22
(viii) Appeals sis 58 34

(ix) His sense of author-
ity and assurance. 65 27


(x) A prayer for a pupil 72 «29
(xi) Consolation and
happiness in God 74 29
(xii) Admonitions to him-


self 98 38
(xiii) Some incidents in
his life .. 101 39


II. Descriptions anp Invo-
‘CATIONS... .. 127 48


iii CONTENTS


ABHANGA PAGE
III. PanpHarRI... .. 152 57


IV. Denu eer «. Tl 64
V. Toe Nature or Gop—
(i) In Himself we 172 +65
(ii) His relation to the
world owe, LTT 66
(iii) Union with God
necessary ; 184 68
(iv) Distinction from Goa
necessary « ¢. 2038 74


{y) The all-paceh Weg
character ofGod. 214 77
{vi) The universality of


God’sgrace ... 228 82
(vii) God’s*power .. «287 85
(viii)-The power of God's

name 259 893
(ix) God’s generosity aud

condescension ... 282° 101


(x) God’s protecting
love .. 806 108
Vi. Tue Propiem or Action—
(i) The perplexing as-
pect of the world. 319 113
(ii) The impossibility of
escaping ourpast. 326 116


“ Nothing is gained by
works of law or .
austerities ww. | 834 120


XIII.
XIV.


XVI.


CONTENTS


iz


ABHANGA PAGE


(iv) Our faith a reward


of merit
Tae Sense oF Sin
REMONSTRANCES wiTH GoD
PRAYERS sea


THE ConDITIONS OF Ac-
CEPTATION


Taz Neorssity or Expsri-
ENCE


TRIuMPHANT HAPPINESS ...


RAILLERY OF Gop me


Fara anp\ Trust
Tue Moran Iprar—
(i) Purity
(ii) Sincerity
(iii) Trathfulness
(iv) Simplicity
(v) Humility
(vi) Peacefulness
(vii) Perseverance
(viii) The service of others
(ix) General
(x) There are few who
attain as


LIFE UNDER THE INFLUENCE
OF RELIGION 5


428


r121


124
138
151


CONTENTS


ABHANGA PAGE


XVII. Our ArtirupDE ToOwaRDSs
THE Wor~tp—
(i) The problem
(ii) That we should
make the most of it
(iii) That we should re-
- nounce it


XVIII. Tue Saints—


810 264


265
840


(i) Their character 888
& Their services to.men). 919
(iii) The insignificance of
caste in comparison
of virtue w- §=—.942,

XIX. Appeans AND,’ Exuorta-.
TIONS ow =: 949

XX. RepuxE aND ADMONITION—

(i) The evil age 990

(ii) The obstinacy of the
wicked 995

(iii) Ill-temper and want
of charity 1005
(iv) Pride -- 1013
(v) Deceit .- 1015
(vi) Greediness .. 1019
(vii) Worldliness — « 1025
(viii) Sensuality «+ 1033

(ix) Hypocritical pro-
fessions 1039

(x) Indifference to re-

ligion and churlish

conduct to the
Saints ee =1046


273


288
298


- 804


807


319
321
324


326


327
328
329
332


334


836


CONTENTS


xi


ABHANGA PAGE


(xi) Various «+ 1065


XX1 Trur Worsairp—
(i) Referring to outward
observances. e 1106
(ii) Inner qualities are
-more than outward


observances w 1196
XXII. Tae vse oF ImMaGus IN
; WORSHIP - we 1148
XXIII. Faust Revigious Opsur-
VANCES i. «6.1155


XXIV. Ovr ArrirupE TOWARDS
TRADITIONAL’ FoRMS OF


Worsuip ..- 1170
XXV. Acatnst Fausz Teachers
AND ImMpostors .. 1174
NOTES ea


APPENDIX. I. Prorrr ities


4 _TI. Curemontus anp Beurers
REFERRED TO By TUKA-
BAM


is TIT. Cervarn CLAssiFICATIONS


WHICH ARE REFERRED
To BY TUKARAM


341


354
360
367


372


378


380
391
402


414


416


Che Life of Cukarama


[HE poet Tukaé was by caste a Sidra, and by

occupation a vani or retail dealer in corn.
He was born in the littie village of Dehu, sixteen
miles north-west of Poona, probably in the. year
1608 a.p. His father’s name was Bolhoji; and
from his thirteenth year Tuka had to undertake the
management of the family business. In this he
was successful for some time, but a famine brought
— and bankruptcy, and several of his relatives
led, : :

Upon this he turned seriously to religion. His
family had always been distinguished for piety;
and he, naturally, devoted himself to the family
god, Vitthoba of Pandharpura. He continued, how-
ever, to reside in Dehu, and a hill, named Bhandara,
is pointed out as a frequent scene of his meditations.

He soon became’a well known teacher, and crowds
of people were attracted to his Kathas and Bhaja-
nas.* Same jealousy and enmity were aroused
by this. success, which was not welcome to his
Brahmana contemporaries. Tuk& was personally
assaulted by one of ‘them, Mumbaji Gosavi, and
another, Rameshvara Bhatta, induced the headman
of Dehu to expel him from the village. Tuka met
these antagonists with submission, and soon obeyed
an order of Rameshvara’s to throw his poems into
the river Indrayani. They were recovered, however,
whether by a miracle or by the simple process of


* A Bhajana is a hymn in praise of the Deity; a Katha is
a sermon on a sacred text or theme, interrupted by frequent
hymns, which, like those of the Bhajana, are often composed
6x tempore.


92° THE LIFE OF TUKARAMA


taking them out again; and Rameshvara Bhatta
relented. An abhanga is preserved in which Tuka
bestows his forgiveness on his foe.

Other troubles assailed him, of a domestic kind,
for his wife was incensed at the poverty which her
husband’s religious life entailed. Some abhangas
are preserved in which her conduct is related.and
deplored. ,

Finally, however, ,Tuka’s character and influence
were established. Sivaji himself sent him a flatter-
ing invitation to visit Raigad. Tuka declined this
honour, with his usual modesty, but-he wrote seven
abbangas in which he thanked the king, and offered
him some advice on public affairs.

The circumstances of his death are unknown.
The popular account statesthat he ascended into
Heaven in the car of Vishnu; a note on the Dehu
manuscript of his poems says that “ Tukoba
started on pilgrimage’’—and was, apparently,
seen no more.

His memory ,is»well preserved in the Deccan.
Bramhana and Stdra alike are familiar with his
poems; and there are Varkaris, or regular pilgrims
between Dehu, Alandi, and Pandharpura, who
know thousands of them by heart. Unfortunately
they--do. not always know their meaning, for
Tuka’s Marathi, now archaic, is often difficult and
obseure. It is much to be regretted that no one
has produced a good Marathi commentary on
his works.

Their form is simple enough; an irregular
rhymed metre, which in course of time makes
itself felt if not understood by the English ear.
They deal little with outward circumstances and
much with the inward life”’of the spirit. Every
word of the writer is set down with great force and


THE LIFE OF TUKARAMA 3


naiveté ; and no suspicion of affectation offends us
while we read him. We easily comprehend him
for what he is, an unlearned man struggling with
the mysteries of faith, by such light as be can find.
‘This light is sometimes reflected from the great
Sanskrit classics; if is sometimes borrowed from
the traditions of the Krishna worship and_the
Bhakti school of Bengal. It is always concentrated,
however, on the image of Vitthoba at Pandharpura,
in which Tuka finds a power actually present to
help and save him. It has been conjectured that
this was only his early attitude; that this faith in
the power of images gradually left him. But there
is no foundation for this view that IT know of; and
we must not support it by any ‘‘internal evidence”
from the abhangas; we do not know in what order
they were composed.

Whatever view we take.of Tuka’s creed, he was
undoubtedly in many ways a man able to discern
spiritual things; and-no one who is interested in
these things can fail to learn from him. He appeals
to no miracles and no direct vision of any saint or

deity ; he proclaims the need of man for God’s grace,
the power of-God to bestow it, and the peace and
happiness. which it brings. He never forgets the
duties.of morality; if his code (like all moral codes)
‘is limited, it is clearly conceived and enforced,
We. may sometimes wish he had faced the world
with more resolution, but we shall never find him
wanting in honesty.

He has no philosophic system to propotund ; and
he does not open up any paths of mystical intui-
‘tion. He isa plain man of the people, who has
set out, under all the limitations of his age and
-class, to find a faith sufficient for himself and hig
countrymen.


,4 THE LIFE OF TUKARAMA


Vitthoba is probably a relic of Buddhist times ;
and Tuka’s creed is in some ways a far off reflec-
tion of Buddhism. No one, however, knew this
less than he.

He has many analogues in literature. King
David is one of them—a figure not unlike that of
Tuka’s own prince, Sivaji, and a composer of
hymns not unlike Tuka’s abhangas. John Bunyan
is another—not so much of a poet, buta seeker
after truth, who emerged from a similar.station in
life.

I refrain, however, from further criticism at pre-
sent. This translation is only meant to provide
the materials for it, should cireumstances allow it.
to proceed.

It remains to add that the arrangement of the
poems is simply adopted for convenience, similar
poems being brought together under suitable head-
ings. But of course the significance of the head-
ings must not be pressed too far.

The present volume contains abhangas 1—1,500
in the Indu Prakash edition, which are one-third
of the whole.. Some abhangas by Tuka’s brother,
and all the Hindi abhangas, are omitted.


I
Autobiography


1.—Choughts about the World


1


“"~ ET God loose me not from his hand; I have
come with devout faith to seek-his protec-
tion. Consider me thy own; I perform for thee a
neem-fruit ceremony with my(own soul. Sitting
amid the saints, I have learned to. know the consort
of Lakshmi; I had nothing to call my own; thus
my thoughts were fixed on thee. Hindrances arise
to keep us from thy worship; they raise before us
the temptations of the world. Men love what is
base and call it sweet; as we look upon them
we discern their-clownish natures. Men are ever
dying and have died, innumerable; it is good for
us to gaze upon them; therefore I come to entreat
thy mercy; grant me to be patient and steadfast.
Let men. censure me, at their ease; I will not
answer\them. You, O Narayana, are our first
father; your feet are solid gain. If I will not seek
my.own advantage, if I am content to depend on
my merit, then I am a worthless sinner; the saints
will laugh at me, says Tuka.


- 2


if Meer country people cover their dead and go
on sowing without loss of time; so must
you seek your own gain, since a body of flesh is
bestowed on you. The grain drawn forth by the


6 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


hand sprouts sooner than what is left in the bag;
thus is it with the welfare of man. We have no
authority over time; the wise must solve this
riddle. Tuka& says, The wise man takes counsel
with himself in this mortal world.


3


Te not the sages of old know this ?\ They
kept the world at a distance. /They on
whom the eight mystic powers descended would
not come into contact with the popular mind.
They ate roots and leaves to nourish the humours
of the. body; they dwelt in the forest; they sat.
still with fixed eyes, they wore the seal of silence.
Tuk& says, Thus, O infinite One, do thou with my
spirit; keep the people far from me.


4


, E E who knows. the affection of the devout


—


heart, he is God’s darling. I desire myself
no other, be he wise’or learned. Who so fixes his
thoughts on God’s name and form, his servant
am I. Tuk& says, He knows in their purity the
nine forms of.worship.


5


6) GOD, I am consumed by the fever of the

world, in the service of my household. Thus
I.have forgotten thy feet; come speedily to me,
O mother Panduranga I am oppressed with the
burdens of many lives, I know not the secret of
escape. I am beset by thieves on all sides, no one
hears my ery for pity. Iam sorely troubled, sorely
bestead! I have long been utterly weary. Tuka
says, Run now speedily to me; this is thy glorious
name in the world, O Lord of the helpless.


THOUGHTS ABOUT THE WORLD 7


6


Sl Baers is not my own country or garb; by
chance I have wandered here. What can I
claim as mine? Where have I found a resting
place? Though I call my feet and my hands my
own, how bereft I am of them! I am a friendless
stranger blind and lame. O Lord, regard and
relieve me; I have neither brother nor child, I
commit myself to the saints. I tremble as 1 follow
the path before me, whereon many have) travelled
and none returned. I cannot see. what happens
though my ears perceive a sound.)I sit at the
cross roads, holding thee fast in-my. thoughts. I °
ery out for mercy like one. that has lost his way.
My belly is never filled; my feet are never at rest.
I am weary with wandering through the eight
million villages. I cling to this inhabited spot ;
what can I trust to? Who will bring me an unex-
pected alms? Oft have I heard its praises sung
in such a strain. that now I cry, O meritorious
Lord, be my friend! Iam very hungry, but thou
givest freely. Any merits I had, I resign. Wealth,
family, son;-mother, all these ties I have cast off.

‘ God, I have renounced desire, for so it was

-- decreed. I should do. Tuk& says, You are now my

all-powerful protector.


7


\ S an actor plays a part, as a heron assumes a
: contemplative attitude to catch fish, so a
hypocrite wears a garland and marks his forehead,
but he keeps his secret guile from the sight of the
world. As an angler offers a morsel to the fish
but keeps them ignorant of the guile within; as
a butcher kindly protects his beasts, while he


8 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


carries a knife to cut their throats; Tuka says, Even
so I am a simple man in the world, but you are
merciful, Q Panduranga. ;


8


HAVE renounced the world, sprinkling my

head against it; now I shall let no trouble
touch me. Why should I pollute my hands, to
wash them again? Thus hindrances beset us in
the way we have to walk. God has ordained every-
thing and assigned everything to its own place.
Tuka says, When we forget to think of ourselves,
we cease to speak of ‘‘ours”’ or ‘another's.’


9


“T CANNOT bear to hear ofrestraint; my spirit

7 is weary. I cannot bear any one’s company ;
-I find it pleasant to sit by myself. I weary of the
‘life of sensuous desire. Tuka says, The snares of

‘desire and illusion, that keep us from God, increase
‘ our pain.


10


T is vain.to tell the secret to the world; we
roust leave men to their own wanderings. In
vain-do.they pretend to run after us; they return
empty and dejected. Though we teach them,
they will not learn and lay the matter to heart.
Tuka says, Unless they have true experience they
will still be wretched.


ll


O not praise me, O. ye saints; your words
will make me proud. That burden of pride

will keep me from your feet and will not suffer me
to erd8s the sea of the world. Tuka says, A high


HUMILITY, SIN AND MISERY — 9


spirit will pursue me and I shall be severed from
the feet of Vitthoba. ;


12


E must listen to nothing that will bring

‘us sorrow and separation from your feet.
I tremble when I see destruction 80 near men; ‘s
make them ashatned, but they will not listen.
What can I do, O God? I have no strength to beat
them and drive them before me to the path. Tukaé
says, O Panduranga, do not set such mad men in
my sight.


TI.— Humility, Sit.and Misery


13


AM a cripple, O.God, in hands. and feet; I am
seated on a Self-willed mount; if I spur him,

he will not see fences, hedges, stumps of trees or
holes. I have’none to lean on, either father or
mother. . QO generous people, bestow a gift on me,
I am going to Pandharpura; convey me there,
© friend. of the feeble! I have wandered on my
crutches from door to door till I am quite worn
‘out »I find none to relieve me or save me from the
pains of mortal life. Let Hari show me that power
which the saints extol; he who dwells at Pandhar-
pura gives limbs to the cripple. For the sake of my
belly I have become dependent on the world. My
cries of ‘mother and father” procure me nothing ;
there is no lack of contempt for me. Some say,
“* Move on!” they feel no pity; the dogs attack me.
Many fierce desires possess me. I know not what


10 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


faults I have committed in time gone by; I know
nothing of my merits or demerits, I recollect
nothing of them. I have lost all my wits, like a
moth that flutters round a lamp. Give me in some
measure the gift of life, O ye that are holy and
deep in experience. I have travelled far, I have
‘suffered harrowing pain ; this was the purpose that
brought me here. Hard it is to find you,.but I

. have met you; I have greeted your feet. I, Tuka,
fold my hands and make my bow to the saints.


14


I HAVE no faith myself; I merely utter a song

to adorn the world; but do thou, O Saviour of
the sinful, make true my words!\I call myself thy
servant, butin my spirit dwell-passion, and worldly
hope. Tuka says, I assume the outer garb but
within me I have nothing at all like it.


15


AM desolate-and guilty, void of good actions,
slow in understanding ; I have never sent thee

any word of mine, O sea of mercy, my father and
mother. I-have never sung or listened to thy
praises. \Through shame I have turned from my
own true welfare. When the saints are assembled,
I delight not in thy story. I have often slandered
others. I have neither done nor procured good
deeds. I harassed others without compassion. I
have dwelt in unlawful traffic; I took on me the
burden of a family. I have néglected to visit holy
places. I have devoted hand and foot to the ser-
vice of my body. I have offered thy saints neither
service nor gift; I have neither worshipped nor
looked upon thy image. I have fallen into evil
company, unjust and impious acts; I have forgotten


HUMILITY, SIN AND MISERY 11


to seek my true welfare; my conduct I would wish
to forget and speak no more. I have destroyed
myself, I have been an enemy to all my neighbours.
But thou art a sea of mercy; O carry me over to
the end, says Tuka.


16


I CANNOT give up food, or dwell in the forest,
LL soTlcry to thee, O Narayana, for pity !. I have
no authority to con the Vedas! Tuka says, Man’s
life is short, a hard riddle.


17


ho pompous ornament becomes me not, it

is false upon me. I.am but dust upon your
feet, a sandal on the saints’ feet. I cannot recog-
nize your primal form; I offer you faith, so far I
can see you; I cannot |see the perishable world
merge into the imperishable ; in my mind there
dwells no distinction, of spiritual and non-spiritual
and so forth. Iam nothing at all, says Tuka, I
will fall at your feet, O listen to these words !


18


M* life has been passed in seeking every pleas-
ure; I have not pursued for one moment
liberation. I have vexed myself with wandering
im every region; my life has been shrouded in
illusion. There is none who knows my true wel-
fare, none to help me but myself. Even the saints
know not the true source of bliss, the beginning or
the end of it. How can I tell the torments of the
womb, though I have enduredthem? O Narayana,
I was conscious of the flesh and its secretions;
when I tried to think of thee, when I drew near to


12 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


death, I knew thee not, though thou wast near to
me. Dust returns to dust; the store of the past
clings to the soul. Now I entreat thee, grant that
I may serve thee. Tuka beseeches thee, O Kesava,
show him the path through life.


TH.— Prayers


19


HOMEVER I meet on this road I enquire of

him, “ Will God be mereiful to me? Will

he keep me from shame?” “I have forgotten all

other interests; in this alone I occupy myself,.

‘Tuka says, I am full of anxious wonder—who will
meet me and tell me?


20


O PROTECTOR of thy worshippers, O kind io

the humble spirit, O Vitthala, that art our
only mother! How comes it thou hast forgotten
me? There is something wanting in my lot; what
shall Ido? Tuka says, Burn up the history of my
past, make it perfect and meet me.


al


Wa do you wait for a sacred or auspicious

day? My spirit is growing weary. Send
me speedily, O Panduranga, a tender morsel; do
not keep me waiting. Consider not that I am faulty
and full of transgression; be not angry against me:
why do you make us weep, your ignorant children,
—your elder and wise no less? Why do you stand


PRAYERS 13.


with your hand upon your hips, to crush your little
darlings? Tuka& says, Now I will tie a knot in
my mantle and I will not forget to stay with you.


22


HY do you not speak, O God? Why do you
make me wretched? With my lifé in.my
throat I wait for an answer; it seems you \have
ceaséd to care for me. To-day you have muffled
yourself ina mantle to avoid the pollution of my
présence. I am ashamed to call myself God’s;.
ou will not ask after me, though it costs you
nothing, says Tuka.
7 23
aVV HY do you not pity me, though you are
seated in my heart? O Narayana, cruel
and merciless, I have cried on thee unheard till
all my voice is lost... Why has my spirit found no
fepose? The stirrings of sense never pause. Tuka&
says, O whyare youangry? We know not, O Paén-
daranga, whether our guilt be over or not.


24


F-yore I used to gaze on all that lay before

or behind me; then I lost my sight, a film
passed over my eyes. They were shrouded in
darkness ever thicker and thicker; I trembled,
O- God,—where was the fruit of my birth? Give
me now the gift of sight, O Panduranga, my father
and mother! I have come to thee for protection,
seeking to avert my sin. Do thou anoint my eyes
and make the path easy for me. I will follow the
path of the saints, the path that leads back to life
no more. My spirit is afflicted, I can remember
no good thought. I relied on mankind, but I lost.


14 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


that support; I can turn neither to this place or
that, utter darkness has fallen upon me. My com-
panions have all turned away from me; no one
supports me. As long as man is active, others call
him their friend; great and small honour him to
secure their own comforts. But when the senses
have decayed, they say, ‘This old bugbear \is
come! how changed a man he is, though his person
is the same!” I am entangled in this’ worldly
life; how blind I have become! Ever dwelling on
“T” and “mine” and strengthening the bonds of
illusive desire I do not see my true interest; I have
killed myself. Death pursues me}-desire and pas-
sion accompany me; as I walk along, my good and
bad qualities trip me up. NowvI have left that
path; I have become another man; I look toward
your dwelling-place with abundant hope, Tuka
says, O great physician, dweller in Pandhari!


25


We I was-at ease, I took a rope and tied
if round my neck myself: now what am
I $0 do? Iam fast bound; I cannot stir forwards
or backwards. I finished all my means; I ran
into debt; I left my field unweeded ; I starved my
wife~and children. I plundered many people’s
houses; I could not save myself whatever I did.
Tuka says, We must give up desire; we must cast
it away altogether.


26


GOD, be merciful to me and show me the

truth ; how pitiful thou art! Such is thy
glorious name in the world. With a mere glance
‘dost thou chase away the power of Time. Tuka
says, O God, do thou protect me!


PRAYERS 15


27


S*the Ganges fails not to quench the desire

of the thirsty, so do thou, O sea of mercy,

fulfil my desires! Thou art chief of the generous ;

it is little that I ask. Tuka says, Look upon me
with a merciful countenanca be my help!


28


6 LIVE in the world so far as I am required to,

but let my faith dwell at your feet: O gener-
ous master, what can I do? You have bound me
fast; I am trudging along withthe load that is
set upon me. The body performs its appointed
duty; O mind of mine, let notthe secret lapse from
you. The forces of the world drag me from place
to place, but let me never be slothful in contempla-
tion. Let the senses perform their own part; do
thou give their fond passion a resting place at your
feet. Tuka says;Do not, I entreat thee, hand me
over to destruction.


29


I CANNOT sing or speak with clear utterance ;

but I have brought body, speech and mind to
seek-thy protection. O accept me, reject me not, O
Hari! O Saviour of the sinful, vindicate thy name!
I know nothing of faith or devotion; I cal! myself
thy servant; if you abandon me, who will be dis-
graced? Tuka’s brother says, I have embraced
thy feet; now whom else have we but thee ?


16 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


TU.—Bow be Awoke
30


ui DREAMED that I was impressed in a gang; but

when the dream ended, it all turned out to be
false. I cried for mercy in vain; that very cry
was the source of my trouble.’ King, noble-and
peasant—the whole picture was unreal, but my
sufferings were real, till I awoke; my bodily
experiences witness it, for it was pain that made
me open my eyes. Tuka says, The saints brought
me to my senses at last; otherwise the lock-up
was ready waiting for me.


31


WAS caught in the net\of the illusory world,
but this Vitthala took mercy on me. He
rescued me and set me apart and showed me the
form that I view with fond and curious love. I see
others leaping and dancing and displaying fond
interest in the world; they have found their plea-
sure in treating the false as though it were true.
Others too ITsee weeping and sobbing and breaking
their heads for grief; in weeping for their friends
they bring on their own deaths. Tuka says, I
marvel at my own words.


32


LEFT the world by my own resolution, for I
was bound up in it heart and soul. When
butter and buttermilk are once separated, you
cannot find either present in the other. One pro-
cess of churning brings both into existence, but
their natures are distinct. Tuka says, When the
pearls have been discovered, the pearl-shells are
left alone.


HOW HE AWOKE 1%


33


ie my own life I have experienced both good

and evil fortune. I have witnessed both; I
have found and shall find both displeasing. I have
lived in the forest, but even here pain overtook me.
Tuka says, I will take God with me and make him
my guide.


34


‘TTNIS well I was created a Kunbi, otherwise I

should have perished of pride; thou hast
done well,O Lord God. Tuka leaps to his feet and
dances. If I had had any knowledge, I should
have been in danger, I should have missed the ser-
vice of holy men, I should haye-fallen into fruit-
less ignorance; I should have been puffed up
with conceit, I should have followed the path of
destruction. Tuk& says, Where human greatness
ig, there follows hell; the punishment of pride.


35


Wen a child is learning to form the letters,
bd pebbles are placed to guide him; but when
he grows familiar with their shape, what need is
there of-these? The false fears I had in the past
were due to my ignorance. Tuka says, Now I know
the truth, I have no fear of bugbears.


36


8 far as renunciation goes, without set pur-

“XL pose, I accomplished it in my mind, O Vit-

thala! Experience of life soon brought distaste for

life; unavowedly I became an ascetic, in my own

mind, My body felt weary through the burden of

debt; I was weary of the world. Tuka says, Now
2


18. . AUTOBIOGRAPHY


disgust and weariness have quitted me; I have put
off the guilt of misconduct.


37


T is well I have got rid of this straggling crowd,
they have gone each to her mother-house. . It
cost me grievous pain to take care of them ;.now
I am ashamed of those greedy desires. When they
strayed, I had to suffer myself; I had to pay away
my wages in fines. I would not remain.still for a
monient, I suffered misery till to-day. Their tricks
were innumerable; they broke their tethers; I
have neither time nor will to tell the tale. Tuka
has given over charge of these cattle to God.


U.—fBis own Disqualifications
38


DO not know a single trick to take away men’s

. senses ;I sing your praises, I celebrate your
excellent deeds! I cannot display a knowledge of
herbs, or marvels of sleight of hand. I have no
following of pupils; I do not pretend that I am
not a beggar. I am not the head of a school, I
am no lord of lands. I preside over no formal
worship, I have not opened a shop of that kind.
I have not propitiated Vetala; I cannot declare
secrets. Jam not a reader of Puranas; one whose
actions resemble not his speech. I do not under-
stand dialectics; Iam no miserable scholar, I do
not carry burning fires, crying Udo! O anand!
I do not count a rosary, gathering an idle crowd
about me. I do not know the secrets of the


HIS OWN DISQUALIFICATIONS 19


Atharva-veda; the charms that arrest and deceive,
and remove enemies. I am not like these men,
says Tuka; I am no mad fellow dwelling in hell.


39


CN OME one may say of me, ‘‘ You are a poet,’ but
) my speech is not my own. It is not\my
own contrivance that is at work; the pervader of
the world sets me speaking. Weakast.am, what
power have I to disarm? What I say is what
Govinda prompts. Iam appointed to sitand meas-
ure out, but I am nothing, the authority of
master is all. Tuka says, lam afaithful henchman,
I bear the seal of my master’s name.


40


UTWARDLY I receive honour from the world,

but within I do not deserve it. Therefore,

‘O Lord of Pandhari, I feel uneasy; I feel ashamed

when I confess ity The saints look on all mankind

as images of Bramha; they do not perceive my

faults. Tuka says, I know myself very well; I am
just. what I was.


41


AM a man of low degree—why should I be

proud? It is you that people honour in me, O
Narayana. What pleasure or pain can I find in.
that ? Honour and dishonour spring from the quali-
ties of men. I am like a rag that men set on their -
heads to honour it, because it ‘once held a golden
coin. Tuka says, People honour me, but I am not
what they honour; what reason is there to delight
in so feeble a creature ?


20 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


42


QUOTE the words left- behind by the saints ;

what can a clown like me know himself? I
cannot utter the name of Vitthala aright—how
could I draw the true moral from it? Like a
child I linger over it with stammering lips; chide
me for it, if you will. Do you forget what I‘am by
birth? I cannot dwell on this thought. Tuka says,
It is God who makes me speak; he alone knows
the secret meaning of what I say.


43


pee the cock keep the author-of day true to

his time? Why, O God, do you place on my
head such a burden as to bid'me be a saint? Will
masters starve, if servants. refuse to cook food?
Tuka says, The infinite one knows how to bring
all things to pass.


qT BELONG to’no village, I stay alone in my
own place. I have no fixed round of wander-
ing and all\my words pass unheeded. I count
nothing.my own or another’s; verily I belong to no
one; I-need neither live nor die; I remain continu-
ally as Iam. Tuka says, I have neither name nor
shape; I stand apart from actions good and evil.


45


T SPEAK though I am silent; I am dead yet

alive ; Iam in the world yet out of it. Ihave

. renounced all, yet I have my fill of pleasure; I am

alone yet not alone; I have severed all ties. Tuka

says, | am not what I seem, if you ask what I am,
ask Panduranga. ;


HIS MOTIVES 21


UL.—Fis Motives


46


\ PEECH is not local, it does not choose to travel
kK. in one direction and not in another, Even
so my accents travel throughout the universe.
The arrow that once was lodged in the quiver must
go wherever it is shot. Now what needs Tuka do
here? He merely wears the seal of his lord.


47


W® may look on the world/ag divine, but I
blame this disposition of men; I feel a
compassion that seeks to help them, for they will
fall into the hands of death. 1 have no friend nor
any enmity towards strangers. I speak this by
way of prelude, says Tuka, to lay bare the heart
of the matter.


48


HAVE come to smooth paths, to distinguish

truth from falsehood. While I utter my voice,
Vitthala is my witness; therefore no doubt dwells
in my mind, through the power of my lord alone.
Tuka says, In future I shall speak no idle words.


49


ks preserve faith is the end of my efforts. I

declare the righteous precepts of the Vedas ;
I do as the saints have done before me. Unless a
steady spirit possesses you, you are a miscreant to
leave, your worldly duties. Tuka says, Such a one
is a vile wretch ; the worship of Hari turns to guilt
in him.


22 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


50


TUKA am smaller than an atom, yet vast as the

sky. I have relinquished the body, for the
world is error manifest. I have relinquished the
triad of knowledge; I have lit a lamp within the
vessel of my body. Tuka says, Enough of me is
left to serve mankind.


51


i WILL consult my own soul; why should I care
for the views of men? All men know their
own interest; if you use force to them; they feel
aggrieved. Whether they listen.to-my preaching
or not, I shall go home and sleep’soundly. What
influence have I? I can point out the way when
I have seen it. Tuka says, I will point out the
mercy of God; he who wishes can enjoy the fruit
of it.
52
PROCLAIM these resources to benefit mankind ;.
I have no delight in any other task. I am
filled with compassion for the world, for I cannot
bear to see.itydrowning. Tuka says, I shall see
their sufferings, which they will comprehend when
the time-comes to endure them.


UTI.—Che ature of bis Mission


53


HOUGH a man be a transgressor, yet if he
utters the name, I am his servant, body,
speech and mind. Though a man has no faith, yet
if he sing of Hari’s attributes; though he offend
in action, yet if he utter the name of Hari, I am


THE NATURE OF HIS MISSION 293


his. Whatever lineage be his, pure or vile, yet if
he calls himself Hari’s, Tuka says, blessed is he.


-54

HAVE shown as with a lamp what lies behind,

midway and before; you must now make an
effort for yourself. In my function asa servant I
have shown you my master’s treasure, in which
there is nothing that is not perfect. By due meas-
ures I have stilled all longing desires; through
God’s authority, such authority has come to dwell
‘in mé. Tukasays,J sit here and send my messages
abroad over the beads of you all,


55


HAVE laid up a stock pf goods and opened a

fine shop; whatever. you want, whenever you
want it, here it is ready tohand. I have honestly
distinguished articlesgood, bad and indifferent.
Tuka sits in his shop and displays wares corre-
sponding to the price offered. e<


- 56

HIS. is our delight, to show the world what
is-right, to make those ashamed who have
strayed fromthe path. How can a man be injured
by. delivering his message? What harm can the
anger of the worlddome? What can the exertions
of ignorance effect, so sharp are the arrows of
Krishna's name? Tuka says, This is a shop where
genuine goods are sold; no false wares will pass

current here.


57


HE eyes are brightened by the unction of
Krishna's name, so that one distinguishes the


24 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


various tribes of men. I interfered With them by
serving as a measure of communicated wisdom ;
and I loved the task because I filled the measure
with Narayana. Those who work faithfully in
the household of the fortunate become fortunate
through the act of service. Tuka says, He who
earns his bread honestly finds his own place amid
the surroundings that rightly belong to him.


UTTT.—Appeals


58


BOW down before all, and entreat you, laying
my head at your feet;\ho! people all, speak-
ers and listeners all, examine this well and tie it
up in your bundles. Ihave dispensed a rich store,
my master’s property...I am only the porter who
carries it. Tuka says, Its value is known in the
four regions; it has-passed the test, and is found to
be genuine.


59


‘B* day and night I will employ myself with the

praises of Govinda. All my desires are in
God; I have offered my body to him; I stay nota
moment, but apply all my senses to him. Tuka
says, I sing his praises ; I rouse the people.


60


HAVE girt up my loins, and wrestled stoutly
against Time and Death; I have made a foot-
path across the river of the world. Come, great
and small, men and women, people of low degree ;
remember that none need feel anxious fear. Busy


APPEALS 95


and idle, devout and austere, come together ;
drums resound to invite the liberated and those
who seek liberation. He has sent me into this
world with a seal of general authority; I bear his
name with me, says Tuka.


61


(INCE I have spoken to profit you, pardon me
ifI am poor in speech. You should not be
angry with one who shows you the ar a straggler
will be ruined, his soul will perish. The neem is
applied to crush the disease within; you spread it
outwardly, it penetrates within. .Tuké says, The
beholder sees the advantage of it; the blind fall
into the well.


62


[ AM merely a blind-man on the path that leads
to the unbodied self; I have renounced the life
of many impulses for the life that is at rest in him ;
in him I see the world no more. “I” and “mine”
are lost in the very spot where they arose. All
that was visible now has grown invisible. I have
swept cleanthe place of the world and fallen
sweetly asleep. On the summit of the triple hill
there-is.a free gift bestowed; I have cast away
the dish and the wallet, deeds good and bad and
desires. I have escaped from the tumult of the
world, the attachment of the three qualities ; 1 am
well assured I shall have to beg no more.
seventeenth quality is turned round, had it fulfilled
all my desires; with uplifted face I have uttered
the words “I am He.” By fond affection turned
towards him I have aroused the unbodied source ;
he has bestowed on me Absolute Truth and Know-
ledge of the Absolute Self. He has absorbed my


26 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


‘name into his own form, he has set aside all
distinction between us, These words are satisfying
and full of ample relief; he has made them current
for men to come; in their train follows a line that
has attained the mystic heights; they have passed
beyond the world. This is the only secret, ‘to
believe in him ; the spirit of self is an oppression ;
it does not suffer us to reach our home. Therefore
east off the ties of the world, embrace the’ monist
faith. Tuka& says, This is the resource which the
saints devised of old.


63


SHOPKEEPER may spread out various
goods, but each one chooses according. to his
own desires. Each one makes his proper purchase
in the end, though people like to see many things
to satisfy their curiosity. A warrior understands
the movements of the-enemy ; others look:on them
as something to talk about. Tuka says, My speech
plays on themes of its own ; worldly wisdom TI have
sacrificed to the untainted One.


64


HAT the All-powerful dwells in all being, this.
first law I know well. I have been shooting

forth arrows; he who is struck by one knows its
“power. First we must make our instruction blame-
less, and then we may impart it. Tuka says, If you
miss the path and stray into the jungle, you will
meet with thorns.


HIS SENSE OF AUTHORITY AND ASSURANCE 97


1X.—Bis Sense of Authority and Assurance


65


AM no obstinate preacher, filled with my own

opinions; I teach under the authority of the
truth; You must test my doctrine by experience;
mature knowledge will show if it is true or. false,
This utterance belongs not to one spot; if any will
receive it, he will find it.fill the universe. Tuka
entreats the wise not to distress themselves by
conflicting opinions.


[ SPEAK words mingled with Narayana, in his
own presence. I need not grope about, I go
forward sowing faith. The treasure I have belongs
to that generous master ;,where am “I” to be found
here? Here Tuka has raised a sudden shout.


67


HAVE shown-men a path according to the

authority I received. To each has been shown
a path according to his capacity; he will learn to
know it.as he follows it. You need not burn the
boat when you have reached the shore; many
will depend on it hereafter. Tuka says, If the
physician is ill, he will never heal mankind.


68


iS bes is not my own speech, it all comes from

Vitthala. Cease all anxious pining, and cling
to what will bring you profit. The spirit of self is
a false guide; I have given it up in spite of men’s
Yemonstrances. Every one will recognize what is
best for himself, says Tuka ;I am only a measure
to portion it out.


28 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


69


\ E dwellers in Vaikuntha have come for this

purpose, to prove by our faith the words of
the Rishis. We will sweep clean the paths of the
saints, for weeds have choked up the world. _We
will take the leavings of the saints’ meals... The
ancient forms have lost their meaning, for idle skill
in words has ruined them. Men’s minds are
greedy of pleasure; the way of salvation has
vanished; we will beat a drum in the’ name of
devotion. We will appal Time and Death. Tuka
says, Raise a joyful shout of acclamation.


70


i Rage: measure says, “‘I \measure all,” yet its
master fills it and lays it aside empty. O God,

let pride have no power-to arise in me! This seal is

current through the country, without it who would

receive a wretch like me? Tuka says, The majesty

peleaes to him who holds all the strings in his
and.


71


\ \ J] HAT power had gone forth to proclaim my

name from land to land? The wind was
bidden to bear the measure of it; so mighty is my
father: whose power was it that gave the power of
words to my speech? Tuka says, Confidence in
him hag removed all fear from me.


PRAYER FOR A PUPIL 29


X.—Al Prayer for a Pupil


72
LORD of the world, show me this kindness,
give me a pupil who wil! continue my rules;
beckon forward such a one, who is fully expert in
the knowledge of Bramha, whose banner is known
in the three worlds. Tuka cries aloud at the \door
of his Vitthoba.
- 73
\IVE me, O God, « pupil versed in-knowledge
of Bramha, who is a glorious-image of faith
and loving devotion. In his mind let such a skill
be deeply planted, that victory over passion may
have its station in him. IfI find such a one in the
flesh, I will wave round. him ‘the neem-tree leaves
to shield him from harm !


XT.— Consolation and Happiness in God


74
[ CANNOT sing ; there is no music in my voice ;
Twill cast my butden on thee, O Panduranga.
Iknow nothing of tune, time or accent or metre ;
I place my spirit at thy feet, O Panduranga. Tuka
says, I care nothing for the world; I care for thee
alone, O Narayana. ,
75
I AM a man of low degree: feeble in brain, |
miserable in aspect ; other defects of mine too
he knows; yet Vitthala has accepted me, knowing
what my purpose is. Whatever I do, I seek my


30 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


own true interest, so experience has taught me.
Infinite bliss and joy are bestowed on my soul; he
who is joy in the highest has taken my burden.
‘Tuka says, He is proud of his name, so he puts
forth his strength to save his suppliant.


= 76
HY should I pursue glory or pride or popular
honour? Show me thy feet,O God! Let
not thy servant turn aside to vanity. Grandeur
will be a burden on my soul; it will lead me away
from thy feet. What do mankind/know about the
faith of the heart? They honoureach other accord-
ing to outward appearances., Tuka says, I find
adversity sweet, if it leads me.to thy feet.


77


I WAS worn out by desires, O mother; they

oppressed me without pity: I took refuge in
thee and all was well. I went to thee, now again
I entreat thee. Tuka says, Through thy influence,
O Kanhoba, the oppression has ceased.


78


F I stay apart from you for a moment, I come

erying to you. I love to be with you; we are

no new friends; we are one by nature. The high

and mighty call me away from you; I will have

none of them. Tuka says, You dearly love the
faithful, O embrace me heartily !


. 79


HE essence of the Sastvas, the image of the
Vedas, he dwells with me as the friend of my
soul. I desire, therefore, none but him, I have all


CONSOLATION AND HAPPINESS IN GOD 31


in his name alone. He who is both qualified and
unqualified, even he comes to sport with me, says
Tuka.


80


aes good guide and master has shown favour

to me; yet not through any service that I
did him. He met me on the road as I was going
to the Indrayani; know that he laid his hand onmy
head. He asked me for a little butter to eat;
I fell into a dream and forgot him—-somehow a
difficulty arose, so he grew impatient.and went
away. Raghava Chaitanya, Kesava,Chaitanya—
he told me these names to indicate-his teachers ;
‘he told me his own name was Babaji, and gave me
as amantra Rama Krishna Hari. It was Thursday
the tenth of Magha ; finding it auspicious he received
me into the order, says ‘Tuka.


81


ee my faith, my lord and master
taught me the way; he taught me a spell
well pleasing and simple, that severed all the
bonds of the-world. There are saints still moving
on, there.are others that have crossed the sea of
the world; wise and foolish alike, he has provided
them with vessels well pleasing to them—gourds,
rafts and floats. Tuka says, Panduranga has shown
me a vessel, for he is a sea of mercy.


82


qT HAVE cast down my burden; I am free from

anxious care; the saints have entrusted me to
Vitthoba. He put out his hand and caressed my
head ; he bade me lay aside care. His hand is on
his hip, fair are his even feet on the brick; he


82 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


stands upright on the bank of the Bhima. My
mortal toil is over; I have embraced thy feet, O
Kesgava! Tuka says, Now, O infinite one, do thy
will! any shame of mine belongs to the saints.


83


NOW that this is my resolve, I have become
indifferent to the world. I shall embrace
none but thee; I have cast away fear, shame and
doubt. O infinite one! there is an-—old bond
between thee and me; a close bond formed by the
saints. I have laid down my personal self at thy
feet; it exists no more; any shame of mine belongs
to you. Tuka says, The saints have escorted me to
you. Now I will not leave your feet, O Vitthala!


84


VERY moment I am watchful and observe
myself. I have.put a check on myself, not
to be parted from thy feet. I consider before I
speak ; I keep myself-pure. Tuk& says, Once I was
afraid ; now I am wakeful. ,
85
Ts is the diversion of the goddess within me ;
why do you not recognize it? Who is at
work here, if I do not heed pain or joy? I myself
am here no more, the words are all you can recog-
nize. I am converted into her; surely my faith
cannot be concealed. Now ask.me your own ques-
tions, of things dear or things indifferent to you.
With this goddess firmly fixed in my mind I shall
know what you mean or what you are asking
about. Tuka says, You must not keep still when
such a season of gain is offered you; where shall
you go to find such an opportunity ?


CONSOLATION. AND HAPPINESS IN GOD 383


86


HOULD evil spirits seize you, they will vanish

in time; when this god has entered you, he

will never depart. Now speedily so deal with me

that I shall never -have to bear any otber burden.

Take me and place me on the bank of the Chandra-

bhaga; there is ‘nothing left of my own soul within

me now. Tuka says, I have understood the tidings,
my own voice has vanished away.


87

TY ITTHOBA alone is generous to the blind and
lame ; he has created the world and he knows

all. Without an effort he organizes and destroys
our store of merit and demerit; who but thou can
save us from the pain and.cares of the world? Let
thy kingdom prevail, O mereiful Lord! Easily thou
knowest the heart though we speak not. Pundalika
rolled betore thee on the pebbly shore; blessed is
Pandhari, on the bank of the Nira and Bhima; I see
nothing else, my eyes have begun to see the unseen ;
the source of love has descended there and brought
a shower of imperishable knowledge. Moreover
Upamianya, @ little child, who could not see nor
walk inthe ways of the world, he threw himself
down and called with loud cries on Hari’s. name;
therefore Hari came to him with hasty steps. The


child Suka, that was born blind, lay in the shed,
wearied out by the pain of many a re-birth; he
remembered thee in due time. ‘I fear no more the
pain of the past,” he said to Gopala. Thereupon he
came and by his skilful power he saved him from
shame. To the blind man who sees not thé world
he shows himself; he is free from pain and grief,
he relinquishes the greed of wealth. He knows no


34 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


distinction of Self” and “ Other” ; *he recognizes
neither brother nor friends. Tuka has reached tle
same stage ; therefore be pleased, O Narayana!


88


M* spin ig dull; I cannot learn to know the
truth, but I meditate in my heart on thy
lotus feet. What dol know about the differences of
the scriptures? I spend the time in meditation. I
know nothing, but I call myself bis servant ,-he will
be proud of me. I have departed from the comforts
and beaten paths of the world; at one stroke I
have thrust the world from me.” It elung to me
before, but I have severed it now; in solitude 1
have preserved my mind. Tuka says, O husband
of Rakhumai,-protect thy worshipper who ,calls on
thee. f

89


O GOD, for thy sake I am dead, while yet I live ;

how free from,all desires my spirit reposes !
Tt never falls into error. My feet and h&nds stir
not; how my sight has been turned towatds God,
seeing I as not the perishable or imperishable
world! O Vitthoba, give us a gift worthy of your
name! Your glory has been proclaim§d; your
fame has spread to regions afar; you alo bestow
joy; liberation, and attainment ; we have abandoned
all and cried to thee, therefore thou hast set us
free from grief and fear and shame and affliction ;
O God, come now before us and grant us thy
merciful favour. The sea of mortal life ig the
source of misery; the scandalous voice of mankind
is like a scorpion concealed in a bed. The organs
of sense are like arrows piercing us; I feel a heat
like flame passing over me. I have endured it all;


CONSOLATION AND HAPPINESS IN GOD 35


what shall ldo? These evil wretches are hard to
bear.. ‘Your name in the three worlds is like a tree
full of leaves and branches; I have climbed up the
trunk, trusting to the support of faith. I arouse.
men.and women; may your rule prevail through-
out all worlds! Through merit men attain to
happiness; these are mere cries of ours. I cannot
remember what is mine or others,—what shall I .
do.? I have losi the thoughts that lead like a
““smooth@way to happiness; I have set on.your head
~as a btrden my cares of getting and keeping.
Stretch out to thy suppliant Tuka thy hand that
- «ealme all fear !


90


HAVE dispersed the crowd; my mind is at

rest; Tuka has’ come hither to avoid the
vaproar. Let him rest.on a cot and sleep, himself
and Rakhumai together. I have come hither with
cymbals and vina-to worship the feet of my lord.
‘Tuka says, Now with respect let Panduranga listen
‘to my stammering accents.


91

E must tell thee what we want; we must
; ask of thee the secret desire of our hearts.
‘O.Vitthala, humble in spirit, loving and merciful,
mother of ours, you will deal gently with our
fancies. We have laid at thy feet our devoted faith.
You are all in one to us. I will let no breath of
any other being touch me; I will visit no other
house but thine, all power rests with thee; I know
thou wilt give me what I ask; therefore Tuka ceases

from this time to entreat thee.


386 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


92


OW thou shalt do a8 seems fit to thee; if thou
wilt, save me, or slay me if thou wilt; keep:
me near thee or far from thee; bring me back into
the world or not. I have sought thee, all ignorant,
I know nothing of faith and devotion. I am void of
all understanding, needy and worse than needy.. TI
cannot steady my mind, I cannot rule my way-
ward senses; I have exhausted every effort; peace
and rest are far from me. I have offeied thee
perfect faith, I have iaid my life at thy feet; do
now as thou wilt, I can only look to thee; O God,
I trust in thee, I cling firmly to/thy robe. Tuka
says, It is for you to deal with my efforts.


93


OW I shall attain perfect happiness. I have
left every strange region, I see nothing but
my mother’s house.’ Vitthala and Rakhumai are
near me, my sister, brother, father and mother ; he
is the head of all my family. I need recognize no:
stranger. I>-have stretched out my authority
throughout the world. “I have shaken off subjec-
tion to-others ; all is my own now; I have dismissed
shame and anxious care. I indulge my wishes to
stay.at home, in my mother’s house where I have
my way. I do as he bids me; I am not afraid of
making mistakes. I long endured to dwell with my
mother-in-law; I was troubled by many desires ;
now I forget worldly interests. My father and
mother caress me with fond affection ; they answer
me gently and bid me tell them my childish desires..
Tuka will speak freely henceforth, in his stammer-
ing accents.


CONSOLATION AND HAPPINESS IN GOD 387


94


We sweet is-the food we get with him;

therefore I have preferred the pursuit of
Krishna to life itself. The delight of his company
grows from moment to moment. Henceforth,
says Tuka, I shall teach mankind to be as fond
of him as I am.


95


Y OU have given shares to all; look upon me!

Along with my companions I formed great
hopes. Why are you'silent? Give me my own
share! I have given up all my own provisions ;
now I will not be left out..O infinite one, I am
hungry; you who know everything, why don’t
you know that? Iam_tired out with tending the
cows of self-will and extravagance. Tuka cries
out for mercy, Haricasts a morsel to him; Tuka
takes it up and rejoices and divides it among
his friends.


96

Ts little cowherds meet together and begin

to make a plan, ‘‘ Come, let us go and steal
butter, to-day ; let us take with us the Lord of the
Moon. Comrades, there is one who has kept us
waiting all this time.” Govinda leads the way, the
cowherds follow ; he moves about in his essential
nature, he goes to and fro unknown to any. He
gees a lonely house with nine kinds of butter in it.
He enters himself, he supplies them with lines of
butter-pots. He does not let them speak ; he says,
“« Be quiet; when I give the sign, eat the milk.’’.
After full contentment, Tuka serves God.


88 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


97


H* companions begin to ery, ‘ Kanhoba,
you never let us get the better of you.
We won't play any more; we have found out what
you are like. We cannot bear the weight; you
ride on our shoulders so long together.” Tuka
grows angry against the devotee’s life, but God
will not let him retire.


XTI.—Admonitions to Himself
98


H speech of mine, henceforth remember God..
You mischievous creature, have done with
quarrelsome idle speaking! You left off repeating
“Vitthala! Vitthala!’’ but now, says Tuka, you
are sworn to serve the Iuord, be assured.


99


GO on deferring to wife and children, and

humbling myself before objects of sense.
Run now and deliver me, O Narayana, I cannot.
govern my desires! Stand thou between me and
shame of the multitude; for I see that this dispels
your worship. Tuka says, Wherever you find us.
entangled, O God, you must protect us.


100


I HAVE constrained myself to wear an outward
appearance; but I have not renounced my
inward nature. So my experience constantly tells
me; the fruit is known to any mind. I have not.


SOME INCIDENTS IN HIS LIFE 39


even dreamed what it is to be awake; I go about

forgetful of all. My mind has not emerged from

worldly life; it is still engaged in its old occupa-

tions. Tuka says, Like an actor I have changed

my outward garb, but inwardly I am still what
was,


XTIT.—Some Incidents in bis Life
101


Y caste I was a Sidra, I beeame™a trader;
this God from the first had been worshipped

by my family. I ought not to talk of this, but
since you have asked the question, I respect your
speech, O saints! When my father and mother had
finished their course, I was grievously harassed by
the world. A famine used\up my money, and took
away my good name; one wife of mine died crying
for food. I grew ashamed and was tormented by
this grief; I saw that I was losing by my business.
The temple of God which we had was in ruins; I
resolved to do what occurred to me. I began by
preaching and singing on the eleventh day; but at
first my.mind was not in practice. So I learned
by heart.some speeches of the saints, being full
of.resource and faith in them. When others sang
first, I took up the refrain, purifying my mind by
faith. I counted holy the water wherein the feet of
the saints had been washed; I suffered no shame to
enter my mind. I served others when the chance
was given me, wearying out my own body. I paid
no heed to friends who loved me, I was heartily sick
of the world. I bade my own mind testify to the
true and the false, I paid no heed to the voice of
the crowd. I honoured the instruction my teacher


40 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


gave me in a dream, I believed firmly in God’s
name. After this the impulse of poetry came upon 3
me; I embraced in my spirit the feet of Vitthoba.
A blow fell upon me: I was forbidden to write;
thus for awhile my spirit was grieved. My pages
were sunk in the river; I sat down like a creditor;
Narayana comforted me. Ii I told all the story,
the tale would be long; it would grow too late,
so enough of it now. You see now my present
purpose, my future course God knows. -God never
neglects his worshipper; I have learned that he
is merciful. Tuka says, This is all my capital, I
utter the verses which Panduranga bids me utter.


102


F one begs for titles with tears, what sort of
ornament are they? If God gives anything
himself, it is sweet; its flavour and its delight
continue. Sow your field, and you will reap corn
for sale, corn for beggars, corn for seed and corn
for charity. Tuka says, Without long endurance
how can a diamond be formed ?


103


AMADEVA came with Panduranga, and

Bh roused me in a dream. ‘I appoint you

a task, write poetry, do not talk of vain affairs.”’

Namadeva counted his own verses, Vitthala

kept the tally; he told me the total he arrived at,

a hundred crores. “What is left undone, you
must finish, O Tuka.”

104

F thou wilt give me a place, I will stay with

thee for ever, sitting at thy feet in the row of

saints. I have given up a place that delighted


SOME INCIDENTS IN HIS LIFE 41


me; so now be not heedless of me! Give me the
lowest place, for my office is lowest; trusting to
that I shall find peace. Tuka has visited Nama’s
feet in a dream; this favour he has stored up in
his heart.


105.


as HERE I am concerned he has renounced

the world; what enjoyment of his own
has he given up? For him all pleasures come
walking to the house; but J cannot escape disgrace.
Whom shall I marry to keep things going? How
rouch family trouble must I suffer ? ~ What shall I
give the children to eat? They will devour me for
very hunger; it would be.a good riddance if they
died. He has swept the house clean and emptied -
it; there is not a cow left to give us dung for
the floors.” Tuka says, Miserable and thoughtless
wretch ; she loads her own head and grumbles at
the burden.


106


aL ERHAPS the brute was my enemy before,

we were born, and has gained his end
now-—by marrying me. How long must J bear
this unceasing misery? How often must I beg
my. food from others? Curses on this Vitthala,!
‘What has he done for me and my family?” Tuka
says, These are my wife’s vagaries; she laughs
one moment and cries the next.


107


“ I HAD a bag of grain sent me; he would not
let the children eatit. He fills up baskets
for other people. He is a gluttonous thief!’’ She


42 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


grew quite wild and seized his hand like a wolf.
Tuka says, It is idle to talk of a harlot’s stored-up
merit.

\


108


i N | OW, my son, what will you eat? My-hus-

band is grown a devotee of the temple.
He wears garlands on his head, he does not care
to be a shopkeeper as he was. He>has made
arrangements to feed himself. He has no interest
in us. He goes about with cymbals and open
mouth, he sings before God in the temple. What
are we todo now? He is gone off to the jungle.”
Tuka says, Show some patience now, if you never
did before.


109


“ OOD; he is gone; now we have got all

we want! Now I shall have plenty to eat;
bread and soup and all. Wretch as I am, how
could I go on quarrelling with him for ever ?”” Tuka
says, When-I showed that I despised her words, she
‘began to'like me.


110


K E cannot follow his trade; he gets bread
thrust into his mouth; he gets up and
strikes his cymbals and makes no end of a noise.
He is a dead man; he has pounded up shame and
swallowed it. He forgets all about his family;
they are ruined; his women folk are frightened
to death, they hate their own existence.” Tuka
says, All right, wife, I will leave you alone; I give
you a written promise.


SOME INCIDENTS IN HIS LIFE 48.


lil


“ 7 HY do people come to our house? Have-

they not their own business to attend
to?” “Through God the whole world has become
a part of me; what does it cost you to give a gentle:
answer? For love’s sake people come to see me
who could not be appeased by respectful entreaties.”
Tuka says, This vile woman can find no pleasure in
a jewel; she runs after people like a mad dog.


112


Y wife died; she was set free; God released

her from the world of illusion. O Vitthoba,.

you and I will enjoy the kingdom; we need no

other. ’Tis well that my boy died, God released

him from the world. My mother died looking
upon me. Tuka says,I have lost anxiety.


118


le is well, O God, that I became bankrupt, and

was crushed by the famine; this is how I
repented and turned to thee, so that the world
became odious to me. It is well that my wife
was a scold, that I was dishonoured, and lost my
good name, my wealth and my cattle; it is well
that.I-did not fear people’s opinion, but sought thy
protection, O God; it is well that I built up thy
temple, and neglected my wife and children. Tuka
says, It is well that I fasted on the eleventh day,.
for so I kept myself awake.


114


E found the deer-skin under his arm a nui--
sance; it made a crackling noise, so he-


AA AUTOBIOGRAPHY


threw it away. Listen, O listen to my complaint ;
the shameless man has no shame. There is a cry
from everyone, “ Rama, Rama’; no one practises
his religious duties. Men fall at the feet of the
‘saints, and yet the saints conspire to oppress them,
Tuka says, They have both brought shame on them-
selves; they have satisfied themselves by wicked-
ness; in bringing discredit on their own garb they
have ruined themselves.


115


\ HY, O God, why is this shame brought upon

me? I ought not to have forgotten the
primal secret that he and Lare one. What was to
‘pe has come to pass; now remorse is idle. Tuka
-says, I have had enough now of the company of
‘the wicked.


116


I HAVE reached God, I have reached him ; my

store of merit was excellent, for it has brought
this to pass; now what shall I say? The road
was covered with thorns; I went to remove them.
‘Though I did the act, says Tuka, I was saved from
showing malevolence.


117


HOU hast done well, O Vitthoba, that seeing
within me a spirit of forgiveness, thou didst
-eause me to be pierced with thorns. Reproaches,
abuse and injustice were bestowed on me with
grievous ridicule. Tuka says, Thou didst not leave
me subject to anger.


SOME {NCIDENTS IN HIS LIFE 45.


118


WILL not, I will not, I will not leave the feet

of Vitthoba! Though I be crushed to death

unmercifully ; though armed men cut me into a

hundred pieces, yet I fear not. Tuka says, Before I
acted, I resolved to be firm and vigilant.


119


7 HAT shall I eat ?—where shall I go ?—under
whose protection shall I live inthe village ?
The Patil and all the people are angry with. me—no-
one will give me an alms. He has, lost all his
senses, they say; they have set me-down among
the mad men. Good people have put the idea into
his head, and ruined me—helpless that I am.
Tuka says, His company is not good; let me go
now fo seek Vitthala.


120


M* body is burning, like a forest on fire, run!

O Kesava! It is kindled with all the hair
on it; I cannot:stop the fire, I am burned up like a
hol. My heart is about to burst—why dost thou
look on? Bring water and run quickly; no one
else can help me. Tuka says, Thou art my mother,
who.else will help me in the last hour?


121


6) NARAYANA, do not send me the fellowship

of women, nor even that of dolls, clay or
wooden. This woman has taken from me the
remembrance of God and his worship; my mind
was tempted and I could not forbear talking to her.
At the sight of her face death entered in through my


46 AUTOBIOGRAPHY


‘senses. Beauty is the true root of sorrow. Tuké
says, If fire should become a saint,it has the power
to burn one who touches it.


122


LOOK on other women like Rakhumai, for so I

- have been resolved from the first. Begone, O

mother, cease your efforts; we servants of Vishnu

are not what you think. I cannot bear your sinful

inclinations, desist from this evil speech. Tuka

says, If you need a paramour, are there not many
men about?


123


CANNOT bear to see this turmoil; I am dis-

tressed by the sufferings*of others. O God, it
‘seems you have left us; we ought not to have
witnessed this calamity. “What brings an invading
army to the dwellings of Hari’s servants? We
desire not to see.them in the land we inhabit.
Tuka says, I am ashamed of your service ; O God!
my life has grown wretched.


124


V HY. should I hold that the story of Hari

brings salvation to all mankind? Lo,
here is destruction begun; O Vitthala, an invading
army is upon us. Sin never arises without sin;
here is clear evidence to prove it. Tuka says,
Where your servants dwell, how can we say now
that you dwell too ?


125


I AM not afraid of my own death now; I cannot
bear to see the people suffering. Our holy
order is perishing; O generous one, how is it you


SOME INCIDENTS IN HIs LIFE AT


perceive it not? Our worship is broken off; ‘this
indeed is death ; we cannot bear an instant without
it. Tuka says, O generous one, I ask thee for a
place where no wind of violence ean touch me.


126


EAR my words, O saints! I am a sinner
beyond all men—why do you love me with
such tenderness? My heart testifies within me, of
a surety I am not saved; men look upon me with
honour, because I follow a.track that others have
laid down. I was sorely troubled by my -worldly
business, I became a. cattle driver, a twister of
oxen’s tails. Even so, I could not maintain myself,
so I took to my present course. The little money
TI had was soon finished} not that I renounced it,
I gave it to Bramhanas and beggars. I cut myself
off from wife, sons and daughters, and became of
course a low, stupid wretch. I dared not show my
face to the world; I crept into holes or retired to
the jungle; thus I entered on a solitary life. I
was vexed.by’the cravings of the belly; and I
thought that God had no mercy. If any one
offered me a dinner, I readily said “Yes.” My
fathers served this God before me, this is why I
worship him. Tuka says, Come, some of you, offer
him faith and take him in exchange for it.


II
Descriptions and Tnvocations


127


Ye is the sight of his even féet on the, brick
: there; O Hari, let my restless mind repose.
I desire no other illusory joy; send me, O.God, no.
striving for such. The realms of Brahma and the
‘rest are extreme misery; you permit the thoughts.
of men to be drawn thither. Tuka-says, We have
learned the secret of faith in-him’; works of all
kinds are ruinous.
128


AIR is the vision where he stands on the brick,

with his hand upon bis hip. On his neck is

a Tulsi wreath, his robe-is of silk; I delight for ever

in that form. The pendant fish sparkle in his

ears; the jewel Kaustumbha.shines at his throat.

Tuka says, Herein is all my pleasure, I will
contemplate his‘holy face with joy.


129


L& my eyes be fixed for ever on thy image, dear

husband of Rakhumai; sweet is thy form,
sweet is thy name, I will give thee my love for
ever. O mother Vittho, give me this excellent gift,
dwell in my heart and pervade it. Tuka says, I
need nothing else, there is complete joy in thy feet.


130


E is noble and full of grace, the very image of
Madana; in him the rays of the sun are
eclipsed; he wears on his forehead the spot of


SOME INCIDENTS IN HIS LIFE 49


‘musk, his body ig anointed with sandal, about his
neck hangs the garland of tulsi. He wears the
crown and earrifigs; fair is his holy face, moulded
out of happiness; about his waist is thrown :a
robe of golden ‘silk; such, O women, is he ‘of
the dark cloud and dark face. Come,.all of you,
accompany him. Tuka says, I can be patient no
longer.


131


V ITH thy hand upon thy hip and thy garland

‘of. tulsi, show us thy form, /O Hari!
standing with thy two feet on the brick, show us
thy form, O Hari! with thy gorgeous robe of silk
about thy loins, show us thy form speedily. As
thou appearest on Garud’s~plinth, so men recall
thee. I am wasting away.to a skeleton; come, O
Lord of Pandhari, to meet me. Tuka says, Fulfil
my hopes; benot heedless of my desires.


132


‘TD ORNE on Garuda, wearing his silken robe, I

‘shall.see him, the dark one, the lovely one,
the god ofysthe purple cloud, who wears on his
neck the fair garland of tulsi. The crown on his
head.shines like millions of suns, the pure jewel
Kaustumbha sparkles at his throat. His holy face
ismoulded out of happiness; on his left stands his
spouse, Rakhumadevi ; Udbhava and Akrira stand
on either side of him; Sanaka and the rest sing his
praises. Tuka says, There is none like him, my
friend Panduranga.


133


\ N ) ITH his tulsi garland round his neck the lord
of the world stands on the brick; gazing
4


50 DESCRIPTIONS AND INVOCATIONS


on Pundalika the lord of Pandhari stands by the
Bhima. Joy and liberation are his handmaids,
prosperity and perfection cling to his door. The
holy dise moves round him; death trembles and
flees from it. The mother of the world stands on
his left. Bhimaki his consort stands beauteous by.
As lightning flashes from a cloud, so the greatest
guilt is crushed by the sight of him. He is the.sea
of joy, bliss supreme, the delight of the cowherds
and the damsels. Govinda blows his flute in joy,
entrancing birds and beasts. Handsome is his
face, the four-armed god, the rider-of Garuda, who
entrances the mind. Tuka says,-My lord comes
speedily in return for devotion.


134


A JEWEL fades under the shadow of poverty ;
: adversity eclipses the best of the things.
Beauty and prosperity-are not found apart from
Panduranga, generous master, sea of mercy. If
you set materials for a feast before one who knows
not how to cook, these conveniences are all wasted
on him. Tuka/says, If you put a jewel on a goat’s
neck, if looks ‘a mean thing for that very reason.


135


ET me contemplate him, who bestowed this

life upon me, Narayana, the life of the world;

T will sing his attributes. Him who stands by the
Bhima hand on hip, whose even feet are lovely
to see, him I will clasp within me. He who slew
the demons, who guards his worshippers, who
_-Adiverts himself with perfecf skill—at his feet I lay
my head. He who wore the wreath of wild flowers
sporting among the cowherds, who took Bali down


SOME INCIDENTS IN HIS LIFE 51


to the pit, who stayed there with him, he is my
Lord, he to whom this image belongs. Who -
unites in himself every power, who wears the
wreath of basil on his neck, before him ever and
anon I fall. He whose name destroys all guilt,
whose servant is Lakshmi, to him belongs this
surpassing lustre, him’ Tukaé worships with full
‘devotion.
136 ;
ITTHALA is ,our life, the source of all
the Vedas and Sastras ; Vitthala-is perfect,
attainment, the repose of rapt—contemplation.
Vitthala is our ancestral God, treasure, family and
‘spirit; our merit, our highest goal; we love the
throne of Vitthala. Vitthala is diffused throughout
our race. He fills the seven regions of hell; he
pervades the three worlds, and the souls of the
sages. Vitthala is the. darling of our hearts. Our
gracious and tender master, the embodiment of
our love; it is he>who puts the world in motion.
Vitthala is our father, mother, uncle, brother, sister ;
apart from him we care not for our family. Tuka
says, Now we-have none but him,


137
Re Vaikuntha he stands upright on
the brick. The lord of the world has come;
he has come to meet his worshipper Pundalika! On
the further bank of the Chandrabhaga he stands
with his hands upon his hips. Tuka says, The sky
resounds with shouts of acclaim.


138


J HE throne whereon he sits is studded with
jewels; on either side is a besom of peacock’s


52 + DESCRIPTIONS AND INVOCATIONS


feathers; Rakhumai and Radha stand near him.
All mystic powers attend as handmaids upon him,
Tuka takes off his shoes and stands by as a
minstrel to sing of his praise.


139


| IKE a diamond set in gold, like a mine of
4 rubies, so glorious is Narayana to the sight.
His face is a jewel moulded out of joy.” Therein is.
the lustre of a million moons, full moons of the
fullmoon day. Tuka says, Our eyes.cannot turn
away. They are fully satisfied to behold him.


140


PRIGHT on the~bank of Bhima he stands
towards the south looking upon us. Evil-
doers tremble and‘run.away, when those that are
bold in his name ery‘aloud. He endures all with a
patient smile; from his speech proceeds a nectar of
perfect joy. \The sages tasted in their souls this.
sweetness, when the cravings of their bodily life
were stilled. He has taken.a firm, hold on the
minds.of men, for he is generous enough to give
them their hearts’ desire. Excellent is thy name,
O mother Vittha, to which all perfections resort.
He stands upon the brick, unclothed, grasping the-
joint of his waist, to reward devotion. Show us
the path across the sea of the world, O Vittha,
mother of those that have attained or seek perfec-
tion. Make haste, first enter the path, then you
will reach infinite bliss. Tuka says, Everything
has come to Pandhari; the universe is maintained
by the light that proceeds from it.


SOME INCIDENTS IN HIS LIFE 53


141


VITTHALA, that standest on the Bhima’s

bank, thou hast wearied thyself for thy wor-
shippers, with many a care and many a visit to the
earth. Thou art gentle to us, but destructive to
the demons. Thou wast reclined amid the sea ‘of
milk, when the earth was infested with demons;
therefore thou didst appear in the cowherd’s house;
Pundalika stayed thee at Pandhari. -Tuka says,
Thou canst be gained by faith.


142


tae a mother’s feelings, when she hears the

auspicious news that-a son is born, such be
even my feelings when Ising or hear sung the
attributes of Hari. The deer is fascinated by the
sound of music; he forgets his own existence.
Tuka says, The offspring of the tortoise gazes on its
mother for nurture.


143


6 Das cooking is done; Rakhumai waits for you;

the water is heated in the pot; she has ground
beneath her feet the powder for your bath. O
Panduranga, the feast delays for you; the Gopis
have brought the pot and are waiting to pour water
for your face and hand. All the damsels stand
‘expectant to serve you; Udbhava and Akrira have
come to give you an invitation. A couch of fragrant
flowers is spread; jewelled lamps are sei on the
trays with khus-khus grass and betel leaves, pre- —
pared for your delight. Tuka entreats you, Look
hither, O Lord of Pandhari; he says, Be vigilant
every one of you.


54 DESCRIPTIONS AND INVOCATIONS


144


E ‘count as the murder of a Brahmana the

praise of any other than thee, O Pandu-

ranga! We slaves of Vishnu fix our faith on thee

alone; we call none God besides thee. My tongue

shall be cut into a hundred pieces if I turn back

from this assertion. Tuk& says, lf 1 attach myself
to any other, I shall be guilty of all sins.


145


O HUSBAND of Lakshmi, listen tomy words!
I pray to thee in my wretchedness. With
folded hands I wait while thy song.is sung; draw
near to me thyself. Listen to my ery; I ask for
nothing more. Tuka’s brother says, O God grant.
this little petition.
146


OU are wearied with granting the wishes of
your servants;-you make it your pride to.
accept us. O Lord. of the abject, O visible image
of joy, right well do these titles become you! Many
have asked thee to bless them; many hast thou
blessed and satisfied. Tuka says, O loving father,.
who can fathom your playful kindness ?


147


WILL extol Kegava, Mukunda, Murari, Rama,
Krishna, mighty names that annihilate all
guilt. O Life at once and Death of the world, who
art at once the Dwarf and the Universe of manifold
glory; O container of good and evil, slayer of
Madhu; thou who severest mortal ties, who bearest
the disc and the mace, strong hero that didst over-
throw the demons! O wartior that wearest the
jewelled crown, O generous master that givest.


SOME INCIDENTS IN HIS LIFE 5D


the world to men, O image of Madana, entrancing
the spirit, in whom the cowherds and the dam-
sels delighted. O Kanha, master of dramatic skill,
endowed with every perfection, possessed of every
attribute, beyond all attributes, who beholdest
and knowest all things; thou who hast created the
sun and other lights, yet dost allow no sense of
pride to approach thee, how can I serve this God?
What little can I offer him? Without faith he
cannot be comprehended. Tuka suffers not his
soul to quit his feet.


148


QO VITTHALA, thou art the prince of the gener-
. ous, the life of the world. “Thou art a beap
of generosity, all perfection-dwells with thee.
‘Thy name is passing sweet, thou dost fulfil our -
fond desires. Thy holy face is very good; I have
begun to fix my thoughts on thee. O utter the
sweet name of Vitthala; we have heartily desired
him. Tuk& crieslamentably on thee; do thou

run speedily to him !


149


O VASUDEVA, lord of the humble, lotus-eyed

glorious ‘eternity ! O thou who givest happi-
ness to thy worshippers, there is nothing void of
thee! O infinite one, master of the world, most
noble form, image of Vamana! Creator of Brahma,
Lord of Vaikuntha, inaccessible to the Vedas and


Sastras. O all-pervading. one, whose arm is
everywhere, unfathomable! Eye of the world,
God of the world, ancient father of Brahma!
O Panduranga, servant of thy worshippers, thou
that dost crush their fears, O best of beings!
Infinite one, that dost fill the minds of all, that


56 DESCRIPTIONS AND INVOCATIONS


dwellest apart from association and solitude! O
Lord of the senses, thy noble form is unknown to
thy simple worshippers; assume thy embodied
shape, and set them to adore thee, says Tuka.


150


THOU that dwellest in the sea of milk, and
dost repose on the serpent!.O thou ‘that
dost take a form for thy diversion and didst delight
the Gopis! O thou that visibly appearing art thy
worshippers’ ornament, a sea of attributes whose
true form is unknown! O thou who hast assumed
unnumbered shapes, whose true shape is limitless !
O abode of pity! O Lord God,/who dost protect
the deities, dispel the mortal fears of thy worship-
pers! O thou that dost pervade all and liest beyond
all, Lord of Vaikuntha, saviour of Gajendra! O
thou who givest happiness to thy simple worship-
pers, there is nothing.void of thee. O thou who
dost put our minds~in motion, a mass of know-
ledge, thyself champion of thy worshippers, slayer
of the demons! O Narayana, proud of thy servants,
O Panduranga, life of the world! Parent of
Brahma and-the rest; author of all deeds, thyself
doingnone; pervading every atom and particle;
saviour of the sinful! these are Tuka’s words.


151

te I praise any other than thee, let my tongue

rot away. If I care for any other, let my
head be crushed. If.I find pleasure in others,
surely it is sinful that very instant. If the ears
drink no nectar of God’s glory, what use are they ?
Tuka says, If I forget thee for one moment, what
purpose can life serve ?


Il


Pandbari


152


OME to Pandhari! You need not toil after

emancipation! The gods come to salute his’

feet with natural joy and exultation. The dust

raised by their dancing feet keeps-company with

us as we go. Tukaé says, There are)heads raised

on pillars to point the way; there is the spotless
throng of the Vaishnavas.


153


W HEN you have seen Pandhari, you will

praise no more the glory of Vaikuntha.
There liberation wanders from door to door, needy
in aspect like a servant. There is the tulsi-plinth,
the courtyard washed, bright hues and garlands,
ceremonies ever new irom house to house. His
name ig repeated, his story is told and his praises
are sung; as they- pound the rice, they recite
verses of Panduranga. There is perfect happiness
unbroken ; in a word, Bramha dwells there. Tuka
says, What toilsome efforts cannot attain, there you
see visible before you, standing on the brick.


; 154

B* a pilgrim and gaze on Pandhari; why need
you practise other means of salvation ?

You will gather the fruit in perfection from this.

No pride survives here ; every craving is satisfied.

Tuk& says, Dark-blue Vittho dwells before my

eyes.


58 PANDHARI


155


i age original source of all sacred spots, the

fruit of all vows, Bramha himself embodied
is Pandhari; we have seen it with our own eyes;
our longing fasting eyes are satisfied. Life of all
life, companion in happiness, he stands upright
hand on hip. Father of the world, sea of mercy,
~ he destroys the wicked and loves the,’ humble.
This is the form unqualified, adored of gods and
contemplated by sages. Tuka says, I did not meet
it in the Vedas; I found it as I sing of it in songs.


156


\7 OU cannot find sorrow at Pandhari, though
you wanted it for medicine; the joy of love
is ever present there. Pundalika has established a.
market there, he has brought thither all Vaikuntha.
In all dealings there, no loss overtakes one ;°
people make a profit that satisfies them. There is
enough for all the country side; it is stored in
great heaps; for ten miles round the land is
fattened. -Tuka says, The saints are well con-
tented ; they dwell for ever in’Pandhari.


157


OTH gods above and places of pilgrimage
come continually to visit this pure abode by

the Chandrabhiga. This is no story I have
heard; I describe what I have seen, for its
unequalled splendour. passes description. No guilt
enters the ten miles of its circuit; the worst of
sins burn themselves up by a natural fire; men
and women are purged from lust; they beeome
divine; the joy of Bramha dwells in every house.


SOME INCIDENTS IN HIS LIFE 59


Tuka says, Though you have no trace of merit, go
to Pandhari and receive merit infinite.


158


ee is the glory of Pandhari that if we seek
aught to equal it, we find no such place, for
there God meets us at once. All other holy places
take time to yield their fruit. Tuka says, This is a
mart of bliss, a heaven upon earth.


159


Beene is a city on the bank of the Bhima,
whose name is Pandharpura ;.the Patil there
has four arms, and sixteen thousand wives. Let
us go dancing to play at that town; he will give
us joy and rest. Our predecessors have grown.
bold, they will describefor us their goal of joy.

- He is mighty above the;mighty, ruler over kings
the age of evil cannot enter his dominion. The
Patil Pundalikahas established a farm, be has.
escaped from the sorrow of the world; thé saints
and .sages have opened shops there, you can buy
what you-will. You can buy liberation there for
nothing; for nobody wants it! Both markets are
thickly crowded ; there is an endless stream of
pilgrims; they say, ‘‘We care not for Vaikuntha, for
we have seen Pandhari; I hoped for it long, now
by toil I have won it.” Tuka says, O saints, it is.
through your merits that I have reached his feet.


_ 160


CO OME, let us go and see for ourselves the festival
of Kartika; Vaikuntha has come near to
Pandhari. There is a harvest of invocations; the.
heavens cannot contain our love; every house in


60 PANDHARI


Pandhari overflows. They go steadily on, bearing
images of Garuda ; with resolute hearts they clash
the cymbals, raise the note of song and beat the
‘drum. Tribes of happy men are gathered there;
how they stagger for joy! With stout hearts they
move forward, outstripping each other. The nectar
of his name is poured out in floods; their senses-are
all choked up. The army of the Vaishnavas draws
near; the, forces of Time and Death tremble.
Brahma and the rest are filled with desire, when
they see the joys of the pebbly shore. ‘ Blessed,
blessed are mortal men,” they cry,‘ how fortunate
they are.” One must pass through death to
liberation at Benares; Gaya does but pay off the
debt which we owe our fathers; but at Pandhari
there is nothing left in abeyance, before the feet of
Vitthala. Tuka says, Why should we be anxious
now? He who gives/all gifts in perfect measure, .
he will never disappoint-us.


161

i ie guilt. which cannot be purged by searching

the Sastras is altogether put away by the
sight of Pandhari. Blessed, blessed is the bank of
the Bhima, the lake of Chandrabhaga. The warrior
form of Vitthala is at Padmatirtha; the place of
his sport is at Venunada. Here is the mother of
all.sacred spots; Vaikuntha on earth, unchangeable.
His name is proclaimed with shouts; the demons of
destruction tremble. There is no spot to compare
with this; none that can be weighed against it.
Fortunate is the lot of those who behold Pandhari ;
since you are born into the world, come, look but
once upon it! What is left of your sins, when you,
have seen the god and his worshippers? Such is


SOME INCIDENTS IN HIS LIFE - 61


the city of Vishnu that all grow divine in it, both
menand women. The wheel of Vishnu goes round
the town; Time and Death cannot enter it. To
describe that joy I bave no means nor spirit; they
who visit Pandhari have reached Vaikuntha. Tuka
says, He who believes not these words of mine, he |
is vile here and hereafter; he loves not Pandhari! *


162


eae goods we want have come in a tegake
we need wander to and fro no more.
stands upright on the brick; the market of Pand-
hari is his inheritance. The streets are crowded;
the world breaks into blossom. Tuka says, Bring a
true measure, dear friends !


163


i the square of. Pandhari a game has been
started; all the Vaishnavas have gathered
together. With cymbals and sticks they make a
sound in concert; they have taken the child of
Devaki for their leader. Come, my brothers, let us
behold thissmarvel; why are you engrossed in
wordly_ desires ? Blessed aré those who have
joined him; there is no pleasure like this in the
three worlds! Their conversation is full of joy
and delight; they show to one another their fond
affection. They are earnestly bent on the Six, the
Highteen, and the Four; they dance and circle in a
pure measure. Asc mbals of devotion they wear
jewels and sandal-wood ; their energy is glorious,
and skilfully they wind their clothes about them ;

they proclaim his name with loud cries. Hari,
Hara, Brahm& and the thirty-three crores of
gods meet in eae holy Bhima, They all stand


62. PANDHARI


marvelling. Amraoti is abandoned; they cry,
‘Glorious is Vaikuntha, but it cannot compare
with Pandhari.” Tuka’s servant says, Be -not
slothful; I call on men and women.


164


E are obstinate little children ehtreating you

for the happiness of your love; our desires

we have centered on your feet, and we have spurned
the knowledge of Brahma. When I am ‘invited to
Pandhari, I set my eyes on that road. .Tuka says,
There I shall see all notable spots together in one.


165


E who visits Pandhari-forgets his father and,

mother; he becomes. Panduranga and no-

thing else; he continues to embrace him. “He .

needs neither wealth nor house; he quits the

sensuous life. Tuka says, This spot annihilates
impurity at once.


166


UNDALIKA’S inam is full; the roads are

crowded ; every article is brought there; the

omens«are, good for all kinds of profit. All diffi-

culties, overgoing these are swept away; all

balances of debts due and payable. Tuka says,

Whatever gain you make there, it belongs all to
yourself.

167

M Y treasure consists in worshipping at Pand-

hari, 1 know nothing else but that, O Lord

of Pandhari! I am Vitthala’ s own slave stamped


with hisown name. Tuka says, Now I cannot turn
back at all. : :


SOME INCIDENTS IN HIS LIFE 63


168


O reach Vaikuntha you need not mortify your
body nor take away your life; Pundalika has
provided a means thereto, a means of putting off
the burden of the world. Tuka says, He has
provided an easy path; Pandhari is Vaikuntha
upon earth.


169


ies a man has visited a million holy places, but
has not seen Pandhari, accursed is-his birth,
for he has not seen the even (feet. He may
have gone through forms of sacrifice. and union
innumerable, but he has not seen the even feet.
Tuka says, In Vitthala’s feet, lo! unnumbered holy
places meet. if


170


\ \ 7 are born and go on ‘our way; we eat the

curds and rice of the world. Not so in
Vaikuntha, there you get no mouthful of the world!
We go on feeding each other, we rejoice in the
whirl of existence. Tuka says, Excellent are the
level sands of Pandharpura; what is humble is best!


IV


Debu


171


LEST is the village of Dehu; holy is that
spot of earth, for there lives Panduranga,
our God. Blest are the husbandmen there,
happy are they, who cry upon-his name. With his.
hand upon his hip the father of the world stands:
there; by‘his left is Rakhumadevi, our mother; at
the door stands Garuda with his hands joined to-
gether. On the north is a peepul tree, on the
south stands the Ling of Sankar; beautiful is the
bank of the holy stream Indrayani. There is the
wood of Lakshminarayana Ballal, where the Lord
of perfectiondwells. Without is Bhairava, who
smooths the way, with Hanumanta near at hand.
TheredoI, Tuka, preach and sing, with the feet of
Vitthoba in my heart.


.
Che Nature of God


T.—In Bimself
172


E hear it said that Janairdana lives,in man-

kind; how is it we fail to perceive this ?

Who is it that passes through birth,age and death,

through pain and disease? Guilt and-merit, conduct

pure and impure, who is it that-has taken these

on himself and why? Wedie-and pass away ; but

not so thou; how shall we assure ourselves of this ?

Tuka says, Do thou unfold this mystery and show
me the truth.

173


F what material isthe “I”? made; how difficult

it is to look into its nature. We cannot forget

the idea, though it is nothing but ourself. When

darkness. overpowers light, the ground under our

feet ischanged. Tuka says, If you take God with
you, he will show you where you are.


174


LL our possessions belong to Krishna; nof
knowing this, the mind imagines otherwise ;
therefore evil spirits assault it; the five elements
come besieging it. We conceal our possessions from
their true owner, and bring punishment on our-
selves. Tuka says, Time throttles us in its grasp,
yet we go on erying “I,” “1.”


66 THE NATURE OF GOD


175


HEE, without attributes, let me contemplate as

one with attributes ; all on a sudden I feel the

sense of difference between us. Henceforth there

will be no conception of union between us; it is

well as it is, let us keep our respective positions. \In

trying to approach thee I have wasted ‘words.

Tuka says, A feeling of indifference pervades my
frame as it does thine, O infinite one!


176


AISE no question whether Hara and Hari be

different ; one resides in the other, as sweet-

ness resides in sugar. If one cares to distinguish

them, it is but a vtlanti that marks the difference.

fe says, The right side and the left form one
ody.


TI.— Bis Relation to the World


177


RAHMA and Maya exist together, as the
shadow follows the body. If you try to cut
it off,-you fail; if you try to destroy it, it has an
. existence of its own; if you cover it up beneath
you, it is there, out of sight. When it is insepar-
able, why should we persist in ealling it sepa-
rate? We lead ourselves into a confusion of mind.
Tuka says, The taller you grow, the taller it is;
the shorter, the shorter; it varies with yourself.


178


= God intervenes, then the action passes over to
him, I am a silent witness; knowing this, all


HIS RELATION TO THE WORLD 67


vexation about purity end impurity passes away.
The toy notion of individual and supreme spirit was
created for a diversion of the fancy. Where then
are the worlds? They are an illusion that passes
away. Of atruth the world is of one substance with
Vishnu; under this notion all our ideas fall into
their place. The variety of castes and creeds is a
diversion of his; the whole texture is woven of.one;
then how can there be a distinction of like and
unlike things? Such is the conclusion reached by
Narayana in the person of his Vedic author. This
essence of gracious favour Tuka has obtained; his
dwelling is close to his feet and_not far from
them


179


HE mind serves-as.a crucible wherein all

pleasures are thrown together. One serves

to make another deeper, but each returns at last to

its native form. “When a drop of rain falls into the

t sea, how can it be distinguished? Tuka says, The
{ new drops cannot be recognized even by God.


180


| OW could we contrive a ferry across the
P mirage of the world, to cross to the farther
side of it? When children play at shop with coins
of broken potsherds, what real loss or gain is made
in that business? When girls play at a wedding,
does any real relation between them follow?
Whatever joy or grief we experience in a dream,
when we wake we find it was a false impression.
It is false that all are born or dead, or bound or
free or suffering, says Tuka.


68 THE NATURE OF GOD


181


\ J HY should I trouble sbout actions good or

bad? I have found the true secret. You
are like your name; you have not revealed your-
self at all. You have parted with nothing ; you are
still stored up. Tuka says, What will my burden
be to you ?


182


| NOW this, the devout have no store of merit;

they have reached the state where all is
God, immanent and transcendent. Purity, ignor-
ance, passion and pain can/never touch the
devotees of Hari. In all their members it is
nothing but God that eats or.speaks or acts. Tuka
says, There is no such distinction as ‘‘God” and
“ His worshippers.”


183


B* this means our independence of spirit is

cast forth >-whether we take or refuse plea-
* sure, if is Panduranga dwelling in us who takes
or refuses. \The semblance of a cause being de-
stroyed, we cease to count loss or gain, much or
little. _Tuka says, Let us return to our tasks, but
cease to.identify ourselves with them.


THT.— Union with God Necessary


184 :
bE abe ences I need urge no more reasons. The
diversity of gods is an offspring of our own
thoughts; there is no truth in it; God is one.
Among duties of worship, as they are reckoned, who


UNION WITH GOD NECESSARY 69


ean distinguish between good and bad? who knows
what should be done and what should not? Let
us leave them all alone and put from us a chance
of suffering. Tuka says, Sing the praises of this
God; sing them, O my soul, with satisfaction.


185


I WENT to ask for provisions for the way; I felt

bewildered in your world of illusion. . Apart
from you it yields nothing to any one; in expressing
my own soul I lost it. It was in vain A visited
your home of illusion; enough, I say, enough of it
now! Tuka says, For this very reason, O Gopala
stay apart from us!


186


We should I do with any other God but

the Lord of Pandhari? When a river has
joined the ocean, all.other names of it vanish,
When the sun rises; all other lights are lost.
Tuka says, I know-none but the Lov of Pandhari.


187


M Oe te. we are greatly strengthened ; we
- shall hold you by your pledges. What is
past-and gone is past and gone; by finding the
vital principle all objects are secured. To break
otf all bonds produced by movements of the world,
we ought to be pure in the presence of the pure
one.. Tuka says, Such is your nature that through
you knowledge of the true self comes to us easily
and unbidden.


-188


7 AY do I care where the Ganges meets the
ocean? My desire is to allay my thirst.


vil} THE NATURE OF GOD


I store up in my heart for ever the lovely form of

. Vitthala. It is the butter that men want: who
cares to store up butter-milk? The mother gives
the child a morsel conveniently to its mouth: the
child need not be anxious. Let us sing and dance
and perform rites of joy; alas! that I have nota
fuller faith! Tuka says, I am altogether one with
God; why need I desire the future world?


189
O KESIRAJA, thus I will worship thee ; putting
' aside all sense of difference, Iwill reverence
thy feet. I will shun no direction; I will go
straight to any point. Tuka says, I will not be
one-sided in matters of praise.or blame.


190
ENCEFORTH I shall reverence all spirits.
: I shall conceive thee to be present every
moment, O Narayana. While I hold the Vedas
authoritative, I shall except those passages that
teach difference. Tuka says, Then I shall want no
other companions.
191
OU\cannot separate the sun from its rays;
even so through faith our God inheres in
ourselves. How can you separate sweetness from
sugar? Tuka says, Where a sound arises, it melts
into the vault of the sky.


192. :
re was you who created me: how could I be
different from you? Consider now yourself
if I am not just like you, neither more nor less.
In the place where you set me I have continued,


UNION WITH GOD NECESSARY 71


obedient to you. Tuka says, NowI declare plainly,
T am free from actions, like yourself.


193


HATEVER I do, O God, I offer thee as a
service. O Narayana, spirit supreme, there
is no distinction between me and thee. We know
none but thee; our own mind testifies this to itself.
Tuka says, O Lord of the world, is not,this the
truth?
194


GOD, I see why you answer not. You are
ashamed to be called one who speaks ; yet I
will not seek to catch you_in avdilemma. Why
should I fear to call you dumb? Take me beyond
all limits to yourself, giving me this for a response ;
if you will not receive me, I shall be perplexed.
indeed. But remember this,—between giver and
receiver this is the rule of piety: the gift must be
such as the other can receive ; if either be careless
of the other, both sides are guilty, ThereforeI hope
and long to hear your voice; to this end I patiently
strive departing not from my resolve, I will not go
till I have had an answer from you; know that
thisis my fixed intention. You may say yes or no,
as you will, says Tuka.


195
i Rage eae the idea of a second is dispelled, yet


Hari remains undiminished: we need not
search for his seat outside ourselves. If you desire
to know so much, know it by the mind within the
mind; know it as the expert hunter knows the .
signs where game may be found. First, is the
body a reality? Are the correlatives of the body


72 THE NATURE OF GOD


facts? It is a mere scarecrow : itis something that
the thief takes for a sentinel. Tuka wakens you
and cries, Do not be idly frightened! Open the inner
eye, you will find you are in himself.


196


1 HAVE learned your secret by my own faith;
now I shall keep my form concealed within me,
like a tortoise. I shall meet you eye toveye; I
shall not allow any separation to part us. Tuka
says, O God, to contemplate you is to serve you.


197


\ ILL men turn up their noses at the smell of

sandalwood? Will they object to gold—
can such a thing happen? \Sugar is sweet to all
alike, young and old. ‘Tuka says, If my mind were
‘pure, why should people censure me ?


198


OU are yourselves immortal—see whether this

be true or false! Do not speak of ‘This body

of mine,” and then you will believe what I say.

What are you afraid of? Every thing is yours,

ie a says, In very truth you are better than the
gods.


199


HE world is all God-—true, but the chief thing

needed is good advice. First, destroy yourself,

then you will pass this test. You have gained the

treasure of divine knowledge, when you can speak

. confidently on this point. Tuka says, This is the

fifth stage of emancipation, when you see the effect
absorbed into the cause.


UNION WITH GOD NECESSARY 73


200


BY) Gees have died who were dear to me; how
me is it, O Hari, you have survived them?
Come, tell me now, O Vitthala, how is it you have
lived so long? My father died with his eyes fixed
on you, my grandfather and great-grandfather.
Childhood, youth and the staff of age have chased
me hotly; but you have lasted so long, because you
had none to withstand you. Tuka says, Thus I
conclude that all men, myself too, have to be
placed in you as a deposit.


201


LESSED is the time that ispassed in con-
templation; among the auspicious it is most
highly auspicious. The servants of Hari need not
cross the sea of the world; they know not what
dwelling in the womb is. Deserts and peopled
places alike are filled to overflowing by this ocean
of mercy, Panduranga. Tuka says, God and his
worshippers are bound up together, they appear
separate but ‘they are really one.


202


E-hevis the true substance of the Vedas, why do
the Vedas say of him “ Not this not this’?

It is clear the Vedas are distinct from him. When
thou hast revealed thy own secret nature, how can
it be said, O infinite one, thou knowest it not?
Since thou dost enjoy the sacrifice, why dost thou
not help to complete it? If aught is missing, thou
art angered. Thou dost dwell within us mortal
creatures ; then why, O Hari, hast thou set forth 4
difference between us and thee? Since thy form
can be seen by austerity and pilgrimage, why does


74 THE NATURE OF GOD


pride step in to keep us apart? Tuka entreats thee
to pardon him, he stands and cries at thy door.


TU.— Distinction from God Necessary


203


A S sweetness pervades sugar, so God pervades

my frame; now I will worship him’as best
1 may; God is within and without the soul at
once. A ripple is not different from the water it
belongs to; gold is still gold, though it be known as
an ornament. Tuka says, So are we in him.


204


OW ¢an a child’s longing fail to be gratified ?

We who are God’s babes trust not to know-

ledge of Brahma or union with the supreme soul.

We will master ‘by experience those words which

have been published. Tuka says, This shall be the

effort I makein my simplicity ; when the last end
comes I willshow this fond desire.


205


Hes was designed to spread the glory of

God; otherwise whence in the nature of
things arises a second to speak of? To display his
glory the test of worship was designed. Tuka says,
The worshipper of God 1s an ornament to mankind.


206


7 ITHOUT a worshipper, how can God assume
a form.or accept service? The one makes
the other beautiful, as a gold setting shows off a


DISTINCTION FROM GOD NECESSARY 75


jewel. Who but God can make the worshipper free
from desires ? Tuka says, They feel to each other -
like mother and child.


207


HAT does the lotus flower know of its own
perfumes? The bee enjoys it all. Thus
thou knowest not thy own name, but we know
the happiness of love that proceeds from/it. “The
mother cow eats grass, but the calf enjoys the
sweet milk; he enjoys who produces not. Tuka
says, Tue pearl lies in the shell, but-the shell cannot
see or enjoy it.
208


IBERATION belongs to-you, O God; keep to
yourself that hard acquisition. What I prefer
is worship; I will not-renounce that delight. Ac-
cording to your powers, take care of that generous
master. Tuka says, It is enough if you meet me
once iy the last end.
209


ae repeat.your name is to string pearls together ;
this pleasure in your embodied form is ever
new. «Ihave ceased to desire the unembodied God;

_ your worshippers do not seek liberation. With
you it is still left possible to give and to receive.
What avails the spot where a dish stood, when it
is'taken away? Tuka says, Give me the gift of
freedom from fear; say, O thou that pervadest the
world, I have given it thee !


210
AM not starved for want of food, but it is
Janardana who deserves my reverence. I have
looked on God as one who sees everything, in


76 THE NATURE OF GOD


bright and dark days alike. God is like a father

with his child, who feels and gives pleasure at once.

Good acts and bad acts vanish. Tuka says, God’s

glory alone is left, ,
211


URSED be that knowledge which makes me one
with thee ; I love to have precepts from thee
and prohibitions. I am thy servant; thou art my
lord ; let there be still between us such difference
of high and low; let this wonderful truth be estab-
lished, destroy it not. Water cannot taste itself,
nor trees taste their own fruit: the worshipper
must be separate, thus alone pleasure arises from
distinction. The diamond looks beautiful in its
setting ; gold, when it is fashioned into an orna-
ment; if there were no.difference, how could you
contrast the one withthe other? After heat one
enjoys shade; at the sight of her child the milk
comes into the mother’s breast--what delight there
is when they meet-each other! Tuka says, This is a
great thing gained and so I view it ; lam thoroughly
resolved to desire liberation no more.


212


TAS is why I have left my house and gone to

the forest; my love will be spoiled by the
evil eye; I shall lose my love of him. I will not
listen to this doctrine of unity. Tuka says, This
doctrine that God and I are one is false, I shall
not let it interfere with me.


213


Tt AD I not been a sinner, how could there have
been a Saviour? So my name is the source,
and hence, O sea of mercy, comes thy purifying


ALL-PERVADING CHARACTER OF GOD 17


power. Iron is the glory of the Parisa, else bad
it been but an ordinary stone. Tuka says, Through
the petitioner’s faith comes the honour of the tree
of wishes.


U.—The All-Pervading Character of God
and His Relation to the Created World.


214


YHAT manner of faith shall-we offer; what
single thing is fit to present you? You fill

all and lie beyond all; you are present in our bodily
form, whether we speak, eat, taste, orsmell. How
shall we control our organs, and sort out merit
and guilt? What ceremonies or deeds shall we
perform? Where is the scene where you are not
present? What do/I- gain by closing my eyes?
‘What spell or charm shallI utter? Where shall we
place our faith? Where is the spot in which you
are not? Whither shall we turn? Where shall we
set our feet ?~ There is no spot known to us that is
void of.thee; how can I search for such a place?
Tuka says, Nothing but thy name shail be to us
worship, liturgy, rosary, incense, lamp, fruits, betel-
nut; flowers and water !


215


YHOU art to me mother, father, brother and
bosom friend; treasure, family and darling

of the soul. Now I need no other grounds of
assurance. Ihave placed on thy head all my burden
of gaining and keeping. Thou art the sum of
action, deeds of piety, thou art deity and family,


ry


78 THE NATURE OF GOD


in thee deeds of austerity, place of holy resort,
religious vows, teacher—in thee everything is
comprised. Thus says Tuka’s brother, O God, who
doest and makest man to do, in thee is fulness
of faith, devotion, worship and attendance on God!


216

dl eer Hari dwells in every spirit, pervading it

ag fire pervades wood. Light is reflected in
‘every vessel, yet it does not perish -~when they
perish. If you pound grass, you find no milk in it,
yet when the cattle eat grass it turns to milk; he
alone knows the secret of this who pervades all
things and yet remains without them. The fruit
appears at the end of the plantain tree; yet if you.
search within the stem, what do you find there "
Cursed be the impatient. man, his life is wastec
be gets no fruit or flowers; his labour is wastey’
The reflecting medium occasions the name; but the
reflection is nothing more; the essence remains
behind in the dense body. Since the medium is
impure, how can you see the essence within? Do
not go on.inereasing sin and merit. Employ the
true secret, have done with pretences; thus I Tuka&
entreat-you; need I fall at your feet? If your
desires, ‘are set on children, wife and money,
consider, what will be left you at the end?


217 .

HY feet are everything to me; let me trust in

thee alone. I see thy feet everywhere; the

three worlds are pervaded by Vitthala. Discussions

of thy nature are a maze of error; let me refuse to

enter into them. Tuka says, There is no particle

without thee, yet I see thou art greater than space
itself.


ALL-PERVADING CHARACTER OF GOD 79


218


R AMA is royal power and subject and protector
IU of the people; in him all are comprised.
There is no speech of him that is not auspicious;
he is an infinite mine, a heap of good things. He
has destroyed the idea of master, and every sort.of
service: whom else need we desire? Tuka. says,
The whole earth is buzzing with God’s name; there
‘s nothing left for us but to sing of him.


219


ARAYANA gives and himself enjoys the

ea gift; now what is left tosay? Few words

main to speak. Whatever object our eyes behold

’ 4r own form dancing before us. Tuka says,
* ty sound is Govinda.


220


PEECH cannot describe it, though you should

utter all the words to our satisfaction. God’s

_body is as it were a mirror, where each may see his

own form. Infinite is the ripe crop that faith alone

produces... Tuka is embarrassed by the heap of corn
and sits dividing it out. .


221


yy °s have created amusing games to soothe

your eyes with watching them; apart from
that end, we all know what the world is—a wooden
tiger and a wooden cow! There is unity at the
bottom, but he has set an amusement afoot; he has
made one light into many.. Tuka says, There is no
real form in the mirror, the reflection serves as an


amusement.


80 THE NATURE OF GOD


222


“Y7 HEN you have the evidence of your mind,
why do you need public opinion? You
have your own advantage within yourself. The
true faith you should hold is your own reflection
that God- pervades all, within and without you.
With pure faith on your side, you need not abandon
the world; the truth will come to light anywhere.
The man who hag tasted inward sweetness values
it; he cares no more for outward show. Tuka says,
Pure faith brings this about; God- will belong to
those who possess it,


223


IME devours all this visible world; all things

are ever passing from ‘birth to destruction.

As the sprout lies hidden in the seed, so is the

infinite one the last resort of all things. Tuka says,

Sound is resolved into the sky; thus men fail to
perceive this great.secret.


224


N this reflection there is pleasure ever new, it
should be discussed among the saints. If we
remember the form of a thing, it becomes one with
ourself; it does not stay apart a single moment.
If you mean to worship him, then conceive him as
the universe ; in vain it is to limit him to one spot.
Tuka says, Such is my perception of him; I lay
my head in submission at his feet.


225


\ 7 E love this worthless world only while we
fail to sew him who pervades it. Nara-
yana is the father of the world, Narayana pervades


ALL-PERVADING CHARACTER OF GOD 81.


it; when we take him for our standard, all else be-
comes false. We need lamps no more when the
sun arises; their light disappears in the lustre of
the day. Tuka says, The store of our past makes
the world cling to us; the undoubted secret of sal-
vation is with Narayana.


226


E have hurled a stone upon the Sensuous
life; we have put death to death. You
pervade the world: how can I be separate from
you? Now why need I struggle-to teach you?
How can I expel anything from-myself? How
can I admit any thing to me? We may enter on
dry discussions, but you remain beyond them; we
are only thrusting imaginary torments on our-
selves. You have all kinds, of workmen dwelling
in your house; you distribute wages according to
their labour done. ‘Luka says, We know nothing of
loss or gain; let him=who is master preserve the
-house. :


227


ITHIN and without is Hari; Hari has

imprisoned me in my heart. Hari has set

a stone\upon desire; he has robbed me of worldly

wealth. Hari has given me his soul in exchange

formine; he has caused a breach between me and

mankind. Tuka says, Hari is not apart from us;
he surrounds us on every side.


82 THE NATURE OF GOD


UT.—Universality of God's (Grace


228 j
ECAUSE a girl is enjoyed for vee years by
Gandharva and Agni, do men\ or animals
cast her off? A cow feeds on filth with her own
‘mouth, yet she is pure; so is a stream when it has
mingled with the Ganges. A peepul tree’ grows
from a crow’s excrement; if you consider the birth
of the Pandavas, it was guilty. Sakuntala, Suta,
Karna, Sringi and Vyasa—their names destroy
sin. Consider Ganika, Ajamela, Kuffja. Vidura—
consider too who was Pingala, Valhaj Visvamitra,
Vasishta, Narada—was the origin of these men
pure? Yet men and women whose abtions would
not save them were saved by thei# repentance
and by remembering. Hari. Tuka says, Lord Hari
does not remember a-man’s origin; he who con- .
siders that goes to hell.


229


HAVE renounced all vehicles of sense; I shall
not_allow any trouble to come near me here-
after.~Why should we have to clean our hands?
Why should we put obstacles in a practised path?
What, has God not created for you? Every thing
is in its proper place. Tuka says, When our pride
‘disappears, with it goes the relation pf I and you,


230°


OU cannot make cakes without pounding
wheat; if you are idle, you will spoil them.

Do not be angry if I tell you the secret! The thread-
hound pole dances when the conjuror beats the


UNIVERSALITY OF GOD'S GRACE 83


ground with his rod. Tuka says, The secret is in
the rod; it puts its skill in every thing.


231


Ww primal form is beyond mind or speech ; so
/ devotion has been invented to measure thee
‘withal. With the measure of devotion I count-out
the infinite one, for verily there is no other way
to do it. By sacrifice and austerity and union
through the body, by recourse to contemplation,
thou canst bé found. Tuka says, Accept, O Kesgava,
.as we offer it, the service we lay before thee in simple
faith.
. 232
\ THAT limit of his have we found by seareh,
by considering. further him who fills the
world? Atoms and masses alike are divisible for
ever; if the Srutis say he is not, they too are
_ exhausted before they define him. Toa grub with-
“in a frait there is-a sky proportioned to his size;
but how many such fruits there are on a tree! The
infinite one showed Arjuna within his belly new
creations and the world of Krishna. Tuka says,
Cling tothe robe of the saints; if you try to fathom
him, how can you live long enough | ?


- 233


TJ.HE Yogis gaze on the reflection of your

splendour; we see the original before our eyes.
He stands upright with both hands on his hips;
from his body glances a purple lustre. He pervades
the world, yet dwells far from it; within all things
he is hidden unmodified by all. He has neither
shape, nor outline, nor name; we must approach


84. THE NATURE OF GOD


him in our spirits. There is neither end nor limit
to him, nor room for distinction of caste; he has
neither family, nor caste, head, hands or feet. The
joy of faith enlightens the ignorant, through their ,
own fond desire, says Tuka.


234


F I would praise thee, lo! the Vedas cannotdo
it; what are my efforts worth in comparison
with that? But I find it very sweet to speak of
thee; my tongue longs to taste the draught. Where
is the intellect that can describe thyform ? In every
hair of thy body unnumbered worlds. arise and pass
away. Tuka says, True as thou aft, and thou alone,
there is no speech than can truly describe thee.


235


OW can I see or meditate om thee ! Show me
the secret,—beggar that Iam. Tell me how
I can worship or.serve thee, what faith, O God,
will bring thee to‘me. How can I praise thee or
conceive thee, or know whose or what thou art ?_
How can I-sing thee or meditate on thee! Show
me what are thy thoughts, and thy ideas. Tuka
says, As thou hast made thy servant, so, O God,
teach me this by experience.


236 .
HAVE ‘no abilities to praise thee; the Srutis
stand still and dumb before thee; the four
modes of speech stand dumb and helpless,—such is
thy form, O Hari! That form is such that our eyes
may not behold it, for the sight of it deceives
Brahma and the rest, Brahma and the rest ave
embarrassed by Karma; hence they must wander


GOD'S POWER 85


from birth to birth. Tuka says, Thy attributes, thy,
name and form, ate unmeasurable: how can “we
deseribe them ? 5


UIT.—God’s Power
237


THE high yogis sit contemplative in’ closed
rooms; he comes up behind sto protect
them; he satisfies their hunger and thirst; be
cools them when they are hot; they have learned
to disregard the sensations of the body. What
society delights them save that of Hari alone?
- What earthly pleasure or joy affects their souls ?
They would not choose for an instant the pride of
kings. Tuka says, Poison becomes nectar through
the gracious favour of Narayana.


238


T ERE is a little secret of your love, O Lord of
the>world; I remember the tale and will
tell it to you. A deer and two fawns were grazing |
blithelyin the wood, when suddenly there came a
- hunter with two dogs. He spread his nets on one
side, he stationed his dogs on the other, he fired
the grass on one side and waited himself on the
other. The deer were beset on all sides; they
‘began to remember your name. “O Ramkrishna,
God of Gods, come at once! who will save us in
this strait, but thou, O father, Lord of the world ?”’
‘You heard their words and your pitiful heart was
troubled; you ordered the rain to quench the fire
speedily. You roused up a hare and the dogs


86 THE NATURE OF GOD


pursued it; the deer joyfully bounded off, crying
“ Govinda has saved us!” Thus art thou full of
mercy, beloved of thy worshippers; they delight-
heartily in thy praise, O spouse of Rakhumai,.
says Tuka. ;


239


1 I speak of goodness, he satisfies every desire ;
.sif of sweetness, how sweet is his name! If
of mercy, behold, he is altogether righteous; of
humility, he will not vex his servanis.. In gener-
osity he is ready to give his/spouse away;
he triumphs over Time and Death: Regarding
wisdom, he is a heap of noble qualities ; but all to.
those who know him alone. He is as old as
time; his way of diversion\cannot be tathomed.
Among the cowherds, he was a rude cowherd,.
a subtle cheat among the weak women. We
may call him a simpleton, for he is submissive to
faith; greedy, for he loves the morsels left by
others; ugly, for he fell in love with Kubja;
timorous, for he dreads sin. As to games he alone
can play them;.in dancing he alone knows a dancer.
He hides, within our spirit, yet, though we grasp
thee, O God, thou art not apprebended. If we call
thee high, behold thou art highest of all; or low,
thenthou art lowest. Tuk& says, I have spoken
the truth; I have paid no false worship.


, 240


Wa. lack we at the feet of Vithoba? No.
y single thing. To distribute the mind among
all the objects around us is to make it a beggar
from door to door. Who is mighty save my
Vithoba? Tell me any that is glorious save him.


GOD'S POWER 87


Tuka says, There is liberation in Vithoba’s village
let us carry off this treasure that costs us nothing


241


F Narayana is weak, why do the Puranas
resound with his praise? No drum is beatén
save in the name of a glorious prince; else why-do
not men praise some other? Therefore. declare
that he lives for ever; it is his noble nature to
make the lives of men happy. The excellence that
is in him is incomparable, therefore his holy form
has penetrated our hearts. No one-is great who
does not obey Hari; no prince, should rise up
against him. Tuka says, The truly great will serve
him; with him there is no deceit or envy.


242


HLL me of any one/else like Panduranga; it
is he who bestows salvation upon this Iron
Age. There is some weakness in every other; look
in your own heart’ for the place where he may
be formed. “Sin committed elsewhere vanishes in
holy spots;.sin committed there is like a line
graven upon adamant; but the sin committed at
Panduranga’s abode is absorbed in him and con-
tinues not in the sinner. This secret was told by
Siva.to his wife. Tuka says, This deity comprises
in‘himself all holy places.


243


F God is your friend, then all the world is kindly

to you. Experience shows us this, yet men are
troubled without cause.. Ii God. protects a man,
fire.cannot harm him. Tuka says, Hari protected
Prahlada.


88 THE NATURE OF GOD"


244


} E who pleases the saints is the death of

Death, even as the child of a rich man is
vich. If you listen to him, you will hear of none
but the One; he protects you from weariness of
fond desire. He has means to set you free from
any guilt you have incurred; look not upon \any
other source of destruction. Tuka says, The shade-
of the wishing-tree is the chief thing: what
compassion is not to be found there? :


245


| RISHNA is my mother and father, sister,

brother, aunt and uncle. Krishna is my
teacher and boat of salvation. He bears me over
the river of the world, ‘Krishna is my own mind,
my family, and my, bosom friend. Tuka says,
Holy Krishna is my place of repose; I em
resolved I will not/be parted from him.


246


GOD, give us some hope of support! There

is no lack of aught with thee: what does
it cost thee to grant us repose? My mind is
frenzied with desire to serve thee. Tuka says,
O. Narayana, thou dost own thy worshippers’
control.


247


ISTEN, people, how’ you may recognize your
own interests! You‘ must bring to mind the
prince of Pandhari; if you utter the name of
Narayana, how can you be fettered? From this/


GOD’S POWER 89


shore you may pass over the sea of the. world.
He will bring the age of Kali into subjection ; the
mirage of the world he will chase away. Pros-
‘perity and mystic powers will all be bond-slaves of
his. This is the essence of all the scriptures, the
secreb purpose of the Vedas ; if you look, you will
see it is the purport of the Puranas. All_are
empowered to approach him, Brahmanas, Kshat-
triyas, Vaisyas, Stdras and low-caste men; children,
harlots and all others. Tuka says, By experience
I have found this much out; other creatures may
perchance enjoy this pleasure by good fortune,
through their faith.


248


W HAT or whom shall. we ask for but thee,

O thou who fillest the globe and the uni-
verse? Who else knows how to fulfil our heart’s
desires? What of other princes and kings? There
is none other in the three worlds that grants libera-
tion, none that saves us but thou. When we
think upon thy name and form, sin and fever run
away in fear, desite is destroyed. Hari, this name
of thine is truly called such in the Puranas, for it
drives. away death and re-incarnation from those
they hawve seized. Why should I waste my speech ?
It is fruitless for me to praise any other than thee.
O.thou that destroyest the world, the great serpent
is wearied with describing thee. Let my spirit
repose in confidence at thy feet; it is vain to ask
for aught else. Thy title, < Lord of the humble,”
ig justified in the eyes of men; thou hast saved
many a humble, many a guilty, many a sinful man.
Tuka dwells at thy feet; preserve him, O God!
I ask that I may serve thee.


90 THE NATURE OF GOD


249


\ ‘7 E feed upon this essence; we distribute it
/ to others; come take it, do not ramble in
the waste! He whose even feet aré set upon the
brick, he alone is a hero in generosity. All your
desires will be satistied, if your mind dwells steadily
at his feet. Tuka says, He has sent me with the
message, that this path is easy and pleasant.


250


V HAT puzzle car. we find in-the sea of the

world, if he shows us the path and goes
before us? Panduranga is a good ship; he suffers
not our feet or our bodies to be wet. Many holy
men have gone over already, and reached the fur-
ther shore. Tuk& says, Now is the chance, come,
let us run speedily after him.


251


r{ \HROUGH the virtue of the magnet iron stands

upright and changes its nature. Such is the
effect with us; thou dost-play about us within and
without. The flame devours a thread, but an amulet
will preserve it. Tuka says, The sandal tree raises
its wood to the highest honour.


252


ay ITH his wheel and mace in hand, he ever
protects his worshipper at his feet and
destroys the wicked. The unknown one has
assumed a form, the excellent one has shown him-
self to us. Tuka says, Vitthala fulfils the desires of
every man.


GOD'S POWER 91


253


EFORE now thou hast saved many sup-
pliants, therefore they call thee lord of the
helpless. Thou didst not weigh guilt or race or
lineage; thou didst save Azamela and the Bhil
woman. Thou didst set the child Dhuru in a firm
place; thou didst offer the sea of milk to. Upa-
manya. When the beast Gajendra was injured by
the denizen of the waters, thou didst-rescue him
from the sea of the world. Thou didst save
Prahlada in fire and flood, turning poison into
nectar by thy name. When heavy burdens fell on
the Pandavas, thou wast. their’champion. Tuka
says, Thou wast the Lord of these helpless people :
I have heard the tale, I am ‘come to thee.


254


H brother, the Ganges is no commen water,

the banyan and peepul are not mere trees,

tulsi and rudraksha rosaries are not necklaces,
they are manifestations of God. The sea is not a
stream, you must not call the linga.a stone. The
saints are not like worldly men; you must not call
the ascetic’s staff a cane, nor holy food by the
name of wheat; Rama-Rama you must not call
words of common conversation. The sun and the
moon are not mere stars ; Meru is not a hill, The
serpent of Siva and Vasuka are’ not poisonous
snakes. Garuda is not a bird. The bull’of Siva
is not a head of cattle. The wishing-tree is not a
mere tree, nor the wishing-cow a cow. The tortoise
of the world is more than a tank tortoise. Varaha
is not a wild boar. Brahma is more than the soul
of man. Lakshmi is not a mere woman, A holy


92 THE NATURE OF GOD


sprinkling horn is not a bone; the silk robe of a

goddess is nota piece of cloth. The magic stone

Pariksha is not a stone; it is a manifestation of the

goddess. Gold is not a common metal, nor salt a

kind of sand; the ascetic’s deer-skin and tiger-skin

are not hides. Pearls are not flints, nor diamonds

pebbles; the soul is not a guest to be dismissed
when:you desire. Dvarakais not a mere village;nor
Krishna’s image a mere figure. The Gomati is not
a mere place of pilgrimage; the very sight. of them
brings liberation ; Krishna is not a mere pleasure-'
seeker, vor Siva an ascetic. Tuka-says, He has
obtained in Panduranga alone’ all_the bliss that
these things can give.


255


EN of strength have fought their way swiftly
i to the goal; but) we are weak, we will cry
to you for mercy. They have made a stepping
stone of that mighty enemy. Tuka says, They are
true heroes, steadfast saints, a very sea.


256


WHE vile and stubborn demons tremble, for the
bank of the Bhima rejoices in the town of
Pandhari. Now shout aloud the thousand names
at once! Vithai enters her worshippers’ bodies and
drives out any demon that has lodged there. Sita
was seized by a demon and taken to live in the
asoka, forest; yet a mother came to her in the
form of a goblin. with loose hair. Mahisasura
made Prahlada mad, suddenly Vithai came to the
scene, gnashing her teeth. When seven children
of Vasudeva had been devoured, she came at the
appointed time for Vasudeva’s sake. When the


THE POWER OF GOD'S NAME 98


poor Pandavas were forced to wander in the forest
like madmen, she ran and saved them, protect-
ing them in the flesh, Wherever men fix their
thoughts on her name, thither she runs herself; she
considers not the low degree of any men where
she sees faith. O ancient goddess of our line, O
mother, says Tuka, Why should we fear now spirits
of evil or servants, of Yama?


257


OU saints need feel no anxiety; nor wonder

how you can turn a crystal into a diamond.

You must test « thing by the rules of its own place

and time, and allow it whateverits’ worth may be.

If you punish one, you will frighten many ; this

reproach will be in many mouths. Tuka says, My
words are not foolish, no madman’s ravings.


258


HATEVER good you do a child, his mother

is aware of it. The child is dearer to the

mother than her own life; if you take the child

away for akindly purpose, still the separation is

poison to.her. Tuka says, It follows the same law

as that which refreshes the eyes when the feet are
anointed.


UTTT.—The Power of God's Name


259
UCH is Vitthala’s name that it heals the dis-
ease of the world, the sum of action stored
from the past. If you utter it, you annihilate
rebirth. Guilt cannot dwell along with it, the


94 THE NATURE OF GOD


three-fold fever passes away. Tuka says, The illu-
sion of life becomes your servant and falls at your
feet. :


260


ITTHOBA’S name is ever true and good and
welcome, it severs all ties, its praise is heard

in both * worlds. He who has faith among his
possessions profits by it very speedily; simple as
he is, says Tuka, he knows how to conquer Time
and Death.


261


B® assured that this perishable body will be
destroyed: why then do you not utter
his name? Countless millions-have been saved by
his name; it has given them a place in Vaikuntha.
‘There is nothing in the three worlds of such virtue
as his name: why.do you not recall it? Tuka
‘says, His name is more glorious than the Vedas;
-Gopala has bestowed it on us freely.


262


i: IS. name is the essence of all essences; the ©
servants of Yama come to beseech it. Let
your speech glorify the best and the highest of
beings. He who wore on his head the moon, he
saved himself by repeating this name; even so
Valhakoli saved himself. Tuka says, Why should
T describe it? The feet of Vitthoba are full of
‘salvation. ‘


263
r[\EACHERS themselves do not understand the


secret of the Vedas: what authority do others
possess? The name of Vitthoba is easily mastered ;


THE POWER OF GOD’S NAME 95


with one impulse it bears you over the sea of the
world. The wise know well that charms are
impracticable, likewise acts and seasons prescribed ;
other men are all foolish. Tuka says, We have lost
sight of the commandments and prohibitions; this
path has been annihilated.


264


r | Beatie you have made friends of the mighty,

_L..-. they cannot help you in the last hour. Ra-
ther utter the name of Rama; make this provision,
the best of all, or Yama will gnash-his teeth.and
rend you. Amass, if you will, crores of wealth; it
will not release you from the grasp of death. No
train of followers or host innumerable’ will save
you; only till death appears. you may waste your
might. Tuka says, Good sir, cut short the revo-
lutions of birth and death!


265


7 OU are set free from all obligations, if you
recite. the name of Vitthala continually ;
when you utter the name no sin can stay near you.
Uttering his name it takes not one instant to burn
up millions of the five great sins. You have sinned
in time passed; sin, if you will, in time to come;
we shall stand security for you. Commit what
sins you can commit; what other names of sin
need I mention? Tuka says, Time and Death
cannot enter here; our sins are consumed in
flames. ;


*


266


ONSIDER him as a Brahmana beyond all
doubt, vile though his birth may be, who


96 THE NATURE OF GOD


utters correctly the name of Rama Krishna and
remembers his purple form. Peace, love and com-
passion are ornaments upon him, his patience is
still unbroken. Tuka says, The six enemies have
altogether left him; he is Brahma himself.


267


HE pleasure which his name gives—know, that

it is God himself. I do not say/this in
ignorance, for I have the approval of the saints.
That he who utters the name needs_any other
means of attainment—do not say’so. Tuka says,
Through ‘his word that man /aitains happiness
whose father and mother are\ both of them pure, ©


268 :
I HAD fallen into the eddy of the world; I had
been oppressed by care; Ihad missed the path
and ‘urgently I had raised a loud ery. I had been


caught and imprisoned by the senses. Tuka says,
‘Allis well now, for I uttered the name of Vitthala.


269


HERE is nothing else that I trust to, I have

made it my business tovtter “ Vitthoba.” I

_have girt up my loins, and issyed.a challenge; I

shall not allow Time or Death to stir against me.

With faltering speech, as best aS you can, cry out,

Hari! Hari! Tuka says, We have discovered the
* true seed of all the Puranas.


270


T\ESIRING the bait, a fish swallgws the hook ;
his throat is laid open and he dies: as he
‘ writhes % the hour of death, he remembers the


‘
THE POWER ae NAME 97


merciful one; in his last moments he utters thy
name. Tuka says, His happiness passes all bounds.


271


ANS ‘ig not accomplished by the contempla-

tion of Vitthala alotié ?~“En him all means
of attainment are summed up; he carries us over
the sea of the world. That name bestows. the
fruit of many austerities. Tuka says, Those three
syllables are a form easy to repeat.


272


Sheer ene the name is close to his lips, a man
utters it not day or night; the name of
Vitthala destroys desires and annihilates the world.
Why do, you not secure this dwelling-place,
this pleasant neighbour for your heart? Tuka.
says, Why do you not lay up this excellent. store ?


- 273


HOSE _who live in the world cannot be.
servants of a teacher, they cannot renounce
passion, for ‘they tremble through fear of lust.
Such is-not thy name, O Lord of Pandhari, that
requires ‘no toil from anyone; it is perfect sweet-
_ness.and we neéd not wash our face before we
taste it. We shall not hanker after wealth,. we
need not fear the world. A single life is not enough
to fulfil our destiny, and good deeds. multiply
their consequences; the name of Vitthoba alone
destroys the sorrow of the world. You may
give up doing and undoing, or looking into sacred
texts. Tuk& says, All is concluded by the name of
Vitthala. ,
7


98 THE NATURE OF GON


274


z VERY fruit that appears on’a tree is sure
to ripen, if it falls not from its stem ; this
name will enable you to uttain the end, if you
abstain from vice. Ié is a well-trodden path and
will take you to the goal, if no obstacle interferes.
Tuka says, If adversity arises, it will bring destruc-
tion of your gain.


275


r|\HODGH you. have no sweet speech, though
+. God has-given you,no music-in your voice,
yet Vitthala sutfers no loss for lack of that; utter
the name of Rama Krishna.as best as-you can. Ask
God to givé you that sweetness of worship, the
face that brings love and confidence. Tuka says,
I hid my spirit be resolufe froin day to day.


276


fl er miraculous power of mine is developed to

its height in music; this is your own gift.
O God, grant me to serve you continually ! Therein
is a flood of love, that neither ebbs nor flows.
As you utter his name, says Tuka, you perceive a
deep mine of nectar.


277


EDUCE four speech to silence, keep it away
from all objects of sense. Every effort is
weariness that is not spent upon his name. Our
own plans draw the mind after them ; merit and
guilt are alike in this. Tuka says, Let my spirit
find a resting-place in Narayana.


THE POWER OF GOD’S ‘NAME 99


278 -
HE Puranas tell his story in song; where his
praises are sung he stands waiting himself.
In the throat of Daitatreya the spell of bis game
prevailed; he repeated only the praise that de-
lighted him. This name is an essence of supreme
power; amid the ritual acts of the Brahmans this
name stands first. Narada wandered amid the
three worlds with a vina in his hand and this
name on his lips. Parikshita was condemned to
die within three days, but he escaped by uttering
this name. The fame of the fisherman spread
far and wide; he composed the life-of Rama ere
Rama was born. The Vedas call you embodied
and unembodied. Tuk& says;.Your name is the
‘game in both aspects.


279


eee utterance of his name brings no libération ;
; such is the teaching of some. Wicked in-
deed are their words ; we should turn a deaf ear to
them. Those who kept his name within their
minds have>attained to him. Foolish men have
died groping in darkness, chattering nonsense
as they died. They who censure the nine rites of
worship, they are born to be reproved, they are
like. swine: that have entered the world. Why
should I repeat this time after time? The vile do
not remember it. Merely because he recited this
name, a child was hidden in the sea of milk. For
his own name’s sake he chased the demon San-
kha; he tore his entrails open and took out the
four scriptures. It is well known in- the world
that through his name Ganika was saved. Others
too were rescued, guilty and sinful wretehes. This


100 THE NATURE OF GOD


at least has been loudly proclaimed, that his mind
was in Prahlada’s mind. He saves men in danger
from- fire and water; poison has no power over
them, Why should I display, says Tuka, by such
examples the glory of his name? Those who
denounce it go down to hell.


280


‘1 OD serves his servants, he cannot-suffer them
to want anything, he throws away the dish
prepared for himself and runs to help them. Such
is the sea of merey that stands~on the brick ;
complete in generosity he displays himself in
‘return for devotion, On his breast appears the
sacred footprint, the ornament that his worship-
pers have set there. He feels it no hardship ;
he gladly suffers himself\to be spurned. Satya-
bhama makes a gift.of him; he cares not to
conceal it. He sets his servant’s feet on his head.
and goes about his task. He keeps Bali’s gate ;
he drives Arjuna’s chariot. He serves his servants
like a true dependent. From due respect he will
not speak to Pundalika, be stands decorously
behind-him. Tuka says, Why do you not worship
so kind a mother ?


281


F a child calls his father uncle, why should he
be rebuked? If our faith be pure, however
imperfect it be, Vitthala fulfils ourlongings. If you
call sugar stone, does it not still taste sweet? Tuka
says, The words may be irregular, but no word will
be fruitless. :


GOD’S GENEROSITY AND CONDESCENSION 101


1X.— God's Generosity and Condescension
282


E ealis himself his worshippers’ debtor; he
is ever grateful to them. By singing his
praises we have induced the formless to assume a
form. So the Lord of Pandhari fulfils to each-his
desire; he has presented himself to his devotees.to
pay off his debt of. gratitude. Narayana was born
for the Rishi Amba’s sake; such is his-love of de-
votion that he serves his servant. In obeying their
commands he hesitates not; he became a door-
keeper in the house of Bali. Heis deeply grateful
for devotion; he finds no resort.away from them.
He who is Lord of the world trains the steeds
in Arjuna’s chariot. Such is his grateful love of
devotion that he followshis worshipper’s heels ;
at Pundalika’s door he stands with even feet on
the brick; he never stirs, but stands still with his
hand upon his hip. He is subject to faith and
devotion; truly is he called Lord of thé humble.
Tuka therefore lies and embraces his feet without
moving. ;
283
WW #e is such a heap of generosity as you?
You give your servant a place with your-
self. You consider not whether he is pure or
abject, or what his lineage is; you purify him by
dwelling in his body. In his house you will eat
even bitter food, but you will not relish dainties
from impious people.’ You will not leave your
servants’ houses though you are beaten there—
you, who will not visit the Yogi’s minds. Tuké
says, True are your titles to honour, so the four
Vedas declare.


102 THE NATURE OF GOD


284


IS servants feel no uncertainty of salvation ;

Panduranga is a haughty champion; with

him is mercy and the gift of life. He can save you

from death by flood or fire. Tuka says, For our
sake his heart is stirred to mercy.


" 285


1 my fear, I have forgotten my fatigue; so I
: eall on the Lord of the world with piteous
cries. My father is a mighty man, a-jewel in a
crest; my words shall cause him to-arise. When
my prayer falls on his ears, he will not be slothful ;
he gives strength to his suppliant, he relieves him
from anxious fear; he sets him down at a banquet
and gives him to eat freely. He bears him on his
shoulder, he takes him-home, he visits him oft and
oft. Tuka says, Let my lord regard my stammering
speech. ;


286


E OW merciful he is! in those who are helpless

hevfeels his chief delight. He bears their
burden on his bead; he undertakes the care of
acquiring-and keeping for them. He suffers them
not to stray from the path, he takes them by the
handand leads them. Tuka says,. This is the
reward if you follow him with absolute devotion.


287


| \HE stories of Hari are mother’s milk that never

cloys; people take kindly to them, the saints
delight in them. Nectar stays ashamed inthe rear
of this sweet juice, because of the deep joy that
Brahma gives. The guilty and sinful become as


GOD'S: GENEROSITY AND CONDESCENSION 103


men that sanctify assemblies; they become four-
armed like God himself. All delights blossom in
that spot where the crowd of Vishau’s worshippers
is gathered. Void of form, like an actor he has
put on form; through love to men he dances and
sings in the person of the saints. Tuka says, He
has sifted the true means of attainment; he stands
forth easy to attain by songs of praise.


288


PROTECTOR of the fallen, your praises shall

fill the world, if you take up=the cause of

your suppliants. We have learnt in-our own deal-

ings how true is the praise the Puranas give thee.

You cannot bear to see your servants weak, there-

fore you stand upright before us, with dise and

mace and weapons innumerable in your hands ;

where you see aught needed you run to supply it.

Tuka says, It was our faith that brought about
your full incarnation. ;


289


OD dearly loves the man who has given up

the world, he comes running after him and

bears himself his joys and sorrows. The grace of

Vitthala does all for him; he has only to repeat

the name. Tuka says, Simple and tender is
Vitthala’s kind heart.


290


EE what manner of God he is—mad after devo-
tion and simple-hearted! He comes the
moment he is called for—so ravenous of service he
is! He growls in the dry wood unashamed. Tuka
says, He assumed the form half male and half
female.


104 THE NATURE OF GOD


291


HE consort of the Gopis is merciful to his

worshippers ; unsummoned he stands at their

door; unbidden for them he toils. ‘Wherever he

sees pure faith, he sets the dust of his feet on

men’s foreheads. Tuka’s brother says, Why will
you not worship so kind a master ?


292


\ \ ] ee have you left such a leader? and why do

ou look so wretched? Your ‘heart is Yall
of pissiban: you have nothing in-your hand but
dust. Panduranga is a proud “and generous
master; he needs but a tulsi leaf and water, he
hungers after meditative devotion ; you need not ask
what ottice he will give you, nor send a pleader
to plead your cause with him. He himself pre-
sides over his service and chastisement in his
service. Tuka says,-You will find no impediment
if you go to meet him ; go silently and embrace his
feet.


293


Tess our Lord is so great, yet faith can

make him dwell in a casket. He assumes
the form that his worshipper has imposed on him ;
he fulfils his desires as he’ conceives them.
Though he who gives us the world is so great, yet
he asks us for a leaf of tulsi and water. He has
assumed name and shape; he has made himself
easy to reach, says Tuka.


294


ITTHALA dwells by the Bhima in Pandhazri;
he keeps Pundalika by his side, he is gener-


GOD’S GENEROSITY AND CONDESCENSION 105


ous in compassion. Vitthala is tender, if you re-
member him; he is highest in the height. He
supports all the worlds, he finds his diversion in
assuming forms. He stands upright, but he feels
no weariness; there is no other saviour than he.
A wealthy man keeps but one kind of food in his
house, he succours the afflicted every instant. His
servants bring thom tasty food with all respect, he
never stands aloof from them. With the exalted
he is exalted, with the lowly he is lowly. You
cannot seize him by an effort of strength.» If you
close your eyes, he comes before the mind, he
dwells in the heart, and notes the opportunity to
give you your desire. When the mother is ready
to nurse, she has every breast full and none empty ;
we children go on sucking when the milk is ready ;
thus soul mingles with soul, says Tuka.


295


RICH man need make no distinction of

castes; he.has materials at home to feed
every one who comes. .When he is honoured, he
‘shows abundant honour; where any one calls for
food, he serves him abundantly. Surely he does
not distinguish friends and relations; prince and
peasant.are alike to him. Where he sées faith, he
comes and busies himself; he leaves the dull of
spirit to themselves. He forgets not the beggar;
by. soft persuasion’ he puts an end to his doubts.
‘Tuka says, He gives enough to eat and leave uneaten;
he leaves on their faces signs that they have felt
satisfaction. ;


296


N OW beneath this strong compulsion the lord
ee of Pandhari stands ready and waiting for us.


106 THE NATURE OF GOD


Now let us receive into our hearts him whose
limit cannot be discerned. We have forgotten our
bodily form and have engnared him by repeating
his name. He considers not race, family or name,
when he purposes to save his saints. It is good
that we have found the secret; we need wander no
more in search of it. He is immortal, full of help;
a generous master; the four-armed God respects
his saints. He makes himself great and small as
he pleases ;, his form is fair and lovely; hevis full of
love to the devout, he shows his respect to the saints
by employing their aid: we have found this secret,
therefore we have come to supplicate the saints.
Tuka says, I will cleave to the lord of Pandhari
with perfect devotion.


297


a Dee cattle are cared for because they yield us

curds and butter. This is the sécret that we
faithful people know, hence we have embraced the
name of Rama. Steel, flint and cotton serve to
produce fire; else who would carry them about ?
Tuka says, Spades and iron-bars are only kept till
we find this treasure.


298


ANZ wishing-tree despises not those who apply

to it; but you are better than all wishing-trees,
for you require no application. O listen! if you
bestow a gift, it awakens one to a notion of pride ;
thus Tuka, with complaints like these, cries out for
no gift but yourself.


299


RAMA, prince of Ayodhya, lord of the lowly
and friend, destroy the sin and fever that


‘GOD'S GENEROSITY AND CONDESCENSION 107


stand in my way, make me happy! You accepted
the berries tasted by the Bhil woman; you are.
yourself polluted. Tuka says, I am your darling
child, but your nature is too deep for me. ,


300 *


‘F you cry to him, he leaps up at once and

rends a pillar, who is so clement as this but

my mother Vithai? If you remember Aer, she

runs and embraces you. Tuka says, As Ising of
thee, give me union with thee through thy name.


301


| [* has lifted up his hand,he has proclaimed
his purpose ; God sits on his royal throne ;
if you come as a beggar, \be-will be your lord.
Through his protecting power alone many have
escaped out of trouble: Here and in the next
world Tuka will-not allow him once to be lost.


302


A ener deity who tends the cows, will he ask a
. rich present from you? He is pacified by
the language of faith; he is gladdened by imper-
fect speech. He needs no multitude of forms nor
profession of respect. Tuka says, In the company
of the helpless he lays aside his greatness.


303


ANAKA, Suka and the rest secured salvation

for Parikshiti in seven days. Call speedily

on God to remember this; he cannot wait for

thee patiently. For Draupadi’s sake Nar&yana

made haste; he left Garuda behind him. God

makes great haste, for he delights in his worship-
pers’ love,


108 THE NATURE OF GOD


304


“7 ITTHALA is an unpaid servant who works
for no reward. Hand on hip he stands
upright, unmoved, he sits not down; he requires
no store of merit, he regards not caste or lineage.
Tuka says, If you ery to him, he makes haste\to
visit you. :


305


E have a milk cow in our houses the three
worlds cannot contain her,milk. Her
eolour is dark blue, her name is Sridhara, she
grazes on the earth and the fourteen worlds. She
has no calf, she will go like a mother with any one,
she yields her milk to any who caresses her; her
milk flows in four abundant streams, it satisfies
Sanaka and the other sages. \Tuka says, My hunger
is nothing to her, for her love satisfies the three
worlds.


X.. God's Protecting Love


306


OU. need not hand a babe to his mother, she
is drawn to him by her own nature. Why
have I begun to be troubled? He to whom I
belong from the womb will set my burden on his
head. The mother unbidden offers her child
sweetmeats ; she takes no pleasure in eating them
herself. When he is busy: playing, she searches
for him and puts him to her breast. She feels his
pain herself, she grows as restless as corn that is
parching ina dish, Tukasays, She forgets herself,
she suffers no blow to touch him.


GOD’S PROTECTING LOVE 109-


307


HOU knowesi our hearts, though we tell thee
nothing. Thou dost pervade the world ;.
there is no need to tell thee aught. But these
desires of mine I cannot govern though I would;
meanwhile they leave me no energy to subdue
them. What do I lack since I was brought-into.
the world? From the hour wherein I was\con-
ceived I was strengthened by you. Tuka says,
T have governed my desires, and turned them from
every object but Narayana.


308


Y the favour of God, feed on this food, every-
one of you that is entitled to it. Brahma
and the other gods can hardly obtain these frag-
ments; despise not you. this nectar of Brahma.
The store is full enough fio satisfy all; title to the
food exists in every soul. Herein the mighty one
is inclined to grant our wishes; he fulfils the de-
sires of all, Here the supply is inexhaustible ; one
is tempted to take mouthful after mouthful for
ever. Tuka says, The cooking is done by Lakshmi’s
hand; God has with him a maidservant incom-
parable.


309


HE gain which is beyond the reach of Bramha

we simple suppliants obtain through that
mighty one. By abandoning desires we acquire
the worship of him; Padman&bha becomes our
debtor through the serviee. There is no limit to
the milk of Kamadhenu ; it flows as the wishes of
men flow. In the spot where we sit there is a
tide of happiness which transcends the three-fold


410 THE NATURE OF GOD


distinction. -We servants of Vishnu have nothing
lacking in the world; Narayana is seated at peace
within us. Tuka says, This is the grand dinner,
where no one remains unsatisfied, or if there be
any such, let him be.


310


UR mother Vithai is like a cool shadow; her
breast is ever filled with love; seated in her
lap I shall seek her bosom and drink as much as
I desire. O yield the milk of thy mercy and
nourish my frame’; a stream of nectar-flows from
thee. My spirit cannot contain this joy ; what is
the whole sea compared to it? -If we go astray
she feels herself in danger; with loving desire she
protects us on every side. \Tuka says, “I know not
what care is; I am Vithai’s dear babe.


311


HE mother understands the child’s secret, his
joys, his griefs and all his actions. He who
lends a support to a blind man, he understands his
purposes. He, who has set a suppliant behind
him, he. knows how to protect him. If one holds
the girdle.of a man in the water, he takes him over
the stream without fatigue. Tuka says, If a man
has.entrusted his lip to Vitthala, he knows his
condition. ©


312


HOU art our merciful mother, O Vitthala, a
shadow to thy suppliant; the milk of love
ever flows in thy’ breast, thy sight is pure and sweet
as nectar. Thou canst discern the inward parts
and sufferest not hunger or thirst, pain or weariness
to vex us. Thou dost chase far away the thirst of


GOD’S PROTECTING LOVE 114


desire and illusion; thou givest us a place to play
in, Tukaé says, Set me with the saints, where the
hand of time cannot reach me.


313


_\UCH is the loving trust of my Vitthoba that
s God, as he becomes our teacher, assumes a
pleasing form, and fulfils our desires ; we may hope
he will take us to himself. He shields us on all
sides ; if destruction draw nigh, he ayerts it. He
preserves what we have acquired;he knows
what would distress us; he takes us, by the hand
andleads us. Tuka says, He who believes this not,
let him search the Puranas with attention.


314


ATIENCE makes Narayana our ally; he suf-

fers no weary.pain, no anxious care, to over-

take ‘his servants. Sing then his praises joyfully ;
with his disc he keeps off the power of Time and
Death. When her child is sick, the mother spends
her life for him ;, yet there is no common generosity
that is like-Narayana’s. Assuredly my own ex-
perience has taught me this. Tukasays, You must
be truthful, for no assumption will serve your turn.


315


H* who is the repose of his worshippers, he
stands and cries to us to hasten. With fond
interest he takes and puts morsels of love in my
mouth. He fastens us to his waist-cloth and takes
ug quickly over the stream of the world. Greatly
he desires his worshippers, and looks round in
every quarter for them. Tuk& says, He isa sea of
mercy, he satisfies abundantly the desire of all.


112 THE NATURE OF GOD


* 316


eee to the greatness of love: Rama ate
- the berries of the Bhil woman; he hungers
after love, he is ravenous to feed on it. He pays
no heed to the eight transcendental powers or the
ocean of milk; he drinks Sudama’s water and
eats his mouthfuls of parched rice. He does not
complain that another has tasted it or despise it ag
small, says Tuka, because of the love that offers it.


317


HERE are plenty ‘of poets-from house to
house, but no one knows the true taste of
God’s favour. A noisy rogue delights in orna-
ments; he forgets the trouble they will bring him.
Men ought to accept the benefits they can have for
nothing. Tuka says, They know this, yet they
continue blind.


318


I DELIGHT to sing your praises; the mention

of yourlove tastes sweet in my mouth. Two
birds were born upon one tree; a mischievous hunter
drew near, He flew a hawk near the tree; he fit-
ted an varrow to his bow. Thereupon the birds
remember thee. ‘‘O run to us, consort of Lakshmi,
‘our mother, and father! If we fly up, the hawk
will strike us; if we sit still, the hunter will pierce
us!” Hearing the birds’ prayer, he assumed with
speed a serpent’s form; he bit the hunter and flung
him on the ground, his arrow struck the hawk.
Thus art thou merciful to thy servants, a support
in time of peril. Tuka says, No speech in the three.
worlds can describe thy joy.


VI


Che Problem of Action


1.—Che perplexing Aspect of the World
319


HE fair bas begun; the confusion. is at its
height; the paths laid down by our past
spread in every direction. You must suffer as your
own place requires the effects of the three-fold rule
of action. On you God looks asa witness, you have
no part in his plans. He has once for all set you
your lesson, distinguishing. between merit and sin.
Men enjoy the sweets earned by their own conduct.
Tuka says, Men are in another’s power, because
they have fallen into-debt; their fetters will be
broken, if they entreat God.


320


OW long will you endure the dizzy whirl of
time? See, it is every day chasing you.
Save.yourself from the eighty-four lakhs of re-
birth; go and supplicate Panduranga. When the
body~is born, death is born with it; in the same
moment it is born and dies. Tuka says, Your line
of lives is like a string of vessels on a water wheel,
each will be released when its pot is broken.


321
HE circles of sin and merit, of joy and pain,
spread outwards impelled byeach other. I |
have seen all these marvels with my own eyes; it


8


114 ‘THE PROBLEM OF ACTION


is time that sets in motion the souls of men. When
the soul has visited heaven, then follows hell; the
one succeeds the other. Tuka says, My mind has
taken fright; O clasp me to your side, Narayana.


322


OOD is his name, fair his form, it soothes
the eye and drives away the feverish heat.
Vitthala! Vitthala! To repeat his name is a present
and easy help, a very essence. This weapon is an
arrow fit for extremity, for a critical and final hour.
Why need a man provide himself.with funeral
gifts? Narayana destroys pain, if you fix your eyes
on him, The best of all doctrines becomes ours,
for Narayana bestows itonsus. Go therefore to
implore his aid, only this is required of you; this
‘is why I am angry against the world, it is a
poisonous snake gleaming before the ‘eyes. O
generous one, I have forsaken thee through this
enemy; it has made.me pass through the cycle of
re-births, it has taught me false desire. I am intoxi-
cated by wanderings in “I” and ‘‘mine.” J have
been robbed_and put to shame, have suffered the
penalty of actions, births without number I have
gone through. Now I must cut myself loose.
Tuka casts himself before thee, O God!


323


HAVE been harassed by the world; I have dwelt

in my mother’s womb ; I must enter the gate

of the womb eight million times; I am born a
needy beggar; my life is passed under a stranger’s
power ; J am fast bound in the meshes of my past;
the fated influence of the past continues with me,
it puts forth its power and whirls me along. My


PERPLEXING ASPECT OF THE WORLD 115


stomach is empty; Iam never at rest; I have no
fixed course or home or village. I have no power,
O God, to end my wanderings; my soul dances
about like rice frying in a pan. Ages have passed
in this futile strain; I know not how many more
await me. I cannot close my course, for it begins
again ; so the end of the world must set me free.
Who will finish this suffering of mine? Who will
take my burden on himself? Thy name will
convey.me over the sea of the world; thou dost
run to help the distressed. Now run to me, O
Narayana, me, poor and wretched that Tam; con-
sider not my merits or my faulis; Tuka implores:
thy mercy.


324


See was my desire and I have gained my
uttermost longing. What I have gained is
Narayana, as it were; a gain imperishable, uncloy-
ing. I will not loose my hold of his feet; what a
great thing I have gained at the cost of this life!
Where can»such a shelter be found? My merit
has bestowed it on me. An illusion has passed
-over-me; my spirit strayed ; I was caught in the
snare of the world ; it was well that my eyes were,
‘opened. Now let me attain to this faith, let no
unsteadiness overtake me; to this end I implore thy
compassion, O merciful, one, O giver of the world.
Now will my mind comprehend thee itself; how
many a blow keeps it from thee; shame and pros-
perity stand hostile in the path. These holy men
have taken. pity on me; they have adorned my
speech. They have created in me a love of thy
praises; Tuka throws himself at their feet. —


116 THE PROBLEM OF ACTION


325


HOU hast assembled together the five vital ele-
ments of the body; thou hast set the spirit
of selfish pride to assail them. What comes there
of “I” and “mine”? Who can bear this burden?®
How can we delight in the body? Itis itself but
a prey to death. The soul does not perish ; it quits
its old frame and enters a new one; according’ to
its store of merit it passes through a good’ or evil
life. Desire increases the spreading creeper of the
world; we should check its growth; this is true
wisdom. Tuka says, A hidden treasure is esteemed.
the more highly.


TI.—CThe Impossibility of Escaping
our Past


326


Mr are subject to the sum of their past; it
ae brings them pleasure or pain. By contact
with one whovis’ bleeding we sully ourselves. It is
from the baitthat disaster proceeds; by shunning
that we—secure happiness. Tuk& says, My soul
has taken fright, it has severed itself from every-
thing.
327


ESIRES add to our guilt; the touch of the
past cannot be changed. These are pro-
fitable words; it is Narayana who has pro-
nounced them. You have what your past has.
assigned you by a fixed rule; exertions will leave
you with nothing but exertions. Tuka says, If you.
embrace peace, it will bestow joy upon you.


IMPOSSIBILITY OF ESCAPING OUR PAST 117
328


T is mind that puts the mind in motion; so too
the intellect the intellect, from moment to
moment. I have learned how to protect myself by
the aid of the power that entrapped me; whatever
notion springs up in it, by the aid of it I subdue.
‘Thoughts arise in me, and pass away. Tuka says,
I have witnessed both processes.


329


T HAVE little faith or intellect, a shortlife and no

control over it. I am a molten image of guilt,
‘do thou who art the image of the Vedas, hear me!
How shall I throw off my guilt? Iam soiled with--
‘in by actions good: and bad. ~There was a past,
there is a present, there will be a future; it is im-
possible to reach the end. . To this body belongs a
history of manifold action, the revolution of eight
million re-births, the-influx of the three qualities ; -
it is a prison formed by our past, with birth and
age and death appointed for it. The soul resem-
bles not the body, wherein the five elements are
mingled. It-is ordered and contrived by the past ;
an empty worthless ear of corn. Son, daughter,
brother,~—the whole range of family connections,—
they are even as logs of wood that meet in a great
flood, and are parted when the waters subside.
Therefore I beg this much of thee that thou wilt
énd my ignorance; thou art the merciful Lord of
the world. Tuka clasps thy feet and entreats thee.


330
IRE is kindled, the corpse is burned, con-
sumed already as it is by the three fevers, but
your store of merit, actions and destiny, your place


118 THE PROBLEM OF ACTION


in the world, does not pass away. Your destiny
goes on revolving like a Persian wheel; the fulk
pots ascend, the empty pots go down. Secure .
your passage through the world and the five fires,
thus you will reach the repose of the Spirit.
Let your tongue cease not to pronounce the names
of Narayana and Rama; they shall destroy birth,
age and death, sin and merit, and all forms of\pain.
Suffer heat and cold and the solitude of the jungle,
and master the postures and concentration of the
mind ; practise austerities, go on pilgrimage, bestow
gifts, perform duties and vows, sacrifice and follow
the house-holder’s purposes ; you will not in these
stages of life avoid pain arid pleasure, the expe-
riences of birth and age. Then when you have
subdued lust and rage and selfishness, seek the
further stage and secure the infinite; still, when
you study the law, thoughts of pride, with rules
and prohibitions, come~assailing you; you praise
and censure. others, incurring guilt, it will cling to:
you with the strength of adamant. Tuka says, All
accomplishments are roots of sin, relinquish these
false sources of pain; go and supplicate the saints,
and you may pass your life in any shape you please.


331


AW BES pleasures drag away the blind souls of

men, who will take compassion on them ?
When we enter the scene of mortal life, faith
in Narayana is not born along with us. What
pleasure is it to cling to wordly life, and to fall
into the hands of Death? The ministers of hell
measure their bodies, then they drag them about
and torture them. Their state will be piteous in
the end, when they are parted from life. Millions


IMPOSSIBILITY OF ESCAPING OUR PAST 119


of births they have passed through before, and they
have as many more to encounter. Their eyes are
bandaged, they are fastened to the mill, they feel
the torture of the yoke and the goad. They cannot
tell how far they have tdiled; they forget even
hunger and thirst in their misery. This is all due
to merit or demerit in action and in store; for such
as will not with confidence recite Hari’s name.
Tuka says, They pay no price and yet say that.
Vitthala is dear; they will not even spend their
yoice, which costs them nothing; how vastly to be
pitied are they !


332


See and perdition are contrived by the

mind; send your mind to a solitary spot, to
dwell with holy men; watch over it, for it runs a
headlong course of its own. Honour and dis-
honour are the tokens by which the mind judges ;
but it will concentrate itself if you force. it to.
Tuka says, [tis the mind that carries us over the
stream of the-world, or binds us to the eghhe million
re-births,


333


O not imagine to bring together'things dis-
cordant in their natures. Whatis to happen
will happen because it is destined; what Narayana
has ordained. will come to pass. if you kill a cow
to satisfy a hungry tiger, will it be called a merito-
rious deed? Tuka says, If a man is too lazy to
think the matter out, his father and mother ate
asses.


120 THE PROBLEM OF ACTION


TIT.—Nothing is Gained by Works of
Law or Austerities


334°


We I look for some means of escape, I.see
that my feet are entangled; I am caught
in such a strait that my intellect and forceare reft
away. The stores of my past actions ‘have been
mounting up from all time; I am held as in a cleft
by rules and prohibitions, they are-so)compounded
that I cannot disengage them. “When I sweep
them away, they increase again of themselves; I
am tortured by the desires that pursue me. Tuka
ay Now set me free;.I am altogether feeble, O
od!


335,


YO long as the root is left we find pain con-

stantly growing; but surely it should not be

the yogi’s practice to increase our troubles. Why

they choose to do so, I cannot tell, nor what they

are like.or what the habit of their mindsis. Tuka
says, Lt is in vain that we vex our minds.


336


-E E who casts his body away deceives time and

creeps into a corner; such men cast rudely
from them the rug they have long worn. They
-will not get another till the time comes; for the
next chance is far out of sight. Tukasays, This
is an impediment. to service; it is a craving too
hastily conceived.


OUR FAITH A REWARD OF MERIT 121


337


T is a student’s duty to recite the Vedas; in the
second stage a man must perform the six
tasks, When he takes to the forest he seeks sepa-
ration through union; a sanyasi must renounce his
plans. If aman is initiate, know his open secret;
he is beyond all caste, religion or family. He who
preaches a rule and does not follow it, he\is a
sinner, as the Vedas say. Tuka says, Every state
has its own rules; it is all empty toil that ends
in pain,


T.—Our Faith a Reward of Merit


338


A FLOOD of joy is poured forth, with streaming
\. waves of love; I will tie on me a float of
Vitthala’s name;-and swim to the further shore.
Ho! people, all, brother and friends, leap in! This
will not last. for ever, this immeasurable flood of
nectar. Tuka‘says, It is due to our great merits
that it has run along this path.


339


TL is well that I was born and came to possess a
human body. This was a great acquisition ;

it has made me fit for happiness. I received organs,
hand, foot and ear, eyes, and mouth to speak with ;
these have gained for me thee, O Narayana, and
thus the disease of mortal life vanishes. If merit
is stored up grain by grain, then this is the reward
after many lives. Thy name clings to my speech;
when the saints are gathering around me for this


122 THE PROBLEM OF ACTION


spot that I have gained, how can I be grateful
enough! All I can do is to lay my soul at thy feet,
O mother mine, Panduranga


340


QO YOU who are swallowed up by the world,

preserve something true at least; the piteous
lord has bestowed upon you a human body, a good
surrounding; do not put obstacles in. your own
path, it is ruinous to talk of stored-up sin and
merit. Make haste and sow seed, to increase your
store of good:seed. Recognize that) what you do
makes up your store of actions, what has passed
your store of merit, and destiny is what remains to
work itself out. Falsehood is born of evil habits ;
disease of pleasures. Tuka says, The uncontrollable
tongue voids itself in filth.


341


OUR field has grown tipe; you must watch
the four, corners of it; it has borne a crop,
but you must take care of it. Watch it, watch it,
never rest, till it is put up in stacks. Put a stone
in your sling, like a vigorous watchman; all the
bands of sparrows will fiy away, when they hear
your shouts. Light a fire and keep awake in
another quarter of the field. If the birds descend
upon you, you will need both strength and skill.
Set up your thrashing-ground, and make all the
beggars happy, when you pile up your stack. Pay
off the revenue and give everyone in the village
his share. Tuka says, Afterwards you need exert.
yourself no more; you have secured what you
want and thrown away the chaff and empty ears.


OUR FAITH A REWARD OF MERIT 123.


342


EEP off the forest fires! Your field is de-
voured by sparrows,—don’t put up with
such damage; stay awake, though you feel sleepy !
If you keep company with thieves, you will lose
everything. If you shut your eyes, you will fall
into a well, be it night time, day time or lamp light.
If you keep a barren cow, how will you get milk or
cream from her? If your float is burst, < Tuka,
how will it carry you over the stream ?


VII


The Sense of Sin


343


ALLEN of fallen, thrice fallen am I; but do
thou raise me by thy power. I have neither
purity of heart, nor a faith firmly set at thy feét;
I am created out of sin; how often shall I repeat
it? says Tuka.


344


HAT an ty is there in clinging to the
world?. Tellme, O Hari! Ali the world‘is
perishable;>O° you who stand fast, you have left
the world far behind; when first I dwelt in the
womb; how can I tell’ the pangs I endured; nine
months I suffered, then I was born; my childhood
- passed in ignorance; in my youth I was harassed
by. lust ; with old age arrived care; I must die;
then I must be born again. I have no rest for a
moment, ever speeding through the eighty-four
lakhs of re-birth. Greedy passions run after me,
and throng about me. Cursed be-the name of my
selfishness! Enough of these encumbrances now ;_
I will be a poor man to dwell at thy door, I will be
thy ‘lowly servant. Tuka says, Be merciful to me
now!


THE SENSE OF SIN 125.


345


A CHILD tells his mother of his hunger and

thirst: what does he know of the troubles.
she takes to relieve him? Even so take all my
burden on thyself and protect me. Why wilt thou
remember my merits or my faults? I amone heap
of sin, O Narayana! Void of my service to thee,
abject, guiliy—-why wilt thou consider, all \this
now? When my spirit first followed thy feet, I
trusted to this acquisition. Tuka-‘says, Thou hast-
saved many; O bethink thee of me. now!


346


CALL myself his servant, but I do not act as

though I were; my inward and outward parts
are at variance. I showmyself singing and ty
ing to the people, but the love of Narayana dwells
not within me. I know nothing of the needful
secret; Iam sunk in a gulf of pride. Death has
carried off my treasure, hand over hand; the length
of my days has been numbered. Tuka says, I
seem to have wasted my life; every one will laugh
at me.


347


CO? of works and sense I am nothing but thy

lowly servant; O God, protect me and still
my agitated soul. Cast no reproach on me; receive.
within thyself, says Tuka, the million offences I
have committed.


348


RESERVE me when I am sinking in the sea
of life. ‘ Consider me no burden—regard not
uy mountainous guilt, Preserve your own—what


anc- .


126 THE SENSE OF SIN


is your title and claim? Tuka says, I am guilty, a
heap of sins.


349


So as 1am I have sought your protection,

O Hari! Now you must not belie your
reputation. My mind is not purified, but [call
myself your devotee. Wretch that I am) who
cares forme? Tuka utters your name.


350


HAD fallen into confusion and desire“of what is

worthless ; through pride I had grown false
and culpable. It is well that my eyes were opened
or I should have suffered anguish. All creation is
weeping tears through its\own misconduct. My
mind is so pre-occupied by gain that I have for-
gotten death; it will never turn back from its
purposes. Tuka says, If a man remembers not
Narayana, he stores up wealth and dies and leaves
it for his children-to quarrel over.


351


I HAVE become skilful in my own conceit; I

have. given up faith for idle self-satisfaction ;
thereafter that I should waste my time is a small
thing; lust and rage have come to dwell in me.
The world is full of faults; the spirits of men per-
sistin envy. Tuka says, I shall admonish mankind,
but I am not free from a single fault myself.


352


HE all-pervading illusion has spread its shadow

abroad ; sincerity is called simplicity, intrigue

is called success. Our own mind fetters us. Tuka
says, O God, you must unravel this riddle.


THE SENSE OF SIN 127


353


M* spirit is entangled, O Murari, by wealth;

it sets my mind roaming from door to door.
Tt dies in the search unsatisfied ; the earth submits
to it, yet it is not contented. I see that my own
heart is not pure; I have fallen into the destructive
power of the senses. My soul is ruined, for wealth
brings fetters and the scourge; O Hari,ydo thou
swiftly cut off this evil that clings to me. Other
evils too why need I count up ;—sinful illusions, evil
affections. I am tortured by lust-and rage; who
but thou can set me free? As we gaze on the
truth, sleep vanishes; sleep, sloth and pride are
afraid of it. Let them not stay with me, O God; I
have no desire except to see thee. Doubt brings on
great evils, and shame is too much for me, while
truth and devotion are far from me. Do not dis-
miss me, O brother-of.the humble; so Tukaé be-
seeches you.


354


fl Bente L speak gentle words, yet lust and
rage flourish within me; I cannot tell, O
Panduranga, how it is that I have moved towards
thy feet. My spirit is not pure, as the saints
describe purity, from the testimony of the Puranas.
Tuka says, Bring me to experience, O God, and
show me the pure truth.


355


REAT men have called me your servant, so
protect me, Lord of the helpless, Saviour of

the sinful; guard thus these titles of thine. My
heart tells me, if my faults be looked into, they are
endless, I know not how-to serve thee, but thou


128 THE SENSE OF SIN


- viewest the inward parts. Tuka says, Thou art a
sea of mercy, O sever the net of the world. ;


356


I KNOW not by what means I shall keep my

faith ever fixed at thy feet. How can I pre-
vail on thee to come and dwell in my heart?
When, O God, wilt thou grant me to contemplate
thee with genuine faith? Do thou banish all,in’
me that is deceitful and come in thy genuine
nature to dwell within me. Tuka says, Sinful as I
am, let thy power save me, O Panduranga.


357


T WOULD gladly know the truth about the soul,

but my mind drags me away, with ungracious.
obstinacy. I can make no progress because it is so.
narrow; my conduct is altogether crazy. We can
taste nothing till the right time comes; I have
made up my mind to this, Tuk& says, Your words.
serve to disclose you: why should I make you"
speak time after time ?


358


YHO will support me in my reflections?
Who will fortify my mind? Iam neither

learned nor skilled in debate, nor pure of lineage.
In this evil age there are many clever folk, who
will torment me when I sing thy praises. Iam
beset by a doubt whether I shall worship thee, or
not, O God! Tuka says, Now to live apart from
mankind or to die, both of these resolves are good.


359


ARD it is to cross this sea of the world, we
cannot pass it; we have drifted far away,


THE SENSE OF SIN , 129


we cannot reach the shore beyond. We cannot
reckon, O generous one, the cycle of re-births
‘we have seen. We have fallen into a whirlpool,
that, has drawn us down in its vast eddies. We
have grown up, but our intellect is vacant; it has
wandered far and knows not where itis. If I let:
this hour pass, how shall I enquire again? «In
births unnumbered I have known enjoyment, food,
sleep, and sensual pleasure ; yea, in childhood, youth
and age, pleasure is lord of all. I havev passed
these regions and travelled here; Ihave been
rambling about. Now I pray thee unfold this knot,
‘with a might as of dawning day. (Iwill leave this.
worldly path, Iam wearied by many-a visit I have
paid to it. I came to fancy it was all true; I fell
into contamination, says Tuka,


360


CANNOT reach-him, I feel distressed. There

are many whovrule over me. Iam fast bound
and I cannot loose myself; Iam fallen into the power:
of my past. A grievous load lies upon my head,
the claims_of‘I’’ and ‘‘ mine.” J am robbed by
bold thieves in my own house, though I know it all
the times I only ask this of thee, that thou
wouldst commit me to the saints; I have broken
my voice with entreaties; now do not make me
despair. Now is the great crisis ; henceforth what
can I do? When the day is gone, night, will
prevail; in the night time a cry of sorrow alone will
be left me. Alas! there will be left the power of
my past to control me; I shall be in a stranger’s
power. There is no place for me to hide in;
thoughts of heavy care are roused within me.
Such is my perilous state, that I ery to the sea


130 THE SENSE OF SIN


of mercy. Tuk& says, My strength, my intel-
lect, and all success lie in thy feet alone.


361


<7 OW I shall toil no more in this world of woe;
i I shall go humbly to the saints and beg of
them a place by their feet. I know of no merit of
mine that has brought thy feet within my reach.
Now, O mother, forget me not, I beseech thee with
loud cries. I am harassed by the world. I am
caught in the poisonous net of illusive desire. The
three qualities of the world foam like venom at my
mouth, and Iam overwhelmed with misery. Wh
should I number other miseries ?./ The whole worl
is an eddy of misery. I cannot bear it; adamant
would break beneath it; my soul is filled with
trembling fear; I utterly shrink from the tale of
this fetid world. I am changed from a sane man to
amad man. I turmto the infinite one, says Tuka.


362


IVE me, O God, a humble condition; for the

ant finds a particle of sugar to eat. Airavata

is a huge jewel, but he has to endure the goad.

Grandeur. brings sharp torments. Tuka says,

Know'that we ought to be smaller than the smal-
lest of things.


363


OW can-I be saved? How shall Narayana

be merciful to me? Tell me, O ye saints,

and pacify my mind. How shall the sum of my
past perish? How shall merit and demerit aban-
don me? I know not the secret, and hence I
despair. How shall I keep my mind at rest, beyond
the reach of évil? How can I make myself pure?


THE SENSE OF SIN 131


How shall I see my way to the end? Howshall I
provide me such a store of merit? I will embrace
the feet of God; the lord of the world will gently
caress me till my throat is choked with devotion.
How it will soothe my eyes to behold that happi-
ness, that various delight! I cannot tell how my |
lot will guide me; perchance desire will grow_up
within me. I weigh this thought continually day
and night; I am disquieted. Tuka says, I have
no strength of my own, to bring me to. this final
repose.


364


¥ aman has two wives, sin dwells in his house;
you need not go searching for sin; one who
wants it need only visit him> No long reflections *
on the subject are needed... Where there is false-
hood, there is a heap of sin; where men speak the
truth, there pleasures come welling up. Tuké says,
Profit and loss are not far apart.


365
OW make me wake to consciousness. Di-
a vert-my intellect from this world. O sea


of mercy, release and receive me; I have fallen a
prey.tothe turning wheel of time. If thou wilt,
what is impossible? A mustard seed will become
@ mountain, or a mountain a seed. O mother,
sei me within the trench of thy pity. I have
spent my life hitherto in ignorance, through my
own natural temper. I know not how, but my life
is passed, and I have reached not the next stage
of my path. Now I feel afraid, for day after day
is passing away from me. I have travelled so far,
and what have I done? Ihave not remembered
thy feet. O best of beings, pity my sins, past and


132 THE SENSE OF SIN


future. In thy name let me know thy love; re-
lease me from all doubt. Let my heart dwell amid
thy attributes; give me a place by thy feet. Thy
sweetness I shall taste with my voice. It will bea
recompense, says Tuka.


366


( NARAYANA, pure and good, whose name is

a sea of goodness, hear our prayer, protect
thy lowly worshippers! we have laboured for our
bellies; we have neglected our religious duties.
We have left thy path; therefore I_urge thee with
entreaties. I have become a cripple amongst men ;
a bounden slave of the world;I know not when thou
wilt set me free; Iam bound by adamantine chains.
Here I never recall thee, I have no rest for a
moment, I have fallen into a stream that bears me
elsewhere. I see mo advantage for me. I have
spent my life away from thee, wandering idly in
foreign lands; I was cut off from thee by sickness
and trouble,.and pains and pleasures I engaged in.
Tam become my own enemy; I have neither son,
wife norfriend ; why have I increased my earthly
ties, O lord of the world? says Tuka.


367


W HAT can a feeble man know about right or

wrong? He who is mighty has hidden
himself from me. I ery aloud at the door and no
one hears me; the house is empty; there is no one
at home. Ifa chance guest comes and you speak
kindly to him, do you waste your words? Tuka
says, O holy Hari, such kindness becomes you well.


THE SENSE OF SIN 133


368


AN a little girl goes to her mother-in-law’s
house, she looks behind her on the way;
so it is with my soul. O Kesgava, when wilt thou
come to me? When achild loses his mother, he
looks round him anxiously. Tuka says, I am
distressed like a fish taken out of the water.


369


6 are a mother should abandon her living child

shows something strange in the child himself.
Is he mute or deaf? What is lacking)in Narayana
that he cannot understand us? «He wiil not protect
me for a moment, so evil a season of misfortune
has overtaken me. Tuka says, There is no sweet
savour in my speech; it is like bitter fruit.


370


M* spirit is carried away by desire; it suffers
Bt “me not to look on thy face; fain would my
heart break for sorrow. Why hast thou made me
like a young wife in her husband’s house? I have
no power, no authority of my own. In the morning
when I feel I ought to visit thee, I cannot steal to
thee, my desire continues unsatisfied. Thus it
seems that all my toils are wasted; all that I have
spent is lost, says Tuka.


371


S a-fish pants out of the water, so pants my
soul; my mind is chafed like that of one

who cannot find a buried treasure. When a child
is parted from his mother, you know how troubled
he is, O God! How often need I tell you what my
State is; show me your feet which are the essence


134 THE SENSE OF SIN


of all means! This anxious care has scorched my
heart; I cannot tell why I have been. forgotten.
Tuka says, You know all this, so be merciful, O.
God !


372


HERE is none who respects me; as far-as
. reputation goes I am lost. What service is
credited to me possessed of such power, that the
house of God should be favourable to me?’ What
purity have I, of descent, lineage or action, that thy
secret should be revealed to me? What strength
of austerities or liberality, what single source of
power have I? Tuka says, I am.a burden on the
earth; what do I know of the-future ?


373


I FEAR the world,-yet I cannot shake it off; so
I am distressed and cry to thee. If I- think
about anything, my mind runs away from me.
Tuka says, O God, thought cannot make its way

in here.


374


O no purpose have I indulged the world; I
have nothing of it and nothing of God. I
have imagined that God does not exist ; a man who
has food to eat knows not what hunger is. My
speech is graced by command of words,-but the
truth does not penetrate within me. I have become
a wanderer; I have lost both the world and thy
feet,O God! Tuka says, If I had known this long
ago, I should not have allowed this frenzy to touch
me.


THE SENSE OF SIN 135


375


[ HAVE begun to wonder, O God, whether thou
wilt accept me or not, whether thou wilt or
wilt not let me behold thy feet. My mind is there-
fore full of agitation; I am fearful whether thou
wilt speak to. me or not; I doubt whether thou
wilt remember me or not. Tukaé says, 1 have no
pone of my own, therefore I exert myself, O
God! .


376


SEE my own village no more; alonely stranger,

how much must I suffer? -Ilook for some
messenger passing along the road; when will some
friend meet me? As I look I find on every side
a waste prospect before_me.\ Tuka says, No one,
O Panduranga, brings~me tidings of you;-I feel
anxious about you.


377


fees store of my past is unpleasing tome; my
heart is chafed and troubled unwittingly. I
have strayed.from the path; in the world I have
played many a worldly part. It is well that my
eyes-are opened, that I have found a boatman.
Tuké says, If you hear my piteous cry, at once, O
Narayana, leap across the stream.


378


i ere is knowledge of Brahma in every house,

but much adulterated ; if there be any who
has a particle of it pure, bestow it upon me, feeble
wretch that I am! If desire and fond hope be
mingled with it, there results pride visible afar.
Lust and rage are a grievous affliction; when they


136. THE SENSE OF SIN


enter into us, they are poison. Tuka says, We
gain nothing.in this way; our life is sold and
wasted.


379


OW can we constrain you, unless you show

us mercy, by any confidence or anticipation

of ours! We shall be henceforth as wretched: as

before, uttering piteous cries. We shall be full of

fear and anxious thought; to what shall we attach

ourselves? Tuka says, Our life is void of faith and
therefore God remains far from us,


380


I HOPE nothing more than to call myself your

servant; but I do not know the secret of your
service; do you be charitable to me. We go on
prating with dur lips; ostentation is vain without
faith. Tuk& says, We know how to make a great
display.


381


HY worshippers dwell intently upon thee;
T-cannot turn my thoughts to austerities,
repetition of names and other means. With piteous
cries. have entreated thy mercy. Tuka says, Ac-
cept the little I have to offer.


382


OD’S door is shut; all importunity is vain;
come now, let us go home; do not keep him
waking. God is asleep. What avails it to stand
here? God is angry, says Tuka; he-will not accept
our service.


THE SENSE OF SIN 137


383


GOD, I have caught the fever of the world in
serving my family, so now I remember thy
feet; come, O mother Pandurang, I have borne the
burden of many lives; I do not know the seeret
path of deliverance. I am surrounded on all sides
by thieves; no one protects me; I am greatly
aiflicted, greatly oppressed, and long weary. Tuka
says, O run speedily to me; it is thy glory to be
called lord of the helpless.


384


AY Y life is altogether wretched; what ground
a of faith can I see now? I cannot bear to
hear of the world; if I callanyone a friend, I find
him a stranger. Means-of bodily pleasure are poison
to me; honour is a snare; dignity and high posi-
tion are a toil and a burden: my life is weary.
Tuka says, I can hear nothing else, I delight in
the feet of Vishnu’s servants.


*


VIII


Remonstrances with God


385


HY am I made thus pisifal and brought low
among the abject? Why is thy power
weakened as it seems, O God! I am ashamed to.
call myself thy servant; once my speech was filled
with a sweetness far different from)the taste of
these words. OncelI could put-toshame the utter-.
ances of the saints; I know the \character of my
words to-day from comparing them with what once
I said. Tukaé says, Whatis it that has made me-
speak, except thy favour, O Vitthala ?


386


HY has some*adverse season stepped in to.
destroy me with thee? Why have such
perplexities arisen? Why will you not visit me and
prevent them? Why, O God, have I clung in-
wardly to this idea of separation? Either I am
very sinful, or you have grown weak; you have not-
your old strength now. Are you indebted or bank-
rupt.? Are you forcibly bound by reason of a debt?
Tuka says, Why are you so entangled that you have
separated your treasure from mine ?


387


OU area wealihy man; what loss have you
suffered that is due to any fault of mine?

If you will not receive me, I will declare amid the
saints how you have dealt with me. Show me


REMONSTRANCES WITH GOD 139


some witness to prove that I have delighted in any
other than you. Tuk& says, Speak, O Pandu-
ranga; disclose to me what suspicion has possessed
you!


388


I HAVE come to you with varied entreaties, yet

you heed me not. O God, why should I. form
these deceitful hopes of you? You and Tare
parted; but now contemplation shall. bring us
together. Tuka says, Shameful is the fluctuating
life of desire.


389


HEN my doubts are dispelled, I perceive a
sweet savour, but who-ean care for what is
vapid and tasteless? Now do not deceive me
falsely: whither can I/go with my entreaties con-
tinually? “What evil is it if life departs? what good
if it linger on? Tuké& says, You have created us
children to love you, so how can you distinguish
between us ?. ‘


390


OU_know me to be impatient, and you will

not disappoint me. Why do you put off

the time of my salvation? Bestow it upon me and
stop\my complaints. If you know Iam not to be
released, why do you set me praying time after
time? Tuka says, O God, O blessed’ above man,
what thought can you take for me? ;


391


N f ETHINKS you have turned forgetful ; but we
a remember your pledges; you display your
title of Saviour, but, tell me, how will you explain


140 REMONSTRANCES WITH GOD


it? I am. not, like you, hungry after wealth; I
shall talk of anything else and chase away that
desire. Tuka says, I shall renounce the body; I
shall wave it round you together with pride and
cast it away.


392


F I should wrestle with you closely, in\ that

. moment I must needs abolish your’ world-
widefame. While it is yet time, keep that purpose
from my mind: if the hour of trial comes, which
of us will prove stronger? I will tie my neck to
your feet, I will not suffer you to.move. When
I have brought on this fatal moment, all will be
decided. Tuka says, We ‘know you well from of
old, O Vitthob&; you love ‘to bring things to a
erisis.


393


HAVE not disobeyed any voice of authority:
why has Narayana left me? With undoubting
mind I beseech him, for I have not found the peace
that knowsnovcare. It is not right that you should
forget your servants; for there is perfect justice
in your feet, Tuka says, You are not ashamed,
though we are sinking in the gulf of anguish !


394


INCE T have ceased to be his servant, I will
speak in my lord’s presence as my experience
directs me. Why do you not answer? I spend
my powers in earnest cries. How can the sweet-
ness of trust be born, when there is no pleasant
savour of love? Tuka says, O wise prince, bethink
thee of this, O Lord of the senses.


REMONSTRANCES WITH GOD 141


395


E are lost in a wood of anxiety: why do you

still delay ? Come, O Vitthala, our strength

is spent in entreaties. Why do you not fear

disgrace, thus abandoning your own children?

Tuka says, We are full of anxious longing; we have
laid hold of God, but he seems to be far off.


396


LL faults are chased away by your name and

the song of your praises—-this reputation of

yours why have you begun to falsify? Perchance

you shrink from our sin; but that brings anxious

care on us. Tuka says, I am convinced that. your
service, O God, will conquer Time and Death.


397


[ HAVE not sought any honour from you, O

Vitthala, that you should have exposed me to
this public shame.»I never cried out for my belly’s
sake, nor took you by the hand, says Tuka, into a
court of justice.


398


Ey have given him up: why should we

quarrel with him ? Let him continue as he

is ; if we make ourselves anxious, we gain nothing

but anxiety. If we speak to him, he grows weary.;

he prefers to hold aloof from us. Tuka says, We
have something of our own to keep—patience !


399


‘Lge me dwell with those who love you beyond
measure, then, O husband of Lakshmi, I -
will be a trouble to you no more. I will fall at


142 REMONSTRANCES WITH GOD’


the saint’s fees and continue there; JI will ask
nothing more, I will do nothing else, O Vitthoba.
That which vexes you and me will be averted at
one stroke; I sit like a debtor laying hold of you,
I cry aloud at your door. Tuka says, Attend, O
Vitthala, to’my speech; you must not wholly
neglect me.


400


ESHREW the life of him who has a weak
patron ; death were better for him! Listen,
‘O God; this is proper, that you~should protect
what is right. It were better to be the dog of one
whose words are feared throughout the land.
‘Tuka says, Why have I made these suggestions?
You, who know the heart, ought to recognize the
reason. ;


401


AM humbler than the humblest of men, and

you are proud-of me. I have- come to seek
your protection, you must give me your true bless-
ing. Osea of mercy, O Lord of the humble, see
that you protect your own name! Tuka says, It
were not.well now if you should cast me off.


402


HY have you counted me a burden ?—for so

it seems you have. You have given others
salvation times without number: is there no place
for me even at last? My sin is strong and stout;
it can stand even before you. There is something
still dragging me from behind; I have seen a
strange puzzle. How will the saints believe me,
when I say that you are feeble? What! Hag


‘REMONSTRANCES WITH GOD 143


Nar&yana grown old, that he cannot keep his time-
honoured pledge? Now do not hide yourself. Do
not hold me aloof. Why have you spread a
curtain within the house and kept me aloof? Do
not tantalize me, O infinite one; why do you
pretend, who know me not? Why do you not
assume your power? Tuka says, Come forth!


403


HE saints will laugh at me, even those who
have seen thee embodied. Iam cast down;
I am, it seems, an unprofitable worshipper. How
can I meditate upon you, how can I describe you ?
Your praises have been sung long’ago. I cannot
forget them and still I cling.to hope. Why have_
you created this path, if it is all fruitless and leads
nowhere? It brings misery on us, your children,
for we go on following each other. Tell me, whose
is the fault? I cling to thy feet and beg you to
answer. You are the mother of us all. What is
there different from others in me? If Iam no use
to you, why did you bring me forth? O Narayana,
answer me;I_beg, and teach myignorance. I have
‘cried to you long, I am wearied with seeking the
way. Tuka says, I have spread a dish for you, I
know not, O my lord, why you find it distasteful.


404


is ee thy knowledge of Brahma I need not ;

enough for me is the form visible and lovely.
A saviour of the sinful, why dost thou tarry ? Hast
thou forgotten thy promise? I have burned up the
world, and here [ sit in my yard: is it not in thy
mind or heart ? Tuka says, Be not angry, O
Vitthala.; rise up and meet me now.


144 REMONSTRANCES WITH GOD


405


EAR me, O Panduranga, I would say some-
thing to you by yourself. If our store of
merit is to save us, what place is left for you?
What sort of piety is it to repay a debt ? Will people
think the act worthy of honour? Ifa man gives
himself credit for it, he will gain nothing by his
concert; we ought to feed a man who wants food.
A beggar is the right person to feed and the gift is
appropriate. Gratitude is due to a wise liberality,
when a man gives where he has no hope of getting
back. Be assured that the man is-rightly called’
brave who puts the lowly behind~his back and
protects him ; the merit of that noble act, is bound-
less. Listen to my words, O Narayana! Now what
more shall I say? If you save me, then I will
call you great. Fulfil-your own words, says Tuka,
then I shall know you.


406


NFINITE in action, who makest all action
visible; why art thou dumb to me? O piety,

O protector of piety, who settest all in motion and
liest beyond all! thou dost not consider the limits
of caste or creed; thou dost render to each perfect
service. Thou art never ashamed, O Govinda: why
art thou silent now? Perchance thy incarnation,
whether as fish or tortoise, has wearied thee. O
Lord of the world, perchance thou art tired with
making and unmaking in the world. O consort of
Lakhsmi, how often must I entreat thee and come
again and again crying to thee? Dost thou say,
“ Knough of thy company”? O image of pity, what
has happened? How must I deal with thee now ?


REMONSTRANCES WITH GOD 145


Why art thou angry? O thou that dost dispel
sorrow, O saviour of the sinful, says Tuka.


407


E sinful people throw fetters upon you, but
you must escape from the soils yourself.
We act without weighing the guilt of our conduct,
you must protect us and choose and decide ‘for us.
You must protect us without charging a cowry,
when we call on you, O God, for your name’s
sake. Your name is a sea of mercy, saviour of the
sinful ; such promises we have found. “Though we
commit millions of sins, you a compassionate of
heart, says Tuka.
408
We have paid off ourdebt by offering you our
faith. You now must satisfy our cravings ;
and make us your darlings. This is our rule, and
this the duty you owe to us. Tuké says, We know
the service thats required of us#


409
if be meet you time after time is misleading,
O.heedless one! What good can we get from
you? We shall simply lose ourselves. If a man
dod not recover his principal, he may die while he
is counting the interest. Tuka says, Such is the
character you have impressed on the three worlds.


410


F we are in debt or on evil terms with any one,

or are guilty of murder, we cannot escape
without paying the cost—so you will tell mankind,
but you pretend not to know it yourself. My con-
nection with you is slight, but you should avoid


10


146 REMONSTRANCES WITH GOD


disgrace.in the world’s eyes. Tuka says, For this:
very reason, if you don’t accept me, you won’t get
a discharge.


411


HAVE come to supplicate you with my whole
heart, body, speech and mind, O God! No
other purpose enters my mind, my desire is fixed
at thy feet. I have a heavy burden upon me :>\who
but thou can stirit,O God? Iam thy servant, thou
are my debtor, thou hast pursued me from afai.
Tuka says, I have sat like a creditor before thee; :
meet me and settle the account.


412


SPEAK in a resolute spirit; these are not the
-words of a friend. .My mind is thrown into.a
fever when I hear of the distress of others; now
that I see it visibly near me, I can bear it no


longer. Ifyou keep Tuka in this mind, the devoters
will curse you.


413


[ WAIT expectantly for some message or invita-

tion; why cannot you take pity on my trouble?
O Panduranga, you bave kindled my desire, it is
you who have set me in motion! What have I
gained by being born?—thus I say to myself every
moment. Tuka says, We do not receive our true
portion ; the world reproaches us ; this is one profit
when the account is settled.


414
E have lost your presence; this talk. of
philosophy is dry. Now, O God, I ‘am
resolved neither to walk nor talk with any one.


REMONSTRANCES WITH GOD 147


You have found an excuse for absence; you have
resolved to leave us. Tuka says, Still my desire
remains; I delight to meet you.


415


F the child of a rich man looks destitute, whom
are the world to laugh at,O God! Vicious or
offensive though he be, yet his father has to look
after him. Even so I am a sinful man, says Tuka,
but Iam thy servant, stamped as thy own.


416


ii deceiving us you have entangled’ yourself!

How can you go on cheating us? Why have
you taught us wisdom ? \\Why have you assumed
name and form, O father? ~ Tuka says, It ml not
do for you to entrust us to others.


417


\ HAT! shall we. fill our stomachs now and
pretend to stir the world as devotees? If
such be.your intention, declare it; for we have long
been wearied. Shall we continue the tradition of
’ poetry by stringing words together? What! says
Tuka, shall we open a shop, O Narayana, and go on
ruining men ?


418


|} ARI, you have a vast heap. of ‘bliss in your

house ; how can you be in any want on my
account? Why is nota share given tome? We
have a father then completely possessed of all -
attributes. ~Tuka& says, O Panduranga, I stand
before you; O tell me this !' -


148 REMONSTRANCHS WITH GOD


419


i: AVE we no right to ask you for our own *

Yet we have ceased calling on you, because .
‘the opinion of men forbids it. Come now, let us
sit down, and cast our accounts up. Tuka says,
I will disturb you from your place, O Vitthala !


420


\\7 HERE will you hide yourself when I claim

’ my portion? The saints will bear witness
- to my claims, for they know the signs of just
rights. I will sit at your doors like-a,creditor ahd
will not suffer you tc come out. /Tuka says, I am
imperishable ; you have to bear the burden of your
Godhead.


421


gies one thing fills me with wonder; my cries

for pity have been wasted, as though I had
put these up tora corpse. How could one fail to
be angry, on seeing you so false? Tuka says, O
Vitthala, how can you improve on what I have said ?


422


K shall ask you for what you have, for we

have not given up all activities like you.
All. goes well as long as we do not reveal your
faults; but how could we publish them? Why
do you not give to-one what you give to another ?
Tuka& says, While this weakness is yet unknown
to the people, take care of your reputation.


423


T ET be now ; how often must I come entreating
you? My destiny is strong; you are weak


/


REMONSTRANCES WITH GOD 149


before it. Now, O Lord of Pandhazi, I shall destroy
your titles of glory. Tuka says, A strong man wu
twist the ear of a weaker.


“424


W® are children of many vows and much
desire. Who else utters your name, O
God, or offers you balls of rice? Whom have you
before or behind you? Who stands near you to talk
to? Tuka says, O Panduranga, what companions
have you? :
425


E are known to each other of old; if you

will cast me off, you are welcome to do so ; :

you will lose your name for honesty ; degradation

will fall to me. The deposit I have made with you

—is it right you should deny. it through avarice ?
Tuk& says, O generous one, do not hesitate !


426


TL you are cruel and inconceivable, you

are stern and heartless ; you do what should
not be done; what no other has done, you do.
You took from Harischandra his glory, his kingdom,
horses, and wealth; you caused him to sell his wife
and son to a tanner. You brought together Nala
and, Damayanti, and you parted them; this all the
world knows and the Paurnas tell the tale. King


Sibi, mighty lord, compassionate towards all crea-
tures—at last his flesh was weighed. in balances.
Karna on the stricken field was covered with arrows
in the fray; you come up and ask him to take out
his teeth for you! Bali, who spared no wealth of
his, held forth his hand: Vamana in his insolence
sent him down to hell. Murari sat as a creditor


150 REMONSTRANCES WITH GOD


in Sriyala’s house, and caused him to kill his own
son. Those who worship you are brought to such -
straits as these. Tuka says, We know not what
you will do in time to come.


427


HAUGH we be your servants, and yet ask another

for good? Cursed be such a life! What shall

I say to you, O Vitthoba? Under the lucky protec-

tion of the great any fortune good or bad is agree-

able; but we are always afraid of the world. We

should be delighted to die: why then does this

beggar’s condition trouble us? Ifyou protect us,

shall we seek protection from any other? Tuka.

says, Don’t you know who is disgraced by this state
of things ?


rE
Pravyer's


428


OU are the generous friend of the helpless,

: you set yourself to destroy sorrow; delusion,
and anxious care. I have come to-take refuge in
you; save me, O merciful parent! Grant me to serve
thy feet amid the saints, then shall I néver forget
thee. This is the wish of.my soul; O fulfil my
desires ; give me faith and love to sing thy glorious
name and nature. Deliver me from all that stands
between us; listen to my application; I ask thee
for nothing else, neither pleasure, nor riches nor
royal power ; ‘my~prayers will not fetter thee with
a demand for aught else than faith. With folded
hands I lay my head at thy feet ; Tuka entreats the
Gord of Pandhari. Bring to the stage the glorious
tale of thy deeds! Fulfil thou this desire of mine.


429


HERE is no limit to thy attributes, but my
intellect is weak. O Narayana, O thou that
knowest all and takest us beyond the world, I lay
one prayer before thee. Humble as I am, how can
I know the due signs of devotion to thee? I
cannot even wash my face clean, but I spend my
time in contemplating thee. Suffer no frenzy to
possess me that will lead my mind astray. Take
me by the hand and lead me ; make me walk by thy


152 PRAYERS


light. I have offered thee my body with perfect
devotion, O Lord of Pandhari! Keep me in chances
good and evil; spread over me the shadow of thy
favour. If I speak of skill, thou art prince of all
skill; of knowledge, thou art prince of all know-
ledge; in nothing art thou wanting, yet my faith
is dull. I have given thee my capital, I have—laid
my power of speech at thy feet; give me a return
according as thou dost esteem it. Tuka says, Thou
knowest true from false.


430


HE company of great poets would contaminate
me; they foully abuse their gifts. Those who
delight in pride are blind and deaf; their faces shall
be blackened with shame at last. Red lac may be
put next to gold, but their properties continue what
they were. Men fall into confusion, says Tuka,
because they do not know the difference between a
servant and a master.
431


LAY my head at thy feet in supplication, O
Lord of-Pandhari, listen to my prayer! Let ~
me dwell\for ever at thy feet; be content to be
straitened ; give me a little room there! Whether
I have faith or not, I have come where thou art.
Look upon me with favourable countenance, O
Lord of Pandhari. Tuka says, We are thy feeble
and errant creatures ; by thy name and with thy
hand dissever the meshes of the world.


432


T*0 whom shall I appeal but thee, O Narayana?
Who will fulfil my desires? Put me to thy
breast; O merciful mother! Consider not thy own


PRAYERS 1538


weariness, keep me not far from thee; preserve the
lowly being thou hast accepted; give me willingly
the gift of life. I trust I shall never quit this pure
draught divine; give me what I beg of thee, a place
by thy feet forever. This was appointed and stored
up for me, that thou shouldst show me this path.
I eagerly desire this honour: I demand joyfully the
gift of thy service. I will entreat thee with piteous
cries, for [ find nothing else sweet. Sleeping, waking
and dreaming, I have fixed my thought and my
spirit on thy form. Now though we meet not, we
have met: ask me whether this be-so or not; this
imperishable spring has begun to flow. Tuka says,
You have given me help within.


433


I HAVE no strength of my own, I know not

how you will help me. I am delayed by this
clog that is fastened on me. Give me my own, O
God,—the store.that you have set apart for me;
T form no further, no extravagant desire. I do not
pursue you-like a bravado; I use no language but
your own,Call in daysmen to decide between us ;
it is meet that you delay not. I will not deal with
you by violence, O Gopala. Tuka says, I fall at your
feet; O set my neck free. ‘


434


BRB? not vexed at our antique speech; you are
our mother and we your darling children.
© Mother: Vitha, give each of us, greatand small,
tender morsels of your love! Respond to our fond
desire! Whether we have faith or not, we have come
to thee. Now, O Lord of P&ndhari, look upon us
kindly! we are your foolish errant children, says


154 PRAYERS


Tuka; dissever by your name the meshes of this
world.


435


LADLY would I compare thee, O best of

beings; but when I consider, to whom art

thou like, O Lord of three worlds? Take my gross

speech, make it sweet, and listen to it. Tuka

blithely diverts himself; you must complete his.
festal joy.


436


N Y life has been fruitless and passed under

deep oppression. Now, then, run, run to
me! O Hari, why are you\waiting? I have spent
my days struggling over‘ mine”’ or “ thine”; my
face is soiled with dirt. My mind suffers me not to
trust; it seeks to drown me in the sea of life.
Pleasures have beset and oppressed me. Now I


have come to thee, O run and save me, says
Tuka.


437


BANDON these desires, these wicked cravings,
O ‘mind ; the intellect is the one idle source
of delight in man. In thee I find peculiar bliss;
therefore I embrace thy feet in love. Thus with
complete faith I have come as a suppliant to thee ;
for bodily pain made me greatly afraid. There is.
no other saviour, though the thirty-three. crores.
of gods should guide me. Mankind desire ‘the
grandeur of wealth; but it were best for us to find
thee. I have abandoned all, says Tuka; I entreat
thee, O Vitthala, my head laid up at thy feet.


PRAYERS 155


438


O but this, O God, at my request; burn up

my pride, root and branch. Do but this ;,

let me see thee in everything with impartial eye.

Let me place on my head with reverence the dust

from the saints’ feet. Hear but this prayer;.O

Lord of Pandhari, dwell in my heart day and night,

Tuka says, I have come to thee, O save me) un;
reasoning as my faith may be!


439


O RAKHUMAI, we want scmething from you;

tell us if aught was left when Sanaka and
the rest satisfied themselves. | Wevsit without and
venture forth a hope, that-.we shall satisfy each
other’s mouths. e have travelled thus far, O.
generous one, hoping inthy name. Deep is the
love you have now bestowed upon us. Tuka says,
Speak now, O Vitthala!


440


| fs who forbids his disciples to serve him,

and_ honours them as gods, that man’s ad:
vice brings forth fruit; others are themselves con-
taminated»by their pupils’ faults. His knowledge
of God is true; he pays no heed to the life of the
body. Tuka says, I speak the truth, lei men be
angry if they will.

441


Y eyes are weary with waiting for you: when
will you show me your feet? O Lady
Vitthali, you are my mother, cast over me the sb
of your mercy; I have long waited for you.. Tuké
says, My arms long to embrace you, let me. clasp
you, O Panduranga!


156 PRAYERS


442


S I look around me, I see that all is worthless:
reveal to me the snares of illusion, O God!
I do not cling to any of my surroundings; I am
pure and enlightened within. Take off the veil of
illusion that thou hast spread between us and thee;
do not drive us mad, O God! Why hast, thou
ordained such expressions as “‘ my soul” and “ the
universal soul’’, when thou knowest the truth ?
In thy desire for service: thou takest no thought
for us; thou sendest us wandering from door to
door. Since I have now discovered the truth of
this union, keep far from me the notion that we
are two. Tuka says, Why should I desire the
shadow? The wild geese perished in the starry
sky.


443


fl eae our sake thou didst right easily display
thyself in the fish and the tortoise and the
boar. When we utter thy name, O Mistress of
Pandhari, run to us with fond affection, give us thy
fond breast! We cannot see thee anywhere; leap
suddenly into sight. Take our suffering upon thy-
self-and, give us joy; set us safe behind thee;
there we will fight against Time and Death. Tuka
says, O sea of mercy, take us over in thy boat.


444


NARAYANA, annihilate my pain! Keep

every wandering impulse of mine at thy feet,
making thy homeinmy mind. Bestow thy caresses
on me, and place the fruit within my reach, Tuka
says, O thou who relievest the fatigue of the
humble!


PRAYERS 157


445


fd Bipee not thy back on thy suppliant! Hear

my entreaty, O Lord of the world! Answer
speedily those who beseech thee! Come running
and help the oppressed! Be thou rést for the
weary! Take on thy head thy servant’s burden!
Tuka says, Forget us not, O God!


446


UN to me, O mother; why are you waiting ?

I have no endurance to wait,-I am cast

down by the loss of you. Soothe me, for I am

deeply troubled. Tuka says, When’shall I lay my
head at your feet ?


447


det the power of faith how small you

have become,.you whose form was described.
by the saints of old! Make that form fit for my
eyes and show itme, O Keéava! I will declare it
when I have seen it ; I will embrace your feet ; I
will stand gazing upon them with folded hands.
Tuk& says, O.Nardyana, fulfil my deep and earnest
desire.


448


HAVE but little sense, therefore I ery to

thee for pity ; show me thy feet, O Kesava! I
have no endurance, O Narayana. Tuka says, Have
mercy on me and my hapless fate.


449


pee magic stone by its virtue has turned com-
- mon metal into gold; even so, O Lord of
Pandhari, consider not my faults or shortcomings.


158 PRAYERS


The Ganges does not charge with impurity a filthy
stream that runs below a village. Tukaé says,
Common earth is valued if musk has imparted its
odour into it. |
. 450

E have been severed from you; we are ‘all -

laid open to the world. We have no

friends belonging to us in this your swelling flood
of life. We have renounced the world, we have
broken away from the place where we sat; now,
O God, says Tuka, do not keep us aloof:


451


I HAVE no power to understand anything; I

do not know what will-become of me. In
considering the requirements of the Puranas I have
worn myself to death. “We are bondslaves ‘of the
senses; our minds are steeped in the impressions.
‘Even one sense I cannot subdue ; how can I control
all? Tuka says, Save me, O Panduranga, else it is
in vain that I have become thy servant.


452


F I desired to serve those around me, I have no
strength for such a purpose. O Lord God,
carry me to that spot which the saints have reached!
Why should I compare myself te those who went
before me? I cannot equal them. Tuka says,
Fulfil my fond desires and longings.


453


NNIHILATE this ‘separation, the fruit of
learning, between us; for it has murdered

me: When our food digests, we profit by it; if we
vomit it-up and waste it, our body is distressed.


PRAYERS 159


A man’s riches are well used, if he enjoys them, if
they mingle their powers with the vital functions.
Tuka says, Save me, O Vitthala, I am better off as
an ignorant servant.


454


I HAVE only one mind for all purposes ; accept,

O God, this feeble service which I offer ‘thee !
Thou art the source of all; I lay my spirit at thy
feet. Tuka sings thy praises from the platform of
his heart.


455


I WAIT for your favour; O give me the remains

when your plate is washed ; I will take what
is left when your meal is finished. I shall be all
alone, if I am parted from you. Tuka says, I have
set my mind at rest.


456


HAVE given you my fortune and endured
poverty; you may show your gratitude by
making me‘a return in the end. You have founda
place for my.name and form, or who would call you
God? Tuka says, O Hari, I have given you a seat
Bl a the house of my heart.


457


Ty you.will give me a rosary, I will fall at your

feet: who throws himself before anybody for
nothing? When people see a profit in the account
book, they believe in it; if a man is liberal, he is
respected. , If you mean to be liberal in return for
my service, pray send me a mark of favour speedily.
Tuka says, If you turn miser, who will look oer
the credit of your. name ?


160 PRAYERS


458


OME, Panduranga, lift me up and set me in

thy lap; though I have sought this shelter, 1

feel myself a stranger. Set me free and carry me

with thee, O God; there is no force that can thwart

thy purposes. Tuka says, O Lord of the senses,
why dost thou delay?


459


I HAVE come to thy feet with fond affection,
which I will offer thee as best as°I may.
Where else should I go? Here I gladly pour my-
self out. To describe thee fully we-have faith as
our only instrument. Tuka says, Satisfy our fond
cravings, O merciful mother, Vitthali!


460


\ \ J HAT are you waiting for? Step forward

now; let me set my head at your feet: I
stand before you with folded hands. Grant me that
goodly union withyou ; let not our love be severed.
Tuka says, Come forward, O Vitthala!


461


# Lview it correctly, this is a boat to carry me
over the sea of life.’ In my mind I will em-
brace thy feet; that which is called happiness ‘is
there. -The marks which show the godhead are
known in my mind; all else is sunk in this devotion.
Tuka says, It is well I have found this secret.


462


ee Puranas call you merciful ; to them I trust;
I can tell no other means to learn your
secret. I cannot make it plain whatever I say, so


PRAYERS 161


I have come to you with a supplication. If you will
show me mercy, it is a small thing with you; it
will drive away much care from me. Tuka says,
Show me your boly face, and the hunger of my
eyes will be satisfied.
463

LORD of Pandhari, thou.pitiest the unpro-

tected; I heard this thy fame, and found
great relief. O run to help the friendless; make
walls of thy name about their houses. Tuka says,
“The benefit is easy to gain; we shall place our
mind at his feet.


464


KT me free, O infinite one, set me free! What

other is there that bestows life like you?

Do you not know who would repent it if I had to

seek protection from another? Tuk& says, O my
friend, O husband of Rakhumai !


465


[ HAVE pledged my body, speech and mind; I

have. become a, debtor to you to make a profit.
I had lost all; my belly sank in through hunger ; so
I gaveup the world and found repose,O God! I
have not a tola nor the twelfth of a tola left to give
you; you know it already, O Lord of the illusive
world! Others mightier than I bave incurred heavy
debts to you. Tuka says, Take and make your own
any being who is heavily on your books.


466


E have come to thee wearied out with suffer-
ing in the wood; O Vitthoba, suffer us to.
fallat thy feet for repose. We have suffered shame


11


162 PRAYERS


and we came to implore thy grace. Tuka says, We
have made these great efforts to gain thee.


467


NE may gain distinction and popular honour
and fill one’s stomach by false behaviour;
but a man will not gain his true ends by. these
means. IfI embrace this grandeur of knowledge, I
shall be severed from your feet. In cherishing the
body the passions break forth; my enemies dwell
within myself. Why should I destroy-myself by’
pride and regard for public esteem?) Tuka says,
O God, grant me this happy rite, to-look upon thy
feet.


468


WwW due affection clasp me to your heart; I
: have come very hopefully to entreat a gift.
When I fix my thoughts on you, permit me to serve
you. Tuka’s brother says, Send to me an apt frame
of mind, O God!


469


(HOW. me the secret, for what do I know my-

self,O God? Ido not wear the bright colours

of other men, therefore I have come as a suppliant

to thee. If you give me courage, my mind will

grow steady. Tuka says, With your high power
you should protect your loving children.


470


OU are the embodiment of righteous conduct ;

in your hands are actions for good and evil.

O generous one, release me from the meshes ‘of
Karma. If you will receive me, can I bea burden to


PRAYERS 163


you? Tuka says, You are the life of lives, O
Narayana !


471


W HAT is there you cannotdo? Now save me
from shame; I am a heap of trangressions,
I am encased in the net, head and toes. Protect,
oh protect me! Look on me graciously! \ Tuka
says, O God, grant me to serve thee continually.


472
h AKE and keep me your servant; grant me
wa this blessing; let the saints)give into my


hands the nine forms of worship, as they are named.
‘Tuka says, Through the support of your feet I shall
-of a surety cross the sea of the world.


473
I ET the saints.listen to.my last request; O
4 God, do not forget me. Why should I con-
tinue with many>words? It is all known at thy
feet. Tuka says, I fall at thy feet, grant me the’
shadow of thy favour.


474 —


Tis your part to silence the contentions of the
world: who would willingly embroil himself
in these? Read the riddles you have set. I have
finished the task imposed on me; I have observed
and published abroad the duties of religion. Tuka
says, Now let your burden rest on your own head.


475


i hs is not my wish to have illusive wealth, io
take care for the world. To gain thy feet I
have composed my spirit; now I want nothing


164 PRAYERS


else. Be merciful and accept me, delay not, O God.
I have learned that there is nothing real here, so
I have narrowed my desires. Tuka says, O sea of
mercy, accomplish my hopes.


476


I ENJOY no pieasure. I need no honour-~this

world passes—what shall Ido? Luxuries set.
my flesh on fire; sweet food is poison to me.. I
dislike to hear my praises when men extolme; they
weary my soul. Tell me how to reach thee; let.
me not be swallowed up in the mirage of the
world. Tuka says, Do good to me now, take me out.
of the flame where I burn.


477


RISH, you are weary, you have stayed awake ;
INA 0 sleep, my Lord!) Rakhumai has prepared
your bed and stands waiting for you. O best of
beings, pardon as-ever my prating speech. Tuka’s
. brother falls at the feet of Narayana.


478


WX the serpent is entranced by his flute,
the charmer pounces on him; he keeps |
him confined in a cage for a dwelling place, and
goes. wandering from door to door to fill his own
belly. Such is my state, O Panduranga; I am a
prisoner, O set me free! Nothing can I do for
myself, unless you take compassion on me. The.
fish gets the hook stuck in his throat because he
swallows the bait; when he is drawn forth he
strives to take breath. What are his father and
mother to him then? A bird is snared by her desire
to approach her young ; as she looks on them, she is-


PRAYERS 165


caught fast in the net; while she runs towards them
with fond affection, she thinks not of death, she
‘saves neither herself nor her brood. Through his
love of sweets a fly is caught in a trap, and then he
goes on fluttering wildly. Tuk& says, My soul is
possessed by desire; O dweller in Pandhari, take
pity on me!

‘ 479


H husband of Lakshmi, Lord of the abject
thou of the lotus-navel! Set me at thy feet

where pleasure dwells. Little is my desire, and
thou art a generous prince. Tuka says, I am tor-
mented by this sensuous life, Orun to me speedily!


480


A VIGOROUS body is.the instrument needed

for your service; .O Panduranga, do not
‘suffer my body to be wasted! Shorten my life, but
let me still delightin thy praises. Tuka says, There
‘is no loss worse‘than the loss of these.


481


ORSHIP offered in the mind is what the

Lord of the senses prefers. He accepts the

thoughts that dwell with hav he heeds no out-

ward show. He knows the heart, the impressions

left by the past and present. Tuka says, How can
falsehood continue before him?


482


-\ PEAK a word for us, O Rukhmabai. If there

is anything left, make haste and send it us.

We are waiting, anxiously longing, for one morsel.

Tuka says, He gave us many a dish of love; cry
out the name of Vitthala.


166 PRAYERS


483


[ SIT at the door waiting for him with my hand

upon my brow. My thoughts and eyes are
fixed upon the road to Pandhari. When shall I see
him coming? I count the hours and mintites on
my fingers. My left eyelid itches; my right arm
throbs; my mind in its impatience forgets\my
body. I have no pleasure in my bed, I forget house
and wife, hunger and thirst. Tukaé says, Blessed
will be the day when I see a messenger coming
from Pandhari. :


484


yrs have granted all our entreaties whenever

we made them. Soconfess that you are our
mother, O Panduranga. If-you set us on your:
thigh, we shall never rise... Tuka says, Put into our
mouth a morsel of divine knowledge.


485


COME as thy bond-servant to find thee ; O do.

good to\me, Panduranga! It is thy glory to
be called saviour of the sinful ; O preserve it for thy
own! The. saints will call thee the Lord of the help-
less ;-when I heard this I took confidence. Make
me not hopeless; be not heedless of me, .bestow
on thy suppliant the gift of thy mercy. Tuka says,
‘ yey heap of sin, give me a place by thy feet,

od.


x
Che Conditions of Acceptation


486


Drees repentance guilt vanishes in\ the

twinkling ofan eye ; the transgressor remains
at peace; a good man from first to last. »This is
the true ceremony of purification, to bathe the mind
in repentance. Tuka says, Sin cannottouch repent-~


ance.
487


ae WISE listener does \not aspire. to be an

eloquent speaker; he clings to faith alone ;
blessed is he in the world; Brahma dwells within
him. You need neither wash your face nor bathe
yourself, call uponthe name of Rama continually.
One may neglect the repetition of spells, austerities,
meditation,.and efforts at union, yet if he be merci-
ful towards living creatures, then, says Tuka, be he
learned\or ignorant, the infinite one loves him
more than his own soul.


488
ERE no other effort is needed, to go to meet
God ; accept him with a mind intent on that _
alone. Empty your bodily frame. Exhaust your
‘heart of the six passions. Tuka says, Where desire
‘eeases to exist, there he makes his dwelling place.


489
i fia lay aside hatred is the secret of attainment,
other rules of renunciation are waste of words.


168 THE CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTATION


All assumptions fall away from us; pure and
impure are discerned from each other in the end.
True renunciation is oblivion of all objects, we
should obey the rules of Scripture so far as is
necessary. Tuka says, It is in contemplation I
delight; this alone guides us to the truth.


490


ISERABLE are ail who turn their faces from

Narayana. They shake their hands clear of

him; but they only fit themselves for punishment.

Sin and merit may ke a provision for-our path, but

they require the pains of begging. Tuka says,
Behold whaé-a stream of vanity flows here!


491


INAS has shown me a simple path: I

need neither austerities of diet nor any other
means. I must praise-God in this base age of the
world, then he wilhcome to me. J need not leave
business or public life, I need not take to the jungle,
smear myself. with ashes, or mortify my body.
Tuka says, [deem all other sources idle, save thy
name alone!


492


WAY with place and time, with rites and spells

of all kinds. Make your mind tranquil and

call upon him for mercy. God our Lord will come
to the spot where we are sitting, for he occupies
every spot himself; it isan unpolluted body that
he chooses for his seat. He perceives the subject
of our thoughts, therefore regard him with due
respect. Gladly he devoured the dry grain offered
him, and smacked his lips over it. He desires an


THE CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTATION 169


offering, but he knows faith is all his servants bave
to give. Tuka says, The infinite one will merge
our soul in his.


493


MAN is not a Bramhacharya because he has
left his wife ; vain is the renunciation which
consists in Jeaving one’s country. Lust and. fear
grow up through desire; we must quit idle prating
of renunciation. IJIfaman whose legs are trembling
talks about his valour, the right moment will
scatter it to the winds. Tuka says, Sin cleaves to
the tongue, if it praises what is worthless,


494


Ps yee must dig up desire by the roots, then only
can you be sald-to have renounced the world.
Tf you will not do so, you should live in the world
and enjoy it; you should not make yourself ridicu-
lous. You must strike down desire and triumph
over it, then you may escape from all the world.
Tuka says, If you are eager for union with God, you
must first annihilate the germs of desire.


495


HE speech of some men is sweet and melodious,

they are truly manifestations of God; but

fate ordains otherwise of others. The words of

others are sharp and biting. Tuka says, There are
three sorts of men. ;


496


HE duties of the four stages, if neglected, bring
on sin; such is not our simple service, where
faith is the key to all, O God! Austerities destroy


170 THE CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTATION


the powers of sense, and the effect vanishes in a
moment; if the form of words is slightly mispro-
nounced, a sane man will go mad. Though you
perform austerities carefully, yet one mistake annuls
them ; you must observe your duties strictly or
your labour is all wasted. Thereis much that inter-
feres with our practising sympathy; be its object
high or low, itis ruined. Tuka says, All merit too
is hampered by injunctions and prohibitions.


497


S your faith, such is your fruit; violence can
effect nothing with God. “The men of a caste
consort together, for they recognize each other;
only the anvil can separate the diamond from the
matrix. Tuka says, You \had better purify your
mind, for an impure mind cannot serve him.


498


WE is sung for the music’s sake keeps the

mind interested. When a hungry man
sees food, then it is hard to abstain from eating.
So keep your.mind in an expectant frame to hear
God’s praises. Tuka says, No one is satisfied till he
has eaten his food.


499


HIS is the medicine for the disease of life, that
heals birth, and age and sickness; no more
trouble will follow, it will slay the six enemies, I
have anointed my eyes with his purple form, for
the six Sastras, the four Vedas, the eighteen Puranas
drove me away like a scoundrel. Thus I have made
me a garland of Vishnu’s thousand names; give
me no food that I cannot digest. Tf you keep your
faith pure after taking it, you may say you secured


THE CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTATION 17}


the reward of doing so. You need not leave your
own house, you need not let the wind blow upon
you. Do away with much talking, avoid all the
company ; you need give but one pleasant medicine,
it will taste like butter. Avoid the milk that needs
much churning, there is no quality about that.
Bathe in repentance, clothe yourself with the
quarters of heaven, let all the sweat of desire pour
out of you. - You will become what once you were.
Tuka says, We will enjoy the passionless:state.


500


"TIDE it son, daughter, or brother, you must act.
yourself free from them. \ If you find them to-
be mischievous, you must not touch them and cover
yourself with blame. Break the pot! At one stroke.
make them as dead to you! Tuka says, Unless you
renounce them, you. will not escape the fruits of
their company.


501


\ \7 HATEVER keeps you from God, be it your
father or mother, give it up! Be it your

darling son, your treasured money, it is your enemy
if it-brings you misery. Pralhada gave up his.
fatber, Vibhishana his brother, Bharata his mother:
and kingdom. Tuka says, All pious duties are con-
tained in the feet of Hari; other resources bring
misery.
: 502


anes pride, and then you may speak of
austerity and union attained; this is truly
a noble exercise ; this you should practice. Then.
the process of rebirth stops ; the burden of the body:


172 THE CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTATION


‘passes away. Tuka says, We ought not to retain
the tie of regard for honour or dishonour.


503


HE saints have told us an easy secret; to
take the cymbal and dindi and dance. Wave
round him and cast¢ away the delight of absolute
union; this praise 6f God is like a sweet juice of
Brahma. Henceforward this glorious service oc-
cupies us most and most, it is fully accomplished
through the fortune that has made us thy worship-
pers. No doubt need arise in our/minds ; the four
modes of salvation are handmaids to the worship-
pers of Hari. Tukaé says, Ifthe mind attains
peace, the threefold fever vanishes at once.


504


Ww have discovered ‘one means to compass

Vitthala: then what strength has he against
you? He surrenders to you himself; he cries to
you for pardon, and performs your heart’s desire.
Through the power of faith alone you will not reach
him, no, not in/length of time; but if you join the
saints, he will rise up in answer to yourcall. Tuka
‘says, Bindhim to my soul with bonds of love ; I will
not leave him who gives away all he has.


505

EMEMBER God; make this your resource ;
give up all other machinations. Awake,
‘awake! Why will you weary yourself in vain?
Weighed down by pride of knowledge, you are
-drowning in the gulf of the world: why will you not
rise out of it? Tuka says, You will reach God by
faith ; through efforts to know him, you will -not

understand him.


THE CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTATION 173:


506


ae you become a reasoner or a reader, still listen

with devotion to the story of Krishna. As
when milk and ghee and sugar are mingled, such is
the savour of its sweetness. Learn its worth, O
father, and tie it up in your cloth, keep it by you;.
this sweetness is manifold. If you desire to save
yourself, dig up the mischievous root of learning.
Wealth of. flowers and sandal smeared on the
body,—without food to eat, these ornaments are:
vain, and such is all sweetness apart from the story
of Hari. That which the Vedas and Puranas intend
is all contained in the story of Vitthala. Tuka says,
Others are mere granaries of.gravel; mere jingle is.
the chief thing there.


507


ALSE teachers*assert that Brahma is a delu--
sion ; they make other people as wretched as
themselves. A vicious man naturally teaches evil
doctrine; he follows the inclinations of his own
mind as a.trained bull follows his master. Swuran
and rai are digestible, if you eook them; if you are
too impatient to do so, they will make you ill. You
persuade a child to take medicine by showing him a.
piece of sugar. If you seek salvation, first sift the
Vedas, diseard those sayings in them which are
~ fruitless. Tuka says, If a man cherishes his own
body, Narayana will not come to meet him.


508


T is a little thing, if your mind helps you. The
tumult of passions vanishes, it closes in
Panduranga. No search is needed; here you have:


174 THE CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTATION


‘the essence of all means of attainment. Tuk& says,
Look on all pride as false and quit it.


509
EARY not thyself; search not the forest of
philosophy. Come to the house of the
milkman, of him that was bound with the rope:
‘Thou art troubled by doubt; thou knowest not. the
way nor the clue; Tuk says, The doctrine of Maya
is a deadweight; cast off thy sense of self.


510
VOID the world; be at rest; let no stain of
affection come upon thee: thus shalt thou
gain true union, true knowledge of Brahma; with-
-out experience of it all talks idle chatter. He who
has conquered his senses and destroyed his desires,
he thereafter forms nodesigns. Tuka says, It is not
knowledge that enters his heart; his heart is a
dwelling-place of joy.
511
OU cannot make yourself a saint in the
market-place nor get peace by wandering
through jungle and forest; this condition is not to
be bought for heaps of wealth, it cannot be found
in heaven or in hell. Tuka says, You must give
your.own soul in change for it, else you need not
talk about it.
512
[THE children of cowherds, brought up on whey,
were they handsome? Why was God so
fond of them? what service, what devotion did they
render him? Was God hungry that he accepted
the bajari g¥ains of Vidura? Tuka says, The de-
formed maid Kubja, was she a heap of beauty ?


THE CONDITIONS OF ACCEHEPTATION 175


513


E cannot experience his pleasure as long as

the soul hesitates over it. If you avoid all

gvief for past pleasures, he will set you free from.

association with them. Tuka says, In all ways he

is perfectly endowed; the scriptures declare_his
glory to be such.


514


T is hard to reach the glorious estate of the
: saints; there is no opportunity for talkative
people here. A cow or a buffalomay be a stout
animal, but it will not equal the wishing cow.
Tuka says, You must be yourself what you ought to
be, then you will know what that glorious state is
like.


515


PROCLAIM ‘these tidings, since I have power

to do so; we are your children by loving

service; we speak the language of close affection.

By dwelling close to you we shall do away with

doubt and fear. Tuka says, There is a genuine taste
here ;_how can we go away?


516


Y OU say you have no merit; do not talk in this

way. Shout out Hari’s name; in good sooth
do not waste your birth. Your neck will be caught
in the toils of Yama: then how can you say
“ Hari’? Do not, O do not say foolishly, the body
is meant for pleasure; do not, like a low wretch,
say the body is infirm. Tuka says, How often
shall I tell you, your mouth will be filled with mud
at last ?


176 THE CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTATION


517


F you have faith alone, you need strive no more

I have learned this through my own faith. If

you remember God, you have all pleasures present

before you. Tuka says, It is worship of the spirit
that Narayana desires.


518


WAY with knowledge of Brahma.and intui-
tions of the self in the self! Let me be thy
worshipper and thou my God. Show me thy form
that delighted the cowherds; I willset my head at.
thy feet. When TI have seen thy holy face, I will
embrace thee; I will cast away my existence as an
offering to thee. When I.have enquired of thee I
will declare thy secret ; I will sit by myself and tell
myself the story of the delights. Tuka says, Now
that thou knowest my heart, delay not the hour.


519


HAT is there that we need know or know

not.?\The essential thing is to contemplate

thy feet. What is there that we need door do not?

What is there that we need say or say not? Where

need we go or go not? Allis well if we remember

thy name. Tuka says, You make it easy for us;
our will turns sinful into righteous deeds.


520


OD himself has set apart the sweet dish of his.

worship; lei some one make good his claim

to it and Hari will give it him. In the strength of

ascetic repose we must conquer the six enemies.
Tuka cries, There will be nothing left undone!


THE CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTATION 177


521


OW amid deeds right and wrong is there
anything proper for me? I must look to
my own advantage. You know that I am asinner,
but I have come to you as a suppliant. Here
prince and peasant are alike; there is no difference
of persons in your house. I have come to your-feet
as best I could, so you must not cast me out. \ It is
an old fashion—I speak seriously—that when men
fall into difficulties, they begin to praise another.
I have laid my burden on your head and sit still ;
T have given up all traffic with the world ; from the
first I counted this the highest spot, a place of
eternal refuge. Here the one/secret needed is
patience,—but thattoo I rejected as useless ; know-
ing that this body shall pass.away, I have clung to
thy name as the thing ‘essential. Thou hast sent
me repose. for the hour through all the messengers ;
TI have clung in my soul to that which is needful.
Tuka says, Give mé-at last, O God, that place
which the saints have told of.


522


F doctors could preserve men’s lives, then who
would think of God? How can I tell what.
sort of balance is left by my store of merit? If
vows.could give us sons and daughters, what need
could there be of marrying? Tuka’s generous
master knows this secret.


’ 523


LL the steps I have wandered have been
‘wasted; there is but one door to enter by.

The secret is to set the feet of Vitthala in one’s
soul; let no one forget it for a moment. It is easy


12


178 THE CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTATION


for all to find this elemeni; no secret introduction
in your ear is needed. Tuka says, Here every
desire is satisfied; he, the root and trunk of all, is
sufficient.


524.


EANS of liberation present themselves.in
many forms, but consider whether. they
attain the end; it is the end of churning to produce
butter. A bird meets with no obstacle-on its way ;
it flies through the heavens to its goal. You can
attain devotion by renouncing the world wholly,
you need it not much, little or in moderate degree.
Tuk& says, If you have merit stored up from the
past, to-day, suddenly, you may meet with perfect
satisfaction.


525


Bee up honour and dishonour and put
them away: where peace of mind abides,
there the vision of God comes. Where peace dwells,
the lapse of time loses its power. Put down every
impulse to moye as it arises. Tuka says, It is a
little thing to-ask.


526


ee it is to be born in a pure family; I

shall soon be returning home. This we have
heard with our ears and are now digesting in our
mind. Let your heart be filled with yearnings, and
be awake to your true interests. Tuka says, Whoso
has faith, know verily that faith is God.


527


pena is ever designed to protect mortal
creatures; but it is offered in various forms


THE CONDITIONS OF ACCHPTATION 179


according to the motive present. If you want to
start on the road that leads to the worship of Brahma,
there are several modes prescribed. If it is granted
you to adopt one, still you will depend for fruit on
the seed present in your soul. Blessed is he in
the world who not only begins but finishes his task;
it is indispensable that you reach the end; what
precedes is all peaceful effort. Rare is-the.man
who knows how to follow ihe path. Tuka has left
the perishable and imperishable worlds; he looks
into the arts which the Vedas teach and speaks by
the favouring grace of Vitthala.


528


\ HATEVER load-we take up, it becomes an

evil and keeps us ‘from Govinda. I will sit
still and remember your feet; I will gaze up on your
dwelling place, O God! The indestructible is one
‘day broken and doubt succeeds to resolution ; for
the mind creates sin as it makes a serpent of a rope.
‘Tuka says, He who pervades the universe dwells in
it; let us attain this conception and rest full of joy
in it.


529


F the water is not pure, what will soap effect?
Thus if the soul is not pure, what will advice
effect? If a tree bears neither fruit nor flower,
what will Spring effect? If a woman is barren,
what can a husband do for her? If a man is impo-
tent, what can a wife do for him? If the soul has
vanished, how can the body stir? Tuka says, With-
out rain there can be no harvest.


180 THE CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTATION


530


“ye have your mind for your: whole capital;

how can you divide it? -Soclasp Panduranga
firmly, and leave your body to inherited destiny.
Let no other purposes entrap your mind; then you
will find the true purpose of life attainable. Tuka,
says, You must learn that this is right, then you
will learn the primal purpose.


531


Y7 HY should I cast my body on saws or sharp
weapons, or into the midst-of fire? Why
should I dwell in the forest suffering’cold, heat and
thirst ; why should I sit dumb? ‘Why should I put
ashes or dust on my head and-wander through the
four quarters of the land? Why should I give up
food and fast ; why should I destroy my life? Tuka
says, Why should I adopt such means as these ?
Give me faith, O Panduranga!


532


OD has ‘not told us that we should sing, while
you utter never a word. Cry Rama! Rama!
strike the.cvmbals; dance till you sway to and fro
in love, seeking your own profit. When the task is
‘go. simple, why should you be so lazy? The hand
is the natural prey of fire: why do you take such
care of it in your indolence? Here is no room for
shame or thought of the public voice ; here devotion
is due. He who laughs at us is guilty of such sin
as the slayer of a Briahmana commits. Let each
‘offer God his faith in the form he chooses, for God
has no preference, no consistent rule. Happy are:
they who listen to his praises. Tuka says, Others
are born mere stones.


THE CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTATION 181


533


F a man bear Paégduranga about in his mind,
though he love him not, yet Panduranga will
help him. Lei a passion to visit Pandhari possess
you, if you form 16; you will doubtless gain your
desire. Be weak if you will, be the slave of an-
other, but do not cease to contemplate him. . Tuka
says, You should die contemplating him, or you will
return to the world for this end.


534° —t

E who is bound with the -fetters of hope
remains a slave of the world; he who heeds
nothing is venerated by all.. In this matter all de-
pends on ourselves ; why should we blame others?
Troubles assail the suspicious; the unsuspecting is
ready to feast himself. Tuka says, Fear is in store
for him; a thief runs swiftly after him. oe


535


‘Get thy burden on God’s head; wave thy
body.round him and cast it away.- False are
the passions and pride that dwell within it; sweep
away this burden swiftly when the chance oceurs.
Cry out at once for pity; let nothing come between
you-and him. Tukasays, Cease to converse with
what is falsé; then joy will dawn upon you.


536


TJ HE servants of Vishnu know that all is full of

him ; others have to carry burdens on their
heads. All devices and penances are a burden}
the only plan is to throw off pride. Pride is hard
.indeed; even adamant may be broken, but the net


182 THE CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTATION


of illusion cannot be severed. Tuka says, Through
worship we shall discover the secret, all others will
‘find the world a barren waste.


537


OU may seek to attain all gods, but these
faults of yours stand in the way, for the-two

things are incompatible, they will not go together.
If you plant sugar-cane and onions in-the same
trench, their flavour and sweetness are. different.
Tuka says, Poison and nectar will not go_ together.


538


\ \ 7 HY is man not ashamed to/say “ mine” of

daughter, son, wife;.wealth or property ?
Nothing can release him from the power of death,.
save the truth of Narayana. » How often shall I tell
you, wretched man, says Tuka, you know not the
principle of life by which you live?


539


wee no words of your Guru that sever you
from. Narayana. Bali pierced an eye of
Sukra and made him blind, because he came in his
way..If God exerts himself, what may not come
to pass ?—then why do you struggle in vain, man
by man? The wives of the sages broke their hus-
band’s orders and took them food; God performed
all those women needed; he fulfilled for them
religious rites and saved them from shame. God
has set fathers against sons ; he caused Pralhada to
smite the demon. Many a difficulty his father put
-in his way, but he never ceased to profess God's
name. The wives of the cowherds became im-
moral and unchaste and committed adultery with


THE CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTATION 183


God; but what he gave them he gave to none
other, for he became entirely one with them. Un-
holy deeds we should commit, if they bring the
possession of God ; proper actions we should give up,
if they sever us from him. Tuka says, He is full
of compassion, therefore he saved Ajamela.


540


E shall ask him to take us to his own place;

act towards men according to their faith;

if they are false, treat them as false. Let us not

draw any curtain of separation between us and him.

Tukaé says, God is pleased by sincere faith and
truthfulness.


XI


Che Necessity of Experience


541


HERE are three ways of perception: first, as
when one carries a load ; then, from hearsay ;
last, through personal experience. “A_man’s reward
is according to his faith; it is but water that falls
when the sunis in Arcturus, yet\it becomes a pearl.
It ig one thing to see food,.or talk of food, and
another thing to take food,;—a very different thing.
Tuka says, A diamond isa diamond to one who: can
tell it; it is a flint for a fool.


542


ILK is sweet itself; but the taste of sugar

enhances it; be assured that the knowledge

ot God resembles this; it is feeble without devotion.

Food without sali has no savour; to have the

scholar’s credit is like the efforts of a blind man to

see. Tuka says, The essential part of a cambura is
its dead wires.


543


HAT good will Kasi and the Ganges do

you, if you are not pure within? If you

put hard grain in boiling water, it does not change ;

it gains no flavour, it wili not cook. What will a

man gain by garlands and marks on his forehead,

if he is vile and void of faith? Tuka says, A man

who talks without love i is merely barking; his words
are ineffective.


THE NECESSITY OF EXPERIENCE 185


544


7 EX find it easy to talk, but it is action that

sets the legs trembling. Itis no easy thing

to renounce passion; if you tell me so, I deem it

false. If you talk of eating poison by mouthfuls,

he is the lucky man who cando it. Tuka says, The

man who can illustrate by action—I set his feet
within my soul.


545


T is not the fruit of action nor of contemplation ;
itis not what men call knowledge, nor a notion
of the mind. It is not the foul chatter of one who
wearies us with talking; it is not the whirl of objects
that surrounds us, nor the naked firmament above
us. Tuka says, It is something that the spirit finds
within itself.
546
HE fevered.man cannot enjoy sugar, though
otbers know how sweet it is; in his mouth
alone it tastes like earth, though all others eat their
fill of it. If you compel him to eat it, you can put
it insidehis teeth ; but the lucky people are those
who get it when they ask for it. Tuk& says, If one
comes to this pass through want of merit, how can
any one else help him ?


547


GOLDEN plate is filled with sugar and milk,

and given toa dog to drink; a necklace of

pearls is hung about an ass; musk is plastered on
a hog. A reciter of the Vedas utters wisdom to a
deaf man,—how can he tell his meaning? Tuka
says, He alone understands a thing who truly


186 THE NECESSITY OF EXPERIENCE


possesses it; the Sadhu alone understands the glory
of devotion.


548


Sa G of gifts, falling at his feet, liberation

itself is idle—what avails it? When we have
met him and obtained it, all will see how good itis.
If we do not meet him face to face, what is the use
of dry talk about him? Tuk& remains silent;
listen to the evidence in your own hearts.


549


E satisfied with inward pleasure; what need

is there of chattering about it? This busi-

ness of rules and prohibitions, is’ heart-breaking ;

witbout the sweetness of spiritual experience both

teacher and taught increase. their. tribulation. In

your own mind you think. this talk of experience

madness, but you do, not alter its value. If you

would attain to means of salvation, be calm and

silent. Tuka says;-Verbosity has ruined crowds of
Brahmanas.


550


“F a man goes on describing cakes and rubbing
his hands to show how they are made, he brings
spittle into his mouth, but his speech is insipid, it is
like unsalted food that has neither taste nor flavour.
One who can only talk and has no spirit within
him—what is the good of his words? Curses on
them ! Tuka says, A talkative and loquacious temper
is the root of falsehood.


551


Raa mother puts a morsel in her infant’s mouth,
but she rules her children with authority;


THE NECESSITY OF EXPERIENCE 187


thus knowledge sets us far from God, and puts a
growing interval between us and him. The same
mother bore both children, but her affection towards.
them takes a different course. Tuka says, The
stronger is separated from her, the infant is laid
to her breast,


552


HEAT is all the same in kind, but bad cooks

spoil it. ‘To know the secret of an art is

the great thing ; be it much or little;-the secret-

what todo and where to do it. By honest toil

different kinds of grain may be made into different.

dainties. Tuka says, It is skill that is valuable ;.
words are false and worthless:


553


i | EN may dispute-over arguments they have-

learned ;.and yet know nothing of the secret-
truth. Learned. men may preach, and yet never
attain their desire, the happiness of the self. Tuka.
says, They are like men that give evidence for a.
bribe and know nothing of the facts.


554


* OU musi pass along the road, if you mean to-
reach the spot; it is no use listening to mere
tales of it. Listen to me, I humbly entreat you ;:
‘inactive faith will not carry you forward. A virgin
and a matron alike have gained their knowledge
from experience; it is not acquired by hearsay...
Tuka says, Here is needed one immersed in the
subject; when the source is cleared, light will pro-.
ceed from it.


188 THE NECESSITY OF EXPERIENCE


555


E has toiled atthe study of books; and the

fruit is mere foil. Now he has fathomed

‘the nature of all things; he finds there is no place
left for his soul. The tree bends beneath its fruit,
when it has produced a genuine crop. Tuka_ says,
.Henceforth you must offer faith to God.


556


“TE you know Narayana’s tokens, pray show him

to me; he dwells with the saints, but others
-are kept aloof by their own fear of him. Small as
‘an atom, he is filled with light that reveals him.
Those who can master the songs, they can under-
stand him; he is hidden ‘by arguments, good and
bad, and the reasoning ofthe logicians. Tuka says,
You must anoint your eyes to behold him.


557


Ore. the devotee knows the devotee’s high
estate; it is hard for others to attain to their
‘station. Though they know the secrets of know-
ledge, they assume ignorance for the sake of that
pleasure; they speak not, though they speak with
their lips; to increase love and joy in the world
they-have kept themselves apart, though they are
‘not apart, from God. They beat cymbals, they call
upon his*hame, they proclaim a season of abundant
Jove, to save ignorant shepherds of the people.
Tuka says, Well they know all this who have learned
‘it by faith unalloyed.


558


7 RAP up and put away your knowledge ; here
faith is what you must trust to. If you


THE NECESSITY OF EXPERIENCE _ 189.


follow One, all is accomplished for you, the Lord of
Pandhari assures you thereof. There is no room
here for arguments, right or wrong; no room for
painful efforts. Tuka says, Unless faith accompany
it, whatever men say is weariness.


559


‘l. HAVE not known myself the joys of devotion,.

how then can I understand philosophy, O
God? .Do not, I pray, look on me unmoved, when
I speak of union with you. The mind alone will
not bestow peace upon us, unless we have seen the:
feet of God. Tuka says, My speech has conceived
a passion for your qualities; it cannot be still,
though you say nothing to me.


560


EFORE she has borne a child, if a woman per-:
forms joyful ceremonies, she is a silly crea-
ture practising nonsense. What is the good of such
public display? The mere mention of sugar brings.
no pleasure. A forced attempt to belch will not
make a manfat; be will still look thin and miser-
able. Tuka says, You talkative men, listeri to me;
if you\have no experience, do not assume the
exterior of knowledge.


561


ae is ihe: impression the world has left on

; if God ceases to speak to a man he too-

ought - e be silent; there is no need to wait, he

should make up his mind to that at once. Tuka

says, People act very differently—when God has.

ceased to speak to them, they go on talking about
him.


“190 THE NECESSITY OF EXPERIENCE


562


EARS will not come into the eyes, if there be

no yearning in the heart; apart from this

‘speech is idle, prating, a fruitless diversion. If the

Lord is not attentive to us, our words are profitless.

Tuka says, We must wait till we meet him face. to
face.


563


<6 HE gift of a daughter with her marriage

ornaments is nothing less than a gift of the
world.”’ So one says, but the foolish fellow knows
not the truth ; he will know it some day by suffer-
ing. If you do your worldly duties, you will fill
your stomach, but you will let religion perish. God
helps the truth; practise.it and you will see for
yourself. Food, honour‘and wealth are a matter of
destiny. Tuka says, Enjoy pleasure now if you will;
it will turn to destruction some day. :


564


HE fire cannot burn the string that bears the

charmed amulet ; everything else is its prey:

why need I prove the fact? When a woman bas a

lord, her-beauty is for no other to enjoy. Tuka

‘says, Where there is a fault, the magic touchstone
will not let it conceal itself.


565


\PEECH may describe him, but experience is
hard to attain ; our own tendencies draw us

in many directions. How can we be still and calm,
when death is pursuing us? Our bellies lead us
into pride and ostentation; we shall lose our princi-
pal at last. Tuka says, O Naréyana, it is good that


THE NECESSITY OF EXPERIENCE 191


you awaken the world with your hand that calms
all fear. :


566 —


Ae we say God isa false conception, we feel a

suspicion that we are wrong; I myself have
come to know him by serving him. If we feel
disposed to make him uon-existent, then wemake
his praises folly. Tuka says, It is our own unsteadi-
ness that prevents us from fixing our thoughts on
him.


567


Sl aera is no appointed time for contemplation,
it should be practised without ceasing. Aus-
picious is the mouth that is.always uttering “ Nara-
yana.”’ Delightful is faith in him who excels all;
here all pretences are idle. Such is the advice
Tuka gives to mankind.


568


HAVE been spreading out viands of speech:

how can these be real or satisfy us? When
you have gone home, no one will know what dis-
appointment is, though many of you have met and
eaten. \At sunrise you may conceive both sunrise
and sunset, if in your waking thoughts you form.
animage of them. Tuka sets to work enlight-.
ening ignorant children, awakening the rest of
inankind.


569


F experience is completed by experience, then
the mind grows steady ; when gold is burnt in

a crucible all impurity is burned out of it anda
jewel emerges. So one thing alone remains when


192 THE NECESSITY OF EXPERIENCE


body, speech and spirit are done with ; that is joy
in the three worlds. Tuka says, We have conquered
mortal conditions by taking service with Vitthoba.


570


OD alone knows who secures the real fruit of
worship, who can abide by the institutions of
worship. Now, O God, you are my hearer and my
preacher; let me serve you. The clever and the
acute do not end in this; they make idle-conjectures
at their owo will. Tuka says, We-have halted in
one house; O Hari, there is union between you and


me.
571


7 HAT a long tale you tell without warrant !

As long as you) know not the Lord of

Pandhavi, so long you will prefer worthless things.

Who cares for your, dry philosophy? Tuka says,

Service is the only thing: lay aside that pride of
learning.


572


HAT will he who honours thee lose? He

who will not honour thee, what will he

gain? We will see Vitthala in all things; let him

dwell in our mind in any form he pleases. Those

‘who are slaves of the world pfattle idly from their

own point of view; of such, some praise, some
blame thee, O Panduranga, says Tuka.


XII
Criumpbant Happiness


573


HAVE found a sea of love, an inexhaustible
: flood; I have opened a treasure of spiritual know-
ledge, it diffuses the lustre of a million suns, arisen in
thy worshipper’s souls. Unexpectedly, without an
effort, I have heard the eternal secret, I-have learn-
ed to know God. The seed of the high reunion
has been enfolded in my own destiny. I have now
beheld him in whose sight is all/goodness, a sea of
happy augury, the supreme power of mystic words.
I bave attained him, whose name is nectar, whose
nature is pure, intellect free from passion. The
very joy of peace and compassion is found in this
joy, that accompanies the knowledge of the being
and knowing God; this Pundalika declares. Lo!
Pandhari has unfolded the delight of infinite joy!
I do not myself know the stage beyond desire that
the faithful need; I do not know the universal
brotherhood of/living things. Tuka says, O Lord of
Pandhari, let me now dwell with the saints!


574


V* is well that death has not yet devoured me, I

have lived so long; the rest of my life I offer to
thee. O Hari, death allowed mea respite; my life
has not yet perished ; les me use to some purpose
the time that is left; the chaff that has vanished—
let it go! I was drowned in falsehood till Ireached
the bank; I struggled hard in the dream of life.


13


194 TRIUMPHANT HAPPINESS


My time of conscious life I wasted, but I have
gained something real, a sweet mouthful of food.
I have sent a cry to thee, whereby my fears have
tiled; it seems to be thy fond delight to watch over
thy suppliants. The night was passed meditating
on my sin; there was light indeed, when the dawn
appeared.- What fault of ours can survive, when
we have thee for our champion? Perish then body,
pleasure, pride and honour; I will strive for these
no more; I am come, says Tuka, to seek thee,
Narayana, Lord of the world.


575


GOD, thou art our merciful master, loving to

the humble, the guardian of thy worshippers ;
thou art our tender mother; thou dost lift every
burden; all our careful thoughts we pass on to
thee; it is for thee to keep us when we stray.
Henceforth thou dost. deliver us to the saints; if
any man neglects.us, thou canst not endureit. We
have neither care nor fear of life nor death nor
anything else. We have attained heaven upon
earth, all Vaikuntha has come to us. We know not
’ whether it is day or night, an eternal splendour has
dawned. upon us. Billows of joy roll upon us.
How can we describe that happiness? Through
singing thy name, thou hast adorned me with a
rich jewel. Tuka says, Through the virtue of thy
name, what have I left to wish for?


576


M* pleasure in the company of the saints is
ever doubled through your name. All ac-
tions are. burned out of existence; I sit swaying to
and fro in a passion of love. So I bave no more


TRIUMPHANT HAPPINESS 195


anxious care; you are my father and mother, sister,
brother and ‘ancle, my relatives in all degrees. . I
have found this resolution in you, that you will
never forget me; without, within, and by my side
you stand inspiring confidence. I may not even
dream of sorrow ; delight and liberation are become
my servants; you their secret source abide «with
me in the happiness of love. Where your praises
are sung, sin is burnt up and guilt flees away : what
is wanting to complete my joy? I drink the nectar
of Brahma, says Tuka.


577


‘@) GOD, thou art a sea of compassion; mother,

father, and brother to me! Thou art an ocean
of measures for attaining life; thou dost sever the
ties of the world, the snares of destruction. Thou
art a wall of adamant to thy refugee ; freedom from
fear is thy generous gift. It is beyond all gods to
perceive thee, thou art unembodied, imperishable ;
where the highest effort of praise is too feeble for
the theme, what can I do with my uncultivated
wit? Do not make me wait to know thy purposes.
I know nothing of faith, but I call myself thine ;
I know. nothing of devotion, but I offer thee
homage. For thy own name’s sake, O controller of
the senses, it behoves thee to run speedily. O-Lord
of, Pandhari, J am filled with thy joy ; I have van-
quished pain ; I have laid my burden on thy head,
I shall fear no more, says Tuka.


578 |


\ | Y desire has drawn nearto me: why need I
speak? -I am bound up with his name and
form; I am done with all discourse about it. I-am


196 TRIUMPHANT HAPPINE ss


like a dumb man who sits delighted eating sugar.
Tuka says, What shall I say now? Silence is the
right thing.

579


Doe the protection of a mighty one, we

have grown mighty; thus.we have struck
down the world, we have crushed the six evil
passions. We have made to be like stubble kindred,.
wealth and the body. ‘Tuka says, Now we have:
attained the source of emancipation.


580


Y desires have been accomplished; I have
set my spirit firmly at his feet. I have
found peace and repose ; my distress vanished when
Tremembered him. The three-fold fever was con-
sumed away, my soul was delighted by the joy of
love. Great is my gain, that Panduranga uns
in my speech, he never stirs from my side; within
me I feel a stream™of life; the world is merged in
him who pervades it. Tuka says, The measure is.
filled andheaped up, and it overflows like the
Ganges in flood.


581


HAVE tasted a sweet taste, my stomach is
filled, for his name suddenly occurred to me ;.
when the tongue utters the name of Vitthala, sin
vanishes. Believe it, O all men; he saved Ajamela ;
he has saved sinners of the lowest degree, for his
name’s sake. My spirit has attained bliss and joy
and eternal repose. Utter Govinda’s name from
time to time; he knows this who has felt its power ;
he who loves this will practise it. Tuka says, O
thou, who art formless, show us thy form.


TRIUMPHANT HAPPINESS 197


582


HO regards the world, while he continues with

us people of Hari? Time is swallowed up in

the joy of Brahma; we have an excess of delight

stored up. We never even dream of care, as the

days and nights pass by. Tuka Bays, This juice of
Brahms t is a satisfying meal.


583


NDERSTAND what your own form is; why

do you despise the mirror of the self? The

life of the flesh will not bring you near it; Narayana

must be generous to you. Babhru did not expect,

when he shot his arrows, that they would hit the

vital parts of Arjuna. Tukasays, This tale has been

handed down by many lips, but it would not have
‘been started had it not been true.


584


HAVE secured now the supreme union; it is

mine for ever; .I will not abandon it; the
foundation is deep laid; there is nothing further to
reach beyond» this point. What was scattered is
brought together again; the books are balanced,
the account isclear. Tuka says, Henceforth I shall
‘stop speaking.

585


HAVE found an inexhaustible capital, with

which I will maintain my trade. I have found
cheap seed in my house; I have stored it up in the
form of speech. In lending or borrowing this
capital all are benefited; the rate is the same for
rich and poor. One who comes to the sale-room
is not disappointed, though he knows nothing of


198 TRIUMPHANT HAPPINESS


the business. Tuka says, I am free from anxiety
T seek for nothing else.


586


I WILL keep before my thoughts his delicate

feet, the treasure chamber of all happiness... I
will keep on my lips his name, that is like a creeper
yielding nectar; my body shall be at rest. J. will
gaze on his fair and beauteous face—a mine of all
lovely charms. I will cling to him like-a child; I
will sit on his thigh and will never rise. Tuka says,
He becomes what we have made him; I have.
embraced in my spirit the happiness that Vitthoba.
gives.

587


‘B* this purpose and, resolution my body Bas

escaped from death; all cravings have been
rooted out, J have found my native portion of bliss.
- T have found the secret; I see before me no anxious
care. Tuka says, Why need anyone pity me?
Wherein is my soul apart from him?


588


MC spirit is infused into this essential. j juice of
all; my joy is unbounded; in him who per-
vades_the world I have found father, family and

Ybosom friend; I recognize them all under one
name; I have cut myself free from faith in others.
Tuka says, By his name and form all guilt is purged
away.
589


IGHT will not vanish now that I have this
gem; I am far removed from darkness. I
have been myself a witness of your properties—so


TRIUMPHANT HAPPINESS 199


evince them, O Narayana! By remembrance of
you I have forgotten the past; I have preserved
‘the experiences vouchsafed to me. Tuka says, I
find my diversion in God; we have not two aspects
as you have.


590


AM noi wearied, but Iam afraid: what can I

do inmy ignorance? City and waste are alike
to me; anger and lust have become my_footstools.
O infinite one, I have conquered the six rebels
now, through the compelling power of thy name.
My chief duty now is like a servantto forward my
lord’s purposes with ready obedience; therefore
Tuka stands gazing on his feet, listening for his


word.
591


I HAVE finished a profitable journey ; how can I

describe it in words? My gain has brought.
me two-fold gain. My soul is comforted by the
right of him; fortune has led me to the company
of saints, and given me what I delighted in. Tuka
says, The efforts which I made have all borne fruit.


592


LESSED is to-day, for to-day I have seen the

saints. I have broken away from the fever

of. sin; my misery has vanished. I have found

peace; my spirit has sunk to rest at thy feet.

Tuka says, To-day the Divali and Dasara have both
visited my house together.


593


HAD been impressed and dragged far away,
with a burden on my head; now IJ have


200. TRIUMPHAN®? HAPPINESS


escaped from the burden, for you have accepted me.
How many times I cried to you in time past! -Tuké
says, To-day my service has borne fruit.


594


URSED be my destiny ; my toil is all wasted ;

the bold claims I made have not been realized.

How can I make myself patient now? Itis\for

thee, O Narayana, to inspire me. I have been

given wisdom to teach me my faults. I-am deeply

guilty. Tuka says, O piteous king, it is thou that
hast satisfied my cravings, now, at last!


595


HAT merit’ shall permit. me to serve those

who have put away duality from them?

Show me this secret, O Narayana, by the agency of
some inward sign. It is, hard to serve the saints;
and yet the Lord of the-world has shown me mercy.
Tuka says, I shall not return to my old disposition,
T shall repose in joy.
, 596


INCE have seen his holy face, what two-fold
pleasure I have received! The hunger of my
eyes never departs. My tongue tastes the sweet-
ness that makes nectar insipid. The path of
hearing has been swept and cleansed ; the sense of
difference has vanished. My mind that was soiled
and foul has been swept and cleansed, till it is like
a crystal. Tukasays, I have found a treasure, even
Vitthala, the life of my soul.


597


“T HAVE his strength within me; what can death
do? J have forfeited my soul as a pledge,


TRIUMPHANT HAPPINESS 201


till my soul and God are united. I have applied
myself to this; I shall not turn back till we are
united. Tuka says, I believe I shall one day be
like thee.


598


NOWING the secret faith of our innermost
hearts, Panduranga has dealt with us, ac-
cordingly. The words I have uttered will not fall
to the ground ; thou art the mother of us friendless
people! Thou hast destroyed my misgivings and
any sense of separation that remained, Tuka says,
Now I am full of joy ; I will sing of thy noble qua-
lities unfathomable.


599


Hs can I tell the joy that lies in thy feet?

Thou hast no experience of it thyself. IfI
describe the nature of nectar, how shall I be thought
to speak the truth?» As mother and child we must
testify to each other; thus we both shall discern
what that happiness is. Tuka says, We detest
emancipation.: why do you forget this, O cowherd ?


600


EEING nothing I have seen all; I have be-
come one with all men, because I have kept
myself far from me. Receiving nothing I have
received all; I have found feet for my limbs. Eat-
ing nothing I have been fed, my tongue hag tasted
a sweet savour. Though I speak not I am as one
that speaks, making manifest the secret of my life.
Tuka says, I have not beard with my ears, yet it has
come into my mind.


202 TRIUMPHANT HAPPINESS


601


S we utter the name, our minds are quieted,
our tongues perceive a taste of nectar;
omens of gain appearto us. Our minds are delight-
ed; we repose at your feet; we must know_that
such is your mercy if we utter your name. \We
have, as it were, feasted ; we have cast a stone upon
desire; we speak like men who have been satisfied.
Delight has come to meet delight; we have found
a treasure that is sweet in the mouth. Tuké& says,
Now we cannot measure our joy.


602


, XCELLENT is the testof thy names, it con-
sumes away great.guilt. It has bestowed life
onus; weemploy itabundantly. Sweet and easy—
better bow far than nectar! Tuka says, Our bene-
factor, our tree of wishes, cannot be disturbed.


603


HIS isa blessed, golden day! The saints

have feasted in a row, an excellent feast in

full confidence; uttering the name of Rama Krishna

they have fallen into a glorious trance of love. Tuka
says, This hasty meal has been delicious.


XIII


Raillery of God


604


I HAVE the support of the saints, ‘but you, O
formless being, are alone and helpless. Con--
sider this, O God, and enter into no suit with me. .
You know not how to plead, but-we are well versed
in quarrels. Tuka says, The only thing left for you

then is to be at peace with us.


605


A DECEIVER has-come to Pandhari, bringing
snares of love-with him. Henceforth he-
has ruined mankind; he carries people off and
leaves no trace of them. He lifts up his arms and
pierces them with the shaft of bis glance. In his
passage. from Vaikuntha he has made a halt at.
Pandhari; it is Pundalika who has brought this.
thief here and made a place for bim. Tuka says,,
Come you and I, let us seize him!


606


MOTHER sets her children quarrelling,
through fond curiosity; she watches all that
happens herself. She calls one girl her own and:
beats another, yet both are near to her heart.
“Yours is a big piece’’—‘‘ mine a small one’”—
these desires and grumblings are baseless talk..


204 RAILLERY OF GOD


“Tuka& says, There remains in one spot the secret
_ that saves us from all exertions.


607


I HAVE learned well to pay you back in your
own coin; you are heedless of me; you may
‘say too, O Narayana, Iam heedless of you. “If-a
cheat meets a greater cheat, it is certain. that
“some one will gain something. This is a one-sided
quarrel ; there is no danger to my life, says Tuka.


608


HOPE to behold you; I<cannot bear to be

heedless of you. My soulvhas visited your
‘feet ; I am here before youinthe flesh. I forget
all ; 'T cannot rise from the spot when I am sitting.
Behold, while life is yet in-him, Tuka is cheated out
of his life.


609


HESE cries are raised at your door; we see
that you.are always in debt. You are a
shameless fellow, O God, your worshippers often
‘beat and fine you. You hide away yourself and
coollyentangle us in feasting. Tuka says, You are
a cheat, you dupe us by giving us one thing for
9 Nee


610


: . ro Ou: are as‘clean asa erystal; you have cleaned
"out your worshippers; so people do not come
cto, your door, O generous one, for they are cheated
there: - Your behaviour is known; you have ruined
-everybody. Tuka says, When you take a man ’s
property, this is the result you show him.


RAILLERY OF GOD 205.


611


| NOW you not, O God, what Ican say? I

ever took delight in your speech. O per--
vader of the world, to no purpose you puzzle me by
your jests. Do as it pleases you, for you dwell.in
the heart and know all. Tuka says, When I attain
to peace, my mind will be released.


612


F our mind is willing to be still and-peaceful,
why are we full of restless regrets? Why do

we fail to recognize your hand in/operation, when
you take your diversion within us? You set our
souls dancing with many fond desires, you increase
our longings for chance objects. Tuka says, In this
sportive style you design to establish your honour.


613


OW many are-the sources of honour and dis-
honour,—these are the least of your boons.
Go and temptother poor creatures who can find any
taste of sweetness In them. Though you should
offer us-the height of prosperity, we are not greedy
of itlikeothers. Tuka says, You are a cheat; this-
is how you have ruined people.


XIV


Faith and Crust


614


HO asks whetber we are faint or weary ?

Who else but thou asks us, O Panduranga ?

‘To whom shall we tell our joys and sorrows? Who

will relieve our hunger and thirst? What other

will chase away our fever and deliver us? Whom

‘should we ask for the morsel we want? Who wiil

delight to caress us? To whom shall we allow

authority but to thee? What ally shall we find?

Tuka says, O Lord, who knowest all, I throw myself
-at thy feet.


615


HAVE used up every means of reachin§ thy

feet. IfI shalloffer thee worship, I want faith ;
I cannot control my soul for any purpose. IfI
shall offer thee pious deeds, 1 want will; if I shall
-offer thee a present, I want treasure. J know not
how to honour Brahmana guests; I am void of
compassion. I know not how to serve a teacher or
holy men, to reiterate thy name, to undertake
mortilications or ceremonies. I cannot lay aside
passion, or dwell in the forest or subdue my senses.
Tf I go ona pilgrimage, my mind goes not with me;
if I perform ceremonies, I know not myself the due
procedure. IfIshall say ‘‘God is with me,’’ behold
I have not forgotten distinctions between myself
and others. Therefore I have come as a suppliant,
your servant in all humility. Such an one needs no
store of merit; I am resolved now, says Tuka.


FAITH AND TRUST 207


616


A FATHER protects his child; he shows him
: his own stored up wealth and all his posses-
sions; even so I have been protected, I have not
seen any evil standing in my path. Close to the
hungry child is the breast; our anxious thoughts
are not far from theirremedy. Tuka stands entreat-
ing on the bank; his mother Panduranga leaps
over the stream.


617


OW will I sing auspicious hymns and uplift
aE loud praises to Hari; you will avert all our
fears, our troubles, our sin and merit. We will
deposit in you all our sensuous life; we will
continue in this world, yet.apart from it. Tuka
says, We are your darling children, we will not
leave your feet.


618


Wea the child’s mouth touches her breast,
the mother yields her milk. Both delight
in their caresses, the desire of each satisfies the
other’s desire. As their bodies meet, their bliss
increases through their love. Tuka says, I have
laid-all heavy burdens on my mother’s head.


619


‘TF you remember the Lord of Pandhari, you will

not be subject to time even for one moment.
Time is ever counting your days, but it cannot
count the days you spend in preaching Hari;
hence it is that the praise of my Vitthoba has come
to be a high way in the three worlds. Tuka says,
You have the true frnit of your birth if you remem-
ber Gopila.


208 FAITH AND TRUST
620


OU should make no effort to serve the world,

for it leads to disobedience to God. He is

the controller of the body; of his own motion he

will take care of it, so that time cannot assail you.

The mother serves her child in obedience to ‘his

will; but she does not lose her dignity by. this

offence. Tuka says, Abandon all assumption; it is
a dysentery that distresses the body.


621


HAT does a child know whether his father is

rich or poor? He knows not at any time

whether a thing is in his father’s power or not.

When he sees something, he.embraces his father and

asks for it. Tuka says, A man’s inner nature is
intelligible to him alone.


622


E ask. of thee, O God, that thou wilt

permit us to worshi pthy feet. We desire

nothing else though thou wouldst give it—prosperity,

perfection—or the four liberations. With the saints

there is now a seagon of abundant love. Tuka says,
Thy name fulfils my desires.


623


Y devotion is simple, concentrated in thee,

and strong in faith. Hari, can I abandon

this delight and fall away from tbee? Now let there

be no hasty change in me. Tuk&says, With feet set
together I stand upright and still before thee.


FAITH AND TRUST 209


624


>| still and think upon him; he who gives food

and clothes will give thee all. Why need we
accuroulate any further store, when God is our
debtor and supplies all our needs? He is loving
and pitiful; he knows how to return his petitioner's
endearments. We need not tell him our desires;
he knows and gives us what we want. Tuka says,
Put his ornaments on your person; you’ will ‘be-
-come yourself Vitthala in the world.


625


MUST needs declare my mind,.O God; how

is it you know it not? Appoint me my lot as
you will; I shall not change. My mind is lame;
Ican recall no remedy; so Ihave embraced your
feet. Both enjoyment and renunciation bring
pain; why should I gojon doing and undoing?
I have fallen into a grave doubt. Tuka says,
When a motherhas lost her child in the wood, she '
grieves because she cannot find him, O mother
Vitthala.


626


TP\HE-goods of Dvaraka have come to this spot;

henceforth the lord of devotees gives us
conrage. He has bound us to him by earnest-
money, he has measured us out our purchases ©
fairly; he does not yet think of returning. The
servants of Vishnu wield the measure; they have
not yet laid all the tallies aside; nor can we see a
time when the measuring will be finished. Those
who have gained by this trade have not changed
their plans ; they have stored up enough for the life
here and beyond. Tuk&says,I have got my wages;


14


210 FAITH AND TRUST


T have earned a place of confidence in the dwellings
of the saints.


627


\A 7 ] will honour the dust of thy feet; we will

eat the scraps that are left of thy food.
We will tie up this infinite treasure in our bundles.
Vitthala is fit for such poor creatures as we. All
gain is accessible through thy contemplation, and
chanting the name of Govinda. Thus shall the
vicissitudes .of birth and death be abolished; this
shali be a sure and easy road. I seek for the path
of those who went before me; let us-go on following
the track. Tuka says, We shallbury this life under
a slab of stone; we shall go straight to our own
mother’s house.


628


‘\7 E taste all the sweetness of assurance; we

feel a fond craving for you. Now that my

faith has settled-at thy feet, I shall dance for joy-

If I know that my master is watchful, then my

mind is delighted. Tuka says, Console us and grant
us thy love;,O mother Vitthala.


629


N Y treasure consists in worshipping thy feet;
ay through this good fortune I shall live on,
offering thee my mind, little as it is. God has pro-
tected me, helpless soul that I am. Tuka, his
servant, stands with folded hands beseeching him.


630


ASK for fragments from the meals of the saints >
I will sweep up every row of dishes. I
sare nothing for ceremonial cleanliness; I am far


FAITH AND TRUST 21h


removed from such ideas. The highest truth of all
none need teach me; for God has taught it me well
himself. I avoid every other; I know the signal
that I stand and wait for. There is no occasion for
any doubt here ; there is only one kind of food that
I desire, Tuk& has taken to this and pounces upon
it; Nariyana has satisfied his craving.


631


\ HOSE mind is set on thee, sucha one let

me behold. What a pure and natural faith
is this, whereby I move neither hands nor feet, but
have gathered all together for anoffering, and fixed
my eyes on thee. Tuka says, Hide me behind thee,
and show me my fond desire. ;


632


i is is the defects of a thing that bring shame.

We need not trouble about the vessel. The
question is whether the contents are sweet or taste-
less. We must not-put poison to our lips, whether
it is contained in'a big pot or a small one. Tuka
says, True faith is a good thing; pretence is worth-
less.


633


if HAVE offered my speech to’ Panduranga; it
finds content inhim. It offers pearls of wor-
ship, honey of songs in his praise, My utterance
flows on in a stream unbroken. Tuka has offered
his soul for the last oblation; his trust is perfect.


634


HE light of the sun vanishes in the night;
though lamps are multiplied, yet what are
they? Now let this controller of the senses dwelt


F12, FAITH AND TRUST


in my soul and in my heart; by this aid the secrets
of the world become known. If my master is with
me, none can come between us ; nor shall I pray to
any other. By his aid the migrations of rebirth are
closed, because his love is near at hand, says Tuka.


635


CARE for no theme but the Lord of Pandhari.

I listen to the song of his praise, I delight to

hear it. Tuka says, The sages may say anything; I
think of nothing but Vitthala.


636


LL shelters but this area mere dream. The

feet of God are above-all; there I have made

my dwelling place. No destruction comes near it.
Tuka says, I have found.the spot and I strive no
more.


637


I KEEP company with no other, who will vex

my mind. { listen to no speech of any other
than Vitthala. I may speak of another to please
mankind, but- my heart is not in it. I love more
than my own soul those who love Panduranga.
Tuka says, Any saint like this knows what is best
for me; I listen to no other.


638


HAVE made no other choice than a resolute

purpose; of Panduranga I think, on him I
meditate; dreaming and waking I have turned
towards him every organ of sense; I put no faith
in any other. Tuka says, My eyes have learnt to
know him again; fair is the form that stands for
contemplation on the brick.


FAITH AND TRUST ‘913


639


i ae me fail to find food or beget children, if

only Narayana will be merciful tome. Thus
my own speech advises me, and I declared it also
‘to mankind. Though my body fall into shame or
want, let Narayana dwell in my thoughts. Tuka
says, All this world is perishable; so far as we
remember Gopala, we gain something.


640


I MOVE where Hari pulls me bythe string of his

love ; I have given all to Panduranga—hody,
speech and mind; all authority rests with him, he
takes pity on me. Tuka says, He disposes of us;
we will continue as he wills.


641


AITH is the due offering of God; faith is God
himself. Blessed are the pure; can any

doubt of this remain in their mind? Beggar as I
am, I dearly love God. Tuk& says, This is the:
truth, the gain is large and all faults are driven out.


642


LAMP sees no darkness; treasure up this

faith. Narayana is a powerful treasure to
have in your bundle. When you have the gem of
Paradise, all anxious cares will vanish. Tuka says,
This is the true treasure both here and hereafter.


643


E were not vigilant, therefore we lost the
blessing ; we forgot his name, we cherished
the world. We were carried far from him by the


214 FAITH AND TRUST


swollen flood of falsity. Tuk& says, We have found
a boat in the shape of faith.


644


O GOD, thou dost know my innermost desire ;

bow can I escape, O Lord of Vaikuntha?
Hadst thou not encouraged me, I should not_have
been protected. Tuka says, O merciful one, ié is
well thou hast given me thy help.


645


HIS Goddess becomes God when our distresses

are over ; she does not continue apart from

him; there is no need to describe her separately.

Awake now! Chant the name of Hari, the name of

God! Ask for your parting. gift; let no clogging

burden remain with you. Sound the drums to

proclaim that we haye reached our goal. Close

your shrine; accept\the honour your officers give

ba Tuka says, To-day I have read the riddle
well.


646


HERE are many paths, but this is the one on
which the saints have travelled. ‘Take no
devious\path”’; thus the Puranas proclaim. Our
road has been cleared ; it is a high road; you need
notask the way. There are banners fluttering and
brazen images to guide us, says Tuka.


647


Bihar birth to birth I continue thy suppliant

and dependent; I desire nothing but thee,
© Keégava! I sing thy name and praises; I have
adorned myself, says Tuka, with the ornament of
thy name.


FAITH AND TRUST 215


648


“has me fix my thoughts on him; that will be

good even though he does not visit me. Itis
-well if faith dwells within us; know that such good
luck is God himself. Though he delay to visit us
himself, yet a state of faith may possess us. Tuka
sys In either case our own mind brings about the
results.


649


F you desire nothing, O God, why have you

assumed any name? Why do-you impart to

any one the knowledge of yourself? Is not this

proof of fraud on your part? (If aman dances be-

fore you with true joy, then~your true form stands

before him. Tuka says, Love is a thing that should
not be impaired.


650


AITH and fixed affection are all the devotee’s

duty; a firm resolution is the secret they

must not forget. Without desire or motive of the

mind they must trust in Vitthala; they must not

wait upon other gods. Tuka says, When has such

an one-ever been neglected? The thing has never
been heard of.


651


D° not give up food or resort to the forest, but

enjoy the translation of Narayana. The
child on his mother’s shoulders finds no weariness ;
other notions of God’s dealings should be swept
away. Be not entangled in pleasure nor go aside
after renunciation ; but trust in everything to God
and move forward. Tuka says, Do not raise doubts,
no other counsel is needed.


216 FAITH AND TRUST


652


We are not people of to-day, raw and weak and

driven to and fro; we have roots and
rootlets in one place—and well-known art thou!
You and we have not been put apart. Tuka says,
Wherever I am, I am seen to be yours.


653


E need know nothing but Panduranga; all
doubtful enquiries will fatigue us. By
whatever foolish name we have addressed our
father, by them he knows our yearnings. He be-
comes an ornament to grace our speech, if we praise
him with all our powers. Tuké says, Out of our
eomplaints joy is born; let.us ery aloud from
moment to moment.


654

i ae the burden of knowledge rest on God’s head ;

itis well for us to beignorant as we are. As
he looks upon us, he enjoys our amusing pranks;
on both sides there is a growing delight. His
dear little ones feel no painful- doubt; their minds
are set on play, their thoughts are one with his.
Tuka says, Nothing hinders us in any direction ;.
our diversions are known in the skies.


655

SHALL respect what I have often said; of that
no doubt arises in my mind. You have loved
many; you have endured the complaints of men and
appeased men. To many men for their faith, you
have divided tender morsels of love; with fond
indulgence you have set them sporting. Tuka says,
I know this secret of yours; I need be anxious no

more.


FAITH AND TRUST 217


656


“YY the strength of his devotion the servant of

Vishnu is kept from perishing. Opportuni-.

ties and blessings visit his house, all powers come

walking to him. Who will deny to a son his father’s

wealth? Tuka says, We sit on his hip, hence we:
have full confidence.


657


LL our capital is Vitthala—-body, speech and.

spirit ; gladly I have laid out my all on this.

The true principle of all is your feet, I know

nothing else than them. Tuka says, In the society
of the saints I am transfigured by this passion.


658


Te a thing is not present in your mind, what good

will it do to place it, before your eyes? This
is why a calf forgets\its-mother. But if your mind
is in harmony with: another’s, then you delight in
his speech and love the wind that blows from him..
Tuka says, Without faith all is insipid, like food
without salt.


659.


lg you wash the roots of a plant, you will destroy

it altogether. The saints complain that you
have stirred up many a dispute. The man, whom
God directs towards the goal, he casts out from the-
common herd. Tuka says, Your qualities, if they
were imposed on another, would ruin him.


660


ae playing, eating, I will sing thy name.
I will wind round my neck for a garland the
“name of Rama Krishna. My strength and confidence:


918 FAITH AND TRUST


shall be in his name. Tuka says, He is the life of
his suppliants.
661


if ees: men cut my head off, yet my tongue
shall speak of no other. I entreat all my
‘senses, not to turn away from Panduranga.. Let
me hear of no other, let me see no other than thee.
Let my spirit rest ever at thy feet, attached to the
‘one God. Come, O hands and feet, be this your
task, to salute Vitthoba. Tuk& says, What shall
alarm you? Our champion is Narayana.


662


ITTHALA is my mother; her breast is filled

with the milk of love» She caresses and

ilifts me to her breast ; she does not stay away from

me. She fulfils my entreaties; she is gracious and

tender. Tuka says,-She puts into my mouth as a
morsel the sweet juice-of Brahma.


663


ENEROUS and merciful, Lord of the helpless,
thou dost listen to thy suppliants’ speech.
Thou dost. remove all burdens from their heads; I
have followed thee, body, speech and mind. When
we call upon thee, thou dost stand near us, to grant
us in good time what we need. As we travel
along, thou dost protect us; with thy hand thou
dost remove thorns and stones before us. Tuka
says, Thy servants feel no anxious care, thou dost
heartily make thyself their refuge.


664


‘| \ J ITH all our might we will embrace Sripati ;
we have laid our soul at his feet; we have


FAITH AND TRUST 219


wiped away the source of birth and death. We
have handed over our plans to him whose business
it is to give; we have escaped the guilt of the
fetter. Tuka says, Here Vitthala alone is left; he
eats and speaks and dances and sings in us.


665


NEITHER worship nor serve other’gods; I
honour none but Kegava. When I am at
thy feet, what do I need, or of whom else shall
Task it? I neither bear nor speak the praise of
others; I delight in none but Vitthala. I gaze on
his holy face alone; I never leave the lord of
Pandhari. I do not look for release, nor toil for it;
I do not fear the world and\the change of life and
death. Tuka says, Let.me feel there is nothing
besides Kesava.


666


SPEECH of-mine, utter the sweet name of

Vitthoba. O eyes, delight yourself with the

sight of his‘face. O ears, listen to the attributes

of my Vitthoba. O mind, run to him and rest at

his feet. \\Tukaé says, O my soul, forsake not this
Kesava:


667


E shall contemplate the acquisition of the

Self; we shall sow the seed in the shape

of Vitthala. I have gained a fortune in this place ;

now I shall throw away my body. In future how

can such a thing occur? Many a time I have

missed the chance. Tuk& says, Now I have

reached your feet; I do not forget them for a
moment,


220 FAITH AND TRUST


668


I HAVE found the aspiration of my soul; I see
LL . the desires of my heart fulfilled. I know not
whether it is night or day. I feel my body thrilled
by the power JI worship. I have gained what I
sought in my vow; in the hour of fruition one does
not feel himself far from his wish. Tuka says,
His gifts are equal; his image on the brick stands
evenly.


669


A FORMAL worshipper continues his worship

till all the materials are exhausted ; it is not
so with me. O generous one, you will take all my
burden upon you. O Narayana, you know what
is really auspicious. Tuka-says, I have offered you
the attachment of the body.


670


A Sa chaste bride values her husband above all

things, so we value Narayana. As an avari-

cious man‘delights in money, so do we delight in

Narayana, Tuka says, My mind is concentrated,
I know nothing but Vitthala.


671


OW I am resolved with my whole heart to
think of no other. I will sing thy name
with complete faith and joy; all my riches are in
thy feet. I will cast myself down before thee; I
will look on thy face till my eyes are satisfied. I
will put away shame and dance openly; I will let
no doubt cross my mind. Tuka says, I am thy
branded slave, O God; I am resolved to be such.


FAITH AND TRUST 221


672


WILL utter God’s name heartily, with pure
4 faith. Vitthala is my treasure, my life in the
latter end. The weight of merit and demerit is a
trouble to me, I will sweep it away, and exchange
it all for the other. Tuka says, I will keep it in
the base of the heart, the best vessel for it.


673


HEN I reeall thee, what other source of

pleasure is left me? Nothing comes be-

tween us; the seed has borne iis fruit. Vain dis-

quietude and weariness—how can they touch my

spirit? Tuka says, All doubt has left me, through
devotion to thy feet.


674


TREMBLE notjand keep quiet; this merciful
one is my lord. ~ He will give me eternal joy
in the end of all things, the source of the eight
million rebirths will pass away. He will show him-
self generous ‘to other souls also, millions of benefits
he willsconfer. Thou shalt be exalted here and
hereafter; utter the name of Rama, Rama! Tuka
says, Give up your passion for the world, then you
willreach the joy of the highest.


675


KNOW thy faith; I have grasped thy feet. I

will not let them go; I will not take anything

to let them go. I have clung to them so long that

you will find it an old affair and a perplexing one

to get rid of me. Tuka says, I will not let you ‘go,
not if you give me all else.


922 FAITH AND TRUST


676


HAVE taken care of this, making it my own
treasure. I look on him as the seed, and keep-

it safe, for from him has proceeded the world. I
have separated the chaff; the grain is what is solu-
ble. Tuka says, God is a legacy of treasured merit.


677


E OW can I be born again? I am saved from
any such care. [ am comforted ‘by this
thought, that I need never return. Panduranga is
a ship that will carry us over, if we-trust in him.
Tuka says, Good sir, every new turn of rebirth is
prevented.
678
A HEAP of victuals\has.come to the cooking
L place ; it would be madness to give up one’s
meal and go begging» The road is finished; it
would be folly for me to gobackwards. Tuka says,.
I shall be still and employ my power of speech.


679
ite our actions depart from ceremonial rule, do
not.thou observe our conduct. Count them
as service done to thee; show us mercy in the end.
I have enquired for the primal source; here my
faith has made its abode. Now Tuka feels no eager
longing, no impatience any more.


680
EEP me wide, I beseech you, every moment ;
let love choke my throat, let me cast myself
on the ground. Actions of good report are neglect-
ed; we forget everything. Tuka says, We should
gaze on thee with the fondness of lawless passion,


FAITH AND TRUST "993.


681


HY should we be styled liberated? Bonds

we have never felt; we joyfully celebrate.

thy praises, our mind has forgotten all fear. I see

no harm approaching me. Why need I depend on

any other? Tuka says, God who guards mankind
is my guardian.


682


I AM perishing, O God; I know not how to offer
thee service or devotion; now I stand still
with folded hands before thee. I know not what
to do; I gaze upon thy feet.. Tuka says, I will
gather up in my cloth the gift thou hast given me.


xV


Che Moral Tdeal
T.—Purity


683


\ E shall see with our owneyes the darling

of our souls; Vitthala.is, our only god,
all others are vain. He stands hand on hip upright
behind Pundalika. Tuka says, We shall bear in
our heart the husband of Rakhumai.


684


aoe is what we mean by guilt, a stain lingering

in the soul. Guilt and merit are creatures of
the mind, so are all pure and lofty thoughts. The
fruit is like the seed, good or bad. Tuka says, It is
well to keep the mind pure.


685


PURE life is the worship to be offered to the
saints; you need no wealth or possessions.

To satisfy those who worship the embodied form
they grant a material peace; they come caressing
you. As you sing God’s praises, his mercy flows
forth in a sweet stream; though you live apart, still
you are near to him. Tuka says, I tell you the
secret at a cheap rate, apply your mind to profit by


PURITY 295
686


F one is to achieve the end, there are two means

of attaining it; hold in abhorrence the money

and wives of others. If virtues sent of God visit

thy house, let that be all thy wealth. Tuka says,
Then thy body and thy house are God’s temple.


687


F we cast forth pride and desire, the body be-
comes like the jewel Chintémani. If we cast
forth fraud, malice and a censorious spirit, the body
grows clear as crystal. Such an one need not visit
holy places of liberation, nor Benares itself; all men
come to him. He becomes himself chief of all holy
places, liberation is gained by.the sight of him. If
@ man’s mind ig pure, whatican garlands do for him ?
He is already adorned with»all ornaménts. Such
men ever proclaim the attributes of Hari, joy dwells
within them. -Body,; mind and possessions they”
have surrendered\to the highest; they desire
nothing. Tuka says, He is more glorious than the
‘stone Parisa : how can I describe his glory?


688


Ys must cook your food so that it will not

create disgust or cause pain; then it retains
its sweetness ; it is pure and true to its'own nature.
If any contaminating influence enters in, it will
show its effects. Tuka says, That which is essen-
tially pure will not change afterwards.


689
BROTHER, here is a rest-house where food
is given free; drinking places are provided
everywhere ; the road is full of pilgrims who have
15


226. THE MORAL IDEAL


come to satisfy their desire for a pleasant dinner-
All comers may partake of it. Sadasiva has made
arrangements that it will never cease. But to be
fit for it you must be holy, so with a pure heart call
out “ Hari” all of you. This is not an obvious
truth, nor true apart from the witness of the four
Vedas ; it will not suffer you to follow the vanities.of
your own minds. Itis smaller than an atom. » It
is greater than greatness itself, inasmuch as it is
the witnessing spirit of the world. This name of
Hari is prepared as a soup to fill the belly of the
world; rest in the shade of this celestial tree. Itis

a food that will nourish all castes; cry then Hara!
Hara! Mighty God! 'Tuka, the servant of Hari,

ig the headman; the rest are-all criers. Come, let

us bow down at the foot ofthe temple spire; now

that we have seen Vasudeva, this is the holiest time

of spring.

690


‘HE religious=rites of our fathers should be
sought in knowledge and means of attain-
ment; such things deserve the name as place a
treasure in our hands. Such things are devotion
and a smooth passage to salvation; through them
we shail reach peace. Such things are compassion
and the service of mankind; in them is the very
essence of the true path ; in them are greatness and
honour and the attainment of the other world. Such
things, says Tuka, show that what we call God is.
God, if we have faith according to their precepts.


691


GOOD seed brings forth sweet and excellent
4 fruit; let our mouth be filled with words of
divine sweetness; let our body be employed on


SINCERITY 997


useful purposes. Whoso is pure in every way and
has a spirit like the water of the Ganges, Tuka says,
the sight of him drives away trouble and brings
peace.


692


()* all dwellers on earth those alone are_pure

and unpolluted who love God with lasting
love and faith. Those alone are prosperous who go
beyond the Jove of money. Tuka says, Ifyou serve
them, your service reaches God.


TI.—Sincerity


693


CT as you speak;-or you disgrace God. What
would sweet.food be like without salt? Like
a lifeless corpse dressed out with ornaments. The
actor’s make-up is disgraced without appropriate
action; a fine shape is worthless without solid
qualities...To perform the ceremonies of wedlock
without a bride and bridegroom would be an idle
waste of money. Tuka says, So it is in my case,
so long as I see not the spirit of love within me.


694


agree who possess an open mind and pleasant

speech, such men deserve to be called fortu-
nate; a happy life lies before them. One who is
humble and respectful and does not change his
demeanour, Tuka says, we should rejoice when we
utter his name.


228 THR MORAL IDEAL


695


HE sandal tree need not call the other trees
together and talk of its own perfume. Its
inner quality comes to light through its natural
power; it cannot restrain it though it would. The
sun need not tell his rays to shine when he would
arouse the world. Tuks says, The clouds. make
the peacocks dance ; no one can conceal the truth.


696


oes sandal tree is sandal in every limb; the

philosopher’s stone is not void, of power in
any of its parts. There is no, darkness in a
flame within or without; sugar is‘sweet in every
particle. Tuka says, Even so.in a good man no
evil quality can be discerned.


697

[et us offer the worship which is best, the

worship of the heart ; then what do we want
with outward preparations? God ought to know
the heart and he knows it; in the heart of the
true worshipper is the truth which he accepts. In
the last\hour the spirit shall reap gain or doss
according to the seed it has sown. Tuka says,
That worship which keeps us in peace secures its
end.


698

PLENDOUR accompanies a prince, he need
issue no orders. In this world no one
honours another without some reward; God alone
gives his mercy freely. Ornamentation will not last
on anything; the substance beneath soon shows
through. Tuka says, If Narayana dwells in the

heart, a sympathetic demeanour proves his grace.


SIMPLICITY 299


699


d Base brings its own reward, it does not need

force for an ally. Contemplate the feet of
God; patience is the only resource you need. As-
auredly you need not fear. Tuka says, You will do
well to proclaim yourself his suppliant’ with all
confidence.


THT.— Cruthfulness


700


F you will speak the truth, you may get Hari
for nothing; yet men neglect this cheap
resource, and waste their lives. One truthful word
is the best of service you,can offer to others. Tuka
says, If you purge the- mind of its guile, you will
give it repose.


TU.—Simplicity
701


EN may be passing wise, and versed in argu-
ment, yet have never found Vitthoba for
their conclusion. They may heap together count-
less books, ee know not the glory of Vitthoba.
Tuka says, A simple heart is needed ; without it

' knowledge is a weariness, an empty measure.


230 THE MORAL IDEAL


U.— Bumility


702


UMILITY is a good thing, O God; it avoids

all enmity ; in a great flood the trees perish,

the blades of grass survive. When the waves.pass

over them, they escape because they are humble.

Tukaé says, The secret is to clasp his feet; no vio-
lence can harm you.


703
NE who is humble to all creatures brings the
infinite under his control; true valour is
shown when aman has vanquished Sriranga. He
is altogether successful, but humility was the secret
of it. Tuka says, Water penetrates to the lowest
depth.


704


N ETAL melts_in the fire, but still continues

within it; it is purified and survives as
threads survive in a cloth. All false speech affects
the outside‘alone; pride and arrogance accompany
the ignorant man to his death. When the river
overflows its banks, the grass, that yields to the
stream, rejoices; the tree is uprooted and riven,
but. that weed is never crushed. The elepbant’s
foot crushes a hostile army, but the ant lives beneath
it; who would venture to accompany the insect?
You may hammer a diamond as you will, but it
enters either the hammer or anvil; will flint stones
hold out like this, though they be far larger? Be
modest and humble; this is the secret that will take
you over the sea of life. Tuka says, It is the
burden men carry that makes them sink.


PERSEVERANCE 931


UT:—Peacefulness


705


H® is truly liberated who feels no misgivings ;
J shame and anxious care are bound up with
fond desire. He is happy who embraces peace and
solitude; he is wretched who dwells in the world
and plays the hypocrite. Tuka says, Little reflec-
tion is needed over this, but outward shows reduce
-one to misery.


706


ERCY, forgiveness, and peace—where these
Bs are, there is the dwelling-place of God. He
comes running to that house and takes up his abode
there. Like a glutton he continues in the spot
where his praises are~sung. Tuka says, Where
worship is offered, the name of God brings him into
our possession.


707


EACE is a mistress that overrules pride; she

secures all grandeur. Men do not know this

‘open secret and thus they bring trouble on them-

‘selves. If you allow patience to rule, you will be

a hero of heroes. Tuk& says, The hardest of steel
is a.close friend of rust.


UTT.— Perseverance
708


HE tender root can cleave the hard rock; steady
toil will accomplish its end; there is no task
so hard but patience will overcome it. A rope will


239 THE MORAL IDEAL


cut a stone by long rubbing against it; by practice:
one can learn to digest poison. Tuka says, Where
can a place be found to sit? You will find one, O
child, in the heart of him who is supreme God.


UTTT.—The Service of Others


709


AY ie makes himself the friend of the op-

pressed, recognize him for a true saint,
know that God dwells in him. -Mild as butter
within and without, such is the nature of a good
man. He who takes the unprotected to his heart,
who shows to his servants.and to his own son the
same compassion, Tuka says, how often shall I tell
you, he is the very image of the Divine?


710


E who renotnces all is ever clear, even as
flame, that clings not to any impurity. He
who is truthful/in speech throughout this worldly
course is like the lotus to which the water clings
not. He who serves other creatures and shows
them compassion, in him the supreme spirit dwells.
He who utters not nor listens to criticism of others,
he is Janardana dwelling in the world. Tuka says,
he who knows not the secret is exhausted by ritual
observances.


711


ERIT consists in service to others, sin is
injury done to them; there is no other way

to gain anything. Truth is the true religion; ob-
servances are false, there is no other secret than


THE SERVICE OF OTHERS 233.


this. Salvation consists in uttering his name; de--
struction in turning away from it. The society of
the saints is paradise; the heedless and wanton
man is hell himself. Tuka says, Our own gain and
destruction lie clear before us; let each do as he
chooses.


712


HE Puranas declare that God is the debtor of
his worshippers, this is a solid~assurance ;.
show then that it is true. What more do I know?
I have heard a story that Kabir going to the
market gave away his cloth; when he got home
people brought money to his house, he could not:
take it because he had given-the cloth away. God.
sent beggars to the house of Namadeva; as he had
no food, he bade them plunder his granary. What:
historical proof of this can I bring? God paid the
debts due to Venkoba.~ He ground his seed-grain
and satisfied the beggars; Narayana had to sow
his field. Tuka says, The man who can form no
resolution, he is truly wretched.


713


Bee in the world are the compassionate ;.

their true- home is Vaikuntha, but they have
come here to serve mankind. They speak no false.
word; they are heedless of the life of the body..
Tuka says, Sweet is the speech on their lips; there
is room within their hearts.


714


ROM singing the name of Hari we must not.
hinder any one, nor from penance, pilgrim-
ages, charity or vow. Millions of a man’s ancestors.


‘234 THE MORAL INEAL


wait to see his practices accomplished; as often as
-one hinders him the sin of a Bramhana-murder is
incurred. No efforts can release us from our own
sins; what time will be left to cleanse us from
this? We ought to help men in good deeds, not to
-deter them ; then we shall have merit freely given
us, even as we incur destruction in the other-case:
‘Tuka says, Believe my words to be beneficial ;
pleasure or pain you will have freely given you.


715


BENEFACTOR is still such when he has
finished his benefactions ; he knows not the
‘ difference between himself and/others. Take up
the task you have found, to benefit yourself; do not
‘count your own toil. Look.on the souls of other
men as you look on your own; be a heap of pure
‘qualities. Tuka says,God'submits himself to those
whose long-stored patience is inexhaustible.


716


F one consents to sin, he commits sin; both
men are guilty alike. The presence of poison
makes butter poisonous; nothing can be gained
except you abandon wicked company. When you
are passing a field, if you see a mischievous animal
there,-you should raise a shout and drive it away
for the time. Tuka says, If you neglect this, guilt
will cleave to you; for you saw the need, and you
should think your trouble no pains.


717


Oe whose mind is for ever unquiet and dis-
/ contented,—let me never meet such a man,
he is a living corpse. There is a stink in his evil


THE SERVICE OF OTHERS 235


words, his speech is contaminated. Tuka says,
He knows not the highest word of ali, do good to
-others.


718


HE cow runs after her calf; thus she makes

_ her affection visible. Affection induced_by
schooling will be barren, though your training
may deceive strangers. When the calf is weaned,
the cow will not suckle it, though you put it to her
‘udder; she drives it away with a kick. Tuka says,
Affection needs no pressure; my own experience
has tanght me this.


719


*

O OME, cultivate this\ field that costs you

/ nothing, even Vitthoba’s name. Here there
are no pressed men, there. is none to feed, no re-
venue to pay, no oppression, no laborious toil, you
have no partner, you-are quite your owa master.
Instead of ploughing you must call on God’s name
and live virtuously ; there are no penalties to be
incurred, no stipulations to fulfil. Here is neither
weeding to be done nor a waste boundary to be
left ; for neither actions nor religious duties trouble
you. Take divine knowledge for your drill and you
need not sow any seed. No seed of accumulated
merit is wasted; the crop ripens from the primal
‘source. Yama cannot steal it away, for you have
Vitthala’s name as watchman. You may be sure
this crop will never vanish; only a madman would
be anxious about it. Harvest time is ever present ;
not a single moment is wasted. There is a crop of
infinite love; we have no room sufficient to store
it. Tuka says, Whoever fails to make this his own,
a miserable wretch is he!


236 . THE MORAL IDEAL


720


W* should use- our best endeavours for the

afflicted; where fruit and consolation fol-
low, there is good reason for our efforts. Such an
one is gratified with a little, that he finds in his
house at sunrise. What is gained without asking,
that, says Tuk, is the best of gains.


TX.— General
721


es you treat another man’s wife as your mother,
what does it cost you?~If you are not fault
finding and covetous, what does it cost you? If
yon sit still and call on the name of Rama, does it
ring any vexation? If you trust in the words of
the saints, what doesit cost you? Isit any burden
to speak the truth—does it cost you anything ?
Tuka says, The reward of these things is God.


722


7 HILE yet you have all these organs perfect,
hands and feetto walk with, seek your own
advantage. Fail not to visit holy places. While
death is yet far away, sing and listen to the song of
Hari’s excellent nature. Be truly faithful to him,
be not deceived, stray not from him. If you have
found a treasure, do not bury it; honour the saints
and the assemblage of Brambhanas. Let your deeds
be righteous; show compassion to all creatures ;
when you have reached the age of youth, do not
roam about after pleasures. Abandon lust and rage
and greed and passion; fail not to keep company


GENERAL 237


with the saints. In the hour of death no power
of yours will help you; your power and wealth will
be left behind. Thereafter your actions will go to
testify for you. Tuka says, Such is the command
of Yama.


723


HIi mind is the only ruler in the city of our
body; there he dwells with his two wives; he
has sons and grandsons well endowed; he has
shown his royal kindness to us. At his direction I
came into this country; else I had_lost my way.
Of his own generous will he came to meet me, he
came forward and showed me a smooth path. His
fair son has come too, bringing with him four com-
panions. He came by aside path to avoid the
thorns; listen whom he. brought with him. Before
him went Devotion, clasping his hand; behind him
came Knowledge, ascetic Repose, and good Works.
To the fitful he gave.a calm spirit; he made them
steady and set them in the right path. How shall
I tell the kindness he conferred, passing the kind-
ness of a-father and mother? By good deeds I
attained the sight of his feet; he gave me freedom
from _fear—an imperishable gift. I was a wretched
wanderer in the villages; my stomach was empty,
I had-no dwelling-place. Tuka’s brother says, He
removed all doubt from my mind,


724


OME, brothers, let us first revere Vinayaka,

setting ouz heads at our teacher’s feet. My

voice shall proclaim well pleased the praises of «

Hari-Hara. This is my vocation; as a servant of
God rendering him service I claim to be above


238 THE MORAL IDEAL


others. By watering places the path is made.
muddy; take, O mendicants, this lip water of mine,
that is cooler, more limpid, than aught else that is.
cool or limpid. Enjoy, O ye fortunate, this well-
favoured nectar of love! Conquer pride, if ye will
beat down all sense of shame and honour. . Em-
brace tbe faith of Sambu, if ye will; display him,
but display him thus. He will not allow. destruc-
tion to find a place; if the blows of adversity fall,
he will protect you. Keep your faith pure and
true. Say “Great is Hari-Harsa,”; let your voice
resound. Look on another’s wife as-a mother, let.
not your mind be polluted with covetousness. Con-
sider knowledge as a blade of grass; know that we
can call such an one brave in-bis master’s service.
Spend your strength in the)service of others; it is a.
faise action to spread -false opinions. It is truth
that will carry you over the stream of the world; I
bid you be not idle here. Perform the due rites on
every Monday, on each eleventh day, sing praises,.
offer worship, keep vigil in Hari’s name. There is
merit infinite in song and dance. Again, you have
beén told that truly the world is not, is not. It is.
well to keep company with the saints; best of all is
the treasure that consists in the service of praise.
Walk along the good path ; desire is an idle encum-
brance. Tuka carries along this exalted yoke, from
which depend the active life and the life of repose.
Before him les a growing sweetness; he fills his
pots of worship and joyfully sets on his pilgrimage
as the servant of Kesava.


725


O but this; let the wives and wealth of others.
be nothing to you; be not covetous, but.


GENERAL 239:


follow your occupation comfortably. Without any

covert struggle live peacefully. Enjoy the sweet.
and fragrant name; be not slothful in uttering the

name of Rama. Be everybody’s friend; speak no-
word of evil import; avoid the wicked ; exert your--
self for the saints. If you form any hopes apart

from God, they will end in the loss of all hopes,

If you foster the thirst for desire, you will never

find happiness. Trust and be patient; let God be

your stay. God is a source of gain and ‘preserva-

tion for such; none will be an exception, says.
Tuka.


726


L ISTEN, woman, to my words; if you fall asleep-

and lose your senses, you will have to wake:
up »gain; if you pay heed‘to me, I shall finish my
message in one word. | If/I tell this to the public, it
will not be welcome news. I tell you a means of’
improvement, a ‘secret of the heart; listen to my
words. Sit down with concentrated faith and
pledge your band in mine. The place in family life.
that has fallen’to you is the best. If a false faith-
comes to\light in your heart, no fruit will follow..
If you have in your power to procure the fulfilment
of one prayer, strengthen your faith by the aid of |
the. four Vedas and eighteen Puranas. Be per-
severing. Seek not after wealth or intellect, thus.
you will be like one who is a happy wife for ever.
This goddess of your forefathers has come to bless-..
your old condition ; if you forget her, she will yield
no fruit; you will not realize what she is. Tuka
says, Enjoy the happiness that belongs to you;
awake to remembrance. Give ample honour to those-:
of my company that approach you.


240 THE MORAL IDEAL


727


E who is awake to his own true gain, blessed

are his father and mother. The family that

has honest sons and daughters, that family makes
God feel happy. They listen to the Gita, they
contemplate Vitthoba. Tuka says, Be it mine to
serve them, and my good fortune will be unbounded.


728


ET your food and clothing be’ enough for
existence ; your dwelling a hermitage in a
hut ora cave. Let nothing fetter your mind ; store
up Narayana in your heart. 'Palk not over much,
nor sit in public places; keep your mind wakeful
and subdue your senses. .Tuka says, We should
improve our days, resolving the knot of the three
-qualities.


729


IN ae 1 tell you in detail the rules of piety and

right conduct? They proceed all from one
source, pure faith in Vitthala. Distinguish what is
perishable from what is not; visit Pandhari. Tuka
says, Here the butter of the Vedas has been
-churned forth.


730


a Wate to the duties laid down by the Vedas;

I declare their secret in the presence of the
‘saints. The four castes sprang from one body; sin
and merit were divided for their portions among
‘them. At the threshold of the Vedas the path is
laid down, that we must make no distinction of
beginning, middle or end. The mango, the jujube,
‘the fig, the babhal and the sandal, all these have


GENERAL QAI


divine qualities, but all burn alike in the fire. Tula
says, Till the mind has laid aside its properties as
mind, till then it is wise thou follow this direction.


731


W* should destroy time by contemplation,
dwell alone and bathe in Ganges water ;
worship God and walk round the tulsi;/control
ourselves in eating and pleasures and master the
organs of sense. We should avoid slothful sleep
and excessive talk; we should make the Supreme
Spirit our treasure, and the feet of God our posses-
sion. These are the means to procure true gain;
we should offer our body to God and take no burden
.on ourselves. Tuka says, This will bring us perfect


joy.
732


HERE in the: past men erred through igno-

rance, I pardon them; now I make a rule
for them! He who goes with a strange woman is
no better than an incestuous wretch. Now that I
have made this rule, let me see no more the man
who-cannot govern his mind. Tukaé says, We must
take our conscience for our guide; I have sworn
that I will obey it.


733


IM ack means the protection of created beings,

destruction belongs to the merciless. Sin
means contempt for law; the haughty man acis
after his own will. Tuka says, To keep faith alive,
God aroused himself and came into the world.


16


242 THE MORAL IDEAL


734


NUCH as have stored up a heap of merit, such
will importune God to save them; if a man
is strong enough to send a weak man to Ben§res,
when he has gone and come back, the merit will
be shared between them. When worship or dinner:
is going on, a sleeping man should be sound ;. there
is boundless pleasure in doing this. To,perform
a sacrifice a man must take a loan, and_one who is
prosperous ought to grant it him; if it is lost,
neither of them will be grieved. Tukasays, With
full knowledge of the purpose the-loan should be
asked and taken; there should be no false pre-
tences.


735


HIS is the blessed fruit of union, patience

is in your power; jfirst learn to control the

senses. All blessings come to his house, who has

made God his friend; hé has a field of inheritance,.

which yields no worthless crop. Tuka says, Do

what is right; why vex yourselves with unwise
actions ?


736


AMENTATION increases lamentation, but a.
stout spirit of courage stands firm. What is
it.that fails in this life, my brothers? Cowardice is
ruinous. Men say, “ Yes, yes,” but no one takes
our side. Tuka says, One hour is enough if you
employ it wisely.
737


\ | AKE your mind clear; from the mind comes.
everything that is attained; be it liberation
or bondage, pleasure, satisfaction, or desire. It is.


THOSE ARE FEW WHO ATTAIN 943


the mind that creates an image; therein the mind
worships itself. It is by the mind that desires are
fulfilled ; the mind is the motber of all things; the
mind is teacher and pupil; the mind is its own
servant. The mind, if it is clear within itself, con-
fers on itself salvation or destruction. O holy and
learned men, all who read or speak, listen to my
words. Tuka says, There is no other God than the
noind.


738


F a man attacks another with/a_sickle and he
defends himself with a sword, that is no proper
conduct, we ought to cry shame on him. If one
snaps his fingers at us, need.we fight against him
with horses and spears? “You need not be a gym-
nast to overcome a eunuch, says Tuka.


X.—Those.are few who Attain
739


HE mahura bears not as many fruits as flowers,
for there are some that drop off; there are
few-of\them that ripen; and ere the layers are
cleared, the destruction still goes on. Few are they
that reach the goal, for the last stage is the hardest.
Round the master are servants high and low; but
he alone knows how they serve him. Few are the
marksmen whose arrows reach the shining mark ;
you may call him your friend who reaches the
fartber shore. Tuka says, Who would believe in
outward show ?


xYI


Life under the influence of Religion


740


i your passage over the sea of the world, why

are you troubled? On the farther side stands
the generous one, with his hands upon his hips.
Embrace his feet; the Lord of the world seeks no
price from you; in return for faith~alone he lifts
you upon his shoulder. Live in the world and
enjoy it, but do not give up the two days of pilgrim-
age; merey and forbearance shall visit your house
with fond affection. You shall not be anxious for
worldly pleasure. or liberation; poverty and misery
shall not vex you, says Tuka, if you embrace
Panduranga, the generous one.


741


ae they have God behind and before them,

why should the servants of Hari fear? Sing
his praise joyfully; let not misgivings rule your
minds: What violence shall Time do to God?
Tuka says, When our master gives us all, what want
can remain ?


742


I CANNOT describe this pleasure; my mouth is
; not sufficient to praise him. We will serve
him joyfully and clasp to our heart our heart’s
delight. If we would compare anything to this
gain, what glory is there like it? Tuka says, I
ee not lift up my head; I have laid it at the saint’s
ect.


LIFE UNDER RELIGION 945


743


ITTHALA, my friend, accompanies me and

dwells in my soul; he pervades my frame ;

he is a shadow to me. He dwells on the tip of my

tongue; I can speak of nothing else. The mind is

prince above all organs; he too contemplates Vit-

thala. Tuka says, Now I can never forget this
Vitthala.


744


TEP by step he supports me; my life is led on

to perfection. I have found an-assured place

in him, and the world I have left. void. My spirit

goes forward on the path, I am filled in the flesh

with growing joy. Tuka says;In this mortal world
I have joined the pervading. spirit.


745


Y stomach ig filled, for I sat down in the
iN row at meat; now shall we need to rely on
another for salvation? We have called upon thee,
80 come running to us now; is there any need for
us to be in-doubt? What place is left now for
song ?.A flood of joy has passed over us. Possess-
ing -thefriendship of God, we can find room in it
even for our foes; how can any place be void
of him? All our sorrows are flown away; love
has arisen in our hearts. Tuk& says, Surely we
have prevailed ; does God ever dismiss a servant of
his ?


746


HIS is now my task, not to forget thy name
to clap my hands and dance delighted by
thy love. I enjoy now perfect peace behind me


246 LIFE UNDER THE INFLUENCE


and before ; the threefold triad of knowledge, the
power of fate are swept away. How happily the
day passes on tbe pure bank of the Godaveri,
where there is God, God’s temples, and crowds of
saints. Tuk& says, I have no cares now, I have
set on thy head, O Lord of Pandhari, my burden of
getting and keeping.
747


LORD, thou art impatient to serve thy de-
votees! I have learned to trust thy feet,
hence I have given up all other-efforts. Sages
and saints without number have learned what thy
great purpose is. Imperishablie is the bliss thou hast
bestowed on those that have altogether ceased to
heed the world. Tuka says, The spirit cannot con-
tain that bliss; I have set thy feet in my heart.


748


H? has given me choice butter to eat. I enjoy
this as the fruit of my past; now I look
forward to this essence of faith as a support for my
life. It has fallen to one who can appreciate it,
no blind man that goes on groping. Tuka says,
He who takes to God’s service, he gains this end,


749


S we recall the name, our throat is choked with
emotion; love swells within us. O bless me
with that lot! My hair stands erect; sweat breaks
forth upon me; a flood of tears fills my eyes; my
eight limbs are filled with thy love. I will consume
all. my body in uttering thy praises; I will sing thy
name day and night. Tuka says, I will do nothing
else till the end of the world; there is peace unend-
ing with the saints.


OF RELIGION QAT


750

E dwells in my spirit; I rejoice in his words,
now methinks I must go to visit him.
Kinsmen pine away for each other; in separation
they are not severed in spirit. There is eagerness
to meet again, an anxious ear for tidings, eager
enquiries after the past. Tuka says, The people of
Hari are the life of my life, the close associates of

my soul,


751


KNOW not how to withdraw my-faith ; I have

laid my soul peacefully at’ thy feet. This is
the spot whence all gain proceeds, such is the gen-
eral view in my mind. My.capital is trust in thee;
once for all I am resolved to be thy servant. I
look back no more on the desires of the past; hence-
forth I long to serve thee. I have offered thee all
I have; I have erushed the pride of “I” and
“mine”. I find propitious the unpropitious hour ;
every day a holy day; I feel assured of thy mercy.
‘The infinite:one is the guiding spirit in the concern;
I know no-other guide. Thus I feel at peace; the
gain or loss in the business concerns not me. I
passthrough life untouched by it. I have kept
my heart aloof from all its shows. The earnest
effort of the seed is a true shelter in this life; it
protects from all assaults of evil. I stand aloof
‘from the chaos of doctrine, and keep myself holy.
T love the form which comes to dwell in my mind;
‘Tuka says, I have made it the ornament of my eye.


752


HAT is said with open eyes is consistent with
the precepts of religion. Why should you


248 LIFE UNDER THE INFLUENCE


eat dirt, to make people spit on you? What power
is strong enough to consume flame with fire?
Tuka says, A brave man enters the field of battle; a
coward stays muttering to himself.


753


XCELLENT, excellent art thou, O God, dearer
to me than my own soul; my eyes ‘are
delighted with the sight of thy face, my ears with
the rehearsal of thy attributes. The threefold fever
has left all my frame, while I describe thy features,
O God! The mind rises above itself, for the subject
is high beyond comparison. Tuka’s brother says, I
cannot conceive your glory.


754


T HAVE no speech to describe thy glory; I

cannot truly tell the limits of thy nature. I
have laid this body, thy-own gift, at thy feet; now
what can I renounce for thee to honour thee there-
with ? T have no faith to serve thee; if I offer thee
my life, behold itis thine; I cannot see anything
of my own.to offer thee. Tuka says, I have nothing
I'can rely on, to pay the debt of gratitude I owe
thee.


755


N the company of God men turn into God; they |
who range themselves with the world perish.
Each road will take you in a different direction;
will bring a different store of merit or demerit. IT
have shown you the two, but you cannot avoid
your own; you must fulfil and be responsible for
your own destiny. Tuka says, It is the innate pre-
ference that triumphs; instruction is merely a seed
that is sown in you.


OF RELIGION 249°


756


E E who has stored up Hari within the temple

of his heart, his journeyings are over, he has.
followed a profitable trade. When you have gained
Hari, what is left of fear or anxious care? Tuka.
says, Hari leaves nothing to be desired.


757


HE God of Pandhari has accepted me; now
what can time do tome? I may count him
a fly. He has cast out every sourceof fear; he has
come to dwell instead of them himself. He per-
mits no breath of any rival totouch me; I have
learnt that he is so resolved. Tuka’s brother says,
Nothing need make me anxious now; I am seated
on the head of an elephant.


758


N faithful devotion-is a mine of jewels; a deposit:
made by Brahma. A band of children follows.
their mother as a rope is drawn by a single thread.
Whencesoever a king demands aught, it is brought.
before him;-no man answers him nay. By the
authority that service gives we can make our master:
our servant; you need spend nothing of your own.
There lies ever a middle point between beginning
and.end, and there it looks well to have a high seat:
for a prince. Tuka has been suddenly exalted by
faith, he is altogether become God in the world.


759


OR a moment we endured evil, but now we
have attained a pleasure that never wearies.

In pulling down and building up we busied our-
selves, but our efforts led to more and more pain.


250 LIFE UNDER THE INFLUNECE


Tuka says, There is no more going or coming for us
now; we dwell at the feet of the infinite one.


760


E have found an excellent trade, we have
reached the place of desire ; we have settled
our faith at thy feet, our life has found repose.
The happy omen has borne fruit; we have escaped
from all misery; now that we have seen thee, we
shall live and die no more. Good it is that I came
to this place; my legs have done well to bring me
here. We have turned from the lifeof bodily sense,
we rest under the shadow of Brahma. We have
found a treasure, inexhaustible, imperishable, full
of bliss. We have seen even his feet who is form
beyond form, the slayer of. Madana. This is an
old coin of the early ages; it\has long been hoarded
up. It has been counted strange and laid aside ; we
‘have walked over it without knowing it. Now that
I have embraced him, for my soul’s sake I will not
leave him. Tuk&asays, I am weary, O leader of the
world ; do not let my eyes rest on another.


761


HE~saints have returned me an answer that
calms all fear; it has given me repose.
Now. that I have tasted this juice of love, I shall
not abandon it; O give me, Narayana, the gift of thy
favour. If destiny grants it as our due portion on
-earth, we shall stand by thy feet. Tuka says, I
‘worship thee with my lips; I sing of thee in
stammering accents.


762


\ E have such a treasure in the world that I
eannot describe the varied joys it brings.


OF RELIGION 251


‘He is fully pleased, O God, who embraces thy feet
with desire and kisses them. When thy peace is
attained, fever dies away, with sin and sense of
separation. Tuka says, In every direction I see no
-difference of parts, no distinction of “ my own ” and
“ others ”.


763


O GOD, listen to my prayer, do not/grant me

liberation! This joy exceeds hat other,
desired of men though it be. In the homes of us
‘followers of Vishnu the happiness of love desires to
rest; prosperity and accomplishment stand with
folded hands at our doors. Grant me not to live in
Vaikuntha, for that pleasure may pass away; but
unspeakable is the sweetness of your name when
your praises are sung. O dark as the clouds, you
know not the glory of your own name. Tuk& says,
It is that which makes life sweet to us.


764


E have received his blessing, now let us go;
looking within ourselves, we can under-
‘stand his weariness. Now, O Gopala our lord,
sleep undisturbed. You have fulfilled my desires ; I
goto my own place. We shall wake thee up through
‘our own fond desire for thee, to save us from
actions pure and impure, from guilt and suffering.
Tuka says, He has given us a meal of his leavings;
he has left no division between himself and us.


765
OW let me contemplate this object; let it be
oe fixed before my eyes. I will clasp jt to my


heart and lodge it deeply therein; I will wave round


252 LIFE UNDER THE INFLUENCE


it and cast away my bodily nature. Thus shall I
crown the edifice; my heart is steady now. Tuka
says, Let me fall at Vitthoba’s fair feet.


766


\\7 = have now a perfect sweetness of joy.

What was lostis all madeup. Panduranga
is with us and dwells within us. Now we have
reached the bank, we find we have recovered all
we lost in the flood. Tuka says, The dream has
passed away and we are awake.


767
N7? OW we shall eat together and we shall have
Be a provision for the future left. We have


made a pottage of Hari’s name; Hari is allured by
means of devotion. Hach mouthful will yield an
increasing flavour, the very nectar of Brahma.
Tuka says, It tastes delicious; the tongue asks for
it more and more.


768


Y strength was wasted by the long drag ‘of the
senses; but whatever happened I Jaid all

before you. Let this purpose of service continue
with me; thus I shall find I have passed on my
burden to you. Body, speech and mind to serve
you, such is my continued thought; through my
faith in you I am dead to the world. Tuka says, If
I shall offer earnest prayer, lei Narayana hear me!


769


HAT is the right faith, which burns up the
store of our past. From moment to moment,
I contemplate the feet of my Vitthala. He suffers


OF RELIGION 253


mot my actions to overtake me, no false path to
lead me aside. Tuka says, He suffers no stain, no.
flame of fever to dwell with me.


770


TT\HOUGH life be sad, yet let Hari’s name.be

proclaimed, and who will be lucky enough.to
be born? He must possess stores of treasured
merit; that man alone deserves the -privilege.
Why are you waiting, O brothers! Show your-
selves active and dance for joy. Hat freely of joy,
leave none of it over! The joy which you behold,
if we can only drink it up, then, says Tukaé, what is
this world of Time? A mere nothing!


771


FEEL an inward sweetness, as I gaze upon

my treasure of faith; God is my bosom-friend,

the bosom-friend of this"helpless creature: accord-

ing to his glorious might let him adorn us with

purity. Tuka says, God eats with us, to give us a
share in his love,


772


me this be my calling now, to remember thee,

O Govinda. If thou wilt protect me, what
need.others do for me? Body, speech and mind, I
will dwell at thy feet; thisindeedI will do. Tuka
says, I will sing of thee, with my thoughts fixed
upon thy form.


773


OW we will settle quietly in one spot; we will
Sh not cheat each other. We have given up
our store of merit and retired from the world;
what annoyance can follow us? O God, do you


O54 LIFE UNDER THE INFLUENCE


untie the bundle and see what is in it. Tuka says,
’ I have left thé world, now shall I cry out to Gopal.


774


9TTMS well that God should dwell in your house-

continually, that he should be with you \in
sitting and sleeping, in eating and stirring about.
Then you could give up resolution and apprehension ;
merit and demerit. Tuka says, You may spend all
your time with Govinda.


775


E comes to destruction who, has tormented
others; but if a man has’set his heart on
eternal pleasures, there isan abode of all bliss in
Panduranga; in union with him is a dish of all
delights cooked together. Tuka says, Perfect satis-
faction is there an accomplished fact.


776
HERE is no joy like peace; all other joy is
pain>Lay hold then of peace, you will cross
to the further shore. When you are harassed by
desire. and passion and tormented in body and mind,
Tuka says, lay hold of peace and the triple fever:
will. vanish itself.


777


E it but a little, take this pure essence that

never clogs, then shall you be one with him,

as the sprout is one with the seed. Let your own

heart be your witness that you desire nothing else.

Tuka says, In this true essence you will find your
own exceeding profit.


OF RELIGION 255-


778


HIS is genuine gold that was laid up long ago ;.
we have brought to light a great man’s
deposit. The labourer’s hand has revealed it and
measured it out; Iam nobody here, it belongs of
right to the owner. The potter’s hand creates
vessels and such of them as he sends go to the kiln.
Tuk& says, Our life issues from Narayana, as his
splendour travels forth in the rays of light.


779


HIS spot is free from fear,here alone is rest ;
therefore I have gathered confidence, I have.
continued to be his servant.~ He has given me
perfect_happiness; I have tasted sweetness at his
feet. Tuka says, His‘name is in my ae my
body is filled with love for him.


780


E who. contains within him the fourteen
worlds has become a treasure in my throat..
What is there lacking in my house? Prosperity
and mystic powers embrace me at the door. He
who bound the demons to his feet embraces me
with both of his arms. He, who has neither form
nor shape nor outline, has assumed a shape in
answer to my devotion. He, who contains within
him the infinite worlds of Brahma, has become as
small as an ant for my sake. If I have lightly
spurned prosperity and mystic powers, what should
T care for the common gifts of the world? Tuka
says, I have become stronger than God by putting
desire away from me.


256 LIFE UNDER THE INFLUENCE


781


I WILL take the lot that is appointed me: that

cannot be suitable to others. Keep to your-
selves such a wish as looks for many accomplish-
ments. IfIam parted from Hari, men may scorn
me. Tuka says, Make me your servant, O ) GER I
‘shall do your bidding.


782


D ANCE and song are my best-refuge; I shall

offer you such faith as I can, When you
sleep, I must of course obey you and go; when you
vanish, I shall make an offering of my life to you ;
I shall burst forth into joyfuland harmonious song.
Tuka says, You generous spirit, that give freely to
aes you in an/instant will clear away my
burden,


783


We have you given him away in charity,
_ when.he is in your power? Come now at
once and set your feet together, I shall not let you
wander. Abandon not your place, I shall not leave
you free'to wander. Tuka says, I shall make him
respect my wishes.


784


OW I delight in none but him; who is there

that prates idly of another? We have

learned that earthly pleasure is pain and merit is

truly sin, Tuka says, I have dedicated my speech to

‘the infinite one. There is no need of words any
more.


OF RELIGION 257
785


T is hard to express what divine knowledge -
is; whence can we obtain inner experience of
it? The pleasure of worship leads us to renounce
the world; even the ignorant hear thy praises with
awakened interest. I cannot listen to other
means; thy song alone I hear and sing with de-
light. There is peace in resorting to the forest ;
Iam mad with desire for Hari’s worship. What
agent of Death has any power over us; when all
‘day long we are rapt in this blessed meditation ?
Tuka says, We shall be like children playing at'a
dinner party, like simple children dividing up their
food. ~
786


i he is good to sing the praises of God, for thus the

body becomes animage of him. Through love
and joy it dances and sways from side to side, till
every mortal sense vanishes. The life of man is
bound up in one spot; God is connected with all
creatures. Tuka says, When God alone is left with
us, at that.season all fear vanishes.


787


SEE that men are absorbed in worldly thoughts ;
they donot remember him. My mind retired,

as it looked on the wilderness of difficulties. In this
spot resounds the tumult of the sensuous organs ;
the spirit of selfish pride splits my head. Tuka
says, O God, the efforts of desire have ruined men.


788


ITHOUT reflection we cannot attain to
peace. The body is a mass of the three


17


258 LIFE UNDER THE INFLUENCE


qualities; there is no good quality in it. Through
love to God offer him all your gains. Tuka says,
What is, is very sweet.


789


YT HATEVER be the source of advice, take it

to heart. Do not look at the shell, for it

is the kernel that gives value to the cocoanut husk.

Your wife or children or relatives may put you in

mind of Narfyana. Tuka says, Admire the precious

gem, though you have to thank arag for preserving
it.


790


i this mortal world there is nothing delights us.
but Hari’s name alone. Our mind revolts
from worldly life. Our spirits are sick of it. We
count gold as earth, diamonds as pebbles. Tuka.
says, Women will appear as bears in our eyes.


791


LO\NE life is/now divided between two ; there

is.now no difference between us; we and
Narayana are one; he has kept and fulfilled his
promise.» Tuka says, We have received the fruit of
our toil; time and death have vanished away.


792


W® are now both elder and younger than our-

selves; there is none in front of or behind
us. We have learned to enjoy solitude and the sense
of union; Hari gives usevery pleasure. Tukasays,
Let us embrace each other, in a spot where a third
cannot come.


OF RELIGION 259


793


O GOD! where is there any grandeur in me?

It was well that I was made lowly. The
service of the saints is the best path of attainment ;
I will sing thy name joyfully. Wherever I am, no
one questions me; I have perfect repose witha
joyful spirit. Tuka says, Though the world should
despise me, yet the Lord of the senses would be
my protector.


794


HAT other friend have I but-thee, O Pandu-

ranga? I long to see thy dwelling place;

I count the days and nights on my fingers. I can

take no pleasure in any employment. Tuka says,
Tam ever contemplating thee.


795


GOD, I cannot succeed in finding the truth, ©

in serving thee or in any thing at all. We
must do some good deed to bring us peace; we
must dwell silent in the forest. My faith will be
purified at thy feet ; so choose out this gift and give
it me. T-have learned the difference between right
and wrong through thy kindly glance, O Panduranga.
Tuka-says, [delight to be near thy feet; whatever
thou sayest is acceptable to me.


796


ASK thee not for aught, if thou fearest to be
asked. Thou knowest that I look on thee expect-
antly ; we are comforted by thy namealone. Pros-
perity is the gratest treasure thou could’st give, yet
we count it as chaff in comparison of salvation


260 LIFE UNDER THE INFLUENCE


Tuk& says, We shall go walking on to Vaikuntha;
we shall sit and enjoy calm happiness.


797


HIS is the task of the blessed, to measure out

thy name with their speech. He grows fat

upon joy; his listeners are saved along with him.

He whose crop has ripened—what a store he has to

eat! There is abundance for a row of. feasters.
Tuka salutes his teachers with reverence.


798


‘T HAVE entered into my own womb ; I have be-
gotten myself. My prayers are fulfilled: all
desires have vanished. 1 have become stout and
strong in the very moment when I died. Tuka
looks round him and finds himself unchanged.


799


D4 in hand, I worship thee contentedly ;
I have ,cried to mankind, “ Be assured there
is nothing to fear.’ Mirthfully I sing and dance,
keeping time with cymbals and anklets. Tuka says,
There isnothing to fear now; God is coming.


800


A GOLDEN pot may be filled with spirituotis
liquor: say, O holy saints, what appearances
can we trust to? A vessel of clay may contain nec-
tar. Tuka says, Tell me quickly which. would be
better for us? fi
801


OW, © mind, cease to speak of the impious;
a be not careless of the name of Hari. Let


OF RELIGION 261


us never talk of them ; their name brings repentance
‘on the tongue. No one, they say, should mention
a monkey’s name in the morning; no one should
even mention the wicked. Tuka says, Let us
remember the auspicious one; then we shall be
happy for ever.


802


AM the servant of the servants of Hari; body,
spirit, mind and speech, with them-is.a plen-
teous season of joy, billows of music from cymbals
and tabors. All evil thoughts are destroyed ; there
is peace where the praises of Hari are sung. As he
hears the praises of Hari, the\impious man begins
to worship. How Panduranga stands up to behold
the delights of the scene! Tuka says, Brahma and
the rest possess not, possess not this joy !


803


ET us salute. Vishnu, our father and mother,
whose image is the world, infinite, immeasura-
ble Panduranga,; I his servant bow before him; let
him listen to. this one word of mine. The Veda
is wearied with singing thy praise, it has sunk into
silence declaring thee ‘ not that—not that.” The
sages and mystics and poets cannot make an end of
describing thy qualities. Tuka says, What is my
speech in this matter, that it should glorify thee, O
God?


804


W* have put off the life of the body and kept

still at the feet of Vitthoba, knowing before-
hand what will avail us. God is already at work ;
neither pleasure nor pain therefore possesses our


262 LIFE UNDER THE INFLUENCE


minds, since we have heard his voice. I have be-
come separate, alone, and still; I have cast. my
burden upon Vitthala. Tuka says, He whose mark
I bear, he knows all that is good for me.


805


OR this end I have striven, that my last day

might be sweet. Now I have found repose ;

the motions of thirsty desire have ceased: I am

amazed at the efforts I have gone through; yet

they have taught me this auspicious name. Tuka

says, I have taken liberation for my bride; now I
will spend my life in joy and revelry: —


806


| ae us taste this sweetness; we have found
the joy of love, Let us not waste the time;
let us contemplate thefeet of Vitthala. Let us
make a feast of worship; let us take our fill of
Narayana. Tuka says, O Vitthala, you have satis-
fied our souls.
807
HAVE driven forth desire and grown far from
passion. Now, O Hari, who can henceforth
fear death 2? Whetber I am cast away in misery or
mounted on horseback, my worldly state is your
province ; Iam heedless of it. The sense of honour
and disgrace is vanished from me; pleasure and
pain are rooted out. Tuka says, I have no anxiety
now.


808


Cy man gives me blame and blows, another
honour and worship. All are alike to me; I


OF RELIGION 263


am far removed fromthem. The experiences of the
body result from our connexion with it; whatever
befalls me is welcome. Tuka has all he wants in
Janardana Narayana.


809


S oft as I utter the name of Vitthala, I people

the unpeopled world with images of dear

ones. There I see my father and mother, Vitthala

and Rakhumai; wilderness and town are alike to

me; all places are excellent. Tukaforgets pleasure
and pain ; he dances with fond admiration.


XVII


Our Attitude towards the World


T.—The Problem
810


HE body is a store-house of pain, a chamber
of disease, a stinking corner; there-is nothing
so abominable. The body is noble,a heap of de-
lights; it is the body that has found the way and
attained the primal spirit. The body is a trench
of corruption, a snare of illusive desire. Sin has.
its roots in the body, destruction pervades it. The
body is altogether pure, the treasure of treasures ;
itis the body that breaks the ties of the world, God
dwells delighted within it. The body is a creature
shapen of ignorance, a mass of evil qualities ; misery
dwells within it, there is no good quality found there.
Give not the body pleasure, neither torture it or
forsake it; it.is neither good nor bad, says Tuka;.
turn with ardour to the worship of Hari.


811


tas keeps away from actions good and

bad; he does not unite himself to that com-
pany. He alone knows Brahma whose own heart
witnesses that he has found him. There is an
identity between purity and impurity ; the bundles
of hay are bound with ropes of hay; there is no
room for distinction of sinand merit. Tuka says,
All depends on our point of view.


MAKE THE MCST OF THE WORLD 965


TI.—Chat we should make the most of the
World


812


O use the world according to the divine rules.

is equal to renouncing it; the great precept.

of religion is to hear God in the heart, \ first

throughout our course, and last. To go to any

extreme is to be deceived ; restless conjecture dis-

covers many paths. Tuka says, It is faith that.
procures the grace of God.


813


HROUGH God the whole world is related to.
us ; when a rope is stretched, every fibre of it.
is tense. The world is- not worthless or an object
of scorn; see how each life is blended with the life
of all. The joy and_grief of others penetrate us,
and ours them, by:the samerule. Tuka says, When
this pure principle dwells within the heart, the out-
ward man is radiant with light.


814


NEED not care for my body now ; I will be satis-
fied to mete out the treasure I have. I will
employ my sight on heavenly truth: I am wearied
by worldly matters. Here there is nothing fit to.
take with us; there is nothing to spend our life on;
all is false. In birth and re-birth there is no re-
moval of pain; we are always wretched in the
world. If sitting in a boat brings us to the end of
our passage, who could weary himself by exerting
his arms? Tuka says, This is the sum of all, pass
through the world like one sitting in a boat.


966 OUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE WORLD


815


i is you do what is right for your class and station,

you will reach the better world. Do you not
know that you can become Brahma in the body it-
self? If you are a learned man, you will show your
learning in matters of speech ; if a singer, you will
sing according to the rules of art ; if a Yogi, you will
know all about the systems of worship, as they are
laid down in the Sastras—the effort by which
meditation is accomplished, the motions of the eyes.
Tuka says, You do not need all these things; the
saints dwell in the body and yet are free from the
body.


816


E are Sanyasis, bound to one spot, lords of
the senses manifest in the flesh. We have
not rooted out hope and love. This portion we
have received unsought ; with tranquil minds we
have obtained it from Panduranga. Our staff is the
erect body; we have replaced shaving by doing
without it. “For the postures of Yoga we choose a
rag round the Joins ; for spiritual freedom a dwelling
outside the town. We secure the chief season of
time,-within time itself; counting the world impure,
we dwell apart. Our conduct is “governed by cause
andeffect ; our speech is ruled by the laws of speech.
Listen to the rule of our conduct, to remain true to
ourselves. Tuka loves not disguises, which govern
the exterior, but in vain,


817


HAT do we know about divorce from the
world? We know but the name of Vitthoba ;
among the crowd of his worshippers we dance


MAKE THE MOST OF THE WORLD 267


rejoicing and beat the cymbals. What do I know
about peace and mercy and love ?—except what I
find in the name and praises of Govinda. Why
should I practise‘neglect of the body, when I am
immersed in the sea of nectar? Why should I
serve him alone in the waste, when I have this
joy among men? Tuk& says, Right well I know;
Vitthala goes by my side.


818


a Nigee* body which we possess in this world, lo!

the gods covet it. We are-blessed in our
birth, we have become the slaves of Vitthoba. In
attaining this mortal life we have found being, mind
and happiness. Tuka says, I shall make our first
steps to Svarga a symbol of liberation.


819


‘ages mankind practise austerity and other means

of attainment ; let one seek the end by self-
immolation ; we do-not follow that path, we dance
at the cross-roads’ of Pandhari. Let others reach
the supreme soul ; let others declare liberation, the
highest.end; Tuka says, we servants of Hari
reprove-their fancy.


820


I ET the body be treated with respect, for there-
4 by we attain to all happiness, through the
recitation of his name. Where there is a glimpse
of Brahma, and duality has vanished, the body has
become the image of Brahma. Men may perform
every rite of worship, sacrifice and austerity; but
they are robbed of all merit by wandering thoughts.
Tuké says, Lo! perfect delight is here; cast far
away all hesitation and behold it.


268 OUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE WORLD


821


OW I desire nothing else; I grasp one thing

alone, him who carries ug over the sea of

the world, who breaks through the hard fate of

re-birth. I will embrace the feet of God; my

eternal wealth is in the highest one. Tuka says,

Then I shall have truly used this body ; I shall have
dwelt in the world with perfect humanity.


822


HE right enjoyment of pleasures is renuncia-

tion; renunciation leaves room for pleasure ;

the secret is found in this paradox—otherwise from

pious acts themselves would \proceed impiety.

What keeps God away fromus; that is sin; so put

aside false ideas. Tuka says, All else is false
respect; let your heart dwell on true gain.


823


(OD reveals himself, while his worshippers are
passing through the world ; the two purposes

from each side’ meet. By the help of God his
worshippers enjoy every comfort, while God enjoys
the pleasure that their company yields. The
worshippers have given God form and shape; they
have.celebrated the limits assumed by his nature.
Twovnatures have been created in one body, that of
God and the worshipper, the master and his
servant. Tuka& says, Here there is no conscious
difference, the worshipper is God and God the
worshipper.


824


, HANGE your mind somewhat; it is not easy
to secure a. human form in your next birth ;


MAKE THE MOST OF THE WORLD 269


you gain nothing by struggling for home, wife and
wealth. This is a treasure you have suddenly lit
on. You had to endure the miseries of the womb.
It may keep you coming and going in future, or
cause you to fall into hell. Tuka says, Be mindful
how you possess this: body, or else you will gain
nothing from it.


825


’ REJOICE that I have found the true source ; I
have dwelt at thy feet. In the saints’ company
I shall enjoy bliss; my speech shall resound thy
attributes. The body shall not omit to serve thee
nor the speech nor spirit; I am a/bond-maid of the
saints—such as I have resolved tobe. I have kept
my desire to live, but I have separated “ myself”
from “me”. The image of. the five elements goes
‘on sporting of itself. I have secured this as my
gain, the faith that.each object will know itself.
Such was the conviction of my soul, when God had
removed me from this world. I have abandoned all
worldly hopes in this mortal life; all paths of
devotion are easy to me. O Saviour of the distressed,
all else trembles through fear of thy power. I am
changed. into mere joy, because I am thy slave ; sin
and merit can touch me no more; my own wishes
Lhave forgotten, says Tuka, by a swift motion of
my soul, ~


826


N AMES and forms are the sphere that we

assign to illusion, but within that sphere we
have received all our knowledge of him. Marks
are set for the distribution of land, but the land is
never broken up; wise men alone will understand
this. When a child rolls about in his mother’s lap,


270 OUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE WORLD


he does not think anything of her, ‘and his mind is
free from insolence. Tuka says, The formless Hari-
Hara visits us in return for faith. .


827


joey are born in the body, yet how could

we call them our friends? Simples grow-in
the forest. yet how could we call them strangers?
Tukaé says, Such is the body’s relation to us, if we
make it a friend, it is a friend.


828


HAT will it avail to live in a glen or a forest,

if inward peace be absent? But are those

few that have already gone there, and what have

they gained? If you enter the forest, you will falh

into pits; what will you gain by that? What good

will ashes, mere ashes, do, if the inward parts be

impure? The pious deeds of every class or station

vanish, when men grow weary of them. Tuka.

says, These things are all snares; give up your
trust in them, then it will be well with you.


829


HATEVER we obtain should be offered to
him in service. Worship in his name is an
easy thing; all pride must be discarded. On this
condition you may enjoy all pleasure and remain
an ascetic from the beginning to the end of your
life. Tuka says, If a man has no passion for plea-
sure, he remains unchanged.


830


\ HILE his worshippers enjoy all the delights.
of the world, they are fortified by Vitthobs.


MAKE THE MOST OF THE WORLD 271


They have neither fear nor anxious care, for the
wheel-handed God protects his worshippers. Guilt
and merit cannot touch them, for Sriranga per-
vades all their thoughts. They are not liberated
froma the world; they desire to live init. God bears
all the burden of his worshippers. Tuka says, God
is a friend in need to his worshippers; through-him
they are set free from care.


831


6 eae sages secured liberation, because they were

afraid of re-birth; but we servants of Vishnu
count it an easy matter. We have made all the
world into the image of Brahma; we see in it the
image of Vitthala. The Puranas admonish us to
seek austere paths, but we have found an easy way
to Vaikuntha. Tuka says, Together will all man-
oe let us accept the everlasting pleasure of his
ove.


832


S I have set this diversion afoot, I have not
neglected any aspect of it. I find the whole
world peopled with relatives; I see nothing to
cause contamination of man by man. At one stroke
I am made acquainted with the whole world; I see
nothing anywhere different from myself. Tuka
says; I am not limited by time or environment or
laws of the mind; I regard nothing but God.


833


H:? holds lightly at all times the place of

Brahma, whose treasure is still Hari’s name.
The joys of Indra’s heaven he counts not joy, but
a sickness of mortality. The empire of the world


272, OUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE WORLD


is useless to him; he esteems the sovereignty of
hell an evil; he counts the height of mystic power
as nothing, and the joy of liberation as sorrow.
Tuka says, Away from Hari he deems all life
wretched.


834


ABOUR as much as suffices for your belly, but

never forget Rama; make this your ‘chief

object, to set your thoughts on Panduranga. The

desire of God is your inheritance; service rendered

to him is your true gain. Tuka says, You can ac-

quire spiritual strength by casting~away all your
intellect.

835


H® wife or wealth of another is contamination ;

he who avoids them is pure. You need not

trouble to write prose or /poetry; keep your mind

under your own control. Bethink you of your own

true interests, store up your capital of sin or merit.

Tuka says, You need not go to the forest; all the
world is the:same to him who pervades it,


836


iva ! the fruit is found within the seed, without

any desire of ours. One who seeks in his
folly to treat his guide as a pressed labourer, how
will he break his fetters? You may call him a
senseless madman, Tuk& says, Preserve your body
to be useful to you in future.


837


ne E have no difficulty about liberation; we
have it, as it were tied up ina bundle. As
we satisfy our fond curiosity to know it, our soul


WE SHOULD RENOUNCE THE WORLD 273


will enjoy a full feast of devotion. How delightful
it is to return anything to its owner! I, therefore,
count devotion profitable and practise it joyfully.
Tuka says, Bring me into the world if you will, but
make it for me a scene of joy.


838


A Boe! some food to your desires, so far as

suffices to keep you alive. This will prove
that Narayana has entered you; for peace of mind
is the mark of his presence. I meditate continually
on this theme, duly reflecting on the distinct nature
of the self. Tuka says, If we turn to adore him, we
shall find that he is near us.


839

\A 7 HAT has the body to do except to secure

love? Those appropriate duties which
have fallen to my lot-I will perform. I will call
upon Narayana, for this act cannot be controlled b
the limitations of the body. The Lord of Pandhari,
when he hears, will run, The frame of the seven
senses and five activities is formed by destiny.
Now that it éxists, let it be; do thou, O God, guard
it that-it\may be happy. “Tis well that we have
found union ; let us keep our enlightened vision.
Tuka says, I take no rest.


TII.—Chat we should renounce the World


840


fi Racers mind is captured by the tempting world, ié
goes running after it. He who can rescue it
is a hero, the one stout warrior in the world. It


18


974. OUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE WORLD


surprises or bears us down; I fear for your ‘fate.
Tuka says, This enemy has ruined many a wise
man.


841


W HEN you enter the world, do this one thing—

walk gradually in the path of liberation.
Sharp are the pains and penalties of hell: how is it.
you fear not that terrible pit? There is no pity
there, when Yama has drawn the soul out of the
body. If a stray animalis found in the corn, when
caught it is punished like a thief... If you pay
nothing, how can you reach the goal? You pass-
along a road which will bring you back. Ifa man
comprehend not, how can he listen? He will be
carried off like a prisoner.arrested. He may be
one who cannot endure togo barefoot ; but if he has
transgressed, they will drag him across beds of
thorns, and make him embrace hot pillars. He may
tremble at the river of hell, but he will have to pass.
through it; he shall not be drowned as he passes,.
but Yama’s rod will fall on him. Hungry and
thirsty beyondendurance, so shall they keep him:
for ever. They shall keep his body cool that the
fire consume it not, yet roll him about on a red-
hot floor. So make an effort; resign the world
while-you can; repeat his name if you can; enjoy
the sweetness of faith, says Tuka.


842


fee takes a stick and fiercely he assaults his.

body. He has caught it and laid it low in a
burying-ground, yea, even a mound where men are-
burned; he has made it pay forall the luxuries it
enjoyed. He felt no fear, knowing that it is God


WE SHOULD RENOUNCE THE WORLD 275


who feels pleasure or painin us. It was put to this.
extremity to test the mind. Tuk& says, Experience
is necessary in all things: a coward 1s chastised.


843


Lar me not pray for children or for wealth

for any one. By sharing in these things I
should fall into misery, for this is the end of both,
Let not my eats covet praise or blame, arising from
any heed to such things. Tuka says, They prevent
us from finding God; we are snaréd in the net of
desire and illusion.


844


E are amazed ab.our.undue passion for the
world—how have.you led us to believe it is
genuine? This faith of ours is inconceivable to
others: we must make our own souls witnesses of
it. We see the many in the one and the one in the
many; each receives his assurance from his own
inclination. \Tuka says, You know how to create
this belief and dispel it; you are skilled in this
matter, O.God !


845


HEREVER you dwell, meditate on his name,
publish it widely abroad. My master will
assuredly set you free; we his servants have
solemnly declared this. In singing his praises we
discern no man’s merits or faults; it is love that
brings the wheel-handed God under our control.
*Tuka says, I find the world very bitter; my hair
stands on end; my throat is choking.


276 OUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE WORLD


846


6 age not on your head at all the burden of the

world; devotion itself compels you to cast
away everything. To make the beggar’s calling a
trade is the act of a fool; how can a man live in
the bazaar, and put away desires from him? A poet
without the gift is a man of milk and water. « Tuka
says, Be either a sage or a downright clown.


847


E dress up all the parts for the drama; we
assume disguises, but we cannot change
the inward man. We have set going this varied
game to amuse ourselves ; but we-know what our
primal form is. A slab of crystal remains distinct
from its attributes, though it looks as if if were red
or yellow. Tuka says, We shall sever ourselves
from this world and disport ourselves at peace.


848


NCE for all I have performed a ceremony of

purification, severing myself from the world ;

T have renounced the fault known as selfish desire.

I have bathed myself in repentance ; I have offered

a sacrifice of my body, where the life of the one is

lost in that of the many. Thither Tuka is drawn,
dancing with fond devotion.


849


JEWEL becomes a woman when her husband

sees her wearing it. Ifa loose woman bedecks

herself, every one laughs at her. Ifaman is a hero,

his speech is a graceful ornament upon him. Tukaé

says, Life without something at stake is con-
temptible.


WE SHOULD RENOUNCE THE WORLD 977


850


YT\RUTH is ever welcome ; through false notions

faith departs; through the gift of your favour
we know the pure from the impure gold. If a
pleasure seeks me out, I will renounce it forthwith.
Tuka says, O God, your service is an ointment-to
the eyes.


851


HAT purpose remains unfulfilled that I
should trouble thee any longer? For thy
name’s sake I need suffer no loss of life or aught
else; it recurs easily to the mind. It brings no
pangs, nor inflicts starvation; nor demands wealth
in cows and buffaloes. O- worshipper, all this you
know well: why then.do you believe in wordly
wealth? Tuk& says, People break away from thy
feet, through the love of the fleeting world.


852


OD has-given us a full meal; the world has
turned bitter to us. We shall be satisfied to
bursting with the joys of Harihara. He draws men
to him, so strong is he. Tuka says, No other
appetite can arise.


853


UR curious desires have created the world and

bring pain on ourselves. It would be well to.

end the game; if you prolong it, you prolong the

noise. Ii, to learn what fear is, you fill your heart

‘with fear, Tuk& says, O mind, you will be turned.
yourself into living fear.


378 OUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE WORLD


854


Sheers are all devices of the belly; we must

not look upon them wistfully; the object of
desire remains such to the end. From things
material how can spiritual gains proceed? The
heart remains desirous, but it asks in vain from this
idle hypocrite. Such men rehearse the life and
actions of God; but these are idle arts to captivate
others. Tuka says, If secret desires reside in the
spirit, then deceiver and deceived (go) to hell
together.

855


LOW man’s wisdom bids/him worship his

body, procuring wanton pleasure and sweet
food. He calls it piety to\tend his person ; but
what control has he over/his body? It vanishes
in a moment, before he is aware; he may swallow
food, but he cannot -control his body. Tamra-
dhvaja sawed his body asunder, Sibi cut off his
flesh; Suka and others retired to the forest. Tuka
says, When \Janaka ruled, he had one of his legs
consumed by. fire.

856

18 oe bere drowns the light within us; how can

doubt fail to bea sin? We should realize
this for ourselves ; if the mind is quite clear, it will
testify to it. What was pure and stainless and
enlightened was defiled by imposing on it form and
name. A blind man cannot walk like one who
sees; this is what Tuka says.


857


F honour increases; do not repose on it; love of
the five elements will make you as one of


WE SHOULD RENOUNCE THE WORLD 279


them. ‘You must torment your own mind, or the
organs of sense will drag it after them. When a
man mingles with another, he will contract his
colour through assimilating his own to it. Tuka
‘says, God dwells apart and unconcerned ; in human
‘souls a spirit of change is ever at work.


858


HEN we view the illusion from outside, we

set ourselves free from fear or-influence;

we know no distinction of self or-other. If we

purchase truth, we get a full return-of our money ;

we do not like an unprofitable business. If we rub

the spot outside, we aggravate-an inward pain, and

we must open a passage by burning or cutting.

‘Tuka says, This is no~place to glorify ourselves ;

God has made himself witness and will deeide the
case,


859


INCE they three aspects of knowledge accom-
pany each other, nothing can remain with one
man for ever. One object passes away and another
takes possession of his mind. The power of time
lies all around us ; we cannot run away from it nor
fight against it; but if we cry out, Hari mercifully
takes us on his shoulders. Whether a man be
sinful or meritorious his powers are directed by
‘Sripati. Let us go to this Lord of all powers and
implore bim. Tuka stands on the further bank,
and hence he distinguishes this light. There are
gourds and plants and rafts floating in the stream ;
pas them on.


980 OUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE WORLD


860


HEY take a lamp and go looking for darkness.
The wonder is they believe they have found
it. Weservants of Vishnu fear not time and death;.
we have left the mirage of the world; it never
overtakes us. If you raise a cloud of dust, you
defile the sunlight; O ill-starred creatures, cannot
you perceive this? Tukaé says, I am covering up
fire with a heap of straw; my words are idle.


861


W HEN a man is repeating God’s name, he is a.
low wretch if he suffers anger to approach
him. If you wear ashes on.your person, then do not
stare round you at the world. “We are surrounded
by the wicked; we have to eat along with them.
Tuka says, He attains Brahma who leaves actions.
behind him,


862


IME governs only the changes of the world;
therefore let us clasp the feet of Vitthobia.
All merit proceeds from him; with him it lies to.
destroy all sin. Hre time ceases to be, every soul
shallbe pleased; families of mankind shall be
released. Time and death and the pangs of mortal:
life'shall perish, through the utterance of his name
alone. Tuka says, You need renounce nothing; I
tell the secret to those who receive it with faith.


863


URSED now be name and form ; these are the
guilt that I carry bound up with me. Let us

take the dust on the saints’ feet to rid us of this.
burden of clay. Pride in worthless claims was-


WE SHOULD RENOUNCE THE WORLD 28I


bringing me to misery. Tuka says, Our joy in the
formless is true and beyond all names.


864


AMPS and drums and dinner are ordered ; the
bride is arrayed and handed to her husband.
The husband takes his bride home; the bridegroom
is worshipped and bathed. The father and mother:
are complimented ; everyone begs them to finish
the programme. ‘ Let us go on with the) presents.
and bathing.”—-O why do you forget-the spirit
within? He besieges the marriage) guests with.
pleasures ; he bathes them till they look like vessels
dipped in oil. Tukasays, You are collecting spittle ;
you are making a good provision for hell.


865


NURSED be all that severs me from thee; it is.
thy feet that.my efforts seek to gain. Do-
thou, O God, helpme now; set me free from all
that holds me and take the service offered thee.
Sensual pleasures: have inflicted a strange disease
on me. Or whence comes this disgust from all
these things? Tuka says, Let thy own be on thy
own head ; I shall mix no more with the affairs of
the world.


866


T is only the base who turn back from their
words; not so does Narayana. He has-
accepted me now; his strength will account me
no burden. I have no longing for the world; for
I see God as all in all. Tuka says, I will sing
your praises; I will not allow any purpose to come-
between us. j


989 OUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE WORLD


867


VERY form is destroyed by time; the name

of Hari alone is beyond its power. I have

lodged the name of the Eternal in my throat; it is

‘life stored up in my heart. Bodily health isa

false impression, a mirage; it will perish. Tuka

-says, God has made me weary of the very name of
‘the disguises of the soul.


868


F you whirl round yourself, the-world seems to

be whirling round you; if you stand still your-

self, everything seems to be steady. If you shout

in a forest place, you hear.a second sound arise.

The moon moves forward because the clouds move.
‘Tuka says, The impression is false.


869


E has turned his back on the world, who

cares no more for wealth or wife. He who

‘has ceased to distinguish auspicious and inaus-

picious joy-and anger, he has become Janardana

in the world. Tuka& says, He who has renounced
the body has nothing further to heed.


870


HE stone must suffer the strokes of the chisel

ere the true form within it is brought out;

‘then it will be valued as a genuine article. We
must hand over the body to undergo what it has
merited, and expelling the power of the past over
‘it. To rise in splendour you must learn to loathe
the pleasures of the elements, and you must humble
“yourself. Tuka says, What becomes then of-the


WE SHOULD RENOUNCE THE WORLD 983


world? You must turn yourself into what you
esteem.


871


WILL embrace this supreme joy; if I place
my treasure in thee, all separation between us
vanishes. Thou hast spoken the word; my mind
is at rest, my spirit rejoices ; two-fold is the delight
of thy love. Thou art the ornament of the world;
the head of Vaikuntha; my own profit is perfect in
thee. I have dismissed the illusion of sense, the
life of business and intercourse with=men; the
world repels me altogether. Tuka says, Let Vitthala
be mine; I care for nothing else.


872


‘| SET my heart on things needless; cursed be
the robe that I wrapped them up in! Ii is
good now that I have seen myself what was truly
worth seeing. I have-learned by profit what loss is ;
let me keep the two distinct. Tuka says to himself,
Whence all this vain glamour of the world ?


873


ONTEMPLATING him, I have stood calm and

still; but how long is this to last?) Beyond

this comes a time for absolute silence, when there

is no room for speech at all. I made what haste 1

could ; I allowed no suspicion to remain within me.

Tuka says, With renunciation I have renounced all,
so that illusion will never return upon me.


874


\ \7E ought to call nothing here our own, but this
speech of ours is wild, and sets us chatter-
ing. This mass of the five elements, this body, is


284 OUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE WORLD


truly not ours. Tuka says, Illusion is ever walking
backwards.


875


Wee men become as senseless as brutes when

they take to chewing bodily pleasures.
Setting their desires on objects of desire, they have
ruined the spiritual essence of the soul. Solid food
they have prepared and handed over to others, like
@ foolish cook who gets buttermilk for himself to
drink, Tuka& says, This body of ours is a great
danger and source of destruction.


876


pe dogs and pigs for their bodies, but

show them respect.for their souls. By so
doing I have learned to sweep away “I” and
“mine”; if you love the world you will be caught
in the net of re-birth. Despise home, wealth and
country ; embrace \spiritually beasts and trees.
Tuka says, Let meutter neither “I” nor “ mine ” ;.
those are true saints who avoid these words.


877


ESIRE and thirst and passion are seeds of dis-
honour; by destroying them a man makes
himself worshipful. An unsteady man wins no-
honour, though he walks to the homes of others; it
is hard to set one’s eyes on a man who is steady..
Tuka says, I address nothing to others, for my
words would be wasted ; the wise alone will value


my words.
878


\ \7 HAT was impossible has come te pass, I
have seen thy feet; now shall I go back.


WE SHOULD RENOUNCE THE WORLD 285


into the world, O God? Long had I hoped for
this; now I enjoy the fruit of my efforts. How long
shall I live in hope of worldly prosperity? Here-
after let this snare be cut off. Those who suc-
cumbed have altogether vanished; what chance
-of salvation they had they gave up. If I goon
-crossing mountains of difficulty, I shall never cease
to be bora again. Tuk& says, I shall cling to the
robe of Pitambar; O God, do thou carry me over
the sea of the world.


879


HAVE crossed over; I have justified my confi-

dence; I have spoken thy name; I have

dismissed the world. I am_tied’to nothing now.
Tuka says, There is nothing left now.


880


ESTINY has enabled me to reach him ; nowI

do not forget him for one moment. With

even feet he stands on the brick; the saints have

told us how we may know him. Now we will put

aside all worldly affairs. This shall be the end of

-our diligence. Tuka says, We will destroy the

revolutions of re-birth, brought about by sin and
merit.


881


PANDURANGA, you have destr: oyed my affec-
tion for you, but now whisper in my ear the
nectar of devotion. So I have left nothing of the
‘world remaining ; I have reached the vital principle
-all at once. I look back no more; whatever is left
-of the world has in truth no real existence. Tuka
says, If my spirit should be perverted, my tongue
will utter nonsense.


286 OUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE WORLD
882


SPIRIT of mine inured to shame, how long
shall I instruct thee? Pursue nothing. The-
enjoyment of society brings misery. Whether any
praise or blame or love thee, care not for the pain
or pleasure of this. Is it not because of this nature
of thine that the mystics assume one portion. and
remain still? Tuka says, Consider well, my spirit,
and make thyself harder than adamant.


883
MY spirit, why dost thou not enter the assem-
bly of Hari’s worshippers? -Go where all
your bones will be restored to.you ; you are wasting:
your life in vain. All things that entangle you here
will desert you in the lasthour. Tuka says, Con-


sider what is true gain.


884

ET me cry ‘Vitthala, see Vitthala, make
Vitthala into my own soul. Through this.
eager longing my soul has found satisfaction ; it
réturns to. the earth no more. He has released
me from the knot; he came and embraced me.
Tuka says, My body is filled with Vitthala; I have-

emptied the hour of anger and lust.


885
PITTING on thoughts of honour and pride, we
sing thy praises. J have grown heedless of
the body ; I care for one thing alone. ‘Wealth and
poverty are the same tome; I have weighed them
-and set them aside. Tuka remains holy, and far:


from the stain of the world.


WE SHOULD RENOUNCE THE WORLD 3287


886


E ought not to take any’ burden away from

God ; if we remember him through hunger’

and thirst, it is well even so that we have been

made to think of him. To have no trouble in sight

separates us from Sripati. Tuka says, I look.on
all prosperity as a source of pollution.


887


iT HAVE no work ; see I have nothing more to do !.

I will go through such movements as_present
themselves, sitting still like a spectator. Through
their needless appetites, mankind of their own will.
undergo trouble. Tuka has\set himself apart; he:
lives in the world, yet helives apart from it.


XVIII


Che Saints


1.—Cheir Character
888


HE servants of Hari are like Hari; free from
fear, desire, anxious care and™~hope, they
heed not the world; they are girded up with the
‘strength of devotion. They have clasped his feet
and abandoned the world; they need not honour
cee goods. His name in their throats is a
raught of neetar; they need nothing else. There
is infinite room for compassion within him; the
lord of the world is like a deep sea. The grip of
lust and anger cannot. be loosened ; these are de-
mons that press us’ into their service. They are
strong enough to vanquish death ; humble enough
to retire before all men; generous enough to give
themselves away ; possessing all accomplishments,
they claim no knowledge. The world is their
servant; liberation waits their time. They send
prosperity and perfection wandering; yea, the
people of Vishnu will not touch them. They look
-on birth and death as a dream; they cannot tell
their own from what is other men’s, Tuka says,
With increasing delight I tell the story of their
love.


889
ee are the saints who meet us on this path


that the fetter of the world ig broken at the
‘sight of them; they are ever filled with the joy of


THEIR CHARACTER 289


true mind and true being ; we shall honour them as
hallowed sources of liberation. Faith is their all-
sufficing principle; nothing breaks their repose ;
they crush the spirit of infidelity. By their mercy
to all creatures they destroy the root of hatred ; they
treat all as brothers,—friend, foe, or child of their
own. Purify your mind, body and speech ; behoid-
ing his form everywhere, salute it. Be humble
with your whole heart, renouncing all presumptuous
pride. Be not greedy of gain, nor scrupulous about
honour; desire and love are false. One who knows
all, yet keeps as still as though he. knew nothing,
such a one the saints come suddenly)to visit. Be
truly faithful, and toil not after. wealth, then the
saints will ever visit you. Thus says Tuka, sick of
pride of learning.


890


H brother ! let us bow to those whe have ceased
to heed the sensations of the body, to those
who entreat God,.to those who visit holy places, to
those who come to those who see them off, to those
who trust inthe speeches of the saints, to those who
serve their.teacher in faith, to those who cherish
their parents, to those who always speak the truth,
to those who perceive the pain and joy of others,
who guard them from hunger and thirst; to those
who have won merit by service to others; to those
who govern the organs of sense. Tuka says, Let us
bow down to the servants of Hari, for their every
desire is fulfilled.


891


HE servants of Vishnu are the only stout
warriors in the world ; guilt and merit cannot
touch them. Sitting and sleeping, Govinda is with


19


290 THE SAINTS


them; he is with them in their thoughts. They
wear the widening lines on their foreheads, fair
garlands on their necks; time and death humble
themselves beforethem. Tuka says, They wear the
ornaments of the shell and the wheel; in their
mouths is the nectar of his name.


892


\ YE are stout warriors, we shall maintain a
sturdy fight ; we have dealt heavy blows to
sin, we have crushed it. There isa loud uproar,
the warriors march shouting on ; they wear the
shell and wheel for ornaments, with tulsi garlands
on their necks. Their arrows bear the name of
Rama; they have smeared themselves with white
Gokula clay. Their standards and ensigns wave
gaily ; their poles bear the imageofGaruda. Tuka
says, We have conquered time and found repose ;
we have received-all the delight that is due to us.


893


E_ servants of Vishnu are softer than butter,
yet we can cleave adamant; though dead
we are alive, sleeping we are awake; we will give:
you whatever youaskfor. We are generous enough
to give away the very cloth from our loins, yet we
will put a knave to confusion. We are more loving
than father or mother, yet no enemy can deal out
such destruction. What do we care for the sweet-
ness of nature? Even poison is weak against us ;
what bitterness is there in it ? Tuk& says, We are
all sweetness ; we satisfy the several desires of all
men.


THEIR CHARACTER 291


894


LESSED are the pious, for their heart is pure.
The saints worship the visible God, they
testify that they have faith therein. They know
nothing of rules and prohibitions ; their hearts are
filled with devoted love. Tuka says, O God, you
must take a form responsive to their faith.


895


HEY dance and clap the hands and-roll on the

earth in a transport of love._My friends are

the saints, the simple and faithful people of Hari.

They feel no shame; they have no concern with

this world. Tuka says, They feel their throats
choking ; their eyes are filled with tears.


896


WwW pretend. to possess the source. of all

happiness, but we have no bread to eat.
We talk as though we had pillows, mattresses and
bedding, but.we have not a loin cloth to put on.
If youask us, we tell you we live in heaven, but we
have-no dwelling of our own place. Tuka says, We
are lords of the three worlds, but we cannot give
anyone what he needs.


897


7 E servants of Vishnu have no hopes of any
other; we know not why these wretches
continually censure us. Wherever we be, our minds
are at peace in themselves. Tuka says, O God, we
will make thy service our calling.


292 THE SAINTS


898


ORSHIP those for whom worship is meet ;

the people of Hari who stand up to serve

him. They are moulded into images of him whose

praise they sing. They have forgotten their bodies;

joy has entered into them; pride is vanished;

they have bidden farewell to shame and honour.

There are no tidings with them of lamentation, de-

sire or anxious care. Tuka says, They are friends
of Vitthoba; they are all like him.


899


HE dwellers in Vaikuntha watch and wait for
your worshippers ; they feel no pangs of birth
and death; they have no future world to think of.
Blessed are the servants‘of Hari; mortal birth they
can easily bear, while Brahma and the rest still
desire their presence; and all sacred places long to
see them. Yama desires earnestly to hear thy
praises; he stands-with folded bands waiting for
them day and night. Prosperity and perfection
seek out the worshippers of Hari uninvited ; liber-
ation and union are waiting for them. Wherever
they stand, they are comforted by the joy of love;
many too have been saved by them, who were low
and guilty wretches. All beings long to see them;
while they themselves are unmoved ; blessed, says
Tuka, are all they who behold him.


900


HIS self-controller is the elemental substance

of their frame; their life is a boon of love

from him. The embrace that unites the saints to
him is adelicate kond. In this they find auspicious


THEIR CHARACTER 293


seasons, achievements and wealth. Tuka& says,
Night and day he is the food on which they feed.


901


Cran and drum in hand, they dwell in
Vaikuntha. If you will go with them, make
haste and get your provisions together. Where
they pass along shouting, there let your spirit
dwell. Tuka says, They goalong crying ‘“ Vitthala.”


902


W* wear the jewel of Krishna on our necks,

to be a light for the world. » We will divide
our portion with each other;.there is true order in
the devotees of Vishnu. Wewill look with mockery
on Brahma and the other gods, but joyfully on our
fellowmen. Tuka says, Among the company of
men, we are stout and strong warriors.


903


LESSED are they who delight in God; they

enjoy-bliss and ever growing happiness, the

very height of love; I salute those who possess

salvation ag it were a treasure tied up in a bundle.

Tuka says, All my hopes are centred on Hari’s
servants.


904


F you have nothing, still offer him anything you

can. If you are called his servant, no one

will impress you. Get yourself styled a servant of

this great master, in any post whatever. Tuka says,

In this way you will make yourself master of
many.


294 THE SAINTS


905


care will play rejoicing on stringed instruments

and drums; for they have conquered the
spirit of selfish desire; they have made their head
the footstool of God. There is no room left for
destroying time, no place for anxious care. Tuka
says, Now they will easily go forward to Vaikuntha.


906


‘T F he be absent from the mind, he must be so;

still let him dwell in our speech. Let life end
in the name and praise of Vitthoba. By dissimula-
tion or any means whatever let me gain the name
ofa servant of Hari. Tuka_says, Hari will some
day take care of me.


907


T a meeting the speaker is entitled to respect,
to sandal-wood.and rice and articles of wor-
ship; among the.audience, though there be an
ascetic, yet he has no right to these things. The
head is the highest member of the body; bands and
feet come intheir appointed place; let all observe
the established rules. If a son takes charge of the
throne, his father must obey him; this is a rule for
all and all should accept it. Ifa stone be placed
on the highest seat, it should not be treated as a
common stone; though the instruments of worship
be of gold, yet compared with it they are humble.
Sometimes anclets are made of gold, sometimes
crowns of alloy. That which is the source of
power, that is the centre of grace; servants are
honoured for the sake of their master; they enjoy
his name and his wealth. Tuka says, Understand
this is why the saints should be respected.


THEIR CHARACTER 295


908


MIGHTY man may be caught in a snare and

laid in prison; such an hour may come; all

things arein the handsof time. He whogave alms

may come to ask them, may beg a beggar to protect

him. Tuka says, You know it, O Narayana! why
should I tell it you ?


909


E is not fatigued with guarding the three

worlds; what matters our burden to him?

When a, toad lies in the hollow of a_stone, who puts

food inits mouth? Birds and serpents gather up no

store, yet the infinite one protects them. Tuka

says, If I lay my burden cn him, my sea of mercy
will not disappoint me.


910


He? who worships. truly, what fear can totch
his soul? As he converses with his lord,
his joy increases more and more. If you perform
the duties of. religion, then critical seasons can be
endured. Tuka says, It is the great Vitthala who
-controls my speech.


911


JN the village of the saints there is a full harvest

of love, there is no pain or disquietude. I will
live there as a beggar ; they shall cast a morsel to me.
In the village of the saints there is an excellent
treasure ; Vitthala is all their wealth and store. The
meal of the saint is a draught of nectar; they sing
his praises continually. The business of the saints
is to keep a mart of good advice ; they buy and sell
the delight of love. Tuka& says, There is nothing


296 THE SAINTS


to compare with this, soI have gone to them as a
beggar.
912


N song, in thought, in sleep, sitting, lying,

eating, waking, dreaming, whoso forget. all

but Vitthala, whoso make Vitthala their ornament,

their jewel, their sources of delight and. the stay

of support, Tuka& says, they have become Vitthala

He Oe tt all notions of being others have van--
ished.


913


TOUT and sturdy are Vitthala’s followers; time
kK.) and death fall at their feet. They raise a
shout of triumph; mountains of guilt are burned
up. Grace, merey, and\peace are the arrows in
their hands, invincible. )Tuka says, They are the:
only true warriors in the world.


914


F a diamond survives, when you place it on an

anvil and strike it with a hammer, that stone:

will feteh.its price; while a false one is crushed.

That-is\a real gem, which, if you bind a thread

upon it, will not suffer it tobe burned. Tuka says,

He is truly a saint who can endure the blows of the
world.


915


A arene are drills of Europe and iron sickles,.
but their property and worth are various.
Footsteps and images are alike of stone, but they
differ in degree of honour. Tuka says, Even so the
orders of saints differ.


THEIR CHARACTER 297


916


HO is there mightier than Hari, the infinite-

one? We have acquired the might of this.

mighty one; we can wield authority over all men..

Tuka says, We are prodigal of our lives, therefore:
we are dearly loved by Govinda,


917


\ HEREVER [I may go, my destiny will not-
be changed ; that supreme gain I shall only
procure in the company of the saints. If I had
had perfect merits to help me, no’source of disunion:
could have arisen. I need neither fortune, wealth,.
child, nor wife; the best thing is to dwell close to
the saints’ feet. Tuka says, Give me this for a free-
hold inheritance ; let me ‘sacrifice my life to win the
company of the saints.


918


E beggars are lucky folk; thieves are fright-
ened when they come near us! When we
go to beg for a.morsel, the dogs look after the houses.
Let us be proud of such a career, otherwise our
labour‘is-in vain; we must find our dignity in it.
By our toil we have built ourselves an imperish-
able.house. Our house needs the castor oil and:
wild cotton tree—no other timber can bear the load.
We have wealth and grain in every house, for we-
live on charity. Who would be at the trouble of
keeping cattle, when he gets everything without
anxiety? Cowdung makes our walls bright enough ;.
we can build stands for the tulsi plant. Tuka
says, O God, you have driven out all desire.


THE SAINTS


TI.—Thbeir Services to Men


919


HERE the servants of Vishnu dwell, the
country is blessed, the region is full of merit;
the messengers of Yama tell him that if it were
wanted as medicine, sin could not be found. there.
The earth feels the weight of pillared images; it re-
sounds with shouts of victory. Unbidden springs
up amid the people the fond love of Govinda. There
are groves of tulsi plants, and store of paintings,
and all the happy store of Vaikuntha. Tuka says,
No season of want ever visits that land.


920


F I wish to invite the\saints, I can find no

materials to entertain them; O thou who art

the soul of the universe, tell me how to serve them

fully. It needs anocean to contain an ocean; how

can I become vast-enough to receive one? Tuka

says, It were well to call oneself sincerely a suppli-
ant,


te
ite)
ee)


921


INCE we should be merciful to all creatures, we
should treat each other mercifully, yet honour

the saints with your whole heart. If you disdain
my preaching, you will enter the path that leads to
hell. The diamond, the parisa, and the mohara&
exist along with other stones, but there is no such
kinship between the saints and common men.
None is baser than he who esteems alike a village
‘stream, the Ganges and the sea. There are con-
stellations without number; but they cannot be
counted equal to the sun and moon. Tuka says,


THEIR SERVICES TO MEN 299


‘That which is not malleable is not Phirangi iron, it
is cast-iron.


922


T is well to remember how short life ‘is; the

speeches of the saints are like flowers, gentle,

soft and pleasant in flavour. When you have heard

them with your ears, they are easily digested\in the

mind. Tuké& says, A desire for them is immediate
gain,


923


HE servants of Vishnu by their-ecompany have

cleansed me from sin; who’can look them in

the face? They are brave and stout. Impurity

grows pure before them; heaps of love and joy

spring up; you could not find sin though you needed

it for medicine. Tuka-says, They have made the
earth into Vaikuntha.


924


HE sun, a lamp or a diamond shows visible
objects ; objects invisible are revealed by the
saints. My powers are too feeble to describe their
glory. Brahma and the rest do not truly knew
it. As-sandal cools the fevered frame, so their
company drives out the three qualities. Our pa-
rents cherished our bodies, but the saints drive away
from us illusion, age anddeath. Sweet food drives
away hunger, but the speech of the saints dispels
the pain of birth. Tuka says, We should draw near
them, though they summon us not, to approach their
feet with faith.


925


ee pleasure which the saints feel reaches God ;
therefore, I servethem. What powers have I


800 THE SAINTS


to describe this glory? He who is void of form has
assumed form and shape in them. I throw myself’
down in worship before them. Holy floods desire
them continuously, to purify themselves. What to-
them are the eight miraculous powers worth? He
allows nothing to stand in their way. Tuka says,
They are a jewel of glorious power ; I will dwell close
by their feet.


926


- holy places we find water and an image of

stone, but in the society of good.men we have
the actual presence of God. Meeting with such, if
we offer them our body, that body’is blessed. At
holy places it is faith that yields fruit; though the
ignorant are tempted to visit them. Tuka says,
When our sin vanishes,.as it vanishes, we learn
what a fever it was.


927


| OW can Ibe grateful enough to the saints?—

they keep me continually awake. How can
I pay off thisdebt, O God? Ifl gave up my life at
their feet, it would be too little. Their conversation
is always edifying ; they instruct me at the cost of
great toil. Tuka says, As a cow keeps her calf in
mind, so they watch over me.


928


B* embracing the saints, salvation and union

with God are attained; such is the glory of
tke saints; speech can go no further in describing
it, All holy places and seasons are at their feet.
Tuka says, The service which is done to them
reaches God.


THEIR SERVICES TO MEN 301


929


rae the names of the saints and gain merit

thereby ; I bid you depart not from these
names; they bring great gain without toil. Faith
in the feet of the saints isa haven of repose. Tuka
says, Call on the names of the saints, and your sins
will disappear.


930


‘TN this cause I will spend my breath; listen to

my message! I love the peopleof Hari; to
-converse with them is perfect peace. As for the
tales of strangers, I ask not who or whence they
are. Tuka says, These are true “heroes, pure in
spirit every one of them.


931


i ie is a blessed season when you have met the
saints and embraced theirfeet. The knot of
-doubt is unravelled ;.there is calm within the heart.
‘There is a ford through the stream of life estab-
lished ; cross over by this gracious favour. Tuka
says, What.can surpass his glorious generosity ?


932


OW destiny breaks into light; all anxious

S cares are chased away. The sight of the

saints has brought this gain, I have seen him of

the lotos navel. I will store this up as a treasure

in the casket of my heart. Tuka says, It is a buried
‘treasure, which I have gained by this faith.


933


MID a pile of pots, one is used for cooking,
another to hold filth; such are the different


302 THE SAINTS


lots of men, as destiny appoints them. There are
diamonds and common stones in one mine together ;:
but how could the other stones possess the lustre
of the diamond? Tukaé says, The one is set on the
head; the others are used for a staircase.


934


HAVE roused myself; I have entered \this

company of Hari’s worshippers; there the
crowd of devotees make the song, of) triumph
resound. The sinful impediment. of-sleep has
vanished, Tuka says, In that spotis the moist.
shadow of his mercy.


935


a thou wilt meet any one, meet the saints, O

mind; think of nothingelse. With complete
faith they deem God their treasure, they talk of
nothing else. If thou wilt live with any, live with
the saints; if thou wilt sit anywhere, sit with them ;.
if thou wilt go anywhere, go to their dwellings;
there thou shalt have repose. Tuka says, The
saints are a.seaof joy; O mind, satisfy thyself with
them for ever.


936


AKE me a servant of the servants of saints;
aA then, O Hari, I will gladly return to the
womb till the endoftime. Letmy station be hum-
ble, but let thy name be ever in my mouth. Tuké.
says, Let all my thoughts be employed on service
to the saints.


937


HEN shall I hear the saints tell me “‘ Pandu-
ranga has accepted thee ” ?—after that my


THEIR SERVICES TO MEN 303:


spirit will be at rest. Therefore, I gaze upon their
feet and faces; this is my great hope; this is what
I trust to; I practise no laborious means of attain-
ment. Tuka says, I shall be confident, I shall feel
assured that I am saved.


938


PRAISE you more than I have any right to do
I cannot see what my own worth allows. I
am your feeble servant, O ye saints; keep me at
your feet and preserve me. In uttering the spell of
Ramakrishna—Hari, in the feet of Vitthoba is my
delight. Tuka says, I eat themorsels you have
left; because I trust in your forgiving nature.


939


Seca all joys have turned to visit us; we have
seen the lotus feet of the saints ; we remember
them continually; this reason has satisfied our
longings. Tuka says, Our speech is confounded).
henceforth-our busy minds are hushed.


940


C \NE is safe when he calls himself a servant of
J) the saints; a ready and comfortable alms.
awaits him. It takes toi! to form a deep impres-
sion; a slight error of principle brings destruction.
To cook a meal, there must be materials ready ;
when these are well arranged, the dinner is plea-
sant. Tuka says, It is easy to make up tales, as.
long as the battle-field of impressions presents itself
before the eyes.


304 THE SAINTS


941


FE will turn these asses into horses, as long

as they stand in our presence; behind our

backs they will tear our shoes like mischievous

-dogs. Yes! we will convert hypocrites into honest

men. Tuka says, We will purify dirt, if only it_will
-show itself before us.


TIT.— The insignificance of Caste in Com-
parison of Virtue


942


. VAISHNAVA is one who loves God alone,
who puts no trust in anything else; body,
-~wealth and his fellow-men are but a straw to him.
‘Though he be’ afflicted, yet he fails not in his
purpose, because he is thoroughly resolved. Tuka
says, His ‘caste may be anything at all.


943


HAT is akin to the devil? A cruel heart; a

cruel and grasping spirit in man. The

‘source of virtue is in the inner parts; caste and

family cannot ensure it. To taste poison, to dis-

tinguish brass from pure gold, you need no evidence

but a particle of it... Tuka says, How good itis to

-come in contact with the truly well-born! there is
nothing but butter stored up in them!


CASTE IN COMPARISON OF VIRTUE 305


944


NE who sells his daughter, his cow or his
sermon, he is rightly called a low-caste
wretch. The standards of goodness are merits and
demerits ; God considers not a man’s caste. Tuka
says, They who do unlawful deeds, these are they
who go down into hell.


945


6 aoe water of the Ganges cannot see pollution,

yet it may do when carried in a pot; what is
lofty and what is lowly are not the same, it is pollu-
tion that shows the difference between them. Is
the world divided into parts to hold the various
castes and low castes? Tuka says, Various grains
of corn are distinct only till they have been fried.


+ 946


HAME on a Bramhana who is void of devotion!

Blessed is the’ Vaishnava who is a chambar;

his lineage is pure on both sides. So the Puranas

have decreed; this is no private opinion of my own.

Tuka says, Cursed be their self-conceit; may I
never behold a bad man of that kind!


947


as ee are my friends and comrades who re-

member the feet of Vitthoba; others I respect
only for form’s sake, because they are God’s crea-
tures. I am become a servant of Vishnu’s wor-
shippers; I will set my desire on the morsels they
have left. Tuka says, Such honour as the servants
of Vishnu pay me, I cannot hope to haye from
others.


20


306 THE SAINTS


948


i Bie me keep company with the saints in any

guise; let me lie at their doors like a dog.
Then I shall hear the name of Rama; I shall feed
on the scraps they leave behind. To be a slave
with them, a bond-maid, and a servant, yea, ‘to—be
humble and wretched with them is good. \Tuka
says, I shall have perfect joy with the saints; if it is
granted, me to sit with them.


XIX


Appeals and Exhortations


949


’ HEN we are thirsty, we are delighted to come

across water ; let the company of the saints
be as dear to us as that. When sweet food is
placed before a man, he sometimes forgets to say
*“ Enough,’”’ Tuka says, A mother’ yearns over a
child when she meets him.


950


FLOUGH you know these things, how is it you

know them not? You will suffer for it in

the next stage of your course. Awake, awake, O

woman! If you sleep, a thief will ruin you and run

away. Don’t let men plunder the goods you have.

Tuka says, When you see what others have suffered,
why-are you not afraid ?


951


sf Rasen ‘is time enough if you will but run after

Vitthoba, when you have done with the knots
-of the world. Take and fill your house with him;
then you will come back to life no more. Pundalika
made him stand upright and quiet as long as he
‘wished. Tuka says, Such has become the common
path,


808 APPEALS AND EXHORTATIONS


952


A MEAL is delightful, if it be eaten in peace, be

the food rich or poor ; like a fountain playing
by art, it is a source of gratification. Let your
thoughts be set on God. Tuka says, Then you will
procure that peace which all living things bestow
on such a man.


953


OW I give you this advice, do not waste your
lives. I cast myself at the feet of all, be-
seeching you to purify yourselves. Make this your
gain, thé contemplation of God, with a mind centred
‘in him, Tuké says, Practise a trade that brings
true profit; why should I teach you incessantly ?


954


IME after time I beg the world to utter the:

auspicious name of Vitthala. We will utter-

this auspicious name sitting in rows together.

Minute after minute flees away ; you must strengthen

yourself.. Tuka says, Be not faint-hearted, be not
idle ; these are impediments on your path.


955


HE mirage looks real, but it makes the foolish

. man’s heart break with disappointment. Why
do you knowingly destroy yourselves? Pray, con-
sider your true interests! A treasure of merit is a
companion, an escort for the soul; when it is
secured, it yields fruit. Tuka says, You may boast
yourselves till you reach the grave; you will be
brought to the cowdung cakes and the fire.


APPEALS AND EXHORTATIONS 309


956


A ETER many a re-birth, you have secured at last

this gain; you have entered a human body,
so grasp the feet of Vitthala. You have wandered
long, and but here you have found a resting place.
Tuka says, The simple and wise know this.


957


OW open your eyes; if you cannot see even
now, you are a mere stone produced from
your mother’s womb. Since you have secured such
a treasure as this human frame, whatever mystic
power you seek you will attain. Enlightening
others, many saints have been saved themselves.
There is a boat on the bank of the Chandrabhaga,
it stands at the door of Panduranga. He who
stands there hand on hip delays not to protect thee.
Tuka says, It costs, you nothing to embrace his
feet; salvation follows-at once.


958


O effort.will bring you back to this same life
again; to the pleasure and pain you have
once passed through. When you know this, why
are you. blind? You must pass through eight
million re-births, through the grievous pains of the
womb. You will enter the city of doubt, you will
writhe in the nets of illusion. What do the beasts
know of sin or merit? They live their lives more
or less happily; they are born and die; they grow
deaf, blind, lame, and dumb. If the treasure of
human life is delivered to you, it is the highest and
choicest state. O be calm for a moment, awake
cand open your eyes! Listen to the words of the
Vedas and Puranas; Tuka entreats you.


310 APPEALS AND EXHORTATIONS


959


ij hunger vanishes at the odour of food, then
why is there this cooking in every house?
Bring a blessing upon yourselves; remember even
-in your speech the name of Rama. If thirst
vanishes at the sight of water, then why is it stored
up in every house? ' The sight of shade brings. no
pleasure tili we sii down beneath it. “You are
blessed in singing and listening, if your faith is firm
within you. Tuka says, Faith will bring you liber-
ation, then why take the intricate: path of know-
ledge ?
960


iene his spirit for yours; continue your efforts;
to him belongs a.stout ship; he conveys to
the further shore all-who seek him; they need
not fear the river ofthe world. Blessed are those
who trust in him, for God dwells with them.
Tukaé says, God isthe true servant of the simple.


961
Pp* DURANGA will bring you to your goal, if
you meditate on him; you will find a cell:
provided for your mind. To attain this fruit there:
must needs be strength within you. Tuka says, All:
powers will then wait on your feet.


' 962


WELL not on rules and prohibitions; remem--

ber in your heart Panduranga. When you

have eaten your food, do not complain that there
was a fly in it; for it all goes down at one mouth--
ful. You can make this acquisition easily, but
you will find it hard to keep. Tuka says, Spare no.


APPEALS AND EXHORTATIONS 311


labour to obtain; without a poultice of neem-tree
leaves you cannot dispel pain.


963


ET not want of faith replace your faith; to
this name, be assured, belongs much guilt.
When the showers of rain stream down, they do
good or harm according as the ground is soft ‘or
hard, When good things are distributed, if-you set
your heart on a worthless portion, the wishing tree
will bestow that on you. Tuka says, Life is very
short; in future look out for what is best.


964


‘BB? quick and take your share ; you have stayed

a long way behind; if you collect worldly
riches, the essential portion will be taken by others.
Others, like you, have been scared away; I cannot
tell how many. “Why do not men perceive the
favourable moment but go on carrying their burden
on their heads? Run! make haste, before it is all
spent. What you have tied up in your cloth you.
have got foryour own. Poor-spirited creature, says
Tuk&, cannot you venture one effort? without that
how-will you gain this happiness ?


965


N the rear of riches comes the assault of this
evil age, therefore their society is treacherous.
Leave behind you this source of hell, when you
have, in good time, set the praises of God before
you. To-day is your opportunity to appropriate this
gain; henceforward cast your burden upon God.
No cravings will change your appointed destiny ;
this madness of desires is vain and foolish. Tuka


312 APPEALS AND EXHORTATIONS


says, Wait and take this treasure ; listen with rever-
ence to the praises of God.


966


O! some one of you, receive God! He has
come unbidden, asking for your house.
Those who want none of him are stuck fast where
they have stored their treasures. God is tardy; faith
has sunk out of sight: what shall wedo? Receive
God without price: you need pay neither cash nor
goods for him. Tukais feeble through loss of faith ;
he has bought God on credit and fallen into debt.


967


fe mother feels her chief joy in the caress of

her child. Gladly she.gives him a morsel to
eat and satisfies his longings. She puts ornaments
upon him and directs her)glance towards him; she
takes him on her lap and humbles herself before
him. She lifts him.on her shoulder, and lets no
evil eye fall on him. Tuka says, Fall on him for
your own gain; visit him of the lotus-navel.


968

Gs favour shows itself in a loving answer ;

joy is multiplied in joy. Luckily for many
our ship has reached its harbour; come, make haste
and take what you want. A thing unattainable has
been brought freely to your doors ; make no mistake
about it now. Tuka says, Through the doors of
tongue and ears fill the measure up to the brim.


969


OU must know what is right; the chief duties
come first; the mind has to be purified and


APPEALS AND EXHORTATIONS 313


the spirit made steady. You must not follow the
promptings of the mind; you must love the teaching
of the saints. If you trust to these precepts, you
need no further admonition, says Tuka.


970


Are story of the Puranas is like a sweet- juice ;

these poems are not idle words or empty chaff.
Receive them in faith; go once at least to Pandhari.
By good fortune you have entered into’a human
body ; then visit Vitthala ; he willsweep away your
store of sin and merit. Take-in your hand the
cymbals and sing his praises. Tuka says, You need
no a in dialectics ; you«need not search for the
path.


971


A LL trouble is.unprofitable as long as you do

not utter the name of Rama. Awake, awake,
set your mind free from desire. You will recover
what you have renounced; if you persist as you
are, you will be punished by time. Tuka says,
Surrender. to Panduranga what has fallen to your
lot,


972


7 OU have no power of your own to assure
yourself in future what you have now. So

take what is within your reach; sing his name
joyfully. The store of our past is powerful; our
actions run on ahead of us. Tuka says, If you
behave like an owl, you will return to birth as


& pig.


314 APPEALS AND EXHORTATIONS


973


HE embodied gods could not overcome the:
world ; how can we feeble creatures stand
against it? You will soon be ensnared by pleasures,
if once they make you their victim. I cannot
conceive when they will set you free. You will
exhaust yourself with carrying this burden—I too
carry it; in vain do we renounce it. Tuka says,
How is it you are not ashamed of it? The saints
have secured the controller of the senses.


974


HAT the yogi gains in glory is renunciation:

and peace ; in both worlds he secures the.

delights of festal praise and honour. What men
have borrowed from)each other they have to pa
off in the hour of prosperity. Exert yourself an

you will find the original treasure ; the cravings of

thirst will wear you out. Tuka says, We shall

find our true account in activity; we shall enjoy in


our souls. union with Siva.


975


HEN you have kept the principal, why need

-you care about interest? Seal up your

own bundle at home; you cannot avoid the

attempts of the strangers. Robbers wili assault

you not far on the road; your business takes you

through the swindlers’ quarter. Tuka says, Ap-

Desectee are all false; you will be caught by secret.
wiles.


APPEALS AND EXHORTATIONS 815.


976


foe who attain no mastery in anything

have wasted their lives. Listen to this easy
secret; contemplation needs no anxious toil. If
this resource be neglected, then the shadow of
death falls ona man. Tuka says, O mankind, lend
your ear to this.


977


OU have all the gifts of fortune, hands and

feet to walk with, a mouth to speak with,.

ears to listen to God’s praise, eyes to behold his

image. How many blind havevbeen robbed of

these, how many dumb and-lame! If a house

catches fire, a waking man cannot survive unless.

he runs away. Tuka says, Awake now to your own
interests.


978


\ OOD men have attained liberation in the flesh ;
abandon the company of the wicked. If
poison like‘a mustard seed enter a mass of food,
it will turn it all to poison. Tuka says, Do heedfully
such deeds as will bring your own gain.


979


A Raa body is not; “I” comes to an end;.

Vitthala that was left before is still left. So
raise a cry; sweep away time by contemplation.
Think not of maintaining yourself; there is a place
empty for you within God. Tuka says, If you give:
up your own soul, God will enter your body.


316 APPEALS AND EXHORTATIONS


980


INCE you have an excellent tongue, why do you

not repeat ‘ Vitthala”? Let your heart turn

to him who will rescue you. What gain is there

in putting gossip together? Tuka says, All skill
is vile save skill in God.


981


OOK not even on your teacher’s son, if he be
impious, more than on the face_of the in-
cestuous. To avoid such it were-well to seek
solitude, where nothing can interrupt our devotion.
Consort not with a fault-finder, for his evil heart is
fall of enmity. Tuka says;.Never speak to one
whose sight increases sin.


982


T is a foul life that scorns the saints; shun it as
an enemy of mankind. If a woman leaves her
husband, she loses family, beauty, and all worldly
comfort. How’can he be short of fruit who pre-
serves the root? A wise man knows bow to
observe-the due signs. Tuka says, Let all your
efforts be directed to one spot; if you have a lamp
in\your hand, allis well.


983


WwW destroy a seed and then we reap an ear'of

corn; all men know this, and appreciate
small things as well as great. The gain is not
without its price; we must offer our own souls to
buy it. Tuka says, If you sacrifice your life in
battle, you gain twice as much.


APPEALS AND EXHORTATIONS S17
984.


1PEECH brings its own evils, but a silent man

is like a dumb post. Avoid too much and too

little, this is the wise plan; let your speech and

your silence be both appropriate. When darkness.

sets in, day vanishes, and night comes on. Tukaé

says, The seed lies hidden in the earth and yet it
shows itself.


985


OME men temper and eat the root of aconite

ounce by ounce; while others cannot bear to-

look on it. Some will charm a snake and grasp it,

while others tremble to see it. “The unattainable

may be attained by toil; yes,practice will bring it
about, says Tuka.


986


|? you are a god, you can make others like

yourself; you.need not doubt it. If you are
a wicked man, you-can do the same. Tuka says,
Whatever is reflected in a glass does without: doubt
penetrate it.


987


Faman ties a broken gourd round his waist,

how can he reach the farther shore safely ?

He. brings destruction on himself, if he listens to

no remonstrances. Ifa hungry man seeks to eat

poison, he destroys himself. Tuka says, There are

guides preceding us ; if you miss the way they point.
out, you will go wrong.


988


I HAVE suffered much before now in my ignor-
ance; why should I be blind any more? We


318 APPEALS AND EXHORTATIONS


ought to commit ourselves to one God, and not go
groping about from one to another. Whoever it be
that keeps the world in motion, he will answer your
call, Tuka says, We dogs were put on this search
after God; for had no desire been excited in us, we
should not have been stirred to the search.


989


RY out “ Hari” all of you, and the snares of
illusion willbe broken. Do not be swallowed
up by other vile desires; they will bring much
misery with them. Fold your handsand offer with
true faith water and a leaf of tulsi; call yourself a
sinner once and again. Tuka says, He is an ocean
of mercy ; if you utter his name, he will carry you
to the goal.


xX


Rebuke and Admonition


L.—Che Evil Age


990


\ X } E have begun to find out by experience the
truth of what the saints declared. Man-
kind are contaminated in this evilage ; good deeds
are weak and sin is powerful’ None observes the
rules of his caste or avoids pollution ; men create one
vast heap of impurities» Those who have learned
the Vedas take strong drink; they observe no dis-
tinction between things; they are all degenerate.
Tuka says, How often shall I make you ashamed ?
‘These cravings are numerous and ever present.


991


HA brother, to him I address my recitation of
praises ; come now, you the Kali age—-foul

and untidy! Spit upon his face! All speech of self-
praise isidle; cast it away! Heis a slave to his wife,
heedless of his parents; he bestows no charity on
beggars. He uses his education to torment people
with discussions and he breaks up the parties of
other harmless people. He does not revere his
village god; Brahmans and beggars never come
near him. He is always finding fault. He never
remembers Govinda evenin a dream. He shuts up
his wealth in a pit. He tightens his waist band to


320 REBUKE AND ADMONITION


keep off hunger; he does not know what charity is..
Tuka says, He goes about with affected airs, but he.
does not let devotion touch him.


992


HE saints have described the age of Kali long
ago, as the time when the twice born shall for-
sake their rules. We see this now under our eyes;
they forsake the rules of religion and resort to im-
pious deeds. They find it wearisome to «practice
rites and austerities; they enjoy looking after them-
selves, They say they are gods themselves and do
not visit. the temples; but if they are gods, how is
it they do not live apart from the world? Tuka says,
If I show any respect to these-people, some of them
will be going to hell.


993


\UCH is the nature of the evil age that piety

has been ruined. The Bramhanas have given

up “ Rama-Rama” and say ‘‘ Doma-Doma.” They

wear black and blue clothes, which they ought not

even to touch. Tuk@ says, They abandon their
own calling and cry out vociferously for a boon.


994


‘NUCH is a good name that one can never keep.
it, O Lord and Master, O saviour of the
sinful. Ifa man takes care of his family, people
find fault with him; if he renounces it, they call
him lazy and selfish ; if he goes through ceremonies,
they call him ostentatious; if he discards them, they
take him to task. If he lives with the saints, they
ery “A disciple!’ If he leaves them alone, they
say he is an ignoramus. If he is poor, he is born to-


THE OBSTINACY OF THE WICKED 321


be a beggar; if he has means, they charge him with
pride. If he speaks much, he is over-talkative; if
he speaks little, they cry out on his pride. If he
.stands aloof from men, he is cold-blooded; if he
moves amongst them, he is said to ruin his family.
If he gets married, they say he is lustful ; if he does
not, they say he is impotent. If he has no chil-
dren, they look down on him; if he has a tribe of
children, they say it leads to hell. I am sick of
mankind, I cannot contain my disgust of them ; a
worldly man cannot stomach the company of the
saints. Tuka says, Listen to my words, leave the
world and practise devotion.


TL—Che Obstinacy of the Wicked
995


F a man has faith, a stone will save him; but
how can a@>good man help a wicked one?
Though you straighten a dog’s tail, it will not eet
so: what can the magic stone make of a potsherd
Though you-dig a trench and fill it with sugar, yet
the seed planted in it bears fruit like itself. Tuka
says; Even adamant is sometimes broken, but these
wretches are harder still.


996


W? may beat a thievish dog on the head; he

howls, but he does not give up his tricks.
Such, O.God, is a man of bad character; he destroys
his own soul. To him the loss of his nose brings
neither shame nor reflection; he carries the dis-
grace from house to house. Tuk& says, The prints


21


399 REBUKE AND ADMONITION


of a man’s actions are strong and powerful; they
do not suffer him to stir one way or another.


997


F you wash a donkey in a sacred stream, it will
not turn to an Arab steed; even so, whatever
advice you offer a scoundrel, you cannot purify-his
mind. You may feed a snake on sugar and_nec-
tar, but the poison within it will not vanish. Tuka
says, If you offer a dog milk, it is all the.same to
‘him as vomit.


998


W BE have to suffer mountains of sorrow; every

body knows it; yet men neglect their own
advantage, they utter not'the name of Hari. Our
comforts in the present tell us what our past lives
were like—good, bad or middling. Tuka says, If
you close your eyes now, you will know what you
‘have to meet when it is dealt out to you.


999


EOPLE “like falsehood; truth they cannot

digest. Such is the effect of pride, but they

‘will learn by experience what misery is like. We

see men fostering their love for the world, till the

agents of Yama seize them. Tuk@ says, Such are
obstinate monkeys and will not listen to advice.


1000


of Raa monkey seizes the grain within the pot;
; he does not understand that his hand is
caught. I need not explain his mistake; he does
~not understand what to do for himself. A parrot
- gets his feet caught in his perch; he forgets all


THE OBSTINAOY OF THE WICKED 823


about bis two wings. Tuka says, Some men are
just like animals; you can do nothing to help them.


1001


HAT! does not even a tree bend? A mad-

man forgets who and what he is; the man

‘who bears no fruit by admonition is like the dry

‘stump of a tree. What! are there not stones that

are ag mute as sages? Tuka says, You may look on
fools as hard corn that will not cook.


1002


YE should approach the saints respectfully ;

it is heart-breaking to deal with low people.

A vagabond goes about braying like an ass and gets

beaten on the back by Yama. He talks like a fool

and does not understand the occasion; the honour

he gets by his faulty.conduct is mere discredit.
‘Tuka says, His behaviour is foul and offensive.


1003


fi you smear sandal powder on an ass, the crea-

ture will mingle it with ashes. No being can
easily change its own quafities. If you hang a
jewel about the neck of a monkey, he bites it off
and throws it away and spits on it. Tuka says, A
worthless fellow rejects a benefit to himself; his
ignorance confirms his folly.


1004
HOSE who will not leave their faults, who
count the divine secrets folly, what will they
do when they suffer for it? when their heads are
crushed by Yama’s rod? When they show the ac-


824 REBUKE AND ADMONITION


count of their merit and demerit, they will suffer
grievously. Tuka says, O Vitthala, they feel weary
at my words.


TIT.—TH Temper and Want of Charity
1005


E who is soothed by another’s misfortunes,
know him for a sinful man ; he who is quick

to anger ig a dweller in hell. He who opens bis
ears to slander or speaks it himself, T'uka says, he
cannot control his tongue, he is~a) quarrelsome:


fellow.
_ 1006


E who employs the same mouth to praise and

to censure another secretly, he is a vile

creature ; he loses his gold and eats dirt; he eats.

sweet dainties and voids excrement; hell takes.

hold of him. Tuka says, He is like a scorpion that.
carries a mischievous sting.


1007


HE man who calculates the merits and faults.

of the saints, closes the roll of his own good

deeds. He is a fool who crushes a flower to look.

for its fragrance, or cleaves a plantain stem to find

its fruit in it. Tuka says, He who attributes im-

purity to the Ganges and to fire, he is a miscreant.
and shall suffer for it,


1008


HE world is full of Vishnu, such is the guiding
rule of his worshippers ; discussions on the
unity of God are an evil. Listen, O ye devotees of:


ILL TEMPER AND WANT OF CHARITY 325


Vishnu ; in what you do seek always your true
interest. Put from you all censorious spirit. This
is the secret of worshipping ‘the highest. Tuka
says, There are many limbs in one body, but one
soul feels pain or pleasure.


1009


F a man entertains the‘low caste creature anger,

he ceases to be a Brahmana. Whatatonement

can he make? It avails him not, if he quits the

body. Do not touch this villain ; he is-all unclean-

ness within. Tuka says, He who-associates with
him makes himself of the same caste as his,


1010


HE mother rejoices to see a male child; she
says, “A son is born.” Then he grows up
quarrelsome, slanderous, thievish and vicious.
Wherever he goes he injures men; he gains nothing
but contempt. Itis all a sad mistake ; why was he
not smothered at his birth? The earth shudders
beneath his.weight ; he and such as he are creatures
of hell. \His speech is cruel; his gaze is evil; his
mind is foul; his evil ways make him a pollution;
‘sin and contamination go with him. Tuka says,
He is’a vile thing, meet to be avoided.


1011


NE like a dog, one swift to anger, he destroys
himself, he is a sinful wretch. He has
neither respect nor self-control; the milk of good
advice does not agree with him. He barks against
mankind; other men spit upon him. Tuka says,
His mind is filthy; let it be put to shame.


326 REBUKE AND ADMONITION


1012


OU may burn-rice and sesamum seed, but a
. fierce and greedy temper will remain as vil-
_lainous as ever. Why do you weary yourselves in
vain, forgetting to worship Panduranga? You
have spent your time on words and the fruit is
hypocrisy and pride; you have practised austerities
and pilgrimages and increased your own conceit.
You have distributed your wealth to others; you
have cherished your self-conceit. Tuka says, You
have missed the secret; all your conduct has been.
impious.


TU.—Pride


1013


W PE its parents like the snake or cat, that.

eat their-offspring, then their child would
not enjoy their company. Gallows of sandalwood
or fetters of gold,—therein is no pleasure, but death
and misery. ~Tuka says, If our learning ends in
pride ok arrogance, our self-conceit will cast us down:
to hell. i


1014


O sit on a seat side by side with worthier men
is a crime no less than incest. I am de-
claring the rules of righteous conduct: listen to me
for your own welfare! If you desire to be wor--
shipped as though you were saints, you will fall
into an eddying whirlpool of ruin. Tuka says, If
you suddenly desire the highest place, it will not be-
come you and you will disgrace it.


DECEIT. 327


U.—Deceit


1015


A tices child of a liar chooses the company of liars;
he prefers appearances to reality. The fruit
is like the seed; when the plant comes to maturity,
it scatters abroad the fragrance of its kind. A
jewel round a monkey’s name is nothing to him; a
vagabond leaves his true wife and goes ‘roaming
about the streets. Tuka says, The mother of such
a one is an ass; shame waits to overtake her.


1016


ie aman displays gold that.contains copper and

seeks to sell it as pure, a good judge can
discern its inward nature, and distinguish the two
elements. How perfect )seems the mixture when
milk and water are mingled; yet a good judge can
distinguish them.by the taste. Tuka says, The liar
has degraded himself in vain ; he will come to great
distress.


1017


HOSE who forsake the truth and point out
courses 1of their own, they shall go to the
lowest pit. When a thief is caught, he gives a false
name; so both parties are fettered, hands and feet.
Tuka says, This is settled in the Puranas; s itis no
idle chatter of mine.


1018


\HEY make up a bundle of stolen leaves and
show off these stale dishes as their own poetic
skill; such wicked people stay in hell as long as


328 REBUKE AND ADMONITION


the sun and moon go round. Tukaé says, Accept
Naréyana alone; in other pathways distress will
meet you.


U1.—Greediness


1019


66 wet can we get out of him ? Whocan go
on singing for ever? The-—praises of
Hari have beggared us; even sleep deserts us.
This troublesome noise interrupts our work and
occupation.” Tuké says, This is what brutes and
. scoundrels think.
1020


GREEDY man loses judgment in his haste ;

he goes on talking nonsense. He shows the

hue of his nature, just.as poison brings on spasms.

Men have gone ‘mad through their passion for

wealth, so that they cannot stop talking ofit. Tuka
Says, Both vices end in experience of hell.


1021


E_who égells merit commits incest ; the wealth

of a pander is polluted; you may call the

lustful man a suicide; he does whatever he is bid-

den to do, he cares not for any penalty. He ruing

himself for a slight gain ; he barters the magic stone

for a bit of glass. Tuké says, He has washed his

hands of heaven ; he reaps nething but toil ; he has
only forced his ears to listen to teaching.


1022


\ \ 7 HY are you not ashamed to call yourself.
servant of Hari, when you are willing to


WORLDLINESS 329


call an ignoble man ‘ Maharaja?” Is your stomach
unsatisfied or what else do you need that you go on
wagging your tail in public? Tuka says, It is our
belly 1 that brings scorn upon us, that makes a man
abject and sets him calling for pity.


1023


ite the spirit is at rest, it counts gold as poison.

Covetousness is a sinful thing; know this, O
simple men; what shall I say to you? Ifthe mind is
disturbed, sandalwood will not cool the raging of
the body. Tuka says, If the spirit is not at rest,
any remedy or ceremony increases affliction.


1024


i bieres is one that makes his wife play the port
of his mother, andputs himself in the place
of his fore-fathers. Poor wretch, you have spent
too much over it !—with all your tricks and perver-
sions. You have wasted your life feeding on
pleasure. Tuka says, You knave! God will have
no mercy on you; it is a stone that you worship.


UTT.— Worldliness


1025


iy Roa who acquire incomes, land, power and

wealth, know that God is absent from their
thoughts. A quarrelsome man carries a burden
about with him, he never gains the essential truth;
he may purpose to worship God, but it is one
stone worshipping another for the sake of gain.
Tuk& says, They honour God for reward; their
crafty thoughts are like the love of a harlot.


330: REBUKE AND ADMONITION


1026


N the bond of desires, what does any man know

of God? He serves him with his person, but

he looks toward the things he desires. Like the

ravings of a delirious man are his notions of whatis

right. Tuka says, He is like good food spoiled
by poison.


1027


HERE is no peace for the servant of the world;

his occupation is never absent from his
: thoughts ; the service of God is entirely deserted ; a
riot of self-indulgence goes raging/on. Toiling
night and day he cannot satisfy his family; it is
hard for him to gain a sight of God. Tuka says, O
destroyers of yourselves, your action is suicide;
you have altogether lost. Narayana.


1028


E follows a-path he has not travelled before ;

he seems to be worldly wise, the wretch!

How shameless he is, he never utters the name of

Rama! Hestares fiercely on his worldly foes, yet

he weeps when he is handed over to Yama; for all

that he\repents not. He fancies he shall never

have to deal with-Yama; he is a low wretch, who

thinks so! So-he is silent still, Ah! why do you
behave so? says Tuka.


1029


pD° they not know what has happened to others?

Why must we tell them about it? They
may see and hear it, and they know what the
Purénas have said. They know the question
whether the body is real or perishable ; why cannot.


WORLDLINESS 331


their own experience answer it, as they pass
through childhood, youth and age? Why do they
delight in wife or child or wealth; who has ever at
any time found these help him? Why has the
excellent gift of life been given them in vain; why
do they not utter Rama! Rama!? Why when
they know all do they forget it, though theysee
others die before them? What will they do, says
Tuka, when death with his adamantine chains seizes
and binds them ?


1030


AM astonished at these people; they will not

think of their own true interests. What re-
sources have they to make up for this? Who will
help them in the latter end? What notion keeps
them free from anxiety? What answer will they
give to Yama’s servants? Feeble creatures that
they are, how have they forgotten death? To
what pleasures have they given themselves up?
With nothing in their hands, what will they do?
How can we learn what has happened to them?
Why do they not remember Devaki’s son, to escape
from the trammels of the world? Does he need to
be purchased with a price? Why do their minds
not admit him? Tuka says, Why will they pass
through birth and death again? why have they
forgotten the wheel-handed one ?


1031


F the secret were known, what would be im-
possible? But we are entangled in errors.

Yet knowledge puts an end to everything; hear, O
«God, this sentiment of mine. For the sake of the
bait the fish gets his gullet pierced by the hook;


8382 REBUKE AND ADMONITIO


even so, greed of wealth ruins men. Tuka says,
Something false must happen, for destiny is huge
and strong.


1032 -


HEY in whom personal interests and desires

dwell, who look on the body as their.own,

they need provisions for their passage as they. go

along. Tuka says, He who follows a false path to

protect his faith, he suffers for it; one who is
fevered by the sun seeks the shade.


OTTT.— Sensuality

1033
He they enjoy sensual pleasures; before
them lies:the grievous chastisement of
Yama; the stern. servants of Yama beat and cut
and thrash them in countless ways. They make
them pass over the edges of swords, over glow-
ing coals of..khaira wood; flames shall issue from
the heated oil; see, they roll them on the burning
round ; they make them clasp fiery pillars. There-
ore, Tukaé cries, enough now of these agonies and

the life that brings them on.


1034


F you mean to ruin yourself, devote all your
powers to gambling with dice. Then what
becomes of Hari’s name? While you are asleep,
Rama is awake; you have acquired for yourself
pain and degradation from ‘one birth to another.
For the greedy and impudent whoremaster there


SENSUALITY 333


is a road that leads into the pit. If you choose
another way to hell, then be it your delight to speak
ill of the saints. Tuk& says, Make your mind
mad after Rama,. or, your labour will be lost ; you
will be deceived and disappointed.


1035


ee rich man who does no pious deeds is robbed

by the king; when his mother bore him,
would she had been barren! He who sleeps atthe
time of preaching, but wakes to satisfy bis lust, like
a dog; who is ashamed to gratify his.own wife, but
shares the coverlet of a whore, Tuka says, know
that he is a man viler than an ass.


1036


i ie a man has renounced his family, whilst he
has not put away passion, his devotion is
worthless, he goes to hell without fail. Though he
bestow labour on forms of words, if he thinks evil
of the saints, Tuka says, his foot returns backwards
to that evil spot.
1037


Bean pleasure is like a grain of barley,

pain like a mountain. O remember, remem-
ber |. Heed thou the word of the saints! Night takes.
away half our lives, together with childhood and
old age. Tuka says, After this they are fools who
pursue pleasures, like oxen yoked to an oilman’s
mill. :


1038
HY do you make a slave of yourself, an ass


loaded with the burden of the world ?
Sweet viands are pleasant on the tip of the tongue ;


334 REBUKE AND ADMONITION


but they lose their savour when the stomach is filled.
If you pile up sensual pleasures from every organ,
still they pass away and leave no trace with you.
If you gaze on Vitthoba’s form till you are satisfied,
you will feel no further thirst of desire. Tuka says;
‘Why do you sever yourself from God to gain what
is perishable ? :


TX.—ypocritical Professions


1039.


iG this evil age the infidels are turned poets;

these quarrelsome people are skilful indeed!
In his heart he delights in wealth, wife and children;
with his lips he continues his dry prating. He
assumes a proud exterior to make men honour him;
he talks of renunciation but his heart is not in it.
They do not seek their true profit by obeying the
Vedas ; they donot sever themselves from the body.
Tuka says, That man will endure the pangs of hell,
who does not act as he professes.


1040


| | E displays the pompous air that he has
learned; but how can a flint look like a dia-
mond? You luckless fellow, learn where the truth
lies; all images of God resemble him. Why have
you lent yourself to illusions ? Why do you throw
away your true greatness? Tuka& says, Destruction
‘is visible ahead of you; this is why I make you
- ashamed. ;


HYPOORITICAL PROFESSIONS 335


1041


Cy people are buried under prohibitions,

contentious people under talk; how weary
they grow, in the embarrassing straits of pride!
What have they gained by their winnowing? They
have lost their world and the next. Tuka says,
What butter can be abstracted from whey that has
once been churned ?


1042


URSED be the outward show, that vanishes
like a butterfly. The daughter-in-law weeps
for her husband’s mother, but her inner feeling is
different. A hypocrite is smooth tongued, but his
inner purpose is different..He is like the Vrinda-
vana fruit, which looks handsome, but is not safe to
touch. A heron assumesa contemplating attitude,
but his object is to catch fish. Tuka says, Like a
serpent waving his head, he pretends to be delighted
with the service.of God.


1043


iG your hand trembles when you offer a gift, your

words therewith find no acceptance. If your
speech of devotion be idle prate, it is like assafcetida
mixed with milk, vapid and worthless. If your feet
move not to holy places and you say ‘Why should
I spend money on them?’’ Tuka says, you will
accomplish nothing.


1044


EEP me far from talkative mon, far from

those who condemn the saints and forget

thee, O Govinda! Cursed be the face of such a one;

. let me not set eyes on a quarrelsome man! Tuka
says, O God, keep me far from them,


836 REBUKE AND ADMONITION


1045
NE whose speech is uncertain, whose mind
is unstable, go not to visit such a one; it is
a pollution to sit at meat withhim. He who reviles
holy men and honours the base for private gain,
Tuka says, he has one thing on his lips and another
in his heart.


X.— Indifference to Religion and Zhurlish
Conduct to the Saints


1046


[ CARE nothing for his speech, who never speaks

of Vitthala. Heismy foe, andI shall call him
no friend of mine, who has firmly turned away his
face from Vitthala:) Ifa man finds the name of
Vitthala displeasing, know him for a base wretch,
says Tuka.


1047


| E_who-gives not a spoonful to the saints, who

asks them for water, but pours out a bath
for a-maid-servant; who turns his back on the
saints, but kisses a maid-servant’s brat; who ridi-
cules the saints when he sees them, but cheerfully
washes a maid-servant’s bodice; spit in his face,
says Tuka, he goes to find what hell is like!


1048


aes man who shows hospitality to his friends

and produces a rod for the saints, who be-
labours a cow when he ‘sees her, and is glad of a
horse’s service, who gives fruit and flowers to a


CHURLISH CONDUCT TO THE SAINTS 387


harlot freely, but never a morsel of betel nut to
Brahmans; who cherishes his wife’s family and
drives out his father and mother, Tuka says, spit in
that man’s face; he goes to find what hell is like !


1049


i Mae sluggish mind resembles the lazy body;

it takes a good judge to discernthem. Some
men contemplate God and utter his name; others
lie down and go to sleep. Some renounce ail;
others are all alert to fill their stomachs; some pro-
fess love for the sake of their stomachs, others seek
true union with God. Each has his own principle
within him; but the fruits thereof are diverse,
says Tuka,


1050


HOSO torments the servants of Vishaou, ill-

omened is his.speech ; let him not i

you; his evil conduct brings misfortune. He who

loves not the praises of Hari is born of an adul-

terous woman.. Tuka says, His lineage and his
spirit are alike impure.


1051


(Ret me whose protection you have sought:
.» you have made indifference your great crime.
Who has given you this advice, “ Do not go for pro-
tection to Vitthala” ? When Yama lays you prostrate
on the earth, who will shield youfrom him? Why
do you rob yourself? Time eats up your life ; your
strength decays from day today. Tuka says, Ex-
plain to him, some one, that be has forgotten his
parents.


22


338 REBUKE AND ADMONITION


1052


fe dishonour the saints and then worship God

isa sin. Ifthus you act, it is in vain you
put flowers on the gods’ heads uttering Vedic
spells; they turn to stones. Ifyou dishonour your
guests while you offer cakes to God, Tuka says,
you make a distinction between the saints and God;
your worship is an insult to God.


1053


O say “ We are God’s” and to show_no respect

to God, this seems to me a strange thing.

Yet why say this to other men, who bear the burden

of the world on their heads? To give up the

world, and yet to seek its-honour and treasure,

this would be unfair to the world. Tuka says, This

is seeking indolence fora friend; see how such
men rush to ruin!

1054


H® who observes not the eleventh day, know

him fora living corpse. Death is measuring
out his life, and gnashes his teeth with rage against
him. He who keeps no tulsi plant at his door,
know ‘his house for a burial-ground. He who has
no worshippers of Vishnu in his family, his raft
for crossing the sea of life is foundered. The
mouth that speaks not the name of Vitthobé is
verily a tanner’s pit. Tuka& says, His hands are
wooden sticks, that goes not to hear the praises of
Hari.

, 1055


HOSE who observe not the eleventh day’s fast,
I know not what their state shall be. What
hall I do? I am quite disheartened; men are


CHURLISH CONDUCT TO THE SAINTS 3839


blind and look at the outside. Those who offer not
an inch of wick to Hara and Hari, those who have
no love for Narayana, Tuka says, I know not what
their state shall be.


1056


if aa man is a mere corpse, a charnel house,
who is a clown void of divine love’ and ser-
vice. Such fellows feed like dogs and open their
house to the spirits of hell. Where no image
is worshipped, refuse thou to dwell; itis an abode
of thieves and scoundrels. Tuka-says, Jf a man
knows not his true position and powers of the mind,
he is a retainer of Yama, beyond reform.


1057


C\EARCH the Srutis“and you will find that he
) is no Brahma who does not love to sing the
praises of Hari and dance amid Vaishnavas. He is
a vicious wretch, incestuous and vile. Tuka says,
If you think differently of him, your mouth will be
‘attacked by leprosy. :


1058


HEY are hard-hearted listeners whose mind

is bent on praise or blame ; a luckless fool is

‘he who is absent from service while he is present.

He spends his ears, eyes and speech on a profitless

purpose ; he is an associate of sin ; let his negligent

mouth be filled with dirt. Heis truly profited who

has learned to forget the wants of the body. Tuka

eries fie on such; he renounces them and shaves
their heads.


340 REBUKE AND ADMONITION


1059 _-


daa is no pleasure to me—why do they bring

their ill-omened faces here? The flavour of
my thoughts is spoiled, O Narayana, when I see a
row of scoundrels before me. A dog goes about.
with a mouth as filthy as hell; he defiles sweet food-
Tuka says, He who shows no deference to the saints
and abuses them, abuse him for a guilty scoundrel.


1060


Wa the body is heated by fever, milk tastes

like poison ; so it is with him who has ban-
ished God’s truth, a raving fever fastens upon him..
When jaundice affects a man’s eyes, he sees the
moon of a yellow colour. Tuka says, When a man
loves spirituous drinks, he cannot taste the sweet-.
negs of butter.


1061


()* E who is lazy by nature and has moreover his.

teacher’s advice to confirm him, what will
prevent him from taking his own way, what will
stop him? He cannot practise religion, or obey the
rules of conduct. Tukasays, He is anass; he runs.
where his mind leads him.


1062


A SOW relishes ordure continually; what

pleasure has she in savoury food? Thus.
the irreligious delight in false doctrine; they
find no pleasure in the highest truth. You may
offer dogs nectar, but their heart is set on bones.
Tuka says, Though you feed a snake on milk, it.
vomits forth poison in return.


VARIOUS 341


1063


- a man destroys the source of milk, what will

he gain by doing so? He who finds fault with
the Vedas is a low and sinful, a polluted wretch.
If a man sets fire to his own house, where will he
‘find a place to live in? Tuka declares the secret;
the rest are led astray by error.


1064


F you mean to sing, then sing Vitthala alone; if

not, remain silent where you are. If you hold

that absolute union isthe end, then you will not

need speech ; you are wasting your efforts on know-

ledgein vain. Tuka says, How often shall I put you

4o shame? The shameless.man does not know
what shame is.


XT.— Various


1065 _
E goes_off to Kasi, leaving with his friends
his cows, horses and buffaloes. ‘I shall


be back before you know [ am gone; honour the
confidence I have placed in you. Do not take the
corn out of the pit. You may eat the chaff and
waste. Take a stick and chase away the beggars.
You will be cutting my throatif you ask Brahmans
to dinner. I have never spent a penny to cureany
sickness of mine. You may eat the butter milk,
but keep the butter and ghee for me. There is no
room in my heart for plundering women and
children.”” Tuka says, The wretch speaks out his
notions plainly.


842 REBUKE AND ADMONITION


1066


- E who eats his food without due ceremony is
a dog; what avails his manhood? Heisa
draught animal, a bullock! He knows nothing of
right conduct; he is a burden to the earth; he isa
foe of his ancestors and forces pollution upon them.
He whose speech is foul, who never speaks. the
truth even in his dreams, there is none more guilty
than he. He who looks to his stomach.alone and
has no compassion on other creatures; if a beggar
-on his rounds draws near him, who drives him
away, who never worships holy men, visits no holy
spot; he is a dowry of hell, he shall come to the
worst misery. Tuka says, They destroy their own
eye who forget God ‘and ery out “I”. and
* Mine.”


1067


i bi you bring a crazy old man to a marriage hall,
he will use vulgar language of the bride and
bridegroom. He does not understand the occa-
sion; what use is he at sucha time? Tuka says,
He is an ags; take him away!


1068


V\7 HEN a vicious child is begotten in a family,

his ancestors cry out with horror. Why
did be not perish in the womb? Why did his
mother conceive him? She has brought shame.
into the world; she is a sinful woman. He is
swift to cruelty and lustful. His mind is active:
in evil doing. If he feeds not on censure and
scandal, he feels hungry. He gathers up every
chance of blaming others. Kindly and virtuous.


VARIOUS 343
deeds disagree with him; he is like a worm that
lives in poison and dies in milk. Tuka says, He
is the*embodiment of filth; mercy, kindness and
peace are far from him.


1069


A FOOLISH man gets angry with the oil-
. merchant; to gratify his resentment he eats
dry bread. A woman gets vexed with other people;
she renounces her husband, she shaves her head,
and loses his affection. Another is angry with her
neighbours; she leaves her house’and the dogs
occupy it. A man is worried by fleas, he burns his
house; he loses it, but he does not’care. A woman
is annoyed with lice; she throws off her clothes and
shows herself naked to the world. Tuka says,
Think of these; keep your true interest in view; do
not be short-sighted.


1070


HEN a man is madly fond of his wife, he
keeps on saying “ Yes, yes,” through de-

ference to her. She makes idle complaints to her
husband).as it suits her—“ See, you cannot under-
stand. my sufferings. I cannot digest my food,
though I have eaten eight pounds of wheat and six
of flour. Last market day you brought me ten
pounds of sugar and a half; it lasted me only a
week. I have pain in my stomach continually,
though I doctor myself with rice and milk and
_ sugar and ghee. In the middle of the day I have
spasms ; I lie down on my mattress quite senseless,
I cannot get to sleep, though I put flowers on my
bed ; I cannot bear the children near me. I put
sandalwood paste on my brow, yet I have fever in


344 REBUKE AND ADMONITION


my head continually. My bones have disappeared ;
my body is nothing but flesh ; no one.can describe
my sufferings.” Tuka says, She makes an ass of
her husband while he is alive, and when he is
dead she drags him down to hell.


1071


eas friendship of the vile is like the bright

hue on the moth’s wing; it vanishes in a
moment; its value is lost without service to any
one. He is filled with poison, like a snake, in his
heart. Tuka says, O God, disclose such villains
to me speedily!


1072


BLIND man thinks all men are blind, because

he has not himself eyes or sight. A sick

man finds sweet food-bitter as poison, because his

mouth has lost -itsspower to taste. Tuka says,

He who is unrighteous himself believes the three
worlds are full of falsehood.


1073


URSES on the wretch who is subject to a wife;
be has neither honour here nor life hereafter.
Curses on the wretch whose mind is set on gain ;
he cannot welcome guests with due devotion.
Curses on the lazy and sleepy man, on the greedy
and intemperate glutton. Curses on him who
cannot distinguish truth or renounce passion; who
gives up spiritual attainments for worldly honour.
Tuka says, Cursed be all such people; the censori-
ous and contentious go to hell.


VARIOUS 345
1074


ile is not your garments or your speech but your
: faults that I have censured ; perchance you
will be angry, good people, at my words. Who
knows not that food is the life of the life? Yet if
you mix poison with it, it grows poisonous. Who
knows not that gold itself is pure? but a mixture of
base metal degrades it. If a man be of pure.de-
scent and yet bear the inner traits of a low nature,
he is rendered useless by his insincerity. Tuka.
says, A true man meets with honour, but-others are
beasts of burden carrying ornaments:


1075


A DEPRAVED taste will-eat cowdung for the
sweet roots that grow in it; though food
were offered such a one, he would not have it.
‘When he is rebuked, he deems himself praised; he
looks on a thrashing as a compliment. A depraved
taste follows its-dirty inclinations, and gives not
up its base habits. Tuka goes on shaming the
wretch, to make him quit his vile ways.


1076


SNUB-NOSED man is ashamed when he looks

in a mirror ; he is vexed to see his nose as it

is. Thus, where bad qualities stand in the way,

what is true seems hostile to us. What is a

diamond to a blind man? It ig just like a flint.

Tuka says, A dog goes on barking, because he
does not know the right time to bark.


1077


HINT is enongh for a mettlesome horse ; one
we must take a thorny branch to a rough pony.


3846 REBUKE AND ADMONITION


What else can I say? Lay this one thing to heart.

Iam no quarrelsome fellow to seize you by your

garments. Tuka says, You turn your backs on me
and let your heads hang down in silence.

1078

F a flower is fragrant, that is no reason to crush

it in our hands; if a child is handsome, that is

no reason to eat’ him. [f a pear! is lustrous, that is

no reason to lick it; if we hear a musical instru-

ment, we must not open it to find the source of the

sound. If the past has made us what we are, we


must not pursue pleasure. Tukasays, Let us show
the secret truth to mankind.


1079


HEN man has reallyeaten, he shows it by
belching, otherwise there is nothing but

idle siraining. One may talk of food, whether he
has eaten. it or not; but without some real taste
- words are dry chaff. There are many dainties
made of wheat ; but let us not merely pretend to
eat them:Tuka says, If you have a bracelet on
your wrist, if would be absurd to look at it in a


mirror.
1080


F a thief counsels a thief, he will teach: him his

own trade. If a woman goes after a whore,

she will become like her. Tuka says, I fear for
what will follow, hence my anxiety.


1081


BAD man stinks like poison: avoid him?
Hear my words, you that are good: avoid
him! Speak not to him! A bad man is filthy


VARIOUS 347


within; his speech is like the impurity of a woman.
Dread a bad man as you dread that; he runs about
like a mad dog. A good man dwells not with a
bad man; I bid you flee from his country. Tuka
says, How often must I tell you? A bad man is
heil incarnate.


1082


Coa one at dinner holding his nose like

aman at stool! If a man acts so; it shows
he has no sense of his own. People go on making
plans and upsetting them—why?/Nobody knows.
Tuka says, You are weighing milk against butter-
milk !


1083


F one wears the jewel of Krishna at his throat,
and his speech beimpure, be he man or woman,
his true name is whore. If she brings no gift
in her hand, if she wears not the bracelet of a
stout spirit, such a-whore is cast ott by the saints,
they shave her head and put her toshame. Tuka
says, She fails to reach the standard and sinks into.
misery.


- 1084


F a man loses his courage, a woman may strike

him ; then no efforts can recover his authority;

itis vanished. Ifthe spirit is crushed, it cannot be

renewed by any exertions. Tuka says, If a man’s

courage is crushed, there is nothing left for him but
lamentation.


1085,


|* a Vedantin rejects the existence of his own
soul, he is guilty of slaying his teacher; the


348 REBUKE AND ADMONITION


lesson that was taught him isin vain. That which
was whispered in his ear he proclaims to be his
own shape. If he still harbours enmity to created
things, then his knowledge of Brahma has been
stolen from him. If he repeats the words he has
been taught, but nourishes self-will and anger and
speaks the language of praise or censure, then, says
‘Tuka, he wastes his speech. °


1086


Ay pleases us is death to the world. Others
reject faith and live by appearances. They
never heard what truly profits them; therefore
they go drifting from door to door. They praise
or blame according to fashion ; they follow other
people’s lead. Tuk& says, They will not listen
when they are taught, they go running to hell.


1087


O* who. duly bathes and prays oft destroys

his merit by the food he eats. His gain and
loss are equal; his income and expenses are the
same... The labourer’s capital remains just his rope
and sickle. Tuka says, A wasteful man will never
procure God.


1088


VICIOUS husband will not trust even his

wife’s brother; he will not trust his wife

with him. A man of evil intentions is a thief him-

self and says other people are thieves. Tuka says,

A man’s confidence in other people depends on his
own desires.


VARIOUS 349


1089


A S a prostitute has pimps to go before Hebi $0-

the companion of the base is base ; when one
such man rubs against another, then fire breaks
forth. Tuka says, We shall cut ‘off: their noses, or
they will teach others to be like themselves.


.1090


N unlucky man will mistake a treasure for

snakes and scorpions and bits of charcoal ;

where there is a blemish in the eye, a bright object

will look dirty. When you are dizzy) yourself, you

will see trees and rocks whirlinground you. Tuka

says, It is your own sin which bars the way to your
advancement,


1091


| | E who takes his partis like him. He comes

to sorrow and gains nothing by it; he im-
prisons his ancestors in the gaol of hell. The
king who hears of it, and punishes not the wretch, is
a scoundrel:himself. Tuk& says, His food is like the
lIgiuor of drunkenness.


1092


E who speaks thus is surely the son of a
; shameless mother; he utters not the name
of Govinda, he is ever blaming others. How shall
he fail to repose in hell? Tuka says, How shall
the knave fail to be punished ?


1093


E who is void of moral conduct and of faith ;.
who brings evil on others or cavils at them
with superior wit; he, like a dog, pollutes sweet.


350 REBUKE AND ADMONITION


food when he touches it. Tuka says, Would that
he had died on the fifth day !


1094


AINLY his mother bore him in her womb ;-she
brought forth the handle of an axe ; why-did

she not stifle him at his birth? She begot a, mis-
chievous being, a pollution to his forefathers: Tuka
says, The mother of an impious man goes.to hell.


1095


O not jest with me; I am no weaver or
spinner. Sit still and-renounce your pride ;
goand blacken your face for shame! Your jest will’
not pass here, nor other low tricks of yours. Tuka
gays, The servant of Hari knows how hollow
pleasures are,


1096


Ones there are children born in a family
who ruin their forefathers, whose treasure
is idle talk and thievish habits, and the family shares
it; the earth is full of pain beneath their weight.
Tuka-says, They waste their lives like brutes.


1097


ET them go on barking, if they will; we must

not learn their ways. A man of true faith

should refuse to believe in the wicked. To the

best of our power we must make the scoundrels
ashamed, Tuka says, It is no sin to harry them.


VARIOUS 851


1098


HE father shows his gold; the brokers settle
the price of his daughter; such is the fate of
religion in this age; the holy are degraded and the
unholy are strong. The twice-born have forgotten
their rules ; they are turned slanderous and thievish.
They conceal their books and the marks on ‘their
foreheads; they put on trousers and shoes. They
sit down on their trestles and harass the people, if
food is not given them. They write accounts at
bania’s shops; they live by dealing in oil and ghee.
They become servants to the lowest of men; if they
fail in their duties, they get beaten. The Raja
oppresses his subjects; the warrior class oppress
the wretched. Vaisyas and Sidras are naturally
a low race—but what of these? They are all mere
show; within they are black, without they are
bright. Tuka says, O God,-why sleepest thou? I
ery unto thee!


1099


66 E has killed a Brahman; he has killed a

cow; he has committed other sins.”
Such are the praises bestowed on him, the empty
fellow who has sold a daughter. He has taken the
price of human flesh, therefore men cry out against
him. His lust of gold is equal to all sins together.
It is asin in me to name it; my tongue trembles
at the words. Tuka says, Why does not the pander
beg a piece of dry bread ?


1100


HE man who reflects not is like an ass; he
carries his knowledge like a log of wood. He
loves disputation ; he loves filth, and leaves the high


352 REBUKE AND ADMONITION


roads for it. Possessed though he be of wealth,
honour or age, he does but scatter the filth that
clings to his feet. Birth or family will not redeem
a cut-throat. Tuka says, Why do you vainly carry
the marks of religion stamped upon you?


1101


|? aman has a wife and child dying of hunger

and gives himself out publicly as a great man,
what could he show people if he took them» home ?
He would have to creep away ashamed. Tuka says,.
We can tell a fellow like that; worldly people may
be deceived but not we.


1102


A REVILER of the Vedas is not of pure seed ;-

know him for a-low caste man. He who.
credits not the Vedas nor heeds the speech of the
wise, Tuka says, his pléasant words are like sweet.
food mixed with spirit; touch him not.


1103


DOG ‘cannot tell a guest. from a thief or a
.. beggar; when it catches sight of either, it
barks.wildly at him. It is no use teaching the.
creature, your words are wasted. Milk makes him
sick, but he eats filth; he will not give up his own
habits. Tuka says, What use is it to praise or
blame a scoundrel for conduct which issues from
his own thoughts?


1104


HE foal of an ass changes its form every in-
stant after it is born; even such are vile men;
their minds are unsteady. It looks well when it is


VARIOUS 353


born, but as it grows its shape is spoiled. Tuka
‘says, As it goes braying about it cannot tell the
right time from the wrong.


1105


KANARESE woman has married a Maratha,
neither can understand the other. Treat me
not thus, O husband of Lakshmi; grant me to live
in the company of the saints! She calls to him,
“ Tlli ba’ (Come here); he runs away, saying ‘She
is swearing at me!” Tuka says, Where one is un-
suitable to the other, there pleaspre is turned to
wexation.


XXI


Crue Worship


T.—Referring to Outward Observances


1106


(OME to meet him, if you will; follow me, fol-

low me! To-day, we will feed you till yow

say “ Hnough.” Come softly, come softly; do not

speak to each other. Tuka says, Leave the husks;
don’t fill your bellies with them !


1107


tae us wave lamps round the Lord of Pandbari ;

with devoted faith 1 have come to seek pro-
tection at hisfeet. He who pervades the universe,
whose form passes comprehension, he has come to

well in the house of the cowherd damsels as the
child~Krishna. He whose original form is void of
qualitiss, he has displayed himself; he is the

anduranga who stands on the brick. O wonder!
tor his worshipper'’s sake he has assumed a shape;.
he wears an anklet to make known his claim and
boast. We have waved a lamp round him to.
beseech a gift. We have exhausted speech in sing-
ing his praises. Through the spell of faith and
devotion, thou art rendered merciful, O God. Tuké
says, We cannot comprehend thy ways, O Pandu-
ranga.


OUTWARD OBSERVANCES 355


1108


HERE is a pleasure, the very essence of plea-
sure, standing in the courtyard of Vishnu’s
worshippers; there stands the altar of the tulsi
plant; the enclosure is washed with cowdung, and
painted and hung with garlands; he looks on_ the
ceremonies, and dances. He wears his jewels
unchanging, his sacred emblems, and garlands of
tulsi about his neck. His name is a stream of
nectar in the mouth; the dust of his feet sanctifies
the head. Tuka& says, Liberation never enters
the worshipper’s mind, for it seeks to take hold of
him.


1109


[ HAVE seen thy form, standing hand on hip;
therefore my spirit is at rest; I am minded
not to leave thy feet. I sing of thee with my lips;
I clap the cymbals; Idance in thy temple full of
happiness and love.. Tuka says, In comparison of
thy name all this world is worthless.


1110


O-DAY is a holy and welcome day ; the Dasra

is here; observe it well; if is an auspicious
season. Raise a cry of acclamation; take Hari to
your hearts, great and small; I bid you not to be
slothful. Come, women, come; Hari has stepped
forth to cross the frontier. Run and take lamps and
wave them round him. Let us wave them round
his holy face; let us place his feet upon our
heads. Good fortune has visited us in our own
houses. Ere we quit this body of ours, there is
open to us a happy season, that cannot wither.
“Then ”’, says one, “ seeing what a time this is, let


356 TRUE WORSHIP


no one stay to look round her. Leave every other
task and accompany Hari.” Take these words to
heart in every way; do not neglect what you hear;
you will never see nor dream of such happiness
again ; if you neglect it, there will be nothing but
lamentation left, nothing but a legend of what is
lost. Those who lose him will be infinitely
wretched; you may be sure of this; never. will
return this chance of immortality ; be it known to
you, or sad destruction will follow. He for whom
Brahma and the rest went mad, to sedure whose
leavings of food the gods entered“the water, and
becyme fish; he in half of whose frame dwells
Lakshmi, the mother of the world ; he, says Tuka,
has come without an effort of ours.


llil


E have laid foot cloths on the earth, and the
garlanded/one walks thereon, sere
in red hues the tread of his delicate feet. Adore, al
of you, the dust of his feet, who made the bridges of
stones swim in the water. ‘Make room for him,
stand silent.inyour places; be dumb and utter not
a word! Tuka proclaims the season; halls and
porches and doors are opened.


1112


H*2} has entered; pause a moment; be
patient; the fruit will follow. Be not in
haste; listen to me; sit still for a moment! The
god is shampooed, water is brought along, he is
bathed, and Bhavani dries his person He is
clothed in a vesture of golden stripes. Rakhumai
supplicates him; now the feast is served, let him
go to his seat. The feast is over; he has cleansed


OUTWARD OBSERVANCES 857


his hands; Narayana gladly reclines to rest. Tuka
says, I tell you the tale now, as many men have
told it before me.


1113


\ | OW the time has come for the final prayer;
El be vigilant all of you! Raise a shout, ery
upon him with sudden speed, clap your hands. for
the Lord of the world! If you die without doing
this, you will not reach his feet. Tuka’s brother
says, But little time is left us.


1114


flees has risen and gone «to his own place;

God remains within the temple. O wondrous
consummation! The master’s orders confer repose
on the servant that obeys them. Hari sleeps on
the eternal serpent ; there. no desire is left unful-
filled. Tuka has sent_every one outside, telling
them that god is asleep.


1115


[ HAVE waked you with noisy cries, for Iknow

not. how to dance or sing. I am no more
ashamed.or afraid or anxious for my belly’s sake.
Sit down, for you are tired. We will rub your feet, O
generots one; your body is hot. We will make you
feel the wind. One delay follows another; how can
I describe it? A mother should feel no anger
against her child. Tuka says, We will call together
all the children and the cowherds and meet you
and cry upon you.


1116


ET us take lamps and wave them round the
consort of Lakshmi. To-day my vows are


358 TRUE WORSHIP


fulfilled; blessed is this day! Attend, young maidens,
ra of you! Tuka clasps his hands as he stands near
im.


1117


O you go into your own temple; I return
/ home. O Vitthoba, love me still! I wil)
‘continue at thy feet. My spirit serves thee, though
I return to my own village. Tuka says, Perchance
I shall miss the way and come wandering back to
thy feet.
1118


A RISE, all of you;-Narayanais arisen; the

sages of the three worlds,rejoice. Raise a
shout of acclamation, with the sound of drums;
make a noise of tabors and cymbals and stringed
instruments. Fold your hands and behold his face
with reverence; lay your head at his feet. Tuka
says, Ask whatever you desire; tell him your own
joys and sorrows.


1119


HEY, who eat and take betel on the eleventh
day, enjoy as it were the excrement of dogs;
such-an one is the vilest of all men. There is no
ordinance supreme like this; they who observe it
duly, who sing and listen to the praises of Hari,
they become like Vishnu himself. He, who eats
betel on that day, eats an unclean thing; he shall
fall into the power of destruction, he shall find no
escape. He who dallies in bed with a mistress
shall contract wasting illness, life-long and violent.
He who attends not the service of Hari’s praise and
keeps others from going, know that Meru is a mole-
-hill compared to his guilt. Tuka says, They fall


OUTWARD OBSERVANCES 859


into Yama’s power, and he torments those who heed
not the eleventh day.


1120


We will sing and clap our hands at the scene

of thy worship; we will dance with spirit,
careless of the world. Mightiest among the mighty,
you are our champion ; from you proceed worldly
wealth, salvation and mystic powers. We will shoot
an arrow of speech unerring, irresistible; we will
erush all impediments. We will break the head of
time and death. Tuka’s brother says, We have no
fondness for life, not even for our own life, much
less that of others.


1121


Y OU do not lose anything by listening to the

praises of Hari, or uttering them yourself;
by visiting the temple and worshipping God; by
pilgrimages to holy places or observances of religion ;
by visiting the-saints or by purity of conduct.
Tuka says, Whether you have faith or not, you do
not lose anything by-.exerting yourself.


1122


F-you make another observe due rites, half the
- merit is yours; if you deter him, both of you
go to hell together. If you and your friend are
righteous, men will honour both of you; if pon
‘consort with a thief, no one will spare your life
You give the weapon yourself, you cause your own
destruction ; you should know the folly of this and
avoid it. Send men on pilgrimage and pay the
cost; give no imaginative sympathy to thieves.
Tuka says, Do not depart from the path of pil-
grimage, observance, sacrifice and devotion.


360 TRUE WORSHIP


1123


\ \ ) HILE you are worshipping God, should saints.

visit your house, you should put the gods:
on one side and worship the saints. The Sala-
grama is an image of Vishnu; a saint may belong
to any caste. Tuka says, Vishnu’s followers in-
crease the opportunities of devotion.


1124
I WILL become a beggar, a pilgrim of Pandhari ;
this is my chosen path, Vitthala’s name alone.
Even thus will I worship, by falling at the saints’
feet. Tuk& says, O God, I will perform that simple


service,
1125


Rea crowning pinnacle is set upon your work.

I worship you under the thousand names.
Traly the harvest is_ripe; it stands thick and
plentiful. Narayana, the final gift has fallen to our
lot. Tuka& says, Our bellies are filled ; we are saved
from the cry.of need.


T1.—Inner Qualities are more than Outward.
Observances


1126


4 VERY action should be offered to God; this

is the only worship that reaches him. Every
action is perfected by this rule of conduct, that
the worshippers are members of God. This is the
one secret; this is the message of religion. Tuké
says, It is true; it is true; three times I say it.
is true.


INNER QUALITIES 361.


1127


HAT true worshipis performed with earthly

pomp? Let us light lamps, to show the

way to Vaikuntha; all treasure is stored up there..

Why should we perform an idle task with perish-

able things of earth ? Tuka says, Be my escort.the
people of Vishnu.


1128


i ae contemplation is the chief worship that.

should be paid him. All materials of worship
are sinful; to relinquish all plans is true sweetness..
In obedience is true piety ; O knowing ones, know
this secret. Tuka says, This attitude of the mind.
never wearies and is easily maintained.


1129


GR platform is filled with seats ; we have sent.

for the ancient mistress of our line; the
mistress of Vaikuntha comes running swiftly—Come.
to the scene, dear lady Vitha, with your purple lustre:
and keen eyes; when shall I behold your sweet and
holy face? We offer thee for incense our faults of
ignorance and passion ; we dedicate to thee every
power of our souls. Make thyself all ready, and:
come running speedily. We will slay thee our own
hearts for a victim ; we will offer thee the thirst of
desire and passion. We have prepared our loving:
faith as a portion for thee to eat; we have filled the.
dish and called loudly upon thee. For drums thou:
shalt have the sounds of the heart in holy rapture ;:
come thyself and enter among us ;. take the presents
that are offered thee; heal Tuk&é and make him:
whole.


362 TRUE WORSHIP


1130


“T HAVE purified the temple in my house;

pledges are my store and sincere faith. I have
‘made for thee a garland of the mind’s three ele-
‘ments ; I tell you my vow and my desire. My-God
is present at the scene; he dances amid the crowd
-of Vishnu’s followers. He pervades my frame, yet
he keeps our two beings distinct. O man, you have
‘your own treasure within you, but you have for-
gotten tbe place of it; the foolish inmates of your
breast have spoiled and corrupted it.. Now no one
knows the truth save my Godialone. We must be
blind and forget the place before we need to search.
She gives eyes to the blind; limbs to the lame;
-children to the barren ; our lady Vitha fulfils every
vow. How many are the feeble of the time gone
-by whose riddles she has unravelled! Tuka says, It
needs no time, no time with you; fulfil my desires
and then lead me to perfect bliss !


1131


I HAVE framed my desire, do you attend to it;

let your hand set me free from fear. If Iam
-aftlicted by other and evil spirits, my duty will be
to repeat your name. Come to this unequalled
‘scene, which I have prepared for you. The name
-of Hari rises aloft, mingled with cries and the clash
-of music. We bow before thee, God of Gods, Lord
‘supreme; come running, O merciful one, O master
-of delight, in whom I delight! Delay not, for all is
prepared! Tuk& says, Come thou, who art our
ancient goddess !


INNER QUALITIES 363


1132


56 Bae temple in my house is pure ; it belongs to no

other than thee ; no one need seek the like of
it in the three worlds. Come throw yourselves
down before her, put up some prayer to her! She
will sweep you clean and drive out the demon of
the world. Amid the tumult of lust, the prison of
the three qualities, if the name of Hari falls on the
ears, she stands up. Though the spirit of self lay
hold of a man, with lust and rage and spite, yet
they flee away when love fills him; they vanish
altogether. Though affection and fondness have
harboured within you, yet they vanish with one
impulse when they behold this scene. Tuka says,
If you give him faith, all doubts will be cleared from
your mind; you need not go wandering elsewhere.


1133


HEN raw_thieves go forth to steal, they be-

have in strangers’ houses as though they

were in their own. They gain nothing and get

themselves_into trouble; they lose their ears and

hands and feet. A foolish fellow succeeds in

nothing;-to him the injuries he receives are plea-

‘sures. | Tuka says, If men know not the secret, the
fruit-of their actions overtakes them.


1134
LL my religion is the name of Vitthoba; I
perform no task save to utter it, What
knowledge have [? The saints have been sent by
God; therefore they show their kindness to me.
“‘Tuké says, What authority have I, to make known
this path to men?


364 TRUE WORSHIP


1135


ITHATI steps forth: let her influence travel on ;

cast out the deities of the past; wrench your:

neck with a jerk. The only warrior goddess has

entered your body; she will drive out all disorders.

‘Tell my devotee to worship me with faith ; if-you

slay for me a shaggy ram, you have offered. me

complete worship. If you are obstinate, I will not

visit the spot.” Tuka says, She visited ourancestors

and has come into the family ; worship her, all of
you, waving round her a tray of lights.


1136


I HAVE made him jeweis of speech to adorn his
- person, thus I have ‘worshipped the Lord of
the universe. I have made a dainty meal of faith,
thus I have fed Narayana. I have given him the
activities of my body for water to wash his hands ;
for a purification ofthe mouth I have offered him
my mind; I haye given him choice betel nut of my
delighted senses; I finally have crowned him with
tulsi leaf. J have made him a lamp of devoted faith ;.
I have‘given him my body for a seat. Tuka serves
his feet,in silence; he has laid god to rest within
his house.


1137


ABHAL and rui plants are not trees of wishes,.

for they grant not the fruits of desire to.

mankind; there are many cows and buffaloes and

goats, but the wishing cow is different from them

all. Tuka says, If God will show himself, it will
be a supreme merit to have met him. :


INNER QUALITIES 365


1138


HAVE no desire to make a request; I need

not restrain my tongue. I will not praise
what is worthless, through any private desire.
We ought to take our share on the books, as every
body knows. Tukaé says, What sort of service, O
God, is due to the master here ?


1139


Woe ends in peace; we exhaust our-
selves by seeking something more. You
know this, O saints; you have pronounced the true
rule. We must endure cheerfully whatever hap-
pens from hour to hour.. Tuka says, I place my
head at your feet, O saints.


1140


I HAVE supplied the needs of all creatures; I

have given away all my estate. All times are
pure to me, day and night. I have seized the
holiest of allmoments. I have visited holy places,
with ceremony and sacrifice; I have duly observed
all pious rules ; I have received the reward in full ;
I have offered all to the infinite one. Tuka says,
Now, 1 speak the unspeakable; body, speech and
mind have vanished from me.


1141


ohare are worshippers who are heedless of the

body, and have foiled the snares of desire.
‘They have sought their pleasure in Narayana;
‘wealth, people, mother and father delight them not.


366. TRUE WORSHIP


At the end of all things, Govinda is behind and
before us; he suffers no trouble to oppress us. Tuka
says, You should forward those good actions which
help mankind ; if you terrify men, you will go down


to hell.
1142


T E is God’s darling who knows the delights of

adoration ; I will heed no other, be he wise
or learned. Whoso poeee his thoughts on God’s
name and form, his slave am I.. Tuka says, He is
pure who knows the nine forms of worship.


XXII
Che use of Images in Worship


1143


UST beyond us we see that purple lustre—how
glorious! with his noble crown -of peacock.
feathers stitched together. As you look upon him,
fever and illusion vanish ; adore then the prince of
the Yadavas, the lord of Yogis. He who filled with
passion the sixteen thousand, royal damsels, fair
creatures, divine maidens, he stands upon the hank
with the lustre of a million\moons; it is fastened
in jewels on his neck and/merges in the lustre of
his form. This God/who bears the wheel is the
chief of the Yadavas ;.bim the thirty-three crores.
of gods adore; the demons tremble before him ;
his dark blue countenance destroys sin. How fair
are his feet with saffron stained ! How fortunate is
the brick that is grasped by his feet! The very
thought of him makes fire cool, therefore embrace
him witb experience of your own. The sages, as
they see his face, contemplate him in the spirit ; the:
father of the world stands before them in bodily
shape. Tuka is frenzied after him; his purple
form ravishes the mind.


1144


HEY form the Lord of creatures in clay, but
what other name can they give to clay?

The worship .of Siva reaches Siva ; the clay remains
within the clay. Thus the saints worship us, but
God receives the worship. We are the servants


368 | THE USE OF IMAGES IN WORSHIP


of the saints; we desire not the rankof saints. We
have formed a Vishnu of stone, but the stone is not
Vishnu ; the worship of Vishnu is offered to Vishnu ;
the stone remains in the form ofastone. We have
‘formed out of bronze the mother of the world;
‘but the bronze is not the mother. She takes the
worship which is offered to her ; the bronze remains
what it was. Tuka says, The highest bliss exists in
‘the perfect alone; O sir, he to whom worship be-
longs by right, he must take it; we remain no
more than stone images.


1145


F men are habitations of God, we should fall at
their feet, but we should leave alone their
habits and aims. Fire is good to drive away cold,
but you must not tie it up/and carry it about in a
cloth, Tuka says, A scorpion or a snake is a
habitation of Narayana; you may worship him
afar, but you must not touch him.


1146


Bee dwells in all things; there is no place

void of him; then how can you say an image
‘is not God? If men have no faith, how much ex-
planation is needed to move them? They are infi-
‘dels. by their own inclination. The faith which
inspited the utterances of the saints finds no
approval from contentious men. Tuka says,
Possessing not the strong faith of the saints, wicked
-ones have brought charges against God.


1147


1S ee Y has brought and bestowed on me the
heart of this world. Heartily have I em-
‘braced him, with firm and concentrated faith. I


THE USE OF IMAGES IN WORSHIP 369


have induced him to reveal himself; he stands up-
right, close at hand, and easy of attainment. Tuka
says, I have made him my servant; he has de-
scended at my speech.


1148


HIS merciful God will show himself to each in

a form that each can comprehend. I have
embraced the feet on the brick, where the embodied
and unembodied gods dwell together. He is like
sugar that is altogether sweet; if part of it be set
aside, it is not found defective. Tuka says, Whatso-
ever I do, it is Hari on whom the’experience rests.


1149


I HAVE sought out évery sign; I have brought

him before my mind. I have beheld the prince
who dwells at Pandharpur. If we follow him, what
shall we lose? LThave seen those even feet; they
are set within my soul. There is no ceremony
needed save tosee him; meditation will effect all;
you need observe no holy seasons. Yuka says, All
foulness-is. cleansed away at once; men are puri-
fied‘and dance on the pebbly shore.


1150


F the mind remembers the father of wisdom,
the consort of Lakshmi, what does it need
more? Who would share his mind with any other
thoughts? Panduranga is the perfect sum of plea-
sure. We will sing and dance in time and clap our
hands; there is bliss among the company of


24


370 THE USE OF IMAGES IN WORSHIP


Vaishnavas. In a single pore of his body there are
infinite worlds, yet we simple people have brought
him upright before us by faith. We have treated
the world as false; before us are no more fetters but
true liberation. Tuka says, I have found repose
through the might of him to whose name I hold
myself subject.


1151


\ \ 7 can. now satisfy our desire to sing his

praises and gaze on his form. Excellent
is Panduranga, our dark blue/god, lustrous and
lovely. He is the essence of all bliss; his face is a
treasure of perfect attainment... Tuka says, Doubt
not there is no limit to his joys.


1152


EITHER the Vedas nor the Srutis know

thee, nor any save us faithful worshippers.

We love to.see thy visible form ; this is our reward,

O Lord ‘ofthe senses. Faith gives us strength;

we will-set you in our hearts. Tuka says, You
stand watching; you will come to our cry.


1153


E do not ask for milk, with the strong

elements in it; but give us at least butter-

milk to help us; we ask not for food, but give us

atleast water freely. Tuka says, Give me something

visible to pray to; let some one fulfil my helpless
desires.


THE USE OF IMAGES IN WORSHIP 871


1154


ff Deore is none but thyself can describe thee,

none in the three worlds. The serpent of the
thousand mouths grew weak and weary over the
task ; every one of his tongues was split into two.
O Narayana, inapprehensible, invisible, unlimited ;
infinite, unembodied truth and intelligence! Thou
dost assume name and form at thine own desire;
thou dost assume name and shape responsive to our
own faith. Tuka says, If thou wilt show thyself,
then, O Narayana, we shall know thee.


XXII


False Religions Observances
1155


ITH their straining eyes and painted features.

they dazzle the beholders,.they tell their
disciples they have attained union with Ged; it is
alt a false uproar, they are cheating them. They
light lamps and elose the room about them; they
convey their instructions inthe night time. They
adorn the floor of the yard with pictures and spread
a clean covering, and describe their mystic figures ;
they hang up a curtain and set lamps in the four:
corners ; they sit in quaint postures and go through
motions with théir.hands. He says, ‘“ You must.
offer the gods a dish of rich food, many kinds.
of delicacies; the discourse is over; eat now a.
morsel.” They rinse their mouth with liquor:
instead_of water. He has made kis living by his
false doctrine ; he ruins the faithful ; he calls upon
them for a vow, and bids them cry, ‘‘O teacher, O
teacher.” The pure truth he has drowned; the
noble character of a teacher he makes a means.
of self-indulgence. He has extinguished all the
rules and drowned the Veda; the admonitions.
of the Sastras he has swept away. He practises
not the concentration of yoga, nor control of the
breath ; he abandons all rules of conduct and auster-
ities. He has done away with renouncing the
passions, and confounded the worship of Hari;


FALSE RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES 873


degenerate wretch, he has increased sin. Tuka
says, He and his office descend into hell; he brings
‘his ancestors down into the pit.


1156


ABANDONING Hara and Hari, they put their
faith in worthless deities; listen how they

have brought God and piety into contempt. They
wear strings of cowries on their necks and. carry a
filthy wicker basket; they wander from door to
door with their chains about their necks; they are
dogs in human shape. They paint their faces with
vermilion and gnash their teeth; they carry Satvi’s
jute. They worship the monstrous belly of Ganesa
and the elephant’s brute trunk. Their idle desires
‘have led them from the path; their faith and
worship are false; suchare they, says Tuka, who


‘worship any other than Vishnu and Siva.


1157


F we love.the Lord of Pandhari, whom shall we
call\God? I feel deeply ashamed to call any
‘other.God. Who would throw away the diamond
and pick up flints? Tuka says, So it would be,
to abandon a leader like Hara and Hari.


1158


Mee have been lost through not worshipping
the Lord of Pandhari; they worship the
greedy and false gods that beg and pursue men for
food. They have forgotten the lord of all men.
Tuka says, They fall at last into the hands of Yama.


874 FALSE RELIGIOUS CBSERVANCES


1159


HE mother of the Saktas is a sow, that eats

ordure in the street ; it ig her nature to do 80,

and she runs after it. The mother of the Saktas

is an ass, braying from door to door. Tuka says,

They are the children of an adulteress ; it is culpable
even to speak of them.


1160


| | E who worships the female energy is verily

moulded out of sin; O Panduranga, let him
not contaminate me! He is lustful-and wrathful,
a drinker of spirits, delighting in every vile offence.
Without hesitation, says Tuké, he commits sin of
any kind.


1161.


RINCE and subject alike are perverse, where

a Sakta makes his dwelling in a land.

There is a rank crop of misdeeds ; piety is a beggar

in the village.. The land bears no harvest, it

trembles beneath its burden; the winds disperse

the clouds. Tuké says, Suffering of every kind
comes joyfully to dwell there.


1162


bi a region where an ass of & Sakta dwelis

there is a heap of sins. He has blown good
conduct to the winds, and bidden the senses rage
unchecked. If he conceives a passion for 2 woman,
he repeats her name with fierce incantations. He
is a drinker of spirits, a low wretch; his mind is
a pit of uncleanliness. He is not ashamed, for


FALSE RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES 875


all his beard, to sing the praises of a harlot, Tuka
says, The cursed woman will take him to herself
at last !


1163


a procure intelligence of past, present. or

future is an achievement of worthless people.
We servants of Vishnu ought to contemplate him ;
what is already ensured comes to pass in the course
of fate. To practise magic, to trade for reputation,
it puts a distance between us and Narayana. Tuka
says, This world is overpowering ;/the eight mystic
powers are a grievous burden.


1164


1" any speech leads you into error, you are de-

ceived in making friendly or affectionate use
of it. If the Vedie rule enjoins it, then it. is
necessary ; but muchrof it is an evil. The fetter of
fluent speech is>-altogether mischievous. Tuka
says, It is well to put it far from you.


1165


HEY cut the throats of others, there is no end

to their cruelty; poor wretches, they aré

running into debt, they will have to taste.of hell.

They paint a red stone to make a god; they

promise an offering to it. Tuka says, This is mere

child’s play ; they would cry out, if others hurt them
but a little.


1166


ee are helpless through ignorance; others
are carried away by knowledge. It is clear


376 FALSE RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES


that a dumb man cannot speak; but what use is a
talkative man? There is a hindrance in each
direction—a well on one side and a tank on the
other. Tuka says, Your past history keeps the
truth from you.


1167


OU pay entrance-money, and store up sin, in
looking on boys disguised for the stage. If
you listen to Hari’s ministers singing” his» praise,
there merit is secured in growing measure. If
some one in Hari’s part steals boy’s clothes to show
the theft of the cowherd damsels, the sin is that of
incest. Tuka says, Such is the world now-a-days ;
people love the outward show, they have renounced
service and piety. :


1168


N O one has ever praised a vicious character,
for we have venerable rules descended from

the past. If we cite in our defence examples of

man’s weakness, we employ a false agreement
‘“ Spirits ” and“ honey ” are names similar iff form ;

but the name of the one does not justify us in

drinking the other. Tuka says, I borrow these

thoughts from others; I scatter them abroad like

rain, to fall as they may.


1169


id Byes gods and goddesses smeared: with
vermilion,—who could worship such mas-
ters? They ery out for their bellies’ needs, and
demand a handful of sin. They worry others like
beggars, for their own sakes; what can they give
to men? I have known what it is to wait on them;


FALSE RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES 377


it is in truth a base and vile inclination. A slave can
only promise hospitality, but a master will offer it
with hisown hand. Words of compassion, designed
for the moment, are all an empty show. How
much water can there be in a rivulet ?—not enough
to wet the lips or satisfy the desires. It is all
weariness, from beginning to end, even if it ripens
through long penances to fruit. They keep their
faces covered with red paint, and wear‘a heavy
garment upon them; they punish themselves
with cracks; only beggars call such things gods.
Such is not Narayana, nor Janardana, who pervades
the world. Tuka says, Meditate on that God, all
others come to worship.


AXIYV


Our Attitude towards Craditional
Forms of Worship


1170


MID all the elder goddesses whither should
worship be directed ? If you-embrace faith,
they vanish away. Things may’ look like each
other, when they belong to different purposes; if
you go to the bottom, you will see that these beings
can bear no strokes from above. The chief honour
belongs to one at the head; the rest are esteemed
according to certain rules; there is a scale, as when
large and small vessels are arranged in a pyramid.
Tuka says, Go on worshipping them: no one can
be angry with you; they will diffuse light in their
own proper places.


1171


OU should not even listen to unholy words.

-Whoso contemns the story of Hari, a wasting

pain shall fall upon him. His caste may be high,

but he is a vile and sinful wretch. Tuka says, He
is as sinful as an unfilial son.


1172
Bias way leads to every stage of salvation; the
highest worship is that of God manifest.
The form that is cherished in our hearts displays
himself when he perceives the purity of our faith.


TRADITIONAL FORMS OF WORSHIP 379:


The name of Hari is seed and fruit; the perfection
of merit and pious conduct. It is the key of all
accomplishments, it dispels anxious care. Where
thy name is repeated and thy praises sung and the
servants of Hari lay aside shame, there a delicious:
draught is poured forth, the snares of the entangling
world are severed. The signs of his presence dwell
within us, God stations himself there; his powers
come to visit us unbidden ; there is no more birth
and death in store for us. You need not abandon
your own order of life, nor the pious ways that
have grown up in your family; trouble not over-
anything but the one sufficient name of Vittboba..
Narayana, the Declarer of the Vedas, the unem-
bodied Brahma, of the Yogis, to the emancipated, .
says Tuka, he is the primal and perfect spirit, to
us simple people he shows himself incarnate.


1173


Y OU cannot.perfectly observe ceremonial rules,.
and if you fail in aught, you bring about
your fall; but the list of names you may recite at
any time ;-it is easily mastered by the simple and
faithful. All forms of repentance lie at men’s feet.
when they glorify the Vaishnavas. Tuka says,.
Repeat his name joyfully ; it brings no guilt.


XxXV


Against False Ceachers and
Timpostors
1174


“TNALSE teachers have set upon-me ; now there-

fore what shall I say, O Vitthala? They are
‘like an eater of onions who wishes for musk, and
forgets that he is as poor as_a beggar. They tor-
ment me with questions of things they comprehend
‘not; though I fall at their feet, they will not leave
‘me. I know nothing but thy feet; thou alone art
-allin allto me. Tuk& says, Would a nail were
-driven through their lips! how often must I speak
to these quarrelsome disputants ?


1175


A HERETIC may find Ged in his own soul,

devotion in feeding himself, salvation in
-death. People are ruined by these servants of the
-flesh-;“they have made out the Vedas and Puranas
to be falee. They reason in their own capricious
way, declaring that thereis no re-birth. Tukasays,
“The penalties of hell leap upon their back; these
-rogues forget guilé and merit.


1176


Y OUR dress may attract compliments, but
which of you isatrue Brahmana? Confess
xthis to me, then I will present you to the saints.


FALSE TEACHERS AND IMPOSTORS 381


You may be experts and skilled to perceive the:
merits and faults of people’s looks. Tuka says,.
You are guilty of sin, if you conceal the truth.


1177


ISTEN not to such an one; the wisdom he
discourses is like chaff, void of devotion..
He extols the doctrine that seeks absolute union,
he sets aside devotion; this is grief and weariness
both to speaker and listener. Saying “I am
Brahma”, he nourishes his own person;we should
not speak to such a disputant as he. If one turns
from the Vedas, and talks heresy, the knave’s face
is blackened when he meets the/saints. If one
denounces the love of God.and. the saints, he is
viler, says Tuka, than an eater of dogs.


1178


ol Rare ee is no greater hypocrite than he who

listens to the voices of the crowd. He will
attain the dignity of strayed cattle; the servants
of Yama willbeat him on the back. Some in their
own judgment are skilled in words, yet they inter-
pret the Vedas differently. Tuka says, They do:
not concentrate their faith, hence their mouths are
filled with dirt.


1179


“W BEN a man has learned to use blustering

words, his speech is like dry bread without
moisture in it. Who will attend to such an one?
We hear him as though we heard him not. He goes
from house to house professing knowledge, wasting
his labour in pounding chaff. Tuka says to him-
self, How empty and hollow their minds are!


382 FALSE TEACHERS AND IMPOSTORS


1180


A MAN who prates excessively and draws a

single line on his forehead, while he is as
‘tricky as an actor, such a talkative fellow is nota
follower of Vishnu. He declares this and that man
-out of caste; he honours one and harries another.
. Tuka says, Such an one has ne compassion in him}


1181


np REBe are men whose speech is sweet to hear;

they talk philosophy, but in their heart they
.are worthless. Such cheating rogues are fit neither
for this world nor the next. Listen, for I tell you,
-you must not let this dustdefile you. Tuka says, A
bone sets the dogs quarrelling.


1182


HEY ¢all themselves saints, but no one sees it

in their actions ; who would put faith in such

men? Their purity vanishes with the hour of

ibrouble. Inthe rains, brooks look like rivers ; when

the flood passes, not a drop remains. A pebble,

Says Tuka, may look like a diamond afar, but it
-cannot stand the anvil.


1183


HERE is such.an one as says, “ Study my
songs!” This he cries as he goes from house
ito house ; yet he knows not the outskirts of his own
village; he feels ashamed if he leaves his own
corner. He collects fragments from others’ songs;
by poetical devices he simulates pathos. Tuka
says, A man may wear the signs of devotion; alas!
this avails not before Govinda.


FALSE TEACHERS AND IMPOSTORS 383


1184


E knows not what is right; he is dragged
along by the organs of sense; he continues
prating in the words which he has learned. Such
n one goes to hell himself and would take forty-two
families and the world besides with him. He shuts
his eyes and utters things unfit for speech ; he talks
idle nonsense to gratify his pride. Tuka says, I
have scrutinized him; I know him forvone who
dances in imitation of others.


1185


A eres grow tong hair on their heads, and receive
demons into their bodies; but they are not
saints, there is no sign of the spirit about them.
They assemble men and women and declare various
omens. Tuk& says, They are impostors ; Govinda is
not with them.


1186


N this evil age men find their means of spiritual
attainment in long hooka pipes ; they accustom
themselves to drink spirits and smoke bhang. They
make speeches about union with God, but they
discover a fast attachment to vices ; disciples follow
them~in abundance; they have fat bodies, staves,
and mortars for bhang. They love honour and
wealth ; they are full of high desires ; they are filthy
heaps of outward pretences. Tuka says, I have
rated them well and leave them now.


1187


HEN the preacher is fond of money, the
listeners are alarmed. They say, he knows


384 FALSE TEACHERS AND IMPOSTORS


not what he sings, he opens his mouth to get some-
thing given him. He is as greedy as a cat; he goes
begging from door to door. Tuka says, The
measure and the sack are both empty.


1188


A SHOW of courtesy on the face, while-the
disposition within is very different—what is
the use of such hypocrisy? It merely simulates
sincerity in public. To prepare a banquet.and to
poison your guests would be to mislead them
to their death. Tuka& says, A Thug conceals his
murderous trick; he acts courteously as though he
were @ respectable man.


1189


ite the preacher is fettered by desire of money and

the listeners fearful of expense, the worship is
all in vain ; each party alike is greedy ; they are both
met together, but their attention is distracted,—
such is the case. ‘The sack is full of measures, but
all are empty, says Tuka.


1190


E_turns to worship God when he meets with
good fortune, while his mind is set on un-
righteous deeds. Curse his affectation of virtue!
He pollutes his mind before he acts. He loves
wealth, he heartily desires gain; he has no particle
of the devotee’s spirit. Tuka says, He gains neither
one nor the other ; his life is wasted.


, 1191


[? you have any doubts when you utter his
name, you do not know his nature. Listen
while I tell you of him with absolute faith; eat


FALSE TEACHERS AND IMPOSTORS 885:


joyfully what you have in your houses. One may
carry the basket, the rosary and the marks of his
sect, yet he is an impostor who deceives mankind.
He extends his hand, for he has not renounced
all; he shows people a stone and worships wealth
himself. He soils his body with ashes and idly
boasts himself the strongest man alive. He suffers
desire to lay hands on his neck to bind him, \ It
comes and swallows him up. What comfort is
there in ashes, in lying face downwards with up-
lifted legs? Such an one brings pain and grief on
himself ; he falls into hell, yet in his folly he will
not run away from it. He has learnt to vociferate
loud cries, and collect a crowd of women and.
children. He fouls his body and demands small
coins; but all his efforts are wasted. To show
people that he is the strongest man alive he stands.
up and takes a plank and breaks it, he rubs his
knees and elbows and pretends he has hurt himself.
They wear themselves out by these worthless tricks ;.
they shave their heads for a pretence; unholy
deceit lurks in their hearts; they pollute their
bodies and gain nothing by it. Do not play any
tricks with this dust and noise; take the fragrant.
powder-of civet and sandal. You will enjoy the
sweet odour along with others; grandeur that is
paid for is a worse disgrace. _ By tricks like these
men have brought pain on themselves, without.
winning either wisdom or power. They are smitten
on their backs; their faces are darkened by shame,
yet their tongue waters for lustful pleasurés. Listen
to what I Tuka tell you: break away from these
tricks ; learn noneofthem. Come, let us eat first to
fill our hungry stomachs; when we are satisfied, we
will think of outward graces.


25


386 FALSE TEACHERS AND IMPOSTORS


1192


“\7 OU may treat me, O God, as you will, but I

4, ‘will not call these men saints ; for they have
set their hearts on rule and wealth. Their desires
have made them the victims of hypocrisy. Though
they be Brahmanas, I shall hold them none such.
They bear knowledge blindly as a burden. \Tuka
says, I shall not fear.mankind in the person of
such men, though I suffer for it.


1193


HE sacred marks, the cap, the) garland, all
the furniture of God he carries for his belly’s
sake—a vile burden. He wears in his ear the
tulsi, the darbha grass in his hair; hypocritically
he holds the end of his nose. As he sings the
praises of God, he weeps and throws himself on the
ground; tears flow from his eyes, though no true
tears. Tuk says, Such is a deceitful impostor ;
Govinda is not with him.


1194


6 bet you lay hands on them and seek to
prevent them, they go violently down into
hell..No persuasion will move these slaves of
women. They have wasted their lives; they shall

come to utter destruction. Tuka says, O Lord of

Pandhavi, they bring a stain on thy worship.


1195


HOSE who give or take money for singing

God's praises go to dwell in the lowest pit of

hell. They suffer the tortures of Rava, Rava and
Kumbhpaka; Narayana takes no pity on them,

» There they cut them up with swords and roll them


FALSE'‘TEACHERS AND IMPOSTORS 387


-on the hot ground. Tuk& says, They shall not
escape hell; they are caught in the grip of Yama.


1196


i Bae practise worship according to their own

ideas of pleasure and they say, “ Narayana
has enjoyed it.” They say, ‘God is present.every-
where,” and they break their heads over the mean-
ing of the Vedas. They are asbamed to bear the
ascetic’s gourd and to wear his patched clothes.
‘Their desires are set on shawls and pots.and money ;
they assert in every speech that these things are
perishable. Tuka says, God will never come to =
ameet such people, though they be.re-born time after
time till the end of the world.


, 1197
bine who take and pay money for glorifying
. his name go both of them to hell. Make
‘yourself fully into Brahma ; remember the name of
Rama without ceasing. Do not be carried away
‘by a sweet voice, or you will go to visit Yama.
‘Tuka says, He counts the world too little for a
present;.he stretches out his hands for alms; fie
upon him!
1198


URSED be their shameless trade, that look to’
, the alms pot for support ; Naréyana pays no
heed to such. They have no faith in the feet of
God; their devotion is a vain outward show.
‘They lead vicious lives ; they have not offered their
soulto God. They pretend to be weak and humble,
and make mankind uneasy. In this, however, they
are truly wretched—that they destroy all con-
fidence in themselves. What will the Lord of the


388 FALSE TEACHERS AND IMPOSTORS


world not do for you, if you make truth your stay
and support? Tuka says, The secret is, clasp his-
feet closely.


1199


HE belly with its disguises and its clamorous
outcries sets us on praise and censure. «Mat-

ted hair and ashes are a scandal when the mind
has neither patience nor forbearance ; they are like
a decorated corpse, a dead and lifeless body. Tuka.
says, I speak of one who is passionate and goes on.


talking folly.
1200


E keeps his wealth tied up, and goes about
begging for pity ; he entreats and harasses
kindly people. This is the piety of a scoundrel; ‘the:
persistence of a rogue ; it ends in a sound thrashing,.
He conceals his god's house and pretends to have
lost it; he howls and affects to be worshipping.
stones. Tuka says, These are the tricks of a
monkey ; the obscene motions of a whore.


1201


Ai speech of a Thug is irreproachable ; but his-

secret thought is how to ensnare you. How
goodly he is outside! yet he is not sincere; he is a
low scoundrel. He wears the mark of a saint, the
head gear and the rosary on his neck, but he takes”
you aside in the darkness and strangles you. Tuka:
says, He is a rogue.


1202


F a man talks of divine knowledge, while his
heart is full of pride in wealth, what pleasure
does it yield the soul to serve him? Many in this.


FALSE TEACHERS AND IMPOSTORS 389


‘Kali age have turned saints to fill their bellies.
Rare indeed, says Tuka, is the man before whom I
-fall down.


1203


| E presents the buttermilk fo his pupils ; he

declares that the butter is Narayana,-and
‘therefore he swallows it. Such philosophers are
:as stupid as buffaloes, ruined by their desires ;
they preach purity to the world, but are no more
“holy themselves than Mangs. Victims to their
lust and love of chatter, Tuka& says, They are slaves
of loquacity and lust ; they wear an outer garb of
-ostentation.


"1204


Zh HE world is ruined for this piece of knowledge,
which is worth no more than an onion ; lust
-and age and evil passions break forth. He de-
‘mands money for worship; what does he say to hig
pupil? Tuka says, Where is Brahma in his doings?
“They are a carnival of lust.


1205


()°3 Gosavis profess that they beg no alms;
they set their disciples to preach. A stone
‘boat is naturally heavy ; how can it bear a freight
of\stones? Tukaé says, They bring disgrace on
‘their garb, though they iry to play the part.
1206
BY, Gaaicae has not found his own true gain seeks
to ruin those who sit before him. This
mischievous trick of his will swell his heap of guilt;
his purposes will hasten on his fall. When a man
‘has to pass-through what he has stored up for


390 FALSE TEACHERS AND IMPOSTORS


himself, what can God do for him? Tuk says,.
You should ask your way from one who is already
going to the sarhe village.


1207


OME proclaim themselves teachers and collect:

a crowd of followers, who are not men_but:

dogs, though they have neither a tail nor four legs.

Adulterous and drunken brutes, they fatten their’

bodies. Tuka says, They are fully prepared to go-
down to the pit.


1208


HERE is no one who will save others; there-
are plenty who will destroy.what is sound.
We hada store of pure gold ‘in the house ; the gold-
smith has destroyed it and made it into ornaments..
Where there is moist, dark soil, and black seed sown:
within it, how could-you get hold of the actual seed
again? Wheat is all the same by nature, but it is:
made into many viands, cakes, porridge and boiledi
grain. Tuka says, Some people can make even
arr taste ‘sweet, while a bad cook will spoil
utter.


NOTES


Abhanga, Line.
16 3 To read the Vedas was an ancient privilege’
of the Brahmanas and Tuka was a Sidra.
21 «6 AS a sign of resolution made.


29 This Abhanga is by Tuka’s brother, A few
by this writer have been translated as speci-
mens, but most of them have been omitted.


30 1 A gang of labourers.
9 T.e., hell.
8% Kunbi, the peasant class of the Deccan.
387 1 The desires, as often, are spoken of under the’


image of a herd of unruly cows.
388 6 A Math is a school where Sanskrit and phi-
losophy are taught.

18 There are many ascetics who seek by austeri-.
ties to bend the unseen powers to their will.
Some such devotee is referred to; I do not.
know the meaning of his cry.

16 Agama, a Sastra (or Scripture) containing
magical spells. The reference is specially to-
the Atharva-Veda.

aa 2 “‘T am not a regular religious mendicant.”
55 1  \Tuka’s illustrations are frequently drawn:
from the language of trade.

5 Recurring to the constant idea that men
receive from God something proportioned to
what they bring—their faith—and also to what-
they desire.

61 4 The leaves of the neem-tree are made into-
plaisters.
62 8 The triple hill is Kajilasa, the hill of heaven.

14.‘ The seventeenth principle in the Self (Purw-
sha) ; this, like much else in Tuk, is a reminis-.
cence of the Sankhya philosophy.

80 Raghava, Kesava and Babaji were those
reformers who popularized Krishna worship in-


392 NOTES


Abhanga. Line.


the Deccan in the fifteenth century. Tuka
relates that Babaji met him in a dream.


85 1 The goddess Vitthoba considered as a female,

95 to 96 Two of the Krishna Abhangas are inserted
here as specimens of the poet’s delight, in
Krishna.

101 12 = Possibly, ‘I resolved to live in it,”or “T
resolved to repair it.’’

105 to 111 Complaints of Tuka’s wife.

105 10, It is usual to smear the floors of Hindu


houses with cow-dung, which is warm to the
feet, and is esteemed clean.

110 1 People come to feed him out of respect.

111 1 The first words are the wife’s ; then follows
Tuka’s answer.

115 to 118 Relating to the incident of Tuka’s persecu-
tion by Mumbajf.

115 1 =‘ Tuké wished to walk round the temple of
Vitthoba at Dehu; Mumbaji had closed the
road with thorns, to protect his field; Tuké
removed the thorns and Mumbaji assaulted
him with one of the bushes.

2 Or “T ought not to have forgotten the old
tule, ‘ Leave the wicked alone ’.’’

120 When Tuk@ was staying at Lohogaon at the
invitation of the villagers, the wife of a Teli,
who was entertaining him, poured some hot

\ oil over him.

- 121 to 122 A young woman who attended Tuka’s services
fell in love with him ; these are the verses in
which he rebuked her overtures, ~

128 to 125 Written when Lohogaon was attacked by a
band of dacoits. :

127 1 Even ; i.e., placed close by, side by side.

4 The heavens of the Vedic deities do not
compare in happiness with the joy of union
with Vitthoba. :


NOTES 393


Abhanga. Line.


128


182
138


132
148


147
152


153


159


8


10


10


10


wo


The Tulsi is a small dark herb (Ocimum
Sanctum), common everywhere in India. It
is specially associated with Vishnu; according
to one account Tulsi was a female disciple of
Vishon, who excited the jealousy of his wife
Lakshmi and by her was turned into this herb.


The colour of Krishna is dark blue,


The disc is one of the emblems of Vishnu;
it is a missile like a quoit for use in war.


A scientific belief!


Andropogon Muricatum, whose roots—more
familiar than its name—furnish the fragrant
“tatties’? or screens for, Indian doors and
windows.


The ‘ Betel” nutis the fruit of the Areca
palm—familiar in England in the form of
tooth paste. Fragments of it are wrapped in
the betel leaf, or leaf of the pepper-vine along
with lime and spices, and chewed as a stimu-
lant and digestive. All over the East this
‘preparation is highly esteemed and is frequent-
ly offered-to visitors as a mark of respect. .It
is to be noted that the name betel really be-
longs to the leaf and is wrongly though usually
applied to the nut. ;


Refers to the power of Krishna to create
illusions. ,


Brass heads of Garuda, erected along the
path of the pilgrims.


Because no one wants liberation.


The tulsi plinth is a square structure like an
altar, three feet high, with a tulsi plant grow-
ing on it. This may frequently be found in
the courtyard of a Hindu house.


The Patil is the headman ofavillage. Here
Vitithoba is meant; the number of his arms is
a usual attribute of divinity and the number
of his wives is that of Krishna’s.


394


NOTES


Abhanga. Line.


160


176


216


221 ©


228


254


2


12


The eighth Iunar month of the year, when
the sun is in Kartika or the Pleiades. The
eleventh of Kartika is about the 8th of Novem-
ber, when Vishnu is supposed to arise from
four months’ sleep; it is a great festival. at
Pandhari. :

It is not certain who Tuka’s servant is.

An inam is an inheritable freehold estate.


The Vedas—or rathter the Vedantins-—assert
that the only way in which the absolute tan
be described is by saying of it—neti “ not this.”
Tuka is here arguing against.this position.

The vilanti is the'mark/above the line that
indicates ‘‘ i” in Sanskrit...


If an object is reflected in a mirror, then
we can give the name of the object to the
reflection also, though in actuality it is absent
from it. So Hari is seen reflected in us and
the world, but-is not actually attained except
by coming into contact with himself.


Explains the nature of the creative act and
God’s interest in the world.


The Smriti represents a girl under two years
of age as enjoyed by a Gandharva ; under four,
by Fire ; under six, by the Moon; in the mar-
tiage ceremony the bridegroom reminds her of
this when he claims her as his wife.


The banyan.


—a
“The fig-tree, not that kitid for fruit renowned,
But such as at this day to Indians known in
Malabar or Deccan.
Branching so broad and long that in the ground
The bended twigs take roct and daughters grow
About the mother tree, a pillared shade,
High over arched, and echoing walks between.”


It is a sacred tree, but not so sacred as its
taller relative, the pipal, fieus religiosa.


NOTES 395


Abhanga. Line.


262


271
280


290


800
820


831


7


4


ae


The staff is formed of three rods bound to-
gether; it symbolises concentration of the:
mind.

The Asoka, Jonesia ascca.

Siva wears the crescent moon on his head;
perhaps as an emblem of Time, as his destruc-
tive power is associated with the passage of
Time.

The three syllables are formed by the three
letters V-tthz].

Refers to Vishnu abandoning his dinner
which had been served by Laskshm? and run-
ning to help the elephant Gajendra.


It is said that Muchakunda, a devotee of
Vishay, went to Vaikuntha to seek him.
Vishnu lay down and. pretended to be asleep,
in order to test his. patience. The devotee,
annoyed by this, gave him a kick in the chest ;
and Vishnu still wears the mark of this as an
ornament.

Refers to the Lion-Avatar when Vishnu
émerged from the wooden pillar to confound
the atheist. The half male and half female
form is a representation of Siva (Ardh-nari), in
which he appears conjoined with Parbati,
one side of the body being male, one female.

See the preceding note. :

The wheel is a Persian wheel for raising’
water. It is a large wheel at the side of a
pond, with vesseis attached toits circumference,
As it revolves, each vessel is filled with water
when it dips in the pond, and subsequently
empties itself into a channel at the side of the
wheel for the purpose of irrigation.

How can a dying man find these gifts ?

Who art ready to grant even the whole
world as a boon.

See Yoga in Appendix IT.

Man is frequently compared to an ox work-
ing an oil-mill.


396


NOTES


Abhanga. Line.


337
Bat
342


887


882


406 ©


407
411


25,
454


465
498


507


512


2


a)


eo oe oo


Cf. . Appendix It, the four stages. Tuka
means neither one stage nor another brings
satisfaction.


‘Protect one side of your field by lighting a
fire there, and another side by staying there
yourself.

Floats are made out of the empty skins, of
pumpkins, toassist beginners to learn to swim.


A Lalita Abhang. Lalita is akind of dance
performed at the end of certain religious
festivities, e.g., those in connexion with the
birth of Rama and Krishna.

Written apparently after a-visit to the tem-

ple when he received no consolation.


Identifying Vitthoba with Vishnu.


Cowries are still used in India as very small
change.

To sit like a creditor :—tosit and starve one-
self at a debtor’s door, to force him into pay-
ment. Anold Indian method of exacting pay-
ment from debtors of high position, now for-
bidden by British law.


Seems to imply a‘belief that man’s soul was
originally united with God’s.

The performer at Kirtana sits or stands on @
raised platform at the end of the room.

A tla, 180 grains Troy.

The name Brahmachfrya is given both toa
Brahmana youth who is still a pupil, and to a
sect of Brahmana ascetics.

One may often see in the streets a trained
bull accompanied by his master, both dressed
in a curious garb of gaudy rags. The bull’s
accomplishments are very limited.

Kinds of grain.

Krishna’s companions, -

Bajri, a coarse grain.


NOTES 397


Abhanga. Line.


11


589 «6
B42 «GG
568.1
5867
604—618
604

609 6
618 1
6764
687 8
695 6
704
7075
708.1
m9 «9
728
723 =«


At Gokula, when the Brahmanas refused to
honour Krishna, as he was the son of a Vaisya;
Krishna inspired their wives with devotion
to him, and they brought him food.

A Tambura is a guitar with four wires,

Exaggerating the value of the gift.

Indian babies are usually carried in this way
with one arm encircling the body.

Here, under the pretence of abusing
Vitthoba, Tuké playfully expresses confidence
in him.

He advises him in his own-inierest not to
quarrel with his worshippers.

Yo give us the bliss of devotion instead of
worldly interests. You cheat us out of our
worldly interests.

pao, great or small, is the least of God's -
gifts. .

The grain can be made into food.

Devotees of all bands wear garlands.

In anticipation of the, rain, at the end of the
hot weather.

The diamond is not broken ; it is driven into
the substance of the hammer or anvil.

Even the obstinate steel shows itself cor-
ruptible.

The root of the pipul (stertlis mala robora
ficus) will penetrate almost any rock or
masonry.

Astrip of land is left waste as a boundary
between two fields and no doubt this vexes the
careful eyes of the husbandman.

A Vasudeva is a religious mendicant who
makes his round before daybreak wearing a
cap of peacock’s feathers and jingling a set of
bells. He wakes up the villagers for their work.

The two wives arethe good and bad impulses.
The children are designs of all kinds. “This
country” is Vitthoba’s shrine,


398


NOTES


Abhbanga. Line.


12%


726


‘130


768


71%


825
828
859


867


875


891


907


921


8


10


16


10


The four companions are ‘devotion, know-
ledge, renunciation and duty.

The thorns are infidelity and sensuality.

The Kévada carries by a yoke on his should-
ers two vessels of Ganges water and takes it. to
bathe the linga at some shrine.

i.e., join my profession; let your water drip on
the road like mine.

Every Hindu family has an ancestral god or
goddess who is occasionally visited even from
@ distance. p

From the first step of creation the principle
was declared that there is no difference between
the first and last step.

Prosperity andaccomplishment are the names
of the two servants of Ganesha. They are terms
of general application.

A reference to the valour of Krishna.


Forming plans and also entertaining doubts
about them:

The body.

Ashes rubbed by the devotee on his person.

The further bank of the sea of the world.

Upadhi, an object of sense viewed ag a
metamorphosis of the spirit or an external
limit unnaturally placed upon it.

The spirit bears the same relation to the
material world as butter does to the sour butter
milk which is left after churning.

The sectarian mark worn on the forehead
by Vaishnavas resembles (accidentally) the
letter V.

A platform is made for an image (simhasana)
and certain stones found near the Narbada are
worshipped as emblems of Siva.

Parisa, the stone that turns iron into gold.
Mohar is a jewel that will not allow a thread
wound round it to be burned.


NOTES 399


Abhanga. Lixe.


926


978
993


1008
1012
1041


1055


1062
1065


1088
1098


1098


1129


1130


2


5
3


a
1
2


The Chambhars are a low caste of leather
workers.

Personal knowledge of God.

Dém-dom, a Mahommedan cry; perhaps a
corruption of Din-din (‘ faith ”’).

. By rolling on the earth.

In offerings to the gods.

_ By seeking truth through debate and discus-
sion.

The gods are often honoured by lighting
lamps before their images:

The dog in a village is a general scavenger.

This depicts the selfish prudence of a worldly-
minded man going.on pilgrimage. The corn
referred to is the private store in his house,

Bracelets area symbol of marriage, as a ring
is among European nations. A widow wears uo
bracelets.

The death of very young babies is ascribed °
to a mischievous goddess named Satvai, who
kills them on the fifth day.

Denounces the crime of selling a daughter
inmarriage. The “ twice-born ’’ are the Brah-
manas, who are born a second time when they
are invested with the sacred thread. A Bania
is a general dealer, especially in grocery.

Refers to the building of the bridge to
Ceylon, which was done by the aid of ‘the
monkey Nala, who was able to make stones
swim in water.


Danka, a drum, used to proclaim the festivity,
A band of singers (Gondhala) come and place
an image of the goddess Bhavani on a platform
and honour it with song.


The “house of god’? here means “my
thoughts about the deity.’ Or possibly it
means “my shrine at Pandhari.”


400


NOTES


Abhanga. Line.


1135


1158
1156
1158
1159
4162
1164
1167
1168
4169


1170


1177
4190


1491


1193


1196


5


“chaff, they have changed places.


This is of © course the language the Gondhala
would use about Bhavani. Tuka uses it of
Vitthala.


Refers to impostors of magical pretensions.
Satvai is a mischievous female demon.
Demon powers that insist on sacrifices to


, propitiate them.


The Saktas are a sect that worship the fe-
male energy, with impure orgiastic rites.


The female power that he worships.
Possibly against the use of spells.


Against dramatising episodes in the life of
Krishna as a public amusement.


Spirits, (madhya),’’ honey, ‘(madhu).”
These village gods (Bhairoba, Maisoba) are


represented by stones smeared with red oxide
of mercury.


The ‘“‘Jeshtadevi” are the deities who preside
over the confinement of women. The term,
which means ‘“ eealted deities,” is a euphe-
mism.


“Rasa” isthe kernel and “Bhoua ” the


He is not successful either in this world or
the next.


Apparently describes an impostor who pre-
tends to supernatural powers.


He shows some stone of pretended magical
powers and worships the female organ.


The darbha grass Poa eynosureides ; he puts
it in his hair. He takes hold of the tip of his
nose and pretends to practise pranayama, i.e.,
regular breathing according to the rules of the
Yogis.

The ascetic’s gourd; the rindof the gourd
used for carrying water.


NOTES 401


Abhanga. Lint.


1200 This impostor carries about the stones which-
are used as emblematic of the gods and pretends
he cannot afford to make a proper receptacle for
them. Accordingly he asks for alms for that
purpose. The stones in question are black am-

-monite fossils found in Northern India.


1205 «(1 Gésai is a corruption of Go-svami, controller
of the senses, and’is a title applied to many
religious mendicants,


3 How can a wicked man make others better
than himself?


26


APPENDIX I
Proper Names


AnatLya.—tThe first woman ¢reated by, Brahma,
wife of Gautama. She was seduced byIndra; and
being cursed by Gautama became a sae Rama.
afterwards delivered her. 7


Asamreta.—A degenerate Brahmana, who was
saved by reciting Narayana’s name.


Axrora.—Krishna’s- uncle; who was sent by —
Kansa to fetch Krishna from Gokula that he might.
be slain. Akrira went unwillingly, and Krishna
disclosed to him-his.own true nature. ~


AmpBarisHa.—A solar king of Barsi, who observed
strictly the Ekadasi fast and broke it according to
rule hefore the end of the day. On one occasion a
Durvasa Rishi came to him as a guest, and was
asked to. bathe before dinner. He took so long in
bathing that Ambarisha drank a sip of water to
keep his rule, Dutvasa offended invoked the
female demon Kritya to destroy him; but Amba-
risha sought protection from Vishnu, who destroyed
the demon with his disc.


Amravati.—The heaven of Indra:


Angani.—The mother of Hanumana by Vayu,
Hanumana went on the expedition to Lanka, under
Sugriva, the monkey-king, and on his return so

'


PROPER NAMES 403


great a, flood of milk was poured from his mother’s
breast that it broke through the hills between
Nasik and Saptasringa.


Basuru.—The son of Arjen by Chitrangi,
who fought against his father in the war of the
Mahabharata. He severed Arjuna’s head with an
arrow, but it was reunited by the aid of a:magic
stone. Tuka says it-was by the dispensation of
Providence that so great a warrior was slain by
so young a one. |


‘Bau.—King of Mahabalipura, descended foci
Pralhada and Hiranyakasipu. Though a virtuous
monarch he became arrogant and neglected the
gods. To punish this Vishnu assumed the form of
a dwarf Brahmana beggar, and asked as a boon the
gift of as much land as he could cover in three
steps. This haying been granted, the dwarf sud-
denly expanded and covered in two steps heaven
and earth. Bali fell before him in adoration, and
was esranted the~empire of the nether world,
Patala. Vishnu condescended to become a door-
keeper of the entrance of Sex kingdom there.


Batnata— Mighty one”; a name of Ganapati.


BuHanupasa._-A Braéhmana saint who lived at
Pandhari.

Budrata.—Son of Dasaratha and Kaikeyi ; elder
brother of Rama. His mother procured the exile
of Rama in order to place Bharata on the throne,
but it was agreed that Rama should finally return
after fourteen years.

Bravani.—The wife of Siva. Sbe unites many
attributes, frequently BppeaTing as a warrior
goddess.


404 APPENDIX I


Bariri.—Literally “ Bhil woman.” A woman of
the forest tribe of Bhils, who presented Rama with
some fruit which she had bitten to see if it was
sweet. Rama accepted the offering on account of
the spirit in which it was made.


Burmagi—Daughter of Bhima.


BrpxisHana.—Brother of Ravaya, who deserted
to the side of Rama and assisted him.


Cuarranys.—A Brahmana by birth (a.p. 14865),
who initiated a reform movement in Upper India.
He attacked the licentious orgies of the worship-
pers of the female energy; and following Kabir
refused to recognize caste. He exalted Krishna
into the position of supreme Deity accessible by
devotion—Bhakti. The chief scene of his work was
Jaganatha, though he travelled much throughout
Northern India. ‘The. circumstances of his death
(4.D. 1527) are unknown. Among his followers in
the Deccan were Baba Chaitanya, Kegava Chaitanya
and Raghava Chaitanya, to .whose inspiration
Tuka owed a-good deal.


CHimunpé.—A name of Bhavani.


CuanpraBHaca.—A digit of the moon.


Cuaneapeva.—A yogi of Vateshwarin Khandesh,
who was converted by Dnyandeva to the school of
devotion (Bhaktimarga).


Dasavanti.—A corruption of Jasoda or Yesoda.


Durvuva.—The grandson of Manu. Though a
boy, he performed such austerities that he was
raised to heaven as the Polar Star.


PROPER NAMES 405


DyyanesHwaRs.—A Maratha saint of the four-
teenth century, who wrote a commentary on
Bhagavadgita.


Dravupapi.—The daughter of Drupada, a solar
prince, who married the five Pandava brothers,
She was lost in gambling by one of them, Yudhis-
thira, and became the property of the Kauravas.
‘The war of the Mahabharata followed till Draupadi-
was finally rescued.


Dvarka.—A town in Kathiaw&ar containing a
famous shrine of Krishna, still a place of pilgrim-
age.

Exanataa.—A Maratha saint.of the sixteenth
century who lived at Paithan,in the Nizam’s, terri-
tory. He composed’ metrical translation of Srimat
Bhagavat, which was probably known to Tuka.


Gasenpra.—An_ elephant whose foot was seized
by an alligator. _In‘his distress he cried to Vishnu,
who came to the rescue and destroyed the alligator.


Ganixa.—A courtesan who -renounced her pro-
fession and».was saved by reciting the name of
Hari.

GaRupa.—A creature with the head and wings
of.a.bird and the body of a man.: The vehicle of:
Vishnu.

Gauri.— Fair in complexion”; an epithet of
Bhavani, Siva’s wife.

Gaya.—A town in Bengal containing the pipal
tree under which Buddha meditated for five years.
Still a place of pilgrimage.

Gopavari.—A sacred river:


406 APPENDIX I


Govinpa.—A name of Krishna meaning both
“ Keeper of cows” and ‘‘ Controller of the senses.”


Hanumanta.—The son of Anjani, a monkey
queen, and Vayu, the wind. The chief general of
the monkeys, who assisted Rama in his campaign
against Ravana.


Hara.—A name of Siva.


Hari.—“ One who removes” the sins Gi men;
a name of Vishnu.


InprRAvVANI.—A small river on the bank of which
is situated Dehu, the birthplace of Tuka.


_Janaxa.—-Father-in-law of Rama; father of
Sita. :
JANAKI.— Daughter of Janaka ; Sita.


J ANARDANA.—' Destroyer of re-birth”’; a name
?
of Vishnu.


Kasir.—A Hindu reformer of Northern India
(? a.D. 1338-1449). He was a follower of Rama-
nanda; probably a Muhammadan by birth, who
adopted a reformed Hinduism. His doctrines are
contained in the Sukh Nidan and resemble those of
Vaishnavas generally. He opposed idolatry.


Kaui, or Kaliya, the, serpent which lived in the
Yamun& and poisoned its water. Krishna, pretend-
ing he was going to look for a chendu or ball that
was lost, jumped into the stream and after a famous
contest drove Kali away.


KamapHENv.—A ‘cow produced at the churning
of the Milk Sea, and afterwards owned by Vasish-
tha, which had the power of granting wisbes.


PROPER NAMES 407


Karna.—Son of Kunti‘ by the sun; he fought
against his half brothers the Pandavas, and was
killed in a battle by, Arjuna. He is famous for his
generosity and is said to have given away his own
teeth to Krishna disguised as a Brahmana.


KANHOBA.—A name of Krishna.

Kausatya.—The wife of Dasaratha and mother
of Rama.

KaustumpHa.—A jewel produced at the churning
of the ocean, and worn by Vishnu on his neck.


Kersava.—A name of Vishnu (origin uncertain).


Kestrasa.— Controller of, Kegi.” Kesi was a
horse-headed demon killed by the. infant Krishna.


KumpyHapixs.—A region in hell where sinners
are immersed in boiling oil.


Kussa.—A deformed menial servant of. peers
who was straightened by Krishna.


LaksHmi.—The wife of Vishnu, and goddess of
wealth and ‘prosperity.

Mapana.—A name of Kama, the God of love.

Martar.—A name of Khandoba, as victor over
Malla, a local king of the Deccan. The name may
also-be applied to Krishna, as victor over the
gymnasts of Kansa, called “ Mallas.” .

Merrv.—A mythical mountain, the centre of the
world, with three peaks, one of which is Kailasa, or
the heaven of Siva, another Svarga, the heaven ei
Indra.

Mougkrspat.—The sister of the Maratha poet
Dnyandeva, who herself composed religious poetry


408 APPENDIX I


Murari—aA name of Krishna, in consequence of
his killing the demon Mura.


Naua.—-A king of the solar-race, who lived at
the close of the Vedic period. He became the
husband of Damayanti, who chose him herself
according to a romantic tale preserved inthe
Mahabharata. Afterwards he lost all his wealth in
gambling and deserted her; but she recovered him
by proclaiming that she would choose another
husband. The king of Oudh came to ask for her
hand, and Nala accompanied him ag, his charioteer ;
he was recognized by Damayanti and they were
reunited.

Namprva.—-A Maratha saint of the fourteenth
century.

Narapa.—One of the Rishis who appears arpang
the attendants of Vishnu as @ musician accompanie
by Tumbaru.


Narayaina.— Whose abode is in the crater,” a
“name of Vishnu.

NarmapA, also Narbada, a sacred river of Central
India; inferior in sanctity only to the Ganges.
Indeed according to the Reva Purana the sanctity
of the Ganges disappears in Samvat year 1951 (a.p.
1895), while that of Narmada continues for ever.


PANDURANGA.—‘The ‘joy of fhe Pandava,” a name
ot Vitthoba.


Pinpava.—The lunar princes of Hastinapura,
whose quarrel with their cousins, the Kauravas,
brought on the war of the Mahabhérata.


PraLHaDA.—The pious son of Hiranyakasipu,
who rebuked his father’s atheism. At the rebuke


PROPER NAMES 409


the lion-avatar, Narsinh, issued from the pillar
and rent Hiranyakasipu.


Purana.—A demoness sent by Kansa to destroy
Krishna by suckling him with her poisonous milk.
However, Krishna was too strong for her and suck-
ed all the blood out of her body and killed her.


RapHa.—The wife of Ayana-Gosha, the favourite
mistress of Krishna.


RacHava.— Poevendant of Raghu.” “A name
of Rama.

RaGHUNATH ns above.

Rakuumar.—A name of Bhimaki.

Ravana.—The king of Lank& or Ceylon, who
carried off Sita, the wife.of Rama, The war by


which she was recovered forms the subject of the
Ramayana.

Rupra.—A name of Siva, one of the trinity of
gods.

Rupra.—A Vedic god of storms, identified in
later times with Siva.


, SaDastva.— Always prosperous.” A name of
Siva.


Sanaka.—One of the four great Rishis with
Sanandana, Sandtana, and Sujata. Sanaka was.
the preceptor of Narada, and author of the doctrine
of Bhakti or devotion.


Satrasira.—King Phe country near Dwarka.


Satwat—A corruption of Shashthibai, a mis-
chievous eee goddess who exercises her powers
6*


410 APPENDIX I


on the sixth night ‘after the birth of a child, and
often kills it. a

SatyaBHima.—Sister of Satrajita, and wife of
Krishoa. At the instigation of Narada, Hanumana,
when he came to Dwarka, tried to see if Krishna
was as truly an incarnation of Vishnu as his own
Rama was, Krishna accordingly changed his durbar
into that of Rama, and sent Garuda to bring Hanu-
mana to see it. He asked Satyabhama to represent
Sita; but she failed to do so and incurred ridicule.
Accordingly Rukhmini, his other wife, became Siti.
This is one victory of Rukhmini.over Satyabhama ;
the other was on the occasion when Satyabhima
gave away Krishna in charity to Narada, under the
mistaken idea that she would thus secure him as a
husband for ever. To recover him at all, she was
told to give to Brihmanas his weight in gold. No
gold however was enough to weigh down Krishna;
and Rukhmini had/to come to the rescue. She
put a single leaf of-tulsi in the scales, and this, as
the symbol of unselfish devotion, was sufficient to
make up the weight.

, SamByu.—" The origin of blessings,” a name of
Siva. F
Sankana.—A name of Siva.

Sip1.—A Solar king famous for his generosity.
One day a dove flew into his court pursued by
a hawk, and Sibi to save the dove offered the
hawk a piece of his own flesh. Whén this was
cut off both the hawk and the dove manifested
their own true forms and ggnferred on him many
boons.

Srinaa.—A.- Rishi who wears a horn on his
forehead ; invoked in seasons of drought.


PROPER NAMES 411


Srivata.—A king of the Solar race, who con-
sented to give his'son to supply a meal for Siva,
when he came to him disguised as a Brahmana.
Tuka confounds Siva here with Krishna, either
accidentally or perhaps from a view that they
are ultimately the same.


SankHasura.—A demon in the form of a conch
shell who concealed the Vedas within himself
and took them down into the sea, “Vishnu as-
sumed his fish incarnation, destroyed the demon,
and rescued the scriptures.


Suxa.—A saint who preached Srimat Bhigvata
-to king Parikshit.


Sorana.—The brother of, the Maratha poet
Dnyandeva.


Supama.—A playmate of Krishna’s childhood. :
When Krishna revealed his true form to him,
being very poor,»he could only offer him three
handfuls of rice which Krishna accepted.


Suta.—A \charioteer whose preaching of the
Puranas. was attended by 88,000 Rishis in Nimi-
sharanya,a forest near the Ganges.


Svarca.—The paradise of Indra.


Tamrapavasa.-A Lunar king famous for his
generosity. Krishna and Arjuna came disguised
as Brahmana beggars to his court and he con-
sented to give them the right half of his body.
While his body was being sawn in two by his
wife and son, a tear dropped from his left eye.
Krishna then declared that the offering was con-
taminated by this but Tamradhvaja explained


412 APPENDIX I


that the tear was one of devotion, on which the
gods relented, made him whole and blessed him.


Triata.—A giantess in the service of Ravana,
who was appointed to guard Sita. She was moved
with compassion for Sit& and condoled with her.


.  umpBarv.—A musician who appears as a com-
panion of Narada. ;


‘UppHava.—A descendant of the Yadavaor Lunar
race, to whom Krishna delivered Ch. XI of Srimat
Bhagavat.


Uramanya.—tThe son of poor Brahmana parents.
Once when he. asked his mother for milk, she
replied that she had none and he must pray to God
for milk. This he accordingly did, going to the
forest and praying to Vishnu, who took him to the
sea of milk,


Varuntua.—The paradise of Vishnu.


Vatna—A corruption of Valmiki, the reputed
author of the Ramayana. He is said to have
belonged to a tribe of robbers, and to have attained
divine knowledge under the guidance of Narada.
He received from him the direction to invert the
letters. of Rama and to recite the name as Mara,
“Die thou;” and he continued reciting this name
till he was surrounded by an anthill.


VALHARBILLYA.—Sixty thousand dwarf Rishis
sprung from the hair of Brahma.


VasisHta.—One of the seven Rishis represented
by the seven stars of the Great Bear. He was a
family priest of the Solar race to which Rama be-
longed, and is the reputed author of several hymns
in the Rig Veda.


PROPER NAMES 413


VasuDEva.—The father of Krishna, a prince of
the Lunar Yadava race.


Vasuxi.—The serpent used by the gods and
demons as a churning rope at the churning of
the ocean. Sometimes identified—though wrongly
—with Sesha, the primeval serpent on which
Vishnu lay before the creation.


Vayu.—The wind-god, the father of Hanumana.


VenunaDs.—“ The sound of the flute,” Venu
being a bamboo flute. A spot near the Chandra-
bhaga' where Krishna used to play~his flute, and a
temple now stands in honour of Pundalika.


VeraLa.—The king of goblins; he haunts burial
grounds.


Vipura.—The son/of Vyasa by a slave girl; a
faithful friend of the Pandavas.


VimaLaRsuna.—The name of two white Arjuna
trees that stood in Nanda’s courtyard. They were
two nymphs—Gandharvas—Nala and Kubara,
who had:been’ changed into trees by N&rada as a
punishment for their sensualities. Krishna rooted
them up as he passed between them and at the
touch of the god they attained their original form.


Visvamitra.—A Kshatriya prince of the Lunar
race, who became a great Rishi. He appears in
constant conflict with the Brahmana Vasishta;
and like him is represented by one of the stars in
the Great Bear. He protected Rama and assisted
him in arranging his marriage with Sita.


VRINDAVANA.—“ Forest of Vrinda,” a tree into
which the wife of the demon Jalandhara was


414 APPENDIX II


transformed, as a punishment for her passion for

Vishnu. The name of a forest near Mathura,

-, where Krishna spent his childhood with cowherds

and the damsels. Also in modern usage frequently

the name-of the small altar in the courtyard of.
a Hindu house where the tulsi plant is grown.

Vvanxopa.— Crawling ;” a “name of the infant
Krishna.

Vyasa.—-Lit. the distributor, a title-applied in
general to the. authors of the Vedas and Puranas,
of whom 28 are mentioned. The most celebrated
was the son of Paraéara and Satyavati, from whom
the Pandava and Kaurava brothers were both
descended. He is said to have compiled the Vedas
and the Mahabharata.

Yapava.—A race of invaders of India, to whom
Krishna belonged.

YaMADHARMA.—A_ name of Yaris; viewed as
the upholder of vighteous conduct. The ruler of
the nether world.

Yusopa.—The wife of the herdsman Nanda, to
whom Krishna was entrusted.


APPENDIX II


Ceremonies and Beliefs referred to” by
Tukaram


The necm-fruit ceremony (fAaBIT]).— Leaves of
“the neem tree, with salt, etc., are waved round
the head of a person and thrown away, to carry
off an evil influence.


_ CEREMONIES AND BELIEFS 415


. The eighty-four lakhs of ‘re-births (8,400,000).
This is usually given as the number that are
necessary._


The primal form (@ *q). _'The native essence of
God not contracted or disfigured by the world.


The eleventh day of each half of the month is
observed by the Hindus generally and especially
by Vaishnavas as a solemn fast.


Yoga.—A method of liberating the-spirit from
the material world. T6 follow it, certain postures
of tha body must first be practised ; these will
assist the concentration and ultimately the libera-
tion of the spirit.


The wishing cow.—See Kamdhenu. —


My mother’s house—A little Hindu girl after
‘her marriagé—or/rather betrothal—goes to live
in the house of. ber husband, where her mother-
in-law drills her into the ways of the new family.
She has often reason to regret the indulgence of
her “ mother’s house’’; and the mother-in-law’s
house is. appropriately employed by Tuké as an
image of the uncomfortable world.


Enidtamani. —A gem of Svarga supposed. to
yield its possessor every wish.


Waving a Lamp. —A lamp is waved round “a
person as a sign of blessing, to remove evil: influ-
ences from him.


Saligram—A whirl-shaped fossil shell resem-
bling the conch of Vishyu, and accepted as a
symbol of him. It is found in the bed of the
Gaodaki, a tributary of the Ganges.


416 APPENDIX ITI


The Sea of the World.—Perhaps more properly,
“the river of the world,” a large flood which the
traveller has to cross.

The Sea of Milk.—Conceived as surrounding
Vaikuntha, the paradise of Vishnu. ;

The ascetic’s staff—A triple rod, formed of three
staves fastened together, and often carried. by
ascetics. These indicate mystically the three stages
of life they have passed through, pupilage, worldly
life, and renunciation.


APPENDIX III


Certain Classifications which are mentioned
by. Tukaram


The three Worlds—Heaven, Earth, Hell.

The three aspects of merit (and demerit). (i)
afya_ (Sanchita) merit stored up ; (ii) gTwy (Pra-
rabdha). merit in action ; (iii) fiaRyo, (Kriamana)
merit which has yet to operate.

The three qualities of created beings.—{i) qa
Truth or goodness; (ii) yq@ Passion or foulness,
(iii) qagq Darkness. ‘


The triad of knowledge—{i) Knower ; (ii) Known ;
(iii) Process of knowing.


The three fevers—(i) sf (Adhibhautike


CERTAIN CLASSIFICATIONS 417


tapa), fever caused by the five elements; (ii) _ oar fy
a fia (Adhidaivika), fever caused by demons ;
(iii) aqpeqr fay (Adhyatmike, t&pa), fever caused by


diseases of the mind.


The four Vedas—Rig Veda, Yazur Veda, Sains ;
Veda, Atharva Veda.


The four stages of life—a aaa wikoy ays;
the unmarried life of a student; yee (Gri-
hastha), the householder’s life; aTqyey (Vana-
prastha), living in the forest; gzqrg (Sanyasa),
abandonment of the world.

-The four stages of speech. _ qu (Para), the .
first stirring of breath; (ii) qgqqy (Pasyanti), the
whisper ofthe breast; (iii) qeqry (Madhyamé), the
middlestage; (iv) Arai (Vaikhari) articulate
utterance. ; ;

The four kinds of liberation—(i) GeBrRat (Salo-
kat&), or dwelling in the same heaven with God;
(ii) qatqat (Samipats), being near him; (iii) gEqay
(Sartipaté), possessing similarity of form with him ;


(iv) aTsTat aa complete absorption in
him. °


27


418 APPENDIX” TIL


The four means of attaining union.{i) wAaAITE
(Samadamacdi), or restraining: the senses; (ii)
aU (Vairagya); or restraining the mind ; (iii)
fide (Viveka), discriminating matter and ming;


(iv) HAT (Muninksh4), or desire for liberation,
aa


The five vital breaths. —3a@laq (Udana), the
breath rising from the chest; SIS (prana) ; the
breath passing through the nose; S19[4 (Ap&na),
the abdominal breath, below. the navel; Gala


(Samana), the navel piregn sqtq (Vyana), the
breath in the limbs.


The five fires..used at sacrifices.—(i) srelaaty
(Ahvaniya) ; (ii) TG (Garhapatya) ; (iii) efeq-


or fit (Dakshinagni) ; (tv) q+q (Sabhya); (v) taaey
.(Avasathya). Their shapes are various’—square,
circular, semi-circular, hexagonal, octagonal.


The five elements. aah air, fire; water, and
ether.


" The vin tasks—Study, teaching, sacrificing,
causing sacrifices to be made, giving and
receiving gifts.


The sia enemies.—(i) AIH (Kama), desire ; (ii)
sry (Krodha), anger ; (iii) Sw (Lobha), covetous-


CERTAIN CLASSIFICATIONS 419


ness; (ivy We (Moha),- infatuated love; (v) AeqT
(Matsara), envy; (vi) HZ (Mada), pride.

The six stages of life—(i) Existence ; (ii) birth,
(iii) growth ; (iv) maturity; (v) decay; (vi) death.


Che sia Sastras—Six learned works—three of
which relate to grammar, one to ceremonies, one
to mathematics, one to explanation of ‘obscure
words in the Vedas. ,


The siz enchantments.—(i) StC_(Jarana) caus-
ing another’s body to waste; (ii) FI<97 (Marana)
causing the death of another ; (iii) Alea. (Uchcha-
tana), causing another to remove from his habita-
tion ; (iv) ta (Stambhana) stopping another’s
motion ; (v) 4tga(Mohana) casting an illusion over,
another ; (vi) ARTA] (Vasikarana) reducing
another tio subjection.

The seven regions of hell.—(1) Atala; (2) Vitals;
(3) Sutala ; (4) Rasatala ; (5) Talatala; (6) Mahatala ;
(7) Patala.


The eight limbs; or the eight parts of the body.
which touch the ground when a prostration is
made, the forehead, nose, the two shoulders, the
two knees, and the toes. .


The eight mystic powers.—(i) to make oneself
exceedingly small ; (ii) to make oneself exceedingly


420 APPENDIX IIT


lorge ; (iii) to become light; (iv),to become heavy ;
(v) to touch the sun and moon ; (vi) to make predic-
tions ; (vii) to subdue ; (viii) to create.


The. nine forms of worship—(i). sqo] (sravana)
hearing ; (ii) afta (Kirtana) celebrating praise; (iii)
eq, (smarana) meditation ; (iv) qizaaa (padase-
yvana) worshipping the feet; (v) era) (archana)
worshipping an image; (vi) qzq_ (vandana) saluta-
tion ; (vii) zreq (dasya) attendance ; (viii) Gama (sak-
hya) friendship ; (ix) sqpaifytea (Stmanivedana)
communion.


- The ten gifts presented after death.—(1) sesamum
seed ; (2)-catton ; (3) iron ; (4) salt ; (5)udida ; a black
grain; (6) oil;.(7)-rice; (8) wheat; (9) a pair of
Shées; (10) an umbrella.

~ The ten dwatars'or incarnations of Vishnu.—Fish,
tortoise, boar, lion, the dwarf, Paragurama, Rama,
Krishna, Buddha, ‘Kalki.


“Lhe eleven senses.—The five senses of perception;
(eye, ear, nose, tongue, touch); the five of. action,
(hands, feet, speech, excretory organ, generative
organ), and the mind controlling them.


The. fourteen worlds—Bhu (earth), bhuvah
(space), svah (heaven), mahah, janah, tapah
satya. Also the seven lower regions, atala, vitala,
putala, mahatala, rasatala, talatala, patala.


CERTAIN CLASSIFICATIONS . 421


The sixteen presents offered to an image or to a
great man.—(1) sandal-wood ; (2) flowers ; (3) rice;
(4) betelnuts ; (5) camphor ; (6) incense ;:(7) alamp ;
(8) some sweet food ; (9) water for the feet; (10)
water to drink ;-(11) cloth; (12) an ornament; (13)
money ; (14) a seat; (15) leaves ; (16) fruit.


The eighteen puranas, collections of doctrines.
and mythology..


PRINTED AT THE 8, P. C. K. PRESS, MADRAS— 1909.


PET UTE
00142308


"ANS assistance from


on 16 N@Perhad ashes
