Essays on the Floating-Matter of the Air in Relation to Putrefaction and Infection (John Tyndall, 1881)
=======================================================================================================
John Tyndall — Essays on the floating-matter of the air (London, 1881). Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (b21355435).


LIBRARY


Date  5  .June


Class  Mar*-

Accession  No.


in  2014


C


'J-  fly.  ^
PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION


LONDON  :   MINTED  BY
SrOTTISWOODE  AND   CO.,  NEW-6TBEET  SQUARE
AND   TAKLIAMEST  6T11EET


ESSAYS  ON  THE

FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR

IX   RELATION  TO

PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION


BY

JOHN  TYNDALL,  F.E.S.

(M.D.  TUBINGEN)


LONDON

LONGMANS,    GREEN,    AND  CO.

1881


All    rightt  rrsrrvd


for,  .  V^^-|io


INTBODUCTOEY  NOTE.


The  virtual  triumph  of  the  Antiseptic  system  of
surgery,  based  as  that  system  is  on  the  recognition  of
living  contagia  as  the  agents  of  putrefaction,  is  of
good  augury  as  regards  the  receptivity  of  the  public
mind  to  new  views  respecting  the  nature  of  contagia
generally.

To  the  credit  of  English  surgeons  it  stands  recorded
that,  guided  by  their  practical  sagacity,  they  had
adopted  in  their  hospitals  measures  of  amelioration
which  reduced,  almost  to  a  minimum,  the  rate  of  mor-
tality arising  from  the  '  mortification '  of  wounds.
They  had  discovered  the  evils  incident  to  '  dirt ;'  and,
by  keeping  dirt  far  away  from  them,  they  had  saved
innumerable  lives,  which  would  undoubtedly  have  suc-
cumbed under  conditions  prevalent  in  many  of  the
hospitals  of  continental  Europe.

In  thus  acting,  English  surgeons  were,  for  the  most
part,  *  wiser  than  they  knew.'  Their  knowledge,  how-
ever momentous  in  its  practical  applications,  was  still
empirical  knowledge.  That  dirt  was  fatal  they  had
discovered  ;  but  why  it  was  fatal  few  of  them  knew.


viii


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE.


At  this  point  Lister  came  forward  with  a'  scientific
principle  which  rendered  all  plain.  Dirt  was  fatal,  not
as  dirt,  but  because  it  contained  living  germs  which,
as  Schwann  was  the  first  to  prove,  are  the  cause  of
putrefaction.  Lister  extended  the  generalization  of
Schwann  from  dead  matter  to  living  matter,  and  by
this  apparently  simple  step  revolutionized  the  art  of
surgery.  He  changed  it,  in  fact,  from  an  art  into  a
science.

'  Listerism '  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  if  it  merely
consisted  in  the  application  of  carbolic  acid  spray;
but  no  man  of  any  breadth  of  vision  will  regard  the
subject  thus.    The  antiseptic  system  had  been  enun-
ciated, expounded,  and  illustrated,  prior  to  the  intro-
duction of  the  spray.    The  spray  is  a  mere  offshoot  of
the  system — elegant  and  effective  it  is  true,  but  still
a  matter  of  detail.     In  company  with  my  excellent
friend  Mr.   John   Simon,  I   once  visited  St.  Bar-
tholomew's Hospital,  and  became  acquainted,  in  its
wards,  with  the  practice  of  the  late  Mr.  Callender.
The  antiseptic  system  was  there  as  stringently  applied
as  at  King's  College.    Immediately  before  his  departure
to  America  I  spoke  to  Mr.  Callender  on  this  subject ;
and  he  then  told  me  expressly,  that  his  aim  and  hope
had  been,  not  to  introduce  a  new  principle,  but  to
simplify  the  methods  of  Lister.   And  yet  Mr.  Calen-
der's practice  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  if  it  were,  in
principle,  different  from  that  of  his  eminent  contem-
porary.

It  is  interesting,  and  indeed  pathetic,  to  observe
how  long  a  discovery  of  priceless  value  to  humanity


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE.  IX

may  be  hidden  away,  or  rather  lie  openly  revealed,
before  the  final  and  apparently  obvious  step  is  taken
towards  its  practical  application.  In  1837,  Schwann
clearly  established  the  connexion  between  putrefaction
and  microscopic  life  ;  but  thirty  years  had  to  elapse
before  Lister  extended  to  wounds  the  researches  of
Schwann  on  dead  flesh  and  animal  infusions.  Prior  to
Lister  the  possibility  of  some  such  extension  had
occurred  to  other  minds.  Penetrative  men  had  seen
that  the  germs  which  produce  the  putrefaction  of  meat
might  also  act  with  fatal  effect  in  the  wards  of  a
hospital.

Thus,  for  example,  in  a  paper  read  before  the  British
Medical  Association  at  Cambridge  in  1864,  Mr.  Spencer
Wells  pointed  out  that  the  experiments  of  Pasteur,
then  recent,  had  «  all  a  very  important  bearing  upon
the  development  of  purulent  infection,  and  the  whole
class  of  diseases  most  fatal  in  hospitals  and  other  over-
crowded places.'  Mr.  Wells  did  not,  as  far  as  I  know,
introduce  any  systematic  mode  of  combating  the  organ-
isms whose  power  he  so  early  recognised.  But,  I
believe,  in  hardly  any  other  department  of  surgery  has
the  success  of  the  antiseptic  system  been  more  con-
spicuous and  complete  than  in  that  particular  sphere
of  practice  in  which  Mr.  Wells  has  won  so  great  a
name.

A  remark  in  the  paper  just  referred  to  would  seem
to  indicate  that,  in  regard  to  the  further  possible
influence  of  germs,  the  thoughts  of  Mr.  Spencer  Wells
had  passed  beyond  the  bounds  of  pure  surgical  prac-
tice. '  Their  influence,'  he  says, '  on  the  propagation  of


X


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE.


epidemic  and  contagious  diseases  has  yet  to  be  made
out.'

This  shows  that  at  the  time  here  referred  to  the
Grerm  Theory,  in  its  wider  medical  sense,  had  begun  to
ferment  in  England.  Two  years,  indeed,  prior  to  the
above  occasion,  and  for  the  use  of  the  same  Association
as  that  addressed  by  Mr.  Wells,  the  late  Dr.  William
Budd  had  drawn  up  a  series  of  '  Suggestions  towards  a
Scheme  for  the  Investigation  of  Epidemic  and  Epizootic
Diseases,'  which  strikingly  illustrate  the  insight  of  a
man  of  genius,  withdrawn  from  the  stimulus  of  the
metropolis,  and  working  alone,  at  a  time  when  the
whole  medical  profession  in  England  entertained  views
opposed  to  his.  Budd  states  in  succession,  and  with
perfect  clearness,  the  points  which  he  considers  most
worthy  of  the  attention  of  the  Association.  He  re-
commends inquiry  as  to  the  nature  of  the  evidence
alleged  to  prove  the  disease  under  investigation  to  be
contagious  or  communicable.  Whether  such  disease
admits  of  being  artificially  propagated  by  inoculation
or  otherwise.  Through  what  surface  or  surfaces  the
virus  may  be  shown  to  enter  the  body,  and  to  leave  it,
when  the  disease  is  taken  in  the  natural  way.  Whether
the  disease  is  distinguished  by  eruptions  external  or
internal.  Whether  it  has  a  period  of  true  incubation;
and  if  so,  what  are  the  length  and  limits  of  that  period.
Whether  one  attack,  as  in  smallpox  and  many  other
contagious  diseases,  preserves  against  future  attacks.
Whether  in  the  case  of  human  disease  animals  as  well
as  man  are  susceptible,  and  if  so,  what  animals.  What
is  the  evidence,  if  any,  as  to  the  particular  country  or
region  in  which  the  disease  first  appeared.    What  are


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE.


xi


its  present  geographical  limits.  Whether  there  is  any
•evidence  of  its  modem  or  recent  introduction  into
countries  previously  exempt.  How  far  any  such  disease
may  have  been  prevented  from  invading  new  countries,
or  from  spreading  from  any  particular  centre,  by
measures  directed  against  contagion.  Above  all,  to
determine  what  is  the  nature,  and  what  the  true  value,
of  the  evidence  eupposed  to  show  that  the  specific
poison  of  a  contagious  disease  may  originate  spon-
taneously, or  be  generated  de  novo.  '  What  we  most
want  to  know,'  adds  Budd,  'in  regard  to  this  whole
group  of  diseases  is,  where,  and  hotu,  the  specific
poisons  ichich  cause  them,  breed  and  multiply.'1

Budd's  own  relation  to  the  question  here  raised
was  distinct  and,  under  the  circumstances,  impressive.
'  After  giving  many  years  of  time  and  thought  to  an
examination  of  the  evidence  bearing  on  this  question,'
he  comes  to  the  conclusion  '  that  there  is  no  proof
whatever'  that  the  poisons  of  specific  contagious
diseases  ever  originate  spontaneously.  *  That  the
evidence  on  which  the  contrary  conclusion  is  founded
is  negative  onlv  ;  that  evidence  of  precisely  the  same
order,  only  to  all  appearance  still  more  cogent,  would
prove  animals  and  plants,  even  of  large  species,  to
originate  spontaneously;  that  this  evidence  is  therefore
of  no  weight ;  and,  lastly,  that  all  the  really  important
facts  point  the  other  way,  and  tend  to  prove  that  these
poisons  (to  use  a  term  which  is  probably  provisional
only),  like  animals  and  plants,  however  they  may  have
once  originated,  are  only  propagated  now  by  the  law  of
continuous  succession.'


Xll


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE.


The  word  '  poisons,'  here  provisionally  employed,
was  a  concession  on  Budd's  part  to  his  weaker  brethren ;
for  he,  without  a  shade  of  doubt,  considered  the  poison
to  be  a  real  living  seed.  There  was,  I  believe,  but
one  physician  of  eminence  in  England  who,  at  the  time
here  referred  to,  shared  this  conviction,  and  who  im-
parted to  Budd  the  incalculable  force  derived  from  the
approbation  and  encouragement  of  a  wise  and  cele-
brated man.  It  gives  me  singular  pleasure  to  write
down  here  the  name  of  the  venerable  Sir  Thomas
Watson,  who  lent  to  William  Budd  unfailing  counte-
nance and  support,  and  who  has  lived  to  see  that  the
views  which  commended  themselves  to  his  philosophic
judgment  are  at  the  present  moment  advancing  with
resistless  momentum  among  the  members  of  the  medical
profession.  It  was  far  otherwise  at  the  time  to  which
we  here  refer.  '  Opinions  like  these,'  said  Budd,  '  are
no  doubt,  at  present,  those  of  a  small  minority.  A
very  large,  and  by  far  the  most  influential  school  in  this
country — a  school  which  probably  embraces  the  great
majority  of  medical  practitioners,  and  the  whole  of
the  "  sanitary  public  " — holds  the  exact  contrary ;  and
teaches  that  sundry  of  these  poisons  are  constantly
being  generated  de  novo  by  the  material  conditions
which  surround  us.'

Budd's  remark  regarding  the  spontaneous  generation
of  '  animals  and  plants,  even  of  large  species,'  is  both
pregnant  and  pertinent.  In  reference  to  special  and
solitary  outbreaks  of  contagious  fever,  I  have  frequently
heard  physicians  of  distinction  affirm,  without  apparent
misgiving,  the  'impossibility'  of  importation  from


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE.


xiii


without.    On  such  occasions  a  reply,  in  the  strict  sense
.affirmed  by  William  Budd,  was  always  at  hand  ;  for  I
was  able  to  adduce  cases  of  solitary  mushrooms,  found
upon  out  of  the  way  Alpine  slopes,  to  which  the
evidence  would  apply  with  greater  force  than  to  the
cases  on  which  the  physicians  referred  to  based  their
conclusions.    With  the  atmosphere  as  a  vehicle  of
universal  intercommunication,  it  is  hard  to  see  any
just  warrant  for  the  reliance  of  medical  men  upon  the
negative  evidence  stigmatized  by  Budd  as  valueless.
It  is,  however,  evidence  by  which  many  physicians  are
still   influenced,  and  the   effects   of  which  it  will
probably  require  a  generation  of  doctors,  brought  up
under  other  conditions  of  culture  and  of  practice,  to
wholly  sweep  away.

These  conditions  are  growing  up  around  us,  and
their  influence  will  be  all-pervading  before  long.  Never
before  was  medicine  manned  and  officered  as  it  is  now.
To  name  here  the  workers  at  present  engaged  in  the
investigation  of  communicable  diseases  would  be  to
extend  beyond  all  reasonable  limits  this  Introductory
Note.    On  the  old  Baconian  lines  of  observation  and
experiment  the  work  is  carried  on.    The  intercommuni-
cation of  scientific  thought  plays  here  a  most  important
part.    It  will  probably  have  been  noticed,  that  while
physiologists  and  physicians  in  England  and  elsewhere
were  drawing  copiously  from  the  store  of  facts  furnished
by  the  researches  of  Pasteur,  that  admirable  investigator
long  kept  himself  clear  of  physiology  and  medicine.
There  is,  indeed,  reason  to  believe  that  he  was  spurred
on  to  his  most  recent  achievements  by  the  papers  of


xiv


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE.


Burdon  Sanderson,  Koch,  and  others.  The  union  of
scientific  minds  is,  or  ought  to  be,  organic.  They  are
parts  of  the  same  body,  in  which  every  member,  under
penalty  of  atrophy  and  decay,  must  discharge  its  due
share  of  the  duty  imposed  upon  tlie  whole.  Of  this
'  body,'  a  short  time  since,  England  provided  one  of  the
healthiest  limbs  ;  but  round  that  limb  legislation  has
lately  thrown  a  ligature,  which  threatens  to  damage
its  circulation  and  to  divert  its  energies  into  foreign,
channels.  In  observational  medicine  one  fine  piece  of
work  may  be  here  referred  to — the  masterly  inquiry  of
Dr.  Thorne  Thorne  into  the  outbreak  of  typhoid  fever
at  Caterham  and  Eedhill.  Hundreds  were  smitten  by
this  epidemic,  and  many  died.  The  qualities  of  mind
illustrated  in  Dr.  Thome's  inquiry  match  those  dis-
played by  William  Budd  in  his  memorable  investigation
of  a  similar  outbreak  in  Devonshire.  Dr.  Budd's  process
was  centrifugal — tracing  from  a  single  case  in  the
village  of  North  Tawton,  the  ravages  of  the  fever  far
and  wide.  Dr.  Thome's  proce-s  was  centripetal-
tracing  the  epidemic  backwards  from  the  multitude  of
cases  first  presented,  to  the  single  individual  whose
infected  excreta,  poured  into  the  well  at  Caterham,  were
the  cause  of  all.

The  Essays  here  presented  to  the  reader  belong  to
the  A  B  C  of  the  great  subject  touched  upon  in  the
foregoing  Note.  The  two  principal  ones,  namely,
Essays  II.  and  III.,  were  prepared  for  the  Royal
Society,  and  are  published  in  the  '  Philosophical  Trans-
actions'  for  1876  and  1877.    But,  though  written  for


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE.


XV


that  learned  body,  I  sought  to  render  their  style  and
logic  so  clear  as  to  render  them  accessible  to  any  fairly
cultivated  mind.  The  Essays  on  'Fermentation'  and
'  Spontaneous  Generation  '  have  already  appeared  else-
where ;  while  the  first  Essay,  on  £  Dust  and  Disease,'
has  been  for  some  years  before  the  public.  It  may  be
regarded  as  a  kind  of  popular  introduction  to  the  more
strenuous  and  original  labours  which  follow  it.

The  Essay  most  likely  to  try  the  reader's  patience
is  No.  III.  On  the  whole,  however,  and  particularly
in  its  bearings  on  the  Germ  Theory  of  disease,  it  is
probably  the  most  important  of  all.  The  difficulties
which  sometimes  beset  the  experimenter  in  these  in-
vestigations are  best  illustrated  by  this  Essay.  It
shows,  to  my  mind  in  a  very  impressive  manner,  the
analogy  of  the  spread  of  infection  among  organic  in-
fusions with  its  mode  of  propagation  among  human
beings.  The  vital  resistance  of  certain  germs  to  heat
is  strikingly  illustrated  in  the  third  Essay,  one  in-
fusion being  there  proved  to  maintain  its  potentiality
of  life  intact  after  eight  hours'  continuous  exposure  to
the  temperature  of  boiling  water.  Under  the  plain
guidance  of  the  Germ  Theory,  it  is  however  shown  that
an  infusion  of  this  stubborn  character  may  be  infallibly
sterilized  by  discontinuous  heating,  in  one  hundredth
part  of  the  time  requisite  when  the  boiling  is  con-
tinuous. Another  question,  to  my  mind  of  fundamental
importance,  is  also  disposed  of  in  Essay  III.,  where  it
is  shown  that  the  germs  which  exhibited  the  foregoing
resistance  are  neither  contained  in  the  air,  nor  attached
to  the  surface  of  the  vessel,  above  the  liquid,  but  that


xvi  INTRODUCTORY  NOTE.

they  manifest  their  extraordinary  vitality  in  the  body
of  the  liquid  itself.

On  public  sympathy  the  sanitary  physician  has
mainly  to  rely  for  support,  in  a  country  where  sanitary
matters  are  left  so  much  in  the  hands  of  the  public
itself  as  they  are-  in  England.  But  sympathy  without
cause— that  is  to  say,  without  some  basis  of  knowledge
—is  hardly  to  be  expected.  It  is  as  a  contribution  to
such  knowledge  that  these  Essays  have  been  collected,
and  thrown  into  their  present  handy  form.


Royal  Institution  :
August  1881.


J.  TlSDALL.


CONTENTS.


 KX

ON  DUST  AND  DISEASE.

PAGE

Experiments  on  Dusty  Air   1

The  Germ  Theory  of  Contagious  Disease   6

Parasitic  Diseases  of  Silkworms.    Pasteur's  Researches   .       .  9

Origin  and  Propagation  of  Contagious  Matter      .       .       .    .  18

The  Germ  Theory  applied  to  Surgery   22

The  Luminous  Beam  as  a  means  of  Research       .       .       .    .  27

The  Floating- Matter  of  the  Air        .       •   28

Dr.  Bennett's  Experiments   31

OPTICAL  DEPORTMENT  OF  THE  ATMOSPHERE
IN  RELATION  TO  PUTREFACTION  AND  INFEC-
TION.

§    1.  Introduction   45

§    2.  Method  of  Experiment   49

§    3.  Deportment  of  Urine   '61

§    4.  Mutton-Infusion   54

§    5.  Beef-Infusion   56

§    6.  Haddock-Infusion   56

§    7.  Turnip-Infusion   58

§    8.  Hay-Infusion   64

§    9.  Infusion  of  Sole  •       •       .    .  66

§  10.  Liver-Infusion   66

§  11.  Infusions  of  Hare,  Rabbit,  Pheasant,  and  Grouse      .    .  67

§  12.  Infusions  of  Codfish,  Turbot,  Herring,  and  Mullet  .       .  70

§  13.  Infusions  of  Fowl  and  Kidney   71

§  14.  Boiling  by  an  Internal  Source  of  Heat    ....  72

§  15.  Partial  Discussion  of  the  Results,       ,       ,       ,       ,    ,  73

a


XV111


CONTENTS.


PAGE

§  16.  Suspended  Particles  in  Air  and  Water ;  their  relation  to

Bacteria                                          ....  75

§  17.  Eecent  Experiments  on  Heterogenesis    ....  84

§  18.  Experiments  with  Filtered  Air  .      .      .      .      .    .  85

§  19.  Experiments  with  Calcined  Air      .      .       .  .88

§  20.  Infusions  withdrawn  from  Air   90

§  21.  The  Germ  Theory  of  Contagious  Disease        ...  91
§  22.  Experiments  with  Hermetically-sealed  Vessels  .       .    .  94
§  23.  Conditions  as  to  the  Temperature  and  Strength  of  In-
fusions    .       .       .  '   98

§  24.  Developmental  Power  of  Infusions  and  Solutions :  Air-
germs  contrasted  with  Water-germs      .      .      .    .  101

§  25.  Diffusion  of  Germs  in  the  Air   107

§  26.  Tray  of  one  hundred  Tubes   110

§  27.  Some  Experiments  of  Pasteur  and  their  Belation  to  Bac-
terial Clouds    .      .      .  ■   121

Note    I.  Action  of  Bacteria  upon  a  Beam  of  Light     .  127

NOTE  II.  Fluorescence  of  Infusions   128

FURTHER  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  DEPORTMENT  AND
VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.

§    1.  Introduction   131

§    2.  Experiments  of  Pasteur,  Eoberts  and  Cohn       .       .    .  135
§    3.  Hay-Infusions.    Preliminary  Experiments  with  Pipette-
bulbs    138

§    4.  Hay-Infusions.    Experiments  with  Cohn's  Tubes  .       .  144

§    5.  Hay-Infusions  (in  Closed  Chambers)   146

§  6.  Desiccation  of  Germs.  New  Hay  and  old  .  .  .  148
§    7.  Hay-Infusions.     Further    Experiments   with  Closed

Chambers   150

§    8.  Experiments  with  Soaked  Hay   154

§    9.  Infusions  of  Fungi   158

§  10.  Infusions  of  Cucumber,  Beetroot,  &c   161

§  11.  New  Experiments  on  Animal  Infusions.  Contradictory

results     .       .       .   165

§  12.  Infusions  protected  by  Glass  Shades  containing  Calcined

Air  .       .       .       .    '   169

§  .1 3.  Further  Precautions  against  Infection    .       .       .  .171

§  14.  Experiments  in  the  Eoyal  Gardens,  Kew    .       .      .    .  1 7 !

§  15.  Experiments  on  the  Eoof  of  the  Eoyal  Institution  .  .  177
§  16.  Preliminary  Experiments  on  the  Eesistance-limit  of

Germs  to  the  temperature  of  Boiling  Water      .      .  180


CONTENTS.


xix


PAGE

§  17.  Further  Experiments  on  the  Kesistance-liniit  of  Germs

to  the  Boiling  Temperature  183

§  18.  Change  of  Apparatus.    New  Experiments  with  Filtered


Air  '  .      .  •    .  18  8

§  19.  Final  proof  that  the  Resistant  Germs  are  embraced  by
the  Infusion.    Examples  of  Resistance  both  in  Acid

and  Neutral  Liquids  194

§   20.  Remarks  on  Acid,  Neutral,  and  Alkaline  Infusions        .  203
§  21.  Remarks  on  the  Germs  of  Bacteria  as  distinguished

from  Bacteria  themselves   ......  205

§  22.  Sterilization  by  discontinuous  Heating       .       .    '  .    .  210


§  23.  Mortality  of  Germs  through  defect  of  Oxygen  produced


by  Exhaustion  with  the  Sprengel  Pump  .       .       .    .  216
§  24.  Mortality  of  Germs  through  defect  of  Oxygen  conse-
quent on  boiling  the  Infusion   221

§  25.  Critical  Review  of  the  last  two  Sections  ....  225

§  26.  Mortality  of  Germs  through  excess  of  Oxygen   .       .    .  227

§  27.  Experiments  on  neutralized  Urine   228

§  28.  Hermetically-sealed  Flasks  exposed  to  the  Sun  of  the

Alps   231

§  29.  Remarks  on  Hermetic  Sealing   233

§  30.  Experiments  with  Turnip-cheese  Infusions       .       .    .  234

FERMENTATION,    AND   ITS   BEARINGS  ON

SURGERY  AND  MEDICINE   237

SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION     .       .       ...  277

APPENDIX   321


ON  DUST  AND  DISEASE.


I.

'Experiments  on  Dusty  Air.

Solar  light,  in  passing  through  a  dark  room,  reveals
its  track  by  illuminating  the  dust  floating  in  the  air.
'  The  sun,'  says  Daniel  Culverwell,  '  discovers  atomes,
though  they  be  invisible  by  candle-light,  and  makes
them  dance  naked  in  his  beams.'

In  my  researches  on  the  decomposition  of  vapours
by  light,  I  was  compelled  to  remove  these  '  atomes '
and  this  dust.  It  was  essential  that  the  space  con-
I  taining  the  vapours  should  embrace  no  visible  thing —
that  no  substance  capable  of  scattering  light  in  the
slightest  sensible  degree  should,  at  the  outset  of  an
experiment,  be  found  in  the  wide  '  experimental  tube  '
in  which  the  vapour  was  enclosed.

For  a  long  time  I  was  troubled  by  the  appearance
there  of  floating  matter,  which,  though  invisible  in
diffuse  daylight,  was  at  once  revealed  by  a  powerfully
condensed  beam.  Two  U-tubes  were  placed  in  suc-
cession in  the  path  of  the  air,  before  it  entered  the
liquid  whose  vapour  was  to  be  carried  into  the  experi-
mental tube.  One  of  the  U-tubes  contained  fragments
of  marble  wetted  with  a  strong  solution  of  caustic  potash  ;


2


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OE  THE  AIR.


the  other,  fragments  of  glass  wetted  with  concentrated
sulphuric  acid  which,  while  yielding  no  vapour  of  its  own,
powerfully  absorbs  the  aqueous  vapour  of  the  air.  To
my  astonishment,  the  air  of  the  Royal  Institution,  sent
through  these  tubes  at  a  rate  sufficiently  slow  to  dry
it,  and  to  remove  its  carbonic  acid,  carried  into  the
experimental  tube  a  considerable  amount  of  mechani-
cally suspended  matter,  which  was  illuminated  when
the  beam  passed  through  the  tube.  The  effect  was
substantially  the  same  when  the  air  was  permitted  to
bubble  through  the  liquid  acid,  and  through  the  solu-
tion of  potash.

1  tried  to  intercept  this  floating  matter  in  various
ways;  and  on  October  5,  1868,  prior  to  sending  the
air  through  the  drying  apparatus,  it  was  carefully
permitted  to  pass  over  the  tip  of  a  spirit-lamp  flame.
The  floating  matter  then  no  longer  appeared,  having
been  burnt  up  by  the  flame.  It  was  therefore  organic
matter.  I  was  by  no  means  prepared  for  this  result ;
having  previously  thought  that  the  dust  of  our  air  was,
in  great  part,  inorganic  and  non-combustible.1

I  had  constructed  a  small  gas-furnace,  now  much
employed  by  chemists,  containing  a  platinum  tube,
which"  could  be  heated  to  vivid  redness.2    Within  this

i  According  to  an  analysis  kindly  furnished  to  me  by  Dr.  Percy,
the  dust  collected  from  the  n-alls  of  the  British  Museum  contains
fully  50  per  cent,  of  inorganic  matter.  I  have  every  <^»ce  m
the  results  of  this  distinguished  chemist;  they  show  that  the.  float-
Zg  dust  of  our  rooms  is,  as  it  were,  winnowed  from  the  heavier
matter  As  bearing  directly  upon  tins  point  I  may  quote  the  fol-
ding passage  from  Pasteur  :  'Mais  ici  se  present  e  une  remarque:
la  noussiere  que  l'on  trouve  a  la  surface  de  tons  les  corps  est  soumtse
S  4  des  courants  d'air,  qui  doivent  -lever Jespa,  ,
cules  les  plus  legeres,  au  nombre  desquelles  se  trouvent,  sans  dout  e,
de  Terence  les  corpuscules  organises,  ceufs  ou  spores,  moms  lourds
generalement  que  les  particules  mmfrales.'

*  Pasteur  was,  I  believe,  the  first  to  employ  such  a  tube.


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


3


tube  was  a  roll  of  platinum  gauze,  which,  while  it
permitted  the  air  to  pass  through  it,  ensured  the
practical  contact  of  the  dust  with  the  incandescent
metal.  The  air  of  the  laboratory  was  permitted  to
enter  the  experimental  tube,  sometimes  through  the
cold,  and  sometimes  through  the  heated,  tube  of  plati-
num. In  the  first  column  of  the  following  fragment  of
a  long  table  of  results,  the  quantity  of  air  operated  on  is
expressed  by  the  depression  of  the  mercury  gauge  of  the
air-pump.  In  the  second  column  the  condition  of  the
platinum  tube  is  mentioned,  and  in  the  third  the  state
of  the  air  in  the  experimental  tube.

Quantity  of  air        State  of  platinum  tube        State  of  experimental  tube
15  inches     .       .       Cold       .       .       Full  of  particles.
30     „         .       .       Ked-hot  .       .       Optically  empty.

The  phrase  'optically  empty'  shows  that  when  the
conditions  of  perfect  combustion  were  present,  the
floating  matter  totally  disappeared.

In  a  cylindrical  beam,  which  strongly  illuminated
the  dust  of  the  laboratory,  I  placed  an  ignited  spirit-
lamp.  Mingling  with  the  flame,  and  round  its  rim,
were  seen  curious  wreaths  of  darkness  resembling  an
intensely  black  smoke.  On  placing  the  flame  at  some
distance  below  the  beam,  the  same  dark  masses  stormed
upwards.  They  were  blacker  than  the  blackest  smoke
ever  seen  issuing  from  the  funnel  of  a  steamer ;  and
their  resemblance  to  smoke  was  so  perfect  as  to  lead
the  most  practised  observer  to  conclude  that  the
apparently  pure  flame  of  the  alcohol  lamp  required  but
a  beam  of  sufficient  intensity  to  reveal  its  clouds  of
liberated  carbon.

But  is  the  blackness  smoke  ?  This  question  pre-
sented itself  in  a  moment  and  was  thus  answered :  A
red-hot  poker  was  placed  underneath  the  beam  :  from

B  2


4


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


it  the  black  wreaths  also  ascended.  A  large  hydrogen
flame  was  next  employed,  and  it  produced  those  whirl-
ing masses  of  darkness,  far  more  copiously  than  either
the  spirit-flame  or  poker.  Smoke  was  therefore  out  of
the  question.1

What,  then,  was  the  blackness  ?  It  was  simply  that
of  stellar  space  ;  that  is  to  say,  blackness  resulting
from  the  absence  from  the  track  of  the  beam  of  all
matter  competent  to  scatter  its  light.  When  the  flame
was  placed  below  the  beam  the  floating  matter  was
destroyed  in  situ  ;  and  the  air,  freed  from  this  matter,
rose  into  the  beam,  jostled  aside  the  illuminated  par-
ticles, and  substituted  for  their  light  the  darkness  due
to  its  own  perfect  transparency.  Nothing  could  more
forcibly  illustrate  the  invisibility  of  the  agent  which
renders  all  things  visible.  The  beam  crossed,  unseen,
the  black  chasm  formed  by  the  transparent  air,  while,
at  both  sides  of  the  gap,  the  thick-strewn  particles
shone  out"  like  a  luminous  solid  under  the  powerful
illumination.

It  is  not,  however,  necessary  to  burn  the  particles
to  produce  a  stream  of  darkness.  Without  actual
combustion,  currents  may  be  generated  which  shall
displace  the  floating  matter,  and  appear  dark  amid  the
surrounding  brightness.  I  noticed  this  effect  first  on
placing  a  red-hot  copper  ball  below  the  beam,  and
permitting  it  to  remain  there  until  its  temperature
had  fallen  below  that  of  boiling  water.  The  dark
currents,  though  much  enfeebled,  were  still  produced.
They  may  also  be  produced  by  a  flask  filled  with  hot
water.

1  In  none  of  the  public  rooms  of  the  United  States  where  I  bad
the  honour  to  lecture  was  this  experiment  made.  The  organic
dust  was  too  scanty.  Certain  rooms  in  England— the  Brighton
Pavilion,  for  example— also  lack  the  necessary  conditions.


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


5


To  study  this  effect  a  platinum  wire  was  stretched
transversely  under  the  beam,  the  two  ends  of  the  wire
being  connected  with  the  two  poles  of  a  voltaic  battery.
To  regulate  the  strength  of  the  current  a  rheostat  was
placed  in  the  circuit.  Beginning  with  a  feeble  current
the  temperature  of  the  wire  was  gradually  augmented  ;
but  long  before  it  reached  the  heat  of  ignition,  a  flat
stream  of  air  rose  from  it,  which  when  looked  at  edge-
ways appeared  darker  and  sharper  than  one  of  the
blackest  lines'  of  Fraunhofer  in  the  purified  spectrum.
Right  and  left  of  this  dark  vertical  band  the  floating
matter  rose  upwards,  bounding  definitely  the  non-
luminous  stream  of  air.  What  is  the  explanation?
Simply  this :  The  hot  wire  rarefied  the  air  in  contact
•with  it,  but  it  did  not  equally  lighten  the  floating
matter.  The  convection  current  of  pure  air  therefore
passed  upwards  among  the  inert  particles,  dragging
them  after  it  right  and  left,  but  forming  between  them
an  impassable  black  partition.  This  elementary  ex-
periment enables  us  to  render  an  account  of  the  dark
currents  produced  by  bodies  at  a  temperature  below
that  of  combustion.

When  the  platinum  wire  is  intensely  heated,  the
floating  matter  is  not  only  displaced,  but  destroyed.
I  stretched  a  wire  about  4  inches  long  through  the  air
of  an  ordinary  glass  shade  resting  on  cotton-wool,
which  also  surrounded  the  rim.  The  wire  being  raised
to  a  white  heat  by  an  electric  current,  the  air  expanded,
and  some  of  it  was  forced  through  the  cotton-wool.
When  the  current  was  interrupted,  and  the  air  within
the  shade  cooled,  the  returning  air  did  not  carry  motes
along  with  it,  being  filtered  by  the  wool.  At  the
beginning  of  this  experiment  the  shade  was  charged
-with  floating  matter  ;  at  the  end  of  half  an  hour  it
was  optically  empty.


6  THE  FLOATING  MATTEE  OF  THE  AIR.


On  the  wooden  base  of  a  cubical  glass  shade,  a
cubic  foot  in  volume,  upright  supports  were  fixed,  and
from  one  support  to  the  other  38  inches  of  platinum
wire  were  stretched  in  four  parallel  lines.  The  ends
of  the  platinum  wire  were  soldered  to  two  stout  copper
wires  which  passed  through  the  base  of  the  shade
and  could  be  connected  with  a  battery.  As  in  the
last  experiment  the  shade  rested  upon  cotton-wool.
A  beam  sent  through  the  shade  revealed  the  suspended
matter.  The  platinum  wire  was  then  raised  to  white-
ness. In  five  minutes  there  was  a  sensible  diminution
of  the  matter,  and  in  ten  minutes  it  was  totally  con-
sumed.

Oxygen,  hydrogen,  nitrogen,  carbonic  acid,  so  pre-
pared as  to  exclude  all  floating  particles,  produce,
when  poured  or  blown  into  the  beam,  the  darkness  of
stellar  space.  Coal-gas  does  the  same.  An  ordinary
glass  shade,  placed  in  the  air  with  its  mouth  down-
wards, permits  the  track  of  the  beam  to  be  seen
crossing  it.  When  coal-gas  or  hydrogen  is  allowed  to
enter  the  shade  by  a  tube  reaching  to  its  top,  the  gas
gradually  fills  the  shade  from  above  downwards.  As
soon  as  it  occupies  the  space  crossed  by  the  beam,  the
luminous  track  is  abolished.  Lifting  the  shade  so  as
to  bring  the  common  boundary  of  gas  and  air  above
the  beam,  the  track  flashes  forth.  After  the  shade  is
full,  if  it  be  inverted,  the  pure  gas  passes  upwards  like
a  black  smoke  among  the  illuminated  particles.

The  Germ  Theory  of  Contagious  Disease.

There  is  no  respite  to  our  contact  with  the  floating
matter  of  the  air.  We  not  only  suffer  from  its
mechanical  irritation,  but  it  is  a  growing  belief  that
a  portion  of  it  lies  at  the  root  of  a  class  of  disorders


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


7


most  deadly  to  man.  And  what  is  this  portion  ?  It
was  some  time  ago  the  current  belief  that  epidemic
diseases  generally  were  propagated  by  a  kind  of  malaria,
which  consisted  of  organic  matter  in  a  state  of  motor-
decay  ;  that  when  such  matter  was  taken  into  the  body
through  the  lungs,  skin,  or  stomach,  it  had  the  power
of  spreading  there  the  destroying  process  by  which
itself  had  been  assailed.  Such  a  power,  it  was  alleged,
was  visibly  exerted  in  the  case  of  yeast.  A  little  leaven
was  seen  to  leaven  the  whole  lump— a  mere  speck  of
matter,  in  this  supposed  state  of  decomposition,  being
apparently  competent  to  propagate  indefinitely  its  own
decay.  Why  should  not  a  bit  of  rotten  malaria  within
the  human  body  act  in  a  similar  way?  In  1836  a
very  unexpected  reply  was  given  to  this  question.  In
that  year  Cagniard  de  la  Tour  discovered  the  yeast-
plant— a  living  organism,  which  when  placed  in  a
proper  medium  feeds,  grows,  and  reproduces  itself,  and
in  this  way  carries  on  the  process  which  we  name
fermentation.  Here  we  have  active  life  instead  of
motor-decay.  By  this  discovery  fermentation  was  con-
nected with  organic  growth.

Schwann,  of  Berlin,  discovered  the  yeast-plant  in-
dependently about  the  same  time  ;  and  in  February,
1837,  he  also  announced  the  important  result,  that
when  a  decoction  of  meat  is  effectually  screened  from
ordinary  air,  and  supplied  solely  with  calcined  air,
putrefaction  never  sets  in.  Putrefaction,  therefore,  he
affirmed  to  be  caused,  not  by  the  air,  but  by  something  in
the  air  which  could  be  destroyed  by  a  sufficiently  high
temperature.  The  results  of  Schwann  were  confirmed  by
the  independent  experiments  of  Helmholtz,  Ure,  and
Pasteur,  while  other  methods,  pursued  by  Schultze,
and  by  Schroeder  and  Dusch,  led  to  the  same  result.
But  as  regards  fermentation,  the  minds  of  chemists,


8  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

influenced  probably  by  the  great  authority  of  Gray-
Lussac,  fell  back  upon  the  old  notion  of  matter  in  a  state
of  decay.  It  was  not,  they  said,  the  living  yeast-plant,  but
the  dead  or  dying  part  of  it,  which,  assailed  by  oxygen,
produced  the  fermentation.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
when  the  plant  is  killed  the  ferment  disappears.
Mediate  or  immediate,  the  real  '  ferments  '  are  living
organisms  which  find  in  fermentable  substances  their
necessary  food.

Side  by  side  with  these  researches  and  discoveries,
and  fortified  by  them  and  others,  has  run  the  germ
theory  of  epidemic  disease.  The  notion  was  expressed
by  Kircher,  and  favoured  by  Linnaeus,  that  epidemic
diseases  may  be  due  to  germs  which  float  in  the  at-
mosphere, enter  the  body,  and  produce  disturbance  by
the  development  within  the  body  of  parasitic  life.
The  strength  of  this  theory  consists  in  the  perfect
parallelism  of  the  phenomena  of  contagious  disease
with  those  of  life.  As  a  planted  acorn  gives  birth  to
an  oak,  competent  to  produce  a  whole  crop  of  acorns,
each  gifted  with  the  power  of  reproducing  its  parent
tree  ;  and  as  thus  from  a  single  seedling  a  whole  forest
may  spring :  so,  it  is  contended,  these  epidemic  diseases
literally  plant  their  seeds,  grow,  and  shake  abroad  new
germs,  which,  meeting  in  the  human  body  their  proper
food  and  temperature,  finally  take  possession  of  whole
populations.  There  is  nothing  to  my  knowledge  in
pure  chemistry  which  resembles  the  power  of  propaga-
tion and  self-multiplication  possessed  by  the  matter
which  produces  epidemic  disease.  If  you  sow  wheat
you  do  not  get  barley ;  if  you  sow  small-pox  you  do
not  get  scarlet-fever,  but  small-pox  indefinitely  mul-
tiplied, and  nothing  else.  The  matter  of  each  con-
tagious disease  reproduces  itself  as  rigidly  as  if  it  were
(as  Miss  Nightingale  puts  it)  dog  or  cat.


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


9


Parasitic  Diseases  of  Silkworms.  Pasteur's
Researches.

It  is  admitted  on  all  hands  that  some  diseases  are
the  product  of  parasitic  growth.  Both  in  man  and  in
lower  creatures,  the  existence  of  such  diseases  has  been
demonstrated.  I  am  enabled  to  lay  before  you  an  ac-
count of  an  epidemic  of  this  kind,  thoroughly  investi-
gated and  successfully  combated  by  M.  Pasteur.  For
fifteen  years  a  plague  had  raged  among  the  silkworms
of  France.  They  had  sickened  and  died  in  multitudes,
while  those  that  succeeded  in  spinning  their  cocoons
furnished  only  a  fraction  of  the  normal  quantity  of  silk.
In  1853  the  silk  culture  of  France  produced  a  revenue
of  one  hundred  and  thirty  millions  of  francs.  During
the  twenty  previous  years  the  revenue  had  doubled  it-
self, and  no  doubt  was  entertained  as  to  its  further
augmentation.  The  weight  of  the  cocoons  produced
in°1853  was  52,000,000  pounds;  in  1865  it  had
fallen  to  8,000,000,  the  fall  entailing,  in  a  single  year,
a  loss  of  100,000,000  francs.

The  country  chiefly  smitten  by  this  calamity  hap-
pened to  be  that  of  the  celebrated  chemist  Dumas,  now
perpetual  secretary  of  the  French  Academy  of  Sciences.
He  turned  to  his  friend,  colleague,  and  pupil,  Pasteur,
and  besought  him,  with  an  earnestness  which  the  cir-
cumstances rendered  almost  personal,  to  undertake  the
investigation  of  the  malady.  Pasteur  at  this  time  had
never  seen  a  silkworm,  and  he  urged  his  inexperience  in
reply  to  his  friend.  But  Dumas  knew  too  well  the
qualities  needed  for  such  an  inquiry  to  accept  Pasteur's
reason  for  declining  it.  '  Je  mets,'  said  he,  '  un  prix
extreme  a  voir  votre  attention  fixee  sur  la  question  qui
interesse  mon  pauvre  pays ;  la  misere  surpasse  tout  ce


10  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

que  vous  pouvez  imaginer.'  Pamphlets  about  the
plague  had  been  showered  upon  the  public,  the  mono-
tony of  waste  paper  being  broken,  at  rare  intervals,  by
a  more  or  less  useful  publication.  c  The  Pharmacopoeia
of  the  Silkworm,'  wrote  M.  Cornalia  in  1860,  £is  now
as  complicated  as  that  of  man.  Grases,  liquids,  and
solids  have  been  laid  under  contribution.  From
chlorine  to  sulphurous  acid,  from  nitric  acid  to  rum,
from  sugar  to  sulphate  of  quinine, — all  has  been  in-
voked in  behalf  of  this  unhappy  insect.'  The  helpless
cultivators,  moreover,  welcomed  with  ready  trustfulness
every  new  remedy,  if  only  pressed  upon  them  with
sufficient  hardihood.  It  seemed  impossible  to  diminish
their  blind  confidence  in  their  blind  guides.  In  1863
the  French  Minister  of  Agriculture  signed  an  agree-
ment to  pay  500,000  francs  for  the  use  of  a  remedy,
which  its  promoter  declared  to  be  infallible.  It  was
tried  in  twelve  different  departments  of  France,  and
found  perfectly  useless.  In  no  single  instance  was  it
successful.  It  was  under  these  circumstances  that  M.
Pasteur,  yielding  to  the  entreaties  of  his  friend,  betook
himself  to  Alais  in  the  beginning  of  June,  1865.  As
regards  silk  husbandry,  this  was  the  most  important
department  in  France,  and  it  was  the  most  sorely
smitten  by  the  plague.

The  silkworm  had  been  previously  attacked  by
muscardine,  a  disease  proved  by  Bassi  to  be  caused  by
a  vegetable  parasite.  This  malady  was  propagated  an-
nually by  the  parasitic  spores.  Wafted  by  winds,  they
often  sowed  the  disease  in  places  far  removed  from
the  centre  of  infection.  Muscardine  is  now  said  to
be  very  rare,  a  deadlier  malady  having  taken  its
place.  This  new  disease  is  characterized  by  the  black
spots  which  cover  the  silkworms ;  hence  the  name  pe-
brine,  first  applied  to  the  plague  by  M.  de  Quatrefages,


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


11


and  adopted  by  Pasteur.  Pebrine  declares  itself  in  the
stunted  and  unequal  growth  of  the  worms,  in  the
languor  of  their  movements,  in  their  fastidiousness  as
regards  food,  and  in  their  premature  death.  The  course
of  discovery  as  regards  the  epidemic  is  this:  In  1849
G-uerin  Meneville  noticed  in  the  blood  of  silkworms
vibratory  corpuscles,  which  he  supposed  from  their
motions  to  be  endowed  with  independent  life.  Filippi,
however,  showed  that  the  motion  of  the  corpuscles  was
the  well-known  Brownian  motion  ;  but  he  committed
the  error  of  supposing  the  corpuscles  to  be  normal  to
the  life  of  the  insect.  Possessing  the  power  of  in-
definite self-multiplication,  they  are  really  the  cause
of  its  mortality— the  form  and  substance  of  its
disease.  This  was  well  described  by  Cornalia;  while
Lebert  and  Frey  subsequently  found  the  corpuscles  not
only  in  the  blood,  but  in  all  the  tissues  of  the  insect.
Osimo,  in  1857,  discovered  them  in  the  eggs  ;  and  on
this  observation  Vittadiani  founded,  in  1859,  a  prac-
tical method  of  distinguishing  healthy  from  diseased
eggs.  The  test  often  proved  fallacious,  and  it  was
never  extensively  applied.

These  living  corpuscles  first  take  possession  of  the
intestinal  canal,  and  spread  thence  throughout  the  body
of  the  worm.  They  fill  the  silk  cavities,  the  stricken
insect  often  going  automatically  through  the  motions
of  spinning,  without  any  material  to  work  upon.  Its
organs,  instead  of  being  filled  with  the  clear  viscous
liquid  of  the  silk,  are  packed  to  distension  by  the
corpuscles.  On  this  feature  of  the  plague  Pasteur
fixed  his  entire  attention.  The  cycle  of  the  silkworm's
life  is  briefly  this:  From  the  fertile  egg  comes  the
little  worm,  which  grows,  and  casts  its  skin.  This
process  of  moulting  is  repeated  two  or  three  times
at  intervals  during  the  life   of  the  insect.  After


12


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


the  last  moulting  the  worm  climbs  the  brambles
placed  to  receive  it,  and  spins  among  them  its  cocoon.
It  passes  thus  into  a  chrysalis ;  the  chrysalis  becomes
a  moth,  and  the  moth,  when  liberated,  lays  the  eggs
which  form  the  starting-point  of  a  new  cycle.  Now
Pasteur  proved  that  the  plague-corpuscles  might  be
incipient  in  the  egg,  and  escape  detection ;  they  might
also  be  germinal  in  the  worm,  and  still  baffle  the
microscope.  But  as  the  worm  grows,  the  corpuscles
grow  also,  becoming  larger  and  more  defined.  In  the
aged  chrysalis  they  are  more  pronounced  than  in  the
worm ;  while  in  the  moth,  if  either  the  egg  or  the
worm  from  which  it  comes  should  have  been  at  all
stricken,  the  corpuscles  infallibly  appear,  offering  no
difficulty  of  detection.  This  was  the  first  great  point
made  out  in  1865  by  Pasteur.  The  Italian  naturalists,
as  aforesaid,  recommended  the  examination  of  the  eggs
before  risking  their  incubation.  Pasteur  showed  that
both  eggs  and  worms  might  be  smitten,  and  still  pass
muster,  the  culture  of  such  eggs  or  such  worms  being
sure  to  entail  disaster.  He  made  the  moth  his  starting-
point  in  seeking  to  regenerate  the  race.

Pasteur  made  his  first  communication  on  this  sub-
ject to  the  Academy  of  Sciences  in  September,  1865.
It  raised  a  cloud  of  criticism.  Here,  forsooth,  was  a
chemist  rashly  quitting  his  proper  metier  and  pre-
suming to  lay  down  the  law  for  the  physician  and
biologist  on  a  subject  which  was  eminently  theirs.
'  On  trouva  etrange  que  je  fusse  si  peu  au  courant  de
la  question  ;  on  m'opposa  des  travaux  qui  avaient  paru
depuis  longtemps  en  Italie,  dont  les  resultats  montraient
Finutilite  de  mes  efforts,  et  l'impossibilite  d'arriver  a
un  resultat  pratique  dans  la  direction  queje  m'etais
engage.  Que  mon  ignorance  fut  grande  au  sujet  des
recherches  sans  nombre  qui  avaient  paru  depuis  quinze


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


13


annees.'  Pasteur  heard  the  buzz,  but  he  continued  his
work.  In  choosing  the  eggs  intended  for  incubation,
the  cultivators  selected  those  produced  in  the  successful
<  educations  '  of  the  year.  But  they  could  not  under-
stand the  frequent  and  often  disastrous  failures  of  their
selected  eggs ;  for  they  did  not  know,  and  nobody  prior  ,
to  Pasteur  was  competent  to. tell  them,  that  the  finest
cocoons  may  envelope  doomed  corpusculous  moths.  It
was  not,  however,  easy  to  make  the  cultivators  accept
new  guidance.  To  strike  their  imagination,  and  if
possible  determine  their  practice,  Pasteur  hit  upon  the
expedient  of  prophecy.  In  1866  he  inspected,  at  St.
Hippolyte-du-Fort,  fourteen  different  parcels  of  eggs
intended  for  incubation.  Having  examined  a  sufficient
number  of  the  moths  which  produced  these  eggs,  he
wrote  out  the  prediction  of  what  would  occur  in  1867,
and  placed  the  prophecy  as  a  sealed  letter  in  the  hands
of  the  Mayor  of  St.  Hippolyte.

In  1867  the  cultivators  communicated  to  the  mayor
their  results.  The  letter  of  Pasteur  was  then  opened
and  read,  and  it  was  found  that  in  twelve  out  of  fourteen
cases  there  was  absolute  conformity  between  his  pre-
diction and  the  observed  facts.  Many  of  the  groups
had  perished  totally;  the  others  had  perished  almost
totally;  and  this  was  the  prediction  of  Pasteur.  In
two  out  of  the  fourteen  cases,  instead  of  the  prophesied
destruction,  half  an  average  crop  was  obtained.  Now,
the  parcels  of  eggs  here  referred  to  were  considered
healthy  by  their  owners.  They  had  been  hatched  and
tended  in  the  firm  hope  that  the  labour  expended  on
them  would  prove  remunerative.  The  application  of
the  moth-test  for  a  few  minutes  in  1866  would  have
saved  the  labour  and  averted  the  disappointment.  Two
additional  parcels  of  eggs  were  at  the  same  time  sub-
mitted to  Pasteur.    He  pronounced  them  healthy  ;  and


14  THE  ELOATING-MATTEK  OF  THE  AIR.


his  words  were  verified  by  the  production  of  an  excellent
crop.  Other  cases  of  prophecy  still  more  remarkable,
because  more  circumstantial,  are  recorded  in  Pasteur's
work  on  the  Diseases  of  Silkworms.

Pasteur  subjected  the  development  of  the  corpuscles
to  a  searching  investigation,  and  followed  out  with
admirable  skill  and  completeness  the  various  modes  by
which  the  plague  was  propagated.    From  moths  per-
fectly free  from  corpuscles  he  obtained  healthy  worms,
and  selecting  1 0,  20,  30,  50,  as  the  case  might  be,  he
introduced  into  the  worms  the  corpusculous  matter.
It  "was  first  permitted  to  accompany  the  food.    Let  us
take  a  single  example  out  of  many.     Eubbing  up
a  small  corpusculous  worm    in    water,  he  smeared
the  mixture  over  mulberry-leaves.    Assuring  himself
that  the  leaves  had  been  eaten,  he  watched  the  con-
sequences from  day  to  day.    Side  by  side  with  the
infected  worms  he  reared  their  fellows,  keeping  them  as
much  as  possible  out  of  the  way  of  infection.  These
constituted  his  5  lot  temoin,' — his  standard  of  com-
parison.   On  April  16,  1868,  he  thus  infected  thirty
worms.    Up  to  the  23rd  they  remained  quite  well.
On  the  25th  they  seemed  well,  but  on  that  day  cor-
puscles were  found,  in  the  intestines  of  two  of  them.  On
the  27th,  or  eleven  days  after  the  infected  repast,  two
fresh  worms  were  examined,  and  not  only  was  the
intestinal  canal- found  in  each  case  invaded,  but  the  silk
organ  itself  was  charged  with  corpuscles.    On  the  28th
the  twenty-six  remaining  worms  were  covered  by  the
black  spots  of  pebrine.    On  the  30th  the  difference  of
size  between  the  infected  and  non-infected  worms  was
very  striking,  the  sick  worms  being  not  more  than  two-
thirds  of  the  bulk  of  the  healthy  ones.    On  May  2  a
worm  which  had  just  finished  its  fourth  moulting  was
examined.     Its  whole  body  was  so  filled  with  the


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


15


parasite  as  to  excite  astonishment  that  it  could  live.
The  disease  advanced,  the  worms  died  and  were  ex-
amined, and  on  May  11  only  six  out  of  the  thirty
remained.  They  were  the  strongest  of  the  lot,  but  on
being  searched  they  also  were  found  charged  with  cor-
puscles. Not  one  of  the  thirty  worms  had  escaped  ;  a
single  meal  had  poisoned  them  all.  The  standard  lot,
on  the  contrary,  spun  their  fine  cocoons,  two  only  of
their  moths  being  proved  to  contain  any  trace  of  the
parasite,  which  had  doubtless  been  introduced  during
the  rearing  of  the  worms.

As  his  acquaintance  with  the  subject  increased,
Pasteur's  desire  for  precision  augmented,  and  he  finally
counted  the  growing  number  of  corpuscles  seen  in  the
field  of  his  microscope  from  day  to  day.  After  a  con-
tagious repast  the  number  of  worms  containing  the
parasite  gradually  augmented  until  finally  it  became
cent,  per  cent.  The  number  of  corpuscles  would  at  the
same  time  rise  from  0  to  1,  to  10,  to  100,  and  some-
times even  to  1,000  or  1,500  in  the  field  of  his  micro-
scope. He  then  varied  the  mode  of  infection.  He
inoculated  healthy  worms  with  the  corpusculous  matter,
and  watched  the  consequent  growth  of  the  disease.  He
proved  that  the  worms  inoculate  each  other  by  the
infliction  of  visible  wounds  with  their  claws.  In  various
cases  he  washed  the  claws,  and  found  corpuscles  in  the
water.  He  demonstrated  the  spread  of  infection  by  the
simple  association  of  healthy  and  diseased  worms.  By
their  claws  and  their  excrement,  the  diseased  worms
spread  infection.  It  was  no  hypothetical  infected
medium — no  problematical  pythogenic  gas — that  killed
the  worms,  but  a  definite  organism.  The  question  of
infection  at  a  distance  was  also  examined,  and  its
occurrence  demonstrated.  As  might  be  expected  from
Pasteur's  antecedents,  the  investigation  was  exhaustive.


1  6  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


the  beauty  of  his  manipulation  finding  a  fit  correlative
in  the  clearness  of  his  thought.

The  following  quotation  from  Pasteur's  work  clearly
shows  the  relation  in  which  his  researches  stand  to  the
important  question  on  which  he  was  engaged  :

Place  (he  says)  the  most  skilful  cultivator,  even  the  most
expert  microscopist,  in  presence  of  large  cultivations  which
present  the  symptoms  described  in  our  experiments;  his
judgment  will  necessarily  be  erroneous  if  he  confines  him-
self to  the  knowledge  which  preceded  my  researches.  The
worms  will  not  present  to  him  the  slightest  spot  of  pebrine ;
the  microscope  will  not  reveal  the  existence  of  corpuscles  ;
the  mortality  of  the  worms  will  be  null  or  insignificant;
and  the  cocoons  leave  nothing  to  be  desired.    Our  observer
would,  therefore,  conclude  without  hesitation  that  the  eggs
produced  will  be  good  for  incubation.    The  truth  is,  on  the
contrary,  that  all  the  worms  of  these  fine  crops  have  been
poisoned ;  that  from  the  beginning  they  carried  in  them  the
aerm  of  the  malady ;  ready  to  multiply  itself  beyond  measure
in  the  chrysalides  and  the  moths,  thence  to  pass  into  the
e«*s  and  smite  with  sterility  the  next  generation.  And
what  is  the  first  cause  of  the  evil  concealed  under  so  deceit-
ful an  exterior  ]    In  our  experiments  we  can,  so  to  speak,
touch  it  with  our  fingers.    It  is  entirely  the  effect  of  a
single  corpusculous  repast;  an  effect  more  or  less  prompt
according  to  the  epoch  of  life  of  the  worm  that  has  eaten
the  poisoned  food.

Pasteur  describes  in  detail  his  method  of  securing
healthy  eggs.  It  is  nothing  less  than  a  mode  of  restor-
ing to  France  her  ancient  silk  husbandry.  The  justifi-
cation of  his  work  is  to  be  found  in  the  reports
which  reached  him  of  the  application  and  the  suc-
cess of  his  method,  while  editing  his  researches  for
final  publication.  In  both  France  and  Italy  his  method
has  been  pursued  with  the  most  satisfactory  results.
But  it  was  an  up-hill  fight  which  led  to  this  victory.


I


DUST  AND  DISEASE.  17

{ Since  the  commencement,'  he  says, £  of  these  researches,
I  have  been  constantly  exposed  to  the  most  obstinate
and  unjust  contradictions  ;  but  I  have  made  it  a  duty
to  leave  no  trace  of  these  conflicts  in  this  book.'  And  in
reference  to  parasitic  diseases,  generally,  he  uses  the
following  weighty  words  :  '  II  est  au  pouvoir  de  l'homme
de  faire  disparaitre  de  la  surface  du  globe  les  maladies
parasitaires,  si,  com  me  c'est  ma  conviction,  la  doctrine
des  generations  spontanees  est  une  chimere.'

Pasteur  dwells  upon  the  ease  with  which  an  island
like  Corsica  might  be  absolutely  isolated  from  the  silk-
worm epidemic.  And  with  regard  to  other  epidemics,
Mr.  John  Simon  describes  an  extraordinary  case  of  in-
sular exemption,  for  the  ten  years  extending  from  1851
to  1860.  Of  the  627  registration  districts  of  England,
one  only  had  an  entire  escape  from  diseases  which,  in
whole  or  in  part,  were  prevalent  in  all  the  others  :  '  In
all  the  ten  years  it  had  not  a  single  death  by  measles,
nor  a  single  death  by  small-pox,  nor  a  single  death  by
scarlet-fever.  And  why  ?  Not  because  of  its  general
sanitary  merits,  for  it  had  an  average  amount  of  other
evidence  of  unhealthiness.  Doubtless,  the  reason  of  its
escape  was  that  it  was  insular.  It  was  the  district  of
the  Scilly  Isles  ;  to  which  it  was  most  improbable  that
any  febrile  contagion  should  come  from  without.  And
its  escape  is  an  approximative  proof  that,  at  least  for
those  ten  years,  no  contagium  of  measles,  nor  any
contagium  of  scarlet -fever,  nor  any  contagium  of  small-
pox had  arisen  spontaneously  within  its  limits.'  It
may  be  added  that  there  were  only  seven  districts  in
England  in  which  no  -death  from  diphtheria  occurred,
and  that,  of  those  seven,  the  district  of  the  Scilly  Isles
was  one.

A  second  parasitic  disease  of  silkworms,  called  in
France  la  fiacherie,  co- existent  with  pebrine,  but  quite

c


18


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


distinct  from  it,  1ms  also  been  investigated  by  Pasteur.
Enough,  however,  has  been  said  to  send  those  in-
terested in  these  questions  to  the  original  volumes  for
further  information.  To  one  important  practical  point
M.  Pasteur,  in  a  letter  to  myself,  directs  attention  :

Permettez-moi  de  terminer  ces  quelques  rjgaaes.  que  je
dois  dieter,  vaincu  que  je  suis  par  la  maladie,  en  vous  faisant
observer  que  vous  rendriez  service  aux  Colonies  de  la  Grande-
Bretagne  en  repandant  la  connaissance  de  ce  livre,  et  des
princpes  que  j'etablis  toucbant  la  maladie  des  vers  a  soie.
Beaucoup  de  ces  colonies  pourraient  cultiver  le  murier  avec
succes,  et,  en  jetant  les  yeux  sur  mon  ouvrage,  vous  vous
convaincrez  aisement  qu'il  est  facile  aujourd'hui,  non-
seulement  d'eloigner  la  maladie  r^gnaute,  mais  en  outre  de
donner  aux  recoltes  de  la  soie  une  prosperity  qu'elles  n'ont
iamais  eue.

Origin  and  Propagation  of  Contagious  Matter.

Prior  to  Pasteur,  the  most  diverse  and  contradictory
opinions  were  entertained  as  to  the  contagious  character
of  pebrine ;  some  stoutly  affirmed  it,  others  as  stoutly
denied  it.  But  on  one  point  all  were  agreed.  '  They
believed  in  the  existence  of  a  deleterious  medium,
rendered  epidemic  by  some  occult  and  mysterious
influence,  to  which  was  attributed  the  cause  of  the
disease.'  Those  acquainted  with  our  medical  literature
will  not  fail  to  observe  an  instructive  analogy  here.
We  have  on  the  one  side  accomplished  writers,  like  Dr.
Murchison,  ascribing  epidemic  diseases  to  <  deleterious
media'  which  arise  spontaneously  in  crowded  hospitals
and  ill-smelling  drains.  According  to  them,  the  contagia
of  epidemic  disease  are  formed  de  novo  in  a  putrescent
atmosphere.  On  the  other  side  we  have,  writers  like
Dr  Budd,  clear,  vigorous,  with  well-defined  ideas  and


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


19


methods  of  research,  contending  that  the  matter  which
produces  epidemic  disease  comes  always  from  a  parent
stock.  It  behaves  as  germinal  matter,  and  they  do  not
hesitate  to  regard  it  as  such.  They  no  more  believe  in
the  spontaneous  generation  of  such  diseases,  than  they
do  in  the  spontaneous  generation  of  mice.  Pasteur,  for
example,  found  that  pebrine  had  been  known  for  an  in-
definite time  as  a  disease  among  silkworms.  The  de-
velopment of  it  which  he  combated  was  merely  the
expansion  of  an  already  existing  power — the  bursting
into  open  conflagration  of  a  previously  smouldering  fire.
There  is  nothing  surprising  in  this.  For  though
epidemic  disease  requires  a  special  contagium  to  pro-
duce it,  surrounding  conditions  must  have  a  potent  in-
fluence on  its  development.  Common  seeds  may  be
duly  sown,  but  the  conditions  of  temperature  and  mois-
ture may  be  such  as  to  restrict,  or  altogether  prevent,
the  subsequent  growth.  Looked  at,  therefore,  from  the
point  of  view  of  the  germ  theory,  the  exceptional  energy
which  epidemic  disease  from  time  to  time  exhibits  is  in
harmony  with  the  method  of  Nature.  We  sometimes
hear  diphtheria  spoken  of  as  if  it  were  a  new  disease  ;
but  Mr.  Simon  tells  me  that  about  three  centuries  ago
tremendous  epidemics  of  it  raged  in  Spain  (where  it  was
named  Garrotillo),  and  soon  afterwards  in  Italy;  and
that  since  that  time  the  disease  has  been  well  known  to
all  successive  generations  of  doctors.  In  or  about  1758,
for  instance,  Dr.  Starr,  of  Liskeard,  in  a  communication
to  the  Eoyal  Society,  particularly  described  the  disease,
with  all  the  symptoms  which  have  recently  again  become
familiar  to  us,  but  under  the  name  of  morbus  strangula-
iorius,  as  then  severely  epidemic  in  Cornwall.  This  fact
is  the  more  interesting,  as  diphtheria,  in  its  more  modern
reappearance,  again  showed  predilection  for  that  remote
county.    Many  also  believe  that  the  Black  Death,  of

c  2


20


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


five  centuries  ago,  has  disappeared  as  mysteriously  as  it
came ;  but  Mr.  Simon  finds  that  it  is  believed  to  be
prevalent  at  this  hour  in  some  of  the  north-western
parts  of  India.

Let  me  here  state  an  item  of  my  own  experience.
When  I  was  at  the  Bel  Alp  in  1869,  the  English
chaplain  received  letters  informing  him  of  the  breaking
out  of  scarlet-fever  among  his  children.  He  lived,  if  I
remember  rightly,  on  the  healthful  eminence  of  Dart-
moor, and  it  was  difficult  to  imagine  how  scarlet-fever
could  have  been  wafted  to  the  place.  A  drain  ran  close
to  his  house,  and  on  it  his  suspicions  were  manifestly
fixed.  Some  of  our  medical  writers  would  fortify  him
in  this  notion,  and  thus  deflect  him  from  the  truth,
while  those  of  another,  and,  in  my  opinion,  a  wiser
school,  would  deny  to  a  drain,  however  foul,  the  power
of  generating  de  novo  a  specific  disease.  After  close
inquiry  he  recollected  that  a  hobby-horse  had  been
used  both  by  his  boy  and  by  another  who,  a  short  time
previously,  had  passed  through  scarlet-fever.

Drains  and  cesspools,  indeed,  are  by  no  means  in
such  evil  odour  as  they  used  to  be.  A  fetid  Thames
and  a  low  death-rate  occur  from  time  to  time  together
in  London.  For,  if  the  special  matter  or  germs  of
epidemic  disorder  be  not  present,  a  corrupt  atmosphere,
however  obnoxious  otherwise,  will  not  produce  the
disorder.  But,  if  the  germs  be  present,  defective  drains
and  cesspools  become  the  potent  distributors  of  disease
and  death.  Corrupted  air  may  promote  an  epidemic,
but  cannot  produce  it.  On  the  other  hand,  through
the  transport  of  the  special  germ  or  virus,  disease  may
develop  itself  in  regions  where  the  drainage  is  good  and
the  atmosphere  pure.

If  you  see  a  new  thistle  growing  in  your  field,  you
feel  sure  that  its  seed  has  been  wafted  thither.    Just  as


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


21


sure  does  it  seem  that  the  contagious  matter  of  epi-
demic disease  has  been  sown  in  the  place  where  it
newly  appears.  With  a  clearness  and  conclusiveness  not
to  be  surpassed,  Dr.  William  Budd  has  traced  such  diseases
from  place  to  place  ;  showing  how  they  plant  them-
selves, at  distinct  points,  among  populations  subjected
to  the  same  atmospheric  influences,  just  as  grains  of  corn
might  be  carried  in  the  pocket  and  sown.  Hildebrand,
to  whose  remarkable  work, '  Du  Typhus  contagieux,'  Dr.
de  Mussy  has  directed  my  attention,  gives  the  following-
striking  case,  both  of  the  transport  and  the  durability
of  the  virus  of  scarlatina :  '  Un  habit  noir  que  j'avais  en
visitant  une  malade  attaquee  de  scarlatine,  et  que  je
portai  de  Vienne  en  Podolie,  sans  l'avoir  mis  depuis
plus  d'un  an  et  demi,  me  communiqua,  des  que  je  fus
arrive,  cette  maladie  contagieuse,  que  je  repandis  ensuite
dans  cette  province,  ou  elle  etait  jusqu'alors  presque
inconnue.'  Some  years  ago  Dr.  de  Mussy  himself  was
summoned  to  a  country  house  in  Surrey,  to  see  a  young
lady  who  was  suffering  from  a  dropsy,  evidently  the
consequence  of  scarlatina.  The  original  disease,  being
of  a  very  mild  character,  had  been  quite  overlooked ;
but  circumstances  were  recorded  which  could  leave  no
doubt  upon  the  mind  as  to  the  nature  and  cause  of  the
complaint.  But  then  the  question  arose,  How  did  the
young  lady  catch  the  scarlatina  ?  She  had  come  there
on  a  visit  two  months  previously,  and  it  was  only  after
she  had  been  a  month  in  the  house  that  she  was  taken
ill.  The  housekeeper  at  length  cleared  up  the  mystery.
The  young  lady,  on  her  arrival,  had  expressed  a  wish  to
occupy  a  room  in  an  isolated  tower.  Her  desire  was
granted  ;  and  in  that  room,  six  months  previously,  a
visitor  had  been  confined  with  an  attack  of  scarlatina.
The  room  had  been  swept  and  whitewashed,  but  the
carpets  had  been  permitted  to  remain.


22


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


Thousands  of  cases  could  probably  be  cited  in  which
the  disease  has  shown  itself  in  this  mysterious  way,  but
where  a  strict  examination  has  revealed  its  true  parent-
age and  extraction.  Is  it,  then,  philosophical  to  take
refuge  in  the  fortuitous  concourse  of  atoms  as  a  cause
of  specific  disease,  merely  because  in  special  cases  the
parentage  maybe  indistinct?  Those  best  acquainted
with  atomic  nature,  and  who  are  most  ready  to  admit,
as  regards  even  higher  things  than  this,  the  potentiali-
ties of  matter,  will  be  the  last  to  accept  these  rash
hypotheses.

The  Germ  Theory  applied  to  Surgery.

Not  only  medical  but  still  more  especially  surgical
science  is  now  seeking  light  and  guidance  from  this
germ  theory.  Upon  it  the  antiseptic  system  of  Pro-
fessor Lister  of  Edinburgh  is  founded.  As  already
stated,  the  germ  theory  of  putrefaction  was  started  by
Schwann ;  but  the  illustrations  of  this  theory  adduced
by  Professor  Lister  are  of  such  public  moment  as  not
only  to  justify,  but  to  render  imperative,  their  intro-
duction here.

Schwann's  observations  (says  Professor  Lister)  did  not
receive  the  attention  which  they  appeared  to  me  to  have
deserved.  The  fermentation  of  sugar  was  generally  allowed
to  be  occasioned  by  the  torula  cerevisice;  but  it  was  not
admitted  that  putrefaction  was  due  to  an  analogous  agency.
And  yet  the  two  cases  present  a  very  striking  parallel.  In
each  a  stable  chemical  compound,  sugar  in  the  one  case,
albumen  in  the  other,  undergoes  extraordinary  chemical
changes  under  the  influence  of  an  excessively  minute  quantity
of  a  substance  which,  regarded  chemically,  we  should  suppose
inert.  As  an  example  of  this  in  the  case  of  putrefaction,
let  us  take  a  circumstance  often  witnessed  in  the  treatment


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


23


of  large  chronic  abscesses.    In  order  to  guard  against  the
access°of  atmospheric  air,  we  used  to  draw  off  the  matter  by
means  of  a  canula  and  trocar,  such  as  you  see  here,  consist-
ing of  a  silver  tube  with  a  sharp-pointed  steel  rod  fitted
into  it,  and  projecting  beyond  it.    The  instrument,  dipped
in  oil,  was  thrust  into  the  cavity  of  the  abscess,  the  trocar
was  withdrawn,  and  the  pus  flowed  out  through  the  canula,
care  being  taken  by  gentle  pressure  over  the  part  to  prevent
the  possibility  of  regurgitation.    The  canula  was  then  drawn
out  with  due  precaution  against  the  reflux  of  air.  This
method  was  frequently  successful  as  to  its  immediate  object,
the  patient  being  relieved  from  the  mass  of  the  accumulated
fluid,  and  experiencing  no  inconvenience  from  the  operation.
But  the  pus  was  pretty  certain  to  leaccumulate  in  course  of
time,  and  it  became  necessary  again  and  again  to  repeat
the  process.    And  unhappily  there  was  no  absolute  security
of  immunity  from  bad  consequences.    However  carefully
the  procedure  was  conducted,  it  sometimes  happened,  even
though  the  puncture  seemed  healing  by  first  intention,  that
feverish  symptoms  declared  themselves  in  the  course  of  the
first  or  second  clay,  and,  on  inspecting  the  seat  of  the  abscess,
the  skin  was  perhaps  seen  to  be  red,  implying  the  presence
of  some  cause  of  irritation,  while  a  rapid  reaccumulation  of
the  fluid  was  found  to  have  occurred.    Under  these  circum-
stances, it  became  necessary  to  open  the  abscess  hy  free
incision,  when  a  quantity,  large  in  proportion  to  the  size  of
the  abscess,  say,  for  example,  a  quart,  of  pus  escaped,  fetid
from  putrefaction.    Now,  how  had  this  change  been  brought
about?    Without  the  germ  theory,  I  venture  to  say,  no
rational  explanation  of  it  could  have  been  given.    It  muse
have  been  caused  by  the  introduction  of  something  from
without.    Inflammation  of  the  punctured  wound,  even  sup-
posing it  to  have  occurred,  would  not  explain  the  pheno-
menon.   For  mere  inflammation,  whether  acute  or  chronic,
though  it  occasions  the  formation  of  pus,  does  not  induce
putrefaction.    The  pus  originally  evacuated  was  perfectly
sweet,  and  we  know  nothing  to  account  for  the  alteration
in  its  quality  but  the  influence  of  something  derived  from


24


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


the  externa]  world.  And  what  could  that  something  be  1
The  dipping  of  the  instrument  in  oil,  and  the  subsequent
precautions,  prevented  the  entrance  of  oxygen.  Or  even  if
you  allowed  that  a  few  atoms  of  the  gas  did  enter,  it  would
be  an  extraordinary  assumption  to  make  that  these  could
in  so  short  a  time  effect  such  changes  in  so  large  a  mass
of  albuminous  material.  Besides,  the  pyogenic  membrane
is  abundantly  supplied  with  capillary  vessels,  through  which
arterial  blood,  rich  in  oxygen,  is  perpetually  flowing;  and
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  pus,  before  it  was  evacu-
ated at  all,  was  liable  to  any  action  which  the  element
might  be  disposed  to  exert  upon  it.

On  the  oxygen  theory,  then,  the  occurrence  of  putrefac-
tion under  these  circumstances  is  quite  inexplicable.  But
if  you  admit  the  germ  theory,  the  difficulty  vanishes  at
once.  The  canula  and  trocar  having  been  lying  exposed  to
the  air,  dust  will  have  been  deposited  upon  them,  and  will
1  >e  present  in  the  angle  between  the  trocar  and  the  silver
tube,  and  in  that  protected  situation  will  fail  to  be  wiped
off'  when  the  instrument  is  thrust  through  the  tissues.  Then
when  the  trocar  is  withdrawn,  some  portions  of  this  dust  will
naturally  remain  upon  the  margin  of  the  canula,  which  is
left  projecting  into  the  abscess,  and  nothing  is  more  likely
than  that  some  particles  may  fail  to  be  washed  off  by  the
stream  of  out-flowing  pus,  but  may  be  dislodged  when  the
tube  is  taken  out,  and  left  behind  in  the  cavity.  The  germ
theory  tells  us  that  these  particles  of  dust  will  be  pretty
sure  to  contain  the  germs  of  putrefactive  organisms,  and
if  one  such  is  left  in  the  albuminous  liquid,  it  will  rapidly
develop  at  the  high  temperature  of  the  body,  and  account
for  all  the  phenomena.

But  striking  as  is  the  parallel  between  putrefaction  in  this
instance  and  the  vinous  fermentation,  as  regards  the  greatness
of  the  effect  produced,  compared  with  the  minuteness  and  the
inertness,  chemically  speaking,  of  the  cause,  you  will  natu-
rally desire  further  evidence  of  the  similarity  of  the  two
processes.  You  can  see  with  the  microscope  the  torula  of
fermenting  must  or  beer.    Is  there,  you  may  ask,  any


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


25


organism  to  be  detected  in  the  putrefying  pus?  Yes,  gentle-
man, there  is.  If  any  drop  of  the  putrid  matter  is  examined
with  a  good  glass,  it  is  found  to  be  teeming  with  myriads  of
minute  jointed  bodies,  called  vibrios,  which  indubitably  pro-
claim their  vitality  by  the  energy  of  their  movements.  It
is  not  an  affair  of  probability,  but  a  fact,  that  the  entire
mass  of  that  quart  of  pus  has  become  peopled  with  living
organisms  as  the  result  of  the  introduction  of  the  carmla  and
trocar ;  for  the  matter  first  let  out  was  as  free  from  vibrios
as  it  *as  from  putrefaction.  If  this  be  so,  the  greatness  of
the  chemical  changes  that  have  taken  place  in  the  pus  ceases
to  be  surprising.  We  know  that  it  is  one  of  the  chief  pecu-
liarities of  living  structures  that  they  possess  extraordinary
powers  of  effecting  chemical  changes  in  materials  in  their
vicinity,  out  of  all  proportion  to  their  energy  as  mere  chemical
compounds.  And  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  the  animalcules
which  have  been  developed  in  the  albuminous  liquid,  and
have  grown  at  its  expense,  must  have  altered  its  constitu-
tion, just  as  we  ourselves  alter  that  of  the  materials  on  which
we  feed.1

In  antiseptic  operations  care  is  taken  that  every
portion  of  tissue  laid  bare  by  the  knife  shall  be  de-
fended from  germs ;  that  if  they  fall  upon  the  wound
they  should  be  killed  as  they  fall.  With  this  in
view  he  showers  upon  his  exposed  surfaces  the  spray  of
dilute  carbolic  acid,  which  is  particularly  deadly  to  the
germs,  and  he  surrounds  the  wound  in  the  most  careful
manner  with  antiseptic  bandages.  To  those  accustomed
to  strict  experiment  it  is  manifest  that  we  have  a  strict
experimenter  here — a  man  witli  a  perfectly  distinct
object  in  view,  which  he  pursues  with  never-tiring
patience  and  unwavering  faith.  And  the  result,  in  his
hospital  practice,  as  described  by  himself,  has  been,
that  even  in  the  midst  of  abominations  too  shocking
to  be  mentioned  here,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of


1  Introductory  Lecture  before  the  University  of  Edinburgh.


26


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


wards  where  death  was  rampant  from  pysemia,  erysipe-
las, and  hospital  gangrene,  he  was  able  to  keep  his
patients  absolutely  free  from  these  terrible  scourges.
Let  me  here  recommend  to  your  attention  Professor
Lister's  '  Introductory  Lecture  before  the  University  of
Edinburgh,'  which  I  have  already  quoted  ;  his  paper  on
'  The  Effect  of  the  Antiseptic  System  of  Treatment  on
the  Salubrity  of  a  Surgical  Hospital ; '  and  the  article
in  the  'British  Medical  Journal'  of  January  14,  1871.

If,  instead  of  using  carbolic  acid  spray,  he  could
surround  his  wounds  with  properly  filtered  air,  the  re-
sult would,  he  contends,  be  the  same.  In  a  room,  where
the  germs  not  only  float  but  cling  to  clothes  and  walls,
this  would  be  difficult,  if  not  impossible.  But  surgery
is  acquainted  with  a  class  of  wounds  in  which  the  blood
is  freely  mixed  with  air  that  has  passed  through  the
lungs,  and  it  is  a  most  remarkable  fact  that  such  air
does  not  produce  putrefaction.  Professor  Lister,  as  far
as  I  know,  was  the  first  to  give  a  philosophical  interpre-
tation of  this  fact,  which  he  describes  and  comments
upon  thus :

I  have  explained  to  my  own  mind  the  remarkable  fact
that  in  simple  fracture  of  the  ribs,  if  the  lung  be  punctured
by  a  fragment,  the  blood  effused  into  the  pleural  cavity,
though  freely  mixed  with  air,  undergoes  no  decomposition.
The  air  is  sometimes  pumped  into  the  pleural  cavity  in  such
abundance  that,  making  its  way  through  the  wound  in  the
pleura  costalis,  it  inflates  the  cellular  tissue  of  the  whole
body.  Yet  this  occasions  no  alarm  to  the  surgeon  (although
if  the  blood  in  the  pleura  were  to  putrefy,  it  would  infallibly
occasion  dangerous  suppurative  pleurisy).  Why  air  intro-
duced into  the  pleural  cavity  through  a  wounded  lung,  should
have  such  wholly  different  effects  from  that  entering  directly
through  a  wound  in  the  chest,  was  to  me  a  complete  mystery
until"  I  heard  of  the  germ  theory  of  putrefaction,  when  it  at
once  occurred  to  ma  that  it  was  only  natural  that  air  should


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


27


be  filtered  of  germs  by  the  air-passages,  one  of  whose  offices
is  to  arrest  inhaled  particles  of  dust,  and  prevent  them  from
entering  the  air-cells.

I  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  to  this  remarkable  hypo-
thesis farther  on.

The  advocates  of  the  germ  theory,  both  of  putrefac-
tion and  epidemic  disease,  hold  that  both  arise,  not
from  the  air,  but  from  something  contained  in  the  air.
They  hold,  moreover,  that  this  'something'  is  not  a
vapour  nor  a  gas,  nor  indeed  a  molecule  of  any  kind,
but  a  particle.1  The  term  '  particulate  '  has  been  used
by  Mr.  Simon  in  the  Eeports  of  the  Medical  Department
of  the  Privy  Council  to  describe  this  supposed  constitu-
tion of  contagious  matter ;  and  Dr.  Sanderson's  experi-
ments render  it  in  the  highest  degree  probable,  if  they  do
not  actually  demonstrate,  that  the  virus  of  small-pox  is
'  particulate.'  Definite  knowledge  upon  this  point  is  of
exceeding  importance,  because  in  the  treatment  of  par-
ticles methods  are  available  which  it  would  be  futile  to
apply  to  molecules.


The  Luminous  Beam  as  a  means  of  Research.

My  own  interference  with  this  great  question,  while
sanctioned  by  eminent  names,  has  been  also  an  object
of  varied  and  ingenious  attack.  On  this  point  I  will
only  say  that  when  angry  feeling  escapes  from  behind
the  intellect,  where  it  may  be  useful  as  an  urging  force,
and  places  itself  athwart  the  intellect,  it  is  liable  to

1  As  regards  size,  there  is  probably  no  sharp  line  of  division
between  molecules  and  particles ;  the  one  gradually  shades  into
the  other.  But  the  distinction  that  I  draw  is  this:  the  atom
or  the  molecule,  if  free,  is  always  part  of  a  gas,  the  particle  is  never
so.  A  particle  is  a  bit  of  liquid  or  solid  matter,  formed  by  (she
aggregation  of  atoms  or  molecules.


28  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


produce  all  manner  of  delusions.  Thus  my  censors,  for
the  most  part,  have  levelled  their  remarks  against  posi-
tions which  were  never  assumed,  and  against  claims
which  were  never  made.  The  simple  history  of  the
matter  is  this  :  During  the  autumn  of  1868  I  was  much
occupied  with  the  observations  referred  to  at  the  he-
ginning  of  this  discourse,  and  in  part  described  in  the
preceding  article.  For  fifteen  years  it  had  been  my
habit  to  make  use  of  floating  dust  to  reveal  the  paths
of  luminous  beams  through  the  air;  but  until  1868  I
did  not  intentionally  reverse  the  process,  and  employ  a
luminous  beam  to  reveal  and  examine  the  dust.  In  a
paper  presented  to  the  Royal  Society  in  December,  1869,
the  observations  which  induced  me  to  give  moi*e  special
attention  to  the  question  of  spontaneous  generation,
and  the  germ  theory  of  epidemic  disease,  are  thus
described  :


The  Floating  Matter  of  the  Air.

Prior  to  the  discovery  of  the  foregoing  action  (the
chemical  action  of  light  upon  vapours),  and  also  during
the  experiments  just  referred  to,  the  nature  of  my  work
compelled  me  to  aim  at  obtaining  experimental  tubes  abso-
lutely clean  upon  the  interior  surface,  and  absolutely  free
within  from  suspended  matter.  Neither  condition  is,  how-
ever, easily  attained.

For  however  well  the  tubes  might  be  washed  and  polished,
and  however  bright  and  pure  they  might  appear  in  ordi-
nary daylight,  the  electric  beam  infallibly  revealed  signs  and
tokens  of  dirt.  The  air  was  always  present,  and  it  was  sure
to  deposit  some  impurity.  All  chemical  processes,  not  con-
ducted in  a  vacuum,  are  open  to  this  disturbance.  When
the  experimental  tube  was  exhausted,  it  exhibited  no  trace  of
floating  matter,  but  on  admitting  the  air  through  two  U-tnbes
containing  respectively  caustic  potash  and  sulphuric  acid,  a


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


29


dust-cone  more  or  less  distinct  was  always  revealed  by  the
powerfully  condensed  electric  beam.

The  floating  motes  resembled  minute  particles  of  liquid
which  had  bt  en  carried  mechanically  from  the  TJ-tubes  into
the  experimental  tube.   Precautions  were  therefore  taken  to
prevent  any  such  transfer.    They  produced  little  or  no  miti-
gation.   I  did  not  imagine,  at  the  time,  that  the  dust  of  the
external  air  could  find  such  free  passage  through  the  caustic
potash  and  sulphuric  acid.    This,  however,  was  the  case;
the  motes  really  came  from  without.    They  also  passed,  with
freedom  through  a  variety  of  sethers  and  alcohols.    In  fact,
it  requires  long-continued  action  on  the  part  of  an  acid  first
to  wet  the  motes  and  afterwards  to  destroy  them.    By  care-
fully passing  the  air  through  the  flame  of  a  spirit  lamp,
or  through  a  platinum  tube  heated  to  bright  redness,  the
floating  matter  was  sensibly  destroyed.    It  was  therefore
combustible,  in  other  words,  organic,  matter.    I  tried  to
intercept  it  by  a  large  respirator  of  cotton- woo  I.    Close  pres-
svu-e  was  necessary  to  render  the  wool  effective.    A  plug
of  the  wool,  rammed  pretty  tightly  into  the  tube  through
which  the  air  passed,  was  finally  found  competent  to  hold
back  the  motes.    They  appeared  from  time  to  time  after-
wards, and  gave  me  much  trouble ;  but  they  were  invariably
traced  in  the  end  to  some  defect  in  the  purifying  apparatus
— to  some  crack  or  flaw  in  the  sealing-wax  employed  to  render
the  tubes  air-tight.    Thus  through  proper  care,  but  not  with-
•  out  a  great  deal  of  searching  out  of  disturbances,  the  expe-
rimental tube,  even  when  filled  with  air  or  vapour,  contains
nothing  competent  to  scatter  the  light.    The  space  within  it
has  the  aspect  of  an  absolute  vacuum.

An  experimental  tube  in  this  condition  I  call  optically
empty.

The  facts  here  forced  upon  my  attention  had  a  bear-
ing too  evident  to  be  overlooked.  The  inability  of  air
which  bad  been  filtered  through  cotton-wool  to  generate
microscopic  life,  had  been  demonstrated  by  Schroeder
and  Pasteur  :  here  the  cause  of  its  impotence  was  ren-


30  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


dered  evident  to  the  eye.  The  experiment  proved  that
no  sensible  amount  of  light  was  scattered  by  the  mole-
cules of  the  air  ;  that  the  scattered  light  always  arose
from  suspended  particles.  The  fact  moreover  that  the  re-
moval of  these  abolished  simultaneously  the  power  of
scattering  light  and  of  originating  life,  obviously  de-
tached the  life-originating  power  from  the  air,  and  fixed
it  on  something  suspended  in  the  air.  Gases  of  all
kinds  passed  with  freedom  through  the  plug  of  cotton-
wool ;  hence  the  thing  whose  removal  by  the  cotton-
wool rendered  the  gas  impotent,  could  not  itself  have
been  matter  in  the  gaseous  condition.  It  at  once
occurred  to  me  that  the  retina,  protected  as  it  was,  in
these  experiments,  from  all  extraneous  light,  might  be
converted  into  a  new  and  powerful  instrument  of  demon-
stration in  relation  to  the  germ  theory.

The  observations  just  described  also  revealed  the
danger  incurred  in  experiments  of  this  nature  ;  showing
that  without  an  amount  of  care  far  beyond  that  hitherto
bestowed  upon  them,  such  experiments  left  the  door
open  to  errors  of  the  gravest  description.  It  was
especially  manifest  that  the  chemical  method  employed
by  Schultze  in  his  experiments,  and  so  often  resorted
to  since,  might  lead  to  the  most  erroneous  conse-
quences; that  neither  acids  nor  alkalies  had  the  power
of  rapid  destruction  hitherto  ascribed  to  them.  In
short,  the  employment  of  the  luminous  beam  rendered
evident  the  cause  of  success  in  experiments  rigidly  con-
ducted like  those  of  Pasteur ;  while  it  made  equally
evident  the  certainty  of  failure  in  experiments  less
severely  carried  out.


«


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


31


Dr.  Bennett's  Experiments.

I  do  not  wish  to  leave  an  assertion  of  this  kind  with-
out proof  or  illustration.  Take,  then,  the  well-conceived
experiments  of  Dr.  Hughes  Bennett,  described  before
the  Eoyal  Society  of  Surgeons  in  Edinburgh  on  January
17,  1868. 1  Into  flasks  containing  decoctions  of  liquor-
ice-root, hay,  or  tea,  Mr.  Bennett,  by  an  ingenious
method,  forced  air.  The  air  was  driven  through  two
U-tubes,  the  one  containing  a  solution  of  caustic  potash,
the  other  sulphuric  acid.  '  All  the  bent  tubes  were
filled  with  fragments  of  pumice-stone  to  break  up  the
air,  so  as  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  any  germs  passing
through  in  the  centre  of  bubbles.'  The  air  also  passed
through  a  Liebig's  bulb  containing  sulphuric  acid,  and
also  through  a  bulb  containing  gun-cotton.

It  was  only  natural  for  Dr.  Bennett  to  believe  that
his  '  bent  tubes  '  entirely  cut  off  the  germs.  Previous
to  the  observations  just  referred  to,  I  also  believed  in
their  efficacy.  But  these  observations  destroy  any  such
notion.  The  gun-cotton,  moreover,  will  fail  to  arrest
the  whole  of  the  floating  matter,  unless  it  is  tightly
packed,  and  there  is  no  indication  in  Dr.  Bennett's
memoir  that  it  was  so  packed.  On  the  whole,  I  should
infer,  from  the  mere  inspection  of  Dr.  Bennett's  appa-
ratus, the  very  results  which  he  has  described — a  retar-
dation of  the  development  of  life,  a  total  absence  of  it
in  some  cases,  and  its  presence  in  others.

In  his  first  series  of  experiments,  eight  flasks  were
fed  with  sifted  air,  and  five  with  common  air.  In
ten  or  twelve  days  all  the  five  had  fungi  in  them  ;
whilst  it  required  from  four  to  nine  months  to  develop
fungi  in  the  others.    In  one  of  the  eight,  moreover,

1  British  Medical  Journal,  13,  pt.  ii.  1868.


32


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


even  after  this  interval  no  fungi  appeared.  In  a  second
series  of  experiments  there  was  a  similar  exception.  In
a  third  series  the  cork  stoppers  used  in  the  first  and
second  series  were  abandoned,  and  glass  stoppers  em-
ployed. Flasks  containing  decoctions  of  tea,  beef,  and
hay  were  filled  with  common  air,  and  other  flasks  with
sifted  air.  In  every  one  of  the  former  fungi  appeared
and  in  not  one  of  the  latter.  These  experiments
simply  ruin  the  doctrine  that  Dr.  Bennett  finally
espouses.

In  all  these  negative  cases,  the  air  was  forced  through
the  bent  tubes  and  bulb  into  the  boiling-hot  infusion.  Dr.
Bennett  made  a  fourth  series  of  experiments,  in  which,
previous  to  forcing  in  the  air,  he  permitted  the  flasks
to  cool.  Into  four  bottles  thus  treated  he  forced  pre-
pared air,  and  after  a  time  found  fungi  in  all  of  them.
What  is  his  conclusion  ?  Not  that  the  boiling-hot
liquid,  employed  in  his  first  experiments,  had  destroyed
such  germs  as  had  run  the  gauntlet  of  his  apparatus ;
but  that  air,  which,  previous  to  being  sealed  up,  had
been  exposed  to  a  temperature  of  212°,  is  too  rare  to
support  life.  This  conclusion  is  so  remarkable  that  it
ought  to  be  stated  in  Dr.  Bennett's  own  words.  '  It
may  be  easily  conceived  that  air  subjected  to  a  boiling
temperature  is  so  expanded  as  scarcely  to  merit  the
name  of  air,  and  that  it  is  more  or  less  unfit  for  the  pur-
pose of  sustaining  animal  or  vegetable  life.'

Numerical  data  are  attainable  here,  but  they  are
unnecessary.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  live  and  flourish
for  a  considerable  portion  of  each  year  in  a  medium  of
less  density  than  that  which  Dr.  Bennett  describes  as
scarcely  meriting  the  name  of  air.  The  inhabitants  of
the  higher  Alpine  chalets,  with  their  flocks  and  herds,
and  the  grasses  which  support  these,  do  the  same;
while  the  chamois  rears  its  kids  in  air  rarer  still.


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


33


Insect  life,  moreover,  is  sometimes  exhibited  with
monstrous  prodigality  at  Alpine  heights.

In  a  fifth  series  of  experiments  sixteen  bottles  were
filled  with  infusions.  Into  four  of  them,  while  cold,
ordinary  unheated  and  unsifted  air  was  pumped,  and
in  these  fungi  were  developed.  Into  four  other
bottles,  containing  a  boiling  infusion,  ordinary  air  was
also  pumped — no  fungi  were  here  developed.  Into
four  other  bottles  containing  an  infusion  which  had
been  boiled  and  permitted  to  cool,  sifted  air  was  pumped
— no  fungi  were  developed.  Finally,  into  four  bottles
containing  a  boiling  infusion  sifted  air  was  pumped —
no  fungi  were  developed.  Only,  therefore,  in  the  four
cases  where  the  infusions  were  cold  infusions,  and  the
air  ordinary  air,  did  fungi  appear.

Dr.  Bennett  does  not  draw  from  his  experiments  the
conclusion  to  which  they  so  obviously  point.  On  the
contrary,  he  founds  on  them  a  defence  of  the  doctrine  of
spontaneous  generation,  and  a  general  theory  of  sponta-
neous development.  So  strongly  was  he  impressed  with
the  idea  that  the  germs  could  not  possibly  pass  through
his  potash  and  sulphuric  acid  tubes,  that  the  appear-
ance of  fungi,  even  in  a  small  minority  of  cases,  where
the  air  had  been  sent  through  these  tubes,  was  to  him
conclusive  evidence  of  the  spontaneous  origin  of  such
fungi.  And  he  accounts  for  the  absence  of  life  in  many
of  his  experiments  by  an  explanation  which  will  not
bear  a  moment's  criticism.  But  knowing,  as  we  now  do,
that  organic  particles  may  pass  unscathed  through
alkalies  and  acids,  the  results  of  Dr.  Bennett  are  pre-
cisely what  ought  under  the  circumstances  to  be  ex-
pected. Indeed,  their  harmony  with  the  conditions
now  revealed  is  a  proof  of  the  honesty  and  accuracy
with  which  they  were  executed.

The  caution  exercised  by  Pasteur  both  in  the  exe-

D


34  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

cution  of  his  experiments,  and  in  the  reasoning  based
upon  them,  is  perfectly  evident  to  those  who,  through
the  practice  of  severe  experimental  inquiry,  have  ren-
dered themselves  competent  to  judge  of  good  experi-
mental work.  He  found  germs  in  the  mercury  used  to
isolate  his  air.  He  was  never  sure  that  they  did  not
cling  to  the  instruments  he  employed,  or  to  his  own
person.  Thus  when  he  opened  his  hermetically-sealed
flasks  upon  the  Mer  de  Grlace,  he  had  his  eye  upon  the
file  used  to  detach  the  drawn-out  necks  of  his  bottles ;
and  he  was  careful  to  stand  to  leeward  when  each  flask
was  opened.  Using  these  precautions,  he  found  the
glacier  air  incompetent,  in  nineteen  cases  out  of  twenty,
to  generate  life  ;  while  similar  flasks,  opened  amid  the
vegetation  of  the  lowlands,  were  soon  crowded  with
living  things.  M.  Pouchet  repeated  Pasteur's  experi-
ments in  the  Pyrenees,  adopting  the  precaution  of
holding  his  flasks  above  his  head,  and  obtaining  a
different  result.  Now  great  care  would  be  needed  to
render  this  procedure  a  real  precaution.  The  luminous
beam  at  once  shows  us  its  possible  effect.  Let  smoking
brown  paper  be  placed  at  the  open  mouth  of  a  glass
shade,  so  that  the  smoke  shall  ascend  and  fill  the  shade.
A  beam  sent  through  the  shade  forms  a  bright  track
through  the  smoke.  When  the  closed  fist  is  placed
underneath  the  shade,  a  vertical  wind  of  surprising
violence,  considering  the  small  elevation  of  temperature,
rises  from  the  hand,  displacing  by  comparatively  dark
air  the  illuminated  smoke.  Unless  special  care  were
taken  such  a  wind  would  rise  from  M.  Pouchet's  body
as  he  held  his  flasks  above  his  head,  and  thus  the  pre-
caution of  Pasteur,  of  not  coming  between  the  wind
and  the  flask,  would  be  annulled.

Let  me  now  direct  attention  to  another  result  of
Pasteur,  the  cause  and  significance  of  which  are  at  once


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


35


revealed  by  the  luminous  Learn.  He  prepared  twenty-
one  flasks,  each  containing  a  decoction  of  yeast,  filtered
and  clear.  He  boiled  the  decoction  so  as  to  destroy
whatever  germs  it  might  contain,  and  while  the  space
above  the  liquid  was  filled  with  pure  steam,  he  sealed
his  flasks  with  a  blow-pipe.  He  opened  ten  of  them  in
the  deep,  damp  caves  of  the  Paris  Observatory,  and
eleven  of  them  in  the  courtyard  of  the  establishment.
Of  the  former,  one  only  showed  signs  of  life  subse-
quently. In  nine  out  of  the  ten  flasks  no  organisms  of
any  kind  were  developed.  In  all  the  others  organisms
speedily  appeared.

Now  here  is  an  experiment  conducted  in  Paris,  on
which  we  can  throw  light  in  London.    Causing  our
luminous  beam  to  pass  through  a  large  flask  filled
with  the  air  of  this  room,  and  charged  with  its  germs
and  its  dust,  the  beam  is  seen  crossing  the  flask  from
side  to  side.    But  here  is  another  similar  flask,  which
cuts  a  clear  gap  out  of  the  beam.    It  is  filled  with  un-
filtered  air,  and  still  no  trace  of  the  beam  is  visible.
Why  ?    By  pure  accident  I  stumbled  on  this  flask  in
our  apparatus  room,  where  it  had  remained  quiet  for
some  time.    Acting  upon  this  obvious  suggestion,  I  set
aside  three  other  flasks,  filled,  in  the  first  instance,  with
mote-laden  air.    They  are  now  optically  empty.  Our
former  experiments  proved   that  the  life-producing
particles  attach  themselves  to  the  fibres  of  cotton-wool.
In  the  present  experiment  the  motes  have  been  brought
by  gentle  air-currents,  established  by  slight  differences
of  temperature  within  our  closed  vessels,  into  contact
with  the  interior  surface,  to  which  they  adhere.  The
air  of  these  flasks  has  deposited  its  dust,  germs  and  all,
and  is  practically  free  from  suspended  matter.

I  had  a  chamber  erected,  the  lower  half  of  which  is
of  wood,  its  upper  half  being  enclosed  by  four  glazed

D  2


36


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


window-frames.  It  tapers  to  a  truncated  cone  at  the
top.  It  measures  in  plan  3  ft.  by  2  ft.  6  in.,  and  its
height  is  5  ft.  10  in.  On  February  6  it  was  closed,
every  crevice  that  could  admit  dust,  or  cause  displace-
ment of  the  air,  being  carefully  pasted  over  with  paper.
The  electric  beam  at  first  revealed  the  dust  within  the
chamber  as  it  did  in  the  air  of  the  laboratory.  The
chamber  was  examined  almost  daily ;  a  perceptible
diminution  of  the  floating  matter  being  noticed  as  time
advanced.  At  the  end  of  a  week  the  chamber  was
optically  empty,  exhibiting  no  trace  of  matter  competent
to  scatter  the  light.  Such  must  have  been  the  case  in
the  stagnant  caves  of  the  Paris  Observatory.  Were  our
electric  beam  sent  through  the  air  of  these  caves,  its
track  would,  doubtless,  save  from  aqueous  haze,  be  invi-
sible ;  thus  showing  the  indissoluble  association  of  the
scattering  of  light  by  air  and  its  power  to  generate  life.

I  will  now  turn  to  what  seems  to  me  a  more  interest-
ing application  of  the  luminous  beam  than  any  hitherto
described.  My  reference  to  Professor  Lister's  interpre-
tation of  the  fact,  that  air  which  has  passed  through
the  lungs  cannot  produce  putrefaction,  is  fresh  in  your
memories.  '  Why  air,'  said  he,  '  introduced  into  the
pleural  cavity,  through  a  wounded  lung,  should  have
such  wholly  different  effects  from  that  entering  through  NJ
a  permanently  open  wound,  penetrating  from  without,
was  to  me  a  complete  mystery,  till  I  heard  of  the  germ
theory  of  putrefaction,  when  it  at  once  occurred  to  me
that  it  was  only  natural  that  the  air  should  be  filtered
of  germs  by  the  air  passages,  one  of  whose  offices  is  to
arrest  inhaled  particles  of  dust,  and  prevent  them  from
entering  the  air-cells.'

Here  is  a  surmise  which  bears  the  stamp  of  genius
but  which  needs  verification.  If,  for  the  words 'it  is
only  natural '  we  were  authorized  to  write  '  it  is  per-


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


37


iectly  certain,'  the  demonstration  would  be  complete.  .
Such  demonstration  is  furnished  by  experiments  with  a
beam  of  light.    One  evening,  towards  the  close  of  1869,
while  pouring  various  pure  gases  across  the  dusty  track
of  a  luminous  beam,  the  thought  occurred  to  me  of
using  my  breath  instead  of  the  gases.    I  then  noticed,
for  the  first  time,  the  extraordinary  darkness  produced
by  the  expired  air,  towards  the  end  of  the  expiration.
Permit  me  to  repeat  the  experiment  in  your  presence.
I  fill  my  lungs  with  ordinary  air  and  breathe  through  a
glass  tube  across  the  beam.    The  condensation  of  the  •
aqueous  vapour  of  the  breath  is  shown  by  the  formation
of  a  luminous  white  cloud  of  delicate  texture.  We
abolish  this  cloud  by  drying  the  breath  previous  to  its
entering  the  beam ;  or,  still  more  simply,  by  warming
the  glass  tube.    The  luminous  track  of  the  beam  is  for
a  time  uninterrupted  by  the  breath,  because  the  dust
returning  from  the  lungs  makes  good,  in  great  part,  the
particles  displaced.    After  a  time,  however,  an  obscure
disk  appears  in  the  beam,  the  darkness  of  which  in-
creases, until  finally,  towards  the  end  of  the  expiration,
the  beam  is,  as  it  were,  pierced  by  an  intensely  black
hole,  in  which  no  particles  whatever  can  be  discerned.
The  deeper  air  of  the  lungs  is  thus  proved  to  be  abso-  ||
lutely  free  from  suspended  matter.    It  is  therefore  in
the  precise  condition  required  by  Professor  Lister's
explanation.    This  experiment  may  be  repeated  any
number  of  times  with  the  same  result.    I  think  it  must
be  regarded  as  a  crowning  piece  of  evidence  both  of  the
correctness  of  Professor  Lister's  views  and  of  the  impo-
tence, as  regards  vital  development,  of  optically  pure  air.1
1  Dr.  Burdon   Sanderson   draws   attention  to  the  important
observation  of  Brauell,  which  shows  that  the  contagium  of  a  preg-
nant animal,  suffering  from  splenic  fever,  is  not  found  in  the  blood
of  the  foetus  ;  the  placental  apparatus  acting  as  a  filter,  and  holding
back  the  infective  particles.


«*8  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

The  foregoing  essay,  as  far  as  it  relates  to  the
theory  which  ascribes  epidemic  disease  to  the  develop-
ment of  low  parasitic  life  within  the  human  life,  was
embodied  in  a  discourse  delivered  before  the  Royal
Institution  in  January  1870.    In  June  1871,  after  a
brief  reference  to  the  polarization  of  light  by  cloudy
matter,  I  ventured  to  recur  to  the  subject  in  these
terms  :  What  is  the  practical  use  of  these  curiosities  ?
If  we  exclude  the  interest  attached  to  the  observation  of
new  facts,  and  the  enhancement  of  that  interest  through
the  knowledge  that  facts  often  become  the  exponents  of
laws,  these  curiosities  are  in  themselves  worth  little.
They  will  not  enable  us  to  add  to  our  stock  of  food,  or
drink,  or  clothes,  or  jewellery.    But  though  thus  shorn
of  all  usefulness  in  themselves,  they  may,  by  carrying
thought  into  places  which  it  would  not  otherwise  have
entered,  become  the  antecedents  of  practical  conse-
quences.   In  looking,  for  example,  at  our  illuminated
dust,  we  may  ask  ourselves  what  it  is.    How  does  it
act,  not  upon  a  beam  of  light,  but  upon  our  own  bodies  ?
The  question  then  assumes  a  practical  character.  We
find  on  examination  that  this  dust  is  mainly  organic
matter— in  part  living,  in  part  dead.    There  are  among
it  particles  of  ground  straw,  torn  rags,  smoke,  the  pollen
of  flowers,  the  spores  of  fungi,  and  the  germs  of  other
things.    But  what  have  they  to  do  with  the  animal
economy  ?    Let  me  give  you  an  illustration  to  which
my  attention  has  been  lately  drawn  by  Mr.  George
Henry  Lewes,  who  writes  to  me  thus  :

'  I  wish  to  direct  your  attention  to  the  experiments
of  Von  Recklingshausen,  should  you  happen  not  to  know
them.  They  are  striking  confirmations  of  what  you  say
of  dust  and  disease.  Last  spring,  when  I  was  at  his
laboratory  in  Wurzburg,  I  examined  with  him  blood
that  had  been  three  weeks,  a  month,  and  five  weeks,  out


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


39


of  the  body,  preserved  in  little  porcelain  cups  under
glass  shades.   This  blood  was  living  and  growing.  Not
only  were  the  Amoeba-like  movements  of  the  white
corpuscles  present,  but  there  were  abundant  evidences  of
the  growth  and  development  of  the  corpuscles.    I  also
saw  a  frog's  heart  still  pulsating  which  had  been  removed
from  the  body  (I  forget  how  many  days,  but  certainly
more  than  a  week).    There  were  other  examples  of  the
same  persistent  vitality,  or  absence  of  putrefaction.  Von
Eecklingshausen  did  not  attribute  this  to  the  absence  of
germs— germs  were  not  mentioned  by  him ;  but  when
I  asked  him  how  he  represented  the  thing  to  himself,
he  said  the  whole  mystery  of  his  operation  consisted  m
keeping  the  blood  free  from  dirt.     The  instruments
employed  were  raised  to  a  red  heat  just  before  use  ;  the
thread  was  silver  thread  and  was  similarly  treated ;  and
the  porcelain  cups,  though  not  kept  free  from  air,  were
kept  free  from  currents.  He  said  he  often  had  failures,
and  these  he  attributed  to  particles  of  dust  having  escaped
his  precautions.'

Professor  Lister,  who  has  founded  upon  the  removal
or  destruction  of  this  '  dirt'  momentous  improvements
in  surgery,  tells  us  the  effect  of  its  introduction  into
the  blood  of  wounds.  The  blood  putrefies  and  be-
comes fetid ;  and  when  you  examine  more  closely  what
putrefaction  means,  you  find  the  putrefying  substance
swarming  with  infusorial  life,  the  germs  of  which  have
been  derived  from  the  atmospheric  dust.

We  are  now  assuredly  in  the  midst  of  practical  mat-
ters ;  and  with  your  permission  I  will  refer  once  more  to
a  question  which  has  recently  occupied  a  good  deal  of
public  attention.  As  regards  the  lowest  forms  of  life,
the  world  is  divided,  and  has  for  a  long  time  been
divided,  into  two  parties,  the  one  affirming  that  we
have  only  to  submit  absolutely  dead  matter  to  certain


40  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

physical  conditions,  to  evolve  from  it  living  things ;  the
other  (without  wishing  to  set  bounds  to  the  power  of
matter)  affirming  that,  in  our  day,  life  has  never  been-
found  to  arise  independently  of  pre-existing  life.  I
belong  to  the  party  which  claims  life  as  a  derivative  of
life.    The  question  has  two  factors-the  evidence,  and
the  mind  that  judges  of  the  evidence ;  and  it  may  be
purely  a  mental  set  or  bias  on  my  part  that  causes  me,
throughout  this  long  discussion,  to  see,  on  the  one  side
dubious  facts  and  defective  logic,  and  on  the  other  side
firm  reasoning  and  a  knowledge  of  what  rigid  experi-
mental inquiry  demands.    But,  judged  of  practically,
what,  again,  has  the  question  of  Spontaneous  Genera-
tion to  do  with  us  ?    Let  us  see.    There  are  numerous
diseases  of  men  and  animals  that  are  demonstrably  the
products  of  parasitic  life,  and  such  diseases  may  take
the  most  terrible  epidemic  forms,  as  in  the  case  of  the
silkworms  of  France,  referred  to  at  an  earlier  part  of  this
essay.    Now  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  important  to
know  whether  the  parasites  in  question  are  spontaneously
developed,  or  whether  they  have  been  wafted  from  with-
out to  those  afflicted  with  the  disease.    The  means  of
prevention,  if  not  of  cure,  would  be  widely  different
in  the  two  cases.

But  this  is  not  all.    Besides  these  universally  ad-
mitted cases,  there  is  the  broad  theory,  now  broached
and  daily  growing  in  strength  and  clearness— daily,  in-
deed, gaining  more  and  more  of  assent  from  the  most
successful  workers  and  profound  thinkers  of  the  medical
profession  itself— the  theory,  namely,  that  contagious
disease,  generally,  is  of  this  parasitic  character.   Had  I
any  cause  to  regret  having  introduced  this  theory  to
your  notice  more  than  a  year  ago,  that  regret  should
now  be  expressed.    I  would  certainly  renounce  in  your
presence  whatever  leaning  towards  the  germ  theory


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


41


my  words  might  then  have  betrayed.  But  since  the
time  referred  to  nothing  has  occurred  to  shake  my
conviction  of  the  truth  of  the  theory.  Let  me  briefly
state  the  grounds  on  which  its  supporters  rely.  From
their  respective  viruses  you  may  plant  typhoid  fever,
scarlatina,  or  small-pox.  What  is  the  crop  that  arises
from  this  husbandry  ?  As  surely  as  a  thistle  rises  from
a  thistle  seed,  as  surely  as  the  fig  comes  from  the  fig,
the  grape  from  the  grape,  the  thorn  from  the  thorn,
so  surely  does  the  typhoid  virus  increase  and  multiply
into  typhoid  fever,  the  scarlatina  virus  into  scarlatina,
the  small-pox  virus  into  small-pox.  What  is  the  con-
clusion that  suggests  itself  here?  It  is  this:  That
the  thing  which  we  vaguely  call  a  virus  is  to  all
intents  and  purposes  a  seed.  Excluding  the  notion
of  vitality,  in  the  whole  range  of  chemical  science
you  cannot  point  to  an  action  which  illustrates  this
perfect  parallelism  with  the  phenomena  of  life — this
demonstrated  power  of  self-multiplication  and  repro-
duction. The  germ  theory  alone  accounts  for  the
phenomena.

In  cases  of  epidemic  disease,  it  is  not  on  bad  air  or
foul  drains  that  the  attention  of  the  physician  of  the
future  will  primarily  be  fixed,  but  upon  disease  germs,
which  no  bad  air  or  foul  drains  can  create,  but  which
may  be  pushed  by  foul  air  into  virulent  energy  of  repro-
duction. You  may  think  I  am  treading  on  dangerous
ground,  that  I  am  putting  forth  views  that  may  interfere
with  salutary  practice.  No  such  thing.  If  you  wish  to
learn  the  impotence  of  medical  practice  in  dealing  with
contagious  diseases,  you  have  only  to  refer  to  the  Har-
veian  oration  for  1871,  by  Sir  William  Gull.  Such  dis-
eases defy  the  physician.  They  must  run  their  course,
and  the  utmost  that  can  be  done  for  them  is  careful
nursing.    And  this,  though  I  do  not  specially  insist


42


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


upon  it,  would  favour  the  idea  of  their  vital  origin.  For
if  the  seeds  of  contagious  disease  be  themselves  living
things,  it  may  be  difficult  to  destroy  either  them  or  their
progeny,  -without  involving  their  living  habitat  in  the
same  destruction.

It  has  been  said,  and  it  is  sure  to  be  repeated,  that
I  am  quitting  my  own  metier,  in  speaking  of  these
things.  Not  so.  I  am  dealing  with  a  question  on  which
minds  accustomed  to  weigh  the  value  of  experimental
evidence  are  alone  competent  to  decide,  and  regarding
which,  in  its  present  condition,  minds  so  trained  are  as
capable  of  forming  an  opinion  as  regarding  the  pheno-
mena of  magnetism  or  radiant  heat.  '  The  germ  theory
of  disease,'  it  has  been  said,  '  appertains  to  the  biologist
and  the  physician.'  Where,  I  would  ask  in  reply,  is  the
biologist  or  physician,  whose  researches,  in  connection
with  this  subject,  could  for  one  instant  be  compared  to
those  of  the  chemist  Pasteur  ?  It  is  not  the  philosophic
members  of  the  medical  profession  who  are  dull  to  the
reception  of  truth  not  originated  within  the  pale  of  the
profession  itself.  I  cannot  better  conclude  this  portion
of  my  story  than  by  reading  to  you  an  extract  from  a
letter  addressed  to  me  some  time  ago  by  Dr.  William
Budd,  of  Clifton,  to  whose  insight  and  energy  the  town
of  Bristol  owes  so  much  in  the  way  of  sanitary  improve-
ment.

'  As  to  the  germ  theory  itself,'  writes  Dr.  Budd,
'  that  is  a  matter  on  which  I  have  long  since  made  up
my  mind.  From  the  day  when  I  first  began  to  think  of
these  subjects  I  have  never  had  a  doubt  that  the  specific
cause  of  contagious  fevers  must  be  living  organisms.

'  It  is  impossible,  in  fact,  to  make  any  statement
bearing  upon  the  essence  or  distinctive  characters  of
these  fevers,  without  using  terms  which  are  of  all  others
the  most  distinctive  of  life.    Take  up  the  writings  of


DUST  AND  DISEASE.


43


the  most  violent  opponent  of  the  gerui  theory,  and,  ten
to  one,  you  will  find  them  full  of  such  terms  as  "  pro-
pagation," «  self- propagation,"  "reproduction,"  "self-
multiplication,"  and  so  on.  Try  as  he  may— if  he  has
anything  to  say  of  those  diseases  which  is  characteristic
of  them— he  cannot  evade  the  use  of  these  terms,  or  the
exact  equivalents  to  them.  While  perfectly  applicable
to  living  things,  these  terms  express  qualities  which
are  not  only  inapplicable  to  common  chemical  agents,
but,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  actually  inconceivable  of
them.'


OPTICAL  DEPORTMENT  OF  THE  ATMOSPHERE

IN  RELATION  TO

PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.1


II.

§  1.  Introduction.

An  inquiry  into  the  decomposition  of  vapours  by  light,
begun  in  1868  and  continued  in  1869, 2  in  which  it  was
necessary  to  employ  optically  pure  air,  led  me  to  experi-
ment on  the  floating  matter  of  the  atmosphere.  A
brief  section  of  a  paper  published  in  the  Philosophical
Transactions  for  18703  is  devoted  to  this  subject.

I  at  that  time  found  that  the  air  of  London  rooms,
which  is  always  thick  with  motes,  and  also  with  matter
too  fine  to  be  described  as  motes,  after  it  had  been
filtered  by  passing  it  through  densely  packed  cotton-
wool, or  calcined  by  passing  it  through  a  red-hot  pla-
tinum-tube containing  a  bundle  of  red-hot  platinum
wires,  or  by  carefully  leading  it  over  the  top  of  a  spirit-
lamp  flame,  showed,  when  examined  by  a  concentrated
luminous  beam,  no  trace  of  mechanically  suspended
matter.  The  particular  portion  of  space  occupied  by
such  a  beam  was  not  to  be  distinguished  from  adjacent
space.

The  purely  gaseous  portion  of  our  atmosphere  was
thus  shown  to  be  incompetent  to  scatter  light.

1  Philosophical  Transactions,  Tart  I.,  1876.

2  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  vol.  xvii.  3  Vol.  clx.  p.  3ii7.


46


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


I  subsequently  found  that,  to  render  the  air  thus
optically  pure,  it  was  only  necessary  to  leave  it  to  itself
for  a  sufficient  time  in  a  small  closed  chamber,  or  in  a
suitably  closed  vessel.  The  floating  matter  gradually
attached  itself  to  the  top  and  sides,  or  sank  to  the
bottom,  leaving  behind  it  air  possessing  no  scattering
power.  Sent  through  such  air,  the  most  concentrated
beam  failed  to  render  its  track  visible.

1  mention  '  top '  and  '  sides,'  as  well  as  '  bottom,'
because  gravity  is  not  the  only  agent,  perhaps  not  even
the  principal  agent,  concerned  in  the  removal  of  the
floating  matter.  It  is  practically  impossible  to  sur-
round a  closed  vessel  by  an  absolutely  uniform  tempera-
ture ;  and  where  differences  of  temperature,  however
small,  exist,  air-currents  will  be  established.  By  such
gentle  currents  the  floating  particles  are  gradually
brought  into  contact  with  all  the  surrounding  surfaces.
To  these  they  adhere,  and,  no  new  supply  being  ad-
mitted, the  suspended  matter  finally  disappears  from
the  air  altogether.

The  striking  parallelism  of  these  results  with  those
obtained  in  the  excellent  researches  of  Schwann,1
Schroeder  and  Dusch,2  Schroeder  himself,3  and  Pasteur4
in  regard  to  the  question  of  '  spontaneous  generation,'
caused  me  to  conclude  that  the  power  of  scattering
light,  and  the  power  of  producing  life,  by  atmospheric
air  would  be  found  to  go  hand  in  hand.

This  conclusion  was  strengthened  by  an  experiment
easily  made  and  of  high  significance  in  relation  to  this
question.    It  had  been  pointed  out  by  Professor  Lister  5

1  Pogg.  Ann.  1837,  vol.  xli.  p.  184.

2  Ann.  der  Pharmacie,  vol.  lxxxix.  p.  232.
8  Ibid.  vol.  cix.  p.  35.

4  Ann.  de  Chim.  et  de  Phys.  3rd  series,  vol,  lxiv.  p.  83.

5  Introductory  Lecture  before  the  University  of  Edinburgh,


PUTKEFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


47


that  air  which  has  passed  through  the  lungs  is  known
to  have  lost  its  power  of  causing  putrefaction.  Such  air
may  mix  freely  with  the  blood  of  an  internal  wound
without  risk  of  mischief;  and  that  truly  great  scientific
surgeon  had  the  penetration  to  ascribe  this  immunity
from  danger  to  the  filtering  power  of  the  lungs.  Prior
to  my  becoming  acquainted  with  this  hypothesis  in
1869,  I  had  demonstrated  its  accuracy  in  the  following
manner.1

Condensing  in  a  dark  room,  and  in  dusty  air,  a


Fig.  1.


powerful  beam  of  light,  and  breathing  through  a  glass
tube  (the  tube  actually  employed.was  a  lamp-glass,  ren-
dered warm  in  a  flame  to  prevent  condensation  of  the
breath)  across  the  focus,  a  diminution  of  the  scattered
light  was  first  observed.  But  towards  the  end  of  the
expiration  the  white  track  of  the  beam  was  broken  by  a
perfectly  black  gap,  the  blackness  being  due  to  the
total  absence  from  the  expired  air  of  any  matter  com-
petent to  scatter  light.  The  experimental  arrangement
is  represented  in  fig.  1,  where  g  represents  the  heated

1  Proc.  lloy.  Inst.  vol.  vi.  p.  9.


48  THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


lamp-glass,  and  b  the  black  gap  cut  out  of  the  beam
at  its  brightest  point.  The  deeper  portions  of  the
lungs  were  thus  proved  to  be  rilled  with  optically
pure  air,  which,  as  such,  had  no  power  to  generate  the
organisms  proved  by  Schwann  to  be  essential  to  the
process  of  putrefaction.1

It  seemed  that  this  simple  method  of  examination
could  not  fail  to  be  of  use  to  workers  in  this  field.  They
had  hitherto  proceeded  less  by  sight  than  by  insight,
being  in  general  unable  to  observe  the  physical  character
of  the  medium  in  which  their  experiments  were  con-
ducted. But  the  method  has  not  been  much  turned  to
account ;  and  this  year  (1875)  I  thought  it  worth  while
to  devote  some  time  myself  to  the  more  complete
demonstration  of  its  utility.

I  also  wished  to  free  my  mind,  and  if  possible  the
minds  of  others,  from  th  =3  uncertainty  and  confusion
which  now  beset  the  doctrine  of  '  spontaneous  genera-
tion.' Pasteur  has  pronounced  it  '  a  chimera,'  and  ex-
pressed the  un  doubting  conviction  that  this  being  so  it  is
possible  to  remove  all  parasitic  diseases  from  the  earth.
To  the  medical  profession,  therefore,  and  through  them
to  humanity  at  large,  this  question,  if  the  illustrious
French  philosopher  be  correct,  is  one  of  the  last  import-
ance. But  Pasteur's  labours,  which  have  so  long  been
considered  models  by  most  of  us,  have  been  subjected  to

1  '  No  putrefaction,'  says  Cohn,  '  can  occur  in  a  nitrogenous  sub-
stance if  it  be  kept  free  from  the  entrance  of  new  Bacteria  after
those  which  it  may  contain  have  been  destroyed.  Putrefaction
begins  as  soon  as  Bacteria,  even  in  the  smallest  numbers,  are  acci-
dentally or  purposely  introduced.  It  progresses  in  direct  proportion
to  the  multiplication  of  the  Bacteria ;  it  is  retarded  when  the  Bac-
teria (for  example,  by  a  low  temperature)  develop  a  small  amount
of  vitality,  and  is  brought  to  an  end  by  all  influences  which  either
stop  the  development  of  the  Bacteria,  or  kill  them.  All  bacteri-
cidal media  are  therefore  antiseptic  and  disinfecting.' — Beitrage
ztvr  Biologie  der  Pflanxen,  zweites  Heft,  1872,  p.  203[


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


49


rough  handling  of  late.  His  reasoning  has  been  criti-
cised, and  experiments  counter  to  his  have  been  adduced
in  such  number  and  variety,  and  with  such  an  appear-
ance of  circumstantial  accuracy,  as  to  render  the  evi-
dence against  him  overwhelming  to  many  minds.  This,
I  have  reason  to  know,  has  been  the  effect  wrought,  not
only  upon  persons  untrained  in  science,  but  also  upon
biologists  of  eminence  both  in  this  country  and  America.
The  state  of  medical  opinion  in  England  is  correctly
described  in  a  recent  number  of  the  '  British  Medical
Journal,'  where,  in  answer  to  the  question,  '  In  what  way
is  contagium  generated  and  communicated  ? '  we  have
the  reply  that,  notwithstanding  '  an  almost  incalculable
amount  of  patient  labour,  the  actual  results  obtained,
especially  as  regards  the  manner  of  generation  of  con-
tagium, have  been  most  disappointing.  Observers  are
even  yet  at  variance  whether  these  minute  particles,
whose  discovery  we  have  just  noticed,  and  other  disease-
germs,  are  always  produced  from  like  bodies  previously
existing,  or  whether  they  do  not,  under  certain  favour-
able conditions,  spring  into  existence  de  novo.''

With  a  view  to  the  possible  diminution  of  the  un-
certainty thus  described,  I  beg  without  further  preface
to  submit  to  the  Royal  Society,  and  especially  to  those
who  study  the  etiology  of  disease,  the  following  descrip-
tion of  the  mode  of  procedure  followed  in  this  inquiry,
and  of  the  results  to  which  it  has  led.

§  2.  Method  of  Experiment.

A  chamber,  or  case,  was  constructed,  with  a  glass
front,  its  top,  bottom,  back,  and  sides  being-  of  wood.
At  the  back  is  a  little  door  which  opens  and  closes  on
hinges,  while  into  the  slides  are  inserted  two  panes  of
glass,  facing  each  other.    The  top  is  perforated  in  the

E


50


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


middle  by  a  hole  2  inches  in  diameter,  closed  air-tight
by  a  sheet  of  india-rubber.  This  sheet  is  pierced  in  the
middle  by  a  pin,  and  through  the  pin-hole  is  passed  the
shank  of  a  long  pipette  ending  above  in  a  small  funnel.


Fig.  2.


A  circular  tin  collar,  2  inches  in  diameter  and  1^-  inch
deep,  surrounds  the  pipette,  the  space  between  both
being  packed  with  cotton-wool  moistened  by  glycerine.
Thus  the  pipette,  in  moving  up  and  down,  is  not  only
firmly  clasped  by  the  india-rubber,  but  it  also  passes


PITT  REFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


51


through  a  stuffing-box  of  sticky  cotton-wool.  The  width
of  the  aperture  closed  by  the  india-rubber  secures  the
free  lateral  play  of  the  lower  end  of  the  pipette.  Into
two  other  smaller  apertures  in  the  top  of  the  chamber
are  inserted,  air-tight,  the  open  ends  of  two  narrow
tubes,  intended  to  connect  the  interior  space  with  the
atmosphere.  The  tubes  are  bent  several  times  up  andv
down,  so  as  to  intercept  and  retain  the  particles  carried?
by  such  feeble  currents  as  changes  of  temperature  might-
cause  to  set  in  between  the  outer  and  the  inner  air.

The  bottom  of  the  box  is  pierced  with  two  rows  of-
holes,  six  in  a  row,  in  which  are  fixed,  air-tight,  twelve
test-tubes,  intended  to  contain  the  liquid  to  be  exposed-
to  the  action  of  the  moteless  air.

The  arrangement  is  represented  in  fig;  2,  where  w  w
are  the  side  windows  through  which  the  searching  beam
passes  from  the  lamp  I  across  the  case  c ;  p  is  the  pi-
pette, and  a,  b,  are  the  bent  tubes  connecting  the  inner
and  outer  air.  The  test-tubes  passing  through  the  bot-
tom of  the  case  are  seen  below.

On  the  10th  of  September,  1875,  this  case  was  closed.
The  passage  of  a  concentrated  beam  across  it  through
its  two  side  windows  then  showed  the  air  within  it  to  be
laden  with  floating  matter.  On  the  13th  it  was  again
examined.  Before  the  beam  entered,  and  after  it  quit-
ted the  case,  its  track  was  vivid*  in  the  air,  but  within
the  case  it  vanished.  Three  days  of  quiet-  had  sufficed
to  cause  all  the  floating  matter  to  be  deposited  on  the
interior  surfaces,  where  it  was  retained  by  a  coating  of
glycerine,  with  which  these  surfaces  had  been  purposely
varnished.

§  3.  Deportment  of  Urine.

The  pipette  being  dipped  into  the  tubes,  fresh  urine
was  poured  into  eight  of  them  in  succession  on  the  13th

E  2


52


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


of  September.  Each  tube  was  about  half-filled  with
the  liquid.  The  tubes  were  then  immersed  in  a  bath  of
brine,  raised  to  ebullition,  and  permitted  to  boil  for  five
minutes.  Aqueous  vapour  rose  from  the  liquid  into  the
chamber,  where  it  was  for  the  most  part  condensed,  the
uncondensed  portion  escaping,  at  a  low  temperature,
through  the  bent  tubes  at  the  top.  Before  the  brine  was
taken  away  little  stoppers  of  cotton-wool  were  inserted
in  the  bent  tubes,  lest  the  re-entrance  of  the  air  into  the
cooling-chamber  should  at  first  be  forcible  enough  to
carry  motes  along  with  it.  As  soon,  however,  as  the
outside  temperature  was  assumed  by  the  air  within  the
case  the  cotton-wool  stoppers  were  removed.

The  front  and  back  of  this  chamber  were  squares  of
14  inches  the  side,  the  depth  of  the  chamber  being  8*5
inches.  It  contained,  therefore,  1666  cubic  inches  of
air,  which  had  unimpeded  access  to  the  liquid  in  the
tubes.  No  stoppers  were  employed.  The  air  was  un-
affected by  calcination,  or  even  by  filtering.  Neither
cotton-wool  nor  hermetic  sealing  was  resorted  to.  Self-
subsidence  was  the  only  means  employed  to  rid  the
'  untortured  '  air  of  its  floating  matter.

A  second  series  of  eight  tubes  were  filled  at  the  same
time  with  the  same  liquid,  and  subjected  to  the  same
boiling  process.  The  only  difference  between  the  two
series  was,  that  these  latter  tubes  were  placed  in  a  stand
beside  the  case  containing  the  former  ones  and  exposed
to  the  common  air  of  the  laboratory.

For  the  sake  of  distinction  I  will  call  the  tubes
opening  into  the  case  the  protected  tubes,  and  those
opening  into  the  common  air  the  exposed  tubes.

On  the  17th  of  September  all  the  protected  tubes
were  bright  and  clear,  while  all  the  exposed  tubes  were
distinctly  turbid.  Specks  of  mould,  moreover,  were  in
every  case  seen  on  the  surface  of  the  exposed  liquid.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.  53


These  waxed  daily  larger,  and  finally  formed  a  thick
layer  on  the  top  of  every  column.  The  liquid,  mean-
while, changed  from  a  pale  sherry  to  a  reddish-brown
colour.    To  me  the  experiment  was  impressive  in  the

highest  degree.

On  the  27th  of  September  I  provided  myself  with  a
microscope  having  a  magnifying  power  of  1200  diame-
ters. Under  its  scrutiny  the  turbidity  of  the  liquid
immediately  resolved  itself  into  swarms  of  'Bacteria  in
active  motion.  Cohn  correctly  explains  the  turbidity.
The  index  of  refraction  of  the  Bacterium  being  slightly
different  from  that  of  the  surrounding  medium,  a  scat-
tering of  light  is  the  consequence.  This  scattering,
however,  and  the  opalescence  it  produces,  are  practically
independent  of  the  motions  of  the  Bacteria.

Since  the  date  here  referred  to  the  exposed  liquid  has
been  frequently  examined,  both  with  the  eye  and  with
the  microscope.  To  the  former  it  is  thickly  turbid,  to
the  latter  it  is  swarming  with  life.  Its  smell  is  putrid.
All  this  time  the  'protected  tubes  exhibit  a  liquid  per-
fectly unchanged  in  appearance.  For  four  months  it
has  remained  as  transparent  and  of  as  rich  a  colour  as
the  brightest  Amontillado  sherry.

On  the  1st  of  October  another  experiment  similar  in
principle  to  that  just  described  was  begun.  Fresh  urine
was  employed,  and  a  much  smaller  case.  The  capacity
of  the  latter  was  451  cubic  inches  ;  and  three  test-tubes,
instead  of  twelve,  were  passed  air-tight  through  its  bot-
tom. Like  those  in  the  larger  chamber  they  were  filled
by  a  pipette,  and  boiled  for  five  minutes  in  a  bath  of
brine.  Beside  them  were  placed  three  other  tubes  con-
taining the  same  liquid  treated  in  exactly  the  same  way,
but  exposed  to  the  common  air.  On  the  5th  all  the
exposed  tubes  were  turbid,  and  found  by  microscopic
examination  to  be  swarming  with  Bacteria.   The  colour


54


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


of  the  exposed  liquid  had  changed  from  a  pale  sherry-
colour  to  a  brown  orange.  On  the  25th  the  tubes  were
again  examined,  and  found  full  of  Bacteria.  Two
months  subsequent  to  this  latter  date  the  infusion,
diminished  by  evaporation,  was  found  well  charged
with  Bacterial  life.

While  this  process  of  putrefaction  was  going  on
outside,  the  tubes  opening  into  the  moteless  air  of  the
case  remained  perfectly  clear  and  void  of  life.

The  large  chamber  represented  in  fig.  2,  and  above
described,  was  the  first  operated  on,  and  the  liquid  is
shown  by  the  draughtsman  as  filling  only  a  small  portion
of  the  test-tubes.  This  smallness  of  volume  is  in  part  due
to  evaporation.  Test-tubes  1*2  inch  wide  and  9  inches
long  were,  in  all  subsequent  experiments,  nearly  filled
with  the  infusions.  Strong  in  the  first  instance,  these
were  sometimes  kept  until  slow  evaporation  through  the
bent  tubes  at  the  top  of  the  case  had  reduced  them  to
one  third  or  one  fourth  of  their  original  volume.  Each
expei'iment,  therefore,  was,  in  reality,  a  series  of  experi-
ments, extending  over  months,  on  infusions  of  different
strengths,  the  concluding  ones  of  the  series  attaining  a
very  high  degree  of  concentration.

§  4.  Mutton-Infusion.

A  new  case  was  constructed  to  contain  six  test-tubes.
It,  like  the  others,  had  a  front  of  glass,  side  windows,
and  a  back  door.  Its  capacity  was  857  cubic  inches.  It
was  sealed  up  on  the  21st  of  September,  and  found  free
from  floating  matter  on  the  24th.  The  lean  of  mutton,
cut  into  small  pieces,  was  digested,  or  soaked,  for  four
hours  in  water  of  a  temperature  of  120°  F.1   The  infu-

1  The  temperature  recommended  by  the  supporters  of  sponta-
neous generation.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.  55

sion  was  then  carefully  filtered,  and  introduced  into  the
six  test-tubes  by  a  pipette  which  was  never  removed

from  the  case.

The  mutton-juice  was  of  a  fine  ruby  colour;  but  on
boilino-,  its  albumen  was  precipitated,  subsequently  sank,
and  carried  the  colouring-matter  with  it.  The  superna-
tant liquid  was  perfectly  clear.  The  frothing  was  con-
siderable when  the  boiling  began.  Beside  this  new  case
was  placed  a  stand  containing  six  test-tubes  filled  with
the  same  infusion,  but  exposed  to  the  common  air.

On  the  27th  all  the  outside  flasks  were  perceptibly
turbid;  on  the  28th  they  were  found  well  filled  with
Bacteria,  which  on  the  30th  had  increased  to  astonishing
swarms.  On  the  15th  of  October  the  tubes  were  again
examined,  and  found  charged  with  undiminished  life.
They  remained  thus  'putrid'  until  the  14th  of  Novem-
ber.

During  the  whole  of  this  time  the  infusion  %n  con-
tact with  the  moteless  air  of  the  chamber  remained  as
clear  as  distilled  water,  and  entirely  free  from  life.

On  the  14th  of  November  I  infected  one  of  the  clear
tubes  by  introducing  into  it  through  the  pipette  a  few
drops  of  mutton-infusion  which  had  been  prepared  and
exposed  upon  the  12th  of  November,  and  which  two
days  had  sufficed  to  render  turbid.  On  the  15th  the
inoculated  infusion  showed  signs  of  turbidity,  and  on
the  16th  putrefaction  had  actively  set  in,  the  liquid
being  thickly  muddy  and  full  of  life.

With  a  moteless  chamber  and  three  tubes,  experi-
ments were  subsequently  made  on  a  second  infusion  of
mutton.  In  this  case,  however,  the  infusion  was  boiled,
its  albumen  was  precipitated,  and  removed  by  filtration
prior  to  its  introduction  into  the  chamber.  The  pellucid
liquid  was  introduced  on  the  1st  of  OctobeF,  boiled  for


THE  FLO ATIN G-M ATTEE  OF  THE  AIE.


five  minutes  in  the  brine-bath,  and  abandoned  to  the  air
of  the  case.  A  series  of  exposed  tubes  containing  the
same  infusion,  similarly  treated,  was  placed  beside  the
protected  ones.  On  the  4th  all  the  outside  tubes  were
muddy  and  swarming  with  Bacteria.  Schroeder  and
Cohn  have  shown  that  different  colours  are  produced  by
different  kinds  of  Bacteria.  In  the  three  exposed  tubes
here  referred  to  a  yellow-green  pigment  was  developed.

More  than  three  months  after  its  preparation,  the
infusion,  considerably  diminished  by  evaporation,  re-
mained in  all  the  'protected  tubes  as  clear  as  at  first.

§  5.  Beef-Infusion.

A  beef-steak,  after  having  its  fat  removed,  was  cut
up  into  small  pieces,  and  digested  for  three  hours  at  a
temperature  of  120°  F.  The  liquid  was  then  poured
off,  boiled,  and  filtered.  It  was  as  clear  and  colourless
as  pure  water.  On  the  4th  of  October  it  was  introduced
into  three  tubes  protected  by  a  chamber  of  451  cubic-
inches  capacity.  It  was  boiled  for  five  minutes  in  a
brine-bath.  Three  exposed  tubes,  containing  the  same
infusion,  were  placed  beside  the  protected  ones.  On  the
5th  the  exposed  tubes  showed  signs  of  haziness,  on  the
6th  they  were  turbid,  of  a  green  colour,  and  filled  with
Bacteria.  They  have  maintained  for  months  their  mud-
diness,  colour,  and  swarming  life.

While  the  exposed  beef-infusion  putrified  in  this
way,  all  the  protected  infusions  rennained  perfectly
sweet  and  clear.

§  6.  Haddock- Infusion.

The  haddock  was  cut  up  and  digested  on  the  24th
of  September ;  it  was  afterwards  introduced  into  six
tubes,  protected  by  a  chamber.    On  boiling,  its  albumen,


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


57


like  that  of  the  mutton  first  referred  to,  coagulated  and
sank  to  the  bottom,  leaving  a  perfectly  clear  liquid
overhead.  Six  exposed  tubes  filled  with  the  same  infu-
sion were  placed  beside  the  six  protected  ones.

On  the  27th  the  exposed  tubes  were  all  turbid  and
swarming  with  Bacteria.  On  the  29th  one  of  the
tubes  showed  a  fine  green  colour;  three  other  tubes
showed  the  same  colour  afterwards.  The  vivacity  of
the  organisms  was  extraordinary,  and  their  shapes
various.  They  darted  rapidly  to  and  fro  across  the
field,  clashing,  recoiling,  and  pirouetting— rendering  it,
indeed,  difficult  to  believe  in  the  vegetable  nature
which  the  best  microscopists  assign  to  them.

For  nearly  three  weeks  the  protected  tubes  remained
perfectly  clear.  To  gain  room,  the  case  was  subse-
quently shifted,  and  soon  afterwards  one  of  the  six
tubes  became  turbid  with  organisms,  the  germs  of  which
had  obviously  been  shaken  into  the  tube.

For  more  than  a  month  this  single  infected  flask
remained  in  company  with  the  five  healthy  ones.  The
air  containing  the  gaseous  products  of  putrefaction  had
free  access  to  the  whole  of  them,  but  there  was  no  spread
of  the  infection.  As  long  as  the  organisms  themselves
were  kept  out  of  the  flasks,  the  '  sewer-gas '  developed
by  the  putrefaction  had  no  infective  power.  On  the
14th  of  November  I  infected  two  of  the  five  perfectly
pellucid  tubes  with  haddock-infusion  which,  after  boil-
ing, had  been  exposed  for  two  days  to  the  air.  On  the
15th  the  two  tubes  had  obviously  yielded  to  the  infec-
tion. On  the  16th  disease,  if  I  may  use  the  term,  had
completely  taken  possession  of  them.  Into  one  of  them
only  one  or  two  drops  of  the  turbid  infusion  had  fallen,
while  ten  times  this  amount  was  introduced  into  the
other.  Nevertheless  on  the  16th  both  appeared  equally
turbid.    The  infection  acted  exactly  like  the  virus  of


58


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


smallpox,  a  small  quantity  of  which  will  in  the  long
run  produce  the  same  effect  as  a  large  one.

§  7.  Turnip-Infusion.

Turnip-juice  had  a  special  interest  for  me  in  con-
sequence of  the  important  part  it  plays  in  the  experi-
ments of  heterogenists.  I  turned  to  it  with  the  anxious
desire  to  learn  whether  the  statements  made  concerning
it  were  correct.

The  conditions  laid  down  as  to  the  strength  of  the
infusion,  the  temperature  to  be  maintained  during  the
process  of  digestion,  and  the  time  it  was  to  be  maintained1
were  scrupulously  adhered  to.  Thus  the  turnip  was  cut
into  thin  slices,  and  digested  for  four  hours  in  a  beaker
of  water  immersed  in  a  water-bath  kept  at  a  tempera-
ture close  to  120°  Fahr.  The  infusion  was  then  carefully
filtered,  introduced  through  a  pipette  into  its  case,  and
boiled  there  for  five  minutes.  Six  protected  test-tubes
were  charged  with  the  infusion  on  the  24th  of  Sep-
tember, while  six  other  tubes  were  placed  on  a  stand
outside,  and  exposed  to  the  common  air  of  the  labora-
tory.

On  the  27th  the  exposed  tubes  were  distinctly
turbid,  and  on  microscopic  examination  were  found
peopled  with  Bacteria.  The  protected  tubes,  on  the
contrary,  were  perfectly  clear.  A  little  distilled  water
had  been  added  to  one  of  the  outer  tubes.  The  e:ermi-
nal  matter,  whatever  it  may  be,  must  have  been
copious  in  the  water  ;  for  the  tube  to  which  it  was
added  far  exceeded  the  other  two  in  the  rapidity  of  life-
development.  On  the  30th  this  tube  contained  Bacteria
in  swarms,  of  small  size,  but  of  astonishing  activity.
The  other  tubes  also  were  fairly  charged  with  organisms,

1  Bastian,  1  Beginnings  of  Life,'  vol.  i.  p.  357,  note.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.  59

larger  and  more  languid,  but  not  at  all  so  numerous  as
nfhe  watered  tube.  On  the  5th  of  October  some  of
he  exposed  tubes  began  to  clear;  as  if  the  Bac teria

had  died  through  lack  of  nutriment,  and  were  falling

as  a  thick  sediment  to  the  bottom.

During  these  changes  the  protected  tubes  were

visibly  unaltered,  the  liquid  within  every  one  of  them

remaining  as  clear  as  it  had  been  on  the  day  of  its

introduction.  ,

In  this  instance  I  was  specially  anxious  to  verity  the
result  by  repetition.  Two  other  cases  were  therefore
fitted  up  to  contain  three  tubes  each,  and  instead  ot  a
door  a  movable  panel  was  placed  at  the  back.  Alter
two  or  three  days'  rest  both  cases  were  found  free  from
floating  matter,  and  on  the  1st  of  October  the  turnip-
infusion  was  introduced,  and  boiled  for  five  minutes  m

a  bath  of  brine.

In  the  former  experiment  the  temperature  ot  di-
gestion was  maintained  by  keeping  the  beaker  contain-
ing the  turnip  in  a  bath  of  warm  water.  In  the  present
instance  the  turnip  was  sliced  in  a  dish  and  placed
before  a  fire.  An  occult  but  efficient  power  like  that
already  ascribed  to  the  actinic  rays1,  might,  I  thought,
be  ascribed  to  radiant  heat,  and  I  therefore  copied  to
the  letter  the  mode  of  digesting  pursued  by  modern

heterogenists.

Adjacent  to  the  closed  cases  was  placed  a  series  ot
three  exposed  tubes,  containing  a  liquid  prepared  m
precisely  the  same  way.  On  the  4th  of  October  the
exposed  tubes  were  all  turbid,  and  swarmed  with  Bacteria.
In  two  of  the  tubes  they  were  distinctly  more  numerous
and  lively  than  in  the  third.  Such  differences  between
sensibly  conterminous  tubes,  containing  the  same  infu-
sion, are  frequent.  On  the  9th,  moreover,  the  two  most
1  'Nature,'  vol.  iii.  p.  217.


60


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


actively  charged  tubes  were  in  part  crowned  by  beautiful
tufts  of  Pemcillium  glauoum.1  This  expanded  gra-
dually until  it  covered  the  entire  surface  with  a  thick
tough  layer,  which  must  have  seriously  intercepted  the
oxygen  necessary  to  the  Bacterial  life.  The  Bacteria
lost  their  translatory  power,  fell  to  the  bottom,  and  left
the  liquid  between  them  and  the  superficial  layer  clear.

Another  difference,  pointing  to  differences  in  the
unseen  life  of  the  air,  was  shown  by  these  tubes.  The
turbidity  of  the  two  mould-crowned  ones  was  colourless
exhibiting  a  grey  hue.  The  third  tube,  the  middle  one
of  the  three,  contained  a  bright  yellow-green  pigment,
and  on  its  surface  no  trace  of  mould  was  to  be  seen.
It  never  cleared,  but  maintained  its  turbidity  and  its
Bacterial  life  for  months  after  the  other  tubes  had  ceased
to  show  either.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  mould-
spores  had  fallen  into  this  tube  also,  but  in  the  fight  for
existence  the  colour-producing  Bacteria  had  the  upper
hand.  Six  other  tubes,  similarly  exposed,  showed  the
grey  muddiness:  all  of  them  became  thickly  covered
with  mould,  under  which  the  Bacteria  died  or  passed
into  a  quiescent  state,  fell  to  the  bottom,  and  left  the
liquid  clear.

Up  to  the  13th  of  October  the  purity  of  the  six
protected  tubes  remained  unimpaired.

Here  a  complementary  experiment  was  made.  It
remained  to  be  proved  that  those  long-dormant  clear
infusions  had  undergone  no  change  which  interfered
with  their  ability  to  develop  and  maintain  life.  On  the
1 3th  of  October,  therefore,  the  small  panel  was  removed
from  the  back  of  one  of  the  cases,  and  with  three  new
pipettes  specimens  were  taken  from  the  three  tubes
within  it.    The  closest  search  revealed  no  living  thing.

1  Ordinary  mould.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.  61


The  air  of  the  laboratory  being  permitted  to  diffuse
freely  into  the  case,  on  the  day  after  the  removal  of  the'
panel  the  test-beam  showed  the  case  to  be  charged  with
floating  matter.

The  access  of  this  matter  was  the  only  condition
necessary  to  the  'production  of  life ;  for  on  the  17  th  all
the  tubes  were  muddy  and  swarming  with  Bacteria.

A  similar  experiment,  subsequently  made,  revealed
some  of  the  snares  and  pitfalls  which  await  an  in-
cautious worker.     The  chamber  already  referred  to
as  containing  six  tubes,  filled  with  turnip-juice,  pre-
served the  infusion  clear  for  a  month.    On  the  21st
of  October  the  back  door  of  the  chamber  was  opened,
and  specimens  of  the  clear  infusion  were  taken  out
for  examination  by  the  microscope.     The  first  tube
examined  showed  no  signs  of  life.    This  result  was
expected.     Picking   up   another  pipette,  I   took  a
sample  from  the  second  tube.    Here,  to  my  astonish-
ment, the  exhibition  of  life  was  monstrously  copious.
There  were  numerous  globular  organisms,  which  re-
volved, rotated,  and  quivered  in  the  most  extraor-
dinary manner.    There  were  also  numbers  of  lively
Bacteria  darting  to  and  fro.     An  experimenter  who
ponders  his  work  and  reaches  his  conclusions  slowly,
cannot  immediately  relinquish  them  :  and  in  the  pre-
sent instance  some  time  was  required  to  convince  me
that  no  mistake  had  been  made.    I  could  find  none,
and  was  prepared  to  accept  the  conclusion  that  in  the
boiled  infusion,  despite  its  clearness,  life  had  appeared.

But  why,  in  the  protected  turnip-infusion,  which
had  been  examined  on  the  13th  of  October,  could  no
trace  of  life  be  found  ?  In  this  case  perfect  transparency
was  accompanied  by  an  utter  absence  of  life.  The
selfsame  action  upon  light  that  enabled  the  Bacteria
to  show  themselves  in  the  microscope  must,  one  would


62


THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


think,  infallibly  produce  turbidity.  Why,  moreover,
should  life  be  absant  from  the  first  member  of  the
present  group  of  tubes  ?  I  searched  this  again,  and
found  in  it  scanty  but  certain  signs  of  life.  This
augmented  my  perplexity.  A  third  tube  also  showed
traces  of  life.  I  reverted  to  the  second  tube,  where
life  had  been  so  copious,  and  found  that  in  it  the
organisms  had  become  as  scanty  as  in  the  others.  I
confined  myself  for  a  time  to  the  three  tubes  of  the  first
row  of  the  six,  going  over  them  again  and  again ;
sometimes  finding  a  Bacterium  here  and  there,  but
sometimes  finding  nothing.  The  first  extraordinary
exhibition  of  life  it  was  found  impossible  to  restore.
Doubtful  of  my  skill  as  a  microscopist,  I  took  specimens
from  the  three  tubes  and  sent  them  to  Prof.  Huxley,
with  a  request  that  he  would  be  good  enough  to  examine
them.

On  the  22nd  the  search  was  extended  to  the  whole
of  the  tubes.  Early  in  the  day  lively  Bacteria  were
found  in  one  of  them  ;  later  on,  not  one  of  the  six
yielded  to  my  closest  scrutiny  any  trace  of  life.  On
the  evening  of  the  22nd  a  note  was  received  from  Prof.
Huxley  stating  that  a  careful  examination  of  the  speci-
mens sent  to  him  revealed  no  living  thing.

Pipettes  had  been  employed  to  remove  the  infusion
from  the  test-tubes.  They  were  short  pieces  of  narrow
glass  tubing,  drawn  out  to  a  point,  with  a  few  inches  of
india-rubber  tubing  attached  to  them.  This  was  found
convenient  for  bending  so  as  to  reach  the  bottom  of  the
test-tubes.  Suspicion  fell  upon  this  india-rubber.  It
was  washed,  the  washing-water  was  examined,  but  no
life  was  found.  Distilled  water  had  been  used  to  cleanse
the  pipettes,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  23rd  I  entered
the  laboratory  intending  to  examine  it.  Before  dip-
ping a  pipette  into  the  water  I  inspected  its  point.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


63


The  tiniest  drop  had  remained  in  it  by  capillary  attrac-
tion from  the  preceding  day.    This  was  blown  on  to  a
slide,  covered,  and  placed  under  the  microscope.  An
astonishing  exhibition  of  life  was  my  reward.    Thus  on
the  scent,  I  looked  through  my  pipettes,  and  found  two
more  with  the  smallest  residual  drops  at  the  ends  :  both
of  them  yielded  a  field  rampant  with  life.  The  Bacteria
darted  in  straight  lines  to  and  fro,  bending  right  and
left  along  the  line  of  motion,  wriggling,  rotating  longi-
tudinally, and  spinning   round  a   vertical  transverse
axis.    Monads  also  galloped  and  quivered  through  the .
field.     From  one  of  these  tiny  specks  of  liquid  was
obtained  an  exhibition  of  life  not  to  be  distinguished
from  that  which  had  astonished  me  on  the  21st.

Obviously  the  phenomenon  then  observed  was  duo
to  the  employment  of  an  unclean  pipette.  Equally
obvious  is  it  that  in  inquiries  of  this  nature  the  experir
menter  is  beset  with  danger,  the  grossest  errors  being
possible  when  there  is  the  least  lack  of  care.

The  chamber  here  operated  on  had  been  opened
with  a  view  to  testing  the  capacity  of  the  infusions
within  it  to  develop  and  maintain  life.  For  four  weeks
they  had  remained  'perfectly  clear.  Two  days  after
the  door  was  opened  and  the  common  laboratory  air
admitted  all  six  tubes  were  turbid,  and  swarming  with
Bacteria.  Some  of  them  were  very  long,  and  their  wrig-
gling and  darting  hither  and  thither  very  impressive.

The'  same  chamber  was  again  thoroughly  cleaned,
sealed,  and  permitted  to  remain  quiet  until  the  floating
matter  had  subsided.  On  the  17th  of  November  a
fresh  infusion  of  turnip  was  introduced  into  it  through
the  pipette,  boiled  in  an  oil-bath,  and  again  abandoned
to  the  air  of  the  case.

After  several  months  the  infusion  in  every  tube  of
the  six  remained  as  clear  as  it  was  on  the  day  of  its
introduction.


64        .  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OE  THE  AIR.

Six  other  tubes  charged  with  the  same  infusion,
boiled  in  the  same  way,  became  turbid  in  a  few  days,
and  subsequently  covered  with  thick  layers  of  Penicil-
lium.

§  8.  Hay-Infusion.

This  infusion  has  been  credited  with  a  power  of
spontaneous  generation  similar  to  that  ascribed  to
turnip-juice.  The  hay  being  chopped  into  short  lengths
was  digested  for  four  hours  in  water  kept  at  a  tempera-
ture of  120°  Fahr.  On  the  24th  of  September  the
filtered  infusion  was  introduced  into  its  chamber,  and
boiled  there  for  five  minutes.  Six  tubes  were  charged
with  the  protected  liquid,  while  six  other  tubes,  filled
with  the  same  infusion,  were  placed  on  a  stand  outside
the  case.

On  the  27th  the  inside  flasks  were  clear,  the  outside
ones  faintly  turbid.  On  the  28th  spots  of  mould  ap-
peared upon  all  the  exposed  surfaces.  The  infusion  in
one  of  the  outside  tubes  had  been  diluted  with  distilled
water,  and  in  it  the  development  of  life  was  far  more
rapid  than  in  the  five  others ;  all  of  them,  however,  on
the  28th  contained  Bacteria.

On  the  29th  I  noticed  a  larger  'organism  than  the
Bacteria  moving  rapidly  to  and  fro  across  the  field,  the
drop  containing  it  being  taken  from  the  dilute  infusion.
Several  of  these  monads  were  seen  upon  the  30th  gambol-
ling among  the  smaller  Bacteria,  appearing  bright  or
dark  as  they  sank  or  rose  in  the  liquid,  a  film  of  which,
large  as  they  looked,  was  to  them  an  ocean.  Swarms  of
Bacteria  were  seen  on  the  2nd  of  October,  their  transla-
tory  motions  being  so  rapid  and  varied,  and  so  apparently
guided  by  a  purpose,  as  to  render  it  difficult  to  believe
that  they  could  be  anything  else  than  animals.  On  the
15th  there  was  a  marvellous  exhibition  of  the  larger


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


65


Infusoria,  which  appeared  to  have  driven  the  Bacteria
from  their  habitat,  as  few  of  the  latter  were  to  be  seen.
My  inability  to  find  the  larger  creatures  a  second  time
in  such  numbers  perplexed  me,  causing  me  to  conclude
that  I  had  accidentally  alighted  upon  a  colony  of  them.
My  experience  with  the  unclean  pipettes  already  de-
scribed, pointed,  however,  to  another  source.

While  three  days  sufficed  to  break  dowu  their  purity,
and  to  fill  the  six  exposed  tubes  with  Bacterial  life,  the
six  protected  ones  remained  for  more  than  three  months
as  clear  and  healthy  as  they  were  on  the  day  the  infu-
sion ivas  poured  into  them.  Neither  a  trace  of  mould
upon  the  surface  of  any  one  of  them,  nor  a  trace  of  tur-
bidity in  its  mass,  was  to  be  seen.

Into  another  chamber  containing  three  test-tubes  a
very  strong  infusion  of  hay  was  introduced  on  the  1  st  of
October.  It  was  boiled  for  five  minutes,  and  then  aban-
doned to  the  air  of  the  case.  Three  other  tubes  exposed
to  the  laboratory  air  were  placed  on  a  stand  beside  the
case.  The  colour  of  the  infusion  was  very  deep,  but  it
was  quite  transparent.  One  of  the  outer  tubes  was
diluted  with  distilled  water.  On  the  3rd  the  infusion
in  this  tube  was  turbid,  the  other  exposed  ones  remain-
ing clear.  The  unseen  germinal  matter  had  in  some
way  or  other  invaded  the  distilled  water,  and  made  it
infective.  The  dilute  infusion  contained  multitudes  of
Bacteria,  many  motionless,  but  many  moving  rapidly
about.  On  the  4th  of  October  all  the  tubes  swarmed
with  Bacteria.  They  continued  muddy  till  the  middle
of  November,  when  they  were  employed  for  experi-
ments on  infection.

Throughout  the  whole  of  this  time  the  protected
tubes  remained  unchanged.

With  regard  to  infection,  it  may  be  stated  here  that

F


66  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

the  merest  speck  of  a  vegetable  infusion  containing
Bacteria  infects  all  animal  infusions,  and  vice  versa.
The  bursting  of  a  bubble  infects  an  infusion  reached  by  ■
the  spray.    It  is  the  envelope,  and  not  the  gas  of  the
bubble,  which  produces  this  result.

Other  experiments  on  hay-infusions,  acid,  neutral,
and  alkaline,  placed  in  contact  with  air  purified  in
various  ways,  yielded  in  1875  the  same  negative  re-
sult.

§  9.  Infusion  of  Sole.

The  fish  was  cut  up  and  digested  for  three  hours  in
water  kept  at  120°  Fahr.  On  the  17th  of  November  it-
was  introduced  into  a  case  containing  three  test-tubes,
and  boiled  there  for  five  minutes.  Three  other  tubes
hung  outside  the  case  were  exposed  to  the  ordinary
laboratory  air.

The  three  exposed  tubes  were  feebly  but  distinctly
cloudy  on  the  19th.  On  the  22nd  they  were  all  thickly
turbid.  Scattered  spots  of  Penicillium  then  appeared
on  two  of  them,  while  the  third  tube,  which  stood  be-
tween these  two,  kept  the  Penicillium  down.  This
central  tube  contained  the  pigment-forming  Bacteria,
which  have  frequently  shown  a  singular  power  in  pre-
venting the  development  of  mould.  For  nearly  two
months  the  central  tube  successfully  withstood  this  de-
velopment, while  its  two  neighbours  were  covered  by  a
matted  layer  of  Penicillium.

During  the  whole  of  this  time  the  protected  infusion
continued  as  clear  and  colourless  as  distilled  water.

§  10.  Liver-Infusion.
On  the  10th  of  November  the  infusion  was  prepared
by  the  process  of  digesting  already  so  often  described.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


67


It  was  introduced  into  a  case  containing  three  protected
tubes,  and  boiled  there  for  five  minutes  in  the  brine-
bath.  Hung  on  to  the  chamber  at  the  same  time  were
three  tubes  containing  the  same  infusion,  but  exposed  to
the  common  air.  On  the  13th  Bacteria  were  numerous
in  the  exposed  tubes,  and  soon  afterwards  all  three  of
them  became  thickly  muddy  and  putrescent.  They
continued  so  for  months.

The  protected  tubes,  on  the  contrary,  showed
throughout  a  bright  yellow  liquid,  as  transparent
and  fresh  as  it  ivas  on  the  day  of  its  introduction
into  the  case.

§  11.  Infusions  of  Hare,  Rabbit,  Pheasant,  and

Grouse.

For  the  sake  of  economy,  as  so  many  of  them  were
employed,  the  shape  of  the  cases  was  subsequently  varied.
The  rounded  end  of  a  tall  glass  shade  was  cut  off,  so  as
to  convert  the  shade  into  a  hollow  cylinder,  open  at
both  ends.  This  was  set  upright  on  a  wooden  stand,
and  cemented  to  it  air-tight.  Through  the  stand  passed
three  large  test-tubes  also  air-tight.  To  the  top  of
the  cylinder  was  cemented  a  circular  piece  of  wood,  the
middle  of  which  was  occupied  by  a  pipette  passing  first
through  india-rubber  and  then  through  a  stuffing-box
of  cotton-wool  moistened  by  glycerine.1  The  air  within
the  case  was  connected  with  the  air  without  by  means
of  the  open  bent  tubes  already  described.

In  the  first  experiments  made  with  these  cases  defects
of  construction  were  revealed  during  the  boiling  of  the
infusions.    But  increased  experience   enabled  me  to

1  In  the  earlier  experiments  the  india-rubber  formed  the  bottom
of  the  stuffing-box,  where  particles  were  sometimes  detached  from
it  by  ti  e  motion  of  the  pipette.  To  prevent  this  the  positions  of
wool,  and  rubber  were  afterwards  reversed.

F  2


68  THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


render  them  secure.  The  floating  matter  within  the
cases  having  been  permitted  to  subside,  into  four  of
them,  on  the  30th  of  November,  infusions  of  hare,  rabbit,
pheasant,  and  grouse  were  introduced.  The  infusions
were  boiled  in  the  usual  way,  and  abandoned  to  the  air
of  the  case.  Outside  each  case,  and  hung  on  to  it,
were  three  test-tubes  of  the  same  size  and  containing
the  same  infusion  as  that  within.

Examined  on  Christmas-day,  the  following  were  the
observed  results : —

Pheasant. — The  three  interior  tubes  perfectly  limpid  :
the  three  exposed  ones  turbid  and  covered  with  Peni-
cillium.

Grouse. — In  the  same  condition  as  the  pheasant.

Hare. — The  same  as  grouse  and  pheasant.

Rabbit. — The  three  interior  tubes  covered  with  tufts
of  particularly  beautiful  Penicillium,  some  of  the  tufts
striking  deep  into  the  liquid.  In  two  out  of  the  three
tubes,  moreover,  mycelium  was  flourishing  below.  All
the  outer  tubes  were,  as  usual,  turbid  and  covered  with
Penicillium.

Is  this,  then,  a  case  of  spontaneous  generation  ?
Without  further  evidence  no  cautious  worker  would
draw  such  a  conclusion.  Opposed  to  this  isolated  in-
stance stand  all  the  others  rhentioned  in  these  pages,
and  their  proper  action  on  the  mind  is  to  compel  it
to  demand  the  closest  scrutiny  before  accepting  this
apparent  exception  as  a  real  one.  Subjected  to  such
scrutiny,  it  appeared  that  of  the  four  shades  the  one
containing  the  rabbit-infusion,  and  that  only,  had
yielded  to  the  heat  of  boiling.  The  shade  had  been
fastened  upon  its  slab  with  plaster  and  cement,  winch
became  so  loose  during  the  boiling  that  the  steam
issued  from  the  chinks.  But  crannies  which  could  per-
mit steam  to  escape  could  permit  air  to  enter,  and  to


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


69


the  presence  of  such  air  the  appearance  of  the  Peni-
c  III  htm  was  doubtless  due.

I  did  not,  however,  rest  content  with  mere  inference,
but  tested  the  rabbit-infusion  by  placing  three  fresh
tubes  of  it  in  one  of  the  firmer  cases  first  described.  It
was  introduced  and  boiled  on  the  5th  of  January,  1876,
three  other  tubes  filled  with  the  same  boiled  infusion
being  exposed  on  the  same  day  to  the  ordinary  air.  The
three  protected  tubes  remained  clear  for  three  months,
while  in  three  days  the  three  exposed  ones  were  charged
with  Bacteria.

Salmon. — The  colouring-matter  of  this  fish  did  not
at  all  affect  the  infusion  ;  indeed,  no  better  example  of
original  freedom  from  colour  or  opalescence,  and  of
persistent  purity  in  contact  with  the  moteless  air,  has
occurred  to  me  than  salmon-infusion.  It  was  introduced
into  a  cylindrical  case  on  the  13th  of  December,  where
it  continued  for  months  to  show  the  brilliant  trans-
parency exhibited  at  first.  Three  unprotected  tubes,  on
the  other  hand,  became  turbid  and  covered  with  mould
in  a  few  days.

Hops. — One  tube  of  this  infusion  was  protected
simply  by  a  lamp-glass,  corked  and  cemented  above  and
below.  Through  the  lower  cork  passed  the  single  test-
tube,  air-tight ;  while  through  the  upper  one  passed  the
pipette  and  the  bent  tubes  intended  to  connect  the  outer
and  the  inner  air.  The  infusion  was  prepared  and  in-
troduced on  the  28th  of  October.  In  a  few  days  the
exposed  tube  was  found  turbid  and  covered  with  mould;
the  protected  tube,  on  the  contrary,  remained  clear  for
several  months.

Tea  and  Coffee. — One  tube  of  each  was  protected
by  a  lamp-glass  similar  to  that  employed  in  the  infusion
of  hops.  Both  were  prepared  on  the  28th  of  October,
exposed  tubes  being  hung  up  at  the  same  time.  The


70


THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


protected  tea  has  remained  clear,  while  the  exposed  tea
is  turbid  and  covered  with  mould.  Both  the  exposed
coffee  and  the  protected  coffee  are,  on  the  other  hand,
turbid  and  covered  with  Penicillium.

The  remarks  already  made  with  regard  to  the  rabbit-
infusion  apply  here.     The  case  is  one,  not  for  the  hasty
admission  of  spontaneous  generation,  but  for  further
scrutiny.    I  examined  the  apparatus  as  it  stood.  The
pipette  used  to  introduce  the  coffee  (and  this  one  only
of  the  three  employed  in  these  experiments)  rested
against  the  outer  edge  of  the  tube  containing  the  infu-
sion.   This  had  in  part  evaporated,  had  been  in  part
re-condensed,  and  had  trickled  down  the  pipette  so  as  to
form  a  small  drop  at  the  point  where  pipette  and  tube
touched  each  other.    The  drop  had  virtually  washed  the
outer  surface  of  the  pipette,  carrying  with  it,  in  part,
such  matter  as'  might  have  attached  itself  to  that  sur-
face.   A  portion  of  this  washing-water  reaching  the
infusion  was  clearly  the  origin  of  the  life  observed.
The  sure  test,  however,  was  the  repetition  of  the  experi-
ment under  conditions  which  should  exclude  this  source
of  error.    On  the  27th  of  December  accordingly  two
tubes  protected  by  lamp-glasses  were  prepared,  two
other  tubes  of  the  infusion  being  exposed  to  the  air.
The  former  remained  clear  for  months,  the  latter  in  the
same  number  of  days  became  turbid  and  covered  with
Penicillium.

§  12.  Infusions  of  Codfish,  Turbot,  Herring,  and

Mullet.

With  a  view  of  causing  these  experiments  on  mote-
less  and  mote-laden  air  to  run  parallel  with  others  made
with  hermetically-sealed  tubes,  to  be  described  further
on,  I  added  the  fish  named  in  the  heading  of  this  section
to  the  other  substances  examined.    The  mullet  was  in-


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


71


troduced  into  its  case  on  the  3rd  of  January.  The  warm
air  of  the  room  had,  however,  so  acted  on  the  wood  of
the  chamber,  which  had  been  employed  in  former  ex-
periments, that  the  water  of  condensation  trickled  from
a  chink  in  the  bottom.  The  other  chambers  were
mended  as  far  as  possible,  and  into  them  the  infusions
were  introduced  on  the  4th  of  January.  Each  chamber,
as  before,  was  provided  with  three  exposed  tubes  for
comparison  with  three  protected  tubes  within.  On  the
morning  of  the  6th  the  exposed  turbot-infusion  was
clear  in  all  the  tubes  ;  a  few  hours  subsequently  two  out
of  the  three  became  cloudy ;  while  on  the  7th  Bacteria
had  taken  possession  of  all  of  them.  All  the  unpro-
tected tubes  of  codfish  were  cloudy  on  the  6th,  more
cloudy  on  the  7th,  and  covered  with  a  soapy  layer  upon
the  8th.  The  three  exposed  herring-tubes  were  also
cloudy  on  the  6th,  the  cloudiness  advancing  afterwards
to  thicker  turbidity.  The  mullet  gave  way  in  the  same
manner.  For  more  than  three  months  the  protected
tubes,  including  even  the  imperfect  chamber  which
protected  the  mullet-infusion,  have  remained  as  clear
as  they  were  upon  the  day  of  their  introduction.

To  these  fish-infusions  may  be  added  others  of  eel
and  oyster.  Two  tubes  of  each,  protected  by  lamp-
glasses,  were  charged  on  the  27th  of  December.  They
remain  unchanged.  Two  other  pairs  of  tubes,  prepared
in  the  same  way  and  exposed  to  the  laboratory  air,  are
turbid  and  covered  with  Penicillium.

§  13.  Infusions  of  Fowl  and  Kidney.

Three  tubes  of  the  fowl-infusion  were  introduced
into  a  case,  and  boiled  there  for  five  minutes,  on  the
4th  of  January.  Three  similar  tubes  were  at  the  same
time  exposed  to  the  air.    On  the  6th  all  the  outer


72  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


tubes  were  cloudy,  the  cloudiness  becoming-  denser  on
the  following  days,  while  disks  of  Penicillium  began
to  form  on  the  exposed  surfaces.  It  was  found  ex-
ceedingly difficult  to  obtain  a  clear  infusion  of  kidney.
The  liquid,  after  it  had  passed  through  a  dozen  filters,
was  still  quite  muddy.  With  considerable  labour  and
care,  and  by  the  employment  of  200  filters,  the  mechani-
cally suspended  matter  was  at  length  removed,  and  a
clear  infusion  obtained.  It  was  introduced  into  its
case,  to  which  three  exposed  tubes  were  attached,  on
the  4th  of  January.  On  the  7th  the  latter  were  per-
ceptibly cloudy,  on  the  8th  distinctly  so,  while  specks
of  mould  rested  upon  them  all.  The  protected  tubes,  on
the  contrary,  have  for  months  maintained  their  trans-
parency undimmed.1

The  entire  number  of  experiments  made  to  illustrate
the  association  of  scattered  light  and  Bacterial  and
fungoid  life  are  not  here  recounted.  Whiting,  for
example,  may  be  added  to  the  fish,  and  pork  to  the
flesh  examined,  while  many  of  the  other  substances
have  been  tested  oftener  than  I  have  thought  it  neces-
sary to  record.  The  method  of  boiling  was  also  varied
in  a  manner  which  may  claim  a  passing  reference  here.

§  14.  Boiling  by  an  Interned  Source  of  Heat.

Two  large  test-tubes  were  fixed  air-tight  in  the
same  case.  On  the  8th  of  November,  after  the  floating
matter  had  subsided,  infusions  of  hay  and  turnip  were
introduced.  Dipping  deep  into  each  infusion  were  two
tinned  copper  wires,  connected  below  by  a  spiral  of

1  Kidney  has  been  mentioned  by  Dr.  Bastian  as  a  substance
with  which  he  demonstrates  the  occurrence  of  spontaneous  genera-
tion. He  does  not  mention  the  extraordinary  turbidity  of  the
infusion,  which  proved  so  troublesome  to  me.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


platinum  wire.  The  copper  wires  passed  through  the
case,  and  were  connected  with  a  voltaic  battery  outside.
The  spiral  was  heated  by  the  current  from  this  bat-
tery. After  a  few  minutes'  heating  ebullition  set  in,
and  was  continued  for  five  minutes  in  each  tube.  Two
other  tubes  containing  the  same  infusions  were  boiled
in  the  same  way,  and  afterwards  hung  outside  the  case
containing  the  two  protected  tubes.

In  another  chamber  were  placed  two  tubes  con-
taining infusions  of  beef  and  mutton.  The  arrange-
ment and  the  treatment  were  precisely  the  same  as
those  just  described  in  the  case  of  hay  and  turnip.

Examined  some  months  subsequently,  the  exposed
tubes  of  all  four  infusions  were  found  turbid  and
covered  with  Penicillium,  while  all  the  four  protected
tubes  remained  unchanged.  During  the  boiling  process
some  flocculi  detached  themselves  from  the  tinned  sur-
faces of  the  copper  wires ;  but  in  the  protected  tubes
these  have  fallen  to  the  bottom,  and  left  the  supernatant
liquid  clear.  Platinum  wires  would  have  been  better
than  tinned  copper  ones.

§  15.  Partial  Discussion  of  the  Results.

Thus  by  experiments,  reiterated  in  many  cases,
with  urine,  mutton,  beef,  pork,  hay,  turnip,  tea,  coffee,
hops,  haddock,  sole,  salmon,  codfish,  turbot,  mullet,
herring,  eel,  oyster,  whiting,  liver,  kidney,  hare,  rabbit,
fowl,  pheasant,  grouse,  has  the  induction  been  established,
that  the  power  of  developing  Bacterial  life  by  atmospheric
air  and  its  power  of  scattering  light,  go  hand  in  hand.
We  shall  immediately  examine  more  closely  what  this
means.

The  necessity  of  employing  strong  infusions  has
been  frequently  dwelt  upon,  if  we  would  realize  the


74  THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

phenomena  of  spontaneous  generation.  I  would  there-
fore recall  to  mind  what  has  heen  stated  on  a  previous
page,  that  in  most  of  the  experiments  here  described
the  infusion  at  starting  was  strong,  and  that  it  was
permitted  to  evaporate  with  extreme  slowness  until  its
concentration  became  three  or  four  fold  what  it  had
been  at  starting.  Every  experiment  was  thus  converted
into  an  indefinite  number  of  experiments  on  infusions
of  different  strengths.  Never,  in  my  opinion,  was  the
requirement  as  to  concentration  more  completely  ful-
filled, and  never  was  the  reply  of  Nature  to  experiment
more  definite  and  satisfactory.  The  temperatures,
moreover,  to  which  the  infusions  have  been  sub-
jected embrace  those  hitherto  alleged  to  be  effectual,
extending  indeed  beyond  them  in  both  directions.1
They  reached  from  a  lower  limit  of  50°  to  a  higher
limit  of  more  than  100°  Fahr.  Still  higher  tempera-
tures were  applied  in  other  experiments  to  be  described
subsequently.  With  regard  to  the  number  of  the
infusions,  more  than  fifty  moteless  cnambers,  each  with
its  system  of  tubes,  have  been  tested.  There  is  no
shade  of  uncertainty  in  any  of  the  results.  In  every
instance  we  have,  within  the  chamber,  perfect  limpidity
and  sweetness — without  the  chamber,  putridity  and  its
characteristic  smells.  In  no  instance  is  the  least  counte-
nance lent  to  the  notion  that  an  infusion  deprived  by
heat  of  its  inherent  life,  and  placed  in  contact  with  air
cleansed  of  its  visibly  suspended  matter,  has  any  power
whatever  to  generate  life  anew.

If  it  should  be  asked  how  I  have  assured  myself
that  the  protected  liquids  do  not  contain  Bacteria,  I
would,  in  the  first  place,  reply  that  with  the  most
careful  microscopic  search  I  have  been  unable  to  find

1  See  Proc.  of  Roy.  Soc.  vol.  xxi.  p.  130,  where  a  temperature  of
70°  is  described  as  effectual.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


75


them.    But  much  more  than  this  may  be  affirmed.
The  electric  or  the  solar  beam  is  a  far  more  powerful
and  searching  test  in  this  matter  than  the  microscope.
In  the  foregoing  pages  I  have  more  than  once  described
the  clearness  of  my  protected  infusions,  after  months
of  exposure,  as  equal  to  that  of  distilled  water.    So  far
is  this  from  being  an  exaggeration,  that  it  falls  short  of
the  truth ;  for  I  have  never  seen  distilled  water  so  free
from  suspended  particles  as  the  protected  infusions
prove  themselves  to  be.    When  for  months  a  transparent
liquid  thus  defies  the  scrutiny  of  the  searching  beam,
maintaining  itself  free  from  every  speck  which  could
scatter  light  as  &  Bacterium  scatters  it— when,  moreover,
an  adjacent  infusion,  prepared  in  precisely  the  same
way,  but  exposed  to  the  ordinary  air,  becomes  first
hazy,  then  turbid,  and  ends  by  wholly  shattering  the
concentrated  beam  into  irregularly  scattered  light,  I
think  we  are  entitled  to  conclude  "that  Bacteria  are  as
certainly  absent  from  the  one  as  they  are  present  in  the
other.    (See  Note  I.  at  the  end  of  this  paper.)

For  the  right  interpretation  of  scientific  evidence
something  more  than  mere  sharpness  of  observation  is
requisite,  very  keen  sight  being  perfectly  compatible
with  very  weak  insight.  I  was  therefore  careful  to  have
my  infusions  inspected  by  biologists,  not  only  trained
in  the  niceties  of  the  microscope,  but  versed  in  all  the
processes  of  scientific  reasoning.  Their  conclusion  is
that  it  would  simply  weaken  the  demonstrative  force  of
the  experiments  to  appeal  to  the  microscope  at  all.

§  1 6.  Suspended  Particles  in  Air  and  Water ;
their  relation  to  Bacteria.

Examined  by  the  concentrated  solar  rays,  or  by  the
condensed  electric  beam,  the  floating  matter  of  the  air


76


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


is  seen  to  consist :— first,  of  particles  so  coarse  that  their
individual  motions  can  be  followed  by  the  eye  ;  secondly,
of  a  finer  matter  which  is  not  to  be  distinguished  as
motes,  but  which  emits  a  uniform  and  changeless  light.
In  this  finer  matter  the  coarser  motes-  move  as  in  a
medium,

As  regards  the  production  of  colour,  the  action  of
small  particles  has  been  examined  by  Briicke  in  a  paper
«  On  the  Colours  of  Turbid  Media.' 1  In  relation  to  the
question  of  polarization,  Professor  Stokes  has  made  some
remarks  in  his  memoir  <  On  the  Change  of  the  Eefrangi-
bility  of  Light.' 2  I  may  also  be  permitted  to  refer  to
my  own  papers  <  On  New  Chemical  Keactions  by  Light '
and  '  On  the  Blue  Colour  of  the  Sky,'  in  the  Proceed-
ings of  the  Eoyal  Society  for  1868-69,  and  to  a  paper
'On  the  Action  of  Pays  of  High  Refrangibility  on
G-aseous  Matter,'  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  for
1870.  M.  Soret,  Lord,  Eayleigh,  and  Mr.  Bosanquet
have  also  worked  at  this  subject,  which,  as  far  as  it  now
concerns  us,  a  few  words  will  render  clear.

When  the  track  of  a  parallel  beam  in  dusty  air  is
looked  at  horizontally  through  a  Mcol's  prism,  in  a
direction  perpendicular  to  the  beam,  the  longer  diago-
nal of  the  prism  being  vertical,  a  portion  of  the  light
from  the  finer  matter,  being  polarized,  is  extinguished.
The  coarser  motes,  on  the  Other  hand,  which  do  not
polarize  the  light,  flash  out  with  greater  force,  because
of  the  increased  darkness  of  the  space  around  them.

The  individual  particles  of  the  finest  floating  matter
of  the  air  lie  probably  far  beyond  the  reach  of  the
microscope.  At  all  events  it  is  experimentally  demon-
strable that  there  are  particles  which  act  similarly  upon
light,  and  which  are  entirely  ultra-microscopic.    A  few

1  Pogg.  Ann.  lxxxviii.  p.  363.

2  Philosophical  Transactions,  vol.  142,  pp.  529-530.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


77


days  ago,  for  example,  an  inverted  bell-jar  was  filled
with  distilled  water,  into  which,  while  it  was  briskly
beaten  by  a  glass  rod,  was  dropped  a  solution  of  mastic
in  alcohol.  The  proportion  was  less  than  that  employed
by  Briicke,  being  about  ten  grains  of  the  gum  to  1 ,000
grains  of  the  alcohol.  The  jar  was  placed  under  a  sky-
light, at  the  height  of  the  eye  above  the  floor.  It  was
of  a  beautiful  cerulean  hue,  this  colour  arising  wholly
from  the  light  scattered  by  the  mastic  particles.
Looked  at  horizontally  through  a  Nicol's  prism,  with  its
shorter  diagonal  vertical,  the  blue  light  passed  freely
to  the  eye.  Turning  the  long  diagonal  vertical,  the
scattered  light  was  wholly  quenched,  and  the  jar
appeared  as  if  filled  with  ordinary  pure  water.

I  tried  the  effect  of  a  powerful  filter  upon  those  parti-
cles, and  found  that  they  passed  sensibly  unimpeded
through  forty  layers  of  the  best  filtering-paper.1

The  liquid  containing  them  was  examined  by  a
microscope  magnifying  1,200  diameters.  The  suspended
mastic  particles  entirely  eluded  this  power,  the  medium
in  which  they  swam  being  as  uniform  as  distilled  water
in  which  no  mastic  whatever  had  been  precipitated.

The  optical  deportment  of  the  floating  matter  of
the  air  proves  it  to  be  composed,  in  part,  of  particles
of  this  excessively  minute  character.  The  concentrated
beam  reveals  them  collectively,  long  after  the  micro-
scope has  ceased  to  distinguish  them  individually.
In  London  rooms,  moreover,  they  are  for  the  most  part
organic  particles,  which  may  be  removed  from  the  air
by  combustion.  In  presence  of  such  facts,  any  argu-
ment against  atmospheric  germs,  based  upon  their  being
beyond  the  reach  of  the  microscope,  loses  all  validity.
We  are  here  brought  face  to  face  with  a  question

!  There  are  filters,  however,  which  stop  them  ;  but  of  this
immediately.


78


THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


of  extreme  importance,  which  it  will  be  useful  to  clear
up.  c  Potential  germs '  and  '  hypothetical  germs '  have
been  spoken  of  with  scorn,  because  the  evidence  of  the
microscope  as  to  their  existence  was  not  forthcoming.
Sagacious  writers  had  drawn  from  their  experiments  the
perfectly  legitimate  inference  that  in  many  cases  the
germs  exist,  though  the  microscope  fails  to  reveal  them.
Such  inferences,  however,  have  been  treated  as  the  pure
work  of  the  imagination,  resting,  it  was  alleged,  on  no
real  basis  of  fact.  But  in  the  concentrated  beam  we
possess  what  is  virtually  a  new  instrument,  exceeding
the  microscope  indefinitely  in  power.  Directing  it
upon  media  which  refuse  to  give  the  coarser  instrument
any  information  as  to  what  they  hold  in  suspension,  these
media  declare  themselves  to  be  crowded  with  particles
 not  hypothetical,  not  potential,  but  actual  and  myriad-
fold  in  number — showing  the  microscopist  that  there  is
a  world  far  beyond  his  range.

In  §§  6  and  8  experiments  on  the  infection  of  clear
infusions  by  others  containing  visible  Bacteria  are  re-
ferred to.  But  for  the  infection  to  be  sure  it  is  not
necessary  that  the  Bacteria  should  be  visible.  Over  and
over  again  I  have  repeated  the  experiments  of  Dr.  Bur-
don  Sanderson  on  the  effective  power  of  ordinary  distilled
water,  in  which  the  microscope  fails  to  reveal  a  Bacte-
rium. The  water,  for  example,  furnished  to  the  Koyal-
Institution  laboratory  by  Messrs.  Hopkin  and  Williams
is  sensibly  as  infectious  as  an  infusion  swarming  with
Bacteria.    The  vessels  are  the  source  of  infection  here.

Perhaps  the  severest  experiment  of  this  kind  ever
made  was  one  executed  by  Dr.  Sanderson  with  water
prepared  by  myself.  In  1871  I  sought  anxiously  and
assiduously  for  water  free  from  suspended  particles.  The
liquid  was  obtained  in  various  degrees  of  purity,  but
never  entirely  pure.    Knowing  the  wonderful  power  of


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.  79


extrusion,  as  regards  foreign  matter,  brought  into  play
by  water  in  crystallizing,  the  thought  occurred  to  me  of
examining  the  liquid  derived  from  the  fusion  of  the
most  transparent  ice.  At  my  request,  therefore,  my
assistant  arranged  the  following  apparatus  for  me

Fig.  3.


Through  the  plate  of  an  air-pump  (fig.  3)  passed  air-
tight the  shank  of  a  large  funnel.  A  small  glass  bulb,
b,  furnished  with  a  glass  stopcock,  was  attached  to  the
shank  of  the  funnel  below.  Prior  to  being  put  together
all  parts  of  the  apparatus  had  been  scrupulously  cleansed.


80


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


In  the  funnel  was  placed  a  block  of  ice,  I,  selected  for
its  transparency,  having  a  volume  of  1000  cubic  inches
or  thereabouts,  and  over  the  ice  was  placed  an  air-tight
receiver.  Several  times  in  succession  the  air  was  re-
moved from  this  receiver,  its  place  on  each  occasion
being  taken  by  other  air  carefully  filtered  through
cotton-wool.  The  transparent  ice  was  thus  surrounded
by  moteless  air.

The  ice  was  now  permitted  to  melt;  its  water  trickled
into  the  small  glass  bulb  below,  which  was  filled  and
emptied  a  great  number  of  times.    From  the  very  heart
of  the  block  of  ice  the  water  was  finally  taken  and  sub-
jected to  the  scrutiny  of  the  concentrated  beam.  It
proved  to  be  the  purest  liquid  1  had  ever  seen — pro-
bably the  purest  human  eye  had  ever  seen  ;  but  still  it
contained  myriads  of  ultra-microscopic  particles.  The
track  of  the  beam  through  it  was  of  the  most  delicate
blue,  the  blue  light  being  perfectly  polarized.    It  could
be  wholly  quenched  by  a  Nicol's  prism,  the  beam  then
passing  through  the  liquid  as  through  a  vacuum.  A
comparison  of  the  light  with  that  scattered  by  mastic
particles  such  as  those  above  referred  to,  proved  the
suspended  particles  of  the  ice-water  to  be  far  smaller
than  those  of  the  mastic.    No  microscope,  therefore,
could  come  near  them.1    Such  water,  however,  was
proved  by  Dr.  Sanderson  to  be  as  infectious  as  the  water
from  any  ordinary  tap.

Infinitesimal  as  these  particles  are,  however,  they
may  be  separated  by  mechanical  means  from  the  liquid
in  which  they  are  held  in  suspension.  Filters  of  porous
earthenware,  such  as  the  porous  cells  of  Bunsen's  battery,

•  I  have  endeavoured  to  convey  some  notion  of  the  smallness  of
these  scattering  particles  in  'Fragments  of  Science,'  Art.  'Scientific
Use  of  the  Imagination.'  See  note  on  Mr.  Dallinger's  observations
at  the  end  of  this  Memoir.


PUTEEF ACTION  AND  INFECTION.


81


heave  been  turned  to  important  account  in  the  researches
of  Dr.  Zahn,  Professor  Klebs,  and  Dr.  Burdon  Sander-
son. In  various  instances  it  has  been  proved  that,  as
regards  the  infection  of  living  animals,  the  porous
earthenware  intercepts  contagia.  For  the  living  animal,
organic  infusions,  or  Pasteur's  solution,  may  be  substi-
tuted. Not  only  are  ice-water,  distilled  water,  and
tap-water  thus  deprived  of  their  powers  of  infection,
but,  by  plunging  the  porous  cell  into  an  infusion  swarm-
ing with  Bacterial  life,  exhausting  the  cell,  and  per-
mitting the  liquid  to  be  slowly  driven  through  it  by
atmospheric  pressure,  the  filtrate  is  not  only  deprived  of
its  Bacteria,  but  also  of  those  ultra-microscopic  germs
which  appear  to  be  as  potent  for  infection  as  the  Bac-
teria themselves.  The  precipitated  mastic  particles
before  described,  which  pass  unimpeded  through  an  in-
definite number  of  paper  filters,  are  wholly  intercepted
by  the  porous  cell.

These  germinal  particles  abound  in  every  pool,
stream,  and  river.  All  parts  of  the  moist  earth  are
crowded  with  them.  Every  wetted  surface  which  has
been  dried  by  the  sun  or  air  contains  upon  it  the  parti-
cles which  the  unevaporated  liquid  held  in  suspension.
From  such  surfaces  they  are  detached  and  wafted  away,
their  universal  prevalence  in  the  atmosphere  being
thus  accounted  for.  Doubtless  they  sometimes  attach
themselves  to  coarser  particles,  organic  and  inorganic,
which  are  left  behind  along  with  them  ;  but  they  need
no  such  rafts  to  carry  them  through  the  air,  being  them-
selves endowed  with  a  power  of  flotation  commensurate
with  their  extreme  smallness  and  the  specific  lightness
of  the  matter  of  which  they  are  composed.

I  by  no  means  affirm  that  the  developed  Bacterium,
which  requires  for  its  maintenance  nutriment  beyond
that  which  ordinary  water  can  always  supply,  is  never

G


82


THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


wafted  through  the  air.  Cases  may  arise  favourable
to  the  growth  and  dispersion  of  the  full-grown  or-
ganism. Whether,  after  desiccation,  it  retains  the  power
of  reproduction  is  another  question.  But  it  ought,  I
think,  to  be  steadily  borne  in  mind  that  the  complete
Bacteria  and  the  atmospheric  matter  from  which  they
spring  are,  in  general,  different  things.  I  have  care-
fully sought  for  atmospheric  Bacteria,  but  have  never
found  them.  They  have  never,  to  my  knowledge,  been
found  by  others ;  and  that  they  arise  from  matter  which
has  not  yet  assumed  the  Bacterial  form  is,  as  just  shown,
capable  of  demonstration.  An  organic  infusion,  boiled
and  shielded  from  atmospheric  particles,  will  remain
clear  for  an  indefinite  period,  while  a  fragment  of  glass
which  has  been  exposed  to  the  air,  but  on  which  no  trace
of  a  Bacterium  is  to  be  found,  will  in  two  or  three  days
develop  in  the  infusion  a  multitudinous  crop  of  life.

We  have  now  to  look  a  little  more  closely  at  these
particles,  foreign  to  the  atmosphere  but  floating  in  it,
and  proved  beyond  doubt  to  be  the  origin  of  all  the  Bac-
terial life  which  our  experiments  have  thus  far  revealed.
We  must  also  look  at  them  as  they  -exist  in  water,  in
countless  multitudes,  being  as  foreign  to  this  medium  as
the  floating  atmospheric  dust  is  to  the  air  in  which  it
swims.  The  existence  of  the  particles  is  quite  as  certain
as  if  they  could  be  felt  between  the  fingers,  or  seen  by
the  naked  eye.    Supposing  them  to  augment  in  magni-
tude until  they  come,  not  only  within  range  of  the
microscope,  but  within  range  of  the  unaided  senses.
Let  it  be  assumed  that  our  knowledge  of  them  under
these  circumstances  remains  as  defective  as  it  is  now—
that  we  do  not  know  whether  they  are  germs,  particles
of  dead  organic  dust,  or  particles  of  mineral  matter.
Suppose  a  vessel  (say  a  flower-pot)  to  be  at  hand  filled
with  nutritious  earth,  with  which  we  mix  our  unknown


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.  83


particles,  and  that  in  forty-eight  hours  subsequently  buds
and  blades  of  well-defined  cresses  and  grasses  appear
above  the  soil.  Suppose  the  experiment  when  repeated
a. hundred  times  to  yield  the  same  unvarying  result.
What  would  be  our  conclusion  ?  Should  we  regard
those  living  plants  as  the  product  either  of  dead  dust,
or  of  mineral  particles  ?  or  should  we  regard  them  as
the  offspring  of  living  seeds  ?  The  reply  is  unavoidable.
We  should  undoubtedly  consider  the  experiment  with  the
flower-pot  as  clearing  up  our  pre-existing  ignorance ;
we  should  regard  the  fact  of  their  producing  cresses  and
grasses  as  proof  positive  that  the  particles  sown  in  the
earth  of  the  pot  were  the  seeds  of  the  plants  which  have
grown  from  them.  It  would  be  simply  monstrous  to
conclude  that  they  had  been  '  spontaneously  generated.'

This  reasoning  applies  word  for  word  to  the  develop
ment  of  Bacteria  from  that  floating  matter  which  the
electric  beam  reveals  in  the  air,  and  in  the  absence  of
which  no  Bacterial  life  has  been  generated.  I  cannot
see  a  flaw  in  the  reasoning;  and  it  is  so  simple  as  to
render  it  unlikely  that  the  notion  of  Bacterial  life  being-
developed  from  dead  dust  can  ever  gain  currency  among
the  members  of  the  medical  profession.

It  has  been  said  of  those  whom  the  evidence  adduced
in  favour  of  spontaneous  generation  fails  to  convince,
that  they  seem  willing  to  beHeve  in  almost  any  infringe-
ment of  natural  uniformity  rather  than  admit  the
doctrine.1  This  surely  is  an  inversion  of  the  true  order
of  the  facts.  Natural  uniformity  is  the  record  of  expe-
rience ;  and,  apart  from  the  phenomena  to  be  accounted
for,  there  is  not  a  vestige  of  experience,  possessed  either
by  the  man  of  science  or  the  human  race,  which  warrants
the  notion  that  dead  dust,  and  not  living  seed,  is  the
source  of  the  crops  which  spring  from  our  infusions
1  Transactions  of  the  Pathological  Society,  vol.  xxvi.  p.  273.

a  2


84  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OE  THE  AIR.


when  impregnated  by  the  floating  particles  of  the  at-
mosphere.

§  17.  Recent  Experiments  on  Heterogenesis.

The  uniform  sterility  of  the  boiled  infusions  described
in  the  foregoing  pages,  when  protected  from  the  floating
matter  of  the  air,  proves  that  they  do  not  contain  germs
capable  of  generating  life.  Our  most  advanced  hetero-
genist,  indeed,  affirms  that  a  temperature  of  140°  Fahr.
reduces,  in  all  cases,  such  germs  to  a  state  of  actual  or
potential  death  ;  and  he  ingeniously  argues  that  as,
even  in  flasks  which  have  been  raised  to  a  temperature
of  212°,  and  hermetically  sealed,  putrefaction,  and  its
associated  Bacteria,  do  most  certainly  arise,  such  Bac-
teria must  be  spontaneously  generated.  'We  know,'
he  says,  '  that  boiled  turnip  or  hay-infusions,  exposed  to
ordinary  air,  exposed  to  filtered  air,  to  calcined  air,  or
shut  off  altogether  from  contact  with  air,  are  more  or
less  prone  to  swarm  with  Bacteria  and  Vibriones  in  the
course  of  from  two  to  six  days.' 1

We  are  here  met  by  a  difficulty  at  the  outset.  The
proof  of  Bacterial  death  at  140°  Fahr.  consists  solely  in
the  observed  fact,  that  when  a  certain  liquid  is  heated
to  that  temperature  no  life  appears  in  it  afterwards  ;
while  in  another  liquid  life  appears  two  days  after  it
has  been  heated  to  212°.  Instead  of  concluding  that  in
the  one  liquid  life  is  destroyed  and  in  the  other  not,  it
is  assumed  that  140°  Fahr.  is  the  death-temperature  for
both ;  and  this  being  so,  the  life  observed  in  the  second
liquid  is  regarded  as  a  case  of  spontaneous  generation.
A  great  deal  of  Dr.  Bastian's  most  cogent  reasoning
rests  upon  this  fomidation.  Assumptions  of  this  kind
guide  him  in  his  most  serious  experiments.  He  finds,
1  '  Evolution  and  the  Origin  of  Life,'  p.  94.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.  85


for  example,  that  a  mineral  solution  does  not  develop
Bacteria  when  exposed  to  the  air;  and  he  concludes
from  this  that  an  organic  infusion  also  may  be  thus  ex-
posed without  danger  of  infection.  He  exposes  turnip-
juice  accordingly,  obtains  a  crop  of  Bacteria,  which,  in
the  light  of  his  assumption,  are  spontaneously  generated.
Such  are  the  warp  and  woof  of  some  of  the  weightiest
arguments  on  this  question  which  have  been  addressed
by  him  to  the  Eoyal  Society.1

Granting,  then,  all  that  Dr.  Bastian  alleges  regard-
ing his  experiments  to  be  correct,  the  logical  inference
would  be  very  different  from  his  inference.  In  a  future
essay  his  position  will  be  more  clearly  defined.  To  the
examination  of  his  experiments  I  now  address  myself.

§  18.  Experiments  with  Filtered  Air.

A  bell-jar  containing  about  700  cubic  inches  of  air
was  firmly  cemented  to  a  slab  of  wood  coated  with  resin,
and  supported  on  three  legs.2  Through  the  slab  passed,
air-tight,  three  large  test-tubes  (a,  b,  c,  fig.  4).  Prior
to  cementing,  the  tubes  had  been  three-fourths  filled,
one  with  an  infusion  of  hay,  another  with  an  infusion  of
turnip,  and  a  third  with  an  infusion  of  mutton.  On
the  2nd  of  November  the  mote-laden  air  was  pumped
out,  air  slowly  filtered  through  a  long  tight  plug  of
cotton-wool  being  allowed  to  take  its  place.  The  jar
was  emptied  and  refilled  until  the  closest  scrutiny  by  a
concentrated  beam  revealed  no  floating  matter  within
it.    The  infusions  were  then  boiled  for  five  minutes,

'  Proceedings,  vol.  xxi.  p.  1 30.

2  Two  hoops  of  sheet  iron,  with  an  annular  space  about  an
inch  wide,  were  fastened  on  to  the  slab  .of  wood.  The  annular
space  was  filled  with  hot  cement,  into  which  the  hot  bell-jar  was
pressed.  The  circular  space  within  the  smaller  hoop  was  also
covered  by  a  layer  of  cement.


86


THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


and  abandoned  to  the  air  of  the  jar.  During  ebullition
a  small  quantity  of  the  liquid  in  one  of  the  tubes  boiled
over,  and  rested  upon  the  interior  resinous  surface  at  a
little  distance  from  the  mouths  of  two  of  the  tubes.
The  germinal  matter,  it  may  be  remarked,  is  not  readily
blown  away  from  such  a  surface,  and  it  certainly  was
not  wholly  removed  by  our  feeble  current  of  filtered  air.
Three  exposed  tubes  containing  the  same  infusion  were
placed  at  the  same  time  beside  the  protected  ones.


Fig.  4.


.  In  three  days  these  exposed  tubes  became  turbid
and  charged  with  life ;  but  for  three  weeks  the  infusions
in  contact  with  the  filtered  air  remained  perfectly
clear.

At  the  end  of  three  weeks,  that  is  on  the  23rd  of
November,  I  desired  my  assistant  to  renew  the  air  in  the
bell-jar.  He  pumped  it  out,  and  while  permitting  fresh
air  to  enter  through  the  cotton-wool  filter,  my  attention


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.  87

was  directed  to  a  couple  of  small  round  patches  of  Peni-
cilli  u  m  resting  in  the  liquid  that  had  boiled  over  on  the
resin.    I  at  once  made  the  remark  that  the  experiment
was  a  dangerous  one,  as  the  entering  air  would  probably
detach  some  of  the  spores  of  the  Penicillium  and  diffuse
them  in  the  bell-jar.    This  was,  therefore,  filled  very
slowly,  so  as  to  render  the  disturbance  a  minimum.
Next  clay,  however,  a  tuft  of  mycelium  was  observed  at
the  bottom  of  one  of  the  three  tubes,  namely  that  con-
taining the  hay-infusion.    It  soon  grew  large  enough
to  fill  a  considerable  portion  of  the  tube.    For  nearly  a
month  longer  the  two  tubes  containing  the  turnip-  and
mutton-infusions  maintained  their  transparency  unim-
paired.   Late  in  December  the  mutton-infusion,  which
was  in  dangerous  proximity  to  the  outer  mould,  showed
a  tuft  of  Penicillium  upon  its  surface.    The  beef-
infusion  continued  bright  and  clear  for  nearly  a  fort-
night longer.    The  cold  winter  weather  caused  me  to
add  a  third  gas-stove  to  the  two  which  had  previously
warmed  the  room  where  the  experiments  are  conducted.
The  warmth  of  this  stove  played  upon  one  side  of  the
bell-jar;  and  on  the  day  after  the  lighting  of  the  stove,
the  beef-infusion  gave  birth  to  a  tuft  of  mycelium.
In  this  case  the  small  spots  of  Penicillium  might  have
readily  escaped  attention;  and  had  they  done  so  we
shoidd  have  had  here  three  cases  of  '  spontaneous  gen-
eration' more  striking  than  most  of  those  that  have
been  adduced  in  support  of  this  doctrine.

The  experiment  was  subsequently  made  upon  a
larger  scale.  Twelve  very  large  test-tubes  were  caused
to  pass  air-tight  through  a  slab  of  wood  ;  the  wood  was
thickly  coated  with  cement,  in  which,  while  it  was  hot
and  soft,  a  heated  'propagating  glass,' resembling  a  huge
bell-jar,  was  imbedded.  The  air  within  the  glass  was
pumped  out  several  times,  air  filtered  carefully  through


88  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

a  plug  of  cotton-wool  being  permitted  to  supply  its
place.  The  test-tubes  contained  infusions  of  hay,  tur-
nip, beef,  and  mutton,  three  of  each,  twelve  in  all.
For  two  months  they  remained  as  clear  and  cloudless
as  they  were  upon  the  day  of  their  introduction,  while
twelve  similar  tubes,  prepared  at  the  same  time,  in  pre-
cisely the  same  way,  and  hung  on  to  the  slab  of  wood
outside  the  propagating-glass,  were,  in  less  than  a  week,
clogged  with  mycelium,  mould,  and  Bacteria.

One  of  the  protected  tubes  was  accidentally  broken,
and  though  its  aperture  was  rapidly  plugged  with
cotton-wool,  some  common  air  must  at  the  time  have
entered  the  propagating-glass.  Evaporation  from  the
infusions  went  -on ;  the  vapour  was  condensed  by  the
glass  above,  trickled  down  its  interior  surface,  carrying
with  it,  in  part,  such  matter  as  had  attached  itself  to
that  surface.  A  kind  of  pool  was  thus  formed  upon  the
cement  below.  This  after  an  interval  of  three  months
became  spotted  with  disks  of  Penicillium,  by  the  spores
of  which  one  or  two  of  the  infusions  have  been  recently
invaded,  the  production  of  very  beautiful  mycelium-
tufts  being  the  consequence.

§  19.  Experiments  with  Calcined  Air.

Six  years  ago1  I  showed  that  the  floating  matter  of
London  air  could  be  removed  by  permitting  a  platinum
wire  heated  to  whiteness  to  act  upon  it  for  a  sufficient
time.  I  availed  myself  of  this  mode  of  calcining  the
air  on  the  present  occasion.  The  apparatus  employed
is  shown  in  fig.  5.  A  glass  shade,  s,  is  placed  upon  a
slab  of  wood  mounted  on  a  tripod.  Through  the  slab
passes  three  large  test-tubes  nearly  filled  with  the  in-
fusion to  be  examined.  A  platinum  spiral,  p,  unites
1  Proc.  Roy.  Inst.  vol.  vi.  pp.  4  and  5.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


89


the  ends  of  two  upright  copper  wires,  which  pass
through  the  stand  and  are  seen  coiled  outside  it.  The
shade  is  surrounded  below  by  a  tin  collar,  with  a  space  of
about  half  an  inch  all  round  between  it  and  the  shade.
This  space  is  filled  with  cotton-wool  firmly  packed.
Connecting  the  wires  with  a  battery  of  fifteen  cells,  the
spiral  p  was  raised  to  whiteness,  and  was  permitted  to
continue  so  for  five  minutes.  Experiments  previously
executed  had  shown  that
this  sufficed  for  the  entire
removal  of  the  floating
matter.  When  the  spiral
was  heated,  a  portion  of
the  expanded  air  was  driven
through  the  cotton  -  wool
packing  below ;  and  when
the  current  was  interrupted,
this  air,  returning  into  the
shade,  was  prevented  by  the
cotton-wool  from  carrying
any  floating  matter  with
it.

The  first  three  substances
brought  into  contact  with
air  calcined  in  this  way  were  damson-juice,  pear -juice,
and  infusion  of  yeast.  They  were  boiled  for  five  min-
utes, and  for  five  months  they  have  remained  without
speck  or  turbidity.  Other  tubes  similarly  boiled,  and
placed  underneath  shades  containing  the  floating  matter
of  the  air,  have  long  since  fallen  into  mould  and  rotten-
ness.

Turnip-  and  hay-infusions,  rendered  slightly  alkaline,
have  been  mentioned  as  particularly  prone  to  spon-
taneous generation.  I  wished  to  test  this.  On  the
26th  of  November,  therefore,  four  shades  were  prepared,


Fig.  5.


90


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


two  containing  strong  turnip-infusion  and  hay-infu-
sion unneutralized,  two  containing  the  same  infusions
slightly  superneutralized  by  caustic  potash.  The  al-
leged spontaneous  development  of  life  was  not  observed.
The  tubes  exhibit  to  this  hour  the  clearness  and  colour
which  they  showed  on  the  day  they  were  boiled.  Her-
metically-sealed tubes,  containing  the  same  infusions,
prepared  on  the  same  day,  remain  equally  clear ;  while
the  specimens  exposed  to  the  laboratory  air  have  fallen
into  rottenness.

The  experiments  with  calcined  air  we're  also  executed
in  another  form  and  on  a  larger  scale.  A  '  propagating-
glass,'  similar  to  that  already  described,  was  cemented
in  the  same  way  to  a  slab  of  wood  through  which  passed
twelve  large  test-tubes.  The  infusions,  as  before,  were
hay,  turnip,  beef,  and  mutton.  The  air  being  removed
from  the  propagating-glass  by  a  good  air-pump,  its  place
was  supplied  by  other  air  which  had  passed  slowly
through  a  red-hot  platinum  tube  containing  a  roll  of
platinum  gauze,  also  heated  to  redness.  Tested  by  a
searching  beam,  this  calcined  air  was  found  quite  free
from  floating  matter.  For  two  months  no  speck  invaded
the  limpidity  of  the  infusions  exposed  to  it,  while  a
week's  exposure  to  the  ordinary  air  sufficed  to  reduce
twelve  similar  infusions,  hung  on  to  the  slab  of  wood
outside  the  glass,  to  the  muddiness  of  putrefaction.

§  20.  Infusions  withdraivn  from  Air.

The  arrangement  here  was  the  same  as  that  adopted
in  the  first  experiment  with  filtered  air,  the  only  dif-
ference being  that  the  bell-jar,  with  a  view  to  its  more
perfect  •exhaustion,  was  smaller.  It  was  cemented  air-
tight to  a  slab  of  wood  through  which  passed  three
large  test-tubes,  filled  to  about  two-thirds  of  their


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


91


capacity  with  infusions  of  beef,  mutton,  and  turnip  re-
spectively. The  bell-jar  was  exhausted  six  times  in
succession,  and  filled  after  each  exhaustion  with  air
carefully  filtered  through  cotton-wool.  While  this  air
was  in  contact  with  the  infusions  they  were  boiled  in  a
brine-bath.  The  receiver  was  afterwards  exhausted  as
perfectly  as  a  good  air-pump  could  exhaust  it;  while
outside  the  receiver  were  hung  three  tubes  to  compare
with  those  within.

Here  the  protected  infusions  remained  as  clear  as
they  were  on  the  day  of  their  introduction,  not  only
after  the  exposed  infusions  had  charged  themselves  with
life,  but  for  many  weeks  after  they  had  evaporated
away.

Such,  then,  are  the  tests  to  which  I  have  subjected
the  statement  that  'boiled  turnip-  and  hay-infusions
exposed  to  filtered  air,  to  calcined  air,  or  shut  off  al-
together from  contact  with  air,  are  more  or  less  prone  to
swarm  with-  Bacteria  and  Vibriones  in  the  course  of
from  two  to  six  days.'  These  results,  and  others  that
might  be  adduced,  leave  no  doubt  upon  my  mind  that
the  deportment  of  air  from  which  the  floating  matter
has  been  removed  by  filtration  or  calcination  is  precisely
the  same  as  that  of  air  from  which  the  particles  have
disappeared  by  self-subsidence.  Once  really  sterilized,
an  infusion  in  contact  with  optically  pure  air,  however
obtained,  remains  sterile.

§  21.  The  Germ-theory  of  Contagious  Disease.

It  is  in  connection  with  the  germ-theory  of  con-
tagious disease  that  the  doctrine  of  spontaneous  genera-
tion assumes  its  gravest  aspect.  My  interest  in  the
general  question  was  first  excited  by  the  investigations
of  Pasteur,  while  the  medical  bearings  of  the  doctrine


92


THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  ATE.


were  subsequently  made  clear  to  me,  mainly,  I  ought
to  say,  by  the  writings  and  conversation  of  the  late  Dr.
William  Budd,  who  was  the  first  of  our  countrymen
to  grasp  with  true  philosophic  insight  the  doctrine  of
'  the  vitality  of  contagia,'  which  is  now  every  day  gain-
ing ground.

At  the  present  moment,  indeed,  no  other  medical
principle  occupies  so  much  thought,  or  is  the  subject  of
so  much  discussion.  '  How  does  it  happen,'  says  Dr.
Burdon  Sanderson1,  'that  these  Bacteria,  which  we
suppose  must  have  existed  half  a  dozen  years  ago  in  as
great  numbers  as  at  present,  were  then  scarcely  heard
of,  and  that  they  now  occupy  so  large  a  place  in  the
medical  literature  of  this  country  and  of  Germany,  and
have  lately  afforded  material  for  lively  discussion  in  the
French  Academy  ? '  Dr.  Sanderson  points  out  the  re-
lation of  Lister  in  England,  and  of  Hallier  in  Grermany,
to  the  movement  regarding  Bacteria  which  is  now  work-
ing like  a  ferment  through  the  medical  world.  But  to
no  other  workers  in  this  field  are  we  more  indebted
than  to  Dr.  Sanderson  himself,  and  to  his  colleagues,
for  the  continued  and  successful  prosecution  of  re-
searches bearing  upon  the  pathology  of  contagion.

fIn  1870,'  writes  Mr.  John  Simon,  in  one  of  his
excellent  reports  to  the  Privy  Council,  '  I  had  the  honour
of  presenting  Dr.  Sanderson's  first  report  of  researches
made  in  this  matter.  At  that  time  general  conclusions
seemed  justified,  first,  that  the  characteristic-shaped
elements  which  the  microscope  had  shown  abounding  in
vaiious  infective  products  are  self-multiplying  organic
forms,  not  congeneric  with  the  animal  body  in  which
they  are  found,  but  apparently  of  the  lowest  vegetable
kind ;  and,  secondly,  that  such  living  organisms  are
probably  the  essence,  or  an  inseparable  part  of  the
1  British  Medical  Journal,  January  16,  1875.


PUTKEF  ACTI 0 N  AND  INFECTION.  93


•  essence,  of  all  contagia  of  disease.  .  .  .  This  view
of  the  matter  has  since  then  become  greatly  more  dis-
tinct, in  consequence  of  the  investigations  made  by  Dr.
Sanderson,  particularly  in  1871  and  1872,  with  refer-
ence to  the  common  septic  contagium  or  ferment.  For
in  that  ferment  there  seems  now  to  be  identified  a  force
which,  acting  disintegratively  upon  organic  matter,
whether  dead  or  living,  can,  on  the  one  hand,  initiate
putrefaction  of  what  is  dead,  and,  on  the  other  hand,
initiate  febrile  and  inflammatory  processes  in  what  is
living.'

At  a  Meeting  of  the  Pathological  Society,  held  on
the  6th  of  April,  1875,  the  germ-theory  of  disease  was
formally  introduced  as  a  subject  for  discussion,  the
debate  being  continued  with  great  ability  and  earnest-
ness at  subsequent  meetings.  The  Conference  was
attended  by  many  distinguished  medical  men,  some
of  whom  were  profoundly  influenced  by  the  arguments,
and  none  of  whom  disputed  the  facts  brought  forward
against  the  theory  on  that  occasion.  The  leader  of
the  debate,  and  the  most  prominent  speaker,  was  Dr.
Bastian,  to  whom  also  fell  the  task  of  replying  on  all
the  questions  raised.  The  coexistence  of  Bacteria  and
contagious  disease  was  admitted  ;  but,  instead  of  con-
sidering these  organisms  as  '  probably  the  essence,  or
an  inseparable  part  of  the  essence '  of  the  contagium,
Dr.  Bastian  contended  that  they  were  '  pathological
products,'  spontaneously  generated  in  the  body  after
it  had  been  rendered  diseased  by  the  real  contagium.
The  grouping  of  the  ultimate  particles  of  matter  to
form  living  organisms,  Dr.  Bastian  considers  to  be
an  operation  as  little  requiring  the  action  of  antece-
dent life  as  their  grouping  to  form  any  of  the  '  other
less  complex  chemical  compounds.'  Such  a  position
must,  of  course,  stand  or  fall  by  the  evidence  which  its


94  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

supporter  is  able  to  produce ;  and  accordingly  Dr.
Bastian  appeals  to  the  law  and  testimony  of  experiment
as  demonstrating  the  soundness  of  his  view.  He  seems
quite  aware  of  the  gravity  of  the  matter  in  hand ;  this
is  his  deliberate  and  almost  solemn  appeal : — '  With  the
view  of  settling  these  questions,  therefore,  we  may
carefully  prepare  an  infusion  from  some  animal  tissue,
be  it  muscle,  kidney,  or  liver ;  we  may  place  it  in  a
flask  whose  neck  is  drawn  out  and  narrowed  in  the  blow-
pipe-flame, we  may  boil  the  fluid,  seal  the  vessel  during
ebullition,  and,  keeping  it  in  a  warm  place,  may  await
the  result,  as  I  have  often  done.  After  a  variable  time
the  previously  heated  fluid  within  the  hermetically
sealed  flask  swarms  more  or  less  plentifully  with  Bacteria
and  allied  organisms — even  though  the  fluids  have  been
so  much  degraded  in  quality  by  exposure  to  the  tempera-
ture of  212°  Fahr.,  and  have  thereby,  in  all  probability,
been  rendered  far  less  prone  to  engender  independent
living  units  than  the  unheated  fluids  in  the  tissues
would  be.'  1

We  have  here,  to  use  the  words  of  Dr.  Bastian,  '  a
question  lying  at  the  root  of  the  pathology  of  the  most
important  and  most  fatal  class  of  diseases  to  which  the
human  race  is  liable.'  Let  us  now  examine  his  settle-
ment of  the  question,  as  described  by  himself  in  the
foregoing  extract.

§  22.  Experiments  with  Hermetically-sealed  Vessels.

Experiments  with  hermetically-sealed  tubes  were
begun  by  me  on  the  5th  of  October,  1875.  The  shape
of  the  tubes  after  sealing  is  represented  in  fig.  6.  Each
of  them  contained  about  an  ounce  of  liquid.  They

1  Transactions  of  the  Pathological  Society  of  London,  1875,
p.  272.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


95


were  boiled  for  only  three  minutes  in  an  oil-bath,  and
were  sealed,  during-  ebullition,  not  by  a  blowpipe,  but
by  the  far  more  effectual  spirit-lamp  flame.

Hay. — Four  tubes  were  charged  on  the  date
mentioned  with  a  strong  infusion,  four  with  a  weak
infusion.  All  eight  flasks  remain  to  the  present  hour
clear.

Turnip. — Two  kinds  of  turnip  were  tried  in  these
first  experiments.  Two  tubes  were  charged  with  a
strong  infusion,  and  two  with  ¥  6

a  weak  infusion  of  a  sound
hard  turnip  ;  while  two  other
pairs  of  tubes  were  filled  with
strong  and  weak  infusions  from
a  soft  woolly  turnip.  All  the
tubes  remain  transparent  to  the
present  time.  Two  or  three
days'  exposure  to  the  air  of  the
laboratory  sufficed  to  cloud  all
these  infusions  and  fill  them
with  life.

On  the  8th  of  October  twenty-one  tubes  were
charged  with  infusions  of  the  following  substances : —
Mackerel,  beef,  eel,  oyster,  oatmeal,  malt,  potato.  There
were  three  tubes  of  each  infusion.  All  of  them  remain
to  the  present  hour  unchanged.

I  had  not  previously  seen  a  more  beautiful  illustra-
tion of  the  dichroitic  action  which  produces  the  colours
of  the  sky  than  in  the  case  of  the  oyster-infusion.  With
reflected  light  it  presented  a  beautiful  cerulean  hue,
while  it  was  yellow  by  transmitted  light.  This  was
due  to  the  action  of  suspended  particles  which  defied
alike  the  power  of  the  microscope  and  of  ordinary  fil-
tration. At  right  angles  to  a  transmitted  beam  the
infusion  copiously  discharged  perfectly  polarized  light.


96


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  TEE  AIR.


Suspended  particles  in  the  potato-infusion  produced  a
somewhat  similar  effect,  but  it  was  by  no  means  so
fine  as  that  of  the  oyster-infusion.  By  ordinary  filtra-
tion it  was  not  possible  completely  to  rid  the  malt  and
oatmeal  infusions  of  suspended  matter ;  but  both  remain
exactly  as  they  were  when  the  flasks  containing  them
were  sealed.

These  experiments  had  been  made  before  the  volume
of  the  Transactions  of  the  Pathological  Society  con-
taining the  discussion  referred  to  above  came  into  my
hands.1  It  caused  me  to  turn  again  to  my  tubes,  seek-
ing further  evidence.  On  the  12th  of  November  thirty-
six  of  them  were  charged,  boiled,  and  hermetically
sealed  ;  on  the  13th  fifty-seven,  on  the  16th  thirty-one,
and  on  the  17th  six  tubes  were  similarly  treated.  The
entire  group  of  tubes,  therefore,  numbered  one  hundred
and  thirty.  I  tried  moreover  to  multiply  the  chances
of  spontaneous  generation  by  making  the  infusions  of
the  most  diverse  materials.  The  following  Table  gives
the  names  of  the  substances  operated  on,  the  number
of  tubes  sealed,  and  the  date  of  sealing : —


jrowl   6  tubes.  November  12th.

Mutton    ......  6  „  „

Wild  Duck      ....  6  „  „

Beef   6  „  „

Herring   6  „  „

Haddock   6  „  „

Mullet   6  „  November  13th.

Codfish   6  n  »

Pheasant                              •  @  »  "

Rabbit   6  »  »

Hare                                 •  6  »  »

Snipe   6     »  »


'  To  the  courtesy  of  Dr.  Bastian  I  am  indebted  for  a  separate
y  of  the  report  of  the  discussion  here  referred  to.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.  97


Partridge

6  tubes

November  13th.

Plover  .

5

tt

Liver

4

Heart      .       .       .       .       .  •

6

»

)>

Tongue  of  Sheep

6

November  16th.

Brains  of  Sheep

3

}>

>)

Sweetbread  ....

6

u

3)

Humour  of  Ox-eye  (undiluted)

2

»

>1

Lens  of  Ox-eye

3

JJ

Lungs  of  Sheep

5

}>

))

Tripe      .       .       .  .

6

»

6

»

November  17th.

The  tubes  were  immersed  in  groups  of  six  at  a
time  in  an  oil-bath,  boiled  for  three  minutes,  and  then
sealed.

More  than  one  hundred  of  these  flasks  were  sensibly
transparent  and  free  from  turbidity  at  the  outset,  and
they  remain  so  to  the  present  hour.  In  some  cases,
however,  it  was  not  possible  to  wholly  remove  turbidity
by  filtration.  I  have  already  referred  to  .the  opalescence
of  oyster-infusion,  which  has  invariably  appeared  when-
ever oyster  has  been  digested.  A  still  more  pronounced
case  of  the  kind  is  furnished  by  an  infusion  of  the
crystalline  lens  of  the  ox.  Nothing  hitherto  encountered
by  me  imitates  the  flush  of  the  true  opal  so  closely  as  this
infusion.  Filtration  through  one  hundred  layers  of  paper
was  quite  incompetent  to  remove  the  suspended  particles
to  which  this  opalescence  is  due.  Some  of  the  other
infusions  remained  turbid  after  filtration,  without  ex-
hibiting what  I  should  call  opalescence.  The  sheep's
lungs  furnish  an  example  of  this.  In  some  cases,
moreover,  where  repeated  filtering  failed  to  remove  the
suspended  particles,  a  few  weeks'  quiet  caused  them  to
sink,  and  leave  the  supernatant  liquid  clear.  It  may
be  worth  remarking  that  some  rabbit-infusions  have
shown  a  decided  opalescence,  while  others  have  been

H


98


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


perfectly  clear.  The  same  remark  applies  to  turnip-
infusions,  some  of  which  have  been  found  as  clear  as  dis-
tilled water,  while  in  general  a  slight  opalescence  is  not
to  be  got  rid  of  by  filtering.

These  later  experiments  are  quite  in  harmony  with
the  earlier  ones.  Not  a  single  flask  of  this  multitude
manifests  the  deportment  alleged  to  be  a  matter  of
common  observation.1  If  the  power  of  spontaneous
generation  be  a  scientific  verity,  surely  amid  opportu-
nities so  multiplied  and  various  it  must  have  exerted
itself.  That  the  infusions  employed  were  not  'de-
graded '  by  the  boiling  so  as  to  be  incapable  of  sup-
porting life,  was  proved  by  the  fact  that  exposed  tubes
containing  the  same  infusions,  treated  in  precisely  the
same  way,  resolved  themselves  with  the  usual  speed
into  Bacterial  swarms.


§  23.  Conditions  as  to  the  Temperature  and
Strength  of  Infusions.

In  connection  with  these  experiments,  I  have  sought,
to  the  best  of  my  ability,  to  meet  every  condition  and
requirement  laid  down  by  others  as  essential  to  success.
With  regard  to  warmth,  a  temperature  of  90°  was
generally  attainable  in  our  laboratory,  while  on  cer-
tain days  of  mild  weather  without,  and  in  favourable
positions  within,  the  temperature  to  which  the  infu-
sions were  subjected  reached  over  100°  Fahr.  As
Dr.  Bastian,  however,  had  laid  considerable  stress  on
warmth,  though  most  of  his  results  were  obtained
with  temperatures  from  15°  to  30°  lower  than  mine,2  I

>  This  group  of  flasks  was  submitted  to  the  inspection  of  the
Fellows  of  the  Royal  Society  on  the  13th  of  January,  1876.

*  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  vol.  xxi.  p.  130.  Also  '  Beginnings  of  Life,
vol.  i.  p.  354.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


99


thought  it  desirable  to  meet  this  new  requirement  also.
The  sealed  tubes,  which  had  proved  barren  in  the  Eoyal
Institution,  were  suspended  in  boxes  copiously  per-
forated, so  as  to  permit  of  the  free  circulation  of  warm
air,  and  placed  under  the  supervision  of  an  intelligent
assistant  in  the  Turkish  Bath  in  Jermyn  Street.  The
washing-room  of  the  establishment  was  found  to  be
particularly  suitable  for  our  purpose  ;  and  here,  accord-
ingly, the  boxes  were  suspended.  From  two  to  six  days
are  allowed  by  Dr.  Bastian  for  the  generation  of
organisms  in  hermetically-sealed  tubes.  Mine  remained
in  the  washing-room  for  nine  days.  Thermometers
placed  in  the  boxes,  and  read  off  twice  or  three  times  a
day,  showed  the  temperature  to  vary  from  a  minimum  of
101  °  to  a  maximum  of  1 12°  Fahr.  At  the  end  of  nine
days  the  infusions  were  as  clear  as  at  the  beginning.

They  were  then  removed  to  a  warmer  position ;  the
temperature  115°  having  been  mentioned  as  favour-
able to  spontaneous  generation.  For  fourteen  days  my
temperatures  hovered  about  this  point,  falling  once  as
low  as  106°,  reaching  116°  on  three  occasions,  118°  on
one,  and  119°  on  two.  The  result  was  quite  the  same  as
that  recorded  a  moment  ago.  The  higher  temperatures
proved  perfectly  incompetent  to  develop  life.1

Fifty-six  observations,  including  both  the  maximum
and  minimum  thermometers,  were  taken  while  the  tubes
occupied  their  first  position  in  the  washing-room,  and
seventy-four  while  they  occupied  the  second  position.
The  whole  record,  carefully  drawn  out,  is  before  me,  but
I  trust  the  statement  of  the  major  and  minor  limits  of
temperature  will  suffice.

Dr.  Bastian's  demand  for  these  high  temperatures  is,
as  already  remarked,  quite  recent.    Prior  to  my  com-

'  My  thanks  are  due  to  the  managers  of  the  bath  for  their
obliging  kindness  in  this  matter.

H  2


100        THE  ELOATING-MATTEK  OF  THE  AIR.

munication  to  the  Eoyal  Society  on  January  13,  he  had
successfully  worked  with  temperatures  lower  than  those
within  my  reach  in  Albemarle  Street.  There  I  followed
his  directions,  adhered  strictly  to  his  prescriptions ;  but,
taking  care  to  boil  and  seal  the  liquids  aright,  his  results
refused  to  appear  in  my  experiments.  On  learning  this
he  raised  an  objection  as  to  temperature,  and  made  a
new  demand.  With  this  I  have  complied ;  but  his  posi-
tion is  unimproved.

With  regard  to  the  question  of  concentration,  I  have
already  referred,  in  sections  3  and  16  of  this  memoir,
to  the  great  diversity  in  this  particular  presented  by
all  my  infusions,  through  their  slow  evaporation.
But  more  than  a  general  conformity  to  prescribed  con-
ditions was  observed  here  also.  The  strength  of  an
infusion  is  regarded  as  fixed  by  its  specific  gravity  ;
and  I  have  worked  with  infusions  of  precisely  the
same  specific  gravity  as  those  employed  by  Dr.  Bastian.
This  I  was  specially  careful  to  do  in  relation  to  the
experiments  described  and  vouched  for,  I  fear  incau-
tiously, by  Dr.  Burdon  Sanderson  in  vol.  vii.  p.  180  of
'  Nature.'  It  will  there  be  seen  that,  though  failure
attended  some  of  his  efforts,  Dr.  Bastian  did  satisfy
Dr.  Sanderson  that  in  boiled  and  hermetically-sealed
flasks  Bacteria  sometimes  appear  in  swarms.  With
purely  liquid  infusions  I  have  failed  to  reproduce  this
result.  Hay-  and  turnip-infusions,  of  accurately  the
same  character  and  strength  as  those  employed  on
the  occasion  referred  to,  were  prepared,  boiled  in  an
oil-bath,  carefully  sealed  up,  and  subjected  to  the
proper  temperatures.  In  multiplied  experiments  they
remained  uniformly  sterile.1

1  One  hundred  and  twenty  flasks,  hermetically  sealed,  contain-
ing animal  and  vegetable  infusions,  some  two,  some  three  years  old,
are  now  beside  me.    They  show  no  sign  of  Bacterial  life.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.  101


§  24.  Developmental  Power  of  Infusions  and  Solu-
tions :  Air-germs  contrasted  with  Water-germs.

Wishing  to  make  no  experiment,  whether  with  self-
cleansed,  filtered,  or  calcined  air,  or  with  infusions  with-
drawn from  air  by  the  air-pump,  or  contained  in
hermetically-sealed  vessels,  without  exposing  the  same
infusions  to  ordinary  air,  this  comparison  was  instituted
with  the  substances  mentioned  at  pages  96  and  97.
One  hundred  test-tubes,  an  inch  wide  and  3  inches
deep,  were  divided  into  groups,  each  group  being  filled
with  the  same  infusion.  The  groups  were  sufficiently
numerous  to  embrace  all  the  substances  mentioned  in
the  Table  referred  to.  Exposed  to  the  uncleansed  air,
they  were  attacked  with  different  degrees  of  rapidity
and  vigour;  but  in  a  few  days  all  of  them  without
exception  became  muddy  and  crowded  with  life.  On
the  whole,  the  hare-  and  pheasant-infusions  presented
the  greatest  contrast.  The  tubes  containing  the  former
were  far  gone  before  those  containing  the  latter  were
sensibly  invaded.  The  putrescibility  of  pheasant,  more-
over, was  exceeded  by  that  of  snipe,  partridge,  and
plover.  The  sheep's  heart  examined  was  also  slow  to
putrefy.  A  single  illustration  of  this  difference  of
developmental  power  may  be  given  here.

On  the  13th  of  November  thirty  tubes,  containing
infusions  of  partridge,  pheasant,  snipe,  hare,  sheep's
heart,  and  codfish,  five  tubes  being  devoted  to  each,  to-
gether with  four  tubes  of  plover,  three  of  mullet,  and
three  of  liver,  were  exposed  to  the  laboratory  air.  On
the  15th,  16th,  and  22nd  the  numbers  taken  possession
of  by  Bacteria  were  as  follows : —


102         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


15th.  16th

Partridge

.    0  3

Pheasant

.    0  1

Snipe  .

O  O

.    A  6

Hare  .

.    2  4

Heart  .

.    0  1

Codfish

.   2  4

Plover .

.    1  2

Mullet

.    1  2

Liver        ■  ,

.    1  3

They  had  doubtless  all  given  way  some  days  before
the  22nd,  but  I  had  not  taken  the  precaution  to  look  at
them.

Thus,  then,  the  first  two  days  produced  no  visible
change  in  the  pheasant-infusion,  while  in  two  of  the
hare-tubes  putrefaction  had  vigorously  set  in.  Three
days'  exposure  caused  only  one  of  the  pheasant-tubes  to
yield  ;  four  of  the  hare-infusion  had  yielded  in  the  same
time.  The  difference  between  them  was  also  illustrated
by  the  mould  upon  their  surfaces.  Some  days  after
their  exposure  four  of  the  five  pheasant-tubes  were
thickly  covered  with  Penicillium,  while  the  five  hare-
tubes,  with  one  exception,  which  could  hardly  be  con-
sidered such,  had  repelled  that  enemy,  maintaining  their
Bacteria  undisturbed.

Still  the  deportment  of  the  hare-infusion  may  have
been  due,  not  to  any  specific  difference  between  hare
and  pheasant,  but  to  the  circumstances  preceding  death.
The  researches  of  Dr.  Brown-Sequard  show  that  even  the
same  animal  tissue  exhibits,  under  different  circum-
stances, very  different  tendencies  to  putrefaction.  In
guinea-pigs  subjected  immediately  after  death  to  the
action  of  the  magneto-electric  current,  he  found  the
rapidity  of  putrefaction  to  correspond  with  the  violence
of  the  tetanization.    He  also  draws  attention  to  the


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


103


influence  of  muscular  exercise  on  cadaveric  rigidity  and
putrefaction,  showing  how  quickly  they  appear  in  <  over-
driven cattle,  and  in  animals  hunted  to  death.'    It  is
known,  indeed,  to  sportsmen  that  a  shot  hare  will  remain
soft  and  limp  for  a  day,  while  a  hunted  one  becomes
rigid  in  an  hour  or  two.    In  September,  1851,  two
sheep  which  had  been  overdriven  to  reach  a  fair  were
killed  by  the  section  of  the  carotid  arteries.   '  Putrefac-
tion,' says  Dr.  Brown-Sequard,  '  was  manifest  before  the
end  of  the  day,  or  in  less  than  eight  hours  after  death.' 1
The  deportment  of  the  hare  operated  upon  by  me  may
therefore  depend  upon  the  circumstance  of  its  being
brought  down  by  the  greyhound  instead  of  the  gun.  It
will  be  interesting  to  inquire  how  far  the  peculiarity  of
the  animal  tissue  is  transferred  to  the  infusion.    This  is
a  fit  subject  for  further  investigation.2

Such  observations  inculcate  caution  in  drawing  in-
ferences from  the  deportment  of  any  infusion  as  to  the
distribution  of  germs  in  the  air.  The  germs  may  be
demonstrably  present  while  the  infusion  may  not  favour
their  development.  As  to  the  quantity  and  quality  of  at-
mospheric germs,  the  hare  and  the  pheasant  might  lead
to  different  conclusions.  A  passing  reference  to  an  im-
portant practical  inference  may  be  fitly  introduced  here.
In  one  of  the  earliest  of  the  able  series  of  researches
with  which  he  has  enriched  medical  science,  Dr.  Burdon
Sanderson  exposed  to  the  air  'Pasteur's  solution,'  which  is
capable  of  vigorously  developing  and  nourishing  Bacteria

'  Croonian  Lecture,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  1862,  vol.  xi.  p.  210.

2  Five-and-twenty  flasks  containing  pheasant-infusion  were
compared  during  the  month  of  December  with  five-and-twenty
containing  infusion  of  hare.  Neither  in  the  rapidity  of  Bacterial
development,  nor  in  the  readiness  to  support  the  growth  of  Pcni-
cillium,  did  the  considerable  differences  between  hare  and  pheasant
first  observed  repeat  themselves.


THE  FLOATING-MATTEK  OF  THE  AIR.


when  they  are  communicated  to  it  by  inoculation;  he
also  permitted  air  to  bubble  through  the  liquid,  and  find-
ing no  development  in  either  case,  he  inferred  the  entire
absence  of  Bacteria  and  their  germs  from  the  air,  con-
sidering water  to  be  their  exclusive  habitation.  Other
distinguished  men  have  come  to  the  same  conclusion  ;
while  in  his  books  and  papers,  and  in  the  discussion  be-
fore the  Pathological  Society  already  referred  to,  Dr.
Bastianhas  forcibly  dwelt  upon  the  result  as  justifying
the  interpretation  which  he  has  affixed  to  his  experi-
ments.   If,  he  rightly  urges,  the  air  be  '  entirely  free  '
from  matter  which  could  produce  Bacteria,  then  their
appearance  in  boiled  infusions  exposed  to  the  air  must
be  due,  not  to  anything  contained  in  the  air,  but  to  the
inherent  power  of  the  infusions.    Spontaneous  genera-
tion is  undoubtedly  the  logical  outcome  of  the  position
that  '  the  germinal  matter  from  which  Bacteria  spring
does  not  exist  in  ordinary  air.'    The  experiments,  how-
ever, recorded  in  this  memoir  constitute  an  ocular
demonstration  of  the  respective  parts  played  by  the
infusion  and  the  air.    A  pinch  of  fungus-spores,  taken
between  the  fingers,  sown  in  a  suitable  medium,  and
producing  their  appropriate  crop,  could  not  more  clearly
indicate  the  origin  of  that  crop  than  experiments  with
the  luminous  beam  indicate  the  origin  of  our  harvests
of  Bacteria.    Dr.  Sanderson  is,  I  doubt  not,  now  well
aware  that  his  first  statement  was  founded  on  an  error  of
interpretation.   In  a  lecture  delivered  at  Owens  College,
Manchester,  and  published  in  the  'British  Medical
Journal'  for  January  16,  1875,  he  to  a  great  extent
qualifies  and  corrects  his  first  inference.    He  there  says
that  the  Bacteria  '  attach  themselves  without  doubt  to
these  minute  particles,  which,  scarcely  visible  in  ordinary
light,  appear  as  motes  in  the  sunbeam,  or  in  the  beam
of  an  electric  lamp.'    In  fact  the  experiments  on  which


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.  105

he  based  his  first  inference  owed  their  barrenness,  not  to
the  absence  of  Bacteria-germs  from  the  air,  but  to  the
inability  or,  rather,  slowness  of  his  mineral  solution  to
develop  them.

With  regard  to  the  part  played  by  the  visible  motes,
I  may  repeat  here  what  has  been  previously  stated,
namely,  that  while  the  coarser  particles  could  hardly
exist  in  their  midst  without  loading  themselves  to  some
extent  with  the  minute  germs  of  Bacteria,  there  is  no
reason  to  think  the  motes  indispensable  for  the  diffusion
of  the  germs.  Whether  they  are  attached  to  each  other
or  not,  the  dryness  and  the  moisture  of  the  air  are  shared
equally  by  both.  The  germs,  moreover,  float  in  the  air
more  readily  than  the  larger  particles  ;  and  they,  I  doubt
not,  when  properly  illuminated,  shed  forth  a  portion  of
that  changeless  light  to  which  reference  has  been  already
made,  and  the  perfect  polarization  of  which  declares  the
smallness  of  the  masses  which  scatter  it.

The  prevalence  of  the  germinal  matter  of  Bacteria
in  water  has  been  demonstrated  by  the  experiments  of
Dr.  Burdon  Sanderson.  But  the  germs  in  water,  it
ought  to  be  remembered,  are  in  a  very  different  condi-
tion, as  regards  readiness  for  development,  from  those  in
air.  In  water  they  are  already  wetted,  and  ready,  under
the  proper  conditions,  to  pass  rapidly  into  the  finished
organism.  In  air  they  are  more  or  less  desiccated,  and
require  a  period  of  preparation  more  or  less  long  to
bring  them  up  to  the  starting-point  of  the  water-germs.1

1  The  process  by  which  an  atmospheric  germ  is  wetted  would
■  be  an  interesting  subject  of  investigation.  A  dry  microscope
covering-glass  may  be  caused  to  float  on  water  for  a  year.  A
sewing-needle  may  be  similarly  kept  floating,  though  its  specific
gravity  is  nearly  eight  times  that  of  water.  Were  it  not  for  some
specific  relation  between  the  matter  of  the  germ  and  that  of  the
liquid  into  which  it  falls,  wetting  would  be  simply  impossible.
Antecedent  to  all  development  there  must  be  an  interchange  of


106         THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

The  rapidity  of  development  in  an  infusion  infected
by  either  a  speck  of  liquid  containing  Bacteria,  or  by  a
drop  of  distilled  water,  is  extraordinary.  On  the  4th  of
January  I  dipped  a  thread  of  glass  almost  as  fine  as  a  hair
into  a  cloudy  turnip-infusion,  and  introduced  the  tip
only  of  the  glass  fibre  into  a  large  test-tube  containing
an  infusion  of  red  mullet :  twelve  hours  subsequently
the  perfectly  pellucid  liquid  was  cloudy  throughout.  A
second  test-tube  containing  the  same  infusion  was  in-
fected with  a  single  drop  of  the  distilled  water  furnished
by  Messrs.  Hopkin  and  Williams ;  twelve  horns  also
sufficed  to  cloud  the  infusion  thus  treated.  Precisely
the  same  experiments  were  made  with  herring  infusion,
with  the  same  result.  In  the  winter  season  several  days'
exposure  to  warmed  air  are  needed  to  produce  this  effect
with  air-germs.

On  the  31st  of  December  a  strong  infusion  was  pre-
pared by  digesting  turnip  in  distilled  water  at  a  tem-
perature of  120°  Fahr.  It  was  divided  between  four  large
test-tubes,  in  one  of  which  the  infusion  was  left  unboiled,
in  another  boiled  for  five  minutes,  in  the  two  remain-
ing ones  boiled  and,  after  cooling,  infected  with  one
drop  of  beef-infusion  containing  Bacteria.  In  twenty-
four  hours  the  unboiled  tube  and  the  two  infected  ones
were  cloudy,  the  unboiled  tube  being  the  most  turbid  of
the  three.  The  infusion  in  the  unboiled  tube  was  pecu-
liarly limpid  after  digestion ;  for  turnip  it  was  quite
exceptional,  and  no  amount  of  searching  with  the  micro-
scope could  reveal  in  it  at  first  the  trace  of  a  living
Bacterium ;  still  germs  were  there  which,  suitably
nourished,  passed  in  a  single  day  into  Bacterial  swarms
without  number.    Five  days  failed  to  produce  an  effect

matter  between  the  germ  and  its  environment;  and  this  inter-
change must  obviously  depend  upon  the  character  of  the  encom-
passing liquid.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


approximately  equal  to  this  in  the  uninfected  boiled
tube,  which  was  exposed  to  the  common  laboratory  air.

There  cannot,  I  think,  be  a  doubt  that  the  germs  in
the  air  differ  widely  among  themselves  as  regards  pre-
paredness for  development.  Some  are  fresh,  others
old ;  some  are  dry,  others  moist.  Infected  by  such  germs,
the  same  infusion  would  require  different  lengths  of
time  to  develope  Bacterial  life.  And  this  remark,  I
doubt  not,  applies  to  the  different  degrees  of  rapidity
with  which  epidemic  disease  affects  different  people.
In  some  the  hatching-period,  if  I  may  call  it  such,  is
long,  in  some  short,  the  differences  depending  upon  the
different  degrees  of  preparedness  of  the  contagium.1

§  25.  Diffusion  of  Germs  in  the  Air.

During  the  earlier  observations  recorded  in  this
essay,  and  others  not  here  mentioned,  about  100  ex-
posed tubes  or  flasks  had  been  distributed  irregularly  in
the  rooms  where  the  inquiry  is  conducted.  They  ex-
panded to  nearly  1000  in  the  end:  not  one  of  them
escaped  infection.  A  few  days  always  sufficed  to  cloud
the  exposed  infusions,  and  fill  them  with  Bacterial  life.
I  placed  tubes  at  various  points  in  the  Eoyal  Institu-
tion— on  the  roof  of  the  house  outside,  in  my  bedroom,
in  an  upper  kitchen,  in  my  study,  in  the  upper  and
lower  libraries,  in  the  theatre,  model-room,  reading-room,
managers'  room,  and  in  the  kitchen  at  the  bottom  of
the  house  below  the  level  of  Albemarle  Street.  All
were  smitten  with  putrefaction,  and  with  its  invariable

1  The  medical  student  of  the  future  will  probably  connect  these
remarks  with  the  following  statement  of  Dr.  Murchison :— '  In
that  protean  disease  typhoid  fever,  I  have  repeatedly  had  occasion
to  observe  a  remarkable  similarity  in  the  course,  and  even  in  the
complications,  according  to  the  source  of  the  poison.' — Trans.  Path.
Soc.  vol.  xxvi.  p.  315.


108         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


associate,  Bacteria.  In  the  rooms  without  fires  the
action  was  slower  than  in  the  warmer  rooms ;  but  all
the  infusions  gave  way  in  the  end.

In  view  of  the  statements  which  had  been  made
regarding  the  scantiness  of  Bacteria-germs  in  the  air,
observations  outside  of  London  would,  I  thought,  be
interesting.  Accordingly,  on  the  27th  of  October,  a
tube  containing  an  infusion  of  beef  was  placed  in  the
hands  of  Mr.  Darwin,  who  had  the  kindness  to  set  it  in
his  study  at  Down  and  observe  its  changes.  In  three
days  it  became  cloudy  and  peopled  with  Bacteria.  The
same  result  was  obtained  in  the  open  air.  Mr.
Francis  Darwin  was  good  enough  to  expose  an  infusion
for  me  in  his  father's  orchard :  the  weather  was  cold,
and  the  progress,  therefore,  slow ;  but  the  tube  which
had  been  exposed  on  the  2nd  of  November  was  cloudy
and  full  of  Bacteria  on  the  9th.  In  Sir  John  Lubbock's
study  a  similar  result  was  obtained.  From  Sherwood,
near  Tunbridge  Wells,  infusions  of  fowl  and  wild  duck
were  returned  to  me  by  Mr.  Siemens  thickly  turbid
and  crowded  with  Bacteria.  From  Pembroke  Lodge,
Eichmond  Park,  Mr.  Eussell  returned  tubes  of  turnip,
beef,  and  mutton  swarming  with  life.  An  infusion
of  beef  exposed  at  Heathfield  Park,  Sussex,  for  a
week  was  returned  to  me  by  Miss  Hamilton  muddy
and  filled  with  Bacteria.  From  Greenwich  Hospita]
Mr.  Hirst  sent  me  tubes  of  beef-,  mutton-,  and  turnip-
infusion  filled  with  vigorous  Bacteria.  Dr.  Hooker
was  good  enough  to  take  charge  of  three  sets  of  tubes
at  Kew,  each  set  embracing  beef,  mutton,  and  turnip.
One  set  was  placed  in  the  conservatory,  with  a  tem-
perature of  45°  to  50°;  one  in  his  own  study,  with  a
temperature  of  54°  to  60°;  a  third  set  was  placed  in
the  orchid-house  (the  hottest  in  the  gardens),  with  a
temperature  of  62°  to  75°.


PTJTKEFACTION  AND  INFECTION.  109

The  tubes  were  exposed  on  the  4th  of  December,  all
of  them  being  then  clear.  In  the  orchid-house  the
turnip  became  cloudy  on  the  7th,  the  beef  and  mutton
on  the  8th,  after  which  the  opacity  rapidly  increased.
In  the  study  all  remained  clear  until  the  9th,  when  the
turnip  began  to  cloud.  On  the  1 1th  the  beef  was  still
clear,  while  the  mutton  had  given  way.  On  the  1 3th
all  of  them  had  yielded.  In  the  conservatory  the  turnip
began  to  cloud  on  the  10th;  the  others  followed  in
the  same  order  as  in  the  other  cases.

The  influence  of  temperature  seems  well  shown
by  these  observations.  Three  days  sufficed  to  cloud  the
turnip  in  the  orchid-house,  five  days  in  the  study,  and
six  days  in  the  conservatory.  The  mutton  in  the  study
gathered  over  it  a  thick  blanket  of  Penicillium.  On
the  1 3th  it  had  assumed  a  light  brown  colour,  '  as  if  by
a  faint  admixture  of  clay;'  but  the  infusion  became
transparent.  The  'clay'  here  was  the  slime  of  dormant
or  dead  Bacteria,  the  cause  of  their  quiescence  being
the  blanket  of  Penicillium.  I  found  no  active  life  in
this  tube,  while  all  the  others  swarmed  with  Bacteria.
From  the  Crystal  Palace  at  Sydenham  Mr.  Price  sent
me  tubes  of  mutton,  beef,  and  turnip  charged  with
Bacteria.  The  temperature  was  low  at  night,  the
development  of  life  being  thereby  considerably  retarded.

Thus,  wherever  it  has  been  tested,  the  atmosphere
has  been  found  charged  with  the  germs  of  Bacteria.

I  wished,  however,  to  obtain  clearer  and  more  defi-
nite insight  as  to  the  diffusion  of  atmospheric  germs.
Supposing  a  large  shallow  tray  to  be  filled  with  a  suitable
organic  infusion  and  exposed  to  the  air.  Into  it  the
germs  would  drop ;  and  could  the  resulting  organisms
be  confined  to  the  locality  where  the  germs  fell,  we
should  have  the  floating  life  of  the  atmosphere  mapped,


110        THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


so  to  speak,  in  the  infusion.  But  in  such  a  tray  the
organisms  would  intermingle  and  thus  mar  the  revela-
tion of  their  distribution.  Valuable  information  I
thought  might  be  gained  by  breaking  up  the  infusion
into  isolated  conterminous  patches,  and  exposing  them
to  the  air.

A  square  wooden  tray  was  accordingly  pierced  with
one  hundred  circular  apertures;  into  each  of  which
was  dropped  a  test-tube  3  inches  long  and  1  inch  wide,
with  its  rim  resting  in  each  case  upon  the  rim  of  the
aperture.  There  were  ten  rows  of  tubes,  with  ten  tubes
in  each  row.  On  the  23rd  of  October,  1875,  thirty  of
these  tubes  were  filled  with  an  infusion  of  hay,  thirty-
five  with  an  infusion  of  turnip,  and  thirty-five  with  an
infusion  of  beef.  The  tubes  with  their  infusions  had
been  previously  boiled  ten  at  a  time  in  an  oil-bath.

One  hundred  circles  were  marked  upon  paper  so  as
to  form  a  plan  of  the  tray,  and  every  day  the  state  of
each  tube  was  registered  upon  the  corresponding  circle.
Seven  such  maps  or  records  were  executed.

I  will  use  the  term  '  cloudy '  to  denote  the  early
stage  of  turbidity,  distinct  but  not  strong.  The  term
'  muddy '  will  be  used  to  denote  thick  turbidity.

§  26.  Tray  of  one  hundred  Tubes.

On  the  25th  of  October  one  or  two  of  the  tubes
exposed  on  the  23rd  showed  signs  of  yielding;  but  the
progress  of  putrefaction  was  first  registered  on  the
26th.  Fig,  7,  embracing  the  first  record,  is  annexed ;
it  may  be  thus  described.

Hay.— Of  the  thirty  specimens  exposed,  one  had
become  'muddy' — the  seventh  in  the  middle  row,
reckoning  from  the  side  of  the  tray  nearest  a  stove.
Six  tubes  remained  perfectly  clear  between  this  muddy
one  and  the  stove,  proving  that  differences  of  warmth


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


Ill


may  be  overridden  by  other  causes.  Every  one  of  the
other  tubes  containing  the  hay-infusion  showed  spots  of
mould  upon  the  clear  liquid.

Turnip. — Four  of  the  thirty-five  tubes  were  very
muddy,  two  of  them  being  in  the  row  next  the  stove,
one  four  rows  distant,  and  the  remaining  one  nine  rows
away.  Besides  these,  seven  tubes  had  become  clouded.
There  was  no  mould  on  any  of  the  tubes.

Beef.— One  tube  of  the  thirty-five  was  quite  muddy,
in  the  seventh  row  from  the  stove.  There  were  three
cloudy  tubes,  while  seven  of  them  bore  spots  of  mould.

As  a  general  rule  organic  infusions  exposed  to  the
air  during  the  autumn  remained  for  two  days  or  more
perfectly  clear.  Doubtless  from  the  first  germs  fell
into  them,  but  the  germs  required  time  to  become  or-
ganisms. This  period  of  clearness  may  be  called  the
'  period  of  latency ; '  and,  indeed,  it  exactly  corresponds
with  what  is  understood  by  this  term  in  medicine.
Towards  the  end  of  the  period  of  latency  the  fall  into  a
state  of  disease,  if  I  may  use  the  term,  is  comparatively
sudden;  the  infusion  passing  from  perfect  clearness  to
cloudiness  more  or  less  dense  in  a  few  hours.

Thus  the  tube  placed  in  Mr.  Darwin's  possession
was  clear  at  8.33  a.m.  on  the  19th  of  October,  and
cloudy  at  4.30  p.m.  Seven  hours,  moreover,  after  the
first  record  of  our  tray  of  tubes,  a  marked  change  had
occurred.  For  the  purpose  of  comparison  the  second
record,  fig.  8,  is  placed  beside  the  first.  The  change
may  be  thus  described : — Instead  of  one,  eight  of  the
tubes  containing  hay-infusion  had  fallen  into  uniform
muddiness.  Nineteen  of  them  had  produced  Bacterial
slime,  which  had  fallen  to  the  bottom,  every  tube  con-
taining the  slime  being  covered  by  mould.  Three  tubes
only  remained  clear,  but  with  mould  upon  their  sur-
faces. The  muddy  turnip-tubes  had  increased  from  four
to  ten ;  seven  tubes  were  clouded,  while  eighteen  of  them


112         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


remained  clear,  with  here  and  there  a  speck  of  mould  on
the  surface.  Of  the  beef,  six  were  cloudy  and  one  thickly
muddy,  while  spots  of  mould  had  formed  on  the  majority
of  the  remaining  tubes.  Fifteen  hours  subsequent  to  this
observation,  viz.  on  the  morning  of  the  27th  of  October,
all  the  tubes  containing  hay-infusion  were  smitten,
though  in  different  degrees,  some  of  them  being  much

Pig.  7.   26th  Oct.,  noon.

o#ooboo«oo
ooo#oooooo

°©ooooo#ooo

OOQO#IOO@Q0
iOOOOOO«00#

^oooo#oo###

0#QOO#QO##

0000(D®0(3@€)

iG©®«0Q®0@®

O   ©   •  •

Clear.  Mould.         Cloudy.  Muddy.

more  turbid  than  others.  Of  the  turnip-tubes,  three
only  remained  unsmitten,  and  two  of  these  had  mould
upon  their  surfaces.  Only  one  of  the  thirty-five  beef-
infusions  remained  intact.  A  change  of  occupancy,
moreover,  had  occurred  in  the  tube  which  first  gave
way.  Its  mucldiness  remained  grey  for  a  day  and  a
half,  then  it  changed  to  bright  yellow-green,  and


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


113


maintained  this  colour  to  the  end.  On  the  evening  of
the  27th  every  tube  of  the  hundred  was  smitten,  the
majority  with  uniform  turbidity,  some,  however,  with
mould  above  and  slime  below,  the  intermediate  liquid
being  Clear.  The  whole  process  bore  a  striking  resem-
blance to  the  propagation  of  a  plague  among  a  popula-
tion,  the  attacks  being  successive  and  of  different

Tig.  8.  26th  Oct.,  7  p.m.

o#o<oo'©©#@©
ooitooooois

0O#0O0#OOO"
O@OO>IOOQ0Q

oo©oo«##~  ~

OOO#0O##
0*00)0*00


OOO0OOOO
0#©##OQ

©ooooooo


Mould.


Muddy.


Clomly.


©  o


Slime.  Slime  aud  Mould.  Clear.

degrees  of  virulence.  I  annex  copies  of  the  fourth  and
seventh  maps  (figs.  9,  10)  with  their  respective  dates.

On  the  31st  of  October  I  finally  inspected  the  tray
of  tubes.  All  those  containing  the  hay-infusion  were
turbid,  some  thicker  and  much  more  deeply  coloured


114         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


than  others.  They  had  been  all  at  first  alike  in  colour.
Out  of  the  thirty  tubes  four  only  were  free  from  mould.
Three  of  these  were  adjacent  to  each  other,  the  fourth
at  a  distant  portion  of  the  tray.

The  Penicillium  was  exquisitely  beautiful.  Its
prevalent  form  was  a  circular  patch  made  up  of  alternate
zones  of  light  and  deep  green.    In  some  cases  the  liquid

Fig.  9.   27th  Oct.,  6.30  p.m.


o®oo'#o©


m©Q#©#Q»»»0

QOQQWQOOOO

QfltiQtitf

#©#•#••••©

iOiOifiiOf


Muddy.  Cloudy.  Green.


Css)      CsD  CZ^

Slime.  Slime  and  mould.  Clear.

was  covered  by  a  single  large  patch ;  in  others  there
were  three  or  four  patches,  each  made  up  of  its  dif-
ferently coloured  zones.  Eeticulated  patterns  also
occurred.  Three  kinds  of  Penicillium  seemed  strug-
gling for  existence,  namely : — that  just  described  ;  a
second  kind,  of  the  same  consistency  and  colour,  but


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


115


forming  little  rounded  heaps  instead  of  circles  ;  thirdly,
a  woolly,  voluminous,  white  mould,  in  the  middle  of
which  a  zoned  circle  of  the  other  mould  sometimes
formed  a  little  islet.

All  the  tubes  containing  the  turnip-infusion  were
also  turbid  on  the  31st.  Nine  of  them  were  free  from
mould.    This,  where  it  occurred,  exactly  resembled


Fig.  10.   29th  Oct.,  10.30  a.m.


Muddy.  Green.  Muddiness

subsided  as  slime.


small  cocoons  in  shape.  The  beef-tubes  were  also  all
turbid  on  the  31st,  and  seventeen  of  them  were  free
from  mould.  The  mould  upon  the  beef,  moreover,  was
much  less  luxuriant  than  that  on  the  hay-  and  turnip-
infusions.  The  mould-developing  power  is  obviously
greatest  in  the  hay-,  less  in  the  turnip-,  and  least  of  all
in  the  beef-infusion.    In  every  case  where  the  mould

i  2  '


116         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


was  thick  and  coherent  the  Bacteria  died,  or  became
dormant,  and  fell  to  the  bottom  as  a  sediment.  The
growth  of  mould  and  its  effect  on  the  Bacteria  are  very-
capricious.    The  turnip-infusion,  after  developing  in
the  first  instance  its  myriadfold  Bacterial  life,  fre-
quently contracts  mould,  which  stifles  the  Bacteria  and
clears  the  liquid  all  the  way  between  the  sediment  and
the  scum.    Of  two  tubes  placed  beside  each  other,  one
will  be  taken  possession  of  by  Bacteria,  which  success-
fully fight  the  mould  and  keep  the  surface  perfectly
clean ;  while  another  will  allow  the  mould  a  footing,  the
apparent  destruction  of  the  Bacteria  being  the  con-
sequence.   This  I  have  proved  to  be  the  case  with  all
infusions,  fish,  flesb,  fowl,  and  vegetable.    At  the  pre-
sent moment,  for  example,  of  three  tubes  containing  an
infusion  of  sole,  placed  close  together  in  a  row,  the  two
outside  ones  are  covered  by  a  thick  tough  blanket  of
mould,  while  the  central  one  has  not  a  single  speck
upon  its  surface.    The  Bacteria  which  manufacture  a
green  pigment  appear  to  be  uniformly  victorious  in
their  fight  with  the  Penicillium.

These  observations  enable  us,  I  think,  to  draw  some
interesting  conclusions.    From  the  irregular  manner  in
which  the  tubes  are  attacked  we  may  infer  that,  as
regards  quantity,  the  distribution  of  the  germs  in  the
air  is  not  uniform.    A  single  tube  will  sometimes  be  a
day  or  more  in  advance  of  its  neighbours.    The  singling
out,  moreover,  of  one  tube  of  the  hundred  by  the  par-
ticular Bacteria  that  develop  a  green  pigment,  and
other  cases  just  adverted  to,  shows  that,  as  regards  qual-
ity, the  distribution  is  not  uniform.    This  has  been
further  illustrated  by  the  following  observations :— Of
five-and-twenty  tubes  of  different  animal  infusions  ex-
posed in  groups  of  five,  in  the  middle  of  November,  and


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.  117

all  swarming  with  Bacterial  life,  five  were  green.  They
were  distributed  as  follows :— Beef  2,  herring  1,  had-
dock 1,  fowl  1,  wild  duck  0.    The  same  absence  of
uniformity  was  manifested  in  the  struggle  for  existence
between  the  Bacteria  and  the  Penicillium.    In  some
tubes  the  former  were  triumphant;  in  other  tubes  of
the  same  infusion  the  latter  was  triumphant.    It  would
also  seem  that  a  want  of  uniformity  as  regards  vital
vigour  prevailed.    With  the  self-same  infusion  the
motions  of  the  Bacteria  in  some  tubes  were  exceedingly
languid ;  while  in  other  tubes  the  motions  resembled
a  rain  of  projectiles,  being  so  rapid  and  violent  as  to  be
followed  with  difficulty  by  the  eye.    Eeflecting  on  the
whole  of  this,  I  conclude  that  the  germs  float  through
the  atmosphere  in  groups  or  clouds,  and  that  now  and
then  a  cloud  specifically  different  from  the  prevalent  ones
is  wafted  through  the  air.    The  touching  of  a  nutritive
■  fluid  by  a  Bacterial  cloud  would  naturally  have  a  dif-
ferent effect  from  the  touching  of  it  by  the  sterile  air
between  two  clouds.    But,  as  in  the  case  of  a  mottled
sky,  the  various  portions  of  the  landscape  are  succes-
sively visited  by  shade,  so,  in  the  long  run,  are  the  various
tubes  of  our  tray  touched  by  the  Bacterial  clouds,  the
final  fertilization  or  infection  of  them  all  being  the
consequence.1

1  In  hospital  practice  the  opening  of  a  wound  during  the  pass-
age of  a  Bacterial  cloud  would  have  an  effect  very  different  from
the  opening  of  it  in  the  interspace  between  two  clouds.  Certain
caprices  in  the  behaviour  of  dressed  wounds  may  possibly  be  ac-
counted for  in  this  way.

Under  the  heading  '  Nothing  New  under  the  Sun,'  Professor
Huxley  has  lately  sent  me  the  following  remarkable  extract  :—
«  Uebrigens  kann  man  sich  die  in  der  Atmosphare  schwimmenden
Thierchen  wie  Wolken  denken,  mit  denen  ganz  leere  Luf  tmassen,
ja  ganze  Tage  vollig  reinen  Luftverhiiltnisse  wechseln.'  (Ehren-
berg,  '  Infusionsthierchen,'  1838,  p.  525.)  The  coincidence  of
phraseology  is  surprising,  for  I  knew  nothing  of  Ehrenberg's  con-
ception.   My  <  clouds,'  however,  are  but  small  miniatures  of  his.


118


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


The  tray  of  tubes  proved  so  helpful  in  enabling  me
to  realize  mentally  the  distribution  of  germs  in  the  air,
that  on  the  9th  of  November,  1875,  I  exposed  a  second
tray  containing  one  hundred  tubes  filled  with  an  infusion
of  mutton.  On  the  morning  of  the  11th  six  of  the  ten
nearest  the  stove  had  given  way  to  putrefaction ;  three
of  the  row  most  distant  from  the  stove  had  yielded,
while  here  and  there  over  the  tray  particular  tubes  were
singled  out  and  smitten  by  the  infection.  Of  the  whole
tray  of  one  hundred  tubes,  twenty-seven  were  either  •
muddy  or  cloudy  on  the  11th.  Thus,  doubtless,  in
an  infective  atmosphere,  are  individuals  successively
struck  down.  On  the  12th  all  the  tubes  had  given
way,  but  the  differences  in  their  contents  were  extraor-
dinary. All  of  them  contained  Bacteria,  some  few,
others  in  swarms.  In  some  tubes  they  were  slow  and
sickly  in  their  motions,  in  some  apparently  dead,  while
in  others  they  darted  about  with  rampant  vigour.  These
differences  are  to  be  referred  to  differences  in  the  ger-
minal matter,  for  the  same  infusion  was  presented
everywhere  to  the  air.  Here  also  I  imagine  we  have  a
picture  of  what  occurs  during  an  epidemic,  the  difference
in  number  and  energy  of  the  Bacterial  swarms  resem-
bling the  varying  intensity  of  the  disease.  It  becomes
obvious  from  these  experiments  that  of  two  individuals
of  the  same  population  exposed  to  a  contagious  atmo-
sphere, the  one  may  be  severely,  the  other  lightly
attacked,  though,  as  regards  susceptibility,  the  two
individuals  may  be  as  identical  as  two  samples  of  one
and  the  same  mutton-infusion.  What  I  have  already
said  regarding  tbe  'preparedness'  of  contagium  has  its
application  here.

The  parallelism  of  these  actions  with  the  progress
of  infectious  disease  may  be  traced  still  further.  The
'  Times,'  for  example,  of  January  ]  7,  1876,  contained  a
letter  on  typhoid  fever,  signed  '  M.D..'  in  which  occurs


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.  119

the  following  remarkable  statement :— <  In  one  part  of  it
[Edinburgh],  congregated  together  and  inhabited  by  the
lowest  of  the  population,  there  are,  according  to  the
Corporation  return  for  1874,  no  less  than  14,319  houses
6r  dwellings— many  under  one  roof,  on  the  "flat"
system— in  which  there  are  no  house  connexions  what-
ever with  the  street-sewers,  and,  consequently,  no  water-
closets.  To  this  clay,  therefore,  all  the  excrementitious
and  other  refuse  of  the  inhabitants  is  collected  in  pails
or  pans,  and  remains  in  their  midst,  generally  in  a  par-
titioned-off  corner  of  the  living-room,  until  the  next
day,  when  it  is  taken  down  to  the  streets  and  emptied
into  the  Corporation  carts.  Drunken  and  vicious  though
the  population  be,  herded  together  like  sheep,  and  with
the  filth  collected  and  kept  for  24  hours  in  their  very
midst,  it  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  typhoid  fever  and
diphtheria  are  simply  unknown  in  these  wretched
hovels.'

The  analogy  of  this  result  with  the  behaviour  of  our
infusions  is  perfect.    On  the  30th  of  last  November,  for
example,  a  quantity  of  animal  -refuse,  embracing  beef,
fish,  rabbit,  hare,  was  placed  in  two  large  test-tubes
opening  into  a  protecting-ch amber  containing  six  tubes.
On  December  13,  when  the  refuse  was  in  a  state  of
noisome  putrefaction,  infusions  of  whiting,  turnip,  beef,
and  mutton  Were  placed  in  the  other  four  tribes.  They
were  then  boiled  and  abandoned  to  the  action  of  the  foul
«  sewer-gas '  emitted  by  their  two  putrid  companions.
On  Christmas-day,  187  5,these  four  infusions  were  limpid.
The  end  of  the  pipette  was  then  dipped  into  one  of  the
putrid  tubes,  and  a  quantity  of  matter,  comparable  in
smallness  to  the  pock-lymph  held  on  the  point  of  a
lancet,  was  transferred  to  the  turnip.    Its  clearness  was
not  sensibly  affected  at  the  time ;  but  on  the  26th  it
was  turbid  throughout.    On  the  27th  a  speck  from  the
infected  turnip  was  transferred  to  the  whiting  ;  on  the


120        THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

28th  disease  had  taken  entire  possession  of  the  whiting.
To  the  present  hour  the  beef-  and  mutton-tubes  remain
as  limpid  as  distilled  water.  Just  as  in  the  case  of  the
living  men  and  women  in  Edinburgh,  no  amount  of
fetid  gas  had  the  power  of  propagating  the  plague,  as
long'  as  the  organisms  which  constitute  the  true  con-
tagium  did  not  gain  access  to  the  infusions.

In  the  foregoing  observations  the  tubes  were  arranged
in  the  same  horizontal  plane ;  but  I  also  sought  to  ob-
tain some  notion  of  the  vertical  distribution  of  the
germs  in  the  air  of  the  room.  Two  trays,  each  contain-
ing 100  tubes,  were  supported  the  one  above  the  other
in  the  same  frame.  The  upper  tray  had  all  the  air  be-'
tweenit  and  the  ceiling,  a  height  of  about  12  feet,  from
which  the  germs  might  descend  upon  it ;  the  lower  tray
was  shaded  by  the  upper,  a  space  of  only  6  inches  exist-
ing between  them.  If  the  number  of  germs  deposited
in  the  tubes  were  determined  by  the  air-space  above,
the  upper  tray  would  be  the  one  most  rapidly  and
thoroughly  taken  possession  of.  The  reverse  was  the
case.  As  regards  the  development  of  Bacterial  life,  the
lower  tray  was  from  first  to  last  in  advance  of  its  neigh-
bour. It  is  not  air-space,  then,  so  much  as  stillness,
that  determines  the  deposition  of  the  germs.  The  air
between  the  two  trays  being  less  disturbed  than  the
general  air  of  the  room,  the  germs  were  less  wafted
about,  and  therefore  sank  in  greater  numbers  into  the
tubes  of  the  lower  tray.  We  have  here  data  which  will
enable  us  to  form  a  rough  notion  of  the  lower  limit  of
the  number  of  germs  contained  in  the  room  where  the
experiments  were  made.

The  floor  of  the  room  measured  20  feet  by  15  feet ;
its  area  was  therefore  43,200  square  inches,  and  every
square  inch  would  afford  room  for  the  section  of  one  of
our  test-tubes.    The  height  of  the  room  is  180  inches;


PUTKEFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


121


hence  30  layers  of  tubes  6  inches  apart  might  be  placed
one  above  the  other  between  the  floor  and  ceiling.
This  would  make  1,296,000  tubes.  If  only  a  single
germ  a  day  fell  into  each  tube,  this  would  be  the  number
of  the  germs.  If  the  number  deposited  were  one  an
hour,  we  should  have  thirty  millions  a  day  sown  in  the
tubes.  Probably  the  average  time  necessary  for  infec-
tion is  very  much  less  than  an  hour.  At  all  events,
30,000,000  of  germs  daily  would  be  an  exceedingly
moderate  estimate  of  the  number  falling  into  our  thirty
layers  of  tubes.  This,  moreover,  would  only  be  a  frac-
tion—probably a  small  fraction— of  the  germs  really
present  in  the  air.  In  his  Presidential  Address  to  the
British  Association  at  Liverpool,  Professor  Huxley  ven-
tured the  statement  that  myriads  of  germs  are  floating
in  our  atmosphere.  Certain  experimenters  have  rashly
ridiculed  this  statement.  In  view  of  the  foregoing
calculation  it,  however,  expresses  the  soberest  fact.
Indeed,  taking  the  word  myriad  in  its  literal  sense  of
ten  thousand,  it  would  be  simple  bathos  to  apply  it  to
the  multitudinous  germs  of  our  air.

§  27.  Some  Experiments  of  Pasteur  and  their  Rela-
tion to  Bacterial  Clouds.

Quite  recently  I  had  occasion  to  refresh  my  memory
of  Pasteur's  paper  published  in  the  £  Annales  de  Chimie '
for  1862.  The  pleasure  I  experienced  on  first  reading
it  was  revived  by  its  reperusal.  Clearness,  strength,  and
caution,  with  consummate  experimental  skill  for  their
minister,  were  rarely  more  strikingly  displayed  than  in
this  imperishable  essay.  Hence  it  is  that  during  recent
discussions,  in  which  this  and  other  labours  of  the
highest  rank  met  with  such  scant  respect,  those  in
England  most  competent  to  judge  of  the  value  of  scien-


122         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


tific  work  never  lost  faith  in  the  substantial  accuracy  of
Pasteur.  One  striking  example  of  his  penetration  has
an  immediate  bearing  on  the  conclusion  regarding
Bacterial  clouds,  independently  drawn  by  me  from  the
deportment  of  the  tray  of  one  hundred  tubes.  On  the
28th  of  May,  1860,  Pasteur  opened,  on  an  uncovered
terrace  a  few  metres  above  the  ground,  four  flasks  con-
taining the  water  of  yeast.  Nothing  appeared  in  any
of  them  until  the  5th  of  June,  when  a  small  tuft  of
mycelium  was  observed  in  one  of  them.  On  the  6th  a
second  tuft  appeared  in  another  flask  ;  the  two  remaining
flasks  continued  intact  and  without  organisms.  On  the
20th  of  July  he  opened,  in  his  own  laboratory,  six  flasks
containing  water  of  yeast.  Four  of  them  remained  per-
fectly intact,  while  two  of  them  became  promptly  charged
with  organisms.  From  these  observations  Pasteur  in-
ferred the  non-continuity  of  the  cause  to  which  so-called
spontaneous  generation  is  due.  This  inference  is  quite
in  accord  with  the  notion  of  Bacterial  clouds  suggested
by  my  observations.  Pasteur,  in  fact,  sometimes  opened
his  flask  in  the  midst  of  a  Bacterial  cloud  and  obtained
life,  sometimes  in  the  interspace  between  two  clouds,
and  obtained  no  life.

Not  with  a  view  of  repeating  this  observation,  which
I  had  forgotten,  but  for  another  reason,  I  opened  on
the  6th  of  January  last  a  number  of  hermetically-sealed
tubes  in  one  and  the  same  room  of  the  Royal  Institu-
tion. The  names  of  the  infusions  contained  in  the
tubes,  the  date  of  sealing  them  up,  their  condition  be-
fore opening  on  the  6th,  and  their  appearance  six  days
subsequently  are  given  in  the  accompanying  table.
I  chose  for  these  observations  tubes  which  contained  a
little  liquid  in  their  drawn-out  portions.  In  every  case
the  motion  of  this  liquid,  when  the  tube  was  broken,
indicated  a  violent  inrush  of  air.


PUTKEFACTION  AND


INFECTION.


123


Infusion.


Grouse
Sole  .

Turnip  No.  1

Turnip  No.  2
Hay  .

Wild  Duck
Mutton
Fowl
Beef  .

Haddock  .
Sweetbread

Rabbit
Heart

Pheasant
Mullet
Hare .
Snipe
Partridge
Plover

Codfish
Kidney

Salmon
"Whiting
Turnip
Hay,  4  drops  of  caustic

potash
Hay,  2  drops  of  caustic

potash
Hay,  5  drops  of  caustic

potash
Hay,  6  drops  of  caustic

potash
Liver
Hay  .

Hay  ....
Turnip


Date  of
sealing.


Appearance,
Jan.  6.


Nov.  27th
„  .17th
Oct.  5th


a  u
Nov.  12th


n
ii
ii


n
n
n


n  n
„  16th


13th


)>

11
11
11
11
11


11
11
11
11
11
11


!>  »

Jan.  5th


Dec.  13th

V  11

„  29th
Nov.  22nd


Nov.  30th


11

18th

ii

ii

)1

ii

ii

Clear


ii

i<

ii

ii
ii
»>

ii

ii
ii

a
i>

a
a
a
a
ii
a

a
ii

ii
a
a


Appearance,
Jan.  12.


Clear  with
sediment
Clear

Clear  with
sediment

Clear  with
sediment
Clear


Clear.

Turbid.

Penicillium

on  surface.
Clear.
Mycelium

at  bottom.
Turbid.
Cloudy.
Clear.
Mycelium

at  bottom.
Clear.
Mycelium  .

at  bottom.
Clear.

Curdy  layer

at  top.
Clear.


ii
ii


Mycelium

below.
Clear.
Mycelium

at  bottom.
Clear.


ii


Mycelium

at  bottom.
Mycelium

at  bottom.
Clear.


>i


Muddy.


124         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


Thus,  out  of  31  flasks  opened  in  the  same  air,  18
remained  intact,  while  13  were  taken  possession  of  by-
organisms — a  fact  obviously  the  same  in  character  as
that  described  by  Pasteur.  Such  experiments  demon-
strate, if  demonstration  were  needed,  that  it  is  not
the  air  itself,  or  any  gaseous  or  vaporous  substance
uniformly  diffused  through  it,  but  some  discontinuous
substance  floating  in  it,  that  is  the  cause  of  the  infec-
tion. Instead  of  our  tubes,  let  us  suppose  thirty-one
wounds  to  Ife  opened  in  the  same  ward  of  a  hospital ;
plainly  what  has  occurred  "with  the  tubes  may  occur  with
these  wounds — some  may  receive  the  germs  and  putrefy,
others  may  escape.  Helped  by  the  conception  not  only
of  germs,  but  of  germ-clouds,  the  different  behaviour  of
wounds  subjected  apparently  to  precisely  the  same  con-
ditions will  cease  to  be  an  inscrutable  mystery  to  the
surgeon.1

During  the  course  of  this  inquiry  some  eminent
biologists  have  been  good  enough,  from  time  to  time,
to  look  in  upon  my  work,  and  to  give  me  their  views

1  '  We  have  ample  facts  of  experiment  in  our  hands,'  said  Mr.
Knowsley  Thornton  (Trans,  of  the  Pathological  Society,  vol.  xxvi.
p.  313),  '  to  show  that  it  is  not  the  ga  of  the  air,  or  any  soluble
material  in  water,  but  something  "particulate  "  which  sets  up  all
the  train  of  changes  in  an  open  wound,  which  may,  after  the  patient
has  passed  through  a  period  of  more  or  less  constitutional  disturb-
ance, end  in  the  healing  of  the  wound,  or  may  end  in  septicaemia
and  death.  This  particulate  material,  then,  I  believe  we  have  evi-
dence enough  to  prove  consists  of  germs  of  Bacteria  and  other  low
organisms.'  All  the  evidence  points  to  this  conclusion.  I  may  say
that  I  entirely  agree  with  Mr.  Thornton  in  the  distinction  he  draws
between  germs  and  developed  Bacteria  floating  in  the  air.  It  is,  in
my  opinion,  of  the  very  last  importance  to  seize  this  distinction
with  clearness.  When  it  is  fully  realized  we  shall  probably  hear
less  of  the  arguments  against  Bacterial  contagia  founded  on  the
fact  that  a  virus  diminishes  in  strength  as  the  Bacteria  multiply.
A  portion  of  the  energy  of  the  virus  consists  in  its  passage  from  the
germ  state  to  that  of  the  finished  organism.


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


125


regarding-  the  evidential  force  of  the  experiments.  To
Professor  Huxley,  moreover,  I  am  indebted  for  under-
taking the  examination  of  a  number  of  the  hermetically-
sealed  tubes.    Thirty  of  them  were  placed  in  his  hands,
none  of  them  being  regarded  as  defective.    A  close
examination,  however,  disclosed  in  one  of  them  a  myce-
lium.   No  faultiness  could  for  a  time  be  discovered  in
the  tube ;  the  sealing  appeared  to  be  quite  as  perfect  as
that  of  its  sterile  fellows.    Once,  however,  on  shaking  it
a  minute  drop  of  liquid  struck  my  friend's  face ;  and  he
soon  discovered  that  an  orifice  of  almost  microscopic
minuteness  had  been  left  open  in  the  nozzle  of  the  tube.
Through  this  the  common  air  had  been  sucked  in  as
the  liquid  cooled,  and  hence  the  contamination.   It  was
the  only  defective  tube  of  the  group  of  thirty,  and  it
alone  showed  signs  of  life.

The  statement  of  this  fact  before  the  Eoyal  Society,
by  Professor  Huxley,  brought  to  my  mind  a  somewhat
similar  experience  of  my  own.    One  morning  in  Novem-
ber I  lifted  one  of  the  hermetically-sealed  tubes  from
the  wire  on  which  it  was  suspended,  and,  holding  it  up
against  the  light,  discovered,  to  my  astonishment,  a
beautiful  mycelium  at  the  bottom.    Before  restoring
the  tube  to  its  place  I  touched  its  fused  end  and
found  it  cutting  sharp.    Close  inspection  showed  that
the  nozzle  had  been  broken  off ;  the  common  air  had
entered,  and  the  seed  of  the  mycelium  had  been  sown.
Two  other  instances,  one  like  that  observed  by  Professor
Huxley,  have  since  come  to  light.    In  one  of  them  a
minute  orifice  remained  after  the  supposed  sealing  of  the
tube.    The  other  case  was  noticed  when  the  tubes  were
returned  from  the  Turkish  bath.  One  of  them  contained
a  luxuriant  mycelium.    It  was  noticed  that  the  liquid
in  this  tube  had  singularly  diminished  in  quantity,  and
on  turning  the  tube  up  it  was  found  cracked  at  the
bottom.


126


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


No  case  of  pseudo-spontaneous  generation  ever
occurred  under  my  hands  that  was  not  to  be  accounted
for  in  an  equally  satisfactory  manner.

In  this  inquiry,  thus  far,  I  have  confined  my  ob-
servations to  purely  liquid  infusions,  purposely  exclud-
ing milk,  mixtures  of  turnip-juice  and  cheese,  and,
indeed,  mixtures  of  solids  and  liquids  of  all  kinds.  The
next  section  of  the  investigation  will  he  devoted  to  these
and  kindred  subjects;  and  to  it  I  also  postpone  the
complete  examination  of  pepton,  and  of  the  remarkable
experiments  described  by  Dr.  William  Eoberts,  a  small
residue  of  which  only  I  have  failed  to  corroborate.

Throughout  the  whole  of  this  investigation  I  have
had  to  congratulate  myself  on  the  zealous  and  efficient
aid  of  my  excellent  assistant,  Mr.  John  Cottrell.  His
intelligence  in  seizing  my  ideas,  and  his  mechanical
skill  in  realizing  them,  have  rendered  me  admirable
service.  Without  such  aid,  indeed,  so  much  ground
could  not  have  been  covered  in  the  time.

Royal  Institution,  5th  April,  1876.


It  gives  me  special  pleasure  to  direct  attention  here
to  a  paper  by  the  Eev.  W.  H.  Dallinger,  for  an  advanced
proof  of  which  I  am  indebted  to  the  courtesy  of  Dr.
Lawson,  editor  of  the  'Popular  Science  Eeview.'  Mr.
Dallinger  and  his  colleague  Dr.  Drysdale  are  known  to
have  pushed  the  microscope  to  its  utmost  power  of  per-
formance at  the  present  time.  Their  '  Kesearches  into
the  Life-History  of  the  Monads '  are  models  of  scientific
thoroughness  and  concentration.  Mr.  Dallinger's  review
of  the  present  position  of  the  doctrine  of  spontaneous
generation,  his  remarks  on  Bacterial  germs  in  relation


PUTEEF ACTION  AND  INFECTION.


127


to  the  limits  of  the  powers  of  the  microscope,  his
demonstration  that  the  germs  of  monads  survive  in  a
medium  raised  to  a  temperature  which  destroys  the
adult,  and  that  precipitated  mastic  particles  like  those
mentioned  in  §  1 6  of  this  paper  are  not  to  be  discerned
by  a  magnifying-power  of  15,000  diameters,  constitute
a  most  interesting  and  important  communication.

Note  I.  Action  of  Bacteria  upon  a  Beam  of  Light.

To  trace  the  gradual  growth  and  multiplication  of  the
Bacteria  by  their  action  on  a  beam  of  light,  an  infusion
of  beef  was  prepared  on  the  5th  of  October,  1875,  placed
in  a  globular  flask  of  about  50  cubic  inches  capacity,
and  put  aside  with  its  mouth  open  to  the  laboratory  air.
On  the  8th,  9th,  10th,  11th,  and  12th  similar  flasks  were
prepared  and  put  aside  in  succession.  On  the  12th  all  the
flasks  were  examined  by  the  concentrated  electric  light.
The  freshest  one  showed  the  track  of  the  beam  as  a  richly-
coloured  green  cone.    The  green  light  was  unaffected
by  a  Nicol's  prism,  which,  however,  quenched  the  ordi-
nary scattered  light  and  augmented  the  purity  and
vividness  of  the  green.    It  was  a  case  of  fluorescence.
In  the  second  flask,  one  day  old,  the  fluorescent  beam
was  in  great  part  masked  by  the  scattered  light ;  the
latter,  however,  could  be  partially  quenched  by  a  Nicol's
prism,  the  purity  of  the  fluorescence  being  thus  in  part
restored.  Through  the  third  flask,  two  days,  and  through
the  fourth  flask,  three  days  old,  the  track  of  the  beam
was  still  discernible ;  through  the  fifth  flask,  four  days
old,  it  was  all  but  obliterated,  while  in  the  sixth  flask,
seven  days  old,  it  was  entirely  shattered,  the  turbid
medium  being  filled  uniformly  with  the  laterally  scat-
tered light.

Two  of  these  flasks  were  of  a  bright  yellow-green


128         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


colour,  two  were  milky  or  white,  and  two  of  a  dull
brownish  hue.

Cohn  mentions  the  bluish  tinge  of  the  infusion  by-
reflected  and  its  yellow  tinge  by  transmitted  light  when
the  Bacteria  are  incipient.  This  is  due  to  a  dichroitic
action,  similar  to  that  which  produces  the  blue  of  the
sky  and  the  morning  and  evening  red.  The  blue,  how-
ever, though  discernible,  is  not  pronounced,  for  the
Bacteria  are  too  large  to  scatter  the  colour  in  any  high
degree  of  purity  ;  but  with  a  '  muddy '  infusion  a  very
fair  red  may  be  obtained  from  transmitted  light.  I
have  used  the  Bacterial  turbidity  for  photometric  pur-
poses. On  the  9th  of  October,  for  example,  I  ac-
companied Sir  Kichard  Collinson  and  a  Committee  of
the  Elder  Brethren  of  the  Trinity  House  to  Charlton,
with  the  view  of  comparing  together  two  lights
mounted  at  the  Trinity  Wharf  at  Blackwall.  To  imi-
tate a  foggy  atmosphere,  I  employed  an  infusion  cloudy
with  Bacteria  and  placed  in  a  glass  cell.  With  it  the
beams  could  be  toned  gradually  down  to  complete  ex-
tinction.

Note  II.  Fluorescence  of  Infusions.

All  the  animal  infusions,  both  flesh  and  fish,  showed
the  same  fluorescence.  It  was  the  same  green  hue
throughout,  though  of  varying  degrees  of  intensity.
In  wild  duck,  grouse,  snipe,  hare,  partridge,  and
pheasant  the  fluorescence  was  fine — sometimes  exceed-
ingly fine.  In  rabbit  it  was  less  fine  than  in  hare,  and
in  a  tame  rabbit  less  fine  than  in  a  warren  rabbit.
Fishes  also  differed  from  each  other.  Mullet,  for
example,  was  finer  than  cod,  herring,  or  haddock.
Beef,  mutton,  heart,  liver,  all  showed  the  same  green
fluorescence.

Led  up  to  it  by  a  series  of  remarkable  experiments


PUTREFACTION  AND  INFECTION.


129


on  the  rapidity  of  the  passage  of  crystallized  substances
into  the  vascular  and  non-vascular  textures  of  the  body,1
Dr.  Bence  Jones  and  Dr.  Dupre  communicated  to  the
Eoyal  Society  in  1867  a  highly  interesting  paper  «  On
a  Fluorescent  Substance,  resembling  Quinine,  in  Ani-
mals.' a  They  then  showed  that  '  from  every  texture  of
man  and  of  some  animals  a  fluorescent  substance  can
be  extracted,  which,  when  extracted,  has  a  very  close
■optical  and  chemical  resemblance  to  quinine.'  They
therefore  called  it  animal  quinoicline.  In  dilute  solu-
tions they  found  that  the  fluorescence  of  the  animal
substance  was  not  to  be  distinguished  from  that  pro-
duced by  quinine.  When  the  solution  was  concentrated,
the  colour  of  the  light  was  of  a  decidedly  greenish  hue.
This  latter  observation  is  most  in  agreement  with  mine.
In  all  the  infusions  examined  by  me  the  fluorescent
light  was  a  decided  green,  and  not  to  be  mistaken  for
the  blue  light  of  quinine.

The  green  colour  is  similar  to  that  emitted  by  the
crystalline  lens  when  a  beam  of  violet  light  impinges
•on  it ; 3  sending  such  a  beam  through  any  of  the  infu-
sions, the  '  degradation '  of  the  violet  to  green  is
strikingly  illustrated.

The  foregoing  statement  refers  to  the  deportment
■of  the  infusions  after  boiling  and  filtering.  Prior  to
boiling  some  of  them  were  of  a  brilliant  ruby  colour  ;
but  even  here,  when  the  layer  of  liquid  between  the
•eye  and  the  beam  was  not  too  thick,  the  green  fluor-
escence could  be  seen  through  the  red  liquid.

'  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society,  vol.  xiv.  18G5.
-  Ibid.  vol.  xv.  p.  73.

3.  On  plunging  the  eye  into  the  beam  of  the  electric  lamp,  trans-
mitted through  violet  glass,  the  moment  the  crystalline  lens  is  seen
to  fluoresce  by  a  second  observer,  a  blue  shimmer  is  seen  by  the  eye
on  which  the  beam  falls.  In  the  case  of  my  own  eye,  I  can  always
readily  tell  when  the  fluoresence  has  set  in.

K


FURTHER  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  DEPORT-
MENT AND  VITALITY  OE  PUTREFACTIYE
ORGANISMS.1


III.

§  1.  Introduction.

On  the  13th  of  January,  1876,  I  had  the  honour  of
submitting  to  the  Eoyal  Society  some  account  of  an
investigation  in  which  the  power  of  atmospheric  air
to  produce  life  in  organic  infusions  and  its  power  to
scatter  light  were  shown  to  go  hand  in  hand.  The
'  scattering'  was  proved  to  be  due,  riot  to  the  air  itself,
but  to  foreign  matter  suspended  in  the  air.  It  was
moreover  proved  that  air  placed  under  proper  conditions
went  through  a  process  of  self-purification,  and  that,
when  this  purification  was  visibly  complete,  the  power
to  scatter  light  and  to  generate  life  disappeared  to--
gether.

The  form  of  the  experiments  here  referred  to  was,
it  will  be  remembered,  as  follows : — Wooden  chambers
were  constructed  with  glass  fronts,  side  windows,  and
back  doors.  Through  the  bottoms  of  the  chambers
test-tubes  passed  air-tight,  their  open  ends,  for  about
one-fifth  of  the  length  of  the  tubes,  being  within  the
chambers.  Provision  was  made  for  a  connexion  through
sinuous  channels  between  the  outer  and  the  inner  air.

1  Philosophical  Transactions,  Part  L,  1877.
K  2


132


THE  FLOATING-MATTEE  OF  THE  AIR.


The  chambers,  being  closely  sealed,  were  permitted  to
remain  undisturbed  for  a  few  days.  The  floating
matter  of  the  internal  air  gradually  subsided,  until  at
length  an  intensely  luminous  beam  failed  to  show  its


Fra.  11.


track  within  the  chamber.  Then,  and  not  till  then,
were  the  infusions  introduced,  by  means  of  a  pipette
passing  through  the  top  of  the  chamber.  After  their
introduction,  they  were  boiled  in  an  oil  or  brine-bath  1

1  From  the  fact  of  their  being  boiled  in  oil  or  brine,  Professor


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  133

for  five  minutes,  and  afterwards  placed  permanently  in
a  warm  room.

The  annexed  woodcut  (fig.  11),  taken  from  the
'.Proceedings'  of  the  Eoyal  Institution,  shows  a  cham-
ber with  its  six  test-tubes,  its  side  windows  w  w,  its
pipette  c,  and  its  bent  tubes  a  b,  which  connect  the  air
of  the  chamber  with  the  external  air.

In  upwards  of  fifty  chambers  thus  constructed,  many
of  them  used  more  than  once,  it  was,  without  excep-
tion, proved  that  a  sterilized  infusion  in  contact  with
air  shown  to  be  self-cleansed  by  the  luminous  beam  re-
mained sterile.  Never,  in  a  single  unexplained  instance,
did  such  an  infusion  show  any  signs  of  life.  That  the
observed  sterility  was  not  due  to  any  lack  of  nutritive
power  in  the  infusion,  was  proved  by  opening  the  back
door  and  permitting  the  uncleansed  air  to  enter  the
chamber.  The  contact  of  the  floating  matter  with  the
infusions  was  invariably  followed  by  the  development  of
life.  Numerous  examples  of  these  results  were  placed
before  the  Fellows  of  the  Eoyal  Society  at  their  Meet-
ing on  the  13th  of  January,  1876.

Prior  to  the  date  here  referred  to,  great  public
interest  had  been  excited,  and,  I  may  add,  considerable
scientific  uncertainty  had  been  produced  in  reference
to  this  subject,  both  in  England  and  America,  by  the
writings  of  Dr.  Bastian.  These  writings  consisted,  in
part,  of  theoretic  considerations  and  reflections,  not
new,  but  sometimes  very  ably  stated,  based  on  the
general  doctrine  of  Evolution ;  and,  in  part,  of  very
pungent  criticisms  of  those  who,  though  believers  in
Evolution,  declined  to  accept  the  writer's  programme

Cohn  has  inadvertently  inferred  that  the  infusions  themselves  were
raised  above  their  boiling-points.  The  tnbes  being  open,  the  tem-
perature of  ebullition  is  of  course  independent  of  the  source  which
provokes  it.


134


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


of  its  operations.1  Passing  over  both  theory  and
criticism,  I  thought  it  wise  to  fix  upon  certain  well-
defined  statements  of  fact  which  lay  at  the  basis  of  the
weighty  superstructure  raised  by  their  author,  and  to
bring  these  statements  to  the  test  of  strict  experiment.

Thus  it  was  affirmed  'that  boiled  turnip  or  hay-
infusions  exposed  to  ordinary  air,  exposed  to  filtered
air,  to  calcined  air,  or  shut  off  altogether  from  contact
with  air,  are  more  or  less  prone  to  swarm  with  Bacteria
and  Vibriones  in  the  course  of  from  two  to  six  days.' 2
I  resorted  accordingly  to  filtered  air,  calcined  air,  and
to  infusions  withdrawn  from  air,  but  failed  to  discover
the  alleged  '  proneness  '  to  run  into  living  forms.  It
had  also  been  affirmed  that  infusions  of  muscle,  kidney,
or  liver,  placed  '  in  a  flask  whose  neck  is  drawn  out  and
narrowed  in  the  blowpipe  flame,  boiled,  sealed  during
ebullition,  and  kept  in  a  warm  place,  swarmed  after  a
variable  time  with  Bacteria  and  allied  organisms.' 1  I
resorted  to  such  flasks,  employiDg  infusions  of  fish,  flesh,
fowl,  and  viscera,  and  on  the  13th  of  January  was  able
to  place  before  the  Eoyal  Society  one  hundred  and
thirty  flasks,  every  one  of  which  negatived  the  fore-
going statement.

Two  objections  were  subsequently  urged  against
these  results.  The  infusions,  it  was  contended,  were
not  sufficiently  concentrated,  nor  were  the  temperatures
sufficiently  high.  Both  these  objections  were  met  by
the  statement  that  forty-eight  horns'  exposure  under
the  same  circumstances  to  common  air  sufficed  to  fill
these  same  infusions  with  life.  Beyond  this,  however,
I  was  able  to  show  that  the  temperatures  employed  by
me  were  exactly  those  which  had  previously  been  found

1  See  'Evolution,  or  the  Origin  of  Life,'  pp.  168,  169.

2  '  Evolution,' p.  94.

3  Transactions  of  the  Pathological  Society,  1875,  p.  272.


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  135


most  effectual  by  the  writer  who  urged  the  objection.
Other  temperatures,  higher  than  any  previously  em-
ployed, were  at  the  same  time  said  to  ensure  sponta-
neous generation.  I  exposed  my  infusions  to  these
newly-discovered  efficient  temperatures,  but  found  that
they  remained  as  barren  as  before.

With  regard,  moreover,  to  the  question  of  concen-
tration, it  was  shown  that,  owing  to  their  gradual
vaporization,  the  infusions  used  by  me  were  probably
unequalled  in  strength  by  those  employed  by  any  pre-
vious investigator.  Some  of  these  infusions  remain  with
me  to  the  present  hour.  Concentrated  by  twelve
months'  slow  evaporation,  and  reduced  to  one-fifth  of
their  primitive  volume,  they  still  exhibit  the  purity  ot
distilled  water.

These  results  proved  beyond  a  doubt  that  in  the
atmospheric  conditions  existing  in  the  laboratory  of
the  Royal  Institution  during  the  autumn,  winter,
and  spring  of  1875-6,  five  minutes'  boiling  sufficed
to  sterilize  organic  liquids  of  the  most  diverse  kinds.
Among  these  may  be  mentioned  urine  in  its  natural
condition,  infusions  of  mutton,  beef,  pork,  hay,  turnip,
haddock,  sole,  salmon,  cod-fish,  turbot,  mullet,  her-
ring, eel,  oyster,  whiting,  liver,  kidney,  hare,  rabbit,
barn-door  fowl,  grouse,  and  pheasant.  Once  properly
sterilized,  and  protected  afterwards  from  the  floating
matter  of  the  air,  not  one  of  these  putrescible  infusions
ever  manifested  the  power  of  generating  by  its  own  in-
herent energy  putrefactive  organisms  of  any  kind.

§  2.  Experiments  of  Pasteur,  Roberts,  and  Cohn.

During  the  investigation  just  referred  to  I  confined
myself  for  the  most  part  to  animal  and  vegetable  juices
in  their  natural  condition — that  is  to  say,  extracted


136         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


by  distilled  water,  and  not  rendered  artificially  acid,,
neutral,  or  alkaline.  I  had  occasion,  however,  to  repeat
among  others  some  of  the  very  remarkable  experiments-
on  superneutralized  hay-infusions  described  by  Dr.
William  Eoberts  in  his  excellent  paper  in  the  Philo-
sophical Transactions  for  1874.  These  experiments  I
could  not  corroborate ;  for  while  in  his  hands  such
infusions  sometimes  required  three  hours'  boiling  to-
sterilize  them,  in  mine  they  behaved  like  other  in-
fusions, and  were  sterilized  in  five  minutes.

In  the  abstract  of  the  investigation  communicated
to  the  Eoyal  Society  on  the  13th  of  January,  1876,  I
mentioned  this  discrepancy,  and  pointed  out  its  possible-
cause.1  But  the  largeness  of  the  question,  which  had
been  long  previously  raised  by  M.  Pasteur,  and  the
limitation  of  my  time,  led  me  to  postpone  it.  This
postponement  is  mentioned  at  the  conclusion  of  my
paper  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  for  1876,  where-
the  discrepancy  referred  to  is  not  at  all  discussed.

In  his  celebrated  paper,  '  Sur  les  corpuscules  orga-
nises qui  existent  dans  1' Atmosphere,'  published  fifteen
years  ago,2  M.  Pasteur  first  announced  that  while  acid
infusions  had  their  germinal  life  destroyed  by  a  tem-
perature of  100°  C,  a  temperature  over  100°  was
needed  to  produce  the  same  effect  in  alkaline  infusions.
In  his  '  Etudes  sur  la  Biere,'  published  in  the  early
part  of  1876,  he  repeats  and  illustrates  this  statement.
Vinegar  he  finds  has  the  organisms  which  decompose  it
destroyed  by  a  temperature  of  50°  C.  Wine  is  ren-
dered unchangeable  by  a  slightly  higher  temperature.
Beerwort  without  hops  requires  a  temperature  of  90°  C
to  sterilize  it,  and  milk  a  temperature  of  110°.  Fresh
urine  has  its  organisms  destroyed  at  a  temperature  of

1  Roy.  Soc.  Proc.  vol.  xxiv.  p.  178.
-  Annales  dc  Chimic,  1862,  vol.  lxiv.


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  137

100°,  while  a  higher  temperature  is  needed  when  the
mine  has  been  neutralized  by  carbonate  of  lime.1  The
resistance  of  alkalized  urine  to  sterilization  is  therefore
by  no  means  a  new  announcement.2

On  my  return  from  Switzerland  in  1876  the  experi-
ments on  alkalized  hay-infusions  were  resumed ;  and
soon  afterwards  Professor  Cohn,  of  Breslau,  so  highly
distinguished  by  his  researches  on  Bacteria,  placed  in
my  hands  a  memoir 3  which  rendered  it  doubly  incum-
bent on  me  to  examine  more  strictly  the  grounds  of  my
dissidence  from  Dr.  Roberts.  Professor  Cohn  is,  on  the
whole,  emphatic  in  his  corroboration  of  Dr.  Eoberts,4
having  found,  during  a  long  and  varied  series  of  ex-
periments with  hay-infusions  of  divers  kinds,  that  when
the  period  of  boiling  did  not  exceed  fifteen  minutes
organisms  invariably  appeared  in  the  infusions  after-

1  '  Etudes  stir  la  Biere,'  p.  34.

-  "With  regard  to  the  different  action  of  acid  and  alkaline
liquids,  I  put  the  subject  purposely  aside  with  the  view  to  its  full
investigation  as  soon  as  the  first  instalment  of  these  researches  had
been  published.  I  could  find  no  adequate  explanation  of  the
alleged  fact  that  germs  are  killed  in  an  acid  liquid,  while  they
survive  in  an  alkaline  one  of  the  same  temperature  ;  nor  could  the
well-merited  respect  that  I  feel  for  M.  Pasteur  cause  me  to  accept
his  explanation  without  further  inquiry  on  my  own  account.  ^  In
due  time,  therefore,  I  resolved  to  examine  the  question.  Various
experiments  and  explanatory  views  regarding  it  are  recorded  in
the  following  pages.

3  Beitrage  zur  Biologie  der  Pflanzen,  July  1876.

4  Professor  Cohn  gently  censures  me  for  taking  exception  to  the-
cotton-wool  plug,  seeing  that  cotton-wool,  even  in  my  own  experi-
ments, has  always  proved  a  trustworthy  filter.  I  did  not,  however,,
object  to  it  as  a  filter,  but  on  grounds  which  have  in  part,  at  all
events,  commended  themselves  to  Professor  Cohn  himself.  With
reference  to  the  method  of  Dr.  Roberts  he  writes  thus  :— '  The  de-
fect of  this  method  consists  in  the  difficulty  of  protecting  the
cotton-wool  from  accidental  wetting  by  the  infusion.  The  steam,
moreover,  which  rises  from  the  liquid  penetrates  the  cotton-wool,,
and,  through  its  partial  condensation  in  the  neck  of  the  bulb,  might
readily  charge  itself  with  germs.'


138


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR


wards.  Sixty,  eighty,  and  even  one  hundred  and
twenty  minutes'  boiling  were  found  in  some  cases  in-
sufficient to  sterilize  the  infusions.  One  marked  dif-
ference, however,  exists  between  Dr.  Eoberts  and  Pro-
fessor Cohn.  The  former  found  five  minutes'  boiling
sufficient  to  sterilize  unneutralized  hay-infusion,  but
one,  two,  and  even  three  hours'  boiling  insufficient  to
sterilize  superneutralized  hay-infusion ;  while  the  latter
noticed  no  difference  of  this  kind,  but  found  acid  and
neutral  infusions  equally  resistant.1

§  3.  Hay-infusions.     Preliminary  Experiments
with  Pipette-bulbs.

I  have  now  the  honour  to  submit  to  the  Eoyal
Society  an  investigation  which  embraces  among  others
the  points  here  referred  to,  and  which  has  proved  far
more  difficult  and  laborious  than  I  expected  it  would  be.

On  the  27th  of  September,  1876,  a  quantity  of
•chopped  hay  was  digested  for  three  hours  and  a  half  in
distilled  water  maintained  at  a  temperature  of  120°  Fahr.
The  infusion  was  afterwards  poured  off,  and  its  specific
gravity  reduced  to  the  exact  figure  given  by  Dr.  Eoberts,
viz.  1006.  It  was  then  filtered  and  slightly  super-
neutralized.  Precipitation  occurred  on  the  addition  of
the  potash,  and  the  infusion  was  boiled  for  five  minutes
to  render  the  precipitation  complete.  It  was  then  re-
filtered,  and  introduced  into  a  series  of  bulbs  of  the
same  size  and  character  as  those  described  by  Dr.
Eoberts,  and  called  by  him  'plugged  bulbs.'2

Each  bulb  was  a  cylinder  about  four  inches  high  and
upwards  of  an  inch  wide,  with  a  long  neck  attached  to

1  '  Ein  constanter  Untersckied  in  der  Zeitdauer  zwischen  sauren
und  neutralen  Aufgiissen,  wie  ihn  Roberts  gef imden,  trat  in  unseren
Versuchen  nicht  hervor  '  (p.  259).

5  Phil.  Trans,  vol.  clxiv.  p.  460.


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  139


it,1  as  shown  at  a,  fig.  12.  Two-thirds  of  the  cylinder
were  occupied  by  the  infusion.  After  the  introduction
of  the  latter,  the  neck  of  the  bulb  was  plugged  with
cotton-wool,  and  hermetically  sealed  above  the  plug,
as  at  b,  fig.  12.  The  bulbs  were  afterwards  plunged  in
water  deep  enough  to  cover  their  necks.   The  water  was

Fig.  12.


gradually  raised  to  the  boiling-point,  and  maintained
at  the  boiling  temperature  for  ten  minutes.  They

1  I  have  called  them  '  pipette-bulbs '  because  they  are  formed
by  hermetically  sealing  one  shank  of  a  pipette,  close  to  the  bulb,
leaving  the  other  shank  open  for  the  introduction  of  the  infusions.
German  pipettes,  on  account  of  their  cheapness,  were  at  first  com-
monly used ;  but  in  cases  of  long-continued  boiling,  explosions
were  so  frequent  that  bulbs  of  English  glass  of  specially  resistant
quality  were  resorted  to.


140         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIE.


Pig.  IS


were  then  removed  and  permitted  to  cool;  after
which  the  sealed  end  of  each  neck  was  broken  off  by
means  of  a  file,  its  subsequent  appearance  being  shown
at  c,  fig.  12.  The  bulbs,  protected  by  the  cotton-wool
plugs  in  the  neck  above  them,  were  then  exposed  to  a
tolerably  uniform  temperature  of  about  90°  Fahr.

At  the  same  time  two  similar  bulbs,  charged  with
the  same  infusion,  had  their  necks  bent  downward.-,

as  in  fig.  1 3,  the  inclined  por-
tion being  plugged,  so  that  no
impurity  could  fall  into  the
liquid  from  the  cotton-wooL
These  two  bulbs  were  boiled
for  five  minutes  in  an  oil-bath,
and  plugged  while  boiling  with
cotton-wool.  They  were  then
sealed  behind  the  plugs  and
permitted  to  cool,  their  sealed
ends  being  broken  off  after-
wards.

On  the  30th  of  September
the  infusion  in  all  the  straight-
necked  bulbs  was  turbid,  while
in  the  two  bent-necked  ones  it
was  perfectly  clear.  On  the  2nd
of  October  the  turbidity  of  the
straight-necked  bulbs  had  in-
a  fatty  scum  had  formed  on  the  sur-
face of  each.  The  two  others  were  at  the  same  time
slightly  but  distinctly  turbicl.

My  inference  from  this  experiment  was  that  in
neither  the  straight-neckecl  nor  the  bent-necked  bulbs
had  the  germs  been  wholly  killed  by  the  boiling.  The
difference  between  the  results  obtained  with  the  re-
spective bulbs  arises  from  the  different  modes  of  mani-


creased,  while


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  141

pulation  pursued  in  the  two  cases.  For  it  is  to  be
noted  that  a  quantity  of  air,  with  its  associated  floating
matter,  was  imprisoned  above  the  infusion  in  every
straight-necked  bulb  ;  that  in  the  case  of  the  two  bent-
necked  bulbs  this  air  had  been  in  part  displaced  by
steam,  the  air  which  entered  on  cooling  being  sifted  by
the  cotton-wool  plugs.  To  this  difference  of  treatment
is  to  be  attributed  the  observed  difference  of  deport-
ment. Unlike  the  thick  cloudiness  of  their  neigh-
bours, the  turbidity  of  the  bent-necked  bulbs,  though
distinct,  was  barely  sensible,  and  in  none  of  them  was
any  scum  ever  formed  upon  the  surface  of  the  infusion.

Examined  microscopically,  numerous  Vibrios  were
found  in  the  infusions  of  the  straight-necked  bulbs,
many  of  them  broken  at  the  centre,  with  the  two  halves
apparently  trying  to  separate  from  each  other.  There
were  also  numerous  smaller  Bacteria,  very  active  and
of  various  lengths.  In  the  bent-necked  bulbs  a  num-
ber of  exceedingly  small  Bacteria  were  found,  but  no
Vibrios.

The  deportment  of  the  hay -infusion  employed  in
these  experiments  corroborates  the  results  of  Dr.
Roberts  and  Professor  Cohn.

On  the  2nd  of  October  another  infusion  of  hay  was
prepared,  and,  after  neutralization  with  caustic  potash,
was  introduced  into  six  pipette-bulbs  with  straight
necks.  The  necks,  being  first  plugged  with  cotton-
wool, were  afterwards  sealed  by  the  blowpipe.  The
infusions  were  maintained  for  ten  minutes  at  the  tem-
perature of  boiling  water.  Their  sealed  ends  were
afterwards  broken  off,  and  they  were  subjected,  like  the
former  ones,  to  a  temperature  of  90°  Fahr.

Six  other  bulbs  were  charged  at  the  same  time  with
the  same  infusion ;  but,  instead  of  being  hermetically
sealed,  they  were  placed  in  an  oil-bath,  and  boiled  there


142         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

for  five  minutes.  Before  the  ebullition  ceased,  the
neck  of  each  was  stopped  with  a  plug-  of  cotton-wool.

Up  to  October  6th  all' the  bulbs  continued  clear.
On  the  6th  one  bulb  of  the  series  last  described  be-
came turbid,  lighter  in  colour  than  its  neighbours,  and
covered  with  a  fatty  scum.  On  the  7th  one  tube  of  the
first  series  (boiled  after  the  fashion  of  Eoberts  for  ten
minutes)  also  became  turbid  and  exhibited  the  same
fatty  scum.  The  remaining  ten  bulbs  maintained  per-
manently their  deep  brown-sherry  colour,  their  high
transparency,  and  their  perfect  freedom  from  Bacterial
life.  They  are  still  clear,  though  seven  months  have
elapsed  since  their  preparation.

In  the  great  majority  of  these  experiments  the  de-
portment of  alkalized  hay-infusion  contradicts  that
observed  by  Dr.  Roberts  and  Professor  Gohn.

Six  other  pipette-bulbs,  with  their  necks  so  bent
and  plugged  with  cotton-wool  and  asbestos  that  no
impurity  falling  from  the  plug  could  reach  the  infusion,
were  also  charged  on  the  2nd  of  October.  Three  of  the
bulbs,  with  their  necks  hermetically  sealed,  were  main-
tained for  ten  minutes  at  the  temperature  of  boiling-
water,  the  sealed  ends  being  afterwards  broken  off.
The  three  other  bulbs  were  boiled  in  an  oil-bath,  and
had  their  necks  plugged  before  ebullition  ceased.  All
six  bulbs  have  remained  perfectly  transparent  up  to  the
present  time.

Here,  again,  we  have  discordance  behueen  my  re-
sults and  those  of  Dr.  Roberts  and  Professor  Gohn.

But  on  the  6th  of  October  another  infusion  was
prepared  and  neutralized,  exactly  in  the  same  fashion
as  before.  Five  pipette-bulbs  were  charged  with  it;
they  were  hermetically  sealed  and  maintained  at  the
boiling  temperature  for  ten  minutes.  The  sealed  ends
were  afterwards  broken  off,  and  the  bulbs  exposed  to  a


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  145


Fig.  14.


temperature  of  90°  Fahr.  On  the  morning  of  the  8th
of  October  (that  is  to  say,  two  days  after  their  pre-
paration) the  infusion  in  every  one  of  the  bulbs  was
turbid  and  covered  with  scum.

Here  once  more  lue  have  perfect  harmony  betiveen
my  results  and  those  of  Dr.  Roberts  and  Professor
Cohn.

On  the  2nd  of  October,  moreover,  fourteen  of  our
ordinary  small  retort-flasks  with  bent  necks  (shown
in  fig.  14)  were  charged  with
the  neutralized  hay-infusion.
They  were  boiled  for  three  mi-
nutes, and  hermetically  sealed
whilst  boiling.  Some  clays  after-
wards one  tube  of  the  entire
number  was  observed  to  have  be-
come lighter  in  colour  and  sen-
sibly cloudy;  but  thirteen  out  of
the  fourteen  remained  unchanged
in  colour,  brightly  transparent,
and  entirely  free  from  life.

Here  the  dissidence  between  my  results  and  those
of  Professor  Cohn,  tvho  also  experimented  with  her-
metically-sealed flasks,  reappears.

Numerous  other  experiments  with  pipette-bulbs  and
retort-flasks  were  made  at  the  time  here  referred  to,
but  it  is  unnecessary  to  record  them.  Suffice  it  to  say
that,  like  those  just  described,  some  of  them  corrobo-
rated and  some  of  them  contradicted  the  results  of  Dr.
Eoberts  and  Professor  Cohn.


144         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


§  4.  Hay -infusions.    Experiments  with  Cohrts

Tubes.

For  reasons  given  by  himself,1  Professor  Cohn  de-
viated from  the  method  of  experiment  pursued  by  Dr.

Eoberts,  employing,  instead  of  the  pipette-
Fig.  is.  "bulbs,  flasks,  the  nature  of  which  will  be  under-
stood from  the  following  description.  Let  a
zone  of  a  common  test-tube,  about  one-third
of  its  length  from  its  open  end,  be  softened
by  heat,  and  let  the  softened  glass  be  drawn
out  so  as  to  form  a  tube  of  much  narrower
bore  than  the  original  test-tube.  Thus  modi-
fied, the  tube  would  consist  of  an  elongated
bulb  below  and  an  open  funnel  above,  both
being  connected  by  a  narrow  neck  (see  fig.  15).
Professor  Cohn  filled  the  elongated  bulb  to
about  two-thirds  of  its  volume  with  hay-
infusion,  pluuged  his  bulbs  in  water,  raised  the
water  to  ebullition,  and  continued  the  boiling
for  the  required  time.  The  tubes  were  then
removed  from  their  bath,  and  after  being  held
open  for  a  minute  or  two  so  as  to  allow  the
water  condensed  in  their  necks  to  evaporate,
the  funnel  was  plugged  with  cotton-wool.

Professor  Cohn  considers  that  all  possibility
of  external  contamination  is  here  shut  out.2  By
bis  method,  therefore,  I  wished  to  check  the  results  above

1  Beitrage,  July  187G,  p.  256.

2  '  Ehe  ich.  iiber  die  Organisrnen  berichte,  welche  sich  in  den
gekochten  Aufgtissen  entwickelten,  will  ich  bemerken,  dass  an  cine
nachtriigliche  Infection  derselben  durch  von  aussen  nach  dem
Koclien  eingescbleppte  Keime  bei  unseren  Versuchen  nicht  zu
denken  ist '  (p.  259).  I  may  remark  that,  with  an  atmosphere  like
that  in  which  my  recent  experiments  were  conducted,  there  would
be  no  chance  of  escape  for  an  infusion  thus  handled.


VITALITY  OF  PUTREF A CTI VE  ORGANISMS.  145

described.  Accordingly,  on  the  24th  of  October;  I  had
four  groups  of  Cohn's  tubes  (twelve  in  a  group)  carefully
charged  with  two  fresh  infusions  of  two  different  kinds  of
hay.  Each  infusion  was  divided  into  two  equal  parts,  one
of  which  was  neutralized  and  the  other  left  in  its  natural
acid  condition.  Twelve  of  the  tubes  were  charged  with
one  of  the  infusions  neutralized,  and  twelve  with  the
same  infusion  unneutralized.  We  will  label  this  in-
fusion A.  Twelve  other  tubes  were  charged  with  the
second  infusion  neutralized,  and  twelve  with  it  unneu-
tralized. We  will  call  this  infusion  B.  The  forty-eight
tubes  were  subsequently  boiled  for  ten  minutes  in  tin,
vessels  containing  water  deep  enough  nearly  to  submerge
them.  Having  proved  by  previous  experiments  that  it
was  dangerous  if  not  fatal  to  exactness  to  expose  the  in-
fusions for  one  or  two  minutes  to  the  air  after  their
removal  from  the  water,  I  took  the  precaution  of  plug-
ging them  first  and  removing  them  afterwards.

On  the  28th  of  October  (that  is  to  say,  four  days
after  their  preparation)  several  of  the  tubes  containing
the  unneutralized  infusion  A  were  faintly  but  distinctly
turbid  and  thinly  covered  with  scum.  The  twelve
neutralized  tubes  of  the  same  infusion  were  at  the  same
time  perfectly  clear.  This  retarding  influence  of  the
alkali  has  been  of  frequent  occurrence  in  this  inquiry.
That  it  was  simply  a  case  of  retardation  was  proved  by
the  fact  that,  on  the  30th  of  October,  the  twenty-four
tubes,  both  neutral  and  acid,  of  infusion  A  were  tur-
bid and  covered  with  scum.

On  the  same  date  the  twelve  neutralized  tubes  of
infusion  B  were  perfectly  clear  and  without  a  trace  of
scum.  Of  the  twelve  unneutralized  tubes  three  had
given  way,  and  a  fourth  yielded  on  the  31st.  Four
days  later  three  of  the  neutralized  tubes  also  yielded.
The  permanent  state  of  matters  was  that  eight  out  of


146         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


the  twenty-four  tubes  charged  with  infusion  B  had
become  turbid,  while  sixteen  of  them  remained  perfectly
clear.  I  do  not  doubt  that  the  tardy  infection  of  some
of  the  tubes  just  referred  to  arose  from  external  con-
tamination, which  is  almost  inseparable  from  the  method
of  experiment.

Here,  while  infusion  A  corroborated  Professor
Colin,  infusion  B  in  substance  contradicted  him.

§  5.  Hay-infusions  (in  Closed  Chambers).

In  dealing  with  hay-infusions  I  also  fell  back  on  the
method  of  experiment  which  was  found  so  effectual  in
1875,1  employing  closed  chambers  in  which  the  air  had
been  permitted  to  cleanse  itself  by  the  gradual  subsi-
dence of  its  floating  matter.

On  the  3rd  of  October,  1876,  my  experiments  with
such  chambers  recommenced.  Two  of  them,  containing
each  three  large  test-tubes,  were  then  charged  with  an
infusion  of  hay  accurately  prepared  according  to  the
prescription  of  Dr.  Roberts.  Its  specific  gravity  was
1006  ;  it  was  superneutralized  to  the  proper  extent  with
caustic  potash,  but  the  period  of  boiling,  instead  of  being
three  hours,  was  five  minutes.

Examined  from  time  to  time  for  more  than  four
months  subsequently,  the  infusion  in  both  chambers
continued  perfectly  unchanged.  It  was  free  from  sus-
pended matter,  free  also  from  every  trace  of  scum,  main-
taining for  the  light*  which  passed  through  it  a  singular
transparency.

Here,  to  a  certainty,  a  period  of  boiling  not  amount-
ing to  one-twentieth  of  that  required  by  Dr.  Roberts,
sufficed  to  destroy  totally  the  power  of  generating  life
in  an  alkalized  hay-infusion.

1  Briefly  described  in  the  Introduction.


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  147

This  result  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  all  the  results
of  last  year.  Chamber  after  chamber  was  then  charged
with  infusions  of  hay,  which  were  afterwards  subjected
to  the  boiling-  temperature  for  five  minutes.  In  every
chamber  the  infusion  remained  perfectly  clear  until
purposely  infected  from  without.  There  was  no  instance
observed  last  year  in  which  five  minutes'  boiling  failed
to  sterilize  hay-infusion,  whether  neutralized  or  un-
neutralized.

Thus,  on  the  26th  of  November,  1875,  a  group  of
three  test-tubes  was  charged  with  hay-infusion  of  the
same  specific  gravity  and  of  the  same  degree  of  alkalinity
as  that  found  most  resistant  by  Dr.  Koberts.  They  were
protected  by  glass  shades,  the  air  within  the  shade  being
calcined  by  an  incandescent  platinum  wire  in  the  man-
ner described  in  the  last  essay.1  The  tubes  were  boiled
for  five  minutes,  the  subsequent  intrusion  of  contami-
nated air  being  prevented  by  a  ring  of  cotton  -wool.
Thirteen  months  afterwards  the  infusion,  greatly  con-
centrated by  evaporation,  exhibited  its  pristine  deep
transparency.  A  second  similar  group  of  tubes  was
charged  with  alkalized  hay-infusion  on  the  27  th  of  last
January,  and  on  the  5th  of  December  (that  is  to  say,
after  a  period  of  more  than  ten  months)  the  infusion
was  found  perfectly  clear.

A  number  of  hermetically-sealed  tubes  charged  with
the  same  infusion,  and  boiled  for  only  three  minutes,
have  maintained  for  more  than  a  year  both  their  primi-
tive transparency  and  their  water-hammer  sound.  Thus
many  of  the  earliest  experiments  of  the  present  year,
and  the  whole  body  of  last  year's  experiments,  are  in
complete  harmony  with  each  other.

This  harmony  was,  however,  disturbed  by  some  of
the  foregoing  experiments  with  bulbs  and  tubes,  and  it
1  Phil.  Trans.,  vol.  clxvi.  p.  50.
l  2


148         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

was  soon  to  be  further  disturbed  by  experiments  with
closed  chambers.  On  the  6th  of  October,  1876,  for  ex-
ample, an  infusion  was  got  ready  in  strict  imitation  of
that  prepared  on  the  3rd ;  it  was  of  the  same  specific
gravity,  it  was  alkaline  to  the  same  degree,  and  it  was
introduced  in  the  same  manner  into  a  chamber  of  three
tubes ;  but  whereas  the  infusion  of  the  3rd  remained
intact  for  months,  and  would  have  remained  so  indefi-
nitely, a  week  had  not  elapsed  before  every  tube  of  this
new  infusion  was  turbid  and  covered  with  fatty  scum.

§  6.  Desiccation  of  Germs.    New  Hay  and  old.

In  his  work  entitled  'Evolution,  and  the  Origin  of
Life,'  Dr.  Bastian  affirms,  with  repeated  emphasis,  that
living  matter  is  unable  to  maintain  its  life  when  exposed
to  a  temperature  even  below  that  of  boiling  water.  He
refers  to  the  scalding  of  the  hand  and  other  destructive
effects,  and  also  to  the  action  of  boiling  water  on  eggs.
He  also  refers  to  the  experiments  of  Spallanzani  on
seeds,  and  extends  the  results  observed  with  living
matter  of  these  special  kinds,  to  living  matter  generally.
4  It  has  been  shown,'  he  writes,1  '  and  is  believed  by  the
great  majority  of  biologists,  that  the  briefest  exposure
to  the  influence  of  boiling  water  (212°  F.)  is  destructive
of  all  living  matter.'

More  than  ten  years  ago  an  extremely  significant
.observation  directly  bearing  upon  this  subject  was  made
by  the  wool-staplers  of  Elboauf,  in  France.  They  were
accustomed  to  receive  dirty  fleeces  from  Brazil,  and
among  other  matters  entangled  in  the  wool  were  the
seeds  of  a  certain  plant  called  Medicago.  It  had  been
repeatedly  found  by  the  wool-cleaners  that  these  seeds
sometimes  germinated  after  a  period  of  four  hours'
1  <  Evolution,'  p.  46.


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  149


boiling.  The  late  M.  Pouchet  repeated  the  experiment.
He  collected  the  seeds,  boiled  them  for  four  hours,  and
sowed  them  afterwards  in  proper  earth.  To  his  aston-
ishment they  proved  fruitful.  He  then  closely  examined
the  boiled  seeds,  and  found  the  great  majority  of  them
swollen  and  disorganized;  but  amongst  these  ruined
seeds  he  observed  others  which  had  refused  to  imbibe
the  water  or  to  swell  or  break  up  in  any  way.  These  he
carefully  picked  out,  and  sowed  them  and  their  neigh-
bours separately  in  the  same  kind  of  earth.  The  swollen
seeds  were  incapable  of  germination,  while  the  unaltered
ones  rapidly  gave  birth  to  a  crop.  This  was  the  only
instance  of  such  resistance  known  to  Pouchet  when
he  communicated  the  fact  to  the  Paris  Academy  of
Sciences.

The  observation  here  described  stands  recorded  in
the  '  Comptes  Eendus '  for  1866,  vol.  lxiii.  p.  939.  It  is
not  difficult,  indeed,  to  see  that  the  surface  of  a  seed  or
germ  may  be  so  affected  by  desiccation  and  other  causes
as  practically  to  prevent  contact  between  it  and  a  sur-
rounding liquid.1  The  body  of  a  germ,  moreover,  may
be  so  indurated  by  time  and  dryness  as  to  resist  power-
fully the  insinuation  of  water  between  its  constituent
molecules.  It  would  be  difficult  to  cause  such  a  germ
to  imbibe  the  moisture  necessary  to  produce  the  swelling
and  softening  which  precede  its  destruction  in  a  liquid
of  high  temperature.

In  my  last  paper  I  made  some  remarks  upon  this
subject;2  and  in  relation  to  our  present  experiments,

1  In  this  connexion  a  remark  of  Dr.  Roberts  regarding  the  re-
sistance of  chopped  green  vegetables  merits  quotation.  '  The  singu-
lar resistance  of  green  vegetables  to  sterilization  appears  to  be  due
to  .some  peculiarity  of  the  surface,  perhaps  their  smooth  glistening
epidermis,  which  prevented  complete  wetting  of  their  surfaces.'

2  Phil.  Trans.,  vol.  clxvi.  p.  60.


150         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


the  influence  of  drying  and  hardening  was  brought  home
to  me  by  the  fact  that  in  all  the  foregoing  cases  the
infusions  which  five  minutes'  boiling  proved  sufficient
to  sterilize  voere,  without  exception,  derived  from  fresh
hay  mown  in  1876,  while  the  infusions  which  five
minutes'  boiling  failed  to  sterilize  ivere  derived,  with-
out exception,  from  old  hay  mown  either  in  1875  or
some  previous  year.

In  the  earlier  experiments  of  the  present  inquiry
this  distinction  between  old  and  new  hay  came  most
clearly  and  definitely  out.  The  result  was  subsequently
blurred  by  circumstances  which  it  required  time  and
labour  to  unravel,  and  which  will  require  patience  on
the  reader's  part  if  he  would  thoroughly  follow  them.
They  will,  however,  throw  far  more  light  upon  the  real
character  of  these  inquiries,  and  do  more  to  reconcile
the  discords  to  which  researches  on  spontaneous  genera-
tion have  given  birth,  than  if  every  experiment  had
been  a  success  unshaded  by  doubt.

§  7.  Hay-infusions.    Further  experiments  ivith
Closed  Chambers.

With  a  view  to  probing  to  the  uttermost  this  ques-
tion of  drying  and  hardening,  on  the  6th  of  October
an  extensive  series  of  experiments  with  closed  chambers
was  begun.  Three  different  kinds  of  hay  were  em-
ployed:— ist3  Old  hay,  sent  to  me  by  Lord  Claud
Hamilton,  from  Heathfleld,  Sussex ; 1  2nd,  new  hay
from  Heathfleld  (both,  it  may  be  stated,  from  a  some-
what ungenerous  soil);  3rd,  new  hay  purchased  in
London,  and  artificially  dried  for  some  days  upon  a  sand-

1  After  the  possible  influence  of  hard  drying  and  hardening  had
suggested  itself,  I  purposely  introduced  old  hay  from  various  locali-
ties into  the  laboratory.


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  151


bath.  For  these  experiments  eleven  closed  chambers
were  prepared,  as  I  wished  every  result  to  be  based  as
far  as  possible  upon  the  testimony  of  two  chambers.
On  the  6th  of  last  October  they  were  carefully  charged
with  the  infusions,  the  period  of  boiling  afterwards
being  five  minutes.

Two  chambers  were  devoted  to  the  acid  and  two  to
the  alkalized  infusion  of  old  hay.  Two  chambers  were
also  devoted  to  the  acid  and  two  to  the  alkalized  infu-
sion of  dried  hay.  Two  chambers  were  finally  devoted
to  the  alkalized  and  one  to  the  natural  acid  infusion  of
new  Heathfield  hay.

Examined  from  clay  to  day,  differences  were  soon
observed,  not  only  between  the  different  infusions,  but
also  between  different  chambers  containing  the  same
infusion.  Thus  every  tube  of  both  the  chambers  con-
taining the  neutralized  infusion  of  old  hay  became
turbid,  but  the  three  tubes  of  the  one  chamber  were
loaded  in  four  days  with  a  fatty  scum,  while  the  tubes
of  the  other  chamber  remained  for  ten  days  perfectly
free  from  scum.  The  two  chambers  containing  the
acid  infusion  of  old  hay  exhibited  similar  differences.
Every  tube  in  both  of  them  became  turbid ;  but  in  one
of  them  the  infusion  was  scumless  throughout,  while
in  the  other  each  of  the  three  tubes  was  heavily  laden
with  scum.

The  two  chambers  containing  the  alkalized  infusion
of  dried  London  hay  had  all  their  tubes  turbid  and
covered  with  scum.  In  the  case  of  the  acid  infusion  of
dried  hay,  the  tubes  of  one  of  the  chambers  became
turbid,  while  the  tubes  of  the  other  chamber  remained
clear.

The  two  chambers  of  alkalized  new  Heathfield  hay-
infusion  were  also  in  disaccord.  In  the  one  chamber  all
three  tubes  became  turbid  and  covered  with  scum,


152


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


while  in  the  other  chamber  the  three  tubes  remained
sensibly  clear  and  free  from  scum.  Nor  did  the  three
tubes  of  the  single  chamber  charged  with  the  new
Heathfield  acid  infusion  present  the  same  appearance  ;
for  while  one  tube  became  thickly  turbid,  the  other  two
remained  perfectly  pellucid.

Amid  this  confusion,  the  only  point  worth  dwelling
on  is,  that  while  no  single  case  of  escape  occurred  with
the  old-hay  infusion,  whether  acid  or  neutral,  with  the
infusions  of  both  dried  and  undried  new  hay  a  certain
percentage  of  the  tubes  remained  sterile.

Keflection  on  these  results  naturally  drew  suspicion
upon  the  chambers.  They  had  been  used  before,  and,
though  carefully  cleansed,  some  unobserved  source  of
infection  may  have  clung  to  them.  This,  at  all  events,
seemed  the  most  rational  way  of  accounting  for  the
differences  observed  between  samples  of  the  self-same
infusion  placed  in  different  chambers.  Hence  my  desire
to  expose  a  fresh  series  of  infusions  in  chambers  which
had  never  been  used  before.

Six  new  ones  were  therefore  constructed,  each  of
them  containing  six  tubes.  These  were  charged  on  the
3rd  of  November  with  infusions  of  old  London  hay,
old  Heathfield  hay,  new  London  hay,  and  dried  London
hay.  Two  chambers  were  devoted  to  each  infusion,
which  in  the  one  chamber  was  neutralized  and  in  the
other  unneutralized.

The  six  tubes  in  each  chamber  were  arranged  in  two
rows  of  three  tubes  each.  Those  nearest  to  the  glass
front  were  called  the  front  tubes,  the  others  the  back
tubes.  The  infusion  intended  for  the  unneutralized
chamber  was  unboiled  before  its  introduction  into  the
three  back  tubes,  and  boiled  in  those  tubes  for  five
minutes  afterwards  ;  the  infusion  for  the  front  tubes  was


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  153

boiled  for  fifteen  minutes  before  introduction  and  for
five  minutes  afterwards.  These  differences  in  the  mode
and  period  of  boiling  were  adopted  to  ascertain  whether
they  had  any  influence  on  the  subsequent  development,
of  life.  In  the  case  of  the  neutralized  chambers,  the
infusion  for  the  three  back  tubes  was  boiled  for  fifteen
minutes  outside  before  neutralization,  and  five  minutes
in  the  chamber  after  neutralization.  The  infusion  for
the  three  front  tubes  was  boiled  fifteen  minutes  outside
after  neutralization,  and  five  minutes  afterwards  in  the
chamber.  If  the  potash  used  for  neutralization  carried
germs  into  the  infusion,  the  difference  between  five  and
twenty  minutes  in  the  period  of  boiling  might,  it  was
thought,  declare  itself  in  the  subsequent  phenomena.

Four  days  after  its  introduction  the  old  Heathfield
acid  infusion  was  found  turbid  throughout  and  covered
with  scum.  The  scum  and  turbidity  were  sensibly  the
same  in  all  the  tubes,  though  the  period  of  boiling
varied  from  five  to  twenty  minutes.  On  the  same  clay
the  neutralized  infusion  of  the  same  hay  was  perfectly
brilliant  and  free  from  scum.  Three  days  subsequently,
however  (that  is  to  say,  on  the  10th  of  November),
the  neutralized  tubes  also  became  turbid  and  covered
with  scum.

The  salient  fact  here  to  be  noted  is,  that  in  neither
the  neutral  nor  the  acid  chamber  did  a  single  tube  of
the  old  Heathfield  hay-infusion  maintain  its  primitive
clearness  and  freedom  from  scum.

The  old  London  hay  behaved  substantially  as  the
old  Heathfield  hay,  no  single  tube  escaping  either  in  the
neutralized  or  the  unneutralized  chamber.

The  dried  new  London  hay  comes  next.  A  week
after  its  introduction  every  one  of  the  six  tubes  con-
taining the  acid  infusion  was  turbid  and  coated  with
scum.    In  the  neutralized  chamber,  on  the  contrary,


154


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


two  only  of  the  back  tubes  gave  way,  the  third  back
tube  and  the  three  front  tubes  remaining  clear.

On  the  3rd  of  November,  moreover,  a  new  chamber  of
six  tubes  was  charged  with  an  infusion  of  new  London
hay.  Three  of  the  tubes  were  neutralized  and  three
unneutralized.  Both  infusions  were  introduced  into  the
chamber  unboiled,  and  were  boiled  afterwards  for  five
minutes.  In  a  week  all  the  tubes  had  given  way,  be-
coming turbid,  in  the  same  degree  and  covered  to  the
same  extent  with  scum.  The  newness  of  the  hay  had
failed  to  secure  the  sterility  of  the  infusions.

Nothing  of  this  kind  occurred  in  the  experiments  of
last  year.  It  was  then  found  that  hay-infusions  of  all
kinds  were  uniformly  sterilized  by  five  minutes'  boiling.

Guided  by  such  hints  as  the  experiments  furnished,
I  continued  to  work.  On  the  4th  of  November  four
closed  chambers  of  three  tubes  each  were  charged
with  infusions  of  old  and  new  Heathfield  hay— two
chambers  with  the  one,  and  two  chambers  with  the
other.  One  chamber  of  each  pair  contained  a  neutral-
ized, the  other  an  unneutralized  infusion,  and  the  time
of  boiling  was  ten  minutes.  Six  days  subsequently  the
infusion  of  new  hay,  both  neutralized  and  unneutralized,
was  found  perfectly  unchanged.  Of  the  old-hay  in-
fusion, on  the  other  hand,  only  one  of  the  six  tubes
escaped.  The  three  acid  tubes  became  completely  tur-
bid, while  two  out  of  the  three  neutral  ones  fell  into  the
same  condition.

§  8.  Experiments  with  Soaked  Hay.

Pondering  still  further  on  the  influence  of  drying
and  hardening,  and  recognizing  the  necessity  of  not
only  wetting  but  also  softening  the  germs,  the  thought


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  155


occurred  to  me  of  soaking  the  hay  for  some  days  prior
to  digesting-  it.  Old  London  hay  was  accordingly
chopped  tip  and  placed  in  three  glass  vessels— one  con-
taining distilled  water,  another  acidulated  water,  and  a
third  alkalized  water.  The  superior  extractive  power
of  the  alkalized  liquid  was  at  once  manifest ;  it  rapidly
assumed  a  dark  colour.  The  distilled  water  came  next,
yielding  a  colour  less  deep  than  that  of  the  alkalized,
but  more  deep  than  that  of  the  acidulated  water.  The
alkaline  and  distilled-water  infusions  emitted  a  rich
odour  of  hay,  while  the  smell  of  the  acid  infusion  was
very  faint,  and  not  like  that  of  hay.  The  hay  was  per-
mitted to  soak  from  the  8th  to  the  11th  of  November.
It  was  then  digested  for  three  hours  in  the  same  liquid
at  a  temperature  of  120°  F.,  boiled,  filtered,  and  intro-
duced into  the  closed  chambers,  where  it  was  reboiled  in
each  case  for  five  minutes.

Prior  to  digesting  the  hay  in  the  liquid  in  which  it
had  been  soaked,  Bacteria  had  developed  in  swarms.
These,  of  course,  were  killed  by  the  boiling,  and  they
were  not  entirely  removed  by  the  filtration.  The  alka-
line infusion,  indeed,  though  filtered  repeatedly,  was
sufficiently  turbid  to  prevent  the  flame  of  a  candle
placed  behind  the  tubes  containing  it  from  being  seen.
The  same  to  a  less  extent  was  true  of  the  distilled-
water  infusion.  This  latter  had  been  divided  into  two
portions,  one  of  which  was  accurately  neutralized,  and
the  other  left  unneutralized,  a  separate  chamber  being
devoted  to  each.

From  the  11th  to  the  18th  of  November  the  only
change  observed  in  any  of  the  infusions  was  in  the
direction  of  increased  transparency.  They  all  became
clearer  with  time,  the  distilled-water  infusions  becoming
particularly  clear  and  brilliant  at  the  top.  After  two  or
three  days'  quiet  the  alkaline  infusion  allowed  a  flame


156


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


placed  behind  it  to  be  seen  of  a  deep  red.  The  acidu-
lated-water infusion  remained  entirely  unchanged  ;  but
this  is  not  worth  dwelling  on,  for  in  this  case,  even
when  exposed  to  the  common  air,  the  infusion  resisted
infection  for  a  considerable  time.

In  no  case  was  the  fatty  scum  which  had  been
already  so  frequently  observed  formed  in  any  one  of  the
tubes.  Some  change  inimical  to  the  particular  organ-
isms which  produce  this  scum  must  have  been  caused  by
the  soaking  of  the  hay.

Examined  microscopically  on  the  1 8th  of  November
these  infusions,  I  thought,  exhibited  undoubted  evi-
dences of  Bacterial  life.  Bacterial  forms  were  unques-
tionably there  in  considerable  numbers,  more  particularly
in  the  sediment  at  the  bottoms  of  the  tubes.  Nor  do  I
now  see  any  valid  grounds  for  doubting  the  presence  of
life  ;  but  I  was  warned  against  drawing  too  hastily  the
conclusion  which  first  prompted  itself,  by  boiling  an  in-
fusion swarming  with  active  Bacteria,  and  submitting
the  liquid  after  cooling  to  microscopic  examination.
Here  also  the  dead  Bacterial  forms  were  preserved,  and
it  was  extremely  difficult  to  distinguish  their  motions,
which  were  certainly  Brownian  motions,  from  those  ob-
served in  the  protected  infusions  of  soaked  hay.

The  experiment  was  thought  worth  repeating.  On
the  16th  of  November  accordingly  chopped  bundles  of
old  Heathfield  hay  and  new  Heathfield  hay,  and  of  old
London  hay  and  new  London  hay,  were  placed  in  glass
dishes  containing  distilled  water,  and  were  thus  soaked
until  the  18th.  They  were  then  moved  from  the  lower
laboratory,  and  taken,  with  their  glass  covers,  to  a  dis-
tant room  at  the  top  of  the  Eoyal  Institution.  Here
the  four  specimens  of  hay  were  digested  for  three  hours
at  a  temperature  of  120°  Fahr.  They  were  filtered,
boiled,  refiltered,  some  of  them  through  100  layers  of


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  157

filter-paper  ;  after  which  they  were  introduced  into  four
closed  chambers  of  six  tubes  each,  and  then  boiled  for
five  minutes.

On  the  20th  of  November  the  infusions  in  all  the
chambers  appeared  to  be  as  free  from  organisms  as  at
first.  The  new  Heathfield  and  the  new  London  hay-
infusions  in  their  respective  chambers  had  their  some-
what turbid  columns  surmounted  by  an  exceedingly
clear  zone  of  liquid,  due,  I  should  consider,  to  the  me-
chanical subsidence  of  the  particles,  had  Dot  subsequent
experience  taught  me  to  regard  this  appearance  as  a  sign
of  life.

On  the  23rd  scum  had  begun  to  gather  on  every
tube  of  the  case  containing  the  infusion  of  old  Heath  -
field  hay.  On  the  30th  this  scum  continued,  but  there
was  no  trace  of  it  in  any  of  the  chambers  containing
new  Heathfield  hay,  new  London  hay,  and  old  London
hay.  These  infusions  were  all  somewhat  turbid  ;  but  the
turbidity  differed  very  little  from  that  exhibited  when
the  infusions  were  prepared.

I  spent  a  good  deal  of  time  over  these  infusions  of
soaked  hay,  both  with  the  microscope  and  otherwise,
but  the  recorded  observations  would  not  add  materially
to  our  knowledge.  I  therefore  dismiss  them  with  the
remark  that  their  general  drift  was  in  favour  of  the  idea
that  the  extraordinary  resistance  to  sterilization  mani-
fested by  the  old-hay  infusions  is  the  result  of  hardening
and  desiccation.  The  foregoing  observations,  however,
have  been  noted,  more  with  the  view  of  indicating  my
line  of  thought  than  of  claiming  for  them  any  value
whatever  as  a  demonstration.


158         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


§  9.  Infusions  of  Fungi.

Turning  from  hay  to  substances  in  which  germs,  if
they  existed,  could  not  be  desiccated,  I  felt  pretty  sure
that  infusions  of  such  substances  would  be  unable  to
resist  the  boiling  temperature.  To  test  the  correctness
of  this  view  the  following  experiments  were  made  : —
Three  different  kinds  of  fungi  (red,  black,  and  yellow)
were  gathered  in  Heathfield  Park  on  the  13th  of  Octo-
ber, and  digested  separately  in  London  on  the  following
day.  Three  tubes  of  a  closed  chamber  containing  six
tubes  were  charged  with  the  recl-fungus  infusion  and
three  with  the  black,  while  a  second  chamber  of  three
tubes  was  charged  with  the  yellow-fungus  infusion.
They  were  all  boiled  for  five  minutes  after  their  intro-.
duction  into  the  chambers.

For  two  or  three  days  all  the  infusions  continued
clear ;  but  they  subsequently  broke  down,  every  tube
of  the  nine  becoming  turbid  with  organisms  and  covered
with  scum.

'  Examined  microscopically  on  the  8th  of  November
the  red-fungus  infusion  was  found  charged  with  a  mul-
titude of  spore-like  bodies,  massed  in  some  places  con-
tinuously together,  in  others  floating  freely  in  the  liquid.
Among  these  ran  long  filaments,  dotted  with  spore-like
specks  from  beginning  to  end.  There  was  a  consider-
able number  of  Vibrios  in  one  of  the  tubes.  The  black-
fungus  infusion  contained  a  mixed  population  of  Vibrios
and  Bacteria  with  spore-filled  filaments.  Swarms  of
Bacteria  were  observed  in  the  red-fungus  infusion.

Suspicious  of  the  chambers  in  which  these  infusions
had  been  exposed,  I  had  three  new  ones  constructed
and  provided  with  new  tubes.  A  fresh  supply  of  fungi
was  sent  to  me  from  Heathfield,  a  tree  fungus  being,


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  159


however,  substituted  for  the  black  oue  used  in  the
former  experiments.  On  the  1st  of  November  the
three  infusions  were  very  carefully  introduced  into
three  chambers,  a  chamber  being  devoted  to  each  in-
fusion. I  thought  it  advisable  to  vary  the  period  of
subsequent  boiling.  One  tube  of  the  yellow  fungus  was
therefore  boiled  for  five,  one  for  ten,  and  one  for  fifteen
minutes;  but  as  it  was  difficult  to  save  the  infusion
from  waste  when  the  boiling  was  long  continued,  one
tube  of  each  of  the  other  two  infusions  was  boiled  for
five  minutes,  and  the  other  two  for  ten.  Tubes  charged
with  the  respective  infusions  were  exposed  at  the  same
time  to  the  common  air.

In  two  days  the  outside  tubes  containing  the  red-
and  yellow-fungus  infusion  became  turbid  and  covered
with  the  fatty  scum  so  prevalent  in  our  laboratory  this
year.  No  scum  had  formed  on  the  surface  of  the  ex-
posed tree-fungus  infusion,  which,  to  casual  observation,
appeared  quite  black.  Closer  scrutiny,  however,  showed
that  it  transmitted  the  deepest  red  of  the  spectrum,  and
was  apparently  quite  free  from  floating  matter.  It
changed  rapidly  during  the  night  of  the  3rd,  and  on  the
morning  of  the  4th  of-  November  the  bottom  of  this
tube  was  found  laden  with  a  heavy  dark-brown  precipi-
tate, while  numerous  dark-brown  flocculi  floated  in  the
liquid  overhead,  which  had  become  almost  as  clear  and
colourless  as  water.  Under  the  microscope  the  dark-
brown  mass  resolved  itself  into  confused  moss-like
patches  and  long  cylindrical  sheaths  dotted  throughout
with  small  dark  specks.  These  filaments  with  spore-
like specks  have  been  of  very  frequent  occurrence  in
this  inquiry.

The  deportment  of  the  closed  chambers  was  as  fol-
lows : — 1.  Yellow  fungus  :  the  liquid  in  the  three  tubes
remained  perfectly  and  permanently  clear  and  without


160         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

a  trace  of  the  scum  which  loaded  the  infusion  outside.
2.  Eed  fungus :  one  of  the  three  tubes  became  thickly
turbid,  while  the  two  others  maintained  their  pristine
brilliancy.  3.  Tree  fungus :  one  of  the  tubes  became
thickly  turbid,  the  two  others  remained  permanently  clear.

I  asked  myself  why  should  one  tube  of  the  red-fungus
give  way  and  the  others  remain  intact?  The  answer
seemed  at  hand.  The  turbid  tube  had  been  boiled  for
only  five  minutes,  while  the  clear  ones  had  been  boiled
for  ten.  On  consulting  the  adjacent  chamber  this  pos-
sible explanation  was  blown  to  the  winds,  for  here  the
turbid  tube  had  been  boiled  for  ten  minutes,  while  its
untainted  neighbour  had  been  boiled  for  only  five.

Thus,  although  the  more  carefid  repetition  of  the
experiments  did  not  secure  every  tube  from  infection,
the  escape  of  seven  out  of  nine  tubes  entirely  destroys
the  presumption  of  spontaneous  life-development  which
the  first  experiments  might  suggest  to  some  minds.

Wishing  to  observe  more  attentively  the  action  of
Common  uncleansed  air  upon  boiled  fungus-infusions,  a
tray  of  100  tubes  was  cbarged  with  them  on  the  14th
of  October.  Thirty-five  tubes  were  filled  with  black,
thirty-five  with  yellow,  and  thirty  with  red-fungus  in-
fusion. On  the  1 6th  of  October  every  one  of  the  yellow-
fungus  tubes  was  turbid  and  covered  with  a  thick,  cohe-
rent, cobweb-like  scum.  The  surfaces  of  the  black-
fungus  tubes  were  also  sprinkled  with  spots  of  white
scum.  Turbidity  was  the  only  change  observed  in  the
red-fungus  tubes.    They  were  wholly  free  from  scum.

Examined  microscopically  on  the  2nd  of  November
the  yellow-fungus  tubes  were  for  the  most  part  found
swarming  with  exceedingly  small  and  active  Bacteria;
the  red-fungus  tubes  also  swarmed  with  Bacteria,  some
beaded  Vibrios  being  mingled  with  them.  In  many  of
the  tubes  examined  galloping  monads  appeared,  attain-


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  16T


ing  an  astounding  development  in  the  black- fungus  infu-
sion. Patches  of  moss-like  matter  would  appear  here
and  there  in  the  field  of  the  microscope ;  and  it  was  no
uncommon  thing  to  see  from  ten  to  twenty  monads
nestling  and  quivering  in  this  'moss,7  and  darting
actively  in  and  out  of  it.  They  put  me  in  mind  of
frogs  amid  their  spawn ;  and  as  I  looked  at  them  my
belief  in  the  animality  of  the  one  was  almost  as  strong
as  in  that  of  the  other.  Almost  every  patch  of  spawn-
like matter  had  its  colony.  In  some  cases  hardly  any
thing  but  monads  was  to  'be  seen ;  but  in  others  the
crowding  of  active  Vibrios  was  so  great  that  the  monads
wholly  retreated  from  the  field.


§  10.  Infusions  of  Cucumber,  Beetroot,  &c.

The  fungi  having  disappeared  on  the  approach  of
winter,  I  turned  to  cucumber  and  beetroot,  not  expecting
that  their  sterilization  would  offer  any  difficulty.  Two
closed  chambers  were  accordingly  prepared,  left  for  the
proper  time  in  quietness,  and  on  the  7th  of  November
were  charged,  the  one  with  the  cucumber-  and  the  other
with  the  beet-root  infusion.  In  a  few  days  the  infu-
sions in  both  chambers  broke  down,  first  losing  their  tran-
sparency and  afterwards  loading  themselves  with  fatty
scum.    Thus  perplexities  accumulated.

On  the  18th  of  November  twenty-four  Cohn's  tubes1
were  charged  with  infusions  of  cucumber,  beetroot,  par-
snep,  and  turnip,  six  tubes  being  devoted  to  each  infu-
sion.  They  were  placed  in  a  vessel  of  cold  water,  raised
gradually  to  the  boiling-point,  and  maintained  at  the
bulling  temperature  for  ten  minutes.  Before  their  re-
moval from  the  hot  liquid  they  were  one  and  all  plugged
with  cotton-wool.

1  See  §  4.
M


162         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

On  the  30th  of  November  all  the  infusions  were
thickly  turbid  throughout  and  heavily  coated  with  scum.

From  some  of  the  precautions  already  mentioned  it
may  be  inferred  that  before  this  point  of  the  inquiry
had  been  reached,  I  had  begun  to  suspect  the  atmo-
sphere in  which  I  worked.    Hay  of  various  kinds,  both
-old  and  new,  had  been  exposed  and  shaken  about  in  the
laboratory,  the  air  of  which  doubtless  contained  multi-
tudes of  spores  which  diffused  and  insinuated  themselves
everywhere.    So,  at  all  events,  I  reasoned.    On  the
20th  of  November,  therefore,  I  had  infusions  of  cucum-
ber, beetroot,  parsnep,  and  turnip  prepared,  far  from  the
laboratory,  in  one  of  the  highest  rooms  of  the  Koyal
Institution,  and  introduced  into  four  new  chambers  of
three  tubes  each.    I  deemed  the  precaution  of  prepar-
ing the  infusions  and  introducing  them  in  the  distant
room  sufficient.    Accordingly,  when  the  chambers  were
charged  they  were  carried  down,  and  the  infusions  boiled

in  the  laboratory.

Two  days  afterwards  the  parsnep  alone  remained  clear.
This,  however,  was  only  a  respite,  for  a  day  or  two  sub-
sequently it  fell  into  the  condition  of  its  neighbours.
On  the  30th  of  November  both  turnip-  and  parsnep-
infusions  were  turbid  throughout,  and  laden  at  the
surface  with  thick  fatty  scum.    The  cucumber  was  also
heavily  laden  with  scum,  which  sent  long  streamer-like
filaments  into  the  subjacent  liquid.    The  beetroot  agreed
with  the  others  in  becoming  turbid,  but  differed  from
them  in  remaining  free  from  scum.  In  no  case  last  year
did  turnip-infusion  show  the  deportment  here  described.
Knowing,  then,  from  multiplied  experiments,  that  turnip
possessed  no  inherent  power  of  life-development,  the
conclusion  was  irresistible  that  its  present  behaviour
and  with  it  the  behaviour  of  cucumber,  beetroot,  and
parsnep,  were  due  to  infection  from  without.


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  163

I  once  more  tried  removal  to  a  distant  room,  with
the  added  precaution  of  not  only  introducing  the  infu-
sions into  the  chambers  upstairs,  but  of  boiling  them
there.  It  had  been  noticed  that  when  the  test-tubes
were  withdrawn  from  the  oil-bath,  and  the  discharge
of  steam  into  the  chambers  ceased,  a  somewhat  violent
entrance  of  the  air  into  the  cooling  chamber  was  the
consequence.  To  sift  such  air  of  its  germs,  both  the
funnel  of  the  pipette  and  the  open  ends  of  the  bent
tubes  were  carefully  stopped  with  cotton -wool.  The
wool  was  never  removed  from  the  funnel,  and  it  was
not  removed  from  the  bent  tubes  until  the  chamber  had
thoroughly  cooled.  The  same  vegetables  were  operated
on,  viz.  cucumber,  beetroot,  turnip,  and  parsnep.  On
the  25th  of  November  four  chambers  were  charged  with
the  infusions.  On  the  30th  they  were  one  and  all  covered
with  a  layer  of  deeply  pitted  and  corrugated  fatty
scum.  Thus  far,  then,  I  was  defeated  in  my  efforts  to
escape  contamination.

During  these  experiments  a  fact  was  observed  which
repeated  itself  afterwards  in  other  instances.  Samples
of  the  different  infusions  were  always  exposed  to  the
common  air  beside  their  respective  chambers,  and  in
general  these  outside  samples  became  turbid  and  covered
with  scum  a  day  or  so  before  the  interior  tubes  gave
notice  of  breaking  down ;  but  here,  in  the  case  of  the
turnip,  the  outside  tube  continued  pellucid  and  free
from  life  for  some  time  after  the  inside  ones  had  become
turbid  with  organisms.  How  could  this  be  ?  The  case
of  my  two  trays  placed  one  above  the  other  last  year  1
suggested  itself  to  my  memory.  In  regard  to  life-de-
velopment it  was  then  found  that  the  lower  tray  was
always  in  advance  of  the  upper  one.    As  pointed  out

1  Phil.  Trans.,  vol.  clxvi.  p.  68.
m  2


164         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


at  the  time,  the  absence  of  agitation  which  permitted
the  germs  to  sink  into  its  tubes  was  the  cause  of  the
quicker  contamination  of  the  lower  tray.  No  other
cause  appeared  to  me  assignable  in  the  present  instance.
By  some  means  or  other  germs  had  insinuated  them-
selves into  my  closed  chamber,  where  the  tranquillity  of
the  air  permitted  them  to  sink  into  the  infusion,  and
thus  produce  effects  in  advance  of  those  produced  by
the  unquiet  air  outside.    So,  at  all  events,  I  reasoned.

But  how  could  the  germs  get  into  the  chamber  ?  I
could,  at  the  moment,  fix  only  upon  one  way.  The
weather  had  changed  from  warm  to  cold  and  from  cold
to  warm.  This  genial  outside  temperature  sometimes
caused  the  air  surrounding  the  infusions  to  rise  to  up-
wards of  90°  Fahr.,  and  we  had  often  to  work  in  this
heat.  To  moderate  it,  I  sometimes  partially  turned  off
the  gas,  thus  lowering  the  temperature  of  the  room  10°
or  more.  The  contraction  of  the  air  within  the  closed
chambers  followed  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  the  bent
tubes  being  open,  I  thought  the  entrance  of  the  external
air  might  be  sufficiently  rapid  to  carry  germs  along
with  it.

A  new  chamber  of  six  tubes  was  therefore  prepared
upstairs,  three  of  its  tubes  being  charged  with  cucum-
ber- and  three  with  turnip-infusion  on  the  27th  of
November.  The  pipette  funnel  and  the  bent  tubes
were  plugged  above  with  cotton-wool,  which  was  not
removed  from  them  afterwards.  I  took  care,  moreover,
not  to  alter  the  gas-stoves  in  any  way.  My  care  was
nugatory.  In  three  days  every  tube  of  the  six  was
laden  with  life.  Another  chamber  of  six  tubes,  charged
on  the  30th  of  November  with  cucumber-infusion,  and
two  additional  ones  prepared  on  December  1st,  shared
the  same  fate.

a      Slices  of  cucumber  were  next  digested  for  three


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  165

hours  ;  the  infusion  was  filtered,  boiled,  and  such  pre-
cipitated matter  as  appeared  on  boiling  was  removed  by
refiltering.  The  liquid  thus  prepared  was  introduced
■into  five  thick  glass  tubes,  which  were  hermetically
sealed,  placed  in  a  cold  oil-bath,  gradually  heated  to
230°,  and  maintained  at  that  temperature  for  a  quarter
of  an  hour.  The  tubes  being  removed  and  permitted
to  cool,  the  infusion  was  introduced  into  a  chamber  of
six  tubes,  and  boiled  there  for  five  minutes.

The  previous  superheating  of  the  infusion  did  not
even  retard  the  development  of  life,  for  in  less  than  two
days  every  tube  in  the  chamber  swarmed  with  Bacteria.
Thus  far,  then,  every  attempt  at  a  solution  was  unsuc-
cessful.

But  why,  it  may  be  asked,  attempt  such  solutions  ?
Was  it  not  mere  prejudice  against  the  doctrine  of  spon-
taneous generation  that  prevented  me  from  frankly
submitting  to  the  apparent  logic  of  facts,  and  admitting
the  experiments  just  recorded  to  be  a  demonstration  of
the  doctrine?  By  no  means.  The  only  prejudice  I
feel  is  the  wholesome  repugnance  to  accepting  momen-
tous conclusions  on  insufficient  grounds.  Hume's  cele-
brated argument  has  its  application  here.  Taking  an-
tecedent experience  fully  into  account,  it  was  far  easier
for  me  to  believe  my  knowledge  imperfect,  or  my
present  work  erroneous,  than  to  believe  the'  doctrine  of
spontaneous  generation  true.

§  11.  N&iv  Experiments  on  Animal  Infusions.
Contradictory  results.

In  the  course  of  this  inquiry  I  was  continually  re-
minded of  nay  experiments  in  1875,  when  the  most
complete  immunity  from  Bacterial  or  fungoid  life  was
so  readily  secured.    I  had  operated  many  times  with


166         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIE.

turnip,  never  finding  the  least  difficulty  as  to  its  steriliza-
tion. It  is  certain  that  the  care  bestowed  in  preparing
the  turnip-infusion  on  the  20th  of  November,  1876,  was
greater  than  that  bestowed  upon  the  same  infusion  in
1875.  But  whereas  the  latter  was  invariably  sterilized
by  five  minutes'  boiling,  remaining  afterwards  as  pel-
lucid as  distilled  water,  the  former,  three  days  after  its
preparation,  became  thickly  turbicl  and  swarming  with
life.  I  extended  the  present  inquiry  to  other  substances
whose  deportment  was  familiar  to  me  last  year,  some  of
whose  infusions,  indeed,  still  remain  with  me  as  clear  as
they  were  on  the  day  of  their  preparation.

On  the  1st  of  December,  for  example,  infusions  of
beef,  mutton,  pork,  herring,  haddock,  and  sole  were
prepared,  and  introduced  into  six  closed  chambers,  each
containing  three  tubes.  On  the  5th  of  December  the
pork,  beef,  mutton,  and  haddock  were  all  covered  with
a  fatty  corrugated  scum.  A  second  chamber,  containing
artichoke-infusion,  prepared  at  the  same  time,  was  found
on  the  5th  more  turbid  than  any  of  the  animal  infu-
sions, and  equally  covered  with  scum.  In  the  animal
infusions,  indeed,  the  body  of  the  liquid  underneath  the
scum  maintained  a  surprising  brilliancy,  the  develop-
ment of  life  being  confined  to  the  layer  in  immediate
contact  with  the  atmospherie  oxygen.

On  the  5th  of  December  the  herring-  and  sole-infu-
sions were  both  clear ;  but  this  was  only  a  respite,  for
on  the  6th  white  spots  appeared  on  the  latter,  which
extended  until  they  covered  the  whole  surface.  The
herring-infusion  remained  clear  for  a  week,  after  which
small  specks  began  to  appear  on  its  surface.  They
never  reached  the  development  of  the  scum  which
coated  the  other  infusions.  It  sometimes  occurred  to
me  that  the  oil  of  this  fish  exercises  a  certain  antiseptic
action.


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  167

Last  year  I  preserved  infusion  of  herring  perfectly
pellucid  for  months,  even  in  a  chamber  so  leaky  that
the  light  could  be  seen  through  its  chinks.  I  had,
moreover,  no  failure  with  any  of  the  animal  infusions
here  enumerated.  Last  year  they  all  remained  sweet
and  clear;  this  year,  with  far  greater  precaution,  I
failed  to  proteet  any  of  them  from  putrefaction.  Ke-
flection  on  these  results,  renders,  I  think,  but  one  con-
clusion possible  to  the  scientific  mind.  It  will  be  loth
to  assume  that  mutton,  beef,  pork,  haddock,  herring,
and  sole  had  totally  changed  their  natures,  and  con-
tracted qualities  and  powers  in  1876  which  they  did
not  possess  in  1875.'  But  if  the  origination  of  the
observed  life  be  denied  to  the  infusions  themselves,
there  is  but  one  other  source  to  which  it  could  be  re-
ferred, namely,  atmospheric  contamination.

It  became,  indeed,  more  and  more  obvious  to  me  that,
in  consequence  of  increased  vitality  or  virulence  in  the
contagia  afloat  this  year,  liberties  in  the  preparation  of
the  infusions  or  defects  in  the  construction  of  closed
chambers  which  would  have  been  of  no  moment  a  year
ago  were  sufficient  to  ruin  the  experiments,  and  render
nugatory  the  usual  means  of  sterilization.  Against
such  defects  I  continued  to  struggle.    With  a  view  to
stopping  ail  chinks  and  crannies  which  might  permit
of  the  entrance  of  contamination,  I  had  some  of  the
chambers  carefully  coated  with  oil-silk  and  others
covered  with  three  coatings  of  strong  paint;  and  as
failure  had  attended  my  efforts  to  procure  an  uninfected
atmosphere  upstairs,  I  had  the  entire  apparatus  used
for  digesting,  filtering,  and  boiling  removed  to  a  store-
room at  the  base  of  the  Royal  Institution.    The  floor
of  the  room  was  of  stone,  and  it  was  covered  by  no
carpet.    Prior  to  going  into  it,  moreover,  I  caused  my
assistant  to  remove  the  clothes  which  he  had  previously


1G8         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


worn  in  the  laboratory  and  to  dress  himself  in  others'.
The  infusions  prepared  under  these  conditions  were—
cucumber,  melon,  turnip,  and  artichoke,  which,  from
beginning  to  end,  were  operated  on  below  stairs.  Two
chambers  were  devoted  to  each  infusion,  and  after  the
usual  boiling  in  the  chambers  they  were  permitted  to
remain  in  the  store-room  throughout  the  night,  being
transferred  to  the  warm  laboratory  next  morning.

I  fully  expected  that  the  majority  of  these  chambers
would  prove  sterile.    I  did  not  expect  to  find  them  all
in  this  condition,  because  the  chambers  had  been  put
together  in  the  laboratory,  the  air  of  which  must  have
deposited  its  germs  not  only  on  the  glycerine-coated
interior  of  the  chambers,  but  also  on  the  inner  surfaces
of  the  test-tubes.    My  expectation,  moderate  as  it  was,
was  not  realized.    The  only  noticeable  peculiarity  in
the  deportment  of  the  infusions  was  that  they  yielded
tardily,  but  in  the  end  every  one  of  them,  without
exception,  broke  down-
Was  the  infeetion  in  this  case  derived  from  the  air
of  the  store-room  ?  I  thiuk  not ;  and  for  this  reason  : —
On  the  27th  of  December  four  hermetically- sealed  flasks,
charged  with  a  cucumber-infusion  which  had  remained
perfectly  pellucid  for  some  weeks,  were  opened  in  the
store-room ;  four  similar  flasks,  charged  with  the  same
infusion,  were  opened  at  the  same  time  in  the  laboratory.
On  the  31st  of  December  the  whole  group  of  the  latter
four  was  found  invaded  by  organisms,  while  those
opened  in  the  store-room  contracted  no  infeetion  and
developed  no  life.    I  do  not  imagine,  therefore,  that  the
air  of  the  store-room  had  anything  to  do  with  the  con-
tamination of  the  infusions  contained  in  the  closed  cham-
bers, but  conclude  that  the  contagium  already  existed
in  the  chambers  when  they  were  taken  down  stairs.
They  acted  as  infected  houses  placed  in  salubrious  air.


VITALITY  OF  PUTEEF ACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  169


Fig.  1G.


§  12.  Infusions  protected  by  Glass  Shades
containing  Calcined  Air.

I  have  already  described  this  mode  of  experiment.1
The  shades,  stood  upon  circular  plates  of  wood,  each
supported  on  a  tripod  (see  fig.  16).    Under  each  shade
were  two  upright  rods  of  stout  copper  wire,  and  stretch-
ing from  rod  to  rod  was  a  spiral  (p)  of  platinum  wire.
The  copper  wires  passed
through  the  slab  of  wood,
their  free  ends  being  in
the  air.    The  rim  of  eaeh
shade  was  surrounded  by  a
collar  of  tin  attached  by
wax  to  the  slab,  with  a
space  of  about  half  an
inch  between  the  collar
and  the  glass.    After  the  /««^
introduction  of  the  infu-
sions and  the  mounting  of
the  shades,  this  annular
space   was   packed   with  ^
cotton-wool.       The  aim
here  was  to  destroy  the
floating  matter  of  the  air  by  the  incandescent  pla-
tinum spiral.    The  air  heated  by  the  spiral  would  of
course  expand,  passing  outwards  through  the  cotton-
wool, while  the  air  re-entering,  on  the  cooling  of
the  shade,  would  be  duly  sifted  by  the  wool.    In  my
former  experiments  five  minutes'  incandescence  sufficed
to  render  the  air  absolutely  inoperative  on  infusions
exposed  to  its  action.

In  the  present  experiments  the  period  of  incan-
1  Phil.  Trails,  vol.  clxvi.  p.  50.


170         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


descence  was  doubled,  ten  minutes  being  allowed  in-
stead of  five,  while  the  wire  was  raised  to  the  highest
possible  degree  of  incandescence.  The  infusions  em-
ployed were  turnip  and  cucumber,  a  group  of  three
tubes  being  charged  with  each.  After  the  air  had  been
calcined,  the  infusions  were  boiled  for  five  minutes  in
an  oil-bath.  With  this  mode  of  treatment  not  a  single
failure  occurred  in  1875,  turnip-infusion  being  among
the  number  of  liquids  thus  treated.  This  year  two  days
sufficed  to  render  every  one  of  the  six  tubes  turbid  with
organisms  and  to  cover  the  infusion  with  a  heavy  scum.

I,  however,  had  occasion  to  doubt  the  closeness  of
these  shades.  The  wax  intended  to  seal  the  junction
of  the  tin  collar  with  the  plate  of  wood  had  cracked  and
yielded  here  and  there,  and  the  entry  of  contamination
through  such  cracks  was  possible.  Six  new  shades  were
therefore  mounted  and  surrounded  by  collars  which  were
imbedded  in  white  lead  and  firmly  screwed  down  to
the  plate  of  wood.  The  height  of  the  collar,  which
measured  the  depth  of  the  filtering  layer  of  wool,  was
much  greater  than  it  had  ever  been  last  year.  As
before,  the  period  of  incandescence  was  ten  minutes,
during  which  the  platinum  spiral  was  brought  as  close
as  possible  to  its  point  of  fusion.

Each  of  these  six  shades  covered  a  group  of  three
test-tubes.  Two  such  groups  were  charged  with  turnip,
two  with  cucumber,  and  two  with  artichoke-infusion.
The  infusions,  as  usual,  were  boiled  for  five  minutes
after  calcination.  They  were  all  brilliant  when  pre-
pared; but  in  two  days  every  one  of  them  had  become
turbid,  and  had  covered  itself  with  a  fatty  scum.  This
gradually  augmented  until  it  reached  in  some  of  the
tubes  a  thickness  of  half  an  inch.  The  weight  of  the
scum  caused  it  in  some  cases  to  bag  downwards,  form-
in  <>•  a  kind  of  inverted  cone,  the  apex  of  which  was


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  171


more  than  an  inch  from  its  base.  These  bags  finally
broke  and  scattered  their  organisms  in  the  subjacent
liquid.    Thus  the  conflict  went  on.

§  1 3.  Further  precautions  against  Infection.

At  the  beginning  of  December,  my  attention  being
keenly  aroused  by  those  successive  failures,  I  watched
more  closely  than  I  had  previously  done  the  filling  of
the  test-tubes  through  the  pipette.  Now  and  then  I
noticed  minute  bubbles  of  air  carried  down  with  the
descending  infusion.  On  escaping  from  the  end  of  the
pipette,  these  small  bubbles,  I  concluded,  would  break,
and  scatter  such  germs  as  they  contained  in  the  air  of
the  chamber.  Last  year  I  should  have  found  it  difficult
to  believe  that  a  cause  so  small  could  lie  at  the  root  of
the  observed  anomalies;  but  this  year  I  had  learned  to
respect  small  causes,  and  accordingly  took  measures  to
effectually  exclude  the  air.

On  December  4th  three  chambers,  which  had  been
previously  left  quiet  for  several  days,  were  charged  with
carefully  prepared  cucumber-infusion,  and  two  other
chambers  with  turnip-infusion  prepared  with  equal
care.  The  following  precautions  were  taken  : — The
funnel  of  the  pipette  formerly  employed  was  broken
off  from  its  shank,  and  for  it  was  substituted  a  '  separa-
tion-funnel '  with  a  glass  stopcock.  This  was  connected
by  closely  fitting  india-rubber  tubing  with  the  shank  of
the  pipette.  But  before  the  connexion  was  made,  the
funnel  was  filled  with  the  infusion,  and  the  stopcock
turned  on  for  a  moment,  until  the  liquid  issued  from
the  orifice  below.  The  stopcock  being  then  turned  off,
the  flow  of  the  liquid  ceased,  and  the  column  in  the
shank  below  the  stopcock  was  supported  by  atmospheric
pressure.    A  pinchcock  nipped  the  india-rubber  tube  at


172         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

its  centre-  The  portion  of  tubing  above  the  pinchcock.
was  then  filled  with  the  infusion,  and  the  end  of  the
separation-funnel  introduced  into  the  tube,  all  air  being
thus  excluded.  On  turning  on  the  stopcock  and  releasing
the  pinch coek,  the  liquid  passed  slowly  down  the  shank
of  the  pipette,  filling  it  wholly.  The  point  of  the  shank
was  then  placed  in  succession  over  the  test-tubes,  the
infusion  entering  them  without  a  single  associated
bubble.  The  arrangement  was  not  absolutely  perfect,
but  it  was  an  improvement  upon  previous  ones.  As
before,  the  charged  chambers  were  placed  in  a  room
the  air  of  which  was  maintained  at  -a  temperature  of
about  90°  Fahr.

The  result  was  as  follows : — Of  the  two  turnip  cham-
bers prepared  as  just  described,  on  the  4th,  one  had
completely  given  way  on  the  6th.  In  the  other  cham-
ber two  out  of  the  three  tubes  had  given  way,  but  the
third  remained  permanently  brilliant.  Previous  to  this
series  of  experiments  I  had  never  succeeded  in  saving
even  a  single  tube  of  cucumber-infusion  ;  here,  how-
ever, two  out  of  the  three  chambers  charged  with  it
remained  perfectly  clear  for  many  days.  Subsequently
one  of  these  chambers  yielded  in  part,  through  an
accident,  but  the  other  chamber  is  as  brilliant  at  this
moment  as  it  was  on  the  day  of  its  preparation  many
months  ago.

Now,  as  regards  inherent  power  to  generate  life,  the
infusion  of  this  chamber  was  in  precisely  the  same
condition  as  its  two  neighbours.  They,  one  and  all,
contained  the  same  infusion ;  and  there  is  no  way  of
accounting  for  the  observed  difference  of  deportment
save  by  reference  to  contamination  from  without.  Here
we  are  certainly  on  the  trace  of  the  enemy  which  haa
given  us  so  much  trouble.

On  the  5th  of  December  two  additional  cases  were


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  173


charged  with  infusion  of  melon  prepared  in  the  usual
wayt  and  on  the  12th  of  December  I  subjected  both
these  chambers,  and  those  prepared  upon  the  4th,  to  a
very  close  scrutiny.    The  result  was  instructive.  After
the  introduction  of  the  infusions,  and  prior  to  the  re-
moval of  the  separation-funnel,  the  india-rubber  tubing
connecting  the  latter  with  the  shank  of  the  pipette
was  perfectly  closed  by  the  pinchcock.    Provided  the
clasping  of  the  india-rubber  tube  round  the  shank  of
the  pipette  were  perfectly  air-tight,  the  liquid  contained
in  the  shank  ought  to  remain   there,  supported  by
atmospheric  pressure.     If,  however,  the  Indian-rubber
tube  failed  to  clasp  with  sufficient  tightness  the  pipette-
shank,  air  would  insinuate  itself  between  the  two,  and
the  depression  of  the  liquid  would  be  the  consequence.
The  result  observed  upon  the  12th  was  this  : — In  two
only  of  the  seven  chambers  prepared  on  the  4th  and
5th  was  the  liquid  column  found  perfectly  supported  ;
and  only  in  these  two  chambers  were  the  test-tubes,
which  contained  cucumber-infusion,  without  exception
pellucid.

In  the  five  remaining  chambers  the  liquid  columns,
which  had  completely  filled  the  pipette-shanks  on  the
4th  and  5th,  were  found  more  or  less  depressed.  The
tubes  in  one  of  the  chambers,  containing  melon-infusion,
had  become  rapidlv  turbid  and  covered  with  scum.  The
pipette-shank  in  this  case  was  found  entirely  emptied  of
its  liquid  and  filled  with  air.    Another  chamber  had
nine  inches,  while  a  third  had  seven  inches  of  its
pipette-shank  filled  with  air.     In  a  fourth  chamber
only  one  inch  of  the  pipette-shank  was  filled  with  air  ;
here  one  out  of  a  total  of  three  tubes  remained  pellucid.
Thus,  where  the  closure  above  was  perfect,  we  had  in
this  instance  perfectly  pellucid  infusions  ;  where  it  was
grossly  defective,  the  infusions  gave  way  in  all  the  tubes  ;


174


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


while  where  the  closure  was  but  slightly  defective  we
had  the  escape  of  a  fraction.

The  defects  thus  revealed  came,  I  concluded,  into
play  when  the  infusions  were  introduced,  the  descending
column  of  liquid  sucking  in  minute  air-bubbles  between
the  india-rubber  tubing  and  the  pipette,  thus  carrying
with  it  the  external  contagium.  Few  seem  aware  of  the
precautions  which  are  sometimes  essential  to  save  the
experimenter  from  error  in  inquiries  of  this  nature.
Even  with  some  of  our  best  and  most  celebrated  observers
I  find  no  adequate  sense  of  the  danger  involved  in  their
modes  of  experimentation.

§  14.  Experiments  in  the  Royal  Gardens,  Kew.

But  it  was  only  in  exceptional  instances,  dependent
on  the  state  of  the  air,  that  even  precautions  such  as
those  described  in  the  foregoing  section  secured  freedom
from  contamination.  The  contagium  seemed  omni-
present and  persistent,  and  whether  it  was  local  or
general — due  to  the  accidental  condition  of  our  labora-
tory, or  to  an  epidemic  of  the  air — became  a  question
with  me,  not  by  any  means  to  be  decided  offhand.  On
this  point,  then,  I  held  judgment  in  suspense.  The  in-
fection was,  to  all  appearance,  fully  accounted  for  by
reference  to  the  conditions  under  which  I  worked ;  but
as  regards  outbreaks  of  epidemics  the  autumn  had  been
a  remarkable  one,  and  it  seemed  well  worth  investigating
whether  it  was  not  also  a  period  prolific  generally  in  the
germs  of  putrefaction.

I  resolved  therefore  to  break  away  wholly  from  the
Eoyal  Institution,  and,  thanks  to  the  friendly  permission
of  Sir  Joseph  Hooker,  I  was  enabled  to  transfer  my
apparatus  to  Kew  Gardens.     By  the  enlightened  mu-


VITALITY  OF  PUTEEFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  175

nificence  of  Mr.  Jodrell,  a  new  and  very  complete  labo-
ratory had  been  just  erected  there,  and  in  it  I  sought  a
purer  air  than  1  could  find  at  home.

My  chambers  hitberto  bad  been  constructed  of  wood,
but  those  to  be  tested  at  Kew  were  made  of  block-tin,
and  they  were  carried  direct  from  the  tinman's  to  the
gardens  without  being  permitted  to  come  near  the  in-
fected air  of  Albemarle  Street.  At  Kew  the  test-tubes
employed  were  first  cleansed  with  carbolic  acid,  then
washed  with  a  solution  of  caustic  potash,  afterwards
swept  out  with  distilled  water,  and  finally  raised  almost
to  the  temperature  of  redness  by  a  Bunsen-fiame.  They
were  then  fitted  air-tight  into  the  chambers  with  white-
lead  and  tow.

The  chambers  were  closed  on  the  3rd  of  January,
and  allowed  to  remain  quiet  until  the  8th,  when  the
two  most  refractory  liquids  that  I  had  encountered  in
the  laboratory  of  the  Eoyal  Institution  were  introduced
into  them.  These  were  infusions  of  cucumber  and
melon.  There  were  two  chambers  devoted  to  each
infusion — four  in  all ;  and  each  chamber  embraced  three
large  test-tubes.  The  period  of  boiling  was  that  found
effectual  last  year,  i.e.  five  minutes.  The  temperature
of  the  room  in  which  the  chambers  were  placed  was
maintained,  partly  by  hot-water  pipes  and  partly  bv  a
gas-stove,  at  about  90°  Fahr. — a  temperature  which  had
been  proved  eminently  favourable  to  the  development  of
Bacteria.

Tubes  containing  the  same  infusions  were  at  the  same
time  exposed  to  the  common  air  of  the  Jodrell  labora-
tory. These  became  rapidly  turbid  and  covered  with
scum.  My  interest  and  anxiety  during  the  early  days
of  the  trial  of  the  protected  tubes  may  be  imagined.
After  eleven  days'  exposure  they  showed  no  signs  of
giving  way.  On  the  19th  of  January  the  four  chambers


176         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


were  removed  in  a  van  from  Kew,  and  shown  in  the
evening  of  that  day  to  the  members  of  the  Eoyal
Institution,  including  many  eminent  Fellows  of  the
Eoyal  Society.  The  infusions  were  one  and  all  brilliant,
no  trace  either  of  turbidity  or  scum  being  found  associ-
ated with  any  of  them.  During  all  my  previous  efforts
(and  they  had  been  very  numerous)  I  had  never  suc-
ceeded in  saving  a  single  tube  of  melon-infusion ;  here,
however,  every  tube  of  both  chambers  was  intact.  The
epidemic  was  thus  localized,  the  obvious  cause  of  it
being  the  contaminated  air  of  our  laboratory.

A  couple  of  days  subsequent  to  the  removal  of  the
chambers  from  Kew,  a  single  tube  of  the  cucumber-
infusion  became  turbid,  its  two  neighbours  in  the  same
chamber  remaining  intact.  Not  one  of  the  other  tubes,
either  of  melon  or  cucumber,  gave  way.  They  all
remained  as  pellucid  in  London  as  they  had  been  at
Kew.  Their  removal  from  Albemarle  Street  to  the
city  last  year  ruined  many  of  our  sterilized  chambers.
I  was  not  therefore  prepared  to  see  so  little  damage
done  by  the  transport  from  Kew.

It  may  be  remarked,  in  passing,  that  this  infection
of  an  infusion  by 'mere  mechanical  shaking  is  an  obvious
proof  that  the  contagium  is  not  a  gas  or  vapour,  but
that  it  consists  of  particles  capable  of  being  detached
from  the  interior  surface  of  the  chamber,  and  endowed
with  the  power  of  passing  into  active  life.

Two  other  chambers  were  exposed  at  the  same  time
in  the  Jodrell  laboratory,  the  one  containing  beef-  and
the  other  sole- infusion.  They  are  by  no  means  so
sensitive  as  the  cucumber  and  melon,  still  one  of  the
three  beef-tubes  broke  down,  becoming  thickly  turbid
throughout.  Eight  and  left  of  this  tube  its  two  com-
panions remained  perfectly  transparent.  As  an  illustra-
tion of  the  externality  of  the  contagium,  the  result  was


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  177


more  conclusive  than  it  would  have  been  had  all  three
tubes  remained  intact ;  for  had  the  power  of  developing
the  organisms  which  produced  the  turbidity  been  in-
herent in  the  infusions,  its  action  would  not  have  been
confined  to  a  single  tube.

It  will  be  understood  that  when  the  chamber  is
lifted  from  the  oil-bath  in  which  its  infusions  are  boiled,
the  air  within  the  chamber  contracts,  and  an  indraught
is  the  consequence.  If  the  entering  air  be  properly
sifted,  by  passing  it  through  cotton-wool  plugs,  no  harm
is  done ;  but  if  it  enter  an  aperture  unsifted,  it  carries
its  motes  along  with  it.  In  the  beef-chamber  just  re-
ferred to  an  aperture  of  this  kind,  about  the  size  of  a
pin-hole,  was  detected.-  This  obviously  was  the  door
through  which  the  contagium  entered.  Through  a
similar  but  graver  defect  in  its  chamber  the  sole-
infusion  also  broke  down  ;  but  in  a  subsequent  experi-
ment with  sole-infusion  in  the  Jodrell  laboratory,  two-
thirds  of  the  whole  number  of  tubes  charged  with  it
remained  free  from  all  trace  of  life.


§  15.  Experiments  on  the  Roof  of  the
Royal  Institution.

With  a  view  to  making,  nearer  home,  experiments
similar  to  those  made  at  Kew,  I  had  a  wooden  shed
erected  on  the  roof  of  our  laboratory.  The  shed  was
provided  with  benches,  water  and  gas-pipes,  and  a  stove
for  heating.  To  an  infusion  of  cucumber,  which  I  had
found  extremely  intractable  in  the  laboratory,  my  atten-
tion was  first  directed.  Two  tin  chambers  of  three
tubes  each  were  prepared,  and  transferred  to  the  shed
from  the  workshop  where  they  were  made,  without

N


178         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OE  THE  AIR.


being  permitted  to  enter  our  laboratory.  The  cucumber
used  for  the  infusion  was  also  kept  clear  of  the  infected
air  ;  it  was  sliced  and  digested  in  the  shed,  the  infusion
was  there  filtered,  introduced  into  the  tin  chambers,  and
boiled  subsequently  for  five  minutes.

The  result  was  not  that  expected.  Not  a  single
tube  of  either  of  these  two  chambers  escaped  con-
tamination. They  one  and  all  behaved  like  the
same  infusion  in  the  infected  laboratory,  becoming
in  three  days  turbid  throughout  and  laden  with  fatty
scum.

I  have  been  daily  and  hourly  impressed  with  the
parallelism  between  these  phenomena  of  putrefaction
and  those  of  infectious  disease.  A  further  illustration
of  this  parallelism  is  here  presented  to  us.  The  clothes
of  my  assistants  who  prepared  the  infusion  in  the  shed
had  been  worn  in  the  laboratory,  a  transfer  of  infection
by  one  of  the  modes  of  transport  known  to  every
physician  being  the  result.  The  thoughtful  physician
cannot  indeed  fail  to  see  the  absolute  identity  of  deport-
ment between  the  contagia  with  which  he  is  familiar,
and  those  assailants  of  my  infusions  against  which  I
have  been  contending  so  long.

With  regard  to  the  shed  my  first  step,  after  this
preliminary  failure,  was  to  disinfect  it.  This  was  done
bv  washing  every  part  of  it,  first  with  a  mixture  of
carbolic  acid  and  water,  and  secondly  with  a  solution  of
caustic  potash.  When  the  whole  was  well  dried,  new
tin  chambers  furnished  with  new  tubes  were  introduced.
Cucumbers  and  beef  fresh  from  the  market  were  also
digested  in  the  shed,  my  assistant  taking  care  to  cover
his  legs  with  clean  linen  trowsers,  and  his  body  with  a
new  blouse.  There  was  one  chamber  devoted  to  the
cucumber  and  another  to  the  beef.  Into  the  former
the  infusion  was  introduced  on  the  19th,  and  into  the


VITALITY  OF  PUTEEFACTIVE  OEGANISMS.  179

latter  on  the  20th  of  March ;  each  infusion  was  boiled
for  five  minutes  after  its  introduction.

Let  us  compare  results  and  draw  conclusions.  At  a
distance  of  eight  yards  from  the  shed,  viz.  in  the  labora-
tory, infusions  both  of  beef  and  cucumber  refused  to
be  sterilized  by  three  hours'  boiling.  Indeed  I  have
samples  of  both  infusions  which  have  borne  five  hours'
boiling  and  developed  multitudinous  life  afterwards.
But  the  upshot  of  this  experiment  in  the  disinfected
shed  is,  that  every  tube  of  the  two  chambers,  though
boiled  for  only  five  minutes,  contains  an  infusion  which,
at  the  present  hour,  is  as  limpid  as  the  purest  distilled
water.

What  shall  we  say,  then?  is  the  infusion  in  the
laboratory  endowed  with  a  generative  force  denied  to
the  same  infusion  in  the  shed  ?  Irrespective  of  the
condition  of  the  air,  can  a  linear  space  of  eight  yards
produce  so  remarkable  a  difference  ?  It  is  only  the
confusion  of  mind  still  prevalent  in  relation  to  this  sub-
ject that  renders  such  a  question  necessary.  Let  me
add  that  it  suffices  simply  to  wave  a  bunch  of  hay  in
the  air  of  the  shed  to  make  it  as  infective  as  the  labora-
tory air.  Even  the  unprotected  head  of  my  assistant
when  his  body  was  carefully  covered  sufficed  in  some
cases  to  carry  the  infection.

If  anything  were  needed  to  illustrate  the  extra-
ordinary care  necessary  on  the  part  of  physicians  and
surgeons,  both  as  regards  the  clothes  they  wear  and  the
instruments  they  use,  such  illustrations  are  copiously
furnished  by  the  facts  brought  to  light  in  this  inquiry.


*  2


180         THE  ELOATING-MATTEB  OF  THE  AIE.


§16.  Preliminary  Experiments  on  the  Resistance-
limit  of  Germs  to  the  temperature  of  Boiling  Water.

While  continuing  the  conflict  and  experiencing  the
defeats  recorded  in  the  foregoing  pages,  a  remark  of
Professor  Lister's  sometimes  occurred  to  me.    To  apply
the  antiseptic  treatment  with  success,  the  surgeon  must,
he  holds,  be  interpenetrated  with  the  conviction  that
the  germ  theory  of  putrefaction  is  true.    He  must  not
permit  occasional  failures  to  produce  scepticism,  but,  on
the  contrary,  must  probe  his  failures,  in  the  belief  that
his  manipulation,  and  not  the  germ-theory,  is  at  fault.
This  may  look  like  operating  under  a  prejudice ;  but
Professor  Lister's  maxim  is  nevertheless  consistent  with
sound  philosophy  and  good  sense ;  and  if  I  permitted  a
bias  to  influence  me  in  this  inquiry,  it  was  one  fairly
founded  on  antecedent  knowledge,  which  led  me  to
conclude  that  the  long  line  of  failures  above  referred
to  would  eventually  be  traced  to  my  ignorance  of  the
conditions  whereby  perfect  freedom  from  contamination
was  to  be  secured.

I  laboured  to  discover  these  conditions,  and  to  learn
something  more  regarding  the  nature  of  the  contami-
nation—its origin,  persistence,  and  manner  of  action.
When  these  researches  began,  five  minutes'  boiling,  as
I  have  frequently  stated,  sufficed  to  sterilize  the  most
diversified  infusions.  Here  we  have  frequently  extended
the  time  of  boiling  to  ten  and  fifteen  minutes,  and,
in  some  cases  glanced  at  above,  to  immensely  longer
periods,  without  producing  this  result.  I  desired  more
exact  knowledge  as  to  the  limit  of  endurance,  and  with
this  view,  on  the  22nd  of  December,  had  six  '  pipette
bulbs 'charged  with  an  infusion  of  cucumber,  sp.  gr.  1004.
They  were  then  plugged  with  cotton-wool,  hermetically
sealed,  and  subjected  to  the  boiling  temperature  for  10


VITALITY  OF  PUTEEF ACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  181


minutes.  Six  other  bulbs,  charged  with  the  same  in-
fusion and  treated  in  the  same  way,  were  boiled  for
30  minutes.  Finally  eight  bulbs,  similarly  charged,
were  boiled  for  120  minutes.

On  the  23rd  of  December  three  of  the  first  group  of
bulbs,  three  of  the  second,  and  five  of  the  third,  had
their  sealed  ends  filed  off,  and  were  afterwards  exposed
to  a  tolerably  constant  temperature  of  about  90°  Fahr.
Not  one  of  these  twenty  bulbs  preserved  itself  free  from
life.  On  the  25th  of  December  every  one  of  them  had
given  way  to  cloudiness  and  turbidity.

There  was,  however,  a  marked  difference  between
the  sealed  and  the  unsealed  bulbs.  To  the  latter,  it
will  be  remembered,  the  air  had  access  through  the
plug  of  cotton-wool,  while  to  the  former  no  air  had
access,  save  the  small  quantity  imprisoned  above  the
infusion  when  the  necks  of  the  bulbs  were  sealed.  The
aerated  bulbs  grew  rapidly  and  thickly  turbid,  while  a
passing  cloudiness  was  all  that  showed  itself  in  the
sealed  ones.  This  soon  disappeared,  and  left  the  in-
fusions apparently  intact.  In  fact  it  required  some
attention  to  detect  the  appearance  of  this  fugitive  life,
which  existed  only  so  long  as  there  was  oxygen  to  sus-
tain it.  I  have  ranged  the  sealed  and  unsealed  tubes
side  by  side  in  groups.  To  the  most  cursory  observa-
tion the  difference  between  them  is  obvious.  The  ex-
periment strikingly  illustrates  the  dependence  of  the
special  organisms  here  implicated  on  the  oxygen  of  the
air.

The  experiments  were  pushed  still  further  on  the
28th  of  December.  Two  bulbs  of  cucumber,  two  of
melon,  two  of  turnip,  and  two  of  artichoke  were  then
plugged,  sealed,  and  maintained  at  the  boiling  tem-
perature for  four  hours.  Six  of  the  eight  bulbs  burst  in
the  operation,  but  two  of  them,  a  bulb  of  melon  and


182


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


one  of  cucumber,  bore  tbe  ordeal  uninjured.  After
cooling,  their  sealed  ends  being  broken  off,  they  were
placed  in  the  warm  room.  The  melon  remained  per-
manently sterile,  but  in  two  clays  the  cucumber-infusion
became  turbicl  and  laden  with  fatty  scum.

Eight  similar  bulbs  were  boiled  on  the  same  day  for
five  hours  and  a  half.  Four  of  them  burst,  but  four
remained  intact.  Of  these,  two  contained  cucumber-,
one  melon-,  and  one  turnip-infusion.  Three  out  of
the  four  bulbs  were  sterilized  by  the  long-continued
boiling,  but  one  cucumber-bulb  passed  through  the
ordeal  unscathed.  Two  days  after  the  operation  it
swarmed  with  life,  and  was  covered  with  a  fatty  scum
formed  of  matted  Bacteria.

Many  similar  experiments  were  subsequently  made.
On  the  27th  of  January,  for  example,  six  bulbs  of
turnip  infusion  were  boiled  for  220  minutes,  six  for
300  minutes,  and  two  for  305  minutes.  Suspended  in
the  air  above  each  infusion  was  a  sprig  of  old  Colchester
hay,  this  being  purposely  introduced  to  augment  the
chance  of  infection.  Notwithstanding  its  presence  the
bulbs  were  one  and  all  permanently  sterilized.  The
specific  gravity  of  the  infusion  was  in  all  cases  1007.

The  sprigs  of  old  hay  were  afterwards  shaken  into
the  liquid,  but  they  produced  no  effect.  For  weeks
afterwards  the  infusion  remained  clear.  Was  this  im-
potence to  generate  life  due  to  the  fact  that  the  nutri-
tive power  of  the  infusion  had  been  destroyed  by  the
'  blighting  influence  of  heat1  ?  Not  so  ;  for  when  the
same  infusion  was  infected  by  a  sprig  of  fresh  hay,  by  a
small  pellet  of  cotton-wool  rubbed  against  the  dusty
shelves  of  the  warm  room,  or  by  a  speck  of  another
infusion  containing  Bacteria,  it  never  failed  to  develop
life.  The  only  observed  difference  between  the  effect
produced  by  the  dry  hay  or  dust  and  the  living  Bacteria


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  183


was  purely  a  difference  of  time.  Inoculation  with  the
finished  organisms  acted  more  rapidly  than  infection
with  the  dust,  but  the  effects  were  the  same  in  the  end.

On  the  27th  of  January  also  nine  melon-bulbs  were
treated  exactly  like  the  turnip,  being  furnished  with
sprigs  of  old  Colchester  hay,  plugged  with  cotton-wool,
and  hermetically  sealed  above  the  plugs.  Six  of  them
were  boiled  for  215  minutes,  and  three  for  220  minutes.
They  were  one  and  all  permanently  sterilized ;  but,  like
the  turnip,  all  of  them  were  open  to  infection  by  fresh
hay,  dry  dust,  or  living  Bacteria.  The  specific  gravity
of  the  melon-infusion  was  1008.


§  17.  Further  Experiments  on  the  Resistance-limit
of  Germs  to  the  Boiling  Temperature.

The  amount  of  boiling  which  turnip-infusion  failed
to  withstand  is  shown  by  some  of  the  foregoing  experi-
ments; but  to  determine  the  limit  of  its  resistance  we
must  begin  with  shorter  periods.  On  the  1st  of  March,
therefore,  eight  groups  of  pipette-bulbs  were  charged
with  turnip-infusion  which  had  been  prepared  in  an
atmosphere  purposely  infected  with  the  germs  of  old
Heathfield  hay.  In  every  case,  moreover,  a  sprig  of  the
same  hay  was  placed  in  the  air  above  the  infusion.
The  bulbs  had  their  necks  plugged  with  cotton-wool,
and  were  hermetically  sealed  above  the  plug.  In  this
condition  the  respective  groups  were  boiled  for  the  fol-
lowing times  : —

1st  group  15  minutes.

30


2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th


45
60
75
90
105
120


184         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIE.

After  boiling  they  were  removed,  permitted  to
cool,  had  their  necks  broken  off  by  a  file,  and  were
afterwards  exposed  to  the  temperature  of  our  warm
room.  It  may  be  remarked  that  the  infusion  gradually
deepened  in  colour  from  the  15-minute  period,  where
the  colouring  was  hardly  sensible,  to  the  2-hour  period,
where  the  colouring  became  deep  yellow.  The  effect
was  doubtless  due  to  the  oxidation  of  the  infusion,
which,  notwithstanding  the  colour,  was  in  all  cases
highly  transparent.

Two  days  after  their  preparation,  every  tube  of  the
series  had  become  turbid  and  had  begun  to  cover  itself
with  scum.

On  March  the  6th  the  periods  of  boiling  were  pro-
longed with  a  fresh  infusion.  Two  groups  of  tubes
were,  on  that  day,  exposed  to  boiling  water  for  the  fol-
lowing times : —

1st  group       .....      180  minutes.
2nd    „   240  „

On  the  8th  of  March  all  the  members  of  the
first  group  were  turbid  and  covered  with  scum.  The
second  group  was  completely  sterilized.  This  latter
result  is  quite  in  accordance  with  the  experiments  made
on  the  27  th  of  January.  Turnip-infusion  was  then
boiled  for  periods  varying  from  220  minutes  to  305
minutes;  complete  sterilization  being  in  all  cases  the
consequence.  These  results  were  subsequently  checked
by  a  continuous  series  of  experiments  extending  over
periods  of  boiling  varying  from  one  to  six  hours.  Up
to  three  hours  the  infusion  resisted  sterilization  ;  but
when  the  periods  of  boiling  were  prolonged  to  four,
five,  and  six  hours  respectively,  all  the  bulbs  became
permanently  barren.  The  liquid  continued  in  the
highest  degree  transparent,  and  in  colour  a  brilliant
orange-brown'.


VITALITY  OF  PUTEEFA CTIVE  ORGANISMS.  185


Experiments  intended  to  determine  the  limit  of
resistance  of  cucumber-infusion  were  made  on  the  24th
of  February.  Nine  pipette-bulbs  were  then  charged,
plugged,  hermetically  sealed,  and  subjected  to  the  boil-
ing temperature  for  the  following  times : —


1st  bulb
2nd  „

3rd  „

4th  „

5th  „

6th  „

7th  „

8th  „

9th  „


15  minutes.

30  „

45  „

60  „

120  „

180  •  „

240  „

300  „
360


After  boiling  and  cooling  they  had  as  usual  their
ends  broken  off  by  a  file.  The  result  here  was  that  at
the  5th  bulb,  which  corresponded  to  a  boiling  for  two
hours,  the  life-development  suddenly  ceased.  All  the
tubes  boiled  from  three  to  six  hours  inclusive  were  com-
pletely sterilized.

The  infusion  in  this  case  had  been  diluted  by  an
accident,  so  that  its  specific  gravity  was  not  much  above
that  of  distilled  water.  On  the  28th  of  February,
therefore,  a  fresh  infusion  having  a  specific  gravity  of
1006  was  prepared,  and  introduced  into  a  series  of
bulbs  exactly  as  in  last  experiment.  The  bulbs  were
exposed  to  the  boiling  temperature  for  the  following
times : —


1st  bulb
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
0th


»


15  minutes.

30

45

60
120
180.
240
300
360


»


186         THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


The  result  here  was  that  at  the  6th  bulb,  which  cor-
responded to  three  hours'  boiling,  the  life-development
suddenly  ceased.  All  the  bulbs  boiled  from  15  minutes
to  180  minutes  inclusive  proved  fruitful;  while  from  240
minutes  to  360  inclusive  all  were  completely  sterilized.
As  in  the  case  of  the  turnip-infusion,  the  cucumber  sub-
jected to  long  periods  of  boiling  assumed  an  orange-
brown  tinge.

Comparing  these  results  with  those  obtained  with
the  turnip-infusion,  it  will  be  observed  that  cucumber
and  turnip  exhibit  about  the  same  resistant  power :
three  hours'  boiling,  and  less,  failed  to  sterilize  both  of
them ;  four  hours'  boiling,  and  more,  rendered  both  of
them  permanently  barren.

The  cucumber-infusions  prepared  on  the  22nd  and
28th  of  February  were  connected  with  the  atmosphere
through  the  cotton-wool  plugs  ;  but  no  attempt  had
been  made  to  remove  its  floating  matter  from  the  air
above  the  infusions.  On  the  22nd,  however,  four  bulbs
of  the  infusion  were  also  prepared,  charged  with  filtered
air,  left  unplugged,  and  hermetically  sealed.  The  same
was  done  with  four  bulbs  on  the  28th  of  February.  Each
group  was  subjected  to  periods  of  boiling  of  15,  30,
45,  and  60  minutes  respectively.  All  of  them  became
turbid ;  but  it  was  interesting  to  notice  the  gradual  and
obvious  fall  of  life  from  the  1 5-minute  to  the  60-minute
period.  Could  the  Bacteria  have  been  counted,  and
the  result  graphically  represented,  the  ordinate  corre-
sponding to  the  abscissa  15  would  have  been  found  very
considerably  longer  than  that  corresponding  to  the
abscissa  60.

The  method  of  experiment  here  for  the  most  part  pur-
sued was  employed  by  Spallanzani  and  Needham.  It
was  afterwards  extensively  applied  by  the  late  excellent


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  187


Professor  Wyman,  of  Harvard  College,  while  in  1874
it  was  materially  refined  and  improved  upon  by  Dr.
William  Eoberts,  of  Manchester.  The  method  is  ham-
pered by  one  grave  doubt.  The  air,  plus  its  floating
matter,  is  imprisoned  in  the  sealed  bulbs,  so  that  the
heat  applied  has  not  only  to  destroy  the  germs  clasped
by  the  infusion,  but  also  those  diffused  through  the
supernatant  atmosphere.  Now  it  is  not  certain  whether
an  amount  of  heat  which  would  be  absolutely  destruc-
tive to  a  germ  embraced  by  a  hot  liquid  may  not  be
wholly  ineffectual  when  acting  on  a  germ  floating  in
vapour  or  air.  Throughout  Spallanzani's  and  Needham's
experiments,  throughout  those  of  Wyman  and  Eoberts,
and  throughout  my  own,  as  reported  in  this  section
and  the  last,  this  possibility  of  error  runs.  Such  ex-
periments, in  short,  do  not  enable  us  to  state  with
certainty  the  temperature  at  which  an  infusion  is  steri-
lized, because  the  germs  which  most  pertinaciously
oppose  sterilization  may  not  belong  to  the  infusion  at
all,  but  to  the  adjacent  air.

The  most  astonishing  cases  of  resistance  to  steriliza-
tion observed  by  Wyman  were  associated  with  this
particular  mode  of  experiment.  The
possible  action  of  the  uncleansed  air,
moreover,  was  in  his  case  augmented  by
the  fact  that  he  employed  quantities
of  liquid,  very  small  in  comparison
with  the  size  of  his  flasks.  In  some  of
his  earlier  experiments  the  volume  of
air  was  more  than  thirty  times  that  of
the  infusion.  These  relative  volumes
are  represented  in  the  annexed  figure
(fig.  17),  copied  from  Wyman's  Memoir
of  1862.1

1  yilliman's  American  Journal,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  80.


188         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


§  18.   Change  of  Apparatus.    Neiv  Experiments
with  Filtered  Air.

The  source  of  possible  error  referred  to  in  the  last
section  had  been  long  present  to  my  mind,  and  I  had
already  taken  measm-es  to  avoid  it.  On  the  2nd  of
January,  1877,  an  infusion  of  turnip  (sp.  gr.  1006)  and
an  infusion  of  melon  (sp.  gr.  1008)  were  prepared  and
introduced  into  a  series  of  pipette-bulbs  in  the  follow-
ing manner: — One  end  a,  fig.  18,  of  a  glass  T-fxibe  was
connected  with  an  air-pump,  the  other  end  b  was
closely  plugged  with  cotton-wool,  while  to  the  third
branch  of  the  T-tube  the  neck  of  the  pipette-bulb  A
was  attached  by  india-rubber  tubing.  A  piece  of  the
same  tubing,  furnished  with  a  pinchcock  p,  was  also
attached  to  the  free  end  of  the  T-tube  beyond  the
cotton-wool.

The  bulb  A  was  exhausted  three  times  in  succession,
the  pinchcock  p  being  closed,  and  was  three  times  filled
with  filtered  air,  the  pinchcock  being  opened.  At  the
third  exhaustion  the  bulb  was  raised  to  a  very  high
temperature  by  a  Bunsen  flame,  and  finally  filled  with
filtered  air.  It  was  then  plunged  for  a  minute  into  ice-
cold  water,  from  which  it  was  afterwards  removed,
detached  from  the  T-tube,  and  then  charged  with  the
infusion  by  means  of  a  narrow  pipette,  /  e,  shown  at  the
top  of  b,  fig.  18.

The  rationale  of  the  above  proceeding  is  this : — On
quitting  the  ice-cold  water  for  the  warmer  air  of  the
laboratory,  expansion  of  the  air  within  the  bulb  would
occur.  This  would  cause  a  gentle  motion  from  within
outwards,  opposing  all  indraught  of  contaminated  air.
The  entry  of  the  infusion  into  the  bidb  would,  I  thought,
also  promote  this  outward  motion.  On  the  removal  of
the  pipette,  which  occupied  but  a  very  small  portion  of  the


VITALITY  OF  PUTEEFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  189

neck  of  the  bulb,  a  little  warmth  was  applied  to  the
latter,  and  during-  its  application  the  neck  was  plugged
with  cotton-wool.  The  air  entering  through  this  plug-
to  supply  the  place  of  the  small  quantity  displaced  by

Fig.  18.


the  warmth  would,  I  concluded,  reach  the  interior  of  the
bulb  perfectly  sifted  of  its  floating  matter.  The  necks
of  the  bulbs  were  hermetically  sealed,  and  the  infusions


190


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


maintained  for  ten  minutes  at  the  temperature  of  boil-
ing water.  After  a  lapse  of  twelve  hours  their  sealed
ends  were  broken  off  by  means  of  a  file.

In  our  experiments  on  the  28th  of  December  turnip
and  melon  subjected  to  ten  minutes'  boiling  entirely
gave  way.  In  these  present  experiments,  where  greater
care  was  taken,  two  out  of  the  six  turnip-bulbs  and
three  out  of  the  six  melon-bulbs  remained  permanently
barren.  Even  this  amount  of  success  proved  afterwards
so  exceptional  that  it  might  be  fairly  regarded  as
accidental.

On  the  4th  of  January  the  experiments  were  con-
tinued. The  pipette-bulbs  employed  were  first  carefully
washed  with  carbolic  acid,  which  was  removed  as  far  as
possible  with  ordinary  water.  They  were  then  washed
with  a  solution  of  caustic  potash,  and  finally  rinsed  out
with  distilled  water.  They  were  not  subjected  to  the
action  of  the  Bunsen  flame.  The  infusions  employed
were  turnip  (sp.gr.  1006)  and  melon  (sp.  gr.  1008),
eight  bulbs  being  filled  with  each  infusion.

I  could  not  be  certain  that  the  motion  of  the  liquid
fillet  at  the  end  e  of  the  pipette  with  which  the  bulb  b,
fig.  18,  had  been  charged,  had  not  drawn  into  the  neck
of  the  bulb  a  modicum  of  the  external  air.  In  the  pre-
sent experiments,  therefore,  the  method  of  charging  the
bulbs  was  modified  in  the  following  way:— The  glass
J-tube  employed  in  our  last  experiments  had  its  end  a,
which  was  to  be  connected  with  the  air-pump,  drawn
out  to  a  small  orifice  and  bent  as  in  fig.  19.  The  branch
connected  with  the  bulb  was  also  drawn  out  to  a  tube
of  fine  bore,  which  entered  the  neck  of  the  bulb  for
some  distance  to  e,  the  thicker  part  above  being  con-
nected with  the  neck  of  the  bulb  by  india-rubber
tubing.  The  end  6,  as  before,  was  plugged  with  cotton-
wool and  provided  with  a  pinchcock,  p.    The  object


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  191


here  aimed  at  was  that  the  liquid  should  be  discharged
into  the  bulb  far  below  the  india-rubber  connecting-
piece,  and  that  during  the  discharge  it  should  pass  only
through  filtered  air.


Fig.  19.


B


Each  bulb  was  exhausted  in  the  manner  already
described,  and  refilled  three  times  in  succession.  When
last  filled  it  was  plunged  for  a  minute  or  so  into


192         THE  FLOATJNG-MATTEK  OF  THE  AIR.


iced  water,  with  the  view  of  rendering  the  air  within
the  bulb  denser  than  that  without.  The  pinchcock  p
being  closed,  the  whole  apparatus  was  then  detached
from  the  air-pump.  On  being  lifted  from  the  iced
water  into  the  warmer  air  there  was  a  gentle  outflow  of
air  from  a.

The  mode  of  charging  the  bulb  was  this : — The  point
a  was  well  sunk  into  the  infusion,  and  the  associated
bulb,  b,  was  plunged  into  boiling  water.    There  was  an
immediate  outrush  of  air  from  a  which  bubbled  through
the  liquid.    As  soon  as  the  bubbling  had  relaxed  a
little,  a  being  still  submerged,  the  bulb  was  transferred
to  iced  water.    A  shrinking  of  the  warm  air  was  the
consequence,  and  through  a  the  infusion  was  forced  by
atmospheric  pressure.    It  descended  the  middle  branch
of  the  T-tube,  and  was  discharged  from  its  end  e  into
the  bulb.    The  quantity  of  liquid  obtained  by  a  first
immersion  in  the  iced  water  was  not  sufficient  to  charge
the  bulb;  but  by  repeating  the  process  of  heating  and
chilling  two  or  three  times,  the  point  a  never  being
permitted  to  quit  the  infusion,  any  required  quantity
was  with  ease  and  accuracy  introduced.    The  neck  of
the  bulb  was  finally  detached  from  the  T-piece  by
loosening  the  india-rubber  tube.    The  bulb  was  then
slightly  warmed  so  as  to  cause  an  outflow  of  air  from
within,  and  while  this  outflow  continued  the  neck  was
plugged  with  cotton-wool.    It  was  sealed  above  the
plug,  and  after  the  cooling  of  the  infusion  the  sealed
end  was  broken  off  with  a  file.

It  is  not  my  intention  to  take  up  time  in
describing  in  detail  the  numerous  experiments  made
in  accordance  with  this  method,  or  the  variety  of
infusions  employed  in  testing  its  efficacy.  Suffice
it  to  say  that,  notwithstanding  all  my  care,  the
results  were  chequered  throughout.    Sometimes  success


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  193


would  seem  complete,  but  a  repetition  of  the  experi-
ments— and  I  never  felt  safe  without  frequent  and  varied
repetition — would,  as  before,  present  the  success  in  the
light  of  an  accident.  I  am,  however,  secure  in  stating
that  while  pursuing  this  plan  I  have  in  some  cases-
effected  complete  sterilization  by  an  amount  of  boiling
which,  in  other  cases,  though  twenty  times  multiplied,
has  failed  to  produce  this  effect.  I  have,  for  example,
placed  side  by  side  in  my  collection  two  series  of  organic
infusions,  one  as  pellucid  as  distilled  water,  having
been  rendered  permanently  sterile  by  an  exposure  to
the  boiling  temperature  for  five  and  ten  minutes,  and
a  second  series  containing  the  same  infusions  boiled  for
30,  120,  and  330  minutes  respectively,  and  which  never-
theless are  muddy  throughout  and  covered  with  scum.
Even  here,  however,  causes,  other  than  differences  of
manipulation,  may  have  contributed  to  the  result.

Weeks  of  labour  have  been  devoted  to  these  experi-
ments, nor  did  they  exhaust  the  trials  actually  made.
Another  mode  of  proceeding  was  this.  Pipette-bulbs
were  prepared  by  having  a  portion  of  their  necks  drawn
out  to  a  tube  of  very  fine  bore.  The  open  end  being
connected  with  an  air-pump,  the  bulb  was  exhausted
and  filled  with  filtered  air  several  times  in  succession.
In  the  final  experiment  the  bulb  was  charged  with  one-
third  of  an  atmosphere  of  cleansed  air;  and  while  this
pressure  was  maintained  by  the  air-pump  the  narrow
tube  was  hermetically  sealed.  Each  bulb  was  after-
wards heated  almost  to  redness  in  the  flame  of  a  Bunsen
lamp.  It  was  charged  by  inverting  the  bulb,  dipping
the  sealed  end  into  the  infusion,  and  breaking  it  off
underneath  the  surface.  The  liquid  entered  until  the
bulb  was  two-thirds  filled,  when  the  narrow  tube  was
again  sealed.    A  great  number  of  experiments  were

o


194


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


thus  executed,  the  results  of  which  distinctly  favoured
the  conclusion,  though  they  did  not  to  my  satisfaction
prove  it,  that  the  resistant  germs  were  not  to  be  wholly
ascribed  to  the  air,  but  that  they  had  survived  in  the
liquid.


§  19.  Final  proof  that  the  Resistant  Germs  are  em-
braced by  the  Infusion.  Examples  of  Resistance
both  in  Acid  and  Neutral  Liquids.

We  here  face  a  question  which  greatly  harassed
me  at  the  time  to  which  I  now  refer.    It  was  this: —
Have  the  germs,  which  under  the  circumstances  here
described  produced  life,  been  really  embraced  by  the
infusion  itself  during  the  time  of  heating?   The  liquid,
it  will  be  remembered,  had  to  pass  through  the  neck
of  the  pipette-bulb,  and  it  could  not  descend  from  the
neck  into  the  bulb  without  leaving  a  film  adherent  to
the  internal  surface  of  the  neck.    This  film,  I  reflected,
might  dry  in  part  by  evaporation ;  and  it  might,  in  doing
so^leave  germs  behind  which  would  be  very  differently
circumstanced  from  those  in  the  liquid.    To  germs  thus
exposed,  not  to  the  heat  of  water,  but  to  the  possibly
less  effective  heat  of  vapour  and  air,  the  observed  life
might  I  thought  be  due.    Before  closing  definitely  with
the3 proposition  that  the  surviving  germs  had  actually
been  in  the  liquid,  the  possibility  to  which  I  have  just
referred  had  to  be  inexorably  shut  out.

The  evil  was  to  some  extent  mitigated  by  charging
the  bulb,  not  through  its  own  neck,  but  through  a
narrow  tube  issuing  at  right  angles  to  the  neck.  But
even  here  a  portion  of  the  neck  and  of  the  higher
interior  surface  of  the  bulb  was  trickled  over  by  the
infusion.  The  difficulty  was  finally  met,  and  completely
surmounted,  by  causing  the  lateral  tube  to  issue  from


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  195


the  centre  of  the  bulb  itself,  and  forcing  the  infusion
into  the  bulb  by  atmospheric  pressure,  until  the  surface
.  of  the  liquid  stood  clearly  above  the  lateral  orifice.
To  this  level  the  liquid  rose  without  wetting  any
portion  of  the  surface  against  which  it  did  not  per
manently  rest.

The   precise  method  pursued  in   preparing  and
charging  the  bulbs  was  this : — First,  the  bulb  as  sent  to
us  by  the  glass-blower  is  represented  at  a,  fig.  20.  Its
neck  is  first  plugged  with  cotton-wool  (c)  and  hermetic-
ally sealed  as  at  b,  fig.  20.     The  lateral  tube  is  then
drawn  out  to  almost  capillary  narrowness  at  o  and  p.
The  end  n  is  connected  with  an  air  pump,  by  which
the  bulb  is  exhausted,  and  after  two  or  three  emptyings
and  fillings,  it  is  finally  charged  with  one-third  of  an
atmosphere  of  thoroughly  filtered  air.    While  the  pump
attached  to  n  maintains  this  pressure  within  the  bulb,
the  capillary  tube  p  is  sealed  with  a  lamp.    The  bulb
and  its  appendages  are  then  heated  nearly  to  redness  in
a  Bunsen  flame,  all  life  adherent  to  the  interior  surface
being  thus  destroyed.

The  end  p  is  then  introduced  into  the  infusion,
pressed  against  the  bottom  of  the  vessel  that  contains
it,  and  thus  broken.  The  external  pressure  of  a  whole
atmosphere,  having  but  one-third  of  an  atmosphere
within  the  bulb  to  oppose  it,  forces  the  liquid  through
the  lateral  tube.  It  enters  the  bulb,  gradually  rising
until  it  reaches  the  orifice,  and  rises  above  it.  When
the  pressure  within  is  exactly  equal  to  the  pressure
without,  two-thirds  of  the  bulb  are  occupied  by  the
liquid.

The  infusion  then  extends  without  breach  of  con-
tinuity from  the  bulb  b  to  the  vessel  in  which  the  end
p  is  immersed,  the  uncleansed  air  being  thus  completely

o  2


196         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

excluded.  A  small  gas  flame  is  carefully  applied  at  o.
The  liquid  within  the  narrow  tube  vaporizes,  and  the
vapour  drives  the  liquid  to  some  distance  right  and  left
from  the  place  of  heating.  In  the  absence  of  the  liquid
the  fine  tube  reddens,  fuses,  and  is  hermetically  sealed.

Fig.  20.


The  aspect  of  the  bulb  after  it  has  been  thus  charged  i
shown  at  c,  fig.  20.


By  this  method,  on  the  20th  of  February  sixteen
bulbs  were  charged  with  infusions  of  old  Heathfield  hay
and  of  a  hard  wiry  hay  from  Guildford,  not  old.  They
were  divided  into  four  groups,  four  bulbs  m  a  group.


VITALITY  OF  PUTEEFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  197


Each  group  embraced  two  acids  and  two  neutral  in-
fusions.   They  were  boiled  for  the  following  times : —


1st  group
2nd  „
3rd  „
4th  .,


10  minutes.
20
30
60


»


After  the  bulbs  had  sufficiently  cooled,  their  sealed
ends  were  removed  by  a  file.

On  the  21st  of  February,  less  than  24  hours  after
their  preparation,  all  these  bulbs  showed  signs  of  yield-
ing. On  the  22nd  they  were  all  turbid,  while  as
regards  the  comparison  of  acid  and  neutral  infusions,
their  condition  was  this: —


1st  group.    10  minutes.


2nd  group.  20  minutes.


3rd  group.  30  minutes.-


'  Guildford  neutral  distinctly  more  turbid
than  Guildford  acid.  Scum  on  for-
mer, none  on  latter.
Old  Heathfield  neutral  not  to  he  dis-
tinguished from  old  Heathfield  acid.
Both  turbid  and  covered  with  scum.
Much  lightened  in  colour.
Guildford  neutral  distinctly  more  turbid

than  the  acid  liquid.
Old  Heathfield  neutral  more  turbid  than
the  acid  infusion.
(  Guildford  neutral  a  little  more  turbid
than  Guildford  acid  :  difference  small.
Old  Heathfield  neutral  more  turbid  than
the  acid  infusion ;   the  former  with
scum,  the  latter  none.
,  Guildford  neutral  distinctly  more  turbid
than  Guildford  acid  ;  the  former  with
scum,  the  latter  free  from  scum.
Old  Heathfield  neutral  somewhat  more
turbid  and  scummy  than  the  acid
V     liquid  :  difference  not  great.

Here  I  take  it  to  be  absolutely  certain  that  the
germs  which  resisted  sterilization  were  contained  in  the


4th  group.   60  minutes.  „


198         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

liquid — a  proof  necessary  to  the  argument,  and  admit-
ting of  no  question,  being*  thus  offered  to  the  reader.

On  the  22nd  of  February  four  groups  of  bulbs  were
charged  as  above  described  with  the  same  two  infusions,
and  the  periods  of  boiling  prolonged  as  follows  : —

1st  group  90  minutes.

2nd    „  ......  120  „

3rd    „  .....  180  „

4th    „  .       .  240  „

As  in  the  last  case,  neutral  and  acid  infusions  of
each  kind  of  hay  were  operated  on.  This  was  the  re-
sult:— On  the  evening  of  the  23rd,  that  is  to  say,  24
hours  after  their  preparation,  every  one  of  these  bulbs
disclosed  to  the  practised  eye  that  organisms  existed
within  it.  At  2  p.m.  on  the  24th  they  all  swarmed
with  life.  The  old  Heathfield  bulbs,  both  acid  and
neutral,  were  turbid  and  covered  with  scum,  the  very
weakly-acid  infusions  being  indistinguishable  in  appear-
ance from  the  neutral  ones.  In  the  case  of  the
Guildford  infusion,  however,  the  scum  of  the  neutral
infusions  was  richer  and  heavier  than  that  on  the  acid
ones.

Four  hours  mark  the  limit  to  which  the  boiling  was
carried  in  these  experiments.  On  the  27th  of  February
the  periods  of  boiling  were  still  further  prolonged.
Four  groups  of  bulbs  charged  with  infusions  of  the
same  two  kinds  of  hay,  both  acid  and  neutral,  were  on
that  day  boiled  for  the  following  times: —

1st  group   300  minutes.

2nd     „   360  „

3rd     „   420  „

4th     „   480  „

I  had  previously  boiled  infusions  of  old  Heathfield,
old  London,  and  old  Colchester  hay  for  5  hours,  and


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  199

found  them  afterwards  permanently  barren.  In  the
present  instance,  also,  all  the  bulbs  boiled  for  5  hours,
6  hours,  and  7  hours  were  completely  sterilized.  They
remained  ever  afterwards  perfectly  brilliant.  This,  with
one  exception,  was  also  the  deportment  of  the  group  of
bulbs  boiled  for  8  hours.  The  exception  was  a  neutral-
ized bulb  of  the  Ghiildford  infusion,  which  became  turbid
and  covered  with  scum.  Considering  the  severity  with
which  the  bulb  had  been  treated  prior  to  charging,
and  considering  the  mode  of  charging  it,  the  life
developed  could  not  possibly  have  been  the  product  of
external  germs.  Through  profound  and  thorough  hard-
ening and  desiccation,  through  defect  of  contact  with
the  liquid  or  some  other  cause,  some  germs  in  the
infusion  itself  had,  I  doubt  not,  been  enabled  to  with-
stand the  extraordinary  ordeal  here  described.

Was  it  'the  blighting  influence  of  heat'  that  de-
prived the  great  majority  of  these  8-hour  bulbs  of  the
power  of  spontaneous  generation  ?  Whatever  be  the
meaning  attached  to  such  language  the  reply  is  ob-
vious, that  the  'blighting'  was  the  same  for  all  the
bulbs;  and  yet  we  find  one  of  them  which,  when  taken
from  the  boiling  water,  was  perfectly  brilliant,  rendered
in  two  days  muddy  with  organisms.  Further,  it  was  only
necessary  to  wash  with  perfectly  sterilized  distilled  water
the  adherent  germs  from  a  small  bunch  of  hay,  and  to
inoculate  the  clear  infusion  in  an  8-hour  bulb  with  the
washing-water,  to  cause  it  within  four-and-twenty  hours
to  become  turbid  throughout.  To  speak  more  definitely,
14  hours  in  the  warm  room  were  found  sufficient  to
cloud  the  infected  8-hour  bulb  with  Bacteria.  Thus
the  infusion,  when  living  germs  are  restored  to  it,  shows
its  perfect  competence  to  develop  them,  and  it  was
solely  the  destruction  of  the  germs  which  it  possessed
before  it  was  boiled  that  rendered  it  sterile  afterwards.


200


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


It  is  worth  bearing  in  mind  that  the  particular  kinds
of  hay  whose  germs  manifested  these  extraordinary
powers  of  resistance  were  so  sapless  and  indurated  that
the  specific  gravity  of  their  infusions,  even  after  five
hours'  digesting,  could  not  without  difficulty  be  sensibly
raised  above  that  of  distilled  water.  This  was  more
especially '  the  case  with  old  Heath  field  and  old  Col-
chester hay,  the  infusions  of  which,  though  highly
coloured,  were  marked,  almost  without  exception,  'spe-
cific gravity  1000.'  Old  London  hay-infusion  was
usually  1003,  while  infusions  of  new  Heathfield  hay
were  raised  without  difficulty  to  1007.1

As  already  stated,  I  never  felt  safe  in  these  experi-
ments until  they  were  checked  by  careful  repetition.  A
partial  corroboration  has  been  already  adverted  to.  But
on  the  2nd  of  March  I  had  the  same  infusions  prepared,
kept  in  a  cool  place  throughout  the  night,  and  intro-
duced into  four  groups  of  bulbs  next  morning.    The  infu-
sions were  all  brilliant.    During  the  process  of  boiling
one  group'  of  bulbs  blew  up,  hence  one  link  is  absent  from
the  series.    I  thought  the  4-hour  group  could  be  best
spared,  and  therefore  selected  it  for  omission.    We  had
thus  the  infusions  subjected  for  one,  two,  three,  five  and
six  hours  respectively  to  the  boiling  temperature.  The
three  first  hours  agree  exactly  with  their  predecessors.
No  single  bulb  within  these  limits  was  sterilized,  all  of
them  became  turbid  throughout  and  loaded  with  scum.

1  A  comparative  experiment  on  dried  and  nndried  peas,  de-
scribed in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  (1877,  vol.  xxv.
p.  503),  may  be  referred  to  here  as  illustrating  the  manner  in  which
desiccation  restricts  diffusion,  and  thus  tends  to  preserve  the  in-
tegrity of  the  desicoated  germ.  I  suppose  the  original  mineral
salts  of  the  hay  were  still  retained  in  the  old  samples ;  but  hot
water  appeared  to  have  little  power  of  extracting  them.  The  resist-
ance of  -  the  hay  in  this  respect  appeared  to  be  shared  by  its
germs.


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  201


One  bulb  of  the  5-hour  group  and  one  of  the  6-hour
group  also  became  turbid  and  flocculent  within,'  but
without  any  scum  upon  the  surface.  As  in  the  case  of
the  8-hour  bulb  already  mentioned,  this  appearance
of  life  was,  I  doubt  not,  due  to  stray  germs  of  excep-
tional resisting  power,  which  maintained  themselves
unscathed  in  the  infusions  after  their  fellows  had  been
destroyed.

By  multiplied  experiments  of  a  similar  character
executed  subsequently,  and  fortified  by  others  made  in
a  different  way,  all  doubts  as  to  the  real  ordeal  to  which
the  germs  had  been  exposed  were  set  at  rest.  A  flood
of  light,  moreover,  was  thrown  upon  the  difficulties
recorded  in  the  foregoing  pages.  Prior  to  the  intro-
duction into  our  laboratory  of  the  particular  samples  of
desiccated  hay  whose  adherent  germs  had  manifested
such  extraordinary  powers  of  resistance,  infusions  of  all
kinds,  even  those  of  hay  itself,  were  sterilized  with  ease
and  certainty.  But  the  old  London,  the  old  Heathfield,
the  Gruildford,  and  the  old  Colchester  hay  brought  a
plague  into  our  atmosphere,  and  thus  the  infusions  of
other  substances,  some  samples  of  hay  included,  became
the  victims  of  a  pest  entirely  foreign  to  themselves.
The  failure  to  sterilize  cucumber,  turnip,  beetroot,
artichoke,  melon,  beef,  mutton,  haddock,  herring,  sole,
was  plainly  due  to  the  fact  that  their  infusions  had  been
prepared  in  an  atmosphere,  or  brought  into  contact
with  vessels,  contaminated  with  germs  which  have  been
here  shown  capable  of  resisting  240  minutes'  boiling.
It  is  obvious  from  all  this  that  to  speak  of  an  infusion
being  rendered  barren  by  such  or  such  a  temperature,
is  simply  to  use  words  without  definite  meaning ;  be-
cause the  temperature  at  which  any  infusion  is  sterilized
depends  upon  the  character  and  condition  of  the  germs
which  find  access  to  it.    The  death-temperature,  for


202


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


example,  may  be  more  than  three  hours  in  London,  and
less  than  three  minutes  at  Kew.1

I  will  cite  here  two  conspicuous  illustrations  of  the
infective  energy  of  those  desiccated  hay-germs  in  two
infusions  which,  under  ordinary  atmospheric  conditions,
are  very  easily  sterilized.  On  the  30th  of  March  five
pipette-bulbs  were  charged  with  clear  beef-infusion  and
boiled  for  the  following  times: —

1st  bulb  GO  minutes.

2nd    „   120,  „

3rd    „  .       .       .       .       .  180

4th    „   240  „

6th.    „  .       .    -  .       .       .  300  „

After  cooling,  the  sealed  ends  were  broken  off,  the
air  being  admitted  through  cotton-wool  plugs.  Every
one  of  these  bulbs  became  charged  with  organisms.  In
the  shed,  eight  yards  off,  this  beef-infusion  was,  as
already  reported,  sterilized  by  five  minutes'  boiling.

Precisely  the  same  experiment  was  made  on  March
30  with  pellucid  mutton-infusion.  Not  one  of  the  five
bulbs  was  sterilized.  All  of  them  are  at  this  moment
charged  with  life.  It  behoves  those  engaged  in  the
industry  of  preserved  meat  and  vegetables  to  keep  clear
of  the  old-hay  contamination.  Probably  they  from
time  to  time  have  encountered  difficulties  and  dis-
appointments which  they  could  not  explain,  but  which
may  be  solved  by  reference  to  the  results  here  set  forth.

1  I  have  already  described  the  distribution  of  Bacteria-germs
in  the  air  as  'Bacterial  clouds.'  Were  our  vision  sufficiently
sharpened  to  see  the  manner  in  which  such  germs  are  distributed
over  the  surface  of  a  meadow,  we  should  not,  I  am  persuaded,  find
that  distribution  uniform.  We  should,  in  my  opinion,  find  the
germs  grouped  in  crowds,  with  comparatively  free  interspaces,  like
violets  on  an  alp,  or  mushrooms  in  a  field.  It  is  therefore  con-
ceivable that  two  bunches  of  hay  from  the  same  meadow  may
differ  from  each  other  in  deportment.


VITALITY  OF  PUTEEF ACTIVE  OKGANISMS.  203


But  above  all  the  practical  question  arises  : — May  not
the  surgeon  have  to  fight  sometimes  against  enemies
like  those  here  described?  The  particular  germs  with
which  I  have  been  so  long  contending  act  on  both  fish
and  flesh  in  the  manner  described.  How  would  they
behave  in  the  wards  of  an  hospital?  Can  they  cause
wounds  to  putrefy?  and  if  so,  would  they  succumb  to
the  disinfectants  usually  applied?  These  are  questions
the  weighty  import  of  which  will  be  best  understood  by
the  enlightened  follower  of  the  antiseptic  system,  and
which  he  will  know  how  to  answer  for  himself.


§  20.  Remarks  on  Acid,  Neutral,  and  Alkaline

Infusions.

In  the  foregoing  section  reference  was  made  to  the
comparative  deportment  of  acid  and  neutral  infusions.
There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  fact  that,  for  the  nutrition
and  multiplication  of  Bacteria,  acid  infusions  are  less
suitable  than  neutral  or  slightly  alkaline  ones.  In
acid  infusions  exposure  to  the  common  air  sometimes
copiously  developes  Penicillium,  while  it  fails  to  de-
velope  Bacteria.  It  is  also  true  that  exposure  for  a
certain  time  to  a  certain  temperature  may  in  many
cases  prevent  the  appearance  of  life  in  an  acid  infusion,
and  fail  to  prevent  it  in  a  neutral  or  slightly  alkaline
one.

In  the  present  inquiry  this  has  been  frequently
found  to  be  the  case.  I  have  many  closed  chambers,
for  example,  to  which  the  process  of  'discontinuous
heating,'  to  be  subsequently  described,  has  been  applied ;
and  with  them  it  has  proved  a  common  experience  that
an  amount  of  heating  which  has  rendered  acid  infusions
of  hay  permanently  barren  has  failed  to  sterilize  the
corresponding   neutral   infusions.     Moreover,  in  the


204        THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

cases  just  recorded,  where  single  bulbs  escaped  steriliz
ation  though  exposed  for  five,  six,  and  eight  hours  to
the  boiling  temperature,  it  was  always  a  neutral  bulb
that  kindled  into  life.    To  these  instances  another  may-
be added  here.    On  the  22nd  of  March  an  infusion  of
the  wiry  Guildford  hay  already  referred  to  was  divided
into  two  parts,  one  of  which  was  neutralized  and  the
other  left  acid.    Five  pipette-bulbs  were  filled  with  the
one  infusion  and  five  with  the  other.    After  hermetic
sealing  they  were  all  completely  submerged  in  water
and  boiled  for  six  hours.    Every  one  of  the  acid  bulbs
was  sterilized  by  this  process,  while  in  two  days  three
of  the  five  neutral  ones  became  turbid  and  covered  with
scum.

The  best  thought  that  I  have  been  able  to  bestow
upon  this  subject  does  not  induce  me  to  lean  towards
the  explanation  suggested  by  M.  Pasteur,  namely,  that
the  germs  escape  the  destructive  action  of  the  heat
because  they  are  not  wetted  by  the  alkaline  or  neutral
liquid.    From  the  comparative  action  of  alkalized  and
acidulated  water  upon  hay,  I  should  be  inclined  to  infer
that  the  wetting  of  its  germs  by  the  former  would  be
more  prompt  than  by  the  latter.  The  question,  I  think,  is
not  one  of  wetting,  but  of  relative  nutritive  power.  Two
Bacteria-germs  of  equal  vital  vigour  dropping  from  the
atmosphere,  the  one  into  a  neutral  or  slightly  alkaline,
the  other  into  an  acid  infusion,  soon  cease  to  be  equal
in  vigour.    The  life  of  the  one  is  promoted,  the  life  of
the  other  only  tolerated  by  its  environment.  When
the  temperature  surrounding  both  is  raised  to  a  pre-
judicial height  the  one  will  suffer  more  than  the  other,
because  equally  inclement  conditions  are  brought  to
bear  upon  constitutions  of  different  strengths;  and  if
the  temperature  be  sufficiently  exalted  or  sufficiently
prolonged  to  become  fatal,  the  more  weakly  organism


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  205


will  be  the  first  to  give  way.  A  germ,  moreover,  brought
close  to  the  death-point  in  a  neutral  or  in  an  alkaline  in-
fusion may  revive,  while  in  an  acid  one  it  may  perish —
just  as  proper  nutriment  may  rescue  a  dying  man,  while
improper  nutriment  would  fail  to  do  so.  These  elemen-
tary considerations,  founded  on  the  demonstrable  fact
that  Bacteria-germs  are  more  fully  vivified  and  better
nourished  in  neutral  infusions  than  in  acid  ones,  suffice,
I  think,  to  explain  the  observed  difference  of  action.
At  all  events,  these  are  the  thoughts  which  have  be-
come rooted  in  my  mind,  through  long  observation  and
long  pondering  of  this  question.1


§  21.   Remarks  on  the  Germs  of  Bacteria  as
distinguished  from  Bacteria  themselves.

The  failure  to  distinguish  between  these  stubborn
germs  and  the  soft  and  sensitive  organisms  which
spring  from  them  has  been  a  source  of  error  in  writings
on  Biogenesis.  In  his  able  and  important  paper,
'On  the  Origin  and  Distribution  of  Bacteria  in  Water,
and  the  circumstances  which  determine  their  exist-
ence in  the  Tissues  and  Liquids  of  the  Living  Body,'
Dr.  Burdon  Sanderson,  for  example,  has  described  ex-
periments from  which,  in  my  opinion,  very  incorrect
conclusions  have  been  drawn.  He  exposed  to  the  com-
mon air  vessels  containing  Pasteur's  solution,  which
when  inoculated  with  fully  developed  Bacteria  enables
them  freely  and  copiously  to  increase  and  multiply;

'  From  their  deportment  in  boiling,  I  should  infer  that  the  air
dissolved  in  an  alkaline  liquid  is  in  a  different  physical  condition
from  that  dissolved  in  an  acid  liquid;  and  to  this,  in  some  measure
the  difference  of  nutritive  power  may  be  due.  I  have  been  unable
to  find  any  experiments  on  the  comparative  absorption  of  air  by
acid  and  neutral  liquids.  The  subject  is,  I  think,  well  deserving  of
attention.


206


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


he  even  caused  the  air  to  bubble  through  the  solution,
and  finding  that  though  Torula  and  Penicillium  were
luxuriantly  developed  in  the  liquid,  Bacteria  never
made  their  appearance,  he  concluded,  '  not  merely  that
the  conditions  of  origin  and  growth  of  Bacteria  and
fungi  are  considerably  different,  but  that,  as  regards
the  former,  the  germinal  matter  from  which  they  spring
does  nut  exist  in  ordinary  air.n

Dr.  Sanderson  subsequently  reaffirmed  the  position
here  laid  down.  '  In  my  preceding  experiments,'  he
says,  'it  has  been  shown  that,  although  Torula-cells  and
Penicillium  appear  invariably,  and  without  exception,
on  all  nutritive  liquids  of  which  the  surfaces  are  ex-
posed to  the  air,  without  reference  to  their  mode  of
preparation,  no  amount  of  exposure  has  any  effect  in
determining  the  evolution  of  Bacteria.''2  And,  again,
with  reference  to  another  experiment:— 'The  result
shows  that  ordinary  air  is  entirely  free  from  living
Bacteria.'' 3  His  general  conclusion  is  that,  as  regards
the  development  of  Bacteria  in  organic  liquids,  'water
is  the  contaminating  agent.'

Upon  these  experiments,  and  the  conclusion  drawn
from  them,  an  argument  has  been  founded  by  .  Dr.
Bastian,4  which  would  be  weighty  were  its  basis  sure.
In  reference  to  the  Presidential  Address  of  the  British
Association  in  Liverpool,5  he  argues  thus:— 'Speaking
of  living  Bacteria-geims,  Professor  Huxley  summed
up  by  saying,  "considering  their  lightness,  and  the

"  Appendix  to  the  Thirteenth  Eeport  to  the  Medical  Officer  of
the  Privy  Council  for  1871,  p.  335.

*  'Appendix,'  p.  338.  Though  Dr.  Sanderson  speaks  of  'all
nutritive  liquids,'  if  I  understand  him  aright,  he  really  tried  but
one,  and  that  was  a  mineral  solution,  not  an  animal  or  vegetable
infusion.

«  '  Appendix,'  p.  339.  4  '  Evolution,  p.  44.

5  Brit.  Assoc.  Report,  1870.


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  OEGANISMS.  207


wide  diffusion  of  the  organisms  which  produce  them,
it  is  impossible  to  conceive  that  they  should  not
be  suspended  in  the  atmosphere  in  myriads."  Had
Professor  Huxley  himself  made  some  careful  and  dis-
criminating experiments  on  this  part  of  the  subject,  he
might  have  found  that  the  supposed  impossibility  of

conception  was  entirely  delusive  What  has  been

the  subsequent  progress  of  events?  In  the  first  place,
it  has  been  shown  by  Professor  Burdon  Sanderson,  my-
self, and  others,  that  the  living  Bacteria-germs  are
not  diffused  through  the  air  to  any  appreciable  extent;
and  this  is  now  a  very  widely  accepted  doctrine,  in  spite
of  its  being,  as  Professor  Huxley  imagined,  an  im-
possible conception.'  The  'others'  referred  to  by  Dr.
Bastian  embrace  among  them,  it  is  to  be  admitted,  the
celebrated  naturalist  Cohn.

Dr.  Bastian  was  quite  correct  in  saying  that  the
'doctrine'  he  enunciated  was,  at  that  time,  'widely
accepted.'    But  the  deportment  of  almost  any  sterilized
animal  or  vegetable  infusion  exposed  to  common  air
will  disprove  the  doctrine.    It  is  irreconcileable  with
the  experiments  on  melon-,  turnip-,  cucumber-,  and
hay-infusions,  alluded  to  in  this  memoir.    Such  in-
fusions, after  having  been  sterilized  by  exposure  for  six
or  eight  hours  to  the  boiling-temperature,  remain,  if
protected  from  the  Bacteria-gevms  of  the  air,  for  ever
barren ;  but  when  infected  spontaneously,  or  purposely,
by  atmospheric  germs,  they  are  found,  within  eight  and
forty  hours  after  such  infection,  thickly  crowded  with
Bacteria.    That  London  air  is  laden  with  living  Bac-
teria-germs is  as  certain  as  that  London  chimneys  are
laden  with  smoke.    What  Dr.  Sanderson's  extremely
important  experiments  really  prove  is,  that  a  mineral
solution  competent  to  nourish  the  Bacteria,  after  they
have  been  fully  developed,  is  not  competent  (or,  rather,


208        THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OE  THE  AIR.

is  but  very  feebly  competent)  to  effect  the  transfer  from
the  germ  state  to  that  of  the  finished  organism.  It
can  feed  the  chick,  but  it  cannot  hatch  the  egg.  As  I
have  already  expressed  it,  the  experiment  proves,  not
the  absence  of  Bacteria-germs  from  the  air,  but  the
inability  of  the  mineral  solution  to  develop  them.

Another  experiment,  described  by  Dr.  Sanderson  in
the  paper  above  referred  to,  is  this :— '  A  glass  rod  was
charged  with  Bacteria  by  dipping  it  into  a  solution  on
the  surface  of  which  there  was  a  viscous  scum,  consist-
ing entirely  of  these  bodies  imbedded  in  a  gelatinous
matrix.  The  rod  was  allowed  to  dry  in  the  air  for  a
few  days.  It  was  then  introduced  into  boiled  test-
solution  contained  in  a  superheated  glass.  On  February
6th  the  liquid  was  already  milky,  and  teemed  with
Bacteria.

'  To  determine  the  effect  of  more  complete  desicca-
tion, an  eprouvette  containing  one  cubic  centimeter  of
cold  water,  previously  ascertained  to  be  zymotic,  was
evaporated  to  dryness  in  the  incubator,  and  kept  tor
some  days  at  a  temperature  of  40°  Cent.  On  February
90th  the  dried  glass  was  charged  with  boiled  and
cooled  solution,  and  plugged  with  cotton-wool  in  the
usual  way.  The  liquid  was  examined  microscopically
on  March  2nd,  when  it  contained  numerous  Torula-
cells  but  no  trace  of  Bacteria.  It  therefore  appears
that'the  germinal  particles  of  Bacteria  are  rendered
inactive  by  drying  without  the  application  of  heat.'  _

These  experiments  have  been  quoted  as  conclusive
in  reference  to  the  influence  of  desiccation.  They  are
quoted,  moreover,  as  applicable  not  only  to  the  de-
veloped Bacterium,  but  also,  without  restriction,  to
the  germs  from  which  Bacteria  spring.  '  To  main-
tain,'says  Dr.  Bastiau,1  'hisPanspermism  in  the  face
i  '  Evolution,'  p.  156.


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  209


of  his  own  experiments,  Spallanzani  was  compelled  to
assume  that  the  germs  of  the  lower  infusoria  do  possess
this  seed-like  property  of  developing  after  desiccation.
Modern  science,  however,  declares  that  they  have  no
such  property.    We  are  told  most  unreservedly  by
Professor  Burdon  Sanderson,  not  only  that  the  germinal
particles  of  Bacteria  are  rendered  inactive  by  thorough
drying,  without  the  application  of  heat,  i.e.  by  mere
exposure  to  air  for  two  or  three  days  at  a  temperature
of  104°  Fahr.,  but  also  that  fully-formed  Bacteria  are
deprived  of  their  power  of  further  development  by
thorough  desiccation.'   In  this  unqualified  sense  the
conclusion  is  untenable.    I  could  cite  a  multitude  of
experiments  to  prove  this,  but  a  reference  to  one  or
two  of  them  will  here  suffice.

A  small  bunch  of  old  Heathfield  hay  was  washed
with  distilled  water,  which  was  received  into  a  cham-
pagne-glass.    The  glass  was  placed  on  a  stove  until
the  water  had  all  evaporated,  and  the  dried  residue
was  permitted  to  remain  upon  the  stove  for  several
days.    Dr.  Sanderson's  drying  temperature  was  104°
Fahr.,  mine  was  120°  Fahr.,  and  my  period  of  dryino-
was  longer  than  his.    Scraping  a  little  of  the  dry  sedi-
ment treated  as  above  from  the  bottom  of  the  cham-
pagne-glass,  I  infected   with  it  a  bulb  containing
bay-mfusion  which  had  been  completely  sterilized  by
eight  horns'  boiling.    When  infected,  the  infusion  was
brightly  transparent,  but  forty-eight  hours  afterwards
it  was  teeming  with  Bacteria.     With    regard   to  '
the  doctrine  that  tbese  organisms  arise  from  <  dead
organic  particles,'  instead  of  from  living  germs,'  no
scientific  man  at  the  present  day  ought,  I  submit,  to
be  called  upon  to  spend  a  moment's  thought  upon  it
One  other  reference  will  suffice.    I  have  had  bun-
1  '  Evolution,'  p.  44.


P


210        THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


dies  of  hay  hung  up  for  seven  or  eight  weeks  in  the  hot
rooms  of  the  Turkish  Bath  in  Jermyn  Street,  and  ex-
posed during  the  whole  of  this  time  to  a  temperature
of  140°  Fahr.  and  upwards.  The  germs  adherent  to  this
hay  were  not  killed  by  even  this  amount  of  desiccation.
When  a  sterilized  animal  or  vegetable  infusion  was
infected  with  them  they  gave  birth  in  the  usual  time
to  swarms  of  Bacteria.


§  22.  Sterilization  by  discontinuous  Heating.
Keeping  the  distinction  between  germs  and  de-
veloped organisms  here  insisted  on,  and  the  probable
changes  that  occur  in  passing  from  the  one  to  the  other,
clearly  in  view,  I  have  been  able  to  sterilize  with  in-
fallible certainty  the  most  obstinate  infusions  referred
to  in  this  paper,  without  either  raising  the  tempera-
ture of  the  infusions  beyond  their  ordinary  boiling-
point,  or  inordinately  prolonging  the  application  of
heat.    The  infusions  may  be  sterilized  by  a  tempera-
ture even  below  that  of  boiling  water,  while  the  time
of  its  application  may  be  but  an  extremely  minute
fraction  of  that  resorted  to  in  some  of  the  foregoing
experiments.

It  is  an  undisputed  fact  that  active  Bacteria  are
killed  by  a  temperature  far  below  that  of  boiling  water.
It  is  also  a  fact  that  a  certain  period,  which  I  have
called  the  period  of  latency,  is  necessary  to  enable  the
hardy  and  resistant  germ  to  pass  into  that  organic  con-
dition in  which  it  is  so  sensitive  to  heat.  There  can
hardly  be  a  doubt  that  the  nearer  the  germ  approaches
the  moment  when  it  is  to  emerge  as  the  finished  organ-
ism the  more  susceptible  it  is  to  that  influence  by
which  that  organism  is  so  readily  destroyed.  We  may
learn  from  experience,  aided  by  the  power  of  search


VITALITY  OF  PUTEEFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  211

which  the  concentrated  luminous  beam  places  in  our
hands,  what  is  the  approximate  time  required  for  the
Bacterial  germ  to  pass  into  the  Bacterium.    Say  that
it  is  twenty-four  hours.    Supposing  the  heat  of  boiling
water,  or  even  a  lower  heat  than  that  of  boiling  water,
to  be  applied  to  the  germ  immediately  before  its  final
development,  when  all  its  parts  are  plastic,  when  it  is,
in  short,  on  the  point  of  reaching  a  stage  at  which  a
temperature  of  140°  Fahr.  is  demonstrably  fatal.  It
is  in  the  highest  degree  probable  that  a  temperature  of
212°,  or  of  200°,  or,  indeed,  a  temperature  of  150°,  if
applied  sufficiently  often  or  for  a  sufficient  length  of
time,  will  prove  fatal  to  the  germ,  and  prevent  the
appearance  of  the  still  more  sensitive  organism  to
which  the  germ  is  on  the  point  of  giving  birth.

Here,  at  all  events,  we  have  a  theoretic  finger-post
pointing  out  a  course  which  experiment  may  profitably
pursue.  It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  the  germs  with
which  our  infusions  are  charged  all  reach  their  final
development  at  the  same  moment.  Some  are  drier
and  harder  than  others,  and  some,  therefore,  will  be
rendered  plastic  and  sensitive  to  heat  before  others.
Hence  the  following  procedure.

Four-and-twenty  small  retorts  were  charged  with
hay-infusions  on  the  1st  of  February,  and  subjected
morning  and  evening  to  the  boiling  temperature  for
one  minute.  The  last  heating  took  place  on  the  even-
ing of  the  3rd  of  February.  The  retort-necks  had  been
plugged  with  cotton-wool ;  the  air  within  them,  how-
ever, had  not  been  filtered,  and  there  was  comparatively
little  care  bestowed  on  their  preparation.  After  the
final  heating  they  were  abandoned  to  the  temperature
of  a  room  kept  close  to  90°  Fahr.  A  series  of  similar
retorts  charged  at  the  same  time  with  the  same  infu-
sions were  boiled  continuously  for  ten  minutes,  plugged

P  2


212         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


while  boiling,  and  placed  in  the  same  warm  room.  Two
days  after  their  preparation  the  retorts  last  mentioned
had,  without  a  single  exception,  given  way  to  turbidity
and  scum.  On  the  other  hand,  twelve  of  the  twenty-four
retorts  which  had  been  subjected  for  a  much  shorter
period  to  the  discontinuous  boiling  remained  perma-
nently brilliant  and  free  from  scum.

On  the  same  1st  of  February  eight  pipette-bulbs  were
charged  with  two  hay-infusions,  four  bulbs  being  de-
voted to  each.    The  air  above  the  infusions  was  the
unfiltered  air  of  the  laboratory.    They  were  subjected
to  the  temperature  of  boiling  water  for  a  minute ;  at  the
same  time  four  other  bulbs  containing  the  same  infu-
sions were  boiled  continuously  for  ten  minutes  and  sus-
pended beside  their  neighbours.    Twelve  hours  subse-
quent to  their  first  brief  heating  the  eight  bulbs  were
perfectly  brilliant,  and  while  in  this  condition  they  were
again  subjected  to  the  boiling  temperature  for  a  minute.
On  the  evening  of  the  same  day  they  were  subjected  to
the  boiling  temperature  for  half  a  minute,  and  on  the
following  morning  the  process  was  repeated.  Two
additional  heatings  of  the  same  brief  character  were
resorted  to.    The  result  of  the  whole  experiment  was
that  two  days  after  their  preparation  .the  four  bulbs
which  had  been  boiled  for  ten  minutes  were  found  tur-
bid and  covered  with  scum,  while  two  months  after  their
preparation  the  eight  bulbs  whose  periods  of  boiling
added  together  amounted  only  to  four  minutes  were
perfectly  brilliant  and  free  from  scum.

The  reason  of  this  procedure  is  plain.  By  the  first
brief  application  of  heat  the  germs,  which  are  at  that
moment  plastic,  are  killed ;  and  before  any  of  the  re-
maining germs  can  develop  themselves  into  Bacteria
they  are  subjected  to  another  brief  period  of  heating.
This  again  kills  such  germs  as  are  sufficiently  near  their


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  213


final  development.  At  each  subsequent  period  of  heat-
ing the  number  of  living  germs  is  diminished,  until
finally  they  are  completely  destroyed.  The  infusion,  if
protected  from  external  contamination,  remains  for  ever
afterwards  unchanged,  although,  when  living  Bacteria,
a  sprig  of  hay,  or  even  the  dry  dust  particles  of  the
laboratory  are  sown  in  it,  the  sterilized  liquid  shows  its
power  both  of  enabling  the  fully  developed  organism  to
increase  and  multiply,  and  of  developing  the  desiccated
Bacterial  germ  into  multitudinous  Bacterial  life.

On  the  same  date  an  experiment  was  made  with  a
series  of  pipette-bulbs,  whose  necks  were  so  bent  and
plugged  with  cotton-wool  that  no  impurity  from  the
wool  could  fall  into  the  infusion.     Four  bulbs  were
charged  with  an  infusion  of  Heathfield  and  four  with  an
infusion  of  London  hay,  samples  of  the  same  infusions
being  introduced  at  the  same  time  into  another  series
of  bulbs  which  were  plugged  like  their  neighbours  and
subjected  continuously  to  the  boiling  temperature  for
ten  minutes.    The  eight  bulbs  first  referred  to  were,  on
the  contrary,  discontinuously  boiled,  the  sum  of  their
periods  of  boiling  being  four  minutes.    The  result  is
that  while  the  entire  series  of  bulbs  boiled  for  ten
miuutes  gave  way  within  forty-eight  hours  after  their
preparation,  seven  out  of  the  eight  bulbs  which  had  been
subjected  to  discontinuous  boiling  remained  permanently
brilliant.

On  the  3rd  of  February,  with  the  view  of  testing  the
new  method  still  further,  infusions  of  our  most  refrac-
tory kinds  of  hay  were  prepared.  There  were  five  bulbs
of  neutralized  Guildford  infusion,  and  five  of  a  neutral-
ized infusion  formed  from  a  mixture  of  old  Colchester
and  old  Heathfield  hay.  Two  bulbs  of  each  infusion
were  at  the  same  time  charged  and  subjected  to  the
boiling  temperature  for  ten  minutes.    The  ten  bulbs


214


THE  .FLOATING- MATTEK  OF  THE  AIR.


first  mentioned  were  never  raised  to  the  boiling  tempe-
rature at  all,  the  maximum  to  which  they  were  exposed
being  some  degrees  below  their  boiling-point.  The
result  is  that  while  every  one  of  the  four  bulbs  boiled
for  ten  mimites  has  become  turbid  and  covered  with
scum,  one  only  of  the  ten  discontinuously  heated  bulbs
has  given  way ;  cine  of  them  remain  as  brilliant  as  at
first.

It  is  obvious  from  what  has  gone  before  that  two
hundred  and  forty  minutes  might  have  been  substituted
for  ten  minutes  without  altering  this  result.  Five
minutes  of  discontinuous  heating  can  accomplish  more
than  five  hours'  continuous  heating.

On  the  same  date  three  bulbs  charged  with  an  acid
infusion  of  London  hay  were  subjected  to  the  same  dis-
continuous treatment.  They  all  remain  brilliant  to  the
present  hour.

On  the  7th  of  February  four  of  Cohn's  tubes  were
charged  with  turnip-infusion,  which  was  heated  discon-
tinuously night  and  morning  up  to  a  temperature  of
205°  Fahr.  The  total  time  during  which  they  were
exposed  to  this  temperature  was  about  three  minutes.
They  were  permanently  sterilized,  and  exhibit  a  singular
brilliancy  to  the  present  hour.

The  discontinuous  method  of  heating  has  also  been
applied  with  success  to  the  closed  chambers.  One  mode
of  operation  is  this  : — An  oil-bath  is  heated  to  a  tempe-
rature of  300°  Fahr.  The  charged  test-tubes  of  the
closed  chamber  are  then  plunged  in  the  oil,  which  clasps
the  tubes  to  the  level  of  the  surface  of  the  infusion.
They  are  either  raised  to  incipient  boiling  and  then  re-
moved, or  suffered  actually  to  boil  for  thirty  seconds
and  then  removed.  Another  mode  of  heating  is  this :
instead  of  being  plunged  into  hot  oil,  the  test-tubes  are
plunged  for  two  or  three  minutes  into  boiling  water,


VITALITY  OF  PUTEEF ACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  215


taken  out,  wiped  dry,  the  actual  boiling  being  finished
by  a  spirit-lamp.  This  is  a  very  handy  method,  and
more  under  the  experimenter's  control  than  the  oil-bath.
When  the  latter  is  employed,  the  infusions  sometimes  in
great  part  waste  themselves  by  leaping  from  their
tubes  ;  but  the  spirit-lamp  enables  us  to  humour  the
infusions  by  occasionally  withdrawing  the  flame  and
moderating  the  ebullition.  The  lamp,  of  course,  may
be  employed  alone  without  the  preliminary  immersion
of  the  tubes  in  hot  water.  Usually  the  process  of  heat-
ing is  repeated  at  intervals  of  twelve  hours,  but  in  the
case  of  very  nutritive  infusions  in  a  very  warm  room  the
interval  ought  to  be  shorter.  Practice  must  inform  the
experimenter  on  this  point.  The  reheating  must  always
occur  before  the  infusions  show  the  slightest  visible
tendency  to  change.

In  the  early  days  of  February  a  closed  chamber  of
six  tubes  was  treated  in  the  manner  here  described.
Three  of  the  tubes  were  charged  with  strong  turnip-  and
the  three  others  with  strong  artichoke-infusion.  After
two  days'  discontinuous  heating  night  and  morning,  they
were  allowed  to  remain  undisturbed  in  the  warm  room.
The  six  tubes  remain  perfectly  brilliant  to  the  present
hour.

On  the  12th  of  February  a  closed  chamber  of  three
tubes  was  charged  with  cucumber-infusion.  Heated
discontinuously  in  the  manner  described,  and  abandoned
afterwards  to  a  warm  temperature,  the  three  tubes  re-
mained perfectly  sterile.

Any  process  competent  to  sterilize  very  old  hay  can
sterilize  with  greater  ease  any  other  infusion.  The  fact,
therefore,  that  only  a  few  days  ago  three  closed  chambers
charged  with  our  most  refractory  hay-infusions  were
sterilized  by  discontinuous  heating  proves  the  power  of
the  method  over  infusions  of  all  kinds.


216


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


By  this  method  very  instructive  comparative  experi-
ments might  be  made,  and  the  resistant  power  of  dif-
ferent germs  might  be  expressed  in  terms  of  the  heatings
necessary  for  their  sterilization.  I  possess,  for  example,
two  test-tubes,  containing  the  same  infusion  and  asso-
ciated with  the  same  closed  chamber,  one  of  which  has
been  heated  five  times  and  the  other  six.  The  former
is  quite  turbid,  while  the  latter  is  perfectly  clear.  In
this  case  five  heatings  had  left  some  of  the  more  resist-
ant germs  still  unkilled,  which  were  destroyed  by  the
sixth  heating.  Of  two  other  tubes  charged  with  a
different  infusion,  one  has  been  heated  seven  times  and
is  now  full  of  life  ;  the  other  has  been  heated  eight
times  and  is  perfectly  barren.

With  due  care  the  method  of  sterilization  here  de-
scribed is  infallible,  however  highly  infective  the  sur-
rounding atmosphere  may  be.  But  here,  as  elsewhere  in
these  difficult  inquiries,  the  sagacity  which  comes  in
great  part  from  nature,  the  skill  which  comes  from
training,  and  the  care  which  ought  to  root  itself  in  his
moral  constitution,  are  all  necessary  to  save  the  experi-
menter from  error  and  to  lead  him  to  the  truth.

§  23.  Mortality  of  Germs  through  defect  of  Oxy-
gen produced  by  Exhaustion  with  the  Sprengel
Pump.

An  equally  striking  mode  of  sterilization  is  now  to
be  described.  The  crowding  together  of  the  organisms
so  as  to  form  in  a  multitude  of  cases  a  heavy,  corrugated,
fatty  scum  upon  the  surface  of  the  infusions  obviously
indicated  that  air  was  a  necessity  of  their  life.  In  some
cases  the  oxygen  dissolved  in  the  infusions  sufficed  to
enable  the  Bacteria  to  cloud  them  from  top  to  bottom ;
but  in  many  cases  they  gathered  at  the  top,  and  formed


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  217


there  a  living  layer  through  which  no  oxygen  could  pass
to  the  liquid  underneath,  which,  thus  surmounted,
remained  as  clear  as  water.  The  observation  of  these
facts,  and  many  others  oft  a  similar  bearing,  suggested
inquiry  into  the  effect  which  the  more  or  less  perfect
withdrawal  of  the  air  from  the  infusions  would  have
upon  the  development  of  life.

A  few  experiments  with  an  ordinary  air-pump  were,
in'  the  first  instance,  made.    The  necks  of  a  series  of
pipette  bulbs  charged  with  turnip-infusion  were  drawn
out  at  the  middle  to  a  tube  of  very  small  diameter.
The  open  end  of  the  neck  being  connected  with  the
air-pump,  the  bulbs  were  exhausted.    In  some  cases,
to  render  the  removal  of  the  air  more  perfect,  hydrogen
was  admitted  into  the  bulb  and  was  afterwards  with-
drawn by  the  air-pump.    Before  they  were  detached
from  the  pump  the  bulbs  were  immersed  in  lukewarm
water.    They  boiled  freely,  and  after  a  minute's  ebul-
lition the  narrowed  necks  were  hermetically  sealed.
The  bulbs  were  then  submerged  in  cold  water,  which
was  gradually  raised  to  212°  F.  and  kept  boiling  for
ten  minutes ;  they  were  afterwards  removed  and  placed
in  a  room  with  a  temperature  of  about  90°  Fahr.

Four  bulbs  were  thus  treated  in  a  preliminary  expe-
riment on  the  7th  of  March.  Two  of  them  remain
crystal  clear  to  the  present  hour ;  the  two  others  became
cloudy,  but  remained  entirely  free  from  scum.  The
cloudiness,  I  may  add,  was  barely  perceptible,  but  it
was  perfectly  distinct  to  the  practised  eye.

By  such  means,  however,  the  removal  of  the  air
must  have  been  more  or  less  imperfect,  and  I  therefore
resorted  to  the  far  more  effective  Sprengel  pump.  To
connect  them  with  the  pump,  the  bulbs  were  thrown
into  the  form  represented  in  fig.  21.  After  the  neck  of
the  bulb  had  been  plugged  with  cotton-wool  it  was  bent


218         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

at  right  angles  above  the  plug,  and  a  portion  of  it  was
drawn  out  to  a  tube  of  capillary  diameter,  represented
at  o.  The  end  a  was  connected  with  the  Sprengel
pump,  and  after  the  exhaustion  had  been  continued  for
the  required  interval,  the  neck  of  the  bulb  was  sealed
at  o.

On  the  14th  of  March  three  bulbs  charged  with
turnip-infusion,  from  which  the  air  had  been  as  far  as
possible  removed  by  the  ordinary  air-pump,  were  con-
nected with  the  Sprengel,  which  continued  the  exhaus-
tion uninterruptedly  for  three  hours.  The  air  dissolved
in  the  liquid  freely  escaped  from  it  at  first,  and  it  con-
tinued to  appear  in  minute  bubbles  long  after  the
exhaustion  had  reached  a  considerable  degree  of  perfec-
tion. The  drawn-out  necks  of  the  bulbs  being  hermetic-
ally sealed,  the  infusion  within  them  was  maintained
as  before  for  ten  minutes  at  the  boiling  temperature.

It  will  be  remembered  that  when  the  infusion  and
the  air  above  it  possessed  their  ordinary  supply  of  oxy-
gen, 180  minutes'  boiling  failed  to  sterilize  the  turnip-
infusion.  Here,  when  the  air  was  withdrawn  from  the
liquid,  exposure  for  one-eighteenth  of  the  foregoing
interval  sufficed  to  produce  perfect  barrenness.  The
infusion  in  the  three  bulbs  here  operated  on  remains  to
the  present  hour  clear  in  body  and  perfectly  free  from
scum.

On  the  15th  of  March  seven  bulbs  charged  with  in-
fusion of  turnip  were  treated  in  the  manner  just  de-
scribed, being  purged  of  their  air  by  three  hours'  action
of  the  Sprengel  pump,  and  boiled  for  ten  minutes  after-
wards.   Six  out  of  the  seven  remain  perfectly  pellucid.

On  the  1 6th  of  March  the  result  was  still  further
verified.  Seven  bulbs  were  then  charged  with  turnip-
infusion,  exhausted  first  by  the  air-pump,  and  afterwards
by  five  hours'  action  of  the  Sprengel  pump.  Hermetic-


VITALITY  OF  PUTEEFACT1VE  ORGANISMS.  219


Fig.  21.


ally  sealed  and  boiled  as  before,  six  out  of  the  seven
remain  as  clear  as  distilled  water.

On  the  20th  of  March  seven  bulbs  were  charged  with
infusion  of  cucumber,  and  subjected  to  the  action  of  the
Sprengel  pump  for  seven  hours.  They  were  afterwards
treated  in  the  manner  just
described.  They  were  all
completely  sterilized.

On  the  27th  of  March
three  bulbs  were  charged
with  cucumber -infusion
and  subjected  to  the  ac-
tion of  the  Sprengel  pump
for  five  hours.  One  of  them
was  subsequently  boiled  for
five  minutes,  another  fox-
one  minute,  while  the  third
was  left  unboiled.  This
third  tube  became  faintly
cloudy,  but  the  two  others
remain  perfectly  free  from
life.

This  result  invited  re-
petition. On  the  29th
accordingly  six  bulbs  of
cucumber  -  infusion  were
exhausted  for  five  hours,
and  afterwards  sealed  and
boiled  for  a  single  minute.
Five  of  the  six  bulbs  re-
mained permanently  clear  ;  one  became  cloudy.

On  the  30th  of  March  six  bulbs  containing  turnip-
infusion  were  exhausted  for  five  hours  and  boiled  after-
wards for  a  minute.  Five  remain  perfectly  clear,  one
has  become  muddy.


220        THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

On  the  6th  of  April  five  bulbs  of  beef-infusion  were
subjected  for  three  hours  to  the  action  of  the  Sprengel
pump  and  boiled  for  a  minute  afterwards.  They  all
remain  brilliant.

On  the  7th  of  April  five  bulbs  of  mutton-infusion
were  treated  like  the  beef-bulbs,  being  exhausted  for
three  hours  and  boiled  for  a  minute.  All  remain  clear.
This  experiment  was  repeated  and  confirmed  on  the
20th  of  April.

On  the  14th  of  April  three  bulbs  of  pork-infusion
were  exhausted  for  four  hours  and  boiled  for  a  minute.
They  all  remain  pellucid.

On  the  17th  of  April  four  bulbs  of  accurately  neu-
tralized urine  were  exhausted  for  five  hours  and  boiled
for  a  minute.  Three  of  them  remain  bright ;  one  has
become  cloudy.

This  does  not  exhaust  the  list  of  instances.  Many
other  infusions  have  been  sterilized  by  this  method  since
the  17th  of  April.

It  is  perfectly  certain  that  in  most,  if  not  all,  of
these  cases  200  minutes'  boiling  would  have  proved  in-
sufficient to  sterilize  the  infusion  if  it  had  been  supplied
with  air.

Here  the  question  naturally  arises : — What  would
happen  if  the  bulbs  were  exhausted  and  left  unboiled  ?
Probably  with  sufficiently  perfect  exhaustion  all  infu-
sions would  be  sterilized.  But  in  the  trials  I  have  thus
far  made  some  of  the  unboiled  infusions  have  become
cloudy,  while  others  have  remained  clear.  Thus  three
bulbs  of  mutton-infusion  exhausted  for  four  hours,  two
bulbs  of  beef-infusion  exhausted  for  three  hours,  four
bulbs  of  pork-infusion  exhausted  for  four  hours  and  left
unboiled  remain  as  transparent  and  as  free  from  life  as
their  boiled  companions.  Various  other  instances  of
sterilization  without  boiling  might  be  cited.    On  the


VITALITY  OF  PUTEEFACTIVE  OEGANISMS.  221


other  hand,  three  bulbs  of  neutralized  urine,  exhausted
for  five  hours  and  left  unboiled,  became  cloudy.  A  case
of  cucumber-infusion  which  behaved  similarly  has  been
cited  above.  It  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  remove
from  the  infusion  and  the  space  above  it  the  last  traces
of  air ;  and  when  backed  by  a  highly  nutritive  liquid
an  infinitesimal  residue  of  oxygen  can  develop  a  sensible
amount  of  life.  I  may  add  that  I  have  tested  the  ex-
haustion of  some  of  the  cloudy  bulbs,  and  have  found  it
in  every  case  defective.

The  foregoing  instances  sufficiently  illustrate  the
dependence  of  the  organisms  here  under  review  upon  the
supply  of  oxygen.1  I  think  it  probable  that  the  prin-
ciple thus  indicated  is  capable  of  useful  and  extensive
practical  application.


§  24.  Mortality  of  Germs  through  defect  of  Oxygen
consequent  on  boiling  the  Infusion.

Long  prior  to  these  experiments  with  the  Sprengel
pump,  the  influence  of  atmospheric  oxygen  on  the  life
of  these  organisms  had  been  brought  home  to  me.  It
revealed  itself  in  a  striking  manner  in  experiments  with
infusions  purged  of  air  by  boiling,  the  vessels  containing
them  being  carefully  sealed  during  ebullition.  At  a
time  when  the  atmosphere  of  our  laboratory  was  so  laden
with  infection  that  no  escape  for  animal  or  vegetable
liquids  introduced  in  the  usual  way  into  closed  chambers
was  possible,  it  was  perfectly  easy  to  keep  the  same  in-
fusions pellucid  for  an  indefinite  time  in  vessels  purged
of  air  by  boiling  and  properly  sealed.   I  will  give  a  few

'  In  search  of  this  gas  they  sometimes  rise  into  the  liquid  film
which  covers  the  interior  of  the  bulb  to  the  height  of  an  inch  and
more  above  the  surface  of  the  liquid,  forming  within  the  bulb  a
gauzy  scum  which  appears  as  if  lifted  by  capillary  attraction


222         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


Fig.  22.


out  of  the  multitude  of  examples  that  might  be  cited  in
proof  of  this  statement.

On  the  2nd  of  October  four-
teen of  our  ordinary  retort-flasks
(fig.  22)  were  charged  with  a
neutralized  infusion  of  hay.  They
were  boiled  for  three  minutes  in
an    oil-bath,   and  hermetically
sealed  whilst  boiling.  Thirteen
out  of  the  fourteen  tubes  re-
mained perfectly  barren,  retain-
ing for   months    their  pristine
colour  and  transparency.
On  the  18th  of  November  six  retort-flasks  were  filled
with  turnip-,  five  with  cucumber-,  five  with  beetroot-,
and  four  with  parsnep-infusion.    The  six  turnip-flasks
remained  permanently  pellucid,  yielding  a  clear  water-
hammer  ring.    The  five  beetroot-flasks  remained  also
permanently  barren,  all  yielding  the  water-hammer
sound.    Of  the  parsnep-flasks,  two  became  turbid,  but
two  remained  clear.     Of  the  cucumber-flasks,  three
became  cloudy,  while  three  remained  permanently  clear.
Neither  in  the  case  of  the  parsnep  nor  in  that  of  the
cucumber  could  the  water-hammer  sound  be  obtained
from  the  cloudy  flasks,  and  when  their  sealed  ends  were
broken  under  water,  the  vacuum  was  found  defective.
In  the  clear  tubes,  on  the  contrary,  it  was  found  practi-
cally perfect.

Again,  on  the  20th  of  November,  seventeen  retort-
flasks  were  charged  with  infusions  of  turnip,  cucumber,
and  parsnep.  They  were  boiled  for  three  minutes  m  an
oil-bath,  and  carefully  sealed  while  boiling.  The  sxx
turnip-flasks  remained  permanently  clear,  mamtamang
for  months  their  sharp  water-hammer  sound.  Of  the
five  parsnep-flasks,  one  became  turbid  and  four  remained


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  223


permanently  clear.  These  latter  only  yielded  the  water-
hammer  sound.  The  turbid  flask,  on  the  contrary,
when  shaken  yielded  no  such  sound,  and  when  its  sealed
end  was  broken  under  water,  its  vacuum  proved  defec-
tive. Of  the  six  cucumber-flasks,  two  became  turbid,
the  remaining  four  being  perfectly  clear.  On  breaking
their  sealed  ends  under  water,  one-third  of  one  of  the
turbid  flasks  and  one-fourth  of  the  other  remained  un-
filled by  the  liquid.

On  the  6th  of  December  eighteen  retort-flasks  were
charged  with  cucumber-infusion.  They  were  boiled  for
the  usual  time,  that  is  three  minutes,  extreme  care
being  taken  to  seal  them -during  the  issue  of  the  steam.
The  water-hammer  soimd  in  all  these  flasks  was  parti-
cularly sharp  and  clear.  Exposed  to  a  temperature  of
90°  Fahr.  for  many  weeks,  seventeen  of  them  remained
perfectly  pellucid ;  while  the  same  infusion  in  a  sealed
bulb  with  filtered  air  above  it,  and  dissolved  in  it,
swarmed  with  life  after  boiling  for  sixty  times  the
interval  here  found  effectual.

On  the  day  subsequent  to  its  preparation,  one  of
these  well-exhausted  flasks  was  unexpectedly  found  tur-
bid and  covered  with  scum.  But  on  examining  the
sealed  end  it  was  found  snipped  off.  The  laboratory  air
had  thus  entered  the  flask  and  given  birth  to  the  ob-
served organisms.  Failures  of  this  sort  have  a  demon-
strative force  greater  even  than  successes ;  they  render  so
obviously  plain  the  external  source  of  the  contamination.

It  is  worth  saying  here  that  the  observation  just
recorded  was  of  frequent  occurrence.  The  fineness  of
the  sealed  points  of  our  retort-flasks  renders  them  very
liable  to  be  snipped  off  if  they  are  not  handled  with
care.  After  preparation  they  are  usually  suspended  on
a  wire  or  on  a  wooden  support ;  and  in  frequent  in-
stances, after  such  suspension,  I  have  found  a  flask


224        THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


differentiating  itself  by  thick  turbidity  from  a  number
of  perfectly  pellucid  neighbours,  the  yielding  of  the  flask
being  immediately  traced  to  the  fracture  of  its  sealed
end.

With  the  view  of  showing  how  readily,  unless  ex-
treme care  is  taken,  contamination  may  enter  her-
metically-sealed vessels,  the  following  experiment  was
made  on  the  6th  of  December.  Four  retort-flasks
were  charged  with  cucumber-infusion,  boiled  for  the
usual  time  and  sealed,  not  during  the  outrush  of  the
steam,  but  a  moment  after  ebullition  had  ceased.  On
the  9th  of  December  three  of  these  four  flasks  were
faintly  but  distinctly  turbid.  The  reason  is  obvious.
On  the  cessation  of  the  ebullition,  a  momentary  conden-
sation of  the  steam  above  the  infusion  caused  an
indraught— slight,  no  doubt,  but  still  sufficient  to
contaminate  or  vivify  the  infusion.

The  source  of  the  contagium  was  also  indicated  by
the  following  experiments.  A  large  number  of  retort-
flasks,  embracing  infusions  of  snipe,  wild  duck,  partridge,
hare,  rabbit,  mutton,  turbot,  salmon,  whiting,  mullet,
turnip,  and  hay,  had  remained  over  from  my  stock  of
1875.  After  a  year's  exposure  to  the  temperature  of
our  warm  room  not  one  of  these  flasks  showed  the
slightest  trace  of  turbidity  or  life.  On  the  7th  of  De-
cember the  sealed  ends  of  forty  of  them  were  snipped
off  in  the  laboratory.  Five  days  afterwards  twenty-
seven  of  them  were  found  swarming  with  organisms— a
considerably  higher  percentage  than  that  obtained  by
the  same  process  in  the  same  laboratory  a  year  pre-
viously. .

It  is  needless  to  dwell  with  any  emphasis  on  the
obvious  inference  from  all  this,  namely,  that  the  conta-
gium is  external  to  the  infusions,  that  it  is  something
in  the  air,  and  that  at  different  times  we  have  different


VITALITY  OF  PUTKEFACTIVE  OKGANISMS.  225

amounts  of  aerial  interspace  free  from  the  floating-  con-
tagium.

§  25.  Critical  Revieiv  of  the  last  two  Sections.

It  has  been  my  desire  and  aim  throughout  this
inquiry  to  free  it  as  much  as  possible  from  uncer-
tainty and  doubt,    I  have  tried  to  render  the  facts
safe  by  laborious  repetition,  and  the  interpretations
of  those  facts  secure  by  close  and  constant  criticism.
Thus,  in  reference  to  "our  present  subject,  I  had  to  put
to  myself  very  definitely  the  question  whether  the  per-
manent clearness  of  an  infusion  exposed  to  a  very
moderate  amount  of  heat,  after  having  been  freed  from
air  by  boiling  or  by  the  Sprengel  pump,  was  really  due
to  the  destruction  of  the  germs  in  the  infusion.  Even
m  a  highly  infective  atmosphere,  from  three  to  five
minutes'  boiling  in  an  oil-bath  suffices  to  sterilize  our
retort-flasks,  while  it  is  perfectly  certain  that  exposure
to  the  boiling  temperature  for  fifty  times  this  interval
may  fail  to  kill  the  germs  of  an  infusion  containing
a  good  supply  of  atmospheric  air.    A  similar  remark
applies  to  our  experiments  with  the  Sprengel  pump
I  asked  myself  whether  in  these  cases  the  life  of  the
germs  was  not  suspended  merely,  instead  of  being
destroyed.    It  was  quite  conceivable  that  germs  en-
dowed with  vital  power,  ready  to  act  under  proper
conditions,  might  still  exist  in  our  hermetically-sealed
flasks,  although  the  entire  absence  of  oxygen  rendered
their  further  development  impossible.

That  something  more  than  a  mere  temporary  hind
ranee  to  development  is  here  involved  was,  however
proved  by  many  of  the  experiments  just  recorded'
These  experiments  showed  that  after  hermetically-sealed
flasks  had  remained  pellucid,  not  only  for  days  but  for

Q


226


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


weeks  and  months,  and  in  some  cases  for  more  than  a
year,  on  their  sealed  ends  being  broken  off,  even  in
ordinary  air,  they  by  no  means  invariably  showed  signs
of  life  afterwards.  Many  of  them  remained  permanently
barren  while  copiously  supplied  with  oxygen.

Special  experiments  were,  however,  made  to  illus-
trate this  point.  .First  of  all,  as  I  have  already  re-
counted, hermetically-sealed  retort-flasks  were  opened
in  one  of  our  lower  store-rooms,  and  though  supplied
with  oxygen  from  this  source  they  showed  subsequently
no  signs  of  life.  A  considerable  number  of  retort-flasks
had  also  their  sealed  ends  broken  off  in  the  midst  of  a
spirit-lamp  flame.  It  is  known  that  gunpowder  can  be
dropped  through  such  a  flame  without  ignition  ;  and  in
a  few  rare  instances  the  infusions  which  had  their  first
supply  of  air  thus  passed  through  a  flame  showed  subse-
quent signs  of  life.  In  such  cases  the  germinal  matter
had  been  sucked  so  rapidly  through  the  flame  that^  it
escaped  destruction  ;  but  in  the  vast  majority  of  in-
stances the  sterilized  infusions  remained  sterile.

Mechanical  arrangements  were  also  made  for  the
breaking  off  of  the  sealed  ends  in  a  receiver  filled  with
filtered  air.    But  it  is  by  no  means  easy  to  perfectly
cleanse  from  infectious  matter  the  instruments  used  m
such  experiments,  though  with  sufficient  practice  this
might  certainly  be  done.    The  consequence  was  that
some  of  the  flasks  opened  in  filtered  air  yielded  subse-
quently. The  following  is  an  illustrative  case  :— On  the
3rd  of  January  ten  flasks  were  charged  with  cucumber-,
turnip-,  artichoke-,  and  melon-infusions.    They  were
boiled  for  the  usual  time,  sealed  during  ebullition,  and
exposed  afterwards  to  a  warm  temperature.  Their  sealed
ends  were  then  broken  off  by  a  mechanical  contrivance
placed  in  a  receiver  containing  filtered  air.    The  two
artichoke-flasks  remained  permanently  barren  after-


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  227


wards.  Of  the  two  melon-flasks,  one  remained  barren
and  the  other  developed  life.  Of  the  two  cucumber-
flasks,  one  became  turbid,  the  other  remained  clear.  Of
the  four  turnip-flasks,  two  became  turbid  and  two  re-
mained clear.  Out  of  the  ten  flasks,  therefore,  all  freely-
connected  with  the  external  air,  six  remained  perma-
nently barren.  By  further  practice  barrenness  in  almost
■every  instance  has  been  secured.  The  conclusion,  I
•think,  is  obvious.  It  is  not  the  heat  alone  that  destroys
these  germs,  for  fifty  times  the  amount  of  heat  will  not
accomplish  this  when  oxygen  in  due  quantity  is  pre-
sent :  the  heat  must  be  aided  by  the  withdrawal  of  the
•oxygen.

§  26.  Mortality  of  Germs  through  excess  of  Oxygen.

The  foregoing  remarks  lead  naturally  to  a  brief
reference  to  the  important  experiments  of  M.  Paul  Bert1
■on  the  toxic  influence  of  compressed  oxygen.  From  the
imperfect  account  of  these  experiments  which  first
reached  me,  I  inferred  that  the  germs  of  putrefaction
had  been  destroyed  by  mere  mechanical  pressure,  and
more  than  a  year  and  a  half  ago  I  placed  turnip-infu-
sions in  strong  iron  bottles,  and  subjected  them  for  several
days  to  an  air-pressure  of  twenty-three  atmospheres.
When  taken  from  the  bottles  the  infusions  were  found
■one  and  all  swarming  with  life.  Last  October  I  made
a  series  of  similar  experiments  with  infusions  of  hay  and
turnip,  subjecting  them  for  several  days  to  an  air-pres-
sure of  twenty-seven  atmospheres.  When  taken  from
their  iron  bottles  the  infusions  were  found  one  and  all
teeming  with  Bacteria.

I  then  resorted  to  pure  oxygen,  and  found  the  same
to  be  true  of  my  infusions  thatM.  Paul  Bert  had  found
1  Comptes  llcndus,  vol.  Ixxx.  p.  1579.
Q  2


228


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OE  THE  AIR.


true  of  his  flesh,  moist  bread,  boiled  starch,  strawberries,
cherries,  wine,  and  urine.     Pressures  varying  from
twenty-seven  atmospheres  to  ten  atmospheres  of  oxygen
were  employed.   In  all  cases,  however  long  the  pressure
was  continued,  or  however  favourable  to  putrefaction  the-
surrounding  temperature  might  be,  the  infusions  (which
embraced  those  of  beef,  mutton,  and  turnip)  were  found,
when  taken  from  the  bottles,  as  clear  as  crystal  and
entirely  free  from  life.    It  required,  indeed,  long  subse-
quent exposure  to  the  common  air  to  infect  infusions
which  had  been  thus  surcharged  with  oxygen.  Other
bottles  containing  the  same  infusions  were  simultane-
ously subjected  to  a  like  pressure,  not  of  oxygen,  how-
ever, but  of  atmospheric  air.    When  removed  from  the
bottles  they  were  one  and  all  found  in  a  state  of  putre-
faction and  swarming  with  life.

Thus  when  oxygen  is  wholly  withdrawn  from  organic
infusions,  the  life  with  which  we  are  here  concerned
ceases.  When,  on  the  other  hand,  the  gas  is  in  con-
siderable excess,  it  becomes  a  deadly  poison  to  organisms
which,  in  moderate  quantities,  it  sustains.  As  m  the
case  of  temperature,  so  in  regard  to  the  supply  of  oxygen,
there  is  a  medial  zone  favourable  to  the  play  of  vitality,
beyond  which,  on  both  sides,  life  cannot  exist.

The  present  memoir  virtually  ends  here  ;  but  I  will
append  a  few  brief  sections  which,  though  incomplete,
are  not  without  instruction.

§  27.  Experiments  on  neutralized  Urine.

I  have  already  communicated  to  the  Eoyal  Society
the  result  of  some  experiments  made  with  this  liquid,
in  which  the  potash  employed  for  neutralization  was
subjected  to  a  temperature  of  220°  Fahr.    The  alkali
1  Proceedings,  vol.  xxv.  p.  i'u-


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  229


was  contained  in  tubes  drawn  out  finely  at  the  end,
which  were  introduced  into  the  flasks  containing-  the
urine,  and  broken  by  shaking  after  the  acid  urine  had
been  completely  sterilized  by  heat.  The  cases  were  ex-
ceedingly rare  in  which  life  showed  itself  in  the  urine
thus  neutralized.  The  preponderance  of  sterilized  flasks
•over  unsterilized  ones  was  very  great.

In  the  experiments  now  to  be  glanced  at,  neither
the  urine  nor  the  potash  was  raised  to  a  temperature
higher  than  212°.  Wishing  to  ascertain  how  the  refrac-
tory germs  of  our  laboratory  would  fare  in  neutralized
urine,  on  the  16th  of  February  I  had  five  pipette-bulbs
charged  with  the  liquid.  It  was  neutralized  by  caustic
potash,  which  on  boiling  produced  copious  precipitation.
It  was  afterwards  filtered  and  rendered  very  transparent.
The  bulbs  had  been  well  cleansed,  filled  with  one-third
of  an  atmosphere  of  filtered  air,  hermetically  sealed,
and  exposed  afterwards  to  the  heat  of  a  Bunsen  flame.
They  were  charged  with  the  urine  by  breaking  off  their
finely  drawn  out  points  in  the  body  of  the  liquid.  They
were  then  again  sealed,  and  subjected  to  the  boiling
temperature  for  ten  minutes

Not  one  of  these  bulbs  remained  sterile.  Two  days
subsequent  to  their  preparation  they  were  all  swarming
with  organisms.

Three  other  bulbs  were  on  the  same  occasion  charged
with  precisely  the  same  infusion,  only  instead  of  being-
associated  with  air  they  were  well  purged  of  air  by  five
minutes'  boiling  in  an  oil-bath.  While  the  steam  was
issuing  they  were  hermetically  sealed.

Not  one  of  these  bulbs  has  proved  fruitful.  They  are
all  as  brilliant  and  as  free  from  life  as  they  were  after
they  had  passed  through  the  filter.

The  difference  here  indicated  is  worthy  of  notice.
In  the  one  case  five  minutes'  action  completely  steril-


230


THE  FLOATING  -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


izes ;  in  the  other  ten  minutes'  action  fails  to  do  so.
This  latter  interval  indeed  might  be  multiplied  twenty-
fold  and  still  prove  ineffectual.  In  the  one  case  the
process  of  boiling  purged  the  liquid  of  its  air ;  in  the
other  case  the  air  was  retained  within  and  above  the
liquid.  The  case  therefore  connects  itself  with  our
former  illustrations.

On  the  21st  of  February  six  bulbs  were  charged
with  fresh  urine  carefully  neutralized  and  boiled  for  five
minutes  in  an  oil-bath.  Of  the  six  flasks,  four  remain
perfectly  clear  and  brilliant,  one  is  slightly  cloudy,  and
one  turbid.

The  urine  here  referred  to  was  neutralized  in  our
own  laboratory ;  but  as  the  importance  of  accurate  neu-
tralization has  been  much  insisted  on,  I  wished  to  check
myself.  At  my  request,  therefore,  Dr.  Debus  was  good
enough  to  send  me  from  Greenwich  a  quantity  of  urine
carefully  neutralized  by  him.  On  the  1st  of  March
seven  retort-flasks  were  charged  with  the  neutralized
liquid.  These  were  boiled  for  five  minutes  in  an  oil-
bath  and  sealed  during  ebullition.  Three  of  these  flasks
have  become  turbid,  but  four  remain  perfectly  clear.

On  the  5th  of  March  Dr.  Williamson  was  good
enough  to  send  me  a  supply  of  neutralized  urine  collected
in  a  public  urinal  in  University  College.  The  colour
was  very  deep,  the  odour  was  very  bad,  and  the  precipi-
tation on  boiling  very  copious.  Fourteen  retort-flasks
were  charged  with  this  liquid  on  the  6th  of  March.
Seven  of  them  have  gone  bad,  but  seven  of  them  remain
clear.

On  the  10th  of  March  Dr.  Frankland  was  good
enough  to  send  me  a  supply  of  urine  neutralized  by
himself.  It  was  introduced  into  four  retort-flasks,  which,
like  the  others,  were  boiled  for  five  minutes  in  hot  oil
and  sealed  during  ebullition.  None  of  these'  flasks  have


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  231


shown  the  slightest  sign  of  yielding.  The  liquid  within
all  of  them  is  as  brilliant  as  it  was  when  first  intro-
duced.

In  every  case  here  mentioned  the  liquid,  after  boil-
ing, was  exposed  for  several  days  to  a  temperature  of
50°  C.

The  conflict  described  in  the  foregoing  pages  and
the  search  for  principles  to  reconcile  the  results  occupied
me  too  long  to  permit  of  my  doing  more  than  break
ground  on  the  subject  of  urine.  I  entertain,  however,  a
strong  opinion  that  by  a  little  practice  with  this  liquid,
its  sterilization  by  five  minutes'  boiling  might  be  ren-
dered certain  in  every  case.  As  the  experiments  stand,
they  sufficiently  negative  the  conclusion  that  neutralized
urine  furnishes  a  specially  convincing  illustration  of
spontaneous  generation.

§  28.  Hermetically -sealed  Flasks  exposed  to  the  Sun

of  the  Alps.

A  remark  of  Dr.  Bastian's,  wherein  he  refers  to  the
power  of  the  actinic  rays  of  the  sun  to  promote  spon-
taneous generation,1  caused  me  to  take  with  me  to
Switzerland  a  number  of  flasks  hermetically  sealed  with
special  care  and  charged  with  infusions  of  various  kinds.
Eighty  of  them  were  carefully  packed  in  sawdust  in
London  ;  but  on  my  arrival  at  the  Bel  Alp,  which
stands  at  an  elevation  of  some  7,000  feet  above  the
sea,  I  found  only  forty-five  of  them  unbroken.  They
were  thus  distributed  : —

Beef     ......  12  flasks.

Mackerel      .      .      .      .  ,  •  .  12  „

Turnip  .       .       .             .       .  12  „

Fowl   9  „

1  '  Nature,'  vol.  iii.  p.  247.


232


THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


For  ten  days  of  the  splendid  summer  with  which  we
were  favoured  during  a  portion  of  last  July,  these  flasks
were  exposed  daily  to  the  sunlight  upon  the  roof  of  the
Bel  Alp  hotel.  The  sky  during  many  of  these  days  was
of  a  deep  and  cloudless  blue ;  and  certainly  in  London-
the  actinic  rays  never  approached  the  power  of  those
here  brought  to  bear  upon  the  infusions.  The  tempera-
ture for  many  hours  of  each  day  was  about  120°  Fahr.
Every  evening,  when  the  thermometer  had  fallen  to
about  70°,  the  flasks  were  removed  and  suspended  above
the  kitchen-range  of  the  hotel,  the  temperature  gene-
rally varying  throughout  the  night  from  70°  to  80°
Fahr.  Such  variations  of  temperature,  it  may  be  re-
marked, are  deemed  favourable  to  spontaneous  genera-
tion.

After  the  sunny  weather  had  disappeared,  the  flasks
were  allowed  to  remain  for  three  weeks  suspended  in
the  kitchen,  with  occasional  exposures  to  the  sun;  the
average  temperature  of  the  kitchen  where  the  flasks
were  hung  was  about  90°  F.  The  result  of  the  observa-
tions was  that  not  one  of  these  forty-five  flasks  yielded
the  slightest  evidence  of  spontaneous  generation.  From
first  to  last  they  all  continued  as  limpid  as  distilled
water.

The  sealed  ends  of  these  flasks  were  afterwards  nipped
off  under  various  circumstances,  some  on  the  Sparren-
horn,  some  on  the  glacier,  some  in  the  Massa  Gorge,
some  amid  the  hair  of  my  own  head,  and  some  in  the
rooms  of  the  hotel.  Many  of  them,  moreover,  were
infected  with  water  of  various  kinds — spring-water,  lake-
water,  and  glacier- water.  It  is  not  my  object  to  give
a  detailed  account  of  these  experiments,  but  simply  to
say  that  it  was  not  lack  of  nutritive  power  on  the  part
of  the  infusions  which  prevented  the  appearance  of  or-
ganisms in  the  first  instance ;  for  when  brought  into


VITALITY  OF  PUTREFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  233

contact  with  infectious  matter  every  one  of  the  flasks
showed  its  power  of  sustaining  and  multiplying  life.

§  29.  Remarks  on  Hermetic  Sealing.

A  few  brief  remarks  on  this  subject  may,  I  think,
be  fitly  interpolated  here.     Hermetic  sealing  during
ebullition  is  an  operation  requiring  some  apprenticeship
to  perform  it  aright.    The  neck  of  the  flask  ought  to
be  so  narrow  that  the  pressure  of  the  steam  within  shall
be  always  sensibly  greater  than  that  of  the  atmosphere
without.    This  condition  would  be  readily  fulfilled  if
the  liberation  of  the  steam  were  absolutely  uniform,  and
not  by  fits  and  starts.    But  it  never  is  uniform,  and  if
the  channel  through  which  the  steam  issues  be  wide,  it
is  scarcely  possible  to  avoid  regurgitation.  Sometimes
the  pressure  within  is  above  that  of  the  atmosphere,  and
steam  freely  issues ;  but  at  the  next  moment,  through
liquid  adhesion  to  the  flask,  and  partial  condensation
above,  the  internal  pressure  may  be  below  that  of  the
atmosphere  and  permit  air  to  enter.    This  alternate
triumph  of  the  inner  and  the  outer  pressure  may  be
rendered  plainly  evident  by  the  motions  of  the  water
condensed  in  the  neck  of  the  flask.    The  liquid  acts  as
an  index  which  moves  to  and  fro,  sometimes  forward,
sometimes  backward,  as  the  pressure  varies.  It  is  quite
evident  that  contamination  may  be,  and  it  is  quite  cer-
tain that  contamination  has  been,  thus  introduced  into
flasks  reputed  to  be  free  from  air.

Even  with  considerable  care  and  fairly  disciplined
manipulatory  skill  success  is  not  invariable.  Ten  per
cent,  is  not  at  all  a  large  allowance  to  set  down  as
defective  in  ordinary  hermetically-sealed  flasks.  The
recent  opening  of  about  two  hundred  flasks  employed  in
my  earlier  experiments,  under  water  and  under  caustic-


234         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  A  IE.


potash  solution,  furnishes  the  basis  of  this  conclusion.
Even  in  a  comparatively  pure  atmosphere  success  does
not  in  every  instance  attend  the  experimenter.  At  Kew,
for  example,  on  the  8th  of  January,  thirteen  retort-flasks
were  charged  with  infusions  of  cucumber,  melon,  beef,
and  sole.  Twelve  out  of  the  thirteen  remained  perfectly
limpid,  but  one  of  them  (a  cucumber-flask)  became  dis-
tinctly cloudy,  and  this  one  alone  refused,  when  tested,
to  yield  the  water-hammer  sound.  With  due  training,
however,  success  may  be  rendered  invariable.

§  30.  Experiments  with  Turnip-cheese  Infusions.
I  am  unwilling  to  omit  all  reference  to  experiments
which  have  cost  considerable  labour,  and  which,  though
they  have  not  been  repeated  and  controlled  to  the  extent
that  I  could  wish,  contribute  nevertheless  to  our  know-
ledge of  the  present  question.  This  unwillingness  causes
me  to  introduce  here,  in  the  briefest  manner  possible,  a
reference  to  a  series  of  experiments  made  with  turnip-
cheese  infusions,  which  have  been  so  frequently  cited  as
offering  a  conspicuous  proof  of  the  doctrine  of  sponta-
neous generation.

The  experiments  to  which  I  refer  were  made  in  part
with  closed  chambers,  and  in  part  with  hermetically-
sealed  retort-flasks.    The  specific  gravity  of  the  infu-
sions varied  from  1008  to  1012.    The  cheeses  employed
were  Cheshire,  Cheddar,    Gloucester,  Dutch  cheese,
American  cheese,  Eoquefort,  and  Parmesan,  the  quantity
varying  from  half  a  grain  to  two  grains  for  every  ounce
of  the  infusion.    The  cheese  being  first  well  triturated
in  a  mortar,  so  as  to  render  its  particles  very  minute,
was  intimately  mixed  with  the  infusion,  which  was  then
boiled  for  a  few  minutes  and  passed  through  a  filter.
The  filtered  liquid  was  then  introduced  into  its  closed
chamber,  and  boiled  there  for  five  minutes.


VITALITY  OF  PUTEEFACTIVE  ORGANISMS.  235


Sixteen  such  chambers  were  employed,  one  of  them
containing  twelve  test-tubes,  each  of  the  others  only
three.  There  were  therefore  fifty-seven  test-tubes  in
all.  The  result  of  the  experiment  was,  that  out  of  the
fifty-seven  tubes,  twenty-seven  became  turbid  in  a  few
days,  while  thirty  remained  for  months  without  sensible
alteration.1

A  considerable  number  of  retort-flasks  were  charged
at  the  same  time  with  the  same  infusions,  and  boiled  for
five  minutes  in  an  oil-batb.  The  great  majority  of
these  flasks  remained  perfectly  intact.

Here,  then,  as  elsewhere,  the  ground  on  which  the
doctrine  of  spontaneous  generation  has  sought  to  plant
itself  slips  from  under  it ;  for  assuredly  the  scientific
mind  will  attribute  to  other  causes  than  to  it  the  pro-
duction of  organisms  in  the  minority  of  cases  above
referred  to.

One  likely  cause  may  here  be  signalized  and  illus-
trated. The  experiments  of  Spallanzani  on  the  action
of  heat  upon  seeds  are  well  known,  and  they  have
been  frequently  cited  in  support  of  the  thesis  that
the  briefest  exposure  to  the  temperature  of  212°  Fahr.
suffices  to  destroy  all  living  matter.  I  have  repeated
many  of  Spallanzani's  experiments,  and  will  here
briefly  refer  to  one  series  which  bear  upon  the  present
point.  Peas,  kidney-beans,  cress-  and  mustard-seed
were  tied  up  in  small  calico  bags,  and  boiled  for  in-
tervals varying  from  half  a  minute  to  five  minutes.
They  were  then  carefully  sown  in  flower-pots  filled  with
well-prepared  earth,  and  placed  in  a  shed  kept  at  a

1  These  chambers  were  prepared  and  their  tubes  charged  prior
to  the  introduction  of  hay  into  our  laboratory  last  autumn,  other-
wise the  immunity  of  a  single  one  of  them  could  not  have  been
secured.  The  chambers  employed  had  stood  over  from  my  last  in-
vestigation, and  no  pains  had  been  taken  to  render  them  air-tight.


236       .  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


temperature  of  70°  Fahr.    An  unboiled  sample  of  every
seed  was  sown  at  tbe  same  time  beside  the  boiled  ones.
The  unboiled  seeds  sprouted  vigorously.  Thirty  seconds'
exposure  to  the  boiling  temperature  deprived  both  the
peas  and  the  beans  of  their  power  of  germination.  A
few  of  the  cress-seeds  exposed  for  this  interval  sprouted,
but  the  majority  were  killed,  and  all  were  killed  by  a
minute's  boiling.    On  the  other  hand,  a  very  large  pro-
portion of  the  mustard-seeds  boiled  for  thirty  seconds
germinated.    The  time  of  exposure  in  the  case  of  this
seed  was  doubled,  trebled,  and  quadrupled,  leaving  stiii
a  residue  of  life.    The  fertile  mustard-seeds  gradually
diminished  in  number  as  the  time  of  boiling  increased,
but  even  after  two  minutes'  boiling  many  of  them
germinated.

And  now  comes  a  fact  which  I  deem  of  some  im-
portance as  regards  the  present  inquiry.    When  the
calico  bag  was  abandoned,  and  the  mustard-seeds  were
placed  loosely  in  water,  so  as  to  ensure  not  only  the  free
communication  to  them  of  its  temperature,  but  free
diffusion  between  the  soluble  portions  of  the  seeds  and
the  surrounding  liquid,  not  one  of  them  escaped  the
ordeal  of  thirty  seconds'  boiling.    In  the  first  series  of
experiments,  the  bag  which  held  the  seeds  together  not
only  exercised  a  protecting  influence  itself,  but  it  en-
abled the  outside  seeds  to  act  as  shields  to  the  inside
ones     Assuredly  in  a  far  higher  degree  will  cheese
shield  germs  contained  within  it.     Unlike  fruit  and
meat,  it  is  highly  impervious  to  water.    It  thus  wards
off  the  liquid  on  which  the  softening  and  swelling  of  tbe
germ  depend,  so  that  within  such  a  substance  the  life  of
a  germ  might  be  indefinitely  prolonged.


FERMENTATION,  AND  ITS  BEARINGS  ON
SURGERY  AND  MEDICINE.1


IV.

One  of  the  most  remarkable  characteristics  of  the  age
in  which  we  live,  is  its  desire  and  tendency  to  connect
itself  organically  with,  preceding  ages — to  ascertain
how  the  state  of  things  that  now  is  came  to  be  what  it
is.  And  the  more  earnestly  and  profoundly  this  pro-
blem is  studied,  the  more  clearly  comes  into  view  the
vast  and  varied  debt  which  the  world  of  to-day  owes  to
that  fore-world,  in  which  man  by  skill,  valour,  and.
well-directed  strength  first  replenished  and  subdued
the  earth.  Our  prehistoric  fathers  may  have  been
savages,  but  they  were  clever  and  observant  ones.
They  founded  agriculture,  by  the  discovery  and  develop-
ment of  seeds  whose  origin  is  now  unknown.  They
tamed  and  harnessed  their  animal  antagonists,  and  sent
them  down  to  us  as  ministers,  instead  of  rivals  in  the
fight  for  life.  Later  on,  when  the  claims  of  luxury
added  themselves  to  those  of  necessity,  we  find  the
same  spirit  of  invention  at  work.  We  have  no  historic
account  of  the  first  brewer,  but  we  glean  from  history
that  his  art  was  practised,  and  its  produce  relished,
more  than  two  thousand  years  ago.  Theophrastus,
who  was  born  nearly  four  hundred  years  before  Christ,

1  A  Discourse  delivered  before  the  Glasgow  Science  Lectures
Association,  October  19,  1876.


'238


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  ALU.


described  beer  as  the  wine-  of  barley.  It  is  extremely
difficult  to  preserve  beer  in  a  hot  country,  still,  Egypt
was  the  land  in  which  it  was  first  brewed,  the  desire  of
man  to  quench  his  thirst  with  this  exhilarating  beverage
overcoming  all  the  obstacles  which  a  hot  climate  threw
in  the  way  of  its  manufacture.

Our  remote  ancestors  had  also  learned  by  experience
that  wine  maketh  glad  the  heart  of  man.  Noah,  we
are  informed,  planted  a  vineyard,  drank  of  the  wine,
and  experienced  the  consequences.  But,  though  wine
and  beer  possess  so  old  a  history,  a  very  few  years  ago
no  man  knew  the  secret  of  their  formation.  Indeed,  it
might  be  said  that  until  the  present  year  no  thorough
and  scientific  account  was  ever  given  of  the  agencies
which  come  into  play  in  the  manufacture  of  beer,  of
the  conditions  necessary  to  its  health,  and  of  the
maladies  and  vicissitudes  to  which  it  is  subject.
Hitherto  the  art  and  practice  of  the  brewer  have  re-
sembled those  of  the  physician,  both  being  founded  on
empirical  observation.  By  this  is  meant  the  observa-
tion of  facts,  apart  from  the  principles  which  explain
them,  and  which  give  the  mind  an  intelligent  mastery
over  them.  The  brewer  learnt  from  long  experience
the  conditions,  not  the  reasons,  of  success.  But  he  had
to  contend,  and  has  still  to  contend,  against  unexplained
perplexities.  Over  and  over  again  his  care  has  been
rendered  nugatory  ;  his  beer  has  fallen  into  acidity  or
rottenness,  and  disastrous  losses  have  been  sustained,
of  which  he  has  been  unable  to  assign  the  cause.  It  is
the  hidden  enemies  against  which  the  physician  and  the
brewer  have  hitherto  contended,  that  recent  researches
are  dragging  into  the  light  of  day,  thus  preparing  the
way  for  their  final  extermination.

Let  us  glance  for  a  moment  at  the  outward  and


FERMENTATION.


239


visible  signs  of  fermentation.    A  few  weeks  ago  I  paid
a  visit  to  a  private  still  in  a  Swiss  chalet ;  and  this  is
what  I  saw.    In  the  peasant's  bedroom  was  a  cask  with
a  very  large  bunghole  carefully  closed.    The  cask  con-
tained cherries  which  had  lain  in  it  for  fourteen  days.
It  was  not  entirely  filled  with  the  fruit,  an  air-space
being  left  above  the  cherries  when  they  were  put  in.  I
had  the  bung  removed,  and  a  small  lamp  dipped  into
this  space.    Its  flame  was  instantly  extinguished.  The
oxygen  of  the  air  had  entirely  disappeared,  its  place
"being  taken  by  carbonic   acid  gas.1     I  tasted  the
•cherries :  they  were  very  sour,  though  when  put  into
the  cask  they  were  sweet.    The  cherries  and  the  liquid
associated  with  them  were  then  placed  in  a  copper
boiler,  to  which  a  copper  head  was  closely  fitted.  From
the  head  proceeded  a  copper  tube  which  passed  straight
through  a  vessel  of  cold  water,  and  issued  at  the  other
side.    Under  the  open  end  of  the  tube  was  placed  a
bottle  to  receive  the  spirit  distilled.    The  flame  of
small  wood-splinters  being  applied  to  the  boiler,  after
a  time  vapour  rose  into  the  head,  passed  through  the
tube,  was  condensed  by  the  cold  of  the  water,  and  fell
in  a  liquid  fillet  into  the  bottle.    On  being  tasted,  it
proved  to  be  that  fiery  and  intoxicating  spirit  known  in
commerce  as  Kirsch  or  Kirschwasser.

The  cherries,  it  should  be  remembered,  were  left  to
themselves,  no  ferment  of  any  kind  being  added  to
them.  In  this  respect  what  has  been  said  of  the  cherry
applies  also  to  the  grape.  At  the  vintage  the  fruit  of
the  vine  is  placed  in  proper  vessels,  and  abandoned  to
its  own  action.  It  ferments,  producing  carbonic  acid  •
its  sweetness  disappears,  and  at  the  end  of  a  certain

»  The  gas  wind,  is  exhaled  from  the  lungs  after  the  oxygen  of
the  air  lias  done  its  dutyin  purifying  the  blood;  the  same  also  which
effervesces  from  soda  water  and  champagne.


240         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


time  the  unintoxicating  grape-juice  is  converted  into
intoxicating  wine.  Here,  as  in  the  case  of  the  cherries,
the  fermentation  is  spontaneous— in  what  sense  sponta-
neous will  appear  more  clearly  by-and-hy.

It  is  needless  for  me  to  tell  a  Glasgow  audience  that
the  beer-brewer  does  not  set  to  work  in  this  way.  In
the  first  place  the  brewer  deals  not  with  the  juice  of
fruits,  but  with  the  juice  of  barley.    The  barley  having
been  steeped  for  a  sufficient  time  in  water,  it  is  drained
and  subjected  to  a  temperature  sufficient  to  cause  the
moist  grain  to  germinate ;  after  which,  it  is  completely
dried  upon  a  kiln.    It  then  receives  the  name  of  malt.
The  malt  is  crisp  to  the  teeth,  and  decidedly  sweeter  to
the  taste  than  the  original  barley.  It  is  ground,  mashed
up  in  warm  water,  then  boiled  with  hops  until  all  the
soluble  portions  have  been  extracted  ;  the  infusion  thus
produced  being  called  the  wort.  This  is  drawn  off,  and
cooled  as  rapidly  as  possible  ;  then,  instead  of  abandon-
ing the  infusion,  as  the  wine-maker  does,  to  its  own
action,  the  brewer  mixes  yeast  with  his  wort,  and  places
it  in  vessels  each  with  only  one  aperture  open  to  the
air.    Soon  after  the  addition  of  the  yeast,  a  brownish
froth,  which  is  really  new  yeast,  issues  from  the  aper-
ture, and  falls  like  a  cataract  into  troughs  prepared  to
receive  it.    This  frothing  and  foaming  of  the  wort  is  a
proof  that  the  fermentation  is  active.

Whence  comes  the  yeast  which  issues  so  copiously
from  the  fermenting  tub  ?  What  is  this  yeast,  and  how
did  the  brewer  become  possessed  of  it  ?  Examine  its
quantity  before  and  after  fermentation.  The  brewer
introduces,  say  10  cwts.  of  yeast;  he  collects  40,  or  it
may  be  50,  cwts.  The  yeast  has,  therefore,  augmented
from  four  to  five  fold  during  the  fermentation,  Shall
we  conclude  that  this  additional  yeast  has  been  sponta-
neously generated  by  the  wort  ?    Are  we  not  rather  re-


FERMENTATION.


241


minded  of  that  seed  which  fell  into  good  ground,  and
brought  forth  fruit,  some  thirty  fold,  some  sixty  fold,
some  an  hundred  fold  ?  On  examination,  this  notion
of  organic  growth  turns  out  to  be  more  than  a  mere
surmise.  In  the  year  1680,  when  the  microscope  was
still  in  its  infancy,  Leeuwenhoek  turned  the  instru-
ment upon  yeast,  and  found  it  composed  of  minute
globules  suspended  in  a  liquid.  Thus  knowledge  rested
until  1835,  when  Cagniard  de  la  Tour  in  Frarjce,  and
Schwann  in  Germany,  independently,  but  animated  by
a  common  thought,  turned  microscopes  of  improved
definition  and  heightened  powers  upon  yeast,  and
found  it  budding  and  sprouting  before  their  eyes.  The
augmentation  of  the  yeast  alluded  to  above  was  thus
proved  to  arise  from  the  growth  of  a  minute  plant  now
called  Torula  (or  Saocharomyces)  Cerevisice.  Sponta-
neous generation  is  therefore  out  of  the  question.  The
brewer  deliberately  sows  the  yeast-plant,  which  grows
and  multiplies  in  the  wort  as  its  proper  soil.  This  dis-
covery marks  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  fermentation.

But  where  did  the  brewer  find  his  yeast?  The  reply
to  this  question  is  similar  to  that  which  must  be  given
if  it  were  asked  where  the  brewer  found  his  barley.  He
has  received  the  seeds  of  both  of  them  from  preceding
generations.  Could  we  connect  without  solution  of  con-
tinuity the  present  with  the  past,  we  should  probably
be  able  to  trace  back  the  yeast  employed  by  my  friend
Sir  Fowell  Buxton  to-day  to  that  employed  by  some
Egyptian  brewer  two  thousand  years  ago.  But  you  may
urge  that  there  must  have  been  a  time  when  the  first
yeast-cell  was  generated.  Granted— exactly  as  there
was  a  time  when  the  first  barley-corn  was  generated
Let  not  the  delusion  lay  hold  of  you  that  a  living  thino-
is  easily  generated  because  it  is  small.  Both  the  yeast*
plant  and  the  barley-plant  lose  themselves  in  the  dim

R


242


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


twilight  of  antiquity,  and  in  this  our  day  there  is  no
more  proof  of  the  spontaneous  generation  of  the  one
than  there  is  of  the  spontaneous  generation  of  the
other.

I  stated  a  moment  ago  that  the  fermentation  of
grape-juice  was  spontaneous  ;  but  I  was  careful  to  add,
'  in  what  sense  spontaneous  will  appear  more  clearly
by-and-by.'    Now  this  is  the  sense  meant.    The  wine-
maker  does  not,  like  the  brewer  and  distiller,  delibe-
rately introduce  either  yeast,  or  any  equivalent  of  yeast,
into  his  vats  ;  he  does  not  consciously  sow  in  them  any
plant,  or  the  germ  of  any  plant ;  indeed,  he  has  been
hitherto  in  ignorance  whether  plants  or  germs  of  any
kind  have  had  anything  to  do  with  his  operations.
Still,  when  the  fermented  grape-juice  is  examined,  the
living    Torula  concerned  in  alcoholic  fermentation
never  fails  to  make  its  appearance.    How  is  this  ?  If
no  living  germ  has  been  introduced  into  the  wine-vat,
whence  comes  the  life  so  invariably  developed  there?

You  may  be  disposed  to  reply,  with  Turpin  and
others,  that  in  virtue  of  its  own  inherent  powers,  the
grape-juice  when  brought  into  contact  with  the  vivi-
fying atmospheric  oxygen,  runs  spontaneously  and  of
its  own  accord  into  these  low  forms  of  life.  I  have  not
the  slightest  objection  to  this  explanation,  provided
proper  evidence  can  be  adduced  in  support  of  it.  But
the  evidence  adduced  in  its  favour,  as  far  as  I  am  ac-
quainted with  it,  snaps  asunder  under  the  strain  of
scientific  criticism.  It  is,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  the  evi-
dence of  men  who,  however  keen  and  clever  as  ob-
servers, are  not  rigidly  trained  experimenters.  These
alone  are  aware  of  the  precautions  necessary  m  investi-
gations of  this  delicate  kind.  In  reference,  then,  to  the
life  of  the  wine-vat,  what  is  the  decision  of  experiment
when  carried  out  by  competent  men  ?    Let  a  quantity


FERMENTATION.


243


of  the  clear,  filtered  4  must '  of  the  grape  be  so  boiled
as  to  destroy  such  germs  as  it  may  have  contracted  from
the  air  or  otherwise.  In  contact  with  germless  air  the
uncontaminated  must  never  ferments.  All  the  mate-
rials for  spontaneous  generation  are  there,  but  so  long-
as  there  is  no  seed  sown,  there  is  no  life  developed,  and
no  sign  of  that  fermentation  which  is  the  concomitant
of  life.  Nor  need  you  resort  to  a  boiled  liquid.  The
grape  is  sealed  by  its  own  skin  against  contamination
from  without.  By  an  ingenious  device  Pasteur  has  ex-
tracted from  the  interior  of  the  grape  its  pure  juice,
and  proved  that  in  contact  with  pure  air  it  never
acquires  the  power  to  ferment  itself,  nor  to  produce
fermentation  in  other  liquids.1  It  is  not,  therefore,  in
the  interior  of  the  grape  that  the  origin  of  the  life
observed  in  the  vat  is  to  be  sought.

What  then  is  its  true  origin  ?  This  is  Pasteur's
answer,  which  his  well-proved  accuracy  renders  worthy
of  all  confidence.  At  the  time  of  the  vintage  micro-
scopic particles  are  observed  adherent,  both  to  the  outer
surface  of  the  grape  and  to  the  twigs  which  support  the
grape.  Brush  these  particles  into  a  capsule  of  pure
water.  It  is  rendered  turbid  by  the  dust.  Examined
by  a  microscope,  some  of  these  minute  particles  are
seen  to  present  the  appearance  of  organized  cells.
Instead  of  receiving  them  in  water,  let  them  be  brushed
into  the  pure  inert  juice  of  the  grape.  Forty-eight
hours  after  this  is  done,  our  familiar  Torula  is  observed
budding  and  sprouting,  the  growth  of  the  plant  being
accompanied  by  all  the  other  signs  of  active  fermenta-
tion.   What  is  the  inference  to  be  drawn  from  this

1  The  liquids  of  the  healthy  animal  body  are  also  sealed  from
external  contamination.  Pure  blood,  for  example,  drawn  with  due
precautions  from  the  veins,  will  never  ferment  or  putrefy  in  contact
with  pure  air.

ji  2


244        THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


experiment?    Obviously  that  the  particles  adherent
to  the  external  surface  of  the  grape  include  the  germs
of  that  life  which,  after  they  have  been  sown  in  the
juice,  appears  in  such  profusion.    Wine  is  sometimes
objected  to  on  the  ground  that  fermentation  is  '  arti-
ficial 5 '  but  we  notice  here  the  responsibility  of  nature.
The  ferment  of  the  grape  clings  like  a  parasite  to  the
surface  of  the  grape  ;  and  the  art  of  the  wine-maker
from  time  immemorial  has  consisted  in  bringing — and
it  may  be  added,  ignorantly  bringing— two  things  thus
closely  associated  by  nature  into  actual  contact  with
eaeh  other.    For  thousands  of  years,  what  has  been
done  consciously  by  the  brewer,  has  been  done  uncon-
sciously by  the  wine-grower.    The  one  has  sown  his
leaven  just  as  much  as  the  other.

Nor  is  it  necessary  to  impregnate  the  beer-wort
with  yeast  to  provoke  fermentation.     Abandoned  to
the  .contact  of  our  common  air,  it  sooner  or  later
ferments ;  but  the  chances  are  that  the  produce  of  that
fermentation,  instead  of  being  agreeable,  would  be
disgusting  to  the  taste.    By  a  rare  accident  we  might
get  the  true  alcoholic  fermentation,  but  the  odds  against
obtaining  it  would  be  enormous.    Pure  air  acting  upon
a  lifeless  liquid  will  never  provoke  fermentation ;  but
our  ordinary  air  is  the  vehicle  of  numberless  germs
which  act  as  ferments  when  they  fall  into  appropriate
infusions.    Some  of  them  produce  acidity,  some  putre-
faction.   The  germs  of  our  yeast-plant  are  also  in  the
air  ;  but  so  sparingly  distributed  that  an  infusion  like
beer-wort,  exposed  to  the  air,  is  almost  sure  to  be  taken
possession  of  by  foreign  organisms.    In  fact,  the  mala-
dies of  beer  are  wholly  due  to  the  admixture  of  these
objectionable   ferments,  whose  forms  and   modes  of
nutrition   differ  materially  from   those  of  the  true
leaven.


FERMENTATION.


245


Working  in  an  atmosphere  charged  with  the  germs
of  these  organisms,  you  can  understand  how  easy  it  is
to  fall  into  error  in  studying  the  action  of  any  one
of  them.  Indeed  it  is  only  the  most  accomplished
experimenter,  who,  moreover,  avails  himself  of  every
means  of  checking  his  conclusions,  that  can  walk  with-
out tripping  through  this  land  of  pitfalls.  Such  a  man
the  French  chemist  Pasteur  has  hitherto  proved  himself
to  be.  He  has  taught  us  how  to  separate  the  com-
mingled ferments  of  our  air,  and  to  study  their  pure
individual  action.  Guided  by  him,  let  us  fix  our
attention  more  particularly  upon  the  growth  and  action
of  the  true  yeast-plant  under  different  conditions.  Let
it  be  sown  in  a  fermentable  liquid,  which  is  supplied
with  plenty  of  pure  air.  The  plant  will  flourish  in
the  aerated  infusion,  and  produce  large  quantities  of
carbonic  acid  gas — a  compound,  as  you  know,  of  carbon
and  oxygen.  The  oxygen  thus  consumed  by  the  plant
is  the  free  oxygen  of  the  air,  which  we  suppose  to  be
abundantly  supplied  to  the  liquid.  The  action  is  so
far  similar  to  the  respiration  of  animals,  which  inspire
oxygen  and  expire  carbonic  acid.  If  we  examine  the
liquid  even  when  the  vigour  of  the  plant  has  reached
its  maximum,  we  hardly  find  in  it  a  trace  of  alcohol.
The  yeast  has  grown  and  flourished,  but  it  has  almost
ceased  to  act  as  a  ferment.  And  could  every  individual
yeast-cell  seize,  without  any  impediment,  free  oxygen
from  the  surrounding  liquid,  it  is  certain  that  it  would
cease  to  act  as  a  ferment  altogether.

What,  then,  are  the  conditions  under  which  the
yeast-plant  must  be  placed  so  that  it  may  display  its
characteristic  quality  ?  Eeflection  on  the  facts  already
referred  to  suggests  a  reply,  and  rigid  experiment
confirms  the  suggestion.  Consider  the  Alpine  cherries
in  their  closed  vessel.    Consider  the  beer  in  its  barrel,


246


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OE  THE  AIR.


with  a  single  small  aperture  open  to  the  air,  through
which  it  is  observed  not  to  imbibe  oxygen,  but  to  pour
forth  carbonic  acid.    Whence  come  the  volumes  of
oxygen  necessary  to  the  production  of  this  latter  gas  ?
The  small  quantity  of  atmospheric  air  dissolved  in  the
wort  and  overlying  it  would  be  totally  incompetent  to
supply  the  necessary  oxygen.    In  no  other  way  can  the
yeast-plant  obtain  the  gas  necessary  for  its  respiration
than  by  wrenching  it  from  surrounding  substances  in
which  the  oxygen  exists,  not  free,  but  in  a  state  of
combination.    It  decomposes  the  sugar  of  the  solution
in  which  it  grows,  produces  heat,  breathes  forth  car-
bonic acid  gas,  and  one  of  the  liquid  products  of  the
decomposition  is  our  familiar  alcohol.    The  act  of  fer-
mentation, then,  is  a  result  of  the  effort  of  the  little
plant  to  maintain  its  respiration  by  means  of  combined
oxygen,  when  its  supply  of  free  oxygen  is  cut  off.
As  defined  by  Pasteur,  fermentation  is  life  without
air.

But  here  the  knowledge  of  that  thorough  investi-
gator comes  to  our  aid  to  warn  us  against  possible  error.
It  is  not,  he  says,  all  yeast-cells  that  can  thus  live  without
air  and  provoke  fermentation.  They  must  be  young  cells
which  have  caught  their  vegetative  vigour  from  contact
with  free  oxygen.  But  once  possessed  of  this  vigour  the
yeast,  he  alleges,  may  be  transplanted  into  a  saccharine
infusion  absolutely  purged  of  air,  where  it  will  con-
tinue to  live  at  the  expense  of  the  oxygen,  carbon,
and  other  constituents  of  the  infusion.    Under  these
new  conditions  its  life,  as  a  plant,  will  be  by  no
means  so  vigorous  as  when  it  had  a  supply  of  free
oxygen,  but  its  action  as  a  ferment  will  be  indefinitely
greater.

Does  the  yeast- plant  Stand  alone  in  its  power  ot
provoking  alcoholic  fermentation?    It  would  be  sm-


FERMENTATION.


247


gular  if  amid  the  multitude  of  low  vegetable  forms  no
other  could  be  found  capable  of  acting  in  a  similar  way.
And  here  again  we  have  occasion  to  marvel  at  that
sagacity  of  observation  among  the  ancients  to  which  we
owe  so  vast  a  debt.  Not  only  did  they  discover  the
alcoholic  ferment  of  yeast,  but  they  had  to  exercise  a
wise  selection  in  picking  it  out  from  others,  and  giving
it  special  prominence.  Place  an  old  boot  in  a  moist
place,  or  expose  common  paste  or  a  pot  of  jam  to  the
air ;  it  soon  becomes  coated  with  a  blue-green  mould,
which  is  nothing  else  than  the  fructification  of  a  little
plant  called  Penicillium  glaucum.  Do  not  imagine
that  the  mould  has  sprung  spontaneously  from  boot,  or
paste,  or  jam  ;  its  germs,  which  are  abundant  in  the
air,  have  been  sown,  and  have  germinated,  in  as  legal
and  legitimate  a  way  as  thistle-seeds  wafted  by  the
wind  to  a  proper  soil.  Let  the  minute  spores  of  Peni-
cillium be  sown  in  a  fermentable  liquid,  which  has
been  previously  so  boiled  as  to  kill  all  other  spores  or
seeds  which  it  may  contain;  let  pure  air  have  free
access  to  the  mixture;  the  Penicillium  will  grow
rapidly,  striking  long  filaments  into  the  liquid,  and
fructifying  at  its  surface.  Test  the  infusion  at  various
stages  of  the  plant's  growth,  you  will  never  find  in  it
a  trace  of  alcohol.  But  forcibly  submerge  the  little
plant,  push  it  down  deep  into  the  liquid,  where  the
quantity  of  free  oxygen  that  can  reach  it  is  insufficient
for  its  needs,  it  immediately  begins  to  act  as  a  ferment,
supplying  itself  with  oxygen  by  the  decomposition  of
the  sugar,  and  producing  alcohol  as  one  of  the  results
of  the  decomposition.  Many  other  low  microscopic
plants  act  in  a  similar  manner.  In  aerated  liquids
they  flourish  without  any  production  of  alcohol,  but  cut
off  from  free  oxygen  they  act  as  ferments,  producing
alcohol  exactly  as  the  real  alcoholic  leaven  produces  it,


248         THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


only  less  copiously.  For  the  discovery  and  apprehension
of  these  facts  we  are  indebted  to  Pasteur.

In  the  cases  hitherto  considered,  the  fermentation
is  proved  to  be  the  invariable  correlative  of  life,  being
produced  by  organisms  foreign  to  the  fermentable  sub-
stance.   But  the  substance  itself  may  also  have  within
it,  to  some  extent,  the  motive  power  of  fermentation.
The  yeast-plant,  as  we  have  learned,  is  an  assemblage
of  living  cells  ;  but  so  at  bottom,  as  shown  by  Schleiden
and  Schwann,   are  all   living  organisms.  Cherries,
apples,  peaches,  pears,  plums,  and  grapes,  for  example,
are  composed  of  cells,  each  of  which  is  a  living  unit.
And  here  I  have  to  direct  your  attention  to  a  point  of
extreme  interest.     In    1821,  the  celebrated  French
chemist,  Berard,  established  the  important  fact  that  all
ripening  fruits,  exposed  to  the  free  atmosphere,  absorb
the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere  and  liberate  an  approxi-
mately equal  volume  of  carbonic  acid.    He  also  found
that  when  ripe  fruits  were  placed  in  a  confined  at-
mosphere,  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere   was  first
absorbed,  and  an  equal  volume  of  carbonic  acid  given
out.    But  the  process  did  not  end  here.    After  the
oxygen  had  vanished,  carbonic  acid,  in  considerable
quantities,  continued  to  be  exhaled  by  the  fruits,  which
at  the  same  time  lost  a  portion  of  their  sugar,  becoming
more  acid  to  the  taste,  though  the  absolute  quantity  of
acid  was  not  augmented.    This  was  an  observation  of
capital  importance,  and  Berard  had  the  sagacity  to
remark  that  the  process  might  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of
fermentation.

Thus  the  living  cells  of  fruits  can  absorb  oxygen  and
breathe  out  carbonic  acid,  exactly  like  the  living  cells
of  the  leaven  of  beer.  Supposing  the  access  of  oxygen
suddenly  cut  off,  will  the  living  fruit-cells  as  suddenly
die,  or  will  they  continue  to  live  as  yeast  lives,  by


FEEMENTATION.


249


extracting  oxygen  from  the  saccharine  juices  round
them?  -This  is  a  question  of  extreme  theoretic  signi-
ficance. It  was  first  answered  affirmatively  by  the
able  and  conclusive  experiments  of  Lechartier  and
Bellamy,  and  the  answer  was  subsequently  confirmed
and  explained  by  the  experiments  and  the  reasoning  of
Pasteur.  Berard  only  showed  the  absorption  of  oxygen,
and  the  production  of  carbonic  acid ;  Lechartier  and
Bellamy  proved  the  production  of  alcohol,  thus  com-
pleting the  evidence  that  it  was  a  case  of  real  fermen-
tation, though  the  common  alcoholic  ferment  was  absent.
So  full  was  Pasteur  of  the  idea  that  the  cells  of  a  fruit
would  continue  to  live  at  the  expense  of  the  sugar  of
the  fruit,  that  once  in  his  laboratory,  while  conversing
on  these  subjects  with  M.  Dumas,  he  exclaimed,  '  I  will
wager  that  if  a  grape  be  plunged  into  an  atmosphere
of  carbonic  acid,  it  will  produce  alcohol  and  carbonic
acid  by  the  continued  life  of  its  own  cells — that  they
will  act- for  a  time  like  the  cells  of  the  true,  alcoholic
leaven.'  He  made  the  experiment,  and  found  the  result
to  be  what  he  had  foreseen.  He  then  extended  the
inquiry.  Placing  under  a  bell-jar  twenty-four  plums,
he  filled  the  jar  with  carbonic  acid  gas ;  beside  it  he
placed  twenty-four  similar  plums  uncovered.  At  the
end  of  eight  days,  he  removed  the  plums  from  the  jar,
and  compared  them  with  the  others.  The  difference
was  extraordinary.  The  uncovered  fruits  had  become
soft,  watery,  and  very  sweet ;  the  others  were  firm  and
hard,  their  fleshy  portions  being  not  at  all  watery.  They
had,  moreover,  lost  a  considerable  quantity  of  their
sugar.  They  were  afterwards  bruised,  and  the  juice
was  distilled.  It  yielded  six  and  a  half  grammes  of
alcohol,  or  one  per  cent,  of  the  total  weight  of  the
plums.  Neither  in  these  plums,  nor  in  the  grapes  first
experimented  on  by  Pasteur,  could  any  trace  of  the


2o0


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIE.


ordinary  alcoholic  leaven  be  found.  As  previously
proved  by  Lechartier  and  Bellamy,  the  fermentation
was  the  work  of  the  living  cells  of  the  fruit  itself,  after
air  had  been  denied  to  them.  When,  moreover,  the  cells
were  destroyed  by  bruising,  no  fermentation  ensued.
The  fermentation  was  the  correlative  of  a  vital  act,
and  it  ceased  when  life  was  extinguished.

Ludersdorf  was  the  first  to  show  by  this  method
that  yeast  acted,  not,  as  Liebig  had  assumed,  in  virtue
of  its  organic,  but  in  virtue  of  its  organized  character.
He  destroyed  the  cells  of  yeast  by  rubbing  them  on  a
ground  glass  plate,  and  found  that  with  the  destruction
of  the  organism,  though  its  chemical  constituents  re-
mained, the  power  to  act  as  a  ferment  totally  dis-
appeared.

One  word  more  in  reference  to  Liebig  may  find  a
place  here.    To  the  philosophic  chemist  thoughtfully
pondering  these  phenomena,  familiar  with  the  concep-
tion of  molecular  motion,  and  the  changes  produced
by  the  interactions  of  purely  chemical  forces,  nothing
could  be  more  natural  than  to  see  in  the  process  of
fermentation  a  simple  illustration  of  molecular  insta-
bility, the  ferment  propagating  to  surrounding  molecular
groups  the  overthrow  of  its  own  tottering  combinations.
Broadly  considered,  indeed,  there  is  a  certain  amount
of  truth  in  this  theory ;  but  Liebig,  who  propounded
it,  missed  the  very  kernel  of  the  phenomena  when  he
overlooked,  or  contemned,  the  part  played  in  fermenta-
tion by  microscopic  life.    He  looked  at  the  matter  too
little  with  the  eye  of  the  body,  and  too  much  with  the
spiritual  eye.    He  practically  neglected  the  microscope,
and  was  unmoved  by  the  knowledge  which  its  revelations
would  have  poured  in  upon  his  mind.    His  hypothesis,
as  I  have  said,  was  natural— nay,  it  was  a  striking
illustration  of  Liebig's  power  to  penetrate  and  unveil


FERMENTATION.


251


molecular  actions ;  but  it  was  an  error,  and  as  such  has
proved  an  ignis  fatuus  instead  of  a  pharos  to  some
of  his  followers.

I  have  said  that  our  air  is  full  of  the  germs  of
ferments  differing  from  the  alcoholic  leaven,  and  some-
times seriously  interfering  with  the  latter.  They  are
the  weeds  of  this  microscopic  garden  which  often  over-
shadow and  choke  the  flowers.  Let  us  take  an  illus-
trative case.  Expose  milk  to  the  air.  It  will,  after  a
time,  turn  putrid  or  sour,  separating  like  blood  into  clot
and  serum.  Place  a  drop  of  such  milk  under  a  powerful
microscope  and  watch  it  closely.  You  see  the  minute
butter-globules  animated  by  that  curious  quivering-
motion  called  the  Brownian  motion.  But  let  not  this
attract  your  attention  too  much,  for  it  is  another
motion  that  we  have  now  to  seek.  Here  and  there  you
observe  a  greater  disturbance  than  ordinary  among
the  globules ;  keep  your  eye  upon  the  place  of  tumult,
and  you  will  probably  see  emerging  from  it  a  long  eel-
like organism,  tossing  the  globules  aside  and  wriggling
more  or  less  rapidly  across  the  field  of  the  microscope.
Part  of  the  change  wrought  in  the  milk  is  due  to  this
organism,  which  from  its  motions  receives  the  name  of
vibrio.  In  curdled  milk  you  find  other  organisms,
small,  motionless,  and  usually  linked  together  like
beads  on  a  string.  It  is  these  which  cause  the  milk  to
separate  into  clot  and  serum.  They  constitute  the  lactic
ferment  of  milk,  as  the  yeast-plant  does  the  alcoholic
ferment  of  sugar.  But  milk  may  become  putrid  without
becoming  sour.  Examine  putrid  milk  microscopically,
and  you  find  it  swarming  with  shorter  organisms,  some-
times associated  with  the  vibrios,  sometimes  alone,  and
often  manifesting  a  wonderful  alacrity  of  motion.  Keep
these  organisms  and  their  germs  out  of  your  milk  and  it


252


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


will  never  putrefy.    Expose  a  mutton-chop  to  the  air
and  keep  it  moist ;  in  summer  weather  it  soon  stinks.
Place  a  drop  of  the  juice  of  the  fetid  chop  under  a  power-
ful microscope  ;  it  is  seen  swarming  with  organisms
resembling  those  in  the  putrid  milk.   These  organisms,
which  receive  the  common  name  of  bacteria,1  are  the
agents  of  all  putrefaction.    Keep  them  and  their  germs
from  your  meat  and  it  will  remain  for  ever  sweet.  Thus
we  begin  to  see  that  within  the  world  of  life  to  which  we
ourselves  belong,  there  is  another  living  world  requiring
the  microscope  for  its  discernment,  but  which,  never-
theless, has  the  most  important  bearing  on  the  welfare
of  the  higher  life- world.

And  now  let  us  reason  together  as  regards  the  origin
of  these  bacteria.    A  granular  powder  is  placed  in  your
hands,  and  you  are  asked  to  state  what  it  is.  You
examine  it,  and  have,  or  have  not,  reason  to  suspect  that
seeds  of  some  kind  are  mixed  up  in  it.    To  determine
this  point  you  prepare  a  bed  in  your  garden,  sow  in  it
the  powder,  and  soon  after  find  a  mixed  crop  of  docks
and  thistles  sprouting  from  your  bed.   Until  this  powder
was  sown  neither  docks  nor  thistles  ever  made  their  ap-
pearance in  your  garden.    You  repeat  the  experiment
once,  twice,  ten  times,  fifty  times.    From  fifty  different
beds  after  the  sowing  of  the  powder,  you  obtain  the  same
crop.    What  will  be  your  response  to  the  question  pro-
posed to  you  ?    'Iam  not  in  a  condition,'  you  would
say,  'to  affirm  that  every  grain  of  the  powder  is  a
dock-seed,  or  a  thistle-seed  ;  but  I  am  in  a  condition
to  affirm  that  both  dock  and  thistle-seeds  form,  at  all
events,  part  of  the  powder.'    Supposing  a  succession  of
such  powders  to  be  placed  in  your  hands  with  grains
becoming  gradually  smaller,  until  they  dwindle  to  the
•Doubtless  organisms  exhibiting  grave  specific  differences  are
grouped  together  under  this  common  name.


FERMENTATION.


253


size  of  impalpable  dust  particles ;  assuming  that  you
treat  them  all  in  the  same  way,  and  that  from  every
one  of  them  in  a  few  days  you  obtain  a  definite  crop —
it  may  be  clover,  it  may  be  mustard,  it  may  be  mignon-
ette, it  may  he  a  plant  more  minute  than  any  of  these —
the  smallness  of  the  particles,  or  of  the  plants  that
spring  from  them,  does  not  affect  the  validity  of  the
conclusion.  Without  a  shadow  of  misgiving  you  would
conclude  that  the  powder  must  have  contained  the
seeds  or  germs  of  the  life  observed.  There  is  not  in
the  range  of  physical  science,  an  experiment  more  con-
clusive nor  an  inference  safer  than  this  one.

Supposing  the  powder  to  be  light  enough  to  float  in
the  air,  and  that  you  are  enabled  to  see  it  there  just  as
plainly  as  you  saw  the  heavier  powder  in  the  palm  of
your  hand.  If  the  dust  sown  by  the  air  instead  of  by
the  hand  produce  a  definite  living  crop,  with  the  same
logical  rigour  you  would  conclude  that  the  germs  of
this  crop  must  be  mixed  with  the  dust.  To  take  an
illustration  :  the  spores  of  the  little  plant  Penicillium
glaucum,  to  which  I  have  already  referred,  are  light
enough  to  float  in  the  air.  A  cut  apple,  a  pear,  a
tomato,  a  slice  of  vegetable  marrow,  or,  as  already  men-
tioned, an  old  moist  boot,  a  dish  of  paste,  or  a  pot  of
jam,  constitutes  a  proper  soil  for  the  Penicillium.  Now,
if  it  could  be  proved  that  the  dust  of  the  air  when
sown  in  this  soil  produces  this  plant,  while,  wanting  the
dust,  neither  the  air,  nor  the  soil,  nor  both  together
can  produce  it,  it  would  be  obviously  just  as  certain,  in
this  case,  that  the  floating  dust  contains  the  germs  of
Penicillium,  as  that  the  powders  sown  in  your  garden
contained  the  germs  of  the  plants  which  sprung  from
them.

But  how  is  the  floating  dust  to  be  rendered  visible  ?
In  this  way.    Build  a  little  chamber  and  provide  it


254:  THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

with  a  door,  windows,  and  window-shutters.    Let  an
aperture  be  made  in  one  of  the  shutters  through  which
a  sunbeam  can  pass.    Close  the  door  and  windows  so
that  no  light  shall  enter  save  through  the  hole  m  the
shutter.     The  track  of  the  sunbeam  is  at  first  per-
fectly plain  and  vivid  in  the  air  of  the  room.    If  all
disturbance  of  the  air  of  the  chamber  be  avoided,  the
luminous  track  will  become  fainter  and  fainter,  until  at
last  it  disappears  absolutely,  and  no  trace  of  the  beam
is  to  be  seen.    What  rendered  the  beam  visible  at  first  t
The  floating  dust  of  the  air,  which,  when  thus  illuminated
and  observed,  is  as  palpable  to  sense  as  dust  or  powder
placed  on  the  palm  of  the  hand.  In  the  still  air  the  dust
gradually  sinks  to  the  floor  or  sticks  to  the  walls  and
ceiling,  until  finally,  by  this  self-cleansing  process,  the
air  is  entirely  freed  from  mechanically  suspended  matter.

Thus  far,  I  think,  we  have  made  our  footing  sure.
Let  us  proceed.    Chop  up  a  beefsteak  and  allow  it  to
remain  for  two  or  three  hours  just  covered  with  warm
water;  you  thus  extract  the  juice  of  the  beef  in  a  con-
centrated form.     By  properly  boiling  the  liquid  and
filtering  it,  you  can  obtain  from  it  a  perfectly  trans-
parent beef-tea.    Expose  a  number  of  vessels  containing
this  tea  to  the  moteless  air  of  your  chamber ;  and
expose  a  number  of  vessels  containing  precisely  the
same  liquid  to  the  dust-laden  air.    In  three  days  every
one  of  the  latter  stinks,  and  examined  with  the  micro-
scope every  one  of  them  is  found  swarming  with  the
Z  ria  o/putrefaction.    After  three  months,  or  three
y      ,  the  beef-tea  within  the  chamber,  if  properly
Lilized  in  the  first  instance,  will  be  found  as  swee
and  clear,  and  as  free  from  bacteria,  as  it  was  at  the
moment  when  it  was  first  put  in     There  is  abso  u  dy
no  difference  between  the  air  within  and  that  without,
save  that  the  one  is  dustless  and  the  .other  dust-


FERMENTATION.


255


laden.  Clinch  the  experiment  thus  :  Open  the  door  of
your  chamber  and  allow  the  dust  to  enter  it.  In  three
days  afterwards  you  have  every  vessel  within  the  chamber
swarming  with  bacteria,  and  in  a  state  of  active  putre-
faction. Here,  also,  the  inference  is  quite  as  certain
as  in  the  case  of  the  powder  sown  in  your  garden.
Multiply  your  proofs  by  building  fifty  chambers  instead
of  one,  and  by  employing  every  imaginable  infusion  of
wild  animals  and  tame ;  of  flesh,  fish,  fowl,  and  viscera  ;
of  vegetables  of  the  most  various  kinds.  If  in  all  these
cases  you  find  the  dust  infallibly  producing  its  crop  of
bacteria,  while  neither  the  dustless  air  nor  the  nutritive
infusion,  nor  both  together,  are  ever  able  to  produce
this  crop,  your  conclusion  is  simply  irresistible  that  the
.  dust  of  the  air  contains  the  germs  of  the  crop  which
has  appeared  in  your  infusions.  I  repeat  there  is  no
inference  of  experimental  science  more  certain  than
this  one.  In  the  presence  of  such  facts,  to  use  the
words  of  a  paper  lately  published  in  the  '  Philosophical
Transactions,'  it  would  be  simply  monstrous  to  affirm
that  these  swarming  crops  of  bacteria  are  spontaneously
generated.

Is  there  then  no  experimental  proof  of  spontaneous
generation  ?  I  answer  without  hesitation,  none  !  But
to  doubt  the  experimental  proof  of  a  fact,  and  to  deny
its  possibility,  are  two  different  things,  though  some
writers  confuse  matters  by  making  them  synonymous.
In  fact,  this  doctrine  of  spontaneous  generation,  in  one
form  or  another,  falls  in  with  the  theoretic  beliefs  of
some  of  the  foremost  workers  of  this  age ;  but  it  is
exactly  these  men  who  have  the  penetration  to  see,  and
the  honesty  to  expose,  the  weakness  of  the  evidence
adduced  in  its  support.

And  here  observe  how  these  discoveries  tally  with


256


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


the  common  practices  of  life.  Heat  kills  the  bacteria,
colds  numbs  them.  When  my  housekeeper  has  pheasants
in  charge  which  she  wishes  to  keep  sweet,  but  which
threaten  to  give  way,  she  partially  cooks  the  birds,  kills
the  infant  bacteria,  and  thus  postpones  the  evil  day.
By  boiling  her  milk  she  also  extends  its  period  of
sweetness.  Some  weeks  ago  in  the  Alps  I  made  a  few
experiments  on  the  influence  of  cold  upon  ants.  Though
the  sun  was  strong,  patches  of  snow  still  maintained
themselves  on  the  mountain  slopes.  The  ants  were  found
in  the  warm  grass  and  on  the  warm  rocks  adjacent.
Transferred  to  the  snow  the  rapidity  of  their  paralysis
was  surprising.  In  a  few  seconds  a  vigorous  ant,  after
a  few  languid  struggles,  would  wholly  lose  its  power
of  locomotion,  and  lie  practically  dead  upon  the  snow.
Transferred  to.  the  warm  rock,  it  would  revive,  to  be
again  smitten  with  death-like  numbness  when  retrans-
ferred  to  the  snow.  What  is  true  of  the  ant  is  specially
true  of  our  bacteria.  Their  active  life  is  suspended
by  cold,  and  with  it  their  power  of  producing  or  con-
tinuing putrefaction.  This  is  the  whole  philosophy  of
the  preservation  of  meat  by  cold.  The  fishmonger,  for
example,  when  he  surrounds  his  very  assailable  wares
by  lumps  of  ice,  stays  the  process  of  putrefaction  by
reducing  to  numbness  and  inaction  the  organisms  which
produce  it,  and  in  the  absence  of  which  his  fish  would
remain  sweet  and  sound.  It  is  the  astonishing  activity
into  which  these  bacteria  are  pushed  by  warmth  that
renders  a  single  summer's  day  sometimes  so  disastrous
to  the  great  butchers  of  London  and  Glasgow.  The
bodies  of  guides  lost  in  the  crevasses  of  Alpine  glaciers
have  come  to  the  surface  forty  years  after  their  in-
terment, without  the  flesh  showing  any  sign  of  putre-
faction. But  the  most  astonishing  case  of  this  kind
is  that  of  the  hairy  elephant  of  Siberia  which  was


FERMENTATION.


257


found  incased  in  ice.  It  had  been  buried  for  ages,  but
when  laid  bare  its  flesh  was  sweet,  and  for  some  time
afforded  copious  nutriment  to  the  wild  beasts  which  fed
upon  it.

Beer  is  assailable  by  all  the  organisms  here  referred
to,  some  of  which  produce  acetic,  some  lactic,  and  some
butyric  acid,  while  yeast  is  open  to  attack  from  the
bacteria  of  putrefaction.  In  relation  to  the  particular
beverage  the  brewer  wishes  to  produce,  these  foreign
ferments  have  been  properly  called  ferments  of  disease.
The  cells  of  the  true  leaven  are  globules,  usually  some-
what elongated.  The  other  organisms  are  more  less
rod-like  or  eel-like  in  shape,  some  of  them  being  beaded
so  as  to  resemble  necklaces.  Each  of  these  organisms
produces  a  fermentation  and  a  flavour  peculiar  to  itself.
Keep  them  out  of  your  beer  and  it  remains  for  ever
unaltered.  Never  without  them  will  your  beer  contract
disease.  But  their  germs  are  in  the  air,  in  the  vessels
employed  in  the  brewery ;  even  in  the  yeast  used  to
impregnate -the  wort.  Consciously  or  unconsciously,  the
art  of  the  brewer  is  directed  against  them.  His  aim  is
to  paralyze,  if  he  cannot  destroy  them.

For  beer,  moreover,  the  question  of  temperature  is
one  of  supreme  importance ;  indeed,  the  recognized
influence  of  temperature  is  causing  on  the  Continent
of  Europe  a  complete  revolution  in  the  manufacture  of
beer.  When  I  was  a  student  in  Berlin,  in  1851,  there
were  certain  places  specially  devoted  to  the  sale  of
Bavarian  beer,  which  was  then  making  its  way  into
public  favour.  This  beer  is  prepared  by  what  is  called
the  process  of  low  fermentation ;  the  name  being  given
partly  because  the  yeast  of  the  beer,  instead  of  rising
to  the  top  and  issuing  through  the  bunghole,  falls  to
the  bottom  of  the  cask  ;  but  partly,  also,  because  it  is
produced  at  a  low  temperature.    The  other  and  older

s


258         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


process,  called  high  fermentation,  is  far  more  handy,
expeditious,  and  cheap.  In  high  fermentation  eight
days  suffice  for  the  production  of  beer  ;  in  low  fermenta-
tion, ten,  fifteen,  even  twenty  days  are  found  necessary.
Vast  quantities  of  ice,  moreover,  are  consumed  in  the
process  of  low  fermentation.  In  the  single  brewery  of
Dreher,  of  Vienna,  a  hundred  million  pounds  of  ice  are
consumed  annually  in  cooling  the  wort  and  beer.  Not-
withstanding these  obvious  and  weighty  drawbacks,  the
low  fermentation  is  rapidly  displacing  the  high  upon
the  Continent.  Here  are  some  statistics  which  show  the  ,
number  of  breweries  of  both  kinds  existing  in  Bohemia
in  1860,  1865,  and  1870  :—

lRfin.       I8fifl.      1R70.  .
High  Fermentation    .    .    281        81  18
Low  Fermentation     .    .    135       459  831

Thus  in  ten  years  the  number  of  liigh-fermentation
breweries  fell  from  281  to  18,  while  the  number  of  low-
fermentation  breweries  rose  from  135  to  831.    The  sole
reason  for  this  vast  change— a  change  which  involves  a
great  expenditure  of  time,  labour,  and  money— is  the
additional  command  which  it  gives  the  brewer  over  the
fortuitous  fermeuts  of  disease.    These  ferments,  which,
it  is  to  be  remembered,  are  living  organisms,  have  their
activity  suspended  by  temperatures  below  10°  C,  and
as  long  as  they  are  reduced  to  torpor  the  beer  remains
untainted  either  by  acidity  or  putrefaction.    The  beer
of  low  fermentation  is  brewed  in  winter,  and  kept  in
cool  cellars ;  the  brewer  being  thus  enabled  to  dispose
of  it  at  his  leisure,  instead  of  forcing  its  consumption
to  avoid  the  loss  involved  in  its  alteration  if  kept  too
long.    Hops,  it  may  be  remarked,  act  to  some  extent
as  an  antiseptic  to  beer.    The  essential  oil  of  the  hop
,  is  bactericidal ;  hence  the  strong  impregnation  with  hop
juice  of  all  beer  intended  for  exportation.


FERMENTATION.


259


These  low  organisms,  which  one  might  be  disposed
to  regard  as  the  beginnings  of  life,  were  we  not  warned
that  the  microscope,  precious  and  perfect  as  it  is,  has
no  power  to  show  us  the  real  beginnings  of  life,  are
by  no  means  purely  useless  or  purely  mischievous  in
the  ^economy  of  nature.  They  are  only  noxious  when
out  of  their  proper  place.  They  exercise  a  useful
and  valuable  function  as  the  burners  and  consumers
of  dead  matter,  animal  and  vegetable,  reducing  such
matter,  with  a  rapidity  otherwise  unattainable,  to  in-
nocent carbonic  acid  and  water.  Furthermore,  they
are  not  all  alike,  and  it  is  only  restricted  classes  of
them  that  are  really  dangerous  to  man.  One  difference
in  their  habits  is  worthy  of  special  reference  here.
Air,  or  rather  the  oxygen  of  the  air,  which  is  absolutely
necessary  to  the  support  of  the  bacteria  of  putre-
faction, is,  according  to  Pasteur,  absolutely  deadly  to
the  vibrios  which  provoke  the  butyric  acid  fermentation.
This  has  been  illustrated  by  the  following  beautiful
observation.

A  drop  of  the  liquid  containing  those  small  organisms
is  placed  upon  glass,  and  on  the  top  is  placed  a  circle
of  exceedingly  thin  glass  ;  for,  to  magnify  them  suffi-
ciently, it  is  necessary  that  the  object-glass  of  the
microscope  should  come  very  close  to  the  organisms.
Eound  the  edge  of  the  circular  plate  of  glass  the  liquid
is  in  contact  with,  the  air,  and  incessantly  absorbs  it,
including  the  oxygen.  Here,  if  the  drop  be  charged
with  bacteria,  we  have  a  zone  of  very  lively  ones.  But
through  this  living  zone,  greedy  of  oxygen  and  appro-
priating it,  the  vivifying  gas  cannot  penetrate  to  the
centre  of  the  film.  In  the  middle,  therefore,  the
bacteria  die,  while  their  peripheral  colleagues  continue
active.  If  a  bubble  of  air  chance  to  be  enclosed  in  the
film,  round  it  the  bacteria  will  pirouette  and  wabble

s  2


260


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


until  its  oxygen  has  been  absorbed,  after  which  all
their  motions  cease.  Precisely  the  reverse  of  all  this
occurs  with  the  vibrios  of  butyric  acid.  In  their  case
it  is  the  peripheral  organisms  that  are  first  killed,  the
central  ones  remaining  vigorous  while  ringed  by  a  zone
of  dead.  Pasteur,  moreover,  filled  two  vecsels  with  a
liquid  containing  these  vibrios ;  through  one  vessel  he
led  air,  and  killed  its  vibrios  in  half  an  hour ;  through
the  other  he  led  carbonic  acid,  and  after  three  hours
found  the  vibrios  fully  active.  It  was  while  observing
these  differences  of  deportment  fifteen  years  ago  that
the  thought  of  life  without  air,  and  its  bearing  upon
the  theory  of  fermentation,  flashed  upon  the  mind  of
this  admirable  investigator.

We  now  approach  an  aspect  of  this  question  which
concerns  us  still  more  closely,  and  will  be  best  illustrated
by  an  actual  fact.    A  few  years  ago  I  was  bathing  in
an  Alpine  stream,  and  returning  to  my  clothes  from
the  cascade  which  had  been  my  shower-bath,  I  slipped
upon  a  block  of  granite,  the  sharp  crystals  of  which
stamped  themselves  into  my  naked  shin.    The  wound
was  an  awkward  one,  but  being  in  vigorous  health  at
the  time,  I  hoped  for  a  speedy  recovery.    Dipping  a
clean  pocket-handkerchief  into  the  stream,  I  wrapped
it  round  the  wound,  limped  home,  and  remained  for
four  or  five  days  quietly  in  bed.   .There  was  no  pain,
and  at  the  end  of  this  time  I  thought  myself  quite  fit
to  quit  my  room.    The  wound,  when  uncovered,  was
found  perfectly  clean,  uninflamed,  and  entirely  free  from
pus.    Placing  over  it  a  bit  of  goldbeater's-skin,  I
walked  about  all  day.    Towards  evening  itching  and
heat  were  felt ;  a  large  accumulation  of  matter  followed,
and  I  was  forced  to  go  to  bed  again.     The  water-
bandage  was  restored,  but  it  was  powerless  to  check


FEEMENTATION.


261


the  action  now  set  up  ;  arnica  was  applied,  but  it  made
matters  worse.  The  inflammation  increased  alarmingly,
until  finally  I  had  to  be  carried  on  men's  shoulders
down  the  mountain  and  transported  to  Geneva,  where,
thanks  to  the  kindness  of  friends,  I  was  immediately
placed  in  the  best  medical  hands.  On  the  morning
after  my  arrival  in  Geneva,  Dr.  Gautier  discovered  an
abscess  in  my  instep,  at  a  distance  of  five  inches  from
the  wound.  The  two  were  connected  by  a  channel,  or
sinus,  as  it  is  technically  called,  through  which  he  was
able  to  empty  the  abscess,  without  the  application  of
the  lance.

By  what  agency  was  that  channel  formed — what
was  it  that  thus  tore  asunder  the  sound  tissue  of  my
instep,  and  kept  me  for  six  weeks  a  prisoner  in  bed  ?
In  the  very  room  where  the  water  dressing  had  been
removed  from  my  wound,  and  the  goldbeater's-skin
applied  to  it,  I  opened  this  year  a  number  of  tubes,
containing  perfectly  clear  and  sweet  infusions  of  fish,
flesh,  and  vegetable.  These  hermetically-sealed  infusions
had  been  exposed  for  weeks,  both  to  the  sun  of  the
Alps  and  to  the  warmth  of  a  kitchen,  without  showing
the  slightest  turbidity  or  sign  of  life.  But  two  days
after  they  were  opened  the  greater  number  of  them
swarmed  with  the  bacteria  of  putrefaction,  the  germs
of  which  had  been  contracted  from  the  dust-laden  air
of  the  room.  And  had  the  matter  from  my  abscess
been  examined,  my  memory  of  its  appearance  leads
me  to  infer  that  it  would  have  been  found  equally
swarming  with  these  bacteria — that  it  was  their  germs
which  got  into  my  incautiously  opened  wound,  and  that
they  were  the  subtile  workers  that  burrowed  down  my
shin,  dug  the  abscess  in  my  instep,  and  produced  effects
which  might  easily  have  proved  fatal.

This  apparent  digression  brings  us  face  to  face  with


262         THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

the  labours  of  a  man  who  combines  the  penetration  of
the  true  theorist  with  the  skill  and  conscientiousness
of  the  true  experimenter,  and  whose  practice  is  one
continued  demonstration  of  the  theory  that  the  putre-
faction of  wounds  is  to  be  averted  by  the  destruction
of  the  germs  of  bacteria.  Not  only  from  his  own
reports  of  his  cases,  but  from  the  reports  of  eminent
men  who  have  visited  his  hospital,  and  from  the
opinions  expressed  to  me  by  continental  surgeons,  do
I  gather  that  one  of  the  greatest  steps  ever  made  in
the  art  of  surgery  was  the  introduction  of  the  anti-
septic system  of  treatment,  for  which  we  are  indebted
to  Professor  Lister.

The  interest  of  this  subject  does  not  slacken  as  we
proceed.    We  began  with  the  cherry-cask  and  beer-vat ;
we  end  with  the  body  of  man.    There  are  persons  born
with  the  power  of  interpreting  natural  facts,  as  there
are  others  smitten  with  everlasting  incompetence  in
regard  to  such  interpretation.    To  the  former  class  in  .
an  eminent  degree  belonged  the  illustrious  philosopher
Eobert  Boyle,  whose  words  in  relation  to  this  subject
have  in  them  the  forecast  of  prophecy.    '  And  let  me
add,'  writes  Boyle  in  his  'Essay  on  the  Pathological
Part  of  Plrysik,'  '  that  he  that  thoroughly  understands
the  nature  of  ferments  and  fermentations  shall  probably
be  much  better  able  than  he  that  ignores  them,  to  give
a  fair  account  of  divers  phenomena  of  several  diseases
(as  well  fevers  as  others),  which  will  perhaps  be  never
properly  understood  without  an  insight  into  the  doctrine
of  fermentations.'

Two  hundred  years  have  passed  since  these  pregnant
words  were  written,  and  it  is  only  in  this  our  day  that
men  are  beginning  to  fully  realize  their  truth.  In  the
domain  of  surgery  the  justice  of  Boyle's  surmise  has
been  most  strictly  demonstrated.     But  we  now  pass


•  FERMENTATION.


263


the  bounds  of  surgery  proper,  and  enter  the  domain  of
epidemic  disease,  including  those  fevers  so  sagaciously
referred  to  by  Boyle.  The  most  striking  analogy  between
a  contagvum  and  a  ferment  is  to  be  found  in  the  power
of  indefinite  self-multiplication  possessed  and  exercised
by  both.  You  know  the  exquisitely  truthful  figures
regarding  leaven  employed  in  the  New  Testament.  A
particle  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal  leavens  it  all.  A
little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump.  In  a  similar
manner,  a  particle  of  contagium  spreads  through  the
human  body  and  may  be  so  multiplied  as  to  strike  down
whole  populations.  Consider  the  effect  produced  upon
the  system  by  a  microscopic  quantity  of  the  virus  of
smallpox.  That  virus  is,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,
a  seed.  It  is  sown  as  yeast  is  sown,  it  grows  and
multiplies  as  yeast  grows  and  multiplies,  and  it  always
reproduces  itself.  To  Pasteur  we  are  indebted  for  a
series  of  masterly  researches,  wherein  he  exposes  the
looseness  and  general  baselessness  of  prevalent  notions
regarding  the  transmutation  of  one  ferment  into  another.
He  guards  himself  against  saying  it  is  impossible.  The
true  investigator  is  sparing  in  the  use  of  this  word,
though  the  use  of  it  is  unsparingly  ascribed  to  him;
but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  Pasteur  has  never  been  able  to
effect  the  alleged  transmutation,  while  he  has  been
always  able  to  point  out  the  open  doorways  through
which  the  affirmers  of  such  transmutations  had  allowed
error  to  march  in  upon  them.1

The  great  source  of  error  here  has  been  already
alluded  to  in  this  discourse.    The  observers  worked  in

1  Those  who  wish  for  an  illustration  of  the  care  necessary  in
these  researches,  and  of  the  carelessness  with  which  they  have  in
sonic  cases  been  conducted,  will  do  well  to  consult  (he  Rev.  W.  H.
Dallinger's  excellent  '  Notes  on  Heterogenesis '  in  the  Octob<  r
number  of  the  Pojmlar  Science  ller.iem.


264


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


an  atmosphere  charged  with  the  germs  of  different
organisms  ;  the  mere  accident  of  first  possession  ren-
dering now  one  organism,  now  another,  triumphant.
In  different  stages,  moreover,  of  its  fermentative  or
putrefactive  changes,  the  same  infusion  may  so  alter
as  to  he  successively  taken  possession  of  by  different
organisms.  Such  cases  have  been  adduced  to  show  that
the  earlier  organisms  must  have  been  transformed  into
the  later  ones,  whereas  they  are  simply  cases  in  which
different  germs,  because  of  changes  in  the  infusion,
render  themselves  valid  at  different  times.

By  teaching  us  how  to  cultivate  each  ferment  in  its
purity — in  other  words,  by  teaching  us  how  to  rear  the
individual  organism  apart  from  all  others, — Pasteur  has
enabled  us  to  avoid  all  these  errors.    And  where  this
isolation  of  a  particular  organism  has  been  duly  effected
it  grows  and  multiplies  indefinitely,  but  no  change  of
it  into  another  organism  is  ever  observed.    In  Pasteur  s
researches  the  Bacterium  remained  a  Bacterium,  the
Vibrio  a  Vibrio,  the  Penicillium  a  Penicillium,  and  the
Torula  a  Torula.    Sow  any  of  these  in  a  state  of  purity
in  an  -appropriate  liquid ;  you  get  it,  and  it  alone,  in
the  subsequent  crop.    In  like  manner,  sow  smallpox
in  the  human  body,  your  crop  is  smallpox.    Sow  there
scarlatina,  and  your  crop  is  scarlatina.     Sow  typhoid
virus,  your  crop  is  typhoid— cholera,  your  ^  crop  is
cholera.    The  disease  bears  as  constant  a  relation  to  its
contagium  as  the  microscopic  organisms  just  enumerated
do  to  their  germs,  or  indeed  as  a  thistle  does  to  its  seed.
No  wonder  then,  with  analogies  so  obvious  and  so
striking,  that  the  conviction  is  spreading  and  growing-
daily  in  strength,  that  reproductive  parasitic  life  is  at
the  root  of  epidemic  disease— that  living  ferments  find-
ing lodgment  in  the  body  increase  there  and  multiply,
directly5  ruining  the  tissue  on  which  they  subsist,  or


FERMENTATION.


265


destroying  life  indirectly  by  the  generation  of  poisonous
compounds  within  the  body.  This  conclusion,  which
-conies  to  us  with  a  presumption  almost  amounting  to
demonstration,  is  clinched  by  the  fact  that  virulently
infective  diseases  have  been  discovered  with  which
living  organisms  are  as  closely  and  as  indissolubly  as-
sociated as  the  growth  of  Torula  is  with  the  fermentation
of  beer.

And  here,  if  you  will  permit  me,  I  would  utter  a
word  of  warning  to  well-meaning  people.  We  have  now
reached  a  phase  of  this  question  when  it  is  of  the  very
last  importance  that  light  should  once  for  all  be  thrown
upon  the  manner  in  which  contagious  and  infectious
diseases  take  root  and  spread.    To  this  end  the  action
of  various  ferments  upon  the  organs  and  tissues  of  the
living  body  must  be  studied ;  the  habitat  of  each  special
organism  concerned  in  the  production  of  each  specific
disease  must  be  determined,  and  the  mode  by  which  its
germs  are  spread  abroad  a3  sources  of  further  infection.
It  is  only  by  such  rigidly  accurate  inquiries  that  we  can
obtain  final  and  complete  mastery  over  these  destroyers.
Hence,  while  abhorring  cruelty  of  all  kinds,  while
shrinking  sympathetically  from  all  animal  suffering —
suffering  which  my  own  pursuits  never  call  upon  me
to  inflict,— an  unbiassed  survey  of  the  field  of  research
now  opening  out  before  the  physiologist  causes  me  to
conclude,  that  no  greater  calamity  could  befall  the
.  human  race  than  the  stoppage  of  experimental  inquiry
in   this  direction.     A  lady  whose  philanthropy  has
rendered  her  illustrious  said  to  me  some  time  ago,  that
science  was  becoming  immoral :  that  the  researches  of  the
past,  unlike  those  of  the  present,  were  carried  on  with-
out cruelty.   I  replied  to  her  that  the  science  of  Kepler
and  Newton,  to  which  she  referred  as  moral,  dealt  with
the  laws  and  phenomena  of  inorganic  nature ;  but  that


266         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


one  great  advance  made  by  modern  science  was  in  the
direction  of  biology,  or  the  science  of  life ;  and  that  in
this  new  direction  scientific  inquiry,  though  at  the
outset  pursued  at  the  cost  of  some  temporary  suffering,
would  in  the  end  prove  a  thousand  times  more  benefi-
cent than  it  had  ever  hitherto  been.  I  said  this  because
I  saw  that  the  very  researches  which  the  lady  deprecated
were  leading  us  to  such  a  knowledge  of  epidemic  diseases
as  will  enable  us  finally  to  sweep  these  scourges  of  the
human  race  from  the  face  of  the  earth.

This  is  a  point  of  such  capital  importance  that  I
should  like  to  bring  it  home  to  your  intelligence  by  a
single  trustworthy  illustration.    In  1850,  two  distin-
guished French  observers,  MM.  Davainne  and  Rayer,
noticed  in  the  blood  of  animals  which  had  died  of  the
virulent '  disease  called  splenic  fever,  small  microscopic
organisms  resembling  transparent  rods  ;  but  neither  of
them  at  that  time  attached  :-ny  significance  to  the
observation.    In  1861,  Pasteur  published  a  memoir  on
the  fermentation  of  butyric  acid,  wherein  he  described
the  organism  which  provoked  it ;  and  after  reading  this
memoir  it  occurred  to  Davainne  that  splenic  fever  might
be  a  case  of  fermentation  set  up  within  the  animal  body,
by  the  organisms  which  had  been  observed  by  him  and
Rayer.    This  idea  has  been  placed  beyond  all  doubt  by
subsequent  research.

Observations  of  the  highest  importance  have  also
been  made  on  splenic  fever  by  Pollender  and  Brauell.  .
Two  years  ago,  Dr.  Burdon  Sanderson  gave  us  a  very
clear  account  of  what  was  known  up  to  that  time  of
this  disorder.  With  regard  to  the  permanence  of  the
contagium,  it  had  been  proved  to  hang  for  years  about
localities  where  it  had  once  prevailed ;  and  this  seemed
to  show  that  the  rod-like  organisms  could  not  con-
stitute the  contagium,  because  their  infective  power


FERMENTATION.


267


was  found  to  vanibh  in  a  few  weeks.  But  other  facts
established  an  intimate  connexion  between  the  organ-
isms and  the  disease ;  so  that  a  review  of  all  the  facts
caused  Dr.  Sanderson  to  conclude  that  the  contagium
existed  in  two  distinct  forms:. the  one  'fugitive'  and
visible  as  transparent  rods;  the  other  permanent  but
'  latent,'  and  not  yet  brought  within  the  grasp  of  the
microscope.

At  the  time  that  Dr.  Sanderson  was  writing  this  re-
port, a  young  German  physician,  named  Koch,1  occupied
with  the  duties  of  his  profession  in  an  obscure  country
district,  was  already  at  work,  applying,  during  his  spare
time,  various  original  and  ingenious  devices  to  the
investigation  of  splenic  fever.    He  studied  the  habits  of
the  rod-like  organisms,  and  found  the  aqueous  humour
of  an  ox's  eye  to  be  particularly  suitable  for  their
nutrition.     With  a  drop  of  the  aqueous  humour  he
mixed  the  tiniest  speck  of  a  liquid  containing  the  rods,
placed  the  drop  under  his  microscope,  warmed  it  suit-
ably, and  observed  the  subsequent  action.    During  the
first  two  hours  hardly  any  change  was  noticeable  ;  but
at  the  end  of  this  time  the  rods  began  to  lengthen,
and  the  action  was  so  rapid  that  at  the  end  of  three
or  four  hours  they  attained  from  ten  to  twenty  times
their  original  length.    At  the  end  of  a  few  additional
hours  they  had  formed  filaments  in  many  cases  a
hundred  times  the  length  of  the  original  rods.  The
same  filament,  in  fact,  was  frequently  observed  to
stretch  through  several  fields  of  the  microscope.  Some-
times they  lay  in  straight  lines  parallel  to  each  other,
in  other  cases  they  were  bent,  twisted,  and  coiled  into
the  most  graceful  figures ;  while  sometimes  they  formed
knots  of  such  bewildering  complexity  that  it  was  im-

1  This,  I  believe,  was  the  first  reference  to  the  researches  of  Koch
made  in  this  country.  1879.


268


THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


possible  for  the  eye  to  trace  the  individual  filaments
through  the  confusion.

Had  the  observation  ended   here  an  interesting
scientiGc  fact  would  have  been  added  to  our  previous
store,  but  the  addition  would  have  been  of  little  practical
value.    Koch,  however,  continued  to  watch  the  filaments,
and  after  a  time  noticed  little  dots  appearing  within
them.  These  dots  became  more  and  more  distinct,  until
finally  the  whole  length  of  the  organism  was  studded
with  minute  ovoid  bodies,  which  lay  within  the  outer
integument  like  peas  within  their  shell.  By-and-bye
the  integument  fell  to  pieces,  the  place  of  the  organisms
being  taken  by  a  long  row  of  seeds  or  spores.  These
observations,  which  were  confirmed  in  all  respects  by
the  celebrated  naturalist,  Cohn  of  Breslau,  are  of  the
highest  importance.    They  clear  up  the  existing  per-
plexity regarding  the  latent  and  visible  contagia  of
splenic  fever ;  for  in  the  most  conclusive  manner,  Koch
proved  the  spores,  as  distinguished  from  the  rods,  to
constitute  the  contagium  of  the  fever  in  its  most  deadly
and  persistent  form.

How  did  he  reach  this  important  result  ?    Mark  the
answer.    There" was  but  one  way  open  to  him  to  test
the  activity  of  the  contagium,  and  that  was  the  inocu-
lation with  it  of  living  animals.    He  operated  upon
guinea-pigs  and  rabbits,  but  the  vast  majority  of  his
experiments  were  made  upon  mice.    Inoculating  them
with  the  fresh  blood  of  an  animal  suffering  from  splenic
fever,  they  invariably  died  of  the  same  disease  within
twenty  or  thirty  hours  after  inoculation.     He  then
sought  to  determine  how  the  contagium  maintained  its
vitality.     Drying  the  infectious  blood  containing  the
rod-like  organisms,  in  which,  however,  the  spores  were
not  developed,  he  found  the  contagium  to  be  that  which
Dr.  Sanderson  calls  'fugitive.'   It  maintained  its  power


FERMENTATION.


269


of  infection  for  five  weeks  at  the  farthest.  He  then
dried  blood  containing-  the  fully  developed  spores,  and
exposed  the  substance  to  a  variety  of  conditions.  He
permitted  the  dried  blood  to  assume  the  form  of  dust ;
wetted  this  dust,  allowed  it  to  dry  again,  permitted  it
to  remain  for  an  indefinite  time  in  the  midst  of  putre-
fying matter,  and  subjected  it  to  various  other  tests.
After  keeping  the  spore-charged  blood  which  had  been
treated  in  this  fashion  for  four  years,  he  inoculated  a
number  of  mice  with  it,  and  found  its  action  as  fatal  as
t  hat  of  blood  fresh  from  the  veins  of  an  animal  suffering
from  splenic  fever.  There  was  no  single  escape  from
death  after  inoculation  by  this  deadly  contagium.  Un-
counted millions  of  these  spores  are  developed  in  the
body  of  every  animal  which  has  died  of  splenic  fever,
and  every  spore  of  these  millions  is  competent  to  produce
the  disease.  The  name  of  this  formidable  parasite  is
Bacillus  anthracis.1

Now  the  very  first  step  towards  the  extirpation  of
these  contagia  is  the  knowledge  of  their  nature  ;  and
the  knowledge  brought  to  us  by  Dr.  Koch  will  render
as  certain  the  stamping  out  of  splenic  fever  as  the
stoppage  of  the  plague  of  pebrine  by  the  researches  of
Pasteur.2    One  small  item  of  statistics  will  show  what

1  Koch  found  that  to  produce  its  characteristic  effects  the  con-
tagium of  splenic  fever  must  enter  the  blood ;  the  virulently  in-
fective spleen  of  a  diseased  animal  may  be  eaten  with  impunity
by  mice.  On  the  other  hand,  the  disease  refuses  to  be  communi-
cated by  inoculation  to  dogs,  partridges,  or  sparrows.  In  their  blood
Bacillus  anthracis  ceases  to  act  as  a  ferment.  Pastern-  announced
more  than  six  years  ago  the  propagation  of  the  vibrios  of  the  silk-
worm disease  called  jiacheric,  both  by  fission  and  by  spores.  He
also  made  some  remarkable  experiments  on  the  permanence  of  the
contagium  in  the  form  of  spores.  See  •  Etudes  sur  la  Maladie  des
"Vers  a  Soie,'  pp.  168  and  256.

2  Surmising  that  the  immunity  enjoyed  by  birds  might  arise
from  the  heat  of  their  blood,  which  destroyed  the  bacillus,  Pasteur


270         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OE  THE  AIR.


this  implies.  In  the  single  district  of  Novgorod  in
Eussia,  between  the  years  1867  and  1870,  over  fifty-six
thousand  cases  of  Heath  by  splenic  fever,  among  horses,
cows,  and  sheep  wore  recorded.  Nor  did  its  ravages
confine  themselves  to  the  animal  world,  for  during  the
time  and  in  the  district  referred  to,  five  hundred  and
twenty-eight  human  beings  perished  in  the  agonies  of
the  same  disease.

A  description  of  the  fever  will  help  you  to  come  to
a  right  decision  on  the  point  which  I  wish  to  submit
to  your  consideration.    '  An  animal,'  says  Dr.  Burdon
Sanderson,  'which  perhaps  for  the  previous  day  has  de-
clined food  and  shown  signs  of  general  disturbance,
begins  to  shudder  and  to  have  twitches  of  the  muscles
of  the  back,  and  soon  after  becomes  weak  and  listless.
In  the  meantime  the  respiration  becomes  frequent  and
often  difficult,  and  the  temperature  rises  three  or  four
degrees  above  the  normal ;  but  soon  convulsions,  affect-
ing chiefly  the  muscles  of  the  back  and  loins,  usher
in  the  final  collapse,  of  which  the  progress  is  marked
by  the  loss  of  all  power  of  moving  the  trunk  or
extremities,  diminution  of  temperature,  mucous  and
sanguinolent  alvine  evacuations,  and  similar  discharges
from  the  mouth  and  nose.'     In  a  single  district  of
Eussia,  as  above  remarked,  fifty-six  thousand  horses,
cows,  and  sheep,  and  five  hundred  and  twenty-eight
men' and  women,  perished  in  this  way  during  a  period
of  two  or  three  years.     What  the  annual  fatality  is
throughout  Europe  I  have   no  means  of  knowing.
Doubtless  it  must  be  very  great.    The  question,  then,
which  I  wish  to  submit  to  your  judgment  is  this  :— Is

lowered  their  temperature  artificially,  inoculated  them,  and  MUed
them  He  also  raised  the  temperature  of  guinea-pigs  after  inocu-
lation,  and  saved  them.  It  is  needless  to  dwell  for  a  moment  on  the
importance  of  this  experiment.


FERMENTATION.


271


the  knowledge  which  reveals  to  us  the  nature,  and
which  assures  the  extirpation,  of  a  disorder  so  virulent
and  so  vile,  worth  the  price  paid  for  it  ?  It  is  exceed-
ingly important  that  assemblies  like  the  present  should
see  clearly  the  issues  at  stake  in  such  questions  as  this,
and  that  the  properly  informed  sense  of  the  community
should  temper,  if  not  restrain,  the  rashness  of  those
who,  meaning  to  be  tender,  become  agents  of  cruelty
by  the  imposition  of  short-sighted  restrictions  upon
physiological  investigations.  It  is  a  modern  instance
of  zeal  for  God,  but  not  according  to  knowledge,  the
excesses  of  which  must  be  corrected  by  an  instructed
public  opinion.

And  now  let  us  cast  a  backward  glance  on  the  field
we  have  traversed,  and  try  to  extract  from  our  labours
such  further  profit  as  they  can  yield.  For  more  than
two  thousand  years  the  attraction  of  light  bodies  by
amber  was  the  sum  of  human  knowledge  regarding
electricity,  and  for  more  than  two  thousand  years  fer-
mentation was  effected  without  any  knowledge  of  its
cause.  In  science  one  discovery  grows  out  of  another,
and  cannot  appear  without  its  proper  antecedent.  Thus,
before  fermentation  could  be  understood,  the  micro-
scope had  to  be  invented,  and  brought  to  a  considerable
degree  of  perfection.  Note  the  growth  of  knowledge.
Leeuwenhoek,  in  1680,  found  yeast  to  be  a  mass  of
floating  globules,  but  he  had  no  notion  that  the  globules
were  alive.  This  was  proved  in  1835  by  Cagniard  de  la
Tour  and  Schwann.  Then  came  the  question  as  to  the
origin  of  such  microscopic  organisms,  and  in  this  con-
nexion the  memoir  of  Pasteur,  published  in  the
'  Annales  de  Chimie  '  for  1862,  is  the  inauguration  of  a
new  epoch.

On   that    investigation   all   Pasteur's  subsequent


272         TITE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

labours  were  -based.    Ravages  had  over  and  over  again
occurred  among  French  wines.  There  was  no  guarantee
that  they  would  not  become  acid  or  bitter,  particularly
when  exported.     The  commerce  in  wines  was  thus
restricted,  and  disastrous  losses  were  often  inflicted  on
the  winegrower.     Every  one  of  these  diseases  was
traced  to  the  life  of  an  organism.    Pasteur  ascertained
the  temperature  which  killed  these  ferments  of  disease,
provino-  it  to  be  so  low  as  to  be  perfectly  harmless  to
the  wine     By  the  simple  expedient  of  heating  the
wine  to  a  temperature  of  fifty  degrees  Centigrade,  he
rendered  it  inalterable,  and  thus  saved  his  country  the
los«  of  millions.    He  then  went  on  to  vinegar—
aiqre,  acid  wine-which  he  proved  to  be  produced  by
a   fermentation  set   up   by   a   little   fungus  called
Mycoderma  aceti.    Torula,  in  fact,  converts  the  grape
mice  into  alcohol,  and  Mycoderma  aceti  converts  the
ilcohol  into   vinegar.     Here  also    frequent  failures
occurred,  and  severe  losses  were  sustained.  Through
the  operation  of  unknown  causes,  the  vinegar  often
became  unfit  for  use,  sometimes  indeed  falling  into  utter
tmtridity.   It  had  been  long  known  that  mere  exposure
to  the  air  was  sufficient  to  destroy  it.    Pasteur  studied
all  these  changes,  traced  them  to  their  living  causes,
and  showed  that  the  permanent  health  of  the  vinegar
was  ensured  by  the  destruction  of  this  life.    He  passed
from  the  diseases  of  vinegar  to  the  study  of  a  malady
which  a  dozen  years  ago  had  all  but  mined  .  the ^lk
husbandry  of  France.     This  plague,  which  receiv  ed  th  e
name  of  pebrine,  was  the  product  of  a  parasite  which
first  took  possession  of  the  intestinal  canal  of  the  silk-
wormTsPrePad  throughout  its  body,  and  filled  the  sack
which  ought  to  contain  the  viscid  matter  of  the  silk.
Thus  smitten,  the  worm  would  go  automatically  through
the  process  of  spinning,  when  it  had  nothing  to  spm.


FEKMENTATION.


273


Pasteur  followed  this  parasitic  destroyer  from  year  to
year,  and  led  by  his  singular  power  of  combining'  facts
with  the  logic  of  facts,  discovered  eventually  the
precise  phase  in  the  development  of  the  insect  when
the  disease  which  assailed  it  could  with  certainty  be
stamped  out.  Pasteur's  devotion  to  this  inquiry  cost
him  dear.  He  restored  to  France  her  silk  husbandry,
rescued  thousands  of  her  population  from  ruin,  set  the
looms  of  Italy  also  to  work,  but  emerged  from  his
labours  with  one  of  his  sides  permanently  paralyzed.
His  last  investigation  is  embodied  in  a  work  entitled
'  Studies  on  Beer,'  in  which  he  describes  a  method
of  rendering  beer  permanently  unchangeable.  That
method  is  not  so  simple  as  those  found  effectual  with
wine  and  vinegar,  but  the  principles  which  it  involves
are  sure  to  receive  extensive  application  at  some  future
day.

There  are  other  reflections  connected  with  this  sub-
ject which,  even  were  they  now  passed  over  without  re-
mark, would  sooner  or  later  occur  to  every  thoughtful
mind  in  this  assembly.  I  have  spoken  of  the  floating
dust  of  the  air,  of  the  means  of  rendering  it  visible,  and
of  the  perfect  immunity  from  putrefaction  which  accom-
panies the  contact  of  germless  infusions  and  moteless  air.
Consider  the  woes  which  these  wafted  particles,  during
historic  and  pre-historic  ages,  have  inflicted  on  man-
kind ;  consider  the  loss  of  life  in  hospitals  from  putre-
fying wounds ;  consider  the  loss  in  places  where  there
are  plenty  of  wounds,  but  no  hospitals,  and  in  the  ages
before  hospitals  were  anywhere  founded  ;  consider  the
slaughter  which  has  hitherto  followed  that  of  the  battle-
field, when  those  bacterial  destroyers  are  let  loose,  often
producing  a  mortality  far  greater  than  that  of  the
battle  itself;  add  to  this  the  other  conception  that  in
times  of  epidemic  disease  the  self-same  floating  matter

T


274


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


has  mingled  with  it  the  special  germs  which  produce
the  epidemic,  being  thus  enabled  to  sow  pestilence  and
death  over  nations  and  continents — consider  all  this,
and  you  will  come  with  me  to  the  conclusion  that
all  the  havoc  of  war,  ten  times  multiplied,  would  be
evanescent  if  compared  with  the  ravages  due  to  atmo-
spheric dust.

This  preventible  destruction  is  going  on  to-day,  and
it  has  been  permitted  to  go  on  for  ages,  without  a  whis-
per of  information  regarding  its  cause  being  vouchsafed
to  the  suffering  sentient  world.  We  have  been  scourged
by  invisible  thongs,  attacked  from  impenetrable  ambus-
cades, and  it  is  only  to-day  that  the  light  of  science  is
being  let  in  upon  the  murderous  dominion  of  our  foes.
Facts  like  these  excite  in  me  the  thought  that  the  rule
and  governance  of  this  universe  are  different  from  what
we  in  our  youth  supposed  them  to  be — that  the  inscrut-
able Power,  at  once  terrible  and  beneficent,  in  whom  we
live  and  move  and  have  our  being  and  our  end,  is  to  be
propitiated  by  means  different  from  those  usually  re-
sorted to.    The  first  requisite  towards  such  propitiation
is  knowledge ;  the  second  is  action,  shaped  and  illumi-
nated by  that  knowledge.    Of  knowledge  we  already
see  the  dawn,  which  will  open  out  by-and-by  to  perfect
day  ;  while  the  action  which  is  to  follow  has  its  un-
failing source  and  stimulus  in  the  moral  and  emotional
nature  of  man — in  his  desire  for  personal  well-being,
in  his  sense  of  duty,  in  his  compassionate  sympathy
with  the  sufferings  of  his  fellow-men.  '  How  often,'  says
Dr.  William  Budd  in  his  celebrated  work  on  Typhoid
Fever, — £  How  often  have  I  seen  in  past  days,  in  the
single  narrow  chamber  of  the  day-labourer's  cottage  the
father  in  the  coffin,  the  mother  in  the  sick-bed  in  mut-
tering delirium,  and  nothing  to  relieve  the  desolation
of  the  children  but  the  devotion  of  some  poor  neigh-


FERMENTATION.


275


hour,  who  in  too  many  cases  paid  the  penalty  of  her
kindness  in  becoming  herself  the  victim  of  the  same
disorder ! '  From  the  vantage  ground  already  won  I  look
forward  with  confident  hope  to  the  triumph  of  medical
art  over  scenes  of  misery  like  that  here  described.  The
cause  of  the  calamity  being  once  clearly  revealed,  not
only  to  the  physician,  but  to  the  public,  whose  intelli-
gent co-operation  is  absolutely  essential  to  success,  the
final  victory  of  humanity  is  only  a  question  of  time.  We
have  already  a  foretaste  of  that  victory  in  the  triumphs
of  surgery  as  practised  at  your  doors.


T  2


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.1


v.

Within  ten  minutes'  walk  of  a  little  cottage  which
I  have  recently  built  in  the  Alps,  there  is  a  small  lake,
fed  by  the  melted  snows  of  the  upper  mountains.
During  the  early  weeks  of  summer  no  trace  of  life
is  to  be  discerned  in  this  water ;  but  invariably  to-
wards the  end  of  July,  or  the  beginning  of  August,
swarms  of  tailed  organisms  are  seen  enjoying  the  sun's
warmth  along  the  shallow  margins  of  the  lake,  and
rushing  with  audible  patter  into  deeper  water  at  the
approach  of  danger.  The  origin  of  this  periodic  crowd
of  living  things  is  by  no  means  obvious.  For  years  I
had  never  noticed  in  the  lake  either  an  adult  frog,  or
the  smallest  fragment  of  frog  spawn  ;  so  that  were  I
not  otherwise  informed,  I  should  have  found  the  conclu-
sion of  Mathiole  a  natural  one,  namely,  that  tadpoles
are  generated  in  lake  mud  by  the  vivifying  action  of
the  sun.

The  checks  which  experience  alone  can  furnish
being  absent,  the  spontaneous  generation  of  creatures
quite  as  high  as  the  frog  in  the  scale  of  being  was
assumed  for  ages  to  be  a  fact.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  the
dominant  mind  of  Aristotle  stamped  its  notions  on
the  world  at  large.  For  nearly  twenty  centuries  after
him  men  found  no  difficulty  in  believing  in  cases  of
1  '  The  Nineteenth  Century,'  January  1878.


278


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


spontaneous  generation  which  would  now  he  rejected
as  monstrous  by  the  most  fanatical  supporter  of  the
doctrine.  Shell-fish  of  all  kinds  were  considered  to
be  without  parental  origin.  Eels  were  supposed  to
spring  spontaneously  from  the  fat  ooze  of  the  Nile.
Caterpillars  were  the  spontaneous  products  of  the  leaves
on  which  they  fed  ;  while  winged  insects,  serpents,  rats,
and  mice  were  all  thought  capable  of  being  generated
without  sexual  intervention.

The  most  copious  source  of  this  life  without  an
ancestry  was  putrefying  flesh  ;  and,  lacking  the  checks
imposed  by  fuller  investigation,  the  conclusion  that
flesh  possesses  and  exerts  this  generative  power  is  a
natural  one.  I  well  remember  when  a  child  of  ten  or
twelve  seeing  a  joint  of  imperfectly  salted  beef  cut  into,
and  coils  of  maggots  laid  bare  within  the  mass.
Without  a  moment's  hesitation  I  jumped  to  the  con-
clusion that  these  maggots  had  been  spontaneously
generated  in  the  meat.  I  had  no  knowledge  which
could  qualify  or  oppose  this  conclusion,  and  for  the
time  it  was  irresistible.  The  childhood  of  the  indi-
vidual typifies  that  of  the  race,  and  the  belief  here
enunciated  was  that  of  the  world  for  nearly  two  thou-
sand years.

To  the  examination  of  this  very  point  the  celebra-
ted Francesco  Kedi,  physician  to  the  Grand  Dukes
Ferdinand  II.  and  Cosmo  III.  of  Tuscany,  and  a
member  of  the  Academy  del  Cimento,  addressed  him-
self in  1668.  He  had  seen  the  maggots  of  putrefying
flesh,  and  reflected  on  their  possible  origin.  But  he
was  not  content  with  mere  reflection,  nor  with  the
theoretic  guesswork  which  his  predecessors  had  founded
upon  their  imperfect  observations.  Watching  meat
during  its  passage  from  freshness  to  decay,  prior  to  the
appearance  of  maggots  he  invariably  observed  flies


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.


279


buzzing  round  the  meat  and  frequently  alighting  on  it.
The  maggots,  he  thought,  might  be  the  half-developed
progeny  of  these  flies.

The  inductive  guess  precedes  experiment,  by  which,
however,  it  must  be  finally  tested.  Eedi  knew  this,  and
acted  accordingly.    Placing  fresh  meat  in  a  jar  and
covering  the  mouth  with  paper,  he  found  that,  though
the  meat  putrefied  in  the  ordinary  way,  it  never  bred
maggots,  while  the  same  meat  placed  in  open  jars  soon
swarmed  with  these  organisms.    For  the  paper  cover
he  then  substituted   fine  gauze,  through  which  the
odour  of  the  meat  could  rise.    Over  it  the  flies  buzzed,
and  on  it  they  laid  their  eggs,  but,  the  meshes  being  too
small  to  permit  the  eggs  to  fall  through,  no  maggots
were  generated  in  the  meat.    They  were,  on  the  con-
trary, hatched  upon  the  gauze.     By  a  series  of  such
experiments  Eedi  destroyed  the  belief  in  the  sponta-
neous generation  of  maggots  in  meat,  and  with  it
doubtless  many  related  beliefs.    The  combat  was  con-
tinued by  Vallisneri,  Schwammerdam,  and  Reaumur,
who  succeeded  in  banishing  the  notion  of  spontaneous
generation  from  the  scientific  minds  of  their  day.
Indeed,  as  regards  such  complex  organisms  as  those
which  formed  the  subject  of  their  researches,  the  notion
was  banished  for  ever.

But  the  discovery  and  improvement  of  the  micro-
scope, though  giving  a  death-blow  to  much  that
had  been  previously  written  and  believed  regarding
spontaneous  generation,  brought  also  into  view  a  world
of  life  formed  of  individuals  so  minute — so  close  as  it
seemed  to  the  ultimate  particles  of  matter — as  to  sug-
gest an  easy  passage  from  atoms  to  organisms.  Animal
and  vegetable  infusions  exposed  to  the  air  were  found
clouded  and  crowded  with  creatures  far  beyond  the
reach  of  unaided  vision,  but  perfectly  visible  to  an  eye


280


THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


strengthened  by  the  microscope.  With  reference  to
their  origin  these  organisms  were  called  '  Infusoria.'
Stagnant  pools  were  found  full  of  them,  and  the
obvious  difficulty  of  assigning  a  germinal  origin  to
existences  so  minute  furnished  the  precise  condition
necessary  to  give  new  play  to  the  notion  of  hetero-
genesis  or  spontaneous  generation.

The  scientific  world  was  soon  divided  into  two  hos-
tile camps,  the  leaders  of  which  only  can  here  be
briefly  alluded  to.    On  the  one  side,  we  have  Buffon
and  Needham,  the  former  postulating  his  'organic
molecules,'  and  the  latter  assuming  the  existence  of  a
special  '  vegetative  force '  which  drew  the  molecules
together  so  as  to  form  living  things.  On  the  other  side,
we  have  the  celebrated  Abbe  Lazzaro  Spallanzani,  who
in  1777  published  results  counter  to  those  announced
by  Needham  in  1748.    They  were  obtained  by  methods
so  precise  as  to  completely  overthrow  the  convictions
based  upon  the  labours  of  his  predecessor.   Charging  his
flasks  with  organic  infusions,  he  sealed  their  necks  with
the  blowpipe,  subjected  them  in  this  condition  to  the
heat  of  boiling  water,  and  subsequently  exposed  them
to  temperatures  favourable  to  the  development  of  life.
The  infusions  continued  unchanged  for  months,  and
when  the  flasks  were  subsequently  opened  no  trace  of
life  was  found.

Here  I  may  forestall  matters  so  far  as  to  say  that
the  success  of  Spallanzani's  experiments  depended  wholly
on  the  locality  in  which  he  worked.  The  air  around
him  must  have  been  free  from  the  more  obdurate  in-
fusorial germs,  for  otherwise  the  process  he  followed
would,  as  was  long  afterwards  proved  by  Wyman,  have
infallibly  yielded  life.  But  his  refutation  of  the  doc-
trine of  spontaneous  generation  is  not  the  less  valid  on
this  account.    Nor  is  it  in  any  way  upset  by  the  fact,


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.


281


that  others  in  repeating  his  experiments  obtained  life
where  he  obtained  none.  Rather  is  the  refutation
strengthened  by  such  differences.  Given  two  experi-
menters equally  skilful  and  equally  careful,  operating
in  different  places  on  the  same  infusion,  in  the  same
way,  and  assuming  the  one  to  obtain  life  while  the  other
fails  to  obtain  it ;  then  its  well-established  absence  in
the  one  case  proves  that  some  ingredient  foreign  to  the
infusion  must  be  its  cause  in  the  other.

Spallanzani's  sealed  flasks  contained  but  small  quan-
tities of  air,  and  as  oxygen  was  afterwards  shown  to
be  generally  essential  to  life,  it  was  thought  that  the
absence  of  life  observed  by  Spallanzani  might  have
been  due  to  the  lack  of  this  vitalizing  gas.  To  dissi-
pate this  doubt,  Schulze  in  1836  half  filled  a  flask  with
distilled  water  to  which  animal  and  vegetable  matters
were  added.  First  boiling  his  infusion  to  destroy  what-
ever life  it  might  contain,  Schulze  sucked  daily  into
his  flask  air  which  had  passed  through  a  series  of
bulbs  containing  concentrated  sulphuric  acid,  where  all
germs  of  life  suspended  in  the  air  were  supposed  to  be
destroyed.  From  May  to  August  this  process  was
continued  without  any  development  of  infusorial  life.

Here  again  the  success  of  Schulze  was  due  to  his
working  in  comparatively  pure  air,  but  even  in  such
air  his  experiment  is  a  very  risky  one.  Germs  will
pass  unwetted  and  unscathed  through  sulphuric  acid
unless  the  most  special  care  is  taken  to  detain  them.
I  have  repeatedly  failed,  by  repeating  Schulze's  experi-
ments, to  obtain  his  results.  Others  have  failed  like-
wise. The  air  passes  in  bubbles  through  the  bulbs,  and
to  render  the  method  secure,  the  passage  of  the  air  must
be  so  slow  as  to  cause  the  whole  of  its  floating  matter,
even  to  the  very  core  of  each  bubble,  to  touch  the  sur-
rounding liquid.    But  if  this  precaution  be  observed,


282         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

water  will  be  found  quite  as  effectual  as  sulphuric  acid.
By  the  aid  of  an  air-pump,  in  an  highly  infective  atmo-
sphere I  have  thus  drawn  air  for  weeks  without  inter-
mission, first  through  bulbs  containing  water,  and
afterwards  through  vessels  containing  organic  infusions,
without  any  appearance  of  life.  The  germs  were  not
killed  by  the  water,  but  they  were  effectually  intercepted,
while  the  objection  that  the  air  had  been  injured  by
being  brought  into  contact  with  strongly  corrosive  sub-
stances was  annulled.

The  brief  paper  of  Schulze,  published  in  Poggen-
dorfs  Annalen  for  1836,  was  followed  in  1837  by
another  short  and  pregnant  communication  by  Schwann.
Kedi,  as  we  have  seen,  traced  the  maggots  of  putrefying
flesh  to  the  eggs  of  flies.    But  he  did  not  and  he  could
not  know  the  meaning  of  putrefaction  itself.    He  had
not  the  instrumental  means  to  inform  him  that  it  also
is  a  phenomenon  attendant  on  the  development  of  life.
This  was  first  proved  in  the  paper  now  alluded  to.
Schwann  placed  flesh  in  a  flask  filled  to  one-third  of  its
capacity  with  water,  sterilized  the  flask  by  boiling,  and
then  supplied  it  for  months  with  calcined  air.  Through-
out this  time  there  appeared  no  mould,  no  infusoria,
no  putrefaction ;  the  flesh  remained  unaltered,  while
the  liquid  continued  as  clear  as  it  was  immediately
after  boiling.    Schwann  then  varied  his  experimental
argument,  with  no  alteration  in  the  result.    His  final
conclusion  was,  that  putrefaction  is  due  to  decompositions
of  organic  matter  attendant  on  the  multiplication  there-
in of  minute  organisms.   These  organisms  were  derived
not  from  the  air,  but  from  something  contained  in  the
air,  which  was  destroyed  by  a  sufficiently  high  tempera-
ture.   There  never  was  a  more  determined  opponent  of
the  doctrine  of  spontaneous  generation  than  Schwann,
though  a  strange  attempt  was  made  a  year  and  a  half


SPONTANEOUS  GENEEATION.


283


ago  to  enlist  him  and  others  equally  opposed  to  it  on
the  side  of  the  doctrine.

The  physical  character  of  the  agent  which  produces
putrefaction  was  further  revealed  by  Helmholtz  in  1843.
By  means  of  a  membrane  he  separated  a  sterilized
putrescible  liquid  from  a  putrefying  one.  The  steril-
ized infusion  remained  perfectly  intact.  Hence  it  was
not  the  liquid  of  the  putrefying  mass— for  that  could
freely  diffuse  through  the  membrane — but  something
contained  in  the  liquid,  and  which  was  stopped  by
the  membrane,  that  caused  the  putrefaction.  In  1854
Schroeder  and  Von  Dusch  struck  into  this  inquiry,
which  was  subsequently  followed  up  by  Schroeder  alone.
These  able  experimenters  employed  plugs  of  cotton- wool
to  filter  the  air  supplied  to  their  infusions.  Fed  with
such  air,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  the  putrescible
liquids  remained  perfectly  sweet  after  boiling.  Milk
formed  a  conspicuous  exception  to  the  general  rule.  It
putrefied  after  boiling,  though  supplied  with  carefully
filtered  air.  The  researches  of  Schroeder  bring  us  up
to  the  year  1859.

In  that  year  a  book  was  published  which  seemed  to
overturn  some  of  the  best  established  facts  of  previous
investigators.  Its  title  was  Hettrogtnie,  and  its  author
was  F.  A.  Pouchet,  Director  of  the  Museum  of  Natural
History  at  Eouen.  Ardent,  laborious,  learned,  full  not
only  of  scientific  but  of  metaphysical  fervour,  he  threw
his  whole  energy  into  the  inquiry.  Never  did  a  subject
require  the  exercise  of  the  cold  critical  faculty  more
than  this  one — calm  study  in  the  unravelling  of  com-
plex phenomena,  care  in  the  preparation  of  experiments,
care  in  their  execution,  skilful  variation  of  conditions,
and  incessant  questioning  of  results  until  repetition  had
placed  them  beyond  doubt  or  question.  To  a  man  of
Pouchet's  temperament  the  subject  was  full  of  danger


284


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


— danger  not  lessened  by  the  theoretic  bias  with  which
he  approached  it.    This  is  revealed  by  the  opening
words  of  his  preface :  '  Lorsque,  par  la  meditation,  il
fut  evident  pour  moi  que  la  generation  spontanee  etait
encore  l'un  des  moyens  qu'emploie  la  nature  pour  la  re-
production des  etres,  je  m'appliquai  a  decouvrir  par
quels  procedes  on  pouvait  parvenir  a  en  mettre  les
phenomenes  en  evidence.'    It  is  needless  to  say  that
such  a  prepossession  required  a  strong  curb.  Pouchet
repeated  the  experiments  of  Schulze  and  Schwann  with
results  diametrically  opposed  to  theirs.    He  heaped  ex-
periment upon  experiment  and  argument  upon  argu-
ment, spicing  with  the  sarcasm  of  the  advocate  the
los'ic  of  the  man  of  science.    In  view  of  the  multitudes
required  to  produce  the  observed  results,  he  ridiculed
the  assumption  of  atmospheric  germs.    This  was  one
of  his  strongest  points.    '  Si  les  Proto-organismes  que
nous  voyons  pulluler  partout  et  dans  tout,  avaient  leurs
germes  dissemines  dans  l'atmosphere,  dans  la  propor-
tion mathematiquement  indispensable  a  cet  effet,  Tak-
en serait  totalement  obscurci,  car  ils  devraient  s'y
trouver  beaucoup  plus  serres  que  les  globules  d'eau  qui
forment  nos  nuages  epais.    II  n'y  a  pas  la  la  moindre
exageration.'    Eecurring  to  the  subject,  he  exclaims :
'  L'air  dans  lequel  nous  vivons  aurait  presque  la  den-
site  du  fer.'    There  is  often  a  virulent  contagion  in  a
confident  tone,  and  this  hardihood  of  argumentative
assertion  was  sure  to  influence  miuds  swayed  not  by
knowledge,  but  by  authority.    Had  Pouchet  known
that  '  the  blue  ethereal  sky '  is  formed  of  suspended
particles,  through  which  the  sun  freely  shines,  he  would
hardly  have  ventured  upon  this  line  of  argument.

Pouchet's  pursuit  of  this  inquiry  strengthened  the
conviction  with  which  he  began  it,  and  landed  him  in
downright  credulity  in  the  end.    I  do  not  question


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.


285


his  ability  as  an  observer,  but  the  inquiry  needed  a
disciplined  experimenter.  This  latter  implies  not  mere
ability  to  look  at  things  as  Nature  offers  them  to  our
inspection,  but  to  force  her  to  show  herself  under  con-
ditions prescribed  by  the  experimenter  himself.  Here
Pouchet  lacked  the  necessary  discipline.  Yet  the
vigour  of  his  onset  raised  clouds  of  doubt,  which  for  a
time  obscured  the  whole  field  of  inquiry.  So  difficult
indeed  did  the  subject  seem,  and  so  incapable  of  definite
solution,  that  when  Pasteur  made  known  his  intention
to  take  it  up,  his  friends  Biot  and  Dumas  expressed
their  regret,  earnestly  exhorting  him  to  set  a  definite
and  rigid  limit  to  the  time  he  purposed  spending  in
this  apparently  unprofitable  field.1

Schooled  by  his  education  as  a  chemist,  and  by
special  researches  on  the  closely  related  question  of
fermentation,  Pasteur  took  up  this  subject  under  par-
ticularly favourable  conditions.  His  work  and  his
culture  had  given  strength  and  finish  to  his  natural
aptitudes.  In  1862,  accordingly,  he  published  a  paper
'  On  the  Organized  Corpuscles  existing  in  the  Atmo-
sphere,' which  must  for  ever  remain  classical.  By  the
most  ingenious  devices  he  collected  the  floating  par-
ticles of  the  air  surrounding  his  laboratory  in  the  Eue
d'Ulm,  and  subjected  them  to  microscopic  examination.
Many  of  them  he  found  to  be  organized  particles.
Sowing  them  in  sterilized  infusions,  he  obtained  abund-
ant crops  of  microscopic  organisms.  By  more  refined
methods  he  repeated  and  confirmed  the  experiments
of  Schwann,  which  had  been  contested  by  Pouchet,

1  '  Je  ne  conseillerais  a  personne,'  said  Dumas  to  his  already-
famous  pupil,  '  de  rester  trop  longtemps  dans  ce  sujet.' — Annates  dc
Chvmie  et  de  Physique,  1862,  vol.  lxiv.  p.  22.  Since  that  time  the
illustrious  Perpetual  Secretary  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  has  had
good  reason  to  revise  this  '  counsel.'


286


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


Montegazza,  Joly,  and  Musset.  He  also  confirmed  the
experiments  of  Schroeder  and  Von  Duseh.  He  showed
that  the  cause  which  communicated  life  to  his  infusions
was  not  uniformly  diffused  through  the  air  ;  that  there
were  aerial  interspaces  which  possessed  no  power  to
generate  life.  Standing  on  the  Mer  de  Glace,  near  the
Montanvert,  he  snipped  off  the  ends  of  a  numher  of
hermetically-sealed  flasks  containing  organic  infusions.
One  out  of  twenty  of  the  flasks  thus  supplied  with
glacier  air  showed  signs  of  life  afterwards,  while  eight
out  of  twenty  of  the  same  infusions,  supplied  with  the
air  of  the  plains,  became  crowded  with  life.  He  took
his  flasks  into  the  caves  under  the  Observatory  of  Paris,
and  found  the  still  air  in  these  caves  devoid  of  genera-
tive power.  These  and  other  experiments,  carried  out
with  a  severity  perfectly  obvious  to  the  instructed
scientific  reader,  and  accompanied  by  a  logic  equally
severe,  restored  the  conviction  that,  even  in  these  lower
reaches  of  the  scale  of  being,  life  does  not  appear  with-
out the  operation  of  antecedent  life.

The  main  position  of  Pasteur  has  been  strengthened
by  practical  researches  of  the  most  momentous  kind.
He  has  applied  the  knowledge  won  from  his  inquiries
to  the  preservation  of  wine  and  beer,  to  the  manufacture
of  vinegar,  to  the  staying  of  the  plague  which  threatened
utter  destruction  of  the  silk  husbandry  of  France,  and
to  the  examination  of  other  formidable  diseases  which
assail  the  higher  animals,  including  man.  His  relation  to
the  improvements  which  Professor  Lister  has  introduced
into  surgery  is  shown  by  a  letter  quoted  in  his  Etudes
sur  la  Biere.1  Professor  Lister  there  expressly  thanks
Pasteur  for  having  given  him  the  only  principle  which
could  have  conducted  the  antiseptic  system  to  a  suc-
cessful issue.  The  strictures  regarding  defects  of
reasoning,  to  which  we  have  been  lately  accustomed,

»  P.  48.


SPONTANEOUS  GENEEATION.


287


whatever  light  they  may  shed  upon  their  author,  throw
no  shade  upon  Pasteur.

Eedi,  as  we  have  seen,  proved  the  maggots  of  putre-
fying flesh  to  be  derived  from  the  eggs  of  flies  ;  Schwann
proved  putrefaction  itself  to  he  the  concomitant  of
far  lowe.  forms  of  life  than  those  dealt  with,  by  Eedi.
Our  knowledge  here,  as  elsewhere  in  connexion  with
this  subject,  has  been  vastly  extended  by  Professor
Cohn,  of  Breslau.  '  No  putrefaction,'  he  says,  '  can  occur
in  a  nitrogenous  substance  if  its  bacteria  be  destroyed
and  new  ones  prevented  from  entering  it.  Putrefaction
begins  as  soon  as  bacteria,  even  in  the  smallest  numbers,
are  admitted  either  accidentally  or  purposely.  It  pro-
gresses in  direct  proportion  to  the  multiplication  of
the  bacteria,  it  is  retarded  when  they  exhibit  low
vitality,  and  is  stopped  by  all  influences  which  either
hinder  their  development  or  kill  them.  All  bactericidal
media  are  therefore  antiseptic  and  disinfecting.'1  It
was  these  organisms  acting  in  wound  and  abscess  which
so  frequently  converted  our  hospitals  into  charnel-
houses,  and  it  is  their  destruction  by  the  antiseptic
system  that  now  renders  justifiable  operations  which  no
surgeon  would  have  attempted  a  few  years  ago.  The
gain  is  immense — to  the  practising  surgeon  as  well  as
to  the  patient  practised  upon.  Contrast  the  anxiety  of
never  feeling  sure  whether  the  most  brilliant  operation
might  not  be  rendered  nugatory  by  the  access  of  a  few
particles  of  unseen  hospital  dust,  with  the  comfort
derived  from  the  knowledge  that  all  power  of  mischief
on  the  part  of  such  dust  has  been  surely  and  certainly

1  In  his  last  excellent  memoir  Cohn  expresses  himself  thus  :
'  Wer  noch  heut  die  Faulniss  von  einer  spontanen  Dissociation  der
Proteinmolecule,  oder  von  einem  unorganisirten  Ferment  ableitet,
oder  gar  aus  "  Stickstoffsplittern "  die  Balken  zur  Stiitze  seiner
Fiiulnisstheorie  zu  zimmern  versucht,  hat  zuerst  den  Satz  "  keine
Faulniss  ohne  Bacterium  Termo  "  zu  widerlegen.'


288


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIE.


annihilated.  But  the  action  of  living  contagia  extends
beyond  the  domain  of  the  surgeon.  The  power  of  re-
production and  indefinite  self-multiplication  which  is
characteristic  of  living  things,  coupled  with  the
undeviating  fact  of  contagia  *  breeding  true,'  has  given
strength  and  consistency  to  a  belief  long  entertained  by
penetrating  minds,  that  epidemic  diseases  generally  are
the  concomitants  of  parasitic  life.  '  There  begins  to  be
faintly  visible  to  us  a  vast  and  destructive  laboratory  of
nature  wherein  the  diseases  which  are  most  fatal  to  ani-
mal life,  and  the  changes  to  which  dead  organic  matter
is  passively  liable,  appear  bound  together  by  what  must
at  least  be  called  a  very  close  analogy  of  causation.'1
According  to  this  view,  which,  as  I  have  said,  is  daily
gaining  converts,  a  contagious  disease  may  be  defined
as  a  conflict  between  the  person  smitten  by  it  and  a
specific  organism  which  multiplies  at  his  expense,
appropriating  his  air  and  moisture,  disintegrating  his
tissues,  or  poisoning  him  by  the  decompositions  incident
to  its  growth.

During  the  ten  years  extending  from  1859  to  1869,
researches  on  radiant  heat  in  its  relations  to  the  gas-
eous form  of  matter  occupied  my  continual  attention.
When  air  was  experimented  on,  I  had  to  cleanse  it
effectually  of  floating  matter,  and  while  doing  so  I  was
surprised  to  notice  that,  at  the  ordinary  rate  of  transfer,
such  matter  passed  freely  through  alkalis,  acids,  alcohols,
and  ethers.  The  eye  being  kept  sensitive  by  darkness,
a  concentrated  beam  of  light  was  found  to  be  a  most
searching  test  for  suspended  matter  both  in  water
and  in  air — a  test  indeed  indefinitely  more  searching
and  severe  than  that  furnished  by  the  most  powerful
microscope.  With  the  aid  of  such  a  beam  I  examined
1  Report  of  the  Medical  Officer  of  the  Privy  Council,  1874,  p.  5.


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.


289


air  filtered  by  cotton-  wool;  air  long  kept  free  from  agita-
tion, so  as  to  allow  the  floating  matter  to  subside  ;  cal-
cined air,  and  air  filtered  by  the  deeper  cells  of  the  human
lungs.  In  all  cases  the  correspondence  between  my  ex-
periments and  those  of  Schwann,  Schroeder,  Pasteur,  and
Lister  in  regard  to  spontaneous  generation  was  perfect.
The  air  which  they  found  inoperative  was  proved  by
the  luminous  beam  to  be  optically  pure  and  therefore
germless.  Having  worked  at  the  subject  both  by  expe-
riment and  reflection,  on  Friday  evening,  January  21,
1870,  I  brought  it  before  the  members  of  the  Eoyal
Institution.  Two  or  three  months  subsequently,  for
sufficient  practical  reasons,  I  ventured  to  direct  public
attention  to  the  subject  in  a  letter  to  the  Times.
Such  was  my  first  contact  with  this  important  question.

This  letter,  I  believe,  gave  occasion  for  the  first
public  utterance  of  Dr.  Bastian  in  relation  to  this
subject.  He  did  me  the  honour  to  inform  me,  as  others
had  informed  Pasteur,  that  the  subject  '  pertains  to  the
biologist  and  physician.'    He  expressed  ' amazement'
at  my  reasoning,  and  warned  me  that  before  what  I  had
done  could  be  undone  '  much  irreparable  mischief  might
be  occasioned.'  With  far  less  preliminary  experience  to
guide  and  warn  him,  the  English  heterogenist  was  far
bolder  than  Pouchet  in  his  experiments,  and  far  more
adventurous  in  his  conclusions.  With  organic  infusions
he  obtained  the  results  of  his  celebrated  predecessor,
but  he  did  much  more — the  atoms  and  molecules  of  in-
organic liquids  passing  under  his  manipulation  into
those  more  '  complex  chemical  compounds,'  which  we
dignify  by  calling  them  '  living  organisms.'1    As  re-

1  It  is  further  held  that  bacteria  or  allied  organisms  are  prone
to  be  engendered  as  correlative  products,  coming  into  existence  in
the  several  fermentations,  just  as  independently  as  other  less
complex  chemical  compounds.' — Bastian,  Trans,  of  Patlwlogical
Society,  vol.  xxvi.  258.

tr


290        THE  FLOATING  MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

gards  the  public  who  take  an  interest  in  such  things,
and  apparently  also  as  regards  a  large  portion  of  the
medical  profession,  our  extremely  clever  countryman
succeeded  in  restoring  the  subject  to  a  state  of  uncer-
tainty similar  to  that  which  followed  the  publication  of
Pouchet's  volume  in  1859.

It  is  desirable  that  this  uncertainty  should  be
removed  from  all  minds,  and  doubly  desirable  on
practical  grounds  that  it  should  be  removed  from  the
minds  of  medical  men.  In  the  present  article,  there-
fore, I  propose  discussing  this  question  face  to  face  with
some  eminent  and  fair-minded  member  of  the  medical
profession  who,  as  regards  spontaneous  generation,  en-
tertains views  adverse  to  mine.  Such  a  one  it  would
be  easy  to  name ;  but  it  is  perhaps  better  to  rest  in  the
impersonal.  I  shall  therefore  simply  call  my  proposed
co-inquirer  my  friend.  With  hirn  at  my  side,  I  shall
endeavour,  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  so  to  conduct  this
discussion  that  he  who  runs  may  read  and  that  he  who
reads  may  understand.

Let  us  begin  at  the  beginning.    I  ask  my  friend
23  to  step  into  the  laboratory  of  the

Eoyal  Institution,  where  I  place
before  him  a  basin  of  thin  turnip
slices  barely  covered  with  distilled
water  kept  at  a  temperature  of
120°  Fahr.  After  digesting  the
turnip  for  four  or  five  hours  we
pour  off  the  liquid,  boil  it,  filter
it,  and  obtain  an  infusion  as  clear
as  filtered  drinking  water.  We
cool  the  infusion,  test  its  specific
gravity,  and  find  it  to  be  1006  or  higher— water
being  1000.  A  number  of  small  clean  empty  flasks,  of
the  shape  shown  on  the  margin,  are  before  us.    One  of


I


SPONTANEOITS  GENERATION.


291


tbem  is  slightly  warmed  with  a  spirit-lamp,  and  its  open
end  is  then  dipped  into  the  turnip  infusion.  The  warmed
glass  is  afterwards  chilled,  the  air  within  the  flasks
cools,  contracts,  and  is  followed  in  its  contraction  by
the  infusion.  Thus  we  get  a  small  quantity  of  liquid
into  the  flask.  We  now  heat  this  liquid  carefully.
Steam  is  produced,  which  issues  from  the  open  neck,
carrying  the  air  of  the  flask  along  with  it.  After  a  few
seconds'  ebullition,  the  open  neck  is  again  plunged
into  the  infusion.  The  steam  within  the  flask  con-
denses, the  liquid  enters  to  supply  its  place,  and  in
this  way  we  fill  our  little  flask  to  about  four-fifths  of
its  volume.  This  description  is  typical ;  we  may  thus
fill  a  thousand  flasks  with  a  thousand  different  infusions.

I  now  ask  my  friend  to  notice  a  trough  made  of
sheet  copper,  with  two  rows  of  handy  little  Bunsen
burners  underneath  it.  This  trough,  or  bath,  is  nearly
filled  with  oil ;  a  piece  of  thin  plank  constitutes  a  kind
of  lid  for  the  oil-bath.  The  wood  is  perforated  with
circular  apertures  wide  enough  to  allow  our  small  flask
to  pass  through  and  plunge  itself  in  the  oil,  which  has
been  heated,  say,  to  250°  Fahr.  Clasped  all  round  by
the  hot  liquid,  the  infusion  in  the  flask  rises  to  its
boiling  point,  which  is  not  sensibly  over  212°  Fahr.
Steam  issues  from  the  open  neck  of  the  flask,  and  the
boiling  is  continued  for  five  minutes.  With  a  pair  of
small  brass  tongs,  an  assistant  now  seizes  the  neck  near
its  junction  with  the  flask,  and  partially  lifts  the  latter
out  of  the  oil.  The  steam  does  not  cease  to  issue,  but
its  violence  is  abated.  With  a  second  pair  of  tongs  held
in  one  hand,  the  neck  of  the  flask  is  seized  close  to  its
open  end,  while  with  the  other  hand  a  Bunsen's  flame
or  an  ordinary  spirit  flame  is  brought  under  the  middle
of  the  neck.  The  glass  reddens,  whitens,  softens,  and
as  it  is  gently  drawn  out  the  neck  diminishes  in  dia-

u  2


292        THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


meter,  until  the  canal  is  completely  blocked  up.  The
second  pair  of  tongs  with  the  fragment  of  severed  neck
being  withdrawn,  the  flask,  with  its  contents  diminished
by  evaporation,  is  lifted  from  the  oil-bath  perfectly
sealed  hermetically.

Sixty  such  flasks  filled,  boiled,  and  sealed  in  the
manner  described,  and  containing  strong  infusions  of
beef,  mutton,  turnip,  and  cucumber,  are  carefully  packed
in  sawdust,  and  transported  to  the  Alps.    Thither,  to
an  elevation  of  about  7,000  feet  above  the  sea,  I  invite
my  co-inquirer  to  accompany  me.    It  is  the  month  of
July,  and  the  weather  is  favourable  to  putrefaction.
We  open  our  box  at  the  Bel  Alp,  and  count  out  fifty-
four  flasks,  with  their  liquids  as  clear  as  filtered  drink-
ing water.    In  six  flasks,  however,  the  infusion  is  found
muddy.    We  closely  examine  these,  and  discover  that
every  one  of  them  has  had  its  fragile  end  broken  off  in
the  transit  from  London.    Air  has  entered  the  flasks,
and  the  observed  muddiness  is  the  result.   My  colleague
knows  as  well  as  I  do  what  this  means.    Examined  with
a  pocket-lens,  or  even  with  a  microscope  of  insufficient
power,  nothing  living  is  seen  in  the  muddy  liquid ;  but
regarded  with  a  magnifying  power  of  a  thousand  diameters
or  so,  what  an  astonishing  appearance  does  it  present !
Leeuwenhoek  estimated  the  population  of  a  single  drop
of  stagnant  water  at  500,000,000  :  probably  the  popu-
lation of  a  drop  of  our  turbid  infusion  would  be  this
many  times  multiplied.    The  field  of  the  microscope
is  crowded  with  organisms,  some  wabbling  slowly,  others
shooting  rapidly  across  the  microscopic  field.  They
dart  hither  and  thither  like  a  rain  of  minute  projectiles ;
they  pirouette  and  spin  so  quickly  round,  that  the
•  retention  of  the  retinal  impression  transforms  the  little
living  rod  into  a  twirling  wheel.    And  yet  the  most
celebrated  naturalists   tells  us   they  are  vegetables.


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.


293


From  the  rod-like  shape  which  they  so  frequently
assume,  these  organisms  are  called  '  bacteria  '—a  term,
be  it  here  remarked,  which  covers  organisms  of  very

diverse  kinds-
Has  this  multitudinous  life  been  spontaneously
generated  in  these  six  flasks,  or  is  it  the  progeny  of
living  germinal  matter  carried  into  the  flasks  by  the
entering  air  ?    If  the  infusions  have  a  self-generative
power,  how  are  the  sterility  and  consequent  clearness
of  the  fifty-four  uninjured  flasks  to  be  accounted  for  ?
My  colleague  may  urge— and  fairly  urge— that  the
assumption  of  germinal  matter  is  by  no  means  neces-
sary ;  that  the  air  itself  may  be  the  one  thing  needed
to  wake  up  the  dormant  infusions.    We  will  examine
this  point  immediately.  But  meanwhile  I  would  remind
him  that  I  am  working  on  the  exact  lines  laid  down
by  our  most  conspicuous  heterogenist.    He  distinctly
affirms  that  the  withdrawal  of  the  atmospheric  pressure
above  the  infusion  favours  the  production  of  organisms  ;
and  he  accounts  for  their  absence  in  tins  of  preserved
meat,  fruit,  and  vegetables,  by  the  hypothesis  that
fermentation  has  begun  in  such  tins,  that  gases  have
been  generated,  the  pressure  of  which  has  stifled  the
incipient  life  and  stopped  its  further  development.1
This  is  the  new  theory  of  preserved  meats.    Had  Dr.
Bastian  pierced  a  tin  of  preserved  meat,  fruit,  or  vege-
table under  water  with  the  view  of  testing  its  truth,
he  would  have  found  it  erroneous.    In  well-preserved
tins  he  would  have  found,  not  an  outrush  of  gas,  but  an
inrush  of  water.    I  have  noticed  this  recently  in  tins
which  have  lain  perfectly  good  for  sixty-three  years  in
the  Koyal  Institution.    Modern  tins,  subjected  to  the
same  test,  yielded  the  same  result.    From  time  to  time,
moreover,  during  the  last  two  years,  I  have  placed  glass
1  <  Beginnings  of  Life,'  vol.  i.  p.  418.


294


THE  FLOATING-MATT  EE  OF  THE  AIR.


tubes,  containing  clear  infusions  of  turnip,  hay,  beef,
and  mutton,  in  iron  bottles,  and  subjected  them  to  air-
pressures  varying  from  ten  to  twenty-seven  atmospheres
— pressures,  it  is  needless  to  say,  far  more  than  sufficient
to  tear  a  preserved  meat  tin  to  shreds.  After  ten  days
these  infusions  were  taken  from  their  bottles  rotten  with
putrefaction  and  teeming  with  life.  Thus  collapses  an
hypothesis  which  had  no  rational"  foundation,  and  which
could  never  have  seen  the  light  had  any  well-directed
attempt  been  made  to  verify  it.

Our  fifty-four  vacuous  and  pellucid  flasks  also  declare
against  the  heterogenist.  We  expose  them  to  a  warm
Alpine  sun  by  day,  and  at  night  we  suspend  them  in  a
warm  kitchen.  Four  of  them  have  been  accidentally
broken ;  but  at  the  end  of  a  month  we  find  the  fifty
remaining  ones  as  clear  as  at  the  commencement.
There  is  no  sign  of  putrefaction  or  of  life  in  any  of
them.  We  divide  these  flasks  into  two  groups  of
twenty-three  and  twenty-seven  respectively  (an  accident
of  counting  rendered  the  division  uneven).  The  question
now  is  whether  the  admission  of  air  can  liberate  any
generative  energy  in  the  infusions.  Our  next  experi-
ment will  answer  this  question  and  something  more.
We  carry  the  flasks  to  a  hayloft,  and  there,  with  a  pair
of  steel  pliers,  snip  off  the  sealed  ends  of  the  group
of  three- an d-twenty.  Each  snipping  off  is  of  course
followed  by  an  inrush  of  air.  We  now  carry  our  twenty-
seven  flasks,  our  pliers,  and  a  spirit-lamp,  to  a  ledge
overlooking  the  Aletsch  glacier,  about  200  feet  above
the  hayloft,  from  which  ledge  the  mountain  falls  almost
precipitously  to  the  north-east  for  about  a  thousand
feet.  A  gentle  wind  blows  towards  us  from  the  north-
east— that  is,  across  the  crests  and  snow-fields  of  the
Oberland  mountains.  We  are  therefore  bathed  by  air
which  must  have  been  for  a  good  while  out  of  practical


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.  295

contact  with  either  animal  or  vegetable  life.  I  stand
carefully  to  leeward  of  the  flasks,  for  no  dust  or  particle
from  my  clothes  or  body  must  be  blown  towards  them.
An  assistant  ignites  the  spirit-lamp,  into  the  flame  of
which  I  plunge  the  pliers,  thereby  destroying  all  attached
germs  or  organisms.  Then  I  snip  off  the  sealed  end
of  the  flask.  Prior  to  every  snipping  the  same  process
is  gone  through,  no  flask  being  opened  without  the
previous  cleansing  of  the  pliers  by  the  flame.  In  this
way  we  charge  our  seven-and-twenty  flasks  with  clean
vivifying  mountain  air.

We  place  the  fifty  flasks,  with  their  necks  open,
over  a  kitchen  stove,  in  a  temperature  varying  from
50°  to  90°  Fahr.,  and  in  three  days  find  twenty-one  out
of  the  twenty-three  flasks  opened  on  the  hayloft  invaded
by  organisms— two  only  of  the  group  remaining  free
from  them.  After  three  weeks'  exposure  to  precisely
the  same  conditions,  not  one  of  the  twenty -seven  flasks
opened  in  free  uir  had  given  way.  No  germ  from  the
kitchen  air  had  ascended  the  narrow  necks,  the  flasks
being  shaped  so  as  to  avoid  this  contingency.  They
are  still  in  the  Alps,  as  clear,  I  doubt  not,  and  as^  free
from  life  as  they  were  when  sent  off  from  London.1

What  is  my  colleague's  conclusion  from  the  experi-
ment before  us?    Twenty-seven  putrescible  infusions,
first  in  vacuo,  and  afterwards  supplied  with  the  most
invigorating  air,  have  shown  no  sign  of  putrefaction
or  of  life.    And  as  to  the  others,  I  almost  shrink  from
asking  him  whether  the  hayloft  has  rendered  them
spontaneously  generative.     Is  not  the  inference  here
imperative  that  it  is  not  the  air  of  the  loft— which  is
connected  through  a  constantly  open  door  with  the
general  atmosphere— but  something  contained  in  the

•  An  actual  experiment  made  at  the  Bel  Alp  is  here  described.


296


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIB.


air,  that  has  produced  the  effects  observed  ?  What  is
this  something  ?  A  sunbeam  entering  through  a  chink
in  the  roof  or  wall,  and  traversing  the  air  of  the  loft,
would  show  it  to  be  laden  with  suspended  dust  particles.
Indeed  the  dust  is  distinctly  visible  in  the  diffused  day-
light. Can  it  have  been  the  origin  of  the  observed  life  ?
If  so,  are  we  not  bound  by  all  antecedent  experience  to
regard  these  fruitful  particles  as  the  germs  of  the  life
observed  ?

The  name  of  Baron  Liebig  has  been  constantly
mixed  up  with  these  discussions.  « We  have,'  it  is  said,
'  his  authority  for  assuming  that  dead  decaying  matter
can  produce  fermentation.'  True,  but  with.  Liebig
fermentation  was  by  no  means  synonymous  with  life.
It  meant,  according  to  him,  the  shaking  asunder  by
chemical  disturbance  of  unstable  molecules.  Does  the
life  of  our  flasks,  then,  proceed  from  dead  particles  ?
If  my  co-inquirer  should  reply  '  Yes,'  then  I  would  ask
him,  '  What  warrant  does  Nature  offer  for  such  an
assumption?  Where,  amid  the  multitude  of  vital
phenomena  in  which  her  operations  have  been  clearly
traced,  is  the  slightest  countenance  given  to  the  notion
that  the  sowing  of  dead  particles  can  produce  a  living
crop  ? '  With  regard  to  Baron  Liebig,  had  he  studied
the  revelations  of  the  microscope  in  relation  to  these
questions,  a  mind  so  penetrating  could  never  have
missed  the  significance  of  the  facts  revealed.  He,  how-
ever, neglected  the  microscope,  and  fell  into  error — but
not  into  error  so  gross  as  that  in  support  of  which  his
authority  has  been  invoked.  Were  he  now  alive,  he
would,  I  doubt  not,  repudiate  the  use  often  made  of  his
name — Liebig's  view  of  fermentation  was  at  least  a
scientific  one,  founded  on  profound  conceptions  of
molecular  instability.  But  this  view  by  no  means
involves  the  notion  that  the  planting  of  dead  particles


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.


297


— <  Stickstoffsplittern,'  as  Colin  contemptuously  calls
them— is  followed  by  the  sprouting  of  infusorial  life.

Let  us  now  return  to  London  and  fix  our  attention
on  the  dust  of  its  air.  Suppose  a  room  in  which  the
housemaid  has  just  finished  her  work  to  be  completely
closed,  with  the  exception  of  an  aperture  in  a  shutter
through  which  a  sunbeam  enters  and  crosses  the  room.
The  floating  dust  reveals  the  track  of  the  light.  Let
a  lens  be  placed  in  the  aperture  to  condense  the  beam.
Its  parallel  rays  are  now  converged  to  a  cone,  at  the
apex  of  which  the  dust  is  raised  to  almost  unbroken
whiteness  by  the  intensity  of  its  illumination.  Defended
from  all  glare,  the  eye  is  peculiarly  sensitive  to  this
scattered  light.  The  floating  dust  of  London  rooms  is
organic,  and  may  be  burned  without  leaving  visible
residue.  The  action  of  a  spirit-lamp  flame  upon  the
floating  matter  has  been  elsewhere  thus  described  : —

In  a  cylindrical  beam  which  strongly  illuminated  the
dust  of  our  laboratory,  I  placed  an  ignited  spirit  lamp.
Mingling  with  the  flame,  and  round  its  rim,  were  seen
curious  wreaths  of  darkness  resembling  an  intensely  black
smoke.  On  placing  the  flame  at  some  distance  below  the
beam,  the  same  dark  masses  stormed  upwards.  They  were
blacker  than  the  blackest  smoke  ever  seen  issuing  from  the
funnel  of  a  steamer ;  and  their  resemblance  to  smoke  was
so  perfect  as  to  prompt  the  conclusion  that  the  apparently
pure  flame  of  the  alcohol-lamp  required  but  a  beam  of
sufficient  intensity  to  reveal  its  clouds  of  liberated  carbon.

But  is  the  blackness  smoke  1  This  question  presented
itself  in  a  moment,  and  was  thus  answered :  A  red-hot
poker  was  placed  underneath  the  beam ;  from  it  the  black
wreaths  also  ascended.  A  large  hydrogen  flame,  which
emits  no  smoke,  was  next  employed,  and  it  also  produced
with  augmented  copiousness  those  whirling  masses  of  dark-
ness.   Smoke  being  out  of  the  question,  what  is  the  black-


298


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


ness?  It  is  simply  that  of  stellar  space;  that  is  to  say,
blackness  resulting  from  the  absence  from  the  track  of  the
beam  of  all  matter  competent  to  scatter  its  light.  When
the  flame  was  placed  below  the  beam,  the  floating  matter
was  destroyed  in  situ;  and  the  heated  air,  freed  from  this
matter,  rose  into  the  beam,  jostled  aside  the  illuminated
particles,  and  substituted  for  their  light  the  darkness  due  to
its  own  perfect  transparency.  Nothing  could  more  forcibly
illustrate  the  invisibility  of  the  agent  which  renders  all
things  visible.  The  beam  crossed,  unseen,  the  black  chasm
formed  by  the  transparent  air,  while,  at  both  sides  of  the
gap,  the  thick-strewn  particles  shone  out  like  a  luminous
solid  under  the  powerful  illumination.1

Supposing  an  infusion  intrinsically  barren,  but
readily  susceptible  of  putrefaction  when  exposed  to
common  air,  to  be  brought  into  contact  with  this  un-
illuminable  air,  what  would  be  the  result  ?  It  would
never  putrefy.  It  might,  however,  be  urged  that  the
air  is  spoiled  by  its  violent  calcination.  Oxygen  passed
through  a  spirit-lamp  flame  is,  it  may  be  thought,  no
longer  the  oxygen  suitable  for  the  development  and
maintenance  of  life.  We  have  an  easy  escape  from  this
difficulty,  which  is  based,  however,  upon  the  unproved
assumption  that  the  air  has  been  affected  by  the  flame.
Let  a  condensed  beam  be  sent  through  a  large  flask  or
bolthead  containing  common  air.  The  track  of  the
beam  is  seen  within  the  flask— the  dust  revealing  the
light,  and  the  light  revealing  the  dust.  Cork  the  flask,
stuff  its  neck  with  cotton-wool,  or  simply  turn  it  mouth
downwards  and  leave  it  undisturbed  for  a  day  or  two.
Examined  afterwards  with  the  luminous  beam,  no  track
is  visible ;  the  light  passes  through  the  flask  as  through
a  vacuum.  The  floating  matter  has  abolished  itself,
beinff  now  attached  to  the  interior  surface  of  the  flask.

1  See  pp.  3  and  4  of  this  volume.  ,


SPONTANEOUS  GENEKATION.


299


Were  it  our  object,  as  it  will  be  subsequently,  to  effec-
tually detain  tbe  dirt,  we  might  coat  that  surface  with
some  sticky  substance.,  Here,  then,  without  <  torturing '
the  air  in  any  way,  we  have  found  a  means  of  ridding


Fig.  24.


it,  or  rather  of  enabling  it  to  rid  itself,  of  floating
matter.

We  have  now  to  devise  a  means  of  testing  the  action
of  such  spontaneously  purified  air  upon  putrescible
infusions.    Wooden  chambers,  or  cases,  are  accordingly


300        THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


constructed,  having  glass  fronts,  side-windows,  and
back-doors.  Through  the  bottoms  of  the  chambers
test-tubes  pass  air-tight ;  their  open  ends,  for  about
one-fifth  of  the  length  of  the  tubes,  being  within  the
chambers.  Provision  is  made  for  a  free  connexion
through  sinuous  channels  between  the  inner  and  the
outer  air.  Through  such  channels,  though  open,  no
dust  will  reach  the  chamber.  The  top  of  each  chamber
is  perforated  by  a  circular  hole  two  inches  in  diameter,
closed  air-tight  by  a  sheet  of  india-rubber.  This  is
pierced  in  the  middle  by  a  pin,  and  through  the  pin-
hole is  pushed  the  shank  of  a  long  pipette,  ending
above  in  a  small  funnel.  The  shank  also  passes  through
a  stuffing-box  of  cotton-wool  moistened  with  glycerine  ;
so  that,  tightly  clasped  by  the  rubber  and  wool,  the
pipette  is  not  likely  in  its  motions  up  and  down  to  carry
any  dust  into  the  chamber.  The  annexed  woodcut  (fig.  24)
shows  a  chamber,  with  six  test-tubes,  its  side-windows
iv  w,  its  pipette  p  c,  and  its  sinuous  channels  a  b  which
connect  the  air  of  the  chamber  with  the  outer  air.

The  chamber  is  carefully  closed  and  permitted  to
remain  quiet  for  two  or  three  days.  Examined  at  the
beginning  by  a  beam  sent  through  its  windows,  the  air
is  found  laden  with  floating  matter,  which  in  three
days  has  wholly  disappeared.  To  prevent  its  ever
rising  again,  the  internal  surface  of  the  chamber  was
at  the  outset  coated  with  glycerine.  The  fresh  but
putrescible  liquid  is  introduced  into  the  six  tubes  in
succession  by  means  of  the  pipette.  Permitted  to
remain  without  further  precaution,  every  one  of  the
tubes  would  putrefy  and  fill  itself  with  life.  The  liquid
has  been  in  contact  with  the  dust-laden  air  outside  by
which  it  has  been  infected,  and  the  infection  must  be
destroyed.  This  is  done  by  plunging  the  six  tubes  into
a  bath  of  heated  oil  and  boiling  the  infusion.   The  time


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.


301


requisite  to  destroy  the  infection  depends  wholly  upon
its  nature.  Two  minutes'  boiling  suffices  to  destroy  some
contagia,  whereas  two  hundred  minutes'  boiling  fails  to
destroy  others.  After  the  infusion  has  been  sterilized,
the  oil-bath  is  withdrawn,  and  the  liquid,  whose  putre-
scibility  has  been  in  no  way  affected  by  the  boiling,  is
abandoned  to  the  air  of  the  chamber.

With,  such  chambers  I  tested,  in  the  autumn  and
winter  of  1875-6,  infusions  of  the  most  various  kinds,
embracing  natural  animal  liquids,  the  flesh  and  viscera
of  domestic  animals,  game,  fish,  and  vegetables.  More
than  fifty  chambers,  each  with  its  series  of  infusions,
were  tested,  many  of  them  repeatedly.  There  was  no
shade  of  uncertainty  in  any  of  the  results.  In  every
instance  we  had,  within  the  chamber,  perfect  limpidity
and  sweetness,  which  in  some-  cases  lasted  for  more  than
a  year — without  the  chamber,  with  the  same  infusion,
putridity  and  its  characteristic  smells.  In  no  instance
was  the  least  countenance  lent  to  the  notion  that  an
infusion  deprived  by  heat  of  its  inherent  life,  and  placed
in  contact  with  air  cleansed  of  its  visibly  suspended
matter,  has  any  power  to  generate  life  anew.

Eemembering  then  the  number  and  variety  of  the
infusions  employed,  and  the  strictness  of  our  adherence
to  the  rules  of  preparation  laid  down  by  the  hetero-
genists  themselves  ;  remembering  that  we  have  operated
upon  the  very  substances  recommended  by  them  as
capable  of  furnishing,  even  in  untrained  hands,  easy  and
decisive  proofs  of  spontaneous  generation,  and  that  we
have  added  to  their  substances  many  others  of  our  own
— if  this  pretended  generative  power  were  a  reality,
surely  it  must  have  manifested  itself  somewhere.
Speaking  roundly,  I  should  say  that  in  such  closed
chambers  at  least  five  hundred  chances  have  been  given
to  it,  but  it  has  nowhere  appeared.


302


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


The  argument  is  now  to  be  clenched  by  an  experi-
ment which  will  remove  every  residue  of  doubt  as  to  the
ability  of  the  infusions  here  employed  to  sustain  life.  We
open  the  back  doors  of  our  sealed  chambers,  and  permit
the  common  air  with  its  floating  particles  to  have  access
to  our  tubes.  For  three  months  they  have  remained
pellucid  and  sweet — flesh,  fish,  and  vegetable  extracts
purer  than  ever  cook  manufactured.  Three  days'
exposure  to  the  dusty  air  suffices  to  render  them
muddy,  fetid,  and  swarming  with  infusorial  life.  The
liquids  are  thus  proved,  one  and  all,  ready  for  putre-
faction when  the  contaminating  agent  is  applied.  I
invite  my  colleague  to  reflect  on  these  facts.  How  will
he  account  for  the  absolute  immunity  of  a  liquid
exposed  for  months  in  a  warm  room  to  optically  pure
air,  and  its  infallible  putrefaction  in  a  few  days  when
exposed  to  dust-laden  air  ?  He  must,  I  submit,  bow
to  the  conclusion  that  the  dust-particles  are  the  cause
of  putrefactive  life.  And  unless  he  accepts  the  hypo-
thesis that  these  particles,  being  dead  in  the  air,  are
in  the  liquid  miraculously  kindled  into  living  things,
he  must  conclude  that  the  life  we  have  observed  springs
from  germs  or  organisms  diffused  through  the  atmo-
sphere.

The  experiments  with  hermetically-sealed  flasks
have  reached  the  number  of  940.  A  sample  group  of
130  of  them  were  laid  before  the  Koyal  Society  on
January  13,  1876.  They  were  utterly  free  from  life,
having  been  completely  sterilized  by  three  minutes'
boiling.  Special  care  had  been  taken  that  the  tempe-
ratures to  which  the  flasks  were  exposed  should  include
those  previously  alleged  to  be  efficient.  The  conditions
laid  down  by  the  heterogenist  were  accurately  copied,
but  there  was  no  corroboration  of  his  results.  Stress
was  then  laid  on  the  question  of  warmth,  thirty  degrees


*


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.  303

being  suddenly  added  to  the  temperatures  with  which
both  of  us  had  previously  worked.  Waiving  all  protest
against  the  caprice  thus  manifested,  I  met  this  new
requirement  also.  The  sealed  tubes,  which  had  proved
barren  in  the  Royal  Institution,  were  suspended  in  per-
forated boxes,  and  placed  under  the  supervision  of  an
intelligent  assistant  in  the  Turkish  Bath  in  Jermyn
Street.  From  two  to  six  days  had  been  allowed  for
the  generation  of  organisms  in  hermetically-sealed
tubes.  Mine  remained  in  the  washing-room  of  the
bath  for  nine  days.  Thermometers  placed  in  the  boxes,
and  read  off  twice  or  three  times  a  day,  showed  the
temperature  to  vary  from  a  minimum  of  101°  to  a
maximum  of  112''  Fahr.  At  the  end  of  nine  days  the
infusions  were  as  clear  as  at  the  beginning.  They
were  then  removed  to  a  warmer  position.  A  tempera-
ture of  1 1 5°  had  been  mentioned  as  particularly  favour-
able to  spontaneous  generation.  For  fourteen  days
the  temperature  of  the  Turkish  Bath  hovered  about
this  point,  falling  once  as  low  as  106°,  reaching  116°
on  three  occasions,  118°  on  one,  and  119°  on  two.  The
result  was  quite  the  same  as  that  just  recorded.  The
higher  temperatures  proved  perfectly  incompetent  to
develope  life.

Taking  the  actual  experiment  we  have  made  as  a
basis  of  calculation,  if  our  940  flasks  were  opened  on
the  hayloft  of  the  Bel  Alp,  858  of  them  would  become
filled  with  organisms.  The  escape  of  the  remaining  82
strengthens  our  case,  proving  as  it  does  conclusively
that  not  in  the  air,  nor  in  the  infusions,  nor  in  anything
continuous  diffused  through  the  air,  but  in  discrete
particles,  suspended  in  the  air  and  nourished  by  the
infusions,  we  are  to  seek  the  cause  of  life.  Our  experi-
ment proves  these  particles  to  be  in  some  cases  so  far
apart  on  the  hayloft  as  to  permit  10  per  cent,  of  our


304         THE  FLOATING -MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


flasks  to  take  in  air  without  contracting  contamination.
A  quarter  of  a  century  ago  Pasteur  proved  the  cause  of
'  so-called  spontaneous  generation '  to  be  discontinuous.
I  have  already  referred  to  his  observation  that  12  out
of  20  flasks  opened  on  the  plains  escaped  infection,
while  19  out  of  20  flasks  opened  on  the  Mer  de  Grlace
escaped.  Our  own  experiment  at  the  Bel  Alp  is  a
more  emphatic  instance  of  the  same  kind,  90  per  cent,
of  the  flasks  opened  in  the  hay] oft  being  smitten,  while
not  one  of  those  opened  on  the  free  mountain  ledge  was
attacked.

The  power  of  the  air  as  regards  putrefactive  infec-
tion is  incessantly  changing  through  natural  causes,  and
we  are  able  to  alter  it  at  will.  Of  a  number  of  flasks
opened  in  1876  in  the  laboratory  of  the  Royal  Institu-
tion, 42  per  cent,  were  smitten,  while  58  per  cent,  es-
caped. In  1877  the  proportion  in  the  same  laboratory
was  68  per  cent,  smitten,  to  32  intact.  The  greater
mortality,  so  to  speak,  of  the  infusions  in  1877  was  due
to  the  presence  of  hay  which  diffused  its  germinal  dust
in  the  laboratory  air,  causing  it  to  approximate  as  re-
gards infective  virulence  to  the  air  of  the  Alpine  loft.
I  would  ask  my  friend  to  bring  his  scientific  penetration
to  bear  upon  all  the  foregoing  facts.  They  do  not
prove  spontaneous  generation  to  be  <  impossible.'  My
assertions,  however,  relate  not  to  '  possibilities,'  but  to
proofs,  and  the  experiments  just  described  do  most
distinctly  prove  the- evidence  on  which  the  heterogenist
relies  to  be  written  on  waste  paper.

My  colleague  will  not,  I  am  persuaded,  dispute  these
results  ;  but  he  may  be  disposed  to  urge  that  other  able
and  honourable  men  working  at  the  same  subject  have
arrived  at  conclusions  different  from  mine.  Most  freely
granted  ;  but  let  me  here  recur  to  the  remarks  already
made  in  speaking  of  the  experiments  of  Spallanzam,


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.


305


to  the  effect  that  the  failure  of  others  to  confirm  his
results  by  no  means  upsets  their  evidence.  To  fix  the
ideas,  let  us  suppose  that  my  colleague  comes  to  the
laboratory  of  the  Eoyal  Institution,  repeats  there  my
experiments,  and  obtains  confirmatory  results ;  and
that  he  then  goes  to  University  or  King's  College,
where,  operating  with  the  same  infusions,  he  obtains
contradictory  results.  Will  he  be  disposed  to  conclude
that  the  selfsame  substance  is  barren  in .  Albemarle
Street  and  fruitful  in  Grower  Street  or  the  Strand  ?
His  Alpine  experience  has  already  made  known  to  him
the  literally  infinite  differences  existing  between  diffe-
rent samples  of  air  as  regards  their  capacity  for  putre-
factive infection.  And,  possessing  this  knowledge,  will
he  not  substitute  for  the  adventurous  conclusion  that
an  organic  infusion  is  barren  at  one  place  and  sponta-
neously generative  at  another,  the  more  rational  and
obvious  one  that  the  atmospheres  of  the  two  localities
which  have  had  access  to  the  infusion  are  infective  in
different  degrees  ?

As  regards  workmanship,  moreover,  he  will  not  fail
to  bear  in  mind,  that  fruitfulness  may  be  due  to  errors
of  manipulation,  while  barrenness  involves  the  pre-
sumption of  correct  experiment.  It  is  only  the  careful
worker  that  can  secure  the  latter,  while  it  is  open  to
every  novice  to  obtain  the  former.  Barrenness  is  the
result  at  which  the  conscientious  experimenter,  whatever
his  theoretic  convictions  may  be,  ought  to  aim,  omit-
ting no  pains  to  secure  it,  and  resorting,  only  when
there  is  no  escape  from  it,  to  the  conclusion  that  the
life  observed  comes  from  no  source  which  correct  experi-
ment could  neutralize  or  avoid.

Let  us  again  take  a  definite  case.  Supposing  my
colleague  to  operate  with  the  same  apparent  care  on
100  infusions— or  rather  on  100  samples  of  the  same

x


306


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


infusion— and  that  50  of  them  prove  fruitful  and  50
barren.  Are  we  to  say  that  the  evidence  for  and  against
heterogeny  is  equally  balanced  ?    There  are  some  who
would  not  only  say  this,  but  who  would  treasure  up  the
50  fruitful  flasks  as  'positive'  results,  and  lower  the
evidential  value  of  the  50  barren  flasks  by  labelling
them   'negative'   results.     This,   as  shown  by  Dr.
William  Eoberts,  is  an  exact  inversion  of  the  true  order
of  the  terms  positive  and  negative.1    Not  such,  I  trust,
would  be  the  course  pursued  by  my  friend.    As  regards
the  50  fruitful  flasks  he  would,  I  doubt  not,  repeat  the
experiment  with  redoubled  care  and  scrutiny,  and  not
by  one  repetition  only,  but  by  many,  assure  himself
that  he  had  not  fallen  into  error.    Such  faithful  scru-
tiny, fully  carried  out,  would  infallibly  lead  him  to  the
conclusion  that  here,  as  in  all  other  cases,  the  evidence
in  favour  of  spontaneous  generation  crumbles  in  the
grasp  of  the  competent  inquirer.

The  botanist  knows  that  different  seeds  possess
different  powers  of  resistance  to  heat.2  Some  are
killed  by  a  momentary  exposure  to  the  boiling  tem-
perature, while  others  withstand  it  for  several  hours.
Most  of  our  ordinary  seeds  are  rapidly  killed,  while
Pouchet  made  known  to  the  Paris  Academy  of  Sciences
in  1866,  that  certain  seeds,  which  had  been  transported
in  fleeces  of  wool  from  Brazil,  germinated  after  four
hours'  boiling.  The  germs  of  the  air  vary  as  much
among  themselves  as  the  seeds  of  the  botanist.  In
some  localities  the  diffused  germs  are  so  tender  that

»  See  his  truly  philosophical  remarks  on  this  head  in  the  British

Medical  Journal,  1876,  p.  282.  ^.a«mft
%  I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  Thiselton  Dyer  for  various  illustrations
of  such  diff  erences.  It  is,  however,  surprising  that  a  subject  of !raoh
high  scientific  importance  should  not  have  been  more  thoroughly
explored.  Here  the  scoundrels  who  deal  in  killed  seeds  might  be
able  to  add  to  our  knowledge.


SPONTANEOUS  GENEEATION.


307


boiling  for  five  minutes,  or  even  less,  would  be  sure  to
destroy  them  all ;  in  other  localities  the  diffused  germs
are  so  obstinate,  that  many  hours'  boiling  would  be
requisite  to  deprive  them  of  their  power  of  germina-
tion. The  absence  or  presence  of  a  truss  of  desiccated
hay  would  produce  differences  as  great  as  those  here
described.  The  greatest  endurance  that  I  have  ever
observed — and  I  believe  it  is  the  greatest  on  record —
was  a  case  of  survival  after  eight  hours'  boiling.

As  regards  their  power  of  resisting  heat,  the  in-
fusorial germs  of  our  atmosphere  might  be  classified
under  the  following  and  intermediate  heads : — Killed  in
five  minutes  ;  not  killed  in  five  minutes  but  killed  in
fifteen;  not  killed  in  fifteen  minutes  but  killed  in
thirty  ;  not  killed  in  thirty  minutes  but  killed  in  an
hour ;  not  killed  in  an  hour  but  killed  in  two  hours ;
not  killed  in  two  but  killed  in  three  hours ;  not.  killed
in  three  but  killed  in  four  hours.  I  have  had  several
cases  of  survival  after  four  and  five  hours'  boiling,  some
survivals  after  six,  and  one  after  eight  hours'  boiling.
Thus  far  has  experiment  actually  reached ;  but  there  is
no  valid  warrant  for  fixing  upon  even  eight  hours  as
the  extreme  limit  of  vital  resistance.  Probably  more
extended  researches  (though  mine  have  been  very  exten-
sive) would  reveal  germs  more  obstinate  still.  It  is
also  certain  that  we  might  begin  earlier,  and  find  germs
which  are  destroyed  by  a  temperature  far  below  that  of
boiling  water.  In  the  presence  of  such  facts,  to  speak
of  a  death-point  of  bacteria  and  their  germs  would  be
unmeaning — but  of  this  more  anon.

'  What  present  warrant,'  it  has  been  asked,  '  is  there
for  supposing  that  a  naked,  or  almost  naked,  speck  of
protoplasm  can  withstand  four,  six,  or  ■  eight  hours'
boiling  ? '  Kegarding  naked  specks  of  protoplasm  I
make  no  assertion.    I  know  nothing  about  them,  save

x  2


308         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AI14.


as  the  creatures  of  fancy.  But  I  do  affirm,  not  as  a
'  supposition,'  nor  an  '  assumption,'  nor  a  '  probable
guess,'  nor  as  '  a  wild  hypothesis,'  but  as  a  matter  of
the  most  undoubted  fact,  that  the  spores  of  the  hay
bacillus,  when  thoroughly  desiccated  by  age,  have
withstood  the  ordeal  mentioned.^  And  I  further  affirm
that  these  obdurate  germs,  under  the  guidance  of  the
knowledge  that  they  are  germs,  can  be  destroyed  by
five  minutes'  boiling,  or  even  less.  This  needs  explana-
tion. The  finished  bacterium  perishes  at  a  temperature
far  below  that  of  boiling  water,  and  it  is  fair  to  assume
that  the  nearer  the  germ  is  to  its  final  sensitive  condi-
tion the  more  readily  will  it  succumb  to  heat.  Seeds
soften  before  and  during  germination.  This  premised,
the  simple  description  of  the  following  process  will
suffice  to  make  its  meaning  understood.

An  infusion  infected  with  the  most  powerfully  re-
sistent  germs,  but  otherwise  protected  against  the
floating  matters  of  the  air,  is  gradually  raised  to  its
boiling-point.  Such  germs  as  have  reached  the  soft
and  plastic  state  immediately  preceding  their  develop-
ment into  bacteria  are  thus  destroyed.  The  infusion  is
then  put  aside  in  a  warm  room  for  ten  or  twelve  hours.
If  for  twenty-four,  we  might  have  the  liquid  charged
with  well-developed  bacteria.  To  anticipate  this,  at
the  end  of  ten  or  twelve  hours  we  raise  the  infusion  a
second  time  to  the  boiling  temperature,  which,  as
before,  destroys  all  germs  then  approaching  their  point
of  final  development.  The  infusion  is  again  put  aside
for  ten  or  twelve  hours,  and  the  process  of  heating  is
repeated.  We  thus  kill  the  germs  in  the  order  of
their  resistance,  and  finally  kill  the  last  of  them.  No
infusion  can  withstand  this  process  if  it  be  repeated  a
sufficient  number  of  times.  Artichoke,  cucumber,  and
turnip  infusions,  which  had  proved  specially  obstinate


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.


309


when  infected  with  the  germs  of  desiccated  hay,  were
completely  hroken  down  by  this  method  of  discontinuous
heating,  three  minutes  being  found  sufficient  to  accom-
plish what  three  hundred  minutes'  continuous  boiling-
failed  to  accomplish.  I  applied  the  method,  moreover,
to  infusions  of  various  kinds  of  hay,  including  those
most  tenacious  of  life.  Not  one  of  them  bore  the
ordeal.  These  results  were  clearly  foreseen  before  they
were  realized,  so  that  the  germ  theory  fulfils  the  test
of  every  true  theory,  that  test  being  the  power  of
prevision.

When  '  naked  or  almost  naked  specks  of  protoplasm  '
are  spoken  of,  the  imagination  is  drawn  upon,  not  the
objective  truth  of  Nature.  Such  words  sound  like  the
words  of  knowledge  where  knowledge  is  really  nil.  The
possibility  of  a  '  thin  covering '  is  conceded  by  those
who  speak  in  this  way.  Such  a  covering  may,  however,
exercise  a  powerful  protective  influence.  A  thin  pellicle
of  india-rubber,  for  example,  surrounding  a  pea  keeps
it  hard  in  boiling  water  for  a  time  sufficient  to
reduce  an  uncovered  pea  to  a  pulp.  The  pellicle  pre-
vents imbibition,  diffusion,  and  the  consequent  dis-
integration. A  greasy  or  oily  surface,  or  even  the  layer
of  air  which  clings  to  certain  bodies,  would  act  to  some
extent  in  a  similar  way.  '  The  singular  resistance  of
green  vegetables  to  sterilization,'  says  Dr.  William
Koberts,  '  appears  to  be  due  to  some  peculiarity  of  the
surface,  perhaps  their  smooth  glistening  epidermis
which  prevented  complete  wetting  of  their  surfaces.'
I  pointed  out  in  1876  that  the  process  by  which  an
atmospheric  germ  is  wetted  would  be  an  interesting
subject  of  investigation.  A  dry  microscope  covering-
glass  may  be  caused  to  float  on  water  for  a  year.  A
sewing-needle  may  be  similarly  kept  floating,  though
its  specific  gravity  is  nearly  eight  times  that  of  water.


310         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.

Were  it  not  for  some  specific  relation  between  the
matter  of  the  germ  and  that  of  the  liquid  into  which
it  falls,  wetting  would  be  simply  impossible.  Antece-
dent to  all  development  there  must  be  an  interchange
of  matter  between  the  germ  and  its  environment ;
and  this  interchange  must  obviously  depend  upon  the
relation  of  the  germ  to  its  encompassing  liquid.  Any-
thing that  hinders  this  interchange  retards  the  de-
struction of  the  germ  in  boiling  water.  In  my  paper,
published  in  the  '  Philosophical  Transactions'  for  1877,
I  add  the  following  remark : —

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  the  surface  of  a  seed  or  germ
may  be  so  affected  by  desiccation  and  other  causes  as  practi-
cally to  prevent  contact  between  it  and  the  surrounding
liquid.  The  body  of  a  germ,  moreover,  may  be  so  indm*ated
by  time  and  dryness  as  to  resist  powerfully  the  insinuation
of  water  between  its  constituent  molecules.  It  would  be
difficult  to  cause  such  a  germ  to  imbibe  the  moisture  neces-
sary to  produce  the  swelling  and  softening  which  precede  its
destruction  in  a  liquid  of  high  temperature.

However  this  may  be — whatever  be  the  state  of  the
surface,  or  of  the  body,  of  the  spores  of  Bacillus  svMilis,
they  do  as  a  matter  of  certainty  resist,  under  some
circumstances,  exposure  for  hours  to  the  heat  of  boiling
water.  No  theoretic  scepticism  can  successfully  stand
in  the  way  of  this  fact,  established  as  it  has  been  by
hundreds— nay  thousands,  of  rigidly  conducted  expe-
riments.

We  have  now  to  test  one  of  the  principal  founda-
tions of  the  doctrine  of  spontaneous  generation  as
formulated  in  this  country.  With  this  view,  I  place
before  my  friend  and  co-inquirer  two  liquids  which
have  been  kept  for  six  months  in  one  of  our  sealed
chambers,  exposed  to  optically  pure  air.    The  one  is  a


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.


311


mineral  solution  containing  in  proper  proportions  all
the  substances  which  enter  into  the  composition  of
bacteria,  the  other  is  an  infusion  of  turnip— it  might
be  any  one  of  a  hundred  other  infusions,  animal  or
vegetable.    Both  liquids  are  as  clear  as  distilled  water,
and  there  is  no  trace  of  life  in  either  of  them.  They
are,  in  fact,  completely  sterilized.    A  mutton-chop,  over
which  a  little  water  has  been  poured  to  keep  its  juices
from  drying  up,  has  lain  for  three  days  upon  a  plate  m
our  warm  room.    It  smells  offensively.    Placing  a  drop
of  the  fetid  mutton-juice  under  a  microscope,  it  is  found
swarming  with  .the  bacteria  of  putrefaction.    With  a
speck  of  the  swarming  liquid  I  inoculate  the  clear
mineral  solution  and  the  clear  turnip  infusion,  as  a
surgeon  might  inoculate  an  infant  with  vaccine  lymph.
In  four-and-twenty  hours  the  transparent  liquids  have
become  turbid  throughout,  and  instead  of  being  barren
as  at  first,  they  are  teeming  with  life.    The  experiment
may  be  repeated  a  thousand  times  with  the  same
invariable  result.    To  the  naked  eye  the  liquids  at  the
beginning  were  alike,  being  both  equally  transparent—
to  the  naked  eye  tbey  are  alike  at  the  end,  being  both
equally  muddy.     Instead  of  putrid  mutton-juice,  we
might  take  as  a  source  of  infection  any  one  of  a
hundred  other  putrid  liquids,  animal  or  vegetable.  So
long  as  the  liquid  contains  living  bacteria,  a  speck  of  it
communicated  either  to  the  clear  mineral  solution,  or  to
the  clear  turnip  infusion,  produces  in  twenty-four  hours
the  effect  here  described.

We  now  vary  the  experiment  thus  -.—Opening  the
back-door  of  another  closed  chamber  which  has  con-
tained for  months  the  pure  mineral  solution  and  the
pure  turnip  infusion  side  by  side,  I  drop  into  each  of
them  a  small  pinch  of  laboratory  dust.  The  effect  here
is  tardier  than  when  the  speck  of  putrid  liquid  was


312


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


employed.  In  three  days,  however,  after  its  infection
with  the  dust,  the  turnip  infusion  is  muddy,  and  swarm-
ing as  before  with  bacteria.  But  what  about  the  mineral
solution  which,  in  our  first  experiment,  behaved  in  a
manner  undistinguishable  from  the  turnip-juice?  At
the  end  of  three  days  there  is  not  a  bacterium  to  be
found  in  it.  At  the  end  of  three  weeks  it  is  equally
innocent  of  bacterial  life.  We  may  repeat  the  experi-
ment with  the  solution  and  the  infusion  a  hundred
times  with  the  same  invariable  result.  Always  in  the
case  of  the  latter  the  sowing  of  the  atmospheric  dust
yields  a  crop  of  bacteria — never  in  the  former  does  the
dry  germinal  matter  kindle  into  active  life.1  What
is  the  inference  which  the  reflecting  mind  must  draw
from  this  experiment  ?  Is  it  not  as  clear  as  day  that
while  both  liquids  are  able  to  feed  the  bacteria  and  to
enable  them  to  increase  and  multiply,  after  they  have
been  once  fully  developed,  only  one  of  the  liquids  is
able  to  develope  into  active  bacteria  the  germinal  dust
of  the  air  ?

I  invite  my  friend  to  reflect  upon  this  conclusion ;
he  will,  I  think,  see  that  there  is  no  escape  from  it.
He  may,  if  he  prefers,  hold  the  opinion,  which  I
consider  erroneous,  that  bacteria  exist  in  the  air,  not
as  germs  but  as  desiccated  organisms.  The  inference
remains,  that  while  the  one  liquid  is  able  to  force  the
passage  from  the  inactive  to  the  active  state,  the  other
is  not.

But  this  is  not  at  all  the  inference  which  has  been
drawn  from  experiments  with  the  mineral  solution.
Seeing  its  ability  to  nourish  bacteria  when  once  inocu-
lated with  the  living  active  organism,  and  observing

1  This  is  the  deportment  of  the  mineral  solution  as  described  by
others.  My  own  experiments  would  lead  me  to  say  that  the  de-
velopment of  the  bacteria,  though  exceedingly  slow  and  difficult,  is
not  impossible.


SPONTANEOUS  GENEEATION.


313


that  no  bacteria  appeared  in  the  solution  after  long
exposure  to  the  air,  the  inference  was  drawn  that  neither
bacteria  nor  their  germs  existed  in  the  air.  Through-
out Germany  the  ablest  literature  of  the  subject,  even
that  opposed  to  heterogeny,  is  infected  with  this  error  ;
while  heterogenists  at  home  and  abroad  have  based  upon
it  a  triumphant  demonstration  of  their  doctrine.  It  is
proved,  they  say,  by  the  deportment  of  the  mineral
solution  that  neither  bacteria  nor  their  germs  exist  in
the  air;  hence,  if,  on  exposing  a  thoroughly  sterilized
turnip  infusion  to  the  air,  bacteria  appear,  they  must  of
necessity  have  been  spontaneously  generated.  In  the
words  of  Dr.  Bastian :  '  We  can  only  infer  that  whilst
the  boiled  saline  solution  is  quite  incapable  of  engen-
dering bacteria,  such  organisms  are  able  to  arise  de  novo
in  the  boiled  organic  infusion.' 1

I  would  ask  my  eminent  colleague  what  he  thinks
of  this  reasoning  now?  The  datum  is — 'A  mineral
solution  exposed  to  common  air  does  not  develope
bacteria;'  the  inference  is— ' Therefore  if  a  turnip
infusion  similarly  exposed  develope  bacteria,  they  must
be  spontaneously  generated.'  The  inference,  on  the  face
of  it,  is  an  unwarranted  one.  But  while  as  matter  of
logic  it  is  inconclusive,  as  matter  of  fact  it  is  chimerical.
London  air  is  as  surely  charged  with  the  germs  of
bacteria  as  London  chimneys  are  with  smoke.  The
inference  just  referred  to  is  completely  disposed  of
by  the  simple  question:  'Why,  when  your  sterilized
organic  infusion  is  exposed  to  optically  pure  air,  should
this  generation  of  life  de  novo  utterly  cease  ?  Why
should  I  be  able  to  preserve  my  turnip-juice  side  by
side  with  your  saline  solution  for  the  three  hundred  and
sixty-five  days  of  the  year,  in  free  connexion  with  the
general  atmosphere,  on  the  sole  condition  that  the
'Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society,  vol.  xxi.  p.  130.


314


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIE.


portion  of  that  atmosphere  in  contact  with  the  juice
shall  be  visibly  free  from  floating  dust,  while  three  days'
exposure  to  that  dust  fills  it  with  bacteria  ? '  Am  I
over-sanguine  in  hoping  that  as  regards  the  argument
here  set  forth  he  who  runs  may  read,  and  he  who  reads
may  understand  ?

We  now  proceed  to  the  calm  and  thorough  con-
sideration of  another  subject,  more  important  if  pos-
sible than  the  foregoing  one,  but  like  it  somewhat
difficult  to  seize  by  reason  of  the  very  opulence  of  the
phraseology,  logical  and  rhetorical,  in  which  it  has  been
set  forth.  The  subject  now  to  be  considered  relates  to
what  has  been  called  '  the  death-point  of  bacteria.'
Those  who  happen  to  be  acquainted  with  the  modern
English  literature  of  the  question  will  remember  how
challenge  after  challenge  has  been  issued  to  pansperm-
atists  in  general,  and  to  one  or  two  home  workers  in
particular,  to  come  to  close  quarters  on  this  cardinal
point.  It  is  obviously  the  stronghold  of  the  English
heterogenist.  '  Water,'  he  says,  '  is  boiling  merrily
over  a  fire  when  some  luckless  person  upsets  the  vessel
so  that  the  heated  fluid  exercises  its  scathing  influence
upon  an  uncovered  portion  of  the  body — hand,  arm,  or
face.  Here,  at  all  events,  there  is  no  room  for  doubt.
Boiling  water  unquestionably  exercises  a  most  per-
nicious and  rapidly  destructive  effect  upon  the  living-
matter  of  which  we  are  composed.' 1  And  lest  it  should
be  supposed  that  it  is  the  high  organization  which,
in  this  case,  renders  the  body  susceptible  to  heat,  he
refers  to  the  action  of  boiling  water  on  the  hen's  egg-
to  dissipate  the  notion.  '  The  conclusion,'  he  says,
'  would  seem  to  force  itself  upon  us  that  there  is
something  intrinsically  deleterious  in  the  action  of
boiling  water  upon  living  matter — whether  this  matter
be  of  high  or  of  low  organisation.' 2  Again,  at  another
1  Bastian,  '  Evolution,'  p.  133.  2  Ibid.  p.  135.


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.


place :  '  It  has  been  shown  that  the  briefest  exposure
to  the  influence  of  boiling  water  is  destructive  of  all

living-  matter.' 1

The  experiments  already  recorded  plainly  show  that
there  is  a  marked  difference  between  the  dry  bacterial
matter  of  the  air,  and  the  wet,  soft,  and  active  bacteria
of  putrefying  organic  liquids.    The  one  can  be  luxu-
riantly bred  in  the  saline  solution,  the  others  refuse  to
be  born  there,  while  both  of  them  are  copiously  de-
veloped in  a  sterilized  turnip  infusion.    Inferences,  as
we  have  already  seen,  founded  on  the  deportment^  of
the  one  liquid  cannot  with  the  warrant  of  scientific
logic  be  extended  to  the  other.    But  this  is  exactly  what
the  heterogenist  has  done,  thus  repeating  as  regards
the  death-point  of  bacteria  the  error  into  which  he
fell  concerning  the  germs  of  the  air.    Let  us  boil  our
muddy  mineral  solution  with  its  swarming  bacteria  for
five  minutes.    In  the  soft  succulent  condition  in  which
they  exist  in  the  solution  not  one  of  them  escapes
destruction.    The  same  is  true  of  the  turnip  infusion
if  it  be  inoculated  with  the  living-  bacteria  only— the
aerial  dust  being  carefully  excluded.    In  both  cases  the
dead  organisms  sink  to  the  bottom  of  the  liquid,  and
without  re-inoculation  no  fresh  organisms  will  arise.
But  the  case  is  entirely  different  when  we  inoculate
our  turnip  infusion  with  the  desiccated  germinal  matter
afloat  in  the  air.

The  'death-point'  of  bacteria  is  the  maximum
temperature  at  which  they  can  live,  or  the  minimum
temperature  at  which  they  cease  to  live.  If,  for  ex-
ample, they  survive  a  temperature  of  140°,  and  do  not
survive  a  temperature  of  150°,  the  death-point  lies
somewhere  between  these  two  temperatures.  Vaccine
lymph,  for  example,  is  proved  by  Messrs.  Braidwood
and  Vacher  to  be  deprived  of  its  power  of  infection  by
1  Bastian,  '  Evohition,'  p.  46.


316         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


brief  exposure  to  a  temperature  between  140°  and  150°
Fahr.  This  may  be  regarded  as  the  death-point  of  the
lymph,  or  rather  of  the  particles  diffused  in  the  lymph,
which  constitute  the  real  contagium.  If  no  time,  how-
ever, be  named  for  the  application  of  the  heat,  the  term
'  death-point '  is  a  vague  one.  An  infusion,  for  example,
which  will  resist  five  hours'  continuous  exposure  to  the
boiling  temperature,  will  succumb  to  five  days'  exposure
to  a  temperature  50°  Fahr.  below  that  of  boiling.  The
fully  developed  soft  bacteria  of  putrefying  liquids  are
not  only  killed  by  five  minutes'  boiling,  but  by  less
than  a  single  minute's  boiling — indeed,  they  are  slain
at  about  the  same  temperature  as  the  vaccine.  The
same  is  true  of  the  plastic,  active  bacteria  of  the  turnip
infusion.1

But,  instead  of  choosing  a  putrefying  liquid  for
inoculation,  let  us  prepare  and  employ  our  inoculating
substance  in  the  following  simple  way : — Let  a  small
wisp  of  hay,  desiccated  by  age,  be  washed  in  a  glass  of
water,  and  let  a  perfectly  sterilized  turnip  infusion  be
inoculated  with  the  washing  liquid.  After  three  hours'
continuous  boiling  the  infusion  thus  infected  will  often
develope  luxuriant  bacterial  life.  Precisely  the  same
occurs  if  a  turnip  infusion  be  prepared  in  an  atmosphere
well  charged  with  desiccated  hay-germs.  The  infusion
in  this  case  infects  itself  without  special  inoculation,
and  its  subsequent  resistance  to  sterilization  is  often
very  great.  On  the  1  st  of  March  last  I  purposely  in-
fected the  air  of  our  laboratory  with  the  germinal  dust
of  a  sapless  kind  of  hay  mown  in  1875.    Ten  groups

1  In  my  paper  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  for  1876,  I
pointed  out  and  illustrated  experimentally  the  difference,  as  regards
rapidity  of  development,  between  water -germs  and  air-germs  ;  the
growth  from  the  already  softened  water-germs  proving  to  be  prac-
tically as  rapid  as  from  developed  bacteria.  This  preparedness  of
the  germ  for  rapid  development  is  associated  with  its  preparedness
for  rapid  destruction.


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.


317


of  flasks  were  charged  with  turnip  infusion  prepared  in
the  infected  laboratory,  and  were  afterwards  subjected
to  the  boiling  temperature  for  periods  varying  from
15  minutes  to  240  minutes.    Out  of  the  ten  groups
only  one  was  sterilized— that,  namely,  which  had  been
boiled  for  four  hours.    Every  flask  of  the  nine  groups
which  had  been  boiled  for  15,  30,  45,  60,  75,  90,  105,
120,  and  180  minutes,  respectively,  bred  organisms
afterwards.    The  same  is  true  of  other  vegetable  in-
fusions.   On  the  28th  of  February  last,  for  example,  I
boiled  six  flasks,  containing  cucumber  infusion  prepared
in  an  infected  atmosphere,  for  periods  of  15,  30,  45,  60,
120,  and  180  minutes.    Every  flask  of  the  group  sub-
sequently developed  organisms.    On  the  same  day,  in
the  case  of  three  flasks,  the  boiling  was  prolonged  to
240,  300,  and  360  minutes ;  and  these  three  flasks  were
completely  sterilized.    Animal  infusions,  which  under
ordinary  circumstances  are  rendered  infallibly  barren
by  five  minutes'  boiling,  behave  like  the  vegetable  in-
fusions in  an  atmosphere  infected  with  hay-germs.  On
the  30th  of  March,  for  example,  five  flasks  were  charged
with  a  clear  infusion  of  beef  and  boiled  for  60  minutes,
120  minutes,  1 80  minutes,  240  minutes,  and  300  minutes
respectively.    Every  one  of  them  became  subsequently
crowded  with  organisms,  and  the  same  happened  to  a
perfectly  pellucid  mutton  infusion  prepared  at  the  same
time.    The  cases  are  to  be  numbered  by  hundreds  in
which  similar  powers  of  resistance  were  manifested  by
infusions  of  the  most  diverse  kinds.

In  the  presence  of  such  facts  I  would  ask  my
colleague  whether  it  is  necessary  to  dwell  for  a  single
instant  on  the  one-sidedness  of  the  evidence  which  led
to  the  conclusion  that  all  living  matter  has  its  life
destroyed  by  '  the  briefest  exposure  to  the  influence  of
boiling  water.'    An  infusion  proved  to  be  barren  by


318         THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


six  months'  exposure  to  moteless  air  maintained  at  a
temperature  of  90°  Fahr.,  when  inoculated  with  full-
grown  active  bacteria,  fills  itself  in  two  days  with
organisms  so  sensitive  as  to  be  killed  by  a  few  minutes'
exposure  to  a  temperature  much  below  that  of  boiling
water.  But  the  extension  of  this  result  to  the  desic-
cated germinal  matter  of  the  air  is  without  warrant  or
justification.  This  is  obvious  without  going  beyond
the  argument  itself.  But  we  have  gone  far  beyond  the
argument,  and  proved  by  multiplied  experiment  the
alleged  destruction  of  all  living  matter  by  the  briefest
exposure  to  the  influence  of  boiling  water  to  be  a  de-
lusion. The  whole  logical  edifice  raised  upon  this  basis
falls  therefore  to  the  ground ;  and  the  argument  that
bacteria  and  their  germs,  being  destroyed  at  140°,  must,
if  they  appear  after  exposure  to  212°,  be  spontaneously
generated,  is,  I  trust,  silenced  for  ever.

Through  the  precautions,  variations,  and  repetitions
observed  and  executed  with  the  view  of  rendering  its
results  secure,  the  separate  vessels  employed  in  this
inquiry  have  mounted  up  in  two  years  to  nearly  ten
thousand.

Besides  the  philosophic  interest  attaching  to  the
problem  of  life's  origin,  which  will  be  always  immense,
there  are  the  practical  interests  involved  in  the  appli-
cation of  the  doctrines  here  discussed  to  surgery  and
medicine.  The  antiseptic  system,  at  which  I  have
already  glanced,  illustrates  the  manner  in  which  bene-
ficent results  of  the  gravest  moment  follow  in  the  wake
of  clear  theoretic  insight.  Surgery  was  once  a  noble
art ;  it  is  now,  as  well,  a  noble  science.  Prior  to  the
introduction  of  the  antiseptic  system,  the  thoughtful
surgeon  could  not  have  failed  to  learn  empirically  that
there  was  something  in  the  air  which  often  defeated  the
most  consummate  operative  skill.    That  something  the


SPONTANEOUS  GENERATION.


319


antiseptic  treatment  destroys  or  renders  innocuous.  At
King's  College  Mr.  Lister  operates  and  dresses  while  a
fine  shower  of  mixed  carbolic  acid  and  water,  produced
in  the  simplest  manner,  falls  upon  the  wound,  the  lint
and  gauze  employed  in  the  subsequent  dressing  being
duly  saturated  with  the  antiseptic.  At  St.  Bartholomew's
Mr.  Callender  employs  the  dilute  carbolic  acid  without
the  spray  ;  but,  as  regards  the  real  point  aimed  at —
the  preventing  of  the  wound  from  becoming  a  nidus
for  the  propagation  of  septic  bacteria — the  practice  in
both  hospitals  is  the  same.  Commending  itself  as  it
does  to  the  scientifically  trained  mind,  the  antiseptic
system  has  struck  deep  root  in  Germany.

Had  space  allowed,  it  would  have  given  me  pleasure
to  point  out  the  present  position  of  the  '  germ  theory '
in  reference  to  the  phenomena  of  infectious  disease,
distinguishing  arguments  based   on  analogy — which,
however,  are  terribly  strong — from   those  based  on
actual  observation.    I  should  have  liked  to  follow  up
the  account  I  have  already  given  1  of  the  truly  excel-
lent researches  of  a  young  and  an  unknown  German
physician  named  Koch,  on  splenic  fever,  by  an  account
of  what  Pasteur  has  recently  done  with  reference  to  the
same  subject.    Here  we  have  before  us  a  living  con-
tagium  of  the  most  deadly  power,  which  we  can  follow
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  its  life  cycle.2  We
find  it  in  the  blood  or  spleen  of  a  smitten  animal  in
the  state  say  of  short  motionless  rods.    When  these
rods  are  placed  in  a  nutritive  liquid  on  the  warm  stage
of  the  microscope,  we  soon  see  them  lengthening  into
filaments  which  lie,  in  some  cases,  side  by  side,  forming

1  '  Fortnightly  Review,' November,  1876  ;  see  preceding  Article  on
'  Fermentation.'

2  Dallinger  and  Drysdale  had  previously  shown  what  skill  and
patience  can  accomplish,  by  their  admirable  observations  on  the  life
history  of  the  monads.


320


THE  FLOATING-MATTER  OF  THE  AIR.


in  others  graceful  loops,  or  becoming  coiled  into  knots
of  a  complexity  not  to  be  unravelled.  We  finally  see
those  filaments  resolving  themselves  into  innumerable
spores,  each  with  death  potentially  housed  within  it,
yet  not  to  be  distinguished  microscopically  from  the
harmless  germs  of  Bacillus  subtUis.  The  bacterium
of  splenic  fever  is  called  Bacillus  Anthracis.  This
formidable  organism  was  shown  to  me  by  M.  Pasteur
in  Paris  last  July.  His  recent  investigations  regarding
the  part  it  plays  pathologically  certainly  rank  amongst
the  most  remarkable  labours  of  that  remarkable  man.
Observer  after  observer  had  strayed  and  fallen  in  this
land  of  pitfalls,  a  multitude  of  opposing  conclusions
and  mutually  destructive  theories  being  the  result.  In
association  with  a  younger  physiological  colleague,  M.
Joubert,  Pasteur  struck  in  amidst  the  chaos,  and  soon
reduced  it  to  harmony.  They  proved,  among  other
things,  that  in  cases  where  previous  observers  in  France
had  supposed  themselves  to  be  dealing  solely  with
splenic  fever,  another  equally  virulent  factor  was  simul-
taneously active.  Splenic  fever  was  often  overmastered
by  septicaemia,  and  results  due  solely  to  the  latter  had
been  frequently  made  the  ground  of  pathological  in-
ferences regarding  the  character  and  cause  of  the
former.  Combining  duly  the  two  factors,  all  the
previous  irregularities  disappeared,  every  result  obtained
receiving  the  fullest  explanation.  On  studying  the
account  of  this  masterly  investigation,  the  words  where-
with Pasteur  himself  feelingly  alludes  to  the  difficulties
and  dangers  of  the  experimenter's  art  came  home  to
me  with  especial  force  :  '  J'ai  tant  de  fois  eprouve  que
dans  cet  art  difficile  de  I'experimentation  les  plus
habiles  bronchent  a  chaque  pas,  et  que  Interpretation
des  faits  n'est  pas  moins  perilleuse.' 1

1  Comptes-Rendus,  lxxxiii.  p.  177.  .


APPENDIX.


The  following  Abstract  of  Essay  III.,  taken  from  the  Pro-
ceedings of  the  Royal  Society  for  1877,  may  be  of  use  to
the  reader.

For  reasons  which  will  appear  in  the  sequel,  it  will  be
desirable  to  glance,  in  the  first  place,  at  the  results  already
submitted  to  the  Royal  Society.

Portions  of  the  autumn  of  1875,  and  of  the  winter  and
spring  of  1875-76,  were  devoted  to  the  first  section  of
these  researches,  and  on  the  13th  of  January,  1876,  its
main  results  were  communicated  orally  to  the  Royal
Society.  The  completed  memoir  was  handed  in  to  the
Society  on  the  6th  of  April :  it  is  published  in  vol.  166  of
the  '  Philosophical  Transactions.'

Many  of  the  '  closed  chambers '  employed  in  the
inquiry  were  submitted  on  the  13th  of  January  to  the
inspection  of  the  Fellows.  There  had  been  over  fifty  of
them  in  all,  and  several  of  them  had  been  used  more  than
once.  The  air  in  these  chambers  had  been  permitted  to
free  itself  from  floating  matter  by  self-subsidence,  no
artificial  means  of  cleansing  it  being  employed.  Sterilized
oi'ganic  liquids  and  infusions  of  the  most  varied  kinds
freely  exposed  to  air  thus  spontaneously  purified  were
found,  when  tested  by  the  microscope,  to  remain  absolutely
free  from  organisms  of  all  kinds,  and  equally  free  from  the
turbidity,  scum,  and  mould  which  to  the  naked  eye  are  the
infallible  signs  of  the  generation  and  multiplication  of
such  organisms.

These  experiments  embraced,  among  others,  the  follow-

Y


322


APPENDIX.


ing  organic  liquids  : — urine  in  its  natural  conditions  ;  in-
fusions of  mutton,  beef,  pork,  hay,  turnip,  sole,  haddock,
codfish,  salmon,  turbot,  mullet,  herring,  eel,  oyster,
whiting,  liver,  kidney,  hare,  rabbit,  barndoor  fowl,
pheasant  and  grouse.

The  number  of  separate  vessels  containing  these  liquids
which  were  exposed  to  spontaneously  purified  air  amounted
to  several  hundreds,  and  the  consensus  of  their  testimony,
in  the  sense  just  indicated,  was  complete.

Five  minutes'  boiling  was  found  in  all  cases  sufficient
to  sterilize  the  infusions.

When,  after  remaining  sterile  for  months,  the  doors  of
the  chambers  were  opened  so  as  to  admit  the  uncleansed
air  of  the  laboratory,  the  contact  of  such  air,  or,  more
correctly,  of  the  matter  mechanically  floating  in  it,
infallibly  produced  organisms  in  abundance — sometimes
exclusively  Bacterial,  sometimes  exclusively  fungoid,  and
sometimes  a  combination  of  both.

Infusions  of  the  substances  above  referred  to.  were
afterwards  exposed  in  succession  to  air  which  had  been
freed  of  its  floating  matter  by  filtration  through  cotton
wool,  also  to  air  from  which  the  floating  matter  had  been
removed  by  calcination,  and  finally  to  vacua  obtained  by
exhausting  as  far  as  possible  with  an  air-pump,  large
receivers  which  had  been  previously  filled  with  filtered  air.

Boiled  for  five  minutes  and  exposed  to  air  thus  treated,
or  to  vacua  thus  produced,  none  of  the  infusions  showed  sub-
sequently any  alteration  of  colour  or  of  transparency  to  the
naked  eye,  or  to  the  microscope  any  manifestation  of  life.

Thus  far  are  summed  up  the  results  obtained  with
self-purified  air,  filtered  air,  calcined  air,  and  air-pump
vacua,  the  liquids  in  all  cases  being  exposed  in  open  test-
tubes.  Small  retort-flasks,  with  drawn-out  necks,  were
afterwards  resorted  to.  Charged  with  the  infusions,  they
were  boiled  in  heated  oil  or  brine,  and  sealed  with  ex-
ceeding care  during  ebullition.  At  the  Royal  Society  on
January  13,  1876,  one  hundred  and  thirty  such  flasks
were  submitted  to  the  Fellows,  free  alike  from  putrefaction


APPENDIX.


323


and  from  life.  They  embraced  specimens  of  all  the  sub-
stances above  mentioned  and  some  others.

Briefly  expressed,  then,  the  evidence  furnished  by  six
months'  assiduous  work  during  the  autumn,  winter,  and
spring  of  1875-76,  proved  conclusively  that  in  the
atmospheric  conditions  then  existing  in  tbe  laboratory  of
the  Royal  Institution,  not  one  of  the  many  hundred  flasks
and  tubes  experimented  on  failed  to  be  sterilized  by  five
minutes'  boiling,  and  no  countenance  was  given  to  the
notion  that  any  of  these  once  sterilized  infusions  possessed
the  power  of  spontaneously  generating  life.

The  investigation  embodied  in  the  memoir  now  sub-
mitted to  the  Society  was  opened  in  the  summer  of  1876
by  a  series  of  tentative  experiments  on  turnip -infusions,  to
which  were  added  varying  quantities  of  bruised  or  pounded
cheese.  Seven  different  kinds  of  cheese  were  employed,
fifty-seven  test-tubes  being  charged  with  the  mixture  and
■exposed  to  the  self-purified  air  of  closed  chambers.

The  majority  of  these  mixtures  remained  unchanged  ;  a
minority  became  charged  with  organisms,  which  are,  in  my
opinion,  completely  accounted  for  by  reference  to  the
protective  action  of  the  cheese.  In  the  memoir  of  which
this  is  an  abstract  such  protective  action  is  illustrated  by
the  fact  that  when  ordinary  mustard  seeds  were  tied
together  in  a  calico  bag,  they  resisted  the  boiling  tem-
perature for  a  considerable  multiple  of  the  time  which
sufficed  to  kill  them  when  no  bag  enveloped  them.  The
bag  and  outside  seeds  protected  the  interior  ones.

Not  temperature  alone,  but  the  ability  to  diffuse  its
•juices  or  salts,  is  a  condition  of  prime  importance  in  the
destruction  of  the  integrity  and  life  of  a  germ  by  boiling
water.  Without  diffusion  a  germ  may  withstand  tem-
peratures competent  to  utterly  destroy  it  where  diffusion  is
free.  I  need  not  remark  on  the  imperviousness  of  cheese
to  water,  and  its  consequent  power  to  prevent  diffusion.

These  summer  experiments  on  turnip-cheese  infusions
were,  however,  merely  tentative,  and  I  purpose  completing
them  hereafter.

Y  2


324


APPENDIX.


In  the  autumn  I  resumed  experiments  on  infusions  of
hay,  which  had  been  purposely  postponed.  With  this  sub-
stance no  difficulty  was  encountered  in  my  first  inquiry.
Boiled  for  five  minutes,  and  exposed  to  air  purified  spon-
taneously, or  freed  from  its  floating  matter  by  calcination
or  filtration,  hay-infusion,  though  employed  in  multiplied
experiments  at  various  times,  never  showed  the  least
competence  to  kindle  into  life.  After  months  of  trans-
parency, in  a  great  number  of  cases,  I  inoculated  this
infusion  with  specks  of  animal  and  vegetable  liquids  con-
taining Bacteria,  and  observed,  twenty-four  hours  after-
wards, its  colour  lightened  and  its  mass  rendered  opaque
by  the  multiplication  of  these  organisms.

But  in  the  autumn  of  1876,  the  substance  with  which
I  had  experimented  so  easily  and  successfully  a  year  pre-
viously appeared  to  have  changed  its  nature.  The  in-
fusions extracted  from  it  bore,  in  some  cases,  not  only  five
minutes'  but  fifteen  minutes'  boiling  with  impunity.  On
changing  the  hay  a  different  result  was  often  obtained.
Many  of  the  infusions  extracted  from  samples  of  hay  pur-
chased in  the  autumn  of  1876  behaved  exactly  like  those
extracted  from  the  hay  of  1875,  being  completely  sterilized
by  five  minutes'  boiling.

The  possible  influence  of  age  and  dryness  soon  sug-
gested itself,  and  I  tested  the  surmise  to  the  uttermost.
Numerous  and  laborious  experiments  were  executed  with
bay  derived  from  different  localities  ;  and  by  this  means,
in  the  earlier  days  of  the  inquiry,  it  was  revealed  that  the
infusions  which  manifested  this  previously  unobserved
resistance  to  sterilization  were,  one  and  all,  extracted  from
old  hay,  while  the  readily  sterilized  infusions  were
extracted  from  new  hay,  the  germs  adhering  to  which  had
not  been  subjected  to  long-continued  desiccation.

As  the  inquiry  proceeded  the  distinction  between  old
and  new  hay  became  more  and  more  blurred,  while  pro-
longed experiment  with  hay  of  various  kinds  failed  to
rescue  the  question  from  uncertainty.  I  therefore  turned
to  substances  of  a  succulent  nature— to  fungi,  cucumber,


.M'PJSNDIX.


325


melon,  beetroot  and  artichoke,  for  example,  whose  parasitic
or  epiphytic  germs  were  nnlikely  to  have  suffered  desic-
cation.

Boiled  for  periods  varying  from  five  to  fifteen  minutes
and  exposed  afterwards"  to  moteless  air,  in  numberless
experiments  these  infusions  broke  down,  charging  them-
selves throughout  with  organisms,  and  loading  themselves,
almost  in  all  cases,  with  a  soapy  corrugated  scum.

I  then  fell  back  upon  infusions  whose  deportment  bad
been  previously  familiar  to  me,  and  in  the  sterilization  of
which  I  had  never  experienced  any  difficulty.  Fish,  flesh,
and  vegetables  were  re-subjected  to  trial.  Though  the  pre-
cautions taken  to  avoid  contamination,  were  far  more
stringent  than  those  observed  in  my  first  inquiry,  and
though  the  interval  of  boiling  was  sometimes  tripled  in
duration,  these  infusions,  in  almost  every  instance,  broke
down.  Spontaneously  purified  air,  filtered  air,  and  calcined
air  (calcined,  I  may  add,  with  far  greater  severity  than
was  found  necessary  a  year  previously)  failed,  in  almost
all  cases,  to  protect  the  infusions  from  putrefaction.

I  was  sometimes  cheered  by  a  success  which,  at  the
time  of  its  occurrence,  would  seem  to  be  the  result  ot
increased  severity  in  the  methods  of  experiment.  But  the
success  was  subsequently  so  opposed  by  failure  that  it
finally  stood  out  rather  as  an  accident  than  as  the  normal
result  of  the  inquiry.

I  had  the  most  implicit  confidence  in  the  correctness  of
my  earlier  experiments  ;  indeed  incorrectness  would  have
led.  to  consequences  exactly  opposite  to  those  arrived  at.
Errors  of  manipulation  would  have  filled  my  tubes  and
flasks  with  organisms,  instead  of  leaving  them  transparent
and  void  of  life.  By  the  unsuccessful  experiments  above
referred  to  a  clear  issue  was  therefore  raised : — Either
infusions  of  fish,  flesh  and  vegetables  had  become  endowed
in  1876  with  an  inherent  generative  energy  which  they  did
not  possess  in  1875,  or  some  new  contagium  external  to  the
infusions,  and  of  a,  far  more  obstinate  character  than  that
of  1875,  had  been  brought  to  bear  upon  them  at  the  later


326


APPENDIX.


date.  The  scientific  mind  will  not  halt  in  its  decision
between  these  two  alternatives.

For  my  own  part  the  gradual  but  irresistible  interaction
of  thought  and  experiment  made  it  in  the  first  instance
probable,  and  at  last  certain,  that  the  atmosphere  in  which
I  worked  had  become  so  virulently  infective  as  to  render
utterly  impotent  precautions  against  contamination  and
modes  of  sterilization  which  had  been  found  uniformly
successful  in  a  less  contaminated  air.  I  therefore  removed
from  the  laboratory,  first  to  the  top,  and  afterwards  to  the
basement  of  the  Royal  Institution,  but  found  that  even
here,  in  a  multitude  of  cases,  failure  was  predominant,  if
not  uniform.  This  hard  discipline  of  defeat  was  needed  to
render  me  acquainted  with  all  the  possibilities  of  infection
involved  in  the  construction  of  my  chambers  and  the  treat-
ment of  my  infusions.

I  finally  resolved  to  break  away  from  the  Royal
Institution,  and  to  seek  at  a  distance  from  it  a  less  infec-
tive atmosphere.  In  Kew  Gardens,  thanks  to  the  President
of  the  Royal  Society,  the  requisite  conditions  were  found.
I  chose  for  exposure  in  the  Jodrell  laboratory  the  special  in-
fusions which  had  proved  most  intractable  in  the  laboratory
of  the  Royal  Institution.  The  result  was  that  liquids  which
in  Albemarle  Street  resisted  two  hundred  minutes'  boiling,
becoming  afterwards  crowded  with  organisms,  were  utterly
sterilized  by  five  minutes'  boiling  at  Kew.

A  second  clear  issue  is  thus  placed  before  the  Royal
Society : — Either  the  infusions  had  lost  in  Kew  Gardens
an  inherent  generative  energy  which  they  possessed  in  our
laboratory,  or  the  remarkable  instances  of  life- development,
after  long-continued  boiling,  observed  in  the  laboratory
are  to  be  referred  to  the  contagium  contained  in  its  vessels
or  diffused  in  its  air.

With  a  view  to  making  nearer  home  experiments  similar
to  those  executed  at  Kew,  I  had  a  shed  erected  on  the  roof
of  the  Royal  Institution.  In  this  shed  infusions  were
prepared  and  introduced  into  new  chambers  of  burnished
tin,  which  had  never  been  permitted  to  enter  our  labora-


APPENDIX.


327


tory.    After  their  introduction  the  liquids  were  boiled  for
five  minutes  in  an  oil-bath.

The  first  experiment  in  this  shed  resulted  m  complete
failure.  Not  one  of  the  infusions  exposed  to  the  moteless
air  of  the  shed  escaped  putrefaction.

Either  of  two  causes,  or  both  of  them  combined,  might,
from  my  point  of  view,  have  produced  this  result.  First
a  flue  from  the  laboratory  was  in  free  communication  with
the  atmosphere  not  far  from  the  shed  ;  secondly,  and  this
'  was  the  real  cause  of  the  infection,  my  assistants,  m  pre-
paring the  infusions,  had  freely  passed  from  the  laboratory
to  the  shed.  They  had  thus  incautiously  carried  the  con-
tagiam  by  a  mode  of  transfer  known  to  every  physician.

The  infected  shed  was  disinfected;  the  infusions  were
ao-ain  prepared,  and  care  was  taken,  by  the  use  of  proper
clothes,  to  avoid  the  former  causes  of  contamination.  The
result  was  similar  to  that  obtained  at  Kew,  viz.  organic
liquids  which,  in  the  laboratory,  withstood  two  hundred
minutes'  boiling,  were  rendered  permanently  barren  by
five  minutes'  boiling  in  the  shed.

A  third  clear  issue  is  thus  placed  before  us  which  1
should  hardly  think  of  formulating  were  it  not  for  the
incredible  confusion  which  apparently  besets  this  subject
in  the  public  mind.    A  rod  thirty  feet  in  length  would
stretch  from  the  infusions  in  the  shed  to  the  same  in-
fusions in  the  laboratory.    At  one  end  of  this  rod  the
infusions  were  sterilized  by  five  minutes'  boiling,  at  the
other  end  they  withstood  two  hundred  minutes'  boiling.
As  before,  the  choice  rests  between  two  inferences:—
Either  we  infer  that  at  one  end  of  the  rod  animal  and
vegetable  infusions  possess  a  generative  power  which  at
the  other  end  they  do  not  possess,  or  we  are  driven  to
the  conclusion  that  at  the  one  end  of  the  rod  we  have
infective  and  at  the  other  end  uninfective  air.

The  second  inference  is  that  which  will  be  accepted  by
the  scientific  mind.  To  what,  then,  is  the  inferred  differ-
ence  at  the  two  ends  of  the  rod  to  be  ascribed  ?  In  one
obvious  particular  the  laboratory  this  year  differed  from


328


APPENDIX.


that  in  which  ray  first  experiments  were  made.  On  its
floor  were  varions  bundles  of  old  and  desiccated  hay,  from
which,  when  stirred,  clouds  of  fine  dust  ascended  into  the
atmosphere.  This  dust  proved  to  be  both  fruitful  and,  in
the  highest  degree,  resistant.  Prior  to  the  introduction  of
the  hay  which  produced  the  dust,  no  difficulty  as  regards
sterilization  had  ever  been  experienced ;  subsequent  to  its
introduction  my  difficulties  and  defeats  began.

I  have  twice  glanced  at  periods  of  boiling  amounting  to
two  hundred  minutes  ;  for,  after  long  and  laborious  trials  of
shorter  periods,  I  advanced  to  longer  ones,  subjecting  turnip,
cucumber,  and  other  infusions  to  the  boiling  temperature-
for  intervals  varying  from  five  minutes  to  three  hundred
and  sixty  minutes.  Up  to  a  certain  point  these  liquids
maintained  their  power  of  developing  life,  but  beyond  this
point  complete  sterility  was  the  result.  In  the  preliminary
experiments  bearing  upon  this  question  the  point  of  steriliza-
tion lay  between  180  and  240  minutes.  Boiled  for  the
former  period  the  infusions  continued  fruitful ;  boiled  for
the  latter  period  they  remained  permanently  barren.

In  these  and  numerous  other  experiments  a  method  was
followed  which  had  been  substantially  employed  by  Spal-
lanzani  and  JSTeedham,  and  more  recently  by  Wyman  and
Eoberts,  the  method  having  been  greatly  refined  by  the
philosopher  last  named.  The  flasks  were  partially  filled
with  the  infusions,  the  portions  unoccupied  by  the  liquids
being  taken  up  with  ordinary  unfiltered  air.  Now  as
regards  the  death-point  of  contagia  we  know  that  in  air  it
may  be  much  higher  than  in  water,  the  selfsame  tempera- '
ture  being  fatal  in  the  latter  and  sensibly  harmless  in  the
former;  hence  the  doubt  whether,  in  my  recent  experi-
ments, the  resistance  of  the  contagium  did  not  arise  from
the  fact  of  its  not  being  surrounded  by  liquid  water.

I  changed  the  method,  and  made  a  long  series  of  ex-
periments with  filtered  air.    They  were  almost  as  unsuc-  '
cessful  as  those  made  with  ordinary  air.    From  time  to
time  I  succeeded  in  producing  complete  sterility  by  five
minutes'  boiling ;  but  these  successes  were  so  checked  by


APPENDIX.


329


failures  that,  similar  to  other  cases  referred  to,  they  finally
appeared  in  the  light  of  accidents.  They  were,  however,
by  no  means  nninstructive,  for  they  revealed  the  existence
of  breaks  in  the  prevalence  of  the  contagium,  which,  under
the  circumstances,  might  have  been  foreseen.

A  rapid  glance  at  the  means  employed  to  improve  the
methods  of  experiment,  and  at  the  results  of  their  employ-
ment, may  be  permitted  here.  Bulbs,  exhausted  by  an
air-pump  and  afterwards  heated  almost  to  redness,  were
filled  when  cool  with  filtered  air.  While  being  charged
with  the  infusions  the  bulbs  were  warmed,  so  as  to  produce
a-  gentle  outflow  of  air,  and  their  necks  were  sealed  while
the  outflow  continued.  It  was  thus  sought  to  avoid  the
contamination  consequent  on  an  indraught.

The  failures  resulting  from  this  mode  of  experiment
greatly  predominated  over  the  successes.

Employing  similar  bulbs,  their  necks  in  the  first  instance
were  drawn  out  at  the  ends  to  tubes  of  capillary  fineness.
The  bulbs  were  then  filled  each  with  one-third  of  an  atmo-
sphere of  filtered  air,  and,  while  connected  with  the  air-pump,
were  heated  almost  to  redness.  The  capillary  tubes  were
then  sealed  with  the  lamp.  The  sealed  ends  were  afterwards
broken  off  in  the  body  of  the  liquid,  two-thirds  of  each  bulb
being  thus  filled  with  the  infusion.  By  great  care  it  was
found  possible  to  re-seal  the  capillary  tubes  without  remov-
ing them  from  the  liquid.  The  infusions  were  afterwards
boiled  from  five  to  fifteen  minutes.

Here  also  the  fruitfulness  of  the  boiled  infusion  was
the  rule,  and  its  barrenness  the  exception.

A  source  of  discomfort  clung  persistently  to  my  mind
throughout  these  severer  experiments.  I  was  by  no  means
certain  that  the  observed  development  of  life  was  not  due  to
germs  entangled  in  the  film  of  liquid  adherent  to  the  necks
and  higher  interior  surfaces  of  the  bulbs.  This  film  might
have  evaporated,  and  its  germs,  surrounded  by  air  and
vapour,  instead  of  by  water,  might,  on  this  account,  have
been  able  to  withstand  an  ordeal  to  which  they  would  have
succumbed  if  submerged.


330


APPENDIX.


A  plan  was  therefore  resorted  to,  by  which  the  infusions
were  driven  by  atmospheric  pressure  through  lateral  chan-
nels issuing  from  the  centres  of  the  bulbs.  As  before,  each
bulb  was  filled  with  one-third  of  an  atmosphere  of  filtered
air,  and  afterwards  heated  nearly  to  redness.  When  fully
charged,  the  infusion  rose  higher  than  the  central  orifice,
and  no  portion  of  the  internal  surface  was  wetted  save  that
against  which  the  liquid  permanently  rested.  The  lateral
channel  was  then  closed  with  a  lamp  without  an  instant's
contact  being  permitted  to  occur  between  any  part  of  the
infusion  and  the  external  air.  It  was  thus  rendered  ab-
solutely certain  that  the  contagia  exposed  subsequently  to
the  action  of  heat  were  to  be  sought,  neither  in  the  super-
jacent air  nor  on  the  interior  surfaces  of  the  flasks,  but  in
the  body  of  the  infusions  themselves.

By  this  method  I  tested  in  the  first  place  the  substance
which,  at  an  early  stage  of  the  inquiry,  had  excited  my
suspicion — without  reference  to  which  the  discrepancy
between  the  behaviour  of  infusions  examined  in  the  winter
of  1875-76  and  those  examined  in  the  winter  of  1876-77  is
inexplicable,  but  by  reference  to  which  the  explanation  of
the  observed  discrepancy  is  complete  ;  I  mean,  the  old  hay
which  cumbered  our  laboratory  floor.

Four  hours'  continuous  boiling  failed  to  sterilize  bulbs
charged  with  infusions  of  this  hay.  In  special  cases,  more-
over, germs  were  found  so  indurated  and  resistant  that
five,  six,  and,  in  one  case,  even  eight  hours'  boiling  failed  to
deprive  them  of  life.

All  the  difficulties  encountered  in  this  long  and  laborious
inquiry  were  traced  to  the  germs  which  exhibited  the  ex-
traordinary powers  of  resistance  here  described.  They
introduced  a  plague  into  our  atmosphere — the  other  in-
fusions, those  of  fresh  hay  included,  like  a  smitten  popula-
tion, becoming  the  victims  of  a  contagium  foreign  to
themselves.1

It  is  a  question  of  obvious  interest  to  the  scientific

1  A  hard  and  wiry  hay  from  Guildford,  which  I  have  no  reason
to  consider  old,  was  found  extremely  difficult  to  sterilize.


APPENDIX.


331


surgeon  whether  those  powerfully  resistant  germs  are
amenable  to  the  ordinary  processes  of  disinfection.  It  is
perfectly  certain  that  they  resist  to  an  extraordinary  extent
the  action  of  heat.  How  would  they  behave  in  the  wards
of  an  hospital?  There  are,  moreover,  establishments
devoted  to  the  preserving  of  meats  and  vegetables.  Do
they  ever  experience  inexplicable  reverses  ?  I  think  it
certain  that  the  mere  shaking  of  a  bunch  of  desiccated  hay
in  the  air  of  an  establishmeut  of  this  character  might  render
the  ordinary  process  of  boiling  for  a  few  minutes  utterly
nugatory,  thus  possibly  entailing  serious  loss.  They  have,
as  will  subsequently  appear,  one  great  safeguard  in  the
complete  purgation  of  their  sealed  tins  of  air.

Keeping  these  germs,  and  the  phases  through  which
they  pass  to  reach  the  developed  organism,  clearly  in  view,
I  have  been  able  to  sterilize  the  most  obstinate  infusions
encountered  in  this  inquiry,  by  heating  them  for  a  small
fraction  of  the  time  above  referred  to  as  insufficient  to  sterilize
them.    The  fully  developed  Bacterium  is  demonstrably
killed  by  a  temperature  of  140°  F.    Fixing  the  mind's  eye
upon  the  germ  during  its  passage  from  the  hard  and
resistant  to  the  plastic  and  sensitive  state,  it  will  appear  in
the  highest  degree  probable  that  the  plastic  stage  will  be
reached  by  different  germs  in  different  times.    Some  are
more  indurated  than  others,  and  require  a  longer  immersion
to  soften  and  germinate.   Eor  all  known  germs  there  exists
a  period  of  incubation,  during  which  they  prepare  them-
selves for  emergence  as  the  finished  organisms  which  have
been  proved  so  sensitive  to  heat.    If  during  this  period,
and  well  within  it,  the  infusion  be  boiled  for  even  the  fraction
of  a  minute,  the  softened  germs  which  are  then  approach-
ing their  phase  of  final  development  will  be  destroyed.
Kepeating  the  process  of  heating  every  ten  or  twelve  hours,,
before  the  least  sensible  change  has  occurred  in  the  in-
fusions, each  successive  heating  will  destroy  the  germs  then
softened,  until,  after  a  sufficient  number  of  heatings,  the
last  living  germ  will  disappear.


332


APPENDIX.


Guided  by  the  principle  here  laid  down,  and  applying
the  heat  discontinuously,  infusions  have  been  sterilized  by
an  aggregate  period  of  heating,  which,  fifty  times  multi-
plied, would  fail  to  sterilize  them  if  applied  continuously.
Four  minutes  in  the  one  case  can  accomplish 'what  four
hours  fail  to  accomplish  in  the  other.

If  properly  followed  out,  the  method  of  sterilization
here  described  is  infallible.  A  temperature,  moreover,  far
below  the  boiling-point  suffices  for  sterilization.

Another  mode  of  sterilization,  equally  certain  and  re-
markable, was  forced  upon  me,  so  to  speak,  in  the  following
way.  In  a  multitude  of  cases  a  thick  and  folded  layer  of
fatty  scum,  made  up  of  matted  Bacteria,  gathered  upon  the
surfaces  of  the  infusions,  the  liquid  underneath  becoming
sometimes  cloudy  throughout,  but  frequently  maintaining
a  transparency  equal  to  that  of  distilled  water.  The  living
scum-layer,  as  Pasteur  has  shown  in  other  cases,  appeared
to  possess  the  power  of  completely  intercepting  the  atmo-
spheric oxygen,  appropriating  the  gas  and  depriving  the
germs  in  the  liquid  underneath  of  an  element  necessary  to
their  development.

Placing  the  infusions  in  flasks,  with  large  air-spaces
above  the  liquids,  corking  the  flasks,  and  exposing  them
for  a  few  days  to  a  temperature  of  80°  or  90°  ¥.,  at  the  end
of  this  time  the  oxygen  of  the  superjacent  air  seems  com-
pletely consumed.  A  lighted  taper  plunged  into  the  flask
is  immediately  extinguished.  Above  the  scum,  moreover,
the  interior  surfaces  of  the  bulbs  used  in  my  experiments
were  commonly  moistened  by  the  water  of  condensation.
Into  it  the  Bacteria  sometimes  rose,  forming  a  kind  of
gauzy  film  to  a  height  of  an  inch  or  more  above  the  liquid.
In  fact,  wherever  air  was  to  be  found,  these  Bacteria  fol-
lowed it.  It  seemed  a  necessity  of  their  existence.  Hence
the  question,  What  will  occur  when  the  infusions  are
deprived  of  air  ?

I  was  by  no  means  entitled  to  rest  satisfied  with
inference  as  an  answer  to  this  question  ;  for  Pasteur  has


APPENDIX.


abundantly  demonstrated  that  the  process  of  alcoholic  fer-
mentation depends  on  the  continuance  of  life  without  air-
other  organisms  than  Torula  being  also  alleged  to  be  com-
petent to  live  without  oxygen.  Experiment  alone  could
determine  the  effect  of  exhaustion  upon  the  particular
organisms  here  under  review.

Air-pump  vacua  were  first  employed,  and  with  a  con-
siderable measure  of  success.  Life  was  demonstrably
enfeebled  in  such  vacua.

Sprengel  pumps  were  afterwards  used  to  remove  more
effectually  both  the  air  dissolved  in  the  infusions  and  that
diffused  in  the  spaces  above  them.  The  periods  of  ex-
haustion varied  from  one  to  eight  hours,  and  the  results  of
the  experiments  may  be  thus  summed  up  : — Could  the  air-
be  completely  removed  from  the  infusions,  there  is  every
reason  to  believe  that  sterilization  without  boiling  would  in
most,  if  not  in  all,  cases  be  the  result.  But,  passing  from
probabilities  to  certainties,  it  is  a  proved  fact  that  in
numerous  cases  unboiled  infusions  deprived  of  air  by  five
or  six  hours'  action  of  the  Sprengel  pump  are  reduced  to
permanent  barrenness.  In  a  great  number  of  cases,  more-
over, where  the  unboiled  infusion  would  have  become-
cloudy,  exposure  to  the  boiling  temperature  for  a  single
minute  sufficed  completely  to  destroy  the  life  already  on
the  point  of  being  extinguished  through  defect  of  air.
With  a  single  exception,  I  am  not  sure  that  any  infusion
escaped  sterilization  by  five  minutes'  boiling  after  it  had
been  deprived  of  air  by  the  Sprengel  pump.  These  five
minutes  accomplished  what  five  hours  sometimes  failed  to
accomplish  in  the  presence  of  air.

The  exception  here  referred  to  is  old-hay  infusion,,
which,  though  sterilized  in  less  than  half  the  time  needed
to  kill  its  germs  where  air  is  present,  maintained  a  power
of  developing  a  feeble  but  distinct  life  after  having  been
boiled  for  a  large  multiple  of  the  time  found  sufficient  to
render  infusions  of  mutton,  beef,  pork,  cucumber,  turnip,
beetroot,  shaddock,  and  artichoke  permanently  barren.
These  experiments  gave  me  the  clue  to  many  others


334


APPENDIX.


which  might  Lave  readily  become  subjects  of  permanent
misinterpretation.  In  the  midst  of  a  most  virulently  in-
fective atmosphere,  where,  even  after  some  hours'  boiling,
there  was  no  escape  for  infusions  supplied  with  air,  the
expulsion  of  the  air  by  less  than  five  minutes'  boiling  in
properly  shaped  retort-flasks,  and  the  proper  sealing  of
the  flasks  during  ebullition,  insured  the  sterility  of  the
infusions.

The  meaning  of  a  former  remark  regarding  the  part
played  by  boiling,  in  establishments  devoted  to  the  pre-
serving of  meats  and  vegetables,  will  be  now  understood.

The  inertness  of  the  germs  in  liquids  deprived  of  air  is
not  due  to  a  mere  suspension  of  their  powers.  The  germs
are  hilled  by  being  deprived  of  oxygen.  For  when  the
air  which  has  been  removed  by  the  Sprengel  pump  is,  after
some  time,  carefully  restored  to  the  infusion,  unaccom-
panied by  germs  from  without,  there  is  no  revival  of  life.
By  removing  the  air  we  stifle  the  life  which  the  returning
air  is  incompetent  to  restore.

These  experiments  on  the  mortality  arising  from  a
defect  of  oxygen  are,  in  a  certain  sense,  complementary  to
the  beautiful  results  of  M.  Paul  Bert.  Applying  his
method  to  my  infusions,  I  find  them  sterilized  in  oxygen
possessing  a  pressure  of  ten  atmospheres  or  more.  Like
higher  organisms,  our  Bacterial  germs  are  poisoned  by  the
excess  and  asphyxied  by  the  defect  of  oxygen.

A  few  short  sections  on  Bacteria  germs  as  distinguished
from  Bacteria  themselves,1  and  on  the  alleged  destruction
of  germs  by  merely  drying  them,  on  hermetic  sealing,  and
on  the  deportment  of  hermetically- sealed  flasks  exposed  to
the  sun  of  the  Alps,  are  introduced  towards  the  end  of
the  memoir.

1  By  the  excellent  researches  of  Dallinger  and  Drysdale  it  has
been  proved  that  the  germs  of  Monads,  as  compared  with  the  adult
organisms,  possess  a  power  of  resistance  to  heat  in  the  proportion
of  11  to  6.


APPENDIX.


335


NOTE  ON  THE  DEPORTMENT  OF  ALKALIZED

URINE.1

The  communication  '  On  the  Influence  of  Liquor  Potassas
and  an  Elevated  Temperature  on  the  Origin  and  Growth
of  Microphytes,'  which,  at  Dr.  Roherts's  request,  I  have
had  the  pleasure  of  presenting  to  the  Royal  Society,  causes
me  to  say  earlier  than  I  should  otherwise  have  done  that
the  subject  which  has  occupied  Dr.  Roberts's  attention  has
also  occupied  mine,  and  that  my  results  are  identical  with
his.

In  some  of  the  experiments  the  procedure  described  by
Dr.  Roberts  was  accurately  pursued,  save  in  one  particular
which  has  reference  to  temperature.  Small  tubes  with
their  ends  finely  drawn  out  were  charged  with  a  definite
amount  of  caustic  potash,  and  subjected  for  a  quarter  of
an  hour  to  a  temperature  of  220°  Fahr.  They  were  then
introduced  into  flasks  containing  measured  quantities  of
urine.  The  urine  being  boiled  for  five  minutes,  the  flasks
were  hermetically  sealed  during  ebullition.  They  were
subsequently  permitted  to  remain  in  a  warm  place  sufii-
ciently  long  to  prove  that  the  urine  had  been  perfectly
sterilized  by  the  boiling.  The  flasks  were  then  rudely
shaken,  so  as  to  break  the  capillary  ends  of  the  potash-
tubes  and  permit  the  liquor  potassce  to  mingle  with  the
acid  liquid.  The  urine  thus  neutralized  was  subsequently
exposed  to  a  constant  temperature  of  122°  Fahr.,  which
is  pronounced  by  Dr.  Bastian  to  be  specially  potent  as
regards  the  generation  of  organisms.

I  have  not  found  this  to  be  the  case ;  for  ten  flasks,

1  From  the  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society,  No.  17(i,  1870.


336


APPENDIX.


prepared  as  above  described  towards  the  end  of  last
September,  remained  for  more  than  two  months  perfectly
sterile.  I  have  no  doubt  that  they  would  have  remained
so  indefinitely.

Three  retorts,  moreover,  similar  to  those  employed  by
Dr.  Bastian,  and  provided  with  potash-tubes,  had  fresh
urine  boiled  in  them  on  the  29th  of  September,  the  retorts
being  sealed  during  ebullition.  Several  days  subsequently,
the  potash-tubes  were  broken  and  the  urine  neuti'alized.
Subjected  for  more  than  two  months  to  a  temperature  of
122°  Fahr.  they  failed  to  show  any  signs  of  life.

These  results  are  quite  in  accordance  with  those  ob-
tained by  Dr.  Roberts.  His  potash-tubes,  however,  were
exposed  to  a  temperature  of  280°  Fahr.,  while  mine  were
subjected  to  a  temperature  of  220°  only.

With  regard  to  the  raising  of  the  potash  to  a  tempera-
ture higher  than  that  of  boiling  water,  M.  Pasteur  is  in
advance  both  of  Dr.  Roberts  and  myself.  In  a  communi-
cation to  the  French  Academy,  on  the  17th  of  last.  Jul}',
M.  Pasteur  showed  that  when  due  care  is  taken  to  add
nothing  but  potash  (heated  to  redness  if  solid,  or  to  110°
C.  if  liquid)  to  sterilized  urine,  no  life  is  ever  developed
as  a  consequence  of  the  alkalization.1

M.  Pasteur  has  quite  recently  favoured  me  with
sketches  of  the  simple  but  effectual  apparatus  by  means
of  which  he  has  tested  the  conclusions  of  Dr.  Bastian.
Since  his  return  from  his  vacation  at  Arbois,  he  has  care-
fully gone  over  this  ground  with  results,  he  reports  to  me,
not  favourable  to  Dr.  Bastian's  views.

I  may  add  that  I  have  by  no  means  confined  myself  to
the  thirteen  samples  of  urine  here  referred  to.  The  ex-
periments have  already  extended  to  one  hundred  and  five
instances,  not  one  of  which  shows  the  least  countenance
to  the  doctrine  of  spontaneous  generation.

1  That  alkaline  liquids  are  more  difficult  to  sterilize  than  acid
ones  was  announced  by  Pasteur  more  than  fourteen  years  ago.  See
'  Annales  de  Chimie,'  1862,  vol.  lxiv.  p.  62.


APPENDIX.


337


The  method  of  '  Discontinuous  Heating '  was  first  described
in  the  following  letter  to  Professor  Huxley.1

Eoyal  Institution,  Feb.  14,  1877.

My  dear  Huxley, — In  my  '  Preliminary  Note,'  communi-
cated to  the  Royal  Society  on  the  18th  of  January,  various
infusions  were  referred  to  as  manifesting  an  astonishing
resistance  to  sterilization  by  heat.  This  resistance  was
traced  to  its  source  ;  and  I  have  been  since  informed  that
you  were  good  enough  to  express  at  the  time  a  very
favourable  opinion  as  to  the  significance  and  value  of  the
results  indicated.

It  will,  I  think,  now  interest  you  to  learn  that  the  most
obstinate  of  the  infusions  referred  to  in  the  '  Note '  have
been  since  rendered  tractable  by  the  application  of  very
simple  means.  Following  up  the  plain  suggestions  of
the  germ  theory,  I  have  been  able,  even  in  the  midst
of  a  virulently  infective  atmosphere,  to  sterilize  all  the
infusions  by  a  temperature  lower  than  that  of  boiling
water.

It  is  known  that  the  prolonged  application  of  a  low
temperature  is  often  equivalent  to  the  brief  application  of
a  higher  one ;  and  you  may  therefore  be  disposed  to
conclude  that  in  the  experiments  here  referred  to  I  have
substituted  time  for  intensity.  This,  however,  is  not  the
case.  The  result  depends  solely  upon  the  manner  in
which  the  heat  is  applied.  For  example,  I  boil  an  infusion
for  fifteen  minutes,  expose  it  to  a  temperature  of  90°
Fahr.,  and  find  it  twenty-four  hours  afterwards  swarm-
ing with  life.  I  submit  a  second  sample  of  the  same
infusion  to  a  temperature  lower  than  that  of  boiling
water  for  five  minutes,  and  it  is  rendered  permanently
barren.

The  secret  of  success  here  is  an  open  one.  I  have
already  referred  to  the  period  of  latency  which  precedes
the  clouding  of  infusions  with  visible  Bacteria.  Durin°-

1  From  the  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society,  No.  178,  1877.

Z


338  APPENDIX.

this  period  the  germs  are  being  prepared  for  their  emer-
gence into  the  finished  organism.  They  reach  the  end  of
this  period  of  preparation  successively — the  period  of
latency  of  any  germ  depending  up6n  its  condition  as
regards  dryness  and  induration.  This,  then,  is  my  mode
of  proceeding : — Before  the  latent  period  of  any  of  the
germs  has  been  completed  (say  a  few  hours  after  the  pre-
paration of  the  infusion),  I  subject  it  for  a  brief  interval
to  a  temperature  which  may  be  under  that  of  boiling
water.  Such  softened  and  vivified  germs  as  are  on  the
point  of  passing  into  active  life  are  thereby  killed ;  others
not  yet  softened  remain  intact.  I  repeat  this  process  well
within  the  interval  necessary  for  the  most  advanced  of
those  others  to  finish  their  period  of  latency.  The  number
of  undestroyed  germs  is  further  diminished  by  this  second
heating.  After  a  number  of  repetitions,  which  varies  with
the  character  of  the  germs,  the  infusion,  however  obstinate,
is  completely  sterilized.

The  periods  of  heating  need  not  exceed  a  fraction  of
a  minute  in  duration.  Sum  them  up  in  the  case  of  an
infusion  which  they  have  perfectly  sterilized ;  they  amount
altogether  to,  say,  five  minutes.  Boil  another  sample  of
the  same  infusion  continuously  for  fifteen  or  even  sixty
minutes,  you  fail  to  sterilize  it,  although  the  temperature
is  higher  and  its  time  of  application  more  than  tenfold
that  which,  discontinuously  applied,  infallibly  produces
barrenness.

In  a  few  weeks  I  hope  to  bring  this  entire  subject
under  the  notice  of  the  Royal  Society ;  meanwhile,  if  you
think  it  would  interest  them,  I  should  be  glad  if  you
would  communicate  to  the  Fellows  this  general  statement
of  the  most  recent  results  of  experiment.

Believe  me,

Ever  faithfully  yours,

John  Ttndall.

T.  H.  Huxley,  Esq.,  Sec.  B.8.


Spolliswoode  <0  Co.,  Printers,  New-street  Square,  London.


WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR.


SOUND.

New  Edition,  being  the  Fourth,  thoroughly  revised  and
including  Becent  Researches.  Crown  8  vo.    [In  the  press.

LECTURES  on  LIGHT  DELIVERED  in  the

UNITED  STATES  of  AMERICA  in  1872  and  1873.
Second  Edition,  with  Portrait,  Lithographic  Plate  and  59
Diagrams.    Crown  8vo.  price  7s.  6d.

NOTES  of  a  COURSE  of  NINE  LECTURES

on  LIGHT,  delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution  of  Great
Britain,  a.d.  1869.  Crown  8vo.  price  Is.  sewed,  or  Is.  6d.
cloth.

LESSONS  in  ELECTRICITY  at  the  Royal

Institution  of  Great  Britain.  Second  Edition.  With
58  Woodcuts  and  Diagrams.    Crown  8vo.  2s.  del.


'  These  form,  •Kith  some  amplifica-
tion, the  substance  of  a  Christmas  course
of  lectures  given  by  Professor  Tyndat.l
to  a  juvenile  audience  They  are  simple
in  language,  well-arranged,  and  progres-
sive, each  step  being  either  demonstrated
or  illustrated  by  experiments,  within  the
reach  of  anyone's  performing  for  himself.'

Lancet.


'  This  is  a  very  attractive  little  book,
especially  distinguished  by  the  selection
of  experiments — many  of  them  very
novel  and  interesting  —  which  can  be
performed  with  cheap  and  home-made
apparatus.  A  popular  history  of  dis-
coveries in  frictional  electricity  runs
through  it,  serving  as  a  text  on  which
the  experiments  are  the  commentary.'

ATHENJ30M.


NOTES  of  a  COURSE  of  SEVEN  LECTURES

on  ELECTRICAL  PHENOMENA  and  THEORIES,
delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution  of  Great  Britain,
a.d.  1870.    Crown  8vo.  price  Is.  sewed,  or  Is.  6d.  cloth.

RESEARCHES  on  DIAMAGNETISM  and

MAGNE-CRYSTALLIC  ACTION  ;  including  the  Ques-
tion of  Diamagnetic  Polarity.  New  Edition  in  prepara-
tion.

CONTRIBUTIONS    to  MOLECULAR

PHYSICS  in  the  DOMAIN  of  RADIANT  HEAT.  With
Two  Plates  and  Thirty-one  Woodcuts.    8vo.  price  16s.

FARADAY  as  a  DISCOVERER.

Cheaper  Edition,  with  Two  Portraits.  Fcp.  8vo.
price  3s.  6d.


London,  LONGMANS  &  CO.


WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR.


FRAGMENTS  of  SCIENCE.

Sixth-  Edition,  revised  and  augmented.  2  vols,  crown
8vo.  price  16s.

'These  are  only  a  few  of  the  interesting  subjects  on  which.  Professor  Tyndall
offers  his  best  thoughts  and  powerful  expositions  to  his  readers.  .  .    To  sav  that
these  volumes  are  more  worthy  in  their  new  form  of  general  reading  than  the
previous  editions,  would  be  but  faint  praise,  for  they  aim,  with  eminent  success  at
showing  how  scientific  methods  of  thought  which  are  easily  intelligible  are  per
meatnig  with  augmenting  power  all  masses  of  facts  in  which  the  human  mind  finds
an  absorbing  interest.   To  emancipate  the  minds  of  men  from  any  form  of  slaver*
by  substituting  intelligent  comprehension  for  unreasoning  formula  or  wonder  has
ever  been  the  first  step  in  the  liberation  of  human  energies,  so  that  they  may  produce
greater  happiness  for  the  individual  and  advance  the  progress  of  the  whole  com-
mumty  ;  and  we  cannot  doubt  that  these  utterances  of  Professor  Tyndall  will  go
ar  towards  creating  a  new  element  of  religious  belief  in  this  country,  by  demon-
strating that  science  is  legitimately  extending  her  influence  beyond  the  elementary
principles  expounded  in  text-books  to  the  practical  application  of  those  principles
among  the  phenomena  of  life.'  Westminster  Review.

HEAT  a  MODE  of  MOTION".

New  Edition,  being  the  Fifth  ;  with  a  Plate  and  110
Woodcuts  and  Diagrams.    Crown  8vo,  price  10s.  6d.
•  Students  will  be  glad  to  see  a  new  edition  of  this  very  valuable  treatise  on  heat
which  during  the  last  two  years  has  been  out  of  print.    Professor  Tyndall  not
satisfied  with  a  mere  re-issue,  has  re-written  several  chapters,  and  introduced  much
fresh  matter  to  bring  the  information  conveyed  up  to  the  latest  discoveries  in  the
science  of  thermodynamics.   The  historical  development  of  the  dynamics  of  heat
has  been  more  fully  elucidated,  and  new  chapters  on  electrical  heat  have  been  intro-
duced.  The  work  is  too  well  known  to  need  either  praise  or  description  ;  it  is
exhaustive  of  its  subject,  and  the  materials  so  well  arranged,  so  clearly  and  dis-
.  tinctly  explained,  that  the  book  is  not  only  of  high  value  to  the  student,  but  may  be
read  by  every  one  who  desires  to  keep  abreast  of  the  scientific  knowledge  of  the
day.   The  volume  is  profusely  illustrated,  and  it  is  easy  to  foresee  that  the  present
edition  will  pass  out  of  print  as  rapidly  as  its  predecessors.'  Standard.

'  Professor  Tyndall's  well-known  treatise  on  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat  has
now  been  out  of  print  for  a  considerable  time,  so  that  the  appearance  of  this  sixth,
revised  and  enlarged  edition,  will  be  welcomed  by  many  students.  Pounded  as  it  is
upon  his  lectures  delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution,  and  retaining  the  lecture  form
in  its  chapters,  while  the  numerous  experiments  which  the  Professor  delights  to  •
bring  before  his  audiences  are  copiously  illustrated  by  figures  of  apparatus  in  use
the  style  in  which  the  information  is  conveyed  to  the  reader  has  a  freshness  and'
vigour  about  it  hardly  attainable  by  any  drier  mode  of  treatment,  and  one  is  at  no
loss  to  understand  the  great  popularity  that  this  book  has  so  long  enjoyed.  In  his
new  edition  Professor  Tyndall  has  evidently  been  careful  to  work  in  the  mos  t
recent  results  of  physical  researches  in  the  somewhat  wide  field  that  he  undertakes
here  to  open  up  to  his  readers,  Iris  book,  as  is  well  known,  discussing  a  host  of  phe-
nomena with  which  heat  is  more  or  less  immediately  concerned.'

Popular  Science  Review.


London,  LONGMANS  &  CO.
