Heat Considered as a Mode of Motion (John Tyndall, 1863)
==========================================================
The kinetic theory popularized; Tyndall's Royal Institution lectures made physics public. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (heatconsidereda08tyndgoog).


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web



at |http : //books . google . com/



in|ii|i|^j"f


^--^-A. « ^.._--. .__



HARVARD COLLEGE


SCIENCE CENTER
LIBRARY


/ 16



HEAT



(X)NSIDBB1D A8



A MODE OF MOTION:



A COURSE OP TWELVE LECTURES



DELIYESSD AT



THE EOYAL INSTrrUTION OF GREAT BRITAIN IN THB BKABON

OF 186^



JOHN TYNDALL, F.R.S., &c.

PBOfKSSOB Of HATURAL PBILOSOPHT IN THB BOTAL WSTITUTIOV.



WITH ILL VSTRATI0H8.



NEW YORK:
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY,

443 Ai 446 BBOADWAT.
1865.


PEEFAOE.



IN the following Lectures I have endeavoured to
bring the rudunents of a new phUosophy within the
reach of a person of ordinary intelligence and culture.

The firet seven Lectures of the course deal with
thermometriG heat; its generation and consumption in
mechanical processes; the determination of the me-
chanical equivalent of heat ; the conception of heat as
molecular motion ; the application of this conception
to the solid, liquid, and gaseous forms of matter ; to
expansion and combustion ; to specific and latent heat ;
and to calorific conduction.

The remaining five Lectures treat of radiant heat /
the interstellar medium, and the propagation of motion
through this medium ; the relations of radiant heat to
ordinary matter in its several states of aggregation ;
terrestrial, lunar, and solar radiation ; the constitution
of the Sim ; the possible sources of his energy ; the re-
lation of this energy to terrestrial forces, and to vege-
table and animal life.

My aim has been to rise to the level of these ques-
tions from a basis so elementary, that a person* possess-
ing any imaginative faculty and power of concentration,
might accompany me.



IV PBBFAOB.

Wherever • additional remarks, or extracts, seemed
likely to render the reader's knowledge of the subjects
referred to in any Lecture more accurate or complete,
I have introduced such extracts, or remarks, as an Ap-
pendix to the Lecture.

For the use of the Plate at the end of the volume,
I am indebted to the Council of the Koyal Society ; it
was engraved to illustrate some of my own memoirs in
the 'Philosophical Transactions.' For some of the
Woodcuts I am also indebted to the same learned body.

To the scientific public, the names of the builders
of this new philosophy are already familiar. As ex-
perimental contributors, Eumford, Davy, Faraday, and
Joule, stand prominently forward. As theoretic writers
(placing them alphabetically), we have Clausius, Helm-
holtz, Kirchoff, Mayer, Kankine, Thomson ; and in the
memoirs of these eminent men the student who desires
it, must seek a deeper acquaintance with the subject.
MM. Eegnault and Seguin also stand in honourable re-
lationship to the Dynamical Theory of Heat, and M.
Verdet has recently published two lectures on it,
marked by the learning for which he is conspicuous.
To the English reader it is superfluous to mention the
well-known and highly-prized work of Mr. Grove.

I have called the philosophy of Heat ^ new philoso-
phy, without, however, restricting the term to the sub-
ject of Heat. The fact is, it cannot be so restricted ;
for the connection of this agent with the general ener-
gies of the universe is such, that if we master it per-
fectly, we master all. Even now we can discern, though
but darkly, the greatness of the issues which connect
themselves with the progress we have made — tissues
which were probably beyond the contemplation of



PBEFAOB. y

tliofie, by whose indnstry and gemns the foundatioDB
of our present knowledge were laid.

In a Lecture on the ' Influence of the History of
Science on Intellectual Education,' delivered at the
Royal Institution, Dr. Whewell has shown ^ that every
advance in intellectual education has been the effect of
some considerable scientific discovery, or group of dis-
coveries.' If the association here indicated be invaii-
able, then, assuredly, the views of the connection and
interaction of natural forces — organic as well as inor-
ganic — ^vital as well ba physical — ^which have grown,
and which are to grow, out of the investigation of the
laws and relations of Heat, will profoundly affect the
intellectual discipline of the coming age.

In the study of Nature two elements come into
play, which belong respectively to the world of sense
and to the world of thought. We observe a fact and
seek to refer it to its laws, — ^we apprehend the law, and
seek to make it good in fact. The one is Theory, the
other is Experiment ; which, when applied to the ordi-
nary purposes of life, becomes Practical Science. Noth-
ing could illustrate more forcibly the wholesome inter-
action of these two elements, than the history of our
present subject. If the steam-engine had not been in-
vented, we should assuredly stand below the theoretic
level which we now occupy. The achievements of
Heat through the steam-engine have forced, with aug-
mented emphasis, the question upon thinking minds —
^ What is this agent, by means of which we can super-
sede the force of winds and rivers — of horses and of
men? Heat can produce mechanical force, and me-
chanical force can produce Heat ; some common quality
must therefore unite this agent and the ordinary form^



71 FBEFAOB.

of mechanical power.' This relationship established,
the generalising intellect conld pass at once to the other
energies of the universe, and it now perceives the prin-
ciple which unites them all. Thus the .triumphs of
practical skill have promoted the developement of phi-
losophy. Thus, by the interaction of thought and fact,
of truth conceived and truth executed, we have made
our science what it is, — ^the noblest growth of modem
times, though as yet^ut partially appealed to as a
source of individual and national might.

As a means of intellectual education its claims are
still disputed, though, once properly organised, greater
and more beneficent revolutions await its employment
here, than those which have already marked its appli-
cations in the material world. Surely the men whose
noble vocation it is to systemize the culture of England,
can never allow this giant power to grow up in their
midst without endeavouring to turn it to practical ac-
count. Science does not need their protection, but it
• desires their friendship on honourable terms : it wishes
to work with them towards the great end of all educa-
tion, — ^the bettering of man's estate. By continuing to
decline the offered hand, they invoke a contest which
can have but one result. Science must grow. Its de-
velopement is as necessary and as irresistible as the
motion of the tides, or the flowing of the Gulf Stream.
It is a phase of the energy of Nature, and as such is
sure, in due time, to compel the recognition, if not to
win the alliance, of those who now decry its influence
and discourage its advance.

BoTAL Institutioh, February 1868.



CONTENTS.



LECTURE L
Introduction— DeseripUon of iDBtmmentB— The Thermo-electrlo POe and the Qnl'
yanometer— Heat and Cold indicated by the Deflection of a Magnetic Needle
—Heat generated by Friction, Compreesion, and PercnBaion— Waterblls gen-
erate Heat— Friction of Railway Aziee— The Force necessary to heat the Axles
is withdrawn tram the urging Force of the Engine— Meteorites probably ren-
dered incandescent by Friction, against Air— Rumford's Experiments on tho
Heat excited by Friction— Water boiled by Friction— Consumption of Heat
when compressed Air is suffered to expand— Action of a Current of Air when
urged by a bellows against the Face of the Thermoelectric Pile . pioi 18

APPENDIX TO LBCTURB I.

Mode of constmotlng a Thermo-electric Pile— Mode of oonstracting a Galvanome-
ter—Mode of rendering Needles astatic— Experiments on the Magnetism of
Galvanometer Coils, and Mode of avoiding this Magnetism ... 80

LECTURE IL

The Nature of Heat— the Material Theory supposes it to be a subtle Fluid stored
up in the inter-atomic Spaces of Bodies— The idea of 'Capacity' for Heat
originated in this way— The Dynamical Theory supposes Heat to be a Motion
of the ultimate Particles of Bodies— Rumford's and Davy's Views— Davy's
Fusion of Ice by Friction — Bearing of the Experiment on the Material Theory
— Heat and Light developed by the Compression of Air— Ignition of Bisulphide
of Carbon Vapour in Fire Syringe— Thermal Effects of Air in Motion— Con-
densation of Aqueous Vapour by the Rarefaction of Air— Machine of Schem-
nitz— Deportment of a Conductor between the Poles of a Magnet— Apxmrent
Viscosity of the Magnetic Field— The Conductor encounters Resistance to its
Motion — A Conductor swifUy rotating is struck motionless when the Magnet
is excited— When the Conductor is compelled tojrotate Heat is generated—
Fusion of an Alloy by this Heat— Measurement of the Amount of Heat gen-
erated by a given Expenditure of Force— Dr. Mayer and Mr. Joule— The Me-
chanical Equivalent of Heat— Definition of the Term 'Foot-pound' — Heat
developed increases as the height of the fall, and is proportional to the Square
of the Velocity— Calculation of Heat generated by the impact of PrqJeetUet—


HARVARD COLLEGE


SCIENCE CENTER
LIBRARY


> »



X OOHTENTS.

lantio— ThU is the Cmm of the IfildneM of European Tempentnre— Rainfall
in Ireland— Effect of Mountain Ranges on Bainfall—Convection in Liquids-
Experimental Illustrations— The Oulf Stream: its influence on the Climate
of Britain— Formation of Snow— The Molecules aggregate to form Frozen
Stars with Rays sixty degrees apart— Figures of Snow Crystals— Collection of
Snow on Mountains— The Snow Line— Squeezing of this Snow to Ice— Forma-
tion of Glaciers— The Motion of a Glacier resembles that of a River— Theories
of Glacier Motion— The Regelation of Ice— The Moulding of Ice by Pressure-
Ancient Glaciers— Their Traces in Switzerland, England, Ireland, and Wales
—The Cedars of Lebanon grow on Glacier Mcnraines— Theories of the Glacial
Epoch— Not due to a Diminution of Solar Power, or to the passage of the Solar
System through cold Regions of Space . .... paqk 181

APPENDIX TO LBCTURB VI.

Abstract of a Lecture on the Merde Glace 208



LECTURE Vn.

The Conduction of Heat a Transmission of Molecular Motion— Different Bodies
possess different Powers of Transmission— Good Conductors and bad Con-
ductors—Experimental IllustratioDs— Experiments of Ingenhausz, Despretz,
Wiedemann, and Franz— Table of Conductivities— Parallelism of Conduction of
Heat and Conduction of Electricity— Good Conductors of the one are also good
Conductors of the other, and vice versd— Influence of Heat on Electric Con-
duction—The Motion of Heat interferes with the Motion of Electricity— Con-
duction of Cold— Constancy of Temperature of Animal Body— Capacity to
bear high Temperatures— Diversion of Heat from the Purposes of Tempera-
ture to the Performance of Work— Influence of Molecular Structure — Some
Bodies conduct differently in different Directions— Conduction in Crystals and
in Wood— Feeble Conductivity of Organic Substances— This secures them
from sudden Alternations of Temperature— Influence of Speciflc Heat on the
Speed of Conduction— Anomalous Case of Bismuth as compared with Iron-
Bismuth, though the worst Conductor, apparently transmits Heat most
speedily— Action of Clothing— Rumford's Experiments— Influence of mechani-
cal Texture on Conduction— A Powder conducts ill, on account of the incessant
Break in the Continuity of the Mass along which the Motion of Heat is trans^
mitted— Non-conductivity of Gypsum- Effect of Boiler encrustations— With-
drawal of Heat from Flames by good Conductors— The Motion of Flame,
though intense, is much lowered by being transferred ft-om so light a Body to
a heavy one— Effect of Wire Gauze— The Safpty Lamp— Conduction of Liquids
denied by Rumford, but proved by M. Despretz— Conduction of Gases denied
by Rumford, but affirmed in the case of Hydrogen by Prof. Magnus— Cooling
Effect of Air and Hydrogen— Exi)erlment8 on CKuseous Conduction doubt-
ful 218

LECTURE VIII.

Radiant Heat— Cooling a loss of Motlon-^To what is this Motion imparted?— Pre-
llminary Experiments on Sound— Communication of Vibrations through the
Air to Membranes and to Flames— The Vibrations of a Body propagated
through the Air and striking on the Drum of the Ear produce Sound— Analo-
gous Phenomena of Light— Theories of Emission and Undulation— Discussions



<xnrrsHT8. xi

OB the Botrfect— Ui i ii t0 Huygfacpg— Kqler— Yoong— JVMBeW-BiMiee filled
-with an elastic Medium called Ether— The Motioa of a hot or of a luminoiia
body commonicated to this Ether is propagated through it io wayes— In this
form Heat is called RadimU Heat—The Thermo-electric Pile in relation to
Radiant Heat— I>iBtribiition of Heat in the Electric Spectrom examined ex>
perimentally— Low Calorific Power of blue End of Spectrom— The most
lominoas Part not the hottest Part— Of the visible rays Red is the hottest—
The maximum Caliurific Action is beyond the Red, and is dne to Rays which are
incompetent to excite the Sense of Yiaion — Extra Violet Rays— Physical Caose
of Coloui^-The Spectrum is to the Eye what the Gamut is to the Ear— The
Colour of Light corresponds to the Pitch of Sound— Number of Impulses in-
yolved in the Perception of Light— Theory of Exchanges— Reflection of Radiant
Heat from Plane Surfaces— Angle of Incidence equal to the Angle of Reflec-
tion— Experimental Proof— The obscure Rays of the Electric Lamp pursue the
same Track as the luminous ones— Angular Velocity of reflected Ray twice
that of rotating Mirror— Experiments with radiant Heat of Fire and of obscure
Bodies— Reflection fh>m curved Surfaces— Parabolic Mirrors— Explosion of
Chlorine and Hydrogen in Focus of Mirror by Light— Explosion of Oxygen
and Hydrogen by Radiant Heat— Reflection of Cold . . • pags257

APPKNDIX TO LXCTUBB Yin.

On the Spunds produced by the Combustion of Oases In Tubes ... 284

LECTURE IX.

The Intensity of Radiant Heat diminishes as the Square of the Distance fhnn the
radiant Point Increases— Experimental Proof— TJndulatioAs of Sound longitu-
dinal, of Light transversal— The ultimate Particles of difibrent Bodies possess
difl*erent Powers of Communicating Motion to the Ether— Experimental Illus-
trations of good and bad Radiators— Reciprocity of Radiation and Absorption
—Protection by Gilding against Radiant Heat— Transmission of Radiant Heat
through Solids and Liquids— Diathermancy— Absorption occurs within the
Body— Absorption of Light by Water— Radiant Heat passes through Diather-
mic Bodies without heating them— Athermic Bodies are heated— Concentra-
tion of Beam on bulb of Air Thermometer— Penetrative Power of Sunbeams—
—Sifting of Radiant Heat— Ratio of Obscure to Luminous Radiation in various
Flames 2W

APPENDIX TO LEOTUBI IX.

On some physical Properties of Ice 824

LECTURE X.

Absorption of Heat by Gases and Vapours— First Apparatus— Rocksalt Plates-
Peculiarities of the Galvanometer— The higher Degrees of greater Value than
the lower ones— Improved Apparatus— Principle of Compensation permits the
use of a powerfhl Source of Heat while it preserves the Needle In a sensitive
Position— Air, Oxygen, Hydrogen, and Nitrogen are practical Vacua to Radiant
Heat— Opacity of defiant Gas and Sulphuric Ether— Radiation through other
Gases and Vapours— Great difference of Absorbing Power— Radiation of Heat
by Ghises— The atom which Absorbs powerfully Radiates powerfully— Absorp-
tion by Gases at a Tension of an Atmosphere— Absorptions at smaller Tenslomi



2ai OOHTENTB.

— Compariioa of BloiMnUry and Gomponnd G^^ and Vapoun— Badlatton
through Lampblack, 4to paqb887

APPENDIX TO LICTUSB Z.

Calibration of the OalTanometer 870

LECTURE XI.

Action of Odorous Babstanoet on Radiant Heat— List of Perfbmes examined— Ac-
tion of Ozone on Radiant Heat— Inflacnce of the Size of the Electrodes on the
Quantity of Ozone generated— Constitntion of Ozone— Radiation and Absorp-
tion of Gakes and Vapours determined without any Source of Heat external to
the gaseous Body itself- Dynamic Radiation and Absorption— Varnishing a
metal Surface by a Qas— Varnishing of a Gas by a Vapour— Tenuity of Bora-
cic Ether shown in Experiments on Dynamic Rsidiation^Influence of Length
of radiating Column- In a long Tube, a Vapour at a small Tension may ex-
ceed a Gas at a high Tension, while in a short Tube the Gas exceeds the
Vapour— Radiation through Humid Air— Action of the Vapour of the Atmo-
sphere on Terrestial and Solar Radiation— Objections answered— Applicability
of Rocksalt Plates— Experiments in Tube without Plates— Experiments with-
'out either Tube or Plates— Examination of Air ftrom various localities— Influ-
ence of the Results oa the Science of Meteorology— Application to tropical
Rain Torrents— To the Formation of Cumuli— To the Condensation of a Moun-
tainous Region— To Radiation Experiments at high and low ElcTations— To
the Cold of Central Asia— To the Thermometric Range in Australia— To the
Meteorology of Sahara— To Leslie's Experiments— To Wells^s Theory of Ice-
formation in India— To Melloni's Theory of Sirein 373

APPENDIX TO LECTURE XI.

Further Details regarding the Action of aqueous Vapour on Radiant Heat . 409

LECTURE XII.
Dew— a clear Sky and calm but damp Atmosphere necessary for its copious For-
mation—Dewed Substances colder than undewed ones— Dewed Substances
better Radiators than undewed ones— Theory of Wells— Dew is the Condensa-
tion of the atmospheric Vapour on Substances which have been chille<[ by
Radiation— Lunar Radiation— Constitution of the Suv^The bright Lines in
the Spectra of the Metals— An incandescent Vapour absorbs the Raj's which
it can itself emit — Eirchhoflfs Generalisation— Praunhofer's Lines, caused by
the Absorption of such Rays by the luminous Solar Atmosphere as that At-
mosphere itself could emit— Solar Chemistry— Emission by the Sun— Hers-
chell and Pouillet's Experiments— Mayer's Meteoric Theory— Effect of the
Tides on the Earth's Rotation- Energies of the Solar System— Helmholtz,
Thomson, Waterston— Relation of the Sun to Vegetable and Animal Life 414

APPENDIX TO LECTURE XII.

Lecture cm Force; Letters of Dr. Joule and Prof. Tyndall .... 460



HEAT



CONSIDEBED AS

A MODE OF MOTION.



LECTURE I.

[January 28, 1862.]



IK8TBUMENTS— GENERATION OF HEAT BY MECHANICAL ACTION —
CONSUMPTION OF HEAT IN WORK.



APPENDIX :^NOTES ON THE THERMO-ELECTRIC PILE AND OALTANOMETER.

THE chief characteristic of Natural Knowledge is its
growth ; each fact is vital, and every new discovery
forms a starting point for fresh investigation. Thus it
seems destined to advance, until the phenomena and laws
of the material universe are entirely subdued by the intel-
lect of man. But though each department of natural
knowledge has been adding to its store, at a rate unknown
in former times, no branch of it has expanded so rapidly,
of late, as that which, in these lectures, is to occupy our
attention. In scientific manuals but scanty reference has
as yet been made to the modem ideas of Heat, and thus
the public knowledge regarding it is left below the attain-



14 LBCrUBB I.

able leveL But the reserve is natural, for the subject is
still an entangled one, and, in entering upon it, we must be
prepared to encounter difficulties. In the whole range of
Natural Science, however, there are none more worthy of
being overcome, — ^none whose subjugation secures a greater
reward to the worker. For by mastering the laws and re-
lations of Heat, we make dear to our minds the interde-
pendence of natural forces generally. Let us, then, com-
mence our labours with heart and hope ; let us familiarise
ourselves with the latest facts and conceptions regarding
this all-pervading agent, and seek diligently the links of
law which underlie the facts and give unity to their most
diverse appearances. If we succeed here we shall satisfy,
to an extent unknown before, that love of order and of
beauty which, I am persuaded, is implanted in the mind
of every person here present. From the heights at which
we aim, we shall have nobler glimpses of tiie system of
Nature than could possibly be obtained, if I, while acting
as your guide in the region which we are now about to en-
ter, were to confine myself to its lower levels and already
trodden roads.

It is my first duty to make you acquainted with some
of the instruments which I intend to employ in the exami-
nation of this question. I must devise some means of
making the indications of heat and cold visible to you all,
and for this purpose an ordinary thermometer would be
useless. You could not see its action ; and I am anxious
that you should see, with your own eyes, the facts on
which our subsequent philosophy is to be based. I vrish to
give you the material on which an independent judgment
may be founded ; to enable you to reason as I reason if you
deem me right, to correct me if I go astray, and to censure
me if you find me dealing unfairly with my subject. To
secure these ends, I have been obliged to abandon the use
of a common thermometer, and to resort to the littie in-



THE THERMO-ELECTBIC FILE AND GALYANOMETEB. 15

Btnunent a b (fig. 1), which 70a see before me on the table,
and which is called a thermo-elec&ric pile.*

By means of this instrument I cause the heat which it
receives to generate an electric current. You know, or
ought to know, that such a current has the power of de-
fecting a freely suspended magnetic needle, to which it
flows parallel. Before you I have placed such a needle
m n (fig. 1), surrounded by a covered copper wire, the free



Fig.l.


ends of which, w w Bxe connected with the thermo-electric
pile. The needle is suspended by a fibre, s «, of unspun
silk, and protected by a glass shade, g, from any disturb-
ance by currents of air. To one end of the needle I have
fixed a piece of red paper, and to the other end a piece of
blue. All of you see these pieces of paper, and when the
needle moves, its motion will be clearly visible to the most
• distant person in this room.t



* A brief description of the thermo-electric pile is given in the
Appendix to this Lecture.

f In the actual arrangement the galvanometer here described stood on
a stool in front of the lecture table, the wires to to, being sufficiently long



16 LBOrUSB L

At the present moment the needle is quite at rest, and
points to tiie zero mark on the graduated disc nndemeath
it. This shows that there is no current passing. I now
breathe for an instant against the naked face a of the pile
— a single puff of breath is sufficient for my purpose —
observe the effect. The needle starts off and passes through
an arc of 90°. It would go further, did I not limit its
swing by fixing, edgewise, a thin plate of mica at 90"^.
Tske notice of the direction of the*deflection ; the red end
of tlv^ needle moved from me towards you, as if it disliked
me, and had been inspired by a sudden affection for you.
This action of the needle is produced by the small amount
of warmth communicated by ijiy breath to the face of the
pile, and no ordinary thermometer could give so large and
prompt an indication. We will let the heat thus communi-
cated waste itself; it will do so in a very short time, and
you notice, as the pile cools, that the needle returns to its
first position. Observe, now, the effect of cold on the face
of the pDe. I liave here some ice, but I do not wish to wet
my instrument by touching it with ice. Instead of doing
so, I will cool this plate of metal by placing it on the ice ;
then wipe the chilled metal, and touch with it the face of
the pUe. You see the effect ; a moment's contact suffices
to produce a prompt and energetic deflection of the needle.
But mark the direction of the deflection. When the pile
was warmed, the red end of the needle moved from me
towards you ; now its likings are reversed, and the red end
moves from you towards me. Thus you see that cold and
heat cause the needle to move in opposite directions. The
important point here established is, that from the direction
in which the needle moves, we can, with certainty, infer *
whether cold or heat has been communicated to the pile ;

to reach from the table to the stool ; for a farther description of the gal*
vanometer, see the Appendix to this Lecture.



HEAT or rsssmos. 17

and the energj with whidi tiie needle moyea — the prompt-
ness with which it is driren aside fix)m its position of rest
— gives ns some idea of the comparative quantity of heat
or cold imparted to it in different cases. In a fotnre lecture
I shall explain how we may express the relative quantities
of heat with nmnerical accuracy; but for the present agen-
eral knowledge of the action of our instnunents will be
sufficient.

My desire now is to connect heat with the more famil-
iar forms of force, and I will, therefore, in the first place,
try to fiimish you widi a store of facts illustrative of tiie
g^ieration of heat by mechanical processes. I have placed
some pieces of wood in the next room, which my assistant
will now hand to me. Why have I placed them there ?
Simply tliat I may perform my experiments with that sin-
cerity of mind and act which science demands from her
cultivators. I know that the temperature of that room is
slightly lower than the temperature of this one, and that
hence the wood which is now before me must be slightly
colder tiian the face of the pile with which I intend to test
the temperature of the wood. Let us prove this. I place
the &ce of the pile against this piece of wood ; the red end
of the needle moves from you towards me^ thus showing
that the contact has chilled the pile. I now carefully rub
Hie face of the pile along the surface of the wood ; I say
* carefully,' because the pile is a brittle instrument, and
rough usage would destroy it ; — ^mark what occurs. The
prompt and energetic motion of the needle towards you
declares that the face of the pile has been heated by this
small amount of friction. The needle, you observe, goes
quite up to 90° on the side opposite to that towards which
it moved before the friction was applied.

Now these experiments, which illustrate the develope-
ment of heat by mechanical means, must be to us what a
boy's school exercises are to him. In order to fix them on



18 IMOUBM J.

our nundSy and obtem doe mastery ofrer tiiem, we most re-
peat and vary them in many ways. In this task I ai^ yon
to aoocHnpany me. Here is a flat piece of brass with a stem
attached to it ; I take the stem in my fingers, preserving
the brass from aU contact with my warm hand, by oiydop-
ing the stem in cold flanneL I place the brass in ccmtaot
with the ftce of my pile ; the needle moyes, showing that
the brass is cold. I now rob the brass against the snr&ce
of this cold piece of wood, and lay it <Hice more ag^unst
my pile. I withdraw it instantly, for it is so hot that if I
allowed it to remain in contact with the instrmnent, the
current generated would dash my needle yiolently against
its stops, and probably derange its magnetism. Ton see
the strong deflection which even an instant's contact can
produce. Indeed, when a boy at sdiool, I have often blis-
tered my hand by the contact of a brass button, which I
had rubbed energetically against a form. Here, also, is a
razor, cooled by contact with ice ; and here is a hone, with-
out oil, along which I rub my cool rasor, as if to sharpen
it. I now place the razor against the face of the pile,
and you see that the steel, which a minute ago was cold,
is now hot. Similarly, I take this knife and knife-board,
which are both cold, and rub the knife along the board. I
place the knife against the pile, and you observe the result;
a powerful deflection, which declares the knife to be hot.
I pass this cold saw through this cold piece of wood, and
place, in the first instance, the surface of the wood against
which the saw has rubbed, in contact with the pile. The
needle instantly moves in a direction which shows the
wood to be heated. I allow the needle to return to zero,
and now apply the saw to the pile. It also is hot. These
are the simplest and most common-place examples of the
generation of heat by friction, and*l choose them for this
reason. Mean as Hiey appear, they will lead us by degrees



HEAT OF 00MPEES8I0K ASD PEBOUSSIOH. 19

i&to the secret recesses of Nature, and lay open to our
view the policy of the material universe.

Let me now make an experiment to illustrate the de-
velopem^it of heat by compression. I have here a piece
of deal, cooled below the temperature of the rooni^ and
giving, when placed in contact with our pile, the deflection
which indicates cold. I place this wood between the
plates of a small hydraulic press, and squeeze it forcibly.
The plates of the press are also, you will observe, cooler
than the air of the room. After compression, I bring the
wood into contact with the pile ; see the effect. The gal-
vanometer declares that heat has been developed by the
act of compression. Precisely the same occurs when I
place this lead bullet between the plates of the press and'
squeeze it thus to flatness.

And now for the effect of percussion. I have here a
cold lead bullet, which I place upon this cold anvil, and
strike it with a cold sledge hammer. The sledge descends
with a certain mechanical force, and its motion is suddenly
destroyed by the bullet and anvil ; apparently the force of
the sledge is lost. But let us examine the lead ; you see it
is heated, and could we gather up all the heat generated by
Hie shock of the sledge, and apply it without loss mechan-
ically, we should be able, by means of it, to lift this ham-
mer to the height from which it fell.

I have here arranged another experiment, which is almost
too delicate to be performed by the coarse apparatus neces-
sary in a lecture, but which I have made several limes be-
fore entering this room to-day. Into this small basin I
pour a quantity of mercury which has been cooled in the
next room. I have coated one of the faces of my thermo>
electric pile with varnish, so as to defend it from the mer-
cury, which would otherwise destroy the pile ; and, thus
protected, I can, as you observe, plunge the pile into the
Uquid metal. The deflection of the needle shows you that



20



LBOTUSE I.



Fig. 2.



the mercury 10 cold. Here are two glasses a and b (fig«
2), swathed thickly round by listing, which will effectually
prevent the warmth of my hands from reaching the mer-
cury. Well, I pour the cold mercury from the one glass
into ihe other, and back. It falls with a certain mechani-
cal force, its motion is destroyed, but heat is developed.
The amount of heat generated by a single pouring out is
extremely small ; I could tell you the exact amount, but
shall defer quantitative considerations till our next lecture ;
so I pour the mercury from glass to glass ten or fifteen
times. Now mark the result, when the pile is plunged into

the mercury. The
needle moves, and its
motion declares that
the mercury, which
at the beginning of
the experiment was
cooler than the pile,
is now warmer thai^
the pile. We here
introduce mto the
lecture-room an effect
which occurs in na-
ture at the base of ev-
ery waterfall. There
are friends before me
who have stood amid the foam of Niagara. Had they,
when there, dipped sufficiently sensitive thermometers into
the water at the top and bottom of the cataract, they would
have found the latter a little warmer than the former. The
sailor's tradition, also, is theoretically correct ; the sea is
rendered warmer through the agitation produced by a
storm, the mechanical dash of its billows being ultimately
converted into heat.

Whenever friction is overcome, heat is produced, and


HBAT OF WATEBFALLB, BTD., FLINT XSD STEEL. 21

the heat produced is the measure of the force expended in
oyercoming the friction. The heat is simply the primitive
force in another form, and if we wish to avoid this conver-
sion, we must abolish the friction. We usnallj pnt oil
upon the surface of a hone, we grease a saw, and are care-
ful to lubricate the axles of our railway carriages. What
are we really dmng in these cases ? Let us get general
notions first ; we shall come to partictdars afterwards. It is
the object of a railway engineer to urge his train bodily
from one place to another ; say from London to Edinburgh,
or from London to Oxford, as the case may be ; he wishes
to apply the force of his steam, or of his furnace, which
gives tension to the steam, to this particular purpose.
It is not his interest to allow any portion of that force to
be converted into another form of force which would not
further the attainment of his object. He does not want
his axles heated, and hence he avoids as much as possible
expending his power in heating them. In fact, he has ob-
tained his force from heat, and it is not his object to recon-
vert the force thus obtaiued iuto its primitive form. For,
for every degree of temperature generated%y the friction
of his axles, a definite amount would be withdrawn from
the urging force of his engine. There is no force lost ab-
solutely. Could we gather up all the heat generated by
the friction, and could we apply it all mechanically, we
should, by it, be able to impart to the train the precise
amount of speed which it had lost by the fHction. Thus
every one of those rsdlway porters whom you see moving
about with his can of yellow grease, and op^iing the little
boxes which surround the carriage axles, is, without know-
ing it, illustrating a principle which forms the very solder
of Nature. In so doing, he is unconsdously affirming both
the convertibility and the indestructibility of force. He is
practically asserting that mechanical energy may be con-
verted into heat, and that, when so converted, it cannot



23 UBOTUBB I.

stin exist as medumical energy, but that, for every degree
of heat developed, a strict and proportional equivalent of
the locomotive farce of the en^e disappears. A staticm is
approached, say at the rate of thirty or forty miles an hour;
the brake is applied, and smoke and sparks issue from the
wheel on which it presses. The train is brought to rest —
How ? Simply by converting the entire moving force which
it possessed, at the moment the brake was applied, into heat.

So, also, with regard to the greasing of a saw by a car-
penter. He applies the muscular force of his arm with the
express object of getting through the wood. He wishes to
tear the wood asunder, to overcome its mechanical cohesion
by the teeth of his saw. When the saw moves stiffly, on
account of the Mction against its flat surface, the same
amount of force may produce a much smaller effect than
when the implement moves without friction. But in what
sense smaller ? Not absolutely so, but smaller as regards
the act of sawing. The force not expended in the sawing
is not lost ; it is converted into heat, and I gave you an
example of this a few minutes ago. Here again, if we
could collect tMb heat engendered by the friction, and apply
it to urge the saw, we should make good the precise amount
of work which the carpenter, by neglecting the lubrication
of his implement, had simply converted into another form
of power.

We warm our hands by rubbing, and in the case of
frostbite we thus restore the necessary heat to the injured
parts. Savages have the art of producing fire by the skil-
ful friction of well-chosen pieces of wood. It is easy to
char wood in a lathe by friction. From the feet of the
labourers on the roads of Hampshire sparks issue copiously
on a dark night, the collision of their iron-shod shoes
against the flints producing the effect. In the common
flint and steel the particles of the metal struck off are so
much heated by the collision that they take fire and bum in



HBAT OF 1IETB0BITE8. 28

the air. But the heat precedes the combustioiL Dairy
found that when a gonlock, with a flint, was discharged in
vacuo, no sparks were produced, but the particles of steel
struck of^ when examined under the microscope, showed
signs of fusion.* Here is a large rock-crystal ; I have only
to draw this sipall one briskly along it, to produce a stream
of light ; here are two quartz pebbles, I have only to rub
Hiem together to make them luminous.

A bullet, in passing through the air, is warmed by the
firiction, and the most probable theory of shooting stars is
that they are small planetary bodies, revolving round the
sun, which are caused- to swerve from their orbits by the
attraction of the earth, and are raised to incandescence by
friction against our atmosphere. Mr. Joule has shown
that the atmospheric friction is competent to produce the
effect ; and he may be correct in believing that the greater
portion of the aerolites are dissipated by heat, and the
earth thus spared a terrible bombardment.f These bodies
move with planetary velocity ; the orbital velocities of the
four interior planets are as foUows : —

lines per second.
Hercmy, ...... 30*40

Venua, . ... 22*24

Earth, 18*91

Mars, . . . . 16*82

while the velocity of the aerolites varies from 18 to 36
miles a second.^ The friction engendered by this enor-
mous speed is certainly competent to produce the effects
ascribed to it.

More than sixty-four years ago Count Rumford, who
was one of the founders of the Royal Institution, exe-
cuted a series of experiments on the generation of heat

• Works of Sir H. Davy, vol. ii. p. 8.

f PhiloBoi^cal Magazine, 4th Series, vol. xuiL p. 849.

) Galbndth and Houghton's Manual of Astronomy, p. 18.



24 LXoroBB I.

by friction, which, viewed by the light of to-day are of
the highest interest and importance. Indeed, the servioea
which this Institution has rendered, in connection with
this question of the brotherhood of natural forces, can
never be forgotten. Thomas Young, a foqner profes-
sor of this Institution, laid the foundations of the undula-
tory theory of light, which, in its fullest application, em-
braces our present theory of heat. Davy entertained sub*
stantially the same views regarding heat as those which I
am now endeavouring to approach and elucidate. Faraday
established the laws of equivalence between chemistry and
electricity, and his magneto-electric discoveries were Hie
very first seized upon by Mr. Joule in illustration of the
mutual convertibility of heat and mechanical action.* Rum-
ford, in a paper of great power both as regards reasoning
and experiment, advocated in 1798f the doctrine regarding
tiie nature of heat which the recent experiments of eminent
men have placed upon a secure basis. While engaged in
the boring of cannon at Munich, he was so forcibly struck
by the large amount of heat developed in the process of
boring, that he was induced to devise an apparatus for
the special examination of the generation of beat by fric-
tion. He had constructed a hollow cylinder of iron, into
which he fitted a solid plunget, which was caused to press
against the bottom of the cylinder. A box which sur-
rounded the cylinder contained 18f lbs. of water, in which
a thermometer was placed. The original temperature of the
water was 60°. The cylinder was turned by horse4abour,
and an hour after the friction had commenced the tempera-
ture of the water was 107°, having been raised 47°. Half
an hour afterwards he found the temperature to be 142**.
The action was continued, and at the end of two hours the



• Philosophical Magazine, 4th Series, vol. xxiiL pp. 265, 847, 486.
f An abstract of this paper is given in the Appendix to Lecture IL



WATER BOILED BT FBIOHOH. 85

temperature as 178°. At the end of two hours and twenty
minutes it was 200°, and at two hours and thirty minutes
from the conmiencement the water <K^hwMy boUedl Rum-
ford's description of tifie effect of Uiis experiment on those
who witnessed it, is quite delightfiiL * It would be diffi-
cult,' he says, * to describe the surprise and astonishment
expressed in the countenances of the bystanders on seeing
so large a quantity of water heated, and actually made to
boil, without any fire. Though there was nothing that
could be considered very surprising in this matter, yet I
acknowledge fairly that it afforded me a degree of cluldish
pleasure which, were I ambitious of the reputation of a
grave philosopher, I ought most certainly rather to hide
than to discover.'* I am sure that both you and I can dis-
pense with the application of any philosophy which would
stifle such emotion as^umford here, avowed. In connec-
tion with this striking experiment, Mr. Joulef has estimated
tihe amount of mechanical force expended in producing the
heat, and obtained a result which ' is not very widely differ-
ent ' from that which greater knowledge and more refined
experiments enabled Mr. Joule himself to obtain, as regards
tihe numerical equivalence of heat and work.

It would be absurd on my part to attempt here a repe-
tition of tiie eiq>eriment of Count Rumford with all its
conditions. I cannot devote two hours and a half to a sin-
gle experiment, but I hope to be able to show you substan-
tially the same effect in two minutes and a half. I have
here a brass tube, four inches long, and three quarters of
an inch in interior diameter. It is stopped at the bottom,
and I thus screw it on to a whirling table, by means of
which I can cause the upright tube to rotate very rapidly.
I have here two pieces of oak wood, united by a hinge, and

* Romford's Essays, toI. IL p. 484.

f Philosophical TnmsactioiiB, toI. cxl. p. 62.



26 LBcmrRB i.

in which are two semidrcnlar grooyeB, which are intended
to embrace the brass tube. Thus the pieces of wood form
a kind of tongs, x (fig. 3), by gently squeezing which I can
produce friction between tiie wood and the brass tube,
when the latter rotates. I almost fill the tube with cold


water, and stop it with a cork, to prevent the splashing out
of the liquid, and now I put the machine in motion. As
the acticm continues, the temperature of the water rises,
and though the two minutes and a half have not yet elapsed,
those near the apparatus will see steam escaping from the
cork. Three or four times to-day I have projected the cork
by the force of the steam to a height of twenty feet in the
air. There it goes again, and the steam follows it, pro-
ducing by its precipitation this small cloud in the at-
mosphere.

In all the cases hitherto introduced to your notice, heat
has been generated by the expenditure of mechanical force.
Our experiments have gone to show that where mechanical
force is expended heat is produced, and I wish now to
bring before you the converse experiment, that is, the con-
sumption of heat in mechanical work. And should you at
present find it difficult to form distinct conceptions as to
the bearing of these experiments, I exhort you to be pa-
tient. We are engaged on a difficult and entangled sub-



GOLD OF DILATATION.



2T



ject, which, I hope, we shall disentangle as we go along.
I have here a strong vessel, filled, at the present moment,
with compressed air. It has been now compressed for some
hours, so tl^t the temperature of the air within the vessel
is the same as that of the air of the rooni without it. At
the present moment, then, this inner air is pressing against
the sides of the vessel, and if I open this cock a portion of
the air will rush violently out of the vessel. The word
* rush,' however, but vaguely expresses the true state of
things ; the air which rushes out is driven out by the air
behind it ; this latter accomplishes the work of urging for-
ward the stream of air. And what will be the condition
of the working air during this process ? It will be chilled.
It performs mechanical work, and the only agent which it
can call upon to perform it is the heat which it possesses,
and to which the elastic force with which it presses against
the sides of the vessel, is entirely due. A portion of this
heat will be consumed and the air will be chilled. Observe
the experiment which I am about to make. I will turn
the cock c, and allow the current of air from the vessel v
(fig. 4), to strike against the face of the pile p. See how

Fig. 4.


28



IJ&OTDBB I.



the magnetic needle responds to the act; its red end is
driven towards mdy thus declaring that the pile has been
chiUed by the current of air.

The effect is different when a current of ^ is urged
from the nozzle of a conunon bello>vs against the thermo*
electric pile. In the last experiment the mechanical work
of urging the air forward was performed by the air itself,
and a portion of its heat was consumed in the effort In
the case of the bellows, it is my muscles which perform
the work. I raise the upper board of the bellows and the
air rushes in ; I press the boards with a certain force, and
the air rushes out. The expelled air strikes the face of the
pile, has its motion stopped, and an amount of heat equiva-
lent to the destruction of this motion is instantly generated.
Thus you observe that when I urge with the bellows b


Pig. 5.



-(fig. 6), a current of air against the pile, the red end of the
needle moves towards you, thereby showing that the face
of the pile has been, in this instance, warmed by the air. I
have here a bottle of soda water ; at present the bottle is
slightly warmer than the pile, as you see by the deflection
it produces ; I cut the striogs which holds the cork, and it



GOLD OF DILATATION. 29

is % driven out by the elastic force of the carbonic add
gas ; the gas performs work, in so doing consumes heat,
and now the deflection it produces is that of cold. Tlie
truest romance is to be found in the details of daily life,
and here, in operations with which every child is familiar,
we shall gradually discern the illustration of principles
from which all material phenomena flow.



APPENDIX TO LECTURE L



NOTE ON THE CONSTBUCTION OF THE THEBMO-ELECTBIO PILE.



Fig. 9.



Let a b (fig. 6) be a bar of antimony, and b c a bar of Ms-
muth, and let both bars be soldered together at b. Let the free
ends A and c be united by a piece of wire, ado.
On wanning the place of junction, b, an electric
current is generated, the direction of which is
from bismuth to antimony (b to a, or against
the alphabet), across the junction, and from an-
timony to bismuth (a to b, or with the alpha-
bet), through the connecting wire, ado. The
arrow indicates the direction of the current.

If the junction b be chUledy a current is gene-
rated opposed in direction to the former. The
figure represents what is called a thermo-electric
pair or couple.

By the union of several thermo-electric pairs,
a more powerful current can be generated than
would be obtained from a single pair. Fig. 7,
for example, repres^its such an arrangement, in which the shaded
bars are supposed to be all of bismuth, and the unshaded ones of
antimony ; on warming all the junctions, B, b, &c., a current is
generated in each, and the sum of these currents, all of which flow
in the same direction, will produce a stronger resultant current
than that obtained from a single pair.

The Y formed by each pair need not be so wide as it is shown
in fig. 7 ; it may be contracted without prejudice to the couple.
And if it is desired to pack seyeral pairs into a small compass.


THEBMO-ELECTBIOnY.



81



each separate couple may be arranged as in fig. 8, where the black
hnes represent small bismuth bars, and the white ones small bars
of antimony. They are soldered together at the ends, and through-
out the length are usually separated by strips of paper merely. A


collection of pairs thus compactly set together constitutes a ther-
mo-electric pile, a drawing of which is giyen in fig. 9.

The current produced by heat being always from bismuth to
antimony across the heated junction, a moment's inspection of
fig. 7 will show that when any one of the junctions A, A, is heated,
a current is generated, opposed in direction to that generated
when the heat is applied to the junctions b, b. Hence, in the case
of the thermo-electric pile, the effect of heat falling upon its two



Fig.'S.



Fig. 9.


opposite faces is to produce currents in opposite directions. If
the H«mperature of the two faces be alike, they neutralize each
other, no matter how high they may be heated absolutely, but if
one of them be warmer than the other, a current is produced. The
current is thus due to a difference of temperature between the two
ftJO&A of the pile, and within certain limits the strength of the cur-
rent is exactly proportioned to this difference.



AFPESUa. TO LBGTDBB I.



From the junction of almost any oilier two metak, thermo-
electric cnrrents may be obtain^ but they are most copiously
generated by the nnion of bJamnfli and antimony.*



NOTE ON THE CONSTBUCTION OF THE 6ALYAN0METEB.

The existence and direction of an electric current are ebown
by its action upon a freely suspended magnetic needle.

But such a needle is held in the magnetic meridian by the
magnetic force of the earth. Hence, to move a single needle, the
current must overcome the magnetic force of the earth.

Very feeble currents are incompetent to do this in a sufficiently
sensible degree. The following two expedients are, therefore,
combined to render sensible the action of such feeble currents : —

The wire through which the current flows is coiled so as to
surround the needle several times ; the needle must swing freely
within the coiL The action of tiie single current is thus mul-
tipliedi

The second device is to neutralize the directive force of the
earth, without prejudice to the magnetism of the needle. This is
accomplished by using two nee-
dles instead of one, attaching Fig.io.
them to a common vertical stem,
and bringing their opposite poles
over each other, the north end of
the one needle, and the south end ^
of the other, being thus turned in
the same direction. The double
needle is represented in fig. 10. ^

It must be so arranged that

one of the needles shall be within the coil through which the cur-

*

* The discovery of thermo-electricity is due to Thomas Seebeck, Pro-
fessor in the University of Berlin. Nobili constructed the first thermo-
electric pile ; but in Melloni's hands it became an instrument so important
as to supersede all others in researches on radiant heat To this purpose
it will be applied in future lectures.



TH W AfiTUno W ^cyiiTfi c,



83



rent flowSi wbfle the other needle swings ficeely above the co!!, the
yerticaL connecting piece jiassiDg through an spjpmpdaie slit in
the coiL Were both the needles within, the same cnnent would
urge them in opposite directions, and thus one needle would neu-
tralize the other. But when one is within and the other without,
the current urges both needles in the same direction.

The way to prepare such a pair of needles is this. Magnetize
both of them to saturation ; then suspend them in a yessel, or un-
der a shade, so as to protect them fix>m air-cmrants. The system
will probably set in the magn^c meridian, one needle being in
ahnost all cases stronger than the other; weak^ri the stronger
needle carefiilly by the touch of a seoond smaller magnet When
tiie needles are precisely equal in strength, they will set at riff At
angim to the magnetic meridian.

It might be supposed that when the needles are equal in
strength, the directive force of the earth would be compl^ely an-
nulled, that the double needle would be perfectly oMtatie^ and per-


fectly neutral as regards direction ; obeying simply the torsion of
its suspending fibre. This would be the case if the magnetic axes
of both needles could be caused to lie with mathematical accuracy
in the same vertical plane. In practice, this is next to, impoa-
2*



34 AFPENDIZ TO LBOTUBB I.

dble ; the axes always ctobs each other. Let n $j n* ^ (fig. 11)
represent the axes of two needles thus crossing, the magnetic
meridian being }>arallel to m b ; let tb^ pole n be drawn by the
eartli's attractiye force in the direction n m ; the pole if being
niged by the repulsion of the earth in a predsely opposite direc-
tion. When the poles n and t' are of exactly equal strength, it is
manifest that the force acting on the pole f', in the case here sup-
posed, would have the advantage as regards leverage, and would
therefore overcome the force acting on n. The crossed needles
would therefore turn away still further from the magnetic meri-
dian, and a little reflection will show that they cannot come to rest
until the line which bisects the angle enclosed by the needles is at
right angles to the magnetic meridian.

This is the test of perfect equality as r^^ards thv magnetism
of the needles ; but in bringing the needles to this state of perfec-
tion, we have often to pass through various stages of obliquity to
the magnetic meridian. In these cases the superior strength of
one needle is compensated by an advantage, as regards leverage,
possessed by the other. By a haj^y accident a touch is some-
times sufficient to make the needles perfectly equal; but many
hours are often expended in securing this result It is only, of
course, in very di^icate experiments that this perfect equality is
needed ; but in sucli experiments it is essential.

Another grave difficulty has beset experimenters, even after the
perfect magnetization of their needles has been accomplished.
Such needles are sensitive to the slightest magnetic action, and
the covered copper wire, of which the galvanometer coils are
formed, usually contains a trace of iron sufficient to deflect the
prepared needle from its true position. I have had coils in which
this deflection amounted to 80 degrees ; and in the splendid in-
struments used by Professor Du Bois Raymond, in his researches
on animal electricity, the deflection by the coil is sometimes even
greater than this. Melloni encountered this difficulty, and
proposed that the wires should be drawn through agate holes,
thus avoiding all contact with iron or steel. The disturb-
ance has alwa3rs been ascribed to a trace of iron contained
in the copper wire. Pure silver has also been proposed instead
of copper.



THB ASSAnO BXSDLB. 85

To pnnnie Ids beantiftil th^mo-eiectric reseudieB in a satiafiMS
tory mann^, Professor Magnus, of B^lin, obtained pore eof^ipeacy
by a most laborious electro^rtic process, and after the metal had
been obtained, it required to be melted eight times in succession
before it could be drawn into -wire, in fact, the impurity of the
coil entirely yitiated the accuracy of the instrument, and ahnost
any amount of labour would be well expended in remoying this
great defect

My own experience of this subject is instmctiTe. I had a beau-
tiful instrument constructed a few years ago by Sau^rwald, of Ber-
lin, the coil of which, when no current flowed through it, deflected
my double needle full 80 degrees from the zero line. It was im-
possible to attain quantitatiye accuracy with this instrument.

I had the wire removed by Mr. Becker, and English wire used
in its stead ; the deflection fell to 8 degrees.

This was a great improvement, but not sufficient for my pur-
pose. I commenced to make inquiries about the possibility of
obtaining pure copper, but the result was very discouraging,
When, almost despairing, the following thought occurred to me :
The action of the coil must be due to the admixture of iron with
the copper, for pure copper is diamagnetic, it is feebly repelled by
a strong magnet. The magnet therefore occurred to me as a
means of instant analysis ; I could tell by it, in a moment, whether
any wire was tree f^om the magnetic metal or not.

The wire of M. Sauerwald's| coil was strongly attracted by the
magnet. The wire of Mr. Becker's coil was also attracted, though
in a much feebler degree.

Both wires had been covered by green silk ; I removed this,
but the Berlin wire was still attracted ; the English wire, on the
contrary, when presented naked to the magnet was feebly
repelled; it was truly diamagnetic, and contained no sensible
trace of iron. Thus the whole annoyance was fixed upon the
green silk ; some iron compound had been used in the dyeing
of it, and to this the deviation of the needle from zero was mani-
festly due.

I had the green coating removed and the wire overspun with
white silk, clean hands being used in the process. A perfect gal-
vanometer is the result ; the needle, when released from the action



86 AFFIBBIX TO LBOTDBB I.

of the cnirent, rehinis aociiiatd J to zero, and is perf^

all magnetic action on the part of the coiL In &ct, while we

have been deyising agate plates and other learned methods to get

rid of the nuisance of a magnetic coil, the means of doing so are •

at hand. Let the copper wire be selected by the magnet, and no

difficulty will be experienced in obtaining specimens magnetically

pure.



LECTURE II.

[Jannaiy SO, 1862.]

THS HATUBX OF HKAT — THB KATERIAL THSOET — THl DTHAXIGAL THIOST
— THSBICAL XiraCTS OF AIR IH MOTION— eEHULATIOH OF HSAT BT
BOTATIOH BBTWXEH THS POLKS OF A MAGNET — ^EXPERDCSNTS OF KUM-
FORD, DATT, AND JOULE — THE MECHANICAL EQUITALSNT OF HSAT —
HEAT OENERAfED BT PROJECTILES — HEAT WHICH WOULD BE GENERATED
BT 8TOPPINO THE EABTH^S MOTION — ^METEORIC THEORY OF THB 8UN*8
HEAT — FLAME IN ITS RELATION TO THE DYNAMICAL THEORY.



APPENDIX: — EXTRACTS FROM BACON AND RUMFORD.

IN our last lectnre the developement of heat by mechan-
ical action was illustrated by a series of experiments,
which showed that heat was easily produced by friction,
by compression, and by percussion. But facts alone can
not satisfy the human mind ; we desire to know the inner
and invisible cause of the fact ; we search after the prin-
dple by the operation of which the phenomena are pro-
duced. Why should heat be generated by mechanical ac-
tion, and what is the real nature of the agent thus gene-
rated ? Two rival theories have been offered in answer to
these questions. Till very lately, however, one of these —
the materiai theorf^ — ^had the greater number of adherents,
being opposed by only a few eminent men. Within cer-
tain limits this theory involved conceptions of a very sim-
ple kind, and this simplicity secured its general acceptance.
The material theory supposes heat to be a kind of matter
— a subtle fluid^Hstored up in the inter-atomic spaces of



38 LBOTUBE IL

bodies. The laborious Gmelin, for example, in his Hand-
book of Chemistry, defines heat to be ^that substance
whose entrance into our bodies causes the sensation of
warmth, and its egress the sensation of cold.'* He also'
speaks of heat combining with bodies as one ponderable
substance does with another; and many other eminent
chemists treat the subject from the same point of view.

The developement of heat by mechanical means, ina»-
much as its generation seemed unlimited, was a great diffi-
culty with the materialists ; but they were aoquainted with
the fact (which I shall amply elucicbte in a future lecture)
that different bodies possessed different powers of holding
heat, if I may use such a term. Take, for example, the
two liquids water and mercury, and warm up a pound of
each of them, say from fifty degrees to sixty. The abso-
lute quantity of heat required by the water to raise its
temperature 10° is fully thirty times the quantity required
by the mercury. Technically speaking, the water is said
to have a greater capacUt/ for heat than the mercury has,
and this term ' capacity ' is sufficient to suggest the views
of those who invented it. The water was supposed to
possess the power of storing up the caloric or matter of
hieat ; of hiding it, in fact, to such an extent that it required
thirty measures of this caloric to produce the same sensible
effect on it, that one measure would produce upon mercury.

All substances possess, in a greater or less degree, this
apparent power of storing up heat. Lead, for example,
possesses it ; and the experiment with the lead bullet, in
which you saw heat generated by compression, was expMn-
ed by those who held the material theory in the follow-
ing way. The uncompressed lead, they said, has a higher
capacity for heat than the compressed substance ; the size
of its atomic storehouse is diminished by compression, and

* EngMsh Transladon, toL i. p. 22.



HATBBIAL AND DYNAMTOATi THE0BIE8 OF HEAT. 8d

henoe, when the lead is squeezed, a portion of that heat
which, previous to compression, was Mdden, must make its
appearance, for the compressed substance can no longer
hold it all. In some similar way the experiments on fric-
tion and percussion were accounted for. The idea of call-
ing neM heai into existence was rejected by the believers
in the material theory. According to their views, the
quantity of heat in the universe is as constant as the
quantity of ordinary matter, and the utmost we can do by
mechanical and chemical means, is to store up this heat or
to drive it from its lurking place into open light of day.

The dynamioal theory^ or, as it is sometimes called, the
mecAanical tJieoiy of heat, discards the idea of materiality
as applied to heat. The supporters of this theory do not
believe heat to be matter, but an accident or condition of
matter ; namely, a motion of its vMmate partidea. From
the direct contemplation of some of the phenomena of
heat, a profound mind is led almost instinctively to con-
clude that heat is a kind of motion. Bacon held a view of
this kind,* and Locke stated a similar view with singular
felicity. ' Heat ' he says, ' is a very brisk agitation of the
insensible parts of the object, which produce in us that
sensation from whence we denominate the object hot ; so
what in our sensation is heat^ in the object is nothing but
motion.^ In our last lecture I referred to the experiments
of Count Rumfordf on the boring of cannon ; he showed
that the hot chips cut from his cannon did not change their
capacity for heat ; he collected the scales and powder pro-
duced by the abrasion of his metal, and holding them up

* See Appendix to this Lecture.

t I have particular pleasure in directing the reader's attention to an
abstract of Count Rumford's memoir on the Generation of Heat by Fric-
tion, contained in the Appendix to this lecture. Rumford, in this me-
moir, annihilates the material theory of heat Nothing more powerful on
the subject has since been written.



40 LEoruBB n.

before his opponents, demanded whether they believed
that the vast amount of heat which he had generated had
been all squeezed out of that modicum of crushed metal ?
* You have not,' he might have added, ' given yourselves
the trouble to enquire whether any change whatever has
occurred in the capacity of the metal for heat by the act
of friction. You are quick in inventing reasons to save
your theory from destruction, but slow to enquire whether
these reasons are not merely the finespun fandes of your
own brains.' Theories are indispensable, but they some-
times act like drugs upon the mind. Men grow fond of
them as they do of dram-drin^ng, and often feel discon-
tented and irascible when the stimulant to the imagination
is taken away.

At this point an experiment of Davy comes forth in it^
true significance.* Ice is solid water, and the solid has
only one half the capacity for heat that liquid water pos-
sesses. A quantity of heat which would ndse a pound of
ice ten degrees in temperature, would raise a pound of wa-
ter only five degrees. Further, to simply liquefy a mass
of ice, an enormous amount of heat is necessary, this heat
1>eing so utterly absorbed or rendered ^ latent ' as to make
no impression upon the thermometer. The question of
^ latent heat ' shall be fully discussed in a future lecture ;
what I am desiroi^s of impressing on you at present is, that
liquid water^ at its freezing temperature, possesses a vastly
greater amount of heat than ice at the same temperature.

Davy reasoned thus : * If I, by friction, liquefy ice, I
produce a substance which contains a far greater absolute
amount of heat than the ice ; and, in this case, it cannot,
with any show of reason, be affirmed that I merely render
sensible the heat hidden in the ice, for that quantity is only
a small fraction of the heat contained in the water/ He

* Works of Sir H. Dayy, vol ii, p. 11.



FOBHUf or HS B7 B UOl'IO H . 41

made the experiment, and liquefied the ice bj pore Mcticm;
and the result has been r^arded as the first which proved
the immateriality of heat.

When a hammer strikes a beU, the motion of the ham-
mer is arrested, but its force is not destroyed; it has
thrown the bell into vibrations, which affect the auditory
nerves aa sonnd. So, also, wh^i our sledge hammer de-
scended upon our lead buUet, the descending motion of the
dedge was arrested : but it was not destroyed. Its moHon
tDOS tnmsferred to the cUoms of the leadj and aimounced it-
self to the proper nerves- as heat. The theory, then, which
Rumford so power^illy advocated, and Davy so ably sup-
ported,* was, that heat is a kind of molecular motion ; and
that, by Mction, percussion, or compression, this motion
may b6 generated, as well as by combustion. This is the
theory which must gradually develope itself during these
lectures, until your minds attain to perfect clearness re-
garding it. And, remember, we are entering a jungle, and
must not expect to find our way dear. We are striking
into the brambles in a random fashion at first ; but we shall
thus become acquainted with the general character of our
work, and, with due persistence, shall, I trust, cut through
all entanglement at last.

In our first lecture I showed you the effect of projecting
a current of compressed air against the face of the thermo-
electric pile. You saw that the instrument was chilled by
the current of air. Now, hedt is known to be developed
when air is compressed ; and, since last Thursday, I have

* In Dayy^s first scientific memoir, he calls heat a repulsiye motion,
which he sayi may be augmented in various ways. * First, by the trans-
mutation of mechanical into repulsive motion ; that is, by friction or per^
cussion. In this case the mechanical motion lost by the masses of mat-
ter in friction is the repulsive motion gained by their corpuscles : * an
extremely remarkable passage. I have given further extracts from thia
paper in the Appendix to Lecture in.



42



UDOTUBB n.



been asked bow this beat was diqxMed of m the case of the
condensed air. Pray listen to my reply. Supposing the
vessel which contained the compressed air to be formed of
a sabstance perfectly impervious to heat, and supposing all
the heat developed by my ann, in compressing the air, to be
retained within the vessel, that quantity of heat would be
exactly competent to undo what I had done and to restore
the compressed idr to its original volume and temperature.
But this vessel v (fig. 12), is not impervious to heat, and it
was not my object to draw upon the heat developed by my


arm; I therefore, after condensing the air, allowed the
vessel to rest, till all the heat generated by the condensa-
tion had been dissipated, and the temperature of the air
within and without the vessel was the same. When, there-
fore, the air rushed out, it had not the heat to draw upon,
which had been developed during compression. The heat
from which it derived its elastic force was only sufficient
to keep it at the temperature of the surrounding air. In
doing its work a portion of this heat, equivalent to the



FISB STBOraJB. • 43

woA done, was oonsnmed, and the issidiig air was oonse-
<]pientL7 chilled. Do not be disheartened if this reasoning .
should not appear quite dear to yon. We are now in oom- >
paradve darkness, bat as we proceed light will gradually
a{^>ear, and irradiate retrospecdrely onr present ^o<»n«

I wish now to make evident to yon that heat is devel-
aped by l^e compression of air. Here is a strong cylinder
of glass T u (fig. 13)9 accurately bored, and quite smooth
within. Into it this piston fits air-tight, so that, by driving
the {oston down, I can forcibly compress l^e air
underneath it; and when the air is thus com- ^^^^
pressed, heat is suddenly generated. Let me
prove this. I take a morsel of cotton wool, and
wet it T^th this volatile liqmd, the bisulphide of
carbon* I throw this bit of wetted cotton into
the glass syringe, and instantly eject it. It has
left behind it a small residue of vapour. I com-
press the air suddenly, and you see a flash of light
within the syringe. The heat developed by the
compression has been sufficient to ignite the
vapour. It is not necessary to eject the wetted
cotton ; I replace it in the tube, and urge the pis-
ton downwards ; you see the flash as before. If,
with this narrow glass tube, I blow out the fumes
generated by the combustion of the vapour, I can,
without once removipg the cotton from the syr-
inge, repeat the experiment twenty times.*

I tave here arranged an experiment intended
to give you another illustration of the thermal ^9^ ^
effect produced in air by its own mechanical ac-
tion. Here is a tin tube, stopped at both ends, and con-
nected with this air-pump. The tin tube is at present full
of air, ithd I bring the face of my pile up against the

* The accident which led to this form of the experiment is referred to
in ^be Appendix to this Lecture.



44 * uscrnsE n.

ourved surface of the tube. The instrument declares that
the face of the pile in contact with the tin tube has been
wanned by the latter. I was quite prepared for this result,
having reason to know that the air within the tube is
slightly warmer than that without. Now, what you are to
observe is this : — ^My assistant shall work the pump ; the
cylinders of the machine will be emptied of air, and the air
within this tin tube will be driven into the exhausted cyl-
inders by its own elastic force. I have already demon-
strated the chilling effect of a current of compressed air on
the thermo-electric pile. In the present experiment I will
not examine the thermal condition of the current at all, but
of the vessel in which the work has been performed. As
this tube is exhausted I expect to see the needle, which is
now deflected so considerably in the direction of heat,
descend to zero, and pass quite up to 90° in the direction
of cold. The pump is now in action, and observe the re-
sult. The needle falls as predicted, and its advance in the
direction of cold is only arrested by its concussion against
the stops.

Three strokes of the pump suffice to chill the tube so
as to send the needle up to 90° ; ♦ let it now come to rest.
It would require more time than we can afford to allow the
tube to assume the temperature of the air around it ; but
the needle is now sensibly at rest at a good distance on
the cold side of zero. I will now allow a quantity of aii
to enter the tube, equal to that which was removed from
it a moment ago by the air-pump. I can turn on this cock,
the idr will enter, and each of its atoms will hit the inner
surface of the tube like a projectile. "Pie mechanical mo-
tion of the atom will be thereby annihilated, but an amount

* The galyanometer used in this experiment was that which 1 employ
in my original researches: it is an exceedingly delicate one. When intro-
duced in the lectures its dial was illuminated by the electric light ; and an
image of it, two feet in diameter, was projected on the screen.



OOHDENBATIOnr OF AQUEOirS YAFOUB. . 45

of heat equivalent to this motion will be generated. Thus
1^ the air enters it will develope an amount of heat suffix
cient to re-warm the tube, to mido the present deflection,
and to send the needle np on the heat side of zer6. The
air is now entering, and you see the effect: the needle
moves, and goes quite up to 90° on that side which indi-
cates the heating the pile.*

I have now to direct your attention to an interesting
effect connected with this chilling of the air by rarefaction.
I place over the plate of the air pump a large glass receiver,
which is now filled with the air of this room. This »r,
and, indeed, all air, unless it be dried artificially, contains
a quantity of aqueous vapour which, as vapour, is perfectly
invisible. A certain temperature is requisite to mftint iM"
the vapour in this invisible state, and if the air be dulled
so as to bring it below this temperature, the vapour will
instantly condense, and form a visible cloud. Such a cloud,
which you will remember is not vapour^ but liquid water
in a state of fine division, will form within this glass vessel
B (fig. 14), when the air is pumped out of it ; and to make
this effect visible to everybody present, to those right and
left of me, as well as to those ii\ front, these six little gas
jets are arranged in a semicirde, which half surrounds the
receiver. Each person present sees one. or more of these

* In this experiment a mere line along the surface of the tube was in
contact with the face of the pile, and the heat had to propagate itself
through Hie tin envelope to readi the instrument. Previous to adopting
this arrangement I had the tube pierced, and a separate pile, with its naked
fiice turned inwards, cemented air-tight into the orifice. The pile came
thus into direct contact with the air, and its entire face was exposed to the
action. The eflfects thus obtained were very lai^e; sufficient, indeed, to
swing the needle quite round. My desure to complicate the subject as little
as possible induced me to iibandon the cemented pile, and to make use
of the instrument with which my audience had already become familiar.
With the arrangement actually adopted the effects were, moreover, so
large, that I drew only on a portion Of my power to produce them.



46



LBOTUBB n.



jets on looking through the receiver, and when l^e dond
forms, l^e dimness which it produces will at once declare
its presence. The pump is now quickly worked ; a very few
stroke!^ suffice to precipitate the vapour ; l^ere it spreads
throughout the entire receiver, and many of you see a col-

Flg. 14.


curing of the cloud, as the light shines through it, similar
to that observed sometimes, on a large scale, around the
moon. When I allow the air to re-enter the vessel, it is
heated, exactly as in the experiment with our tin tube ;
the cloud melts away, and the perfect transparency of the
air within the receiver is restored. Again I exhaust and
again the cloud forms ; once more the air enters and the
cloud disappears ; the heat developed being more than suffi-
cient to preserve it in the state of pure vapour.

Sir Humphry Davy refers, in his ' Chemical Philos-
ophy,' to a machine at Schemnitz, in Himgary, in which
air was compressed by a column of water 260 feet in
height. T^ei^ A stopcock was opened, so as to allow the



FBI£fTK>K AGAIBBT 8PA0E. 47

air to escape, a degree of cold was produced which not
only precipitated the aqueous vapour diffused in the air,
but caused it to congeal in a shower of snow, while the
pipe from which the air issued became bearded with icicles.
*• Dr. Darwin,' writes Davy, ' has ingeniously explained the
production of snow on the tops of the highest mountains,
by the precipitation of vapour from the rarefied idr which
ascends from plains and valleys. The Andes, placed almost
under the line, rise in the midst of burning sands ; about
the middle height is a pleasant and mild climate ; the sum-
mits are covered with unchanging snows.'

I would now request your attention to another experi-
ment, in which heat will be developed by what must ap-
pear to many of you a very mysterious agency, and, indeed,
the most instructed amongst us know, in reality, very little
about the subject. I wish to develope heat by what might
be regarded as friction against pure space. And indeed it
may be, and probably is, due to a kind of friction against
that inter-stellar medium, to which we shall have occasion
to refer more fully by and by.

I have here a mass of ♦iron — ^part of a link of a huge
chain cable — ^which is surrounded by these multiple coils
of copper wire c c (fig. 16), and which I can instantly con-
vert into a powerful magnet by sending an electric current
through the wire. You see, when thus excited, how pow-
etffA it is. This poker clings to it, and l^ese chisels,
screws, and nails clhig to the poker. Turned upside down,
this maamet will hold a half hundred weight attached to
eacn of its poles, and probably a score of the heaviest peo-
ple in this room« if suspended from the weights. At the
proper signal my assistant will interrupt the electric cur-
rent : — ^ Break 1 ' The iron falls, and all the magic disap-
pears: the magnet now is mere common iron. At the
y ends of the magnet I place two pieces of iron p p — ^mov-
able poles, as they are called — ^which, when the magnet is



48



LSOTUBE n.

Fi«.U.


vfi



AFPABBNT YISOOfinT OF MAOKEHO FIELD. 49

miexcited, I can bring within any required distance of eadi
other. When the current passes, these pieces of iron vir-
tually form parts of the magnet. Between than I will
place a substance which the magnet, even when exerting
its utmost power, is incompetent to attract This substance
is simply a piece of silver — ^in fact, a silver medaL I bring
it close to the excited magnet ; no attraction ensues. In-
deed, what little force — and it is so little as to be utterly
insensible in these experiments — ^the magnet really exerts
upon the silver, is repulsive instead of attractive.

Well, I suspend this medal between the poles p p of
the magnet, and exdte the latter. The medal hangs there ;
it is neither attracted nor repelled, but if I seek to move it
I encounter resistance. To turn the medal round I must
overcome this resistance ; the silver moves as if it were
surrounded by a viscous fluid. This curious effect may also
be rendered manifest, thus : I have here a rectangular plate
of copper, and if I cause it to pass quickly to and tro like
a saw between the poles, when their points are turned
towards it, I seem, though I can see nothing, to be sawing
through a mass of cheese or butter.* Nothing of this kind
is noticed when the magnet is not active : the copper saw
then encounters nothing but the infinitesimal resistance of
the air. Thus far you have been compelled to take my
statements for granted, but I have arranged an experiment
which wiU make this strange action of the magnet on the
silver medal, strikingly manifest to everybody present.

Above the suspended medal, and attached to it by a bit
of wire, I have a little reflecting pyramid m, formed of four
triangular pieces of looking-glass ; both tbie medal and the
reflector are suspended by a thread which was twisted in
its manufacture, and which will untwist itself when the
weight it sustains is set free. I place our electric lamp so

* Ah experiment of Faraday^



50 LBCfTDBS n*

«s to cast a strong beam of light on this little pyramid :
you see these long spokes of light passing through the
dusty air of the room as the mirror turns.

Let us start it from a state of rest. You now see the
beam passmg through the room and striking against the
white walL As Ihe mirror commences to rotate, the patch
of light moves, at first slowly, over the wall and ceiling.
But the motion quickens, and now you can no longer see
the distinct piEitches of light, but instead of them you have
this splendid luminous band fully twenty feet in diameter
drawn upon the wall by the quick rotation of the reflected
beams. At the word of command the magnet will be ex-
cited, and the motion of the medal will be instantly
stopped. ^Make!' See tiie effect: the medal seems
struck dead by the excitement of tiie magnet, the band
suddenly disappears, and there^ou have the single patch
of Ught upon the wall. This strange mechanical ^ect is
produced without any visible change in the space between
the two poles. Observe the slight moti<m of the image on
the wall : the tension of the string is struggling with an
unseen antagonist and produdng that shght motion. It is
such as would be produced if the medal, instead of being
surrounded by air, were immersed in a pot of thick trea-
cle. I destroy the magnetic power, and the viscous charac-
ter of the space between the poles instantly disappears ; the
medal begins to twirl as before ; there are the revolving
beams, and there is now the luminous band. I again ex-
cite the magnet : the beams are struck motionless, and th^,
band disappears.

By the force of my hand I can overcome this resistance
and turn the medal round ; but to turn it I must expend
force. Where does that force go ? It is converted into
heat. The medal, if forcibly compelled to turn, will be-
come heated. Many of you are acquainted with the gra^
discovery of Faraday, that electric currents are developed



HBAT 6EHSBATED Hf HAOSXIH) FIELD. 51

wbere a condnctor of electricity is set in motion between
the poles of a magnet. We have these emrentB doabtiesB
here, and they are competent to heat the medaL Bat idiat
are these currents f how are they leli^ied to the space be-
tween the magnetic poles — how to tiie f<m>e of my ann
which is expended in thdr generation f We do not yet
know, bnt we shall know by and by. It does not in the
least lessen the interest of ^e experiment if the force of
my arm, preyions to appearing as heat, appears in another
form — ^in the form of electricity. Hie ultimate reiRilt is
the same : the heat developed ultimately is the exact equiv-
alent of the qnantity of strength required to move the
medal in the exdted magnetic field.

I wish now to show yon the developement of heat by
this action. I have here a solid metal cylinder, the core
of which is, however, composed of a metal more easily
melted than its outer case. The outer case is copper, and
thifl is filled by a hard but fusible alloy. I set this cylinder
upright between the conical poles p p (fig. 16) of tiie mag-
Fig. i«.


net. A string s s passes from the cylinder to a whirling
table, and by turning the latter the cylinder is caused to
spin round. It might turn till doomsday, as long as the
magnet remains unexcited, without producing the effect
sought ; but when the magnet is in action, I hope to be
able to develope an amount of heat sufficient to melt the
core of that cylinder, and, if successful, I will pour the
liquid metal out before you. Two minutes will suffice for
this experiment. The cylinder is now rotating, and its



52 LBOTDXB IL

npper end is open. I shall leave it thus open until the
liquid metal is seen spatteHng over the poles of the mag-
net. I already see the metallic q>ray, though a minute has
scarcely elapsed since the commencement of the experi-
ment. I now stop the motion for a moment, and c(»rk up
the end of the cylinder, so as to prevent the scattering
about of the metaL Let the action continue for half a min-
ute longer ; the entire mass of the core is, I am persuaded,
now melted. I withdraw the cylinder, remove the cork,
and here is the liquefied mass, which I thus pour out before
you.*

It is now time to consider more closely than we have
hitherto done, the relation of the heat developed by me-
dianical action to the force which produces it. Doubtless
this relation floated in many minds before it received either
distinct enunciation or experimental proof. Those who
reflect on vital processes— on the changes which occur in
the animal body — ^and the relation of the forces involved in
food, to muscular force, are led naturally to entertain the
idea of interdependence between these forces. It is, there-
fore, not a matter of surprise that the man who first raised
the idea of the equivalence between heat and mechanical
energy to philosophic clearness in his own mind, was a
physician. Dr. Mayer, of Heilbronn, in Germany, enunci-
ated the exact relation which subsists between heat and
work, giving the number which is now known as the ^ me-
chanical equivalent of heat,' and following up the state-
ment of the principle by its fearless application*! It is,

* The developement of heat bj causing a oonduotor to revolve between
the poles of a magnet was first effected by Mr. Joule (Phil. Mag. vol. xxiii.
8rd Series, year 1843, pp. 865 and 489), and his experiment was after-
wards revived in a striking form by M. Foucault. The artifice above
described, of fusing the core out of the cylinder, renders the experiment
very effective in the lecture-room.

t See Lectures m. and XIL



MAYER AHD JOULB. S8

boweyer, to Mr. Joule, of Manchester, that we are ahnost
wholly indebted for the ea^perimentcU treatment of this im-
portant subject. Entirely independent of Mayer, with his
mind firmly fixed upon a principle, and undismayed by the
coolness with which his first labours appear to have been
received, he persisted for years in his attempts to prove
the invariability of the relation which subsists between
heat and ordinary mechanical force. He placed water in a
suitable vessel, and agitated that water by paddles, driven
by measurable forces, and determined both the amount of
heat, developed by the stirring of the liquid, and the
amount of labour expended in the process. He did the
same with mercury and with sperm oil. Ho also caused
disks of cast iron to rub against each other, and measured
the heat produced by their friction, and the force expended
in overcoming it. He also urged water through capillary
tubes, and determined the amount of heat generated by the
friction of the liquid against the sides of the tubes. And
the results of his experiments leave no shadow of doubt
upon the mind that, under all circumstances, the quantity
of heat generated by the same amount of force is fixed and
invariable. A given amount of force, in causing the iron
disks to rotate against each other, produced precisely the
same amount of heat, as when it was applied to agitate
water, mercury, or sperm oiL Of course, at the end of an
experiment, the temperati^es in the respective cases would
be very different ; that of the water, for exanrple, would
be -^jfth. of the temperature of the mercury, because, as we
alrc^y know, the capacity of water for heat is 30 times
that of mercury. Mr. Joule took this into account in re-
ducing his experiments, and found, as I have stated, that,
however the temperatures might differ, in consequence of
the different capacity of heat for the substances employed,
the absolute amount of heat generated by the same expend-
iture of power, was in all cases the same.



54 LXorusB n.

In this way it was found that the quaiitity of heat
which would raise one pound of water one d^ree Fi^. in
t^nperatnre, is exactly equal to what would be generated
if a pound weight, after having fidlen through a height of
772 fe^ has its moving force destroyed by collision with
the earth. Conversely, the amount of heat necessary to
n^se a pound of water one degree in tenq>erature, would^
if all applied mechanically, be competent to raise a pound
weight 772 feet high, or it would raise 772 lbs. one foot
high. The term ^ foot-pound ' has been introduced to ex-
press, in a convenient way, the lifting of one pound to the
height of a foot. Thus the quantity of heat necessary to
raise the t^nperature of a pound of water one degree being
taken as a standard, 772 foot-pounds constitute what is
called the mechanical equivalent of heat.

In order to imprint upon your minds the thermal effect
produced by a body falling from a height, I will go through
the experiment of allowing a lead ball to fall from our
ceiling upon this floor. The lead bi^ is at the present mo-
ment slightly colder than the air of this room. I prove
this by bringing it in contact with the thermo-electric pile,
and showing you that the deflection of the needle indicates
cold. Here <m the floor I have placed a slab of iron, on
which I intend the lead to fall, and which, you observe, is
also co<der than the air of the room. At the top of the
house I have an assistant, who will heave up the ball after
I have attadbed it to this string. He will not touch the
ball, nor will he allow it to touch anything else. He will
now let it go ; it falls, and is received upon the plate of
iron. The height is too small to get much heat by a single
fall ; I will therefore have the ball drawn up and dropped
three or four times in succession. Observe, there is a
length of covered wire attached to the ball, by which I lift
it, so that my hand never comes near the ball. There is
the fourth collisi(m, and I think I may now examine the



^MBOHANIOAL EQUTTALENT ' OF HEAT. $5

temperature of the lead. I place the ball, which at the
oommencement iras cold, again upon the pile, and the uor
mediate deflection of the needle in the opposite direction,
declares that now the ball is heated ; this heat is due en-
tirely to the destruction of the moving energy which the
ball possessed when it struck the plate of iron. According
to our theory, the common mechanical motion of the ball
as a mass, has been transferred to the atoms of the mass,
producing among them the agitation which we call heat.

What was the total amount of heat thus generated ?
The space fallen through by the ball in each experiment is
tw^ity-suc feet. The heat generated is proportional to the
height through which the body falls. Now a ball of lead,
in falling through 772 feet, would generate heat sufficient
to raise its own temperature 30^, its ^ capacity ' being ^th
of that of water : hence, in falling through 26 feet, which is
in round numbers jV o^ ^^^9 ^^ ^^^^ generated would, if
aU G<mcentrated in the lead, raise its temperature one de-
gree. This is ihe amount of heat generated by a single
descent of the ball, and four times this amount would, of
course^ be generated by four descents. The heat generated
is not, however, all concentrated in the ball ; it is divided
between the ball and the iron on which it falls.

It IS needless to say, that if motion be imparted to a
body by other means than gravity, the destruction of this
motion also produces heat. A rifle bullet, when it strikes
a target, is intensely heated. The mechanical equivalent
of heat enables us to calculate with the utmost accuracy
the amount of heat generated by the bullet, when its Te-
locity is known. This is a point worthy of our attention,
and in dealing with it I wiU address myself to those of my
audience who are unacquainted even with the elements of
mechanics. Everybody knows that the greater the height
is from which a body falls, the greater is the force with
whidi it strikes the earth, and that this is entirely due to



66 LBOTUBB n.

the greater velocity imparted to the ball, in falling from the
greater height. The velodty imparted to the body is not,
however, proportional to the height from which it falls.
If the hdght be augmented four-fold, the velocity is aug-
mented only two-fold ; if the height be augmented nine-
fold, the velocity is augmented <nily Ihree-fold ; if the
height be augmented sixteen-fold, the velodty is augmented
only four-fold; or, expressed generally, the height aug-
ments in the same proportion as the square of the velocity.

But the heat generated by the collision of the falling
body inc^reases simply as the height; c<msequently, the
heat g^erated mcreasea as the sqtsare of the velocity.

If, therefore, we double the velodty of a projectile, we
augment the heat generated, when its moving force is de«
stroyed, four-fold ; if we treble its velocity, we augment the
heat nine-fold ; if we quadruple the velodty, we augment
the heat sixteen-fold ; and so on.

The velocity imparted to a body by gravity in falling
through 112 feet is, in round numbers, 223 feet a second,
that is to say, immediately before the body strikes the
earth, this is its velocity. Six times this quantity or 1,338
feet a second, would not be an inordinate velodty for a
rifle buUet.

But a rifle bullet, if formed of lead, moving at a ve-
lodty o£ 223 feet a second, would generate, on striking a
tiu*get an amount of heat which, if concentrated in the bul-
let, would raise its temperature 30° ; with 6 times this ve-
lodty it will generate 36 times this amount of heat ; hence
36 times 30, or 1,080% would represent the augmentation
of temperature of a rifle ball on striking a target with a
velodty of 1,338 feet a second, if all the heat generated
were confined to the bullet itself. This amount of heat
would be far more than suffident to fuse the lead ; but in
reality a portion only of the heat generated is lodged in the
ball, the total amount being divided between it and the



mcr,ATifHf €V HXAT TO vsLocaTr. 57

target. Were the bdl mm insteftd of lead, the lieaft gea-
ersled, under the oonditioos siq^poeed, woold be eonqpelent
to raise the temp^rstore of the ball Qoity bj mbont ^rd of
1,080% because the ci^pacitjr of iroo for heat is about diiee
times that of lead.

From these o(»ffldenitaoDS I think it is manifest that if
we know the yelodfy and wd^t of anj projectile, we can
calcobite, with ease, the amoimt of heat devdcqied bj the
destrocticm of itp movii^ fraroe; For ftTMmpl^*^ knowii^,
as we do, the wei^t of the earUi, and the yelodty with
which it moyes through space, a simple calculaticm would
enable ns to determine the exact amoont of heat whidi
would be developed, siq>posing the earth to be stopped in
her orbit. We could tell, for example, the number of de-
grees which this amount of heat would inqiart to a ^obe
of water equal to the earUi in rize. Mayer and Hdmholti
haye made tiiis calculation, and found that the quantity of
heat generated by this colossal shock would be quite suffi-
cient, not only to fuse the entire earth, but to reduce it, in
great part, to yapour. Thus, by the simple stoppage of
the earth in its orbit *• the elemeats ' might be caused ^ to
melt with fervent heat.' The amount of heat thus deyel-
oped would be equal to that deriyed firom the combustion
of fourteen globes of coal, each equal to the earth in mag-
nitude. And if, after the stoppage of its motion, the earth
diould fan into the sun, as it assuredly would, the amount
of heat generated by the blow would be equal to that de-
veloped by the combustion of 5,600 worlds of solid carbon.

Knowledge, such as that which you now possess, has
caused philosophers, in speculating on the mode in which
the sun is nourished, and his supply of li^t and heat kept
up, to suppose the heat and light to be caused by the
showering down of meteoric matter upon the sun's sur-
face.* Some philosophers suppose the Zodiacal, Light to

* Mayer propounded this hypotheas in 1848, and worked it fully ouk
8*



58 ' LBonnoB m

be a doud of meteorites, and from it, it b imagined, the
showering meteoric matter maj be derived. Now, what-
ever be the value of this speoolation, it is to be borne in
mind that the pouring down of meteoric matter, in the
way indicated, would be competent to produce the light
and heat of the sun* With regard to the probable truth or
&]lac7 of the theory, it is not necessary that I diould offer
an opinion ; I would only say that the theory deids witht^
cause which, if in sufficient operation,^ would be competent
to produce the effects asmbed to it.

Let me now pass from the sun to something less, — in
fact, to the oj^Kmite pole of nature* And here that divine
power of the human intellect which annihilates mere mag-
nitude in its dealings with ktWy comes conspicuously mto
play. Our reasoning applies not only to suns and planets,
but equally so to the very ultimate atoms of which matter
is composed. Most of you know the scientific history of
tiie diamond, that Newton, antedating intellectually the
discoveries of modem chanistry, pronounced it to be an
unctuous or combustible substance. Everybody now
knows that this brilliant gem is composed of the same
substance as common charcoal, graphite, or plumbago. A
diamond is pure carbon, and carbcm bums in oxygen. I
have here a diamond, held fast in a loop of jdatinum wire ;
I will heat the gem to redness in this flame, and then
plunge it into this jar, which contains oxygen gas. See
how it brightens on entering the jar of oxygen, and now it
glows, like a little terrestrial star, with a pure white light.
How are we to figure the action here going on ? Exactly
as you would present to your minds the conception of me-
teorites showering down upon the sun. The conceptions

It was afterwards enunciated independently by Mr. Waterston^ and devel-
oped by Professor William Hiomson (Transactions of the Royal Soc. of
Edinb., 1863). See Lecture XIL



1HBQSY or ooifBUBnoir. 59

are, m qnafi^, the same, and to the intelleot the one k
not more drfficnlt than the other. Yoa are to figure the
at<Mns of cnjg&k show^ing against thk diamond on aU
sides. TIkey are niged towards it bjirfaat is caDeddiemi-
cal alBnity, bat this foroe, made dear, presents itself to the
mind as pore attracti<m, of tiie same medianical quality, if
I may use the term, as grayity . Ereiy oxygen aUnn, as it
strikes the sor&ee, and has its motioD. of translati<Hi de-
stroyed by its collision with the carbon, assumes the moticm
which we call heat : and this heat is so intense, the attiao-
timis exerted at these moleciilar distances are so mi^ty,
that the crystal is kept white4iot, and the compound,
formed by the union of its atoms with those of the oxy-
gen, flies away aa carbonic add gas.

Let us now pass <m firom the diamond to ordinary
flame. I haye here a burner firom which I can obtain an
ignited jet of gas. Here is the flame : what is its constitu-
tion ? Within the flame we have a core of pure unbumt
gas, and outside the flame we have the oxygen of the air.
The external surface of the core of gas is in contact with
the air, and here it is that the atoms dash together and
produce light and heat by their collision. But the exact
constitution of the flame is worthy of our special attention,
and for our knowledge of this we are indebted to one of
Davy's most beautiful investigations. Coal-gas is what we
call a hydro-carbon ; it consists of carb<m and hydrogen in
a state of chemical union. From this transparent gas es-
cape the soot and lampblack which we notice when the
combustion of the gas is incomplete. Soot and lampblack
are there now, but they are compounded with other sub-
stances to a transparent form. Here, then, we have a sur-
face of this compound gas, in presence of the oxygen of
our air ; we apply heat, and the attractions are instantly
so intensified that the gas bursts into flame. The oxygen
has a choice of two partners, or, if you like, it is in the



60



LBOTUBB n.



Fig. IT,



presence of two foes ; it closes with that which it likes
best, or hates most heartily, as the case may be. It first
doseis with the hydrogen, and sets the carbon firee. Solid
particles of carbon thus scattered in numbers innmnenble
in the midst of bnming matter, are raised to a state of in-
tense incandescence ; they become white-hot, and mainly to
them the light of our lamps is due. | The carbon, 'however,
c in due time, closes with the oxygen, and becomes, or ought
to become, carbonic add ;\bat in passing from the hydro-
gen with which it was first combmed, to the oxygen, with

which it enters into final nnion^
it exists, for a time, in the sin-^
gle state, and, as a bachelor, i^
gives ns all the splendour of it&
light.

The combustion of a candle
is in principle the same as that
of a jet of gas. Here you have
a rod of wax or tallow (fig. 17),
through which is passed the
cotton wick. You ignite the
wick; it bums, melts the tal-
low at its base, the liquid as-
cends through the wick by cap-
illary attraction, it is converted by the heat into vapour,
and this vapour is a hydro-carbon, which bums exactly like
the gas. Here also you have unbumt vapour within, com-
mon air without, while between both is a shell which
forms the battle-ground of the clashing atoms, where they
develope their light and heat. There is hardly anything in
nature more beautiful than a burning candle ; the hollow
basin partially filled with melted matter at the base of the
wick, the creeping up of the liquid ; its vaporisation ; the
structure of the flame ; its shape, tapering to a point, while
converging air-currents rush in to supply its needs. Its


MuuiunimE or n.AM& a



bemtj, its brigfatnesS) its moUfitj, hsfe nsde it a fiieviov-
ite type of ^iritosl essenees, sad its disBectioQ by Dftvj,
fiur from ^JimniiidiTng die pleasare with idiidi we look
iqpon s Hame, has rendered it more tbaa ever s mnwle of
beauty to the CDli^tened mind.

Yoa oo^t now to be aUe to {Mctore dearly before
your minds the sLmclore of a candle^ame. Yoaoi^tto
see the mibamt owe within and the banuii^ didl whidi
eav^apes this cc»e. Frmn the ewe, throi^h this shdl,
the ccmstitiients of the eandle are inoesnntty pausin g and
esei^ii^ to the sorroanding air. In the case of a candle
yon have a hdlow cone of burning matt^*. Lm^ine this
cone cot across horiaontaDy ; yon would then expose a
training ring. I will pAcdcally cot the flame of a eandle
thus across. I have here a jneoe of white ps^^er, vdiich I
win bring down iqKm the candle ; pressing it down upctk
the flame nntil it almost tondies the wick. Observe the
^yper snrfiM^ of that paper; it becomes diarred, bat how?
Exactly in correspcMidence with the homing rmg of the
candle, we haye a diarred ring npcm the paper {i^. 18).


I might i^rate in the same manner with a jet of gas. I
will do so. Here is the ring which it produces. Within
the ring, yon see, there is no charring of tiie {M^r, for at
this place the nnbnmt yaponr of the candle, or ibe unbornt
gas of the jet, impinges against the sorfiM», and no charring
can be produced.

To the existence, then, of solid carbon partides the
light of our lamps is mainly due. But the existence of
these partides, in the angle state, imjdies the absence of



63 LBOIDXB IL

oxygen to seise hold of them. If^ at the moment of their
liberation from the hydrogen with which they are first
combined, oxygen were present to seize upon Iheni^ their
state of bachelorhood would be extinguished, and we should
no longer have their light. Thus, when we mix a sufficient
quantity of air with the gas issuing from a jet, when we
mix it so that the oxygen penetrates to the very heart of
the jet, we find the light destroyed. Here is a burner, in-
vented by Prof. Bunsen, for the express purpose of destroy-
ing the light by causing the quick combustion of the car-
bon particles. The burner from which the gas escapes is
introduced into a tube ; this tube is perforated nearly on a
level with the gas orifice, and through these perforations
the air enters, mingles with the g», and the mixture issuecr
from the top of the tube. Pig. 19 repre-
^*^- ^^' sents a form of this burner ; the gas is dis-

^fi^ I5 charged into the perforated chamber a,

^^^ I where air mingles with it, and both ascend

I the tube a b together : (2 is a rose-burner,

I which may be used to vary the shape of

I the flame. I ignite the mixture, but the

|M^ flame produces hardly any light. Heat is
^Bim^ the tbing here aimed at, and this lightless
flame is much hotter than the ordinary
flame, because the combustion is much quicker, and there-
fore more intense. If I stop the orifices in a I cut off the
supply of air, and the fiame at once becomes luminous :
we have now the ordinary case of a core of unbumt gas
surrounded by a burning sheU. The illuminating power, of
a gas may, in fact, be estimated by the quantity of air
necessary to prevent the precipitation of the solid carbon
particles ; the richer the gas, the more sdr wUl be required
to produce this effect.

An interesting observation may be made on almost any
windy Saturday evening in the streets of London, on the



COMBUSTION OET MONT BLANO. 98

sodden, and almost total extinction of the light of the huge
gas jets, exposed diiefly in batchers' shops. When the
wind blows, the oxygen is carried mechanically to the very
heart of the flame, and the white light instantly vanishes
to a pale and ghastly blue. During festive illuminations
die same effect may be observed ; the absence of the light
being due, as in the case of Bunsen's burner, to the pres-
eaoe of a sufficient amount of oxygen to consume, instant-
ly, the carbon of the flame.

To determine the influence of height upon the rate of
combustion, was one of the problems which I had set be-
fore me, in my journey to the Alps in 1869. Fortunately
for science, I invited Dr. Frankland to accompany me on
the occasion, and to undertake the experiments on combus-
tion, while I proposed devoting myself to observations on
solar radiation. The plan pursued was this: six candles
were purchased at Chamouni and carefully weighed ; they
were then allowed to bum for an hour in the Hotel de
rXJnion, and the loss of weight was determined. The same
candles were taken to the summit of Mont Blanc, and on
the morning of Aug. 21, were allowed to bum for an hour
in a tent, which perfectly sheltered them from the action
of the wind. The aspect of the six flames at the summit
surprised us both. They seemed the mere ghosts of the
flames which the same candles were competent to produce
in the valley of Chamouni — ^pale, small, feeble, and sug-
gesting to us a greatly diminished energy of combustion.
The candles being carefully weighed on our return, the un-
expected fact was revealed, that the quantity of stearine
consumed above was almost precisely tjie same as that
consumed below. Thus, though the light-giving power of
the flame was diminished in an extraordinary degree by
the elevation, the energy of the combustion was the same
above as it was below. This curious result is to be ascribed
mainly to the mobility of the air at this great height. The



64 LBOTUBB n.

partides of oxygen dould penetrate the flame with com-
parative freedom, thus destroying its light, and making
atonement for the smaUness of their number by the prompt-
ness of their action.

Dr. Frankland has made these experiments the basis
of a most interesting memoir.* He shows that the quan-
tity of a candle consumed in a given time is, within wide
limits, independent of the density of the air ; and the rea-
son is, that although by compressing the air we augment
the number of active particles in contact with the flame,
we almost, in the same degree, diminish their mobility, and
retard their combustion. When an excess of air, moreover,
surrounds the flame, its chiUing effect will tend to prolong
the existence of the carbon particles in a solid form, and
even to prevent their final combustion. One of the beauti-
ful experimental results of Dr. Frankland's investigation
is, that by condensing the air around it, the pale and
smokeless flame of a spirit lamp may be rendered as bright
as that of coal gas, and, by pushing the condensation suffi-
ciently far, the flame may actually be rendered smoky, the
sluggish oxygen present* being incompetent to effect the
complete combustion of the carbon.

But to return to our theory of combustion : it is to the
clashing together of the oxygen of the air and the constitu-
ents of our gas and candles, that the light and heat of
our flames are due. I scatter steel filings in this flame, and
you see the star-like scintillations produced by the com-
bustion of the steel. Here the steel is flrst heated, till the
attraction between it and the oxygen becomes sufficiently
strong to cause them to combine, and these rocket-like
flashes are the result of their collision. It is the impact
of the atoms of oxygen against the atoms of sulphur which
produces the flame observed when sulphur is burned in

* Philosophical Transactions for 1861.



OLASHINO OF AIOIIB. 65

oxygen or in air; to the collision of the same atoms
against phosphorus are due the intense heat and <i<«iJmg
Hght which result from the combustion of phosphorus in
oxygen gas. It is the collision of chlorine and antimony
which produces the light and heat observed where these
bodies are mixed together ; and it is the clashing of siilr
phnr and copper which causes the incandescence of the
mass when these substances are heated together in a Flo-
rence flask. In short, aU cases of combustion are to be as-
cribed to the collision of atoms which have been urged, to-
gether by their mutuid attractions.



APPENDIX TO LECTUKE IL



EXTBACT8 FEOM THE TWENTIETH APHOBISM OP THE SECOND
BOOK OF THE * NOVUM OBGANUM.'

When I say of molion that it is the genus of which heat is a
species, I would be understood to mean, not that heat generates
motion, or that motion generates heat (though both are true m
certam cases), but that heat itself, its essence and quiddity, is
motion, and nothing else ; limited, howeyer, by l^e specific differ-
ences which I will presently subjoin, as soon as I have added a
few cautions, for the sake of avoiding ambiguity. . . .

Nor, again, must the communication of heat, or its transitive
nature, by means of which a body becomes hot when a hot body
is applied to it, be confounded with the form of heat. For heat
is one thing, and heating is another. Heat is produced by the
motion of attrition without any preceding heat. . . .

Heat is an expansive motion, whereby a body strives to dilate
and stretch itself to a larger sphere or dimension than it had pre-
viously occupied. This difference is most observable in flame,
where the smoke or thick vapour manifestly dilates and expands
into flame.

It is shown also in all boiling liquid, which manifestly swells,
rises, and bubbles, and carries on the process of self-expansion,
till it turns into a body far more extended and dilated than the
liquid itself^ namely, into vapour, smoke, or air.

♦ ♦*♦»»*

The third specific difference is this, that heat is a motion of
expansion, not uniformly of the whole body together, but in the
smaller parts of it ; and at the same time checked, repelled, and
beaten back, so that the body acquires a motion alternative, per-



EXTBAOTB FROM BACON. 67

petoally qniTering, striying and straggliiig, and initftted by le-
percnasion, whence springs the fury of fire and heat

Again, it is shown in this that when the air is expanded in a
calender glass, without impediment or repnlcdon, that is to say,
uniformly and equably, there is no perceptible heaL Also, when
wind escapes firom confinement, although it bursts forth with tibe
greatest yiolence, there is no yery great heat peroepiiUe; because
the motion is of the whole, without a motion alternating in tibe
particles.

And this specific difference is common also to the nature of
cold ; for in cold contractiye motion is checked by a resisting
tendency to expand, just as in heat the expansiYe action is checked
by a resisting tendency to contract Thus whether the particles
of a body work inward or outward, the mode of action is the
same.

Now from this our "first vintage it follows, that the form or
true definition of heat (heat that is in relation to the uniyerse, not
simply in relation to man) is in a few words as follows : Beat is
a maUany eaepan^foej restrained^ cmd acting in iU strife upon the
mnaUer partides of iodiea. But the expansion is thus modified :
while it expands M wa/ys, it has (xt the same time an inclination up-
Hoards. And the struggle in the particles is modified also ; it is
not duffffishy hit hurried cmd with violence,'^



AB8TBAGT OP COUNT RUMFOBD'S ESSAY, ENTITLED *AN ENQUIET
COKCEBNINO THE SOUBCE OF THE HEAT WHICH IS EXCITED BY
FBIOTION.'

[Sead htfore the Boyal Society, January 25, 1798.]

Being engaged in superintending the boring of cannon in the
workshops of the military arsenal at Munich, Count Rumford was
struck with the yery considerable degi:ee of heat which a brass
gun acquires, in a short time, in being bored, and with the still
more intense heat (much greater than that of boiling water) of

* Bacon's Works, voL iv. : Spedding's Translation.



68 AFPESDIX TO LEOTUBE IL

the metallic chips separated from it by the borer, he proposed to
himself the following questions :

' Whence comes the heat actaally produced in the mechanical
operation aboye mentioned ?

^ Is it furnished by the metallic chips which aref»parated from
the metal ? '

If this weate the case, then the eapaeit>yf&r heat of the parts of
the metal so reduced to chips ought not only to be changed, but
the change undergone by them should be sufficiently great to ac-
count for aU the heat produced. No sudi change, howeyer, had
taken place ; for the chips were found to have the same capacity
as slices of the same metal cut by a fine saw, where heating was
ayoided. Hence, it is eyident that the heat produced could not
possibly haye been furnished at the expense of the latent heat of
the metallic chips. Rumford describes those experiments at length,
and they are conclusiye.

He then designed a cylinder for the express purpose of gener-
ating heat by friction, by haying a blunt borer forced against its
solid bottom, while the cylinder was turned round its axis by the
force of horses. To measure the heat deyeloped, a small round
hole was bored in the cylinder for the purpose of introducing a
small mercurial thermometer. The weight of the cylinder was
118.18 lbs. ayoirdupois.

The borer was a flat piece of hardened steel, 0*68 of an inch
thick, 4 inches long, and nearly as wide as the cayity of the bore
of the cylinder, namely, 8^ inches. The area of the sur&ce by
which its end was in contact with the bottom of the bore was
nearly 2| inches. At the beginning of the experimrait the tem-
perature of the air in the shade and also that of the cylinder
was 60 degrees Fahr. At the end of 80 minutes, and after the
cylinder had made 960 reyolutions round its aids, the temperature
was found to be 180 degrees.

Haying taken away the borer, he now remoyed the metallic
dust, or rather scaly matter, which had been detached from i^e
bottom of the cylinder by the blunt steel borer, and found its
weight to be 887 grains troy. * Is it possible,' he exclaims, * that
the yery considerable quantity of heat produced in this experi-
ment — a quantity which actufdly raised the temperature of aboye
118 pounds of gun metal at least 70 degrees of Fahrenheit's ther-



mometor— could haye been fomiahed by so inconsiderable a quan-
tity of metallic dust, and this m^ely in consequence of a change
in its capadty for heat ?

' Bat without inmstiug on the improbability of this supposi-
tion, we haye cmly to recollect that from the results of actual and
dedsiye experiments, made for the euptees purpose of ascertaining
tiiat &ct, the capacity for heat of the metal of which great guns
are cast is not mnmbl^ dumged by being reduced to the form of
metallic chips, and there does not seem to be any reason to think
that it can be much duinged, if it be changed at all, in being re-
duced to much smaller pieces by a borer which is less sharp.'

He next surrounded his cylinder by an oblong deal box, in
such a manner that the cylinder could turn water-tight in the cen-
tre of the box, while the borer was pressed against the bottom of
the cylinder. The box was filled with water until the entire cyl-
inder was coyered, and then the apparatus was set in action.
The temperature of the water on commencing was CO-degi^ees.

' The result of this beautiful experiij^t,' writes Rumford,
' was yery striking, and the {Measure it afforded me amply repaid
me for all the trouble I had had in contriying and arranging the
complicated machinery used in making it. The cylinder had
been in motion but a short time, when I perceiyed, by putting my
hand into the water, and touching the outside of the cylinder,
that heat was generated.

• * At the end of an hour the fluid, which weighed 18'77 lbs., or
2^ gallons, had its t^nperature raised 47 degrees, being now 107
degrees.

*• In thirty minutes more, or one hour and thirty minutes after
the machinery had been set in motion, the heat of the water was
143d^ree8.

* At the end of two hours from the beginning, the temperature
was 178 degrees.

* At two hours and twenty minutes it was 200 d^rees, and at
two hours and thirty minutes it actually boiled ! '

It is in reference to this experiment that Rumford made the
remarks regarding the surprise of the bystanders, which I haye
quoted in Lecture L

He then carefully estimates the quantity of heat possessed by
each portion of his apparatus at the conclusion of the experiment,



70 APPENDIX TO LBCrrUBS IL

and adding all together, finds a total sofScient to raise 26*68 lbs.
of ice-cold water to its boiling point, or through 180 degrees Fah-
renheit. By careftd calculation, he finds this heat equal to that
giyen out by the combustion of 2808*8 grains (= 4^ oz. troy)
of wax.

He then determines the ' ederUy * with which the heat was
generated, summing up his computations thus : ' From the results
of these computations, it appears that the quantity of heat pro-
duced equably, or in a continuous stream, if I may use the expres-
sion, by the friction of the blunt steel borer against the bottom
of the hollow metallic cylinder, was greater than that produced in
the combustion of nine wm ecmdki^ each f of an inch in diameter,
all burning together with clear bright flames.'

*• One horse would ha^e been equal to the woik performed,
though two were actually employed. Heat may thus be produced
merely by the strength of a horse, and, in a case of necessity, this
heat might be used in cooking yictuals. But no circumstances
could be imagined in irhich this method of procuring heat would
be adrantageous ; for more heat might be obtained by using the
fodder necessary for the support of a horse as fuel*

[This is an extremdy significant passage, intimating as it
does, that Rumford saw clearly that the force of animals was de-
riyed from the food ; no creation of force taking place in the ani-
mal body.]

* By meditating on the results of all these experiments we Ire
naturally brought to that great question which has so often been
the subject of speculation among philosophers, namely. What is
heat— is there any such thing as an igneous fluid t Is there any
thing that, with propriety, can be called caloric ? '

* We have seen that a very considerable quantity of heat may
be excited by the friction of two metallic surfaces, and given off
in a constant stream or flux in aU directions, without interruption
or intermission, and without any signs of diminution or exhaustion.
In reasoning on this subject we must not forget that most remarh-
able dremMtance, that the source of the heat generated by friction
in these experiments appeared evidently to be inesdhaustible. (The
italics are Rumford's.) It is hardly necessary to add, that any-
thing which any irmUated body or system of bodies can continue
to furnish mthtmt limitation cannot possibly be a material sub-



CX)MFB£SSI(»r OF BISULPHIDE OP CASBON VAPOUB: 71

tUmce; and it appears to me to be extremely difficult, if not
quite impossible, to form any distinct idea of anything capable
of being excited and commmiicated in those experiments, except
it be MOTION.

When the history of the dynamical theory of heat is written,
the man who, in opposition to the scientific belie/ of his time,
conld experiment and reason upon experiment, as Rmnford did in
fbe investigation here referred to, cannot be lightly passed oyer.
Hardly anything more powerful against the materiality of heat
has been since adduced, hardly anything more condnsiTe in the
way of establishing that heat is what Bmnford considered it to
\3e^ Motion,



OS THE COMPRESSION OF AIB CONTAINING BISULPHIDE
OF CABBON VAPOUB.

* A yery singular phenomenon was repeatedly observed daring
the experiments with bisulphide of carbon. After determining
the absorption of the vapour, the tube was exhausted as perfectly
as possible, the trace of vapour left behind being exceedingly
minute. Dry air was then admitted to cleanse the tube. On
again exhausting, after the first few strokes of the pump, a jar
was felt and a kind of explosion heard, while dense volumes of
blue smoke immediately issued £'om the pump cylinders. The
action was confined to the latter, and never propagated itself
backwards into the experimental tube.

* It is only with bisulphide of carbon that this effect has been
observed. It may, I think, be explained in the following man-
ner : — ^To ofMsn the valve of the piston, the gas beneath it must
have a certain tension, and the compression necessary to produce
this appears sufficient to cause the combination of the constituents
of the bisulphide of carbon with the oxygen of the air. Such a
combination certainly takes place, for the odour of sulphurous
add is unmistakeable amid the fumes.

' To test this idea I tried the effect of compression in the air
syringe. A bit of tow or cotton wool moistened with bisulphide
of carbon, and placed in the syringe, emitted a bright flash when



73 APPENDIX TO LBCTUBB IL

the air was compressed. By blowing out the ftunes with a glass
tube, this experiment may be repeated twenty times with the same
bit of cotton.

' It is not necessary eyen to let the moistened cotton remain in
the syringe. If the bit of tow or cotton be thrown into it, and
out again as quickly as it can be ^ected, on compressing the air
the luminous flash is seen. Pure oxygen produces a brighter flash
than atmospheric air. These fiicts are in harmony with the above
explanation.' '*'

• FhiL Trans., 1861 ; FhiL Mag., Sept 1861.



LECTURE III.

// [Friiraaij €, 1862L]

KXPAsmos : tsk soun, uQum, Msn oaskoos iobms <w



PAXnOO— HEAT IMPJJCtKD TO ▲ cam imSB OOnXAST nSBBCXB — SKAT
IMPAKSD TO A GA8 AT OOI8TAXT TOLOO — MATKB,^ CAUXI-Aimi ^OF
THX MXCHAnCAL XQUrTALER OF HBAT — DII.AIATIOX OF OA8B WIIB0X:T
KKmOZmATIOV — ABSMtUTK ZKBO OF TSMPSKATUmB — SXPAjbhuji OV U-
^IITIDS ASD 80IJII8: AHOXAIjOCB DKPOKOfXVT OF WATKE ASO BimiTH
'— BRBCrr OF TBB FOBCB OF CTTBTAIlilXiTfffl'— »'"*»*^'- SfFBCT OF

nsncmso wnua— asomaioub okpobzukst of odla-subbsk.
•APPxaDix: — ^aih>itioxal data QamcEMsa» kzpaxbios — EXfrnAcrs wmam.

8IK H. DtATT'S FOST SC HF T IFIC KKMOnt: FCBIOV OF ICB BT FUCIIOS, Ac.

TOUS ie^^)eanuiee here to-day, after the stnin whidi
has already beat pot npon your attentlcHi, enooorages
me to h<^>e that our present experiment win not be entirely
nnsQcoessfiiL I ne^ not teU an audience like tiusthsut
nothing intdlectaalLy great is ^tiber acc(»npliflhed or ap-
prc^Miated withoot ^S>rt. Kewt<m ascribed the diflfer^iee
betweoi himself and other men to his patience in steadily
looking at a qoestion, nntil li^t dawned iqKm it, and if we
hare fhrmnAgu to imitate his example, we shall, no doobL
leqp a conunensorate reward.

In onr first lecture I permitted a 8ledge4iammer to de-
scend iqxm a mass of lead, and we found that the lead be.
5 heated, as soon as the mechani c a l motion of the hum.

was arrested. Formeilyit wasassmnedthatthe f^

4



74 LBoruBB m.

of the hammer was simply lost by the concussion. In elas*
tic bodies it was supposed that a portion of the force was
restored by the elasticity of the body, which caused 1^
descending mass to rebound ; but in the collision of inelas-
tic bodies it was taken for granted that the force of impact
was lost. This, according to our present notions, was a
fundamental mistake ; we now admit no loss, but assume,
that when the motion of the descending hammer ceases, it
is simply a case of transference^ instead of annihilation.
The motion of the mass, as a whole, has been transformed
into a motion of the molecules of the mass. This motion
of heat, however, though intense, is executed within limits
too minute, and the moving particles are too small, to be
visible. To discern these processes we must make use of
a finer eye and higher powers, namely, the eye and powers
of the mind. In the case of solid bodies, liien, while the
force of cohesion still holds the particles together, you
must conceive a power of vibration, within certain limits,
to be possessed by the particles. You must suppose them
oscillating to and fro across their positions of rest ; and
the greater the amount of heat we impart to the body, or
the greater the amount of mechanical action which we in-
vest in it by percussion, compression, or friction, the more
intense will be the molecular vibration, and the wider the
amplitude of the atomic oscillations.

Now, nothing is more natural than that particles thus
vibrating, and ever as it were seeking wider room, should
urge each other apart, and thus cause the body of which
they are the constituents, to expand in volume. This, in
general, is the consequence of imparting heat to bodies —
expansion of volume. We shall closely consider the few
apparent exceptions to this law by and by. By the force
of cohesion, then, the particles are* held together ; by the
force of heat they are pushed asunder : here are the two
antagonist principles on which the molecular aggregation



THB LIQUID A2n> GASBOUS FOBMB OF KATTEB. 75

of the body depends. Let ns suppose the oommimioadoii
of heat to continiie ; every increment of heat pushes the
p^fticles more widely apart; but the force of cohesion, like
all other known forces, acts more and more feebly, as the
distance between the particles which are the seat of the
force is augmented. As, therefore, the heat strengthens,
its oppon^it grows weak, until, finally, the particles are so
fsu* loosed from the rigid thrall of cohesion, that they are
at liberty, not only to Vibrate to and fro across a fixed po-
sition, but also to roll or glide around each other. Cohesion
is not yet destroyed, but it is so far modified, that while the
particles still ofier resistance to being torn directly asunder,
their lateral mobility over each other's surfaces is secured.
This is the Uquid condiHon of maUer.

In the interior of a mass of liquid the motion of every
atom is controlled by the atoms which surround it. But
suppose you develope heat of sufficient power within the
body of a liquid, what occurs ? Why, the particles break
the last fetters of cohesion, and fly asunder to form bubbles
of vigour. If one of the surfaces of the liquid be quite
free, that is to say, uncontrolled either by a liquid or solid ;
it is quite easy to conceive that some of the vibrating su-
perficial particles will be jerked quite away from the liquid,
and win fly with a certain velocity through space. Thus
freed from the infiumee of cohesion^ we have matter in the
vaporotis or gaseotisform.

My object here is to familiarize your minds with the
general conception of atomic motion. I have spoken of the
vibration of the particles of a solid as causing its expan-
aion ; the particles have been thought by some to revolve
round each other, and the communication of heat, by aug-
menting the centrifugal force of the particles, was supposed
to push them more widely asunder. I have here a weight
attached to a spiral spring ; if I twirl the weight round in
tiie air it tends to fly away from me, the spring stretches to



76 usuiuMR m.

a certain extoit, and as I augment tiie speed of revolution,
the spring stretches still more, the distance between my
hand and the weight being thus angmented. It has be^
thought that the aagmentation of the distance between a
body's atoms by heat, may be also doe to a revolntion of
its particles. And imagine the motion to continue till the
spring snaps ; the ball attached to it would fly off alcmg a
tangent to its former orbit, and thus represent an atom
freed, by heat, from the force of cohesion, which is rudely
represented by our spring. The ideas of the most well-
informed philosophers are as yet uncertun regarding the
exact nature of the motion of heat; but the great point,
at present, is to regard it as motion of some kind, leaying
its more precise character to be dealt with in future inves-
tigations.

We might extend the notion of revolving atoms to
gases also, and deduce their phenomena from a motion of
this kind. But I have just thrown out an idea regarding
gaseous particles, which is i^ present very ably main-
tained:* the idea, namely, that such particles fly in
straight lines through space. Everybody must have re-

I marked how quickly the perfume of an odorous body fills
a room, and this fact harmonizes with the idea of the di-

' rect projection of the particles. But it may be proved,
that if the theory of rectilinear motion be true, the parti-
cles must move at the rate of several hundred feet a seo-
ond. Hence it might be objected that, according to the
above hypothesis, odours ought to spread much more
quickly than they are observed to do.

The answer to this objection is, that they have to make
their way through a crowd of air particles, with which
they come into incessant collision. On an average, the



* By Joule, Eronig, Maxwell ; and, in a series oi extremely able papers,
by ClaiiBiiis.



ATOnn vMotmanLBB. 77

dfetanoe tbioo^ wMeh an odwons particle can timrd in ^
common air, without striking against a partide of air, is
iflfcatesima], and henoe tfad propi^aticm of a petfaaaae
Ibroi^ air is enormonsly retarded bj the air itseUl It is
well known that when a fiee commimicalion k opened be>
tween the rar£Ke of a fiqnid and a Taciram, the Taeuoas
apaee ni mudi more speedily filled to saturation with the
Tq>onr of the liquid, than wh»i air is jvesent.

Aooording to this hypothesis, then, we are to figure a
gaseous body as one whose particles are flying in stnd^
lines Ihron^ space, impinging like little projectiles upaa
each other, and strikii^ i^ainst the bonndaries of the space
whidi they oocnpy. Mr. Anderson will place this Uaddei^
half filled with air, under the receiver of the air-pump ; he
win now work tiie pump, and remove the dir that surrounflb
the Madder. The bladder swells ; the air within it appears
quite to fin it, so as to remove an its folds and creases.
How is this expansion of the bladder produced ? Accord*
ing to our present theory, it is produced by the shooting
of atomic projectiles against its interior surface, which
drive the envelope outwards, until its teiisi<m is able to
cope with l^eir force. When air is admitted into the re-
ceiver, tiie bladder shrivels up to its former size ; and here
we must figure the discharge of the air particles agaiost the
outer sur&ce of the bladder, which drive the ^ivelope in-
wards, causing, at the same time, the particles within to
concentrate their fire, until finaUy the force from within
equals that firom without, and the envdope remains quies-
cent. AU the impressions, then, which we derive from
heated air or vapour are, according to this hypothesis,
due to the impact of the gaseous atoms. They stir the
nerves in their o|m peculiar way,4the nerves transmit
the motion to the brain, and the brain declares it to be
heat. Thus l^e impression one receives on entering the
hot room of a Turkish bath, is caused by the atcnnic can-



78 LBcmiBB m.

nonade whioh is there maintained agains the surface of
the body.

If, instead of placing this bladder under the receiver of
an air-pump, and withdrawing the external air^ I augment,
by heat, the projectile force of the particles within it, these
particles, though comparatively few in number, will strike
with such impetuous energy against the inner surface as to
cause the envelope to retreat : the bladder swells and be-
comes a|ft>arently filled with air ; I hold the bladder close
to the fire, and here it is, you see, with ail its creases re-
moved. But you will retort, perhaps, by saying that thia,
ought not to be the case, inasmuch as the air outside the
bladder is also near the fire, and therefore animated with a
like projectile energy, which tends to drive the envelope
in. True, the bladder and the air in contact with it are
equally near the fire ; but in a future lecture you will learn
that tlie air outside the bladder allows the rays of heat to
pass through it with very little augmentation of tempers^
ture, while the bladder intercepts the radiant heat ; the erir
vdope becomes first warmed and then communicates its heat,
by contact, to the air within. The air, moreover, in con-
tact with the bladder on the outside, though heated by the
bladder, has free space to dilate in, and is therefore incom-
pet^it to resist the expansion of the confined air which the
bladder contains.

This, then, is a simple illustration of the expansive force
of heat, and I have here an apparatus intended to show you
the same fact in another manner. Here is a flask, f (fig.
20), empty, except as regards air, which I intend to heat
by this little spirit-lamp underneath. From the flask a bent
tube passes to this dish, containing a coloured liquid. In
the dish, a 2-foot gllss tube, 1 1^ is inverted, closed at the
top, but with its open end downwards ; you know that the
pressure of the atmosphere is competent to keep the column
of liquid in this tube, and here you have it quite filled to



SXPANSIOK OF GABE8 BY HEAT.



79



the top widi the liquid. The tube passing from the flask
is caused to turn np exactly underneath the open end of
this njnight tnbe, so that if a bubble of air should issue
from the former, it will ascend the latter. I now heat the



Fig; 20.


flask, and as I do so, the air expands, for the reasons al-
ready given ; bubbles are driven from the end of the bent
tube, and they ascend in the tube 1 1 The air speedily de-
presses the liquid column, until now, in the course of a very
few seconds, the whole column of liquid has been super-
seded by air.

It is perfectly manifest that the jdr, thus expanded by
heat, is lighter than the unexpanded air. Our flask, at the
conclusion of this experiment, is lighter than it was at the
commencement, by the weight of the air transferred from
it into the upright tube. Supposing, therefore, a light bag
to be filled with such air, it is plain that the bag would,
with reference to the heavy air outside it, be like a drop
of oil in water ; the oil Being lighter than the water, will



80 liBOTUBB HL

ascend through tiie latter; so also our bag, fiUed with
heated air, will ascend in the atmosphere ; and this is the
principle of the so-called fire-balloon. Mr. Anderson will
ignite some tow in this vessel, over it he will plaee this
funnel, and over the fmmel I will hold the mouth of this
paper balloon. The heated air ascending from the burning
tow enters the balloon, causes it to swell ; its tendency to
rise is already manifest. I let it go, and thus it sails aloft
tiU it strikes the ceiling of the room.

But we must not be content with regarding these phe-
nomena in a general way ; without exact quantitative de-
terminations our discoveries would confound and bewilder
us. We must now enquire what is the amount of expan-
♦sion which a given quantity of heat is able to produce in a
gas ? This is an important point, and demands our special
attention. When we speak of the volume of a gas, we
should have no distinct notion of its real quantity, if its
temperature were omitted, the volume varies so largely
with the temperature. Take, then, a measure of gas at the
precise temperature of water when it begins to freeze, or
of ice when it commences to melt, that is to say, at a tem-
perature of 32° Fahr. or 0° Cent., and raise that volume of
gas one degree in temperature, t?ie pressure on every square
inch of the envelope which holds the gas being preserved
constant. The volume of the gas will become expanded
by a quantity which we may call a ; raise it another degree
in temperature, its volume will be expanded by 2a, a third
degree will cause an expansion of 3a, and so on. Thus, we
see, that for every degree which we add to the temperature
of the gas, it is expanded by the same amount. What is
this amount ? No matter what the quantity of gas may be
at the freezing temperature, by raising it one degree Mthr- *
enheit we augment its volume by ^i^^h. of its own amount ;
while by raising it one degree Centigrade we augment the
volume by rri^^ ^^ ^^ ^^n amomt A cubic foot of gas,



CX>EFIlC!Iia9T OF lEZPANBIOK. 81

for example, at 0"" C^ becomes, on being heated to l"",
l^j cubic foot, or, ejqpressed in decimals,

1 voL at 0° C. becomes 1 + '00367 at 1° C
1^ 2° C. it becomes 1 + -00367 X 2
at 3° C. it becomes 1 + -00367 X 3, and so on.

The constant number -00367, which expresses the frac-
tion of its own volume, which a gas, at the freezing tem-
perature, expands on being heated one degree, is
called the coefficient of ex^pansion of the gas. Of ^^' *^
course if we use the degrees of Fahrenheit, the co-
efficient will be smaller in the proportion of 9 to 5.

This much made clear, we shall now approach,
by slow degrees, an interesting but difficult sub-
ject. Suppose I have a quantity of idr contained
in a very tall cylinder, a b (fig. 21), the transverse
section of which is one square inch in area. Let
the top A of the cylinder be open to the air, and
let p be a piston, which, for reasons to be explained
immediately, I will suppose to weigh two pounds
one ounce, and which moves air-tight and without
friction, up or down in the cylinder. At the com-
mencement of the experiment, let the piston be at
the point p of thfe cylinder, and let the height of
the cylinder fi'om its bottom b to the point p be
273 inches, the air underneath the piston being at
a temperature of 0® C. Then, on heating the air
from 0° to 1° C. the piston will rise one inch ; it
win now stand at 274 inches above the bottom. If
the temperature be raised two degrees, the piston
win stand at 275, if rsdsed three degrees it will
stand at 276, if raised ten degrees it will stand at
283, if 100 degrees it will stand at 373 inches
above the bottom ; finsdly, if the temperature were raised
to 273° C, it is quite manifest 273 inches would be added
4*



1



o*a



S3 LEcrruBB hl

to the height of the colmnn, or, in other words, by heating
the air to 273^ C, its voh^me would he doubled.

It is evident that the gas, in this experiment, executes
work. In expanding from p upwards, it has to overcome
the downward pressure of the atmosphere, which amounts
' to 15 lbs. on every square inch, and also the weight of the
piston itself, which is 2 lbs. 1 oz. Hence, the section of
the cylinder being one square iach in area, in expanding
from p to p' the work done by the gas is equivident to the
rabing a weight of 17 lbs. 1 oz., or 273 ounces, to a height
of 273 inches. It is just tixe same as what it would accom-
plish, if the jdr above p were entirely abolished, and a pis-
ton weigbing 17 lbs. 1 oz. were placed at p. X^

Let us now alter our mode of experiment, and instead
of allowing our gas to expand when heated, let us oppose
its expansion by augmenting the pressure upon it. In
other words, let us keep its volume constant while it is
being heated. Suppose, as before, the initial temperature
of the gas to be 0° C, the pressure upon it, including the
weight of the piston p, being, as formerly,^. 273 ounces.
Let us warm the gas from 0° C. to 1° C. ; what weight
must we add to p in order to keep its volume constant ?
Exactly one ounce. But we have supposed the gas, at the
commencement, to be under a pressure of 273 ounces, and
the pressure it sustains is the measure of its elastic force ;
hence, by being heated one degree, the elastic force of the
gas has augmented by ^4 s^^ ^^ ^^** ^* possessed at 0°.
If we warm it 2°, 2 ozs. must be added to keep its volume
constant ; if 3°, 3 ozs. must be added. And if we raise its
temperature 273°, we should have to add 273 ozs. ; that is,
we should have to double the original pressure to keep the
volume constant.

It is simply for the sake of deamess, and to avoid frSiXi'
tions in our reflections, that I have supposed the gas to be
under the original pressure of 273 ozs. No matter what its



WOBX DONE BY EXPAKDIKa GAS. 83

pressure may be, the addition of 1^ C. to its temperature
produces an augmentation of s^s^i of the elastic force
which the gas possesses at the freadng tonperature ; and
by raising its temperature 273"^, while its volume is kept
constant, its elastic force is doubled. Let us now compare
this experiment with the last one. There we heated a cer-
tain amount of gas from 0° to 273°, and doubled its vol-
ume by so doing, the double volume being attained while
the gas lifted a weight of 273 ozs« to a height of 273
inches. Mere we heat the same amount of gas from 0° to
273°, but we do not permit it to lift any weight. We
keep its volume constant. The quantity of matter heated
in both cases is the same ; the tempercUure to which it is
heated is in both cases the same; but are the abeolvZe
qwxnJbUieB of heat imparted in both cases the same ? By
no means. Supposing that to raise the temperature of the
gas, whose volume is kept constant, 273°, 10 grams of
combustible matter are necessary ; then to raise the tem-
perature of the gas whose presmre is kept constant an
equal number of degrees, would require the consumption
of 14| grains of the same combustible matter. The heat
produced by the combustion of the (additional 4^ grain^^ in
the latter case^ is entirely/ consumed in lifting the weight.
Using the accurate numbers, the quantity of heat applied
when the volume is constant, is to the quantity applied
when the pressure is constant, in the proportion of

1 to 1-421.

This extremely important fact constitutes the basis
£rom which the mechanical equivalent of heat was first cal-
culated. And here we have reached a point which is wor-
thy of, and which will demand, your entire attention. I
wQl endeavour to make this calculation before you.

Let c (fig. 21fl^) be a cylindrical vessel with a base one
square foot in area. Let p p mark the upper surface of a


84 LBOTUBB m.

cubic foot of air at a temp«ratnre of B2'' Fahr. The height
A p will be then one foot. Let the air be heated till this
Yolmiie is doubled ; to effect this it must,
as before explained, be nosed 273^ C, or
490"" F. in temperature; and, when ex-
panded, its upper surface will stand at p'
p', one foot above its initial position. But
in rimng from p p to p' p' it has forced
back the atmosphere, which exerts a pres-
sure of 15 lbs. on every square inch of its
upper surface ; in other words, it has lifted
a weight of 144 X 15 = 2,160 lbs. to a
height of one foot#
The ^ capacity ' for heat of the air thus expanding is
0*24 ; water being imity. The weight of our cubic foot of
air is 1*29 oz., hence the quantity of heat required to raise
1*29 oz. of air 490° Fahr. would raise a little less than one-
fourth of that weight of water 490°. The exact quantity
of water equivalent to our 1*29 oz. of air is 1*29 X 0*24 =
0-31 oz.

But 0*31 oz. of water, heated ^ 490°, is equal to 162
ozs. or 9 J lbs. heated 1°. Thus the heat imparted to our
cubic foot of air, in order to double its volume, and enable
it to lift a wei^t of 2,160 lbs. one foot high, would be
competent to raise 9i lbs. of water one degree in tempera-
ture.

The air has here been heated under a constant pressure^
and we have learned, that the quantity of heat necessary to
raise the temperature of a gas under constant pressure a
certain number of degrees, is to that required to raise the
gas to the same temperature, token its volume is Jc^t coPr-
stant^ in the proportion of 1*42 : 1 ; hence we have the
statement —

lbs. lbs.

1-42: 1 = 9*6: 6*7



liATEs's OAUOUULTIOS. 85

wUoh shows that the quantity of heltt neoessaiy to aog*
ment the temperature of our cubic foot of air, at constant
y<dmne, 490% would heat 6*7 lbs. of water 1°.

Deducting 6*7 lbs. from 9*5 Ibs^ we find that the excess
of heat imparted to the air, in the case where it is permit-
ted to expand, is competent to raise 2*8 lbs. of water I'' in
temperature.

As explained already, this excess is employed to lift the
weight of 2,160 lbs. one foot high. Dividing 2,160 by 2*8,
we find that a quantity of heat sufficient to raise one pound
of water 1° Fahr. in temperature, is competent to raise a
weight of 771*4 lbs. a foot high.

This method of calculating the mechanical equival^t
of heat was followed by Dr. Mayer, a physician in Heil-
bron, Glermany, in the spring of 1842.

Mayer's first paper contains merely an indication of the
way in which he had found the equivalent ; but does not
contain the calculation. The paper was evidently a kind
of preliminary note, from which date might be taken. In
it were enunciated the convertibility and indestructibility
of force, and its author referred to the mechanical equiva-
lent of heat, merely in illustration of his principles. Had
this first paper stood alone, Mayer's relation to the dynami-
cal theory of heat would be very different from what it
now is ; but in 1845 he published an Essay on Organic
Motion, which, though exception might be taken to it here
and there, is, on the whole, a production of extraordinary
merit. This was followed in 1848 by an Essay on ^ Celes-
tial Dynamics,' in which, with remarkable boldness, saga-
city, and completeness, he developed the meteoric theory
of the sun. Taking him all in all, the right of Mayer to
stand, as a man of true genius, in the front rank of the
founders of the dynamical theory of heat, cannot be dis-
puted.

On August 21, 1843, Mr. Joule communicated a paper



86 LBCfTDBB m.

to the British Assooiiitioii, then meeting at Cork, and in the
third part of this paper* he describes a series of experi^
ments on magneto-electricaty, executed witii a yiew to de^
termine the ^ mechanical value of heat' The results of this
elaborate investigation gave the following weights raised
one foot high, as equivalent to the wanning of 1 lb. of
water 1^ Fahr.



1. 896 lbs.


5. 1026 lbs.


2. 1001 „


6. 687 „


S. 1040 „


1. 742 „


4. 910 „


8. 860 „



'In 1844 Mr. Joule deduced from experiments on the
condensation of air, the following equivalents to 1 lb. of
water heated V Fahr.

823 foot pounds

796

820 „

814

760

As the experience of the experimenter increased, we
find that the coincidence of his results becomes closer. In
1845 Mr. Joule deduced from experiments with water, agi-
tated by a paddle-wheel, an equivalent of

890 foot pounds.

Summing up his results in 1846, and taking the mean,
he found the equivalent to \^

817 foot pounds.

In 1847 he found the mean of two experiments to give
as equivalent

781*8 foot pounds.
• FhiL Mag., 1848, vol xziiL p. 485.



JOULES SXPBBDCENTB. 87

Filially, in 1849, applying all the preoantions snggested
by seven years' ezperienoe, he obtained the following nmnr
bers for tiie mechanical eqmralent of heat : —

772*692, from fiiction of water, mean of 40 experiments
774-088, „ „ mercory, „ 60 „
774-987, „ „ cast-iron, „ 20 „

For reasons assigned in his paper, Mr. Joule fixes the
exact equivalent of heat at

772 foot pounds.

According to the method pursued by Mayer, in 1842,
the mechanical equivalent of heat is

771*4 foot pounds.

Such a coincidence relieves the mind of every shade of
uncertainty, regarding the correctness of our present me-
chanical equivalent of heat.

Do I refer to these things in order to exalt Mayer, at
the expense of Joule ? It is far from my intention to do
so. The man who through long years, without encourage-
ment, and in the face of difficulties which might well be
deemed insurmountable, could work with such unswerving
steadfastness of purpose to so triumphant an issue, is safe
from depreciation. And it is not the experiments alone,
but the spirit which they incorporate, and the applications
which their author made of them, that entitle Mr. Joule to
a place in the foremost rank of physical philosophers.
Mayer's labours have, in some measure, the stamp of a pro-
found intuition, which rose, however, to the energy of un-
doubting conviction in the author's mind. Joule's labours,
on the contrary, are an experimental demonstration. True
to the speculative instincts of his coimtry, Mayer drew
large and weighty conclusions from slender premises, while
the Englishman aimed, above all things, at the firm estab-
lishment of £Eu:ts. And he did establish them. The future


88



IiBCfTDBB in*



historian of sbi^ice will not, I think, place tii^se men in
antagonism. To each belongs a reputation which will not
quickly fade, for the share he has had, not only in estab^
lishing the dynamical theory of heat, but also in leading
the way towards a right appreciation of the general energies
of the universe.

Let us now check our conclusion regarding the influence
which the performance of work has on the quantity of heat
communicated to a gas. Is it not possible to allow a gas
to expand, without performing work ? This question is an-
swered by the following important experiment, which was
first made by Gay Lussac. I have here two copper vessels,
A, B (fig. 22), of the same size, one of which, a, is exhaust-
ed, and the other, b, filled with air. I turn the cock c ;
Ihe air rushes out of b into a, until the same pressure exists
in both vessels. Now the sir in
driving its own particles ont of b
performs work, and experiments
which we have already made in-
form us, that the residue of air
which remains in b must be chill-
ed. The particles of air enter a
with a ceiiain velocity, to generate
which the heat of the air in b has
been sacrificed ; but they immedi-
ately strike against the interior
surface of a, their motion of trims-
lation is annihilated, and the exact quantity of heat lost by
B appears in a. Mix the contents of a and b together, and
you have air of the original temperature. There is no work
performed, and there is no heat lost. Mr. Joule made this
experiment by compressing twenty-two atmospheres of air
into one of his vessels, while the other was exhausted. On
surrounding both vessels by water, kept properly agit^ied,
no augmentation of temperature was observed in the water.



A



\y



Fig. 22.
C

^3=



?^



V^'



EXPANBIOK WITHOUT BBFBIGEBATIOir. 89

whea the gas was allowed to streatn from one vessel into
the other."*" In like manner, supposing the top of the cylin-
2^ j der {^g.Jiffj to be closed, and the half above the piston a
perfect vacuum ; and suppose the air in the lower half to
be heated 273°, its volume being kept constant. If the
pressure were removed, the air would expand and fill the
cylinder ; the lower portion of the column would thereby
be chilled, but the upper portion would be heated, and
mixing both portions together, we should have the whole
coluinn at a temperature of 273°. In thb case we raise the
temperature of the gas from 0° to 273°, and afterwards al-
low^ it to double its volume ; the state of the gas at the
commencement, and at the end, is the same as when the
gas expands against a constant pressure, or lifts a constant
weight ; but the absolute quantity of heat in the latter case
is 1*421 times that employed in the former, the difference
being iitb to the fact that the gas, in the one case, per-
forms mechanical'Tt^ork, and in the other not.

We are taught by this experiment that mere rarefaction
is not of itself sufficient to produce a lowering of the mean
temperature of a mass of air. It was, and is still, a current
notion, that the mere expansion of a gas produced refriger-
ation, no matter how that expansion was effected. The
coldness of the higher atmospheric regions was accounted
for by reference to the expansion of the air. It was
thought that what we have called the * capacity for heat *
was greater in the case of the rarefied than of the unrare^
fied gas. But the refrigeration which accompanies expan-
sion is, in reality, due to the consumption of heat in the
performance of work by the expanding gas. Where no
work is performed there is no absolute refrigeration.

All this needs reflection to arrive at clearness, but every
effort of this kind which you make will render your subse-

* PhiL Mag. 1S46, yoL xxtL p. 878.



\



90 LBOTUBB in.

qaent efforts easier, and should yon fail, at present, to gain
deamess of comprehension, I repeat my recommendation
of patience. Do not quit this portion of the subject with-
out an effort to comprehend it — ^wrestle with it for a time,
but do not despair if you fail to arriye at deamess.

I have now to direct your attention to one other inter-
esting question. We have seen the elastic force of our gas
augmented by an increase of temperature. In an inflexible
envelope we have, for every degree of temperature, a cer-
tsun definite increment of elastic force, due to the augment-
ed energy of the gaseous projectiles. Reckoning fSrom 0®
C. upwards, we find that every degree added to the tem-
perature produces an augmentation of elastic force, equal
to ?! ^rd of that which the gas possesses at 0% and hence,
that by imparting 273° we double the elastic force. Sup-
posing the same law to hold good when we reckon from 0°
dotontoarda — ^that for every degree of temperature toithr
drawn from the gas we diminish its elastic force, or the
motion which produces it, by ^l^rd of what it possesses at
0°, it is manifest that at a temperature of 273° Centigrade
below 0° we should cease to have any elastic force what-
ever. The motion to which the elastic force is due must
here vanish, and we reach what is called the ahsolvte zero
oftemperoiture.

No doubt, practically, every gas deviates from the
above law of ocAitraction before it sinks so low, and it
would become solid before reaching — ^273° C, or the abso'
lute zero. This is considerably below any temperature
which we have as yet been able to obtain.

I will not subject your minds to any ftirther strain in
connection with this subject to-day, but will now pass on
to illustrate experimentally the expansion of liquids by
heat.

Here is a Florence flask filled with alcohol, and tightly
corked ; through the cork a tube, t' (fig. 23), passes waters


or UQuiDa.



91



tigiiti and the liquid nses a fooft or bo in tiuB tabe. I w31
beat this flask, the alc(^iol will expand, and it will rise in
the tabe. But I wish yon to see it rising, and to enable
you to do so I win pbice the tube if hi finint of the dec-
trie lamp JE, and send a strong beam of light aoroGS it, at


the place ^, where the liquid column ends ; I thns illimd-
nate the tube and colnmn. Li front of the tube I place this
lens L, and arrange its distance so that it shall cast an en-
larged image i t, of the colnmn upon the screen. You now
see clearly where the column ends ; you see this quivering
of the top of the column, and if if moves, you will he able
to aee its motion. I now fill this beaker, b, with hot wa-



9S ItBOTDSB m.

to, and I will raise the beaker so tiiat tke hot water shall
surround the Florence flask. It is needless to say that the
image iqpon the screen is inverted, and that when ibe liquid
expands, the top of the oolnnm will descend along the
screen. Observe the experiment firom the oommenoetnent;
the flask is now in tiie hot water, and the head of our col-
umn ascends^ as if the liquid contracted. Now it stops
and commences to descend, and it will continue to do so
permanently. But why the first ascent ? It is not due to
the contraction of the liquid, but to the momentary eapan^
Hon of the flcuJe^ to which the heat is first communicated.
The glass expands before the heat can fairly reach the
liquid, and hence the column fSEdls ; but soon the expansion
of the liquid exceeds that of the glass, and the column
rises. Two things are here illustrated ; the expansion of
the solid glass by heat, and tiie fact that the observed dila-
tation of the liquid does not give us its true augmentation
of volume, but only the difference of dilatation between
the glass and it.

I have here another flask filled with water, exactly
similar in size to the former, and ftimished with a similar
tube. I place it in the same position, and repeat with it
the experiment made with the alcohol. You see, first of all,
the transitory effect due to the expansion of the glass, and
afterwards, the permanent expansion of the liquid ; but you
can observe that the latter proceeds much more slowly than
in the case of alcohol ; the alcohol expands more speedily
than the water. Now we might go over a hundred liquids
in this way, and find them all expanding by heat, and we
might thus be led to conclude that expansion by heat is a
law without exception ; but we should err in this conclu-
sion. And it is really to illustrate an exception of this kind
that I have introduced this flask of water. I will cool the
flask by plunging it inter a substance somewhat colder than
water, when it first freezes. This substance I obtain by



DEPOBIMBBT GF WATER. 98

mixiiig pounded ioe -with salt. You see the oolmnn grado^
ally sinldiig, the heat is being giv^i up to the freezing mix-
ture, and the water contracts. This contraction is now very
slow, and now it stops altogether. A slight motion com-
mences in the 0]^M>site direction, and now the liquid is vis-
ibfy eocpandmg, I stir the freezing mixture, so as to bring
colder portions of it into contact with the flask ; the i!!Older
ihe mixture the quicker is the expansion. Here then we
have Nature stopping in her ordinary course, and reversing
her ordinary habits. The fact is, that the water goes on
contracting till it reaches a temperature of 39^ Fahr., or 4^
Cent., at which point the contraction ceases. This is the
so-called point of maximum density of the water ; from
this downwards, to its freezing point, the liquid expands ;
and when it is converted into ice, the expansion is large
and sudden. Ice, we know, swims upon water, being
lightened by this expansion. If I now ftpply heat, the
series of changes are reversed: the column descends, show-
ing the contraction of the liquid by heat. After a time the
contraction ceases, and permanent expansion sets in.

The force with which these molecular changes are
effected is all but irresistible. The changes usually occur
under conditions which allow us no opportunity of observing
the energy involved in their accomplishment. But to give
you an example of this energy, I have confined a quantity
of water in this iron bottle. The iron is fully half an inch
thick, and the quantity of water is small, though sufficient
to fill the bottle. The bottle is closed by a screw finnly
fixed in its neck. I have here a second bottle of the same
kind, and prepared in a similar manner. Both of them I
]dace in this copper vessel, and surround them with a freez-
ing mixture. They cool gradually, the water within ap-
proaches its point of maximum density ; no doubt, at this
moment, the water does not quite fill the bottle, a small
▼acuous space exists within. But soon the contraction



94 LBOTUBB HL

ceases, and expansion sets in ; the vacaons space is slowlj
filled, the water gradually changes from liquid to solid ; in
doing so it requires more room, which the rigid iron re-
fuses to grant. But its rigidity is powerless in the pres-
ence of the atomic forces. These atoms are giants in did*
guise ; you hear that sound ; the bottle is shivered by the
crystallising molecules — ^there goes the other ; and here are
the fragments of the vessels, which show their thickness,
and impress you with the might of that energy by whidi
they were thus riven.*

You have now no difficulty in understanding the effect
of frosty weather upon the water pipes of your houses. I
have here a number of pieces of such pipes, all rent. Ton
become first sensible of the damage when the thaw sets in,
but the mischief is really done at the time of freezing ; the
pipes are then rent, and through the rents the water es-
capes, when the solid within is liquefied.

It is hardly necessary for me to say a word on the iror
portance of this property of water in the economy of na-
ture. Suppose a lake exposed to a clear wintry sky ; the
superficial water is chilled, contracts, becomes thus heavier,
and sinks by its superior weight, its place being supplied
by the lighter water from below. In time this is chilled,
and sinks in turn. Thus a circulation is established, the
cold, dense water descending, and the lighter and warmer
water rising to the top. Supposing this to continue, even
after the first pellicles of ice were formed at the surface ;
the ice would sink as it was formed,f and the process

* Metal cylinders, an inch in thickness, are unable to resist the dec(»n-
posing force of a small galvanic battery. M. Oassoit has burst many such
cylinders by electrolytic gas.

f Prof. William Thomson has recently raised a point which deserves
the grave condderation of theoretic geologists : Supposing the constituents
of the earth's crust to contract on solidifying, as the experiments thus far
made indicate, a breaking in, and sinking of the crust would assuredly



DEFOBTMSNT OF BIBICUTH. 96

-wouM not cease until the entire water of the lake would be
BolidifiecL Death to every living thing in the water would
be the consequence. But just when matters become critical.
Nature steps aside from her ordinary proceeding, causes
the. water to expand by cooling, and llie cold water swims
like a scum on the surface of the warmer water under-
neath. Solidification ensues, but the solid is much lighter
than the subjacent liquid, and the ice forms a jNrotecting
roof over the living things below.

Such facts naturally and rightly excite the emotions ;
indeed, the relations of life to the conditions of life — ^the
genera] adaptation of means to ends in Nature, excite, in
the profoundest degree, the interest of the philosopher.*
But in dealing with natural phenomena, the feelings must
be carefiilly watched. They often lead us unconsciously
to overstep tiie bounds of fact. Thus, I have heard this
wonderful property of water referred to as an irresistible
proof of design, unique of its kind, and suggestive of pure
benevolence. * Why,* it is urged, * should this case of wa-
ter stand out isolated, if not for the purpose of protecting
Nature against herself? ' The fact, however, is, that the
case is not an isolated one. Tou see this iron bottle, rent
from neck to bottom ; I break it with this hanmier, and
you see a core of metal within. This is the metal bismuth,
which, when it was in a molten condition, I poured into
this bottle, and closed the bottle by a screw, exactly as in
the case of the water. The metal cooled, solidified, ex-
panded, and the force of its expansion was sufficient to
burst the bottle. There are no fish here to be saved, still
the molten bismuth acts exactly as the water acts. Once
for all, I would say that the natural philosopher, as such,



follow Hb fonnation. Under these circumstances, it is extr^nely difficult
to oono^e that a solid shell should be formed, as is generally assumed,
round a liquid nucleus.



96



LBOTUBE m.



has nothing to do with purposes and designs. His vooar
tion is to enquire whoA Nature is, not why she is ; though
he, like others, and he, more than others, must stand at
times rapt in wonder at the mystery in which he dwells,
and towards the final solution of which his studies furnish
him with no clue.

We must now pass on to the expansion of solid bodies,
by heat, and I will illustrate it in this way : I have here
two wooden stands, a and b (fig. 24), wilh plates of brass,
p p\ riveted against them. I hold in my hand two bars
of equal length, one of brass, the other of iron, and these,
as you observe, are not sufficiently long to stretch from


Stand to stand. I will support them on two little projec-
tions of wood attached to the stand at^ and^^ I connect
one of the plates of brass, p^ with one pole of a small vol-
taic battery, d, and from the other, p\ a wire proceeds to



sxpABBioar <fip 80IJD8. 97

the fitde mstTnment c, wlddi yoa see in firoot of die tiUe ;
and again firom that instnnnent a wire retnnis direct to the
other pole of the battery. The instramoit in front con-
flists mex^ of an arrangCTsent to siq^rt a ^iral c of pla-
tinum wiie, whidi will glow with a pore white light when
the cnrrent from d passes throng it. At the present mo-
ment the mfy break in the drcoit is doe to the insofSdent
leaagOi of the bars of brass and iron to bridge the space frinn
stand to stand. Underneath the bars is a row of gas jets,
whidi I win now ignite ; die bars are heated, the metals
expand, and I expect that in a few minutes they will
stretdi quite across from plate to plate ; when this occurs,
the current will pass, and the fact of the gap being bridged
win be dedared by the sadden glowing of the pbtinmn
spiraL It is stall non-lmninons, the bridge is not yet com^
plete ; but now it brightens up, showiog that one, or both,
of these bars have expanded so as to stretch quite across
fr<»n stand to stand. Whidi of the bars is it ? I remove
the iron, but die platinum stUl glows : I restore die iron,
and remove the brass; the light disappears. It was the
brass that bridged the gap. So that we have here an illus-
tration, not only of the general fact of expansion, but also
of the fiMSt that different bodies expand in different degrees.
The expansion of both brass and iron is very small : and
various instruments have been devised to measure the ex-
pansion. Such instruments go under the general name of
pyrometers. But I have here a means of multiplying the
effect, far more powerful than the ordinary pyrometer.
Here is a solid upright bar of iron two feet long, and on a
mirror connected with the top of the bar I throw a beam
of light from the electric lamp, which beam is reflected to
the upper part of the wall. If the bar shorten, the mirror
win turn in one direction : if it lengthen, the mirror will
turn in the opposite direction. Every movement of the
mirror, however slight, is multiplied by this long index of
5



98 LBGTDiBB m.

light ; which, besides its length, has the advantage of moT-
ing with twice the angular ydocity of the mirror. Even
tiie breath, projected agunst this massive bar of iron, pro-
daces a sensible motion of the beam ; and if I warm it for
a moment with the flame of a 8pirit4amp, the Inminons m-
dex will travel downwards, the patdi of light upon the
wall moving through a space of full thirty feet. I with-
draw the lamp, and allow the bar to cool ; it contracts, and
the patch of light reascends the wall : I hasten the con-
traction by throwing a little alcohol on the bar of iron, the
l^ht moves more speedily upwards, and now it occupies a
place near the ceiling, as at the commencement of the ex-
periment.*

I have stated that different bodies possess different
powers of expansion ;f that brass, for example, expands
more, on being heated, than iron. Here are two nders,
one of brass and the other of iron, riveted together so as
to form, at this temperature, a straight compound ruler.
But if the temperature be changed, the ruler is no longer
straight. I heat it, it bends in one direction : I cool it, it
bends in the opposite direction. When heated, the brass
expands most, and forms the convex side of the curved
ruler. When cooled, the brass contracts most, and forms
the concave side of the ruler. Facts like these must, of
course, be taken into account, in structures where it is ne-
cessary to avoid distortion. The force with which bodies
expand when heated, is quite irresistible by any mechanical
appliances that we can make use of. All these molecular
forces, though operating in such minute spaces, are almost
infinite in energy. The contractile force of cooling has

* The piece of i^paratus with which this experiment was made is in-
tended for a totally different purpose. I therefore indicate its principle
merely.

f The coefficients of expansion of a few well-known substances are
^Ten in the Appendix to this Lecture.



mrEBlGfT OF VOBCOB OF EXPANSION. 99

been implied by engineers to draw leaning walls into an
upright position. If a body be bhtde, the heating of one
portion of it, producing expansion, niay so press or strain
another portion, as to produce fracture. Hot water poured
into a glass often cracks it, through the sudden expansion
of the interior. It may also be cracked by the contracticm
produced by intense cold.

I have here some flasks of very thick glass, which, when
blown, were allowed to cool quickly. The external por-
tions become first chilled and rigid. The internal portions
cooled more gradually, but they found themselves, on
cooling, surrounded, as it were, by a rigid shell, on which
tihey exerted the powerM strain of Iheir contraction. The
consequence is, that the superficial portions of these flasks
sre in such a state of tension that the slightest scratch pro-
duces rupture. I throw into this glass a grain of quartz ;
the mere dropping of the little bit of hard quartz into the
flask causes the bottom to fly out of it. Here, also, I have
these so-called Rupert drops, or Dutch tears, produced
by glass being fused to drops, which are suddenly cooled.
The external rigid shell has to bear the stram of the inner
contraction ; but the strain is distributed so equally all over
the surface, that no part gives way. But by shnply break-
ing thi^ filament of glass, which forms the tail of the drop,
the solid mass is instantly reduced to powder. I dip the
drop into a small flask filled with water, and break the tail
of the drop outside the flask ; the drop is shivered with
such force that the shock, transferred through the water, is
sufiicient to break the bottle in pieces.

A very curious effect of expansion was observed, and
explained, some years ago by the Reverend Cauon Mosely.
The choir of Bristol Cathedral was covered with sheet lead,
the length.of the covering being 60 feet, and its depth 19
feet 4 inches. It had been laid on in the year 1851, and
two years afterwards — ^viz., in 1853 — ^it had moved bodily



100 LBOTDBB nL

down for a distance of eighteen inohes. The descent had
been contmually going on frcon the time the lead had been
bfid down, and an attempt made to stop it hj driving nails
into the rafters had failed ; for the force with which the
lead descended was sufficient to draw oat the nails. The
roof was not a steep one, and the lead wonld have rested
on it for ever, without sliding down by gravity. What,
then, was the cause of the descent? Simply this. The
lead was exposed to the varying temperatures of day and
night. Daring the day the heat imparted to it caused it to
expand. Had it lain upon a horizontal surface, it would
have expanded equally all round, but as it lay upon an in-
dined surface, it expanded more freely downwards than
upwards. When, on the contrary, the lead contracted at
night, its upper edge was drawn more easily downwards
than its lower edge upwards. Its motion was therefore
exactly that of a common earthworm ; it pushed its lower
edge forward during the day, and drew its uj^r edge
after it during the night, and thus by degrees it crawled
through a space of eighteen inches in two years. Every
local change of temperature during the day and during the
night contributed also to the result ; indeed Canon Mosely
afterwards found the main efiect to be due to these quicker
alternations of temperature.

Not only do different bodies expand differently by heat,
but the same body may expand differently in different di-
rections. In crystals the atoms are laid together according
to law, and along somQ lines they are more closely packed
than along others. It is also likely that the atoms of many
crystaUrae bodies oscillate more freely and widely in some
directions than in others. The ccmsequence of this would
be an unequal expansion by heat in different directions.
This crystal I hold in my hand (Iceland spar) has been
proved by Professor Mitscherlich to expand more along its
crystallographic axis than in any other directi(m. Nay,



THEEMAL EFFEC i' B OF 6TBET0HING. 101

while the ciystal expands as a whole — ^that is to say, while
its Tolnme is augmented by heat — ^it actually ccmtracts in a
direction at right angles to the crystallographic axis. Many
other crystals also expand differently in different direction3;
and, I doubt not, most organic structures would, if exam^ v^^
ined, exhibit the same fact. /X

Nature is full of anomalies which no foresight can pre-
dict, and which experiment alone can reveaL From the
deportment of a vast number of bodies, we should be led
to conclude that heat always produces expansion, and that
cold always produces contraction. But water steps in, and
bismuth steps in to qualify this conclusion. If a metal be
compressed, heat is developed : but if a metal wire be
stretched, cold is developed. Mr. Joule and others have
worked at this subject, and found the above fact all but
general.

One striking exception to this rule (I have no doubt
there are many others) has been known for a great number \
of years ; and I will now illustrate this exception by an ex- \

periment. My assistant will hand me a sheet of India-
rubber, which I have placed in the next room to keep it
quite cold. * From this sheet I cut a strip three inches long,
and an inch and a half wide ; I turn my thermo-electric pile
upon its back, and upon its exposed face I lay this piece of
India-rubber. From the deflection of the needle, you see
that that piece of rubber is cold. I now lay hold of the
ends of the strip, suddenly stretch it, and press it, while
stretched, on the face of the pile. See the effect I The .
needle moves with energy, and showing that the stretched
rubber has heated the pile.

But one deviation from a rule always carries other de-
viations in its train. In the physical world, as in the moral,
acts are never isolated. Thus with regard to our India-
rubber ; its deviation from the rule referred to is only part
of a series of deviations. In many of his investigations



102



LEOTUSE in.



Fig. 25.



Mr. Jotde has been associated
with an enuiient mLtui^al pliilos-
opher — ProfeB&or William Thom-
son — and when Mr, Thomson was
made aware of the deviation of
India-rubber from an almost gen-
eral rule, he soggested that the
stretched India - rubber might
ahorteuy on being heated. The
test was applied hj Mr. Joule,
and the ehortening was found to
take plaee. This aingutAr eicper-
iment} thrown into a suitable
form, I will now perform before
you.

I fasten to this arm, a a (fig.
25), a length of common vulcan-
lEcd Indiarrubber tubing, and
fttrcteh it by a weight, w, of ten
pounds, to about three times its
former length. Here is an index,
% i, formed first of, a piece of
light wood moving freely on a


DEPOBTMENT OF INDIA BUBBEB. 103

pivot, and prolonged by a stout straight straw. At the end
of the straw I place a spear-shaped piece of paper, which
can range over the graduated circle drawn on this black
board. The index is now pressed down by a projection
which I have attached to the weight ; but if the weight
should be lifted by the contraction of the India-rubber, the
lever will^foUow it, being drawn after it by a spring, 8 «,
which acts upon the short arm of the index. The India-
rubber tube, yoi^ observe, passes through a sheet iron
ohinmey, c, through which I will now allow a current of
hot air to ascend firom this lamp l. You see the effect ;
the index rises, showing that the rubber contracts, and by
continuing to apply the heat for a minute or so, I cause the
end of my index to describe an arc fully three feet long.
I withdraw the lamp, and as the India-rubber returns to its
former temperature, it lengthens ; the index moves down-
wards, and now it rests even below the position which it
first occupied.



APPENDIX TO LECTURE Til,



FUBTHEB KEMABgft ON DILATATION.



It is not within the scope of these lectures to dwell in detail
on all the phenomena of expansion by heat ; but fer the sake of
my yomig readers, I will supplement this lecture by a few addi-
tional remarks.

The linear, superficial, or cubic coefficient of expansion, is that
fraction of a body's length, sur£su^, or volume, which it expands
on being heated one degree.

Supposing one of the sides of a square plate of metal, whose
length is 1, to expand, on being heated one degree, by the quanti-
ty'A ; then the side of the new square is 1 + a, and its area is

l + 2a + a\

Li the case of expansion by heat, the quantity a is so small, that
its square is almost insoisible ; the square of a small fraction is,
of course, greatly less than the fraction itself. Hence without
sensible error, we may throw away the a' in the above expres-
sion, and then we should have the area of the new square

l + 2a.

2a, then, is the superficial coefficient of expansion ; hence we infer
that by multiplying the linear coefficient by 2, we obtain the su-
perficial coefficient.

Suppose, instead of a square, that we had a cube, having a
side = 1 ; and that on heating the cube one degree, the side ex-
panded to 1 + a ; then the volume of the expanded cube would
be

1 + 8a + 8a» + a».



EXPANSION' I IRE THEBMOMETIIB.



105



Id this, as in the former case, the square of a, and much more the
cnbe of a, may be neglected, on accomit of their exceeding smaU-
ness ; we then haye tiie yolmne of the expanded cnbe

= l + 8a;

that is to say, the cnbic coefficient of expansion is found by treb-
ling the linear coefficient.

The fbUowing table contains the coeffici^its of expansion, fw
a nximber of well-known substances : —



Copper


. 0-000017


0-000061


0-000061


Lead .


. 0-000029


0-000087


0-000089


Tin .


. 0-000028


0-000069


0-000069


Iron .


. 0-0000123


0000037


0-000037


TSnc .


. 0-0000294


0-000088


0-000089


Glass .


. 0-000080


0-000024


0-000024



The second column here gires the linear co^dent of expansion
for 1° C. ; the third column contains this coefficient trebled,
which is the cubic expansion of the substance ; and the fourth
column giyes the cubic expansion of the same substance, deter-
mined directly by Professor Kopp.* It will be seen that Kopp's
coefficients agree almost exactly with those obtained by the trel>-
ling of the linear coefficients.

The linear coefficient of glass for 1° C. is



That of platinum is



00000080.



0-0000088.



Hence glass and platinum expand nearly alike. This is of the
greatest importance to chemists, who often find it necessary to
fuse platinum wires into their glass tubes. Were the coefficients
different, the firacture of the glass would be ineyitable during the
contraction.

The Thermometer.

Water owes its liquidity to the motion of heat; when this
motion sinks sufficiently, crystallisation, as we haye seen, sets in.

* Phil Mag., 1862, vol. iii. p. 268.
6*



lOe ASTSSDTL TO LBOTUSS IIL

The tempen^^nie of cryBtalliaatioii k perfecdy c<»i8taiit if the
water be kept under the same {nreeBiire. For example, water crys-
tallises in all climates at the sea-lerel, at a temperature of 82° F^
or of 0° 0. The temperature of condensation from the state of
steam is equally constant, as long as the pressure remains the
same. The melting of ice and the fireeong of water touch each
other, if I may use the expression, at 82** F. ; the condensation of
steam and the boiling of water touch each other at 212'' : 82'' then
is the freezing point of water, and it is the melting point of ice ;
212^ is the condensing point of steam and the boiling pdoit of
water. Both are inyariable as long as the pressure remains the
same. Here, then, we have two invaluable standard points of
temperature, and they haye been used for this throughout the
world. The mercurial thermometer consists of a bulb and a stem
with capillary bore. The bore ought to be of Equable diameter
throughout. The bulb and a portion of the stem are filled with
mercury. Both are then plunged into melting ice, the mercury
shrinking, the column descends, and finally comes to rest Let
the point at which it becomes stationary be marked; it is the
ftemn/g point of the thermometer. Let the instrument be now
removed and thrust into boiling water ; the mercury expands, the
column rises, and finally attains a stationary height. Let this
point be marked ; it is the Jxnling point of the thermometer. The
q>ace between the freezing point and the boiling point has been
divided by Beaumur into 80 equal parts, by Fahrenheit into 180
equal parts, and by Celsius into 100 equal parts, called degrees. The
thermometer of Celsius is also called the Centigrade thermometer.

Both Reaumur and Celsius call the freezing point O'', Fahren-
heit calls it 32°, because he started from a zero which he incor-
rectly imagined was the greatest terrestrial cold. Fahrenheit's
boiling point is therefore 212°. Reaumur's boiling point is 80°,
while the boiling point of Celsius is 100°.

The length of the degrees being in the proportion of 80 : 100 :
180, or of 4 : 5 : 9 ; nothing can be easier than to convert one into
the other. If you want to convert Fahrenheit into Celsius, mul-
tiply by 6 and divide by 9 ; if Celsius into Fahrenheit, multiply
by 9 and divide by 5. Thus 20° of Celsius are equal to 36°
Fahrenheit ; but if we would know what temperature by Fah-
renheit's thermometer corresponds to 20° of Celsius, we must



OALOBiO DOBS HOT KZIBr. 107

add 8d to the 86, -wbach would make the temperatine 909, as
shown by OelfiiiiS) equal the temperature 68^, as ahown by Fiah-
lenhfiit.



SXTRACTB FROM BIB H. DAYY^ FIBST SCIENTIFIG MEMOIB, BEAB-
INe.THE TITLB 'ON HEAT, LIGHT, AlH) THE 00MBINATI0N8 OF
LIGHT.'*

The peculiar modes of existence of bodies, solidity; fluidity,
and gazity, depend (according to the calorists) on the quantity
of the fluid of heat entering into their composition. This sub-
stance insinuating itself between their corpuscles, separating them
tnm eadi other, and preventing their actual contact, is by them
supposed to be the cause of repulsion.

Other philosophers, dissatisfied with the evidences produced in
fiivour of the existence of this fluid, and perceiving the genera-
tion of heat by friction and percussion, have supposed it to be the
motion. Considering the discovery of the true cause of the repul-
sive power as highly important to philosophy, I have endeav-
oured to investigate this part of ch^nical science by experiments ;
fh»n these experiments (of which I am now about to give a detail)
I conclude that heat or the power of repulsion is not matter.

The Phenomena of Bepuhian are nd dependent en a peeuUar daeUe
fluid for their exutence^ or Cahriedoes net eocut.

Without considering the effects of the repulsive power on
bodies, or endeavouring to prove from these effects that it is mo-
tion, I shall attempt to demonstrate by experiments, that it is not
matter; and in doing this, I shall use the method called by
mathematicians, reduetio ad dbmrdum.

First, let the increase of temperature produced by friction and
percussion be supposed to arise from a diminution of the capaci-
ties of the acting bodies. In this case it is evident some change
must be induced in the bodies by the action, which lessens their
capacities and increases their temperatures.

ExpeHment. — ^I procured two parallelopipedons of iceti of the

• Sir Humphry Davy's works, voL iL

t The resolt of this experiment is the same, if wax, tallow, resin, or



108 APFKNBIX TO LECTUBS IIL

temperature of 29°, six inches long, two wide, and two-thiids of
an inch thick ; they were fastened by wires to two bars of iron.
By a peculiar mechanism, their surfaces were placed in contact,
and kept in a continued and most violent friction for some min-
utes. They were almost entirely converted into water, which
water was collected, and its temperature ascertained to be 85"",
after remaining in an atmosphere of a lower temperature for some
minutes. The ftision took place only at the plane of contact of
the two pieces of ice, and no bodies were in friction but ice.

From this experiment it is eyident that ice by friction is oour
verted into water, and according to the suppositicm, its capadty
is diminished ; but it is a well-known fact, that the capacity of
water for heat is much greater than that of ice ; ^nd ice must have
an absolute quantity of heat added to it, before it can be convert*
ed into water. Friction consequently does not diminish the ca-
pacities of bodies for heat.

From this experiment it is likewise evident, that the increase
of temperature consequent on friction cannot arise from the de-
composition of the oxygen gas in contact, for ice has no attrac*
tion for oxygen. Since the increase of temperature consequa^
on fHction cannot arise fh)m the diminution of capacity, or oxy-
dation of the acting bodies, the only remaining suppositicm is,
that it arises firom an absolute quantity of heat added to them,
which heat must be attracted from the bodies in ooB^act Then
friction must induce some change in bodies, enabling them to at-
tract heat from the bodies in contact

Eayperimmt. — ^I procured a piece of clockwork, so constructed
as to be set at work in the exhausted receiver ; one of the external
wheels of this machine came in contact with a thin metallic plate.
A considerable degree of sensible heat was produced by friction
between the wheel and plate when the machine worked, uninsu-
lated from bodies capable of communicating heat. I next pro-
cured a smaU piece of ice ; * round the superior edge of this a

any substance fusible at a low temperatare, be used ; even iron may be
fused by colliaon.

* The temperature of the ice and of the surrounding atmosphere at
the commencement of the experiment was 82°, that of the machine was
likewise 83°. At the end of the experiment the temperature of the coldest



vmaxm op iob by vsaanc^. 109

dmall canal was made, and filled with water. The machine was
placed on the ice, but not in contact with the wate^. Thus dis-
posed, the whole was placed imder the receiver (which had been
preTionsly filled with carbonic add), a quantity of potash (i e.
canstic yegetable alkali) being at the same time introduced.

The receiyer was now exhausted. From the exhaustion and
torn the attraction of the carbonic add gas by the potash, a ya-
cuum nearly perfect, was, I believe, made.

The machine was now set to work ; the war^ rapidly melted,
proving an increase of temperature.

Caloric then was collected by fHction ; which caloric, on the
supposition, was communicated by the bodies in contact with the
machine. In this experiment, ice was the only body in contact
with the machine. Had this ice given out caloric, the water on
the top of it must have been frozen. The water on the top of it
was not frozen, consequently the ice did not give out caloric.
The caloric could not come from the bodies in contact with the
ice, for it must have passed through the ice to penetrate the ma-
chine, and an addition of caloric to the ice would have converted
it into water.

Heat, when produced by friction, cannot be collected from the
bodies in contact, and it was' proved, by the first experiment, that
^e increase of temperature consequent on friction cannot arise
from diminution of capacity or oxydation. But if it be considered
as matter, it must be produced in one of these modes. Since (as
is demonstrated by these experiments) it is produced in neither
of these modes, it cannot be considered as matter. It has there-
fi>re been experimentally demonstrated that caloric, or the matter
of heat, does not exist.

Solids, by long and violent friction, become expanded, and if
of a higher temperature than our bodies, affect the sensory organs
with the peculiar sensation known by the common name of heat.

part of the machine was near 83*^, that of the ice and sorrounding atmo-
q)here the same as at the commencement of the experiment ; so tiiat the
heat prodnced by the friction of the different parts of the machine was
safficiMit to raise the temperature of near half a pound of metal at least
one degree ; and to conYert eighteen graros of wax (the quantity employed)
Into a fluid.



110 AFFENDIX TO LBOTDBB HL

Since bodies beoome expanded by friction, it is eyident that
their corpuscles must more or separate from each other.

Now a motion or vibration of the corpuscles of bodies must
be necessarily generated by friction and percusdon. Therefore
we may reasonably conclude that this motion or Tibration is heat,
or Hhe repuMye power.

Heat, then, or that power which prerents the actual contact
of the corpuscles of bodies, and which is the cause of our peculiar
sensations of heat «nd cold, may be defined a peculiar motion,
probably a yibration of the corpuscles of bodies, tending to
separate th^n. It may with propriety be called the repulsiye
motion.

Since there exists a repulsiye motion, the particles of bodies
may be considered as acted on by two opposing forces ; the ap-
proximating power, which may (for greater ease of expression) be
called attraction, and the repulsiye motion. The first of these is
the compound ^ect of the attraction of cohedon, by which the
partides tend to come in contact with each other ; the attraction
of gravitation, by which they tend to ii^roximate to the great
contiguous masses of matter, and the pressure under which they
exist, dependent on the gravitation of the superincumbent bodies.

The second is the efiect of a peculiar motory or vibratory im-
pulse given to them, tending to remove them farther from each
other, and which can be generated, or rather increased, by friction
or percussion. The effects of the attraction of cohesion, the great
approximating cause, on the corpuscles of bodies, is exactly simi-
lar to that of the attraction of gravitation on the great masses of
matter composing the universe, and the repulsive force is analo-
gous to the planetary projectile force.

In his ^ Chemical Philosophy,' pp. 94 and 95, Davy expresses
himself thus : — * By a moderate degree of friction, as it would
\ appear from Rumford's experiments, the same piece of metal may
be kept hot for any length of time ; so that, if the heat be pressed
out, the quantity must be inexhaustible. When any body is
cooled, it occupies a smaller volume than before ; it is evident,
therefore, that its parts must have approached each other ; when
the body has expanded by heat, it is equally evident that its
parts must have separated frrom eadi other. The inmiediate cause
of the phenomenon of heat, then, is motion, and the laws of its



DAYT ON THB MOTION OF HEAT. Ill

conHnanication aie precisely the same as the laws of the oomma-
nicatioii of motion.'

Since all matter may be made to fill a smaller space by cool-
ing, it is evident that the particles of matter must have space be-
tween them ; and since every body can commmdcate the power
of expansion to a body of a lower temperature — ^that is, can give
an expansive motion to its particles — ^it.is a probable inference
that its own particles are possessed of motion ; but as there is no
change in the position of its parts, as long as its femperature is
imiform, the motion, if it exist, must be a vibratory or undulatory
motion, or a motion of the particles round their axes, or a motion
of the particles round each other.

It seems possible to account for all the phenomena of heat, if
it be supposed that in solids the particles are in a constant state
of yibratory motion, the particles of the hottest bodies moving
with the greatest velocity, and through the greatest space ; that
in fluids and elastic fliuds, besides i^e vibratory motion, which
must be conceived greatest in the last, the particles have a motion
round their ovm axes with different velocity, the particles of
elastic fluids moving with the greatest quickness, and that in
ethereal substances the particles moye round their own axes, and
separate from each other, penetrating in right lines through space.
Temperature may be conceived to depend upon the velocity of
the vibrations ; increase of capacity in the motion being performed
in greater space ; and the diminution of temperature during the
conversion of solids into fluids or gases, may be explained on the
idea of the loss of vibratory motion, in consequence of the revo-
lution of particles round their axes, at the moment when the body
becomes fluid or aeriform, or from the loss of rapidity of vibration
in consequence of the motion of the particles through space.



LECTURE IV.

[February 18, 1862.]

tEE TBETILTAN INSTRUMKHT— GORE'S RETOLTIHO BALLS — ^UTTLUINOB Of
FBMSaVKE ON rUSINQ POINT — ^UQVITAOnON AND LAMINATION OF ICK BY
PRESSURE — DISSECTION OF ICE BT A CALORIFIC BEAM — ^LIQUID FLOWERS
^ AND THEIR CENTRAL SPOT — ^MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF WATER PURGED
OF AIR — THE BOILINO POINT OF LIQUIDS : INFLUENCING CIRCUMSTANCES
— THE OETSERS OF ICELAND.



APPENDIX : — ^NOTE ON THE TREYELTAN INSTRUMENT — PHYSICAL PROPERTIES

Of ICE.

BEFORE finally quitting the subject of expansion, I
wish to show you an experiment which illustrates in a
curious and agreeable way the conversion of heat into me-
chanical energy. The fact which I wish to reproduce was
first observed by a gentleman named Schwartz, in one of
the smelting works of Saxony. A quantity of silver which
had been fused in a ladle was allowed to solidify, and to
hasten its cooling it was turned out upon an anvil. Some
time afterwards, a strange buzzing sound was heard in the
locality, and was finally traced to the hot silver, which was
found quivering upon the anvil. Many years subsequent to
this, Mr. Arthur Trevelyan chanced to be using a hot sol-
dering-iron, which he laid by accident against a piece of
lead. Soon afterwards, his attention was excited by a
most singular sound which, after some searching, was found
to proceed from the soldering-iron. like the silver of



YXBRATIONS OF HEATED METALS.



118



Schwartz, the soldering-iron was found in a state of -vibra-
tion. Mr. Trevelyan made his discovery the subject of a
very interesting investigation. He determined the best
form to be given to the ' rocker ' as the vibrating mass is
now called, and throughout Europe at present this instru-
ment is known as * Trevelyan's Instrument.* Since that
time the subject has engaged the attention of Prof. J. D.
Forbes, Dr. Seebeck, Mr. Faraday, M. Sondhaus, and my-
self ; but to Trevelyan and Seebeck we owe most.

Here is such a rocker made of brass. Its length, a c
(%. 26), is five inches, the width a b, 1*5 in., and the length
of the handle, which temunates in the knob f, is ten inches.

Fig. 26.



©=



■^


M



A groove runs at the back of the rocker, along its centre ;
the cross section of the rocker and its groove is given at m.
I heat the rocker to a temperature somewhat higher than
that of boiling water, and lay it on this block of lead, al-
lowing its knob pj^2^
to rest upon the
table. You hear
a quick succes-
sion of forcible
taps. But you
cannot see the
osdUations of
the rocker to
which the taps
are due. I
therefore place
on it this rod
of brass, a b (fig. 27), with two balls of brass at its end,


114 LBoruBB rr.

the oscillations are thereby rendered much slower, and yon
can easily follow with the eye the pendulous motion of the
rod and balls. This motion will continue as long as the
rocker is able to communicate sufficient heat to the carrier
on whidi it rests. Thus we render tlie vibrations slow, but
I can also render them quick by using a rodker with a
wider groove. The sides of this rocker do not overhang so
much as those of the last ; it is virtually a shorter pendu-
lum, and will vibrate more quickly. Placed upon the lead,
as before, it commences an unsteady and not altogether
pleasant music. It is still restiess, sometimes seeming to
expostulate, s<mietimes even to objurgate, as if it disliked
the treatment to which it is subjected. Now it becomes
mellow, and fills the room with a dear full note. Its taps
have become periodic and regular, and have linked them-
selves together to produce music Here is a third rocker,
with a still wider groove, and with it I can obtain a shriller
tone. You know of course that the pitch of note augments
with the number of the vibrations; this wide^ooved
rocker oscillates more quickly, and therefore emits a higher
note. By casting a beam of light upon the rocker I obtain
a better index than the rod and balls. This index is with-
out weight, and therefore does not retard the motion of the
rocker. To the latter I have fastened, by a single screw
at its centre, a small disk of polished silver ; on which the
beam of the electric lamp now falls, and is reflected against
the screen. When the rocker vibrates, the beam vibrates
also, but with twice the angular velocity, and theie you see
the patch of light quivering upon the screen.

What is tiie cause of these singular vibrations and
tones ? They are due simply to the sudden expansion by
heat of the body on which the rocker rests. Whenever the
hot rocker comes into contact with its lead carrier, a nipple
suddenly juts from the latter, being produced by the heat
communicated to the lead at the point of contact. The



THB TBEYBLTAN INSl'KUHJfiNT.



115



rdbker is tilted up, and some other point of it comes into
contact with the lead, a fresh nipple is produced, and the
rocker is again tilted. Let a b (fig. 28) be the surface of
the lead, and b the cross section of the hot rocker ; tilted
to the right, the nipple is formed as at b ; tilted to the left,
it is formed as at i*. The consequence is that until its tem-

Fig.28.


perature falls sufficiently, the rocker is tossed to and fro,
and the quick succession of its taps against the lead pro-
duces a musical sound.

I have here fixed two pieces of sheet lead in a vice ;
their edges are exposed, and are about half an inch asun-
der. I balance a long bar of heated brass across the two
lead edges. It rests first on one edge, which expands at
the point of contact and jerks it upwards ; it then falls upon
the second edge which also rejects it ; and thus it goes on
oscillating, and will continue to do so as long as the bar



Fig. 29.


can communicate sufficient heat to the lead. This fire-shovel
will answer quite as well as the prepared bar* I balance



116 LBcrruBB nr.

the heated shovel thus upon the edges of the lead, and it
oscillates exactly as the bar did (fig. 29). I may add, that
by properly laying either the poker or the fire-shovel upon
a block of lead, supporting the handle so as to avoid Mo-
ticm, yon may obtain notes as sweet and musical as any
which you have heard to-day. A heated hoop placed
upon a plate of lead may be caused to vibrate and sing ;
and a hot penny-piece or half crown may be caused to
do the same.*

Looked at with an eye to the connection of natural
forces, this experiment is interesting. The atoms of bodies
must be regarded as all but infinitely small, but then they
must be regarded as all but infinitely numerous. The aug-
mentation of the amplitude of any oscillating atom by the
communication of heat, is insensible, but the summation
of an almost infinite number of such augmentations become
sensible. Such a summation, effected almost in an in-
stant, produces our nipple, and tilts the heavy mass of the
rocker. Here we have a direct conversion of heat into
common mechanical motion. But the tilted rocker fstlls
again by gravity, and in its collision with the block restores
almost the precise amount of heat which was consumed in
lifting it. Here we have the direct conversion of common
gravitating force into heat. Again the rocker is surrounded
by a medium capable of being set in motion. The air of
this room weighs some tons, and every particle of it is
shaken by the rocker, and every tympanic membrane, and
every auditory nerve present, is similarly shaken. Thus we
have the conversion ofap<ni;ion of heat into sound. And,
finally, every sonorous vibration which speeds through the
air of this room, and wastes itself upon the walls, seats,
and cushions, is converted into the form with which the
cycle of actions commenced — ^namely, into heat.

* For foriher informalion see Appendix to this leoture.



BOTATION BT M^EUTKIOITV. Ut

Here is another curious effect, for which we are indebtr
ed to Mr. George Gore, and which admits of a similar ex-
planation. Ton see this line of rails. Two strips of brass,
s s, s' s' (fig. 30), are set edgeways, and about an inch
asunder. I place this hollow metal ball b upon the rails ;
|f I push it, it rolls along them; but if I do not push
it, it stands still. I connect these two ridls, by the wires



Fig. 80.


to to\ with the two poles of a Voltaic battery. A current
now passes down one rail to the metal ball, thence along
the ball to the other rail, and finally back to the battery.
In passing from the rail to the ball, and from the ball to
the other rail, the current encounters resistance, and where-
ever a current encounters resistance, heat is developed.
Heat, therefore, is generated at the two points of contact
of the ball with the rails ; and this heat produces an eleva-
tion of the rail at these points. Observe the effect ; the
ball which a moment ago was tranquil is now very uneasy.
It vibrates a little at first without rolling ; now it actually
rolls a little way, stops, and rolls back again. It gradually
augments its excursion, now it has gone further than I
intended : it has quite rolled off the rails, and injured itself
by falling on the floor.

Here is another apparatus for which I am iadebted to
Mr. Gore himself, and in which the rails form a pair of
concentric hoops ; when the circuit is established, the ball
p (fig. 31) rolls round the circle.* Mr. Gore has also ob-
tained the rotation of light balls, by placing them on cir-

* PhiL Mag., yoL 16, p. 621.



118 UDurujUB nL

onlar rails of hot copper, the rolling force in this case
being the same as the rocking force in the Trevelyan in-
strument.

In my last lecture I made evident to you the expansion
of water when it passes fhmi the liquid to the solid condi-
tion; with most other substances solidification is acoom-



rig.81.


panied by contraction. I have here a round glass dish into
which I pour some hot water. Over the water I pour from
a ladle a quantity of melted bees'-wax. The wax now
forms a liquid layer nearly half an inch thick above the
water. We will suffer both water and wax to cool, and
when they are cool you will find that the wax which now
overspreads the entire surface, and is attached all round to
the glass, will retreat, and we shall finally obtain a cake of
wax of considerably smaller area than the dish.

The wax, then, in passing from the solid to the liquid
state ea^nds. To assume the liquid form, its particles
must be pushed more widely apart, a certain play between
the particles being necessary to the condition of liquidity.
Now supposing we resist the expansion of the wax by an
external mechanical force ; suppose we have a very strong
vessel completely filled with solid wax, and which offers a
powerful resistance to the expansion of the mass within it ;



INFLUENOE OF FBE8SUXB OH FUBINa POINT. 119

what wonH you expect if 70a gonght to Uquefy liie wax in
this vessel ? When the wax is free, the heat has only to
conquer the attraction of its own particles, but in the strong
Tessel it has not only to conquer the attraction of the par-
tid^s, bat also the resistance offered by the vessel. By a mere
process of reasoning, we should thus be led to infer that a
greater amount of heat would be required to melt the wax
under pressure, than when it is free ; or, in other words,
that the point of fusion of the wax is elevated by pressure.
This reasoning is completely justified by experiment, not
only with wax, but with other substances which contract on
solidifying, and expand on liquefying. Messrs. Hopkins
and Fairbaim have, by pressure, raised the melting point
of some substances which contract considerably on soUdify-
ing as much as 20^ and 30^ Fahr.

These experiments bear on a very remarkable specula-
tion. The earth is known gradually to augment in temper-
ature as we pierce it deeper, and the depth has been calcu-
lated at which all known terrestrial bodies would be in a
state of fusipn. Mr. Hopkins, however, observes that
owing to the enormous pressure of the superincumbent
layers, the deeper strata would require a far higher tem-
perature to fuse them, than would be necessary to fuse the
strata near the earth's surface. Hence he infers that the
solid crust must have a considerably greater thickness than
that given by a calculation, which assumed the fusing
points of the superficial and the deeper strata to be the
same.

Now let us turn from wax to ice. Ice, on liquefying,
eanir<xcts ; in the arrangement of its atoms to form a solid,
more room is required than they need in the neighbouring
liquid state. No doubt this is due to crystalline arrange-
ment ; the attracting poles of the molecules 2xq so placed
that when the crystallising force comes i^to play, the mole-
cales unite so as to leave larger later-atomic spaces in the



120 LEOTUBB 17.

mass. We may suppose them to attadi themselyes by their
comers ; and in taming comer to comer, to cause a reces-
sion of the atomic centres. At all events their centres re-
treat from each other when solidification sets in. By cool-
ing, then, this power of retreat, and of consequent ^ilarge-
ment of Tolume, is conferred. It is evident that pressure
in this case would resist the expansion which is necessary
to solidification, and hence the tendency of pressure, in the
case of water, is to keep it liquid. Thus reasoning, we
should be led to the condusion that the fusing points of
substances which expand on solidifying are lowered by
pressure.

Professor James Thomson first drew attention to this
fact, and his theoretic reasonings have been verified by the
experiments of his brother Professor William Thomson.

Let us illustrate these principles by a striking experi-
ment. I have here a square pillar of clear ice an inch and
a half in height and about a square inch in cross section.
At present the temperature of this ice is O*' C. But sup-
pose I subject this ice to pressure, I lower its point of fu-
sion: the ice under pressure will melt at a temperature
under 0° C, and hence the temperature which it now pos-
sesi^es is in excess of that at which it will melt under pres-
sure. I have cut this ice so that its planes of freezing are
perpendicular to the height of the pillar. The direction of
the stratified air-bubbles in the ice from which this clear
piece was taken, enabled me to fix at once upon its planes
of freezing. Well, I place the column of ice, l, upright
between two slabs of boxwood, b b' (fig. 32), and place the
whole between the plates of this small hydraulic press;
through the ice I send a beam from the electric lamp. In
front of the ice I place a lens, and by it project a magnified
image of the ice upon the screen before you. The beam
which passes through the ice has been purified beforehand,
so that, although it is still hot, its heat is not of such a



UQTJEFAOnOK OF lOE BY FBESSUBEL



191



quality as can melt the ice ; hence the light passes through
the substance without causing fusion. I work the arm of
Ae press ; the pillar of ice is now gently squeezed between
tibe two slabs of boxwood. I apply the pressure cautiously,
and now you see dark streaks beginning to show them-
selves across tiie ice, at right angles to the direction of
pressure. Right in the middle of the mass they are ap-

Fig.S2L


pearing ; and as I continue the pressure, the old streaks
expand and new oi^es appear. The entire colunm is now
scarred across by these strise. What are they ? They are
simply liquid layers foreshortened, and when you examine
this column and look into it obliquely, you see these sur-
faces. We haye liquefied the ice in planes perpendicular to
the pressure, and these liquid planes interspersed through-
out the mass ^ye it this strongly pronounced laminated
appearance.^

Whether as a solid, a liquid, or a gas, water is one of



* See Appendix to this lecture for flirther information.
6



123 LBOTUBB lY.

the most wonderfiil substances in nature. Let us consider
its wonders a little further. At all temperatures above 32"^
Fahr. or 0^ C, the motion of heat is sufficient to keep the
molecules of water from rigid union. But at 0° C. the mo-
tion becomes so reduced that the atoms then seize upon
each other and aggregate to a solid. This miion, however,
is a union according to law. To many persons here present
this block of ice may seem of no more interest and beauty
than a block of glass ; but in the estimation of science it
bears the same relation to glass, that an oratorio of Handel
does to the cries of a market-place. The ice is music, the
glass is noise ; the ice is order, the glass is concision. In
the glass, molecular forces constitute an inextricably entan-
gled skein ; in the ice they are woven to a synametric web ;
the miraculous texture of which I will now try to reveal.

How shall I dissect this ice ? In the solar beam, — or,
failing that, in the beam of an electric lamp, we have an
anatomist competent to perform this work. I remove the
agent by which this beam was purified in the last experi-
ment, and wiU send the rays direct from the lamp through
this slab of |)ellucid ice. It shall puU the crystal edifice to
pieces by accurately reversing the order of its architecture.
Silently and symmetrically the crystallizing force builds the
atoms up, silently and symmetrically the electric beam will
take them down. I place this slab of ice in front of the
lamp, the light of which now passes through the ice. Com-
pare the beam before it enters with the beam after its pass-
age through the substance : to the eye there is no sensible
difference ; the light is scarcely diminished. Not so with
the heat. As a thermic agent, the beam, before entering,
is far more powerful than it is after its emergence. A por^
tion of the beam has been arrested in the ice, and that por-
tion is our working anatomist. Well, what is he doing ?
I place a lens in front of the ice, and cast a magnified image



mBSBcno^ OF igb. 128

of the slab npon the screen. Observe that image (fig. 33),
which, in beauty, falls far short of the actual effect. Here
we have a star and there a star ; and as the action contin-
ues, the ice appears to resolve itself into stars, each one
possessing six rays, each one resembling a beautiful flower
of six petals. And as I shift my lens to and fro, I bring
new stars into view, and as the action continues, the edges
of the petals become serrated, and spread themselves out
like fern leaves upon the screen. Probably few here pres-
ent were aware of the beauty latent in a block of common
ice. And only think of lavish Nature operating thus
throughout the world. Every atom of the solid ice which
sheets the frozen lakes of the North has-been fixed accord-
ing to this law. Nature ^ lays her beams in music,' and it
is the function of science to purify our organs, so as to
enable us to hear the strain.

And now I have to draw your attention to two points
connected with this experiment, of great minuteness, but
of great interest. You see these flowers by transmitted
light — by the light which has passed through both the
flowers and the ice. But when you examine them, by al-
lowing a beam to faU upon them and to be reflected from
them to your eye, you find in the centre of each flower a
spot which shines with the lustre of burnished silver. You
might be disposed to think this spot a bubble of air ; but
you can, by immersing it in hot water, melt away the ice
aU round the spot ; and the moment the spot is thus laid
bare, it collapses, and no trace of a bubble of air is to be
seen. 7%6 spot is a vcunmm. Observe how truly Nature
works ; observe how rigidly she carries her laws into all
her operations. We learned in the last lecture, that ice in
melting contracted, and here we find the fact turning up.
The water of these flowers cannot fill the space occupied
by the ice by whose fusion they are produced, hence the



IM


^ .M^


UQTTID FLOWBBS AX[D OXNTBAL SPOT. 125

production of a yacumn neoessarily accompanies the fonnar
tion of every liquid flower.

When I first observed these beautiful figures, I thought
at the moment when the central spot appeared, like a point
of light suddenly f(»ined within the ice, that I heard a
clink, as if the ice had split asunder when the bright spot
was formed. At first I suspected that it was my imagina-
tion which associated sound with the appearance of the
spot, as it is said that people who see meteors often imar
gine a rushing noise when they really hear none. The
dink, however, was a reality ; and if you will allow me, I
will now make this trivial fact a starting point from which
I will conduct you through a series of interesting phenom-
ena, to a far-distant question of practical science.

All water holds a large quantity of air within it in a
state of solution ; by boiling you may liberate this impris-
oned air. On heating a flask of water you see air bubbles
crowding on its sides long before it boils, and you see the
bubbles rising through the liquid without condensation,
and often floating on the top. One of the most remarkable
effects of this air in the water is, that it promotes the ebul-
lition of the liquid. It acts as a kind of elastic spring,
pushing the atoms of the water apart, and thus helping
them to take the gaseous form.

Now suppose this air removed ; having lost the cushion
which separated them, the atoms lock themselves together
in a far tighter embrace. The cohesion of the water is
vastly augmented by the removal of the air. Here is a
glass vessel, the so-called -water hammer, which contains
water purged of air. One effect of the withdrawal of the
dastic buf^ is, that the water here falls with the sound
of a solid body. Ton hear how the* liquid rings against
the end of the tube when I turn it upside down. Here is
another tube, a. b c (fig. 34), bent into the form of a V, and
intended to show how the cohesion of the water is affected



126



LECTUBE IV.



by long boiling. I bring this water into one arm of the
V ; by tilting the tube it flows, as yon, see, freely into the
other arm. I restore it to the first arm, and now tap the
end of this arm against the table. You hear, at first, a
loose and jingling sound. As long as you hear it the wa-
ter is not in true contact with the surface of the tube. I

Fig. 81.


continue my tapping : you mark an alteration in the sound ;
the jingling has disappeared, and the sound is now hard,
like that of solid against solid. I now raise my tube. Ob-
serve what occurs. I turn the column of water upside
down, but there it stands in a b. Its particles cling so te-
naciously to the sides of the tube, and lock themselves so
firmly together, that it refuses to behave like a liquid
body ; it declines to obey the law of gravity.

So much for the augmentation of cohesion ; but this
very cohesion enables the liquid to resist ebullition. Wa-
ter thus freed of its air can be raised to a temperature 100*^



DSPOBTMERT OF WATEB FDBOED OF AIB. 127

and more above its ordmary boiling point, without ebnlli-
ticHL Bat mark what takes place when the liquid does
b(HL It has an enormous excess of heat stored np ; the
locked atoms finally part company, but they do so with i3ie
violence of a spring which suddenly breaks under strong
tension, and ebullition is converted into explosion. For
the discovery of this interesting property of water we are
indebted to M. Donny, of Ghent.

^ Turn we now to our ice : — ^Water, in freezing, complete-
'ij excludes the air from its crystalline architecture. All
foreign bodies are squeezed out in the act of freezing, and
ice holds no air in solution. Supposing then that we melt
a piece of pure ice under conditions where air cannot ap-
proach it, we have water in its most highly cohesive condi-
tion ; and such water ought, if heated, to show the effects to
which I have referred. That it does so has been proved
by Mr. Faraday. He melted pure ice under spirit of tur-
pentine, and found that the liquid thus formed could be
heated far beyond its boiling point, and that the rupture
of the liquid, by the act of ebullition, took place with al-
most explosive violence. And now, let us apply these facts
to the six-petaled ice-flowers and their little central star.
They are formed in a place where no air can come. Imag-
ine the flower forming and gradually augmenting in size.
The cohesion of the liquid is so great, that it will pull the
walls of its chamber together, or even expand its ot^ vol-
ume, sooner than give way. But as its size augments, the
q>ace which it tries to occupy becomes too large for it,
until finally the liquid snaps, a vacuum is formed, and a
clink is heard.

Let us now take our final glance at this web of rela-
tions. It is very remarkable that a great number of loco-
motives have exploded on quitting the shed where they
had remained for a time quiescent. The number of explo-
sions whidi have occurred just as the engineer turned on



138 XEOTUBS IV*

die steam is quite smprisiiig. Now supposing that a looor
motiye had been boiling sufficiently long to expel the air
contained in its water; that liquid would possess, in a
greater or less degree, the high cohesive quality to which I
have drawn your attention. It is at least conceivable thai
while resting previous to starting on its journey, an excess
of heat might be thus stored up in the boil^, and if stored
up, the certain result would be, that the engineer on tunir
ing on the steam would, by a mechanical act, produce the
rupture of the cohesion, and steam of explosive force would
instantly be generated. I do not say that this is the case ;
but who can say that it is not the case. We have been
dealing throughout with a real ag^icy, which is certainly
competent, if its power be invoked, to produce die most
terrible effects.

We have here touched on the subject of steam ; let us
bestow a few minutes' further consideration on its formar
tion and action. As you add heat, or in other words, mo-
tion, to water, the particles from its free surface fly off in
augmented numbers. We at length approach what is called
the boUing point of the liquid, where the conversion into
vapour is not confined to the free surface, but is most co*
pious at the bottom of the vessel to which the heat is ap^
plied. When water boils in a glass beaker, the steam is
seen rising in spheres from the bottom to the top, where it
often swims for a time,, enclosed above by a dome-shaped
liquid film. Now, to produce these bubbles, certain resist-
ances must be overcome. First, we have the adhesion of
the water to the vessel which contains it, and this force
varies with the substance of the vessel. In the case of a
glass vessel, for example, the boiling point may be raised
two or three degrees by adhesion ; while in metal vessels
this is impossible. The adhesion is overcome by fits and
starts, which may be so augmented by Hie introduction of
salts into the liquid, that a loud bumping sound accompa-



BOILINO.TOnSTS OF LIQUIDS. 129

nies the ebnHHioh ; the detachment is in some cases so sud-
den and yiolent as to cause the liquid to jump bodily out
of the vesseL

A sec(»id antagonism to the tKuling of the liquid is the
attraction of the liquid particles for each other, a force
which, as we have seen, may become very' powerftil when
the liquid is purged of air. This is not only true of water,
but of oth^ liquids — of all the ethers and alcohols, for
example. If we connect a small flask containing ether or
alcc^ol with an air pump, a violent ebuDition occurs in the
liquid when the pump is first worked ; but after all the air
has been removed, we may, in many cases, continue to work
the pxunp, without producing any sensible ebullition ; the
free sur&ce alone of the liquid yielding vapour.

But that steam should exist in bubbles, in the interior
of a mass of liquid, it must be able to resist two other
things, the weight of the water above it, and the weight
of the atmosphere above the water. What the a^osphere
is competent to do may be thus illustrated. I have here a
tin vessel containing a little water, which is kept boiling by
this small lamp. At the present moment all the space above
the water is filled with steam, which issues from this stop-
cock. I shut off the cock, withdraw the lamp, and pour
cold water upon the tin vessel. The steam within it is con-
d^ised, the elastic cushion which pushed the sides outwards
in opposition to the pressure of the atmosphere is withdrawn,
and observe the consequence. The sides of the vessel are
crushed and crumpled up by the atmospheric pressure.
This pressure amounts to 15 lb. on every square inch : how
then, can a thing so frail as a bubble of steam exist on the
snrfiice of boiling water ? simply because the elastic force
of the steam within is exactly equal to tiiat of the atmos-
phere without ; the liquid film is pressed between two elas-
tic cushions which exactly neutralize each otiier. If the
steam were predominant, the bubble would burst from
6*



130 jJs/cmjsE 17.

within outwards ; if the air were predonunant, the bubl^
would be crushed inwards. Here, then, we have the true
definition of the boiling point of a liquid. It is that tem-
perature at which Ihe tendon of its Ti^ur exactly balances
die pressure of the atmosphere.

As we ascend a mountain the pressture of the atmos-
phere above us diminishes, and the boiling point is corres-
pondingly lowered. On an August morning in 1869 I
found the temperature of boiling water on the summit of
Mont Blanc to be 184-96° Fahr. ; that is, about 27° lower
than the boiling point at the sea level. On August 3, 1868,
the temperature of boiling water on the summit of the
Finsteraarhom was 187° Fahr. On August 10, 1868, the
boiling point on the summit of Monte Rosa was 184*92°
Fahr. The boiling point on. Monte Rosa is shown by these
observations to be almost the same as it was found to be
on Mont Blanc, though the latter exceeds the former in
height by 600 feet. The fluctuations of the barometer are
however quite sufficient to account for this anomaly. The
lowering of the boiling point is about 1° Fahr. for every
690 feet that we ascend; and from the temperature at
which water boils we may approximately infer the eleva-
tion. It is said that to make good tea in London, boiling
water is essential ; if this be so it is evident that the bever-
age cannot be procured, in all its excellence, at the higher
stations in the Alps. »

Let us now make an experiment to illustrate the de-
pendence of the boiling point on external pressure. Here
is a flask, f (fig. 35), containing water ; here is another and
a much larger one, g, from which I have had the air re-
moved by an air pump. The two flasks are connected to-
gether by a system of cocks, which enables me to establish
a communication between them. The water in the small
flask has been kept boiling for some time, the steam gen-
erated escaping from the cock y. I now remove the spirit



INFLUENCE OP PEESSUKB ON BOILING POINT.



131



lamp and tnm tMs cock so as to shut ont the air. The
water ceases to boil, and pnre steam now fills the flask
above it. Give the water time to cool a little. At inter-
vals you see a bubble of steam rising, because the pressure
of the vapour above is gradually becoming less through its
dow condensation. I hasten the condensation by pouring
cold water on the flask, the bubbles are more copiously
generated. By plunging the flask bodily into cold water
we might cause it to boil violently. The water is now at

rig.8&


rest and some degrees below its ordinary boiling point. I
turn this cock c, which opens a way for the escape of the



182 " LBOTUBE IV.

vapour into the exfaaosted vessel o ; the moment the pres-
sure is diminished ebullition sets in in f ; and observe how
the condensed steam showers in a kind of .rain agsunst the
ffldes of the exhausted vesseL By intentionally promoting
this condensation, and thereby preventing the vapour in the
large flask from reacting upon the surface of the water, we
can keep the small flask bubbling and boiling f(H* a consid-
erable length of time.

By high heating, the elastic force of steam beconies
enormous. The Marquis of Worcester burst cannon with
it, and our calamitous boiler explosions are so many illus-
trations of its power. By the skill of man this mighty
agetit has been controlled : by it Denis Papin raised a pis-
ton, which was pressed down agmn by the atmosphere,
when the steam was condensed; Savery and Newcomen
turned it to practical account, and James Watt completed
the grand application of the moving power of heat. Push-
ing the piston up by steam, while the space above the pis-
ton is in communication with a condenser or with the free
air, and again pushing down the piston, while the space
below it is in communication with a condenser or with
the air, we obtain a simple to and fro motion, which, by
mechanical arrangements, may be made to take any form
we please.

But the grand principle of the conservation of force is
illustrated here as elsewhere. For every stroke of work
done by the steam-engine, for every pound that it lifts, and
for every wheel that it sets in motion, an equivalent of heat
disappears. A ton of coal furnishes by its combustion a
certain definite amount of heat. Let this quantity of coal
be applied to work a steam-engine ; and let all the heat
communicated to the machine and the condenser, and all
the heat lost by radiation and by contact with the air be
collected ; it would fall short of the amomit produced by
the simple combustion of the ton of coal, and it would faU



HBAT Aim worn nar Tsa btbam engine. 183

flbort of it hj ua amount exactly eqoiTident to the qoaatily
of work performed. Suj^se that work to c^udst in lift-
ing a weight of 7,720 11)^. a foot Ingh ; the heat jNTodnoed
hy the coal wonld fall short of its maYiTnnni) hy a quantity
JQSt sofficient to warm a pomid of water 10*^.

But my object in these le<^nires is to desl with nature
lather^thsm art, and the limits of our time compel me
to pass quickly over the triumphs of man's skill in tJie
apfdication of steam to the purposes of life. Those who
have walked throtigh the workshops of Woolwich, or
throng any of our great factories where machinery is ex-
tensively employed, wiU have been sufficiently impressed
idth the aid which tlus great power renders to man. And
be it remembered, every wheel which revolves, every chis-
d, and plane, and saw, and punch, which forces its way
through solid iron as if it w^e so much cheese, derives its
movUig energy from the clashing atoms in the furnace.
The motion of these atoms is conmiunicated to the boiler,
thence to the water, whose particles are shaken asunder,
and fly fr(»n each other with a rq)ellent energy commen-
surate with the heat communicated. The steam is simply
the apparatus through the intermediation of which the
atomic motion is converted into the mechanical. And the
motion thus generated can reproduce its parent. Look at
the {Waning tools ; look at the boring instruments— Hstreams
of water gush over them to keep them cool. Take up the
curled iron shavings wMch the planing tool has pared off:
yon cannot hold them in your hand they are so hot, Here
the moving force is restored to its first form ; the energy
of the machine has been consumed in r^roducing the
power from which that energy was derived.

I mnst now direct your attrition to a natural steam-
engine whidi long held a place among the wonders of the
world. I eUlvAe to the Great Geyser of Iceland. The sur-
ftoe of Iceland gradually slopes from the co^Mst towards the



184r UH/rUKB IV.

centre, wbere the general level is abont 2,000 feet above
the sea. On this, as a pedestal, are planted the Joknll or
icy moontams, which extend both ways in a north-easterly
direction. Along this chain occur die active volcanoes of
the island, and the thermal springs follow the same g^ieral
direction. From the ridges and chasms which diverge from
die mountains enormous masses of steam issue at intervals
hissing and roaring ; and when the escape occurs at the
mouth of a cavern, die resonance of the cave often raises
the sound to the loudness of thunder. .Lower down in the
more porous strata we have smoking mud pools, where a
repulsive blue-black aluminous paste is boiled, rising at
times in hugh bubbles, which, on bursting, scatter their
slimy spray to a height of fifteen or twenty feet. From
the bases of the hills upwards extend the glaciers, and
above these are the snow-fields which crown the summits.
From the arches and fissures of the glaciers vast mftsses
of water issue, falling at times in cascades over walls of
ice, and spreading for miles over the country before they
find definite outlet. Extensive morasses are thus formed,
which add their comfordess monotony to the dismal scene
already before the traveller's eye. Intercepted by the
cracks and fissures of the land, a portion of this water finds
its way to the heated rocks underneath ; and here, meeting
with the volcanic gases which traverse these underground
regions, both travel together, to issue, at the first conve
nient opportunity, either as an eruption of steam or a boil*
ing spring.

The most famous of these springs is the Great Geyser.
It consists of a tube 14 feet deep and 10 feet in diameter.
The tube is surmounted by a basin, which measures from
north to south 52 feet across, and from east to west 60
feet. The interior of the tube and basin is coated with a
beautiftil smooth siliceous plaster, so hard as to resist
the blows of a hammer, and the first question is, how was



THB OBEAT OETBBB OF IOELAin>. 185

ibis wonderful tube constructed — ^how was this perfect
plaster laid on ? Chemical analysis shows that the water
holds silica in solution, and the conjecture might therefore
arise tiiiat the water had deposited the silica against the
sides of the tube and basin. But this is not the case : the
water deposits no sediment ; no matter how long it may be
kept, no solid substance is separated from it. It may be
bottled up and preserved for years as clear as crystal, with-
out showing the slightest tendency to form a precipitate.
To answer the question in this way would moreover assume
that the shaft was formed by some foreign agency, and
Ihat the water merely lined it. The geyser basin, however,
rests upon the summit of a mound about 40 feet high, and
it is evident, from mere inspection, that the mound has
been deposited by the geyser. But in building up this
mound the spring must have formed the tube which per-
forates the mound, and hence the conclusion that the gey-
ser is the architect of its own tube.

If we place a quantity of the geyser water in an evapor-
ating basin the following takes place : In the centre of the
basin the liquid deposits nothing, but at the sides, where
it is drawn up by capillary attraction, and thus subjected
to speedy evaporation, we find silica deposited. Round
the edge a rmg of silica is laid on, and not until the evapo-
ration has continued a considerable time do we find the
slightest turbidity in the middle of the waters This exper-
iment is the microscopic representant of what occurs in
Iceland. Imagine the case of a simple thermal siliceous
spring, whose waters trickle down a gentle incline.; the
water thus exposed evaporates speedily, and silica is de-
posited. This deposit gradually elevates the side over
which the water passes until finally the latter has to take
another course. The same takes place here, the ground is
elevated as before and the spring has to move forward.
Thus it is compelled to travel round and round, discharg-



,A



186 x;botubb iv.

ing its silica and deepening the shaft in wbidi it dwells,
until finally, in the course of ages, the simple spring has
prodnced that wonderfid apparatus which has so Icmg pnz*
ded and astonished both the traveller and the philosopher.

Previous to an eruption, both the tube and baon are
filled with hot water ; detonations which shake the ground,
are heard at intervals, and each is succeeded by a violent
agitation of the water in the basin. The water in the pipe
is lifted up so as to form an eminence in the middle of the
basin, and an overflow is the consequence. These detona-
tions are evidently due to the producticm of steam in the
ducts which feed the geyser tube, whidi steam escaping
into the cooler water of the tube is there suddenly conr
densed,* and produces the explosions. Professor Bunsen
succeeded in determining the temperature of the geyser
tube, from top to bottom, a few minutes before a great
eruption; and these observations revealed the extraordi-
nary fact, that at no part of the tube did the water reach
its boiling point. In the annexed sketch (fig. 36) I have
given, on one side, the temperatures actually observed, and
on the other side the temperatures at which water would
boil, taking into account both the pressure of the atmos-
phere and the pressure of the superincumbent column of
water. The nearest approach to the boiling point is at a,
a height of 30 feet from the bottom ; but even here the
water is 2^ Centigrade, or more than 3i° Fahr. below the
temperature at which it could boil. How then is it pos-
sible that an eruption could occur under such drcum-
stancQ0 ?

Fix: your attention upon the water at the point a;
where the temperature is within 2° C. of the boiling point.
Gall to mind the lifting of the colunm when the detona-
tions are heard. Let us suppose that by the entrance of
steam from the ducts near the bottom of the tube, the
geyser column is elevated 6 feet, a height quite within the



THBOBY or TSE ^EYSEB.



m



limits of Actual observation ; the water at ▲ is thereby
transferred to b. Its boiling point at a is 123*8% and its
actoal temperature 121*8° ; hv^ at b its boiling point is
onl^ 1^0*8°, Jbence, when transferred from ▲ to b the heat
which it possesses is in excess of that necessary to make it
boiL This excess of heat is instantly applied to the gen-
eration of steam : the column is t^us lifted hi^er, and the


OBSBBYED
TEMPEBATUBES


1



BOILINO
TEMPEBATUBES


>C^



water below is further relieved. More steam is generated ;
from the middle downwards the mass suddenly bursts into



%


138



LECrrUBB IV.


OEYSBB OPEBATIOKS IK IOELAl!n>.



139



Fig.8a



ebullition, the water above, mixed with steam clouds, is
projected into the atmosphere, and we have the geyser
eruption in all its grandeur.

By its contact with the air the water is cooled, falls
back into the basin, partially refills the tube, in which it
gradually rises, add finally fills the basin as before. Deto-
nations are heard at intervals, and risings of the water in
the basin. These are so many futile attempts at an erup-
tion, for not untn the water in the tube comes sufficiently
near its boiling temperature, to make the lifting of llie col-
mnn effective, can we have a true eruption.

To Bunsen we owe this beautiful theory, and now let
us try to justify it by experiment. Here is a tube of gal-
vanized iron, 6 feet long, a b (fig. 37), and surmounted by
this basin o d. It is heated by a fire
underneath ; and to imitate as far as
possible the condition of the geyser,
I have encircled the tube by a second
fire F, at a height of 2 feet from the
bottom. Doubtless the high tem-'
perature of the water at the corres-
ponding part of the geyser tube is
due to a local action of the heated
rocks. I fill the tube with water,
which gradually becomes heated ; and
regularly, every five minutes, the wa-
ter is ejected from the tube into the
atmosphere.

But there is another famous spring
in Iceland, called the Strokkur, which
is usually forced to explode by stop-
ping its mouth with clods. We can
imitate the action of this spring by
stopping the mouth of our tube a b with a cork.
0o: and now the heating progresses.


I do
The steam below



140 uBoruBB rr.

will finally attain sufficient tension to ejeot the ooi^ and
the water, suddenly relieved from the pressure, will
burst forth in the atmosphere. There it goes! The
ceiling of this rocon is nearly 30 feet from the floor, but
the enq)tion has reached the ceiling, from which the
water now drips plentifully. In fig. 38, I have given a
section of the Strokkur.

By stopping the tube with corks, through which: tubes
of various lengths and widths pass, the action of many of
the other eruptive springs may be accurately imitated*
Here, for example, I have an intermittent action; dis-
charges of water and impetuous steam gushes follow each
other in quick succession, the water being squirted in jets
15 or 20 feet high. Thus, it is proved experimentidly,
that the geyser tube itself is the suffident cause of the
eruptions, and we are relieved from the necessity of ima-
gining underground caverns filled with water and steam,
which were formerly regarded as necessary to the produce
tion of these wonderful phenomena.

A moment's reflection will suggest to us that there
must be a limit to the operations of the geyser. When
the tube has reached such an altitude that the water in the
depths below, owing to the in<»'eased pressure, cannot at-
tain its boiling point, the eruptions of necessity cease. The
spring, however, continues to deposit its sUica, and often
forms a Lcmg or cistern. Some of those in Iceland are 40
feet deep. Their beauty, according to Bunsei, is inde-
scribable ; over the surface curls a light vapour, the water
is of the purest azure, and tints witji its lovety hue the fan-
tastic incrustations on the cistern walls ; whUe, at the bot-
tom, is often seen the mouth of the once mighty geyser.
There are in Iceland vast, but now extinct, geyser opera-
tions. Mounds are observed whose shafts are filled with
rubbish, the water having forced a passage underneath and
retired to other scenes of action. We have in fact the



GETSBB OPERATIONS IN lOELAKD. 141

gejrser in its youth, manhood, old age, and death, here pre-
sented to ns. In its youth, as a simple thermal spring ; in
its manhood, as the eruptive column ; in its old age, as the
tranquil Lang ; while its death is recorded by the ruined
shaft and mound which testify the fact of its once active
existence.



APPENDIX TO LECTUEE IV.



ABSTRACT OP A.LECTUBE ON THB VIBRATION AND TONES PRO-
DUCED BY THE CONTACT OF BODIES OF DIPFERENT TEMPER-
ATURES.

[Oivm at the Boyal Institution on Friday^ January 27, 1854.]

In the year 1805, M. Schwartz, an inspector of one of the
smelting works in Saxony, placed a cnp-shaped mass of hot silver
upon a cold anyil, and was surprised to find that musical tones
proceeded from the mass. In the antnnm of the same year. Pro-
fessor Gilbert of Berlin visited the smelting works and repeated
the experiment. He observed, that the sounds were accompanied
by a quivering of the hot silver, and that when the vibrations
ceased, the sound ceased also. Professor Gilbert merely stated the
&cts, and made no attempt to explain them.

In the year 1829, Mr. Arthur Trevelyan, being engaged in
spreading pitch with a hot plastering iron, and once observing
that the iron was too hot for his purpose, he laid it slantingly
against a block of lead which chanced to be at hand ; a shrill
note, which he compared to that of the chanter of the small
Northumberland pipes, proceeded from the mass, and, on nearer
inspection, he observed that the heated iron was in a state of vi-
bration. He was induced by Dr. Reid of Edinburgh to pursue
the subject, and the results of his numerous experiments were
subsequently printed in the Transactions of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh.

On April 1, 1881, these singular sounds and vibrations formed
the subject of a Friday evening discourse by Professor Faraday at
the Royal Institution. Professor Faraday expanded and further
establi^ed the explanation of the sounds given by Mr. Trevelyan



6ENBBAL LAWS OF FBOFB880B FOBBE8. 143

and Sir John Leslie. He refeired them to the tapping of the hot
mass against the cold one underneath it, the taps being in many
cases sufficiently quick to produce a high musical note. The al-
ternate expansion and contraction of the cold mass at the points
where the hot rocker descends upon it, he regarded as the sus-
taining power of the yibrations. The superiority of lead he as-
cribed to its great expansibility, combined with its feeble power
of conduction, which latter prevented the heat from being quick-
ly diffused throi^h the mass.

Professor J. D. Forbes of Edinburgh was present at this lec-
ture, and not feeling satisfied with the explanation, imdertook the
farther examination of the subject ; his results are described in
a highly ingenious paper communicated to the Royal Society of
Edinburgh in 1833. He rejects the explanation suppoijted by
Professor Faraday, and refers the yibrations to ^ a new species of
mechanical agency in heat' — a repulsion exercised by the heat
itself on passing from a good conductor to a bad one. This con-
clusion is based upon a number of general laws established by
Professor Forbes. If these laws be correct, then indeed a great
step h^s been taken towards a knowledge of the intimate nature
of heat itself, and this consideration was the lecturer's principal
stimulus in resuming the examination of the subject.

He had already made some experiments, ignorant that the sub-
ject had been feirther treated by Seebeck, until informed of the
fact by Professor Magnus of Berlin. On reading Seebeck's inter-
esting paper, he found that many of the results which it was his
intention to seek had been already obtained. The portion of the
subject which remained untouched was, however, of sufficient in-
terest to induce him to prosecute his original intention.

The general laws of Professor Forbes were submitted in succes-
sion to an experimental examination. The first of these laws
afSrms that ' the mbrations never take place "between suhtancea of tlie
same nature? This the lecturer found to be generally the case when
the hot rocker rested upon a Uock^ or on the edge of a thick plate
of the same metal ; but the case was quite altered when a thin
plate of metal was used. Thus a copper rocker laid upon the
edge of a penny-piece did not vibrate permanently ; but when the
coin was beaten out by a hanmier, so as to present a thin sharp
edge, constant vibrations were obtained. A silver rocker resting



144 APfESmJL 'SO LBOTDBB IV.

restiiig on the edge of ahalf-arownTeftiBed toyibratepennaneiitlj;
but on the edge of a sixpence oontinuons yibrations were obtained.
An iroBL rodccv on the edge of a dinner knife gaye continnons yi-
bratiims. A flat brass rodcer placed upon the iK)ints of two comr
mon brass pins, and having its handle suitably supported, gaye
distinct yibrations. In these experiments the plates and pins
were fixed in a yice, and it was found that the thinner the plate,
within its limits of rigidity, the more certain and striking was the
e£fSect. Yibrations were thud obtained with iron cm iron, copper
on copper, brass on brass, sdnc on Einc, sUyer on silver, tin on
tin. The list might be extended, bat the cases dted are raflldent
to show tiiat the proposition above dted cannot be r^arded as
expressing a * general law.'

The second general law enunciated by Professor Forbes is, that
^hoth 9uManee$ muit Ife metaHk.'^ This is the law which firstat-
tracted the lecturer's attention. During the progress of a kindred
enquiry, he had discovered l&at certain non-metallic bodies are
endowed with powers of conduction fkr higher than has hem
hitherto supposed, and the thought occurred to him that such
bodies might, by suitable treatment, be made to supply the place
of metals in the production of vibrations. This anticipation was
realized. Bocks of silver, copper, and tetss, placed upon the
natural edge of a prism of rock crystal, gave distinct tones ; on
the clean edge of a cube of fluor spar, the tones were still more
musical ; on a mass of rock-salt the vibrations were vary fordMe.
There is scarcely a substance, metallic or non-metallic, on which
vibrations can be obtained with greater ease and certainty than
on rock-salt. In most cases a high temperature is necessary to
the production of the tones, but in the case of rock-salt the tem-
perature need not exceed that of the blood. A new and singular
property is thus found to belong to this already remarkable sub-
stance. It is needless to enter into a ML statement regarding the
various minerals submitted to experiment. Upwards of twenty
mm-metallic substances had been examined by the lecturer, and
disdnct vibrations obtained with every one of them.

The number of exceptions here exhibited far exceeds that of
the substances whidi are mentioned in the paper of Professor
Forbes, and are, it was imagined, suffidentto show that the sec-
ond general law is untenable.



LAWS TESTED EZPEKIMKNTALLT. 145

The tMrd general law states, that * the wbraUonM take plaee
wUh an intensity proportional (within certain limits) to the differ-
ence of the eondficting powers of the metals for heat, the metal hading
the least conducting power, deing necessarily the coldestj* The evi-
dence adduced against the first law appears to destroy tiiis one
also ; for if the intensity of the yibrations be proportional to the
difference of the conducting powers, then, where there is no such
difference, there ought to be no yibrations. But it has been
proved in half a dozen cases, that yibrations occur between differ-
ent pieces of the same metal. The condition stated by Professor
Forbes was, howeyer, reyersed. Silyer stands at the head of con-
ductors ; a strip of the metal was fixed in a yice, and hot rockers
of brass, copper, and iron, were successiyely laid upon its edge :
distinct yibrations were obtained with all of them. Vibrations
were also obtained with a brass rocker which rested on the edge
of a half-soyereign. These imd other experiments show that it is
not necessary that the worst conductor should be the cold metal,
as affirmed in the third general law aboye quoted. Among the
metals, antimony and bismuth were found perfectly inert by
Professor Forbes; the lecturer howeyer had obtained musical
tones from both of these substances.

The superiority of lead as a cold block. Professor Faraday, as
idready stated, referred to its high expansibility, combined with
its deficient conducting power. Against this notion, which he
considers to be ' an obyious oyersight,' Professor Forbes contends
in an ingenious and apparently unanswerable manner. The yi-
brations, he urges, depend upon the difference of temperature
existing between the rocker imd the blocb ; if the latter be a bad
conductor and retain the heat at its surfiace, the tendency is to
bring both the surfaces in contact to the same temperature, and
thus to stop the yibration instead of exalting it. Farther : the
greater the quantity of heat transmitted from the rocker to the
block during contact, the greater must be the expansion ; and
hence, if the yibrations be due to this cause, the effect must be a
maximimi when the block is the best conductor possible. But
Professor Forbes, in this argument, seems to haye used the term
expansion in two different senses. The expansion which produces
the yibration is the sudden upheaval of the point wnere the
hot rocker comes in contact with the cold mass underneath : but
7



146 jLPPSHDIZ to LBCTTUKB IV.

the expansion due to good conduction would be an expansion of
the general mass. Imagine the conductiye power of the block to
be infinite — that is to say, that the heat imparted by the rpcker is
instantly diffused equally throughout the block; then, thoi^h
the g^eral expansion might be very great, the local expansion at
the point of contact would be wanting, and no yibrations would
be possible. The inevitable consequence of good conduction is,
to cause a sudden abstraction of the heat from the point of con-
tact of the rocker with the substance underneath, and this the
lecturer conceiyed to be the precise reason why Professor Forbes
had failed to obtain yibrations when the cold metal was a good
conductor. He made use of hloek$^ and the abstraction of heat
tram the place of contact by the circumjacent mass of metal, was
so sudden as to extinguish the local eleyation on which the yitek-
tions depend. In the experiments described by the leeturer, this
abstraction was to a great extent ayoided, by reducing the metal-
lic masses to thin lamini^ ; and thus the yery experiments adduced
by Professor Forbes against the theory supported by Professor
Faraday, appear, when duly considered, to be conyerted into
strong corroboratiye proofs of the correctness of the views of the
philosopher last mentioned.



EXTBACT FEOM A PAPEE ON SOME PHYSICAL PEOPEETIEB OP

ICE.*

In a yery interesting paper communicated to the British Asso*
ciation during its last meeting, Mr. James Thomson has explained
the freezing together of two pieces of ice at 82° Fahr., in the fol-
lowing manner : — * The two pieces of ice, on being pressed to-
gether at their point of contact, will at that place, in virtue of the
pressure, be in part liquefied and reduced in temperature, and the
cold evolved in their liquefaction will cause some of the liquid
film intervening between the two masses to freeze.'

I am far from denying the operation under proper circum-
stances of the vera causa to which Mr. Thomson refers, but I do

* PhiL Trans., 1868, p. 226.



LAIONATIOK OF lOB BT PBEBStTBE.



147



not think it explains the ffusts. For freezhig takes place without
the intervention of any pressure by which Sfr, Thomson^s effect
could sensibly come into play.

It is not necessary to squeeze the jieces of ice together ; one
bit may be simply laid upon the other, and they will still freeze.
Other substances besides ice are also capable of being frozen to
the ice. If a towel be folded round a piece of ice at 32^ the towel
and ice will freeze together. Flannel is still better ; a piece of
flannel wrapped round a piece of ice, freezes to it sometimes so
firmly that a strong tearing force is necessary to separate both.
Cotton, wool, and hair may also be frozen to ice, without the in-
tervention of any pressure which would render Mr. Thomscm's
cause sensibly actire.

•But there is a class of effects to the explanation of which the
lowering of the freezing point of water, by pressure, may, I think,
be properly applied. The following statement is true of flfry ex-
periments, or more, made with ice from various quarters. A cyl-
inder of ice, two inches high and an inch in diameter, was placed
between two slabs of box-wood, and submitted to a gradually
increasing pressure. Looked at perpendicularly to the axis,
cloudy lines were seen drawing themselves across the cylinder ;
and when the latter was looked at obliquely, these lines were
found to be sections of dim hazy sur&ces which traversed the
cylinder, and gave it an appearance closely resembling that of a
crystal of gypsum whose planes of cleavage had been forced out
of optical contact by some external force.

Fig. 39 represents the cylinder looked at perpendicularly to
its axis, and fig. 40 the same cylinder when looked at obliquely.



Fig. 40.


148



APPENDEJC TO LEOTURB 17.



To ascertun whether the rapture of optical contact which
these experiments disclosed was due to the intrusion of air be-
tween two separated surfaces of ice, a cylinder of ice, two inches
long and one inch wide, was placed in a copper vessel containing
ice-cold water. The ice cylinder projected half an inch above the
surfiEtce of the water. Placing the copper vessel on a slab of
wood, and a second slab of wood upon the cylinder of ice, the
whole was subjected to pressure. When the hazy surfiaces were
well developed in the portion of ice above the water, the cylinder
was removed and examined. The planes of rupture extended
throughout the entire length of the cylinder, just the same as it
had been squeezed in free air.

Still the removal of the cylinder from its vessel might be at-
tended with the intrusion of air into the fissures. I there&re
placed a cylinder of ice, two inches long and one inch wide, in a
stout vessel of glass, which was filled with ice-cold water. Squeez-
ing the whole, as in the last experiment, the surfaces of discontin-
uity were seen under the liquid quite as distinctly as in air.

The sur&ces are due to compression, and not to any tearing
asund^ of the mass by tension, and they are best developed
where the pressure, within the limits of fracture, is a maximum.
A cylindrical piece of ice, one of whose ends was not parallel to
the other, was placed between slabs of wood and subjected to
pressure. Fig. 41 shows the disposition of the experiment. The



Fig, 41.


effect upon the ice-cylinder was that shown in fig. 42, the sur-
&ces being developed along that side which had suffered the
pressure.



UQUEFACnON OF ICE BY FBES8USB. 149

Sometimes the Bur&ces commence at the centre of the cylin-
der. A dim small spot is first observed, which, as the preBsore
continues, expands nntil it sometimes embraces the entire trans-
verse section of the cylinder.

On examining these surfaces with a pocket lens, they appeared
to me to be composed of very minute water-parcels, like what is
produced upon a smooth cold sur&ce by the act of breathing.
Were they either vacuous plates, or plates filled with air, their
aspect would, on optical grounds, be &r more vivid than it really
was.

A concave mirror was so disposed, that the diffused light of
day was thrown full upon the cylinder while under pressure.
Observing the expanding surfaces through a lens, they appeared
in a state of intense commotion ; this was probably due to the
molecular tensions of the little water-parcels. This motion fol-
lowed'closely on the edge of the surfiekce as it advanced through
the solid ice. Once or twice I observed the hazy surfiuses pio-
neered through the mass by dim of&hoots apparently liquid.
They constituted a kind of negative crystallization, having the
exact form of the crystalline spines and spurs produced by the
congelation of water upon a sur&ce of glas^ I have no doubt,
then, that these surfaces are produced by the lique&ction of the
solid in planes perpendicular to the direction of pressure.

The surfaces are developed with great fetdlity when they cor-
respond to the Bur&ces of freezing. By care I succeeded in some
cases in producing similar offsets in sur&ces at right angles to the
planes of freezing, but this was difficult and uncertain. Wherever
the liquid disks before described were observed, the sui&ces were
always easily developed in the planes of the disks.



LECTURE V.

[FebiTiarf 20, 1862.]

APPLIOATIOlf or TBI DTNAlflOAL THIOBT TO THK .VBXSOUEKA. OW BPECIFIO
AJXD LATENT HEAT — ^DEFINITION OF ENESOT : POTENTIAL AND DYNAMIO
ENERGY — ^EHEBGT OW MOLECULAR FORCES — ^EXPERIMENTAL ILLUSTRA-
TIONS or SPECITIC AND LATENT HEAT — MECHANICAL VALUES OF THE
ACTS OF COMBINATION, CONDENSATION, AND CONGELATION IN THE CASE
OF WATER — SOLID CARBONIC ACID— THE SPHEROIDAL STATE OF LIQUIDS —
FLOATING OF SPHEROID ON ITS OWN YAPOUR — FREEZING 07 WATER AND
MERCURT IN A RED-HOT CRUCIBLE.

A /^ 1 "YXT^HENEVER a difficult expedition is undertaken in
VV the Alps, the experienced mountaineer commences
the day at a slow pace, so that when the real hour of trial
arrives, he may find himself hardened instead of exhausted'
by his previous work. We, to-day, are about to enter on
a difficult ascent, and I propose that we commence it in the
same spirit ; not with a flush of enthusiasm which the
necessity of labour extinguishes, but with patient and
determined hearts which will not recoil should a difficulty
arise.

I have here a lead weight attached to a string which
passes over a pulley at the top of the room. We know
that the earth and the weight are mutually attractive ; the
weight now rests upon the earth and exerts a certain press-
ure upon its surface. The earth and the weight here
totich each other; their mutual attractions are as far as
possible satisfied, and motion by their mutual approach is
no longer possible. As far as the attraction of gravity is



pongnTAL and dthamic s39Sbgt. 151

coBoemed, ihe possibOity of iNrodudi^ motkn ceases as
soon as tiie two attractmg bodies are actuaUy m contact.

I draw op this weight. It is now snsp^^ed at a height
of sixteen feet aboTC the floor ; it is jnst as motionless as
wh^i it rested on tiie floor ; bat by introducing a space
betwe^i the floor and it, I ^itirdy change the condition
of the weight. By raising it I have conferred upon it a
moti<m-prodacing power. There is now an action posmUe
to it, which was not possible when it rested iqson the earth;
it can /aU^ and in its descent can turn a machine or per-
form other work. It has no energy as it hangs there dead
and motionless ; but energy is posable to it, and we might
fairly nse the term possible energy^ to express this power
of motion whidi the weight possesses, but which has not
yet been exerdsed by fallmg ; or we might call it ^ poten-
tial energy,' as some eminent men have already done. This
potential energy is derived, in the case before ns, from ik^^
pull of gravity, which pull, however, has not yet eventoated
in motion. But I now let ik^<^ string go ; the weight falls,
and readies the earth's surface with a velocity of thirty-two
feet a second. At every moment of descent it was pulled
down by gravity, and its final moving force is the summa-
tion of the pulls. While in the act of falling, the energy
of the weight is active. It may be called ctctucd energy, in
antithesis to possible ; or it may be called dynamic energy,
in antithesis to potential^ or we might call the energy with
which the weight descends momng force. Do not be inat-
tentive to these points ; we must be able promptly to dis-
tdnguish between energy in store and energy in action.
Once for all then, let us take the terms of Mr. Rankine,
and call the energy in store ^ potential,' and the energy in
action ^actual'* If, after this, I should we the terms

* Helmholtz, in his admirable memoir on * Die Erhaltung der Kraft,*
(1847), divided all energy into Tension and vis viva. (Spannkrafte und
Lebendige Krifte.)



162 LEOTUEB V

* possible energy,' or * dynamic energy,' or * moving force,'
you will have no difficulty in affixing the exact idea to these
terms. And remember exactness is here essential. We
must not now tolerate vagueness in our conceptions.

Our weight started from a height of sixteen feet ; let
us fix our attention upon it after it has accomplished the
first foot of its fall. The total pull, if I may use the term,
to be expended on it has been then diminished by the
amount expended in its passing through the first foot. At
the height of fifteen feet it has one foot less of potential
energy than it possessed at the height of sixteen feet, but
at the height of fifteen feet it has got an equivalent amount
of dynamic or actual energy which, if reversed in direction,
would raise it again to its primitive height. Hence ^ po-
tential energy disappears, dynamic energy comes into play.
ITiroughout the universe the sum of these two energies is
constant.

It is as yet too early to refer to organic processes, but
could we observe the molecular condition of my arm as I
drew up that weight, it would be seen that in acfomplish-
ing this mechanical act, an equivalent amount of some
other form of motion was consumed. If the weight were
raised by common heat, a portion of heat would disappear
exactly equivalent to the work done. The weight is about
one pound, and to raise it sixteen feet would consume as
much heat as would raise the temperature of a cubic foot
of air about 1° F. Conversely, this quantity of heat would
be generated by the falling of the weight from a height of
sixteen feet. It is easy to see that, if the force of gravity
were immensely greater than it is, an immensely greater
amouiit of heat would have to be expended to raise the
weight. Th# greater the attraction, the greater would be
the amount of heat necessary to overcome it ; but conversely,
the greater would be the amount of heat which a falling
body would then develope by its collision with tiie earth.



ENBBGY 07 MOLBOULAB F0B0B8. 153

Haying made our minds clear that heat is consmned
when a weight is forcibly separated from the earth by this
agent, and that the amomit of heat consumed depends on
the energy of the attracting force overcome, we must turn
these conceptions, regarding sensible masses, to account,
in forming conceptions regarding insensible masses. As
an intellectual act it is quite as easy to conceive of the sep-
aration of two mutually attracting atome^ as to conceive of
the separation of the earth and weight. I have already
had occasion to refer more than (mce to the energy of
molecular forces, and here I have to return to the subject.
Closely locked together as they are, the atoms of bodies,
though we cannot suppose them to be in contact, exert
enormous attractions. It would require an almost incred-
ible amount of ordinary mechanical force to widen the dis-
tances intervening^between the atoms of any solid or liquid,
so as to increase the volume of the solid or liquid in any
considerable degree. It would also require a force of great
magnitude to squeeze the particles of a liquid or solid to-
gether, so as to make the body less in size. I have vainly
tried to augment the density of a soft metal by pressure
Water, for example, which yields so freely to the hand
plunged in it, was for a long time regarded as absolutely
incompressible. Great force was brought to bear upon it ;
but sooner than shrink sensibly, it oozed through the pores
of the metal vessel which contained it, and spread like a
dew on the surface.* By refined and powerful means we

* I have to thank mj friend, Mr. Spedding, for the following extract
in reference to this experiment : —

*Now it is certain that rarer bodies (such as air) allow a considirable
degree of contraction, as has been stated ; not that tangible bodies (such as
water) suffer oompres^on with much greater difficulty and to a less extent.
How far they do suffer it, I haye investigated in the following experiment:
I had a hollow globe of lead made capable of holding about two pints, and
sufficiently thick to bear considerable force ; having made a hole in it, I
7*



154 LEOTDBB y.

can now compress water, but the force necessary to accom-
plish this is very great.

When we wish to overcome molecular forces we must
attack them by their })eers. Heat accomplishes what me-
chanical energy, as generally wielded, is incompetent to
perform. Bo^es when heat^ expand, and to effect this
expansion their molecular attractions most be overcome.
In masses equally large this is a work, in comparison with
which the 'erection of the Egyptian pyramids dwindles to
the labour of mites ; and where the attractions to be over-
come are so vast, we may infer that the quantity of heat
necessary to overcome them will be commensurate.

And now I must ask your entire attention. I hold in

filled it with water, and then stopped up the hole with melted lead, so that
t|ie globe became quite solid. I then flattened the two oppoate sides of the
globe with a heavy hanmier, by which the water w&s necessarily contracted
into less space, a sphere being the figure of largest capacity ; and when the
hammering had no more efibct in making the water shrink, I made use of
a mill or press ; till the water, impatient of further pressure, exuded
through the solid lead like a fine dew. I ihen computed the space lost by
the compression, and cpnduded that, this was the extent of compression
which the water had sufibred, butonly when constrained by great Tiolence.'
(Bacon's Novum Organum published in 1620: vol. iv. 209 of the transla-
tion.) Note by R. Leslie Ellis, vol. i. p. 324. — ^This is perhaps the most
remarkable of Bacon's experiments, and it is angular that it was so little
spoken of by subsequent writers. Nearly fifty years after the production
of the " Novum Organum," an account of a similar experiment was pubMi-
ed by Megalotti, who was secretary of the Academia del Gimento at Flor-
ence ; and it has since been familiarly known as the Florentine experiment.
I quote his account of it, " Facemmo lavorar," ' &c.

The writer goes on to remark that the absolute -incompressibility of
water is not proved by this experiment, but merely that it is not to be com-
pressed in Ihe manner described ; but the experiment is on other grounds
inconclusive.

It is to be remembered that Leibnitz (* Nouveaux Essais*) in mentioning
the Florentine experiment, says that the globe was of gold (p. 229 Erd-
mann), whereas the Florentine academicians expressly say why they pre-
ferred diver to either gold or lead.



INTEBIOB WOSK. 155

my hand a lump of lead ; suppose I communicate a certain
amount of heat to the lead, how is that heat disposed of
within the substance ? It is applied to two distinct pur-
poses — ^it performs two diflferent kinds of work. One por-
tion of it imparts that species of motion which raises the
temperature of the lead, and which is sensible to the ther-
mometer ; but another portion of it goes to force the atoms
of the lead into new positions, and this portion ie lost as
heca. The pushing asunder of the atoms of the lead in
this case, in opposition to their mutual attractions, is exact-
ly analogous to the raising of our weight in opposition to
the force of gravity. Let me try to make the comparison
between the two actions still more strict ; suppose that I
have a definfte amount of force to be expended on our
weight, and that I divide this force into two portions, one
of which I devote to the actual raising of the weight, while
I employ the other to cause the weight, as it ascends, to
oscillate, or revolve, like a pendulum or governor, and to
oscillate, moreover, with gradually augmented energy ; we
have, then, the analogue of that which occurs when heat is
imparted to the lead. The atoms are pushed apart, but
during their recession they vibrate, or revolve, with grad-
ually augmented intensity. Thus the heat communicated
to the lead resolves itself, in part, into atomic potential
energy, and in part into a kind of atomic music, the music-
al part alone being competent to act upon our thermome-
ters or to affect our nerves.

In this case, then, the heat accomplishes what we may
call interior work;* it performs work within the body
heated, by forcing its particles to take up new positions.
When the body cools, the forces which were overoMne in
the process of heating come into play, and the heat which
was consumed by the forcing asunder of the atoms is now
restored by the drawing together of the atoms.

' * See the excellent memoiis of Clausius in the Philosophical Magazine.



156 LBOTUBE y.

Chemists have determined the relative wdghts of the
atoms of different snbstanees. Galling the weight of a hy-
dro^n atom 1, the weight of an oxygen atom, you know,
is 16. Hence to make up a pound weight of hydrogen,
sixteen times the number of atoms contained in a pound
of oxygen would be necessary. The number of atoms re-
quired to make up a pound is evidently inversely propor-
tional to the atomic weight. We here approach a v^y
delicate and important point. The experiments of Dulong
mid Petit, and of MM. Begnault and Keumann, render it
extremely probable that all elementary atoms, great and
small, light and heavy, when at the same temperature,
possess the same amount of the energy which we call heat,
the lighter atoms making good by velocity M%at they want
in mass. Thus, each of the atoms. of hydrogen has the
same moving energy as an atom of oxygen at the same
temperature. But, inasmuch as a pound weight of hydro-
gen contains sixteen times the number of atoms, it must
also contain sixteen times the amount of heat possessed by
a poimd of oxygen, at the same temperature.

From this it follows that to raise a pound of hydrogen,
a certain number of degrees in temperature — say from 50°
to 60° — would require sixteen times the amount of heat
needed by a pound of oxygen under the same circum-
stances. Conversely, a pound of hydrogen, in falling
through 10°, would yield sixteen times the amount of heat
yielded by a pound of oxygen, in falling throiigh the same
number of degrees.

In oxygen and hydrogen we have no sensible amount
of ' interior work,' to be performed ; there are no molecu-
lar attractions of sensible magnitude to be overcome. But
in solid and liquid bodies, besides the differences due to
the number of atoms present in the unit of weight, we have
also differences due to the consumption of heat in interior
work. Hence it is clear that the amount of heat which



BELATIONS OF ATOMIO NUMBEBS TO HEAT. 157

different bodies contain is not at ail declared^ hj their tem-
perature. To raise a pound of water, for example, 1"^,
would require thirty times the amount of heat necessary to
raise a pound of mercury 1^. Conversely, the pound of
water, in falling through 1°, would yield up thirty times
tiie amount of heat yielded up by the pound of mercury.

Let me illustrate, by a simple experiment, the differ-
ences which exist between bodies, as to the quantity of
heat which they contain. I have here a cake of beeswax
six inches in diameter and half an inch thick. Here I have
a vessel containing oil, which is now at a temperature of
180° C. In the hot oil I have immersed a number of balls
of different metals— of iron, lead, bismuth, tin and copper.
At present they all possess the same temperature, namely,
that of the oil. Well, I lift them out of the oil, and place
them upon this cake of wax c d
(fig. 43), which is supported by ^*^* ^'

the ring of a retort-stand ; they
melt the wax underneath and .
sink in it. But I see that they
are sinking with different ve-
locities. The iron and the cop-
per are working themselves
much more vigorously into the
fusible mass than the others ; the
tin comes next, while the lead
and the bisihuth lag entirely be-
hind. There goes the iron clean
through, the copper follows ; I
can see the bottom of the tin

ball just peeping through the lower surface of the cake,
but it cannot go farther ; while the lead and bismuth have
made but little way, being imable to sink to much more
than half the depth of the cake.

Supposing, then, I take equal weights of different sub-


168



LBUTliKB y.



i^AnoeB) heat tiiem all (say to 100°) and then determine the
exact amount* of heat which each of them gives out in
cooling from 100° to 0% I should find very different
amounts of heat for the different substances. How could
this problem be solred? It has been solved by eminent
men by observing the time which a body requires to coed.
Of course the greater the amount of heat possessed and
generated by its atoms, the longer would the body take to
cboL The relative quantities of heat j^ielded up by differ-
ent bodies have also been determined by plunging them,
when heated, into cold water, and observing the gain on
the one hand and the loss on the other. The probl^n has
also been solved by observing the quantities of ice which
different bodies can liquefy, in falling from 212° Fahr. to
32% or from 100° C. to 0°. These different methods have
given concordant results. Calling the amount of heat giv^i
out by a pound of water, in sinking through one degree of
temperature, unity, the following numbers express the
amount of heat given out by a pound weight of each of the
substances whose names are annexed.



Water


. 1-0000


Sulphur


. 0-2026


Arsenic


. 00814


Antimony ,


. 0-0508


Bismuth


. 0-0808


Zinc .


. 0-0965


. 0-0667


Tin .


. 0-0662


Lead .


. 0-0814


Iron .


. 0-1188


Cobalt


. 0-lOYO


NidLel


. 0-1086


Copper


. 0-0961


Mercury


. 0Q338


SilTcr .


. 006T0


Gold .


. 0-0324


Pliitiniim


.0-0844



bp;boi7IO WBja. 159

A moment's ini^ection of this table explains why it is
that, in the case of iron and copper, our balls melted
throt^h the wax, while the lead and bismuth balls were in-
competent to do so ; it wiU also be seen that tin here occn^
pies the position which w^e should assign to it from the ex-
periment with the cake of wax ; water, we see, stands at
the head of all.

Each of these numbers d^iotes what has been hitherto
cdXied the ' specific heat ' or the ' capacity for heat ' of the
substance to which it is attached. As I stated in a former
lecture, those who hold that heat is a fluid, explained these
differences by saying that some substances had a greater
store of this fluid than others. We may, without harm,
continue to use the term ' specific heat ' or ' capacity for
heat ; ' now that we know the true nature of the actions
covered by the term.

The energy of the forces engaged in this atomic motion
and interior work, as measured by any ordinary mechanical
standard, is enormous. I have here a pound of iron, which
on being heated from 32° to 212° F. expands by about ^^th
of the volume which it possesses at 32°. Its augmentation
of volume would certainly escape the most acute eye ; still
to give its atoms the motion corresponding to 1Mb aug-
mentation of temperature, and to shift them through the
small space indicated, an amount of heat is requisite which
would raise about eight tons one foot high. Gravity air
most vanishes in comparison with these molecular forces ;
the pull of the earth upon the pound weight, as a mass, is
as nothing compared with the mutual pull of its own mole-
cules. .Water Punishes a still subtler example. Water
expands on both sides of 4° C. or 39° F. ; at 4° C. it has its
maximum density. Suppose a pound of water heated from
Si° C. to 4^° C. — ^that is, 1° — ^its yolume at both tempera-
tures is the same ; there has been no forcing asunder what-
ever of the atomic centres, and stiU, though the volume is



160 LEOTUBB V.

unchanged, an amount of heat has been imparted to the
water, sufficient, if mechanically applied, to raise a weight
of 1390 lbs. a foot high. The interior work done here by
the heat can be nothing more than the turning round of
the atoms of water. It separates the attracting poles of
the atoms by a tangential movement, but leaves their cen-
tres at the same distance asunder first and last. The con-
ceptions with which I here deal, may hot be easy to those
unaccustomed to such studies, but they are capable of per-
fect clearness of realization to all who have the patience to
dwell upon them sufficiently long.

This is the place to note further, that there are descrip-
tions of interior work different from that of pushing the
atoms more widely apart. Enormous interior work may
be accomplished while the atoms, instead of being pushed
apart, as a whole, approach each other. Polar forces —
forces emanating from distinct points, and acting in dis-
tinct directions, give to crystals their symmetry, and the
overcoming of these forces, while it necessitates a con-
sumption of heat, may also be accompanied by a diminu-
tion of volume. This is illustrated by the deportment of
both ice and bismuth on liquefying. I could readily
sketch a system of atoms illustrative of this position, but
every instructed mind will be able to imagine such combi-
nations for itself.

The high specific heat of water has one important bear-
ing which I do not wish to pass over here. Comparing
equal weights, the specific heat of water being f^ that of
£dr is about 0-26. Hence a pound of water in losing 1° of
temperatm-e, would warm 4 lbs. of air 1°. But water is
770 times heavier than air; hence, comparing eqical vol-
umes, a cubic foot of water in losing 1° of temperature
would raise 770 x 4 = 3080 cubic feet of air 1°.

The vast influence which the ocean must exert as a
moderator of climate here suggests itself. The heat of



THE OCEAN A MODEBATOB OF CLIMATE. 161

summer is stored up in the ocean, and slowly given out
during the winter. Hence one cause of the absence of
extremes in an island climate. The summers of the islaild
can never attain the fervid heat of the continental summer,
nor can the winter of the island be so severe as the conti-
nental winter. In various parts of the continent fruits
grow which our summers cannot ripen ; but in these same
parts our evergreens are unknown; for they cannot live
through the winters. The winter of Iceland is, as a gen-
eral rule, milder than that of Lombardy.

"We have hitherto confined our attention to the heat
consumed m the molecular changes of solid and liquid
bodies while these bodies continue solid and Uquid. We
shall now direct our attention to the phenomena which ac-
company changes of the state of aggregation. When suffi-
ciently heated, a solid melts, and when sufficiently heated,
a Hquid assumes the form of gas. Let us take the case of
ice, and trace it through the entire cycle. This block of
ice has now a temperature of 20^ F. I warm it ; a ther-
mometer fixed m it rises to 32°, and at this point the ice
begins to melt ; the thermometrio column, which rose pre-
viously, is now arrested in its march, and becomes perfectly
stationary. I continue to apply warmth, but there is no
augmentation of temperature ; and not till all the solid has
been reduced to liquid does the thermometer resume its
motion. It is now again ascending ; it reaches 100°, 200°,
212° : here steam-bubbles show themselves in the Uquid ;
it boils, wid from this point onwards the thermometer re-
mains stationary at 212°.

But during the melting of tbe ice and during the evap-
oration of the water, heat is incessantly communicated : to
simply liquefy the ice, as much heat has been imparted to
it as would raise the same weight of water 143° Fahr., or
as would raise 143 times the weight 1° F. in temperature ;
and to convert a pound of water at 212° into a pound of



162 LBOTCBB T.

Steam at the same tranperature, 967 times as much heat is
required as would raise a pomid of water 1^ in temperature.
The former nmnber, 143°, represents what has been hither-
to caUed the latent heat of water ; and the latter nmnber,
967'', represents the latent heat of steam. It was manifest
to those who first nsed these terms, that, throughout the
entire time of melting, and throughout the entire time of
boiling, heat was communicated; but inasmuch as this heat
was not reyealed by the thermometer, the fiction was in-
yented that it was rendered latent. The fluid of heat hid
itself in some unknown way in the interstitial spaces of the
water and of the steam. According to our present theory,
the heat expended in melting is consumed in conferring
potential ^lergy upon the atoms. It is virtually the Efting
of a weight. So likewise as regards the steam, the heat is
consumed in pulling the liquid molecules asunder, confer-
ring upon them a still greater amount of potential energy ;
and when the heat is withdrawn, the vapour condenses and
the molecules again clash with a dynamic energy equal to
that which was employed to separate them, and the precise
quantity of heat then consumed now reappears.

The act of liquefaction consists of interior work ex-
pended in moving the atoms into ney positions. The act
of vaporisation is also, for the most part, interior work ; to
which however must be added the external work performed
in the expansion of the vapour, which makes place for it-V^
self by forcing back the atmosphere. "^^^

We are indebted to the eminent man to whom I have
referred so often, for the first accurate determinations of
the calorific power of fuel. ' Rumford estimated the cal-
orific power of a body by the number of parts, by weight,
of water, which, one part, by weight, of the body would,
on perfect combustion, raise 1° in temperature. Thus one
part, by weight, of charcoal, in combining with 2| parts
of oxygen to form carbonic acid, will evolve heat sufficient



LATENT H«AT OF UQUIDB. 168

to raise the temperatnrei of about 8,000 parts hj weight of
water 1° C. Similarly, one pound of hydrogen, in com-
bining with ei^t pounds of oxygen to form water, will
raise 34,000 lbs. of water V C. The relative calorific pow-
ers, therefore, of carbon and hydrogen are as 8 : 34.'*
The recent refined researdies of Favre and Silbermann en-
tirely confirm the determinations of Rumford.

Let us, then, fix our attention upon this wonderful sub-
stance, water, and trace it through the various stages of
its existence. First we have its constituents as free atoms,
which attract each other, fall, and clash together. The
mechanical value of this atomic act is easily determined ;
knowing the numbeir of foot-pounds corresponding to the
heating of 1 lb. of water 1^ C, we can readily calculate the
number of foot-pounds equivalent to the heating of 34,000
lbs. of water 1° C. Multiplying the latter number by
l,390,f we find that the concussion of our 1 lb. of hydrogen
wth 8 lbs. of oxygen is equal, in mechanical value, to the
Tfdsing of forty-seven million pounds one foot high I I
think I did not overrate matters when I said that the force
of gravity, as exerted near the earth, was almost a vanish-
ing quantity, in comparison with these molecular forces ;
and bear in mind die distances whidi separate the atoms
before combination-— distances so small as to be utterly
immeasurable; still it is in passing over these distances
that the atoms acquire a velocity sufficient to cause them
to dash with the tremendous energy indicated by the above
numbers.

After combination the substance is in a state of vapour,
which sinks to 212°, and afterwards condenses to water.
Li the first instance the atoms fell togedier to form the
compound ; in the next instance the molecules of the com-

* Percy*a Metallurgy, p. 68.

f 772 foot-pomids being the meduuiical equiTiileiit for V F,, 1,890
foot-pounds is the equivalent for 1"* 0.



164 LEcruBB y.

pound fall together to form a liquid. The mechanical val-
ue of this act is also easily calculated : 9 lbs. of steam in
falling to water, generate an amount of heat sufficient to
raise 967X9 = 8,703 lbs. of water 1° F. Multiplying
this number by 772, we have a produet of 6,718,716 foot-
pounds as the mechanical value of the mere act of condeur
sation.* The next great fall of our 9 lbs. of water is from
the state of liquid to that of ice, and the mechanical value
of this act is equal to ^93,564 foot-pounds. Thus our 9
lbs. of water, in its origin and progress, falls down three
great precipiced : the first fall is equivalent to the descent
of a ton weight urged by gravity down a precipice 22,329
feet high ; the second fall is equal to that of a ton down
a precipice 2,900 feet high ; and the third is equal to the
descent of a ton down a precipice 433 feet high. I
have seen the wild stone-avalanches of the Alps, which
smoke and thunder down the declivities with a vehemence
almost sufficient to stun the observer. I have also seen
snow-fiakes descending so sofUy as not to hurt the fragile
spangles of which they were composed ; yet to produce,
from aqueous vapour, a quantity of that tender material
which a child could carry, demands an exertion of energy
competent to gather up the shattered blocks of the largest
stone-avalanche I have ever seen, and pitch them to twice
the height from which they fell.

I will now relieve the strain which I have hitherto put
upon your attention, by introducing a few experimental
illustrations of the calorific effects which accompany the
change of aggregation. I place my thermo-electric pile
thus upon its back on the table, and on its naked face I

* In Rumford's experiments the heat of condensation was included in
his estimate of calorific power ; deducting the above number from that
found for the chemical imion of the hydrogen and oxygen, forty millions of
foot-pounds would still remain as the mechanical yalue of the act of comr
binaUoD.



EXPERIMENTAL ILLUSTRATIONS. 165

place this thin silver basin, b (fig. 44), into which I pour a
quantity of water slightly warmed, the needle of the gal-,
vanometer moves to 00"^, and remains permanently deflected
to 70°. I now place a little powdered nitre, not more than
can fit upon a three-p^my piece, in the basin, and allow it
to dissolve. I had placed the nitre previously before the
fire, so that not only was the liquid warm, but the solid
powder was also warm. Observe the effect of their mix-



Fig. 44.


ture ! The nitre dissolves in the water ; and to produce
this change, all the heat which both the water and the nitre
possess, in excess of the temperature of this room, is con-
sumed, and, indeed, a great deal more. The needle, you
see, sinks not only to zero, but goes strongly up at the
otl^r side, showing that now the face of the pile is power-
ftdly chilled.

I remove the basin, pour the liquid out, and resupply it
witii warm water, into which I introduce a pinch of com-
mon salt. The needle was at 70° when the salt was intro-
duced : it is now sinking, reaches zero, and goes up on the
side which indicates cold. But the action is not at all so
strong as in the case of saltpetre. The reason is tiiat the
amount of interior work required by the salt, and which
necessitates the consumption of heat, is much less than that
demanded by the nitre. As regards latent heat, then, we
have differences similar to those which we have already
iUustrated as regards specific heat. Again, I cleanse the
basin, put fresh water in it, and put a little sugar in the
water ; the amount of heat absorbed in the solution of the



166



LECfrUBE y.



sugar is sensible, the liquid is chiUed, but the amount of
chilling is much less than in either of the former cases.
Thus, when you sweeten your hot tea, you cool it in the
most philosophical manner; when you put salt in your
soup, you do the same ; and if you were concerned with the
act of cooling alone, and careless, of the flavour of your
soup, you might hasten its refrigeration by adding saltpetre.
In a former lecture I made use of a mixture of pounded
ice and salt to obtain great cold. Both the salt and the ice
when they are thus mixed together, change their state of
aggregation ; the amount of interior work is here so great,
that during its performance the temperature of the mix-
ture sinks 80° Fahr., and more, below the freezing point
of water. Here is a nest of watch-glasses which I have
wrapped in tinfoil, and immersed in a mixture of ice and salt.
Into each watch-glass I had poured a little water, in which
the next glass rested. They are now all frozen together to
a solid cylinder, by the cold of this mixture of ice and salt.
I will now reverse the process, and endeavour to show
you the heat developed in pass-
ing from the liquid to the solid
state. But first let me show you
that heat is rendered latent when
sulphate of soda is dissolved. I
experiment with the substance
exactly as I experimented with
the nitre, and you see, that as the
crystals melt in the water the pile
is chilled. And now for the com-
plementary experiment. This
large glass bolt-head b (fig. 45),
with this long neck, is now filled
with a solution of sulphate of so-
da. Yesterday Mr. Anderson
dissolved the substance in a pan



Fig. 45.


HEAT AOOOHPAKTINa 0OLIDIFIGATION. 167

over our laboratory fire, and filled this bolt-head with the
solution. He then covered the top careMly with a piece
of bladder, and placed the bottle behind this table, where
it has remained undistorbed throughout the night.

The Uquid is, at the present moment, supersaturated
with sulphate of soda, l^en the water was hot, it melted
more than it could melt when cold. But now the tempera-
ture has sunk much lower than that which corresponds to
the point of saturation. This state of things is secured by
keeping the solution perfectly stUl, and permitting nothing
to fall into it. Water, kept thus still, may be cooled many
degrees below its freezing point. Some of you may have
noticed the water in your jugs, after a cold winter night,
suddenly freeze on being poured out in the morning. In
cold climates this is not uncommon. Well, the particles of
sulphate of soda in this solution are on the brink of a preci-
pice, and I can push them oyer it, by simply dropping a
small crystal of the substance, not larger than a grain of
sand, into the solution. Observe what takes place; the
bottle now contains a dear liquid ; I drop die bit of crys-
tal in, it does not sink ; die molecules have closed round it
to form a solid in which it is now embedded. The passage
of the AtOBOB from a state of freedom to a state of bondage
goes on quite gradually ; you see the solidification extend-
ing down the neck of the bottle. Observe where I tave
placed my thermo-electric pile p. Its naked face rests
against the convex surface of the bottle, and the needle of
the galvanometer points to zero. The process of crystalli-
sation has not yet reached the liquid in front of the pile,
but you see it approaching. It is now solidified opposite
the pile, and mark the effect. The atoms, in falling to the
solid form, develope heat ; this heat communicates itself to
the glass envelope, the glass envelope warms the pile, and
the needle, as you see, files to 00^. The quantity of heat



168 LECTTUSB y.

thus rendered sensible hj solidification is ezactlj equal to
that which was rendered latent by liquefaction.

We have, in these experiments, dealt with the latent
heat of liquids ; let me now direct your attention to a few
experiments illustrative of what has been called the latent
heat of vapours — ^in other words, the heat consumed in
conferring potential energy, when a body passes from the
liquid to the gaseous state. As before, I turn my pile upon
its back with its naked face upwards, and on this face I
place the silver basin already used, into which I have
poured a small quantity of a volatile liquid, which I have
purposely warmed. The needle now moves, indicating
heat. But scarcely has it attained 90^ when it turns
promptly, descends to 0^, and flies with violence up on the
side of cold. The liquid here used is sulphuric ether ; it is
very volatile, and the speed of its evaporation is such that
it consumes, rapidly, the heat at first communicated to it,
and then abstracts heat from the face of the pile. I re-
move the ether, and supply its place by alcohol, slightly
warm ; the needle, as before, goes up on the side of heat.
But wait a moment ; I will use these small bellows to pro-
mote the evaporation of the alcohol ; now you see the nee-
dle descending, and now it is up at 00^ on the side of cold.
Water is not nearly so volatile as alcohol, still I can show
the absorption of heat by the evaporation of water also.
We use a kind of pottery for holding water, which admits
of a slight percolation of the liquid, so as to cause a kind
of dewiness on the external surface. Evaporation goes on
from that surface, and the heat necessary to this work,
being drawn in great part from the water within, keeps it
cool. Butter-coolers are made on the same principle.

To show you the extent to which refrigeration may be
carried by the evaporation of water, I have here an instru-
ment (fig. 46), by which water is frozen, through the sim-
ple abstraction of its heat by its own vapour. The instru-



LATBNT HEAT OF VAPOBB. 169

ment is called the eryophorua^ or ice-carrier, and it was
invented by Dr. WoUaston. It is made in this way — ^a ht-
tle water is put into one of these bulbs ; the other bulb, b,
when softened by heat, had a tube drawn out from it with
a minute aperture at the end. Well, the water was boiled
in A, and steam was produced, until it had chased all the
air away through the small aperture in the distant btilb.
When the bulbs and connecting tube were filled with pure
steam, the small orifice was sealed with a Wow-pipe. Here,

Fig. 46.


then, we have water and its vapour, with scarcely a trace
of air. You hear how the liquid rings, exactly as it does in
the case of the water-hammer.

I turn all the liquid into one bulb, a, which I dip into
an empty glass to protect it from currents of air. The
mipty bulb, B, I plunge into a freezing mixture ; thus, the
vapour which escapes from the liquid in the bulb, a, is con-
densed by the cold, to water, in b. This condensation
permits of the formation of new quantities of vapour. As
the evaporation continues, the water which supplies the
vapour becomes more and more chilled. In a quarter of
an hour, or twenty minutes, it wUl be converted into a
cake of ice. Here is the opalescent solid formed in a sec-
ond instrument, which you saw me arranging before the
ccmmiencement of the lecture. The whole process consists
in the uncompensated transfer or motion from the one bulb
to the other.

8



170 umuxB Y.

But the most strikiiig eTample of the consumption of
heat in changing the state of aggregation is fnmiBhed by
the substance whidi I hare impriscmed in this strong iron
bottle, lliis bottle contains carbonic acid, liquefied by
enormous pressure. The substance you know is a gas under
ordinary circumstances; here is a jar full of it, which,
though it manifests its nature by extinguishing a taper, is
not to be distinguished, by the eye, from common air.
When the cock attached to the iron bottie is turned, the
pressure which acts xspon the gas is relieved, the liquid
boils — flashes, as it were, suddenly into gas, which rushes
firom the orifice with impetuous force. But you can see
this current of gas ; mixed up with it you see a white sub-
stance, which is now blown against me, to a distance of
eight or ten feet, through the air. What is this white
substance ? It is carbonic acid snow. The cold produced
in passing from the liquid to the gaseous state is so intense
that a portion of the carbonic acid is actually frozen to form
this snow, and mingles in small flakes with the issuing
stream of gas. I can collect this snow in a suitable vesseL
Here is a cylindrical box with two hollow handles, through
which I will allow the gas to pass. Right and left you see
the streams, but a large portion of the frozen mass is re-
tained in the box. I open it, and you see it filled with this
perfectly white carbonic acid snow.

The solid very gradually disappears ; its conversion iuto
vapour is slow, because it can only slowly collect from sur-
rounding substances the heat necessary to vaporise it. You
can handle it freely, but not press it too much, lest it should
bum you. It is cold enough to bum the hand. I plunge
a piece of it into water, and hold it there : you see bubbles
rising through the water — ^these are pure carbonic acid gas.
I collect this gas, and show you that it possesses all the
properties of the gas as commonly prepared. The solid
acid does not melt in the water ; when I release it, it rises



SOUD GASBQHK AOOK 171

to the snrfiMe, and floats uposk iL I put a l»t of the add
into my month, taking care not to inhale while it is there.
I bres^he against this candle ; mj breath extinguishes the
flame. Before the ccmchisicHi of the lecture, I wiU show
you how it is posdble to presenre so cold a body in the
mouth without injury. A pieoe of inn of equal coldness
would do serious damage.

Here, then, we hare a solid body intensely ccdd, which,
however, does not chill bodies in contact with it, as it
might be expected to do. In &ct, no real contact has be^i
established with the add. Water, we see, will not dissolve
it, but sulphuric ether will ; and by pouring a quantity of
this ether on the snow, I obtain a pasty mass, whidi has
an enormous power of refrigeration. Here I have some '
thidL and irregular masses of glass — ^the feet, in fact, of
drinldng-glasses. I place a portion of the solid add on
them, and wet it with ether ; you hear the glass crack ; it
has been shattered by the contraction produced by the in-
tense cold.

In this bacon I spread a little paper, and over the paper
I pour a pound or two of mercury ; on the mercury I place
some solid carbonic add, and over the add I pour a little
ether. Mercury, you know, requires a very low tempera-
ture to fireeze it. Well, here it is frozen ; I turn it out be-
fore you, a solid mass ; I can hammer the solid ; I can also
cut it with a knife. To enable me to lift the mercury out
of the basin, I have dipped this wire into it ; by this I
raise it, and plunge it into a glass jar containing water. It
liquefies, and showers downwards through the water ; but
every fillet of mercury freezes the water with which it
comes into contact, and thus round each fillet is formed a
tube of ice, through which you can see the liquid metal
descending. These experiments might be multiplied al-
most indefinitely ; but enough, I trust, has been shown to
illustrate our present subject.


172



liECTUBB y.



Fig. 47.


I haye now to direct your attention to another and yerjr
edngular class of phenomena, connected with the production
of yapour. Here is a broad porcelain basin, b (fig. 47),
filled with hot water. Here is a silyer basin, s, which I
now heat to redness. If I place the silyer basin in the hot
water, what will occur ? You might naturally reply, that

the basin will impart its
excess of heat instantly to
the water, and be cooled
down to the temperature
of the latter. But nothing
of this kind occurs. The
basin for a time deyelopes
a sufficient amount of
yapour underneath it, to
lift it entirely out of contact with the water ; or, in the lan-
guage of the hypothesis, developed in our third lecture, it
is lifted by the discharge of molecular projectiles against its
under surface. This will go on until the temperature of
the basin sinks, and it is no longer able to produce yapour
of sufficient tension to support it. Then it comes into con-
tact with the water, and the ordinary hissing of a hot
metal, together with the cloud which forms overhead, de-
clares the fact.

I now reverse the experiment, and instead of placing
the basin in the water, I place the water in the basin — first
of all, however, heating the latter to redness by a lamp.
You hear no noise of ebullition, no hissing o'f the water as
I pour it into the hot basin ; the drop rolls about on its
own yapour — ^that is to say, it is sustained by the recoil of
the molecular projectiles discharged from its under surface.
I withdraw the lamp, and allow the basin to cool, until it is
no longer able to produce vapour strong enough to support
the drop. The liquid then touches the metal ; the instant



SPHEROIDAL 8TATE. 178

it does 80, violent ebtillition sets in, and the cloud which
yon now observe forms above the basin.

You cannot, from your present position, see this flat-
tened spheroid rolling about in the hot basin, but I can
show it to you, and, if I am fortunate, I shall show you
something very beautiful. You will bear m mind that
there is an incessant developement of vapour underneath
the drop, which, as incessantly, escapes from it laterally.
If the drop rest upon a flattish surfiace, so that the lateral



Pig. 48.


escape is very difficult, the vapour will burst up through the
middle of the drop. But I have here arranged matters, so
that the vapour shall issue laterally ; and it sometimes hap-
pens that the escape of the vapour is rythmic ; it issues in
regular pulses, and then we have our drop of water mould-
ed to a most beautiful rosette. I have it now, — a round
mass of liquid, two inches in diameter, with a beautifully
crimped border. I will throw the beam of the electric
lamp upon this drop so as to illuminate it, and holding this
lens over it, I hope to cast its image on the ceiling, or on
the screen. There it is (fig. 48), a figure eighteen inches in



174 I.BOTUKE Y.

diameter, and the vapour breaking, as if in music, from its
edge. If I add a little ink, so as to darken the liquid, the
definition of its outline is augmented, but the pearly lustre
of its surface is lost. I withdraw the heat ; the undulation
continues for some time : the border finally becomes unin-
dented. The drop is now perfectly motionless — a liquid
spheroid — and now it suddenly spreads upon the surface^

Flg.49.


contact has been established, and the spheroidal conditioi|
ends.

I dry the silver basin and place it, with its bottom upr
wards, in front of the electric lamp, and with a lens in
front I bring the rounded outline of the basin to a focus
on the screen ; I dip this bit of sponge in alcohol and
squeeze it over the cold basin, so that the drops fall upon
the surface of the metal : you see their magnified images
upon the screen, and you observe that when they strike the
surface ihey spread out and trickle down along it. Now I
will heat tins basin by placing a lamp underneath. Ob*



THB DBOP IB 8UPF0BTED ON A YAFOUB BFBSSQ. 175

serve what occurs : when I squeeze the sponge the drops
descend as before, hut when they come in contact with the
basm they no longer spread bnt roll over the surface as
liquid spheres (fig. 49). See how they bound and dance
as if diey had fallal upon elastic springs ; and so in fact
they have. Every drop, as it strikes the hot surface, and
as it rolls along the surface, developes vapour whidi lifts
it out of contact, thus destroying all cohesion between the
surface and the drop, and enabling the latter to preserve its
spherical or spheroidal form.

I have here an arrangement suggested by Professor
Poggendorf, which shows, in a very beautiful manner, the
interruption of contact between the spheroidal drop and its
supporting surface. From this silver basin, b (fig. 50), in-

Fig.6a


tended to hold the drop, I carry a wire, t^, round yonder
magnetic needle ; the other end of the galvanometer wire
I attach to one end of this battery, a. From the opposite
pole of the little battery I carry a wire, w\ and so attach
it to the arm, a ft, of this retort-stand, ^, that I can readily
lower it. I heat the basin, pour in the water, and lower
my wire till the end of it dips into the spheroidal mass :
you see no motion of the galvanometer needle ; the only



176



I.BOTUKB V.



gap in the entire circnit is that which now exists under-
neath the drop. If the drop were in contact the current
would pass. I prove this thus : I withdraw the lamp ; the
spheroidal state will soon end ; the liquid will touch the
bottom. It now does so, and the needle instantly flies
aside.

You can actually see the interval between the drop and
the hot surface upon which it rests. A private experiment
may be made in this way : Let a flattish basin, b (flg. 51),
be turned upside down, and let the bottom of it be slightly
indented so as to be able to bear a drop ; heat the basin by
a spirit lamp, and place upon it a drop of ink, d^ with which
a little alcohol has been mixed. Stretch a platinum wire.



Fig. 51.



&. :^


a 6, vertically behind the drop, and render the wire incan-
descent by sending a current of electricity through it. Bring
your eye to a level with tlie bottom of the drop, and you
will be able to see the red-hot wire through the interval
between the drop and the surface which supports it. Let
me show you this interval. I place my basin, b (fig. 62),
as before, with its bottom upward in front of the lamp ; I
heat the basin and bring carefully down upon it a drop, d^
dependent from a pipette. When it rests upon the prop-



INTEBYAL BETWEEN DROP AND HOT BUBFAOE. 177

er part of the surface, and the lens in front is brought to
its proper position, you see a line of bright light between
the drop and the silver, indicating that the beam of the
lamp has passed underneath the drop to the screen.

The spheroidal condition was first observed by Leiden-
frost, and I might give you fifty other illustrations of it.



Fig. 82.


Liquids can be made to roll on liquids. If, moreover, I
take this red-hot copper ball and plunge it into a vessel of
hot water, a loud sputtering is produced, due to the escape
of the vapour generated ; still the contact of the liquid and
solid is only very partial : let the ball cool, the liquid at
length touches it, and then the ebullition is so violent as
to project the water from the vessel on all sides.

M. Boutigny has of late lent new interest to this sub-
ject by expanding the field of illustration, and applying it
to the explanation of many extraordinary effects. If the
hand be wet, it may be passed though a stream of molten
metal without injury. I have seen M. Boutigny myself pass
his wet hand through a stream of molten iron, and toss with
his fingers the fused metal from a crucible : a blacksmith
will lick a white hot iron without fear of burning his
8*



178 USOTUBE V.

tongue. The tongue is effectually preseired from contact
with the iron, by the vapour developed ; and it was to the
vi^ur of the carbonic acid, which shielded me from its
contact, that I owed my safety when I put the substance
into my mouth. To the same protective influence many
escapes from the fiery ordeal of ancient times have been
attributed by M. Boutigny. I may add, that the explana-
tion of the spheroidal condition given by M. Boutigny has
not been accepted by scientific men.

Boiler explosions have also been ascribed to the water
in the boiler assuming the spheroidal state ; the sudden
developement of steam, by subsequent contact with the
heated metal, causing the explosion. We are more igno-
rant of these things than we ought to be. Experimental

Fig. 68.


sci^ce has brought a series of true causes to light, which
may produce these terrible catastrophes, but practical sci-
ence has not yet determined the extent to which they ac-
tually come into operation. The eflbct of a sudden genera-
tion of steam has been illustrated by an experiment which
I will now make in your presence. Here is a copper ves-
sel, V (fig. 63), with a neck which I can stop with this
cork, through which half an inch of fine glass tubing passes.



FIEBY OSDEAL: BDXLEB'EXPLOfilOKS. 179

I h<Bat the copper yessel, and pQnr into it a little water.
The liquid is now in the spheroidal state. I cork the vessel,
and the smaU quantity of steam developed, while the water
remains spheroidal, escapes through the glass tube. I now
remove the vessel from the lamp, and widt for a minute or
two : very soon the water will come into contact with the
copper ; it now does so, and you observe the result : the
cork is driven, as if by the explosion of gunpowder, to a
considerable height in the atmosphere.

I have reserved what you will probably think the most
interesting experiment in connection with this subject, for
the conclusion of to-day's lecture. M. Boutigny, by means
of sulphurous acid, first froze water in a red-hot crucible ;
and Mr. Faraday subsequently froze mercury, by means of
solid carbonic acid. I will try and reproduce this latter re-
sult ; but first let me operate with water. I have here a
hollow sphere of brass about two- inches in diameter, now
accurately filled with water ; into the sphere I have had
this wire screwed, which is to serve as a handle. I heat
this platinum crucible to glowing redness, and place within
it some lumps of solid carbonic acid. I pour some ether on
the acid — ^neither of them comes into contact with the hot
crucible — ^they are protected from contact by the elastic
cushion of vapour which surrounds them; I lower my
sphere of water down upon the mass, and carefully pile
fragments of carbonic acid over it, adding also a little
ether. The pasty mass within the red-hot crucible remains
intensely cold ; and now you hear a crack ! I am thereby
assured that the experiment will succeed. The freezing
water has burst the brass sphere, as it burst the iron bottles
in a former experiment. Bound the sphere I have wound
a bit of wire to prevent the ice from falling out. I now
raise the sphere, peel off the shattered brass shell, and there
you have a solid sphere of ice, extracted from the red-hot
crucible.



180 LBoruBB r.

I place a quantity of meronry in a conical copper spoon,
and dip it into the crucible. Tlie ether in the crucible has
taken fire, which I did not intend it to do. The experiment
ought to be so made, that the carbonic add gas — ^the choke-
damp of mines— ought to keep the ether from ignition. .
But the mercury will freeze notwithstanding. Out of the
fire, and through the fiame, I draw the spoon, and there is
the frozen mass turned out before you on the table.



/-^'



^



f



^£ t <-.-;_. •>r.



LECTURE VI

[February 27, 1862.]

OONTBCnON 07 HEATED AIB — ^WINDS — THE UPPEB AND LOWER * TRADES*
— ^ETFECT or THE EARTH'S ROTATION ON THE DIRECTION 07 WIND — ^IN-
FLUENCE or AQUEOUS TAPOUR UPON CLIMATE — EUROPE THE CONDENSER
OF THE WESTERN ATLANTIC — RAINFALL IN IRELAND— THE GULF STREAM
—FORMATION OF SNOW — ^FORMATION OF ICE FROM SNOW-— GLACIERS —
PHENOMENA OF GLACIER MOTION — ^REGELATtON — ^MOULDING OF ICE BT
PRESSURE— ANCIENT GLACIERS.



APPENDIX :— DATA CONCERNING GLACIER MOTION.

I PROPOSE devoting an hour to-day to the considera-
tion of some of the physical phenomena which exhibit .
themselves on a large scale in Nature. And first, with re-
gard to winds. You see those sunbumers now almost
wholly turned down, which are intended to illuminate this
room when the daylight is intercepted or gone. Not to
give light alone were they placed there ; they were set up,
in part, to promote ventilation. The air, heated by the
gas flames, expands, and issues in a strong vertical current
into the atmosphere. The air of the room is thereby inces-
santly drawn upon, and a fresh supply must be introduced
to make good the loss. Our chimney draughts are so many
vertical winds due to the heating of the air by our fires.

I ignite this piece of brown paper, the flame ascends ; I
blow out the flame, leaving the edges of the paper smok-
ing ; the heated edges warm the air, and produce currents
which carry the smoke upward. I dip the smoking paper



18S LBOTUBB TX.

into a large glass yesBel, and stop the neck of the vessel to
prevent the escape of the smoke ; the smoke ascends with
the light air in the middle, spreads out laterally aboye, is
cooled, and falls like a cascade of doad along the sides of
the yesseL I haye here a heayy iron spatula, heated to
dull redness ; as I hold it thus, you cannot see the currents
of heated air ascending from it. But I can show them to
you by their action on strong light. I place the spatula in
the beam of the electric lamp ; here is the shadow of the
spatula on the screen, and those waving lines of light and
diade mark the streaming upwards of the heated air. Here
also is an iron spoon contiuning a fragment of sulphur,
which I heat until it ignites ; I plunge the sulphur into this
jar of oxygrai : the combustion becomes more brilliant and
energetic, and the air of the jar is thrown into intense com-
motion. The fumes of the sulphur enable you to track the
storms which the heating of the air produces within the
jar. I use the word ' storms ' advisedly, for the hurricanes
whkh desolate the earth are nothing more than large illus*
trations of the effect which we have produced in this glass
jar. ^

J^m the heat of the sun our winds are all derived.
We Eve at the bottom of an aerial ocean, which is to a re-
markable degree permeable to the sun's rays, and is but
little disturbed by their direct action. But those rays,
when they fall upon the earth, heat its surface ; the air in
contact with the surface shares its heat, is expanded, and
aseends into the upper regicms of the atmosphere. Where
the rays fall vertically on the earth, the heatiilg of the sur-
face is greatest, that is to say, between the tropics. Here
aerial currents ascend and flow laterally north and south
towards the poles, the heavier air of the polar regions
streaming in to supply the place vacated by the light and
warm air. Thus we have an incessant circulation. Yes-
terday I made the following experiment in the hot room



OONTECmOir OF HBAXED AIB. 183

of a Tnrlddi bath. I opened wide die door, and held a
limited taper in the doorway, midway between top and
bottom. The flame rose straight from the taper. I {Aaqed
the taper at the bottom, it was blown yicdently inwardp ;.!
placed it at the top, it was blown violently outwards. Here
we bad two oarrents, or winds, slidmg oyer each other,
and moving in opposite directions, llms, also, as regards
our hemisphere, we have a cmrrent from the equator setting
in towards the north and flowing in the higher regions of
the atmosphere, and another flowing towards the equator in
the lower regions of the atmosphere. These are the upp^
and Ae lower Trade Winds. ^

Were the earth motionless, tl^se two currents would
run directly north and south, but the earth rotates from^
west to east round its axis once in twenty-four hours. In
virtue of this rotation, an individual at the equator is car-
ried round with a velocity of 1,000 miles an hour. You
have observed what takes place when a person incautiously
steps out of a carriage in motion. He is animated by the
motion of the carriage, and when his feet touch the earth
he is thrown forward in the direction of the motion. This
is what renders leaping from a railway carriage, when the
train is at full speed, ahnost always fatal. As we with*
draw from the equator, the velocity due to the earth's ro-
tation diminishes, and becomes nothing at the poles. It is
proportional to the radius of the parallel of latitude, and
diminishes as these circles diminish in size. Imagine, then,
an individual suddenly transferred from the equator to a
place where the velocity, due to rotation, is only 900 mUes
an hour ; on touching the earth here he would be thrown
forward in an easterly direction, with a velodty of 100
miles an hour, this being the difference between the equa-
toril^ velocity with which he started, and the velocity of
A^iearth^s siurface in his new locality.

Sii4^ oondiderations apply to the transfer of air from



18i LOOrUBS TI.

the eqoaiorial to tbe nortbein i^uMifl, and Ti^ At

the equator the air poaseases the yelodty of the earth's waas
face there, and on quitting this position, it not oulj has its
tendency northwards to obey, but also a tendency to the
east, and it must take a resubant direction. The farther it
goes north the more is it deflected from its original course ;
the more it turns towards the east, the more it becomes
what we should call a westerly wind* The opposite holds
good for the current proceedingyromtiie north; this passes
from idaces of slow motion to {daces of quick motion : it is
met by tiie earth ; hence the wind whidi started as a north
wind becomes a north-east wind, and as it approaches tiie
equator it becomes more and more easterly.

It is not by reasoning al<»ie that we arrive at a knowl-
edge of the existence of the upper atmospheric curr^it,
though reasoning is sufficient to show that comp^isaticm
must take place somehow, — ^that a wind cannot blow in any
direction without an equal displacement of air taking place
in the opposite direction. But clouds are sometimes seen in
the tropics high in the atmosphere, and moving in a direction
opposed to that of the constant wind below. Could we dis-
charge a light body with sufficient force to cause it to pen-
etrate the lower current, and reach the higher, the direction
of that body's motion would give us the direction of the
wind above. Human strength cannot perform this experi-
ment, but it has nevertheless been made. Ashes have been
shot through the lower current by volcanoes, and, from the
places where they have subsequently fallen, the direction
of the wind which carried them has been inferred. Pro-
fessor Dove in his * Witterungs Verhfiltnisse von Berlin '
cited the following instance : ^ On the night of April 30th,
e^losions like those of heavy artillery were heard at Barba-
does, so that the garrison at Fort St. Anne remidned all night
under arms. On May 1, at daybreak, the eastern portion
of the horizon appeared dear, while the rest of the firma-



OUSSENTB OF THE ATBCOBPHEBB. 185

ment was covered by a black cloud, which soon extended
to the east, quenched the light there, and at length pro-
duced a darkness so dense that the windows in the rooms
could not be discerned. A shower of ashes descended,
under which the tree branches bent and broke. Whence
came these ashes ? From the direction of the wind, we
Aould infer that they came from the Peak of the Azores :
Ihey came, however, from the volcano Home Garou in St.
Vincent, which lies about 100 miles west of Barbadoes. The
ashes had been cast into the current of the upper trade. A
second example of the same kind occurred on January 20,
1835. On the 24th and 25th the sun was darkened in Jar
maica by a shower of fine ashes, which had been discharged
from the mountain Coseguma, distant 800 miles. The peo-
ple learned in this way that the explosions previously heard
were not those of artillery. These ashes could only have
been carried by the upper current, as Jamaica lies north-
east from the mountain. The same eruption gives also a
beautiful proof that the ascending air-current divides itself
above, for ashes fell upon the ship Conway in the Pacific,
at a distance of 700 miles south-west of Coseguina.

* Even on the highest summits of the Andes no traveller
has as yet reached the upper trade. From this some notion
may be formed of the force of the explosions ; they were
indeed tremendous in both instances. The roaring of Cose-
guina was heard at San Salvador, a distance of 1,000 miles.
Union, a seaport on the west coast of Conchagua, was in
absolute darkness for fort^y-three hours ; as Ught began to
dawn it was observed that the sea-shore had advanced 800
feet up<m the ocean, through the mass of ashes which had
fallen. The eruption of Morne Garou forms the last link
of a chain of vast volcanic actions. In June and July
1811, near St. Miguel, one of the Azores, the island Sabri-
na rose, accompanied by smoke and flame, from the bottom
of a sea 150 feet deep, attained a height of 800 feet and a



186 LBonnoB yi.

oircumferenoe of a mile. The small AntiQee wore afteiv
wards shaken, and subsequently the yaUeys of the Missis-
sippi, AT'VangAflj and Ohio. But the elastic foroes found no
Tent ; they sou^t one, then, on the nordi coast of Colum*
bia. March 26 began as a day of extraordinary heat in
Caraocas ; the air was dear and the firmament cloudless.
It was Green Thursday, and a regiment of troops of the
line stood under arms in the barracks of the quarter San
Carlos ready to join in the procession. The people
streamed to the churches. A loud subterranean thunder
was heard, and immediately afterwards followed an earth-
quake shock so violent, that the church of Alta Grada, 150
feet in height, borne by pillars fifteen feet thick, formed a
heap of crushed rublndi not more than six feet high. In
the evening the almost full moon looked down with mild
lustre upon the ruins of the town, under whidi lay the
crushed bodies of upwards of 10,000 of its inhabitants.
But even here there was no exit granted to the elastic
forces underneath. Finally, on April 27, they succeeded in
opening <mce more the crater of Mome Gkurou, whidi had
been closed for a century ; and the earth, for a distance
equal to that from Vesuvius to Paris, rung with the thun-
der-shout of the liberated prisoner.'

I have here a terrestrial globe, on whidi I now trace
with my hand two meridians ; they start from the equator
of the globe a foot apart, which would correspond to about
1,000 miles on the earth's surface. But these meridians,
as Hiey proceed northward, gradually approach each other,
and meet at the north pole. It is manifest that the air
whidi rises between these meridians in the equatorial re-
gions must, if it went direct to the pole, squeeze itself into
an ever-narrowing bed. Were the earth a cylinder instead
of a sphere, we might have a circulation from the middle
of the cylinder quite to each end, and a return current from
each end to the middle. But this, in the case of the earth*



THE TJFPEB MUD LOWER TRADES. 187

is impossible, simply because the space aromid the poles is
unable to embrace the air from the equator. The cooled
equatorial air sinks, and the return current sets in before
the poles are attained, and this occurs more or less irregu-
larly. The two currents, moreover, instead of flowing one
over the other, often flow beside each other. They con-
stitute rivers of air, with incessantly shifting beds.

These are the great winds of our atmosphere which,
however, are materially modified by the irregular distribu-
tion of land and water. Winds of minor importance also
occur, through the local action of heat, cold, and evapora-
tion. There are winds produced by the heating of the air
in Alpine valleys, and which sometimes rush with sudden
and destructive violence down Hie gulleys of the moun-
tains : gentler down-flows of air are produced by the pres-
ence of glaciers upon the heights. There are the land
breeze and the sea breeze, due to the varying temperature
of the sea-board soil, by day and night. The morning sun
heating Hie land, produces vertical displacement, and the
air from the sea moves landward. In the evening the land
is more chilled by radiation than the sea, and the conditions
are reversed ; the heavy air of the land now flows seaward.

Thus, then, a portion of the heat of the tropics is sent
by an aerial messenger towards the poles, a more equable
distribution of terrestrial warmth being thus secured. But
in its flight northward the air is accompanied by another
substance — ^by the vapour of water, which, you know, is
perfectly transparent. Imagine the ocean of the tropics,
giving forth its vapour, which promotes by its lightness the
ascent of the associated air. They expand as they ascend ;
at a height of 16,000 feet the air and vapour occupy twice
the volume which they embraced at the sea leveL To se-
cure this space they must, by their elastic force, push away
the air in aU directions round them ; they must perform
work ; and this work cannot be performed, save at the ex-



188 LEcrruBB tl

pense of the warmth with which they were In the first in-
stance charged*

Th^ vapour thns chilled is no longer competent to retain
the gaseous form. It is predpitated as cloud : the cloud
descends as rain ; and in the region of calms, or directly
under the sun, where the air is first drained of its aqueous
load, the. descent of nun is enormous. The sun does not
remain always vertically over the same parallel of latitude
— ^he is sometimes north of the equator, sometimes south
of the equator, the two tropics limiting his excursion.
When he is south of the equator, the earth's surface north
of it is no longer in the region of calms, but in a region
across which the aerial current from the north flows
towards the region of calms. The moving air is but
slightly charged with vapour, and as it travels from north
to south it becomes ever warmer; it constitutes a dry
wind, and its capacity to retain vapour is continually aug-
menting. It is plain, from these considerations, that each
place between the tropics must have its dry season and
rainy season ; dry when the sun is at the opposite side of
the equator, and wet when the sun is overhead.

Gradually, however, as the upper stream, which rises
from the equator, and flows towards the poles, becomes
chiUed and dense, it sinks towards the earth ; at the Peak
of Teneriffe it has already sunk below the summit of the
mountain. With the contrary wind blowing at the base,
the traveller finds the stream from the equator blowing
strong over the top. Farther north the equatorial wind
sinks lower still, and finally quite reaches tiie surface of
the earth. Europe, for the most part, is overf owed by
this equatorial current. Here in London, for eight or nine
months in the year, south-westerly winds prevail. But
mark what an influence this must have upon our climate.
The moisture of the equatorial ocean comes to us endowed
with potential energy; with its molecules separate, and



AXMOaPABSIO OOKDENSATIOK. 189

therefore competent to clash and devdope heat by their
collision ; it comes, if you will, charged with latent heat.
Li our northern atmosphere the collision takes place, and
the heat generated is a main source of warmth to onr cli-
mate. Were it not for the rotation of the earth, we should
have oyer us the hot dry blasts of Africa ; but owing to
this rotation, the wind which starts northward from the
Gulf of Mexico is deflected to Europe. Europe is, there-
fore, the recipient of those stores of latent heat which were
amassed in the western Atlantic, l^e British Mes come
in for the greatest share of this moisture and heat, and this
circumstance adds itself to that already dwelt upon — ^the
high specific heat of water — to preserve our climate from
extremes. It is thib condition of things which makes our
fields so green, and which gives the blossom to our maid-
ens' cheeks. A German writer, Moritz, expresses himself
<Mi these points in the following ardent words: — ^'Ye
blooming youthful faces, y^ green meadows and streams
of this happy land, how have ye enchanted me ! O Rich-
mond, Richmond ! never can I forget the evening when,
full of delight, I wandered near you up and down along
the flowery banks of the Thames. This, however, must
not detain' me from that dry and sand-strewn soil on which
fate has appointed me my sphere of action.' All this poe-
try and enchantment are derived directly from aqueous
vapour.*

As we travel eastward in Europe, the amount of aque-
ous precipitation grows less and less ; the air becomes more
and more drained of its moisture. Even between the east
and west coasts of our own islands the difierence is sensi-
ble, and local circumstances also have a powerful influence
on the amount of precipitation. Dr. Lloyd finds the mean
yearly temperature of the western coast of Ireland about

* Its relation to Badiant Heat is developed in Lecture XL



190 LBOTUBB TL »

two degrees higher than that of the eastern coast, at the
same height, and in the same parallel of latitude. The
total amount of rain which fell in the year 1851, at various
stations in the island, is given in the following table —

Station Bain in inches

Portarlington .... 21*2
EiUough ..... 28-2
Dublin .... . . 26*4

Athy 26-7

Donaghadee .... 27*9
Courtown ..... 29*6

Eilrush 82*6

Armagh 88*1

Eillybegs 88*2

Dunmore 88*5

Portrush 87.2

Burincrana . . . .89*3

Markree 40*8

Gastletownsend .... 42*5
Westport . . . . . 46*9
Cahirciveen .... 59*4

With reference to this table, Dr. Lloyd remarks —

* 1. That there is great diversity in the yearly amount
of raii> at the different stations, all of which (excepting
four) are but a few feet above the sea level ; the greatest
rain (at CaMrciveen) being nearly three times as great as
the least (at Portarlington).

^ 2. That the stations of least ram are either inland or
on the eastern coast, while those of the greatest rains are
at or near the western coast.

* 3. That the amount of rain is greatly dependent on
the proximity of a mountain chain or group, being always
considerable in such neighbourhood, unless the station lie
to the north-east of the same.

*Thus, Portarlington lies to the north-east of Slieve-
bloom ; Killough to the north-east of the Moume range ;
Dublin, north-east of the WicHow range, and so on. On



BAIN-FALL Df IRELAND. 191

the Other hand, the stations of greatest rain, Cahirdyeen,
Castletownsend, Westport, &c., are in the vicinity of high
mountains, but on a different side/ *

This distribution of heat by the transfer of masses of
heated air from place to place, has been called ^ convection^
in contradistinction to the process of conduction, which
will be treated in our next lecture. Heat is distributed in
a similar manner through liquids. I have here a glass cell,
c (fig. 54), containing warm water ; I place it in front of

Fig. 64.


the electric lamp, and by means of a converging lens,
throw a magnified image of the cell upon the screen. I
now introduce the end of this pipette into the water of the
cell, and allow a little cold water to gently enter the hot.
The difference of refraction between both enables you to
see the heavy cold water falling through the lighter warm
water. The experiment succeeds still better when I allow
a fragment of ice to float upon the surface of the water.
As the ice melts, it sends long heavy striae downwards to
the bottom of the cell. You observe, as I cause the ice to

* The greatest rainfall recorded by «Sir John Herschel m his table
(Meteorology, 110, &c.) occurs at Cherra Pungee, where the annual fall is
592 inches. It is not my object to enter far into the subject of meteor-
ology ; for the fullest and most accurate information the reader will refer to
the excellent works of Sir John Herschel and Professor Dove.



192 LBOrUBB TI.

move along the top, how these Btreams of cold water
^ descend through the hot I now reverse the experiment,
placing cold water in the cell, and hot water in the pipette.
Care is here necessary to allow the warm water to enter
without any momentum, which would carry it mechanically
down. You notice the effect. The point of the pipette is
in the middle of the cell, and you see, as the warm water

Fig.Ui


enters, it speedily turns upwards (fig. 55) and overflows the
top, almost as oU would do under the same circumstances.

When a vessel containing water is heated at the bot-
tom, the warmth conmiunicated is thus diflused. Tou may
see the direction of the ascending waran currents by means
of the electric lamp, and also that of the currents which
descend to occupy the place of the lighter water.. Here is
a vessel containing cochineal, the fragments of which,
being not much heavier than the water, freely follow the
direction of its currents. You see the pieces of cochineal
breaking loose from the heated bottom ; ascending along
the middle of the jar, and descending again by the sides.
In the Geyser of Iceland this convection occurs on a grand
scale. A fragment of paper thrown upon the centre of the
water which fills the pipe is instantly drawn towards the
side, and there sucked down by the descending current.

Partly to this cause, but mainly, perhaps, to the action
of winds, currents establish themselves in the ocean, and



ooNVBonoN nsr liquids. 193

powerftilly influence climate by the heat which they diB-
tribate. The most remarkable of these cm*rents, and by
£eur Hie most important for ns, is the so-called Gulf-stream,
which sweeps acrqps the Atlantic from the equatorial re-
^ons through the Gulf of Mexico, whence it derives its
name. As it quits the straits of Florida it has a tempera-
ture of S3° Fahr., thence it follows the coast of America as
far as Cape Fear, whence it starts across the Atlantic, tak-
ing a north-easterly course, and finally washing the coast
of Ireland, and the north-western shores of Europe gen-
erally. As might be expected, the influence of this body
of warm water makes itself most evident in our winter.
It then entirely abolishes the diflerence of temperature
due to the difference of latitude of north and south Brit-
idn ; if we walk from the Channel to the Shetland Isles, in
January, we encounter everywhere iMb same temperature.
The Isothermal line runs north and south. The presence
of the water renders the climate of western Europe totally
different from that of the 6pposite coast of America. The
river Hudson, for example, in the latitude of Rome, is
frozen over for three months in the year. Starting from
Boston in January, and proceeding round St. John's, and
thence to Iceland, we meet everywhere the same tempera-
ture. The harbour of Hammerfest derives great value from
the fact that it is clear of ice all the year round. This is
due to the Gulf-stream which sweeps round the North
Cape, and so modifies the climate there, that at some
places, by proceeding northward, you enter a warmer re-
gion. The contrast between northern Europe and the east
(k)ast of America caused Halley to surmise that the north
pole of the earth had shifted ; that it was formerly situate
somewhere near Behring's Straits, and that the intense
cold observed in these regions is really the cold of the an-
cient pole, which had not been entirely subdued since the
axis changed its direction. But now we know that the
9



194 IMOTUEK YI.

Gnlf-fltreamand tbe difibmoii of best by winds and Tapoan
are tbe real causes of European mildness. On tbe western
coast of America, between tbe Rocky momitains and tbe
ocean, we find a European dimate. ^

Europe, tben, is tbe condenser of tbe Atlantic ; and tbe
mountams are tbe cbief condensers in Europe. On tbem,
moreover, wben tbey are sufficiently bigb, tbe condensed
vapour descends, not in a Uquid, but a solid form. Let us
look to tbis water in its birtbplace, and follow it tbrougb
its subsequ^it course. Clouds float in Hie air, and bence
tbe surmise tbat tbey are composed of vesicles or bladders
of water, tbus forming sheBs instead of spheres. Eminent
travellers say tbat tbey bave seen tbese bubbles, and tbeir
statements are entitled to all respect. It is certain, bow-
^ever, tbat tbe water-partides at bigb elevations possess, on
or after precipitatidb, tbe powers of building tbemselves
into crystalline forms ; tbey tbus bring forces into play
wbicb we bave bitberto been accustomed to regard as
molecular, and wbicb could not be ascribed to tbe aggre-
gates necessary to form vesicles.

Sttow, perfectly formed, is not an irregular aggregate
of ice-partides ; in a calm atmospbere, tbe aqueous atoms
arrange tbemselves so as to form tbe most exquisite figures.
You bave seen tbose six-stalled flowers wbicb form tbem-
selves witbin a block of ice wben a beam of beat is sent
tbrougb it. Tbe snow-crystals, formed in a cabn atmos-
pbere, are built upon tbe same type : tbe molecules arrange
tbemselves to form bexagonal stars. From a central nuc-
leus sboot six spicuke, every two of wbicb are separated
by an angle of 60°. Prom tbese central ribs smaller spio-
ulje sboot rigbt and left witb unerring fidelity to tbe
angle 60°, and from tbese again otber smaller ones diverge
at the same angle. The six-leaved blossoms assume tbe
most wonderful variety of form ; their tracery is of the
finest frozen gauze ; and round about tbeir comers other



GAUBB OF BDBOPBAlSr MILDHXB8. 195

rosettes of smaller dimenfflons often dhig. Beauty is su-
perposed upon beauty, as if Nature, once oommitted to her
task, took delight in showing, even within the narrowest
limits, the wealth of her resonroes.*

lliese frozen blossoms constitote oar mountain snows ;
Ihey load the Alpine heights, where their frail architecture
is soon destroyed by the accidents of the weather. Every
winter they fiill, and every sunmier they disi^pear, but this
rythmic action does not perfectly compensate itself Be-
low a certain line warmth is predominant, and the quantity
which falls every winter is entirely swept away; above
this line cold is predominant, the quantity which falls is in
excess of the quantity melted, and an annual residue re-
mains. In winter the snows reach to the plains ; in sum-
mer they retreat to the snau>-Unej — ^to that particular line
where the snow-fall of every year is exactly balanced by
the consumption, and above which is the region of eternal
snows. But if a residue remains annually above the snow
line, the mountains must be loaded with a burden which
increases every year. Supposing at a particular point
above the line referred to, a layer of three feet a year is
added to the mass ; this deposit, accumulating even through
the brief period of the Christian era, would produce an
elevation of 5,580 feet. And did such accumulations con-
tinue throughout geolo^c instead of historic ages, there is
no knowing the height to which the snows would pUe
themselves. It is manifest no accumulation of this Und
takes place ; the quantity of snow on the mountains is not
augmenting in this way ; for some reason or other the sun
is not permitted to lift the ocean out of its basins and pile
its waters permanentiy upon the hills.

But how Is this ammally augmenting load taken off the

* See fig/ 66, in which are copied some of the beautiAil drawinga of
Mr. Glaisher.



196



LBXXrCSB TI.



Vig,U.


SNOW GBT8TAL8. 197

dionlders of the mountains f Tlie snows sometimes detach
themselves and msh down the slopes in avalanches, melting
to water in the warmer air below. Bat the viol^it rush
of tii^ avalanche is not their only motion ; they also creep
by almost insensible degrees down the slopes. As layer,
moreover, heaps itself upon layer, the deeper portions of
the mass become squeezed and consolidated ; the air first
^itrapped in the meshes of the snow is squeezed out, and
the compressed mass approximates more and more to the
character of ice. Tou know how the granules of a snow-
ball will adhere ; you know how hard you can make it if
mischievously inclined : the snow-ball is incipient ice ; aug-
ment your pressm^p, and you actually convert it iato ice.
But even after it has attained a compactness which would
entitle it to be called ice, it is still capable of yielding
more or less, as the snow yields, to pressure. When, there-
fore, a sufficient depth of the substance colkcts upon the
earth's surface, the lower portions are squeezed out by the
pressure of the upper ones, and if the snow rests upon a
slope, it will yield principally in the direction of the slope,
and move downwards.

This motion is incessantly going on along the slopes of
every snow-laden mountain; in the Himalayas, in the
Andes, in the Alps ; but in addition to this motion, which
depends upon the power of the substance itself to yield to
pressure, there is also a sliding motion over the inclined
bed. The consolidated snow moves bodily over the moun-
tain slope, grinding off the asperities of the rocks, and pol-
ishing their hard surfaces. The under surface of the
mighty polisher is also scan^d and furrowed by the rocks
over which it has passed ; but as the compacted snow de.
scends, it enters a warmer re^on, is more copiously melted
and sometimes, before the base of its slope is reached, it is
wholly cut off by fusion. Sometimes, however, large and
deep valleys receive the gelid masses thus sent down ; in



198 LEcnrBB yl *

these yaneys it is furdier consolidated, and through tiiem
it moves, at a slow but measurable pace, imitating in all its
motions those of a river. The ice is thus carried far be^
joad the limits of perpetual snow, until, at length, the c<m-
sumption below equals the supply above, and at this point
the glacier ceases. From the snow-line downwards in sum*
mer, we have ice; above the snow-line, both summer and
winter, we have, on the surface, gnoto. The portion below
the snoW'line is called a glader^ that above the snow-line is
called the rUve^ The n^v6, then, is the feeder of the
glacier.

Several valleys thus filed may unite in a single valley,
the tributary glaciers welding themselves together to i(ynxi
a trunk glacier. Both the main valley and its tributaries
are often sinuous, and the tributaries must change their di-
rection to form the trunk. The width of the valley, also»
often changes; the glacier is forced through narroiir
gorges, widening after it has passed them ; the centre of
the glacier moves more quickly than the sides, and the
surface more quickly than the bottom. The point of
swiftest motion follows the same law as that observed in
the flow of rivers, changing from one side of the centre to
the other, as the flexure of the valley changes.* Most of
the great glaciers in the Alps have, in summer, a central
velocity of two feet a day. There are points on the Mer-
de-Glace, opposite the Montenvert, which have a daily mo-
tion of thirty inches in summer, and in winter have been
found to move at half this rate.

The power of accommodating itself to the channel
through which it moves has led eminent men to assume
that ice is viscous.; and the phenomena at flr$t sight seem
to enforce this assumption. The glacier widens, bends, and
narrows, and its centre moves more quickly than its sides ;

* For the data onirbidii this law is founded see Appendix to thid Lecture.



* GLAdEBS. 199

a viscous mass would nndoobtedly do the same. But the
most delkate experiments on the capacity of ice to yield
to strain, to stretch out like treacle, honey or tar, have
failed to detect this stretching power. Is there, then, any
other physical quaMty to which the power of acccnmnoda-
tion possessed by glacier ice, may be referred ?

Let us approach this subject gradually. We know that
Tapour is ccmtinually escaping from the free surface of a
liquid ; tiiat the particles at the surface attain their gaaeouB
fiberty sooner tiian the particles within the liquid ; it is
natural to expect a similar state of things with regard to
ice ; that when the temperature of a mass of ice is uni^
formly augmented, the first particles to attam liquid liberty
are those at the surface ; for here they are eitirely free,
on one idde, from the controlling action of the surrounding
particles. Supposing, then, two pieces of ice raised
throughout to 32"^, and melting at this temperature at their
surfaces ; what may be expected to take place if we plac^
the liquefying surfaces dose together ? We thereby vir-
tually transfer these surfaces to the centre of the ice, where
tiie motion of each molecule is controlled aU round by its
neighbours. As might reas<mably be expected, the liberty
of liquidity at each point where the surfaces touch each
other, is arrested, and the two pieces freeze together at
these points. Let us make the experiment : Here are two
nuisses which I have just cut asunder by a saw ; I place
their flat surfaces together ; half a minute's contact will
sufBice ; they are now frozen together, and by taking hold
of one of them I thus lift them both.

This is the effect to which attention was first dkected
by Mr. Faraday in June 1860, and which is now known
under the name of He^elation. On a hot summer's day, I
have gone into a shop in the Strand where fragments of ice
were e:q>osed in a basin in the window; and with the
shopman's permission have laid hold of the topmost pieo«



200 LBOrUBE TL

of ice, and by means of it have lifted ibe whole of ike
pieces bodily out of the dish. Though the thermometer at
the time stood at 80^, the jaeoes of ice had frossen together
at their points of jmiction. Even under hot water this
effect takes place ; I have here a basin of water as hot as
my hand can bear ; I plmige into it these two pieces of
ice, and hold them together for a moment : they are now
frozen together, notwithstanding the presence of the heat-
ed liquid. A pretty experiment of Mr. Faraday's is to
place anmnber of small fragments of ice in adish of water
deep enough to float them. When one piece touches the
other, if only at a single point, regelation instantly sets in.
Thus a train of pieces may be caused to touch each other,
and, after they have once so touched, you may take the
terminal piece of the train, and, by means of it, draw all
the others after it. When we seek to bend two pieces
thus united at their point of junction, the frozen points
suddenly separate by fracture, but at the same moment
other points come into contact, and regelation sets in be-
tween them. Thus a wheel of ice might be caused to roll
on an icy surface, the contacts being incessantly ruptured,
with a crackling noise, and others as quickly established by
regelation. In virtue of this property of regelation, ice is
able to reproduce many of the phenomena which are usu-
ally ascribed to viscous bodies.*

Here, for example, is a straight bar of ice : I can by
passing it successively through a series of moulds, each
more curved than the last, finally turn it out as a semi-ring.
The straight bar in being squeezed into the curved mould
breaks, but by continuing the pressure new surfaces come
into contact, and the continuity of the mass is restored. I
take a handful of those small ice fragments and squeeze

* See note on the Regelation of Snow Granules in the Appendix to this
Leotore.



BEOBLATiON OF ICB. 201

tbem together, they freeze at their points of contact and
now the mass ia one aggregate. The making of a snow-
ball, as remarked by Mr. Faraday, Illustrates the same prin-
ciple. In order that this freezing shall take place, the snow
ought to be at 32° and moist. When below 32° and dry,
on being squeezed it behaves like salt. Ilie crossing of
snow-bridges in the upper re^ons of the Swiss glaciers is
often rendered possible solely by the regelation of the
snow granules. The climber treads the mass carefully,
and causes its granules to regelate: he thus obtains an
amount of rigidity which, witliout the act of regelation,
would be quite unattainable. To those unaccustomed to
such work, the crossing of snow bridges, spanning, as they
often do, fissures 100 feet and more in depth, must appear ^^
quite appalling. "^ ^

If I still further squeeze this mass of ice fragments, I
bring them into still closer proximity. My hand, however,
is incompetent to squeeze them very closely together. I
place them in this boxwood mould, which is a shallow cyl-
inder, and placing a flat piece of boxwood overhead, I in^
troduce both between the plates of a small hydraulic press,
and squeeze the mass forcibly into the mould. I now
relieve the pressure and turn the substance out before you:
it is converted into a coherent cake of ice. I place it in
this lenticular cavity and again squeeze it. It is crushed
by the pressure, of course, but new contacts establish
themselves, and there you have the mass a lens of ice. I
now transfer my lens to this hemispherical cavity, h (fig.
57), and bring down upon it a hemispherical protuberance, x
p, which is not quite able to fill the cavity. I squeeze the
mass: the ice, which a moment ago was a lens, is now
squee^ into the space between the two spherical snr-
&aes : I remove the protuberance, and here I have the in-
terior surface of a cup of glassy ice. By care I release it
from the mould, and there it is, a hemispherical cup, which
9*



90S



IdKTTDBB YI.



I can fill widi odd sherry, without the esospe of a drop.
I scrape with a chisel a quantity of ice from this block, and

Fig. 57.


pladng the spongy mass within this spherical cavity, o (fig.
58), I squeeze it and add to it, till finally I can bring down
another spherical cavity, d, upon it, enclosing it as a sphere
between both. As I work the press the mass becomes
more and more compacted. I add more material, and
again squeeze ; by every such act the mass is made harder,
and there you have a snow-ball before you such as you
never saw before. It is a sphere of hard translucent ice,
B. Thus, you see, broken ice can be compacted together

Pig. 68.


by pressure, and in virtue of the property of regelation,
which cements its touching surfaces, the substance may be
made to take any shape we please. Were the experiment
worth the trouble, I feel satisfied that I could form a rope
of ice from this block, and afterwards coil the rope into a
knot. Nothing of course cim be easier than to produce
statuettes of the substance from suitable moulds.

It is easy to understand how a substance so endowed



MOULDoro or vm vr febbsubx. 908

em be squeeaed through di^ goftgoa of Uie Alpe— eaa heoA
BO aa to aooommodate itself to the flexuret of the Alpine
TalleyBy and can permit of a differential motion of its part8|
without at the same time possessfaig a sensible trace of vis*
cosity. Tlie hypothesis of Yiscosity, first started by Ren-
do, ttid w(H-ked oat with sndi abifity by Prof. Forbes, ao*
coimts, certainly, for half the facts. Where pressure
comes into {day, the deportment of ice is a{^>arently that
of a Tiscous body ; where tension comes into play, the anal-
ogy with a Tiscous body ceases.

I have thus briefly sketched the phenomena of existing
glaciers, as far as they are related to our present subject ;
but the scientific explorer of mountain regions soon meets
with appearances which carry his mind back to a state of
things very different from that which now obtains. The
unmistakable traces which they have left behind them show
that yast glaciers once existed in places, from which they
haye for ages disappeared. Gk>, for example, to the gla-
cier of the Aar in the Bernese Alps and obserye its present
performances ; look to the rocks upon its flanks as they are
at this moment, rounded, polished, and scarred by the
moying ice. And haying by patient and yaried exercise
educated your eye and judgment in these matters, walk
down the glacier towards its end, keeping always in yiew
the eyidences of the glacier's action. After quitting the
ice, continue your walk down the yalley towards the Grim-
sel: you see eyerywhere the same unmistakable record.
The rocks which rise from the bed of the yalley are round-
ed like hogs' backs ; these are the ^ roches moutonn6s ' of
Charpentier and Agassiz ; you obserye upon them the larger
flutings of the ice, and also the smaBer scars scratched by
pebbles, which the glacier held as emery on its under sur-
face. All the rocks of the Grimsel haye been thus planed
down. Walk down the yalley of Haedi and examine the
moimtain sides right and left ; without the key which I



now siqppoae yoa to poesefls, you would be in a liuid o£
enigmas ; but with this key all is plain, yoa see eyerywhere
the well4mown scars and flutings and furrowings. In the
* bottom of the valley yon have the rocks filed down in some
{daces to dome-shaped masses, and, in others, polished so
smooth that to pass over them, even when the inclination is
moderate, steps must be hewn. All the way down to
Meyringen and beyond it, if you wish to porsue the en-
quiry, these evidences abound. For a preliminary lesson in
the recognition of the traces of ancient glaciers no better
ground can be chosen than this.

Similar evidences are found in tiie vaUey of the Rhone ;
you may track them through the valley for eighty miles,
and lose them at length in the lake of Gleneva. But on the
flanks of the Jura, at the opposite side of the Canton de
Yaud, the evidences reappear. All along these limestone
slopes you have strewn the granite boulders of Mont Blanc.
Bight and left also from the great Bhone valley the lateral
valleys show that they were once held by ice. On the
Italian side of the Alps the remains are, if possible, more
stupendous than on the northern side. Grand as are the
present glaciers to those who explore them in all their
lengths, they are mere pigmies in comparison with their
predecessors.

Not in Switzerland alone — ^not alone in proximity with
existing glaciers — ^are these well-known vestiges of the an-
cient ice discernible ; in the hills of Cumberland they are .
almost as clear as in the Alps. Where the bare rock has
been exposed for ages to the action of the weather, the
finer marks have in most cases disappeared ; and the mam-
millated forms of tiie rocks are the only evidences. But
the removal of the soil which has protected them, often
discloses rock surfaces which are scarred as sharply, and
polished as cleanly as those which are now being scratched
and polished by the glaciers of the Alps. Round about



AKOIEST OLA€IEBS. 205

Scaidbn tbe traces of the ancient ice appear, both in
roe/ies moutonnSs and blocs perches; and there are ample
facts to ehow that Borrodale wafi once occupied by glacier
ice. In North Wales, also, the ancient glaciers have placed
tiieir stamp so firmly npon the rocks, tiiat the ages which
have since elapsed have failed to obliterate even their
saperficial marks. All romid Snowdon these evidences
abound. On the south-west coast of Ireland also rise the
Re^s of Magillicuddy, which tilt upwards, and catch upon
their cold crests the moist winds of the Atlantic ; precipi-
tation is copious, and rain at Killamey seems the rule of
Nature. In this moist region every crag is covered with
rich vegetation; but the vapours which now descend as
mild and fertilising rain, once fell as snow, which formed
the material for noble glaciers. The Black Valley was
imce filled by ice, which planed down the sides of the Pur-
ple Mountain, as it moved towards the Upper Lake. The
ground occupied by this lake was entirely held by the an-
cient ice, and every island that now emerges from its sur-
£ice is a glacier-dome. The fantastic names which many
of the rocks have received are suggested by the shapes into
which they have been sculptured by the mighty moulding
plane which once passed over them. North America is also
thus glaciated. But the most notable observation in con-
nection with this subject is one recently made by Dr. Hooker
during a visit to Syria : he has found that the celebrated
cedars of Lebanon grow upon ancient glacier moraines.

To determme the condition which permitted of the for-
mation of those vast masses of ice has long been a problem
with philosophers, and a consideration of the solutions
which have been offered from time to time will not be un-
instmctive^ I have no new hypothesis, but it seems pos-
sible to give a truer direction and more definite aim to our
enquiries. The aim of all the writers on this, subject, with
whom I am acquainted, has been directed to the attain-



S06 LBOTDSB yi.

ment of coUL Some emment men baye tlioiight, and som^
still Hunk, that the reduction of temperature during thct
glacier epoch was due to a temporary diminution of solan
radiation ; others have thou^t that, in its mc^ion through
spac«, our system may have trayersed regions of low tem^
perature, and that during its passage through these regionsj
the ancient glaciers were produced. Others, with greatei^
correctness, haye sought to lower the temperature by a re^
distribution of land and water. If J understand the writ-
ings of the eminent men who hHiye propounded and advo-
cated the above hypotheses, many of them seem to have
overlooked the fact, that the enormous extension of gla-
ciers in bygone ages, demonstrates, just as rigidly, the
operation of heat as the action of cold.

Cold will not produce glaciers. You may have the bit-
terest north-east winds here in London throughout the
winter without a single flake of snow. Cold must have the
fitting object to operate upon, and this object — ^the aqueous
vapour of the air— is the direct product of heat. Let us
put this glacier question in another form : the latent heat
of aqueous vapour, at the temperature of its production in
the tropics, is about 1,000° Fahr., for the latent heat grows
lafger as the temperature of evaporation descends. A
pound of water then vaporised at the equator, has absorbed
1,000 times the quantity of heat which would raise a pound
of the liquid one degree in temperature. But the quantity
of heat which would raise a pound of water one degree
would raise a pound of cast-iron ten degrees : hence, simply
to convert a pound of the water of the equatorial ocean
into vapour, would require a quantity of heat sufficient to imr
part to a pound of cast-iron 10,000 degrees of temperature.
But the fusing point of cast-iron is 2,000 Fahr. ; therefore,
for every pound of vapour produced, a quantity of heat has
been expended by the sun sufficient to raise 5 lbs. of cast-
iron to its melting point. Lnagine, tiien, every one of



HYP0THS8EB TO AOOOCHfr VGR AKOIEMT OLAGIEB8. 207

those ancient gladers with its mass of ioe qnintapled ; and
let the place of the mass, so augmented, be taken hj an
eqnal mass of cast-iron raised to the white heat of fusion,
and we have the exact expression of the solar action in-
Tolved in the production of the andent glaciers. Substi-
tute the hot iron for the cold ice-— our speculations would
instantly be directed to account for the high temperature
of the glacial epoch, and a complete reversal of some of
the hypotheses above quoted would probably ensue.

It is perfectly manifest that by weakening the sun's ac-
tion, either through a defect of emission, or by the steep-
ing of the entire solar system in space of a low tempera-
ture, we should be cutting off the gladers at their source.
Vast masses of mountain ice indicate, infallibly, commen-
surate masses of atmospheric vapour, and a proportionately
vast action on the part of the sun. In a distilling appara-
tus, if you required to augment the quantity distilled, you
would not surely attanpt to obtain the low temperature
necessary to distillation, by taking the fire from under your
boiler ; but this, if I understand them aright, is what has
been done by those philosophers who have sought to pro-
duce the ancient glaciers by diminishing the sun's heat. It
is quite manifest that the thing most needed to produce the
glaciers is an improved condenser; we cannot afford to lose
an iota of solar action ; we need, if anything, more vapour,
but we need a condenser so powerful that this vapour, in-
stead of falling in liquid showers to tiie earth, shall be so
far reduced m temperature as to descend in snow. The
problem, I think, is thus narrowed to the precise issue on
which its solution depends.



APPENDIX TO LECTURE VI.



ABSTSAOr OF A DISCOUBSE ON TBS HER-DE-OU.CE.*

A FOBTiON of a series of observations made upon the Mer-de-
Glace of Chamouni during the months of July and August last
year, fonned the basis of this discourse.

The law first established by [M. Agassiz and] Pro£ J. D.
Forbes, that the central portions of a glacier moved faster than
the sides, was amply illustrated by the deportment of lines of
stakes placed across the Mer-derGlace at several places, and across
the tributaries of the glacier. The portions of the Mer-de-Glace
derived from these tributaries were easily traceable throughout
the glacier by means of the moraines. Thus, for example, that
portion of the trunk stream derived from the Glacier du G^ant,
might be distinguished, in a moment, from the portion derived
from the other tributaries, by the absence of the debris of the
moraines upon the surface of the former. The commencement of
the dirt formed a distinct junction between both portions. Atten-
tion has been drawn by Prof. Forbes to the fact, that the eastern
side of the glacier in particular is ' excessively crevassed ; ' and he
accounts for this crevassing by supposing that the Glacier da
G^nt moves most swiftly, and in its efforts to drag its more slug-
gish companions along with it, tears them asunder, and thus pro-
duces the fissures and dislocations for which the eastern side of
the glacier is remarkable. The speaker said that too much weight
must not be attached to this explanation. It was one of those
suggestions which are perpetually thrown out by men of science

* Given at the Royal Institution of Great Britfun, on Friday, June 4,
1868. By John Tyndall, F.R.S.



HOnON OF HES-DB-OLAOK • 20d

dniiiig fhe coime of an inyestdgation, and the fuHillment or non«
ftdflllment of which cannot materially affect the merits of the in-
vestigator. Indeed, the merits of Forbes must be judged on &r
broader gromids ; and the more his labonrs are compared with
those of other observers, the more prominently does his compara-
tive intellectual magnitude come forward. The speaker would
not content himself with saying that the book of Prof. Forbes was
the best .book which had been written upon the subject. The
qualities of mind, and the physical culture invested in that excel-
lent work, were such as to make it, in the estunation of the phys-
ical investigator at least, outweigh all other books upon the sub-
ject taken together.''' While thus acknowledgmg its merits, let a
free and frank comparison of its statements with &ctB be insti-
tuted. To test whether the Glacier du G^ant moved quicker than
its fellows, five different lines were set out across the Mer-de-
Glace, in the vicinity of the Montenvert, and in each of these it
was found that the point of swiftest motion did not lie upon the
Glacier du G^ant at all ; but was displaced so as to bring it com-
paratively close to the eastern side of the glacier. These measure-
ments prove that the statement referred to is untenable ; but the
deviation of the point of swiftest motion from the centre of the
glacier will doubtless be regarded by Prof. Forbes as offer great-
er importance to his theory. At the place where these measure-
ments were made, the glacier turns its convex curvature to the
eastern side of the valley, being concave towards the Montenvert.
Let us take a bolder analogy than even that suggested in the ex-
planation of Forbes, where he compares the Glacier du G^ant to a
strong and swiftly-flowing river. Let us enquire how a river
would behave in sweeping round a curve similar to that here
existing. The point of swiftest ilkotion would undoubtedly lie on

* Since the above was written, my * Glaciers of the Alps* has been
published, and, soon after its appearance, a * Reply ' to those portions of the
book which referred to the labours of M. Rendu was extensively circulated
by Principal Forbes. For more than two years I have abstained from
answering my distinguished censor ; not from inability to do so, but because
I thought, and think, that, within the limits of the case, it is better to sub-
mit to misconception, than to make sdence the arena of a purely personal
oontroversy.



SIO ' APFBRDIZ TO LBDniBB YI.

that side of the centre of tlie stzeftm towards wMdL it tmift its
eonyex curratiue. Can tMa be the case with the ice t If so, then
we ought to hate a shifting of the point of mazimnm motion
towards tiie western side of the Tslley, when the cnrratnre o£ the
leader so changes as to torn its conrexity to the western fflde»
Bach a change of flexnre occors oppoAtd the passages called Le$
Pontic and at this place the Tiew just enunciated was tested, U
was soon ascertained that the point of swiftest motion here lay at
a different side of the axis fix»n that observed lower down. Bat
to confer strict nnmerical accuracy iip<m the residt, stakies were
fixed at certain distances fix»n the western side of the glacier, and
others at equal di$tanee$ fimn the eastern side. The ydodties of
these stakes were compared with eadi other, two by two ; a stake
on the western side being always compared with a second one^
which stood at the same distance from the eastern side. Tlie re*
suits of this measurement are giyen in tibe following table, tkM
numbers denoting inches : —

Ifltpair indpalr Srdpair 4th pair Mhpalr

West 16 West Hi We8t22i West 28f We8t28f
East 12i East lOi East 16i East 18^ East 19^

It is here seen that in each case the western stake moyed more
rapidly than its eastern fellow stake; thus proTing, beyond a
doubt, that opposite the Fonts the western side of the Mer-<Le-
Glace moves quickest — a result precisely the reverse of that ob-
served where the curvature of the valley was different.

But another test of the explanation is possible. Between the
Fonts and the promontory of Tr^laporte, the glacier passes a
point of contrary flexure, its convex curvature opposite to Tr^la-
porte being turned towards tl]^ base of the Aiguille du Moine,
which stands on the eastern side of the valley. A series of stakes
was placed across the glacier here ; and the velocities of those
placed at certain distances from the western side were compared,
as before, with those of stakes placed at the same distances from
the eastern side. The following table shows the result of these
measurements ; the numbers, as before, denote inches : —

Ifltpair ' 2nd pair Srdpair

West . . 12f West . . 15 West Hi

East . . 14i East . . 1^ East 19



IforEKnr of hsb-bb^m^oEi.



fill



Fig. 59.



• Hoe we find tbat incachcase ihe eaOem utekB moved iaiBtat
than its fellow. Tlie point of mazinium motion has ther^£;»co
ooce more crossed the axis of the glacier, being now upon its east-
ern fiide.

Determining the points of maTimnm motion for a great nmn-
ber of transyerse sections of the Mer-de-Glace, and uniting these
points, we have the heu$ of the dure described by the point re-
iorred to. Fig. 59 represents a sketch of the Mer-de-Glaoe. The
dieted line is drawn akmg the centre of the gla-
cier; the defined line, which crosses the axis oi
Khe glacier at the points a a, is then the locos of
tJie point of swiftest motion. It is a curve more
de^y sinuons than the Talley itself^ and crosses
the centnd line of the yalley at each point of
ocmtrary flexure. The q>eaker drew attention to
the tsiict that the position of towns upon the
banks of riyers is usually on the conyex side of
the stream, where the rush of the water renders
silting-up impossible: the Thames was a case in
point; and the same law which regulated its
flow and determined the position of the ac^acent
towns, is at this moment operating, with silent
energy, among the Alpine glaciers.

Another peculiarity of glacier motion is now
to be noticed.

Before any observations had been made upon
the subject, it was surmised by Prof. Forbes that
the portions of a glacier near its bed were retarded by Motion
against the latter. This view was afterwards confirmed by his
own observations, and by those of M. Martins. Nevertheless the
state of our knowledge upon the subject, rendered ftirther con-
firmation of the fact highly desirable. A rare opportunity for
testing the question was furnished by an almost vertical precipice
of ice, constituting the side of the Glacier de G^ant, which was
exposed near the Tacul. The precipice was about 140 feet in
height. At the top and near the bottom stakes were fixed, and
by hewing steps in the ice, the speaker succeeded in fixing a
stake in tiie fietce of the precipice, at a point about 40 feet above
the base. After the lapse of a sufficient number of days, the prog-


SIS APPEEKDIX TO LBOnTEB TL

Teas of tlie tiuee stakes was measmed; reduced to the dinmal
rate, the motion was as follows : —



Top Btako


. 6-00 inches


MMdle stake .


.4-59 „


Bottom stake .


. 2-66 „



We thus see that the top stake moved with more than t^ioe
ike Tdodty of the bottom one ; while the Telocity of the middle
stake lies between the two. But it also appears that the at^meo'
tation of relocitj upwards is not proportional to the distance
from the bottom, but increases in a quicker ratio. At a height
of 100 feet from the bottom, the yelodty would undoubtedly be
practically the same as at the sur&ce. Measurements made upon
an adjacent ice-cliff proved this. We thus see the perfect validity
of the reason assigned by Forbes for the continued verticality of
the walls of transverse crevasses. Indeed a comparison of the re-
sult with his anticipations and reasonings will prove alike their
sagacity and their truth.

The most commanding view of the Mer-de-Glace and its trib-
utaries is obtained from a point above the remarkable cleft in the
mountain range underneath the Aiguille de Oharmoz, which is
sure to attract the attention of an observer standing at the Mont-
envert. This point, which is marked G on the map of Forbes,
the speaker succeeded in attaining. A Ttibingen professor once vis-
ited the glaciers of Switzerland, and seeing these apparently rigid
masses enclosed in sinuous valleys, went home and wrote a book,
flatly denying the possibility of their motion. An inspection from
the point now referred to would have doubtless confirmed him in
his opinion ; and indeed nothing can be more calculated to im-
press the mind with the magnitude of the forces brought into
play than the squeezing of the three tributaries of the Mer-de-
Glace through the neck of the valley at Tr61aporte. But let us
state numerical results. Previous to its junction with its fellows,
the Glacier du €^6ant measures 1,184 yards across.' Before it is
influenced by the thrust of the Tal^fre, the Glacier de L6chaud
had a width of 825 yards ; while the width of the Talefre branch
across the base of the cascade, before it joins the L^chaud, is ap-
proximately 638 yards. The sum of these widths is 2,597 yards.
At Tr^laporte those three branches are forced through a gorge



SIS

nsoltiBrtSL inoieaatoiiiahing, if weooiifiiie<Nir«tteiil^
oftfietrilwitiricH^-4h«toftheIi6di«i^ Before its jimciioiiifiai
tlieTy^fre,thec^acier hasaindUi of ST^En^iah diaiiM^ At
Trfli^ofte tins hnmd ke mer is sqiieeied to a driblet of lesB
tiian 4 dudm in width thtt is to say, to about ODe-tmHi of its
j aef J o gs horiaontal ttansreise dfimmsio iL

Wbenoe is the tone derired whidi dri:fes the glader through
the gorge I Hie qpeator beUered that it muit be a pressure firom
behind. Other &cts also suggest that the Glader dn Qteit is
timra^ioiit its length in a state of forcible longitudinal compre8>
■on. Tskii^ a series of points aloaig the axis of this glacier— if
these pointSi during the descent of the spader, preseryed their
distanccB asander perfectly constant— there could be no longitu-
dinal compression. The medwnical meaning of this term, as ap-
plied to a substance capable of yielding like ice, must be that the
hinder ]>oint8 are incessantly adyandng upon the f<»rward ones.
The speaker was particolariy anxions to test this yiew, whidi fint
ooomned to him from ji priori considerations. Three points, a b o,
were therefore fixed upon the axis of the Glader du G^ant, a be-
ing the highest np the glader. The distance between 4 and b
was 545 yards, and that betwemi b and c was 487 yards. The
daily yelodties of these three points, determined by the theodo-
lite, were as follows : —

A . 20*66 inches

B . 16-43 „

C . . 12-t6 „

The result completely corroborates the foregoing antidpation.
The hinder points are incessantly adyandng upon those in front,
and that to an extent sufficient to shorten a segment of this gla-
der, measuring 1,000 yards in length, at the rate of 8 inches a
day. Were this rate uniform at all seasons, the shortening would
amount to 240 feet in a year. When we consider the compactness
of this glader, and the uniformity in the width of the yalley
whidi it fills, this result cannot fail to exdte surprise ; and the
exhibition of force thus rendered manifest must, in the speaker's
opinion, be mainly instrumental in driying the glader through the
jaws of the granite yice at Tr61aporte. *



314 AFPXHmX TO LBOrUBB TI.

In Tirtde of wbat quaHtj, thfli^ call ioe be beot and 8qiifie2»c^
and ciiaiig* ita Ibnn in the manner indicated in the foregoing ob«
servations ? The only theory worthy of serious consideratLcm. at
the present day is that of Pro£ Forbes, which attributes these
effects to the Tiscosity of the ice. The speaker did not agree with
this liiecHry ; as the term yiscosity appeared to him to be wholly
inapplicable as expressiye of the physical constitati<m of the gla7
der ice. He bad already moulded ice into cups, bent it into
rings, changed its form in a variety of ways by artificial pressure,
and he had no donbt of his ability to mould a c(»npact mass of
Norway ice which stood upon the table into a statuette; bnt
would Tisoosity be the proper term to apply to the process of
bruising and regelation by whidi this result could be attained t
He thought not A mass of ice at Sd*" is very easily crushed, but
it has as sharp and definite a firacture as a mass of glass. Theie
is no sensible evidence of yiscosity.

The Yerj essence of Tiscosity is the ability of yielding to a
Ibroe of tmiian, the texture of the substance, after yielding, being
in a state of equilibrium, so that it has no strain to recover from ;
and the substances chosen by Prot Forbes, as iUustratiye of the
physic^) condition of a glader, possess this power of being drawn
out in a very eminent degree. But it has been urged, and justly
urged, that we ought not to conclude that yiscosity is absent be-
cause hand specimens do not e^ow it, any more than we ought to
conclude that ice is not blue because small fi-agments of the sub-
stance do not exhibit this colour. To test the question of yiscos-
ity, then, we must appeal to the glacier itself Let us do so.
First, an analogy between the motion of a glacier through a sinu-
ous yalley, and of a riyer in a sinuous channel, has been already
pointed out But the analogy &0s in one important particular :
the riyer, and much more so a mass of flowing treacle, honey, tar,
or melted caoutdiouc, sweeps round its curyes without rupture of
continuity. The yiscous mass stretches^ but the icy mass hreakty and
the * excessiye creyassing ' pointed out by Profl Forbes himself is
the consequence. Secondly, the inclinations of the Mer-de-Glaoe
and its three tributaries were taken, and the association of trans-
verse crevasses with the changes of inclination was accurately
noted. Every Alpine traveller knows the utter dislocation and
conftision produced by the descent of the Mer-de-Glace firom the



^ WBhffWOY 07 lOB. 215

C^peau downwaidd. A similar fStsAe of tilings exists in tiie ice-
cascade of the Tal^e. Deseending from the Jardin, as the ice
approaches the fall, great transyerse chasms are fcmned, which at
length follow each other so speedily as to reduce the ice masses
between them to mere plates and wedges, akmg whidi the ex-
plorer has to creep cautiously. These plates and wedges are in
some cases bent and crumpled by the lateral pressure, and on
some masses yortical forces appeared to haye acted, turning large
pyramids 90° round, so as to set their structure at r^ht angles to
its normal position. The ice afterwards descends the &11, the
portions exposed to yiew being a fimtastic assemblage of frozeati
boulders, pinnacles, and towers, some erect, some leaning, fidling
at interyals with a sound like thunder, and crushing the ice crags
on which they fall to powder. The descent of the ice through
this outlet has been referred to as a proof of its yiscosity ; but
the description just giyen does not, it was belieyed, harmonifle
with our ideas of a yiscous substance.

But the proof of the non-yiscosity of the substance nmst be
sought at places where the change of inclination is yery smalL
Nearly opposite PAngle there is a change ftom 4 to 9 d^rees, and
the consequence is a system of transyerse fissures, which renders
the glacier here perfectly impassable. Further up the glacier,
transyerse creyasses are produced by a change of inclination fix>m
8 to 5 degrees. This change of inclination is accurately protracted
in fig. 60 ; the bend occurs at the point b ; it is scarcely percep-



tible, and still the glacier is unable to pass oyer it without break-
ing across. Thirdly, the creyasses are due to a state of strain,
from which the ice relieyes itself by lN*eaking : the rate at which
they widen may be taken as a measure of the amount of relief
demanded by the ice. Both the suddenness of their formation,
and the slowness with which they widen, are demonstratiye of
the non-yiscosity of the ice. For were the substance capable of
stretching eyen at the small rate at which they widen, there would
be no necessity for their formation.

Further, the marginal creyasses of a glacier are known to be a



216 AFPSMDIX TO liSOTUSX TI.

OQDaequenoe of the swifter flow of its central pcnrtioiifl^ whidi
throws the sides into a state of strain^ firom which th^ leliefv
themselyes by breaking. Now it is easy to calculate the amount
of stretching demanded of the ice in order to accommodate itsdf
to the speedier central flow. Take the case of a glacier, half a
mile wide. A straight transreise ekment, or slice, of such a f^
der, is bent in twenty-fonr hours to a corre. Tlie ends of the
slice moTC a little, but the centre moyes more : let ns siqypoiBe the
yersed side of the corye farmed by the dice in twenty-four homa
to be a foot, which is a £ur ayerage. Haying the chord of thk
arch, and its yersed side, we can calculate its length. In the case
of the Mer-de-Glace, which is about half-armile wide, tlie amount
of stretching demanded would be about the eightieth of an indi
in twenty-four hours. Surely, if the glacier possessed a property
which could with any propriety be called yiscosity, it ought to
be able to respond to this moderate demand ; but it is not able
to do so : instead of stretching as a yiscous body, in obedience
to this slow strain, it breaks as an eminently fiagile one, and mar-
ginal creyasses are the consequence. It may be urged that it is
not Mr to distribute the strain oyer the entire length of the
curye : but reduce the distance as we may, a residue must remain
which is demonstratiye of the non-yiscodty of the ice.

To sum up, then, two classes of facts present themselyes to the
glacier inyestigator — one class in harmony with the idea of yis-
cosity, and another as distinctly opposed to it. Where fremure
comes into play we haye the former, where tendon comes into play
we haye the latter. Both classes of facts are reconciled by the
assumption, or rather the experimental verity, that the fragility
of ice and its power of regelation render it possible for it to
change its form without prejudice to its continuity.



NOTE ON THE EEGELATION OP BN0W-GEANTJIiE8.»

I this morning (March 21, 1862) noticed an extremely interest-
ing case of regelation. A layer of snow, between one and two

» PhiL Mag. 1862, vol. xxiiL p. 812.



laSKLASKS Off SHOW-fflLAHULm. 217

indMB thick, had Mten on the fgbuB roof of a small groen-hooBe
Into whidi a door opened firom the manaioii to which the green-
house was attached. Air, sli^^itly wanned, acting on the glass
goifiice nndemeath, nudted the snow in immediate contact with
the ghisB, and the layer in consequence slid slowly down the glass
root The indination of the roof was Tery gentle, and the motion
ccnre^ondingly gradoaL When the lay» oyershot the edge of
the roo^ it did not drop ofi^ but bent like a flexible body and
hnng down oyer the edge for several inches. The oontinmty of
the layer was brokm into rectangular spaces by the inclined Ion-
gitadhial sashes of the roo^ and firom local drcomstances one side
of the roof was warmed a little more than the other : hence the
sabdirisions of the layer moTed with different velocities, and oyer-
hnng the edge to different depths. The bent and down-hanging
layer of snow in some cases actoally carved up inwards.

Faraday has shown that when small firagments of ice float on
water, if two of them touch each other, they instantly cement
themselves at the point of contact ; and on causing a row of firag-
ments to touch, by laying hold of the terminal piece of the row,
yon can draw all the others after it. A similar cementing must
haye taken place among the particles of snow now in question,
which were immersed in the water of lique&ction near the sur&ce
of the glass. But Faraday has also shown that when two firagments
of ice are thus united, a hinge-like motion sets in when you try to
separate the one firom the other by a lateral push : one firagment
m^t, in fact, be caused to roll round another, like a wheel, by
the incessant rupture, and re-establishment of r^^ation.

The power of motion thus experimentally demonstrated, ren-
^tered it an easy possibility for the snow in question to bend it-
self in the manner observed. The lowermost granules, when the
support of the roof had been withdrawn, rolled over each other
without a destructionof continuity, and thus enabled the snow-layer
to bend as if it were viscous. The curling up was evidently due
to a contraction of the inner sui&ce of the layer, produced, no
doubt, by the accommodation of the granules to each 'other, as
thej dowly diminished in me.

J.T.

10



LECTURE VII.

[Mwdi 6, 1862.]
ooHMTOnov A, numoasBioN or MonoK— €K>od cohmtotobs ahd bad

CONDUCTOBS— CONDUCTITITT OF THE METALS FOB HEAT: BELATIOH BE-
TWEEN THE COKDUCrrVITT OF HEAT AND THAT OF ELECTBICITT — ^INFLU-
ENCE OF TEMFEBATUBE ON THE CONDUCTION OF ELECTBICITT — INFLU-
ENCE OF liOLECULAB CONSTITUTION ON THE CONDUCTION OF HEAT — BE-
LATION OF SPECIFIC HEAT TO CONDUCTION — PHILOSOPHY OF CLOTHES:
BUliFOBD*S EZPEBIliENTS — INFLUENCE OF MECHANICAL TEXTUBE ON
CONDUCTION— INCBUSTATI0N8 OF BOILEBS — THE SAFETY LAMP — CON-
DUCTITITY OF LIQUIDS AND GASES: EZPEBIMENTS OF BUMFOBD AND
DESPBETZ— COOLING EFFECT OF HYDEOGEN GAS — EZPEBIMENTS OF MAG-.
NU8 ON THE CONDUCTIVITY OF GASES.

I THINK we are now sufficiently conversant with our
subject to distinguisli between the sensible motions pro-
duced by heat, and heat itself. Heat is not the clash of
winds ; it is not the quiver of a flame, nor the ebulliticni
of water, nor the rising of a thermometric column, nor the
motion which animates steam as it rushes from a boiler in
which it has been compressed. All these are mechanical
motions into which the motion of heat may be converted ;
but heat itSelf is moledular motion — ^it is an oscillation
of ultimate particles. But such particles, when closely
grouped, caimot oscillate without conmiunication of motion
from one to the other. To this propagation of the motion
of heat, through ordinary matter, we must this day devote
our attention.

Here is a poker, the temperature of which I am scarce-



ooHDDonov or hxat. 319

ly o(Hi8doii8 of: I feel it as a hard and heayy body, bat it
nehber warms me nor chOls me ; it bas been before tbe
fire, and tbe motion of its particles at tbe present moment
diances to be tbe same as tbat wbidi actuates my nerves ;
there is neitber oommmiioaticm nor witbdrawal, and bence
the temperature of tbe poker on tbe one band, and my
sensations on tbe other, remain michanged. Bat I tbrost
tbe end of tbe poker into tbe fire ; it is heated ; tbe parti-
cles in contact with the fire are thrown into a state of more
intense osdllaticm ; tbe swinging at<Hns strike their neigb-
bodrs, these again theirs, and thos the molecolar mnsic
rings along the bar. The motion, in this instance, is com-
monicated from particle to particle of the poker, and finally
appears at its most disant end. If I now lay hold of tbe
poker, its motion is commonicated to my nerves, and pro-
daces pain ; the bar is what we call hot, and my band, in
popular language, is burned. Convection we have already
defined to be the transfer of heat, by sensible masses, from
place to place ; but this molecular transfer, whidi consists
in each atom taking up the motion of its neighbours, and
sending it on to others, is called tbe conduction of heat.

Let me exemplify this property of conduction in a
homely way. I have here a basin filled with warm water,
and in the water I plac6 this cylinder of iron, an inch in



Fig.ei.


diameter, and two inches in height ; this cylinder is to be
my source of beat. I lay my thermo-electric pile, o (fig.
61), thus flat, with its naked face turned upwards and on



220 CSOTDKB Tn.

Iliat fiioe I place a cylmder of copper, <v whidi now poa-
gesses the temperature of tliis room. We observe no deflec-
tion of the galvanometer. I now place my warm cylmder,
i, having first dried it, upon the cool cylinder, which is
supported hj the pile. The npper cylinder is not at moire
than a blood heat ; but yon see that I have scarcely lime
to make this remark before the needle flies aside, indicating
that the heat has reached the face of the pile. Thus the
molecular motion imparted to the iron cylinder by the
warm water has been communicated to the copper one,
through whidi it has been tiansmitted, in a few seconds,
to the face of the pile.

Different bodies possess different powers of transmit-
ting molecular motion; in other words, of conducting
heat. Copper, which we have just used, possesses this
power in a very eminent degree. I will now remove the
copper, allow the needle to return to 0°, and then lay upon
the face of the pile this cylinder of glass. On the cylinder
of glass I place my iron cylinder, which has been re-heated
in the warm water. There is, as yet, no motion of the
needle, and you would have to wait a long time to see it
move. We have abeady waited thrice the time which the
copper required to transmit the heat, and you see the needle
continues motionless. I place cylinders of wood, chalk,
stone, and fireclay, in succession on the pile, and heat their
upper ends in the same maimer ; but in the time which we
can devote to an experiment, not one of these substances is
competent to transmit the heat to the pile. The molecules
'of these substances are so hampered or entangled, that
they are incompetent to pass the motion freely from one to
another. The bodies are all bad condiustors of heat. On
the other hand, I place cylinders of zinc, iron, lead, bis-
muth, ifec, in succession on the pile ; each of them, you
see, has the power of transmitting the motion of heat
swiftly through its mass. In comparison with the wood.



ooanoonov or hsax. SSI

stone, duJfcy ^afli| and dsj^ they aie dl ^ood eomimeton
of beat.

Asa genovl rule, tfaougb it is not whlKNit itsexoep-
ticMiSy the^m^als are the best c(xidiiet<»8 of beat. But the
metals differ notably anuMig themselves as r^aids thdr
powers of eondocticm. In ilhistration of this I will com-
pare ec^po* and iron. Herey bdundme^aie twobar8,AB|



« • O



A



1



A c (fig. 62), placed end to end, with balls of wood at-
tached by wax at eqmd distances ^rom the place of junction.
Under the jmiction I place a spiritbonp, which heats the
ends of the bars ; the heat will be propagated right and
left throngh both, lliis bar is iron, this one is copper;
the beat will travd to the greatest distance along the best
conductor, liberating a greater nmnber of its balls.

But for my present purpose I want a quicker experi-
ment. Here, then, are two plates of metal, the one of cop-
per, the other of iron, which are united together, so as to
form a long continuous plate c i (fig. 63). To it a handle
is attached, which gives the whole instrument the shape of
a T. From c to the middle, the plate is copper, from i to
the middle it is iron. At c I have soldered a small bar of
bismntb to the plate ; at i a similar bar ; and from both
bars wires, g g^ lead to the galvanometer. I warm the
junction i by placing my finger on it; an electric cur-
rent is there generated, uid you observe the deflection.
The red end of the needle moves towards you. I with-
draw my finger, and the needle sinks to 0**. I now warm,
in the same manner, the junction c ; the needle is deflected.



LECTUBE VIL



but in the opposite direction. If I place a finger on each
end, at the same time, these currents neutralise each other,
and we have no deflection. I now place a spirit-lamp, with


a very small flame, directly raider the middle of the com-
pomid plate ; the heat will propagate itself from the cen-
tre towards the two ends, passing on one side through
copper, and on the other through iron. If the heat reach
both ends at the same instant, the one end will neutralize
the other, and the needle will rest quiescent. But if one
end be reached sooner than the other, we shall obtain a
deflection, and the direction in which the needle moves will
declare which end is heated. Now for the experiment : I
place the lamp underneath, and in three seconds the needle
flies aside. The red end moves towards me, which proves
that the end c is heated ; the molecular motion has propa-
gated itself most swiftly through the copper. I allow the
lamp to remain until each metal has taken up as much heat
as it can appropriate, until the ends of the plates become
stationary in temperature ; that is to say, until the quan-
tity of heat which they receive from the lamp is exactly
equal to the quantity ^ssipated in the space around them.
The copper still asserts its predominance ; the needle still
indicates that the end c is most heated : and thus we prove
copper to be a better conductor of heat than iron. This
little experiment illustrates how in natural philosophy
we turn one agent to account in the investigation of an-



EXPEBIMENTAL ILLXJSTBATIONB OF OONDITOTION. 223

•

other. Every new discovery is a new instrument : it was
once an end, bat it is soon a means ; and thus the growth
of science is secured.

One of the first attempts to determine with accuracy
the conductivity of different bodies for heat, was that sug-
gested by Franklin, and carried out by Ingenhausz. He
coated a number of bars of various substances with wax,
and immersing the ends of the bars in hot oil, he observed
the distance to which the wax was melted on each of the
bars. The good conductors melted the wax to the great-
est distance ; and the melting distance furnished a measure
of the conductivity of the bar.

The second method was that pointed out by Fourier,
and followed out experimentaUy by M. Despretz. a b (fig.
64) represents a bar of metal with holes drilled in it, in-
tended to contaiQ small thermometers. At the end of the

Fig. 61


bar was placed a lamp as a source of heat ; the heat propa-
gated itself through the bar, reaching the thermometer a
first, b next, c next, and so on. For a certain time the
thermometers continued to rise, but afterwards the state
of the bar became stationary, each thermometer marking a
constant temperature. The better the conduction, the
smaQer is the difference between any two successive ther-
mometers. The decrement, or faU of heat, if I may use
the term, from the hot end towards the cold, is greater in
the bad conductors than in the good ones, and from the



224



LBOTDBB Vn.



decrement of temperature shown by the tbermometers we
can deduce, and express by a nmnber, the condactivity of
the bar. This same method was followed by MM. Wiede-
mann and Franz, in a very important investigation, but in-
stead of using thermometers they employed a suitable
modification of the thermo-electrio pile. Of the numerous
and highly interesting results of these experiments the fol-
lowing is a resum6 : —


OondaotiTitr


Name ofSnbstaiiee For Electridtj


For Heat


SUver .... 100


100


Copper


. IS


H


Gold .


, 69


63


Brass .


22


24


Tin .


23


15


Iron .


. 18


12


Lead .


, 11


9


Platinnm


, 10


8


German ^ver


6


6


Bismuth


2


2



This table shows, that, as regards their conductiye
powers, the metals differ very widely from each other.
Calling, for example, the conductive power of silver 100,
that of Glerman silver is only 6. You may illustrate this
difference in a very simple way by plunging two spoons,
one of German silver and the other of pure silver, into th|»
same vessel of hot water. After a little time you find the
free end of the silver spoon mudi hotter than that of its
neighbour ; and if bits of phosphorus be placed on the ends
of the spoons, that on the silver will fuse and ignite in a
very short time, while the heat transmitted through the
other spoon will never reach an intensity sufficient to ignite >y
the phosphorus. ^ ^

Nothing is more interesting to the natural philosopher
than the tracing out of connections and relationships be-
tween the various agencies of nature. We know that they



TABLB OF OCnnDIH/riVlTlJEH. 225

sre a oommon brotherhood, we know that they are mutual-
ly conyertible, but as yet we know very little as to the pre-
dse form of the conversion. We have every reason to
conclude that heat and electridty are both modes of mo-
tion ; we know experimentally that from electri<»ty we can
get heat, and from heat, as in the case of our thermo-eleo-
trio pile, we can get electridty. But although we have, or
think we have, tolerably clear ideas of the character of the
motion of heat, our ideas are very unclear as to the precise
nature of the change which this motion must undergo, in
order to appear as electricity — ^in fact, we know as yet
nothing about it.

Our table, however, exhibits one important connection
between heat and electricity. Beside the numbers express-
ing conductivity for heat, MM. Wiedemann and Franz have
placed the numbers expressing the conductivity of the same
metals for electricity. They run side by side : the good
conductor of heat is the good conductor of electricity, and
the bad conductor of heat is the bad conductor of electri-
city.* Thus we may infer, that the physical quality which
interferes with the transmission of heat, interferes^ in a
proportionate degree, with the transmisdon of electricity.
This common susceptibility of both forces indicates a rela-
tionship which future investigations will no doubt clear up.

Let me point out another evidence of communion be-
tween heat and electricity. I have here a length of wire
made up of pieces of two different kinds of wire ; there
are three pieces of platinum, each four or five inches long,
and three pieces of silver of the same length and thickness.
It is a proved fact that the amount of heat developed in a
wire by a current of electricity of a certain strength, is di-
rectly proportional to the resistance of the wire.f We

* Professor Forbes had previously notioed this,
t Joule, PhiL Mag. 1841, vol xix. p. 268.
10*



LBOTDSS TIL

may %iire the atoms as throwing themselves as barriers
across the track of the dectric current — ^the current knock-
ing against them, and imparting its motion to them, and
rendering the wire hot. In the case of the good conduct-
or, on the contrary, the current may be figured as gliding
freely round the atoms without disturbing them in any
great degree. I will now send the self-same current from
a battery of twenty of Grove's cells through this com-
pound wire. You see three spaces white-hot, and three
dark spaces between them. The white-hot portions of the
wire are platinum, and the dark portions are silver. The
electric current breaks impetuously upon the molecules of
the platinum, while it glides with little resistance among
the atoms of silver thus producing, in the metals, different
calorific eflfects.*

Now I wish to show you that the motion of heat inter-
feres with the motion of electricity. You are acquainted
with the little platinum lamp which stands in front of the
table. It consists simply of a little coil of platinum wire
suitably attached to a brass stand. I can send a current
through that coil and cause it to glow. But you see I have
introduced into the circuit two feet additional of thin platir
num wire, and on establishing the connection, the same
current passes through this wire and the coil. Both, you
see, are raised to redness — ^both are in a state of intense
molecular motion. What I wish now to prove is, that this
motion of heat, which the electricity has generated in these
two feet of wire, and in virtue of which the wire glows,
offers a hindrance to the passage of the current. The elec-
tricity has raised up a foe in its own path. I will cool this
wire, and thereby cause the heat to subside. I shall thus
open a wider door for the passage of the electricity. But



* May not the condensed ether whidi Borromids the atoms be the
vehicle of electric corrents?



oo]!n>ucnoK of hbat asd ELBOTBiorrr.



227



if more electricity passes, it will aDnoiince itself at the pla-
tinum lamp ; it will raise that red heat to whiteness, and
the duinge in the intensity of the light will be yisible to
yoaalL


Thns, then, I plunge my red-hot wire into a beaker of
water w (fig. 66) : observe the lamp, it becomes almost too
bright to look at. I raise the wire out of the water and
allow the motion of heat once more to develope itself; the
motion of electricity is instantly impeded, aud the lamp
sinks in brightness. I again dip the wire into the cold
water, deeper and deeper : observe how the light becomes
intensified— deeper still, so as to quench the entire two feet
of wire ; the augmented current raises the lamp to its maxi-
mum brightness, and now it suddenly goes out. The cir-
cuit is broken, for the coil has actually been fused by the
additional flow of electricity.

Let us now devote a moment's time to the conduction of
cold. To all appearance cold may be conducted like heat.
Here is a copper cylinder, which I wann a little by holding



LSOTUBB YII.

it for a moment in my hand. I place it on the pile, and the
needle goes np to 90% declaring heat. On this cylinder I
place a second one, which, as you observe, I have chilled
by sinking it for some time in this mass of ice. We wait
a moment, the needle moves : it is noTT descending to zero,
passes it, and goes on to 90^ on the side of cold. Analogy
might well lead yon to suppose that the cold is conducted
downwards from the top cylinder to the bottom one, as
the heat was conducted in our former experiments. I have
no objection to the term * conduction of cold,' if it be used
with a clear knowledge of the real physical process in-
volved. The real process is, that the warm intermediate
cylinder first deUvers up its motion, or heat, to thexld cy-
linder overhead, and, having thus lost its own possession
of heat, it draws upon that of the pile. In our former ex-
periments we had conduction of motion to the pile ; in our
present one we have conduction of motion from the pile.
In the former case the pile is heated, in the latter chilled ;
the heating produces a positive current, the chilling pro-
duces a negative current ; but it is in both cases the propa-
gation of motion with which we have to do, the heating
and the chilling depending solely upon the direction of
propagation. I place one of these metal cylinders, which I
have purposely cooled, on the face of our pile ; a violent
deflection follows, declaring the chilling of the instrument.
Are we to suppose the cold to be an entity communicated
to the pile ? No. The pile here is the warm body ; its
molecular motion is in excess of that possessed by the cyl-
inder ; and when both come into contact the pile seeks to
make good the defect. It imparts a quantity of its own
motion to the cylinder, and by its boimty becomes impov-
erished : it chiUs itself, and generates the current due to
cold.

I remove the cold metal cylinder, and place upon the
pile a cylinder of wood, having the same temperature as



ooKDUonosr of oolb. 229

flie metal one. ThexMl is very feeble, and the consequent
deflection very smaD. Why does not the cold wood pro-
duce an action equal to that of the cold metal? Simply be-
cause the heat communicated to it by the pile is accumulat-
ed at its under surface ; it cannot escape through the bad
conducting wood as it escapes through the metal, and thus
the quantity of heat withdrawn from the pfle, by the wood,
is less than that withdrawn by the copper. A similar effect
is {produced when the human nerves are substituted for the
pite. Suppose you come into a cold room and lay your
hand upon the fire-irons, the chimney-piece, the diairs, the
carpet, in succession ; they appear to you of different tem-
perature : the iron chills you more than the marble, the
marble more than the wood, and so on. Your hand is affected
exactly as the pile was affected in the last experiment. It
is needless to say that the reverse takes place when you
enter a hot room ; that is to say, a room hotter than your-
own bodi.es. I should certainly suffer if I were to lie down
upon a plate of metal in a Turkish bath ; but I do not suffer
when I lie down on a bench of wood. By preserving the
body from contact with good conductors, very high tem^
peratures may be endured. Eggs may be boiled and beef-
steaks cooked, by the heat of an apartment in which the
living bodies of men sustain no injury.

The exact philosophy of this last experiment is worthy
of a moment's consideration. With it the names of Blag-
den and Chantrey are associated, those eminent men hav-
ing exposed themselves, in ovens, to temperatures consider-
ably higher than that of boiling water. Let us compare
the condition of the two living human beings, with that
of two marble statues placed in the same oven. The stat-
ues become gradually hotter, until finally they assume the
temperature of the air of the oven ; the two sculptors,
under the same circumstances, do not similarly rise in tem-
perature. If they did, the tissues of the body would be



380 LscroBB Tn.

infallibly destroyed, the temperature ^vdiicli they endured
being more than sufficient to stew the mnsoles in their own
liquids. But the fact is, that the heat of the blood is
scarcely affected by an augmentation of the external heat.
This heat, instead of being applied to increase the t^n-
perature of the body, is applied to the performance of
work, in altering the aggregation of the body ; it prepares
the perspiration, forces it through the pores, and in part
vaporises it. Heat is here converted into potential ener-
gy ; it is consumed in Work. Hiis is the waste-pipe, if I
may use the term, through which the.ezcess of heat over-
flows ; and hence it is, that under the most varying condi-
tions of climate the temperature of the human blood is
practically constant. The blood of the Laplander is sensi-
bly as warm as that of the Blndoo ; while an Englishman,
in sailing from the north pole to the south, finds his blood-
temperature hardly heightened by his approach to the
equator, and hardly diminished by his approadi to the ant-
arctic pole.

When the communication of heat is gradual — as it al-
ways is when the body is surrounded by an imperfect
conductor — ^the heat is consumed in the manner indicated
as fast as it is supplied ; but if the supply of heat be so
quick (as it would be in the case of contact with a good
conductor) that the conversion into this harmless potential
energy cannot be executed with sufficient rapidity, the in-
jury of the tissues is the result. Some people have pro-
fessed to see in this power of the living body to resist a
high temperature, a conservative action peculiar to the
vital force. No doubt all the actions of the animal organ-
ism are connected with what we call its vitality ; but the
action hece referred to is the same in kind as the melting
of ice, or the vaporisation of water. It consists simply in
the diversion of heat from the purposes of temperature to
the performance of work.



HEAT OF HUMAN BODY 00NSTA17T.



S31



Thos far we have compared the condncting power of
different bodies together; but the same substance may
possess different powers of conduction in different direc-
tions. Many crystals are so built that the motion of heat
nms with greater facility along certain lines of atoms than
along others. Here, for instance, is a large rock-crystal —
a crystal of quartz forming an hexagonal pillar, which, if
complete would be terminated by two six-sided pyramids.
Heat travels with greater facility along the axis of this
crystal than across it. This has been proved in a very
simple manner by M. de Senarmont. I have here two
plates of quartz, one of which is cut parallel to the axis
of the crystal, and the other perpendicular to it. I coat
the plates with a layer of white wax, laid on by a camel's
hair pencil. The plates are pierced at the centre, and into
the hole I inser* « wire, which I warm by an electric cur-



Fig. 4 1



Fig. 67.


Fig. «7fl.


rent, b (fig. 66) is the battery whence the current pro-
ceeds ; c is a capsule of wood, through the bottom of which
a sewing-needle passes ; d is 2k second capsule, into which
dips the point of the needle, and q is the perforated plate



S82 LEOTUBB TIL

of quartz. Each capsule eontaiiis a drop of meroiuy.
When the current passes from c to d^ the needle is heated,
and the heat is propagated in all directions. The wax
melts aroimd the place where the heat is applied ; and on
this plate, which is cut perpendicular to the axis of the
quartz, I find the figure of the melted wax to be a perfect
circle (fig. 67). The heat has travelled with the same ra-
pidity all round, and melted the wax to the same distance
in all directions. I make a similar experim^it with the
other plate : the wax is now melting ; but I notice that its
figure is no longer a circle. The heat travels more speedily
along the axis than across it, and hence the wax figure is an
ellipse instead of a circle (fig. 67a). When the wax dried,
I will project magnified images of these two plates upon
the screen, and you will then see the circular figure of the
melted wax on the one, and the oval figure of the wax on
the other. Iceland spar conducts better along the crysibal-
lographic*axis than at right angles to it, while a oystal of
tourmaline conducts best at right angles to its axis. The
metal bismuth, with which you are already acquainted,
cleaves with great facility in one direction, and, as has been
T^ell shown by MM. Svanberg and Matteucci, it conducts
both heat and electricity better along the planes of deav- V^
, v»v age than across them. '^^N,

. ^ In wood we have an eminent example of this difference

of conductivity. Upwards of twenty years ago MM. De
la Rive and De Candolle instituted an inquiry into the con-
. ductive power of wood,* and, in the case of five specimens
examined, established the fact that the velocity of transmis-
sion was greater along the fibre than across it. The manner
of experiment was that usually adopted in inquiries of this
nature, and which was applied to metals by M. Despretz.f

* M6m. de la Soc. de Geneve, vol. iv. p. 70.
t Annales de Chim. et de Phys. December 1827.



EFFECfT OF MOLEOULAB 8TBIJCTUSE.

A bar of the substance was taken, one end of whicli was
brought into contact with a source of heat, and allowed to
remain so until a stationary temperature was assumed.
The temperatures attained by the bar, at various distances
from its heated end, were ascertained by means of ther-
mometers fitting into cavities made to receive them ; from
these data, with the aid of a well-known formula, the con-
ductivity of the wood was determined.

To determine the velocity of calorific transmission in
different directions through wood, the instrument shown in
fig. 68 was devised some years ago by myself, q q' b b' is
an oblong piece of mahogany, a is a bar of antimony, b is
a bar of bismuth. The united ends of the two bars are
kept in close contact by the ivory jaws 1 1', and the other
ends are let into a second piece of ivory, in which they are
firmly fixed. Soldered to these ends are two pieces of
platinum wire, which proceed i;o the little ivory cups m m,
enter through the sides of the cups, and communicate with
a drop of mercury placed in the interior. The mahogany
is cut away, so 4hat the bars a and b are sunk to a depth
which places their upper surfaces a little below the general
level of the slab of mahogany. The ivory jaws 1 1' are sunk
similarly. Two small projections are observed in the figure
jutting from i i' ; across, from one projection to the other,
a fine membrane is stretched, thus enclosing a little cham-
ber *w, in front of the wedge-like end of the bismuth and
antimony junction ; the chamber has an ivory bottom, s is
a wooden slider, which can be moved smoothly back and
forward along a bevelled groove, by means of the lever l.
This lever turns on a pivot near q, and fits into a horizontal
slit in the slider, to which it is attached by the pin jt>' pass-
ing through both ; in *the lever an oblong aperture is cut,
through which p' passes, and in which it has a certain
amount of lateral play, so as to enable it to push the slider
forward in a straight line. Two projections are eeen at



284



iscrcsB yn.


OONDITCTION OF OKT&TALS AND OF WOOD.

the end of the isfider, and across, from projection to projec-
tion, a thin membrane is stretched ; a chamber ni is thus
formed, bomided on three sides and the bottom by wood,
and in front by the membrane. A thin platinum wire, bent
up and down sereral times, so as to form a kind of grating,
is laid against the back of this chamber, and imbedded in
the end of the slider by the stroke of a hammer ; the end
in which the wire is imbedded is then filed down, nntil
about half the wire is removed, and the whole is reduced
to a uniform flat surface. Against the conmion surface of
the slider and wire, an extremely thin plate of mica is
glued, sufficient, simply, to interrupt aU contact between
the bent wire and a quantity of mercury which the cham-
ber rn is destined to contain ; the ends v) w' of the bent
wire proceed to two small cisterns c c\ hollowed out in a
slab of ivory ; the wires enter through the substance into
the cisterns, and come thus into contact with mercury, which
fills the latter. The end of the slider and its bent wire are
shown in fig. 68a. The rectangular space e fg h (fig. 68)
is cut quite through the slab of mahogany, and a brass
plate is screwed to the latter underneath ; from this plate
(which, for reasons to be explained presently, is cut away,
as shown by the dotted lines in the figure) four conical
ivory pillars abed project upwards ; though appearing to
be upon the same plane as the upper surfaces of the bis*
muth and antimony bars, the points are in reality 0*3 of an
inch below the said surfaces.

The body to be examined is reduced to the shape of a
cube, and is placed, by means of a pair of pliers, upon the
four supports a 6 c rf; the slider s is then drawn up against
the cube, and the latter becomes firmly clasped between
the projections of the piece of ivory i i' on the one side,
and those of the slider s on the other. The chambers m m'
being filled with mercury, the membrane in front of each
is pressed gently against the cube by the interior fluid



386 usaruBB til

mass, and in this way perfect contact, which is absolutely
essential, is secured.

The probl^n which requires solution is the following :
— ^It is required to apply a source of heat of a strictiy
measurable character, and always readily attainable, t<t
that face of the cube which is in contact with the mem^
brane at the end of the slider, and to determine the quan-
tity of this heat which crosses the cube to the opposite
face, in a minute of time. For the solution of this prob-
lem, two things are required — ^first, the source of heat to
be applied to the left hand of the face of the cube, and sec-
ondly, a means of measuring the amount which has made
its appearance at the oppodte face at the expiration of a
minute.

To obtain a source of heat of the nature described, the
following method was adopted : — ^b is a small galvanic bat-
tery, from which a current proceeds to the tangent galvanr
ometer t ; passes round the ring of the instnunent, deflect-
ing in its passage the magnetic needle, which hangs in the
centre of the ring. From t the current proceeds to the
rheostat b ; this instrument consists of a cylinder of ser-
pentine stone, round which a German silver wire is coiled
spirally; by turning the handle of the instrument, any
required quantity of this powerfully resisting wire is
thrown into the circuit, the current being thus regulated at
pleasure. The sole use of these two last instruments, in the
present series of experiments, is to keep the current per-
fectly constant from day to day. From the rheostat the
current proceeds to the cistern c, thence through the bent
wire, and back to the cistern c', from which it proceeds to
the other pole of the battery.

The bent wire, during the passage of tiie current, be-
comes gentiy heated ; this heat is transmitted through the
mercury in the chamber ml to the membrane in front of
the cluunber ; this membrane becomes the proximate source



iHKi'KinijmTH, 287

of heat wMeh is applied to the left-hand fsuoe of the eabe.
The quantity of heat transmitted from this source, through
the mass of the cube, to the opposite ftoe, in any given
time, is estimated from the deflection which it is able to
{MTodnoe upon the needle of a galvanometer, connected with
1^ bismuth and antimony pair. 6 is a galvanometer used
f<ff this purpose; from it proceed wires to the mercury
cups H M, whidi, as before remarked, are connected by pla-
tinum wires with a and b.

The action of mercury upon bismuth, as a solvent, is
well known ; an amalgam is speedily fom^ed when the two
metals come into contact. To preserve the thermo-electrio
couple fit)m this action, their ends are protected by a
sheathing of the same membrane as that used in front of
the chambers m m\

Previous to the cube's being placed between the two
membranes, the latter, by virtue of the fluid masses behind
them, bulge out a Httie, thus forming a pair of soft and
slightiy convex cushions. When the cube is placed on its
supports, and the slider is brought up against it, both cush^
icms are pressed flat, and thus make tiie contact perfect.
The surface of the cube is larger than the Surface of the
membrane ; * and thus the former is always firmly caught
between the opposed rigid projections, the slider being held
fast in this position by means of the spring r, which is then
attached to the pin jo. The exact manner of experiment is
as foHows : — ^Ehving first seen that the needle of the gal-
vanometer points to zero, when the thermo-drouit is com-
plete, the latter is interrupted by means of the break-cir-
cuit key k'. At a certain moment, marked by the second-
hand of a watch, the voltaic circuit is closed by the key k^
and the current is permitted to circulate for sixty seconds ;
at the sixtieth second the voltaic circuit is broken by the

* The edge of each cube measured 0*8 inch.



LBOTDBB TIL

left hand at kj while, at the same instant, the thenno-ciiv
cuit is closed by the right hand at k\ The needle of the
galvanometer is instantly deflected, and the limit of the
first impulsion is noted ; the amount of this impulsion de-
pends, of course, upon the quantity of heat which has
reached the bismuth and antimony junction through the
mass of the cube, during the time of action. The limit of
the first impulsion being noted, the cube is removed and
the instrument is allowed to cool, until the needle of the
galvanometer returns to zero. Another cube being intro-
duced, the voltaic, circuit is once more dosed, the current
permitted to circulate sixty seconds, then intem^ted by
the left hand, the thermo-circuit being closed at the same
moment with the right, and the limit of the first swing is
noted as before.

Judging from the description, the mode of experiment
may appear complicated, but in reality it is not so. A sin-
gle experimenter has the most complete command over the
entire arrangement. The wires from the small galvanic
battery (a single cell) remain undisturbed from day to day ;
all that is to be done is to connect the battery with them,
and everything is ready for experiment.

There are in wood three lines, at right angles with each
other, which the mere inspection of the substance enables
us to fix upon as the necessary resultants of molecular ac-
tion : the first line is parallel to the fibre ; the second is
perpendicular to the fibre, and to the ligneous layers which
indicate the annual growth of the tree ; while the third is
perpendicular to the fibre, and parallel, or rather tangential,
to the layers. From each of a number of trees a cube was
cut, two of whose faces were parallel to the ligneous lay-
ers, two perpendicular to them, while the remaining two
were perpendicular to the fibre. It was proposed to exam-
ine the velocity of calorific transmission through the wood
in these three directions. It may be remarked that the



INEnBUMENTB.

cobes were fair average specimens of the woods, and were
in all cases well-seasoned and dry.

The cube was first placed upon its four supports abcd^
so that the line of flux from m' to m was parallel to the
fibre, and the deflection produced by the heat transmitted
in sixty seconds was observed. The position of the cube
was then changed, so that its fibre stood vertical, the line
of flux from m! to m being perpendicular to the fibre, and
parallel to the ligneous layers ; the deflection produced by
a minute's action in this case was also determined. Final-
ly, the cube was turned 90° round, its fibre being still ver-
tical, so that the line of flux was perpendicular to both fibre
and layers, and the consequent deflection was observed.
In the comparison of these two latter directions the chief
delicacy of manipulation is necessary. It requires but a
rough experiment to demonstrate the superior velocity of
propagation along the fibre, but the velocities in all di-
rections perpendicular to the fibre are so nearly equal that
it is only by great care, and, in the majority of cases, by
numerous experiments, that a difference of action can be
securely established.

The following table contains some of the results of the
enquiry ; it will explain itself: —



2^



LBOTUBB TIL



Description of Wood.



1 American Birch ,

2 Oak

8 Beech

4 Coromandel-wood

5 Bird's eye Miq>Ie

6 Lance-wood ,

7 Box-wood »

8 Teak-wood

9 Rose-wood.

10 Peravian-wood

11 Green-heart

12 Wahiut

13 Drooping Ash.

14 Cocoa-wood

15 Sandal-wood

16 Tnlip-wood

11 Camphor-wood

18 Olive-tree

19 Ash

20 Black Oak.

21 Apple-tree

22 Iron-wood ,...

23 Chestnut

24 Sycamore

25 Hondnras Mahogany..

26 Brazil-wood

27 Yew

28 Elm

29 Plane-tree

30 Portugal Laurel ^

31 Spanish Mahogany

32 Scotch Fir



DnxxonoHs.



PanUelto
fibre.



•



35
34
33
33
31
31
31
31
31
30
29
28
28
28
28
28
28
28
27
27



26
26
25
25
24
24
24
24
23



IL

Ferpendlcnlar
to fibre And
parallel to

ligneoos layers.



IIL

Perpendlealar

to fibre and

to

ligneous layers



9-0


110


95


11-0


8-8


10-8


9-8


12-3


11-0


120


10-6


. 121


9-9


12-0


9-9


12-4


10-4


12-6


10-7


11-7


11-4


12-6


11-0


13-0


11-0


12-0


11-9


13-6


100


11*7


11-0


121


8-6


10-0


10-5


13-2


9-5


11-5


80


9-4


10-0


12-5


10-2


12-4


101


11-5


10-6


12-2


90


100


11-9


13-9


11-0


120


10-0


11-5


100


12K)


100


11-5


11-6


12-5


100


12-0



The above table furnishes us with a corroboration of
the result arrived at by De la Rive and De CandoUe, re-
garding the superior conductivity of the wood in the direc-
tion of the fibre. Evidence is also afbrded as to how little



AXES OF OOHDTTOnOK JN WOOD. 241

mere density affects the velocity of transmissioii. There
appears to be neither law nor general rule here. American
Birch, a comparatiyely light wood, possesses undoubtedly
a higher transmissive power than any other in the list.
Ircm-wood, on the contrary, with a spedfic gravity of 1*426,
stands low. Again, Oak and Goromandel-wood^-the latter
so hard and dense that it is used for sharp war-instruments
by savage tribes — stand near the head of the list, while
Scotch Fir and other light woods stand low.

If we cast our eyes along the second and third columns
of the table, we shall find that in every instance the velocity
of propagation is greatest in a direction perpendicular to
the ligneous layers. The law of molecular action, as re-
gards the transmission of heat through wood, may there^
fore be expressed as follows : —

At aU the paints not situate in the centre of ths tree^
wood possesses three unequal axes of ccUorf/ic conduction^
which are at right angles to eo/ch other. The firsts and
principal aadSj is parattd to the fJbre of ths wood/ the
secondj cmd intermediate axis^ is perpendicular to the fbre
<md to the ligneous layers ; while the third and least axis
is perpendicular to thejibre and parallel to the layers.

MM. De la Rive and De Candolle have remarked upon
the influ^ce which its feeble conducting power in a lateral
direction must exert in preserving withm a tree the warmth
which it acquires from the soiL In virtue of this property
a tree is able to resist sudden changes of temperature which
would probably be prejudicial to it : it resists alike the sud-
den abstraction of heat from within and the sudden acces-
sion of it from without. But Nature has gone further, and
clothes the tree with a sheathing of worse-conducting ma-
terial than the wood itself, even in its worst direction.
The following are the deflections obtained by submitting
11



S^ JJUjrUUK YTL



a nmnber of cabes of l>ark» of the flnxne


size as


the cubes


of wood, to the same ^onditiona of experiment ^-


-


DdlMliMI


produced by the wood


Beecfa-tree Bark .


. . r


10-8*


Oak-tree Bark .


. 1


11-0


Elm^reeBaik .


. . 1


11-5


Pine-tree Bark .

fTTL ^ a? A? _^ A ^--


12-0

.. ^



The direction of transmission, in these cases, was from
the interior surface of the bark outwards.

The average deflection produced by a cube of wood,
when the flux is lateral, may be taken at

12°;

a cube of rock crystal (pure silica), of the same size, pro-
duces the deflection of

90°.

Two bodies so diverse, where they cover any consider-
able portion of the earth's surface, must affect the climate
very differently. There are the strongest experimental
grounds for believing that rock-crystal possesses a higher
conductive power than some of the metals.

The following numbers express the transmissive power
of a few other organic structures : cubes of the substances
were examined in the usual manner : —



Tooth of Walrus

Tusk of East-Indian Elephant

Whalebone

Bhinoceros*-hom

Cow's-hom



16

17

9

9

9



Sudden changes of temperature are prejudicial to ani-
mal and vegetable health ; the substances used in the con-
struction of organic tissues are exactly such as are best cal-
culated to resist those changes.

The following results further illustrate this point. Each



LOW OONDUOIITlTr OF OiMAlIIO IIBSUES. 948

of the fmbstanoefl mentioned was reduced to the cdbioal
form, and submitted to an examination similar in eveiy
Te^eet to that of wood and quartz. While, however, a
cube of the latter substance produces a deflection of 90% a
cube of

Sealing-wax prodooes a deflectkui of • • 0**

Sdelealher

Bees'-wax

GlM

Gatta-perdia .

Indiarrobber

Blbert^cemel

Ahnond-kemel • ,

BoQed ham-mascle

Baw Teal-musde

The substances here named are animal and vegetable
productions ; and the experiments demonstrate the extreme
imperviousness of every one of them. Starting from the
principle that sudden accessions or ^deprivations of heat are
prejudicial to animal and vegetable health, we see that the
materials chosen are precisely those which are best calcu-
lated to avert such changes. ^' ^

I wish now to direct your attention to what may, at
first sight, appear to you a paradoxical experiment. Here
is a short prism of bismuth, and here another of iron, of
the same size. I coat the ends of both prisms with white
wax, and then place them, with their coated surfaces up-
wards, on the lid of this vessel, which contains hot water.
The motion of heat will propagate itself through the
prisms, and you are to observe the melting of the wax. It
is already beginning to yield, but on which ? On the bis-
muth. And now the white has entirely disappeared from
the bismuth, the wax overspreads it in a transparent liquid
layer, while the wax on the iron is not yet melted. How
is this result to be reconciled with the fact stated in our



344 UKKTCBB YIL

table (page 224), that, the ccmdactioii of ircm being 12^
conduction of bismuth is only 2 ? In this experiment the
bismuth seems to be the best conductor. We solve this
enigma by turning to our table of specific heat (Lecture
y.) ; we there find that, the specific heat of iron being
1138, that of bismuth is only 308 ; to raise it, therefore, a
certain number of degrees in temperature, iron requires
more than three times the absolute quantity of heat re-
quired by bismuth. Thus, though the iron is really a much
better conductor than the bismuth, and is at this moment
accepting, in every unit of time, a much greater amount
of heat than the bismuth, still, in consequence of the num-
ber of its atoms, or the magnitude of its interior work, the
augmentation of temperature, in the case of Iron, is slow.
Bismuth, on the contrary, can immediately devote a large
proportion of the heat imparted to it to the augmentation
of temperature ; and thus it apparently outstrips the iron in
the transmission of that motion to which temperature is
due.

Ton see here very plainly the incorrectness of the
statements sometimes made in books, and certainly made
very frequently by candidates in our science examinations,
regarding the experiment of Ingenhausz, to which I have
already referred. It is usually stated, that the greater the
quickmaa with which the wax melts, the better is the con-
ductor. If the bad conductor and the good conductor have
the same specific heat, this is true, but in other cases, as
proved by our last experiment, it may be entirely incorrect.
The proper way of proceeding, as already indicated, is to
wait un^ both the iron and the bismuth have attained a
constant temperature — ^till each of them, in fact, has ac-
cepted, and is transmitting, all the motion which it can ac-
cept, or transmit, from the source of heat ; when this is
done, it is found that the quantity transmitted by the iron
is six times greater than that transmitted by the bismuth.



INFLTJSNOR OF BPEOmO HEAT. S46

Tou remember our experiments with the Trevelyan instni-
ment, and know the utility of having a highly expansible
body as the bearer of the rocker. Lead is good, because
it is thus expansible. Bat the coefficient of expansion of
fine is slightly higher than that of lead ; still zinc does not
answer well as a block. The reason is, the specific heat of
zinc is more than three times that of lead, so that the heat
communicated to the zinc by the contact of the rocker,
produces only about one-third the augmentation of tem-
perature, and a correspondingly small amount of local ex-
pansion.

These considerations also show that in our experiments
on wood the quantity of heat transmitted by our cube in
one minute's time, cannot, in strictness, be regarded as ibe
expression of the conductivity of the wood, unless t^
specific heat of the various woods be the same. On this
point no experiments have been made. But as regards the
infiuence of molecular structure, the experiments hold
good, for here we compare one direction with another, in
the same cube. With respect to organic structures, I may
add that, even allowing them time to accept all the motion
which they are capable of accepting, from a source of heat,
their power of transmitting that motion is exceediogly
low. They are really bad conductors.

It is the imperfect conductibility of woollen textures
which renders them so eminently fit for clothing. They
preserve the body from sudden accessions or losses of heat.
The same quality of nonkK)ndactibility manifests itself when
we wrap flannel round a block of ice. The ice thus pre-
served is not easily melted. In the case of a human body
on a cold day, the woollen clothing prevents the transmis-
don of motion from within outwards ; in the case of the
ice on a warm day, the self-same fabric prevents the trans-
mission of motion from without inwards. Animals which
inhabit cold climates are furnished by Nature with their



S46



LBCrUBB TIL



neoesBarj dothing. Birds especially need this (ffotoetioii,
for they are still m<Nre warm-blooded than the mammalia.
They are furnished with feathers, and between the feathers
the interstices are filled with down, the molecular oonsti-
toUoa and mechanical texture of whidi render it, perhi^>6,
the worst of all conductors. Here we have another ezam-
-pLe of that harmonious relation of life to the ccmditions of
life, which is incessantly presented to the student of nat-
ural science.

The indefatigable Rumford made an elaborate series
of experiments on the conductivity of the substances used in
clothing.* His method was this : — ^A mercurial thermom-
eter was sui^ended in the axis of a cylindrical glass tube
ending with a globe, in such a manner that the centre of
the bulb of the thermometer occupied the centre of the
globe ; the Bpaace between the internal surface of the globe
and the bulb was filled with the substance whose conduct-
ive power was to be determined ; the instrument was then
heated in boiling water, and afterwards, being [dunged into
a freezing mixture of pounded ice and salt, the times of
coding down 135° Fahr. were noted. They are recorded
in the following table : —



Sammndedwith


Seconds


Twisted ailk .... 917


Fine lint .


. ioa2


CJotton wocd


. 1046


Sheep's wool


. 1118


Taffety


. 1169


Rftwirilk .


. 1264


Beavers* Air


. 1296


^derdown


. 1806


Hares' for .


. 1812


Wood ashes


. 927


Charcoal .


. 987


Lamp-bla(^ . .


. 1117



*FhiLTMna.i^2,p.48.



Among the sabstanoes here examined, hares' fhr offered
t^ greatest impediment to the transmission of the heat.

The transmission of heat is powerftillj influenced by
the medianical state of the bodj dirongh whidi it passes.
ThB raw and twisted silk of Rmnford's table illustrate
diis. Pure silica, in the state of hard rock-crystal, is a
bett^ conductor than bismndi or lead ; but if the crjrstal
be reduoed to powder, the propagation of heat through
that powder is exceedingly slow. Through transparent
rock-salt heat is copiously conducted, Hiroi^ common
table-sidt very feebly. I have here some asbestos, which
is composed of certain silicates in a fibrous condi1i<m ; I
place it on my hand, and on it I place a red-hot inm ball :
you see I can support tbe ball without inconyenknce. The
asbestos intercepts the heat. That this division of the sub-
stance should interfere with the transmission might reason-
ably be inferred ; for, heat being motion, anything which
disturbs the iMmtinmty of the molecular chain, along which
tibie motion is conveyed, must affect the transmission. In
the case of the asbestos the fibres of the silicates are sepa-
rated trom each other by spaces of air ; to propagate itself,
therefore, the motion has to pass from the sflicate to the
air, a very light body, and again from the air to the sili-
cate, a comparatively heavy body ; and it is easy to see^
that the transmission of motion through this composite tex-
ture must be very imperfect. In the case of an animal's
fur, this is more especially the case ; for here not only do
spaces of air intervene between the hairs, but the hidrs
themselves, unlike the fibres of the asbestos, are very bad
conductors. Lava has been known to flow over a layer of
ashes underneath which was a bed of ice, and the non-con-
ductivity of the ashes has saved the ice from fusion. Red-
hot cannon-balls may be wheeled to the gun's mouth in
wooden barrows partially filled with sand. Ice is packed
in sawdust to prevent it fhim melting ; powdered charcoal



248 LBOTUBB vn.

k also an eminently bad conductor. But there are (iases
where sawdust, cha^ or charcoal could not be used with
safety, on account of their combustible nature. In such
cases, powdered gypsum may be used with advantage ; in
the solid crystalline state it is incomparably a worse con-
ductor than silica, and it may be safely infi^red, that in
the powdered state its imperviousness far transcends that
of sand, each grain of which is a good conductor. A
jacket of gypsum powder round a steam boiler would ma-
terially lessen its loss of heat.

Water usually holds certain minerals in solution. In
percolating thi^ough the earth, it dissolves more or less of
the substances with which it comes into contact. For
example, in chalk districts the w^er always contains a
quantity of carbonate of lime ; such water is called Jwurd
waiter. Sulphate of lime is also a common ingredient of
water. In evaporating, the water is only driven o% the min-
eral is left bdiind, and often in quantities too great to be
held in solution by the water. Many springs are strongly
impregnated by carbonate of lime, and the consequence is,
that when the waters of such springs reach the surface and
are exposed to the air, where they can partially evaporate,
the mineral is precipitated, and forms incrustations on the
^urfaces of plants and stones over which the water trickles.
In the boiling of water the same occurs ; the minerals are
precipitated, and there is scarcely a kettle in London which
is not internally coated with a mineral incrustation. This
is an extremely serious difficulty as regards steam boSers ;
the crust is a bad conductor, and it may become so thick as
materially to intercept the passage of heat to the water. I
have here an example of this mischief. This is a porti<m
of a boiler belon^g to a steamer, which was all but lost
through the exhaustion of her coals : to bring this vessel
into port her spars and every piece of available wood were
burnt. On examination tUs formidable incrustation was



WITHDBAWAL OF HEAT BY GOOD OOHDU0IOB8. 349

fonnd within the boiler : it is mainly carbonate of lime,
which by its non-conducting power rendered a prodigal ex-
penditure of fuel necessary to generate the required qnan-
tity of steam. Doubtless the slowness of many kettles in
boiling would be fonnd due to a similar cause.

I wish now to bring before you one or two instances of
the action of good conductors in preventing the local ac-
cumulation of heat. I have here two spheres of the same
size, both covered closely with white paper. One of them
is copper, the other is wood. I place a spirit lamp under-
neath each of them, and after a time we will observe the
effect. The motion of heat is, of course, communicating it-
self to each ball, but in one it is quickly conducted away
from the place of contact with the flame, through the entire
mass of the ball ; in the other this quick conduction does
not take place, the motion therefore accumulates at the
point where the flame plays upon the ball ; and Here you
have the result. I turn up the wooden ball, the white par
per is quite charred ; I turn up the other ball, — so far from
being charred, it is wet at its under surface by the condensa-
tion of the aqueous vapour generated by the lamp. Here
is a cylinder covered closely with paper ; I hold its centre
thus over the lamp, turning it so that the flame shall play
all round the cylinder : you see a well-defined black mark,
on one side of which tiie paper is charred, on the other
side not. The cylinder is half brass and half wood, and
this black mark shows their line of junction : where the
paper covers the wood, it is charred ; where it covers the
brass, it is not sensibly aflected.

If the entire moving force of a common rifle bullet
were communicated to a heavy cannon-ball, it would pro-
duce in the latter a very small amount of motion. Sup-
posing the rifle bullet to weigh two oimces, and to have a
velocity of 1,600 feet a second, the moving force of this
bullet communicated to a 100 lb. cannon-ball would impart ^



ttM UKBUBS TIL

to tiie lattor a vdocity of only 32 feet a second. Tbxm.
with regard to a flame ; ita moleciilar motioii is very in^
tense, bat its wei^t is extruneLy flmall, and if commmnr.
Gated to a heavy body^ the inten^ty of the motion most
fall. For example, I hare here a die^ of wire ganze, with
meshea wide CTongh to allow air to pass through them
with the utmost freedom ; and here is a jet of gas bammg
brilliantly. I bring down the wire gauze upon the flame ;
you would imagine that the flame could readily pass
through the meshes of the gauze; but no, not a flkker gets
throu^ (fig. 69). Ihe combustion is entirely confined to



Hgvea. Fig. TO.


h



the space under the gauze. I extinguish the flame, and al-
low the unignited gas to stream from the burner. I place
the wire gauze thus above the burner : the gas, I know, is
now freely paanng through the meshes. I ignite the gas
above ; there you have the flame, but it does not propagate
itself downwards to the burner (fig. 10). You see a dark
q>ace of four indies between the burner and the gauze, a
space filled with gas in a condition eminently favourable to
ignition, Imt still it does not ignite. Thus, you see, this
metallic gauze, which allows the gas to pass freely through,
intercepts the flame. And why ? A certain heat is neces-
sary to cause the gas to ignite ; but by placing the wire
gauze over the flame, or the flame over the wire gauze, you
transfer the motion of that light and quivering thing to



851

AfeamptndreljbeaTjgmiiie. Tliemtessityof Aeiftole-
cdar motioii is grestlj lowered hj }mBg eommnuoatcd
fo so grest > misB of matter — so nradi loirered, indeed,
dist it IS ineompetent to propi^mte the comboslioii to the
o^KMhe side of the ganae.

We are all, unhi^^fMlj, too wcH acquainted irith the ter-
fiUe acc i de n ts that ooc^o' through exploocms in coal mines.
YoQ know tiiat tiie canse of these explosions is the presaice
of a certain gas — a ccnnpoimd of carbon and hydrog^i —
generated in tiie coal strata. When this gas is mixed with
a snflSdent qnantitj of air, it exj^odes on ignition, the car-
bon of the gas muting with the oxygoi of the air, to pro>
dace carbonic add ; the hydrogoi of the gas nmtmg with
the oxygen of the air to produce water. By the flame of
the exploraon tiie miners are bomt ; but eA'en should this
not destroy fife, they are often suffocated afterwards by
the carbonic acid produced. The original gas is the miner^s
^firedamp,' the carbonic add is his ^ cholc&damp«' Sir
Humphry Dayy, after Imving assured himself of the action
of wire gauze, whidi I haye just exhibited before you, ap-
l^ed it to the construction of a lamp which should enable
the miner to carry his light into an explosive atmosphere.
Previous' to the introduction of the sqfity-ktmpj the miner
had to content himself with the light ftom sparks pro-
duced by the collision o? flint and steel, for it was found
that these sparks were incompetent to ignite the fire-
damp.

Davy surrounded a common oil lamp by a cylinder of
wire gauze (fig. 71). As long as this lamp is fed by pure
air, the flame bums with the ordinary brightness of an oil-
flame ; but when the miner comes into an atmosphere which
contains ^ fire-damp,' his flame enlarges, and becomes less
luminous ; instead of being fed by the pure oxygen of the
air, it in now in part surrounded by infliunmable gas. This
he ought to take as a warning to retire. Still, though a



263



UDOTUBB TIL



Fig.Tl.



oontinnous explosiTe atmosphere may extend from the%ir
outside, through the meshes of the gauze, to ike flame
within, the ignition is not propagated
across the gauze. The Limp may be filled
with an almost lightless flame, and still
explosion does not occur. A defect in
the gauze, the destruction of the wire at
any point by oxidation, hastened by ths
fiame playing against it, would cause an
explosion. The motion of the lamp
through the air might also force, mechan-
ically, the flame tiirou^ the meshes. In
short, a certiun amount of intelligence
and caution is necessary in using the
lamp. The intelligence, unhappily, is not
always possessed, nor the caution always
exercised, by the miner ; and the conse*
quence is, that even witii the safety-Ian^,
explosions still occur. Before permitting
a man or a boy to enter a mine, would it
not be well to place these results, by ex>
periment, visibly before him ? Mere ad-
vice win not enforce caution ; but let the minar have the
physical image of what he is to expect, clearly and vividly
before his mind, and he will find it a restraining and a
monitory influence, long after the effect of cautioning
words has passed away.

A word or two now on the conductivity of liquids and
gases. Rumford made numerous experiments on this sub-
ject, showing at once clearness of conception and skill of
execution. He supposed liquids to be non-conductors,
clearly distinguishing the * transport ' of heat by convec-
tion from true conduction ; and in order to prevent convec*
tion in his liquids, he heated them cU the top. In this way
he found the heat of a warm iron cylinder incompetent to


OHILLINa BT HTDBOCaOf AKD AIB. 258

i downwards throng (y*2 of anindiof diyeoil;lieabo
boSed water in a ^^ass tnbe, over ke, without melting the
Bobstance. The later ezpernqjents of M. Despretz show,
howeiner, that Uqnida poBsees true, though extremely feeble,
powers of o(mdiicti<»u Rmnford also denied the conductiy-
ity of gases, thou^ he was well acquainted with, their con-
vection.* The subject of gaseous conduction has been re-
teaiij taken up by Professor Magnus, of Berlin, who con-
siders that his experiments prove that hydrogen gas con-
ducts heat like a metaL

Hie cooling action of air may be thus prettily illustrat-
ed—here is a platinum wire, formed into a coil ; I send a
voltaic current through the cdl, till it glows bright red. I
now stretch out the coil so as to tonn, a straight wire ; the
glow instantly sinks — ^you can now hardly see it Thiseffect
is due ^itirely to the freer access of the cold air to the
Btretdied wire. Here, again, is a receiver b (fig. 72) which
can be exhausted at pleasure ; attached to the bottom is a
vertical metal rod, m n, and through the top another rod,
a bj passes, which can be moved up and down through an
air-tight collar, so as to bring the ends of the two rods
within any required distance of each other. At present
the rods are united by two inches of platinum wire, b m,
which I can heat to any required degree of intensity by a
voltaic current. I have here a small battery, and now I
make my connections ; the wire is barely luminous enough
to be seen ; in fact, the current from a single cell only is
now sent through it. It is surrounded by air, which, no
doubt, is carrying off a portion of its heat I exhaust
tiie receiver — ^the wire glows more brightly than before.
I allow air to enter — ^the wire, for a time, is quite
quenched, rendered perfectly black ; but after the air has
ceased to enter, its first feeble glow is restored. The cur-

• FhiL TraoB. 1792: EaBays, toL iL p. 66.



-i-



SM



LXOTOBS TIL



rent of air here pMiii^ oyer the wire, and deitroying its
glow, acta like the etirrent which the wire itaelf eetabliahea
by heating the air in contact with it.
The cooling of the wire in both cases is
due to convection and not to true con-
daction.

The same effect is obtained in a great-
ly increased degree, if hydrogen be used
instead of air. We owe this interesting
observation to Mr. Grove, and it formed
the starting-point of M. Magnus's investi-
gation. The receiver is now exhausted,
and the wire is almost white-hot. Air
cannot do more jbhan reduce that white-
ness to bright redness ; but observe what
hydrogen can do. On the entrance of
this gas the wire is totally quenched, and
even after the receiver has been filled
with the gas, and the inward current has
ceased, the glow of the wire is not re-
stored. The electric current now passing
through the wire is from two cells ; I try
three cells, the wire ^ows feebly ; five cause it to glow
more brightly, but. even with five it is but a bright red.
Were the hydrogen not there, the current now passing
through the wire would infallibly fuse it. Let us see
whether this is not the case. I commence exhaustion, — ^the
first few strokes of the pump produce a scarcely sensible
effect; but I continue to work the pump, and now the
effect begins to be visible. The wire whitens and appears
to thicken. To those at a distance it is now as thick as a
goose-quiU ; and now it glows upon the point of fusion ; I
continue to work the pump, the light suddenly vamshes,
the wire is fused.

This extraordinary cooling power of hydrogen has been


KiGHin. 8S8



iMMdiF aainbed to tiM inohaitr <tf Its ^^
Ues cnii«irta to ertaUkh dMHiadY«s in tUft g«8 1^^
or £M3iIitj than in maj otfmr. But IVdE. Magam oommes
tiie diiUiBg of die wire to be «a dfeei of ooacfaBwtioii. To
impede, if iiot prafvent^ tiie fiHHiaiMm of corraftts, he p^^
his {dfttinum wire akmg the sziB of a narrow j^aae tnbe,
whioh he fflla with kfdrogcn. Although in Ais case the
wire is surroimded bj amere ihn of die gas, and eonrmts,
in the ordinaiy sense, are soaroely to be assumed, the fihn
shows itself just as competent to quench the wire, as when
the latter is caused to pass throng a large vessel contain-
ing the gas. He also heated the closed top of a vessel, and
found that the heat was conveyed more qmckly firom it to
a thermometer, placed at some distance below the source
of heat, when the vessel was filled with hydrogen, than
when it was filled with air. He found this to be the case,
even wh^i the vessel was loosdy filled with cotton wool or
dder down. Here, he contends, currents could not be
formed ; the heat must be conveyed to the thermometer by
the true process of conduction, and not by convection.

Beautiful and ingenious as these experiments are, I do
not think they condusively establish the conductivity of
hydrogen. Let us suppose the wire in Prof. Magnuses first
experiment to be stretched along the axis of a wide cylin-
der containing hydrogen, we should have convection, in the
ordinary sense, on heating the wire. Where does the heat
thus dispersed ultimately go ? It is manifestly given up to
the sides of the cylinder, and if we narrow our cylinder we
simply hasten the transfer. The process of narrowing may
continue till a narrow tube is the result, — ^the convection
between centre and sides will continue %nd produce the
same cooling effect as before. The heat of the gas being
instantly lowered by communication to the heavy tube, it
is prepared to re-abstract the heat from the wire. TVith
regard also to the vessel heated at the top, it would require



S66 lAOTUBB TTL

a Bfortace matliemaEticallyhoTusoiital, and a perfectly nnifonn
applioation of heat to that snrfaoe — it would, moreover, be
necessary to cnt the heat sharply off fix>m the sides of the
vessel— to prevent convection. Even in the interstices of
the eider down and of the cotton wool the convective mo-
bility of hydrogen will make itself felt, and taking every-
thing into accomit, I think the experimental qaesticm of
gaseous condnotion is still an open one.



LECTURE VIII.

[March 13, 1862.]
ooouNe A LOSS OF motion: to what is this motion imparted ?—>ez*

PXRIMSNTS ON SOUND BEARING ON THIS QX7ESTI0N — ^EXPERIMENTS ON
LIGHT BEARING ON THIS QUESTION — ^THE THEORIES OF EMISSION AND
UNDULATION — ^LENGTH OF WAVES AND NUMBER OF IMPULSES OF LIGHT
— ^PHYSICAL CAUSE OF COLOUR — INYISIBLB RATS OF THE SPECTRUM —
THE CALORIFIC RATS BETOND THE RED— THE CHEMICAL RATS BEYOND
THE BLUE — ^DEFINITION OF RADIANT HEAT — ^REFLECTION OF RADIANT
HEAT FROM PLANE AND OURYED SURFACES: LAWS THE SAME AS THOSE
OF UGHT — CONJUGATE MIRRORS.



appendix:— ON singing flames.



"\TT"E have this day reached the boundary of one of the
VV two great divisions of our sabject; hitherto we
have dealt with heat while associated with solid, liquid, or
gaseous bodies. We have fonnd it competent to produce
changes of volnme in all these bodies. We have also ob-
served it reducing solids to liquids, and liquids to vapours ;
we have seen it transmitted through solids by the process
of conduction, and distributing itself through liquids and
gases by the process of convection. We have now to fol-
low it into conditions of existence, different from any
which we have examined hitherto.

I hang this heated copper ball in the air ; you see it
glow, the glow sinks, the ball becomes obscure ; in popular
language the ball cools. Bearing in mind what has been
said on the nature of heat, we must regard this cooling as



258 LBcrruBB yul

a loss of motion on the part of the baU. But motion caa^
not be lost without being imparted to something ; to what
then is the molecular moticm of this ball transferred?
You would, peiiiaps, answer to the air, and this ispartly
true : over the ball air is passiag, and rising in a heated
column, which is quite visible against the screen, when we
allow the electric beam to pass through the warmed air«
But not the whole, nor even the chief part, of the mole<m*
lar motion of the ball is lost in this way. If the ball were
placed in vacuo it would still cooL Rumford, of whom we
have heard so much, contrived to hang a small theimom^
eter, by a single fibre ofsUk^ in the middle of a glass globe
exhausted by means of mercury, and he found that the cal-
orific rays passed to and fro across the vacuum ; tiius prov-
ing tiiat the transmissi<m of the heat was independent of
the air. Davy, with an apparatus which I have here be-
fore me, diowed that the heat rays jfrom the electric light
passed freely through an air-pump vacuum ; and we can
repeat his experiment substantially for ourselves. I simply
take the receiver made use of in our last lecture (fig. 72),
and removing the remains of the platinum wire, then de-
stroyed, I attach to each end of the two rods, m n and ad,
a bit of retort carbon. I now exhaust the receiver, bring
the coal points togetiier, and send a current from pcHiit to
point, ^e moment I draw the points a littie apart, the
electric Ught blazes forth: and here I have the thermo-
electric pile ready to receive a portion of the rays. 'Hie
galvanometer needle at once flies aside, and this has beeot
accomplished by rays which have crossed the vacuum.

But if not to the air, to what is the motion of our cod-
ing ball communicated ? We must ascend by easy stages
to the answer to this question. It was a very considerable
step in sdence when men first obtained a dear conception
of the way in which sound is transmitted tiirough air, and
it was a very important experiment which Hauksbee made



AHALOGISB OF U9HT, HBA3^ AKD 80UNB. 9M

b^M» the Royal Societjm 17a5»by whkdilie akowed thai
•omid oonld not pn^Migate itself through a yacuum. Now
I wish to make maniftet to jou this oony^f^anoe of the vi-
Imtioiis of sound through the air. I have here a bell
temed iqp-side-down, and supported bj a stand. I draw a
Sddle-bow across the edge of the bell, you hear its tone ;
Ae bell is now yibrath^, and if I throw sand upon its flat-
tiflh bottcHn, it would arrange itsdf there so as to fonn a
definite figure, <ur if I fflled it with water I should see the
sorftoe fretted with the most beautiful criqpations. These
enqMlions would show that the bell, when it emits this
Bote, diyidea itsdf mto four swinging parts, which are sep-
araitod from each othar by lines of no swinging. Here is
a sheet of tradbi^ p^p^* drawn tightly over this hoop, so
as to form a kind of fragile drum. I h<dd it over the vi>
braling beU, but not so as to touoh the latter ; you hear the
dnvering of the m^nbrane. It is a little too slack, so I
will tighten it by warming it before the fire, and repeat
tiie experiment. You no longer hear a shivering, but a loud
musical tome 8iq>eradded to that of the bell. I raise the
membrane and lower it ; I move it to and fro, and you hear
the riong and the onking of the tone. Here is a smaller
cbrum, which I pass round the beU, holding the membrane
yertical ; it actually bursts into a roar when I bring it within
half an inch of the beU. The motion of the bell, communi-
cated to the air, has been transmitted by it to the mem-
brane, and the latter is thus ccmverted into a sonorous
body.

I have here two plates of brass, a b (fig. 78), united to-
gether by this metid rod. I have darkened the plates by
Inxwizing them, and (m both of them I strew a quantity of
white sand. I now take the MmMcting brass rod by its
centre, between the finger and thumb of my left hand, and
holding it upright I draw, with my right, a piece of flan-
nel, over which I have shaken a little powdered resin, along



960



LBOTOBB VIIL


fhe rod. Yoa hear the soimd ; but obeerre the beharionr

of the sand: a single
^^ ^ stroke of my finger, you

see, has caused it to
jump into a series of
conoentric rings, whidi
mnst be quite visible to
you alL I repeat the
experiment ' operating
more gently; you hear
the dear, weak, musical
sound, you see the sand
shivering, and creeping,
by degrees, to the lines
which it formerly occu-
pied ; and there are the
curves as sharply drawn
upon the surface of the
lower disk as if they had
been arranged with a
camel's hair pencil On
the upper disk you see a
series of ^ncentric cir-
des of the same kind.
In fact, the vibrations
which I have imparted
to the rod have commu-
nicated themselves to
both the disks, and di-
vided each of them into
a series of vibrating seg-
ments, which are sepa-
rated from each other

by lines of no vibration, on whidi the sand finds peace.
Now let me show you the transmissicoi of these vibra*


ooiofuinoATiON oar YisBAnums thbough Am. 261

tioDB fh>iii the lower disk thro1^;h the air. On the floor I
plaoe this paper drum, d, strewing dark-colonred sand nni-
formly over it ; I might stand on the table — I might stand
as high as the oeiling, and produce the effect which I am
now going to show you. Pointing the rod which unites
my plates in the direction of the paper dnun, I draw my
resined mbber yigoronsly over the rod : observe the effect,
•*-« single stroke has caused that sand to spring into a reti-
culated pattern. A precisely similar effect is produced by
Boimd on the drum of the ear ; the tympamo membrane is
caused to shudder in the same manner as that drum-head
of paper, and its motion, conveyed to the auditory nerves
and transmitt^ thence to the brain, awakes in us the sen-
sation of sound.

Here is a still more striking example of the conveyance
of the motion of sound through the air. By permitting a
jet of gas to issue through the small orifice of this tube, I
obtain a slender flame, and by turning the cock I reduce
the flame to a height of about half an inch. I in^oduce
the flame into this glass tube, a b (flg. 74), which is twelve
inches long. Now I must ask your permission to address
that flame, and if I am skilful enough to pitch my voice to
the precise note, I am sure the flame will respond ; it will
start suddenly into a melodious song, and continue sin^g
as long as the gas continues to bum. The burner is now
arranged within the tube, which covers it to a depth of a
couple of inches. If I were to lower it more, the flame
would start iuto singhig on its own account, as in the well-
known case of the hydrogen harmonica ; but, with the
present arrangement, it camiot sing till I tell it to do so*
Now I emit a sound, which you will pardon if it is not
musical. The flame does not respond ; I have not spoken
to it in the proper language. Let me try again ; I pitch
my voice a little higher ; there, the flame stretches its little
throat, and every individual in this large audience hears



MS



XAOTUXB TtEU



the sound of it. I stop the song, and sta&d at a greater
distance fix>m the flame, and now that I have ascertained

the proper pitdi, the ex-
^^ periment is sure to may

ceed; from a distance of
twenty or thirty feet I can
came that flame to sing. X
now stop it, turn my back
upon it, and strfte the note
as before; you see how
obedient it is to my voice;
when I call, it answ^^ and
with a little practice I hare
been able to eoimnand the
flame to i^g and to stop,
and it has strictly obeyed
the injunction. Here, th^o,
we have a striking ezani{de
of the conveyance of the
vibraticms of the organ of
voice through the air, and
of their communication to
a body which is eminently
sensitive to their action.*

Why do I mi^e these

experiments on sound ?

Simply to give you clear

conceptions regarding what takes place in the case of heat ;

to lead you up from the tangible to the intangible ; from

the region of sense into that of physical theory.

After philosophers had become aware of the manner in

* Though not belonging to our present subject, so many persons have
evmced an interest in this experiment that I have been induced to reprint
two short papers in the Appendix to this Lecture, in which the experiment
is more folly described,'


THEOBEBB OF TCMTOfllfWf MXD UNDULATIOK.

wbibh «oimd was prodnced and transmitted, woalogj led
some of them to suppose that li^it might be produced and
tnasmitted in a somewhat similar manner. An/i perhaps
in the whole history of science there was never a question
more hotly contested than this one. Sir Isaac Newton sup-
posed lig^t to consist of minute particles darted out from
Itmrnoos bodies : this was the celebrated Emission Theory.
Hnyghens, the contemporary of Newton, found great diffi-
culty in conceiving of this cannonade of particles ; that
they should shoot with inconceivable velocity through space
and not distuii) each other. This celebrated man enter-
tained the view that light was produced by vibrations sim-
ilar to those of sound. Euler supported Huyghens, and
one of his arguments, though not quite physical, is so
quaint and curious that I will repeat it here. He looks at
our various senses, and at the manner in which they are
affected by external objects. ^ With regard to smell,' he
says, ^ we know that it is produced by material particles
which issue fi*om a volatile body. In the case of hearing,
nothing is detached from the sounding body, and in the
case of feeling we must touch the body itself. The dis-
tance at which our senses perceive bodies is, in the case of
touch, no distance, in the case of smell a small distance, in
the case of hearing, a considerably distance, but in the case
of sight greatest of all. It is therefore more probable that
the same mode of propagation subsists for sound and light,
than that odours and light should be propagated in the
same manner ; — that luminous bodies should bdiave, not as
volatile substances, but as sounding ones.'

The authority of Newton bore these m^n down, and
not until a man of genius-within these walls took up the
subject, had the Theory of Undulation any chance of co-
pmg with the rival Theory of Emission. To. Dr. Thomas
Young, who was formerly Professor of Natural Philos-
ophy in this Institution, belongs the immortal honour of



264 LBOTUSB TUX*

gtemmmg this tide of aathority, and of establiahii^ on u
safe basis, the theory of undulation. There have been great
things done in this edifice, but hardly a greater than diis.
And Toung was led to his ccmolnsiiHi regarding li^t, by *
series of investigations on sound. He, like ourselves, at
the present moment, rose from the known to the unknown,
from the tangible to the intangible. This subject has been
illustrated and enriched by the labours of genius ever since
the time of Toung ; but one name only will I here asso-
ciate with his, — a name which, in connection with this sub-
ject, can never be forgotten : that is, the name of Augustm X
FresneL

According to the notion now universally received, li^t
consists, first, of a vibratory motion of the particles of the
luminous body ; but how is this motion thmsmitted to our
organs of sight ? Sound has the air as its medium, and
long pondering on the phenomena of light, and refined
and conclusive experiments, devised with the express inten-
tion of testing the idea, have led philosophers to the con»
elusion, that space is occupied by a substance almost in-
finitely elastic, through which the pulses of light make
their way. Here your conceptions must be perfectly dear.
The intellect knows no difference between great and small :
it is just as easy, as an ii\|bellectual act, to conceive of a vi-
brating* atom as to conceive of a vibrating cannon-ball ; and
there is no more difficulty in conceiving of this Ether, as it
is called, which fills space, that in imagining all space to be
filled with jelly. You must imagine the atoms vibrating,
and their vibrations you must figure as communicated to
the ether in which they swing, being propagated through it
in waves ; these waves enter the pupil, cross the ball of the
eye, and break upon the retina at the back of the.eye. The
act, remember, is as real, and as truly mechanical as the
breaking of the sea waves upon the shore. Their motions
are communicated to the retina, transmitted thence along



TN'ricKflf rpnr-T.A'R MEDIUM.

the optic nerve to the brain, and there annotince them-
selves to consciousness as light.

I have here an electric lamp, known well to all of you,
and on the screen in front of you I project an image of the
incandescent coal points which produce the electric light.
I will first bring the points together and then separate them.
Observe the effect. You have first the place of contact ren-
dered luminous, then you see the glow conducted downwards
to a certain distance along the stem of coal. This, as you
,know, is in reality the conduction of motion. I interrupt
the circuit. The points continue to glow for a short time ;
the light is now subsiding. The coal points are now quite
dark, but have they ceased to radiate ? By no means. At
the present moment there is a copious radiation from these
points, which, though incompetent to affect sensibly the
nerves of vision, are quite competent to affect other nerves
of the human system. To the eye of the philosopher who
lodes at such matters without reference to sensation, these
obscure radiations are precisely the same in kind as those
which produce the impression of light. You must there-
fore figure the particles of the heated body as being in a
state of motion ; you must figure the motion communicated
to the surrounding ether, and transmitted through the ether
with a velocity, which we have the strongest reason for be-
lieving is the same as that of light. Thus when you turn
towards a fire on a cold day, and expose your chilled hands
to its influence, the warmth that you feel is due to the im-
pact of these ethereal billows upon your skin ; they throw
the nerves into motion, and the consciousness correspond-
ing to this motion is what we popularly call warmth. Our
task during the lectures which remain to us is to examine
heat under this radiant form.

To investigate this subject we possess our valuable ther-
mo-electric pile, the face of which is now coated with lamp-
black, a powerftil absorber of radiant heat. I hold the in-
12



266 LBcrruBB ym.

Btmmentin fh>nt of the cheek of Mr. Anderson; he is a ra^
diant body, and observe the effect produced by his rays ;
the pile drinks them in, they generate electricity, and the
needle of the galvanometer moves up to 90^. I withdraw
the pile from the source of heat, and allow the needle to
come to rest, and now I place this slab of ice in front of
the pile. You have a deflection in the opposite direction,
as if rays of cold were striking on the pile. But you know
that in this case the pile is the hot body ; it radiates its
heat against the ice ; the face of the pile is thus diilled,
and the needle, as you see, moves up to 90° on the side of
cold. Our pile is therefore not only available for the
examination of heat communicated to it by direct contact,
but also for the examination of radiant heat. Let us ap-
ply it at once to a most important investigation, and exanv-
ine, by means of it, the distribution of thermal power in
the electric spectrum.

Let me in the first place show you this spectrum. I do
so by sending a slice of pure white li^t from the orifice
o (fig. 75), through this prism, abcy which is built up of


plane glass sides, but is filled with the liquid bisulphide of
carbon. It gives a richer display of colour than glass does,
and this is one reason why I use it in preference to glass.
Here then you have the white beam disentangled, and re-



HEAT OF SFECTEEUH.



267



daoed to the colours which compose it ; you have this bom*
ing red, this vivid orange, this dazzling yellow, this brill-
iant green, and these various shades of blue ; the blue space
being usually subdivided into blue, indigo, and violet. I
will now cause a thermo-electric pile of particular construe-
tion to pass gradually through all these colours in succes-
sion, so as to test their heating powers, and I will ask you
to observe the needle of the galvanometer which is to de-
clare the magnitude of that power.

For this purpose I have here (fig. 76) a beautiful piece
of apparatus, designed by Melloni, and executed, with his
accustomed skill, by M. Ruhm-
korff.* You observe here a pol-
ished brass plate, a b, attached
to a stem, and this stem is
mounted on a horizontal bar,
which, by means of a screw, has
motion imparted to it. By turn-
ing this ivory handle in one di-
rection I cause the plate of brass
to approach ; by turning it in the
other, I cause it to recede, and
the motion is so fine and gradual,
that I could, with ease and cer-
tainty, push the screen through a
space less than ^T^^^th of an inch.
You observe a narrow vertical ?
slit in the middle of this plate,
and something dark behind it.

That dark space is the blackened face of a thermo-electric
pile, p, the elements of which are ranged in a single row,
and not in a square, as in our other instrument. I will al-
low distinct slices of the spectrum to fall on that slit ; each
will impart whatever heat it possesses to the pile, and the

* Ejndly lent to me by M. Gasoot.


268 LBOTDBB .Ym.

quantity of the heat will be marked by the needle of our
galvanometer.

At present a small but brilliant spectmm falls upon the
plate, A B, but the slit is quite out of the spectrum. I turn
the handle, and the slit gradually approaches the violet
end of the spectrum ; the violet light now falls upon the
slit, but the needle does not move sensibly. I pass on to
the indigo, the needle is still quiescent; the blue also
shows no action. I pass on to the green, the needle bare-
ly stirs : now the yellow falls upon the dit ; the motion of
the needle is now perhaps for the first time visible to you ;
but the deflection is small, though I now expose the pile
to the most luminous part of the spectrum^ I will now
pass on to the orange, which is' less luminous than the yel-
low, but you observe, though the light diminishes the heat
increases ; the needle moves stiU farther. I pass on to the
red, which is still less luminous than the orange, and you
see that I here obtain the greatest thermal power exhibited
by any of the visible portions of the spectrum.

The appearance, however, of this burning red might lead
you to suppose it natural for such a colour to be hotter
than any of the others. But now pay attention. I will
cause my slit to pass entirely out of the spectrum, quite
beyond the extreme red. Look to the galvanometer I The
needle goes promptly up to the stops. So that we have
here a heat-spectrum which we cannot see, and whose ther-
mal power is far greater than that of any visible part of
the spectrum. In fact, the electric light with which we
deal, emits an infinity of rays which are converged by our
lens, refracted by our prism, which form the prolongation
of our spectrum, but which are utterly incompetent to ex-
cite the optic nerve to vision. It is the same with the sun*
Our orb is rich in these obscure rays ; and though they are

* I am here dealing wiUi a large lecture-room galvanometer.



XXTBA BED AND JBXTBA VIOLET BAYS. 269

for the most part cut off by our atmosphere, multitudes of
them still reach us. To the great William Herschel we are
indebted for the discovery of them.

Thus we prove that the spectrum extends on the red
side much beyond its visible limits ; and were I, instead of
being compelled to make use of lenses and prisms of glass,
fortunate enough to possess lenses and prisms of rock salt, I
oould show you, as Melloni has done, that those rays extend
a great way farther than it is now in my power to prove.
In fact, glass, though sensibly transparent to light, is, in a
great measure, opaque to these obscure rays ; instead of
reaching the screen, they are for the most part lodged in
the glass.

The visible spectrum, then, simply marks an interval of
radiant action, in which the radiations are so related to out
organisation that they excite the impression of light ; be-
yond this interval, in both directions^ radiant power is
exerted — obscure rays fall — ^those falling beyond the red
being powerfdl to produce heat, while those falling beyond
the violet are powerful to promote chemical action. These
latter rays can actually be rendered visible ; or more strict-
ly expressed, the undulations or waves which are now
striking here beyond the violet against the screen, and
which are scattered from it so as to strike the eyes of every
person present, though they are incompetent to excite
vision, in those eyes ; those waves, I say, may be caused to
impinge upon another body, and to impart their motion to
it, and actually to convert the dark space beyond the violet
into ^^brilliantly illuminated one. I have here the proper
substance. The lower half of this sheet of paper has been
washed with a solution of sulphate of quinine, while I have
left the upper half in its natural state. I will hold the
sheet, so that the straight line dividing its prepared from
its unprepared half, shall be horizontal and shall cut the
q>ectrum into two equal parts ; the upper half will remain



270 LBoruBB vm.

unaltered, and yon will be aUe to oompare with it the
nnd^ half, on which I hope to find the spectrum elongated^
You see this effect ; we have here a splendid fiuoresorait
band, several inches in width, where a moment ago there
was nothing but darkness. I remove the prepared paper,
and the light disappears. I re-introdnoe it, and the light
flashes out again, showing you, in the most emphatic man-
ner, that the viidble limits of tiro ordinary spectrum by no
means mark the limits of radiant action. I dip my brush
in this solution of sulphate of quinine, and dab it against
the paper ; wherever the solution falls, light flashes forth.
The existence of these extra violet rays has been long
known ; it was known to Thomas Young, who actually ex-
perimented on them ; but to Prof. Stokes we are indebted
for the complete investigation of this subject He rendered
the rays thus visible.

How then are we to conceive of the rays, visible and
invisible, which fill this large space upon the screen ? Why
are some of them visible and others not ? Why are the
visible <Hies distinguished by various c<dours? Is there
anything that we can lay hold of in the undulations which
produce these colours, to which, as a physical cause, we
must assign the colour? Observe first, that the entire
beam of white light is drawn aside, or refracted by the
prism, but the violet is pulled aside more than the indigo^
the indigo more than the blue, the Uue more than the
green, the green more than the yeUow, the yellow more
than the orange, and the orange more than the red. These
colours are differently refrangible, and upon this dependfl
the possibility of their separation. To every particular de-
gree of refraction belongs a definite colour and no other.
But why should light of one degree of refrangibility pro-
duce the sensation of red, and of another degree the sensa-
tion of green ? This leads us to consider more dosely the
cause of these sensations.



FHYSIOAL OAUSB OF OOLOUB. 371

A reference to the phenomena of flonnd will materially
help our conceptions here. Figure clearly to your minds a
haqHString vibrating to and fro ; it advances and causes the
particles of air in front of it to crowd together ; it thus
produces a condensation of the air. It retreats, and the
inr particles behind it separate more widely; in other
words, a rarefaction of the air occurs behind the retreating
wire. The string again advances and produces the ccmden-
sation as before, it again retreats and produces a rarefac-
tion. Thus the condition of the air through which the
sound of the string is propagated consists of a regular
sequence of condensations and rarefactions, which travel
with a velocity of about 1,100 feet a second.

The condensation and rarefaction constitute what is
caUed a sonorous pulse or wave, and the length of the wave
is the distance from the middle of the condensation to the
middle of the rarefaction. Of course these blend gradually
into each other. The length of the wave is also measured
by the distance from the centre of one condensation to the
centre of the next one. Now the quicker a string vibrates
the more quickly will these pulses follow each other, and
the diorter, at the ssune time, will be the length of each in-
dividual wave. Upon these differences the pitch of a note
in music depends. If a violin player wishes to produce a
higher note, he shortens his string by pressing his finger
on it ; he thereby augments the rapidity of vibration. If
his point of pressure exactly halves the length of his string,
he obtains the octave of the note which the string emits
when vibrating as a whole. ' Boys are chosen as choristers
to produce the shrill notes, men to produce the bass notes ;
the reason being, that the boy's organ vibrates more speed-
ily than the ipai's ; ' and the hum of a gnat is shriller than
that of a beetle, because the smaller insect can send a
greater number of impulses per second to the ear.

We have now cleared our way towards the dear com-



S73 LBCfTDBB Tin.

prdiencdon of the physical csose of oolaar. This Bpectmm
is to the eye what the gamut is to the ear ; its diffisrent
colours represent notes of different pitch. The yibratioBS
which prodace the impression of red are slower, and the
ethereal waves which tiiey generate are longer, than t^ose
which prodace the impression of violet, while the oth^
colours are excited by waves of some intermediate leng&.
The lenglih of the waves both of sound and light, and the
nmhber of shocks which they respectively impart to the ear
and eye, have been strictly determined. Let us here go
through a simple calculation. light travels through space
at a velocity of 192,000 miles a second. Reducing this to
inches, we find the number to be 12,165,120,000. Now it
is found that 89,000 waves of red Hght placed end to end
would make up an indi; multiply the number of inches in
192,000 miles by 89,000, we obtain the number of waves
of red light in 192,000 miles : this number is 474,439,680,-
000,000. AU tJiese waves enter the eye in a eingle second.
To produce the impression of red in the brain, the retina
must be hit at this almost incredible rate. . To produce the
impression of violet, a still greater number of impulses is
necessary ; it would take 57,500 waves of violet to fill an
inch, and the number of shocks required to produce the
impression of this colour, amounts to six hundred and nine>
ty-nine millions of millions per second. The other colours
of the spectrum, as already stated, rise gradually in pitch
from the red to the violet.

But beyond the violet we have rays of too high a pitch
to be visible, and beyond the red we have rays of too low
a pitch to be visible. The phenomena of light are in this
case also paralleled by those of sound. If it did not in-
volve a contradiction, we might say that tlMie are musical
sounds of too high a pitch to be heard, and also sounds of
too low a pitch, to be heard. Speaking strictly, there are
waves transmitted through the air from vibrating bodies.



THBOBY or TOfOHANfUCB. 273

wlndi, though they strike upon the air in r^^olar recniv
renoe, are incompetent to excite the sensation of a musical
note. Probably sounds are heard by insects which entirely
escape onr perceptions ; and, indeed, as regards human be-
ings, the selfsame note may be of piercing shrillness to one
person, while it is absolutely unheard by another. Both
as regards light and sound, our organs of sight and hearing
embrace a certain practical range, beyond which, on both
sides, though the objective cause exists, our neryes cease to
be influenced by it.

When therefore I place this red-hot copper ball before
you, and watch the waning of its light, you will have a
perfectly dear conception of what is occurring here. The
atoms of the ball oscillate, but they oscillate in a resisting
medium on which their moving force is expended, and
which transmits it on all sides with inconceivable velocity.
The oscillations competent to produce light are now ex*
hausted ; the ball is quite dark, still its atoms oscillate, and
still their oscillations are taken up and transmitted on all
sides by the ether. The ball cools as it thus loses its
molecular motion, but no cooling to which it can be prac-
tically subjected can entirely deprive it of its motion. That
is to say, all bodies, whatever may be their temperature,
are radiating heat. From the body of every individual
here present, waves are speeding away, some of which
strike upon this cooling ball and restore a portion of its
lost motion. But the motion thus received by the ball is
far less than what it communicates, and the difference be-
tween them expresses the ball's loss of motion. As long
as this state of things continues the ball will continue to
show an ever-lowering temperature : its temperature will
sink imtil the quantity it emits is equal to the quantity
which it receives, and at this point its temperature becomes
constant. Thus, though you are.conscioi^ of no reception
of heat, when you stand before a body of your own tem-
12*



S74 UDOTDBB WJXL

peratore, an interchange of rays is passing between yon.
Every superficial atom of each mass is sending forth its
waves, which cross those that move in the opposite direc-
tion, every wave asserting its own individuality amid the
entanglement of its fellows. When the smn of motion re-
ceived is greater than that given out, warming is the con-
sequence; when the sum of motion given out is greater
than that received, chilling takes place. This is Prevost's
Theory of Exchanges, ezjuressed in the language of the
Wave Theory.

Xet us occupy the remainder of this lecture by illustrat-
ing experimentsJly the analogy between light and radiant
heat, as regards reflection. You observed when I placed
my thermo-electric pile in front of Mr. Anderson's face, that
I had attached to it an open cone which I did not use in
my former experiments. This cone is silvered inside, and
it is intended to augment the action of feeble radiations,
by converging them upon the face of the thermo-electric
pile. It does tiiis by reflection ;^ instead of shooting wide
of the pile, as they would do if the reflector were removed,
they meet the silvered surface and glance from it against the
pile. The augmentation of the eflect is thus shown. I place
the pile at this end of the table with its reflector 0% and at
a distance of four or five feet I place this copper ball, hot
— ^but not red-hot ; you observe scarcely any motion of the
needle of the galvanometer. Disturbing nothing, I now at-
tach the reflector to the pile ; the needle instantly goes up
to 00% declarmg the augmented action.

The law of tMs reflection is precisely the same as that
of li^t. Observe this apparently solid luniinous cylinder,
issuing from our electric lamp, and marking its track thus
vividly upon the dust of our darkened room. I take*a mir-
ror in my hand, and permit the beam to fall upon it ; the
beam rebounds from the mirror ; it now strikes the ceiling.
This horizontal l)eam is the incident beam, this vertical



BEEXEOnON FBOM PLANB 6UBFA0ES.



275



one is the reflected beam, and the law of light, as many of
you know, is, that the angle of incidence is equal to the
angle of reflection. The incident and reflected beams now
enclose a right angle, and when this is the case I may be



Fig. 77.


8nre that both beams form, with a perpendicular to the
surface of the mirror, an angle of 45^.

I place the lamp at this comer, b, of the table (fig. *!*!) ;
behind the table I place a looking-glass, l, and on the table
you observe I have drawn a large arc, a b. Attached to
the mirror is this long straight lath, m n, and the looking-
glass, resting upon rollers, QSH IT iillT^crT^J^ '.Tl'Iath, ^>»'-^
is to serve as an index. I have here drawn a dark central
line, and when the mirror exactly faces the middle of the
audience, our lath and this line coincide. Those in front
may see that the lath itself and its reflection in the mirror
form a straight line, which proves that the central dark
line is now perpendicular to the mirror. Right and left of
this central line I have divided the arc' into ten equal
parts ; commencing at the end b with 0^, I have graduated
the arc up to 20°. I first turn the index so that it shall be
in the line of the beam emitted by the lamp. The beam
now falls upon the mirror, striking it as a perpendicular,
and you see it is reflected back along the line of incidence.
I now move my index to 1 ; the reflected beam, as you ob-



376 LBOTDBB ym.

serve, draws itself along the table, cutting the fignre 2. I
move the index to 2, the beam is now at 4 ; I move the in-
dex to 3, the beam is now at 6 ; I move it to 5, the beam
is now at 10 ; I move it to 10, the beam is now at 20. If I ^

stand midway between the incident and reflected beams,
and stretch out my arms, my jSnger tips touch each of th^n.
One lies as much to the left of the perpendicular as the
other does to the right. The angle of incidence is equal to
the angle of reflection. But we have also demonstrated
that the beam moves twice as fast as the index ; and this
is usually expressed in the statement, that the angular ve-
locity of a reflected ray is twice that of the mirror wMck Xy
reflects it. ^^^^

I have already shown yon that these incandescoit coal- '

points emit an abundance of obscure rays— of rays of pure ^

heat, which have no illuminating power ; my object now is
to show you that those rays of heat emitted by the lamp,
have obeyed precisely the same laws as the rays of light.
I have here a piece of black glass ; so black that when I
look through it at the electric light, or even at the noonday
sun, I see nothingv^ybn ohsprve the disappearance of the
Mf^\ixit wii^n 1 place this glass in front of the lamp. It cuts
off every ray of light ; but, strange as it may appear to
you, it is, in a considerable degree, transparent to the ob-
scure rays of the lamp. I now extinguish the light by in- f

terrupting the current, and I lay my thermo-electric pile on
the table at the number 20, where the luminous beam fell a
moment ago. The pile is connected with the galvanometer,
and the needle of ttie instrument is now at zero. I ignite
the lamp, no light makes its appearance, but observe the
galvanometer; the needle has already swung to 90°,.
through the action of the non-luminous rays upon the pDe.
If I move the instrument right or left from its present po-
sition the needle immediately sinks ; the calorific rays have ^
pursued the precise track of the luminous rays ; and for



BADIAKT HEAT AND LIGHT OBEY THE SAME LAW. 277

them, also, the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of
reflection. Repeating the experiments that I have already
executed with light, bringing the index in succession to 1,
2, 3, 5, &c., I prove that in the case of radiant heat also,
the angular velocity of the reflected ray is twice that of the
mirror. ♦

The heat of the fire obeys the same law. I have here a
sheet of tin — a homely reflector, but it will answer my pur-
pose. At this end of the table I place the thermo-electric
pile, and at the other end. my tin screen. The needle of
the galvanometer is now at zero. Well, I turn the reflector
so as to cause the heat striking it to rebound towards the
pile ; it now meets the instrument, and the needle at once
declares its arrival. Observe the positions of the fire, of
the reflector, and of the pile ; you see that they are just in
the positions which make the angle of incidence equal to
that of reflection.

But in these experiments the heat is, or has been, asso-
ciated with light. Let me now show that the law holds
good for rays emanating from a truly obscure body. Here
is a copper ball, o (fig. 78), heatpd to du ll redn ess ; I plunge
it in water until its light totally disappe»iD^»Fui, I'teave it
warm. It is still giving out radiant heat of a slightly
greater intensity than that emitted by the human body. I
place it on this candlestick as a support, and here I place
my pile, p, turning its conical reflector away from the ball, so
that no direct ray from the latter can reach the pile. Tou
seQ the needle remains at zero. I place here my tin reflect-
or, M N, so that a line drawn to it from the ball, shall make
the same angle with a perpendicular to the polished tin re-
flector, as a line drawn from the pile. The axis of the con-
ical reflector lies in this latter line. True to the law, the
heat-rays emanating from the ball rebound from it and
strike the pile, and you observe the consequent prompt mo-
tion of the needle.



S78



UBOTURB Tin.



Like the rajB of light, the rays of heat emanatang from
our ball proceed in straight lines through space, diminish-

Fig.Ta


ing in intensity exactly as light diminishes. Thns, this ball,
which when close to the pile causes the needle of the gal-
vanometer to fly up to 90®, at a distance of 4 feet 6 inches,
shows scarcely a sensible action. Its rays are squandered on
Jli*£xat^x^' iflitrcot^aratlvely few of them reach the pile. But
I now introduce between the pile and the ball this tin tube,
A B (fig. 79), 4 feet long. It is polished within, and there-
Fig. 79.


fore capable of reflection. The calorific rays which strike
the interior surface obliquely, are reflected from side to side



REETiBCrnON FBOM OUBYED SUBFAOES.



279



of the tube, and thus those rays which, when the tobe is
absent, are squandered in space, are caused, by internal re--
flection, to reach the pile. Ton see the result : the needle,
which a moment ago showed no sensible action, moves
promptly to its stops.

We have now dwelt sufficiently long on the reflection of
radiant heat hjpkme surfaces; let us turn for a moment to
reflection from curved surfaces. I have here a concave
mirror, m n (flg. 80) formed of copper, but coated with sil-

Fig.8a


ver. I place this warm copper ball, b, at a distance of
eighteen inches from the pile, which has now its conical
reflector removed ; you observe scarcely any motion of the
needle. If I placed the reflector, m n, properly behind a
candle, I should collect its rays, and send them back in a cyl-
inder of light. I shall do the same with the calorific rays
emitted by the baU b ; you cannot, of course, see the track
of these obscure rays, as you can that of the luminous
ones; but you observe that while I speak, the galvano-
meter has revealed the action ; the needle of the instrument
has gone up to 90^.



280 LBOTDBB Tm.

I have here a pair of much larger mirrors, one of which
is placed flat upon the table : now, the curvature of this
mirror is so regulated that if I place a li^t at this point,
which is called the focus of the mirror, the rays which fall
divergent upon the mirror are reflected upward from it par*
alleL Let us make the experiment : In the focus I place
our coal-points, bring them into contact, and then draw
them a little apart ; there is the electric light, and there is
a splendid vertical cylinder, cast upwards by the reflector,
and marked by the action of the light on the dust of the
room. If we reversed the experiment, and allowed' a par-
allel beam of light to fall upon the mirror, the rays of that
beam, after reflection, would be collected in the focus of
the mirror. We can actually make this experiment by in-
troducing a second mirror ; here it is suspended from the
ceiling. I will now draw it up to a height of 20 or 25 feet
above the table ; the vertical beam, which before fell upon
the ceiling, is now received by the upper mirror ; I have
hung in the focus of the upper mirror a bit of oiled paper,
to enable you to see the collection of the rays of the focus.
You observe how intensely that piece of paper is now illu-
minated, not by the direct light from below, but by the re-
flected Ught converged upon it from above.

Many of you know the extraordinary action of light
upon a "mixture of hydrogen and chlorine. I have here a
transparent collodion balloon filled with the mixed gases ;
I lower my upper reflector, and suspend the balloon from
a hook attached to it, so that the little globe shall swing
in the focus ; we will now draw the mirror quite up to the
ceiling (fig. 81) ; and as before I place my coal-points in
the focus of the lower mirror ; the moment I draw them
apart, the light gushes from them, and the gases explode.
And remember this is the action of the light ; you know
collodion to be an inflammable substance, and hence might
suppose that it was the Aeo^ of the coal-points that ignited



OOKJUGATB HIEB0B8.



981



it, and that it comma-
nicated its combustion
to the gases ; but look
here! you see, as I
speak, the flakes of the
balloon descending on
the table; the lumi-
nous rays went harm-
lessly through it, caus-
ed the gases to ex-
plode, and the hydro-
chloric add, formed
by their combustion,
has actually preserved
the inflammable envel-
ope from sharing in
the combustion.

I lower the upper
mirror and hang in its
focus a second balloon,
containing a mixture
of oxygen and hydro-
gen, on which light
has no sensible effect ;
I nnse the mirror, and
in the focus of the
lower one place this
red-hot copper ball.
The calorific rays are
now reflected and con-
verged above, as the
luminous ones were
reflected and converg-
ed in the last experi-
ment; but they act



Fig. 81.


^


^p^il^^b.j


ji'


■-'11


.


III i^^^^^Bioy


I'l''-


l~^


1 i


IH^d


HI



■^.


I .'I



282 LSOTUBB YIIL

upon the envehpe, which I have purposely blackened a lit-
tle, 80 as to enable it to intercept the heat-rays ; the action
is not so sadden as in the last case, bat there is the explo-
sion, and you now see no trace of the balloon ; the inflam-
mable substance is entirely dissipated.

But here, you may object, light is associated with the
heat ; very well, I lower the upper mirror once more and
suspend in its focus a flask of hot water. I bring my ther-
mo-electric pile to the focus of the lower nwrror, and first
turn the face of the pile upwards, so as to expose it to the
direct radiation of the warm flask — ^there is no sensible ac-
tion produced by the direct rays. But I now turn my pile
with its face downwards. If light and heat behave alike,
the rays from the flask which strike the reflector will be
collected at its focus. You see that this^ is the case ; the
needle, which was not sensibly affected by the direct rays,
goes up to its stops. I would ask you ^to observe the di-
rection of that deflection ; the red end of the needle moves
towards you.

I again lower the mirror, and, in the place of the flask
of hot water, suspend a second one containing a freezing
mixture. I raise the mirror and, as in the former case,
bring the pile into the focus of the lower one. Turned di-
rectly towards the upper flask there is no action ; turned
downwards, the needle moves : observe the direction of the
motion — ^the red end comes towards me.

Does it not appear as if this body in the upper focus
were now emitting rays of cold which are converged by
the lower mirror exactly as the rays of heat in our former
experiment. The facts are exactly complementary, and it
would seem that we have precisely the same right to iufer
from the experiments, the existence and convergence of
these cold rays, as we have to infer the existence and con-
vergence of the heat rays. But many of you, no doubt,
have already perceived the real state of the case. The pile



BADIATION OF GOLD. 283

is a warm body, bat in the last experiment the quantity
which it lost by radiation was more than made good by
the quantity received from the hot flask above. ISTow the
case is reversed, the quantity which the pile radiates is in
excess of the quantity which it receives, and hence the pile
is chilled ; — ^the exchanges are against it, its loss of heat
k only partially compensated — and the deflection due to
cold is the necessary consequence.



APPENDIX TO LECTURE Vm.



\



ON THE SOUNDS PBODUOED BY THE COMBUSTION OF GASES
IN TUBES.*

In the first Tolmne of Nicholson's Journal, published in 1802, the
sounds produced by the combustion of hydrogen in tubes are
referred to as haying been ' made in Itfdy : ' Dr. Higgins, in the
same place, shows that he had discovered them in the year 1777,
while obscarying the water formed in a glass vessel by the slow
combustion of a slender stream of hydrogen. Chladni, in his
^Akustik,' published in 1802, page 74, speaks of their being
mentioned, and incorrectly explained, by De Luc in his 'New
Ideas on Meteorology : ' I do not know the date of the volume.
Chladni 'himself showed that the tones produced were the same
as those of an open pipe of the same length as the tube whidi
encompassed the flame. He also succeeded in obtaining a tone
and its octave from the same tube, and in one case obtained the
fifth of the octave. In a paper published in the ' Journal de Phy-
sique ' in 1802, G. De la Rive endeavoured to account for the
sounds by referring them to the alternate contraction and expan-
sion of aqueous vapour ; basing his opinion upon a series of ex-
periments of great beauty and ingenuity made with the bulbs of
thermometers. In 1818 Mr. Faraday took up the subject,! and
showed that the tones were produced when the glass tube was
enveloped by an atmosphere higher in temperature than 212°
Fahr. That they were not due to aqueous vapour was further
shown by the fact that they could be produced by the combustion

* From the Plulosophical Magazine for July, 1857. By JohnTyndall,
P.R.S.

t Journal of Science and the Arts, toL t. p. 274.



BINGINa FLAMES. 285

of carbonic oxide. He referred the sounds to snccessiye explo-
sions produced by the periodic combination of the atmospheric
oxygen with the issuing jet of hydrogen gas.

I am not aware that the dependence of the pitch of the note
on the size of the flame has as yet been noticed. To this point I
will, in the first place, briefly direct attention.

A tube 25 inches long was placed oyer an ignited jet of hydro-
gen : the sound produced was the ftmdamental note of the tube.

A tube 12i inches long was brought oyer the same flame, but
no sound was obtained.

The flame was lowered, so as to make it as small as possible,
and the tube last mentioned was again brought oyer it ; it gaye
a clear melodious note, which was the octaye of that obtained
with the 25-inch tube.

The 25-inch tub^was now brought oyer the same flame ; it no
longer gaye its fundamental note, but exactly the same note as
that obtained firom the tube of half its length.

Thus we see, that although the speed with which the explo-
sions succeed each other depends upon the length of the tube,
the flame has also a yoice in the matter : that to produce a musi-
cal sound, its size must be such as to enable it to explode in
unison either with the fundamental pulses of the tube, or with
the pulses <>f its harmonic diyisions.

With a tube 6 feet 9 inches long, by yarying the size of the
flame, and adjusting the depth to which it reached within the
tube, I haye obtained a series of notes in the ratio of the numbers
1,2,3,4,5.

These experiments explain the capricious nature of the sounds
sometimes obtained by lecturers upon this subject. It is,, how-
eyer, always possible to render the sounds clear and sweet, by
suitably adjusting the size of the flame to the length of the tube.*

Since the experiments of Mr^ Faraday, nothing, that I am
aware o^ has been added to this subject, until quite recently.
In a recent number of PoggendorfTs * Annalen ' an interestii^

* With a tube l^ inches in length and an exceedingly minute jet of
gas, I obtained, without altering the quantity of gas, a note and its octave :
the flame possessed the power of changing its own dimensions to suit both
notes.



286 AFPKNDIX TO LXOTDBB Ym.

experiment is described by IL yon Schaffgotsch, and made the
subject of some remarks by Pro£ Poggendorff himself A musical
note was obtained with a jet of ordinary coal-gas, and it was
found that when the voice was pitched to the same note, the *
flame assumed a lively motion, which could be augmented until
the flame was actually extinguished. IL von Schafl^tsch does
not describe the conditions necessary to the success of his experi-
ment ; and it was while endeavouring to flnd out these condi*
tions that I alighted upon the &cts which form the principal
subject of this brief notice. I may remark tiiat IL von Bchafi^
gotsch's result may be produced, with certainty, if tiie gas be
caused to issua under suffident pressure through a very small
oriflce.

In the flrst experiments I made use of a tapering brass burner,
10^ inches long, and having a superior orifice about ^th of an
indi in diameter. The shaking of the singing flame within the
glass tube, when the voice was properly pitched, was so manifest
as to be seen by several hundred people at once.

I placed a syrene within a few feet of the singing-flame, and
gradually heightened the note produced by the instrument. As
the sounds of the flame and syrene approached perfect unison, the
flame shook, jumping up and down within the tube. The inter-
val between the jumps became greater until the unison was per-
fect, when the motion ceased for an instant ; the syrene still in-
creasing in pitch, the motion of the flame again appeared, the
jumping became quicker and quicker, until finally it esciqped
cognisance by the eye.

This experiment showed that the jumping of the flame, ob-
served by M. von Schaffgotsch, is the optical expression of the
leaU which occur at each side of the perfect unison : the beats
could be heard in exact accordance with the shortening and
lengthening of the flame. Beypnd the region of these beats, in
both directions, the sound of the syrene produced no visible
motion of the flame. What is true of the syrene is true of the
voice.

While rq>eating and varying these experiments^ I once had a
silent flame within a tube, and on patching my voice to the note
of the tube, the flame, to my great surprise, instantly started into
song. Placing the finger on the end of the tube, and silencing



fiXNama flambs. 287

the melody, on repeating the experiment the same result was
obtained.

I placed the syrene near the flame, as before. The latter was
burning tranquilly within its tube. Ascending gradually from
the lowest notes of the instrument, at the moment when the sound
of the syrene reached the pitch of the tube which surrounded the
gas flame, the latter suddenly stretched itself and commenced its
song, which continued indefinitely after the syrene had ceased to^
sound.

With the burner which I have described, and a glass tube 13
inches long, and from ^ to f of an inch internal diameter, this re-
sult can be obtained with ease and certainty. If the yoice be
thrown a Uttle higher or lower than the note due to the tube, no
Tisible eflect is i»x>duced upon the flame : the pitch of the yoice
must lie within the region of the audible beats.

By yarying the length of the tube we yary the note produced,
and iJie yoice must be modified accordingly.

That the shaking of the flame, to which I haye already re-
ferred, proceeds in exact accordance with the beats, is beautiftilly
shown by a tuning-fork, which giyes the same note as the flame.
Loading the fork so as to throw it slightly out of unison with the
flame, when 'the former is sounded and brought near the flame,
the jumpings are seen at exactly the same interyals as those in
which the beats are heard. When the tuning-fork is brought
over a resonant jar or bottle, the beats may be heard and the
jumpings seen by a thousand people at once. By changing the
load upon the tuning-fork, or by slightly altering the size of the
flame, the quickness with which the beats succeed each other
may be changed, but in all cases the jumpings address the eye at
ihe same moment that the beats address the ear.

With the tumng-fork I haye obtained the same results as with
tiie yoice and syrene. Holding a fork oyer a tube which responds
to it, and which contains within it a silent flame of gas, the latter
immediately starts into song. I haye obtained this result with a
series of tubes yarying from 10 J to 29 inches in length. VThe fol-
lowing experiment could be made : — ^A series of thbes; joipable of
producing the notes of the gamut, might be placed oyer suitable
jets of gas ; all being silent, let the gamut be Tun oyer by a
musidan with an instrument sufficiently powerfril, placed at a



288 AFPENDIZ TO LBOTDBB Tm.

distance of twenty or Unity yards. At the sound of each partic>
nlar note, the gas-jet contained in the corresponding tube wookl
instantly start into song.

I must remark, however, that with the jet which I have nsed,
the experiment is most easily made with a tube about 11 or Id
inches long : with longer tubes it is more difficult to prevent the
flame from singing spontaneously, that is, without external exdr
tation.

The principal point to be attended to is this. With a tube,
say of 12 inches in length, the flame requires to occupy a certain
position in the tube in order that it shall sing with a maximum
intensity. Let the tube be raised so that the flame may penetrate
it to a less extent; the energy of the sound will be thereby
diminished, and a point (a) will at length be attained, where it
will cease altogether. Above this point, for a certain distance,
the flame may be caused to bum tranquilly and silently for any
length of time, but when excited by the voice it will sing.

When the flame is too near the point (a), on being excited by
the voice or by a tuning-fork, it will resfpond for a short time,
and then cease. A little above the point where this cessation
occurs, the flame bums tranquilly, if unexcited, but if once caused
to sing it will contniue to sing. With such a flame, which is not
too sensitive to external impressions, I have been able to receras
the effect hitherto describedj and to stop the song at pleasure by the
sound of my voice, or by a tuning-fork, without quenching the
flame itself. Such a flame, I flnd, may be made to obey the word
of command, and to sing or cease to sing, as the experimenter
pleases.

The mere clapping of the hands, producing an explosion,
shouting at an incorrect pitch, shaking of the tube surrounding
the flame, are, when the arrangements are properly made, ineffec-
tuaL Each of these modes of disturbance doubtless afEiscts the
flame, but the impulses do not "accumulate, as in the case where
the note of the tube itself is strack. It appears as if the flame
were dec^ to a single impulse, as the tympanum would probably
be, and, like the latter, needs the accumulation of impulses to
give it sufficient motion. A diflerence of half a tone between
two tuning-forks is sufficient to cause one of these to set the flame
singing, while the other is powerless to produce this effect.



BBSGTSQ FLAMES. 289

I haye said that the yoioe must be pitched to the note of the
tube which surrounds the flame ; it would be more correct to say
the note produced by the flame when singing. In all cases this
note is sensibly higher than that due to the open tube which sur-
rounds the flame ; this ought to be the case, because of the high
temperature of the vibrating column. An open tube, for exam-
ple, which, when a tuning-fork is held oyer its end, giyes a maxi-
mum reinforcement, produces, when surrounding a singing flame,
a note higher than that of the fork. To obtain the latter note
the tube must be sensibly longer.

What is the constitution of the flame of gas while it produces
these musical sounds ? This is the next question to which I will
briefly «all attention. Looked at with the naked eye, the sound-
ing flame appears constant, but is the constancy real ? Supposing
each pulse to be accompanied by a physical change of the flame,
such a change would not be perceptible to the naked eye, on
account of the yelocity with which the pulses succeed each other.
The %ht of flame would appear continuous, on the same princi-
ple that the troubled portion of a descending liquid yet appears
continuous, although by proper means this portion of a jet can be
shown to be composed of isolated drops. If we cause the image
of the flame to pass speedily oyer diifferent portions of the retina,
the changes accompany the periodic impulses will manifest them-
selyes in the character of the image thus traced.

I took a glass tube 3 feet 2 inches long, and about an inch and
a half in internal diameter, and placing it oyer a yeiy small flame
of olefiant gas (common gas will also answer), obtained the ftm-
damental note of the tube : on moying the head to and fro, the
image of the sounding flame was separated into a series of dis-
tinct images; the distance between the images depended upon
the ydocity with which the head was moyed. This experiment
is suited to a darkened lecture-room. It was still easier to obtain
the separation of the images in this way, when a tube 6 feet 9
inches in length, and a large flame, were made use of.

The same result is obtained when an opera glass is moyed to
and fro before the eye.

But the most conyenient mode of obserying the flame is with
a mirror ; and it can be seen either directly in the mirror, or by
projection upon a screen.
13



990 APP E MTOi : TO LBCrUSB Tm.

A lens of 88 centimetres focus was placed in front of a fliame
of common gas, npwards of an indi long, and a paper screen was
hnng at about 6 or 8 feet distance behind the flame. In fixmt of
the lens a small looking-glass was held^ which receiyed the liglrt
tiiat had passed through the lens, and reflected it back upon the
screen placed behind the latter. By adjusting the position of the
lens, a well-defined inverted image of the flame was obtained
upon the screen. On moving the mirror the image was diq^laced,
and owing to the retention of the impression by the retina, when
the movement was sufficiently speedy the image described a con-
tinuous luminous track. Holding the mirror motionless, the 0-
foot 0-inch tube was placed over the flame : the latter changed
its shape the moment it commenced jto sound, remaining however
well defined upon the screen. On now moving the mirror, a
totally different effect was produced: instead of a continuous
track of light, a series of distinct images of the sounding flame
was observed. The distance of these images apart varied with
the motion of the mirror ; and, of course, could be made, by suit-
ably turning the reflector, to form a ring of images. The experir
ment is beautifhl, and in a dark room may be made visible to a
large audience. '^

The experiment was also varied in the following manner : —
A triangular prism of wood had its sides coated with rectangular
pieces of looking glass : it was suspended by a thread with its
axis vertical ; torsion was imparted to the thread, and the prism,
acted upon by this torsion, caused to rotate. It was so placed
that its three faces received, in succession, the beam of light sent
from the flame through the lens in front of it, and tlu'ew the
images upon the screen. On commencing its motion the images
were but slightly separated, but became more and more so as the
motion approached its maximum. This once past, the images
drew closer together again, until they ended in a kind of luminous
ripple. Allowing the acquired torsion to react, the same series of
effects could be produced, the motion being in an opposite direc-
tion. In th^se experiments, that half of the tube which was
turned towards the screen was coated with lamp-black, so as to
cut off the direct light of the jet from the screen.*^

* Since these experiments were made, Mr. Wheatstone has drawn my



smamG flames. 291 ,

Bafc what is the state of the flame in the interval between two
images t The flame of common gas, or of olefiant gas, owes its
Inminonsness to the solid particles of carbon discharged into it.
If we blow against a luminous gas-flame, a sound is heard, a
mail ^plosion in fact, and by such a puff the light may be
caused to disappear. During a windy night the exposed gas-jets
in the shops are often depriyed of their light, and bum blue. In
like manner the common blowpipe-jet deprives burning coal-gas
of its brilliant light. I hence concluded, that the explosions, the
repetition of which produces the musical sound, rendered, at the
moment they occurred, the combustion so perfect as to extin-
guish the solid carbon particles ; but I imagined that the images
fm. the screen would, on closer examination, be found united by
spaces of blue, which, owing to their dimness, wore not seen by
^ method of projection. This in many instances was found to
be the case.

I was not, however, prepared for the following result : — ^A
flame of olefiant gas, rendered almost as small as it could be, was
procured. The 8-foot 2-inch tube was placed oyer it ; the flame,
on singing, became elongated, and lost some of its light, still it
was bright at its top ; looked at in the moving mirror, a beaded
line of great beauty was observed ; in fi*ont of each bead was a
little limiinous star, after it, and continuous with it, a spot of
rich blue light, which terminated, and left, as far as I could
judge, a perfectly dark space between it and the next following
luminous star. I shall examine this farther when time permits
me, but as &r as I can at present judge, the flame was actually
extinguished and relighted in accordance with the sonorous pul-
sations.

When a sUent flame, capable, however, of being excited by the
voice in the manner already described, is placed within a tube,

attention to the following passage, which proves that he had already made
use of the rotating mirror in examining a singing flame : * A flame of hy-
drogen gas burning in the open air presents a continuous circle in the
mirror; but while producmg a sound within a glass tube, r^ular intermis-
sions of intensity are observed, which present a chain-like appearance, and
indicate alternate contractions and dilatations of the flame corresponding
with the sonorous vibrations of the column of air.' — ^Phfl. Trans., 1834, p.
686.



292 APPENDIX TO LECrUBJft TIIL

and the contmuoas line of light produced by it in the moTing
mirror is obserred, I know no experiment more pretty than the
resolution of this line into a string of richly Immnons pearls at
the instant the voice is pitched to the proper note. This may be
done at a considerable distance from the jet, and with the back
tamed towards it.

The change produced in the line of beads when a tuning-fork,
capable of giving beats with the flame, is brought oyer the tube,
or over a resonant jar near it, is also extremely interesting to
observe. I will not at present enter into a more minute descrip-
tion of these results. Sufficient, I trust, has been said to induce
experimenters to reproduce the effects for themselves ; the sight
of them will give more pleasure than any description of mine
could possibly do.



TRANSLATION OP A PAPEB ON ACOUSTIC EXPEEIMENT8. *

A glass tube open at both ends, when simply blown upon by
the mouth, gives its fundamental tone, i e. the deepest tone belong-
ing to it, as an open organ-pipe, feebly but distinctly. On placing
the open hand upon one of the openings and rapidly withdraw-
ing it, the tube- yields two notes, one after the other ; first the
fundamental note of the closed pipe, and then the note of the
open pipe, already mentioned, which is an octave higher. By the
application of heat these fundamentfd tones, of which only the
higher one will be taken into consideration here, are raised, as is
well known ; this is observed immediately on blowing upon a
tube heated externally, or by a gas-flame burning in its interior.
For example, a tube 242 miUims. in length, and 20 millims. in
diameter, heated throughout its whole length, when blown upon
even before it reaches a red heat, gives a tone raised a major
third, namely, the second G sharp in the treble clef^ instead of the
correspcmding E. If a gas-flame 14 millims. in length, and 1
millim. in breadth at the bottom, is burning in the tube, the tone
rises to the second treble F sharp. The same gas-flame raises

* By Count Schaffgotsch: Phil. Mag., December 1857.



SINGIKa FLAMES. 293

the tone of a tube 278^ millims. in length, and 21 millims. in
width, from the second treble D to the corresponding E. These
two tubes, which for brevity will hereafter be referred to as the
E tube and the D tube, served for all the following experiments,
the object of which was to show a well-known and by no means
surprising fact, in a striking manner, namely, that the column
of air in a tube is set in vibration when its fdndamental tone, or
one nearly allied, for example, an octave, is sounded outside the
tube. The existence of the atrial vibrations was rendered per-
ceptible by a column of smoke, a current of gas, and a gas flame.

1. A glimmering smoky taper was placed close under the E
tube held perpendicularly, and the smoke passed through the
tube in the form of a uniform thread. At a distance of 1*5 metre
from the tube, the first treble E was sung. The smoke curled,
and it appeared as if a part of it would be forced out at the upper,
and the other part at the lower opening of the tube.

2. Two gas-burners, 1 millim. in the aperture, were applied
near each other to the same conducting tube. Common gas
flowed from both of them ; one projected from below into the D
tube for about one-fifth of its length ; the gas flame of the other
was 8 millims. in height. At a distance of 1*5 metre therefrom
the first treble D was sung ; the flame increased several times in
breadth and height, and consequently in size generally ; a larger
quantity of gas therefore flowed out of the outer burner, which can
only be explained by a diminution of the stream of gas in the
inner burner, that is, in the one surrounded by the glass tube.

8. A burner, with an aperture of 1 millim. projecting from
below into the D tube, about 80 millims., yielded a gas flame
14 millims. in length. At 5*6 metres therefrom the first treble E
was sung ; the fiame was instantaneously extinguished. The same
thing took place at 7 metres, when the fiame is only 10 millims.
in height, and the first treble D sharp is sung.

4. The last-mentioned fiame is also extinguished by the note G
sharp sounded close to it. Noises, such as the clapping of hands,
pushing a chair, or shutting a book, do not produce this effiect.

5. A burner with an aperture of 0*5 millim., projecting from
below 60 millims. into the D tube, yielded a globular gas fiame
8 to 8*5 millims. in diameter. By gradually closing a stopcock
the passage of gas was more and more limited. The flame sad-



294 AFPEN M X TO USOTUSE TUL

denly became much longer, but at the same time nanxmer, aad
nearly cylindrical, acquiring a bluish color throughout, and fhxm
the tube a piercing second treble D was sounded ; this is the
phenomenon of the so-called diemical harmonica, which has been
known for eighty years. When the stopcock is still furtlMT
dosed, the tone becomes stronger, the flame longer, narrower, and
nearly spindle-shaped ; at last it disappears.

An effect exactly similar to that caused by cutting off the
gas is produced upon the small gas flame by a D, or the first
treble D, sung or sounded firom instruments ; and in this case it
is to be observed that the flame generally becomes the more sensi-
tiye the smaller it is, and the further the burner projects into the
glass tube.

6. The flame in the D tube was 2 or 8 millims. in length ; at
a distance of 16*3 metres (more than 51 feet) from it, the first
treble D was sounded. The flame immediately acquired the un^
usual form, and the second treble D sounded and continued to
sound from the tube.

7. While the second treble D of the preceding experiment was
sounding, the first treble D was sounded loudly close to the tube,
when the flame became excessively elongated, and then disap-
peared.

8. The flame being only 1*5 millim. in length, the flrst treble
D was sounded. The flame gave out the second treble D (and
perhaps sometimes also a higher D) only for a moment, and dis-
appeared. The flame is also affected by various D's of an ad-
justible labial pipe, by the contra D, D, D, the first treble D, and
the second treble D of a harmonium, but by no single sharp or
D sharp of this powerful instrument. It is also affected by the
third treble D of a clarionet, although only when quite close.
The sung note also acts when it is produced by inspiration (in this
case the second treble), or when the mouth is turned from the
flame.

9. In immediate proximity the note G sung is effective.
Some influence is exai«d by noises, but not by all, and often

not by the strongest and nearest, evictently because the exciting
tone is not contained in them.

10. The flame burning quietly in the interior of the D tube
was about 2*5 milliung, in length. In the next room, the door of



SINGDra FLAMES.

iMch. -was open, the four legs of a chair were stamped smralta-
neonsly upon the wooden floor. The phenomenon of the chemi-
cal harmonica inunediately occurred. A very small flame is of
ooncse extinguished, after sounding for an instant, by the noise
of a chair. A tambourine, when struck, acts sometimes, but in
general not

11. The flame burning in the excited singing condition in the
interior of the D tube, the latter was slowly raised as high as
possible without causing the return of the flame to the ordinary
condition. The note, the flrst treble D, was sung strongly and
hvioen off mtddenly at a distance of 1*5 metre. The harmonic
tone ceased, and the flame fell into a state of repose wilJiout being
extinguished.

12. Hie same result was produced by acting upon the draught
of air in the tube by a fanning motion of the open hand close
above the upper aperture of the tube.

13. In the D tube there were two burners close together ; one
of them, 0*5 millim. in aperture, opened 5 millims. below the
other, the diameter of which was 1 millim. or more. Currents
of gas, independent of each other, flowed out of both; that
flowing from the narrower burner being yery feeble, and burning
when ignited, with a flame about 1*5 millim. in length, nearly
iuTisible in the day ; the first treble D was sung at a distance of
three metres. The strong current of gas was inunediately in-
flamed, because the little flame situated below it, becoming
elongated, flared up into it By a stronger action of the tone,
the small flame itself is extii^uished, so that an actual transfer
of the flame from one burner to the oilier takes place. Soon after-
wards the feeble current of gas is usually again inflamed by the
large flame, and if the latter be again extinguished alone, eyeiy-
thing is ready for a repetition of the experiment

14. The same result is furnished by stamping with the chair,
&c. It is evident that in this way gas-flames of any desired
size and any mechanical action may be produced by musical
tones and noises, if a wire stretched by a weight be passed through
the glass tube in such a way that the flaring gas-flame must bum
upon it.

15. If the flame of the chemical harmonica be looked at stead-
&stly, and at the same time the head be moved rapidly to the



296 APPENDIX TO LBcrruBE vm.

right and left alternately, an uninterrapted streak of light is not
seen, such as is given by everj other Ituninons body, bat a series
of closely approximated flames, and often dentated and nndnlated
figures, especially when tubes of a metre and flames of a centi-
metre in length are employed.

This experiment also succeeds yery easily without moving
the eyes, when the flame is looked at through an opera-glass, the
object-glass of which is moved rapidly to and firo, or in a circle ;
and also when the picture of the flfune is observed in a hand-
mirror shaken about. It is, however, only a variation of the
experiment long since described and explained by Wheatstone,
for whidi a mirror turned by watdiwork was employed.

[It is perhaps bat right that I should draw attention to the relation of
the foregoing paper to one that I have published on the same subject. On
May 6, and the days immediately f[41owingy the principal facts described in
my paper were discovered ; but on April 30, the foregoing results were
communicated by Prof. Poggendorff to the Academy of Sciences in Berlin.
Through the kindness of Mr. Schaffgotsch himself, I received his paper at
Chamonni, many weeks after the publication of my own, and untU then I
was not aware of his having continued his experiments upon the subject.

We thus worked independently of each other, but as far as the describ-
ed phenomena are conmion to both, all the merit of priority rests with
Count Schaffgotsch.— J. T.]



LECTURE IX.

[March 20, 1862.]

LAW OF DIMINUTION WITH THE DISTANCE — THE WAVES 01 SOUND LONCU-
TUDINAL ; THOSE OF LIGHT TRANSYEBSAL — WHEN THET OSCILLATE THE
MOLECULES OF DIFFERENT BODIES COMMUNICATE DIFFERENT AMOUNTS
OF MOTION TO THE ETHER — ^BADIATION THE COMMUNICATION OF MO-
TION TO THE ETHER ; ABSORPTION THE ACCEPTANCE OF MOTION FROM
THE ETHER — THOSE SURFACES WHICH RADIATE WELL ABSORB WELL — ^A
CLOSE WOOLLEN COYERINO FACILITATES COOUNa-^PRESERYATITE IN-
FLUENCE OF GOLD-LEAF — ^THE ATOMS OF BODIES SELECT CERTAIN WAVES
FOR DESTRUCTION AND ALLOW OTHERS TO PASS — TRANSPARENCY AND
DIATHERMANCY — DIATHERMIC BODIES BAD RADIATORS — ^THE TERM QUAL-
ITY AS APPLIED TO RADIANT HEAT — THE RAYS WHICH PASS WITHOUT
ABSORPTION DO NOT HEAT THE MEDIUM! THE MOST POWERFUL SOLAR
RAYS MAY PASS THROUGH AIR WHILE THE AIR REMAINS BELOW A
FREEZING TEMPERATURE — PROPORTION OF LUMINOUS. AND OBSCURE RAYS
IN VARIOUS FLAMES.

ITTAVE said that the intensity of radiant heat dimin-
ishes with the distance, as light diminishes. What is
the law of diminntion for light? I have here a square
sheet of paper, each side of the square measuring two feet ;
I fold it thus to form a smaller square, each side of which
is a foot in length. The electric lamp now stands at a dis-
tance of sixteen feet from the screen ; at a distance of
eight feet, that is exactly midway between the screen and
the lamp, I hold this square of paper ; the lamp is naked,
nnsnrroimded by its camera, and the rays, uninfluenced by
any lens, are emitted on all sides. You see the shadow of
the square of paper on the screen. My assistant shall meas-
ure the boundary of that shadow, and now I unfold my
sheet of paper so as to obtain the original large square ;
13*



LBCrrUBB IX*

yon see by the creases, that it is exactly four times the area
of the smaller one. I place this large sheet against the
screen, and find that it exactly covers the space formerly
occupied by the shadow of the small square.

On the small square, therefore, when it stood midway
between the lamp and screen, a quantity of light feU which,
when the small square is removed, is diffused over four
times the area upon the screen. But if the same quantity
of light is diffused over four times the area, it must be dilu-
ted to one-fourth of its original intensity. Hence, by
doubling the distance from the source of light, we diminish
the intensity to one-fourth. By a precisely similar mode
of experiment we could prove, that by trebling the dis-
tance we should diminish the intensity to one-ninth ; and
by quadrupling the distance we should reduce the intensity
to one-sixteenth: in short, we thus demonstrate the law
that the intensity of light diminishes as the square of the
distance increases. This is the celebrated law of Inverse
Squares as applied to light.

But I have said that heat diminishes according to the
same law. Observe the experiment which I am now about
to perform before you. I have here a tin vessel ; narrow,
but presenting a side a square yard in area, mn (fig. 82).
This side, you observe, I have coated with lampblack. I
fill the vessel with hot water, intending to make this large
surface my source of radiant heat. I now place the conical
reflector on the thermo-electric pile, p, but instead of per-
mitting it to remain a reflector, I push into the hollow cone
this lining of black paper, which fits exactly, and which,
instead of reflecting any heat that may fall obliquely on it,
completely cuts off" the oblique radiation. The pile is now
connected with the galvanometer, and I place its reflector
close to this large radiating surface, the face of the pile
being about six inches distant from the surface.

The needle of the galvanometer moves : let it move



DDflNDTIOtfir WITH DIBTANGE.



299



until it takes up its final position. It now points steadily
to 60% and there it will remain as long as the temperature


of the radiating surface remains sensibly constant. I will
now gradually withdraw the pile from the surface, and will
ask you to observe the effect upon the galvanometer. Of
course you will expect that as I retreat from the source of
heat, the intensity of the heat wUl diminish, and that the
deflection of the galvanometer will diminish in a corre-
sponding degree. I am now at double the distance, but the
needle does not move ; I treble the distance, the needle is
still stationary ; I successively quadruple, quintuple — go to
ten times the distance, but the needle is rigid in its adher-
ence to the deflection of 60°. There is, to all appearance,
no diminution at all of intensity with the increase of dis-
tance.

From this experiment, which might at first sight appear
fatal to the law of inverse squares, as applied to heat, Mel-
loni, in the most ingenious manner, proved the law. Mark
his reasoning. I again place the pile close to the radiating
surface. Imagine the hollow cone in front of the pile pro-
longed ; it would cut the radiating surface in a circle, and



800 iSOTUBB DL

this drele is the <»ily porti<ni of the BurfSu» whose rays can
reach the pile. All tiie other rays are cut off by the non
reflecting lining of the cone. I move the pile to donUe the
distance ; the section of the cone prolonged now encloses
a circle of the radiating snrfiEuse, exactly four times the area
of the former circle ; at treble the distance the radiating
surface is augmented nine times ; at ten times the distance
the radiating surface is augmented 100 times. But the
constancy of the deflection proves that the augmentation
of the radiating surface must be exactly neutralised by the
diminution of intensity ; the radiating surface augments as
the square of the distance, hence the intensity of the heat
must diminish as the square of the distance; and thus the
experiment, which might at first sight appear fatal to the
law, demonstrates the law in the most simple and conclu-
sive manner.

Let us now revert for a moment to our fundamental
conceptions regarding radiant heat. Its origin is an oscil-
latory motion of the ultimate particles of matter — a motion
taken up by the ether, and propagated through it in waves.
The particles of ether in these waves do not oscillate .in the
same manner as the particles of air in the case of sound.
The fdr-particles move to and fro, in the direction in which
the sound travels, the ether particles move to and fro,
across the line in which the light travels. The undulations
of the air are longitudinal, the undulations of the etiher are
transversal. The ether waves resemble more the ripples
of water than they do the aerial pulses which produce
sound ; that this is the case has been inferred from optical
phenomena. But it is manifest that the disturbance pro-
duced in the ether must depend upon the character of the
oscillating mass ; one atom may be more unwieldy than an-
other, and a single atom could not be expected to produce
so great a disturbance as a group of atoms oscillating as a
system. Thus, when different bodies are heated, we may



LAW OF mrSBflS 8QUABE8.



301



fairly expect that they will not dl create the same amount
of diBtnrbaDce in the ether. It is probable that some will
commmdcate a greater amoimt of motion than others : in
other words, that some wiU radiate more copiously than
others ; for radiation, strictly defined, is the cammunieaHan
of motion from the particles of a heated body, to the ether
in which these partides are immersed.

Let us now test this idea by experiment. I have here
a cubical vessel, c (fig. 83) — a * Leslie's cube ' — so called
firom its having been used by Sir John Leslie in his beauti-
ful researches on radiant heat. The mass of the cube is
pewter, but one of its sides is coated with a layer of gold,
another with a layer of silver, a third with a layer of cop-
per, while the fourth I have coated with a varnish of isin-
glass. I fill the cube with hot water, and keeping it at a
constant distance from the thermo-electric pile, p, I allow



A



Fig. 88.


its four fSces to radiate, in succession, against the pile.
The hot gold surface, you see, produces scarcdy any deflec
tion ; the hot silver is equally inoperative, the same is the
case with the copper ; but when I turn this varnished sur-



803 UBOTOXB zz.

face towards the {fle, the gush of heat beo(»nes suddenly
augmented ; and the needle, as yon see, moves up to its
stops. Henoe we infer, that through some physical cause
or other, the molecules of the yamish, when set in motion
by the hot water within the cube, communicate more mo-
tion to the ether than the atoms of the metals ; in other
words, the varnish is a better radiator than the metals are.
I obtain a similar result when I compare this silver teapot
with this earthenware one ; filling them both with boiling
water, the silver, you see, produces but little effect, while
the radiation from the earthenware is so copious as to drive
the needle up to 90°. Thus, also, if I compare this pewter
pot with this glass beaker, when both are filled with hot
water, the radiation from the glass is much more powerful
than that from the pewter.

You have often heard of the effect of colours on radia-
tion, and heard a good deal, no doubt, which is unwarrant-
ed by experiment. I have here a cube, one of whose sides
is coated with whiting, another with carmine, a third with
lampblack, while the fourth is left uncoated. I present the
bladk surface first to the pile, the cube being filled with
boiling water ; the needle moves up, and now points stead-
ily to 66°. The cube rests upon a little turn-table, and by
turning the support I present the white face to the pile ;
the needle remains stationary, proving that the radiation
from the white surface is just as copious as that from the
black. I turn the red surface towards the pile, there is no
change in the position of the needle. I turn the uncoated
side, the needle instantly falls, proving the inferiority of
the metallic surface as a radiator. I repeat precisely the
same experiments with this cube, the sides of which are
covered with velvet ; one face with black velif^t, another
with white, and a third with red. The results are precise-
ly the same as in the former instances ; the three velvet
surfaces radiate alike, while the naked surface radiates less



INFLTJENOB OF COLOUBS ON BADIATIOK . 308

than any of them. These experiments show that the radia-
tion from the clothes which cover the hmnan body, is inde-
pendent of the colour of these clothes ; the colour of an
animal's fur is equally incompetent to influence the radia-
tion. These are the ccmdusions arrived at by Melloni for
obscure heat.*

But if the coated surface communicates more motion to
the ether than the uncoated one, it necessarily follows that
the coated vessel will cool more quickly than the uncoated
one. I have here two cubes, one of which is quite coated
with lampblack, while the other is bright. At the com-
mencement of the lecture I poured boiling water into these
vessels, and placed in each a thermometer. A short time
ago both thermometers showed the same temperature, but
now one of them is two degrees below the other. The ve-
locity of cooling in one vessel is greater than in the other,
and the vessel which cools quickest is the coated one. Here
are two vessels, one of which is bright and the other close-
ly coated with flannel. Half an hour ago two thermometers
plunged in these vessels showed the same temperature, but
they show it no longer ; the covered vessel has now a tem-
perature two or three degrees lower than the naked one.
It is usual to preserve the heat of teapots by a woollen
covering, but the cover must fit very loosely. In this case,
though the covering may be a good radiator, its goodness
is more than counterbahmced by the difficulty encountered
by the heat in reaching the outer surface of the covering.
A closely fitting cover would, as we have seen, promote the
loss which it is intended to diminish, and thus do more
harm than good.

One of the most interesting points connected with our
subject is the reciprocity which exists between the power

* By the application of a more powerful and delicate test than that
employed by Melloni, I find that his conclusions will require modification.



804



usonnEB IX.



of a body to commnnicste motion to the.ether^ or to ndi
ate ; and its capacity to accept motion firom the ether, or
to absorb. As regards radiation we have already compared
lampblack and chalk with metallic snrfSftces ; we will now
compare the same substances with reference to their powers
of absorption. I have here two sheets of tin, h n, o p (fig.
84), one of them coated with whiting and the other left
nncoated. I place them thus parallel to eadi other, imd

Fig. 84.


at a distance of about two feet asunder. To the edge of
each sheet I have soldered a screw, and from one screw to
she other I stretch a copper wire, a ft, which now connects
the two sheets. At the back of the sheet I have soldered
one end of a little bar of bismuth, to the other end, e, of
which a wire is soldered, and terminated by a binding
tcrew. To these two binding screws I attach the two ends



BBCIFBOGITr OF BADIATKOT ASD ABSOBPnON.

of the wire ooming from my galvanometer at o, md yoa
observe I have now an mibroken ciremt, in which the gal-
vanometer is included. Yon know aheadj what the bis-
mnth bars are intended for. I place my wann fi^er <m
Una left^biand one, a current is immediately developed,
which passes from the bismuth to the tin, thence through
the wire connecting the two sheets, thence round the gal*
vanometer, to the pomt from which it started. You ob-
serve the effect. The needle of the galvanometer moves
tiirough a large arc ; the red end going towards you. The
junction of tin and bismuth is now cooling, the needle re-
turns to 0% and now I will place my finger upon the bis-
muth at the back of the other plate— you see the effect— a
large deflection in the opposite direction ; the red end of
the needle now comes towards me. I withdraw my finger,
the junction cools, and once more the needle sinks to
zero.

I set this stand exactly midway between the two sheets
of tin, and on the stand I intend to place a heated copper
ball ; the baU wiU radiate its heat against both sheets ; on
the right, however, the rays wffl strike upon a coated sur-
face, while on the left they wiU strike upon a naked metal-
lic surface. I* both surfaces drink in the radiant heat— if
both accept with equal freedom the motion of the ethereal
waves— the bismuth junctions at the backs will be equaUy
warmed, and one of them wiU neutraUse the other. But
if one surface be a more powerful absorber than the other,
that which absorbs most win heat its bismuth indicator
most ; a deflection of the galvanometer needle will be the
consequence, and the direction of the deflection will tell us
which is the best absorber. The ball is now upon the
stand, and you see we have not long to wait for a decision
of the question. The prompt and energetic deflection of
the needle mforms us that the coated surface is the most
powerful absorber. In the same way I compare lampblack



806 LBCTDBB IX.

and vaniidi witli tin, and find the two former by &r the
best absorbers.*

The thinnest metallic coating furnishes a powerful de-
faice against the absorption of radiant heat I have here
a sheet of * gold paper,' the gcAd being merely copper re-
duced to great tenuity. Here is a red powder, the iodide
of mercury, with which I coat the under surface of the gold
paper. This iodide, as many of you know, has its red cot
our discharged by heat, the powder becoming a pale yet
low. I lay the paper flat on this board with the coloiu*ed
surface downwards, and on this upper metallic surface I
paste pieces of paper — common letter paper will answer my
purpose. A figure of Any desired shape is thus formed on
the surface of the copper. I now take a red-hot qiatula in
my hand and pass it several times over Hie sheet; the
spatula radiates strongly against the sheet, but I apprehend
Urn its rays are absorbed in very diflerent degrees. The
metallic surface will absorb but little ; the paper surfaces
will absorb greedily ; and, on turning up the sheet, you see
the effect : the iodide underneath the metallic portion is
perfectly unchanged, while under every bit of paper the
colour is discharged, thus forming below an exact copy of
the figure pasted on the opposite surfac# of the sheet.
Here is another example of the same kind, for which I am
indebted to Mr. Hill, of the establishment of Mr. Jacob
Bell in Oxford Street. A hot fire sent its rays agsunst this
painted piece of wood (fig. 86), on which the number 338
was printed in gold leaf letters ; the paint is blistered and
charred all round the letters, but underneath the latter the
wood and paint are quite unaffected. This thin film of
gold has been quite sufiicient to prevent the absorption, to
which the destruction of the surrounding surface is due.

* Colour, according to Melloni, has no influence on the absorption of
obscure heat : on luminous heat, such as that of the sun, it has great in*
fluence.



METALS BAD BADIAT0B8 AND ABSOBBEBS. 807

The Inminiferotis ether fills stellar space ; it makes the
universe a whole, and renders the intercommunication of
light and energy between star and star possible. But the
subtle substance penetrates further ; it surrounds the very

Fig. 86.


atoms of solid and liquid substances. Transparent bodies
are such, because the ether and their atoms are so related
to each other, that the waves which excite light can pass
through them, without transferring their motion to the
atoms. In coloured bodies certam waves are broken or ab-
sorbed; but those which give the body its colour pass
without loss. Through this solution of sulphate of copper,
for example, the blue waves speed unimpeded, but the red
waves are destroyed. I form a spectrum upon the screen ;
sent through this solution you see the red end of the spec-
trum is cut away. This piece of red glass, on the contrary,
owes its redness to the fact that its substance can be trav-
ersed freely by the longer undulation of red, while the
shorter waves are absorbed. Interposing it in the path of
this light you see it cuts the blue end of the spectrum quite
away, leaving merely a vivid red band upon the screen.
This blue liquid then cuts off the rays which are transmit-
ted by the red glass ; and the red glass cuts off the rays
which are transmitted by the liquid ; by the union of both
we ought to have perfegt opacity, and so we have* When



SOS LBOTUBB EL

both are placed in the path of the beam, the entire fpeo-
tmm disappears ; the union of these two transparent bodies
produce an opadty equal to that of pitdi or coaL

I hare here another liquid — a solution of the perman-
ganate of potash — which I introduce into the path of the
beam. See the effect upon the spectrum; the two ends
pass freely through, you have the red and llie blue, but be-
tween both a space of intense blackness. The yellow of
the spectrum is pitilessly destroyed by this liquid ; through
the entanglement of its atoms these yellow rays cannot
pass, while the red and the blue glide round them and get
through the inter-atomic spaces without sensible hindrance.
And hence the gorgeous colour of this liquid. I will turn
the lamp round and project a disk of light two feet in
diameter upon the screen. I now introduce this liquid;
can anything be more splendid than the colour of that disk ?
I again turn the lamp obliquely and introduce a prism ;
here you have the components of that beautiful colour ; the
violet component has slidden away from the red. You see
two definite disks of these two colours upon Hie screen,
which overlap in the centre, and exhibit there the colour of
the composite light which passes through the liquid.

Thus, as regards the waves of light, bodies exercise as
it were an elective power, singling out certain waves for
destruction, and permitting others to pass. Transparency
to one wave does not at all imply transparency to others,
and from this we might reasonably infer, that transparency
to light does not imply transparency to radiant heat. This
conclusion is entirely verified by experiment. I have here
a tin screen, m n (fig. 86), pierced by an aperture, behind
which is soldered a small stand s. I place this copper ball,
B, heated to dull redness, on a candlestick, which will serve
as a support for the ball. At the other side of the screen I
place my thermo-electric pile, p; the rays from the ball
now pass through the aperture in the screen and fall upon



ELEOnVB ABSOBFnON.



80»



the pile — ^the needle goes up, and finally comes to rest with
a steady deflection of 80°. I have here a glass 'cell, a '
quarter of an inch wide, which I now fiU with distilled wa-
ter. I place the cell on the stand, so that all rays reaching
the pile must pass through it; what takes place? The


^



needle steadily sinks almost to zero ; scarcely a ray from
the ball can cross this water ; — ^to the imdulations issuing
from the ball the water is practically opaque, though so
extremely transparent to the rays of light. Before remov-
ing the cell of water I place behind it a similar cell, con-
taining transparent bisulphide of carbon; so that now,
when I remove the water cell, the aperture is still barred
by the new liquid. What occurs ? The needle promptly
moves upwards and describes a large arc ; so that the self-
same rays that foimd the water impenetrable, find easy ac-
cess through the bisulphide of carbon. In the same way I
compare this alcohol with this chloride of phosphorus, and
find the former almost opaque to the rays emitted by our
warm ball, while the latter permits them to pass freely.
So also as regards solid bodies ; I have here a plate of



810 ^ JJK7IUKE IX.

yery pore glass, whidi I place on the stand, and, using a
' cube of hot water instead of the ball b, I permit the rays
from the heated cube to pass through it, if they can. No
movement of the needle is perceptible. I now displace the
plate of glass by a plate of rocksalt of ten times Uie thick-
ness ; you see how promptly the needle moves, until it is
arrested by its stops. To these rays, then, the rocksalt is
eminently transparent, while the glass is practically opaque
to them.

For these, and numberless similar results, we are in-
debted to Melloni, who may be almost regarded as the
creator of this branch of our subject. To express this
power of instantaneous transmission of radiant heat, he
proposes the word diathermancy. Diathermancy bears the
same relation to radiant heat that transparency does to
light. Instead of giving you determinations of my own
of the diathermancy of various bodies, I will make a selec-
tion from the tables of the eminent Italian philosopher just
referred to. In these determinations Melloni uses four dif-
ferent sources of heat, the flame of a Locatelli lamp ; a
spiral of platinum wire, kept incandesc^it by the flame of
an alcohol lamp ; a plate of copper heated to 400° Cent.,
and a plate of copper heated to 100° Cent., the last men-
tioned source being the surface of a copper cube contain-
ing boiling water. The experiments were made in the fol-
lowing manner : — ^First, the radiation of the source, that is
to say the galvanometeric deflection produced by it, was
determined when nothing but air intervened between the
source and the pile ; then the substance whose diatherman-
cy was to be examined was introduced, and the consequent
deflection noted. Calling the quantity of heat represented
by the former deflection 100, the proportionate quantities
transmitted by twenty-flve different substances are given in
the following table : —



DIATHBBUAK07.



311



■


TnDMniasions: per o6nU«o of tlie total


radiation.


ooounoo UilokMflS of ^th of an Inch


(8^ minim.)


LocateUl
Lamp


Incan-

desoent

Platinum


"^^'S


^^O.**


IRocksalt


92-8


92-3


92-3


92*3


2 Sicilian sulphur


74


11


60


54


8 Fluor spar .


72


69


42


88


4 Beryl


64


28


13


6 Iceland q[>ar .


39


28


6


6 Glass


89


24


6


1 Rock crystal (clear) .


38


28


6


8


8 Smoky quartz


87


28


6


8


9 Ghromate of Potash .


84


28


16


10 White Topaz


83


24


4


11 Carbonate of Lead .


82


28


4


12 Sulphate of Baryta .


24


18


8


13 Felspar


23


19


6


14 Amethyst (violet) .


21


9


2


16 Artificial amber


21


6


16 Borate of Soda


18


12


8


11 Tourmaline (deep green)


18


16


8


18 Common gum


18


8


19Selemte


14


6


20 Citric acid .


11


2


21 Tartrate of Potash .


11


8


22 Natural amber


11


6


23 Alum


9


2


24 Sugar-candy .


8


1


26 Ice .


6


0-6


This table shows, in the first place, what very different
transmissive powers different solid bodies possess. It
shows us also that, with a single exception, the transparen-
cy of the bodies mentioned for radiant heat varies with the
quaUty of the heat. Rocksalt alone is equally transparent
to heat from the four sources experimented with. It must
be borne in mind here that the luminous rays are also calo-
rific rays ; that the selfsame ray, falling upon the nerve
of vision, produces the impression of light ; while, imping*
ing upon other nerves of the body, it produces the impres-



812 LEOTUBB DL

sion of heat. The luminous calorific rays have, however, a
shorter length than the obscure rajs, and knowing, as we
do, how differently waves of different lengths are absorbed
by bodies, we are in a measure prepared for the results of
the foregoing table. Thus, while glass, of the thickness
specified, permits 39 per centi of the rays of Locatelli's
lamp, and 24 per cent, of the rays from the incandescent
platinum to pass, it gives passage to only 6 per cent, of the
rays from copper, at a temperature of 400° C, while it is
absolutely opaque to all rays emitted from a source of 100°
C. We also see that limpid ice, which is so highly trans-
parent to light, allows to pass only 6 per cent, of the rays
of the lamp, and 0*5 per cent, of the rays emitted by the
incandescent platinum, while it utterly cuts off all rays issu-
ing from the other two sources. We have here an intima-
tion, that by far the greater portion of the rays emitted by
the lamp of Locatelli must be obscure. Luminous rays
pass through ice, of the thickness here given, without sen-
sible absorption, and the fact that 94 per cent, of the rays
issuing from Locatelli's flame are destroyed by the ice,
proves that this proportion of these rays must he obscure.
As regards the influence of transparency, dear and smoky
quartz are very instructive. Here are the two substances,
one perfectly pellucid, the other a dark brown ; still, for
the luminous rays only, do these two specimens show a
difference of transmission. The clear quartz transmits 38
per cent., and the smoky quartz 37 per cent, of the rays
from the lamp, while, for the other three sources, the trans-
missions of both substances are identical.

In the following table, which I also borrow from Mel-
loni, the calorific transmissions of different liquids are
given. The source of heat was an Argand lamp furnished
with a glass chimney, and the liquids were enclosed in a
cell with glass sides, the thickness of the liquid layer being
0*21 millemetres.



sadiahoh thbough solids and liquids.



313


aOoriflo


NanMS of lianlda transmlssiona;
xviimw w xaqiuoB percentage of


the total radiaUon


BisulpMde of Carbon . . ,68


Bichloride of Suli^iir .


63


Fh>tochlorideofPhofq[>horu8 <


62


Essence of Tuzpentine


81


OUveOU


80


Naphtha


28


Essence of Lavender


26


Sulphuric Ether


21


Sulphuric Add


11


Hydrate of Ammonia


15


NUric Acid .


16


Absolute Alcohol


15


Hydrate of Potash ,


18


Acetic Acid .


12


Pyroligneous Acid .


12


Concentrated Solution of Suga


r


12


Solution of Roeksak


12


White of Egg


11


DistiUed Water


11



liquids are here shown to be as diverse in their powers
of transmission as solids ; and it is also worthy of remark,
that water maintains its opacity, notwithstanding the
change in its state of aggregation.

The reciprocity which we have already demonstrated
between radiation and absorption in the case of metals,
varnishes, &c«, may now be extended to the bodies contain-
ed in Melloni's tables. I will content myself with one or
two illastrations, borrowed from Mr. Balfour Stewart. Here
is a copper vessel in which water is kept in a state of gen-
tle ebullition. On the flat copper lid of this vessel I place
plates of glass and of rocksalt, till they have assumed the
temperature of the lid. I place the plate of rocksalt upon
this stand, in front of the thermo-electric pile. You ob-
serve the deflection ; it is so small as to be scarcely sensi-
ble. I now remove the rocksalt, and put in its place a
14



814 LBCTDBB IZ.

plate of heated glass ; the needle moves upwards through
a large arc, thus conclusively showing that the glass, which
is the more powerful absorber of obscure heat, is also the
more powerful radiator. Alum, unfortunately, melts at a
temperature lower than that here made use of; but though
its temperature is not so high as that of the glass, you can
see that it transcends the glass as a radiator ; the action on
the galvanometer is still more energetic than in the case of
the last experiment.

Absorption takes place within the absorbing body ; and
it requires a certain thickness of the body to accomplish
the absorption. This is true of both light and radiant
heat. A very thin stratum of pale beer is almost as colour-
less as a stratum of water, the absorption being too incon-
siderable to produce the decided colour which larger masses
of the beer exhibit. I pour distilled water into a drinking
glass ; in this quantity it exhibits no trace of colour, but I
have arranged here an experiment which will show you that
this pellucid liquid, in sufficient thickness, exhibits a very
decided colour. Here is a tube fifteen feet long, a b (fig.
87), placed horizontal, the ends of which are stopped by

Fig.81:



pieces of plate glass ; at one end of the tube stands an elec-
tric lamp, L, from which I intend to send a cylinder of
light through the tube. The tube is now half filled with
water, the upper surface of which cuts the tube in two



INFLI7EN0E OF THIOKiraSBS.



315



equal parts horizontally. Thus I send half of my beam
through air and half through water, and with this lens, c,
I intend to project a magnified image of the adjacent end
of the tube, upon the screen. Here it is; you see the
image, o p, composed of two semicircles, one of which is
due to the light which has passed through the water, the
other to the light which has passed through the air. Side
by side, thus, you can compare them, and you notice that
while the air semicircle is a pure white, the water semicir-
cle is a bright and delicate blue green. Thus, by augment-
ing the thickness through which the light has to pass, you
deepen the colour ; this proves that the destruction of the
light rays takes place wUhin the absorbing body, and is not
an effect of its surface merely.

Melloni shows the same to be true of radiant heat. In
our table, at page 311, the thickness of the plates used was
2*6 millimetres, but by rendering the plate thinner we en-
able a greater quantity of heat to get through, and by ren-
dering it sufficiently thin, we may, with a very opaque sub-
stance, almost reach the transmission of rocksalt. The fol-
lowing table shows the influence of thickness on the trans-
missive power of a plate of glass.



Thicknefls of

Pistes In MilU.

metres


the total SadisUon ' ^ ^


Locatelli Lamp


Inesndescent
Platinnm


<^iS^:^


^^S^'c**


2-6
0-5
O-OY


89
64

*11


24

zn

67


6
12
34


1

12



Thus, we see, that by diminishing the thickness of the
plate from 2*6 to 1*07 mllimetres, the quantity of heat
transmitted rises, in the case of the lamp of Locatelli, from



816



LSOTOBB DL



80 to 77 per cent. ; m tke ease of the mcaadeeoent plati-
nam, from 24 to 57 per eent ; ia the asm of oc^per at 400""
C. from 6 to 34 per cent. ; and in the case of copper at
100^ C*, from absolute opacity to a transmission of 12 vet
eent.

The influence of the thickness of a plate of selenite o&
the quantity of heat whidi it transmits is exhibited in the
following table*



Tbiokneisof
metroL


of toUl radtetioiL ^ » *^ "^


Platinnm


"^a"


^^cS^'a** i


2.6
0.4
0.01


14
88
64


5
18
51


1

82


1

^ :

81 !

i



The decomposition of the solar beam gives us the solar
spectrum ; luminous in the centre, calorific at one end, and
chemical at the other. The sun is therefore a source of
heterogenous rays, and there can scarcely be a doubt that
all other sources of heat, luminous and obscure, partake of
this heterogeniety. In general, when such mixed rays entejr
a diathermic substance, some are struck down and others
permitted to pass. Supposing, then, that we take a sheaf
of calorific rays which have already passed through a di^
thermic plate, and permit them to fall upon a second plate
of the same material, the transparency of this second plate
to the heat incident upon it will be greater than the trans-
parency of the first plate to the heat incident on it. In
fact the first plate, if suflSciently thick, has already extin-
guished) in great part, the rays which the substance is
capable of absorbing ; and the residual rays, as a matter of
course penetrate a second plate of the same substance with



8IFTING OF CALORIFIC BEAMS. 817

comparative ^eedom. The original beam is sifted byth^
first plate, and the purified beam possesses, for the same
substance, a higher p^ietrative power than the original
beam.

This power of penetration has nsnally been taken as a
test of the quality of heat ; the heat of the purified beam is
said to be different in quality from that of the unpurified
beam. It is not, however, that any individual ray has
changed its quality, but that from the beam, as a whole,
certain rays have been withdraw^, and that their with-
drawal has altered the proportion of the incident heat
transmitted by a second substance. This, I think, is the
true meaning of the term * quality ' as applfed to radiant V
heat. In the path of the rays from a lamp let plates of
tocksalt, alum, bichromate of potash, and selenite be suo:-
cessively placed, each plate 2*6 millimetres in thickness ; let
the heat emergent from these plates fall upon a second se-
ries of the same thickness ; out of every 100 rays of tfiis
latter heat, the following proportions are transmitted.

Bocksalt . . 92*8

Alum . . 90

Chromate of Potash . 71

Selenite . . 91

Referring to the table, p. 311, we find that of the
whole of the rays emitted by the Locatelli lamp, only 34
per cent, are transmitted by the chromate of potash ; here
we find the percentage 71. Of the entire radiation, sele-
nite transmits only 14 per. cent., but of the beam which has
been purified by a plate of its own substance it transmits
91 per cent. The same remark applies to the alum, which
transmits only 9 per cent, of the unpurified beam, and 90
per cent, of the purified beam. In rocksalt, on the con-
trary, the transmissions of the sifted and unsifted beam
are the same, because the substance is equally transparent



818 LBonrsB dl

to rays of all kinds.* In these cases I have supposed llie
rays emergent from rocksalt to pass through rocksalt ; the
rays emergent from alum to pass throng alum, and so of
the others ; but, as might be expected, the siftmg of the
beam, by any substance, will alter the proportion in which
it will be transmitted by ahnost any other second sub-
stimce.

I win conclude these observations with an experiment
which will show you the influence of sifting in a very
striking manner. I have here a sensitive differential air-
thermometer with a dean glass bulb. Tou see the sl%ht-
est touch of my hand causes a depression of the thenno-
metric column. Here is our electric lamp, and from it I
will converge a powerful beam on the bulb of that ther-
mometer. The focus now falls directly on the bulb, and
the air within it is traversed by a beam of intense power ;
but not the slightest depression of the thermometric col-
umn is discernible. When I first showed this experiment
to an individual here present, he almost doubted' the evi-
dence of his senses ; but the explanation is simple. The
beam, before it reaches the bulb, is already sifted by the
glass lens used to concentrate it, and having passed
through 12 or 14 feet of air, the beam contains no constit-
uent that can be sensibly absorbed by the air within the
bulb. Hence the hot beam passes through both air and
glass without warming either. It is competent, however,
to warm the thermo-electric pile ; exposure of the pile to
it, for a single instant, suffices to drive the needle violently
aside ; or let me coat with lampblack the portion of the
glass bulb struck by the beam; you see the effect: the
heat is now absorbed, the ^r expands, and the thermo-
metric column is forcibly depressed.

* This was Melloni's conclusion ; but the experiments of MM. Provostaye
and Desains, and of Mr. Balfour Stewart, prove that the conclusion is not
strictly correct



AOnON OF GLASS FIBE-SCSEENS.



319



We use glass fire-screens, whicli allow the pleasant
light of the fire to pass, while they cut off the heat ; the
reason is, that by far the greater part of the heat emitted
by a fire consists of obscure Tays, to which the glass is
opaque. But in no case is there any loss. The rays ab-
sorbed by the glass go to warm the glass ; the motion of
the ethereal waves is transferred to the molecules of the
solid. But you may be inclined to urge, that under these
circumstances the glass screen itself ought to become a
source of heat, and that therefore we ought to derive no
benefit from its absorption. The fact, is so, but the conclu,
fflon is unwarranted. The philosophy of the screen is this :

Xlg.88.


— ^Let F (fig. 88) be a fire from which the rays proceed in
straight lines towards a person at p. Before the screen is
introduced, each ray pursues its course direct to p ; but
now let a screen be placed at s. The screen intercepts the
rays of heat and becomes warmed ; but instead of sending
on the rays in their original direction only, it emits them,
as a warm body, in aU directiona. Hence, it cannot re-
store to the person at p all the heat intercepted. A por-
tion of the heat is restored, but by far the greater part is
diverted from p, and distributed in other directions.

Where the waves pursue their way unabsorbed, no mo-
tion of heat is imparled, as we have seen in the case of the



320 LBcrnsE dl

air thermometer. A joint of meat might be roasted beibre
a fire, with the air aromid the joint as cold as ice. The air
on high momitains may be intensely cold, while a burning
smi is overhead ; the solar rays wMch, striking on the hu*
man skin, foe almost intolerable, are incompetent to heat
the air saisibly, and we have only to withdraw into perfect
shade to feel the chill of the atmoq>here. I never, on any
occasion, suffered so much from solar heat as in descending
from the * Corridor ' to the Grand Plateau of Mont Blanc>
on August 13, 1857 ; though hip deep in snow at the time,
the sun blazed against me with unendurable power. Ln-r
mersion in the shadow of the Dome du Ooute at once
changed my feelings ; for here the air was at a freezing
temperature. It was not, however, sensibly colder than
the air through which the sunbeams passed ; and I suffered,
not from the contact of hot air, but from the impact of
calorific rays which had reached me through a medium icy
cold.

The beams of the sun also penetrate glass without sen-
sibly heating it, and the reason is, that having passed
through our atmosphere, the beams have been in a great
measure deprived of those rays which can be absorbed by
glass.*" I made an experiment in a former lecture which
you will now completely understand. I sent a beam from
the electric lamp through a mass of ice without melting
the substance. I had previously sifted the beam by send-
ing it through a vessel of water, in which the rays capable
of being absorbed by the ice were lodged — and so cppious-
ly lodged — ^that the water was raised almost to the boiling

* On 4 priori grounds I should conclude that the obscure solar rays
which have succeeded in gettmg through our atmo^here, must be able to
penetrate the humours of the eye and reach the 'retina : the rec^t experi-
ments of M. Franz prore this. Their not producing yision as, therefore^
not due to their absorption by the humours of the eye, but to their own
intrinsic incompetence to excite the retina.



SADIATIOH THSOCOH OPAQUE BODIES. 821

p<rint during the experiment. It is here worthy of remark
tl^t the liquid water and the solid ice appear to be pervi-
ous and impervious to the same rajs; the one may be used
88 a eief&e for the otiier ; a result whidi indietktes that the
quality of the absbrption is not inflt^iced by thie di^rencd
of aggregation between solid and liquid. It is easy to
prove that the beam which has traversed the ice without
meltbig it, is really a calorific beam, by allowing it to fall
upon our thenno-electrio pile. Here is a beam which has
passed through a layer of water ; I permit it to fall upon
the pile, and you instantly see its effect upon the galva^
nometer, causiag the needle to move with energy to its
Btqps. ( Here is a beam which has passed tiirough ice, but
you see that it is equally competent to affect the pile ; faere^
finally, is a beam wMt^h has passed through both water and
ice ; you see it still possesses heating power.*"

When the calorific rays are intercepted, -they, as si gen-
eral rule, raise the temperature of the body by which they
are absorbed ; but when the absorbing body is ice at a
temperature of 32° Fahr., it is impossible to raise its tem-
perature. How then does the heat absorbed by the ice
employ itself? It produces internal liquefaction, it takes
down the crystalline atoms, and thus forms those lovely
liquid flowers which I showed you in a former lecturcf

We have seen that transparency to light is not at all a
test of diathermancy ; that a body highly transparent to
the luminous undulations may be highly opaque to the non-
luminous ones. I have also given you an example of the
opposite kind, and showed you that a body mdy be abso-
lutely opaque to light and still, in a considerable degree,
transparent to heat. I set the electric lamp in action, and

* Mr. Faraday has fired gunpowder by conyerging the solar rays upon it
by a lens of ice.

t For the bearing of these results oa air aad water bubbles of ioe, see
Appendix to Lecture IX.
14*



UBcrras DL



jaa see tlib co n fwyp i bean tnddng itadf dKoagh tbe
dost of the room: joo see the point of eo n T « gcnce of the
TWjn here, at a distanoe of fifteen feet from the haaap ; I
win nuu^ ibat p<Mnt aecontelj bj the end of this rod.
Here is a jtete of rodonh, coated so tfaiddy with soot that
tbe light, not onlj of ererj gas lamp in this room, but ^be
electric Bght itself is cot off bj it. I interpose this jdate
of smoked sah in the path of the beam ; the li^it is inter-
cepted, but the rod enables me to find with m j fS\e ihe
place where the focus fdL I ]daoe the pile at this foeos :
yon see no beam fidling <m the pile, bat ibe violent acticm
of the needle instantly rereals to the mind's eye a focus of
heat at the p(Hnt from whidi the Hgfat has been with-
drawn.

Ton mi^it, perhi^>s, be disposed to think that the heat
fidling on the pile has been absorbed by the soot, and then
radiated from it as an independent somx^e. Melloni has re-
moved every objection of this kind ; but none of his exper-
im^its, I think, are more condnsiye, as a reAitaticm of the
objection, than that now performed before yon. For if
the fflnoked salt were the source, the rays coold not con-
verge here to a focns, for the salt is at this side of the con-
verging lens, and you see when I displace my pile a little
laterally, still keeping it turned towards the smoked salt,
the needle sinks to zero.

The heat, moreover, falling on the pile is, as shown by
Melloni, practically independent of the position of the plate
of rocksalt ; you may cut off the beam at a distance of fif-
teen feet from the pile, or at a distance of one foot ; the
result is sensibly the same, which could not be the case if
the fflnoked salt itself were the source of heat.

I make a similar experiment with this black glass, and
the result, as you see, is the same. Now the glass reflects
a considerable portion of the light and heat from the lamp ;
if I hold it a littie oblique to the beam you can see the re-



NBOPOBnON OF YI8IBLB TO INYIBIBLE BAYS. 323

fleeted portion. While the glass is in this position I will
ooat it with an opaque layer of lampblack so as to cause it
to absorb, not only aU the rays which are now entering it,
but also the portion which it reflects. What is the result ?
Though the glass plate has become the seat of augmented
absorption, it has ceased to afiect the pile, the needle de-
scends to zero, thus furnishing additional proof that the
rays which, in the first place, acted upon the pile, came di-
rect from the lamp, and traversed the black glass, as light
traverses a transparent substance.

Rocksalt transmits ail rays, luminous and obscure;
alum, of the thickness already given, transmits only the lu-
minous rays ; hence the difference between alum and rock-
salt will give the value of the obscure radiation. Tested
in this way, Melloni finds the following proportions of lu-
minous to obscure rays for the three sources mentioned : —

Source Luminoos Obscure

Flame of Oil .10 90

Incandescent Platinmn 2 98

Flame of Alcohol . 1 99

Thus, of the heat radiated from the flame of oil, 90 per
cent, is due to the obscure rays ; of the heat radiated from
incandescent platinum, 98 per cent, is due to obscure rays,
while of the heat radiated from the flame of alcohol, fully
99 per cent, is due to the obscure radiations.



A



APPENDIX TO LECTURE IX.



EXTBACT FSOM A MEMOIB ON SOME PHYSICAL PBOPEBTIES OF
ICE.*

I AVAILED myself of the fine sunny weather with whidi we
were fayonred last September and October, to examine the effects
of solar heat upon ice. The experiments were made with Wea*
ham Lake and Norway ice. Slabs were formed oi the substance,,
yarying ih>m one to several inches in thidmess, and these
were placed in the path of a beam rendered convergent by a
double convex lens, 4 inches in diameter, possessing a focal dis-
tance of 10^ inches. The slabs were usually so placed, that the
focus of parallel rays fell within the ice. Having first found the
position of the focus in the air, the lens was screened ; the ice was
then placed in position, the screen was removed, and the effect
was watched through an ordinary pocket lens.

A plate of ice an inch thick, with parallel sides, was first
examined: on removing the screen the transparent mass was
crossed by the sunbeams, and the path of the rays through it was
instantly studded by a great number of little luminous spots, pro-
duced at the moment, and resembling shining air-bubbles. When
the beam was sent through the edge of the plate, so that it trav-
ersed a considerable thickness of the ice, the path of the beam
could be traced by those brilliant spots, as it is by the floating
motes in a dark room.

In lake ice the planes of freezing are easily recognized by the
stratified appearance which the distribution of the air bubbles
gives to the substance. A cube was cut from a perfectly trans-

* PblL Trans. December IS61.



v'l



LIQUID FLOWEBS IN ICE. 325

oaient portion of tbe ice, and the solar b^am was sent throogb
he cnbe in three lectangalar directions saccessiTely. One was
^ipendicnlar to the plane of fi:eezing, and the other two parallel
to it. The bright bubbles were formed in the ice in all three
cases.

When the siir£aces perpendicular to tlie planes of freezing were
examined by a lens, after exposure to the light, th^ were found
to be cut np by innumerable small parallel fissures, with here and
there minute spurs shooting from them, which gave the fissures,
in some cases, a feathery appearance. When the portions of the
ice traversed by the beam were examined parallel to the sur&eei
of freezing, a yery beautiful a^qpearance revealed itsel£ Allow-
ing the light from the window to &11 upon the ice at a suitable
incidence, the interior of the mass was found filled with little
flowerrshaped figures. Each flower had six petals, and at its cen-
tre was a bright spot, which shone with more than metallic bril-
liancy. The petdU were manifestly composed of wateVy and were
consequently xlim, their visibility depending on the small differ-
ence of refrangibility between ice at 83° Fahr. and water at the^
same temperature.

For a long time I found the relation between the planes of
these flowers and the planes of fr^eziag perfectly constant. They
were always parallel to each other. The developement of the
flowers was independe^ of the direction in which the beam trav-
ersed the ice. Hence, when an irregularly shaped mass of trans-
parent ice was presented to me, by sending a sunbemn through it
I could tell in an instant the direction in which it had been
fh>2en.

Allowing the beam to enter the edge of a plate of ice, and
causing the latter to move at right angles to the beam, so that the
ladiant heat traversed d^r^t portions of l^e ice in succession,
when the track of the beam was observed through an eye-glass,
the 108) which a moment ago was optically continuous, was in-
stancy ^Arred by those lustrous little spots, and around each of
them the formation and growth of ite associated flower could be
distinctly observed.

ThR maximum effect was conflned to a space of about an inch
from the place at which the beam first struck the ice. In this
space the absorption, which resolved the ice into liquid flowers,



^6 APPESDEL TO LBOTOBB EL

for tiie mo0t part took fdaoe, bat I baye traced the eflbct to a
depth of sereral inches in large blocks of ice.

At a distance, ho werer, fiom the point of incidence, the spaces
between the flowers became greater ; and it was no nnoonunon
thing to see flowers deyeloped in planes a quarter of an inch
apart, while no change whateyer was observed in the ice between
these planes.

The pieces of ice experimented on appeared to be quite homo-
genous, and their transparency was yery perfect Why, then, did
the substance yield at particular points ? Were they weak points
of crystalline structure, or did the yielding depend upon the man-
ner in which the calorific wayes impinged upon the mcdecules of
the body at these points ? Howeyer these and other questicms
may be answered, the experiments haye an important bearing
upon the question of absorption. In ice the absorption which
produces the flower is fitful, and not continuous ; and there is no
reason to suppose that in other solids the case is not the same,
though their constitution may not be such as to reyeal it.'*'

I haye applied the term ^ bubbles ' to the little Imght disks in
the middle of the fiowers, simply because they resembled the lit-
tle air-globules entrapped in the ice ; but whether they contained
air or not could only be decided by experiment.

Pieces of ice were therefore prepared, through which the sun--
beams were sent, so as to deyelope the ^wers in considerable
quantity and magnitude. These pieces were then dipped into
warm water contained in a glass yessel, and the effect, when the
melting reached the bright spots, was carefhlly obseryed through
a lens. The moment a liquid connection toas estMiahed between them
cmd the atmosphere^ the bubbles mddenly eoUwpeedj and no trace of
aAr rote to the wrface of the warm water.

This is the result which ought to be expected. The yolume
of water at 82° being less than that <3i ice at the same tempera-
ture, the formation of each flower ought to be attended with the
formation of a yacuum, which disappears in the manner described
when the ice surrounding it is melted.

* Notwithstanding the incomparable diathennancy of the substance, M.
Knoblauch finds that when plates of rocksalt are thick enough, they always
exhibit an elective absorption. Effects like those above described may
possibly be the cause of this.



UQTTID DISKS IN lOB. 337

Similar experiments were made with ice, in which tme air-
bubbles were enclosed. When the melting liberated the air, the
bubbles rose slowly through the liquid, and floated for a time
upon its snr&ce.

Exposure for a second, or even less, to the action of the sun
was sufficient to develope the flowers in the ice. The flrst appear-
ance of the central star of light was often accompanied by an au-
dible clink, as if the substance had been suddenly ruptured. The
edges of the petals were at the commencement definitely curved ;
but when the action was permitted to continue, and sometimes even
without this, when the sun was strong, the edges of the petals be-
came serrated, the beauty of the figure being thereby augmented.

Sometimes a number of elementary flowers grouped together
to form a thickly-leaved cluster resembing a rose. Here and there
also amid the flowers a liquid hexagon might be observed, but
such were of rare occurrence.

The act of crystalline dissection, if I may use the term, thus
performed by the solar beams, is manifestly determined by the
manner in which the crystalline forces have arranged the mole-
cules. By the abstraction of heat the molecules are enabled to
build themselves together, by the introduction of heat this archi-
tecture is taken down. The perfect symmetry of the flowers, from
which there is no deviation, argues a similar symmetry in the
molecular architecture ; and hence, as optical phenomena depend
upon the molecular arrangement, we might pronounce with per-
fect certainty from the foregoing experiments, that ice is, what
Sir David Brewster long ago proved it to be, optically speaking,
uniaxal, the axis being perpendicular to the surface of freezing.

On September 25, while examining a perfectly transparent
piece of Norway ice, which had not been traversed by the con-
densed sunbeams, I found the interior of the mass crowded with
parallel liquid disks, varying in diameter from the tenth to the
hundredth of an inch. These disks were so thin, that when looked
at in section they were reduced to the finest lines. They had the
exact appearance of the circular spots of oily scum which float on
the sur&ce of mutton broth, and in the pieces of ice first exam-
ined they always lay in the planes of freezing.



838 AFPEHPIZ TO LSOTUBB DL

Ab time prograwed, tfaii internal diBintBgration of the ioe ap-
peared to become more pronounced, eo that some pieces of Nor-
way ice examined in the middle a£ HJORrember aj^eared to be re-
duced to a congeries of water-cells entangled in a dieteton of ioe^
The effect of thk was rendered manifest to the hand tm sawing a
block of this ice, by the &cllity with which the saw went
through it.

There seems to be no snch thing as absolute homogeneity in
nature. Change commences at distinct c^itres, instead of being
uniformly and continuously distributed, and in the most appar-
ently homogeneous substance we should dJscoyer deiGBcts, if our
means of observation were fine enough* The aboTe Observations
i^ow that BCMne portions of a mass of ioe melt more readily than
others. The melting temperature of the substance is set down at
82° Fahr., but the absence of perfect homogeneity, whether from
difference of crystalline texture or some otiier cause, makes the
melting temperature oscillate to a slight extent on both sides of
the ordinary standard. Let this limit, expressed in parts (^ a de«
gree, be t. Some parts of a block of ice will melt at a tempera-
ture of 83 — e, while others require a t^tnp^rature of 82-^^ : the
consequence is, that such a blodk raised to the temperature of 82°^
Will have some of its parts Hquid, and others solid.

When a mass exhilnting the water-disks was examined by a
concentrated sunbeam, the six-leaved flowers before referred to
were(UiDaysfar7n^mtheplcmeeofthedisk9»

* * 1|C « ♦ « «

§ni

What has been already said will prepare us for the considera-
tion of an associated class of phenomena of great physical inter-
est. The larger masses of ice which I examined exhibited layers,
in which bubbles of air were collected in unuusal quantity, mark-
ing, no doubt, the limits of successive acts of freezing. Ibese
bubbles were usually elongated. Between two such be^r^ bub-
bles a clear stratum of ice intervened ; and a clear^fiur&ce layer,
which, from its appearance, seemed to have suffered more from
external influences than the rest c^ the ice, was associated with,
each block. In this supeiflcial portion I observed detached air-
bubbles irregularly distributed, and associated with each veside



IMTEBlf AL UQITEFACnON. 829

of air, a bleb of water wldcb bad tbe appearaace of a drop of dear
oil within tbe solid. The adjacent figure will give a notion of
these oompodte cayities : the imshaded m-'
derepres^ts the air-bubble, and the shaded mm:l^^y^>^>^^>>>^4^
9paee acyaeeot^ the water* P M |

Whwi the quantity of water was suffi- P ^^ |

dently Iwge, which was usually the case, on W /^ |

turning the ice round, the bubHe ^lifted its m *^ 4

position, ridng always at the top of the bleb W///////////////M^^^^^^
of water. ScMuetimes, howerer, the cell was
Tery flat, and the air was then quite surrounded by the liquid.
These composite cells often occurred in pellucid ice, which showed
inwardly no otheor sign of disintegration.

This is manifestly the same phenomencm as that which struck
M. Agassiz so fordbly during his ealier investigations on the ^*
der of the Aar. The sanw appearances have been described by
Uie Messrs. Schlagintwdt, and finally attention has been forcibly
drawn to the subject in a recent paper by Mr. Huxley, published
in the ^Philosophical Magazine.' ♦

The only explanation of this phenomenon hitherto given^ and
adopted apparently without hesitation, is that of M. Agassiz and
the Messrs. Schlaglntweit. These obseryers sd^tribute the phe*
nomenon to the diathermancy of the ice, which permits the radit
9Dt heat to pass through the substimce, to heat the bubbles of air,
and cause them to melt the surrounding ice.t

Th^ apparent simplicity of this explanation contributed to
ensure its general aoc^tance ; and yet :I think a little reflection
will show that the hypothesis simple as it may appear, ia attend*
ed with graye dificulties.

For the sake of distinctness I will here refer to a most interests
ing fiKt^ observed first by M. Agassiz, and afterwards by the Messrs.
Scihlagintweit. In the ' Systdme Glaciaire ' it is described in these

• October, 186Y.

f n est ^dent pour quiconque a sairi leprogr^ d6 la physique mo-
deme, que ce ph4Qom6ne est d6 uniquement ^ la diathennanoit^ de la
^ace (Agassiz, Systtoe, p. 167).

Das Wasser ist dadurch enstanden dass die Luft Wfirmestrahlen absor-
birie, weldie das Eis als diathermaner Eorper durdiliess (Schlagintweit,
Untof8achuDg.eD, S. 17).



880 AFPEHBIZ TO LBOTDBB IX.

words: *I ought also to mention a angular property of those
air-babbles, which at first strack us forciUy, but which has since
receyied a yeiy satisfactory explanation. When a fragment con-
taining air-bubbles is exposed to the action of the sun, the bab-
bles augment insensibly. Boon, in proportion as they enlarge, a
transparent drop shows itself at some point of the bubble. This
drop, in enlarging, contributes oa its part to the enlargement of
the cayity, and following its progress a little, it finishes by pre-
dominating oyer the babble of air. The latta* th^i swims in the
midst of a zone of water, and tends incessantly to readi the most
eleyated point, at least if the fiatness of the cayity does not hin-
der it'

The satisfiictory explanation here spoken of is that already
mentioned : let us now endeayour to follow the hypothesis to its
consequences.

Comparing equal weights of both substances, the specific heat
of water being 1, that of air is 0*25. Hence to raise a pound of
water one degree of temperature, a pound of air would haye to
lose four d^rees.

Let us next compare equal yolumes of the substances. The
specific grayity of water being 1, that of the air is ^^ ; hence a
pound of air is 770 times the yolume of a pound of water ; and
hence, for a quantity of air to raise U$ aum wlfume of water one
degree, it must part with 770x4, or 8,080 degrees of temperature.

Now the latent heat of water is Ud'O"" Fahr., hence the quan-
tity of heat required to melt a certain weight of ice is 142*6 times
the quantity required to raise the same weight of wat^ one de-
gree in temperature ; hence, a measure of ur, in order to reduce
its own yolume of ice to the liquid condition, must lose 8,080 x
142*6, or 489,208 degrees of temperature.

This, then, giyes us an idea of the amount of heat which, ao-
cording to the aboye hypothesis, is absorbed by the bubble and
communicated to the ice during the time occupied in melting a
quantity of the latter equal in yolume to the bubble, which time
is stated to be brief; that is to say the quantity of heat supposed
to be absorbed by the air would, if it had not been communicated
to the ice, haye been sufficient to raise the bubble itself to a tem-
perature 160 times that of fhsed cast iron. Had air this power
of absorption, it might be attended with inconyeni^it conse-



ASSOOIATfiD BUBBLES OF AIB ASD WATEB. 331

qnences to the denizens of the earth ; for we ahoiild dwell at the
bottom of an atmospheric ocean, the upper strata of which would
eflfectnally arrest all calorific radiation.

It is established by the experiments of Delaroche and Mel-
lon!,* that a calorific beam, emergmg from any medimn' which it
has traversed for any distance, possesses, in an exalted degree,
the power of passing through an additional length of the same
substance. Absorption takes place, for the most part, in the por-
tion of the medium first trayersed by the rays. In tiie case of a
plate of glass, for example, 17^ per cent, of the heat proceeding
from a lamp, is absorbed in the first fifth of a millimetre ; where-
as, after the rays have passed through 6 millimetres of the sub-
stance, an additional distance of 2 millimetres absorbs less than 2
per cent, of the rays thus transmitted. Supposmg the rays to
haye passed through a plate 25 millimetres, or an inch, in thick-
ness, there is no doubt that the heat emergmg from such a plate
would pass through a second layer of glass, 1 millimetre thick,
without suffering any measurable absorption. For an incompar-
ably stronger reason, the quantity of solar heat absorbed by a
bubble of air at the earth's surface, after the rays haye trayersed
the whole thickness of our atmosphere, and been sifted in their
passage through it, mut be wholly inappreciable.

Such, if I mistake not, are the properties of radiant heat which
modem physics haye revealed ; and I think they render it evident
that the hypothesis of M. Agassiz and the Messrs. Sdilagintweit
was accepted without due regard to its consequences.

But the question still remains, how are the water-chambers
produced within the ice ? . . . One simple test will, I think, de-
cide the question whether the liquid is, or is not, the product of
melted ice. If it be, its volume must be less than that of the ice
which produced it, and the bubble associated with the water mutt
he composed of ra/r^fUd air. Hence, if on establishing a liquid con-
nection between tliis bubble and the atmosphere a diminution of

* La Thermodirose, p. 202.



883 Apnannx to ubotusb ix.

Tolmiie be obserred, lids will indicate tint ihe water kas beea
produced bj the meltiiig of the ice.

From a block of Norway ice, onotainiiig sodi eompoond bub*
bles, I cut a priam, and immeniiig it in warm water, contained in
a f^saa Teasel, I careftilly watched through tiie side <^ tine reaael
the effect of the mdtingiqpon the bubbles. I^ imMrMfy ahnuii
in wHwme at the moment ibe Munromnding ice woe meitedj and die
dimimdied g^bnks of air roae to the sorfiMe of the watof: I
tiien arranged matters so tliat the wall of the cayitj mi^t be
melted away underneath, without permitting the babble of air at
the tqp to eao^. At the moment the meltmg reached the cavity
the air-babblea instanl^ collapeed to a sphere possessing, in some
eases, fiur less Uian tiw hnndredth part of its maginal Tolvme;
The experimenta were repeated with seyeral distinct masses c^ice^
and always witiL the same result I think, therefore, it may be
regarded as certain that the liquid cells are tiie product of mdted
ice.*

Oonaidering the manner in which ice imported into this oomse
try is protected fix>m the solar rays, I think we must infer that in
the qiedmens examined byme,t^i06 m contact toUh iAehMe
ha$ lee» meked ^ heatj wM^ ha$ deen conducted through the ««(-
itanee without visible prejudice to ite eolidity.

Paradoxical as this may i^pear, I think it is no more than
might reasonably be expected from d priori cfmsiderations. The
heat of a body is referred, at the iN:esent day, to a motion:of its
particles. When this motion reaches an intensity suffici^t to
liberate the particles of a solid from their mutual attractions, the
body passes into the liquid condition. Now, as r^ards the
amount of motion necessary to produce this liberty of liquidity,
the particles at the surface of a mass of ice must be rery different-
ly circumstanced from those in the interior, which are influenced
and controlled on every side by other particles. But if we sup*
pose a cavity to exist within the mass, the particles bounding that
cavity will be. in a state resembling that of the particles at the
sur&ee; and by the removal of all opposing action on ghq side^
the molecules may be liberated by a force which the surroundini^
mass has tnoiamitted with<(Hit pn^udice to its aolidity. 8uppQ»-.

* This of course refcas adj tp Ihe lake ioe examined as described.



i&g^ for example, l&at soticKty is limited by in<^eciilar Tibn^tioiis
of a certain amplitude, those at the sar&ce of the intemal caviiy
may exceed tins limit, while those between the cavity and the ex-
ternal sorface of the ice may, by their recqirocal actions, be pre-
usi^ed witlnn it, just as the terminal member of a series of elastio
bails is detached by a foEce which has been irimsmitted by the
ottier members of ihe series without yisibie sepu^tion.'i'
f Where, howeva*, expedn^nt is within reach we ought not to
frost to 8pe^ati<m ; and I was partioidarly anxious to obtain an
UiiequiTocal reply to the question whether an interior portion of
a mass of ice could be mdted by heat whidi had passed through
fte substance by the process of condueUan. A piece of Korway
ioe^ containing a great nun^^ of the liqtiid disks already de^
(Maibed, and sev^al cells of air and water, was enveloped in tia^
jfoil ai»l |daced in a mixture of pounded ice and salt. A few
minutes sufficed to freose the disks to thin dusky circles, whidi
a^>eared, in some cases, to be formed of concentric rk^s, and
reminded me of the sections df certain agates. Looked at side-
ways, these disks were no thicker than a fine line. The water-
ecdls were also frozen, and the associated air-bubbles were greatly
diminii^ied in size. I plaoed the maias of ice between me and a
gas-light, and observed it through a lens : aft^ some time the
disks and water-cells showed s^ns of Inreaking up. The rings of
tiM disks dkappeared ; the contents seemed to aggregate so as to
form larger liquid spots^ and finally^ some 6f them were reduced
to clear transparent disks as before.

But an objection to this experiment is, that the ice may have
been lique^d by the radiation from the lamp, and I have experi*
ments to describe which will show the justice of this objection^
A rectangular slab, 1 inch thick, 9 inches long, and 2 wide, was
therefore taken from a mass of Norway ice, in which the associat-
ed air and water-cells were very distinct. I enyeloped it iu tin-
foil, and placed it in a freezing mixture. In about ten minutes
the water-blebs were completely frozen within the mass. It was
immediately placed in a dark room, where no radiant heat could
possibly affect it, and examined every quarter of an hour. The
dim frozen spots gradually broke up into little water parcels, and

* Of oonrse I intend this to help the conception merely.



884 AFFEHBIX TO LBC^nTBB DL

in two honn the water-blebB were perfectly restored in the centre
of the 8lab of ice. Wh^i last examined, this plate was half an
inch thick, and the drops of liqnid were seen right at its centre.

A second piece, similarly frozen and wrapped up in flannel,
showed the same deportment. In an hour and a half the toata.
water snrroimding the air-bubbles was restored to its liquid con-
dition. Hence no doubt can remain as to the possibility of effect-
ing lique&ction in the interior of a mass of ice, by heat which
.has passed by eonchution through the substance without melting it

I have already referred to the formation of the liquid cayities
observed by M. Agassiz, when glacier ice was exposed to the sun.
The same e£fect may be produced by exposure to a glowing coal
fire. On the 21st and 22nd of November, I thus exposed plates
of clear Wenham Lake ice, which contained aome scattered air-
bubbles. At first the bubbles were sharply rounded, and without
any trace of water. Boon, however, those near the sur&ce, on
which the radiant heat fell, appeared encircled by a liquid ring,

©which expanded and finally became crimped at its border,
as shown in the adjacent figure. The crimping became
more pronounced as the action was permitted to continue.*
A second plate, crowded with bubbles, was held as near to the
fire as the hand could bear. On withdrawing it, and examining
it through a pocket lens, the appearance was perfectly beaittifuL
In many cases the bubbles appeared to be surrounded by a series
of concentric rings, the outer ring surrounding all the others like
a crimped frill.

I could not obtain these effects by placing the ice in contact
with a plate of metal obscurely heated;)- nor by the radiation from
an obscure source. Indeed ice, as before remarked, is impervious
to radiant heat from such a source.} The rays from a common

* The blebs observed in glacier ice also exhibit this form: see fig. 8,
plate 6, of the Atlas to the * Syst^me Glaciaire.' In fig. 18 we have also a
close resemblance of the flower-shaped figures produced by radiant heat in
lake ice.

f To develope water-cavities within ice a conmderable time is necessary ;
more time, indeed, than was sufficient to melt the entire pieces of ice made
use of in these contact experiments.

X Hence the soundness of the ice under the monunes ; the sun's rays
are converted into obscure heat by the overlying debris ; this only affects a



BBGELATIOlf. 335

fbre also are wholly absorbed near the snrfisu^e upon which they
strike^ and hence the described internal UqueJ&ction was confined
to a thin layer dose to this surface.

But not only does liqae£etction occur in connection with the
bubMes, but the ' flowers,' already described as produced by the
scdar beams, start by hundreds into existence, when a slab of
transparent ice is placed before a glowing coal fire. They, how-
eyer, are also confined to a thin stratum of the substance close to
the surfitce of incidence. In the experiments made in this way,
the central e^sis of the flowers were often bounded by sinuous
lines of great beauty.

The foregoing considerations show that liqueflu^on takes
place at the surfiice of a mass of ice at a lower temperature than
that required to liquefy the interior of the solid. At the surface
the temperature 8d° produces a vibration, to produce which, with-
in the ice, would necessitate a temperature of 82° +^ ; the incre-
ment X being the additional temperature necessary to oyercome
the resistance to lique&ction, arising fix>m the action of the mole*
cules upon each other.

Now let us suppose two pieces of ice at 82°, with moistened
sor&ces, to be brought into contact with each other, tM thereby
wtudUy tranter the touching p&rtums of iihese pieces from the «ur*
face to the interior ^ where 82+ a; is the melting temperature,
lique&ction will therefore be arrested at those sur£EM:es. Before
being brought together, the surfaces had the motion of liquidity,
but the interior of the ice has not this motion ; and as equilibrium
will soon set in between the masses on each side of the liquid film
and the film itself, the film will be reduced to a state of motion
inconsistent with liquidity. In other words^ it mU he frozen, and
toiU cement the Ueo surfaces of ice "between which it is enclosed,* •

If I am right here, the importance of the physical principles

layer of infinitesimal depth, and cannot produce the difflnt^ration of the
deeper ice, as the direct sunbeams can.

* It is here implied that the contact of the moist surfaces must be so
perfect, or, in other words, the liquid film between them must be so thin,
as to enable the molecules to act upon each other across it The extreme
tenuity of the film may be inferred from this. A thick plate of water
within the ice would facilitate rather than retard liquefiM^on.



886 AFPENDiX TO LBOTDBE DL

involved are snfSciently manifest : if I am irrong, I hope I have
80 ezpreaeed myBeif as to raider the detection of my error easy.
Right or wrong, my aim has been to give as explicit utterance to
my meaning as the subject will admit ot

IV.

Mr. Faimday'seKperiments on the fteeiang together of i^eoes of
ice at 83^ Fahr., and all of those reoomited in the paper published
by Mr. Huxley and myself find their explanation in the principles
here laid down. The conversion of snow into n^v§, and of n^ri
mto glacier, is pefhaps the grandest illustration of the same prin-
dpte. It has been, however, suggested to me that the sticking
together of two pieces of ice may be an act of cohesion, similar to
that which enables pieces of wetted glass, and other similar
bodies, to stick together. This is not the case. There is no slid-
ing motion possible to the ice. When contact is Inoken, it breaks
with the snap due to the rupture of a solid. Glass and ice cannot
be made to stick thus together, neither can glass and glass, n(«
ahnn and alum, nor nitre and nitafe, at common temperatures. I
have, moreover, placed pieces <^ice together over night and found
them in the morning so rigidly frozen together that when I sought
to separate them, the sur&ce of fracture passed through cme of
Ihem in preference to taking the surfkce of regelation. Many
saEgacious persons have also suggested to me that the ice trans-
ported to this country firom Norway and Wenham Lake may pos-
rfbly retain a residue of its cold, sufficient to fireeze a thin film
enclosed between two pieces of the substance. But the facts al-
ready adverted to are a sufficient reply to this surmise. The ice
experimented on cannot be regarded as a magazine of cold, lecmtde
parede of liquid water exist vsUkin it.



LECTURE X,

[March 21, 1862.]

ABSOBPTION OF HEAT BT GASIOUS MATTIV^-APPABJLTUB IMPLOTED— XABLT
DimCULTISS — ^DIATHERMANCT OF AIR AND OF THK TRANSPARENT ELE-
MENTARY GASES — ^ATHERMANCT (OPACITT) OF OLEFIANT 0A8 AND OF THE
COMPOUND OASES — ^ABSORPTION OF RADIANT HEAT BT TAPOURS — RADIA-
TION OF HEAT BT OASES — ^REOIPROCITT OF RADIATION AND ABSORPTION
—INFLUENCE OF MOLECULAR CONSTITUTION ON THE PASSAGE OF RA-
DL^NT HEAT.

IN our last lecture we examined the diathermancy, or
transparency to heat, of solid and liquid bodies ; and we
liien learned, tliat closely as the atoms of such bodies are
packed together, the interstitial spaces between the atoms
afford, in many cases, free play and passage to the ethereal
undulations, which were transmitted without sensible hin-
drance among the atoms. In other cases, however, we
found that the molecules stopped the waves of heat which
impinged upon them; but that in so doing, they them-
selves became centres of oscillation. Thus we learned that
while perfectly diathermic bodies allowed the waves of
heat to pass through them without suffering any change of
temperature, those bodies which stopped the calorific flux
became heated by the absorption. Through ice, itself, we
sent a powerful calorific beam ; but as the beam was of
such a quality as not to be intercepted by the ice, it passed
through this highly sensitive substance without melting it.
We have now to deal with gaseous bodies ; and here the
interatomic spaces are so vastly augmented, the molecules
15



888 LBonnoB z.

are so oompletdy released from all mntnal entanglement,
that we should be almost justified in condading that gases
and Taponrs famish a perfectly open door for the passage
of the calorific waves. This, indeed, mitil quite recently,
was tke miiversal belief, and the condosiim was verified by
such experiments as had been made on atmospheric ab,
which was fonnd to give no evidence of absorption.

But each succeeding year augments our experimental
powers ; our predecessors were often obliged to fight with
flints, where we may use swords, and hence the conflict
with Nature is not decided by their discomfiture. Let us,
then, test once more the diathermancy of atmospheric air.
We may make a preliminary essay in the following way :
I have here a hdlow tin cylmder a b (fig. 89), 4 feet long,
and nearly 3 inches in diameter, through which we may
send our calorific rays. We must, however, be able to com-
pare the passage of the rays through the air, with their
passage through a vacuum, and hence we must have some
means of stopping the ends of our cylinder, so as to be
able to exhaust it. Here we encounter our first experi-
mental difficulty. As a general rule obscure heat is more
greedily absorbed than luminous heat, and as our object is
to make the absorption of a highly diathermic body sensi-
ble, we are most likely to effect this object by employing
obscure heat.

Our tube, therefore, must be stopped by a substance
which permits of the free passage of such heat. Shall we
use glass for the purpose ? An inspection of the table at
page 311 shows us, that for such rays ])lates of glass would
be perfectly opaque ; we might as well stop our tube wit^
plates of metal. Observe here how an investigator's results
are turned to account by his successors. From one experi-
ment buds another, eaxd science grows by the continual deg-
radation of ends to means. Had not Melloni discovered
the diathermic properties of rocksalt, we should now be ut-



FIB8T EZPEBDCENTB WiTU GASES.



339



tedy at a^ loss. For a time, however, I was exta*emely ham-
pered by the difficulty of obtaming plates of salt suffidently
large and pore to stop the ends of my tube» Bat a scientific
worker does not long lack help, and, thanks to such friend*
ly aid, I have here plates of this precious substance which,
by means of these caps, I can screw air-tight on to the ends

Fig. 89.


of my cylinder * You observe two stopcocks attached to
the cylinder ; this one, c, is connected with an air-pmnp, by



* At a time when I was greatly in need of a supply of rocksalt, I stated
my wants in the ' Philosophical Magazine,' and met with an immediate re-
sponse from Sir John Herschel. He sent me a block of salt, accompanied
by a note, from which, as it refers to the purpose for which the salt was
originally designed, I will make an extract. I have not yet been able to
examine the extremely remarkable point to which the eminent writer di-
rects my attention. I am also greatly indebted to Dr. Szabo, the Hunga-
rian Commisffloner to the International Exhibition, by whom I have been
lately raised to comparative opulence, as regards the possession of rocksalt.
To the Messrs. Fletcher, of Northwich, and to Mr. Corbett, of Bronui-
grove, my best thanks are also due for their obliging kindness.

Here follows the extract from Sir J. HersdiePs note : — * After the publi-
cation of my paper in the Phil. Trans., 1840, 1 was very desirous to disen-
gage myself from the influence of glass prisms and lenses, and ascertain, if
possible, whether in reality my insulated heatspots /ly 9c in the spectrum



840 LBOTUBB Z.

wliidi the tabe can be exhausted ; iHdle fhrou^ Hiis oihor
one, o', I can allow air or any other gas to enter the tube.

At one end of the cylinder I place this Leslie's cube €,
containing boiling water ; and which is coated with lamp-
black, to angm^it its power of radiation. At the other ^id
of the cylinder stands our thermo-electric pile, from whidi
wires lead to the galyanometer. Between the end of the
cylinder and the source of heat I have introduced a tin
screen, t, whidi, when withdrawn, will allow the calcmfic
rays to pass through the tube to the pile. We first exhaust
the cylinder, then draw the screen a little aade, and now
the rays are traversing a yacuum and falling upon the pile.
The tin screen, you observe, is cmly partially withdrawn,
and the steady deflection produced by the heat at present
transmitted is 80 degrees.

Let us now admit dry air : I can do so by means of the
cock o', from which a piece of flexible tubing leads to the
b^t tubes Vj v\ Hie use of whidi I will now explam ; u is
filled with fragments of pumice stone moistened with a so-
lution of caustic potash ; it is destined to withdraw what-

were of solar or terresUal origin. Rocksalt was the obvious resource, and
after many and fruitless endeavours to obtain sufficiently large and pure
specimens, the late Dr. Somerville was so good as to send me (as I under-
stood from a friend in Cheshire) the very fine hlotk which I now forward.
It is, however, much cracked, but I have no doubt pieces laige enough for
lenses and prisms (especially if cemented together) might be got from it*

* But I was not pfepared for the working of it— evidently a very delicate
and difficult process, (I proposed to dissolve off the comers, &c., and, as it
were, lick it into Aape) and thou^ I have never quite lost sight of the
matter, I have not yet been able to do anything with it : meanwhile, I put
it by. On looking at it a year or two after, I was dismayed to find it had
lostmudi by deliquescence. Accordingly, I potted it up in salt in an
earthen dish, with iron rim, and placed it on an upper shelf ina room with
an Amott stove, where it has remained ever since.

* If you should find it of any use I would ask you, if posmble, to repeat
my experiment as described, and settle that point, whidi has always struck
me as a Tery important one.'



BEFBOrS OF METHOD. 841

ever carbonio add may be oontained in the air ; u' is a sim-
ilar tube, filled with fragments of pumice stone moistened
with sulphuric acid ; it is intended to absorb the aqueous
yapour of the air. Thus the air reaches the cylinder de-
jnived both of its aqueous vapour and its carbonic acid. It
is now entering, — ^the mercury-gauge of the pump is de-
scending, and as it enters I would beg of you to observe
the needle. If the entrance of ike air diminish the radia-
tion through the cylinder— if air be a substance which is
ocHnpetent to destroy the waves of ether in any sensible
degree — ^this will be declared by the diminished deflection
of the galvanometer. The tube is now full, but you see no
change in the position of the needle, nor could you see any
change even if you were dose to the instrument. The air
thus examined seems as transparent to radiant heat as the
vacuum itself.

By dianging the screen I can alter the amount of heat
falling upon the pile ; thus, by withdrawing it, I can cause
the needle to stand at 40"", 50% 60% 70"" and SO"" in sncces-
don ; and while it occupies eadi position I can repeat the
experiment which I have just performed before you. In
no instance could you recognize the slightest movement of
the needle. The same is the case if I push the screen for-
ward, so as to reduce the deflection to 20 and 10 degrees.

The experiment just made is a question addressed to
Nature, and her dlence might be construed into a negative
reply. But a natural philosopher must not lightly accept a
negative, and I am not sure that we have put our question
in tiie best possible language. Let us analyse what we
have done, and first condder the case of our smallest de-
flection of 10 degrees. Supposing that the air is not per-
fectly diathermic ; that it really intercepts a small portion
— say the thousandth part of the heat passing through the
tube— that out of every thousand rays it struck down one ;
should we be able to detect this execution ? This absoip-



S4S LBOTUBB Z.

tion, if it took j^ek^ would lowet the deflection the thoi»-
sandth part of ten degrees, or the hundredth part of one
degree, a diminution which it would be impossible for 7011
to see, even if you were dose to the galvanometer.* In
the case here supposed, the total quarUtty of heat faUing
upon the pile ie so inconsiderable, that a smaU fiuction of
itj even if ahsorbeA, might nodi escape detection.

But we have not confined ourselves to a small quantity
of heat ; the result was the same when the deflection was
60^ as when it was 10°. Here I must ask you to sharpen
your attention and accompany me, for a time, over rather
difficult ground. I want now to make clearly intelligible
to you an important peculiarity of the galvanometer.

The needle being at zero, let us suppose a quantity of
heat to fall iq>on the pile, sufficient to produce a deflection
of one degree. Suppose that I afterwards augment the
quantity of heat, so as to produce deflections of two de-
grees, three degrees, four degrees, five degrees; I then
know that the quantities of heat which produce these de-
flections stand to each other in the ratios of 1 : 2 : S : 4 : 5 ;
the quantity of heat which produces a deflection of 6° be-
ing exactly five times t^at which produces a deflection of
1°. But this proportionality exists only so long as the de-
flections do not exceed a certain magnitude. For, as the
needle is drawn more and more aside from zero, the cur-
rent acts upon it at an ever augmenting disadvantage.
The case b illustrated by a sailor working a capstan ; he
always applies his strength at right angles to the lever,
for, if he applied it obliquely, only a portion of that strength
would be effective in turning the capstan round. And in
the case of our electric current, when the needle is very
oblique to the current's direction, only a portion of its force

*It will be borne in mind that I am here speaking of ^a/ifanatit«(rtc
not of ikernumetrie degrees.



BELATIOK OF BSFLBOnOOET TO AB80BPTI0N. 843

18 effective in moTing the neecBe round. Thns it happens,
that though the quantity of heat may be, and, in our case,
is, accurately expressed by the strength of the current
which it excites, still the larger deflections, inasmudb as
they do not give us the action of the whole current, but
only of a part of it, cannot be a true measure of the
amount of heat falling upon the pile.

The galvanometer now before you is so constructed
that the angles of deflection, up to 30° or thereabouts, are
proportional to the quantities of hetA ; the quantity neces-
sary to move the needle from 30° to 31° is nearly the same
88 that required to move it from 0° to 1°. But beyond 30°
the proportionality ceases. The quantity of heat required
to move the needle from 40° to 41° is three times that ne-
cessary to move it from 0° to 1° ; to deflect it from 60° to
61° requires five times the heat necessary to move it from
0° to 1° ; to deflect it from 60° to 61° requires about ten
times the heat necessary to move it from 0° to 1° ; to de-
flect it from 70° to 71° requires nearly twenty times, while
to move it from 80° to 81° requires more than fifty tunes
the heat necessary to move it from 0° to 1°. Thus, the
higher we go, the greater is the quantity of heat represent-
ed by a degree of deflection ; the reason being, that the
force which then moves the needle is only a fraction of the
force really circulating in the wire, and hence represents
only a fraction of the heat falling iq)on the pile.

By a certain process, which I will not stop here to de-
scribe,* I can express the higher degrees in terms of the
lower ones ; I thuft learn, that while deflections of 10°, 20°,
80°, respectively, express quantities of heat represented by
the numbers 10, 20, 30, a deflection of 40° represents a
quantity of heat expressed by the number 47 ; a deflection
of 50° expresses a quantity of heat expressed by the num-

* See Appendix to Lecture X.



844 LBCfTUBK X.

ber 80 ; while the defleetions 60% 70^, 80^, express quan-
tities of heat which increase in a much more rapid ratio
than the deAed&OfDB themselves.

What is the iqMshot of this analysis ? It will driye ns,
I think, to a better method of qaestimiing Nature. It leads
to the reflection that, when we make onr angles $maUy the
qoanttty of heat ftlling on the i»le is so inconsiderable, that
even if a feactioQ of it were absorbed, it might escape de-
tecti(» ; while, if we make our deflections large, by em-
ploying a powerful flax of heat, the needle is in a poriticm
from which it would require a considerable addition or
abstraction of heat, to move it. The 1,000th part of the
whole radiation in the one case would be too small, abso-
lutely, to be measured ; the 1,000th part in the other case
might be something c<«siderable, without, however, being
considerable enough to affect the needle in any sensible de-
gree. When, for example, the deflection is over 80^, an
augmentation or diminution of heat, equivalent to 15 or 20
of the lower degrees of the galvanometer, would be scarce-
ly measurable.

We are now face to face with our problem ; it is this,
to work with a flux of heat so large thata small fractional
part of it will not be infinitesimal, and still to keep our
needle in its most sensitive position. If we can accom-
plish this we shall augment indefinitely our experimental
power. If a fitustion of the heat, however small, be inter-
cepted by the gas, we can augment the absolute vcUue of
thcajVadhn by augmenting the total of which it is a frao-
tion.

The problem, happily, admits of an effective practical
soluti<Hi. You know that when we allow heat to faHH upon
the <^posite faces of the thermo-electric pile, the currents
generated neutralise each other more or less ; and, if the
quantities of heat falling upon the two faces be perfectly
equal, the neutralisation is complete. Our gfdvanometer



DfFBOYSD AFPABATUB. 845

needle is now deflected to 80^ by the flnx of heat passing
through the tube ; I uncover the second face of the pile,
famish it with its conical reflector, and place a second cube
of boiling water in front of it ; the needle, as you see, de-
scends instantly.

By means of a proper adjusting screen I can so regulate
the quantity of heat falling upon the posterior face of the
pile, that it shall exactly neutralise the heat incident upcm
its other face : this is now effected ; and the needle points
to zero.

Here, then, we have two powerful and perfectly equal
fluxes of heat, falUng upon the opposite faces of the pile,
one of which passes through our exhausted cylinder. If I
allow air to enter the cylinder, and if this air exert any ap*
preciable action upon the rays of heat, the equality now
existing will be destroyed ; a portion of the rays passing
throu^ the tube being struck down by the air, the second
source of heat will triumph ; the needle, now in its most
sensitiye position, will be defleoted ; and from the magni-
tude of the deflection we can accurately calculate the ab-
sorption.

I have thus sketched, in rough outline, the apparatus by
which our researches on the relation of radiant heat to
gaseous matter must be conducted. The necessary tests
are, however, at the same time so powerful and so delicate,
that a rough apparatus like that just described would not
answer our purpose. But you will now experi^ace no diffi-
culty in comprehending the construction and application of
the more perfect apparatus, with which the experiments on
gaseous absorption and radiation have been actually made.
See Plate I., at the end of the volume.

Between s and s' stretches the eaperimental cylmier^ a

hollow tube of brass, polished within ; at s, and s', are the

plates of rock salt which dose the cylinder air-tight ; the

length from s to s', in the experiments to be first recorded,

15*



846 UDoroKB x

b 4 feet» o, the souroe of best, is a cube of oast cq)pef^
filled with water, which is kept oontiniially boiling by the
lamp L. Attached to the cdbe o by brasmg is the short
cylinder r, of the same diameter as ^e experimental cyln^
der, and cq>able of being connected air-tight with the lat-
ter at 8. Thus between the source o and the end s' of the
experimental tube, we have the front chamber f, from
which the air can be removed, so that the rays from the
source will enter the cylinder s s' unsifted. To prevent
the heat from the source c passing by conduction to the
plate at s, the chamber f is caused to pass throi^h the
vessel V, in which a stream of cold water continually drco-
lates, entering through the pipe 1 1 , which dips to the bot*-
torn of the vessel, and esci^mg through the waste-pipe e e.
The experimental tube fmd the front chamber are connect-
ed, independently, with the air-pump ▲ a, so that either of
them may be exhausted or filled without interfering with
the other. I may remark that in later arrangements the
experimental cylinder was supported apart from the pump,
being connected with the latter by a flexible tube. The
tremulous motion of the pump, which occurred when the
connection was rigid; was thus completely avoided.

* p is the thermo-electric pile, placed on its stand at the
end of the experimental tube, and furnished with its two
conical reflectors, c' is the compensating cube^ used to
neutralise the radiation from c ; h is the O/Cfjusting screen^
which is capable of an exceedingly fine motion to and fro.
N N is a delicate galvanometer connected with the pile p,
by the wires io io'. The graduated tube o o (to the right
of the plate), and the appendage m k (attached to the cen-
tre of the experimental tube) shall be referred to more par-
ticularly by and by.

I should hardly sustdn your interest in stating the diffi-
culties which at first beset the investigation conducted with
this apparatus, or the numberless precauticms which the



AcnoK or ATHO^HKBIO AIB. 347

exact balandi^ of the two powerfnl sources of heat, here
resorted to, rendered necessary. I believe the experiments
made with atmosfdieric air alone nodght be numbered hy
tens of thousands. Sometimes for a week, or even for a
fortnight, coincident and satisfactory results would be ob-
tained; the strict conditions of accurate experimenting
would appear to be found, when an additional da/s ex-
perience would destroy the superstructure of hope, and ne-
cessitate a recommencem^it, under changed conditions, of
the whole enquiry. It is this which daunts the experi-
menter ; it is this preliminary fight with the entanglements
of a subject, so dark, so doubtful, so ungjieeiing ; without
any knowledge whether the conflict is to lead to anything
worth possessing, that renders discovery difficult and rare.
But the experimenter, and particularly the young experi-
menter, ought to know, that as regards his own moral maur
hood, he cannot but win if he only contend aright. Even with
a negative result, the consciousness that he has gone fair-
ly to the bottom of his subject, as far as his means allowed
— ^the feeling that he has not shunned labour, though that
labour may have resulted in laying bare the nakedness of
his case — ^reacts upon his own mind, and gives it firmness
for future work.

But to return ; — ^I first neglected atmospheric vapour
and carbonic acid altogether, concluding, as others did
afterwards, that the quantities of these substances being
so small, tlieir effect upon radiant heat must be quite in-
iqppreciable ; after a time, however, I found this assump-
tion leading me quite astray. I first used chloride of cal-
cium as a drying agent, but had to abandon it. I next used
pumice stone moistened with sulphuric acid, and had to
give it up also. I finally resorted to pure glass broken to
small fh^ments, wetted with sulphuric acid, and inserted
by means of a funnel into a XT tube. I found this arrange-
ment best, but even here the greatest care was needed. It



848 LB0TDB3B X.

was neoesBuy io cover each oolmmi with a layer of dry
glass fragments, for I found that the anallest partide ^
dust from the oork, or a qiiantity of sealing wax not nuMre
than the twentieth-part of a pin's head in size, was quite
sufficient, if it reached the acid, to vitiate the results. Hie
drying-^ubes moreover had to be frequently changed, as
the organic matter of the atmosphere, infinitesimal though
it was, soon introduced disturbance.

To remove the carbonic acid, pure Carrara marUe was
broken into fragments, wetted with caustic potash, and in-
troduced into a U tube. These, then, are the Bgmts for
drying the gas ayd removing the carbonic acid whidi are
used at present ; but previous to their final adoption, I emr
ployed, to dry the air, the arrangement shown in Plate I.,
where the glass tubes marked t t, each three feet Icngy
were filled with chloride of caldum, after which ware
placed two U tubes s z, filled with pumice stone and sul-
phuric acid. Hence, the air, in the first place, had to pasa
over 18 feet of chloride of calcium, and afterwards through
the sulphuric acid tubes, before it entered the experimental
tube s s'. A gas-holder, o g, was employed for other
gases than atmospheric air. In the investigation on whidh
I am at present engaged, this arrangement, as I have said,
is abandoned, a simpler one being found more eti^tuaL

My assistant has now exhausted both the front chamber
F and the experimental tube s b'. The rays are passing,
from the source c through the front chamber ; across the
plate of rocksalt at s, through the experimental tube, across
the plate at s', afterwards impinging upon the anterior sur-
face of the pile p. This radiation is neutralised by that
from the compensating cube c'. The needle, you will ob-
serve, is at zero. We will commence our experiments by
applying this powerful test to dry air. It is now entering
the experimental cylinder ; but, at your distance, you see
no motion of the needle, and thus our more powerful mode



AB80BFTI0N OF BADLUTT HEAT BY OLEFIAliT GAS. 849.

of ezperim^it fails to detect any abs<»rption on the part of
the air. Its atoms, apparently, are incompetent to shatter
a single calorific wave ; it is aprtxctical vacuum as regards
the rays of Ji/eat. Were you quite near, however, you
would see a deflection of the needle amounting to about
one degree. Oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen, when care-
fully purified, exhibit the action of atmospheric air ; they
are ahnost neutral.

But the neutral quality of atmospheric air was thought
to extend to transparent gases generally. Let us see
whether this is correct. I have here a gas-holder of olefiant
gas,--common coal gas would also answer my purpose. I
discharge a little of the olefiant gas in the air, but you see
nothing; the gas is perfectly transparent. The experi-
mental tube is exhausted, and the needle points to zero ;
and now we will allow the olefiant gas to enter. Observe
the effect. The needle moves in a moment ; the transpar?
ent gas strikes down the rays wholesale— ^e final and per-
man^it defiecti<»i, when the tube is full, amounting to 70
degrees.

I will now interpose a metal screen between the pile P
and the end s' of the experimental tube, thus entirely cut-
tmg off the radiation through the tube. The fiace of the
pile turned towards the metal screen wastes its heat speed-
ily by radiation ; it is now at the temperature of this
room, and the radiation from the compensating cube alone
acts on the pile, producing a deflection of 75 degrees. But
at Ihe commencement of the experiment the radiations from
both cubes were equal, hence the deflection 75° correqK>nds
to the total radiation, through the experimental tube, when
the latter is exhausted.

Taking as unit the quantity of heat necessary to move
the needle from 0"" to I'^'the number of units expressed by
a deflection of 75° is

860.



^



1



S50 UBOTOBB X.

The number of units eiq^ressed by a d^edaon of lif It
290.

Oat of a total, therefore, of 860, defiant gas has stmdc
down 290 ; that is about sevenrnmths of the whole, or
about 81 per cent.

Does it not seem to you as if an opaque layer had been
Buddeuly predpitated on our plates of salt, when the gas
entered? The substance, however, deposits no such layer.
I discharge a current of the dried gas agamst a polii^ed
plate of salt, but you do not perceive the slightest dhnness.
The rocksalt plates, moreover, though necessary tor exact
measurements, are not necessary to show the destructive
powers of this gas. Here is an open tin cylinder whidi I
interpose between the pile and our radiating source; I
force defiant gas gently into the cylinder from this gas-
holder and you see the needle fly up to its stops. Observe
the smallness of the quantity of gas which I shall next use.
I cleanse the open tube by forcing a current of air through
it ; the needle is now at zero ; and I will simply turn this
cock on and of^ as speedily as I can. A mere bubble of
the gas enters the tube in this brief interval ; still you see
that its presence causes the needle to swing to 10°. I next
abolish the open tube, and leave nothing but the free air
between the pile and source ; fi*om the gasometer I dis-
charge olefiant gas into this space. You see nothing in the
air, but the swing of the needle through an arc of 60*^ de-
cUu^s the presence of this invisible barrier to the calorific
rays.

Thus, it is shown that the ethereal undulations which
glide among the atoms of oxygen, nitrogen, and hydrogen,
without hindrance, are powerfully absorbed by the mole-
cules of olefiant gas. We shall fin^ other transparent gases
also almost immeasurably superior to air. We can limit at
pleasure the number of the gaseous atoms, and thus vary
the amount of destruction of the ethereal waves. In this



BBLA.TION OF QUAXmrr TO ABSOBFTION.



351



i^espect gaseous bodies possess a great advantage over
liquids and solids, in experim^its on radiation. Attached
to the air-pump is a barometric tube, by means of which I
ean admit measured portions of the gas. The experimen-
tal cylinder is now exhausted, and turning tiiis cock slowly
<m, and observing the mercury gauge, I allow the defiant
gas to enter, till the mercurial column has been depressed
an inch. I observe the galvanometer and read the deflec-
tion. Determining thus the absorption produced by one
mch, another inch is added, and the absorption effected by
two inches of the gas is determined. Proceeding thus we
obtain for tenfidcms from 1 to 10 inches the following ab-
sorptions : —



TeiMsIonB
in Inches

1


Ol^r<


U Oas


Absorption
. 90


2


. 123


8


^ 142


4


. 167


6


. 168


6


. Ill


7


. 382


8


. 186


9


. 190'


10


. 198



The unit here used is the amount of heat absorbed
when a whok atmosphere of dried air is allowed to enter
the tube. The table, for example, shows that one-thirtieth
of an atmosphere of defiant gas exercises ninety times the
absorption of a whole atmosphere of air.

The table also informs us that each additional inch of
olefiant gas produces less destruction than the preceding
one. A single inch, at the commencement, strikes down
90 rays, but a second inch strikes down only 33, while the
addition of an inch, when nine inches are already in the



852 LBOTUBB X.

tabe, effects the destruction of <nily 3 rays. This is what
might reasonably be expected. The number of rays emit-
ted is finite, and the discharge of the first inch of defiant
gas amongst them has so thinned their ranks that the exe-
cution produced by the second inch is naturally less than
that of the first. This execution must <liniiiiiRli^ as the
number of rays capable of being destroyed by the gas, be-
comes less ; until, finally, all absorbable rays being removed,
the residual heat would pass through the gas unimpeded.

But supposing the quantity of gas first introduced to be
so inconsiderable, that the number of rays extinguished by
it is a vanishing quantity, compared with the total number
capable of being destroyed, we might then reasonably ex-
pect that, for some time at least, the quantity of execution
done would be proportional to the quantity of gas present.
That a double quantity of gas would produce a double
effect, a treble quantity a treble effect; or, in general
terms, that the absorption would, for a time, be found pro
portional to the density.

To test this idea we will make use of a portion of the
apparatus omitted in the general description, o o (Plate
I.) is a graduated glass tube, the end of which dips into the
basin of water b. The tube is closed above by means of
the stopcock r; ddiB a tube containing fragments of chlo-
ride of calcium. The tube o o is first filled with water up
to the cock r, and the water is afterwards carefully dis-
placed by defiant gas admitted in bubbles from below.
The gas is admitted into the experimental cylinder by the
cock r, and as it enters, the water rises in o o, each of
whose divisions represents a volume of jVtii of a cubic inch.
Successive measures of this capacity are permitted to enter
the tube, and the absorption in each particular case is de-
termined.

In the following table the first column contains the
quantity of gas admitted into the tube ; the second con-



ABSOBPnOK BT ETHER YAP0I7B.



353



tains the corresponding absorption; the third column con-
tains the absorption, calcnlated on the supposition that it is
proportional to the density.


OJ^nJt Oas.


Unit measare ^tb of a cable inch.


•SONftOfOMk


Absorption.


Obaenred. Oacvlftted.


1 . . . 2-2 . . .2-2


2


4-6


4«4


8


6-6


6-6


4


s-s


8-8


5


110


. 11-0


6


120


. 18-2


Y


14-8


. 15.4


8


. 16-8


. 17-6


9


19-8


. 19-8


10


220


. 220


11


240


. 24*2


12


25*4


. 26*4


18


. 29-0


. 28-6


14


. 80-2


. 29-8


15


. 88-6


. 880



This table proves the correctness of the surmise, that
when yery small quantities of the gas are employed, the
absorption is sensibly proportional to the density. But
consider for a moment the tenuity of the gas with which
we have here operated. The volume of our experimental
tube is 220 cubic inches ; imagine ^^^th of a cubic inch of
gas difiused in this space, and you have the atmosphere
through which the calorific rays passed in our first experi-
ment. This atmosphere possessies a tension not exceeding
T fi vvth of that of ordinary air. It would depress the mer-
curial column connected with the air-pump not more than
^lifth of an English inch. Its action, however, upon the
calorific rays is perfectly measurable.

But the absorptive energy of defiant gas, extraordinary



884 LBcrruBB z.

M it 18 shown to be by the f oregomg exp e rimmitfl, is ex-
ceeded by that of various vapours, the action of which I
will now endeavour to illustrate. Here is a glass flask, a
(flg. 90), provided with a brass cap, into which a stopcock
can be screwed idr-tight. I pour a small quantity of sulr
phuric ether into the flask, and completely re-
^ move, in the first place, the air which fills the

flask above the liquid. I attach the flask to
the experimental tube, which is now exhaust-
ed — ^tiie needle pointing to ^ro— and permit
. the vapour from the flask to enter the experi-
mental tube. The mercury of the gauge
sioks, and now that it is depressed one inch I
will stop the further supply of vapour. The
moment the vapour entered, the needle moved,
and it now points to 65^. I can add aoother
inch, and again determine the absorption, a
third inch and do the same. The absorptions
effected by four inches, introduced in this way, are given in
the following table. For the sake of comparison I place
the corresponding absorptions of defiant gas in the third
column.

Sulphuric Ether.


TensionB


Correeponding absorptton


ininoheg.


AbeocpUoiL


ofOleflantOaa.


1


. 214


90


2 .


. 282


123


8 . .


. 816


. . 142


4


. 830 . .


164



For these tensions the absorption of radiant heat by the
vapour of sulphuric ether is about two and two-third times
the absorption of defiant gas. There is, moreover, no pro-
portionality between the quantity of vapour and the ab-
sorption.

But reflections similar to those which we have already
applied to defiant gas are also applicable to the ether.
Supposing we make our unit measure smaU enough, the



belahok of QflSAsrmY to absobftiok.



855



number of rayn first destroyed will vanish m oomparison
witii the total number, and, for a time, the fact will proba*
bly manifest itself, that thei absorption is direoUy propor>
tional to the density. To examine whether this is the case,
the other portion of the apparatns, omitted in the g^ieral
Ascription, was made nse of. k is one of the small flasks
already described, with a brass cap, which is closely
screwed on to the stopcock c\ Between the cocks & and
c, which latter is connected with the experimental tube, is
the diamber h, the capacity of which was accnrately deter*
mined. The flask k was partially flUed with ether, and the
air above tlie liqMd removed. The stopcock & being sknt
off and e tnmed on, the tube s s' and the diamb^ m are
exhausted. The cock c is now shut of^ and c' being turned
on, the chamber m becomes filled with pure ether vapour.
By turning c' off and c on, this quantity of vapour is allow-
ed to difiuse itself through the experimental tube, where
its absorption is determined ; successive measures are thus
sent into the tube, and the effect produced by each is noted.
In the following table the unit measure made use of had
a volume of t}?^^ ^^ ^ cubic inch.

Sulphuric Mher.

Absorptloo.



Measorea.

1


Obeerved. ' Calculated.
6-0 ... . 4-6


2


. 10-8


9-2


4


19-2


18-4


6


24*6


. 280


6


29-6


. 21-0


1


84-6


. 82-2


8


88-0


86-8


9


44*0


. 41-4


10 .


46-2


, 46-2


11


. 60-0


50-6


12


52-8


66-2


18 ,


66-0


69-8


U


. 5M


64-4


15


69*4


69-0



856 ixaruME x.

We here find that the proportbn between deansSty and
absorption holdB senMbly good for the first eleyen measnreOt
after which the deviation from proportionality gradually
angments.

No doubti for smaller measures than li^th of a cabie
indi the above law holds still more rigidly tme ; and in
a suitable locality it would be easy to determine, with per-
fect accuracy, i^th of the absorption produced by the first
measure ; this would correspond to j-^jili of a cuUc indi
of vapour. But, before entmng the tube, the vapour had
only the tension due to the temperati&e of the laboratory^
namely 12 inches. This would require to be multiplied by
2*5 to bring it tq> to that of the atmosphere. Hence the
j^^th of a cubic inch would, on being difiused through a
tube possessing a capacity of 220 cubic inches, have a ten-
sion ot jijXj^'gXj^\z=jj^jjiii of an atmosphere !

These experiments with ether and defiant gas show that
not only do gaseous bodies, at the ordinary tension of the
atmosphere, offer an impediment to the transmission of ra-
diant heat ; not only are the interstitial spaces of such gases
incompetent to allow the ethereal undulations free passage ,
but, also, that their density may be reduced vastly below
that- which corresponds to the atmospheric pressure, and
still the door thus opened is not wide enough to let the un-
dulations through. There is something in the constitution
of the individual molecules, tlius sparsely scattered, which
enables them to destroy the calorific waves. The destruo-
tion, however, is merely one of form ; there is no absolute
loss. Through dry ur the heat rays pass without sensibly
warming it; through defiant gas and ether vapour they
cannot pass thus freely ; but every wave withdrawn from
the radiant sheaf produces its equivalent moti(m in the body
of the absorbing gas, and raises its t^nperature. It is a
case of transference, not of annihilation. I might extend
the experiments to all available volatile liquids, and show



ABSORFnON BY OASES.



86T



yon that the same role holds good for the vapours of
all.

Before changing the source of heat here made use of, I
wish to direct jowt attention for a moment to the action
of a few of the permanent gases on radiant heat. To
measure the qnantities introduced into the experimental
tabe, the mercury gauge of the air-pump was made use of.
In the case of carbonic oxide, the following absorptions
correspond to the tensions annexed to them, the action of
a fbll atmosphere of air, which, as you remember, produces
a deflection of 1% being taken as unit : —
Carbonic Oxide.

AbaofpUon.



Otaerred.


Caleslaled


2-5


2-6


5-6


6-0


80


. 7-5


10-0


. 10^


12-0


. 12-6


15-0


. 15-0


11-6 . ,


. 11-5



0.5
1*0
1*6
2-0
8*5
«-0
8-6

As in former cases, the third column is calculated on the
assumption that the absorption is directly proportional to
the density of the gas ; and we see that for seven measures,
or up to a tension of 3*5 inches, the proportionality holds
strictly good. But for large quantities this is not the case ;
when, for instance, the unit measure is 5 inches, instead of
half-an-inch, we obtain the following results :

AbMNptlon,



Tendon
Inlnebei.

6

10

15



Obflerred.
18 .
82-5
45 .



Ctleokted.
18
86
54



The case of carbonic oxide is therefore similar to that of
olefiant gas. Carbonic add, sulphide of hydrogen, nitrpus
oxide, and other gases, though differing in the energy of



S68 UDOTDBB X.

their abiOfptum, and all of ^lem exeeedHag earibonic oxide,
exhibit, whoi small and large qoandties are used, a similar
deportment towards radiant heat.

ThuBy then, in the case of s(Hne gases, we find an abnost
absolute incompetence on the part of their atoms to be
diflken by the ethereal waves. Tbey remain practicallj at
rest when the nndnlations speed amcmgst them, while the
atoms of other gases, stmek hy these same nndnlations, ab-
sorb their motion, and become ihemselyes centres of heat.
We haye now to examine what gaseons bodies are compe-
tent to do in this latter capacity; we have to enquire
whether these atoms and molecules, whidi can accept mo-
tion from the ether in such very diflferent degrees, are not
also characterised by their competoicy to impart motion
to the ether in different degrees ; or, to use the common
language, having learned something of the power of differ-
ent gases, as aisorbers of radiant heat, we have now to en-
quire into their capacities as radiators.

I have here an arrang^nent, by means of which we can
put the necessary question, which has hitherto received
only a negative reply, p (fig. 91) \& the thermo-electric pile
with its two conical reflectors ; s is a double screen of pol-
ished tin ; A is an argand burner, consisting of two conc^i-
tric perforated rings ; o is a copper ball, which, during the
experiments, is heated under redness ; while the tube t t
leads to a gas holder. When the hot ball c is placed on
the burner it warms the air in contact with it ; an ascend-
ing current is thus established, which, to some extent, acts
upon the pile. To neutralise this action a large Leslie's
cube, L, filled with water, a few degrees above the air in
temperature, is placed before the opposite face of the pile.
The needle being thus brought to zero, the gas is forced,
by a gentle water pressure, through the orifices of the
burner ; it meets the ball c, glides along its surface, and
ascends, in a warm current, in front of the pile. The rays



•ptA-HTATrniW BT QAfiES.



860



ftom the heated gas gush forth in the direotioii of the ar-
rows against the pile, and the oonseqnent deflection of the

Fig. 91.


galvanometer needle indicates the magnitude of the radia-
tion.

The results of the experiments are given in the second
column of the following table, the numbers there recorded
marking the extreme limit to which the needle swung,
when the rays from the gas fell upon the pile : —

BadiatkHL Absorption.

0-2

0-2

0-2

0-2

180

26*0

44*0

61-0



Aip .


Oxygen


Nitrogen


'


Hydrogen


Garfoonic oxide


12


Carbonic add.


18


MHrouB oxide .


29


Olefiant gas .


68



860



UKVUBB X.



In order to ocHnpare the radiation with the abiorption,
I have placed in the third oolnmn the deflecti<ni8 doe to the
absorption of the same gases, at a ccnnmon tension of 5
inches. We see that radiation and absorption go hand in
hand ; that the molecnle which shows itself competait to
wUereqfi a calorific flux, shows itself competent, in a pro-
portionate degree, to generaU a calorific flax, lliati in
short, a capacity to accept motion fhHn the ether, and to
impart moticm to the ether, by gaseous bodies, are corrda-
tive properties.

And here, be it remarked, we are relieyed from aH con-
siderations regarding the influence of cohesion, on the re-
sults. In solids and liquids the partides are more or less
in thrall, and cannot be c(msidered as indiyidually free.


The difierence in point of radiatiye and absorptive power,
between alum and rocksalt, for example, might be fSEdrly



BLA0KNE88 OF TBAHBPABENT GAfiES TO HEAT. 861

regarded as due to their character as aggregates, held to-
gether by crystaHifiing force. But the difference between
defiant gas and atmospheric air cannot be explained in this
way ; it is a difference dependent on the individual mole-
cnles of these substances, and thus our experiments with
gases and vapours probe the question of atomic constitution
to a depth, quite unattainable with solids and liquids.

I have refrained thus far from giving you as full a
tabular statement of the absorptive powers of gases and
vapours as the experiments made with the apparatus al-
ready described would enable me to do, knowing that I
had in reserve results, obtained with another apparatus,
which would better illustrate the subject. This second ar-
rangement is the same in principle as the first ; only two
changes of importance have been made in it. The first is,
that instead of making a cube of boiling water my source
of heat, I employ a plate of copper, against which a thin
steady gas-dame from a Bunsen's burner is caused to play ;
the heated plate forms the back of my new front chamber,
which latter can be exhausted independently, as before.
This portion of the apparatus is sketched in fig. 92, the
chimney a being added. The second alteration is the sub-
stitution of a tube of glass of the same diameter, and 2
feet 8 inches long, for the tube of brass s s'. Rate I.
All the other parts of the f^paratus remain as before. The
gases were introduced in the manner already described into
the experimental tube, and from the galvanometric deflec-
tion, consequent on the entrance of each gas, its absorption
was calculated.

The following table gives the relative absorptions of
several gases, at a common tension of one atmosphere : —

Absorption at
Name. 80 incbee tension.

Air . . . . .1

Oxygea .... 1

16



\



aea



ISOTOKB



/


AbioiptloBor


HlBMl 1


Nitrogen • • • <


1
1


flydrogeD • • •
Chlorine • • • .


89


Hydrodiloric add •


62


Ottbonic oxide


90


Carbonic add


90


Nitrous oxide


855


Sulphide of hydrogen


890


Marshgas .. . . .


408


Sulphurous acid


'^lO


defiant gas


910


AnuncHiia . . • ' «


1195



The most powerful and delicate tests that I have been
able to apply have not yet enabled me tb establish a differ-
ence between oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen, and air. The
absorption of these substances is exceedingly small — ^prob-
ably even smaller than I have made it. The more perfect-
ly the above-named gases are purified, the more closely
does their action approach to that of a vacuum. And who
can say that the best drying apparatus is perfect ? I can-
not even say that sulphuric acid, however pure, may not
yield a modicum of vapour to the gases passing through it,
and thus make the absorption by those gases appear great-
er than it ought. Stopcocks also must be greased, and
hence may contribute an infinitesimal impurity to the air
passing through them. But however this may be, it is
certain that if any further advance should be made in the
purification of the more feebly acting gases, it will only
serve to augment the enormous dijQTerences of absorption
exhibited by the foregoing table.

Ammonia, at the tension of an atmosphere, exerts an
absorption at least 1,195 times that of the air. If I inter-
pose this metal screen between the pile and the experiment-
al tube, the needle will move a little, but so little that you
entirely fail to see it. What does this experiment mean ?



^



INFLUENOB OF ATOMIO OOKSTITUnOK. 363

Why, that this ammonia which, within our glass tube, is
as transparent to light as the air we breathe, is so opaque
to the heat radiating from our source, that the addition of
a plate of metal hardly augments the opacity. I have rea-
son to believe that it does not augment it at all, and that
this light transparent gas is really as black, at the present
moment, to the calorific rays, as if the experimentsJ tube
were filled with ink, pitch, or any other impervious sub-
stance.

In the case of oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen, and air, the
action of a whole atmosphere is so small that it would be
quite useless to attempt to determine the action of a frac^
tional part of an atmosphere. Could we, however, make
such a determination, the difference between them and the
other gases would come out stiQ more forcibly than in the
last table. In the case of the energetic gases, we know
that the calorific rays are most copiously absorbed by the *
portion of gas which first enters the experimental tube, the
quantities which enter last producing, in many cases, a
merely infinitesimal effect. If, therefore, instead of com-
paring the gases at a common tension of one atmosphere,
we were to compare them at a common tension of an inch,
we should doubtless find the difference between the least
absorbent and the most absorbent gases greatly augmentr
ed. We have already learned that for small quantities, the
heat absorbed is proportional to the amount of gas present.
Assuming this to be true for air and the other feeble gases
referred to ; taking, that is, their absorption at 1 inch of
tension to be j'^th of that at 30 inches, we have the follow-
ing comparative effects. It will be understood that in every
case, except the first four, the absorption of 1 inch of the
gas was determined by direct experiment.

Absorption at
Namfli 1 inch tensloii.

Air 1

dygen .... 1



864



UBOTUKB X.



Hamai


SlBch'tn


Nttitigcn. • •


1


Hydrogen •


1


Cfalorine


. 60


BTomine


. 160


Oartxmic oxide


. 760


HTdrotmmiic irad


. 1006


Nitric oxide .


. 1690


Nitrous oxide .


. 1860


Sulphide of hydrogen .


. 2100


Anunoiiift • •


. 7260


Olefiantgas


. 7960


Solphnroiis add


. 8800



/?



What extraordinary diflferences in the oonstitntion and
character of the ultimate particles of various gases do tiie
above results reveal! For every individual ray struck
down by the air, oxygen, hydrogen, or nitrogen — ^the am-
monia strikes down a brigade of 7,260 rays ; the olefiant
gas a brigade of 7,950 ; while the sulphurous add destroys
8,800. With these results before us, we can hardly help
attempting to visualise the atoms themselves, trying to dis-
cern, with the eye of intellect, the actual physical qualities
on which these vast differences depend. These atoms are
particles of matter, plunged in an elastic medium, accepting
its motions and imparting their motions to it. Is the hope
unwarranted, that we may be able finally to make radiant
heat such a feekr of atomic constitution, that we shall be
able to infer from their action upon it, the mechanism of
the ultimate particles of matter themselves ?

Have we even now no glimpse of the atomic qualities
necessary to form a good absorber ? You remember our
experiments witii gold, silver, and copper; you recollect
how feebly they radiate and how feebly they absorb. We
heated them by boiling water ; that is to say, we imparted,
by the contact of the water, motion to their atoms ; still
this motion was imparted with extreme slowness to the



INFLUENOE OF ATOMIO C0NB'1!1TUT10K. 865

ether in which those atoms swung. That their particles
glide through the ether with scarcely any resistance may
also be inferred from the length of time which they require
to cool in vacuo. But we have seen that when .the motion
which the atoms of the above bodies possess, and which
they are incompetent to transfer to the ether, is imparted,
by contact, to a coat of varnish, or to a coat of chalk or
lampblack, or even to flannel or velvet, these bodies soon
waste the motion on the ether. The same we found true
for glass and earthenware.

In what respect do those good radiators differ from the
metals referred to ? In one profound particular — ^the met-
als (xre elements; the others are compounds. In the metals
the atoms swung singly ; in the varnish, velvet, earthen-
ware and glass, they swung in groups. And now, in bocues
as diverse from the metals as can possibly be conceived, we
find the same significant fact making its appearance. Oxy-
gen, hydrogen, nitrogen, and idr, are elements, or mixtures
of elements, and, both as regards radiation and absorption,
their feebleness is declared. They swing in the ether with
scarcely any loss of moviug force. They bear the same
relation to the compound gases as a smooth cylinder turn-
ing in water does to a paddle-wheel. They create a small
comparative disturbance.

We may push these considerations still further. It is
impossible nA to be struck by the position of chlorine and
bromine in the l^t table. Chlorine is an extremely dense
and coloured gas ; bromine is a far more densely-coloured
vapour ; still we find them, as regards perviousness to the
heat of our source, standing above every transparent com-
pound gas in the table. The act of combination with hy-
drogen produces, in the case of each of these substances, a
transparent compound ; but the chemical act, which aug-
ments the transparency to light, augments the opacity to



866 LBcrruBE x.

heat ; hydrochloric add absorbs more than chlorine ; and
hydrobromic add absorbs more than bromine.

Farther, I have here the element bromine in the liquid
condition ; I endose a portion of it in this glass cdl ; the
layer is of a thickness soffident to extingnish utterly the
flame of a lamp or candle. But I place a candle in frwit
of the cell, and a thermo-electric pile behind it ; the prcm^
movement of the needle declares the passage of radiant
heat through the bromine. This consists entirdy of the
obscure rays of the candle, for the light, as I have stated,
is utterly cut off. I remove the candle, and put in its place
our copper ball, heated not quite to redness. The needle
at once flies to its stops, showing the transparency of the
bromine to the heat emitted by the ball. I cannot use
ioAne in a solid state, but, happily, it dissolves in bisulfide
of carbon. I have here the densdy coloured liquid in this
glass celL I throw the parallel electric beam upon the screen ;
this solution of iodine completely cuts the light off; but
if I bring my pile into the path of the beam, the violence
of the needle's motion shows how copious is the transmis-
don of the obscure rays. It is impossible, I think, to close
our eyes upon this convergent evidence that the free atoms
swing with ease in the ether, while when grouped to oscit
lating systems, they cause its waves to swell, imparting to
it, as compound molecules, an amount of motion which was
quite beyond their power to communicate, 41 l(mg as they
remained uncoml^ined. »

But it will occur to you, no doubt, that lampblack,
which is an elementary substance, is one of the best ab-
sorbers and radiators in nature. Let us examine this sub-
stance a little : ordinary lampblack contains many impur-
ities ; it has various hydro-carbons condensed within it, and
these hydro-carbons are all powerful absorbers and radia-
tors. Lampblack, therefore, as hitherto applied, can hardly
be considered an dement at all. I have, however, had these



BADIATION THEOUGH LAMPBLACK, ETC. 867

hydro-carbons in great part removed, by carrying through
red hot lampblack a current of chlorine gas ; bnt the sub-
stance has continued to be both a powerful radiator and a
powerful absorber. Well, what is lampblack ? Chemists
will tell you that it is an allotropic form of the diamond :
here, in fact, is a diamond reduced to charcoal by intense
heat. Now, the allotropic condition has long been defined
as due to a difference in the arrangement of a body's parti-
cles ; hence, it is conceivable that this arrangement, which
causes such a marked physical difference between lampblack
and diamond, may consist of an atomic grouping, which
causes the body to act on radiant heat as if it were a com-
pound. I say such an arrangement of an element, though
exceptional, is quite conceivable ; and I shall show you this
to be eminently the case as regards an allotropic form of
our highly ineffectual oxygen.

But, in reality, lampblack is not so impervious as you
might suppose it to be. Melloni has shown it to be trans-
parent, in an unexpected degree, to radiant heat emanating
from a low source, and I have prepared an experiment
which will corroborate his. Here is a plate of rock-salt,
which, by holding it over a smoky lamp, has been so thick-
ly coated with soot that it does not allow a trace of light
from the most brilliant gas jet to pass through it. I place
the plate upon its stand, and between it and this vessel of
boiling water, which is to serve as our source of heat, I
place a screen. The thermo-electric pile is at the other side
of the smoked plate. The needle is now at zero,, and I
withdraw my screen ; instantly the needle moves, and its
final and permanent deflection is 52°. I now cleanse the
salt perfectly, and determine the radiation through the un-
smoked plate, — ^it is 71°. Now, the value of the deflec-
tion 62°, expressed with reference to our usual unit, is
90, and the value of 71°, or the total radiation, is about
300. Hence, the radiation through the soot is to the whole
radiation as



868 LEOTDSB X«

90:300

or as 80 : 100
that* is to say, 30 per cent, of the incident heat has been
transmitted by the layer of lampblack.

I have shown you the action of gases npon radiant heat,
with our glass experimental tube and our new source of
heat ; let us complete this lecture by reference to the action
of vapours. Here, you see, I have several glass flasks, each
furnished with a brass cap, to whidi a stopcock can be
screwed. Into each I pour a quantity of a volatile liquid,
reserving a flask for eadi liquid, so as to render admixture
of the vapours impossible. Prom each flask I remove the
air, — ^not only the air above the liquid, but the air dissolved
in it. This latter bubbles freely away when the flask is
exhausted ; now I attadi my flask to the exhausted experi-
mental tube, and allow the vapour to enter, without per-
mitting any ebullition to occur. The mercury column of
the pump sinks, and when the required depression has been
obtained, I cut off the supply of vapour. In this way the
vapours of the substances mentioned in the next table have
been examined, at tensions' of 0*1, 0*5, and 1 inch, respec-
tively.


Ab8ori>tipn of Vapours


Name


at Tensions


^oT"


0-5


1-0


Bisulphide of carbon . . 15


47


62


Iodide of methyl.


85


U1


242


Benzol .


66


182


267


Chloroform


85


182


236


Methylic alchohol


109


890


590


Amylene


182


635


823


Sulphuric Ether


. ' 800


710


870


Alcohol


825


622


Formic ether


480


870


1075


Acetic ether


590


980


1195


Propionate of ethyl


596


970


Boracic ether


620


ACnON OF YAFOTTBB ON SADIAIST HSAT. 869

These numbers refer to the absorption of a whole at-
mosphere of dry air as their miit; that is to say, tV^ of an
inch of bisulphide of carbon vapour does 15 times the exe-
cution of 30 inches of atmospheric air ; while i^th of an
indi of boracic ether vapour does 620 times the execution
of a whole atmosphere of atmospheric air. Comparing air
at a tension of 0*01 with boracic ether at the same tension,
the absorption of the latter is probably 180,000 times that
of the former.

16*



APPENDIX TO LECTURE X.



Fig. 98.



I oiVB here the method of calibrating the galyanometer which
Melloni recommends, as leaving nothing to be desired as regaids
fiicility, promptness, and precision. His own statement of the
method, translated from La Thermochrose, page 69, is as
follows : —

Two small vessels, v v, are half-
filled with mercury, and connected,
separately, by two short wires, with
the extremities o g of the galvano-
meter. The vessels and wires thus
disposed make no change in the ac-
tion of the instrument ; the thermo-
electric current being freely trans-
mitted, as before, from the pile to
the galvanometer. But i^ by
means of a wire f, a communication
be established between the two vessels, part of the current will
pass through this wire and return to the pile. The quantity of
electricity circulating in the galvanometer will be thus dimin-
idied and with it the deflection of the needle.

Suppose, then, that by this artifice we have reduced the gal-
vanometric deviation to its fourth or fifth part ; in other words,
supposing that the needle being at 10 or 12 degrees, under the
action of a constant source of heat, placed at a fixed distance
from the pile, that it descends to 2 or 8 degrees when a portion
of the current is diverted by the external wire ; I say that by
causing the source to act from various distances, and observing
- in each case the total deflection, and the reduced deflection, we


0ALIBBA.TION OF G^LYANOMETEB. 871

haye all the data necessary to determine the ratio of the deflec-
tions of the needle, to the forces which produce these deflections.

To render the exposition clearer, and to famish, at the same
time, an example of the mode of operation, I will take the num-
bers relating to the application of the method to one of my
thermo-multipliers.

The external circuit being interrupted, and the source of heat
bdng sufllciently distant from the pile to give a deflection not
exceeding 5 degrees of the galranometer, let the wire be placed
from T to y ; the needle fiills to 1°'5. The connection between
the two yessels being again interrupted, let the source be brought
near enough to obtain successively the deflections : —
6% 10% 16% 20% 25% 80% 85% 40% 45^

Interposing after each the same wire between y and y we ob-
tain the following numbers : —

r-6, 8% 4°-5, 6*-3, 8'*-4, ll''^, IS^'-S, 22''-4, 2^1,

Aftsnming the force necessary to cause the needle to describe
each of the first degrees of the galyanometer to be equal to unity,
we haye the number 5 as the expression of the force corresponding
to the first observation. The other forces are easily obtained by
the proportions : —

1-6: 5=a: x=ifiy a=3-838 a.*
where a represents the deflection when the exterior circuit is
closed. We thus obtain

5, 10, 15-2, 21, 28, 87-8.
for the forces, corresponding to the deflections,
6% 10% 15% 20% 25% 80°.

In this instrument, therefore, the forces are sensibly propor-
tional to the arcs, up to nearly 16 degrees. Beyond this, the pro-
portionality ceases, and the divergence augments as the arcs in-
crease in size.

The forces belon^^ng to the intermediate degrees are obtained
with great ease either by calculation or by graphical construc-
tion, which latter is sufficiently accurate for these determinations.

* That is to say, one reduced current is to the total current to which
it corresponds, as any other reduced current is to its correspondhig total
current.



873 AFPENDEC TO LBCTDBE X.

By these meane we find,

Degroet . . 18% 14% 15% 16% 17% 18% 19% 20', 2r.

Forces . . 18, 141, 16-2, 168, 174, 186, 19^, 21, 22-8.

Differenoet . 1:1, 11, 11, 11, 1.2, 1-2, 1-2, 1-8.

Degrees . . 22% 28% 24% 25% 26% 27% 28% 29% 80^

Forces . . 28-5, 24-9, 26-4, 28, 297, 81*5, 88-4, 85-8, 37-3.

Differences . 1-4, 1-5, 1-6, 1-7, 1$, 19, 2.

In this table we do not take into account any of the degrees
preceding the 18th, because the force corresponding to eadi of
them possesses the same yalae as the deflection.

The forces corresponding to the first 80 d^rees being known,
nothing is easier than to determine the yalaes of the forces corre-
sponding to 85, 40, 45 degrees, and upwards.

The reduced deflections of these three arcs are,
W'S, 22°-4, 29**-7.

Let us consider them separately ; commencing with the first
In the first place, then, 15 degrees, according to our calculation,
are equal to 15*2 ; we obtain the yalue of the decimal 0*8 by mul-
tiplying this fraction by the difference 1*1 which exists between
the 15th and 16th degrees ; for we have evidently the proportion

1 : 11=0-8 :x=0 8.
The yalue of the reduced deflection corresponding to the 85th
d^ree will not, therefore, be 15''-8, but 15''-2+0^-8=15<^-5. By
similar considerations we flnd 28'*-5+0°-6=24''l, instead of
22'''4, and 86*'*7 instead of 29°*7 for the reduced deflections of 40
and 45 d^rees.

It now only remains to calculate the forces belonging to these
three deflections, 15'*-5, 24'*-l, and 86°*7, by means of the expres-
sion 8*888 a ; this giyes us,

the forces, 51-7, 80-8, 122-8.
for the degrees, 85, 40, 46.

Comparing these numbers with those of the preceding table,
we see that the sensitiveness of our galvanometer diminishes con-
siderably when we use deflections greater than 80 degrees.


J®S®lKIP!irE(IJiK'



LECTURE XI.

[April 8, 1862.]

ACnON OF ODOROUS SUBSTANCES UPON RADIANT HEAT — ^ACTION OF OZONl
UPON RADIANT HEAT — DETERMINATION OF THE RADIATION AND ABSORP-
TION OF GASES AND YAPOURS WITHOUT ANT SOURCE OF HEAT EXTERNAL
TO THE GASEOUS BODY — DYNAMIC RADIATION AND ABSORPTION — RADIA-
TION THROUGH THE EARTH^S ATMOSPHERE — INFLUENCE OF THE AQUEOUS
TAPOUR OF THE ATMOSPHERE ON RADIANT HEAT— CONNECTION OF THE
RADIANT AND ABSORBENT POWER OF AQUEOUS YAPOUB WITH METEORO-
LOGICAL PHENOMENA.

appendix: FURTHER DETAILS OF THE ACTION OF HUMID AIR.

SCENTS and effluvia generally have long occupied the
attention of observant men, and they have formed fiir
vourite illustrations of the 'divisibility of matter.' No
chemist ever weighed the perfume of a rose ; but in ra-
diant heat we have a test more refined than the chemist's
balance. The results brought before you in our last lecture
would enable you to hear me without surprise, were I to
assert that the quantity of volatile matter removed from a
hartshorn bottle by any person in this room, by a single act
of inhalation, would exercise a more potent action on ra-
diant heat, than the whole body of oxygen and nitrogen
which the room contains. Let us apply this test to other
odours, and see whether they also, notwithstanding their
almost infinite attenuation, do not exercise a measurable in-
fluence on radiant heat.

I will operate in this simple way : here is a number of
small and equal squares of bibulous paper, which I roll up
thus, to form little cylinders, each about two inches in
length. I moisten the paper cylinder by dipping one end



874



lalCTDBX TL



of It mto m aromatie oil ; the oil ereeps by capiDary attnc-
tioii thioiigfa the paper, and the whde of the cylinder is
now moist I introduce the rolled paper thns into a glass
tabe of such a diameter that the cylinder fills it without
being squeezed, and between my drying iqyparatiis and the
experimental cylinder I place the tube ccmtaining the
scented paper. The experimental cylinder is now exhaost-
ed, and the needle at zero ; taming this cock on, I allow
dry air to pass gently through the folds of the saturated
paper. Here the air takes up the perfinne of the aromatic
oil, and carries it into the experimental tube. Hie absorp-
tion of an atmosphere of dry dr we know to be unity ; it
produces a deflection of one degree ; hence, any additional
absorption which these experiments reveal, must be due to
the scent which accompanies the air.

The following table will give a condensed yiew of the
absorption of the substances mentioned in it; air at the
tension of one atmosphere being regarded as unity : —



Per/iimes.


Name oTPerftune


AlwnpUi


PachouU


80


Sandal Wood


82


Geranium


88


Oaofaoves


88-5


Otto of Roses


86-5


Bei^gamot


44


Neroli


. . 47


Lavender


60


Lemon


65


Portugal


. 67


Thyme


68


Rosemary


. . 74


Oil of Laurel.


80


Camomile Flowers .


87


Cassia .


. 109


Spikenard


. 865


Aniseed


. 872



AOnON OF 80ENTS OH BADIAliTr HEAT. 375

llie ntimber of atoms of air here in the tube must be
regarded as almost infinite in comparison with those of the
odours ; still the latter, thinly scattered as they are, do, in
the case of pachouli, 30 times the execution of the air ; otto
of roses does upwards of 36 times the ezeeutioki of the
air ; thyme, 74 times ; spikenard, 355 times ; and aniseed
372 times the execution of the air. It would \>e idle to
speculate on the quantities of matter implicated in these
results. Probably they would have to be multiplied by
millions to bring them up to the tension of ordinary air.
Thus,—

The sweet south

That breathes upon a bank of violets,

Stealing and giving odour,

owes its sweetness to an itgent, which, though almost infi-
nitely attenuated, may be more potent, as an interceptor of
terrestrial radiation, than the entire atmosphere from
* bank ' to sky.

In addition to these experiments on the essential oils,
others were made on aromatic herbs. A number of such
were obtained from Covent Garden Market; they were
dry, in the common acceptation of the term ; that is to
say, they were not green, but withered. Still I fear the
results obtained with them cannot be regarded as pure, on
account of the probable admixture of aqueous vapour. The
aromatic parts of the plants were stuffed into a glass tube
eighteen inches long aud a quarter of an inch in diameter.
Previous to connecting them with the experimental tube,
they were attached to a second air-pump, and dry air was
carried over them for some minutes. They were then con-
nected with the experimental cylinder, and treated as the
essential oils ; the only difference being that a length of
eighteen inches, instead of two, was occupied by the herbs.

Thyme, thus examined, gave an action thirty-three times
that of the air which passed over it.



870 i.KrnnDi'Xi.

Peppennmt exodied tUrty-foor timeBtheactkm of the
air.

Spearmint exercised tlurty-^gfat times the action of the
air.

Lavender exercised thirty-two times the acticm of the
air.

Wormwood exercised forty-one times the action of the
air.

Cinnamon exercised fifty-three times the action of the
air.

As already hinted, I fear that these results may be
complicated with the action of aqueous vapour : its quan-
tity, however, must have been infinitesimaL

There is another substance of great interest to tiie
chemist, but the attainable quantities of which are so mi-
nute as almost to elude measurement, to which we may ap-
ply the test of radiant heat. I mean that extraordinary
substance, ozone. This body is known to be liberated at
the oxygen electrode, when water is decomposed by an
electric current. To investigate its action I had construct-
ed three different decomposing cells. In the first, which I
shall call No. 1, the platinum plates used as electrodes had
about four square inches of surface ; tiie plates of the sec-
ond (No. 2) had two square inches of surface ; while the
plates of the third (No. 3) had only one square inch of sur- *
face, each.

My reason for using electrodes of different sizes was
this : — On first applying radiant heat to the examination of
ozone, I constructed a decomposing cell, in which, to di*
minish the resistance of the current, very large platinum
plates were used. The oxygen thus obtained, and whidli
ought to have embraced the ozone, showed scarcely any of
the reactions of this substance. It hardly discoloured
iodide of potassium, and was almost witiiout action on rar
diant heat. A second decomposing apparatus, with smaller



AOnON OF OZOl!!^ OK BABIAISrr HEAT. 877

plates, was tried, and here I found both the action on iodide
of potassium, and on radiant heat, very deci^d* Being
tmable to refer these differences to any other cause than the
different magnitudes of the plates, I formally attacked the
subject by operating with the three cells above described.
Galling the action of the main body of the electrolytic oxy-
gen unity ; that of the ozone which accommpanied it, in
the respective cases, is given in the following table : —

NnmberofCeQ AlMorptfon.

No. 1 20

No. 2 84

No. 8 47

Thus the modicum of ozone which accompanied the
oxygen, and in comparison to which it is a vanishing quan-
tity, exerted, in the case of the first pair of plates, an action
twenty times that of the oxygen itself, while with the third
pair of plates the ozone was forty-seven times more ener-
getic than the oxygen. The influence of the size of the
plates, or, in other words, of the density of the cmTcnt
where it enters the liquid, on the production of the ozone,
is rendered strikingly manifest by these experiments.

I then cut away portions of the plates of cell No. 2, so
as to make them smaller than those of No. 3. The reduc-
tion of the plates was accompanied by an augmentation of
the action upon radiant heat ; the absorption rose at once
from 34 to

65.

The reduced plates of No. 2 here transcend those of
No. 3, which, in the first experiments, gave the largest
action.

The plates of No. 3 were next reduced, so as to make
them smallest of all. The ozone now generated by No. 3,
effected an absorptifn of

85.



S78 UKjrujofTL

Thus sre see that tiie action upon radiant heat advances
as the size of the electrodes is diminished.

Heat is known to be verj destmctiye of ozone, and
suspecting the developement of heat at the small electrodes
of the cell last made use of^ I sorromided the cell witih a
niixtQre/>f pomided ice and salt. Kept thus cool, the ab-
sorption of the ozone generated rose to

136.

These experiments on the action of ozone npon radiant
heat were made, before I was acqnidnted with the re-
searches of MM. De la Rive, Soret, and Meidinger, on this
substance. There is a perfect correspondence in our re-
sults, though there is no resemblance between our modes
of experiment. Such a correspondence is calculated to
augment our confidence in radiant heat, as an investigator
of molecular condition.*

* Ml Meidinger commences his paper by showing the absence of agree-
ment between theory and experiment in the decomposition of water, the
difference showing itself very decidedly in a deficiency of oxygen toAen ilie
current toaa strong. On heating his electrolyte, he fomid that this dif-
ference disappeared, the proper quantity of oxygen being then liberated.
He at once surmised that the defect of oxygen might be due to the forma-
tion of ozone ; but how did the substance act to produce the dimmution of
the oxygen? If the defect were due to the great dennty of the ozone, the
destruction of this substance, by heat, would restore the oxygen to its true
volume. Strong heating, however, which destroyed the ozone, produced
no alteration of volume, hence M. Meidinger concluded that the effect
which he observed was not due to the ozone which remained mixed with
the oxygen itself. He finally concluded, and justified his conclusion by
satisfactory experiments, that the loss of oxygen was due to the formation
in the water, of peroxide of hydrogen by the ozone ; the oxygen being thus
withdrawn from the tube to which it belonged. He also, as M. De la Rive
had previously done, experimented with electrodes of different sizes, and
found the loss of oxygen much more considerable when a small electrode
was used tham. with a large one ; whence he inferred that the formation of
ozone was facilitated by augmenting tlie density of the current at the place
where electrode and electrolyte meet. The same conclusion is deduced from



ooNsnriTTfOK <^ ozoKB. 379

The qnoDtitieB of ozone with which the foregoing ex-
periments were made, mndt be perfectly mmieasurable by
ordinary means. Still its action upon radiant heat is so
^lergetic, as to place it beside defiant gas, or boracic ether,
as an absorbent — ^bulk for bulk it might transcend either.
No elementary gas that I have examined behaves at all like
ozone. In its swing through the ether it must powerfully
disturb the medium. If it be ox jgei^,, itjftugti I tbicilb* be
oxygen atoms packed into groups. I sought to decide the
qu656oh whether it is oxygen, or a compoimd of hydrogen,
in the following way. Heat destroys ozone. If it were
oxygen only, heat would convert it into the common gas ;
if it were the hydrogen compound, which some chemists
consider it to be, heat would convert it into oxygen, plus
aqueous vapour. The gas alone, admitted into my tube,
would give the neutral action of oxygen, but the gas, plus
the aqueous vapour, I hoped might give a sensibly greater
action. The dried electrolytic gas was caused to pass
through a glass tube heated to redness, and thence direct
into the experimental tube. It was next, after heating,
made to pass through a drying tube into the experimental
tube. Hitherto I have not been able to establish, with cer-
tainty, a difference between the dried and undried gas. If,
therefore, the act of heating develope aqueous vapour, the
experimental means which I have employed have not yet
enabled me to detect it. For the present, therefore, I hold

ihe above experiments on radiant heat No two things could be more di-
verse than the two modes of proceeding. M. Meidinger sought for the
oxygen which had disappeared, and found it in the liquid ; I examined the
oxygen actually liberated, and found that the ozone mixed with it aug-
ments in quantity as the electrodes diminish in size. It may be added that
since the perusal of M. Meidinger*s paper I have repeated his experiments
with my own deoompoation cells, and found that those which gave me the
greatest absorption, also showed the greatest deficiency in the amount of
oxygen liberated.



880 LBOTDSB la.

the belief that osone is prodnoed by the paddng of the
atoms of elementary oxygen into osdllating groups ; and
that heating dissolves the bond of miion, and alk>ws the
atoms to swing singly, thus disqualifying them for either
interceptmg or generating the motion, which, as systems,
they are competent to intercept and generate.

I have now to direct your attention to a series of facts
which surprised and perplexed me when I first observed
them. While experimenting last November (1861), on one
occasion I permitted a quantity of alcohol vapour, sufficient
to depress the mercury gauge 0*5 of an inch, to enter the
experimental tube ; it produced a deflection of 72°. While
the needle pointed to this high figure, and previously to
pumping out the vapour, I allowed dry air to stream into
the tube, and happened, as it entered, to keep my eye upcm
the galvanometer.

The needle, to my astonishment, sank speedily to zero,
and went to 25° on the opposite side. The entry of the
almost neutral air, not only neutralised the absorption pre-
viously observed, but left a considerable balance in favour
of the face of the pile turned towards the source. A repe-
tition of the experiment brought the needle down from 70°
to zero, and sent it to 38° on the opposite side. In like
manner, a very small quantity of the vapour of sulphuric
ether produced a deflection of 30° ; on allowing dry air to
fill the tube, the needle descended speedily to zero, and
swung to 60° at the opposite side.

My first thought, on observing these extraordinary
efiects, was, that the vapours had deposited themselves in
opaque films on the plates of rock-salt, and that the dry air
on entering had cleared these films away, and allowed the
heat from the source free transmission.

But a moment's reflection dissipated this supposition.
The clearing away of such a film could, at best, but restore
the state of things existing prior to the entrance of the



BYNAHIO BADLLTION. 881

vapour. It might be conceived to bring the needle again to
O'', but it could not possibly produce the negative deflec-
tion. Nevertheless, I dismounted the tube, and subjected
the plates of salt to a searching examination. No such de-
posit as that above surmised was observed. The salt re-
mained perfectly transparent while in contact with the
vapour. How, then, are the effects to be accounted for ?

We have ah*eady made ourselves acquainted with the
thermal effects produced when air is permitted to stream
into a vacuum (page 44). We know that the jur is
warmed by its collision against the sides of the receiver.
Can it be the heat thus generated, imparted by the air to
the alcohol and ether vapours, and radiated by them against
the pile, that was more than sufficient to make amends for
the absorption? The eaperimentum crucia at once sug-
gests itself here. If the effects observed be due to the
heating of the air on entering the partial vacuum in which
the vapour was diffused, we ought to obtain the same
effects when the sources of heat made use of hitherto are
entirely abolished. We are thus led to the consideration of
the novel and at first sight utterly paradoxical problem —
namely, to determine the radiation and absorption of a gas
or vapour without any source ofheaJt external to the gaseous
body itself.

Let us, then, erect our apparatus, and omit our two
sources of heat. Here is our glass tube, stopped at one end
by a plate of glass, for we do not now need the passage of
the heat through this end ; and at the other end by a plate
of rock-salt. In front of the salt is placed the pile, con-
nected with its galvanometer. Though there is now no
special source of heat acting upon the pile, you see the nee-
dle does not come quite to zero ; indeed, the walls of this
room, and the people who sit before me, are so many
sources of heat, to neutralise which, and thus to bring the
needle accurately to zero, I must slightly warm the defect-



883 LBonjBB XL

ire face of the pfle. This is done without any diffictilty hj
a cube of lukewarm water, placed at a distance ; the needle
is now at zero.

The experimental tube being exhausted, I allow air to
' enter, till the tube is filled ; the horizontal column of air at
present in the tube is warmed ; every atom of the air is os-
cillating ; and if the atoms possessed any sensible power of
communicating their motion to the luminiferous ether, we
should have from each atom a train of waves impingmg on
the face of the pile. But you observe scarcely any motion
of the galvanometer, and hence may infer that the quantity
of heat radiated by the air is exceedingly smaU. The de-
flection produced is 7 degrees.

But these 7° are not really due to the radiation of the
air. To what, then ? I open one of the ends of the ex-
perimental tube, and place a bit of black paper as a lining
within it ; the paper merely constitutes a ring which covers
the interior surface of the tube for a length of 12 inches.
I close the tube and repeat the last experiment. The tube
has been exhausted and the air is now entering, but mark
the needle — it has already flown through an arc of 70**.
You see here exemplified the influence of this bit of paper
lining ; it is warmed by the air, and it radiates towards the
pile in this copious way. ITie interior surface of the tube
itself must do the same^ though in a less degree, and to
the radiation from this surface, and not from the air itself,
the deflection of 7° which we have just obtained is, I be-
lieve, to be ascribed.

Removing the bit of lining from the tube, instead of
air I allow nitrous oxide to stream into it; the needle
swings to 28°, thus showing the superior radiative power
of this gas. I now work the pump, the gas within the ex-
perimental tube becomes chilled, and into it the pile pours
its heat ; a swing of 20° in the opposite direction is the con-
sequence.



DYNAHIO RADIATION OF GAfiSS.



888



LiBtead of mtroiiB oxide, I now allow olefiant gas to
stream into the exhausted tube. We have already learned
that this gas is highly gifted with the power of radiation.
Its atoms^are here warmed, and everyone of them asserts
its power ; the needle swings through an arc of 67°. Let
it waste its heat, and let the needle come to zero. I now
pump out, and the consequent chilling of the gas, within
the tube, produces a deflection of 40° on the side of cold.
We have certamly here a key to the solution of the enig-
matical effects observed with the alcohol and ether vapour.

For the sake of convenience we may call the heating of
the gas on entering the vacuum dynamic heating ; its radi-
ation I have called dynamic radiation^ and its absorption,
when chilled by pumping out, dynamic absorption. These
terms being understood, the following table explains itself.
In each case the extreme limit to which the needle swung,
on the entry of the gas into the experimental tube, is re-
corded*

Dynamic JRadiation of Gases,



ame


limit of IstimpnlstoB

o


Air . . .


. '^r


Oxygen .


. 1


Hydrogen .


. 1


Nitrogen .


. 1


Carbonic Oxide .


. 19


Carbonic acid


. 21


Nitrous oxide


• 81


Olefiant gas


. 68



We observe that the order of the radiative powers, de-
termined in this novel way, is the same as that already ob-
tidned from a totally different mode of experiment. It
must be borne in mind that the discovery of dynamic radi-
ation is quite recent, and that the conditions of perfect ac-
curacy have not yet been developed; it is, however, ceiv



884



LsoruBB la.



tain, that the mode of experiment is Bosceptible of tiie last
degree of precision.

Let ns now torn to onr yaponrs, and while dealing with
them I shall endeavoor to unite two effects which, at first
sight, might appear utterly incongruous. We have already
learned that a polished metal surface emits an extremely
feeble radiation ; but that when the same surface is coated
with varnish the radiation is copious. In the communica-
tion of motion to the ether the atoms of the metal need a
mediator, and this they find in the varnish. They oonmm-
nicate their motion to the molecules of the varnish, and the
latter are so related to the luminiferous ether* that they


can communicate their motion to it. You may varmsh a
metallic mrface by a film of a powerful gas. I have here

* If we could change either the name given to the interstellar medium,
or that given to certdn volatile liquids by chemists, it would be an advan-
tage. It is difficult to avoid confusion in the use of the some name for
objects so utteriy diverse.



DYNAMIO RADIATION OP VAPOUBS, 385

an arrangement whicli enables me to cause a thin stratum
of olefiant gas from the gasholder g (fig. 94) to pass through
the slit tube a 6, and over the heated surface of the cube c.
The radiation from c is now neutralised by that from c' ;
but I allow the gas to flow over the cube c ; and though
the surface is actually cooled by the passage of the gas, for
the gas has to be warmed by the metal, you see the effect
is to augment considerably the radiation : as soon as the
gas begins to flow the needle begins to move, and reaches
an amplitude of 45°,

We have here varnished a metal by a gas, but a more
iBteresting and subtle effect is the vamuhing of one gaseous
body by another, I have here a flask containing some ace-
tic ether ; a volatile, and, as you know, a highly absorbent
substance. I attach the flask to the experimental tube, and
permit the vapour to enter the tube, until the mercury col-
nnm has been depressed half an inch. There is now vapour
possessmg half an inch of tension in the tube. I intend to
use that vapour as my varnish ; and I intend to use the ele-
ment oxygen instead of the element gold, silver, or copper,
as the substance to which my vapour varnish is to be ap-
plied. At the present moment the needle is at zero, and I
now permit dry oxygen to enter the tube : the gas is dynam-
ically heated, and we have seen its incompetence to radi-
ate its heat ; but now it comes into contact with the acetic
ether vapour, and, communicating its motion to the vapour
by direct collision, the latter is able to send on the motion
to the pile. Observe the needle — ^it is caused to swing
through an arc of 70° by the radiation from the vapour
particles. I need not insist upon the fact that in this ex-
periment the vapour bears precisely the same relation to
the oxygen, that the varnish does to the metal in our foi^
mer experiments.

Let us wait a little, and allow the vapour to pour away
the heat : it is the discharger of the calorific force gene-
17



886



L80TDBX 21.



nied bj tbe ozygm— the needle is again at aero. I woik
the pnnqs tbe yapoor within the tube becomes diilled, and
now yon observe the needle swing nearly 45"^ on the other
side of aera Li this way the dynamic radiati<m and ab-
sorpti<m of the vi^Kmrs mentioned in the fcAowing taUe
hare beoi detomined ; air, howeyer, instead of oxygen,
being the substance employed to heat the yaponr. The
limit of the first swing of the needle is noted as before.

Dynamic Radiation and Ab^orpHon of Vapours.

DefleeUoM


JUdiAlioii Abiorpaoa'


1. Ksnlphide of carbon


• o

14 ... 6


2. Iodide of methyl .


19-5


. 8


8. Benzol .


80


. 14


4. Iodide of ethyl


84


15-5


5. M etbylic aloohol .


86


6. Chloride of amy! .


41


. 23


*!. Amylene


48


8. Alcohol


60


27-5


9. Salphuric etber


64


34


10. Formic ether


68-5 .


88


11. Acetic etber .


70


. 48



We have here used eleven different kiads of vapour as
varnish for our air, and we find that tbe dynamic radiation
and absorption augment exactly in the order established by
experiments with external sources of heat. We also see
how beautifully dynamic radiation and absorption go hand
in hand, the one augmenting and diminishing with the
other.

The smallness of the quantity of matter concerned in
some of these actions on radiant heat has been often re-
ferred to ; and I wish now to describe an experiment which
shall furnish a more striking example of this kind than any
hitherto brought before you. The absorption of boradc ether



VABNISHIKG MSR BY VAPOUE. 887

Taponr, as given at pi^e 8889 exceeds that of any other
substance there referred to ; and its dynamic radiation may
be presumed to be commensurate. I exhaust the experi-
mental tube as perfectly as possible, and introduce into it
a quantity of boracic ether vapour sufficient to depress the
mercury column ^'^^th of an inch. The barometer stands to-
day at 30 inches ; hence the tension of the ether vapour
now in our tube is ^Jsth of an atmosphere.

I send dry air into the tube ; the vapour is warmed,
and the dynamic radiation produces the deflection 56°.

I work the pump until I reduce the residue of air within
it to a tension of 0*2 of an inch, or ^ J^^th of an atmosphere.
A residue of the boracic ether vapour remains of course in
the tube, the tension of this residue being the ijgth part
of that of the vapour when it first entered the tube. I let
in dry air, and find the dynamic radiation of the residual
vapour expressed by the deflection 42°.

I again work the pump till the tension of the air within
it is 0*2 of an inch ; the quantity of ether vapour now in
the tube being tss*^ of that present in the last experi-
ment. The dynamic radiation of this residue gives a de-
flection of 20°.

Two additional experiments, conducted in the same
way, gave deflections of 14° and 10° respectively. The
question now is, what was the tension of the boracic ether
vapour when this last deflection was obtained ? The fol-
lowing table contains the answer to this question : —

Dj/namic Badiatton of JSaracic Ether.

Tension in parts of an atmosphere Defleetioii



tJtj X liiT ^ "300 = ?T«ocxr?y •
iht X liTJ X riu X sin = •nrTisfiSTJOTj



56
42
20
14
10



388 LBoriTSE zl

Hie air itself, wanning the interior of the tdbe, pro-
daces, as we have seen, a deflection of 7^ ; hence the entire
deflection of 10^ was not dne to the radiation of the Ya-
poar. Deducting 1°^ it would leave a residue of 3"^. But
suppoidng we entirely omit the last experiment, we can
then have no doubt tliat at least half the deflection 14*^ is
due to the residue of boracic ether vapour ; this residue
we find, by strict measurement, would have to be multi-
plied by one thousand millions to bring it up to the ten-
sion of ordinary atmospheric air.

Another reflection here presents itself, which is worthy
of our consideration. We have measured the dynamic
radiation of olefiant gas, by allowing the gas to enter our
tube, until the latter was quite filled. What was the state
of the warm radiating colunm of olefiant gas in this experi-
ment ? It is manifest that the portions of the column most
distant from the pile must radiate through the gas in front
ofthem^ and, in this forward portion of the column of gas,
a large quantity of the rays emitted by its hinder portion
will be absorbed. In fact, it is quite certain that if we
made our column sufficientiy long, the frontal portions
would act as a perfectly impenetrable screen, to the radia-
tion of the hinder ones. Thus, by cutting off the part of
the gaseous colunm most distant from the pile, we might
diminish only in a very small degree the amount of radia-
tion which reaches the pile.

Let us now compare the dynamic radiation of a vapour
with that of olefiant gas. In the case of vapour we use
only 0*5 of an inch of tension, hence the radiating mole-
cules of the ether are much wider apart than those of the
olefiant gas, which have 60 times the tension ; and conse-
quently the radiation of the hinder portions of the column
of vapour will have a comparatively open door through
which to reach the pile. These considerations render it
manifest that in the case of the vapour a greater length of



EFFECT OF DISTAKOB BETWEEN RADIANT OENTBES. 889

tixbe is available for radiation than in the case of olefiant
gas. ^fhis leads to the conclnsion, that if we shorten the
tube, we shall diminish the radiation in the case of the
vapour more considerably than in the case of the gas. Let
116 now bring our reasoning to the test of experiment.

We found the dynamic radiation of the following four
substances, when the radiating column was 2 feet 9 inches
long) to be represented by the annexed deflections : —

o

defiant gas . . . .63

Sulphuric ether * . . .64

Formic ether . . . . 68*6

Acetic ether .... 70 '

olefiant gas giving here the least dynamic radiation.

Experiments made in precisely the same manner with a
tube 3 inches long, or j\ih of the former length, gave the
following deflections : —

Olefiant gas . . . .39

Sulphuric ether . * . .11

Formic ether , . . .12

Acetic ether . . . .16

The verification of our reasoning is therefore complete. It
is proved, that in the long tube the dynamic radiation of
the vapour exceeds that of the gas, while in a short one
the dynamic radiation of the gas exceeds that of the vapour.
The result proves, if proof were needed, that though dif-
fused in air, the vapour molecules are really the centres of
the radiation.

Up to the present point, I have purposely omitted all
reference to the most important vapour of aU, as far as our
world is concerned — ^I mean, of course, the vapour of wa-
ter. This vapour, as you know, is always difi^ised through
the atmosphere. The clearest day is not exempt from it :



890 LBOltTBB XI.

indeed, in the Alps, the purest skies are often the most
treacherous, the blae deep«ilBg with the amonnt of aque-
ous yaponr in the air. It is needless, therefore, to remind
you, Hiat when I speak of aqueoiffi Yapoor, I mean nothing
visible ; it is not fog ; it is not cloud ; it is not mist of any
kind. These are formed of vapour which has been con*
densed to water ; but the blue vapour wit^ which we have
to deal is an impalpable transparent gas. It is Effused
everywhere throughout the atmosphere, though in very
different proportions.

To prove the existence of aqueous vapour in the air of
this room, I have placed in front of the table a copper ves-
sel, which was filled an hour ago with a mixture of pound-
ed ice and salt. The surface of the vessel was then black,
but it is now white — ^furred all over with hoar-frost — ^pro-
duced by the condensation, and subsequent congelation upon
its surface of the aqueous vapour. I can scrape off this
white substance, and collect it in my hand. As I remove
the frozen vapour, the black surface of the vessel reap-
pears ; and now I have collected a sufficient quantity to *
form a respectable snow-ball. Let us go one step further.
I place this snow in a mould, and squeeze it before you
into a cup of ice — ^there is the cup ; and thus, without quit-
ting this room, we have experimentally illustrated the man-
ufacture of glaciers from beginning to end. On the plate
of glass which I have used to cover the vessel the vapour
is not congealed, but it is condensed so copiously, that
when I hold the plate edgeways the water runs off it in a
stream.

The quantity of this vapour is small. Oxygen and ni-
trogen constitute about 99 J per cent, of our atmosphere ;
of the remaining 0'5, about 0*46 is aqueous vapour ; the re-
sidue is carbonic acid. Had we not been already acquaint-
ed with the action of almost infinitesimal quantities of mat-
ter on radiant heat, we might well despidr of being able to



ABSOBPTION OF BAIHAKT HBAT BY HUMID AIB. 391

establish a measurable action on the part of the aqueous
vapour of our atmosphere. Indeed, I quite neglected the
action of this substance for a time, and could hardly credit
my first result, which made the Action of the aqueom
vapour or our laboratory fifteen times that of the idr in
which it was difiused. This, however, by no means ex-
presses the true relation between aqueous vapour and dry
iur.

I will make an experiment before you which shall illus-
trate this. Here, you see, I have resumed our first ar-
rangement, as shown in Plate I., with a brass tube, and
with two sources of heat acting on the opposite faces of the
pile. I exhaust the experimental tube, and repeat to-day
the experiment with dry air, which I made at the com-
mencement of the last lecture. The needle does not move
sensibly. If close to it you would, as I have already
stated, observe a motion through about one degree. Prob-
ably, could we get our air quite pure, its action would be
even less than this. I now pump out, and allow the air of
this room to enter the experimental cylinder direct, with-
out permitting it to pass through the drying apparatus.
The needle, you observe, moves as the air enters, and the
final deflection is 48^. The needle will steadily point to
tins figure as long as the sources of heat remain constant,
and as long as the air continues in the tube. These 48°
correspond to an absorption of 72 ; that is to say, the aque-
ous vapour contained in the atmosphere of this room to-day
exerts an action on the radiant heat, 72 times more power*
ful than that of the air itself.

This result is obtained with perfect ease, still not with-
out due care. In comparing dry with humid air it is per-
fectly essential that the substances be pure. You may work
for months with an imperfect drying apparatus and fail to
obtain air^hich shows this ahnost total absence of action
on radianrheat. An amount of organic impurity, too small



LBOTDBE XL

to be Been by the eye, is safficient to augment fiflyfold the
action of the air. « Knowing the effect whidi an almost in-
tinitesimal amount of matter, in certain cases, can produce,
you are better prepare^ for such facts than I was when they
first forced themselves upon my attention. But let us be
careful in our enquiries. The experimental result which
we have just obtained will, if true, have so important an
influence on the science of meteorology, that, before it is
admitted, it ought to be subjected to the closest scrutiny.
First of all, look at this piece of rocksalt brought in from
the next room, where it has stood for some time near a
tank, but not in contact with visible moisture. The salt is
wet ; it is a hygroscopic substance, and freely condenses
moisture upon its surface. Here, also, is a polished plate
of the substance, which is now quite dry ; I breathe upon
it, and instantly its affinity for moisture causes the v^>our
of my breath to overspread the surface in a film which ex-
hibits beautifully the colours of thin plates. Now we
know from the table, at page 313, how opaque a solution
of rocksalt is to the calorific rays, and hence arises the
question whether, in the above experiment with undried
air, we may not in reality be measuring the action of a thin
stratum of such a solution, deposited on our plates of salt,
instead of the pure action of the aqueous vi^ur of the »r.
If you operate incautiously, and, more particularly, if it
be your actual intention to wet your plates of salt, you may
readily obtain the deposition of moisture. This is a point
on which any competent experimenter will soon instruct
himself; but the essence of good experimenting consists in
the exclusion of circumstances which would render the pure
and simple questions which we intend to put to Nature,
impure and composite ones. The first way of replying to
the doubt here raised is to examine our plates of salt ; if
the experiments have been properly conducted, no trace of
moisture is found upon the surface. To render fiie success



WETTING- BOOKSALT PLATES.



893



of this experiment more certain, I will slightly alter the ar-
rangement of our apparatus. -Hitherto we have had the
thermo-electric pile and* its two reflectors entirely otO^ide
the experimental cylinder. I now take this reflector from
the pile, and removing this terminal plate of rocksait, I
pnsh the reflector into the cylinder. The hollow reflecting
cone is ^ sprung ' at its base a h (fig. 95), (our former ar-
rangement, with the single exception that one of the re-
flectors of the pile p is now within the tube) so that it is

Fig. 95.


held tightly by its own pressure against the inner surface
of the cylinder. The space between the outer surface of
the reflector smd the inner surface of the tube I fill with
fragments of fused chloride of calcium, which are prevent-
ed from falling out by a little screen of wire gauze. I now
reattach niy plate of salt, agamst the inner surface of which
abuts the narrow end of the reflector ; bring the face of
the pile close up to the plate, though not into actual con-
tact with it, and now our arrangement is complete.

In the first place it is to be remarked, that the plate of
salt nearest to the source of heat c is never moistened, un-
less the experiments are of the grossest character. Its
proximity to the source makes it the track of a flux of heat,
powerful enough to chase away every trace of humidity
17*



894 UBOTUBiB XL

from it0 snrftoe. The distant plate is the one in da[nger«
and now we have the oircnmferential portions of this plate
kept perfectly dry by the diloride of calcium ; no moist air
can at all reach the rim of the plate ; while upon its central
portion, measuring about a square inch in area, we have
converged our entire nzdiation. On a priori grounds we
should condttde that it is quite impossible that a film of
moisture could collect there ; and this conclusion is justified
by fact. I test, as before, the dried air and the undried
air of this room, and find, as in the former instance, that
the latter produces seventy times the effect of the former.
The needle is now deflected by the absorption of the un-
dried six ; allowing this air to remain in the tube, I unscrew
my plate of salt, and examine its surface. I even use a
lens for this purpose, taking care, however, that my breath
does not strike the plate. It was carefully polished when
attached to the tube ; it is perfectly polished now. Glass,
or rockcrystal, could not show a surface more ex^pt from
Ibiy appearance of moisture. I place a dry handkerchief
over my finger, and draw it along the surface : it leaves no
trace behind. There is not the slightest deposition of mois-
ture; stiH we see that absorption has taken place. This
experiment is conclusive against the hypothesis that the
effects observed are due to a film of brine instead of to
aqueous vapour.

The doubt may, howev^, linger, that although we are
unable to detect the film of moisture, it may still be there.
This doubt is answered in the following way : — ^I detach
the experimental tube from the front chsmiber, and remove
the two plates of rocksalt ; the tube is now cpen at both
endhj and my aim will be to introduce dry and moist mr
into this open tube, and to compare their efifects upon the
radiation from our source. And here, as in all other cases,
the practical tact of the experimenter must come into play.
The source, on the one hand, and the pile on the othw, are



ABSORPTION WITHOUT BOOKSALT PLATES. 395

now freely exposed to the air ; and a very slight agitati<m
aeting upon either would disturb, and might, indeed, alto-
gether mask the effect we seek. The air, then, must be in-
troduced into the open tube, without producing any com-
motion either near the source or near the pile. The length
of the experimental tube is now 4 feet 3 inches ; at c (fig.
96) is a cock connected with an India-rubber bag containing
common air, and subjected by a weight to gentle pressure ;

FIg.W.


I



at B is a second cock connected by a flexible tube, t, with
an air-pump ; between the cock c and the India-rubber bag
our drying tubes are introduced ; when a cock near the bag
is opened, the idr is forced gently through the drying tubes
into the experimental cylinder. The air-pump is slowly
worked at the same time, and the dry air thereby drawn
towards b. The distance of c from the source s is 18
inches, and the distance of j> from the pile p is 12 inches,
the compensating cube c, aud the screen h, serve the same
purpose as before. By thus isolating the central portion
of the tube, we can displace dry air by moist, or moist air
-by dry, without permitting any agitation to reach either
the source or the pile.

At present the tube is filled with the common air of the
laboratory, and the needle of the galvanometer points
steadily to zero. I now allow air to pass through the dry-
ing apparatus and to enter the open tube at o, the pump
being worked at the same time. Mark the effect. When
tiie dry air enters the needle commences to move, and the



896 LBOTDBB TL

direction of its motion shows Hiat more heat is now pass-
ing than before. The substitution of dry air for the air of
the laboratory has rendered the tube more transparent to
the rays of heat. The final deflection thus obtained is 45
degrees. Here the needle steadily remains, and beyond
this point it cannot be moved by any further pumping in
of the dry air.

I now shut off the supply of dry air and cease working
the pump ; the needle sinks, but with great slowness, indi-
cating a correspondingly slow difiusion of the aqueous
vapour of the adjacent air into the dry lur of the tube. If
I work the pump I hasten the removal of the dry air, and
the needle sinks more speedOy, — ^it now points to zero.
The experiment may be made a hundred times in succes-
sion without any deviation from this result; on the en-
trance of the dry air the needle invariably goes up to 45%
showing the augmented transparency ; on the entrance of
the undried air the needle sinks to 0°, showing augmented
absorption.

But the atmosphere to-day is not saturated with mois-
ture ; hence, if I saturate the air, I may expect to get a
greater action. I remove the drying apparatus and put in
its place a U tube, which is filled with fragments of glass
moistened by distilled water. Through this tube I force
the air from the India-rubber bag, and work the pump as
before. "We are now displacing the humid air of the labor-
atory by still more humid air, and see the consequence.
The needle moves in a direction which indicates augmented
opacity, the final deflection being 15^.

Here then we have substantially the same result as that
obtained when we stopped our tube with plates of rock-
salt ; hence the action cannot be referred to a hypothetical
film of moisture deposited upon the surface of the plates.
And be it remarked Ifaat there is not the slightest caprice
or uncertainty in these experiments when properly con-



FBOFOBnON ABSOBBED BY HUMID AIB. 897

ducted. They have been executed at different tiittes and
seasons; the tube has been dismounted and remounted;
the suggestions of eminent men who have seen the experi-
ments, and whose object it was to test the results, have
been complied with ; but no deviation from the effects just
recorded has been observed. The entrance of each kind
of air is invariably accompanied by its characteristic action ;
the needle is under the most complete control : in short, no
experiments hitherto made with solid and liquid bodies, are
more certain in their execution, than ^e foregoing experi-
ments on dry and humid air.

We can easily estimate the per centage of the entire
radiation absorbed by the common air between the points
candD.

Introducing this tin screen between the experimental
cylinder and the pile, I shut off one of the sources of heat.
The deflection produced by the other source indicates the.
total radiation.

This deflection corresponds to about 1,200 of the units
which have been adopted throughout these lectures; that
unit beiDg the quantity of heat necessary to move the nee-
dle from 0^ to 1°. The deflection of 46° corresponds to 50
units ; out of 1,200, therefore, 50 in this iostance have been
destroyed by the moist air. The following statement gives
us the absorption per hundi*ed : —

1200 : 100 = 50 : 42

An absorption of at least 4'2 per cent, was, therefore,
effected by the atmospheric vapour which occupied the
tube between c and d. Air perfectly/ saturated gives an
absorption of more than 5 per cent.

This absorption took place notwithstanding the partial
si/ting of the heat in its passage from the source to c, and
from D to the pile. The moist air, moreover, was, prob-
ably, only in part displaced by the dry. Li other experi-



S98

Bents ¥taaaAf wiUi % tobe 4 feet loi^ and polidied witfam,
fhst the fttmospheiic Tapoor, en s day of arerage dryness,
absorbed oyer 6 per ceot. of the radistk» firtxn our source.
Regarding the earth as a source of heat, no doubt, ai leatC
10 per cent o/U$ heat is uOercqptei wUhin ten feet of the
eurfoice.^ This sin^ fact suggests the enormous influence
wMoh th» newly deyeloped property of aqueous Taponr
must haye in the phemnnena of meteorology.

Bttt we have not yet disposed of all objections. It has
been intimated to me thai the air of oar laborat(»y mi^lift
be impure ; and the suspended carbcm particles of tiie L<»ir
don air have also been referred to, as a possible cause of the
absorption, ascribed to aqueous vapour.

I reply : 1st. The results were obtained when the ap-
paratus was ranoved firom the laboratory — they are ob-
tainable in this room. 2ndly. Air was brought from t^e
following localities in impervious bags : — ^Hyde Park, Prim-
rose Hill, Hampstead Heath, Epsom Downs (near t^e
Grand Stand) ; a field near Newport, Isle of Wight ; St.
Catharine's Down, Isle of Wi^t; the sea beach near
Black-gang Ghme. The aqueous vapour of the air fivm
all these localities, examined in the usual toay, exerted an
absorption seventy times that of the air in which the vapovr
was diffused.

Again, I experimented thus. The air of the laboratory
was dried and purified until its absorption fell below unity ;
this purified air was then led through a U tube, filled with
fra^ents of perfectly clean glass moistened with distilled
water. Its neutrality, when dry, showed that all prejudi-
cial substances had been removed from it, and in passing
through the U tube, it could take up nothing but the pure
vapour of water. The vapour thus carried into the experi-

* Under some circumstances the absorption, I have reason to bc^eve,
oonsidetBbly exceeds this amount.



OBJBOnOiNB AJSmWEBBD, 889

mental tube produced an action ninety times greater tiian
that of the air which carried it.

But fair and philosophic criticism does not end even
here. The tube with which these experiments were made
is polished within, and it was surmised that the vapour of
the humid air might, on entering, have deposited itself
upon the interior surface of the tube, t^us diminishing its
reflectiye power, and producing an effect appar^itly the
same as absorption. But why, I would ask, should such a
dq>osition of moisture take {^ace ? On many of the days
when these experiments were made the air was at least 25
per cent, under its point of saturation. It can hardly be
assumed that such air would deposit its moisture on a me-
tallic surface, against whichj moreover ^ the rays from our
source of heat toere at the time impinging. The mere con-
sideration of the objection must deprive it of weight.
Further, the absorption is exerted when only a small frac-
tion of an atmosphere is introduced into the tube, and it is
proportional to the quantity of air present. This is shown
by the following table, which gives the absorption, by hu-
mid air, at tensions varying from 6 to 30 inches of mercury.


BumidAir.


Temloii
inincbM


Absorption


Obeenred


CalcoUtad


6


16


. 16


10


82


. 82


16


49


. 48


20


64


• 64


26


82


. 80


80


98


. 96



The third column of this table y^ calculated on the as-
sumption that the absorption is proportional to the quan-
tity of vapour in the tube, and the agreement of the calcu-
lated and observed results show this to be the case, within
the limits of the experiment. It cannot be supposed that



400



LBtfi'UKE ZI.



effects so regular as these, and agreeing so completely with
those obtamed with small qnantities of other vapours, and
even with small qnantities of the permanent gases, can be
dne to the condensation of the vapour on the interior sur-
face. When, moreover, five inches of air were in the tube,
less than jth of the vapour necessary to saturate the space
was present. The dryest day would make no approach to
this dryness. Condensation under these circumstances is
impossible, and more especially a condensation which
should destroy, by its action upon the inner reflector, quan-
tities of heat so accurately proportional to the quantities of
matter present.

My desire, however, was to take this important ques-
tion quite out of the domain of mere reasoning, however
strong this might appear. I therefore resolved to abandon
not only the plates of rocksalt but also the experimental
tube itself, and to displace one portion of the free atmos-

Fig.9T.


C:^



n



phere by aaother. With this view the following arrangij-
ment was made : — c (fig. 97), a cabe of boiling water, b
our source 'of heat, t is a hollow brass cylinder set np-
right, 3*6 inches wide, and 7*6 inches high, p is the Ihet-



ABSOBFnOK OF AQITBOUB VAPOTJB IN FEBB AIB. 401

mo-electrio pUe, and c' a compensating cube, between which
and p is an adjusting screen, to regulate the amount of ra-
diation falling on the posterior surface of the pile. The
whole arrangement was surrounded by a hoarding, the
space within which was divided into compartments by
sheets of tin, and these spaces were stuffed loosely with
paper or horsehair. These precautions, which required
time to be learned, were necessary to prevent the formation
of local air-cifrrents, and also to intercept the irregular ac-
tion of the external air. The effect to be measured here is
very small, and hence the necessity of removing all causes
of disturbance which could possibly interfere with its clear-
ness and purity.

A rose-burner r was placed at the bottom of the cylin-
der T, and from it a tube passed to an India-rubber bag
containing air. The cylinder t was first fiUed with frag-
ments of rockcrystal, moistened vrith distilled water. On
subjecting the India-rubber bag to pressure, the air from it
was gently forced up among the fragments of quartz, and
having there charged itself with vapour it was ^sch^rged
in the space between the cube o and the pile. Previous to
this the needle stood at zero ; but on the emergence of the
saturated air from the cylinder, the needle moved and took
up a final deflection of five degrees. The direction of the
deflection showed that the opacity of the space between
the source c and the pile was augmented by the presence
of the saturated air.

The quartz fragments were now removed, and the cyl-
inder was filled with fragments of fresh chloride of cal-
cium, through which the air was gently forced, exactly as
in the last experiment. Now, however, in passing through
the chloride of calcium, it was in great part robbed of its
aqueous vapour, and the air, thus dried, displaced the com-
mon air between the source and pile. The needle moved,
declaring a permanent deflection of 10 degrees ; the direc-



403 LEOTUBB XL

tion of the deflection showed that the transparency of the
BpsLce was angmented by the presence of the dry air. By
properiy timing the discharges of the air, the swing of the
needle coidd be augmented to 15 or 20 degrees. Repeti-
tion showed no deviation from this result ; the saturated
air always augmented the opadty^ the dry air always ang-
mented the transparency of the space betwe^i the source
and the pile. Not only, therefore, have the plates of rock-
salt been abandoned, but also the experimental tube itself^
and the results are all perfectly concurrent as regards t^
action of aqueous vapour upon radiant heat.

Were this subject less important I should not have
dwelt upon it so long. I thought it right to reoaoYe every
objection, so that meteorologists might apply, without the
faintest misgiving, the results of experiments. The appli-
cations of these results to their science must be innumer-
able ; and here I cannot but regret that the incompleteness
of my knowledge prevents me from making the proper ap-
plications myself. I would, however, ask your permission to
refer to such points as I can now call to mind, with whidi
the facts just established appear to be more or less inti-
mately connected.

And, first, it is to be remarked that the vapour whioii
absorbs heat thus greedily, radiates it copiously. This
fact must, I imagine, come powerfully into play in the
tropics. We know that the sun raises from the equatorial
ocean enormous quantities of vapour, and that immediately
under him, in the region of calms, the rain, due to the con-
densation of the vapour, descends in deluges. Hitherto,
this has been ascribed to the chilling which accompanies
the expansion of the ascending air, and no doubt this, as a
true cause, must produce its proportional effect. But I
cannot help thinking that the radiation from the vapour it-
self is also influential. Imagine a column of saturated air
ascending from the equatorial ocean ; for a time the vapoor



TOBBENTIAL BAINS GF THE TROPICS. 403

ecntanglei in this bxTj is snrroanded by air almost folly
saturated. Its vapour radiates, but it radiates into vapour,
and the vapour into it. To the radiation from any vapour,
a screen of the same vapour is particularly opaque. Hence,
for a time, the radiation from our ascending column is in-
tercepted, and in great part returned by the surrounding
vi^ur ; condensation under such circumstsmces caonot oc-
cur. But the quantity of aqueous v£^our in the air duniur
ishes speedily as we ascend ; the decrement of tension, as
proved by the observations of Hooker, Strachy, and Welsh,
is much more speedy than that of the air ; and, finally, our
vaporous column finds itself elevated beyond the protecting
screen whidi, during the first portion of its ascent, was
spread out above it. It is now in the presence of pure space,
and into space it pours its heat without stoppage or re-
quital. To the loss of heat thus endured, the condensation
of the vapour, and its torrential descent to the earth, must
certainly be in part ascribed.

Similar remarks apply to the formation of cumuli in our
own latitudes ; they are the heads of columnar bodies of
vapour which rise from the earth's surface, and are precipi-
tated as soon as they reach a certain elevation. Thus the
visible cloud fovms the capital of an invisible pillar of sat-
urated air. €ertainly the top of such a column, raised
above the vapour screai which dasps the earth, and offer-
ing itself to space must be chilled by radiation ; in this ac-
tion alone we have a physical cause for the generation of
clouds.

Mountains act as condensers, but how? Partly, no
dcmbt, by the coldness of their own masses ; which cold-
ness they owe to their elevation. Above them spreads no
vapour screen of sufiicient density to intercept their heat,
which consequently gushes unrequited into space. When
the sun is withdrawn, this loss is shown by the quick and
large descent of the thermometer. This descent is not due



404 LBOTDBR XI.

to radiation from the air, bat to radiation from Ae earthy
or from the thermcnneter itself. Thus the difference be-
tween a thermometer which, properly confined, gives the
true temperature of the night air, and one which is permit-
ted to radiate freely towards space, must be greater at high
elevations than at low ones. This conclusion is entirely
confirmed by observation. Qn the Grand Plateau of Mont
Blanc, for example, MM. Martins and Bravais found tlie
difference between two such thermometers to be 24° f ahr. ;
when a difference of only 10° was observed at ChamounL

But mountains also act as condensers by the deflectiQa
upwards of moist winds, and their consequent expansion ;
the chilling thus produced is the same as that which accom*
panics the direct ascent of a column of warm air into the
atmosphere ; the elevated air performs work, and its heat
is correspondingly consumed. But in addition to these
causes, I think we must take into account the radiant
power of the moist air when thus tilted upwards. It is
thereby lifted beyond the protection of the aqueous layer
which lies close to the earth, and therefore pours its heat
freely into space, thus effecting its own condensation. No
doubt, I think, can be entertained, tHat the extraordinary
energy of water as a radiant, in all its atfiOea of aggregor
tion^ must play a powerful part in the condensation of a
mountain region. As vapour it pours its heat into space
and promotes condensation ; as liquid it pours its heat into
space and promotes congelation ; as snow it pours its heat
into space and thus converts the surfaces on which it falls
into more powerful condensers than they otherwise would
be. Of the numerous wonderful properties of water, not
the least important is this extraordinary power which it
possesses, of discharging the motion of heat upon the in-
terstellar ether.

A freedom of escape similar to that from bodies of
vapour at great elevations would occur at the earth's sur-



OOLD OF CENTRAL ASIA, ETO. 405

fkce generally, were the aqneous vapour removed from the
air above it, for the body of the atmosphere in a practical
vacuum as regards the transmission of radiant heat. The
withdrawal of the sun from any region over which the at-
mosphere is dry must be followed by quick refrigeration.
The moon would be rendered entirely uninhabitable by be-
ings like ourselves through the operation of this single
cause ; with an outward radiation uninterrupted by aqueous
vapour, the difference between her monthly maxima and
minima must be enormous. The winters of Thibet are al-
most imendurable from the same cause. Witness how the
isothermal lines dip from the north into Asia, in winter, as
a proof of the low temperature of this region. Humboldt
has dwelt upon the ' frigorific power ' of the central por-
tions of this continent, and controverted the idea that it
was to be explained by reference to its elevation, for there
were vast expanses of country, not much above the sea
level, with an exceedingly low temperature. But not know-
ing the influence which we are now studying, Humboldt, I
imagme, omitted one of the most important of the causes
which contributed to the observed result. Even the ab-
sence of the sun at night causes powerful refrigeration
when the air is dry. The removal, for a single summer
night, of the aqueous vapour from the atmosphere which
covers England, would be attended by the destruction of
every plant which a freezing temperature could kill. In
Sahara, where ^ the soil is fire and the wind is flame,' the
refrigeration at night is often painfril to bear. Ice has been
formed in this region at night. In Australia, also, the dir
wmcd range of temperature is very great, amounting, com-
monly, to between 40 and 50 degrees. In short, it may be
safely predicted, that wherever the air is dry^ the daily
thermometric range will be great. This, however, is quite
different from saying that when the air is dear the ther-
mometric range win be great. Great clearness to light is



406



IiBUmJUl XL



Fig. 9a



perfectly oompatible with great opacity to heat ; tiie alr
mosphere may be charged with aqueous vapour while a
deep blue sky is overhead, and on snch occanons the ter-
restrial radiation would, notwithstanding the ^ deamess,'
be intercepted*

And-here we are led to an easy explanation of a &/tb
which evidently perplexed Sir John Les-
lie. This celebrated experimenter ooa-
stmcted an instrument which he named
an a3thr%09cope^ the fonction of which
was to determine the radiation against
the sky. It consbted of two glass bulbs
nnited by a vertical glass tube, so nar-
row that a little column of liquid was
supported in the tube by its own adhe-
sion. The lower bulb d (fig. 98) was
protected by a metallic envelope, and
gave the temperature of the air ; the up-
per bulb B, was blackened, and was sur-
rounded by a metallic cup c, which pro-
tected the bulb from terrestrial radia-
tion.

^ This instrument,' says its inventory
^ exposed to the open air in clear weath-
er will at aU times, both during the day
and the night, indicate an impression of
cold shot downwards from the higher
The sensibility of tiie instrument is very
striking, for the liquor incessantly falls and rises in the
stem, with every passing cloud. But the cause of its varia-
tions does not always appear so obvious. Under a fine
blue sky the cethriosccpe win sometimes indicate a cold of
60 millesimal degrees; yet on other days, when the air
seems equdUy bright^ the effect is hardly 30°.' This anom-
aly is sim{^y due to the difference in the quantity of


regions.



<oleab' days Aim ^dby' days. 407

aqueous vapour present miii% atmosphere. Indeed, Leslie
libnself connects the effect tnth aqueous vapour in these
words, ' The pressure of hygrometrio moisture in the air
probably affects the ^strunSBnt.' It is not, however, the
* pressure ' that is effectr^ ; the presence of invisible vapour
intercepted the radiatloi^from the sethrioscope, while its
absence opened a doonHSv the escape of this radiation into
space. As regards experiments on terrestrial radiation, a
new definition will have to be given for ' a clear day ; ' it
is manifest, for example, that in experiments with the
pyrheliometer,* two days of equal visual clearness may
give totally different results. We are also enabled to ac-
count tor the iWot that the radiation from this instrument
is often inte^c^ed wLen no clpud is seen. Could we,
however, make Uie eonstitiients of the atmosphere, its
vapour includetl^ olyt^cts of vision, we should see sufficient
to account for this result.

Another interesting point, on which this subject has a
bearing is Meiloni's theory of serein. 'Most authors,'
writes this eniiiient phlloeoplior, ' attribute to the cold, re-
sulting from the radiation of the air, the excessively fine
rain which sometimes faHa in a clear sky, during the fine
season, a few moments after sunset.' * But,' he continues,
J^ as no fact is yet known which directly proves the emissive
power of pure and transparent elastic fluids, it appears to
me more conformable,' &c., &c. If the difficulty here
urged against the theory of serein be its only one, the the-
ory will stand, for transparent elastic fluids are now proved
to possess the power of radiation which the theory assumes.
It is not, however, to radiation from the air that the chil-
ling can be ascribed, but to radiation from the body itself,
whose condensation produces the sirein.

Let me add the remark, that as far as I can at present

« The iDStrament is described in Lecture XII.
J



APPENDIX TO.LECTURE XL



EXTRACT FROM A PAPER IN THE * PHILOSOPHIOAL TRAVBAOTIOm
FOR 1882/ ON THE ABSORPTION AND RADUTION OF HXAT IT
GASEOUS MATTER.



* I WAS engaged in experiments on aqueous ^ M§M B m wktm wj
other duties compelled me to close this cnqmry lor a tanc X
beUeye, howeyer, I may safely say that not oily v 4e «^bi ^
aqneoos yapom* on radiant heat meaflnnble, tat &■» ma^m mm§
te made tue of aiaw^mure of atmMfknie mmi^mm. & tah^ mmc

mg deUeacy, Unhappily, as in other caaei tmtamgL mmm x .'u*
memoir, I haye heen nnable to give ^m m&smc li^
I could wish; but the lesolti vibidt I ahi it «^
are nevertheless interesting.

^ On a great nmnber of ^teamam Z votommv \m tr ^
directly from the laborat<»y bttHf -^ ^atpcnaHsw- -i*.^ -*»*
same air aft» it had been paaKifi itnvji^ Im- irr-*- «rs*'->--
Galling the action of the dry jor mmr ir rnnxu^*- • ^-^
oerillati? aboit msAj (fer the ^em^aasm-- r >r *^.. ••^
little %Bam '^te day), on tibr lui«Mrii«; m»« .^ t^^^^
soipiiinK^eBeiiterfedwithtfie VKT^cr or * ^ **»*w#».^



kdbi


ir^i£ .


. «s.


't»


2(tth .


. •fg.


tr


29di .


^S^


rr


3Iat .


>



< Heady /^^ths (^Oc j6imi. <|irti
which, therefore, in wsul mauu
odUmofthealriMmktA t-m^uift^

*TheezperinMife^iM«i «^
been yery
tions and able
self against


408 LBcrruBE xi.

judge, aqueous vapour and liquid water absorb the same
class of rays ; this is another wslj of stating that the colour
of pure water is shared by its vapour. In virtue of aqueous
vapour the atmosphere is therefore a blue medium. I be-
lieve it has been remarked that the colour of the firmament-
al blue, and of distant hills, deepens with the amount of
aqueous vapour in the air ; but the substance which pro-
duces a variation of depth must be effective as an origin
of color. Whether the azure of the sky — the most difficult
question of meteorology, — ^is to be thus accounted for, I
will not at present venture to enqmre.

^ Note.

The fetr of being led too far from my subject causes me to withhold all
speculation as to the cause of atmospheric polarisation. I may, howerer,
remarlc that the polarisation of heat was illustrated in ^le lectures by means
of the mica piles with which Professor (now Principal) J. D. Forbes first
succeeded in establishing the fact of polarisation. '

In connexion with the inrestigation of the radiation and absorption of
heat by gases and vapours, it gives me pleasure to refer to the prompt and
intelligent aid rendered me by Mr. Becker, of the firm of Elliotts*, 80
West Strand.

From the more energetic gases and vapours a series of very striking
class experiments may be derived, interesting alike to the chemist and the
natural philosopher. Mr. Becker has constructed a cheap form of apparatus
suitable for the experiments. Where quantitative results are not required,
two cubes of hot water, an open tin tube, a thermo-electric pile, and a
galvanometer, magnetised, as described in the Appendix to Lecture I., will
suffice to illustrate the action of the stronger gases and vapours. A current
of air from a common bellows wiU carry the vapour into the tube.



APPENDIX TO, LECTURE XI.



BXTBAOT FROM A PAPER IN THE * PHILOSOPHICAL TRANSACTIONS
FOR 1862; ON THE ABSORPTION AND RADIATION OP HEAT BY
GASEOUS MATTER.

* I WAS engaged in experiments on aqueons yaponrs when my
other duties compelled me to close this enquiry for a time. I
believe, however, I may safely say that not only is the action of
aqneons vapour on radiant heat measurable, but this action may
he made use of as a measure of <xtmoap7ieric moisture, the tvbe used
in my experiments being thus converted into a hygrometer of surpass-
ing delicacy. Unhappily, as in other cases touched upon in this
memoir, I have been imable to give this subject the developement
I could wish ; but the results which I am in a position to record
are nevertheless interesting.

^ On a great number of occasions I compared the air sent
directly from the laboratory into the experimental tube with the
same air after it had been passed through the drying apparatus.
Calling the action of the dry air unity, or supposing it rather to
oscillate about unity (for the temperature of my source varied a
little from day to day), on the following days the annexed ab-
soiptions were observed with the undried air of the laboratory : —

Absorptiofrvs hy Undried Air.



October 23rd . . 63

„ 24th . . 62

„ 29th . . 66

,, 31st . . 56



November 1st . .50

„ 4th . . 58

„ 8th . . 49

12th . . 62



* Nearly y*5>ths of the above eflfects are due to aqueous vapour;
which, therefore, in some instances exerted nearly sixty times the
action of the air in tohich it wa>s diffused,

* The experiments which I have made on aqueous vapour have
been very numerous and varied. Differing as I did from so cau-
tious and able an experimenter, I spared no paons to secure my-
self against error. I have experimented wi^ air moistened in

18



410



APPENDIX TO LEOTUBB XI.



TBiioiis ways, sometimes by aUowing ranall babbles of it to ascend
throagh water, sometimes diyiding it, by sending it through the
pores of common cane imnSersed in water. Between the drying
apparatus and the experimental tube I have introduced tubes
containing fragments of glass moistened with water, and allowed
the air to pass over them ; large effects were in all such cases ob-
tained, the absorption being usually mare than eighty times that
of dried air. Fragments of unwetted glass, which had been
merely exposed to the air of the laboratory, had dried air led
oyer them into the experimental tube; the absorption was fifteen
times that of dried air. A roU of bibulous paper, taken from <me
of the drawers of the laboratory, and to all appearance perfectly
dry, was enclosed in a glass tube, and dry air carried between its
leayes. The experiment was made five times in succession with
the same paper, and the following absorptions were observed : —

Absorption



No.1


12


No. 2


62


No. 3


62


No. 4


47


No. 5


47



' In fact, the action of aqueous vapour is exactly such as might
be expected from the vapour of a liquid which Melloni found to
be the most powerful absorber of radiant heat of all be had ex-
amined.

^ Every morning, on commencing my experiments, I had an
interesting example of the power of glass to gather a film of
moisture on its surface. Suppose the tube mounted and the air
of the laboratory removed, as far as the air-pump was capable of
removing it. On allowing dry air to enter for the first time, the
needle would move firom 0° to 50°. On pumping out it would
return to 0°, and on letting in dry air a second time it would
swing almost to 40°. Repeated exhaustions would cause this
action to sink almost to nothing. These results were entirely due
to the moisture collected during the night in an invisible film on
the inner surface of the tube, and which was removed by the air
on entering, and diffused through the tube. If the dry air en-
tered at the end of the tube nearest to the source of heat, on the
first and second admissions, and sometimes even on a tMrd, the



ABSOBPnON BT DBT AOT) BT MOIST AIB. 411

yapour carried fix)m the wann end to the cold end of the tube
was precipitated as a mist apon the latter, for a distance some-
times of nearly a foot. The mist always disappeared on pumping
out. It is needless to remark that facts of this character, of
which I could cite many, were not calculated to promote incau-
tiousness or rashness on my part. I saw very clearly how easy
it was to &11 into the grayest errors, and I took due precautions
to prevent myself from doing so

' But, to place the matter beyond all doubt, I abolished the
plates of rocksalt altogether, and operated thus : — ^An India-rub-
ber bag, B (fig. 99), was filled with air, and to its nozzle a T-piece,
with the cocks q q', was attached. The cock q,' was connected
with two tubes, tj'u', each of which was filled with fragments of
glass moistened with distilled water. The cock q, was connected
with the tubes v u, each of which was filled with fragments of
glass moistened by sulphuric acid. The other ends of these two
series of tubes were conijected with the cocks o o' ; and from the
T-piece between these cocks a tube led to the end e' of the open
experimental tube t. The cock a at the other end of the experi-
mental tube was placed in connection with an air-pump. The pile
p, the screen s, and the compensating cube c' were used as in the
other experiments, e is the end of the front chamber, and c the
source of heat. In some experiments I had the end e closed by a
plate of rocksalt, in others it was allowed to remain open, a dis-
tance of about 13 inches intervening between the radiating surface
and the open end e' of the experimental tube.

* Closing the cocks q and o, and opening q' and o', gentle
pressure being applied to the bag b, a current of moist air was
slowly discharged at the end of e' of the experimental tube. The
pump in connection with a was then worked, and thus by degrees
the air was sucked into the tube t. The deflection of the galva-
nometer was 30"*, when the moist air filled the tube as completely
as the arrangement permitted— this deflection being due to the
predominance of the compensating clKibe over the radiating
source c.

* The cocks q' and o' were now closed, and q and o opened ;
proceeding as before, a current of dry air was discharged at b\
and this air was drawn into the tube t in the manner just de-
scribed. The moist air was thus displaced by dry ; and, while



412



APPENDIX TO LBXTTUBB XI.

Fig. 00.


BOCESALT PLATES BUITABLE. 413

the displacement was going on, the galvanometer was observed
through the distant telescope. The needle soon commenced to
sink, and slowly went downHo zero, proving that a greater quan-
tity of heat passed through the dry than through the moist air.
The wet air was substituted for the dry, and the dry for the wet,
twenty times in succession, with the same constant result : the
entrance of the humid air always caused the needle to move from
0° to 30**, while the entrance of dry air caused it to fall from
30** to 0®. The air-pump was resorted to, because I found that
when I attempted to displace the air by the direct force of the
current from b, the temperature of the pile, or of the source, was
so affected by the fresh air as to confuse the result. I may remark
that not only have I operated thus for days with aqueous vapour,
but every result which I have obtained with vapours generally
has been thus confirmed, so that all doubt as to the applicability
of the rock-salt plates to researches of this nature may, I think,
be abandoned.'



LECTURE XII.

[April 10, 1862.]
9Sir,— ▲ CLEAB nrr imd calm but damp ahiosphkix hscisbait vob

m 00PI0U8 VOBMAfKm— 0KWKD SUBSTAJICIS COLDKE TBAH Lai>« W «P
OR»— DKWKD SUBSTAVCIS SBITEB mAMATVKS TBAH UaDl W lD mnS —

raw IS nn cosonsATiov of the AmoBrHssic tafovm. oh subsujicks

WHICH HATI BUH CHILLED BT RAOIATIOH — ^LUXAB KADLATIOlf— COK-

vnTvnov of thk suk — the bbiobt lives ik the spectra op the

METAtS — ^AX nrCAVDESCElIT TAPOVE ABSORBS THE RATS WHICH IT CAB
ITSELF EMIT — KIRCHHOF*S OEBERALISATIOB — PRAC SU OP E R^ UHES — SO-
LAR CBEMISTBT — EMI8BI0B OF THE SUB — ^HERSCMEL ABD POCILLET's EX-
PERIMEBTB— mater's METEORIC THEORY— KPPECT OP THE TIDES OB THE
BARTB'S ROTATIOB — EBEROIES OP THE SOLAR SYSTEM — ^HELMHOLTZ, THOM-
iOB, WATBRSTOB — RELATIOB OP THE SCB TO ANIMAL ABD TE6ETABLX
LIPB.

"A 1 rE have learned that our atmosphere is always more
V V or less charged with aqueons vapom*, the condensa-
tion of which forms our clouds, hail, ram, and snow. I
have now to direct your attention to one particular case of
condensation, of great interest and heauty — one, moreover,
regarding which erroneous notions were for a long time en-
tertained. I refer to the phenomenon of Dew. The
aqueous vapour of our atmosphere is a powerful radiant,
but it is diffused through air which usually exceeds its own
mass more than one hundred times. Not only, then, its
own heat, but the heat of the large quantity of air which
surrounds it, must be discharged by the vapour, before it
C|an sink to its point of condensation. The retardation of
chilling due to this cause enables good solid radiators, at
the earth's surface, to outstrip the vapour in their speed of



DBW. 415

refrigeration ; and hence upon these bodies aqueous vapour
may be condensed to liquid, or eyen congealed to hoar-
frost, while at a few feet above the surface it still main-
tains its gaseous state. This is actually the case in the
beautiful phenomenon which we have now to examine.

We are indebted to a London physician for a true
theory of dew. In 1818 Dr. Wells published his admirable
Essay upon this subject. He made his experiments in a
garden in Surrey, at a distance of three miles from Black-
friars Bridge. To collect the dew he used little bundles
of wool, which, when dry, weighed 10 grains each ; and
having exposed them during a clear night, the amount of
dew deposited on them was determined by the augmenta-
tion of their weight. He soon found that whatever inter-
fered with the vi^w of the sky from his piece of wool, in-
terfered also with the deposition of dew. He supported
a board on four props ; on the board he laid one of his
wool parcels, and under it a second similar one ; during a
clear calm night, the former gained 14 grains in weight,
while the latter gained only 4. He bent a sheet of paste-
board like the roof of a house, and placed underneath it a
bundle of wool on the grass : by a single night's exposure
the wool gained 2 grains in weight, while a similar piece
of wool exposed on the grass, but quite unshaded by the
roof, collected 16 grains of moisture.

Is it steam from the earth, or is it fine rain from the
heavens, that produces this deposition of dew ? Both of
these notions have been advocated. That it does not arise
from the earth is, however, proved by the observation, that
more moisture was collected on the propped board than on
the earth's surface under it. That it is not a fine rain is
proved by the fact, that the most copious deposition occur-
red on the clearest nights.

Dr. Wells next exposed thermometers, as he had done
his wool-bundles, and found that cU those places where the



416 LBOTUBE zn.

dew fell mpat coptouBly the temperature sank loweet. On
the propped board already referred to, he found the tem-
perature 0° lower than under it ; beneath the pasteboard
roof the thermometer was 10^ warmer than on the open
grass. He also found that when he laid his thermometer
upon a grass plot, on a dear night, it sank sometimes 14^
lower Hian a similar thermometer suspended in free air at
a height of 4 feet above the grass. A Int of cotton, placed
beside the former, gained 20 grains ; a similar bit, beside
the latter, only 11 grains in weight. ITie lowering of the
tempemture and the deposition of the dew went hand in
hand. Not only did the shade of artificial screens inter-
fere with the lowering of the temperature and the formar
tion of the dew, but a cloud-screen acted in the same man-
ner. He once observed his thermometer, which, as it lay
upon the grass, showed a temperature 12° lower than the
air a few feet above the grass, rise, on the passage of some
clouds, until it was only 2° colder than the air. In fact, as
the clouds crossed his zenith, or disappeared from it, the
temperature of his thermometer rose and fell.

A series of such experiments, conceived and executed
with singular clearness and skill, enabled Dr. Wells to pro-
pound a Theory of Dew, which has stood the test of all
subsequent criticism, and is now universally accepted.

It is an effect of chilling by radiation. ^The upper
parts of the grass radiate their heat into re^ons of empty
space, which, consequently, send no heat back in return ; its
lower parts, from the smallness of their conducting power,
transmit little of the earth's heat to the upper parts, which,
at the same time, receiving only a small quantity from the
atmosphere, and none from any other lateral body, must
remain colder than the air, and condense into dew its watery
vapour, if this be sufficiently abundant in respect to the
decreased temperature of the grass.' Why the vapour
itself, being a powerful radiant, is not as quickly chilled as



THBOEY OF WELLS. 417

the grass, I have already explained, on the ground that the
vapour has not only its own heat to discharge, but also that
of the large mass of air by which it is surrounded.

Dew being the result of the condensation of atmo-
spheric vapour, on substances which have been sufficiently
cooled by radiation, and as bodies differ widely in their
radiative powers, we may expect corresponding differences
in the deposition of dew. This Wells proved to be the
case. He often saw dew copiously deposited on grass and
painted wood, when none could be observed on gravel
walks adjacent. He found plates of metal, which he had
exposed, quite diy, while adjacent bodies were covered
with dew : in aU mch cases the temperature of the metal
was fouThd to he higher than thaJt of the dewed svbstancea.
This is quite in accordance with our knowledge that metals
are the worst radiators. On one occasion he placed a plate
of metal upon grass, and upon the plate he laid a glass
thermometer ; the thermometer, after some time, exhibited
dew, while the plate remained dry. This led him to sup-
pose that the instrument, though lying on the plate, did not
share its temperature. He placed a second thermometer,
with a giU bulb^ beside the first ; the naked glass ther-
mometer — a good radiator — remained 9° colder than its
companion. To determine the true temperature of a body
is, I may remark, a difficult task : a glass thermometer, sus-
pended in the air, will not give the temperature of the air ;
its own power as a radiant or an absorbent comes into
play. On a clear day, when the sun shines, the thermom-
eter will be warmer than the air ; on a clear night, on the
contrary, the thermometer will be colder than the air.
We have seen that the passage of a cloud can ndse the
temperature of a thermometer 10 degrees in a few minutes.
This augmentation, it is manifest, does not indicate a cor-
responding augmentation of the temperature of the air, but
18*



418 UDOTDKB xa.

merely the interceptioa and reflection, by the doiid, of the
rays of heat emitted by the thermometer

Dr. Wells applied his prindples to the ezplanaticm of
many oorioos effects, and to the correction of many popular
errors. Moon blindness he refers to the chill produced by
radiation into dear space, the shining of the moon being
merely an accompaniment to the clearness of the atmos-
phere. The putrefying influence ascribed to the moon-
beams is really due to the deposition of moisture, as a kind
of dew, on the exposed animal substances. The nipping
of tender plants by frost, even when the air of the garden
is some degrees above the freezing temperature, is also to
be referred to chilling by radiation. A cobweb screen
would be sufficient to preserve them from injury.*

Wells was the first to explain the formation, artificially^
of ice in Bengal, where the substance is never formed nat-
urally. Shallow pits are dug, which are partially filled
with straw, and on the straw flat pans, containing water
which had been boiled, is exposed to the clear firmament.
The water is a poweful radiant, and sends off its heat
copiously into space. The heat thus lost cannot be supplied
from the earth — ^this source being cut off by the non-con-
ducting straw. Before sunrise a cake of ice is formed in
each vessel. This is the explanation of Wells, and it is, no
doubt, the true one. I think, however, it needs supple-
menting. It appears, from the description, that the con-

* With reference to this point we have the folIo¥ring beautiful passage
in the "Eaa&y of Wells : — * I had often, in the pride of half knowledge, smiled
at the means frequently employed by gardeners to protect tender plants
from cold, as it appeared to me impossible that a thin mat, or any such
flimsy substance could prevent them from attaining the temperature of the
atmosphere, by which alone I thought them liable to be injured. But
when I had leai^ed that bodies on the surface of the earth become, during
a stUl and serene night, colder than the atmosphere, by radiatlH^ their heat
to the heavens, I perceived inounediately a just reason for the practice whidi
I had before deemed useless.'



NOOTUBNAL BABIA.TION. 419

dition most suitable for the formation of ice, is not only a
clear air, but a dry air. The nights, says Sir Robert
Barker, most favourable for the production of ice, are those
which are clearest and most serene, and in which very little
dew appears after midnight. I have italicised a very sig-
nificant phrase. To produce the ice in abundance, the at-
mosphere must not only be clear, but it must be compara-
tively free from aqueous vapour. When the straw in
which the pans were laid became wet, it was always changed
for dry straw, and the reason Wells assigned for this was,
that tie straw, by being wetted, was rendered more com-
pact, and efficient as a conductor. This may have been the
case, but it is also certain that the vapour rising from the
wet straw, and overspreading the pans like a screen, would
check the chill, and retard the congelation.

With broken health Wells pursued- and completed this
beautiful investigation ; and, on the brink of the grave, he
composed his Essay. It is a model of wise enquiry and of
lucid exposition. He made no haste, but he took no rest
till he had mastered his subject, looking steadfastly into it
imtil it became transparent to his gaze. Thus he solved
his problem, and stated its solution in a fashion which ren-
ders his work imperishable.*

Since his time various experimenters have occupied
themselves with the question of nocturnal radiation ; but,
though valuable facts have been accumulated, if we ex-
cept a supplement contributed by Melloni, nothing of im-
portance has been added to the theory of Wells. Mr.
Gl^her, M. Martins, and others, have occupied themselves
with the subject. The following table contains some re-
sults obtained by Mr. Glaisher, by exposing thermometers
at difierent heights above the sm*face of a grass field. The

* The tract of Wells is preceded by a personal memoir written by him-
0elf. It has the solidity of an essay of Montaigne.



490 JJOtVMM XXL

tbSSBt^ obtenred, when the thermometer was ezpofled on
loDg graifl, is represented hj the number 1,000 ; while the
•nooeeding numbers represent the relative ehiOmg of the
tfaermoiseters placed in the positions indicated :

Sadiation.
LoDggrafli .... 1000
One inch above titepointo of die gra» . 671
Twoincfaes „ „ . 610

Three indies „ ,, . 477



Six inches
One foot
Two feet
Four feet
Six feet



. 129
86
69

. 62



It may be asked why tiie thermometer, which is a good
radiator, is not, when suspended in free idr, jnst as much
chiUed as at the earth's surface. Wells has answered the
question. It is because the thermometer, when chilled,
cools the air in immediate contact with it ; this air con-
tracts, becomes heavy, and trickles downwards, thus allow-
ing its place to be taken by warmer air. In this way the
free thermometer is prev^ited from falling very low be-
neath the temperature of the air. Hence, also, the neces-
sity of a still night for the copious formation of dew ; for,
when the wind blows, fresh air continually circulates amid
the blades of grass, and prevents any considerable chilling
by radiation.

When a radiator is exposed to a clear sky it tends to
keep a certsdn thermometric distance, if I may use the
term, between its temperature and that of the surrounding
air. This distance will depend upon the energy of the
body as a radiator, but it is to a great extent independent
of the temperature of the air. Thus M. Pouillet has proved
that in the month of April, when the temperature of the air
was 8^*6 C, swansdown fell by radiation to — 8°-5 : the
whole chilling, therefore, was 7°*!. In the month of June,



MELLONl's BUFFLEMSBT TO TEOB THEORY OF DEW. 421

when the temperature of the air was^ 7^*75 C^ the tempera-
ture of the radiating swansdown was 10^*54 : the chilling of
the swansdown by radiation is here 7'''21 ; almost precisely
the same as that whidi occorred in April Thus, while the
general temperature varies within wide limits, the differ-
ence of temperature between the radiating body and the
surrounding air, remains sendbly constant.

These facts enabled Melloni to make an important addi-
tion to the theory of dew. He found that a glass thermom-
eter, placed on the ground, is never chilled more than 2"^
C. below an adjacent thermometer, ieith silvered bulb^ which
hardly radiates at alL These 2° C, or thereabouts, mark
the thermometric distance above referred to, which the
glass tends to preserve betweeen it and the surrounding
air. But Six, Wilson, Wells, Parry, Scoresby, Glidsher,
and others, have found differences of more thau 10° O.,
between a thermometer on grass, and a second thermom-
eter hung a few feet above the grass. How is this to be
accounted for ? Very simply, according to Melloni, thus :
— ^The grass blades first chill themselves by radhition, 2° O.
below the surroundiog air : the air is then chilled by con-
tact with the grass, and forms around it a cold aerial bath.
But the tendency of the grass is to keep the above constant
difference between its own temperature and that of the
surroimding medium. It therefore sinks lower. The air
sinks in its turn, being still further chilled by contact with
the grass ; the grass, however, again seeks to re-establish
the former difference ; it is agun followed by the air, and
thus, by a series of actions and reactions, the entire stratum
of air in contact with the grass becomes lowered far below
the temperature which corresponds to the actual radiative
energy of the grass.

So much for terrestrial radiation ; that of the moon
will not occupy us so long. Many futile attempts have
been made to detect the warmth of the moon's beams. Ko



48S JaWJTvmm zn.

doabt 18 entertamed that ereij Imnmoiis raj is also a heat
TBj ; but the ligfatrgiyiiig power is not even an i^pYoxiniate
measure of the calorific energy of a beam. With a large
polyzonal lens, Melloni conyerged an image of the moon
upon his pile ; but he found the cold of his lens far more
than sufficient to mask the heat, if such there were, of the
moon. He screened off his lens from the hearens, placed
his pile in the focus of the lens, waited until the needle
came to zero, and then suddenly removing his screen al-
lowed the concentrated light to strike his pile. The slight
air-drafts in the place of experiment were sufficient to dis-
guise the effect. He then stopped the tube in front of his
pile with glass screens, through 'Which the light went
freely to the blackened face of the pile, where it was con-
Terted into heat. TTiis heat could not get back through the
glass screen^ and thus Melloni, following the example of
Saussure, accumulated his effects, and obtained a deflection
of 3^ or 4°. The deflection indicated warmth, and this is
the only experiment which gives us any positive evidence
as to the calorific action of the moon's rays. Incomparably
less powerful than the solar rays in the first instance, their
action is first enfeebled by distance, and, secondly, by the
fact that the obscure heat of the moon is almost wholly ab-
sorbed by our atmospheric vapour. Even such obscure
rays as might happen to reach the earth would be utterly
cut off by such a lens as Melloni made use of. It might be
worth while to make the experiment with a metallic reflec-
tor, instead of with a lens. I have myself tried a conical
reflector of very large dimensions, but have hitherto been
defeated by the unsteadiness of the London air.

We have now to turn our thoughts to the source from
which all terrestrial and lunar heat is derived. This source
is the sun ; for if the earth has ever been a molten sphere,
which is now cooling, the quantity of heat which reaches
its surface from within, has long ceased to be sensible.



SFBOTBUH AliTALYBIS BY THB ELECTRIO UGHT. 423

First, ihean, let us enquire what is the constitution of this
wondrous body, to which we owe both light and life.

Let us approach the subject gradually and prepare our
minds, by previous discipline, for the treatment of this
noble problem. You already know how the spectrum of
the electric light is formed. Here you have one upon the
screen, two feet wide and eight long, with all its magnifi-
cent gradations of colour, one fading into the other, without
solution of continuity. The light from which this spec-
trum is derived, is emitted from the incandescent carbon .
points within our electric lamp. All other solids give a
similar spectrum. When I raise this platinum wire to
whiteness by an electric current, and examine its light by a
prism, I find the same gradation of colours, and no gap
whatever between one colour and the other. But by in-
tense heat, — ^by th^heat of the electric lamp, for example,
— ^I can volatilise that platinum, and throw upon the screen,
not the spectrum of the incandescent solid, but of its tw-
candescent vapour. The spectrum is now changed ; instead
of being a continuous gradation of colours, it consists of a
series of brilliant lines, separated from each other by spaces
of darkness.

I have arranged my pieces of carbon thus : — the lower
one is now a cylinder, about half an inch in diameter, in
the top of which I have scooped a small hollow ; in this
hollow I place the metal which I wish to examine — say this
piece of zinc, — and bring down upon it the upper point.
The current passes ; I draw the points apart, and you see
the magnificent arc that now unites them; here is its
magnified image upon the screen, a fine stream of purple
light 18 inches long. That coloured space contains the
particles of the zinc discharged across from carbon to car-
bon ; these particles are now oscillating in certain definite
periods, and the colour which we perceive is the mixture
of impressions due to these oscillations. Let us separate,



\



434 LflOTDBB XSL

hj a priBm, tlie coloured etream into its xsomponents ; here
they are, splendid bands of red and blue. Pray remember
the character and position of these bands, as I shall have
to refer to them again immediately.

I interrupt the current ; eject the zinc, and put in its
place a bit of copper. Here you see a stream of green
light between the carbons, which we will analyse as we
did the light of the zinc. You can see that the spectrum
of the copper is different from that of the zinc : here you
have bands of brilliant green, which are absent from the
zinc. We may therefore infer, with certainty, that the atoms
of copper, in the voltaic arc, swing in periods different from
those of zinc. Let us now see whether these different
periods create any confusion, when we operate upon a sub-
stance composed of zinc and copper, — ^the familiar sub-
stance brass. Its spectrum is now before you, and if you
have retained the impression made by our two last experi-
ments, you will recognise here a spectrum formed by the
superposition of the two separate spectra of zinc and cop-
per. The alloy emits, without confusion, the rays peculiar
to the metals of which it is composed.

Every metal emits its own system of band% which are
as characteristic of it as those physical and chemical quali-
ties which give it its individuality. By a method of ex-
periment sufficiently refined we can measure, accurately, the
position of the bright lines of every known metal. Ac-
quainted with such lines we should, by the mere inspection
of the spectrum of any single metal, be able at once to
declare its name. And not only so, but in the case of a
mixed spectru^ we should be able to declare the constitu-
ents of the mixture from which it emanated.

This is true, not only of the metals themselves, but also
of their compounds, if they be volatile. I place a bit of
sodium on my lower cylinder and cause the voltaic dis-
charge to pass from it to the upper coal-point ; here is the



METALUO YAFOUBS. 43$

spdctrnm of the sodium: a single band of brilliant yel-
low. If I operated with sufficient delicacy I should divide
that band into two, with a narrow dark interval between
them. I eject the sodium from the lamp and put in its
place a little conunon salt, or chloride of sodiuhi. At this
high temperature the salt is volatile, and. you see the exact
yellow band produced by the salt that was given by the
metal. Thus, also, by means of the chloride of strontium
I produce the bands of the metal strontium ; by the chlo-
rides of calcium, magnesium, and lithium, I produce the
spectra of these respective metals.

Here, finally, I have a carbon cylinder perforated with
holes, into which I have stuffed a mixture of all the com-
pounds just mentioned ; and tJiere is the spectrum of the
mixture upon the screen. Surely nothing more magnifi-
cent can be imagined. Each substance gives out its own
peculiar rays, and thus they cut transversely, the whole
eight feet of the spectrum into splendid parallel bars of
coloured light. Having previously made yourselves ac-
quainted with the lines emitted by all the metals, you
would be able to unravel this spectrum, and to tell me what
substances I have employed in its production.

I make use of the voltaic arc simply because its light
is so intense as to be visible to a large audience like the
present, but I might make the same experiments with a
common blow-pipe fiame, which is nearly deprived of light
by the admixture of air or oxygen. The introduction of
sodium, or chloride of sodium, turns the fiame yellow;
strontium turns it red ; copper green, <fcc. The fiames thus
coloured, when examined by a prism, show the exact bands
which I have displayed before you on the screen.

We have already learned that gases and vapours absorb
the rays of heat, the heat that we employed being obscure.
I have no doubt that if those rays could make an impres-
sion upon the eye — ^if I could spread them out before you



496 LBCTDBB XIL

like the ooloure of the spectnmi — jon would find oertain
daaies of rays selectod, in eadi case, for destruction, the
others being allowed free passage throngh the* vapours.
A famous experiment of Sir David Brewster's, which I
will throw into a form suited to the lecture room, will
enable me to illustrate this power of selection io the case
of light. Into this cylinder, the ends of which are stopped
by plates of glass, I iotrodnce a quantity of nitrous acid
gas, the presence of which is now indicated by its rich
brown colour. I project a spectrum on the screen, eight
feet long and nearly two in width, and I place this cylin-
der, containing the brown gas, in the path of the beam as
it issues from the lamp. You see the effect ; the contin-
uous spectrum is now furrowed by numerous dark bands,
the rays answering to which are struck down by the nitric
gas, while it permits the intervening bands of light to pass
without hindrance.

We must now take a step in advance of the principle of
reciprocity, which I have already enunciated. Hitherto
we have found in gases, liquids, and solids^ that the good
absorber is the good radiator ; we must now go further and
state, that a gas or vapour^ absorbs those precise rays which
it can itself emit ; the atoms which swing at a certain rate
intercept ^e waves excited by atoms swinging at the same
rate. The atoms which vibrate red light will stop red
light; the atoms that oscillate yellow will stop yellow;
those that oscillate green will stop green, and so of the
rest. Absorption, you know, is a transference of motion
from the ether to the particles immersed in it, and the ab-
sorption of any atom is exerted chiefly upon those waves
which arrive in periods that correspond with the atom's
own rate of oscillation.

Let us endeavour to prove this experimentally. We
already know that a sodium flame, when analysed, gives us
a brilliant double band of yellow. Here is a flat vessel



ABSOBPnON BY SOBIUH VAPOUE. 427

containing a mixture of alcohol and water ; I warm the
mixture and ignite it : it gives a flame which is so feebly
luminous as to be scarcely visible. I now mix salt with
the liquid, and again ignite it ; the flame, which a moment
ago was scarcely to be seen, is now a brilliant yellow. I
project a continuous spectrum upon the screen, and in the
track of the beam, as it issues from the electric lamp, I
place the yellow sodium flame. Observe the spectrum nar-
rowly : you see a flickering gray band in the yellow of the
spectrum ; sometimes it is shaded deeply enough to show
you all that the flame has, at least in part, intercepted the
yellow band of the spectrum : it has partially absorbed the
precise light which it can itself emit.

But I wish to make the effect plainer, and therefore
abandon the alcohol light, and proceed thus: here is a
Bunsen's burner, the flame of which is intensely hot,
though it hardly emits any light. I place the burner in
front of the lamp, so that the beam, whose decomposition
is to form our spectrum, shall pass through the flame. I
have here a little net of platinum wire, in which I place a
bit of the metal sodium, about the size of a pea. I also set
up a pasteboard shade, which shall cut off the light emitted
by the sodium, from the screen on which the spectrum
fiJls. And now I am ready to make the experiment.
Here, then, in the first place, is the spectrum. I now in-
troduce the platinum net in front of the lamp ; the sodium
instantly colours the flame intensely yellow, and you see a
shadow coming over the yellow of the spectrum. But the
effect is . not yet at its maximum. The sodium now sud-
denly bursts into intensified combustion, and there you see
the yellow dug utterly out of the spectrum, and a bar of
intense darkness in its place. This violent combustion will
endure for a little time. I withdraw the flame, the yellow
reappears upon the screen; I reintroduce it, the yellow
band is cut out. This I can do ten times in succession,



^8 hwoTVBE zn.

and in tbe whole range of opties I do not think there is a
more striking experiment. Here, then, we have ocmdn-
aiyelj proved, that the light whidi the sodimn flame ab-
sorbs is the precise light ndiidi it can emit.

Let me be still more precise in mj experiment. The
yellow of the spectnun s[H-eads over a widish interval ; and
I wish now to show joa that it is the particular porticm
of the yellow which die sodimn emits, that is absorbed by
its flame. I place a little salt solaU<m on the ends of my
coal points ; yon now see the oontinnons spectnun with the
yellow band of the sodimn brighter than the rest of the
yellow. It is thus clearly defined before yom' eyes. I
again place the sodimn flame in front, and that particular
band which now stands oat from the speotmm is cat away
— a space of intense gloom occupying its {dace.

Ton have already seen a spectnun, derived from a mix-
tare of various substances, and whidi was composed of a
succession of sharply defined and brilliant bars, separated
from each other by intervals of darkness. Could I take
the mixture which produced that striped spectrum, and
raise it, by means of Biinsen's burner, to a temperature
sufficiently intense to render its vapours incandescent ; on
placing its flame in the path of a beam producing a contin-
uous spectrum, I should cut out of the latter the precise
rays emitted by the components of my mixture. I should
thus, instead of furrowing my q>ectrum by a single dark
band, as in the case of sodium, furrow it by a series of
dark bands, equal in number to the bright bands produced,
when the mixture itself was the source of light. .

I think we now possess knowledge sufficient to raise us
to the level of one of the most remarkable genendisations
of our age. When the light of the sun is properly decom-
posed, the spectrum is seen furrowed by innumerable dark
lines. A few of these were observed, for the first time,
by Dr. Wollaston ; but they were investigated with pro-



fraunhofbb's unes. 429

found (s&ill by Fraunhofer, and called, after him, Fratin-
borer's lines. It has long been supposed that these dark
spaces were caused by the absorption of the rays whidi
•correspond to them, in the atmosphere of the smi ; but no-
body knew how. Having onc^ proved that an incandescent
vapour absorbs the precise rays which it can itself emit,
and knowing that the body of the son is sorromided by an
incandescent photosphere, the supposition at once flashes
on the mind, that this photosphere may cut off those rays
of the central incandescent orb, whidi the photosphere
itself can emit. We are thus led to a theory of the con-
stitution of the sun, whidi renders a complete account of
the lines of Fraunhofer.

The sun consists of a central orb, liquid or solid, of ex-
ceeding brightness, which, of itself, would give a contin-
uous spectrum, or in Other words, which emits all kinds of
rays. These, however, have to pass through the photo-
sphere, which wraps the sun like a flame, and this vaporous
«ivel(^e cuts off those particular rays of the nucleus which
it can itself emit — ^the lines of Fraunhofer marking the
position of these failing rays. Could we abolish the cen-
tral orb, and obtain the spectrum of the gaseous envelope,
we should obtain a striped spectrum, eadi bright band of
which would coincide with one of Fraunhofer's dark lines.
These lines, therefore, are spaces of relative, not of abso-
lute darkness ; upon them the rays of the absorbent photo-
sphere fall ; but, these not being sufficiently intense to make
good the light intercepted^the spaces which they illuminate
are dark, iu comparison to the general brilliancy of the
spectrum.

It has long been supposed that sun and planets have
had a oonunon origin, and that hence the same substances
are more or less conmion to them all. Can we detect the
presence of any of our terrestrial substances in the sun ? I
have said that the bright bands of a metal are character-



430 LBOTUBB XIL

istic of the metal ; that we can, without seeing the metal,
declare its name from the inspection of the bands. The
bands are, so to speak, the voice of the metal declanhg its
presence. Hence, if any of our terrestrial metals be con- •
tamed in the sun's atmosphere, the dark lines which they
produce ought to coincide exactly with the bright lines
emitted by the vapour of the mjBtal itself. In the case of
the single metal iron, abotit 60 bright lines have been de-
termined as belonging to it. When the light from the
incandescent vapoitr of iron, obtained by passing elec-
tric sparks between two iron wires, is allowed to pass
through one-half of a fine slit, and the light of the sun
through the other half, the spectra from both sources of
light may be placed together ; and when this is done it is
found that for every bright line of the iron spectrum there
is a dark line of the solar spectrum. Reduced to actual
calculation, this means that the chances are more than 1,000,-
000,000,000,000,000 to 1 that iron is in the atmosphere of
the sun. Comparing the spectra of other metals in the
same manner. Professor Kirchhof, to whose genius we owe
this splendid generalisation, finds iron, calcium, magnesium,
sodium, chromium, and other metals, to be constituents of
the solar atmosphere, but as yet he has been unable to de-
tect gold, silver, mercury, aluminium, tin, lead, arsenic, or
antimony.

I can imitate in a way more precise than that hitherto
employed, the solar constitution here supposed. I place in
the electric lamp a cylinder of carbon about half an inch
thick ; on the top, and round about the edge of the cylin-
der, I place a ring of sodium, leaving the central portion
of the cylinder clear. I bring down the upper coal point
upon the middle of the cylinder's upper surface, thus pro-
ducing the ordinary electric light. The proximity of this
light to the sodium is sufficient to volatilise the latter, and
thus I surround my little central sun with an atmosphere



SOLAB BiaBBIOK.



481



Fig. 100.



of Bodiuin Taponr, as the real sun is surroimded by its
photosphere. In the spectrum of this light you see the yel-
low band is absent.

The energy of solar emission
has been measured by Sir John
Herschel at the Gape of Good
Hope, and by M. Pouillet in
Paris. The agreement between
the measurements is very re-
markable. Sir John Herschel
finds the direct heating effect of
a vertical sun, at the sea level, to
be competent to melt 0*00764 of
an inch of ice per minute ; while
according to M. Pouillet,. the
quantity is 0*00703 of an inch.
The mean of the determinations
cannot be far from the truth;
this gives 0*00728 of an inch of
ice per minute, or nearly half an
inch per hour. Before you (fig.
100) I have placed an instrument
similar in form to that used by
M. Pouillet, and called by him a
pyrheliometer. The particular in-
strument which you now see is composed of a shallow cylin-
der of steel, a a, which is filled with mercury. Into the cylin-
der this thermometer c?, is introduced, the stem of which is
protected by a piece of brass tubing. We thus obtain the
temperature of the mercury. The flat end of the cylinder
is to be turned towards the sun, and the surface thus pre-
sented is coated with lampblack. Here is a collar and
screw, cc, by means of which the instrument may be at-
tached to the stake driven into the ground, or into the
snow, if the observations are made at considerable heights.


433 jJKmms zn.

It is necessary that the surface whidi receives the son's
rays should be perpendicular to the rays, and this is secured
by appending to the brass tube which shields the stem of
the thermometer, a disk, e e, of precisely the same diameter
as the steel cylinder. When the shadow of the cylinder
accurately covers the disk, we are sure that the rays fall,
as perpendiculars, on the upturned surface of the cylinder.
The observations are made in the following manner : —
First, the instrument is permitted, not to receive the sun's
rays, but to radiate its own heat for five minutes ag^st
an unclouded part of the firmament ; the decrease of the
temperature of the mercury consequent on this radiation is
then noted. Next, the instrument is turned towards the
sun, so that the solar rays fall perpendicularly upon it for
five minutes, — ^the augmentation of temperature is now
noted. Finally, the instrument is turned again towards
the firmament, away from the sun, and allowed to radiate
for another five minutes, the sinking of the thermometer
being noted as before. You might, perhaps, suppose that
exposure to the sun alone would be sufficient to determine
his heating power ; but we must not forget that during
the whole time of exposure to the sun's action, the black-
ened surface of the cylinder is also radiating into space ;
it is not therefore a case of pure gain : the heat received
from the sun is, in part, thus wasted, even while the ex-
periment«is going on ; and to find the quantity lost, the
first and last experiments are needed. In order to obtain
the whole heating power of the sun, we must add to his
observed heating power, the quantity lost during the time
of exposure, and this quantity is the mean of the first and
last observations. Supposing the letter b to represent the
augmentation of temperature by five minutes' exposure to
the sun, and that t and t' represent the reductions of tem-
perature observed before and after, then the whole force
of the sun, which we may call t, would be thus expressed :



INFLUENOB OF THB BABTH's ATM06PHEBB. 433

The surface on which the sun's rays here fall is known ;
tiiie quantity of mercury within the cylinder is also known ;
hence we^ can express the effect of the sun's heat upon a
given area, by statrog that it is competent, in five minutes,
to raise so much mercury, or so much water, so many de-
grees in temperature. Water indeed, instead of mercury,
was used in M. Pouillet's pyrheliometer.

The observations were made at different hours of the
day, and, hence, through different thicknesses of the earth's
atmosphere ; augmenting from the minimum thickness at
noon, up ot the maximum at 6 p. m., which was the time of
the latest observation. It was found that the solar energy
diminished according to a certain law, as the thickness
of the air crossed by the sunbeams increased ; and from
this law M. Pouillet was enabled to infer what the atmos-
pheric absorption of a beam would be, if directed down-
wards to his instrument firom the zenith. This he found
to be 25 per cent. Doubtless, this absorption would be
chiefly exerted upon the longer undulations emitted by the
sun, the aqueous vapour of our air, and not the air
itself, being the main agent of absorption. Taking into
account the whole terrestrial hemisphere turned towards
the sun, the amount intercepted by the atmospheric en-
velope is four-tenths of the entire radiation in the direction
of the earth. Thus, were the atmosphere removed, the
illuminated hemisphere of the earth would receive nearly
twice the amount of heat from the sun that now reaches
it. The total amount of solar heat received by the earth
in a year, if distributed imiformly over the earth's surface,
would be suflScient to liquefy a layer of ice 100 feet thick,
and covering the whole earth.

•Knowing thus the annual receipt of the earth, we can
calculate the entire quantity of heat emitted by the sun in
19



4M

a year. Conoeiye a hollow sphere to anrroimd the sun, its
centre being the son's centre, and its surface at the dis-
tance of the earth from the son. The section of the earth
cat by this surface, is to the whole area of the hollow
sphere, as 1 : 2,800,000,000 ; hence, the quantity of sohu*
heat intercepted by the earth is only tszv^S^^^j ^^ ^^
total radiation.

The heat emitted by the sun, if used to melt a stratum
of ice applied to the sun's surface, would liquefy the
ice at the rate of 2,400 feet an hour. It would boil, per
hour, 700,000 millions of cubic miles of ice-cold water.
Expressed in another form, the heat given out by the sun,
per hour, is equal to that which would be generated by the
combustion of a layer of solid coal, 10 feet thick, entirely
surrounding the sun ; hence, the heat emitted in a year is
equal to that which would be produced by the combustion
of a layer of coal 17 miles in thickness.

These are the results of direct measurement; and
should greater accuracy be conferred on them by future
determinations, it will not deprive them of their astound-
ing character. And this expenditure has been going on
for ages, without our being able, in historic times, to de-
tect the loss. When l^e tolling of a bell is heard at a dis-
tance, the sound of each stroke soon sinks, the sonorous
vibrations are quickly wasted, and renewed strokes are
necessary to maintain the sound. lake the bell,

Die Sonne tont nach alter Weise.

But how is its tone sustained ? How is the- per^mial
loss of the sun made good ? We are apt to overlook the
wonderful in the common. Possibly to many of us — ^and
even to some of the most enlightened among us — ^the sun
appears as a fire, differing from our terrestrial fires only in
the magqitude and intensity of its combustion. But what
is the burning matter which can thus maintain itself? Al]



MADTTENAKOB OF 80LAB FOWEB. 435

that we know of cosmical phenomena declares our brother-
hood with the sun, — ^affirms that the same constituents
enter into the composition of his mass as those ah*eadj
known to chemistry. But no earthly substance with which
we are acquainted — ^no substance which the fall of meteors
has landed on the earth — would be at all competent to
maintain the sun's combustion. The chemical energy of
such substances would be too weak, and their dissipation
would be too speedy. Were the sun a solid block of coal,
and were it allowed a sufficient supply of oyygen, to enable
it to bum at the rate necessary to produce the observed
emission, it would be utterly consumed in 5,000 years.
On the other hand, to imagine it a body originally en-
dowed with a store of heat — sl hot globe now cooling —
necessitates the ascription to it of qualities, wholly differ-
ent from those possessed by terrestrial matter. If we knew
the specific heat of the sun, we could calculate its rate of
cooling. Assuming this to be the same as that of water —
the terrestrial substance which possesses the highest spe-
cific heat — at its present rate of emission, the entire mass
of the sun would cool down 16,000° Faht. in 6,000 years.
In short, if the sun be formed of matter like our own,
some means must exist of restoring to him his wasted
power.

The facts are so extraordinary, that the soberest hy-
pothesis regarding them must appear wild. The sun we
know rotates upon his axis ; he turns like a whed once in
about *26 days : can it be the friction of the periphery
of this wheel against something in surrounding space
which produces the light and heat ? Such a notion has
been entertained. But what forms the brake, and by what
agency is it held, while it rubs against the sun ? The ac-
tion is inconceivable ; but, granting the existence of the
brake, we can calculate the total amount of heat which the
sun could generate by sudi friction. We know his mass,



486 JJKTUEE zn.

we know his time of rotadon ; we know the T nech a ni c d
eqniyaloit of heat ; and from these data we dedace, with
certainty, that the entire foroe of rotatiim, if ccmverted into
heat, would cover more than one, bat less than two ceur-
tories of emi^on.* There is no hypothesis inyolved in
this calcnlatioiL

There is another theory, which, however bold it may, at
first sight, appear, deserves our earnest attention* I have
already referred to it as the Meteoric Theory of the smi's
heat. Sohir space is peopled with ponderable objects:
Keller's celebrated statement that * there are more comets
in the heavens than fish in the ocean,' refers to the fact
that a small portion only of the total nmnber of comets be-
longing to oar system, are seen from the earth. Bat
besides comets, and planets, and moons, a nameroos class
of bodies belong to oar system, — asteroids, which, from
their smallness, might be regarded as cosmical atoms. Like
the planets and the comets these smaller bodies obey tiie
law of gravity, and revolve on elliptic orbits roond the son ;
and it is they, when they come within the earth's atmo-
sphere, that, fired by friction, appear to as as meteors and
falling stars.

On a bright night, 20 minutes rarely pass at any part
of the earth's surface without the appearance of at least
one meteor. At certain times (the 12th of August and the
14th of November) they appear in enormous numbers.
During nine hours of observation in Boston, when they were
described as falling as thick as snowflakes, 240,000 Meteors
were calculated to have been observed. The number fall-
ing in a year might, perhaps, be estimated at hundreds or
thousands of millions, and even these would constitute but
a small portion of the total crowd of asteroids that cbcu-
late round the sun. From the phenomena of light and

♦ Mejer Dynamlk dee Himmela, p. 10.



THB ZODUOAJL LIGHT. 437

heat, and by the direct observations of Encke on his comet,
we learn that the universe is filled by a resisting medium,
through the friction of which all the masses of our system
are drawn gradually towards the sun. And though the
larger planets show, in historic times, no diminution of
their periods of revolution, this may not hold good for the
fflnaller bodies. In the time required for the mean distance
of the earth from the sun to alter a single yard, a small
asteroid may have approached thousands of miles nearer to
our central luminary.

Following up these reflections we should infer, that
while this immeasurable stream of ponderable matter rolls
unceasingly towards the sun, it must augment in density
as it approaches its centre of convergence. And here the
conjecture naturally rises, that that weak nebulous light,
of vast dimen^ons, which embraces the sun — ^the Zodiacal
Light — ^may owe its existence to these crowded meteoric
masses. However this^ may be, it is at least proved that
this luminous phenomenon arises from matter which cir-
culates in obedience to planetary laws ; the entire mass
constituting the zodiacal light must be constantly ap-
proaching, and incessantly raining its substance down
upon the sun.

We observe the fall of an apple and investigate the law
which rules its motion. In the place of the earth we set
the sun, and in the place of the apple we set the earth, and
thus possess ourselves of the key to the mechanics of the
heavens. We now know the connection between height
of fall, velocity, and heat of the surface of the earth. In
the place of the earth let us set the sun, with 300,000 times
the earth's mass, and, instead of a fall of a few feet, let us
take cosmical elevations ; we thus obtmn a means of gen-
erating heat which transcends all terrestrial power.

It is easy to calculate both the maximum and the mini-
mum velocity, imparted by the sun's attraction to an as-



4SS LBQTUBB XH.

teroid drcalating round him ; the TnaYimuin is generated
when the body approaches the sun from an infinite dis-
tance ; the entire pull of the sun being then expended upon
it ; the minimum is that velocity which would barely eur
able the body to revolve round the sun close to his sui^ace.
The final velocity of the former, just before striking the
sun, would be 390 miles a second, that of the latter 276
miles a second. The asteroid, on striking the sun with the
former velocity, would develope more than 9,000 times the
heat generated by the combustion of an equal asteroid of
solid coal ; while the shock, in the latter case, would gen-
erate heat equal to that of the combustion of upwards of
4,000 such asteroids. It matters not, therefore, whether
the substances falling into the sun be combustible or not ;
their being combustible would not add sensibly to the tre-
mendous heat produced by their mechanical' collision.

Here then we have an agency competent to restore his
lost energy to the sun, and to maintain a temperature at
his surface which transcends all terrestrial combustion.
The very quality of the solar rays — ^their incomparable
.penetrative power— enables us to infer that the tempera-
ture of their origin must be enormous ; but in the fall of
asteroids we find the means of producing sudi a tempera-
ture. It may be contended that this showering down of
matter must be accompanied by the growth of the sun in
size ; it is so ; but the quantity necessary to produce the
observed calorific emission, even if accumulated for 4,000
years, would defeat the scrutiny of our best instruments.
If the earth struck the sun it would utterly vanish from
perception, but the heat developed by its shock would
cover the expenditure of the sun for a century.

To the earth itself apply considerations similar to those
which we have applied to the sun. Newton's theory of
gravitation, which enables us, from the present form of
the earth, to deduce its original state of aggregation, re-



THB TIDES AND THB SABXh's BOTATION. 489

veals to us, at the same time, a source of heat powerful
enough to bring about the fluid state — ^powerful enough to
fuse even worlds. It teaches us to regard the molten con-
dition of a planet as resulting from the mechanical union
of cosmical masses, and thus reduces to the same homo-
geneous process, the heat stored up in the body of the
earth, and the heat emitted by Hie sun.

Without doubt the whole surface of the sun displays an
unbroken ocean of fiery fluid matter. On this ocean rests
an atmosphere of glowing gas — ^a flame atmosphere, or
photosphere. But gaseous substances, when compared with
solid ones, emit, even when their temperature is very high,
only a feeble and transparent light. Hence it is probable
that the dazzling white light of the sun comes through the
atmosphere, from the more solid portions of the surface.*

There is one other consideration connected with the
permanence of our present terrestrial conditions, -which is
well worthy of our attention. Standing upon one of the
London bridges, we observe the current of the Thames re-
versed, and the water poured upwards twice a-day. The
water thus moved rubs against the river's bed and sides,
and heat is the consequence of this friction. The heat thus
generated is, in part, radiated into space, and there lost, as
far as the earth is concerned. What is it that supplies
this incessant loss ? The earth's rotation. Let us look a
little more closely at this matter. Lnagine the moon fixed,
and the earth turning like a wheel from west to east in its
diurnal rotation. A mountain on the earth's surface, on
approaching the moon's meridian, is, as it were, laid hold
of by the moon ; forms a kind of handle by which the
earth is pulled more quickly round. But when the meridian
is passed the pull of the moon on the mountain would be

* I am quoting here from Majer, but this is the exact yiew now enter-
tained by Eirchhof. We see the solid or liquid mass of the sun iJircugh
his photosphere.



440 LBcrrusE xn.

in the opposite direction ; it now tends to diminisli tlie
velocity of rotation as much as it previously augmented it ;
and thus the action of all fixed bodies on the earth's sur-
face is neutralised.

But suppose the mountain to lie always to the east of
the moon's meridian, the pull then would be always exert-
ed against the earth's rotation, the velocity of which would
be duniuished in a degree corresponding to the strength of
the pull. The tidal wave occupies this position — ^it lies al-
ways to the east of the moon's meridian ; the waters of the
ocean are, in part, dragged as a brake along the surface of
the earth, and as a brake they must diminish the velocity
of the earth's rotation. The diminution, though inevitable,
is, however, too small to mak^ itself felt within the period
over which observations on the subject extend. Suppos-
ing, then, that we turn a mill by the action of the tide, and
produce heat by the friction of the millstones ; that heat
has an origin totally different from the heat produced by
another pair of millstones which are turned by a mountain
stream. The former is produced at the expense of the
earth's rotation ; the latter at the expense of the sun's ra-
diation, which lifted the millstream to its source.*

Such is an outlrue of the Meteoric Theory of the sun's
heat, as extracted from Mayer's "Essay on Celestial Dynam-
ics. I have held closely to his statements, and in most
cases simply translated his words. But the sketch conveys
no adequate idea of the firmness and consistency with
which he has applied his principles. He deals with true
causes ; and the only question that can affect his theory re-
fers to the quantity of action which he has ascribed to these
causes. I do not pledge myself to this theory, nor do I ask
you to accept it as demonstrated ; still it would be a great
mistake to regard it as chimerical. It is a noble specula-

• Djnamik des Himmela p. 88, &c



DYNAMIO BADIA.TION. 441

ti<m ; and depend upon it, the true theory, if this, or some
form of it, be not the true one, wiQ not appear less wild or
less astoundmg.*

Mayer published his Essay in 1848 ; ^yq years after-
wards Mr. Waterston sketched, independently, a similar
theory, at the Hull Meeting of the British Association.
The Transactions of* the Royal Society of Edinburgh for
1864 contain an extremely beautiful memoir, by Professor
William Thomson, in which Mr. Waterston*s sketch is de-
veloped. He considers that the meteors which are to fur-
nish stores of energy for our future sunlight, lie principally
within the earth's orbit, and that we see them there, as the
Zodiacal Light, * an illuminated shower, or rather tornado,
of stones ' (Herschel, § 897). Thus he points to the precise
source of power previously indicated by Mayer. ' In con-
clusion, then,' writes Professor Thomson, ' the source of
energy from which solar heat is derived is undoubtedly
meteoric. . . . The principal source— perhaps the sole ap-
preciable efficient source — ^is in bodies osculating round the

* While preparing these sheets finally for press, I had occasion to look
once more into the writings of Mayer, and the effect was a revival of the
interest with which I first read them. Dr. Mayer was a working physician
in the little German town of fleilbronn, who, in 1840, made the observation
that the venous blood of a feverish patient in the tropics was redder than
in more northern latitudes. Starting from this fact, while engaged in the
duties of a laborious profession, and apparently without a single kindred
spirit to support and animate him, Mayer nused his mind to the level
indicated by the references made to his works, throughout this book. In
1842 he published his fii*st memoir * On the Forces of Inorganic Nature ; '*
in 1846, his * Organic Motion' was published ; and in 1848, his * Celestial
Dynamics ' appeared. After this, his overtasked brain gave way, and a
cloud settled on the intellect which had accomplished so mudi. The shade
however, was but temporary, and Dr. Mayer is now restored. I have never
seen him, nor has a line of correspondence ever passed between us.
Modestly and noiselessly he has done his work ; and having spoken of his
merits, as accident made it my duty to speak, I confidently leave to history
the care of his fame.
19»



442 LBOrCBB JOL

Sim at present inside the earth's orbit, and probably seen
in the sunlight by us called ^^ Zodiacal light." The store
of energy for future sunlight is at present partly dynamical
— ^that of the motions of these bodies round the sun.; and
partly potential — ^that of their grayitation towards the sun.
This latter is gradually being spent, half against the re8is^
ing medium, and half in causing a continuous increase of
the former. Each meteor thus goes on moving faster and
faster, and getting nearer and nearer the centre, until some
time, very suddenly, it gets so much entangled in the solar
atmosphere as to begin to lose velocity. Jn a few seconds
more it is at rest on the sun's surface, and the energy giv^Q
up is vibrated across the district where it was gathered
during so many ages, ultimately to penetrate, as light, the
remotest regions of space.'

From the tables published by Prof. Thomson I extract
the following interesting data; firstly, with reference to
the amount of heat equivalent to the rotation of the sun
and planets round their axes ; the amount, that is, whidi
would be generated, supposing a brake applied at the sur-
faces of the sun and planets, until the motion of rotation
was entirely stopped: secondly, with reference to the
amount of heat due to the sun's gravitation — the heat,
that is, which would be developed by each of the planets
in falling into the sun. The quantity of heat is expressed in
terms of the time- during which it would cover the solar
emission.



Heat of Orayitatlon, eqnal to Solar


Heat of Rotation, eqnal to Solar


emiasion for a period of


emission for a period of


Sun


.


.


116 years


6 daya


Mercury


6 years 214 days


16 „


Venus .


. 88 „


22t „


»» „


Earth .


• ^^ >»


803 „


81 „


Mars .


• 12 „


262,,


f ,,


Jupiter .


82240 „


. ,


H ..


144 „


Saturn .


. 9660 „


,


a «


12» „


Uranus .


. 1610 „


, ,


n „


Neptune


. 1890 „


.


THEOBT OF HSUCHOLTZ. 443

The heat of rotation of the sun and planets, taken all
together, irould cover the solar emission for 134 years ;
while the heat of gravitation (that produced by falling into
the sun) would cover the emission for 45,589 years. There
IB nothing hypothetical in these results ; they follow directly
and necessarily from the application of the mechanical
equivalent of heat to cosmical masses.

Helmholtz has shown that if the solar system has ever
been a nebulous mass of extreme tenuity, the mechanical
force equivalent to the mutual gravitation of the particles
of ench a mass would be 454 times the quantity of mechan-
ical force which we now possess in our system ; f f f ths of
the gravitating tendency has been already satisfied and
wasted as heat The 7 j^th that remains to us would, how-
ever, if converted into heat, raise the temperature of a mass
of water, equal to the sim and planets in weight, 28 mil-
lions of degrees Centigrade. The Jieat of the^lime li^t. it
may be _remarked, is esl^aated^ at 2,000° C. ; of a tem-
perature of 28,000,000° C. we can therefore form no con-
ception. If our entire system were pure coal, by the com-
bustion of the whole of it only ^ jVir^hi of the above enor-
xmous amount of heat would be generated.

* But,' continues Helmholtz, ' though the store of our
planetary system is so inunense as not to be sensibly dimin-
ished by the incessant emission which has gone on during
the period of man's history, and though the time which
must elapse before a sensible change in the condition of
our planetary system can occur is totally incapable of
measurement, the inexorable laws of mechanics show that
this store, which can only suffer loss, and not gain, must
finally be exhausted. Shall we terrify ourselves by this
thought ? Men are in the habit of measuring the greatness
of the universe, and the wisdom displayed in it, by the du-
ration and the profit which it promises to their own race ;
but the past history of the earth shows the insignificance of



444 LBCTUBX XJL

the interyal, during whidi man has had his dwelling here.
What the museums of Europe show us of the remains of
.Egypt and Assyria we gaze up<m with silent wonder, and
despair of being able to carry back our thoughts to a period
so remote. Still the human race must have existed and
multiplied for ages, before the pyramids could haye been
erected. We estimate the duration of human history at
6,000 years ; but vast as this time may appear to us, what
is it in comparison with the period during which the earth
bore successive series of rank plants and mighty animflla^
but no men ? * Periods, during which, in our own neigh-
bourhood (Konigsberg), the amber tree bloomed, and
dropped its costly gum on the earth and in the sea ; when
Iq Europe and North America groves of tropical pahns
flourished, m which gigantic lizards, and, after them, ele-
phants, whose mighty rem^s are still buried in the earth,
found a home. Different geologists, proceeding from dif-
ferent premises, have sought to estimate the length of the
above period, and they set it down from one to nine mil-
lions of years. The time during which the earth has g^e-
rated organic beings is agsdn small, compared with the
ages, during which the world was a mass of molten rocks.
The experiments of Bischof upon basalt show, that for our
globe to cool down from 2,000° to 200° Centigrade, would
require 350 millions of years. And with regard to the pe-
riod during which the first nebulous masses condensed, so
as to form our planetary system, conjecture must entirely
cease. The history of man, therefore, is but a minute rip-
ple in the infinite ocean of time. For a much longer period
than that during which he has already occupied this world,
the existence of a state of inorganic nature, favourable to
man's continuance, seems to be secured, so that for our-

* The absence of men may be doubted. See the conclusion of Lubbock^s
article on the Lake Habitations of Switzerland, in the Natural HiBtary
Review,



BELATIOK OF THB BUS TO LIFE. 44:5

selves, and for long generations after ns, we have nothing
to fear. But the same forces of air and water, and of the
vdcanic interior, which produced former geologic revolu-
tions, and buried one series of living^forms after another,
still act upon the eartli's crust. They, rather than those
distant cosmical changes of which we have spoken, will
end the human race ; and, perhaps, compel us to make way
for new and more complete forms of life, as the lizard and
the mammoth have given way to us and our contempora-
ries.'

Grand, however, and marvellous as are those questions
regarding the physical constitution of the sun, they are but
a portion of ^e wonders connected with our luminary.
His relationship to life is yet to be referred to. The earth's
atmosphere contains carbonic acid, and the earth's surface
bears living plants ; the former is the nutriment of the lat-
ter. The plant apparently seizes the combined carbon and
oxygen; tears them asunder, storing up the carbon and
letting the oxygen go free. By no special force, different
in quality from other forces, do plants exercise this power,
— ^the real magician here is the sun. We have seen in for-
mer lectures (see Lecture Y.) how heat is consumed in
forcing asunder the atoms and molecules of solids and li-
quids, converting itself into potential energy, which reap-
peared as heat, when the attractions of the separated
atoms were again allowed to come into play. Precisely
the same considerations which we then applied to heat we
have now to apply to light ; for it is at the expense of the
solar light that tiie decomposition of the carbonic acid is
effected. Without the sun the reduction cannot take place,
and an amount of sunlight is consumed exactly equivalent
to the molecular work accomplished. Thus trees are
formed, thus the meadows grow, thus the flowers bloom.
Let the solar rays fall upon a surface of sand, the sand is
heated and finally radiates away as much as it receives ; let



\



446 LBOTUEB ZQ.

the same rays fSsiU upon a forest, the quantity of heat pv&i
back is less than that received, for the energy of a porticm
of the sunbeams is invested in the building of the trees.*
I have here a bundle of cotton, which I ignite ; it bursts
into flame and yields a definite amount of heat ; precisely
that amount of heat was abstracted fi*om the sun, in ordeac
to form that bit of cottcoL This is a representative case ;
— every tree, plant, and flower, grows and flourishes by
the grace and bounty of the sun.

]But we cannot stop at vegetable life ; for this is the
source, mediate or immediate, of all animal life. In the
animal body vegetable substances are brought again into
contact willi their beloved oxygen, and they bum within
us, as a fire bums in a grate. This is the source of all ani-
mal power ; and the forces in play are the same, in kind,
as those which operate in inorganic nature. In the plant
the clock is wound up, in the animal it runs down. In tike
plant the atoms are separated, in the animal they re-com-
bine. And as surely as the force which moves a clock's
hands is derived from the arm which winds up the dock, so
surely is all terrestrial .power drawn from the sun. Leav-
ing out of account the eruptions of volcanoes, and the ebb
and flow of the tides, every mechanical aoti<m on the
earth's surface, every manifestation of power, organic and
inorganic, vital and physical, is produced by the sun.f His
warmth keeps the sea liquid, and the atmosphere a gas,
and all the storms which agitate both are blown by the me-
chanical force of the sun. He lifte the rivers and tbe gla-
ciers up to the mountsdns ; and thus the cataract and tike
avalanche shoot with an energy derived immediately from
him. Thunder and lightning are also his transmuted

* Mayer * Die oiganiscbe BeweguDg/ p. 89.

f The genn, and much more than the germ, of what is here stated ia
to be found in a paragraph in Sir John HerschePs Outline$ ofA U ro n omy^
pnbUahed in 1888.



THE SUN THE BOUBOB <»* UFB AKD KOTIOH. 447

Strength. Every fire that bums and everj fiame that
glows dispenses light and heat which originally belonged
to the smi. In these days, nnhappily, the news of battle is
familiar to as, but every shock, and every charge, is an ap-
plication, or misapplication, of the mechamcal force of the
sun. He blows the trumpet, he urges the projectile, he
bursts the bcmib. And remember, this is not poetry, but
rigid mechanical truth. He rears, as I have said, the whole
vegetable world, and through it the animal ; the lilies of
the field are his workmanship, the verdure of the meadows,
and the cattle upon a thousand hills. He forms the muscle,
he urges the blood, he builds the brain. His fieetness is i^
the lion's foot ; he springs in the panther, he soars in the
eagle, he slides in the snake. He builds the forest and
hews it down, the power which raised the tree, and which
wields the axe, being one and the same. The clover
sprouts and blossoms, and the scythe of the mower
swings, by the operation of the same force. The sun digs
the ore from our mines, he rolls the iron ; he rivets the
plates, he boils the water ; he draws the train. He not
only grows the cotton, but he spins the fibre and weaves
the web. There is not a hammer raised, a wheel turned,
or a shuttle thrown, that is not raised, and turned, and
thrown by the sun. His energy is poured freely into space,
but our world is a halting place where this energy is con-r
ditioned. Here the Proteus works his spells; the self-
same essence takes a million shapes and hues, and finally
dissolves into its primitive and ahnost formless form. The
sun comes to us as heat ; he quits us as heat ; and between
his entrance and departure the multiform powers of our
globe appear. They are all special forms of solar power —
the moulds into which his strength is temporarily poured,
in passing from its source through infinitude.

Presented rightly to the mind, the discoveries and gen«
eralizations of modem science constitute a poem more sub-



448 hMOruRM JOL

fime dum bat erer jet been addrawed to tlie intdlect and
imflgmation of man. The natural i^iilofioplia> of to-daj
maj dwell amid oonoeptionay whidi beggar those of Ifil-
ton« Se great and grand are thej, that m the contempla-
tion of them, a e^tain force of diaracter ia requisite to
preserve ua from bewilderment. Lod^ at the integrated
energies of our wcM'ld — ^the stored power of our coal-
fields ; our winds and rivers ; our fleets, armies, and gons.
What are thej ? They are all generated by a porti<ni of
the son's energy, which does not amomit to rsvw^Ttvwv^
of the whole. This, in &cty is the entire fraction of the
ami's force intercepted by the earth, and, in reality, we
convert bat a small fraction of this fracticm, into mechan-
ical energy. Multiplying all oar powers by millions of mil-
lions, we do not reach the son's expenditure. And still,
notwithstanding Ais enormoos drain, in the lapse of homan
history we are onable to detect a diminotion of his store.
Measored by our largest terrestrial standards, soch a reser-
voir of power is infinite ; but it is our privilege to rise
above these standards, and to regard the son himself as a
speck in infinite extension, — a mere drop in the universal
sea. We analyse the space in which he is immersed, and
which is the vehicle of his power. We pass to other sys-
tems and other suns, each pouring forth energy like our
own, but still without infringement of the law, which re-
veals immutability in the midst of change, which recog-
nises incessant transference and conversion, but neither
final gain nor loss. This law generalises the aphorism of
Solomon, that there is nothing new under the sun, by
teaching us to detect everywhere, under its infinite variety
of appearances, the same primeval force. To Nature noth-
ing can be added; from Nature nothing can be taken
away ; the sum of her energies is constant, and the utmost
man can do in the pursuit of physical truth, or in the ap-
plications of physical knowledge, is to shift the constituents



OONSTAKOY OF POWER OF NATUBAL FQBOBS. 449

of the never-varying total, and out of one of them to form
another^ The law of conservation rigidly excludes both
creation and annihilation. Waves may change to ripples, and
ripples to waves, — ^magnitude may be substituted for num-
ber, and number for magnitude, — ^asteroids may aggregate
to suns, suns may resolve themselves into florae and faunae,
and florae and faunae melt in air, — ^the flux of power is eter-
nally the same. It rolls in music through the ages, and all
terrestrial energy, — ^the manifestations of life, as well as
the display of phenomena, are but the modulations of its
rhythm;



APPENDIX TO LECTURE XH



Fob various reasons I am anxious that this book should embnice
1^ that I have written with regard to the relationship of Dr.
Mayer to the Dynamical Theory of Heat Here, in the first
place, follows an abstract of a Lecture on Force, given at the
Boyal Institution on the evening of Friday, June 6, 1863, and
published in the Proceedings of the Institution and in the ' Philo-
sophical Magazine.'

ON FORCE.

The existence of the Ihtemational Exhibition suggested to our
Honorary Secretary the idea of devoting the Friday evenings after
Easter of the present year to discourses on the various agencies
on which the material strength of England is based. He wished
to make iron, coal, cotton, and kindred matters, the subjects of
these discourses : opening the series by a discourse on the Great
Exhibition itself; and he wished me to finish the series by a dis-
course on * Force ' in general. For some months I thought over
the subject at intervals, and had devised a plan of dealing with
it ; but three weeks ago I was induced to swerve from this plan,
for reasons which shall be made known towards the conclusion of
the discourse.

We all have ideas more or less distinct regarding force ; we
know in a general way what muscular force means, and each of
us would less willingly accept a blow from a pugilist than have
his ears boxed by a lady. But these general ideas are not now
sufficient for us ; we must learn how to express numerically the
exact mechanical value of the two blows ; this is the first point
to be cleared up.

A sphere of lead weighing 1 lb. was suspended at a height
of 16 feet above the theatre floor. It was liberated, and fell bj



BFFEcrr OF YELOonr. 451

graTity. That weight required exactly a second to fall to the
earth horn that elevation, and the instant before it touched the
earth it had a velocity of 82 feet a second. That is to say, if at
that instant the earth were annihilated, and its attraction annul-
led, the weight would proceed through space at the uniform ve-
locity of 82 feet a second.

Suppose that, instead of being pulled downward by gravity,
the weight is cast upward in opposition to the force of gravity —
with what velocity must it start from the earth's surface in order
to reach a height of 16 feet 9 With a velocity of 32 feet a second.
This velocity imparted to the weight by the human arm, or by
any other mechanical means, would carry the weight up to the
precise height from which it had fallen.

Now the lifting of the weight may be regardckl as so mucb
mechanical work. I might place a ladder against t^ wall, and
carry the weight up to a height of 16 feet ; or I might draw it
up to this height by means of a string and pulley ; or I might
suddenly jerk it up to a height of 16 feet. The amount of work
done in all these cases, as far as the raising of the weight is con-
cerned, would be absolutely the same. The absolute amount of
work done depends solely upon two things : first of all, on the
quantity of matter that is lifted : and secondly, on the height to
which it is lifted. If you call the quantity or mass of matter wi,
and the height through which it is lifted h, then the product of
m into A, or m h, expresses the amount of work done.

Supposing now, that instead of imparting a velocity of 82
feet a second to the weight we impart twice this speed, or 64
feet a second. To what height will the weight rise ? You might
be disposed to answer, ' To twice the height ; ' but this would be
quite incorrect. But theory and experiment inform us that the
weight woidd rise to four times the height ; instead of twice 16,
or 82 feet, it would reach four times 16 or 64 feet. So also if we
treble the starting velocity the weight would reach nine times
the height ; if we quadruple the speed at starting, we attain six-
teen times the height. Tlius, with a velocity of 128 feet a second
at starting, the weight would attain an elevation of 256 feet.
Supposing we augment the velocity of starting seven times, we
should raise the weight to 49 times the height, or to an elevation
of 784 feet.



453 AFFKinnz to lsotdsb zil

Now the woik dime— or, as it is sometimes caDed^the meAm^
ietU 4^«06— as before explained, is proportiomd to the height, aod
as a doable Telocity gives four times the height, a treble Telocity
nine times the height, and so on, it is peifecUj plain that the
mechanidil efEect increases as the square of the Telodty. If ihe
mass of the body be represented by the letter m, and its yelodty
by 9, then the mechanical effect would be lepresented by m 9*.
IxL the case considered, I have supposed the wdght to be cast
upward, being opposed in its upward flight by the resistanoe of
graTity ; but the same holds true if I send the projectile into
water, mud, earth, timber, or other resisting mateiiaL If; for
example, you double the Telodty of a cannon ball, you quadruple
its mechanical effect Hence the importance of augmenting the
Telocity of a projectile, and hence the philosophy of Sir William
Armstrong in using a 50 lb. charge of powder in his recent strik-
ing experiments.

The measure then of mechanical effect is the mass of the body
multiplied by the square of its velocity.

In firing a ball against a target the projectile, after coUidon,
is often found hissing hot. Mr. Fairbaim informs me that in the
experiments at Bhoeburyness it is a common thing to see a fladbi
of light, even in broad day, when the ball strikes the target
And if I examine my lead weight after it has fallen fix>m a height
I also find it heated. Now here experiment and reasoning lead
us to the remarkable law that the amount of heat g^ierated, like
the mechanical effect, is proportional to the product of the mass
into the square of the velocity. Double your mass, other things
being equal, and you double your amount of heat ; double your
Telocity, other things remaining equal, and you quadruple your
amount of heat,. Here then we have common mechanical motion
destroyed and heat produced,

I take this violin bow and draw it across this string. You
hear the sound. That sound is due to motion imparted to the air,
and to produce that motion a certain portion of the muscular
force of my arm must be expended. We may here correctly say,
that the mechanical force of my arm is converted into music.
And in a similar way we say that the impeded motion of our de-
scending weight, or of the arrested cannon ball, is converted into
heat The mode of motion changes, but it still continues motion ;



C^mtlOAL AFBTNirr OF ATOKB. 453

^ motion of the mau i$ eontmied into a nu^ion of the atcm$ of the
mass; and these small motions, commmiicated to the nerves, pro-
duce the sensation which we call heat. We, moreover^ know the
amoont of heat which a given amount of mechanical force can
develop. Our lead ball, for example, in £Uling to the earth gen-
atkted a quantity of heat sufficient to raise the temperature of its
own mass three-fifths of a Fahrenheit d^ree. It reached the
earUi with a velocity of 83 feet a second, and forty times this ve-
locity would be a small one for a rifie bullet ; multiplying fths
by the square of 40, we find that the amount of heat developed by
collision with the target would, ii^ wholly concentrated in the lead,
raise its temperature 960^. This would be more than sufficient
to fuse the lead. In reality, however, the heat developed is di-
vided between the lead and the body against which it strikes ;
nevertheless, it would be worth while to pay attention to this
point, and to ascertain whether rifle bullets do not, under some
circumstances, show signs of ftision.

From the motion of sensible masses, by gravity and other
means, the speaker passed to the motion of atoms towards each
other by chemical affinity. A collodion balloon filled with a
mixture of chlorine and hydros^ was hung in the focus of a
parabolic mirror, and in the focus of a second mirror, 20 ft. dis-
tant, a strong electric light was suddenly generated ; the instant
the light fell upon the balloon, the atoms within it fell together
with explosion, and hydro-chloric add was the result. The
burning of charcoal in oxygen was an old experiment, but it had
now a significance beyond what it used to have ; we now regard
the act of combination on the part of the atoms of oxygen and
coal exactly as we regard the clashing of a fisilling weight against
the earth. And the heat produced in both cases is referable to
a common cause. This glowing diamond, which bums in oxygen
as a star of white light, glows and bums in consequence of the
fiedling of the atoms of oxygen against it. And could we meas-
ure the velocity of the atoms when they clash, and could we find
their number and weight, multiplying the weight of each atom
by the square of its velocity, and adding all together, we should
get a number representing the exact amount of heat developed
by the union of the oxygen and carbon.

Thus fiur we have regarded the heat developed by the dash-



454 AFPBNDIZ TO UBUVUKB ZIL

ing of sensible masses and of atoms. Work is ezpmided in giving
motion to these atoms or masses, and heat is deTek)ped. But
we reverse this process daily, and by the expenditure of heat ex-
ecute work. We can raise a weight by heat ; and in this ag^ait
we possess an enormous store of medumical power. This pound
of coal, which I hcdd in my hand, produces by its cmnbinalaoa
with oxygen an amount of heat whidi, if mechanically applied,
would suffice to raise a weight of 100 lbs. to a hei^t of 20 miles
above the earth's surface. Conversely, 100 lbs. falling from «
height of 20 miles, and striking against the earth, would gener-
ate an amount of heat equal to that developed by the combustion
of a pound of coal. Wherever work is done by heat, heat disap-
pears. A gun which fires a ball is less heated than one whii^
fires blank cartridge. The quantity of heat communicated to the
bo&er of a working steam-engine is greater than that which could be
obtained from the re-condensation of the steam after it had done
its work ; and the amount of work performed is the exact equiva-
lent of the amount of heat lost. Mr. Smyth informed us in his
interesting discourse, that we dig annually 84 millions of tons of
coal from our pits. The amoun^ of mechanical force represented
by this quantity of coal seems pgffectiy fabulous. The combustion
of a single pound of coal, suppo^g it to take place in a minute,
would be equivalent to the work of 800 horses ; and if we sup-
pose 108 millions of horses working day and night, with unim-
paired strength, for a year, thdr united energies would enable
them to perform an amount of work just equivalent to titat
which the annual produce of our coal-fields would be able to
accomplish.

Comparing the energy of the force with which oxygen and
carbon unite together, with ordinary gravity, the chemical affinity
seems almost infinite. But let us give gravity fair play ; let us
permit it to act throughout its entire range. Place a body at
such a distance from the earth that the attraction of the earth is
barely sensible, and let it &11 to the earth from this distance. It
would reach the earth with a final velocity of 86,747 feet in a
second, and on collision with the earth the body would generate
about twice the amount of heat generated by the combustion of
an equal weight of coal. We have stated that by j&lling through
a space of 16 feet our lead bullet would be heated three-fifths of



THE BEAT ElIIITED BY THE SDK. 455



a d^ree ; bufc a body fidlmg from an k£idte distance has abready
used up 1,299,999 parts out of l,30(pb0 of the earth's pulling
power, when it has arriyed within 16 feet of the surface ; on this
fspace only fTviinnr^^ ^^ ^^ whole force is exerted.

Let us now turn our thoughts for a moment from the earth
towards the sun. The researches of Sir J. Herschel and M*
Pouillet have informed us of the annual expenditure of the sun
as regards heat, and by an easy calculation we ascertain the pre-
cise amount of the expenditure which falls to the share of our «
planet. Out of 2,800 million parts of light and heat the earth
receiyes one. The whole heat emitted by the sun in a minute
would be competent to boil 12,000 millions of cubic miles of ice-
cold water. How is this enormous loss made good 9 Whence is
Ihe sun's heat derived, and by what means is it maintained ?
No combustion, no chemical affiility with which we are acquainted
would be competent to produce the temperature of the sun's sur-
&ce. Besides, were the sun a burning body merely, its light
and heat would assuredly speedily come to an end. Supposing
it to be a solid globe of coal, its combustion would only cover
4,600 years of expenditure. In this short time it would bum
itself out. What agency, then, can produce the temperature and
maintain the outlay 9 We have already regarded the case of a
body fidling from a great distance towards the earth, and found
that the heat generated by its collision would be twice that pro-
duced by the combustion of an equal weight of coal. How much
greater must be the heat developed by a body fisilling towards the
sun I The maximum velocity with which a body can strike the
earth is about 7 mUes in a second ; the maximum velocity with
which it can strike the sun is 390 miles in a second. And as the
heat developed by the colli4on is proportional to the square of
the velocity destroyed, an asteroid falling into the sun with the
above velocity would generate about 10,000 times the quantity
of heat generated by the combustion of an asteroid of coal of the
same weight.

Have we any reason to believe that such bodies exist in space,
and that they may be raining down upon the sun 9 The me-
teorites flashing through our air are small planetary bodies,
drawn by the earth's attraction, and entering our atmosphere
witii planetary velocity. By friction against the air they are



456 APPENDIX TO IiEOTUBB ZIL

raised to incandescence a^ caused to emit li^t and heat* At
certain seasons of the year they shower down upon us in great
numbers. In Boston 240,000 of them were observed in nine
hours. There is no reason to suppose that the planetary system
is limited to ' vast masses of enormous weight ; ' there is erery
reason to belieye that space is stocked with smaller masses,
which obey the same laws as the large ones. That lenticular en-
Telope which surrounds the sun, and which is known to astrono-
mers as the Zodiacal light, is probably a ax>wd of meteors ; and
moving as they do in a resisting medium they must continually
approach the sun. Falling into it, they would be competent to
produce the heat observed, and this would constitute a source
from which the annual loss of heat would be made good. The
sun, according to this hypothesis, would be continually growing
larger ; but how much larger ? Were our moon to Ml into the
sun it would develop an amount of heat sufficient to cover one or
two years* loss ; and were our earth to fall into the sun a cen-
tury's loss would be made good. Still, our moon and our earth,
if distributed . over the surface of the sun, would utterly vanish
from perception. Indeed, the quantity of matter competent to
produce the necessary effect would, during the range of histoiy,
produce no appreciable augmentation in the sun's magnitude.
The augmentation of the sun's attractive force would be more
appreciable. However this hypothesis may £EU*e as a representant
of what is going on in nature, it certainly shows how a sun might
be formed and maintained by the application of known thermo-
dynamic principles.

Our earth moves in its orbit with a velocity of 68,040 miles an
hour. Were this motion stopped, an amount of heat would be
developed sufficient to raise the temperature of a globe of lead
of the same size as the earth 884,000 degrees of the Centigrade
thermometer. It has been prophesied that ' the elements shall
melt with fervent heat.' The earth's own motion embraces the
conditions of fulfillment ; stop that motion, and the greater part,
if not the whole, of her mass would be reduced to vapour. If the
earth fell into the sun, the amount of heat dev;eloped by the shock

* To Mr. Joule, as stated in Lecture I., we owe this hypothesis.



HEAT DEVELOPED BY THE TIDAL WAVE. 457

would be equal to that developed by the combustioii of 6,485
earths of solid coaL

There is one other consideration connected with the perma-
nence of our present terrestrial conditions which is well worthy
of our attention. Standing upon one of the London bridges, we
observe the current of the Thames reyersed, and the water poured
upward twice a-day. The water thus moved rubs against the
rive's bed and sides, and heat is the consequence of this friction
The heat thus generated is in part radiated into space, and then
lost, as &r as the earth is concerned. What is it that supplies
this incessant loss ? The earth's rotation. Let us look a Uttle
more closely at the matter. Imagine the moon fixed and the
earth turning like a wheel fix>m west to east in its diurnal rota-
tion. Suppose a high mountain on the earth's surface ; on ap-
proaching the moon's meridian, that mountain is, as it were, laid
hold of by the moon, and forms a kind of handle by which the
eartii is pulled more quickly round. But when the meridian is
passed, the pull of the moon on the mountain would be in the
opposite direction ; it now tends to diminiflh the velocity of ro-
tation as much as it previously augmented it ; .and thus the action
of all fixed bodies on the earth's sur^ice is neutralised. But sup-
pose the mountain to lie always to the east of the moon's meri-
dian : the pull then would be always exerted against the earth's
rotation, the velocity of which would be diminished in a degree
corresponding to the strength of the pull. The tidal wom occupies
this position — ^it lies always to the ei^ of the moon's meridian,
and thus the waters of the ocean are in part dragged as a brake
along the surface of the earth ; and as a brake they must diminish
the velocity of the earth's rotation. The diminution, though in-
evitable, is, however, too small to make itself felt within the
period over which observations on the subject extend. Sup-
posing then that we turn a mill by the action of the tide, and pro-
duce heat by the friction of the millstones ; that heat has an
origin totally different irom the heat produced by another mill
which is turned by a mountain stream. The former is produced
at the expense of the earth's rotation, the latter at the expense of
the sun's radiation.

The sun, by the act of vaporization, lifts mechanically all the
moisture of our air. It condenses and falls m the form of rain—
20



458 APPENDIX TO LBOTUSB Xn.

it freezes and fiills as snow. In this solid form it is piled upon
the Alpine heights, and fbmishes materials for the glaciers of the
Alps. Bat the son again interposes, liberates the solidified liquid,
and permits it to roll by gravity to the sea. The mechanical
force of erery rirer in the world, as it rolls towards the ocean, is
drawn from the heat of the son. No streamlet glides to a lower
level without having been first lifted to the elevation from which
it springs by the mighty power of the sun. The energy of the
winds is also due entirely to the sun ; but there is still another
work which he performs, and his connection with which is not so
obviona Trees and vegetables grow npon the earth, and when
burned they give rise to heat, and hence to mechanical energy.
Whence is this power derived ? Yon see this oxide of iron, pro-
duced by the falling together of the atoms of iron and oxygen ;
here also is a transparent gas which you cannot now see — car-
bonic acid gas — which is formed by the filing together of carbon
and oxygen. These atoms thus in close union resemble our lead
weight while resting on the earth ; but I can wind up the weight
and prepare it for another fall, and so these atoms can be wound
up, separated from each other, and thus enabled to repeat the
process of combination. In the building of plants carbonic acid
is the material from which the carbon of the plant is derived ;
and the solar beam is the agent which tears the atoms asunder,
setting the oxygen free, and allowing the carbon to aggregate in
woody fibre. Let the solar rays fall upon a surface of sand ; the
sand is heated, and finally radiates away as much heat as it re-
ceives ; let the same beams fall upon a forest, the quantity of heat
given back is less than the forest receives, for the energy of a
portion of the sunbeams is invested in building up the trees in the
manner indicated. Without the sun the reduction of the car-
bonic acid cannot be effected, and an amount of sunlight is con-
sumed exactly equivalent to the molecular work done. Thus
trees are formed ; thus the cotton on which Mr. Bazley discoursed
last Friday is formed. I ignite this cotton, and it flames ; the
oxygen again unites with its beloved carbon ; but an amount of
heat equal to that which you see produced by its combustion was
sacrificed by the sun to form that bit of cotton.

But we cannot stop at vegetable life, for this is the source,
mediate or immediate, of all animal life. The sun severs the car-



POWER OF THE BUN. 459

bon from its oxygen ; the animal consmnes the ratable thuB
formed, and in its arteries a reunion of the severed elements take
place, and produce animal heat. Thus, strictly speaking, the
process of building a vegetable is one of winding up ; the process
of building an animal is one of running down. The warmth of
our bodies, and every mechanical energy which we exert, trace
their lineage directly to the sun. The fight of a pair of pugilists,
the motion of an army, or the lifting of his own body up moun-
tain slopes by an Alpine climber, are all cases of mechanical
energy drawn from the sun. Not, therefore, in a poetical, but in
a purel^^echanical sense, are we children of the sun. Without
food we should soon oxidize our owu bodies. A man weighing
150 lbs. has 64 lbs. of muscle ; but these, when dried, reduce them-
selves to 15 lbs. Doing an ordinary day^s work, for 80 days, this
mass of muscle would be wholly oxidized. Special organs whicli
do more work would be more quickly oiddized : the heart, for
example, if entirely unsustained, would be oxidized in about a
week. Take the amount of heat due to the direct oxidation of a
g^ven amount of food ; a less amount of heat is developed by this
food in the working animal frame, and the missing quantity is the
exact equivalent of the mechanical work which the body accom-
plishes.

I might extend these considerations: the work, indeed, is
done to my hand— but I am warned that I have kept you already
too long. To whom, then, are we indebted for the striking gen-
eralisations of this evening^d discourse ? All that I have brought
before you is the work of a man of whom you have scarcely ever
heard. All that I have brought before you has been taken from
the labors of a German physician, named Mayer. Without ex-
ternal stimulus, and pursuing his profession as a town physician
in Heilbronn, this man was the first to raise the conception of the
interaction of natural forces to clearness in his own mind. And
yet he is scarcely ever heard of in scientific lectures ; and even to
scientific men his merits are but partially known. Led by his
own beautifrd researches, and quite independent of Mayer, Mr.
Joule published his first Paper on the ' Mechanical Value of Heat,*
in 1843 ; but in 1843 Mayer had actually calculated the mechani-
cal equivalent of heat from data which a man of rare originality
alone could turn to account. From the velocity of sound in air



160 APPENDIX TO LECTUBB Zn.

Mayer detennined the mechanical equivalent of heat. In 1845
he published his Memoir on * Organic Motion,' and applied the
mechanical Theory of Heat in the most fearless and precise man-
ner to vital processes. He also embraced the other natural agents
in his chain of conservation. In 1853 Mr. Waterston proposed,
independently, the Meteoric Theory of the sun's heat, and in
1854 Professor William Thomson applied his admirable mathe-
matical powers to the development of the theory ; but six years
previously the subject had been handled in a masterly manner by
Mayer, and all that I have said on this subject has been derived
from him. When we consider the circumstances of M^er's life,
and the period at which he wrote, we cannot fidl to jSe struck
with astonishment at what he has accomplished. Here was a
man of genius working in silence, animated solely by a love of
his subject, and arriving at the most important results, some time
in advance of those whose lives were entirely devoted to Natural
Philosophy. It was the accident of bleeding a feverish patient
at Java in 1840 that led Mayer to speculate on these subjects.
He noticed that the venous blood in the tropics was of a much
brighter red than in colder latitudes, and his reasoning on this
fact led him into the laboratory of natural forces, where he has
worked with such signal ability and success. Well, you will
desire to know what has become of this man. His over-tasked
mind gave way — ^a result felt to be quite possible in his own case
by many a great scientific worker — and he was sent to an asylum.
In a biographical dictionary of his country it is stated that Mayer
died in the asylum : but this is incorrect. He recovered ; and,
I believe, is at this moment a cultivator of vineyards in Heil-
bronn.

While preparing for publication my last course of Lectures on
Heat, I wished to make myself acquainted with all that Mayer
had done in connection with this subject. I accordingly wrote
to two gentlemen who above all others seemed likely to give me
the information which I needed. Both of them are Germans,
and both particularly distinguished in connection with the Dy-
namical Theory of Heat. Each of them kindly furnished me with
the list of Mayer's publications, and one of them was so friendly
as to order them from a bookseller, and to send them to ma
This friend, in his reply to my first letter regarding Mayer, stated



BESEASOHES OF MAYEB. 461

his belief that I should not find anything very important in
Mayer's writings ; but before forwarding the memoirs to me he
read them himself His letter, accompanying the first of these
papers, contains the following words : — * I most here retract the
statement in my last letter, that you will not find much matter
of importance in Mayer's writings ; I am astonished at the multi-
tude of beautifhl and correct thoughts which they contain ; ' and
he goes on to point out various important subjects, in the treat-
ment of which Mayer had anticipated other eminent writers. My
second friend, in whose own publications the name of Mayer re-
peatedly occurs, and whose papers containing these references
were translated some years ago by myself^ was, on the 10th of last
month, unacquainted with the thoughtful and beautiful essay by
Mayer, entitled ^Beitrage zur Dynamik des ffimmels;' and in
1854, when Professor William Thomson developed in so striking
a manner the meteoric theory of the sun's heat, he was certainly
not aware of the existence of that essay, though from a recent
article in *■ Macmillan's Magazine ' I infer that he is now aware
of it Mayer's physiological writings have been referred to by
physiologists — by Dr. Carpenter, for example — in terms of honour-
able recognition. We have hitherto, indeed, obtained frag-
mentary glimpses of the man partly from physicists, and partly
fit>m physiologists ; but his total merit has never yet been recog-
nized, as it assuredly would have been had he chosen a happier
mode of publication. I do not think a greater disservice could
be done to a man of science than to overstate his claims : such
overstatement is sure to recoil to the disadvantage of him in
whose interest it is made. But when Mayer's opportunities,
achievements, and fate, are taken into account, I do not think
that I shall be deeply blamed for attempting to place him in that
honourable position which I believe to be his due.

Here, however, are the titjes of Mayer's papers, the perusal
of which will correct any error of judgment into which I may
have fallen regarding their author. 'Bemerkungen uber die
Krafbe der unbeleten Natur,' Liebig's Annalen, 1842, vol. xlii.
p. 281 ; * Die Organische Bewegung in ihrem Zusammenhange
mit dem Stoflf-wechsel ; ' Heilbronn, 1845; *Beitrage zur Dyna-
mik des Himmels,' Heilbronn, 1848; ^Bemerkungen iiber das
Hechanische Equivalent der Wfirme,' Heilbronn, 1851.

J.T.



468 APPENDIX TO LECTUBB XIL

"^th reference to this Lecture^ Mr. Joule published the fol-
lowing letter in the August number of the * Philosophical Maga-
rine:' —



NOTE ON THE mSTORY OP THE DYNAMICAL THEORY
OP HEAT.

BT J. P. JOULE, LLJ>., F.B.S.

2b ike EdUon of the PhUoeopMedl Magazine and Journal,

Gezttlemen, — ^Will you permit me to trouble your readers
with a few remaiira on the subject of my friend Professor Tyn-
daU's Lecture at the Royal Institution, reported in your last
Number ? In this Lecture he enforces the claims of M. Mayer, a
philosopher whose merit has perhaps been overlooked by some of
our English physicists, and unaccountably so by his fellow-
countrymen. I myself was only imperfectly acquainted with his
papers, when, in good conscience and with the materials at com-
mand, I gave a sketch of the history of the Dynamical Theory
of Heat, in my paper published in the Philosophical Transac-
tions for 1850. M. Mayer's merit consists in having announced,
apparently without knowledge of what had been done before, the
true Theory of Heat. This is no smaQ merit, and I am the last
person who would wish to detract from it. But to give to Mayer,
or indeed to any single individual, the undivided praise of pro-
pounding the Dynamical Theory of Heat is manifestly unjust to
the numerous contributors to that great step in physical science.
Two centuries ago, Locke said that ^ Heat is a very brisk agita-
tion of the insensible parts of the object, which produces in us
that sensation fi*om whence we denominate the object hot ; so
that what in our sensation is heai^ in the object is nothing but
motion? In 1798, Rumford, inquiring into the source of heat de-
veloped in the boring of cannon, observed that it was * extremely
difficult, if not quite impossible, to form any distinct idea of any-
thing capable of being excited and communicated, in the manner
the heat was excited and communicated in these experiments, ex-
cept it be motion.' In 1812, Davy wrote : ' The immediate cause
of the phenomena of heat, then, is motion, and the laws of its
communication are precisely the same as the laws of the com-



LITTTEB C^ MB. JOTTLB. 468

mtmication of motion ; ' * and he confirmed bis Tiews by that
original and most interesting experiment in which he melted ice
by MctioiLt In 1889, S^guin published a work entitled De
rififluence det Ohemins de Fer, He shows that the theory gener-
ally adopted would lead to the absurd conclusion that a finite
quantity of heat can produce an indefinite quantity of mechanical
action, and remarks (p. 828), * II me parait plus naturel de sup-
poser qu^une certaine quantity de calbrique disparait dans Facte
m6me de la production de la force ou puissance m^canique, et r6-
ciproquement.' At p. 383 he remarks : * La force m6canique qui
apparalt pendant Tabaissement de temperature d'un gaz comme
de tout autre corps qui se dilate, est la mesure et la representation
de cette diminution de chaleur.' In p. 389 he giyes a Table of the
quantity of mechanical eflfect produced corresponding to the loss
of temperature of steam on expanding. From this it appears
that 1° Cent, corresponds with 363 kilogrammes raised to the
height of 1 metre. At p. 408 he states : ' Je bomerai 14 mes re-
flexions sur un sujet dont chacun saura appr^cier Pimportance.
Du calorique qui est employe par Tindustrie h. produire de la
force, et aux usages domestiques, une faible partie seulement est
utilisee ; une autre quantite bien plus considerable, et qui pour-
rait suffire ^ creer d'immenses yaleurs et 4 augmenter d^autant
la richesse nationale, se trouye absolument perdue.' From the
above extracts it will be seen that a great advance had been made
before Mayer wrote his paper in 1842. Mayer discourses to the
same effect as Seguin, but at greater length, with greater per-
spicuity, and with more copiousness of illustration. He adopts
the same hypothesis as the latter philosopher, viz. : that the heat
evolyed on compressing an elastic fluid is exactly the equivalent
of the compressiiig force, and thus arrives at the same equivalent,
viz., 865 kilogrammes per V Cent.

It must be remarked that at the time Seguin and Mayer wrote,
there were known no facts to warrant the hypothesis they adopt-
ed. There was no reason to assert that the heat evolved by com-
pressing a gas was even approximately the equivalent of f^ com-
pressing force. This being the case may account for the inatten*

* Elements of Chemical Philosophy, p. 94.

f My morning Lectures had rendered all this familiar.— J. T.



461 AFFENDIX TO LSOTUBB Zn.

tlon of the scientific world to these writings. The Dynamical
Theoiy of Heat certainly was not established by S^uin and
Mayer. To do this required experiment ; and I therefore fearless-
ly assert my right to the position which has been generally ac-
corded to me by my fellow physicists as having been the first to
giye a dedsiye proof of the correctness of this theory.

In saying this I do not wish to claim any monopoly of merit.
Even if Romford, Mayer, Und S^goin had not produced their
works, justice would still compel me to share with Thomson,
Rankine, Hehnholtz, Holtzman,'*'. Clausius, and others, whose
labours have not only given developments and applications of the
Dynamical Theory which entitle them to merit as well as their
predecessors in these enquiries, but who have contributed most
essentially in supporting it by new proofs.

Permit me to remark, in conclusion, that I applied the Dy-
namical Theory to vital processes in 1848 ; t and that in 1847, in
a popular lecture, published in the * Manchester Courier,' I ex-
plained the phenomena of shooting stars, and also stated that the
effect of the earth falling into the sun would be to increase the
temperature of that luminary. % Since that time Thomson, by
his profound investigations, has made the Dynamical Theory of
Heat, as applied to cosmical phenomena, his own.

I sincerely trust that, by the foregoing remarks, I have done
no injustice to Mayer, especially as I grieve to hear that sickness
has removed him (I hope for only a short time) from the science
to which he has contributed with so much ability. The repro-
duction of some of his papers in the * Philosophical Magazine,'
particularly that * On the Forces of Inorganic Nature,' would, I
am sure, interest many of your readei^, and enable them to fully
appreciate his just claims.

I remain. Gentlemen,

Yours respectftilly,

J. P. JOULB.

* The name of this philosopher ought to be added to those mentioned
in the Preface as the builders of the Dynamical Theory of Heat. — J. T.
f Phil. Mag. § 8. vol xxiii. p. 442.
X Ibid. YoL zxxii. p. 850 ; and Manchester Ck}urier, May 12, 1847.



LETTER TO MS. JOULE. 465

I was in Switzerland when this letter appeared, and imme-
diately after my return I published the following letter to Mr.
Joule. (Phil. Mag. Sept. 1802.)

My deab Joule,
On my return from Switzerland, two days ago, I became ac-
quainted with the note which you have published in the last
Number of the * Philosophical Magazine.' Would you allow me
to make the following remarks in connection with the subject
of it?

During the spring of the present year I gave, at the Royal
Institution, a Course of Lectures, * On Heat, regarded as a kind
of Motion.' During the early portion of the course I had engaged
a short-hand writer to report the lectures, with a view to their
subsequent publication ; and from this gentleman's notes of my
second Lecture I make the following extract, which refers to the
mechanical Theory of Heat : — * It is to Mr. Joule, of Manchester,
that we are almost wholly indebted for the experimental treat-
ment of this subject. With his mind firmly fixed upon a prin-
ciple, and undismayed by the coolness with which his first labours
appear to have been received, he persisted for years in his at-
tempts to prove the invariability of the relation between heat
and ordinary mechanical force. He placed water in a suitable
vessel, agitated it by paddles moved by measurable forces, and
determined the elevation of temperature ; he did the same with
mercury and sperm oiL He also caused disks of cast iron to
rotate against each other, and measured the heat produced by
their friction. He urged water through capillary tubes, and
measured the heat thus generated. The results of his experiments
leave no doubt upon the mind that under all circumstances the
absolute amount of heat produced by the expenditure of a definite
amount of mechanical force is fixed and invariable.' Such has
been my language regarding you ; and to it I still adhere. I
trust you find nothing in it which indicates a desire on my part
to question your claim to the honour of being the experimental
demonstrator of the equivalence of heat and work.

It was not my object in the Lecture to which you refer to
give a history of the mechanical Theory of Heat, but simply to
place a man of geniup, to whom the fktes had been singularly
20*



466 A XVEBDLL TO lATTDBB XIL

^itiirinil^ in a podtion in tome measure wo^rthj of him. I was
quite awaie of all that jon have stated regarding Locke, Rom-
ford, Dayy, and others : yon might have added Bacon to yonr
list-l^nrobably no great generalization was eyer established with-
out having first simmered in the minds of many thinkers. Bat
' the writings of Mayer form an epoch in the history of this sabject ;
and I certainly should not feel diqx)8ed to retract a single sentence
that I hare written in his fkroor. I beliere he deserres more
praise than I have given him. It was he who first used the t^m
*' equivalent* in the precise sense in which yon have applied it;
he calculated the medianical equivalent of heat from data which,
as I have said, * a man of rare ingenuity alone could turn to ac-
count;' and his calculati(m is in striking accordance with your
own experimental determinations.* You worked indqiendently
of Mayer, and in a totally different way. You brought the me-
chanical theory to the test of experiment, and in this way proved
its truth.

Mayer calculated correctly the mechanical equivalent of heat ;
but you say that, at the time he wrote, there were no known Dncts
to warrant the hypothesis whidi he adopted, li by this you
mean to say that he made a ha^diazard guess, which had no basis
of physical probability, I cannot agree with you. The known
constitution of an elastic fluid is, in my opinion, quite sufficient
to justify Mayer's proceeding. Bis hypothesis was this : Let the
quantity of heat required to nuse the temperature of gas, pre-
served (U a constant volume^ f °, be t, and let the heat required to
raise the same gas, under constant preintre^ t°, be x+y. The
weight raised by the expanding gas in the latter case being P,
and the height to which it is raised h, then, according to Mayer,

that is to say, the excess of heat imparted in the latter case is
precisely equivalent to the mechanical work performed.

It is undoubtedly implied in this equation that the quantity
of heat y is expended wholly in external work, and that none of
it has been consumed in overcoming internal molecular attrac-
tions. This, I think, on the face of it is an extremely probable

* The ocNvectod specific heat of sir being made use of.



LBITEB TO XB. JOULE. 467

li^potheBiB— «o probftble, indeed, m to amoant, in my estimation,
ahnost to a certainty. Clausiiis makes the same assumption with
no better aothoiity than Mayer ; and I beiieye (for I here trust to
my memory merely) that tiie assomptibn has been oom^detely
yerified by the experiments of the yery philoec^hera who <Mice
questioned it. *The law,' says Mayer, * " Heat = Medianical
effect," is independent of the nature of an elastic fluid, which
only seryes as the apparatus by means of which the one force is
oonyerted into the other.'

The law of Mariotte was an old principle when Mayer wrote ;
and the fact of its holding good for gases generally rendors the
conclusion exceedingly probable that, in yielding to compressi<Hi,
the attractions of the gaseous molecules were insensible ; otherwise
it is hardly cmiceiyaUe that the same results could haye been
obtained with gases so di£Eerently constituted : the attractions of
the hydrogen atoms, for example, would in all probability be
different from those of oxygen. Mayer was further justified in
his hypothesis as to the absence of interior work in the case of a
true gas, by the experiments of (Ersted and Despretz, which
showed that the law of Mariotte was departed fixxn by the lique-
fiable gases — the amount of departure depending on the proximi-
ty of the gas to its point of condensation. Where, therefore, no
departure from the law had been obseryed Qn. the case of air for
instance), Mayer, I submit, was perfectly warranted in ««mming
that the molecular attractions were insensible, and that the quan-
tity of heat (p) before referred to was entirely expended in raimng
the weight, and had its true mechanical equiyalent in the weight
Bo raised.

With reference io the application of the mechanical Theory of
Heat to cosmical phenomena, if it were not a liberty, I would ask
whether you haye read the Essay of Mayer entitied, ^ Beitrage
zor Dynamik des Himmeb ' ? If so, then I haye good reason to
suspect my competence to come to a correct conclusion as to what
constitutes a scientific right.

Eoiowing that the original memoirs of Mayer would be the
true court of appeal in connection with this subject, I some
months ago urged the responsible editor of the ^Philosophical
Magazine 'to publish translations of them. This I hope he will
do ; for I quite agree with you in thinking that they would in-



468 AFPKXDIX TO LSOTDBB XIL

tcrort maaj of the readcw of the mugnrfne. Let me add^ in con-
diuioii, that I do not think the pnMic estimate of your labours
can be in the least affiacted by any recognition which may be ac-
eorded to Mayer. There is room for both of you on this grand
phitform. Certainly, had Mayer nerer written a syllable on the
wechanical Theory of Heat, I should not deem your work a whit
BoUer than I now hold it to jw.

Befiere me, yours, Ac.,

JOHK TrSDALfu
SoTAL Umumuo m:

The public is now in possession of all that I haye written with
reference to the claims of Dr. Mayer. The whole of it being
placed thus together will facilitate future reference.



INDEX.



Abgolate zero of temperature, 90
Absorber, qualities neceesary to form a

ffood,^
Absorption of heat by coats of whiting

and tin, 804

takesplaco within a body. 314

-^ bydiflferent thioknesses of glass,

315
by gases, mode of experiment,

by olefiant gas, 349, 851, 858

proportional to density of gas

in small quantities, 353

by sulphuric ether. 855

the transference of motion, not

annihilation, 856

— by ammonia, 862

by vapours, 868

by aqueous vapour, 891, 6t aeq.

— and radiation of heat, reciprocity of,



by gases and vapours de-
termined without external heat, 881

dynamic, table of gases,

883

Acetic ether, absorption of heat by va-
pour of, 868



. )locity
^thrioscope, 407
Agassiz, M., movement of glaciers, 208

on the cause of bubbles In ice, 329

Affgregstion, change of state of, in

Bodies by heat, 161
Air, compressed, chilled by expansion,

27

— fh>m bellows, heated, 28

~ effect of stoppage of motion of, 44

— compression of, containing bisulphide
of carbon, ^

—expanded by heat, 79
—expansion of, under constant pressure,
80

— expansion of, under constant volume,
82

— heated, ascends, illustrations of and
experiments to prove, 182



Air, passage of sound through, 261

— cooling effect of, 253

— thermometer unmfluenced by heat
that has i>aBsed through glass, 818

— not warmed by passage of heat
through, 319

— dry, absorption of heat bv, 341
dynamic radiation of, 883

'- when varnished by va-
pours, 885

— difficulties in obtaining perfectly
pure, 391

— saturated with moisture, absorption
of, 896, 410. 413

— humid, table of absorption by at dif-
ferent tensions, 899, 409

— cause of slow nocturnal cooling of,
414

Alcohol, expansion of by heat, shown, 91

— evaporation of. produces cold, 168

— absorption of neat by vapour of, 868
Alps, formation and motion of glaciers

on, 198, et »eq.
Alum, powerful absorption and radia-
tion of, 811

— number of luminous and obscure rays
transmitted by, 817

America, extreme cold of E. coast oT 193

Ammonia, absorption of heat by, 361

Amvlene, absorption of heat by vapour
of, 368

Ancient glaciers, evidences of, 208,
ttseq.

Aniseed, absorption of heat by perfume
of, 374

Animal substances, table of conductive
power of, 242

Angular velocity of reflected ray ex-
plained, 276

Aoueous vapour, precipitated by rare-
faction of air, 46

— — cause of precipitation of In Eng-
land, 189

use of In our climate, 189

— — precipitation of less, east of Ire-
land. 190

definition of, 889

— ~ amount of in atmosphere, 890
action of on radiant heat^ 881,

ttuq.



470



Aqneoof Tsponr , AbtorptioB of inidr ob-

UdDedfrom vartow pteeea, 388
— > — obJeetkMW to ezperimfloU oa an-



•» — <leerei«eof infaifberregloiMofat-
mospbere, 401

— > — ciMe of eopioospre eiplU ttonof to
tropie«,401

— ~ effect of removal of from Engtkh
atmoai^Mre, 406

abeorba aame claaa of raya aa

water, 407
Aabeatoa, eanae of bad eoodnettoo of

beat by, 917
Asia, eaoM of coMneaa of eautnl parta

of, 406
Aftatie needle detcribcd, wHh prapara-

tkMiof,8S
Atlantic, Europe the eoodenaer of,

Atmoaphere, effect of tta piimnre oo
boiling point, 120, etseq.

— dimiuotioo <^ ita preaanre lowera
boiling potot, 130

— amoonl of aqneooa yaptmr in, 800

— action of aqaeona vapour in oo ra>
diant heat, 301

— oae of aqneooa vapour in, 40S

— alMorption of aolar heat by, 810, 488
Atoma, oolUaion of carbon and oxygen,

60

— when Mparated, heat oonanmed, 164

— enormooa attractiona of, 163

• abaorb and emit lame raya, 428
Atomic oecUlations of a body inereaaed
by heat, 74

— motion, how propagated, 78

— forceis power ofj 03

~ conttltntion, influence of on abaorp-
tioa,S6A

B

Bacon, extract firom 2od Book of Kovnm

Organum, 88
Balloon, fire, experiment with, 80
Bark of treea, bad conductive power of,

242
Betl atmck by hammer, motion not lost,

41
Beeswax, contraction of in cooling, 118
Bengal, cause of formation of ice in, by

nocturnal radiation, 418
Benxol, absorption of heat by vapour of,

368
Bibulous paper, absorption of heat by

moisture contained In, 410
Bisulphide of carbon, vapour of ignited

by compression, 48

— — — — note on compression of air

— containing. 71

— — — — ansorption of heat by, 868
transparency of, to heat, 300,

813
Bismuth, expansion of in cooling, 06
Blagden and Ohantrey, their exposure of

themselves in heated ovena, 228



Blood, heat oC; why ao cenatant in all

cltnMtea,230
Body, canae of tta leilaltof }dgk tern*

pn^atnrea, 280
BoUing of water, by fHctloB, Bttmford*k

ezperimenta, M

-: fuUydeaeribed,80

towhatdne,128

— point of water raised by beinc fteed
of air, 126

— — true deflnitioo ofy 120

— — lowered by aaeendlng, 180

on summit of Mt. Blanc, 1ft Boaa,

Ac., 120
depmda on external preaBare,121

— — why selected aa a standard point of
temperature, 106

Boiler exploaioDa, 127, 178

Boracic ciher, wse abscvptioii of heat
by vapour ta^ 368

table of dynamic radiation of

vapour of, 888

Boutigny, 11., his experimmta on the
apherudal state of liquids, 178

— water first frocen to a red-hot

crucible by, 170

Bni88,expansion of; by heat, 07. ei weq.

Breeze, land and sea, how produced, 87

British Isles, cause of dampness of, 180

Bromine, opacity of to Ught, but trans-
parency to heat proved, 866

Bnnsen, Profl, descriptioa of hia bamer,
02

— — his determination of the temper*
atnre of Geysers, 138

his Geyser-theory, 180

Burner, Bunsen's description of, 02



Calibration of the gmtvanometer, Mel-

lonPs method of, ZVO
Calms, the region of, 188

— cause of torrents of rato to region
of, 401

Caloric proved not to exist by Davy,

107
Calorific power of a body, Rumford^a

estimation of, 163

— conduction, three axes of in wood,
241

— — of liquids, 313

— rays, sirling of by glass, water, 6bc.,
316

Candle, combustion of, 60

Cannon, origin of heat produced by

boring, 67
Capacity for heat, different in diflbrent

bodies, 38
explained, means of determine

ing,168
Carbon, light of lamps due to solid par-

tides <^, 02

— atoms, collision of with oxygen, 60

— amount of heat generated by its com-
bination with oxygen, 168



ISIDEZ.



471



Ottrbonio add, how produced by ooni-

bUBtion. 00

solid, properties of, 171

power df radiation and absorption

possessed by, 8&0, ei uq.
Carbonic oxide, table of absorption of

heat by, at different tensions, 857
power of radiation and absorption

possessed by, 859, et seq.
Celestial dynamics, essay on Mayer on,

85,440
Celsius, his thermometer, 106
Chantrey and Blagden, their exposure of

themselves in heated ovens, 220
Chemical harmonica, how produced, 270
Chilling, when produced, 273

— an effect of rarefaction, 45

— by radiation, dew an effect of^ 401
Chlorine, absorption of, 362

— and hydrogen, effect of their combi-
nation on radiant heat, 365

Chloroform, absorption of heat by vapour

of, 368
Climate, cause of dampness of Englilh,

180

— mildness of European, 103
Clothing, conductivity of materials used

Clouds, cause of generation of, 402

— composition of, 105

Coal mines, cause of explosions in, 251
Co-eflSoient of expansion of a gas, 81
linear, superficial and cubic, ex-
plained, 104

of various substances, table of,

106
Cohesion not the cause of the sticking

of two pieces of Ice, 885
~ force of, lessened by heat, 75

— of water increased by removal of air,
126

Cold, effect of on thermo-electric pile, 16

— produced by rarefaction, 44

— produced by the stretching of wire,

— of snow and salt, 166

— generated in passing from the solid to
the liquid sUte, 166

from the liquid to the gaseous

stlite,168
by stream of carbonic acid, 170

— conduction of, 228

— apparent reflection of rays of, 282
Collision of atoms, heat and light pro-
duced by, 64

Colour, physical cause of, 272

— of sky, possible cause of, 408

— influence of on radiation, 802
Combustion, eflbct of height on, 68

— Dr. Frankland^s mem(Mr on, 64

— theory of. 64

— of bisulphide of carbon by compres-
sion of its vapour, 71

— of gases in tubes, sounds produced
by paper on, 284

Compounds good absorbers and radia-
tors, cause of, 866



Compression, heat generated by, 10

Compressed air, expansion of; produces
cold, 20

Condensation, congelation and combina^
tion, mechanical value of each in the
case of water. 162, et teq.

Condensation of aqueous vapour in trop-
ics, cause of, 401

by mountains, ditto, 402

— and congelation promoted by water
in its different states, 408

Conduction of heat defined and illus-
trated, 219
not the same in every substance,

220

by metals, 221, 224

experiments of Ingenhausz, 228

Despretz^s method of observing,

223
by different metals determined

by MM. Wiedemann and Franz2224
by crystals and wood, 231, et

seq,
by wood in different directions,

table of, 240
importance of knowing specific

beat in experiments on, 243

by hydrogen gas, 258, 266

of cold, illuBtrations of, 228

— power of not always the same in
every direction, 231

— of woollen textures, imperfect, use
of, 246

Conductors, good and bad, defined, 220,

et seq.
Conductivity of various substances, 224,

— — of crystals and wood, 231, et seq.
Contraction generally the result of soli-
dification, 118

— of India-rubber by heat, 102
Conservation of force shown in steam

engine. 138
Convection of heat defined, 101

examples of, 192 *

by hydrogen, 255

Cooling a loss of motion, 258

— effect of air and hydrogen on heated
bodies, 254

— hastened by coating substance with
good radiators, 808

Copper wire, iron found in, 34

simple mode of ascertaining the

purity of, 85

infiuence of silk covering of, 35

Crevasses in glaciers, to what due,

214
proof of the non-viscosity of ice,

214, et seq
CryophoruB, or Ice carrier, 169
Crystals, expansion of, 101

— of snow, 196

Crystals, difference of conductivity in

different directions, 232
CrystallisatioB, temperature of constant,

under same pressure, 106
Cumberland, traces of ancient glaciers

in, 204



479



INDEX.



Onirent of electricity, direction of. S2
CiurentB, »rial, how prodnoed, 182
• upper aod lower in atmosphere, 183



D

Dftvy, Sir H., bis Tiews of heat, 24

_ experiment on the liquefaction

of lee by friction, 40, 107, et eeg.

first scientific memoir^ 41, 107

chemical philosophy referred

to, 46

investigation of flame, 69

discoTery of the safety lamp.

251

experiment on the x)aseage of

heat through a vacuum, 258

De la Rive and De Candollo on conduc-
tion of wood, 232

Density, point of maximum, In water,
93

Despretz, his experiments on the con-
duction of boat, 223

Dew, Dr. Wells* experiments on, and
theory of, 415, et seq.

— cause of deposition of, 416

— a still night necessary for the forma-
tion of, 420

Diamond, Newton^s opinion of, 58

— combustion of in oxygen, 59
Diathermancy explained and illus*

trated, 810

— not a test of transparency. 821
Dilatation of gases aflfected without chili-

mg,88
Dissolving of nitre, salt, &c., produces

coid,165
Drying tubes, difficulties in selecting

and obtaining, 347
Dynamic enersy defined, 151
— radiation and absorption, discovery of,

380

of gases, table of, 383

— vapours, ditto, 886

boracic ether vapour, table

of, 387
in difilBrent lengths of tube,

889
Dynamical theory of heat* 89

B

Earth, amount of heat that would be
generated by stoppage of its motion,

falling Into the

sun. 57, 443

resisting the ro-
tation of. 443

— crust of thicker than generally sup
posed, 119

— its rotation, effect of on trade winds,
183

— Ume required to cool down, 444



Earth, all the enendei of due to the sun,
445,0lM9.

Earthquake at Caraocas, 186

Elastic bodies, their difference from in-
elastic, 78

Elective power possessed by bodies with
regard to rays of li|^t and heat, 808,
et »ea.

Electricity and heat, relationship of
shown in the conduction of by various
bodies, 224

— currenl of increased by cooling con-
ducting wire, 227

Elements bad absorbers and radiators,

365
Emission theory of Newton, 263
Energy, meohamcal, converted to heat,

21

— potential or possible, defined, 151

— dynamic or actual, ditto, 151

— potontml and dynamic, sum of con-
Btant, 152

~ all terrestrial due to the sun, 446, si

EngAnd, cause of even temperature of.

Equatorial current, Europe overflowed

by. 188

— ocean, winds from, cause of moisture
of England, 189

Equivalent, mechanical, of heat, 64, el
aeq.

how calculated 83, ei »c<y.

Ether, sulphuric, evaporation oi, pro-
duces cold. 168

and solid c&rbonic acid, 179

absorption of heat by vapour of, at

different tensions, 854, 868

by different measures of

vapour of, 355

— the luminiferous, mode of transmis-
sion of heat by, 800

fills all space and penetrates all

bodies. 307
Ether, the luminiferous, the power of

imparting motion to and accepting mo>

tion from are proportional, 366
Europe the condenser of the Atlantic,

194

— cause of mildness of climate of, 194
Evaporation produces cold, 168

— water frozen by, 169
Exchanges, Prevost^s theory of, 274
Expansion of volume, 74

gases J>y heat, amount of, 79

co-efficient of, 81

without x)erforming work, 88

bismuth in cooling^

water in ft-eezing, 93

use of in Nature, 9i

alcohol by heat, 91

of water by htat, 92

co/rf, 73

solid bodies by heat, 96

crystals, 100

lead, curious effect o^ 99

Expansive foroo of heat, 78, 99



UiDJfiX.



478



Explosions of steam Tjoilers, 127

poBsIbly due to the spheroidal

state, 178
— in coal mines, oanse of, 251



Fahrenheit, his thermometer, 106
Faraday, his discovery of mi^ueto-elec-
tricity, 60

— — explanation of the Trevelyan In-
strument, 142

— — regelation of ice, 199

experiments ou singing flames, and

theory of, 284

— mercury first fh>zen in a red-hot era
cibleby, 179

Fibre of wood, power of oondootion of

heat by, 240
Fire produced by friction, 22

— balloon, 80

— screens of glass, action of, 819
Flame, nonstitution of, 69

^ cause of its inability to pass through

wire gauze, 250
Flames, singing, paper on, 284

— — Count Scbafigotsch, experiments
on, 292

Fluorescence of snlphate of quinine in

the invisible spectrum, 209
Foot i)ounds, explanation of, 54
Forbes, Prof. J. D., on the Trevelyan

instrument, 143

viscous theory of ice, 203, 214

law of movement of glaciers, 208

observations on the Glacier du

G6ant, 208

— — merits as an investigator, 209
surmise that the motion of glaciers

was retarded, 211
Force, lecture on, 450

— of heat In expanding bodies. 98

— — vital, supposed conservative action
of, 230

Forces, molecalar, energy of, 93, 153

polar, heat required to overcome,

160
Formic ether, absorption of heat by va-
pour of, 368
Frnnkland, Dr., bis experiments on com

bustion, 63
. Fraunhofer*s lines, 429
Freezing, efl'ect of on water pipes, 94

— pomt of thermometers, 106

— together of pieces of ice, 147

— point lowered by pressure, 148

— of water produced by its own evapora
tion, 169

— planes of in ice, how recognised, 324
Friction, generation of heat by, 18

— against space, heat developed by. 48
Frost, means of preserving plants from,

«- oanse of their preservation, 418



Fusible alloy liquefied by rotation in

magnetic ueld, 51
Fusion, ix>int of, effect of pressure on,

119, 147



G-alvanometcr described, 15

— construction of, 82

— peculiarity of in high deflections, 843

— method oi calibration of, 369, et ieq.
Oas, carbonic acid, fh>m soda water, con-

Bumes heat, 28

— combustion of, 60

— illuminating power of. 68

— co-eflicient of expansion of, 81

— a feeble, varnished oy a powerful one,
383

— absorbs those rays which it emits, 420
Oases, constitution of, 76

Gases, difl'erent jwwers of accepting mo-
tion from the ether, or diflerence in
absorption possessed by, 351, et teq.

— difltsrent powers of imparting motion
to ibe ether or diflierence in radiation
possessed by, 358, ei seq.

— table of dynamic radiation of, 368
Gaseous condition of matter, 75
Gassiot, iron cylinders buret by, 94, noU
Gauze wire, cause of its stopping pas-
sage of flame, 250

Geyser, the Great, of Iceland, descrip-
tion of, 133

— Bunsen's theory of, 136

Gilbert, Professor, on the vibration of the

Trevelyan instrument, 142
Glacien*, formation of. 198

— motion of described, 198, etuq.

— viBcous theory of, 198

— regelation ditto, 199, et ieq.

— ancient, evidcncesof in various places,
203

— cold alone cannot produce, 206

— central portions move quickest, 209

— point ofswiflest motion shifts, 210
maximum motion of determined,

211

— motion of retarded, cause of, 211

— rate of motion, 218

Glass, why cracked by hot water, 96

— broken by a grain of quartz, 99

— opacity of to heat, 810

" absorption of heat by diflTerent thick-
nesses of, 315

~ fire-screens, use and philosophy of,
319

Gmelin. his definition of heat, 37

Gore, his experiments on revolving balls,
117

Gravity, velocity imparted to a body by,
56

Grease, use of on wheels and axles, 21

Green silk, magnetic, 35

Gulfstream, 193

Gypsum, powdered, bad oondnotlon of
LMtby,^



474



Maad eold. OTpMii« cflbets wptm



~ geowtod by martHiirtfl pfOBumi^ 17
^ tfHMraUdbyfrteUoD,U



~~ — ~* pcroQMlODf l9
fUUnf ofiiiereiinror

— ec wmu ptton of In won, 91
«• Dfttnre of, S7, «< m§

-> « moUon of oltinuue pAitlclea, St
~ doTdoptd wbra air com p ieiecd, 41

moCkm of air stopped, 28, 4§

by roUttoo in magoelie field, §1

~ raeebaiiieel eqnivakent of; M, 81; ef

— proportkNuU to beli^t throai^ whicb
tbebodyfaOs,66

— relation of to velocity. M
^ Baeon*a conception of, M

— Ramford^s eeuy on, Vl

— prodaction of f iiezhanstible, 70

— a motion, Romford'a conception of,
3i,70

— a rectilinear motion, 70
~ ezpanaion of a gaa by, 70

~ imparted to a gaa under constant
•preaenre, 80

— — — at conatant Tolnme, 82

— prodnoed by stretching India-mbber,
101

— ftriotion of ice, 106

— a repulsive motion, 110

— conrersion of into mechanical eneny,
112

— sound, 117

— developed by electricity, 117, 228

— performance of work by in steam-
engine, 132

~ power of in expanding bodies, 154

— two liinds of motion produced in
bodies by, 166

— Interior work nerformed by, 166

— consumed in forcing atoms asunder,
166

— generated by drawing atoms together,

— quantity yielded up by different bod-
ies In cooling, 167

— specific, 168

— causes change of state of aggregation
in bodies. 161

— latent, of water, steam, and aqueous
vapor, 162. et teg. 206

definition of, 162

— generated in passing fh>m liquid to
solid state, 166

— cause of more equal distribution of,
180, 193

— convection of, 196

— necessary for the production of gla-
olers,206



coodQetkm oTdsAnad and Otastntad,
lit

ettt equally poasBSitd by Cfwry-



~ method of deteradnlBg the eoodveti-
blllty of bodies Ibr. SI

— andeleetricity, refatioiMhipoi;fii

— modoBoflnteriMiea with the motioa
ofeleetrfeity,2»

— eonverakm of into potential eneigj,



■^ dtfiference of eondnctivity of t

tals and wood, 231, ef Mf.
~ tranamiseion of throogfa wood, 2SS,



1 by th
ataleofthebody,247

— eoodoetion of by hydrogen gaa, SK

— paasage of through a vacuum, 266

— to what motion of imparted, 266

— radiant, 266

— raya beyond visible spectrum, 266

— ob(Bya the aame laws as Ught, 277 el
seq.

— action of on oxygen and hydrogen,281

— law of inverse squares appUed to, 296

— transversal undulation of wavea of,

aoo

— motion of, UKMie impeded by gronpa
of than by single atoms, SOI

— quality of, 817

— rays of sifted by abaorbent bodies,
S17

— transmission of through opaque bod-
ies,a21

— effect of on ice, 324, el weq.

— alMorptlon of by gaaea, mode of ex-
periment, 888

means of detecting minute

amount of, 242

— radiant, apparatua for researches on
described, 846

— tree passage of through dry air, oxy-
gen, hydrogen, and nitrogen, 848

— absorption of by gases and vi^Kwrs,
849, el Mq.

— absorption and radiation of a gas or
vapour determined without extemid
heat, 860

— absorption of by aqueous vapour, 880,
ef seg.

— nocturnal radiation of, the cause of
dew, 414, et aeq.

— amount of generated bv collision of
meteors with the sun, 436

^ developed by friction of tidal wave,
440

— source of this bent, 440

Height, influence of on combustion, 63
Helmholtz, his remarks on the exhaus-
tion of the mechanical force of our
system, 443

— his calculation of heat that would be
caused by stoppage of earth^s motioni^
67



UlUKX.



475



Hcmhel, &t mHiain, hU diaoovtiy of
the obocnre rays of toe ■pectmm, 288

— Sir John, note on roek-flali, 840
meMoremeDtB of solar radiftUon,

4S1
Herbs, aromatic, action of their odours

on radiant heat, 874
Humboldt ou the cold of Central Asia,

Hnyghens, his theory of light, 283
Hydrochloric acid, absorption of heat

by, 802
Hydrogen, collision of atoms of with

oxygen, 80

— amount of heat generated by com-
bining with oxygen, to form water,
163

— co<ding effect of on heated bodies. 2S4
~ low power of absorption possessed by,

350, et 9eq.
Hygrometer, use of radiant heat as, 400



lee liquefied by fHction, 40, 108

— why it swims on water, 93

— liquefied by pressure, 121, 148, 828

— structure and beauty of, 122

— dissected by heat, 123

— flowers, 122, et »eq., 824 et acq.

— memoir on physical properties of,
146,324

— carrier or cryophoms, 169

— viscous theory of, 198

— regelation ditto, 199, et teq.

— proofiB of non-viscosity of. 214

— power of absorbing heat by, 320

— planes of freezing in, how recognised,
324

— not homc^peneous, 328

— theory of meltinginterior of by con-
duction of heat . 832

— examination of waterblcbs in, 334

— cause of freezing of two pieces of, 835

— artificial formation of by nocturnal
radiation, 418

— this theory supplemented, 419

— amount melted per minute by solar
radiation \ Herschel and PouiUet*s
measurements, 431

^amount melted per hour by total
emission of sun, 484

Iceland, Geysers of, 184

India-rubber, stretching of produces
heat, 101

contraction of by heat, 102

Ingenhausz, his experiments on the con-
duction of heat, 223

Interior work performed by heat, 155

different kinds of, 160

Iodide of methyl, absorption of heat by
vaxx>ur of, 868

Iodine, dissolved in bisulphide of carbon,
diathermancy of, 360

Ireland, more rain on west side than on
east, 190



Ireland, traces of andeni gladen in, 204
Iron, bottle burst \k ftvenng water, 98

— expansion of by neat, 97, e< S09.

— presence of in sim ^t>ved, 480
Isothermal line runs north and south in

England, 193
Ivory, bad conduetiylty of, 242



Joule, his experiments on the mechanio-
al equivalent of heat, 25, 86

heat and work. 82

magneto-electncity, 80

the shortening of Indi»-



rubber by heat, 101
— letter of Dr , 462



Kopp, Professor, his determination of
the cubic oo-eflftdents of expansion, 105



Lampblack, j>owerful abecnption and
radiation ol; 366

— radiation of heat through, 867
Land breeze, how produced, 187
Latent heat of water, 40, 162
liquids, 165

vapour, 168

Lead ball heated by collision, 55
Lead, curious effect of expansion of, 99

— carrier in Trevelyan's instrument, 116
~ low specific heat of, 157

Lecture on force,- 450
LeidenfhMt, first observer of the sphe-
roidal state of liquids, 177
Letter of Dr. Joule, 462

Prof. Tyndall, 465

Light produced by fHction of quartz, 28

— of lamps, to what due, 00

— of gas destroyed when mixed with
air, 62

— theories of, 263

— propagation and sensation of, 264

— reflecti<»i of, 275

— action of on chlorine and hydrogen,
280

— law of diminution of with distance,
298

— undulations of*tnuisversaI, 800
Liquids, calorific transmission of, Mel>

loni's UUe, 313

— condition of matter, 75

— changing to solid produces beat, 166

— the spheroidal state of, 172, et aeq.
Liquefaction of ice by friction, 40, 108

pressure, 121, 148, 328

Linear co-efficient of expansion. 104
Lioyd Dr., his tables of rainfall in Iro*

land, 190
Locke, his view of beat, 39



47«



1HBSX.



lUgnoA, PrafeMor, pure oopper obtained
by, 84

hie ezoerimente oq gaeeooe con-

diiotl<Hi,2f»

tbe eondnctlTity of hydro-
gen, 256

Hignetio exee of aetatlo needloe croes
eeoh other, 88

— field, epperent vlieoelty of, 48
ICegnetlam of copper wire, canee pf, 86
If emh m. ebeorption of, 861
Ifeterid theory of heat, 87

Matter, liquid condition of, 76

— gaseous ditto, 76

Mayer, Dr., the relation found by be-
tween heat and work, 62
his calcuiatioD of the heat that

would be produced by stoppage of

earth^s moUon, 67
mechanical equivalent of heat,

86
essay on celestial dynamics,

quoted fh)m, 440
his meteoric theory of sun's heat,

440
Mechanical processes, generation of beat

by, 17
^ work, consumption of beat in, 20

— theory of heat. 20

~ equivalent of neat. 64, 88, et aeg.., 87
" work, gas expanding without per-
forming, 88

— force, amount formerly and now pos-
sessed in our system, 448

Meidmger, M , his experiments on ozone,

378
Melloni, his suggestion for obtaining

pure copper wlire, 34
mode of proving the diminution of

heat as the square of distance, 209

researches on radiant heal, 810

table of the transmission of heat

through solids, 811

ditto, ditto, liquids, 818

theory of serein, 407

addition to the theory of dew, 421

experiments on the warmth of the

lunar rays, 422
Mercury, low specific beat of, 167

— fh>zen by solid carbonic acid, 171
in redhot crucible, 179 ,

Mer de-Qlaoe, abstract of discourse on,

206
Metals good conductors of heat, 221

— proofs of difi'erence in conduction by,
221, et aeq.

— bad radiators, 301
absorbers, 806

— effect of their bad radiation, 417

~ bands seen In spectra of their vapours

424
~ presence of terrestrial, in eon proved,



— number of seen in Boston, 488

— amount of heat generated by collision
ofwithsun,4d8

— sun's light and beat, kept np by, 68,



Meteorology, absoi
pour allied to ]



stion of aqueous va-
nenomena of, 401, et



Metnylic alcohol, absorption of heat by

vapour 0^868
Mitscherlicn, Professor, his experiments

on the expansion of crystals, 100
Molecular motion, heat a, 41, 74, 218

— vibration of a body more intense when
heated. 74

~ force irresistible, 03

— — power of, 154
calculated, 150

<- action in wood, efiect of, 241
Moon blindness, cause o^ 418
~ beams, cause of putrefying power of,
418

— warmU: of rays of, MeUoni's expert-
ments on. 422

— obscure neat of out off by our atmo-
sphere, 422 '

Moraines the means of tracing the tribn-

taries of glaciers, 208
Mosely, Rev. Canon, curious effect of ex-

pansion noted by, 99
Motion, heat an expansive. Bacon, 67

considered to oe, by Rumford, 70

Locke, w

— transference of from mass to mole-
cules, 74

— point of maximum in a elacier, 210
Mountains good condensers, cause ot^

iOietseq
Moving force, amount of heat produced

by destruction of, 67

produced by steam, 133

or dynamic energy, defined, 161



N

N6v6, the feeder of the glacier, 198
Newt(Hi, his opinion of the diamond, 68

emission theory of light, 268

Nitre, production of cold by dissolving

of, 166
Nitrogen, absorption and radiation of,

360, et 9eq.
Nitrous oxide, absorption and radiation

of, 860, et seg.

dynamic radiation of. :.S3

— acid gas, bands produced by spectrum

of, 426
Nocturnal radiation, experiments on by

Wells, Glaisher, and others, 420

artificial formation of ice by, 418

Novum Orflcanum, extract firom 2nd

book of, 60



HCDBZ.



4il1



Obflonre heat, rays of, obey same laws

aa light, 277
ratio of luminouB to obscure rays

from different sources, 323
Ocean, influence of on temperature, 160
Olefiant gas, athermancy of, 849, et aeg.
table of absorption of at different

tensions, 351
— by yarious measures,

3&3

radiation of, 360

dynamic radiation of, 883

varnishing metal by, 884, et aeq.

Organic motion, paper by Mayer on, 85

— structureSj table of conductivity of, 242
Oxygen, collision of atoms of with car>

bon, 59

— small absorption of heat by, 360, et
%eq.

Ozone, action of on radiant heat, 376

— increase of, by reduction in size of
electrodes, 377

— experiments on means of producing
increased quantity of, 877

'- probable constitution of, 870



Particles of matter, space between, UO

— impact of, causes sensation of heat,
77,

— ultimate, motion of produces heat, 39
Parabolic mirrors, reflection of light and

heat from, 279, et seq.
Percussion, heat generated by, 20
Perfumes, now propagated, 76

— table of absorption of heat by, 874
Perspiration, use of in hot climates, 230
Photosphere of sun, action of on solar

rays, 429
Physical properties of ioo, memoir on.

Pile, thermo-electric, construction and

use of, 14, 30
Pipes, water, how burst, 94
Pitch of note, upon what dependant, 271
Planets, orbital velocity of some, 23

— heat that would be developed by their
falling into sun, or by resisting revo-
lution of, 443

Polar forces, heat required to overcome,

160
Potential or possible energy defined, 151
Pouillet, M., his experiments on the

temperature of air and swan's down,

421
measurement of solar radiation,

431

pyrheliometer. 481

Pressure, relation to heating of gases,

80, 84

— effect of on ix>int of fusion, 119
crust of earth, 119

•- liquefoctiou of ice by, 121



Pressure lowers freezing point, 148
Propionate of ethyl, absorption of heat

by vapor of, 368
Pulse sonorous, how produced. 271
Pyrheliometer, use and description of,

431 /^ »

Pyrometers, 97

Q

Quartz, clear and smoky, transmit equal

amounts of heat, 312
Quality of heat, definition of, 817



Bain, eause of the torrents of in the

tropics, fall, 188, 401
~ faU greater on west than on east

coast of Ireland, 190

Dr. Lloyd's table of, in Ireland, 190

places where greatest occur, 190, et

seq.

upon what dependant, 190

Radiant heat emitted by all bodies, 278

and light, analogy between, 274

laws the same as those of light, 277

reflection and convergence of rayg

of, 278
law of inverse squares applied to,

298, et seg.
apparatus for researches on de-

acribed,345.

action of perfumes on, 373, et aeq.

absorption of by gases, 48, etseg.

vapours, 368

Kadiation, effect of colour on, 302

— and absorption, reciprocity of, 304
~ obscure, 328

— by gases, 360

~~ and absorption of a gas or vai>our de-
termined without external heat, ^1

•— dynamic, table of gases, 383

by niuseous matter, paper on, 400

— dew an effect of chilling by, 416

— nocturnal, Glaisher's table of chilling
by, 420.

artificial formation of ice by, 418

Radiating body and air, difference be-
tween constant, 421
Rarefaction, chilling effect of, 44
~ will not by itself lower mean tempe-
rature, 88
Reaumur, his thermometer, 106
Rectilinear motion, atoms oi gases move

with, 76.
Refrigeration by expansion of a gas, 85
Reflection of light and heat obey same

laws, 274
Regelation, discovery of by Faraday.

— of snow granules, note on, 216
Rendu, his plastic theory of ice, 203
Repulsive motion of heat. 41, 110
Resistance, heat of electnc current pro-
portional to, 117,225



478



INBBX.



Bevolvlnf tMOb, Oorc^s experimenti on,

117
Rifle ball, Mnoant of h«&t cenerai«d by

ittoppage of lU motion, So
Rivers, point of twiflMt moikm In,

200
Rooker naed in the Trerelymn instru

nient, 118
Rock-BAlt, tranipareney of, to beat, 810
~ bygroeoopie cnaracter of, 888, AVT

— deposition of moisture on avoided,
8M

RoUtion of silver medal stopped by

jnai^et. 60
earth, effect of on trade winds,

183
climate of England,

189
Rumford, Coont, his eiperiments on

heat produced by friction, 83
— overthrow of the material theory

of heat, SO

abstract of his essay en heat. 07

his estimation of the calorific

power of a body, 162
experiments on the conductivity

of clothing, 240
on the conductivity of liquids

and gases, 252
Rupert*s drops, 99

S

Safety lamp, explanation and use of,

251 -
Bait and sugar, dissolving of produces

cold, 05

— common, yellow bands emitted and
absorbed by vapour of, 42S

Scents, action of on radiant heat, 873, et

§eq.
Bchemnitz, machine for compression of

air at, 40
Bohaffgotsch, Count, musical notes ob*

tained from coal gas by, 287

— — his paper on acoustic experi-
ments, 292

Bchlagiutweit, Messrs., their observa-
tions on the bubbles in ice, 829

Schwartz, his observation of sound pro-
duced by cooling silver, 112

Bea warmer after a storm, 20

— breeze, how produced, 187
8e'en*te, absorption of heat by different

thickueeses of, 310
66rein, Melloni's theory of, 407
Shooting stars, theory of, 23
Silica, water of Geysers contains and

deposits, 134

— as crystal, high conductive power of,
242

— powder, low ditto, 247
Singing flames, 261, et aeq.
paper on, 284

Sky, colour of, 406

Snow, shower of produced by ifliuing of
compressed air, 40



Snow, earbonie aeid, 170

— beauty of, 194

— crystals, 190

— line, the, 195

— formation of glaciers fhmi, 107

— hall, cause of adherence of, 200

— bridges, how crossed, 201

— squeezed to ice, 201

— granules, note on the regelatlon of,
213

Sodium, yellow bands emitted and ab-
sorbed by vapour of, 428. 431

Solar spectrum, cause of dark lines in,
430. See also fiWn.

Solids, expansion of by heat, 97

— calorific transmission of, MeHoni's
Uble.Sll

Solidification accompanied by expan^

sion,93,c#*e^.

contraction, 118

Sound produced by Trevelyan inatro-

ment, 118

— mode of ita transmission through air,
260

— produced by flame, 261

*~ undulation of waves of, longitudinal,
800 1 © 1

Soundfi, inaudible, 273

— musical, produced by gas flame in
tubes, 284, et seq.

Specific heal of l)odies, how determined,

159
Specific heat of water the highest, con*

sequences, 160
masking the conductive power of

a body, 243
Spectra of zinc, copper, Ac, 425, et seq.
Spectrum, invisible, proved, 268, et aeq.

— solar, cause of dark lines in, 430

— of carbon, 428

— of solids, similar to, 428
Spherical form of earth, effect of on

winds. 187
Spheroioal state of liquids, 172, et aeq.

— condition, first observer of, 177
Spheroid, fioating of, in its vapour, 172.

— not in contact, proved, 175
Springs, boiling, of Iceland, described,

184 «

Steam, how produced, 128

— elastic force of increased by heating,
182

— latent heat of, 102
Strokkur, the, imitation of, 139
Storms produced by heated air, 182
Balphate of soda, cold produced by dls*

BoUing, 160
heat produced by crystallising,

107.
Sulphuric acid used for drying gases,

— ether, absorption of heat by vapour
of, 354, et aeq., 808

Sulphurous acid, absorption of, 302
Sulphide of hydrogen, absorption of, 302
Son, cause of continuance of heat and
light of, 58, 430



oniBX.'



479



Bon, prodaet{<m of winds by heat of, 182

— does not heat drv air seiiBibljr, 310
~ constitation of, 420.

— and planeta, Buppoeed common origin
of, 430

— heating power of, meaanrementa by
HerBchel and Pouillet, 431

— mode of determining the radiation of,
482

— atmospheric absorption of heat of,
• 488

~ total amount of heat emitted by, 484

— flame atmosphere surrounding, 430

— all organic and inorganic energy re-
ferred to 446, et sea.

— small ft'action of its heat that pro>
duces all terrestrial energy, 448

Switzerland, evidences of ancient glaciers

in, 203
Syrene, singing flame produced by

sounding, ^



Temperature, upon what dependant, 111

— absolute zero of, 00

— high, how endured, 220

f~ dew caused by lowering of, 416

-» difficulties in ascertaining the true,

417
Teneriffo, Peak of, two currents blow

on, 188
Thermal effects of air, 43

a body falling from a height, 64

Thermo-electric pile, 14. 30

used difierentiaily in. researches

on radiant heat, 344

— electricity, discovery of, 32
Thermometer, construction of, 106
Thomson, Professor Wm., on earth's

crust, 04
his suggestion that India-rubber

would shorten by heat, 102
theory of the sun, 440

— — — — tables of energy, 442

— Professor James, on the influence of
pressure on fusion, 120

his explanation of the freeadng

together of two pieces of ice, 146

Tidal wave, velocity of earth's rotation
diminished by, 440

Trade winds, upper and lower, 183

Transparency of bodies, cause of, 807

— not a test for diathermancy, 821
Transmission of heat through solids,

Melloni's table, 311

liquids, ditto, 813

Tr6laix>rte, squeezing of glaciers through

valley of, 212
Trevelyan, Mr. A., his instrument, 113

cause of vibrations of, 116

— notes of lecture on, 14^

Tropics, flow of air from and to, 188

— the region of calms or rains, 188

— cause of the torrents of rain in, 401
Tyndairs letter to Dt Joule, 466



Ultimate jMrticles, motion of prodncM

heat, 30
Undulatioutheory, 263



Vacuum in centre of ice flowers, 124

— passage of hcM thntugh, 268
Vacuum, dry air similar to, with regard

to radiant heal, 348
Vapour of water condensed by rarefao*
tionofair,46

— production of consumes heaf^ 168, 200

— phenomena attending production of,

— supporting of spheroid by, 173

— of water, condensation promoted by,
40

metals, spectrum of, 424, et aeq.

— absorbs those rays which it emits, 426
Vapours, table of a))Sorption of heat by,

368

dynamic radiation and absorp-
tion of, 386

Vaporous condition of matter, 76

Varnisbinff a metal or feeble gas by a
powerful one, 386

Velocity of planets and aerolites, 23

— heat augments as the square of, when
a body stopped, 66

Vibratory motion, heat thought by Davy

to be. 111
Vibration, of heated metal, 114
bodies havinff different tempera*

tures, abstract of lecture on, 142

sounding disks, 260

Viscous theory of ice, 108

Viscosity, test of, 214

VitaJ force, supposed conservative action

of, 230
Volume of a gas angihented by heat, 70,

et seq



W

Water boiled by fHcUon, 24, 260, et t$q»

— expanded by heat, 02
cold, 02

^ maximum density of, 08

— contraction of by heat, 08

— pipes, why burst, 04

— cohesion of increased by removing air
from, 126, et seq.

— hammer, 126

~ effects of, when in a highly cohesive
condition, 126

— formerly regarded as incompressible,
168

— Bacon's experiment on the compres-
sion of, 164

— has the highest spedfle heat, 168

— amount ofheat yleldsd by, in oooliBg,



480



UIDlfiX.



Water, q^fle bcaf of, bow determined,
UO

— MDoiuit of work equal to beating of

r, leo

~ eWDCt of bigb Ppedfie beat of, 101

— \nUfDi beat of, 168

~ mecbauical value of combination, oon-
denaation and oongelati<« of, 184, et
seq.
'- evaporation of produces cold, 108
^ frozen bv ita own evaporation, 1(10

— — m redbot crucible,'170

— opacity of to beat, 309

— dUtilltfd, colour of, 314

^ ite power of sifting beat, 881

— efreot#of Its energy as a radiant, In all
iU states, 404

'~ as liquid, absorbs same rays as Its

vapour, 407
^ amount of would be boiled by tbe

total emission of sun, 4S4
Waves of sound, 371

llgbt, 212

beat and sound, difference between,

800
Wells, Dr., bis theory of dew, 416, et aeg.
_ — many curious effects explained by,

418
Winds, extinction of lurht of gas by, 68

— produced by sun, 1K{
Winds, trade, 188



Winds, directum of iiiflae«oed.by eartb^s
rotation, 183

— lesser, cause of, 187

Wotlaston. Dr., lines In solar spectrum
observea by, 420

bis eryopborus. 160

Wood, bad conductibility of, 220

— difference of conductivity m, 232

— apparatus for ascertaining conduc-
tivity of, 238

^ tbree axes of conductive power In, 241.
Woollen 'textures, imperfect ocmduction

of, 240
Work, constant proportion between It

and beat, 63

— interior, 166



Toung, Dr. Tboa., bis tbeory of llgbt, 23
— establishment of the undula-
tion theory, 268



Zero, absolute, of temperature, 00
Zinc, bands seen In spectrum of vapour

of,424
Zodiacal light, probaUe cause of, 68, 435,

442



OC257 .T» 1K5

H«it corsildef«d u t mode of motion


