Christianity at the Cross-Roads (George Tyrrell, 1909)
==========================================================
Tyrrell's 1909 Christianity at the Cross-Roads — the ex-Jesuit modernist's posthumous call for a living, developing Catholicism. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non- commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search


Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at http : / /books . qooqle . com/


-if^


Digitized by


Google


Digiti


zed by G00gle


CHRISTIANITY
AT THE CROSS-ROADS


Digitized by Google


Works by the Rev. G* TyrrelL

NOVA BT VETERA: Informal Meditations.
Crown 8 to. 51. net.

HARD SAYINGS : A Selection of Meditation!
and Studies.
Crown 8 to. 5s. net.

THE FAITH OF THE MILLIONS: A Selec-
tion of Past Essays.

Two Series. Crown 8vo. 51. net each.

LEX ORANDI ; or, Prayer and Creed.
Crown 8ro. 5s. net.

THE SOUL'S ORBIT ; or, Man s Journey to

God. In collaboration with M. D. PETRE.
Crown 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.

LEX CRBDBNDI, a Sequel to " Lex Orandi."
Crown 8vo. 5s. net.

A MUCH-ABUSED LETTER.

Crown 8vo. ts. 6d. net.

EXTERNAL RELIGION : its Use and Abuse.

Crown 8vo. as. 6d. net.

OIL AND WINE.
Crown 8vo. 51. net.

MEDIEVALISM : a Reply to Cardinal Merder

Crown 8vo. 4a net.

THROUGH SCYLLA AND CHARYBDIS ;
or, the Old Theology and the New.
Crown 8ro, 5a net.

CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS

Crown 8vo. 59. net.

By WL D« Petre.

CATHOLICISM AND INDEPENDENCE:
being Studies in Spiritual Liberty.
Crown 8vo. 3*. 6d. net.

LONGMANS, GREfcN AND CO.

LONDON, NEW YORK, BOMBAY, AND CALCUTTA


Digitized by Google


CHRISTIANITY
AT THE CROSS-ROADS


BY

GEORGE TYRRELL"

AUTHOR OF "LEX CRKDENDI," ETC.


FOURTH IMPRESSION


LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.
39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON
NEW YORK, BOMBAY, AND CALCUTTA

1913
AU rigktt rturvtd


Digitized by Google


Digitized by


Google


CONTENTS


PAGE

INTRODUCTION vii

PREFACE . XV

PART I

CHRISTIANITY AND CATHOLICISM

I. MODERNISM AND TRADITION .... 3

II. VARIOUS FORMS OF MODERNISM ... 6

III. THE OLD ORTHODOXY 1 4

IV. THE NEW ORTHODOXY 21

V. NEWMAN'S THEORY OF DEVELOPMENT . . 29

VI. FIRST RESULTS OF NEW TESTAMENT CRITICISM 35

VII. THE CHRIST OF LIBERAL PROTESTANTISM 39

VIII. THE CHRIST OF ESCHATOLOGY ... 46

IX. THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM ... 62

X. THE ABIDING VALUE OF THE APOCALYPTIC

IDEA 91

XI. THE TRUTH-VALUE OF VISIONS . . .105

NOV -31913 302958

7 ^ rv Digitized by GoOgle


▼i CONTENTS

FAGS

XII. THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST . .114

a. THE TRANSCENDENCY OF THE KINGDOM 114

b. IMMORTALITY 1 27

C. RESURRECTION 1 38

d. THE IMMEDIACY OF THE KINGDOM . 1 57

e. THE SON OF MAN 171

f. GOD AND SATAN 191

g. THE IDEA OF ATONEMENT . . 199

h. THE PHENOMENAL AND THE SPIRITUAL 202

XIII. THE APOCALYPTIC VISION AND THE CATHOLIC

CHURCH 2IO

PART II

CHRISTIANITY ANP RELIGION

I. EXCLUSIVENESS AND INTOLERANCE . . 223

II. THE UNIFICATION OF RELIGION . . .229

III. THE SCIENCE OF RELIGIONS .... 245

IV. CHARACTER OF AN UNIVERSAL RELIGION . 252
V. THE RELIGION AND PERSONALITY OF JESUS . 26 1

VI. THE CHURCH AND ITS FUTURE . . .274


Digitized by Google


INTRODUCTION


HEN the work is finished labour ceases,


* * weary man enters into his rest" These
words are in the book that lies before us, and the
manuscript of that book lay open on his desk, and
was receiving its last touches, when the worker
was laid low, and the words were fulfilled. For
some days, while the struggle between life and
death was carried on in the little adjoining room,
one did not even dream of moving the pages from
where they rested. One thought at any moment to
see him rise, as he had so often done after periods
of pain and prostration, and go straight back to
the unfinished task, as though to live and to work
were, for him, but different names for the same
thing. As long ago as November nth, 1901, he
said in a letter : " I am always hurried to get
things in before death overtakes me, and am
restless while anythirtg is unfinished that I have
once begun. Could I feel secure of a year . . . but I
always think it may be in a week" ; and this dis-
position never altered. It was as though his work
were his fate ; as though he were ever driven for-


vii


Digitized by


Google


viii


INTRODUCTION


ward to the accomplishment of labours which
were to bring to the labourer himself an ever new
harvest of suffering and pain. For his work was
not of the kind which reaps its reward in the
satisfaction of ambition or the acquisition of fame.
Such things were not classed by him among the
realities of life. Peace of soul, undisturbed friend-
ship, study and prayer, nature and books, and, last
but not least, the altar from which he had been
exiled, these would have been to him the realities
and the true goods of life. But it was not to be.
Almost as one unwilling, he was forced into
combat ; almost against his will, he remained in it
to the last. With each book he seemed to hope
that he might now steer his bark into stiller waters;
might turn from the immediate and storm-stirring
actualities to the quiet study of calm and universal
problems ; but each time he was disappointed, and
had again to wield his pen in the more pressing
cause. In this work his hopes came, I think,
nearer to fulfilment than they had ever done
before, and perhaps, had he lived, it would have
been to the most fundamental questions of
spiritual philosophy that he would henceforth
have devoted himself. The book itself suggests
this likelihood.

But, on the other hand, how are we to know ?
May not such an idea be as illusory as the hope,


Digitized by Google


INTRODUCTION


U


one had so deeply and constantly cherished, that
his stormy day would close in a peaceful eVening ?
that he would, before the end, find rest, even on
this earth ?

Anyhow, it was not to be, and he has entered
into a peace more profound, and yet more living,
than any which we could have planned for him.

That Father Tyrrell had any special conscious-
ness of approaching death we have no reason to
suppose ; and yet, as though a certain sense of
change were pressing on him, he has occupied him-
self, in this book as in no other, with the question
of immortality ; with an examination of the value
of this life, a study of its relations to the next.

And his verdict is uncompromising. ^ No ideal
that is capable of realisation in this world is
capable of appeasing the heart of man, whose
hunger is for a transcendent kingdom, ruled by a
transcendent God. Something more and some-
thing greater than all that life, under its present
conditions, can offer; something after which we
grope, without seeing it ; something for which we
long, without comprehending it ; something which
will explain us to ourselves as no human wisdom
can explain us ; this is what religion is to stand
for, if it be religion at all, and not merely a
scheme of philosophy, however enlightened. And
this, too, is what Christ is to stand for, if He is to


Digitized by Google


X


INTRODUCTION


be the Christ of our religious aspirations ; not the
Christ of humanitarian ism and philanthropy, but
the Christ of a transcendent kingdom.

There are souls to whom the idea of God pre-
sents itself chiefly under its metaphysical and
mystical aspect; there are others, of whom, I
think, Father Tyrrell was one, who are eminently
Christ-lovers and Christ-worshippers.

* " The faith/' he writes in this book, " in His own
Christhood that Jesus, by the power of His per-
sonality, was able to plant in His Apostles, has been
continually reinforced by the experience of those
who have found Him, in effect, their Redeemer,
the Lord and Master of their souls, their Hope,
their Love, their Rest — in short, all that they
v mean by God."

To the lover of Christ the Christological prob-
lem is more painful and arduous than is the
ecclesiastical problem to the lover of the Church.
Father Tyrrell faced them both, and in this book
we have his last — I will not say it was necessarily
his final — treatment of the double problem. His
answer was, as he believed, not likely to please any
party — but parties matter little; it was to the
single mind and soul and to humanity at large
that, with a truly Catholic instinct, he ever ad-
dressed himself.

\ He deals first with the relation of Christ to the


Digitized by Google


INTRODUCTION


xi


Catholic Church; next with the relation of the (
religion of Christ to religion in general. He j
finds that the Catholic Church has, on the whole, (
preserved the message of Christ more faithfully J
than any other ; and he believes that in Chris- i
tianity is to be found the germ of that future J
universal religion for which we all look. The
Church has fulfilled her end, because she has kept
for us the Christ of the Gospels; not a modernised
Christ, made up to meet the latest requirements,
but the Christ who spoke in the categories of
His place and time, while His message was for
men of all places and all times. And in that
message is the seed of future religion — a religion
whose need is more and more pressingly apparent ;
a religion for which all humanity is crying, weary of
petty divisions and disputes, yearning for a truth
that shall be the possession of all. But it is not
an entirely new religion that can fulfil this de-
mand ; the future must grow from the present as
the present has grown from the past.

This is not the kind of apology to satisfy the
majority of Catholics, who ask for blind, not
open-eyed, adherence. But why should they read
this work at all ? Why should they not live on —
as the writer himself would have urged them
to do — in the peace of their own undisturbed
convictions?


Digitized by Google


xu


INTRODUCTION


But for those Catholics who must love the
Church in another way, or not at all, the book
before us has a message of hope and consola-
tion. For here is no faithfulness grounded on the
habits of a spiritual home — the writer had learned
to live homeless ; nor is there a mere clinging to
those sacramental graces which the Church can
offer us — since of those graces he had been de-
prived ; but here is faith in the Church as having
guarded, amidst all her imperfections, the treasure
committed to her by Jesus Christ

A still further problem will suggest itself here
to those who have faced anything of the per-
plexities of Gospel criticism, a problem which
most certainly presented itself to the author of
this book. He saw quite clearly that there are
elements in the Gospel which seem to find their
development in just those characteristics of
ecclesiastical policy most repugnant to a more
spiritual conception of religion and Christianity.
His final answer to that difficulty he has not
been able to give — but the book before us surely
suggests, at least, the lines on which that answer
might have been framed. No evasion of diffi-
culties would ever have been his solution — of
that one may at least be certain. He would
have drained to the dregs that cup of bitter know-
ledge which truth so often offers us; he would


Digitized by Google


INTRODUCTION


xiu


have driven on, to their fullest conclusion, the
hard premisses which study and research lay bare.
But the mystic would not have been slain by the
critic; the believer by the objector. Through
the letter to the spirit ; through the human to the
divine; through the Church to Christ; through
Christ to God ; the way might have been perilous
and terrible, but it would not have been forsaken
for any easier path. And the victory would have
been such as can only be gained by those who
have shrunk from no hardship of the campaign.

NOTE

We may take this work as having been, sub-
stantially, finished before the writer's death. But
it had not been revised, and the second part
even suggests the possibility of some furthei
additions. Also, he had but partially indicated
the divisions and titles of chapters. For any im-
perfections, therefore, in the execution of these
details* of form, the executor has to crave the
indulgence of readers, while also thanking Mr.
A. R. Waller for his kind help in the revision
of proofs.

M. D. PETRE.


Digitized by Google


Digiti


zed by G00gle


PREFACE


HE hope of a synthesis between the essentials


criticism is very widespread nowadays, and those
who share it are commonly called Modernists or
Liberals. There is a marked division of Modern-
ists according as their tendency is to consider that
alone to be essential to Christianity which agrees
with their idea of the assured results of criticism,
or to consider as the only assured results of criti-
cism those that fit in with their conception of the
essentials of Christianity. Both tendencies are
vicious and, if unchecked, destroy the very idea
of Modernism, which professes to consider each
interest impartially, without respect to the other,
in the belief and hope that the results will prove
harmonious. Religion cannot be the criterion of
scientific truth, nor science of religious truth.
Each must be criticised by its own principles.

It is extremely hard for a Christian to look
straight at his religion without regarding science
out of the corner of his eye, or to face science with-
out a similar side-glance at religion. But the effort

b XT


assured results of


Digitized by


Google


PREFACE


must be made. In these pages I have asked my-
self frankly what I should consider the essence of
Christianity were I not acquainted with the results
of criticism ; and how much of criticism I should
admit if I cared nothing for Christianity. It does
not seem to me that the results are very harmoni-
ous, but I should be sorry to say they were
hopelessly irreconcilable. Indeed, the discord is
much less than I had expected. To guard against
bias I have inclined to the more extreme position
on both sides. If I have overstated the difficulty
so much the better.

But the purpose of these pages is in no wise to
make an apology for Christianity and Catholicism ;
nor yet to defend Modernism from the attacks of
its prejudiced enemies; nor to defend it at all;
but rather to save it from its friends — from those
amiable Liberal critics, who welcome it for precisely
the same mistaken reason as those for which
ultramontanism condemns it. 'It seems ungrateful
and ungracious to criticise those who proffer sym-
pathy where so little is to be had. Yet it is not
quite honest to accept a gift intended for another
address. So precious is praise that, if we do not
deserve it, we are tempted to accept it with
the intention of deserving it, and of becoming
what we are supposed already to be. Every
student of nature recognises the value of prepay-


Digitized by Google


PREFACE


ments of merit But he who would guard his
liberty will be shy of incurring such debts of
honour, and will decline what he knows to be
unmerited praise. Would that all Modernists
did so, and had declined to sacrifice the
originality, distinction and solitude of their posi-
tion to their desire for approbation ; with the
result of seeming to make much ado about nothing,
and of arriving laboriously at a banal and facile
solution, of which the world is well-nigh weary.

Between the Modernism of these, and that of
L'livangiU et V£glise> there is scarcely a thought
in common. Even if the illustrious author of
that classical work has ceased to regard its position
as practicable in view of the subsequent action of
the Roman Church, that is no reason for giving its
name to a precisely contrary position — to the
Liberal Protestantism against which it was a pro-
test. Hope is largely subjective, neither kindled
nor killed by objective reasoning. If we have no
hope in the Modernist position let us say so and
adopt some other, or none at all, and cease to call
ourselves by its name. Clear naming is essential
to clear thinking ; a spade is not a shovel.

If I find fault with some of the mistakenly
sympathetic critics of Modernism, I admit that
they are not without excuse, and that the blame
lies partly with those Catholics who, simply be-


Digitized by Google


xriii


PREFACE


cause they are modern, call themselves Modernists.
I own, however, to intense irritation in reading
some of these well-meaning critiques. Their line
of argument is almost stereotyped. They begin by
dilating on the lethal stagnation and immobility
of Rome. They then announce the astounding
discovery of a little Goshen of enlightenment amid
the waste of Egyptian darkness ; of a group of
Roman Catholics who, in spite of the Index and
the vigilance of the terrible Inquisition, have dared
to read and think for themselves, with the inevit-
able result of developing strong protestant and
rationalistic sympathies. Next follow some quota-
tions of the critical and liberal admissions of
noted Modernists, in crude isolation from the
context of the whole position. Then those
Modernists are told that, though they are on the
right track, they have not read history, or have
read it to little purpose ; that they cannot see the
Papacy as it is seen by the clear impartial eye of
a total outsider; that the Pope claims to be in-
fallible and that it is idle to hope that he will
ever accept and define the truth of Modernism.
They will surely be excommunicated and the bark
of Peter will pursue its even course towards the
rocks as before. Let them give up their childish
dreams, and courageously push on to the only
possible conclusion, which the whole world dis-


Digitized by Google


PREFACE


xiz


covered centuries ago. Then, with a pat on the
head and a final benediction, they are good-
naturedly dismissed.

Now this might be an excellent criticism of that
Liberal Catholicism which is associated with the
names of Lamennais, Lacordaire, Montalembert
and, later, with that of Newman, and of those who
followed his aims rather than his methods. But as
a criticism of the former position of M. Loisy and
of those who still adhere to it, it is entirely beside
the mark. The former undoubtedly believed and
hoped that the categories of existing Catholicism
were elastic enough to accommodate themselves to
the latest results of historical and critical research
and to the requirements of modern life — ethical,
economical and social. What they urged was,
not a criticism, but an energetic development of
those categories along the old lines without any
change of direction. They did indeed entertain
the hope (which no sane Modernist entertains for
a moment) that some spiritual-minded Pope might
one day, in spite of the bureaucracy that exploits
his primacy as a political asset, approve and give
force to their ideas. Any sort of revolution
seemed to them incompatible with substantial
continuity.

To the Modernist it does not seem so. Whether
in the history of nations, or in the world of organic


Digitized by Google


XX


Preface


life, he recognises that such revolutions often
belong to the normal course of development ; that
the larval life runs its course evenly, up to a certain
point, only to prepare the way for a perfectly
normal reconstitution. He is convinced that
Catholic Christianity cannot live much longer on
the old lines ; that it has already reached a stone
wall which it must surmount unless it be content
to dwindle away as it is even now doing. The
time has come, he thinks, for a criticism of cate-
gories — of the very ideas of religion, of revelation,
of institutionalism, of sacramentalism, of theology,
of authority, etc. He believes that the current
expression of these ideas is only provisional, and
is inadequate to their true values. He thinks that
the Catholic Christian Idea contains, within itself,
the power continually to revise its categories, and to
shape its embodiment to its growth, and that such
a transformation or revolution would be within the
orderly process of its life — merely a step forward
to a fuller and better self-consciousness from a
confused and instinctive self-consciousness.

To suppose, then, that such Modernism is a
movement away from the Church and is converg-
ing towards Liberal Protestantism is to betray a
complete ignorance of its meaning — as complete
as that of the Encyclical Pascendu With all its
accretions and perversions Catholicism is, for the


Digitized by Google


PREFACE


Modernist, the only authentic Christianity. What-
ever Jesus was, He was in no sense a Liberal
Protestant All that makes Catholicism most re-
pugnant to present modes of thought derives from
Him. The difficulty is, not Catholicism, but Christ
and Christianity. So far as other Christian bodies
are true to Christ, they are faced by the same
problems as are Modernists. If they escape them,
it is because, in defiance of history, they have
shaped Christ to their own image, and see in him
no more than the Moslem sees in Mohammed.

The wisest men may be wrong, not only in
detail, but in their whole scheme of things; yet
they are not therefore fools. The Modernist's
confidence in Christianity may be misplaced, but
it cannot be despatched in a smart article or en-
cyclical. We may be sure that religion, the deep-
est and most universal exigency of man's nature,
will survive. We cannot be so sure that any par-
ticular expression of the religious idea will survive.
Nay, we may be sure that all must perish, that
none can ever be perpetual and universal save that
which shall at last recognise and conform to the
laws of the religious process, as they come to be
established by reflection on wider experience.
Should Christianity be unable, or unwilling, to
conform to these laws, it must perish, like every
other abortive attempt to discover an universal


Digitized by Google


zxii


PREFACE


religion as catholic as science. Religion, however,
will profit and learn by the failure. Fragments of
the ruin will be built into some new construction
raised on the old site — just as the ethics of Jesus
have been built into the structure of Liberal Pro-
testantism.

But the Modernist hopes for better things and
thinks that he sees the principles of a true Catholi-
cism in Christ and Christianity. Theoretically, it
may be so. The difficulties, however, are mainly
of the practical order, and men will differ in their
estimate of their magnitude.

G. TYRRELL.

Junt 29, 1909.


Digitized by Google


PART I

CHRISTIANITY AND CATHOLICISM


B


Digitized by Google


Digitized by


Google


CHRISTIANITY
AT THE CROSS-ROADS

i

MODERNISM AND TRADITION

THE term "Modernism" is rapidly growing
ambiguous. It was first applied, with hostile
intent, to that group of Roman Catholics whose
position was more or less travestied in the no-
torious Encyclical Pascendi. Next it was ap-
propriated, rather reluctantly, by that same group,
to stand, not for the travesty, but for the truth of
their position. Then it was extended, quite legiti-
mately, to like groups in the Church of England
and other Churches, whose attitude towards tradi-
tion and modernity was analogous. In the ears
of the public at large, which cares little about
these controversies, it means what it sounds —
modernity in religious thought ; detachment from
tradition ; a new religion ; a new theology ; a new
everything.


Digitized by Google


4 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


Of the avowed adherents or admirers of
Modernism a large proportion understand it in
this loose sense. They believe in modernity.
Now a Modernist believes in modernity, but he
also believes in tradition. If he criticises tradition,
he also criticises modernity. In neither case is his
faith blind. Of the two, his belief in tradition has
a certain priority. It is his primary interest A
mere philosopher might be equally interested in
showing that a properly criticised traditionalism
is in harmony with a properly criticised modernity.
But he could not therefore be called a Modernist.
He might just as well be called an Antiquarian or
Traditionalist His interest is in the synthesis,
but not in one more than in another of its terms.
But, paradoxical though it sound, the dominant
interest of the Modernist is in tradition. This
paradox is due to the fact that Modernism has
been christened by the ultra-Traditionalists, not by
the ultra-Liberals. Newman was a reactionary for
the Noetics, a progressive for the Ultramontanes.
Of the two the Noeties were nearer the mark.

So, I would say, the attitude of the Modernist,
however critical, is one of attachment to, not of
detachment from, the Church's tradition. His
attitude towards modernity, however open-minded
and sincere, is one of detachment rather than
attachment. So far as his affections are concerned


Digitized by Google


MODERNISM AND TRADITION 5


he leans towards tradition ; his concessions to
modernity are reluctant.

I am dealing, then, with the Modernism of the
Modernists, not with that of their adversaries on
the right and left ; nor with that of their undis-
cerning partisans and mistaken admirers. By a
Modernist, I mean a churchman, of any sort, who
believes in the possibility of a synthesis between
the essential truth of his religion and the essential
truth of modernity.


Digitized by Google


II


VARIOUS FORMS OF MODERNISM

THERE is obviously a practical and a specu-
lative side to this problem, according as we
consider the institutions or the teachings of the
Churches on the one hand and those of the
modern world on the other. Roughly speaking,
it is a battle between Authority and Liberty ; be-
tween Dogma and Science.

The practical problem is undoubtedly the more
acute, complex and difficult Under its pressure,
both here and abroad, many have been led to
abandon the Modernist hope and to turn away
from the Churches to preach a new secular religion
of life and progress to the alienated multitudes.
They argue that, to be vital and effectual, a re-
ligion must express, while idealising, those moral
and social aspirations of the people from which it
originally sprang. All religions, they contend,
originated in this way by the agency of priests
or prophets, in whose minds moral and social
ideals received a mystical interpretation and super-
natural sanction, and became practically the law,

6


Digitized by Google


VARIOUS FORMS OF MODERNISM J


the will of God. Even where a religion has been
imposed from outside, by conquest or otherwise,
it has taken root only so far as it could explain
and sanction life as lived by the people in question,
and thereby assist in the development of that life.
Thus it was that Christianity obtained a footing,
first among Jews, of whose life it was the product ;
then among Greeks, Romans and Barbarians, to
whose life it was, in great measure, adaptable.
They hold that, by a process of petrifaction and
arrest, by the canonisation of the past, the ethical
and social ideas of Christianity have ceased to be
those of the new people, who have outgrown and
departed from it ; that the Churches and the Age
differ even more profoundly and hopelessly in
their conception and valuation of life than in their
conception of truth; that a mental revolution were
not nearly so impossible as a moral revolution.,
Believing that the Churches have thus lost all vital
and vitalising power, all grip on the living and
actual interests of the new world, all leverage for
its movement, these thinkers would leave religion
aside for the present, and preach all that is best,
most ideal, most truly essential in the spirit of the
age, trusting that, in course of time, its implicit
religion will become explicit in obedience to man's
imperious need of a religion.
To this highly philosophical scheme, I suppose,


Digitized by Google


8 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


a Modernist would reply that the disparity be-
tween the Christian conception of life and the
modern conception, which has, after all, grown out
of it, cannot be quite complete and absolute;
that the new conception is by no means divine
and needs criticism as much as the old ; that the
result of this double criticism would be to reveal
a fundamental unity. He would allow the impo-
tence of the Church, the irreceptivity of the age,
but would ascribe them to accidental, not to essen-
tial, perversions.

But if it be hard to reconcile these opposites in
thought, it is still harder to reconcile them in fact;
and all that the Modernist has to urge against the
more desperate and impatient solution is hope
and patience. No two men will quite agree as to
the precise moment when a case becomes des-
perate. It is a judgment that depends on differ-
ences of experience and temperament, and each
must be left to the liberty of his opinion.

It is, however, with the doctrinal rather than with
the practical Modernism that I propose to deal.
Allowing that life and action, involving as they do
a confused consciousness of the truths they imply,
are more important than the analysis and state-
ment of those truths in doctrinal form, yet a slow
reaction of doctrine upon life and action cannot
be denied. If the root affects the branches, power-


Digitized by Google


VARIOUS FORMS OF MODERNISM 9


fully and directly, the branches may affect the
root, slowly and indirectly, but not less really. If
our feelings govern our thoughts in a great measure,
our thoughts, in a little measure, may gradually
modify our feelings.

Moreover it is chiefly with Roman Catholic
Modernism that I propose to deal, not merely
because I know more about it, but because it is
Modernism par excellence, the first to bear the
name and pass it on to analogous movements.

In the Roman Church the problem attains its
clearest statement, its greatest urgency. For, in
the first place, her doctrinal positions, being far
more numerous and daring than those of any other
Church, offer a wider target to the shafts of critic
cism. Secondly, scholastic logic has bound these
positions into a system so compact as to obliterate
any distinction between fundamental and contin-
gent elements. They all stand or fall together,
for they are all attached to the one root of ecclesi-
astical inerrancy. Other systems, more loosely
organised, could survive the amputation of this or
that member ; Rome would bleed to death if she
sacrificed her little finger. Finally, this system, in
its rigid unity, is tied fast, as none other, to certain
fundamental presuppositions, which are assailed
to-day by a philosophy based on the comparative
study of religions, past and present


Digitized by Google


io CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


Hence the opposition between old and new is
more precise and acute in the Roman Church than
in any other. There the question is put more
clearly and exactly than elsewhere. But the
answer must interest, and eventually decide, the
fate of every other Church that shares any measure
of the same dogmatic system and rests on the
same ultimate presuppositions. If Rome dies,
other churches may order their coffins.

Indeed, it is its preoccupation with these ulti-
mate presuppositions that makes Modernism to
be, in the words of Pius X, " the compendium of
all heresies." Former heresies have questioned
this or that dogma, this or that ecclesiastical insti-
tution. Modernism criticises the very idea of
dogma, of ecclesiasticism, of revelation, of faith, of
heresy, of theology, of sacramentalism.

Heretofore, as Mr. A. Leslie Lilley somewhere
remarks, Christendom has been broken up by
vertical sections. Now it is threatened with a
horizontal cleavage, passing through all those sec-
tions impartially. There are not only Modernist
Roman Catholics, but Modernist Anglicans and
Nonconformists — nay Modernist Jews and Mus-
sulmans. Common to them all is the belief or
hope that their respective Churches are not out-
worn, are not dead but sleeping ; that the wine of
Modernism is not so new as it seems, or else that


Digitized by Google


VARIOUS FORMS OF MODERNISM II


the ecclesiastical bottles are not so old as they
seem.

This criticism of religious categories and ulti-
mate ideas has been slowly forced into existence
by the detailed criticism of the results that have
been deduced from those ideas. The need of
reconciling these results with those of historical
and scientific criticism has gradually driven apolo-
gists back to the very roots of religion, in their
search for the exact point of divergence. Naturally,
it is in the Church of Rome that the divergence
has been most keenly felt and the search for its
origin most eagerly prosecuted.

What is common to all Roman Catholic Modern-
ists is the belief in a possible reconciliation of their
Catholicism with the results of historical criticism.
They differ widely as to what those results are,
and as to the means of reconciliation. This re-
conciliation practically consists in a re-reading or
reinterpretation of their Catholicism so as to find
room in it for accepted facts; and also in an
effort to control, and even resist, the destructive
tendencies of criticism. Plainly this implies philo-
sophising — a philosophy of Catholicism and a
philosophy of criticism; and, as regards their
philosophy, their reading of Catholicism, their
reading of criticism, Modernists are of all possible
varieties, shades and grades.


Digitized by Google


12 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


There are, as there always have been, men in the
the Roman Church whose conflict with official or-
thodoxy springs, not from their historical, but from
their philosophical convictions. One need only
think of Pascal, Descartes, Malebranche, Lamen-
nais, Gioberti in the past, as well as of Dom
Romolo Murri, and of the Christian Democrats
and Sillonists in the present, who are fighting
for ethical, economical and political convictions,
while repudiating all connection with theological
Modernists and their historical problems. As the
Church claims infallibility in morals as well as in
faith, their orthodoxy is only partial at the best,
and their conflict with her doctrinal authority is
not less real because it concerns matters of conduct
rather than matters of theology.

One must add to these another Category of
Modernism, condemned by Pius X under the
names of " Laicism " and " Presbyterianism," which
consists in a protest against that progressive
centralisation of the Roman Church, by which
first the laity, then the priests, and finally the
bishops, have been deprived of all active share in
Church life and government; which demands
constitutional guarantees for the liberty of the
subject against the caprices of authority; and
which is inspired by the idea of democracy as well
as by a knowledge of the original constitution of


Digitized by Google


VARIOUS FORMS OF MODERNISM


the Church. This is the most widespread of all
forms of Modernism, and is shared by thousands
who would cordially anathematise Dom Romolo
Murri as well as M. Loisy.

I must, however, confine my attention to theo-
logical Modernists and their historical problems.

Where there are so many shades and grades it
will be well to take the problem in its most
extreme and aggravated form. If a case can be
made out for that form, the milder forms will
be defensible a fortiori. If not, they may still be
defensible on other grounds.


Digitized by Google


Ill


THE OLD ORTHODOXY

THE historical objections raised against official
orthodoxy are drawn, first of all, from the
study of the origin and development of eccle-
siastical institutions and dogmas as excluding the
traditional notion of immutability. Secondly,
from the criticism of the Old and New Testaments
— more especially of the Gospels, as conflicting
with the Christological and various other affirma-
tions of present orthodoxy. Thirdly, from the
comparative study of religions as threatening the
claim of Christianity to be the sole and absolute
religion.

To estimate justly the measure of the difficulty
we must be clear about the tertninus a quo of
Modernist criticism — about the claims of official
orthodoxy. This is the more necessary as an
illegitimate use of the category of development
has been slowly introduced by way of a new patch
to hide the rent in the old garment — and with the
usual disastrous result According to the orthodox
theory, as defended by Bossuet, as assumed by the


Digitized by Google


THE OLD ORTHODOXY


Councils and the Fathers, the doctrines and essen-
tial institutions of the Catholit Church have been
always and identically the same. The whole dog-
matic, sacramental and hierarchic system, as it
now stands, was delivered in detail by Christ to
His Apostles and by them to their successors*
He proclaimed, not the very words, but the very
substance in all detail of the doctrines of Trent
and the Vatican. He instituted the papacy, the
episcopate, the seven sacraments. The Immaculate
Conception of Mary was familiar, if not to the
Patriarchs, as Pius X has taught us in one of his
encyclicals, at least to the Apostles and the earliest
Christians.

The Church is the infallible guardian of this
system as delivered to her keeping by the Apostles
— not to develop dialectically, but to preserve intact
without addition or subtraction. " Keep the de-
posit," "keep the form of sound words" — that
is her commission. It was an infallibility, not of
new revelation or of further deduction and de-
velopment, but of memory — of her collective*
memory. The Holy Ghost was to teach and
bring to her remembrance all that Christ had said
to her while on earth — nothing more. Hence in
the early Church the appeal is always to the Past/
not to the Future; the golden age of dogmatic
truth lies behind, not before. Apostolicity, de-


Digitized by Google


16 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


rivation from the Apostles through the Apostolic
Sees, is the criterion of orthodoxy. It was not a
question of what, logically, the Apostles ought to
have held but did not hold; but of what they
actually held. Novelty was the very definition of
heresy. Deductions^ which the Apostles had not
imposed with the authority of revelation, could
not be imposed merely on that of reason. Heresy
was any departure from the actual and universal
belief of the faithful. When such novelties arose
and spread, bishops met in Council, not to de-
bate an open theological question and impose
their vote on the faithful, but to bear witness as
to the actual faith of their flocks ; not to decide
what their flocks should believe for the future, but
to declare what they did believe at present and
had always believed ; not to make the innovation
heretical, but to declare that it was so already, as
being a departure from the actual and morally
universal belief of the faithful; not to define an
open question, but to define that it never was
open. They did not make the truth to be de fide
but de fide definite — they defined that it was
already de fide. In this view of unchanging tradi-
tion there was no real, but only a verbal, difference
between the actual Christology of the Nicene and
the ante-Nicene Church. The faithful may pre-
viously have said homoiousios, "of similar sub-


Digitized by Google


THE OLD ORTHODOXY


17


stance," but they meant homousios, "of identical
substance " — all except a few heretical innovators.
Against these the Council selected a term more
accurately expressive of the universal and un-
broken apostolic tradition. It did not make a
new article of universal belief.

So too Pius IX did not decide the open question
as to whether Mary's conception was or was not
immaculate, as though it had not been always de
fide and universally held. He only declared,
against innovators, that the faithful with the ex-
ception of an insignificant minority had always, as
well as everywhere, believed in the Immaculate
Conception. If there were saints in this minority,
such as Augustine, Bernard, Thomas Aquinas and
Anselm, they were heretics in good faith, but none
the less heretics, in opposition to the general belief
of their contemporaries.

The Vincentian Canon sums up this view, in its
criterion of faith, as that which is believed by
everybody everywhere, and has always been so
believed. Nor must we be misled by Vincent's
apparent concession to development For, in his
physiology, the difference between the boy and the
man is only that of implicit and explicit ; not that
of potential and actual. It is, like the evolution
allowed at the Council of Florence, the difference
between a cloak that is folded up and the same
c


Digitized by Google


18 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


spread out. All that is revealed when it is spread
out was there from the first, not potentially, but
actually. 1

Plainly this view of unchangeableness soon
encountered difficulties, even in times to which
the Past was sealed and its divergence from the
Present almost wholly unsuspected. The way in
which those difficulties were met supposes a con-
ception of tradition wherein development could
have no place. The only semblance under which
later theologians have sought to shelter their theory
of development is the distinction just mentioned
between implicit and explicit belief ; between the
cloak folded and the cloak outspread. Because a
deduced conclusion is " implied " in its premisses,
no less than those premisses in the conclusion,
later theologians have quietly interpreted implicit

1 Driesch, in his Giffbrd Lectures t 1907 (p. 46), notes that,
until the triumph of "epigenesis" in the eighteenth century,
" evolution " meant in biology an actual, not merely a potential,
pre-formation of the mature organism in its germ. Each part was
there in microscopic proportions. But "true epigenesis in the
descriptive sense of the term does exist. One thing is formed
after the other ; there is not a mere 4 unfolding ' of what exists
already, though in a smaller form 5 there is no evohitio in the old
meaning of the word." Under this confusion between evolution as
an unfolding of actual packed-up ports, and evolution as epigenesis
or growth of new parts contained virtually in a germ, recent theo-
logians have claimed the authority of S. Vincent of Lerins and of
the Council of Florence for an entirely new conception of doctrinal
evolution, in flat contradiction to the ancient idea of doctrinal
identity.


Digitized by Google


THE OLD ORTHODOXY


19


as meaning potential belief ; whereas it had always
stood for actual though not stated belief; for a
belief too obvious to need statement ; something
taken for granted and never challenged.

If I say that I attended a friend's funeral it is not
necessary to say that he is dead. That is stated (
implicitly. Yet it is not my potential, but my
actual, belief ; my actual belief in his death is
implied in my actual belief in his burial. There
are many more or less remote consequences of his
death which I could, but do not, infer. These I
believe potentially but not actually — Le. I do not
believe them. I may even deny them. They are
implied, but my belief in them is not implied by
my assertion of his death.

Against historical difficulties, drawn from the^l
silence of earlier ages as to current beliefs, appeal /
was made, not to the potential, but to the actual, ■
though implicit and unstated, beliefs of those ages.
They were not mentioned because no one had
challenged them ; but had the man in the street
been questioned he would have answered as the
Church of to-day.

Another appeal, quite inconsistent with any)
theory of development, was to the Discipline
Arcani and to all that Christ taught the Apostles t
during those forty days after His resurrection. v
This was not written down, but was confided to 1


Digitized by Google


so CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS- ROADS


the rulers of the Church to be dispensed according
v as exigencies might demand. All apparent addi-
tions to the Creed were, from the first, known
explicitly to a favoured but undefined few, who
transmitted them to the episcopate or to the Pope.
How much more these know only the future can
tell. This is hardly consistent with quod ubique,
quod ab omnibus, though it saves the quod semper.
< As a weapon of apologetic it has been laid on the
shelf and its place has been taken by development
\ — a weapon which simply murders the system it
would defend.


Digitized by Google


IV


THE NEW ORTHODOXY

THIS new weapon fitted well to hands that\
had been trained in the disputations and '
debates of the schools, where a man who held
certain premisses might be forced, even against f
his will, to admit the conclusion that followed^
from them. He seemed to be thus convicted of \
holding what he did not hold or even denied — as
though it had been buried and lost in his subcon-
sciousness. At this rate earlier generations, who
had admitted the premisses while denying the
conclusions of later theologians, might be said to
have admitted those conclusions by implication ;
and thus modern doctrines, in the face of such
manifest and explicit denial in the past, might
claim to have been held semper y ubique % ab omnibus.
Thus S. Augustine, S. Anselm, S. Bernard, S.\
Thomas, while explicitly denying, implicitly be-^
lieved the Immaculate Conception of Mary.

But it is one thing to say that the truth (or
objective belief) was implied in their admissions ;
another to say that their belief in the truth was

ai


Digitized by Google


22 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


( so implied. An implied potential belief is not
V^the same as an implied actual belief. Under this
/" ambiguity of the word " implicit " a new concep-
tion of tradition has been quietly substituted for
v the old. If a man is said to believe and admit,
in spite of his explicit denial, all that is objectively
implied by his data, then every avowed atheist is
a theist, and every heretic orthodox. If S. Thomas
was not a heretic for denying the Immaculate
Conception, neither was Arius a heretic for deny-
ing the Godhead of Christ It is irrelevant to say
that the former dogma was not yet de fide definita,
for it could not have been defined unless it had
always been de fide, always accepted by the faith-
ful at large. All we can say is that, in default of
/public definition, S. Thomas may not have known
Vthat he was an innovator and a heretic.

In this view, the whole character and meaning
\ of an ecumenical council is changed. It becomes
J a theological debate. Bishops do not meet to
bear witness to the constant and universal belief of
their flocks, against some unheard-of innovation,
and to prove it a heresy simply by showing it to
be contrary to the actual universal faith. No;
someone has started a new opinion which has
gradually spread and divided the Church into two
camps. So far it is an open question ; the faithful
are at perfect liberty to choose this side or that


Digitized by Google


THE HEW ORTHODOXY


Those who choose the wrong side are not heretics,
for there has been no definition. They are justified^
by their willingness to accept whatever a council J
may decide. In that willingness all orthodoxy is/
implied. In virtue of that willingness S. Bernard,
while denying, really believed in the Immacu-
late Conception. When union and charity ar^
threatened by the dispute, and the faithful are at
their wits' end and do not know what to think,
bishops meet for an ecumenical debate. They
do not come to apply the criterion of universal
and constant belief; for the opinion is new and
the faithful are at sixes and sevens on the subject
They do not come tc declare what is and alwaysT
has been de fide, but to make something de fide)
for the future that was not so before and might bey
denied inculpably. They debate the question on
its own merits and then impose their decision on 1 *
the faithful as a law of belief, which is not new
only because it lay potentially in the admissions
of former generations, just as the first book of
Euclid lies potentially in the axioms, postulates
and definitions. It was always and universally
believed by the faithful even when they denied it
In the old view revelation was guarded by the
infallible memory of the faithful collectively. To
know what was of faith was not a question of
speculation and argument, but of observation.


Digitized by Google


34 CHRISTIANITY AT THR CROSS-ROADS


When communication was more difficult than now,
it was possible to mistake local for universal
beliefs. The point was decided by reference to
the Apostolic Sees; especially to Rome, where
Christians from all quarters came together ; or else
to a general council of bishops, who came to wit-
ness to the constant and universal belief of their
several dioceses.
( In the newer view revelation is guarded by the
V infallible understanding of the episcopate in ecu-
i menical debate — infallible in deducing the logical
\ consequences of the faith of past generations, and
! adding them to the ever-growing body of explicit
'and actual beliefs.

In the older view the body of actual beliefs was
a constant quantity ; in the newer it is susceptible
of indefinite increase. It is frankly allowed to be
far larger now than in the days of S. Bernard ; far
larger then than in the ante-Nicene Church. And
yet it was always the same — not actually, but
potentially, like the faith of an atheist who, from
a potential, has become an actual believer. We
are referred at every turn to acorns and oaks and
grains of mustard-seed. The Disciplina Arcani is
heard of no more.

As a means of explaining the ever-multiplying
difficulties of history — its strange silences, its em-
\ barrassing affirmations — Development is a more


Digitized by Google


THE NEW ORTHODOXY


*5


elastic hypothesis than the Disciplines Arcanu We »
need not be astonished that earlier generations^
had not drawn out all the consequences of their |
admissions, or at times flatly denied those con- /
sequences ; that they did not believe actually what \
they believed potentially. It was much harder to J
maintain that they were merely silent because the .
beliefs in question were too obvious to need men-
tion ; or because they were too sacred to be uttered
publicly.

But this relief is purchased too dearly.)

The fact that potential belief can consist witlT)
actual denial : that it levels all distinction between '
believers and unbelievers — since all are potentially/
believers — shows that it is not belief at all, any '
more than potential health is real health.

If this was what the Fathers and Councils
meant by identity and immutability of doctrine,
by semper, ubique, ab omnibus, why did they never
recur to so obvious and easy an explanation, for
surely the idea of dialectical development is as old
as civilisation ? It was not discovered by Darwin
or Newman. No; the identity they taught was
that of actual belief— of a constant body of doc-
trine from which nothing could be taken, to which
nothing could be added; which was apostolic
because it had been delivered whole and entire by
the Apostles, not to the intellectual analysis, but


Digitized by Google


26 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


to the unfailing memory or tradition of the whole
Church. Their appeal was to the past, and not to
the future, as the period of fullest enlighten-
ment — an appeal inconceivable on the hypothesis
of a development of Faith. All growth is from a
! formless germ to a plenitude of expansion ; from
) the dimness of dawn to the light of perfect day.
1 Its golden age is before it and not behind it ; its
criterion is its end, not its beginning. What
would S. Paul, who lived in daily expectation of
the Parousia, have thought had he been told that
the light of Christian truth was but at its dawn ;
that he was living in the Church's darkest age ;
that even the nineteenth century would not see the
sun at its height f What would the Christians of
the first ages, with their faces towards the past,
have thought had they been told that the fulness
of revelation lay before and not behind ?
I This was too fundamental a point of tradition
[ to be denied, and so we find the development
\ theory clumsily tacked on to it It is conceded
[ that the Apostles knew fully and explicitly by
| revelation all that has been, or shall ever come to
v be, believed actually by the Church. But the sub-
^Apostolic age was not fit for this fulness of truth :
only through long centuries could the Church be
prepared to receive it It was delivered to the
sub- Apostolic age wrapped up in certain pregnant


Digitized by Google


THE NEW ORTHODOXY


*7


and central dogmas, whose potentiality has been ^
unfolded by the divinely assisted dialectic o£ ?
Christian thought. Thus dogmatic truth is slowly^
returning to that original fulness and explicitness f
which it possessed in the Apostolic mind. The\
process begins, as it ends, in a period of maximum''
illumination. From an initial maximum of evolu-,
tion it passes immediately to a maximum of in- \
volution, and thence moves slowly and laboriously/
towards its original condition.

But if this fulness of Apostolic illumination was \
not communicable or communicated to the Church, /
how can we appeal to it ? Of what use is it as a cri- j
terion if we are only to rediscover it at the end of
time? The backward appeal can only be to the\
sub- Apostolic age — the age of maximum involution )
and darkness. And let us remember that the
classical appeal was not merely to the Apostles,
but to the earlier ages as nearer the plenitude of
light, and therefore more enlightened.

Let us also remember that theChurch claims to be )
the infallible guardian of that deposit of faith com-
mitted to her by the Apostles. Yet this hybrid
theory of development implies that the casket of
dogmatic jewels at once dropped from her weak
and incompetent hands, and that she is infallible/
not in keeping what she received, but in slowly )
recovering what she has lost.


Digitized by Google


28 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


( But if such a theory of development is in flagrant
contradiction with the patristic idea of doctrinal
immutability, this patristic idea has long since
crumbled to dust in the light of history. To find
our present theological system in the first century
is as hopeless as to find our present civilisation
there. No one attempts it any longer. It was
possible only for those early generations, whose
divergences from the Apostolic age were com-
paratively slight, or for those later generations,
from whom their palpable divergences from Apos-
tolicity were hidden by their ignorance of the past.
No Ultramontane pretends that the Immaculate
Conception was actually and explicitly believed
always and everywhere by everybody. They have
transferred their cargo to the new vessel of develop-
ment, whose unseaworthiness we have just noted.
/ Not that development can do more than post-
' pone their shipwreck on the rocks of history. Even
to show that the present doctrinal system was
contained logically in the admissions of the first
\ centuries means a torturing of texts and documents
incompatible with any sort of historical sincerity.
No historical probability, taken alone, is coercive,
but the cumulus of probabilities is irresistible for
all but the wilful sceptic ; and under the weight of
such a cumulus even the developmental view of
doctrinal immutability falls to the ground.


Digitized by Google


V


NEWMAN'S THEORY OF DEVELOPMENT

THIS idea of dialectical development had long )
superseded the old apologetic of actuals
identity and unchangeableness when Newman;
appeared on the scene with the theory of doctrinal
development associated with his name. The facts
that it is thus associated with his name, and that
it was vehemently opposed by the scholastic sup-,
porters of dialectical development, ought to bei
enough to prove that it is a radically different and;
irreconcilable system. That those who have con^
demned this system in the Encyclical Pascendl /
should try to show that Newman never held it,*
and that he was at one with scholastics in their
purely dialectical idea of development, may be put
down partly to tactics, and partly to ignorance and
the tendency of the ill-read to read their own ideas
into everything. The fact that Newman spoke of]
Christianity as the development of an " idea " easily \
misled those for whom " ideas 99 mean intellectual /
concepts, universals,definitions,from which a doctri-'
nal system could be deduced syllogistically. More-

29


Digitized by Google


30 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


[over his Essay on the Development of Christian
\ Doctrine was undoubtedly written with one eye
f fixed on his scholastic critics, and with a view to
dissemble the difference between their conception
and his own as much as possible. His own con-
ception, undistorted by any such synthetic effort,
is to be found in his Oxford Lectures. It is one
of biological, rather than of dialectical, develop-
ment ; organic, rather than architectural.

If a man is to be judged by what he is funda-
mentally, and in his dominant aims and sym-
pathies, it is absurd to speak of Newman as a
'Modernist in any degree. It is equally absurd
, to speak of him as an Ultramontane ; though it
will be always possible for Ultramontanes to say
that he was one- until we have a sincere and
integral publication of his correspondence. But
if he was not an Ultramontane, it was because
he was more, and not less, conservative than that
a priori school which evolves history out of general
ideas, and holds documents in abhorrence. The
whole aim of his apologetic was the integrity
| of the Catholic tradition of the Roman Church ;
( its preservation against the corrosive atmosphere
of rationalism and liberalism. Yet the whole
character and temper of his mind was adverse
to the merely dialectical apologetic of scholastics
and Ultramontanes, while his knowledge of early


Digitized by Google


NEWMAN'S THEORY OF DEVELOPMENT 31


Church history convinced him of the inadequacy)
of their attempt to reconcile primitive with prej
sent-day Catholic theology. He saw clearly tha^
modern adversaries had to be met on their own\
grounds with their own weapons ; that crossbows \
and bludgeons were helpless against long-range/
rifles.

What he did not see, perhaps, was the intimate ]
connection between methods and their results; \>
that the new could not defend the old, nor the \
old the new; that to give his adversaries the/
choice of weapons was to give them the victory.'
Here the instinct or intuition of the Roman
Church, insisting on scholasticism as the only
proper weapon of orthodox apologetic, is wiser.
So far, and it is now very far, as the Roman x i
system has been created by scholasticism, it can f
only be maintained and defended by scholas-
ticism.

His Essay on Development is an argumentum)
ad hominem, addressed to the Tractarians. He
uses his favourite method, derived from Butler:
If you come so far, you must either come
further or go back. If you are a Deist, you\
must become a Christian or a Rationalist ; if you '
are a Christian, you must become a Catholic 01/
a Deist. In short, if you are not a Roman}
Catholic, you must become a sceptic. So, too,


Digitized by Google


32 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS* ROADS


if the Tractarians reject the later developments
of Roman theology, why not also those of the
Fathers and early Councils ? If they can recon-
cile the latter with the Vincentian canon, why
not also the former? In no case can the rigid
and literal identity of the later and earlier theology
with the Depositum Fidei be maintained. Develop-
ment of some sort must be admitted. The original
^deposit" must be conceived as in some sense


a germ. To conceive it as a body of theological
, premisses, susceptible of indefinite dialectical
/ development, would be obviously inconsistent
\ with the appeal to the Apostolic age as the
most spiritually enlightened. Theology and
(Revelation must be distinguished. The content
/ of Revelation is not a statement, but an "idea"
\ —embodied, perhaps, in certain statements and
institutions, but not exhausted by them. This
(^embodiment is susceptible of development; but
the animating "idea" is the same under all the
variety and progress of its manifestations and
embodiments. There is a development of insti-
tutions and formulas but not of the revealed
"idea," not of the Faith. Thus the advantage
of later over earlier ages is merely secondary
and protective — a compensation for their growing
disadvantage. As time goes on the preservation
of the original " idea " needs more complex


Digitized by


Google


NEWMAN'S THEORY OF DEVELOPMENT 33


defences against oblivion and distortion. As the
initial force lessens, it needs to be husbanded more
carefully.

In this notion of an " idea " as a spiritual forced
or impetus, not as an intellectual concept, New- ) *
man identifies himself with the modern, and j
separates himself from the scholastic, mind. It
is the weapon that Modernists have taken from •
him and turned against much of that system
in whose defence he had framed it. He himself
must have owned that it was as far from the
mind of the Fathers as from that of the
scholastics; that when the Fathers spoke of the)
unbroken identity of the Faith, they were not s
thinking of an "idea" but of a dogmatic system,
which neither had been nor could be developed \
— which had come down unchanged from the
hands of the Apostles.

Dealing with Tractarians, he is more con-
cerned about the "idea" of the Catholic Church
than about that of Christianity. He assumes
their identity as admitted by his opponents.
He has merely to show that the " idea " of early
and present-day Roman Catholicism is the same.
He has to show that they are governed by the
same ends, the same methods, the same temper
— not always a very pleasant one — and therefore
presumably embody the same idea of which even

D


Digitized by Google


34 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


these unpleasantnesses are the characteristic,
though morbid, manifestations.
Y As an argumentum ad hominem it is un-
doubtedly strong. But, for one whom it will
drive forward, it will drive a hundred backward
to reconsider the admissions that lead to such
[ consequences. In virtue of his method Newman
( did as much for unbelief as for belief. Between
himself and the sceptical issue stood the barrier
y of his own subjective and incommunicable religious
experiences, and so his method carried him for-
wards and not backwards. Others may not share
his religious experiences, or, if they do, may seek
their explanation in psychology rather than in
divinity ; and for these his method is a two-edged
sword.


Digitized by Google


VI


FIRST RESULTS OF NEW TESTAMENT
CRITICISM

BUT the problem to which Modernists have A
to apply Newman's theory of Development J
is one which he saw only in vague outline, as a
cloud on the distant horizon. He was contend
porary with that application of historical criticism
to Christian origins and to the New Testament
which occupied so many German scholars in thej
nineteenth century. But Germany was further
from Oxford in his day than at present, and he did
not even read German. It was generally assumed]
and comfortably believed, that this criticism, as the'
work of German rationalists and infidels, could")
offer no immediate danger to the belief of sensible /
people in this country ; that the critics were all at
sixes and sevens, so that any of their assertions <
could be met with counter-assertions from their '
own fraternity ; that there was nothing but endless
oscillation, no real progress, no established results ;
that at any rate the dispute was confined to the
study and could never reach the street.

35


Digitized by Google


36 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


As a matter of fact it has reached the street and
, the railway bookstall, to a great extent here, to a
Vfar greater extent in Germany and elsewhere.
Like every new subject of scientific inquiry, that
! of Christian origins gave rise at first to a whole
^ chaos of conflicting opinions and hypotheses, but,
j as time went on, the number of issues was
narrowed down steadily, and an amount of general
agreement reached that seemed to justify the
diffusion of such results in a popular form.
/" The problem of present-day Catholicism is, not


j )\.o reconcile itself with that of the earlier centuries,
*j to find in both a common M idea " of ecclesiasticism,
/but to find ecclesiasticism of any sort in Jesus
\ Christ as He is given to us by historical criticism ;
f to find in the earliest Catholicism a true develop-
ment of the " idea " of Christ. So far as Newman's
narrower problem is concerned his contentions
have, in many ways, gained rather than lost at
f the hands of historical criticism. The antiquity
f of the leading features and principles of Catholi-
cism has been pushed further and further back,
(till its beginnings are found in the New Testa-
ment itself. The hierarchy is felt in the Pastoral
/ Epistles ; sacramentalism in S. Paul ; theology
in the Johannine writings; ecclesiasticism in
\ S. Matthew ; the Petrine ascendency in S. Matthew
and the Acts.


Digitized by


Google


FIRST RESULTS OF NEW TESTAMENT CRITICISM 37


Taking their idea of Christianity from Ger\
man Protestantism and Pietism, critics are not
concerned to distinguish between the claims of
Tractarianism and Roman Catholicism, or to de-/
fend the purity of the first six centuries against
the impurity of the subsequent thirteen. They\
agree with Newman as to the continuity of " idea " 1 >s
governing the Catholic tradition from S. Paul to f
Pius X. I say " with Newman " — not with the \
scholastic or pre-scholastic view of continuity of \
the dogmatic and institutional system. Of these
views their method is entirely destructive. It^
shows equally that there has been a continual '
process of growth, and that that growth has(
not been dialectical ; but, like that of civilisation, j
unified by its end, its idea, its spirit. For them
the problem is the transition from Christ to^
Catholicism. And here we have two schools —
one affirming, the other denying, continuity of )
idea. The former is at once the older and the^
newer; and this for a reason that points to its
permanence.

The Eschatological view, as it is called, was )
first formulated in a spirit hostile to Christianity, )
as known under the form of German Protestantism.
The intention of this school was to represent \
Christ's central inspiration as an illusion, and
Christianity as the outcome of a fanatical dream ;/


Digitized by Google


38 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


to show that what was of universal and permanent
value in His ethical teaching was not, and did not
claim to be, His own ; that what was His own was
not of permanent value since it was coloured
through and through with His illusion as to the
immediate end of this world and the coming of a
new miraculous world, in which sin would be im-
possible and where ethics would have no scope,
v In a word, they wished to show that the German
v , Protestant Christ never existed any more than the
^ Roman Catholic Christ

Against the haste and crudeness of this first


j quent critics waged, for many years, a steady
^warfare in favour of what we may call the Liberal
Protestant Christ " Liberal," because the rejection
of the miraculous and, to a very great extent, of
the transcendent, Jenseits, was common to them
with their opponents.


Digitized by


Google


VII


THE CHRIST OF LIBERAL PROTESTANTISM

THE Jesus of the school of critics represented !
to-day by Harnack and Bousset, was a Divine j
Man because He Was full of the Spirit of God ; j
full of Righteousness. He came (it is assumed
rather than proved) at a time when the Jews were
full of apocalyptic expectations as to the coming
of the Messiah, who was to avenge them of their
enemies and establish a more or less miraculous and
material Kingdom of God upon earth. He Himself
seems to have shared this view in a spiritual form,
translating it from material to ethical terms. As x -
destined by a Divine vocation to inaugurate a '
reign of Righteousness, a Kingship of God over
men's hearts and consciences, He felt Himself to
be the true, because the spiritual, Messiah. With
difficulty He trained a few of His followers to this ;
conception of the Kingdom and the Christ He
went about doing good (even working cures which \
He supposed to be miraculous) and teaching
goodness. The essence of His Gospel was the^
Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of man

39


Digitized by Google


40 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


^ or else the two great Commandments of the law
— the love of God and of one's neighbour ; or
else the Kingdom of God that is within us. True,
these were platitudes of contemporary Jewish
piety, and even of pagan philosophy. But Jesus
drove them home to the heart by the force of
personal example and greatness of character —
above all, by dying for His friends and for these
f ethical principles. Of course He was, to some
V extent, of His time. He believed in miracles, in
diabolic possession ; above all, He believed in the
immediate end of the world ; and a great deal of
His ethics, coloured by that belief, was the ethics
of a crisis. But these were but accidents of His cen-
tral idea and interest, in regard to which we may
/ say He was essentially modern, so far as our re-
l discovery of the equation Religion = Righteousness
v. is modern, not to say Western and Teutonic.
✓~ For this almost miraculous modernity the first
> century was not prepared. No sooner was the
Light of the World kindled than it was put under
a bushel. The Pearl of Great Price fell into the
( dustheap of Catholicism, not without the wise
permission of Providence, desirous to preserve it
till the day when Germany should rediscover it


accretions. Thus between Christ and early
Catholicism there is not a bridge but a chasm.


useful but deplorable


Digitized by


Google


THE CHRIST OF LIBERAL PROTESTANTISM 41


Christianity did not cross the bridge ; it fell into^)
the chasm and remained there, stunned, for nine- /
teen centuries. The explanation of this sudden-^
fall — more sudden because they have pushed /
Catholicism back to the threshold of the Apos- /
tolic age — is the crux of Liberal Protestant critics. )
The only analogy I can think of is the sudden
appearance of Irvingite Catholicism in the bosom
of Presbyterianism.

The theory is curiously akin to that of the T)
neo-Roman theologians. In both Revelation is y
suddenly eclipsed with the Apostolic age, to regain >
its primitive brilliance only after the lapse of/
centuries. Here it is the Immaculate Conception"^
that is rediscovered ; there it is the Fatherhood of K
God and the first principles of morality. ^

It was to the credit of their hearts, if to the preju- "\
dice of their scientific indifference, that these critics }
were more or less avowedly actuated by apologetic *
interests. They desired to strip Jesus of His x \
medieval regalia, and to make Him acceptable to i
a generation that had lost faith in the miraculous y
and in any conception of another life that was not
merely a complement, sanction and justification J
of this life. They wanted to bring Jesus into the \
nineteenth century as the Incarnation of its ideal '
of Divine Righteousness, i.e. of all the highest
principles and aspirations that ensure the healthy


Digitized by Google


42 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS ROADS


progress of civilisation. They wanted to acquit
\ Him of that exclusive and earth-scorning other-
jworldliness, which had led men to look on His
^religion as the foe of progress and energy, and
which came from confusing the accidental form
with the essential substance of His Gospel With
eyes thus preoccupied they could only find the
German in the Jew; a moralist in a visionary;
a professor in a prophet ; the nineteenth century
in the first; the natural in the supernatural.
^Christ was the ideal man ; the Kingdom of
Heaven, the ideal humanity. As the rationalistic
presupposition had strained out, as spurious, the
^miraculous elements of the Gospel, so the moral-
istic presupposition strained out everything but
\piodern morality. That alone was the substance,
fthe essence, of Christianity — das Wesen des Chris-
ftentunts. If God remained, it was only the God
[ of moralism and rationalism — the correlative of
v the Brotherhood of man ; not the God of Moses,
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob ; of David and the
prophets.

Now it is clear that every scientific inquiry
must be impelled by a motive and guided by
a hypothesis. A method is in itself a dead tool
without force or direction. Were truth not advan- 1
tageous, the will could not seek it The question
is whether we are thinking of some particular,


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF LIBERAL PROTESTANTISM 43


personal or party advantage or the advantage of\
human life as a whole ; whether our desire is in-
dividual or universalistic in its interest — a desire
of the separate or of the spiritual self. The weight
of a given planet has no immediate bearing on
practical politics, but only on the completeness of
the human understanding, which is a co-factor of
human life in general. Truth for truth's sake
means truth for life's sake, it only excludes ap
eye to any less universal advantage. What we
call "idle curiosity" is often a healthy instinct — a !
desire to integrate our general view of the world
in which we have to live.

True, scientific inquiry cannot be coldly dis-
interested, but any other interest than the integra- <
tion of knowledge distorts its vision. Here the
Liberal Protestant critics failed no less than the
positively anti-Christian critics. Their hypothesis
was an article of faith, not an instrument of J
inquiry. If they have been beaten off the field
we need not, perhaps, set it down to the severer
detachment of their conquerors, but to the stricter
application of that critical method which they
invoked

It is by that method that Johannes Weiss and
his followers have been forced back, very un- v
willingly in most cases, to the eschatological and
apocalyptic interpretation of the Gospel. Very


Digitized by Google


44 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS- ROADS


/unwillingly, because it destroys the hope of
smoothing away the friction between Christianity

v and the present age; because, in closing the chasm
between the Gospel and early Catholicism, it
makes the Christianity of Christ, in all essentials,
as unacceptable as that of Catholicism.
/Of this state of things Loisy was not slow

rto take advantage in Vfivangile et I'liglise,
directed against the Liberal Protestantism of

LHarnack's Wesen des Christentuins. The Christ

(that Harnack sees, looking back through nine-
teen centuries of Catholic darkness, is only the
reflection of a Liberal Protestant face, seen at
the bottom of a deep well. Applying Newman's
notion of development to a broader and deeper

-problem than Newman's, Loisy contends that the
"idea" of Christ, in its substance and character,
is identical with that of Catholic Christianity
and opposed at nearly all points to that of Liberal
Protestantism.

Rome (profoundly ignorant of the critical move-
ment, its currents and tendencies) thought that
even a victory over the Protestant might be pur-
chased at too great a cost, and repudiated a
notion of development different from that of
her theological dialecticians, and disastrous to
their idea of orthodoxy. Her hostility to the
book and its author have created a general im-


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF LIBERAL PROTESTANTISM 45


pression that it is a defence of Liberal Protestant
against Roman Catholic positions, and that
"Modernism" is simply a protestantising and '
rationalising movement This confusion is wide-
spread within and without the Roman Church,
and many who account themselves Modernists are
disciples of Harnack rather than of Loisy.


Digitized by Google


VIII


THE CHRIST OF ESCHATOLOGY

fl ET us consider for a moment the figure of the
| J-~s historical Jesus as it slowly emerges from
the hands of criticism. We can only see it in
dim outline, for it is incomplete in many a detail.
But as it stands in the rough it is enough for our
purpose. If the material is supplied by S. Mark,
we cannot complete the image without assistance
from S. Matthew and, to some extent, from the
other evangelists.

„ There is no evidence to show that the Baptist
and Jesus appeared at a time of high Messianic
expectations and were, so to say, creations of their
surroundings. Both seem to have been mystics
and seers, the creators rather than the creatures
of an epoch. Indeed, the whole attempt to write
the Gospel story in the light of natural psycho-
logical laws, working in given social conditions, is
doomed to failure. For the supernatural beliefs
and intuitions of Jesus played the chief part in
that story and interfered with the concatenation
of natural causes. His Messianic consciousness

46


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF ESCHATOLOGY 47


was the main determinant of His action and utter)
ance. Of that consciousness we do not know the 1
source, presumably it was derived from somei
sort of vision or revelation. Inferences and in-
ductions are not wont to be so tyrannically strong
and irresistible. His Christhood was the secret^)
the mystery of His life. He revealed it reluctantly
and cautiously to His disciples ; He confessed it
at His trial in order to induce His death; but
otherwise and even from the Baptist He hid it
away. Of anything like a development of His^
Christ-consciousness there is no evidence that will'^
stand criticism. His eschatology was just that of ,
the Jewish apocalyptics, with the difference that ^
He Himself was destined to be the Son of Man. i
The Son of Man was a superhuman heavenly
being, the ruler of a supernatural Kingdom of}
God, that was to descend upon earth and take the 1
place of the present order of tilings. He was not
the Messiah of the prophets, who was to secure
the temporal supremacy of Israel on earth and
reign on the throne of David. The decay of that
prophetic hope had introduced the more radicaK
apocalyptic hope. The Kingdom of God was no* f
to be realised by any gradual development of the
present order, but by an irruption of the super-
natural order. While on earth Jesus was, in some'
sense, the Son of Man only by destiny. He had


Digitized by Google


48 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


f to wait for His glorification and manifestation.
<^ In what way He was to put on that higher nature
lis not clear. But the "possession" of human
beings by superhuman beings, by the spirit of
God or by evil spirits, was a familiar idea in those
f days. There is reason to think that He mingled
) certain elements of the prophetic Messianic ex-
pectation with the apocalyptic idea. His concep-
tion of the righteousness preparatory to entrance
into the Kingdom was inward and spiritual, not
legal and external. Probably He regarded Him-
) self, in His earthly state, as the promised Son of
• David, 1 and the "suffering servant" who was to
be glorified eventually as the Son of Man. Of
the nearness of the final catastrophe He was
convinced, His own advent into the world was
guarantee for that So far, and as far as He had
already seen Satan falling from Heaven and the

1 There is no reason to question His Davidic origin. The
apologetic anxiety of Matthew and Luke, with their incompatible
stories of His birth in Bethlehem, neither disproves the possibility
that He was born there, nor that He was of Davidic stock. S.
Matthew, as usual, is preoccupied about the fulfilment of a sup-
posed prophecy as to the locality of His birth, not as to His
descent. Had the claim (which was a very early one) to Davidic
origin been mythical, it could easily have been refuted by reference
to James and his other surviving kinsmen. When He asks how
the Son of David can also be David's Lord, seated at God's right
hand, He seems to hint at His own secret of the mysterious identi-
fication of the prophetic Son of David with the apocalyptic Son
of Man — a veritable union of two natures in one personality.


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF ESCHATOLOGY 49


demoniacs quailing before Him, He could speak
of the Kingdom as already on earth — "even at^
the doors." It might burst forth in a year; it)
could not delay beyond a generation. His work'
on earth was to prepare and hasten the Kingdom N
— to close the last chapter of human history. He j
was here avowedly in the rdle of a prophet — the
prophet from Nazareth; and being destined to
shine forth as the Son of Man He was here
incognito. He was here, not to preach His own!
glory — that, the Father would reveal in due time
— but the coming of the Kingdom — His Father's^
business. From the days of the Baptist, and
thenceforth, the Kingdom of Heaven was to be
stormed and hurried on by prayer and repentance.
Repent, He cried, for the Kingdom of Heaven is
at hand. None but the righteous could enter in,
or pass unconsumed through the fiery tribulations
that were imminent — the wrath that was to come
— or stand before the Son of Man in the approach-
ing judgment

Yet righteousness was not the substance of the^
Kingdom ; eternal life was not the moral life. In 7
the Kingdom men were to be as the angels of\
God; the moral struggle with all its conditions
and occasions would be over, it would be rewarded
by rest in glory, not by the glory of going on.
Men would enter into the joy of their Lord, the
s


Digitized by Google


50 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


Son of Man — a superhuman, not a human, state.

1 There is no hint in all this of a Kingdom of Christ,
a reign of morality here upon earth to be brought
about by the gradual spread of Christ's teaching
and example. The parables of the mustard seed
and the leaven, adduced in its favour, are irrelevant
They merely contrast the slightness of the cause
with the greatness of the effect; man's natural
efforts with God's supernatural response. Jesus
did not come to reveal a new ethics of this life,
but the speedy advent of a new world in which
ethics would be superseded. Nor was His secret
the fact that the expected temporal Messiah and
Kingdom of Israel were parables of moral values.

, He thought of the Messiah and the Kingdom as
did His contemporaries ; neither as temporal, nor
yet as moral, but as transcendental and super-
natural. Men were to be transformed and glori-
fied ; heaven and earth were to be transfigured ;
the just were to eat the same spiritual meat and
drink the same spiritual drink at the heavenly
banquet with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; there
was to be no more death or sorrow or sin or
temptation, for the former things were to pass
away. The poor, the meek, the peacemakers, the
merciful, the pure, the mourners, the hungerers
after justice, the persecuted would be so no more ;
and their virtues would cease with their occasions.


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF ESCHATOLOGY 51


The morality of Jesus was for this life, not for the i\
next — the passing condition, not the abiding sub- J
stance of blessedness. Nothing is original in the ^
righteousness preached by Jesus. All is to be
found in the prophets, psalmists and saints of the j
Jewish people, not to speak of the pagan moralists ^
and saints. It represents but the highest dictates A
of man's purified heart and conscience. Much,
however, is coloured by the immediate expectation
of the end and is applicable only to such an emer-
gency. In such a crisis it was not worth while \
to assert a thousand just claims that, in normal
circumstances, could not be inculpably neglected.
There was only time to seek the Kingdom of God N
in which all such losses would be made good.

Involved in the apocalyptic idea of the im- ?
mediate advent of the Kingdom were three of its
necessary preludes — the coming of Elias ; the out-
pouring of the Spirit ; the fiery tribulation through
which the just were to pass to their glorification.

That the Baptist did not consider or announce
himself as Elias is clear; not only from silence,
but from his question to Jesus: "Art thou He
that cometh?" — a term that referred to "that
prophet " and not to the Son of Man, who was to
appear in the clouds and was not expected first
in human form. "Elias indeed cometh and
shall restore all things"; here, as upon another


Digitized by Google


5a CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS ROADS


/ occasion, Jesus reveals, in the form of a mystery
\ or secret, that, in John the Baptist, Elias has
already come — a secret connected with and de-
-pendent on that of His own Christhood. The
( Baptism of John was unto repentance and a new
/ life. It was not a merely symbolic and ritual act,
^as we Modernists take for granted. The idea of
sacraments or effectual symbols was as familiar to
the Jewish as to the Hellenic mind of that day.
It was dominant in the apocalyptic scheme, under
✓ the form of sealings and tokens. The Eucharist,
( as celebrated by Jesus, was not merely a figure but
an effectual pledge of a participation in the Messi-
^ anic banquet of the coming Kingdom. If Hellenic
/influences accentuated the sacramental idea later,
Vit was none the less truly in the mind of Jesus.
So too the Baptism of John was an effectual cause
of the righteousness and repentance that entailed
the subsequent baptism of the Holy Spirit, and
the consequent transfiguration of the body in the
Kingdom of God. The Christian Church carried
on this baptism, with the difference that the
Spirit, already poured out on earth, is at once
given to the recipient of John's baptism.

The outpouring of the Holy Spirit, foretold by
\ Joel as the immediate prelude of the Day of
! Judgment, had for its end the introduction of the
new world and a transfigured humanity. Those


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF ESCHATOLOGY 53


who were " possessed " by God's Spirit were trans-
formed essentially into Sons of God and new
creatures ; they were proved so by superhuman''
works, by dominion over devils and demoniacs, as
much as by moral gifts and graces. Like those
who were possessed, they spoke with strange
tongues — the tongues of angels, not of devils.
They were endowed with a preternatural wis-^
dom that none could withstand and that no]
premeditation could assist: "For it is not ye
that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that
speaketh in you." It seems clear that Jesus)
considered Himself as " possessed " with the pleni-
tude of this "Power from on high" from the'
moment of His baptism by John. For Him no ;
intermediary stage of " repentance " was necessary/
It was this Spirit that forthwith drove Him into a
conflict with the Spirit of Evil in the desert. This
was no mere moral parable, but a visionary
experience; and visions in those days were not
hallucinations but revelations of hidden realities.
From this story we learn that Satan had usurped
the dominion of the whole world, which was now
to be wrested from him by a despoiler stronger
than he. The fact that Jesus and His disciples^
cast out devils by the power of the Holy Ghost
was a sign that the Kingdom of Heaven was at \
hand and the Kingdom of Satan overthrown.


Digitized by


Google


54 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


It was probably not from the Heaven of the
Blessed (where he is placed in the Book of Job)
that Jesus saw Satan fall like lightning, but from
the throne of the Prince of the Air, of the Ruler
of the Darkness of this world, who boasted that
he would set his throne above that of God. The
whole battle was between the Kingdom of Satan
and the Kingdom of God. The visible conflict in
this world was, according to apocalyptic thought,
the shadow or double of an angelic conflict
between the hosts of Lucifer and Michael in the
upper and spiritual world. After the final struggle
and the overthrow of Satan, the just were to be
gathered with the angels into the Kingdom of
God, to which they were predestined from the
foundation of the world; the unjust were to be
gathered with the Devil into that everlasting fire
and outer darkness to which they and the devils
had been likewise predestined. Predestination is
no innovation of the Pauline and Johannine
\ writings, but belongs to the thought of Jesus.
f~ The third prelude of the End was the last
[ desperate and unparalleled struggle of Satan for
j the retention of his Kingdom; the uprising of
v all the powers of evil against Jesus and His
saints; the great " peirasmos " or temptation;
the "fiery tribulation"; the "wrath to come"
through which the just were to pass and from


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF ESCHATOLOGY 55


which they were to pray to be delivered : " Bring
us not into temptation, but deliver us from the
Evil One " ; " Pray that ye enter not into tempta-
tion." It behoved Him, it behoved all His saints,
to suffer these things, and so to enter into their
glory. ^

If the Lord's Prayer admits of a moral inter-(
pretation, its first sense is eschatological. It is the/
prayer of and for the Kingdom. " Thy Kingdom j
come " is its governing clause. " Thy will be done
on earth as it is in heaven " has reference, not to
the present, but to the new earth, where there will
be no sin or possibility of sin, and where ethics will
be superseded. Their daily bread is enough for
those who, in view of the immediate end, have no
reason to hoard for a distant future ; whose first
care is to seek the Kingdom, through repentance
and forgiveness, and to persevere to the end through
the coming temptation or trial.

When He sent forth His disciples it was in the ^
belief (Matt, x., 23) that, before they had preached (
to all the cities of Israel and returned to Him, He j
would come in the clouds as the Son of Man.
Whether He was to have passed to His glory
through death and resurrection, or to have been
caught up into the air and transfigured like Elias,
is not clear. But S. Paul (1 Thess. IV., 13-17;
1 Cor. XV., 50-3) shows that the alternative was


Digitized by Google


56 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


recognised in apocalytic thought In His dis-
course He does not treat the disciples as mission-
ary teachers, but as heralds of the End. He
promises them the gift of the Spirit, which shall
make them wiser than all their adversaries and
triumphant over the power of the Devil. He
foretells them that tribulations, temptations and
persecutions will come, of which there was no
indication in existing natural conditions, but which
\ were entailed in His belief in the immediacy of
the End, and, therefore, of its necessary preludes.

Except their dominion over the possessed,
/none of these predictions were fulfilled when the
\Apostles returned. For Jesus this was an indica-
tion that the Kingdom had to be stormed yet
\more violently. He would go forth and raise the
/Powers of Darkness against Himself and thus,
/by His own death, hasten the issue, and deliver
f from temptation those whose spirit was willing
V but whose flesh was weak. He would suffer in
their place and give His life as a ransom for
many. He would go up to Jerusalem and pro-
voke the ministers of Evil to a final assault.
/Henceforth His life is a quest of that death which
' was to open the Kingdom of Heaven to all
believers. Such a death would necessarily be
the death of the cross, with all its concomitant
v ignominies. His predictions of it were founded


Digitized by


Google


THE CHRIST OF ESCHA TOLOG Y 57


on His resolve ; that of His subsequent resurrec-X
tion was founded on His Messianic self-conscious- /
ness. It behoved Him to suffer and so to enterf
into His glory. But His Christhood was still a
secret, shared only by His disciples. It was to
be revealed to the world only when He should
have come in the clouds, vindicated by the Father,
whose glory, and not His own, was the end of
His earthly mission : " I have glorified Thee on
the earth . . . and now glorify Thou Me, O Father."

It seems probable that the Apostles' vision of\
the Transfiguration preceded rather than followed J
the confession of Peter, and is alluded to in the
words: "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto
thee ; but My Father." It was by no induction or\
inference that Peter had divined His Christhood ; j
but by a supernatural vision. All that could be
divined otherwise was that Jesus was a wonder-
working prophet — possibly Elias ; possibly, even,
the promised Son of David. But these were
human personalities; whereas the Son of Man
was (in common acceptance) a heavenly and a
supernatural being. His destined identification
with that being was the secret of Jesus ; a matter
of revelation, not of inference. There is no con-
vincing reason to question the authenticity of
Matthew XVI., 17-19; since the word "Church"
there may well stand, not for an ecclesiastical in-


Digitized by Google


58 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


stitution, but for the body of the elect or pre-
destined which, in the Apocalypse of S. John, is
compared to a building founded on the twelve
Apostles ; while the keys of the Kingdom, with
their power of binding and loosing, are in char-
acter with the apocalyptic conception of the
Apostles, as sharing the judicial function of the
Son of Man at the last day, seated " upon twelve
thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel."
r If Jesus plans the details of His triumphal
entry into Jerusalem, in accordance with His
Messianic secret, it is not as the Son of Man but,
at most, as Elias, or as the Son of David, that He
is greeted by the crowd.

/"In Jerusalem His work is one of provocation
! rather than of teaching. He openly assails the
' Pharisees and priests ; He cleanses the Temple
with an assumption of authority that is a challenge
~to theirs. The challenge is taken up and His
^-death resolved upon. It was as the agents of the
Powers of Darkness that the Jews crucified the
(Lord of Glory. It was Satan who put it into
)the heart of Judas to betray Him. All was pre-
destined and predetermined. Most probably the
subject of Judas's betrayal was the Messianic
secret, which Jesus shared only with His Apostles
— His claim to be the Son of Man, Who was to
i appear in the clouds. No two witnesses could be


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF BSC HA TO LOG Y 59


adduced against Jesus in support of such a pre-
tension. One was not sufficient. Hence He is at j
last adjured and proclaims Himself to be the Son
of Man. The very claim was blasphemy and)
merited death. As a prophet, or even as Elias,
the crowd next day would have rescued Jesus;
but when the priests went among them and re-
vealed His secret they simply howled for the
death of the blasphemer. So far as the Apostles
entered into that secret, and were not shaken in
their faith by the outcry of priests and people,
they must have expected the resurrection and
glorification of the Son of Man, which was part
of the Messianic scheme. There is no reason to
doubt that Jesus had predicted it to them or that
they so understood His words : " I will not drink
henceforth of this fruit of the vine until that
day when I drink it new with you in my Father's
Kingdom." There is no reason to doubt that theyj


had visions of the risen Jesus.

Such then, roughly, is the figure of Jesus as it
leaves the hands of a scientific criticism, unbiassed
by the prepossessions of Liberal Protestantism.
Of the Jesus Who came forward openly as the
Messiah in a spiritual (i.e. a moral) sense, Who
preached and exemplified the righteousness of
the inward Kingdom of God, Who founded the
Kingdom on earth in the form of a school of


Digitized by


Google


6o CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


imitators and Who died solely as a martyr of
| morality, there is not left a single shred. He did
not oppose a moral to a worldly interpretation of
/the Kingdom. He took the current interpreta-
k tion as He found it, which was not worldly but
\ other-worldly — spiritual, in the sense of meta-
physical and transcendent, not in the immanental
moral sense.

I am not in a position to criticise and judge
between these two readings of the Gospel. But
I if the value of a hypothesis is to be rated by the
number of phenomena that it unifies and puts in
their place, it does not seem to me that there is
/ much choice left, or that the prolonged battle of
Liberal Protestantism against the eschatological
^interpretation has done more than establish the
superiority of the latter. There is, of course, a
residue of difficulties, but they are few and small
compared with those of the other hypothesis.
Moreover, they are easily accounted for by the
same tendency on the part of the redactors of
the synoptics that gave birth to the ethico-spiritual
/ Gospel of S. John. As the Kingdom tarried, it
v became more necessary to dwell upon the pre-
paratory righteousness than on the Kingdom
^ itself ; to consider the expectant Church on
earth as a Kingdom of Righteousness. It is,
on the other hand, impossible to understand the


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF ESCHATOLOGY 61


introduction of the apocalyptical conception iP
such a Kingdom of Righteousness on earth had
been the central interest of Christ's mission. J
Moreover, as a fact, this inward righteousness,^
which, though not original, was systematised by)
Jesus and enforced by the whole impetus of His im
spiration, is the only sensible result of the Gospel.'
It has leavened and transformed humanity, slowly)
perhaps and partially, yet far more rapidly and
fully than it could have done had it not been
associated with a great religion. It is not then
wonderful that, even in the Churches, while the
once central interest of the coming judgment has
dropped into the background, if not altogether
into oblivion, the incidental moralism of the\
Gospel should stand out as its principal value, '
and the central apocalypticism be overlooked as N
a troublesome accident And this tendency, in
an age that repudiates the miraculous and dis^
trusts the transcendent, can only be accentuated
by those whose aim is to secure the sanction of
Christianity for the best ideals of the time; to
alleviate the friction between religion and reason
as much as possible; to transform what was at,
most an ethical religion into a religious ethic.


Digitized by Google


IX


THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM

WE must now try to get hold of the " idea "
embodied in the apocalypticism of the
Gospel and compare it with that embodied in
Catholic Christianity, to see whether they are
merely different embodiments of the same, and
\ whether the latter can be considered as a develop-
ment of the former.

Plainly we must distinguish between the sub-
stance or content and the form or expression of an
" idea." As we use the word here an " idea " is a
concrete end, whose realisation is the term of a
process of action and endeavour. It is akin to that
Augustinian notio (or ratio) semina/is, with which
every living germ seems to be animated, and which
works itself out to full expression through a process
of growth and development. It does not change in
. itself, but is the cause of change in its embodiment.
Transferred from the realm of organic life to that of
human activity, an " idea " is still a good or end to
, be realised and brought to perfect expression. But
it is rather a volition than a concept. Every

62


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM 63


volition, however blind and instinctive, is directed
by the idea of an end to be reached. That idea is
implied in the volition, but it is not necessarily
given to the clear consciousness of the person who
wills. Animals obey instincts without any know-
ledge of the ends with which they are pregnant.
The meaning of many of man's spiritual and ;
rational instincts is revealed to him only gradually,
as he follows them step by step. In most cases
their full meaning will never be clear to him. Thus . (
civilisation, education, society, liberty, justice, are '
spiritual instincts with man. He does not starf j
with a clear conception of what he wants ; but his
conceptions grow clearer, more explicit, more)
complex, more organised, as he moves along. In
the embodiment or expression of the idea we
must, then, include its intellectual expression or
form.

Thus man's religious idea is first felt as a vague'
need of adjusting his action to that whole, of which \
all but a little part is hidden from him ; of coming
to terms with an invisible and mysterious world.
This "idea" is the soul of the lowest and of the
highest forms of religion. But the conception of>
the invisible world and its denizens, of its relation)
to man and the visible order, of the conduct by
which the adjustment is to be effected, belongs to )
the embodiment or expression of the idea. It is


Digitized by Google


64 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


determined by the idea and its environment — the
intellectual, moral and social conditions of man.
Its only criterion and corrective is the idea itself,
which is no practical corrective since man only

i apprehends it in the very form that needs correction.
His measure is at fault and cannot be tested by
itself. But the idea, like Nature, eventually heals

/ itself and asserts itself triumphantly over all ob-
stacles. Thus, too, men long for liberty, but their
very conception of liberty sends them on the wrong
track till, coming up against a blind wall, they are
forced back to the point whence they went astray.
Hence we may not press the analogy between
organic development and that of an idea so closely
as to imply that the whole series of its embodiments
is predetermined, like the stages of an organic pro-
cess, of which each is required by or requires the
next. Nor even where we do get an unbroken series
of ever fuller expressions of the same idea does this
exclude the possibility or actuality of other quite
different series. Thus the idea of liberty, in
different times and places, has been productive of
various processes of self-embodiment, with nothing
in common but their many-sided and inexhaustible
idea. The same is true of man's religious need
and of the religious idea, which branches out in a
thousand directions, in search of an essentially
unattainable completeness of expression.


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM 65


By the " idea " of Jesus I mean, then, the relw
gious idea in a certain stage of development, along
a particular line. I ask myself : Is Catholic Chris-^
tianity on the same line, or, as Liberal Protestants j
suppose, on an entirely different line ? Is it the
outgrowth of the same branch, or did it fork off in
the first century? Is it simply a Hellenic process,
violently grafted into the Liberal Protestantism of
Jesus — the latter being interrupted at that point
until the graft was broken off by criticism ?

Now so far as we find an actual identity of form
and category we are plainly justified in supposing
the same idea to be at work on the same line. No
doubt the expression or form is more ample and
complex in Catholicism than in the Gospel, but its
main and central features are the same.

Transcendentalism, or other-worldliness, belongs ^
to the idea of religion as such, but in varying
degrees. The whole tendency of Liberal Protest-
antism is to minimise the transcendence by estab-
lishing a sort of identity of form between this life
and the other. So far as man's life is moral, it is
an eternal life. The moral life has mystical and
transcendental roots. It postulates a spiritual
principle and end in Nature which we may call
God. Heaven and the Kingdom of Heaven are^
in our midst ; they are the spiritual or moral side ;
of life.


F


Digitized by


Google


66 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


Without this concession to transcendentalism,
( Liberal Protestantism would not be a religion at alL
As it is, it is rather a system of religious ethics than
' a religion. It merely insists that morality is religion
land adjusts our life and action to that spiritual
and invisible side of the world which is an object
of faith, a necessary postulate of morality. No
doubt this is a truth of Christianity ; but not its
whole truth. Emphasis is laid on it in the Fourth
Gospel ; in the synoptics it is implicit rather than
emphatic Christ had not come to emphasise the
religion and the revelation implied in righteous-
ness that were within the reach of man's reason.
His emphasis was on the other-worldly, supermoral
life of the coming Kingdom. How could it be
otherwise on the very brink of the destruction of
the present order? What need of a new ethics
for expiring humanity? His whole emphasis,
therefore, was on the other world, and on the con-
ditions by which men might attain it and flee from
the wrath to come, Of these, repentance and true
inward righteousness were the chief. But men did
not so much need to be told what righteousness
was, as to be called back to it or converted to it
And this Jesus did by giving the will a motive :
" Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand."

If, then, the religion of Jesus was not exclusively


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM 67


transcendental, its emphasis was almost entirely on '
the other world — the world that is least present to }
man's mind and most easily forgotten. And this^
excessive transcendentalism is the great reproach ^
made against Catholicism by the Liberal Protes-
tant, as well as by the Positivist. It is true that
the immediacy of the End very soon dropped oui\
of Catholic consciousness, and so restored the
depressed value and importance of the present
life. But the belief in the End; in the eventual'
appearance of the Son of Man in the clouds ; in
the general Judgment and its preceding tribula-,
tions ; in the destruction of the present order ; in
a transcendental and eternal Heaven and Hell,
figures as the final and, in a sense, dominant
article of her creed.

In her Advent liturgy one finds even the note
of immediacy ; though naturally it evokes no re-
sponse in her consciousness. The contention that
this immediacy was not essential to the idea of
Jesus is not without plausibility. The words " Of
that day or that hour knoweth no one, not even
the Son," although consistent with a certainty that
the End would be very soon, and within a gener-
ation, at least disclaim any sort of revelation on
the point, and imply that any prediction, can be
no more than a private conjecture. The fore-
shortening of time in the prophet's mind does not


Digitized by Google


68 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


affect the substance of the situation. The sup-
posed near approach of death will often make a
man reorder his life, as he ought to have reordered
it in any case, in view of the certainty of eventual
death. The scare has not given him a new reason
but a new stimulus. It has made him attend to
what he should have always seen. The public
scare at the thought of the immediacy of the
Kingdom, that all expected eventually, acted simi-
larly. The Kingdom, not the immediacy of the
Kingdom, was the reason for repentance, detach-
ment and righteousness ; the immediacy was but
a stimulus to rouse the sluggish imagination — to
change a " notional ,f into a " real n assent Hence
it may be said that the conception of immediacy
was no part of the idea of Jesus ; it was a sup-
posed circumstance of the situation in which that
idea was applied.

If Jesus Himself, as seems likely, experienced
one or more disappointments in the matter, we
cannot say that the further disappointments of
His Church were for Him outside the range of
possibility. Still those who now expect the End
at all no longer expect it immediately, and have
given up speaking of " those last days." Only
now and then is there a recrudescence of apocalyp-
tic panic in times of earthquakes, comets, wars
and pestilences.


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM 69


Christianity is, perhaps, the better and not the)
worse for the loss of this stimulus, to which it)
owes its birth. For the violent detachment,,
justified by such an expectancy, is hurtful to, 1
the duties and lawful interests of social life. No
man who believes he has but a day to live will
make proper provision for his future years. The
scare may be useful to make him amend his ways.
But a sustained scare would paralyse his energies)
This evil was soon felt by the early Church in a N
certain anarchy and neglect of plain social duties.)
It was not worth while to assert the claims
of justice, to establish and provide for a family.
Men pooled their wealth and lived in the clouds
and in idleness. "If any will not work neither
let him eat" was a rebuke levelled against this
state of things.

Yet this contempt of the world preached by j
Jesus was not Buddhistic in its motive. It was '
a contempt of a lower and transitory form of !
existence in favour of a higher — a proximate 7
pessimism but an ultimate optimism. That the
world was thought to be in its death-agony made/
it doubly contemptible. But when this thought
was dropped by the Church, the world still
remained contemptible. It was but a preparation^
and purgatory ; the ante-chamber of Heaven ;
the theatre of the great conflict' between the


Digitized by Google


70 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


forces of good and evil — a conflict that could
be decided in favour of Good only by the Coming
of the Son of Man. It was a world in which
the Christian was but a stranger and a pilgrim,
looking for a City whose builder is God. The
notion that Good was to triumph by an immanent
process of evolution never entered into the "idea"
of Jesus or of the Church*

But the impression of the first days remained
with the Church long after the immediate ex-
pectation of the End had ceased : what Christ
had said, what the early Christians had done
in view of that immediacy, has lingered on as
a rule of life, in diminishing measure, even to
the present day. It was this excessive other-
worldliness, which enters largely into the monastic
and ascetic idea of Catholicism, that provoked
that revulsion, which began with Luther and
ended with the purely ethical Christianity of the
Liberal Protestant, for whom the Kingdom of
Heaven is but the ideal term of the moral evolu-
tion of man on earth.

To this ethical idea of the Kingdom some
colour is given by the early tendency to view
the Church as the Kingdom of God upon earth
in a certain anticipatory sense — a tendency that
appeared when men had ceased to look on the
Heavenly Kingdom as imminent Nor was it


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM 71


without warrant from Christ, who considered that,!
in Himself and in the Baptist, and in the victory?
of God's Spirit over the Devil, the Kingdom had)
already begun to touch earth. This conception
of the Church, as the Kingdom in fieri> prepared
the way for that of a moral humanity as the
Kingdom. But the conceptions are radically
distinct Here a natural evolution is to complete)
the work ; there, a supernatural cataclysm.

Again, the emphatic Persian dualism of Good
and Evil, of the Kingdom of God and of that of
Satan, is common to the idea of Jesus and the ;
idea of Catholicism. The Devil is essential to>
the Catholic scheme. Renunciation of the Devil
and his retinue {pompd) is the preliminary of that
Baptism which enlists a man in the service of the
Kingdom. Till then he is possessed by Satan,
in virtue of his natural birth. This is the
teaching of Jesus no less than of S. Paul or)
S. Augustine. Satan is exorcised to make room)
for the Holy Spirit Every priest is an ordained
exorcist, and exorcism has its prescribed ritual.
A host of mental, moral and physical evils,
which science now deals with, not to speak of
storms, plagues and other destructive phenomena
of nature, have, till quite recent times, been
ascribed to the Devil by the Church, and treated
by prayer and exorcism. Even so modern a


Digitized by Google


73 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


Pope as Leo XIII accepted the fables of Leo
Taxil and his mythical Diana Vaughan, and
exorcised Rome daily; and the prevailing mind
of uncritical Catholics is still quick to explain
all the evils of the time by the Devil and his
human agents — Jews, Freemasons, Protestants
and Modernists. The Devil introduced sin and
mortality, with all their attendant evils, into the
world.

On the other hand, with Christ came the fulness
of the Holy Ghost poured out on all the baptised.
Possessed by this Divine Spirit, the baptised be-
comes " a new creature " by an inward transforma-
tion of his nature. Ethical perfection is the
congruous fruit but not the substance of that
change. He is not divine because he is moral, but
moral because he has become divine. So, too, the
main fruit of all the sacraments of Catholicism is
not the moral life of the present, but the super-
moral life of the future. They, as it were, store up
potential glory in the soul, which shall be liberated
by death. Hence the contention that a life of very
average morality, with frequent sacraments, is more
pleasing to God than a life of heroic morality,
without sacraments. It is only the sacraments
'that make us sons of God. Morality can never
do so. It is but the congruous natural condition
of grace, and gets all its lustre and merit from


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM 73


grace. Thus the baptised infant, incapable as yet
of moral life, is made a divine creature by the
expulsion of the Devil and the introduction of the
Holy Ghost. In virtue of this new nature man is
made immortal by a quasi-natural necessity. If
he dies before the End he will rise in a spiritual- )
ised body ; if he lives to the End he will be trans- j
formed and caught up in the clouds. As the
Fourth Gospel says, he has eternal life in him
already. Like Christ on earth he is only waiting
for the eventual manifestation of the glory that is
in him. Grace is the germ of glory. As little as
the natural world could grow into the transcen-
dental Kingdom of God, so little could the natural
man, by a process of moral development, grow into ,
a son of God, a spiritual immortal being. In both
cases the change — a veritable transubstantiation —
is effected by an irruption of the transcendental
into the natural order ; by a triumph of the Spirit
of God over Satan. It is not a work of nature,)
but of unmerited grace.

Uncongenial as this dualism is to our modern
minds, is it possible to deny that it is common to
Jesus and Catholicism? It is not between Jesus;
and Catholicism, but between Jesus and Liberal j
Protestantism that no bridge, but only a great/
gulf, is fixed.

It is, however, a dualism between spirit and 1


Digitized by Google


74 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


! spirit rather than between matter and spirit This
latter dualism came from the further East, and,
through Hellenic philosophy, has left its traces in
the Paulo- Johan nine writings. But it was no part
of the Jewish and synoptic tradition. Here, too,
the Church has been faithful to the idea of Jesus
in opposition to Gnostic and Docetan tendencies.
For her, as for Him, the body is, by nature and by
original destiny, the servant and not the foe of the
spirit Both were to be glorified. The new body
and new world were to be made out of the old
by a process of miraculous transfiguration. The
mortality of the Son of David was to put on the
immortality of the Son of Man. And so, through-
out, the material was to be made the instrument,
the sacrament or effectual symbol of the spiritual
and transcendent

/ For Catholicism as for Jesus baptism is no idle
symbol, but an effectual cause of the new life of the
spirit, and of that Divine Sonship which gives right
of entrance into the transcendent world. As for
the Church, so also for Jesus, the bread of blessing
is the bread of eternal life, the antidote of death,
the food of the angelic nature. Sacramentalism
was a principle of Jewish as of all ancient religions,
to which the miraculous was no scandal, since
they knew nothing of a mechanically determined
nature. In the absence of all proof of sacra-


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM 75


mentalism in the thought of Jesus, we should need
positive and convincing proof that He did not
share that idea with His religious surroundings.

And so as to externality and ritual in worship.^)
Liberal Protestants are satisfied that He swept it j
away for a " worship in spirit and in truth M — as )
though there were an incompatibility between the
two. They assure us that, were Jesus to come on\
earth, He would be quite at home at a prayer
meeting, and quite at sea at a high mass. This is
profoundly uncritical and unhistorical. He might
say, perhaps, " This is your synagogue ; now show
me your temple"; or, "This is your temple;
have you no synagogues?" From first to last\
Jesus revered and practised the religion of HisJ
fathers. As to the Divine authority of its moral
and ceremonial law, even to the last jot and tittle :
He is at one with the Pharisees. He differed
from them in emphasis ; in the stress laid on the
spirit as opposed to the letter, on the end as
controlling the means. In this He had no con-
sciousness of attacking but of defending the true
tradition. He never hints at the idea that His fol-
lowers are destined to break away from Israel : nor
did they ever do so by any definite act of separa-
tion. During His life they were in the Jewish
Church as the Wesleyans were once in the Church
of England — a school of pietists, whose aim was


Digitized by Google


76 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


to purify, not to abandon, their Church. Naturally
we do not hear much in the synoptics of what is
taken for granted — of His scrupulous observance
of the Jewish religion ; but only of the new piety
and its practices. But it is preposterous to sup-
pose that His insistence on inwardness meant a
repudiation of outwardness, or a puritanical sense
of opposition between them. By nature and by
original destiny the bodily was for the service
of the spiritual, however easily sin and Satan
might pervert it from its end. Even the tran-
scendent world of the Kingdom was not purely
spiritual in the Hellenic sense. It was embodied,
as glorified humanity was embodied. However
refined and etherealised, it was sensible and
phenomenal ; nor was the Messianic banquet a
mere parable of moral values. He did not say
that He would destroy the Temple, but that, were
it destroyed, He would raise it up again. When
He purged it, He did not rend the veil or throw
down the altar and its ornaments, saying : " Take
these things hence." He drove forth those whose
traffic dishonoured the sanctity of what He recog-
nised as a house of prayer for all nations.

When, by the course of events, His followers
were driven forth from the Jewish Church, it is
not to be supposed that they ceased to recognise
the need of a Church and of public worship, or


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM 77


were content with informal piety. If the Temple-)
worship entered into the religion of Jesus, a
similar idea of worship belonged to the early
Church, and was gradually realised by borrowings^
from Jewish and Hellenic sources. While the
End was still felt to be imminent this externalism
was but rudimentary and incoherent; later it
became what it remains to this day. Naturally,
the worship at S. Peter's is not the worship of the
Temple ; but it is of the same type and belongs
to the same idea, which was that of Jesus and His
Apostles. In this respect, too, the Catholic Church
is identical and continuous with the Apostolic
band that Jesus gathered round Him. Its later
independent organisation and externalism were
contained in the idea of Jesus. There is no
chasm; no need for a bridge. The temporary
disorganisation of Apostolic Christianity, conse-
quent on its separation from Judaism, was an
abnormal state of affairs. The " idea " was bound
to reassert itself as it did. Of that reassertion
Liberal Protestants speak as of a deplorable re-
lapse into the legalism from which Christ had
made us free. What Christ freed us from was not
externalism, but its abuse; not the letter, but
its oppression of the spirit; not the priesthood,
but sacerdotalism ; not ritual, but ritualism ; not
the Altar, but the exploitation of the Altar. Here


Digitized by Google


78 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


there has indeed been a relapse, but not more
scandalous than the general relapse from righteous-
ness and inward spirituality, due to the loss of
belief in the immediacy of the End. When the
Lord delays His coming His servants wax wanton
or slumber.

Again, in the conception of Eternal Life as a
supermoral life, as a state of rest after labour, of
ecstatic contemplation of the face of God, Catholi-
cism is true to the idea of Jesus and of the
Apocalypse, as already stated. Liberal Protestant-
ism is more anthropomorphic. So far as it admits
another life at all, it is the strenuous life of the
moral hero continued to all eternity — although in

N conditions that rob every known human virtue of
its occasion and subject-matter. It seeks only

' " the glory of going on and still to be." For
Jesus the moral is not the highest life but its
condition. Eternal life is, undoubtedly, the reward
or wages of righteousness, as Hell and Death are
the wages of sin. This too has always been the
Catholic idea ; though the reward is only for those
who are truly righteous, i.e. who love righteousness
for itself and independently of the reward. In a
word, it must be an inward righteousness of the
heart, not only an outward righteousness of the
hand. Neither the fasting nor the almsgiving
of the Pharisees were condemned, but their


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM 79


self-complacency and consciousness of merited
reward.

To regard the Communion of Saints as an ;
exclusively pagan importation is again gratuitous.
For Jesus, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Moses,^
Elias and David, were not of the dead past but^
of the living present. The blood of all the just,
from Abel onward, who had been martyred by
Satan's emissaries in the cause of God, was ever
crying aloud for that vindication which was to be^
effected at the coming of the Son of Man. The
tribulations of the Saints were to hasten that day
and take the Kingdom of Heaven by storm, and
this in union with and through the merits of His
own blood. And in the Kingdom it was with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob that the redeemed
were to sit at meat. Whatever the extension,
ramification and superstition of Catholic saint-
worship, it is idle to deny that it pertains to the
"idea" of Jesus.

Nor can it be contended that, whatever explicit-
ness it may owe to S. Paul, the sacrificial aspect
of the Eucharist is alien to the thought of Jesus.
If it be true that it was with the purpose oP
hastening the coming of the Kingdom that Jesus,
after the return of the Apostles, went forth to
provoke His death at Jerusalem, that death was
in His mind a sacrifice for the benefit of the elect,


Digitized by Google


80 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


and a ransoming of many from the thraldom of
Satan. Even if the words : " This is My Body ;
this is My blood " were but a Pauline amplification
of His thought, suggesting a parallelism with the
pagan sacrifices, they were a justified amplifica-
tion. If the bread and wine were truly sacra-
mental tokens or sealings, effectual symbols and
pledges of a participation in the future banquet
of the Kingdom, every repetition of the rite must
have been a commemoration and pleading of that
death, which was to hasten the Kingdom with all
its attendant benefits for the redeemed. It must
have been viewed as a hastening of the day when
they were to celebrate it with Jesus in the King-
dom of God ; as a showing or pleading of His death
till He should come. If this be so, then the
centrality of the Eucharist in Catholic worship is
true to the " idea w of Jesus. It is something far
more than a mere reminder to the communicants
of their Teacher martyred in the past, or a pure
symbol of moral fellowship with Him and His
true disciples. What the Liberal Protestant calls
the " magical " conception of that sacrament belongs
to the " idea M of Jesus.

Finally, when we turn to the personality and
nature of Jesus Himself, we find that His own
idea and the Catholic idea are at least closely
akin, while that of Liberal Protestantism is another


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM 81


idea altogether. We find two natures — that of ]
the earthly Son of David and that of the Heavenly |
Son of Man — mysteriously united in one person-
ality. We find an earthly period, in which only
one nature is manifest, opposed to a period of
glory in which both are to be manifest It would
be at least hard to show that, whatever Catholic
theology may mean by the doctrine of a hypo-
static union from the very first of these two
natures, that doctrine is excluded by the notion
that Jesus was made the Christ only by His
glorification after death. For Christhood may
have meant the state of manifestation; and in
this sense Jesus may have considered Himself as
but destined to be 11 made " or declared the Son
of Man through death. For Jewish thought the
union would be conceived as a sort of " ppssession 99
of the lower by the higher nature. The dis-
tinction of ousia and hypostasis would have had
no meaning.

As the just already possessed eternal life ^
virtually at their baptism, so Jesus may well have
considered Himself in a like virtual possession
of His Christhood before it was actually made
manifest — to have been thus virtually the Son
of Man from the very first. This the more,
as predestination was no mere purpose in the
Divine mind, but something stamped in the very
o


Digitized by Google


8a CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


nature of the predestined. It was a seal, a token,
imprinted on the soul.

It was certainly not in a moral and adoptive
sense, but in a natural and metaphysical sense
that Jesus claimed to be the Son of God by the
fact that He claimed to be the Heavenly Son of
Man. He was conscious of differing, not only in
degree but in kind, from even the greatest of
prophets. If the redeemed were His brethren, it
was in virtue, not of their moral, but of their
supernatural life, which they derived from and
through Him, who had given them power to be
made the sons of God. This power was the
spirit — the seed of eternal life sown in baptism
and blossoming in the Kingdom. Righteousness
was the condition of its reception and retention,
but was not the substance of Divine Sonship.

The position of Jesus in humanity is unique in
, kind. Not only is He the giver of participated
sonship to others. He has come as God's pleni-
potentiary and vicegerent, at the end of time, to
bring the world to an end, to judge the living and
the dead, to separate light from darkness, tares
from wheat, and gather the fruits of time into the
garner of eternity. In virtue of His double nature
He stands mediatorial between God and man. He
is the Gate, the Way, the Truth, the Life, through
which alone men can have access to the Father.


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM 83


If, in her endeavour to fix the relation of Christ's
heavenly nature to that of the Eternal Father, the
Church may seem to have exaggerated the known
claims of Jesus, this cannot be said of the Johan-
nine and Pauline Christology, in which those claims
are rather amplified than heightened.

Altogether it must be owned that, between^
Christ's idea of Himself and the Catholic idea of ^
Him, there is no practical or substantial difference. J

On the other hand, to maintain that it was only v
as a righteous man that He claimed to be the Son
of God in a pre-eminent degree ; that the Hellenic
mind misunderstood this Hebraism and leaped at s
a bound to a belief in His Godhead, is almost ]
grotesquely uncritical. Such convulsions of thought
do not take place in silence or in one night. If
the claim of even the best of men to be of a
heavenly nature was blasphemy in the ears of the
High Priest, and of the crowd that turned against
Jesus when they heard of it, it would have been\
blasphemy in the ears of the early Church had it
been an innovation. The supposition of such a .
chasm between the Paulo-Johannine Christology
and that of the Synoptics is not credible.

Closely connected with the mediatorial nature
and function of the earthly heavenly Jesus, Son
of David and Son of God, is the doctrine of the
Atonement wrought by His death — a doctrine /


Digitized by


Google


84 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


I which Liberal Protestantism attributes to S. Paul.

( Yet it is really inseparable from the apocalyptic idea
of the Kingdom of God. The long battle between
Satan and Heaven for the possession of the world
and man was to culminate in a final and unparal-
leled outburst of the Powers of Evil and Death
against the saints of God, through whose sufferings
and perseverance God would be provoked to arise
and scatter His enemies and establish His King-
dom. Jesus speaks of the blood of the just, from
Abel onwards, pleading for vindication. In the
Apocalypse of S. John the martyrs cry : " How
long, O Master, the holy and true, dost Thou not
judge and avenge our blood ? 11 But the culmina-
ting crime of Satan, the crowning merit of suffering
Righteousness, was the death of the destined Son
of Man. This filled up the measure of Satan's
iniquity and paid the full price of God's grace
and mercy. Through the blood and suffering of

, Jesus the blood and suffering of the just be-
came effectual to make atonement Satan was
bought out, his rights over the world forfeited,
his slaves set free. So great was the crime,
so great the merit of the death of Clyrist, that
this alone would have sufficed to bring the
Kingdom of God from Heaven to earth. The
sufferings of the saints became, in a way, supere-
rogatory. The great persecution could be short-


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM 85


ened and mitigated for the sake of the elect.
Hence, in every sense, His death was an atonement^
a ransom for many ; His blood was shed for many]
for the remission of sins. Thus we find a sutn
stantial agreement between the apocalyptic doc-^
trine of Jesus and the theological doctrine of i
Catholicism. When we remember that Purgatory >
is only a displacement of the fiery trial that was \
to purify the saints, the shortening of Purgatory, \
through the supererogatory sufferings of martyrs
and confessors, is not at all out of harmony with J
the idea of Jesus.

As to miracles, it is fairly evident that Jesus^
repudiated their apologetic value: "A faithless
and perverse generation seek after a sign " ; "If
they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither
will they be persuaded if one rise from the dead 99 ;
"Blessed are they that have not seen and yet
have believed." These and other texts express
the early tradition as to His mind on the subject
But to suppose that he did not believe in miracles^
or did not believe that His cures and exorcisms^
were miraculous, is to suppose a miracle, namely ;
the existence of a nineteenth-century mind in
the fir6t century. Doubtless it was not the
miracle of our modern apologists and their
assailants — a violation of the mechanical order
of nature, of a system of rigid uniformities. No


Digitized by Google


86 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


such system was dreamt of by the religious mind
of those days. Miracles were not supernatural — *

< for nature strictly did not exist — but superhuman.
They were the natural works of a superhuman
spirit, by which the wonder-worker was "possessed."
Even such " possession " was not supernatural, but
only unusual. At most miracles were evidence of
"possession," but left the good or evil character

; of the spirit undecided. Hence a moral test had

' eventually to be applied to discern diabolic from
divine miracles. The mere extent of the marvel
was of no use. Jesus seems to have discarded the
marvel as apologetically worthless, and to have
appealed directly to the moral test — to the sign
of preaching and prophecy. Allowing, then, for
the change that modern science has gradually
effected in the conception of miracle, it is plain
that the tenacity with which Catholicism defends
the miraculous is not out of harmony with the
idea of Jesus, and is in no sense a relapse.

One prominent feature of Catholicism we miss
in the Christianity of Jesus — namely, any sort of
formal theology.

This marriage of revelation with Greek phil-
osophy could only take place on Hellenic soil at
a later stage. It was from visions and revelations

{ alone that Jesus drew His knowledge of Heavenly
things — from the prophetic and apocalyptic writ-


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM 87


ings and from His own mystical experiences. }
The casuistry and rationalism of the Scribes and
Doctors were profoundly repugnant to Him. What ^
was gathered by such inferences was revealed by |
"flesh and blood," and not by the Father — vain
traditions of men making void the word of God.
In form, His revelations were not conceptual and 1
abstract, but imaginative and imaginable. For
Him spirit is not the negation but the refinement
of matter. It still possesses imaginable content ;
Later, in her endeavour to philosophise His N ,
revelation, the Church had to translate it into
conceptual form, and began to draw logical in- '
ferences from these concepts and so to build up ;
the whole system of Catholic theology. It is un-
doubtedly not more easy to recognise the doctrine
of Jesus in this form than to recognise nature in
the presentments of physical science; and Liberal ^
Protestantism seizes on this difference of form in y
order to dehy that the Church's doctrine was that \
of Jesus, or that He taught more than an ethic I
of inward righteousness. As "dogma" usually
stands for some defined point of theology, im-
posed by ecclesiastical authority, it is affirmed
confidently that Jesus was not dogmatic. But it
is vain to deny that Jesus imposed, with the
authority of Divine revelation, and as a matter
of life and death, that vision of the transcendental


Digitized by Google


88 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


world which the Church has clothed in a theo-
/ logical form. If He did not impose philosophical
formulas He imposed the revelation, the imagina-
tive vision, which they formulate. Nor, in theory,
does the Church impose th6 formula except as
safeguarding the vision, which it translates into
intellectual terms. The authority to which we bow
in accepting the formula is not that of theology,
but of Christ's revelation as thus formulated
Thus where the difference seems most great it is
apparent rather than real.

All said, if the Jesus of Liberal Protestantism is
not a pure myth, a shadow of the present darken-
ing the Past, it is only that, having eliminated
what was principal in the Gospel, they have re-
tained and segregated what was but secondary
and subordinate — the moral element ; that which
alone can have value for those who have no
patience either with the miraculous or the tran-
scendent. For such, Christianity is but the morality
of Christ ; the Kingdom of Heaven is but the term
of moral evolution on earth. God is the law of
Righteousness and Jesus the Son of that Law.
His life was significant as that of a moral teacher
and pattern ; His death, as an example of devotion
to Righteousness. He has risen in the triumph and
spread of His moral teaching, and ascended to
God's right hand in the estimation of mankind.


Digitized by Google


THE CHRIST OF CATHOLICISM 89


His doctrine is an abiding judgment of the world.
His second coming will be at the ideal and un^l
attainable term of man's moral evolution, when all )
shall be saints and the Kingdom of God realised /
in its full development on earth. All this is true^
in a sense, and is ever implied in Christianity. It '
is an implication that was brought out by a revolt
against an excessive transcendentalism under,
which it had been long stifled. But in vindictively
stifling transcendentalism, it has stifled the Jesus
of history.

Liberal Protestant Christianity may claim Jesus, N
if not as the founder, yet as the Great Teacher of
its morality. But the morality of Jesus was not 1
the substance of His revelation, any more than was'
the reason of Jesus. It was not new. It is given
by an immanent process to all men in the measure
that they use their reason and follow their con-
science. The religious idea of Liberal Protestant-
ism is not especially Christian ; it is not the " idea"
of Jesus. The chasm that Liberal Protestantism
finds between Jesus and the earliest Catholicism is
of its own creation ; the work of prepossession.

In Catholicism we find, amid many accretions no
doubt, but in a scarcely altered form, all the lead--
ing ideas of Jesus as determined by the steady
progress of criticism towards impartial otyectivity.
Had this criticism any sort of apologetic bias it


Digitized by Google


90 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


would certainly not be in favour of Catholicism.
Such minor alterations of form as we find are still
in harmony with the governing "idea" of the
Kingdom of God, and are the result of its pro-
tracted delay. Thus the lost stimulus of the
immediacy of the End for all was replaced by an
insistence on its immediacy for each, on the un-
certain certainty of death which was to be followed
at once by a private and particular judgment and
an entrance of the disembodied soul into Hell or
Heaven or Purgatory. The General Judgment
was thus reduced in importance and was viewed
rather as a solemn pageant of justice already done.
The bodily resurrection ceased to be the necessary
condition of other-world existence and served only
to integrate the joys of Heaven and pains of Hell.
The purifying fire of tribulation, through which
the just of the generation of Jesus were to pass
into Glory, was supplied by Purgatory — a doctrine
which is still supported by texts referring to the
Peirastnos — the fire that is to try every man's
work. But plainly these rearrangements of the
apocalyptic vision do not seriously affect its sub-
stance — the idea of the Church is the idea of Jesus.


Digitized by Google


X


THE ABIDING VALUE OF THE
APOCALYPTIC IDEA

IT is, however, one thing to recognise that,
stripped of its theological form, the doctrine
of Catholicism is the same as that of Jesus ; it is
another to contend that, either in its apocalyptic
or in its theological form, it can be accepted by
the modern mind. If, against Liberal Protestantism,
we can vindicate Catholicism as the true Chris-
tianity of Christ, do we not seem to bring the
Christianity of Christ into peril, and to render the
task of the apologist well-nigh impossible? Do
we not make it all rest on apocalyptic visions,
like those ascribed to Ezechiel, Enoch, John and
Baruch ?

Christianity, as we have seen, is subordinately \
and inclusively a religion of righteousness. As, in ]
the progress of thought, faith in the miraculous
and transcendent grew weaker, and men's interest
was no longer centred on the End by the belief in
its imminence, this subordinate value came into
prominence. In Protestantism the apocalyptic

9'


Digitized by Google


9a CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


\ doctrine has gradually been dropped altogether, or
interpreted as symbolic of ethical doctrine. Even
in Catholicism emphasis has been laid progres-
sively on the moral element (especially by modern
apologists) ; and symbolism has softened the more
repellent features of apocalyptic teachings.

This moralising tendency is no new thing in the
Church. It has been long tolerated and encour-
aged with a view to commend Catholicism on
account of its social and political utilities, and
to connect religion with the life and interests of a
world that shows no sign of disruption. But the
Church has felt instinctively that to make Right-
eousness everything, to treat the Apocalypse as
mere moral symbolism, is to introduce a new
religion under the old form. She has rightly seen
in recent " moralisings " of this kind an encroach-
ment of Liberal Protestantism on Catholic terri-
tory. It is an instinct of self-preservation that
has roused her to a condemnation of this sort of
Modernism. If her rulers are unable to see a
distinction between Liberal Catholic and Liberal
Protestant Modernism, it is a confusion they share,
not only with the unthinking world at large, but
with a great number of the Modernists themselves.
Although Loisy*s Lfcvangile et Vfcglise — the
classical exposition of Catholic Modernism — was
fired straight at the heart of Protestant Modernism,


Digitized by Google


VALUE OF THE APOCALYPTIC IDEA 93

not only the Vatican, but half the world beside, )
missed its main thesis and saw in it no more than |
a concession to criticism; and, for the many-headed,>
that is the sum-total of Modernism. If Catholic ;
Modernists are not yet Protestants they are sup- j
posed to be moving towards Protestantism. It is
a difference of degree and not of kind. Hence
Protestants smile on the movement; and on a
good number of its nominal adherents they have
a right to smile — on all who accept the Christ of
Liberal Protestant criticism, who have not faced
the Christ of unbiassed criticism.


It is because Catholic Modernism recognises j
the identity of the " idea " in Jesus and Catholi- ?
cism ; because it acknowledges that the apocalyptic 1
elements of Christianity are essential and not £
accidental, the moral elements subordinate and j
not principal, that, as I have said, it faces the j
conflict between Christian and modern thought in
its purest and acutest form. Were it possible to
maintain that the apocalyptic imagery of Jesus
was but an ethical parable, taken too grossly in
ruder ages and needing only to be restored to its
original value, the task would be an easy one.
But, since this is impossible, the problem arises as ]
to what value such apocalyptic visions can have
for modern religious thought Compared with this
problem, that of the development of present


Digitized by Google


94


CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


' Catholicism out of the Christianity of Jesus is
f ( of slight importance, as soon as we have got rid
, of the supposed chasm between the Gospel and
early Catholicism. This latter was certainly not
the dialectical development of theological proposi-
tions revealed by Christ His revelation was
imaginative, not conceptual ; concrete, not abstract
In substance, and stripped of its theological form,
it has lived on in Catholic tradition, especially in
the minds of the faithful, whose religious appre-
hension is imaginative, not conceptual; who have
to retranslate theology into vision before it can
move their feeling and govern their conduct

If the revelation of Christ has suffered certain
alterations, additions and subtractions, legitimate
or illegitimate, it is due to the attempt to har-
monise it with changing thought and changing
circumstances ; to preserve it, not to destroy it
To contend that the Church's theology has been
always the same is preposterous. Only those who
have confounded revelation with its theological
presentment could be interested in such a hopeless
contention, or could be driven to the expedient ol
treating potential belief as actual. That confu-
sion dates from the earliest times. But to
contend that her revelation has been always the
same, that the " idea 99 of Jesus has been faithfully
transmitted, is to contend for a plain truth. The


Digitized by Google


VALUE OF THE APOCALYPTIC IDEA 95


difficulty, for us, lies in the fact that this " idea " )
has been transmitted too faithfully, in form and not
merely in substance; that this apocalyptic imagery
has been given a literal fact-value which our minds
have slowly become incapable of accepting, and
that we are accordingly tempted to explain it
away as a mere parable of the moral life. Yet in
this the Church is but true to her Founder, for a
Founder He was, when once we abandon the
relapse-theory of Liberal Protestantism and re-
cognise the Church as continuous with the u little
flock/' awaiting and preparing for the Kingdom.
For Jesus, what we call His apocalyptic "imagery"
was no mere imagery but literal fact. But for us
it can be so no longer. We can no longer believe
in the little local Heaven above the flat earth, from
which Jesus is to appear in the clouds; nor in all
the details of the vision governed by this concepr
tion. To do so would be to reduce our minds to
chaos and scepticism and make us incapable of faith
of any sort Criticism, on the other hand, forbids ^
us to believe that He was making mysteries and >
puzzles of plain moral truths that He elsewhere
expressed plainly, or to deny that He was *
giving a revelation ol the transcendental world
of religion. He belonged to the apocalyptics in
His religious conceptions, as He did to the
prophets in His ethical. Except the identification


Digitized by Google


96 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS ROADS


of Himself with the Son of Man and of the
Baptist with Elias, there is nothing original in the
form of His revelation. Nowhere does He in-
dicate that these apocalyptic conceptions of the
Kingdom were not perfectly familiar to His
hearers. He builds on foundations already
laid.

What then? Does Christianity rest on the
visions of one of a whole school of apocalyptics ?
Is it worth defending at all ? Certainly the great
work it has done in the world points to more than
this. But may not this be ascribed to moral
and prophetic elements, to which its apocalyptic
elements gave all the sanctions and reinforcements
of religion, thus popularising what else had been a
mere school of ethics ?

That men believed in the Apocalypse of Jesus
as they believed in no other can only be explained
by the influence of His extraordinary personality
and moral character. No mere wonder-working
could have won Him such faith. Wonders were
less wonderful then than now; more common;
less evidential and unambiguous. Nor did He
appeal to them as to apologetic arguments. All
they could prove was the presence of a super-
human agency, diabolic or divine, in the wonder-
worker. Any evidence of the Divine Spirit in
Himself was a "miracle," in the sense that the


Digitized by Google


VALUE OF THE APOCALYPTIC IDEA 97


word miracle bore for Jesus and the Scripture.
And it was not on physical, but moral, evidenced
that He relied with such effect It was because^
they trusted Him and believed in Him that the }
people trusted and believed His revelation. His
was not merely the power of righteousness, which
may repel rather than draw, but the power of love,
of deep and universal sympathy with the in-
dividual soul ; the power of speaking straight to
the heart and conscience as God only can speak ;
of drawing men after Him by a spell they could
not understand ; of compelling them by an autho-
rity which they felt but could not explain. They
could not help trusting and believing in Him
absolutely: "Whither thou goest I will go: thy
people shall be my people, and thy God my God :
Where thou diest will I die and there will I be
buried"

There is thus some basis for the tendency of a
rationalising and moralising Christianity to find the
revelation of Jesus in His moral personality and
character, in His concrete exemplification or em-
bodiment of the so-called new Righteousness ; to
attach as little importance to His religious imagery
as to His scientific or historic ideas — which were
those of His time. But it may be questioned
whether a great deal of the faith that He com-
manded was not the fruit of His faith in Himself as

H


Digitized by Google


98 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


/ the Son of Man, the vicegerent and plenipoten-
V tiary of God ; whether the authority with which He
/ spoke and convinced was not inspired by His
\ Messianic secret Did He speak merely as a prophet,
in the name of morals and with the authority of
conscience and not also in the name of the Son of
Man ? Had the sense of the supernatural nothing
to do with His mysterious power over men ? the
sense that God was with Him and He with God, in
some undefinable manner? If it had, we must
then allow that His power flowed from His sense
of being, not merely moral but superhuman;
that His apocalyptic idea entered into and formed
His personality ; that, without it, His influence is
not adequately explained.

And I think this may be extended to the moral
influence of Christianity in the world. Had it
been merely moral, and not also transcendental,
could it have done what it has done ? When it is
purged of all transcendental meaning and value,
will Righteousness be able to hold its own ?

Can we then bow down before the moral pre-
eminence of such a personality and, at the same
time, regard its religious ideas as illusory and
negligible? However different in the abstract,
morality and religion are fused together in the living
spirit Moral purity of heart purifies our intuition
of the Divine. Is it credible that the purest of all


Digitized by Google


VALUE OF THE APOCALYPTIC IDEA 99


hearts should not have seen God ; that it should
x/have been the prey to a sort of religious delirium?
Is it possible to trust the moral, and distrust the)
religious, intuitions of Jesus ?

Must we not rather think that, however untenable
in form, the " idea " of Jesus and of Catholic Chris-
tianity stands for a conception of religion answering,
in elevation and dignity, to the morality with which
it was fused in His mind ? that the Heaven to which
this righteousness was subordinate cannot have
been that of a lower plane of spirituality?

We spoke, some time back, of the "religious
idea" as governing man's need to adjust himself to c
the invisible world which lies beyond the range of ,
his sensible experience. The religion of the in-
dividual consists of certain images (or even con-
cepts) of that world and its relation to man ; of
certain feelings, emotions and desires, determined
by those images ; of certain observances and actions
adjusting man to that life beyond. As such,
religion has to do with the transcendent — with the
other world, not with this. Only when man has
risen to the idea of a moral God, and of Righteous-
ness as the will and service of God, are morality
and religion closely connected. Of itself morality
is occupied with our duty towards our neighbour.
Not till we get to an ethical religion is our duty
towards our neighbour seen as also a duty towards


Digitized by Google


loo CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS ROADS


God, as the highest form of worship. It takes on
a transcendent or religious aspect But religion, as
such, deals entirely with the transcendent Its
" idea " unfolds itself and comes into clearer con-
sciousness in an infinity of directions and degrees,
dependent on its mental, moral and social environ-
ment — on the materials out of which it has to weave
an embodiment for itself. But, from the nature
of the case, its presentment of the transcendent
order, and of the present order in its relation to the
transcendent, can never be more than symbolic. And
this, not because the transcendent is absolutely un-
knowable in such sort that we have no term of com-
parison at all. To such a world there could be no
need to relate ourselves. It could not touch us, nor
we it For us it were simply non-existent But
whatever little fraction of experience mankind
possesses can never be more than a symbol of the
totality of possible experience that lies beyond.
A man is not absolutely unknowable for a mouse,
but the mouse's knowledge of him can only be in
terms of mouse-life. Man's highest God will be
man writ large. By no process of abstraction or
magnification or subtraction can the human be
purged out of our concepts of God, or of anything
else above or below us.

Yet our symbolisms of the transcendent vary in
value and truth. Like scientific hypotheses, those


Digitized by Google


VALUE OF THE APOCALYPTIC IDEA 101


are the best that bring our life most fully into ^
harmony with the world they symbolise; which I
best satisfy our needs, deepen our experiences, J
answer to our faith. It is not too much to say I
that mankind feels its way to these symbols and
hypotheses as a blind man feels his way to the
fire. Man is uneasy ; he seeks rest for his soul
he gropes about and follows the direction that
is confirmed by his religious and moral experience.
That he gives absolute, instead of hypothetic, valued
to his constructions is perhaps a misfortune, in that 1
it leads him to do violence to later and fuller I
experience- But so far as a hypothesis gives '
a correct anticipation and control of experience :
it is true.

To pretend that Jesus regarded His apocalyptic'
portrayal of the transcendent as symbolic is to
pretend that His mind belonged to the nineteenth ,
century. It was for Him no more a figure of the
transcendent than it was a figure of the moral
life. And the same must be said of Catholicism,
which has been true, not merely to the religious
" idea" of Jesus, but to its very form. That form,
as we have said, has lost all literal truth for us.
It can no longer produce in us the fruits it pro-
duced in simpler ages. It belonged to a world
that was but six thousand years old and had no
future before it ; to a petty universe of which that


Digitized by Google


102 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


world was the sole and central preoccupation. It
had not even behind it the prestige of the whole
religious history of Israel. The apocalyptic
literature was an exotic, a late introduction into
the religion of Israel. And yet the fact remains

/that it was in the forms of apocalyptic thought
that the religious " idea 99 of Jesus embodied itself,
and exercised the most potent religious influence
that the world has yet known. It is idle to
pretend that His influence has been purely ethical.
He has satisfied, not only the moral, but the
mystical, needs of millions for centuries, and His
moral influence has been largely dependent on His.
mystical influence. We cannot even say that we
owe the apocalyptic form to Jesus, that it was
the creation of His spirit He found it to hand It
was the religious language of His surroundings.
He had not first to invent and teach a new
language before He could communicate with His

. people. He took the existing language as the
medium, not only of His speech, but of His
thought His own place in the apocalyptic
scheme was the substance of His personal revela-
tion. For the rest He adopted the revelations
of others.

It would seem, then, an obvious duty to abandon
the apocalyptic form and retain what it stands
for and embodies. This would be easy if it


Digitized by Google


VALUE OF THE APOCALYPTIC IDEA 103


stood for ethical principles. The symbolic pre- J
sentment of what can be expressed properly is \
inexcusable. But the transcendental can never^
be expressed properly. Translated into the terms \
of our present philosophy, the "idea" of Jesus
remains symbolic. To whatever degree we de-
materialise our symbols of the spiritual, material
they must remain. Our own symbolism would)
be as unacceptable for a later age as the apoca-\
lyptic symbolism is for us. The only remedy^
lies in a frank admission of the principle of
symbolism. With this admission we have no )
need to abolish the Apocalypse, which, as the
form in which Jesus embodied His religious " idea,"
is classical and normative for all subsequent
interpretations of the same. In the long series \
of translations the original sense may be easily
perverted if the original text be lost What eacl^
age has to do is to interpret the apocalyptic sym- )
bolism into terms of its own symbolism. J
How, then, should we express the religious
M idea " of Jesus in our own age ? What, for us,
are the values underlying the apocalyptic revela- ;
tion? How, had He belonged to our own day,
and had His mind been stored with our historical,
scientific, philosophical, moral and religious beliefs,
would His religious "idea" have clothed itself,
and remained the same " idea " ?


Digitized by Google


IQ4 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


It is "the same," in so far as it produces the
same level and degree of spiritual life and experi-
ence. The same relation may be described, the
same direction given, in endless ways. The truth
of all these ways is the same if they yield the
same control over experience. To say they are
< but symbolic of the transcendent is not agnosti-
cism ; since symbols may be representative. Nor
( is it pure pragmatism, since the degree of their
) practical utility is just that of their correspondence
to reality. Were nature not in some way like a
mechanism, the determinist hypothesis of science
would be fruitless. Because the likeness is im-
perfect, the fruitful ness is imperfect Taken as the
whole account of nature, the hypothesis starves
the better half of man's soul.

Any construction of the transcendent that yields
the same fruits as the apocalyptic construction is
true to the "idea" of Jesus. We have not to com-
pare symbol with symbol, or theology with the-
ology, or to show that one can be deduced from
the other. We have to compare life with life;
feeling with feeling ; action with action.


Digitized by Google


XI


THE TRUTH-VALUE OF VISIONS

THE word " visionary " is too widely associated
with illusion not to inspire a profound dis-
trust In an age of psychological ignorance the
easy credit accorded to the visionary was open to
great abuse. Even fairly truthful men are not so
scrupulously accurate about their statements when
these cannot be checked. When few travelled, a
" traveller's tale" meant a fiction, and a sailor's
"yarn" was not taken seriously. Authority is)
always abused in the absence of safeguards, and I
the authority of knowledge follows the rule. In '
days of larger credit and credulity an impostor^
could pretend to visions, and the true visionaryy
re-edit his visions to suit his desires.

Another element of illusion was the " objectifi^ j
cation" of visions. Obvious as it is to us, the)
distinction between subjective and objective ap-
pearances is a slow acquisition of mental develop-
ment, and by no means completed even yet It
is not one of "vividness"; for our dreams, and
tven our waking Imaginations, are often more
105


Digitized by Google


io6 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS ROADS


vivid than our true perceptions. Both systems of

' appearances are, in some sense, our own creation.

/But the latter is common to all men, and is deter-
mined by some principle of regular sequence and
grouping which evades our control. This is a
difference that can only be learnt gradually by
experience. The range of the objective grows
with human experience : just as life teaches us that
many things, which, as children, we thought peculiar
to ourselves, belong to human nature as such.
An appearance is illusory only when we place it in

'the wrong series and are led into consequent errors
of anticipation — as when we mistake our dreams

tfor facts and calculate accordingly. An acciden-
tal vividness of imagination and weakness of
perception and vitality may project a dream into
space and history ; and only by its irrelevance to
the objective series can the hallucination be de-
tected. A vision is a hallucination so far as it
seems to belong to, and come from, the objective
series, and this because it is not seen to belong to
the subjective series. This error of psychological
interpretation has something to do with the dis-
trust of visionaries in these days.

Connected with this error of " objectification "
i . is the tendency to attach a literal, and not merely
a symbolic, value to their content, when they are
accepted as revelations of transcendental realities ;


Digitized by Google


THE TRUTH-VALUE OF VISIONS 107


and to be amazed, for example, at the divergen-
cies between the Sacred Passion according to S.
Bridget and the same according to Sister Catherine
Emmerich.

All this does not exclude the fact that visions^
are a perfectly normal phenomenon of the human (
mind, and possess a certain sort of truth-value J
Every movement of consciousness is from the?)
implicit and vague to the explicit and distinct.)
It unfolds itself in more definite feelings, impulses,
images and even concepts. When the movement
is sudden and strong, the image is sudden and
strong. Its abruptness and force seem to detach)
it from the subjective series and so to throw it
into the objective. Yet this accidental illusion in
no way affects the value of its content, except so
far as, to those who are under sway of the illusion,
it may seem to give this content a divine and
miraculous authority. It may, however, have divine^
authority on a different title — namely, so far as
the inward movement from which it springs is;
divine.

The sense of an absolute opposed to his rela-;
tivity, an infinite to his finitude, a permanent to;
his evanescence, an actual to his potentiality, a
repose to his restlessness, is the groundwork and
canvas on which man's rational life is broidered.
Because it is permanent, like the burden of a


Digitized by


Google


io8 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


melody, it is not an object of distinct advertence
any more than the air we breathe or the space we
f/ move in. We adjust ourselves to it in many ways
as unconsciously as we do to the laws of life or
thought It needs some effort of reflection to
; separate the religious from the other factors of
' our spirit-life ; to study and develop them apart
We do not need to prove religion to men, but to
show them that they are religious. That religion
which we "prove" is not the substance, but a
particular form and interpretation of religious
experience — not the divine, but some particular
image, symbol or conception of the divine. What
we experience (be our creed or non-creed what it
may) is a Power that makes for Righteousness,
i.e. that subjects us to an universal, super-
individual, super-social end, of which we have no
distinct conception, and which we can only figure
to ourselves in symbols and images, whether
spontaneously or by a deliberate effort of thought
That we can feel and suffer from our relativity,
finitude and evanescence, means an under-con-
sciousness of an Absolute, Infinite and Unchanging,
that we must for ever try to express in our thought
and action as in terms of another order of being.
The energy, constancy and sincerity with which
we pursue this task is the measure of our spiritual
life. Only when we are so perfect as to pursue it


Digitized by


Google


THE TRUTH-VALUE OF VISIONS 109


without let or hindrance, shall we have found such
rest as the finite spirit is capable of.

This need of harmony between himself and the
transcendent is, as we have said, the essence of *
the religious "idea." Man's need of righteous-
ness is but subordinate to it His aesthetic
and intellectual needs belong to it just as truly.
In all three he seeks the unattainable absolute
and is ever dissatisfied with his best attain-
ments.

When it is objected that inward experience
does not give us God, this must be admitted if
by " God " we mean some particular image, symbol
or idea. Such symbols are always the spontaneous
or deliberate representation of the transcendent
cause or source of the experience. They are
" mysteries," objects of faith. But to object that
the cause or source is not revealed to us in the
experience is to mistake the very idea of a real
cause. In the modern scientific sense a cause is A
merely a group of antecedent phenomena. And j
God is not such a cause. But a real cause or
agent is only revealable in, through and with its 1
effects or appearances — as affecting us in some
way. In this sense God can be revealed to us in
experiences, just as our fellow-men are. He is an
object of that faith which enters into our simplest
judgments — the faith by which we believe in an


Digitized by Google


no CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS- ROADS


objective world, or in minds other than our own.
' I do not find my fellow-man in t but through my
experience ; by a work of spontaneous interpreta-
tion. If my idea of him be not merely a symbol,
it is because I have an adequate measure of him
in myself; whereas God does not belong to the
world of external sense, nor is His nature ex-
pressible properly in terms of my own. The first
instinct of thought is to treat everything as
, another self— to exalt what is below us, to abase
what is above us, to that level. Differentiation is
the slow work of experience and reflection — a
work which can never be complete. Of the abso-
lutely diverse we could have no conception, no
desire, no need. Our first notion of God, natur-
ally, is human. We gradually dehumanise it to the
idea of an infinite human spirit If we go further
and cancel the last feature of humanity, we are
left with something absolute, unrelated and simply
diverse, that does not exist for us. We cannot
adjust our life to what does not touch us or enter
into our environment Only so far as the absolute
is also immanent, and mingles with the world's
process, can religion have an object

This process of man's self-adjustment to the
immanent-transcendent implies action and re-
action. The Divine is no dead and passive
environment, but a living, active, social environ-


Digitized by Google


THE TRUTH-VALUE OF VISIONS in


ment God gives and man receives; God leads
and man follows. By his inward experiences of
felt harmony or discord with the transcendent,;
man can test the value of his religious notions'
and of the conduct they dictate. It is in those'
experiences that God guides him directly. There
is no other language between the soul and God.
The spontaneous or deliberate symbols, in which j
those experiences take mental shape, serve 1
directly to embody and retain the experience;
to make it in some way communicable; to fix
the direction of life, the tone of feeling, suggested
by it Like the hypotheses of science, they serve)
to co-ordinate and control phenomena, and in the
measure that they do so they are founded in and
represent reality — albeit symbolically. When we J
realise how purely symbolic even our best and
most fruitful scientific hypotheses must be, on
how infinitesimal an experience of the whole
they are founded, we can see that revelation j
involves no violation of the usual processes
of thought, nor calls for any sort of special;
faculty.

Thus there is no more reason for an indis-^
criminate contempt of revelation than for a like?
contempt of other means of knowledge — and we
cannot exclude from the realm of " knowledge "
the record and classification of any department


Digitized by Google


U2 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


of experience, however incapable of exact ex-
/ pression. Tradition, induction, deduction, observa-
tion can be, and have been, as widely abused.
Their laws and criteria have been slowly deter-
' mined. Empirical gave place to scientific medicine,
as soon as analysis and induction had estab-
lished the true chains of antecedents and con-
sequents. Religion is still in the empirical stage '
in many respects. It has no clear method of
distinguishing sham from reality and of justifying
the values it has learnt by experience.

As things are, the only test of revelation is the
test of life— not merely of moral, but of spiritual,
fruitfulness in the deepest sense. It must at once
satisfy and intensify man's mystical and moral
need. It must bring the transcendent nearer to
his thoughts, feelings and desires. It must deepen
his consciousness of union with God. This, as we
have said, was the "evidence" to which Jesus
appealed in proof of His " possession " by God's
spirit — the evidence of His control over man's
mystical life. His revelation was the secret of
that control ; of the fire that He was and the fire
that He came to spread. Such, too, is the evidence v
of Christianity as a personal religion — its power
over souls that are already Christian in sympathy
and capacity; the soul-compelling power of the
spirit of Christ Any other " sign/' be it miracle


Digitized by Google


THE TRUTH- VALUE OF VISIONS 113


or argument, will appeal only to the faithless and
perverse. It may puzzle them, but it will never
convince them ; it may convert them to the
Church, but it cannot convert them to God; it
may change their theology — it cannot change
their hearts.


Digitized by Google


116 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


powers that govern the sequence of phenomena —
powers usually conceived as personal. His gods
are as much part of the order of nature as are
our hypothetical " forces " and " laws." He wants
to be friends with his god, because it is the best
way to control that " force " to his own temporal
advantage. But union with his god is not, for the

, savage, an end in itself, or the satisfaction of a
spiritual need. Only so far as he has some rudi-

f mentary moral sense, some love of Tightness for .

I its own sake, does he possess a sort of virtual re-
ligion. Not till he images God as a moral being,
and recognises morality as the Will of the Highest,
as the sovereign and universal Good; not till union
with such a God becomes for him an end in itself,
and his own ultimate perfection, does he pass
from magic to religion.

The continuity of religion is one of form and
expression, rather than of substance and content
A new god takes over the regalia of the old — his
names, his temples, his rites. We thus find the
surviving forms of the earliest religion in the
latest, and this in virtue of the laws of the human
mind. But there is no continuity of substance
t>etween magical and moral religion. The latter
is the development of a non-religious morality
that co-existed side by side with non-moral magi-
cal religion, till the day when morality took over


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 117


the regalia of religion. The religion of magic, j
being wholly subordinate to man's physical and ^
temporal interests, belongs to man's lower and '
individual life. As such it is far beneath his moral
and universal life in dignity. But the religion^
that grew out of morality is something higher^
and fuller than morality, "Higher and fuller,"
because, with it, man becomes consciously and^
actively the organ of an universal and eternal life, J
the instrument of an universal and eternal end{
because, with it, his physical selfhood is transcended
and subordinated to his spiritual selfhood or person-
ality. Religion deepens and is deepened by his")
profound and divine discontent. With every de^
velopment of his spiritual faculties his rebellion'
against his own relativity, finitude and evanes-
cence increases. Hfc feels that no mere extension
of his individual life could satisfy him ; nay, by
experience he learns that such extensions leave him
less, and not more, content He wants to pass «y
aXXo yevog; and the want implies an unsatisfied
capacity for so doing. There is that in him which ^)
nothing can satisfy but some sort of union with
and appropriation of the infinite and eternal In
the measure that he tries to live widely, deeply?
and nobly he is bound to become a pessimist If
optimism is usually associated with the youth and
pessimism with the age of persons or peoples, it


Digitized by Google


118 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


is because pessimism is the verdict of experience.
Whether in himself, or in the world, if a man has
ideals for both, he is bound to find not only failure,
but an iron law of inevitable failure, of progress
thwarted and frustrated even by its multiplicity
and fecundity — its waves dashed to futile spray by
.their very force and volume. From such a world
and such a life he must seek refuge in an abiding
City, that hath foundations whose builder and
maker is God. Only so established can he have
patience, courage and hope to join in the struggle
between the Divine Will and the forces of evil in
himself and in the world, not asking to see the
meaning and issue of it all, but working blindly
along with Him Who sees.
- Born of a felt contrast between the actual and
) man's wakening spiritual ideals, combined with the
gradual recognition of the schism as inevitable and
..unconquerable, this pessimism is the presupposi-
tion of that optimism of blind faith by which it is
/overcome. They are two stages in the same pro-
cess of spiritual growth — a process that we find
arrested in Buddhism. If it be not arrested, it is
strangely perverted in what may be called Modern
Christianity, whose optimism is begotten of faith
in this world, not of faith in the other; whose
courage and hope is maintained by the belief that
the schism between the ideal and the actual will


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 119


eventually be healed through an inherent vis
medicatrix Natura> that the Kingdom of God
is the natural term of a process of moral and social
development

Nothing is more evident than that Jesus had no*)
such faith or hope. The revelation of the apo-^
calyptic Kingdom of Heaven was a Gospel or)
Good News for those who despaired of the world.^
It supplanted and reinterpreted, in a transcen-^
dental sense, the earlier prophetic Gospel of the?
temporal triumph of Israel and the reign of moral J
and legal righteousness on earth — a Gospel that
experience of the law of failure had discredited)
The mere fact that he expected the Kingdom to-
morrow proves that the faith and hope of Jesus
was not in progress or evolution. What sort of
Gospel had it been for the poor, the sorrowful, the
persecuted, the oppressed, to know that, not they,
but their class, would be relieved in some remote
age by the advance of civilisation and morality?
Had it not been to satisfy their hunger with stones
and their thirst with gall and vinegar ?

The verdict of the deeper spiritual intuition on 1
this life is always pessimistic, and it is a verdict !
that is only confirmed by experience and reflection J
It is evident that there are vital and progressive-
forces at work everywhere, but it is equally plain
that there are destructive forces, that life is 1


Digitized by Google


lao CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS ROADS


strangled by its own fertility, that it is faced by
the insoluble problem of finding room for its
expansion in every direction, that the utmost its
ingenuity can do is to defer the inevitable day of
defeat and to prolong its periods of uninterrupted
(progress. The world is the arena of a conflict
(between a multitude of irreconcilable ends. The
belief that they are ordained to an eventual
I harmony, however useful as a stimulus to combat,
\ falls to pieces on closer inspection, which reveals
an inherent fault or rift in nature. All life is
^ under the sway of sad mortality.

To-day we are so enamoured of our scientific
; and material progress that we have no eyes for our
' many decadences, even though we are face to face
with social and moral chaos. We believe, with
childish simplicity, that we are making straight for
the millennium. We forget that every new comfort
is a new necessity, a new source of discontent and
unhappiness, and leaves the relative proportion of
/happiness and misery unaffected. Thrust out at
i one place the tide of sorrow breaks in at another :
expeUas furca tatnen usque recurret. If medicine
cures diseases, it enables the diseased to increase
and multiply and re-establish the average of un-
healthiness. Shall progress ever wipe away the
tears from all eyes ? Shall it ever extinguish love
and pride and ambition and all the griefs attendant


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST i«


in their train ? Is it enough to give a man bread
for his belly and instruction for his brain ? Pro-
long life as it will, can progress conquer death,
with its terrors for the dying, its tears for the
surviving? Can it ever control the earthquake,
the tempest, the lightning, the cruelties of a nature
indifferent to the lot of man? And even, given
the attainment of its facile dreams, can progress
postpone the day when mankind shall be blotted
off the face of a universe, that will go its way as
though he had never been ?

The root of this fallacy of progress is the un^
criticised and indefensible assumption that the race/
and the whole world, like the individual organism,/
are inherently predetermined to pass through a\
series of stages ending in a definite final perfect
tion. That sort of development belongs only to")
the individual organism. That of the species or^
race is determined casually from without, not pre-|>
determined froirti within. It is a result rather than)
an end — the result of conflict with accidental and
incalculable difficulties; a result that no insight
into present conditions could predict Progress"!
makes for no preordained goal. The race is pre-
determined to live on indefinitely, and to do so it
# must learn to overcome the obstacles it encounter
in its expansion. Its course is no more planned
than the course of a river. It runs on and


Digitized by Google


122 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


expands, because it must, and how it must Differ-
ent obstructions would have called forth different
^ arts, skills and inventions ; so the present course of
> progress is only one out of thousands that might
Vhave been. Altogether the dream of a possible
earthly paradise, in which the travail of nature is
to culminate, has no other basis than a false
analogy between progress and organic life. So far
as the moral struggle is explained and justified by
this imaginary and impossible end, it is a mere
beating of the air. Only an eternal and universal
end can explain the imperative and absolute
\ character of Right ; and humanity is neither eternal
[nor universal. The Right must be worth doing
teven were the world to vanish the next moment.
But that universal and eternal end is necessarily
unimaginable for the human mind, limited to a
brief moment of duration and to a mere point in
the range of possible experience. Yet we are fain
to give some figure, some content, to the idea of
that universal end ; and prone to forget the sym-
bolic character of that figure. We have none
better, perhaps, than the image of a perfectly
happy world, produced by a steady process of
moral development Only when we realise the
inherent contradictions of such a concept, do we
\§ee that we have mistaken a symbol for reality.
The apocalyptic Kingdom of Heaven is not


Digitized by Google


7 HE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 123


more of a dream and unreality ; but there is far)
less danger of our overlooking its symbolic char-(
acter. It is presented to us as an object of faith \
and revelation, not as an object of rational fore- I
sight It is a bliss given by God, not wrought out j
by man ; a bliss into which all may enter and not J
merely a favoured and final generation in a remote)
future. It is the fruit and reward of the moral
life, but is a supermoral life — the continuation of
that divine and spiritual life which, under present
contingencies, manifests itself principally in mor-
ality, in rightness of conduct, though also in Tight-
ness of thought and feeling and, above all, in\
religion and conscious union with God. But there
the contingencies, that now call for the moral
struggle with all its pain and suffering, shall be
done away. It is the rest that remains for the
people of God. Here there is for the just a fore- )
taste of that rest in the midst of their labours^
and tribulations ; for to have God is to have restJ
But till they have Him fully and undividedly their^
rest is broken with restlessness. Rest is the motive
and end of the soul's struggle with the waves that
would bear it from the Rock to which it clings.
So closely are the struggle and the rest associated
in our experience that the saints seem almost to
love the struggle for its own sake, and to shrink
from the idea of an eternal and unbroken rest.


Digitized by Google


124 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


Yet the Peirasmos, or Temptation, is none the less
an evil. Christ did not say " Lead us " but " Lead
us not into the Peirasmos." But action is not
opposed to rest And union with God is union
with the Divine Life and Action, with the undis-
turbed centre of the cyclone.

In the tangle and contradiction of the world of
our present experience goodness, beauty, truth
Vand happiness are at discord. Against this dis-
( cord our whole spiritual nature revolts. It strives,
/ and is bound to strive, to overcome this violation
of order. And yet it can do no more than mitigate
an inevitable and perpetual evil. No conceivable
degree of progress could ever satisfy this deepest
demand of our nature. And even if it could, the
vision would not be for our eyes but for those of a
final, and immeasurably distant, generation. The
whole idea of the subordination of past and
present humanity to the interests of a remote
futurity, as means to an end, belongs to the false
comparison of the life of the race to that of an
individual organism. We live for our own sakes
and not for a posterity that never comes. We
v have equal rights with any generation of the future.
-The truth is that neither we nor they shall find
goodness, happiness, truth and beauty united in
this life.

As man progresses mentally and morally, he is


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 42$


likely to find the discord increased rather than j
diminished. The deepest demand of his nature
is the last to rise to the surface of explicit con-
sciousness. As he grows spiritually, he asks more)
and not less, aod seems to receive less and notj
more. And to this his revolt against earlier and
inadequate expressions of the religious idea is
due in a great measure. Taken literally, and not
symbolically, they do not meet his need. And as)
long as he demands to picture to himself distinctly\
the term and satisfaction of that need he is doomed,)
to doubt, for his picturings will necessarily bet
drawn from the world of his present experienceJ
Not till he resigns the desire to see what is"\
hopelessly beyond the range of his present vision^
is his faith pure and unshaken. Faith believes^
that this need relates to another order of experi- j
ence ; that the present order serves only to evoke, S
exercise and strengthen it, but can never satisfy it. I
This implies that, in his deepest being, man belongs J
already to that other order. He has a power,
whose meaning and purpose are hid from him '
through lack of a proper object for their exercise.
A cage-born bird, he wonders what his wings are
for. He tries to make a heaven out of earth, as it)
were ropes out of sand. He was made for some-^
thing else — he does not know what. Like the
domesticated beaver he builds his dams across the


Digitized by Google


136 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


floor ; he cannot tell why. Not till he is in his
native river will he understand his restless instinct ;
and the river is beyond all his present experience
and imagination — a missing link in his mind.

As far, then, as the apocalyptic Kingdom of
Heaven stands for an order of transcendental
experience, in which sorrow, pain, temptation and
sin shall be done away ; in which the moral
struggle shall be explained, justified and brought
to eternal rest ; in which the spiritual discords of
our present experience shall be harmonised; in
which man shall understand the meaning of
those deepest needs, to which the present order
is educational and preparatory; as far as it
stands for that which is the gift of God and
not the result of development — so far it seems
^to me to express symbolically the religious idea,
brought to an advanced stage of explicitness.
Treated as symbolic, not of transcendent life but
of man's moral experience in the present life, it
ceases to be that Gospel or Good News which
alone makes life bearable for those to whom instinct,
experience and reflection have revealed the shallow-
ness of the Gospel of progress and the promise
of salvation by development Doubtless these
despairing idealists are a minority, but they are
what all men tend to become in the measure of
their spiritual development And, after all, five


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 127


hundred millions of Buddhists share their pes-i
simism, though not the hope that alleviates it.
None should be so ripe for the Gospel ; though not}
for the Gospel of Liberal Protestantism, with itsr
bland faith and hope in the present order, its I
refusal to face the incurable tragedy of human j
life — a tragedy that grows deeper as man rises j
from the hand-to-mouth simplicitjrof mere animal j
existence, extends his knowledge and control of
experience and wakes ever more fully to the sense
of his insatiable exigencies. The more truly he is*)
man, the more truly he is miserable. If he have ?
no hope beyond earth, he can do no better than
contract his desires to the point of extinction,^
unless his humanity be sufficiently latent to let
him live like a gnat in a sunbeam.


(b) IMMORTALITY

The apocalyptic Kingdom of Heaven assumes^
a life after death, a continuation, expansion and/
revelation of the life of the spirit as lived evenf
now by the righteous. The belief in immortality/
is not essential to magical religions, in which ^
gods are dealt with as powers of nature, to bej
controlled in man's temporal interests; in which \
their friendship is not an end, but a utility. Thus 7
the early religion of Israel had no hope beyond^


Digitized by Google


128 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


/

^the grave. In many such primitive peoples there
prevails a belief in some dreamland, whither the
soul (a shade of the body) wanders in sleep or
after death; but this belief is not necessarily
religious. At most there is a hope that, so far as
this life is continued at low pressure in Hades, the
gods who have been propitious here may extend
their favour to that land of shadows and memories.
[But it is a poorer, not a richer and fuller, existence
than the present. The least upon earth is better
than the greatest under the earth ; whereas, for
/ Christianity, the greatest born of woman is less
than the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. Be-
tween these conceptions of immortality there is
Ino continuity of substance, but only of form.
The terms and images of the earlier belief have,
to some extent, been appropriated by the later,
somewhat to the prejudice of truth.
/ As true spiritual religion is a development, not
of magical religion, but of the moral life, so also
belief in spiritual immortality has not sprung
from belief in ghosts and shades, but from the
\same root as spiritual religion. Whether recog-
nised or only implicit, it is a postulate of the
moral life. I cannot desire what is not in some
sense my own good, my own end ; and yet I
desire the right, Le. what is good irrespectively
of my own individual and temporal interests and


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 129


of those of all humanity. Fiat justitia ruat cesium, \
is the dictate of the moral conscience. Every-/
thing temporal must be sacrificed to this absolute")
and imperative good. When we say that right-
eousness must be disinterested, we only exclude")
these temporal interests. Were it not our own
interest in some sense, it could not be an object
of will at all. It is therefore my own interest,
because I am a spiritual, super-temporal and
super-individual being; because, as such, my
interest is identified with that of an eternal and
universal Will. Hence I feel that what matters^
for me absolutely, matters for me eternally. This/
I could not feel were I convinced that, when the \
human race is wiped out of the physical world,
it will not matter whether I have lived well
or ill.

Men have lived, and do live, moral lives without •)
any implicit recognition of such a postulate. BuO
even if they explicitly deny it with their reason, it
is affirmed by their instinct and their conduct.
Connecting the doctrine of immortality, in its^
popular materialistic setting, with a hope of(
temporal reward, deferred in this life, to be be-
stowed in a continuation of a similar order of
experience, they rightly feel it a nobler thing to
love justice for its own sake, and not for the sake '
of a lower happiness. To say that this love or

K


Digitized by Google


ijo CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


satisfaction is, in itself, a reward, and that such
men are, therefore, self-interested, is a mere quibble.
^The self-interest that spoils moral purity is the
\ interest of the individual organic self, not that
U>f the universal and spiritual self ; it is that which
belongs to our consciousness of being separate
\ from all, not to our consciousness of being ident-
ified with all. The desire of an immortality, which
means the persistence and expansion of that very
love of justice, cannot sully the purity of the
fheart It is objectively inseparable from such
^a love, which implies the desire to be with God,
land therefore to be with Him always.

As we have said before, the transcendent and
) universal end, that justifies the imperative and
j absolute character of Right, is hopelessly un-
imaginable for us who command but a moment
" of duration and a point of immensity. We can
only present it to ourselves under symbols drawn
from our present experience. So, too, our symbols
of the life immortal, drawn largely from animistic
and magical religions, imperil the spirituality of the
belief, and propose it to us as an object of vision
rather than of faith. And this not less but more,
when, discarding the symbols of the imagination,
we have recourse to those of the understanding
and try to conceive the when, where and how
of life eternal.


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OP CHRIST 131


Philosophy can neither give us that faith nor \
take it from us. It is given us in the moral J
instinct, which we can no more repress than we/
can repress our belief in personalities other than;
our own. The sceptic who denies it may be un-
answerable, but he convinces neither us nor him-
self. His very denial implies his sense that truth
matters absolutely and eternally. All that philo- ^
sophy can do is to criticise our attempted state-;
ments and interpretation of the instinct These,
being necessarily in terms of temporal experience
and life, may conflict with that experience if they
be taken as more than symbolic of the transcen-
dent and unimaginable. Such criticism is as
irrelevant as if it were applied to the apocalyptic
Kingdom of Heaven. We only know our spiritual^
life in relation to, and in conflict with, certain con- ^
ditions — conditions which hinder and limit its full t
manifestations : in which it can never realise itself '
and come to rest. Any ideal condition we can
imagine must be of the same kind in some new ^
and inherently impossible arrangement, e.g. a j
world of perfectly moral men in which morality
would be ipso facto impossible ; a world of goods
without their essentially correlative evils ; in
short, a world of hills without valleys. Yet these x
imaginings are the necessary symbol of that un- \
imaginable reality which answers to our soiritual 1


Digitized by Google


13* CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


/need — they are "mysteries"; objects of faith;

Vsigns of an unseen.

And what can any philosophy do for or against
our faith in that unseen? Can it ever even tell
us what matter is, or what spirit is ; whether they
be two, or but two aspects of one; and, if two,
how they are related ? Are not all our relations,
such as twoness and oneness, borrowed from the
spatial and temporal, and therefore senseless out-
side that realm? Can it even tell us what we
ourselves, makers of space and time, are? Is thfe
mystery of the Trinity more full of insoluble con-
tradictions than that of our own selfhood ? I may
know everything more easily than what " I " the
knower am. Can I know my thinking self apart
from the objects of my thought of which that self
is co-factor ? When I try to think of it I at once
distort it into some object — usually my body —
which is but its symbol. And if I cannot know
the relation between the perceived object, that I
call my body, and myself, for which it is object,
am I likely to know the relation between myself
and God? When I conceive it as identity or
diversity my eyes are full of dust, my thought is
charged with materialism. I am dealing with a
symbol of myself and with a symbol of God, as
with two spatial objects. Only my spiritual ex-
perience, my moral exigencies, compel me to think


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 133


and act alternately as though there were at once^
identity and diversity. Of the transcendent basis
of that instinct I know (Newman would say) as
much as any man, and that is absolutely nothing.
All I know is a hunger that I can mitigate witli)
dust and bran, but whose plenary satisfaction Ij^
cannot imagine, however I try to heap incom-j
patibles together.

The desire for this spiritual immortality is, then^
totally distinct from that desire for a perpetuation?
of the present life which fits in with magical re-
ligion, and has for its object, not eternal life but
an endless prolongation of temporal life. To
great extent these desires vary inversely. To the J
young, vigorous, fortunate and inexperienced, the
thought of death is as intolerable as the thought
of sleep to an active man in the bright freshness
of morning. But night brings a change and a
desire for rest and unconsciousness. Men live
their fill and want no more of this life. Its end-
less prolongation would be hell. But in the
measure that they have seen through the illusions]
of this outward experience they are more likelyl
to wake to the need of another sort of experience/
As the eternal life that is in them asserts itself^
the thought of its extinction grows more intolerV
able and the faith in its perpetuity more im-)
perative. The immortality that spiritualism strives]


Digitized by Google


134 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


( to establish experimentally is simply a prolonga-
tion of this temporal life, in the absence of that
environment out of which it is utterly meaningless
and positively inconceivable. Moreover the quest

' is vitiated by the animistic conception of the soul,
as a sprite that enters the body at birth and leaves

[ it at death — i.e. as something spatial and material,
a shade of the body. Of spiritual immortality
there is not, and cannot be, any sort of experi-
mental or philosophical demonstration. Like our

I belief in God or in other personalities, it is a

\ matter of faith ; an inevitable, though not logically
inevitable, interpretation of spiritual experience.

That this faith comes late in the history of
religion is no more surprising than that a purer
morality and more spiritual religion should be

/ similarly delayed. It is none the less natural, for
man's nature unfolds its potentialities gradually,
the deepest and most fundamental being the last
to appear.

In early Israel the future life was but the sad
ghost of the present — " They that go down into
the pit cannot hope for Thy truth : The living, the
living, he shall praise Thee." Earth, and not
Shedl, was the place of divine rewards and punish-
ments. The people were one corporate personality,
in which all were responsible for the actions of
. each, and were punished or rewarded accordingly.


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 135


Before God, Israel was everything ; the individual
only a member of Israel. And Israel had the im-
mortal duration of a people, wherein to suffer or
gain by the deeds of its members. Not till the
personality and sole responsibility of the individual
came to be recognised, did the problem of Job and
Ecclesiastes become pressing. Experience showed
that God did not serve individual men in this life
according to their works. As yet there was no
thought of an adjustment in a future life. In Shedl
all were equal in their misery and darkness. The
schism between duty and happiness was viewed
/ as permanent — as a mystery to be accepted in
silence and faith, or else as a justification of moral
and religious scepticism. Later came the prophetic
hope of the triumph of Israel, captive and op-
pressed, over the Gentiles, and a reign of moral
and legal righteousness on earth. Here, then,
was the solution. The just of past ages would
rise in their bodies and enter into that Kingdom
while the wicked would be left in the gloom and
misery of Shedl.

In all this we must recognise the gradual comX
ing to consciousness of the moral sense with its/
postulate of immortality ; its tendency to shape!
the world of its desire out of the world that is, byl
some impossible rearrangement of life and history^
The prophet's dream was an attempted interpret


Digitized by Google


136 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


tation of the exigencies of his moral and religious
instinct; a seeking for a transcendent reality in
\ the lower plane of the present And the stronger
and deeper his instinct, so much the bolder and
grander his vision and so much the closer does its
fulfilment appear. The belief that its ideals must
be fulfilled, and fulfilled soon, is inseparable from
spiritual intensity and ardour. Thus prophet after
prophet proclaimed the triumph of Israel on the
morrow, and time after time it proved that the end
was not yet ; that the vision was but symbolic of
a reality beyond vision and beyond time.

As hope in the coming theocracy failed under
the repeated blows of disappointment, a new
generation of prophets left the world to its fate,
as incurably given over to the powers of evil.
Nothing was to be hoped for from the course
of events ; they believed no longer in any organised
plan that was working mysteriously, in spite of
its seeming crookedness, for the triumph of Israel.
For the later apocalyptic seers the kingdoms of
this world had been usurped by Satan. They
could be redeemed to God only through the con-
quest of Satan and his angels by the Son of Man
and His angels. God's Kingdom was not to grow
out of the earth but to descend upon it from above,
ready-made and complete.
This conception marks a further advance in the


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OP CHRIST 137


interpretation of man's spiritual exigencies. It
recognises that they cannot be satisfied in the ]
natural order, but only in a transcendent world and (
by an entirely new kind of experience. Nodoubt that J
transcendent experience is figured in terms of our
present experience. It cannot be otherwise if we
figure it at all ; and yet the unseeable object of our
faith must be figured if it is to appeal to our imag-
ination and govern our feeling and conduct. We^
cannot adapt our conduct to a world that is wholly (
unknown ; it must be known at least in symbol *J
in some fiction founded in fact and experienced
So far as we have mistaken this fiction for fact,
this symbol for the transcendent reality, we, too,
have been disappointed, like the prophets of old.

The first Christians expected the Son of Man to
appear in the clouds within a few days. After
repeated disappointments, they remembered that
God's days were a thousand years. In the year
one thousand the old hope kindled again, but now
we have practically abandoned all hope. Yet we\
have learnt something, namely, that any imagin- j
able vision of the transcendent can be no more than \
symbolic For this reason we are content with that '
in which Christ incorporated His religious " idea."
We are less likely to take it literally than any new
rendering of our own ; more likely to understand it j
as a mystery of faith and not as historical foresight


Digitized by Google


138 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


(c) RESURRECTION

The belief in spiritual immortality is, then, in-
, separable from spiritual religion ; though, like
J such religion, it will clothe itself in the visible
1 and imaginable forms of our present experience.
If in some sense it is Christ who "brought life
and incorruption to light," yet immortality, or
resurrection (for they were not then distinguished)
was already implied in the apocalyptic conception
of the Kingdom of Heaven. It was the belief
of the Pharisees, as opposed to the philosophical
scepticism of the Sadducees. It had permeated
r the uncritical multitude. Jesus did not reveal
[it, but almost took it for granted. Men, who
were not His disciples, were ready to believe
that He Himself might be John the Baptist, or
Elias, or Jeremiah, or one of the great prophets
risen from the dead. It was not from Him
that they had learnt this doctrine. According to
the Gospel He Himself was not the first to rise.
He and the prophets before Him had raised the
dead, and at the moment of His own death,
before He had risen, we are told that the graves
were opened and that the bodies of the just arose.
If S. Paul speaks of Him as the first-fruits of the
dead he means first in dignity and causality, not
; first in time. Our modern apologists, with their


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 139


idea of natural law and of miracle as a conquest \
of the power of nature by a Higher Power, by !
which conquest the existence of that Higher j
Power is proved, miss the meaning which Christ's /
resurrection had for those who had no idea of
natural law or of any other power in nature
than that of God. They speak as though the
Apostles had doubted whether God could break
through the determinism of nature and raise
the dead, and as though their faith had been
re-established by finding there was a power)
stronger than that of nature. This is to read later)
ideas into an earlier age.

In the first place, where there is no conception
of nature as a rigid autonomous system of uni- 5
formities, there can be no conception of the )
preternatural. God was the sole mover of the^
physical world, which had no power of its own '
to oppose to His. He moved the sun or stayed
it; He raised the storm or stilled it, as a man
moves or stays what is within his strength and


imposed rule of His own action, and not the^
result of a necessity inherent in things. When'
God departed from His usual course He had
no law or obstacle to overcome. The stilling'
of the sun was not more a divine action than its
motion ; no more an evidence of the existence


grasp. Order and uniformity


Digitized by


Google


140 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


of God. Departures from His usual habits were,
of course, signs and wonders, but, in our modern
sense, they were not miracles.

The Apostles had no doubt as to the resurrec-
tion of the body at the last day — a belief that
they had not derived from Jesus. They did not
regard it as a miracle in any sense, but, like
every regular sequence in nature, a rule of Divine
action, a part of God's freely chosen plan. In
that plan death followed upon sin as regularly
las, but not more necessarily than, night followed
(upon day. With the same regularity resurrec-
tion followed upon righteousness. It was only
because righteousness came through the conquest
of Satan, and the gift of the Spirit by the Son
of Man, that S. Paul speaks of Christ as the
cause and first-fruits of the Resurrection : " For
since by man came death, by man came also
resurrection of the dead," etc.

For the Apostles, the resurrection of Jesus
meant that He who had claimed to be the
destined Son of Man had been approved, justi-
fied and glorified by the Father, according to
the rule by which resurrection is the established
and almost natural consequence and proof of
justice. What they had doubted was His claim
to be the Christ; not the possibility of His
resurrection. When He rose, their trust in Him,


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OP CHRIST 141


in their own redemption with and through Him, \
in His whole Gospel of the coming Kingdom
and His own place in it, was confirmed and/
verified, not by an exceptional, but by a regular
occurrence. Resurrection is the fruit of righteous-
ness, and a tree is known by its fruit

Thus S. Paul argues : " If there is no resurrection
of the dead, neither hath Christ been raised." He
assumes that only the just rise ; he has to prove
that Christ has been so justified by God. If the
general law of resurrection be denied the premiss
of his proof is gone. " If Christ hath not been
raised then is our preaching vain, your faith
also is vain 99 ; there is no reason to believe that
Jesus was what He claimed to be. By His resur?
rection He had been proved and made the Christ.
Had He not risen, their faith in the coming King-
dom, the Son of Man and the resurrection of the
just, would have remained intact ; for it was not
derived from Jesus. Only their faith in His Gospel
of the nearness of the Kingdom and of His own
identification with the promised Son of Man would
have perished.

Yet it remains true that Christ brought eternal
life and immortality to light, not as a new doctrine,
but as a new fact. He brought it near, pressed it
home, made it tangible and spiritually effectual, just
as our unquestioning belief in our own mortality is


Digitized by Google


14* CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


made effectual by the death of those near to us, or
by some proximate peril of death, and, from a
mere assent of the mind, becomes an element in
pur character and conduct For the Apostles the
resurrection of Jesus was not merely that of one
, most near and dear ; but of one through friendship
^ with whom their own resurrection was secured. As
such, it transfused their whole character with a
j hope that no temporal sorrow could trouble, and
\ robbed death of all its terrors. It was this realisa-
* tion of immortality that filled the early Church with
a joy and enthusiasm that conquered the world and
sent martyrs rejoicing to death and torment

This, then, was the significance of the resurrec-
tion of Jesus for the Apostles. They had no doubt
about God, or the possibility of superhuman won-
ders, or the coming of the Kingdom, or the resur-
rection of the dead, but only about the Messianic
claim of Jesus ; and this doubt was slain as soon
as God approved Him in the established and uni-
versal way, Le. by raising Him up.

And what are we to think of this alleged resur-
rection, which was undoubtedly the whole inspi-
ration and strength of early Christianity, especially
as it was considered a guarantee for the speedy end
of all ? The harvest had begun ; the sickle was
thrust in ; the risen Christ was the first-fruits of the
general resurrection.


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 143


Here we are on difficult ground. But it is
poor faith that dare not look difficulties straight in \
the face. If the Apostles were mistaken as to the
immediacy of the End (and, of course, they were
so in some sense) may they not have been mistaken
as to the Christhood of Jesus, on which alone that
expectancy was founded ; and also as to His resur-
rection, on which their belief in His Christhood
was founded ? Might it not be put thus ? If He^
has risen, He is the Christ ; if He be the Christ, the
end is near ; but the end is not near, therefore He ]
is not the Christ ; therefore He has not risen. We J
have two interdependent facts — the resurrection of)
Jesus and the immediacy of the End. It is only \
by the sort of quibble that has made epochs out of
six evenings and mornings of creation that we can
pretend that the second of these facts has not been
disproved by universal experience. Is the proof
of the first anything like as strong as the disproof
of the second ?

The prophetic mind, as we have said, not only
embodies its spiritual exigencies and desires in
terms of present experience, in some glorified image
of the visible world, but expresses the impatience
and intensity of its desire in a foreshortening of
time. It translates its felt spiritual nearness to the
transcendental and eternal object of its faith into '
the image of things visible. So far as the prophet


Digitized by Google


144 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS ROADS


confounds the image with the transcendent that it
symbolises, he is doomed to disappointment The
whole apocalyptic imagery of the Kingdom of
[ Heaven ; of the Son of Man ; of the coming in
\ the clouds ; of the resurrection of the dead ; of
| the Judgment in the valley of Jehoshaphat; of the
immediacy of these events, is but imagery of the
transcendent and unimaginable ; of infinitely
\deeper realities. It is an attempt to figure our
(^spiritual requirements in material form ; to give
them a language in which we can think of them
and speak of them. For an embodied spirit they
need embodiment if they are to be brought to bear
on our present experience. It is the future moth
trying to make itself intelligible to the present
grub, in which it is dimly self-conscious and
preparing for its coming life and environment
The only manner in which the Christian Apoca-
> lypse can claim a greater finality and security
than the repeatedly disappointed visions of the
earlier prophets is in recognising the symbolic
K and inadequate character of all such visions. And
this recognition advanced towards explicitness
when the temporal interpretation of God's King-
dom gave place to the apocalyptic and quasi-
transcendent. It advanced still further with
Christ's insistence on the spiritual as the sole
eternal reality. It only needed a gradual cleansing


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 145


of the idea of spirit to complete the distinction!
between the imagery and the reality of the tran-
scendent.

Now if we agree with Liberal Protestantism in\
taking symbolically what the early Church took)
literally, we differ in taking it all as symbolic of 7
transcendental values and not of the moral order
in this life. In so doing we only go more deeply
into the original thought and get under its en-
veloping imagery; we do not go off on another,
line that is merely analogous. We hold to the\
transcendent Kingdom, and, while not discarding^
the imagery, we recognise that it is an envelope ^
and not the substance. Hence we claim to be\
true to the u idea " of original Christianity. Toy
this discrimination between substance and envelope ]
we have been forced by the advance of human f
thought ; by the progressive delimitation between
the territories of subjective and objective, between/
vision and fact.

We need have no doubt that S. Stephen saw
"the heavens opened and the Son of Man standing ^
at the right hand of God." We have none as to the 1
reality of such phenomena. We only ask : were /
they determined from without or from within ;
did they belong to that series of regular sequences!
which exists for all, or to that which exists for one'
alone ? Did they reveal what we call the external

L


Digitized by Google


146 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


world, or the spirit and faith of the beholder?
were they true to an outward or to an inward
reality?

When the mechanism of thought, on the one
hand, and of physical nature on the other, was
less understood, it was inevitable that the phe-
nomena of the former series should be frequently
I intercalated in the latter. To attribute our own
^psychological nicety to the first century is an
anachronism.

There can be no doubt as to the appearances of
Jesus to His Apostles after death. Without them
the faith, hope and enthusiasm of the early
Church are inexplicable. It is plain that the
Apostles intercalated the phenomena into those
of the physical series, yet not without some sense
of their otherness. He appeared and vanished
like creatures of imagination; He passed through
closed doors and rose in the air. S. Paul
says: "Have I not seen Jesus our Lord?" yet
describes that vision as existing for himself and
not for those round him, as belonging to the sub-
jective series of phenomena. His whole doctrine
of the spiritual body shows the same con-
sciousness. It is not the body that is sown
and destroyed, it is not the body of flesh, it is
a transcendental body, though figured in terms
of the phenomenal world. He figures it as, in


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 147


some way, growing out of the fleshly body, like )
eorn from the perishing seed — as related to it in
the same way that the transcendent order is re-
lated to the present order. And in all this he
was answering the question : " How do the dead
arise ? with what bodies do they come ? n He was
answering those who mistakenly supposed that
the resurrection phenomena had to be fitted in
with the physical series. He tells them, in effect^
that they do not belong to that series ; that they
proceed from an inward, not an outward, reality.
Yet, however subjective may be the imaginative
clothing of that reality, the reality itself is not \
necessarily subjective and private. The principles^
of truth and morality are inward, but not sub-
jective; they are valid for all and not for ont)
alone. God's Spirit works in every conscience^
and, if our various pictures of its workings are?
subjective, they are pictures of something within \
us that is independent of us and is the same
for all.

Shall we then be very far from S. Paul's thought]
if we say that the spiritual body is the imaginative >
embodiment of the spirit, the expression of the
transcendent in terms of natural experience ; just
as the material or fleshly body is that which ex^
presses itself in the phenomena of the physical
sequence ?


Digitized by Google


i 4 S CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS.


, - Among those images that exist for the subject
(alone we find the same difference as among those
fthat exist for all and constitute the external world.
^There are some whose sequence and grouping
answer to no observed regularity and evade our
calculation and understanding. Thus it is with
nearly all external phenomena for children and
savages ; and, to a great extent, for ourselves also.
Thus, too, our dreams and a large part of our
waking imaginations follow no intelligible order, j
and serve no end visible to our eyes.
f And then there are other phenomena, of both
\ series, that have meaning and purpose for us.
Thus, between a mere dream and a vision, there
is all the difference that exists between the casual
and the purposeful. The subjective imaginings of
the poet and painter are unified embodiments of
active aesthetic needs. They are the work of the
spirit, selecting its materials from the psycho-
logical stream of incoherent images, and ordering
them in view of an end. The spirit is seeking its -
spiritual body, an expression of its transcendental
end in terms of sensible experience. So, too, the
images in which the religious idea incorporates
itself are purposeful and not casual. They are
twice removed from the subjectivity of dreams;
first, as symbols relating to a reality; then, as
relating to a reality which, though inward, is in no


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 149


sense subjective, but even more objective thanj
what we call the external world.

Yet if poetic or prophetic vision be purposeful,
the purpose is not necessarily explicit and calcu-
lated. The strongest inspiration dispenses alto^
gether with the assistance of reason and reflection/
and embodies itself so spontaneously that the)
vision seems something given and imposed, and)
as such, is all the more liable to be ascribed to the
series of outward phenomena. A Dante often
seems to describe what he saw, though, at other
times, we feel that he is constructing something
for us to see. And between pure spontaneity
and pure elaboration there are all degrees of an
elaboration of the spontaneous.

The resurrection of the just is an integral part^
of. the apocalyptic scheme. We cannot treat the (
two apart ; they enjoy just the same kind of truth j
and reality — either the same literalism or the same\
symbolic value, be it moral or transcendent. Fory
the Liberal Protestant the resurrection is a symbol |
of the victorious survival of the morality of Jesus ]
in the Church and the World. For the Liberal^
Catholic it is a symbol of the survival of the<
spiritual personality of Jesus in that transcen-^
dental world which pervades the visible order. J

Those who accept it as a merely physical eventA
in this lower plane of phenomenal reality must, \


Digitized by Google


ISO CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


\ in consistency, accept the rest of the apocalyptic
vision in the same sense — must accept the advent
in the clouds, the great assize in the valley of
Jehoshaphat, as they were accepted by the Apostles

, and the early Church. What they actually saw
could only confirm them in their literalism — they
saw Jesus risen in physical form ; they saw Him
ascend to the physical heavens ; they saw those
heavens opened, like an awning, and Jesus stand-
ing at the right hand of the visible Father.

Now we may ask ourselves what spiritual signifi-
cance and value could these phenomenal happenings
possibly have for faith ? Apart from some truly
transcendental reality which they figure, and which
alone is the object that explains and satisfies our
spiritual unrest, what interest can physical pheno-
mena and marvels have for religion ? The physical
resurrection and ascension could, at most, be signs
and symbols of Christ's spiritual transformation,
of the fulness of His eternal and transcendent
life; they could never be its substance. Is it in
physical radiance and power and subtlety and
swiftness that our spiritual nature will find its
explanation and satisfaction ? Is it in the bric-a-
brac, rococo Heaven of the Apocalypse of S. John
that our souls are to find rest ?

\ Even, then, though the Apostles regarded the
resurrection phenomena as quasi-physical ; even


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 151


though they grasped the envelope and its content J
in the same hand ; yet the substance was given to \
them by faith alone. What their bodily eyes ;
beheld was but a symbol of a transcendent resur-^
rection, visible only to the eye of faith. The'
inward experience, that thus expressed itself, was^)
the recognition that the Divine Personality of !
Jesus — the Spirit that He was — cannot die ; that ,
it dwells in us all as something distinct from
ourselves, ever claiming our absolute worship and
obedience. In His mortality He had revealed the")
humanity and loving-kindness of that Spirit; He^
had clothed it in visible and fleshly form ; He had;
given it a human voice. Henceforth, in the inward
dictates of that Spirit, they recognised the " I say >
unto you " of the voice of Jesus of Nazareth ; and
the mysterious influence bore His human fornix
and features. ^ Plainly the symbol was accommo-
dated to their apocalyptic ideas, to their belief-
in a quasi-physical Kingdom of Heaven, a quasi-
physical resurrection of the just

They had no doubt that the just would rise )
from their graves. There is no valid critical reason ^
for denying that Jesus had predicted His resur- \
rection as the pendent to His self-sought atoning
death. All the trust and faith with which He had
inspired them bade them expect that resurrection,
which was to justify Him and His claim to be the


Digitized by Google


i$a CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


Son of Man. Their faith in His resurrection was
kindled from His own. Moreover, it was fortified
by the Scriptures. Even had He not appeared to
them at all they ought to have, and might have,
believed. This is the meaning of "Blessed are
they that have not seen and yet have believed,"
and "O foolish men and slow of heart to believe in
3II that the prophets have spoken." The appear-
ances seem to be viewed rather as a reward of faith
than as a proof of the resurrection ; to be a conse-
quence, not an antecedent, of faith, in accordance

jwith Christ's whole attitude towards miracles.

' While they doubted they did not see Him ; their
eyes were held. As soon as they believed they
saw Him.

Have we not, then, every reason to believe that
what they saw was a vision, the spontaneous self-
embodiment, in familiar apocalyptic imagery, of
1 their faith in His spiritual triumph and resurrec-
v tion, in the transcendental and eternal order — a
; vision that was externalised by the very intensity
of their faith, that seemed something given from
outside ; a vision that was purposive and symbolical
of a reality which, though inwardly apprehended,
was in no sense subjective ; a vision that was
divine, just because the faith that produced it was
xlivine?

Of course criticism will not accept all the details


Digitized by


Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 153

of these appearances; but it cannot deny their)
possibility and likelihood in relation to the men^
tality of the time and place ; and it must admitt
enough to account for the birth of Christianity^/
Moreover, we may not look for consistency of
detail between subjective expressions of tran-
scendent facts, as between accounts of the same
physical fact. Visions, besides, change even in the \\
first telling ; still more in, the second and third. /
But they can remain true to the inward fact they)
symbolise.

Thus, as visions, the resurrection phenomena^
take their proper place in the Apocalypse of the ;
Kingdom of Heaven. The alternative is to givei
physical value to the whole Apocalypse. The}
Resurrection thus becomes a visionary present-
ment of the truth of spiritual immortality; of thef
eternity and plenary expansion of that super-
individual life that lies hid in the depths of our^
being; that strives vainly to express itself in
terms of our psychic and organic life ; that is the
root of our discontent, not only with all that the
world gives, but with all that it could ever con-
ceivably give.

In the measure that a man is himself spiritual^
his faith in eternal life is more irresistible. The
faith of the Apostles in the resurrection of Jesus
was the product of their own spirituality and of


Digitized by Google


154 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


their estimate of the spirituality of Him who had
opened their spiritual eyes and ears; of Him
whom it was impossible that death should hold :
"Thou wilt not give Thy Holy One to see cor-
ruption."

{ Christianity is then, pre-eminently, the Gospel
^ of immortality and eternal life ; not of a shadowy
* survival in Hades; not of a prolongation of a
/ kind of existence that could never conceivably
\ satisfy our deepest spiritual need ; but of that
^ spirit-life itself in its full self-consciousness. It
brought home to men, as a felt and effectual
/' reality, the notion of another life, which robbed this
[ of all value except as related to it and illuminated
by its nearness. It tempered and neutralised the
/ proximate pessimism of the despairing spirit with
: an alternate optimism. It sweetened life's bitter
waters with the wood of the Cross. It was a
Gospel for the afflicted in soul and body, to whom
it promised no temporal alleviation, no social
paradise after an unending process of develop-
ment, but eternal rest for their souls in the bosom
of God. To thrust immortality into the back-
ground, as a dim possibility that has not much
to do with our Christianity; to make the reign
of morality on earth, in ourselves and in society^
the whole meaning of the Kingdom of God and
of eternal life, is to abandon, not religion, but the


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 155

religion of Christ ; it is to substitute a religious ^
morality for a moral religion; to make what is
conditional, principal; what is principal, subsi-
diary; it is to insist on what unites us to God
rather than on union with God, whereof morality
is but one of many conditions. The emphasis of\
Christianity is on the whole life of the Spirit,
viewed as a divine and eternal life, to be fully
revealed only in its proper transcendental environ-
ment

If this truth did not originate with Christ, yet it]
was He who quickened it to active life and brought f
it home to humanity. Of this quickening His own ^
realisation and vision of eternal life was the)
principal cause. To this was then added that
realisation of it which, through the power of His
personality, He communicated to His Apostles,
issuing in their conviction as to His resurrection,/
and in the visions that were at once the effect and;
the confirmation of that conviction. Then, too,
the tidings of the nearness of the Kingdom
could not fail to bring a vivid realisation of ;
the truth to a generation that had lost all faith
in the present life; that had no belief in the
panacea of progress ; that viewed the World as
given over to the Devil's dominion, to some iron
law of failure and disappointment ; that looked
for remedy only in an " act of God " that should


Digitized by Google


156 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS- ROADS


sweep away the old order at a stroke and bring in
- the new. This pessimism was the richest soil in
( which the hope of immortality could take root; and
it was the concurrence of such despair of this life
with such faith in the next that gave Christianity
its initial impetus.

If, however, the attitude of the minority, who
live deeply and fully, towards the present order is
one of despair, the general mind is subject to
periodic waves of elation and depression. At
present the world that is heard and seen in public,
elated with the success of science and the triumphs
of invention, confident that what has done so
much will do everything, is blind to the appalling
residue of human misery and to the insoluble
problems that are coming up slowly like storm-
clouds on the horizon. Once more we are told
that life will work out the cure of its own evils
and change the world into Paradise; that progress
will now run its course uninterruptedly, and will
not, as ever in the past, be thrown back in spray,
like a wave from an opposing cliff. Such a period
is not one in which the Gospel of a transcen-
dent life will meet with enthusiastic faith. Re-
ligion itself is apt to come to terms with the
temper of the day. Immortality is thrust into
the background. Christian civilisation takes the
place of the Kingdom of God ; and morality, that


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 157


of eternal life. The Churches chatter progress, j
and the secular and clerical arm are linked t
together in the interests of a sanctified world-
liness.

(<*) THE IMMEDIACY OF THE KINGDOM


For the Apostles the resurrection of Jesus was a J
new pledge of the immediacy of the End — of the >
day when He who had risen and ascended should j
come in the clouds to proclaim His resurrection
and Christhood to the whole world, and bring
human history to an end. And it was this sense
of immediacy, more than anything else, that,
changed the belief in eternal life from mere assent
to an effectual motive, productive of a new senti-
ment and a new manner of living.

That the world passes away for each and for all
— not only for man but for all humanity — is the
motive for that Christian detachment which sets ■
its affections on things above and not on things of J
earth. As a truth of reason and experience we do
not doubt it. But only in rare moments, when <
we realise it, does it exercise its due influence on ]
our affections and conduct, and show us life's true
values and its illusions in a flash of light Many
a change in our character dates from such moments
and is sustained by their repetition. Apart from


Digitized by


Google


158 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


them, we are tangled in dreams and throw our
whole interest into them ; and, if there be no tran-
scendent life, we do well, for we are then but
dreams ourselves. If we look to a waking ; if we
take our dreams with a question and a reserve, we
shall spoil the little that we have. Let us rather

\ try to believe that our race is eternal, and that its
final beatitude on earth is the justification of all
our moral endeavour — that conscience is no more
than the specific instinct which compels us to work

\for the survival of the species Homo sapiens.

It was, then, the conviction that the Kingdom
was at hand, even at the very door, that the har-
vest was ripe, the first-fruits already gathered in,
that brought the multitude of believers face to face
with the illusions of time and the realities of
eternity, and transformed their whole outlook and
sentiment.

And was it all no more than a providential
mistake, to which Christianity owes the impulse
that still carries it along ?

Yes, so far as this temporal nearness of the
visible "parousia" was confounded with the spiri-
i tual reality of which it was the symbol ; so far as
, the apocalyptic vision was referred to the series of
outward phenomena. But such visions are the
creations of an inward reality that faith seizes
through them. " All truth," says Isaac Pennington,


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 159


" is a shadow except the last — except the utmost ;
yet every truth is true in its kind. It is substance
in its own place, though it be but a shadow in
another place — for it is but a shadow from an
intenser substance — and the shadow is a true
shadow, as the substance is a true substance."
This we might well say of the successive efforts of
religion to picture the transcendent Each pre^
sentment is more substantial than its predecessor,
but the last alone is substance, and this, man can ,
never picture while he lives and thinks among )
shadows.

It is by dimness that the painter gives the imA
pression of distance; what is clear seems near. J
The clearness of the prophet's insight, the keen- j
ness of his desire, make him feel that his ideals and '
visions are on the point of realisation. What he
thus translates from spiritual into external values
is his own nearness to the transcendent in the stated
of exaltation and inward tension. He feels \
Heaven pressing upon him. He gathers up time
into the present Now of eternity. Hence the eye
of his reason is magnetised by his interest. He
can only see the signs of the end ; earthquakes,
wars, pestilences, social confusion and chaos — and
when are they not to be seen in a world like this ?
while he is blind to everything else — to the
forces of life that are ever in conflict with those of


Digitized by Google


160 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


/death. But the truth that he struggles with is the
brevity, the comparative nothingness of human
duration ; the need to live as though death were

^ knocking at the door. A clear intuition of the
magnitude of the eternal and transcendent trans-
lates itself imaginatively into an unending tract of
centuries, contrasted with one dying day; and
practically into a certain detachment of the soul
from things transitory.

Now this practical expression is subject to
illusions, like to, and in part dependent on, those
of the imaginative expression ; and these illusions
are answerable for a not unfounded prejudice
against transcendental, other-worldly religion of
every kind.

The conviction of the nearness of death will
affect men differently. The purely unspiritual
man may either be reduced to a state of sullen
apathy, or, as has been observed in times of pesti-
lence, driven to snatch the last crumbs of pleasure
and excitement that life has to offer. The man of
principle, whose religion is simply implicit and
who looks to no life hereafter, will fulfil his duties
perhaps more punctiliously than ever, with the
exception of that of providing for his future years.
Should the conviction prove mistaken his temporal
career may suffer to some extent, but, on the
other hand, the experience may have been a source


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 161


of moral insight and strength well worth the tem-
poral loss. If, however, he believes in and realises
the life to come, there is always some danger lest
his contempt of the world lead him to think too
lightly of its duties. And this danger besets him
in a lesser degree at all times. Whence a certain
de facto contrast between the moral and the reli-
gious temperament Neither scepticism nor faith)
takes the world seriously enough.

Now it cannot be taken too seriously if the!
seriousness be grounded on truth. But it is pos-f
sible that a good deal of moral seriousness rests on
illusion, just as does the immoral seriousness of the ;
frivolous. It rests on the tacit assumption that ;
this life is everything and an end in itself— a
coherent self-explanatory whole ; that it is work-
ing by a process of necessary development towards
a perfect harmony ; that the human race is eternal,
and absolutely significant apart from the transcen-
dent. This is, no doubt, a useful and fertile illusion
and has produced genuine moral fruit in abun-
dance. The moral, like the religious, sense must
have some Weltanschauung, some, imaginative
scheme of things, if its energies are to have
definite direction. And, plainly, we should live
to some extent as though this illusion were truth.
In the conflict between life and death, progress
and decay, our energies should be wholly on the

M


Digitized by Google


ifo CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


side of life. Not, however, because we believe that
life in this order can ever be finally victorious over
almighty death and oblivion, or that our noblest
efforts are not doomed to eventual defeat, and to
utter sterility for remoter epochs ; but only because

/ every moral effort has a transcendent and absolute

> value apart from its success or failure, and one
that the certainty of eventual failure enhances
rather than diminishes. A moral act faces in-
wards and outwards ; it belongs to the transcen-
dent world and to the visible ; it has a soul and a
body; an imperishable and a perishable value.
So far as it is the latter that moves and stimulates

( us to exertion, it is an illusory motive. Its effect
is to attach us to the transitory; to immerse us

l wholly in progress ; to make earth our heaven,
and humanity our God. The inward spring of all
this heroism and effort is, no doubt, spiritual and
transcendent; but it is not thus interpreted and felt
The eye is fixed on a dream of progress brought
to perfection at the end of some final century.
Hence a curious leadenness and solemnity, that
often spoils moralism of this description ; especially
when it goes hand in hand with a deterministic
view of the world, a rigid exclusion of every sort
of contingency.
Against this sort of seriousness the sceptic rises

in revolt He cannot contemplate the withering


Digitized by


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 163


immensities of stellar time and space ; he cannot)
read the ominous testimony of the rocks ; he can- j
not study the records of dead religions and civilisa-,
tions ; he cannot ponder the chaotic conditions of
the present, and yet take the dream of triumphant )
progress seriously, or see more than the struggles ^
of a drowning crew, trying to keep afloat as long
as possible, before yielding themselves to the deep
of oblivion. At most, morality may be the best
way to keep afloat If the sceptical view be hope-:
less, in default of faith, at least it preserves £\
sense of proportion, and holds an element of truth. I
If it favour a far lower worldliness than that of
the moralist, it is relieved by a certain contempt of
the world it embraces. It can better afford to
look at life with both eyes and pronounce it very
bad and not likely to be better. It has not to
imagine a harmony where there is nothing but
discord ; or to look for a single aim, uniting a
chaos of conflicting and independent ends.

And this modern and Western scepticism is only
a return to the grey wisdom of the world-weary
East Five centuries before Christ it had learnt
that the world's miseries were incurable, that its
blessings were illusions, that its process was no
progress, that the best cure was to die to it with-
out fear of any resurrection. Immortality — the
endless prolongation of this experience— is the


Digitized by Google


1 64 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS- ROADS


Buddhist's hell. Of any better experience he has
no explicit hope, though it is impossible not to
interpret his Nirvana as an attempt to express
the transcendental life by way of negation-^-and, so
far, rightly. Unlike ours, his morality and asceti-
cism are inspired by the conviction that life is evil
and not good. He seeks not to live more fully,

\ but to die more fully ; not to keep afloat, but to
sink once and for all to the very bottom. His
terror is lest, through his senses, he should
become attached to the torture -wheel of life.
He dare not die with a single attachment that
would draw him back to earth again and be a seed

^ of resurrection in his soul. Small wonder that the
passive Buddha sits gazing with quiet amazement
at our ant-like turmoil and activity, our hopes, our
dreams, our moral strugglings with the impossible,
our terrible seriousness about shadows : " Are ye
still without understanding ? 99

If Buddhism be not explicitly a religion — for
its very gods and heavens belong to the world of
illusions and are still under the curse of existence
— its scorn of the world implies something in
man that the world can never satisfy ; a hunger
that can find no food ; an ideal of truth and
reality that revolts against illusion. Reason has
brought it to the edge of a chasm that faith fears
to leap. Hence its pessimism is final and not


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 165


merely provisional. It can find no justification for
the effort of progress ; nothing but condemnation.


It is the Christian faith in spiritual immortality)
that changes this ultimately into a provisional/
pessimism, and balances an absolute detachment \
from the interests of the world by a provisional'
attachment to them. A provisional pessimism is
the foundation of the Christian type of religious
character. It is the soil in which the seed of the
Gospel takes root and flourishes. Despair of\
this life is the counterfoil of our hope in another. '
It was no Buddhist, but the profoundly Christian
Michael Angelo, who wrote —

Fain would I sleep ; fainer be dead as stone,
While Wrong and Shame on every side abound ;
Stark, sightless, senseless ! God, what a boon !
Then wake, oh wake me not. Hush t Not a sound !

And the same note is struck by every great Catho-
lic saint or hero whose pessimism, like that of the
stern sculptor, reveals itself, not so much in con-
temptuous aversion from the world, as in a vigorous
losing fight against the overwhelming forces of
evil. In deference to the optimistic Gospel of ;
progress, Christians are disposed in these days to)
modulate or silence this strident note of pessimism ;
to feel it as something excessive and mistaken, '
excusable in disorderly and catastrophic periods.
But it is vain to deny that this note is as true to


Digitized by


Google


166 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


the Gospel of Christ as a cheerful belief in the
world is discordant from it For Christ the world
was as good as finished and its final state was one
of universal failure and illusion, not one of a
proximate perfection that was all but Paradise.
Well for the poor, the afflicted, the oppressed,
who had lost all hope in it! Woe to the easy,
the prosperous, the optimistic, who believed in it
because they had themselves found it a soft place!
From these the truth about it had been hidden ;
to those it had been revealed The sharp dis-
cipline of bitter experience had taught the ignorant
multitudes what the deepest philosophy learns only
after much thought and labour. Hence it was the
poor who were ready for the Gospel of another
life — not for the Gospel of social development

It is equally clear that the joy and hope of the
early community rested on a basis of pessimism
as to this world and its prospects. It was just
tottering to its ruin, and, in the hope of a near
eternity, its light and momentary tribulations were
borne cheerfully and gladly; its gravest events
and concerns were not taken seriously, nor as
laden with all that importance attached to them
by the moralist, whose faith is in life, whose hope
is in development In this sort of lightness of
touch, which may easily be excessive, the Christian
had something of the sceptic's unseriousness. It


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 167


enters as an ingredient into that sort of charity
which seems too easy-going in the eyes of the
Pharisaical rigorist — bearing, believing, hoping,
enduring, all things ; into that improvidence about
temporal concerns, that indifference to injuries,
that contempt of good or ill report, that Jesus
commended both by word and example. What
else could result from a conviction of the badness
of the present life, combined with a vivid faith in
the nearness of a better ? Men will take a ghost
seriously only till they find it is but a shadow.

Yet this emphasis on the other world, however^
necessary as a corrective, needed to be checked f
and balanced by a just estimate of the meaning/
and value of time in relation to eternity. He
who said " Blessed are the poor, the hungry, the]
suffering," spent His life in relieving their needs
He who said "The night cometh," gave it as a
motive for working while it was yet day ; He who
said " The Kingdom is at hand," was urging men
to repentance and righteousness. At the Judg-
ment the reward is not for those who have success-
fully turned earth into paradise and accomplished
the impossible, but for those who have striven to
alleviate its miseries; who have fought a despair-
ing battle against the overwhelming forces of evil
It is not so much the actively evil, as the slack\
and apathetic, that are excluded from the King*


Digitized by Google


168 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


dom. Life, therefore, gains a new importance as
; the arena of the great " temptation "—of the con-
^ flict between the forces of Darkness and Light,
Death and Life, Earth and Heaven; a conflict
where Satan must first be victorious in the present
order before God shall arise to scatter His enemies
and establish His Kingdom. It is not so much
' by their efforts, as by their consequent failures and
J sufferings, that the saints are to hasten God's final
, intervention. In a way they are indifferent to
success or failure, so long as they have striven
with all their might In that striving their spiritual
personality is created and deepened ; their union
with God strengthened ; their place in the tran-
scendent order determined.
r Far, then, from relaxing moral effort for the
alleviation of earth's misery, the Christian faith,
rightly apprehended, intensifies and purifies it
Those who fight only for victory grow slack when
f victory is hopeless. Those who fight for hate or
for love will fight till they drop. Such has been
/the desperate energy with which typical Chris-
; tian saints have combated life's evils, moral and
physical — the energy of those who are masters
and not slaves of their purpose ; whose provisional
attachment to life's interests is subordinate to an
ultimate detachment; who use the world as' not
; using it ; who strain for success and smile when


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 169


they fail. Like Christ they serve ; like Him theyl
are lords and masters of what they serve. They
are not immersed in the clay which they are
moulding but stand well outside it and above it. J
But this faith has not always been rightly N
apprehended. In the early Church, if the tem-
poral nearness of the End was a stimulus to the
wise, it was, to tfye foolish, a plea for apathy and
idleness — to those, namely, who looked on success
and victory as the sole justification of labour and
conflict, and who would waste no care on a )
vanishing world. Even the wise, so far as
they grasped the symbol and the truth in
the same act of faith, and confounded the tem-
poral with the transcendental and absolute near-
ness of the Kingdom, justifiably neglected provision
for a future that would never come. They did not
occupy themselves in far-reaching social and
ecclesiastical schemes, with a view to cutting the
roots of evils to come in later centuries. Suffi-
cient for the day was the evil thereof. The chance
of a morrow was slight And even when the
thought of temporal immediacy had lost its influ-
ence, through delays and disappointments, the
realisation of an eternity, near for the individual,
was too often misapplied to the prejudice of
energy, and the approach of night taken as a
reason for wasting the last hours of the day.


Digitized by Google


170 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


But this sort of abuse and misapprehension is
heartily condemned, not only by Christ Himself,
but by the saints of all ages, who have been
/characterised by a burning activity and zeal in
( well-doing. To the pure moralist, engrossed in
conduct and progress, a good deal of their activity
may seem misplaced. But in spite of many orien-
talisms and ascetical fallacies in its application,
the principle of Christian action makes for the
fullest expansion of man's transcendental and
spiritual nature in every direction. It recognises
I the Divine, not only in conduct and in relation to
1 man's moral progress, but also in thought and in
feeling; it lives for the aesthetic and intellectual
as well as for the ethical "bught" and ideal. It
is the foe of falsehood and ugliness as well as of
v wickedness ; it sees in all of them the principle of
evil, death and decay. It turns in despair from
this world to the transcendent in search of the
synthesis, not only of duty and happiness, but of
truth and loveliness, and of goodness with both.
It is through religion that it unites these interests
and finds courage to struggle for their harmony,
though it can only succeed in diminishing their
discord.

The truth, then, that Christianity symbolises,
under the temporal nearness of the End, is a fun-
damental principle of the best spiritual life — the


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 171


principle of an attachment to the world's highest
interest, at once strengthened and subdued by an
attachment to an eternal and transcendent life,
symbolised by the Kingdom of Heaven. The \
abuse of this truth, to the prejudice not only of /
the rights of this life but of the proper develop-
ment of spiritual personality, is answerable for a
complete inversion of view as to the relation of
religion to the world. So far as religious ethic !
identifies our duties in life with the Will of God, it
asserts a neglected principle of Christianity. But
so far as it identifies the moral with the religious \
life and the Kingdom of Heaven with the ideal ^
term of an endless social and moral process, it is 1
a flat contradiction of the Gospel of Christ. Far
from freeing us, it ties us hand and foot with the
iron bands of duty, to that which sooner or later
must follow the law of mortality. Humanity is
as mortal as any son of Adam. Be it a hell or a
Paradise, the world shall pass away like a dream
or a cloud, or the track of a ship in the waters.


(#) THE SON OF MAN

The Kingdom of Heaven ; His own Christ-^
hood ; the temporal immediacy of the End, were
the three organic constituents of the Apocalypse !
of Jesus. Of these the last was in some sense


Digitized by Google


172 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


principal in point of motive power and inspiration,
though His Messianic secret was undoubtedly
the central and solely original factor. The first
belonged to the apocalyptic tradition ; the last,
to the preaching of the Baptist

Now this view of the immediacy of the King-
dom cannot be accepted as of literal and phe-
nomenal value, but as a vision symbolic of a
transcendental reality that does not admit of
literal expression ; and we must accord the same
kind of truth and reality to the organic whole
as to each of its parts. We know, experimentally,
that, in the year 30, the End was not nearer in
time than was the first advent in the year 1879
B.C. If "near" stood for 1879 years, it was not
used in its literal sense. And though it does
not admit of the same sort of experimental
evidence, we are equally clear that the apocalyptic
I delineation of the Kingdom of Heaven is but a
\ symbol and vision of the transcendent We
cannot possibly stop short and suppose that the
image of the Son of Man belongs to the order
of literal and phenomenal values, any more than
does the Great Dragon or the other mysterious
beings that figure in the same vision.

It is well to reflect that the same must be said
of "the Heavenly Father" and of all our ideas
and images of God which do not, like our ideas


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 173


of things within experience, correspond to some-
thing within that order of experience. They
are to all intents and purposes " visions " of that c
transcendent reality which alone answers to our
spiritual needs and instincts. If truth be the
correct anticipation of a possible experience, it
is our spiritual needs that are true to God, not;"'
the ideas and images in which we try to explain
those needs in terms of present experience, and
by a heaping together of incompatibles. Yet if
the anticipation of phenomenal experiences, im-
plied by a literal acceptance of these images, be
incorrect ; if, so taken, they are illusory ; they ,
have none the less a certain practical truth, in /
that they enable us to anticipate and control
spiritual experiences and to adjust our conduct '
to the transcendent world. They are not arbitrary
but natural symbols; as effects are symbols of
their causes and parts of their wholes. However
assisted or impeded by art and reflection, it is
the transcendent that shapes its own symbol and
image in the human mind. Spontaneously every
spiritual need and movement pictures its own
object and cause in the terms of imagination.
Were they arbitrary signs like x and y> one would
be as good as another But the Father of Jesus >
is a far richer and truer symbol of God than the
War-God of early Israel. It is the result of


Digitized by Google


174 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


/progressive self-revelation on the part of the
[ transcendent. As the spirit grows in man his
symbolism grows truer and more spiritual. "Truer,"
because it gives a fuller anticipation and control
of spiritual experience. But truer also because,
though unlike in kind, it is, in another kind, more
analogous to God — as a symphony might resemble
a picture either more or less.
I So with the hypotheses of physical science,
/ which are fictions founded in fact. Not one
i of them is absolutely true as resting on a com-
I plete comprehension of the whole universe. But
one is truer than another as yielding a wider
anticipation and control of experience ; and that
it does so means that it is, in some greater degree,
like nature — not merely analogous, since the
fiction and fact are in the same order. Aided
by art and reflection, they are suggested, criticised
and improved by experience. They are self-
revelations of physical nature; to which science
is related as is theology to Divine revelation.

It is not merely that in acting as if God were
our father we shall gain certain beneficial results,
but that God has revealed Himself to us under
this figure, whose analogous truth is the explana-
tion of those results. Nature is not actually a
machine nor an organism, but, were she not so
inclusively or equivalently, those fictions could


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 175


not yield such fruitful results. They must at least
be founded in fact And so with aH our symbols
of the Divine, as far as they are spiritually fruitful.

Moreover, as regards the transcendental, we are x
not as blind men trying to build up the colour-^
world in terms of music. We have a dim sense )
of light and darkness whose purpose we do not
rightly understand, whose potentialities we cannot
imagine. In our spiritual life we have the rudi-
ments of a transcendent experience. We know
at least the sort of stuff that Heaven is built
out of, as music is built out of sound. We can
say : As a symphony is to a sound, so is the
unknown world of colour to this dim sensation
of light. We can say : As nature is to a clod,
so is the spiritual world to our own spirit We\
have three terms for our analogy. Else religion )
would have no raison d'itre. We do not need, v
we cannot desire, to adjust ourselves to the \
absolutely diverse — to what cannot affect us in \
any way, If there be not a Divine element in
us, the Divine does not concern us.

Por those that reflect, it is no doubt advisable
that they should recognise the symbolic character
of their conceptions and images of the Divine,
lest, finding them discordant with the natural
understanding, they should reject them as void
of all value. But the vast majority take the


Digitized by


Google


176 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


1 symbol and reality indistinctly as one thing, with-
i out any prejudice to their spiritual life. Even
fairly educated believers accept, not only their
symbol of God, but nearly all the apocalyptic
imagery of the Christian faith, as so much literal
fact. It is so indistinguishably associated with
their religious life and experience, that they cling
to it with the same faith, and put it on the same
plane of reality. For them it is revealed pheno-
menal fact Only here and there, where the
imagery has come into patent conflict with know-
ledge, is it discarded — along with the transcendent
truth it symbolises. People who no longer believe
in devils go on believing in angels ; they deny
Hell but they accept Heaven. The literal accept-
ance of the former offends their rational or ethical
sense. They are sure about God ; but not so
sure about the Trinity. This transitional state
i between consistent literalism and consistent sym-
( bolism is distressing and dangerous. What retards
the process of liberation is just the fear of losing
the experience and guidance so long associated
\with simple literalism. But only when the libera-
tion is completed will it be possible to go back
with safety and profit to the integrity of the
Christian revelation, and realise' its truth as a
guide to spiritual experience and a vehicle of
transcendental meanings


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OP CHRIST 177


Refine and purify our conception how we will, j
we think of even our own spiritual self under (
the analogy of an individual bodily thing, a plexus ;
of sensible phenomena. Strive how we will, we N ;
think of God in terms of our own spirit so con-^
ceived. And we think of the relation between
them under the analogy of some relation that
obtains in the world of space alone. Identity or
diversity are but figures and visions as applied
to the transcendent Their truth or falsehood is
practical. We must act and feel, in some respects,
as if there were an identity ; in others, as if there
were a diversity. Till we see what corresponds^
to our symbols, we have no idea of what answers^
to the relation of those symbols to one another. J

And so when we come to % the relation between])
Jesus and the Son of Man ; between the Son of
Man and God. Of these three terms, two are;
symbols of the transcendent

The necessity of finding in Jesus a German )
Liberal Protestant, guided entirely by the light of
a sweet, nineteenth-century reasonableness, requires
us to ignore everything in the Gospel that suggests^
the visionary or the ecstatic, even though to do so
make the narrative incoherent and unintelligible.
When He called Himself the Son of Man, we are ^
told it was because He felt Himself so entirely
human — the Man par excellence. When He called

N


Digitized by Google


178 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


I Himself the Son of God, it was because all men
were sons of the common Father ; and the Man
par excellence was, therefore, the Son of God par
excellence. A more drastic and objective criticism
has shattered the beautiful simplicity of this tidy
little system, obtained by a liberal use of the
pruning-hook.

' We do not need the Johannine and Pauline
writings, we need only to read the Synoptics in
the light of contemporary apocalyptic conceptions,
to learn that Jesus considered Himself as of a
superhuman nature, and as differing in kind from
other men. It was a secret He eventually shared
with His Apostles ; it was the secret of His ascend-
ency over them ; it was a faith with which He
inspired them. If the least in the Kingdom was
above the greatest born of women, above the chief
of prophets and saints and martyrs, He Who knew
Himself to be the greatest in the Kingdom could
hardly regard Himself as a mere prophet — a man
among men.

f The " Son of Man " was a heavenly being,
; mediatorial between God and man. He was the
Power of God, by which Satan's power was to be
broken and the Kingdom of Heaven to be estab-
lished on earth. To Him all judgment was
committed by nature. Like the Spirit of God,
He was conceived vaguely, and, without prejudice


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 179


to the Divine unity, as an emanation from God
the Arm of the Lord. What trouble later ^
theology had with these emanations is testified by )
the Athanasian Creed — which attempts to satisfy
reason while preserving the apocalyptic vision in
its integrity, and which presents no difficulty
when we remember that our rational concepts ot
the Divine are not less symbolic than our imagin-/
ative visions.

Jesus believed that He was destined to be re-^
pealed to all the world in the clouds of heaven, as £
the Son of Man. Probably, if not certainly, He^
understood this destination as more than moral
or decretorial, as an inherent potentiality of His^
spirit Already He spoke and acted as God's
plenipotentiary. He forgave sins, because He
knew Himself to be the "Son of Man" to whom
all judgment had been committed ; He judged the
sacred Law ; He called men to Himself ; He bade
them imitate Him ; all this points to a sense of
present, and not merely of prospective, super-
human dignity. Not till He was glorified, howA
ever, would He be technically the Christ and]
assume the full functions of the Son of Man.

Now it is idle to contend that this was some^\
thing secondary in the self-consciousness of Jesus ;?
a little touch of the megalomania so frequently
attendant on genius and on the realisation of


Digitized by Google


i8o CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


unusual influence and power; a fiery tongue of
fanaticism, shooting up from the pure flame
of faith. He does not begin as an ethical teacher

, or a prophet, and then warm up to new and as-
tounding pretensions. His attitude is the same
throughout, and is just such as consists with the
secret consciousness of His Messianic dignity.
That consciousness is the cause, and not the effect,
of His soul-compelling power. His belief in Him-
self makes others believe in Him. The saint,
the prophet, is ever self-obliterating. His strength
is God's, not his own. He draws men to God, not
to himself. He says " Thus saith the Lord," and
not " But I say unto you." He claims to be only
the servant of all, not also their Lord and Master.
If Jesus believed Himself but man, He was no

L saint But He felt He was more. And even
those who did not share His Messianic secret felt
and yielded to the authority with which He spoke.
They asked themselves: "What manner of man
is this ? " What won their love and affection was
the lowliness and gentleness of one whom they
felt, through an irrepressible emanation of His
own self-consciousness, to be mysteriously great
and strong and holy.

We must recognise, then, that Jesus was con-

' scious of Himself as in some way mediatorial be-

\ tween the transcendent world and the souls of


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 181


men; that He felt, not merely His own union ^
with God, but the power of uniting other souls to (
Himself, and, through Himself, with God ; that J
this mission was imposed on Him from above ;
that He was set as a magnet for souls, which,
magnetised through Him, should draw and magne-
tise others, till the whole of redeemable humanity,
in Him, with Him, through Him, should be drawn
back to God. This was the nature of His spiritual^
exigency, the bread for which He hungered — to
accomplish the great atonement ; to overthrow sin
and Satan ; to establish the Kingdom of Heaven •/
to banish the night of time ; to bring in the day
of eternity. No doubt this desire to redeem, this
power to draw and to magnetise, belong to the
spiritual nature as such, and to every man in the
measure that his spiritual life has become explicit.
Its source is the Divine nature itself. But no
ordinary man, however possessed by the Divine
Spirit, could feel himself to be the sole redeemer,
mediator and source of redemption and mediation,
in no need himself of redemption and atone-
ment Of this inward experience of Jesus, in
which He felt Himself identified immediately with
the Divine Source of Redemption, we can say
nothing. We may rest satisfied that, when He\
claimed to be one with the Father, it was in no /
merely moral sense of accordant wills; but had


Digitized by


Google


1 8a CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


reference to some mystical experience, some in-
tuition of sameness in otherness.

Every such spiritual experience tends to trans-
late itself into symbolic ideas and images, and,
where strong and intense, to invest these images
with the objectivity ascribed to dreams and visions.
And the nature of the vision, as is proved by a
thousand examples, depends on the religious ideas
and images already to hand. These make the
religious language of the seer ; the words in which
he must embody his experience for himself and for
others. The current religious language in which
Jesus thought and spoke was that of the prophets
and apocalypses. The Kingdom of Heaven ; the
Son of Man, the Messiah ; the Kingdom of Satan ;
the final catastrophe — these were the categories,
under which His spiritual experience had to be
ranged. Hence His sense of universal and supreme
mediatorship between God and Man, of identifica-
tion by love and sympathy with each of the terms
to be united, could find no apter symbol than that
of the prophetic Son of David, united to and
" possessed " by the Heavenly Son of Man, or Son
of God.

To transfer to the transcendental order the
relations that obtain between the imaginative
symbols of spiritual experience, is the same sort of
fallacy that projects our scientific hypotheses into


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 183


the physical world ; or gives a real existence to \
our abstractions and general ideas. All we can j
say of such fictions is that they are founded in
fact and reality. But where that reality is tran-
scendent and spiritual, our fictions have only the
truth of analogy — of parallels in another order of
reality. Hence all our theology of the Incarnation^,
deals, not with transcendent realities, but with the^
visions or revelations in which they are symbolised.
Its purpose is to preserve the original force and
usefulness of that symbolism ; to secure its correct
rendering for other ages and peoples ; to make it
coherent with itself and with the equally symbolic
ideas of rational theology. We simply do not,
know what our own spirit is, or what the tranv
scendent world is to which it aspires, or its relation
to that world and to other spirits. What we
do know is the impress they leave on a mind_
adapted to the world of physical phenomena.

The value of all these symbols and hypotheses
is in the extent to which they anticipate and 1
control that order of experiences on which they \
are founded ; and every new success deepens that \
foundation and strengthens our faith. The faith
in His own Christhood that Jesus, by the power of
His personality, was able to plant in His Apostles,
has been continually reinforced by the experience
of those who have found Him, in effect, their


Digitized by Google


1 84 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


Redeemer, the Lord and Master of their souls,
their Hope, their Love, their Rest — in short, all
that they mean by God. * For them He has be-
come the effectual symbol or sacrament of the
transcendent, through which they can apprehend
the inapprehensible — the Eternal Spirit in human
form.

^ The Messiahship of Jesus is, then, the symbolic
^expression, in terms of apocalyptic imagery, of
\ certain transcendent realities — of the spiritual ex-
perience of Jesus as to His own relation to God
and to men ; and of the experiences of Christians
as to their own relations to God and to Jesus. It
is a visionary presentment of a transcendental
truth, which we can present to ourselves in no
other way ; which we see per speculum et in cenig-
mate % but not facie ad faciem.

Theology is right in trying to make our symbol-
ism coherent with itself and to preserve it from
corruption. But when it strives to make it coherent
with rational knowledge and outward experience,
it forgets its symbolic character, and tends to per-
vert either revelation or knowledge, or both, in
the interests of an impossible synthesis. In the
orthodox and metaphysical formula of the God-
head of Christ we find, at most, a negative intel-
lectual value combined with a positive pragmatic
value. According to the latter, we are to bear


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OP CHRIST 185


ourselves towards Christ as towards a person posO
sessed at once of a perfect human and a perfect )
Divine nature. According to the former, we are
not to think of Him as two persons in only moral
agreement; nor as a human person with extra-
ordinary supernatural endowments; nor as a Divine
person under the illusory appearances of humanity;
nor as the Divinity substituted for a human soul
in a human body. In short, the formula excludes
every previous attempt to find a positive concep-
tion of the relationship of human and Divine in 1
Jesus/and to justify, intellectually, the Christian
sentiment and attitude in regard to Him. There
is little doubt but that those previous formulas,
with all their incoherency and inadequacy, were
attempts to justify Christian experience and feel-
ing. It is plain that the disciples felt the strange \
and superhuman in Jesus as well as the. human ;';
that they feared as well as loved ; that they found
Him irresistible in His authority and power over
their souls ; that they reverenced Him as an in-
carnation of conscience, as a source of conversion
and spiritual strength; that He possessed and
governed them as a lover is possessed by the
beloved.

It was some experience of this sort that the^
early Church strove to understand and explain.
But the finally accepted formula is rather a state-


Digitized by Google


186 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


ment of the problem than a solution. It insists
on factors that the earlier formulas had neglected,
and shows their insufficiency. But its solution, by
way of a distinction between Nature and an un-
known something called Personality, to which we
can give no more positive content than to an
algebraic simply leaves the metaphysical prob-
lem open and forbids further useless discussion.
It prescribes a way of speaking and a way of acting
in accordance with traditional sentiment and
practice.

It is, however, possible to get some more positive
idea of the " Messianic self-consciousness of Jesus"
from the psychological side. The metaphysical
categories of ousia and hypostasis were far from the
Jewish mind. The psychological category of "pos-
session" was familiar, and has, in our own days, re-
ceived a coherent interpretation. The prophet was,
for the time being," possessed * by the Holy Spirit ;
the demoniac by the Evil Spirit For the moment his
psychological personality was submerged, and its
place taken by a foreign personality, that governed
his speech and action, and used his organism for its
own purposes. We have come to understand the ex-
perience thus interpreted and to bring it under law.
Normally we are solicited, prior to every free action,
by various inclinations, motives and passions, and,
amongst them, by the moral or religious motive, that


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 187


is, by the voice of conscience. At this stage they are,
as it were, outside us — objects of possible volition*
They inhibit one another's actuation by their in-
compatibility. To choose one of the proposed
actions means to allow it to absorb the central and
greater part of the field of consciousness ; to push
its competitors to or over the margin of conscious-
ness; to throw away our liberty as regards this
particular attraction or impulse and yield ourselves
to its force. In short, we allow it to possess us and
actuate itself through us. Yet, in so doing, we are
free ; we have not been captured but have yielded
ourselves ; we can undo what we have done and
release ourselves from the force that, for the
moment, is incarnate in us. It is but a moment
in the history of our personality, colouring and
coloured by all that has gone before and that is
still confusedly present in the background.

But there are abnormal states, where we are^
carried away by the violence and vividness of some f
strong desire or passion, to the utter exclusion of \
every other consideration, and to the complete )
obliteration of our whole past We forget who we \
are and where we are ; we are reckless, if not mad,
for the moment; we are literally possessed, and
beside ourselves, with anger, or fear, or enthusiasm,
and become incarnations of those passions. The
psychological " I," that speaks and acts, is not the }


Digitized by Google


188 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


" I " that was, but is personified anger or fear.
Thus the fanatic is one who is carried by his fiery
zeal to a contempt and oblivion of every rational
and moral consideration. His state is morbid,
because the religion that absorbs his personality is
not a pure religion, and often because the absorp-
tion is not due so much to the strength of the
object as to the mental weakness of the subject —
to his inability to hold out against perfectly normal
solicitations. There are, however, solicitations of
such strength as to overcome the resistance of the
strongest and best-balanced mind. If it be an evil
solicitation, it is the sufferer's misfortune but not
his fault. If it be a good one, it is a grace but not
a merit. In either case the normal psychological
personality is extruded and the " I," which speaks

\ and acts, is that of a good or evil spirit incarnate

\—to use the Jewish category.

The perfection man aims at, but never attains, is
to yield himself freely, at all times, to the solicita-
tions of conscience and of the Spirit of God, so
that his motives and interests shall be subject and
serviceable to the Divine and universal interest.
This subjection may become habitual, but it is
always free and revokable. The solicitation may
be strong to the point of enthusiasm, but it is not
overwhelming and destructive of his psychological
personality. He is one thing; his conscience


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OP CHRIST 189


another. He may confidently say, "Thus saith <
the Lord," but he will not say, " / say unto you."^
That could be the utterance only of one whose \
normal psychological personality had been ex-5
traded by the overwhelming strength of the Spirit ; '
of one who was literally God-possessed or con-
science-possessed ; in whom the " 1 " that speaks is
simply conscience incarnate. To say that such a ;
person is not free is to forget that he does not even )
exist ; that the only personality there, is a divine
personality, in possession of a human nature, and
realising its unattainable divine ideal. That per-
sonality is free with the freedom of God and within
the limits of conscience. Outside those limits it
cannot go.

This, perhaps, gives us some little clue to the^
Messianic self-consciousness of Jesus ; to His '
strange spiritual power over the souls of men; to I
His claim to be a revelation of the "humanity and'
benignity of God," which men would not believe
in till they saw and felt it ; to His claim to forgive |
sins, to give eternal life, to call men to Himself as >
if to God, to be their Lord and Master as well as
their servant And, if this be so, is not the breach
between the Synoptics and the Fourth Gospel more
apparent than real? is not the latter merely the
substitution of Hellenic for Jewish categories in
order to explain the same unique — we cannot say


Digitized by Google


190 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


, inconceivable — experience ? ^Could not the Spirit
incarnate in Jesus say : " I and the Father are one,"
M He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father," " I
am the Truth and the Life," " He that hath the Son
hath the Life " ? Could not an apostle have hailed
Him " My Lord and my God " ?

/ Thus when we freely yield ourselves to the
solicitations of the Spirit, we yield ourselves to
the Personality that was incarnate as Jesus,
whose humanity and benignity are revealed to us
through that Incarnation, and, making ourselves
members of Jesus, we lend our humanity, soul

J and body, to the service of that Personality.

We know that He did not escape the charge
of fanaticism on the part of His nearest and
dearest; still less, no doubt, on that of the
sceptical Sadducees or of the more or less
fanatical Pharisees. It is renewed by many of

! our modern Gospel-critics. But it is a charge
universally levelled against any man who is
enthusiastic and intransigent in the cause of
truth and justice. In such a charge, however,
we have evidence that He showed symptoms of
that monoideism which is good or evil according
to the idea or spirit in question, and according as
the will yields to an irresistible or a normally
resistible solicitation. The strongest man may v
be possessed and driven by the Spirit of God,


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 191


but between him and the fanatic there is nothing)
in common, for the rule of the Spirit is the per-i
fection, not the destruction, of rational life. '


(/) GOD AND SATAN

If the nearness of the Kingdom and the Messiali-
ship of Jesus are the substance and centre of the
Christian revelation, various other subsidiary-
apocalyptic ideas need interpretation. We are x
confronted by an acute dualism of God and J
Satan in the quasi-physical other-world that
does duty for the transcendent order. The con- v ^
flict of Good and Evil in the present order is but 1
the reverberation of a battle, raging in the in-\
visible world, between the hosts of the Lord and '
those of Satan. When Jesus saw Satan fall as
lightning from Heaven, it was a sign that the
power of Evil on earth was practically killed in
its root. The remnant of Satan's army still
lingered in hiding. But they knew that their
hour was come and that the Kingdom of God
was upon them. They fled in terror at the word
of Jesus, knowing that He was the Christ, the
Heavenly Son of God. In this view Satan was<
the cause of sin ; sin, the cause of mortality ;\
mortality, the cause of sickness, sorrow and suffer-
ing. Opposed to Satan and his ministers was


Digitized by Google


193 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


God's Holy Spirit and His angels. As sin was
a " possession n by Satan, so righteousness was a
u possession " by the Holy Ghost Man was free

1 to yield his members as servants either to Sin or
to Righteousness. He could not be his own ; he

/must yield to one "possession" or the other.
Thus man and the world are regarded as a terri-
tory for whose possession the invisible powers
are struggling. Jesus beheld all .the kingdoms of
the earth usurped by Satan; all men born his
possession, as being the children of those who had
yielded up their liberty to him. He saw a world
that was tied hand and foot and incapable of
delivering itself; He saw men the slaves of sin,
longing in vain to be free. Such was the pessimism
of the Apocalypse.

/"Yet the struggle was not over. There was an
ever dwindling band of just men, possessed by
the Divine Spirit, free servants of God, who, in

/blind faith and trust, flung themselves desperately

(against the victorious forces of Evil, confident
that, sooner or later, God, moved by their suffer-
ings in His cause, would arise to scatter His
enemies and establish His Kingdom. Here was

'the optimism of the Apocalypse.

The conflict has, therefore, a visible and an in-
visible side — as it were, a body and a soul. At
root it was one between *he Spirit of Evil,


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 193


manifest in sin, death and sorrow, and the Spirit
of Holiness, manifest in righteousness, immortality
and joy. At the final crisis God, moved by the
sufferings of His Saints (and of His Messiah)
would pour forth the fulness of His Spirit on all
flesh, before whose power the Spirit of Evil, after
a final and desperate struggle, would fall. The
Son of Man would gather the children of the )
Spirit into the Kingdom and drive the children \
of Satan into Hell ; and thus the kingdoms of
this world would become the Kingdom of God
and His Christ, and be delivered from the usurpa-
tion of Satan.

So far is this Weltanschauung removed from our
modern way of taking things that, though it is
written broad over the face of the New Testament,
the present-day Christian does not see it there as
a whole, and is simply perplexed by the several
fragments as he comes across them. All this
casting-out of devils he could dispense with, as
with something irrelevant and intrusive. We no
longer regard a man's sickness as the fruit of
some sin, by which he has become possessed
of the Devil. Nor, if it be a congenital ailment,
do we ascribe it to the sin of his parents, or some
foreseen sin of his own. We seek physical causes ^
for physical effects. We have recourse to the '
doctor and not to the exorcist We do not
o


Digitized by Google


194 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


believe that man is naturally immortal, and mortal
only through sin ; we do not believe that physical
Immortality and resurrection are the due and
quasi-natural consequences of righteousness.

And yet is our arrangement of the Whole any
the less a fiction because it is a better one,
because it unifies a greater extent of experience ?
Have we got, or shall we ever get, to more than
a symbolic explanation of the great world drama
— the conflict of Good and Evil ? As compared
with the Babylonian myth of Marduk and Tiamat
and earlier legends, the apocalyptic view is in-
spired by a far deeper moral and religious sense,
and its true values are to be looked for in the
depth of the human spirit and not in the under*
standing. Take it as sober phenomenal reality
and it must prove, as it has so largely proved, an
obstacle to intelligence and to a true comprehen-
sion and use of the natural order. Take it as an
effort of the spiritual life to express itself in the
imagery of a certain place and time, and it still
serves its purpose of registering that spiritual
attitude, of fixing a direction of will, a character
of sentiment — an entire " psychosis."
• That good men cling to its literal truth, as they
still do to some extent, is due to the fact that it is
so intimately bound up with such a psychosis ;
with those deep spiritual experiences that they


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 195


cannot imagine incorporated in any other form.
To admit that their God, their Satan and their
Heaven are symbols is, for them, to deny the
reality of their spiritual life — the firmest reality
they know.

Imagine it how we will, life is a struggle between^
good and evil influences. Within ourselves we^
find a disinterested, forceful love of truth, good- ;
ness and beauty and their synthesis, that is/
thwarted and opposed by other forces within and )
around us. In the measure that we are spiritual,
we realise that this love is doomed to disappoint*
ment and starvation in the present order; that
it is overwhelmed by anti-spiritual forces. We are)
ourselves dominated by a strong anti-spiritual/
individualist, self-centred tendency, the foe of )
order and universal love. We see this selfish,;
narrow, grasping temper wrecking the happiness/
of mankind at large and making hell all round *
it Something in our spirit — its very craving for
truth and justice — tells us that the prevailing
divorce between inward and outward happiness is
a flaw and disorder in life; that the suffering of the
innocent is an evil, and that the whole world is
drowned in an ocean of such injustice. We cry
out for the triumph of the spirit ; for deliverance
from this body of death; for the end of this
conflict, the conquest of this dualism; for the


Digitized by Google


196 CHBISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


Kingdom of God. And in our very despair we
fight more vehemently, confident that, somehow
or other, spirit must win ; and that our efforts
unite us more closely with the transcendent, where
we shall find what we have here sought in vain,
and in the measure that we sought it. Little
( as we know of the transcendent, beyond our
<jown dim spiritual experience and its imaginative
symbols, we feel that the world and its history
come from, and return to, that hidden realm,
and get their ultimate significance thence; that,
so far as the conflict between Good and Evil is
moral, and not merely phenomenal, it refers to
an absolute, eternal and, therefore, transcendent
order.

If the ultimate good, that determines moral
right and wrong, were merely the eventual
blessedness of our race upon earth, we should
have no reason to feel that life's drama had its
transcendent side. But the absolute, imperative,
superhuman, super-temporal interest, to which the
dictate of conscience (ethical, intellectual or
aesthetic) points, translates itself inevitably into
the picture of a battle in Heaven for the souls
of men.

Dependent on the sense of the transcendent
. and universal significance of our free acts, is the
sense of sin. No doubt it has been perverted by


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 197


unworthy, non-moral, or even immoral, conceptions \
of God as arbitrary, vindictive, ambitious and ]
cruel. Against these perversions a remedy hasN
been sought in a purely rational and wholly in-
adequate interpretation of the experience of guilt. j
The view of sin as merely a trespass against our]
own higher interest and that of society, and, still )
more, the view of it as a mistaken judgment, not 1
as a free self-determination, have weakened the
sense of sin and left a real element of our inward /
experience without expression or explanation.

In apocalyptic thought, sin was an act by which^)
a man yielded himself to the possession of Satan ;
sided with all the forces of Evil against the forces\
of Good; became an enemy of God and ex-
posed himself to the destruction that would at last
overwhelm the hosts of darkness. The signifi- N \
cance of the act lay far less in the injury that :
might result to the doer and to society — results
difficult to calculate and realise, and often im-
perceptibly minute — than in its absolute value as ^
a defiance of the spiritual and transcendent, an
act of hostility to God and of solidarity with j
Satan.

j I do not think it can be denied that this view
; recognises an experience which belongs to religion
even in its cruder forms, and which grows stronger
i and purer as man rises morally and spiritually. v If


Digitized by Google


198 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


religion adjusts him to the transcendent, sin is the
essence of irreligion, and the forgiveness of sin

(the central aim of religion. Sin belongs to religion,
not to morality. It is a severance of wills — Divine

i and human — a breach of union. Morality is but
the subject-matter of the quarrel. ^ Similarly,
Righteousness, in the sense of Justification, ac-
ceptance by God, is a religious transcendental value,
of which morality is but a condition or occasion,
and Divine grace or mercy the cause.
v ' By a loss of the sense of sin man's whole
spiritual tone is impoverished, v the significance of
his life and conduct loses all relation to eternity,

-it bears only on the relative and transitory, on
that which ultimately does not matter. He no
longer lives in the transcendent but is wholly im-

[ mersed in himself and in humanity. It was a gain
to recognise morality as the will of God and to
bring the two interests together; to purify and
moralise religion ; to supernaturalise and sanctify
morality. But v to substitute morality for religion
was to fall back to earth again, after having
essayed the sky ; it was to rob morality of all the
reinforcement it derived from the religious motive,
from faith, hope and love ; to leave its idealisms an
easy prey to utilitarian criticism ; to destroy the
only motive that will make men fight, not less but
more eagerly, in the face of ultimately inevitable


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 199


defeat That motive is faith in the transcendent
value and significance of our moral efforts, inde-
pendently of their success or failure.

[g) THE IDEA OF ATONEMENT

That the sufferings and persecutions of the\
saints were "precious in the sight of the Lord,"/
that they moved Him to arise in their defence ancj
overthrow the Kingdom of Satan, is a dominant^
idea of the Apocalypse. Yet it seemed as though \
some mysterious law of justice demanded an over- 1
balancing of the demerits of the wicked by the(
merits of the saints, before God could intervene. /
The hour of that intervention was hastened by\
works of repentance, by deeds of righteousness^
by sufferings for justice' sake. It was retarded by
new sins and offences. Thus the various post-
ponements of the great Day were ascribed to sin
and laxity. The repentance preached by the^
Baptist and by Jesus was not merely to prepare
for, but to hasten, the Kingdom — to take it by^
storm.

But if the unmerited sufferings of all the just)
had a certain atoning value, those of Jesus were(^
not merely those of the most just of men, but J
those of the Messiah — of the Heavenly Son of
Man incarnate in the Son of David. He was to


Digitized by Google


aoo CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


{ the just as a shepherd to his sheep. Like a good
shepherd, He gave Himself to be torn by the wolf
that they might escape: "If therefore ye seek
Me, let these go their way." His death filled up
the cup of Satan's iniquity and moved God to
pour forth His Spirit for the final destruction of
the works of darkness, preparatory to the End.
It was a weight thrown into the balance that the
sufferings of the saints could never have turned.
It was only through the blood of Jesus that the
cry of Abel's blood was heard.
; Now were sin but a moral disorder, bringing
no sense of guilt or estrangement from the Divine
Will, the remedy would be largely in our own
power. It would be a mistake to go on crying
over our past moral failures. What is past is
/ irreparable. The only sensible sort of repentance
( would be a new life. But, in the light of religious
experience, sin is an estrangement of spirit from
spirit, the breach of a mutual bond. It is not
. enough to stretch forth our hand, we need an
5 assurance that it will be grasped. We may long
to be on God's side again, but till we are accepted
we feel cut off from the organism of the spiritual
world, the mystical body; we feel ourselves
identified with, and under the doom of, the forces
of Evil. Hence the idea of atonement has passed
over from the lower or magical to the moral and


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 201


spiritual religions. In both, man feels guilt and j
sin, and needs a means of recovering the lost '
friendship of the gods; or of being restored to
the communion of the spiritual order.

Atonement belongs to spirit as such. The\
Spirit's purpose and aim is universal and not ,
private. Its present life is a war against the
internal discords of the world; against sin and
sorrow ; against the inevitable limitations of the
finite and transitory. It is in the world as a
healing, harmonising power. All who yield thenA
selves to it are, so far, one and the same ; they live/
a common life and serve a common end. They \
are members of one mystical body, manifesta-/ 1
tions of one transcendental life. The Spirit seeks
to draw all men to itself; it invites their voluntary
adhesion ; it is ever soliciting them through their
conscience. But when, by sin, they tear themselvesA
from the Eternal to cling to the transitory and J
corruptible, they become spiritually dead and un- j
able to respond to the inward voice, which grows'
feebler with every moment of alienation. It is
impossible not to feel that those who are nearer
to the Spirit acquire some authority and power in
the transcendental order : '* Whose soever sins ye
forgive they are forgiven unto them " was said of the
Apostles when they received the Spirit that Jesus
had, so to say, earned for them by His death and


Digitized by Google


302 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


j blood. The Spirit can quicken the Spirit dormant
\ in the sinner, can stimulate the will to a new
»act of adhesion, can make its reconciliation a
matter of experimental certainty. In this sense
the sufferings of all the just, united with the
central sufferings of One Who, in His own ex-
perience and in the faith of Christianity was so
closely identified with God, are naturally con-
sidered to have an atoning value. Jesus has
the plenitude of that magnetism which draws
sinners back to God and magnetises them in their
turn.

The idea of atonement is a corollary of that of
spiritual solidarity; of the mystical body whose
members serve one another ; of the " communion
of saints." The spirit-life is essentially a life of
all in each and of each in all. Union with God
means union with all that are God's — whether
actually or potentially.

Life is a poor and narrow thing if we lose sight
of the great principle revealed to us in the doctrine
of Christ's atonement

(h) THE PHENOMENAL AND THE SPIRITUAL

( If there is, in apocalyptic thought, a sharp
dualism between Good and Evil, God and Satan,
the Spirit of Light and the Spirit of Darkness,


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 203


that between Spirit and Matter is far less sharp )
than in Greek thought or in the Pauline-Johannine
writings. The notion of God as the subsistent
idea of Being ; of the transcendent world as built
up of subsistent class notions purified of all content
that would determine them to time or place ; the},
conception of spirit as the subject and cause off
our abstractions and generalisations and, therefore, \
as itself something indifferent to matter, time/
and space — all this metaphysic was as far removed
from apocalyptic thought as it is from our own.
It belongs to that so-called realism, which were
better called idealism in that it regards ideas and
abstractions as the ultimate act and reality, as the
cause of the concrete, contingent, illusory and
potential.

Finding general ideas immutable and indiffer^j
ent to time and place and content, it endows/
them with a mysterious eternity and ubiquity, and \
bids man despise the particular and concrete in
his quest of truth and beatitude. It forgets that
the divisions and headings, under which the library
of our experience is unified and catalogued, are
entirely subordinate and ministerial to a know-
ledge of the contents of the books it contains.
These it despises as contingent and mutable ; and
finds the only worthy object of knowledge in the
headings of the catalogue. The categories of the


Digitized by Google


904 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


understanding are the reflex of the transcendent
and eternal world in the flowing waters of the
contingent and material

The extent to which this conception of the tran-
scendent has influenced later Christian Mysticism,
through Alexandrine and Scholastic philosophy, is
notorious. As a symbolism of the transcendent
order it had, no doubt, some advantages over the
simple imaginative visions of the Apocalypse, and
was in many ways morally and spiritually fruitful.
But in its contempt of the particular and material,
in its violent antithesis of matter and spirit, and
in the moral corollaries of that antithesis, it was
altogether unfortunate. It was in no sense an
hypothesis suggested and moulded by spiritual
experience, but a thought-out system, imposed
upon it It affected to be a translation of re-
vealed divinity into terms of current philosophy,
and to possess actual, and not merely symbolic,
truth ; while, in fact, it was a translation of one
symbolism into another.

Apocalyptic thought knew nothing of these
hypostatised abstractions, these animated class-
notions. It knew of earthly bodies and spiritual
bodies ; bodies of flesh and bodies of glory. Its
heaven, its angels, its very God, were clothed in
bodies of light Of a disembodied immortality it
had no notion. The two orders were not wholly


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 205


discontinuous ; far less were they violently opposed, j
One language fitted them both.

Here an important truth is safeguarded that
is imperilled by the Alexandrine and pseudo-
Dionysian symbolism. As M. Le Roy has pointed
out, analogy needs three terms in order to arrive^
at a fourth. If we have no experience whatever^
of the transcendent, analogy cannot help us. If 5
I had no experience whatever of light, I could
learn nothing from the analogy. As a symphony
is to a sound, so is a painting to light ; I must at
least have the rudiments of vision. So, too, I must
have the rudiments of the transcendent life in
myself if I am to desire an integral knowledge and
enjoyment of it, and to figure it to myself in
analogies drawn from other orders of experience.

Of this rudimentary transcendence, the HghtA
and glory of the apocalyptic vision are a symbol. J
This world and the other belong to one system,
one self-explanatory whole ; as do body and soul
They act and re-act. They have a common
history to some extent The visible is patterned
in the invisible ; the battle on earth is the double
of a battle in the skies.

All this symbolism preserves the importance of j
the interests of the present life and their bearing
on eternity; and condemns the aloofness and
apathy of abstract spirituality and of that ultimate


Digitized by Google


ao6 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


pessimism which is favoured by a contempt of the
material and concrete. It preserves the motive for
struggling to make this world what we know it
can never be. It assures us (to use a hackneyed
quotation) that " life is real, life is earnest," just
because " the grave is not its goal."

It is in and through what we call the material
order, the world of sensible phenomena, that the
■ spiritual element of our being is brought to con-
sciousness and tries vainly to know and realise
itself. It acts on, and is affected by, the sensible.
Nor can we conceive it as conscious, out of all
relation to the sensible. Have we a right to con-
clude that, because it is strangled and blinded
by its present medium of self-expression, it can
express itself without any medium at all ? Were
not this to fall into the fallacy of abstract and
negative spirituality again ? We know that each
sense opens up to us a new phenomenal order that
else had been non-existent for us, and that by it
our spirit has been liberated indefinitely. What
had it been without the world of colour or of
music? What might it not be were other
worlds opened to its consciousness? And what


I probability is there that we are not blind and deaf
; to a thousand worlds around us? If, then, the
only transcendent life we know is thus related
' to the phenomenal, what right have we to assume


Digitized by


Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 207


that the satisfaction it seeks means a release from, )
and not a fuller embodiment in, the phenomenal ;^
or that the transcendent order involves the nega-
tion, and not the completion, of the; phenomenal ? J
Empty spirit of all relation to the phenomenal,
and what is left but a word ? And does not the
phenomenal enter, however vaguely, into the
essence of that life whose rudiments we experi-
ence now, but whose expansion and satisfaction
we know is impossible within the limited potential-
ities of that fraction of the phenomenal world which
is revealed to us by our five poor senses? I own
that I cannot find in myself any longing to escape
from all that is beautiful and wonderful in physical
nature, or in human life and interests, but rather a
desire to enjoy a great deal more of the same with-
out its now inevitable limitations ; nor could I be
consoled by the contemplation of subsistent class-
notions, ranged harmoniously under that of all-
embracing entity. I feel sure that the apocalyptic]
Heaven, with all its colour and music, and light)
and happiness, i sjt tr uer symbol of man's spiritual ,
aspirations than the cold constructions of intellect- V
ualism, in that it escapes a false antithesis of the
spiritual and the phenomenal, and recognises the \
one as an inseparable correlative of the other. The
transcendent is not the spiritual as opposed to the
phenomenal ; but the whole as opposed to an infini-


Digitized by Google


S08 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS ROADS


tesimal fraction of possible spiritual experience. Our
spirit-life, our disinterested love of the universal
Good, our unqualified worship of the Right in con-
duct, thought and feeling, is just the life of the
Whole that is immanent in every part ; that seeks its
own universal end primarily and that of the part
inclusively ; that can never be satisfied by what is
an end only relatively to the part, but clamours
for the universal and eternal Good. Our mind is
the mind of a part, not of the Whole. It is
I built for the service of our temporal life and im-
v mediate ends, and can never comprehend the
spirit and its universal end ; yet it possesses a
, fractional knowledge of the transcendent, which
; it can perfect by analogies derived from its own
narrow field of phenomena.

Incarnation, embodied immortality, sacraments,
external worship, a visible Church ; all are founded
on this correlativity of the spiritual and pheno-
menal; on the idea that the spiritual utters itself in,
and is addressed through, the phenomenal ; that
they are as inseparable as subject and object;
that pure spirit is a pure abstraction. As our
mind is tied for its categories to that small part
of the phenomenal field to which our bodies
belong, it has no proper idea of the transcendent
Whole and its relations, nor can it determine how
the spirit in each of us is related to the univer-


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION OF CHRIST 209

sality of Spirit But judged by the test of life
and fruitfulness, the symbolism of apocalyptic
imagery is truer to our spiritual needs than that;
of Hellenic intellectualism.


Digiti


zed by G00gle


XIII


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION AND THE
CATHOLIC CHURCH

NO UGH has been said, then, to show that


-L--/ the religious "idea" of Jesus, embodied in
apocalyptic imagery, possesses an abiding value,
in no way dependent on the literal worth of that
imagery. A true revelation of the whole in terms
of an infinitesimal part, of the transcendent in
terms of present experience, is not possible. Yet
the Whole, the spiritual, lives in us and moves
us toward a universal End or Good, that exists
for the consciousness of the Whole and not for
that of the part. So far as we are freely to accept
and co-operate with the instinct of the Spirit, we
must have, at least, some symbolic notion of its
nature and end ; some fiction explanatory of the
movements that we experience within ourselves —
a fiction suggested by them ; verified and criticised
by its success in intensifying and enriching our
spirituality. Such visions and revelations com-
mand our faith by their liberating appeal to our
spiritual need, spirit answering to spirit. They


210


Digitized by


Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION AND THE CHURCH an


explain us to ourselves ; they set free the springs'
of life. Such was and such is the power of thej
Gospel of Jesus. It was a vision of the tran-
scendent that fixed a manner of feeling and living
whose fruitfulness was simply a matter of ex-
perience. It was a schema, a way of taking things,
as true to ultimate reality as any expression of
the Whole in terms of so small a part can be. It
had the practical truth of a correct guide to our j
present religious experience ; and, as the sponta-
neous creation of His own experience, working
with the religious language and categories of His
time and tradition, it had the representative value
of an analogy.

Obviously there is no universal language, and
the Gospel Idea had to incarnate itself in that
of a particular time and place. But concrete^
imagery is of more universal significance than >
conceptual language ; the doctrine of repentance j
is less generally understandable than the story
of the prodigal son. For universal and abiding
symbolism an apocalyptic vision is far less cor-^)
ruptible than a theology. Moreover, the Idea\
symbolised is one of universal validity and within
the spiritual experience of all. For these rea-
sons the contingency and particularity of Gospel j
language and imagery detract but slightly from j
its permanent and universal value for humanity.'


Digitized by Google


212 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


It embodies and evokes a development of the
religious Idea that cannot be outgrown till men
have outgrown Christ

It is a Gospel for the poor and afflicted, who,
under the discipline of experience, have ceased to
place their hopes in the present life ; and for those
to whom reflection and observation have revealed
the iron law of failure and mortality, which dissi-
pates the dream of salvation by progress. It
stands or falls with faith in another life, in which
the stifled spirit can realise itself in another order
of experience. It is religion primarily and ex-
plicitly ; it is morality inclusively, because morality
is an exercise of the spiritual life under contin-
gencies peculiar to our present partial experience.
"But when that which is perfect is come, that
which is in part shall be done away." When the
work is finished, labour ceases ; weary man enters
into his rest

( By faith man walks consciously in the light of
eternity, and sees earth and its burden as from a
distant planet — a speck in immensity. And yet
he labours for the alleviation of its sorrows as
they can never labour who need the assurance of
success. The dulness of the most ordinary toil,
the bitterness of the hardest lot, is illuminated by
the consciousness of its transcendent significance.
Translate the Gospel vision into merely ethical


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION AND THE CHURCH 213


values ; tell us that eternal life is moral life,
and the Kingdom of Heaven the eventual triumph
of social reform ; and lo ! the gourd whose leaves
have so long shaded mankind from the sickening
heat of the desert is withered down to the roots.

When we compare the religious idea of Jesus A
as it emerges from the most drastic and impartial j
criticism of the Gospels, with that of the Catholic
Church ; when we consider the type of spirituality
exhibited in her saints, canonised or uncanonised ;
when we listen to her classical preachers and study
her ascetical tradition; it is impossible to deny
that she has been true, not only to the religious
idea of her Founder, but to the very form of its
expression. Nay, her fidelity to the letter; her
unwillingness to tamper with what has been the
vehicle and sacrament of much spiritual life
and experience ; her refusal to admit the symbolic^
character of the apocalyptic vision; her deter- j
mination to treat it as revealed truth of the/
phenomenal order and make it a criterion of his-)
tory and science — all this has gradually weakened^
her influence and brought her into conflict with
the modern mind.


Yet, in this again, she is only blindly faithful to j
the past The distinction she ignores is one that/
has slowly been forced upon us by our growing
knowledge of the laws of the human mind.


Digitized by


Google


214 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


Its recognition in earlier centuries would have been
miraculous. To refuse any longer to recognise
it, is to imperil the Christian religion; and this
perhaps is the main contention of the Catholic
Modernist He certainly does not desire to sub-
stitute any conceptual translation of that vision
for the vision itself. He knows that any transla-
tion of the kind would still be a symbolism. He
feels that the original self-embodiment of Christ's
Idea is a work of Divine inspiration, and preserves
it for us more truthfully than can any rendering of
it But he would have its symbolic character ex-
plicitly recognised, and its meaning rendered by
each age in its own terms.

From all that has been said it is easy to see the
difference between the real development of an idea
and the logical development of premisses. An
idea, like Religion or Christianity, presents itself
to consciousness first as a dull craving, or a blind
instinct making for an end, that is yet unknown,
but is progressively revealed as the instinct tries
to understand and realise itself. Thus the idea
of the End, to which instinct drives us, comes
gradually to consciousness by a process of develop-
ment In all stages of its embodiment it is the
same idea that is manifested under some aspect
or another. The criterion of these developments
cannot be the idea itself, which is only slowly


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION AND THE CHURCH 215


coming to consciousness and can never be appre-
hended exhaustively. It can only be the satisfac-
tion or dissatisfaction of that need to which the
idea corresponds. Thus we do not criticise a
civilisation by some celestial archetype, but by the
expansion and enrichment of life ; not by its near-
ness to the unknown End at which it aims, but
by its distance from its point of departure.

Hence, in regard to whatever additions or sub- \
tractions the revelation of Jesus may have under- \
gone in the course of time, the pertinent point is j
whether they have corrupted, or have preserved, or \
even integrated the Idea of the Gospel. Avowedly
the aim of the Church's dogmatic labour has been*
to preserve the original sense of revelation incor-^
rupt It is to the collective memory of the whole
body that its guardianship has been committed.
But memory needs criticism and correction, and)
this it receives from the understanding. In the
measure that symbols were taken literally theology N
was at war with reason when reason, excluding the
literal acceptance of apocalyptic imagery, seemed
hostile to faith. In the defence of positions that
were rationally impossible, and yet were confirmed \
by religious experience as revealed truth, many
untenable conclusions must have seemed bound j
up with the faith. The story of the conflict
between Scripture and science abounds withl


Digitized by Google


216 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS ROADS


\ instances. It seemed a conflict between internal
\and external experience; between fact and fact
We blame the Church of the seventeenth century
for not possessing the criticism of the twentieth.
We might more justly blame the Church of the
twentieth for abiding by that of the seventeenth.
Errors of this kind were the result, not of a
departure from, but of an ill-judged fidelity to
revelation. The light of truth shone through the
distorting medium of a perverse understanding.
Besides these protective errors there were various
protective truths which, without belonging to the
original revelation, were necessary to secure the '
freshness of its features and colours against the
smoke and dust of time; and these can in no
sense be regarded as corruptions any more than
the explanatory ritual that surrounds the simple
essential rite of baptism, and is merely a develop-
ment of the idea of baptism.
I Finally, it is the very nature of the human mind
| to integrate, in the language of fiction and imagina-
tion, the ideas and ideals that are suggested to it *
\ in the language of fact These fictions are not true
to the fact on which they are founded, but are
true to the idea suggested by those facts — truer
than fact, in their deeper sense. There have been,
no doubt, many such spontaneous and unconscious
integrations of the apocalyptic presentment of the


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION AND THE CHURCH 217


transcendent order, and, like the Apocalypse itself,
they have been inserted in the series of external
phenomena. But the sole pertinent question is,\
not their phenomenal, but their spiritual, truthj
except where it can be shown that their spiritual^
value depends, as it sometimes does, on their/
historicity. In other cases they belong to the
category of visions embodying inward experiences,
and reconstructing the world and history accord-
ing to the exigencies of the spirit

Notwithstanding, and partly because of, these
developments and alterations, it is impossible to\
deny that the revelation 6f the Catholic religion ^
and that of Jesus are the same, not only in sub- /
stance but largely in form. I must go further and
say that, far from feeling more at home to-day
among Liberal Protestants than among orthodox
Roman Catholics, the Jesus of the first century)
would be in sympathy with just those elements f
of Catholicism that are least congenial to the
modern mind — not to say the mind of Modernists
— not only with the transcendental, but with the
literal, value of the Catholic presentment of the \
transcendental ; with sacraments, temples, priests L
and altars ; with miracles, diabolic possessions j
and exorcisms ; with devils and angels and all the
supernaturalism of His own age and tradition.
For all these things He had no word, no thought


Digitized by Google


21 8 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


of censure ; but only for their abuse and exploita-
tion ; for their perversion to unspiritual and
immoral ends by priests and people. Against
superstition as an error of the intellect He has
little, if anything, to say in the way of warning.
, His zeal is not against the letter but against a
j literalism that destroys the spirit to which it should
* minister ; that forgets the end in the means ; that
substitutes outward observance for moral and
spiritual sacrifice. He does not condemn the
lighter matters of the law, but the neglect of
the weightier. He repudiates the traditions of men
only so far as they make vain the tradition of
Moses, and, for Him, that tradition justified the
substance of the Jewish religion. It was in the
forms of such a tradition that He necessarily
embodied His Gospel, and the Catholic Church
has preserved the earthen vessel with its heavenly
treasure ; while those who have broken and cast
away the vessel seem to have lost much of the
treasure. Ought we not still to keep it while
carefully distinguishing it from its content?


In all this I am thinking of the Catholic religion,
not as a theological system on paper, nor as an
institution governed by a hierarchy in other than
i spiritual interests ; but as a personal religion lived


Digitized by Google


THE APOCALYPTIC VISION AND THE CHURCH 219


by what must always be a small minority of)
professed Catholics. I am thinking of what it
does and has done for the souls of those who not
merely profess it, but believe in it, and use it
I am thinking of the bird free on the wing, not
crushed and crumpled in the grip of the hawk;
of the Church living, not of the Church dying and
dead. Religion has ever been exploited by priests^
and politicians, who see in it a means of gripping
men by what is deepest in them— their conscience ;
and so controlling their lives, their services, their
fortunes, to their own selfish and ambitious ends.
They run it as business men, void of all artistic
sympathy, might run a theatre, employing the best
actors or the worst as may prove more profitable.
In religion itself they have no sort of interest —
only in its serviceableness to their own non-religious
interests. They favour laxity or sanctity accord-
ing to their market value, and, as a rule, it pays
better to cater for the groundlings than for the
elect few. No religion of any duration or influence^
has escaped this degradation and corruption. Few '
have had the misfortune to be exploited on so
large a scale by their own guardians. Yet, in spite \
of this misfortune, the Roman Catholic religion
still lives in the grip of the hawk.

Whether it has strength enough to escape, who
can tell? Dead or alive, its claim to be the


Digitized by Google


2 JO CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


authentic tradition of Christianity seems to me to
be incontestable. Judge, then, what truth there
is in the popular idea that Modernism is a Protes-
tantising movement in the Roman Church, con-
verging to the same point as Liberal Protestantism.

But a larger problem is suggested by the com-
parative study of religions. If Catholicism be
authentic Christianity, how does Christianity stand
in relation to other religions ?


Digitized by Google


PART II
CHRISTIANITY AND RELIGION


Digitized by Google


Digiti


zed by G00gle


I


EXCLUSIVENESS AND INTOLERANCE

IN earlier stages of civilisation the rivalry and
mutual exclusiveness of religions was more
frankly a form of esprit de corps. It did not cover
itself under the pretext of the unity of God, of
Truth, of Righteousness. It was little more than
another aspect of the rivalry of clans, tribes and
peoples. Israel's God was a God above all
gods. The gods of her neighbours were devils.
The enmities of earth had their counterparts in
heaven. The egotism, exclusiveness and ambition
of the people were embodied in and sanctified by
its god or gods. When neighbours were peaceful
and allied, they easily practised more than one
religion. It was well to be at peace with as many
gods as possible.

But this liberalism was usually discouraged by
priests, who had no wish to divide the honours and
emoluments of their profession and, therefore, pre-
sented their own god as a jealous god. They
dared not say " There is no other god," but only
u Thou shalt have no other god." They preached
223


Digitized by Google


234 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


monolatry, but not monotheism. The idea of a
supreme God, of a Father and great King above
all gods, was not far ; and the dental of godhead
to all the rest, who then became angels or devils,
was bound to follow. Yet even such a God was
rather a power in nature, a principal part, than
something above and before all worlds. He was a
postulate of man's practical needs, rather than of
his philosophical search for a first and universal
cause.

Not till religion passed from its magical stage ;
not till its regalia were transferred to the worship
of spirit and truth and righteousness, was
monotheism firmly established on its proper basis.
Truth is one, absolute, exclusive. To worship
any other god is not merely rebellion and de-
sertion ; it is folly, immorality, falsehood. There
can be but one religion and one only; all the
rest are false. There can be no toleration for
falsehood and immorality; exclusiveness is a
duty.

The rivalries of monotheistic and spiritual re-
ligions are not concerned with what we shall wor-
ship, but with how — whether at Jerusalem or in
this mountain. Each stands for certain ideas of
truth and goodness; certain conceptions of God
and His Will. If these are right, all others must
be wrong ; for truth is one. Intolerance and ex-


Digitized by Google


EXCLUSIVENESS AND INTOLERANCE 22$


clusiveness are thus deepened. They pass from
the surface affections down to the very roots of
conscience.

It cannot be otherwise if the truth about God
and His Will be as ascertainable and as certain as,
or more certain than, the truth about the laws of
physical phenomena. What is more exclusive
than science? what more intolerant than geometry?
And seeing how intimate is the bearing of truth
on life and happiness, is not the liberty of dis-
seminating a false religion far more reprehensible
than that of vending and advertising deleterious
foods or medicines? Hence every religion that
believes itself to possess the truth about God and
His Will must be exclusive and intolerant What
underlies this intolerance is the conviction that
truth is one and that religious truth is supremely im-
portant ; and, with this, the more doubtful assump-
tion that we possess it and others do not. Given
this assumption, tolerance is simply immorality.
It has been the assumption of Jew, Moslem and
Christian, and is the secret of their exclusivenesa,
It is the assumption of every sect of Christianity as
against every other sect In the measure that the
Christian Apocalypse has been translated from
imaginative into intellectual language — into con-
cepts and theological statements — and has been
brought into one body with the whole of our
Q


Digitized by Google


art CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


systcmatised knowledge, intolerance itself has be-
come more systematic.

We notice this tendency even in the Johannine
and Pauline writings, with their theological pre-
occupations. But it would be a mistake to view
this intolerance as a pure accretion and not as, in
some sense, a development of the synoptic teach-
ing. Christ did not impose theological dogmas
under pain of eternal damnation ; but He im-
posed the Apocalypse of the Kingdom of Heaven,
of which theology is the intellectual render-
ing, under pain of that condemnation. Of
the Gospel in its apocalyptical form He says:
"He that believeth not shall be damned." He
only shall be saved who, believing that the End is
near, is baptised unto repentance and a new life.
The text is dubious ; but it epitomises the whole
of the synoptic teaching. For Jesus, salvation was
of the Jews. If many should come from the East
and the West, it was to Jewry they were to come ;
it was with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob they were
to sit at meat in the Kingdom. If He preferred
many a Gentile and Samaritan to many a soulless
Jew, He did not prefer their religion, but their
greater worthiness of the Jew's neglected privileges
and graces. His was the attitude of the reason-
able Roman Catholic to the heretic in good faith
and " invincible ignorance."


Digitized by Google


EXCLUSIVENESS AND INTOLERANCE 227


What He looked to was the ingathering of all
these into the one fold of Israel, under Himself as
the universal Shepherd. His immediate mission,
however, was only to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel. Ere the Apostles had preached the
Kingdom in all the cities of Israel, the End would
come and Gentiles in good faith would be
gathered in by the angels from the four quarters of
the earth, to be saved in union with the elect 01
Israel. If we have here the seed of Pauline uni-
versalism, we have it in a form consistent with the
Catholic tradition of exclusiveness. "Catholic" and
"exclusive," far from contradicting, complement
one another. Science is catholic and exclusive for
the same reason — its objective truth. Because
Catholicism is the one and only religion it is the
religion for all. If the outsider " in good faith " is
saved, it is only because he is on his way to the
Church.

When Judaism refused to accept Jesus as the
Messiah, we may be sure that the Christian Jews
did not regard themselves as seceders ; but as the
authentic remnant from which the main body had
apostatised. What did numbers matter? Had
they not Christ the Head? Those who excom-
municated the Head had but excommunicated
themselves. Christian Israel was the one true
Israel, out of which there was no salvation.


Digitized by Google


228 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


Thus, when the smaller West separated from the
then far larger East, the West, as possessing the
head (i.e. Rome), considered the East schismatic.

Subsequently, when S. Paul found the formalities
of the law an obstacle to the ingathering of the
Gentiles, he saw that the Gospel and the Spirit
were alone essential ; that form and observance
were free ; that the true Israel could accommodate
itself in such matters to the habits and customs of
its proselytes; could change its outward expression
and embodiment of religion to any extent. Yet
this widening of the borders did not abolish
borders, nor abolish the principle of exclusiveness
in any way.

And the same exclusiveness has been the mark
of Catholic Christianity at all times : " Outside
the Church there is no salvation." An exception
has always been made for cases of " good faith,"
even by the most bigoted, who are loth to admit
the frequency of such cases.

But this is no real exception ; for the man in
good faith is one who is groping his way to the
Church. Never is it allowed that he can be saved
by his religion, but only in spite of it. Every
religion but one is the work of the devil, a snare,
an imposture, a spurious imitation, a greater lie in
that it embodies and perverts a greater measure
of truth. A heretic is worse than an infidel.


Digitized by Google


II


THE UNIFICATION OF RELIGION
ETESTABLE as this exclusiveness has


L-S been in its historical manifestations, we
must respect its assertion of the unity and
sovereign claims of truth. The sects and heresies
of earlier times were as exclusive as the great
Church, as willing to persecute when they were
able. We are too apt to consider that the
oppressed are opposed to the principle of oppres-
sion. The comparatively modern toleration of
other religions is, to a large extent, due to the
scepticism suggested by the multiplication of sects,
each claiming to be the one authentic Christianity ;
and by an increased experience of other religions
making the same claims as the Christian Church.
This scepticism has been systematically deepened
by the comparative study of religion, and by all
the causes that have brought dogma into dis-
repute. Truth may be intolerant, but opinion has
no business to be so ; and religion is felt more and
more to be a matter of opinion.

This sort of indifTerentism is, however, governed


Digitized by


Google


2jo CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


by the old theological idea of religious truth.
Diverse symbolisms, like diverse rituals, might
stand for the same sense and meaning and be
no more than differences of language. But if
religions are identical with their theological ex-
pression, it is plain that not more than one can
be true ; and it is infinitely probable that all are
more or less false. Hence a tendency to search
for some one or two truths in which all religions
agree, and to make this the essence of religion,
regarding all the rest, not as development, but as
mere accretion ; and to seek a sort of negative
Catholicism by levelling down all these differences,
and by emptying the religious idea of all but its
vaguest and most rudimentary content Christians
'are to unite on the basis of the Fatherhood of
; God and the Brotherhood of man. All religions
agree that there is a transcendent to which we
should adjust our lives. The nature of that
transcendent, and of our adjustment to it, is
a matter of opinion.

This, of course, is to go back to the germ and
to deny all truth-value to its developments; to
declare the historical religious process mere waste.
It is Rousseau's remedy of a return to savagery,
to the peace of the desert Indeed, it is not
possible to void the religious form or idea of all
content and ^termination. About even the


Digitized by Google


THE UNIFICATION OF RELIGION 231

simplest formula and most universal affirmation,
agreement can be only verbal. All we can
arrive at is a minimum of disagreement Father-
hood and brotherhood are not abstract mathe-
matical conceptions. The rights, duties and
sentiments of paternity are endlessly disputable.
The transcendent does not consist merely of
transcendence, which is but a relation and attri-
bute of something whose nature is, likewise, end-
lessly disputable. The term "religiosity," which
is coming into vogue to express the "one thing
needful " that remains when religions have been
purified of all doctrinal and institutional accre-
tions, stands for a mere sentiment, for the sense
of an unsatisfied need. Religion is thus reduced
to the religious need. Every response to that
need is an impertinence. We are to ask, seek and
knock, but never to find, receive or enter. We
are to feel the significance of life ; we must not
dare to say what it signifies. Thus the religious
idea is condemned to sterility. It is to produce
nothing. The moment a green shoot appears, it
is to be shorn close to the ground.

Yet this conclusion is almost inevitable if the
expression of religion be taken as literal and
scientific truth. When it is taken otherwise,
namely as symbolic and analogical truth, we are
met by another sort of indifferentism. One re-


Digitized by Google


232 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


ligion is as good, instead of as bad, as another.
Each says the same thing in its own way — the-
way best suited for its time and place. But this
view, again, denies any sort of variation and devel-
opment of the religious idea corresponding to these
varieties of its expression. We might as well say
that, because the idea of life is expressed in every,
living species, one species is as good as another,
and that man has no advantage over a mush-
room ; or that, because the idea of civilisation is
expressed in the lowest as in the highest forms,
these have no advantage over those. Plainly the
idea and its embodiment act and re-act It is,
doubtless, the whole idea of life that seeks ex-
pression in each species; but its success is only
fractional, and limited by the material it works in.
It is revealed far more fully in some forms
than in others ; in all, than in any one. We call
man a microcosm, for he reveals life more fully
and variously than any one creature we know.
But he is a poor compendium of the total mani-
festation of life given us in the living world. And,
similarly, the religious idea reveals itself more
fully in some religions than in others ; but in all,
more than in any one.

When this is recognised we are naturally
tempted to a sort of syncretic Catholicism, em-
bracing all religions as one integral expression of


Digitized by Google


THE UNIFICATION OF RELIGION 233


the religious idea. We might as well try to live
the life of all living species at once. A logical
union of genus or species is not a real union. As
the branches of the tree pf life bifurcate and
diverge, they grow more characterised and unlike
one another. So of the varieties of the religious
idea. They do not converge towards, but diverge
from, a point of sameness. Schism is their very
law. So far as they are alive and vigorous, each
pushes forward in its own direction and away
from others ; reunion becomes less and less
possible. The tendency towards reunion among
the Christian sects of to-day is the result of
weariness and decay; of scepticism as to the
value of their several systems. The withered
branches break off at their point of bifurcation.
Union is restored by going backwards to an
original state of indetermination.

If the laws of life are any guide to the laws of re-
ligion, we must expect to find that, in spite of their
parentage or cousinship, the relation between differ-
ent religions is that of rivalry and hostility, and that
there is more reason for such rivalry in the more
nearly allied branches of the family. I speak ot
spiritual religions, each with its implicit or explicit
claim to be the one and only religion, intolerant of
all the rest Among them the law of competition
prevails and stimulates development. The victory


Digitized by Google


134 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


is plainly with the most elastic and pliable ; with
the most catholic An ideally catholic religion
would eliminate all rivals. As it is, we have, side
by side with legions of short-lived sects and cults
that come and go like leaves, a few which are catho-
lic enough to have held millions of men together
for many centuries. It was to its extraordinary
plasticity that Christianity owed its conquest over
the senile and ossified religions of its day ; and
the same holds good of all the great religions.
If a truly catholic religion is ever to be realised,
it will not be by a sinking of differences and an
insistence on the sole importance of the generic
idea or starting-point of all divergences ; nor by
an impossible unification of essentially incom-
patible systems, as though they were members of
one organism. For each system is whole and
rounded off; each is an attempt to express the
whole idea and not merely a part of it ; none
demands another as its complement and expla-
nation.

It is, however, abstractly conceivable that some
one system should be related to the rest as is man
to other terrestrial species; that it should com-
prehend nearly all their principal advantages and
surpass them in other respects beyond compari-
son ; that it should be so evidently a deeper and
fuller expression of religion as to become, first,


Digitized by Google


THE UNIFICATION OF RELIGION 235


the principal,, and, at last, the only religion in the
world. And this might happen either by the rise
of a new religion or by the development of an
old one. Such a Catholicism* would, therefoffcrbe
the result, not of any sort of reunion, or cessation
of inevitable rivalry, but of a world-old conflict,
ending in the survival of the fittest.

, Looking back on the history of religion, nothing
is more improbable. If induction be worth any-
thing, we may be sure that things will be as they
have always been, and that dissension will ever be
the law of the religious world.

Yet we cannot deny that new factors, new situ-
ations, may interfere to modify the uniformities of
the past. All our laws suppose constant con-
ditions ; but we live now under many conditions
that did not obtain in earlier times. Nations,
continents and the whole world are drawn closer
together than ever before by commerce, by means
of communication, by scientific truth. All former
civilisations perished ; but ours can hardly perish.
It is too widespread, too amply and deeply re-
corded, to be more than locally obliterated. Its
utilities are too manifold and evident to be aban-
doned. If it perished in Europe it would live on
in America, and spread thence over the whole
world. No former civilisation had any such
position of vantage. It is abstractly conceivable


Digitized by Google


236 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


that the history of religions might have a similar
ending; that some one religion might at last
prevail and abide.

What has given our civilisation its advantage
and promise of duration is its grasp of the laws
of nature and of life. Our control of nature
depends upon our understanding of her uniform-
ities, on our ability to anticipate experience, to be
prepared against surprise. Truth is just the
correct anticipation of experience. In every
civilisation man seeks a passage to a wide ocean
of free untrammelled life for all. But heretofore
his way has ever been blocked at the last Now
he seems to have found the main. Heaven knows
he has not found bliss ; but, at most, freedom
to search for alleviations of his misery. Dis-
coveries, like speech, writing, printing, steam,
electricity, are acquisitions for everywhere and
for ever ; and our civilisation rests on a whole
multitude of these discoveries. Man's life, his
pleasures and pains, are, henceforth and for ever,
on a larger and swiftly growing scale — one that
bids fair to exhaust his nervous capacity and
hasten his extinction, since he cannot turn back.

May we not then conjecture that a relatively
universal and permanent religion would be one
that rested on a knowledge of the laws and
uniformities revealed by a comparative study of


Digitized by Google


THE UNIFICATION OF RELIGION 237


religions' and a study of religious psychology?
that it would be, in some reserved sense, a scien-
tific religion ? Catholicism is the characteristic
of science as it is of truth. Science is not local
but cosmopolitan — the same for the American, the
Hindu, the Hottentot

Now we know that the eighteenth century
witnessed an attempt to rationalise religion and
render it independent of faith and revelation ; to
substitute so-called natural for supernatural the-
ology; to show that the existence of one God and
the immortality of the soul were dictates of human
reason and, as such, formed the substance of
universal religion. This idea was, no doubt, a
legacy of scholastic theology, purified of its re-
vealed elements. It took no account of the
history of religions; made no study of specific-
ally religious experience. It was the a priori
construction of a philosophical intellectualism,
that is now practically obsolete. If "scientific"
means suggested and controlled by experience,
nothing could be less " scientific n than the religion
of the Encyclopaedists ; nothing less Catholic than
the philosophy on which it was built It was just
scholastic theodicy with the supernatural omitted.
Hence its marble coldness, its inability to make
any sort of appeal to religious feeling. It had
not sprung from the heart and could not speak to


Digitized by Google


238 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


the heart. In England it produced an Evangelical
and Catholic reaction ; from rational theology and
rational ethics men sought warmth and colour and
life in sentimentalism, mysticism, sacramentalism.

It is easy for us now to see how this ration-
alising attempt failed and must have failed ; but
we should respect its attempt to discover a religion
that should be Catholic and true for all men
alike and at all times. The attempt failed be-
cause it was thoroughly unscientific, based on a
metaphysic spun out of an analysis of concepts,
and not suggested and controlled at every step by
experience. It took no account of any religion
but Christianity, and it treated Christianity as a
theology not as a life.

Since then the historical and comparative
method has asserted and proved its value, and,
together with a practically new psychology, has
rendered possible a true science of religious
phenomena. Enough has been done to assure us
that much more can be done to understand the
uniformities that control this department of in-
dividual and collective life, and to determine
what is normal and what abnormal, what is
progressive and what decadent If an analogous
knowledge enables us to diagnose and cure the
ailments of the body or the ills of society, may we
not hope to remedy those of religion ? We can no


Digitized by Google


THE UNIFICATION OF RELIGION 239


more create religion than we can create life, or by
taking thought add one cubit to our stature. But
we can condition the creation, growth and health
of the body, and, in other matters than religion,
we can condition the growth of the soul — in both
cases through a better and more scientific under-
standing of nature's uniformities. Why, then,
should it be a profanity to suggest that science
may, in like manner, come to the aid of religion ?
Is not science from God and for God ?

If we trace from its origin the history of certain
tracts and departments of human experience that
are now fertilised and regulated by their corre-
sponding sciences, we shall find that, after long
centuries of confusion and groping, they have, at
last, been rationalised by some discovery or fertilis-
ing hypothesis, which has given them objective and
universal validity. In their chaotic, pre-scientific
stage their characteristics have been just those
of religion, as we see it now all round us.

Though it is yet far from exactitude and universal
validity, the art and science of Medicine offers the ,
closest parallel to religion in many ways, as dealing
with a general and permanent need of humanity. In
its pre-scientific stage it is absolutely chaotic in
its diagnoses and prescriptions — a wilderness of
fables and superstitions, as various as the vagaries
of the human imagination. There is at most the


Digitized by Google


240 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


unity, so to speak, of its idea. It looks to that
adjustment which we call health; it seeks the
causes and cures of disease ; it professes to pro-
ceed experimentally or empirically; it justifies
itself by its fruitfulness. But it has no idea of
what experiment really means, or of the con-
ditions of a valid induction. It imputes ailments
to mystical or purely fanciful causes, on the
grounds of some merely subjective association
of ideas. In the same way it devises fanciful
cures, that may often cure by mere suggestion.
Herbs that resemble a part of the body are good
for that part A disease is a devil that must be
exorcised ; an emetic throws him out, and, if the
emetic be beneficial, k is because the devil has
departed. Obviously this sort of aetiology will
not hold good for any two tribes, let alone for the
whole world. The progress of thought consists in
gradually separating the series of objective, and
universally valid, from that of subjective, experi-
ences. In the measure that their confusion pre-
vails, man is, to all intents and purposes, mad ; and
it is this note of insanity that characterises
medicine and religion in their early stages.
Dreams and reality are mixed up; subjective
connections are objectified.

For the simple needs of an almost animal life
imaginative associations are practically enough,


Digitized by Google


THE UNIFICATION OF RELIGION 241


without any attempt at systematic understanding
and logical inference. But understanding is there,
untrained and unskilled, interfering with purely
animal psychology, and producing the wildest con-
fusion in its clumsy quest of order, as we see in
the whole history of magic, tokens and taboos. It
is already beginning to separate subjective from
objective, and to search for that truth of which tjie
animal imagination has no need. Not till man
seeks to distinguish subjective from objective,
does he fall into the madness of confounding one
with the other. Yet it is from this ever-flowing
stream of wild hypotheses and conjectures that
useful, and objectively valid, discoveries are
selected.

In Psyche's Task J. G. Frazer shows now govern-
ment, marriage and the right of property were
products of delirium, justified later by their un-
suspected social utility. Chance has had much to
do with our greatest inventions. The inventive
man is one with a rich imagination and active
intelligence, who makes ten thousand hypotheses,
of which some one or two are bound to be
fruitful.

If, then, mental progress consists in the cultiva-
tion of tracts of reason in a boundless wilderness
of delirium, it need not surprise us that man's
earlier efforts, compared with our own attain-

R


Digitized by Google


142 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


ments, should seem capricious, fanciful and in-
coherent Even to-day the diversities of medical
opinion and practice are enough to show that the
science is yet far removed from unification and
general validity. But we now recognise the need
and possibility of this unification, and we know
the methods by which it can be continually ap-
proached. The complexity of the subject-matter,
together with the conservatism of patients and
practitioners, offer an obstruction from which
astronomy, chemistry, electricity and such sciences
are free. But already Medicine has passed from
its chaotic and subjective to its objective and
rational stage ; and its Catholicism is in view.

Again, in early Medicine, personal authority
exercises an exaggerated influence and takes the
place of intrinsic arguments. Schools centre
round names rather than round systems or theo-
ries. Even so late as in Burton's Anatomy of
Melancholy we see the enormous part played by
faith, by the authority of great names. A dogma
is just the ipse dixit of a great teacher; it is
imposed in the name of his prestige. To question
it were insolence. No one questions the educa-
tional and manuductory value of such dogmatism
within due limits. Pass those limits and it be-
comes a hindrance. The arrogance of doctors
and teachers has been one of the greatest obstacles


Digitized by Google


THE UNIFICATION OF RELIGION 243


to human progress; few men can withstand the
corrupting influence of unlimited trust Credu-
lity in the listeners breeds untruthfulness in the
speaker. A good deal of our truthfulness is due
to the fear of being found out and losing our credit.
When travelling was rare, a traveller's tale or a
sailor's yarn was synonymous with a tissue of
exaggerations and inventions. The teacher who
professes to draw his information from sources
inaccessible to his public, such as private revela-
tions or special faculties of divination, or from
regions visited by himself alone, will be more than
human if he do not grow indifferent to truth ; if
he do not state as probable what is only possible,
and as certain what is only probable ; if he do not
bolster up loose with still looser assertions. There
is something worse than deliberate lying, and that
. is the habit of gratuitous assertion ; of saying, not
what we know to be untrue, but what we do not
know to be true. Nine-tenths of our untruthful-
ness is of this sort ; and it is fostered by the cre-
dulity or the indifference of our hearers.

Both truth and truthfulness are late social
developments, and suppose a clear idea of the
difference between the subjective and the objective
series of phenomena. Primitive men, like very
young children, are hardly capable of formal and
conscious lying. They give out, as of equal value,


Digitized by Google


244 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS ROADS


what they have seen and what they have imagined.
And in some measure the savage survives in us all

When men are trusted without limit, when they
profess to draw their knowledge from esoteric
sources, when their inaccuracies cannot be checked
or their information verified, when, in short, they
are placed in primitive conditions, their primitive
nature comes out, and the whole weight of their
authority is lent to the obstruction of truth and
the multiplication of error.

Not till men are drawn together from all quarters
to compare notes is their trust in personal authority
shaken by the hopeless inconsistency of its utter-
ances. Not till medicine and other sciences passed
from the sway of personal authority, and began to
draw their knowledge from sources accessible to
all ; not till their professors were exposed to criti-
cism and detection, did those sciences become
unified, objective and catholic


Digitized by Google


Ill


THE SCIENCE OF RELIGIONS

OUR experience in the realm of profane
science has given us an ideal of unification
and Catholicism. We cannot help desiring that
religion should be redeemed from chaos to order ;
that so universal a need should be met with an
universally valid response. In medicine we do
not look for a panacea for all diseases, each
disease has its own remedy. But we look for a
science that shall govern the diagnosis and remedy
of every disease; and that science must be one
and universal. In the same way we feel that
religion should be one, but we have not got
beyond the desire for unity. Religion is still
multitudinous, chaotic and capricious ; still mainly
under the sway of personal authority. We are
only gathering the materials for an induction, and
hazarding vague and premature hypotheses. The
subject-matter is complex, not only on account
of its vastness but by reason of its subtlety. We
can get at the structure and workings of the body
with our senses and instruments; not at those of

*45


Digitized by Google


246 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


the soul. What is deepest in our nature is last to
be unearthed. Psychology and metaphysic are
the most backward of sciences; man has ever
been curious about them, but his curiosity has
been futile. Again, man's affections and interests
interfere with freedom of religious inquiry as with
no other matter. Religion usually claims super-
natural authority. Its gods are jealous gods ; its
priests, jealous priests. It is rooted in the customs,
traditions, fears and hopes of the people. In its
spiritual and moral phase it becomes exclusive on
principle, and each form claims the universality and
perpetuity of truth and justice. Moreover, those
whose personal religious experiences have been
associated with a given system cling to that
system en bloc, neither distinguishing occasions
from causes, nor the causative element from other
elements of the system. If a mixture A.B.C.D.
has cured them, they will have nothing to do with
D.E.F.G., though D. may have been just the one
element that mattered. Hence they cling to the
whole system in the name of conscience and
personal religious experience. It is not wonder-
ful, then, that the unification of religion should
seem the remotest and least probable of con-
tingencies.

Yet what brings it within the field of the pos-
sible is the*growing recognition of the universality


Digitized by Google


THE SCIENCE OF RELIGIONS 247


and perpetuity of man's religious need and of J
his effort to satisfy it ; of an important tract of ^
normal experience that has not yet been brought
into order with the rest of man's experience and
that, in its wild state, is as fruitful of evil as, were
it cultivated, it might be of good.

The notion that religion is a disease of man's
intellectual childhood, something that he throws
off with his bibs and tuckers, is being rapidly
discredited. It still governs some of the leaders
in the new science of religions, who are hasty
to generalise, instead of collecting the materials
and perfecting the methods of a successful in-
duction. According to them, the end of such a
science is to prove religions a delusion. It is
rather a history of follies and fallacies, whose
practical end is to deliver us from so disastrous a
superstition. This view is, no doubt, favoured by
the obvious aspect of primitive religions, and by
the survival of their forms and categories in later
religions, down to the present time. It was
ghost-worship at the beginning, it must be a dis-
guised ghost-worship at the end. The stream
cannot rise above its source.

This might be more plausible did we not dis-
tinguish between magical religion on the one
hand and moral and spiritual religion on the
other. What is continuous, is the form, not the


Digitized by Google


348 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


substance. Magical religion is the ancestor of
science ; shall we say, therefore, that science is but
disguised magic? Man's earliest gods were but
the powers of nature conceived personally,
which man strove to manage in the interests of
his temporal life, and sometimes of its prolonga-
tion in the post-mortem world of dreams. The
ancestry of spiritual religion is to be sought in
the beginnings of man's moral sense. When he
comes to recognise Righteousness as the supreme
power and law of the universe and of his own
life, he strips his idols bare, and transfers the para-
phernalia of religious worship to that supreme
spiritual power. On the other hand, his growing
interpretation of nature dispenses gradually with
personified agencies, and science emerges from its
religious wrappings. Thus the two streams of
development cross one another and, at the point
of intersection, morality steps into the clothes of
magical religion and science steps out of them.
This, of course, is a logical schematisation but,
in the rough, it corresponds to history.

Religion then, in its magical stage, stood for
the beginnings of man's scientific effort, his search
for the knowledge and control of the phenomena
of nature. In its spiritual stage it stands for a
development of his moral effort and an expansion
of his whole spiritual interest — moral, intellectual


Digitized by Google


THE SCIENCE OF RELIGIONS 249


and affective, — of his supra-individual and universal
selfhood. The study of religions is, therefore, not ;
a study of illusions, but of the process by which j
truth struggles through darkness into light No'
doubt magical religion belongs to man's childhood
and must be discarded in his maturity. But we
do ill to treat it as delirium. It was the lowly
beginning of something great. The embryo of
a man is grotesque and at first not distinguishable
outwardly from that of a rabbit, but, judged by
what comes out of it, it has an immeasurable
interest and worth.

Again, spiritual religion, far from being out-
grown like a toy, becomes more and more of an
exigency with the deepening of man's moral and
spiritual life and of his inevitable discontent with
what this life offers or can ever possibly offer.
He wants something different in kind, an imperish-
able bread. This want is dulled by his engross-
ment in the rush of material progress; but obtrudes
itself with the growth of his moral ideals and his
sense of their unattainableness. Man's spiritual ,
and moral growth leads straight to a pessimism
that only religion can cure. Spiritual religion is
a demand of his age and grey hairs, not of his
babyhood.

The science of religion, therefore, has for its
object, not ravings and rubbish, but the highest


Digitized by Google


250 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


life of man's soul ; his quest for the true, the
good and the fair, and for God Who is their
synthesis. It can no more create such life than
medicine can create that of the body; but it
can determine its laws, condition its fertility, and
criticise its developments to a great extent It
can discover the unity that underlies its multiplicity.
We are far from such a consummation, but we
have no reason to despair of it

Now the unity and catholicity of the science
of religions is a very different thing from the
unity and catholicity of religion. This, as we
have ventured to suggest, can only result from the
survival of some one form in virtue of its over-
whelming advantages ; riot from a levelling-down
process, nor from a return to a common point of
divergence with a cancelling of all the labours
of development If our civilisation has become
cosmopolitan and perpetual through its knowledge
of the laws of life and nature, a like knowledge
of the laws of religious life, social and individual,
might give the same overwhelming advantage to
some one religion. This would not mean finality,
but the right direction of the course of develop-
ment ; the discovery of a free and open road,
after many vain excursions up blind "alleys. It
ought to be possible, from a study of the origin,
growth and decay of various religions, to deter-


Digitized by Google


THE SCIENCE OF RELIGIONS 251


mine the laws of religion in general, to find a \
criterion and a method by which its life may be
indefinitely prolonged and expanded.

Should such a science, in the course of time,
shape itself out of the present historical and
psychological study of existing and bygone re-
ligions, it could not fail to exert a powerful in-
fluence On the various living embodiments of the
religious idea; of which none could long survive
which was known to defy the laws of its life.
Civilisations that were unable to adapt themselves
to the light of history and science have yielded
before those systems that are more intelligent and
adaptable, and that tend to become catholic and
perpetual. And so with any idea as it comes to
be, no longer merely felt and gropingly followed,
but clearly understood. The first attempts to
understand it result in a half-understanding or
misunderstanding, which is often obstructive of its
spontaneous and instinctive self-unfolding. Yet
this immediate loss prepares an eventual gain.
False political and economic theories have led the
way to truth, at the cost of much evil that instinct
and common sense would have avoided. Bad
theologies have checked the spontaneous growth
of religions ; but the theological attempt must fail
and do harm, before it can succeed and do good.


Digitized by Google


IV


CHARACTER OF AN UNIVERSAL RELIGION
TVT OW by the science of mechanics we can


1 1 create machines ; but by a science of re-
ligion we could no more create a religion than we
could create life by the science of biology. Yet
what we cannot create, we can condition ; and so
far the science of religion may have immense
practical value. There have been and may yet be
new religious institutions ; but there has not been
and never can be a new religion, any more than a
new language. Each is a bifurcation of some
branch that is itself a bifurcation ; and all can
trace their origin to a common stem that has
grown out of a root-idea — the idea of religion.
However strange the new differentiating ele-
ments may be, yet they are united under cate-
gories inherited from the past and belong to the
general process. We cannot, then, expect a new
religion, but only a religion renovated and trans-
formed by knowledge and understanding. And
that renovation will be easiest for the system
which has spontaneously and empirically realised


Digitized by


Google


CHARACTER OF AN UNIVERSAL RELIGION 253


most of the conditions of a true Catholicism. For
others it will be more difficult or even quite
impossible.

We have already rejected the notion of any sort
of organic unity between the vaooys Jerms of
religion, as though they complemented one another,
and constituted, when taken together, one full and
connected expression of the religious idea. It is
true that some are rich where others are poor;
that we gain from all a fuller idea of religion than
from any one, just as we gain a fuller idea of life
from the whole animal kingdom than from man
alone — microcosm though he be. Yet their unity
is only logical. They are exclusive and hostile,
rather than complementary. In each, religion
strives to realise, not a part but the whole of her
nature, within the given conditions of possibility.
But in some few she succeeds far more amply ;
and these, in a limited sense, are her microcosms,
embracing in a higher synthesis the advantages of
many others, though not of all.

Now it is these microcosmic religions, which
have already attained a certain relative catholicity,
that are most capable of assimilating and profit*
ing by the laws of religion, should these ever be
established by historical and psychological science.
It is easier to lop off excrescences and spurious
developments than to take on characteristics that


Digitized by Google


254 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


are real only when they have grown out of a
remote past, and that may be excluded by the
very constitution of the religion in question. Thus
Lutheranism is a development, not of Catholicism
from which it is a departure, but of certain
elements of Catholicism ; Liberal Protestantism
is a development of certain elements of Luther-
anism. At the first rending, when the wound
was raw, the rejected elements might have been
reassumed. But when the accepted elements were
developed apart from the others and became a
completed organism, rounded off and exclusive,
no such restoration as this was possible. So, by
their very formation and history, many religions
exclude the possibility of Catholicity. They have
cut off too much and cannot take it on again.

It seems to me, then, that true Catholicism
is more likely to be realised in one of the older,
wider, more chaotic, more spontaneous religions,
than in any of those more plausible simplifi-
cations, which are shaped by a premature and
somewhat a priori conception of what religion is
and ought to be. Its chaos may contain more than
is needed for the cosmos of law and order, but it
is less likely to run short of the required elements.

Especially does this seem to be the case with
Catholic Christianity, which is more nearly a mi-
crocosm of the world of religions than any other


Digitized by Google


CHARACTER OF AN UNIVERSAL RELIGION 255


known form ; where we find nearly every form
of religious expression, from the lowest to the
highest, pressed together and straining towards
unification and coherence; where the ideal of
universal and perpetual validity has ever been an
explicit aim ; where, moreover, this ideal is
clothed in a form that cannot possibly endure the
test of history and science and must undergo
some transformation.

Now the reasons for this hope I have already
given, in outline, in the opening chapters of
Through Scylla and Charybdis, and it is not
necessary to enlarge upon them here. Moreover,
in the earlier part of this volume, I have given my
reasons for believing that Catholicism is in sub-
stance, and to a large extent even in form, true to
the idea of Jesus ; that it develops the whole of
that idea, and not merely certain elements of it.
Catholicism preserves not only the ethical teaching
of Jesus and His insistence on inwardness, but
likewise His outwardness, His supernaturalism,
His belief and hope in the other world, His sacra-
mentalism and so forth. I do not say that all is
development and that nothing is mere accretion or
impurity ; I say only that no essential element has
been dropped. Other forms of religion have taken
some of these elements and have developed them
apart This has not been without advantage for the


Digitized by Google


156 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


elements in question which, in Catholicism, have
had to wait on the growth of the whole idea to
which they belong. It is easy to show that the
sects have a better appreciation of this or that
feature of Christianity than has the Church. But
perhaps they have it at the cost of a false simplifica-
tion and an impoverishment of the Christian idea.

I need only indicate here what seem to me to be
quite objective and impersonal reasons for regarding
Christianity as the highest spontaneous develop-
ment of the religious Idea and, therefore, the
religion most capable of reflective development, in
the light of a science of religion gleaned from
historical and psychological investigation, i.e. most
capable of becoming as catholic and perpetual as
that science. 1

We have defined religion as being, practically,
* the adjustment of our conduct to a transcendent
world. Such adjustment supposes that the tran-
scendent is, in some way, revealed and felt as inter-*
fering with ordinary experience. The crooked
tree, the oddly shaped stone, the thunderstorm, the
earthquake, prior to any sort of reflection, created
a feeling of wonder and fear, which suggested the
thought of an unseen, incalculable and, possibly,

1 In this I am following, with certain modifications, the line of
thought suggested by Th. Steinmann's admirable work, Die geistige
Ojjfenbarung Gottes in der geschicht lichen Person Jcsu (Vanden-
hoech and Ruprecbt. Gottingen, 1903).


Digitized by Google


CHARACTER OF AN UNIVERSAL RELIGION 257


malign, power, to be appeased and propitiated.
The first notions of the transcendent, its self-
revelation and its propitiation, are materialistic,
gross, entirely unethical and unspiritual. Man
ignorantly worships the powers of nature, not a
power above nature. If, at this stage, he also
ignorantly worships the true God, it is in so far
as he renders disinterested homage to the first
whispers of his undeveloped conscience. His
religion is but the servant of his temporal
necessities; a means not an end. Such religions
are formless and multitudinous.

Later, when he is civilised, we encounter tribal
and state religions, whose gods are practically in
the service of the collectivity. They sanction, with
rewards and penalties, the customs and laws of the
tribe, they go forth with its armies, they watch over
all its temporal interests; all this in return for
certain sacrifices and services. In the measure that
the gods are exalted and that laws and customs
are held to have been revealed by them and to be
the expression of their will, religion begins to
claim a certain independence and superiority over
the people. They are God's people, if not actually
His sons and descendants. They serve His will,
rather than He theirs. If they offend Him He will
cast them off. His attitude towards them is re-
vealed in their prosperity or calamity. It things
s


Digitized by Google


258 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


go wrong, someone has sinned and must suffei
As laws and customs become less arbitrary, more
just and reasonable, God's will is what is just and
reasonable ; He is a God of Righteousness. Ethics
take over the paraphernalia of religion, which
becomes a service of the righteous and true God
by righteousness and truth.

At this stage religion sits in judgment on the
state itself. We must obey God rather than men.
But God is still an outside Power revealed in out-
side wonders, in rewards and chastisements, and
served by external deeds and abstentions. He is
the just Ruler and Judge of all the earth, but not
yet a ruler of hearts and thoughts and desires.
This comes with a further deepening of the moral
sense ; with the perception that inward priitciples
and virtues are more important than those out-
ward fruits, which can be imitated, that God
searches the heart and the reins, that Goodness
and Righteousness, in a word, are inward and not
outward.

But even so God is an external, though heart-
reading, Judge and reveals Himself by external
interferences; by a miraculous book, by spoken
oracles, by inspired teachers and law-givers. The
principles of righteousness are imparted from with-
out and accepted by faith in, and obedience to, an
external teacher. The believer is in a state of


Digitized by Google


CHARACTER OF AN UNIVERSAL RELIGION 359


tutelage, as an art student whose work is still
imitative, and not creative or original ; who is
acquiring the spirit through obedience to the
letter.

Through such an obedience, such an application
of principles taken on trust, the spirit of art or
of morality or of religion, which precedes all rules
and principles as their source, is wakened to self-
consciousness, and recognises its kinship with that
spirit which is striving to express itself in the
historical process of art, science, morality and
religion. It recognises that the whole process is
due to the same spirit, striving to realise itself in
each individual through the medium of human
society and tradition ; striving to make the life of
each man a divine and universal life, governed by
a sympathy with the Divine Will and work in the
whole process of history ; in such sort that each
shall become an instrument or organ of the Divine
action, and take the whole world into himself as
his own concern. Man is then no longer a servant
or imitator of the Divine Will, but a son of God,
a free and original co-operator in the Divine work.
He is not the slave, but the master of the letter,
which he respects so far as it is the utterance of
the spirit by which he is governed. Now it is no
longer from without, but from within, that God
reveals Himself as a mysterious, transcendent


Digitized by Google


a6o CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


force, counteracting and interfering with the
natural order of events, overcoming the forces of
egoism and individualism, and, through the action
of spiritual personalities, interfering with the course
of history as shaped by natural, self-centred man.

In the first stirrings of primitive conscience man
is already solicited, as by an unknown God, to
embrace the life of the spirit ; to live for an uni-
versal and disinterested Good. At the end of the
religious process he explicitly recognises this in-
ward principle as the Divine Spirit, the condition
and foundation of his personality. For what is
personality if not that which is divine in man,
that which makes him master of the determinism of
nature of which he is at first the slave ? — " Thou
hast made him but little lower than God. Thou
hast put all things under his feet" And to the
fulness of this personality he can only attain by
identifying himself with that indwelling Spirit
which is transcendent over nature.


Digitized by Google


V


THE RELIGION AND PERSONALITY OF
JESUS

THERE is a lower mysticism that is content
to wrest the soul from the tyranny of the
external by ascetical self-isolation, by forgetting
the world and the historical process, in which the
Divine Will reveals itself; that lives for rare
moments of almost sensible contact with the in-
dwelling Divinity. However narrowly indifferent
to ethics, science and history, this mysticism
emphasises one-sidedly the great truth that con-
scious union with God is the fullest realisation of
humanity, the secret of that personality which sets
man above nature. But it fails to recognise that
this means union with a Will that is at work in
the whole process of history and in every human
soul. It is, as it were, a form without content.

Not such was the mysticism of Jesus that, in
embracing God, embraced the whole world and all
its spiritual interests — truth of feeling, truth of
conduct, truth of knowledge ; that forced Him into
conflict with evil, reckless of reward or success, by
the mere impetus, the imperative necessity of the
a6i


Digitized by Google


26s CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


Divine Nature — " driven by the Spirit." " A new
creature" a spirit, a personality, a Son of God —
this is the full fruit of Christian Mysticism.

Jesus did not despise or turn away from the
law of God, or the temple of God, in putting
above both the Spirit that had created them and
had revealed itself through them — as it were
through sacraments and beggarly elements. At
most He desired to supplement and fulfil the
necessarily ever-imperfect expressions of the spirit ;
to push the letter down to its proper place of sub-
ordination and instrumentality; to carry religion
to its final phase ; to deny the static immutability
and perpetuity of the external embodiment of the
spirit, and to make it a living and growing organism.

When He opposes " But I say unto you," to
" Moses said unto you " it is plain that He regards
Himself as the Spirit incarnate, possessed of a
human frame and soul, and uttering itself within
all the natural limitations of local thought and
language. It was through Him that Moses had
spoken ; what Moses had % He was. ^S. Paul is
a true interpreter when he identifies Christ with
the Spirit; when he speaks of the indwelling
of the Spirit as the indwelling of Christ So
mastered and enslaved by the Spirit was Jesus,
that His life was simply the life of the Spirit ; His
words the words of the Spirits Against the Spirit


Digitized by Google


RELIGION AND PERSONALITY OF JESUS 263


He had no freedom, but only within the limits of |
the Spirit. If He could not sin it was because the
Spirit cannot sin.

In this sense we can deny Him a human person- \
ality. Man can progressively subject himself to
the Spirit, but with the liberty of rebellion. He is
not overmastered by it in spite of himself. But
the personality, the u I," that speaks and acts in
Jesus, is the Spirit, though it speaks and acts through
the limitations of a human organism. 4t is the
Spirit made man. The Word which enlightens
every man is made flesh ; what works within us
stands before us, to be seen and heard and handled.
In Him we have seen the Father — not in His
fulness, but so far as God is inclusively the ideal
image of man ; so far as God reveals man to him-
self in a Divine Humanity. He comes, so to say,
and lives our life Himself.

Thus it was that, for Christianity, Jesus and the
Spirit became interchangeable terms; that the
birth of the Spirit in man's soul became a birth
and indwelling of Jesus. The inevitable anthro-
pomorphism of man's conceptions of the Divine
received a sanction :

"So, through the thunder, comes a human voice,
Saying : O heart I made, a Heart beats here." v

" My little children," says Paul, u of whom I am
again in travail until Christ be born in you" — all the


Digitized by Google


264 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


instructions, precepts and exhortations of the Chris-
tian religion fall short of their purpose if they but
make a man an obedient imitator of Christ, as it
were of the first founder and example of a new
religious system ; if they do not evoke that Spirit
which was incarnate in Jesus, and therefore is
Jesus. Jesus was not merely a revealed ideal of
human personality, but a forceful, living, self-
communicating ideal ; a fire spreading itself from
soul to soul. It is only personality that works on
personality. We can take precepts and instruc-
tion impersonally ; we can obey and follow them
and build them into the structure of our mental
and moral habits. But we can sometimes appre-
hend the whole spirit and personality of a man
through his words and acts and manner. We
can feel him as an overwhelming personal influ-
ence ; we can catch the concrete living spirit from
the broken letters and words in which it utters
itself. We can feel him living in us as a master-
ful force. We know his way and his will in a
manner that no instruction could ever impart

This it is that distinguishes Christianity from
the following of a teacher or prophet It teaches
the precepts of Christ as a means to a birth of
Christ in the soul — to the constitution of a divine
personality within us ; of a spirit that shall super-
sede all law and precept, as itself the source and


Digitized by Google


RELIGION AND PERSONALITY OF JESUS 265


the end of all law. Jesus Himself was the great
sacrament and effectual symbol of the Divine
Life and Spirit. v He worked on His disciples, not
doctrinally as a teacher of the understanding, but
with all the force of a divine and mysterious
personal ascendency, transmitted through every
word and gesture. He was not a prophet speaking
in the name of the Spirit, but the Spirit itself in
human form. He spoke as only conscience can
speak. Men heard and obeyed, they knew not
why. He entered into their souls and possessed
them and shaped them to His own image and
likeness. When He left them externally, He was
still with them internally. Conscience took shape
and it was the shape of Jesus. Struck down by
conscience Paul cries : " Who art thou, Lord ? "
and the revealing answer comes : "I am Jesus,
whom thou persecutest" To this he refers when
he says' it was the good pleasure of God " to reveal
His Son in me; I live, and yet no longer I, but
Christ liveth in vie!* In what other religion do men
so speak of their founder, however loved and revered
and followed ? Personality is the end, and personal-
ity, mediated no doubt through external signs and
symbols, is the means. Fire is kindled from fire.
The Spirit of Jesus uttered in the Church, In the
Gospel, in the sacraments, is apprehended by
His followers, not as a doctrine but as a personal


Digitized by Google


266 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


influence, fashioning the soul to its own divine
nature.

^ It is impossible for spirit or personality to find
adequate expression in terms of another order of
experience. It is by a sort of internal sympathy
that we read the personality of another out of the
meagre shorthand of words and acts and gestures,
and only so far as we are latently capable of
realising a similar personality in ourselves. The
vehicles and sacramental symbols, through which
the Spirit communicates itself, are no part of the'
Spirit The human frame and mind of Jesus,
His local and temporal limitations of thought
and knowledge, were but the sacramental elements
through which the influence of His Divine Spirit
was mediated. To our age He would have spoken
differently, but the spirit would have been the
same. A great artist, who makes the most of the
poor materials and methods to hand, can reveal his
spirit to a sympathetic apprehension as well as in
a richer language ; it is the spirit that quickens,
the flesh profiteth nothing. The material imita-
tion of the historical Christ tends to extinguish
His Spirit. In us Christ, the Spirit, lives and
utters Himself in the ever-changing forms of
thought and language.^ In this sense S. Paul says
that, if we have known Christ after the flesh, we
shall know Him so no longer, but only after the


Digitized by Google


RELIGION AND PERSONALITY OF JESUS 267


spirit as the Heavenly Adam, the Son of Man,
the Spirit of God. We have long since out-
grown those apocalyptic forms of religious thought
in which the Spirit of Jesus first uttered itself as
the Son of Man — the Jewish Messiah. But the
spirit itself we have not outgrown, and in us it
seeks ever new forms wherein to clothe the same
revelation.

* This, then, is the special characteristic of Chris-
tianity. It does not look back upon Jesus, as a
Franciscan might look back on S. Francis, or a
Moslem on Mohammed, as being the founder of
the society to which he belongs and the first ex-
ample of that system of spirituality which has been
handed down to him. It looks back on Jesus as
being the Divine Spirit revealing itself in human
form ; as Himself the revelation of God ; as com-
municating, not His ideas or His doctrines, but
His very self, His spirit and personality to the soul,
through the sacramental power of the Gospel and
the Church ; as constituting the salvation of the
soul, its communion with God, its eternal life, by
His personal indwelling. To be, as it were,
" possessed " by Jesus is to be possessed by the
Spirit of God. Those who lay hold of Him,
who cluster round Him like swarming bees round
their queen, become His very members, quickened
by that Spirit which He was ; they in Christ and


Digitized by Google


268 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


Christ in them, Christ in God and God in-Christ,
" that they may be perfected into One."

This is what we find from cover to covei* of the
New Testament. If it be more explicit in the
Paulo- Johannine writings, it is fully implicit and
partly explicit in the synoptic Gospels. This is
what we find in the great Christo-Catholic tradi-
tion — " Christ in you, the hope of glory " — a quick-
ening Spirit, an overwhelming personal influence,
killing self and sin by a filial and self-sacrificing
love of God, and of all the world as in God and
from God and for God. This, too, is what we find
in those Protestant bodies that, in breaking with
the integrity of the Catholic tradition, have retained
its central value, and for whom the name of Jesus
is not merely that of a founder and teacher, but of
a sacramental, self-communicating personality, to
be laid hold of and appropriated ; of One Who
reveals Himself in each several soul as He did in
the soul of S. Paul ; of One through Whose inter-
mediating humanity the soul is united to God.

This is what we do not find in that Liberal
Christianity for which Jesus is to the Christian only
what Mohammed is to the Moslem — the founder
and teacher of a society, revealing and exemplify-
ing a doctrine and method. Hence a philosophic
chill, which increases in the measure that criticism
puts Jesus back in His own century and surrounds


Digitized by Google


RELIGION AND PERSONALITY OF JESUS 269


ings, and forbids us to read into His human mind
the ideas and presuppositions of our own day, or
to see in Him a practicable example of what we
now mean by life.

Those for whom He is a living indwelling spirit,
a fire kindling from soul to soul down the long
centuries, who see the expression of that spirit,
not merely in the mortal life and thoughts of the
Galilean carpenter, but in those of His followers
who have been possessed by the spiritual and
eternal personality of Jesus, have no such trouble
in the face of criticism. It is no more to them
that He was a first-century Jew in His mental
outlook than that He was a man and a carpenter.
What they live by is not His human mind but His
divine spirit and personality, revealed in conflict
with His human limitations and with ours, and
with those of all generations to come. Had He
spoken the language of the twentieth century,
would He be intelligible to the fortieth, were it
His language and not His personality that He had
sJ\o communicate and reveal?

Is it any depreciation of the great military
geniuses of the past to say that, if suddenly
plunged into the midst of a modern engagement,
they would be worse than worthless ; that, with-
out the requisite knowledge and experience, their
genius would be useless ? Yet do we not desider-


Digitized by Google


270 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


ate that same genius for our own leaders, {
which all their knowledge and experience Wj&ko
avail? What are the categories and codmI of
Jesus to us ? Are we to frame our thinds to that
of a first-century Jewish carpenter, for whom more
than half the world and nearly the whole of its
history did not exist ; to whom the stellar universe
was unknown ; who cared nothing for art or science
or history or politics or nine-tenths of the interests
of humanity, but solely for the Kingdom of God
and His righteousness? And even in regard to
this supreme interest is it His religious ideas, His
apocalyptic imagery, that we are to take over, and
not rather the spirit of which they were the inade-
quate embodiment — the best possible just for that
time and place and no other ? Would the military
genius of the past tie us down to his weapons and
methods of warfare ? Would he not have desired
and hoped that every generation should, while
retaining his spirit, improve on his methods?
And would not such improvements be the work
of his own spirit ?

To demand that Jesus should have had all the
knowledge of Solomon is on a par with demand-
ing that He should have had all the earthly riches
and glory of Solomon. The note of the Gospel is
that God has not chosen the great things of this
world, but the small ; not the rich, but the poor ;


Digitized by Google


RELIGION AND PERSONALITY OF JESUS 271


learned, but the simple. The elect of the
-e not the elect of the Spirit ; Solomon in
jlory was not arrayed as one of these.


Why,Tl God did not disdain the role of a poor
man and a tempted man, should He disdain that
of an ignorant man, wherein to reveal the Spirit
victorious over the very commonest human limita-
tions? It is not from the human mind that He
had, but from the Divine Spirit that He was, that
man has drawn strength to conquer ignorance and
weakness, energy to fight against darkness and
wickedness, however costly, however interminable
the conflict To fill us with this Spirit was the
mission of Jesus ; not to teach us metaphysics or
science or history or ethics or economics. The
love of truth, the spirit of truthfulness, is the
living root of all mental progress. This the most
ignorant man may have and communicate.

This idea of Jesus as the Divine indwelling and
saving Spirit seems to me the very essence of
Christianity. Faith in Christ never meant merely
faith in a teacher and his doctrine, but an appre-
hension of His personality as revealing itself
within us.

There is no special difficulty in admitting that
the dawn of a new epoch should be associated with
the name of some individual who, however much
the product of his time and sensitive to its spirit


Digitized by Google


27« CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS ROADS


and needs, creates a new synthesis of all he has
received, with some new and original contribution
of his own. That, after all, is the law of spiritual
development Each spirit is evoked and shaped
by the collective spirit of the day and shapes it in
turn; as a rule imperceptibly, because in the
straight line of its actual development

But there come periods when a change of direc-
tion or of level is the condition of progress, and
such new epochs are associated, whether in art,
science, invention, politics or religion, with the
name of some individual who, conscious of the
impasse, discovers a way out and draws the whole
world after him. It is no scandal to us that
only those who come within the sphere of that
man's influence enjoy the advantages thereof.
But it seems intolerable that only those who
have heard the name and the teaching of Jesus
of Nazareth should attain eternal life; that two-
thirds of present humanity, and nine-tenths or far
more of past humanity, should fail of salvation.

Yet this would follow were the personality that
spoke in Jesus that of a man, and not that of the
Spirit which speaks to every man in the mysterious
whisperings of conscience ; were Jesus not simply
the incarnation of conscience, the manifestation of
that ideal humanity which conscience is striving
to reveal to, and realise in, every human souL So


Digitized by Google


RELIGION AND PERSONALITY OF JESUS 273


He is interpreted in the Paulo-Johannine writings
and in Catholic tradition/ Because He did not
merely possess, but was personally the true Light
that enlightens every man, the indwelling Logos
or Word of God, He could say : u I am the Way
and the Truth and the Life, no one cometh unto
the Father but by Me" ; " He that hath the Son
hath the life."

Hence all who are saved are saved through
Christ, whose personality is that of the indwelling
Spirit. Christianity has but brought the universal
principle of salvation to its highest degree of force
and explicitness. Conscience, that is first dimly
felt as a mysterious influence interfering with
and transcending the natural self and its laws,
is revealed at last as the Spirit or Personality
incarnate in Jesus.


T


Digitized by Google


VI


THE CHURCH AND ITS FUTURE

IF Christ be more than a teacher, the Church
is more than a school ; if He be more than a
founder, the Church is more than an institution —
though it is both one and the other. w It is not
merely related to Him as the Franciscan or Jesuit
orders are to S. Francis and S. Ignatius, or the
Wesleyans to John Wesley. This difference is
well marked in the Pauline writings and belongs
to the Catholic tradition. • The Franciscan order is
not the " mystical body " of S. Francis, however it
seek to be imbued with his spirit, by way of imita-
tion and by the following of its founder and teacher.
It is only by a strained metaphor that S. Francis
can be said to live in his true followers. The
spirit that lives in them is that which was incarnate
in Christ and which dwelt in S. Francis. S. Francis
but taught his followers a way to Christ * His
work was the work of a prophet

But the Church of S. Paul is the mystical body
of Christ — an extension of that human frame
through which His spirit and personality com-
274


Digitized by Google


THE CHURCH AND ITS FUTURE 275

municated itself to His disciples, as it were
sacramentally, v i.e. in the way that a personality
makes itself felt, as opposed to the way in which
a teacher imparts a doctrine. In both cases signs
are necessary; but in the latter thought speaks
to thought, in the former spirit to spirit; in the
latter an idea, in the former a force is transmitted.
Through the mystical body, animated by the
Spirit, we are brought into immediate contact with
the ever present Christ We hear Him in its
Gospel, we touch and handle Him in its sacra-
ments. He lives on in the Church, not metaphori-
cally but actually. He finds a growing medium of
self-utterance, ever complementing and correcting
that of His mortal individuality. Thus it is
through the instrumentality of the Church and its
sacraments that His personality is renewed and
strengthened in us ; that the force of His spirit is
transmitted and felt The Church is not merely a
society or school, but a mystery and sacrament;
like the humanity of Christ of which it is an ,
extension.

It is just this view of the Church that stands or
falls with the Catholic conception of Jesus, as the
name of the Divine Spirit acting the rdle of a
man ; and not merely as the name of a man, con-
forming himself to the inspirations of that spirit as
to those of another personality. Where this belief


Digitized by Google


»76 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS- ROADS


has failed the Church is but a society of the
disciples of a bygone prophet, a teacher who
taught an age and a mentality that are almost
entirely obsolete, whose personality and example
grow less and less intelligible and illuminating as
he recedes into a remoter past

Explain it how we will, it is this conception of
the spirit and personality of Jesus as an abiding
v presence in the Church ; as coming in contact with
the soul through her and her sacraments, above all
in the mystery of the Holy Communion, which is
explicitly the communication of His personality
and eternal life— it is this conception that, for the
Catholic Christian, makes the Church a sacrament
rather than a society ; a sacrament not invalidated
by the meanness of the "beggarly elements"
through which the Spirit is communicated. v

Illusion though it be to some, it is a great thought,
a stimulating belief, that breaks down the barriers
of time and place ; makes Jesus present to every
soul, not only imaginatively but effectively ; lends
His human form and face and voice and name to
" the Light which lighteth every man," to the Spirit
that reveals itself in the first glimmerings of con-
science. Take away this faith in Christ, and
Catholicism ceases to be Christian, even though
it still reverence Him as a founder, guide and
example. Given this faith in Christ, and we have


Digitized by Google


THE CHURCH AND ITS FUTURE 277


Christianity even where the integral Catholic tradi-
tion is lacking : as in the uncritical Gospel-Chris-
tianity of so many of the sects.

As for so-called Liberal Protestantism, it is hard
to see in what sense it can be called Christian.
For in no sense was Jesus the originator of that
conception of theistic righteousness which He
adopted. He was at most an eminent disciple of
the best rabbinical piety of His day. He brought
it into His teaching and passed it on to His
Church. If this doctrine of righteousness consti-
tute the sole value to be sifted out of Catholicism,
we have a system, not founded, but only trans-
mitted, by Christ It may be an excellent religion
but it is not Christianity, either in its end or in its
means. It could come to terms more easily with
Islam than with Catholic Christianity, and belongs
to the same stage of the religious Idea — to the
prophetic stage.

But a religion to be truly Catholic, to be educa-
tive of all sorts and conditions of men and of every
stage of man's religious progress, must represent
every phase of the religious Idea, from the lowest
to the highest, and not the highest alone. The
process of the race repeats itself in the individual.
Man does not begin, but ends by being spiritual
and personal ; first that which is earthly, after-
wards that which is heavenly; milk for babes,
t 2


Digitized by Google


*78 CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS-ROADS


meat for the strong. The law is but a pedagogue
to lead us to Christ, though the fruit is implicit in
the seed and Christ in the first whisperings of
conscience. A Catholic religion will lead the soul
through externalism to internalism. Ideally, the
value of the lower is absorbed into and saved by
the higher. Practically, in existing Catholicism, it
is not so. We find these different sorts of religion
ranged side by side, each subsisting with its own
alloy — the religion of fear, the religion of hope ;
the religion of external and of internal obedience;
the religion of abstract and exclusive mysticism,
and that of inclusive and world-embracing mysti-
cism. In his Mystical Element of Religion Baron
F. Von Hugel has shown that, if the ideal syn-
thesis of the institutional, rational and mystical
elements be unattainable, owing to a sort of
natural antipathy between them, yet the perpetual
struggle after that ideal is essential; that the
health of a religion consists in the balancing
and holding together of principles that tend
to fly asunder and become independent and
exclusive.

So it is that, in existing Catholicism, the various
phases of the religious Idea, each with its particu-
lar alloy and limitation, are somewhat violently
held together by a continual synthetic effort, so as
to constitute a manuductory system, byjvhich the


Digitized by Google


THE CHURCH AND ITS FUTURE


279


growing soul is brought to the perfect stature
of the Christ-possessed personality. This has
been the work of instinct and experience, rather
than of design directed by a recognition of the
laws of religion. It has all the imperfection
and clumsiness of tentative gropings. But it
gives us good reason to think that Catholic
Christianity is more capable of conforming itself
to the exigencies of a historical science of
religion than any of those forms that have
narrowed themselves to the development of some
particular element of Catholicism, even though
it be the highest In fact, the science of religion
would, in some sense, be a science of Catholicism
of a microcosm in which the whole religious
process of the world is represented.

Modernists are not such Utopian dreamers as to
imagine that those, whose temporal interests are
vested in existing Catholicism and its worst cor-
ruptions, will ever open their arms to welcome
such a science. Which of the sciences have they
not persecuted ? Much more will they persecute
that which deals with religion itself, their peculiar
field of exploitation. The control of men's con-
sciences, and, thereby, of their conduct and re-
sources, is too valuable a weapon of aggrandisement
not to be grasped at by the secular power, be it
that of Czar or King or Republic; of papal


Digitized by Google


2&> CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSS ROADS


monarchy or the bureaucracy that works for its
restoration.

It is not of Catholicism in the grip of the ex-
ploiter, but of Catholicism as a living and lived
religion, as a school of souls, that Modernists are
thinking. Opposed tooth and nail by the ex-
ploiters of religion, science after science has made
its way and found harbourage in the general mind,
even of Catholicism — the most exploited because
the most widely influential of all religions and the
most dangerously independent in its principles.
Hence the exploiter has ever striven to subject
the consciences and personalities of its members
to the divine right arrogated to himself.

What tyranny ever voted its own destruction
or admitted a truth fatal to its interests? Will
the Roman bureaucracy, that exploits even the
Papacy, ever resign their revenues and their
ascendency? Modernists do not believe it for a
/ moment Their whole hope is in the irresistible
tide of truth and knowledge, which must at last
surround and overmount the barriers of ignorance,
buttressed up by untruthfulness; and, above all,
in such inward and living Christianity as may still
be left in a rapidly dying Church. Is it not the
very growth of the spirit that is straining the old
categories and forms and seeking a better em-
bodiment — and this more especially in Catholicism,


Digitized by Google


THE CHURCH AND ITS FUTURE 281


where the strain is most acutely felt and the pre-
tensions of the exploiter are revealed by their
growing shamelessness ?

While such hopes, be they ever so delusive,
live in him, why should the Modernist leave his
Church? Where else will he find the true,
Catholicism of which he dreams? In this or
that body he may find some neglected principle
of Catholicism, emphasised and developed, but
in isolation from the rest and at the cost of
integral Christianity. He would find a religion
as little, or less, Catholic in fact, and far less in
potentiality.

An idealist is not necessarily a fool. He sees
further, though more dimly, than the practical man,
who calculates on inductions from the past, and
on the presumption that no new factor will inter-
vene. Yet what he sees may be true. The
Modernist knows, not only as much of the difficul-
ties of his ideal, but a great deal more than the
Protestant or free-thinking critic, who sums him
up in a smart article, whether encouraging or
discouraging ; and, accordingly, he is neither en-
couraged nor discouraged.

The reason why, fronted by the same date; one
man hopes and another despairs, is just a differ-
ence of personality, temperament and experience.
Hence even those who see eye to eye with the


Digitized by Google


aSs CHRISTIANITY AT THE CROSSROADS


Modernist may not, and in most cases will not,
agree with him. But they will respect the hope
which they do not share, while those who despise
this hope cannot truly understand it.

It is the spirit of Christ that has again and
again saved the Church from the hands of her
worldly oppressors within and without ; for where
that spirit is, there is liberty. Deliverance comes
from below, from those who are bound, not from
those who bind. It is easy to quench a glimmer-
ing light caught by the eyes of a few; but not
the light of the noonday sun— of knowledge that
has become objective and valid for all. It is
through knowledge of this kind that God has
inaugurated a new epoch in man's intellectual life
and extended his lordship over Nature. Shall He
do less for man's spiritual life when the times are
ripe? and are they not ripening? Are we not
hastening to an impasse — to one of those ex-
tremities which are God's opportunities ?


WILLIAM BRENDON AND SON, LTD.
PRINTERS, PLYMOUTH


Digitized by Google


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google
