United Nations General Assembly Resolution 22
United Nations General Assembly
United Nations General Assembly Resolution 22, adopted 13 February 1946.
Public domain: United Nations official record. Text transcribed from English Wikisource (https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/United_Nations_General_Assembly_Resolution_22).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

=== A. Resolution Relating to the Adoption of the General Convention on Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, and Text of this Convention. ===
The General Assembly approves the annexed convention on the privileges and immunities of the United Nations and proposes it for accession by each Member of the United Nations.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.


=== Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations ===
Whereas Article 104 of the Charter of the United Nations provides that the Organization shall enjoy in the territory of each of its members such legal capacity as may be necessary for the exercise of its functions and the fulfillment of its purposes and
Whereas Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations provides that the Organization shall enjoy in the territory of each of its Members such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the fulfillment of its purposes and that representatives of the Members of the United Nations and officials of the Organization shall similarly enjoy such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the independent exercise of the functions in connection with the Organization:
Consequently the General Assembly by a resolution adopted on 13 February 1946 approved the following convention and proposes it for accession by each Member of the United Nations.


==== Article I - Juridical Personality ====
Section 1. The United Nations shall possess juridical personality. It shall have the capacity:

(a) to contract;
(b) to acquire and dispose of immovable and movable property;
(c) to institute legal proceedings.


==== Article II - Property, Funds, and Assets ====
Section 2. The United Nations, its property and assets wherever located and by whomsoever held, shall enjoy immunity from every form of legal process except in so far as in any particular case it has expressly waived its immunity. It is, however, understood that no waiver of immunity shall extend to any measure of execution.
Section 3. The premises of the United Nations shall be inviolable. The property and assets of the United Nations, wherever located and by whomsoever held, shall be immune from search, requisition, confiscation, expropriation and any other form of interference, whether by executive, administrative, judicial or legislative action.
Section 4. The archives of the United Nations and in general all documents belonging to it or held by it, shall be inviolable wherever located.
Section 5. Without being restricted by financial controls, regulations or moratoria of any kind,

(a) The United Nations may hold funds, gold or currency of any kind and operate accounts in any currency;
(b) The United Nations shall be free to transfer its funds, gold or currency from one country to another or within any country and to convert any currency held by it into any other currency.
Section 6. In exercising its rights under section 5 above, the United Nations shall pay due regard to any representations made by the Government of any Member in so far as it is considered that effect can be given to such representatives without detriment to the interests of the United Nations.
Section 7. The United Nations, its assets, income and other property shall be:

(a) exempt from all direct taxes; it is understood, however, that the United Nations will not claim exemption from taxes which are, in fact, no more than charges for public utility services;
(b) exempt from customs duties and prohibitions and restrictions on imports and exports in respect of articles imported or exported by the United Nations for its official use. It is understood, however, that articles imported under such exemption will not be sold in the country into which they were imported except under conditions agreed with the Government of that country;
(c) exempt from customs duties and prohibitions and restrictions on imports and exports in respect of its publications.
Section 8. While the United Nations will not, as a general rule, claim exemption from excise duties and from taxes on the sale of movable and immovable property which form part of the price to be paid, nevertheless, when the United Nations is making important purchases for official use of property on which such duties and taxes have been charged or are chargeable, Members will, whenever possible, make appropriate administrative arrangements for the remission or return of the amount of duty or tax.


==== Article III - Facilities in Respect of Communications ====
Section 9. The United Nations shall enjoy in the territory of each Member for its official communications treatment not less favorable than that accorded by the Government of that Member to any other Government, including its diplomatic mission, in the matter of priorities, rates and taxes on mails, cables, telegrams, radiograms, telephotos, telephone and other communications; and press rates for information to the press and radio. No censorship shall be applied to the official correspondence and other official communications of the United Nations.
Section 10. The United Nations shall have the right to use codes and to dispatch and receive its correspondence by courier or in bags, which shall have the same immunities and privileges as diplomatic couriers and bags.


==== Article IV - The Representatives of Members ====
Section 11. Representatives of Members to the principal and subsidiary organs of the United Nations and to conferences convened by the United Nations shall, while exercising their functions and during their journey to and from the place of meeting, enjoy the following privileges and immunities:

(a) immunity from personal arrest or detention and from seizure of their personal baggage, and, in respect of words spoken or written and all acts done by them in their capacity as representatives, immunity from legal process of every kind;
(b) inviolability for all papers and documents;
(c) the right to use codes and to receive papers or correspondence by courier or in sealed bags;
(d) exemption in respect of themselves and their spouses from immigration restrictions, aliens registration or national service obligations in the State they are visiting or through which they are passing in the exercise of their functions;
(e) the same facilities in respect of currency or exchange restrictions as are accorded to representatives of foreign governments on temporary official missions;
(f) the same immunities and facilities in respect of their personal baggage as are accorded to diplomatic envoys, and also;
(g) such other privileges, immunities and facilities, not inconsistent with the foregoing, as diplomatic envoys enjoy, except that they shall have no right to claim exemption from customs duties on goods imported (otherwise than as part of their personal baggage) or from excise duties or sales taxes.
Section 12. In order to secure for the representatives of Members to the principal and subsidiary organs of the United Nations and to conferences convened by the United Nations, complete freedom of speech and independence in the discharge of their duties, the immunity from legal process in respect of works spoken or written and all acts done by them in discharging their duties shall continue to be accorded, notwithstanding that the persons concerned are no longer the representatives of Members.
Section 13. Where the incidence of any form of taxation depends upon residence, periods during which the representatives of Members to the principal and subsidiary organs of the United Nations and to conferences convened by the United Nations are present in a State for the discharge of their duties shall not be considered as periods of residence.
Section 14. Privileges and immunities are accorded to the representatives of Members not for the personal benefit of the individuals themselves, but in order to safeguard the independent exercise of their functions in connection with the United Nations. Consequently a Member not only has the right but is under a duty to waive the immunity of its representative in any case where in the opinion of the Member the immunity would impede the course of justice, and it can be waived without prejudice to the purpose for which the immunity is accorded.
Section 15. The provisions of sections 11, 12, and 13 are not applicable as between a representative and the authorities of a State of which he is a national or of which he is or has been the representative.
Section 16. In this article the expression "representatives" shall be deemed to include all delegates, deputy delegates, advisers, technical experts, and secretaries of delegations.


==== Article V - Officials ====
Section 17. The Secretary-General will specify the categories of officials to which the provisions of this article and article VII shall apply. He shall submit these categories to the General Assembly. Thereafter these categories shall be communicated to the Governments of all Members. The names of the officials included in these categories shall from time to time be made known to the Governments of Members.
Section 18. Officials of the United Nations shall:

(a) be immune from legal process in respect of words spoken or written and all acts performed by them in their official capacity;
(b) be exempt from taxation on the salaries and emoluments paid to them by the United Nations;
(c) be immune from national service obligations;
(d) be immune, together with their spouses and relatives dependent on them, from immigration restrictions and alien registration;
(e) be accorded the same privileges in respect of exchange facilities as are accorded to the officials of comparable ranks forming part of diplomatic missions to the government concerned;
(f) be given, together with their spouses and relatives dependent on them, the same repatriation facilities in time of international crisis as diplomatic envoys;
(g) have the right to import free of duty their furniture and effects at the time of taking up their post in the country in question.
Section 19. In addition to the immunities and privileges specified in section 18, the Secretary-General and all Assistant Secretaries-General shall be accorded in respect of themselves, their spouses and minor children, the privileges and immunities, exemptions and facilities accorded to diplomatic envoys, in accordance with international law.
Section 20. Privileges and immunities are granted to officials in the interests of the United Nations and not for the personal benefit of the individuals themselves. The Secretary-General shall have the right and the duty to waive immunity of any official in any case where, in his opinion, the immunity would impede the course of justice and can be waived without prejudice to the interests of the United Nations. In the case of the Secretary-General, the Security Council shall have the right to waive immunity. 
Section 21. The United Nations shall cooperate at all times with the appropriate authorities of Members to facilitate the proper administration of justice, secure the observance of police regulations, and prevent the occurrence of any abuse in connection with the privileges, immunities, and facilities mentioned in this article.


==== Article VI - Experts on Missions for the United Nations ====
Section 22. Experts (other than officials coming within the scope of article V) performing missions for the United Nations shall be accorded such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the independent exercise of their functions during the period of their missions, including the time spent on journeys in connection with their missions. In particular they shall be accorded:

(a) immunity from personal arrest or detention and from seizure of their personal baggage;
(b) in respect of words spoken or written and acts dont by them in the course of the performance of their mission, immunity from legal process of every kind. This immunity from legal process shall continue to be accorded notwithstanding that the persons concerned are no longer employed on missions for the United Nations;
(c) inviolability for all papers and documents;
(d) for the purpose of their communications with the United Nations, the right to use codes and to receive papers or correspondence by courier or in sealed bags;
(e) the same facilities in respect of currency or exchange restrictions as are accorded to representatives of foreign governments on temporary official missions;
(f) the same immunities and facilities in respect of their personal baggage as are accorded to diplomatic envoys.
Section 23. Privileges and immunities are granted to experts in the interests of the United Nations and not for the personal benefit of the individuals themselves. The Secretary-General shall have the right and the duty to waive the immunity of any expert in any case where, in his opinion, the immunity would impede the course of justice and it can be waived without prejudice to the interests of the United Nations.


==== Article VII - United Nations Laissez-Passer ====
Section 24. The United Nations may issue United Nations laissez-passer to its officials. These laissez-passer shall be recognized and accepted as valid travel documents, by the authorities of Members, taking into account the provisions of section 25.
Section 25. Applications for visas (where required) from the holders of United Nations laissez-passer, when accompanied by a certificate that they are travelling on the business of the United Nations, shall be dealt with as speedily as possible. In addition, such persons shall be granted facilities for speedy travel. 
Section 26. Similar facilities to those specified in section 25 shall be accorded to experts and other persons who, though not the holders of United Nations laissez-passer, have a certificate that they are travelling on the business of the United Nations. 
Section 27. The Secretary-General, Assistant Secretaries-General and Directors travelling on United Nations laissez-passer on the business of the United Nations shall be granted the same facilities as are accorded to diplomatic envoys.
Section 28. The provisions of this article may be applied to the comparable officials of specialized agencies if the agreements for relationship made under Article 63 of the Charter so provide.


==== Article VIII - Settlement of Disputes ====
Section 29. The United Nations shall make provisions for appropriate modes of settlement of:

(a) disputes arising out of contracts or other disputes of a private law character, to which the United Nations is a party;
(b) disputes involving any official of the United Nations who by reason of his official position enjoys immunity, if immunity has not been waived by the Secretary-General.
Section 30. All differences arising out of the interpretation or application of the present convention shall be referred to the International Court of Justice, unless in any case it is agreed by the parties to have recourse to another mode of settlement. If a difference arises between the United Nations on one hand and a Member on the other hand, a request shall be made for an advisory opinion on any legal question involved in accordance with Article 96 of the Charter and Article 65 of the Statute of the Court. The opinion given by the Court shall be accepted as decisive by the parties.


==== Final Article ====
Section 31. This convention is submitted to every Member of the United Nations for accession.
Section 32. Accession shall be effected by deposit of an instrument with the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the convention shall come into force as regards each Member on the date of deposit of each instrument of accession.
Section 33. The Secretary-General shall inform all Members of the United Nations of the deposit of each accession.
Section 34. It is understood that, when an instrument of accession is deposited on behalf of any Member, the Member will be in a position under its own law to give effect to the terms of this convention.
Section 35. This convention shall continue in force as between the United Nations and every member which has deposited an instrument of accession for so long as that Member remains a Member of the United Nations, or until a revised general convention has been approved by the General Assembly and that Member has become a party to this revised convention.
Section 36. The Secretary-General may conclude with any Member or Members supplementary agreements adjusting the provisions of this convention so far as that Member or those Members are concerned. These supplementary agreements shall in each case be subject to the approval of the General Assembly.


=== B. Resolution Relating to Negotiations With the Competent Authorities of the United States of America Concerning the Arrangements Required As a Result of the Establishment of the Seat of the United Nations in the United States of America, and Text, of a Draft Convention To Be Transmitted As a Basis of Discussion For These Negotiations. ===
1. The General Assembly authorizes the Secretary-General (with the assistance of a committee composed of persons appointed by the governments of Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, China, Cuba, Egypt, France, Poland, United Kingdom, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) to negotiate with the competent authorities of the United States of America the arrangements required as a result of the establishment of the seat of the United Nations in the United States of America.
2. The following draft convention is transmitted by the General Assembly to the Secretary-General for use in these negotiations as a basis of discussion.
3. The Secretary-General shall report to the General Assembly the results of these negotiations. 
4. Any agreement apart from purely temporary agreements with the competent authorities of the United States resulting from these negotiations shall be subject to approval by the General Assembly before being signed on behalf of the United Nations.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.


=== Convention Between the United Nations and the Government of the United States of America ===
THE UNITED NATIONS AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA:
Desiring to conclude a convention for the purpose of carrying out the resolution adopted by the General Assembly, to establish the seat of the United Nations in _______ and to regulate questions arising as a result thereof:
Who have agreed as follows:


==== Article I - Definitions ====
Section 1. In this convention:

(a) the expression "zone" means the area referred to in section 2, including any additions to it;
(b) the expression "law of the United States of America" includes federal, state, and local laws, however designated;
(c) the expression "Government of the United States of America" includes a State or a competent state authority wherever the context so requires;
(d) the expression "courts of the United States of America" includes federal and state courts;
(e) the expression "United Nations" means the International Organization established by the Charter of the United Nations.


==== Article II - The United Nations Zone ====
Section 2. The seat of the United Nations shall be the area situated and marked pink on the map which forms annex I. Additions may be made later to this area in accordance with the provisions of section 8. 
Section 3. The Government of the United States of America undertakes, on the entry into force of this convention, to cause to be vested in the United Nations possession immediately and full ownership as soon as possible of all land in the zone as shown in annex I and of all buildings situated thereon at the time of transfer.
Section 4. The Government of the United States of America shall be responsible for expropriating and compensating so far as necessary and as soon as possible all interests in land and buildings conveyed to the United Nations.
Section 5. Having regard to section 4, the United Nations shall pay to the United States of America a fair price for any land and buildings conveyed to the United Nations. The amount so payable shall be credited to the United States of America in the accounts of the United Nations and shall be set off, during such period as may be fixed, against contributions due from the United States of America. In default of agreement, this price and this period shall be determined by an expert selected by the President of the International Court of Justice.
Section 6. The United Nations shall have exclusive rights over the subsoil of land conveyed to it, and in particular the right to make constructions underground and to obtain therefrom supplies of water. It shall not, however, have the right to exploit minerals.
Section 7. The United Nations may establish in the zone any type of installation which it deems necessary for the purpose of its work, and in particular may establish its own radio telegraph sending and receiving stations, including broadcasting, teletype, and telephoto services. The United Nations shall make arrangements with the International Telecommunications Union with regard to wavelengths and other similar matters.
Section 8. The Government of the United States of America shall, at the request of the Secretary-General acting in pursuance of a resolution of the General Assembly, cause to be vested in the United Nations possession immediately and full ownership as soon as possible over such further land as may be required for the purpose of constructing an airport, railway station, or radio telegraphic station or for other such purposes as may be required by the United Nations. The provisions of sections 4, 5 and 6 shall apply to land so conveyed.
Section 9. In the event of the land conveyed in accord with section 8 not being contiguous to the remainder of the zone, the Government of the United States of America shall guarantee unimpeded communication and transit between parts of the zone.


==== Article III - Law and Authority in the Zone ====
Section 10. The zone, including the air space above it and the subsoil below it, shall be inviolable.
Section 11. Save as otherwise provided in this convention, the zone shall be under the control and authority of the United Nations.
Section 12. Without prejudice to the generality of section 11, the Government of the United States of America renounces jurisdiction over any matters relating to entry into the zone and to the conditions under which persons may remain or reside there, and over any matters relating to the construction or removal of buildings in the zone.
Section 13. Officers or officials of any authority in the territory of the United States of America, whether administrative, judicial, military or police, shall not enter the zone to perform any official duties therein except with the permission of and under conditions agreed by the Secretary-General. The service of legal process, including the seizure of private property, shall take place within the zone under conditions approved by the Secretary-General.
Section 14. Without prejudice to the provisions which are contained in annex II and subsequently in the General Convention referred to in section 32, and which relate to the immunities of officials of the United Nations and of the representatives of Members, the United Nations shall not permit the zone to become a refuge either for persons who are avoiding arrest under the law of the United States of America or are required by the Government of the United States of America for extradition to another country, or for persons who are endeavoring to avoid service of legal process.
Section 15. Subject to section 16, the law of the United States of America shall apply within the zone, and in particular the ordinary civil and criminal law.
Section 16. The United Nations may enact regulations making provisions of an administrative character for the zone. Any such regulation shall prevail over any provisions in the law of the United States of America which are inconsistent with it. It is agreed that within the zone the protection afforded by the Constitution of the United States to personal liberty and to the basic human freedoms of expression and worship shall not be lessened, and no form of racial discrimination shall be permitted.
Section 17. The courts of the United States of America shall, without prejudice to any provisions of annex II and subsequently of the General Convention referred to in section 32, have jurisdiction over acts done and transactions taking place in the zone, in the same manner as they have over similar acts and transactions taking place outside the zone.
Section 18. The courts of the United States of America, when dealing with cases arising out of or relating to acts done or transactions taking place in the zone, shall take cognizance of the regulations enacted by the United Nations under section 16, though they shall not be obliged to inflict penalties for infraction of such regulations unless the Government of the United States of America has agreed to these regulations before the infraction was committed.


==== Article IV - Communications and Transit to and from the Zone ====
Section 19. The Government of the United States of America shall guarantee at all times adequate means of communication to and from the zone through the territory of the United States of America, for the passage of persons, the transmission of postal correspondence and telegrams, and the transport of goods required for use and consumption in the zone.
Section 20. Representatives of Members, irrespective of the relations existing between their Government and the Government of the United States of America, officials both of the United Nations and of the specialized agencies, and the families of those representatives and officials, shall at all times enjoy the right of unimpeded and safe transit through the territory of the United States of America to and from the zone.
Section 21. The accredited representatives of news agencies, whether press, radio or films, and of non-governmental organizations recognized by the United Nations for the purposes of consultation, shall also enjoy the rights referred to in section 20.
Section 22. Immigration and other regulations in force in the United States of America, regarding the entry and residence of foreigners, shall not be applied in such a manner as to interfere with the rights referred to in sections 20 and 21. Visas required by the persons referred to in those sections shall be granted without charge, without delay and without requirement of personal attendance for the issue of the visa.
Section 23. The Government of the United States of America shall give or cause to be given facilities for the issue of visas to, and for the use of the available means of transport by, persons coming from abroad (other than those referred to in sections 20 and 21) who desire to visit the zone. The Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Government of the United States of America shall, at the request of either of them, enter into discussion with regard to the application of this section.
Section 24. The provisions of this article shall not prevent the Government of the United States of America from taking precautions in the interests of national security, provided that such precautions shall not have the effect of interfering with the rights referred to in sections 19, 20, and 21. 


==== Article V - Resident Representatives to the United Nations ====
Section 25. Persons accredited to the United Nations by Members as resident representatives and their staffs, whether residing inside or outside of the zone, shall be recognized by the Government of the United States of America as entitled on its territory to the same privileges and immunities as that Government accords to the diplomatic envoys accredited to it, and the staffs of these envoys.


==== Article VI - Police Protection of the Zone ====
Section 26. The Government of the United States of America shall cause to be provided on the boundaries of the zone such police protection for the zone as is required, and shall be responsible for ensuring that the tranquility of the zone is not disturbed by the unauthorized entry of bodies of persons from outside or by disturbances in its immediate vicinity.
Section 27. If so requested by the Secretary-General, the Government of the United States of America shall cause to be provided a sufficient number of police to perform duties inside the zone for the preservation of law and order therein, and for the removal of persons who have committed or are suspected of having committed or of being about to commit offenses, including infractions to the administrative regulations of the United Nations.


==== Article VII - Public Services for and the Amenities of the Zone ====
Section 28. The Government of the United States of America will exercise all the powers which it possesses to ensure that the zone shall be supplied on equitable terms with the necessary public services (including electricity, water, gas, post, telephone, telegraph, drainage, collection of refuse) and that these services shall not be interrupted. In case of any interruption or threatened interruption of any of these services, the Government of the United States of America will consider the needs of the zone as being of equal importance with the essential services of the United States Government itself. Consequently, in that event it will take all those steps which it would take in case of interruption or threatened interruption of these services to the essential Departments of the United States Government to ensure that the work of the United Nations is not prejudiced.
Section 29. The Government of the United States of America shall be responsible for ensuring that the amenities of the zone are not prejudiced and the purposes for which the zone is required are not obstructed by any use made of the land in its vicinity.


==== Article VIII - Matters Relating to the Operation of this Convention ====
Section 30. The Secretary-General and the Government of the United States of America shall settle by agreement the channel or channels through which shall be conducted correspondence relating to the application of the provisions of this convention and to other questions affecting the zone. If the Secretary-General so requests, the Government of the United States of America shall appoint a special representative for the purpose of liaison with the Secretary-General.
Section 31. In so far as the fulfillment of this convention requires cooperation and action by any state or other non-federal authority of the United States of America, the Government of the United States will conclude with that state or authority such agreements are are necessary for this purpose. The conclusion of these agreements, together with the enactment of any necessary legislation by the United States and by the state, shall be completed before the notice is given which is required under section 35 to be given by the Government of the United States of America before this convention enters into force.


==== Article IX - Relation between this Convention and the General Convention ====
Section 32. Until the Government of the United States of America becomes a party to the general convention relating to the privileges and immunities of the United Nations, the provisions of annex II shall apply between the United Nations and the Government of the United States of America. Thereafter, those provisions shall be replaced by the provisions of the General Convention, which shall continue in force so long as the present convention remains in operation.
Section 33. The provisions of this convention shall be complementary to the provisions of the general convention and, until the Government of the United States of America becomes a party to the general convention, to the provisions of annex II.
Section 34. In so far as any provision of this convention and any provision of the general convention (or of annex II as the case may be) relate to the same subject matter, the two provisions shall, wherever possible, be treated as complementary, so that both provisions shall be applicable and neither shall narrow the effect of the other; but in any case of absolute conflict, the provisions of this convention shall prevail.


==== Article X - Final Provisions ====
Section 35. This convention, having already been approved by a resolution of the General Assembly, shall enter into force as soon as the Government of the United States of America notifies the Secretary-General that it has all the powers necessary to fulfill the provisions of the convention. The Government of the United States of America shall take every possible step to enable it to give this notification as soon as possible, and in any case not later than ______.
Section 36. This convention shall remain in force so long as the seat of the United Nations is maintained in the territory of the United States of America.
Section 37. The seat of the United Nations shall only be removed from the territory of the United States of America if the United Nations should so decide.
Section 38. If the seat of the United Nations is removed from the territory of the United States of America, the Government of the United States of America shall pay to the United Nations an equitable sum for the land in the zone and for all buildings and installations thereon. An expert nominated by the President of the International Court of Justice shall decide, in default of agreement between the parties, what sum is equitable, having regard to:

(a) the then value to the United States of America of the land, buildings and installations; and
(b) the cost incurred by the United Nations in acquiring the land and in erecting the buildings and installations.
Section 39. Any difference between the United Nations and the Government of the United States of America concerning the interpretation or application of this convention or of any supplementary agreement or agreement which is not settled by negotiation shall be referred to the arbitration of an umpire appointed for the purpose by the President of the International Court of Justice.
Section 40. Either party may ask the General Assembly to request of the International Court of Justice an advisory opinion on any legal opinion arising in the course of the proceedings referred to in section 39. Pending the receipt of the opinion of the Court, and interim decision of the umpire shall be observed by both parties. Thereafter the umpire shall render a final decision, having regard to the opinion of the Court.
IN WITNESS THEREOF THE ABOVEMENTIONED PLENIPOTENTIARIES HAVE SIGNED THIS CONVENTION.


=== C. Resolution on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Court of Justice. ===
1. The General Assembly, with a view to ensuring that the International Court of Justice shall enjoy the privileges, immunities, and facilities necessary for the exercise of its functions and the fulfillment of its purposes, in the country of its seat and elsewhere, invites the members of the Court at their first session to consider this question and to inform the Secretary-General of their recommendations.
2. The General Assembly decides that the question of the privileges and immunities of the Court shall be considered as soon as possible after the receipt of the recommendations of the Court.
3. The General Assembly recommends that, until further action has been taken, the rules which have been applied to the Permanent Court of International Justice should be observed by Members in relation to the International Court of Justice.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.


=== D. Resolution on the Coordination of the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies ===
The General Assembly considers that there are many advantages in the unification as far as possible of the privileges and immunities enjoyed by the United Nations and the various specialized agencies.
While recognizing that not all specialized agencies require all the privileges and immunities which may be needed by others, and that certain of these may, by reason of their particular functions, require privileges of a special nature which are not required by the United Nations itself, the General Assembly considers that the privileges and immunities of the United Nations should be regarded, as a general rule, as a maximum within which the various specialized agencies should enjoy such privileges and immunities as the appropriate fulfillment of their respective functions may require, and that no privileges and immunities which are not really necessary should be asked for.
Therefore the General Assembly instructs the Secretary-General to open negotiations with a view to the re-consideration, in the light both of the General Convention adopted by the United Nations and of the considerations above, of the provisions under which the specialized agencies at present enjoy privileges and immunities.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.


=== E. Resolution Relating to the Insurance Against Third Party Risks of Motor-Cars of the Organization and of Members of the Staff ===
It has been found that a frequent source of difficulty is road accidents in which motor cars, owned or driven by persons possessing immunity from legal process, are involved.
It is the intention of the United Nations to prevent the occurrence of any abuse in connection with privileges, immunities and facilities granted to it under Articles 104 and 105 of the Charter and the general convention on privileges and immunities, which determines the details of the application of these articles.
Therefore the General Assembly instructs the Secretary-General to ensure that the drivers of all official motor-cars of the United Nations and all members of the staff, who own or drive motor-cars, shall be properly insured against third party risks.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.


=== F. Resolution Relating to Arrangements to be Made so that Officials of Members Who Are Transferred or Seconded for Service with the United Nations Should Not Lose their Accrued Pension Rights by Reason of such Transfer or Secondment ===
In order to facilitate the engagement, as members of the staff of the United Nations, of persons who have accrued pension rights as officials, whether of the central government of Members, or of subordinate governmental or other administrative authorities within the territory of Members, it is desirable that arrangements should be made to secure that accrued pension rights are not lost when such persons accept posts on the staff of the United Nations, by way either of transfer or of secondment.
Therefore, the General Assembly recommends that after such discussion with the Secretary-General as may be necessary to settle details the governments of Members adopt such legislative or administrative measures as may be required to preserve such pension rights.
Thirty-fist plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.
