United Nations General Assembly Resolution 31/6
United Nations General Assembly
United Nations General Assembly Resolution 31/6, adopted 1976.
Public domain: United Nations official record. Text transcribed from English Wikisource (https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/United_Nations_General_Assembly_Resolution_31/6).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

=== A. The So-Called Independent Transkei and Other Bantustans ===
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3411 D (XXX) of 28 November 1975 condemning the establishment of bantustans by the racist régime of South Africa,
Taking note that the racist régime of South Africa declared the sham "independence" of the Transkei on 26 October 1976,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid and its special reports,

1. Strongly condemns the establishment of bantustans as designed to consolidate the inhuman policies of apartheid, to destroy the territorial integrity of the country, to perpetuate white minority domination and to dispossess the African people of South Africa of their inalienable rights;
2. Rejects the declaration of "independence" of the Transkei and declares it invalid;
3. Calls upon all Governments to deny any form of recognition to the so-called independent Transkei and to refrain from having any dealings with the so-called independent Transkei or any other bantustans;
4. Requests all States to take effective measures to prohibit all individuals, corporations and other institutions under their jurisdiction from having any dealings with the so-called independent Transkei or any other bantustans.
42nd plenary meeting, 26 October 1976.


=== B. United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa ===
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the Trust Fund, to which is annexed the report of the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa,
Reaffirming that humanitarian assistance by the international community to all those persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia is appropriate and essential,
Deeply concerned over the massive repression of opponents of apartheid and racial discrimination in South Africa, including the killing of numerous peaceful demonstrators,

1. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments, organizations and individuals that have contributed to the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
2. Endorses the urgent appeal of the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa for more generous contributions to the Trust Fund;
3. Commends all voluntary agencies which are engaged in rendering humanitarian assistance to the victims of apartheid and racial discrimination.
58th plenary meeting, 9 November 1976.


=== C. Solidarity with South African Political Prisoners ===
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the legitimacy of the struggle of the South African people for the total eradication of apartheid and the exercise of the right of self-determination by all the inhabitants of South Africa,
Noting that the racist régime of South Africa has constantly defied the United Nations resolutions calling upon it to end repression of the leaders of the oppressed people and other opponents of apartheid and to release all persons imprisoned or restricted for struggling against the system of apartheid,
Gravely concerned about the brutal massacres in Soweto and other areas of South Africa and the incarceration of schoolchildren and other persons demonstrating against apartheid and about the continuation of these atrocities in defiance of Security Council resolution 392 (1976) of 19 June 1976,
Commending the heroism and sacrifices of the South African people in their struggle for liberation,

1. Condemns the racist régime of South Africa for its ruthless repression of the oppressed people of South Africa and other opponents of apartheid;
2. Reaffirms its solidarity with all South Africans struggling against apartheid for the establishment of majority rule and the exercise of their right to self-determination and for the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Demands the immediate and unconditional release of all persons imprisoned or restricted for their involvement in the struggle for liberation in South Africa;
4. Proclaims 11 October the Day of Solidarity with South African Political Prisoners;
5. Requests the Centre against Apartheid, in consultation with the Special Committee against Apartheid, to intensify publicity for the cause of all those persecuted for their opposition to apartheid in South Africa.
58th plenary meeting, 9 November 1976.


=== D. Arms Embargo Against South Africa ===
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions concerning the arms embargo against South Africa,
Deeply concerned over the explosive situation in South Africa resulting from the wanton killings by the racist régime of hundreds of peaceful demonstrators against apartheid and racial discrimination, including many schoolchildren,
Condemning the racist régime of South Africa for its colonial war against the Namibian people and its repeated acts of aggression against the People's Republic of Angola and the Republic of Zambia,
Noting that the racist régime of South Africa has used weapons received from its traditional allies, particularly France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Israel, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, as well as other foreign countries, for repression in South Africa and aggression against other States,
Noting further that the racist régime of South Africa has supplied military equipment to the illegal racist minority régime in Southern Rhodesia in flagrant violation of the resolutions of the Security Council,
Noting with concern the continued rapid increase in the military budget of South Africa and the continued violations of the arms embargo against South Africa by its traditional allies, particularly France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Israel, the United Kingdom and the United States, as well as other foreign countries,
Mindful of the primary responsibility of the Security Council for the maintenance of international peace and security,
Strongly convinced that mandatory measures, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, to secure the full implementation of the arms embargo against South Africa are essential to prevent a further aggravation of the situation,
Expressing serious regret that three permanent members of the Security Council -- France, the United Kingdom and the United States -- have so far prevented such measures and thereby facilitated the militarization of South Africa,

1. Requests once again the Security Council to take urgent action, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, to ensure the complete cessation by all States of the supply of arms, ammunition, military vehicles and spare parts thereof, and any other military equipment to South Africa, as well as any cooperation to enable the building-up of military and police forces in South Africa;
2. Further requests the Security Council to call upon all Governments, in particular:
(a) To implement fully the arms embargo against South Africa, without any exception as to the type of weapons, and to prohibit any violations of the arms embargo by companies and individuals within their jurisdiction;
(b) To refrain from importing any military supplies manufactured by, or in collaboration with, South Africa;
(c) To terminate any existing military arrangements with the racist régime of South Africa and to refrain from entering into or planning any such arrangements;
(d) To prohibit any institutions, agencies or companies, within their national jurisdiction, from delivering to South Africa or placing at its disposal any equipment or fissionable material or technology that will enable the racist régime of South Africa to acquire nuclear weapon capability;
3. Calls upon the Governments of France, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America to adopt a positive policy to enable the Security Council to take effective action under Chapter VII of the Charter;
4. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee against Apartheid to continue to promote the full implementation of the arms embargo against South Africa and, to this end, to launch a special campaign to secure the widest public support for the arms embargo.
58th plenary meeting, 9 November 1976.


=== E. Relations Between Israel and South Africa ===
The General Assembly,
Recalling its repeated condemnations of the strengthening of relations and collaboration between the racist régime of South Africa and Israel in the political, military, economic and other fields, as contained in General Assembly resolutions 3151 G (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3324 E (XXIX) of 16 December 1974 and 3411 G (XXX) of 10 December 1975,
Deeply concerned about the fact that Israel has sent paramilitary personnel to train South African troops and about the sale of warships and other war matériel by Israel to South Africa in flagrant violation of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid concerning relations between Israel and South Africa,

1. Strongly condemns the continuing and increasing collaboration by Israel with the racist régime of South Africa as a flagrant violation of the resolutions of the United Nations and as an encouragement to the racist régime of South Africa to persist in its criminal policies;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to disseminate widely the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid, in various languages, in order to mobilize public opinion against the collaboration by Israel with the racist régime of South Africa.
58th plenary meeting, 9 November 1976.


=== F. Apartheid in Sports ===
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2775 D (XXVI) of 29 November 1971 and 3411 E (XXX) of 28 November 1975 on apartheid in sports,
Reaffirming its unqualified support of the Olympic principle that there should be no discrimination on the grounds of race, religion or political affiliation,
Recognizing the importance in the international campaign against apartheid of the boycott of South African sports teams selected on the basis of apartheid,
Regretting that some national and international sports bodies and individual sportsmen have continued contacts with racist South African sports bodies in violation of the Olympic principle and resolutions of the United Nations,
Convinced that effective measures must be taken, as a matter of priority during the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, to abolish apartheid in all fields,
Taking note of the Declaration and the Programme of Action adopted by the International Seminar on the Eradication of Apartheid and in Support of the Struggle for Liberation in South Africa, held at Havana from 24 to 28 May 1976,
Noting also the resolution of the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976, endorsing the proposal for an international convention against apartheid in sports and requesting the United Nations to give urgent consideration to the formulation of such a convention,
Noting further that in its report the Special Committee against Apartheid, inter alia recommended that the General Assembly should consider the proposal for an international convention against apartheid in sports and that meanwhile the Assembly should adopt a declaration on apartheid in sports,

1. Welcomes the proposal for an international convention against apartheid in sports to promote adherence to the Olympic principle of non-discrimination and to discourage and deny support to sporting events organized in violation of that principle;
2. Decides to establish an Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against Apartheid in Sports, composed of the existing members of the Special Committee against Apartheid and seven other Member States to be appointed by the President of the General Assembly on the basis of equitable geographical distribution;
3. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to prepare a draft declaration on apartheid in sports, as an interim measure, and to submit it to the General Assembly as its thirty-second session;
4. Further requests the Ad Hoc Committee to undertake preparatory steps towards the drafting of an international convention against apartheid in sports and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session;
5. Urges all States to implement the recommendations contained in the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid concerning apartheid in sports, namely:
(a) To convey the United Nations resolutions on apartheid in sports to all national sports bodies with a request that necessary action be taken to implement those resolutions;
(b) To refuse any official sponsorship, assistance or encouragement to sports contacts with South Africa, including official receptions to teams and payments of grants to sports bodies or teams or sportsmen involved in sporting competitions with South African teams or sportsmen;
(c) To refuse visas to South African sports bodies or teams or sportsmen, except for non-racial sports bodies endorsed by the Special Committee and the liberation movements;
(d) To deny facilities to sports bodies or teams or sportsmen for visits to South Africa;
(e) To encourage national sports bodies concerned to support the exclusion of South Africa from international sports bodies and tournaments;
6. Calls upon Member States and international sporting organizations to support actively projects undertaken in collaboration with the liberation movements towards the formation of non-racial teams truly representative of South Africa.
58th plenary meeting, 9 November 1976.


=== G. Programme of Work of the Special Committee Against Apartheid ===
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid and its special reports,
Commending the Special Committee for its activities in the discharge of the mandate given to it by the General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the work of the Centre against Apartheid in assisting the Special Committee,
Considering the need for further expansion of the activities of the Special Committee -- in close cooperation with the specialized agencies, the movement of non-aligned countries, the Organization of African Unity, the League of Arab States, the South African liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity, and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations -- at this crucial stage of the struggle for the eradication of apartheid and the exercise by the South African people of their right to self-determination,

1. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid to continue and to intensify its activities to promote concerted international action against apartheid in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
2. Requests all organs of the United Nations concerned with problems of decolonization to cooperate and consult with the Special Committee with a view to ensuring the coordination of efforts;
3. Authorizes the Special Committee:
(a) To send missions composed of members of the Special Committee and representatives of the African National Congress of South Africa and the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania to Governments of Member States, to the headquarters of specialized agencies and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, as well as trade union confederations, as required, for consultations to promote the international campaign against apartheid;
(b) To take appropriate steps to promote closer cooperation with the movement of non-aligned countries, the Organization of African Unity and other appropriate intergovernmental organizations;
(c) To participate in conferences concerned with apartheid;
(d) To invite representatives of the South African national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity and those of other organizations, as well as experts on apartheid, for consultation on various aspects of apartheid and on action against apartheid;
4. Authorizes the Special Committee to organize a World Conference for Action against Apartheid in 1977, in accordance with the recommendations contained in paragraphs 296 to 302 of its report;
5. Further authorizes the Special Committee to convene an International Conference of Trade Unions against Apartheid, in accordance with paragraphs 269 to 274 of its report;
6. Approves the recommendations contained in the report of the Special Committee concerning information activity against apartheid by the United Nations and the specialized agencies and requests it to take appropriate action towards the implementation of those recommendations;
7. Authorizes the Special Committee to establish an award to be presented to persons who have, in cooperation with the United Nations and in solidarity with the South African liberation movements, contributed significantly to the international campaign against apartheid;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary steps to enable the Centre against Apartheid to continue to provide effective assistance to the Special Committee;
9. Invites all specialized agencies and other inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations to cooperate with the Special Committee in the discharge of its task.
58th plenary meeting, 9 November 1976.


=== H. Economic Collaboration with South Africa ===
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid and its special reports,
Recalling its resolutions on the policies of apartheid of the racist régime of South Africa,
Noting with grave concern that some Governments, in pursuing strategic and economic and other interests, continue to collaborate with the racist régime of South Africa and thereby encourage it to persist in its criminal policies,

1. Proclaims that any collaboration with the racist régime of South Africa constitutes a hostile act against the oppressed people of South Africa and a contemptuous defiance of the United Nations and the international community;
2. Strongly condemns the action of those States and foreign economic and other interests which continue to collaborate with the racist régime of South Africa;
3. Calls upon Member States still engaged in economic collaboration and trade with the racist régime of South Africa to implement the relevant General Assembly resolutions and to cease forthwith any such collaboration with that régime;
4. Calls upon all Governments to take effective action to prohibit all loans to or investments in South Africa by banks and corporations within their national jurisdiction;
5. Condemns the intensified activities of transnational corporations, which continue to exploit the racially oppressed people of South Africa and plunder its natural resources and thereby are accomplices to the crimes of the apartheid régime;
6. Requests all agencies within the United Nations system to refrain from any dealings with corporations which provide any loans to, or make any investment in, South Africa;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council to invite the Commission on Transnational Corporations to study and publicize the involvement of transnational corporations in the apartheid economy of South Africa;
8. Requests the International Monetary Fund to refrain forthwith from extending credits to South Africa;
9. Requests the Economic and Social Council to invite the Commission on Human Rights to give special attention to the scope and consequences of the activities of the transnational corporations in South Africa;
10. Commends all those Governments which have ceased all economic collaboration with the racist régime of South Africa in compliance with the relevant United Nations resolutions;
11. Commends all anti-apartheid movements, churches, trade unions and other organizations which are engaged in shareholder actions or other activities to discourage collaboration by transnational corporations with South Africa.
58th plenary meeting, 9 November 1976.


=== I. Situation in South Africa ===
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid, and its special reports,
Taking note of the national uprising of the oppressed people of South Africa against the apartheid regime,
Outraged by the continuing massacres and other atrocities by the racist regime of South Africa against schoolchildren and other peaceful demonstrators against apartheid and racial discrimination,
Gravely concerned about the military and other activities of the racist regime of South Africa and, in particular, about the nuclear collaboration aimed at the establishment of nuclear installations and the transfer of nuclear technology to South Africa,
Conscious that mercenaries and their organizations are active in the territory of South Africa and participate in the acts of aggression of that country against the African peoples and States members of the Organization of African Unity,
Convinced that the situation in South Africa constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
Reaffirming that the policy and practice of apartheid constitutes a crime against humanity,
Welcoming the coming into force of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid,
Mindful of the special responsibility of the United Nations and the international community towards the oppressed people of South Africa and their liberation movements and towards those imprisoned, restricted or exiled for their struggle against apartheid,

1. Proclaims that the racist regime of South Africa is illegitimate and has no right to represent the people of South Africa;
2. Reaffirms that the national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity -- the African National Congress of South Africa and the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania -- are the authentic representatives of the overwhelming majority of the South African people;
3. Strongly condemns the racist regime of South Africa for its criminal policies and practices of apartheid, its massacres of black people, including schoolchildren, and its ruthless repression of all those struggling against apartheid;
4. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of the oppressed people of South Africa and their liberation movements, by all possible means, for the seizure of power by the people and the exercise of their inalienable right to self-determination;
5. Recognizes, in particular, that the consistent defiance by the racist regime of South Africa of United Nations resolutions on apartheid and the continued brutal repression, including indiscriminate mass killings, by that regime leave no alternative to the oppressed people of South Africa but to resort to armed struggle to achieve their legitimate rights;
6. Declares that the situation in South Africa, resulting from the policies and actions of the racist regime, constitutes a grave threat to the peace, requiring action under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations;
7. Demands the cessation of any form of military and nuclear cooperation with the racist regime of South Africa;
8. Condemns the racist regime of South Africa for encouragement of the activities of the mercenaries and their organizations in its territory and for their use against the African peoples and States members of the Organization of African Unity;
9. Urgently appeals to all States to enact laws declaring the recruitment, financing, training, transit and assembly of mercenaries for the racist regime of South Africa in their territories a punishable crime and prohibiting their citizens from enlisting as mercenaries;
10. Calls upon the Governments of France, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, in particular:
(a) To desist from the misusing their veto power in the Security Council to protect the racist regime of South Africa;
(b) To enable the Security Council to determine the existence in South Africa of a threat to the peace and to exercise its responsibilities under the Charter;
(c) Not to obstruct but to facilitate the adoption of a mandatory arms embargo and other indispensable measures, under Chapter VII of the Charter; to deal with the grave situation in South Africa;
11. Appeals to all States and organizations to provide all assistance required by the oppressed people of South Africa and their national liberation movements during their legitimate struggle, in the light of the recommendations of the Special Committee against Apartheid;
12. Further calls upon Member States and the specialized agencies, through emergency joint projects and financial assistance, to help Lesotho and other countries bordering South Africa to ensure the provision of educational facilities to the rapidly growing number of refugee students from South Africa;
13. Appeals to all Governments which have not yet done so to become parties to the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid;
14. Authorizes the Special Committee against Apartheid to take all appropriate steps to promote such assistance, including the establishment of a joint United Nations/Organization of African Unity fund financed by voluntary contributions, as recommended in paragraph 264 of its report, and to assist the African National Congress of South Africa and the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania to maintain offices at United Nations Headquarters in New York;
15. Commends the anti-apartheid and solidarity movements and other non-governmental organizations which have taken action against apartheid and in support of the South African national liberation movements;
16. Condemns the racist regime of South Africa for its acts of aggression against neighboring independent African States which have assisted the South African national liberation movements, and invites all Governments to provide these States, at their request, with all necessary assistance for defence against aggression;
17. Proclaims 16 June the International Day of Solidarity with the Struggling People of South Africa and calls upon Member States to commemorate this day in the most fitting way.
58th plenary meeting, 9 November 1976.


=== J. Programme of Action Against Apartheid ===
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid and its special reports,
Welcoming the Declaration and the Programme of Action adopted by the International Seminar on the Eradication of Apartheid and in Support of the Struggle for Liberation in South Africa, held at Havana from 24 to 28 May 1976,
Taking note of the resolutions adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African unity at its twenty-seventh ordinary session, held at Port Louis from 24 June to 3 July 1976,
Taking note also of the declarations and resolutions of the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976,
Considering the need for a programme of action to be implemented by Governments, intergovernmental organizations, trade unions, churches, anti-apartheid and solidarity movements and other non-governmental organizations in order to assist the people of South Africa in their struggle for the total eradication of apartheid and the exercise of the right of self-determination by all the people of South Africa irrespective of race, color and creed,

1. Commends to all Governments, organizations and individuals the Programme of Action against ''Apartheid'' annexed to the present resolution;
2. Requests all United Nations organs and specialized agencies concerned to participate in the implementation of the Programme of Action, in close cooperation with the Special Committee against Apartheid;
3. Requests the Special Committee, in cooperation with the Organization of African Unity, to promote the implementation of the Programme of Action and report, from time to time, on the progress achieved;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure maximum publicity to the Programme of Action and provide all necessary assistance to the Special Committee in promoting its implementation.
58th plenary meeting, 9 November 1976.


=== K. Investments in South Africa ===
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid and its special reports,
Noting the increase of foreign investments in South Africa which abets and encourages the apartheid policies of that country,
Welcoming as a positive step the decision of some Governments to achieve the cessation of further investments in South Africa,
Considering that a cessation of new foreign investments in South Africa would constitute one important step in the struggle against apartheid,
Urges the Security Council, when studying the problem of the continued struggle against the apartheid policies of South Africa, to consider steps to achieve the cessation of further foreign investments in South Africa.
58th plenary meeting, 9 November 1976.

The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-General that he had appointed as members of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against Apartheid in Sports six of the seven States to be appointed by him in accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution f above, namely: BARBADOS, CANADA, CONGO, JAMAICA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA AND YUGOSLAVIA.
As a result, the Ad Hoc Committee is composed of the following Member States: ALGERIA, BARBADOS, CANADA ,CONGO, GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, GHANA, GUINEA, HAITI, HUNGARY, INDIA, INDONESIA, JAMAICA, MALAYSIA, NEPAL, NIGERIA, PERU, PHILIPPINES, SOMALIA, SUDAN, SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, UKRAINIAN SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLIC, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA AND YUGOSLAVIA.
