a
a + A id Y )
i‘ = a : > i
P +
care ee
vay
i =
So
= : 7
= —— <
rs —
BG Z $
. —
oe


THE MASTER OF HESTVIKEN
THE SNAKE PIT


BOOKS BY


SIGRID UNDSET


JENNY


KRISTIN
LAVRANSDATTER
THE BRIDAL WREATH

THE MISTRESS OF HUSABY

THE CROSS


THE MASTER OF
HESTVIKEN


THE AXE
THE SNAKE PIT


In Preparation


IN THE WILDERNESS
THE SON AVENGER


THE


SNAKE PIG


By
SIGRID UNDSET


Translated from the Norwegian by


ARTHUR G. CHATER


MCMXXIX


NEW vorK:; ALFRED-A-KNOPF: tonpon


COPYRIGHT I929 BY ALFRED A. KNOPF, INC.


ORIGINAL TITLE
OLAV AUDUNSSON 1 HESTVIKEN


COPYRIGHT 1925 BY H. ASCHEHOUG & CO.
OSLO


MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


THE SNAKE PIT


r


al thai)


1


ESTVIKEN HAD BEEN A SEAT OF CHIEFTAINS IN OLD
H=« Traces of many great boat-sheds could still be

seen by the waterside, and rotting logs strewed the
slope over which the Hestvik men had drawn their longships
in spring and autumn. They showed like the remains of an
old roller-way, reaching from high-water mark up to the little
plain between the crags.

Then Christian faith and morals came to Norway; Saint
Olav forbade his subjects to go a-viking. Men were to believe,
whether they liked it or no, that God will not suffer a man to
rob his even Christian, even though he be of strange race.
The Hestvik men sailed on merchant voyages, and from of
old shipbuilding had been carried on at Hestviken. Even Olav
Ribbung, while he was in his best years, kept a shipwright at
his manor, and when, after the Birchlegs had burnt Hestviken,
he rebuilt both the manor farm on the high ground and the
houses by the shore, he set up the boat-house and the two
sheds and the workshop as they stood to this day down by the
hithe.*


A coupte of hours’ rowing southward from the Thing-stead,
Haugsvik, brings one to a lofty crag; this great dull-red rock,
which falls abruptly to the fiord and is bare of trees to near


1The Birchlegs (see note to The Axe, p. 3) were the adherents
of the pretender Sverre, who became King of Norway in 1184. The
Ribbungs were a remnant of the Church party, opposed to Sverre and
the Birchlegs.
3


THE SNAKE PIT


its summit, is called the Bull. Behind the point Hestviken runs
up into the land; it is a small and rather narrow creek. On
its northern side the Bull crag falls sheer into the sea, and
below it is deep, dark water. Upon the neck of the Bull grow
sparse and wind-bent firs, but they thicken farther up the
height—the promontory is like a foot thrust out into the sea
from the low ridge, which extends on the whole northern side
of the inlet and of Hestviksdal or Kverndal, as it is also
called,” eastward into the heart of the district. Inland along
the valley the ridge falls steeply to the watercourse—a little
stream runs through Kverndal and comes out into the sea at
the head of the creek. Here trees and grass and flowers grow
luxuriantly among clifis and screes, and the ridge itself is
thickly wooded with spruce; but as it descends to the level
ground this passes into foliage, with many oaks even, belong-
ing to Hestviken.

On the south side of the creek the rocks are rounded off
into the fiord, much lower and less steep; juniper bushes
combed flat by the wind and thickets of briar grow in the
crevices of the rock, and here and there are short stretches of
dry turf. But then the hill rises in a sheer cliff, dark grey and
almost bare, facing north; and underneath this crag, which
is called the Horse,® lies the manor, fairly high up and turned
toward the north. The path from the hithe up to the houses
runs along the edge of the manor fields on the fiord side and
is fairly steep. Farther inland there is deep and good soil on
the slopes, and fields and meadows suffer less from drought
than in most other places on the Oslo fiord, as many runnels
trickle down from the Horse crag, and higher up, the valley is

2 Kverndal—Mill-dale.


3 Hesten. Hestviken may be translated “Horse-wick.”
4


THE SNAKE PIT


somewhat moist. But almost all the plough land of Hestviken
lies on the south side of the valley and faces north.

The manor farm of Hestviken was built so that the
houses stood in two rows enclosing a long and narrow court-
yard, in which the bare rock cropped out everywhere like a
ridge through the midst of it. Between this rock and the
Horse crag there was a hollow, marshy from the water trickling
down the cliff, and the buildings on that side of the courtyard
had therefore sunk and become damp; the logs of the lowest
courses on the side facing the rock had rotted, so that the
houses were draughty and the damp came in both above and
below, but in summer nettles and weeds grew in the hollow,
almost to the height of the turf roof. It was the stables, byres
and a few sheds that stood here.

Toward the sea, on the north side of the courtyard, lay
the dwelling-houses, the cook-house and the storehouses. Look-
ing up the fiord the view was shut in by the Bull; but from the
western end of the courtyard one could look across the creek
to Hudrheimsland and southward a great way down Folden.*
And in former days the lords of Hestviken, when there was
war in the land, had been wont to keep a watch on the hill
above the Bull; the turf hut was still there, in which the
watchmen had lived when they relieved each other on the
lookout.

At the end of the courtyard, toward the meadows and
Kyerndal and a good way from the other houses, stood the
barn, all that was left of the old manor. It was immense and
strongly built, of heavy timber. The other houses were small
and without embellishment, of somewhat light logs bonded
together. It had been no easy matter for Olav Ribbung to


4The Oslo fiord.


THE SNAKE PIT


rebuild his manor after the fire—his losses had been great, as
his warehouses were crammed full of goods at the time of
the burning, and in those days it was often difficult for land-
lords to get in what their tenants owed them. But it was the
tradition of the neighbourhood that the old houses of Hest-
viken had been large and splendid. There had been a hall,
built of upright staves with a shingle roof like a church; two
rows of carven pillars supported the roof internally, and the
hall was richly decorated besides with wood-carving and
painting. And for high festivals they had blue hangings and a
tapestry which was spread under the roof; it was of red
woollen stuff embroidered with fair images. Of this tapestry
two pieces still remained—one that had been given to the
church and one that was in the manor; this latter piece was so
long that it stretched over both sides and the end wall of the
new living room, and yet a part of the tapestry was said to be
lost—so one could imagine the difference in size between the
old hall and Olav Ribbung’s house. Apart from this no more
was left of the old glories than a carven plank, which people
said one of Olav’s house-carls had torn out to defend himself
with as he ran from the burning hall. In the new house this
plank was one of the door-posts of the bedchamber.


Oxav AupuNsson knew it again the moment he stepped into
his own house, which he had not seen since he was a child of
seven years. Never had he thought of this carving or known
that he remembered it—but the moment his eye fell upon it,
recognition came like a gust of wind that passes over the
surface of a lake and darkens it: ’twas the door-post of his
childhood. The image of a man was carven upon it surrounded
by snakes; they filled the whole suriace with their windings
and twistings, coiling about the man’s limbs and body, while
6


THE SNAKE PIT


one bit him to the heart. A harp lay trampled under his feet—
it was surely Gunnar Gjukesson in the snake pit.®

This door-post was the only ornament of the hall, which
was otherwise no different from the hearth-room of an ordi-
nary farmstead; an oblong rectangular house, divided off by
a wooden partition near the east end, so as to make two little
rooms beyond the hall: the bed-closet at the far end and an
antechamber by the door leading to the courtyard; for
safety’s sake the entrance was placed as far as possible from
the sea. At the other end, farthest from the door, were two
box-beds with a raised floor between them, and along both
side-walls ran benches packed with earth. Of movable furni-
ture there was none but a few three-legged stools—not so
much as a side-table by the antechamber door or a backed
chair or settle. The top of a long table hung on the north wall,
but it could not have been taken down and used many times
since Olav Ribbung’s death.

The bed within the closet was intended for the master and
mistress. But Olav Audunsson bade his old kinsman Olav
Ingolfsson use this resting-place in which he had slept hitherto;
he himself would take the bed on the south of the hall, where
he had slept as a child.

He had no desire to move into the bed-closet. At the sight
of the doorway leading to the pitch-dark room, ghosts of his
childish loathing of this black hole arose within him. There
his great-grandfather had slept, with his mad son, and when
the fit came upon Foulbeard, they bound him and he lay roar-
ing and howling and tossing in his bonds upon the floor in the

5 This is Gunnar of the Voélsunga Saga, the husband of Brynhild.
Gunnar was thrown into the snake pit by Atle (Attila); his sister
Gudrun, Sigurd’s widow and Atle’s wife, secretly sent him a harp, and
by his playing he charmed all the snakes save one, which bit him to


the heart.
7


THE SNAKE PIT


darkness. The child had been—not so badly frightened; in any
case it was a kind of calm and composed horror, for he had
been a witness of Foulbeard’s attacks as far back as he could
remember, and the madman had never harmed anyone; that
he might do some hurt upon himself was all they had to fear.
But of his own free will the boy never went near the closet-—
and indeed there was always a terrible stench within; a breath
of pestilential air met him whenever he approached the door-
way. His father and Aasa, the old serving woman, did their
best to clean up the madman’s lodging, but it was difficult, so
dark as it was within. They changed the straw of the bed when
they could come at it and strewed fresh mould upon the floor
so often that from time to time old Olav had to have it dug
and carried out again, as the floor of the closet grew into hills
and mountains. But all this availed but little.

And now Olav Audunsson remembered them so vividly—
the two old men who used to appear at the door of the closet.
When the madman had had a fit and struggled till he was
faint and calm again, his father led him outside to sun Ad if
the weather suited.

First the great-grandfather entered—a giant in sta‘ture,
with long, thick hair and a beard that fell over his clvest;
there was still as much black as white in it. He helped his
son out, putting an arm about his neck and bending him, lest
he should strike his face against the frame of the door. ‘The
madman had not the wit to turn aside from anything, |
went straight on.

Torgils Foulbeard seemed a small man, for he was
shrunken and bent. His whole head was overgrown with k. tir;
the beard reached up to the eyes. All this tangle of his
matted with filth, grey and yellow of every dirty shade;
the midst of it shone the great eyes, pale greyish green

8


‘yut


was
“15m


ike


THE SNAKE PIT


sea-water, bloodshot in the whites, with an uncanny stare, and
the nose, small, straight and finely shaped, but red; it had
been frostbitten one winter night when he had slipped out un-
known to his father. But when old Olav had taken his son to
the bath-house, cleansed him with lye and sand and combed
his hair, the whole shaggy head of Torgils shone silvery white
and soft as a great tuft of bog-cotton. Torgils looked much
older than his father.

Old Olav fed him as though he had been a child. Some-
times he had to shake and beat Torgils to make him open his
mouth, at other times the trouble was that he would not shut
it again, but let the food run out upon his beard. His father
could get him to take meat and solid food by stuffing mouthfuls
between Torgils’ teeth and then thrusting his face close to his
son’s and chewing with empty jaws, up and down with all his
force—then it might be that the madman mimicked him and
chewed too.

Aasa sighed when she saw it. It was her charge to be like
a fostermother to young Olav, and he slept in her bed. But
Aasa was more minded to herd Foulbeard and tend him, she
as well as the great-grandfather. Koll, the old house-carl, was
the only one who had care of the boy Olav.—Other than
these four had not been dwelling at the manor, that Olav
could remember. There were some who came and worked on
the farm and down by the waterside—Like enough the de-
cline of Hestviken had already begun in those years. And
after Olav Ingolfsson took over the conduct of the place it
had gone steadily down-hill.

Now farming had never been the main thing at Hestviken;
but neither Olav Ribbung in the last years of his life, nor
Olav Ingolfsson had made such use of the sea as had been the
custom here from old time. Then it came about that the right-

9


THE SNAKE PIT


ful owner was outlawed, and the larger craft which still be-
longed to the place were seized by the King’s officers. Olav
Ingolfsson had never succeeded in providing new boats, nor
yet in restoring the herds of cattle and making good the num-
ber of horses.

Olav guessed that the heritage which had fallen to him
on the death of his father, Audun Ingolfsson, was so great
that he would have been a very rich man at that time; but he
himself had not known this and Steinfinn had never made any
inquiries on his behalf. And even before his outlawry the
estate had greatly shrunk. Now he owned no more than his
ancestral manor and some farm lands in the surrounding dis-
trict, with others over in Hudrheim, across the fiord. He had
sold the udal estate in Elvesyssel that had come to him from
his grandmother, when he had to make atonement and pay
weregild for the slaying of Einar Kolbeinsson; but there was
still so much money owing to him by the monks of Dragsmark,
who had bought most of the land, that he could again fit out
ships and resume the trading by water.

And at that time there were not so many franklins in the
country round the Oslo fiord who possessed their udal estates
whole and undivided. A great part of their property had come
into the hands of the great landlords, or into those of the King
or the Church. So Olav Audunsson of Hestviken might never-
theless be reckoned a man of substance and leading in his
native district—and as such he was honoured as was meet,
when at last he returned to his ancestral home.

Folk judged that he had shown himself generous when
he took over his property from the aged man who had been
his guardian and had acquitted himself so ill of his trust. But
none had heard Olav complain of this, and he showed his
namesake filial respect. And when certain men tried to find

10


THE SNAKE PIT


out what Olav himself thought, and asked how he had found
his affairs situated, Olav replied very soberly: “Not well.”
But it could not have turned out otherwise—with the doom
that had fallen on himself, and even before that the work of
this place must have been more than Olav Ingolfsson could
accomplish, crippled as he was. One of Olav Half-priest’s legs
had been broken, so that it was quite stiff and the foot was
turned outward; he was very lame and could not move with-
out a staff, and his stiff and straddling leg made it difficult for
him to sit a horse or travel in a boat.

Olav Ingolfsson was a good deal more than threescore
winters and he looked older yet—he seemed old as the hills.
He was tall and thin and bent; his face was narrow and well-
featured, with a fine curved nose—the younger Olav had a
feeling that his namesake was not unlike his own father, so
far as he remembered him. But Olav Ingolfsson was bald as a
stone, with red and bleary eyes; the skin hung in shrivelled
puckers under his eyes, on his shrunken cheeks and below his
chin. To cure the pain in his lame leg he used dog-skin and
cat-skin and many kinds of unguents. Whether from this or
other causes, there was always a peculiar smell about the old
man—as of mice, and the closet where he slept smelt of mice.

He was a son of Olav Ribbung’s twin brother, Ingolf
Olavsson, priest of St. Halvard’s church at Oslo. When the
order came that the priests of Norway were to live in celibacy,
Ingolf Priest sent his wife home to Tveit, the estate in Soleyar
which she had brought him as her dowry; and all the children
followed their mother, save the youngest son, Olav; he was
himself set apart for the priesthood and newly ordained deacon
when the accident befell him which made him a cripple. But
he had lived in chastity all his days, and folk thought he had
such great insight into many things that some held him to be

Il


THE SNAKE PIT


more learned and pious than their parish priest. It was above
all when folk were troubled by the walking dead and by gob-
lins on sea and land, or when they had some sickness which
was thought to be the work of witchcraft or evil spirits, that
they sought counsel of Olav Half-priest, for he had more
understanding of such things than all men else.

Olav Audunsson took to his namesake at once—in the
first place because he was his nearest kinsman and the first
man of his father’s race that he had met. It was strange to be
here and to know that this was his ancestral manor and these
surroundings his native soil; here he was destined to live the
rest of his life—and he would have grown up here, but that
his lot had been so markedly unlike that of other young men.
But fate had cast him far from his home while he was yet a
child, and since then he had been homeless and rootless as a
log adrift in the sea.

Now he had come back to the place from which he had
sprung. In a way he felt at home with many things, both in-
doors and out; but for all that it was very different from what
he seemed to remember. The mill in Hestvikdal was familiar,
but all that lay on the other side of the creek—the Bull, the
wooded ridge—was as though he had never seen it, nor could
he remember the marshy valley along the stream, a waste full
of foliage trees. He could never have known what the country
was like to the north of the creek—perhaps he had believed it
settled and tilled like the shores of Lake Mjésen. But from
Hestviken not a single human dwelling was to be seen.

The houses of the manor he remembered much bigger
than they were. And the little strip of beach hemmed in by
rocks, that had seemed to him a whole stretch of country with
many distinctive marks—a great bluish rock on which he used
to lie, some bushes in which he could hide—now he saw that

12


THE SNAKE PIT


the little strip of sand was scarcely fifty of a grown man’s
paces in length. He looked in vain for a hollow in the meadow
above the manor, where he had been wont to sit and sun him-
self—it might have been a little pit east of the barn, which was
now overgrown with osiers and alders. In a crack of the rock
in the courtyard he had once found a curious snow-white ring
—it must have been a vertebra of some bird or fish, from which
the points were broken off, he now thought. But at that time
he had taken it for a rare treasure, had preserved it carefully
and often searched in the crevices of the rock to see if he could
find others like it. It was almost like remembering old dreams
—the scenes of the past floated before him in fragments—and
at times he recalled a forgotten feeling of eeriness, as though
after bad dreams he remembered no more than the dread.

So he snatched at everything that might help him to over-
come this sense of insecurity, of dreams and shadows, and
make him feel that Hestviken was his, and that when he walked
over the fields here he had his own ancestral soil under his
feet—the Bull, the woods and hills on both sides of the valley,
all was his land. And he was glad to think that now he was
dwelling under the same roof as a kinsman, his own grand-
father’s cousin, who had known all the men and women of his
race since the days of his great-grandfather’s, Olav Ribbung’s
manhood. When he sat in the evening drinking with his name-
sake and the old man told him of their bygone kinsmen, Olav
had a sense of fellowship with his father’s stock which he had
never known when he was in Denmark among his mother’s
kindred.

And he was drawn to the old man by the belief that Olav
Priest’s son was so pious and learned. During these weeks,
while he was awaiting the time when he could go northward

13


THE SNAKE PIT


and fetch Ingunn, he felt in a way as though he were settling —
his account with God.

He himself was fully aware that it would not be easy for
him to show perfect serenity and a glad countenance when he
came to Berg to conclude the atonement with Haftor and re-
ceive Ingunn as his wife at the hands of the Steinfinnssons.
But it could not be otherwise—and to get her was what he
himself wished, in spite of all—and so he would surely be
man enough to put a good face on it. But he could not defend
himself against the insistence of childish memories—the cer-
tain knowledge that they belonged to each other and should
always be together. That anything could come between them
had been so far from their thoughts that it had never moved
their hearts either to joy or wonder—they had taken it for
granted that it should be as it had been determined for them.
Until that summer when, locked in an embrace, they had
fallen out of childhood and innocence, frightened, but at the
same time giddy with rapture at the new sweetness they had
found in each other—whether it were right or wrong that they
abandoned themselves to it. Even when he awoke to a fear and
defiance of all who would meddle with their destiny, he had
been full sure that at last they two would win their cause.
These memories would come suddenly upon Olav, and the
pain of them was like the stab of a knife. That dream was
now to take its course—but not the course he had imagined.
And remembering himself as he was then was like remember-
ing some other man he had known—a boy of such infinite
simplicity that he both pitied and despised him, and envied
him excruciatingly—a child he had been, with no suspicion
of deceit, either in himself or in others. But he knew that for
this anguish of the soul there was but one remedy—he would

14


THE SNAKE PIT


have to hide his wound so that no one, she least of all, might
see that he bore a secret hurt.

These thoughts might assail him while he sat conversing
with the other Olav, and he would break off in the midst of
his talk. The old man scarcely noticed it, but talked on and
on, and the young man stared before him with a face hard
and closed—till old Olav asked him some question, and young
Olav became aware that he had not heard a word of what the
other had been saying.—

But he made ready to shoulder the burden he had to bear
—without wincing, should it be God’s will to chasten him
sorely in the coming years. For in a way the memory of that
ski journey he had made with another and of the night at the
ster was ever present to him—except that he did not seem to
see himself as the murderer. Rather was it as though he had
witnessed a settling of scores between two strangers. But it
was he, he knew that in a strange, indifferent way, and the sin
was his sin. The slaying in itself could hardly be any mortal
sin: he had not enticed the other into an ambush, the lad him-
self had planned this journey and he had fallen sword in
hand—and even a thrall had had the right to avenge his wife’s
honour in old days, he had heard; ’twas a man’s right and
duty by the law of God and men.

It was what came after

And he had a feeling that he was offering God a make-
shift in squaring his shoulders and making ready to bear the
burden of Ingunn’s misfortune. Never would he let anyone
see it, if it became too heavy. And he would live piously and
in the fear of God from now on—so far as that was in the
power of a man who had an unshriven sin on his conscience:
he would act justly by his neighbour, be charitable to the
poor, protect the forlorn and defenceless, honour the house

15


THE SNAKE PIT


of God and his parish priest and render such payments as ~
were due, say his daily prayers devoutly and with reflection
and repeat the Miserere often, pondering the words well. He
knew that he had received far too little instruction in the
Christian faith during his youth—Brother Vegard had done
his best, but he came to Frettastein only once or twice a year
and stayed there but a week, and there was none else who so
much as made inquiry whether the children said their prayers
every day. And the good instruction he had received while
with Bishop Torfinn had fared as in the parable—so many
tares had been sown among the wheat during the years he
spent abroad, that the wheat, just as it was beginning to sprout,
was choked by the weeds. For the first time something like
remorse for the slaying of Einar Kolbeinsson dawned upon
Olav Audunsson: he had regretted it because it was an ill
reward to Bishop Torfinn for his kindness and because, as his
affairs were then situated, it was the most unlucky chance that
could befall him—ay, and then he knew that he ought to re-
pent it, because it was sin, even if he could not see why it was
so sinful. Now he began to divine that a deeper meaning and
a deeper wisdom underlay Our Lord’s commandment “Thou
shalt not kill” than merely that which he had been told—God
desires not the death of any sinner. Behind the commandment
lay also a care for the slayer—the slayer also exposed his
soul to many kinds of evil powers, which now found occasion
for sudden assaults.

Therefore it might well be of service to him to dwell with
so pious a man as Olav Half-priest; his kinsman could surely
afford him useful guidance in many things. Such as the peni-
tential psalms—he had learnt a number of them of Asbjérn
All-fat and Arnvid in his days at Hamar, but now he had for-
gotten the most part.


16


THE SNAKE PIT


OLav invited his neighbours to a home-coming feast and told
them that the wife he was to bring home was the daughter of
Steinfinn Toresson, his foster-sister to whom he had been be-
trothed when both were of tender age. So soon as he had
looked about him at home and seen how his affairs stood he
would ride back to the Upplands and fetch his wife. But as
to the wedding he said not a word, whether it had already
been drunk or was still to come; nor did he ask any of his
neighbours to accompany him, though it was impossible for
his kinsman to make the journey. Folk were quick to remark
that the young Master of Hestviken was one who kept his own
counsel and knew full well how far he would give an account
of himself—not much was to be got out of him by asking
questions.

Olav had thought long and deeply whether he should
mention that there was a child. Perhaps it might make the
matter easier if he spoke of this beforehand. But he could not
bring himself to it. And then he thought that after all it might
be dead. It had been born quick—but death came easily to
young children, he had heard it said. Or they might hit upon
some means—put it out to foster-parents on the way, perhaps.
That Ingunn should give him out as the child’s father, as he
had told her in his first bewilderment and desperation, he now
saw to be madness. He could not understand how he had come
to conceive such a thought—bringing a bastard into the
race—. Had it but been a daughter, they could have put her
in a convent, and no man would have suffered any great wrong
by his letting her pass as his; but Ingunn had had a man-
child—. Oh, he had been witless at the time, from grief and
anger. But he felt bound to accept the child, if the mother
wished to have it with her. It must now fall out as fate would
have it; useless to take up an evil before it was there.

17


THE SNAKE PIT


Nevertheless he crept one day up to the little room which
was above the closet and the anteroom. The thought occurred
to him that the child and its foster-mother might live there, if
Ingunn wished to have her son in the house. Olav Ribbung’s
daughters had slept in this loft with their serving-maids; but
it was an age since the young women had lodged there. The
dust and cobwebs of at least twenty years had collected there
undisturbed, and the mice scrambled out of the bedstead when
he went to see what might be stowed away there. Some old
looms stood against the wall and trestles for a table, and then
there was a chest, carven with armorial bearings, which showed
him that it had been his mother’s. He unlocked it: within lay
spindles, spools and combs and a little casket. In the casket
was a book and a child’s swathe of white linen—a christening
robe, Olav guessed, no doubt the same that had been wrapped
round him when he was lifted out of the baptismal font. He
lingered sitting on his haunches and twisting its embroidered
border between two fingers.

He took the book down with him and showed it to Olav
Half-priest. But although the old man had always let it be
thought that he could read and write as well as any priest—
and much better than Sira Benedikt, their parish priest—
there was not much that he could make out of Cecilia Bjérns-
datter’s psalter in any case. In the evening Olav sat and looked
at it: little images were drawn within the capital letters, and
the margins were adorned with twining foliage in red and
green. When he went to bed he buried the book under the
pillow, and there he let it lie.


A FEw days before he was to set out for the north there came

a poor woman to Hestviken, who wished to speak with the

master. Olav went out to her. She bore an empty wallet on her
18


THE SNAKE PIT


shoulder, so he guessed her errand. But first she greeted Olav
with tears in her voice—tears of joy, she said; twas such a
glad thing to see the rightful master stand at his own door at
last, “and a fair and lordly man have you grown, Olav Au-
dunsson—ay, Cecilia ought to have seen her son now—and
they speak well of you among the neighbours, Olav. So me-
thought I must come hither and see you—and I was among the
first who saw you in this world, for I served at Skildbreid at
that time and I was with Margret, my mistress, when she came


to help your mother—I gave her a hand when she swathed


you

“Then you knew my mother?” asked Olav, when the
woman had to pause for want of breath.

“You know, we saw her at church sometimes, when first
Audun had brought her hither. But that winter she grew so
sickly that she never went abroad—'twas too cold, the house
she lived in, her handmaid said, and at last she had to move
into the great room, where the old men were, for the sake of
the warmth. It was right ill with Torgils that winter and spring.
I mind me he raved most foully the night you were born, and
the fit was upon him a whole week—Cecilia was in such fear
of him, she lay trembling in her bed, and Audun himself
could not comfort her. "Twas that, I ween, that broke her, that
and the cold. Audun carried her up to the loft-room when the
weather was warmer; he saw she was not fit to dwell in the


house with the madman—but she died straight. You must have
29


been a month old then-

The woman’s name was Gudrid, she told him, and she

lived in the cot which maybe Olav had seen when he rode east

to the church-town—to the north of the bogs, just before the

road turns off toward Rynjul. In her first marriage she had

had a little farm in the Saana district—with a good and worthy
19


THE SNAKE PIT
husband, but she had had no child by him. Then he died, and


his brother moved to the farm with his wife; and as she could
not be agreed with them, she married this Bjorn, with whom
she was now. This was the most foolish counsel she could have
taken. Nay, he was no poor man at that time; when they put
together their goods, they might have had an easy lot. He was
a widower and had only one daughter, and so they deemed
that all might turn out well: she was minded to take a husband
again, and she greatly desired to have children. And that wish
alone was granted, of all she had looked for—eight children,
and five of them lived. But the very first winter they were mar-
ried Bjorn chanced to slay a man and had to pay fines, and
there was soon an end of their prosperity. Now Bjorn was
mostly out in the fiord, hunting seal and porpoise and sea-
fowl, or fishing for Tore of Hvitastein—and she herself sat in
the cot with all her little children and the step-daughter, who
was shrewish and ungodly:


Olav listened patiently to the woman’s torrent of words,
and at last he bade her follow him to the storehouse. He had
laid in all that was needed for his home-coming feast, and he
filled Gudrid’s sack abundantly: “and if you are in straits
this winter, you must come hither and tell us, foster-mother!”

“God bless you, Olav Audunsson—but you are like your
mother when you smile!—She had so gentle a smile, Cecilia,
and she was always good to poor folk!”

At long last the old wife departed.


THERE was no one in the hall when Olav entered. And he

stood awhile musing. With one foot on the edge of the hearth

and his hands clasped about his knee he stared into the little

heap of burnt wood in which there was still a gleam—it hissed
20


THE SNAKE PIT


and crackled with crisp little sounds and a faint breath came
from the dying embers.

Mother, he thought, and recalled the little he had heard
of her. She had been young—and fair, they said; she had been
reared as became one of noble birth in the rich nunnery, where
she was the playmate of a King’s daughter. And from the
Queen’s court she had been removed to this lonely manor, far
from all she knew. In these poor and rustic rooms she had
borne him under her heart, starved with the cold and left
alone with two aged men—the madman, of whom she was
afraid, and the master himself, who misliked his grandson’s
marriage.—It was hateful.

He smote his thigh hard with the palm of his hand. In-
tolerable it must be to be born a woman, to have so little say
in one’s own destiny. He seemed to pity all women—his own
mother in silk and fine linen, this beggar woman Gudrid, In-
gunn—it availed one as little as the other to meet force by
force. Ingunn—a wave of desire and longing rose within him
—he thought of her slender white neck: poor thing, she had
learnt perforce to bend her proud young head. First for his
sake; and now she had been brought full low. But he would
take her head upon his breast, softly and tenderly he would
caress that poor, weak neck. Never should she hear a word
from him of her misfortune; never should she see a sign, in
word or in deed, that he bore her resentment.—At that moment
he did not feel that there was any resentment in his soul to-
ward the defenceless creature who would soon be in his power
—his only wish was to protect her and do well by her.


LaTeR in the day Olav saddled his horse and rode eastward

to the church-town. He was not sure what he wanted there, but

his mind was in a turmoil that day. And when he came there,
21


THE SNAKE PIT


he tied his horse to the fence and walked across the graveyard
up to the church.

He laid his sword and hat on the bench that ran along the
wall, but chanced to sweep them to the floor with the skirt of
his mantle. The echo within the stone walls made him ill at
ease. And the light was unpleasantly pale and strange, for the
walls had just been whitewashed—pictures were to be painted
on them this summer.

Audun and Cecilia lay at the top of the nave on the left,
between the Lady chapel and the apse. As Olav knelt by their
tomb and said his prayers as softly as he could, his eye was
caught by an image which the master-painter had newly fin-
ished on the pier of the chancel arch. It was of a tall, slender
and graceful woman with bandaged eyes and a broken reed
in her hand—her mien and bearing, nay, the very colour of
her dark garment, was all so unspeakably mournful. Olav had
often seen this image in the churches, but had never remem-
bered to ask what was its significance. But never had the
woman looked so melancholy or so beautiful as here.

Bishop Torfinn’s words about the motherless children
suddenly occurred to his mind. For the first time he thought
he was almost glad he had not required of Ingunn that she
should part with her child. At that moment he felt able to
think of this infant with a kind of compassion. Since she had
borne it, he must find means to rear it.

When he came out of the church he saw that the priest,
Sira Benedikt Bessesson, was standing by his horse. Olav
greeted him courteously, and the priest returned his greeting
blithely. From the little he had seen of his parish priest Olav
liked him uncommonly well. The priest had a fine and dig-
nified presence—thick-set, broad-shouldered and well-knit. His
face was wreathed about with reddish brown hair and beard,

22


THE SNAKE PIT


and it was a broad face, but shapely, with bold features, much
freckled; he had large, clear eyes, sparkling with life. Olav
judged him to be a pious, discerning man of cheerful disposi-
tion—and he liked the priest for having a strong, fine and
flexible voice, whether in speech or song.

At first they talked of the gelding. Olav had got him in
Skaane—he was seven years old, big and strong-legged and
handsome, white and dapple-grey over the quarters. He al-
ways groomed and curry-combed the horse himself, making
him smooth and glossy, for he was very fond of the animal
and he liked to hear that the priest could see what he was
worth. Then Sira Benedikt closely examined the bridle, which
was of red leather. Olav concealed a smile—the priest prac-
tised much tanning and dyeing of leather, and such work was
his joy and delight. This was one of the faults Olav Half-
priest had to find with Sira Benedikt—he thought this work
altogether unseemly for a priest, since it made him soil his
consecrated hands with the worst impurities. To this Sira Bene-
dikt replied that he did not believe such impurities to be un-
seemly in God’s eyes, since the priest’s hands were as clean
as before, when he had washed them. Our Lord himself had
done in like manner and honoured the work thereby, when He
took axe and chisel in the same blessed hands that created and
redeemed mankind, and wrought the logs in the workshop of
his holy foster-father—He surely would not deem His poor
servant disgraced by following a noble and ingenious craft.

The priest invited Olav to accompany him home, and
Olav accepted with thanks. Another thing at which Olav In-
golfsson turned up his nose was the smell in the priest’s yard,
like that of the dyers’ booths in the town. But the house was
clean and fair within; his living-room was far finer than that
of Hestviken. Three well-favoured young maidens brought in

23


THE SNAKE PIT


butter, white bread and ale, greeted the guest with comely
grace and went straight out again. They were daughters of the
priest’s nephew; the eldest undertook the duties of his house-
hold, and at this time she had her sisters on a visit.

The ale was excellent, and the men sat a good while talk-
ing of this and that. Olav liked Sira Benedikt better and better.
Then their talk fell upon Olav Ingolfsson, and the priest
praised the young man for having shown such loving kindness
toward one who had misgoverned his affairs so ill. Olav an-
swered that it was his own outlawry that was chiefly to blame
for the neglected state of Hestviken; the old man had doubt-
less done his best, seeing that he was a cripple and ailing. But
indeed he held old Olav to be a remarkably wise and holy
man.

“That addle-pate?” said the priest.

Olav said nothing. The priest went on:

“Holiness, I trow, he had good cause to seek—to judge
by the fellows he resorted to in his youth his holiness cannot
have been much to boast of. And were he wise, he would think
and speak more of Christ and Mary Virgin, and less of witch-
craft and spectres and mermen and water-wraiths—would pray,
rather than practise these sorceries and incantations of his—I
marvel whether much of what he deals with be not downright
heresy. But he came out of school, a half-taught priestling—
and the half he had learnt was learnt wrong. It may be divert-
ing to listen to his tales some evening or other—but you seem
to be a man of sense, Olav Audunsson, you surely do not be-
lieve all his preaching——?”

Ah, thought Olav, now he knew it. And in fact he thought
he had already suspected how it was. Aloud he said with some-
thing like a smile:


24


THE SNAKE PIT


“There would seem to be no very-warm friendship be-
tween you and my kinsman?”

The priest replied:

“I have never liked him—but that is not merely because
he was foster-brother of him who wronged me and mine most
grievously. And none of us bore hatred to the other men of
Hestviken—they were brave and honourable, all but he. You
may see that yourself, Olav—I have liked you since I saw you
for the first time, and I was minded that you should see I wish
you well, and I think myself that the old enmity between us of
Eiken and you of Hestviken should now be buried and for-
gotten. Not that we ever counted Olav Ribbung and his other
sons our enemies—but we kept out of each other’s way as
much as we could, as you may well suppose——”

Olav busied himself with wiping off some ale which he
had spilt on his jerkin; he did not look up as he asked:

“T know not what you mean, Sira Benedikt——I am but
newly come home and am strange to these parts—I have never
heard aught of this enmity between your kindred and mine.”

Sira Benedikt seemed greatly surprised, and a little em-
barrassed as well:

“I thought surely Olav Half-priest had spoken to you of
this——?”

Olav shook his head.

“Then ’tis better I tell you myself.” The priest sat in
thought awhile, jogging the little dipper that floated in the
ale-bowl and making it sail round:

“Did you look at those fair children of mine, the little
maids that came in here, Olav?”

“Indeed they were fair. And were it not that I have a
young bride waiting for me in the Upplands, I had used my

25


THE SNAKE PIT


eyes better while your kinswomen were here, Sira!” said Olav
with a little smile.

“If I guess your meaning aright,” replied the priest, and
he too smiled, but with a troubled look, “you cannot be aware
that they are your own kinswomen, and near of kin too?”

Olav turned his eyes upon the priest and waited.

“You are second cousins. Torgils Foulbeard was the
father of their father. He ruined my sister m

Involuntarily Olav’s face was convulsed with horror. Sira
Benedikt saw it, guessed the young man’s thought and said:

“Nay, ’twas before God took his wits from Torgils, or the
Evil One whom he had followed so faithfully, while sin and
lust tempted him


“Ay, God knows I am not an impartial man when I speak
of Olav Half-priest; he and Torgils were foster-brothers, and
Olav backed the other through thick and thin. Olav Ribbung
would compel Torgils to marry Astrid; he was an honourable,
resolute and loyal man—and when Torgils left her to her
shame with his bastard son, while he himself kept to his leman
in Oslo and would marry her, Olav Ribbung commanded his
son to come hither. Ingolf, your grandfather, and Olav’s
daughters, and Ivar Staal, his son-in-law, all said they would
not sit at meat with Torgils nor speak to him, while he held
fast to his purpose. But Torgils was living with the priest, the
father of Olav Ingolfsson—the more shame to them that they
received him; one was a priest and the other was to be one.

“Ay, and the end was that my father and brothers ac-
cepted fines and made atonement with the Hestvik men, when
we saw that neither Olav Ribbung nor Ingolf could do aught
to shake Torgils or force him to make amends for Astrid’s mis-
fortune. "T'was the better and more Christian way—that is
true. But had I been of an age to bear arms, I know full sure

26


THE SNAKE PIT


I would not have rested till I had laid Torgils low—I had
done it even if I had been a priest, ordained to the service of
God. I have hated that man so that—God sees my heart, and
He knows it. But He knows too, I ween, that the hardest thing
He can require of a man is that he shall not avenge his kins-
woman’s honour with the sword.—I was ten years old when it
happened. Astrid had been to me as a mother; she was the eld-
est of our family, and I was the youngest. I shared a bed with
her that summer: she wept and wept; I know not how it was
she did not weep herself to death—. I tell you, Olav, the man
who can forgive such a thing from his heart, him I would call
a holy man——.”

The priest sat in silence. Olav waited for him to say more,
still as a rock. But at last he thought he must say something.

“What became of her, your sister?” he asked in a low
voice. “Did she die?”


“Tis eight winters since she died,” said the priest. “She


lived to be an old woman. She was married some years after,
to Kaare Jonsson of Roaldstad, north in Skeidis parish, and
she had a good life with him. Father was too hard upon her
and could not bear the sight of her child; had it been another
man’s—but that a daughter of his should swell the flock of
Torgils’ concubines—— But Kaare was good to them both; it
was he too who brought about the good marriage for his
stepson, with the daughter and heir of Hestbek. And when
disaster fell upon Olav of Hestviken and he began to feel the
lack of kinsmen, he sent word to Astrid—if she would let him
have the child, Arne, he would make the boy heir to his
father’s name and goods. Kaare answered that the lad no
longer needed the support of his father’s kindred, and both he
and Astrid loved Arne Torgilsson far too dearly to send him
out to Hestviken to inherit the fortunes of the Hestvik men.
27


THE SNAKE PIT


So Olav fetched home Aasa, who had served there at one time,
and the son that she had had by Torgils; but he was not long
in life——

“But these are all old matters, and I deem that we should
now forget our enmity and you young ones should claim kin-
ship and meet in charity. I believe that Arne of Hestbak and
you would like each other. You must go thither with me one
day, Olav, and greet the kinsfolk you have in this part of the
land.”

Olav said he would do so more than gladly. But then he
asked:

“That word you spoke of the Hestvik men’s fortunes—
what meant you by that?”

The priest looked as though the question troubled him.

“You know that your great-grandfather was not blest in
his kindred. That was the time when he sat there in Hestviken
with the madman—his other children he had lost, all but
Borgny, who was in a convent, and he had no true-born heir
to follow him other than the little lad Audun, your father—
and him Ingolf’s widow had taken with her, when she went
home to the place she had come from, south in Elvesyssel. So
it may well have seemed to Kaare and Astrid that the race
would not prosper after him ah


Olav said pensively:

“Tis true for all that, Sira Benedikt, favoured of fortune
they were not, from all that my kinsman has told me of them.”

“They were brave men and loyal, Olav, and that is worth
more than good fortune.”

“Not Torgils,” said Olav. “I knew not this thing of him.
I knew naught else but that he had been witless all his days—
old Olav has never spoken his name——”

“Bitterly as I have hated him,” said Sira Benedikt, “I

28


THE SNAKE PIT


will yet tell you the truth of him—he was a brave man—and
with men he kept faith. And all say that no goodlier youth
has been seen within the memory of man in the country about
Folden. Ay, ’tis strange I should have liked you so well, when
first I saw you, for you bear great resemblance to Torgils. But
then Arne too is like his father, and his daughters—methought
perchance you had seen it, when all three came in—they might
well be your sisters. You all have the same abrupt little noses
and the white skin—and the same fair hair, pale as thistle-
down; nay, so handsome as he was you are not—though I
hated him, I must say with the rest, a fairer man have I never
seen. So there may well be truth in what they report of him,
that he had no need to run after women or to allure them with
wooing arts and false words. They followed him of themselves
—as though bewitched, if. he did but fix those strange blue-
green eyes of his upon them. Ay, you have the same light eyes,
you too, Olav——”

Olav had to laugh at this—and he laughed on, trying to
laugh off his sense of oppressive discomfort.


“Nay, Sira Benedikt—I cannot be very like my kinsman


Torgils—in the eyes at least. For J have never marked that I
29


could charm women

“You are like him, Olav, though you be not so handsome
—and you have the same light eyes, both you and these little
maids of mine. But the evil power of bewitching folk dwells
not in the eyes of any of you, God be praised

“And this prating of misfortune which is thought to pur-
sue certain houses and kindreds—it may have been so in
heathen times, I am ready to believe that. But you are surely
wise enough now to lay your life and destiny in the hands of
God Almighty and not to believe such things.—God be gracious
to you, my Olav—I wish you happiness and blessing in your

29


THE SNAKE PIT


marriage, and that your race may be called fortune’s favourites.
from now on!”

The priest drank to him. Olav drank, but could not bring ©
himself to say anything. But now Sira Benedikt fetched in the
three daughters of Arne, Signe, Una and Torgunn, and Olav
greeted his kinswomen with kisses. They were so fair and de-
bonair that Olav warmed little by little and stayed a good while
in cheerful converse with them. To his home-coming feast at
Hestviken they thought they could not come, for it would be just
at the time when they were to go to a great wedding near their
own home. But late in the autumn they would return to the
priest’s house and stay with him awhile, and then they prom-
ised to visit him and pay their respects to his wife.


O.av was profoundly troubled in his mind as he rode home-
ward. That he should have been impelled to visit the church
today—and that he should have met Sira Benedikt and learnt
this of his grandfather’s brother and the priest’s sister, this
seemed so singular to Olav that he could scarce believe it to
be pure chance.

For although it was true that only the Bishop could give
him absolution for the slaying of Teit, yet he could confess it
to Sira Benedikt first. And with a sort of terror Olav felt how
unspeakably he longed to do so.

He knew that if he knelt at Sira Benedikt’s knee and laid it
bare to him that he was a murderer, and how it had come
about that he was one—then he would find himself in the pres-
ence of a servant of God who was not merely a spiritual father.
Sira Benedikt would understand him as a father understands
the son of his body.

He had loved Bishop Torfinn because that monk from
Tautra had suffered him to approach a world of riches and

30


THE SNAKE PIT


beauty and wisdom, which before he had only known as some-
thing distant and strange. The Christian faith had been to him
a power like the King and the law of the land—he knew that
it was to govern his life, and he bowed to it, without reluctance,
with reverence and with the recognition that a man must be
loyal to all these things, if he was to be able to meet his equals
and look them freely in the face without shame. In Bishop
Torfinn he had seen the man who could take him by the hand
and lead him on to all that gave happiness and self-knowledge
to serve and to love. What manner of man he would have been,
had it been his lot to follow the lord Torfinn for a longer
space, he could not tell. To Olav the Bishop remained an ad-
vocate from the eternal heights—and he himself was as a child,
who had only understood a little of that to which the other
opened his eyes, before his own conduct forced him to fly


from his good instructo ;

Of Arnvid he was fond, but their tempers were so unlike
that he had felt Arnvid’s piety as merely a part of what he
did not understand in his friend. Arnvid was reserved, Olav
felt, though he was far from being a taciturn man—but Arn-
vid’s loquacity seemed a part of his readiness to help. Time
and again Olav remembered that it was always himself who
had received and Arnvid who had given—but such a man was
Arnvid Finnsson that Olav could not feel humiliated by it;
he might have accepted even more of the other, and still they
would have been close friends. Arnvid knew him through and
through, thought Olav, and yet was fond of him—he did not
know Arnvid, but yet was fond of him.

It had diverted him greatly to listen to Olav Half-priest’s
talk of spiritual things. But all that the old man talked of,
angels and devils, pixies and sprites and fairies and holy men
and women, seemed as it were to belong to another side of

31


THE SNAKE PIT


life than that in which he himself contended with his difficul-
ties. The Lady Sancta Maria herself became almost as a king’s
daughter in a fairy tale, the fairest rose of Paradise—but it
seemed very far from his part of the world, this Paradise,
when old Olav talked of it é

Sira Benedikt was the first man he had met in whom he


had recognized something of himself—a man who had fought
the fight in which he himself was engaged. And Sira Benedikt
had won, had become a god-fearing man, strong and steadfast
in the faith. And Olav felt longing and hope pulsing in his
veins. All he needed was to take heart—. Pray for strength, as
Brother Vegard had said, without the reservation: O God,
grant not my prayer too quickly.


He lay awake most of that night. It came over him that now he
understood one thing: a conflict had been waged in the whole
of Creation since the dawn of the ages between God and His
Enemy, and all that had life, soul or spirit took part in the
fight in one host or the other, whether they knew it or not—
angels and spirits, men here on earth and on the farther side of
death. And it was most commonly by a man’s own cowardice
that the Devil could entice him into his. service—because the
man was afraid God might demand too much of him—com-
mand him to utter a truth which was hard to force through his
lips, or to abandon a cherished delight without which he be-
lieved himself not strong enough to live: gain or welfare,
wantonness or the respect of others. Then came the old Father
of lies and caught that man’s soul with his old master-lie—
that he demanded less of his servants and rewarded them better
—so long as it lasted. But now Olav himself had to choose
whether he would serve in one army or in the other.


32


THE SNAKE PIT


Ir was thick weather, mild and grey, when he came out next
morning. The mist shed tiny drops of water over him, which
fell gratefully on his face and refreshed his lips after the
sleepless night.

He went out upon the high ground west of the manor,
where the hill sloped in a rounded curve toward the open
fiord, with stretches of bare rock and flowery crevices. It was
already his habit to turn his steps thither every morning, and
to stand and watch the weather. He was beginning to be
familiar with the voice of the fiord. Today the sea was calm.
A light swell lapped the smooth sides of the Bull, breaking
through the mist with little gleams of white, where the spray
was thrown high into the air when the slightest breeze blew
on the shore. There was a trickling of water among the rocks
down on the beach, a lapping of the wreath of seaweed just
beneath him, where the smooth rock slid down into the sea; a
breath of good salt water came up to him.

Olav stood motionless, gazing out and listening to the
faint sound of the fiord—now and again the fog thickened so
that he could scarcely see it ,


He had seen long ago that he had committed a sinister
folly in not proclaiming the slaying straightway at the first
house he came to. Had he done that, ’twas not even certain
that he would have been condemned to make amends—Teit’s
life might have been found forfeit, if Ingunn’s kinsmen had
been willing to witness that he, Olav, had an older right to the
woman. He had now thought so long this way and that, that
he scarce remembered what had been in his mind, when he
chose to remain silent and wipe out all traces of the deed—but
he must have fooled himself into the belief that so the shame
might be kept hid. No man must learn that he had rid himself
of Teit Hallsson, since thus he thought no man would learn

33


THE SNAKE PIT


that Ingunn had been disgraced by Teit. Now it seemed to him
incomprehensible that he could have thought anything so
totally fatuous.

But now he was caught in his own snares. Never would
the Bishop give him absolution for a manslaughter on other
terms than that he should publicly acknowledge the deed, that
justice might be done. But now it had become a secret murder
and dastard’s work, and never could it be anything else.

Behind him he had his manor, his lands along Kverndal,
the forest on the ridges north and south of Hestviken—his
property extended far inland into the mist. The sheds, the
quay, his boats he could glimpse down in the creek; the smell
came up to him of nets and tar and fish offal and salt water
and wood soaked by the sea. And far away in the north Ingunn
waited; God knew how she fared now. To take her out of her
misfortune, bring her hither to a place of refuge, that was the
first duty that lay upon him.

No. The burden he had been mad enough to fasten upon
himself, he would have to bear henceforward. He could not
lay it down now. Perchance he would have to drag it on till
he saw the gates of death open before him—. And he might die
—a sudden death—. But that too he must venture. His case
was not such that he could turn about and retrace his steps to
the point where he had gone astray. He could only go on.


It was with such thoughts that he journeyed northward. Ar-
rived at Berg, he learnt from the mouth of Arnvid that Ingunn
had tried to slay herself. Six weeks later he came home to Hest-
viken for the second time, bringing his wife with him.


THE sea lay glittering white in the sunshine beneath the burn-
ing hot cliff of the Bull when at noonday Olav led Ingunn
34


THE SNAKE PIT


ashore at the Hestvik hithe. It was the day after Lavransmass.®

The water gurgled under the boat’s side and smacked
against the piles of the quay; the air was heavy with smells—
salt water, sweating tar, rotten bait and fish offal, but now and
again there was a breath of flowery scent, sweet and warm and
fleeting—Olav caught it and wondered, for it was so familiar.
Memories were called forth by it, but he knew not what it was
that had this scent—AlIl at once Vikings’ Bay and Hovding-
gaard came vividly before him—that world which had wholly
vanished from his memory since he fled from it to serve the
Earl. At once he knew the smell—’twas lime-trees. That fine
moist breath as of honey and pollen and mead——there must be
flowering lime-trees somewhere in the neighbourhood.

The scent grew stronger as they walked up the slope.
Olav could not understand it; he had never seen limes at Hest-
viken. But when he came up to the courtyard he saw them
growing on the steep cliff behind -the cattle-sheds. They were
firmly rooted in the crevices, clung flat against the face of the
rock and let their branches sweep downward. The dark-green
heart-shaped leaves lay one over the other like the shingles on
a church roof, covering the golden bunches of blossom—Olav
could glimpse them underneath. They were fading and turning
brown, and their scent was somewhat sickly and past, but there
was a faint, soft buzz of bees and a swarm of flies about them.

“Nay, Olav, what is it that smells so sweet?” Ingunn
asked in wonder.

“It is lime. You have never seen limes before, I ween—
they grow not in the Upplands.”

“Ay, but they do. I mind me now—there is a lime-tree in


the garden of the Preaching Friars at Hamar. But I cannot
29


see the trees


6 St. Laurence’s Day, August 10.
35


THE SNAKE PIT


Olav pointed up at the cliff:

“They are not like the trees that are planted on level
ground, the limes that grow here.”

He recalled the mighty lime that stood in the castle court
at Hovdinggaard—its waxen, honey-dewed flowers hung in the
midst of the foliage as though under a tent of leaves. When the
lime flowered at Hévdinggaard he had always had a longing—
and it was not Frettastein or Heidmark or any of the places
where his destiny had been set moving, but the half-forgotten
home of his childhood that came to his mind. It must have
been the scent of the lime-blossom that he recognized—although
he did not seem to have known that there were limes at Hest-
viken.


TowarpD sundown he wandered up Kverndal, to look at the
cornfields on that side. The smell of lime-blossom was so
heavy and strong—Olav moved his feet languidly; the sweet
fragrance seemed to weigh upon him. He felt quite weak with
happiness. And now he saw that limes grew all over the ridge
on the north side as well.

The sun had left the valley; the dew was falling as he
turned homeward. He passed through an enclosure of alders
and thought he remembered that there had been a meadow
here, where they cut grass; but now it was overgrown with
alders. There was a rustling and crashing of leaves and bushes
as the cows burst their way through the thicket. They were
strange beasts, the Hestvik cattle—long-haired, deep-bellied,
with misshapen legs and curiously twisted horns, big heads
and mournful eyes. Most of them had but three teats, or some
other malformation of the udder. Olav patted their cheeks
and spoke kindly to them, as he passed through his herd of
melancholy beasts.


36


THE SNAKE PIT


Ingunn came out upon the path behind the barn, tall and
slender as a wand in her blue habit, with the linen coif waving
about her. Quietly, as though hesitating, she advanced along
the path by the edge of the field. Meadowsweet and setwall,
which had almost shed its blossoms, reached to her waist and
almost met around her. She had gone out to meet him.

When he came up to her he took her hand and led her,
as they walked homeward. Their guests were to come next day,
but this night they two and the old man in the closet were the
only ones in the house.


37


2


the middle of the day the bare rocks glowed with heat;

the vapour rose from them and the sea glittered and
the spray dashed white beneath the crags, in the places where
it was never at rest.


Ts FINE WEATHER LASTED OVER THE LATE SUMMER. IN


Olav was up early in the mornings, but he did not go out
upon the rocks now. He would stand leaning over the fence
round the northernmost cornfield, where the path from the
waterside came up. From there he could see down to the creek
and up the valley, almost the whole of his homefields. But
toward Folden and southward the view was shut in by a crag
that jutted out and gave shelter to the last strip of arable land
in Hestviken—of the fiord he had only a glimpse northward
past the smooth skull of the Bull and its shaggy wooded neck.
Over on the other side lay Hudrheim in the morning sun—a
low ridge of waste, with sparse fir-trees; the higher ground
was tilled, with great farms; he had been over there one day,
but from here nothing could be seen of any dwellings.

In the cornfield the rock cropped out in so many places
that the pale carpet of stubble seemed riddled with it—here
and there a ribbon of soil between two brown rocks. But they
often had good corn here—it was manured with fish offal from
the quayside—and it ripened early. In the crevices of the rock
grew a flowering grass that Olav had never seen before; when
he came hither in the early summer it blossomed with fair
purple stars, but now the grass itself was blood-red and rust-

38


THE SNAKE PIT


red in all its fringed blades and bristled with seed-bolls that
looked like herons’ heads with long beaks.

The work of the farm was what Olav understood best. He
saw that there were tasks enough before him—the old meadows
to be cleared of scrub, the herds to be brought up to their
number, the houses to be repaired. He had hired Bjorn, Gud-
rid’s husband, to fish and hunt seals for him in the fiord during
the coming half-year. Of such things he had no experience,
but he intended to go out with Bjorn this winter, to gain a
knowledge of the pursuits on which the ancient prosperity of
Hestviken had most depended. Bjorn also advised him to take
up again, next summer, the salt pans on the creek south of the
Horse crag.

But behind his thoughts which were busy with the work
of the day and the work of the future, a deep, happy calm
dwelt in Olav’s mind. His day flowed over him now like a
stream of nothing but good hours. And since he knew that the
dangerous memories lay sunk beneath this stream, and that it
was only by virtue of a kind of strength that he was able to
let them lie there in peace and not think about them, he felt
at the same time proud that he was now happy and safe.

He knew, in a clear and cool fashion, that the old disasters
might return and afflict them. But he took the good days while
they were there.

So he stood, morning after morning, gazing and thinking
of this and that, while this dream-like feeling of happiness
surged beneath his thoughts. His fair face looked hard and
angry at times, and the black pupils of his eyes grew small as
pin-points. When he might expect Ingunn to be up, he went
back to the house. He greeted his wife with a nod and the
shadow of a smile, when they met, and watched the little blush

39


THE SNAKE PIT


of joy that appeared on her healthy face and the calm, meek _
happiness that beamed in her looks and bearing.

Ingunn was so fair now, never had she been fairer. She
was a little fuller than of old, and her skin was shining white;
her eyes seemed larger and a deeper blue under the white coif
of the wedded woman.

She moved in a gentle, subdued way—her manner had
become quiet and simple, she was meek with all, but almost
humble toward her husband. But all could see that she was
happy, and all who had met Olav’s wife liked her.

Olav still slept but little at night. Hour after hour he
lay awake without stirring, unless he moved the arm on which
she lay, when it was numb. She reposed so confidingly against
him in her sleep, and he breathed in the sweet hay-scent of
her hair. Her whole being exhaled health, warmth and youth
—and in the pitch-darkness it seemed to Olav that the smell
of old folk dwelt in the corners, overcome and driven out. He
lay thus and felt the time go by, not longing for sleep to come
—it was so good to lie like this and simply be aware of her
presence; now at last they were safely together. He passed his
hand over her shoulder and arm— it was cool and soft as silk;
the coverlet had slipped down. He drew it up, bending over
her with caresses, and she replied from her drowsiness with
little sleepy words of endearment, like a bird twittering on its
nightly perch.


But his heart was wakeful and easily scared—it started like
a bird that flies up. He noticed this himself, and was on his
guard lest others should see it.

One morning he stood by the fence, looking at his cows,
which had been let into the stubble-field; the big bull was
there. It was the only really handsome animal in his herd,

40


THE SNAKE PIT


massive and sturdy, black as coal, but with a pale buff stripe
down its back. But as he stood and watched the bull striding
along, slow and heavy, he thought all at once that the pale
stripe on the dark back wriggled like a snake, and for a mo-
ment it made his flesh creep. It was only for a brief instant,
then he collected himself—But after that he was never quite
so fond of the bull as he had been, and this feeling clung to
him so long as the bull was in his possession.


Wuite the summer weather lasted Olav was in the habit of
going down to the beach daily during the midday rest. He swam
out till he could see the houses of the manor above the rocks—
lay floating on his back and then swam again. Usually Bjorn
bathed with him.

One day, when they had come out of the water and were
letting the wind dry them, Olav chanced to look at Bjérn’s
feet. They were large, but high in the instep, with strongly
curved soles—the sure sign of gentle birth. He had heard it
said that it could be seen at once by a man’s feet, if a drop
of blood from the old thralls’ stock were mingled with his.
Bjérn’s face and limbs were tanned brown as the bark of a
tree, but his body was white as milk and his hair was very
fair, but much grizzled. The question slipped out of Olav’s
mouth:

“Are you akin to us Hestvik men, Bjorn?”

“No,” said Bjorn curtly. “The devil! Know you not who
are your own kindred, man?”

Olav was rather embarrassed and said:

“I grew up far from my own people. There may be
branches of which one has scarce heard.”

“You thought maybe I was one of these wild shoots that
have grown up after that Foulbeard,” said Bjorn gruffly. “Nay

41


THE SNAKE PIT


I am true-begotten, and so were my forefathers for seven gen-
erations. I have never heard that there were bastards in our
stock!”

Olav bit his lip. He was angry—but then he had himself
provoked the man. So he said nothing.


“Hs as


“But there is one fault in us,” Bjorn went on;
though the axe leaps up of itself in our hands, when we are
goaded—if you will call that a fault. And short is the joy that
comes of a stroke—unless the hand that strikes have gold
within its reach.”

Olav was silent. Bjérn laughed and said:

“T slew my neighbour, when we fell out over some thongs.
What think you of that, Master Olav?”

“Methinks they must have been costly thongs. Were they
so wonderful?”

“IT had borrowed them of Gunnar to carry in my hay.
What think you of that?”

“T think you to be such that I cannot believe it your cus-
tom to reward folk thus for a service,” said Olav; “so I think
there must have been something rare and strange about those
thongs nevertheless.”

“Gunnar must have thought I thought so,” replied Bjorn.
“For he charged me with cutting off a piece of them.”

Olav nodded. Bjérn asked, bending down to tie his shoe:

“What would you have done in my place, Olav Auduns-
son?”

“°Tis not easy for me to say—” said Olav. He was strug-
gling to get the pin of his brooch through his shirt.

“Nay, for none would think of charging a man of your
condition with stealing a wretched piece of thong,” said Bjorn.
“But you held not your hand either, Olav, when your honour
was at stake.”


42


THE SNAKE PIT


Olay was about to put on his kirtle, but he let his arm
drop with it:


“What mean you gee

“IT mean—when word came hither, how you had served
your brother-in-law for seeking to deny you the maid you
were promised and giving you foul words withal—methought
I could have a mind to do you a friendly office when you came
home some day. But for that I had not taken service so near
the haunts where once I owned a farm myself—though ’twas
not a great one——”

Olav was putting on his belt. He unfastened the dagger
that hung to it: a good weapon with a blade forged by a for-
eign armourer and a plate of silver with a hook to hold it to
the belt. He handed it to Bjorn:

“Will you accept this as a token of friendship, Bjérn?”

“No. Have you never heard, Olav, that a knife is not a
gift between friends?—it cuts friendship asunder. But you
must do me this friendly office—you will cease giving to the
wife who is here ever and anon.”

Olav blushed—he looked very young for the moment. To
hide his embarrassment he said lightly, as he leapt on to the
rock and began to walk up:


“T wist not that they knew so much hereabout of what has
99


been between the Kolbeinssons and me


By6rn had given him a start with what he said about being
quick of hand when honour was at stake. The slaying of Einar
Kolbeinsson had been far from his mind; it weighed so little
on his spirit, except as the cause of the difficulties from which
he was now free. So it had not occurred to him that Bjorn was


alluding to tha ;


43


THE SNAKE PIT


Oxav had taken to Bjorn when he came and offered him his _
service, and he continued to like him. But he saw that the man
had an ill report in the neighbourhood. His wife, Gudrid,
came down to Hestviken at all times; Bjorn showed little joy
at meeting her, and he seldom went home. Olav soon found out
that she was the most arrant gossip, who preferred to roam
from house to house mumping with her wallet, rather than
look to her home. Nor were they so poverty-stricken over at
Rundmyr as she pretended; Bjorn took better care of his own
than Gudrid gave him word for, he sent home both meat and
fish and a little meal, and they had cow and goat. But now
Olav had once called the woman foster-mother, so she never
went from him without a gift. Now he was sorry he had put
himself in this difficulty—he guessed it must be intolerable
for Bjorn, when the man was to be chief of the serving-men at
the manor, and his wife came and accepted alms in this
way.

A desire had come upon Olav to associate with older men.
Without his knowing it he had felt the want of someone who
might have cared to teach him and be a guide as he grew up.
He was now very courteous and respectful toward all old men
among his equals, and helpful to the aged poor, received old
men’s advice patiently, and followed it too, when he saw that
it was beneficial. Moreover Olav was himself a man of few
words, when he came among strangers—but old folk could
usually succeed in keeping the talk going, without his having
to say much for his part or to listen the whole time. So they
thought very well of the young Master of Hestviken.

Nor was he ill liked among those of his own age, though
they thought it could scarce be said that Olav Audunsson
brought mirth and gladness with him, and some mistook his
quiet and silent manner for pride. But others deemed that the

44,


THE SNAKE PIT


man was only somewhat heavy of disposition and not too
keen-witted. That Olav and his wife were uncommonly fair to
look upon and knew well how to demean themselves among
folk, all were agreed.


One Saturday afternoon, about the time when the work ceased,
Olav and Bjorn with both the house-carls were coming up
from the waterside, when they saw a company ride out of the
little wood in Kverndal and go up the slope toward the manor.
There were two men and three young maids whose flaxen hair
floated freely down to their saddles; their gowns were red and
blue. It was a fair sight on the meadow, which was still fresh
and green with the aftergrass—and Olav was glad when he
recognized the daughters of Arne.

He took them in his arms and kissed them with a merry
greeting, as he helped them from their horses, and then he led
them forward to his wife, who stood at the door and received
her guests in her quiet and gentle way.

They had not been to the home-coming feast, and during
the holy days the two younger were to go home to their father;
so the priest had sent them hither that they might bring greet-
ings and gifts to the wife of their kinsman. The priest’s house-
carl accompanied the maids, and as they rode past Skikkjustad,
the son of that house came and offered to join them; he had
spoken with Olav the week before about a bargain.

Olav went over to the loft-room, changed his sea clothes,
tidied himself and put on his Sunday garments. He was glad
to have these young kinswomen in the neighbourhood, so In-
gunn would be less lonely. He had heard a rumour that Sira
Benedikt and Paal of Skikkjustad were thinking of a marriage
between Signe and Baard Paalsson, and it looked as though the
two young people were not disposed to gainsay the matter

45


THE SNAKE PIT


either; indeed, it might be a comfort to them at Hestviken too,
if this bargain were made.

Outside the weather was still and cold; the pale, clear air
was a sure pressage of frost at night. It was cold indoors too
—much wood was thrown upon the hearth, and after the
household had been fed, the young people were minded to
play in the courtyard awhile, till darkness came on, to warm
themselves. But Ingunn would not take part in the game. She
sat with her cloak wrapped about her and looked as though
she felt the cold; she was so quiet that something seemed to
have depressed her spirits. Seeing it, Olav left the dance and
seated himself by his wife—and soon after, it grew so dark
that they all came into the house. It then appeared that the
three sisters knew many games, riddles and jests which were
fitted for indoors, and they had sweet voices when they sang
—in everything they were courtly and well-bred maidens. But
Ingunn remained in ill humour, and Olav was not able to
enjoy himself fully, for he could not guess what ailed his
wife.

Olav put his arm about Torunn and led her to Ingunn.
Torunn was not yet thirteen, a fair and merry child. But not
even she could thaw the mistress of the house.

In the evening Olav accompanied his guests on the way.
It was fine weather; the full moon shone brightly in the clear
sky, but the frost fog was beginning to creep in from the fiord,
blotting out the shadows. Olav walked, leading Torunn’s horse.

“Your wife likes us not, Olav,” said the little maid.

“Can you think that?” said Olav with a laugh. “Not like
you! I know not what it is that has gone against Ingunn to-
night——”

Ingunn was in bed when Olav came home, and when he
lay down beside her, he found that she was weeping. He

46


THE SNAKE PIT


stroked her and bade her say why she was so sorrowful. At
long last he got her to come out with it—she felt so mortally
unwell; it must come from her having eaten some shellfish
when she was down by the waterside that morning. Olav told
her not to do such things—she could speak to him or to Bjérn,
if she had a mind to such food, and they would find her some
shellfish that was good to eat. Then he asked if she did not
think his kinswomen were pleasant and comely maids.

Ingunn answered yes, “and merry indeed were these
daughters of Arne,” she said in a tone of disapproval. “And
you sported right wantonly with them, Olav—utterly unlike
you. I can guess that you like them.”

“Yes,” said Olav, and his voice was filled with gladness at
the thought of the mirthful evening. "Twould be a great com-
fort to them both that he had these blithe and courtly young
kinswomen so near at hand, he said again.

Olav could hear that she was breathing heavily. After a
while she whispered:

“Were we not as sisters to you, Tora and I, in your boy-
hood?—but never do I mind me that you romped and jested
so wantonly with us.”

“Oh, maybe ’twas not unknown,” replied Olav. “But I
was under another man’s roof,” he added quietly. “Had I
grown up among my own kindred and in my own home, I
trow I had been less grave and silent as a boy.”

Soon after he heard that she was weeping again. And now
her sobs took such hold that he had to get water for her. On
lighting a splinter of wood he saw her face so red and swollen
that he feared she had eaten something downright poisonous.
He threw on some clothes, dashed out and fetched fresh milk,
which he forced her to drink, and then at last she began to
mend and fell asleep.

47


THE SNAKE PIT


One day just before Hallowmas Olav was at the manse
together with certain other franklins; they had come to have
letters drawn up by the priest. Olav had—not exactly fallen
out—with another man, named Stein; but yet the two had ex-
changed words somewhat sharply once or twice.

As they were about to ride home again some of the men
went out to look at Apalhvit, the horse Olav Audunsson was
riding. They praised the horse highly and remarked how well
groomed he was. And they teased Stein, who also had a white
horse, but his was ill kept and rusty yellow, and it was easy
to see that he had been roughly handled by his rider. Stein
said:

“Tt has been Olav’s calling to break and tend horses—
’tis but meet that a knight’s horse should be well groomed. But
wait till you have known a few years of husbandry—then you
will have forgotten all your courtly ways. And then you will
own the truth of the old saying that white horses and too fair
wives are not for country folk, for they have no time to watch
them.”

“°Twill surely never go so hard with me that I have not
the means to keep two white horses,” said Olav proudly. “Will
you sell me the horse, Stein?”

Stein named a price, and at once Olav held out his hand
and bade the others witness the bargain. It was settled on the
spot how and when Olav should pay over the purchase money.
Stein took the saddle off his horse and went into the house to
borrow a halter of Sira Benedikt. The other men shook their
heads, saying that this time Olav had made a bad bargain.

“Oh well—” Olav shrugged his shoulders and gave a little
laugh. “But I care not always to be so thrifty as to split a louse
into four.”

He put his saddle on the horse he had bought and let

48


THE SNAKE PIT


Apalhvit trot behind. The other men stood and watched him;
one or two of them gave a little sneering laugh. The first trial
of strength between horse and rider came at the bend of the
road. It looked as though Olav would be well warmed ere he
reached home.


INGUNN sat sewing alone in the hearth-room when she heard
the beat of hoofs on the rocky floor of the courtyard. She went
to the outer door and looked at her husband in surprise: in
the rarefied autumn sunlight he was holding in a strange and
restive horse; his face was fiery red and both he and the horse
were bespattered with the foam that covered ihe bridle, while
the horse champed and pranced till the stony ground rang
again, and would not stand still. Olav greeted her and the
house-carl, who came up, with a laugh.

“T will tell you all when I come in,” said Olav; he leapt
from the saddle and stayed by the house-carl who was to lead
the new horse to the stable.

“What is it?” she asked in wonder, when he came in. He
stopped just inside the door—looking like a drunken man.

“Ts the old man at home?” asked Olav.

“No, he went down to the sea—shall I send Tore for
him?”

Olav laughed and closed the door behind him. Then he
came forward, lifted his wife as one takes a child in one’s arms


and squeezed her till she gasped
“Olav—” she cried in terror. “What has come over you?”
“Oh, naught else but that you are too fair a wife,” he mut-

tered with the same drunken laugh, and pressed his heated

face against hers, till she thought he would break her neck.


Late in the afternoon Olav betook himself to the mill, and
49


THE SNAKE PIT


Ingunn went into the cook-house; she had a pan of cheese
standing by the fire, below the bake-stone.

The lid could not have been fitted on tightly—so much
ash had got in. And it smelt ill—had doubtless stood too
long, but it would not curdle sooner. Ingunn could never get
her cheeses to work in the right way: the cheeses she had made
the week before had gone soft again and run over on to the
shelf where she had put them to dry.

Her mouth twitched as she stood kneading the sticky,
evil-smelling cheese in the pan, with slow and clumsy hands.
She was no skilful housewife—all work was to her heavy and
difficult and accidents were always happening. Each new mis-
fortune made her so utterly despondent—when would it strike
Olav that his wife was incapable besides her other faults? At
the end of a day like this, when everything she put her hand to
had gone wrong, she felt bruised all over, as though from a
number of falls.

He had not been drunken aftervall, Olav. At first she had
sought comfort in the thought that he must have partaken more
freely than was his wont of that ale of which their priest made
such boast. But he had been quite sober.—And her heart
fluttered fitfully as she pondered—what could have come over
Olav to make him so utterly unlike himself?—Never had he
been aught but kind and affectionate and tender in his love.
At times she would fain have had him—not quite so calm and
sober-minded.


The thought weighed heavily upon her—true enough, he
was calm in his bearing, master of himself—as long as might
be. But she had seen occasions when he lost his self-control.
But even in that night of madness when the boy came to her
and said he had slain Einar, she had felt his love for her as a
safeguard. His rage she had seen once—when it was turned

50


THE SNAKE PIT


against herself; once she herself had lain cowering, mortally
afraid, face to face with his white-hot anger. It was a thing
she could not bear to think of—and she had not thought of it,
till now. But now she recalled it, with such stifling vividness.
But now she could not have done anything to make him
angry r4


She had felt so easy in these four months they had been
married. Unconsciously she reckoned her marriage from the
hour when her kinsmen in the presence of witnesses had given
her into the hands of Olav Audunsson. He had been so good to
her that the memory of all the terrible things that had befallen
her on the eve of that event was now but as the shadow of a
horrible dream. And she had been obliged to acknowledge the
truth of what he said—Hestviken was far away; it had been
easier than she could ever have imagined to forget what had
happened there in the north. But at the same time she had
striven to show him that she was grateful and loved him—un-
speakably.—Surely then she could not have done anything
to cause him to be so—strange—just now, when he came home.
But then she was seized with terror at the thought of what


might have caused it

And yet that was foolish—for he had shown no sign of
wrath; it had all been caresses, in a way, the whole of it. Only
wild ones—and then he had played with her, roughly, mad
with an ungovernable merriment that had scared her, for she
was not used to seeing Olav thus. But perhaps that was no
proof that anything out of the common had befallen him—
perhaps it was the way with all men, that such a fit came over
them now and again. It had been Teit’s way

Teit—she felt a kind of sagging at the heart—it had been
just like Teit. Her memory of him had grown distant and un-
real like all the rest that sank below the horizon, as she moved

51


THE SNAKE PIT


farther and farther away from it with Olav. Now it had again
come nigh her, alive and threatening, the memory that she had
been Teit’s———

She uttered a scream and started, trembling all over, as
Olav suddenly appeared just behind her—she had not noticed
his coming.

He had stood in the doorway for a while watching her,
the tall and slender young wife bending over the board, nar-
row-shouldered and lithe, working slowly and awkwardly
with her long, thin-fingered hands in the mess of cheese. He
could not see her face beneath the coif, but he had a feeling
that she was in low spirits.

He was ashamed of himself for the way he had behaved to
her when he came home before. "Twas far from seemly for a
man to show his wife such conduct. He was afraid she might
feel insulted.

“Have I frightened you?” Olav spoke in his usual voice,
calmly, with a shade of tender solicitude. He placed himself
beside her, a little awkwardly—took a pinch of the curds she


was now kneading into balls, and ate it.

“T never did this work until I came hither,” she said in
excuse. “Dalla would never let me—. Maybe I have not pressed
out the whey enough——”

“You will learn it, I doubt not,” her husband comforted
her. “We have time enough, Ingunn——


“I was so vexed over that matter of the horse—but the
man Stein provoked me to it,” he looked down with embarrass-
ment, turned red and laughed with annoyance. “You know ’tis
not like me—to make a fool’s bargain. I was so glad when you
came out to meet me—” he looked at her as though begging
forgiveness.

52


THE SNAKE PIT


She bent yet deeper over her work and her cheeks flushed
darkly.

“She is not yet fit for much,” thought her husband. “The
unwonted labour tires her.”—If only the old man in the closet
would keep quiet tonight. His poor frame was rent by rheu-
matic pains, so that he often wailed aloud for hours at night,
and the young people got little rest.


Oxav IncoLFsson had broken down completely, as soon as
his young kinsman had relieved him of the duties of master.
He had worn himself out at Hestviken, though there was but
little to show for it. Now he abandoned himself wholly to the
afflictions of old age. The two young people were kind to him.
Olav felt it as a support—without being clear in what way he
needed support—that after years of waiting he was living
under the same roof as a man of his father’s kindred. And he
was glad that Ingunn was so kind and thoughtful in her man-
ner toward the feeble old man. He had been a little disap-
pointed that she seemed to like neither the daughters of Arne
nor their father, whom they had since met. Olav himself had a
great liking for this cousin of his father’s. Arne of Hestbek
was a man of some fifty years, white-haired, but handsome and
of good presence; the family likeness between him and Olav
Audunsson was striking. Arne Torgilsson received Olav very
open-heartedly and bade him be his guest at Yule. And for
this Olav had a right good mind; but Ingunn did not seem so
set on going.

Bui he was glad that in any case she seemed to take to
Olav Ingolfsson, though the old man gave no little trouble.
He was often restless at night—and then he befouled the place
with all the simples and unguents he prepared for himself—
and the old dog, who lay in his bed at night and was to draw

53


THE SNAKE PIT


out the pain from his sick leg, was uncleanly, thievish and
cross-tempered. But Ingunn patiently assisted the old man,
spoke to him gently as a daughter, and was kind to his dog.

Both the young people found it diverting to listen to old
Olav’s talk in the evenings. There was no end to what he knew
of men and families and their seats in all the country around
Folden. Of the warfare that followed Sverre Priest’s coming
to Norway he could tell them many tales learnt from his
father; but in King Skule’s cause Olav Half-priest had fought
himself. Olav Audunsson’s great-grandfather, Olav Olavsson
of Hestviken, had followed Sigurd Ribbung to the last, and
then he had fought against Skule. But when the Duke was pro-
claimed King at the Ore Thing, Olav Ribbung mustered men
about him and marched northward with his three sons to offer
him his support; and his brother, Ingolf the priest, gave his
son leave to accompany his cousins: “we were then in our
fifteenth year, Torgils and I—but we gave a good account of
ourselves. The scar I bear on my back was gotten at Laaka.
They made such sport of me, the Vaarbelgs,1 for getting hurt
there—but we had come into a deep cleft with a stream be-
tween landslides and had the Birchlegs above us both behind
and before—there were Torgils and I and three other lads—
there were so many young lads among our party. One of them
we called Surt, for he had the reddest hair I have seen on any

1Vaarbelger: this was the name given to the followers of Skule
by their enemies, the Birchlegs. Various explanations of the name
have been suggested, the most probable being “hides taken in spring-


time” (vaar, spring, and belg, hide), the hides being almost valueless
during the spring months.

Duke Skule was proclaimed king in 1239. In the following year
he was victorious over the Birchlegs at Laaka, but the Vaarbelgs were
afterwards defeated by King Haakon at Oslo. Skule fell at Trondhjem
in May 1240,

54


THE SNAKE PIT


man.” It chanced, as we followed Gudine Geig into the Eastern
Dales, that we lay one night at a little farm and woke to find
the house afire. “You have lain with your shockhead against
the bare wall, you devil,’ said Gudine. ‘Yes, and then you blew
on it,’ said Surt—he-he-he, his words were less decent than I
will repeat for Ingunn’s sake; we lay all over the floor, Surt
just behind Gudine. The penthouse was all ablaze, but out we
came and hacked our way through. They had an ill habit of
setting fire to houses, the Birchlegs—’twas a jest with us that
there were so many sons of bath-house carls and bake-house
wives among them. But now you are to hear how we fared,
Torgils and I, at Laaka—nay, first let me tell you a little of
this Gudine Gei 2


Oxav noticed that it vexed Ingunn when the old man ques-
tioned her impatiently, whether she would not soon have news
for them. Now she and Olav had been married five monthh——

“We do what we can, kinsman,” said Olav with a little
laugh.

But the old man was angry and told him not to jest lightly
with the matter, but rather to make vows and pray God to
grant them an heir betimes. Olav laughed and thought there
was no such haste. In his own mind he deemed it hard enough
for Ingunn, even now when she was in full health, to cope
with the affairs of the household and keep her three serving-
women to their work.

But Olav Ingolfsson complained: he believed he had not
long to live. Now he had known four generations of the family,
great-grandfather, grandfather, father and son—“I would fain
greet a son of yours, Olav, before I quit this world.”

“Oh, you will live sure enough to greet both my son and


2 Surt is the Norwegian name for a ferruginous earth used as a dye.


55


THE SNAKE PIT


my grandson,” Olav consoled him. But the old man was de-.
spondent:

“Olav Torgilsson, who was the first man of our race here
in Hestviken, was married to Tora Ingolfsdatter ten years be-
fore they had children—and he fell before his sons saw the
light. That was his punishment, to my mind, for having mar-
ried her against his father’s will. Ingolf of Hestviken and Tor-
gils of Dyfrin had been enemies, but Olav Torgilsson said he
would not forgo this good marriage because the two old men
had quarrelled once in a drinking bout. Tora was the heiress
here, for Ingolf was the last man of the old Hestvik line, who
are said to have dwelt in this spot since there were men in
Norway. And Torgils Fivil was the last of the barons’ line at
Dyfrin. Sverre gave the manor and Torgils’ young widow to
one of his own men—he had been thrice married, Torgils Fivil.
He had been given the name in his youth from his flaxen hair
and the fine, white skin which has ever been an inheritance in
our kin.®

“So you may see, our ancestor had cause enough for
vengeance upon Sverre—his manor, his father and three
brothers. And the winter that his wife perceived there was a
hope that the race would survive them was the same winter
when the country folk here around Folden rose to take venge-
ance for Magnus, their crowned King, and strike down that
Sverre, who had no right to the kingdom and sought to upset
all our ancient rights and bring in new customs, which we
liked not. Men of the Vik and of the Upplands, of Ranrike and
Elvesyssel, well-nigh the whole people of Norway were with
us. Olav Torgilsson was among the nobles who were foremost
in counsel and boldest in fight from the very first.


3 Fivil means bog-cotton.
56


THE SNAKE PIT


“You know how we fared at Oslo that time. The Devil
helps his own, and he bore up Sverre Priest till he had him
well housed within the gates of Hell, ’tis my belief. Olav Tor-
gilsson fell there on the ice; but some men from these parts
rescued the body and carried him home. So many men had
fallen above Olav there around the standard that the Birch-
legs had not despoiled him, and home he came axe in hand;
they could not loosen the dead man’s grip of the weapon. But
when the widow came up and took hold of it, he let go—the
arm dropped, and Tora was left with the axe, and at the same
moment the child quickened within her—twas as though the
unborn babe had struck out with his clenched fist, she told the
sons she bore that spring. From the time they were big enough
to understand she spoke of this early and late, that they had
vowed to avenge their father while they were yet in the womb.
That axe was the one you have now, ‘Kin-fetch.’ Tora gave it
that name; of old it was called ‘Wrathful Iron.’ It came to
Olav, since he was the elder of the twins, when she sent the
boys to a man named Benedikt, who was said to be a son of
King Magnus Erlingsson. His was the first company in which
these brothers took part.

“T can well call to mind my grandmother, Tora Ingolfs-
datter. She was a large-hearted woman, of great judgment,
feared God and was charitable toward the poor. While she was
mistress here—and she had a long life; your great-grandfather
and my father obeyed her to her dying day—there was great
fishery here in Hestviken. Grandmother sent her ships along
the whole coast, as far as the border by the Gauta river and
down to Denmark—you can guess, she spied out news of what
was brewing against the race of Sverre. Tora always had scent
of all such plans that were afoot, and all who were minded to
oppose the Birchlegs found good backing with the widow of

57


THE SNAKE PIT


Olav Torgilsson. Tora had loved her husband with marvellous
devotion. Olav Torgillsson was a little, fair-skinned man, but
full of strength, and handsome—somewhat lacking in chastity,
but so they were, the men of King Magnus’s time.
“Grandmother herself can never have been fair of face.
At the time I remember her she was so tall and so portly that
she had to go sideways and bend double to get through the |
door here in the new house. She was half a head taller than
her sons, and they were big men. But fair she was not: she had
a nose so big and so crooked that I know not to what I can
liken it, and eyes like gulls’ eggs, and her chins hung down
upon her chest and her breasts upon her stomach.


“First she sent her sons to Filippus, the Bagler king,* but
soon she grew very dissatisfied with him, deeming him lack-
ing in energy, lazy and a lover of peace. When therefore this
Benedikt came forward in the Marches, she bade the lads go
to him. His company was for the most part a rabble of vaga-
bonds of every kind—my father always said that this Benedikt
was of little worth as a leader. He was rash and heedless and
somewhat foolish—sometimes a coward and sometimes over-
bold. But Olav held staunchly to him, always, for he firmly
believed that Benedikt was King Magnus’s son, though he did
not come up to his father. Now it befell Bene that at the
first he had but this herd of rogues that they called the ragged
host, but soon more and more good franklins took up his cause,
since no more likely leader could be found at the time. But
then they were minded to rule Bene and not let themselves
be ruled by their claimant to the crown. And when, after a
time, Sigurd Ribbung came forward and gained the support of
the nobles, the old Bagler leaders, the chiefs of the ragged


4The Baglers (or “crozier men”) were the party of the Church
and the old nobility, opposed to Sverre and his followers, the Birchlegs.


58


THE SNAKE PIT


host took Bene with them and went over to Sigurd, and Bene-
dikt had to content himself with being one of Sigurd Ribbung’s
petty chieftains. But Olav Olavsson always bore in mind that
Benedikt was the lord to whom he had first sworn fealty,
and served and honoured him accordingly. Olav was a loyal
man.


“Tora made good marriages for her sons—for Olav, As-
trid Helgesdatter of Mork; they were very young, some sixteen
years both of them, and they had a goodly life together and
loved each other with irue affection. Their sons were Ingolf,
your grandfather, he was the eldest; then there was the Helge
who fell at Nidaros with King Skule, and Torgils, he was the
youngest of the sons; he and I were of equal age. The daugh-
ters of Olav and Astrid were Halldis, who was married to Ivar
. Staal of Aas in Hudrheim, and Borgny, the nun—a lovable,


holy woman. She died the year after you were born.

“Father was older when he married, for he wished to be
a priest. It was the Bishop himself, Nikulaus Arnesson, who
ordained him, and he loved my father very dearly, for father
was exceeding pious and learned and wrote books more fairly
than any priest in the diocese. My mother, Bergljot of Tveit,
was merry, fond of feasting and show, so she and father were
ill-matched and did not agree well together, though they had
many children—five of us lived to grow up. She was somewhat
greedy of money, my mother—father was so generous that he
robbed his own larder behind mother’s back to give alms. But
it chanced unluckily that the townsmen got word of this and
laughed at it—you know, it looks ill if a priest be not master
in his own house. I remember one day mother was angry over
something—she took two sheets of a book father had just fin-
ished writing and threw them upon the fire, but then he beat
her. Father was a big, strong, valiant man and he had fought

59


THE SNAKE PIT


bravely against the Birchlegs, but toward his even Christians
he was the most gentle and peaceful of men—but with mother
there was ever some dissension. Between our house at Oslo and
the sea there was a piece—one could not call it ground; ’twas
but beach and weeds and bare rock. The townspeople had been
wont to use a path across it to shorten the way. Mother wished
to close this path—father deemed it unseemly for a priest to
wrangle over such a small matter. But there were quarrels
without end on account of this right of way—between father
and mother and between us and our neighbours.

“When the order came that the priests of Norway were to
live in celibacy as those of other Christian lands, father bade
my mother go home to Tveit, to enjoy the manor and a great
part of his estate. But she and her kinsmen and my brothers
and sisters were very wroth, for they thought in their hearts
that father was more glad than sorry to be forced to break up
their married life. I know full well that my father had always
held the marriage of priests to be an evil custom, and that was
also the opinion of Bishop Nikulaus—but ’twas the usage when
my father was a young man, and then he had to do as his
mother willed. My brothers and sisters and my mother then
went up country, and I have not seen much of them since:
Kaare, my brother, got Tveit, and Erlend got Aasheim; now
both the manors are divided among many children. I stayed
with father; I had always been intended for the priesthood—
and father and I lived happily together and looked on Hal-
vard’s church as our true home. I was ordained sub-deacon
three years after King Skule’s fall. Grandmother Tora died
soon after.

“But it was of your great-grandfather Olav Ribbung and
his kin that I was to tell you. Ingolf, you know, was married
to Ragna Hallkelsdatter from Kaaretorp—twas Tora who had

60


THE SNAKE PIT


busied herself to secure this good marriage for her grandson,
as soon as he was grown; Audun, your father, was already
some two years old when we kinsmen set out to follow King
Skule and the Vaarbelgs. When Torgils turned mad, Ingolf and
Ragna had an uneasy life at Hestviken, and afterwards they
lived mostly at Kaaretorp. But one Yule, when they were here,
Ingolf wished to accompany Halldis, his sister, and her hus-
band across the fiord to Aas and to stay with them awhile.
They ran upon a rock, and all who were in the boat were
drowned.

“Olav Ribbung bore this disaster so well that my father
used to say he had never seen a man bear adversity so nobly—
he always named his brother as a pattern of firmness and
strength—those twin brothers loved each other so dearly.—
Ay, *twas his son and daughter and son-in-law who were lost.
Olav merely said that he thanked God his mother and Astrid,
his wife, had died before these disasters had fallen upon his
children. He dwelt on there with the madman, and there were
no others of his offspring left but Borgny, the nun, and Audun,
a little lad. Ingolf’s widow married again in Elvesyssel, and
Olav gave his consent that Audun should be brought up by his
mother and stepfather. Olav Ribbung then adopted the son
that Torgils had gotten by a serving wench here at Hestviken,
but the boy lived no long time.

“°Twas the third year I was lame from my broken leg,
when Ingolf and the others were lost. And I bore it ill—I
thought it unbearably hard to be a cripple, young as I was,
and that I could never be a priest. Then father always held up
Olav Ribbung to me as an example.—But I know that Olav
took it sorely to heart that Audun would not marry again after
your mother’s death and would not bide at home in Hestviken
—and the race bade fair to die out.

61


THE SNAKE PIT


“But now there is good hope, I ween, that it will thrive ©
again, with such young and sound and goodly folk as you and
your wife. And you may be well assured that I yearn to take a
son of yours in my arms. Four generations have I known—
five, if I may reckon our ancestress among them—gladly would
I see the first man of the sixth ere I die. Tis not given to
many men to know their own kindred through six generations.
And I would deem it a reasonable thing, my Ingunn, if your
husband too should conceive a great longing for the same—
his departed kinsmen have possessed this manor of Hestviken
since there were men in Norway. Do you hear that, young
woman?” he said, laughing to himself.

Olav saw how red she turned.—But it was not the modest
blush of happy longing; it was the hot glow of shame that
mantled her face. Her eyes grew dark and troubled. In charity
he took his glance from her.


62


8


NGUNN CAME OUT INTO THE BALCONY AND STOOD GAZING AT
[« falling snow. High up against the pale clouds the great

wet flakes looked grey, as they whirled in the air, but when
they settled they seemed pure white, a gleaming white mass
against the obliterated white heights toward Kverndalen.

When she looked up for a while into the driving flurry,
she felt as though she herself were being sucked up, to hover
in the air for an instant; then she sank down and all grew
dark. She tried this again and again. The unbearable giddiness
that came over her all at once was somehow turned to gentle
rapture as she felt herself borne upward—but when the drop
came she could not see that she was falling; nothing but grey
and black streaks that whirled around.

There was such a strange hush that the very sea-mews
were silent—she had seen how they settled in such weather, in
cracks of the rock, and on the great stones of the beach. Now
and again they moved a little, but without uttering a note.
When first she came here she had thought these great white
birds with their wide stretch of wing were fairer than anything
she had seen—even their curious screams made her strangely
happy at heart. She had been brought to a new land, far from
the region where she had suffered intolerably. In summer,
when she came out in the morning and heard the regular
pounding of the sea at the foot of the rock on which she stood,
saw the wide and bright expanse of the fiord and the bare
shore on the other side, and the circling white sea-mews


63


THE SNAKE PIT


screamed hoarsely, unreal as wraiths—it had made her so
light at heart: the world was so great and so wide; what had
befallen her somewhere in a spot far, far away could not
possibly be so great a matter—it must surely be forgotten in
time——

But as autumn drew on out here by the fiord she was
alarmed by its being never still. The unceasing murmur and
booming of the waves, the cries of the sea-birds, the sweep of
the storm over the wooded ridge—all this made her dizzy.
If she had but to cross the yard, the wind seemed to rush in
at her ears and fill her whole head with noise. And rain and
fog drifted in from the sea and took away her courage. She
thought of the autumn at home—the ground hard with black
frost, the air bright and clear, so that the blows of an axe or
the baying of a dog could be heard from farm to farm; there
the sun made its way through the morning mist and thawed the
rime to dew in the course of the day. And she longed to listen
to a stillness around her.

It was as though she had sunk lower and lower as the days
and the year grew shorter and darker. Now she was at the
bottom—midwinter was past, the year was climbing again.
And she felt utterly powerless, at the thought that now she was
to take the uphill road. Soon the sun would rise higher and
higher—the time was near at hand when day by day it would
be manifest that brighter and longer days were drawing on,
the springtime. But to her it was as though she faced a lofty
mountain up which she was to climb—with the burden she
now knew full surely that she bore—and it made her sick and
giddy to think of it.

Still, still was the air, though the snow whirled so madly
—the flakes drifted hither and thither, but at last they fell
straight down. The sea was dark as iron, when she had a

64


THE SNAKE PIT


glimpse of it, and the surf-beat on the beach sounded faint and
monotonous in the mild, snowy air.

All was covered now—ihe road down to the wharf was
blotted out. The footprints of the maids who had gone to the
byre, her own tracks across the yard, were snowed under. And
all the white was turning grey and slowly fading as the first
shades of dusk came on.

The door of the bath-house burst open, and in the cloud
of white steam that poured out she caught a glimpse of the
men’s bodies, dark against the snow. They ran up toward the
barn, where they had left their clothes, rolling in the drifts as
they went, with shouts and laughter. She recognised Olav and
Bjorn, who came first; they closed and wrestled, ducking each
other in the snow.

She lifted up the platter of pickled fish and threw her
cloak over it. It was so heavy that she had to carry it in both
arms; she could not steady herself or see beyond her feet and
was afraid of slipping on the snow-covered rocks. The dusk
had deepened and the flickering snow made her yet more giddy.


OLAv came into the house and took his place in the high seat
at the end of the room. He was hungry and tired—seitled down
in ease at the thought that it was Saturday and the eve of a
holy day, and that three women were busied about him, bring-
ing in food.

The fire on the hearth glowed red, with little, low flames
playing over the burnt-out logs, but through the dim light of
the room the man in the master’s seat was conscious of the
new comfort that had been brought in. The table was always
set up now on the raised floor along the end wall; there were
cushions in the high seat, and a piece of tapestry had been
hung over the logs of the wall behind it. By the side of this

65


THE SNAKE PIT


the axe Kin-fetch hung in its old place, together with Olav’s |
two-handed sword and his shield with the wolf’s head and the
three blue lilies. A blue woven curtain had been hung about
the southern bed, where the master and mistress slept.

A faint light showed within the closet-—the old man was
reciting his evening prayers in a half-singing voice. Sira Bene-
dikt might say what he would, thought Olav—his kinsman was
a man of no little learning: he said his hours as well as any
priest. When the old man had finished, Olav Audunsson called
to him: would he not come in and sup?

The old man answered that he would rather have a little
ale and groats brought to him in bed. Ingunn hastily filled a
bowl with the food and carried it in to him. At the same mo-
ment the house-carls appeared at the door—Bjorn with a
bundle of wood which he flung on the floor. He made up the
fire, threw open the outer door and raised the smoke-vent, so
that snow-flakes drifted down to the hearth with a hiss. Ingunn
stayed with the old man till the wood had caught and the
worst of the smoke had cleared away. Then Bjorn closed the
door and the smoke-vent.

Ingunn came in and stood at her table. She made a cross
with her knife on the loaf before cutting it up. The five men on
the bench ate in silence, long and heartily. Ingunn sat on the
edge of the bed and picked at a little fish and bread, enjoying
it, for the salmon was good and well pickled. The ale was of
the Yule brewing and might have been better, but she had had
such dirty grain for the malt, mixed with all manner of weeds.

She glanced over at her husband. His hair was dark with
wet; the eyebrows and stubbly beard stood out with a golden
gleam against his face, which was red and weather-beaten this
evening. He seemed to have a good appetite.

The three serving-maids sat on the bench below the bed,

66


THE SNAKE PIT


facing the hearth, and ate their supper. Herdis, the youngest
of them, whispered and giggled as she ate; that child was
always full of laughter and games. She was showing the other
maids a new horn spoon that she had been given; the laughter
spirted out of her as she did so—then she gave a terrified look
at the mistress and struggled to keep quiet, but the girl was all
squeaks and gurgles.

The house-folk went out soon after the meal was ended.
The men had been on the water from early morning, and the
road from Hestviken to the church was so long that they could
not lie late abed on the morrow, when the going was as heavy
as it was now.

Olav went in to his kinsman—the old man always needed
a hand with one thing or another before he lay down to rest.
Olav Ingolfsson was specially inclined to talk toward bedtime
and wished to hear all about the fishing and the day’s work on
the farm. And every answer he received of the younger Olav
put him in mind of something which had to be told.

Ingunn was sitting on a low stool before the hearth, comb-
ing her hair, when Olav came back into the room. She was
half undressed—sitting in a white, short-sleeved linen shift and
a narrow, sleeveless under-kirtle of russet homespun. Her thick
dark-yellow hair hung like a mantle about her slender,
slightly stooping form, and through it gleamed her delicate
white arms,

Olav came up behind her, filled his hands with her
loosened hair and buried his face in it—it smelt so good:

“You have the fairest hair of all women, Ingunn!”

He forced her head back and looked down into her up-
turned face:

“But you have fallen away since Yule, my sweet one!
You must not work beyond your powers, I will not have it!

67


THE SNAKE PIT


And then you must eat more—else you will grow so thin, ere
Lent comes and we must fast, that there will be nothing left
of you!”

He struggled out of his jerkin and shirt and sat down on
the edge of the hearth to warm his back. The sight of the man’s
naked chesi—the play of the muscles under the milk-white
skin, as he bent down to pull off his boots, affected the young
wife painfully. His sound health made her feel her own weak-
ness all the more.

Olav scratched himself on the shoulder-blades—a few lit-
tle drops of blood trickled, red as wine, down his smooth skin:

“He is such a rough fellow, Bjorn, when he bathes one,”
laughed Olav. Then he bent over the bitch that lay with her
litter on a sack by the hearth, and picked up one of the pup-
pies. It squealed as he held it to the light—its eyes were only
just opened. The mother gave a low growl. Olav had bought
the dog but a little while before and had paid so much that
his neighbours had again shaken their heads at his grand ways.
But it was a special breed of dog, with hanging ears, soft as
silk, and a short coat—keen-scented, excellent sporting dogs.
Olav handled the puppies with satisfaction: it looked as if
they would take after their mother, all five of them. He laugh-
ingly laid one in his wife’s lap, amused at the dog, which now
growled more threateningly, but dared not fly at him.

The tiny, round-bellied creature, still soft of bone,
crawled and scrambled, trying to lick Ingunn’s hands. It was
so weak and jointless—all at once she felt unwell, a lump
came into her throat.

“Let its mother have it back,” she begged feebly.

Olav looked at her, stopped laughing and laid the puppy
back beside the bitch.


68


THE SNAKE PIT

TORRE was past and the month of Gjé came and froze the fiord
—the ice stretched far to the south of Jélund.t The days began
to lengthen and grow lighter. The frost fog crept up the fiord
from farther out where there was open sea, and when clear
days succeeded, with blue sky and sunshine, the whole world
glistened with rime. Olav and Bjorn went out hunting together.

Ingunn’s only thought was, how long yet would she be
able to conceal it. Her tears burst forth—in impotent despair
she knew that now indeed she had no need of concealment:
was she not Olav’s wife in Hestviken, where she was to bear ©
him a child in the old manor that had been the seat of his kin
from time out of mind? And yet she would fain have crept


underground and hidden herself.

She saw that Olav had guessed how it was with her. Still
she kept going and could not bring herself to utter a word of it.
She kept the fast like the others, though her chest was drawn
with hunger so that it gave her pain. She noticed that Olav
stole a glance at her more and more often, with something of
wonder and covert anxiety in his looks. Afterwards he would
remain silent a long while. Her heart was filled with dread
when she saw him thus, brooding and wondering about her.
But she did not get herself to say anything.

Then there came a Sunday; they had just come home from
church and were alone in the room for a moment. Olav seated
himself on the bench; as she was hurrying past he caught her
by the wrist and held her:

“Ingunn mine—you must do a kindness to Olav Ingolfs-

1 Torre and Gjé were the names of two of the old Scandinavian
months, the former beginning with the next new moon after the “Yule
moon.” Gjé would usually include the latter part of February and most


of March.
69


THE SNAKE PIT


son and tell him of it. I believe he will scarce live through the
spring. You know how eagerly he awaits it!”

Ingunn bowed her head; her face was red as fire.

“Yes,” she whispered obediently.

Then her husband drew her to him and would set her on
his knee.

“How is it with you?” he asked in a low voice. “You are
so unhappy, Ingunn? Does he plague you so ill, this little guest
of yours? Or are you afraid?”

“Afraid!” For an instant the young wife seemed to flare
up, like her old headstrong self of former days. “You must


surely know how it is Never have you been anything but
good to me—and now I must think day after day that I am not
worth it)”

“Be silent!”” He squeezed her hand hard. Ingunn saw
Olav’s face shut up. When he spoke again his voice was forced,
though he made an effort to speak calmly and genily:

“Think not of that, Ingunn, which we do much better to
forget. "T'were foolish indeed of us to awaken memories that—
that And you know full well that I love you so dearly that
I could never have the heart to be aught but good to you.”

“Oh, I should be worth still less, if I could forget we

She sank on her knees before him, hid her head in her
husband’s arms and kissed his hand. Olav quickly withdrew it,
leapt up and raised his wife to her feet. Ingunn bent backward
in his arms, looked into his eyes and said in a kind of defiance:

“You are fond of me—ay, God knows I see it—but I be-
lieve, Olav, that had I offered to treat you as of old—with an
overweening, fanciful humour, claiming to have my own way
in all things—I scarce believe you would have suffered it in
me, or loved me so much, after what I have done to you ie

“Oh, be quiet now—!” He let her go.


70


THE SNAKE PIT


“I often wish you had treated me harshly, as you threat-
ened that time——”

“That you do not wish,” he said with the cold little smile
she knew so weil from old days.

But then he drew her passionately to him, hid her head
on his breast.

“Do not weep,” he begged.

“T am not weeping.” Olav raised her face and looked into
it—he felt strangely ill at ease. He would much rather she had
wept.


In the time that followed, a kind of paralysing dread crept
over Olav again and again. He had a feeling that all had been
in vain. In vain the payments he had made to buy peace for
himself and her, in vain that he had sunk his own bitterness to
the bottom of his soul and quenched it with all the old streams
of his love: his life with her was a dear old habit of his child-
hood; when he took her in his arms he recalled the first rap-
ture of his life—. Never had he let her see that he remembered
her—weakness, he called it now. And now he was at his wit’s
end, recognizing that against the sense of shame that gnawed at
her heart he could do nothing.

And when he saw her in this state, he himself could not
avoid the thought—it was not her first child.

During their first months together at Hestviken he had
been so pleased with her quiet bearing, knowing it was happi-
ness that made her so meek and gentle a wife. But now it hurt
him. For she had spoken the truth—had she been as in old
days, when she would have her own way and always expected
him to give in to her—he would not have brooked that of her


now.
Then he straightened himself, as though shouldering his


71


Se


THE SNAKE PIT


burden anew. At home he always appeared calm and contented,
he had a cheerful answer when anyone spoke to him, and put
a good face on the prospect of the old stock sending out fresh
shoots. He was affectionate toward his wife and tried to con-
sole himself: Ingunn had never been strong, and this sickliness
must prey heavily on her meagre powers. No doubt her melan-
choly would pass off when she grew well again.


Op Oxav Inco.tFsson had failed greatly during the spring,
and Olav Audunsson tended him as well as he could. He often
lay at night in the closet with his kinsman; at any moment the
old man might require help of one kind or another. A little
oil-lamp burnt all night long, and the younger Olav lay on
the floor in a leather bag. When old Olav could not sleep he
would babble by the hour together, and now it was always of
their kin: how possessions and prosperity had come into the
hands of the Hestvik men, and how they had been lost again.

One night, as they lay talking of such things, young Olay
asked his namesake about Foulbeard. All he knew of this man
was but scraps—and these scraps were scarcely more agree-
able, he thought, than what he himself remembered of the mad-
man.

Old Olav said:

“TI have not told you much of him before—but maybe you
ought to have knowledge of this too, since you are now to be
the head of our line. Is your wife asleep?” he asked. “ ’T'were
better she did not hear this

“It was truly spoken of him that he acted cruelly and
faithlessly toward—many women. And many spoke ill of me,


because I was always in company with Torgils, I who was

intended for the priesthood. But Torgils I have loved more

dearly than any man on earth—and never have I been able to
Ws


THE SNAKE PIT


understand his evil life, for I never saw that he sought the
company of women or paid court to young maids, when we
were at feasts and merry-makings. And when the talk fell upon
women and loose living, as you know will often happen among
idle young men in hall, Torgils would sit in silence. with a
little scornful smile—and never have I heard him use immodest
or lecherous speech. He was rather sparing of words and grave
in all his dealings, a bold, manly and valorous man. I never
knew him have any friends, save me—but we had been as
foster-brothers from childhood. I grieved at his evil living—
but I could never bring myself to say a word about it to my
cousin. Father reproved him often with hard words—he was so
fond of Torgils, he too: he would remind him of the day that
awaits us all, when we must answer to Our Lord for all our
deeds—‘It had been better for you, Torgils,’ my father often
said, ‘if you had been sunk in the fiord with a millstone about
your neck, as the inhuman wretches did to God’s beloved Saint
Halvard when he sought to protect a poor, simple woman—
but you do outrage to such poor and simple ones— Torgils
never said a word in return. There was something secret about
Torgils: I never saw him go up to a woman, sit down by her
and talk to her, but I noticed that she was uneasy so soon as he
looked at her—he must have had an evil power in his eyes. He
had a kind of power over men too. For when King Skule’s
cause was lost, Torgils lent assistance to the Bishop—and
afterwards he was made captain of the Bishop’s men. But more
than once the Bishop was minded to turn him away on account
of the ugly rumours. When the matter of Astrid Bessesdatter
and Herdis of Stein came out, the Bishop threatened him with
excommunication and outlawry and with expulsion from the


town—but nothing came of it
“It was at Yule, seven years after King Skule’s fall, that


73


THE SNAKE PIT


Torgils had been at home in Hestviken, and in Lent Besse and
his sons and Olav, my uncle, came to Oslo, and it was agreed
that Torgils should marry Astrid as soon as might be after the
fast. That was the only time Torgils spoke to me of such mat-
ters—he said he would stay here and not go home to his wife;
but Besse and his children were such good folk that there was
no way out, he must take Astrid. But I guessed that he had
taken a dislike to her. Never have I been able to understand
how a man can have the heart to bring ruin upon such a young
child, when he did not even like her better than that. But Tor-
gils replied that he could not help turning against them al-
ways——

“God be merciful to his soul—. He met Herdis Karlsdat-
ter just after, and then he did not go home to his own be-
trothal feast. Olav was beside himself with shame and anger
over his son’s behaviour, but Torgils said he would rather fly
the country than let himself be pressed into taking a wife
whom he could not bear to set eyes on. When the rumours got
abroad about Torgils and Herdis, it was yet worse; they both
begged and threatened him, uncle Olav and father and the
Bishop, but Torgils heeded them not at all. Astrid Bessesdatter
was not surpassingly fair, but she was young, red and white—
Herdis Karlsdatter was fat and yellow of skin, thirteen years
older than Torgils, and eight children had she borne, so no
one could understand it, but folk thought that Torgils had
been bewitched. I myself thought it must be the Devil—that
he had now gotten Torgils wholly into his power, after he had
treated the young maid, Astrid, so heartlessly. I told him this,
but then his face turned so white and strange that I was sheer
afraid, and he answered me: ‘I think you are right, kinsman.
But now it is too late.’ And all my prayers and persuasion
were as though I had preached to stocks and stones. Some

74


THE SNAKE PIT


days after came the news that Jon of Stein, Herdis’s husband,
was dead.”

Olav Audunsson started up in his sleeping-bag—stared at
the old man in horror, but said nothing. Olav Ingolfsson was
silent for a moment, then he said in a low voice, as though it
irked him:

“He was on his way home from a gathering, had been ab-
sent for the night, and two of his own faithful men were with
him—he fell right down by the roadside and died at once. Jon
was old and weak—God knows I surely think neither Herdis
nor Torgils had a hand in this. But you may well suppose that
much was said, when it was rumoured that Torgils would
marry the widow. Olav Ribbung said he wished the sons of
Besse had cut down Torgils before this happened, and he de-
clared that so long as Astrid was left unmarried with Torgils’
son, he would not suffer Torgils to offend her kinsmen yet
worse by marrying any other. But if it were true that his son
had ended by loving a married woman, he would himself pray
God to smite Torgils with the hardest of punishments, if he did
not turn from his sinful life, do penance and put away his
leman. And ere he would let Torgils marry her, his father
would bind him as a madman

“Not long after, Herdis died suddenly. I was with Torgils
when the news came—. But I cannot tell you how Torgils
looked—first his eyes grew so big that I have never seen the
like, then they shrank in again and the whole man shrivelled
and faded. But he said nothing, and in the days that followed
he went about and performed his duty as though nothing had
happened—but I felt that something was brewing, and when I
was not at church I did not move from his side, day or night. I
noticed too that he wished me to be with him—but when he
slept I know not; he lay down in his clothes and neither washed

75


THE SNAKE PIT


nor shaved himself, and he began to be strange in his manner
and unlike himself to look at.

“Herdis was buried in the church at Aker. That day week
the Bishop sent Torgils up to Aker, and I went with him. It
was the eve of a holy day and the tenant of the nuns’ farm
offered us baths; then I got him to shave off his foul yellow
stubble, and I cut his hair. ‘Ay, now I am ready,’ said Torgils
—and an uncanny feeling came over me, for he smiled so
queerly—and I saw that his face was ravaged and wasted, and
skin and hair were yet paler than before, but his eyes had
grown so big, and they too had paled till they were of the
colour of milk and water. He was handsome for all that—but
he little resembled a living man, as he sat motionless on the
bench, with a fixed stare.

“At last I lay down on the bed awhile, and then I fell
asleep. But I was awakened by a knocking at the door, three
blows, and I started up.

“Torgils had risen and moved as a man walks in his sleep:
‘I am sent for :

“T rushed up and took hold of him—God knows what I
thought at that moment—but he pushed me aside, and again
there was a knocking at the door.


b)


“ “Let me go,’ said Torgils. ‘I must go out

“I was a tall man, much taller than Torgils, and very
strong I was in my youth, though never so strong as Torgils—
he was thickset and small of limb like you and had immense
bodily strength. I threw my arms around him and tried to hold
him, but he gave me a look, and I knew that he was beyond
human aid.


“It is Herdis,’ he said, and again there were three blows
on the door. ‘Let me go, Olav. Never did I promise the others
aught, but her I have promised to follow, living or dea ;

76


THE SNAKE PIT


“Then he flung me from him, so that I fell on the floor,
and he went out; but I got on to my feet, grasped my axe and
ran after him. God forgive me, had I taken my book or the
crucifix in my hand, it had gone better, but I took no time to
think. I was young—more of a warrior yet than a priest at
heart, maybe; I put more trust in the sharp steel when it came
to the push.

“When I came out into the yard I saw them by the castle
gate. “Twas moonlight, but open weather with driving clouds
and the ground was dark, for we had no snow lying in the low-
lands that year. But it was just light enough for me to see
them before me out in the field, as I came through the gate—
the dead woman went first, and she was like a shred of mist,
scarce touching the ground, and after her ran Torgils, and I
followed. At that moment the moon peeped out and IJ saw that
Herdis stopped, and I guessed her purpose—so I called to her:

“ “Tf he promised to follow you, he must—but he has not


promised to go before you

“But to bid her begone in the Lord’s name and let go her
prey—that did not cross my mind. And as we were near the
church a gleam of moonlight shone on the stone wall. The
dead woman glided in by the churchyard gate and Torgils ran
after her and I leapt—I was through the gate in time to see
Herdis standing by the wall of the church and reaching out
an arm for Torgils. I swung my axe with all my force and
threw it, so that it flew over the head of Torgils and rang on
the stone wall. Torgils fell flat down, but in an instant they
were upon me from behind and flung me to the ground so
hard that my right leg was broken in three places—the thigh,
the knee-cap and the ankle.

“After that I knew no more till folk came to mass in the
morning and found us. Torgils was then as you remember him

(¢i


THE SNAKE PIT


—his wits were gone, and he was more helpless than a suckling,
only that he could go about. If he came near edged tools he
roared like a beast and fell down, foaming at the mouth—and
he had been the boldest wielder of his weapons that I have
known. I have been told that his hair turned white in the very
first winter.

“I lay in bed year after year with my broken leg, and in
the first years the splinters of bone worked out of the wounds,
and the matter ran out and stank so that I could not bear my-
self—and many a time I besought God, with floods of tears,
to be allowed to die, for my torments seemed intolerable. But
father was with me and helped me and bade me bear it as be-
fitted a man and a Christian. And at last my leg was healed—
but Torgils knew me not, when I came hither—twas five win-
ters after. And Olav Ribbung bade me keep away, for he could
not brook seeing his nephew dragging himself about as a
wreck—TI went on crutches at that time—when his own son had
been the cause of it.”


Oxav lay awake long after the old man had fallen asleep.
Favourites of fortune they had not been, the men of his race.
But they had endured one thing and another.

The broken man there, asleep in his bed. His other name-
sake, the great-grandfather, whom he remembered living here
with his grisly mad son—Olav felt warmed by a fellow-feeling
with them. The aged woman, Tora, Ingolf the priest: loyal they
had been, to a lost cause, to dead and doomed ones who were
their own flesh and blood.

He thought of the Steinfinnssons—such no doubt were the
favourites of fortune. Care-free, reckless folk—to them mis-
fortune was as a poison they had swallowed. They held out
till they had thrown it up again—but then they died. And to-

78


THE SNAKE PIT


night he saw it, fully and clearly—Ingunn too was of that sort
—she too had been stricken by misfortune as by a mortal
sickness; she would never hold up her head again. But it was
his fortune to be so moulded that he could endure even without
happiness. His forefathers had not abandoned a lost cause—
they had raised the old standard so long as there was a shred
left of it. In his heart he never knew whether he regretted or
not that he had accepted Earl Alf’s offer and taken his dis-
charge from the service of his lord—but he had accepted it for
the sake of the woman who had been given into his hands
while both were yet little children. And he would protect her
and love her, as he had protected her when a boy and loved
her since first he knew he was a man—and if he got no happi-
ness with her, since she could never be aught but a sick and
useless wife, that made no difference, he now realized—he
would love her and protect her to her last hour.


But in broad daylight he knit his brows when he recalled his
thoughts of the night. One has so many queer fancies when one
cannot sleep. And she had been happy and well in the summer
—fair as never before. She was utterly disheartened now—but
then she had never been any great one at bearing trouble, poor
girl. After the child was born she would surely be both happy
and well.

For an instant it crossed his mind—can it be that she is
thinking of the child she bore last year? She had never men-
tioned it, and so he had not been willing to do so either.—He
knew no more than that it had been alive when they left the
Upplands the summer before.


79


4


NGUNN WAS THINKING OF EIRIK NOW—NIGHT AND DAY.
if This too had grown pale and unreal to her in the first

happy days—that she had had a little son who slept in her
arm, sucked her breast and lay against her, small and soft and
warm, and she breathed the sourish milky scent of him, as she
flooded him with her tears in the blind, dark nights. And she
had parted from him, as though tearing herself in two, before
she faced the final horror and the outer darkness.

But all these horrors lay sunk beneath the horizon of her
fevered nights of darkness and tumult, when she was tossed
high and drawn down into the abyss by waves of dizzy swoon-
ing. When she came back into the light of day, Olav was there
and took her to him. When she was made happy, it was as
though the hapless being of her memory were not herself.
Weeks passed without her thinking once of the child; as though
she wondered, vaguely and almost indifferently—is he still
alive? And she would not have been greatly moved, she
thought, if she had heard that he was dead. But then it might
chance that an uneasy thought stirred within her: how is he,
is Eirik well—or is he ill-treated among strangers? And from
among the pale and distant memories of last year’s misery,
one shot out and came to life—the little, persistent scream that
nothing could quiet but her breast. The truth smote her with a
cruel stab: she was mother to a whimpering babe that had been
flung out among strangers far away, and perhaps at that
moment was screaming himself hoarse and tired for his

80


THE SNAKE PIT


mother. But she thrust these thoughts from her with all her
might. The foster-mother had a kind look—so perhaps she was
more charitable than the mother who had brought the child
into the world. No—she thrust the thought aside, away with it.
And the memory of Eirik faded out again. And here she was at
Hestviken, as Olav’s wife, in all good fortune—and she felt her
youth and beauty flourish anew. She bent her head, radiant
with bashful joy, if her husband did but look at her.


But as the new child grew within her—. From being a


secret, wasting exhaustion which turned her giddy and sick
with fear of the shadows it might conjure up to stand between
Olav and her, it had become a burden which weighed upon
her and obstructed her, whenever she would move. And mean-
while the most important thing about her now in the eyes of
all was that she should bring new life into the old stock. Olav
Ingolfsson talked of nothing else. Had she been queen of Nor-
way and had the people’s hopes of peace and prosperity for
generations been centred on the expected child, the old man
could not have regarded the coming event as more momentous.
But the neighbours too, when they met the young mistress, let
her know that they counted this glad tidings. Olav Audunsson,
since he was seven years old, had been the only one on whom
rested the hope of carrying on the Hestvik race, and ever since
that time he had wandered far from the spot where his home
was. After twenty years of roaming he had come back to the
lands of his ancestors. When children began to grow up about
him and his wife, something that had long been out of joint
would be put right again.

Her own household also took their share in what awaited
their mistress. They had liked Ingunn from the first, because
she was so charming to look at, kind and well-intentioned, and
they had pitied her a little for being so utterly unfitted for all

81


THE SNAKE PIT


the work of her house. And now they pitied her, seeing her
sorry state. She turned pale as a corpse if she did but enter
the cook-house when they were cooking seal-meat or sea-birds
—she was not used to this oily smell in the food where she
came from, she murmured. The maids laughed and pushed her
out—“We will get through it without you, mistress!” She
could not stand up to serve out the meat without the sweat
bursting out on her face—the old dairy-woman gently pressed
her into a seat on the bench and stuffed cushions behind her
back—“Let me be carver today, Ingunn—you can scarce stand
on your feet, poor child!” she laughed, seeing that the mstress
was shaking with weariness. And they were fearful how it
would go with her. She did not look as if she could bear much
more. And it was over three months to her time, from what she
herself said.

Olav was the only one who never showed sign of joy at
the expected child; he never uttered a word about it—and his
household marked that well. But Ingunn thought in her heart
that, when once the boy came into the world, he would be no
less wonderful in his father’s eyes than in those of all the
others. And the bitterness, at which she herself was terrified,
welled up anew.

Not a spark of affection did she feel for the child she
bore, but a yearning for Eirik and a grudge against this new
babe, whom every good thing awaited and all were ready to
caress, when he came. And it seemed to her as though it were
the fault of this child that Eirik was cast out into the darkness.
When she felt that folk looked kindly upon her, took pains
to clear her path and make things easy for her, the thought
struck her—“When Eirik was to be born I had to hide myself
in corners; the eyes of all stoned me with scorn and anger
and sorrow and shame; Eirik was hated by all before he was

82


THE SNAKE PIT


born—I hated him myself.” As she sat at her sewing she re-
called how she had staggered from wall to wall, when the
first pangs came upon her: Tora made up a bundle of swad-
dling cloths, the worst and oldest she had left over from her
own babes. And she, the mother, had thought they were good
enough and more, for this one—. The maid sitting with her
looked in astonishment at her mistress—Ingunn tore impa-
tiently at the fine woollen swathing she was sewing, and threw
it from her.

Now he was a year old, a little more. Ingunn sat out of
doors the first summer evenings, watching ihe little child,
Bjorn’s and Gudrid’s youngest, as he stumped about, fell and
picked himself up, stumped on and tumbled again in the soft
green grass of the yard. She did not hear a word of all Gudrid’s
chatter. My Eirik—barefoot, poorly clad like this one here,
with his poor foster-parents.


Op O.av died a week before the Selje-men’s Mass,’ and Olav
Audunsson made a goodly funeral feast for him. Among the
ladies who came out to Hestviken to help Ingunn with the prep-
arations was Signe Arnesdatter, who was newly married and
mistress of Skikkjustad. Her younger sister Una was with her,
and when the guests were leaving, Olav persuaded Arne and the
priest to let Una stay behind, so that Ingunn might be spared
all toil and trouble at the end of her time.

Olav was somewhat vexed, for he could not help seeing
that Ingunn did not like the girl. And yet Una was deft and
willing to help, cheerful and good to look at—small and deli-
cately built, nimble and quick as a wagtail, fair-haired and
bright-eyed. Olav himself had grown fond of his second


1July 8.
83


THE SNAKE PIT


cousins. He was slow to make acquaintances, with his reserved
and taciturn nature, but there were not many folk he disliked.
He took them as they were, with their faults and their virtues,
was glad to meet them as acquaintances, but not unwilling to
make friends with those he liked, if only he were given time
to thaw.


Oxav IncoLFsson had got together a quantity of good timber,
and in the previous autumn Olav Audunsson had already done
a good deal to repair the most pressing damage in the houses
of the manor. This summer he pulled down the byre and re-
built it, for the old one was in such a state that the cows stood
in a slough of mire in autumn, and in winter the snow drifted
in so that the beasts could hardly have suffered more from
cold if they had been out in the open.

One Saturday evening the household was assembled in the
courtyard. It was fine, warm summer weather and the air was
sweet with the scent of the first haycocks. And the fragrance
of lime-blossom was wafted down from the cliff behind the
out-houses. The byre was set up again and the first beams of the
roof were in place; the heavy roof-tree lay with one end on the
ground and the other leaning against the gable, as the men had
left it when work ceased for the week.

Now the two young house-carls took a start and ran up
the sloping beam, to see how high up they could go. Presently
the other men joined in, even the master himself—the game
went merrily with laughter and shouts whenever one of the
men had to jump off. Ingunn and Una were sitting against the
wall of the house, when Olav called to the young maid:

“Come hither, Una—we will see how sure of foot you
are!”

The girl excused herself with a laugh, but all the men

84


THE SNAKE PIT


crowded round her—she had laughed at them when they had
to jump off half-way up the beam—no doubt she would be
able to run right to the top, she would


At last they came
and dragged her forcibly from the bench.

Laughing, she pushed the men aside, took a run and
sprang a little way up, but then she had to jump down. Again
she took a run and reached much higher this time—stood
swaying for an instant, lithe and slender, waving her out-
stretched arms, while her little feet in the thin summer shoes,
without soles or heels, clutched the beam like the claws of a
little bird. But then she had to jump to one side, as a tomtit
that cannot get a hold on a log wall. Olav stood below and
caught her. Now the young maid had entered into the sport
and ran up time after time, while Olav ran backwards below
and received her laughing in his arms every time she had to
jump down.—Neither of them had an idea of anything, till
Ingunn stood beside them, panting and white as snow beneath
her freckles.

“Stop it now!” she whispered, catching at her breath.


“There is no danger, I tell you,” Olav comforted her with


a laugh; “do you not see that I catch her

“T do see it.”—Olav looked at his wife in astonishment;
she was on the point of tears, he could hear. Then she burst
out, in mingled sobs and scornful laughter, with a toss of the
head toward the girl:

“Took at her—she is not so foolish but she has the wit to
be ashamed.”

Olav turned round to Una—she was red in the face and
looked troubled. And slowly a flush rose in the man’s cheeks:

“Now I never heard—are you out of your senses, In-
gunn?”

“T tell you,” cried his wife, with a hiss in her voice, “she

85


THE SNAKE PIT


there, ’tis not for nothing she comes of Foulbeard’s brood—and


29


I trow there is more likeness between him and you than

“Hold your mouth,” said Olav, revolted. “’Tis you should
have the wit to be ashamed—are you to say such things to
me!”

He checked himself, seeing her wince as though he had
struck her in the face. She seemed to collapse with wretched-
ness, and her husband took her by the arm.

“Come in with me now,” he said, not unfriendly, and led
her across the yard. She leaned against him with her eyes
closed, so heavy that she could scarcely move her feet; he had
almost to carry her. And within himself he was furious—she
makes herself out far more wretched than she is——

But when he had brought her to a seat on the bench and
saw how miserable and unhappy she looked, he came up and
stroked her cheek:

“Tngunn—have you clean lost your wits—can it displease
you that I jest with my own kinswoman ie

She said nothing, and he went on:

“It looks ill and worse than ill—you must be able to see
that yourself. Una has been here with us four weeks, has taken


all the work she could from your shoulders—and you reward
her thus! What do you suppose she thinks of this?”

“T care not,” said Ingunn.

“But I care,” answered Olav sharply. “’Tis unwise of us
too,” he went on more gently, “to behave so that we challenge
folk to speak ill of us. Surely you must see that yourself.”

Olav went out and found Una in the cook-house; she was
cleaning fish for supper. He went up and stood beside her—the
man was so unhappy, he did not know what he was to say. Then
she smiled and said:

“Think no more of this, kinsman—she cannot help being

86


THE SNAKE PIT


unreasonable and ill-tempered now, poor woman. The worst
is,” she added, making the cat jump for a little fish, “that I
cannot be of much use here, Olav, for I saw from the first day
that she likes not my being here. So I believe it will be wiser
if I go to Signe tomorrow.”

Olav answered warmly:

“To me it seems a great shame that she—that you should
leave us in this wise. And what will you say to Signe and to
Sira Benedikt about your not staying here——?”

“You may be sure they have more wit than to make any
matter of this.”

“°Twill grieve Ingunn most of all,” the man exclaimed,
dolefully, “when she comes to herself again—that she has
offended our guest and kinswoman so abominably.”

“Oh no, for then she will scarce remember it. Let not this
vex you, Olav—’she dried her hands, laid them on his arms
and looked up at him with her bright, pale-grey eyes, which
were so like his own.

“You are kind, Una,” he said in a faltering voice, and he
bent over her and kissed her on the lips.

He had always greeted the sisters with a kiss when they
met or parted. But he realized with a faint, sweet tremor that
this was not the kiss that belongs to courtesy between near
kinsfolk who count themselves something more than cottagers.
He let his lips dwell upon the fresh, cool, maidenly mouth,
unwilling to let go, and he held her slender form to him and
felt a subtle, fleeting pleasure in it.

“You are kind,” he whispered again, and kissed her once
more before reluctantly releasing her and going out.

There can be no sin in it, he thought with a mocking
smile. But he could not forget Una’s fresh kiss. It had been
—ay, it had been as it should be. But that was a small thing

87


THE SNAKE PIT


to trouble about. He had been angry with Ingunn—had never
believed she could behave so odiously and ridiculously. But
no doubt Una was right, there was little count to be taken of


what she said or did at this time, poor creature

But when he had accompanied Una to Skikkjustad next
day after mass—it was the feast of the Translation of Saint
Olav?—and was riding homeward alone, his anger boiled up
anew. Had she come to such a pass that she now suspected him
of the worst, simply because she herself had sinned? No, now
he remembered that she had shown his kinswomen ill-will
before, in the autumn, when there was naught amiss with her.
She was jealous—even at Frettastein she had been quick to
find faults and blemishes in other women—the few they met.


And that was unseemly

Olav was indignant with his wife. And then the fact that
she should mention Torgils Foulbeard. All his childhood’s
vague aversion to the madman had turned to open hate and
horror since he had heard the whole story of Torgils Olavsson.
He had been a ravisher whom God struck down at the last; a
disgrace to his kin. And he lived in folk’s minds, while none
remembered the other Olavssons who had lived and died in
honour. Surely he might just as well be said to take after them
—Olav was always ill at ease when he heard it hinted that he
was so like Foulbeard. But he was annoyed with himself for
feeling as it were a cold blast of ghostly terror at the back of
his neck when such things were said.

His worst enemy could not accuse him of being mad after
women. In all the years he had lived in outlawry he could
scarcely recall having looked at a woman. When his uncle
Barnim suggested that he ought to take the pretty miller’s


2 August 3,
88


THE SNAKE PIT


daughter and keep her as his leman, while he was at Hévding-
gaard, he had sharply refused. Fair she was, and willing too,
as he could see—but he had held himself to be a married man
in a way, and he would keep his troth, even if his uncle teased
him for it and laughingly reminded him of Ketillég.—This
was a poor vendible girl he had fallen in with one night when
he was in the town in company with other young men from
the manor and they were all dead-drunk. In the morning, when
he was sober again, he fell to talking with the girl, and after
that he had conceived a sort of kindness for her—she was
unlike others of her kind, sensible and quiet in her ways, pre-
ferring a man who did not care to play the fool and raise a
riot in the inn. And then he had continued to look in on her
when he was in the town on his uncle’s business. Often he
simply came in and sat with her, ate the food he had brought
and sent her for ale: he took pleasure in her quiet way of
waiting upon him. But his friendship for her had been no
heavy sin—and no one in his right mind would assert that he
had been unfaithful to Ingunn with her. He had often thought
of her, however, in the first years that succeeded—hoped she
had got into no trouble for helping him to get away to the
Ear! that time. He wished he could have known for certain that
she had been able to hide from the others in the inn the money
he gave her at parting, and whether she had carried out the
plan she often spoke of: that she would turn her back on that
inn and seek service with the nuns of Saint Clara’s convent. In
truth she was far too good to be where she was.——-

It was the sense of this secret guilt that made him insecure
—he felt defenceless against the Evil One, like a man who
must go on fighting though crippled by a secret wound. His
wife’s prolonged ill-health and her unreasonableness—and her
being herself the cause that he was never allowed entirely to

89


THE SNAKE PIT


forget what must be forgotten—all this made him uneasy,
wavering in his mind. And he felt a little thrill of pleasure as
he remembered how good it had been to hold Una in his arms.

It angered him as he thought of Ingunn—it was her sense-
less behaviour to the kind, fair child that had been the cause of
this


But he would have to take it patiently—she had so little
to comfort her now, Ingunn.


But the same evening Ingunn fell sick; it came so suddenly
that before the ladies who were to help her could reach the
place, it was over. None but Ingunn’s own serving-women were
with her when the child came—and they were all terrified and
bewildered, they told Olav afterwards, with tears in their eyes.
They thought the boy was alive, when they lifted him up from
the floor, but a moment later he was dead.


NEVER, thought Olav, had he seen a creature look Ser jike a
piece of broken, washed-out wreckage, cast up on the "beach,
as did Ingunn, lying there crouched against the wall. Her
thick, dark-yellow hair lay tousled over the bed, and her dark
blue eyes, full of unfathomable distress, stared from her
swollen, tear-stained face. Olav seated himself on the edge of
the bed, took one of her clammy hands and laid it on his knee,
covering it with his own.

One of the weeping maids came in bearing a bundle, un-
wrapped it and showed Olav the corpse of his son. Olav looxed
for a few moments at the little bluish body, and the mother
burst into another harrowing fit of weeping. Quickly the man
bent over her:


“Ingunn, Ingunn, do not grieve so ie


90


THE SNAKE PIT


HE himself was unable to feel any real grief over his son. In a
way he was fully aware how great was the loss—and his heart
was wrung when he reflected that the boy had died unbaptized.
But he had never had peace for rejoicing in the past months
—had felt nothing but a vague and faltering jealousy of what
had gone before, anxiety for Ingunn and a longing for the end
of this cheerless time. But he had never realized that the end
would be the birth of a son in his house—a little boy whom he
would bring up to manhood.

The mother was not very sick, said the neighbours’ wives
when they came and nursed her. But when the time came for
her to be helped to sit up in bed in the daytime, she had no
strength. She was drenched with sweat if she did but try to
bind her hair and put on her coif. And Sunday after Sunday
went by without her being strong enough to think of churching.

Ingunn lay on her bed, fully dressed, with her face turned
to the wall the whole day long. She was thinking that she her-
self had been the cause of this child’s death. She had received
it with loveless thoughts, as it lay within her, groping for its
mother’s heart-strings. And now it was dead. Had skilful
women been with her at its birth, it would surely have lived,
the neighbours told her. But she had always insisted, when they
came to see her this summer, that she did not expect it before
Saint Bartholomew’s Day.’ For she had been afraid of these
wise neighbours of hers—lest they might find out and spread
it abroad that Olav Audunsson’s wife had had a child before.
And the morning she woke up and felt it was coming, she had
risen and kept on her feet as long as she was able.— But Olav


must never know this.


3 August 24.
91


THE SNAKE PIT


But at last it could be put off no longer—it was on the Sunday
after Michaelmas that Ingunn Steinfinnsdatter had to submit to
be led into church. Olav had learnt that there were four other
women newly delivered who were to go in; one of them was
the daughter-in-law of one of the richest manors of the neigh-
bourhood, and she had just brought an heir into the world;
the church would surely be half full of her kinsfolk and
friends alone, who would come to make offerings with her.
Olav could scarce bring himself to think of Ingunn, kneeling
before the church-door, poor and empty-handed, while the
others bowed to receive the lighted candles—as the psalm of
David was sung over the women: “Who shall ascend into the
hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in His holy place? He
that hath clean hands and a pure heart . . . he shall receive
the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of
his salvation.’—To Ingunn and him this would sound like a


judgment.

Olav had been shy of going near Sira Benedikt since the
day Ingunn drove Una Arnesdatter out of their house in such
a shameful manner. But now he rode one day up to the priest’s
and begged him to be kind and bring consolation to Ingunn.

Sira Benedikt had ordered that all corpses of unbaptized
infants should be buried on the outer side of the churchyard
fence; they were not to be hidden under a heap of stones, like
cattle that had died a natural death, or buried in waste places
like evil-doers. He reproved people severely for believing in
the ghosts of such children: dead infants could not appear,
he said, for they were in a place which is called Limbus Puero-
rum, and they can never come out from thence, but they are
well there; Saint Augustine, who is the most excellent of all
Christian sages, writes that he would rather be one of these
children than never have been born. But if folk have been

92


THE SNAKE PIT


scared out of their wits and senses in those places where the
corpses of infants have been hidden away, it is because they
themselves have such sins on their consciences that the Devil
has power over them to lead them astray. For it is clear that
the place where a mother has made away with her babe is
well-nigh an altar or a church to the Devil and all his imps—
they are fain to haunt it ever after.

The priest consented at once to accompany Olav home.
Olav Ingolfsson had firmly believed in infant apparitions and
thought indeed that he himself had once laid such a ghost. So
Sira Benedikt was zealous to dissuade Ingunn from this heresy
and give her consolation.

The woman sat, white and thin, with her hands folded in
her lap, and listened to their parish priest discoursing of the
Limbus Puerorum. It was written of this in a book—a monk
in Ireland had been rapt in an ecstasy seven days and seven
nights, and he had had a vision of Hell and Purgatory and
Heaven; he had also been in the place where are the unbaptized
infants. It appears as a green valley, and the sky is always
clouded as a sign that they can never attain the bliss of be-
holding God’s countenance; but light is shed down between the
clouds, in token that God’s goodness dwells upon the children.
And the children appeared to be happy and in good case.
They do not feel the lack of Heaven, for they know not that
there is such a place, nor can they rejoice at being saved from
the pains of Hell, for they have never heard of it. They play
there in the valley and splash water upon one another, for the
place is passing rich in brooks and meres——

Olav interrupted:

“Then meseems, Sira Benedikt, that many a man might be
tempted to desire he had died an infant and unbaptized.”

93


THE SNAKE PIT


The priest replied:

“It is so ordained, Olav, that in our baptism we are called
to a great inheritance. And we must pay the price of being
men.”

“Are the parents suffered to come thither sometimes?”
asked Ingunn in a low voice “—to have sight of their children
and watch them at play?”

The priest shook his head:

“They must go their own way, up or down—but it will
never take them over that valley.”


!” exclaimed the woman


“Then meseems God is cruel
hotly.

“That is what we human creatures are so prone to say,”
replied the priest, “when He grants not our desires. Now it was
of great moment to you and your husband that this child
should have grown to man’s estate—he was born to take up a
great inheritance and carry on the race. But if a woman bear
a child whose only destiny is to be a testimony of her shame
and whose only inheritance is his mother’s milk—then her
mother’s heart is oftentimes not to be depended upon. It may
be that she will hide herself and give birth to it in secret, de-
stroy her child body and soul or put it out with strangers, well
pleased if she neither hear nor see it more——”

Olav sprang up and caught his wife as she fell forward in
a swoon. Kneeling on one knee he supported her in his arms;
the priest bent down and quickly loosened the linen coif which
was tightly wound about her neck. With her white face hang-
ing backward over her husband’s arm and the bare arch of
her throat she looked as one dead.

“Lay her down,” said the priest. “Nay, nay, not upon the
bed—on the bench, so that she may lie flat—” He busied him-
self with the sick woman.


94,


THE SNAKE PIT


“She is not strong, your wife?” asked the priest as he was
about to ride away. Olav stood holding his horse.

“No,” he said. “She has ever been weak and frail—ay, for
you know we are foster-brother and sister; I have known her


from childhood.”


95


5


ARLY IN THE FOLLOWING SPRING DuKE HAAKON MADE
R= for an inroad upon Denmark; the Danish King

was to be forced to make a reconciliation with his out-
lawed nobles upon such terms as they and the Norwegians
should impose on him.

Olav Audunsson set out for Tunsberg; he was one of the
subordinate leaders under Baron Tore Haakonsson. He was not
altogether glad to be away from home this summer. He was now
striking root at Hestviken: it was his ancestral seat and his na-
tive place—he had so long been homeless and an outlaw. As he
proceeded with repairing the decay of his property, so that the
source which had long been dried up began to flow again with
riches, and as he himself acquired a grasp and a knowledge of
the work ashore and afloat, he came to take pleasure in these
labours on his own behalf. He would have liked Bjorn to stay
behind as his steward, but Bjorn had no mind to it. In the end
Bjorn accompanied Olav as his squire, and an older man named
Leif was to take charge of Hestviken together with the mistress
of the house.

He also felt some anxiety for Ingunn—about midsummer
she would be brought to bed again. True, she had been in much
better health than last time; she had managed her housekeep-
ing and her share of the farm work the whole time—and now
she had learnt and was not nearly so helpless as she had been
when they were newly married. But Olav was uneasy, just be-
cause he guessed that she awaited this child with impatient


96


THE SNAKE PIT


longing. If a disaster should befall it, she would be utterly
struck down with sorrow. And he seemed to have a presenti-
ment—that he should find a child in the house when he came
home in the autumn, seemed to him well-nigh unimaginable.


As soon as he reached Tunsberg Olav Audunsson found old ac-
quaintances of his years of outlawry wherever he turned. Earl
Alf’s men had flocked to the son-in-law of their slain chief, beg-
ging Lord Tore to take them into his service. Also among the
Danish outlaws and their men, of whom the town was full, he
met many that he had known while he was with the Earl. And
one day a vessel ran into the harbour with letters from the Dan-
ish lords at Konungahella; her captain, Asger Magnusson, was
from Vikings’ Bay and he and Olav had been friends when
Olav was at Hovdinggaard; they were also kinsfolk, but very
distant. In the evening he went up into the town with his Dan-
ish kinsman and took a good rouse—he was much better for it
afterwards.

Lord Tore made Olav captain of a little sixteen-oared gal-
ley, and his ship, with three small war-vessels from the ship-
owners of the south-east of the Vik, was to sail under the orders


’ which the Norwegians


of Asger Magnusson in the “Wivern,’
called “Yrmlingen.”1 Feeling between the Danes and their
allies was often barely friendly, for this time the greater part
of the force was Norwegian. And now the Norwegians made no
secret of what they intended by the expedition: King Eirik and
Duke Haakon would claim the whole kingdom of Denmark in
succession to their grandfather, the holy King Eirik Valdemars-
son, and make the country tributary to the crown of Norway.
But the Danes did not like to hear this; they jeered at it, saying


1“The Little Snake.”
97


THE SNAKE PIT


that their lords, the Constable, Stig Andersson, and Count Ja-
cob, had never bound themselves by promises to any king, and
that the Norwegians would have reward enough for their aid
when they helped themselves with both hands among the towns
and castles of the Danish King. The Norwegians answered that
when it came to dividing the spoil the Danes were great trick-
sters who always knew how to get the best share for themselves.
The Norwegians were the more numerous, but they were mostly
peasants and seamen, less inured to war than the Danes. For
nearly all of these had served for years under their outlawed
chiefs, had grown hardy and resolute and let the Devil take
every law but those of the fighting trade. But in this matter
Earl Alf’s old band were a match for the Danes and more than
that. Olav and Asger had their hands full keeping the peace
among their men.

The war fleet lay off Hunehals, and the squadron to which
Asger’s and Olav’s small vessels belonged harried the northern
coasts of the Danish islands. To Vikings’ Bay they did not
come. Olav had heard from Asger that the Danish King’s men
had stormed Hovdinggaard, burnt the manor and pulled down
the stone hall; Sir Barnim Eriksson had fallen sword in hand.
So it booted not to think of him any more—else Olav would
have had a mind to see his uncle again. Now he could only let
say a mass for the man and let it go. For that matter he felt
even less bound than before to his mother’s land and kin-
dred.

There was something light-minded and foolhardy about
these low, defenceless coasts that lay awash in the midst of the
glittering sea. Above the broad white beach the yellow sand-
dunes sloped up, and forest trees grew right out to the point:
the stems of full-grown beeches and gnarled oaks stood just
above the stormy waves; turf and roots overhung the edge of

98


THE SNAKE PIT


the bluff like the threads of a torn tissue. It looked as if the sea
had seized and bitten out great pieces of the naked bosom of
the land. Olav thought it ugly. Inland there were indeed fair
tracts—great and lordly manors, rich soil, swine in the wood-
land, fat cattle in the meadows, fine horses in the parks—never-
theless, he had never felt at home here. His home land, the
coast of Norway, ring within ring of rocky defences—shelves,
skerries and holms, the inner channel and at last the bright
rocks of the mainland, before the first streaks of green soil
stole down to the head of an inlet, as though spying out. The
great manors lay inland, built mostly on ground from which
one could see far afield and know what was coming.

He thought of his own home—the bay within the bare
rocks, the manor on the slope of the hill with the Horse crag


at its back. Ingunn would be up again by now—maybe she was
standing out in the yard, fair and young and slender again,
sunning the child. For the first time he felt an intense desire
for children in his home. But the bright vision was far off and


incredible.

He was back in the same life he had led when he was
outlawed from Norway. The very feeling of wearing a coat of
mail again was strangely good—under the weight of it his
bodily forces seemed gathered together—it was good to feel the
coolness of it when he was at rest, and how it shut in and saved
up the heat of the body when fighting; it was like a warning to
husband his strength, not to waste himself without plan or ob-
ject. The trials of strength, afloat in rough weather, or in a de-
scent ashore—both one and the other demanded of a man that
he should be prompt and vigilant, but at the same time reck-
less in his inmost will, not caring if he were conquered by the
danger he was using all his powers to conquer. It was some-
thing of this sort that loomed within Olav, more as feelings

99


THE SNAKE PIT


than thoughts—and at times he felt a kind of repugnance as he
recalled the two years he had lived upon the land as a married
man. A vague pang at the heart, like a faint throbbing beneath
a healed wound—was he wasting his manly strength as he toiled
in his loose woollen working-clothes, powerless to determine
what he would gain in the end by his trouble? And a kind of
revulsion against the memories of his intimate life with the
sickly woman—it was as though he surrendered his powerful
youth and unbroken health in order that she might absorb
vigour from his store, and in his heart he did not believe it
would be of any use. Like swimming with a drowning com-
panion hanging about one’s neck—no choice but to save the
other or go down with him, if one would deserve the:name of
man. But one might be pardoned a failing at the heart, at the
thought that the end was certain—to be drawn under—ithough
one would struggle to the last, because a man can do no less.

Had she been in good health, and had it seemed natural to
him that they would have children to reap where he sowed and
inherit all his gains, then he would have looked upon his lot
with different feelings. And now and then, when he tried to per-
suade himself into the belief that Ingunn might be well again,
and that for all he knew he had a healthy, squalling infant son
or daughter in the cradle at home—he would long for his own
house. But usually this longing was absent—he had a profound
sense of well-being at having no one but himself, no other care
but his duties as one among many subordinate captains in the
army.

He liked this life among none but men. The women he
saw ashore, old or ageing women who were charged with the
food, venal hussies who were to be found wherever men were,
he did not count these. There were wet days and nights afloat,
fighting when they forced a landing—this had not fallen to

100


THE SNAKE PIT


Olav’s lot very often, nor was he altogether sorry for it: in all
the years he had followed Earl Alf he had never been able to
overcome his dislike of useless cruelty—and the Danes were
cruel, when they harried their own country. Indeed, they would
scarce have been anything else if they had harried another
country. But down here they were used to the game—these
coasts had seen plunder and rape and burning since there were
men in Denmark. Olav felt himself a stranger among his
mother’s people. It was true his heart had been set upon war-
fare and fighting in his young days, but then the struggle was
to end in a decision: death or victory. At times an image would
rise before him—a hostile attack upon Hestviken; he defended
himself in this home on the rock, with its back to the cliff, drove
the enemy downhill into the sea, or fell on his own lands.

The Danes were different, softer and tougher. They let


themselves be chased away—peasants into the depths of the
forests, lords overseas—but they came back, even as the waves
of the sea retire and come again. They lost and they won, and
neither one nor the other made much difference to their appe-
tite or enjoyment of life. And with a strangely buoyant patience
they bore the thought that things would never be otherwise—
they expected to have to fight to all eternity, winning or losing
along the low, wet shores, without calling any victory or de-
feat the last one.

Then they were quartered ashore for a time. The men were
closely packed in the houses of the town; the air was dense and
hot with rank smells, foul talk, ale and wine, belching, wran-
gling and quarrelling. There was fighting every night in the
streets and yards—the captains had hard work to keep any-
thing resembling peace and discipline among their bands.

Rumours were ever in the air—of ships’ crews that were
reported to have made descents and carried off great booty.

101


THE SNAKE PIT


At Maastrand a body of Earl Alf’s old men-at-arms had fought
with some German merchants and killed all their prisoners—
in payment of an old score of their dead lord’s, it was said.
The Danish King’s fleet had taken the Constable’s fortress on
Samsé, and Sir Stig Andersson himself had fallen, folk said.
Among the Norwegians it was believed that Duke Haakon aimed
at winning Denmark for himself—and that it was over this he
had quarrelled with his brother the King; it was for this rea-
son that King Eirik had sailed home to Bjérgvin already in the
early summer, and that the captains of the King’s fleet, lords
from the West country and some few from Iceland, had wrought
such destruction. But the Duke caused strict discipline to be
kept in his army: he did not wish to see the total ruin of the
land he intended for himself.

Olav thought that if the great lords knew the truth or
falsity of all these rumours, in any case the rank and file of
the army had little grasp of what was going on. And the lesser
captains, like himself, were reckoned with the rank and file,
not with the lords—whom the fighting men usually knew only
by name; but the less they knew of them, the more inclined
they were to talk about them. That he himself was related to
many of the outlawed Danish nobles, he was too proud to men-
tion, if they did not remember him. His own chief, Baron Tore,
counted him as no more than a subordinate captain on the
same footing as the masters of the ships of the country levies;
he deemed Olav of Hestviken to be a brave man and a useful
leader—but he had not distinguished himself in any way above
the rest; he had had no opportunity of performing deeds that
attracted attention.

One thing resulted from this life—when Olav recalled his
secret dread that there was some connection between the load
on his conscience and the fact that there had been so little joy

102


THE SNAKE PIT


in his life with Ingunn, this now seemed to him a very pre-
posterous thought. Imperceptibly an idea of this sort had grown
up in him during these two years. But these men among whom
he was had robbed the peasants of their cattle, burnt houses
and castles, had not only reddened their weapons in fight, but
had often slain and maimed defenceless folk without just cause.
Some had on them treasures that they were mightily afraid of
showing—likely enough these things were stolen from churches.
And although it was Duke Haakon’s order that rape should be
punished with death, it could hardly be thought that all the
women and girls who drifted among the fighting men while the
army was ashore, had taken to this life entirely of their own
free will.

His own settlement with that Icelander seemed an utterly
unimportant affair. Surely no one believed that all these fel-
lows here confessed every scrap to such priests as were to be
found—it was impossible that the men could remember all or
the priests find time to hear such scrupulous confessions. Many
a man who cheerfully took Corpus Domini before setting out,
certainly had heavy sins on his conscience which he had for-
gotten to confess. The wretched Teit had his deserts—Olav
now thought himself strangely foolish to have seen signs in
this and that: in the chance words of strangers, in dreams that
had come to him, in the colour and markings of his beasts. He
had believed at last he felt God’s hand over him, seeking to
make him turn aside from the path he followed. Here, among
all these men, where he himself was of so little account, his
own affairs were also lessened in his eyes: so many a brave
man’s death had he seen and heard of that it was unreasonable
to think that the Lord God was so scrupulous over the slaying
of Teit, or that He singled out him, Olav Audunsson, for chas-
tisement, penance and salvation, when there were great men

103


THE SNAKE PIT


enough who needed it much more—such as the Danish lords,
for the way they treated their own countrymen. Even Ingunn’s
transgressions seemed to grow less—he heard and saw so much


out here.


One day in late autumn he steered into the fiord. The sun was
hot, between the rain-squalls that swept over the sea. There was
a fresh breeze; the white spray shooting high under the Bull
gave him a greeting from afar. Up at the manor they had
recognized his little craft—Ingunn stood on the quay as he
came alongside, her coif and cloak fluttering about her thin,
stooping figure. And as soon as he saw her, the husband knew
that all was as it had been

The child had been stillborn, a boy again.


Two months after the new year Ingunn fell sick again—she
had miscarried, and this time her life was in danger. Olav had
to fetch the priest to her.

Sira Benedikt counselled husband and wife to live apart
for a year and employ the time in penitence and good works;
weak as Ingunn Steinfinnsdatter now was, the priest deemed it
impossible that she could bear a living child.

Olav was willing enough to try this expedient. But Ingunn
was clean beside herself with despair when he spoke of it to
her.

“When I am dead,” she said, “you must marry a young
and healthy wife and have sons by her. I told you that I was
broken down—but you would not let me go then. I have not
long to live, Olav—give me leave to be with you the little time
I have left!”

Olav stroked her face and smiled wearily. She often talked
of his marrying again—but she could not bear him to look at

104


THE SNAKE PIT


another woman or to say two words to their neighbours’ wives,
when he met them before the church door.

Sleeplessness troubled him this spring even worse than
the other years. With a heart heavy with compassion he lay
with his arm about the poor, ailing woman—but he felt her
clinging love as an incumbrance. Even in her sleep she lay
with her thin arms clasped about his neck and her head resting
on his shoulder.


HE was glad to get away from home, when he set out for Tuns-
berg in the spring. The summer passed as the previous one.
But whenever he thought of his home, Olav was sick at heart.
It mattered not, he felt, that he had had so little joy in his life
with her—the loss of Ingunn would mean the loss of half his
life.

But she was well and cheerful when he came home late in
the autumn. This time she was so certain that all would go
well. But six weeks before Yule the boy was born, more than
two months before his time.

Awhile before this happened it became known in the
country-side that Lord Tore Haakonsson had had Bjorn Egils-
son beheaded at Tunsberg. After the first campaign in Den-
mark he had entered the Baron’s service—he would not go
back to Hestviken any more. When the war fleet returned to
Norway this autumn, Bjorn had been on board the ship which
brought Lord Tore himself home, and while on shipboard he
had fallen out with another man and cut him down. When the
Baron ordered him to be seized and bound, he had defended
himself, wounded two men to the death and given several others
lesser hurts.

Gudrid, Bjorn’s wife, had died during the summer, and
now Olav Audunsson thought he ought to help the orphans of

105


THE SNAKE PIT


the man he had liked so well. Torhild Bjornsdatter had held
aloof from all—she was cross and taciturn; Olav had rarely
seen her and scarcely exchanged two words with the girl, so he
did not rightly know how he was to put his offer to her.

But when Ingunn lay sick so near to Yule and there was
no mistress at Hestviken to cope with all the work that was at
hand—their numbers were increased during the fishing season,
with the hunting of seals and auks—Olav considered whether
he should speak to Torhild Bjérnsdatter and ask if she would
move to Hestviken and keep house for him. She was said to be
a capable and industrious woman—and the mismanagement
had now reached such a pitch that any housekeeper at all must
be able to do the work better than the mistress; Ingunn was of
little use when she was well, and she had had scarcely a day’s
health in three years. The food was so wretched that Olav had
had difficulty in getting house-carls this winter, and when
strangers visited the house he dreaded and was ashamed of
what might be sent to table. Except the fresh fish and frozen
meat in winter, there was hardly anything that did not smell
and taste abominably. The stores in the larder lasted an unac-
countably short time—until Olav discovered that many of the
servants stole like magpies. Bought ale from town he always
had to keep in the house, dear though it was—for Ingunn’s
brew had a bad name all along the fiord. Even the drink in
the curd-tub was not merely sour, but rotten. He himself had
hardly had a new garment made at home since he was married,
and his everyday clothes looked like a beggar’s rags—they were
neither kept clean nor properly mended.

He had proposed to Ingunn more than once that they should
take a housekeeper, but each time she had been in utter despair,
weeping and begging him not to bring such a shame upon her.
It was in vain he replied that sickness is every man’s master; it

106


THE SNAKE PIT


could be no shame to her. He saw that if he was to speak to
Torhild, he would have to do it without consulting his wife.
The worst thing was about her children—she would have to
bring the younger ones with her, and that was likely to lead to


noise and disturbance, which Ingunn could not bear.

The six surviving offspring of Bjorn and Gudrid were
known to all as “Torhild’s children.” Gudrid had been an un-
natural mother—she shook off one child after another; her
step-daughter took ii up, laid it in her lap and fed it from a
cow’s horn. Gudrid cared for nothing but gadding about the
neighbourhood. Torhild had been betrothed in early youth to
a lad of substance and honour, but he was near akin to that
Gunnar whom Bjorn had had the misfortune to slay, and so
the marriage came to naught. Since then she had been drudg-
ing in their poor home, doing the work of a man and a woman
together. Folk knew little about her, but the maiden was of the
best repute. Nor was she ugly, but no one seemed able to con-
ceive that Torhild Bjérnsdatter might change her condition.
She was now no longer young—eight or nine and twenty win-
ters old; the two eldest of her half-brothers were of an age to
take service, but when this was spoken of, Torhild answered
that she needed them at home.

One Sunday, not long after Ingunn fell sick, Olav saw
. Torhild Bjornsdatter in church. She stood farthest back on the
women’s side and was completely shrouded in a long and am-
ple black cloak, which she held closely about her. She had
drawn the hood forward, and from time to time the man saw
her face in profile, pale against the black woollen stuff. She
was like her father: the forehead high and abrupt, the nose
long, but finely curved, the mouth broad and colourless, but
with lips tightly closed as though in mute patience; the chin
was powerful and shapely. But her fair hair was faded and

107


THE SNAKE PIT


hung straggling about her forehead; her complexion seemed
grey and turbid from smoke and soot which had eaten into the
skin. She had large grey eyes, but they were red-rimmed and
bloodshot, as though she had stood too long over the fire in the
narrow, smoky cot. Her hands, which held the cloak together,
even when she clasped them in prayer, were not large, and the
fingers were long—but they were red and blue, covered with
broken chilblains, ingrained with black, and the nails were
worn. And although she was so well shrouded, it could be seen
ihat the girl held herself very erect.

After mass Olav stayed outside the church talking with
some other franklins, and it came about that he rode home
alone—his people had gone on ahead.

He had reached the place where the forest gives way to
open ground, with some great meres and a little croft on the
edge of the largest of them. The bridle-path divides here just
behind the outhouses—one path going to Rynjul and south-
ward, and another down to Hestviken. As Olav was turning
into the road for home, he saw Torhild Bjérnsdatter standing
outside the hut; she had taken off the cloak and gave it back
to the woman from whom she had borrowed it. As she caught
sight of the horseman, she turned abruptly and crossed the
frozen mere, as quickly as if she were flying from him. But
Olav had seen why she kept the cloak so closely about her—
without it she was in her bare shift, of coarse, undyed home-
spun. It was cut low at the neck, the sleeves reached to the el-
bows, and her arms were blue with cold, as were her naked
ankles, which showed between the edge of the shift and the
big, worn-out man’s shoes she wore on her feet. She had bound
a strip of homespun about her waist for a belt—again Olav
could not help being surprised at her erect bearing.

She was dressed as working women when they cut the

108


THE SNAKE PIT


corn on a summer’s day. A memory flashed across Olav’s mind
—of blue sky, sunshine and warmth over the fields, where the
women bent to grasp the sheaves of ripe, sweet-smelling corn.
He watched the summer-clad maid flying across the frozen
mere, toward the edge of the wood, where the spruces were
grey with rime. How she must feel the cold!—she was bare-
headed, her plait of hair hung thick and straight down her
resolute, unbending back. All at once Olav felt an intense lik-
ing for her. He halted awhile on the path, watching the girl.
Then he rode on a little way—turned his horse and set out
across the mere.

The croft which Bjérn Egilsson had owned lay up the
slope on the other side—an alder thicket almost hid it from
travellers on the road. Olav saw that a good deal of clearing
had been done since he had last had occasion to come here,
two years ago. Some small patches must have been dug last
autumn: some stones and roots were not yet cleared away.
Farther up the strips of stubble showed lighter than the rest
of the rime-covered, swampy ground. The little byre which
Bjorn had put up a few years before shone yellow with its
fresh logs, but he had never got the dwelling-house built: they
were still living in the round turf hut.

Torhild Bjornsdatter came out on hearing the horseman.
The children peeped behind her in the doorway. She stepped
outside and stood erect, blushing slightly and glancing un-
graciously at the man, as he dismounted and she guessed he
had some business with her. Olav tied Apalhvit to a tree and
covered him with his grey fur cloak: “You must let me come
in, Torhild; there is a matter about which I would fain speak
with you.” He did not wish her to stand there in the cold; she
was now barefooted.

Torhild turned and went in. She laid a worn sheepskin on

109


THE SNAKE PIT


the earthen bench, bade her guest be seated and offered him a
ladle of goat’s milk from a bowl that stood behind him on the
seat. The milk tasted and smelt strongly of smoke, but Olav
was fasting and thought it good. The room was like a cave,
with a narrow passage between the two benches of earth which
filled it entirely. Torhild sat down opposite her guest; she had
a two-year-old child on her lap; another girl, a little older,
stood behind her with her arms about her neck. The two eldest
boys lay by the fire near the door, listening to the talk between
their sister and the stranger.

After they had spoken of other things for so long as was
proper, Olav mentioned his business. She must have heard
what a pass he had come to at home—how little likely it was
that his wife would be fit for any work that winter. If Torhild
would grant them a boon and help Ingunn and him in their
difficulty, they would never be able to thank her enough. Olav
spoke as one asking a favour—he liked her so cordially. Strong
she looked, with her broad, straight shoulders, high, firm bosom
and powerful hips. She had never let herself be bent double by
all her drudgery here between the cot and the little byre.

Torhild raised some objections, but Olav replied that it
was clear she should have leave to bring all six children with
her to Hestviken. He had not thought of offering to receive
more that the two eldest—they could no doubt be of some serv-
ice—and the two youngest, who could not be parted from their
foster-mother. The middle ones they could surely find a home
for in the neighbourhood. Her beasts, the cow, four goats and
three sheep, he would also receive; when the roads were fit for
sledges they would send for the fodder she had stacked. And
he would see to it that the fields here at Rundmyr were manured
and sown in the spring.


110


THE SNAKE PIT


The end of it was that Torhild took service with Olav and
was to move to Hestviken as soon as she had made ready a few
clothes for herself and the children. Olav promised to provide
the stuff. He himself rode up with it next day; there was no
need for her fellow-servants to know how poor she had been.

He had thought of telling Ingunn of his agreement with
Torhild the same evening. But when he came in to the sick
woman, she lay in a doze, so faint and bloodless that she
looked as though she could neither hear nor answer him. So he
merely sat on the bedstead beside her. Her face was fearfully
wasted; the eyelids lay like thin, brown membranes over the
sunken eyes, her skin was grey and flecked with brown over
the cheek-bones—the dark streaks which had come with her
second child had never gone away. Her white linen shift was
fastened with a good brooch—her throat was wizened like a
plucked fowl’s. He remembered that Torhild’s grey woollen
shift had been held together with a pin of sharpened bone—
but her throat was round as the stem of a tree and her bosom
was full and high. She was sound and strong, although her lot
in life had been so heavy and toilsome. His own poor creature
was well provided with all that was needed to make pleasant
the lot of a young wife—and here she lay, for the fourth time
in three years, childless and broken in health.—Olav stroked
her cheek:

“Did I but know some means of helping you, Ingunn
mine!”

He did not bring himself to tell his wife that he had hired
a housekeeper, until Torhild moved in with all her following
of children and animals. Ingunn looked displeased, but all she
said was:

“Ay, so it is, I ween; you must have one that can take

111


THE SNAKE PIT


charge of the house. I was never good for aught—and now it


29


seems I can neither live nor die


Incunn lay sick a great part of the winter, and it looked as
though she had spoken truly—she could neither live nor die.
But then she began to mend, and by the first days of Lent she
could sit up. Spring came early on the fiord that year.

It was expected that the levies would be called up again
for the summer. The franklins were now heartily sick of the
war with Denmark. No man believed that either the King or
the Duke would reap anything by it in the end but the loss of
their mother’s inheritance, which indeed they had wrested from
their cousin, the late King of Denmark, before he was mur-
dered.”

That spring Sira Benedikt announced that he intended to
repair to Nidaros for the Vigil of Saint Olav. Many of the folk
of his parish joined him for the sake of having good company
on this pilgrimage, which every man and woman in Norway
desired to make at least once in their lives——Olav leapt at the
thought, seeing in it a hope and a remedy—Ingunn should take
part in the journey. It seemed a very prodigy that she had been
so well of late and ailed not at all—she must needs make use
of this rare occasion.

At first Ingunn was by no means willing to go—if Olav
could not go with her. But then the thought came to her that
she would go home and see her sister and brothers—accom-
pany the pilgrims only so far as Hamar. Olav was displeased
with this; he wished her to make the pilgrimage, then perhaps
she would be restored to health at Saint Olav’s shrine. If she
was equal to travelling so far into Heidmark, then she could

2 Erik Glipping.
112


THE SNAKE PIT


surely make the whole journey: they were to move slowly, for
there were many sick people in the company. But when he saw
how she longed to see her own family again, he gave his con-
sent.


HE accompanied her as far as Oslo and stayed in the town a
few days, buying and selling. One morning Ingunn was sitting
in the inn, when Olav entered hastily. He searched in their
leather bags, did not find what he wanted and opened another
bag. There he came upon some little garments—they might
have fitted a child of four years. Unconsciously his eyes fell
upon his wife—Ingunn’s head was bent and her face was red
as fire. Olav said nothing, packed the bag again and went out.


113


6


of Lady Magnhild Toresdatter. Now Tora Steinfinns-

datter had dwelt there as his widow for over a year.
Ingunn guessed from her talk that she had had a good life with
Haakon, but she lived well without him too. She was a very
capable woman. Ingunn never ceased to marvel at her sister,
who busied herself deftly, promptly and shrewdly both indoors
and out, although her bulk was prodigious. She still preserved
her fair red and white complexion and her regularity of fea-
ture, but her cheeks and chin were grown to an immense size
and her body was so unwieldy that she could scarcely sit on
horseback; even her hands were so fat that the joints only
showed as deep hollows—but Tora could make full use of
them. Wealth and prosperity surrounded her, and her children
were handsome and promising. She had had six, and all were
alive and thriving.


H=: GAUTSSON HAD BOUGHT BERG AFTER THE DEATH


On the third evening the sisters were sitting together in the
balcony before going to rest. Ingunn sat in the doorway listen-
ing to the stillness—far away in the woods the cuckoo still
called now and again, and the corncrake chirped in the fields.
But she had now lived so long in a place where the very air
seemed always to be full of voices, the soughing of the wind,
the roar of the sea dashing against the rocks below: under this
clear and silent vault the little sounds of birds seemed only to
make the stillness more audible—to Ingunn it was as though
she drank deep draughts of refreshment. The bay was so small

114


THE SNAKE PIT


and so dear; bright and smooth it lay, with dark reflections of
the wooded headlands. The last banks of cloud had settled upon
the distant hills—the day had been showery with gleams of
sunshine, and a sweet scent came up to them from the hay
spread out below.

Her longing would not be kept back—all at once, without
thinking, Ingunn declared the purpose for which she had come.
She had fought with herself these two days, now to speak out,
now to hold back the question:

“Do you ever see aught of my Eirik?”

“He is well,” said Tora, with some hesitation. “Hallveig
says he is thriving and promises well. She comes hither every
autumn, you know.”

“Ts it long since you saw him?” asked her sister.

“Haakon was so much against my going there,” said Tora
as before. “And since then I have put on so much flesh that I
am little suited for such a journey. But you know that he is
with honest folk, and Hallveig has naught but good news to
tell of him. I have much upon my hands here at home—and
little time to wander so far afield,” she concluded, with some
heat.

“When saw you him last?” Ingunn asked again.

“T was there in the spring after you left home; but then
Haakon would not have me go thither any more; ’twas only
keeping the gossip alive, he said,” Tora replied impatiently.
“He was a fine child,” she added, more gently.

“Then that is three years ago ee

6c ‘Ay, ay.”

The sisters were silent awhile. Then Tora said:

“‘Arnvid went to see him—many times—in the first years.”

“Has he too given up, Arnvid? Has he too forgotten Eirik


now?”
115


THE SNAKE PIT


Tora said reluctantly:

“You know—folk could never find out who was the father
of your child.”

Ingunn was silent, overcome. At last she whispered:

“Did they believe then that Arnvid es

“Ay, “twas foolish to make such a secret of the father,
since the child could not be hid,” said Tora curtly. “So they
could but guess the worst—a near kinsman or a monk.”


There was a little pause. Then Ingunn said impulsively:

“T had thought of riding up there tomorrow—if the weather
suits.”

“T think it unwise,” said Tora sharply. “Ingunn, remember
we have all had much to suffer for your misdeeds——”

“You—who have six. How think you it feels to have but
a single one—and to be parted from him? I have longed and
longed for Eirik all these years.”

“Tt is too late now, sister,” said Tora. “Now you must re-
member Olav”

“T do remember Olav too. He has had four dead sons by me.
He claimed his own, the child I deserted and betrayed—he
claimed his mother; he has sucked at me without ceasing, he
almost sucked the soul out of my body, and he sucked the life
out of my children while they were yet unborn, the outcast
brother. There was yet a little life in the first son I bore to
Olav, they say, when he came into the world—he died before I
could see him, unbaptized, nameless.—You have seen all your
children come living into the light of day, and grow and pros-
per.—Three times have I felt the child quicken within me and
grow still and die again. And I knew I had nothing to hope
for, when the pains came upon me, but to be quit of the corpse
that burdened me

After a long silence Tora said:


116


THE SNAKE PIT
“You must do as seems good to you. If you think the sight
of him will make it easier for you, then
She patted her sister’s cheek, as they went in to bed.


29


Ir was drawing near to midday when Ingunn halted her horse
at a gate in the forest. She had refused to listen to all Tora’s
prayers, but had ridden off alone. No worse thing had befallen
her but to mistake the road; first she had come to a little farm
which lay high up the slope on the other side of a little river.
The people who lived there were the nearest neighbours to Sil-
juaas, and two children from this croft had gone with her down
the hillside to a place where she could cross the river.

She stayed awhile sitting in the saddle and looking out
over the country. The forests rolled endlessly, wooded ridge
behind ridge into the distant blue—toward the north-west there
was a gleam of snow under the shining fine-weather clouds.
Deep down and far away she saw a small stretch of the surface
of Lake Mjésen glittering beneath the foot of wooded hills, and
the land on the other side lay blue in the noontide heat, with
its green patches of farms and crofts——From Hestviken one
could not see a scrap of cultivation beyond the fields of the
manor itself.

Homesickness and yearning for her child united in a feel-
ing of crying hunger within her. And she knew she had but this
one little hour in which to assuage it, for once only.—Then she
must turn back again, bow her neck and take up her burden of


unhappiness.

It seemed to her that in the south, by the fiord, the sun-

shine was never so clear and deep as here under the blue sky.

It was glorious to be up on a high ridge once more. Below and

to the right of her she had the dark, steep wooded slope, up

which she had toiled on foot, leading her horse. The roar of
117


THE SNAKE PIT


ithe stream at the bottom of the ravine came up to her, now
louder, now softer. Right opposite, on the other side of the se-
cluded little valley, lay the croft which she had come to first,
high up under the brow of the hill, and between her and it the
air quivered in a blue haze over the hillside.

Before her was the clearing. The houses stood on a little
knoll of rock-strewn, tussocky turf—they were grey and low,
not more than a couple of logs high. The little patches of corn
lay for the most part at the foot of the knoll, toward the fence.

Ingunn dismounted, pulled up the stakes of the gate—and
a group of grey-clad little children came in view on the knoll.
Ingunn was unable to move—she was trembling all over. The
children kept as still as stones for a few moments, watching
her—then they whisked round and were gone—not a sound had
she heard from them.

As she walked up the knoll, a woman appeared at the door
of one of the little houses. She seemed rather scared at sight of
the stranger—perhaps she took her for something other than
human, this tall woman with the snow-white coif about her
heated face and the sky-blue, hooded mantle and silver brooch,
leading a great sorrel horse by the bridle. Ingunn hastened to
call out, greeting the woman by name.

They sat indoors for a while, talking, and then Hallveig
went out to fetch Eirik. The children could not be far away,
she thought—they were scared of the lynx; it was abroad and
had been sitting on the fence that morning. But they were shy
of the visitor, for lynxes were more common than strangers
here.

Ingunn sat and looked about her in the tiny room. It was
low under the gabled roof and darkened by smoke—tools and
earthen pots lay all about, so that there was scarce room to
turn. A baby was asleep in a hanging cradle, snoring soundly

118


THE SNAKE PIT


and regularly. And then she heard a fly buzzing somewhere
with a high, sharp, piercing note, incessantly, as though caught
in a cobweb.

Hallveig came back, dragging with her a very small boy
who had nothing on but a grey woollen shirt. Behind them
swarmed the whole flock of the woman’s own children, peeping
in at the door.

Kirik struggled to be free, but Hallveig pushed him for-
ward and held him in front of the strange woman. Then he
raised his head for an instant, glanced in wonder at this splen-
didly clad person—crept back behind his foster-mother and
tried to hide.

His eyes were a yellowish brown, the colour of bog-water
when the sun shines into it, and the long, black eyelashes were
curled up at the end. But his hair was fair and curled about
his face and neck in great, glistening ringlets.

His mother stretched out her arms and drew him on to her
lap. With a voluptuous thrill she felt the hard little head on
her arm, the silky hair between her fingers. Ingunn pressed his
face to hers—the child’s cheek was round and soft and cool;
she felt the little half-open lips against her skin. Eirik resisted
with all his force, struggling to escape from his mother’s im-
petuous embrace, but he did not utter a sound.

“Tt is I who am your mother, Eirik—do you hear, Eirik,
it is I who am your real mother—” she laughed and wept at
once.

Eirik looked up as if he did not understand a word of it.
His foster-mother corrected him sharply, bidding him be good
and sit still on his mother’s knee. Then he stayed quietly in
Ingunn’s lap, but neither of the women could get him to open
his mouth.

She kept her arm about him and his head against her

119


THE SNAKE PIT
shoulder, feeling the whole length of his body. She passed her


other hand over his round, brown knees, stroked his firm calves
and his dirty little feet. Once he plucked a little at his mother’s
hand with his grimy little fingers—playing with her rings.

Ingunn opened her bag and took out the gifts. The clothes
were far too big for Eirik—he was very small for his age, said
his foster-mother. That these fine shirts and little leather hose
were for him, seemed quite beyond Eirik’s comprehension. Not
even when his mother tried on him the red cap with the silver
clasp did he show any sign of joy—he only wondered, in si-
lence. Then Ingunn took out the loaves and gave Eirik one
which he was to have for himself—a big round wheaten cake.
Eirik seized it greedily, clutched it to his chest with both arms
and then ran out—-to all his foster-brothers and sisters.

Ingunn went to the door—the boy was outside with the
cake held tightly in his arms; he thrust out his stomach to sup-
port it and straddled with his bare brown legs. The other chil-
dren stood round in a ring staring at him.

Hallveig produced food for her guest—cured fish, oaten
bannocks and a little cup of cream. The children outside were
given the pan of milk from which the cream had been skimmed.
When Ingunn looked out again they were sitting round their
food; Eirik was on his knees, breaking off big pieces of the
cake and passing them round.

“°Tis his free-handed way,” said the foster-mother. “Tora
gives me a cake for him every year when I go down to Berg,
and Eirik always shares it and nigh forgets to eat any himself.
’Tis such things, and others too, that show the boy comes of
gentle kindred.”

Now that all the children were sitting in a ring in the sun-
shine, Ingunn saw that Eirik’s fair hair was quite different from
the coarse flaxen shocks of the others; Eirik’s was curly and

120


THE SNAKE PIT


shining, all unkempt as it was, and it was not yellow, but more
like the palest brown of a newly ripened hazel-nut.


Incunn had to set out for home about the hour of nones, to be
sure of reaching Berg before evening. She had not been able
to conquer Kirik’s shyness of the strange woman, and she had
scarce heard his voice, except when he spoke to the other chil-
dren out of doors. It was so sweet, so sweet.

Now Eirik was to have a ride on her horse as far as the
forest. Ingunn walked, leading the horse and supporting the
child with one arm, while she smiled and smiled at him, trying
to coax forth a smile on his pretty little round and sunburnt
face.

They had passed through the gate: here no one could see
them. She lifted the boy down, hugged him in her arms, kissed
and kissed again his face and neck and shoulder, while he
struggled, making himself long and heavy in her embrace.
When he began to kick her as hard as he could, his mother
took a firm hold of his smooth bare calves—feeling with pain-
ful joy how firm and strong his little body was. At last she sank
into a crouching attitude, and as she wept and muttered wild
endearments over the child, she strove to coax and force him
to sit in her lap.

When she was obliged for a moment to loosen her grip of
him, the boy managed to wriggle away from her. He darted like
a hare across the little clearing, was lost among the bushes—
then she heard the gate close.

Ingunn stood up—she wailed aloud with pain. Then she
staggered forward, bent double by sobs, with drooping arms.
She came to a hedge, saw Eirik running over the turf so fast
that his heels nearly reached his neck.

The mother stood there, weeping and weeping, as she bent

121


THE SNAKE PIT


over the hedge. The withered, rust-red branches of spruce had
been felled to fence in a little field, where the corn had just be-
gun to shoot, still soft and pinched like some kind of new-born
life—it appeared ever after to her inner vision, when she
thought of her sorrow—although now she had no idea of what
her tear-blinded eyes looked upon.

But at last she had to go back to her horse.


122


vf


fell sick. And one day a message came for Olav of Hest-
viken—the priest would bid him farewell.

Sira Benedikt did not look like a dying man, as he lay
propped up by pillows. But the wrinkles, which had seemed
few and shallow in his fleshy, weather-beaten face, were deeper
and there were more of them. Nevertheless he predicted his ap-
proaching departure with certainty. When Olav had seated him-
self on the edge of the bed, as the other bade him, the priest,
as though absently, took the riding gloves out of the franklin’s
hand, felt the leather and held them critically to his nose and
eyes—Olav could not help a little smile.

They talked for a while of one thing and another—of Arne
Torgilsson and his daughters. Two of them were now married
in the neighbourhood; but Olav had seldom met them or their
husbands of late.

“Folk see less and less of you, Olav,” said the priest; “and
many wonder at it, that you always keep to yourself as you do.”

Olav reminded him that he had been at sea the last few
summers, and every winter his wife had been sick.

Again the priest spoke of his imminent dissolution, asking
Olav to be diligent in prayers for his soul. Olav gave him his
promise, “but you have surely little need to fear what may
await you, Sira Benedikt,” said he.

“I think there is none of us but needs must fear it,” replied
the priest. “And I have always lived negligently, in that I took

123


I: THE COURSE OF THE AUTUMN SIrRA BENEDIKT BESSESSON


THE SNAKE PIT


little thought of the small daily sins—I spoke and acted as my
humour prompted me and consoled myself with the thought
that it was no great and deadly sin—thinking it could be no
such great matter what I did from frailty and natural imper-
fection, though I well knew that in God’s eyes all sin is more
loathsome than sores. And you and I would not like to live
with a man and take him in our arms if he were full of sores
and scabs all over. Now I have every day partaken of the
remedy which surely heals the leprosy of sin. But you know
that even the surest remedy and the most precious ointment is
slow to heal the sickness, if every day a man shall scratch him-
self again and tear his skin anew. And so it is with us, when
Our Lord has washed away our sins with His blood and
anointed us with His mercy, but we are careless to do the deeds
to which we were anointed-—thus we scratch ourselves as soon
as He has healed us, and we must bide in Purgatory, bound
hand and foot, until we are cleansed from our scabs and
taints ———”

Olav sat in silence, twisting his gloves.

“Too great love have I borne to mine own, I fear. I thank
God I have never been the cause of sin in them or backed them
in an unrighteous cause—to that I was never tempted, for they
were honest folk. But I ween I have been over-zealous some-
times for their advancement and wealth—it is written in my
testament that it is to be given back.—And I have been head-


strong with my enemies and my kinsmen’s enemies—hasty and


ready to believe evil of every man I liked not te
“Nevertheless we others must have worse than ill to fear,”
said Olav, trying to smile, “if you think your case stands thus.”
The priest turned his head upon the pillow and looked the
young man in the eyes. Olav felt that he went pale under the
124


THE SNAKE. PIT


other’s glance; a strangely impotent feeling came over him.
He tried to say something, but could not find words —

“How you look at me—” he whispered at last. “How you
look at me!” he said again a few moments later, and he seemed
to be pleading for himself.

The priest turned his head again, and now he looked
straight before him.

“Do you remember I always scoffed at Olav Half-priest
for his talk of having seen so much of those things of which I
had little knowledge? I think now that it may enter into God’s
counsels to open the eyes of one man to that which He conceals
from another. I was never permitted to see aught of those things


with which we are surrounded in this life. But now and again I
PP)


have had an inkling of them, I too

Olav looked at the priest attentively.

“Of one thing I have always had foreknowledge,” said
Sira Benedikt. “I have always known—almost always, perhaps
it were well to say—when folk were on the way to fetch me to
the dying. Above all, to such as had greatest need of help—


9


such as were burdened by an unshriven sin
Olav Audunsson gave a start. Unconsciously he raised one
hand slightly.
“Such things set their mark upon a man. Few are they who
become so hardened as to show no trace that an old priest can


note


“This befell me one evening in this room, as I was putting
off my clothes. I was about to climb into bed, when it was
borne in upon me that one was on the way hither and encoun-
tered great difficulties, and that he had sore need of interces-
sion. I knelt down and prayed that he who was faring hither
might find safe guidance—and then I thought to lie down and
take a little rest before I had to go out. But when I had laid me

125


THE SNAKE PIT


down, I felt ever more strongly that someone was in great
danger. At last it was clear to me that there was one present in
the room with me, who aroused terror in my heart, but I knew
it to be holy awe—‘Speak, Lord, Thy servant heareth,’ I prayed
aloud. And immediately it was as though a voice had called
within me: I arose, clothed myself and waked one of my serv-
ants, an old and trustworthy man. I bade him go with me up to
the church, enter the belfry and ring the midmost bell. I myself
went into the church and knelt on the steps of the altar—but
first I took a taper from the altar of Mary, lighted it and car-
ried it to the church door, which I set open wide. The taper
burnt with a calm, clear flame, although the night was wet and
raw, misty and somewhat tempestuous.

“°Twas not long before a man came and begged me to
bring extreme unction and the viaticum to a sick man. The mes-
senger had been so long on the road that he never thought he
would arrive in time, for he had followed his own tracks in a
ring and gone astray in bogs and rough ground. But we were
able to bring succour in due time to one who needed it more


sorely than most

“Now I have been fain to think that even he who brought
the message was one whose life had been such that evil spirits
were more likely to guide his footsteps than his guardian angel,
to whose voice he had ceased to listen. And it may well be that
’twas this angel, or the guardian spirit of the dying man, who
turned to me and sent me to the church to ring the bell

“But when I came home toward morning and went past the
church, I saw that I had forgotten to close the door; the candle
still stood there burning in its candlestick, and it was not con-
sumed, nor had the wind and rain that drove in at the open
door quenched it. I was afraid when I saw this sign, but I took

126


THE SNAKE. PIT


courage and went in to bring the Virgin Mary back her candle-
stick and to close the door. Then I was ware that one bent over
the candle and guarded the flame, for about it I saw as it were
a reflection of the light falling upon something white—whether
it was an arm or the lappet of a garment or a wing, I know not.
I crept up the steps on my knees, and as I reached out my hand
to take the candlestick, the light went out, and I fell upon my
face, for I felt that one swept past me, whether it was an angel
or a blessed soul—but I knew that this one had seen his and
my Lord face to face.”

Olav sat motionless, with downcast eyes. But at last he
looked up, he could do naught else. And again he met Sira
Benedikt’s glance.

He knew not for how long they stayed thus, staring into
each other’s eyes. But he felt time passing over them like a
roaring stream, and he and the other stood at the bottom be-
neath the stream, where was eternity, unchanging and motion-
less. He knew that the other could see the secret sore that
preyed upon his soul and was eating its way out—but he was
too cowardly to allow the healing hand to touch the festering
cancer. In extreme terror lest the diseased spot might be dis-
turbed, he summoned all his will and all his strength—he
closed his eyes. He sank into darkness and _stillness—time
ceased to roar and sing, but he felt the room turning round
with him. When again he opened his eyes, the room was as
usual, and Sira Benedikt lay with averted head on the green-
spotted pillow. He looked weary and sorrowful and old.

Olav stood up and took his leave—knelt down and kissed
Sira Benedikt’s hand in farewell. The old man took his firmly
and pressed it, as he murmured some Latin words which were


unknown to Olav.
127


THE SNAKE PIT


Then he went out, and the priest did not attempt to hold
him back.


A WEEK after came the news of Sira Benedikt’s death. The folk
of the parish counted it a loss—they had esteemed him as an
able priest and a bold and upright man. But the franklins had
never reckoned him to be endowed with any conspicuous men-
tal gifts—he was like one of themselves in manners and dis-
position and had had no learning beyond what was necessary.

Olav Audunsson alone was strangely stricken in spirit
when he heard the news. It had seemed as though a door stood
open—and vaguely he had reckoned that one day he would be
given courage to enter it. But as yet he had not had the courage.
And now the door was closed for all time.

He had not had much talk with Ingunn about her visit to
the Upplands, and the child had not been mentioned between
them.

But toward Yule Olav again had fears that the worst had
happened—so he called it in his own mind when Ingunn was
clearly with child ——

Ever since Torhild Bjornsdatter had been with them, In-
gunn had shown a more active spirit than ever before in all the


years they had been married. There was now no need for the
mistress to do anything herself—Torhild was so capable that
she accomplished all the household duties alone, and she had
learnt how everything was done at Hestviken. But it seemed
that the other’s presence had aroused a kind of ambition in In-
gunn—Olav guessed that his wife had felt injured at his taking
a housekeeper, and that without first consulting herself. And
although Torhild was very accommodating, inquiring her mis-
tress’s desires in everything, keeping out of the way as far as
possible and living with her children in the little old house on
128


THE SNAKE PIT


the east of the courtyard, where Olav’s mother had once dwelt
—the husband noticed that Ingunn did not like Torhild.

Fine needlework was the only thing in which Ingunn had
excelled in her youth, and now she took it up again. She made
a long kirtle for Olav—it was of foreign cloth, woven in black
and green flowers, and she adorned it with broad borders. Her
husband had little use for such a garment now—but she left
the making of his working clothes to Torhild. For the daily
work about the nianor she remained as useless as ever, but she
insisted on taking part in it all, and for Yule she toiled at pre-
paring the meat, brewing and cleaning houses and clothes, run-
ning between the storehouses and the quay in driving snow-
squalls which came in from the fiord and turned the whole
courtyard and the road down to the sea into a mass of slippery
green slush.

But the evening before Christmas Eve, when Olav came in,
he found her standing by herself up on the bench, struggling
with the old tapestry, which was to be hung on wooden hooks
along the uppermost of the wall-logs. It was all in one piece
and very heavy; Olav came up to help her, holding up a length
at a time.

“T doubt if it be prudent for you to work so hard,” he
said. “If you think it will be well this time. All the more rea-
son to be careful of yourself—so that it may turn out as we
both desire.”

Ingunn said:

“°Twill fall out, sure enough, as ’tis fated—and rather
will I face now the suffering I cannot escape than go through
months of torment in the prospect of it. Think you not that
I know I shall never see the day when any child calls me
mother?”

Olav looked at her a moment—they were standing side by

129


THE SNAKE PIT


side on the bench. He jumped down, lifted her after him and
stood for a while with his hands on her hips.

“You must not talk in that way,” he said feebly. “You
cannot be sure of it, Ingunn mine!”

He turned from her and began to clear away the hooks
and pegs that were lying on the bench.

“T thought,” he asked in a low voice, “that you had a mind
to go and see that boy—when you were at Berg in the sum-
mer?”

Ingunn made no reply.

“I have sometimes wondered whether perchance you longed
for him?” he said very softly. “Do you ever long for him?”

Ingunn was still silent.

“Ts he dead mayhap, the child?” he asked gently.

“No. I saw him once. He was so afraid of me—clawed and
kicked—he behaved like a young lynx when I tried to hold
him.”


Otav felt old far beyond his years, weary and worn at heart.
This was the fifth winter he and Ingunn had lived together—it
might have been a hundred years. But the time must have
seemed yet longer to her, poor woman, he reminded himself.

Meanwhile he tried to rouse himself—to hope. If this time
it went well, that would indeed be the only thing that could
make her happy again. And now she had been in good health
longer than any time before—so maybe she was equal to going
through with it.

As for himself, all desire of having children had been tor-
tured out of him long ago. He thought indeed of his manor and
his race—but now these affected him so little. And then there
loomed before him a shadowy vision of something immensely
far off in the future: when he had grown old, and his pain and

130


THE SNAKE PIT


anxiety and this strange morbid and uneasy love of his was no
more—— For she could not live to be old. And then his life
might be like that of other men. Then he would be able to seek
atonement and peace for his tortured conscience. And then
there might yet be time to think of his manor and his race

But when he had reached this point in his vague conjec-


tures, a sharp pang went through his heart, as when a wound
opens wide. Dimly he divined that, in spite of his having no
peace, no joy, in spite of his soul being hurt to the death—he
yet possessed happiness, his own happiness, even if it were un-
like the happiness of other men. Sick and almost bled to death,
his happiness yet lived within him, and his aim must be to find
courage and means to save it, before it was too late.

Ingunn seemed to keep in good health, even into the new
year. But by degrees it made Olav uneasy to see her so utterly
unlike herself—in a continual state of futile bustling. That
Torhild could have patience with such a mistress was beyond
his comprehension; but the girl followed her mistress with
calm endurance and made work for herself out of all Ingunn’s
restless confusion.

Matters stood thus when at the beginning of Lent word
came to Hestviken that Jon Steinfinnsson, Ingunn’s younger
brother, had died unmarried at Yuletide. There was indeed no
necessity for Olav to journey northward at this winter season
in order to take up his wife’s share of the inheritance. But to
Olav Audunsson this thing came as a token.

For four nights he lay with lighted candles—scarcely clos-
ing his eyes in sleep. He was bargaining with his God and
judge. Some means he must find now of saving himself and this
unhappy wreck of whom he was so fond that he knew of no
beginning or end between them. The whole of Hestviken as his

131


THE SNAKE PIT


patrimony and the name of his own son—that must surely be
amends in full for the brat of the vagabond Icelander.


Oxav had been twelve days at Berg when he spoke of this one
evening as he sat in the hall drinking with Hallvard Steinfinns-
son, while Tora was present: now there only remained his most
important business, to fetch home his son.

Hallvard Steinfinnsson stared at him agape—speechless.
Then he flared up:

“Your—! Do you tell me that you yourself were father to
the brat Ingunn had to creep into the corner and give birth to
like a bitch—” he smote the table, crimson with rage.

“You well know, Hallvard, how my fortunes stood at that
time,” replied Olav with composure. “Had my enemies had
this against me, that I was here in secret while still under sen-
tence of banishment, they would scarce have been éasy to deal
with. And it might have cost their aunt and Lady Magnhild
dearly, if it had come out that they had housed me, an outlaw.”

But Hallvard swore till the sparks flew. “Think you not,
Olav Audunsson, my aunt and Magnhild would rather have
paid all they had in fines for your thrusting yourself upon
them, an outlawed man, than that it should have been said that
one of our women had disgraced herself so foully that she
dared not name the father of her child?” He mimicked all the
guesses folk had brought forward, each one uglier than the last.

Olav shrugged his shoulders.

“I know not how you care to speak of these rumours now.
For now the truth will come to light—and had you let me know
a little sooner that such things were said, I should not have
waited so long. We deemed we ought to keep silence about it
awhile for Magnhild’s sake—but you may be well assured I

132


THE SNAKE PIT
have never had any other thought than to acknowledge my


son.”

“You had—God knows what you had!—” the other
mocked. All at once he sat straight up, with a stiff stare: “You
had so! I wonder whether Ingunn believed it so surely—or
that you would hold to your boast that ’twas a lawful marriage
you made when you went to bed with her before you had hair
on your chin? Why then did she throw herself into the lake?”

“Ask Tora,” said Olav curtly. “She thinks it was the milk
that had gone to her head.”

“Nor do I believe,” said Hallvard slyly, “that Haftor
would have sued Magnhild for this—for you and he were


2 9


reconcile

“Believe what you will,” said Olav. “To be sure Haftor
and I were reconciled—twas on account of the Earl I was then
an outlaw. A numskull you have been all your days, Hallvard,
but you can scarce be so foolish as not to see that for you and
your kinsfolk the more profitable way is to believe what I have
now told you. Even if you should miss the inheritance you
would have gotten, had your sister died childless.”

Hallvard started up and made for the door.

But when Olav was left alone with Tora, he felt all at once
that this thing he had taken upon himself was intolerably difi-
cult. As she remained silent, he began with a kind of sneer:

“And you, Tora; do you believe me?”

Tora looked him straight in the face with eyes that be-
trayed nothing:

“T am bound to believe you, when you say it yourself.”

And Olav felt it as a physical pressure upon his neck.
Weary as he was, he had now taken upon himself a new burden,
in addition to the old. Nothing of it could be cast off, and no-

133


THE SNAKE PIT
where could he turn for help. He must go through with it—


alone.


On the evening of the next day Olav came down to Berg with
the child. Tora did her best to receive her sister’s son kindly.
But for all that the boy seemed to feel he was not very welcome
in this house; he kept close to his new-found father, trotted at
his heels everywhere and stood by Olav’s knee when the man
sat down. Then if it chanced that he was allowed to hold his
father’s hand, or that Olav took him up and set him on his
knees, Eirik’s pretty little face beamed with joy—all at once
he had to turn and look up at his father in glad wonder.

After this Olav stayed no longer at Berg than he was
obliged. Already on the morning of the third day he was ready
for the journey.

Kirik sat well wrapped in the sledge, turning this way and
that, looking about and laughing with joy. Now he was to
drive in a sledge again—he had had one drive when his father
fetched him from Siljuaas; the sledge had been waiting for
them at the last farm in the parish. Anki laughed and chatted,
as he made fast the baggage—the kind man who had carried
him down on his back when his father fetched him. His father
looked shapelessly huge in his fur mantle—and the rime on
the fur of his own cape showed as white as it did on the hairs
around the men’s hoods.

Tora stood looking at the boy’s red and happy face—his
brown eyes were bright and quick as those of a little bird.
There sprang up in the woman’s heart a few drops of the ten-
derness she had felt for Eirik when he was a baby. She kissed
him farewell on both cheeks and bade him bring greetings to
his mother.


134


THE SNAKE PIT


OLav came home to Hestviken early one day, as the pale sun
shone red through the frost fog; he had driven from Oslo in
the pitch-dark early morning. When they came into the valley
he gave the reins to Anki, lifted the sleeping boy out of the
sledge and carried him up the slope to the house.

Ingunn sat by the fire combing her hair when Olav came
in. He set down the child on the floor and pushed him forward:

“Go on, Eirik, and bid your mother good-morrow as you
ought”—whereupon he turned back into the anteroom. From
the door he saw with the corner of his eye that Ingunn crept
toward the boy on her knees, stretching out her ihin, bare arms;
her hair swept the floor behind her.

He was out in the yard by the sledges when she called to
him from the doorway. In the dark anteroom she threw her
arms about his neck, weeping so that it shook her, as she clung
closely to him. He laid his hand upon her back—underneath
the hair and the shift he felt her shoulder-blades standing out
like boards. With that wealth of unbound hair streaming over
the weak, drooping shoulders she reminded her husband in a
strange way of what she had been like when she was young.
Heavy and awkward she was now in her movements—it was not
easy to see traces of her freshness and beauty in the tear-swollen,
wasted face. And yet it was not so many years since she had
been the fairest of all—For the first time he felt the full
wretchedness of her useless fecundity. He put his arm around
her again.

“I thought *twould make you happy,” he said, for she
wept and wept.

“Happy—” she trembled, and now he found that she was
laughing through her sobs. “I am surely happier than the an-


gels—although you know full well, Olav, [ love you more than


ten children :
135


THE SNAKE PIT


“Go in and dress yourself,” he begged her; “you will take
cold here.”

When he came in she put on her clothes and her wimple
and was carrying in food from the closet, where they kept it in
winter. Eirik still stood where Olav had put him down, but his
mother had taken off his leathern jacket. When he saw his
father coming, he turned to him quickly and tried to take his
hand, smiling a little anxiously.

“Nay, go to your mother now, Eirik,” said Olav. “Do as
I tell you,” he repeated, rather sharply, as the boy shyly drew
nearer to him.


136


8


IRIK WAS NEARLY FIVE YEARS OLD, AND HE WAS BEGINNING
R: find out that it was counted a great blemish in him that

he had no father. A year before, when they had been down
to the village for Lady Day in the spring, he had heard certain
folk saying that he was baseborn; the same word had been used
by the men who called at Siljuaas on their fowling—and it was
surely said of him. But when he asked his foster-mother what it
meant, she boxed his ears. Afterwards she had muttered angrily
that they had better deserved the blows who said such things to
the poor little creature—ay, and his mother too— twas not the
boy’s fault that he was a bastard and a straw-brat. But Eirik
guessed it was better not to ask more questions about these
queer words. They meant something which it was wrong to be,
and that was why Torgal did not like him—he could not tell
how he knew it, but it had come to him in some way that Tor-
gal, the father of the house, was not his father.

Torgal, the crofter of Siljuaas, was a kindly, home-loving
man. He trained up his sons: the eldest of them already went
hunting with him in the forest, the younger ones had to work on
the clearing at home, and their father showed them what to do
and chastised them when they needed it. But Eirik he heeded
not at all, whether for good or for evil. He showed his wife the
honour of never meddling with her affairs—and he reckoned
this adoption of the bastard of a great man’s daughter to be a
ventuse of hers with which he had nothing to do—he left her a

137


THE SNAKE PIT


free hand both with the child and with the payment for his fos-
tering.

Eirik knew well enough that Hallveig was not his mother,
but he thought nothing of it, for Hallveig never made any dif-
ference between him and her own children. She was just as
ready with blows and angry words, whichever of them might
get in her way while at work. And on the eve of holy days she
bathed them all in order of age in the big tub, and he was clad
in a sheepskin coat the day before winter night, and as soon as
the cuckoo was heard he had to be content with a homespun
shirt and nothing else, like the other children, whatever the
weather. On those days in the year when the people of Siljuaas
went down to the village to mass, and Hallveig had the use of
the horse, Eirik was allowed to ride behind her just as far as
each of the other children, and she kissed them all with equal
affection, when she had received Corpus Domini.

They never went short of food—cured fish or game; with
it a piece of bread or a ladleful of porridge, small beer now
and again and water when milk ran short in winter. Eirik had
been very well off and quite content with his lot in the lonely
clearing far away in the forest.

Every hour of the day something happened, so many peo-
ple and animals were there in the little homestead. And round
about its fences the forest was thick on every side: within it,
behind the wall of murmuring fir-trees and glistening bushes,
was a teeming, hidden life. Creatures lived and moved in there,
keeping an eye on them from the edge of the wood, luring the
boy and drawing him right down to the fence: at the slightest
movement or sound within the forest the whole flock of young-


sters would spin round and take to their heels across the turf,


1 October 14,
138


THE SNAKE PIT


back to the shelter of the houses. Not much had the children
seen of the folk from beyond, but they heard the grown-ups
tell tales of strange happenings, so they knew of the troll of
Uvaas and the pixy who mostly haunted the mossy rocks by the
Logging Stone, and of the bear—one year he had appeared at
the byre and tried to break through the roof on a frosty night
—but that was before Eirik could remember. Under a fixed
rock in the meadow there dwelt little men and women in blue,
but with them they were good friends—Hallveig carried out
food to them now and again, and they did her many a good
turn in gratitude. Eirik had often seen their footprints in the
snow. Those who dwelt outside the fences were of course more
evilly disposed. There was no great difference, to the boy, be-
tween the beasts of the forest and these others who haunted it.

The sound of something moving within the thicket on a
summer’s day, the calls of beasts and other noises from the
forest at night-time, tracks in the snow on winter mornings,
Beisk, the dog, who would start up and bark furiously on dark
evenings, without Eirik ever finding out what made him do it
—all such things made up the wonderful world outside the
homestead which greeted the child. It was misty and dream-
like, but it was real enough, only he was so small that he had
to stay inside the fence. But Master Torgal and the big boys
went in and out of it and told of the strange things that hap-


pened there.

Eirik never came into the forest except on those days in
the year when Hallveig took him with her to church. Then they
passed through it, a long, long way down. At last they came to
a new world which was even farther away and more dreamlike.
The bells that pealed and rang again across the great open
fields with big houses on them—the church hill where stood
horses and horses and yet more horses—little shaggy ones like

139


THE SNAKE PIT


their own on the lower side, but up by the churchyard fence
there was a neighing of big, shiny colts with hog manes and
red, green and violet harness glittering with gold and silver.
Within the church stood the priests with gilt cloaks on their
backs, singing before the lighted candles on the altar, and some
young ones in long white shirts swung the golden censers so
that the church was filled with the sweetest fragrance. His fos-
ter-mother pushed her flock down on to their knees and hoisted
them up, according to the movements of those in the brilliant
light of the choir. At last came God, as Eirik knew, when the
priest lifted up the little round loaf and the bell in the tower
above began to ring, chiming with a sharp note of joy.

At the upper end of the church stood a whole crowd of
men and women in bright-coloured clothes, shining belts and
big brooches, and Eirik knew that it was they who owned all
the horses with the fine saddles and the gleaming arms that
were left in the room under the tower. Eirik believed they were
a kind of fairies—only that they lived and moved even farther
away from his life than those others in the woods at home. One
day Hallveig pointed to one of them, the bulkiest of all the
women, clad in flaming red, with a triple silver belt about her
big stomach and a brooch like an ale-bowl in the middle of
her mighty bosom: that was his aunt, said Hallveig. Eirik was
none the wiser, for he did not know what an aunt was. Fetches
he had heard of and angels; nay, sometimes a woman came to
Siljuaas whom the children called Aunt—her name was Ingrid
and she had a great hump on her back—but this one did not
look like anything of that sort.


He had been properly scared when that lady in blue came. And

it was for him she had come—she was his mother, they said.

It made him extremely uncomfortable, for it seemed to be not
140


THE SNAKE PIT


only a great danger but a disgrace. She was certainly one of the
women who stood in front at church—fairies of the farthest-off
kind. And now he had got his eldest sister to tell him what a
straw-brat was: when women lie with men out in the woods,
they get a straw-brat. The blue woman had had him, just as
mother had had little Inga in the spring; all the other children
in the house mother had had, but not him. The child had a
horrified suspicion that he had been born out of doors and car-
ried in from the woods. But now he was mortally afraid he
would be taken out there again, and he did not want that at all.
For a long time he was haunted by a terrible dread lest the blue
woman should come back and fetch him out to where she lay
—with a man whom he imagined to be like a tree blown down
by the storm, with tangled roots in the air. They passed a tree
like this on the way to church; it lay on a flat piece of dry
ground under a knoll, and Eirik had always been afraid of this
dead, fallen fir-tree, for it had something like an ugly man’s
face amid the tangle of its roots. The boy imagined that the
blue woman lived in a little glade like this among the woods,
and there he would be alone with her and her tree-man and the
big sorrel horse with bright things on its bridle; never would
anybody else come there, neither people nor animals. But he
would not have that—he wanted to stay at home in the safe,
open clearing and sleep indoors, and he would never be parted
from mother and Gudda, his foster-sister, and Kaare and the
other children and Beisk and the horse and the cows and the
goats and Torgal—and he would not be squeezed and kissed as
he had been by the strange woman. For a long time he scarcely
dared to go three steps from the house door, so frightened was
he that she would come again, this mother of his. But if he had
had a father, she could not have done anything to him—for
141


THE SNAKE PIT


sister had said that only those children who had no father could
be straw-brats.


Att the same, as time went on, Eirik thought less of that visit.
But one day in the winter some men who were following a ski
track through the forest to Osterdalen called at Siljuaas. Again
he heard that they were talking about him, but this time they
mentioned his mother by name: “Leman” they said she was
called. Eirik had never heard that word before, but it sounded
strange and unsafe—as if she were not human, but rather some
kind of great bird. He imagined vaguely that Leman might come
flapping her great blue cloak like a pair of broad wings and
pounce down on him. It grew more and more clear to him how
evil was his plight, since he had no father to own him, so that
nobody would dare take him away.


THEN one day there came a father io him. Eirik was not very
surprised at this. When he was led up to the man, he took a
good look at him. It must have been the fact that Olav’s com-
plexion was so fair that made the boy feel confidence in him
from the first. This father with the broad, straight shoulders
and the upright bearing—KFirik felt at once that he knew this
was another of those who stood in front at church—but he was
not afraid of him. Gay clothes he wore—a leaf-green kirtle, a
silver clasp in the breast of his jerkin, bright metal on his belt
and on the long sheath of his dirk. And then Eirik took such a
fancy to the queer big axe his father held between his knees as
he sat; the hand that rested on the head of the axe was covered
with rings. The more he looked at him, the more pleased he
was with his father. He stood calmly meeting the other’s search-
ing glance—at the first sign of something like a smile on the
man’s face Kirik beamed and went up close to Olav’s knee.
142


THE SNAKE PIT


“He is small, this son of mine?” said the father to Hall-
veig, holding the boy’s chin a moment. Beyond that he said
nothing to Eirik, while he was at Siljuaas, but that was enough
for the boy. Hallveig wept a little, Torgal lifted him up, when
he said farewell, the brothers and sisters stood staring at him
who was to go away with the two strange men. Eirik felt a little
clutch at the heart, when he saw his mother cry; he put his
arms about her neck and his lips began to quiver—then his
father called, and at once he turned and trudged to the door,
clumsy in his new fur coat that came down to his feet.

Kirik and Olav became good friends on the journey. It was
not much that his father said to him; he let Arnketil, his man,
look after the boy. But all the strange new things he met with,
the sledge and horses, a fresh house to sleep in every night, all
the good food, and then the many people everywhere, who
talked to him, many of them—HFirik knew that all this was his
father’s doing. And his father wore a shirt and breeches of
linen next his skin, and he did not take them off at night.


THE new mother that he found when he came to the end of the
journey made much less impression on Eirik. He did not know
her again; when she asked if he remembered that she had been
at Siljuaas, he answered yes, for he guessed that was what he
ought to say. But he had no feeling that she was the same. This
mother here had brown clothes, she was thick about the waist
and trod heavily and slowly, as she went ceaselessly in and out,
busying herself between the houses. The tall, blue mother, Le-
man, with the quick, bird-like movements, he imagined standing
in the little clearing in the forest, where she dwelt with her
tree-man and the big sorrel horse. Only when the new brown
mother crushed him to her and smothered him with kisses and
wild words of endearment, did he know in a way that she and
143


THE SNAKE PIT


Leman were one and the same—although they called this one
Ingunn.—Kirik did not like being kissed and squeezed in this
way—he had never in his life been given other kisses than those
which went with a mass Sunday and fresh meat and a drink
from the ale-bowl when they came home—rare and festive oc-
casions.

But here the way of it was that he got ale every day, and
these folk ate cooked fresh food, fish and meat, day after day
for many days, so maybe the women had the habit of kissing


every day too.


Wuen Eirik came up to Olav, laid his hands in his lap and
asked him all kinds of questions—whether the seal lived in the
forest that he could see straight across the fiord, and why his
two horses were white, and why he was not the father of Tor-
hild’s children, and what they were to do with the train-oil
they were boiling, and where the moon was going when it flew
so swiftly across the sky—Ingunn watched the two with a
strange tension. For one thing, she was afraid Olav might be
impatient with the boy. She was so unspeakably humble in her
gratitude for this thing her husband had done for her in bring-
ing home the child for whom she had longed to the very death;
and now she was only afraid the boy might worry Olav, or that
he might be angry at the sight of her child, if he saw too much
of him. She could not discover that Olav entertained any dis-
like for Eirik. He took little notice of him, unless the boy sought
him out, but then he was always friendly and replied as well as
he could to Eirik’s endless questions. But it was not easy to
make Eirik understand the nature of anything. The boy seemed
to have no grasp at all—he made no difference between living
and dead things, asked whether the big rock on the beach was
fond of the gulls and why the snow wanted to lie on the ground.
144


THE SNAKE PIT


He could not make out that the sun which glimmered through
the fog was the same as shone in the sky on a clear day, and
once he had seen a moon which was quite unlike all other
moons.—The priest came to see them one day, but Eirik never
guessed that he was the same person he had seen up at the
church—that his vestments could be taken off and that he could
ride about like other men. Sometimes Eirik would take it upon
himself to hold forth to them, but all his stories were’ strange
and absurd—impossible to find any sense in them. Ingunn
feared the boy was very stupid and backward for his age—and
she was afraid Olav would dislike him still more for having so
little sense. He was so pretty and so sweet that she thought she
could never feast her eyes enough on him—but clever he was
not.

The secret pang of disappointment and pain that she felt
because the boy showed so openly that he liked his father better
than her, was another reason for her seeking to keep her hus-
band and her son away from each other as much as she could.


At the outset Olav entertained no ill-will toward Eirik. The
violent mental tumult that had shaken him when he heard of
Ingunn’s infidelity, and afterwards time after time, when he
recalled that another man had possessed her—this had become
a thing of the distant past during these years of their joyless
life together. His love of her was a fixed thing and a habit; it
was intertwined with his whole being as the mould of a meadow
is intertwined with a mass of roots. But now he did not feel this
love otherwise than as an infinite compassion with this poor
sick creature, whose life was his own life. What was now the
living warmth in his feelings for Ingunn—what throbbed, flared
up and sank again—was tenderness and anxiety for her; desire
only stirred sluggishly and luke-warm, as in a doze. But thus it
145


THE SNAKE PIT


was that his jealousy had also grown weak and numb—it was
but rarely that he thought of what she had gone through in the
past, and then it seemed very far away. And Olav could not
realize any connection between the shame and agony of that
time and this little boy, whom they had brought into their
home. Ejirik was there, that was to be—God had made known to
him that he was to take Ejirik to himself, and that was an end of
the matter. And Olav was more inclined than not to like the
boy in himself—he was a pretty boy, and he wooed his father’s
affection so openly. Olav, himself slow in taking to others, was
always surprised and glad when any sought his friendship.

Olav often guessed the train of thought behind the boy’s
strange jumble of talk much better than his mother did. And
when she interrupted Eirik’s faltering explanations with inap-
preciative words and would not leave the boy alone so that he
and Olav might reach an understanding, her husband more than
once felt a kind of fretful impatience. He remembered—not in
such a way that he could form clear images of it, much less put
it into words, but in brief and fleeting visions he remembered a
great deal of how the world had appeared to himself, when he
was a child.


146


9


HE ICE BROKE UP AND THE SPRING CAME. THE DULL-RED
rocks down by the fiord were baked in the sunshine,
and the spray gleamed white under ihe Bull crag, as
though new-born. The soil turned green and breathed its sweet
smell of grass and mould, and then came the time of bursting
buds, filling the evening air with a cool and bitter scent of
young leaves along the valley.
One morning in May Olav came across a nest of vipers on
a slope; he killed three of them. He brought them home in a
closed wooden cup and during the midday rest he stole to the
cook-house with them. Snakes’ fat and snakes’ ashes are good
for many things, but they have much more power if one goes
secretly about the preparation of them.
He was about to slip into the cook-house, when he heard
voices. Ingunn was there, and the boy. The child’s voice said:
““__because father gave me the breast, you see.”
“He gave you the breast?” his mother wondered. “What
nonsense are you talking now?”


“Oh yes, he did. And then father said I might eat up the
wings too, if I had not had enough, but there was nothing left


of the cock but the wings ve
Olav laughed quietly to himself. Now he remembered—in
the inn at Oslo the woman had set before him a roast cock, and
the boy had liked the meat hugely. Then he heard Ingunn say:
“A whole cock I will roast for you, Eirik—will that make
147


THE SNAKE PIT


you think I am as kind as your father? You shall havenit next
time he goes away from home——”

Olay stole back across the yard and went east to the smithy.
He felt a strange sense of shame on her behalf. What was the
use of such talk? Surely she could roast one of her own cocks


for the child, whether he were at home or not.


WHETHER it was that the unaccustomed food was too rich for
Lirik’s stomach or from some other cause—as spring went on
the child took to waking up and screaming nearly every night.
Olav heard Eirik start up with a shriek, crawl around and grope
this way and that in the big north bed, where he slept alone—
then he shrieked again, even louder, as though in utmost terror.

Ingunn tumbled out of bed and went to him: “Eirik, Eirik,
Eirik mine, hush, hush, hush, you will wake your father—oh,
be quiet now—there is nothing here that you need be afraid of,
my little son!”

“You had better bring him over to us,” came Olav’s voice
wide awake from the darkness.

“Oh, has he waked you again!” complained Ingunn, as she
came back with the boy and lay down—the two tossed and
wrigegled till they were comfortable.

“T was not yet asleep. What have you dreamt of this time,
Kirik?”

But at night it was only his mother who would serve Eirik’s
turn. He simply nestled closer to her and did not answer his
father. They never got to hear anything of his dreams. He made
a gesture of wiping something from his hands and throwing it
from him, two or three times. Then he gave a sigh of relief and
lay down to rest. Very soon they were both asleep.

Olav was always more sleepless in spring than at other
seasons; he seldom fell asleep before midnight and woke very

148


THE SNAKE PIT


early. On these early summer mornings the fiord often lay
smooth as a mirror, pale blue and glistening in the sunlight,
and the desolate shore opposite seemed bright and tranquil as
a mirage. Olav was absurdly happy and light-hearted when he
went out on such a morning. Torhild Bjérnsdatter was singing
somewhere in the outhouses; she had already been long at
work. Olav and the girl met in the yard; they stood and talked
together in the morning sunshine.

When he came in again some hours later he sometimes
stood for a moment looking at the two, mother and child, who
were still asleep. Eirik lay with his face against his mother’s
neck, breathing with half-open mouth. Ingunn held her narrow
hand, heavy with rings, about his shoulder.


A FORTNIGHT before Saint John’s Day Ingunn gave birth to a
man-child. Olav had him christened at once, Audun.

It was a tiny boy, purple and skinny. Olav put two fingers
around his son’s hand one day, when he lay in Signe Arnes-
datter’s lap and was being washed—it was so thin, that little
hand, almost like a chicken’s leg, and just as cold.

Olav felt no very deep affection for his son or joy that at
last he had one. The waiting had been so long that the bare
suspicion that Ingunn might be with child again had struck him
with black despondency. He had grown so unused to the hope
that all this misery might end at last in rejoicing, that he had
to have time to take it in.

But he saw that it was not so with the mother. In spite of
her having expected nothing but bitter pain, against her own
will, her heart had trembled each time with hopeless and de-
spairing love for the little unborn creatures. Now Audun in-


herited this love from all his brothers, who had left behind


them not even a name or a memory.
149


THE SNAKE PDT


Eirik was boisterously happy at having a brother. He knew
from Siljuaas that the birth of a child was the greatest of great
events. Then there were two or three strange women in the
house, and they brought with them good food, and candles
were burning in the room all night long. The child in the cradle
was tended as a most precious thing—those outside the fence
were lying in wait to steal it—and its health and well-being
were constantly inquired after. That it was the worst off of all
in the home when the next child came and took its place in the
cradle—the child of yesteryear was abandoned to the care of
its little sisters, always in the way and always in danger—of
this Eirik took no account. Here in this house the time was one
of immense festivity, so many wives, each with her maid, and
masses of food—but the candles at night he and his father were
cheated of; his mother and the new brother lay in another
house.

“Ti’s my silken brother, but it’s only your woollen brother,”
he said to Torhild’s two youngest children, as they stood to-
gether watching Audun being dressed.

Olav was sitting with his wife at the moment; he heard it.
He glanced at Ingunn. She lay looking at her two sons, radiant
with joy.

His son—that little creature there, that the maid was pull-
ing about. The other bent his healthy, beaming face over him
and prattled to the little brother, whom all unwittingly he had
deprived of his birthright.


Ir had caused a certain mild stir in the neighbourhood when
the people of Hestviken so unexpectedly produced a big son of
five, who had been hidden away all this time.
Olav was not very well liked in the neighbourhood. He
had been received with evident and cordial goodwill when he
150


THE SNAKE PIT


came home to his own—but little by little a feeling grew up
among the people of the country-side that he had repelled their
offers of friendship and good neighbourship. Olav kept to him-
self more than they liked, and in company he was little in-
clined to be sociable; never discourteous—and this did not
make him more popular, for it was taken as a sign that he
thought himself something above the other franklins—but taci-
turn, quiet and unapproachable. It was hinted in private, with
a slight sneer, that Olav must think himself something like a
courtier, since he had been Earl Alf’s man and was kinsman on
his mother’s side to these great Danish lords who lay here in
Norway half a year at a time and fed at the Duke’s table. Ay,
ay. He owned his fathers’ manor yet, whole and undivided—
but let him wait and see how long that would last, in days
auch as these. Although he never shirked doing anything that
vas his due, and was not ill-natured when it was a question of
Jelping anyone, nobody cared to ask Olav Audunsson to do
‘tm a favour. For if folk who were in difficulties went to the
Tish Master of Hestviken, it was as though he scarce troubled
hinself to listen to them. When they had explained to him their
Si yation at length, he would ask at the end of it all, as though
he had been thinking of other things: ay, what was it they
Wénted—? No one could deny that Olav was generous both in
8iVing and lending, but if anyone would ease his heart and dis-
cus, his affairs with him, there was no comfort to be had of it in
that house—he gave such answers that one knew not whether
the man was foolish or indifferent. So that unless folk had the
MOst crying need of a helping hand, they preferred to go to an-
other, who would listen to what they said, express an opinion
and give them counsel and consolation, even if this man might
nol icrant them help without some hanging back, saying he was
badiy off himself—but in God’s name——
151


THE. SNAKE PIT


Another matter which had been remarked by the neigh-
bours was that no man had seen Olav get honestly drunk or
free-spoken in a carouse. He drank no less than other good
men at a banquet. But it seemed that God’s gifts did not bite on
him.

And by degrees there grew up a feeling in the country-
side—vague and formless, for no one really knew on what they
based it, but with all its obscurity it was strong as a certainty—
that this man had something on his mind, a secret misfortune
or a sin. The handsome, erect young master, with the broad,
fair face beneath his curly flaxen hair, was a marked man.

It was a strange thing too about his wife, that she could
not give birth to living children. Little it was that one saw o|
Ingunn Steinfinnsdatter, and the poor thing was not much t¢
look at either. But folk still remembered how fair she ha


been—and that not so many years ago.

And now it came out that they had a child. For all the:
years they had had a son hidden away, the Fiend knew whee,
far in the north in her home country.

Begotten while the father was an outlaw, ay, that wasit.
Olav had made that known, briefly and clearly. Folk knew nat
his quarrel with his wife’s kinsmen had arisen from this, at
Steinfinn on his deathbed had given into Olav’s charge the
daughter to whom the lad had been betrothed since their clild-
hood. Olav had accepted her as his wife, and it was impos ble
to interpret Steinfinn’s words otherwise than that this accoded
with his wishes. But the new sponsors had thought they mght
dispose of the fair and wealthy maid in another manner. Jow
Olav declared that the summer before he made final recondlia-
tion with his wife’s kinsmen, he had secretly visited the use
where she dwelt. But in the mean time this had had to bexept
secret.


152


THE SNAKE PIT


So said Olav Audunsson. But folk began to wonder. Per-
haps it was not so sure that Olav had accepted purely of his
own free will the wife he was made to marry by Steinfinn’s or-
der, while he was a mere boy and subject to Steinfinn’s author-
ity. Had he not rather tried to shuffle out of a marriage into
which he had been forced in childhood? Folk who had seen a
little of their life together—their serving-folk and the neigh-
bours’ wives who had been with Ingunn when she lay sick—
spoke of what they knew. True enough, Olav was good to his
wife in a way, but he was sulky and silent at home as he was
abroad; days might pass when he spoke not a word to his wife
even. Ingunn never looked happy, and that was not so strange
either—a woman who was tied to this cross-stick of a husband,
always in bad health and giving birth to one dead child after
another.


OnE day the new priest, Sira Hallbjérn, came to Hestviken.
He was a fairly young man, tall and slight, with a hand-
some face, but his hair was fiery red and folk thought he had a
haughty look. He had made himself somewhat disliked in a
short time. Scarcely had he come to the parish when he raised
dissension on every side, over the property of the Church and
the incomings of the glebe, over old agreements which Sira
Benedikt had made with the owners of the land, but which this
new man found to be unlawful. Both the monastery on Hoved6
and the nuns’ convent of Nonneseter owned farms and shares
of farms in the parish, as did several of the churches and pious
foundations in Oslo. The deputies of these institutions were for
the most part wise and kindly men who were on good terms
with the country folk, many of whom had bought themselves a
resting-place within the walls of the convents; and when it hap-
pened that any of the Hovedé monks themselves came to visit
153


THE SNAKE PIT


their farms, the franklins flocked from far around to hear mass
in their chapels. And then it was not long before Sira Hallbjorn
fell out with the convent folk. On the other hand the priest had
set his whole heart upon some monks of a new order that had
just come into the country: they went barefoot, in habits which
were like sackcloth and ashes, and the virtues they chiefly prac-
tised were said to be humility, meekness and frugality—ay,
’twas said these friars begged their daily bread as they went
about teaching rich and poor the true fear of God, and had
they aught left in their bag after vespers, they were to share it
among the poor and themselves go out each morning with
empty hands. Now it was sure that Sira Hallbjorn was neither
humble nor meek, but proud of his birth—he came of noble
stock far away in Valdres—and he was little fitted to teach the
fear of God, for he was so learned and his speech was so hard
to understand that folk had no great benefit from listening to
him. But he could never praise these beggar friars enough,
Minorites they called themselves, and made himself as it were
their protector, gave great gifts to the house which they had set
about building in the town, and tried to persuade his parishion-
ers to do the same. But folk found out that this must be because
the Duke favoured these new monks greatly, while the Bishop
and most of the priests and learned men in the town liked them
ill and thought that the rule of this order was dangerous and
unsound. And folk knew that Sira Hallbjorn had been sent out
to this parish because he, a man who by his birth and rare
learning seemed destined for the highest offices of the Church,
had fallen out with the Bishop and the whole Chapter of Oslo,
through being so proud and quarrelsome and thinking he knew
and understood and could teach everything better than all the
others. But they were not able to do any worse thing to him
than banish him to this good call—his conduct was blameless
154


THE SNAKE PIT


in all else, he had studied in foreign lands for many years, and
he knew all that was to be known of the law and justice of the
land, from the oldest times down to his own day.

It was in order to hear what Olav knew about a right to
salmon-fishing in a little river over on the Hudrheim side that
he had come today. Olav could not tell him much—the farm
with which the right went had been sold by his grandfather to
his son-in-law and since then it had been divided and had
passed into many hands. He could see that Sira Hallbjorn was
vexed because he could tell him so little of the matter; never-
theless Olav asked, while the priest sat at meat, if he could
throw light on a question which weighed upon his mind. “It
concerns my sons——”

It was thus—he had heard that a child begotten while the
father is under ban of outlawry is outside .he law and has no
rights, even if the mother be the outlaw’s duly married wife?

“Nay, nay,” said Sira Hallbjorn, with a sweep of the hand.
“You have heard of the wolf’s cub—such was the name they
gave to an outlawed man’s child in old days. Then it was so
that the outlaw was treated as a dead man, his estate was divided
and his wife held to be a widow; and if he were granted grace,
he had to ask her again of her kinsfolk and wed her anew. But
you know full well that such a law cannot hold among Chris-
tian men—among us no sin and no sentence can sever the bond
of wedlock between man and wife.”

“Her kinsmen would not have it that ’twas lawful wedlock,
that which had been made between us when we were young,”
said Olav. “ "Twas only after Eirik was born that I got her with


her kinsfolk’s consent.”
“You need have no fear on that score now. Whether the
boy were true-born or not, he enjoys the same rights now that
155


THE SNAKE PIT


you are married with her kinsfolks’ consent, so none can dis-
pute with you whether ’tis lawful marriage.”
“Then is it certain,” asked Olav, “that Audun can never
come forward and oust Eirik from his right as our firstborn?”
“Certainly he cannot,” said the priest decisively.
“Nay, nay. I wished but to be sure how this matter stood.”
“Ay, ’twas natural enough,” replied Sira Hallbjorn.
Olav thanked him for his information. ;


Wuitst his mother was lying in, Eirik took to talking of one
he called Totrabassa. At first the grown people thought this
was a beggar woman—one of those who came in greater num-
bers now that the house was overflowing with food and drink.

Ay, Totrabassa was a woman with a bag, said Kirik. But
another day he said that Totrabassa had been there and had
played with him in the field behind the barn. There was a little
hollow in the meadow, where he was fond of going with his
things. Totrabassa was a little maid. No one paid much atten-
tion to this—they were all used to the queer nonsense Eirik so
often talked.

But after a while he began to tell of more playfellows, and
they all had strange names like Tauragaura, Silvarp, Skolorm,
Délvandogg and Kolmurna the Blue—whether they were men
or women, grown-up or children, it was not easy to make out.

The house-folk grew alarmed. It still happened sometimes
that a whole household left croft or cabin, great and small, and
took to the wood, either because they were pursued by the law
or from sheer poverty, and chose a vagabond life, in summer
at any rate, rather than be brought to justice. Just at this time
a fat sheep was lost, that had been kept in the home pasture,
and now the house-carls thought that these friends of Eirik’s
must be vagabonds of this sort, who lived chiefly by pilfering

156


THE SNAKE PIT


and stealing. Folk kept an eye on Eirik, when he was playing in
the hollow, whether any unknown children or grown people
might come to him. But nothing was seen. And one day the
sheep’s carcass was washed up in the bay—it had fallen from
the cliff.

And now the people of Hestviken were afraid in earnest.
This must be some of the underground folk. They asked Eirik
if he knew where they came from. Oh, from away under the
crag. But when he saw how frightened the others were at this,
he was a little scared himself. Nay, they came from the town,
he said—in a sledge they came. Or maybe they sailed, he cor-
rected himself, when Olav said no one could drive a sledge
from Oslo in summer-time, he must not talk such nonsense.
Anyhow, they came from the woods—ay, they dwelt in the
woods, Tauragaura had said. Tauragaura was the one he talked
most about.

Ingunn was quite beside herself with despair. These must
be the evil spirits who had turned all luck from this house, gen-
eration after generation; now they were surely after her chil-
dren. Eirik was shut up in the women’s house and watched—
and then he talked and talked of these friends of his, till it
looked as if his mother would lose her wits with despair. She
would have Olav fetch the priest.

“Now you are not lying, Eirik, by chance?” asked Olav
severely, one day when he had been listening while Eirik re-
plied to his mother’s anxious questions.

Kirik stared in terror at his father with his great brown
eyes and shook his head vehemently.

“For if I find out one day, boy, that you bear untruthful
tales, it will go ill with you.”

Eirik looked at his father in wonder, seeming not to un-
derstand.

157


THE SNAKE PIT


But Olav had conceived a suspicion that the whole story
was a thing the boy had invented—unreasonable as such an
idea appeared to himself; for he could not make out what ob-
ject the child could have in spreading such vain and purpose-
less lies. And the next day, when Olav and a man were to mow
the meadow that lay below the hollow, he let Eirik come with
them, promising Ingunn that they would keep a sharp watch
on the child all the time.

Olav did so, looking out for the boy now and again. Eirik
pottered about, good and quiet, up in the hollow, playing with
some snail-shells and pebbles that the boatmen had given him.
He was quite alone the whole time.

When the other man and the girls went up to the morning
meal, Olav came up to Eirik: “So they did not come to see you
today, Totrabassa and Skolorm and the rest?”

“Oh yes,” said Eirik radiantly, and he began telling of all
the games he had played with them today.

“Now you are lying, boy,” said Olav harshly. “I have
watched you the whole time—none has been here.”

“They took to their heels when you came—they were afraid
of your scythe.”

“Then what became of them—where did they run to?”

“Home, to be sure.”

“Home—and where may that be?”

Firik looked up at his father, puzzled and a little diffident.
Then his face brightened eagerly: “Shall we go thither, father?”
and he held out his hand.

Olav hung his scythe on a tree: “Let us do so.”

Kirik led him up to the manor, out of the yard and on to
the rocks to the west of the houses, where they could see over


the fiord.
158


THE SNAKE PIT


“They must be down there,” he said, pointing to the little
strip of beach that lay far below them.

“I see nobody,” said Olav shortly.

“Nay, they are not there—now I know where they are—”
Kirik first turned back toward the manor, but then he took a path
that led down to the waterside. “Now I know, now I know,” he
called eagerly, hopping and skipping, as he waited for his
father; then he ran on ahead again, stopped and waited and
took his father by the hand, dragging him down along the path.

He showed the way to the farthest of the sheds by the
quay. Olav hardly ever used this one—there was not so much
trade at Hestviken now. Only in spring, when Olav was pre-
paring to visit the Holy Cross fair at Oslo, did he store some of
his winter goods here. Now the shed was empty and unlocked.
Eirik drew his father into it.

The sea splashed and gurgled about the piles under the
floor of the shed. This was leaky and the walls were gaping, so
that reflections of the sunlight from the water rose and fell in
bright streaks on walls and roof. Eirik sniffed in the salt smell
of the shed and his face sparkled with excitement. He looked
up into his father’s eyes with a smile of expectation and, steal-
ing on tiptoe, led him to an old barrel standing bottom up-
wards, which Olav used to pack skins in.

“Here,” he whispered, squatting down. “In here they dwell.
Can you see them—now the cracks have grown so big again,
else we could see better, but they are sitting there eating—can
you see them?”

Olav turned the barrel on its side and gave it a kick, so
that it rolled away. There was nothing underneath but some
litter.

Eirik looked up smiling and was about to say something—
when he noticed the expression of his father’s face and stopped

159


THE SNAKE PIT


in terror, open-mouthed. With a scream he put up his arms to
ward off the blow, bursting into a heart-rending fit of weeping.

Olav let his hand drop—felt it was unworthy of him to
strike the boy. So puny and miserable Eirik looked, as he stood
there in tears, that his father was almost ashamed of himself.
He just took the child’s arms, drew him away and sat down on
a pile of wreckage, holding Eirik before him.

“So you have lied, I see—twas a lie every word you said
of these friends of yours—answer me now?”

But Eirik answered nothing; he stood staring up at the
man’s face, clean dazed—it seemed he could not make it out at
all.

The end of it was that Olav had to take Eirik on his knee
to stop his bitter weeping. He said again and again that Eirik
must never say what was untrue, or he would get a beating—
but he spoke much more gently now, and between whiles he
stroked the boy’s head. Eirik nestled close to his father’s chest
and put his arms tightly about his neck.

But he did not understand—Olav was sure of that, a a it
affected him almost uncannily. This boy that he held in }js
arms seemed to him so strange and odd—what in God’s njame
had come over him that he could invent all these lies? To Olav
it was so utterly aimless that he began to wonder: was Eirilk al-
together in his right senses?


INGUNN stayed indoors for nearly nine weeks after her lyi g-in.
She was not notably sick or weak; it was rather that she, had
grown too fond of her life in the narrow chamber, where al]
was done for the comfort of herself and the infant, and all] was
shut out that might disturb her. She let herself sink deep Sno
this new happiness—the infant she had at the breast, and (Chik
who ran in and out of her room all day long. Toward the. ind


160


a


THE SNAKE PIT


Olav began to grow impatient—they had passed so many bad
years together, and in all that time she had clung to him. Now
she was happy and well, ay, she had recovered some of her
youthful beauty, and she barred herself in from him with the
children. But Olav allowed nothing of this to appear.

At last, on the Sunday after Saint Laurence’s Mass, she
kept her churching. Eirik was asleep when the company left
home in the early morning, but he was out in the yard when the
church-folk came back.

A new custom had grown up—although many liked it not,
nay, said it was tempting God with overweening pride: young
wives at their first churching, especially if the child was a son,
wore again on that day their golden circlet, the bridal crown of
noble maids, outside their wedded woman’s coif.

Ingunn had fastened her white silken kerchief with the
golden garland; she wore a red kirtle and her blue mantle with
the great gold brooch in it.

Olav lifted his wife from her horse; Eirik stood rapt, gaz-
ing at his mother’s loveliness. She seemed much taller in this
splendid dress, with the silver belt around her slender waist,
her movements were lithe and supple, light as a bird’s———

“Mother!” Eirik exclaimed, beaming; “you are Leman after
all!”

In an instant his father seized him by the shoulder; the
blow of a clenched fist fell on his cheek-bone, making his head
swim. Blow followed blow, leaving the child no breath to cry
out—only a hoarse whistling came from his throat. Till Una
Arnesdatter came running up and caught the man by the arm:

“Olav, Olav, curb yourself{—'tis a little boy—are you out
of your senses, to strike so hard!”

Olav let go. Eirik let himself fall backward flat on the
ground; there he lay, panting and whining, black and blue in

161


THE SNAKE PIT


the face. It was no swoon—half on purpose the boy behaved as
if he were dying. Una stooped down to him and lifted him to
her lap; then his tears began to flow.

Olav turned toward his wife—he was still trembling. In-
gunn stood bending forward; eyes, nostrils, the open mouth
were like the holes in a death’s head. Olav laughed, a harsh
and angry laugh—then he took her by the upper arm and drew
her into the hall, where the maids were now bringing in the
banquet.

None of the company had heard what the child said. But
all thought the same—no matter what he had done, it had been
an ugly sight to see the father correct the little boy so roughly.
They sat about on the benches, waiting to be bidden to table,
and all were ill at ease.

At last Una Arnesdatter came in, carrying Eirik in her
arms. She set him down beside his father’s knee:

“Kirik will not disobey you again, Olav—you must tell
your son you are angry no longer.”

“Has he told you why I chastised him?” asked Olav with-
out looking up.

Una shook her head:

“Poor little fellow—he has cried so he had no power to
speak.”

“Never more shall you dare to say that word, Eirik,” said
Olav hotly, in an undertone. “Never more—you understand?”

Eirik was still hiccuping spasmodically. He said nothing,
but stared at his father, frightened and bewildered.

“Never again are you to speak that word,” his father re
peated, laying a heavy hand on the boy’s shoulder. Till the
child nodded. But then Eirik’s eyes wandered longingly to the
dinner-table, which was groaning with good things.

And so the company seated themselves.

162


THE SNAKE PIT


Errik was to sleep in Torhild’s house that night, for there were
so many guests at the manor. In the evening, when he was go-
ing across, his father came after him into the yard. Eirik
stopped short, trembling violently—he looked up at the other
in such mortal fear.

“Who taught you to say that ugly word—of your mother?”

Eirik looked up, frightened; the tears began to rise. Olav
could get no answer to his question.

“Never say it again—do you hear, never again!” Olav
stroked the boy’s head—saw with something like a sense of
shame that one side of Eirik’s face was all red and swollen.


THE boy was on the point of falling asleep, when he felt that
someone was bending over him—his mother; her face was
burning hot and wet.

“Eirik mine—who has told you this—that your mother
was a leman?”

The boy was wide-awake in a moment:

“But are you not Leman?”

“Yes,” whispered his mother.

Ejirik threw his arms about her neck, nestled up to her and
kissed her.


163


10


UTUMN CAME EARLY THAT YEAR. BAD WEATHER SET IN
Az Michaelmas, and then it rained and blew day in,

day out, except when the gale was so high that the
clouds could not let go their rain. This weather lasted for seven
weeks.

At Hestviken the water rose above the quays. One night
the sea carried away the piles under the farthest shed: when
the men came down in the grey dawn they saw the old house
lying with its back wall, which faced the rock, leaning forward
and the front wall, toward the fiord, sunk half under water. It
rocked in the heavy seas like a moored boat, and every time
the wreck was lifted by a wave and sank again, the water poured
out between the timbers, but most of all through a hatch under
the gable. It looked like a drunken man hanging round-shoul-
dered over the side of a boat and spewing, thought Anki.

With axes, boathooks and ropes the men now had to try to
cut the wrecked shed adrift and warp it out of the way; other-
wise it was likely to be flung in against the quay and the shed
in which Olav stored all the salt he had dried during the sum-
mer, and his fish—of this there was not much, for the autumn
fishing had failed. In the course of this work Olav bruised his
right arm badly.

He paid little heed to it while he was toiling in the spray
and the storm, which was so violent that at times the men had
to lie flat and crawl along the rocks. But at dusk, as they walked
up to the manor, he felt his arm aching and it hurt when he

164


THE SNAKE PIT


touched it. As he was shutting the house door a gust of wind
blew it in, carrying Olav off his feet; his bad arm was given a
violent wrench, as the man stumbled over the threshold and fell
at full length on the floor of the anteroom. He had to call for
help to be rid of his soaking sea-clothes, and Torhild bound up
his arm in a sling.

It was unbearable in the hall that evening; the room was
chock-full of smoke, for it was impossible to open door or
louver in this wind. Eyes smarted and chests were racked; and
when the men’s wet clothes began to steam on the cross-beams,
the air was soon so thick that it could be cut with a knife.

Ingunn lay in the little closet with both the children—
there was less smoke, but it was so cold that they had to creep
under the bedclothes. The men went out as soon as they had
supped. Olav threw some skins and cushions on the floor by
the hearth and lay down there, to be below the smoke.

His arm was now swollen. His face was burning from the
weather and his head and body were hot and cold by turns.
Feverish and light-headed, he heard the storm as a multiplicity
of voices—it howled about the corners of the house, slamming
a loose shutter somewhere—now and again he could distinguish
its roaring in the trees upon the crag above the manor. The
deepest note was that of the raging fiord—where he lay he
thought he could hear the thunder of the waves breaking on
the rock on which the houses stood, as though the booming
came from beneath him, up through the rock.

In a doze he saw the huge white-crested seas coming, their
water brown with mud—and he crawled again up the wet rock
on hands and knees, with the boat-hook gripped under him and
the rope which he had to fasten in a cleft of the rock. The
spray, thick as rain, lashed him even up here. The black welter
of clouds was split at that moment with a brassy yellow rift,

165


THE SNAKE PIT


and far beneath him, where the black and foaming fiord seemed
hollow as a cup, a single shaft of sunlight fell glittering upon
the racing waves.

Then another vision appeared under his closed eyelids—
a great bog, pale with rime, grass and heather frosted and
white. But a kind of light glimmered within the morning mist,
and he could tell that as the day wore on the sun would break
through. Never is there such a day for riding out with hawk
and hound: bog-holes and tarns scattered over the moor are
held fast in dark, smooth ice with little white air-bubbles that
crack—. The wooded hillsides are clear and carry sound, for
trees and bushes are bare, and the fallen leaves are bright over
the ground, but the fir forest stands dark and fresh after the
rime has thawed—and then there is the suspense, whether the
bird will make for impassable ground, or will take to the bogs
and the frozen water.——

The only hawk he owned now was in the loft of the men-
servants’ house, sick and reddish about the feet, nor did it
breathe as it should either. It would be as well to make an end
of it now—it would never be fit for hunting again. And he had
lost his falcon last autumn.


Now Audun was fretting again—Ingunn hushed him and
lulled him to sleep in there.

Torhild Bjornsdatter came up and spread some blankets
over her master. Olav opened his eyes—from where he lay he
could see the girl’s strong figure moving in the red glare from
the embers on the hearth. Torhild was putting things straight—
moving the clothes on the cross-beams.

“Are you not asleep, Olav—are you thirsty?”

“Oh, ay. Nay, I will rather have water ad

Olav raised himself on his elbow. His bandaged arm hurt
him when he tried to stretch it out and take the cup of water.

166


THE SNAKE PIT


Torhild sat on her haunches and held it to his mouth. When he
lay down again she drew the coverlet over his shoulder. Then
he heard her asking in the closet whether the mistress wanted
anything.

“Hush, hush,” Ingunn whispered impatiently in reply; “you
will wake Audun for me—he was almost asleep.”

Torhild covered the embers and went out. Olav lay on the
floor all night.


THE severe autumn weather was not good for Audun. He got
sore eyes from being always in the pungent smoke, and he
coughed a great deal.

On the approach of Yule the weather fell calm; the sun
glowed red behind the frost fog every morning. Early in the
new year the fiord froze over, but the cold increased. In the
farms round about folk had to move all into one house and
keep the fire burning on the hearth night and day.

It had been a good spring the year before, so the farmers
had as much live stock as they could in any way find room for.
But in spite of their byres and stables being overfilled, the
beasts suffered so much from the cold that folk had to wrap
those it was most important to save in sacks and cloths, and
they had to spread the floor with spruce boughs, lest the ani-
mals should freeze fast in the clay. The dung was frozen stiff
every morning, so it was almost impossible to clear it away.

About the time of Saint Agatha’s Mass* it was said in the
country-side that now men could drive on the ice right down to
Denmark. But now no man had business in that land; peace
had been concluded between the kings the year before.

About this time Olav was called upon to show cause why


1 February 5.
167


THE SNAKE PIT


he had stayed at home in the summer, when the Duke proceeded
to Denmark to negotiate the peace of Hegnsgavl. The maiter
was thus, that Olav, who had been out for three summers in
succession with the war fleet as one of the lesser captains, had
been given a half-promise of furlough by Baron Tore Haakons-
son for the fourth summer—but Tore ordered him to provide
two fully armed men and their victuals for the Baron’s service
instead. Olav had not been able to do this, but in spite of that
he had not presented himself at the muster of the army in the
spring—the levy this year was much smaller, since the Duke
only went south to negotiate. Now Olav found himself in trouble
over this, and in the bitter cold about mid-Lent he had to ride
once to Tunsberg and then several times to Oslo, first to ac-
count for his absence, and then to raise ready money. He lost
much cattle that winter, and the white horse died, that he had
bought of Stein.


THE two little children filled the crowded house with commo-
tion.

Eirik had a bad fault: Olav found out by degrees that this
boy was greatly given to lying. If his father asked whether he
had seen this or that member of the household, Eirik was al-
ways quick to answer Yes—he had just spoken with the other
in the house or out in the yard, and gave an account of what
had been said or done. Usually there was not a word of truth in
it. Some of the serving-folk, and his mother too, hinted that
perhaps the child had second-sight—KEirik was not like other
boys. Olav had not much to say to this, but he kept an eye on
him—he could see no sign that it was anything but mendacity.

Another bad habit of Eirik’s was that he would sit hum-
ming or singing some rigmarole that he made up himself, in-
terminably, till Olav’s head ached and he felt inclined to beat

168


THE SNAKE PIT


the boy. But he had grown wary of laying a hand on the child
since he had thrashed him so pitilessly, the day Ingunn came
home from her churching.

Firik knelt before the bench in the evening, arranging
these snail-shells and animals’ teeth of his in rows and chant-
ing:

“Four and five of the fifth dozen,

Fonr and five of the fifth dozen,

Fifteen mares and four foals

I got in the daytime and got in the night-time.
Four and five of the fifth dozen

Were the horses I owned upon the morrow.”

He repeated this about cows and calves, sheep and lambs,
sows and pigs.

“Be still,” his father checked him, sharply; “have I not
told you I will have no more of these gowling cantraps of
yours?”

“T had forgotten, father mine,” said Eirik in alarm.

Olav asked him:

“How many horses would you choose to have, Eirik—four
and five of the fifth dozen or a hundred horses?”

“Oh, I would have many more,” replied Eirik. “I would
have—seven and twenty!”

So little did he understand of his own crooning.


Aupun was fretful and ailing. Ingunn boasted of her son and
said there was no fairer child, and indeed he had been better of
late—but Olav saw the smouldering anxiety in her eyes when
she spoke thus. Eirik repeated what he heard his mother say,
hung over the cradle, rocking and wheedling his silken brother,
as he always called Audun.

Olav felt a strange distress when he saw it. Audun seemed
to him a most miserable little creature—always scurfy about

169


THE SNAKE PIT


the scalp, sore about the mouth, lean and raw about the body,
which was backward in its growth. Never had this son made
but that he was father to
this poor sick, fretting child gave him a feeling of bitter pain,


him feel anything like paternal joy


when Eirik was bending over the cradle: the other was so fair
and full of life, with his glistening nut-brown locks falling
about Audun’s wrinkled face.
One day Olav asked Torhild what she thought of Audun.
“He will surely mend, when the spring comes,” said Tor-
hild; but Olav felt in himself that the girl did not believe her
own words.


Tuey had turned loose the cattle at Hestviken and drove them
up to the old moss-grown pastures in Kverndal in the daytime,
when Audun fell very sick. He had coughed the whole winter
and had had many fits of colic, but this time it was worse than
ever before.

Olav saw that Ingunn was ready to drop with fatigue and
anxiety, but she kept wonderfully calm and collected. Untir-
ingly she watched over the child night and day, while every
remedy was tried to help Audun—first those familiar to the
people of the house, and then all those known to the neigh-
bours’ wives for whom Ingunn sent.

At last, on the sixth day, the boy seemed to be much better.
By supper-time he was sleeping soundly, and he did not feel
so cold to the touch. Torhild put warm stones underneath his
cradle clothes; then she went out, taking Eirik with her. She
had watched nearly as much as the mother and had had all the
housework in the daytime; now she could do no more.

Ingunn was so tired that she neither heard nor saw—at last
Olav led her away by force, took off her outer garments and
made her lie down in the bed. He promised that he himself

170


THE SNAKE PIT


would sit up with the maid and would wake her if the boy was
restless.


Ouav fetched three tallow candles, set one on the candlestick
and lighted it. But, though he was usually such a bad sleeper,
he felt heavy and drowsy tonight. If he stared at the flame of
the candle, his eyes began to smart and run, and if he looked
at the maid, who had taken her distaff and was spinning, he
grew sleepy from seeing and hearing the spinning-wheel. From
time to time he made up the fire, snuffed the candle, gave a
look to the sleeping child ard to his wife, drank cold water or
went outside for a moment, to look at the weather and refresh
himself with a breath of the calm, cold spring night—bringing
in a piece of wood which he whittled as he sat. Thus he kept
himself awake, till he had set the third candle on the stick.

He started up on hearing the cradlerockers bumping queerly
against the clay floor; such a strange sound was coming from
the child. It was almost dark in the room; the candle-end had
fallen off the spike, almost burnt out—the wick flickered and
smoked in the molten tallow on the iron plate. On the hearth
there was still a faint crackling amid the smoke of the wood
ashes. Olav was beside the cradle in two noiseless steps—he
lifted up the child, wrapping him in the clothes he lay in.

The little body struggled, as though Audun would free him-
self from his swaddling-clothes—in the dim light Olav thought
the boy gave him a strangely accusing look. Then he stretched
himself, collapsed limply and died there in his father’s arms.

Olav was benumbed, body and soul, as he laid the corpse
down again and covered it over. It was vain to think when In-


gunn would wake.

The maid had fallen asleep, with her head in her arms

over the table. Olav waked her, hastily hushing her as she was
171


THE SNAKE PIT


about to utter a cry. He bade her go out and tell the house-folk,
begging them not to come near the house—Ingunn must be al-
lowed to enjoy her sleep, while she could.

He opened the smoke-vent—it was daylight outside. But
Ingunn slept and slept, and Olav stayed sitting with her and
their dead son. But once when he got up to look at her, he
chanced to jerk her belt on to the floor. It made a clanging
noise, and the woman started up and looked into her husband’s
face.

She sprang up and pushed him aside when he tried to hold
her back, threw herself upon the cradle so violently that it
looked as if the dead child was upset into her arms.

As she sat on her haunches, rocking the corpse in a close
embrace and weeping with a strange, spluttering sound, she
checked herself all of a sudden and looked up at her husband:

“Were you two asleep when he died—were you both asleep
when Audun drew his last breath?”


“No, no, he died in my arms e


“You—and you did not wake me—Lord Christ, how had
you the heart, not to wake me—in my arms he should have
died, twas me he knew, not you—you never cared for your
child

“Ingunn

But she leapt up, holding the child’s corpse high above
her head with both hands and screaming.—Then she tore open
the dress over her bosom, pressed the little dead son to her
bare body and threw herself upon the bed, lying over him

When Olav came up after a while and tried to talk to her,
she put her hand against his face and thrust him away:

“Nevermore will I be parted from my Audun——”

Olav knew not what to do. He sat over on the bench with
his head between his hands, waiting if perchance she should re-

172


Is it thus you keep your word!”
99


THE SNAKE PIT


cover her senses—when Eirik burst open the door and ran to
his mother, in a flood of tears. He had been told it when he
awoke.

Ingunn sat upright—the child’s corpse was left lying on
the pillow. She drew her son to her in a close embrace, let him
go and took his little tearstained face in both hands, laid her
own against it and wept, but much more quietly.


Tue day Audun was borne to the grave was gloriously fine.
During the afternoon Olav stole away from the funeral
guests, down to the fence about the farthest cornfield. The sea
gleamed and glistened so that the air seemed all a-quiver with
it; the quiet surf at the foot of the Bull shone fresh and white.
The smell that came up from the quay was so good and full-
laden today, and it was met by the scent of warm rocks and
mould and young growth. The little waves breaking on the
beach trickled quietly back among the pebbles, rills were gush-
ing everywhere, and from Kverndal came the murmur of the
little stream. The alder-wood up there was brown with bloom,
and the hazel thickets dripped with yellow catkins. Summer


was not far off.

He heard it was Ingunn who came up behind him. Side by
side they stood leaning over the fence, gazing at the reddish
rocks on which the sun was blazing and at the gleam of blue
water.

All at once Olav felt strangely ill at ease, oppressed with
longing. To be on board ship, at sea with a clear horizon on
every side. Or at home up-country, where the scent of mould
and grass and trees welled out of broad hills and ridges as far
as one could see.—Here all was cramped and small, this nar-
row fiord with its strips of land bordering the lonely creek.
He said gently:

173


THE SNAKE PIT


“Do not grieve so much over Audun, Ingunn. It was best
that God took home his poor innocent lamb, whose only heri-
tage was to bear the burden of all our misdeeds.”

Ingunn made no answer. She turned from him and went
back toward the houses, quietly, with bowed head. Up by the
houses Eirik came rushing to meet her—Olav saw that his
mother hushed him, as she took his hand and led him with her.


174


i


Olav and Ingunn were at a working meeting on a farm in
the neighbourhood; they had Eirik with them. The boy was
now seven winters old, and he was apt to be unmanageable


[: THE SUMMER, THE YEAR AFTER THEY HAD LOST AUDUN,


when amusing himself.

When work was over in the evening the people sat in a
meadow near the house which they had been roofing. Some of
the younger ones then began to dance. Eirik and some other lit-
tle boys ran about and made a noise; the ale had gone to their
heads—they ran straight at the chain of dancers and tried to
break it, shouting and laughing as they did so. They mixed
among the older folk, jostling one after another, and inter-
rupted the men’s talk. Olav had spoken to Eirik time after time,
rather sharply at last—but it only kept the boy quiet for a lit-
tle while.

Ingunn had not noticed it—she was sitting a little way off
by the wall in company with other women. All at once Olav
appeared before her, dragging Eirik with him; he lifted him by
the back of his shirt, so that the boy hung from Olav’s hand as
one takes a puppy by the nape of the neck. Olav was red in the
face, somewhat drunken—his ale was apt to tell on him more
than usual when these fits of sleeplessness had been very fre-
quent.

“You must see and keep your boy in order, Ingunn,” he
said angrily, giving Eirik a shake. “He will not obey me, un-
less I thrash him—take him, he belongs to you—” and he flung

175


THE SNAKE PIT


the boy so that Eirik pitched into his mother’s arms. With that
he went away.


In the course of the evening, when folk sat drinking in the shed
after supper, some of them began to tell stories. And Sira Hall-
bjorn told the tale of Jokul:

“A rich merchant fared forth and was away from home
three winters. So every man may judge whether he was more
surprised or joyful, when he came home and found his wife
abed and with her a little boy of one month old. But the trav-
eller’s wife was a crafty and quick-witted woman; she said:

“*A great miracle has befallen me. Sorely have I longed
for you, my husband, while you wandered so far abroad. But
one day last winter I stood here at the door of the house and
the icicles hung from the eaves; I broke one off and sucked,
yearning for you the while with keen and ardent desire—and
then I conceived this child; judge for yourself whether you
and none other are not his father. Jokul* I have had him called!’

“The traveller had to rest content with that; he spoke her
fair, this loving wife of his, and seemed to have great joy of
the son, Jokul. He would have the boy ever near him, when he
was at home. And when Jokul was twelve years old, his father
took him out on one of his voyages. But one day, when they
were in the midst of the sea and Jékul stood at the ship’s side,
the merchant came behind him, while no man saw; he dropped
the boy overboard.

“On returning to his wife he told his tale with sorrowful
mien and mourning voice:

“A great misfortune has befallen us and a heavy loss have


we suffered, my sweet one—Jokul is no more. Know that I lay


1 Jokul


icicle.


176


THE SNAKE PIT


becalmed in the midst of the sea, the day was hot and the sun
poured straight down. Our Jékul stood upon the deck and he
was bare-headed. We begged him hard that he would cover his
head, but he would not—so he thawed in the heat of the sun,
and there was nothing left of Jokul, our son, but a wet spot on
the deck-planks —!’

“With that the wife had to rest content.”

Folk laughed greatly at this tale. None took note that Olav
Audunsson kept his eyes on the floor, while blushes overspread
his face. If his life had depended on it, he did not believe he
would have dared to turn his eyes to the dais, where his wife
sat among the other ladies. Then there was a disturbance up
there—Olav leapt over the table and forced his way through
the crowding women. He lifted up his wife, who had slipped
from the bench in a swoon, and carried her out into the fresh


air.


Tue best thing Eirik knew was to be allowed to go out with his
father—in a boat, when Olav rowed out alone to fish with a
hand-line, as he did now and then, mainly for pastime, or
across the fields. Afterwards he always came to his mother and
told her about it—with beaming eyes, so eagerly that he stum-
bled over the words—all that had happened to them and all
that he had learnt of his father: now he could both row and
fish, make knots and splice ropes after the fashion of sea-faring
men—soon he would be able to go out and fish in earnest with
his father and the men. He had become such a good hand at
shooting and casting—his father said he had never seen his


match.

Ingunn listened to the boy’s chatter, perplexed and dis-

tressed. Her poor, simple-minded little boy loved Olav more

than anyone else on earth. It was as though the man’s unfriend-
177


THE SNAKE PIT


liness did not bite upon Eirik: he was given curt answers to all
his questions, and at last he was told to hold his tongue. Olav
coldly chid him when the boy was wild and wanton, and harshly
bade Eirik speak the truth, when his mother guessed that only
the child’s memory was at fault. But she dared not say that to
her husband, dared not take Eirik’s part and remind Olav that
he was so young—or tell the man Eirik called father how
dearly the child loved him. She had to bow the neck and keep
silence—only when she was alone with her son did she dare to
show her love for him.

Ingunn did not know that what Eirik said was true, and
that it was for this that Olav’s bad humour neither frightened
the boy for long at a time nor lessened his love for his father.
They agreed much better when they were alone together. Eirik
was then more obedient and not so restless, and even if he was
too fond of asking odd questions, there was often some sense in
them. He swallowed every word from his father’s lips with eyes
and ears, and this made him forget to come out with his fables
and rigmaroles. Without being himself aware of it, Olav was
warmed by the affection the child showed him; he forgot his
dislike of other days and let himself be warmed, just as he had
felt warmed whenever anyone showed him the friendship which
he found it so hard to seek for himself. So he met Eirik half-
way with calm goodwill; he instructed the boy in the use of
weapons and implements, which were still more like play-
things, smiled a little at Eirik’s eager questions and chatted
with him as a good father talks to his little son.

They fished for wrasse under the cliff north of the Bull,
and Olav showed the boy the cleft in the rock where an old she-
otter had her lair. Every year Olav took the cubs—one year
two litters—and the dog-otter. As soon as the dog was gone she
got a new mate, said Olav, and he mimicked for the boy the

178


THE SNAKE PIT


otter’s cry. Yes, Eirik should come with him after the otter one
night, when he was a little older—ah, when it would be, his
father could not say.

One day when they were up in his father’s game-covert to
see to some traps, Olav chanced to speak of his own childhood
at Frettastein, while he and Eirik’s mother were young. “Your
grandfather,” said Olav, telling some story of Steinfinn at which
he himself smiled and Eirik roared with laughter—“One day I
had coaxed Hallvard, your uncle, with me—he was very small
at that time, you must know, but all the same I had taken the
boy with me up to the tarn, where we had a dugout we used to
row in—” Till Eirik mentioned Tora of Berg; he remembered
her. Olav broke off his story, answered absently when the boy
went on asking questions—at last he bade him hold his tongue.
It was as though the sky had suddenly clouded over.

But whenever Olav was with his own house-carls, either
on the quay or up at the manor, and Eirik ran about among
them, he was at once more impatient with the boy. It was the
way with Eirik that, the more people he saw about him, the
more noisy and foolish and disobedient he became. The men
were amused at the boy, but they noticed that the master dis-
liked their laughing at the things he said, and they thought
Olav was very short-tempered and strict with his only son.

But it was when the mother was there that Olav felt most
provoked to an intolerable ill-will toward the boy. Many a
time he itched to give Eirik a thrashing, to break him roughly
of all his bad habits.

One thing was that Ingunn provoked him to a dull ex-
asperation when she fussed with the child—he was to be quiet
and behave in a seemly way, she said severely. Olav knew only
too well that the moment his back was turned on the two, she
would be on her knees trying to please Eirik. He saw how

179


THE SNAKE PIT


deeply she distrusted his feeling for the boy; she spied on him
secretly when he was occupied with Eirik. He knew in himself
that he had never done the child any harm—he might surely be
trusted to punish the boy when he needed it. It was Ingunn who
egged him on to anger, but it was his lifelong habit, when she
was concerned, to hold himself in—and of late years it had
come to this, that she was a poor, sick creature, and he had to
be doubly careful not to make things worse for her. So when
Ingunn tried Olav’s patience too far, it was usually Eirik who
suffered.

The boy had come between man and wife, and he was the
first who had sundered their hearts in earnest. In their youth
Olav had had to leave his playmate and fly the country—and
in a way he had felt that Ingunn had gone astray simply be-
cause he had been forced to abandon her. Far too great a bur-
den of evil fortune had been thrown upon her ‘when she had to
have recourse to her angry kinsfolk, who refused to count her
as anything but a disobedient and dishonoured woman. Young
she was, weak-shouldered and pampered—but her nature was
not such that she could have been unfaithful to a husband with
whom she shared bed and board, he knew that. He had had a
feeling that Teit was but an unhappy accident—and in making
an end of this confiding fool he had acted more from a belief
that it would be so hopelessly difficult to remedy the disaster,
so long as he was alive and could blurt out the truth, than be-
cause he had felt himself wronged by Teit. But even when the
slaying had been accomplished, this had not done much to al-
lay his pain of mind. His thirst to avenge the destruction of his
happiness—this the poor corpse in the seter had not been able
greatly to assuage.

Now Olav saw that Ingunn loved another, and he guessed
how often she had wished him out of the way, so that she might

180


EEE SNAKE “PIT


freely shed her affection upon Eirik—as one smuggles food to
an outlawed friend behind the back of the master of the house.

And together with this bitterness and unrest something
like a ghost of his youthful desire awoke in Olav’s heart and
senses; he longed to possess Ingunn, as he had possessed her
in former days, when they were young and healthy and could
find happiness in each other’s arms in spite of all their cares.
Olav had never quite forgotten that time—the memory of her
sweet beauty had warmed his pity to a painful tenderness—
this poor faded wreck, to whom he was bound, was the wreck
of the lovely, useless Ingunn he had once loved, and his will to
protect her became stubborn and intense, as had once been his
will to defend his right to his wife.

Now there blazed up in him a desire to feel that she too
remembered the madness of their youth. Year in, year out a
latent repugnance had smouldered within him, when she clung
to him with her morbid and insensate demand for caresses
which, he knew, ought to be withheld from his sick wife. Now,
when she avoided him, hiding herself away with what was her
own, what she thought he could have no share in, it was Olav
who felt he would fain have crushed her to pieces in his arms
in the effort to make her answer such questions as these: Have
you forgotten that I was once your dearest friend in all the
world?—Why are you afraid of me?—Have I ever willingly
brought sorrow upon you in all these years? For it cannot be
my fault that we have had so little happiness in our married
life ?-——

And then his fear awoke—when he touched upon the sick
spot in his mind; the dull ache became a pain that shot through
his whole being: whether it was so that he might all the time—
have averted her misfortunes. If he had had the couragé to
hand himself over—to men’s justice and God’s compassion.

181


THE SNAKE PIT


Olav noticed that his unwonted impetuosity now frightened
Ingunn and made her shrink; so he withdrew into himself,
while his secret wound throbbed and stung. Why is she afraid
of me? Does she know 4

There were times when he almost believed it—believed
that all knew it. For he had not a friend here in his native coun-


try. It could not be helped; but that was not all: Olav guessed
that no one liked him. Coldness and distrust met him every-
where, and often he thought he could detect a hidden malicious
satisfaction when things went ill with him. Yet in this part of
the country he had always acted rightly and had never done any
man an injustice. He could not even bring himself to be angry
at this—he received his sentence without wincing. It must be
that folk saw the secret mark upon his brow.

But when he thought of Ingunn, the fear quivered through
him: did she see it too? Was it for that she turned cold in his
arms, and was it for that she seemed to be afraid when he came
near her son?


On the day of Saint Olav’s Mass? Olav always held an ale-feast.
He never prayed to his patron saint—the lawmaker King would
certainly not aid him with his intercession except on one con-
dition. But nevertheless he thought himself bound to show Holy
Olav due honour.

The floor was strewed with green and the hall was deco-
rated with hangings—the old tapestry which otherwise only ap-
peared at Yule.

On Saint Olav’s Eve Olav himself was busy hanging up the
tapestry. He moved along the bench and fastened the long piece
with wooden hooks, which he drove in between the topmost log


2July 29.
182


THE SNAKE PIT


of the wall and the roof. Eirik followed him on the floor, gaz-
ing at the worked pictures: there were knights and longships
with men on board. He knew that soon the best picture of all
was coming—a house with pillars and shingled roof like a
church and a banquet going on inside with drinking-horns and
tankards on the table. Eirik had to peep into the roll of stuff
which still lay on the bench—and in so doing he chanced to
pull down a long piece of that which his father had just made
to hang right.

Olav jumped down, pulled the boy from under the folds
of tapestry and flung him on the floor:


“Out with you—you are ever in my way, bastard, doing


mischief ‘

At that moment Ingunn appeared in the door of the ante-
room with the lap of her gown full of flowers. She let her bur-
den fall straight on the floor.—He saw that she had heard.

Olav did not get a word out. Shame, anger and a confused
feeling that soon he would not know which way to turn, made
a tumult within him. He stepped up on the bench and began to
hang up the tapestry that had been torn down. Eirik had fled
out of the door. Ingunn picked up her flowers and strewed
them over the floor. Olav dared not turn round and look at
her. He did not feel equal to talking to her now.


ONE morning a few days later Ingunn was sitting with Eirik on
the top of the crag behind the houses of Hestviken. She had
been down to Saltviken—a path led over the height; it would
serve at a pinch for riding, but was little used: the common
way between Hestviken and Saltviken was by boat.

There was sparkling sunshine and a fresh breeze; from
where Ingunn sat she saw the fiord dark-blue, dotted with white
foam. The breakers dashed up in spray, glittering white along

183


THE SNAKE PIT


the reddish rocks which planted their feet out into the water
all along the coast. The morning sun still lay over Hudrheims-
land. From the height where she sat she could see a little of
the cultivation on the hillside—it was for that she liked this
spot. And up here it sounded fainter and farther off, that in-
tolerable roar of the sea which tormented her at home at the
manor, till she thought it must come from within her own
weary, bewildered head. But there was a kind of taste of salt,
and that flickering of light from the sea in the uneasy air—she
could never accustom herself to that. She grew tired of it.

Eirik lay half in his mother’s lap playing with a bunch of
big bluebells. One after another he tore off the flowers, turned
them inside out and blew into them. Ingunn laid her thin hand
on his cheek and looked down into his sunburnt face. How
handsome, how handsome he was, this son of hers—his eyes
the shade of bog water in sunshine, his hair as fine as silk. It
had grown much darker in the last year; it was brown now.
Kirik scratched his head.

“Louse me now, mother mine. Ugh, they bite so hard in
this heat!”

Ingunn gave a little laugh. She took out her comb from
the pouch at her belt and began to clean the boy’s head with
slow, caressing strokes. It made Eirik sleepy—and the scent of
the fir woods in the sun’s heat and the sourish fragrance of the
hair-moss on which she was lying, the clanging of bells from
the cattle moving on the slope farther up the valley, lulled In-
gunn to sleep.

She started at the little sound of a dog that came swim-
ming through the high bilberry bushes. It sniffed at the two,
jumped without a sound over their knees and set off again down
the path.

Her heart still trembled from being waked so suddenly.

184


THE SNAKE PIT


Now she heard horses’ hoofs on the rock far below. Her head
fell back against the stem of the fir-tree by which she sat—oh,
that he should be back already! She had felt so sure he would
not come home before evening at the earliest, perhaps not be-
fore the morrow.


They came over her again, the same thronging fears and
despair. This thing that she had gone in dread of the last month
—she could not face it, she felt that; it would be her death this
time. And she could almost have wished it—had it not been for
Eirik’s sake; then he would be left alone with Olav. And in the
midst of her great dread this little anxiety started up—why had
Olav come home so soon, had he not been able to accomplish
his errand in the neighbouring parish, or had he fallen out with
those folk?—-and maybe he came home in yet worse humour


than when he set out.

Instinctively she had thrown her arm about her child, -as
though to protect and hide him. Eirik struggled and freed him-
self:

“Let me go now—father is coming—” He got on his feet,
and his mother saw that he turned red, as he went along the
path, seeming a little uncertain and hesitating. Ingunn followed.

She saw the white horse among the trees; Olav was walk-
ing by its side. When Ingunn came up he was showing Eirik
something that lay at his foot—a great lynx.

“I found her over on the mountain here to the south—she
was out in broad daylight. She has young in her lair—her teats
are full of milk.” He turned over the dead lynx with his spear,
shooing off the dog, which lay on its front paws barking, and
holding the uneasy horse. Eirik cried aloud with joy, squatting
down over his father’s quarry. Olav smiled at the boy: “We
could not find the lair—though it cannot have been very far

185


THE SNAKE PIT


away. But there was «scree with fallen trees on it—she must


have had her track among the trees. s


“Will they starve to death now, the young ones?” asked
Ingunn. Eirik fumbled in the light fur under the belly of the
lynx, found the swollen teats and squeezed them—the boy’s
hands were all bloody. Olav was telling him how it was easy
enough to get the lynx when it strayed out in broad day-
light.

“Starve to death?—ay, or else they will eat each other in
the lair, the strongest will come through. Unless they were born
very early in the summer—that is like enough, since the dam
was not with them.”


Ingunn looked at the dead beast of prey. A soft and warm
place the young had had, as they huddled together, nosing for
the sources of milk in the light fur under her soft belly. The
heavy thigh that she had protected them with was tense with
muscle and sinew, the claws were like steel. When she licked
her young, the cruel white fangs showed up. The tufts of hair
in the ears had been given her to make her the more wary
and sharp of hearing; the black streaks in her yellow eyes had
been like keen slits. She had been well fitted to protect and de-
fend and discipline her offspring.

Her own child, he had such a poor wretch of a mother, un-
able to defend her own. And she herself had brought it to such
a pass that he had none to protect him, and most he needed
protection against the man he called father.

“I cannot believe even Mary, God’s Mother, will pray for
a mother who betrays her own son,” Tora had said. And she
had already betrayed her child when she suffered him to be
begotten; she saw that now.


Olav and Eirik were pulling up bunches of moss and wip-
ing away the blood which had got on to the saddle and had run
186


THE SNAKE PIT


down the side of the white horse. Olav helped the boy into the
saddle and placed the reins in his hand.

“He is so quiet, Apalhvit; Eirik will be able to ride him
home, though it is a little steep below here ”” He walked a
few steps down, cheering the boy and the horse with kind
words. Then he returned to the lynx, bound its limbs together
with thongs; now and again he looked up, watching the boy on |


the big white horse, till they were lost among the trees.

“Nay, we came te no agreement—twas vain to stay there
disputing with those Kaaressons,” he said. “I think that Eirik
ought to have Apalhvit—is he not seven winters now, the boy?
*Twill soon be time he had his own horse—and ’tis unsafe to
let the boy ride Sindre, he is too skittish

“What are you crying for?” he asked rather sharply, as


he rose to his feet.
“If you gave Eirik the fairest colt ever bred—with saddle
of silver and bridle of gold—what would that serve, Olav, if


you cannot alter your feelings—can never look at the boy with-
92


out a grudge

“That is not true,” said Olav hotly. “You are heavy too,
you sow of Satan,” he had got the lynx on his spear and hoisted
it over his shoulder. “Do use your wits, Ingunn,” he went on,
rather more gently. “Can I have any joy of the son who is to
take this manor after me, if he is always to hide behind your
skirt, now that he is of an age to need a father’s teaching and
discipline? You must venture it now, to let me take Kirik in
hand; else there will never be a man of him.”

The breeze up here on the height fluttered his long grey
cloak; the wide brim of his black cloth hat flapped. Olav had
come to look much older in the last few years—he was no
stouter than before, yet his figure seemed much more burly,
_ broader and rounder behind the shoulders. And the pale eyes
187


THE SNAKE PIT


looked smaller and even sharper than of old, as his face was
now browned by the weather. The whites were somewhat blood-
shot, no doubt because the man had too little sleep.

He felt her staring at him, till he was forced to turn his
head. He met her complaining glance with a hard eye:

“TI know what you are thinking of, Ingunn. I spoke a word
in wrath—God knows I wish it unsaid.”

Ingunn crouched as though expecting a blow. Olav began
again—forcing himself to be calm:

“But you must not act so, Ingunn, as to entice him away


from me, as though you were afraid I should—. Never have I


chastised Eirik excessively

“T do not remember that my father ever laid a hand upon
you, Olav.”

“No, Steinfinn cared not to trouble himself so far on my
account as to correct me. But I have never departed from my
own word—not from my word to you, Ingunn, in any case.
And now I have let all men know that Eirik is our son—yours
and mine.”

He saw that she was ready to faint. But it seemed to him
that this time he could not turn aside—saying some new thing
to blot out the traces of what he had already said. He went on:

“Tis worst for us all, if you steal away with your motherly
love and dare not take Eirik on your lap when I am there to
see. Deal with the boy in hole and corner fashion, as though
you crept away by stealth to meet a leman.”

He took her hand, pressed it hard and kept it:


“Remember, my dear—by so doing you serve Eirik worst.”


On the Eve of Saint Matthew,° early in the day, Eirik came


3 St. Matthew’s Day is September 21.
188


THE SNAKE PIT


rushing in to his parents, who were in the hall. He was scream.
ing at the top of his voice. Kaare and Rannveig, the two chil-
dren Bjorn had left, who were still with Torhild, came after
him, and Olav and Ingunn heard from them what had hap-
pened.

The stoat that lived in the turf roof of the sheepcot had
had another litter of young, and Eirik had tried to dig out the
nest—though Olav had said they were to be left in peace this
summer. Eirik had been bitten in the hand.

Olav seized the boy, lifted him up and carried him to his
mother’s arms. Hurriedly he took the child’s hand and looked
at it—the bite was in the little finger.

“Are you able to hold him—or shall I fetch in Torhild?
Be quiet—say nothing to Eirik. He can be saved, if we are
quick enough about it.”

The stoat’s bite is the most poisonous of all animals’; the
flesh of him who is bitten by an enraged stoat rots and falls
from the bones, till the man dies, or else he gets the falling
sickness, for all stoats have falling sickness. Only if one be
bitten in the tip of one finger there may be a chance of saving
life and health, if the finger be cut off and the wound burnt out.

Quick as lightning Olav made all ready. Among the smaller
implements kept in a crack of the wall he found a suitable iron
and put it in the fire, bidding Kaare Bjornsson blow. Then he
drew his dagger and set to sharpening it.

But the serving-maid who had been called in to hold the
boy began to scream loudly. Eirik was scared already—now he
guessed what his father would do to him. With a howl of the
utmost terror he tore himself away from his mother and ran
like a rat from wall to wall, howling worse and worse, and
Olav after him.

A ladder stood leading to the loft above the closet. Eirik

189


THE SNAKE PIT


ran up it, and Olav followed him. In the darkness among all
the piled-up chattels he got hold of the boy at last and came
down the ladder carrying him. Eirik kicked and sprawled and
yelled inside the flap of his father’s kirtle, which Olav had had
to wrap about his head so as not to be bitten by the maddened
child.

Ingunn did not look as though he could expect help of
her. Torhild had come in—Olav gave Eirik to her, and the
two other serving-women also took a hand. Eirik fought and
screamed in mortal fear as they struggled to wind a cloth about
his head.

Then the father pulled the cloth from the boy’s eyes.

“Your life is at stake, Eirik—look at me, boy—you will
die, if you will not let me save you-——”

Olav was in a raging tumult. This was the last of her chil-
dren and she loved the child as she had never loved him—if
she were to lose Ejirik, it would be the end of all. He must and
would save the boy; if it might cost his own life, he must—!
At the same time he felt a cruel desire and longing to get home
at last on this flesh that had come between him and her, to
maim and burn it—and in spite of that something arose from
the innermost depths of his being and forbade him to harm
the defenceless child.

“Do not scream like that,” he hissed in fury. “You wretched
whelp—do not be so afraid—it is no worse than—look here!”

He set the point of his dagger to the lining of the sleeve at
his left wrist and slit and cut till his shirt and the sleeve of his
kirtle hung in tatters right up to the shoulder. He quickly
wound the rags about his arm, so that they should not be in the
way, took the red-hot iron by the tongs and pressed it against
his upper arm. ;

Firik had stopped howling from fear and surprise at what

190


THE SNAKE PIT


his father was doing; he lay limply in the women’s arms and
stared. But now he set up a fresh shriek of terror. Olav had
had a vague idea of putting heart into the boy, but all he had
done was to scare away the rest of his wits: the smell of the
scorched flesh, the sight of the spasm that passed over Olav’s
face as he withdrew the iron from the burn, made the boy clean
mad. A straight stream of blood ran down the man’s white arm
as he let it drop; his dagger had entered the flesh as he started.

Then all at once Ingunn was there. She was white in the
face, but perfectly calm now, as she took the child on her lap,
held his legs tight between her knees, threw the end of her coif
across his face and caught it under one arm. With her other
hand she took him by the wrist and held the little fist against
the table. The serving maids helped to hold the boy, smother-
ing his hideous screams of pain with more cloths, while Olav
took off the damaged finger at the inner joint, burnt out the
wound and bound it up—he did it so rapidly and so neatly as
he had never guessed himself able to accomplish leechcraft.

While the women attended to the wailing child, got him
to bed and poured strengthening drinks into him, Olav sat on
the bench. Only now did he feel the pain of his burn—and he
was ashamed and furious with himself for being capable of
such senseless conduct—maltreating himself to no purpose like
a madman.

Torhild came up to him with white of egg in a cup and a
box of fuzz-ball fungus. She was going to tend his arm; but
Ingunn took the things from the serving-woman and pushed her
aside:

“T shall tend my husband myself, Torhild—go you out,
find a tuft of grass and wipe the blood from the table.”

Olav stood up and shook himself, as though he would be
rid of both women:

191


THE SNAKE PIT


“Let be—I can bind this little thing myselfi—” he said
morosely. “And find me some other clothes than these rags.”


Errik recovered rapidly; that day week he was already sitting
up, eating with a good appetite of the dainties which his mother
brought him. It looked as though he would escape from the
stoat’s bite with no worse harm than the loss of his right little
finger.

At first Olav would not allow that the burn on his arm
troubled him; he tried to work and use the arm as if nothing
had happened. Then the wound began to gather and he had to
bind up his arm. After that he had fever, headache and violent
vomiting, and at last he had to take to his bed and let a man
practised in leechcraft tend his arm. This lasted till near Ad-
vent, and Olav was in the worst of humours. For the first time
since they had lived together he was unfriendly to Ingunn; he
constantly used a harsh tone toward her and he would not have
a word said as to how he had met with his hurt.—The house-
folk guessed too that he had very little joy of his wife being
with child again.

When Eirik was up and out of doors again he talked of
nothing but his misfortune. He was unspeakably proud of his
maimed hand and showed it off outside the church to all who
cared to see, the first Sunday the people of Hestviken were at
mass. He boasted fearfully, both of what his father had done,
which seemed to him a mighty exploit, and of his own hardi-
ness—if Eirik was to be believed, he had not let a sound out of
him under the ordeal.

“°Tis my belief that boy is a limb of the Fiend himself,
the way he lies,” said Olav. “It will end ill with you, Eirik, if
you do not give up this evil habit.”


192


12


BOUT SAINT Bialse’s Mass THEY HAD A GUEST AT
Aree whom they had never thought to see here:

Arnvid Finnsson came to the manor one day. Olav was
not at home, and the house-folk did not expect him till after
the holy day.

Olav had a happy look that evening, when he came in
with his friend—Arnvid had gone out to meet him on the hill.
He received the ale-bowl which Ingunn brought, drank to the
other and bade him welcome. But then he saw that Ingunn had
been weeping.

Arnvid told him he had brought her heavy tidings—Tora
of Berg had died in the autumn. But when Olav heard that Arn-
vid had already been here for some days, he wondered a little
—had she wept over her sister for all that time—? They had
not been so very closely attached. But after all, she was her
only sister—and maybe at this time her tears flowed more


readily than usual.

Ingunn bade them good-night as soon as supper was over.
She took Eirik with her and went out—she would lie in the lit-
tle women’s house tonight: “You two would rather sleep to-
gether, I ween; you must have many things to speak of.”

Olav could not help wondering again: was there any spe-
cial thing that she thought they wished to speak of so privily?
For otherwise she might simply have lain in the closet.

After that their talk went but sluggishly, as they sat at


1 February 3.
193


THE SNAKE PIT


their drink. Arnvid spoke of Tora’s children—'twas a pity they
were all under age. Olav asked after his own sons. Arnvid said
he had joy of them: Magnus had Miklebo now; he was mar-
ried, and Steinar was betrothed. Finn had taken vows in the
convent of the Preaching Friars; they said he had good parts,
and next year they would surely send him to Paris, to the great
school there.

“You never thought of marrying again?”

Arnvid shook his head. He fixed his strange dark eyes
upon his friend, smiling feebly and bashfully like a young man
who speaks of his sweetheart:

“T too shall be found among the friars, once Steinar’s
wedding is over.”

“You are not one to change your mind either,” said Olav
with a little smile.

““Kither-—?” said Arnvid involuntarily.

“So you will be father and son in the same convent.”

“Yes.” Arnvid gave a little laugh. “If God wills, it may be
so turned up and down with us that I shall obey my boy and
call him father.”

They sat in silence for a while. Then Arnvid spoke again:

“Tt is on the convent’s business we are now come south,
Brother Vegard and I. We would rebuild our church of stone
after the fire, but Bishop Torstein has other use for his crafts-
men this year; so we were to see whether we can hire stone-
masons in Oslo. But Brother Vegard said that you must do him
a kindness and come into the town—and bring Ingunn with
you if you could—so that he might see you.”

“Ingunn is not fit for any journey—you may guess that.—
But he must be as old as the hills now, Brother Vegard?”

“Oh ay—three and a half score, I believe. He is sacristan
now.—Ay, ’twas that I was to say, that you must not fail to

194


a
THE SNAKE PIT


come. There was something he must needs say to you”—Arn-
vid looked down and spoke with a slight effort—“about that
axe of yours, the barbed axe. He has found out a deal about it
—that it is the same that was once at Dyfrin in Raumarike, at
the time your ancestors held the manor.”

“T know it,” replied Olav.

“Ay, Brother Vegard has heard a whole saga about that
axe, he says. In former times it was the way with it, they say,
that it sang for a slaying.”

Olav nodded:

“That I have once heard myself,” he said quietly. “That
day when I was in the guest house, ready to fare northward—
you know, the last time I visited you at Miklebo i

Arnvid was silent for a while. Then he said in a low voice:

“You told me that you had lost your axe on that journey?”

“You think me not such a fool as to set out through the
forest with that huge devil of an axe?” Olav laughed coldly.
“°Twas a woodcutter’s axe; it served me well enough, that one.
But true it is, I heard Kin-fetch ring—she would fain have gone


with me.” |

Arnvid sat with his arms crossed before him, perfectly si-
lent. Olav had got up and walked uneasily about the hall. Then
he came to a sudden stop. Aloud and as though defiantly he
asked:

“Was there none who wondered—was nothing rumoured,
when that Teit Hallsson disappeared from Hamar so abruptly?”

“Oh—something was said about the matter, no doubt. But
folk were satisfied that he must have been afraid of the Stein-
finnssons.””

“And you? Did you never wonder what had become of
him?”

Arnvid said quietly:

195


THE SNAKE PIT


“Tt is not easy for me to answer that, Olav.”

“I am not afraid to hear what you thought.”

“Why do you wish me to say it?” whispered Arnvid re-
luctantly.

Olav was silent a good while. When he spoke, it was as
though he weighed every word; he did not look at his friend
meanwhile:

“T trow Ingunn has told you how it has gone with us. I
thought it must be because He would that I should offer atone-
ment to the boy for the man I put out of the world. That
vagabond”—Olav gave a little laugh—‘he was mad enough to


imagine he would marry Ingunn—keep her and the child, he


said. I had to put him out of the way, you can see tha

“T can see that you thought you had to,” replied Arnvid.

“Well, he struck first. It was not that I decoyed the fellow
into an ambush. He came of himself, stuck to me like a burr—
I was to help him, as a man buys a marriage for his leman,
when he would be rid of her.”

Arnvid said nothing. Olav went on, hotly:

“So said this—a man of his sort—said it of Ingunn!”

Arnvid nodded. Nothing was said between them for a
while. Then Arnvid spoke with hesitation:

“They found the bones of a man among the ashes, when
they came up in the spring, my tenant of Sandvold; those seters
up there on Luraasen. That must have been he-——”

“Oh, the devil! Was it your hut? That is well so far—now
I can make amends to you for it.”

“Oh no, Olav, stop!” Arnvid rose abruptly and his face
contracted. “What is the sense of that? So many long years
ago——”

“That is so, Arnvid. And every day I have thought of it,

196


THE SNAKE PIT


and never have I spoken of it to any living soul until this eve-
ning.—Then he was given Christian burial?”

es

“Then I have not that to grieve over—to think of. I need
not have vexed myself with that for all these years—that may-
be he still lay there. I have not that sin upon me, that I left a
Christian corpse unburied.—And no one asked or made search,
who it might be that lay there?”

“No.”

“That seems strange.”

“Oh, not so strange either. The folk up there are wont to
do as I say, when for once I let them know my will.”

“But you should not have done that!” Olav wrung his hands
hard. “It had been better for me if it had come to light then—
if you had not helped me to carry out my purpose, hush the
matter up. That you could lend your hand to such a thing—
you, a god-fearing man!”

Arnvid burst out laughing all at once, laughed so that he
had to sit down on the bench. Olav gave a start at the way the
other took it; he said heatedly:

“That ugly habit of yours—bursting into a roar of laugh-
ter just as one is speaking of—other things—you will have to
give that up, I should think, when you are a monk!”

“T suppose I must.” Arnvid dried his eyes with his sleeve.

Olav spoke in violent agitation:

“You have never known what it is to live at enmity with
Christ, to stand before Him as a liar and betrayer, every time
you enter His house. I have—every day for—ay, ’twill soon be
eight years now. Hereabouts they believe me to be a pious man
—for I give to the church and to the convent in Oslo and to the
poor, as much as I am able, I go to mass as often as I have the
means to come thither, and two or three times a day when I am

197


THE SNAKE PIT


in the town. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
mind and all thy heart, we are told—methinks God must know
I do so—I knew not that such love was within the power of
man, until I myself had abandoned His covenant and lost
Him!”

“Why do you say this to me?” asked Arnvid in distress.
“You ought rather to speak to your priest of such things!”

“I cannot do that. I have never made confession that I
slew Teit.”

As he received no reply, he said hotly:

“Answer me! Can you not give me a counsel?”

“Tt is a great thing you lay upon me. I can give you no
other counsel than that which your priest would give you.—I
can give you no other counsel than that you know yourself,

‘And that is not the counsel you wish for,” he said a mo-
ment later, as the other stood silent.

“T cannot.” Olav’s face turned white, as though congealed.
“I must think of Ingunn too—more than of myself. I cannot
condemn her to be left alone, poor and joyless and broken in
health, the widow of a secret murderer and caitiff.”

Arnvid answered doubtfully:

“But I trow it is not certain—quite certain it cannot be,
that the Bishop could not find a way out—since this happened
years ago—and no innocent man has suffered for the misdeed
—and the dead man had done you grievous harm, and you
fought together. Mayhap the Bishop will find a means of recon-
ciling you with Christ-—give you absolution, without demand-


ing that you accuse yourself of the slaying also before human
justice.”


“That can scarce be very likely?”

“I know not,” said Arnvid quietly.

“T cannot venture it. Too much is at stake for those whom
198


THE SNAKE PIT


it is my duty to protect. Then all that I have done to save her
honour might as well have been undone. Think you I did not
know that had I proclaimed the slaying there and then, it would
have been naught but a small matter? —the man was of no ac-
count, alive or dead, and had you then backed me and wit-
nessed she was mine, the woman he had seduced—. But Ingunn
would not have been equal to it—she could face so little al-
ways—and then is every mother’s son in these parts to hear
this of her now that she is worn out ig

It was a little while before Arnvid could answer:

“It is a question,” he said in a low voice, “whether she
could face the other thing better. Should it go with her this
time as all the other times—that she lose her child again %


A quiver passed over Olav’s features.

“However that may be—she is not fit to go through it
many times more.”

“You must not speak so,” whispered Olav.

“Then there is Eirik,” he began again, after a pause. “This
promise I have made to God Himself, that Eirik should be
treated as my own son.”

“Think you,” asked Arnvid, “that it avails you to offer
God this and that—promise Him all that He has never asked
of you—when you withhold from Him the only thing you your-
self know that He would beg of you?”

“The only thing?—but that is everything, Arnvid—hon-
our. Life, maybe. God knows I fear not so much to lose it in


other ways—but to lose it as a caitiff——”

“Nevertheless, you have nothing that you have not received
of Him. And He Himself submitted to the caitiffs’ death to
atone for all our sins.”

Olav closed his eyes.

“Nevertheless I cannot—” he said almost inaudibly. :

199


THE SNAKE PIT


Arnvid rejoined:

“You spoke of Eirik. Know you not, Olav—you have not
the right to act in this way—to make a promise to set aside an
heir—since by so doing you play your kinsmen false.”

Olav frowned in anger:

“Those men of Tveit—never have I seen them, and they
did not deal by me as kinsmen, when I was young and had sore
need of their coming forward.”

“They came forward after you had fled to Sweden.”

“And they might just as well have stayed where they were,
for all the good I had of them. Nay, then I should rather let her
son take Hestviken.”

“That will not make wrong right, Olav.—And neither you
nor she can know whether it will tend to the boy’s happiness
that you two make him a gift which he has no right to receive.”

“Oh ay. I thought as much: she has been talking to you of
what is in her head—that I hate her child and wish him ill.
Tis not true,” he said hotly. “I have never had aught else in
mind for Eirik but his own good—’tis she who corrupts him,


she trains him to be afraid of me, to lie and sneak out of my
27)


way

On seeing the expression in Arnvid’s face he shook his
head: “‘Nay, nay, I blame her not for that—Ingunn knows no
better, poor woman. I have not changed my mind either, Arn-
vid. Do you remember, I promised you once that I would never
fail your kinswoman? And I have never regretted it—in what-
ever shape my last hour may come, I shall thank God that He
held my hand when I was tempted to do harm to her—showed
me, ere it was too late, that I must protect and support her, as
well as I was able. Even if I had come back and found her
stricken with leprosy, I could have done no less than remember

200


THE SNAKE PIT


that she was my dearest friend—the only friend I had in all
the years I was a child and brought up among strangers.”

Arnvid said calmly:

“If you think, Olav, that it would make it easier for you
to judge what you ought to do in order to make your peace
with God—should you be unable to care for those belonging
to you, I promise to be as a brother to Ingunn, to provide for her
and the boy. I shall take them under my roof, if need be——”

“But you have given up Miklebé to Magnus. And you
Olav said it almost with


yourself will enter the convent
a touch of scorn.

“Thereby I have not parted with my whole estate. And if I
have endured the world so long, I doubt not I can endure it to
my dying day, if it must be—while my near kinsfolk need me
by them.”

“Nay, nay,” said Olav as before. “I will not have you
think of the like for my sake or for the sake of any who are
properly in my care.”

Arnvid sat gazing into the dying embers on the hearth—
feeling the presence of his friend in the gloom. “I wonder if he
does not see himself that it is no small burden he has thrown
upon me tonight,” he thought.

Olav pulled a stool toward him with his foot and sat down
by the hearth, facing his friend:

“Now I have told you much, but not that which I had it
in my mind to say: I have told you that I yearn, day and night,
to be reconciled with the Lord Christ—I have told you that
never did Our Lord seem to me so lovable beyond all measure
as when I knew that He had marked me with the brand of Cain.
But I marvel that I yearn so, for never have I seen Him so hard
upon other men as upon me. J have wrought this one misdeed;

201


THE SNAKE PIT


and then I was so—incensed—that I do not now recall what
were my thoughts at the time; but I did it because I judged
that ’twould be even worse for Ingunn if I did it not—I would
save a poor remnant of respect for her, even if it cost me a
murder. And then it all came about as easily as if it had been
laid out for me—he begged me to take him on that journey; no
man was aware that we set out together. But had God or my
Patron or Mary Virgin directed our way to some man’s house
that evening and not to those deserted seters under Luraas—
you know it would have fallen out otherwise.”


“T scarce think you had prayed God and the saints to
92?


watch over your journey, ere you set out

“T am not so sure that I did not—nay, prayed I had not
truly. But all that Easter I had done nothing but pray—and I
was so loth to kill him, all the time. But it was as though all
things favoured me, so that I was driven to do it—and tempted
to conceal it afterward. And God, who knows all, He knew
how this must turn out, better than I—why could not He have
checked me nevertheless, without my prayers——?”

“So say we all, Olav, when we have accomplished our pur-
pose and then see that it would have been better if we had not.
But beforehand, I ween you think like the rest of us, that you
are the best judge of your own good.”

“Ay, ay. But in all else, beyond what this deed has brought
in its train, I have dealt uprightly with every man, to the best
of my power. I have no goods in my possession that were come
by unjustly, so far as I know; I have not spread ill report of
man or woman, but have let all such talk fall to the ground
when it reached my door, even though I knew it to be true and
no lie. I have been faithful to my wife, and ’tis not as she thinks,
that I bear the boy ill-will—I have been as good to Eirik as
most men are to their own sons. Tell me, Arnvid, you who un-

202


THE SNAKE PIT


derstand these things better than I—you have been a pious
man all the days of your life and have shown compassion to
all—am I not right when I say that God is harder upon me
than upon other men?—I have seen more of the world than
you” —Arnvid was sitting so that Olav could not see him smile
at these words—“in the years when I was an outlaw, with my
uncle, and afterward, when I was the Earl’s liege man. I have
seen men who loaded themselves with all the seven deadly sins,
who committed such cruel deeds as I would not set my hand to,
even if I knew of a surety that God had already cast me off and
doomed me to Hell. They were not afraid of God, and I never
marked that they thought of Him with love or longing to ob-
tain His forgiveness—and yet they lived in joy and content-
ment, and they had a good death, many of them, as I myself
have seen.

“Then why can we have no peace or joy, she and I? It is
as though God pursued me, wherever I may go, vouchsafing me
no peace or rest, but demanding of me such impossible things
as J have never seen Him demand of other men?”

“How should I be able to give you answers to such ques-
tions, I, a layman?—Olav, can you not go with me to the town
and speak with Brother Vegard of this——?”

“Maybe I will do so,” said Olav in a low voice. “But you
must tell me first—can you understand why it is to be made so
much harder for me than for other men?”

“You do not know everything about the other men you
speak of, either. But you must be able to see that, if you feel
that God pursues you, it is because He would not lose you.”

“But He has so ordered it for me, that I cannot turn about.”

“Surely it was not God who ordered it so for you?”

“Nay, but I have not brought it about myself either—I
had to do what I did, it seems to me; Ingunn’s life and welfare

203


THE SNAKE PIT


were laid in my hands. But that which was the cause of all this,
Arnvid—that the Steinfinnssons would steal from me the mar-
riage that had been promised to my father—should I have been
content with that, bowed before such injustice? I have never
heard aught else but that God commands every Christian man
to fight against wrong and law-breaking. J was a child in years,
unlearned in the law—I knew no other way to defend my right
than to take my bride myself, ere they could give her to an-
other.”

Arnvid said reluctantly:

“That was the answer you gave me when I—spoke to you
of your dealings with my kinswoman. Do you remember yet,
Olav, that—that you did not speak the truth that time?”

Olav raised his head with a jerk, taken by surprise. He
paused a moment with his reply:

“No.—And I believe,” he said calmly, “most men would
have done the same in my place.”

“That is sure.”

“Do you think,” asked Olav scornfully, “that God’s hand
has pressed so hard upon me—and upon her—because I lied
that time—to you?”

“I cannot tell.”

Olav gave a fretful toss of his head:

“I cannot believe that it was so grievous a sin. So many a
man have I heard tell worse lies—needlessly, and never did I
see that God raised a finger to chastise him. So I cannot under-
stand His justice, which deals so hardly with me!”

Arnvid whispered:

“You must have petty thoughts of God, if you expect His
justice to be the same as man’s. Not two of us outlawed chil-
dren of Eve did He create alike—should He then demand the
same fruits of all His creatures, to whom He has given such

204


THE SNAKE PIT


diverse talents? —When first I knew you in our youth I judged
you to be most truthful, upright and generous; there was no
cruelty or deceit in you, but God had given you a heritage of
brave and faithful ancestors ——”

Olav rose to his feet in violent agitation:

“Methinks that if it were so—. If ’tis as you say—and
truly I have often shrunk from doing what other men do every
day, without a care, for smaller matters—. Methinks that what
you call God’s gifts might just as well be called a burden not
to be borne, which He laid upon my back when He created
me!”

Arnvid leapt up in his turn. He moved forward to the
other and stood before him, almost threateningly:

“So many a man may say that of the nature he was given;
unless he have a faith firm as a rock in his Redeemer, he must
think himself born the most unfortunate of men.”

He put his foot on the edge of the hearth; with his hand
resting on his knee he stood bending forward and looked down
at the embers:

“You often wondered that I longed to turn my back upon
the world—I who had riches in abundance—and more power
than I cared to use—and some respect withal—. Pious you say
I have been, and compassionate to all—. God knows if you do
not deem it must be because I Jove my even Christians!”

“T believed you helped every man who sought your aid


because you were—meek of heart—and pitied everyone who
9


was in any—difficulty
“Pitied—oh yes. Many a time I was tempted to reproach

my Creator because He had made me so that I could do naught

else—I had to pity all, though I could love none re


“T believed,” said Olav very low, “that you—supported—
me and Ingunn with deed and counsel, because you were our
205


THE SNAKE PIT


friend. Was it only for God’s sake you held your hand over
us?”

Arnvid shook his head:

“Tt was not. I was fond of you from our childhood, and
Ingunn has been dear to me since she was a little maid. Never-
theless I was often so mortally weary of all this—it came over
me that I desired more than all else to be rid once for all of
this suit of yours.”

“You might have let me know this,” said Olav stiffly.
“Then I should have troubled you far less.”

Again Arnvid shook his head:

“°Tis you and Ingunn who were ever my best friends. But
I am not pious and I am not good. And often I was weary of
it all—wished I could transform myself and become a hard
man, if I could not be meek and let God judge mankind, not
me. There was once a holy man in France, an anchorite; he had
taken upon himself a work of charity for the love of God, that _
he would harbour folk who fared through the forest where he
dwelt. One night there came a beggar who sought shelter with
the anchorite—Julian was his name, I think. The stranger was
full of leprosy, grievously tainted with the sickness, gross and
foul of mouth—returned ill thanks for all the kindness the an-
chorite showed. him. Then Julian undressed the beggar, washed
and tended his sores and kissed them, put him to bed—but the
beggar made as though he was cold and bade Julian lie close
and warm him. Julian did so. But then his foulness and ugli-
ness and evil speech slipped from the stranger as it were a dis-
guise—and Julian saw that he had embraced Christ Himself :

“It has been my lot that, when I thought I could not bear
all these folk who came to me, lied and threw the burden of
their affairs on me, begged advice and acted as seemed good to
themselves, but blamed me when things went wrong, greedy

206


THE SNAKE PIT


and envious of every one they thought had been better helped
—it was borne in upon me that they must be disguised, and
that under the disguise it would one day be granted to me to
see my Saviour and my Friend Himself. And indged it was so
in a way—since He said that everything ye do unto one of My


little ones—. But never would He throw off the disguise and
9


appear to me in the person of any of them

Olav had seated himself on the stool again, hiding his face
in his arms. Arnvid said in a yet lower voice:

“Do you remember, Olav, what Einar Kolbeinsson said
that evening—the words that goaded me so that I drew my
weapon upon him?”

Olav nodded.

“You were so young at that time—I knew not whether you
had guessed their meaning.”

“T guessed it later.”

“And afterward, those rumours of Ingunn and me——?”

“Hallvard said something of that—when I was north to
fetch the boy.”

Arnvid drew a couple of deep breaths:

“I am not so holy but that I took it greatly to heart, both
one thing and the other. And I often thought God might have
granted me my only prayer—given me leave to serve Him in
such guise that I dared work deeds of compassion, as far as I
was able, without folk whispering behind my back and defam-
ing me or calling me a sanctimonious fool. Or believe the worst
of me, because I took to myself neither wife nor leman after
Tordis’s death.”

He struck out with his fist and brought it down on the
other hand with a crack:

“Often I had a good mind to take my axe and make an end
of the whole pack!”

207


THE SNAKE PIT


THEREAFTER, during the two days Arnvid yet stayed at Hest-
viken, the friends were shy and taciturn with each other. It
pained them both that they had said far too much that evening;
now it seemed they could not talk freely of the simplest trifles.

Olav rode with Arnvid a part of the way up the fiord, but
when they were half-way to the town he said he must turn back.
He drew out something from the folds of his kirtle—a hard
thing, wrapped in a linen cloth. Arnvid could feel that it must
be the silver cup which Olav had shown him a day or two be-
fore. Olav said he was to give it to the convent at Hamar.

“But so great a gift you ought to place yourself in the
hands of Brother Vegard,” thought Arnvid.

Olav replied that he must be home that evening—“but it
may be that I come in to Oslo one day to greet him.”

Arnvid said:

“You know full well, Olav, that it is vain to seek to buy
your atonement with gifts, so long as you live as you do now.”

“I know it—'tis not for that. But I had a mind to give to
their church—many a happy hour have I had in the old Olav’s
church.”


So they bade each other farewell and rode their ways.


Oxav did not come to Oslo. Arnvid spoke with Brother Vegard
about it, saying that he was doubtless unwilling to come while
Ingunn was unfit to accompany him. But she had grieved so
much that she could not see the instructor of her youth, while
he dwelt so near. Arnvid proposed that the monk should bor-
row a sledge and drive south to Hestviken one day. Brother Ve-
gard was well minded to make the journey, but he had been so
unwell and full of rheum ever since he came to Oslo. By Peter’s
Mass’ a hard frost set in. A few days after, the old man fell


2February 22.
208


THE SNAKE PIT


suddenly sick of a fever in the lungs and died the third night.
Thereafter Arnvid had to deal single-handed with the hiring of
the stone-masons, and it took up all his time, until he had to
take the north road again.


Oxav got Ingunn to keep her bed in the daytime when the
weather turned so cold: she was scarcely able to move now, so
far gone was she, and then her feet were frostbitten so that
there were great open holes in the flesh. Olav tended them him-
self and smeared foxes’ fat and swine’s gall on the sores. Ever
_ since Arnvid’s departure he had been gentle and solicitous with
his wife; he had quite put off the cross and unfriendly air that
he had shown her during the autumn and winter.

Ingunn lay huddled under the skins, whispering a little
word of humble thanks whenever Olav did anything for her.
She had bowed beneath his displeasure and harsh words, silent
and submissive—now she accepted his affectionate care with
almost the same dumb meekness. Olav kept an eye on her
privily, as she lay motionless by the hour together, staring out
into the room, almost without blinking. And the old, wild fear
rose up in his heart, as hot as ever—it was no matter if he had
neither use nor joy of her; he could not lose her.

Ingunn was glad to be allowed to creep thus into hiding.
She had come to feel it as an unbearable disgrace, every time
she was to have a child. Even before she had her two first she
had been distressed and shy, because it made her so ugly—
Dalla’s insults had bitten into her mind so that she never got
over them. She winced when she had to appear before Olav—
and when he was away from her, she felt as though she could
not sustain herself without his sound health close at hand to
draw strength from.

But as time went on and it proved that she could not bring

209


THE SNAKE PIT


into life a single one of these creatures who came and dwelt in
her, one after the other, she was filled with a horror of her own
body. She must be marked in some mysterious way, with some-
thing as terrible as leprosy—so that she infected her unborn
infants with death. Her blood and marrow were spent, her
youth and charm wasted long ago by these uncanny guests who
lived their hidden life beneath her heart for a while and then
went out. Till she felt the first warning grip as of a claw in her
back, and had to let herself be led by strange women to the lit-
tle house on the east of the courtyard, give herself into their
hands without daring to show a sign of the mortal dread that
filled her heart. And when she had fought through it, she lay
back, empty of blood and empty of everything—the child was
as it were swallowed up by the night, taken back into a gloom,
where she had not even a name or a memory to look for. The
last premature births the women had not even let her see.

And yet she sometimes thought that it was even worse with
Audun. When she lost the year-old child, he had already shown
in many ways that he knew her for his mother; he would not
be with others than her, and he was so fond of her. But he must
be so still. When they sang in the litany: Omnes sancti Inno-
centes, orate pro nobis, Audun was one of them. In Purgatory
she would know that Audun was one of the holy Innocents who
prayed for her. And when her hour of grace arrived, perhaps
Our Lord Himself or His blessed Mother would say to Audun:
“Run down now and meet your mother. im

How it might go with her this time, she tried hard not to
think.


But when the men came in at mealtimes, Olav and Eirik to-

gether, a deep, uneasy tension came to life in the sick woman’s

great lustreless eyes. Olav noticed how wide-awake she was,
210


e/


THE SNAKE PIT


watching every movement of his features, listening to every
word he spoke, when he was with the boy. And he always kept
a guard over himself, taking care not to show it, when he was
impatient or annoyed with Eirik.

The boy was troublesome enough; Olav liked him but
moderately, now that he was big enough to show his nature.
Noisy, full of boasting and idle tales—he chattered more than
becomes a youth: not even when the men sat over their food,
tired and worn-out, could Eirik keep his mouth shut. There was
that Arnketil, or Anki, as they called him. Olav had had him in
his service some six years, and the man was now well on in the
twenties, but he had poor parts, might indeed be called almost
half-witted, though he was useful for many kinds of work. He
had always been Eirik’s best friend. They quarrelled—half in
jest—raising their voices, till Eirik flew at Anki as he sat on
the bench, pushing and pulling him till he got him to join in
the game: they thrust each other hither and thither about the
room, laughing and screaming and shouting without a thought
of the other men who sat there and wanted rest and quiet.
Grossly disobedient he was too—whether his father taught him
something or forbade him to do this or that—he forgot it at
once.

And Olav was angry that Eirik did not show his mother
more affection. He was himself aware of the unreasonableness
of this: formerly he had felt a secret exasperation when he
knew that mother and son clung together behind his back. But
now it made him angry to see Eirik spend the whole day out of
doors among the men, never going in to sit by his sick mother.
Olav himself had taught the boy his prayers some years ago—
when he saw that Ingunn did not seem to think it was yet time.
Now he made Eirik say a Paternoster and three Aves for his
mother every evening, when he had prayed for himself. The

211


THE SNAKE PIT


boy gabbled off his prayers while his father stood over him—
Eirik rose to his feet before he had finished the last Ave; at
In nomine he was up on the bed, hastily crossed himself and
plunged headlong beneath the skins in the northern bed, which
he shared with his father. He was asleep in an instant, and
when Olav had finished smearing Ingunn’s feet, he found Eirik
curled up in the middle of the bed, so that he had to straighten
him out and push him against the wall to make room for him-


self.


AT times Olav felt a stab of pain, when Eirik sought him out
with his foolish talk, boasting of his little, unhandy attempts to
make himself useful among the men—“If only the boy had been
so that I could have liked him.” In his innocent stupidity Eirik
seemed never to guess that his father was not so fond of his
company as he was of his father’s. But Olav had taken his reso-
lution: he had acknowledged this child and raised him up in
order to set him in the high seat here at Hestviken in succession
to himself—though God knew, Eirik was unpromising material
for a great franklin and the head of a manor: the boy seemed
to be a loose-tongued chatterer, untruthful, boasting and cow-
ardly, lacking in hardiness and born with little sense of seemli-
ness and quiet good manners. But he would have to do what
he could to teach Eirik good behaviour and drive the bad
habits out of him—even if he had to let the discipline wait till
Ingunn was stronger—so that the lad might learn to comport
himself as became Eirik Olavsson of Hestviken.

Some years before, herds of deer had moved into the dis-
tricts on the west side of Folden, and there were now not a few
deer on Olav’s land—they were to be found up in Kverndal, on
the ridge of the Bull and in Olav’s oak wood, which lay inland,
toward the church-town. The summer before, they had grown

Pals


THE SNAKE PIT


so much fodder in Hestviken that they had stacks of hay and
dried leaves standing in the open. Now, in late winter, the deer
came as far as the manor in the early morning to snatch what
they could of the fodder. Hiding behind some timber that lay
in the yard Olav one morning shot a fine young stag of ten
points. Eirik was then quite wild to go with him—he would
bring down a stag too.

Olav laughed a little at the boy’s chatter. The next few
days the wind was off the fiord and he made Anki go out in the
morning, so that the deer might get scent of him and keep off
the hay, and Eirik was allowed to go with them. The boy lay
stiff with cold—with bow and spear by him—but when he came
in he made out that he had both seen and heard the red deer.

Then one night Olav woke up and went to the outer door
to see the time. It was two hours to daybreak, intensely cold
and a dead calm—with the faintest breath from the east down
Kverndal. In the early morning the deer would certainly come
down and take tithe of the stacks. Olav dressed in the dark, but
in order to choose his arrows he had to light a torch. That
waked Eirik—and the end of it was that his father gave him
leave to go with him, but he was not allowed a weapon.

As soon as they had crept into hiding behind the timber
stacks, Olav had hard work to keep the boy quiet. Eirik forgot
himself every minute and would whisper. Then he fell asleep.
He had on a thick leathern jacket of his father’s; Olav wrapped
it well about the child, so that he should not get frost-bites—
it was bitterly cold just before dawn—and thought with satis-
faction that now Eirik could do no harm.

Olav had a long time to wait. The eastern sky was already
turning yellow above the forest when he espied the deer com-
ing out of the thicket. Four dark spots moved against the dun-
coloured ground; patches of it were clear of snow. Now and

213


THE SNAKE PIT


again they stopped, looked about and sniffed the air—now he
could see that they were a stag, two does and a calf.

Excitement and joy warmed his stiffened body, as he rose
on one knee, took his bow and laid an arrow to the string. He
held his breath. The stag came on, proud and stately—now he
saw it against a snow-drift. It climbed on to an old balk of
sods—stood there with feet close together: the neck and head
with the antlers showed clearly against the yellow sky. Olav
gave a noiseless gasp of joy—he had not met this old fellow
before: a mighty beast, full-shouldered, with a great crown of
antlers, fifteen or sixteen points, no less. It moved its head this
way and that, spying out.— It was a rather long shot, but the
target was just right: Olav took his aim, and his heart laughed
with joy—he felt too that Eirik was on the point of waking.

The boy started up with a shout—he too had seen those
glorious horns against the sky.— Olav sent his arrow after the
flying deer, chanced to graze the shoulder, making the stag leap
high into the air—it went on in flying leaps and the whole herd
disappeared in the thicket.


Eirik received a couple of hearty cuffs on the side of the
head—he took them with a little gasp, but did not cry out; he
had wit enough to be ashamed of what he had done and did not
cry out; besides, the thick leather cap he wore must have dead-
ened the blows.

“Say nothing to your mother about this,” said Olav, as
they went back to the houses. “She need not know that you can
behave yourself like an untaught puppy, old as you are.”

Later in the day Olav followed the blood-tracks of the
stag with his hound, found the deer and killed it on the hill-
side at the top of Kverndal. And when the quarry was brought
home at evening, Eirik went about boasting—it was he who
had warned his father when the great stag came within range.

214


THE SNAKE PIT


Olav did not care to say a word to the boy—he was afraid
of losing his temper.


THE seal now came in thickly, on the approach of spring, and
the farmers of the country round took their boats out to the
edge of the ice and went seal-hunting in the south of the fiord.
Olav let Eirik go with him, but the result was not very happy;
the massacre of seals and the brisk life among the hunters made
him wild with excitement. It was quite incredible that the boy
should have so little idea of how to behave anywhere in seemly
fashion. But on coming home again he had the most extraordi-
nary tales to tell. It was not easy for Olav to listen to the boy’s
talk without losing patience.

Saint Gregory’s Day* brought a change of weather, southerly
winds and rain—this was thought to presage a good year both
on land and sea.

On the morrow Ingunn was lying alone in the house early
in the day. It was fairly dark indoors, for the smoke-vent was
closed; it was raining outside.

Olav came in. He sat down on the bench, drew off his
boots, struggled out of his jerkin and shirt and opened his
clothes chest to find other garments.

“Are you asleep, Ingunn?” he asked with his back toward
her. “How is it with you?” he said, when she whispered in re-
ply, no, she was not asleep.

“Oh, well. Will you ride out?”

Olav said, yes, the Thing at Vidanes was summoned for
today. He came up to the bed, naked to the waist, and put one


foot on the step. “Must I change my hose, think you a


Ingunn involuntarily drew her head away:


8 March 12.
215


THE SNAKE PIT


“Indeed you must—they smell so ill *


“They will scarce smell sweeter, the other men who come
there—-we have been out seal-hunting day and night of late, all
of us.”

“But if you are to meet strangers from other parts—” sug-
gested Ingunn.

“Ay, ay, as you will—” He drew off his breeks and hose,
stood quite naked, stretched himself and yawned.

The sight of his faultlessly shaped body hurt her. It made
her own ravaged wretchedness so hopeless. That time was so
impossibly long past when she had been young and lovely,
when they were well matched—but Olav was yet a young man,
sound and handsome. His muscles were more knotted than of
old, chiefly about the shoulderblades and upper arms; they
moved freely and powerfully as he stretched himself, raising
his arms and lowering them. His flesh was still white as’milk.

He came back to his wife when he had put on his red
woollen shirt, long hose of black leather and linen breeks.

“Then I must wear the blue kirtle too, think you—since
you will have me so tricked out?” he asked with a smile.

“Olav—?” As he bent over her, she suddenly threw her
thin arms around his neck and drew him down to her, pressing
her face against his cheek. Olav felt that she was trembling.

“What is it?” he whispered. She only clung to him and
made no answer.

“Are you sick?” He loosed her arms from about his neck;
it was so uncomfortable to stand bent double. “Would you have
me stay at home today? I can ride to Rynjul and fetch Una to
you—at the same time ask Torgrim to speak for me at Vi-
danes.”

“No, no.” She pressed his hand hard in hers. “No—there
will be no change with me till mid-spring be past.—But stay

216


THE SNAKE PIT


with me a little while’—it came as a faint moan. “Sit here a
little while, if you have the time.”

“That I may well do.” He held her hand, stroking her arm.
“What is it with you, Ingunn—? Are you so afraid—?” he
asked quietly.

“Nay. Yes. Nay, I know not that I am so afraid, but—”
Olav pushed the step out of his way, sat on the edge of the bed
and patted her wasted cheek, time after time.

“TI had a dream,” said his wife softly. “Just before you
came jn.”

“Was it an evil dream then?”

The tears began to pour down her cheeks, but she wept
without a sound; only her voice was more veiled and broken:

“Tt seemed not evil while I dreamt it—then it was not evil.
I saw you, walking along a path in a forest; you looked happy
and seemed younger than you are now; you sang as you walked.
I saw you here at Hestviken too, out in the yard, and it was the
same, you looked happy and well. I could see it all, but it was
as though I myself was not—I was dead, I knew.—Children J
saw not here—not one.”

“Ingunn, Ingunn, you must not lie here thinking such
thoughts.” He knelt down, so that he could get his arm in un-
der her shoulder. “There would be little joy for me here in our
house, were I to lose you, Ingunn mine.”

“A joy for you I have never been——”

“You are the only friend I have.” He kissed her, bending
lower over his wife, so that her face was quite hidden against
his breast.

“Tf now it is as Signe and Una say,” he whispered, hesi-
tating, “that you are to have a daughter this year—. They were
all sons till now. But a little maid—her maybe God would let
us keep.”

217


THE SNAKE PIT


29


The sick woman sighed: “I am so weary

Olav whispered:

“Have you never thought, Ingunn—that maybe I have paid
Eirik no more than—the price of his father’s slaying?”

As he received no answer, he asked her—and he could not
make his voice sound quite firm:

“Have you never wondered what became of—that Teit?”

She clasped him closer:

“T never believed that you did it.”

The man felt strangely overpowered—as though he had
suddenly come into a bright light and were trying to distin-
guish things in it. She had known it, all the time. But what did
that mean—had she guessed what was on his mind—or had she
been afraid of his blood-stained hands——?

Ingunn turned her face to his, clasped his neck and drew
his head down to her. She kissed him on the lips, with a wild
gulp:

“I knew it. I knew it. Yet I was afraid, sometimes—when
things were at their worst with me and I almost lost heart. I
could not help it—I thought, what if he were alive and came
after me, avenged himself. But indeed I believed you had done
it, and I could feel safe from him!”

Olav had a queer feeling—as though numb or frozen. Was
that what she had thought—ay, ay. Perhaps that was all she
could take in, poor thing. He kissed her again, a gentle little
kiss. Then he said with a laugh of embarrassment:

“You must let me go now, Ingunn—you will break my


ribs against the bedpost soon——”


He got up, patted her cheek once more and crossed the
room to his chest, searched among the clothes. Then he asked
again:

218


THE SNAKE PIT


“Are you sure, Ingunn—should you not rather I stayed at
home today?”


“Nay, nay, Olav, I will not keep you
Olav buckled on his spurs, took his sword and threw his


rain cloak of thick, felted homespun over his shoulder. He was
already at the door—when he turned and came back to her bed.

Ingunn could see that a change had come over him and he
was not as she had seen him for a long, long time—his face
was still as a rock, his lips pale, his eyes veiled, unseeing. He
spoke as though in his sleep:

“Will you promise me one thing? Should it go with you
as—as you said—should it cost your life this time—will you
give me your promise that you will come back to me?”

He looked at her, bending slightly toward her:

“You must promise me, Ingunn—if it is so that the dead
may come back to the living—then you must come to me!”

“Yes.”

The man bent down hastily, touching her breast with his
forehead an instant:

“You are the only friend I have had,” he whispered quickly
and shyly. .


OLav came riding home late in the evening, wet and cold, so
that he could not feel his feet in the stirrups. His horse trotted
wearily, splashing the snow-slush over him at every beat of the
hoofs.

Clouds and fog rolled over the landscape, the earth breathed
moisture—it was an evening of steaminess and mist, the whole
world strangely dissolved, forest and field bare and dark in
patches among the melting snow. The fiord spoke in dull surf-
beats with long intervals, like a sluggish pulse, but the stream
in Kverndal roared with a glut of water. A sigh went through

219


THE SNAKE PIT


the woods, as the firs shed their snow, and water purled and
gurgled everywhere in the dusk—the cold scent from the fields
and the sea brought the first reminder of springtime and growth.

On the hillside by the barn a dark figure came toward him
—a woman in a hooded cloak.

“Welcome home, Olav!” It was Signe Arnesdatter; she
hurried to meet him as he drew nearer.

“Ay, now Ingunn is over it for this time—and she does bet-
ter than we had looked for.” Olav had reined in his horse and
Signe caressed its muzzle. “——And the child is so big and fine
—none of us has ever seen so big and fair a new-born babe. So
you must bear with it, that ’tis not a son!”

Olav thanked her for the good news—feeling that, had he
been as in his younger years, he would have leapt from his
horse, embraced his kinswoman and kissed her. He was relieved
and he was glad, but as yet he did not feel it to the full. Then
he thanked Signe again for the kindness she had shown once
more to Ingunn.

It had come upon her so suddenly, said Signe, that they
had not been able to take her out to the women’s house. Olav
would have to put up with sleeping in the closet, while they
had the cradle and kept watch in the great room.

But in a moment he saw Ingunn herself—her face shone
snow-white, she lay on her side with one light-brown plait
showing from under her cheek. Una knelt behind her in the
bed, plaiting her other thick rope of hair. The other times Olav
had seen her lying thus, she had been ugly, swollen and blotched
in the face—but now she was unlike herself, marvellously fair,
as if an unearthly light were shed upon her white and wasted
countenance. Her great dark-blue eyes glittered like starlight
mirrored in a well. And the thought sank into the man that a
miracle had taken place.

220


THE SNAKE PIT


Signe came with a little bundle—white swaddling-bands
wound crosswise about the leaf-green woollen wrapper. She
laid the child in Olav’s arm: “Have you ever seen so fair a
maid, kinsman?” !

And again it was as though he had fallen among incredi-
ble things—a girl’s face, impossibly small, but perfect, the
fairest! A new-born life, and it could look like that. Her eyes
were open; dark they were and bottomless—and she was red
and white like a briar-rose and had nose and mouth like a hu-
man being, but so small that he could not understand it.

Signe drew the swaddling-cloth aside, so that the father
might see that she had fine hair too. Olav cupped his hand un-
der the delicate, round head; it lay in his palm no larger than
an apple and as sweet and soft to hold.

Olav still held his little daughter in his hands—a gift, a
gift she was. It softened him—so grateful beyond measure he
had never been before. He laid his face against the baby’s
breast—her face was so pure and fine that he durst not touch it.

Una leapt to the floor, arranged Ingunn on her back, with
the plaits over her bosom. They took the child from him, and
he sat down on the edge of the bed by his wife. He held her
hand in his for a while, and took up one of her plaits; neither
of them said anything.

Then a maid came in with food and drink for him, and
afterwards they said that he must go into the closet and lie
down—Ingunn needed sleep. Then she called to him softly:

“Olav,” she whispered, “there is one thing I would beg of
you, husband”—at other times she never called him that—
“will you do what I ask of you?”

“T will do all you ask of me.” He smiled as in pain, so


unmanned was he by his joy.
221


THE SNAKE PIT


“Promise me that she shall not be called after my mother.
Cecilia I would have her named.”


Olav nodded.


He lay awake in the darkness—against the wall Eirik was sleep-
ing like a stone. Through the door opening he could see the
reflection of the fire flickering on the logs of the wall, it rose
and sank. But the holy candle burning beside the mother and
child shed a mild and golden light.

The watching women whispered and went about their work,
clattering with the kettle and the pot-hook. Once the new-born
child began to cry—and her cries called to his heart; he lis-
tened to her and was tender and happy. The women got on to
their feet; the cradle was set rocking, and Signe sang softly.

Here he lay before her door; it seemed as natural as a
dream that he should lie and listen while they watched over
her sleep. Ingunn slept sweetly now; she had given birth to a
child, and now she was to take a long rest, that would make
her young and healthy and happy again. A child had been born
here in his house, the first one.—All that had gone before had
been as one endless, unnatural sickness—an uncanny spell
upon the unhappy woman. The little lifeless deformities that
the women had brought to him that he might see them, though
he was so loth to do so—the sight of them had filled him with
infinite disgust; and the poor little abortion that had lived his
brief, tormented life, until God had pity on him and took him
to Himself—in his heart he had never been able to acknowl-
edge that these were his children—the fruit of his and Ingunn’s
bodies.

Never had he known how it felt to be a father—till now,
when he had a daughter, a treasure like this little, little—Ce-
cilia.

222


13
Oo: OLAVSDATTER GREW AND THRIVED SO THAT THE


neighbours’ wives said they could see a difference in her

from day to day. What fattened her none could guess,
for the mother would nurse her at her own breast, and there
she could hardly suck many drops of milk. But she grew more
in one month than other infants in three, was the boast of
Signe and Una. Now and again they poured cream into her, or
let her chew at deer’s marrow in a cloth.

Folk who came out to Hestviken asked to see this little
maid whose fame was already abroad—she was so peerlessly
fair. They let it be seen that they wished Olav and his wife
well of their happiness. True, there was none who liked the
Hestvik folk very well. Olav was strangely reserved, a man of
few friends—folk thought it a trouble if they had to be in com-
pany with this cross-stick—but no doubt this was mostly his
manner: one had to admit that in his actions he had always
shown himself an upright and pious man, by no means unhelp-
ful either. The wife was incapable and weak-minded, but in-
deed she wished nobody ill, poor thing. So it was a happy
thing after all that at last they had gotten a child which looked
as if it would grow up.

But Ingunn continued poorly for a long time—she must
have suffered some hurt in her back, and she could not regain
power over her legs, when at last she was up again.

Olav came home from church one Sunday. It was such
fine weather—that day summer had come. In the fair-weather

223


THE SNAKE PIT


breeze the leaves and green meadows gleamed with light, and
every puff of air was like a warm and healthy breath from the
growing grass and the new foliage and from the earth, which
still had the moisture of spring within it. When he entered the
house and saw Ingunn lying outstretched on the bench, he was
a little uneasy—then he said that when they had broken their
fast she must go out with him and look at the “good acre”; the
corn there was coming up so thick and fine this year again.

This was the field which lay farthest out toward the fiord
under the crags; Olav had a peculiar affection for it and al-
ways chose the best and heaviest corn to sow there. He had
fishes’ heads and offal from the quay brought there, and it suf-
fered less from drought than was to be expected—for the mould
was not very deep—but it was ready for reaping before any of
the other fields of Hestviken.

Olav had to carry Ingunn over the threshold, and when he
had set her down outside the door, he saw that she walked as
though she could not lift her feet—she slid them along the
ground in short, uncertain jerks, and at the slightest obstacle
she nearly fell forward. He took her by the waist and she
leaned heavily against him with one hand on his shoulder; at
every third or fourth step she had to pause, and he noticed that
she was sweating profusely and trembling with fatigue.

On arriving at the lookout rocks Olav spread his fur-
lined winter cloak, which he had brought with him, in a hollow
among the rocks. There she could lie in shelter and watch the
breeze caressing the young blades of corn, as though currying
them, sending flames of light down the green slope.

Sea and land were all a-glitter; the summer waves ran in
toward the rocks, splashed and trickled back with the pebbles
of the beach—the sound of the surf was a gentle murmur; but
farther off under the Bull the spray was thrown higher; the

224


THE SNAKE PIT


wind was going round to the south-west now. Olav sat follow-
ing with his eyes a heavily laden trading vessel that was mak-
ing her way up the fiord, rather fast. He was lost in thought;
old memories floated before him of the time when he was an
outlaw and free as a bird—knew nothing of bearing another’s
burdens. Alone he had been, one man among many others, who
were never so near to him that he felt their pressure—it was
strangely far away now, after all these years he had had the
whole of Hestviken depending upon him, and his sick wife as
close to him as his own flesh. He had struggled on with her,
who was always infirm and suffering; it was like fighting with
one arm hanging broken and useless. Nevertheless he did not
feel unhappy as he sat here in the midday sun—he did not
think of the old days in such a way that he wished himself
away from the present or fretted at his lot with Ingunn. He sat
and took his rest—in a kind of melancholy, but even that which
oppressed him was his infinite affection for her; it seemed too
great for him to carry it alone.

He turned to Ingunn, was going to say something about
the vessel; then he saw that she had fallen asleep. She looked
like one dead.

He felt with wonder that he was even fonder of her now
than he had ever been before—just because he could see that
every trace of her beauty was so utterly destroyed. No one who
had not seen her in her youth could imagine that this middle-
aged, faded wife had once been fair. She had been lovely, as a
pure and delicate flower is lovely—now the yellow skin, flecked
with brown patches, was drawn tightly over her hollow-cheeked
and long-chinned face. Her tall and slender form had long lost
its willowy suppleness: she was flat as a board over the nar-
row chest, heavy and shapeless about the waist—looked like

225


THE SNAKE PIT


an aged and worn-out cottar’s wife who has borne many chil-
dren.

The husband sat and looked at her—not daring to touch
her; she must be in need of sleep. He merely took the ends of
her linen coif and tucked them in, lest the wind should blow
them in her face, and wrapped the cloak better about her—she
looked so bloodless that he must not let her take cold.


Boru Olav and the house-folk saw that she was less able to
walk day by day, and about the time of Saint John’s Mass she
could not get up from her seat without help, nor push one foot
before the other without someone to support her. But still they
dressed her every morning; it was Torhild who had to do this
now, for Liv, Ingunn’s own maid, was fit for nothing at this
time.

Olav had never been able to understand Ingunn’s obstinate
dislike of Torhild Bjornsdatter in all these years. Torhild was
a woman whose match was not often to be met—loyal, capable
and strong—and however unreasonable Ingunn might be with
the housekeeper, Torhild remained as patient and attentive as
ever toward her sick mistress.

Equally incomprehensible did it appear to Olav that she
should have taken a fancy to this Liv, who had entered her
service the year before. For one thing, the girl was almost the
ugliest being Olav had ever seen: at the first glance one was
tempted to doubt whether she was human—undersized, hugely
broad, and notably squat and bandy-legged. Her red hair was
thin and straggling, her skin was a reddish grey, with freckles
over her arms and hands and down to her chest, and her face
was marvellously hideous, with little blinking pig’s eyes, a
pointed nose and no chin—the lower part of her face slanted
in and made one with the flabby flesh of her throat. Nor was

226


THE SNAKE PIT


she of kindly disposition—lazy and unwilling with Torhild and
the dairymaid, and exceedingly stupid. But Ingunn had set her
affection on this girl. When it came out that she had gone
astray the autumn before, when she was given leave to go home
and visit her parents at Michaelmas, her mistress beseeched
Olav not to turn Liv out of the house. Olav had had no such
thought; he knew that there was great poverty and many chil-
dren in the croft from which she came, so it was better for her
to stay at Hestviken. But as she was under his roof and very
young—fifteen—he thought he would have to try to see justice
done to the girl and questioned her about the father. But all
she knew was that it was a man who had borne her company a
part of the way through the forest, when she was going home
at Michaelmas.

“Ay—and did he maltreat you then?” asked Olav.

“Nay, nay’—Liv beamed all over her face. He had been
so merry and kind. Jon, he said was his name.

“Ay, so every man is called who has no other name.”

Now in any case she would soon be a fit foster-mother for
Cecilia. For it would go ill if the sick mother were to nurse this
big and greedy child—but hitherto Ingunn had refused to hear


of Cecilia being taken from her breast.


Oxav had sent for all the men and women of the country round
who had a knowledge of sickness and leechcraft. None could
say what ailed the mistress of Hestviken—and most of them
thought it must be caused by treachery or envy. Olav knew
that she had been sick in the same way sixteen or seventeen
years before, when she was at Miklebo, and then Mistress Hille-
bjorg had said it was certain that Kolbein had caused spells or
other witchcraft to be put upon her. He wondered whether this
227


THE SNAKE PIT


might not be true after all, and that she had never been en-
tirely set free from the power of evil.

Then he became acquainted with a German merchant, Claus
Wiephart, in Oslo, who was said to be a very learned leech—
he had been a captive among the Saracens in his youth and had
acquired their knowledge. Olav fetched him, and this man saw
at once what ailed Ingunn.

What might have been the origin of it he was not able to
say; it might be one thing or another, but most probably it
came from the stars: for example, that her husband had first
had knowledge of her in an hour when the position of the
heavenly bodies was hostile to them, according to the stars un-
der which they had been born. It might be a question of less
than an hour—a little before or a little after the auspices might
have been particularly favourable to them. But this might have
had such an effect upon her, who was the weaker, as to disturb
the harmony in her body between the solid matter and the
humours, so that the solid matter had shrunk and the humours
had obtained the mastery—nay, she might even have had a dis-
position toward this disharmony in her hour of birth, but the
disharmony was the especial cause of her weakness. The proof
of this was, that she had not been able to bear children of the —
male sex that were capable of surviving, beyond the first one;
for man’s body is by nature drier than woman’s and demands
from the very beginning more of the solid matter; but a daugh-
ter she had been able to bring forth alive. Even so, this child
too had absorbed more solid matter than the mother’s body
could afford to give up; she was now, Claus Wiephart would
say, in a state of decay, as it were; bones and flesh were satu-
rated with humours—even as wood floating in the sea becomes
soft and full of water.

In the first place they must see to getting her body drained

228


THE SNAKE PIT


of moisture, said the German. The child should by no means
be taken from her breast; she must be given sudatory and diu-
retic medicines, she must drink very little, but take burnt and
pounded bones and terra sigillata, and eat hard, dry food with
hot spices in it.

The learned man’s opinion filled Olav with fresh courage.
It sounded so reasonable—and the Latin words used by the
German came back to Olav from his young days. Prima causa,
harmonia, materia and umidus, disparo, dispono—these words
he remembered to have heard from Asbjérn All-fat, Arnvid and
the friars at the convent, and, as far as he could judge, Claus
knew them rightly. And then, even before they were grown up,
he himself had noticed that Ingunn’s body was strangely weak
and without firmness—it made him think of green corn—surely
she had always had too little of the solid matter. Terra sigillata
must certainly be good for her—it was good for so many things,
he knew.

And he had learnt about the four elements of which the
human body is composed, and had heard that the position of
the heavenly bodies influences a man’s destiny. Learned men
at home did not know so much about this; Asbjorn All-fat said
that Christian men have no need to inquire what is written in
the stars. But the Saracens were said to have more knowledge
of the stars than any other folk.

Olav was unspeakably relieved at heart. Perhaps he had
been on an entirely false scent all these years—he had always
believed it was he who had brought misfortune upon them
both, because he dared not break out of the sin in which he
lived. He was living in sin, there was no doubt of that, so long
as he made no offer to atone for that unhappy deed, but God
must know that he could not; he could not jeopardize the wel-
fare and honour of his wife and child. In all else he had en-

229


THE SNAKE PIT


deavoured to walk as a Christian man. And God must know
even better than himself how unspeakably he longed to live at
peace with Him, to be allowed to love Him with his whole
heart, to bend the knee in prayer, without grieving at his own
disobedience.

But what if he might now believe that all their misfor-
tunes had a natural origin. Cecilia was the pledge that God
had remitted his debt—or would give him respite till the hour
of death. That the stars had been the cause of Ingunn’s weak-
ness in body and soul ;


But Prima Causa—that was one of God’s names. He knew
that.

She said herself that she was better for these remedies of
Claus Wiephart’s. As yet she had not regained sufficient vigour
to be able to move her legs, but she felt less of the pain in her
back.


HE came into the cook-house one evening just before Olav’s
Mass'—there was something he wished to say to Torhild Bjorns-
datter before he forgot it.

She was baking bread for the holy day. The flour dust
floating in the air was golden in the evening sun, as he opened
the door and the light filled the sooty little room. A sweet,
yeasty scent came from the round loaves that lay baking on
slanting stonesaround the glowing, heaped-up fire—Olav’smouth
watered at the smell. The girl was not there.

Olav was turning to go out, when Torhild appeared at the
door, carrying a board so heavy that she supported it on her
head with both arms. She was obliged to walk even more erect
than usual, and in the warm summer evening her light clothing


1July 29.
230


THE SNAKE PIT


looked but well and suitably free; she was in her working
clothes, a short-sleeved shift of homespun and bare legs; she
was so deft in her movements, firm and strong.

Olav took the board from her; it was of oak and very
heavy. He carried it in and laid it on the trestles. Torhild fol-
lowed, filled both her fists with chopped juniper from a basket
and spread it over the board. She gave off a fragrance in her
rapid movements—of meal and fresh bread, of the healthy
warmth of work. Olav threw his arms about the maid and
pulled her roughly to him. His chin came near her shoulder—
for an instant he pressed his cheek against her skin—her neck
was dewy, at once cool and warm. Then he let her go and
laughed to cover his confusion and shame at this foolish wan-
tonness that had come over him so suddenly.

Torhild had turned red as blood—and the sight of her
added to his embarrassment. But she said nothing and showed
no sign of anger—went about quite calmly, moving the loaves
that were done from the stones on to the board.

“You can lift as much as a man, Torhild,” said her master.
And as she did not answer, but went on with her work, he be-
gan again, more seriously: “You support our whole household
—do more work than all the rest of us together.”

“T do my best,” muttered Torhild.

“Ay, I know not how you think—perhaps you think we
might reward you better—if so, you must tell me; we shall
soon be agreed. a

“Nay, I am well content with what I have. I have now put
out all mine own into the world, save the two youngest—and
you have helped me well.”

“Nay, say naught of that—.” He gave her the message he
had come for, and went out.


231


THE SNAKE PIT


INcUNN continued to use the wise German’s remedies, but after
a while it was seen that the results were not entirely beneficial
after all. She had violent pains in the stomach and burning of
the throat from all the pepper and ginger. But she held out as
long as she could, struggling to get down the dry and irritating
diet, although she seemed to feel the pains even at the sight of
the food. She was tortured by thirst day and night; but she
bore it all with patience and made little complaint.

Then Olav had to be away from home for a few nights,
and Signe Arnesdatter came to sleep with the sick woman mean-
while. Afterwards Signe told Olav it was quite wrong that In-
eunn should still have Cecilia with her at night; the mother no
longer had a drop of milk in her breast, and it was hunger and
temper that made the child shriek so wildly at night, keeping
Ingunn and all awake. Olav had never known any other infant
than Audun, and he shrieked almost continually, so the man
thought it was the way of little ones. Now Liv had long nursed
Cecilia in the daytime, and her own child was lately dead, and
the girl was as full of milk as a fairy cow; the only natural
thing was to let Liv be Cecilia’s foster-mother and have the
child both day and night.

But when they spoke of this to Ingunn, she was quite be-
side herself with grief. She begged and beseeched that they
would not take Cecilia from her: “She is all that is left of me;
I bought you this daughter at the price of lying here powerless
and palsied to the waist. If you love her, Olav, have pity on
me—take not Cecilia from me, the little while I have left to
live. "Twill not be long ere you be freed from this wretched
life with me ‘4


He tried to make her see reason, but she screamed, thrust-
ing her elbows into the bolster under her, raising her shoulders
and struggling, as though she would force her palsied body to

232


THE SNAKE PIT


rise. Olav seated himself on the edge of the bed, comforted her
as well as he could, but it was in vain; and at last she had
raged and wept till she was so weary that she sank into a doze,
but even in her sleep she gasped and shook.

The end was that he promised she should have Cecilia in
bed with her at night, but Liv was to lie on the bench near by,
so that she might quiet the child when it shrieked.

When he came to say good-night to her before he went to
bed, she put an arm about his neck and drew his head down:

“Be not angry, Olav. I cannot sleep, but I have her with
me. I have ever been afraid when I had to lie alone,” she whis-
pered, “ever since the first night you slept with me it has
seemed as though I could not feel safe unless I had your arm
about me. And now that will never be again.”

Olav knelt down, took her under the neck and let her is
rest against his shoulder.

“Do you wish me to hold you thus until you fall asleep?”
he asked.

She fell asleep almost at once. Then he arranged the pil-
lows under her shoulders, stole quietly across the floor and
crept in to Kirik in the north bed.

He kept a little charcoal lamp burning on the hearth at
night—he had to get up so often, to help Ingunn and turn her.
And now he had to get up and take Cecilia too, when she
shrieked, carry her to the girl—Liv never woke.

At last he must have fallen asleep and slept heavily—the
child must have been shrieking a good while, so persistently as
to succeed in waking Liv. In the feeble light of the little lamp
he saw the maid padding about by Ingunn’s bed with Cecilia in
her arms. She looked so shapelessly broad and squat that he
could not help thinking of tales he had heard of ogres and

233


THE SNAKE PIT


gnomes. Though he knew how foolish it was, it made him un-
comfortable to see Cecilia in the arms of this foster-mother.


Oxav came in to Ingunn about midday on the morrow—he and
one of the house-carls had been bringing in the hay on pack-
horses from some outlying meadows on the high ground. The
nap of his short cloak was thickly beaded with drops of mist
and his boots were heavy with wet earth and withered leaves.
He gave off a raw scent of autumn, as he bent over Ingunn and
asked her how she did.

With a little embarrassed smile he showed her what he had
brought in his hand—some big watery strawberries threaded
on straws—as they had used to do when they were children.
The berries were soft, so that the palm of his hand was red
with them:

“T found these up by the mill =

Ingunn took them, without remembering to thank him. It
was these little red spots within his coarse, worn hands—and
she recalled their life together from childhood, all the way till
now. Twice he had reddened that hand with blood for her sake,
and it was the same hard, resin-smirched boy’s fist that had
helped her over fences and opened to show her gifts.—Their
life appeared as a tapestry to her—as one long tissue: little
images of brief, hot, happy love with long intervals between
of waiting and longing and barren dreams, the time of shame
and mad despair like a big dark spot, and then all these years
at Hestviken—all appeared to her in an instant as though em-
broidered upon a ground—a single fabric, a whole tapestry of
the same stuff from their childhood’s days until now, until the
end.


True, she had always acknowledged to herself that Olav
was good to her. She had known in a way that few men would
234


THE SNAKE PIT


have had patience with her so long, would have been equal to
the task of protecting her and sustaining her all these years.
She had indeed thanked him in her heart—thanked him some-
times with burning intensity. But only now did she see, as a
whole, how strong his love had been.

He was standing by the cradle now. The rockers bumped
and bumped against the floor, and the child gurgled and cried
with delight, drumming its heels with wild persistence against
the skin rug under it—the mother could just see its little pink
hands waving above the side of.-the cradle.

“Nay, Cecilia—you will soon strangle yourself in these
snares!” Olav laughed and lifted up the child in his arms. She
had wriggled so violently that her clothes were quite undone,
and the swaddling-band had become so tangled about her arms
and legs and neck and her little body that it was a wonder she
had not strangled herself with it. “Can you get this straight?” —
He laid the child on the bed by its mother.

“Are you weeping ?” he asked, saddened. Ingunn was blinded
by tears, so that she could scarcely see, as she tried to free Ce-
cilia from her bands.

“She will be just as fair-haired as the rest of us Hestvik
folk,” said the father; “and now you have seven curls—” he
passed his hand over the child’s forehead, where the hair had
grown long and curly in little, pale yellow locks. “Are you in
such pain today, my Ingunn?”

“Tis not that. I am thinking that, though you have been
good to me and faithful so long as I have known you, I have
never had it in my power to reward you for your affection.”

“Say not so. You have been a—gentle—” he could not
find another word in her praise on the spur of the moment,
though he was trying to say something to please her. “You

235


THE SNAKE PIT


have been a gentle and—and quiet wife. And you know how
fond I am of you,” he said with feeling.
“And now it will soon be a year,” she whispered, dis-


tressed and shy, “that you have been as a widower—with an
29


infirm sister to take care o

“Ay, ay,” said her husband softly. “But if I love you—
Sister, you say. Do you remember, Ingunn, the first years we
lived together; we slept in the same bed, drank from the same
bowl and were as brother and sister; we knew of naught else.
But then too we were happiest when we were together.”

“Yes. But we were children in those days. And then I was
fair—” she whispered with more passion in her voice.

“You were. But I fear I was too childish to see it. I believe
in those years I never had a thought whether you were fair or


not.”


“And I wasnota burden on you. I washealthy and strong e


“Oh nay, Ingunn—” Olav smiled weakly and stroked her


arm. “Strong you have never been, my dearest friend!”


It was a long winter for them at Hestviken.

Olav was at home all the time, he thought he could not
leave her for a single night. She now suffered greatly from ly-
ing in bed, since she was so emaciated, and then she had got
some hurt in her back: when she had lain awhile in one posi-
tion, it felt as if a pain crept over her ribs and filled her whole
chest. The only thing they could do to relieve her was to move
and turn her constantly. She could take no food at all; they
kept life in her by giving her gruel, broth and milk, a mouth-
ful at a time.

She had tried to do a little needlework as she lay in bed,
but her hands became numbed whenever she held them raised
a little while, so that she could neither sew nor plait. And then

236


THE SNAKE PIT


she lay in a doze, altogether motionless. She never spoke a
word of complaint, and she thanked them gently when anyone
came and turned her or arranged her pillows. Sometimes she
slept a good deal in the daytime, but at night she seldom had
any sleep at all.

Olav had the fire burning on the hearth all night, and he
had shut off the closet with a door, to make the great room
warmer. The winter was not a very cold one, but all this smoke
day and night was troublesome.

He watched by the sick woman night after night. Eirik lay
in the bed behind his back asleep, Liv slept on the bench, and
Cecilia slept in her mother’s bed. Olav lay in a sort of doze, but
it was never too deep for him to hear an ember shooting out of
the fire, or Ingunn’s almost inaudible groans—he was up and
beside her in a moment. All that winter he was never out of his
clothes, except every washing-day when he went to the bath-
house. :

He knelt beside her bed, laid the palms of his hands under
her shoulders, then under her back, and then he held her heels
in the hollows of his hands for a while. In his heart he expected
with a kind of morbid horror that she would get bed-sores
there. It was like the last glowing ember of all he had once
felt for her body—he thought he could not bear to see the skin
broken and the sores cating into Ingunn’s flesh, while she yet
lived. Never had it been so hard for him to endure the sight
and smell of wounds and impurities—though he was ashamed
of this weakness. But he prayed desperately to God that at least
it might not come to this—he asked it as much for his own
sake as for hers.

He was away tending the fire.

“Are you thirsty, Ingunn?—Shall I take you in my arms,
Ingunn?”

237


THE SNAKE PIT


Olav wrapped the bedclothes about her and lifted her up
in his arms. He sat with her on the settle before the fire. Care-
fully he bent the lifeless legs, laid down pillows under her feet
on the bench, supporting her hips and back on his thighs, as
he laid her head to rest on his shoulder:

“Ts that better?”

Sometimes she fell asleep when she lay thus in his arms.
And Olav sat by the hour holding her, till he was chilled
through about the shoulders, stiff in all his limbs. She woke if
he made the slightest movement. Then she extricated a hand
from the bedclothes and passed it over his face:

“Now I am much better. Carry me back to bed now, Olav,
and go and lie down—you must be tired. 2


“T am become a heavy burden for you, Olav,” she said one
night. “But bear with me a little—twill not last longer than
this winter.”

He did not deny it. He had thought the same himself.—
When spring came, it would take her with it. And now at last
he was ready to submit to it.


But as winter drew to a close, she seemed rather to be slightly
on the mend. In any case she revived sufficiently to ask how
things were going on the farm and in the fishery. She listened
for the cow-bells morning and evening, mentioned her cows by
name, and said one day that when spring was fully come they
must carry her out of doors, that she might see her cattle once
more.

Cecilia was now a very pretty child, and big for her age;
Ingunn had great comfort of her in the daytime, but then she
had to have Liv in with her. At night she slept with her foster-
mother in another house—Ingunn could no longer bear the big,
heavy child in bed with her: Cecilia rolled over on her mother

238


THE SNAKE PIT


in her sleep, and when she was awake she stumped about the
bed and fell heavily over her palsied body.

Olav had so little liking for Liv that he avoided the room
while the maid was there. He knew too that she stole in a small
way, and he had more than a suspicion that she was too good
friends with Anki, and thus taught the man to pilfer and lieE—
Arnketil’s word had always been untrustworthy, but till now it
had mostly been because he had no better wit. What they stole
was no great matter, but he did not like having dishonest folk
in his house. And now there was such disorder in the household
in many ways—he himself was so tired every day that he could
not accomplish all he ought, and downhill is an easy road.

So now he did not see much of Cecilia in the daytime. But
by degrees it had come to this, that his affection for his daugh-
ter was mingled with a profound soreness—it pained him sharply
when he recalled that blue, damp night of spring, when he
came home and found her in the cradle. The first time they
laid her in his arm he had believed so surely that she betokened
a turn in their fortunes, Cecilia came into the world bringing


their happiness with her.

He loved this little daughter, but his affection was as it
were spread within him, it lay at the bottom of his heart, shy
and mute. In the first days of her life her father had often
stopped before her cradle and touched her with a couple of
fingers, playfully and caressingly—full of quiet joy and won-
der when he got her to smile. And he had lifted her up and
held her to him a moment, in his clumsy, unpractised way: Ce-
cilia, Cecilia—. Now he usually stopped at a little distance
when he saw her being carried from house to house; he smiled
at his daughter and beckoned; she never took the smallest no-
tice. The very fact that she was so pretty, and that he recog-

239


THE SNAKE PIT


nized in her the fair complexion of his own race, seemed only
to increase the father’s melancholy.

Not much was seen of Eirik now. The nine-years-old boy
instinctively kept away from the grown people, whom he saw
to be always heavy at heart. He found enough to do about the
manor, and only came into the hall to eat and sleep.


Oxav had to go in to Oslo for the Holy Cross fair? in the
spring. There he received a message asking him to go to the
convent of the Preaching Friars.

The Prior had news for him that his friend, Arnvid Finns-
son, had died during the winter. In the middle of last summer
he had adopted the professed habit among the friars at Hamar.
But by the second week of Lent he died suddenly—none could
say of what. As they went to morning mass, the monk who
walked beside him saw that Brother Arnvid turned pale and
faltered, but on his asking in a whisper if he were sick, Arnvid
shook his head. But when they knelt at Verbum caro factum
est, his neighbour saw that Brother Arnvid was not able to rise
to his feet again, and when the mass was at an end he lay in a
swoon. Then they carried him into the dormitory and laid him
on his couch: he moaned a little now and again, but was un-
conscious. In the middle of the day, however, he came to and
asked in a low voice for the last office. As soon as he had re-
ceived the sacraments he fell asleep, and when the monks came
from vespers he was dead, so calmly that the friar who sat with
him could not say when he ceased to breathe.

The Prior told him also that before Arnvid entered the
convent he had disposed of a great part of his treasure to kins-
men and friends, and he had bidden his sons send these two

2 May 3.
240


THE SNAKE PIT


drinking-horns to Olav Audunsson. But the Arnvidssons were
so unlike other men that they would never leave their home
parish, and only when they went down to Hamar for their
father’s burial had Magnus brought the horns to the convent;
and Father Bjarne had been unwilling to send these rare treas-
ures south until he could place them in the hands of one of his
own Order.

Olav knew the horns well from Miklebo. They were small,
but very costly: two griffin’s claws mounted in silver and gilt.
Olav and his friend had used them on the evenings of high
festivals, when they drank mead or wine—they only held drink
for one man.

The news of Arnvid’s death shook Olav to the heart. He
could not bear to stay in town among the other men, but sailed
out to Hestviken the same evening.

There had been times when he thought of his friend and
recalled their last talk together—and it pained him that he had
stripped himself so bare to the other. He regretted this weak-
ness so, that at times he had doubtless thought it would be
easier for him if he heard that Arnvid was no more.—And then
he felt all at once that this was the last stroke, and now he was
no longer capable of fighting against his own heart—now that
he knew that not a single one shared his secret: alone he would
not be able to keep it any longer.

And for the first time he saw the true nature of this friend-
ship. It was he who had taken advantage of the other—and
Arnvid had allowed him to do so. He had lied to his friend
and his friend had seen through his untruthfulness; not only
the first time, but always he had told Arnvid what suited him-
self—even to their last meeting; and Arnvid had accepted it
and held his peace. It was always he who had sought support,

241


THE SNAKE PIT


and Arnvid had supported him—as Arnvid had given to all,
whatever was asked of him. And the reward they had given him
was to scourge him—he had found such reward as awaits the
man who has courage to follow Christ’s example. And never-
theless Arnvid had blamed himself and thought himself an un-
faithful follower, whenever he was unable to see his path
clearly, and whenever his heart was full of bitterness and con-
tempt for men’s baseness—as must at times befall a sinful man,
when he ventures to follow where God went before.


OLAv stayed at home during the spring sowing, even more si-
lent than usual.

But one morning, when he had set his folk to work, he
walked back to the houses alone.

The sunshine flooded the rooom through the open smoke-
vent, the light fell upon the fireless hearth, upon the clay floor,
and touched Ingunn’s bed. Both the children were with her:
irik lay with his dark, curly head in his mother’s arm and his
long legs hanging over the edge of the bed. Cecilia crawled
about, climbing up the bedpost and dropping down with a
thump and a little scream of joy upon the lifeless form under
the clothes. The little maid had nothing on but a flame-coloured
woollen shift; her skin was pink and white and her hair had
grown so that it fell in bright, flaxen ringlets about her face
and neck. Her bright eyes were so blue in the whites that they
seemed blue all over, and this gave the charming little face a
strangely wide-awake look, like that of an animal.

“Your mother cannot bear you to weigh so heavily upon
her, irik.” Olav took Cecilia and seated himself on the edge
of the bed with the girl on his knee. Once he clasped his daugh-
ter impetuously, and the child struggled—she was not used to

242


THE SNAKE PIT


being with her father. Olav felt how good and firm the little
body was between his hands, and the silken hair had a fresh,
moist scent.

As she was not allowed to get at her mother, she wriggled
in her father’s arms and tried to reach her brother. Eirik took
her, held her under the arms and tried to make her walk. Ce-
cilia thrust out her round stomach, straddling with her arms
and one foot, as she threw her head back:and laughed up in
her brother’s face. Then she humped herself along with wild
little kicks—laughing and shrieking: “Goy, goy, goy”; she
curled up all her toes under the sole of her foot, which was
quite round—as yet it had scarcely trodden the ground.

Olav swept his hand over the bed—it was strewed with
half-withered flowers, such as bloom between spring and sum-
mer: wild vetch, catchflies, buttercups and great violets. Ingunn


gathered them into a bunch:
9


“They have long come out, I see

Olav sat looking at the children. They were of rare beauty,
the two of hers that had lived. Eirik was a big boy now, tall
and slight, with his knife-belt on his slender hips. Olav could
see he was handsome: his face had lost its childish roundness,
it was narrow and sharp, with a slightly curved nose and a
high, arched jaw; he was brown-skinned and black-haired, had
golden yellow eyes. Could his mother help thinking of whom
he resembled. ?


“Take your sister with you, Eirik, carry her out to Liv.


There is a matter your mother and I would speak of ——”
Ingunn raised the bunch of flowers with both hands to her
face and drank in with open nostrils the acrid scent of spring.
“Now, my Ingunn,” said Olav in a clear, calm voice, “you
shall soon be released from lying here in torment. I have be-
243


THE SNAKE PIT


spoken a passage for us in a vessel to Nidaros* this summer, to
Saint Olav, so that you may recover the use of your limbs at
the shrine of him, the martyr of righteousness.”

“Olav, Olav, do not think of such a thing. Never could I
bear the voyage—I should not come to Nidaros alive.”

“Oh, but you will.” The man closed his eyes, smiling pain-
fully—his face had gone pale as death. “For now, Ingunn, now
I have the courage to do it. When I come thither, to the sanc-
tuary—I will confess my sin. Of my own free will I shall put
myself in God’s hands, make amends for my offence toward
Him and toward the law and justice of my countrymen.”

She looked at her husband in dismay; he went on with the
same haggard smile:

“The thing which befell you that time at Mikleb6—when
you rose from your bed and walked—that must have been a
miracle!—Think you not that God can perform another mira-
cle?”

“Nay, nay!” she cried. “Olav, what are you saying—what
is this sin you speak of?”

“That I slew Teit, what else? Set fire to the hut where the
body lay—and never made confession of it. I have been to con-
fession all these years, have been shriven for all else, great and
small—received Corpus Domini like other Christian men, gone
to mass and prayed and pretended, pretended—but now there
is an end of it, Ingunn—I will have no more of it. Now I will
put my case in the hands of my Creator, and whatsoever He will
that I shall suffer, I will thank Him and bless His Name ei

He saw the look of terror in her face and threw himself
down by the bedside with his head in her lap.


“Ay, Ingunn. But now you shall suffer no more for my


8 The old name of the city of Trondhjem.
244


THE SNAKE PIT
sins. If only you will believe, you know that you will be
helped m
She put her hand under his chin and tried to raise his
head. The sun was now shining full upon the bed, upon the


crown of his bowed head—she saw that Olav’s hair was quite
grizzled. It did not show unless the sun shone straight upon it,
as it was so fair in colour.

“Olav, look at me—in Jesus’ name, have no such thoughts
as these. Have I not sins enough myself to atone for—? Do
you remember”—she forced him to raise his face—“ ‘you are
not human, you said to me that time—you know what I would
have done with Eirik, if you had not prevented me. Should J
cast reproach upon God for deeming I was not fit to bear chil-
dren ?—all that winter long I thought of nothing but of stifling


the innocent life I felt quickening within me
Olav looked at her in surprise. He had as it were never
thought she remembered this—much less recalled it as guilt.
“T may thank God’s mercy and naught else that I have not
child murder upon my conscience. And no sooner was I saved
from that sin than I went about todo a worse one—God stretched
out His hand again, when I was already half-way through the
gates of Hell. I have perceived it long ago—I was not allowed
to send myself straight to Hell; every day I have lived since
has been a loan, a respite given me to bethink myself and un-


derstand

“I do not complain as I lie here—Olav, have you once
heard me complain? J know well that God has chastised me,
not from unkindness—He who has twice plucked me out of the
fire into which I would have thrown mysel

Olav stared at her—a light was kindled far in behind his
pupils. Unspeakably dear as she had been to him in all these
years, he had never expected much more thought in her than in

245


THE SNAKE PIT


an animal, a tender young hind or a bird, that can love its mate
and offspring, and lament its dead young—easily scared out of
its wits, helplessly at the mercy of wounds and pain.—Never
had he imagined he could talk to his wife as to another Chris-
tian person of that which had been growing in his soul for


years. ,

“Oh nay, Olav!” She took his hand, drew him down and
clasped his head to her bosom. He heard her heart beating vio-
lently within the narrow, wasted chest. “Say not such things,
my friend! Your sin—'tis white by the side of mine! You must
know that they were long for me, these years, and ofttimes
heavy—but now it seems to me they were good in spite of all,
since I lived with you, and you were always good!”

He raised his face:

“It is true, Ingunn, that we two have had some good here
in Hestviken—in that we were always friends. In sickness and
in health I have had you with me always, and you have been
dearest to me of all human creatures, in that I grew up away
from all my kinsmen and friends, and you were the one with


whom I consorted most


“But then God was so kind to me, in spite of all, that He
gave you to me—and I see now that it would have been diffi-
cult for me to prosper here, had I dwelt here alone without a
single person that I had known from my youth.—You see then,
*tis for that I can no longer bear to be God’s enemy—of my


own will I will no more live apart from Him. Let it cost what


it may

“I am no poor man either. There too God spared me—He

gave success to many of the enterprises I undertook to better

our fortunes. I own more now than when we came together.

And you know that by our marriage bond half our estate is
246


THE SNAKE PIT


yours, whatever may befall. You and your children will not be


unprovided for ZL


“Speak not so, Olav. It cannot be so grievous a sin that
you slew Teit. I have never told you before, I have never made
complaint of it to any soul—but he took me by force! I could
not bring myself to say it—twas a thing I could not bear to
speak of—” she sobbed aloud “—nor was I myself innocent,
I had borne myself so that he must have thought I was not
above such things—but I had never thought it would end as it
did—and then he forced me— ’Tis true, Olav, I swear #

“I know it.” He put out his hand as though to stop her.
“He said it himself. And I know that this slaying was a small
matter in the beginning—had I declared it at once. But I took
the wrong road at the start—and now the guilt has grown, and
I see that it will go on and breed new guilt. And now I must
turn about, Ingunn—else I shall become the worst of inhuman
wretches. It has come to this, that I scarce dare utter three
words, for I know that two of them will be untrue.”

She laid her arm across her face, wailing low.

“You know,” said Olav, trying to hush her, “’
tain either that the Archbishop will’ demand that I accuse my-
self before the King’s judges. Haply he will deem it enough
that I confess my sin before God. I have heard that men have
been given absolution for the gravest of sins without being
forced to destroy all their kinsfolk’s honour and welfare—they
were made to do such penance as a pilgrimage to Jerusa-


tis not cer-


39


lem—
“Nay, nay!” she cried out again. “You would be sent
away from us—to the world’s end a
“But tis not impossible”—he laid his hand on her bosom
to quiet her—“that I might come home to you again. And you
know you would dwell here and possess Hestviken 2
247


THE SNAKE PIT


“But then it would come out that Eirik is not your son!”

Olav said quietly:

“I have thought of that too, Ingunn—and it held me back,
so long as I had no child of my own by you. Whether you
might be driven out of Hestviken with your son—by my remote
heirs. But now there is Cecilia. You can adopt the boy to full
inheritance in your share of the estate—and he has a rich sister
beside hi ”

“Olav, do you remember what you said yourself?—that


you had made Eirik no more than amends for his father’s
death——”


“T remember. But I see now, Ingunn, that I had no right


to do it—give away my daughter’s inheritance as amends to
the child of a stranger “

*Cecilia—Olav, Cecilia will be a rich maid for all that;
she is rich and born in honour, of noble race—she will be fair


besides. She will not be among the unfortunate—if she must
be content with sister’s share after you .

Olav’s face was stiff and closed:

“A child of such birth as Eirik’s has no right to amends
for his father.”

“Nay—you have always hated—my bastard.” She burst
into a wild fit of weeping. “I have heard you call him that.”

“Oh ay—'tis a bad name that may escape the lips of an
angry man, even when he speaks to one who is true-born.” He
made an effort to speak calmly, but could not help showing a
touch of bitterness: “But I will not deny I have regretted it—
*twere better I: had called the boy by another name when he
vexed me.”

“You hate him,” said the mother.

“That is not true. I have never been too hard with Eirik.
God knows, he has had less of the rod than he needs—I cannot


248


THE SNAKE PIT


do it, when you look at me as though I stabbed you with a
knife, if I do but speak a little harshly to him—and you spoil


him yourself a


“I! who lie here and see naught of the boy from morning
to night she had picked up the flowers and was pulling
them to pieces. “Weeks pass, and he never comes to see his


mother—has no time to speak to me—as today. You came at


once and drove him out 2


Olav said nothing.

“But if Eirik is to suffer for my misdeeds—then it had
been better he had not come living into the world—though I
myself should have suffered death and perdition for it——”

“Be reasonable, Ingunn,” her husband begged her gently.

“Olav, listen to me—Olav, have pity! Too dearly will you
have bought my life and my health, if on this account you
should wander through the world, a poor and homeless pil-
grim in the lands of the black men, among wicked infidels. Or
if the worst should happen—that you should be forced to stand
naked:and dishonoured, in danger of your life maybe, be called
caitiff and murderer—for the sake of that man—you, the best
among franklins, upright and gentle and bold above all——-”


“Ingunn, Ingunn—that is what I am no Jonger—a traitor


I am to God and men

“You are no traitor—it cannot be a mortal sin that you
made away with yon man.—And you know notehow it feels to
have to bend beneath shame and dishonour—I know it, you
have never tried what it is to be disgraced

“I cannot, nay, so help me Christ and Mary, I cannot have
this brought upon me again—even if I were granted life and
the use of my limbs—and I should feel that everyone who
looked upon me knew of my shame: what manner of woman
you had brought home to be mistress of Hestviken—and my

249


THE SNAKE PIT


Eirik a base-born boy without rights or family, whom a run-
away, outlandish serving-man had begotten on me—tempting


me among the wool-sacks in the loft, as though I had been a


loose-minded, man-mad thrall woman
Olav stood and looked at her, white and stiff in the face.
“Nay—were I granted life to suffer in such wise—to stand
up and walk with this to face—with your little Cecilia and my
bastard holding my hands—and you away from us three, all
of us equally defenceless—then I should surely regret the time


39


I lay here waiting for my back to rot away:
She stretched out her arms to him. Olav looked away—

his face was immovably stiff—but he took her hand in his:
“Then it shall be as you wish .


250


14


EXT YEAR, AT THE BEGINNING OF LENT, TORHILD ByOrns-
New moved home to Rundmyr. And at once it was

over the whole country-side that she had to leave Hest-
viken so suddenly because she was to have a child by Olav Au-
dunsson.

If such a misfortune had befallen another man, who had
been as a widower for years with a sick wife living—no one
would have spoken aloud of the matter, but all the best men
and women of the neighbourhood would have given thought-
less youths and those who knew nothing of good manners to
understand that the less there was said about it, the better. Olav
knew that. But he also knew that he was the man—and that he
was regarded almost as a sort of outcast. Not that he had ever
wronged any of his neighbours, so far as he knew. And at times
folk had remembered this—when they thought it over, they
knew of no particular stain on his name; no ugly or dishonour-
able action could be laid at his door—Olav Audunsson had
simply acquired the reputation of being unpopular, a most un-
congenial fellow.

In the brief days of sunshine after Cecilia had come into
the world—before it became clear that her birth had cost the
mother the last remnant of her health—the folk of the country
round had met Olav with goodwill. Now that this strange curse
had been lifted, that denied them living children at Hestviken,
his equals had rejoiced with him, and they had thought that
now perhaps the man would be more sociable, not such a kill-

251


THE SNAKE PIT


joy as he had been—he extinguished life and merriment around
him simply by the way he sat in silence, glaring with unseeing
eyes in good company.—But Olav seemed so litile able to meet
them half-way—he remained the most arrant cross-stick, with
whom nobody could get on.

Then there came to light this matter, which was as ugly as
need be. While his wife lay palsied and full of torment, broken
by one childbirth after another, each harder than the last, the
man had been whoring with his housekeeper under his own
roof. They had known it for years, folk called to mind now—
this man and that knew that Olav had often brought his servant
gifts from the town, far too costly for her position. He had
helped her to provide for Bjérn’s and Gudrid’s children. And
all the time he had worked the land for her up at Rundmyr,
whither she had now betaken herself again. It was no long way
between Rundmyr and Hestviken—so they showed no great
shame: folk had seen Torhild swaying about in broad daylight,
broad as she was now below the belt—she carried pails between
her cot and the byre, far abroad she went along the edge of
the wood, chipping bark and cutting twigs.—While they were
about it, folk dug up again all the talk there had been of Bjorn
Egilsson and Gudrid.

Olav’s nearest kinsfolk in the neighbourhood, Signe of
Skikkjustad and Una of Rynjul, had taken his part all through
and done their best to excuse their cousin. But now even they
were silent and looked ill at ease if anyone did but name Olav
of Hestviken.


Otav knew most of what was said of him and Torhild. When

he had made his confession, Sira Hallbjorn asked if that was

all? And then he discovered what kind of rumours were afloat

about him—that this affair between him and Torhild had been
252


THE SNAKE PIT


going on for years, and that some folk hinted that maybe he
was also father to the child Liv Torbjérnsdatter had had a year
or two ago out at Hestviken.


One of the first Sundays when he was not permitted to ride
to church with other people, the weather was mild. Olav was
walking about the yard. A great wash-tub stood there; it had
thawed so much that there was water on the top of the ice.
Olav chanced to bend over it, and saw his own reflection in the
water. The face that looked up at him from the dark depth of
the vessel, blurred and somewhat indistinct, was like the face
of a leper—his pallor showed like patches of rime-frost against
the weatherbeaten skin, and the whites of his eyes were red
with blood.—Olav was frightened at the sight of himself.


HE had almost expected it to come as a relief in a way, when
he was forbidden to enter the church this year. In the end he
had felt he could no longer endure to go to mass with his un-
shriven sin. But for all that, it was worse to be shut out. He
had thought that the heavy penance for his adultery would at
the same time heal some of his old wound. But it only caused
him to reflect that this last sin was but a consummation of the
old sin.

But this was the last thing in which he had ventured to put
trust in himself—that nothing on earth would be able to break


down his fidelity to Ingunn.

Not a word had been spoken between them of his faith-
lessness. But he knew that she knew of it.

The beginning of it all was that he felt all at once that he
could no longer bear the burden of Ingunn. After that day in
the previous spring, when he had told her that he could live no
longer with a deadly sin stirring in his mind, begetting fresh
sins from day to day—and she had begged him to go on en-

253


THE SNAKE PIT


during it, for the boy’s sake and hers. And in her sick and tor-
tured state she had the advantage—no man worth calling a
man could have opposed such a living bundle of pain.

He could not humiliate himself so far as to broach the
subject again. He made as though nothing had been said, helped
her through the long nights as before. But now, when at last
his heart had run dry of love and patience, it was far more
trying. Now not a day passed but he felt how tired and worn
he was from the endless watching in the air of the sick-room.
And the great bitterness in his heart received constant acces-
sions of petty bitterness, every time he found himself growing
sluggish and forgetful in his work, heavy and inactive of body.

One night before midsummer he had gone out toward
morning. Ingunn had fallen asleep at last, and he wished for a
breath of the cool night air before lying down. Olav paused be-
fore the door of the house—it was light, calm and grey outside.
The boat’s crew were not expected home for some hours yet;
all on the manor were asleep. Then he noticed a thin column
of smoke above the roof of the cook-house. At that moment
Torhild Bjornsdatter appeared at its door and emptied a cook-
ing pot—her wet hair hung about her, dark and straggling.

Olav had always been strangely touched to see how Tor-
hild strove to keep herself clean and tidy, in spite of all she
had to do. She was always first up and last in bed, and thus
she found time to wash and plait her hair even in the middle of
the week, and mend her clothes. Ingunn had given up all such
things before they had been married four years.

Olav went across to Torhild and they spoke together for
a while—instinctively whispering, as it was so still—not a
sound but that of the birds beginning to wake. He had dozed a
little at times, he said in answer to her questions. But now he
would go in and lie down.

254


THE SNAKE PIT


“Could you not come over to us and lie down in my bed?”
asked the girl. “Then you would have more peace.” She her-
self and the children lay in one of the lofts now that it was
summer.

Torhild lived in the house that Olav’s parents had had
when they were first married. It was a little old house which
stood a little way apart, in a line with the cattle-sheds, under
the Horse crag, on the east of the yard toward the valley. Olav
had had it set in order, so that it was now good and weather-
tight, but it was very cramped inside.

Torhild accompanied him to the house and drew out the
cudgel with which she had bolted the door. The air from within
smote him like a sweet breath: the floor was strewed with juni-
per. The room was so narrow that the bed at its end filled it
from wall to wall: in the dim light its sheepskin covers shone
white as snow; around it were hung wreaths of flowers to keep
off flies and vermin. Torhild had made it all trim before she
moved out for the summer.

She bade him sit on the edge of the bed while she pulled
off his shoes. Olav felt sleep well up from this clean, fresh
couch, rising about him like sweet, tepid water. He was already
half off as he rolled over into the bed—was just aware that
Torhild lifted his feet in and spread the coverlet over him.

When he came to himself again, he saw the evening sun
shining yellow on the meadow outside the open door. Torhild
stood over him with a bowl in her hands—it was fresh, warm
milk. He drank and drank ;

“You got some sleep?” asked Torhild; she took the empty
bowl and went out.

His shoes stood before the bed; they were soft, well
smeared with tallow. And a clean everyday jerkin was laid out
for him—still damp across the chest where she had washed

255


THE SNAKE PIT


away the stains, and the tear was mended that had been there
when he wore it last.


Durinc the summer it happened more and more often that he
went and lay down in Torhild’s house to get a night’s sleep.
But each time he rested thus made it harder to go back to the
nights of watching; he was fairly hungry for sleep and again
sleep—he could not have had his fill of sleep for many years,
he thought.

Torhild brought him his morning bread when she came to
wake him. If his clothes were wet the night before, he found
dry ones ready when he woke, holes and tears were mended.
Olav asked her not to do this—it was Liv’s work, though she
seldom did it. Torhild had enough to do as it was. The girl
gave a little smile and shook her head.—

And then there aruse in him a desire for her—to know for
once in his life what it was like to hold a sound and healthy
woman in his arms, one he need not be afraid of touching. But
for all that, it was as though he had never willed it—even that
morning when he reached out and took hold of her, he had
expected her to thrust him back, perhaps in anger——But she
yielded to him, without a sigh.


ALL through that autumn and winter he seemed to be walking
at the bottom of a thick sea of mist. He could not bear himself,
and sometimes he could not bear her either; but he had no
force to pull himself out of the mire. When she moved back
into the house with the children, it must surely come to an end,
he comforted himself; but it did not.

He stayed indoors with Ingunn from early in the morning
till late in the evening. He had not been away from home a
night, except for a week in the seal-hunting. Now that he had

256


THE SNAKE PIT


betrayed his wife, he remembered his bitterness toward her as
a temptation of the Devil to which he had yielded. “Ingunn, my
Ingunn—how could I treat you thus, while you lie here, patient
and kind, helpless as a maimed animal? Was that to be the end
of our friendship, that I turned traitor to you?”

Night after night Olav carried her wrapped in skins and
blankets, as one carries a child, so that she might have some
relief from the stress of lying in bed. The more weary and cold
and sleepless it made him, the greater was the relief he got
from it.

He and Torhild had scarcely exchanged a word since that
fatal morning. In all these years Torhild had been almost the
only person with whom Olav had much talk—as with a grown-
up equal. He remembered that—remembered what he owed this
Torhild, whom he had rewarded thus. He could find nothing to
excuse his misdeed. She had known no man before him—all
she had known was hard work for other folk’s welfare—and to
make no complaint if life was too hard for her. And now he
durst not speak to her, checked her when she would speak—in
his heart he knew full well what she had long treasured up,
and why this upright and scrupulous woman who was no longer
young had allowed him to possess her without resistance. He
was aware of it in her silent caresses. But if she once forgot
herself and put it into words, his shame would stifle him.

Of Bjorn, her father, he also thought. Ay, had he been


alive now, he would have cut him down straight.


He guessed that it would not remain hidden either. It was in

the darkest days before Yule that his fear changed to certainty.

And in his despair temptation came to him. It was as though

the Devil, who had led him for all these years into an ever-in-

creasing slough, going before him cloaked and half disguised
257


THE SNAKE PIT


—had now turned about, thrown off his hood of concealment
and shown him his true face:

He knew that Torhild would do whatever he asked of her.
In former years it had often happened that they had been out
together in a boat alone. She would go with him again—even
if she guessed what was in his mind, she would follow him, he


felt that—Then something might easily happen.

And Ingunn would be spared the knowledge of this. And
he would be spared the shame of being exposed to every
mother’s son around the fiord as the worst of wretches. If he
was already in the Devil’s power neck and crop—he could no


longer have a soul to lose.

But no, for all that. It was Satan who held out all this to
him, but he himself said no. “This crime I will not be guilty of
—no matter whether you have my chair ready for me in Hell.
I have nothing to lose, I can well believe that—honour and
hope of salvation and my happiness with Ingunn which I had
saved so far—all this I have sold. But nevertheless you will not
get me to do this. I will not do Torhild more harm than I have
done already. Not even for Ingunn’s sake——

“Lord, have mercy! Holy Mary, pray for us! Not for me,
I beg nothing for myself—but, Lord, have mercy—upon the


bP)


others


“AY, now it is too late,” he said scornfully to the Devil. “They
have guessed it, my whole household has guessed it; now you
may cease to mutter about it. Be quiet! You will get me, when
the time comes an

An ugly silence had fallen about him. The house-folk
ceased speaking when the master came near. Scarcely a whis-
pered word was spoken at mealtimes. Olav sat in the high seat,
the housekeeper brought in the food and served it out. No one


258


THE SNAKE PIT


could mark the slightest change in her bearing; she was about
from dawn to late in the evening, industrious as ever, her back
was as straight and her foot as nimble, though it was plain to
all that she no longer went alone.

Ingunn turned her face to the wall when Torhild came
into the room.


So much had already gone by of the new year that Lent was at
hand, and yet not a word had been said between Olav and Tor-
hild of that which awaited them. But one day he saw her go up
to the storehouse loft after the morning meal. He followed. She
was taking pieces of bacon out of the salt barrel and scraping
off the worst of the scum that had formed on them.

“T have been thinking, Torhild,” Olav went straight to the
point—“that it is not much I can do for you; I cannot help
you much. But I will do what is in my power. And therefore I
thought—that farm of Auken that I bought over on the Hudr-
heim side five years ago—that I give you a deed of it and
make it over to you. Rundmyr I can continue to work for you
and your brothers and sisters, as we have done in these last
years——”

Torhild reflected for a moment:

“Nay, it may well be better that I do not stay up there at
Rundmyr Be .

“Tt will surely be better for you, if you do not have to live
hereabouts. After the trouble I have brought upon you,” said
the man in a low voice.

“Auken—” Torhild looked at him. “That is no small gift
to make to a woman of my condition, Olav.”

“Tt was reckoned to be a three-cows’ croft, and there were
some good cornfields on the south side of the knoll the houses
stand on. But you know that no folk have lived there for a

259


THE SNAKE PIT


score of years, and they who rented the land of me have not
kept it in good tilth.”

Torhild turned round to him and held out her hand:

“Then I say thanks, Olav. I see that you wish to make
good provision for me.”

Olav squeezed her fingers:

“T have behaved worst to you of all people,” he whispered.
“You had the right to expect a different reward of me——”

Torhild looked him in the eyes:

“The fault is mine as much as yours, I ween, master.”

He shook his head. Then he said quietly:

“Will it not be too hard for you now—all the work of the
house here?”

“Oh no.” She smiled feebly. “But perhaps it were best
that I stay here at Hestviken no longer—?”

Olav nodded stiffly. “But the houses over at Auken are in
a sorry state—sunken and roofless. I shall have them repaired
and put new roofs—but you cannot move in before the sum-
mer.”
“Then I must stay at Rundmyr meanwhile,” Torhild sug-
gested.

“Ay, I see no other way,” said Olav.


A WEEK after, Olav left home for a few days, and when he came
back, Torhild had moved home to the croft at Rundmyr. And
Olav discovered that he missed her—unspeakably.

It was not that his affection for Ingunn was less or other
than it had been. This was something that had grown up en-
tirely outside it. As in a sort of mirage he had had a vision of
a life very different from his own; had seen’ how it might be
for a man to have a sound and sensible wife by his side in all
things, one who took her share of their common burden and

260


THE SNAKE PIT


bore it with as much discretion and strength as he bore his—
or even more. And to see children, sons and daughters, suc-
ceeding one another, without its breaking and slowly killing
the mother to bring them into the world. It was not that he
would have changed his lot for this that the vision showed him
—he thought that, had he known from his first meeting with
the child Ingunn what she would bring him as a dowry, he
would nevertheless have reached out both hands for her.

And yet he missed Torhild painfully. She had done him
more good than any other creature. And he had repaid her in


the worst way.


Errik had seen how it was with Torhild, like everyone else in
the house, and he had not given it much thought. But there was
this silence that spread around Torhild—and it began to dawn
upon Ejirik that there was something sinister behind it. It could
not be merely that she had gone the way of so many other serv-
ing-maids.

This silence which spread like the soundless rings in water,
when a stone was thrown into it. And by degrees, without a
word having been said to him, Eirik became aware that this
same sinister silence surged about his father too. A vague, evil
dread stirred in the boy’s soul—but he could not guess what
his father had to do with Torhild’s being with child. For his
father was married to their mother-—.

Sira Hallbjérn sent word to Hestviken that this year Eirik
Olavsson must go to confession in Lent and receive the Easter
sacrament; the boy was now in his tenth winter, he ought to
have come the year before. Eirik forgot all his gloomy anxie-
ties on the morning his father sent him off—the priest wished
to have the children with him for a week to teach them. It was
the first time Eirik was to ride alone right up to the church-

261


THE SNAKE PIT


town; his father had lent him a little light sword, and behind
his saddle he had a bag of gifts for the priest and provisions


for himself.

The day after his return he asked Olav:

“Father—who is my godmother?”

“Tora Steinfinnsdatter, your aunt, who is dead.” Olav was
not sure of this, but believed he had heard it once. Eirik asked
no more.

Memories that he had not thought of for years began to
swarm upon the boy. Half-forgotten feelings of insecurity and
bewilderment were revived.—The other children had spoken of
godmothers and godfathers—Sira Hallbjérn had wished to hear
on the first day how much they knew of Christian religion from
their homes. His .father had taught Eirik his Credo, Pater-
noster, Ave Maria and Gloria Patri, but that was long ago, and
now he never saw that the boy said his prayers. So Eirik did
not know them well, and he had almost forgotten what they
meant in Norse. Nearly all the other children were better taught
—and most of them had learnt something from their god-
mother or godfather.

Eirik remembered that while he was at Siljuaas the mother
he had there pointed out a stout, splendidly clad woman, one
day when they were at church, saying that she was his aunt.
But she had not so much as looked at him, as she walked past
them. He was not even sure that she was the same aunt as the
one in whose house they had lodged, when his father fetched
him from Siljuaas. At any rate he had never heard that she was
his godmother. For the first time it occurred to him to wonder
why he had been there, at Siljuaas, when he was small.He
had often heard of other children being brought up away from
their parents; but it was always with kinsfolk, solitary people
or old. That little maid, Ingegjerd, who was so pretty and wore

262


THE SNAKE PIT


a silver belt about her waist like a grown-up maid, only that
the plates were quite small, and who knew all the penitential
psalms almost right—she was with her godmother, and she
ruled the whole house for the childless couple and was given
everything she asked for. But at Siljuaas the cabin had been
poor and narrow, and Hallveig and Torgal had had plenty of
other children—and he had never heard his parents mention
these folk since; so they could not be kinsfolk of theirs.

_ Bastard and straw-brat, he knew well enough now what
those words meant, and leman too. The memory of his mother’s
visit which had frightened him so much that time—now it
came up again, a living riddle. Words that he had heard his
mother murmur almost to herself, when she could not hide her
tears—they came up; and he remembered that his mother had
once borne the keys, but they had been moved to Torhild’s belt
even before her mistress became bedridden.—And now, since
his mother had lain low, palsied and unfit for anything, his
father had taken to himself Torhild in her stead, and she was
already far gone with child, and Eirik guessed now that it was
his father’s. But if his father had been married, this was a sin
so grievous that scarcely any man would dare commit it—.
But then it must be so, that his mother was only his father’s


leman.
But then, but then—! That a rich franklin sent away his


leman and children, assigned them a little home to dwell in
far from his own, while he himself took in another or married
—that had happened many times in the country round, and
Eirik had heard of it.

The boy’s heart was gripped by the dread of it, so that he
could not sit still or stay quietly in one place. His father might
send them away, if he wished—. And he no longer cared for
any of them. It was over a year since his father had taken irik

263


THE SNAKE PIT


about with him, he no longer taught him anything, scarcely
spoke to him. Nor did he take any notice of Cecilia. And his
mother lay there, needing constant attention and unable to do
the merest trifle of work. If his father ordered them all three to
leave Hestviken, he would bring Torhild and her child hither
in their stead.

He had always remarked his mother’s dislike of Torhild
and never thought about it. Now he saw—. And hatred, of
which hitherto he had known nothing, was born in the boy’s
heart. He hated Torhild Bjornsdatter, his cheeks turned white
and he clenched his fists if he did but think of her. He took it
into his head that one night he would steal up to Rundmyr and
kill her, who would force his poor sick mother and all of them
out of their home—drive his knife straight into her wicked,
false heart.

But his father, his father— Eirik stood as it were with two
arrows in his hand, not knowing which to lay to his bow.


Should he hate his father too—or love him even more than be-
fore, now that he was in danger of losing him? To Ejirik Olav
had always appeared the most perfect being on earth—the
man’s impatience, taciturnity and coolness had made no im-
pression on the child; he shook them from him as the sea-bird
shakes off the water, and thought only of the times when his
father had treated him differently. Above all when they had
been out together without other company, in the forest or on
the fiord, and his father had been the all-knowing, helpful be-
ing who warmed the child and gave him a feeling of security
by his quiet good humour; but even at other times Eirik had
often been able to feel that his father wished him well. And
then there was that time when his father had to cut off his poi-
soned finger and thrust the red-hot iron into his own flesh to
show his son there was nothing to be afraid of. To the boy this
264,


THE SNAKE PIT


was such a shining deed that he did not remember it clearly—
it dazzled him to think of it.

Lose his father—Kirik turned to fire and ice with pain at
the thought. Then he had dreams of doing something or other
—a manly deed which would bring him fame. He imagined
many things, but did not quite know which to choose. But when
his father’s eyes were opened to the kind of son he had, when
he saw that he was bringing up a lad of spirit—when Eirik had
won his father’s heart, then he would say to him that he claimed
an honourable position for his sister and himself, and his father
should not send away his mother, were she never so sick and
useless and in the way. But Torhild he should drive so far
abroad that he need never more fear her coming with her child


to claim their place.

But even if his affection for his father was more lively
than ever, his confidence and sense of security were gone; and
now Ejirik noticed this—that his father was not fond of him,
although the man never corrected him now, scarcely paid heed


to him.
Olav hardly gave Eirik a thought now, only noticed with
a vague relief that the boy was quieter than before, less in the
way.
Not to a living soul did Eirik so much as hint at the con-
flict of thoughts that possessed him.


At last, one day in the course of spring, Olav stayed behind
when the household went out after the morning meal—and then
he said it:

“Tis likely you have heard—Torhild has a son—” he
spoke in a low voice which sounded husky.

“T heard it—” With a painful effort she turned her head
so far as to see a glimpse of her husband as he sat leaning

265


THE SNAKE PIT


back in the high seat. His face was white and patched with
red, his eyes swollen and bloodshot. She guessed he had been
weeping.

She had not seen him thus in all these years, not when Au-


dun died, not when she herself received the last sacraments,
that time the women expected her to bleed to death. Only once


before had she seen Olav weep.
“What is it like—?” whispered his wife—“Torhild’schild?”
“Fair and shapely, they say.”
“Have you not—seen—your son?”
Olav shook his head:
“T have not seen Torhild—not since she left us.”
“But surely you will see it—?”
“T can do no more than I have done—for her. I cannot
amend the boy’s lot.—And so


2


Olav got up and crossed the room—was going out. Ingunn
called to him:

“What name has she given him?”

“Bjorn.” Ingunn saw that his tears were about to overcome
him again.

“That was the name of your mother’s father.”

“She can have had no thought of that. "T'was her father’s


29


name, you know

Olav made as though he would bend over his wife, but
then he turned abruptly and went out.

She said no more to him till supper-time.—From Liv she
had heard that he had gone straight off to the smithy in the
morning, and no one in the place had seen the master all day.
—He looked as if he had wept most of the time.

Then came the night. Olav and Ingunn were left alone in
the house—with Eirik, who was asleep against the wall in his
father’s bed. The man tended the sick woman as he did all the

266


THE SNAKE PIT


other nights. Several times his wife saw that he was near burst-
ing into tears again. And not a word did she dare to say—to
him, who had now gotten a son, and who could never lead
in his own son to sit beside him in the high seat in his ances-
tral manor—. But what of Eirik—when she herself was no
more——?

Withal Ingunn had an obscure feeling that it was not only
sorrow over his son that had so shattered Olav.

The man himself was not thinking so much of his child.
He wept chiefly over himself—it was as though he saw the last
remnant of his honour and his pride lying crushed before his
feet.


Not till after Olav’s Mass had Olav Audunsson finished repair-
ing the houses at Auken so far that Torhild Bjornsdatter could
move thither with her belongings. His house-carls were to carry
her and her goods across the fiord. Olav himself had gone off
south to Saltviken the day she was to move.

Ingunn lay listening—she had had both doors thrown open
to the yard. She heard the coming of the pack-horses, the hoof-
beats on the rock. Then the cow-bell, the tripping of little hoofs
—the children, Rannveig and Kaare, ran about, driving and
keeping together their flock of sheep and goats.

Liv stood at the outer door, sniffing and making game of
the procession:

“Torhild takes the lower path along the creek,” announced
the maid, buzzing with excitement. “To bring her whoreson
among the houses here—that’s more than even she has a mind


29


to
“Hush, Liv!” whispered Ingunn, breathing rapidly. “Run
down to her—bid her—ask if she will—tell her I would so fain
have a sight of her child #4
267


THE SNAKE PIT


A moment later Eirik dashed in hurriedly. His narrow,
swarthy face was burning—his yellow eyes sparkled with in-
dignation:

“Mother! Now she is coming hither! Shall I drive her
off?—we must not let the filthy Hell-sow drag her bastard in
here——!”

“irik, Eirik!” His mother called to him in a wail, stretch-
ing out her thin, yellow hand. “For God’s mercy’s sake—say
not such ugly words. ’Tis a sin to scoff at a poor creature and
call her bad names——”

He was so tall now, her boy, slender as a reed and slight
of build. Angrily he tossed his shapely head with its black
curls.

“Tt is I who sent for her,” whispered Ingunn. The boy
frowned and turned on his heel—then he went and flung him-
self down on the edge of the north bed, sat there staring with
an angry, scornful smile, as Torhild entered.

The girl came forward with bent head—she had bound up
her hair under a coarse, tight-drawn coif—but her back was as
straight as ever. She carried a bundle in her arms, wrapt in a
kerchief with a red and white border. It was strange to see that
she bore herself with all her old dignity and calm, even as she
appeared before Olav’s wife, humble and sorrowful.

The women greeted one another, and Ingunn remarked
that Torhild would have good weather for the passage across.
Torhild agreed.

“I had so great a mind to see your boy,” whispered In-
gunn shyly. “You must do me the kindness to let me see him.
You must lay him down here before me; you know I cannot
raise myself,” she said, as Torhild held out the bundle. Then
the girl laid the child down on the bed before the mistress.

With trembling hands Ingunn undid the kerchief that was

268


THE SNAKE PIT.


wrapt about it. The boy was awake—he lay staring, at nothing
in particular, with big blue eyes; a little smile, as it were a
reflection of a light none but himself could see, hovered about
the toothless, milky mouth. A fine, fair down curled from un-
der the border of his cap.

“He is big?” asked Ingunn—“for his age—three months,
is it not?”

“He will be three months by Laurence Mass.”

“And fair he is. He is like my Cecilia, methinks?”
Torhild stood silent, looking down at her child. There was
“no great change to be seen in the housekeeper—though in some

way she had grown younger and fairer. It was not only that her
figure seemed yet more shapely: she was broad-shouldered and
had always been high-bosomed, with a chest as deep and broad
as a man’s. But now her full, firm breast looked as if it would
burst her kirtle—and this made her seem slighter in the waist.
But it was not that alone—her grey, bold-featured face had
softened as it were and become younger.

“He has no look of knowing what hunger is, this fellow,”
said Ingunn.

“Nay—I thank God,” replied Torhild quietly; “he knows
not what it is—and with His help he shall never know it either,
so long as I am alive.”

“You may be sure Olav will see to it that the boy shall
never lack aught, even if you be taken from him,” said Ingunn


in a low voice.

“That I know full surely.”

Torhild threw the cloth over her child again and lifted
him in her arms. Ingunn held out her hand in farewell—Tor-
hild bent deeply over it and kissed it.


2 August 10.
269


THE SNAKE PIT


Then Ingunn burst out—she could not keep back the words:

“So in the end you got your old desire fulfilled, Torhild!”

Torhild replied calmly and with a mounful air:

“T tell you, Ingunn—as truly as I hope in Christ and Mary
Virgin for mercy for myself and this my child—I do not be-
lieve, mistress, that I ever desired to deceive you—and he, your


husband, never desired it, as you must know—but it came about
29


nevertheless
Ingunn said bitterly:
“Nevertheless I have seen it, years before I lost my health,
what thoughts you had of Olav—you liked him better than all
beside—and that has been so for more than three years or


four. a


“Ay, from the time I knew him first I have liked him best
of all.”

She bowed stiffly and went out.

Eirik started up, spat after the woman and swore. His
mother called to him, in a hushed and frightened voice:

“Kirik mine, be not so sinful—never say those ugly words
of any mother’s child,” she begged him, bursting into tears and
trying to draw the boy to her. But he wrested himself from her
and dashed out of the door.


270


15


EVERTHELESS IT OVERTOOK OLAV AS SOMETHING QUITE
Nose when the end came.

The winter following the misfortune with Torhild
Bjornsdatter passed like the two that preceded it. Everyone
marvelled that life still clung to Ingunn Steinfinnsdatter—it
was more than two years since she had been able to take dry
food. She had bed-sores now, and in spite of all Olav’s efforts
they grew worse. She herself felt little of the sores, except those
under her shoulders, they sometimes burnt like fire. She al-
ways had to have linen cloths under her, and although Olav
smeared the places where the skin was broken thickly with
grease, the linen often clung fast to the sores, and then it was
pitiful to see her torments. But she complained wonderfully
little.

One morning Olav had carried her over to his own bed,
and while Liv spread clean skins and linen on hers, he tended
her back; he had laid her on her side. He was dizzy with fatigue
and sickened by the bad smell there was now in the room—
suddenly he bent over his wife and cautiously touched with his
lips the moist, open sores on her thin shoulder-blades—he had
recalled something he had heard—of holy men who kissed the
sores before they bound up the lepers. whom they tended. But
then this was the other way about: it was he who was the leper,
though he seemed clean and sound outside—and she must in-
deed be washed clean now, who had borne the torments of all
these years meekly and without complaint.

271


THE SNAKE PIT


He accused her of nothing now.

Ingunn guessed it must be hard for Olav to be shut out of
the church. And one night, when her husband had fasted on
bread and water during the day, so that he was quite worn out
when he had to watch by her, she whispered, as she drew him
down to her:

“I will not complain, Olav—but why could I not be suf-
fered to die, when Cecilia was born? Then you would not have
fallen into this sin with Torhild z

“Speak not so.” But he could not tell her it was not that
that had brought about the misfortune. It was that he had been
embittered against her, and then he had grown careless and


weary of himself, had longed for rest from all that weighed
upon him. Now he no longer gave her any blame for it—she
had known no better: he had known for close on thirty years
that Ingunn had little wit, and God had laid it upon him to
judge and answer both for himself and for her. Simple she was
—and unspeakably dear.to him. He put no blame on any but
himself. Mea culpa, mea culpa—and the fault of no one else.

All things went regularly at Hestviken now, both with the
farming and the fishery. If the master could not take part him-
self—but he had to be with her. He always consoled himself
with the thought—“It cannot possibly go on much longer.” But
at the same time he could not imagine it would be today, nor
tomorrow, nor the next day. The end must indeed come soon,
but there was still a little time.


Easter fell early that year, so that the Oslo fair was held in

the week before Saint Blaise’s Day. Olav had to go into town:

he had some goods lying in the hands of Claus Wiephart—had

entered into a kind of trading partnership with the German, but

he did not trust that fellow farther than he could see him, nor
272


THE SNAKE PIT


had he cared to lodge with Claus on his recent visits; it came
too dear. Hitherto he had excused himself by saying that he
would lie in the guest house of the Preaching Friars, since from
his youth up he had been a friend of that Order. But this year
he could not very well be in the convent, since he was banned
from taking part in the mass. So this time he had put up at the
Great Hostelry.

On the evening of the last day of the fair he sat in the
great room of the hostelry munching the provisions he had
brought and washing them down with their indifferent ale,
when Anki came in and asked for Master Olav of Hestviken.

“Here am I. Is there any news from home, Arnketil, or
what brings you hither?”

“God help you, master. Ingunn lies at the point of death
—she was given extreme unction as I left home——”

She had had a fit of colic, but no worse than often before,
and she had coughed violently for some nights. But when she
collapsed that morning they did not guess that she was dying
—until old Tore came in to dinner. As soon as he saw the state
the woman was in, he went out, saddled his horse and rode for
the priest. Sira Hallbjorn was again away from home—ay, now
his parishioners would complain to the Bishop on his next
visitation—but one of these barefoot friars of his occupied the
parsonage and was called his vicar. Even before the monk be-
gan his ministrations to the dying woman, he told the house-
folk that they must send for the master in all haste—it was un-
certain at the best whether he could reach home in time to say


farewell to his wife.

There had been no cold worth talking about that winter;

beyond the islands the fiord had been open, so that Olav had

come by boat. But then here had been a few nights’ frost, fol-
273


THE SNAKE PIT


lowed by a strong southerly wind, and now it was freezing
again—Anki had been able to row as far as Sigvaldasteinar,
but there he had had to take to the land and borrow a horse.
And now it was likely that the fiord was full of ice a long way
out; it was hard to say how Olav would reach home quickest.
No doubt he would have to ride round inland. Claus would be
able to find him a horse.

People had collected about Olav Audunsson and his man,
they stood listening and offering advice. Some young, well-
dressed squires in long, coloured kirtles and cloaks also came
up—they had been sitting farther up the hall, laughing rather
noisily as they drank German mum and threw dice. Now one of
them spoke to Olav—he was a tall, fair lad with silky, flaxen
hair which he wore long upon his shoulders according to the
latest foreign fashion. Olav knew him by sight: he was one of
the sons of the knight of Skog and was in company with his
brother; the others were doubtless pages from the King’s
palace.

“It means much to you to reach home quickly, I can guess.
You can borrow a horse of me—I have a well-paced horse out
in the friars’. paddocks—if you will go thither with me?”

Olav protested that this was too much—but the young man
was off already, settled his gaming debts and drank up his ale,
while he took his sword and cloak. Then Olav gave Arnketil
orders about his baggage and threw his cloak about him.


THE snow crunched under their feet as they came outside. The
sky was clear and the hills were still green; the first stars were
coming out: “’T will be villainously cold tonight,” said Olav’s
companion; they struck out eastward through the alleys toward
Gjeitabru.

274


THE SNAKE PIT


Olav asked the other about the road—he was totally un-
acquainted with the districts lying east of the town toward
Skeidissokn, had never come to Oslo overland. The young man
answered that he could ride across the whole of the Botnfiord,
the ice was safe enough—vwell, it was unsafe too, in some places,
“But I can ride over with you.”

Olav said that was far too much and he would find his
way sure enough; but his companion, Lavrans Bjérgulfsson
was his name, made off at once: “I have my horse standing in
Steinbjorn’s Yard; if you will wait for me in the church—I
shall not be long—” he turned and went back to the town.

The Franciscans’ church was not yet dedicated and the
friars said mass in a house within the garth; but the church
was roofed, Olav had heard, and they preached there in the
evenings during Lent. Not before Easter would his first year
of penance be ended, but he was free to enter this edifice, which
had not yet become the house of God.

For all that he had a queer feeling as he crossed the bridge
and took the trampled path over a field, where the snow shone
grey in the falling darkness, toward the church, whose black
gable-end was outlined against the blue, star-set gloom.

It was colder inside than out. From habit he bent the knee
as he came in, forgetting that the Holy Sacrament had not yet
been brought into this house. From the farther end of the dark
nave his eye was met by the blaze of a great number of little
tapers—they were burning at the foot of a great crucifix which
stood against the grey stone wall—beside it the chancel arch
yawned before a pitch-dark empty space.

A little farther down the nave a solitary candle was burn-
ing by a lectern; before the book a monk stood reading, clad
in the Order’s brown garb of poverty. He was standing on an

275


THE SNAKE PIT
inverted tool-chest, and about him were assembled a score of
men and women in thick winter clothes—some stood and some
had drawn up beams and overturned vessels to sit upon—their
breath showed like white smoke in the light of the candle.

The very incompleteness and desolation of the place caught
at him like a hand clutching at his anxious heart. The openings
for windows in the wall were boarded up; the scaffolding still
stood at the western end of the nave, and he made out boxes
and mortar vats and boards and ends of beams, as his eyes
grew accustomed to the darkness. But most desolate of all was
the black chasm of the choir—and above this image of the
world, without form and void, rose the great crucifix with the
glittering assemblage of candles at its foot.

It was not like any crucifix he had seen before—at every
step he took forward, an immense pain and dread rose within
him at the sight of this image of Christ—it was no image, it
seemed alive—God Himself in mortal agony, bleeding from
His scourging as though every wound men have inflicted upon
one another had stricken His flesh. The body was bent forward
at the loins, as though contorted with pain, the head had fallen
forward, with closed eyes over which streamed the blood from
the crown of thorns, down into the half-open, sighing mouth.

Beneath the crucifix stood Mary and John the Evangelist.
The Mother held her thin hands clasped, one above the other,
against her bosom, as she looked up—mournfully as though
she raised the sorrows of all races and all ages to her Son,
praying for help. Saint John looked down; his face was con-
tracted with brooding upon this mystery.


The monk read—Olav had known the words since he was
a child:
276


THE SNAKE PIT


O vos omnes, qui transitis per viam, attendite, et videte, si
est dolor sicut dolor meus.*
The monk closed the book and began to speak—Olav did


not hear a word—he only saw the image on the cross before


him: et videte, si est dolor sicut dolor meus.

Ingunn lay at home, in the agony of death, if she were not
dead already. It did not seem real to him, but he knew now
that this sorrow of his was also as a bleeding wound upon that
crucified body. Every sin he had committed, every wound he
had inflicted on himself or others, was one of the stripes his
hand had laid upon his God. As he stood here, feeling that his
own heart’s blood must run black and sluggish in his veins
with sorrow, he knew that his own life, full of sin and sorrow,
had been one more drop in the cup God drained in Gethsemane.
And another sentence he had learnt in his childhood came back
to him: he had believed it was a command, but now it sounded


as a prayer from the lips of a sorrowing friend: Vade, et am-
2


plius jam noli peccare

Then it was as though his eyes lost their power of sight,
and his blood rushed back to his heart, so that he grew out-
wardly cold as a dead man. All this was as it were within him:
his own soul was as this house, destined for a church, but
empty, without God; darkness and disorder reigned within, but
the only sparks of light which burnt and sent out warmth were
gathered about the image of the rejected Lord, Christ crucified,
bearing the burden and the suffering of his sin and his despair.
—Vade, et amplius jam noli peccare.

My Lord and my God! Yea, Lord, I come—I come, for I
love Thee—. I love Thee, and I acknowledge: Tibi soli pec-
cavi, et malum coram te feci—against Thee alone have I sinned,


1 Lamentations, i, 12.
2St. John, viii, 11.
277


THE SNAKE PIT


and done evil in Thy sight—He had said these words a thou-
sand times, and only now did he know that this was the truth


which held all other truths in itself as in a cup.

My God and my all!——

Then someone touched him on the shoulder—he gave a
start: it was Lavrans Bjorgulfsson: the horses were standing in
the garth. This was the shorter way—the young man went in
front, up through the church, into the choir. Now that Olav’s
eyes were used to the darkness he could make out the altar—
the naked stone, as yet undedicated and unadorned, a cold,
dead heart.—There was a little door on the south of the choir:

“Look how you go—the steps are not finished—” Lavrans
jumped down into the snow. Out in the yard stood two of the
friars. One held the horses, the other carried a lantern. Lavrans
must have told them how things stood, for one of them came
up to Olav—it was one of those who had been with Sira Hall-
bjorn, and he had come out to Hestviken once. Olav knew the
monk’s face, but did not remember his name.

“Patiently and meekly she bore it all, your wife. Ay,
and now it is Brother Stefan who is with her—ay, we shall re-
member her in our prayers here too tonight.”


THE north wind was at their backs as they rode over the ice—
long stretches of it were like steel, swept of the little snow that
had fallen lately. The moon would not rise till toward morn-
ing; the night was black and strewed with stars.

“We shall have to ride up to Skog,” said Olav’s guide,
“and get fur cloaks on Ss


It was a great manor, Olav saw—many great houses stretching

away in the darkness. Young Lavrans sprang from the saddle,

unhindered by the long folds of his mantle, stretched his tall,
278


THE SNAKE PIT


supple frame, and went across and opened the door of one of
the houses. Then he stood by his horse, caressing and talking
to it, till a man came out with a lantern—the light seemed to
hover over the snow.

“You must dismount, Olav, and come in with me.” He
took the lantern from his man and showed the way across the
courtyard. “We live where we have been since we were mar-
ried—my stepmother and Aasmund, my brother, have the great
house, as in father’s time—” he seemed to take it for granted
that everyone knew all about the great people of Skog.

“Is your father dead?” asked Olav for the sake of saying
something.

“Ay, “tis a year and half since——”

“You are young though—to be master of this great manor.”

“I? not so young either—I am three and twenty winters
old—” he opened a door. They did not seem to bar their houses
here at Skog. Through an anteroom they entered a little hall,
warm and tidy. Lavrans lighted a thick tallow candle which
stood near a curtained bed, threw the pine-torch on to the
hearth and spoke to someone within the bed. He handed in
some woman’s clothes behind the curtain.

A moment after, a young woman stepped out, lightly clad,
with a red cloak over her long, blue shift—she was tucking
locks of jet-black hair under the coif which she had flung
around her narrow, large-eyed face. While she busied herself,
with easy, youthful briskness, her husband lay half-hidden
within the bed—there were sounds of a little child behind the
curtains, and the young father laughed aloud:

“Nay, Haavard—will you pull your father’s nose off?—
leave go now. Or maybe you want to feel if ’tis frozen off
me—” The hidden youngster choked with laughter.

The mistress had brought in food from the closet and of-

279


THE SNAKE PIT


fered her guest a foaming bowl of ale. Olav thanked her, but
shook his head—he could no more eat and drink now than if
he had been dead. Lavrans shook off the child he was playing
with, came up and took some food standing.

“You must give me a drink of water then, Ragnfrid—My
wife and I have made a vow to drink naught but water in Lent,
except we be in company with guests or on a journey”; he gave
an affectionate look at the foaming bowl of ale. With a little
crooked smile Olav accepted the draught of welcome, took a
taste of it and passed the bowl to the master of the house, who
now did justice to his guest—the young man did not seem
minded to say good-bye to the slight intoxication that had been
on him when they left Oslo. It had been passing off as they
rode along, but now he made up for it, generously.

The single draught he had taken worked upon Olav so
that he felt awakened from his ecstasy. Gone was the strange
sense that all he saw and felt was a shadow, but that he himself
had been taken away this night by God from the paths of men,
brought before His face alone in a desolate spot—for now He
willed that this His creature should understand at last—And
he heard all sounds from the visible world outside as he heard
the voice of the fiord under the crags at home in Hestviken,
sensed them without hearing. Voices reached him as though
they were speaking outside a closed hall, where he was alone
with the Voice which adjured and complained, full of love and
sorrow: O vos omnes, qui transitis per viam, attendite, et videte,
si est dolor sicut dolor meus !


But now the door of the closed room was thrown open, the
Voice was silent—and he sat in a strange house with total
strangers, the night was far spent, and he was to find his way
through country that was quite unknown to him, ere he reached
home. And there death awaited him, and the choice which, as

280


THE SNAKE PIT


he now saw, he had made more and more difficult for himself
every day and every year he had put it off. But now he must
choose—he knew that, as he sat here feeling dazed and frozen,
roused out of his strange visionary state: after that vision or
whatever it might have been, he could not go on drowsily hop-
ing that one day God would choose for him—force him.

So many a time had he allowed himself to be driven out
of his road, upon false tracks which he had no desire to follow.
Long ago he had acknowledged the truth of Bishop Torfinn’s
words: the man who is bent upon doing his own will shall
surely see the day when he finds he has done that which he
never willed. But he perceived that this kind of will was but a
random shot, an arrow sent at a venture.—But he still had his
own inmost will, and it was as a sword. When he was called to
Christianity, he had been given this free will, as the chieftain
gives his man a sword when he makes him a knight. If he had
shot away all his other weapons, marred them by ill use—this
right to choose whether he would follow God or forsake Him
remained a trusty blade, and his Lord would never strike it out
of his hand. Though his faith and honour as a Christian were
now stained like the misused sword of a traitor knight—God
had not taken it from him; he might bear it still in the com-
pany of Our Lord’s enemies, or restore it kneeling to that Lord,
who yet was ready to raise him to His bosom, greet him with
the kiss of peace and give him back his sword, cleansed and
blessed.

Olav felt a vehement desire to be left alone with these
thoughts—though he did not forget that this young Lavrans
had shown himself very kindly, and he knew it might be diffi-
cult for him to reach home that night without the other’s help.
But the young folk troubled and disturbed him by their con-
stant services. The wife knelt before him and would help him

281


THE SNAKE PIT


change his boots—she had brought out foot-clouts of thick
homespun and big fur boots stuffed with straw. The scent of
her skin and hair was wafted to him, warm and healthy—it
made him shrink within himself, as though to ward it off. The
young mother breathed a fragrance of all the things in life ©
from which he had been led away step by step, until tonight he
saw that he was parted from them as completely as though he
had already taken a monk’s vows.

The husband came in with his arms full of fur clothing
and set about finding something that would fit his guest. Olav
was queerly abashed to see how much too large for him the
other’s clothes were—he was quite lost in them when he got
them on. Olav’s broad shoulders gave him a look of bulk, and
the other seemed so slight; but he was doubtless more substan-
tial than he looked, and he was tall besides. And in the pride
of his grief Olav felt mortified that he should appear a lesser
man than Lavrans Bjérgulfsson in everything, stature and wor-
ship and power—this tall, fair-skinned boy who breathed this
air of home with wife and child, who was master of this rich
knightly manor, helpful, kind and well content. He had a long
face with handsome, powerful features, but his cheeks were still
smooth and of a childlike roundness; life had not marked his
young and healthy skin with a single scratch—was never likely
to do so either: he looked as though destined to take his course
through the world without ever meeting sorrow.

Olav protested that he could well find his own way through
the forest in Skeidissokn and Lavrans must not think of riding
from home so late at night for his sake in this cold. But his
host was quick to reply that, as it had not snowed properly for
so long, the forest was full of old trails; a man must be well
acquainted with the paths by Gerdarud to find the shortest way.
And as for a night out of doors—nay, he made nothing of that.

282 |


THE SNAKE PIT


Outside in the courtyard a groom held two fresh horses,
fine, active animals. An excellent horseman was this young
squire, and he had the best of horses. Olav was secretly vexed
that he had to be given a hand in mounting—it was these boots
that were far too big.


THE road lay through forest most of the time, and the thin coat-
ing of snow was frozen hard and broken in every direction by
old, worn tracks of ski-runners, horsemen and sledges—and
the moon could not be expected for an hour yet. Olav guessed
that he might have strayed far and wide ere he had found his
way out of these woods alone.

At last they came through some small coppices and saw
Skeidis church ahead of them on the level. The moon, rather
less than full, had just risen and hung low above the hills in
the north-east. In the slanting, uncertain moonbeams the plain
was raked with shadows, for the snow had been blown into
drifts with bare patches of glimmering crust between; all at
once Olav recalled the night when he fled to Sweden—more
than twenty years ago. It must have been the waning moon that
reminded him—then too he had had to wait for moonrise, and
had started at about this time of night, he remembered now.

He told his guide that from here he was well acquainted
with the roads southward, thanking Lavrans for his help and
promising to send the horse north again at the first opportunity.

“Ay, ay—God help you, Master Olav—may you find it
better at home than you look for.—Farewell!”

Olav remained halted until the sound of the other’s horse
had died away in the night. Then he turned into the road that
bore south and west. It was fairly level here, and the road was
well worn and good for long stretches; he could ride fast. It
was not far now from farm to farm.

283


THE SNAKE PIT


The moon rose higher, quenching the smaller stars, and
its greenish light began to flood the firmament and spread over
the white fields and the grey forest; the shadows shrank and
grew small.

Once the crowing of a cock rang out through the moon-
light—it was answered from farms far away, and Olav became
aware how still the night was. Not a dog barked in any of the
farms, no animal called, there was not a sound but that of his
own horse’s hoofs, as he rode in solitude.


And again it was as though he were rapt away to another
world. All life and all warmth had sunk down, lay in the bonds
of frost and sleep like the swallows at the bottom of a lake in
winter-time. Alone he journeyed through a realm of death, over
which the cold and the moonlight threw a vast, echoing vault,
but from the depths the Voice resounded within him, inces-
santly :

O vos omnes, qui transitis per viam, atiendite, et videte, si
est dolor sicut dolor meus!

Bow down, bow down, yield himself and lay his life in
those pierced hands as a vanquished man yields his sword into
the hands of the victorious knight. In this last year, since he
had turned adulterer, he had always refused to think of God’s
mercy—it would be unmanly and dishonourable to look for
it now. So long had he feared and fled from the justice of men
—should he pray for mercy now, when his case had grown so
old that perhaps he would be spared paying the full price of
it among men? Something told him that, having evaded men’s
justice, he must be honest enough not to try to elude the judg-
ment of God.

But tonight, as he journeyed under the winter moon like
one who has been snatched out of time and life, on the very

284


THE SNAKE PIT


shore of eternity, he saw the truth of what he had been told in
childhood: that the sin above all sins is to despair of God’s
mercy. To deny that heart which the lance has pierced the
chance of forgiving. In the cold, dazzling light he saw that this
was the pang he had himself experienced, so far as a man’s
heart can mirror the heart of God—as a puddle in the mire of
the road may hold the image of one star, broken and quivering,
among the myriads clustered in the firmament.—That evening
many, many years ago, in his youth, when he had arrived at
Berg and heard from Arnvid’s lips how she had tried to drown
herself, fly from his forgiveness and his love and his burning


desire to raise her up and bear her to a safe place.

He saw Arnvid’s face tonight, as his friend admonished
him: you accepted all I was able to give you, you did not
break our friendship, therefore you were my best friend. He
remembered Torhild—he had not seen her since the day he
had had to drive her out of his house, because she bore a child
under her heart, and it was his, the married man’s. He had
never seen his son—could not make good the disgrace, either
to the boy or to his mother. But Torhild had gone without a
bitter word, without a complaint of her lot. He guessed that
Torhild was so fond of him that she saw it was the last kind-
ness she could do him, to go away uncomplaining—and that it
had been her chief consolation in misfortune, that she could


yet do him a good deed.

Even for poor sinners it was the worst of all when one’s
friend in distress refused to accept help. In spite of his being
sunk in sin and sorrow, God had let him have his happiness in
peace: he had been allowed to give to Ingunn, and never had
it been said to him that now the measure was full. Again it was
words from his childhood’s teaching that arose, illumined so

285


THE SNAKE PIT


that he understood their meaning to the full: Quia apud te pro-
pitiatio est: et propter legem iuam sustinui te, Domine.*

The strange horse began to tire under him; he halted in a
field and let it recover its wind. The steam rose from its sides
like silvery smoke under the moon, which now shone from the
height of heaven. They were covered with rime, both he and
his horse—Olav woke up and looked about him. Behind him,
under the brow of the wood, lay a farm he did not recognize;
before him he saw a great white surface bordered by high
rushes, glittering with rime and rustling feebly in the breeze—
a lake: no, he did not know where he was. He must have gone
much too far inland to the eastward.


THE moon had sunk low in the south-west and had lost its
power, the sky began to grow light, blue with a touch of orange
on the land side, when at last Olav came out of a wood and
knew where he was—he had reached some small farms in the
south of the parish. The shortest way home to Hestviken was over
the Horse crag. Stiff, frozen and deadly tired he stood stretch-
ing himself and yawning—he had dismounted to lead the poor
horse over the height. Silently he caressed the strange animal,
taking its muzzle in his hand. Its coat was covered with rime
and frozen foam.—It was now full daylight.

Arrived at the top of the ridge, he stopped for a moment
and listened—an unwonted stillness penetrated him through all
his senses: the last frost had silenced the fiord. The ice lay as
far as he could see up and down, rough and greyish white. The
southern wind at the beginning of the week had broken up the
first sheet of ice and driven the floes inshore; the last night’s
cold had bound them all together. A thin mist rose from the


3 Psalm cxxx. De profundis.
286


THE SNAKE PIT


ground, covering everything with a downy greyness, and the
air was tinged pink by the sun, which was rising behind the fog.


THE monk came into the doorway to meet him, when his horse
was heard in the yard: “God be praised that you are here in
time——!”

Then he stood by her bed. She lay in a doze, with her nar-
row yellow hands crossed upon her sunken bosom—looking
like a corpse, but that her pupils just moved under the filmy
eyelids. With a sharp stab of pain the husband felt that soon
she would lie here no more. For more than three years he had
gone in and out, while she lay stretched here in bed, racked
with pain, unable to move more than her head and hands.—
Lord Jesus Christ, had it been worth so much to him, merely to
have her here alive——!

The monk talked and talked—what a happy thing it was
that at last she was to be released from her sufferings, after the
way she had been lying of late, with the flesh of her back raw
and bloody! Patient and pious—ay, he, Brother Stevne, had
prayed as he was about to administer extreme unction: God
grant we may all be as well prepared to meet death, when the
hour comes, as Mistress Ingunn.—As soon as she had received
the sacrament she had sunk into a doze—she had lain as she
lay now for twenty hours, and like enough she would not come
to herself again; it seemed she would be allowed to die without
a struggle-—Then he began to question Olav about his journey
home—his mouth was never still

“‘__but now they must see that the master had something


to keep him alive!”

The serving-maid brought in ale, bread and a dish of
steaming, freshly boiled salt ling. Olav turned sick at the nau-
seous, washy smell that rose from the fish, and set himself

287


THE SNAKE PIT


against it, but the monk affectionately laid a dirty, frost-bitten
hand on his shoulder and forced him. Olav felt repelled by
this Brother Stefan—his frock smelt so foully, and his face had
the look of a water-rat with its long, pointed nose that seemed
to have no bone in it.

At the first mouthful of food he was almost sick—his
throat hurt him and his mouth filled with water. But when he
had got down a bite or two, he found he was famishing. While
he was eating he stared, without knowing it, at Eirik, who was
busy with something in his place on the bench. When the boy
noticed his father looking at him, he came up and showed what
he was doing—he was so eager about it that he forgot his shy-
ness of Olav: he had kept two pairs of shells from the walnuts
his father had brought home from the town the year before,
and now he had found good use for them. He was collecting
the wax that dripped from the candle by his mother’s death-
bed and filling the walnut-shells with it; one was for Cecilia
and one for himself. Brother Stefan was at once interested in
the boy’s occupation; he pulled off the lump of wax that had
run down the candle and discussed with Eirik how they should
prevent the shells bursting apart afterwards.

Olav was overpowered by fatigue, when he had eaten his
fill. He sat with his neck leaning against the logs of the wall,
the pulses throbbed in his throat and about his ears, and his
eyes would not keep together when he tried to fix them upon
anything—he saw the flame of the holy candle double. Now
and again his eyelids closed altogether—images and thoughts
whirled within him as a mist rolls and drifts along—but when
he took a hold of himself and opened his eyes again, they were
all forgotten. He felt numbed and empty, and the memory of
the last night and all he had gone through in it was as far off
as the memory of an old dream.—This untiring Brother Stevne

288


THE SNAKE PIT


came and pestered him again, wanting him to lie down awhile
in the north bed—he would be sure to wake him if there was
any change in his wife. Olav shook his head crossly and stayed
where he was. Thus the hours wore on till midday.

He had slept and dozed by turns, when he saw that Brother
Stefan was busy beside the dying woman. Kneeling, he held a
crucifix before Ingunn’s face in one hand, while with the other


he beckoned eagerly to Olav.

Olav was there in an instant. Ingunn lay with eyes wide
open—but he could not tell whether she saw anything—whether
she recognized either the crucifix in the priest’s hand or him-
self bending over her. For a moment something like an expres-
sion came into the great, dark-blue eyes; they seemed to be
seeking. Olav bent lower over his wife, the monk held the cru-
cifix close to her face—but the feeble, fluttering disquiet was
still there.

Then the husband got up, took Eirik by the hand and led
him forward to his mother’s bed. The monk had begun to say
the litany for the dying.

“Are you looking for Eirik, Ingunn?—here he is

He had put his arm about the boy’s shoulder and stood
holding him close. Eirik came up to his shoulder now.—Olav
could not see whether Ingunn knew them even now.

Then he knelt down, still with his arm around the child.
Eirik was sobbing, low and painfully, as he knelt side by side
with his father and said the responses.

“Kyrie, eleison.”

“Christe, eleison,” whispered the man and the boy.

“Kyrie, eleison.—Sancta Maria”

“ora pro ea—” the two kept their eyes on the dying
woman. The man was watching for a sign that she knew him.
The boy looked at his mother, in dismay and wonder, as the

289


1°?


THE SNAKE PIT


tears streamed down his cheeks and he sniffled between the re-


sponses—ora pro ea, orate pro ea

“Omnes sancti Discipuli Domini”

“orate pro ea.”

Ingunn sighed, moaning softly—Olav bent forward—no
word came from her white lips. The three continued the prayer
for the dying.

“Per nativitatem tuam”

“libera ei, Domine.”

“Per crucem et passionem tuam”

“libera ei, Domine.”

She closed her eyes again—her hands slipped from each
other, down to her sides. The monk crossed them again over
her bosom, as he prayed:

“Per adventum Spiritus sancti Paracliti”

“Libera ei, Domine.”

—Ingunn, Ingunn, wake up again, only for a moment—so
that I may see you know me


*“Peccatores,” recited the monk, and the father and son re-
plied

“te rogamus, audi nos.”

She still breathed, and her eyelids quivered very slight-


ly

“Kyrie, eleison.”

Olav remained on his knees by the bedside, holding Eirik
to him, even after they had reached the end of the prayer. In-
wardly he was beseeching—let her wake up, only for a little
instant—so that we may bid each other farewell.—Although
every night of these three years had been like entering the val-
ley of Death with her—he felt he could not part from her yet.
Not till they had given each other one last greeting, before she
went out of the door.


290


THE SNAKE PIT
Eirik had laid his face on the edge of the bed, he was


weeping in an agony of grief.

Suddenly the dying woman opened her lips—Olav thought
he heard her whisper his name. Quickly he bent over her. She
muttered something which he could not distinguish—then more
clearly:

“not go forth—’tis uncertain—out yonder—Olav—do


not fi


He could not guess her meaning—whether she spoke in a
dream or what. Almost without knowing it, he put his arm
around Eirik, stood up and raised the boy to his feet.

“You must not weep so loudly,” he whispered, as he led
his son to his seat on the bench.

Eirik looked up at him in despair—the child’s face was
all swollen with weeping.

“Father,” he whispered. “Father—you will not send us
away from Hestviken, will you—because our mother is dead?”

“Send away whom—?” Olav asked absently.

“Us. Me and Cecilia——”

“No, surely—” Olav broke off, held his breath. The chil-
dren—they had never entered his mind, when he was thinking
of all the rest last night. It took him by surprise—but he would
not think of this now, would thrust it from him. As though


asleep he sat down on the bench a little way from Eirik.
He was not fit to contend with it now—. But the children
—he had not thought of that.


THE day wore on to nones. And little by little the inmates of

the house tired of watching and waiting for the last sigh. Liv

had been in once or twice with Cecilia, but as the mother lay in

a doze and the child was noisy and restless, the maid had to
291


THE SNAKE PIT


take her out again. The last time Eirik went with her—Olav
heard their voices outside.

He had seated himself on the step by the bed. Brother Ste-
fan was dozing at the table with his book of hours open before
him. The house-folk came in, quietly, knelt down and softly
said a prayer, paused awhile and quietly went out again. Olav
dropped off—he did not sleep, but it was as though his head
were full of grey wool instead of brains, so tired and spent was
he with the strain.

Once, when again he looked at Ingunn, he saw that her
eyelids had half opened, and underneath he had a glimpse of
her eyes, sightless.


In the first weeks after Ingunn’s death Olav could not have
said when he had slept. For slept he must have at times, since
there was still life in him. Toward morning he felt as if the
grey fog rolled within his head, leading his thoughts astray
and deranging them. Then the fog settled, grey and dense, but
never so that he escaped feeling the pressure of his burden even
in his light morning doze, while his thoughts were busied with
the same things deep down within him, and he was aware of
every sound in the room and out of doors. He longed to be
given real sleep for once—to sink into perfect darkness and
forgetfulness. But as far as he was aware it never happened
that he enjoyed a deep sleep.

It was the thought of the children that kept him awake.

He knew that that night, as he rode home to Ingunn’s
deathbed, he had formed a resolution. He had answered yea to
God. I will come, because Thou art my God and my All; I will
fall at Thy feet, because I know that Thou longest to raise me
up to Thee

But the children—it seemed as though both God and him-

292


THE SNAKE PIT
self had forgotten them. Until Eirik asked—he would not send
them away from Hestviken, haply?

He could not guess how the boy had come to think of such
a thing. It could not have come about in any natural way.


And then he recalled Ingunn’s last words, pondered over
them:

“Do it not, Olav. Not go forth—tis uncertain out yon-
der——”


Perhaps she had only spoken in a dream—dreaming that


he was about to venture on to unsafe ice. But it might also be
that, as she lay with er soul scarce in her body, she had learnt
what had befallen him that night. That both she and Eirik had
had knowledge of it—and both had pleaded with him.

The children had none but himself to look to. Hallvard
Steinfinnsson far away in the north at Frettastein was their


nearest kinsman. And he could imagine how Hallvard would
take it, if he now came forward and accused himself of a secret
murder twelve years old. His children would not be given a
very cordial reception at their uncle’s. And no doubt it would


be revealed who Eirik was.
For that too he would be forced to confess, that he had
tried to push forward a bastard heir, cheat his nearest kinsmen


of the family manor in favour of a stranger.

If he carried out what he had resolved that night, he could
see only one way of dealing with the children: Cecilia he would
have to offer as an oblation to the sisterhood at Nonneseter,
with her mother’s inheritance, and Eirik to the Church or to
the Preaching Friars-———

The man shuddered to his very soul—was that the mean-
ing? Was his race to die out with him, because he had struck
the crown from his own head by a dastard’s deed? He was to
be a childless man, because it is an ill thing that a dastard

293


THE SNAKE PIT


carry on the race? And those children he had begotten, while
he lived in rebellious outlawry, might not carry on the line on
which he had brought misfortune. A son he had, a single one,
whom he could never adopt into his kin. And his only daugh-
ter was to be lost to the world behind the gates of a convent.

Eirik—. At times he thought he was sorry for the boy. It
would be hard for him to send the young lad back to the state
of life from which he had once been willing to raise Ingunn’s
son, born in secret. Now and then he had thought he was fond
of the boy too, in spite of all.

It was chiefly at night, when Eirik slept with him on the
inside of the bed, that he thought, no, he could scarcely have
the heart to thrust the child back into the lot to which he had
been born.


At other times, when he heard the boy roistering among
the house-carls, laughing as if he had already forgotten his
grief at his mother’s death, it seemed to Olav that Eirik was
now the chief of his burdens; it was the boy above all who
stood in the way, made it difficult for him to break through all
that kept him from winning peace and relief for the sickness of
his soul.

He noticed that he was drifting farther and farther away
from the resolution he had made on the night before Ingunn’s
death. But he did not know whether he was being drawn back
into the old slough against his will, or whether he had taken
flight of himself, because after all he dared not come forward,
when it came to the point. |


OnE night Olav got up and went across to the house where Liv,
the maid, lay with his daughter. With great trouble he suc-
ceeded in shaking her awake.
The girl lay huddled under the bedclothes, blinking with
294


THE SNAKE PIT


her little screwed-up pig’s eyes, at once afraid and expectant,
at the master who stood by her bed with a candle in his hand.
Under his shaggy, unkempt, grizzling hair his face was fur-
rowed and pale as ashes, the firm edge of his chin lost in a
fog of stubble; he had nothing on but his linen beneath the
long, black cloak, and his feet were thrust bare into his shoes.

Olav looked down at her, and guessed that the maid must
think he had come to let her share the fate of Torhild Bjérns-
datter without more ado—she had already moved as though to
make room for him by her side.—He gave a short, harsh laugh.

“Cecilia,” he said. “I was dreaming so of her.—There is
nothing wrong with Cecilia?”

The girl turned aside the coverlet, so that he could see the
child. She lay asleep in the bend of her foster-mother’s arm,
with her little pink face well buried, half concealed by her own
shining, silky curls.

Without more words Olav put down the candle, bent over
and lifted up his daughter. He wrapped her well in the folds of
his cloak, blew out the light and went out with his child.

Coming into the great room, he dropped his cloak on the
floor, kicked off his shoes and crept into bed with his daughter,
who was still fast asleep against his chest.

At first all he felt was that sleep was just as far from him
as before. But it was good to hold this tiny young creature in
his arms. Her baby hair was soft as silk under his chin, with a
sweet, fresh smell of sleep, and her little breath played over
his chest and throat, warm and dewy. Silky of skin, her body
was firm and plump and strong; the little knees that bored
their way into her father’s body were quite round. Olav allowed
himself the luxury of loving his child, as a miser indulges him-
self by taking out his hoard and handling it.

But by degrees the little maid acted like a hot stone. The

295


THE SNAKE PIT


warmth of the sleeping infant penetrated the father, soothed
the throbbing, aching unrest in his heart; it flowed through his
whole body and resolved its strain into a sweet, soft tiredness.
He felt slumber settling down upon him, a blessing worth he
knew not what. With his chin buried in Cecilia’s soft, curly


hair he sank into a deep sleep.

He was awakened by her howling wildly and furiously.
The little maid was sitting up, half on his chest, roaring, as she
rubbed her eyes with two small fists. On the inside of the bed
Eirik sat up in surprise. Then he leant over his father’s chest,
coaxing and trying to quiet his little sister.

Olav did not know what time of night it might be—the
smoke-vent was closed; the little charcoal lamp standing on
the edge of the hecrth was still burning—it must be very early.

When her father took hold of the little one, she raged
more violently than ever, hitting about with her little round
fists and shrieking at the top of her voice. Then she swung
round, threw herself upon her father and tried to bite him, but
could not get a proper hold of his thin cheek. Eirik was laugh-
ing boisterously.

Then she took to nipping Olav’s worn eyelids between two
of her nails—she pulled them out and pinched them, and this
gave her so much amusement that she kept quiet—stopped
screaming for a while, as she punished her father all she could.
After that she looked helplessly about her:

“Liv—where Liv—?” she wailed loudly. “Bringlum!” she
said in a tone of command.

That was her name for food, Eirik interpreted. Olav got
out of bed, went into the closet and returned with a thick slice
of the best cheese, a bannock and a cup of half-frozen milk.

While he revived the fire on the hearth, holding the cup
of milk which he was going to warm, Cecilia sat up, stared

296


THE SNAKE PIT


angrily at the strange man with her deep-blue kitten’s eyes, and
threw bits of bread at him. She gobbled up the slice of cheese
till nothing was left but the crust. “Bringlum,” she said, as she
threw the last of the cheese on the floor.

Olav went to fetch more food for his daughter. She ate all
she was given, and when there was no more, she screamed again
that she wanted to go to Liv.

When the milk was warm enough, Olav gave it to his
daughter. She drank it to the last drop and then would not let
go the cup, but hammered on the edge of the bed with it. It was
a fine cup, made from a root, very delicately turned, so Olav
took it from her. Cecilia caught hold of his hair with both
hands and pulled it—then she got her claws into his face and
scratched all down her father’s cheeks with her sharp little
nails. She clawed him to her heart’s content—Kirik tumbled all
over the bed in fits of laughter. He knew his sister better than
her father did and could witness that Cecilia was the most
spiteful little monster: “She has drawn blood from you, father!”

Olav fetched more food, all the dainties he could find, but
Cecilia seemed satisfied now; she refused all he offered her.—
She scarcely seemed to have the makings of a nun, this daugh-
ter of his.

Finally he had to let Eirik take the ill-tempered brat and
carry her back to her foster-mother.


THEN one night Olav awoke in black darkness—the charcoal
lamp had gone out. He had slept—for the first time since In-
gunn died he had had a deep, sound sleep. His gratitude made
him strangely gentle and meek, for he felt born anew and
healed of a long sickness—so good was it to wake without feel-
ing tired.

He closed his eyes again, for the darkness was so dense

297


THE SNAKE PIT


that it seemed to press against them—Then it dawned upon
him that he had dreamt too, while he slept. He tried to put to-
gether the fragments of his dream—he had dreamt of Ingunn
ihe whole time, and of sunshine—the glow of it still lingered
in him.

He had dreamt that he and she were standing together in
the little glen where the beck ran, due north of the houses at
Frettastein. The ground still looked pale and bare with the
withered, flattened grass of the year before, but here and there
along the bank of the stream some glossy leaves, reddish brown
and dark green, shot up among the dead grass. They were just
by the white rock which filled the whole bed of the stream, so
that the water swept over it and round the sides in a little cata-
ract, swirling and gurgling in the pool below—they stood watch-
ing the bits of bark that floated round in the whirlpool. She
was dressed in her old red gown—they were not yet grown up,
he thought.

Throughout the whole dream he seemed to have been walk-
ing with Ingunn by the side of their beck. Olav thought they
stood together under a great fir in the middle of the steep scree;
this was farther down, where the stream ran at the bottom of a
narrow ravine; great fallen rocks choked up the little river-
bed, and on the rough slopes on both sides grew monk’s-hood,
lilies of the valley and wild raspberries so thickly that one
could not see where to plant one’s foot among the stones which
gave way and rattled down.—She was afraid of something, put
out both hands to him with a little moan—and he felt oppressed
himself. Above their heads he saw the narrow strip of sky over
the glen—the clouds were gathering and threatening thunder.

Once they had been right down on the beach, where the
stream runs out into Lake Mjésen. He saw the curve of the bay,
strewed with sharp, dark grey rocks under the cliff. The lake

298


THE SNAKE PIT


was dark and flecked with foam farther out. Ingunn and he had
come there to borrow a boat, it seemed.

It must have been that journey long ago to Hamar that
came back to him, he thought—his memories were confused
and transposed, as they always are in dreams. But his dream
had held the sweetness of their fresh young days, so that the
savour of it still lingered in his mind.

In another way it was as though he had gone through his
whole life with Ingunn again in his dream.

However that might be—he must have slept a whole night
to have dreamt all this. It must soon be morning.

He stole out of bed in the darkness, found some clothes
and put them on. He would go out and see how far the night
was spent.

As he stepped out on the stone before the door he saw the
back of the Horse with its mane of trees at the highest point—
it stood out black against the starry sky. Between the houses
the yard was dark, but there was a faint light on the edge of
the crags that closed the view toward the fiord, like moonlight
upon ice. Olav wondered—could it be possible?—the moon set
before midnight now. But over the forest along Kverndal there
was a faint uncertain glimmer of low, slanting moonbeams.

He could hardly believe it—that he had been so mistaken
in the time. Hesitating, he slowly made his way westward
through the yard and to the lookout rock. It was glazed and
slippery to climb.

The half-moon touched the tree-tops on the other side—
yellow at its setting. Under the dim, oblique beams the whole
surface of the frozen earth was made rugged by the faint light
and the pale shadows that scored it. The glazed surface of the
rock beneath him still gleamed dimly. He saw that he had not
slept more than three hours.


299


THE SNAKE PIT


Again that light of the moon lying low over the brow of
a hill made Olav think of the far-off night when he fled the
country, an outlawed man. The sudden memory plunged him


into an endless, weary despondency.

He thought upon his dream—it was so infinitely long since
they had walked together along the beck, by the hillside path,
down to the village. She was dead, it was only three weeks
since—but so long ago.

He felt a clutching at his throat, the tears collected under
his smarting eyelids, as he stood gazing into the distance, where


the moon was now but as a spark behind the forest. He wished
he could have wept his fill now—he had not wept when she
died, nor since.—But the two or three times he had wept since
he grew up, he had not been able to stop—furiously as he had
striven to master himself, the fits of weeping had come again
and again without its being in his power to hinder them. But
tonight, when he wished he could weep on out here alone, with-
out a soul to see him, it came to nothing but this strangling
pain in his throat and a few solitary tears that flowed at long
intervals and turned cold as ice as they slowly ran down his
face.

When spring came—he thought he would go away some-
where when spring came, the idea had just struck him. He
could not face the summer at Hestviken.

The moon was quite gone, the light faded away over the
distant forest. Olav turned and went back to the house.

As he was about to lie down he felt in the darkness that
Kirik had stretched himself across the bed, taking up all the
room between the wall and the outer board.

All at once a disinclination to take hold of the boy came
over him—whether it was that he shrank from disturbing his
rest or felt he could not have him as a bedfellow tonight.

300


THE SNAKE PIT


The south bed stood empty, since the bedclothes had been
carried out and the straw burnt on which she had died.

Olav went to the door of the closet and pushed it open—
he was met by an icy air and a peculiar stale and frozen smell
of cheese and salt fish; they kept food in the closet in winter
and shut it up to make the outer room warmer; but the bed
was always made up, in case they might have guests to lodge
for the night.

Olav. stood for a moment with his hand on the old door-
post. His fingers felt the carving which covered its surface—
the snakes wreathed about the figure of Gunnar.

Then he went in—butting against tubs and barrels, till he
found the bed. He crept into it and lay down—closed his eyes
upon the darkness and gave himself up to face the night and
sleeplessness.


301


SIGRID UNDSET


is the daughter of one of the best known archeological
scholars of Norway, the late Dr. Ingvald Undset. It
was in working and talking with her father that Sigrid
Undset’s sense and knowledge of the Viking period, the
tumultuous and dramatic development of the Middle
Ages, became so much a part of her own past and
enabled her to give a comprehensive survey of Nor-
wegian history in the 14th century in novels peopled
with human beings more real, more modern, than many
a character of today. The first of her books in this
vein are contained in the KRISTIN LAVRANSDATTER ¢ril-
ogy; she is currently engaged on a second epic work,
THE MASTER OF HESTVIKEN, the first volume of which,
THE AXE, has already been published.


SET UP, ELECTROTYPED, PRINTED AND
BOUND BY H. WOLFF ESTATE, NEW YORK
PAPER MANUFACTURED BY
S.D. WARREN CO.,


BOSTON


cones ene Ppa


ANVUEIT ALISUSAI
NN TIONNVO
NMVYGHLIM


ibe


7


Date Due


wet
nes a


oe


DEMCO-298


| PTS950 AGBE9
-U5S6 Undset
The snake pit


a


PT8950
.U5S6 - 46359


Carroli College Library
Waukesha, Wisconsin


ogwoo
