if


a


i


a


rs 12


JOHN CROWLEY
150 Heather Lane
Palo Alto, CA 94303


ee ie


os
i


tT»


oe


i


in 2023 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation


he ee
an be i net sha
Be amass carn tl >


225


: i


Bie ; ee i : '
‘ a yrs ay i ii F 4 5 cee


ayes fier fier
hd Wes r at : ye p
wie ¥, ‘ r ~ ge
’ i Sets ee /_ Pail
ee ee oe ie a a ‘
= £ ses AAS - 7 a
payers” F E
ee a ee ee = ye


4:


. LOA Coe Ath _ uf ee |


y site nel epee breiilag
A , “a eu dad ee ‘ ‘¥


The Works of
STGRIDSUNDSEL


Winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1928


NOVELS
Jenny The Winding Road
Sng hich comprises:
t os P
ee Lavransdatter a ee
A Trilogy The Burning Bush
The Bridal Wreath
The Mistress of Husaby Ida Elisabeth
The Cross
The Longest Years
The Master of Hestviken
of Gunnar’s Daughter
A Tetralogy:
The Axe The Faithful Wife
The Snake Pit : :
Te the’ Wildernaks Images in a Mirror
The Son Avenger Madame Dorthea
ESSAYS
Stages on the Road Men, Women, and Places


AY BOOK OF WARTIME, EX PERLE N Gas


Return to the Future


BOOKS EORTC H TE DIReEN


Happy Times in Norway True and Untrue
Sigurd and His Brave Companions


These ae BORZOI BOOKS
published in New York by ALFrep A. KnopF


Kristin Labransdatter


VOLUME Ill


THE CROSS


SIGRID UNDSET


VOLUME III


Held, (oA Onin


TRANSLATED FROM THE NORWEGIAN


BY CHARLES ARCHER


ir


axe aL


a ee
lbee of NIT NL WON Ie) ARICE ee


COPYRIGHT 1927 BY ALFRED A. KNOPF, INC.


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any
form without permission in writing from the publisher, except by a
reviewer who may quote brief passages in a review printed in a
magazine or newspaper.


Original title: KORSET. Copyright 1922 by H. Aschehoug & Com-

any, Olso, Norway.

Published February, 1927, and reprinted four times.

Reprinted as Volume III of the Lillehammer Edition (three volumes)
of Kristin Lavransdatter, June, 1927.

Included in one-volume edition of Kristin Lavransdatter February,
1929, and reprinted nine times in that form.

Reset as in the present volume February, 1935 and included in a one-
volume edition of Kristin Lavransdatter, and reprinted four times
in that form.

Reprinted separately as Volume III of a three-volume edition of
Kristin Lavransdatter January, 1946.


MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


Kristin Labransdatter


PART yt


@2|| PART II


PART III


VOLUME III


TD ett COURLO vos


KINSHIP’S DUES 643
DEBTORS 753
THE CROSS 907


THE CROSS


PART ONE


KINSHIP’S DUES


645 Kinship’s Dues


REN Seite P2275 ADEE S


I


HE SECOND year Erlend Nikulaussén and Kristin Lavrans-
datter dwelt on Jorundgaard, the mistress was minded to
go herself and lie the summer over at the szter.

She had thought upon this ever since the winter. At Skjenne it
was the use from of old for the wife herself to pass the summer
at the out-farm, for once a daughter of that house had been carried
off by the mountain folk, and afterwards naught would serve the
mother but she must herself lie on the mountain every summer.
But in so many things they had their own ways down at Skjenne —
and folk in the parish were used to this and thought it was but as it
should be.

But elsewhere in the Dale ’twas not the use for the master’s
womenfolk of the great manors to abide themselves at the szters.
Kristin knew that if she did it, there would be talk and wonder-
ment among the folks.

— In God’s name, then, they must even talk. Sure it was that
they gossiped about her and hers whether or no.

— Audun Torbergss6n had owned no more than his weapons and
the clothes he stood up in when he was wed with Ingebjorg Niku-
lausdatter of Loptsgaard. He had been henchman to the Bishop
of Hamar; ’twas the time when the Bishop was in the north here
to hallow the new church that Ingebjérg fell into trouble. Niku-
laus Sigurdss6n took it hardly at first, swore to God and all men
that a horse-boy never should be son-in-law of his. But Ingebjorg
was brought to bed of twins; and, said folks, laughing, Nikulaus
maybe deemed their bringing up too hard a matter to tackle single-
handed. However that might be, he gave Audun his daughter in
matriage. f

This had happed two years after Kristin’s wedding. "T'was not
forgotten; folk still bore in mind that Audun was a stranger in the
parish — he was a Hallander, of good kin, but his folk had fallen


The Cross 646


LUE NT OSG Fa eat
into great poverty. And the man himself was not over well liked
in Sil; he was stiff-necked and hard, slow to forget either good or
ill; yet was he a notable farmer, and had good knowledge of the
laws — so in some ways Audun Torbergsson was a man of standing
now in the parish, and a man that folk were little willing to fall
at odds with.

Kristin thought of farmer Audun’s broad, brown face set in its
curly red hair and beard; of his sharp little blue eyes. He was like
more men than one that she had seen — she had seen such faces
amongst their serving-folk at Husaby — Erlend’s house-carls and
ship-folk.

The mistress sighed. It must be easier for such a man to hold his
own, even though ’twas his wife’s lands he lived on. He had never
been master of aught before — é


Throughout the winter and spring Kristin talked much with
Frida Styrkaarsdatter, who had come with them from the Trond-
heim country and was the chief of her serving-women. Over and
over again she would say to the girl that they were wont to have
things so and so in the Dale here in summer, the harvest-folk were
used to get this, and that was how they did in the fields in autumn
— Frida must bear in mind how she, Kristin, had done last year. For
it was her will that all things here on the farm should go as they
had gone in Ragnfrid Ivarsdatter’s time —

But to say outright that she herself would not be there on the
farm that summer — this she found hard. She had lived at Jorund-
gaard two winters and a summer now as mistress, and she knew
well that if she went to the seter and abode there this year, ‘twere
much as though she ran away.

— She saw well that Erlend’s lot was no easy one. From the time
he sat upon his foster-mother’s knee, he had known naught save
that he was born to bid and rule over all and everything around
him. And if so be he had let himself be ruled and bidden by others,
at least the man himself had never known it.

"Twas impossible he could be within as outwardly he seemed.
He must needs be unhappy here. She herself — Her father’s manor
on the floor of the still, shut-in valley, the flat fields looped in by
the river bends shining through the alder woods, the farmsteads
on the low ploughed lands at the foot of the fells, and the headlong


647 Kinship’s Dues
hill-sides above, with grey scaurs high up against the sky, pale-


hued screes below, and pine woods and leaf woods scrambling up
and over the slopes from the valley-bottom — no, this no longer
seemed to her the fairest and safest home in the world. "Iwas so
hemmed in. Surely this must seem to Erlend ugly and cramped
and unkindly.

But none could mark aught on him but that he was well
content —


At last, the day they let the cattle out on Jérundgaard, she got it
said — in the evening, as they sat at supper. As she spoke, Erlend
‘was groping in the fish-platter for a titbit — he sat stark still in won-
derment, his fingers still in the dish, gazing at his wife. Then Kris-
tin said quickly —’twas most because of that throat evil that was
ever about among the young children in the Dale; Munan was so
weakly; she would take him and Lavrans with her up to the moun-
tains.

Ay, said Eriend. Then ’twould mayhap be best that Ivar and
Skule should go with her too.

The twins jumped with joy on their bench. Through the rest
of the meal each tried to out-chatter the other. They would go
with Erling, they said, who was to lie away to the north among the
Graah6 fells, with the sheep. Three years ago shepherds from Sil
had chased a sheep-stealer and killed him by his own hut in among
the Boar-fells — he was an outlaw from the Osterdal. As soon as the
house-folk had risen from the board, Ivar and Skule bore into the
hall all the weapons they owned and set to work on them.

A little later in the evening Kristin went southward, with Simon
Andress6n’s daughters and her sons Gaute and Lavrans. Arngjerd
Simonsdatter had been at Jérundgaard the most of this winter. The
maid was fifteen years old now; and one day in Yule, at Formo,
Simon had said somewhat of how ’twas time that Arngjerd should
learn something more than what she could pick up at her home;
' she knew already as much as the serving-women did. At that Kris-
tin proffered to take the girl home with her and teach her as well
as she could, for she knew that Simon held this daughter very dear
and thought much on what was to come of her. And the child
might well have need to learn other ways than those she saw at
Formo. Now that his wife’s father and mother were both dead,


The Cross 648


i nn ne UES UUEE UIE SEnSEI EEE SEER
Simon Andressén was one of the richest men in the country-side.
He guided his estates well and heedfully, and was a stirring and
skilful farmer on his Formo lands. But within the house things
went as best they might — the serving-women ruled and guided all
things, and when Simon marked that disorder and waste went be-
yond all bounds, he would get him one or two serving-wenches
more; but he never spoke of such things to his wife, and seemed
not to look, nor yet to wish, that she should charge herself more
with the house-mistress’s work. Almost it was as though he did not
deem her full-grown yet — but he was most kind and easy with
Ramborg, and poured out gifts upon her and the children in sea-
son and out of season.

Kristin grew fond of Arngjerd when she came to know her. Fair
the maid was not, but she was of a good wit, and was gentle, good-
hearted, quick with her hands, and diligent. As the young girl
went about with her in the house, or sat by her side in the weaving-
house of an evening, Kristin often thought she could wish now that
one of her children had been a daughter. A daughter must be with
her mother more —

She was thinking the like this evening, as she walked, leading
Lavrans by the hand, and looking on the two, Gaute and Arngjerd,
who were on the path before her. Ulvhild Simonsdatter was run-
ning hither and thither, trampling to bits the brittle evening ice on
the puddles — she was making believe she was a beast of some kind,
and had put on her red cloak inside out, so that the white hare-
skin was turned outward.

Down in the dale the shadows were thickening into dusk over
the bare, brown fields. But the air of the spring evening seemed
drenched with light. The first stars shone wet and white in the sky,
high up where clear watery green shaded into blue-black night.
But over the black edge of the fells on the further side of the dale
there lingered yet a band of yellow light, and its sheen lit up the
scree that overlay the steep hill-side above them. Highest up of all,
_ where the drifts jutted over the mountain crests, there was the
glimmer of snow and the glitter of the ice that hung beneath it,
feeding the foaming becks that gushed down everywhere amidst
the boulders. Above the valley the air was full of the noise of
waters, and from below rose the river’s hoarse roar. And there was
the song of birds from all the groves and thickets, and from out the
forest all around.


649 Kinship’s Dues


Once Ulvhild stopped, took up a stone, and threw it in where
the birds were singing. But her big sister caught her by the arm.
Then she went quietly for a while, but in a little she broke away
and galloped down the slope — till Gaute called her back.

They were come close to where the way led into the fir woods;
from among the trees ahead came the clang of a cross-bow. Snow:
was still lying in the woods; it smelt cold and fresh. A short way
on, in a little opening, stood Erlend with Ivar and Skule. :

Ivar had shot at a squirrel; the arrow was sticking in a pine
branch high up, and he wanted now to get it down. He threw
stone after stone; the thick, straight tree rang again when he hit
the stem.

“Stay a little; let me try to shoot it down for you,” said his
father. He shook his cloak back over his shoulders, laid an arrow
to his bow, and took aim, carelessly enough, in the deceitful light
among the trees. The string twanged; the arrow sang through the
air and buried itself in the pine branch close by the boy’s shaft.
Erlend took another arrow and shot again — one of the two arrows
that had stuck in the tree slipped down clattering from branch to
branch; the shaft of the other was splintered, but the head still
stuck fast in the limb.

Skule ran into the snow to pick up the two arrows. Ivar stood
gazing up into the tree-top.

“°Tis mine, father, the one that sticks fast! "Tis in up to the
socket — ’twas strongly shot, father! ” — and he set about telling
Gaute why it was he had not hit the squirrel —

Erlend laughed low and flung his cloak about him again:

“Will you turn back now, Kristin? I must be going homewards
—we are off after capercailzie at daybreak. Naakkve and I—”

Kristin answered in haste, no, she would go on with the maids
to the manor — she had somewhat to talk of with her sister this
evening —

“ Then Ivar and Skule can go with mother and be with her home
— if I may go along with you, father? ” said Gaute.

Erlend lifted Ulvhild Simonsdatter in his arms to bid her fare-
well. And bonny and fresh and rosy as she was, with her brown
curls nestled in the white fur hood, he kissed her, ere he set her
down, and turned and went homewards with Gaute.

Now that Erlend had naught else to take him up, he was ever
about with some of his sons. — Ulvhild took her aunt’s hand and


The Cross 650

walked a little — then she ran on again, bursting in between Ivar
and Skule. Ay, she was a fair child — but wild and unruly. Had
they had a daughter, no doubt but Erlend would have had her too
ever with him for a plaything.


At Formo Simon was in the hall, alone with his little son, when
they came in. He sat in the high-seat at the middle of the long
board, and watched Andres; the child knelt on the outer bench
playing with some old treenails, striving to make them stand upon
their heads on the flat board-top. Soon as Ulvhild saw this, for-
getting to greet her father, she rushed straight up on to the bench
beside her brother, took him by the nape, and knocked his face
against the board-top, shrieking out that they were her pegs;
father had given them to her himself.

Simon got up to part the children, and in rising chanced to
knock over a little dish of earthenware that stood by his elbow. It
fell to the floor and was broken in pieces.

Arngjerd crept under the board and gathered up the bits. Simon
took them from her and looked at them unhappily:

“JT misdoubt me your mother will be vexed at this! ” "Twas a
little dish of clear white ware, a fair pattern upon it, that Sir
Andres Darre had brought home from France; ’twas left to Helga,
but she had given it to Ramborg, said Simon; and the women
deemed it of great price. At that minute he heard his wife in the
outer room, and he hid his hands, with the shards in them, behind
his back.

Ramborg came in and greeted her sister and her sister’s sons. She
took off Ulvhild’s cloak, and the little maid ran to her father and
clung about him.

“ Are we so fine to-day, Ulvhild? — wearing our silver belt on a
working day, I verily believe —” but he could not take hold of the
child, with his hands full as they were.

Ulvhild cried out she had been to Moster Kristin’s at Jérund-
gaard to-day, and that was why her mother had dressed her up this
_ morning —

“ Ay, your mother keeps you so brave and gay — they might
well set you up in the shrine northward in the church, just as you
stand,” said Simon, smiling. The one work Ramborg busied herself


with was sewing clothes for her daughter; Ulvhild went ever
bravely decked out.


651 Kinship’s Dues


“Why stand you thus? ” Ramborg asked her husband.

pen showed forth the shards. “ I know not what you will say
to this —”

Ramborg took them from him: “No need to stand there and
look so like a fool —”

Kristin grew ill at ease as she sat there. "I'was true Simon had
looked foolish enough as he stood hiding the shards behind him,
and, as it were, playing the child. But there was sure no need for
Ramborg to say so.

“T deemed it would vex you, that your bowl had been broken,”
said the man.

“ Ay, you seem at all times so afraid aught may vex me — in small
things like this,” answered Ramborg — and now the other two saw
she was on the brink of tears.

“You know well, Ramborg, ’tis not seeming only,” said Simon.
“ And I trow ’tis not alone in small things either —”

“T know not,” answered Ramborg as before. “”Tis never your
wont, Simon, to speak to me of great matters —”

She turned sharply and went back to the outer room. Simon
stood a little, looking after her. When he sat him down, the boy,
Andres, came and tried to climb upon his father’s knee. Simon
- lifted him up, and sat resting his chin on the top of the child’s head,
but seemed not to hear the little one’s prattle.

After a while Kristin said, haltingly:

“Ramborg is not so young any more, Simon — your eldest child
is seven winters old already —”

“What mean you? ” asked Simon, more sharply than need was,
she thought.

“T mean but that — maybe my sister deems you lay too little on
her — could you not try to let her have things in her hands a little
more, on the farm here — along with you? ”

“ My wife has all in her hands that she would have,” answered
Simon hotly. “TI ask not that she should do more than she herself
would, but never have I denied Ramborg the ruling of aught here
on Formo. If you deem otherwise, ’tis that you do not know —”

“Nay, nay! ” said Kristin. “ But one time and another, brother-
in-law, it has seemed to me you remember not that Ramborg is
more grown-up now than in the days when you were wed. You
should bear in mind, Simon — ”

“Bear you in mind” —he set down the child and sprang up —


The Cross 652


Lhe Cross iat, i Oe eee
“that Ramborg and I agreed together — and you and I could
not —” Just then the mistress of the house stepped in, bearing a
stoup of ale for the strangers; Simon went quickly to his wifé and
laid his hand upon her shoulder: “ Heard you ever the like, Ram-
borg —here is you sister saying she deems not you are content
with things as you have them here —” He laughed.

Ramborg looked up; there was a strange glitter in her great, dark
eyes:

“ How so? I got what I would have, I as well as you, Kristin —
should we two sisters not be well content, I know not —” and she
too laughed.

Kristin stood there red and wrathful; she took not the ale-bowl
in her hands:

“Nay, tis late already —time we were going homeward —”
and she looked about her for her sons.

“Nay, nay, Kristin.” Simon took the bowl from his wife and
drank to the other sister. “ Be not angry now. "Tis not well to
weigh so nicely each word that falls twixt nearest kin — sit a little
and rest your feet; content you again, and forget it, if I answered

ou in other wise than I ought —

“Tam weary,” said he, stretching and yawning a little. He asked
how far they were got on with the spring work at Jorundgaard —
here, now, they had ploughed up all the fields north of the manor
road.

Kristin took her leave as soon as she deemed it seemly. Nay,
Simon need not come with her, she said, as he took up his hooded
cloak and axe — she had the great lads with her. But he would go
—and he prayed Ramborg, too, to go with them, at least up
through the home-fields. This, at most times, she had no mind to,
but to-night she went with them right up to the road.

Without was black night, with clear, twinkling stars. A little
warm springlike breath of new-dunged fields came through the
frosty night air. The noise of water was about them everywhere
in the darkness.

Simon and Kristin went northward, the three boys running be-
fore. She felt that the man walking by her would have said some-
thing, but she had no mind to help him to speech, for she was
greatly vexed with him still. True it was she was fond of her
brother-in-law — but there should be some bounds to what he
deemed he might say and then turn it off — with a “’twas but
among kinsfolk.” He ought sure to understand — that he had stood


853 Kinship’s Dues


by them so steadfastly in their pinch made it the less easy now for
her to bear, when he grew hot and unmannerly — ’twas hard for
her to take him up. She thought of the first winter, when they
were but newly come to the parish: Ramborg had sent for her,
for that Simon lay abed with neck-boils, grievously sick. He was
much plagued with this ill. But when she was come to Formo and
went in to the man, he would not suffer her to touch him or even
look at him; he was so unruly that Ramborg prayed her sister
miserably to forgive her for having brought her thither. Simon
had been no better with her, said she, when she would have tended
him the first time he was sick after they were wed. When these
throat boils came on him, he hid himself away in the old house
.they called the Semunds hall, and would suffer no one near him
but a hideous, filthy, lousy old carl, Gunstein by name, that had
served on Dyfrin before Simon was born. — True, Simon came to
his sister-in-law afterwards and would have made things good
again with her: he liked not, he said, that any should see him lying
with such a sickness; it seemed to him such a pitiful ailment for a
grown man. Kristi: nad answered, shortly enough, that she under-
stood him not; ’twas sure neither sin nor shame to have a swollen
throat.

He went with her now as far as to the bridge, and all the way
they spoke of the weather and the farm work — saying over again
things they had said in the hall. Simon bade her good-night — then,
of a sudden, he asked:

“ Know you, Kristin, what I have done to Gaute, that the boy is
so wroth with me? ”

“ Gaute? ” she asked, in wonder.

“Ay, have you not marked it? He shuns me — and if he must
needs meet me, he will scarce open his mouth, when I speak with
him —”

Kristin shook her head; no, she had marked naught of this —
“but maybe you have said a word in jest, and he has taken it ill,
like the child he is —”

He knew by her voice she was smiling; he laughed a little: “ But
I cannot remember aught of the kind—”

With that he bade good-night again and left her.


At Jérundgaard all was still; dark in the hall, and ashes raked
over the fire. Bjorgulf was lying awake; he said his father and
brothers were gone a good while since.


The Cross 654


Lle™ GT0ss-oy 8 3 i ORS 6g eee

In the great bed Munan lay alone, sleeping — His mother took
him into her arms when she had lain down.

— Twas hard to speak of it to Erlend, if he himself did not un-
derstand — that he ought not to take his great sons and go roaming
the woods with them, when there was more than enough work to
be done on the farm —

Truly, she had never looked that Erlend should go behind the
plough himself. For that matter, he was scarce the man to cope
with a spell of real work. And Ulf, like enough, would take it but
ill if Erlend meddled with the farming. But her sons could not be
suffered to grow to manhood as their father had done — learning
but to handle arms, to hunt wild beasts and disport him with his
horses — or hang over a draught-board with a priest whose task
it was to coax into the knight’s son some little lore of Latin and of
writing, of singing and playing on strings. "Iwas therefore, in
chief, that she had kept the manor short of working folk — her
sons should learn, she thought, from childhood on, that they must
use them to husbandry. There was small hope now for Erlend’s
sons in the knightly calling.

But of all the youths Gaute was the only one who had any turn
for farming ways. Gaute was a worker — but he was scarce thir-
teen; naught else was to be looked for but that he would liefer be
off with Erlend, when his father bade him come —

But’twas hard to speak of this to Erlend. For she held fast to this
— never from her should her husband hear one word he could take
for blame of his deeds or lamentation over the fate he had brought
upon himself and his sons. ‘The harder was it for her to bring home
to the father that his sons must needs use them to work themselves
on their farm. If only Ulf would speak of it, she thought —


When the folk moved with the herds from the lower sezters up
to Hoévringen, Kristin went with them to the mountain. The twins
she would not have with her. They were near eleven years old
now, and were the most unruly and self-willed of all her children;
twas all the harder for her to guide them since there were two of
them, and they held together in all things. If it so happed that she
could get Ivar alone, then was he good and biddable enough; but
Skule was fiery and headstrong — and when the brothers were to-
gether, Ivar said and did whatsoever the other would.


655 K inship’s Dues


2


One day in early autumn Kristin went out about the time of
nones. The herd had said that, a little down the hill-side, if she fol-
lowed the run of the river, she would find a forest clearing where
were many Aaron’s-rods growing.

Kristin found the spot: a steep hill-side with the sun beating
straight upon it — ’twas even now the best time to pick the flowers.
_ They grew in masses all over the heaps of stones and round about
the grey tree-stumps — tall, bright yellow stalks, set thick with
little full-blown starlets. — Kristin set Munan to plucking rasp-
berries amid some bushes he could not come away from without
her help, and bade the dog stay and guard him. Then she drew her
knife and set about cutting the flowers, while ever keeping an eye
on the little child—Lavrans kept by her side and helped her
busily.

She was ever fearful for her two little ones up here. Otherwise
she had no great dread of yonder folk any more. Already from
many of the seters the dairy-folks had gone down home, but she
‘was minded to stay on over the second Maria Mass.* True, the
nights were black now, and uncanny when it blew hard — uncanny
for them when they must go out late. But for the most part the
weather had been so fair up here — and down in the dale ’twas a
year of drought and poor feed. Men had to bide up here both in
the late fall and the winter-time — and her father had said he had
never marked that there were any Dwellers in their seter of
winters —

Kristin came to a stand under a lone pine on the mid-hill-side;
stood with her hands clasped about the heavy bunch of flower-
stems resting upon her shoulder. From here one could see north-
wards, some way up into Dovre. The corn stood in stooks in many
places out on the farm lands —

The sward was yellow and burnt-up there too. But truly green
*twas never here in the Dale, it seemed to her now — not green as
in Trondheim —

Ay —her mind went back in longing to the home they had
had there — the manor that lay so high and chieftainly forth on

* 8th September.


The Cross 656

the broad-bosomed hill-side, fields and meadows spreading wide
around and downward to the leaf woods in the glen that dipped to
the lake in the dale bottom. The far outlook over low wooded
ridges that rolled, wave behind wave, southwards to the Dovre-
fjeld. And the grass-lands, so rank and deep in summer, red with
ruddy flowers under the red of evening skies; and the aftermath,
so green and sappy in the autumn —

Ay, there were times when longing came on her even for the
fiord — The strands at Birgsi, the wharfs with boats and ships, the
boat sheds, the smell of tar and fishing-gear, and of the sea —all
those things she had liked so little when first she came to the
north —

Erlend — he must long, surely, for that smell, and for the sea and
the sea-winds —

She missed now all that once she had deemed did but weary her

out — the great householding, the flocks of serving-folk, the din
when Erlend’s men rode into the courtyard with clashing arms and
jingling gear — strangers coming and going, bearing great tidings
from far in the land and gossip of folks in the country-side and the
town — She felt now how hushed her life had grown, when all this
fell dumb —
' The market town with its churches and cloisters and feasts in
the great men’s town houses — She longed to pass along the streets,
her own page and serving-maid behind her; to climb the stairs into
the merchants’ ware-rooms, to choose or throw aside; to be set
aboard the trading-smacks on the river and to chaffer: English
linen head-gear, fine veils, wooden horses, with knights astride of
them, who could thrust with their lances when you pulled a string.
She thought on the meadows outside the town, by Nidareid,
where she would go with her children and watch the showmen’s
trained dogs and bears, and buy honey-bread and walnuts —

And at times she would be so fain to deck herself out once more
— Silken shifts and thin, fine head-linen. The sleeveless surcoat of
light-blue velvet that Erlend had bought for her the winter be-
fore mischance fell on them. It had borders of ermine-skin about
the deeply cut-out bosom and round the long arm-slits, that
reached right down to the hips and showed the belt beneath —

And now and then she longed — oh no, ’twere witless not to be
glad of that, glad so long as she were spared the bearing of more
children. When she fell sick in the autumn, after the big slaughter-


657 Kinship’s Dues


ieee er eee ee OO es Kamshep's, Dues
ing — ’twas best things fell out as they did. But she had wept a little
over it, the first nights after —

For it seemed to her a long, long time since she had held a little
child. Munan was but four winters old — but him she had had to
give into strangers’ keeping ere yet he was full a year. And when
she got him back again, he could both walk and talk, and he knew
her not —

Erlend! Oh, Erlend! She knew well that, in her inmost heart, she
knew he was not so — careless — as he seemed. He, that had been
ever restless — ’twas as though now he was ever still: as a stream of
water, striking at last on a steep wall of rock, lets itself be turned
aside, and oozes through the peat to make a silent pool with marsh-
land all around. He passed his time on Jérundgaard, doing naught,
and taking now one and now another of his sons to keep him com-
pany in nothing-doing. Or he went a-hunting with them. The
whim might take him to set to work, and tar and patch up one of
the boats they kept on the tarns for fishing. Or he would set about
breaking one of the young colts. But at that he never made any
hand — he was all too hasty —

He kept to himself, and made at least as though he marked not
that none sought his company. The sons did as their father did.
Liked they were not, these strangers, whom ill-fortune had driven
to the Dale, and who went their ways now, proud and strange as
ever, seeking not to learn aught of the ways of the parish and of
its folk. For Ulf Haldorss6n there was sheer ill-will — he scorned
the Dalesmen openly, called them thick-witted and old-fashioned,
folk that were not bred by the sea-shore were not folk —

And she herself —she knew she had not many friends either,
here in her own home country. Not now any more —

Kristin straightened herself in her moss-brown wadmal dress,
and shaded her eyes with her hand from the golden flood of after-
noon sunlight — ;

Northward she caught a glimpse of the Dale along the river's
white-green riband, and then came the throng of mountain-hulks,
one behind the other, yellow-grey with scree and marsh, away to
where, seen through clefts and scaurs, snow-fields and clouds were
one. Straight before her Rostkampen bent forward a knee and
hemmed the Dale, thrusting the Laagen aside in a great crook. A

far-off thunder rose to her from the river, where it cut deep into
the slate rocks below and fell, boiling and foaming, from shelf to


The Cross 658


Lhe CTO8S" ou a) NE ee
shelf. On the moorish hills above Rostkampen’s dome rose the
rounded backs of the two great BlaahGer, that her father had lik-
ened to a woman’s breasts —

Erlend must feel it cramped and ugly here—hard to draw
breath in —

— A little to the south on this same hill-side, yonder, under the
slopes near the seter, was where she had seen the elf-maiden, when
she was a little child —

A gentle, soft, fair, slender child with thick, silky hair about her
round, red and white cheeks — Kristin shut her eyes, and turned
her sunburnt face full to the flood of light. A young mother with
milk-swollen breasts and a heart stirred and fruitful with child-
bearing like a new-ploughed field — ay. But for such an one as she
was now there was no fear; her they would scarce try to draw into
their clutches. Ill would the mountain-king deem a woman so worn
and meagre would set off his bridal gold; the elf-wife would scarce
be fain to put her child to such dried-up breasts. She felt herself
hard and dry as the pine root beneath her foot, that crooked itself
over the stones, and clawed itself fast. She struck her heel hard
upon it with the thought.

The two little lads had come to her side; they made haste to do
as their mother did, kicking the pine root with all their might, and
then asking eagerly:

“Why did you so, mother? ”

Kristin sat down, laid the Aaron’s-rods in her lap, and began to
strip off the full-blown blossoms into her basket.

“Twas that my shoe pinched me on the toes,” she answered, so
long after that the boys minded not that they had asked. But they
gave little heed to this—they were so used to have their mother
seem not to hear when they spoke to her, or wake up and answer
when they had forgot what ’twas they had asked.

Lavrans helped to strip off the blossoms; Munan would have
helped too, but he only tore the tassels to shreds. So his mother
took the flowers from him without a word, without anger, far
away in her own thoughts. Soon the boys began to play and fight
with the stripped stalks that she threw aside.

The game went on noisily before their mother’s knees. Kristin
looked on the two small, round, brown-haired child-heads. Much
alike they were still: they had well-nigh the same light-brown hue
of hair, but, by all kinds of small scarce-seen marks and signs that


659 Kinship’s Dues


came and went in a flash, their mother could see they would grow
to be most unlike. Munan would favour his father: he had his sea-
blue eyes, and the silky hair that clung, soft and close, in curls and
little waves round the narrow head; ’twould darken to sooty black
with time. That little face of his, that still was so round below the
chin and on the cheeks, so that ’twas a joy to lay a hand on its soft
freshness, would narrow and lengthen out, once he grew a little
older; he, too, would one day show the high, narrow forehead
sunken at the temples, and the straight, outstanding triangle of
nose, sharp and narrow on the bridge, with thin, restless nostrils,
that Naakkve had already and that the twins had plainly shown
they were to have.

_ Lavrans had had flaxen, silk-fine curls when he was little. Now
his hair had the hue of a hazel-nut, but it held golden gleams in the
sunlight. "T'was smooth, and soft enough, but yet much coarser
and thicker; deep masses you could bury your fingers in. Lavrans
was like her; he had grey eyes and a round face, broad of fore-
head and with softly rounded chin, ’twas like he would keep the
red and white of his cheeks well on into manhood.

Gaute’s skin too had this bright fresh hue; he was so like her
father, with his full oval face, iron-grey eyes, and light, light
yellow hair.

Bjorgulf alone — she knew not whom he favoured. He was the
tallest of the sons, broad-shouldered, heavy and strong of limb.
Untamed, curly, coal-black hair grew low over the broad, white
brow; his eyes were blue-black, but strangely lustreless, and they
blinked sorely when he lifted them to the light. She knew not
rightly when it had begun, for it had chanced that this was the
child she had always taken the least heed of. They took him from
her and gave him to a foster-mother soon as he was born; eleven
months afterwards she bore Gaute, and Gaute had been sickly the
four first years he lived. After the twins’ birth she had come to
her feet, sick still, with a hurt in the back, and yet must take up
the big boy again, carry him about and tend him, so that she scarce
had time to look on the new children save when Frida brought
Ivar thirsty and shrieking — and Gaute, too, lay and shrieked while
she sat and gave the little one the breast. She had not been able —
holy mother Mary, thou knowest I could not give more heed to
Bjorgulf than I did — And from the first he was such an one as
would rather go about alone and fend for himself; strange and


The Cross 660


silent had he ever been, seemed ever to mislike it when she would
have fondled him. She had ever deemed him the strongest of her —
brood; like a swart, headstrong little bullcalf had Bjorgulf always —
seemed to her —

Little by little it had come home to her that there was somewhat
amiss with his sight. The monks had done something to his eyes
when he and Naakkve were at Tautra, but it seemed that had not
helped — |

He was still close and silent as ever; she made no way when now
she tried to draw Bjérgulf to her. His father fared no better, she
saw — Bjorgulf was the only one of their sons who did not warm
to any heed from Erlend as a meadow takes the sunshine. Only
with Naakkve was Bjérgulf otherwise — but when she would have |
talked with Naakkve of his brother, he turned the matter off. She —
knew not if Erlend fared any better in this— though greater love
than Naakkve’s for his father —!

— Oh no, with Erlend’s offspring there could be no mistaking
who their father was. — When she was last in Nidaros, she had
seen that child from Lensvik. She met Sir Thorolf in Christ’s
Church yard; he came out with a train of men and women and ~
serving-folk, a maid bearing the babe in its swaddling clothes.
Thorolf Aasulfss6n greeted her with a bow, quiet and courteous,
as he went by. His wife was not there —

She had seen the child’s face; in a single glance, but ’twas enough.
It was like other children’s faces that had lain at her own breast —

Arne Gjavvaldss6n was with her, and he could not refrain him —
from talking — as his way ever was. Sir Thorolf’s kinsmen that
were his heirs were but ill pleased when the child saw the light last
winter. But Thorolf had it christened Aasulf. Twixt Erlend Niku-
laussén and Lady Sunniva there had never been more than the
friendship all folk knew of — he made as though he never doubted
this. Loose-tongued and rash as the man was, he had talked reck-
lessly, without doubt, when bandying jests with her — and ’twas
no more than the lady’s duty to warn the king’s wardens when she
suspected mischief. But had they been over-good friends, Sunniva
must sure have known that her own brother was privy to Erlend’s
plan. When Haftor Graut made forfeit of his life and his soul’s
salvation in the prison, she had gone clean from her wits — no one
could pay heed to what she had laid to her own charge in that
state. Sir Thorolf had laid his hand on his sword-hilt and looked
around the company as he spoke of this, said Arne —


661 Kinship’s Dues


Arne had named the matter to Erlend too. One time when she
was above in a loft-room, the two men had stood below under the
balcony, knowing not that she could hear their words. The Lens-
vik knight was so o’erjoyed at the coming of the son his wife had
borne last winter — ’twas plain he had no doubt that he himself
was the father.

“Ay, Thorolf himself must sure know best,” Erlend had an-
swered. She knew that tone in his voice — he was standing now
with downcast eyes and the little smile at one corner of his mouth.

Sir Thorolf hated so those kinsmen of his who should have been
his heirs if he died childless. But folk were talking, saying the thing
was not as it should be — “ Oh, the man must sure know best him-
self,” said Erlend as before —

“ Ay, ay, Erlend! That one boy is heir to more than the seven
sons you have by your wife —”

“For my seven sons shall I care myself, Arne —” But at that she
went down; she would not suffer them to talk any more of this
thing. Erlend looked a little out of countenance when he saw her.
Then he came and took her hand, standing behind her so that her
shoulder touched his body. She felt that, as he stood there looking
down upon her, he was making over again, wordlessly, the prom-
ise he had just made — as it were to give her courage —

— Kristin grew ware now that Munan was gazing up into her
face —somewhat fearful. She must have smiled — not a pleasant
smile. But when his mother looked down at him, he smiled back to
her straightway, doubtfully and provingly.

Vehemently she caught him up into her lap. He was little, little,
little yet, her youngest — not too big yet to be kissed and fondled
by his mother. She winked one eye at him. He did his best to wink
back at her, but, try as he would, both eyes would shut together —
his mother laughed aloud; Munan too went off into peals of laugh-
ter, while Kristin hugged and squeezed him in her arms —

Lavrans had been sitting with the dog in his lap. They both
turned, listening, towards the woods below.

“Tis father! ” The dog first and the boy after him went leaping
down the steep hill-side. wi ty

Kristin sat still awhile. Then she rose and went out on a jutting

oint. Now they were coming up the path from below: Erlend,
Naakkve, Ivar, and Skule. They came along in wild glee, calling
their greetings up to her.

Kristin greeted them again. Were they going up to fetch the


The Oross 662

horses? No, answered Erlend: Ulf, he thought, was sending Svein-
bjérn up for them to-night. He and Naakkve were bound further
afield after reindeer, and the twins had had a mind to come along
with them and see their mother —

She made no answer. She had known how ’twas ere she asked.
Naakkve had with him hounds in leash; he and his father were in ©
wadmal jerkins of mingled grey and black, such as make little
show against the screes. All four of them had bows.

Kristin asked the tidings from the manor, and Erlend talked as
they climbed upward. Ulf was in full swing with the harvest work,
he was not ill pleased, but the straw was cutting short; the corn had
riped so quickly on the higher fields, the grain was dropping from
the ears. And the oats were all but ready to cut — they must keep
hard at it, Ulf said —

Kristin nodded as she walked, but said no word.


She went to the byre herself to help in the milking. It was ever
pleasant to her, this hour when she sat in the dark close in to the
swelling cow-flank, and felt the milk’s sweet breath in her nostrils.
Swish, swish, came the answer from the inner darkness, where the
byre-woman and the herd were milking. "Twas all so restful, the
strong, warm smell in the byre, the sound of a withy-band creak-
ing, of a horn knocking against wood, of a cow moving her feet
in the miry earth floor of the stall, or whisking her tail at the flies.
— The wagtails that nested in here in the summer were gone
now —

The cows were restless to-night. Bluesides put her foot in the
milk-pail — Kristin slapped at her and scolded her. The next cow
turned restive and ugly, as soon as Kristin sat in to her side. She
had sores on her teats. Kristin pulled her wedding-ring from her
finger and milked the first jet through it.

She heard Ivar and Skule down by the gate — they were shout-
ing and throwing stones at the strange bull that followed her cattle
home each evening. They had offered to help Finn to milk the |
goats in the pen, but they must have grown tired of that —

When she came by a little later, they were busy tormenting the
pretty white bull-calf she had given Lavrans — the little boy stood
by whimpering. His mother set down the pails, took the two by
the shoulders, and pushed them aside — they must let their broth-
er’s calf be, when he bade them to —


663 Kinship’s Dues


Erlend and Naakkve were sitting on the doorstep; they had a
fresh cheese between them; they were eating hunch upon hunch,
and stuffing Munan, who stood betwixt Naakkve’s knees. Naakkve
had laid her strainer over the little one’s head, saying that none
could see Munan now — for this was no strainer, but a fairy hat.
They were laughing, all three, — but no sooner did Naakkve see
his mother than he handed her the strainer, stood up, and took the
pails from her.

Kristin lingered in the dairy. The upper half of the door to the
outer room stood ajar —she saw they had piled the hearth with
fuel. Round the fire in the warm flickering glow they sat eating,
Erlend, the children, the serving-wench, and the three herds.

When she came in, they had ended their meal. She saw that the
two little ones had been put to bed upon the wall-bench; they
seemed to be asleep already. Erlend lay huddled up in the bed. She
stumbled over his jerkin and boots and, as she went by, picked
them up and then went out.

The sky was bright still, with a red streak over the fells in the
west; a few dark cloud-wisps swam in the clear heaven. It looked
like good weather for to-morrow too, ’twas so still, and so nipping
cold, now that night had well fallen — no wind, but an icy breath
from the north-west, a steady air-drift from the naked grey-stone
mountains. Over the low hills down to the south-east the moon
was floating up, nigh the full, big and pale red yet in the thin haze
that hung always over the marshes there.

The strange bull was bellowing mournfully somewhere away on
the uplands. But for that, all was so still twas like an ache — naught
but the rush of the river below their milking-place, the little beck
tinkling down the grassy green, and a sleepy soughing off in the
woods — an unrest among the pines, that stirred, settled for a space,
and then stirred again —

She busied herself with some milk-pans and troughs that stood
by the seter wall. Naakkve and the twins came out — whither
were they going? their mother asked,

They were going to lie in the barn — there was such a rank smell
in the dairy from all the cheese and butter — and from the herds
sleeping there.

Naakkve went not at once to the barn. His mother still saw his
light-grey form faintly against the green darkness of the hay-field
that bordered the woods. A little later the serving-wench came to


The Cross 664


———— ee eee
the door — she started when she saw the mistress standing by the
wall. ; as

'“ Are you not for bed now, Astrid? — ’tis late already —

The wench mumbled —she was but going behind the byre.
Kristin waited till she had seen her in again. Naakkve was in his
sixteenth year. "Iwas some time now since his mother had begun
to keep an eye upon the serving-women on the manor, when they
grew merry with the comely and lively youth.

Kristin went down to the river and knelt upon the stone slab out
over the water. Before her the river ran, well-nigh black, in a wide
pool; only a few rings showed the current; but a little above, it
foamed down, white in the darkness, with a drumming noise and
cold puffs of air. The moon had risen so high now that its light
was grown strong — here and there it glittered on a dewy leaf.
Then a sparkle showed on a ripple on the stream —

Erlend spoke her name just behind her — she had not heard him
coming down across the sward. Kristin sank her arm into the icy
water and fished up a pair of milk-pans that lay at the bottom
with stones on them, scouring in the river; she rose and followed
her husband back with both hands full. They did not speak as they
passed up the slope.

Once in the hut, Erlend stripped himself wholly and climbed
into the bed:

“Will you not come to rest soon, Kristin? ”

“T must get me a bite of food first —” She sat her down on her
three-legged stool close by the hearth, with some bread and a slice
of cheese in her lap, ate slowly, and gazed into the heap of embers
that were dying out little by little in the stone-lined hole in the
floor.


“Are you sleeping, Erlend? ” she whispered, as she rose and
shook her skirt.

“No —” Kristin went over and drank a dipperful of sour milk
from the tub in the corner. Then she went back to the hearth,
lifted a slab of stone and laid it on top, and spread the Aaron’s-rod
blossoms on it to dry.

But now there was no more she could think on to be done. She
undressed in the dark and laid her down in the bed by Erlend.
When he put his arms around her, she felt her weariness like a
wave of cold sweeping through her whole body; her head grew
hollow and heavy, as though all within it had settled down and


665 Kinship’s Dues
made a lump of sheer pain where it joined her neck. But when he


whispered to her, she dutifully put her arms about his neck.


She awoke in the night and knew not what time it was. But by
ne pane above the smoke-hole she could see the moon must be

igh.

The bed was narrow and short, so that they needs must lie close
to one another. Erlend slept; he breathed quietly and evenly; his
breast rose and fell gently in his sleep. At one time she had been
wont to nestle close in to his warm, sound body when she woke of
nights and grew fearful because he breathed so noiselessly — then
it had seemed a sweet joy to feel his breast rise and fall in slumber
against her side.

After a while she crept out of the bed, put on her clothes in the
dark, and stole to the door.

The moon was sailing high over the whole world. Here and
there was a glimmer from water in the mosses, or on cliffs over
whose face it had trickled the day through and was freezing now
to ice. The moon shone over the leaf woods and the pine woods.
On the grass banks hoar-frost glittered. It was bitter cold —she
crossed her arms upon her breast and stood a little.

Then she went up along the beck. It tinkled and gurgled, with
little sounds of ice-needles breaking in sunder —

At the upper end of the fenced field lay a great deep-bedded
boulder. No one went near it unless he must, and when he went,
he crossed himself. They poured cream in under it when they
came in the summer, and when they left again. ‘True it was she had
never known of any that had seen or heard aught there — but such
had been the custom on the seter from of old —

She knew not herself what had taken her, to leave the house in
this wise, at dead of night. She came to a stand by the stone — set
her foot ina notch in it. Her belly shrank, her body grew cold and
numb with fear — but cross herself she would not. Then she crept
up and sat her down upon the stone.

From here one saw far and wide around — away over the ugly
grey-stone mountains in the moon-light. The big hump on Dovre
rose mighty and pale against the pale sky, the snow-field glistened
white in the scar on Graahé, the Boar-fells shone with blue clefts
and new-fallen snow. In the moonlight the mountains were uglier
than she had ever deemed they could be — hardly a single star


The Cross 666


or two shone here and there in the endless, icy-cold heavens. She
was chilled through bone and marrow — terror and cold pressed
in upon her from all sides. But she sat on defiant.

She would not go down and lay herself in the black darkness
by her husband’s warm, slumbering body. For her there was no
sleep that night, she knew —

So sure as she was her father’s daughter — her wedded husband
should never hear her blame his deeds. For she remembered what
she had sworn when she besought God Almighty and all the holy
saints in heaven for Erlend’s life —

So it was that she 7st go out into this ghostly night to take
breath, when she felt nigh perishing —


She sat and let the bitter old thoughts come to her like old
acquaintance. And met them with other old and well-known
thoughts — in feigned excuse of Erlend —

True, he had not craved this of her. He had not laid upon her
aught of the burden she had taken upon her shoulders. He had
but begotten seven sons on her. “ For my seven sons J shall care,
Arne—” God alone might know what the man meant by those
words. Like enough he had meant nothing — he had but said it —

Erlend had not begged her te set Husaby and his estates a-going
again. He had not begged her fight for dear life to save him. Like
a chieftain he had suffered —that his goods be wasted, that his
life be set on the hazard, that all he owned be lost. Stripped and
bare, he stood amidst mischance loftily unbowed and still; loftily
still and unbowed he abode in her father’s manor like some stranger
guest — ‘

But all that was hers was her sons’ by right. By right they claimed
her sweat and blood and all her strength. But, if so, the manor and
she herself could lay rightful claim to them in return.

There had been no need for her to take the road to the seter like
any cottar’s wife. But at home, as things were now, she felt herself
crushed and hemmed in on every side — so that she seemed to fail
for breath. Besides, she had needed to prove to herself that she
could do a peasant woman’s work. True, toil and struggle had been
hers every hour since she rode, a bride, into Erlend Nikulaussén’s
manor — and saw that here one at least must fight to save the her-
itage of him she bore below her heart. If the father could not, then
she must be the one. But now she must needs assure herself — that,
if the pinch came, there was no piece of work she had set her maids


{ 667 Kinship’s Dues

_and serving-women to in the old days that she could not do with
her own hands. Up here ’twas a good day when she marked that
she ached not across the loins when she had stood long a-churning.
*Twas good in the mornings to be along herself and help let out the
cattle — they had grown fat and fair this summer — the weight on
her heart lightened when she stood in the sunset, crying on the
home-coming cows. She loved to see the food growing under her
own hands —’twas as though she were reaching down to make
firm the very groundwork on which her sons’ fortunes were to be
built up again.

Jorundgaard was a good estate, but ’twas not so good as she had
deemed. And Ulf was a stranger here in the dale —he fell into
mistakes and he lost patience. As folk reckoned in this country-
side, they ever did well with their hay on Jorundgaard — they had
water-meadows along the river and out on the holms — but ’twas
not the best hay, nor such as Ulf was used to in the Trondheim
country. He was unused to have to garner in so much moss and
leaf fodder, so much heather and twigs, as was needful here —

Her father had known every inch of his land, had had all a farm-
er’s lore: of the whims of seasons; of the way the divers fields took
wet or dry years, windy summers or burning summers; of the
strains of cattle that, generation after generation, he himself had
coupled, fed and reared and sold from —all the knowledge that
was needed for just this place. She knew not her manor so by
heart. But she would yet — and her sons should —

But Erlend had never asked the like of her. He had not wed
her to plunge her into toil and trouble; he had but wed her that
she might sleep in his arms. And thus, ever, when her time was
come, a child lay by her side, craved its place upon her arm, at her
breast, in her cares —

Kristin moaned through her clenched teeth. She sat shivering
with cold and wrath. '

“ Pactum serva — that is, in the Norse tongue, keep thy troth! ”

’*T was in that time when Arne Gjavvaldssén and brother Leif of
Holm had come to Husaby and fetched away her goods and her
children’s to Nidaros. That, too, had Erlend left her to deal with —
he had taken lodging out at the Holm cloister. She sat in the town
mansion — the monks owned it now — and Arne Gjavvaldss6n was
with her, helping her with rede and deed; Simon had sent letters

raying for his help. .
me could Rees heen no more eager had it been for himself he


The Cross 668


was to save the goods and gear. The very evening he brought it to
the town, he must needs have both her and Lady Gunna of
Raasvold, who had come in with the two little ones, out to the
stables. Seven picked horses—folk were minded to deal fairly
towards Erlend Nikulaussén, and gave assent when Arne averred
the five eldest sons each owned a riding-horse, and the lady of the
house one for herself and one for her serving-man. As to the Cas-
tilian, Erlend’s Spanish stallion, he could bring witness that him
Erlend had made over in gift to his son Nikulaus — even though
it might have been more jest than earnest. Not that Arne was much
taken with the long-legged beast — but he knew Erlend loved the
horse well —

"Twas an ill thing, said Arne, that he had to let the armour of
state go, with the great helm and the gold-mounted sword — true,
all this gear was fit for naught but the tournament; still twas worth
a great sum. But he had‘got Erlend’s body-shirt of black silk with
the red lion broidered on it. And he had claimed the English bat-
tle-harness for Nikulaus. And that was so choicely wrought that
Arne deemed there was not the like to be found in Norway’s land
— for them that had eyes to see. But twas much worn — ay, indeed,
Erlend had worn his weapons more than most sons of nobles in
these times — Arne fondled each piece — helm, gorget, vambraces,
greaves, gauntlets of the finest steel plates, corslet and hauberk of
chain-mail, so light and easy-fitting and yet withal so strong. And
then the sword — it had but a plain steel hilt, and the leather on the
handle was chafed — but the like of such a blade one saw not every
year—

Kristin sat and held the sword across her lap. She knew Erlend
would take it to him like a much-loved bride — he had never used
any other of all the swords he owned. It had been left to him when
he was but a lad by Sigmund Torolfss6n, who had been his bedfel-
low when first he joined the body-guard. Once only had he
spoken of this friend to her: “ Had God not been in such hot haste
to take Sigmund from this world, ’tis like that much had gone oth-
erwise with me. After his death I was ill at ease at the Court, and
so with much begging I got me King Haakon’s leave to go north
with Gissur Galle that time. ~ Yet but for that I trow I had never
won you, my sweeting — for belike I had been a wedded man long
ere you were grown maid — ”

From Munan Baardssén she had heard that Erlend had nursed


669 Kinship’s Dues


eee See ee ee ee UU ee Amship Dues
his friend day and night, as a mother tends her babe, taking no
sleep but a short doze now and then on the sick man’s bed-side —
that last winter, when Sigmund Torolfssén lay spitting out his
lungs piecemeal, and his heart’s blood. And when Sigmund had
been brought to earth in Halvard’s Church, Erlend had gone to
his grave late and early, and lain flat on the gravestone sorrowing.
But to her he had never spoken of him but that one time. In Hal-
vard’s Church, too, Erlend and she had had their trysts sometimes,
that sinful winter in Oslo. But he had never named with a word
that the dearest friend of his youth lay there. — Twas thus he had
mourned over his mother, she knew; and when Orm died he had
been wild and ungoverned in his despair; yet them too he never
named. She knew he had been in to the town and seen Margret —
but he never spoke of his daughter.

— Right up under the hilt she saw some writing graven into the
blade. ’Iwas runes mostly, and she could not read them, nor Arne
either; but the monk took the sword and looked on it a while.
“ Pactum serva,” said he at last. “ “That means, in the Norse tongue,
keep thy troth.”

Arne and brother Leif spoke, too, of how a great part of her
lands here, north of Dovre, Erlend’s morning-gift to her, had been
pledged and thrown away. Could not some device be found to save
somewhat of this? But Kristin would not — ’twas honour one must
save first of all; she would not have any question raised whether
her husband’s dealings were lawful. And besides, she was well-nigh
plagued to death by Arne’s talk, well meant as it was. ‘That night,
when he and the monk had bidden good-night and gone to their
lodging, she threw herself upon her knees before Lady Gunna and
hid her face in her lap.

In a little the old woman lifted up the young one’s head. Kristin
looked up at the other — Lady Gunna’s face was heavy, yellow,
and fleshy, with three thick folds, as though moulded in wax, right
across her brow, lightly freckled, with sharp, kind blue eyes and
an indrawn, toothless mouth shaded by long, grey lip-hairs. Kris-
tin had seen this face look down on her in so many an hour of
torment — Lady Gunna had been with her each time she bore a
child, save when Lavrans came, for then Kristin had been at home
by her father’s death-bed.

“ Ay, ay, my daughter,” said the lady, pressing a hand on her
forehead. “I have stayed you more times than one now, when you


The Cross 670


needs must to your knees — ay. But in this trial, my Kristin, you
must lay you down before God’s mother Mary herself and pray
her to help you through —”

— Ah, and she had done it too, Kristin thought. She said her
prayers and somewhat of the psalter every sabbath eve; she kept
the fasts Archbishop Eiliv had laid upon her when he gave her
remission of her sins; she gave alms, and tended herself each way-
farer who begged night’s lodging, looked he fair or foul. But she
felt no longer now that the light shone within her when she did
these things. That there was light without she knew, but it seemed
as though mists shut in her soul. It must be what Gunnulf spoke of
— the drought of the spirit. No soul should lose courage by reason
of that, said Sira Eiliv; be steadfast in prayer and good deeds, as
a farmer ploughs and dungs and sows — God will send the quick-
ening rain in His own good time. — But then Sira Eiliv had never
been a farmer —

Gunnulf she had not seen that time. He was making a term north
in Helgeland, preaching and gathering gifts for his cloister. Ay!
there was the one of the knight’s sons of Husaby — and the other —

But Margret Erlendsdatter had come to her sometimes at the
town mansion. Two servants followed the merchant’s wife; she
was in goodly clothing and shone with rich trinkets — her father-
in-law was a goldsmith, so they had them handy in the house. She
seemed happy and content — albeit she had no children. She had
got her dowry from her father in good time. God only knew
whether she ever gave a thought to the poor cripple, Haakon, out
at Gimsar —he could but just drag himself round the courtyard
on two crutches, Kristin had heard. —

But even then she had not thought on Erlend with bitterness, it
seemed to her. She must have felt that what waited Erlend, now
he was a free man again, was the worst of all for him. "Twas there-
fore he hid himself away out with Abbot Olav. Take order for
the flitting, show himself now in the town —it might well be too
much for even Erlend Nikulaussén to face —

And there was the day they sailed out over Trondheim’s fjord —
on the Laurentius galleass, the selfsame bark by which Erlend had
shipped her bridal gear to the north when they first got leave to
wed each other —

A still day, well on in autumn — a pale, leaden glimmer upon the
fjord, the world about them cold, white-barred, unquiet — the


671 Kinship’s Dues


| first snow drifted into ridges across the frozen lands, the cold-

blue hills streaked white with snow. The highest clouds, too,
where the skies were blue, seemed spread out thin as flour by a
wind high up in the dome of heaven. The ship drifted along slowly,
sullenly, close under the land — the town ness. Kristin stood look-
ing at the white surf against the cliff —wondering if she should
be seasick when they got further out into the fjord.

Erlend stood by the rail, further forward near the bow, his two
eldest sons with him. The wind blew their hair and cloaks about.

Now they were looking up Kors fjord, toward Gaularos and the
_ landing at Birgsi. A gleam of sunshine lit up the brown and white
hillside above the strand in there —

Erlend said somewhat to the lads. At that Bjérgulf turned
sharply round, left the bulwark, and came aft. With the spear he
always bore and used as a staff he groped his way among the empty
rowing-benches; he came past his mother — his curly black head
thrust low down upon his breast, his eyes blinking, well-nigh shut,
his lips pressed close together. He went in under the poop —

The mother looked forward at the other two, Erlend and his
eldest son. Then she saw Nikulaus kneel down upon one knee, as a
page does homage to his lord, take his father’s hand, and kiss it.

Erlend tore away his hand — Kristin had a glimpse of his face,
deathly white, quivering, as he turned from the boy and went
behind the sail away from view —

They put into a small haven down the More coast that night.
More sea was running now — the galleass tugged at her land moor-
ings, pitching and rolling. Kristin was down in the room below,
where she was to sleep with Erlend and the two little children. She
felt qualmish with sickness, could not keep her footing on the
boards, which seemed to rise and sink beneath her feet; the lantern
swung over her head, the tiny candle flickered — and she stood
_ struggling with Munan, trying to, get him to make water down be-
tween the planks. When he awoke, drugged with sleep, he would
_ be sick or worse in their bed; and he raged and shrieked and would
not suffer that the strange woman, his mother, should lay hands
on him to help him and hold him over the side. Then Erlend came
down.

She could not see his face, as he asked, very low:

“Saw you Naakkve? — He was so like you in the eyes, Kristin.”
Erlend drew in his breath, short and hard. “” T'was so your eyes


The Cross 672


ESE Oy alan ae er 2 a wea ater a ee 8
looked that morning by the wall of the nuns’ garden — when you
had heard the worst of me — and you plighted me your troth —”

It was then that she had felt the first drop of bitter gall well up
in her heart. God shield the lad — may he never see the day when
he must fix his faith on a hand that lets all slip through its fingers
like cold water and dry sand —


A little while before, she had thought she heard the sound of
hoofs from somewhere far south in the hill wastes. Now it came
again, from nearer by: ‘twas not the noise of stray horses, ’twas
some rider; he rode sharply over the rock slabs below the hillock
yonder.

Fear came over her, icy cold; who rides abroad so late? Dead
men ride north under a waning moon — heard she not horsemen
following the first, far behind—? Yet she sat on; she knew not
herself whether ’twas that she was palsied, or that her heart to-
night was so hardened —

He was bound hither, the rider — now he was crossing the stream
below the home-pasture. She saw the glint of a spear-head above
the willow bushes. Then she found strength to come down from
the stone, and would have run back to the hut — but now the rider
sprang from his horse, bound it to the wicket-post, and threw his
cloak over it for a covering. He came up the green, twas a big,
broad man — and now she knew him — it was Simon.

When he saw her coming towards him in the moonlight, he
seemed as affrighted as she had been before:

“ Jesus, Kristin, is’t you yourself or — how comes it you are out
at dead of night —? Did you look for me to come?” he asked
quickly, as in great dread; “have you had warning of my
coming? ”

Kristin shook her head:

“T could not sleep. — Brother-in-law, what ails you —? ”

“ Andres is so sick, Kristin — we are afeared for his life. And so
we thought — we know you are the most skilful of women in such
things — bear in mind he is your own sister’s son. Will you do a
good deed and go home with me to him? — You know well I
would not come to you thus, but that I know full surely the boy’s
life is the stake,” he said beseechingly. ;

Inside the hut he said the same to Erlend, who sat up in the bed,
still half asleep, in silent wonderment. Then Erlend tried to com:


673 Kinship’s Dues


Pueneenea see aeen veer SOY a o Himship's Dues
fort his brother-in-law, speaking as one with knowledge: such
young children so easily went off into a high fever and wandered
in their talk, even if they had only taken some little chill; mayhap
there was not so much peril as there seemed. “ You may well
know, Erlend, I had never come to fetch Kristin out at such hours
of the night as this, had I not seen all too plain that the child is
lying fighting with death —”

Kristin had blown up the embers and laid wood on the hearth;
Simon sat staring into the fire; he drank eagerly of the milk she
proffered him, but would have no food. He had a mind to set off
down the hill as soon as the others came, “‘—if you are willing,
Kristin? ” One of his Henchmen was bringing with him a widow
that served at Formo, a notable woman, who could take the charge
here for a time — Aasbjorg was a most handy woman, he said again.

When Simon had lifted Kristin to the saddle, he said:

“ Fain am I that we should take the short cut southwards — if
you have naught against it? ”

Kristin had never been on that side of <he fell, but she knew
there was a path there going sheer down into the dale over the
hill-side above Formo. She answered, ay — but then his man must
ride the other way, round by Jérundgaard, to fetch her casket and
the bags of roots and herbs. He must waken Gaute; the boy knew
best about them.

By the edge of a wide moss they were able to ride side by side,
and Kristin made Simon tell her again of the boy’s sickness. The
children at Formo had had the throat sickness about Olav’s Mass,
but had got over that lightly. This new sickness had taken hold on
Andres quite of a sudden, when he seemed in the highest health —
in the middle of the day three days ago. Simon had taken him out
with him; he was to have a ride on the corn-sled down to the field
— but he began to complain that he was cold, and, when Simon
looked, the child was in a shivering fit, his teeth chattering in his
head. Later came the hot fit and the cough; and he spat up an evil-
looking brown slime, and had a sore pain in the breast — but, to be
sure, he could not tell them much of where he felt worst, the poor
little being —

Kristin spoke to Simon as cheerly as she could, and now she
had to ride for a stretch behind him. Once he turned and asked if
she were cold; he would have her to put on his mantle over her


cloak —


The Cross 674

Then he talked again of his son. "Iwas true, he had marked it
—the boy was not strong. But Andres had grown much more
hearty this summer and autumn — his foster-mother deemed so too.
Ay, the last days before he fell sick he had been a little strange
and startlish — “ frighted,” he said when the dogs sprang up on
him in play. And the day he took the fever Simon had come home
at sunrise with some wild-ducks. Other days the boy would ever
beg his father for the birds he brought home, to play with them
awhile; but now Andres had shrieked out loud when his father
had made as if to toss the leash of birds at him. He had indeed
stolen across afterward and handled the ducks, but he got some
blood upon him, and at that he grew quite wild with terror. And
now to-night, as he lay moaning sore, getting no sleep nor rest —
he had cried out somewhat of a hawk that was after him —

““_ Mind you that day the tidings came to me at Oslo, and you
said: ‘Twill still be the Darre stock that will hold Formo when
you are gone—’?”

“Talk not so, Simon —as though you deemed you would die
sonless. God and his gentle mother can surely help —”Tis unlike
you, brother-in-law, to be so faint of heart.”

“ Halfrid, my first wife, said the same to me when she had borne
our son as you said at Oslo. Knew you, Kristin, that I had a son by
her? ”

“ Ay — But Andres is all but three years old — ’Tis the first two
years that are hardest to bring children through alive —” But even
to herself it seemed that her words availed little here. And they
rode, and they rode; the horses nodded as they mounted a rise, and
tossed their heads so that the bits jingled; not a sound in the frosty
night, save of their own riding, and at times the ripple of water as
they crossed a beck; and the moon shone high and low; and scree
and greystone crag glimmered grimly pale as death, where they
rode on under the hill-sides.

At length they had come where they could look down upon the
parish. Moonlight filled all the dale; the river and the marshes and
the lake farther south shone like silver — fields and meadows were
wan.

“ Ay, to-night ’tis freezing in the lowlands too,” said Simon.

He got down from his horse and led hers as they went down
over the edge. The path was so steep in many places, Kristin felt
she scarce dared look ahead. Simon steadied her with his back
against her knee, and she held on with one hand behind the saddle.


we


675 Kinship’s Dues


Seer A A NST Se Wes
Now and then a stone rolled from under the horses’ hoofs, trun-
dled downward, stopped a little, then rolled again, loosening others
and carrying them along —

At last they were down. They rode over the barley-fields north
of the manor between the rime-covered corn-stooks. The aspens
crackled and pattered eerily above their heads in the bright, still
night.

“Said you sooth,” asked Simon, wiping his face with his sleeve
“that you had had no warning —? ” ;

Kristin answered that it was true. Then said he:

“ T have heard tell that sometimes a forewarning goes forth when
any one yearns sorely for another — Ramborg and I said to each
other more than once that had you been at home you might have
known a way —”

“None of you have been in my thoughts all these days,” said
Kristin. “ You must believe me, Simon.” But she could not see that
this comforted him.

In the courtyard a couple of house-carls sprang out at once
and took the horses. “ Ay, ’tis even as when you went, Simon; ’tis
no worse,” said one of them quickly; he had looked up at his mas-
ter’s face. Simon nodded; he went in front of Kristin towards the
women’s house.


Kristin saw clear enough that here was great peril of life. The
little boy lay alone in the great, fine bed, moaning and gasping
and tossing his head without cease to and fro on the pillows. He
was burning hot, and dark red in the face; he lay with half-open,
glistening eyes, fighting for breath. Simon stood, holding Ram-
borg’s hand, and all the women of the manor, who were gathered
in the room, pressed round Kristin while she handled the boy.

But she spoke as calmly as she could, and heartened the parents
as best she was able. Sure enough ’twas the lung fever. But this
night was now near an end without the evil having changed for the
worse — and ’twas the way of this sickness to take a turn the third
or seventh or ninth night, before cock-crow. She prayed Ramborg
to send all the serving-women to bed save two, so that she might
at all times have women, rested and fresh, to help her. And when
the man came from Jérundgaard with her leech-wife’s gear, she
brewed a sweating-drink for the boy and opened a vein in his foot
to draw the humours somewhat away from his breast.

Ramborg’s face blanched at the sight of her child’s blood. Simon


The Cross 676


Le OTO8S eee
put an arm around her, but she pushed the man aside and sat down
ona chair by the bed-foot; there she sat gazing at Kristin with big,
black eyes, while her sister busied herself with the child.


On in the day, the boy seeming a little better, Kristin talked
Ramborg over to lie down on the bench. She heaped cushions and
coverings about the young wife; sat by her head, stroking her
forehead gently. Ramborg took Kristin’s hand:

“Surely now, you wish us naught else but good? ” said she in
a moaning breath.

“Could I wish you aught but well, sister — we two, sister, left
here in the country of our home, alone of all our kindred — >? ”

Ramborg broke into sobs — a few half-choked sobs through lips
pressed hard together. Kristin had but once seen her sister weep —
the time they stood by their father’s death-bed. Now a few small,
hasty tears sprang to her eyes and trickled down her cheeks. She
lifted Kristin’s hand and looked upon it. It was long and slender,
but red-brown now and rough —

“ Even yet ’tis fairer than mine,” she said. Ramborg’s hands were
small and white, but the fingers were short and the nails square.

“Yes,” said she, almost angrily, as Kristin shook her head, smil-
ing. “ And you are even yet fairer than I have ever been. And our
father and our mother held you dearer than me —all our days.
You wrought them sorrow and shame; I was duteous and obedient
and set my heart on the man they most fain would have me wed —
yet withal ’twas you they loved much more —”

“Nay, sister. Be sure they held you every whit as dear. Be glad,
Ramborg, to think you never gave them aught but joy — you know
not how heavy the other thought is to bear. But you ‘were younger
the time when I was young; and therefore, maybe, they spoke
more with me.”

“ Aye, I trow that all were younger that time when you were
young,” said Ramborg, sighing as before.

She slept soon after. Kristin sat and gazed at her. She had known
her sister so little; Ramborg was yet a child when she herself was
wed. And now it seemed to her that the other in some ways had
never ceased to be a child. She had looked like a child as she sat by
her sick boy —a pale, frighted child, striving to bear up against
terror and unhappiness.


It befell at times that beasts stopped short in their growth if they


677 Kinship’s Dues


Senet S EU es
bore young too early. Ramborg had not been full sixteen years
when she bore her daughter, and since then it seemed as though she
had never rightly taken up her growth again; she had stayed frail
and small, without bloom or fruitfulness. She had had this one son
since, and he was strangely ailing — comely of face, fine-featured
and fair of hue, but piteously small and puny — he had been back-
ward in walking, and he still spoke haltingly, so that only those
about him daily understood aught of his prattle. He was so fearful
and peevish with strangers, too, that he had scarce ever let his
mother’s sister touch him till now. Would God and Holy Olav
but grant her grace to save this poor little being — oh! she would
be thankful all her days. Such a child as this mother of his was, sure
it was that she could never endure the loss of him. And she felt
that for Simon Darre too ’twould be bitter hard to bear the blow
well, if this only son were taken from him —

That she had grown to love her brother-in-law heartily she
marked well, now that she understood how sorely he suffered in
this sorrow and dread. She could well understand now her father’s
great love for Simon Andressén. And yet she wondered if he had
not done Ramborg wrong in making such haste to bring about
this match. For when she looked upon this little sister beside her,
it came home to her that, after all said, Simon must be both too old
and too sober and heavy to be husband to this young child.


3


Tue pays went by and Andres lay sick; there was no great change
either for the worse or for the better. The worst was he scarce
got any sleep; the boy lay there with half-open eyes and seemed
not to know any; cough and breathlessness wrung his wasted little
frame, and the flickering fever rose and fell. One evening Kristin
had given him a soothing drink — after it he sank into rest; but in
a while she saw the child had gone a bluish-white, and his skin felt
cold and clammy. ‘

In all haste she got a draught of hot milk poured down his throat,
and laid hot stones to the soles of his feet; but thereafter she no
longer dared give him a sleeping potion. — She saw that he was too


young to support it. :
Sira Solmund came and brought him the Holy Elements from


The Cross 678
the church; Simon and Ramborg vowed perpetual prayer, fasts and
alms, if God would hear them and grant their son his life.
Erlend came thither one day; he would not light from his horse
and go within, but Kristin and Simon came out into the courtyard
and spoke with him. He looked on them most sorrowfully. "Iwas
strange that this look of his ever stirred in Kristin a vague dull
anger. Certain twas that it gave him pain when he saw any sick
or sorrowing, but he seemed most of all mazed and shamefaced —
he ever looked so helpless when he was sorry for folk.
_ After that Naakkve or the twins came each day to Formo to ask
for Andres.


The seventh night brought no turn in the sickness, but as the
day drew on the boy seemed a little better —not so hot. Simon
and Kristin were sitting alone by him towards midday.

The father pulled out a little gilded amulet he wore on a cord
about his neck under his clothes. He bent down over the boy,
dangled the amulet before his eyes, thrust it into the child’s hand,
and pressed the little fingers together around it—but Andres
seemed not to heed.

This amulet Simon had had given him when a child, and he had
borne it ever since —his father had brought it with him from
France. It had been blessed in a cloister named St. Michael’s Mount,
and there was on it the likeness of St. Michael with great wings;
this Andres liked right well to look upon, Simon told her, very low.
But the little fellow deemed it was a cock; he called the chief of all
the angels “the cock” — At last he had got the boy taught to
say “the angel.” But one day they were standing in the courtyard
Andres saw the cock pecking at one of his hens; “ Angel angry
now, father,” said he.

Kristin looked up at the man beseechingly — it cut her to the
heart to hear him, albeit Simon spoke so evenly and calmly. And
she was so worn out by all these nights of watching; she felt she
must break down if she began now to weep —

Simon thrust the charm into the bosom of his shirt again:

“Oh, ay. I shall give a three-year-old ox to the church on St.
Michael’s even, each autumn so long as I live, if he will but tarry
a little ere he come to fetch this soul. Methinks too he would weigh
in the balance no more than a plucked chicken — Andres —sa
little —”’ but when he tried to laugh, his voice broke a little.


-__


679 Kinship’s Dues
eee ee Ae ped Nh A OC A inship 8 tues


“Simon, Simon! ” the woman begged him.

“Ay, twill be as ’tis willed to be, Kristin. And ’tis God Himself
that wills it; he must sure know best —” The father spoke no more,
but stood looking down upon his son.


On the eighth night Simon and one of the serving-women
watched, while Kristin slumbered a little over on the further bench.
When she awoke, the girl was sleeping. Simon sat, as he had sat
most nights, on the bench at the bed-head; he sat with his head
bowed down over the bed and the child.

“Doth he sleep? ” whispered Kristin, going forward to him.

Simon raised his head. He brushed his hand over his face; she
saw that his cheeks were wet, but he answered low and calmly:

“T deem not, Kristin, that Andres will sleep any more till he lies
beneath the turf in holy ground —”

Kristin stood — ’twas as though she grew stark and stiff. Slowly
she blanched beneath her sunburnt skin, grew white to the very
lips.

eethen she went to the corner and took her outdoor cloak.

“You must order it so—” she spoke as though her throat and
mouth were dry — “that you are here alone when I come back.
Stay you with him — and, when you see me enter, speak no word,
and speak no word of this after, neither to me nor to any. Not even
to your priest —”

Simon rose up— came slowly over to her. He too had grown

ale.
; “Nay — Kristin! ” His veice could scarce be heard. “I—I dare
not — have you go that road —”

She wrapped her cloak about her, took a cloth of linen from the
chest in the corner, folded it together, and hid it in her bosom.

“T dare. You wot well not one must come nigh us after, before
I call —no one must come nigh us after, nor speak to us, ere he
“wakes and himself has spoken —” .

“What, trow you, would your father think of this? ” he whis-
pered, faintly as-before. “ Kristin — do it not —”

“T have done before now what my father deemed was wrong ~
— then ’twas but to forward my own lusts — Andres is is flesh and
blood too — my own flesh, Simon — my only sister’s son —”

Simon breathed hard, trembling; he stood looking down.

“ But if you would not that I should make trial of this last shift


The Cross 680
of all —” He stood as before with bowed head, and made no an-
swer. Thereon she said again — and knew not that a strange, nigh
scornful half-smile had come about her white lips:

“Would you that I should not go? ”

He turned his head aside, and she went by him, stepped through
the door noiselessly, and closed it softly behind her.


Without was thick darkness, with little puffs of south wind, so
that all the stars flickered and blinked unsteadily. She had come no
farther than into the road between the fences, and yet it seemed
as though she had passed out into the everlasting itself. An endless
road behind her and before her. As though she would never come
away from what she had stepped into when she set foot out into
this night —

The darkness itself seemed a power that she pressed forward
against. She was walking in deep mud — the way had been ploughed
up by the dung-carts and was thawing in the south wind. At each
step she must tear herself loose from the night and the raw cold
that clung about her feet, sucked its way up, and clogged the hem
of her skirts. Ever and anon a falling leaf brushed by her —as
though a living thing in the dark touched her, softly, sure of its
power: go back, go back! — ;

When she came out upon the highway, walking grew easier: it
was grass-grown; her feet stuck in the mud no longer. She felt her
face stiff as stone, her body strung and taut — each step bore her
mercilessly towards the wood she must go through. An inner palsy
seemed to mount up in her — ’twas impossible she could dare go
through that murky passage — yet she had no thought of turning.
Terror had struck her body numb, yet she kept striding forward
as though in sleep, stepping surely over stones and roots and pud-
dles, all unaware — heedful not to stumble, not to drop her even
gait and give her terror the mastery.

Now the firs sighed nearer and nearer in the night; she passed -
in among them, still calm, as if sleep-walking. She was ware of
every sound, and scarce dared move an eyelid for the darkness. The
thunder of the river, the heavy sighing in the trees, the tinkle over
stones of a beck that she drew near to, passed, and left behind.
Once, up on the scree, a stone rolled, as if some living thing stirred
up there — sweat burst out over her whole body, but she dared
neither slacken nor hasten her gait —


681 Kinship’s Dues


Kristin’s eyes were now so used to the dark that, when she came
out of the wood, she could see a little — there was a faint gleam
upon the river, upon the waters of the marshes. The farm-lands
showed now against the blackness; the clusters of houses looked
like cores of blacker gloom upon them. The sky, too, was surely
lightening high above her as she went — she felt it, but dared not
~ look up the black hillsides that towered up to heaven. But she knew
it must soon be time for the moon to rise —

She tried to remind herself — in four hours’ time ’twill be day:
folk will be setting about the day’s work on all the farms — the air
will be grey with dawn, ’twill grow light above the hills. The way
will not be long then — in the light ’tis not far from Formo to the
church. And long ere that she herself would be home and within-
doors. But something told her that she must needs be another then
than she was when she went forth —

She knew — had it been for one of her own children’s lives, she
had never dared to try this last shift of all. Turn God’s hand aside,
when He had stretched it forth to take a living soul! As she sat
over her own sick little ones, when she was young and her heart
bled with tenderness, she had tried to say, when ready to sink
with dread and anguish: Lord, Thou lovest them better than I —
Thy will be done —

Yet now went she here this night defying her own terror — This
child which was not hers — this child she would save, whatsoever
she might save it for —

— For you too, Simon Darre, when the dearest thing you owned
on earth was the stake, took at my hands more than a man may
take with honour unabated —

“Would you that I should not go—?” And he had not been
man enough to answer. In her heart of hearts she knew — were the
child to die, that too Simon would somehow make shift to bear.
But she had swooped down upon that single hour when she found
him at the breaking-point — had seized the chance that moment
gave her and gone her way. This secret now she would share with
him — that he knew she too had seen i772 in an hour when he stood
not firmly on his feet —

For he had come to know her too nearly. At the hands of the
man she had thrown off she had taken help each time there was
need, to save the man of her choice. The lover she had cast aside
was the man she had turned to, each time she stood in need of a


shield for her love. And she had never besought Simon in vain —
time after time had he stepped forth to screen her with his kindness
and his strength.

—So she walked this road through the night that she might
lighten a little the load of debt whose crushing weight till that hour
she had never felt to the full.

Simon had forced her to understand at the last that he was the
strongest — stronger than she herself and stronger than the man
she had chosen to give herself to. She must indeed have felt it from
the very hour when they three had met face to face in that shame-
ful den in Oslo — though she would not see it then — that this lump-
ish, round-cheeked, talking youth was stronger than —

So went she here, and dared not call upon a good and holy name,
and took upon herself this sin, that she might win — she knew not
what — was it revenge? — revenge for that she had been forced
to see he was worthier than they two —?

But now you too know it, Simon — when ’tis for the life of him
one loves more than one’s own being —a poor human soul will
grasp at aught, at aught —

The moon had risen over the edge of the hills as she went up
the slope towards the church. Again ‘twas as though she must ride
over a fresh wave of terror —the moonlight lay like a thin cob-
web layer over the tar-sprent mass; the church itself stood under
the thin veil, awful and threateningly black. For the first time she
saw the great cross on the green outside and dared not go thither
to bow down before the holy tree. She crept across where she
knew the churchyard wall of turf and stone was lowest and easiest
to climb.

A gravestone here and there glistened like water in the long
dewy grass. Kristin went straight across the churchyard, down to
the poor folks’ graves away by the south wall.

She went to the place where lay a poor new-comer to the parish.
The man had frozen to death on the mountains one winter; his
two motherless daughters had been passed from house to house as
bedesfolk, till Lavrans Bjérgulfsén had proffered to keep them for
Christ’s sake, and to give them nurture. They grew up and turned
out well, and her father had himself sought out honest, hard-work-
ing men for them, and had given them away in wedlock, each
with cow and calf and sheep; while Ragnfrid gave them beds and
bedding and iron pots — now they were thriving housewives, well-


ite MDE as


a een


683 Kinship’s Dues


eee re er ke Oe is NC er A CnSp.g. Ut
to-do in their own way of life. One had been Ramborg’s serving-
maid, and Ramborg had borne children to baptism for her —

So now must you spare me a turf from your covering, Bjarne,
for Ramborg’s son. She knelt down and drew out her dagger.

The sweat burst out in ice-cold beads upon her brow and upper
lip as she dug her fingers in under the dew-wet turf. Something
held it from below —’twas but roots—she cut them with the
dagger.

In guerdon the drow must have gold, or silver heired for three
generations. She drew off the little gold ring with rubies that had
been her grandmother’s betrothal ring — the child is of my father’s
house. She thrust the ring down into the earth as deep as she could,
wrapped the turf in the linen cloth, and covered the spot whence
she had taken it with moss and leaves.

As she rose to her feet, her legs beneath her trembled — she had
to stand a little ere she could turn. If she looked under her elbow
now, she would see them —

And there was a dreadful dragging within her, as though they
would force her to it — all the dead who had known her in days
gone by. Is’t you, Kristin Lavransdatter — come you hither thus?
— Arne Gyrdssén in the grave without the western porch. Ay,
Arne, well may you wonder —I was not such an one when you
and I were friends —

Then she climbed over the wall again and went her way down-
ward.

The moon shone now over the whole country-side. There lay
Jérundgaard out on the river flat — dew glittered in the grass on
all the roofs. She looked down yonder, well-nigh unmoved —
”*T was as though she herself were dead to that home and all therein
—the door barred for ever against her who went by that night on
the highroad —

Nigh all her road back was shadowed by the hills. The wind
blew stronger now — gust after gust pressed straight against her
— Withered leaves blew against her and would have turned her
thither whence she last came —

Nor seemed it to her that she walked alone. Of a sudden there
would come a sound as of stealthy footsteps behind her. Is it you,
Arne —? Look behind you, Kristin; look under your elbow, it
whispered —

And yet ’twas as though she was rightly afraid no longer. Only


The Cross 684


cold and numb, sick with longing to give up and sink down to the
ground. Surely after this night she could never know fear again


in this world —


Simon sat in his wonted place at the head of the bed, bent over
the child, when she opened the door and stepped in. For one short
moment he looked up — Kristin wondered whether she had grown
in this time to look as worn and marred and old. Then Simon
bowed his face wholly down and hid it on his arm.

He reeled a little as he rose. He turned his head away from her
as he went by towards the door, with stooping neck and shoulders.

Kristin lit two candles and set them on the board. The boy
opened his eyes a little, looked up unseeingly, frowned a little, and
tried to turn his head from the light. When Kristin laid the little
body out straight, as one lays out a corpse, he tried not to change
his posture — he seemed too weak to move.

Then she covered his face and breast with the linen cloth and
laid the strip of turf across it.

With that the horror rushed upon her anew, like a breaking sea.

She must sit by the bed. The window was right over the short
bench. She dared not sit there with her back to it — better to look
them in the eyes, if any stood without looking in. She drew the
high-backed chair up to the bed, and sat facing the pane — the
night pressed in upon it, pitchy black; one of the candle flames was
mirrored in the glass. Kristin stared hard at it, clenching her hands
round the chair arms, so that the joints stood out white and her
arms behind them trembled. Her legs had no feeling in them, so
cold and wet were they — she sat with her teeth chattering from
fear and cold, the icy sweat pouring down her face and back. She
sat moveless — threw but now and then a lightning glance upon
the linen cloth that rose and fell ever so little with the child’s
breathing.

At length the window-pane began to grey. Cocks crew shrilly.
And then she heard men in the yard — they were going to the
stables — ; ‘

Limply she fell back against the back of the chair, shaking as in
spasms, and tried to lie so as to still the twitching and jerking of
her limbs.
pane eas the linen cloth something moved strongly — An-

pulled it from his face, whimpering peevishly —he seemed to


685 Kinship’s Dues


have his senses in a fashion, for he grunted crossly at her when
she started up and bent over him —

She snatched up the cloth and the turf, ran to the fire-place,
stuffed in twigs and wood and flung the demon-ware into the
fresh, hissing new-lit fire. But then was she fain to stand a little,
leaned against the wall — tears trickling down over her face.

She dipped milk from the little pot which stood by the hearth
and took it to the child — Andres was asleep again already. It
seemed now to be a healthy sleep —

She drank the milk herself. "Iwas so delicious that she was fain
to swallow two or three dipperfuls of the warm drink.

She dared not speak yet — the boy had said no word that could
be understood. But she fell upon her knees by the bed-foot and
said over to herself, noiselessly:

Convertere, Domine, aliquantulum; et deprecare super servos
tuos. Ne ultra memineris iniquitatis nostre: ecce respice; populus
tuus ommes nos — *

— Ay, ay, ay, twas a fearful thing she had done —

But he was their only son. She, she had seven! Ought she not to
venture all to save her sister’s only son — ?

All that in this night she had been thinking — ’twas but a delu-
sion of the night. Sure it was she had done it for naught else but
that she could not bear to see the child die in her hands —

Simon — he that had never failed her. He, that had been faithful
and kind to every mother’s child she knew of —and best of all
to her and hers. And this son that he loved more than the apples of
his eyes — ought she not to make trial of all to save the boy’s life —
Even if ’twere a sin —

Ay, twas sinful; but God, visit it on me. This little fair, innocent
child of Simon and Ramborg — God would not let His wrath fall
on Andres —

She crossed the room and bent over the bed — breathed down
upon one of the little wax-white hands. Kiss it she dared not — he
must not be waked —

Bright and sinless. — It was in those nights of horror, when they
sat together alone at Haugen, that Lady Aashild had told her of


* Psalm xc. 13. Return, O Lord, how long? and let it repent thee concern-


ing thy servants.
Isaiah Ixiv. 9. [Be not wroth very sore, O Lord,] neither remember in-


iquity for ever: behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy people.


The Cross ES es, Be OBES ck SN alee eee ee
this — told her of her faring to the graveyard in Konungahelle:
“That, Kristin, be sure, is the heaviest task I ever took on my
shoulders.” — But Bjorn Gunnarss6n was no innocent child when
he lay at death’s door, for that Aashild Gautesdatter’s sister’s sons
had come over-nigh his heart with their swords. He had been the
death of one of them ere he had fallen, and the other was never
whole man again after the day he changed sword-strokes with Sir
Bjorn —

Kristin stood by the window and looked out on the court-yard.
Folk went hither and thither among the houses at their daily tasks.
Some little heifer calves wandered about in the yard —so comely
as they were —

All manner of thoughts spring up in the dark — like to those
filmy plants that grow in the sea and wave and rock themselves,
strangely, weirdly fair — awesome and enticing, they draw us with
a strange dark lure while yet they grow within their own living,
wavering dusk. But plucked up by the children and pulled into a
boat, they are naught but a brown, slimy clot. In the night many
and strange are the thoughts that spring up to lure and affright.
Surely ’twas brother Edvin that had said once, the damned in hell
would not themselves be parted from their torment — hate and
sorrow were their delight — therefore it was that Christus could
not save them. This had seemed to her wild talk then— A cold
shudder ran through her — now did she begin to understand what
the monk had meant —

She bent over the bed again — drinking in the air that breathed
from the little child. Simon and Ramborg should not lose him.
Even if ’twere true that she had done this out of her need to set
herself right in Simon’s eyes — to show him that she too was willing
to do more than take gifts at his hands; a need had been in her to
dare all that she might requite him —

Then again she knelt down and said over again and again as much
as she knew of the psalter —


That morning Simon went out and sowed winter rye on the
new-broken field, south in the wood. He had it in mind that he
must make as though it seemed to him fitting that the work on the
farm should go its wonted way. The serving-women had fallen
into great wonderment when he had come in to them in the
night and said that Kristin would be alone with the boy till
she sent for them. He told Ramborg too, when she awoke —


687 Kinship’s Dues


ane had prayed that none should go near the women’s house
to-day.

“ Not you either? ” she asked quickly, and Simon said no. "T'was
then that he had gone out and fetched the seed-box.

But after the midday meal-time he stayed up at the manor —
he had no heart to go far from the houses. And he liked not the
look in Ramborg’s eyes. It came, a while after the midday rest: he
was standing by the corn-barn, and he saw his wife rush across the
yard. He sprang after — Ramborg flung herself at the door of the
women’s house and beat upon it with her clenched fists, shrieking
wildly to Kristin to open.

Simon put his arms about her, trying to soothe her — thereon
she bent, quick as lightning, and bit him on the hand; she seemed
like some wild beast in her rage:

“He is my child! What have you done with my son? ”

“You know well your sister is doing naught but good to An-
dres ” — when he took hold of her again, she shrieked and strug-
gled against him.

“Come now,” said the man, in a voice of feigned harshness:
“Ramborg — are you not ashamed, before our house-folk —”

But she went on screaming:

“He is mine, mine, I tell you — You were not with us when I
bore him, Simon,” she cried; “ then we were not so dear to you —”

“You know well yourself what I had in hand in those days,”
answered the man wearily. He dragged her away towards the hall
by main strength.

Thereafter he dared not leave her. In a while Ramborg grew
quiet, and, when the evening was come, she gave in to him and let
the women undress her.

Simon sat on by her side. His daughters were sleeping in their
own bed; the serving-women he had sent out. Once, when he rose
and went across the room, Ramborg asked from the bed — she was
wide-awake by her voice — whither he was going.

“T had a mind to lie down a little by you,” he answered after a
moment. He took off his outer coat and shoes, and crept in be-
tween the skins and the woollen coverlid. Then he put an arm un-
der his wife’s neck: “I know well, my Ramborg, that this has
been a long day and a heavy for you —”

“Your heart beats so hard, Simon,” she said soon after.

“ Ay, you may believe I am in dread for the boy, I too. But we
must wait in patience till Kristin sends us word —”


The Cross 688


DHE. Cross NS et OO ee SSR

He started up in the bed — lay propped on his elbow — looked
up wildly into Kristin’s white face — it was close above his own,
and shone wet with tears in a glimmer of light; her hand was on
his breast. For one moment he thought — this time “twas not a
dream only — Simon threw himself back against the bed-head,
with a stifled moan he hid his face on his arm. He felt sick, the
heart in him hammered so wildly and so hard —

“ Simon, wake up! ” Kristin shook him again. “ Andres is calling
on his father; hear you not? — ’twas the first word he spoke —”
Her face shone with smiles, while the tears ran down it without
cease.

Simon sat up, and passed his hand once and again across his face.
Surely he had not said aught as she woke him, while yet amazed
with sleep — He looked up at Kristin — she was standing by the
bed with a lantern in her hand.

Softly, not to wake Ramborg, he crept out with her. The qualm-
ish sickness still weighed upon his breast. He felt as though some-
thing would break within him — why was he ever haunted by this
hateful dream? He who, awake, strove and ever strove to drive
all such thoughts from him. And then, when he lay sleeping, will-
Jess and helpless, ever to dream this dream of the devil’s own send-
ing — even now, while she sat watching over his son that lay sick
to death, to dream like some monstrous wretch —

"Twas raining, and Kristin could not say rightly what time of
night it might be. The boy had been half awake in the day, but he
had not spoken. "Twas not till on in the night that it had seemed
to her he slept well and soundly — and she had dared to lie down a
little and rest — with Andres in her arms, that she might feel if he
moved. Then she had fallen asleep —

The boy looked a tiny, tiny thing, lying alone in the bed; woe-
fully pale he was, but his eyes were clear and his face lit up with
smiles when he saw his father. Simon went down on his knees by
the bedside, but when he would have taken the little one to his
breast, Kristin caught him by the arm:

“ Nay, nay, Simon, he is all a-sweat, and ’tis cold here —” She
pulled the bed-clothes closer about Andres. “ Rather lay yourself
in by his side — then will I send hither a woman to watch. I go now
to the hall to lie down by Ramborg —”

Simon crept in under the covering. There was a warm hollow
where she had lain, a faint, sweet scent of her hair on the pillow.


689 Kinshin’s Dues


Simon moaned very softly once — then he drew his little son in to
him and pressed his face against the soft, damp child-head. He
was so small now, he was well-nigh nothing to hold in one’s arms,
was Andres, but he lay there happily enough, saying a little word
ever and again.

Then he took to fumbling and groping in the opening of his
father’s shirt, put his little clammy hand in on the man’s breast,
and pulled out the amulet:

“The cock,” he said, well pleased; “ here he is —”


The day Kristin stood ready to set forth for home, Simon came
to her in the women’s house and handed her a little wooden box:

“ Methought maybe you would like to have this —”

Kristin knew by the wood-carving that ’twas her father’s work.
Within there lay, wrapped in a bit of glove leather, a small, small
golden clasp, set with five emeralds. She knew it at once — Lav-
rans had used to wear it in his wristband at especial times, when he
would go richly clad.

She thanked Simon, but then she blushed blood-red. It had come
upon her of a sudden that she had surely never seen her father wear
this trinket after she had come home from the cloister in Oslo.

“When gave father this to you —?” She repented her of the
question as soon as asked.

“JT got it for a parting gift, once when I was riding from the
manor —”

“This seems to me to be all too great a gift,” she said low, with
eyes cast down.

Simon laughed a little as he answered:

“You will have need of many such, Kristin— when the time
comes for you to send forth all your sons with bridal gifts —”

Kristin looked at him and said:

“You know well, Simon—I deem that the things that have
come to you from him — you know that I hold you as dear as
though you were his own son —”

“Do you so—?” He touched her cheek lightly with the back
of his hand, stroking it downwards, and smiled, a strange little
smile, while he spoke as to a child:

“ Ay, ay, Kristin, I have marked it —”


The Cross 690


4.


Somewuat later in the autumn, Simon Andressén had an errand
that took him to his brother’s house at Dyfrin. While he was there,
a wooer made suit to him for his daughter Arngjerd.

The matter was not concluded, and Simon was somewhat rest-
less and troubled in mind as he rode northward. Maybe he should
have struck the bargain, for then the child would have been well
settled and he himself quit of all fear for her future lot. Maybe
Gyrd and Helga were right — ’twas witless in him not to seize the
chance, when he got such an offer for this daughter of his — Eiken
was a greater manor than Formo, and Aasmund owned outright
more than the third part; he had never thought of wooing for his
son a maid of Arngjerd’s condition, low-born and kinless on the
mother’s side, had it not been that Simon held three hides of the
manor’s land in pledge. They had had to borrow moneys both
from the nuns of Oslo and from Dyfrin, when Grunde Aasmunds-
s6n had to pay forfeit for manslaughter the second time. Grunde
was wild and ungoverned when in drink — yet was he in all other
ways an upright and well-natured fellow, said Gyrd, and twas sure
he would let himself be guided by a clear-witted and kindly
woman such as was Arngjerd —

But the thing was, that Grunde was not many years younger
than Simon himself. And Arngjerd was young. And naught would
serve the folk at Eiken but to have the wedding this coming
spring —

A sore remembrance clung to Simon —he thought not on it
when he could forbear. But now, since the matter of Arngjerd’s
wedding had been stirred, ’twas ever thrusting up its head. An
unglad man had he been that first morning when he woke at Ram-
borg’s side. He had been, for sure, no more flustered and wanton
when he went to bed than a bridegroom should be — albeit to see
Kristin amid the brideswomen had made him strange and wild of
mood — and Erlend, his new brother-in-law, among the men who
brought him up to the loft. And yet when he awoke the next
morning and lay looking at the bride that still slept beside him,
he had known a sore and bitter shame deep down in his heart —
twas as though he had mishandled some young child —


: 691 | Kinship’s Dues
_ = Though all the time he knew he might have spared himself
that sorrow.

She had laughed when she opened her great eyes.

“Now you are mine, Simon” — she pressed her hands on his
breast. “ My father is your father, and my sister your sister ” —
and he had grown clammy with fear, for he thought: what if she
had felt the heart in his bosom start at her words?

Else was he well content with his marriage — to that he held
firmly. His wife was rich, come of high kindred, young and fresh,
fair and kindly. She had borne him a daughter and a son —and on
that a man sets much price, when he has known what ’tis to have
wealth and be without children to hold his estate together when
their parents are gone. Two children — and their welfare was as-
sured — and he was rich enough besides to make a good match for
Arngjerd —

One other son he would fain have had — ay, ’twould be no grief
to him if one, ay or two more children came to Formo. But he
saw Ramborg was best pleased to scape those troubles. So ’twas
somewhat to the good, that too. For he could not deny it: it made
much for comfort in the house when Ramborg was in humour.
He could have wished her, indeed, a more even temper. He knew
not always how he stood with his wife. And ’twould not have been
amiss had things been something better ordered within-doors at
his home. But no man can hope that all his measures shall brim
over, as the byword has it — Simon said thus to himself again and
again, as he rode homewards —

Now was Ramborg to go to Kruke the week before Clement’s
Mass * — it ever livened her up to get from home awhile —

Yet God knew how things were to go there — this time. "I'was
her eighth child that Sigrid went with now. And he had been
frighted when he looked in on his sister but now, on the way down
— she look not as though she had the strength for much more —

He had bestowed four thick wax tapers to set before the old
picture of Mary Virgin at Eyabu—’twas of a rare wonder-
working virtue, folk said — and vowed goodly gifts, if Sigrid came
through this with life and health. For how ’twould fare with Geir-
mund and all the children if their mother died and left them — nay,
that was hard to say —

And they lived i good accord, Sigrid and Geirmund. Never had


* 23rd November.


The Cross ~ 692


Line: Crosee EE eee
she heard an ungentle word from the man, she said; never had he
left aught undone he deemed would pleasure her. When he saw
that Sigrid was pining for the child she had had in her youth by
Gjavvald Arnesson, he had had Simon fetch the boy, so that his
mother might have him by her for a while. But sorrow and hope
deceived were all that Sigrid had reaped from the meeting with
that spoiled young spark. Thereafter Sigrid Andresdatter had
clung to her husband and the children she had had by him, as a
poor sick sinner to priest and sacrament.

In a fashion she seemed now well content. And this Simon could
understand — few men were so good to be with as Geirmund. So
tunable was his speech that, talked he but of the hoof-bound horse
they had passed off on him, ’twas well-nigh like listening to harp-
playing.

Uely and strange of face Geirmund cfersteinssén had ever been,
but at least he had been strong and comely in build of body and
limbs; the best of bowmen, a rare hunter, and ahead of most others
in all sports. But for these three years past he had been a cripple —
ever since he came crawling down the valley from a hunt, on his
hands and one knee, dragging the other leg crushed behind him.
Now could he not cross the floor without a staff, nor come up on
a horse, nor crawl, without help, round his steep hill-side fields.
Mischance was ever at his heels; the man was full of strange ways,
and little fitted to care for his farm or his own fortunes; ’twas easy
for any that had the heart to fool him in his dealings. But he was
deft of hand, a skilful workman in wood and iron, and shrewd and
kind in speech. And when this man took a harp upon his knee, he
could make folk laugh or weep at will with his singing and play-
ing. Ay, ‘twas most like hearkening to the knight that Geirmund
sang of, who played the leaves from off the lindens and the horns
from off the living beasts.

Then would they take up the burden and sing with their father,
the eldest children — and ’twas fairer to hear than all the bells
a-ringing in Bishop’s Hamar. The youngest child but one, Inga,
could but just walk when she held to the bench; speak she could
not yet, but she hummed and sang the livelong day, and her tiny
voice was fine and clear as a Jittle silver bell —

They dwelt huddled together in a little, black old hearth-room
house, husband and wife, children and serving-folk. The loft Geir-
mund had talked of building all these years twas not like he would


693 Kinship’s Dues


ever get put up — hardly had he made shift to get a new barn built
in place of the one burnt two years agone. But none of their many
children could the parents bring themselves to part with. Simon
had made offer, each time he was at Kruke, to take some of them
and give them nurture — Geirmund and Sigrid thanked him, but
said no —

None the less, maybe ’twas she of all his brothers and sisters who
had come off best, thought Simon at times. True, Gyrd said Astrid
was well content with her new husband — they lived far south in
Kyfylke, and Simon had not seen them since they were wed. But
es sons wrangled much with their step-father, Gyrd had
said —

And Gudmund was marvellous glad and well-content .-: But if
this were happiness for a man, Simon deemed ’twere no sin to
thank God their father had not lived to see it — Hard upon Andres
Darre’s death, as soon as ever ’twas seemly, Gudmund had drunk
the bride-ale with the widow his father would not hear of his mat-
ing with. The Dyfrin knight deemed that, if none too good for-
tune had come to Gyrd and Simon through the rich and comely
maids of noble birth and unstained fame he had sought out for his
two eldest sons, naught but sheer wretchedness could come of it
for Gudmund if his father let him have his witless will. Tordis
Bergsdatter was much older than Gudmund. She was indifferent
well-to-do and had no children by her first husband. But since then
she had had a daughter by one of the priests of Maria Church in
Oslo, and folk said, moreover, that she had been over kind to other
men besides —to Gudmund Darre among them, when first she
came to know him. Ugly asa troll she was, and, for a woman, foul-
mouthed and rough of speech, deemed Simon — but she was quick
and witty, of good understanding and well humoured — he him-
self would have liked Tordis well enough, he knew —if only she
had not married into their kin. But Gudmund throve so, ’twas un-
canny to look on him; he was near as fat and heavy now as Simon
himself — and ’twas not Gudmund’s nature so to be; in youth he
had been slender and comely. He had grown so lazy and lumpish
that Simon’s hands itched to thrash the fellow, each time he saw
him. A moonstruck calf had Gudmund been all his days, truth to
tell — and that his children took their wits from their mother and
their looks from him was, after all, a piece of luck in ill luck —
But Gudmund throve —


The Cross 694


So there was no need for him to vex himself as he did for that
brother’s sake. And in a way "twas needless too that he should
grieve so for Gyrd — Yet each time he went home to his father’s
manor and saw how things stood there, it jarred upon him so that
’twas with a right sore heart he rode away — ;

They prospered greatly — was not that brother-in-law of his
brother, Ulf Sakses6n, in the King’s full grace and favour now? —
and he drew Gyrd Andressén along with him into the ring of men
who had most power and profit in the land. But Simon misliked
the fellow — and he felt that Gyrd liked him got either. Unwill-
ingly and ungladly Gyrd of Dyfrin went the way his wife and her
brother would have him go — to win a little peace at home.

Helga Saksesdatter was a troll — But most like ’twas still more
those two sons of his that made Gyrd look so grief-worn now-
adays. Sakse, the elder, was a good sixteen winters old by now —
And well-nigh every single night his body-servant had to drag the
whelp to bed, dead drunk. He had drunk wits and health away
already — like enough he would drink himself to death ere he won
to a grown man’s age. And ’twould scarce be a great loss — Sakse
had got himself a bad name in the country-side, young as he was,
for an overweening churl. That was the mother’s darling; Gyrd
loved the younger, Jon, the most: and "twas true he had much
more of the turn of mind that might have made him an honour to
his kin, if only he had not been — ay, he was somewhat misshapen,
high-shouldered, and wry-backed. And then he had some inside
stomach evil— could brook no other meat than milk gruel and
bannocks —


In his loving-kindness for his own kin Simon Andressén had
ever found a kind of secret refuge when his own life seemed to
him — ay, out of gear, or whatever one might call it. If aught went
awry with him, it touched him much less nearly if he could call
to mind his brothers’ and sisters’ fortune and prosperity. Had
things but been at Dyfrin as they were in his father’s time — when
peace, content, and well-being ruled at the manor — ’twould have
done much, Simon thought, to ease his hidden unrest. "T'was as
though his own life-roots were twined in with those of his kindred,
somewhere deep down in the darksome earth. Every blow that
struck one of them, every ill that sucked the marrow of any, was


felt by all —


695 Kinship’s Dues


peer ee eee Pea ee Ue Ber ein ie Aenghap 3 Dies

With Gyrd and him assuredly it had been so —at least in old
days. He knew not so surely if Gyrd felt so now —

This eldest brother — and Sigrid — had been most dear to him of
all. He minded — when a growing lad: he would sit and gaze at his
youngest sister till he joyed in her so that he zzust do something to
show it. So he would begin nagging at her, tease and fret her, pluck
at her plaits, and pinch her arms, for it was as though he could
show his love in no other wise and not be ashamed. All this bicker-
ing between them had to be, else had he been too shamefaced to
give her all his hidden store of good things, or to join the little
maid in his games, when he built mills in the beck, made houses for
her, or cut willow whistles for the girls in springtime —

Like a burnt-in brand mark was his memory of the day when
first he knew the whole truth of her mischance. The winter
through he had watched Sigrid grieving well-nigh to death over
her dead groom — but more he saw not. Then came a Sunday to-
wards the spring — he stood on the balcony at Mandvik, vexed that
the women were so late of coming — out in the yard stood horses
decked and saddled for church, and the men had waited long. At
length he grew wroth and went in to the women’s house. Sigrid
still lay abed — wondering, he asked if she were sick. His wife was
sitting on the bed-edge — a tremor passed over her gentle, faded
face as she looked up: “ Sick is she truly, the poor child — but yet
more afraid I trow — of you —and of all her kindred — how you
will take this — ”

His sister shrieked aloud, and threw herself headlong over Hal-
frid’s lap, clinging to her, twining her thin, bare arms about her
brother’s wife — Her scream cut Simon so to the quick, it seemed
his heart grew grey and bloodless. Her grief, her shame, so pierced
him through that no feeling was left in him — and then came fear,
and he grew wet with sweat — Their father, what would he do
with Sigrid now —

His dread was such that, as he struggled towards his home in
Raumarike over roads deep in slush, the man with him, knowing
naught of the matter, began at last to jest at his lighting down so
often. For long now he had been a full-grown wedded man, yet
fear so gripped him as he thought on the meeting with his father,
that his bowels turned to water —

And his father had spoken scarce a word — But he had sunk to-
gether — as though lightning-struck. It befell yet, sometimes, that


The Cross . 696 :


ca ————
Simon, when dropping into sleep, would see it all again, and all a
once start broad awake. His father, sitting swaying, swaying, his
head bowed down upon his breast; Gyrd standing by, his hand
upon the high-seat’s arm, something paler than his wont, with
downcast eyes —

“ God be thanked that she was not here when this came out —
At least ’tis well she is with you and Halfrid —” Gyrd had said,
when they two were left alone.

’Twas the one time Simon had heard Gyrd say such a word as
might betoken that he set not his wife above all other women a

Yet seen it he had—how Gyrd seemed to wither and dwine
from the day he was wed with Helga Saksesdatter.

That time they were betrothed — Gyrd’s words were ever few
— but each time he had seen his bride, Gyrd went about so shining
fair that Simon was most strangely moved at sight of him. He had
seen Helga long since, Gyrd let Simon understand, but never had
speech with her, and never could he have deemed her kinsfolk
would give to him a maid so rich and beautiful —

Gyrd Darre’s wondrous comeliness in his youth Simon had felt
to be, as ’twere, an honour to himself. He was fair with a winsome-
ness all his own — ’twas as though all must see that in this fine and
still young man there dwelt goodness, high-mindedness, a brave
and noble heart. Then he was wed with Helga Saksesdatter — and
then there seemed an end to him —

Silent he had always been — but the two brothers were ever to-
gether, and Simon was well able to talk for both. Simon was glib-
tongued, passed for a youth of parts, and was hail-fellow-well-met
with all — for drink and frolic, for hunting and racing, for all man-
ner of youthful sport, Simon had friends in crowds, all alike dear
and near to him. His eldest brother went with him — said little, but
smiled his sweet and sober smile, and what few words he dropped
seemed all the more weighty —

Dumb as a locked chest was Gyrd Andressén now —

The summer that Simon came home and told his father Kristin
Lavransdatter and he of one accord were minded that the bargain
concerning them should be undone — Simon knew then that Gyrd
had guessed the most that lay behind: that Simon loved his bride;
that some weighty cause had brought him to give up his right —
and that the cause was such that Simon was heart-scalded within
with grief and wrath. Very quietly, Gyrd had counselled his


697 Kinship’s Dues
father to let the matter fall. But to Simon he breathed no word that
hinted of his knowledge. And Simon felt, could he ever have loved
_ his brother more than he had done all his days, ’twould have been
now, for his silence —


Simon would be glad and blithe of mood as he rode northwards
towards his home. Upon the way he made himself errands to his
friends’ homes along the Dale, to bear them his greetings and to
drink himself merry — and his friends saddled their horses and bore
him company to the next manor where their own cronies dwelt.
"Twas good and easy riding in this clear and frosty weather —

The last stretch he rode in the dusk. His ale-born mettle was
gone out of him. His men were lusty and loud-voiced — but the
master seemed to have run dry of laughter and jest — he must sure
be weary.

And now he was home. Andres toddled after, wherever his
father stood or went. Ulvhild hung about the saddle-bags — had
he brought home any gifts for her? Arngjerd bore forth ale and
food; his wife sat down beside him while he ate, chatted and asked
of the tidings. When the children had gone to bed, Simon took
Ramborg on his knee, while he gave her messages and told her of
kin and friends.

*T was a shameful thing and an unmanly, so he deemed, if he
could not be content, so well off as he was in all ways —


The day after, Simon was sitting in the Semund’s Hall when
Arngjerd came in to him bearing meat. He thought ’twere well to
speak with her of her suitor while they were alone, and so he told
his daughter of his talk with the Eiken men-folk.

Oh, no, she is none too fair, thought the father — he looked up
at the young girl as she stood before him. Squat and broad-built*
she was, with short, coarse-grained, pale face; her grey-yellow hair
was bushy; down her back it hung in two big plaits, but straggled
above her forehead and hung in tufts about her eyes, and she had a
trick of brushing it back every moment.

“Tr must be as you will, father,” she said quietly, when he was


done speaking.
“ Ay, you are a good child, I know; but what think you yourself


of this? ”
“ Nay, I think nothing. You must judge for me, dear father.”


The Cross 698


eh RE A GPOSS Rs ee eee eee

“Tis thus, Arngjerd — ’twould please me well for you-to go
free for some years yet — from child-bearing and household cares
and pains — all such things as fall to women’s lot when first they
wed. But I have thought that maybe you think long till you have
a house of your own and can be your own mistress — ? ”

“T am in no haste,” said the girl, smiling a little.

“You know that, were you to wed at Eiken, you would have
your rick kinsfolk near by — bare is back without brother behind
it” — he saw a little gleam in Arngjerd’s eyes, and her sly smile. “I
mean Gyrd, your uncle,” he said quickly, somewhat put out.

“ Ay, I deemed well you meant not my kinswoman, Helga —”
and they both laughed.

Simon’s heart grew warm —in thankfulness to God and Mary
Virgin, and to Halfrid, who had brought him to own this daughter
of his. When it chanced that they laughed together thus, he and
Arngjerd, he needed not any other proof that she was his own.

He rose and dusted off some flour she had got on her sleeve:
“ And your wooer — what think you of the man? ” he asked.

“ Oh! I like him, the little I have seen of him — and ’tis well not
to hearken to all that’s said — But you must judge for me in this,
father — ”

“Then shall it be as I have said. Aasmund and Grunde can wait
a while — we shall see if they are still of the same mind when you
are somewhat older — For the rest, you know well, my daughter,
you have freedom to choose yourself whom you shall wed, so far
as you have wit to judge of your own good. And of wit you have
no lack, Arngjerd —”

He put his arms around her. She blushed when her father kissed
her — and Simon bethought him it must be many a long day since
last he had done this. He was not, for the most part, a man who
feared to fondle his wife in the light of day, or romp with his chil-
dren. But ’twas ever as in play — and Arngjerd — It came home to
Simon of a sudden that here on Formo this young daughter was
the only being he spoke with in earnest now and then —


He went over and pulled the stopping from out of the slit in the
south wall. Through the little hole he gazed out over the Dale.
There was a southerly draught in the air, and below, where the
hills met and hemmed in the sight, big grey clouds were rolling
up. When a beam of sunlight broke through, all colours shone out,


699 Kinship’s Dues


rich and clear. The mild weather had licked away the pale grey
rime — the plough-lands were brown, the fir woods blue-black —
and farthest up, along the treeless hill-brows, clothed with moss
and lichen, the light streamed yellow-gold.

Simon felt as though there were a marvellous virtue to be drawn
from the autumn wind out there and the fitful brightness over the
country-side. Should there come rain in plenty at All Hallows’
Mass, the streams might well have water for the mills, at least till
on near Yule: and ’twould be worth while sending men to the hills
to gather moss. Such a dry autumn had it been — the Laagen ran
shrunk and little twixt frets of yellow gravel and whitened stones.

Here, northward of the parish, ’twas only Jérundgaard and the
priest’s farm that had mill-houses on the river. He was loth to pray
for leave to grind at Jorundgaard—were’t but that the whole
parish doubtless went thither with their corn. For Sira Eirik took
toll for grinding. And folk deemed, besides, he got to know too
well what corn they had —he was so greedy for his tithes. But
- Lavrans had ever let folk grind at his mill without price, and Kris-
tin would have things go on as in his time —

The slightest thought of her, and there came a sick, strained
trembling round his heart —

*Twas the day before Simon’s and Jude’s Mass; * he had ever
been wont to go to shrift that day. "I'was to commune with him-
self, to fast and pray, that he was sitting here in the Semund’s-hall
to-day, whilst the house-carls threshed in the barn —

It took no long time to bring to mind his sins — he had sworn,
told cock-and-bull tales to folk that asked of things that concerned
them not; there was the reindeer he had shot long after he had seen
by the sun that the sabbath was begun; and he had hunted a Sunday
morning while folk down in the parish were at mass —

What had newly befallen whilst the boy lay sick he might not
and he dared not name. But ’twas the first time in his life that, un-
willingly, he kept secret a sin from his parish priest. He had thought
much on it, and it weighed much on his heart. A deadly sin it must
sure be — whether he had trafficked with sorcery, or as much as
lured another on to do the like —

Neither could he find in his heart to repent it — when he thought
that but for this his son had surely lain now in the earth. But he was
all the time cast down and fearful — spying to see whether the

* 28th October.


The. Gross ly." = ot i OES See eee
child was changed at all since that night. He deemed not he could
see aught — ;

He knew it happened with many kind of fowl and wild beasts —
if hand of man had lain upon their eggs, or their young, the parents
would have naught more to do with them, but turned from their
offspring. A man, who had from God the light of reason, could not
do the like — with him now things were rather so that, when he
took his son to his arms, he felt scarce able to let the child out of
his hands again, so fearful had he grown for Andres. But none the
less he could understand how ‘twas the heathenish, unthinking
brutes took such a misliking for their own brood once they had
been touched. He, too, felt as though his child had been in some
way soiled —

Yet he repented not — wished not that the thing had not been
done. But he would that it had been another than Kristin. — ” Twas
hard enough for him, at all rates, to have these folk living in the
parish —

— Arngjerd came in — to ask after a key. Ramborg thought not
she had had it back again since her husband had the use of it.

The housekeeping on this manor of his was growing worse and
worse — Simon remembered he had given the key back to his wife;
twas before he set off southward, too — “ Ay, then I shall find it,
surely,” said Arngjerd.

She had such a good smile — and wise eyes — and she was none
so ill-favoured either, thought her father. Her hair was goodly,
and when she let it flow loose on holy-days and feast days, twas
thick and bright.

Erlend’s bastard daughter had been fair enough — and naught
but mischance had come of that —

But Erlend had had that daughter by a fair and well-born
woman. "Twas like Erlend had never cared to cast his eyes on such
an one as Arngjerd’s mother. He had flung on his haughty way
through the world — and, where he went, proud and comely ladies
and maidens had stood arow, proffering him love and adventure —

His own one sin in that sort — his boyish pranks while in the
King’s household he counted not — a little more nicety about that
sin had not been amiss, if indeed he must needs wrong his good and
noble wife —”Iwas not as if he had even looked much at the
woman, Jorunn—he could not so much as bring to mind how


701 Kinship’s Dues


twas he first came to make too free with the wench. He had been
abroad at merry-makings that winter with friends and acquaint-
ance, and when he came home to his wife’s manor, there sat the
wench to see to it that he came to bed without setting the place
afire.

No more glorious than so had that adventure been.

— All the less had he deserved that the child should promise so
fairly and bring him so much gladness — But he ought not to har-
bour such thoughts now — he should be thinking on his confes-


sion —


As Simon took his way home from Romundgaard in the dusk,
fine rain was falling. He went slantwise across the fields. In the last
wan rays of daylight the stubble gleamed pale and wet. Over by
the wall of the old bath-house something small and white lay shin-
ing on the slope. Simon went thither and looked. "Iwas the shards
of the French bowl that was broken that day in the spring — the
children had laid the table with them on a board set upon two
stones. Simon reached out with his axe and tumbled the whole
down the bank —

He was vexed with himself the next moment. But he cared not
to have that evening called to his mind.

To make some little amends for keeping back a sin, he had
spoken to Sira Firik of those dreams. Ay, and because too he felt
a need to ease his heart of that at least. He stood ready to go —
when it came upon him of a sudden — he must speak of this thing.
And this old, half-blind priest had been his ghostly father these
twelve years and more —

So he went back and knelt again at Sira Eirik’s knees.

The priest sat unmoving till Simon had said his say. Then he
spoke — his mighty voice came aged and veiled now from out the
everlasting twilight — Sin it was not. Each member of the Church
militant must be proven in battle with the enemy; therefore did
God suffer the devil to beset a man with manifold temptations. So
long as a man threw not away his weapons — so long as he forsook
not the standard of his Lord, nor, open-eyed and in privity with
the foe, yielded to the visions that unclean spirit would beguile
him with — so long such sinful promptings were not sin —

“Nay! ” Simon was shamed by the sound of his own voice.


The Cross 702


wh OB TOSS GS Ps he eS SE ee eee

Yielded he never had. He was tortured, tortured, tortured by
them. When he awoke, having dreamed these sinful dreams, he
felt as though he himself had been abused the while he slept.


Two stranger horses stood tied to the fence when he came into
the courtyard. They were Erlend Nikulauss6n’s Soten and Kris-~
tin’s riding-horse. He shouted to the horse-boy — why had they
not been stabled? The strangers had said there was no need, the
fellow answered sulkily.

He was a lad who had but now taken service with Simon, since
he had come home — he had served at Dyfrin before. There all
things must go now as ’twere in knightly fashion, Helga had had
her way in that. But if this lout of a Sigurd deemed, because he,
Simon, chose rather to talk cheerly and jestingly with his folk, and
would sometimes suffer a pert answer from a serving-man, that,
here at Formo, anyone might answer the master back, the devil
was in it — Simon was starting to rate the fellow soundly — but he
caught himself up; had he not even now come from shrift? Jon
Daalk would have to take this new-comer in hand, and teach him
that good country breeding was no more to be set at naught than
the courtly ways of Dyfrin —

So he did but ask, mildly enough, if Sigurd had but just come out
of the mountain this year, and bade him put the horses in. But he
was vexed —


The first thing that met his eyes, as he stepped into the hall, was
Erlend’s laughing face — the light from the taper on the board feli
straight upon him, where he sat on the bench, and warded off Uly-
hild, who was kneeling beside him, seeking to scratch him, or
somewhat of the kind —she was clawing with her hands at the
man’s face, laughing till she hiccoughed —

Erlend sprang up and would have put the child aside, but she
clung to his coat-sleeve and hung on his arm, as he came across the
floor straight and light-footed, to greet his brother-in-law. She
kept on teasing about something: Erlend and Simon could scarce
come to speech.

Her father bade her, somewhat harshly, to go with the serving-
women out to the kitchen — they were just done setting the board.
When the little maid answered him back, he grasped her by the
arm and dragged her away from Erlend.


703 Kinships Dues


“There then —! ” Erlend took a lump of resin from his mouth
and stuffed it into the child’s. “Take it then, Ulvhild, blossom-
cheek! — that daughter of yours, brother-in-law,” said he, laugh-
ing, as he looked after the child, “ will scarce be so biddable as
Arngjerd! ”

Simon had not been able to refrain him from telling his wife how
well Arngjerd took this matter of her wedding. But it had not been
his intent that she should speak of it to the Jérundgaard folk.
"Twas unlike Ramborg too — he knew that she loved Erlend but
little. He liked it not — liked not that Ramborg had talked of this
matter, liked not that she was so unstable, nor that Ulvhild, young
child as she was, seemed so fond on Erlend — like most of the tribe
of women —

He went and welcomed Kristin; she sat in the corner by the fire-
place, with Andres in her lap. The boy had grown right loving
with his mother’s sister, since she had nursed him in the autumn
when he lay gathering strength after his sickness.

Simon saw they must have some errand to him, since Erlend had
come thus. "Iwas not often he darkened the doors of Formo.
Simon could not but own that Erlend bore himself well in a case
that was none too easy — things having come to be as they were
betwixt the brothers-in-law. Erlend held himself aloof from the
other as much as he well could, but they met as often as was need-
ful, that no talk of unfriendliness betwixt the kinsmen should get
about in the country-side, and when they met, ’twas as the best of
friends; Erlend was quiet, and held back somewhat when they
were together, yet was his bearing free and unabashed.

When the food had been cleared from off the board and ale set
forth, Erlend spoke:

“ Methinks you will wonder at my errand, Simon — we are here
to bid you and Ramborg to a bride-ale feast with us —”

“Nay, sure, you jest? I knew not that you had folk of age to
marry on your manor? ”

“That is as a’ man takes it, brother-in-law. "Tis Ulf Haldors-
son?’

Simon smote his thighs:

“Nay, now shall J hear next that my plough-oxen are to calve at
Wuleli”

“ Never call Ulf a plough-ox,” said Erlend, laughing. “ It seems
the mischief is that the man has been all too forward —”


The Cross 704 ;


Simon whistled. Erlend laughed again, and said:

“ Ay, you may believe I scarce could trust rhy own ears when
they came in on us to-day, the Herbrandssons from Medalheim,
and made claim that Ulf should wed their sister.”

“ Herbrand Remba’s — ? But they are but young lads — their sis-
ter cannot be so old that Ulf —? ”

“‘ She has twenty winters to her score. And Ulf is nearer the fif-
ties. Ay.” Erlend had grown grave. “ You understand, Simon —
they must account this no great match for Jardtrud; but ’tis the
better choice of two bad ones, for her to wed him. Though, ’tis
true, Ulf is a knight’s son and a well-to-do man — he has no need
to seek his bread in another man’s house. But he came with us, for
that he would rather dwell with us, his kinsfolk, than live upon
his own farm in Skaun — after what had come and gone — ”

Erlend fell silent a little while. His face grew soft and winning.
Then he spoke again:

“Now, we are minded, Kristin and I, to hold this wedding in
every wise as though he were our brother. ’Tis our intent that Ulf
and I shall ride south to Medalheim a-wooing, this coming week.
For appearance’ sake, you understand. And now I had thought to
crave a boon of you, brother-in-law —I know, Simon, that I owe
you much already. But Ulf is but ill liked here in this country-
side. And you stand so high with folk that few men are your fel-
lows — while I myself —” he shrugged his shoulders and laughed
a little. “ Will you do us this friendship, Simon: to ride with us and
be spokesman for Ulf? —he and I have been comrades since ever
we were boys,” said Erlend, beseechingly.

“That will I, brother! ” Simon had gone red in the face — at Er-
lend’s open-hearted speech he felt himself grow strangely abashed
and pitiful. “ All I can do to do honour to Ulf Haldorssén, that
will I gladly do.”

Kristin was still sitting over in the corner with Andres — the boy
had set his heart on having his aunt undress him. Now she came
forward into the light — the child sat half-naked on her arm, clasp-
ing her round the neck.

“This is kindly done of you, Simon! ” said she, low, holding out
her hand. “ For this we thank you, all of us —”

Simon held her hand a moment, loosely:

“Nay, Kristin—I ever liked him, Ulf —be sure, I do this
gladly —” He reached up to take his son, but Andres feigned coy-


705 Kinship’s Dues


ness, and kicked at his father with his little naked feet, laughing
and clinging to the woman.

Simon listened to the two while he sat talking with Erlend of
Ulf’s money affairs. The boy was in a fit of laughter all the time —
she knew so many little chants and nursery jingles; and she laughed
along with him, cooingly soft and gentle, deep down in her throat.
Once, when he glanced their way, she had twisted her fingers into
a kind of winding stairs, and Andres’ fingers were folk that walked
up them. At last she got him to his cradle, and set herself down by
Ramborg. The sisters chatted together, whispering —


*Twas true enough, he thought, when he had lain down that
evening —he had liked Ulf Haldorssén always. And since that
winter in Oslo, when, together, they had striven to help Kristin,
he had felt, in a fashion, knit to the man in a bond of fellowship.
Naught else ever crossed his mind than that Ulf was his equal —
a great man’s son; and that he had no lawful footing amid his
father’s kin, being gotten in whoredom, made Simon yet more
heedful in his dealings with Ulf —somewhere deep down in his
own heart there dwelt ever a prayer for Arngjerd’s welfare. Else
was this none too seemly a matter for a man to be mixed with —
an ageing man and a young girl like this. — Ay, well, if Jardtrud
Herbrandsdatter had tripped when she was at the Thing last sum-
mer, it touched not him — he was no kin to these folks, and Ulf was
a near kinsman to his brother-in-law.

Unasked, Ramborg had proffered to help Kristin and to wait at
the wedding-feast. He deemed this kindly done of her. When
aught of weight was toward, Ramborg ever showed what manner
of folk she came of. Yes, truly! Ramborg was kind ~


5


Tur pay after Katrine’s Mass * Erlend Nikulaussén held his kins-

man’s wedding with great state and pride. Many good folk were

come together — Simon Darre had cared for that; he and his wife

had many friends in the parishes all about. Both the priests from

Olav’s Church were there, and Sira Firik blessed the house and bed
* 25th November.


The Cross 706


Die GrOSGS G1 ine Ss WOR Se ke aed
— this was counted an honour, for Sira Eirik said mass now on high
holy-days only, and rendered ghostly service to some few folk
who had been his penitents these many years. Simon Darre read
out the deed concerning Ulf’s extra-gift and morning-gift to the
bride; Erlend spoke right lovingly to his kinsman over the board;
Ramborg Lavransdatter, along with her sister, played hostess at
the feasting and helped to undress the bride in the loft.

Yet was it no rightly merry bridal. The bride was of an old and
honoured yeoman stock here in the Dale; her kin and neighbours
could in no wise deem she had made a fitting match, since she must
put up with a stranger to the country-side, and one who served in
another man’s house, albeit a kinsman’s. Neither UIf’s birth — son
of a rich man and a knight by his serving-wench — nor his kinship
with Erlend Nikulauss6n, did the HerbrandssGns seem to count
for any great honour —

Nor seemed it that the bride herself was over well pleased with
what she had made of things. Kristin seemed much disheartened
when she spoke to Simon of it — he had an errand to Jorundgaard
a few weeks after the wedding. Jardtrud was plaguing her man
to move to his estate in Skaun — she had said in Kristin’s hearing,
weeping bitterly, she deemed it the worst that could befall, that
her child should be pointed at for a serving-man’s son. To that Ulf
had answered naught. The newly-married folk dwelt in the house
that had been called the steward’s house ever since Jon Einarss6n
abode there, before Lavrans bought the whole of Laugarbru and
moved him thither. But this name was not to Jardtrud’s liking. And
she was wroth because she must keep her cows in Kristin’s byre —
she feared, belike, that folk might think she was Kristin’s hand-
maid. The mistress deemed this was but reason — she must have a
byre built for the steward’s house, if so be Ulf did not flit to Skaun
with his wife. And maybe that would be the best — he was not so
young but that he must find it hard to change his way of life;
maybe ’twould come easier to him in a new place —

In this Simon thought she might well be right. And Ulf was ill
liked in the country-side. He hid not his scorn of the Dale and all
its ways. Good, hard-working husbandman as he was, there were
many things on this side of the land that he had no skill of —he
reared more cattle in the autumn than he could feed through the
winter — and when the beasts fell dead, or when, on towards
spring, he had, after all, to kill off part of the half-starved brutes,


707 Kinship’s Dues


ree eer ee Ee Ce Nh  Rimsnep Ss Dues
he grew angered, and would blame it on his being unused to the
cottar ways of this country-side, where, as early as Paul’s Mass,*
folk must begin stripping bark to feed to their beasts.

Another thing was this: in the Trondheim country the custom
*twixt landlord and tenant had come to be that the landlord took
for rent such goods as most he needed, hay, hides, meal, butter, or
wool, even though at lease time they had agreed for some especial
ware, or a money rent. And, furthermore, ’twas the landlord or his
bailiffs that fixed the worth of rent-goods, as betwixt ware and
ware, much as seemed good to them. But when Ulf came on Kris-
tin’s leaseholders with claims like these, folk called it high-handed
and grossly unlawful —as, truly, it was—and the tenants made
complaint to the mistress. She set Ulf right, soon as she heard
of the matter, but Simon knew well that folks blamed not only
Ulf, but also Kristin Lavransdatter. He had striven to make it
clear, wherever this matter came up, that the mistress had not
known aught of Ulf’s demands, and that in the country the man
came from these were warranted by use and wont. But Simon
feared this had availed but little —though none gainsaid him to
his face.

So he scarce knew whether to wish that Ulf would stay with her
or go. How things would speed with her without this stout and
faithful helper he could not think. Erlend was most unfit to take
the guidance of the farm, and their sons were all too young. But
Ulf had set the parish against her more than enough already — and
now, on top of all, he had done wrong to a young maid of well-
respected and well-to-do kindred here in the Dale. And yet, God
knew, Kristin must toil hard enough even as things were —

Otherwise, too, the Jorundgaard folks were ill placed here. Er-
lend himself, twas sure, was no better liked than Ulf. If Erlend’s
head man and kinsman set folks on edge with his overweening
ways, the master’s easy-going, somewhat lazy bearing was yet
more galling. For sure, it never crossed Erlend Nikulauss6n’s mind
that he set folks against him — he seemed not to think but that, rich
or poor, he was what he ever had been, and never dreamed that
for that any man could call him haughty. He had plotted to raise
rebellion against his King — he, Magnus’ kinsman and vassal, and
sworn to his service; and these same plans he had brought to
naught by his own witless folly — and yet it seemed no thought

* 15th January.


The Cross 708


LE COLORS ie. A, OE eee
ever came to him that in the eyes of any, by reason of these things,
he might be brand-marked with the name of nithing. Simon could
not font indeed, that Erlend thought much at all —

He was not easy to make out: when one sat talking with him, he
was far from lacking wit, so Simon thought; but ’twas as though it
never came to his mind to take to himself the wise and worthy
things he often said. "T'was no wise possible to bear in mind that
this man would soon be old — might have had well-grown chil-
dren’s children this long time past. When one marked him nearly,
twas plain to be seen that his face was furrowed and his hair sprin-
kled with grey — and yet he and Nikulaus together were more like
two brothers than father and son. He was straight and slender, as
when first Simon saw him, his voice as young endl full of tone. He
went about among folk free and self-assured as ever, with that
somewhat of lazy grace in his bearing — With strangers he had
ever kept himself somewhat quiet and retired — had let others seek
him, rather than sought himself for company, whether in fortune
or mischance. But that none now sought his company Erlend
seemed not to mark. And the whole band of esquires and great
yeomen up and down the Dale, close allied by marriage and by
fellowship as they were, waxed wroth over this haughty Trond-
heim chieftain, cast into their midst by mischance, who yet reck-
oned himself all too high in birth and in kurteisi to seek their
company.

But in truth what most of all had made bad blood for Erlend
Nikulauss6n, was that he had dragged down the men of Sundbu
with him into ill-fortune. Guttorm and Borgar Trondssén were
under ban of outlawry in Norway, and their shares of the great
Gjesling estates, as also their half part of the udal goods, were for-
feit to the Crown. Ivar of Sundbu had had to buy grace of King
Magnus. When now the King gave the forfeit estates — not with-
out a price, folk said — to Sir Sigurd Erlendss6n Eldjarn, Ivar, and
Haavard, the youngest of the Tr ondsséns, who had not been privy
to his brothers’ treason, sold their shares of the Vaage estates to
Sir Sigurd, who was cousin to them and to the Wieveancdateeee his
“ratte Gudrun Ivarsdatter, was sister to Trond Gjesling and to
Ragnfrid of Jorundgaard. Ivar Gjesling moved to Ringheim at
Toten, an estate he had with his wife; ’twas like his children would
find a home there, where were cher mother’s kin and udal lands.
Haavard still owned much land, but it lay for the most in Valdres,


ea en a 100 Kinship’s Dues


and now, by marriage, great estates in the Borgesyssel had come to
him. But to the men of Vaage and the northern Dalemen it seemed
a most grievous mischance that the offspring of the old barons
had been parted from Sundbu, where their fathers had lived and
ruled the country-side time out of memory.

— For a short time Sundbu had been in the hands of King Haa-
kon Haakonss6n’s faithful baron, Erlend Eldjarn of Godaland in
Agder —the Gjeslings had never been warm friends of King
Sverre and his line, and they had joined with the Duke Skule when
he raised revolt against King Haakon. But Ivar the young had got-
ten Sundbu back by barter of lands with Erlend Eldjarn, and had
wed his eldest daughter Gudrun to him. Ivar’s son, Trond, had
done his kin no honour in any wise, but his four sons were comely
men, well liked and bold, and folk took it much to heart that they
had lost their father’s seat.

And ere yet Ivar had left the Dale, a mischance befell which
woke yet more grief and wrath amongst the people over the Gjes-
lings’ evil fate. Guttorm was unwed, but, when Borgar fled, his
young wife was left behind at Sundbu. Dagny Bjarnesdatter had
ever been somewhat weak of wits, and had ever plainly shown that
she loved her husband beyond all measure — Borgar Trondssén
was a comely youth, though something loose-lived. The winter
after he had fled the land, Dagny fell into a lead in the ice on
Vaage lake. Mishap, ’twas called, but folk knew well that grief and
longing had robbed Dagny of the little wit she ever had, and men
pitied with all their hearts the simple, sweet, fair young woman
who had met such an ill death. Thereafter folks’ wrath rose higher
yet — against Erlend Nikulaussén, who had brought all this ill-
fortune upon the best folk in the parish. And now, too, ’twas in all
mouths how he had behaved him in the days when he was to wed
Lavrans Lagmandssén’s daughter — ay, and she too was a Gjesling,
on the mother’s side —

The new master of Sundbu was ill liked, though, for that mat-
ter, none had aught to say against Sigurd himself. But he was a
stranger from Egde, and his father, Erlend Eldjarn, had made foes
of every soul in the country-side who had dealings with him. Kris-
tin and Ramborg had never met this cousin of theirs. Simon had
known Sir Sigurd in Raumarike — he was near of kin to the Haf-
torssOns, and they were near kinsmen of Gyrd Darre’s wife. But,
so tangled as these things were now, Simon made shift to meet Sir


The Cross 710

Sigurd as little as might be. He had no heart now to go to Sundbu;
the Trondssons had been his dear friends; Ramborg and Ivar’s and
Borgar’s wives had been wont, each year, to change visits. Sir
Sigurd Erlendss6n, too, was much older than Simon Andress6n —
a man nigh upon the sixties.


Therefore did it seem to Simon Darre, so tangled had all things
grown through Erlend and Kristin’s coming to dwell at Jorund-
gaard, that, even though their steward’s marriage could not be
deemed in itself any great matter, yet ‘twas enough to make the
coil still worse. "Iwas not his wont at other times to trouble his
young wife with the matter, if he were hard-set or crossed. But
now he could not forbear to speak somewhat with Ramborg of
these things. And ’twas both a wonder and a joy to him to see how
understandingly she spoke of the matter, and with what a good
will she sought to do all she could to help.

She was with her sister at Jorundgaard much more often than
had been her wont, and she quite cast off her sullen bearing toward
Erlend; on Yule-day, when they met upon the church-green after
mass, Ramborg kissed, not Kristin only, but her brother-in-law too.
And ever before she had scoffed sourly at these outlandish tricks
of his — at his using to kiss his mother-in-law in greeting and the
like.

It flashed through Simon, when he saw Ramborg lay her hands.
about Erlend’s neck — then he might do the like by his wife’s sister.
But yet — he felt he could not. Besides, he had never taken up this
fashion of kissing women of his kin — his mother and his sisters had
so laughed at him, if he offered to try it with them at his home-
comings when he was a page in the body-guard.

At the Yule-tide feast Ramborg set Ulf Haldorssén’s young wife
in a high and honourable seat, and showed both to him and to her
all the honour befitting a bride and bridegroom. And she betook
her to Jorundgaard and was with Jardtrud when she bore her
child.

This came to pass a month after Yule — two months before the
time — and the boy was still-born. Jardtrud now fretted bitterly —
could she have thought that ’twould go thus, she would never have
wedded Ulf. But twas done now and could not be helped.

What Ulf Haldorssén thought of the whole matter, none could
tell — he said naught.


Fat Kinship’s Dues


The week before mid-Lent, Erlend Nikulaussén and Simon An-
dress6n rode together southward to Kvam. Some years before he
died, Lavrans, along with two other farmers, had bought a small
farm in that parish; the udalmen were now minded to buy it again,
but ’twas not wholly clear how the law stood in the matter in that
country-side, nor how far the kinsmen of the sellers had claimed
their rights in lawful wise. After Lavrans’ death, when his estate
was parted among his heirs, this farm, and certain other small hold-
ings, the title whereto might give cause for suits at law, were left
undivided, and the sisters shared between them the revenues there-
from. Therefore it was that both of Lavrans’ sons-in-law came now
to the meeting in their wives’ behalf.

Folks were come together in good number, and, since the ten-
ant’s wife and children lay sick in the house, the men were fain to
hold their tryst in an old shed that stood in the farm-place. It was
tumbledown and leaky, and so folk kept on their fur cloaks. Each
man had his weapons lying close by him, and his sword in his belt
—no one had a mind to stay here longer than was needful. But a
bite of meat they must have ere they parted; so toward nones,
when the business had been brought to an end, each man took his
wallets, and sat and ate, with the sacks by him on the bench, or be-
fore him on the ground — board there was none in the shed.

In behalf of the parish priest of Kvam, his son, Holmgeir Moises-
son, had come to tryst. He was a loose-tongued and trustless young
man, that few folk liked. But his father was much beloved, and his
mother had been of a good kindred; and, besides, Holmgeir was a
big, strong fellow, and fiery and swift to fly up at folk; wherefore
no one cared to fall out with the priest’s son — many, too, deemed
him sharp and witty of speech.

Simon knew him but little, and had no liking for his looks — he
had a long and narrow, palely freckled face, with short upper-lip,
so that the great yellow front teeth peeped out like a rat’s. But Sira
Moises had been a good friend of Lavrans, and the son, until his
father had owned him at law, had for a while been nurtured at
Jorundgaard, half as servant and half as foster-son. Therefore had
Simon ever been wont to meet Holmgeir Moisess6n in friendly
wise.

He had rolled a wood-block forward to the hearth, and sat stick-
ing bits of his victuals — roasted thrush and shreds of bacon — on
his dagger and heating them at the fire. He had been sick, and had


The Cross 1


had to get fourteen days’ indulgence, he told the others, who sat
munching bread and hard-frozen fish, while the savoury smell of
Holmgeir’s food rose to their nostrils.

Simon was out of sorts — not outright ill-humoured, but some-
what dull and flat. "Iwas no easy matter to make head or tail of the
case, and the letters left by his father-in-law were in no wise clear;
yet, when he rode from home, he had deemed, none the less, that
he had come to a right understanding of them — having compared
them with other letters. But when here, at the tryst, he came to
hear the testimony of the witnesses and saw the letters that were
put in by others, he felt that his view of the matter could not be
upheld. Yet for that matter none of the other men were better
able to set things straight — even the Warden’s sheriff, who was
there too, was quite at sea. Some had begun to say that belike the
case must go before the Thing — when, of a sudden, Erlend spoke
up and prayed that he might see the letters.

Hitherto he had sat and listened, much as though he had no part
in the matter. Now “twas as if he waked up. He read carefully
through all the papers, some of them more than once. And there-
upon he made plain the whole case, shortly and clearly — the law-
books read so and so, and thus were they most commonly under-
stood; the unclear and clumsy wording of the letters must mean
either this or that; were the matter to go before a Thing, judgment
would fall either thus or thus. Thereafter he put forward a settle-
ment which might well content the udalmen, and yet was not over
unfavourable to the present owners.

He stood while he spoke, his left hand resting lightly on his
sword-hilt, and holding the bundle of letters carelessly in his right.
He bore him as though ’twere he that held the reins in the meeting
— but Simon saw that he thought not of this himself. "Twas thus
he had been wont to stand and speak when he held the Warden’s
Thing in his county — when he turned to one of the others and
asked whether ’twere not so, whether they understood what he
put forward, he spoke as though he questioned witnesses — not un-
courteously, but none the less as though ’twere his part to ask and
the others’ to answer him. When he was done speaking, he handed
the letters to the sheriff, as though the man had been his servant,
and sat him down again; and, while the others spoke together, and
Simon too had his say to the company, Erlend listened indeed, yet
in such wise as though he himself had had no concern in the case.


713 Kinship’s Dues


He gave short, clear, enlightening answers when any spoke to him
—all the while busy scraping with his finger-nails some grease
spots that had come upon the bosom of his coat, settling his belt,
drawing his gloves through his hands, and seeming to wait, some-
thing impatiently, the ending of the debate.

The others fell in with the settlement Erlend had laid before
them, and ’twas one that gave Simon no great cause for miscontent;
he could scarce have won aught more in a suit at law.

But he was out of heart. He deemed himself ’twas childish be-
yond measure that he should be vexed that his brother-in-law had
understood the case, and he himself had not. It was but reason that
Erlend should have more skill in making plain the words of the law
and clearing up the drift of unclear letters, since it had been the
man’s office to make inquiry and guide folk aright in disputed
causes. But it had come upon Simon quite unlooked-for: the eve-
ning before, at Jorundgaard, when he spoke with him and Kristin
of this meeting, Erlend had said no word of what he thought —
‘twas like he had listened with but half an ear. Ay, ’twas clear that
Erlend must be better read in the law than plain farmers — but
*twas as though the law touched not himself, as he sat there guid-
ing the others with careless friendliness — there came to Simon a
dim feeling that in one way or another Erlend had never set aught
by the law, as a rule to his own life —

And ’twas so strange, besides, that he could stand up thus, quite
unabashed. He must know that this turned the minds of all to
think who and what he had been, and what his state now was.
Simon felt that the others sat and thought upon it — some grew
wroth, doubtless, at this man who never list to heed what folk
deemed of him. But no one said aught. And when the blue-frozen
clerk, that was with the Warden’s sheriff, sat him down and took
the writing-board upon his knees, he kept all the time asking of
Erlend, and Erlend spelt out for him what to write, playing the
while with some straws he had picked from off the floor, twining
them round his long, brown fingers and plaiting them to a ring.
When the clerk was done, he reached forth the parchment to Er-
lend; and he cast the straw ring on the fire, took the deed, and read
it half aloud:

“To all men to whose ears or sight this deed may come, send
Simon Andresson of Formo, Erlend Nikulauss6n of Jorundgaard,
Vidar Steinssén of Klaufastad, Ingemund and Toralde Bjérnsséns,


The Cross 714.


ERE CLOSE Wi ©) a EE eee
Bjorn Ingemundsson of Lundar, Alf Einarssén, Holmgeir Moises-
son, God’s greetings and their own — Have you the wax ready? ”
he asked the clerk, who stood blowing upon his frozen fingers.
“ Be it known unto you that in the year from our Lord’s birth one
thousand three hundred and eight-and-thirty, on the Friday be-
fore mid-Lent Sunday, we, the aforesaid, met at Granheim in the
church parish of Kvam—. . .

“__We can take the chest, Alf; that stands in the outhouse, ahd
use it for a board.” He turned to the sheriff, givirig back the deed
to the writer.

Simon remembered how Erlend had been whilst he lived and
moved among his fellows in the north. Self-assured and bold
enough, nothing lacking in that regard — reckless and wanton of
tongue — yet ever with somewhat flattering in his ways that was
his own; he was in no wise careless what they thought of him,
those whom he counted as his fellows and kinsmen. Nay, for he
had set much store by the winning of a good report among them.

With a strangely vehement bitterness, Simon felt himself of a
sudden one with these farmers of the Dale— whom Erlend held
in so low esteem that he cared not to wonder what they thought
of him. "Iwas for Erlend’s sake he had become one of them —
‘twas for his sake that he had bidden farewell to the company of
rich men and nobles. *I‘was well enough to be the wealthy farmer
at Formo — ay, but he could not forget that he had turned his back
upon his fellows, his kinsmen and the friends of his youth, be-
cause he had gone round amongst them on such a beggar’s errand
that he could not bear to meet them again — could scarce bear to
think on it. For this brother-in-law of his he had as good as defied
his King and stepped out of the ranks of guardsmen. To Erlend
he had laid himself bare in such wise that the thought of it was
more bitter to him than death. And Erlend bore himself to him as
though he had understood naught and remembered naught. It
recked not this fellow overmuch that he had maimed another
man’s life —

Just then Erlend spoke to him:

“We must see and be on our way, Simon, if we are to win home
to-night — I go now to see to the horses —” Simon looked up, with
a strange, sick distaste, at the other’s tall, comely form. Under the
hood of his cloak Erlend wore a small, black silk cap, lying close
around his head and tied beneath his chin — the narrow, dark face,


715 Kinship’s Dues
with the great light-blue eyes deep in the shadow of the brows,
looked, within it, yet more young and fine. — “ And buckle up my
wallet the while,” said he from the door, as he went out.

The other men had gone on talking of the case. "T'was strange
enough, none the less, said some, that Lavrans should have ordered
this matter with so little forethought; the man was wont else to
know what he did — he was more skilled than any in the Dale in
al] that concerned the buying and selling of land.

“Likely ’tis my father who is to blame for this,” said Holmgeir
Prestes6n. “ He said himself this morning — had he listened to Lav-
rans that time, all had been straight and clear. But. you know how
*twas with Lavrans — with priests he was ever biddable and meek
as a lamb — ”

For all that, Lavrans of Jorundgaard was wont to know what
was for his own good, said someone.

“ Ay, maybe he thought he did so when he hearkened to the
priests’ counsel,” said Holmgeir, laughing; “’tis the part of wis-
dom, sometimes, even in worldly things —so long as one squints
not at the same morsel the Church has set its eyes on —”

Marvellous pious had Lavrans been, for sure, deemed Vidar —
he had never spared either goods or cattle when ’twas for the
Church or the poor.

“No,” said Holmgeir, musingly. “ Ay, had I been so rich a man,
I too might have been minded to spend somewhat for my soul’s
peace. But I had not been fain to strew out my goods with both
hands, as he did, and go about besides with red eyes and white
cheeks each time I had been to the priest and shrived me of my
sins — and Lavrans went to shrift each month, he did —”

“Tears of repentance are the Holy Ghost’s fair gifts of grace,
Holmgeir,” said old Ingemund Bjérnssén; “ blessed is he who can
weep for his sins in this earthly home; much the easier doth he
enter in unto the next —” som

“ Ay, then must Lavrans be in heaven long ere now,” said the
other. “So as he fasted and mortified his flesh — Good Friday he
locked him in the storehouse loft and lashed him with a scourge, I
have heard tell —” :

“Hold your tongue,” said Simon Andress6n, trembling with
fury; he was blood-red in the face. Whether ‘twere true, what
Holmeeir said, he knew not. But when he was setting in order his
father-in-law’s private chests, at the bottom of the book-chest he


The Cross 716


Lhe Cross i" ee SS eee eee
had found a long, narrow, little wooden box, and in it lay such a
scourge as in the cloisters they call a “ discipline”, the plaited
leather thongs were darkly flecked: it might be with blood. Simon
had burned it — with a kind of sorrowful awe: he felt he had come
upon something in the other’s life which Lavrans had not meant
that living soul should know of.

“ __ Howsoever it be, he talked not of it, I trow, to his serving-
lads,” said Simon, when he could trust himself to speak.

“Nay, like enough ’tis but a tale that folk made up,” answered
Holmegeir, mildly. “I trow well he had no such sins to atone for
that he should need — ” the man smirked a little — “ had I lived as
virtuous and Christian a life as Lavrans Bjérgulfssén — and had
been wedded to that unglad woman, Ragnfrid Ivarsdatter — I had
rather wept for the sins I had not wrought —”

Simon sprang up and struck Holmgeir hard on the mouth, so
that the fellow tumbled backward towards the hearth-place. The
dagger fell from his grasp — next moment he clutched it up and
rushed upon the other. Simon warded off with the arm his cloak
was over, gripped Holmgeir by the wrist, and tried to wrest the
dagger from him — while the priest’s son struck him blow after
blow in the face. Now Simon got a grip round both the other’s
arms, but on that the youth fixed his teeth in the man’s hand.

“Would you bite, dog —? ” Simon let go, sprang back a few
steps, and tore his sword from its sheath. He thrust at Holmgeir —
the young man’s body bent backwards, a couple of inches of steel in
his breast. Then at once Holmgeir’s body sank from off the sword-
point and fell heavily, half over the hearth-fire.

Simon threw down his sword and stooped to lift Holmgeir from
out the fire — then he saw, just above his head, Vidar’s axe lifted
for a blow. He ducked down and to the side, caught up his sword
again, and was but just in time to strike aside Alf Finarssén the
sheriff’s blade — whirled round on guard once more against Vidar’s
axe — when with the corner of his eye he caught a glimpse, behind
him, of the Bjérnsséns and Bjorn of Lunde thrusting at him with
their spears from the far side of the hearth. On this, he drove Alf
before him against the further wall, but marked that now Vidar
came at him from behind (Vidar had dragged Holmgeir out of
the fire; they were cousins, those two) and the carles of Lunde —
were closing on him round the hearth. He was hemmed in and


CLT Kinship’s Dues


uncovered on all sides — and amidst it all, with more than enough
to do to guard his life, he felt a vague, unhappy wonder that all
men’s hands should be against him —

— The next instant Erlend’s sword flashed between the Lunde
men and him. Toralde reeled aside and away, crumpled up against
the wall. Quick as lightning Erlend shifted his sword to his left
hand and struck Alf’s weapon from his grasp, so that it flew clang-
ing across the floor, while at the same time, with his right, he
clutched Bj6rn’s spear-shaft and bent it down —

— “Get you out,” he said to Simon, under his breath, as he
guarded his brother-in-law against Vidar. Simon ground his teeth,
and rushed inwards to meet Bjérn and Ingemund. Erlend was at his
side, shouting, through the trampling and the clash of arms: “ Come
out, hear you not — blockhead? Get you towards the door — we
must run for it! ”

When he saw Erlend meant they should both get out, he drew
backwards, fighting, towards the door. They ran through the outer
room, and stood fast in the courtyard — Simon a step or two farther
from the house, Erlend right in front of the doorway, with his
sword half lifted, facing the men who now came crowding after.

For a moment Simon was near blinded — the winter day without
was so dazzling bright and clear — under the blue sky the white
dome of the fell-top shone golden in the last sunshine; the woods
stood smothered with snow and rime. All over the fields was a spar-
kling and glittering as of gems —

He heard Erlend say:

“> Twill not better this mischance that more men be slain. Let us
come back to our wits, good men, and have no more bloodshed.
’Tis ill enough as it is for my brother-in-law to have been a man’s
bane —”’ /

Simon went forward to Erlend’s side.

“Sackless have you slain my cousin, Simon Andressén,” said
- Vidar of Klaufastad — he stood foremost in the doorway.

“Wholly sackless he fell not, I trow. But you know well, Vidar,
I shall not shun the reckoning — shall make good the mischief I
have wrought you. You all know where you can find me at
home —”

Erlend spoke some words more with the farmers: “ Alf — how
fared it with him — ? ” He went in with the men.


The Cross 718

Simon was left behind, struck strangely speechless. Erlend came
out in a little while: “ Let us ride now,” said he, and went down
towards the stable.

“Ts he dead? ” asked Simon.

“ Ay. And Alf and Toralde and Vidar all have wounds — but
naught grievous, I trow. He has singed off his back hair, Holm-
geir.” Erlend had spoken most soberly — now, suddenly, he burst
into a laugh: “ Now is there a rare stink of roast thrush in there,
trust me! What the devil — how was’t possible you could fall so by
the ears in so short a space? ” he asked, in great amaze.

A half-grown boy stood holding their horses — neither of the
brothers-in-law had brought his henchman with him on this
journey.

Both still bore their swords in their hands. Erlend took up a wisp
of hay and dried the blood from his. Simon did the like — when
he had got off the most of it, he thrust the sword back into its
sheath. Erlend scoured his with careful pains, and, at the end,
furbished it with the skirt of his cloak. Then he made some little
playful passes in the air before him — smiling the while, fleetingly,
as at a memory — threw the sword high into the air, caught it
again by the hilt, and stuck it into the scabbard.

“Your wounds — we must go into the house, and I will bind
them —” Simon said ’twas nothing:

“You are bleeding, too, Erlend! ”

“For me there’s no fear. My flesh heals up so well. Fat folk ever
heal slower, I have marked. And now, in this cold — we have far
to ride —”

Erlend got grease and cloths from the tenant on the farm, and
dressed the other’s wounds with care—they were two flesh-
wounds close together in the left breast; they bled much at first,
but grievous they were not. Erlend had gotten a scratch from
Bj6rn’s spear-point on the outer thigh — it must be irksome to ride
with, Simon said, but his brother-in-law laughed: it had scarce
pierced his leathern hose. He plastered a little grease upon it and
bound it well about, against the frost.


It was biting cold. Before they were come down from the hil-
lock where the farm stood, rime began to gather on the horses,
and the fur edging on the men’s hoods grew white.

“Hoo, hoo! ” Erlend shivered. “ Would we were home! We


719 Kinship’s Dues


se eae en i Rensntp's: Dies
must turn in at the farm down here that you may give yourself
out the slayer —”

“Ts it needful? ” asked Simon. “TI spoke, you wot, with Vidar
and the —”

“*Twere best that you did it,” said Erlend. “ That you told
the tidings here yourself. Let them not have aught they can say
against you —”

The sun was behind the ridges now, the evening a pale grey-
blue, but still light. They rode along a beck, under birch trees yet
more shaggy with rime than the woods around: there was a tang
of raw frost fog in the air down here, fit to choke the breath in a
man’s throat. Erlend grumbled impatiently at the long cold they
had had, and at the cold ride that lay before them.

“You have not got your face frost-bit, think you, brother-in-
law —?” He peered uneasily in under Simon’s hood. Simon
chafed his face — frost-bitten ’twas not, but he was somewhat
pale as he rode. It set him ill, for his big, fat face was weather-
bitten and red-besprinkled, and the paleness spread over it in grey
__ patches and made his hue seem as ’twere unclean.

“Saw you ever a man pitchfork dung with his sword? ” said
Erlend — he burst out laughing at the thought of it, leaned for-
ward in his saddle and aped the motions “—like yonder Alf —a
rare fellow for a sheriff, that! You should have seen UIf at sword-
play, Simon — Jesus Maria! ”

Play — ay, now, indeed, he had seen Erlend Nikulauss6n at that
play. Again and again he saw himself and those men, in the mel-
lay there by the hearth, like peasants hewing wood or pitching
hay — Erlend’s slender, flashing figure amidst them, his lightning

lances, his sure wrist, while he sported with them, swift-thinking,
skilled of fence —

”*T was twenty years and more since the time he himself had been
accounted one of the first in skill of arms amongst the youth of
the body-guard — when they practised them on the play-green.
And from that time on he had had but little use of an esquire’s
swordcraft.

And here he rode now, sick at heart for that he had slain a man
— saw ever Holmegeir’s corpse pitch from off his sword down into
the fire; had his short, hoarse death-cry in his ears, and saw, again
and again, glimpses of the short, furious fight that followed. Heart-
sore was he, downcast and mazed — they had turned on him in a


single instant to slay him, all those men he had sat with, feeling he
belonged to their fellowship — and Erlend had come to his rescue —

A coward he had never deemed himself to be. He had hunted
down six bears in the years he had dwelt at Formo — and twice he
had risked his life as recklessly as well could be. With a slender fir-
stem between him and a mad, wounded she-bear, without other
weapon than his spear-head and a scant handbreadth of shaft — the
peril of the game had not ruffled his sureness of thought and deed
and sense. Now, down there in the hut —he knew not whether
’rwas fearful he had been — but he had been mazed, his wits had
failed him —

And when he sat at home, after that bear-hunt, with his clothes
huddled on him as they best would hang, with his arm in a sling,
burning with fever, his shoulder stiff and torn, he had felt naught
but an overweening joy — things might have gone worse — how,
he thought not on overmuch. But now he must think and think,
endlessly, how all would have ended had Erlend not come so timely
to his help. He had been — not afraid, surely, but strangely dashed.
It was the look on the other men’s faces — and Holmgeir’s dying
carcass —

Manslayer he had never been before —

— That Swedish trooper he had cut down— Twas the year
King Haakon carried war into Sweden to avenge the dukes’ mur-
der. He had been sent out to scout — three men sent with him,
and he to be the leader — full blithe he was and proud. Simon re-
membered that his sword had stuck fast in the trooper’s steel head-
piece, so that he must twist and wrench it loose; there was a notch
in the edge when he looked on it in the morning. He had never
thought on that deed with aught but content — there were eight
of the Swedes, too — he had got at least a taste of war; that fell not
to the lot of all men who marched with the guard that year —
When daylight came, he saw that blood and brains had spurted
out over his coat of mail — he had striven to seem lowly and not
puffed up while he washed it off — :

But ’twas no help to think on that poor devil of a trooper now.
No, yonder time was not like this. He could not rid him x) a gnaw,
ing sorrow for Holmgeir Moisess6n.

And this too, that now he owed his life to Erlend. He knew not
yet how much that might bring with it. But he felt as though all
things must be changed now that he and Erlend were quits —


721 Kinship’s Dues
— On that score they were quits now, ay —


The brothers-in-law had ridden with scarce a word. Once Er.
lend said:

“ Ay, ‘twas foolish of you, too, Simon, that you bethought you
not to make for the door at the first — ”

“How so?” asked Simon, something shortly. “ Because you
were without —? ”

“Nay —” there was a little laugh in Erlend’s voice. “ Ay, that
too — though I thought not on that. But out of that narrow door,
see you, they could not have come at you more than one at a time —
And besides, ’tis wonder often to see how quick folks come to their
wits again once they get out beneath open sky. Much do I marvel
now that no more than one man was slain.”

Once and again he asked after Simon’s wounds. The other said
he felt them not much — though the truth was they burned sorely
enough.


They came to Formo late at night, and Erlend turned in there
with his brother-in-law. He had counselled him to write to the
Warden, betimes in the morning, of what had befallen, so as to
have order taken for a grace-deed * as soon as might be. Erlend
might as well make up the letter for Simon that night — doubtless
the wounds in his breast would hinder his writing: “ And to-
morrow you must lie quiet in your bed, I trow, for like enough
you will have some touch of wound-fever —”

Ramborg and Arngjerd were sitting up waiting. Because of the
cold, they had crept up on the bench against the warm fire-place
wall, and had drawn up their feet beneath them — a draught-board
Jay between them — they looked like two children.

Simon had scarce got a few words said of what had befallen ere
his young wife flew to him and flung her arms about his neck.
She drew his face down to hers, pressed her cheek to his — and
she wrung Erlend’s hands so that he said, laughing, he had never
deemed Ramborg had such strength of fingers —

Naught would serve but that her husband must sleep in there
that night, and she herself sit up by him.’ She begged this, almost
in tears — but on this Erlend proffered to stay there and lie by
Simon, if she would send a man north to Jorundgaard with a
message — ’twas late after all for him to ride home: “and ’twere

* See Note 1.


The Oross 722


LE OPOSSMD ST a ee eee
pity Kristin should sit up so late in this cold — she, too, waits for
me always herself; good wives are you Lavransdatters —”

While the men ate and drank, Ramborg sat nestled close to her
husband. Simon patted her arm and hand now and again — he was
much moved, but a little put out as well, at her showing so much
love and fearfulness. Being that twas now Lent, Simon was sleep-
ing alone in the Semunds hall, and when the men went over there,
Ramborg went with them and set a great kettle with honey-ale
by the stone hearth-brim to warm.

The Semunds hall was a little, ancient hearth-room house, warm
and wind-tight — the timber was so massy that there were but four
logs in the wall. "T'was cold there now, but Simon threw a mighty
armful of pine roots upon the fire and hunted his dog up on to the
bed — it could lie there and warm it up for them. They drew the
block-chair and the settle right up to the hearth and made them-
selves snug, for they were chilled through and through from their
journey, and their meal in the great hall had but half thawed them.

Erlend wrote the letter for Simon. Then they set about loosing
their clothes — as Simon’s wounds began to bleed again if he moved
his arms much, his brother-in-law helped him to get his doublet
over his head and his boots from off his feet. Erlend himself halted
on his wounded leg a little — ’twas stiff and tender from the ride,
he said, but naught to matter. And they settled them down by the
fire again, half undressed — ’twas so good and warm here now, and
a plenty of beer in the kettle yet.

“You take this over-hardly, brother-in-law, I see well,” said
Erlend once. They had been sitting dozing, gazing into the fire.
“He was none so great a loss, this Holmgeir —”

“Twill not seem so to Sira Moises,” said Simon, low. “ He is an
old man and a good priest —”

Erlend nodded gravely.

“Tis a grievous thing to have made an enemy of such a man.
And you know well I often have errands in that parish —”

“Oh! — but, when all is said, the like may hap so easily — to
any one of us. Like enough they will doom you to pay ten or
twelve marks in gold for weregild. Ay, and you know too Bishop
Halvard is a stern lord, when he is to shrive a man of a deed of
blood — and the boy’s father is one of his priests, But you will come
off not much the worse from both reckonings —”


723 Kinship’s Dues


. Simon said naught. Erlend went on again:

“T shall have to make amends for wounding, I trow” —he
smiled to himself — “ and I hold no more of Norway’s ground for
my own than that farm in Dovre —”

“How great a farm is Haugen? ” asked Simon.

“YT mind not rightly — it stands written in the deed. But the folks
who farm the land pay only some hay for rent. None will dwell
on it — the houses are nigh in ruins, they tell me — you know folk
say Aashild and Sir Bjorn walk there in death —

“— But at the least I wot well that for this day’s work I shall
have much thanks of my wife. Kristin loves you, Simon, as though
you were her own brother.”

Simon’s smile could scarce be marked, where he sat in shadow.
He had thrust the block-chair back a little and screened his eyes
with his hand from the heat of the blaze. But Erlend joyed in the
fire like a cat — he sat close in to the hearth, leaning into a corner
of the settle, with one arm over the back, and his wounded leg
stretched out over the other arm-rest.

“ Ay, she spoke so fairly of it here, one day in autumn,” said
Simon in a while; ’twas well-nigh as though his voice had a mock-
ing sound. “ She showed here last autumn, when our son was sick,
that she is a faithful sister”; he spoke gravely now — but then
again came the little tone of mocking. “ Now, Erlend, have we
kept faith one with another, even as we swore that time we laid
our hands together in Lavrans’s and vowed to stand by each other
like brothers —”

“Ay,” said Erlend, simply. “I am glad of this day’s work; I
too, brother Simon.” For a time they both sat silent. Then Erlend,
as though provingly, stretched out a hand towards the other.
Simon took it; they crushed each other’s fingers hard, let go, and
shrank back shamefacedly, each into his seat.

At length Erlend broke the silence. He had sat long with his
chin in his hand, staring into the hearth-fire, where now only one
little flame and another flickered, flared up, flapped a little, and
played along the charred sticks that snapped and fell to pieces with
small brittle sighs. Soon naught would be left of the blaze but black
charcoal and embers.

Erlend said very low:

“So high-heartedly have you borne you towards me, Simon


The Cross 724


BW OTO8S ins a ee ee eee eee
Darre, that I deem few men could be your like. I —I have not for-
gotten —”

“Be still! —you know not, Erlend—God in heaven alone
knows,” he whispered, in fear and distress, “— all that harbours
in a man’s mind —”

“Tt is so,” said Erlend, as low and earnestly. “ We need, all of
us, I trow —that He judge us with His mercy —

‘“‘_ But man must judge man by his deeds. And I—I — God re-
ward you, brother-in-law! ”

After that they sat in dead silence — dared not to move lest they
be put to shame.

Till, of a sudden, Erlend let his hand fall upon his knee —a fiery
blue ray flashed from the stone of the ring he bore on his right
forefinger. Simon knew he had had it of Kristin when he came out
from his prison-cell.

“But you must mind, Simon,” said he softly, “there goes an
old word: Many a man wins what is meant for another, but an-
other’s lot none may win.”

Simon lifted his head with a sudden start. Slowly he grew blood-
red in the face — the veins in his temples stood out like dark, twisted
cords.

Erlend glanced at the other — and withdrew his eyes swiftly.
Then he too reddened —a strangely fine and girlish flush spread-
ing under his dark skin. He sat still, shy and abashed, with mouth
a little open, like a child.

Simon rose vehemently and went over to the bed:

“ You had liefer lie outermost, I trow ”’; he tried to speak evenly
and calmly, but his voice shook.

“Nay — be it as you will,” said Erlend, haltingly. He rose up to
his feet as in a maze. “ The fire?” he asked. “Shall I rake it
under —? ” he began to shovel ashes over.

“Enough now — come and lie down,” said Simon, as before. His
heart beat so, he could scarce speak.

In the dark, Erlend crept, silent as a shadow, in among the skins
at the outer edge, and lay down, still as a beast of the forest. To


Simon it seemed that to have that other by him in his bed must
stifle him.


6


Every year, in Easter-week, Simon Andress6n held an ale-feast for
the folk from all the parish. They came to Formo the third day
after the mass and tarried there till Thursday.

Kristin had never had much delight in these feastings. When
_ mirth and merry-making were afoot, both Simon and Ramborg
seemed to deem the more bustle and uproar there was at the feast
the better was it. Simon ever prayed the guests to bring their own
children, and their serving-folk with their children, as many as
might be away from home. The first day things went quietly and
peacefully; the great folk and the elders led the talk, while the
youth listened and ate and drank, and the small children were for
the most in another house. But on the second the host went about
from early morning and egged on the young and unstaid folk and
children to drink and make merry, and ’twas not long then, for
the most part, till the mirth grew so wild and wanton that wives
and young maids shrank into the corners and stood there in groups,
tittering, ready to run out; while many of the most worshipful
housewives gathered in Ramborg’s ladies’ house, whither already
the mothers had carried off the smaller children out of the hurly-
burly in the great hall.

But this year Easter had brought wondrous fair spring weather.
On the Wednesday, from early morn ’twas so warm and sunny
that, the morning meal scarce over, all the company swarmed out
into the courtyard. Instead of racketing and raising riot, the young
folks were soon busy playing ball, shooting at a mark, or hauling
on the rope; then began the game of stag, and dancing on the log;
after that they got Geirmund of Kruke to pluck his harp and sing
—and thereon all, both young and old, were soon footing it in the
dance. The snow still lay low ‘on the fields, but the alder woods
were brown with blossoms, and the sun shone warm and fair on
every bare hill-side, when folks came out after the supper, there
was such singing of birds everywhere — and they built a bonfire
on the field beyond the smithy and sang and danced till far into
the night. Next morning the guests lay long abed; and thus they
broke up and took their leaves later than was their use. The folk
from Jorundgaard were wont to be the last to leave —and now


The Cross . 726


oO" LOSS gh PS er ee
Simon prevailed on Erlend and Kristin to tarry over the next day
—the Kruke folk were to stay the week out at Formo.

Simon had gone up to the highway with the last flock of guests.
The evening sun shone so fair over his lands, lying spread out on
the hill-slopes; he was warm and of good cheer with the drink and
all the junketing, and as he went down between the fences, home
to the quiet and easy fellowship that follows when, after a great
banquet, a little ring of near kinsfolk are left together, he felt him-
self gladder and more light of heart than he had been for long.

Down on the fields by the smithy they had set the bonfire
a-going again — Erlend’s sons, Sigrid’s eldest children, Jon Daalk’s
sons, and his own daughters. Simon hung over the fence awhile,
watching them. Ulvhild’s holy-day frock flared scarlet in the sun
—she ran about dragging branches to the fire — and there she lay
her length on the ground! Her father shouted to them, laughing,
but they did not hear —

In the courtyard sat two wenches minding the smallest children
— they sat close by the bower wall sunning themselves; over their
heads the evening light burned like melted gold upon the small
glass pane. Simon took little Inga Geirmundsdatter, heaved her
high into the air, and set her upon his arm: “ Can you sing to-day
for your uncle, Inga winsome may —? ”; and at that her brother
and Andres set upon him, and would be thrown high on loft,
they too —

Whistling, he climbed the stairway to the upper hall. The sun
shone in so bravely — they had set the door wide. The folk within
sat in goodly quiet. Up at the end of the board Erlend and Geir-
mund bent them over the harp, putting new strings to it; they had
the meadhorn beside them on the board. Sigrid lay upon the bed,
giving her youngest son the breast; Kristin and Ramborg sat by
her; a silver mug stood on the foot-board between the sisters.

Simon filled his own gilded beaker with wine, went to the bed,
and drank to Sigrid:

“ All folks here have the wherewithal to slake their thirsts, I
see, save you, my sister! ”

Laughing, she raised herself on her elbow and took the beaker.
The little child, disquieted at his meal, burst into a wrathful howl.

Simon sat down on the bench, still whistling softly and hearken-
ing to the others with half an ear. Sigrid and Kristin gossiped of
their children; Ramborg sat silent, toying with a little windmill


727 Kinship’s Dues


eee ee Re AK Os Col A inshep ss Dues
of Andres’s. The men by the board fingered the harp-strings to
try them — Erlend sang a stave very softly; Geirmund picked out
the air on the harp and sang the verse after him — they had such
tuneful voices, both of them —

A little after, Simon went out on the balcony, stood leaning
against the carven pillar, and gazed around. From the byre came
the everlasting hungry bellowing. If this weather would but hold
a while, maybe the spring dearth would not last so long this year.

”*T was Kristin who came. He needed not to turn — he knew her
light tread. She stepped out and stood by his side in the evening
sunlight.

So fair and fine, that she had never seemed to him so fair. And
all at once he felt as though, in some wise, he were lifted up, as
though he floated in this sunlight — he drew a long breath: sud-
denly it came upon him — ’twas good, ’twas good to live. A rich
and golden happiness flooded all his being —

She was his own sweet love — and all the heavy, bitter thoughts
he had thought were but as half-forgotten follies. Poor, poor love
of mine — could I but do you aught of good. Could you but be
glad once more — gladly would I lay down my life, if that might
help you —

O ay! for well he saw her lovesome face was worn and aged.
Fine, small wrinkles had gathered beneath her eyes, her skin had
lost its pure shining — had grown coarser far and sunburned, and
she was pale beneath the brown. But to him for sure she would
be ever alike fair; for her great grey eyes and her fine, still mouth,
and her little round chin — her restful, tempered bearing, too, were
the fairest things he knew on earth.

And ’twas good too — once more to see her clad as beseemed a
high-born lady — The thin little silken kerchief but half hid the
masses of her yellow-brown hair — the plaits were caught up, so
that they peeped forth above her ears — there were streaks of grey
in her hair now, but ’twas no matter. And she bore a stately, blue
outer robe of velvet, edged with ermine — it was cut so deeply at
the bosom, and the arm-slits were so long, that over breast and
shoulders it showed no more than the breast-straps of a horse’s
gear — ’twas brave to look on. Underneath, there clung a some-
what, yellow as sand, an under-robe that lay smooth to the body,
stood high around her throat and ran down to the wrists. "Twas
buttoned with many small gilded buttons, and they touched him


The Cross 728


to the heart — God forgive him, all these little gilt buttons glad-
dened him like the sight of a troop of angels.

He stood, feeling his own heart’s strong, quiet beat. Something _
had slipped from him — ay, like fetters. Evil, hateful dreams — they.
were but shadows of the night, and now he saw his love for her
by light of day, in full sunshine.

“You look at me so strangely, Simon — why smile you so? —

The man laughed, low and j joyously, but did not answer. Out
before them lay the Dale, filled with the evening sun’s golden
glow; flocks of birds twittered and chirruped shrilly i in the bor-
ders of the woods — then from somewhere deep in the forest a
thrush’s full, clear song ran out. And here she stood, warmed by
the sun, shining in her festal pride — escaped from out the dark,
cold house and the coarse, heavy garments reeking of sweat and
toil — Kristin mine, ’twas good to see you thus again —

He took her hand, that ‘lay before him on the railing — lifted it
up toward his face: “ This ring you bear upon your finger is a fair
one! ” He turned the finger-ring a little, and laid her hand down
again. The hand was phate and idea cd now, and he knew not
how he could ever do enough to make it amends — so fair had it
been, her long, slender hand —

SEA BS Arngjerd and Gaute,” said Kristin. ““ Those two are quar-
relling again —”

From below the loft- balcony came the voices, high and angry.
Now the maid broke in with a cry of rage:

“— Ay, mind me of that, you! —meseems "tis more honour to
be called bastard daughter to my father than to be true-born son
to yours! ”

Kristin turned sharp about and ran down the stairway. Simon,
following after, heard the sound of two or three buffets on a cheek.
He saw her standing under the balcony holding her son by the
shoulder.

The two children stood looking down, red-faced, silent and
sullen.

“T see well you know how to behave you to your hosts — you
do us honour, forsooth, your father and me —”

Gaute gazed down on the ground. Low and wrathfully he an-
swered his mother:

“She said somewhat — I will not say it again —”

Simon took his daughter by the chin, forced her to look up at


him Arngjerd grew redder and redder, and dropped her eyelids
under her father’s look.

“ Ay ” —she broke away from him — “I minded Gaute that his
father was judged nithing and traitor to his King — but first he had
called you, father — you, said he, you were the traitor, and you had
Erlend to thank that you sat here rich and scatheless, on your own
manor — ”

“Thad deemed you were a grown maid now — would you let
you be egged on by a child’s chatter, to forget both manners and
the dues of kin? ” — he pushed the girl from him in wrath, turned
to Gaute, and asked, most soberly:

“How mean you, friend Gaute, that I have betrayed your fa-
ther? I have felt before this that you were wroth with me — now
must you say what the cause may be? ”

“That know you well! ”

Simon shook his head. And then the boy cried out, flaming with
fury:
The letter they broke my father on the rack for, to make him
tell who hung their seals below it —J saw it. "T'was I who went off
with it and burnt it —”

“Be still! ” Erlend burst in amongst them. His face was white
to the very lips, his eyes burned.

“Nay, Erlend — ’twere best, now, we came at the truth of this.
Was my name in that letter then? ”

“Be still! ” In furious rage his father seized Gaute by the breast
and shoulder. “ I trusted you — you, my son! If I killed you, ’twere
but your due —”

Kristin sprang forward; Simon too. The boy broke loose and
clung to his mother. Quite beside himself with passion, he shouted
at furious speed, while he hid himself behind the woman’s arm:

“1 Jooked on the seals before I burned it — father! I deemed the
day might come when I could serve you thereby —”

“God’s curse upon you —!” There broke from Erlend’s frame
a short, dry sob. ieee

Simon, too, had grown pale, and then flushed dark red, with
shame for the other. He dared not look towards where Erlend stood
—the sight of the man’s humiliation seemed to choke him.

Kristin stood as though spellbound — still with her arms about -
her son to guard him. But, within her brain, thought fitted into


thought with lightning speed:


The Oross O° si Sy SON


Erlend had had Simon’s privy seal in his ward a short time that
spring — the brothers-in-law were selling Lavrans’s warehouse on
Vedy to the Holm cloister-brothers. Erlend had said himself that it
might well be this was unlawful, but ‘twas like none would ques-
tion it. He had shown her the seal and said that Simon might well
have got him one more fairly graven — all three brothers had had
their seals graven with their father’s arms, only the legends were
diverse. But Gyrd’s was graven much finer, said Erlend —

— Gyrd Darre — Erlend had brought her greetings from him,
both the last times he came from the south country — She remem-
bered she had marvelled that Erlend should visit Gyrd at Dyfrin --
they had seen each other but the once, at Ramborg’s wedding —
Ulf Saksesén was Gyrd Darre’s brother-in-law; Ulf had been in
the plot —

“You saw wrong, Gaute,” said Simon, low and firmly.

“Simon! ” Blindly Kristin grasped her husband’s hand. “ Re-
member — there are other men besides you who bear that device
on their seal — ”

“ Be still! Would you too —” Erlend tore himself from his wife
with a tortured cry and rushed across the courtyard towards the
stable. Simon sprang after him:

“Erlend — was it my brother —? ”

“And send for the lads — come you after me,” cried Erlend back
to his wife.

Simon caught him up again in the stable door, seized him by the
arm:

“Erlend — was it Gyrd —? ”

Erlend answered not —tried to wrench himself free. His face
was set and drawn and white as death.

“Erlend — answer me — was my brother with you in the plot? ”

“Maybe you would measure swords with me too —” Erlend
snarled out the words, and Simon, as they wrestled, felt the oth-
er’s whole body tremble. :

“That you know I will not.” Simon loosed his hold and stag-
gered backwards against the door-jamb. “ Erlend — for the love of
God, that died for us — say if it was so! ”

Erlend led Soten out, forcing Simon aside from the doorway. A
too forward house-carl brought saddle and bridle; Simon took

*them and sent the man away; Erlend took them from Simon.
“ Erlend — sure you can tell it now! — to me!” He knew not


731 Kinship’s Dues


Benen eS ee eR) ea Aanship's Dues
himself why he should beg thus, as though he were begging for his
life. ““ Erlend — answer me — by Christ’s wound-marks, [ conjure
you — tell me, man! ”

“You can go on thinking what you thought,” said Erlend, in a
low biting voice.

“Erlend — I thought — naught —”

“T know what you thought.” Erlend swung himself into the
saddle. Simon caught the horse by the head-stall; it reared and
flung about wildly.

“Let go —or I ride you down,” said Erlend.

“Then will I ask Gyrd—no later than to-morrow will I ride
south — by God, Erlend, you shall tell me —”

. “ Ay, you will get an answer from him, I doubt not,” said Erlend
_ scornfully —he spurred the stallion, and Simon must needs leap
aside. The other galloped from the manor —

Half-way up the courtyard, Simon met Kristin; she had her
cloak on. Gaute walked by her side, carrying the wallet with their
clothes. Ramborg was with her sister.

The boy glanced up an instant, fearful and at a loss. Then he
looked away. But Kristin fixed her great eyes full upon him — they
were dark with sorrow and anger:

“Could you believe this thing of Erlend — that he could betray

ou so? ”

“T believed naught,” said Simon hotly. “I believed ’twas foolish
babble of that young scamp there —”

“Nay, Simon — I will not have you go with me,” said Kristin,
low.

He saw that she was unspeakably hurt and sorrowful.


In the evening, when he was left alone with his wife in the great
hall — they were putting off their clothes, and their daughters were
asleep already in the other bed — all at once Ramborg asked:

“Knew you naught of this, Simon? ”

“No—? Knew you aught? ” he asked, anxiously.

Ramborg came across and stood just within the light of the
taper on the board. She was half undressed —in shift and laced
bodice; her hair hung loose in tresses about her face.

“Knew? —I had my thoughts. Helga was so strange” — her
face twisted into a kind of smile, and she seemed as she were cold.
“ She spoke of how now there would be other times in Norway.


The Cross 732


ENC OPOSS 0, utly - eeeeeeee
The great nobles” —Ramborg smiled a wry, fluttering smile —
“were to come to their rights here as in other lands. Knights — and
barons — they would be called once more —

“ _ Afterward, when I saw you take up their cause so hotly —
you were from home almost all the year — you could not find time
to come north to me at Ringheim, when I was to bear your child
in a strange man’s house — afterwards, I thought maybe you knew
— that there was question of others than Erlend —”

“Ho! Knights and barons! ” Simon laughed, short and angrily.

“ Was’t for Kristin’s sake alone you did it? ”

He saw her face was pale as it were bit with frost; "twas impos-
sible to pretend he did not understand her meaning. Desperately _
and defiantly he burst out:

“ Ay! ”

Then he bethought him — why, she was mad — and he himself
was mad. Erlend was mad — all the world had lost their wits that
day. But now there must be an end to it.

“J did it for your sister’s sake, ay,” said he, soberly, “and for
the children’s sake, who had no man nearer of blood or of kin than
[to take their part. And for Erlend’s sake, since we were to be true
brothers one to the other. — And now begin not you to bear you
witlessly — for of that have I seen more than enough in this house
to-day —” He flamed up, and flung the shoe he had taken off
against the wall.

Ramborg went and took it up — looked at the log where it had
struck:

“°Tis shame that Torbjérg could not think of it herself —to
wash the soot off in here for the banquet —I forgot to tell her of
it.” She wiped the shoe —’twas of Simon’s best pair, with long
toes and red heels — then took up the other and laid the pair in his
clothes-chest. But he marked that her hands shook sorely while she
was about it.

On that, he went and took her to his arms. She twined her
slender limbs vehemently about her husband, while she shook with
strangled weeping, and whispered, on his bosom, that she was so
weary —


_ The seventh day thereafter Simon and his henchman were rid-
ing north from Dyfrin through Kvam. They struggled forward
against a storm of great, clinging snow-flakes. Towards midday


733 Kinship’s Dues


they came to the little farm by the highway where there was a
tavern.

The woman came out and begged Simon to step into their house
— only small folk were sent to the rest-house. She shook his wet
outer garments and hung them to dry on the cross-beam by the
hearth, while she talked away: Such a filthy weather — ’twas pity
of the horses — and he must have had to ride the whole way round
— belike there was no riding over Mjés now?

“Oh, yes, if a man be tired enough of his life —”

The woman, and the children standing beside her, laughed with
a good will. The bigger ones made themselves errands into the
room with firewood and beer; the little ones bunched them
together away by the door. Often they got pennies from Master
Simon of Formo when he stopped there, and if he had with him
something good for his children from Hamar market, they were
like enough to get a taste. But to-day it seemed he list not to look at
them.

He sat on the bench, bent forward, with his hands hanging out
over his knees, staring into the hearth-fire, and answering a word
now and again to the woman’s flood of talk. Then she let fall that
Erlend Nikulauss6n was at Granheim to-day —’twas to-day that
the Udalmen were to pay the first of the redemption-money to the
whilom owners. Should she send one of the children to his brother-
in-law and tell him, so that they might ride home together?

No, said Simon. She might give him a little food, and after that
he would lie down and sleep a while.

— Erlend he would meet soon enough. What he meant to say
he would say in Gaute’s hearing. But he had liefer not speak of the
thing more than once.

His man, Sigurd, had settled down in the kitchen-house while
the woman was cooking the food. Ay, a toilsome journey — and,
besides, the master had been like an angry bull nigh the whole
way. Simon Andress6n was wont to hearken gladly enough to all
the news of his home parish that his men could pick up, when they
had been at Dyfrin. He had most often one or more Raumerike
men eating his bread: folk came and sought service with him when
he was at Dyfrin, for he was known for a kindly man and an open-
handed, merry-hearted and not wont to be too high and mighty
with his men. But “ hold your tongue” was well-nigh the softest
answer he, Sigurd, had had of his master that journey.


The Cross 734

Moreover, it seemed he had quite fallen out with his brothers —
he had not even slept overnight at Dyfrin; they had taken lodging
on a lease-hold farm near by in the parish. Sir Gyrd — ay, for, she
must know, the King had made his master’s brother a knight at
Yule-tide — Sir Gyrd had come out into the yard and prayed
Simon, right fairly, to stay—Simon had scarce answered his
brother. And they had roared and bellowed and shouted, the
gentry in the high-loft hall — yonder Sir Ulf Saksesén and Gud-
mund Andressén had been at the manor — enough fairly to fright
folk. God only knew what they had fallen so by the ears about —

Simon came past the kitchen-house door, stood a moment, and
glared in. Sigurd said, quickly, he was getting an awl and a buckle
to put the saddle-gear to rights that was broke that morning.

“Have they such-like things in the kitchen on this farm —? ”
Simon flung back at him, and went his way. Sigurd shook his head,
and nodded to the woman, when he was out of sight.


Simon thrust the platter from him and sat on at the board. He
was so weary he could scare bring himself to rise. But after a while
he went and threw himself upon the bed in his boots and spurs —
but bethought him then ’twere pity, too, of the bed: it was clean
and good for such a humble house. He sat up and pulled off his
foot-gear. Stiff and weary as he was, he sure should be able to
sleep now —and he was wet through and shivering with cold,
though his face burned after the long ride against the storm.

He crept in under the bed-spread, turned and tossed about the
pillows — they smelt so strangely of fish. Then he lay still, half
raised upon his elbow. :

His thoughts began to go round again in a ring. He had thought
and thought these days, as a beast tramps round in a tether-rope.

— Even if Erling Vidkunssén had known it might cost Gyrd
and Gudmund Darre life and goods if Erlend Nikulaussén let him-
self be driven to speak — ay, that made it none the worse that he
had gone all lengths to win the Bjarké knight’s help. Rather the
contrary — surely a man owed it to his brothers to stand by them,
to the death if need be. Yet would he be fain to know if indeed Er-
ling had known it. Simon weighed the chances for and against.
Quite without knowledge that a rising was a-brewing he sure could
not have been. But what Erling knew —? Gyrd and UIFf, at least,
seemed not to know if the man had knowledge that they were in


735 Kinship’s Dues


SS
it. But Simon minded that Erling had named the Haftorsséns, had
counselled him to seek help there, for ’twas rather their friends
who had need to be afraid — The Haftorsséns were cousins of Ulf
Sakses6n and Helga. The nose is near to the eyes —!

But even if Erling Vidkunssén had believed that Simon was
thinking of his own brothers too, what he had done was none the
worse, surely, for that. And Erling might well have seen, too, that
he knew naught of his brothers’ peril. Besides, had he not said him-
self — he minded, he had said it to Stig — he believed not that they
could wring speech from Erlend.

Nevertheless, they might well have need to fear Erlend’s tongue.
Having held his peace in despite of bonds and torture, he was the
very man to betray himself after by a slip of the tongue. "T'would
be like him — And yet — that, he felt, was the one thing he could be
sure Erlend would not do. He was dumb as a stone each time the
talk turned that way, for very fear he might be drawn on to say too
much. Simon saw that such was Erlend’s fevered, well-nigh child-
ish dread of breaking his troth — childish, for, that himself had be-
trayed the whole emprise to his paramour, Erlend, it seemed clear,
deemed not such a stain on his honour as he need regard. Such a
thing, he seemed to hold, might happen to the best. So long as he
held his tongue himself, he counted his shield untarnished and his
troth unbroken — and Simon had seen well that Erlend was ten-
der of his honour, so far as he understood what good fame and
honour were. Had he not gone clean beside himself with despair
and wrath at but the thought that any of his fellow-plotters should
be bewrayed — (now, so long after, and in such wise that ’twas
not possible it could matter aught to the men he had shielded with
his life — and his honour and his wealth) — by the words of his
child spoken to him who was nearest of kin to these same men — ?

— He would order it so that, if things went awry, he would pay
the price for them all — this Erlend had sworn upon the crucifix
before all who joined with him in this emprise. But that grown
men in their right minds could put their trust in such an oath! —
for ’twas clear the issue rested not with Erlend. Now that he knew
all about the plot Simon deemed ’twas the most witless folly he had
heard on. Erlend had been willing to be torn limb from limb that he
might keep the letter of his oath. And all the while the secret lay
in a ten-year-old boy’s hands — Erlend had himself seen to that.
Nor seemed it to be his fault, either, that Sunniva Olavsdatter knew


Lhe Ordss sah A SO ee
no more than she did know — Could anyone make such a fellow
out? —

So, if he had for a moment thought — ay, what Erlend and his
wife deemed he had thought — God knows, that thought lay close
enough to hand when Gaute came out with this tale of having seen
his seal below the treasonous letter. And they two might have
remembered he knew one thing and another of Erlend Nikulausson
that gave him less ground than most men to believe at all times the
best of that gallant. But ’twas like they had forgotten long ago how
once he had come upon them and seen into the depths of their
shamelessness —

So ’twas with little reason he lay there, ashamed as a beaten dog
for that he had done Erlend wrong in his thoughts. God knew,
twas not that he gladly deemed ill of his brother-in-law — naught
but unhappiness had he felt at the thought. But he knew himself
*twas a witless, foolish misthought — he would have seen straight-
way, even without Kristin’s words, that so it could not be. Well-
nigh as soon as the thought came to him — that Erlend might have
misused his seal — he had felt: nay, Erlend could never have done
the like. Never in his life had Erlend done a dishonourable deed
that had aught of forethought in it — or aught of sense —

Simon flung himself about in the bed and groaned. They had
driven him half-crazy himself with all this foolishness. It hurt him
so to think that Gaute had gone for years believing this of him —
yet "twas against reason to take it so hardly. Even though he were
fond of the boy, fond of all Kristin’s sons — they were scarce more
than children after all; did he need to care so much what they
deemed of him?

And why should such boiling wrath come on him when he
thought on the men who had laid their hands on Erlend’s sword-
hilt and sworn to follow their chieftain? If so be they were such
sheep as to let themselves be dazzled by Erlend’s glib tongue and
his hardihood, and to deem that man had the stuff of a chieftain in
him — then ’twas no more than was to be looked for that they
should behave them like frighted sheep once the whole plan went
awry. He still felt giddy when he thought on what he had heard
at Dyfrin but now —so many men had been willing to sell the
peace of the land and their own welfare into Erlend’s hands — and
Haftor Olafssén, and Borgar Trondssén —! And not one had had
the manfulness to step forth and crave of the King that Erlend be


737 Kinship’s Dues


granted an honourable atonement and safety for his udal lands.
They were so many that, had they but stood together, it had been
no hard matter to force their will through. It seemed that amongst
the gentry of Norway there was less of man’s wit and of manhood
than he had deemed —

Angry, too, he was that he himself had been altogether left out
of these counsels. Not that they could have got him to join with
them in such a senseless complot. But because both Erlend and
Gyrd had gone behind his back and kept him in the dark — Was
he not every whit as much a noble as any of the rest, and did he
not count more than a little in the country-side where folk knew
him — ?

In a fashion he owned that Gyrd was right. So as Erlend had
made wreck of his leadership, the man could not crave, with rea-
son, that his fellows in the plot should come forth and own them-
selves leagued with him. Simon knew that, had he found Gyrd
alone, he had not come to part from his brothers in this wise. But
there lay yonder Sir Ulf, with his long legs stretched out before
him, discoursing on Erlend’s lack of wit — now, after the fray!
And then Gudmund chimed in. Neither Gyrd nor he himself had
ever before suffered their youngest brother to gainsay them in
aught. But since he had wedded with the priest’s leman — his own
leman thereafter — the boy had grown so puffed up and self-glori-
ous — as Simon sat there he soon grew wild at the very sight of
him — he prated so pertly, and his round, red face looked so like
a child’s back-side, that Simon’s hands itched to smack it — In
the end he had scarce known himself what he said to the three
men.

— So now ’twas come to a breach betwixt him and his brothers.
He felt as though he must bleed to death when he thought on it —
as though bonds of flesh and blood had been torn asunder. It had
made him poor. Bare is brotherless back —

But whether ’twere so or so, in the midst of their angry broil he
had understood, of a sudden —he himself knew not how — that
Gyrd’s numbed, half-hearted bearing came not alone from his sore
need of a little peace at home. He had seen in a flash that Gyrd
loved Helga still; twas this that made his brother seem so fettered
and strengthless. And strangely, he understood not how, this
roused him to fury against — ay, against the whole of life.

— Simon hid his face in his hands. Ay, this it was to have been


The Cross 738


ab Mes GROSS) 5s VA SO eee eee
good, dutiful sons. It had come easy to both Gyrd and himself to
feel love for the brides their father came and said he had chosen
for them. The old man had spoken to them one evening right
goodly words of counsel — so that at length they sat there, quite
shamefaced, the two of them — of marriage, and friendship and
faith ‘twixt honourable, clean-living wedded folk; ay, and last of
all their father had even talked of prayer and intercession and
masses. "T'was pity their father had not vouchsafed them counsel
how to forget as well — when friendship is shattered, and honour
dead, and faithfulness a sin and a secret, shameful torture, and the
bond has left naught behind it save a bleeding sore that never
can be healed —

After Erlend was set free, a kind of peace had fallen upon him-
self — if but because a man cannot go on suffering such pain as he
had suffered that time in Oslo. Either somewhat happens — or it

rows better of itself.

Glad he had not been when she moved in to Jérundgaard with
her husband and all their children, and he had to meet them, and
keep up friendship with them and the dues of kin. But he com-
forted himself — so much worse had it been when he had to dwell
with her so as a man cannot bear to live with a woman he loves, if
she be not his wife nor his blood kin. And what had befallen be-
twixt Erlend and himself that night they made festival for his
brother-in-law’s deliverance from prison — he made light of that:
Erlend, like enough, had not understood more than half, and ’twas
like he thought little on the matter. Erlend had such a rare gift for
forgetting. And he himself had his manor, and his wife, who was
dear to him, and his children.

He had found peace, after a fashion. "Twas not his fault that he
loved his wife’s sister. She had been his betrothed maid once —
*twas not he who had broken his troth to her. When first he set
his heart on Kristin Lavransdatter, ’twas but his duty, for then he
deemed she was to be his wife. That ’twas her sister he got — that
was Ramborg’s doing — and her father’s. Lavrans, wise man though
he was, had never bethought him to ask whether Simon had for-
gotten. Howbeit he knew, not even Lavrans would he have suf-
fered to ask that.

He was no good hand at forgetting. "T'was not his doing that it
was so. And he had never said one word that should have been left
unsaid. He could not help it if the devil tempted him with dreams


739 Kinship’s Dues


and promptings that did wrong to the bond of blood — of his own
free will he had never given himself up to sinful thoughts of love.
And in deeds he had been as a trusty brother to her and hers. That
he knew himself.

At length he had come to be not ill content with his lot.

So long as he knew ’twas he who had served those two yonder —
Kristin and the man she had cast him off for — They had ever been
forced to take succour at his hands. ’

Now ’twas so no longer. Kristin had staked her life and her
soul’s heal to save his son’s life. T'was as though all the old wounds
‘had burst open since he had let this be. ,

And since then it had come to pass that he owed Erlend his life.

— And then, in return, he had wronged him — not with his will,
in his thoughts only — but yet —!

“ _ et dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut et nos dimittimus debi-
toribus nostris.” "Twas strange that the Lord had not taught us
also to pray: “ sicut et nos dimittimus creditoribus nostris.” He
knew not whether it were good Latin — he had never been strong
_ in that tongue. But he knew he could ever bring himself to for-
give his debtors fairly enough. To him it seemed much harder to
forgive one who had laid a load of debt upon his shoulders —

And now that they could call themselves quits — he and those
two —he felt every ancient grudge that he had trampled under-
foot these many years sprout up and quicken —

No longer could he thrust Erlend aside in his thoughts — for a
witless babbler, who could neither see, nor learn, nor think, nor
bear aught in mind. The other weighed now upon his spirit, just
because none could know what Erlend saw and thought and re-
membered — there was no counting on him.

“ Many a man wins what is meant for another, but another’s lot
none may win.”

’T was a true word.

He had loved his young bride. Had he got her, for sure he had
been a well-contented man; most like they had cgme to live well
together. And she would have been still as she was when first they
met: gentle and pure, shrewd, so that a man might take counsel of
her even in greater matters; something wilful in small things, but
yielding in the main, used as she was, when in her father’s hands,
to let herself be led and helped and guarded. — But then this man
got a hold on her — one not fit to guide himself, who never had


That Cross cre —-2i Wi sates AEE ee ee
guarded aught. He had ravaged her sweet maidenliness, broken her
proud calm, torn asunder her woman’s soul, and forced her to
stretch to the uttermost all her powers. She had had to stand up for
her lover, as a little bird guards its nest, with throbbing body and
shrilling cries, when any draws near to its home. Her sweet, slen-
der body had seemed to him made to be lifted aloft in a man’s arms
and shielded lovingly — he had seen it strained with wild resolve,
the while her heart beat within her with fear and courage and lust
of battle, and she fought for husband and children, as even a dove
will grow fierce and fearless when she has young.

Had it been he who was her husband — had she lived fifteen win-"
ters through in the shelter of his honest good-will — full well he
knew for him too she would have stood up, if aught of mischance
had come his way. With wisdom and firm will would she have
stood by his side. But never would he have come to see the stony
face she turned on him that night in Oslo, as she sat and told him
she had been to that house and looked around within it. Never
would he have heard her cry out his name in a voice of such wild
despair and woe. And ’twas not the pure and honourable love of his
youth that had answered in his heart. The wild craving that rose
and cried out in answer to her wildness — never had he learned
that aught such could harbour in his soul, had it gone with him and
her as their fathers planned —

Her face as she went past him out into the night to find help for
his child — she had never dared to tread that road, had she not been
Erlend’s wife, and long used to go on undaunted, even though her
heart might shake with dread. The smile on her tear-stained face
when she woke him and said the boy was calling for his father —
so piercing sweet can none smile who knows not what it is to lose
a fight and what to win it —

*Twas Erlend’s wife he loved — as now he loved her. But then
must his love be sin, and so belike there was no help for it—he
must needs be unhappy — For he was so unhappy that at times he
felt naught but a great wonder — that ’twas he who had come to
this pass, and who could see no way out of his unhappiness.

— When, treading underfoot his own honour and all gentle
breeding, he had reminded Erling Vidkunsson of things no man
of honour would have whispered that he knew aught of — he had
done it, not for brothers or kinsmen, but only for her. Only for
her sake had he brought himself to beg of the other man as the


741 Kinship’s. Dues


lazars beg at church doors in the great towns, showing their loathly
sores —

He had thought — some time she shall know of it. Not all, not
~ how deeply he had abased himself. But when they both were come
to be old folk, he had thought he would say to Kristin thus: I
helped you as best I might, for I minded how dear I loved you that
time you were my promised bride.

One thing there was he dared not to turn his thoughts upon. Had
Erlend said aught to Kristin? — Ay, he had thought, some time she
should hear it from his own mouth: —I have never forgot that I
loved you when we were young. But if so it were that she knew,
and that ’twas from her husband she had learned it — nay, then he
deemed he could bear no more —

To her alone he had meant to say it —some time, long hence.
When he thought on that hour when he himself had bewrayed it
— of Erlend’s stumbling upon the thing he had deemed hidden in
his most secret heart! And Ramborg knew it — though how she
had seen it he could not understand —

His own wife — and her husband — they knew it —

Simon cried out, a wild and choking cry, as he flung himself
suddenly on his other side in the bed —

— God help him! "Iwas his turn now to lie, stripped naked, out-
raged, bleeding from torture wounds and quivering with shame —


The woman set the door ajar; from the bed Simon’s hot, dry,
glittering eyes met hers: “Did you not get to sleep? — Erlend
Nikulauss6n rode by even now, with other two — belike ’twas two
of his sons that rode with him.” Simon muttered some kind of
answer, angry and unmeaning.


He would let them get well ahead. But else ’twould soon be time
he too was thinking of the homeward road —

— As soon as he was come into the hall and had taken off his
outer gear, Andres would seize his fur cap and put it on his own:
head. Whilst the boy sat astride the bench and rode to his uncle
at Dyfrin, the big cap would slip down, now upon the little nose
and now back over his bonny bright locks — But it helped him not
much to try to think on such things — God knew when the boy
was like to go a-visiting to his uncle at Dyfrin now —
~ And, instead, came the memory of that other son of his — Hal-


The Cross 742


Ah ROUT OSI FO eee
frid’s child. Erling — ‘twas not so oft that he thought on him. A
little ashy-blue child body —the days that Erling lived he had
scarce seen him — he had to sit by the dying mother. Had the child
lived, or had it lived longer than its mother — then had Mandvik
been his own. And then like enough he had sought a new mate
there, in the south country. Only now and again would he have
come to his estate here, north in the Dale. And so, maybe, he would
have — not forgotten Kristin —she had led him too wondrous a
dance for that ever to be — The devil —a man might, sure, have
leave to remember, as an adventure, that he had been fain to fetch
his bride, a high-born maid, bred up in chaste and Christian ways,
home from a bordel and another’s man’s bed. But then, maybe, he
had not gone on so remembering her that it racked him and took all
relish from whatsoever else of good life held for him —

Erling —he would have been fourteen winters old by now.
When in due time Andres drew so near to man’s estate, he himself
would be old and laid aside —

Oh, ay, Halfrid — you were not over happy with me. Maybe ’tis
not so undeserved that things have gone with me as they have —

And then, for sure, Erlend Nikulaussén had had to pay for his
folly with his life; and Kristin had been sitting now at Jorund-
gaard, a widow —

And he himself going about, maybe, rueing that he was a wedded
man! There was naught so witless but that he could believe it of
himself now —


The gale had died down, but big, wet flakes of spring snow still
fell, as Simon rode from the tavern yard. And, now, towards eve-
ning, the birds were beginning to pipe and trill in the woody
thickets, in despite of the falling snow.

As a cut in the skin bursts open again at a hasty movement, a
chance memory gave him pain — Not many days ago, at his Easter
feast, they —a whole troop of them — had stood without, basking
in the mid-day sun. High above them, in a birch-tree, sat a robin,
piping out into the warm, blue air. Geirmund came round the
house corner, limping, dragging himself along on his staff, with
one hand on his eldest son’s shoulder. He looked up, stopped, and
mimicked the bird. The boy, too, pursed his mouth and whistled.
They could copy well-nigh every bird note. Kristin stood a little


way off, amidst of some other women. Her smile was so fair as she
listened —


743 Kinship’s Dues


Towards sunset the clouds thinned out in the west — rolled in
golden drifts along the white fell-sides, filled glens and little dales
with thick grey mist. The river had a dull gleam, as of brass — it
rushed and eddied, wide and dark, round the stones in its course,
and on each stone lay a little white cushion of new-fallen snow.

‘The wearied horses made but slow going over the heavy roads,
It was milk-white night, with a full moon peering out through
driving haze and clouds, when Simon rode down the steep banks
of the Ula. When he was come over the bridge and out upon the
flat fir tree heath, where the road ran in winter, the horses made
better speed — they knew they were nearing their stalls. Simon
patted Digerbein’s wet, steaming neck. He was glad, at all rates,
that this journey was near an end. Ramborg, belike, was asleep long
ere now.

Where the road makes a sharp turn to leave the woods, there
stood a little house. He was right upon it, when he grew ware that
some men on horseback had drawn rein before the door. He heard
Erlend’s voice cry:

“Then ’tis sure you will come the first day after holy-day —I
may tell my wife so —? ”

Simon shouted a greeting. "would seem too out of the way not
to stay and ride on in their company; but he bade Sigurd go on
ahead. Then he rode up to the others: they were Naakkve and
Gaute. Erlend came forth from the house door at the same
moment. ‘

He greeted them again — the three gave back his greeting some-
what uneasily. He could see their faces but dimly in the glimmer-
ing light — it seemed to Simon they looked at him doubtfully —
seemed at once curious and resentful. So he said straight out:

“T come from Dyfrin, brother-in-law.”

“ Ay, I heard tell you were gone south.” Erlend stood with his
hand on the saddle-bow, looking down. “ You have ridden hard,
’twould seem,” he added, as if to break an irksome silence.

“Nay, stay a little,” said Simon to the youths, as they made to
ride on. “ You, too, must hearken to this. "Iwas my brother’s seal
you saw on the letter, Gaute. And I wot it must seem to you they
kept their troth but ill with your father, he and the other knights
who set their seals to that letter to Prince Haakon your father was
to bear to Denmark — ”

The boys looked down in silence. Erlend spoke:

“ One thing, I trow, you thought not on, Simon, when you rode


The Cross 744


lbh: TOSS) a i ee ae eee
to tryst with your brother. Dearly bought I safety for Gyrd and

those others — with all I owned, save the name of a trusty man that

held to his word. Now Gyrd Darre deems, for sure, not even that

name is left to me —”

Simon bowed his head, abashed. Of that he had not thought.

“Why said you not this to me, Erlend, when I told you I
would ride to Dyfrin—?”

“You must sure have seen yourself I was so mad with rage,
when I rode from your manor, there was neither thought nor
counsel in me —”’

“T was scarce in my full wits either, Erlend —”

“No, but meseems you might have had time to bethink you on
yonder long road. Nor could I well have prayed you give up your
intent to question your brother, without bewraying things I had
sworn a dear oath to keep hidden —”

Simon said naught for a little —at first it seemed to him the
other was in the right of it. But then it struck him—nay, now
was Erlend wrong-headed as could be. Should he have sat still
and suffered Kristin and the boys to think such evil of him? He
asked this something hotly.

“ T have never breathed a word of this, kinsman, either to mother
or to my brothers,” said Gaute, turning his comely, bright face to
Simon.

“ Ay, but none the less they learnt of it in the end,” answered he,
stubbornly. “TI trow, after all that befell yonder day at my house,
great need there was that we should clear the matter. And I see not
how it could come upon your father so unawares— much more
than a child you are not yet, my Gaute, and right young were you
when you were made a sharer in these — secret counsels.” :

‘““My own son I sure might well deem I could trust,” cried Er-
lend hotly. “ And choice I had none, when I must save the letter.
*T was either give it to Gaute or let the Warden find it —”

It seemed to Simon bootless to speak more of the matter. But he
could not refrain him from saying:

“ Little did I like it when I learned what the boy had gone about
believing of me these four years. I have ever set much by you,
Gaute.”

The boy urged his horse forward a few paces; he held out his
hand, and Simon saw his face grew darker, as though he flushed:

“You must forgive me, Simon! ”


745 Kinship’s Dues
Simon gripped the boy’s hand. At times Gaute’s face could be so
like his mother’s father that it moved Simon strangely. He was
something bow-legged and low of stature when afoot, but he was
a rarely good rider, and on horseback he was as fair a sprig of
young manhood as could gladden a father’s eyes.

Now they rode northwards, all four, the boys ahead. When
they were out of ear-shot, Simon said:

“ Understand you, Erlend—I trow you cannot rightly blame
me for seeking out my brother and praying him to tell me truth
about this matter. But I wot you had cause for anger against me,
you and Kristin. For as soon as these ” — he groped for words —
“these strange tidings came out — what Gaute said of my seal —
I cannot deny I thought—I understand your believing that I
thought what I should have had wit to know was unthinkable. So
I say not but you have reason to be wroth —” he said again.

The horses plashed through the snow-slush. Twas a little while
till Erlend answered, and then his voice sounded most meek and
mild:

“T know not, after all, what else you could have thought. "T'was
sure the easiest thing to think —”

“ Ah no, I should have known well ’twas impossible,” Simon
broke in, sorely. A little after he asked:

“Did you deem that I knew of this—of my brother? That
twas for their sake I tried to help you? ”

“Nay,” said Erlend, wonderingly. “I knew for sure that you
could not know it. That J had said naught, I knew. And that your
brother had not let slip aught, that I deemed I could be full sure
of.” He laughed a little. Then he grew grave. “I know well,” said
he, softly, “ you did it for our father-in-law’s sake — and because
you are good —”

Simon rode on for a time, and said no word.

“ You were bitter wroth, I can conceive? ” he asked in a little.

“ Oh! — When I got time to bethink me —I see not that there
was any other meaning you could put on it —”

“ And Kristin? ” asked Simon, still lower.

“ Ay, she —!” Erlend laughed as before. “ You know well she
brooks not that any point a finger at me — save her own self. She
deems, I trow, she can see to that well enough herself. "Tis the same
with our children. God have mercy on me if I but speak a word of
blame to them! But, trust me, I set her right —”


The Cross 746


he CO POSST As Ne NSO eee

“You did that 2

“ Ay — when time and season serve I surely shall make her un-
derstand. You know well Kristin is such an one that, when she has
bethought her, she will remember you have shown us such trusty
friendship that — ”

Simon felt his heart quiver with a tingling wrath. He felt ‘twas
more than he could bear —the other seemed to think that now
they might cast this matter quite from their thoughts. His face, in
the pale moonlight, showed utterly at peace. Simon’s voice shook
with the hurry of his spirits as he spoke again:

“Forgive me, Erlend, I understand not how I could believe — ”

“You hear,” the other broke in, a little impatiently, “that I
understand. Methinks it had been hard for you to believe other-
wise —”

“Would to God those two witless young ones had never
spoken,” said Simon, vehemently.

“ Ay — Gaute has never had such a beating in his life before —
And to think it all came of bickering over their far-off forbears —
Reidar Birkebein and King Skule and Bishop Nikolas.” Erlend
shook his head. ‘“‘ But come, brother-in-law, think no more on it
— ’twere best we forget all this soon as we can —”

“T cannot!”

“Nay, Simon! ” This came by way of protest, gentle and won-
dering. “Tis not worth taking so hardly —! ”

“T cannot, hear you! I am not so good a man as you! ”

Erlend looked at him in a maze:

“Now know I not what you mean.”

“Tam not so good a man as you! I cannot forgive so easily them
that I have wronged.”

“1 know not what you mean,” said the other, as before.

““T mean — ” Simon’s face was drawn and marred with pain and
passion; he spoke low, as though he crushed down a longing to cry
aloud. “ I mean — I have heard you speak fair words of Sigurd, the
Lagmand at Steigen, the old man whose wife you stole from him.
( have seen and known that you loved Lavrans with all a son’s love.
And never have I marked that you bore me grudge for that you —
lured from me my promised maid —I am not so high-minded as
you deem, Erlend —I am not so high-minded as you —I—I/ beara
grudge to the man whom J have wronged — ”

His cheeks palely flecked with passion, he stared into the other’s
eyes. Erlend had listened to him with mouth half open.


747 Kinship’s Dues

“This had I never dreamed on till this hour! Do you hate me,
Simon? ” he whispered, astounded.

“ Seems it not to you that I have cause — ? ”

Without knowing it, both men had stayed their horses. They sat
gazing into each other’s faces: Simon’s little eyes glittered like
steel. In the hazy-white light of the night he saw that Erlend’s thin
features worked, as though something stirred within him —an
awakening — He looked up from under half-closed eyelids, biting
his quivering under-lip.

“ T cannot bear to meet you any more! ”

“Man! —’Tis twenty years agone,” Erlend burst out, in amaze.

“Ay. Deem you not that —she —is worth remembering for
twenty years? ”

Erlend drew himself upright in his saddle — met Simon’s gaze,
full and steadfastly. The moonlight kindled a blue-green spark
within his great light eyes.

“Yes. God — God bless her! ”

So he sat fora moment. Then he set spurs to his horse and dashed
forward along the miry track, splashing the water high behind
him. Simon held Digerbein back — he was well-nigh thrown, so
suddenly did he rein in the horse. He tarried there, on the edge of
the woods, struggling with the impatient beast, for so long as he
could hear the hoof-strokes in the slush.

Remorse had rushed over him in the moment he had said it. Re-
morse, and shame—as though he had struck the most defence-
less of creatures —a child — or a fine and gentle, reasonless beast
—in senseless wrath. His hate seemed like a shivered lance — he
himself seemed shivered by the clash with this man’s witless sim-
plicity — so little understanding had this bird of ill omen, Erlend
Nikulauss6n, ’twas as though he must be held both helpless and
innocent —

He cursed and swore under his breath as he rode on. Innocent —
the fellow was long past two’score years — twas high time he
learnt to suffer being spoken to, man to man. If Simon had
wounded himself — ay, devil take him if ’twas not a cheap price to
pay if he had but got a blow home on Erlend for once.

Now was he riding home to her — “ God bless her,” he mocked
wryly. And then there would be an end to all this struggling for
brotherly love — ’twixt those two there, and him and his. He need
nevermore meet with Kristin Lavransdatter —

— The thought took away his breath — Yet, devil take it! why


The Cross 748


REN OP OSS ES 8 ee ee eee
not —? “If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out,” said the priests.
’T was for this mostly, he told himself, that he had done this thing
— to escape this make-believe of brother and sister’s love with Kris-
tin — he could bear it no more —

One only wish he had now —that Ramborg might not wake
when he came home.

But when he rode down between the fences, he saw a dark form
in a cloak standing under the aspen trees. Her head-linen showed
white.


She had been waiting there, she said, ever since Sigurd came
home. The serving-women were abed, and Ramborg herself ladled
out the porridge from the pot which stood against the fire to kee
warm, set bacon and bread on the board, and fetched fresh-
drawn ale. .

“Will you not to bed now, Ramborg? ” asked the man, while
he ate.

Ramborg answered not. She went over to her loom and began
to thread the little many-coloured balls in and out of the warp.
She had set up a tapestry before Yule, but she was not come far
with it yet.

“Erlend rode northwards, a while ago,” she said; as she stood
with her back to him. “ I deemed, from what Sigurd said, you were
coming with him? ”

“ No — it fell not out so —”

“ Erlend longed more for home and bed than you? ” She laughed
a little. As she got no answer, she said again: “ He, I trow, ever
longs to come home to Kristin, when he has had an errand from
home —”

Simon kept silence for a good while ere he answered: “ Erlend
and I parted not as friends.” Ramborg turned sharp round — he
told her, then, what he had heard at Dyfrin, and of the first part of
his talk with Erlend and his sons.

“Methinks ’tis scarce reason to fall at odds over this — when you
have been able to keep friends till now.” :

“ Maybe — yet so it fell out. But ’twere too long to tell the whole
tale to-night.”

Ramborg turned to her loom, and busied herself with the work
again.

“Simon,” she asked, all at once, “‘ mind you a saga Sira Eirik read


749 Kinship’s Dues


to us Once upon a time — out of the Bible — of a young maid named
Abishag the Shunammite? ”

“ No.”

“ What time King David grew old, and his strength and man-
hood began to fail,” began the wife, but Simon broke in:

“My Ramborg, the night is too far spent; ’tis no time to begin
telling sagas now. — And I mind, too, now, how ’twas with her you
named —”

Ramborg beat the weft up with the reed; she held her peace for
a little. Then she spoke again:

“ Mind you that saga, then, that my father could tell — of Tris-
tan the comely, and Isolde the fair, and Isolde the dark? ”

“ Ay, that one I mind.” Simon pushed the dish from him, rubbed
the back of his hand across his mouth, and stood up. He came over
to the fire-place; with one foot up on the edge, elbow on knee and
chin in hand, he stood looking into the fire that was burning itself
out in the stone-built cavern. From the corner by the loom came
Ramborg’s voice, quavering and ready to break:

“T thought always, when I heard those sagas, that such men as
King David and Sir Tristan — it seemed foolish — and cruel — that
they loved not the young brides who brought them their maiden-
hood and their hearts’ love in all gentleness and seemly purity,
more than suchlike women as the Lady Bath-sheba or yonder
Isolde the fair, who had made waste of themselves in other men’s
arms. Methought had I been a man, I had not been so prideless —
or so heartless ” — she stopped, overcome. “ Meseemed ’twas the
hardest of fates — the lot they had; Abishag and that poor Isolde
of Bretland —” She turned, vehemently, came across the room,
and stood before her husband.

“What ails you, Ramborg? ” Simon spoke low and with an ill
grace. “I know not what you mean by this—”

“Yes, you know,” said she, vehemently. “ You yourself are like

onder Tristan —”

“ That can I scarce trow,” he tried to laugh, “ that I am like —
Tristan the fair — And the two women you named — if I mind me
aright, they lived and died spotless maids, untouched of their hus-
hands —” He looked over at his wife: her little, three-cornered
face was white, and she bit her lips.

Simon put his foot to the ground, stood upright, and laid both
hands upon her shoulders:


The Cross 750


“ My Ramborg, have we not had two children, you and I? ” he
said softly.

She answered not.

“] have striven to show you I was thankful to you for that gift.
[ deemed myself — I have tried to be a good husband to you —”

She still said naught, and, letting fall his hands, he went and sat
him down upon the bench, Ramborg followed, stood before him,
looking down upon her husband: the broad thighs, in wet, mud-
died breeches, the unwieldy body, the heavy, red-brown face. She
pursed up her lips in distaste:

“TIl-favoured, too, have you grown with the years, Simon.”

“ Ay, I have never deemed myself aught of a comely man,” he
said, soberly.

“ And am I not young and fair —” She set her on his lap; the
tears started from her eyes, as she clasped his head in both her
hands: “ Simon — look on me — wherefore can you not repay me
for this? — never have I wished that any should have me save you
—methought, even from the time I was a little maid, my husband
should be such an one as you were — Mind you how you led us
both by the hand, Ulvhild and me — ? you were to go with father
to the west paddock to look upon his foals — you bore her over the
beck, and father would have taken me up, but I screamed out that
you must bear me too. Mind you? ”

Simon nodded. He remembered well he had been much taken
up with Ulvhild, the lovely crippled child had seemed to him so
pitiful. Of the youngest he had had no memory, save that one there
was younger than Ulvhild.

“You had the goodliest hair —” She ran her fingers through the
thick-waved, light-brown forelock that hung somewhat down over
her husband’s brow. “ Not one grey hair have you yet in your
head — Erlend’s hair will soon be as much white as black. — And I
liked so well that there came those deep dimples in your cheeks
when you smiled — and that you were so merry of speech — ”

“ Ay, like enough I was something better-favoured then than I
am now —”

“No,” she whispered vehemently — “ not when you look kindly
on me — Mind you the first time I slept in your arms?’

“—T lay abed, crying with the toothache — father and mother
had gone asleep; ’twas dark in the loft-room, but you came over to


the bench where we lay, Ulvhild and I, and asked why I wept. You


751 Kinship’s Dues


bade me to be quiet and not wake the others, and then you took
me up into your arms, and then you lit the taper and cut a splint
and pricked around the bad tooth till blood came. Then you said
a blessing over the splint, and then I was soon well again, and I got
leave to sleep in your bed and you held me in your arm—”

Simon laid his hand upon her head and pressed it in to his shoul-
der. Now she spoke of it, he remembered: ’twas that time he was
at Jorundgaard and had told Lavrans that the bond ’twixt him and
Kristin had best be loosed again. He had slept little that night —
and now he remembered that he had got up once and done some-
ee to help little Ramborg, who lay whimpering with the tooth-
ache —

“ Have I so borne me to you at any time, my Ramborg — that
you deem you have a right to say I love you not —? ”

“Simon — seems it not to you that I deserve you should love me
more than Kristin? Wicked and false she was to you —I have fol-
lowed you about like a little lap-dog all these years —”

Simon lifted her gently down from his lap, stood up, and took
her hands in his:

“Speak no more of your sister now, Ramborg — in that wise. I
wonder if you understand yourself what you say. Think you not
that I fear God — can you believe of me that I could be so dread-
less of shame and the worst of sins, or that I should not remember
my children and all my kin and friends? Iam your husband, Ram-
borg — forget it not, and speak not so to me —”

“T know you have not broken God’s law, or cast away faith and
honour —”

“Never have I spoken one word to your sister or touched her
with my hand in other wise than I can answer for on the judgment-
day — God and Saint Simon, the apostle, are my witness —”

Ramborg nodded silently.

“ Think you your sister would have met me as she has done all
these years, if she thought as you do, that I loved her with sinful
lust? Nay, then you know not Kristin.”

“Oh, she has never so much as thought whether any other man
save Erlend bears love to her. It scarce comes to her mind that we
others are flesh and blood — ”

“Ay, belike you speak truly there, Ramborg,” said Simon
calmly. “ But then sure you can understand for yourself how wit-
less ’tis for you to plague me with jealousy.”


TTBROTOSS ON = ADT aI OAR Oe eee ee oe


Ramborg drew away her hands.

“T meant it not so either, Simon. But never have you cared for
me as you cared for her. She is for ever in your thought even yet
—of me you think but seldom, when you see me not.”

“*Tis not my doing, Ramborg, that a man’s heart is so made
that what is writ thereon when ’tis young and fresh stands more
deeply graven than all the runes cut afterward —”

“ Have you never heard the word that says: a man’s heart is the
first thing that quickens in his mother’s womb, and the last thing
in him to die? ” said Ramborg, softly.

“Nay — Is there a word that says the like —? Ay, and it may
well be true, too.” He stroked her white cheek lightly. “ But if we
are to sleep this night, we must to bed now,” he said, wearily.

Ramborg slept after a while, and Simon stole his arm from un-
der her neck, moved him gently towards the outer bed-edge and
drew the fur coverlid right up under his chin. His shirt, at the
shoulder, was wet through with her tears. He was bitterly heart-
sore for his wife — and he understood too, with a new desperation,
that he could no longer make shift to live with her by taking her as
though she were a blind, unlessoned child. Now must he make up
his mind that Ramborg was a grown woman.

The window-pane was grey already with dawn — the May night
was nigh its end. He was deathly weary — and to-morrow was
mass-day. Go to church to-morrow he would not — though sure
enough he had great need of it. He had promised Lavrans once,
never would he miss a mass without full good cause — but, he


thought bitterly, it had not helped him overmuch that he had kept


his word all these years. To-morrow he would not ride to mass —


» iL
~~ eat


qi Oe ROS §


Beaker <b W.O


DEBTORS


DFE Bel O, RS


[*


RISTIN learned but in part what had befallen ’twixt Erlend
and Simon. Her husband told her and Bjorgulf what Simon


had said of his journey to Dyfrin, and that, afterwards,
they had changed high words, and in the end had parted unfriends.
“More I cannot tell you of this matter.”

Erlend was a little pale, his face set and resolved. She had seen it
thus some few times before, in the years she had been wedded to
him. And she knew ’twas a sign that these were matters he would
say no more on.

She had never liked it when Erlend had met her questions with
this look. God knew she craved not to be held for more than a
simple woman; she had liefer had to answer for naught but her
children and her housekeeping. But she had been driven to put her
hand to so much that seemed to her fitter for a man to deal with —
and Erlend, ’twas clear, had deemed it fitting that he should let such
things rest upon her shoulders. And thus it beseemed him ill to
carry things so high and answer so curtly, when she sought to
know the rights of doings of his own which touched the welfare
of them all.

She took this unfriendship ’twixt Erlend and Simon Darre
hardly. Ramborg was her only sister. And when she thought on it,
that now Simon would come among them no more, she understood
fully, for the first time, how fond she had come to be of this man
and how much of thanks she owed him — in the troublous lot that
was hers she had had a sure stay in his trusty friendship.

And she knew now that, all over the country-side, the folk
would have a new titbit of gossip — that yonder Jorundgaard peo-

le had broken with Simon of Formo too. Simon and Ramborg
were liked and held in esteem by every soul. And for the most part
she herself, her husband, and her sons were looked on with distrust


* For explanation of the title of Part II, see Note 2.


The Cross 756


The TOss 2) - 328 Ee OO) See ee
and misliking — that she had known for long. Now would they be
left quite unfriended —

Kristin felt as though she must sink into the ground with sorrow
and shame the first Sunday when she came on to the church-green
and saw Simon standing there, a little way off, in a cluster of yeo-
men. He bowed his head in greeting to her and hers, but ’twas the
first time he came not forward to shake hands and chat with them.

But Ramborg went up to her sister and took her hand:

“Tis ill, sister, that our husbands have fallen out — but I see not
that you and I need fall out for that — ” She raised herself upon her
toes and kissed Kristin, so that the folk in the churchyard could
see it. But Kristin knew not how it was — she seemed to feel within
her that, none the less, Ramborg was not greatly grieved. Never
had she brought herself to like Erlend —God knew whether she
had not set her husband against him, knowingly or unknowingly —

Yet thereafter Ramborg ever came and greeted her sister when
they met at the church. Ulvhild called out aloud to know where-
fore her aunt came not south to them any more; then she ran across
to Erlend, and clung about him and his eldest sons. Arngjerd,
standing quietly by her step-mother’s side, took Kristin by the
hand and looked troubled. Simon and Erlend and his sons held
aloof from each other most diligently.

Kristin missed her sister’s children sorely too. She had grown
fond of the two young maids. And one day, when Ramborg had
brought her son to mass, and Kristin, after worship, was kissing
Andres, she fell a-weeping. This weak, sickly boy had grown so
dear to her—and she could not but feel, now that she had no
truly little children any more, ’twas in a way a comfort to her to
care for this little sister’s-son at Formo and spoil him, when his
parents brought him with them to Jérundgaard.


From Gaute she heard somewhat more of the matter, for he told
her the words that had fallen between Erlend and Simon that
night they met by Skindfeld-Gudrun’s cottage. The more she
pondered these things, the more it seemed to her that Erlend was
the most at fault. She had been wroth with Simon — so much he
should sure have known of Erlend as to know that he could not
have thus basely played his brother false — how strange so ever
the things he might do through thoughtlessness or hot temper —
and when he saw what he had brought to pass, he bore himself


757 Debtors


often most like a shy stallion that has broken loose, and goes wild
with fright at what he drags behind him.

But that Erlend never could understand that, sometimes, other
men must needs cross him, to guard their own welfare against the
mischief he had such a rare gift for making! And that then he
cared not what he said, or how he bore himself! She remembered
those days when she herself yet was young and tender —time
after time she had felt as though he were trampling on her heart
with his reckless doings. His own brother he had cut him off from
— even before Gunnulf went into the cloister, he had drawn away
from them, and she had known that Erlend was to blame — so
often he had given offence to his pious and worthy brother,
though never had Gunnulf done Erlend aught but good, that she
wist of. And now he had thrust Simon from him, and when she
would have known what ’twas that had brought unfriendship be-
tween him and their only friend, he but put on a lofty mien and
answered that he might not tell her —


To Naakkve he had said more, she saw well.

The mother waxed sore and uneasy in mind when she marked
that Erlend and their eldest son grew silent, or turned their talk to
some other matter, so soon as she came near them — and this befell
not seldom.

Both Gaute and Lavrans and Munan held closer to their mother
than Nikulaus ever had done, and she had always talked more
with them than with him. Nevertheless it ever seemed to her that,
of all the children, her first-born stood, in a way, closest to her
heart. And since she was come to dwell on Jorundgaard again, the
memories of the time when she bore this son under her heart, and
of his birth, had grown strangely living and near. For she was
made aware in many ways that, here in Sil, folks had not forgotten
the sin of her youth. "T'was almost as though they accounted her
to have smirched the honour of the whole country-side of her
birth when she, the daughter of the man all here looked up to as
their head, had gone astray. They had not forgiven that, nor yet
that she and Erlend had added insult to his shame and sorrow
when they fooled him into giving away an erring maid with the
most stately bridal that had been held in man’s memory here in


the northern Dale.
Kristin could not tell if Erlend knew that now folk were raking


The Cross 758


EMO BU TOSS) 8s es Oe ee
these old tales up again. But if know it he did, ’twas like he cared
naught for the matter. He accounted her countrymen of the Dale
naught but wadmal-farmers and village hinds, one and all — and
he taught her sons to think the like. It seared her soul to know that
these men and women, who had thought much of her and wished
her so well in those days when they called her Lavrans Bjérgulf-
sén’s winsome daughter, and the Rose of the Dale, now held Er-
iend Nikulaussén and his wife in scorn and judged them hardly.
She besought not these folk, she wept not for that she was become
a stranger amongst them. But it hurt her sorely. And it seemed to
her that even the headlong hill-sides about the Dale, that had
sheltered and guarded her childhood, now looked down upon her
and her home in other guise — with darkling menace and hard,
stony-grey will to cow her spirit.

Once she had wept bitterly — Erlend had known of it, and he
had not long had patience with her then. When he learned that she
had gone lonely through those many months with his child a
heavy weight beneath her sad, fearful heart, he had not taken her
into his arms and comforted her with gentleness and loving words.
Angered and shame-struck had he been when he saw that now
*twould come to light how unworthily he had dealt with Lavrans
— but he had not thought how much worse it needs must be for
her, the day when she should stand shamed before her proud and
loving father.

Nor had Erlend greeted his son with overmuch joy when, at last,
she had borne this child forth to life and the light. In that hour,
‘when she was delivered from her endless agony of soul and terror
and torment, and saw the ugly, shapeless burthen of her sin take
life under the priest’s powerful prayers, and change to the loveli-
est child, whole and without blemish —in that moment it had
seemed as though her heart melted with humble gladness, and that
even the hot, defiant blood of her body turned to white, sweet,
innocent milk. Ay, with God’s help he may grow human in time,
said Erlend, as she lay there in bed and would have had him re-
joice with her over this costly treasure, that she could scarce suffer
from out her arms long enough to let the women tend the child.
Yet his children by Eline Ormsdatter he loved; that she had both
seen and known. But when she bore Naakkve to his father and
would have laid him in the man’s arms, Erlend had pulled a wry
face and asked what should he do with this brat who leaked both


759 Debtors


top and bottom. For long had Erlend looked askance at his eldest
true-born son — could not forget that Naakkve had come into the
world at an untoward time — though yet the boy was so fair and
winsome and likely a child that any father might well rejoice who
saw such a son growing up to fill his place.

And Naakkve had loved his father so that ’twas marvel to see
it — even from the time when he was a tiny babe. He had beamed
like the sun over the whole of his little comely face if his father
took him between his knees for a moment and said but two words
to him, or if the man Jet him hold his hand crossing the courtyard.
Staunchly had Naakkve striven to win his father’s favour in those
days when Erlend liked all his other children better than this one.
Bjorgulf had been his father’s favourite while the boys were small.
Then would Erlend sometimes take his little sons with him up to
the knights’ armoury, when he had an errand thither —all the
armour and weapons not in daily use at Husaby were kept there.
While the father talked and jested with Bjérgulf, Naakkve would
sit still as a mouse on a chest — panting for very joy that he had
leave to be there.

But as time went on, and, by reason of his bad sight, Bjérgulf
could not, so well as his brothers, go abroad with Erlend, and as
the boy himself grew more withdrawn and silent when with his
father, all this was changed. "Iwas now well-nigh as though Er-
lend were a little shy of this son. Kristin wondered at times
whether Bjérgulf blamed his father in his heart because he had
wasted all their substance and had dragged down his sons’ fortunes
with him in his downfall — and whether Erlend knew or guessed
this. Howsoever it might be, it seemed as though Bjorgulf alone,
of all Erlend’s sons, looked not up to him with blind love and with
unbounded pride in calling him father.

One day the two smallest boys had marked that their father was
reading the psalter in the morning and keeping fast on bread and
water. They asked why he did:thus — for ‘twas no fast-day. Er-
lend answered ’twas for his sins. Kristin knew that these days of
fasting were a part of the penance laid upon Erlend for his adul-
tery with Sunniva Olavsdatter, and that the eldest sons at least
knew of this. Naakkve and Gaute seemed to think naught of it,
but it chanced that she looked just then at Bjorgulf: the boy sat
there blinking near-sightedly down into his meat-bowl and smiling
to himself — so had Kristin seen Gunnulf smile one time and an-


The Cross 760
other when Erlend got on the high horse. The mother liked not
the sight —


Now ’twas Naakkve whom Erlend would ever have by him.


And the lad lived as though all the roots of his being were knit to
his father. Naakkve served his father as a young page his lord and
chieftain: he would have none but himself care for his father’s
horse, and keep his riding-gear and arms in good order; he buckled
the spurs on Erlend’s feet, and bore hat and cloak to him when he
would go forth. He filled his father’s beaker and carved for him at
board, where he sat on the bench to the right of Erlend’s seat.
Erlend laughed a little at the lad’s kurteisi, but he liked it well, and
more and more he made Naakkve all his own.

Kristin saw that now he had quite forgot how she had striven
and prayed to win from him a little fatherly love for this child.
And Naakkve had forgot the time when he was young and little,
and ’twas to her he came to seek comfort for all ills, and counsel in
all his troubles. To his mother he had ever been a loving son, and
this he was still in a fashion, but she felt that the older the boy
grew the farther he drifted from her and all her concerns. Of all
she had upon her hands Naakkve took no thought at all. He was
never loth to do her will when she set him to any task, but he was
strangely wooden-handed and clumsy at all that might be called
farm work —he did it lifelessly and listlessly, and never could
bring aught to an end. He was not unlike his dead half-brother,
Orm Erlendss6n, in many ways, his mother thought — was like
him, too, in looks. But Naakkve was strong and sound, lusty in the
dance and in all sports, a good marksman with the bow, and pass-
ably skilled, too, in the use of other weapons, a good rider and a
ski-runner of the best. Kristin spoke of this one day with Ulf Hal-
dorss6n, Naakkve’s foster-father. Ulf said:

“None has lost more through Erlend’s folly than this lad. Better
stuff than Naakkve for a knight and a great noble grows not in
Norway in these days.”

But his mother saw that Naakkve never thought of all he had
been bereft of by his father’s fault.


At this time there was again great unrest in Norway, and ru-.


mours flew northward over the parishes of the Dale, some likely
enough and some wholly unbelievable. The great lords south and
west in the realm and throughout the Uplands were so miscontent


761 Debtors


eas Se in ness ise ete re OE Debtors
with King Magnus’ rule — ’twas said they had openly threatened
to take to arms, to rouse the commons, and bring Sir Magnus
Eirikss6n to govern after their will and counsel, or else take for king
his mother’s sister’s son, the young Jon Haftorssén of Sudrheim
— his mother, the Lady Agnes, was daughter to King Haakon Haa-
legg, of blessed memory. Of Jon himself but little was heard, but
*twas said his brother, Sigurd, was the head and font of the whole
emprise, and Bjarne, Erling Vidkunssén’s young son, was of their
counsels — folk told how Sigurd had sworn, if Jon became king,
he should take one of Bjarne’s sisters to his queen, for the maidens
at Giske, too, were of the race of the old Norse kings. Sir Ivar
Ogmundssén, who before had been King Magnus’ stoutest stay,
*twas said had now gone over to the party of these young nobles,
and many others of the land’s richest and best-born men as well —
of Erling Vidkunss6n himself and the Bishop of Bjérgvin, folk
said that they were pushing behind.

Kristin hearkened but little to these rumours; bitterly she
thought: they were but small folk now, the matters of the realm
touched them not. Yet, in the autumn gone by, she had spoken
somewhat of them with Simon Andressoén, and she knew, too, that
he had talked of them with Erlend. But she had seen that Simon
was not fain to talk of these things —in part, maybe, because he
liked not that his brothers should mix themselves in such perilous
doings; and Gyrd at least, she knew, was led by the nose by his
wife’s kinsfolk. But he was fearful too that talk of suchlike things
might discomfort Erlend, since he was born to sit among the men
who met in counsel for Norway’s realm, and now mischance had
barred him out from the fellowship of his peers.

But Kristin knew that Erlend spoke of these things with his sons.
And one day she heard Naakkve say:

“But should these lords make good their right against King Mag-
nus, they could not be so base, father, for sure, as not to take up

our cause and force the King to mend the wrong he did you.”

Erlend laughed; but his son went on:

“You first showed these lords the way, and brought to men’s
minds that ’twas not the wont of Norway’s chiefs of old to sit still
and brook oppression by their kings. [t cost you your udal lands
and fiefs —the men who had leagued them with you came off
without a scratch — you alone paid for them all —”

“ Ay, then have they the better reason to forget me, I trow,”


PheGross 2 eet
said Erlend laughing. “ And Husaby hath the archbishopric got
in pledge. I trow the lords of the council will scarce pester King
Magnus, poor moneyless wretch, to redeem it—” :

“The King is your kinsman, and so is Sigurd Haftorss6n and
most of these men,” answered Naakkve vehemently. “ How, with-
out shame, can they forsake that man of all Norway’s nobles who
bore his shield with honour to the northern Marches, and purged
Finland and the Gandvik coast of the King’s foes and God’s —
caitiffs would they be —”

Erlend whistled.

“Son — one thing can I tell you. I know not how the Haftors-
sons’ emprise will fare, but I wager my neck they will not dare
show Sir Magnus a naked Norse sword. Talk and bargaining I
trow there will be, but not a bolt shot. And these gentry will never
put on harness in my cause, for they know me, and know well that
I am not so qualmish at sight of cold steel as be some others —

““_ Kinsmen, say you — ay, they are your third cousins, both
Magnus and the Haftorsséns. I remember them from the time I
served in King Haakon’s court — ’twas well for your kinswoman,
the Lady Agnes, that she was daughter of the King — else had she,
belike, been fain to go upon the wharves and gut fish, if some such
lady as your mother had not hired her to help in the byre out of
pious charity. More times than one have I dried these Haftorsséns
about the snout, when they were to be brought before their moth-
er’s father, and they came running into the hall as snotty-nosed as
they crept off their mother’s lap — and if I caught them a buffet,
in cousinly kindness, to teach them somewhat of manners, they
shrieked like stuck pigs. I hear it said these oafs of Sudrheim have
been made men of at last. But to look for a kinsman’s help from
that side — as well shear the sow for wool —”

Afterwards Kristin said to Erlend:

“ Naakkve is so young, dear my husband — deem you not ’tis
unwise to talk so freely with him on such matters? ”

“ And you are so mild of speech, dear my wife,” said Erlend, |
smiling, “ that I see well you would take me to task — When I was
of Naakkve’s age, I fared north to Vargéy the first time. Had Lady
Ingebj6rg been loyal and true to me,” he burst out hotly, “ then
had I sent her Naakkve and Gaute to serve her — yonder in Den-
mark ’tis like there had been advancement for two mettlesome
blades with warm blood in their veins — ”


763 Debtors


val thought not,” said Kristin, bitterly, “the time I bore you
me children, that our sons should seek their bread in a foreign .
and.”

“You know I thought not so either,” said Erlend. “But man
proposeth, and God disposeth —”


So Kristin said to herself, twas not alone that it hurt her heart
to mark that Erlend, and her sons, now they were growing up,
bore them as though their affairs were beyond a woman’s kenning.
She was afraid, too, of Erlend’s reckless tongue — never did he
call to mind that his sons were little more than children.

This, too, there was, that, young as the sons were — Nikulaus
was now seventeen winters old, Bjérgulf would be sixteen, and
Gaute fifteen at harvest-time — these three already had a way with
women that made their mother uneasy.

True it was, naught had befallen that she could point to. They
did not run after women-folk; they were never gross of tongue or
foul-mouthed, and liked it little when the serving-carls offered to
crack ribald jests or bring lewd tales to the manor. But Erlend, too,
in such matters had ever borne him right seemly and modestly —
she had seen him abashed at talk that made both her father and
Simon laugh heartily. But at such times she had felt, dimly, that
the others laughed as peasants laugh at tales of the devil’s dull-
wittedness — while learned men, who know better his wicked
wiles, care little for such jesting.

And Erlend, too, might have claimed to be guiltless of the sin of
running after women — only folk who knew not the man could
think him loose, in the way of luring women to him and leading
them astray of set purpose. She never denied to herself that Er-
lend had had his will with her without use of love-philtres, with-
out force or guile. And as for the two wedded women he had
sinned with, she was sure that twas not Erlend had been the
tempter. But, when light women met him half-way with bold and
luring laughter, she had seen that he grew curious as a young kid
—a drift of secret, heedless lightness would seem to breathe from
the whole man.

And, with dread, she deemed she saw the Erlendsséns were like
to their father in this —they ever forgot to think, before doing
aught, of the judgment of other folk — though afterward they took
to heart keenly what was said. And, when women met them with


The Cross 764


AVE EIT OES FS 50 ih Seg OS ee ee ee
smiles and oncoming, they grew not abashed or shy and sullen,
like most lads of their age — they smiled back, chatted, and bore
them as easily and freely as had they been to the King’s court and
learned a courtier’s ways. Kristin grew fearful lest they should be
drawn into trouble through sheer simplicity —to their mother,
rich housewives and their daughters, as well as poor serving-
women, seemed all too forthcoming in their bearing towards these
fair youths. — But they would grow hot with wrath, like other
young men, if afterward any rallied them about a woman. Frida
Styrkaarsdatter in especial did this often — she was a fool in grain,
old as she was, not many years younger than the mistress herself,
and she had had two bastard children — for the last she had even
been hard put to it to find a father. But Kristin had held a shielding
hand over the poor creature; because she had fostered Bjorgulf and
Skule with care and love, the mistress was long-suffering with the
woman — though it vexed her that the old creature should ever
prate to the boys of young maids.

Kristin thought now, ’twere best if she could get her sons
wedded at a young age. But she knew ’twould not be easy — the
men whose daughters might be equal matches for Naakkve and
Bjérgulf in birth and blood would deem that her sons were not
rich enough. And the King’s enmity, and the judgment theirfa-
ther had brought down upon himself, would stand in the way if
the lads should try to better their lot in the service of great lords.
With bitterness she thought of the times when Erlend and Erling
Vidkunsson had talked of a match ’twixt Nikulaus and one of the
High Steward’s daughters.

She knew, indeed, of one growing maid and another amongst
the dales that would be a fitting match — rich and of good kin-
dred, though their forbears, for the space of some lives back, had
held themselves without the service of the court, and stayed at
home in their own country. But she could not brook the thought
that she and Erlend might get no for an answer if they made suit
to these great landowners. Here Simon Darre might have been
the best of spokesmen — and now had Erlend bereft them of this
helper.

To the service of the Church she deemed none of her sons had
a bent — unless ’twere Gaute or Lavrans. But Lavrans was still so
young. And of all her sons Gaute was the only one whose help on
the farm was of some avail to her.


765 Debtors


Storm and snow had wrought havoc with the fences this year,
and the snow-fall in the days about spring Holy Cross Mass * had
_ hindered the work, so that the folk were hard driven to get
through in time. Therefore, one day, Kristin sent off Naakkve and
Bjérgulf to mend the fencing round a field that lay up nigh to the
highway.

In the afternoon their mother went up to see how it fared with
the lads at this unwonted work. Bjorgulf was working on the farm-
road fence — she stopped a while and spoke with him. Then she
went on northward. Soon she caught sight of Naakkve leaning
over the fence talking with a woman on horseback who had
stopped at the road’s edge close by the paling. He fondled the
horse, then he caught the girl by the ankle, and presently he
moved his hand a little upward, as though heedlessly.

The young maid saw the lady first; she reddened and said some-
what to Naakkve. He drew away his hand quickly, and looked
something dashed. The girl would have ridden on, but Kristin
called out a greeting; afterwards she spoke a little with the maid,
and asked after her kinswoman — the girl was sister’s daughter to
the mistress of Ulvsvoldene, and lately come a-visiting there. Kris-
tin made as though she had seen naught, and talked a little with
Naakkve of the fencing after the maid was gone.

Not long after, it chanced that Kristin was at Ulvsvoldene for
the space of two weeks; the woman there was in the straw, and,
after the child was born, lay gravely sick; Kristin was there as her
neighbour, and one who was deemed the most skilled leech-woman
in the parish. In this time Naakkve came often over with messages
and errands to his mother, and this girl, Eyvor Haakonsdatter,
found means always to meet him and talk with him. Kristin liked
this little — she had no liking for the maid, nor could she see that
Eyvor was fair, as she heard most men deemed. She was glad, the
day she learned that Eyvor was gone home again to Raumsdal.

Yet she deemed not that Naakkve had cared aught for Eyvor;
the more so when she heard Frida prating of the daughter of the
house at Loptsgaard, Aasta Audunsdatter, and teasing Naakkve
about her.

Kristin was in the brew-house one day, boiling a juniper brew,
and she heard Frida’s tongue busy again with this. Naakkve was
with Gaute and his father without in the back courtyard; they

* 3rd May.


The Cross 766


ERESOROSS n° i Sek ag eas CS ee ee
were at work on a boat they meant to have for the fishing on the
lake up in the fells —Erlend was a not unskilful boat-builder.
Naakkve waxed wroth, but now Gaute joined in the teasing —
Aasta would be a fitting match, he said —

“ Ask for her yourself, if you deem so,” said his brother, hotly.

“Nay, I will have none of her,” answered Gaute, “for I have
heard that red hair and fir woods thrive on barren ground — but
I wot well you have a leaning to red hair — ag

“ Ay, but that word holds not for women neither, my son,”
said Erlend, laughing. “ Red-haired wives are wont to be white and
soft of flesh — ”’

Frida laughed noisily, but Kristin grew angry; this seemed to
her unseemly talk before such young boys. She remembered, too,
that Sunniva Olavsdatter had had red hair, though her friends had
called it golden. Then Gaute said:

“Be glad that I said not: I durst not, for fear of sin. On Whit-
sunday watch-night you sat with Aasta in the tithe-barn all the
time we danced on the church-green—so sure you must like
her—/

Naakkve would have flown at his brother — but just then Kris-
tin came out. When Gaute was gone, the mother asked her other
son:

“What was this that Gaute said of you and Aasta Auduns-
datter? ” :

“Methinks, mother, that naught was said you did not hear,”
answered the boy — he reddened and frowned angrily,

Kristin said vexedly: ;

“Tis an ill thing that you young folks cannot keep a watch-
night but you must dance and frolic about between the services.
*T was not our use when I was a maid — ”

“You have said yourself, mother, that when you were young,
my grandfather would often sing for them, when folk danced
upon the church-green — ”

“Ay, but they were not such songs, and ’twas not such wild
dancing,” said his mother, “ and we young folks kept us in seemly
wise each by our parents— we went not off in pairs to sit in
barns —”’

Naakkve seemed ready to make a wrathful answer, when Kris-
tin chanced to look over at Erlend. He was smiling stealthily,
while he looked with one eye along the plank he was trimming


767 Debtors


with his axe. Angry and grieved, she went back into the brew-
house again.

— But she thought not a little on what she had heard. Aasta
Audunsdatter was none so bad a match —there was wealth at
Loptsgaard and three daughters only, but no son, and Ingebjorg,
Aasta’s mother, came of most worthy kindred.

That they at Jorundgaard should some day call Audun Tor-
bergss6n kinsman by marriage she had never thought. But he had
had a stroke in the winter, and folk deemed not that he would
live long — And the girl was well mannered and winsome in her
ways, and notable in the house, by what Kristin had heard. If
Naakkve truly liked the maid, ’twere not wise to set oneself
against this match. They must wait two years yet with the wed-
ding — so young as both Aasta and Naakkve were — but she would
gladly make Aasta welcome then as her son’s wife.


But one fair day, in the middle of the summer, Sira Solmund’s
sister came in to Kristin to borrow somewhat. The women were
standing outside before the storehouses saying farewell, when the
ptiest’s sister said: Nay, but Eyvor Haakonsdatter! Her father
had driven her from his house, for she was with child —so now
had she come back for shelter to Ulvsvoldene.

Naakkve had been an errand up in the storehouse loft — he
stopped short on the lowest step. When his mother caught sight of
his face, such a sickness came on her, she felt as her legs would
scarce bear her up. The boy was red to the roots of his hair as he
went past towards the dwelling-house.

But she saw soon from the other’s gossip that things must have
been so with Eyvor long ere she first came to the parish that
spring. My poor, harmless boy, thought Kristin with a lightened
sigh — he is shamed now because he had thought well of the girl.

A few nights later Kristin lay in her bed alone, for Erlend was
gone from home a-fishing. She knew not but that both Naakkve
and Gaute were with him. But she was waked by Naakkve’s touch-
ing her and whispering that he must speak with her. He crept up
and sat him down on the bed by the footboard:

“ Mother — I have been over and spoken with that poor woman,
Eyvor, this night —I knew that they lied about her —I was so
sure, I had gladly taken a red-hot iron in my hand to prove she
lied, yonder magpie from Romundgaard —”


The Oross 768


His mother lay still and waited. Naakkve strove to speak stead-
ily, but all the time his voice kept shifting up and down with the
hurry of his spirits:

“She was on her way to matins the day after Yule — she went
alone, and the road from their farm lies, a long stretch, through
forest. There she met two men — ’twas yet dark, she knows not
who they were; maybe outlawed robbers from the fells — At last
she could keep them off no longer, poor weak young thing. To ~
none durst she make her moan — when her mother and father saw
her mischance, they dragged her by her hair and drove her from
home with blows and curses. She wept so, mother, when she told
me all this, ’twould have melted the very stones in the hill-sides.”
Naakkve stopped speaking suddenly and drew a long breath.

Kristin spoke of how it seemed to her a sore mischance that these
villains had escaped. She hoped that God’s justice would overtake
them, and bring them to their due reward on the gallows-tree.

Thereupon Naakkve began to talk of Eyvor’s father, how rich
he was, and kin to one worthy family and another. The child
Eyvor would send away to be fostered in another parish. Gud-
mund Darre’s wife had had a bastard by a priest — and there sat
Sigrid Andresdatter at Kruke, a good and honoured woman —
A man must be both hard of heart and unjust to deem Eyvor an
outcast, for that, sorely against her will, it had been her lot to suf-
fer shameful mischance — she might well be fit, none the less, to
be wife to a man that held honour dear —

Kristin pitied the girl and cursed the ravishers—and, in her
heart, thanked and praised fortune that not for three years yet
would Naakkve be of age. Gently she prayed him to bethink him
that now must he walk most heedfully, not seek Eyvor in her
bower late of an evening, as he had done this night, nor show him-
self at Ulvsvoldene save when he had an errand to the folk of the
house, else he might, all unwittingly, bring it about that folk
should spread abroad yet uglier gossip of the luckless young child.
Ay, ‘twas well enough to say that they who doubted Eyvor’s
word, and believed not she had come to harm blamelessly would
find his arm no nerveless one — nevertheless, ’twould be an evil
thing for the poor girl if there were more talk —

Three weeks later, Eyvor’s father came and fetched his daugh-
ter home to her betrothal and wedding. "T'was a good farmer’s son
of her own parish that was the man; at first the parents on both


769 Debtors
sides had been against the match, because they were at odds about


some farm lands. In the last winter the men had made friends _


again, and the two young folk were to have been betrothed, but
then, suddenly, Eyvor would not — she had set her fancy on an-
other man. But, afterwards, she saw it might well be something
late to throw away her first lover. None the less she went to be
with her mother’s sister in Sil, deeming, belike, that here she would
find help to hide her trouble, for now she was set upon having
this new man. But when Hillebjorg at Ulvsvoldene saw how it was
with the girl, she sent her back to her parents. That her father had
flown in a fury and had beaten his daughter once and again, and
that she had fled hither once more, was true enough. But now had
_ he come to an accord with the first suitor — and now Eyvor must
put up with him, little as she might like it.

Kristin saw that Naakkve took this hardly. For many days he
went about scarce speaking a word, and his mother had such pity
of him she scarce dared look his way — for if he met his mother’s
eye, he turned so red and looked so abashed that it cut Kristin to
the heart.

When the serving-folk at Jorundgaard would have gossipped of
these doings, the mistress bade them, sharply, to hold their tongues
— she would not have that dirty matter or that wretched woman
named in her house. Frida marvelled greatly: had she not many
and many a time heard Kristin Lavransdatter judge mildly and
help with bounteous hands a maid who had fallen into such mis-
chance — Frida herself had twice found safe shelter in her mis-
tress’s pity. But in the little she said of Eyvor Haakonsdatter she
spoke as ill of her as any woman can of another.


Erlend laughed when she told him how sadly Naakkve had been
fooled — ’twas one evening when she sat out on the green spinning,
and her husband came and stretched himself on the grass at her
side.

“No great harm has been done, I trow,” said the father, “ rather
seems it to me that the boy has learned a man’s lesson at a cheap
rate: put not your trust in women — ‘e :

“Say you so? ” asked his wife; her voice shook with smothered
anger.

“ Ay —” Erlend smiled. “See, of you I believed, the time I met
you first, you were so gentle a maid, you could scarce find in your


The Cross 770


BL ee EE Sy NM Sk coe ae eel
heart to bite a slice of cheese — Yielding as a silk ribbon and mild
as any dove — but therein you fooled me finely, Kristin —”

“ How think you ’twould have gone with us all,” said she, “ had
I been so soft and gentle? ”

“Nay —” Erlend took her hands, so that she was fain to stop
her work; he smiled up at her, shining with gladness. Then he laid
his head in her lap. “ Nay, I knew not, my sweet one, how good
was the luck God gave me when he led you into my path—
Kristin! ”


But, because she must ever and at all times keep herself in check,
to hide her despair at Erlend’s eternal heedlessness, it would chance
at times that her temper took the upper hand when she must cor-
rect her sons: she grew heavy of hand and hot of speech. "Iwas
oftenest Ivar and Skule that bore the brunt.

They were at the worst age now, in their thirteenth year, and so
wild and self-willed that Kristin, at her wits’ ends, thought many
a time, was there any mother in Norway who had the rearing of
two such rufhans. Comely they were, like all her children, with
black, silky-soft ringletted hair, blue eyes beneath black brows,
and narrow, fine-cut faces. They were tall for their age beyond
the common, but narrow-shouldered still, with long, lean limbs —
their joints stood out like the knots of a corn-stalk. They were so
like that none outside their home knew them one from the other,
and throughout the parish folk named them the Jorundgaard dirks-
men — and ’twas not meant as a title of honour. Simon had first
given them this nickname in jest, for that Erlend had made them
each the gift of a dirk, and these small swords they never laid from
them, save when they were in church. Kristin liked it little that
they had got the dirks, and yet less that they ever went about with
axes, spears, or bows; she feared that these hot-headed boys might
bring some mischief on themselves with such-like things. But Er-
lend said, curtly, they were so old now ‘twas time they used them
to bear arms. :

She lived in one unending terror for these her twin sons. When
she knew not whither they were gone, the mother wrung her
hands in secret, and besought Mary Virgin and St. Olav to lead
them home again, alive and unscathed. They climbed the fell-sides
through rifts and up the face of headlong cliffs where none before
had gone; they robbed eagles’ nests, and came home with ugly,


atl Debtors


ener eee eee ee ee ee Ne Sw iy Se ebtors
yellow-eyed, hissing fledgelings within the bosoms of their coats;
they scrambled among the slate rocks along the Laagen, north-
ward in the gorge, where the river dashes from fall to fall; once
Ivar had been dragged by his stirrup and half killed — he was try-
ing to ride a half-broken young stallion that the boys had got a
saddle on, God only knows how. Errandless, for naught but pry-
ing’s sake, they had ventured into the Finn’s hut in the Toldstad
woods — from their father they had learned some words of the
Lapps’ tongue, and when they greeted the old Finn witch-wife
with these, she had feasted them on meat and drink, and they had
stuffed them full to bursting, and that on a fast-day. And Kristin
had ever held so strictly to it that when the grown folk fasted, the
children must content them with little food and such-like things
as they had no mind to — for to this had she been used by her par-
ents when she was little. This time, for once in a way, Erlend, too,
was stern with his sons, took and burnt the sweetmeats the Finn
wife had given them to take with them, whilst he strictly forbade
them ever again to go even to the edge of the forest where the
Finns were. But, none the less, it tickled him to hear of the boys’
adventure; and after, he would often tell Ivar and Skule tales of
his doings and travels in the north, and of what he had seen there
of these folks’ ways, and he talked to the boys in this ugly hea-
thenish speech of theirs.

For the rest, Erlend scarce ever chid his children, and turned it
aside in jest when Kristin bewailed the twins’ ways. At home on
the manor they did endless mischief, though they could be useful
too, when they must — unhandy, like Naakkve, they were not.
But time and again, when their mother had set them some work
and came to see how it fared, the tools would be lying there, and
the boys standing watching their father, while he showed them
how seamen made knots and suchlike —

Lavrans Bjérgulfsén had often been wont, when he made a cross
with tar over the byre door, or on suchlike places, to paint a little
with the brush round about — paint a ring outside or draw a stroke
over each cross-arm. One day the twins bethought themselves to
make a target of one of these old cross-marks. Kristin was beside
herself with despair and wrath at such Jewish doings, but Erlend
took the children’s part — they were so young, one could not look
that they should think on the holiness of the cross each time they
saw it tarred over a byre-door or on a cow’s back. Let the boys go


The Cross (Ce.


up to the cross on the church-green, kneel before it and kiss it, and


say five paternosters and fifteen aves — no need to drag Sira Sol-
mund to the manor for this. But this time Bjorgulf and Naakkve
stood by their mother; the priest was fetched, and he sprinkled
holy water on the wall and corrected the two young sinners most
sternly.

— They gave Kristin’s bulls and he-goats the heads of snakes to
eat, to send them horn-mad. They teased Munan because he
clung still to his mother’s skirts, and Gaute too — he was the one
they were oftenest at odds with — for the most part the Erlends-
sons held together in the goodliest brotherhood. But now and
again, when they got past bearing, Gaute would give them a drub-
bing. To chide them in words was like talking to a wall —and, if
their mother grew hot with them, they would stand, their bodies
stiff, their fists clenched, scowling at her with glittering eyes from
under wrinkled brows, red as fire with fury. Kristin thought on
what Gunnulf had told of Erlend —he had cast his knife at his
father, and lifted his hand against him more times than one while
he was yet a child. So she thrashed the twins, and thrashed hard,
for she thought with terror: what would come of these children
of hers if they were not tamed betimes.

Simon Darre was the only one who could do aught with these
two madcaps — they loved their uncle, and ever grew meek and
towardly when he talked to them good humouredly and quietly.
But, now that they saw him no more, their mother could not see
that they missed him. Sadly Kristin thought: the heart of a child
is fickle. ;

And secretly, in her heart, the mother knew that, in spite of all,
twas of these two sons she was well-nigh proudest. Could she but
break this ill-omened defiance and wildness, it seemed to her none
of the brothers promised a fairer manhood than these two. They
had good health and were strong and sound of body, were fear-
less, truthful, generous, kindly to all poor folk, and more times
than one had they shown a readiness and swiftness in counsel that
far outwent, she thought, what one could look for from such
young lads.

One evening in the hay harvest Kristin had been kept late in the
kitchen-house, when Munan came rushing in, shouting that the
old goat-shed was afire. There were no men at home or near by
— some were at the smithy hammering their scythes sharp; some


had gone north to the bridge, where the young folk were wont to


ee


US Debtors


CO —


gather on summer evenings. The mistress caught up a pair of
buckets and ran, calling to her serving-women to follow after.

The goat-shed was a little old house with a roof going right
down to the ground, and stood in the narrow way between the
court-yard and the farm-yard, against the middle of the main
stable wall and with other houses built close to it on either side.
Kristin ran into the hearth-room penthouse and caught up a broad-
axe and a fire-hook, but when she came round the corner of the
stable, she saw no fire, but only a thick cloud of smoke pouring
forth from a hole in the goat-shed roof. Ivar sat up on the roof-
ridge hacking down at the roof, Skule and Lavrans were within
the house tearing down burning flakes from the roofing, and
trampling and stamping out the fire. Now came running Erlend,
Ulf, and the men who had been at the smithy — Munan had run
on thither and given warning — and now the fire was soon put out.
But the worst mischance might well have befallen — the evening
was still and sultry, but with a puff of wind from south ever and
anon, and had the fire once been let blaze up in the goat-shed, most
like all the houses round about the north end of the yard, the
stables, the store-houses, and the dwelling-houses themselves, had
been swept away.

Ivar and Skule had been up on the stable roof —they had
trapped a hawk and had gone up to hang it from the gable cross
— when they smelt burning, and saw smoke coming from the roof
below them. Straightway they leaped down on the roof, and, with
the small axes they had in their hands, began to hack away the
smouldering turf, while they sent off Lavrans and Munan, who
were playing near by, the one for hooks and the other to their
mother. By good fortune the laths and rafters of the roof were too
rotten to burn freely; but ’twas clear this time the twins had saved
their mother’s manor, by setting to work straightway to tear down
the burning roof and wasting no time in running first for grown
folks’ help. ;

*T was not easy to understand how the fire had arisen, if ’twere
not in this wise, that Gaute, an hour before, had passed by that way
with embers for the smithy, and he owned that the fire-pan had
not been covered — so, belike, a spark had flown on to the tinder-
dry turf roof.

But of that less was said than of the twins’ and Lavrans’s readi-
ness — at the fire-watch that Ulf set, and wherein the whole house-
hold kept him company late into the night, while Kristin had strong


The Cross 74


henross 4 =. es EE eee eee
ale and mead borne out to them. All three boys had burns on hands
and feet — their foot-gear was so scorched it broke in bits. Young
Lavrans was but nine years old, so ‘twas hard for him to bear the
ain with patience for long, but at the first he was the proudest of
all, going about with bound-up hands and hearing all the manor-
folk praise him. ge

That night, when they had gone to rest, Erlend pressed his wife
in to him.

“Kristin mine, Kristin mine — be not so careful and troubled
about your children — see you not, dear one, what metal our sons
are made of? You bear you ever towards these two mettlesome
lads as though you looked that their path must lie ‘rwixt gallows
and block. Methinks now you should joy in your reward for all
you have borne of pangs and pains and toils, in those years you
went ever with a child beneath your belt and a child at your
breast and a child upon your arm — naught would you speak of
then but the little bratlings, and now, when they have grown to
wit and manhood, you go about amongst them as though you
were both deaf and dumb, scarce paying heed enough to answer
if they speak to you. God help me, ’twould seem as though you
loved them less, now you have not the cares of their childhood
to plague you, and our fair, well-grown sons are joy and a bless-
ing to you—”

Kristin did not trust herself to answer a word.

But she lay there and could not fall asleep. And towards morn-
ing she climbed over the sleeping man quietly, went on bare feet
over to the peep-hole, and opened it.

The sky was cloudy grey and the air cool — far to the south,
where the hills drew together and closed the Dale, a rain-shower
was sweeping over the uplands. The mistress stood a while lookin
out — "twas ever hot and close here in the new storehouse loft,
where they slept in summer. On the breath of dampness that was
in the air, the scent of hay was borne in to her, so strong and sweet.
A bird here and there, out in the summer night, twittered a little
in its sleep.

Kristin found her fire-steel and lit a stump of candle. She crept
over to where Ivar and Skule slept on their bench bed — let the
light shine upon them and felt their cheeks with the back of her
hand — sure enough they had a little fever. Softly she said an Ave
Maria, and made the sign of the cross over the two. Gallows and


"75 Debtors


ere ae ae Ae nwa lil Pay fC oy oa e. Su Debtors
block — that Erlend could make a jest of such things—he who
himself had been so near —

Lavrans moaned and murmured in his sleep. The mother stood
a little, bent over the two youngest, who had their couch on a
small bench cot behind the foot-board of their parents’ bed. Lav-
rans was hot and flushed, and tossed about, but did not wake when
she touched him.

Gaute lay with his milk-white arms behind his neck, in among
his long flaxen-yellow hair — the bed-clothes he had thrown clean
off him. Such hot blood had he, that he would ever sleep naked;
and he was shining white of skin — the sun-burnt hue on face,
neck, and hands stood out sharply. His mother drew the covering
up above his waist.

— Twas hard for her to be vexed at Gaute — he was so like her
father. She had said but little to him of the mischance he so nearly
had brought upon them all. So clear-headed and thoughtful was
this boy, she deemed full surely he would take it to heart of his
own accord and not forget it.

Naakkve and Bjorgulf had the second of the two beds in the loft.
For a long time the mother stood and let the light shine upon the
two sleeping youths. Black down already shadowed their child-
ishly soft red mouths. Naakkve’s foot stuck out from under the
coverlid — narrow, high of instep, deep-arched in the sole — and
not over clean. And yet it seemed to the mother ’twas not long
since this man’s foot was so little ’twas quite hidden in her closed
hand, and she had pressed it in under her breast and lifted it to
her mouth, gently biting each single little round toe-bud, for they
were as pink and sweet as the flower-bells on a bilberry bush.

— It might well be that she was not thankful enough for the por-
tion and the lot God had granted her. The memory of the time
before Naakvve was born, and of the visions of horror she had
writhed under — might shoot at times hot as fire through her
mind: she had been delivered,as when one awakes from dream
horrors and the crushing weight of nightmare to the blessed light
of day. — But other women had wakened to find the day’s misery
worse than the worst they had dreamed. Even now, when she
saw a cripple or a misshapen creature, Kristin would grow heart-
sick with the memory of her own fear for her unborn child. Then
would she humble herself with burning ardour before God and
Holy Olav; she would throw herself into good works; she would


The Oross 776


PRENCT OSS Asin 2 '> | A ORs i Re ee ae ee
strive to wring tears of true repentance from her eyes the while
she prayed. Yet ever did she feel within her heart this unyielding
discontent, and the warm glow faded, and the tears of penitence
sank back into her soul as water oozes away in sand. Then she
comforted herself: ’twas that she had not that gift of holiness she
had one time hoped was her heritage from her father. She was
hard and sinful, but like enough she was no worse than most folk,
and like most folk she must lay her account with suffering, in her
second home, the fervent fires that were needful to melt and
cleanse her heart.

Yet, between-whiles, she longed to be another. When she looked
upon the seven fair sons who sat at her board; when, on mass-day
mornings, she walked up towards the church, while the bells rang
out and called so sweetly to gladness and God’s peace, and saw the
flock of tall, well-clad young lads, her sons, go up the slope before
her. She knew of no other woman who had borne so many chil-
dren and never had to know what ’twas to lose one — and all were
fair and healthful, without blemish in body or mind — Bjorgulf
alone was something near-sighted. She longed to be able to forget
her cares altogether, to grow gentle and thankful, to love God
and fear him, as her father had done —she remembered her fa-
ther had said that he who with contrite heart minds him of
his sins, and bows him before the Lord’s cross, never needs to bend
his neck beneath this world’s mischance or wrong.

Kristin blew out the light, snuffed the wick, and put the stump
in its place up under the topmost wall-log. She went to the peep-
hole again — already ’twas light as day without, but grey and
dead — upon the lower house-roofs that she looked over, the scant,
sun-burnt grass shook gently in a breath of wind; a little whisper-
ing sound ran through the leaves of the birch trees that showed
over against her above the hall-house roof.

She looked at her hands, clasping the peep-hole frame. They
were rough and toil-worn, her arms right up to the elbows were
brown, and the muscles swollen, hard as wood. While she was still
young, the children had sucked blood and milk from her till all
trace of a maiden’s smooth, fresh roundness had been worn from
her body. Now each day’s toil took away something of what was
left of the comeliness that had marked her out as daughter and
wife and mother of men of noble blood — the narrow white hands;
the soft fair-skinned arms; the clear and tender hue of face that
she had shielded from the sun so heedfully with a kerchief, and


Yop ne el


777 ‘Debtors


tended with cunningly brewed washes. Long’ ere now she had
grown careless whether the sun beat straight upon her sweat-
stained face and burnt it brown as any poor peasant wife’s.
‘Her hair was all that was left to her of her maiden beauty. "Iwas

thick and brown as ever, seldom though she found time to wash
and tend it. The heavy, tangled plait that hung down her back
had not been undone these three days.

Kristin flung it forward over her shoulder, unplaited the hair,
and shook it out —it still wrapped her about like a cloak and
reached below her knee. She took a comb from out her case, and,
shivering a little now and again, as she sat there in her bare shift
beneath the little window that stood open to the morning chill,
she combed out the tangled masses Natit

When she had smoothed her hair and plaited it again in a firm
and heavy rope, ’twas as though she felt a little better. Then she
lifted Munan, sound asleep, carefully in her arms, laid him down
next the wall in the great bed, and herself slipped between him
and the sleeping man. She took her youngest into her arms, laid
his head to rest against her shoulder, and then she fell asleep —


She overslept next morning; when she awoke, Erlend and the
lads were up. “I trow verily you suck your mother still, when
no one sees,” said Erlend, when he saw that Munan lay by his
mother. Angered at this, the boy ran out and crept over the head-
piece of one of the beams which bore the balcony —he would
fain show his manhood. “ Jump! ” shouted Naakkve from the
courtyard below; he caught his little brother in his arms, turned
him upside down and flung him to Bjérgulf —his two grown
brothers tumbled him about till he laughed and screamed.

But next day, when Munan stood weeping because a bow-string
had caught his fingers in its rebound, the twins took and wrapped
him up in a coverlid, bore him thus up to his mother’s bed, and
stuffed into his mouth a lump of bread so huge the boy was well-
nigh choked.


2


Ervenv’s house-priest at Husaby had taught the three eldest sons
their books. They were not over-diligent scholars, but they were
apt to learn, all three, and their mother, who herself had been


LW" Cross soto 9 Aon TE ee
brought up so learnedly, watched over them, so that they learned
not so very little.
And the year Bjérgulf and Nikulaus were at Tautra cloister
with Sira Filiv, they had sucked —so said the priest —at the
breasts of Lady Knowledge with fiery zeal. The teacher there was
an aged monk who, busy as a bee, had gathered learning his whole
life iong from all the books he could come by, Latin or Norse.
Sira Eiliv was himself a lover of wisdom, but, in the years at Hus-
aby, he had had little chance to follow his bent towards book-lore.
For him the fellowship with Lector Aslak was like ster-pasture
to starved cattle. And the two young boys, who, among the
monks, clung to their home-priest, followed, open-mouthed, the
two men’s learned talk. And brother Aslak and Sira Eiliv found
delight in feeding the two young minds with the most delicious
honey from the cloister’s bookshelves, whereto brother Aslak
himself had added many copies and excerpts from the choicest
books. Soon the boys became so skilled that the monk had rarely
need to speak to them in the Norse tongue, and, when their par-
ents came to fetch them, they both could answer the priest in
Latin, glibly and without many slips. i
This learning the brothers had kept up since. There were many
books at Jorundgaard — Lavrans had owned five; of these, ’twas
true, two had gone to Ramborg at the parting of the estate, but
she had never had a mind to learn to read, and Simon was not so
skilled in letters that he cared to read for pleasure’s sake, though
he could both make out a letter and print one himself well enough.
Therefore he had prayed Kristin to keep the books until his chil-
dren grew bigger. Three books, which had belonged to his par-
ents, Erlend gave to Kristin some little time after they were wed,
and yet another book she had got in gift from Gunnulf Nikulaus-
sén; he himself had had the matter of it brought together and
written down for his brother’s wife out of books on Holy Olav
and his miracles, some other sagas of the saints, and the writing
the Franciscans in Oslo had sent to the Pope concerning brother
Edvin Rikardssén, praying that he might be canonized. And, last
of all, Naakkve had got a prayer-book of Sira Eiliv when they
parted. So Naakkve read much to his brother — he read easily and
well, with somewhat of a singing voice, just as brother Aslak had
taught him; but he liked best the Latin books — his own prayer-
book and one that had been Lavrans Bjorgulfs6n’s. Yet most of


779 Debtors


all he prized a great book, of a passing fair script, that had come
down an heirloom in his kin from their renowned forefather,
Bishop Nikulaus Arness6n himself.

Kristin would fain have got some learning for her younger
sons, too, as was but fitting for men of their birth. But ’twas not
easy to see how this could be: Sira Eirik was all too old, and Sira
Solmund could but read from the books he used at mass; and many
things in what he read he understood not well himself. Lavrans
would now and again of an evening find pleasure in sitting by
Naakkve and letting his brother teach him the letters on the wax
tablet — but the other three had no mind at all to win such knowl-
edge. One day Kristin took a Norse book and bade Gaute see if
he remembered aught of what he had learned in his childhood
of Sira Eiliv; but Gaute could not contrive to spell out three words,
and when he came upon the first sign standing for several letters,
he shut the book up, laughing, and said he liked not to play that
game.

Now, ’twas for this reason that Sira Solmund, one evening in
the late summer, came and prayed Nikulaus to come home with
him. An outland knight, who was come from the Olav’s Mass at
Nidaros, had borrowed a house at Romundgaard, but neither he
nor his esquires and servants had the Norse tongue; the guide who
had brought them hither understood but a word or two of their
prate; Sira Eirik lay sick —could not Naakkve come and speak
with the knight in Latin?

Naakkve seemed nowise ill pleased to be sent for thus to inter-
pret, but he made as though ’twas nothing, and went with the
priest. He came home very late in the night, in high feather and
not a little drunken — ’twas wine he had been given; the stranger
knight had store of it with him, and had set it flowing, for the
priest and the deacon and Naakkve too, something too freely. He
was named somewhat like Sir Allan or Allart of Bekelar; he was
from Flanders, and was on pilgrimage to the holy places round
about the north countries. He was friendly beyond measure, the
talking had gone smoothly. — And then Naakkve brought forth
his message. The knight was bound hence to Oslo, and thereafter
to places of pilgrimage in Denmark and Germany, and he was bent
on having Nikulaus ride with him and be his interpreter, at least
while yet he was here in Norway. And besides, he had dropped
a hint that if the young man would follow him out into the world,


he Cross 780
Sir Allart was the man to make his fortune — it seemed as though,
in the land he came from, golden spurs and neck-chains, heavy
money-purses and goodly weapons did but lie waiting for such a
man as young Nikulaus Erlendssén to come and pick them up.
Naakkve had answered that he was yet under age, and must have
his father’s leave — but Sir Allart had pressed a gift upon him none
the less; ’twould in no wise bind him, he had said plainly —a half-
length, plum-coloured silken jerkin with silver bells on the sleeve-
flaps.

Brlend listened to him, all but silent, with a strangely high-
wrought look. When Naakkve was done speaking, he sent Gaute
for the casket with his writing-gear, and straightway set about
inditing a letter in Latin — Bjorgulf had to help him, for Naakkve
was in no case to be of much use, and his father sent him to bed.
In the letter twas written that Erlend bade the knight to his home
next day after prime, that they might talk of Sir Allart’s proffer
to take the well-born young man Nikulaus Erlendssén into his
service as his esquire. He begged the knight to forgive that he
sent back the proffered gift, with the prayer that Sir Allart would
have it in his keeping until Nikulaus, with his father’s allowance,
had taken oath in the service of the stranger, in accordance with
the use prevailing among the knighthood of all lands.

Erlend dropped a little wax at the bottom of the letter and
pressed his small seal — that on his ring — lightly down on it. Then,
forthwith, he sent a serving-man to Romundgaard with the letter
and the silken jerkin.

“ Husband — surely you cannot think to send your young son
out into foreign lands with an unknown man and an outlander,”
said Kristin, trembling.

“We must see —” Erlend smiled so strangely. ‘“‘— But I deem
not that ’tis like to be,” said he, when he saw her disquietude; he
smiled something more broadly, and stroked her cheek.

At Erlend’s bidding, Kristin had strewn the floor of the upper
hall with juniper and flowers, spread the best cushions on the
benches, and set the board with a linen cloth, and good meat in
trenchers of fine wood, and drink in the rare, silver-mounted
drinking-horns that the manor had in heritage from Lavrans. Er-
lend had shaven himself with care, curled his hair, and clad himself
in a black, richly broidered, long coat of foreign cloth. He went
to the gate of the manor to meet the guest, and when they came


a


781 Debtors


across the court-yard together, Kristin could not but deem her
husband looked far more like one of those knights of Valland of
whom the sagas tell, than did the fat, fair stranger in gay and
motley garments of sarsenet and velvet. She stood upon the bal-
cony of the upper hall, bravely decked and adorned with a silken
coif; the Fleming kissed her hand when she bade him “ Bien venu,”
and more words passed not between her and him in the hours he
was with them. She did not understand aught of the men’s par-
leyings; neither did Sira Solmund, who was with his guest. But
the priest said to the mistress that hereby he had surely made
Nikulaus’ fortune. She answered neither yea nor nay.”

Erlend had a little French, and spoke glibly such German as
hireling soldiers use, and the talk changed betwixt him and the
stranger knight went smoothly and in courtly wise. But Kristin
marked that the Fleming seemed not over well pleased as it went
on, although this he strove to hide. His sons Erlend had bidden
wait over in the new store-house loft, till he sent them word to
come up hither — but no message was sent for them.

Erlend and the mistress went with the knight and the priest
to the gate. When the guests were lost to_sight among the fields
Erlend turned to Kristin and said, with a smile that she mis,
liked:

“ With yonder fellow would I not send Naakkve from home as
far as to Breiden even —”

Ulf Haldorssén came up to them. He and Erlend spoke some-
what that Kristin could not hear, but Ulf swore fiercely and spat.
Erlend laughed and patted the man’s shoulder:

“ Ay, had I been such a stay-at-home as the good farmers here
— but I have seen so much, I promise you ’tis not I will sell my fair
young falcons from out my hands and into the devil’s — Sira Sol-
mund had not understood aught, the holy calf’s-head —”

Kristin stood with hanging arms; the colour came and went in
her face. Horror and shame took hold on her, so that she felt sick;
her legs seemed to fail her. Sure enough, she had known that such
things were — as of somewhat immeasurably far off — but that this
unnamable thing dared thrust itself forward right to her very
threshold — ’I'was as the last billow that must needs overset her
storm-tossed, over-laden boat. Holy Mary, must she go in dread
of such things too for her sons — ?

Erlend said, with the same ill-favoured smile:


The Cross 782

“TY thought my own thoughts, yester-eve already — Sir Allart
seemed to me something too kurteis, by what Naakkve told. I
wot well ’tis no knightly use anywhere in the world to greet a
lad one would take in service with a kiss on the mouth, nor to give
him costly gifts ere ever he has made proof of his worth —”

Trembling from head to foot, Kristin said:

“Why bade you me strew my floor with roses and spread my
board with linen cloths for such a—? ” She spoke the worst of
words. *

Erlend knit his brows. He had picked up a stone — keeping an
eye on Munan’s red cat, which was stealing flat on its belly,
through the long grass under the house wall, towards the chickens
by the stable door. Whiz — he flung the stone; the cat was round
the corner in a flash, and the bevy of hens flounced hither and
thither. He turned to his wife:

“_ Methought I might as well see the man; had he been a trust-
worthy fellow, then — and to see him I must needs show him cour-
tesy —I am not Sir Allart’s confessor. And you heard, belike, he
is bound for Oslo.” Erlend laughed again. “ Now, like enough,
some of my true friends and dear whilom kinsmen may hear tell
that we sit not here at Jérundgaard either, lousing our rags and
eating herring and oat-meal bannock —”


Bjorgulf had the headache and lay abed when Kristin came up
into the loft at supper-time, and Naakkve said somewhat of not
going over to the hall to supper.

“Methinks you are dull this evening, son,” said his mother
to him.

“Nay, how can you think so, mother? ” — Naakkve smiled
scornfully. “That I seem to be a bigger fool than other men, and
"tis easier to throw dust in my eyes, is naught to mope for, sure —”

“Take comfort,” said his father, when they sat at the board,
and Naakkve was still more silent than his wont. “ You will come
out into the world yet to try your fortune —”

“Tt depends, father,” answered Naakkve, low, as if he meant
Erlend alone to hear, “ on whether Bj6rgulf can bear me com-
pany.” Then he laughed quietly. “ But say to Ivar and Skule what
you have said to me —’tis their one longing, I trow, to grow up
and be of an age to fare forth —”

Kristin stood up, and drew on a hooded cloak. She thought to


783 Debtors


eee een eter cree, Senne HOON Mar ey tet - ee Debiors
go north to the old beggar-man in Ingebjérg’s cottage, she told
them. The twins proffered to go along and carry the sack for her
but she would liefer go alone. ;


The evenings were somewhat dark already, and north of the
church the road ran through woods and under the shadow of
Hammer-hill. Here, cold gusts ever blew from out the gorge
and the river’s roar seemed to bring with it a breath of damp.
Swarms of great white moths hovered and flickered under the
trees — sometimes they swept right against the woman; it seemed
as, in the dusk, the palely shining linen about her head and breast
lured them. She beat at them with her hands as she hastened up-
ward, slipping on the smooth pine-needle carpet and stumbling
on the writhen roots that wound across the path she followed.

— There was a dream that had haunted Kristin for many a year.
The first time she had dreamed it was the night before Gaute was
born, but even now it would chance that she waked all a-sweat,
with her heart hammering as if ’twould beat itself in sunder in her
breast, and knew that she had dreamed the selfsame dream.

She saw a flowery lawn —a steep hill-side, deep in pine forest
that hemmed in the greensward on three sides, thick and murky;
at the foot of the slope a little tarn mirrored the dark woods and
the green, spangled clearing. The sun was behind the trees — from
the very top of the hill-side the last golden light of evening sifted
in long rays through the firs, and in the depths of the tarn shining
sunset clouds swam amidst the water-lily leaves.

In the midst of the slope, standing deep in the scree of cam-
pions and buttercups and foamy clouds of the green-white an-
gelica, she saw her child. Naakkve it must have been, the first
time she dreamed it — she had but the two then, and Bjorgulf yet
lay in his cradle. Afterwards she never knew surely which of her
children it might be —the little round sunburnt face under the
round-cropped yellow-brown hair seemed to her now like one,
now like another, but ever the child was two to three years old,
and clad in just such a little dark-yeilow coat as she was used to
sew for her little boys’ everyday wear — of homespun wool, dyed
with litmus and edged with red binding.

She herself, it seemed to her at times, was on the farther side ot
the tarn. Or she was not at the place at all, but yet she saw al}


that befell —


Alees nos. 3k A ee

She saw her little son move hither and thither, and turn his face
as he plucked the flowers. And a dull fear pressed heavy on her
heart, a foreboding of an evil thing to come; yet first there came
ever with this dream a mighty aching sweetness, as she gazed at
the fair child there in the meadow.

Then she grows ware that from out the dark up in the forest
fringe there parts itself a shaggy, living bulk. It moves without a
sound; two tiny wicked eyes glare out. Right out on to the upper
meadow comes the bear, stands and sways its head and shoulders,
sniffing downwards. Then it springs. Kristin had never seen a liv-
ing bear, but she knows they spring not thus; this is no right bear.
This moves like a cat — now it turns grey —like a grey, shaggy
giant-cat it leaps, with long lithe bounds, down the grassy slope.

The mother watches with the anguish of death upon her — and
she cannot come where the little one is to save him; she cannot
warn him with a sound. Then the child grows ware that something
is there; it turns half round and looks over its shoulder. With a
dreadful, little low cry of fear it tries to ran down the slope, lift-
ing its legs, as little children do, high in the long grass, and the
mother hears clearly the little sounds of the sappy stalks breaking
as the child pushes its way through the tangled growth of flow-
ers. Then it stumbles on something in the grass, falls headlong,
and next moment the monster is on top of it, with arched back
and head thrust deep between its fore-paws. Then she wakes —

— And each time she lay awake for hours before it availed aught
to try to calm herself — by thinking ’twas but a dream! Her small-
est child, that lay betwixt her and the wall, she would draw close
in to her — would think of how, had it been real, she might have
done this or that — frightened the monster with shrieks or with
a staff — and at her belt there hung ever the long keen knife —

No sooner had she talked herself into quietness in this wise, than
*twould break over her anew, the unbearable agony, as, in her
dream, she stood strengthless, and saw her little one’s poor, vain
efforts to flee from the deadly swift and strong and cruel beast.
She felt as though the blood boiled and surged within her, as
though her body swelled and her heart must burst, since it could
not contain such a wave of blood —


The cottage called Ingebjérg’s cot lay up on Hammer-hill, a
little below the highway, which here pressed up the height. It had


we em


785 Debtors


—— nnn nn
stood empty many a year, and the ground was leased to a man who
had got leave to clear a place and build close by. An old beggar-
man, left behind from a gang of mumpers, had now got leave to
creep in there. When she had heard of it, Kristin had sent up meat
and clothes and healing simples, but she herself had till now had
_ no time to go thither.

"Twould soon be all over with the poor man, she saw. She gave
her sack to the beggar-woman who had stayed behind with him,
did the little she now could to ease him, and, when she learned that
they had sent for the priest, she washed his face, hands, and feet,
that they might be clean, and ready for his last anointing.

”*T was thick with smoke in the little hovel, and there was a hor-
ribly sickly, foul stench. When two of the settler’s women-folk
came in, Kristin prayed them send to Jérundgaard for all they
might need, then said farewell and went. A strange, sick fear of
meeting the priest with the Lord’s body had come upon her, and
she turned aside into the first by-path she came to.

That ’twas naught but a cattle-path she soon saw; she found her-
self plunged in trackless wilderness. Fallen trees with their high,
tangled masses of roots were fearsome to look on; she must creep
over them, when she could not find a way round. Flakes of moss
slipped from under her feet when she had to scramble down
amongst great stones. Cobwebs clung to her face, and branches
struck her and took hold on her clothes. When she must pass
over a trickling beck, or came to a low swampy opening in the
forest, twas nigh impossible to find a place where she could slip
through the thick, wet scrub of leafy bushes. And the loathly
white moths were everywhere, thick under the trees in the dark,
swarming up in great clouds from off the heather tufts where she
trod.

But at length she came out on the low hills down towards the
Laagen. Here the fir wood was scant and sparse, for here the trees
must send their roots twisting far over the barren rock, and the
forest floor was little else but dry, grey-white reindeer-moss that
crackled beneath her feet — amid it stray tufts of heather stood
out black. The smell of the pine-needles was hotter and dryer
and sharper than higher up —hereabout the forest ever showed
scorched and yellow needles from right early in the spring. The
white moths still kept after her —

The thunder of the river drew her downward. She went right


The Cross 786 :
out on the edge and looked down. Deep down below the water
shimmered white, where it boiled, thundering, over the slaty rocks
from pool to pool. wits

The changeless roar of the falls went quivering through her
overwrought body and soul. It minded and minded her of some-
what — of a time endlessly long since — even then she had known °
that she could not bear the lot she had chosen for herself. She had
laid open her shielded, tender girlhood’s life to ravaging, fleshly
love — in dread, in dread, in dread had she lived ever since, a bonds-
woman from the first hour of motherhood. To the world she had
given herself up in her youth, and the more she struggled and flut-
tered in the world’s snare, the more straitly she found herself
bound and prisoned by the world. Her sons she strove to guard,
with vainly flapping wings tied down by worldly cares. Her dread,
her unspeakable weakness, she had striven to hide from all men,
had gone forward with a straight back and a calm face, held her
peace, and fought to safeguard her children’s welfare in every
wise she could —

But ever with that hidden, breathless fear—if they fare ill,
*twere more than I can bear. And the deeps of her heart made
moan at the memory of her father and mother. Even as they had
walked, laden with fear and care for their children, day after day
forward unto death, they had had strength to bear their burden;
and ’twas not that they loved their children less, but that they
loved them with a better love — y

And was she now to see her strife end thus? — Had she but
reared a brood of restless eyases, who lay in her nest impatiently
waiting the hour when their wings would bear them out over the
farthest blue fells — ? And their father clapped his hands together
and laughed — fly, fly, my young birds —

Bloody fibres from her heart’s roots would they drag with them
when they took flight, and they would know naught of it. And
she would be left behind to sit alone; and all the heart-strings
which once had bound her to this old home of hers she herself had


torn asunder long ago — Surely ’twould be such a life as i: ne Losi
life nor death. i
She turned, and half ran, with stumbling steps, up over the p.,
sere carpet of reindeer-moss, her cloak gathered tightly about {:~
s


[87 Debtors


for twas so uncanny when it caught in the bushes. At last she came
out upon the small hay-fields a little north of the gild-shelter and
the church. As she went slantwise across the field she was ware of
someone standing in the road. He called: “Is it you, Kristin? ” —
she knew ’twas her husband.

“You were long away,” said Erlend. “Tis deep night already,
Kristin. I began to grow afraid.”

“Were you afraid for me? ” Her voice came from her harder
and haughtier than she would have had it.

“Not so much afraid either. But it came to my mind that I had
best come and meet you.”

They scarce spoke a word as they went southward. All was still
when they came into the courtyard. Some of the horses they had
at home shambled along under the house walls, grazing, but all the
folk were abed.

Erlend went straight to the storehouse loft, but Kristin turned
her steps to the kitchen-house. “I must look for somewhat,” she
answered to her husband’s question.

He stood hanging over the balcony waiting for his wife — and
then he saw her come out from the kitchen-house with a lighted
pine-root torch in her hand, and go over to the hearth-room house.
‘The man waited a while — then he ran down and went in after her,

She had lit a candle and set it on the board. Erlend felt a strange
chill of fear go through him as he saw her standing there by the
lone taper in the empty house — there was naught in the room but
the fixed furnishings, and in the candlelight the worn wood glis-
tened, stripped and bare. The hearth was cold and clean swept,
save for the pine-root brand, which lay there where it had been
thrown, yet glowing. They were not wont to use this room, Er-
lend and Kristin; it might well be half a year since fire had been
kindled there. The air was strangely close; the many blended,
living odours left by man’s abidings, his comings and goings, were
lacking, and smoke-vent and door had not been opened in all that
‘ine — °5 the place smelt of wool and hides; some rolled-up skins
aid 2s, which Kristin had taken out from the wares in the

ce, v re piled up in the empty bed that had been Lavrans’ and

onfria s.
WE wm on the top of the board lay a many small skeins — sewing
‘sd and yarn for mending with, both linen and wool, which


The Cross 788


them and setting them in order.

Erlend sat him down in the high-seat at the board end. The room
seemed strangely wide and empty about the slender man, as it
gaped there, stripped of cushions and hangings. The two warriors
of St. Olav with cross-marked helms and shields, that Lavrans had
carven for high-seat posts, scowled, grim and moody, out from
under Erlend’s narrow brown hands. No man could carve out leaf-
age and beasts fairlier than Lavrans, but with men’s semblances he
had never been over happy.

For long the two kept so still that not a sound was to be heard,
save the dull thuds on the sward without, where the horses wan-
dered in the summer night.

“ Are you not for bed soon, Kristin? ” he asked, at length.

“ Are not you? ”

“J thought to wait for you,” said the man.

“T have no mind to go up yet —I cannot sleep —”

“What is’t then that lies so heavy on your mind, Kristin, that
you deem you will not sleep? ” he asked after a little.

Kristin drew her upright. She stood with a skein of heather-
green wool in her hands; she pulled at it and twisted it between
her fingers. “ What was it you spoke with Naakkve to-day —”
She swallowed once or twice, she was so dry in the throat. “ Some
plan —’twould not do for him he seemed to think — but you talked
of how Ivar and Skule —”

“Oh — that! ” Erlend smiled a little. “I but said to the lad—J
have a kinsman by marriage, too, now that I bethink me. —
Though Gerlak, I trow, will scarce be so ready to kiss my hands
and take from me cloak and sword as before he was. But he has
ships on the sea — and rich kinsmen, both at Bremen and at Lynn.
And sure the man must understand that it behoves him to help his
wife’s brothers — J spared not my goods and gear when I was a
rich man and gave my daughter to Gerlak Tiedekenssén to wife.”

Kristin said naught. At last Erlend said, somewhat hotly:

“ Jesus, Kristin, stand not so, staring as you were made of
stone —”

“ Little thought I, the time we first came together, that our chil-
dren should need to wander the world around, begging their bread
in strangers’ houses — ”


“Nay, devil fetch me if I meant that they should beg! But


789 Debtors


ee eee eee te Oe Or ey eb bors
should they have, all seven of them, to wring their bread from
your farms here, ’twill be but peasant’s fare, my Kristin —and I
trow my sons are little fit for that. Bully-boys they seem like to be,
Ivar and Skule — and out in the world is there both wheaten bread
and cake for the man who will carve out his meat with his sword.”

“ Hirelings and vassals would you have your sons to be —? ”

“Hire I took myself, in the days when I was young and fol-
lowed Count Jacob. God be gracious to him, say I—I learned
somewhat then that a man gets not the knowledge of at home in
this land of ours — here, either he sits peacocking in his high-seat
with silver belt about his belly, swilling himself full with ale, or
he walks behind his plough smelling to the rumps of his jades.
"Twas a hearty life I lived in the Count’s service —I say it, even
though I had got that block fast to my leg while yet I was of
Naakkve’s age. — At least I had some joy of my youth —”

“Be still! ” Kristin’s eyes seemed to grow black. “‘ Would you
not deem it the deadliest harm if your sons were ensnared in such
sin and mischance —? ”

“Ay, God defend them from the like of that — but ’twere not
needful either that they should copy all their father’s follies. A
man can, sure, take service with a noble, Kristin, without such
hangers-on to clog him —”

“““ He who draws the sword shall perish by the sword,’ so stands
it written, Erlend! ”

“Ay, I have heard it, my dear one. Yet did the most of both
your forefathers and mine make a good and Christian end in their
beds, with the last anointing and all ghostly comfort. You need
but call to mind your own father — he had shown in his youth that
he was a man that could wield the sword —”

“Twas in war, Erlend, at the bidding of the King they had
gone to help to guard our homes and hearths, that my father and
the others took up arms. Yet father himself said twas not God’s
will with us that we should bear arms — christened, Christian men
— one against the other —”

“ Nay, that know I. But the world is what it is, since ever Adam
and Eve ate of the tree — and that was fore my time; ’tis not my
‘blame that we are born with sin within us —”

“Shameful is your talk —! ”

Erlend broke in, vehemently:

“ Kristin — you know it well — never was I slow to repent and


make amends for my sins as well as might be. No godly man am
I, ’tis true. I saw too much when I was child and youth — My fa-
ther was such a dear friend of the great lords of the chapter — they
came and went in his house like grey swine, Lord Eiliv, when he
was priest, and Sir Sigvat Lande and all their following; and little
else came with them but wrangling and jars —hard-hearted and
unmerciful they showed them to their own archbishop — no more
holy and peace-loving than so were they, they who each day
held in their hands the holiest of holy things and lifted God Him-
self aloft in the bread and wine —”

“°Tis not for us to judge the priests — father ever said ’twas
our duty to bow down before their priesthood and obey them,
but that their natural man lies under the judgment of Almighty
God alone —”

“ A—ay.” Erlend lingered a little on the word. “So I know he
said, and you have said it too, ere now. I wot well you are more
godly in such-like things than I can ever be — yet, Kristin, ’tis hard
for me to see how it should be a right reading of God’s word to
go on, as your way is, ever storing up wrath and never forgetting.
A long memory he too had, Lavrans—oh, no! I say naught of
your father but that he was pious and nobly good, and that are
you too, I wot — but often when you speak so soft and sweet, as
your mouth were filled with honey, I fear me you are thinking
most upon old wrongs, and God may judge whether your heart
is full as pious as your mouth — ”

Of a sudden she dropped down, lay over the board with her face
hidden on her arms, and wept aloud. Erlend sprang up — she lay
weeping, with hoarse, racking sobs that shook her frame. Erlend
laid his arm on her shoulders.

“ Kristin, what is it— ? What is’t? ” he said again, sitting down
on the bench by her and trying to lift her head. “ Kristin — nay,
weep not so — methinks you have lost your wits —”

“Tam frighted! ” She sat up, clenched her hands in her lap. “I
am so frighted; Mary, gentle lady mine, help us all—I am so
frighted — what will become of all my sons — ? ”

“ Ay, Kristin mine — but you must use you to the thought —
you cannot hide them longer beneath your skirts — soon will the
be grown men, all our sons. And you are like the bitch still —” He
sat with one leg over the other, his hands folded over his knee,
looking down somewhat wearily at his wife — “ you snap blindly


Penner errrerten ee eae hile aa ae eh Lo Webtors
both at friend and foe, when ’tis aught that touches your children.”

She got up sharply, and stood a moment dumb, wringing her
hands. Then she began to walk swiftly up and down the room. She
said naught, and Erlend sat silent, looking at her.

“Skule —” She stopped before the man. “ A luckless name you
gave your son. But you would have it — you willed that the duke
should live again in the child —”

“Tis a good name enough, Kristin. Luckless — there is ill luck
of many kinds. Well I remembered, when I named my son after
my father’s mother’s father, that fortune betrayed him, but, none
the less, king he was, with better right than the comb-maker’s
seed * —”

“You were proud enough, you and Munan Baardsson, that you
were of King Haakon Haalegg’s near kindred —” :

“Ay, for you know that my father’s aunt, Margaret Skules-
datter, brought kingly blood into Sverre’s stock —”

For a long time man and wife stood and gazed into each other’s
eyes.

Me Ay, I know what you are thinking on, my fair lady wife.”
Erlend went and sat him down again in the high-seat. With his
hands resting on the two warrior-heads he leaned forward a little;
he smiled a cold and galling smile. “ But you see, Kristin mine —
me it has not broken, that I am become now a poor and friendless
man. "Tis well you should know it — I am not afraid that with me
my father’s line has fallen for all time from might and honour. I
too was betrayed by fortune — but had my plan but sped, then had
I and my sons now sat in the seats on the King’s right hand, that
we, his near kinsmen, are born to. For me the game is up now,
mayhap — but I can see it on my sons, Kristin — they will win back
the place that befits their birth. You need not to grieve so for them,
and strive not so to bind them fast here in this nook-shotten
dale of yours — let them prove them freely, and you will see
maybe, ere you die, they will have won firm footing again on
their father’s rightful heritage — ”

“ Oh, you can talk! ” Hot, bitter tears of wrath were pricking
in the woman’s eyes, but she forced them back and laughed, with
mouth twisted awry:

“ Methinks you are yet more childish than the lads, Erlend! You
can sit and talk thus—and no longer ago than to-day Naakkve

* See Note 3.


had well-nigh come to such fortune as a Christian man’s mouth
dare not name — had not God preserved us — ¥.

“ Ay, but this time ’twas I that had the luck to be God’s instru-
ment ” —Erlend shrugged his shoulders. But then he said most
earnestly: re ‘ :

“Such things — you need not to fear, my Kristin — is’t this that
has clean scared the wits from you, poor soul? ” He looked down,
and said almost shamefacedly: “ You must mind, Kristin — your
father of happy memory prayed for our children, as he prayed
for all of us, early and late. And I deem, most sure and firmly, it
avails for deliverance from much — from the worst things of all —
so good a man’s intercession — ” She saw the man cross his breast
with his thumb as though by stealth.

But, so beside herself was she, it but embittered her the more:

“So — you comfort you with the thought, Erlend, as you sit
there in my father’s high-seat, that your sons shall be saved by
his prayers, even as they are fed by his lands — ”

Erlend grew pale:

“Mean you, Kristin—that I am unworthy to sit in Lavrans
Bjorgulfs6n’s high-seat — ”

His wife’s lips moved, but could bring forth no sound. Erlend
rose and stood moveless:

“Mean you this — for then say I, as sure as God is above us both
—-[ will sit there never more.

“ Answer,” said he again, as she stood speechless. A long tremor
shook the woman’s body.

“ He was — a better master — he who — sat there before you ” —
she could scarce get the words out so as to be heard.

“Heed your tongue now, Kristin! ” Swiftly Erlend strode a
step or two nearer. She stood upright with a start:

“ Ay, strike me —I have borne that too ere now; I can bear it
again.” ‘

“Strike you—I thought not on it.” He stood with his hand
resting on the board; again they gazed at one another, and again
his face had that strange far-off calm which she had seen on it
at some rare times. Now it drove her to distraction. She knew
twas she was in the right — Erlend’s talk was witless, reckless;
ae that face of his made her feel as though all the wrong was

ers.


She looked at him, and, sick with dread herself at what she said.
she spoke:


793 Debtors


“T fear me ’twill not be in my sons that your line will flourish
again in the Trondheim country —”

Erlend flushed blood-red:

“You could not forbear to mind me of Sunniva Olavsdatter,
I see—”

“Twas not I who named her, but you.”

Erlend reddened yet more deeply. :

“ Have you never thought, Kristin — that you were not wholly
without blame in that — mischance —

“Mind you that night in Nidaros—I came and stood before
your bed. Most humble was I, and sorrowful for that I had of-
fended against you, my wife — I came to beg of you —to forgive
me my wrong. Your answer was to bid me go and lay me where
[ had lain the night before —”

“Could I know that you had lain by your kinsman’s wife — ? ”

Erlend stood a little. He grew pale, and again red. Then he
turned and went from the room without a word.

The wife did not stir —long she stood moveless, her clenched
hands pressed up beneath her chin, staring into the light.

Then she raised her head with a jerk —drew a long breath.
Some time he must endure to hear it —


Then she grew ware of the sound of a horse’s hoofs in the court-
yard —heard by its gait that twas a horse being led by a house-
carl. She stole to the door and out into the penthouse, stood behind
the doorpost, and peered out.

Already the night was growing grey with dawn. Out in the
courtyard stood Erlend and Ulf Haldorsson. Erlend held his horse,
and she saw that it was saddled and the man clad for riding. The
two spoke together for a while, but she could not catch one word.
Then Erlend swung himself into the saddle and began to ride at a
foot-pace northward to the manor-gate; he looked not back, but
seemed to talk with Ulf, who walked by the horse’s side.

When they were gone from sight up towards the road, she crept
out, hastened as noiselessly as she could up to the gate, stood there
and listened — she heard now that Erlend had started Soten at a
trot up on the highway.

A little while after, Ulf came back. He stopped short when he
caught sight of the woman there at the gate. For a while they stood
looking at each other in the grey twilight. Ulf’s feet in his shoes
were bare. and he had but a linen shirt beneath his cloak.


The Cross 794


LMG TOSS


“What is this? ” asked the mistress wildly.

“You must sure know —I know not.”

“Whither rode he? ” said she again.

“To Haugen.” Ulf stood a little. “ Erlend came in and waked
me —he said he would ride thither to-night — and he seemed in
haste; there were some things he prayed me to see and have brought
up after him.”

Kristin was silent for a space.

“He was angry, then? ”

“ He was quiet.” In a little Ulf said, low: “I am afeared, Kristin
—I marvel if you have not said what you had best have left un-
said.”

“For once, surely, Erlend might endure to be talked to as he
were a grown man,” said the wife, vehemently.

They went slowly downward. Ulf turned towards his own
house, and at that she came after him.

“Ulf, kinsman,” she prayed him, fearfully, “in old days ’twas
you who told me, late and soon, that, for my sons’ sakes I must
harden my heart and speak to Erlend.”

“Ay —I have grown wiser with the years, Kristin, and that
have you not,” he answered as before.

“You give me fair comfort, in sooth,” said she, bitterly.

He laid a hand heavily upon the woman’s shoulder, but at first
he said naught. They stood there —’twas so still that they both
heard the endless roar of the river, that other times came not to
their ears. Out on the farms around the cocks were crowing, and,
from the stable, Kristin’s farm-cock sent forth a ringing answer.

“Ay —I have had to learn and deal heedfully with comfort,
Kristin — heavily has that ware been drawn on these many years
— we must go sparingly with it now, for we know not how long
yet it will need to last —”

She shook herself free from his hand; with teeth set hard into
her lower lip, she turned her face aside — then she fled downward,
back to the hearth-room house.

The morning was biting cold; she wrapped her cloak close
about her, and pulled the hood down over her head. Crouched
together, with her dew-wet shoes drawn up beneath her skirt and
her arms crossed upon her knees, she sat on the edge of the cold


hearth, brooding, Now and again her face quivered, but she did
not weep.


Rerer e e ee e  O N, R SS Debtors

She must have slept —she started up with aching back, stiff-
limbed and frozen to the marrow. The door stood ajar — she saw
that out in the courtyard the sun was shining.

Kristin went out into the penthouse — the sun was high already,
from down in the home pasture she heard the bell on the horse
that had gone lame. She looked across at the new storehouse. And
then she was ware that little Munan was standing up on the bal-
cony peeping out through the railing arches.

Her sons —it flashed through her. What had they thought,
when they awoke and saw their parents’ bed unslept in?

She ran across the courtyard and up to the child — Munan had
naught on but his shirt. As soon as his mother came to him, he
thrust his hand in hers, as if he were afraid.

Within the loft none of the lads was yet full clad—none had
waked them, she saw. All looked up quickly at their mother, and
then down again. She took Munan’s hose and would have helped’
him to draw them on.

“Whither is father gone? ” asked Lavrans, wonderingly.

“Your father rode north to Haugen at early dawn,” she an-
swered. She marked that the big ones hearkened, and she said:
“ You know he has long said he must go up some time and see how
it fares with his farm.”

The two little ones looked up into their mother’s face with
wide-open, wondering eyes, but the five older brothers hid their
gaze from her as they went out of the loft.


3


Tue pays went by. At first Kristin felt no fear: she cared not to
ponder what Erlend might mean by these doings — running off
from home in sudden wrath at dead of night — or how long he
was minded to sit up north there on his hill farm and punish her
with his absence. She was bitterly wroth with her husband, an-
gered all the more because she denied not to herself that she too
was in the wrong, and had spoken words that she wished from
her heart could be unsaid.

Sure enough, she had been in the wrong many a time, and had
often, in wrath, said hateful and unseemly things to her husband.
But what hurt her most bitterly was that Erlend could never offer


ThesGross'* “0: 1 ae Bol tOES Tee
to forget and to forgive, except she first humbled her and begged
it of him meekly. "Iwas not so often either, thought she, that she
had done amiss — could he not understand, ’twas oftenest when
she was wearied and worn with cares and fears that she had striven
to bear in silence? — ’twas then she most readily lost the mastery
of herself. She deemed that Erlend might have remembered that,
beside all the disquietude for their sons’ future that she had borne
these many, many days, twice this summer she had gone through
a time of deadly fear for Naakkve. Her eyes had been opened now
to see that, after the young mother’s pains and travail are over,
there come for the ageing mother fears and woe of a new kind. =
His careless talk of having no fear for the fortunes of their sons
had goaded her till she was like a wild mother-bear — or like a
bitch with whelps; she cared not if Erlend likened her to a bitch
in all that touched her children. For them would she be watchful
and unsleeping as a mother-bitch, so long as life abode in her.

And if, for such a cause, he could forget that she had stood by
him in every time of need, with all her powers; that, in despite of
her anger, she had been both just and forgiving, when he struck
her, and when he was false to her with the hateful, wanton Lens-
vik woman; then he must even forget. Even now, when she
thought on it, she could not feel so much wrath and bitterness
against Erlend for this, the worst of his offences against her —
when she turned on him with reproaches for that, twas because
she knew that he repented it himself, that in this he saw and felt
he had done evil. But never had she been so wroth with Erlend —
neither was she now —that the memory of his blow and of his
faithlessness, with all it brought with it, did not trouble her, most
of all, for the man’s own sake — she felt ever that in these outbursts
of his ungoverned spirit he had sinned against himself and his
soul’s welfare far more than against her.

What went on rankling in her spirit were all the little wounds
he had dealt her with his unkind heedlessness, his childish lack of
patience — even with his wild and thoughtless way of loving, when
at times he showed that, despite of all, he loved her. "Twas all the
years when she was young and soft of soul, and had felt that both
health and courage must fall short — cumbered as she was with all
those helpless little children —if the father, the husband, would
not show that he had strength and loving-kindness wherewith to
guard her and the little sons upon her knees. It had been such a


197 Debtors


torment to feel herself weak of body, simple and unlessoned in
mind, and not dare trust securely in her husband’s strength and
wisdom — ’twas as though she had got heart-wounds then that
would never heal again. Even the sweet delight that ’twas to lift
up her suckling, set its lovesome mouth to her breast, and feel the
little warm, soft body upon her arm, had been made bitter by
fear and fret—so small, so defenceless you are, and all too oft
your father forgets that his first thought should be to make you
secure.

And now, when her little children’s bones were set and their
heads had hardened, but they yet lacked somewhat of a grown
man’s wit — now he lured them from her. They melted away from
her, the whole flock, husband and sons, in that strange, boyish
light-mindedness that she thought she had seen glimpses of in all
the men she had met, and where a sad, careful woman can never
follow.

So, for her own part, ’twas but sorrow and anger she felt when
she thought on Erlend. But she grew fearful when she wondered
what her sons were thinking.

Ulf had been up to Dovre with two pack-horses, to bear to Er-
lend the things he had asked should be sent after him — clothes,
weapons in plenty; all his four bows, sacks full of arrow-heads
and cross-bow bolts, and three of the dogs. Munan and Lavrans
wept bitterly when Ulf took the little smooth-haired bitch with
silky soft, hanging earlaps— she was a fine, outlandish beast that
Erlend had had of the Abbot at Holm. That their father owned
such a rare dog seemed, more than aught else, to raise him above
all other men in the eyes of the two little ones. And then their
father had promised them that, when the bitch had pups again,
they should each choose him one from out the litter.

When Ulf Haldorssén came back, Kristin asked if Erlend had
said when he thought to turn him home again.

“No,” said Ulf. “It looks as though he had a mind to bide on
there.”

Of his own accord Ulf said but little more of his journey to
Haugen. And Kristin was loath to ask.


In autumn, when they flitted in from the new storehouse, the
eldest sons said they would like, this winter, to sleep above stairs
in the upper hall-room. Kristin gave them leave, and thus she was


The Cross 798

left to sleep with the two youngest in the great hall below. The
first evening she said that Lavrans too might lie in the bed with her
now. : f

The boy lay blissfully rolling about and boring himself down
into the bedding. The children were used to have their couch made
up on the bench, on leathern sacks filled with straw, and to have
fur skins to wrap them in. But in the bed there were blue bolster
mattresses to lie upon, and fine coverlids beside the furs — and the
parents had fine white linen covers on their pillows.

“Twill be but till father comes home that I may lie here,’
asked Lavrans; “ then, belike, we must go back to the bench again,
mother? ” ;

“Then you may sleep in Naakkve’s and Bjérgulf’s bed,” an-
swered his mother; “if the lads change not their minds and move
down again, once the weather grows cold.” Upstairs, too, there
was a small masoned fire-place, but it gave out more smoke than
heat, and the wind and weather were felt much more in the upper
story.

As the autumn drew to an end, a vague fear came creeping over
Kristin; it waxed from day to day, and the strain made. life heavy
to bear. No one seemed to hear word or whisper of Erlend.

In the long, black autumn nights she lay awake, heard the two
little boys’ even breathing, listened to the march of the storm
about the house corners, and thought on Erlend. Had it only not
been on that farm that he was —

She had liked it ill when the cousins had fallen to talking of Hau-
gen — Munan Baardssdn was with them at their lodging one of the
last evenings ere they were to set forth from Oslo. At that time
Munan was sole owner of this little farm —it had come to him
from his mother. He and Erlend had been making merry, and both
were not a little drunken, and while she sat chafing that they must
needs bring up that unchancy place in their talk, things fell out
so that Munan gave Erlend the farm — so should he be not wholly
landless in Norway’s land. The thing was settled amid jest and
laughter — even those rumours that folk could not dwell there
because ’twas haunted they made sport of. The terror that had
taken hold on Munan Baardssén when his mother and her husband
came to their miserable end up there, seemed by this time in some
measure to have worn off the knight.

And, sure enough, he made over Haugen to Erlend by lawful


799 Debtors


deed. Kristin could not hide how hateful ’twas to her that her
husband should own that uncanny place. But Erlend had turned it
off with a jest:

“Tis little like that either you or I will ever set foot in the
houses up there — if they yet stand and are not quite in ruin. And
I trow Moster Aashild and Sir Bjorn will not bring us home the
rents themselves. So it sure can matter naught to us if ’tis true, as
folk say, that they walk there —”


As the year waned, and Kristin’s thoughts ran ever on how it
might fare with Erlend north on Haugen, she grew so tongue-tied
that she scarce spoke a word to her children or to the serving-folk,
unless she must answer their questions — and they grew loath to
speak to the mistress save when they needs must, for she made
them short and impatient answers when they broke in upon and
troubled her uneasy, overwrought brooding. She herself was so
little ware of this that, when at last she marked that the two
youngest children had stopped asking after their father or speak-
ing of him to her, she sighed and thought: children forget apace
— for she knew not how often she had frighted them from her
with impatient answers, and bidden them be still and not plague
her.

With the older sons she spoke scarce at all.


As long as the dry frost lasted she still could answer stranger-
folk, who came to the manor and-asked for the master, that he lay
out in the fells trying his luck in hunting. Then there came a
heavy snow-fall, both in the parish and in the hills, the first week
in Advent.

Early in the morning of St. Lucia’s Eve,* while ’twas yet pitch-
dark without, and the stars showed clear, Kristin came from the
byre. Then she saw, by the light of a pine-torch stuck into a heap
of snow, that three of her sons stood without the house-door with
ski in their hands, binding them on their feet — and a little way
off stood Gaute’s gelding with wicker snow-shoes on its feet and
a pack-saddle on its back. She guessed whither they were bound,
and she dared say naught more than to ask, when she saw that one
of the lads was Bjérgulf —the two others were Naakkve and


Gaute:
* 13th December.


Deh Cross 2 5 ee es SU ee

“Would you go out to-day on ski, Bjorgulf? — tis like ’twill be
bright weather, son! €:

“ As you see, mother.”

“Maybe you will be home ere midday, then? ” she asked,
somewhat at a loss. Bjérgulf was ill at ski-running; the glare from
the snow soon hurt his eyes, and he kept him mostly within-doors
in winter-time. But Naakkve answered that they might be gone
some days.

Kristin was left at home, uneasy and fearful. The twins were
surly and sour — she saw that they had been fain to go too, but
that their grown-up brothers would not let them.

Early on the fifth day, at breakfast time, the three came back.
They had set out at cockcrow for Bjorgulf’s sake, said Naakkve —
that they might be home ere the sun got up. Those two went
straightway up to the upper hall — Bjérgulf seemed like to drop
with weariness — but Gaute bore the sacks and the pack-saddle
into the room. He had with him two goodly little whelps for
Lavrans and Munan —at the sight the little boys forgot all ques-
tions and all cares. Gaute seemed to be troubled, but strove to
hide it:

“ — And this,” said he, drawing it out of a sack, “ this father bade
me give to you.”

*T was fourteen ermine skins, passing fair. His mother took them,
with somewhat of an ill grace — she could not find a word to say
in answer. There was all too much that she would fain have asked;
she was afraid she might lose the mastery of herself if she gave her
heart the smallest vent — and Gaute was so young. She brought
out naught but:

“'They are white already, I see — ay, we are far on in the win-
ter half-year now —”

When Naakkve came down, and he and Gaute set them down
to the porridge dish, Kristin said hastily to Frida that she herself
would bear his food up to Bjorgulf in the loft. It had come to her
all at once that with the silent boy, who she guessed was far riper
in mind than his brothers, she could mayhap talk of this matter.

He had lain down on the bed, and held a linen cloth over his
eyes. His mother hung a kettle of water on the pot-hook in the
fire-place, and, while Bjérgulf lay propped on his elbow and ate,
she brewed a wash of dried eyebright and celandine.

Kristin took from him the empty porridge bowl, bathed his


801 Debtors


red and swollen eyes with the wash and laid damped linen cloths
upon them; and then, at length, she took courage to ask:

“ Said he naught, your father, of when he thought to come home
to us? ”

“cc No.”

“You are ever chary of your words, Bjérgulf,” said his mother
in a little while.

“It seems to run in the breed, my mother.” — He said, a little
after: “ We met Simon and his men near by, north of the gorge —
with loaded sleighs, driving northwards.”

“Did you speak with them? ” asked the woman.

“No —” He laughed as before. “ It seems to run like a sickness
through our kindred — friendship thrives not among us.”

‘““Mean you to blame me for that? ” his mother flashed out.
“ One moment you complain that we hold our peace too much —
and then you say we cannot keep friendship — ”

Bjorgulf only laughed again. Then he raised him on his elbow,
as though he were hearkening to his mother’s breathing:

“In God’s name, mother, do not fall a-weeping now —I am
down-hearted and weary — so unused am I to go on ski—and take
no account of what I say: I know full well that you are no conten-
tious woman.”

Kristin went forth from the loft soon after. For now she dared
not, for aught in the world, ask this son what the young ones
thought of these matters.


So she lay, night after night, when the lads had gone up to the
loft — waking and listening: did they talk together when they
were alone up there? she wondered. There was a thumping of
boots thrown on the floor, a clatter of knife-belts falling down —
she heard their voices, but could make out no words — their
tongues all went at once; their voices rose — it seemed to be half
quarrel, half jesting. One of the twins cried out aloud — then
someone was dragged over the floor, so that dust showered from
the planks above her down into the room —the balcony door
flew open with a crash — something fell heavily on the balcony
floor, and then Ivar and Skule’s voices threatening and clamour-
ing out there, while they beat on the door—then she caught
Gaute’s voice, high and laughing. He stood within the door, she
could hear —’twas clear he and the twins had fallen out again,


The Cross 802

and the end had been that Gaute had thrown them out. Lastly she
heard Naakkve’s grown man’s voice — he was making peace; the
two came in. Yet a while the noise of talk and laughter came down
to her, then the sounds of their getting into bed. Silence fell at
last. In a little she heard an even drone, with stillness ever and
anon —a drone like far-off thunder, away in the hills.

The mother smiled in the dark. Gaute snored when he was
wearied out. So, too, had her father done. "Twas strange, this mat-
ter of likeness — the sons who took after Erlend in outward looks
were like him too in that they slept as noiselessly as birds. And
while she lay thinking on all the little marks of kinship one can
find so strangely, lifetime after lifetime, in the offspring of a stock,
she could not forbear to smile to herself as she lay there. The tor-
turing strain in the mother’s mind slackened for a time, and drowsi-
ness came and tangled all the threads of her thought, while she
sank away, first into blissful ease and then into forgetfulness.

— They were young, she comforted herself —” Twas like they
took it not so hardly —


But one day, when the new year was begun, Sira Solmund, the
chaplain, came to Kristin at Jorundgaard. It was the first time he
had come thither unbidden, and Kristin gave him fair welcome,
though her mind foreboded evil straightway. As she had thought,
so it proved — he deemed ’twas his duty to find out if she and her
husband had wilfully and in ungodly wise severed their fellow-
ship, and, if so it were, which of the pair bore the blame for this
breach of God’s law.

Kristin felt herself that she grew shifty-eyed and over glib of
tongue, and that she used too many words, as she set forth to the
priest how Erlend deemed he must look after his estate north in
Dovre; it had lain quite uncared for these many years; the houses,
for sure, were well-nigh fallen to ruin — with the many children
they had, ’twas needful they see to their welfare —and much
more to the like purpose. She glossed the matter in so many words
that even Sira Solmund, no sharp-sighted man, must needs mark
that she felt herself unsure — and now she talked and talked of how
eager a hunter Erlend was, as the priest well knew. She brought
out and showed him the ermine skins she had had from her hus-
band —in her confusion she had given them to the priest almost
ere she herself knew of it, ere she could bethink her —


803 Debtors


She fretted when Sira Solmund was gone — Erlend might have
known that, when he stayed from home in this wise, a priest such
as they had now would surely take in his head to come and pry
out whether aught were amiss —

Sira Solmund was a paltry little man to look on; ’twas not easy
to guess his age, but folk deemed he was near about forty winters
by now. He was not over bright-witted, and of a certainty he had
no learning to spare; but he was an honest, pious, well-living priest.
An oldish sister of his, a childless widow and a parlous tale-bearer,
cared for his small household. '

He would fain have shown himself a zealous servant of the
Church, but ’twas mostly on small matters and small folk that he
fastened — he was fearful of spirit and shy of grappling with the
big landowners or taking up ticklish questions; but if once he
had done so, he was apt to grow passing stubborn and hot-headed.

For all this, he was well enough liked by his parishioners. For
one thing, folk held him in esteem for his quiet, seemly way of life;
for another, he was not near so greedy of money or so stiff in mat-
ters that touched the Church’s rights or folks’ duties as had been
Sira Eirik. Like enough this came in the main from his lacking al-
together the old priest’s boldness.

But Sira Eirik was loved and honoured by every man and every
child in the parishes round about. Folk had often taken it amiss
in the old days, when the priest had striven, with unseemly greed,
to enrich and make secure the children he had had unlawfully by
his serving-wench; and when he first came to dwell in the parish
the people of Sil could ill brook his masterful sternness toward all
who transgressed the least of the Church’s laws. A warrior had he
been before he took the priestly vows, and he had followed the
sea-rover earl, Sir Alf of Tornberg, in his youth; ’twas easy to
mark it in his ways.

But even then the parish folk had been proud of their priest,
for he was far above most priests of the country parishes in learn-
ing, wisdom, strength of body, and chieftainly bearing, and he had
the noblest singing-voice. And with the years, and under the heavy
trials that God seemed to have laid upon this His servant by reason
of his youthful untowardliness, Sira Eirik Kaaresson had so grown
in wisdom, piety, and righteousness that his name was now known
and honoured over the whole bishopric. When he journeyed to
the synod at Hamar town, he was honoured as a father by all the


The Cross BOE
other priests, and "twas said that Bishop Halvard would gladly
have preferred him to a church which carried with it noble rank
and a seat in the cathedral chapter. But ‘twas said Sira Eirik had
begged he might be left where he was — he had pleaded his age,
and that his sight had been dim these many years past.

In Sil there stood by the highway, a little south of Formo, the
fair cross of potstone which Sira EFirik had set up at his own cost,
where a stone-slip from the mountain-side had taken from him
both his young, hopeful sons forty years agone. Even now the
older folk of the parish passed it not by without stopping to say
Paternosters and Aves for Alf’s and Kaare’s souls.

His daughter the priest had wedded from his manor with a fair
dowry of goods and cattle; he gave her to a comely and well-
born farmer’s son from Viken; none thought other than that
Jon Fis was a good young fellow. Six years after, she came home
to her father, starved, broken, ragged and lousy, with a child
by each hand and one beneath her belt. The folk who had lived
in Sil in those days knew well, though thty never spoke of it:
the children’s father had been hanged for a thief in Oslo. The
Jonss6ns turned out but ill—and now they were dead, all
three. i

Even while his issue were yet alive, it had been Sira Firik’s zeal-
ous care to deck and do honour to his church with gifts. Now
‘twould be it, belike, that would get the greater part of his wealth
and his costly books. The new church of Saint Olav and St.
Thomas in Sil was much greater and statelier than the old one that
burned down, and Sira Firik had bestowed upon it many noble
and costly adornments. He went each day to church for prayer
and meditation, but for the folks he now said mass on the high
holy-days only.

*Twas Sira Solmund, too, who now carried on most of the
duties of the priestly office. But when folk had a heavy grief to
bear, or were vexed at soul by great troubles or the stings of con-
science, they rather sought the old parish priest, and all deemed


that, from a communing with Sira Eirik, they ever brought com-
fort home with them.


And so, one evening on towards spring, Kristin Lavransdatter
went to Romundgaard and knocked upon the door of Sira Eirik’s
house. But she knew not herself rightly how she should set forth


805 Debtors


what she had to say; so, when she had made her offering, she sat
talking of this and that. At length the old man said, something
impatiently:

‘ Have you come in but to greet me, Kristin, and see how I fare?
"Tis kindly done of you, if so— but methinks you have somewhat
else upon your heart, and if so it be, speak of it now, and waste not
time with empty talk —”

Kristin laid her hands together in her lap and looked down:

“Tt mislikes me much, Sira Eirik, that my husband bides on up
yonder at Haugen.” f

“T trow the way is not so long,” said the priest, “ but that you
can get you up thither easily enough, to speak with him and beg
him to return home soon. So much there cannot be for him to see
to, up on that little one-man’s croft, that he need tarry there
longer.” :

“Tam afraid, when I think of him dwelling there alone these
winter nights,” said the wife, shuddering.

“Erlend Nikulauss6n is sure old enough and bold enough to
look to himself.”

“Sira Eirik — you know all that befell up there once upon a
time,” whispered Kristin, so low as scarce to be heard.

The priest turned his dim old eyes towards her — once they had
been coal-black, bright, and keen. He said naught.

“You have heard, belike, what folk say,” she said as low as be-
fore. ‘“ That — the dead — walk there.”

“Mean you you dare not seek him out for that — or are you
feared that the drows will break your husband’s neck? If so be
they have not done it yet, Kristin, ’tis like they will let him be here-
after also’ — the priest laughed harshly. “ "Tis folly, naught but
heathenish, superstitious prate, the most of the tales folks spread
about of drows and of dead men that walk. There are stern door-
keepers, I fear me, where Sir Bj6rn and Lady Aashild are.”

“Sira Eirik,” she whispered, trembling, “ deem you then there
is no salvation for those two poor souls — ? ”

“God forbid that I should be so overbold, to judge of the
bounds of His mercy. But scarce can I deem those two can have
been able to quit their score so soon — not yet have all the tablets
been shown forth on which they two carved their witness — her
children that she forsook; you two that were prentices in the wise
lady’s school. If I deemed it could help, so that somewhat of the


The Cross BOB
ill she did might be righted, then — but since Erlend tarries on
there, ’tis like God deems not it would avail aught if his mother’s
sister should show her and warn him. For this we know, by God's
mercy and Our Lady’s pity and the prayers of the Church, it may
befall that a poor soul have leave to come back to this earthly
home out of the fires of purgatory, if his sin be such that it can
be made good by the help of living men and his time of torture
shortened thereby —as ’twas with the unhappy soul who had
shifted the boundary between Hov and Jarpstad, and the farmer
in Musudal with the false letters concerning the mill-race. But no
soul can come out from purgatory fire except it have such a law-
ful errand —’tis trumpery else, the most of what folk prate of
drows and ghosts; or ’tis the devil’s juggleries, that melt away like
smoke when you ward you with the sign of the cross and the
Lord’s name —”’

“But the blesséd who are with God, Sira Eirik?” she asked
again, low.

“The holy ones with Him you wot well He can send on His
errands with good gifts and messages from Paradise.”

“T told you once that I had seen Brother Edvin Rikardssén,”
she said as before.

“ Ay, either ‘twas a dream — and it might have been sent by God
or by your guardian angel — or else the monk is a holy saint.”

Kristin whispered, trembling:

“My father — Sira Firik, I have prayed so much that it might be
granted me to see his face but once. I long to see him so unspeak-
ably, Sira Eirik — and maybe I might understand by his mien what
he would that I should do. Could I but once have counsel of my
father, then —” She had to bite her lips and, with the fall of her
coif, brush away the tears that would out.

The priest shook his head.

“ Pray you for his soul, Kristin — though I well believe that Lav-
rans, and your mother with him, are now long since comforted, in
the house of them whose comfort they sought in all their sorrows
while they lived here on earth. And true and sure it is that Lavrans
holds you fast in his love in that place too — but your prayers and
masses for his soul’s peace bind you and us all to him — Ay, the
way of it, ’tis one of the secret things which are hard to understand
— but doubt not that this way is better than that he should be dis-


807 Debtors


quieted in his peace that he might come hither and show himself
to you—” ;

Kristin was forced to sit awhile, ere she grew so far mistress of
herself that she dared speak. But then she told the priest all that had
befallen betwixt her and Erlend that night in the hearth-room
house, saying over every word that was spoken, as near as she re-
membered it.

The priest sat long silent when she had done speaking. Then she
smote her hands together vehemently:

“Sira Eirik! Deem you that most of the wrong was with me?
Deem you that so much of the wrong was with me that ’tis no sin
of Erlend to have fled from me and all our sons in this wise? Think
you ’tis just for him to crave that I should seek him out, kneel be-
fore him, and eat my words that I spoke amiss? —I know without
that he will not come home to us! ”

“Think you you need to call Lavrans back from his other home
to ask his counsel in this matter? ” The priest rose, and laid his
hand upon the woman’s shoulder: “ The first time I saw you, Kris-
tin, you were a tender little maid — Lavrans took you between his
knees, laid your little hands cross-wise on your breast, and bade
you say Paternoster to me — clearly and sweetly could you say it,
though you understood not one word — afterward you learned the
meaning of every prayer in our tongue — maybe you have forgot-
ten it now —?

“ Have you forgotten that your father taught you and did hon-
our to you and loved you — he did honour to this man you are now
so afeared to humble yourself before — or have you forgotten how
fair he made the feast in honour of you two? And how you rode
from his manor like two thieves — stealing away with you Lavrans
Bjérgulfsén’s worship and honour? ”

Sobbing, Kristin hid her face in her hands.

“Can you remember yet, Kristin — did he crave of you two that
you fall down on your knees before him, ere he deemed he could
raise you up again into his fatherly love? Think you ’twere all too
hard a morsel for your pride if you must bow yourself now before
a man whom you have wronged, maybe, less than you sinned
against your father —? ” ,

“ Jesus! ” Kristin wept most piteously. “ Jesus — have mercy —

“You remember yet His name, I hear,” said the priest, the


The Cross 808


Pe Ae eS i nn a i Sh Se ae te ek Se
name of Him your father strove to follow as a disciple and to serve
as a faithful knight.” He touched the little crucifix which hung
above them. “ Sinless, God’s Son died upon the cross to atone for
our transgressions against Himself —

“ Go home now, Kristin, and think over this that I have said to
you,” said Sira Eirik, when her weeping was a little allayed.


But in these same days southerly storms set in, gales, sleet, and
rain in torrents — at times it so raged that folk found it hard to
cross over their own courtyards without risk of being blown clean
over the house-tops, as one might almost think. None could travel
by the parish roads. The spring floods came down so sudden and
furious that folk fled from the farms most in danger. Kristin
shifted most of her goods up into the new storehouse loft, and she
got leave to put the cattle in Sira Eirik’s spring byre — the Jérund-
gaard spring byre lay on the further side of the river. "Iwas
cruelly toilsome work in the rough weather —all through the
paddocks the snow lay soft as melting butter — and the beasts were
poor and weak; it had been a hard winter. Two of the best young
steers broke a leg as they walked — they snapped like brittle stalks.

The day they shifted the cattle, Simon Darre, with four of his
house-carls, appeared of a sudden, half-way. They set themselves
to help. Amidst the wind and rain and all the press and bustle, with
cows that had to be held up and sheep and lambs that must be
borne, there was no making oneself heard, nor leisure for the kins-
folk to talk. But when they were come in to Jorundgaard in the
evening, and Kristin had got Simon and his men seated in the hall
—all who had been at work that day stood much in need of a
draught of warm ale — Simon was able to have some speech with
her. He begged her to come to Formo with the women and chil-
dren, and he and two of his men would stay here with Ulf and the
lads. Kristin thanked him, but said she would stay on her manor;
Lavrans and Munan were at Ulvsvoldene already, and Jardtrud
had sought refuge at Sira Solmund’s — she had come to be such
good friends with the priest’s sister. Simon said:

“Folks deem it strange, Kristin, that you two sisters never meet
together. Ramborg will be ill content if I turn me home without
you.”

“T know well that it looks strange,” said the woman, “ but
‘rwould seem yet stranger, methinks, were I to go a-visiting my


809 Debtors


ee he ae a e0ors
sister now, when the master of this house is from home — and folk
know that you and he are unfriends.”

On this, Simon said no more, and soon after he and his men took
their leave.


Rogation week came in with a fearful storm, and by Tuesday
news went round among the farms in the north of the parish that
now had the flood swept away the bridge up in the gorge, which
folk must cross when they were bound for the Ho6vring seters.
They began to fear for the great bridge south by the church.
"Twas built most strongly, of the stoutest timbers, and arched high
in the middle, propped below with great tree-trunks set deep in
the river-bed; but now the water swept over the bridge-ends,
where they joined the banks, and the bridge-arch was packed and
choked with all manner of driftage whirled down the stream from
the north. The Laagen had flooded the low fields on both banks
now, and at one place on the Jorundgaard lands, where was a hol-
low in the meadows, the water ran inwards, like a bay, almost up
to the houses — and the roof of the smithy and the tops of the trees
showed above it like small islands. The out-barn on the holm was
gone down-stream already.

From the farms on the east side of the river but few men had
come to church. They were fearful that the bridge might go in
church-time, and cut them off from their homes. But up on the
other bank, on the hill-side under the Laugarbru barn, where there
was a little shelter from the storm, might be espied, between the
snow flurries, a black clump of people. The word went round that
Sira Eirik had said he would bear the cross over the bridge and set
it on the eastern bank, even if none dared follow him.

A snow squall swept straight in the men’s faces as the procession
stepped out from the church. The snow drove through the air in
slanting streaks — of the country-side but glimpses could be seen
— now and again a cantlet of the blackening lake where the mead-
ows had been; Sahar sweeping across the screes and the
tongues of forest on the hill-sides; glimpses high up of fell-tops
against the high-piled clouds. The air was loaded with a mingled
roar — the river’s drone, rising and falling; the rushing noise of the
woods; the howling of the wind — and ever and again there was a
dull booming echo of the raging of the storm among the moun-
tains, and the thunder of slides of new snow.


The Cross 810 ;
The tapers were blown out as soon as they were borne from out —
the church cloister-way. This day grown young men had donned
the choir-boys’ white surplices — the wind tore at them; they
walked, a whole cluster of them, holding the banner, with hands
grasping the cloth that the wind might not tear it in shreds, while
the procession, with bodies bent forward, clove its way against the
wind across the hill-side. But over the raging of the storm rose,
now and then, a few notes of Sira Eirik’s ringing voice, as he
fought his way forward, singing:

Venite: revertamur ad Dominum; quia ipse cepit et sanabit nos:
percutiet, et curabit nos, et vivemus in conspectu ejus. Sciemus
sequemurque, ut cognoscamus Dominum. Alleluia.*

Kristin stopped, she and all the other women, when the proces-
sion came to the place where the water had overflowed the road,
but the white-clad young men, the deacons, and the priests, were
up on the bridge already, and well-nigh all the men followed after
—the water reached to their knees.

The bridge trembled and shook, and now the women were ware
that from up stream a whole house was coming driving down
upon the bridge. Round and round it was spun by the stream as
it bore downwards; it was rent half in twain and the logs were
spread asunder, but yet it hung together. The wife from Ulvsvol-
dene clung close to Kristin Lavransdatter and wailed aloud — her
husband’s two half-grown brothers were amongst the choir-lads.
Kristin cried silently upon the Virgin Mary, and strained her eyes
towards the crowd on the middle of the bridge, where she could
make out Naakkve’s white-clad form among the men holding the
flag. Through all the hubbub the women deemed they still could
hear tones of Sira Firik’s chant.

He halted on the crown of the bridge, and lifted the cross high
as the house struck. The bridge tottered and groaned — to the folk
on both banks it seemed as though it settled somewhat towards the
south. Then the procession went on, was lost from sight behind
the bridge’s arching back — came into sight upon the other shore.
The wrecked house had tangled itself in the mass of other driftage
clinging to the lower timbers of the roadway.


* Come, and let us return unto the Lord: for he hath torn, and he will
heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up. . . . And we shall live in his
sight. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord. . . . Hosea
Vi. 1-3.


811 Debtors


Ree re een) ET OLS. ihe oe SO jy ebtors

Then, sudden as a heavenly sign, silvery light dropped through
the wind-driven cloud masses —a faint gleam, as of molten lead,
was spread over the swollen river, far and wide. Mists and clouds
burst asunder — the sun broke through, and when the procession
came back across the bridge again, its beams sparkled on the cross;
on the priest’s wet, white alb the crossed stripes of the stole shone
a wondrous purple-blue. Golden and glittering wet the Dale lay,
as in the bottom of a cave of blue darkness, for, smitten down by
the sun’s rays, the storm-clouds clung high up round the brows of
the fells and made the uplands black — between the heights the
mists were fleeing, and the great mountain-dome above Formo
rose up from the blackness, blinding white with new-fallen snow.

She had seen Naakkve go by. The dripping wet vestments clung
about the boys, while they sang with might and main, out into the
sunshine:

Salvator mundi, salva nos omnes. Kyrie, eleison; Christe, eleison;
Christe, audi nos —*

The priests, the cross, had gone by; the crowd of farmers fol-
lowed, heavy in their soaking clothes; but they looked about them
with wondering, shining faces at the parting storm, as they joined
in the pealing supplication — Kyrie eleison!

Then she saw — she believed not her eyes, ’twas she now who
must cling to her neighbour-woman for support. "T'was surely
Erlend who walked there in the procession; he was clad in a
dripping-wet, reindeer-skin coat with the hood over his head —
but it was he; with half-open mouth, he cried Kyrie eleison like
the rest — now he looked straight at her as he went by — she could
not read the look on his face aright; there was somewhat — like the
shadow of a smile upon it —

Together with the other women she followed the procession up
over the church-green, chanting loud with the others in unison
with the young lads who sang the litany. She was ware of naught
but the wild hammering of her own heart.

During the Mass she had a glimpse of him one only time. She
dared not stand in her wonted place — hid herself in the gloom in
the northern aisle.

Soon as the service was at an end she hasted out. She fled from
her serving-women who had been in the church. Outside, the

* Saviour of the world, save us all. Lord, have mercy; Christ, have mercy;


Christ, hear us.


whole valley was steaming in the sun. Kristin ran home, heedless
of the bottomless mire of the way.

She spread her board, and set the brimming mead-horn before
the master’s high-seat, before she gave herself time to change her
wet clothes for her holy-day wear—the dark-blue broidered
dress, the silver belt, the buckled shoes, and the coif with the blue
borders. Then she fell on her knees in the closet. She could not
think, she could find no words of her own, as she so fain would —
over again and over again, she said Ave Maria — Blessed Lady
mine, dear Lord, Son of the Virgin — Thou knowest what I would
say —

‘Time dragged slowly by. From her maids she heard that the
men had gone to the bridge again — they were plying axes and
hooks to loosen the mass of wreckage that had stuck fast — striv-
ing to save the bridge. The priests had gone thither too, when they
had laid aside their vestments.

It was long past midday when the men came in. Her sons, Ulf
Haldorss6n and the three house-carls, an old man and two small
parish boys who were kept on the manor.

Naakkve had already set him down in his place, the right of the
master’s high-seat. Suddenly he rose, left his place, and made for
the door.

Kristin called him by name, half aloud.

On that he came back, and sat him down again. The colour
came and went in the young face; he kept his eyes cast down, and
ever and anon would set his teeth in his under-lip. His mother saw
he was hard put to it to keep the mastery over himself — yet he
won through the trial.

And at last the meal was at an end. The sons on the inner bench
rose, came round the end of the board where was the empty high-
seat, settled their belts a little, as of wont, after they had stuck
their knives back into the sheaths, and went out.

When they were all gone, Kristin followed. The sun shone
warm, and runnels were pouring from every roof. There was not
a soul in the courtyard save Ulf — he stood on the stone slab out-
side his own house door.

A strangely helpless look came to his face as the mistress came
towards him. He said no word — she asked, low:

“Spoke you with him? ”

“Not many words. Naakkve and he talked together, I saw —”


813 Debtors


A little after, he spoke again:

“ He was somewhat fearful — for all of you — when there came
down such a flood. So the thought took him to come home-about
and see how things were going. Naakkve told him how you had
managed —

“T know not where he had heard it — that you had given away
the skins he sent you by Gaute in the autumn. He was angered at
that. And so, too, when he found you had slipped straight home
after Mass — he had thought you would have stayed and spoken
with him —”’

Kristin said naught; she turned and went in.


This summer there were endless broils and bickerings betwixt
Ulf Haldorss6n and his wife. Ulf’s half-brother’s son, Haldor
Jonssén, had come to his kinsman in the spring and brought his
wife with him; he had wedded the year before. Now ’twas meant
that Haldor should take on lease the farm Ulf owned in Skaun,
and flit thither on term-day; but Jardtrud was wroth, for she
deemed Ulf had given his brother’s son over-good terms, and she
saw that the men had in mind that, in one way or another, things
should be so ordered that the heritage of the farm be assured to
Haldor.

Haldor had been Kristin’s page-boy at Husaby, and she had

-much liking for the young man; his wife, too, a quiet, winsome
young woman, she liked well. A little after midsummer the two
young folk had a son born to them, and Kristin lent her the
weaving-house, where the mistresses of the manor had themselves
been wont to lie when they bore children — but Jardtrud took it
ill that Kristin waited on the lying-in woman as the chief of the
midwives — though Jardtrud herself was young and most un-
skilled, and could neither help a woman in child-birth nor care
for a new-born babe. A gd

Kristin was godmother to the boy, and Ulf gave the christening
feast; but Jardtrud deemed that he spent too much on it, and that
the gifts he laid in the cradle and on the mother’s bed were by far
too great. To stop her mouth a little, Ulf gave his wife, before all
men’s faces, divers costly things from among his chattels: a gilt
cross and chain, a fur-lined cloak with a great silver clasp, a finger-
ring of gold, and a brooch. But she saw that he would not give her
a single rood of the land he owned, beyond what was her extra-


The Cross 814


AMES OTOSS! S| gt eee
gift when he wedded her —all his land was to go to his half-
brothers and sisters, if he himself had no children. And now Jard-
trud bemoaned herself that her child had been still-born, and that
it looked not as though she should have more children + she was
soon a laughing-stock among all the neighbours, for talking of this
to everyone. bi

By reason of these bickerings Ulf had to pray Kristin to let Hal-
dor and Audhild dwell in the hearth-room house when the young
wife had held her churching. Kristin agreed gladly. She held aloof
from Haldor, for it brought back to her so much that was sore to
think on when she talked with him that had attended her in those
old days. But much talk fell between her and the wife, for Aud-
hild was bent on helping Kristin in every wise she could. And in
the end of summer the child fell sorely sick; and on that Kristin
took it in hand and tended it for the young, unlessoned mother.

When, in autumn, the two young folk.set forth northwards,
she missed them, but most of all the little baby boy. Foolish as she
herself knew it was, yet she had not been able, these last years, to
rid her of a kind of sorrow because, all at once, she seemed to have
grown barren—though she was no old woman, not yet forty

ears.
It had helped her to keep her mind from grievous thoughts that
she had the young, childish wife and the little babe to help and
tend. And, heavy as she deemed it to see that Ulf Haldorssén had
not had better fortune in his marriage, yet had the happenings in
the steward’s house helped to take her thoughts away from other
things.

For after the fashion Erlend had borne him on Rogation day,
she dared scarce think how it all would end. That he had come
down to the parish and to the church, before all folks’ eyes, and
then had made off north again without greeting his wife with so
much as one word, seemed to her so cruel that she deemed now at
last she no longer cared what he might do —


With Simon Andressén she had not changed a word since that
day of the spring flood when he came to help her. At the church
she greeted him, and most often spoke a few words with her sister.
What they thought of her affairs, and of Erlend’s betaking him up
to Dovre, she knew not.

But the Sunday before St. Bartholomew Mass * Sir Gyrd of


24th August.


815 Debtors


Dyfrin came with the Formo folks to church. Simon looked won-
drous glad as he went in to Mass by his brother’s side. And, after
the service, Ramborg came over to Kristin. and whispered eagerly
that she was with child again and looked to be brought to bed at
Maria Mass, in the spring:

“ Kristin, sister, can you not come home and drink with us this
day? ”

Kristin shook her head sorrowfully, patted the young wife’s
pale cheek, and prayed that God might turn this to joy and bless-
ing for the parents. But go to Formo she could not, she said.


After the breach with his brother-in-law, Simon had forced him-
self to believe that ’twas best so. He was so placed that he needed
not to ask what folk judged of his doings in all things; he had
helped Erlend and Kristin in their greatest need, and as for the stay
he could be to them here in the parish, ’twas not so much worth
that, to yield it them, he should make such a tangled web of his
own life.

But when he heard that Erlend was gone from the parish,
*twas no longer possible for Simon to uphold the heavy, stubborn
calm he had striven to feel. In vain he told himself that none, sure,
knew rightly what was at the bottom of Erlend’s long tarrying
from home — folks prated so much and knew so little. And how-
soever it might be, he could not mix himself in the matter. Yet was
his mind never at rest. At times he pondered whether he should
not seek out Erlend at Haugen, and eat the words he had said
when they parted — thereafter he might see whether he could not
find some way to set things right between his brother-in-law and
his wife’s sister. But he came no further than to think on it.

He believed not, indeed, anyone could mark on him that he was
so uneasy in mind. He lived as he was wont, worked his farm and
cared for his estates, was merry-and drank manfully with his boon
companions, lay out in the fells a-hunting when he had time,
spoiled his children when he was at home, and never did an un-
kind word fall ’twixt him and his wife. To the folk on the manor
it must rather seem as if the love between him and Ramborg were
greater than ever before, since his wife was much more quiet and
even in her bearing, and no longer fell into those fits of whimsy
and childish anger over trifling matters. But in secret Simon felt
himself shy and unsure in his dealings with her — no longer could
he bring himself to take her as though she too were still half a


The Cross 816


child, to be teased and spoiled. He knew not now how he should
behave him towards her.

And so he knew not, either, how he should take it, when one
evening she said to him that now was she with child again.

“ You are not over-glad of it, belike,” he said at length, stroking
her hand.

“But you are glad, I trow? ” Ramborg nestled close to him, half
laughing, half crying, and he laughed somewhat shamefacedly as
he took her in his arms.

“ This time I will be good and quiet, Simon, and not moan and
wail as before. But you must stay with me—hear you? —if all’
your brothers-in-law and your brothers were in bonds and being
led arow to the gallows, you must not forsake me! ”

Simon laughed sadly:

“ Whither should I go, my Ramborg — ? *Tis not like that Geir-
mund, poor cripple, will broil himself in any great matter — and
you know well he is the only man now, of my blood or kin, that
I am not at odds with —”’

“Oh! —” Ramborg laughed, too, through her tears. “ Those
quarrels will last no longer than till they need a helping hand and
you deem you can give it. | know you well now, my husband —”


"Twas fourteen days later that, all unlooked for, Gyrd Andres-
s6n came to the manor. The Dyfrin knight had but one henchman
attending him.

Few words passed between the brothers at their meeting. Sir
Gyrd said somewhat of how he had not seen his sister and brother-
in-law at Kruke these many years, and how the thought had come
to him that he might journey up hither and give them greeting;
and, once he was in the Dale, Sigrid thought surely he ought to
visic at Formo too, “and I thought, brother, twas like you were
not so wroth with me but that you would give me and my man
food and shelter till to-morrow.”

“You may believe that,” said Simon — he stood looking down,
flushed dark red in the face. “ It was — kindly done of you, Gyrd,
to come to me.”

The brothers strolled out together after they had eaten. The
corn was beginning to yellow here on the sunny slopes down to-
wards the river. "T'was most goodly weather — the Laagen shone
gently enough now, in little white gleams down among the alder


817 Debtors


woods. Great white clouds sailed over the summer sky — sunshine
filled the great bowl of the Dale, and the fell right over against
them lay all soft blue and green in the haze of the heat and the
drifting shadows of the clouds.

From within the paddock behind them came the thudding of
horses’ hoofs on the dry ground — the herd came trotting through
the alder bush. Simon leaned over the fence: “ Coltie — coltie —
He begins to grow old now, Bronsvein? ” said he, as Gyrd’s horse
put his head over the paling and nosed at his master’s shoulder.

“Eighteen winters” —Gyrd fondled the horse. “ Methought,
kinsman — this matter — ’twere all too ill a thing if it should part
the friendship betwixt you and me,” he said — and looked not at
his brother.

“Tt has grieved me every day,” answered Simon, low. “ And I
thank you for your coming, Gyrd.”

They went farther along the fence: Gyrd first, Simon tramping
after. At last they sat them down on the edge of a little stony
stretch of burned-up yellow sward. There was a sweet, strong
scent from the small hay-cocks that lay here and there amid the
stone heaps, where the sickles had scraped together a little short,
flowery hay. Gyrd told of the parley between King Magnus.
and the Haftorsséns and their following. After a while Simon
asked:

“Deem you ’tis not to be thought of that any of those kinsmen
of Erlend Nikulaussén should try to win him a full pardon and
bring him back to the King’s favour? ”

“7 cannot do much,” said Gyrd Darre. “ And they have no love
for him, Simon, they that might perchance have the power. Ay, I
have little mind to speak of that mow — Methought he seemed a
bold, winning fellow; but he showed up ill in that emprise of his,
so deem the others. But I would liefer not talk of this now — I
know well this brother-in-law of yours is so dear to you—”

__ Simon sat gazing out at the silvery gleams in the tree-tops on
the slope below, and at the glittering sheen of the river. Wonder-
ingly he thought — ay, in a way ’twas true too, what Gyrd said.

““Howbeit, in these days we are unfriends, Erlend and I,” said
he. “Tis a good while since we spoke together.”

“__Meseems you have grown passing quarrelsome with the
years, Simon,” said Gyrd, laughing a little.

“Have you never thought,” he asked a little after, “to leave


The Cross 818


these dales? We kinsmen might be of more help one to the other
if we dwelt more near together.” ;

“Can you think of such a thing —? Formo is my udal heri-
tage —”

g Aasmund of Eiken owns his part of that manor by right of
udal. And I know he is not unwilling to change udal against udal
—’tis still in his thoughts that he might get your Arngjerd for
Grunde according to the terms he proffered —”

Simon shook his head.

“ Our father’s mother’s kin have had their seat on Formo manor
ever since this land was heathen. And ’tis here I have ever meant
that Andres shall dwell after me. I trow you have lost your wits,
brother — should I part me from Formo? ”

“ Nay, ’tis but reason, what you say.” Gyrd grew somewhat red.
“T thought but that — maybe —in Raumarike you have most of
your kinsfolk — and the friends of your youth — that perchance
you might think that there you would thrive more happily.”
~ “T thrive here,” Simon, too, was grown red. “ Here 1s the place
where I can set the boy ina safe seat.” He looked at Gyrd, and his
brother’s fine-cut, lined face took on somewhat of a bashful look.
Gyrd’s hair was well-nigh white now, but he was as slender and
‘lithe of body as ever. He moved a little uneasily — some stones
slipped from the heap he leaned on and rolled down the slope into
the corn.

“Would you rake the whole scree down on my fields? ” asked
Simon, laughing, with a feigned gruffness. Gyrd sprang up, light
and nimble, and held out a hand to his brother, who had a heavier
weight to move.

Simon kept his brother’s hand in his for a moment after he had
got to his feet. Then he laid his own hand upon his brother’s
shoulder. On that Gyrd did the like; with their hands lying lightly
on each other’s shoulders the brothers went slowly up over the
hill-side towards the manor.


They sat together over in the Semund’s hall in the evening —
Simon was to sleep with his brother. They had said their evening
prayers, but they felt they must empty the ale-bowl before they
went to rest.


“ Benedictus tu in muliebris — ntulieribus — mind you? ” laughed
Simon all at once.


819 Debtors


“ Ay, it cost me a basted back many a time or ever Sira Magnus
got my grandmother’s false doctrine out of my head.” — Gyrd
smiled at the memory. “ Hard-handed as the devil he was, too.
Mind you, brother, once as he sat scratching his legs and had lifted
the skirt of his habit — you whispered to me that, had you been so
crook-legged as Magnus Ketilss6n, you, too, had been a priest and
gone ever in a long gown —? ”

Simon smiled — it seemed to him he saw all at once his brother’s
_ boyish face, bursting with choked laughter for all its piteous rue-
ful eyes: they were yet young boys then, and Sira Magnus was
sorely hard of hand when he set to correcting them —

Over-bright Gyrd had not been when they were children. Ay,
and ’twas not because he was an over and above wise man that
he loved Gyrd now. But he grew warm with thankfulness and
tenderness towards his brother as he sat here — for every day of
their brotherhood, well-nigh forty years now — for Gyrd, even as
he was, the most guileless, the most true-hearted of men.


. And so this, that he had won back his brother Gyrd, seemed to
Simon much as though he had at the least got a fast foothold with
one foot. And for long now his life had been so woefully warped
and tangled.

He felt a warm glow each time he thought on Gyrd, who had
come to him to make good again the breach he himself had made,
when he rode from his brother’s manor in anger and with un-
seemly words. His heart overflowed with thankfulness — he had
others to thank besides Gyrd.

A man like Lavrans, now —how he would have taken such a
happening he knew well enough. He could follow his father-in-
law as far as he was worthy to follow — with almsgiving and the
like. Such things as a broken and contrite heart and adoration of
the Lord’s wounds were beyond him, unless he stared his eyes out
at the crucifix — and that was not what Lavrans had meant. Tears
of repentance he could not weep — he deemed not he had wept
more than maybe two or three times since he had left childhood
behind, and not then when he had the most need to have done so
—those times when he had fallen into great transgression — with
Arngjerd’s mother, while he was a wedded man, and then that
man-slaying a year back. And yet he had repented sorely — it
seemed to him he repented his sins heartily at all times, confessed


The Oross 820


fe ETOss
them fully, and made full amends according to the priest’s behest.


He said his prayers ever with diligence, took heed to give the
right tithes and abundant alms — most of all to the honour of St.
Simon the Apostle, St. Olav, St. Michael and Mary Virgin. Other-
wise he rested content with what Sira Eirik said, that in the cross
alone was salvation, and how else a man should meet and fight the
enemy was in God’s hand, not his.

But now he felt himself drawn to show, with somewhat more
fervency, his deep thankfulness to all the holy ones. He had been
born on the birthday of Mary Virgin, so his mother had said — it
came to his mind that he would fain pay the Lord’s mother his
homage by a prayer he was not wont to say daily. He had had
written down a goodly prayer, the time he was at the King’s court,
and now he sought out the little scroll.

He feared, indeed, now he thought of it, twas more to please
King Haakon than for the sake of God and Mary, that he had got
him, while he was with the body-guard, some such little rolls with
prayers, and learnt them. All the young men did it, for "twas the
King’s wont to question his pages on what they knew of such
profitable lore, when he lay abed of nights and could not sleep.

Oh, ay —’twas long ago now. The King’s bedchamber in the
stone hall of the royal castle at Oslo. On the little board by the bed
stood a single taper burning — its gleam fell upon the fine-cut, wan,
and aged face that lay propped upon the red silk pillows. When
the priest had ended his reading aloud and was gone, the King him-
self often took the book, and lay reading with the heavy tome
ieaned against his drawn-up knees. On two footstools, away by
the great stone-walled chimney, sat the pages —he himself kept
watch nigh always along with Gunstein Ingasén. ’Twas pleasant
in the chamber — the fire burned clear and hot and gave out no
smoke, the room seemed so warm and snug with its cross-vaulted
ceiling and walls ever hung with tapestry. But they grew sleepy
sitting so — first hearing the priest read and afterwards waiting
for the King to fall asleep; ‘twas scarce ever much before midnight.
When he slept, they had leave to take turns at watching, and to
rest between-whiles on the bench ’twixt the chimney and the door
of the Council Hall. So they sat, longing for him to fall asleep,
and swallowing down their yawns.

It might happen that the King would fall into talk with them —
not often — but when he did he was marvellous kindly and win-


i 821 Debtors


ning. Or he would read aloud from a book a wise saw, or some few
staves of verse that he thought might profit the young men or be
wholesome for them to hear.

One night he was waked himself by King Haakon calling him
— ’twas pitch dark; the taper was burned out. Miserably shamed,
he made shift to blow the embers alive again, and lit a new candle.
The King lay smiling slyly:

“ Doth this Gunstein ever snore so fearfully? ”

> Ay, my lord! ”

“You share his bed in the hostel too, I trow? Methinks ’twere
but reason you should crave to be given for a while a bedfellow
that makes less hubbub in his sleeping.”

“JT thank my good lord —but it matters naught to me, Lord
King.”

But you must needs wake, Simon, when this thunder-peal
breaks loose right by your ear —is’t not so? ”

“ Ay, your Grace, but I have but to give him a jog and turn him
over somewhat.”


The King laughed.


“T marvel if you young men understand that such a stomach to
sleep is a great gift from God. When you are come to my years,
friend Simon, mayhap then you will remember these my
words — ”

"Twas endlessly far away — and yet clear; but it seemed not as
if it could be the man sitting here that had been the young page —


One day when Advent was beginning, and Kristin was well-
nigh alone at the manor —her sons were carting home firewood
and moss — she wondered to see Simon Darre come riding into
the courtyard. His errand was to bid her and her sons to a feast
at Formo at Yule.

“ Sure you must know, Simon, that we cannot do as you would,”
she said soberly. “ Friends we ‘can be, as much as ever, in our
hearts, you and Ramborg and I — but you know well that it rests
not always with us to do as we would.”

“You cannot mean that you will go so far in this as not to come
to your only sister’s help when she is to lie in the straw? %

Kristin prayed that all might go well, and end in joy for them
both, “ but I cannot say for sure if I can come.”

“ All folk will deem it passing strange,” said Simon vehemently.


The Cross 8292


DTP OSS 2 nee
“You have the name of being the best of midwives — and she is
your sister — and you two are mistresses of the two greatest man-
ors in this northern country-side.”

“Not a few children have been born into the world on the
great manors here these last years, and I not even prayed to come.
No longer is it so, Simon, that ’tis not reckoned that all is done
fittingly in the lying-in room if the mistress of Jorundgaard be not
there.” She saw that he grew much disheartened at her words,
and she went on: “ Greet Ramborg, and say I will go to her and
help her when the time comes—but to your Yule-tide feast I
cannot come, Simon.”

But on the eighth day of Yule she met Simon coming to Mass
without Ramborg. No, all was well with her, he said; but ’twas
well for her to rest and gather strength, for to-morrow he was
faring south to Dyfrin with her and the children — the roads were
so good for sleigh travel; and since Gyrd had begged them to
come, and Ramborg had such a mind to it, why —


4


Tue pay after Paul’s Mass * Simon Darre rode north over Mjés,
with two henchmen in his company. It was set in hard frost, but
he deemed he could not stay from home longer; the sledges with
the women-folk must come later, as soon as the cold was some-
what bated.

At Hamar he met a friend, Vigleik Paalssén of Fagaberg, and
they rode on together. When they were come to Little Hamar
they rested a while at a farm where was an ale-tap. While they
were sitting at their drink, some drunken fur-hawkers in the room
fell foul of each other and came to blows; at last Simon got up
thrust in between, and parted them, but so doing he got a Ienifes
cut in the right forearm. "Twas little more than a scratch, and he
took no heed of it, but the woman of the house made bind suffer
her to bind a cloth about it.

He rode home with Vigleik, and slept the night at his house. The
men shared a bed, and on towards morning Simon was wakened by
the other crying out aloud in his sleep. Vigleik called out his name


15th January.


823 Debtors


een sl I ppm ieeet oe OBB EA idol FN eo UO DbOTE
more times than one; so Simon waked him up and asked what was
amiss with him. ~~

Vigleik could not remember his dream rightly. “But an ugly
dream it was, and you were in it. One thing I mind — Simon
Reidarss6n stood here in the room and bade you go with him —
I saw him so plain I could have told the freckles on his face.”

“That dream I would you could sell me,” said Simon, half in
jest and half in earnest. Simon Reidarssén was his father’s broth-
er’s son, and they had been good friends in their youth; the cousin
had died when he was thirteen or thereabout.

In the morning, when the men were sitting down to break
their fast, Vigleik saw that Simon had left the right sleeve of his
jerkin unbuttoned at the wrist. The flesh was red and swollen
all down the back of the hand. He spoke of it, but Simon laughed.
And when, a little later, his friend begged him to stay there some
days —to wait for his wife there — Vigleik could not forget his
dream — Simon Andressén answered something peevishly: “ Sure,
you dreamed not aught so ill about me, Vigleik, as that I kept
my bed for a louse-bite — ? ”

About sunset Simon and his men rode down to Losna lake. It
had been the fairest day; now the high blue and white fells were
grown golden and pink in the evening light, but the rime-laden
thickets along the river stood all shaggy grey in the shadow. The
men had rarely good horses, and they had a brisk ride before them
over the long lake — small bits of ice flew out tinkling and clinking
from under the horses’ hoofs. A biting wind blew hard against
them; Simon was bitter cold —but soon after strange, qualmish
surges of heat ran through him, despite the cold — then ice waves
that seemed to pierce right to the marrow of his spine. At times
he felt his tongue swell and grow strangely thick far back in his
throat. Ere yet they had got over the lake, he had to stop and
pray one of his men to help him fasten up his cloak, for a sling for
his right arm.

The men had heard Vigleik Paalss6n talk of his dream; now they
would have had their master show them the wound. But Simon
' said twas naught — it smarted a little: “— Belike I must content
me to be left-handed some few days.”

But as the evening wore on — the moon had risen and they were
- riding high up on the ridges north of the lake — Simon felt him-

self that his arm might likely be troublesome after all. It ached


right up in the arm-pit; the jolting on the horse’s back tormented
him sorely — the blood throbbed and throbbed in the ailing limb.
And his head throbbed and ached from the nape upwards. He
grew hot and cold by turns. wilh

The winter road went high up the hill-side here, in parts
through forest, in parts over white farm-lands. Simon saw it all —
the full moon sailed silver bright in the pale blue heavens; it had
driven all the stars far from its path, only one or two great ones
dared to show their face away far off in the sky. The white fields
glittered and sparkled; the shadows fell short and sharp upon the ~
snow — within the woods the light lay vaguely in splashes and
stripes between the snow-laden firs. Simon saw all this —

— But at the same time he saw most plain, in sunshine of early
spring, a field of tufted, ashy-brown grass. Some stunted firs had
pushed up here and there in the outskirts; they shone like green
velvet in the sun. He knew it again; ‘twas the home-paddock at
Dyfrin. The stems of the alder trees in the woods beyond the field
stood glossy grey as in spring, and their tops brown with blossom
— behind lay the long low Raumarike ridges, shining blue, still
flecked with snow. They were on their way down to the alder
thicket, Simon Reidarssén and he; they had fishing-tackle and
pike-spears — they were bound for the lake lying there dark grey
with rotten ice, to fish in the open water at the lake end. — His
dead cousin walked by his side: he saw his playmate’s curly hair
bushing out from underneath his cap, reddish of hue in the spring
sunlight; he could count each freckle in the boy’s face. The other
Simon stuck out his under-lip a little and blew — ph, ph, when he
deemed his namesake’s talk foolish. They hopped across the wa-
ter-rills, sprang from tuft to tuft over the oozing snow-water in
the grass-land. There was a mossy growth at the bottom— it
frothed and mantled a lovely green, down below the water.

Though his senses had not left him — though he saw all the time
the bridle-path uphill and downhill, through forest, over white
farmlands in glittering moonshine — saw the sleeping, clustered
houses under snow-buried roofs cast shadows across the fields, saw
the mist-belt over the river in the bottom of the dale — and knew
that ‘twas Jon who rode just behind him and spurred up alongside
when they came out on open clearings — yet he found himself
more than once calling the man Simon. He knew ’twas wrong,


but he could not help doing it, though he saw that his men grew
afraid.


825 Debtors


“We must see and come as far as the monks’ at Roaldstad to-
night, men,” he said, once when his head grew clearer.

The serving-men pleaded with him —they should rather see
and get within doors as soon as might be; they named the nearest
priest’s house. But the master would have his way.

“*T will be hard for the horses, Simon —” The two henchmen
glanced at each other. ’

But Simon laughed a little. They must abide it for once in a
way. He thought on the weary miles. The pain drove through his
whole body with each jolt in the saddle. But home he must and
would. For now he knew that he was fey —

And though in the winter night he froze to the marrow and
_ burned by turns, yet all the time he felt the mild spring sunin the
grazing-paddock at home, and the dead boy and he went on and
on towards the alder brake.

For brief moments the vision melted away, and his head grew
clear — only that it ached fearfully. He prayed one of the men to
cut open his sleeve over the aching arm. He went white, and the
sweat trickled down over his face, as Jon Daalk warily ripped
open his jerkin and shirt from wristband to shoulder, while he
himself stayed the swollen limb with his left hand. That eased it
for a while.

Thereafter the men fell a-talking — at Roaldstad they must see
and have word sent south to Dyfrin. But Simon would hear naught
of it. He would not disquiet his wife with such a message, when,
belike, ’twas not needful — a sledge journey in such bitter cold was
not good. Mayhap when he was come home to Formo, they
would see. He tried to smile at Sigurd to hearten the lad —he
looked awestruck and forlorn.

“But you must send for Kristin at Jorundgaard, as soon as we
come home — she is so good a leech-woman.” He felt his tongue
thick and hard as wood as he said it.

Kiss me, Kristin, my promised maid! First she would think
’twas wandering talk. No, Kristin. Then would she marvel.

Erlend had seen it. Ramborg had seen it. But Kristin — she sat
there full of her cares and her wrath — so vexed and so bitter as
she was with yonder man Erlend —for others than him she had
no thought even now. You never set so much by me, Kristin, my
beloved, as to think if ’twere a heavy lot, to be brother to her who
once was promised me to wife —

—In sooth he himself had not known it, that time he parted


from her outside the cloister gate in Oslo—that he would go

on ever thinking of her thus; that in the end ’twould seem to

him naught he had got in life since then could make up fully for

what then he had lost. For the maid that was sealed to me in my
outh.

She should hear it before he died. One kiss should she give him —

—Iam he who loved you, and who loves you still —

These words had he heard once, and he had never been able to
forget them. They were from Mary Virgin’s miracle book; ’twas
a tale of a nun who fled away from her convent with a knight.
Mary Virgin — in the end she saved these two, and forgave them
in despite of their sin. If ’twere sin for him to say it to his wife’s
sister ere he died, then God’s mother must win his forgiveness for
this too —’ Twas not so oft that he had troubled her by craving
aught —

si believed it not myself, that time — that never again should
I be rightly glad or merry —

“Nay, Simon, ’twere all too heavy for Sokka, should she bear
us both —so far as she has had to fare this night,” he said to him
who had got up behind him on his horse, and held him up. “ Ay
—Isee ’tis you, Sigurd, but I deemed you were another — ”


Towards morning they had come as far as the pilgrims’ hostel,
and the two monks, who were charged with the care of the place,
took the sick man in hand. But when, under their tending, he had
grown somewhat better and his fever wanderings were abated,
naught would serve Simon but they must lend him a sledge to
drive on farther north.

The going was good, and they changed horses by the way, jour-
neyed all the night, and came to Formo next morning at daybreak.
Simon had lain and dozed under the many coverings that had
been spread over him. They weighed upon him so — sometimes
he felt as he were lying crushed beneath huge rock slabs — and
his head ached so. Between-whiles he seemed as ’twere to lose
himself. Then the pains began to rage again within him —’twas
as though his body boiled and boiled up, grew monstrously huge
and was like to burst in bits. His arm throbbed and throbbed ae

_He tried to get from the sledge and walk in on his feet — with
his good arm over Jon’s shoulder; Sigurd came behind to hold
him up. Simon was ware that the men’s faces were grey and


827 Debtors


drawn with weariness — for two whole nights on end had they
sat in their saddles. He would have said somewhat to them of this,
but his tongue obeyed him not. He stumbled over the threshold
and fell forward into the room — with a roar of pain, as his shape-
less, swollen arm struck against something. The sweat streamed
from him, as he strove to choke down the groans that were wrung
from him while he was unclothed and helped to bed.


Not long after, he saw that Kristin Lavransdatter stood over by
the fire-place, pounding somewhat in a wooden bow] with a pestle.
The sound tramped so through his head! She poured somewhat
from a little pot into a beaker, and dropped drops into it from a
glass flask that she took from her case — emptied the pounded
stuff from the bowl into the pot and set it on the fire. How still
and deft in all her ways —!

Now she came over to the bed with the beaker in her hand.
She walked so lightly. She was straight and fair as the maid had
been, this slender housewife with the thin, grave face under the
linen coif. It hurt him, for the back of his neck was swollen too,
when she passed one arm under his head and lifted him somewhat.
She propped his head against her breast while she held the beaker
to his mouth with her left hand.

Simon smiled a little, and when, warily, she let his head sink back
upon the pillows, he caught her hand in his whole one. “Iwas
not soft or white any more, the fine, long, narrow woman’s hand.

“ These fingers of yours are ill at sewing silk now, I trow,” said
Simon. “ But good and light are they — and blessedly cold is your
hand, Kristin! ” He laid it on his brow. Kristin stood thus till she
felt the palm of her hand grow warm; then she took it away and
pressed her other hand gently upon his burning brow — close
under the roots of the hair.

“You have an ugly arm, Simon,” she said. “ But with God’s
help I trust all will go well.” :

“T fear me, Kristin, me you cannot heal, skilful leech as you
are,” said Simon. But he looked almost cheerly. The drink was
beginning to work; he felt the pains much less. But his eyes felt
so strange — as though he could not guide them — it seemed to him
he must be lying there with his eyes squinting one to either side. |

“’T will go with me as tis doomed to go, I trow,” he said as


before.


The Cross 828


Kristin went back to her pots—smeared a paste upon linen
cloths, came back and swathed the hot bandages around his arm
from the finger-tips right round behind his back and over his
breast, where the swelling spread from his arm-pit in red stripes.
It hurt sorely at first, but soon it brought a little ease. She wrapped
woollen over all and laid soft down cushions under the arm. Simon
asked what ’twas she had upon the bandages.

“Qh, ’tis divers simples —salsify and swallow-wort for the
most,” said Kristin. “ Had it but been summer, I could have gath-
ered it fresh from my herb-garden. But I had a plenty — thanks
to God — this winter I have had no need of it till now.”

“What was it you told once of swallow-wort — you had heard
it of the abbess when you were in the cloister — of the name — ? ”

“ Mean you that in all tongues it has a name that means swallow-
blossom — all the way from the sea of Greece hither to the north-
ern lands? ”

“ Ay — for in all lands it springs into bloom when the swallows
wake from their winter sleep.” Simon shut his lips a little closer.
By then he would have lain long in the earth —
~ “T would have my resting-place at the church here,” said he,
“if it so befall that I die now, Kristin. Now am I so rich a man
that Andres, belike, will sit here in Formo a man of some power
in time to come. I wonder much if ’twill be a son that Ramborg
will bear in spring after 1am gone — I had been fain to live so long
that I had seen two sons in my house — ”

Kristin said she had sent word south to Dyfrin of his having
fallen so sick. Gaute — that very morning he had set forth.

“You sent not the child to ride that road alone? ” asked Simon,
in alarm.

She had had none“at hand that she deemed could keep pace
with Gaute on Rauden, answered she. Simon said ’twas like to be
a hard road for Ramborg — and if only she did not journey more
hastily than was fit for her. “ But my children, sure enough, I
would fain see again —”

A while after, he began again to speak of his children. He talked
of Arngjerd — of whether he had done wrong not to fall in with
that proffer from the folk at Eiken. But the man seemed to him
full old — and he had been fearful, for that Grunde had the name
of being somewhat ungoverned when he was in drink. Arngjerd
—her in especial he would fain have seen settled in full security.


829 Debtors


ee ee OE et tl CL COLOTE
Now ’twould be for Gyrd and Gudmund to find a husband for her.
“Tell my brothers, Kristin, —I sent them greetings and prayed
that they would look well before them in this matter. Would you
take her away with you to Jérundgaard for a while, I would be
thankful to you, where I lie. And should Ramborg wed again ere
Arngjerd is cared for, then must you take her to you, Kristin.
Nay, you must not deem aught else than that Ramborg has been
good to her at all times — but were she to have both step-mother
and step-father, I fear me she might be looked on more as a serv-
ing-wench than as — you mind, I was wed with Halfrid when I
became her father—”

Kristin laid her hand gently on Simon’s, and gave her promise
that she would do for the maid all that lay in her power. She re-
membered all she had seen — things were hard for the children that
had a man of worship for father, and they born out of wedlock.
Orm and Margret, Ulf Haldorssén—She stroked and stroked
Simon’s hand. ;

“But ’tis not so sure, either, that you will die this time, brother-
in-law,” she said, smiling a little. Even yet, at times, there would
pass as *twere a shadow of the young maid’s sweet, gentle smile
over the thin, stern face of the woman. Thou sweet, young
Kristin — !


Simon’s fever was not so high this evening, and the pains were
less, he said. When Kristin changed the bandages on his arm,
’twas not so swollen; the flesh was softer, the marks of her fingers
stayed a while when she pressed it warily.

Kristin sent the serving-folk to bed. Jon Daalk, whom naught
would serve but that he should watch over his master, she let
lie down over on the bench. The box bench with the carven back
she had drawn up before the bed, and she sat there, leaning in a cor-
ner. Simon dozed and slept — once, when he woke, he saw that
she had got herself a spindle. She sat so straight; she had stuck the
staff with the tuft of wool under her left arm, her fingers twisted
the yarn, the staff sank and sank alongside her long, slender lap —
then she wound up the thread, twisted again, the staff sank and
sank — he drowsed off with watching it —

When he waked again, towards morning, she still sat there as
before, spinning. The light from the taper she had Pee so that
the bed-hanging shaded him, fell straight upon her face. It was so


The Cross 830


pale and still; the full, soft mouth had grown thin-lipped and
firmly shut; she sat with downcast eyes, spinning. She could not
see that he lay awake, gazing at her from the shelter of the
bed-tent. She seemed so deathly sad, that Simon felt as though his
heart bled within him as he lay there and gazed at her.

She rose, went over and saw to the fire. So noiselessly! When
she came back she peered in behind the bed-tent — met his open
eyes looking from the dark.

“ How is’t with you now, Simon? ” she asked, softly.

“ Well —’tis with me now.”

But he deemed he felt now a tenderness up under his left arm,
too — and under his chin when he moved his head. Oh, no, ’twas
naught but fancy, belike —

— Ah, sure it was she would never deem she had lost aught
when she cast away his love —so far as that went, he might well
tell her of it. "Twas impossible that should make her more heavy-
hearted. He would tell her, before he died — once only: I have
loved you all these years — ;

The fever waxed again. And there was pain in the left arm —

“You must try if you can sleep again, Simon. Maybe you will
mend now quickly,” she said, low. -s

“T have slept much to-night —” He began speaking of his chil-
dren again —the three he had and loved so dearly —and the one
unborn. Then silence fell upon him —the pains took him again
so sorely. “ Lie down a little now, Kristin. Jon can sit up a while,
I trow, if you deem ’tis needful that one keep watch.”


In the morning, when she loosed the bandages, Simon looked
up calmly into her despairing face: “ Ah, no, Kristin, there was
over-much foulness and poisonous stuff in the arm already —
and freezing cold had I been too —ere I came into your hands.
"Tis as I said — me you cannot heal. Be not so sorrowful for this,
Kristin.”

“You should not have journeyed all that long way,” she said,
in a weak voice. ;

“No man outlives his fated day,” answered Simon, as before.
“T was set on getting home, you see — There is one thing and
another to speak about — how things shall be ordered when I am
gone.


He laughed a little:


831 Debtors


“ All fires burn out at last.”

Kristin looked at him with tea-bright eyes. He had ever had
a by-word in his mouth. She looked down at his red-flecked face.
The heavy cheeks, the folds below the chin, seemed as ’twere
sunken — lay in deep layers. His eyes looked both dull and glit-
tering — then again they cleared and thought came back to them;
he looked up at her with the steadfast, searching look which most
oft had been in his small, sharp, steel-grey eyes.

When broad daylight came in the room, Kristin saw that
Simon’s face was grown thin about the nose —a strip of white
ran down on either side to the corners of his mouth.

She went over to the little glass pane, stood there, and swal-
lowed down her tears. The thick coating of rime on the window
glittered and shone a golden green. Without must still be such
fair winter weather as had been all the week —

— ’Twas the mark of death, she knew —

She came back, and passed her hand in under the coverlid —
he was swollen around the ankles, and up along the legs.

“Would you — would you that we should send for Sira Eirik
now? ” she said softly.

“ Ay, to-night,” answered Simon.

He must speak of it before he confessed and took the sacra-
ment. Afterward he must try and turn his thoughts another way.

“Strange it is that ’tis like to be you that will lay out my
body,” said Simon. “— And a fair corpse I fear me I shall not be.”

Kristin choked down a sob. She went away and made ready a
cooling draught again. But Simon said:

“T like not these drinks of yours, Kristin—a man’s thoughts
grow so unclear after them.”

Yet, after a while, he begged that she would give him a little.
“But put not overmuch in it of the drowsy stuff. I must speak
with you of a matter.”

He drank, and lay waiting for the pains to abate so much that
he could talk with her clearly and calmly.

“Would you not that we should fetch Sira Firik —that he
might speak such words as would bring you solace at this pass? ”

“Yes, soon. But there is somewhat I must get said to you first.”

He lay a little. Then he said:

“Say to Erlend Nikulaussén, that the words I spoke when last
we parted, those words have I repented each day since. Unmanly


The Cross 832


LOCOS EE
and little-minded did I show me to my brother-in-law that night
— Greet him and say — pray him to forgive it me.”

Kristin sat with bowed head — Simon saw she flushed blood-
red to the very brows.

“You will bear this message to your husband? ” he asked.

She nodded a little. Then Simon said again:

“If Erlend come not to my grave-ale, then must you seek him
out, Kristin, and tell him this.”

Kristin sat silent, with face dark flushed.

“You will not deny me this that I beg of you, now that I am
to die? ” asked Simon Andress6n.

“No,” whispered the woman, “TI will — do it—”

“°Tis ill for your sons, Kristin, that there is unfriendliness
*twixt their father and mother,” Simon began again. “I marvel
if you have seen how much it troubles them. Hard is it for the
brave lads to know that their parents are the common talk of the
parish.”

Kristin answered, in a low, hard voice:

“Erlend forsook our sons — not I. First my sons lost their foot-
hold in the country-side where they were born to rank and udal
lands. If now they must suffer that their home here in the Dale,
my home, is matter of parish talk — ’tis not I that have wrought it.”

Simon lay for a little in silence. Then he said:

“T have not forgot it, Kristin — much rightful cause have you
to plain — ill has Erlend ordered things for his own. But you
should remember — had this his plan gone forward, his sons’ lot
were now secure, and he himself had stood amid the mightiest
knights of this realm. ‘Traitor is he called who fails in such a ven-
ture —but if he wins, folk talk far otherwise. Half Norway
thought with Erlend then — that we were ill served with sharing
a king with the Swedes, and that in Knut Porse’s son we might
look to find other metal than in this weakling — could we have
got Prince Haakon hither to us in his tender years. Many stood
behind Erlend then and pulled the rope with him — they dropped
it and crept to shelter when the matter came to light — so did my
brothers and many others whom folk call now good knights and
esquires-at-arms. Erlend alone went down — And in that pinch,
Kristin, your husband showed him a bold and manful fellow —
howsoever he may have borne him before and since —”

Kristin sat quiet, trembling.


833 Debtors


“Thold, Kristin, if ’tis by reason of this matter you have spoken
to your husband bitter words, then must you eat them again.
Surely you can bring you to do that, Kristin—once on a time
you held to Erlend fast enough — would not hear a true word said
of his dealings with you, when he had done such deeds as I could
never have deemed an honest man, not to say a high-born knight
and a kurteis gentleman-at-arms — mind you where I came upon
you two in Oslo? That you could forgive Erlend, both then and
since —”

Kristin answered low:

“Thad cast in my lot with his then — what would have become
of me afterwards, had I parted my life from Erlend’s? ”

“Look on me, Kristin,” said Simon Darre, “and answer me
true. Had I held your father fast to the word he had given —
chosen to take you, even as you were —had I said to you that
never should you be minded of your shame by me, but that loose
you I would not — what had you then done? ”

“T know not.”

Simon laughed a hard laugh:

“Had I forced you to drink the bride-ale with me —TI trow,
you had scarce taken me to your arms willingly, Kristin, my fair
one —”

Her face was white now. She sat looking down, answering
naught. He laughed as before:

“T trow you had scarce welcomed me kindly, when I mounted
the wedding-bed beside you —”

“ Methinks I had taken a knife with me to bed,” she said in a
half-choked whisper.

“TJ hear you know the ballad of Knut of Borg ” — Simon smiled
grimly. “That such a thing has happed ’twixt living folk I have
never heard. But God knows whether you had not done it! ”

A little after he spoke again:

“Tis unheard of, too, among Christian men, for lawfully wed-
ded folk to part them of their own wills, as you have done — with-
out lawful cause and the bishop’s leave. Are you not ashamed, you
two —? You trod all underfoot and braved all that you might
come together; that time Erlend was in peril of life, you thought
of naught but of saving him, and he thought more on you than
on his seven sons and his name and his goods. But so soon as you
can possess each other in peace and safety, then you throw seem-


The Oross 834


Phed@nosgek — 2 NO es oe. a ee
liness and peace to the winds — wrangling and miscontent were
betwixt you at Husaby, too; that saw I myself, Kristin —

“_T tell you, for your sons’ sakes, you must seek atonement
with your husband. If you be least in the wrong, then belike ’tis
the easier too for you to proffer Erlend your hand,” said he, more
gently. tet

“_ Tis easier for you than for Erlend Nikulauss6n, sitting up
there at Haugen in poverty,” said Simon again.

“Tis not easy for me,” she whispered. “ Meseems I have shown
that, for my children, I can do a little. —I have striven and striven
for them —”

“Tt is so,” said Simon, Then he asked: “ Mind you the day we
met on the road by Nidaros? You sat in the grass giving Naakkve
suck —”

Kristin nodded.

“Could you have done for the child at your breast what my
sister did for her son— given him from you to those better able
to care for him? ”

Kristin shook her head.

“But pray his father to forget what you may have said to
fim in anger —think you not you could do that for him and
six fair sons besides — say to your man, ’tis needful for the young
lads’ sakes that he come home to them and to his manor — ? ”

“T will do as you would have me, Simon,” said Kristin, low.
“Hard are the words you have spoken to me,” she said a little
after. “Before now, too, you have chidden me more harshly
than any other layman —”

“ Ay, but now can I promise you ’twill be the last time ” — his
voice took on the teasing, mirthful ring of old days. “‘ Nay, weep
not so, Kristin — but remember, sister mine, this have you prom-
ised to a dying man.” Once more the old, wicked gleam came to
his eyes:

“You know well, Kristin — before now I have had cause to
know you were not one to put full trust on! ”

“Be still now, dear one,” he begged a little later; he had lain
listening to her broken, sore weeping. “ Be sure I remember that
you were to us a good and faithful sister. We were friends at
the last in spite of all, my Kristin —”

Towards evening he prayed that they would fetch the priest
to him. Sira Eirik came, shrived him, and gave him the last oil


835 Debtors


ee eae EN Frye a eee Debtors
and viaticum. He took leave of his serving-folk and of the Er-
lendss6ns, the five who were at home — Naakkve, Kristin had
sent to Kruke — Simon had begged to see Kristin’s children that
he might say farewell to them.

This night, too, Kristin watched over the dying man. Towards
morning she fell asleep for a moment. She was wakened by a
strange sound — Simon lay moaning a little, softly. It shook her
fearfully, when she heard it—that he should bemoan himself,
quietly and bitterly, like a poor, forsaken child, now when, be-
like, he thought that none would hear it. She bent down and
kissed him many times upon the face. A sickening, deathly smell
came already from his breath and his body. But, as the day grew
light, she saw that his eyes were alive and clear and steadfast
as ever.

He suffered fearful pain, she saw, when Jon and Sigurd lifted
him in a sheet while she put his bed aright and made it as soft
and easy as she could. Food he had taken none for a whole day
and night, but he had a great thirst.

When she had settled him aright, he begged that she would
make the sign of the cross over him: “I cannot move the left
arm either now.”

— But when we cross ourselves, or mark with the cross any-
thing that we would guard, then shall we bear in mind why the
cross was made holy and what it means, and remember that
’twas by the pains and death of the Lord that this sign came to
honour and power —

Simon remembered, this had he heard one read aloud. Sure
enough he had been little wont to think much when he crossed
his breast, or set the cross upon his houses and his goods. — He
felt him unready and ill beseen to fare forth from this earthly
home — he must comfort himself by thinking that he had made
him ready with shrift as well as could be in the time, and that
he had been given the last offices. Ramborg — but she was soa
young, maybe she would live much happier with another man,
His children, God must take them in His ward—and Gyrd
would care for their welfare faithfully and wisely. And for the
rest he must put his trust in God, who judges a man, not ac-
cording to his worth, but of His own grace —

On in the day came Sigrid Andresdatter and Geirmund of
Kruke. Thereupon Simon would have it that Kristin must go out


The Cross 836


ee __ i nnn eee
and rest, so long she had watched and tended him now. % And
soon twill be irksome to be near me,” said he, smiling a little.
At that, for a moment, she broke into loud sobs — then she bent
down and kissed again the poor body that was already begun
to decay. ;

Thereafter Simon lay still. The fever and the pains were now
less sore. He lay thinking, sure now it could not be long before
he was set free.

He marvelled himself that he had spoken to Kristin as he had
done. "T'was not this that he had meant to say to her. But he had
not been able to speak otherwise. At times he was well-nigh
vexed about it.

But now the poison must have worked inward to his heart.
A man’s heart is the first thing to quicken in his mother’s womb,
and the last to grow still in him. But in him now it sure must soon
come to rest.


In the evening he lay wandering. More than once he groaned
aloud, so that ’twas fearsome to hear it. But at other times he lay
laughing softly, and speaking his own name, as Kristin thought —
but Sigrid, who sat bent over him, whispered to her, she deemed
he was talking of a boy, their cousin, with whom he had been
good friends in childhood. Towards midnight he grew still and
seemed to sleep. Then Sigrid prevailed with Kristin to lie down a
little upon the other bed in the room.

She was awaked by a noise in the room —’twas a little before
dawn —and then she heard that the death-throes had begun.
Simon was past speech, but he knew her yet; she could see it by
his eyes. Then it seemed as though a spring snapped within them
—they turned up under the eyelids. But yet a while he lay, the
rattle in his throat, still living. The priest was come, he read the
prayers for the dying; the two women sat by the bed, and
the whole household were come into the room. At last, a while
before midday, he drew his last breath.

The day after, Gyrd Darre came riding in to the Formo court-
yard. He had broken down a horse on the way. Down by Breidin
he had heard of his brother’s death, so that he was calm enough at
first. But when his sister threw herself weeping into his arms, he
pressed her to him, and he too wept like a child.

Ramborg Lavransdatter, he told them, lay at Dyfrin with a


837 _ Debtors


new-born son. When Gaute Erlendssén came with the message,
she had shrieked aloud straightway that she knew ’twould be
Simon’s death. Then she had fallen upon the floor in a fit. The
eos had come six weeks before its time, but they hoped ’twould
ive.

A goodly grave-ale was held for Simon Andressén, and he was
buried close up to the choir by the Olav’s Church. The parish
folk were well pleased that he had chosen his resting-place there.
The old Formo stock, that died out on the spear side with
Simon Semundss6n, had been a mighty and a gallant line; Astrid
Simonsdatter wed richly; her sons bore the knightly name and
sat in the King’s council, but came home but seldom to their
mother’s udal lands. When, therefore, her grandson took up his
abode upon the manor, folk deemed ’twas well-nigh as though
the old race was set in their seat again; soon they forgot to ac-
count Simon Andressén a stranger, and they sorrowed much that
he must die so young; for at his death he was but two-and-forty
winters old.


5


WEEK after week went by, and Kristin made ready in her heart
to bear to Erlend the dead man’s message. Do it she would for
sure — but she deemed it a hard matter. And meanwhile there
was so much that must be done at home upon the manor. From
day to day she put herself off with fresh pleas for delay —

At Whitsuntide Ramborg Lavransdatter came back to Formo,
The children she had left behind at Dyfrin. They were well,
she answered, when Kristin asked after them. The two young
maids had wept bitterly and sorrowed over their father. Andres
was too young to understand. The youngest, Simon Simonssén,
throve well, and there was good hope that in time he would
grow big and strong.

Ramborg came once or twice to the church, and to her hus-
band’s grave; else she stirred not from her home. But Kristin
went south to her often as she could. She wished now from her
heart that she had known more of her young sister. The widow
looked most childlike in her weeds — frail and undergrown her


BhesCioss 070 0 ob aS eo
body seemed in the heavy, dark-blue habit; the little, three-
cornered face showed sallow and thin among the linen bands,
under the black woollen veil falling in stiff folds from the crown
of her head almost to the hem of her skirt. And she had dark
rings under her big eyes, where the pupils ever gazed out now,
wide and coal-black.

At the hay harvest there came a week when Kristin could not
go to see her sister. From her hay-making folk she heard there
was a guest with Ramborg at Formo— Jammzlt Halvardsson.
Kristin remembered that Simon had spoken of this man; he
owned a great manor not far from Dyfrin, and he and Simon
had been friends from childhood up.

A week on in the harvesting it set in rain; and Kristin rode
down the Dale to her sister. Kristin sat talking of the untoward
weather and of the hay, and asked how things went here on
Formo — when Ramborg said of a sudden:

“?T will be for Jon now to see to all that —I am faring south a
few days hence, Kristin.”

“Ay, poor soul, you long for your children, I can well be-
lieve,” said Kristin.

Ramborg rose and walked to and fro in the room.

“You shall hear somewhat that will make you wonder,” the
young woman said in a little. “Soon will you and your sons be
bidden to a betrothal-ale at Dyfrin. I gave Jammelt my yea ere
he went from here, and Gyrd will hold my betrothal feast.”

Kristin sat dumb. Her sister stood, black-eyed and pale, gaz-
ing fixedly at her. At length the elder said: :

“T see, then, not for long will Simon have left you widowed
—I had deemed you grieved for him so sorely. — But tis true
you are your own mistress now —”

Ramborg made no answer; then, in a little, Kristin asked:

“Gyrd Darre knows that you are minded to wed again so
soon? ”

“Ay.” Ramborg walked to and fro again. “ Helga counsels
it — Jammelt is rich.” She laughed. “And Gyrd is so clear-
sighted a man, I trow he has seen long since how wretchedly we
lived together, Simon and I.”

“What is’t you say?” cried Kristin —‘‘ None else knew, for
sure, that you lived unhappily together,” she said a little after.

I wot not that any has seen other than friendship and goodwill


a OO ha a Set Debtors


betwixt you. Simon gave you your way in all things, gave you
all your heart desired, ever kept your youth in mind and was
heedful that you should have joy of it, and be spared all toil anda
trouble. His children he loved, and showed you day by day his
thankfulness for that you bore him those two —”

Ramborg smiled scornfully.

Kristin answered vehemently:

“ Ay, if so it be that you have aught of reason to say you lived
ill together, then for sure ’tis not Simon that bears the blame —”

“No,” said Ramborg. “I will take the blame—if you dare
not.”

Kristin sat in amaze.

“T trow you know not yourself what you say, sister,” said she
at length.

“Yes, in sooth,” answered Ramborg. “But full well I trow
that you know it not. So little have you thought on Simon that
I well believe ’tis news for you. You counted him good enough
to turn to when there was need of a helper that had gladly
borne red-hot iron for your sake —but never did you fling so
much thought Simon Andressén’s way as to ask how much it
cost him —I was left free to joy in my youth, ay — blithely and
gently Simon lifted me into the saddle and sent me forth from
him a-visiting and junketing; even as blithely and gently he wel-
comed me again when I came home — he patted. me as he patted
his dog and his horse—he felt no lack of me, wheresoever I
went —”

Kristin had risen — she stood by the board moveless. Ramborg
wrung her hands so that the joints cracked, going and coming,
going and coming through the room:

“Jammelt—” she said, something more calmly. “I have
known for long what he thought of me. I saw it even while
his wife still lived. Not that he, knows that he has betrayed him
in word or deed — believe not that! He grieved so himself over
Simon — came to me time and again and would have comforted
me —’tis true! "Iwas Helga who said to us both she deemed that
now it were fitting if we —

“ __ And I wot not what I should wait for. Never shall I be
more comforted or less than now I am — Now I have a mind to
try how ’tis to live with a man who has kept silence and has
thought on me for long, long years. I know all too well how 'tis to


The Cross 840
live with one who keeps silence and is ever thinking on an-
other —”

Kristin stood as before. Ramborg stopped before her, with
flashing eyes:

“Vou know ’tis true, what I have said! ”

Kristin went forth from the room, quietly, with bowed head.
While she stood in the rain in the courtyard waiting for the serv-
ing-man to lead forth her horse, Ramborg came to the door of
the hall — she gazed at her elder sister with black, hostile eyes.


"Twas not till the next day that Kristin called to mind what
she had promised Simon if Ramborg should wed again. So she
rode to Formo once more. This seemed to her no easy thing to
do. And the worst was that she knew she could not say aught
that would be a help or comfort to her young sister. To her
this match with Jammelt of A®lin seemed rashly made — with
Ramborg in the mind she now was in. But Kristin saw ’twould
be of no avail for her to gainsay it.

Ramborg was sullen and peev ish and would scarce answer the
other. She would in no wise consent that her step-daughter
should come to Jorundgaard. “Nor methinks are things so or-
dered at your manor that ’twere wise to send a young maid
thither.” Kristin answered mildly that herein Ramborg might
mayhap be right. But she had given Simon her word to make this

rofter —

“ Ay, and if so be Simon, in his fever-wanderings, understood
not that ’twas an affront to me to ask you this, you, at least, must
know that ’tis an affront to. tell me of it,” answered Ramborg;
and Kristin was fain to turn her home from her fruitless errand.

Next morning promised fair weather. But when her sons came
in to the morning meal, Kristin said they must get in the hay
without her; she was setting forth on a journey, and mayhap
she would be gone some days.

“T think to go north to Dovre to seek out your father,” said
she. “Tis in my mind to pray him to forget the troubles that
have been between us — to ask when he mall come home to us.”

The sons flushed red; they scarce dared look up, but she
marked well how glad they were. She drew Munan to her and
bent her face over him:

“ You scarce remember your father, I trow, little one? ”

The boy nodded, dumbly, with shining eyes. One after an-


841 Debtors


a ek a ee a eR
other the other sons looked over at their mother: she was
younger of face and fairer than they had seen her for many
years.


She came out into the courtyard a little after, clad for the
journey in her church-going clothes: a black woollen habit
broidered with blue and silver about the neck and sleeves, and
black, sleeveless, hooded cloak, since ’twas high summer. Naakkve
and Gaute had saddled her horse and their own; they would go
with their mother. She said naught against it. But she spoke fittle
with her sons as they rode north across the gorge and up into
Dovre. For the most she was silent and Jost in thought, and if
she talked with the young lads, ’twas of other things than of
her errand.

When they were come so far that they could see up the hill-
side and had sight of the house roofs of Haugen against the sky,
she bade the lads turn back.

“You can understand well that your father and I may have
much to say one to the other that we can best speak of alone.”

The brothers nodded; they bade their mother farewell and
turned their horses homewards.


The wind from the mountains swept, cool and fresh, against
her hot cheeks as she came up over the last rise. The sun shone
golden upon the small grey houses, casting long shadows across
the courtyard. The corn up here would soon be earing — it
showed fairly upon the small plots, shimmering and swaying
in the wind. On all the stone heaps and over the hillocks tall
waving willow-herb blossomed red, and in between were little
haycocks. But on the farm was no living thing to be seen — not
even a dog came forth to give warning.

Kristin unsaddled her horse and led it to the water-trough.
She had no mind to turn it loose up here—so she took it into
the stable. The sun shone in through a great hole in the roof —
roof-turves hung down in tatters from the beams. And there was
no sign that any horse had stood there for many a long day.
Kristin saw to her beast, and betook her out into the courtyard
again.

She looked into the byre. It was dark and empty —she knew
by the smell that it must have stood long deserted.

Some skins of beasts were stretched upon the house wall to


The Cross 842


eS Oe
dry —a swarm of blue-flies flew up, buzzing, as she drew near.
At the north end of the house earth had been heaped up and
turf spread over it so that the house timbers were quite hidden.
He had done it for warmth, belike —

She looked for naught else but that the house would be lock-
fast, but the door flew open when she laid hand upon the latch.
Erlend had not even barred his house. ;

An air noisome past bearing met her when she stepped in — the
strong, rank smell of skins and of the stable. The first feeling that
rushed over her as she stood within his house was heart-breaking
remorse and pity. This dwelling seemed to her most like a bear’s
winter lair —

O ay, ay, ay, Simon — you were right!

Small the room was, but ’twas choicely wrought and had once
been fine. The fire-place had even a masoned chimney above it, so
that it should not smoke out into the room, like the fire-places
in the hall-house at home. But when she would have opened the
damper to clear the foul air a little, she saw the pipe had been
blocked with slabs of stone. The glass pane in the window to
the penthouse was broken, and had been stopped up with cloths.
The whole room was floored with wood, but so thick with dirt
was the floor that the planks could scarce be seen. Not a cushion
was there upon the benches, but weapons, furs, and old clothes
lay strewn about; the filthy board was littered with orts of food.
And flies buzzed high and low.

She started — stood trembling — breathless, with thumping heart.
In the farther bed —in yonder bed where it had lain when last
she was here — lay somewhat covered with a wadmal cloth. She
knew not herself what she thought —

Then she set her teeth, forced herself to go across and lift the
cloth. "T'was but Erlend’s coat of mail, his helm and shield. They
lay covered up upon the bare bed-boards.

She looked towards the other bed. "T'was there they had found
Bj6rn and Aashild. ’T'was there Erlend slept now — Belike she her-
self would lie there this night —

But what must it have been for him to dwell in this house, to
sleep here — ? Again all else that she felt was drowned in pity. She
went over to the bed — she saw it had not been made for many
days. The hay under the sheet of hide had been lain upon till ’twas
hard as stone. There was nothing in the bed save some sheep-skins,


843 Debtors


and a pair of wadmal-covered pillows, so foul that they stank,
Dust and trash showered from the bed-gear when she handled it.
ean resting-place was no whit better than a horse-boy’s in a
stable.

Erlend, who could never have bravery enough about him; Er-
lend, who would don a silken skirt, velvet and fine furs, on the
least pretext — who chafed because she suffered his children to go
clad in home-spun wadmal on workdays, and never could abide
that she herself should suckle them and take a hand herself with
her serving-women in the housework — like a cottar’s wife, he
said —

Jesus — and ’twas he himself that had brought things to this —

— No, I will not say a word — I will take back all that I have said,
Simon. You were right —he shall not bide on here, the father of
my sons. I will proffer him my hand and my mouth and pray him
for forgiveness —

"Tis not easy, Simon. But you were right — She remembered the
sharp grey eyes —their look, steadfast as ever, well-nigh to the
end. From out the poor body, already beginning to waste away,
there shone through his eyes his pure and shining spirit, until his
soul was taken home like a blade withdrawn. She knew ’twas as
Ramborg had said. He had loved her all these years.

No day had gone by in these months since his death but she
must think on him, and now it seemed to her that she had known
it all ere ever Ramborg spoke. She had been driven in this time
to turn over again every memory she had of him for as long as
she had known Simon Darre. All these years she had borne within
her false memories of him who had been her hand-fasted man; she
had tampered with these memories as a bad ruler tampers with
money, mixing base metal with the silver. When he set her free
and took upon himself the blame for the breach of troth-plight --
she had told herself, and believed, that Simon Andress6n turned
from her with scorn in the moment he knew of her dishonour,
She had forgotten that when he freed her, that day in the nun’s
garden — then for sure he thought not aught else of her but that
she was unstained and pure. But even then he was willing to bear
the shame of her changefulness and revolt — craved only that her
father should know ’twas not he who had willed the breach —

And this, too, she knew now: when he had learned the worst,
and had stood up to save for her a semblance of honour in the


EheiCross = a en ee
world’s eyes — had she been able to turn to him then, Simon would
have taken her even then at the church door to be his wife, and
he would have striven so to live with her that she should never
have felt he had kept the memory of her shame.

And none the less she knew: never could she have loved him.
Never could she have loved Simon Andressén — Yet — all that Er-
lend was not and that she had raged to find he was not, Simon was.
But then must she herself be a pitiable woman, to murmur at her
lot —

Simon had given, with a measureless bounty, to her he loved.
And she had deemed surely that she too did the like —

But when she took gifts at his hands, unthinking and unthank-
ful, he had but smiled. She understood now that often when they
were together he had been heavy of heart. She knew now that
behind that strangely steadfast mien he had hidden sorrow — then,
flinging out a few jesting words, he would thrust all aside, and
stand ready once more to guard, to help, and to give —

She herself had raged, had stored up and brooded over every
hurt — when she reached forth her gifts and Erlend saw them
not —

Here, in this room, she had stood and spoken such brave words:
“T went astray of my own will—never will I cast blame on Er-
lend, should the path lead o’er the cliff edge.” She had said it to
the woman she drove to death to make way for her love.

Kristin moaned aloud, clasped her hands before her breast, and
stood, rocking. Ay — she had said so proudly, she would cast no
blame on Erlend Nikulaussén if he grew weary of her, betrayed
her, forsook her even — ;

Ay —and if Erlend had done that — it seemed to her she could
have stood to her word. If he had betrayed her once for all — and
there had been an end. But he had not betrayed her — only failed
her, failed her, and made her live ever fearful and unsure — no,
never had he played her false, but never had he sustained her —
and she could see no end to it: here she stood now, come to beg
him to turn back to her, to fill her cup each day to the brim with
unsureness and disquiet, with vain expectancy, with longings and
fears, and hope that broke in sunder — ;

And it seemed to her she was worn out by him now. She had
not the youth and courage to live with him any more — and be-
like she would never grow so old that Erlend could not play upon


845 Debtors
her fondness. Never so young that she could live with him in glad-
ness, never so old that she could bear with him in patience. A little,
weak woman was she grown — belike had ever been. Simon was
in the right —

Simon — and father. They had been constant ever in one in
faithful love to her, for all she had trodden them down for the
sake of this man she herself could bear with now no longer —

Oh, Simon, I know well, never have you wished for vengeance
on me at any time. But I marvel, Simon, if, where you lie, you
know not that now you are well avenged —


Nay, she must busy herself with somewhat, else she could not
bear it. She set the bed in order; sought for a mop and a broom,
but it seemed no such thing was in the house. She looked into the
closet — now she saw whence came the smell of the stable. Erlend
had made his horse’s stall in there. But here the floor was swept
and clean. The saddle and the gear that hung upon the wall were
well kept and greased; their rents were mended.

Pity again drove all other thoughts away. Had he brought Soten
in there because he could not bear to be all alone in the house — ?


Kristin heard steps in the penthouse. She stepped over to the
glass pane — ’twas thick with dust and cobweb, but she thought
she could dimly see a woman. She pulled out the cloth and peeped.
Out there a woman was setting down a milk-can and a small
cheese. She was oldish, lame, ugly, and poorly clad. Kristin scarce
knew herself how much freer she drew breath.

She set the room in order as best she could. She found the writ-
ing that Bjorn Gunnarsson had carved upon a log of the long wall
— it was in Latin, and she could not read it all, but he named him- |
self both dominus and miles, and she made out the name of his
fathers’ seat in Elvesyssel that he had lost for Aashild Gautesdat-
ter’s sake. Amidst the fine carvings on the high-seat was his shield,
bearing its device of the unicorn and the lily-star leaves.


A while after Kristin thought she heard a horse somewhere with-
out. She went to the outer room and peered forth.

Down from the wooded slope above the farm-stead came a tall
black horse harnessed to a load of firewood. Erlend walked by its
side, driving. One dog sat atop of the wood; some others ran about


the sleigh.


The Cross 846 .
Soten, the Castilian, strained at his collar and dragged the wood-
sleigh forward over the courtyard sward. One of the dogs dashed
down the slope barking — Erlend, who had begun to unharness,
marked now by the flurry among the dogs that something must
be afoot. He took the wood-axe from the load and walked toward

the dwelling-house —

Kristin fled in again, dropping the latch behind her. She shrank
in to the wall of the fire-place, and stood trembling and waiting.

Erlend strode in, with the wood-axe in his hand and the dogs
tumbling over the threshold before and after him. They found the
stranger forthwith, and greeted her with a storm of barking —

The first she saw was the wave of young, red blood that rushed
over his face — the fluttering quiver about his fine, weak mouth,
the great eyes deep in the shadow of the brows —

The sight of him took away her breath. She saw, indeed, the old
growth of stubble upon his lower face, she saw that his unkempt
hair was iron-grey — but the colour came and went in his cheeks
in hasty pulses, as when they were young — he was so young and
so comely, ‘twas as though naught had availed to quell him —

He was miserably clad —his blue shirt dirty and ragged; over it
he wore a leathern jerkin, scarred and rubbed and rent at the lace-
holes, but fitting closely and pliant to the body’s strong and gra-
cious motions. His tight leathern breeches had a rent over the one
knee, and the seam behind the other leg was burst. Yet never,
more than now, had he seemed the son of chiefs and nobles. So
fairly and easily he bore his tall slim form, with the broad shoul-
ders somewhat stooped, the long, fine limbs — he stood there, rest-
ing a little on one foot, one hand laid on the belt about his slender
waist, the other, with the axe in it, hanging at his side.

He had called the dogs back to him — stood looking at her —
went red and pale and said no word. For a good while they both
stood dumb. At last the man spoke, in a voice that wavered a little:

“Are you come hither, Kristin? ”

“T was fain to see how it fared with you,” answered she.

“ Ay, you have seen it, then.” He cast a glance about the room.
“You see things are passably well with me here — ’tis good you
chanced ona day when my house is trim and in order —” He grew
ware of the shadow of a smile upon her face. “‘— Or maybe ’tis
you who set it in order,” said he, laughing low. ‘


847 Debtors


Erlend laid aside the axe and sat him down on the outer bench,
with his back leaned against the board. Of a sudden he grew

rave:

“ You stand there so — is aught amiss at home — at Jorundgaard,
I mean — with the lads? ”

“No.” Now was her time to bring out what she had to say:
“ Our sons are thriving and doing well. But they long so for you,
Erlend. This was my errand —I came hither, husband, to beg you
to come home to us. We miss you, all of us —” She cast down her
eyes.

“ You look well, none the less, Kristin —” Erlend looked at her
with a little smile.

Red, as though he had struck her, Kristin stood:

=. ..is not-for that?

“Nay, I know ’tis not because you deem you too young and
fresh to live as a widow woman,” Erlend went on, when she
stopped short. “I trow but little good would come of it should
I come back home, Kristin,” said he, more soberly. “In your
hands all goes well on Jorundgaard, that know I — you have for-
tune with you in your doings. And I am well content with the
life I live here.”

“°Tis not well for the boys —that we should be at odds,” she
answered in a low voice.

“Oh —” Erlend lingered on the word. “ They are so young, I
can scarce believe they take it so to heart that they will not forget
it when they leave their childhood behind. I care not if I tell you,”
he said with a little smile, “I meet them now and again —”

She knew it — but she felt as though it humbled her, and felt as
’rwere so he had meant it — he had deemed she knew it not. The
sons had never known that she knew. But she answered gravely:

“Then you know also that much on Jérundgaard is not as it.
should be —”

“We never talk of such-like things,” said he, smiling as be-~
fore. “ We go a-hunting together — but you must be hungry and
thirsty ” — he leapt up. “ And you are standing too — nay, set you
up in the high-seat, Kristin — ay, do so, sweetheart! You shall have
it to yourself —”

He fetched in the milk and the cheese, and brought out bread,
butter, and dried meat. Kristin was hungry and yet more thirsty;


The-Cros eee
but she found it hard to swallow down the food. Erlend ate hastily
and slovenly, as had always been his wont when he was not with
strangers — but he was soon done. ;

He talked of himself the while. The folk down the hill here
tilled his land and brought him milk and a little food — for the
most part he lay out on the fells hunting game and fishing. How-
soever, he said on a sudden, he had thoughts now of faring from
the land. Seeking service with some outland chieftain —

“Oh, no, Erlend! ”

He looked at her quickly and searchingly. But she said no more.
It began to grow dusk in the room — her face and head-linen shone
palely against the dark wall. Erlend rose and made a fire in the
fire-place. Then he sat him down aslant on the outer bench, turned
towards her; the red glare from the fire flickered over his form.

But that he could even think of such a thing! He was nigh as
old as had been her father when he died. And yet ’twas believable
enough that he would do it one day — run after some such whimsy,
off to seek for new adventures —

“Deem you ’tis not enough,” said the wife vehemently, “ ’tis
not enough that you have forsaken the parish and your sons and
me — would you flee the land from us now? ”

“Had I known your thoughts of me, Kristin,” said Erlend
gravely, “then had I gone forth from your manor long ago. But
{ understand now that you have had to bear much from me —”

“You know full well, Erlend— you say my manor, but you
have a husband’s right over all that is mine.” She heard herself
how faint of voice she grew.

“ Ay,” answered Erlend. “ But I know myself I was an ill hus-
band of my own good.” He was silent a while. “ Naakkve — I mind
the time he was unborn — you spoke of him that you bore be-
neath your girdle, that was to mount into my high-seat after me.
I see now, Kristin — ’twas hard for you — best let things be as they
are. And I thrive full well in this life —” f

Kristin looked around her in the darkening room, shuddering
— the shadows filled every corner now, and the fire-light danced —

“T understand not,” she said, nigh sinking with heaviness, “ that
you can abide this house. Naught have you to do, none to bear
you company —at the least you might get you a house-carl, if
trow —”


“You mean that I should work the farm myself — > ” Erlend


849 Debtors


laughed. “ O no, Kristin, sure you must know how little fit I am
to play the farmer. I cannot sit quiet — ”

“ Quiet — Here surely you sit quiet enough — the long winter
through —”

Eriend smiled to himself, his eyes far off and strange:

“ Ay, when ’tis in that way — When I need not to think of
aught but what runs in my head — can go and come as I like —
And you know well —it has ever been so with me, that when
there’s naught to wake for, I can sleep —I sleep like a bear in its
winter lair when ’tis not weather for the fells —”

“ Are you never afraid to be alone here? ” whispered Kristin.

At first he looked at her as though he understood not. Then
he laughed:

“ Because folks say ’tis haunted? Never have I marked aught.
Sometimes I had been fain that my kinsman Bjorn would visit
me. Mind you that he said once he deemed I would ill abide to
feel the knife-edge at my throat. I could e’en have a mind to an-
swer the knight now that I was not greatly feared when I had the
rope about my neck —”

A long shudder passed through the woman’s body. She sat there
dumb.

Erlend rose.

“ T trow ’tis time we went to rest now, Kristin.”

Stiff and cold, she watched Erlend take the covering that lay
over his armour, spread it on the bed, and turn it down over the
dirty pillows. “”Tis-the best I have,” said he.

“Erlend! ” She clasped her hands beneath her breast. She sought
for something she might say to gain a little time yet — she was so
afraid. Then she remembered the errand she was to fulfil:

“Erlend — I was given a message to bear to you. Simon prayed —
me, when he lay dying, that I would greet you from him and say
he had repented him each day of the words he said to you when
last you parted. Unmanly he called them himself — and he begged
that you would forgive him for them.”

“ Simon.” Erlend stood holding the bedpost with one hand, gaz-
ing down at the floor. “ He is the man I am least fain to be re-
membered of.” eS

“T know not what has been between you,” said Kristin.
Strangely heartless these words of Erlend’s seemed to her. “ But
’twere strange and unlike Simon if it were as he said, that he had


WhepC ross eS nt RE eee
shown him little-minded in his dealings with you. If so it be —I
trow the blame was not all his.”

Erlend shook his head: “ He stood by me like a brother when
my need was greatest,” he said low. “ And I took help and friend-
ship at his hands, and I knew not that all the time he could scarce
endure me —

“__ Methinks it must have been easier to live in the old world,
when two such fellows as he and I met together hand to hand —
met ona holm and put it to the trial of arms which should win the
fair-haired maid —”’

He took an old cloak from the bench and flung it over his arm:

“Maybe you would have the dogs beside you to-night? ”

Kristin had risen:

“Whither go you, Erlend? ”

* Out to the barn to lie there —”’

“No —!” Erlend stopped — he stood there, straight and slender
and young in the dim red light of the waning embers. “I dare not
lie alone here in this house —I dare not —”

“Dare you lie in my arms then? ” She half saw his smile through
the dusk, and drooped beneath it. “ Are you not afraid I should
crush you to death, Kristin —? ”

“Would that you might —! ” She sank into his arms.

When she awoke, she saw by the pane of glass that it must be
day without. Something lay crushingly heavy on her breast — Er-
lend slept with his head upon her shoulder; he had laid one arm
over her and his hand was around her left arm.

She looked at the man’s iron-grey hair. She saw her own small,
shrunken breasts — above and below them the high-arched curves
of her ribs showed under the thin covering of flesh. A kind of
terror came over her, while memory after. memory arose from
this night. In this house — they two, young no longer — Disquiet
and shame took hold on her when she saw the livid patches
upon her work-worn, mother’s arms, on her shrunken bosom.
Wildly she caught at the coverlid and would have covered
herself —

Erlend awoke, started up on his elbow, stared into her face —
his eyes were coal-black from sleep:

“ Methought —” He threw himself down beside her again; a
deep wild tremor went through her whole being at the rejoicing


851 Debtors


and the fear in his voice. “ — Methought I had dreamed again —”
She pressed her open lips upon his mouth and twined her arms
about his neck. Never, never had it been so blessed —


Late in the afternoon, when the sunshine was yellow already
and the shadows lay long over the green courtyard, they set out
- down to the beck to fetch water. Erlend bore the two great pails.
Kristin walked by his side, slender, straight, and lissom. Her head-
linen had slipped down, and lay around her shoulders; her hair
shone bare and brown in the sunlight. She felt it herself, when she
shut her eyes and lifted her face against the light — she had grown
red in the cheeks; the lines of her face had softened. Each time
she glanced at him, she sank her gaze, overcome — when she saw
in Erlend’s face how young she was.

Erlend bethought him that he would bathe. While he went a
little farther down, Kristin sat on the greensward, leaning her back
against a stone. The fell beck trilled and gurgled her into a doze
— now and then, when the midges and gnats touched her skin, she
opened her eyes a little and brushed them off. Down among the
sallows around about the pool she caught a glimpse of Erlend’s
white body — he stood with a foot upon a stone, rubbing himself
with wisps of grass. She closed her eyes again and smiled, in happy
weariness. She was strengthless as ever against him —

The man came and flung himself on the grass before her — with
dripping hair, the chill of the water upon his red mouth when he
pressed it into the palm of her hand. He had shaved and found a
better shirt — but this one even was none too brave. Laughing, he
took hold on it up under the arm-pits, where it was tattered:

“You might as lief have brought me a shirt when you did come
north here at the last.”

“T shall set about sewing and hemming a shirt for you soon as I
come home, Erlend,” she answered smiling, and passed her hand
across his brow. He grasped it:

“Never shall you go from here again, my Kristin — Pa

The woman did but smile and answered naught. Erlend dragged
himself a little way, as he lay on his belly. Under the bushes in
the damp shade grew a cluster of small, white starry flowers. The
flower-leaves were veined with blue like a woman’s breast; in the
midst of each blossom was a little, blue-brown boss. Erlend


plucked them one and all:


The Cross 852

“You that have lore of such things, Kristin, I trow you know
a name for these? ”

“Tis Friggja-grass * — nay, Erlend —” She flushed and put
away his hand as he would have stuffed the blooms into her
bosom.

Erlend laughed and lightly bit the white petals one by one.
Then he laid all the blossoms in her open hand and closed up her
fingers over them:

“Do you mind when we walked in the garden of the Hofvin
Spital — you gave me a rose? :

Kristin shook her head slowly, smiling a little:

“No. But you took a rose from out my hand.”

“And you suffered me to take it. And ’twas so you suffered me
to take you, Kristin —as meek and gentle as a rose — afterwards
you pricked me sometimes till the blood came, my sweet.” He
threw himself forward into her lap and laid his arms about her
waist: “‘ Last night, Kristin —’twas of no avail — you did not get
off by sitting meekly waiting —”

Kristin bent her head and hid her face against his shoulder.


On the fourth day they had taken harbour in the birch wood
among the hillocks above the farm. For on that day the tenant was
carrying the hay. And, without having spoken of it, Kristin and
Erlend were at one that none need know she was with him. He
went down to the houses once or twice to fetch food and drink,
but she sat on in the heather up among the stunted birches. From
where they sat they could see the man and woman toiling home,
bearing the loads of hay upon their backs.

“Mind you,” asked Erlend, “that time you promised me that,
when I ended as a crofter away among the fells, then would you
come and keep house for me? You will keep two cows here be-
like, and a few sheep and.goats — >?”

Kristin laughed low, playing with his hair.

“ What think you our sons would say, Erlend — if their mother
fled the parish and forsook them in that wise — ? ”

“T trow they would be fain enough to be their own masters on
Jérundgaard,” said Erlend, laughing. “They are old enough for
it. You wot well Gaute is a full good farmer, young as he is. And
Naakkve is well-nigh a man.” .


* See Note 4.


853 Debtors


“O no.” The mother laughed quietly. “Tis true he thinks so
himself — ay, they think so, all five, I trow — but the lad lacks
somewhat yet of a man’s wit —”

“Tf ’tis after his father he takes, maybe ’twill come to him late
or never,” answered Erlend. He smiled slyly: “You deem you
can still hide your children behind your skirts, Kristin — Naakkve
had a son fathered on him up here this summer — you know not
that, I trow—?”

“No —!” Kristin sat there red and aghast.

“ Ay, “twas still-born—and I trow the boy will think twice
ere he come thither any more —’twas the widow of Paal’s son,
here at Haugsbrekken; she said ’twas his, and sackless, I trow, he
was not, howsoever the matter stood. Ay, such old folk are we
now, you and [—”

“Can you talk so, when your son has brought on him trouble
and shame? ” It cut her to the heart that the man could talk so.
lightly — and that it seemed to be a jest in his eyes that she had
known naught of this.

“ Ay, what would you have me say? ” asked Erlend as before.
“The lad is eighteen winters old. You see yourself now, it avails
not much for you to go about keeping watch on your sons as
though they were children. When you come up hither to me, we
must see to getting him wed —”

“Think you ’twill be a light thing for us to find Naakkve an
equal match —? No, husband, after this bethinks you must come
home with me and help to guide the lads.”

Erlend raised himself sharply on his elbow:

“That will I not do, Kristin. A stranger in your country I am
and ever will be — no man there minds aught of me but that I was
doomed a traitor to king and country. Thought you never in
those years I lived on Jérundgaard that I lived ill at ease — at home
in Skaun I was wont to count for something more ’mongst folk.
Even at that time —in my youth — when the tale of my evil life
was buzzed abroad, when I lay under the Church’s ban — none
the less was I Erlend Nikulaussén of Husaby! Then came the
time, Kristin —I had the fortune to show the folk yonder, north
of the fells, that wholly unworthy of my forefathers I was not —
No, I tell you! Here, on this little croft, I am a free man — none
gape after my doings or talk behind my back. Hearken to me,
Kristin, my only love — stay with me! Never shall you have cause


The Oross 854


De Oross oA Ca ee
to repent it. Here is better dwelling than was at Husaby on any
day. I wot not how it is, Kristin —I was never glad or light of
heart there, not when I was a child, and never since. *Twas hell
while I had Eline with me, and never were you and I glad at
heart together there — Yet God the Almighty knows I have loved
you each day and each hour I have known you. Bewitched, I
trow, the manor was— mother was wrung to death there, and
my father was ever an unglad man. Here ’ts good to be, Kristin
—if only you will be with me. Kristin —as true God died for
us upon the cross, I hold you as dear to-day as that night you
slept beneath my cloak — the night after Margaret’s Mass — and
I sat and looked on you, pure and fresh and young and untouched
blossom that you were.”

Kristin answered low: ‘

“Mind you, Erlend, too, you prayed that night that I should
never have to weep a tear for your sake —”

“Ay —and God and all the saints in heaven know that I meant
it! "Tis true it fell out otherwise — maybe it had to —belike it
ever so befalls while we dwell in this earthly home. But I loved
you when I wrought you evil and when I wrought you good.
Bide here, Kristin —”

“Have you never thought on this,” she asked, gently as before,
“that it might well make your sons’ lot hard to have their father
talked of so as you say? Flee to the hills from the parish talk, they
cannot, all the seven—”

Erlend looked down:

“"They are young,” said he, “ comely and gallant lads — They
will make a way for themselves yet — We, Kristin, we have not
so many years before us, ere we grow old and grey — will you
waste the time while yet you are fair and fresh and fit to joy
in life? Kristin —? ”

She cast down her eyes before the giddy gleam in his. In a little
while she said:

“Have you forgot, Erlend, that two of our sons are little
children yet? What deem you I were worth if I forsook Lavrans
and Munan— ”

“You must bring them up hither, then — if Lavrans would not
rather bide with his brothers. So little a boy he is not neither. —
Is Munan comely as ever? ” the father asked, smiling.

“ Ay,” said the mother, “he is a fair child.”


855 Debtors


Thereafter they sat long silent. And when again they spoke, it
was of other things.


She woke in the grey of dawn next morning, as she had waked
each morning up here — lay and heard the horses stamping with-
out the house wall. She had Erlend’s head fast in her arms. The
other mornings when she awoke in this grey and early hour she
had been gripped by the same fear and shame as on the first —
she had striven to stifle them. Were they not a wedded pair at
odds who had now made up their quarrel? Could aught better
_ befall the children than that their father and mother should make
friends again?

But this morning she lay striving to remember her sons. For
’twas as though a spell was on her — and straight from the wood
at Gerdarud, where first he had taken her to his arms, Erlend had
borne her with him hither. They were so young — it could not
ve true that already she had borne this man seven sons, that she
was mother to tall, grown men—It seemed as though she must
have lain here in his arms and but dreamed of the long years they
had lived as man and wife at Husaby — All his reckless words
lured her and echoed in her — giddy with fear, she felt as though
Erlend had swept from off her the seven-fold burden of her
charge —thus must it be with a young mare when she stands
unsaddled upon the seter pasture-ground — pack and saddle and
head-gear are gone from her; against her blow the winds and the
airs of the uplands; she is set free to graze the tender mountain
grass, free to run far as she will over all the upland wastes.

And at the same time she longed already, sweetly and yearn-
ingly, right willing to bear a new burden. Already she yearned
with a little tender dizziness towards him who should abide next
to her heart for nine long months. She had known full surely
from the first morning she awoke up here in Erlend’s arms. Along
with the hard, dry, scorching fever in her mind, barrenness had
passed away from her. She bore Erlend’s child in her womb, and,
with a strangely tender impatience, her soul stretched forward
towards the hour when it should be brought forth to day.

Those great sons of mine have no need of me, she thought. To
them I seem but doting and troublesome. We shall but stand in
their way, the little one and I. No, I cannot part from here — we
must bide here with Erlend. I cannot go —


The Cross 856

Yet, none the less, as they sat together at their morning meal,
she let fall that she must get her home now to her children.

’Twas of Lavrans and Munan she thought. They were so old
now, that she was abashed when she thought of them dwelling
up here with Erlend and her, and mayhap looking with wonder-
ing eyes at their father and mother, grown so young again. But
do without her those two could not.

Erlend sat gazing at her while she spoke of her journey home.
At last he spoke with a flitting smile.

“ Ay —if so be you will, you must even go!”


He made ready to bear her company on her way. And he rode
with her right down through the gorge into Sil, until he caught
a glimpse of the church roof over the pine-tops. Then he bade
her farewell. At the last he was still smiling, a roguishly secure
smile.

“ Ay, you know well, Kristin — whether you come by night or
by day — whether I wait for you short or long —I shall welcome
you as you were the Queen of Heaven come down to my croft
from the skies — ”

She laughed:

“Ay, with such great matters J dare not meddle. But I trow
you know now, love, that great will be the joy in your house the
day the master comes home to his own.”

He shook his head, laughing a little. Smiling, they made their
farewells; smiling, Erlend leaned over, as they sat a-horseback side
by side, and kissed her many, many times, and between the kisses
he looked at her with his laughing eyes:

“We must see, then,” he said at last, “ which of us two is
the more stubborn, my sweet Kristin. This will not be our last
meeting — that know we well, both you and I! ”

As she rode by the church a little shudder ran through her.
"Twas as though she were coming home from the Mountain
King’s Hall; as though Erlend were the Mountain King himself,
and could not pass the church and the cross on the green.

She drew rein — was well-nigh minded to turn about and ride
after him —

Then she looked out over the green grassy slopes, down upon
her own fair manor with meadows and tilled fields, and the river
sweeping in shining loops down through the Dale. The moun-
tains rose in a warm blue haze — the heavens were full of bellying


857 Phir


summer clouds. "Iwas madness. There, at home with their sons,
was his place. He was no knight of faerie — but a Christian man,
full as he was of mad-brained moods and thoughtless whims; her
wedded husband, with whom she had borne both good and ill —
dear, dear, sorely as he had tormented her with his wayward
fancies. She must bear with him; since she could not live without
him, she must strive on and suffer dread and insecurity as best
she might. Long, she deemed, it would not be till he came after —
now that again they had been together.


6


To her sons she said, their father must take order with one thing
and another at Haugen ere he came home. Most like he would
come down in early autumn.

At home she went about the manor, young, rosy-cheeked, her
face soft and gentle, quicker at all her work — yet she made not
such good speed as when she worked in her wonted quiet and
ordered fashion. She took not her sons to task sharply, as had
been her wont, when they did amiss or ske had cause for miscon-
tent with them. Now she spoke to them jestingly, or let it pass
without saying aught. :

Lavrans was now for sleeping in the loft with his big brothers.

“ Ay, maybe we must reckon you among the grown lads now,
my son.” She ran her fingers through the boy’s thick, yellow-
brown hair, and drew him to her —he was as high already as her
mid-breast. “ And you, Munan, will you let your mother count
you for a child a little while longer? ” — Of an evening when the
boy had gone to rest in the hall, he still liked that his mother
should sit her down on the bedside and fondle him a little; he lay
with his head in her lap, and prattled in more childish fashion
than he would in the day, when his brothers could hear him. The
two talked of the time when father would come home.

Then he would move over to the wall, and his mother would
draw the covers over him. Kristin lit the candle, took her sons’
garments that were to mend, and set herself to sew.

She unclasped the brooch over her bosom, and felt with her
hand about her breasts. They were round and firm as a quite
young woman’s. She pushed her sleeve right up to the shoulder,
and looked on her naked arm in the light. It was grown whiter


The Oro: 858


ERESGCTOSS | 2
and fuller. Then she rose and walked — felt how softly she trod
in the supple within-door shoes — passed her hand down over
her slim hips: no longer were they sharp and hard as a man’s.
The blood flowed through her body as in spring-time the sap
flows in the trees. "Iwas youth burgeoning within her.


She was busy with Frida in the brew-house, pouring warm
water upon the grain for the Yule malt. Frida had forgot to see
to it in time; it had been suffered to go bone dry while yet
swelling. But Kristin did not chide the woman — with a half-smile
she listened to the other excusing herself. For the first time it had
befallen that Kristin had forgot to look to it herself.

By Yule-tide she would have Erlend at home with her. When
she sent him these tidings, he would come home at once, for sure.
So mad the man could not be as not to give way now — he must
see ‘twas not possible she could go up to Haugen, far from all
folk, when she bore another life with her. But she would tarry
a little yet before she sent him this message — though ’twas sure
enough — maybe even till she had felt it quicken — The second
autumn they dwelt on Jérundgaard she had had to go out of
the way, as folk say. She had taken comfort quickly enough then.
She was not afraid that ’twould fall out so this time —it could
not be. Nevertheless —

She felt as though she must bend all her being to the shielding
of this tiny, tender life that she bore beneath her heart — as one
bends one’s hands to guard a little, new-lit flame —


One day late in autumn Ivar and Skule came and said they were
for riding up to their father — ’twas rare and fine now in the fells;
they would ask leave to go a-hunting with him, now ’twas clear
black frost.

Naakkve and Bjérgulf were sitting at the chess-board; they
stopped and listened. ‘

“T know not,” said Kristin. She had not thought on it before
— whom she should send with the tidings. She looked at her two
half-grown sons. Foolish, she herself deemed it, but to tell them
she could not bring herself. She might say they must take Lavrans
with them, and tell him to speak with his father alone. He was so
young he would not wonder. And yet —

“You wot well your father is coming hither soon,” she said.


859 Debtors


“Like enough you would but be in his way. Soon, too, I shall
have a message to send him myself.”

The twins grumbled. Naakkve looked up from the chess-board
and said shortly: “ Do as our mother bids, boys.”


When Yule was nigh she sent Naakkve north to Erlend.
“— You must tell him, son, I begin now to long sore for his com-
ing — and, so, I trow, do all of you! ” She spoke not of the new
reason there was now —’twas most like, she deemed, that the
grown lad had seen it for himself; he should judge himself
whether he would tell his father of it.

Naakkve came back—he had not found his father. Erlend
was gone to Raumsdal; he had had word, it seemed, that his
daughter and her husband were now to flit to Bjérgvin, and that
Margret was wishful to meet her father at Veoy.

"Twas but reason, this — Kristin lay awake of nights — now and
again she would stroke Munan’s face as he slept there by her side.
It grieved her that Erlend came not for Yule. But ’twas but rea-
. son that he would fain see his daughter when the chance offered.
She wiped away the tears as they stole down her cheek. She wept
so easily again now, even as when she was young.


Just after Yule-tide Sira Eirik died. Kristin had been to him
at Romundgaard more than once in the autumn while he lay bed-
ridden; and she was at his grave-ale. Else she never came out among
folks now. She deemed it great loss that their old parish priest
was gone.

At the grave-ale she heard that someone had met Erlend north
at Lesja; he was on his way home then. So he would soon come,
for sure —

In the days that followed, sitting on the bench under the little
window, with her hand-mirror, that she had sought out, in her
hand, she would breathe on it, and rub it bright, and scan her
face in it.

She had been sunburned as a cottar’s wife these last years, but
all trace of that was gone now. Her skin was white, with round,
clear red roses on her cheeks like some painted picture. So fair of
face she had not been since she was a young maid — Kristin sat
and held her breath with wondering joy. ;

So, at length, they would have the daughter Erlend had wished


The Cross 860


ERGOT OSS ss 0%, Se eee
so much — if it fell out as the wise women say. Magnhild. They
must break with the custom this time and give the first daughter
her father’s mother’s name —

There hovered before her some memory of a fairy-tale she had
once heard told. Of seven sons who were outlawed and hunted
into the wilds for a little unborn sister’s sake. Then she laughed
at herself —how she had come to think on it she understood
not —

Out from her sewing-chair she took the shirt of finest white
linen that she sewed upon when she was alone. She pulled out
threads of the linen and sewed birds and beasts on a glassy drawn-
work ground — ’twas many and many a day since she had done
such fine work. — Oh, would that Erlend might come now —
while as yet this had but made her fair, young and straight, rosy
and blooming —

When Gregory’s Mass * was but just gone by, the weather
grew so fair ‘twas right spring-like. The snow was melting —it
Tse like silver; already there were brown patches on the slopes
that took the sun; a blue haze lay upon the mountains.

Gaute stood in the courtyard one day mending a broken
sledge. Naakkve stood leaning against the wood-shed wall watch-
ing his brother at his work, when Kristin came from the kitchen-
house bearing in both arms a great trough of new-baked brown
bread.

Gaute looked up at his mother. Then he laid axe and auger
down upon the sledge, ran after her, and took the trough; he bore
it over to the ere hous

Kristin had stopped still; her cheeks were red. When Gaute
rame back, she went over to her sons:

“You must ride up to your father one of these days, I trow —
say that now is there great need of him here at home, to take the
care of things from off my shoulders. I can do so little now — and
*twill be in the very midst of the spring work, too, that I shall
have to lie in—

The young lads listened to her; they too flushed, but she saw
they were full glad at heart. Nokes said, with a show of care-
lessness:


“*T were as well we rode to- day — towards nones — what think
you, brother? ”


* y2th March.


ee


861 Debtors


It was but the next day at noon when Kristin heard horsemen
in the courtyard. She went out —’twas Naakkve and Gaute —
they were alone. They stood by their horses, looked down, and
said naught.

“What answered your father? ” asked the mother.

Gaute stood leaning on his spear — he still looked on the ground.
On that Naakkve spoke:

“Father bade us say to you that he had looked each day, all
winter, that you should come up to him. And he said you would
be no less welcome than when last you went to visit him.”

The colour came and went in Kristin’s face:

“Said you not then to your father — that things stood thus
with me — that ’twill not be long ere I shall have a child again —?”

Gaute answered without looking up:

“It seemed as though father deemed that no reason — thought
not that because of that you should not be able to remove to
Haugen.”

Kristin stood a little silent:

“What said he? ” she asked, in a low harsh voice.

Naakkve would have spoken. Gaute lifted his hand a little,
and looked up quickly, beseechingly, at his brother. But the eld-
est son spoke out his message:

“Father bade us say this: you knew when the child was begot
how rich a man he was. And if he be not grown richer since,
neither is he grown poorer.”

Kristin turned away from her sons and went slowly towards
the hall-house. Heavily and wearily she sat her down on the
bench under the little window, from which the spring sun had
melted the ice and rime already.

—It was so. "T'was she had prayed to be suffered to lie in his
arms — first. But ’twas not well done of him to mind her of that
now. She deemed ’twas not well done of Erlend to send her this
answer by their sons —


The spring weather held. There came a week’s south wind,
with rain — the river rose, waxed great and loud. Down the hill-
sides the waters gushed noisily; there were sounds of snow-slides
from the mountain valleys. Then came sunshine again.

Kristin stood without, behind the house, in the grey-blue
evening. The thicket below the field was full of the singing of


The Cross 862


Lhe Gross © oO eee eee
birds. Gaute and the twins were gone up to the seter — they
were after black-cock. Even down to the manor the drumming
of the game-birds came from all the hill-sides in the mornings.

She pressed her clenched hands beneath her bosom. ”Iwas but
a short time now —she must bear it with patience to the end.
Often, doubtless, she had been wayward and hard to live with,
she too — Ill-judging in her endless carefulness for the children
— ill-timed, as Erlend had said. It seemed to her, none the less,
that now he was hard. But now the time would soon be here
when he must come to her —that he too knew, for sure.

Sunshine and showers followed one another. One afternoon
her sons.called to her. They were standing without in the court-
yard, all seven, with the whole household. Right across the Dale
stretched three rainbows; the innermost rested a foot upon the
Formo houses; ‘twas quite unbroken, and the colours shone
strong and bright; the two outer ones were fainter and faded away
above —

Even while they stood gazing at this strange and lovely sign,
the air grew grey and dark. From the south a snow-squall came
sweeping. It snowed till in a little while all the world was white.

Kristin sat in the evening and told Munan of King Snow and
his fair white daughter — Mjoll* was her name—and of King
Harold Luva, t who was fostered by Giant Dovre. She felt a
pang of sorrow when she remembered ‘twas years now since she
had sat thus and told tales to her children — ’twas pity of Lavrans
and Munan that she had given them so little of this joy. And now
they would soon be great boys. While the others were small, at
home at Husaby, she had sat telling them fairy-tales of an eve-
ning — so often, so often.

She saw that the grown sons sat listening — she flushed red and
stopped short. Munan begged her to tell more. Naakkve rose and
drew near::

“Mind you, mother, Torstein Uksafot t and the trolls of
Hoiland’s forest? — tell us that one! ”

While she told the tale, her mind went back. They lay resting
in the birch grove down by the river, having a bite of food, her
father and his harvest-folk, men and women. Her father lay upon
his belly; she sat astride the small of his back, kicking his sides


* Mjoll = Powdery snow. + Luv = Snow-cap; e.g. on trees.
t = Ox-foot.


863 Debtors


with her heels —’twas a hot day, and she had got leave to go
barefoot, as did the grown women. Her father reeled off the tale
of the kindred of the Hoiland trolls: Jernskjold * had Skjoldvor;
their daughters were Skjolddis and Skjoldgjerd, that Torstein
Uksafot slew. Skjoldgjerd had been wed to Skjoldketil; their
sons were Skjoldbj6érn and Skjoldhedin and Valskjold, who owned
Skjoldskjessa; they begot Skjoldulf and Skjoldorm; Skjoldulf got
Skjoldkatla, and begot on her Skjold and Skjoldketil —

Nay, he had named that name already, cried Kolbjérn laughing.
For Lavrans had boasted that he could teach them two dozen troll
names, but he had not even filled the first full dozen. Lavrans
laughed too: “ Ay, but sure you know the trolls, too, call their
children for their fathers that are gone!” But the work-folk
would not let it pass; they doomed him to pay them a drink of
mead as fine. Ay, then, said the master, they must have it — to-
night, when they came home. But the folk would have it now,
at once — and at length Tordis was sent up for the mead.

They stood up in a ring, and the great horn went the round.
Then they took their scythes and rakes and went to the meadows
again. Kristin was sent home with the empty horn. She held it
before her in both hands as she ran barefoot in the sunshine on
the green path up towards the manor. Between-whiles she stopped,
when a drop of mead had gathered in the toe of the horn — then
she tilted it over her little face and licked the gilded edge within
and without, and then her fingers to catch the sweetness.

Kristin Lavransdatter sat still, gazing before her. Father! She
remembered a shiver passing over his face, a whitening, as the
wooded hill-sides grow white when a storm-gust turns the leaves
upon the trees —a clang of cold, harsh scorn in his voice, a gleam
in his grey eyes like the flash of a half-drawn sword. A moment,
then it passed away — in merry, kindly jest while he was young;
oftener and oftener, as he grew older, in a gentleness quiet and
something sad. In her father’s soul there had dwelt somewhat
else besides that deep, tender sweetness. She had learned, with the
years, to understand it —her father’s wondrous gentleness came
not therefrom that he saw not clear enough the faults and the
vileness of mankind, but that he was ever searching his own
heart before his God and bruising it with repentance for his own
sins.

* = [ron-shield.


The Cross 864


EO OSS SS ee
No, father, I will not be impatient. Much have I sinned against
my husband, I too —


On the eve of Cross-Mass * day, Kristin sat at the board with
the house-folk, and seemed not other than her wont. But when
her sons had gone up to rest in the upper hall, she called Ulf Hal-
dorssén softly to her. She asked him to go down to Isrid at the
farm, and pray her to come up to the mistress in the old weaving-
house.

Ulf said: “ You must send word to Ranveig of Ulvsvolden and
to Haldis, the priest’s sister, Kristin — and most fitting ’twere if
you could send to fetch Astrid and Ingebjérg of Loptsgaard to
take the charge of the room —”

“There is no time,” said Kristin. “I felt the first pains already
before nones. Do as I say, Ulf —I will have none but my own
women and Isrid with me.”

“ Kristin,” said Ulf gravely, “see you not that much evil talk
may come of it, if you should creep into hiding this night —”

Kristin let her arms fall heavily across the board. She shut her
eyes.

“Then they must. talk who will! I cannot bear to see these
strange women around me to-night —”

Next morning the big sons sat silent — with eyes cast down;
while Munan prattled and prattled of the little brother he had
seen in his mother’s arms down in the weaving-house. At last
Bjorgulf said he had best talk no more now of that.


Kristin did naught but lie and listen — it seemed to her she never
slept so sound that she was not listening, and waiting.

She rose from her bed the eighth day, but the women about
her knew ’twas not well with her. She shivered and felt waves of
heat; one day the milk would stream from her breasts so that
her clothes were wet through; the next day she would not have
enough to give the child its fill. But she would not lie down again.
She would not let the child out of her arms—she never laid it
in the cradle; of nights she had it with her in the bed; in the day
she went about bearing it in her arms, sat with it by the hearth,
sat with it on her bed, listened and waited, and gazed on it; yet
for hours she seemed neither to see it nor to hear its wailing.


* 3rd May.


865 Debtors


Then she would seem to wake — she took up the boy, walked and
walked the floor with him; with her cheek bent down to his
she crooned and crooned to him low and softly; then sat her down
and held him to her breast; sat gazing on him as before, her face
set as stone —

When the boy was near six weeks old —and the mother had
not yet been over the weaving-house threshold — Ulf Haldorssén
and Skule came in thither one day. They were clad for the road.

“ Ay, now are we riding north to Haugen, Kristin,” said Ulf.
“There must be an end to these matters now —”

Kristin sat silent and stiff, with the boy at her breast. At first
she seemed not to understand. All at once she started up, flushed
blood-red in the face:

“Do as you will. If you long to go back to your right master,
I will not hinder you. "I'were best you took your wage — then you
will not need to seek us down here again.”

Ulf half uttered a savage oath. Then he looked at the woman
standing there with the little child clutched to her breast. He
pressed his lips together and held his peace.

But Skule took a step forward:

“Yes, mother mine —I ride now up to father—if so be you
forget that Ulf has been foster-father to all us brothers, you must
mind at least that me you cannot bid and forbid as though I were
a serving-wench or a sucking child—”

“Can I not? ” His mother struck him on the ear, so that the
boy staggered: “ Methinks I shall bid and you shall all do my
bidding so long as I feed and clothe you— Get you out! ” she
shrieked, stamping with her foot.

Skule was wild with rage. But Ulf said below his breath:

“Tis better so, boy — better that she be wild and headstrong
than to seé her sitting staring as though she had grieved her wits
away —”

Gunhild, the house-wench, came running after them. They
were to come at once down to the weaving-house to the mis-
tress — she would speak with them and with all her sons. Curtly
and harshly Kristin bade Ulf ride down to Breidin and talk with
a man who had hired two cows of her; the twins he should take
with him, and they need not come home before the morrow.
Naakkve and Gaute she sent up to the seter —she bade them go
up the Illmand dale, and see how it stood with the horse-shelter


The Cross 866


there — and on the way up they were to look in on the tar-burner,
Bjorn, Isrid’s son, and pray him to come to the manor that evening.
’T was of no avail that they tried to make excuse, saying that the
morrow was Mass-day —


Next morning, when the bells began to ring, the mistress set
forth from Jérundgaard, followed by Bjorn, and by Isrid, who
bore the child. She had given them good and seemly clothes —
but Kristin herself was so decked out with gold for her churching
that all might see she was the mistress and the other two her
servants.

Proud and defiant, she faced the wonderment and ill-will that
she felt look out on her from the eyes of the folk on the church-
green. Oh, ay, another kind of churching had been hers ere now —
with the highest ladies in her train. Sira Solmund looked at her
with ungentle eyes, when she stood before the church door with
the taper in her hand — but he gave her entrance in the wonted
way.

rid was nigh to her second childhood now, and understood
but little; Bjérn was a strange, tongue-tied man, who never trou-
bled his head with other folks’ affairs. These two were godmother
and godfather.

Isrid named the child’s name to the priest. He started — he fal-
tered a moment — then he gave it out so that it rang down the
nave to all the folks:

“Erlend —in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost —”

A shock seemed to run through the whole congregation. And
Kristin felt a wild, revengeful joy.

The child had seemed strong enough when ’twas born. But
even from the first week Kristin had seemed to know it would
not thrive as it should with her. She herself had felt at the mo-
ment of her delivery — as though her heart fell to pieces now like
a burnt-out cinder. And when Isrid showed her the new-born
boy, she misdoubted that the spark of life had but a slender hold
on this child. But she drove the thought from her — for untold
times ere now she had felt as her heart were broken within her.
And the child was big enough and looked not weakly —

But her disquiet for the boy grew from day to day. He was
peevish and had but little stomach for food — she might sit try-


867 Debtors


eae eenererma Weeigehy wera rer eel en Debiors
ing for a long while ere she could bring him to take the breast.
And when at last she had coaxed him to suck, he would fall asleep
well-nigh at once. — She could not see that he grew —

In unspeakable fear and torment of heart, she seemed to mark
that, from the day he had been christened and had got his father’s
name, little Erlend faded more and more. .

None, no, none of her children had she loved as she loved this
little child of sorrow. None had she conceived in such sweet, wild
joy; none had she borne within her with such happy hope. Her
thoughts went again over the past nine months; at the end there
had been naught for her but to fight with all her might to hold
fast to hope and faith. She could not lose this child—and she
could not save it —

Almighty God, Queen of Mercy, Holy Olav —she felt her-
self this time it availed not that she threw herself down and
begged for the life of the child —

Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us —

She went to church each Mass-day as she was wont to do. She
kissed the doorpost, sprinkled herself with holy water, bent her
knee before the ancient crucifix above the choir arch. The Saviour
looked down, sorrowful and gentle, in the anguish of death.
Christ died to save His murderers. Holy Olav stands before His
face, in everlasting supplication for the folk that drove him into
outlawry and slew him —

As we forgive them that trespass against us.

Blessed Mary — my child dies! Know you not, Kristin, rather
had I borne His cross and suffered His death than have stood
under my Son’s cross and seen Him die — But, since I knew that
this must be, for the salvation of sinners, I gave consent in my
heart —I gave consent when my Son prayed: Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do —

— As we forgive them that trespass against us —

The cry of your heart is no prayer until you have said your
Paternoster without guile —

Forgive us our trespasses — Mind you how oft your trespasses
were forgiven. — Behold, yonder, your sons among the men. Be-
hold him who stands foremost, the chief of this fair troop of
youths. The fruit of your sin —for nigh twenty years have you
seen God add to his comeliness, his understanding, and his man-


The Cross 868
hood. Behold His mercy — where is your mercy towards your
youngest son at home —?

Remember you your father; remember you Simon Darre —

— But in the depths of her heart she felt not that she had for-
given Erlend. She could not, for she would not. She clung to her
cup of love, would not let it go, even now when it held naught
but the last bitter dregs. In the hour when she could forgive
Erlend, could even think of him without this gnawing bitterness
— then would all that had been between them be at an end.

’Twas thus she stood throughout the Mass, knowing that it
profited her nothing. She tried to pray: Holy Olav, help me;
work a miracle in my heart, that I may say my prayer without
deceit or guile—may think of Erlend with god-fearing peace
in my soul. But she knew she wished not herself that this prayer
be heard. And so she felt ’twas of no avail when she prayed that
she might have grace to keep the child. Young Erlend was lent
her of God—on one condition only might she have leave to
keep him, and that condition she would not fulfil. And to Saint
Olav it availed not to lie —


So she sat over the sick child. Her tears flowed without ceasing;
she wept without a sound, and without moving a muscle of her
face; her whole face was grey and hard as stone; only little by
little her eyes and her eyelids grew red as blood. If someone came
in to her, she dried her face in haste and sat dumb and stark.

— Yet but little was needed to thaw her. If it chanced that one
of the big sons came in, cast a look on the little child, and said
a gentle, pitying word to it, the mother could scarce refrain her
from sobbing aloud. Could she have spoken with her grown-up
sons of her fears for the little one, she knew her heart would sure
be melted. But they were grown shy of her now. Since the day
they came home and heard what name she had given their young-
est brother, the lads seemed to have drawn yet closer together
and stood, as it were, so far away from her. But one day as
Naakkve stood looking at the child, he said: ;

“Mother, give me leave —let me seek out father and tell him
how it is with this boy —”

“Naught will avail now any more,” answered the mother
hopelessly. ;

Munan understood it not. He brought his playthings to his


869 Debtors


little brother, was overjoyed when he had leave to hold him and
deemed that he had got the child to smile. Munan talked of the
time when father would come home, and wondered how he
would like this new son. Kristin sat silent and grey of face, letting
the boy’s prattle cut her to the heart.

The babe was thin now, and wrinkled as an old man; his eyes
were over large and bright. Yet had he begun to smile at his
mother — she moaned softly when she saw it. Kristin fondled the
small thin limbs, took his feet into her hand — never would this
child lie clutching in wonder at the strange, sweet, pinky things
dancing in the air above him, which he knew not were his own
feet. Never would these little feet tread the earth.


When she had sat through all the weary week’s workdays to the
end, watching the dying child, she would think, while she dressed
for church-going — nay, now was she humble enough for sure.
She had forgiven Erlend — she cared about him no more; if only
she might have leave to keep her sweetest, her most dearest treas-
ure, gladly would she forgive the man.

But when before the cross she whispered out the Paternoster
and came to the words: “ sicut et nos dimittimus debitoribus nos-
tris,” then felt she her heart harden like a hand that clenches for
a blow. No!

Hopeless and soul-sick, she wept, for will it she could not.

And so died Erlend Erlendssén, the day before Mary Magda-
lene’s Feast,* something less than three months old.


yh


Tuis autumn Bishop Halvard came on visitation north through
the Dale. To Sil he came the day before Matthew’s Mass.t "Twas
more than two years since the bishop had been so far north, so
there were many children to be confirmed this time. Munan Er-
lendssén was amongst them; he was now eight years old.
Kristin prayed Ulf Haldorssén to take the boy up for the lay-
ing on of hands — not a friend had she now in her home parish
of whom she would ask this. Ulf seemed glad when she spoke te


* 22nd July. + 21st September.


Phe ross 0 eee
him of it. When the bells rang for Mass, then, these three, Kristin,
Ulf, and the boy, went up churchward. The other sons had been
at early Mass, all but Lavrans, who lay abed with fever; to this
Mass they had no mind to go, the throng in the church would
be so great.

As they passed by the steward’s house, Kristin saw that many
strange horses stood tied outside the fence. A little up the road
they were overtaken by Jardtrud, who came riding with a great
following and passed them by. Ulf made as if he saw not his wife
and her kinsfolk.

Kristin knew for sure that Ulf had not set foot inside his own
threshold since just after the new year. “Iwas said that, at that
time, things had gone even worse than their wont betwixt him
and his wife; and thereafter he had shifted his clothes-chest and
his weapons up into the upper-hall, and abode there with the
lads. Once, early in spring, Kristin had said to him ‘twas an ill
thing that he and his wife were so sorely at odds — on that he had
looked at her, and laughed in such wise that she said no more.

"Twas sunshine and fair weather. Away over the Dale the air
lay blue between the fells. The yellow leafage of the birch-clad
slopes was beginning to grow thin, and in the parish most of the
corn was cut, but here and there by the farms a pale barley-field
still waved, and the aftermath stood green and dew-wet on the
meadows. There were many folk at the church, and much nick-
ering and neighing of stallions, for the church stables were full,
and many had been fain to bind their steeds without.

A kind of smothered, hostile air ran through the throng, whith-
ersoever Kristin and her companions went. A young fellow
slapped his thigh and laughed, but was sharply hushed by elder
folk. Kristin walked, with measured pace and head held high, over
the green into the churchyard. She tarried first for a while by the
child’s grave, and then by Simon Andressén’s. A flat grey slab of
stone was laid upon it — thereon was graven the likeness of a man,
in visored helm and coat of scale-armour, resting his hands upon
his great three-cornered shield with its device. About the stone’s
rim stood carven:

In pace. Simon Armiger. Proles Dom. Andree Filii Gudmundi
Militis Pater Noster.

Ulf stood without the south door; he had put off his sword in
the cloister-way.


871 Debtors


Then came Jardtrud into the churchyard with four men in her
company —they were her two brothers and two old farmers;
one was Kolbein Jonssén, that had been arms-bearer to Lavrans
Bjorgulfsén for many years. They went towards the priest’s
door, south of the choir.

Ulf Haldorss6én sprang down and set himself in their way.
Kristin heard quick hot speech from where they stood. Ulf would
have hindered his wife and her following from going farther.
Folk in the churchyard drew near; Kristin, too, went over thither.
Then Ulf sprang upon the stone base that bore the cloister arches,
bent in through an arch, and seized the first axe he could lay
hands on; and when one of Jardtrud’s brothers would have pulled
him down, Ulf leapt forward and flung up the axe. The blow
_ struck his brother-in-law on the shoulder, and now folk ran up
and laid hands on Ulf. He struggled to tear himself free — Kristin
saw that his face was darkly flushed, writhen, and desperate.

Then came Sira Solmund and a clerk of the bishop’s train to
the priest’s door. They spoke a few words with the farmers.
Straightway three jackmen, who bore the bishop’s white shield
on their livery, took Ulf in charge and led him forth from the
graveyard; but his wife and her following went into the church
after the two priests. ;

Kristin stepped forward to the knot of farmers:

“What is it? ” she asked sharply. “ Wherefore took you Ulf
in charge? ”

“You saw, I trow, that he smote a man in the churchyard,”
answered one as sharply. All the folk drew away from her, so
that she was left standing alone with her boy by the church
door.

Kristin deemed she understood — UIf’s wife would make com-
plaint of him before the bishop. And by forgetting himself and
breaking the churchyard peace he had got him into il case. When
a stranger reading-deacon came to the door and looked out,
she went forward to him, named her name, and asked that she
might be brought before the bishop.

Within the church all its treasures were set forth, but the
candles on the altar were not yet lit. A little sunlight came in
through the small round windows high up, and streamed down
amongst the dark-brown pillars. A part of the congregation was
already come into the nave, and had sat them down on the bench


the Cross 2 eee
that ran along the wall. In the choir before the bishop’s throne
stood a little knot of folk, Jardtrud Herbrandsdatter and her two
brothers — Geirulv with his arm bound up— Kolbein Jonss6n,
Sigurd Geitung, and Tore Borghildssén. Behind and round about
the carven chair stood two young priests from Hamar, some
other men of the bishop’s following, and Sira Solmund.

All these stared hard when the mistress of Jorundgaard stepped
forward and made low obeisance before the bishop.

Sir Halvard was a tall, stout man of exceeding venerable mien.
Beneath his red silk cap his hair shone snow-white on the temples,
and his plump oval face glowed large and red; he had a strong,
crooked nose, and a heavy chin; and his mouth, narrow as a slit,
and all but lipless, ran straight across his face, on which closely
shaven stubble showed greyish-white — but the bushy eyebrows,
over his sparkling coal-black eyes, were still dark.

“God be with you, Kristin Lavransdatter,” said Sir Halvard.
He looked ponderingly at the woman from under his heavy
brows. One of the old man’s large, white hands clasped the gold
cross on his breast, in the other, resting on the lap of his dark
violet robe, he held a wax tablet.

“What moves you to seek me here, Mistress Kristin? ” asked
the bishop again. “,Deem you not ’twere more fitting that you
tarried till after noon, and came to me at Romundgaard to say
what lies upon your heart? ”

“ Jardtrud Herbrandsdatter has sought you here, reverend
father,” answered Kristin. ‘“‘ Now hath Ulf Haldorssén been with
my husband these five-and-thirty years; he was ever our true
friend and helper and good kinsman — methought, perchance, I
might help him in some wise —”

Jardtrud gave a low cry of scorn or rage — all the others stared
at Kristin, the parish folk with bitter looks, the bishop’s train
keenly and curiously. Sir Halvard looked about him sternly; then
he said to Kristin:

“Stands it so that you would essay to make Ulf Haldorssén’s
defence? You know, mayhap,” he said quickly, raising a hand,
as she would have answered, “none has the right to call on you
to speak in this matter — saving your husband — if your own con-
science drive you not thereto. Bethink you first —”

“T thought most of this, Lord Bishop, that Ulf had let anger
carry him away and laid hand on his weapon at the church door


873 Debtors


MS aca ak SS ca a ee et LL
—and whether I might help him at all by standing bail. Or else,”
she brought out painfully, “ full sure I am my husband will do all
he can in this matter to help his friend and kinsman — ”

The bishop turned impatiently to the bystanders, who all
seemed much wrought up:

“The woman need not tarry here. Her spokesmen may have
leave to wait out in the nave — go down thither all of you, while
I speak with the lady — and send the folk outside for a while —
and Jardtrud Herbrandsdatter with them.”

One of the young priests had been busy laying out the bishop’s
vestments. Now, with heedful care, he laid the mitre with its
golden cross down on the outspread folds of the cope, and went
down and spoke a little with the folk in the nave. The others
followed him down thither. The congregation went out, and
- with them Jardtrud, and the sacristan barred the doors.

“You spake of your husband,” said the bishop, looking at her ,
as before. “Is it sooth that last summer you sought atonement
with him? ”

“Ay, my lord.”

“But you came not to an accord? ”

“ My lord — forgive me if I say it — but of my husband I have
made no plaint. I sought you that I might speak of Ulf Haldors-
sOn’s matter —”’

“Knew your husband of this—that you were with child? ”
asked Sir Halvard; he seemed to be wroth at her demurring thus.

“Ay, my lord,” she said, very low.

“ And how took Erlend Nikulaussén that tidings? ”, asked the
bishop.

Kristin stood with downcast eyes, twisting between her fingers
the fall of her linen coif.

“He would not be reconciled with you when he heard it? ”

“My lord, forgive me—” Kristin was grown very red.
“Whether my lord Erlend have been thus or thus towards me
—if it can help Ulf’s cause aught that he come hither, I wot well
that Erlend will hasten hither to him.”

The bishop knit his brows, as he looked upon her:

“Mean you, out of friendship for this man Ulf — or, since the
matter is now come to light — will Erlend now, after all, own the
child you bore last spring? ”

Kristin lifted her head —she gazed at the bishop with wide-


Phe Oras”! hgh AOS
open eyes and lips half parted. "Iwas as though now, little by
little, the meaning of his words were coming home to her. Sir
Halvard looked on her gravely:

“True it is, woman, that none but your spouse has the right
to charge you with this offence. But you understand, belike, that
both he and you were guilty of great sin if he took on himself
the fatherhood of another’s child to shield Ulf. Far better for
you all, if you have sinned, that the sin be confessed and atoned
fOE

The colour came and went in Kristin’s face:

“Has any said that ‘twas not my husband — ’twas not his
child —? ”

The bishop asked slowly:

“Would you, Kristin, I should believe you have not even
known what folk say of you and your steward —?”

“JT have not.” She drew herself up—stood with her head
thrown back a little, white of face under her flowing head-linen.
“Now do I pray you, my reverend lord and father — if any have
defamed me behind my back, that you charge them to make it
good before my face! ”

“No name has been named,” answered the bishop. “Tis
against the law. But Jardtrud Herbrandsdatter has craved leave to
part her from her husband and betake her home with her kinsmen,
laying to his charge that he has lived with another woman, a
wedded wife, and begotten a child with her.”

For a while both were silent. Then Kristin spoke again: -

“My lord —I pray you, do me so much grace, and demand of
these men that they say in my hearing — that J am that woman.”

Bishop Halvord looked at the lady sharply and searchingly.
Then he beckoned —the men in the nave came up and stood
about his chair. Sir Halvard spoke:

“You good men of Sil have come to me at an unbefitting time,
and laid before me a complaint which rightly should first have
come before my deputy. I fell in with this but now, for that I
knew you can scarce have full skill in the law. But here is this
woman, Mistress Kristin Lavransdatter of Jorundgaard, come to
me with a strange prayer — she prays me to ask you if you dare
to say to her, face to face, that word has gone about the parish that
her husband, Erlend Nikulauss6én, was not father to the child she
bore in spring? ”


x


875 Debtors


Sira Solmund answered:

“Tt has been said in every manor and every cot in this our
parish, that the child was begotten in whoredom and in incest
*twixt the mistress and her steward. And to us it seems not to be
believed that the woman herself should not know such was the
rumour.”

The bishop would have spoken, but Kristin said, loud and
firmly:

“So help me God Almighty, Mary Maid, and Saint Olav, and
Saint Thomas Archbishop —I have never known that this lie
was told of us.”

“Tis not easy then to understand — wherefore deemed you
then that you need hide so heedfully that you went with chid,”
asked the priest. “ You hid yourself from all folk, and scarce came
forth from your house the winter through.”

“Tis long since I had friends amongst the people of this parish
—little company have I kept with folk hereabout in these last
years. Though I knew not, as now it seems, that all were my foes.
But I came to church each Mass-day,” said the woman.

“ Ay —and you wrapped you in thick cloaks, and clothed you
so that none might see you grew big beneath your belt —”

“So does every woman—she would fain look seemly when
among folk,” answered Kristin curtly.

The priest spoke again:

“Had it been your husband’s child, as you say —I trow that
then you had not tended it so ill that you wrought its death with
your ill guidance.”

One of the young Hamar priests stepped forth and put his arm
about Kristin quickly. A moment after, she stood as before, pale
and straight — she thanked the priest with a reverence.

Sira Solmund went on vehemently:

“The serving-women at Jérundgaard said it — my sister, whe
comes about the manor, saw it too —the woman went there, and
the milk was spurting from her breasts so that her clothing was
wet through — yet every woman that saw the boy’s body can bear
witness he died of hunger —”

Bishop Halvard struck out sidewise with his hand:

“Enough, Sira Solmund. We must keep to the matter before
us, and that is whether Jardtrud Herbrandsdatter had naught else
to go upon, when she made plaint against her husband, than that


The Cross 876

she had heard tales which the mistress here says are lies — and
whether Kristin can prove these untrue. — None says, I trow, that
she has laid hands upon her child —”

But Kristin stood pale and said no word.

The bishop turned to the parish priest:

“But you, Sira Solmund, ’twas your bounden duty to speak
with the woman here and let her know what folks were saying.
Did you titers

The priest turned red: '

“J have prayed from my heart for this woman, that she might
of her own accord turn from her stiff-neckedness, repent her,
and do penance. — My friend her father was not,” said the priest
vehemently. “ But yet I know, too, that Lavrans of Jorundgaard
was a righteous man and strong in the faith. True it is he had
been worthy a better child — but this daughter of his has heaped
on him shame upon shame. Scarce was she grown maid when, by
her wantonness, she brought two good lads of the parish here to
their death. Then she broke her faith and troth with a bold and
gallant esquire that her father had chosen to be her husband,
gained her end in dishonourable wise, and got this man, who
you, my lord, know well was doomed outlaw and traitor. But
methought at last, for sure, her heart must be softened, when she
saw that she dwelt here hated and scorned and of the worst repute,
she and all hers, at Jorundgaard — where her father and Ragnfrid
Ivarsdatter lived with all men’s love and reverence —

“But ’twas too much when she came hither at this time with
her son to confirmation — and that man was to lead the boy before
you whom all the parish know she had lived with in twofold
adultery and incest —”

The bishop made a sign to the other to be silent:

“ How near of kin to your husband is Ulf Haldorssén? ” he
said to Kristin.

“Ulf’s true father was Sir Baard Peterssén of Hestnes. He was
brother, by the same mother, of Gaute Erlendssén of Skogheim,
Erlend Nikulauss6n’s mother’s father.”

Sir Halvard turned to Sira Solmund impatiently:

“Incest ’tis not — her mother-in-law and Ulf are cousins — ’tis
breach of kinship’s dues and grievous sin, if it be true— no need
to make it worse.”

“ Ulf Haldorss6én is godfather to this woman’s eldest son,” said
Sira Solmund.


877 Debtors


_ The bishop looked at her, and Kristin answered:

“Ay, my lord.”

Sir Halvard sat a while in silence.

“God help you, Kristin Lavransdatter,” he said sorrowfully-
“IT knew your father of old —I was his guest at Jorundgaard in my
youth. I mind you well when you were a fair and sinless child.
Had Lavrans Bj6rgulfsén lived, then had this not befallen. Think
on your father, Kristin — for his sake you must cast off this shame-
ful charge, and clear you, if you can—”

Like a lightning-flash it came to her—she knew the bishop
again. A winter’s day at the sunset hour —a rearing, red young
stallion in the courtyard, and a priest with a black ring of hair
round his fiery red face; hanging to the halter-rope, spattered with
foam, striving to master the unruly beast and mount him bare-
backed. Clusters of drunken, laughing Yule-guests hovering about,
her father among them, red of face from drink and cold, shouting,
dizzily merry —

She turned to Kolbein Jonss6n:

“ Kolbein! You that have known me from my cradle up — you
that knew me and my sisters in our father’s and mother’s home — I
know you so loved my father that — Kolbein — believe you this
of me?”

Farmer Kolbein looked on her, hard and sorrowful of face:

“We loved your father, say you — Ay, all we house-carls of
his, poor serving-men and common folk who loved Lavrans of
Jérundgaard and deemed him such an one as God would have a
chieftain to be —

“ Ask not us, Kristin Lavransdatter, who saw how your father
loved you, and how you rewarded his love — ask not us what we
deem is too evil for you to do!”

Kristin bowed her head upon her breast. The bishop could
draw from her no further word — she answered his questions no
longer.

Then Sir Halvard rose. By the side of the high altar was a little
door that led to the closed-in cloister-way behind the apse. A part
of this served as sacristy, and in part had been pierced some small
openings, through which the leprous might receive the host when
they stood without there and heard Mass apart from the rest of
the congregation. But now, for many years, none in the parish
had been sick of leprosy.

“Mayhap ’twere best you waited out there, Kristin, till the


The Cross 878


folk are come in to the service. I will speak with you afterwards
— but now must you go home to your own place.”

Kristin curtsied before the bishop.

“T would liefer go home straightway, reverend sir, if so be
you give me leave.”

“ As you will, Kristin Lavransdatter. God be your shield, mis-
tress — if you be guiltless, be sure they will work your assoilment,
God Himself and His blood-witnesses who are this church’s
lords, Saint Olav and Saint Thomas, who died for righteousness’
sake.”

Kristin curtsied again before the bishop. Then she went through
the priest’s door out into the churchyard.

A little stripling in a new red habit stood there all alone, stiff
and straight. For a moment Munan turned his pale child’s-face
up towards his mother; his eyes were big and frightened.

Her sons — she had not thought of them before. As in a flash
she saw her troop of boys —as they had stood on the outskirts of
her life this last year, thronging together like a herd of horses
in a thunder-storm, at gaze, affrighted — far off from her, while
she struggled in the last death-throes of her love. What had they
seen, what had they thought, what had they suffered, while she
tossed and writhed in her madness —? What would become of
them now —?

She held Munan’s little rough fist in her hand. The child stared
straight out before him — his mouth quivered a little, but he held
himself upright.

Hand in hand with her son, Kristin Lavransdatter went across
the graveyard, out on to the church-green. She thought of her
sons, and it seemed as though she must wholly break and sink
to the earth. The throng of folk was drawing towards the church
doors, while in the belfry all the bells were ringing.

She had heard a saga once of a slain man that could not fall to
earth for the many spears stuck fast in him. She, as she walked
there, could not drop down for all the eyes that stabbed her
through.


The mother and the child came in to the upper hall. The sons
stood in a cluster round Bjérgulf, who sat at the board. Naakkve’s
head towered high above his brothers’, where he stood with one
hand on the half-blind boy’s shoulder. Kristin saw her first-born’s


879 Debtors


narrow, dark, blue-eyed face, the soft, dark down about his red
mouth.

“You know it?” she asked calmly, as she came forward to-
wards the group of lads.

“ Ay.” Naakkve answered for them all. “‘Gunhild was at the
church.”

Kristin stood a little. The lads had turned again to their eldest
brother, until the mother spoke:

“ Have any of you known that such things were whispered in
the parish — of Ulf and me? ”

At that Ivar Erlendss6n turned to her suddenly:

“Think you, mother, that, had we known, you had heard no
tidings of our doings? “Tis not I who had sat still and let my
mother be miscalled for an adulteress — not if I knew ’twas true
she were one! ”

Kristin said sorrowfully:

“I marvel now, my sons, what you have thought of all this
that has befallen in this last year.”

The lads stood silent. Then Bjorgulf lifted his face, and looked
up at his mother with his ailing eyes:

“ Jesus Christus, mother — what should we think — this year —
and all the years that went before? Trow you ’twas easy for us to
know what we should think? ”

Naakkve said:

“O ay, mother — it may be I should have spoken to you — but
you bore you in such wise that we could not. And when you had
our youngest brother christened as though you would give out
our father for a dead man—” He broke off with a vehement
gesture.

Bjorgulf spoke again:

“ Of naught did you think, father and you, but of this strife of
yours — No thought had you that we were growing to manhood
the while. Never did you take heed who might come between
your weapons and be dealt bleeding wounds —”

He had sprung up. Naakkve laid a hand upon his shoulder.
_ Kristin saw ’twas true — these two were grown men. It seemed as
though she stood naked before them, as though she herself had
stripped her shamelessly before her children —

”*T was this they had seen, more than aught else, in their upgrow-
ing — that their father and mother had come to be old folk — and


The Dhase 880


Phe Grass. ¢ ne ee ee eee
the heats of youth pitiably misbecame them — and yet they had
not been able to grow old in honour and reverence —

Then the child’s voice cut through the silence. Munan broke
out into wild lamentation:

“ Mother — are they coming to take you to prison, mother? Are
they coming now to take mother away from us—? %

He flung his arms about her, and pressed his face up under her
bosom. Kristin drew him to her, sank down upon the bench, and
gathered the little weeping boy into her arms; she tried to soothe
him:

“Little son, little son, weep not so—”

“None can take our mother from us.” Gaute went and laid
hold of his little brother. “ Weep not so—they cannot harm her.
Now must you be still, Munan— you sure must know, boy, we
shall guard our mother! ”

Kristin sat with the child crushed close to her —’twas as though
the little one had saved her by his tears.

Then Lavrans said —he sat up with the flush of fever on his
cheeks:

“ Ay — what will you do, brothers? ”

“When Mass is sung to an end,” said Naakkve, “ we will go to
the parsonage and proffer bail for our foster-father. That is the first
thing we shall do — think you not so, good fellows? ”

Bjorgulf, Gaute, Ivar, and Skule answered ay. Kristin said:

“Ulf has borne arms against a man in the churchyard. And
somewhat must I do to free him and myself of these slanders. These
are such grave matters, my sons, meseems you young lads must
take counsel of someone how to deal with them.”

“Whom think you we should pray for counsel? ” asked Naak-
kve, with a touch of scorn.

“Sir Sigurd of Sundbu is my mother’s sister’s son,” answered
his mother, faltering a little.

“ Since he has not bethought him of it ere now,” said the young
man as before, “ methinks ’tis not like that we Erlendsséns will go
a-begging to him now that a pinch has come. What say you,
brothers? If we be not of full age, yet are we of age to bear arms,
the five of us—” }

“ Boys,” said Kristin. “In this matter you will make no speed
with arms.” :

“You must leave us to judge, mother,” answered Naakkve
curtly. “ But now, mother, ’twere well you let us have some food.


881 Debtors


And seat you in your wonted place — for the house-folk’s sake,”
said he, as one giving command.

"Twas but little she could eat. She sat, thinking — she dared not
ask if now they would send after their father. And she thought —
in what wise would this matter go forward? She knew but little of
the law in such things— maybe she must clear herself of the
slander by oath with compurgators.* If so it were, ’twould most
like be at the head church at Ullinsyn in Vaagaa — There she had
kin on her mother’s side well-nigh on every great manor. And if
her oath fell to the ground—and she should stand before their
eyes unable to free herself of this shameful charge! Bring shame
upon her father — He had been a stranger here in the Dale. He
had been able to make good his place; him all had honoured. Those
times when Lavrans Bjorgulfsén took up a cause at Thing or
moot, he had ever had a full following. But she knew her shame
would strike back at him. She saw now, all at once, how lonely
her father had stood —in spite of all, alone and a stranger amid
the folk here, when time after time she loaded him with a burthen
of shame and sorrow and ill repute.

She had not thought she could feel the like of this any more —
again and again it had seemed to her that her heart must break into
bleeding shards—and now once more ’twas as though it were
bursting. ;

Gaute went out upon the balcony and looked northwards:

“The folk are coming out now from the church,” said he.
“Shall we tarry till they have gone a little on their way? ”

“No,” answered Naakkve. “They may as lief see that the Er-
lendsséns are out. We must busk us now, boys. "Iwere well you
took your morions on.”

Only Naakkve owned right harness. His coat of mail he left,
but set his helm on, and took shield and sword and a long halberd.
Bjorgulf and Gaute put on the old iron casques the boys wore
when they practised them in sword-play, but Ivar and Skule were
fain to rest content with small steel caps, such as the yeoman
levies still used. Their mother looked on. She felt a strange tight-
ening in her breast:

“ Meseems ’tis ill bethought, my sons, to arm yourselves thus to
go to the priest’s manor,” said she, uneasily. “ Take heed you for-
get not the holy-day peace and the bishop’s reverence.”

Naakkve answered:


* See Note 5.


The Cross 882 -


Lent oss it eee

“ There is dearth of honour here on Jérundgaard now, mother
— we must buy it at what price we may.”

“Not you, Bjérgulf,” begged the mother, fearfully, for the
weak-sighted boy had taken up a great battle-axe. ““ Remember,
son, you can see but little! ” ;

“Oh, as far as this reaches, I still can see,” answered Bjorgulf,
weighing the axe in his hand.

Gaute went over to young Lavrans’ bed and took down his
grandfather’s great battle sword, which the boy would ever have
hanging on the wall above his couch. He drew it from its sheath
and looked on it:

“You must lend me your sword, kinsman —I deem that our
grandsire would like full well that it should go with us on this
journey.”

Kristin wrung her hands where she sat. It seemed as though she
must cry out — In agony and utmost horror, urged too by a power
stronger than agony or horror —as she had cried out when she
gave these men birth. Wounds and wounds and wounds without
number had been dealt her throughout her life, but now she knew
they were all healed over — the scars were tender as raw flesh —
but bleed to death she knew she could not — never had she been
more alive than now —

Blossom and leaf were worn from off her, but her branches
were not lopped, and felled she was not. For the first time since
she had borne Erlend Nikulauss6én’s child, she forgot the father
quite and saw naught but his sons —

But the sons looked not at their mother, sitting white, with fixed,
wide eyes. Munan still lay across her lap —he had not unclasped
her all this time. The five lads went forth from the loft.

Kristin stood up and stepped out upon the balcony. Now they
came forth from behind the storehouses and, one behind the other,
went up the path to Romundgaard between the pale, waving
barley-fields. The morions and steel caps gleamed dully, but the
sunlight glittered on Naakkve’s glaive and on the twins’ spear-
heads. She stood there looking after the five young men. She was
mother to them all —

Within the room she sank down before the chest, below where
Mary Virgin’s picture hung. Her sobs and weeping seemed to
tear her in sunder. Munan, sobbing too, nestled close to his mother;
Lavrans sprang from his bed and cast himself down on his knees


883 Debtors


se oe ae ee i ln a I a i AE
at her other side. She flung her arms about her two youngest
sons —

Since the little one died — she had thought: what was there to
pray for? Hard, cold, heavy as stone, she had felt her falling to-
wards hell’s gaping jaws. But now prayer burst from her lips resist-
lessly — without her conscious will her soul poured itself out to
Mary, maid and mother, Queen of heaven and earth, cries of dread,
of praise, of thanksgiving — Mary, Mary, I own so much, still
have I endless treasures that may be reft from me. — Mother of
Mercy, take them in thy ward —!


There were many folk in the courtyard at Romundgaard. When
the Erlendsséns came in, some yeomen asked what they would.

“Of you we would naught —as yet,” said Naakkve, with a
galling smile. “ We have an errand to the bishop to-day, Magnus.
Afterward, mayhap, we brothers may deem we have somewhat to
say to you folks too, But to-day you need not fear us.”

There arose some cries and commotion. Sira Solmund came out
and would have bidden the lads begone from there; but now some
farmers spoke up: the boys should have leave, they said, to make
inquiry concerning this charge against their mother. The bishop’s
servants came out and said to the Erlendsséns: they must go now;
folk here were sitting down to meat, and none had time now to
listen to them. But this the farmers liked not.

“What is this, good folk? ” asked a loud voice above them. No
one had marked that Sir Halvard himself was come out on the
loft balcony. There he stood now in his violet robe, the red silk
cap upon his white hair, tall, broadly built, chieftain-like. ““ Who
are these young men? ”

He was answered that these were Kristin of Jorundgaard’s sons.

“ Are you the eldest? ” asked the bishop of Naakkve. “Then
will I speak with you. These others must bide here in the court-
yard the while.”

Naakkve went up the stairs of the upper hall and followed the
bishop into the room. Sir Halvard sat him down in the high-seat
and looked at the young man, who stood before him leaning on
the great halberd.

“What is your name? ”

“ Nikulaus Erlendssén, my lord.”

“Think you ’tis needful to be so well armed, Nikulaus Erlends-


The Cross 884


Dien Gross. a ee ee eee
son,” said the other, smiling a little, “ when you go to have speech
with your bishop? ”

Nikulaus flushed deep. He went over to the corner, laid aside
his weapons and head-piece, and came back. He stood up before
the bishop, his bared head bowed, one hand clasped about the
other wrist, with an easy, yet seemly and reverent, bearing.

Sir Halvard thought: this young man had not lacked teaching
in kurteisi and mannerly bearing. “Iwas true he could not have
been so young a child when his father fell from wealth and hon-
ourable estate — he remembered, for sure, the time he was heir to
Husaby. A comely fellow he was, too —’twas great pity of him,
the bishop thought.

“Were they your brothers, all those who were in your com-
pany? How many are you Erlendsséns? ”

“We are seven, my lord, living.”

—So many young lives entangled in this broil. Unwittingly the
bishop heaved a sigh.

“Be seated, Nikulaus— you would speak with me, belike, of
these rumours that have gone abroad about your mother and her
steward? ”

“Thanks, reverend sir, I would liefer stand before you.”

The bishop gazed thoughtfully at the young man. Then he said,
slowly:

“The thing stands thus, Nikulaus; methinks ’tis hard to believe
that this that is said of Kristin Lavransdatter can be true. And right
to impeach her of adultery has none save her husband. But there
is, besides, the kinship ’twixt your father and this Ulf, and this,
too, that he is your godfather — And Jardtrud has made her plaint
in such wise that it must be read as importing your mother’s dis-
honour. — Wot you if ’tis as she says, that her husband has beat
her often, and that he has shunned her bed close on a year? ”

“Ulf and Jardtrud lived not well together — our foster-father
was not young when he wed, and something harsh and hasty he
can be. Towards us brothers and to our father and mother he has
ever been the most trusty friend and kinsman. "Iwas the first
prayer I had thought to lay before you, dear my lord: that if
‘twere in any wise possible, you would be pleased to let Ulf go
free against bail.”

“You are not of age yet? ” asked the bishop.


“ . ete
No, my lord. But our mother is willing to proffer whatever
bail you may demand.”


885 Debtors


The bishop shook his head.

“My father will be of the same mind, that know I full surely.
"Tis my intent now to ride from here straightway up to him, and
make known what has here befallen. If, then, you would grant
him a hearing to-morrow — ”

The bishop put his hand about his chin, and sat, rubbing his
thumb softly over the stiff hairs with a little rasping noise.

“Be seated, Nikulaus,” he said; “we can talk the better so.”
Naakkve bowed in thanks and sat him down. “ — But it is true then
that Ulf has denied to live with his wife? ” he asked, as though he
had just bethought himself of this again.

“ Ay, my lord. So far as my knowledge goes —” A smile crossed
the bishop’s face, and at that the young man smiled a little too.
“Ulf has slept in the loft with us brothers since Yule that is over-

ast.”

The bishop sat silent for a while again: “ And his food — where
got he his food? ”

“ He had his wife give him his victuals out, when he had to go
to the forest or the like.” Naakkve faltered a little. “‘ There was
some trouble in the matter — mother deemed ’twere best he had his
board with us again, as he had had before he wed. Ulf would not
have this, for he said there would be so much talk if now they
changed the bargain he and father struck, about the goods he was
to have from the manor for his dwelling when he set up house —
and he deemed it not just that mother should take him to board
again without abatement of those supplies. But mother had her
way — Ulf had his food with us —and the rest was to be settled
hereafter.”

“Hm. Your mother has else the name of one that looks nar-
rowly to her goods, and is a most notable and thrifty house-
wite ="

“Not with food,” said Naakkve eagerly. “To that every soul
can bear witness, every carl and every woman that has served on
our manor — with food is mother the most free-handed woman.
In that way she is no otherwise now than when we were rich folk
— never gladder than when she can set on her board some dainty
dish — and she purveys such full measure that each serving-man
and woman, down to the swineherd and the bedesfolk, get their
share of the good things.”

“Hm.” The bishop sat in thought. “ You said you were minded
to fetch your father? ”


The Cross 886


“ Ay, my lord. Surely aught else were against reason? ” The
bishop made no answer, and Naakkve went on: “ We spoke with
father in the winter, my brother Gaute and I — we told him, too,
these tidings, that our mother was with child. But we saw no sign
and we heard no word from his mouth which we could take to
mean he doubted mother was true to him as gold, or that he mar-
velled. But father has never felt at ease in Sil; he was minded to
dwell on his own farm in Dovre, and mother was there a while
last summer. He was wroth because she would not bide there
and keep his house — his will was that she should let Gaute and
me have the care of Jérundgaard, and should move herself to
Haugen — ”

Bishop Halvard rubbed and rubbed his chin and gazed at the
young man.

— What kind of man soever Erlend Nikulaussén might be — so
base he could scarce be as to have charged his wife with whore-
dom before their young sons.

Though much seemed to tell against Kristin Lavransdatter —
nevertheless he believed not the charge. He deemed he had seen
that she spoke truth when she denied knowing that she was sus-
pect with Ulf Haldorssén. Yet he remembered this woman had
been weak before when fleshly lusts had lured — with ugly tricks
had they forced Lavrans’ consent from him, she and this man
whom she lived now at strife —

When the matter of the child’s death came up, he saw at once
that conscience smote her. But even if she had been neglectful of
her child, she could not for that be haled before an earthly court.
For that she must atone to God according to her father confes-
sor’s bidding. And the child might be the husband’s none the less,
even though she had tended it but ill. Glad she could scarce have
been to have a babe on her hands again, well on in years as she
was, forsaken of her husband, with seven sons already to nurture,
with narrowed means by far than they were born to. "Twould be
against reason to look that she should love that child overmuch.
He believed not she was an unfaithful wife. Though God alone

knew what things he had heard and seen in the two score years he
had been priest and heard confession. But he believed her —

But Erlend Nikulaussén’s doings in this matter he could not un-
derstand save in one way. He had not come near his wife while
she was with child, nor when the child was born, nor when it died.
He must needs believe that he was not the father —


887 Debtors


Now ’twas to be thought on how the man would act. Whether,
notwithstanding, he would stand forth and shield his wife for their
seven sons’ sake — ’twere thus a man of honour would bear him.
Or would he, now these tales were noised abroad, make plaint
against her. From what the bishop had heard of Erlend of Husaby,
he-deemed he could not be sure the man might not do this.

“Who are your mother’s nearest kin by blood and marriage? ”
he asked again.

, “ Jammelt Halvardssén of Elin is wed with her sister, widow
of Simon Darre of Formo. Then has she two cousins on the
father’s side, Ketil Aasmundssén of Skog and his sister Ragna, wife
to Sigurd Kyrning. Ivar Gjesling of Ringheim and his brother
Haavard Trondss6n are her mother’s brother’s sons. But they all
dwell far away —”

“But Sir Sigurd Eldjarn of Sundbu — your mother and he are
sisters’ children. In such a cause the knight must stand forth and
defend his kinswoman, Nikulaus! You must ride thither to him
even now — to-day — and bring him word of this, friend! ”

Hesitating a little, Naakkve answered:

“ Reverend sir — there has been little fellowship ’twixt him and
us. And I believe not, my lord, ’twould vantage my mother’s cause
if that man stood forth in her defence. Erlend Eldjarn’s house are
little liked in this country-side. Naught harmed my father more in
folk’s esteem than this, that the Gjeslings had bound them to him
in that emprise that cost us Husaby, and whereby they lost
Sundbu.”

“ Ay, Erlend Eldjarn ”; the bishop laughed a little. ““ Ay, he had
the knack of falling at odds with folk — he quarrelled with all his
brothers-in-law here in the north. Your mother’s father, that was
a godly man, and not afraid to bend if peace and concord ’twixt
kinsmen could thereby be furthered — he fared no better than the
rest; he and Erlend Eldjarn came to be the bitterest unfriends.”

“Ay”; Naakkve began to laugh a little. “ And ’twas not over
any such great matters either — two sheets with fringes and a blue-
bordered towel; ’twas valued at two marks in money, the whole
matter. But mother’s mother had been so urgent that her husband
must get just these very things at the parting of the heritage, and
Gudrun Ivarsdatter had spoken of them to her man also. In the
end Erlend took them and hid them in his travelling bags, but
Lavrans took them out again —he deemed he had most right to
them, for ’twas Ragnfrid who had worked these things when she


The Cross 888


Te? C1088 Was a sis Sl Rte a a
was a young maid at home on Sundbu. But when Erlend grew
ware of this, he struck grandfather in the face, and then my grand-
father laid hold on him and threw him three times and shook him
like a pelt. After that they never changed a word again — and
’rwas all for the sake of these trumpery rags — mother has them
at home in her chest —”’

The bishop laughed heartily. He knew this tale full well already
—it had made much merriment for folks in its day — of how the
husbands of Ivar’s daughters were so zealous to please their wives.
But he had gained his end — the young man’s face had melted into
a smile; the watchful, fearful look was driven for a while from the
comely, blue-grey eyes. Then Sir Halvard laughed yet louder:

“ Ay, but, Nikulaus, they spoke together once again, and I stood
by. "Iwas in Oslo, at the Yule-tide feasting, the year before the
Queen, the Lady Eufemia, died. Our lord, King Haakon of
blessed memory, spoke with Lavrans—he had come south to
greet his master and lay before him his faithful service — the King
spoke of how ’twas unchristian and churl-like, this enmity *twixt
the husbands of two sisters. Lavrans went over to where Erlend
stood with some gentlemen of the guard, prayed him lovingly to
forgive his over-hastiness, and proffered to send the things to Lady
Gudrun with loving greetings from her brother and sister. Erlend
answered: he would make up the quarrel if Lavrans would own,
before the men who stood there, that he had borne him like a
thief and a robber at the parting of their father-in-law’s goods.
Lavrans turned upon his heel and walked away — and that, I trow,
was the last time Ivar Gjesling’s sons-in-law met on earth,” the
bishop ended, laughing.

“But hearken to me now, Nikulaus Erlendssén,” he said, fold-
ing his hands together. “I know not if ’tis wise to make such haste
to bring your father down hither — or to set this Ulf Haldorssén -
free. Clear herself your mother wzust, meseems — seeing how loud
has been the talk of her having done amiss. But, as matters now
stand, think you ’twill be easy for Kristin to find the matrons who
will join with her in making oath? ”

Fe cas looked up at the bishop — his eyes grew doubtful and
afraid.

“Wait but a few days, Nikulaus! Your father and Ulf are men
from outland parishes and little liked — Kristin and Jardtrud are
both from the Dale here —but Jardtrud, you wot, is from far


889 Debtors


farther south, and your mother is one of these folks’ own. And I
have marked well that Lavrans Bjérgulfson is not forgotten of the
people. Well-nigh it seems as though they had meant to chasten
her because they deemed she had been a bad daughter — but I can
tell already that many see they served the father but ill by raising
such a cry against his child —they are vexed and repentant, and
soon they will wish for naught so much as that Kristin may be
able to clear herself. And, mayhap, ’twill be little enough that
Jardtrud has to show, when we come to look into her wallet. An-
other matter would it be if her husband were to go about, chafing
the folk and setting them against him —”

“ My lord,” said Naakkve, looking up at the bishop: “ forgive
me that I say it, but ’tis little to my mind —that we should do
naught for our foster-father, and that we should not fetch my
father to stand at this time by mother’s side —”

“Nevertheless I pray you, my son,” said Bishop Halvard, “ to

_ take my counsel. Press not on over-hastily by bringing Erlend
Nikulauss6n hither. Meanwhile will I have a letter written to Sir
Sigurd of Sundbu, praying him to come forthwith and meet me
— what is this? ” He stood up and went out on the balcony.

Their backs against the storehouse wall, Gaute and Bjérgulf Er-
lendss6ns stood, holding off a knot of the bishop’s men, who made
at them with uplifted weapons. Bjérgulf felled a man to the earth
with a blow of his axe at the moment the bishop and Naakkve
came out. Gaute was parrying blows with his sword. Some farm-
ers held Ivar and Skule fast, while others led away a wounded
man. Sira Solmund stood a little way off, bleeding from mouth
and nose.

“ Hold there,” cried Sir Halvard. “ Down with your arms, you
Erlendsséns —”” He went down into the courtyard, and up to the
young men, who had obeyed straightway. “ What is this? ”

Sira Solmund came forward, bent him before the bishop, and
said:

“Thus it is, reverend father; Gaute Erlendssén has broken the
holy-day peace, and smitten me, his parish priest, even as you see! ”

At the same moment one of the elder farmers stepped forth,
made obeisance to the bishop, and spoke:

“Reverend sir, the boy was sorely wrought on. The priest there
spoke of his mother in such wise, that one could scarce look that
Gaute should brook his words tamely.”


The Cross 890


ThesQ@ross'-. a ee eee

“ Hold your peace, Sira — I cannot hearken to more than one of
you at a time,” said Sir Halvard impatiently. “ Speak, Olav Tronds-
son.”

Olav Trondsson spoke:

“ The priest sought to stir up the Erlendsséns, but Bjérgulf and ©
Gaute answered him back, soberly enough. Gaute said, too, what
we all know is true, that Kristin lived with her husband at Dovre
a while last summer, and ’twas then he was smithied — the poor
little soul there is all this stir about. But at that the priest says, since
folk on Jorundgaard have ever been so book-learned — ’twas like
she knew the saga of King David and Lady Bath-sheba — but Er-
lend Nikulaussén had mayhap been as sleepy-headed as the knight
Urias.”

The bishop’s face flushed as purple as his own robe; his black
eyes flashed. He looked at Sira Solmund for a space. But ’twas not +
to him he spoke:

“You know, I trow, Gaute Erlendssén, that by this deed you
have brought on you the Church’s ban? ” he said. Then he bade
that the Erlendssons be carried home to Jérundgaard; two of his
henchmen, and four farmers whom the bishop chose as men of
worth and of a good wit, he sent with them to keep guard on
them.

“You must go with them too, Nikulaus,” he said to Naakkve,
“and keep you quiet. Your brothers have done their mother no
good service, but I see well that they were sore provoked.”

In his heart the Hamar bishop scarce deemed that Kristin’s sons
had harmed her cause. He had seen that already there were many
who had other thoughts of the mistress of Jérundgaard than had
been theirs that morning, when she had made the cup to overflow
by coming to the church with Ulf Haldorssén to be sponsor for
her son. One of these was Kolbein Jonssén — and him, therefore,
Sir Halvard set over the guard,


Naakkve went the first into the upper hall, where Kristin was
sitting on the edge of Lavrans’ bed, with Munan on her lap. He
told her what had befallen, but laid much weight thereon that the
bishop held her to be guiltless, and thought, too, that the younger
brothers had been sorely baited ere they broke the peace. He


counselled his mother not to go herself and seek speech of the
bishop.


891 Debtors


The four brothers were led in now. Their mother gazed at
them; she was pale and strange-eyed. In the midst of her deep de-
spair and dread, her heart seemed to swell again to bursting. Yet
she spoke calmly to Gaute:

“Tl have you borne you, son, in this matter — and ’twas little
honour for Lavrans Bjorgulfs6n’s sword that you should draw it
against a herd of tale-mongering boors — ”

“ Faith, I drew it first against the bishop’s jackmen,” said Gaute,
angrily. “ But true it is, twas small honour for our grandfather that
we should need to take up arms in such a cause —”

Kristin looked at her son. Then she had perforce to turn her
head away. Sorely as his words hurt her, she could not but smile
— *twas as when a child bites with its milk-teeth into its mother’s
nipple, she thought.

“Mother,” said Naakkve, “ methinks ’twere best you went now,
and took Munan with you. — You must not leave him alone at all,
till things are better with him,” he said low. “ Keep him within
the house, so he see not that his brothers are in durance.”

Kristin stood up:

“My sons — if you deem not that I am unworthy, I would pray
you kiss me ere I go from here.”

Naakkve, Bjorgulf, Ivar, and Skule went one by one and kissed
her. The outlaw gazed sorrowfully upon his mother — when she
held out her hand to him, he took up a fold of her sleeve and
kissed it. All these five, save Gaute, were taller now than she, Kris-
tin saw. She tarried a little, setting Lavrans’ bed in order, and then
went out with Munan.


There were four loft-houses on Joérundgaard: the great hall,
_ the new storehouse, that had been the summer dwelling in Kris-

tin’s childhood, before Lavrans built the great house; the old store-
house; and the salt-store — it had a loft where the women servants
slept in summer. :

Kristin went up to the new storehouse loft with Munan; they
two had slept there since the little child’s death. There she was
pacing the floor to and fro, when Frida and Gunhild came with
the evening porridge. Kristin bade Frida see to it that the watch
were served with ale and meat. The woman answered she had
done so already — at Naakkve’s behest — but the men had said
they would take naught at the mistress’s hands, since they were


The Cross ee
at her manor on such an errand. They had gotten meat and drink
from elsewhere.

“Nevertheless, see to it that an ale-keg is borne in to them,”
said Kristin.

Gunhild, the young serving-wench, was all red-eyed with
weeping: ’ ;

“ There are none of us, your house-folk, that believe this of you,
Kristin Lavransdatter, trust me — we ever said we knew for sure
’twas all lies.”

“ You have heard this talk then,” said the mistress. “ Better had
it been had you told me of it—”

“ We dared not, for fear of Ulf,” said Frida, and Gunhild went
on, weeping:

“He forced us to hold our peace with his threats — often I
thought I should have told you, and begged you to be more w
— when you stayed behind talking with Ulf far into the night.”

“ Ulf —he knew of it too, then? ” asked Kristin, low.

“Jardtrud has long been throwing it in his teeth — ’twas ever
for that he beat her, I trow. And one night this last Yule-tide,
about the time you began to grow big —we sat drinking with
them over at the steward’s house — Solveig and Oivind were there,
and some folk from south in the parish — Jardtrud said to him
then that ’twas his doing. Ulf struck her with his belt so that the
buckle drew blood. But thereafter Jardtrud went about saying that
Ulf had not spoken one word in denial —”

“ And afterward there was talk of this in the parish? ” asked the
mistress.

“ Ay. But we house-folk of yours have ever stood out against
it,” said Gunhild, tearfully.

To quiet Munan, Kristin was forced to lay her down with the
child and take him in her arms; but she put not off her clothing,
and no sleep came to her that night.


Meanwhile in the upper-hall young Lavrans had arisen and
donned his clothes. And later, towards evening, when Naakkve had
gone down to help with the cattle, the boy went forth and down to
the stable. He saddled the red gelding that Gaute owned; ’twas the
best horse there, next to the stallion, and that he ventured not to
back.

Some of the men on guard at the manor came out and asked the
boy whither he would go.


WS aah We


893 Debtors


“T wot not that J am a prisoner,” answered young Lavrans.
“ But I care not if I let you know it — you cannot hinder me from
riding to Sundbu to fetch the knight hither to stand by his kins-
woman —”

“Twill soon be dark, boy,” said Kolbein Jonsson. “ This child
cannot be suffered to ride the Vaage Gorge by night. We must
speak with his mother.”

“No, do not so,” said Lavrans. His mouth trembled a little. “I
ride on such an errand that I put my trust in God and Mary Virgin
—they will watch over my goings, if mother be guiltless. And
else, naught matters —” He broke off, for he was nigh to tears.

The men stood silent for a little. Kolbein gazed at the comely,
fair-haired child:

“Ride then — and God be with you, Lavrans Erlendss6n,” said
he, and would have helped the boy into the saddle.

But Lavrans led forth the horse, so that the men must needs
give way. At the great stone near the manor gate he climbed up
and threw himself on Rauden’s back, then galloped westward on
the road to Vaagaa.


8


Lavrans had ridden his horse into a lather of sweat when he came
to the spot whence he knew there went a path up through the
screes and among the cliffs that everywhere rise sheerly on the
north side of Silsaa dale. He must be up on the uplands, he knew,
ere it grew dark. He was not at home in these fells between
Vaagaa, Sil, and Dovre; but the gelding had been here to grass
one summer, and had borne Gaute to Haugen many a time, though
twas by other paths. Young Lavrans lay forward along the horse’s
neck and patted him: ;

“You must find your way to Haugen, Raud, my son. You must
bear me up to father to-night; ay, good nag! ”

Scarce was he come up on to the brow of the fell and could sit
in the saddle again, when darkness came hastily on. He rode on
‘through a shallow marshy glen, betwixt low crags in endless line
against a sky that grew ever darker. There were birch brakes on
the dale-sides, and the tree-stems shone white; time and again wet
leaf clusters brushed against the horse’s chest and the boy’s face.
Stones loosened underfoot and went rolling down into the beck


The Cross 894


LfesC ross»). rp Se ee eee
in the dale-bottom — then the horse’s hoofs would plash in deep
mire. Rauden picked out his way in the dark, up and down the
slopes, so that the gurgle of the beck now sounded near and loud,
now dwindled away. Once some beast yelped, away in the night,
but Lavrans knew not what it was — and the soughing and sing-
ing of the wind rose and fell.

The child held his spear along above the horse’s neck so that
the point stood out twixt the beast’s ears. "Iwas the very haunt
of bears, this dale. He wondered when it would end. Very softly
he began to croon out into the dark: “ Kyrie, eleison, Christeleison,
Kyrieleison, Christeleison —”

Rauden plashed through a shallow place in a mountain stream.
The star-strewn skies grew wider about him — the hill-tops stood
farther off against the gloom, and the wind sang with another note
in the open spaces. The boy let the horse go as it list, and hummed
all he could call to mind of the hymn, Jesus Redemptor omnium
— Tu lumen et splendor patris — and ever and anon Kyrie eleison.
He was riding now almost due south, he could see by the stars;
but he dared not do aught but trust to the horse and let it follow
its own counsel. Now they were riding over rocky slabs, where
the reindeer-moss beneath him showed palely upon the stones.
Rauden stood a little, panting, and peered into the night. Lavrans
saw that the sky in the east grew lighter; clouds were lifting yon-
der, silver-edged beneath. The horse went on again, straight now
towards the rising moon. There must be an hour yet till midnight,
or thereabouts, by the boy’s reckoning.

When the moon shot up clear of the far-off hills, and her light
shone in on the new snow on peaks and domes, and whitened the
mist wreaths drifting by cleft and hill-top, then Lavrans knew
where he was come to in the fells. He was upon the marish
grounds below the Blaahéer.

Soon after, he found a path that led down into the upland dale.
And three hours later Rauden limped into the moon-blanched
courtyard at Haugen.

When Erlend opened the door, the boy sank forward swoon-
ing on the penthouse floor.

Some while after, Lavrans woke in bed, under filthy, sour-
smelling fur coverings. Light came from a pine-root brand stuck
in a crack of the wall near by. His father stood over him, damp-
ing his face with somewhat; his father was but half clad, and the


895 Debtors


boy saw by the flickering light that his hair was wholly grey.

“ Mother —” said young Lavrans, looking up.

Erlend turned, so that his son could not see his face. “‘ Ay,” he
said in a little, so low he could scarce be heard. “Is your mother
—has she —is your mother — sick? ”

“You must come home straightway, father, and save her —
they are laying the worst of things to her charge — they have
prisoned Ulf and her and my brothers, father! ”

Erlend felt the boy’s hot face and hands; the fever had mounted
again. “ What is’t you say — ? ” But Lavrans sat up and told clearly
enough of all that had befallen at home the day before. His father
listened in silence, but a little on in the boy’s tale he began to finish
his dressing; he drew on his boots and buckled spurs on them.
Then he fetched some milk and food and brought them to the
child.

“But you cannot bide alone in the house here, my son — I must
take you to Aslaug at Brekken here hard by, ere I ride down-
ward.”

. “Father —” Lavrans caught him by the arm, “no —I must go
with you home —”

“You are sick, little son,” said Erlend; and never before in the
boy’s memory had he heard such a tender tone in his father’s voice.

“Nay, father — indeed, indeed I would go home with you to
mother —I would home to my mother —” He wept now like a
little child.

“But Rauden is lame, boy —” Erlend took his son on his lap,
but he could not stay the child’s weeping. “ And you so weary —
Well, well,” he said at length, “ Soten can bear us both, belike —”

“You must mind, if you can,” he said — when he had led the
Castilian out, put Rauden in his place, and cared for him — “ to see
that someone comes north hither to look to your horse — and my

ear —” '

“Will you stay at home now, father? ” asked Lavrans joyfully.

Erlend gazed out before him.

“T know not — but ’tis in my mind that hither I shall come no
more.”

“ Should you not be better armed, father? ” asked the boy again,
for Erlend, beside his sword, had taken but a small light axe, and
he was making to leave the house. “ Will you not take your shield


at least? ”


The Oross 896


Erlend looked upon his shield. The oxhide was so scarred and
torn that the red lion on the white field was all but blotted out.
He laid it down again and spread the covering over it.

“Tam armed well enough to drive a herd of peasants from my
manor,” he said. He went out, locked the house door, mounted his
horse, and helped the boy up behind him.

The sky clouded up more and more; when they were come a
little down the hill-side, where the woods grew thick, they rode
in darkness. Erlend marked that his son was so weary he could
scarce keep himself from falling off; and on that he made Lavrans
sit before him and put his arm about the lad. The young fair-
haired boyish head against his breast — Lavrans was of all the chil-
dren the likest to his mother. Erlend kissed the crown of his head
as he drew the hood around it.

“Did she sorrow much, your mother, when the little child
died in summer? ” he asked once, very low.

Young Lavrans answered:

“ She wept not after he was dead. But she went up to the grave-
yard gate each night — Gaute and Naakkve used to follow when
she went out, but they dared not speak to her, nor durst they let
mother see they watched her — ”

A little after, Erlend said:

“She wept not — ? I mind me, the time your mother was young,
she wept as easily as the dew drops from the willow twigs by the
beck. She was so mild and soft, Kristin, when she was amid those
she deemed wished her well. Afterward she had to learn to be
harder — and most often, I trow, *twas my doing.”

“ Gunhild and Frida say that all the time our youngest brother
lived, she wept each hour and each moment, when she thought
that none could see it.”

“God help me,” said Erlend, softly. “I have been an unwise
man.”

They were riding now in the dale-bottom, with the cold
draught from the river at their backs. Erlend wrapped his cloak
about the boy as closely as he could. Lavrans, as he dozed and
was near dropping off to sleep, marked that his father’s body
smelt like a poor man’s. Dimly he remembered from his early
childhood, while they were yet at Husaby, when his father came
from the bath-house of a Saturday, he was wont to have some
little balls that he held within his hand. They smelt so daintily,


897 Debtors


ea eee eee ee ee ee eons
and their fine, sweet scent hung about the palms of his hands and
in his clothes all the holy-day.

Erlend rode at an even quick pace; here, down on the flats, it
was quite dark. Without thinking on it, he knew at each moment
where he was—he knew, by the changing tone of the river’s
roar, where the Laagen ran in rapids and where in headlong
falls. Now the path led over flat rocks, where the sparks flew from
under the horse’s hoofs; now Soten picked his way surely and
easily mid twisted fir roots, where the road passed through thick
forest; now there came sucking, sobbing sounds, as he rode over
spongy green slopes, where some rill from the mountains trickled.
He would be home by break of day — and that would fit in pat —

— All the time there ran in his mind that far-away night of
frost and pale-blue moonlight when he had driven a sledge down
through this dale — Bj6rn Gunnarss6n sat behind, holding a dead
woman in his arms. But the memory was faint and far off, and
far off and unreal was all this that the child had told — this that
they said had happed down in the parish, and the crazy tales
about Kristin — ”Twas as though he could not get all this into his
head. When he got home, there would be time enough, belike,
to think what he should do. Naught was real save the strain and
the fear — soon, now, he would meet Kristin.

He had waited and watched for her so. And never had he
doubted but she would come at last — until he heard what name
she had given the child —


In the grey dawn, folk who had been hearing one of the
Hamar priests say early Mass came forth from the church, Those
who came first saw Erlend Nikulaussén ride by towards his home,
and told the others. There was some uneasiness and much talk;
folk drew slowly down and stood in clusters where the way to
Jérundgaard left the highway..


Erlend rode into the courtyard as the waning moon was sinking
down between a cloud rim and the mountain crest, pale in the
breaking day.

Without the steward’s house stood a knot of folk — Jardtrud’s
kinsfolk and her friends who had been with her for the night.
And at the sound of hoof-falls in the courtyard came out the men
who had been on guard in the room below the upper hall.


The Cross 898

Erlend drew up his horse. He looked out over the farmers’
heads and spoke, loud and scornfully:

“Ts a feast towards on my manor —and I know not of it—or
wherefore are all you good folks gathered here in the morning
so early? ”

Dark and angry looks met him from every side. Erlend sat
tall and slim on the long-legged, outlandish stallion. Soten had
had a cropped mane, but now it was ragged and unclipped, the
horse was ill groomed, and its head showed grey hairs, but there
was a dangerous glitter in the beast’s eyes, and it stamped and
fidgeted restlessly, laid back its ears, and tossed its fine, small head
so that the foam flakes bespattered its chest and shoulders and
the rider on its back. The riding-gear had once been red, and the
saddle stamped with gold; now it was worn and broken and
patched. And the man was clothed much like a beggar; the hair
that surged out from under a coarse black woollen hat was a
whitish-grey, a grey stubble grew upon the pale, lined, big-nosed
face. But he sat erect, and he smiled haughtily down at the crowd
of peasants; young he looked, in despite of all, and like a chief-
tain — and hate rose hot against this stranger man at halt there,
bearing his head high and unabashed — after all the sorrow and
shame and misery he had brought down upon them that these
peasant folk deemed their own chiefs.

Yet he spoke soberly enough, the farmer who answered Erlend
first:

“T see you have found your son, Erlend —so methinks you
know we are not gathered here for feasting — and strange it is
that you would jest with such a matter.”

Erlend looked down at the child, who was still asleep — his
voice grew softer:

“The boy is sick, as you may see. The tidings he brought me
from the parish here seemed so unbelievable, almost I thought
he spoke in fever wanderings —

“Some at least of what he told is empty talk, I see—” Er-
lend looked toward the stable door with a puckered brow. Ulf
Haldorss6n and a couple of men, a brother-in-law of his amongst
them, were leading out some horses.

Ulf let go his horse and went up to his master quickly:

“ Are you come at last, Erlend? — and there is the boy — praised
be Christ and Mary Virgin! His mother knows not he has been


899 Debtors


gone. We were setting forth to seek for him — the bishop set me
free upon my oath, when he heard the child had ridden alone to
Vaagaa — how is’t with Lavrans? ” he asked, fearfully.

“Nay, God be praised that you have found the boy,” said
Jardtrud, weeping; she was come out into the courtyard.

“Is’t you that are there, Jardtrud? ” said Erlend. “ ’Tis the first
thing I must see to, I trow, that you get you gone from my manor,
you and your tribe. This slanderous hussy will we send packing
first of all—and after, they that have lied about my wife shall
have their deserts, one and all—”

“So it cannot be, Erlend,” said Ulf Haldorssén. “ Jardtrud is
my wedded wife. I trow that she and I have little mind to hold
together, but from my house she goes not ere I have made over
to her brothers all her goods, her dowry and her extra-gift and
morning-gift — ”

“Ts it | who am master on this manor? ” asked Erlend, furi.
ously.

“That you must ask of Kristin Lavransdatter,” said Ulf. “ Here
she comes.”

The mistress was standing up on the new storehouse balcony.
Now she came slowly down the steps. Unwittingly she drew her
coif forward over her head — it had slipped back — and smoothed
the church-going dress that she had worn since the day before.
But her face was set hard as stone.

Erlend rode to meet her, foot by foot —bending forward a
little he gazed fearfully, despairingly, into his wife’s grey, lifeless
face.

“ Kristin,” he begged, “ my Kristin —I am come home to you.”

She seemed neither to hear nor see. Then Lavrans, who had
sat in his father’s arms and waked up little by little, slid down
to the ground. As he touched the sward with his feet, the boy
sank down and lay in a heap.,

A quiver passed over the mother’s face. She bowed her down
and lifted the great boy up in her arms, laid his head close against
her neck, as though he had been a little child — but his long legs
hung limply down in front of her.

“Kristin, my dearest love,” begged Erlend desperately, “ oh,
Kristin, I know ’tis all too late that am come to you —”

Again a quiver ran across the woman’s face:

“Too late ’tis not,” she said in a low, hard voice. She gazed


The Cross 900


down at her son lying swooning in her arms. “ Our last child
lies in the earth already — and now ’tis Lavrans. On Gaute is the
Church’s ban —and our other sons—we two still have much
that can be laid in ruin, Erlend! ”

She turned away from him, and began to cross the courtyard
with the child. Erlend rode after, keeping by her side:

“ Kristin — Jesus, what shall I do for you? — Kristin, would
you not, then, that I should bide here with you now —? ”

“No longer need I now that you should do aught for me,”
said the wife, as before. “ Me you cannot help, whether you abide
here or make your bed in Laagen —”

Erlend’s sons were come out upon the balcony of the upper
hall; Gaute ran down now, sprang towards his mother, and
would have stayed her.

“ Mother,” he prayed her. Then she looked at him, and he stood
still, helpless.

By the foot of the hall stairs stood some peasants.

“Make room, men,” said the mistress, and would have passed
with her burden.

Soten tossed his head and danced restively; Erlend wheeled him
half round, and Kolbein Jonssén caught hold of the bridle. Kris-
tin had not rightly seen what was afoot — now she turned some-
what and said over her shoulder:

“Let the horse go, Kolbein —if he would ride forth, even let
him ride—”

Kolbein took faster hold and answered:

“Understand you not, Kristin, that ’tis time the master stayed
at home on the farm? You at least ought to understand it,” he said
to Erlend.

But Erlend struck the other over the hand, and drove the stal-
lion on so that the old man reeled. A couple of men sprang
forward. Erlend shouted:

“ Away with you! Naught have you to do with my affairs and
my wife’s — and I am no master of a farm; never will I be bound
to any stead like a steer in its stall. If | own not the manor here,
at least the manor owns not me —! ”

Kristin turned full round upon the man and shrieked:

“Ay, ride! Ride, ride to the devil, whither you have driven me
and flung all you have ever owned or laid your hands on—”

What now befell came so swiftly that none rightly saw or


A ea


a


901 Debtors


could have hindered it. Tore Borghildssén and another farmer
caught the woman by the arms:

“ Kristin, speak not so to your husband now —”

Erlend rode at them:

“Would you dare lay hands upon my wife—?” He swung
his axe and smote at Tore Borghildssén. The blow fell betwixt
his shoulder-blades, and the man dropped. Erlend lifted the axe

*anew, but at the moment he rose in his stirrups, a man thrust a
‘spear into his side —it pierced his groin. "T'was Tore Borghilds-
son’s son that did it.

Soten reared and struck out with his forefeet. Erlend pressed
his knees into the horse’s sides, bending forward somewhat, while
he wound the reins about his left hand and again raised the axe.
But at once almost he lost one of his stirrups, and down his left
thigh blood ran in streams. Some arrows and javelins whizzed
across the courtyard — Ulf and Erlend’s sons ran into the crowd
with uplifted axes and drawn swords —then a man stabbed the
stallion under Erlend, and it fell forward on its knees, neigh~
ing wildly and shrilly, so that the horses answered from their
stalls.

Erlend stood up, astride the beast. He clutched Bjérgulf’s
shoulder and stepped clear of the horse. Gaute came up and grasped
his father under the other arm.

“Kill him,” said he, pointing to the horse; it had fallen over
now on its side, and lay with outstretched neck, frothing blood
at the mouth and kicking with its mighty hoofs. Ulf Haldorssén
did it.

The farmers had drawn aside. Two men bore Tore Borghildssén
towards the steward’s house, and one of the bishop’s men led off
his comrade, who was wounded.

Kristin had put down Lavrans, who had come to himself now,
they stood, clinging fast to one another. She did not seem to un-
derstand what had befallen —the thing indeed had come about
too quickly.

The sons would have led their father to the hall-house, but
Erlend said:

“T will not thither — I will not die there, where Lavrans died — ”

Kristin ran forward and flung her arms about her husband’s
neck. Her frozen mask broke up before a rush of weeping, as
ice is splintered under the dint of a stone: “Erlend, Erlend! ”


Erlend bowed his head so that his cheek brushed hers — he
stood thus a moment. ie

“Help me up to the old storehouse, boys,” he said. “I would
liefest lie there —”

In haste the mother and the sons made ready the bed in the old
storehouse loft, and put off Erlend’s clothes. Kristin bound up his
wounds. The blood welled in gushes from the spear-thrust in his
groin, and he had got an arrow-wound low on the side of the
left breast; but that bled not much.

Erlend passed his hand over his wife’s head:

“Me you cannot heal, I trow, my Kristin—”

She looked up in despair —a deep shudder ran through all her
frame. She remembered, Simon, too, had said this — and it seemed
to her a forewarning of the worst, that Erlend should now say
these same words.

He lay in the bed, propped up high with pillows and cushions,
and with the left leg bent up to stop the bleeding from the groin
wound. Kristin sat bending over him, and he took her hand:

“Mind you the first night we slept together in this bed, my
sweet — ? | knew not that even then you bore a secret sorrow that
Thad wrought you. And ’twas not the first sorrow, either, you had
had to bear for my sake, Kristin —”

She took his hand in both of hers. Its skin was cracked, and ’twas
ingrained black about the narrow, scored nails and in the creases
of each joint of the long fingers. Kristin lifted it to her breast
and to her lips; her tears streamed down upon it.

“So hot as your lips are! ” said Erlend in a low voice. “I waited
and I waited for you—TI thought so long — At last I thought J
would give way — come down hither to you — but then I heard
— Methought, when I heard that he was dead, ’twas too late, be-
like, for me to come to you —”

Kristin answered, sobbing:

“T looked for you still, Erlend. I thought, for sure, some time
you must come to the boy’s grave.”

“You had scarce greeted me then as your friend, I trow,” said
Erlend. “ And God knows you had no cause either. — So sweet
and lovely as you were, my Kristin,” he whispered, and closed
his eyes.

She sobbed, low and piteously.

“Now is there nothing left,” said the man, as before, “save


903 Debtors


that we try to forgive one another like Christian wedded folk — if
you can — ”

“Erlend, Erlend—” She bent down over him and kissed the
white face. “ You must not speak so much, my Erlend —”

“ Rather must I make haste and say what I have to say,” an-
swered the man. “ Where is Naakkve? ” he asked uneasily.

They answered that yestereve, when Naakkve heard that his
young brother had taken the road for Sundbu, he had ridden
after as fast as horse could bear him. He would be clean beside
himself, for sure, since he had not found the child. Erlend sighed
and moved his hands restlessly on the coverlid.

The six sons came forward to his bed.

“ Ay, by you I have not done well, my sons,” said their father.
He coughed a strange, guarded cough —a bloody froth came
oozing over his lips. Kristin wiped it away with her coif. Erlend
lay quiet a little:

“You must forgive it me now, if you deem you can. Never
forget, good lads, that your mother has striven for you each
day of all the years she and I were together — there never was ill
blood between us but what I wrought, by thinking too little on

our welfare — but she loved you more than her own life —”

“We shall not forget,” answered Gaute, weeping, “that you,
father, seemed to us all our days the most manful of men and the
foremost of chieftains. Proud we were to be called your sons,
no less when fortune forsook you than in your days of power.”

“You speak so, knowing no better,” answered Erlend; he
laughed a little broken, coughing laugh. “ And give not your
mother the sorrow to see you follow in my footsteps — enough
affliction has she had to suffer since she got me —”

“ Erlend, Erlend,” sobbed Kristin.

The sons kissed their father on hand and cheek; weeping they
went away and sat them down by the wall. Gaute put his arm
about Munan and drew the child to him; the twins sat hand in
hand. Erlend laid his hand in Kristin’s again. His was cold; and she
drew the coverlids over him right to his chin, but sat clasping his
hand in hers beneath the coverings.

“Erlend,” said she, weeping. “God have mercy on us — we
must fetch a priest now to you —”

“ Ay,” said Erlend, weakly. “ Someone must ride up to Dovre,
and fetch Sira Guttorm, my parish priest —”


_ The Cross 904


“Erlend — he will not come in time,” she said, in dismay.

“ Yes,” said Erlend, vehemently. “ If so be God will be gracious
to me —for the last office I will not take from this priest that
spread lying tales of you—”

“ Erlend — for Jesus’ sake — you must not talk so—”

Ulf Haldorssén stepped forward, and leaned over the dying
man;

“T, Erlend, will ride to Dovre —”

“Mind you, Ulf,” said Erlend — his voice began now to grow
weak and unclear — “ the time we set forth from Hestnezs, you and
I—” He laughed a little. ““ Ay, I promised then to stand by you
all our days as your trusty kinsman — God mend us all, friend
Ulf — oftenest ’twas you and not I— of us two—that showed a
kinsman’s faith and truth —I must — thank you then — kinsman.”

Ulf bowed down and kissed the other’s bloody lips:

“Thanks to you, Erlend Nikulaussén —”

He lit a candle, set it near the dying man’s couch, and went his
way.

Erlend’s eyes had fallen shut again. Kristin sat staring at his
white face—she passed her hand over it now and again. She
deemed she saw that he began to sink towards death.

“Erlend,” she begged, softly. “For Jesus’ sake —let us fetch
Sira Solmund to you. God is God, whatever priest may bear him
to us—”

“No! ” ‘The man sat up in bed, so that the coverings slid down
from his naked, yellow body. The bandages over his breast and
belly were stained anew in bright red patches by the frésh
blood that welled forth. “ A sinful man I am — God in His mercy
grant me what forgiveness He will; but I feel — ” He fell back on
the pillows — whispered so that he could scarce be heard: “not
long enough shall I live to grow —so old —and so meek — that I
can suffer — stay quiet in one room with him that lied of you—”

“Erlend, Erlend —think on your soul! ”

The man shook his head as it lay on the pillows. His eyelids had
drooped close again.

“Erlend! ” She clasped her hands; she cried aloud in utmost


need. “ Erlend — see you not that, so as you had borne you


towards me, this 7zust needs be said! ”


Erlend opened his great eyes. His lips were leaden —but a
shadow of his young smile flitted over the sunken face:


905 Debtors


ee ee ee Ne eh pares OObOTS

“ Kiss me, Kristin,” he whispered. There was somewhat like a
shade of laughter in his voice. “ There has been too much else
*twixt you and me, I trow — beside Christendom and wedlock —
a us easily —to forgive each other—as Christian man and
wife —”

She called and called his name after him; but he lay with shut
eyes, his face wan as new-cloven wood under his grey hair. A
little blood oozed from the corners of his mouth; she wiped it
away, whispering imploring words to him—when she moved
she felt her clothing clinging cold and wet from the blood she
had got upon her when she led him in and laid him in the bed.
Now and again there was a gurgling sound in Erlend’s breast, and
he seemed to draw breath painfully — but he heard no more, and
most like felt nothing, as he sank steadily and surely towards the
sleep of death.


The hall door was opened suddenly; Naakkve rushed in, flung
himself down before the bed, and grasped his father’s hand, call-
ing on his name.

Behind him came a tall and heavy man in a travelling-cloak. He
bowed him before Kristin:

“ Had I known, my kinswoman, that you stood in need of your
kinsmen’s help —” He broke off when he saw that the man was
dying, crossed himself, and moved away to the farthest corner
of the room. In a low voice the knight of Sundbu began to say
the prayers for the dying — but Kristin seemed not even to have
marked Sir Sigurd’s coming.

Naakkve was upon his knees, bent over the bed:

“Father! Father! Know you not me, father? ” He laid his face
on the hand that Kristin sat holding; the youth’s tears and kisses
rained upon both his parents’ hands.

Kristin thrust her son’s head a little aside—as though half
awaked:

“You trouble us,” she said impatiently; “get you away from
here —”

Naakkve rose upon his knees:

SGo— ) but. mothers”

“ Ay — set you down by your brothers yonder — ”

Naakkve lifted his young face—wet with tears and drawn
with sorrow — but his mother’s eyes saw naught. Then he went


The Oross 906 .
over to the bench where his six brothers sat already. Kristin
marked it not — she did but stare, with wild eyes, at Erlend’s face,
that now shone snow-white in the light of the taper.


A little after, the door was opened again. With candles and the
ringing of a silver bell, deacons and a priest came with Sir Hal-
vard, the bishop, into the hall. Ulf Haldorss6n came in last. Er-
lend’s sons and Sir Sigurd rose, and fell to their knees before the
Lord’s body. But Kristin only lifted her head a little — turned for
a moment her tear-blind, unseeing eyes towards the comers. Then
she laid her down again, as she had lain, stretched forward over
Erlend’s corpse.


ptt ROSS


Peagialee lH RE


ila Gk: O55


~909 _ The Cross


tlie rea C) (S75


I


LL fires burn out at last.
There came a time when these words of Simon Darre’s


rang again in Kristin’s heart.

It was the summer of the fourth year after Erlend Nikulaussén’s
death, and of her flock of sons only Gaute and Lavrans were left
with their mother at Jérundgaard.

Two years before, the old smithy had burned down, and Gaute
had built a new one north of the manor up by the high-road. The
old smithy had lain south of the houses, down towards the river,
in a hollow between Jérundsbarrow and some mighty heaps of
stones that they said had been cleared from off the fields in an-
cient days. Well-nigh every year at flood-time the water had
come right up to the smithy.

Now naught was left to mark the spot but the heavy, fire-
cracked slabs of stone that showed where the door had been, and
the masoned fire-place. Fine, soft, pale-green grass sprouted up
now from the black, charcoal-covered ground.

Kristin Lavransdatter had a plot of flax this year close to the
old smithy-ground; Gaute would have corn now on the fields
nearer the manor, where the mistresses of Jorundgaard time out
of mind had been wont to sow flax and raise onions. And Kristin |
often had errands that took her that way besides looking to her flax.
On Thursday evenings she bore her gift of ale and meat to the
Old Man of the barrow; on bright summer eves the lonely hearth
in the meadow would look then like some age-old heathen altar,
glimmering there amidst the grass, greyish-white and streaked with
soot. On scorching, hot summer days she would go with her
basket to the stone heaps at noontide, to pluck raspberries, or
gather the willow-herb leaves that are so good for brewing
cooling drinks against the fever-sickness.

The last notes of the church bells’ midday greeting to God’s


The Cross 910

mother died away in the light-drenched air between the moun-
tains. The country-side seemed to lay itself to rest under the
flooding white sunshine. Since dewy dawn the song of the scythes
in the flowery meadows, the ring of whetstones on iron, and voices
calling, had sounded from the farms far and near. Now all sounds
of toil were hushed; the midday rest sank over all. Kristin sat on
the stone heap, listening. Only the rush of the river could be heard
now, and the faint rustling of the leaves in the grove; the thin
buzz and muted hum of flies and gnats above the meadow; the
clink of a lonely cow-bell somewhere far away. A bird winged
its way, swift and silent, along the edge of the alder thicket; a bird
rose from the meadow tussocks and flew with a shrill twitter to
light on a thistle-stalk.

But the drifting blue shadows along the hill-side, the fair-
weather clouds that piled up over the edge of the fells and melted
in the blue summer sky, the glitter of the Laagen’s water between
the tree-trunks, the white gleam of the sunlight on all the leaf-
trees — these things she was ware of as the voice of the stillness
heard by an inner ear, rather than as seen by the eye. With her
coif drawn over her brow to ward off the sun, Kristin sat listening
to the play of light and of shadows over the Dale.

— All fires burn out at last —


In the alder wood along the marshy river-bank, pools of water
glittered in the darkness between the thick-growing sallows.
Sedge grew there and tufts of cotton-grass, and thick as a carpet
the marsh cinquefoil covered the ground with its grey-green,
five-fingered leaves and red-brown blossoms. Kristin had plucked
a heavy bunch of them. Often had she wondered whether this
herb might not have in it some useful virtue; she had dried it and
seethed it and added it to ale and mead. But it seemed to stand in
no stead. Yet could Kristin never forbear to go out into the
marsh and wet her shoes to gather it.

Now she stripped all the leaves from the stems and wove a
wreath of the dark flower-heads. They were like both red wine
and brown mead in hue; they were moist, as with honey, at the
base of the red bunches of filaments. Sometimes Kristin would
weave a wreath for the picture of Mary Virgin in the upper hall
—such was their wont in southern lands, she had heard from
priests who had been there.


911 The Cross


eee en ee ee be Cross

Else had she none now to make wreaths for. Here in the Dale
*twas not the young men’s use to deck themselves with wreaths
when they went to dance on the green. In the Trondheim coun-
try, the men who came home from serving in the body-guard
had brought the custom with them to some places. The mother
thought this thick, dark-red wreath had gone passing well with
Gaute’s light-hued face and flaxen-yellow hair—or with Lay-
rans’ nut-brown mane.

— Twas an endless age since the time when she was wont to
walk with all her little sons and their foster-mothers in the pas-
ture above Husaby, those long, fair summer days. Then she and
Frida could not make wreaths fast enough for all the impatient
little ones. She remembered when she had Lavrans at her breast
still, and Ivar and Skule had deemed the suckling child too should
have a wreath — but it must be of quite little flowers, said the
four-year-olds —

Now she had only grown-up children.

Young Lavrans was fifteen winters old; he should not be
counted as full-grown yet, maybe. But, as time went on, the
mother had grown ware that this son stood farthest from her of
all her children. He did not hold himself aloof from her of set
purpose, as Bjérgulf had done; he was not self-wrapped, nor
seemed he close-lipped like the blind boy — But ’twas like he
was yet more silent than he by nature — only none had marked
it when all the brothers were at home: he was bright and fresh,
and seemed ever glad and well-humoured, and all were fond of
the winsome child, and never gave it a thought that Lavrans well-
nigh always went alone and spoke but little.

He was held to be the fairest of all Kristin of Jorundgaard’s
fair sons. Their mother always deemed the one that at the mo-
ment she thought on to be perhaps the fairest, but she felt, she
too, how Lavrans Erlendssén seemed to give out brightness. His
light-brown hair and apple-fresh cheeks seemed, as ’twere, gilded,
full-filled with sunshine; his great dark-grey eyes, too, seemed
sown full of yellow sparks —he was much like what she herself
had been in her youth, with her bright skin hue veiled, as it were,
with sun-browning. And he was big and strong for his age, stout
and handy at all work he was put to, biddable with his mother
and elder brothers, cheerful, kind, and friendly. But withal there
was this strange aloofness about the boy.


The Cross 912


Cr %

On winter evenings, when the household gathered in the weav- ©
ing-house and passed the time with jest and gossip, while each one
had his work to keep him busy, Lavrans would sit as in a dream.
Many a summer evening, when the day’s work on the manor was
done, Kristin would go out and set her down by this boy, where
he lay on the green, chewing resin or rolling a sprig of sorrel in
the corner of his mouth. She marked his eyes as she talked with
him —’twas as though he fetched his thoughts home from afar
off. Then he would smile up into his mother’s face, answer her
clearly and with understanding; often would they two sit out
on the bank for hours in close and easy talk. But no sooner did
she rise to go in than ’twould seem as though Lavrans let his
thoughts wander far afield again.

And ’twas impossible for her to make out what it was the boy
thought so deeply on. He was good enough at sports and with his
weapons — yet he was much less keenly set on such things than
had been her other sons, and he never went off alone a-hunting,
though he was glad when Gaute took him out along with him. So
far, at any rate, he did not seem to mark that women looked upon
his fair youth with kind eyes. He had no mind at all to book-learn-
ing, and to all the talk of his elder brothers’ purpose to go into a
cloister the youngest seemed to pay little heed. Kristin could not
mark that the lad looked for any other lot than to stay here at
home all his days, helping Gaute with the farming, even as now
he did —

Sometimes Kristin deemed that these strange, absent ways of
Lavrans’s put her in mind somewhat of his father — but Erlend’s
soft, drowsy ways had often given place to wild wantonness; and
Lavrans lacked altogether his father’s hasty, vehement moods. Er-
lend had never been so far away from what went on about him —


Lavrans was the youngest now. Soon now ’twould be a long
time that Munan had slept in the graveyard beside his father and
his little brother. He died early in spring the year after Erlend
was slain.

The widow had gone about after her husband’s death as though
she neither heard nor saw. More than pain and sorrow, she felt a
numbing chill, a dull nervelessness in body and soul, as if she her-
self were still bleeding to death from his death-wounds.

The whole of her life had lain within his arms, since that thun-
der-fraught midday hour in the out-barn at Skog, when for the


913 The Cross


first time she gave herself to Erlend Nikulaussén. Then was she
so young and so unweeting, and knew so little what she did, that
she strove to hide that she was near weeping because he wrought
her pain, while she smiled because she deemed she gave her lover
the most precious gift. And whether, after all, it had been a good
gift or no — at least she had given him herself, wholly and for ever.
Her maidenhood, which God in His mercy had adorned with
comeliness and health, when he caused her to be born to a safe
and honourable lot, and which her parents had guarded with most
loving strictness all the years she was in their care — with both
hands she had given all to Erlend, and thereafter she had lived
but in his arms.

How often, in the years that followed, had she suffered his
caresses, hard and cold with anger, dutifully yielded to her hus-
band’s will, while she felt as though she miust perish, worn out
with weariness. She had thought with a kind of wrathful joy,
when she looked on Erlend’s fair face and sound and comely
body: that could no longer blind her to the man’s faults. Ay, he
was young and fair as ever; he could still overpower her with his
caresses, fiery as when she too was young. But she was aged, she
thought — and with the thought came a kind of passion of vic-
torious pride. Easy to keep their youth for them who will never
learn a lesson, who list not to fit themselves to the fate life brings
them, nor to strive to master fate by man’s will.

But even when she met his kisses with hard, locked lips, and
turned with all her being from him to the fight for her sons’
future, she knew dimly ’twas with the fire this man had once for
all kindled in her blood that she threw herself into the work. The
years had chilled her, so she deemed, for she no longer grew »
hot when Erlend’s eyes had that old gleam, and his voice that
deep note which had made her sink down, will-less and strength-
less with happiness, when first she knew him. But as then she had
longed to drown the heaviness and heart-ache of separation in her
meetings with Erlend, so afterwards she longed, dully yet fever-
ishly, after a goal which would be reached when, one day, a white-
haired old woman, she saw her sons’ lot settled and secure. Then
twas for Erlend’s sons that she suffered the old dread of the un-
certainty that lay before them. She was tormented still by a crav-
ing like hunger and burning thirst — she must see her sons thrive
and flourish.

And as at first she had given herself wholly to Erlend, so, after-


The Cross 914


The Cross. > Se eee
wards, she gave herself wholly to the world that had sprung up
around their wedded life — flung herself in the breach to answer
every call that must be met, threw herself into every work that
must be done to safeguard Erlend’s and his children’s welfare. She
half understood herself that she lived ever with Erlend; when she
sat at Husaby pondering with their priest over the papers in her
husband’s chest; when she talked with his tenants and working-
folk; busied herself with her serving-wenches in storehouse and
kitchen; sat up in the horse-paddock with the foster-mothers
keeping watch on her children on fair summer days. It seemed to
herself as though ’twas against Erlend she turned her wrath when
aught went wrong in the house and when the children crossed
their mother’s will; twas to him her heart-felt joy went forth
when they got the hay in dry in summer, or did well with the
corn in autumn, when her calves throve, and when she heard her
boys shout and laugh in the courtyard. The thought that she was
his glowed hidden in her heart when she laid aside, full finished,
the last of the holy-day garments for the seven sons, and stood
joyful, looking at the pile of goodly, well-wrought work done
by her own hands through the winter. It was of him she was
sick and weary when, of a spring evening, she went home from
the river with her women — and they had washed wool from the
last shearing, boiled the water in a cauldron by the strand, rinsed
the wool in the stream —and the mistress herself felt as though
her back were broken across, and was coal-black with wool-dirt
high up her arms, and the smell of sheep and greasy filth had
soaked into her clothes till it seemed three baths would not make
her body clean again.

And now that he was gone, twas as though the widow could
see no meaning any more in her life’s restless busyness. He had
been cut down, and so she must die, like a tree whose roots are
severed. The young suckers that had shot up around her lap must
grow now from their own roots. They were old enough for each
of them to take order for his own lot. The thought flitted through
Kristin’s mind — if she had but understood this before, that time
when Erlend said it! Shadow-like pictures of a life with Erlend
up on his mountain croft drifted across her mind —they two,
grown young again, the little child beside them. But ’twas not
that she repented or grieved for what might have been. She her-
self could not have parted her life from her sons’ lives — now


915 The Cross


death would part them soon, for without Erlend she had not
strength to live. All that had befallen, and all that was yet to befall,
was their doom — all things fall out as they are doomed to fall,


She grew grey of hair and skin, scarce cared to keep her trim or
put her clothes on rightly. Of nights she lay and thought of her life
with Erlend; in the day she went about as in a dream, never spoke
with any till spoken to, seemed not even to hear when her little
sons spoke to her. The watchful and hard-working housewife set
her hand to no work. Love had underlain all her strivings with
earthly things — Erlend had given her little thanks for it; ‘twas
not so that he listed to be loved. But she could do no otherwise; it
was her nature to love with much toil and care.

At this time she seemed to be slipping down towards the trance
of death. Then came a sickness that ran through all the parish,
and laid her sons upon a sick-bed — and the mother awoke once
more.

__ The sickness was more perilous for grown folk than for chil-
dren. On Ivar it took such a hold that none looked that he should
live. The young lad had a giant’s strength in his fever fits; he
roared, and struggled to get up and seize his weapons — his fa-
ther’s death seemed to run in his mind. "Iwas all Naakkve and
Bjérgulf could do to hold him down by main force. Then
Bjorgulf was laid low. Lavrans lay with his face so swollen with
the breaking sores it scarce seemed his own — his eyes glittered
dully through two small slits — seemed as though they must burn
out in the glowing fever.

Their mother watched over these three in the loft. Naakkve
and Gaute had had the sickness as small children, and Skule was
much less sick than his brothers; Frida looked to him and Munan
down below in the hall. None deemed that Munan was in any

eril; but he had never been strong, and one evening, when they
all believed he was near well, of a'sudden he went off into a swoon.
There was scarce time for Frida to warn his mother — Kristin ran
down, and, a moment after, Munan breathed his last in her arms.

The child’s death awoke her to a new, wide-eyed despair. Her
wild sorrow for the suckling that died at its mother’s breast had
been, as it were, tinged red by the memory of all her slain dreams
of happiness. The very storm in her heart had borne Kristin up in
those days. And the fearful strain that had ended but when she


The Cross 916


le ao DF ee
saw her husband slain before her eyes, left behind it such a weari- :
ness of soul that Kristin herself deemed for sure she would soon —
die of grief for Erlend. But this surety had dulled the edge of —


sorrow. She had lived, feeling dusk and shadows thicken round
her, while she waited for the door to be opened for her too —


But over Munan’s little corpse the mother stood grey and wide —


awakened. The fair, sweet little boy had been her youngest child
for so many years, the last little one that she still dared fondle and
laugh at, when she should have been stern and grave and have cor-
rected her son for his small misdeeds and giddinesses. And he had
been so loving and so fond of his mother. It seemed to cut into
her very flesh —so bound was she still to life; twas not so easy
as she had thought for a woman to die, when she has poured her
life’s blood into so many new young hearts.


In cold, steadfast despair she passed to and fro betwixt the child r


that lay on the dead-straw and her sick sons. Munan lay in the old
storehouse, where first the little babe and then the father had
lain — three corpses in her home in less than one year. With a heart
withered with dread, but stark and dumb, she waited for the next
to die —she waited as for a relentless fate. She had never set
store enough by the gift she had got when God granted her so
many children. And the worst was that wnderstood it she had in a
fashion. But she had thought more on the troubles, the pangs, the
fears and struggles — though she had learned over again and over
again, through what she missed each time a child grew too great
for her arms, through the delight each time a fresh one lay upon
her bosom — that the joy was unspeakably greater than ‘the la-
bour and the pain. She had murmured because the children’s fa-
ther was so trustless a man, with little forethought for the line
that should come after him. She forgot always that he had been
no other, that time she broke God’s law and trod her own kin
beneath her feet to come to him.


Now he had been torn from her side. And now she looked to
see her sons die, one by one. Perchance ’twas her lot to be left


a childless mother at the last.


— There were so many things that before she had seen indeed, —


but not thought of much, what time she saw the whole world
through the mist of her own love and Erlend’s. She had seen,
truly, that to Naakkve ’twas an earnest matter that he was the


first-born and that ’twas his to be the head and leader of the band


917 The Cross


of brothers. She had seen, too, that he loved Munan dearly. Yet
she was shaken, as by something unlooked for, when she saw his
vehement sorrow at the youngest brother’s death.


But the other sons grew well again, though but slowly. On
Easter Sunday she was able to take to church four sons; but
Bjorgulf lay abed still, and Ivar was too weak to come without
the house. Lavrans had grown much in height while he lay on his
sick-bed, and in other ways, too, ’twas as though this half-year’s
happenings had advanced him far beyond his age.

And so it seemed to Kristin that she was an old woman now. A
woman must be held young, she deemed, so long as she had little
children sleeping in her arms at night, playing about their mother
in the day-time, and needing her care day and night. When her
little ones have grown too great for this, a mother is an old woman.

Her new brother-in-law, Jammelt Halvardsson, spoke to her
of the Erlendsséns’ tender age, and of how she herself was but
little over forty years; she would soon feel, mayhap, that she must
wed again, she needed a husband to help her with the care of the
estate and the nurture of the younger sons. He named more than
one good man who he deemed might be a fitting match for Kris-
tin — she must visit their home at ‘lin in the fall, and he would
see to it that she met them, and thereafter they could talk more
nearly of this matter.

Kristin smiled wanly. Ay — she was no more than forty years of
age. Had she heard of another woman that had been widowed with
a flock of growing children, she had said as Jammzlt said — she
must wed again, seek the stay of a new husband; she might even
have more children by him. — But she herself would not —

’T was when the Easter holy-days were just gone by that Jam-
malt of Alin came to Joérundgaard, and Kristin met her sister’s
new husband for the second time. They had gone neither to the
_ betrothal at Dyfrin nor to the bride-ale at Atlin, she and her sons.
The two feasts had been held with but short space between, that
spring when she was heavy with her last child. As soon as Jam-
melt had heard of the slaying of Erlend Nikulaussén, he had
hasted to Sil; with rede and deed he helped his wife’s sister and
sister’s sons, ordered, as well as he might, all that must be done
after the master’s death, and took upon him the conduct of the
charge against the man-slayers, since none of the Erlendss6ns was


yet of age. But at that time Kristin knew naught of what went
on around her. Even the judgment on Gudmund Toresson, who
was found to be Erlend’s slayer, seemed to stir her little.

This time she spoke more with her brother-in-law, and he
seemed to her a man to be liked. Young he was not — he and Simon
Darre were of an age —a quiet and steady man, tall and big, of
darker hue than common, comely of face, but somewhat stooped.
He and Gaute were good friends at once. Naakkve and Bjérgulf,
since their father’s death, had held themselves yet closer together
and apart from all the rest. But Ivar and Skule told their mother
they liked Jammelt well —“ Yet to us it seems, none the less,
that Ramborg might well have done so much honour to Simon
as to bide a widow something longer — this new husband of hers
is noways the like of Simon.” Kristin marked that these two mad-
caps of hers still remembered Simon Andressén: by him they
had let them be guided, whether with sharp words or with kindly
jest, though they would not suffer a word of correction from
their own father and mother without their eyes flashing and their
hands clenching with rage.

While Jammelt was at Jorundgaard, Munan Baardss6n too came
hither to visit Kristin. Not much was left now of Sir Dance
Munan. He had been wide of girth and portly in the old days,
and he had borne his heavy body not without grace, so that he
looked taller and more stately than he was. Now the gout had
crooked him, and the skin hung loosely on his shrunken frame;
he looked most like a little hobgoblin, wholly bald but for a scant
fringe of limp white tufts about his nape. ‘Once a strong, blue-
black beard had darkened his smooth, plump cheeks and chin,
but now grey stubble grew rankly in all the flabby folds of his
chin and neck, whither his razor found it hard to make its way.
He was grown blear-eyed, drivelled a littke—and was much
plagued with a weak stomach.

With him he had his son Inge, whom folk called Fluga, after
the mother; he was an oldish man already. The father had helped
this son forward in the world right well; made a rich match for
him, and got Bishop Halvard to lend Inge his countenance —
Munan’s wife Katrin had been the bishop’s cousin, and therefore
was Sir Halvard fain to hetp Inge to wealth, so that he should not
trespass on the heritage of Lady Katrin’s children. The bishop
held the Hedemarken wardenship in fief, and he had made Inge


919 The Cross


Munanss6n his deputy, so that he now owned no little land in
Skaun and Ridabu. His mother too had bought her a manor in
those parts; she was a most pious woman now, and did much
good, and she had vowed to live a life of chastity till her death.
* Ay, and she is none so old or so failing either,” said Sir Munan,
testily, when he saw Kristin smile. He would have been fain,
indeed, to have so ordered things that Brynhild should come to
him and keep house for him at his manor near Hamar, but that she
would not do.

He had so little joy of his old days, Sir Munan complained.
His children were so quarrelsome —the children of the same
mother were at odds one with another, and fought and wrangled
with their half-brothers and sisters. The worst was the youngest
daughter; her he had got with a paramour while he was a wedded
man, so that he could leave her no heritage, and therefore she
plundered her father of all she could lay hands on while yet he
lived. She was a widow, and had sat her down at Skogheim, the
manor that was Sir Munan’s proper seat; neither her father nor
her brothers and sisters could shift her therefrom. Munan was
sore afraid of her, but when he tried to scape and live with any of
his other children, he was plagued there, too, with plaints of the
others’ greed and dishonest dealings. He was happiest with the
youngest of his true-born daughters, who was a nun at Gimséy;
he liked well to be in the hostel there for a while; at such times
he strove much to make his soul with penance and prayers under
his daughter’s guidance, but he could not put up with the life
there for long at a time. Kristin was not sure that Brynhild’s sons
were much kinder towards their father than the other children,
but this Munan Baardss6n would not own; he loved them best of
all his offspring.

But miserable as this kinsman of hers now was, ’twas while he
was with her that Kristin’s stony sorrow first seemed to melt a
little. Sir Munan talked of Erlend early and late — when he was
not groaning over his own trials he was ever speaking of his dead
cousin and boasting of Erlend’s deeds — but most of all of his
reckless youth: Erlend’s wild pranks when first he was let loose
into the world, away from his home at Husaby — where Lady
Magnhild evermore gloomed at his father and the father gloomed
at his eldest son — and from Hestnes and his grave, pious foster-fa-
ther, Sir Baard. Sir Munan’s prate might have seemed strange com-


The Cross 920


en
fort for Erlend’s sorrowing widow. But in his own way the knight
had loved his young kinsman, and had ever deemed that Erlend
outshone all other men in comeliness and manhood — ay, and in
understanding as well, said Munan eagerly, only that he list not
to use it. And though Kristin deemed full surely that ‘twas not
for Erlend’s good that he had come out and into the King’s guard
when but sixteen, with this cousin of his for guide and teacher,
she yet was fain to smile sorrowfully and tenderly when Munan
Baardssén talked on and on, while the spittle ran out of the cor-
ners of his mouth and the tears oozed from his old, red-rimmed
eyes — of Erlend’s flashing joyous spirit in his boyish years, ere
unhappy chance had led him astray after Eline Ormsdatter and
scorched him for his lifetime.

Jammelt Halvardssén, sitting in earnest talk with Gaute and
Naakkve, looked across at his sister-in-law wonderingly. She had
sat her down on the cross wall-bench with this unsavoury old
man and Ulf Haldorss6n — Ulf seemed to Jammelt to look some-
what moodily, but she smiled as she chatted with them and filled
their beakers —he had not seen her smile before, but it became
her well, and her little, low laughter was like a quite young
maid’s.


Jammelt spoke once of how ’twas not possible all these six
brothers could stay at home, living on their mother’s manor. None
could look that any rich man of equal birth would give kins-
woman of his to Nikulaus if his five brothers were to dwell with
him, and maybe draw their livelihood from the manor when they
wed. And they ought to look about for a wife for the young man
now — he was twenty winters old already and seemed to be of a
lusty habit. Therefore Jammelt was minded to take Ivar and Skule
with him when he journeyed south again; doubtless he would find
a way to their advancement. When Erlend Nikulaussén had met
his end in such hapless wise, it had plainly appeared that the great
nobles of the land bethought them now once more that the slain
man had been one of their own peers, marked out by birth and
blood to take his place among the foremost, of a winning nature,
high-minded in many ways, in war a hardy and valiant chieftain
—though fortune had not been with him. The men who had
taken part in slaying the master on his own manor were dealt
with most sternly, And Jammelt could tell of many who had


921 The Cross


SS
asked him of Erlend’s sons. The men of Sudrheim he had met at
Yule, and they had let fall that these young lads were their own
kin; Sir Jon had bidden him greet them, and say he would wel-
come Erlend Nikulaussén’s sons as a kinsman and gladly keep
any of them that would join his household. Jon Haftorssén was
now to be wed with the Lady Elin, Erling Vidkunssén’s eldest
daughter, and the young bride had asked if the youths were like
their father: she well remembered that Erlend had visited them in
Bj6rgvin when she was a child, and that he seemed to her the come-
liest of all men. And her brother, Bjarne Erlingss6n, had said that
all he could do for Erlend Nikulaussén’s sons, that would he de
with all his heart.

Kristin sat gazing at her twin sons while Jammelt talked. They
grew more and more like their father: silky fine, soot-black hair
clung close and smooth to their heads, but curled a little in their
forelocks and down over their slim brown necks. They had
' narrow faces with high-bridged, outstanding noses, and fine small
mouths with a knot of muscles at each corner. But they had
shorter and broader chins and darker eyes than Erlend. And it
was this most of all, his wife now thought, that had made Erlend
so wondrous fair, that when his eyes looked up, light-blue and
clear, out of that lean, dark face under the coal-black hair, they
took one so unawares.

But there was a gleam of steel-blue in the young lads’ eyes now
as Skule answered his uncle (he was wont to be spokesman for
the two): \

“ We thank you for this your good and kindly proffer, kinsman.
But we have spoken already with Sir Munan and with Inge, and
taken counsel of our eldest brother — and the upshot is that we
have come to an accord with Inge and his father. These men are
our near kindred on our father’s side — and we are to bear Inge
company when he rides south, and are minded to bide at his
manor this summer, and for some further time —”

The boys came down to their mother in the hall that evening
when she had gone to rest:

“ Ay, we deem most like you understand this, mother,’
Ivar.

“We will not claim kindred and beg for help and friendship
from the men who sat dumb and looked on while our father suf-
fered wrong,” added Skule.


said


The Cross 922


eta ek eT


The mother nodded.

She deemed her sons did right. Jammelt was a prudent and
right-minded man, she saw, and his proffer had been well meant
— but she was well pleased that the lads were true to their father.
Yet had she never thought of old that the day would come when
her sons would serve Brynhild Fluga’s son.

The twins set forth with Inge Fluga as soon as Ivar was strong
enough to ride. The manor grew passing still when they were
gone. The mother remembered — last year about this time she lay
in the weaving-room with a new-born babe — it seemed to her
like a dream. So short a time was it since she had felt her young,
with her mind stirred and shaken by a young woman’s cares and
yearnings, by hope and hate and love.—Now was her flock
shrunken to four sons, and in her mind naught:stirred, save dis-
quietude for the grown young men. In this stillness which fell
upon Jorundgaard after the going of the twins, her smouldering
fear for Bjorgulf broke out into flame.

On the guests’ coming, he and Naakkve had moved down to
the old hearth-room house. He rose from his bed in the daytime,
but he had not yet been without the door. With deepest dread
Kristin marked that Bjérgulf sat ever in the same spot, never
crossed the floor, and scarce moved at all when she was in beside
him. She knew that his eyes were grown worse in this last sick-
ness. Naakkve was most still and silent — but so he had been ever
since his father’s death, and he seemed to hold aloof from his
mother all that he could.

At length one day she took heart of grace and questioned the
eldest how it stood now with Bjérgulf’s sight. For long Naakkve
turned off her questions. But at last she called on her son to tell
his mother the truth.

Naakkve said:

“Strong light he can still see dimly —” As he said it the young
man grew deadly pale, turned sharply, and went from the
room.

Late in the day, when the mother had wept her so weary that
she deemed now she might trust herself to speak calmly with her
son, she went over to the old house.

Bjorgulf lay upon the bed. Soon as she came and sat her down
by him on the bed’s edge, she could see by his face that he knew
she had spoken with Naakkve:


993 The Cross


“ Mother. You must not weep, mother,” he prayed, fearfully.

She would fain have cast herself down over her son, taken him
in her arms, wept over him, and wailed his hard lot. But she did
but steal her hand into his under the coverlid:

“Greatly does God try your manhood, my son,” she said,
hoarsely.

The look on Bjérgulf’s face changed, grew firm and steadfasc.
But it was a little while ere he could speak:

“T have known for long, mother, that I was chosen out to
suffer this. Already that time we were at Tautra — brother Aslak
spoke to me of this, and said that, should it go thus with me,
then —

“— As our Lord Jesus was tempted in the wilderness, said he —
He said the true wilderness for a Christian man’s soul was when
sight and sense were barred — then followed he the Lord’s foot-
steps out into the wilderness, even though his body were amidst
his brethren and his kinsmen. He read of these things from the
books of Saint Bernard. And if a soul but understand that him
hath God chosen in especial for such a hard trial of manhood,
then he need not fear that he cannot abide it. God knows my

soul better than the soul knows itself —”
_ He went on speaking to his mother after this fashion, com-
forting her, with wisdom and strength of soul which seemed far
beyond his years.’

In the evening Naakkve came to Kristin and begged that he
might speak with her alone. Thereupon he said that ’twas his in-
tent and Bjérgulf’s to enter a godly brotherhood and take the
vows as monks at Tautra.

- Kristin stood struck dumb, but Naakkve went on, calmly. They .
would wait till Gaute was of age and could see to their mother’s
and their younger brothers’ affairs. They would go into the con-
vent with goods in such measure as befitted the sons of Erlend
Nikulaussén of Husaby, but they would have an eye also to their
brothers’ welfare. From their father the Erlendsséns had naught in
heritage worth the speaking of, but the three who were born ere
Gunnulf Nikulaussén went into the cloister owned some parcels
of farms north of the fells —he had given gifts to his nephews
when he made division of his wealth, though most of what he gave
not to the Church and godly works he made over to his brother.
And, said Naakkve, if he and Bjérgulf claimed not their full share


The Cross ~ 994


ERG OT OSS). cs yo ea ae eee
of the heritage, ’twould be a help to Gaute too, who was now to
be the head of the house and carry it onward, that they two should
die to the world.

Kristin felt as though a blow had stunned her. Never had she
dreamed that Naakkve would think of a monk’s life. But she spoke
naught against it — she was so overcome. And she dared not try to
turn her son’s mind from so fair and so profitable a purpose.

“Even while we were boys, dwelling together in the cloister
there in the north, we two promised each other we would never
part our company,” said Naakkve.

His mother nodded; she knew it. But she had deemed ’twas so
meant, that Bjérgulf should go on living with Naakkve, even
when the eldest brother wed.

It seemed to Kristin well-nigh a miracle that Bj6rgulf, so young
as he was, could bear his ill-fortune so manfully. The times she
spoke with him of it, thoughout the spring, she heard naught from
his lips but brave and god-fearing words. "Iwas scarce to be un-
derstood, it seemed to her —but it must surely be that he had
known for many years already what would come of his dim-
sightedness, and so, belike, he had been arming his soul with pa-
tience ever since the time he dwelt amongst the monks —

But, since this was so, she could not but think how hard and
heavy had been the lot of this luckless child of hers — and how
little she had understood, standing by with mind filled full of her
own concerns. And now Kristin Lavransdatter would steal, each
moment she was alone, to kneel down before the likeness of Mary
Virgin at home in the loft, and before her altar northward in the
church as oft as it was opened. Grieving from the bottom of her
heart, and with humble tears, she prayed the Redeemer’s gentle
mother to be to Bjérgulf in a mother’s stead, and make good to
him all that his mother in the flesh had left undone.


One summer night Kristin lay awake. Naakkve and Bjérgulf had
gone back to the upper hall, but Gaute lay below with Lavrans,
for the elder brothers had a mind to practise them in watching and
praying, Naakkve had said. She was about to drop asleep at last,
when she was roused by a noise of one moving stealthily up in the
loft balcony. There were footfalls on the stairs — she knew the
blind man’s tread.


*T was but that he had some errand, she thought — yet she got


925 The Cross


up and felt for her clothes. Then she heard the door above thrown
open — someone cleared the steps in two or three bounds.

The mother ran to the outer room and threw open the door.
The mist lay so thick without that the storehouses across the
courtyard were but dimly seen. Up by the manor gate Bjérgulf
was fighting furiously to free him from his brother’s hold:

“Will you lose aught,” cried the blind man, “ if you be quit of
me? — then were you free of all your vows —and had no need to
die to this earthly home —”

What Naakkve answered, Kristin could not hear. She ran out
barefoot into the dripping wet grass. Bjorgulf had wrenched him
free now — then he dropped, as though felled by a blow, down
over the great stone, and beat upon it with his clenched fists.

Naakkve saw his mother, and came hastily some few steps to-
wards her:

“ Go in, mother —J can deal best with this alone — you shall go
in, I say,” he whispered urgently, then turned and stood again
bowed over his brother.

The mother stood watching a little way off. The sward was
soaking with wet; it dripped from all the roofs, and drops trickled
from every leaf —it had rained all the day, but now the clouds
were sunken low, in a thick, white fog. When after a while her
sons came down the path — Naakkve had hold of Bjérgulf beneath
the arm and led him thus — Kristin shrank back within the outer-
room door.

She saw that Bjérgulf’s face was bleeding; belike he had struck
it against the stone. Unwittingly, Kristin thrust her hand within
her mouth and bit into her own flesh.

On the stairs Bjérgulf tried once again to tear himself from
Naakkve — he stumbled against the wall, crying:

“T curse, I curse the day that I was born —!”

When she had heard Naakkve bar the door of the loft behind
them, their mother stole up after them and stood in the balcony
without. Long she heard Byjérgulf’s voice from within — he raged,
shrieked, and cursed — one or two of his wild words she could
make out. Between-whiles she heard that Naakkve spoke to him,
but his voice came to her as a muffled murmur only. At length
Bjérgulf fell into a loud and heart-rending sobbing.

The mother stood, shivering with cold and erief. She had on
_ her but a cloak flung over her shift; she stood there so long that


TheCros' ee
her loose-flowing hair was wetted by the raw night air. At last
silence fell within the loft.

When she was come into the room below, she went to the bed
where Gaute and Lavrans slept. They had heard naught. While
her tears ran down, she put out her hand in the dark, felt the two
warm faces, and listened to the boys’ healthy breathing. It seemed
to her that now were these two all she had left of her riches.

Shuddering with cold, she crept up into her own bed. One of
the dogs that lay over by Gaute’s bed pattered across the floor,
jumped up beside her, and curled him up upon her feet. He was
wont to do this of nights, and she scarce had the heart to drive
him away, though he was heavy and weighed upon her legs so that
they grew numb, but Erlend had owned the dog, and ’twas his
favourite, a coal-black, ragged old bear-hound. To-night Kristin
deemed twas good that it should lie there and thaw her frozen
feet.

— She saw naught of Naakkve the next morning till the morning
meal. Then he came in and sat him down in the high-seat; this
place had been his since his father died.

He said not a word throughout the meal, and there were black
rings about his eyes. His mother followed when he went out again.

“ How is’t with Bjérgulf now? ” she asked, in a low voice.

Naakkve shunned her look, but he answered, as low, that Bjér-
gulf slept now.

“Has — has he been thus before? ” she whispered, fearfully.

Naakkve nodded, turned from her, and went up to his brother
again.

Naakkve watched over Bjérgulf late and early, and kept his
mother from him all he could. But Kristin knew that the two
young men had many a heavy hour together.

*Twas Nikulaus Erlendssén who should have been master at
Jérundgaard now, but he could find no time to pay the least heed
to the farming. It seemed too that, like his father, he had small
mind to the work and small skill in it. So Kristin and Gaute had
the whole charge upon their shoulders —for this summer Ulf
Haldorssén, too, forsook her.

After the hapless doings that ended with Erlend Nikulaussén’s
slaying, Ulf’s wife had gone home with her brother. Ulf stayed on
at Jorundgaard — he said he would show folk he would not be
driven out by lies and gossip. But he hinted, none the less, that here


his time was well-nigh spent; he thought maybe he would betake
him north of the fells to his own farm in Skaun, when so much
time had gone by that none might say he had fled from the
slanders.

But then the bishop’s deputy began to bring in question whether
Ulf Haldorssén had put away his wife unlawfully. On this Ulf
made ready to depart, fetched Jardtrud, and was now to set forth
for the north ere the autumn storms made the roads across the
mountains over toilsome. To Gaute he said that he would join
company with his half-sister’s husband, that was an armourer in
Nidaros; his brother’s son would still work his Skjoldvirkstad
farm for him, and he would send Jardtrud to dwell there.

On the last night Kristin drank to Ulf from the silver-gilt
beaker her father had had in heritage from his father’s father, Sir
Ketil the Swede. She prayed that he would take the beaker and
keep it in memory of her; thereafter she set a gold ring that had
been Erlend’s upon his finger, and bade him wear it for his kins-
man’s sake.

Ulf kissed her in thanks: “Tis one of the dues of kin,” said he,
laughing. “You thought not, Kristin, for sure — when first we
were acquaint, and I was the serving-man that came to fetch you
and bring you to my master — that we should part in this wise? ”

Kristin flushed crimson, for he was smiling at her with his old
mocking smile — yet she deemed she saw in his eyes that he was
sad. So she said:

“None the less, Ulf, I trow you think long till you are back in
the Trondheim country, you who were born and bred there in
the north. I long for the fjord there many a time, I who lived
there but those few years.” Ulf laughed as before; and then she
said, low: “If, in my youth, I affronted you at any time by
haughtiness or —I knew not then that you were near kinsmen,
you and Erlend — you must forgive it me now! ”

“Nay —and ’twas not Erlend who would not own the kin-
ship. But I was so high and mighty when I was young — since
my father had cast me out from among my kindred, beg me a
place I would not —” He rose hastily, and went over to where
Bjérgulf sat on the bench: “ Understand you, Bjorgulf, my foster-
ling — your father — and Gunnulf —they showed me the hearts
of kinsmen from the time when first we met as lads — far other-
wise than my brothers and sisters at Hestnes. Afterward — never


The Cross 928


EMUE AGT OES AE 00S Ss DN ES Se
did I put me forward as Erlend’s kinsman unless I saw that thereby
I could the better serve him — and his wife — and you, my foster-
sons. Understand you? ” he said, vehemently, and laid his hand
over Bjérgulf’s face, hiding the sightless eyes.

“T understand.” Bjérgulf’s answer came half smothered through
the other’s fingers; he nodded behind Ulf’s hand.

“We understand, foster-father ”; Nikulaus laid his hand heavily
on Ulf’s shoulder, and Gaute drew closer to the group.

A strange feeling came to Kristin — ’twas as though they would
speak of things she had no knowledge of. Then she too went for-
ward to the men, saying:

“ Trust me, Ulf, kinsman, all of us understand — other friend so
trusty as you not Erlend nor any of us ever had. God bless you! a

The next day Ulf Haldorssén set forth for the north.


As the winter went on, Bjérgulf grew more at peace, so far as
Kristin could see. He came again to the household meals and went
to Mass with the folk, and he took in willing and friendly wise at
Kristin’s hand the help and service she was so fain to render to
him.

And as the time went by, and Kristin never heard her sons say
aught more of the cloister, she felt herself how unspeakably loath
she was to give up her eldest son to the convent life.

She could not but see that for Bjérgulf the cloister would for
sure be the best. But she knew not how she could endure to lose
Naakkve in this wise. It must be, after all, that the first-born was
in a way knit to the mother’s heart yet more closely than were the
other sons.

Nor could she see that Naakkve was fitted to be a monk. True
enough, he had a passing good head for the arts of learning and a
love for godly exercises; yet, all the same, he seemed not to his
mother to be truly devout of mind. He showed no zeal in attend-
ance at his parish church, missing the services often on slender
grounds, and she knew that neither he nor Bjorgulf made to their
parish priest aught but the common confession of sins. The new
priest, Sira Dag Rolfssén, was a son of Rolf of Blakarsarv, who had
been wed with Ragnfrid Ivarsdatter’s cousin, and he came much to
his kinswoman’s manor; he was a young man of about thirty years,
learned and a good clerk; but the two eldest sons met him with
coldness. Howbeit with Gaute he was good friends straightway.


929 The Oross


Gaute was the only one of the Erlendsséns who had made
friends amongst the folk of Sil. But yet none of the others had kept
himself so much a stranger in the parish as had Nikulaus. He never
mixed with the other youths — if so be he went where the youth
were met for dance or trysting, he would stand most often aside
at the border of the green, and look on — with the mien of one
who deemed himself too good to take part. But should the whim
take him, he would join in the game unbidden — from vainglory
folk said, to show off his powers: he was lusty, strong, and nimble,
easily egged on to fight — and after he had set down two or three
of the most renowned fighters of the parish, folk thought it best
to put up with his manners. And if so were that he had a mind to
dance with a maid, he paid no heed either to brothers or kinsmen,
but danced with the girl and after sat alone with her — and never
did it befall that a woman said no when Nikulaus Erlendss6n prof-
fered her his company. He was none the better liked for this.

Since his brother was grown quite blind, Naakkve seldom left
him, but, if it chanced that he went out of an evening, he bore him
no otherwise than he had ever done. He had given up too, for the
most part, his long hunting-trips, but none the less this same
autumn he had bought of the Warden a most costly white falcon,
and he was zealous as ever to practise him in archery and sports.
Bjérgulf had taught himself to play chess in despite of his blind-
ness, and the brothers often spent whole days over the chess-
board; they were both most eager players.

At this time Kristin heard that folk were talking of Naakkve and
a young maid, Tordis Gunnarsdatter of Skjenne. The next year
the girl lay up at the seter the summer through; and Naakkve
more than once was away from home by night. Kristin came to
know that he had been with Tordis.

The mother’s heart trembled, and turned hither and thither like
an aspen-leaf on its stalk. Tordis was of an old and honourable kin
—she herself was a good, innocent child; ‘twas impossible that
WNaakkve could have the heart to wrong her. If the two young folk
forgot themselves, then must he make this girl his wife. Sick with
dread and shame of her own thoughts, Kristin yet knew in her
heart that ’twould surely not grieve her overmuch if so it turned
out. But two years agone she would have heard naught of it — that
Tordis Gunnarsdatter should be mistress of Jorundgaard after her.
The maid’s father’s father was still living, and dwelt on the manor


The Cross 930


ihe Gross" | a eee
with four married sons; she herself had many brothers and sisters;
she would be a poorly dowered bride. And each woman of that
kindred had ever one witless child at the least. The mountain-
people either changed the children or cast a spell on them —in
despite of all they could do to guard the lying-in women and
make them safe, neither baptism nor exorcism seemed to avail
aught. There were two old men now at Skjenne whom Sira Eirik
had adjudged to be changelings,; two deaf-and-dumb children —
and Tordis’s eldest brother the wood-elf had bewitched when he
was in his seventeenth year. Otherwise the Skjenne kindred were
a goodly tribe; they had luck with their cattle, and they throve in
all their doings; but there were so many of them ’twas impossible
they should lay up riches.

— God alone might know whether Naakkve could draw back
from his purpose without sin, if he had vowed him already to
Mary V irgin’s service. But she knew that a man must ever prove
him for a year as novice in the cloister ere he took the vows — he
could draw back even then, if he felt he was not called to serve
God in this wise. And she had heard how that a count’s lady of
Valland, who was mother to the great doctor in religion and
preaching friar, Sir Thomas Aquinas, had shut her son in with a
fair and wanton woman, to shake his purpose when he was minded
to forsake the world. Kristin deemed ’twas the foulest deed she
had heard on —and yet this woman died at peace with God. Sc
belike it could not be so fearful a sin in her, if she thought now
that she would welcome Tordis of Skjenne with open arms as her
son’s wife.

In the autumn Jammelt Halvardssén came to Formo, and from
him they learned the truth of the rumours of great tidings that
had spread up through the Dale before his coming. With consent
of the foremost fathers of the Church, and the knights and esquires
of the Council of Norway’s realm, Sir Magnus Eirikssén had re-
solved to part his kingdoms ’twixt the two sons he had got by his
queen, the Lady Blanche. At the Diet at Varberg he had bestowed
on the younger, Prince Haakon, the name of King in Norway;
the chiefs of the realm, both clerks and laymen, had sworn upon
the Lord’s body to hold and guard the land for him. ’Iwas said he
was a fair and likely child of three years old, and was to be nur-
tured here in Norway, with four of the best Norse dames for

' foster-mothers, and two Church and two lay lords for foster-


931 ( The Cross


fathers, when King Magnus and Queen Blanche were in Sweden.
Sir Erling Vidkunss6n and the bishops of Bjérgvin and Oslo, ’twas
said, had thought out this choice of king, and Bjarne Erlingss6én had
furthered the matter most with King Magnus; for of all men in
Norway’s land he loved Bjarne best. And all men deemed ’twould
be of great gain to Norway’s might and welfare, that now we
should have a king again who made his home amongst us and
would guard our laws and rights and the land’s weal, instead of
wasting his time and strength and the realm’s wealth on emprises
in other lands.

Kristin had heard of the choice of king, even as she had heard of
the feuds with the German merchants in Bjérgvin and of the
King’s wars in Sweden and Denmark. But the tidings had touched
her little — ’twas like the echoes of thunder-claps amidst the moun-
tains when the storm passes over far-off country-sides. Her sons,
she knew, had talked among them of these things. But by Jam-
melt’s tale Erlend’s sons were vehemently stirred. Bjorgulf sat
with his forehead on his hand, hiding his blind eyes; Gaute listened
with lips a little open, his hand clutching his dagger’s hilt, Lavrans
breathed quick and heavily, and kept ever looking from his aunt’s
husband over at Naakkve in the high-seat. The eldest son was pale
of face and his eyes glowed.

“Tt has been the lét of many a man,” said Naakkve, “ that they
who stood against him most stiffly in life went forward to victory
on the road he showed them — when they had first laid him out as
food for worms. When once his mouth is filled with mould, lesser
men than he are fain enough to own his words true.”

“ Ay, maybe so, kinsman,” said Jammalt, soothingly, “ there is
truth in what you say; your father, first of all men, thought of this
way out of the slough — to put two brothers on the thrones here
and in Sweden. A deep-thinking, wise and great-hearted knight
was Erlend Nikulaussén, I wot. But be wary in your speech, Niku-
laus; I trow well you would not have such words go abroad from

ou as might work harm to Skule —”

“Skule asked not my leave for this he has done,” said Naakkve
sharply.

“ Nay, he remembered not, belike, that you are come of age
now,” answered Jammalt, as before, “and I thought not on it
either — so twas with my consent and goodwill that he laid his
hand on Bjarne’s sword and swore — ”


“1 trow he remembered it — but the cub knew full well I had
never given consent. And the Giske men stood in need, no doubt,
of this salve for a pricking conscience — ” ;

— Skule Erlendsson had taken service with Bjarne Erlingss6n as
his sworn follower. He had met the young noble at Yule-tide
when a-visiting his mother’s sister at Atlin, and Bjarne had made
it clear to the boy that it was most through Sir Erling’s pleadings
and his own that Erlend’s life had been pardoned — without their
backing ’twas impossible Simon Andresson’s errand to King Mag-
nus could have sped. — Ivar was still with Inge Fluga.

Kristin knew that what Bjarne Erlingssén had said was not
wholly untrue — it fitted in well enough with Simon’s own tale of
his journey to Tunsberg. Nevertheless she had all these years
thought with great bitterness of Erling Vidkunss6n; it seemed to
her he must needs have had the power to help her husband to win
better terms had he had the will. Bjarne, belike, counted for little
at that time, being but a boy. Howsoever it was, she liked not over
well that Skule had bound him to this man — and it took her breath
strangely that the twins took their own way, and had ventured
them out into the wide world thus —they seemed to her still but
children —

After this visit of Jammelt’s, the unrest in her spirit waxed so
great that she could scarce bear to think. ff ’twere as the men
thought, that ’twould further so much the well-being and safety
of the people of the land that this tiny boy in Tunsberg castle
should now be called King of Norway, then this great gain fo1 the
folk might have been won nigh ten years agone had Erlend not —
No! She would not think of that, when she thought of the dead.
But she could not help herself, were it but because she knew that
in the sons’ eyes their father stood out glorious and perfect, the
foremost of warriors and chieftains, without spot or blemish. And
she herself, indeed, had thought all these years that Erlend had
been betrayed by his fellows and his rich kinsmen; her husband
had suffered great wrong — but Naakkve overshot the mark when
he said they had laid him out to be food for worms. She, too, ’twas
sure, bore her own heavy share of the blame — but most of all
‘twas Erlend’s own folly and his ungoverned self-will that had
brought him to his hapless end.

Nay, but — none the less ’twas bitter to her that Skule should
now be Bjarne Erlingssén’s man.


933 The Cross


Should she never see the day when she would be set free from
the endless torture of unrest and dread —? O Jesus, remembering
the care and sorrow Thy blessed mother suffered for Thy sake,
have mercy upon me, a mother, and comfort me —!


Even for Gaute she had fears. There was the stuff in the boy for
a husbandman of the best, but he was so headlong in his eagerness
to set the fortunes of the house on their feet again. Naakkve gave
him a free hand — and Gaute had so many irons in the fire. Along
with some other men in the parish he had now taken up the old
iron blast-furnaces in the fells. And he sold away too much; sold
not only of what came in as rent in kind, but of the stuff from the
home farm too. Kristin had all her days been used to see store-
houses and ware-rooms on her manor full to overflowing, and she
was more than a little wroth when Gaute turned up his nose at
rank butter, and made a mock of the ten-year-old bacon she had
hanging. She had need to feel that on her manor there should never
be lack of food; that no poor folk need be turned away unholpen
from her door, if black dearth should come again to the country-
side. And there should be naught lacking when days of bride-ales
and child-ales and feasting came again to the old manor.

Her high-flown hopes for her sons shrank and dwindled. She
would be content if they would come to rest here in her parish.
She could exchange and bring together her estates so that three of
them might be settled on their own farms. And Jorundgaard, with
the part of Laugarbru that lay this side the river, would suffice to
keep three freeholders. If their lot were not that of great esquires
— yet, at the least, poor folk they would not be. And here in the
Dale was peace — all this unrest among the chieftains of the land
was little heard of and little heeded here. Even if this might be
deemed an abatement of the power and worship of the kindred —
yet twas in God’s power to lead those who came’ after on to
greater things if He saw ’twould be for their good. But belike
’twas vain for her to hope she should see them gathered about her
in this wise — they would scarce come to rest so easily, these sons
of hers who had Erlend Nikulauss6n for father.

It was at this time that her soul was wont to find peace and solace
if she let her thoughts run on the two little children she had laid
to rest up in the graveyard,

Each day in these years she had thought of them — wondered,


The Oross 934


when she saw children as old as they growing and thriving, what
hers would have been like now —

When now she went about her daily tasks, deft and diligent as
ever, but withdrawn and full of thought, the dead children were
ever with her; in her dreams they grew and throve, and their na-
tures were in every wise just as she would have had them: Munan
was as faithful to his kinsmen as Naakkve, while in his ways with
his mother he was merry and frank as Gaute — but, unlike him,
never affirighted her with doubtful plans; he was gentle and
thoughtful as Lavrans, but all the strange thoughts that Munan
pondered he talked of freely with his mother. In mother-wit he
was Bjérgulf’s like, but no mischance darkened his road through
life, and thus his wisdom was untouched by bitterness; he was
self-assured, strong and bold as the twins, but not so unruly and
self-willed —

And all the sweet, joyous memories of her children’s lovesome-
ness when they were little, these she called up again when she
thought of little Erlend. He stood upon her lap to be dressed; she
held her hands about his fat naked form, and with tiny hands and
upturned face and all his precious body he strained upward to-
wards her face and her caresses. She taught him to walk — she had
laid a folded cloth across his breast and up below his arm-pits —
in this harness he hung, heavy as a sack, working away so blunder-
ingly and drolly with his feet, laughing himself till he twisted him
about like a little worm. She bore him with her on her arm out
into the farm-yard to the calves and lambs; he screamed with joy
at the sow with all her piglets, threw back his head and gaped at
the doves up on the stable loft. He ran beside her in the tall grass
by the stone heaps, cried out for each berry he saw, and ate them
from out her hand so eagerly that her palm was all wet from his
little greedy mouth.

All the joys she had had of her children she called to mind and
lived over again in this dream-life with these two little ones, and
all the sorrows she forgot —


Spring was come for the third time since Erlend was laid in his
grave. Kristin heard no more of Tordis and Naakkve. But neither
did she hear aught of the cloister. And her hopes grew — she


could not help herself: she was so loath to give up her eldest son
to the monkish life.


935 > The Cross


Just before John’s Mass * Ivar Erlendssén came home to Jérund-
gaard. The twins had been sixteen-year-old, growing lads when
they set forth from home. Ivar was a grown man now, near
eighteen years old, and his mother deemed he had grown so fair
and manly she could not look her fill on him.

His mother bore his breakfast up to Ivar the first morning, while
he lay abed. Wheaten honey-bread, bannocks, and ale that she had
drawn from the last barrel of the Yule-tide brew. She sat upon the
bed’s edge while he ate and drank, smiled at all he said, stood up
and looked at his clothes, turned and felt each garment, rummaged
in his travelling-bag, weighed his new silver buckle in her narrow,
red-brown hand, drew his dagger from its sheath, praised it and
all his gear. Then she sat her down again upon the bed, looked on
her son, and listened with a smile in her eyes and about her lips to
all the young man’s tales.

Then Ivar said:

“*Twere best, mother mine, I should tell you what errand has
brought me hither —I am come to get me Naakkve’s assent to my
marriage.”

Astounded, Kristin smote her hands together:

“Tvar mine! And you so young — sure you have not been play-
ing any foolish pranks? ”

Ivar prayed his mother to hearken. "Twas a youngish widow,
Signe Gamalsdatter of Rognheim in Fauskar. The manor was
worth six score silver marks, and the most of it her own; she had
it in heritage from her only child. But she had been drawn into a
lawsuit with her husband’s kin, and Inge Fluga had sought all man-
ner of unlawful gain for himself, if he was to help the widow to
her rights. Ivar had grown angry, and had taken the woman’s part
and gone with her to the bishop himself, for Sir Halvard had
shown Ivar fatherly goodwill at all times when he had met with
him. Inge Munanssén’s doings in his wardenship would ill bear to
be looked into sharply — but he had known how to keep friend-
ship with the great people in the parishes, and to frighten the com-
mon folk into a mouse-hole — and in throwing dust in the bishop’s
eyes he had shown great skill; ’twas like too that, for Munan’s sake,
Sir Halvard was not minded to be over strict. But now things
looked none too well for Inge —and so the second-cousins had
parted in most unfriendly wise when Ivar took his horse and rode

* 24th June.


The Cross 936


a a he ee
from Inge Fluga’s manor. But then it had come to his mind that
he might go south and greet the folks at Rognheim ere he left that
country-side. That was at Easter-tide, and he had been with Signe
since — helped her on her manor in the spring — and now they had
agreed together that he should wed her. She deemed not that Ivar
Erlendss6n was too young to be her husband and take her welfare
in charge. And he was in favour with the bishop, as he had said —
sure enough he was too young and untaught as yet for Sir Halvard
to entrust him with any office, but Ivar had good hopes that he
would make his way, if he wed at Rognheim.

Kristin sat playing with the bunch of keys in her lap. This, sure
enough, was sage and sober talk. And well she deemed that Inge
Fluga deserved naught better. But she wondered much what the
poor old man, Munan Baardss6n, would say to this.

Of the bride she learned that Signe was thirty winters old, and
of poor and humble stock, but her first husband had prospered, so
that now she was in good estate; and she was herself an honour-
able, kindly, and notable woman.

Nikulaus and Gaute went south with Ivar to see the widow, but
Kristin stayed behind to be with Bjérgulf. When her sons came
home, Naakkve brought the tidings to his mother that Ivar was
now betrothed to Signe Gamalsdatter. The wedding was to be
held at Rognheim in the autumn.


Not long after his home-coming, Naakkve came in to his mother
one evening when she sat sewing in the weaving-house. He barred
the door within. He said then to his mother that now Gaute was
twenty, and Ivar, too, by reason of his marriage, was become his
own master, ‘twas his and Bjérgulf’s intent to journey north this
next autumn and pray to be received as novices into the cloister.
Kristin said not much in answer, and what more was said was but
of the ordering of the portion that the two eldest sons must now
be given from the estate.

But a few days later men came to Jérundgaard to bid them to a
feast — Aasmund of Skjenne was to hold his granddaughter Tor-
dis’s betrothal-ale with a worthy yeoman’s son of Dovre.

Naakkve came in to his mother in the weaving-house that night
too, and again he barred the door behind him. He set him down on
the edge of the hearth-place, and sat raking with a stick in the


embers — Kristin had made a little fire, for the nights were cold
that summer.


937 The Cross


“Naught but feasting and revelling, mother mine,” he said,
laughing a little. “ Betrothal feast at Rognheim and betrothal feast
at Skjenne, and then ’twill be Ivar’s wedding — but when Tordis
rides to church to her bridal, I shall not be of the company, I trow

—I shall have donned the cloister garb by then —”
__ Kristin answered not for a while. But then she said, without
looking up from her seam —’twas a wedding-coat for Ivar:

“Many had deemed, I trow, that ’twould be a grief to Tordis
Gunnarsdatter if you turned monk.”

“I had deemed so once myself,” said Naakkve.

Kristin let the sewing sink upon her lap. She looked at her son
— his face was set and calm. And he was so fair —his dark hair,
combed back from his white forehead, clustered so softly behind
his ears and over the slender brown pillar of his neck. His features
were shapelier than his father’s — his face was broader and firmer,
the nose not so big and the mouth not so small; his clear blue eyes
lay fairly set beneath the straight, black eyebrows —and yet he
did not seem so comely as Erlend had been. ’Twas his father’s
animal-like suppleness and grace, the breath of never-fading youth
about him, that Naakkve lacked.

The mother took up her work again, but she did not sew. After
a little she said, while she looked down and smoothed in an edge
of the cloth with her needle:

“ Bear in mind, Naakkve, yet have I said no single word against
your godly purpose. I dare not be so bold. But you are young —
and you, who are much more learned than I, wot well —some-
where in the scriptures ’tis written: Ill beseems it a man to turn
and look back over his shoulder when once he has set his hand to
the plough.”

Not a muscle of her son’s face moved.

“T know that for long have you two had this in your thoughts,”
his mother went on. “ Ever since you were children. You under-
stood not then, yourselves, what you would forgo. Now you are
come to man’s estate — think you not ’twere fit you should prove
you a little longer — whether or not you have the call? You are
born to be the master of this manor and the head of your house —”

“You make bold to counsel me now? ” Naakkve drew breath
heavily once or twice. He rose — of a sudden he took hold on his
bosom, tore apart his coat and shirt, so that the mother looked
upon his naked breast, where the birth-mark, the five small blood-
red, fiery flecks, shone amidst the black, curling down:


The Cross 938


“ You thought, maybe, I was too young to understand what you
sighed out with tears and moans as you kissed me here when I was
a little child — I understood it not then, but the words you spoke
{ never could forget —

“ Mother, mother — have you forgot that father died the most
miserable of deaths, unshriven and unhouseled? — And you dare to
gainsay our purpose?

“ _ “Methinks we brothers know well what we turn us from —
Meseems ’tis none so great a loss if I lose this manor and cut me off
from wedlock — and such peace and joy as you and my father had
together all the years I can remember —”

Kristin let fall her sewing. All her life with Erlend —the evil
and the good — the rich wealth of memories came over her in a
flood. So little, then, did this child know what he was forgoing.
With all his boyish battles, his venturesome deeds, his playing at
. love and gallantry —naught else was he but an innocent child.

Naakkve saw the tears come into his mother’s eyes; he cried
aloud:

“ Quid mihi et tibi est, nulier * —?” Kristin started in dread,
but her son spoke on in a vehement tumult of mind: “ God said
not these words, I trow, for that He contemned his mother — But
He corrected even her, the pure pearl without spot or blemish,
when she would have counselled Him how He should use the
power He had got from His Father in heaven and not from His
mother in the flesh. — Mother, you must not counsel me in this
matter — dare not to do it—”

Kristin bent her head upon her breast.

A little after Naakkve said, very low:

“Have you forgot, mother, that you drove me from you—?”
He stopped, as though he could not trust his own voice. But then
he went on again: “I would have knelt by you at my father’s
death-bed — but you bade me begone — Think you not my heart
has been wrung in my bosom as often as I thought onit— 2)?

Kristin whispered, so low twas scarce to be heard:

“Ts it therefore you have been so — cold — towards me all these
years, since I have been widowed? ”

The son was silent.


“T begin to understand—you have never forgiven me this,
Naakkve —”


Woman, what have I to do with thee? ” -- John ii. 4


939 The Cross

Naakkve looked down, aside.

: Sometimes — I have forgiven you, mother,” he said, in a faint
voice.

“ Often was it not, I trow — Naakkve, Naakkve,” she cried in
bitter moan, “—think you my love for Bjérgulf was less than
yours —am I not his mother—am I not mother to you both?
Cruel were you when you ever barred the door ’twixt him and
me—!”

Naakkve’s pale face grew yet whiter:

“Ay, mother, I barred the door against you. — Cruel, say
you—? Jesus comfort you, you know not—” His voice died
away in a whisper, as though the boy’s strength were ebbed away:
“ Methought you should not — you at least we must spare —”

He turned sharp about, went to the door, and unbarred it. But
then he stood there unmoving, with his back to Kristin. At length
she called him softly by his name. On that he came back, and stood
before her with bowed head:

“ Mother — I know well this is not — easy — for you —”

She laid her hands upon his shoulders. He hid his face from her
sight, but he bowed down his head and kissed one of her wrists.
Kristin remembered that his father had done this once — when, she
could not recall —

She stroked his sleeve, and on that he lifted his hand and patted
her on the cheek. Afterwards they sat them down, and sat in si-
lence a little.

“ Mother,” said Naakkve, in a while, in a steady, even voice.
“ Have you still the cross that was my brother Orm’s? ”

“Ay,” said Kristin; “he told them to pray me never to part
from it.”

“T trow that, had Orm known of this, he had given consent that
I should heir it of him. Now shall I, too, have neither kin nor
neritage — ”

Kristin drew forth from under her shift the little silver cross.
Naakkve took it from her hand; ’twas warm yet from his moth-
er’s breast. Reverently he kissed the reliquary in the midst of the
cross, clipped the thin chain about his neck, and thrust the trinket
in under his clothing.

“Have you memory of your brother Orm? ” asked his mother.

“T know not. At times it seems — but mayhap ’tis but that you
spoke so much of him when I was little —”


The Cross 940

Naakkve sat on there a little while before his mother. Then he
stood up:

“‘Good-night, mother! ”

“ God bless you, Naakkve; good-night! ‘

He went. Kristin folded up Ivar’s bridal coat, laid it with her -
“sewing-gear, and quenched the fire.

“ God bless you, God bless you, Naakkve mine —” Then she
blew out the candle and left the old house.


It chanced, a little while after, that Kristin met Tordis at a
manor in the outskirts of the parish. There was sickness amongst
the manor-folk and they had not got in their hay; so the brothers
and sisters of Olav’s Gild * went thither to lend them a hand with
the work. In the evening Kristin bore the girl company part of
her way home. She walked slowly, as one well on in years, chat-
ting with the girl; and before long she had led the talk in such wise
that Tordis of her own accord had told Naakkve’s mother all that
had been ’twixt him and her.

Ay, she had been wont to meet him in their home paddock, and
last summer, when she lay at the seter, he had been with her more
times than one of nights. But he had never offered to be overbold
with her. She knew well what folk said of Naakkve in general —
to her he had never done wrong, either in word or in deed. But he
had lain by her side upon the bed-covers once or twice, and they
had talked together — Once she had asked him if ’twere his pur-
pose to ask for her in marriage; and he had answered that he could
not; he had vowed him to the service of Mary Virgin. He said the
same this last spring one time they spoke together. And so she
would no longer set her against her grandfather’s and her father’s
wills.

“It must needs have brought down evil upon you both, had he
broken his vow and you defied your kinsfolk,” said Kristin. She
stood leaning upon her rake, looking on the young maid —a gentle, |
round, and comely face this child had, and the fairest bright hair in
a heavy plait. “ God will surely grant you happiness withal, my
Tordis — he seems a gallant, good lad, your betrothed.”

“Ay, I like Haavard well,” said the girl—and then burst into
bitter weeping.


x Hhey The Bridal Wreath (The Garland), Note 17, Peasant or Farmers’
uilds,


941 The Cross


Kristin comforted her with such words as were fitting in the
mouth of an old and a staid woman. Her own heart ached with
yearning — she had so gladly called this good, fresh child her
daughter.


After Ivar’s wedding she stayed a while at Rognheim. Signe
Gamalsdatter was not fair, and she looked worn and old, but she
was gentle and winning. She seemed to cherish a heart-felt love
for her young husband, and she welcomed his mother and broth-
ers as though she deemed they stood so far above her ’twas not
possible she should honour and serve them enough. For Kristin
*twas a quite new thing that any should put themselves about to
guess her wishes and care for her heedfully. Not even while she
was the rich lady of Husaby, with a host of serving-folk to do her
bidding, had any served her as though they took thought for the
mistress’s ease and well-being. She had never spared herself when
all work for the good of the whole household was on her shoul-
ders, and none else had even bethought them that she should be
spared. So Signe’s ready thoughtfulness for her mother-in-law’s
well-being all the time she was at Rognheim did Kristin’s heart
good; she soon grew to love Signe so well that, well-nigh as ear-
nestly as she prayed God to bless Ivar’s wedded life, she prayed
also that Signe might never have cause to repent that she had
given herself and all she had to so young a husband.


And so, just after Michael’s Mass,* Naakkve and Bjérgulf jour-
neyed northward to the Trondheim country. All that she had
heard of them since was that they were come to Nidaros in good
case, and that they had been received as novices into the brother-
hood at Tautra.


Soon now would Kristin have dwelt a year on Jérundgaard with
but two of her sons to bear her company. But she herself won-
dered — that ’twas but a year. For that day in autumn of last year
when she had been as far as Dovre with the two, and came riding
by the church and looked down upon the lower slopes, lying
sheeted in cold mist so that she could not make out the houses on
her own manor —she had thought that so must they feel, who


* 20th September.


The Cross 942


i NelOTOSS 8 eee
ride towards their home knowing that the houses lie there burned
to ashes and cold charred wood — ‘

— Now, when she turned homewards by the old path past the
smithy garth — this year ’twas all but overgrown, and tufts of yel-
low bedstraw, bluebells and vetch swept over it from the edges
of the rank hay-field — almost it seemed to her that what she saw
was a picture of her own life: the weather-beaten, sooty old
hearth-place, that never again would have fire kindled upon it.
The ground about it was strewn thick with powdered charcoal,
but soft, short, glossy grass was springing up over all the plot
where the fire had raged. And from the cracks of the old fireplace
bloomed the long, pink tassels of the willow-herb, which sows
itself in all places.


2


Ir would befall at times, when Kristin was gone to rest already,
that she would be awaked by folk coming riding into the court-
yard. Someone would thunder at the loft door — she would hear
Gaute meet his guests with a loud, gay greeting. Serving-folk
must up and out. There was a clatter and tramping in the room
above — Kristin could make out Ingrid’s voice raised in chiding.
Ay, she was a good child, that young serving-wench; she would
put up with no forwardness from any man. A roar of langhter
from young throats greeted her sharp, ready answers. Frida
squealed — poor thing, she would never grow wiser; not many
years younger than Kristin herself —and yet the mistress had to
keep a watchful eye on her —

Then Kristin would turn in her bed and sleep again.

Gaute would be up next morning at cock-crow as was his wont
—he slept no longer of a morning for having sat up drinking ale
at night. But his guests would not show themselves till the hour
of the morning meal. Then they would stay at the manor the day
through — sometimes they had a bargain to strike, and sometimes
twas but a friendly visit. Gaute ever kept open house,

Kristin took heed that everything of the best was set before
Gaute’s friends. She knew not herself that she went about smiling
quietly, as she heard once more the sounds of youth and joyous
life on her father’s manor. But she spoke little with the young men


943 The Cross


and saw but little of them. Enough for her to see that Gaute was
happy and a man of many friends.

Gaute Erlendss6n was as well liked by the small folk as amongst
the rich landowners. Although the doom passed on Erlend’s slay-
ers had borne right hardly upon their kinsmen, so that there were
farms and kindred whose folk were still most loath to meet with
any of the Erlendsséns, yet Gaute himself had not a foe.

Sir Sigurd of Sundbu had conceived the greatest fondness for
his young kinsman. This cousin of hers, whom Kristin had never
met before fate led him to Erlend Nikulaussén’s death-bed, had


shown him at that time the most faithful kinsman to her. He had ©


stayed at Jorundgaard till nigh to Yule-tide, and done all he could
to help the widow and the fatherless young lads. The Erlendsséns
showed their thankfulness fairly and courteously, but only Gaute
made close friends with him, and he had been much at Sundbu
since that time.

When this daughter’s son of Ivar Gyjesling died, the manor
would pass wholly away out of the Gjesling house — he was child-
less, and the Haftorss6ns were his nearest heirs. Sir Sigurd was
somewhat of an old man already, and had had a heavy Jot to bear —
his young wife had gone from her wits at her first child-bearing.
He had now dwelt with this mad wife nigh on forty years, but
still almost daily he went to visit her and see how things were with
her — she lived in one of the best houses on Sundbu, and had cer-
tain serving-women who did naught but tend her. “ Know you
me to-day, Gyrid?” her husband was wont to ask. Sometimes
she made no answer, but at other times she would say: “I know
you well — you are Ysaias the soothsayer that dwells at Brotveit,
northward, under the Brotveit hill.” She sat ever with a spindle
in her hands — when she was at her best she would spin a fine and
even thread, but when ’twas ill with her, she would pluck her own
spinning to pieces and strew the wool that her handmaidens had
carded over the whole room. After Gaute had told Kristin of this,
she ever welcomed her cousin with heart-felt friendliness, if it
chanced that he came to the manor. But she would not consent
to go herself to his manor — there she had not been since the day
she stood, a bride, in the Sundbu church.


Gaute Erlendssén was much lower of stature than Kristin’s
other sons. Beside his tall mother and long-limbed brothers he


The Cross 944


looked somewhat short, but he was of a good middle height. Al-
together Gaute seemed to bulk more largely in every way, now
that the two eldest brothers, and the twins, who came next him
in age, were gone — amongst them he had been quiet in his bear-
ing. All through the country-side folk deemed him a most sightly
man — and he was comely of face too. With his flaxen-yellow hair
and his big grey eyes, well set beneath his brows, his oval, some-
what full face, fresh-hued skin and well-shaped mouth, he was
much like his mother’s father. His head was fairly set upon his
shoulders, and his well-formed, large hands were strong beyond
the common. But he was somewhat too short in the lower body,
and his legs were much bowed. For this reason he went ever in
long garments, save when, for his work’s sake, he must needs wear
a short coat — though just at this time ’twas growing more and
more the use for men who would go fine and courtly clad to have
their garments of state cut shorter than before. The country
farmers saw this fashion on the great folk who journeyed through
the Dale. But when Gaute Erlendss6n came to church or to ban-
quet in his long, green, broidered holy-day habit, with silver
belt about his slim waist and great miniver-lined cape thrown back
upon his shoulders, the parish folk would follow the young master
of Jérundgaard with glad and friendly eyes. In his hand Gaute
bore ever a fair silver-mounted axe that Lavrans Bjérgulfsén had
owned in heritage from his father-in-law, Ivar Gjesling — and folk
deemed it right good to see Gaute Erlendssén following in his
forefathers’ footsteps, and, young as he was, keeping to good old
country ways, both in dress, in manner of life, and in bearing.

And on horseback Gaute was the comeliest man any could wish
to see. He was a most venturous rider, and folk in the parish
boasted there was never a horse in Norway’s land that their Gaute
could not tame and ride. When he was in Bjérgvin a year agone,
twas said, he had mastered a young stallion that no man before
him had been able to back — under Gaute’s handling it grew so
gentle that he rode it bare-backed, with a maiden’s hair-riband
for bridle. But when Kristin questioned her son about this matter,
he only laughed and would not speak of it.

That Gaute was light in his dealings with women Kristin knew,
and she misliked it much, but she thought twas most because
women met the comely young man all too kindly, and Gaute was
open-hearted and forthcoming. For the most ’twas doubtless sport
and jesting — he took not such things hardly, nor kept them hid-


945 The Cross


eee eg ere ee Mees et i EA hes UrOss
den, as Naakkve had done. He came himself and told his mother
when he had got a child with a young girl over at Sundbu — that
was now two years gone by. With the mother he had dealt open-
handedly, giving her, for her rank, a fitting maintenance, so Kristin
heard from Sir Sigurd; and the child Gaute would have home with
him when ’twas weaned from the breast. It seemed he was most
fond of his little daughter; he went to see her always when he was
in Vaagaa — she was the fairest of children, said Gaute proudly,
and he had had her christened Magnhild. Kristin too deemed that,
since so it was that the boy had done amiss, ’twere best he should
bring his child home and be a good father to her. She herself was
nowise loath to have little Magnhild brought thither. But the child
died when a year old. Gaute grieved much when he heard of it;
and Kristin felt ’twas a sore thing that she had never had a sight
of her son’s little daughter.

It had ever been most hard for Kristin to chide Gaute. He had
been so sickly when he was little, and after, too, he had kept by his
mother’s side more than the other children. And then he was like
her father. And he had been so steady and trusty as a child — grave
and like a grown-up man, he had gone about with her and done -
her many a well-meant hand’s turn, such as he deemed in his child-
ish simplicity must be of the greatest help to his mother. No, never
had she had the heart to be hard with Gaute — and if he did wrong
out of heedlessness or because at his age he knew no better, he
needed naught but some gentle words of guidance; so sober and
clear-witted was the boy.

When Gaute was two years old, their house priest at Husaby,
who had more than common skill in little children’s ails, coun-
selled that he should again be given woman’s milk, since other
means had availed nothing. The twins were then new born, and
Frida, who fostered Skule, had much more milk than the little
child could drink. But the wench held the poor little being in
dread — Gaute was an ill-favoured child, with his great head and
his thin and wizen body, and he could neither talk nor stand upon
his legs —so she was afeared he might be a changeling, though
the child had been sound and comely until the sickness took hold
on it at ten months old. Howbeit Frida would nowise put Gaute
to her breast; so there was naught to do but for Kristin, herself to
take him; and he sucked his mother’s milk till he was four winters
old.

Afterwards Frida could never take to Gaute; she had ever


The Cross 946


The.Crogs ) oN ee eee
snapped at him, as much as she dared for fear of his mother. Frida
sat next to the mistress now on the women’s bench, and bore the
keys when Kristin was from home. She said to the master and
mistress whatever came into her head. Kristin bore with the
woman and smiled at her ways, though she was often irked by her
too — yet she sought ever to put matters to rights and smooth
them over, when Frida had done aught foolish or had let her
tongue wag too rudely. Frida took it greatly amiss that Gaute sat
in the high-seat now, and was to be the master of the manor.
Naught would bring her to account him for aught more than a
witless youth; she boasted of his brothers, though most of Bjérgulf
and Skule, whom she had nursed; and she scoffed at Gaute’s short
stature and crooked legs. Gaute took it in good part:

“ Ay, be sure, Frida, had I had you to suck, I had been as good
a giant as any brother of them all. But / had to be content with my
mother’s breast —”’ He smiled at Kristin.

Often mother and son would stroll out together of an evening.
In many places the paths across the fields were so narrow that
Kristin must follow after Gaute. He walked in front with his long-
handled axe, so masterfully —his mother could not but smile
behind his back. She felt a mischievous, youthful fancy to run at
him from behind, clasp him to her, laugh and toy with Gaute as
she had done when he was a child. ;

Sometimes they went right down to the washing-place by the
river-side, and sat listening to the rushing sound of the stream as
it hurried by, bright and swift in the twilight. Most often they
spoke but little. But it might happen that Gaute would ask his
mother of old times in this country-side and about her own kin.
Kristin told of what she had heard and seen in her childhood. Of
his father and the years at Husaby no word ever passed between
them.

“Nay, mother, you are sitting there shivering, I trow,” said
Gaute, “‘— tis cold this evening.”

“ Oh, ay —and I am stiff with sitting on this stone.” Kristin got
up too. “Iam growing to be an old woman, my Gaute! ”

On the way up she stayed herself with a hand on his shoulder.

Lavrans was sleeping like a stone in his bed. Kristin lit the little
train-oil lamp —she had a mind to sit a little and solace her with
the calm in her own soul. And there was ever enough she could
busy her fingers with. From overhead came clattering noises —


947 The Cross


ee ee ee eee ek eee ae Ee. Cros)
then she heard Gaute climb into his bed up there. The mother
straightened her back a moment — smiling a little at the lamp’s
small flame. Her lips moved; she made the sign of the cross upon
her face and breast in the air before her. Then she took up her
seam again.

Bjorn, the old hound, got up and shook himself, stretched him
flat upon his fore-paws with a yawn. Then he padded across the
floor to his mistress. She patted him, and straightway he put his
fore-paws up on her lap — when she spoke to him pettingly, he
set to licking her face and hands, thumping the floor with his tail.
Then Bjorn slunk back again — turned his head and looked at the
woman; evil conscience looked out from his beady eyes and the
whole of his rough, shaggy body, to the uttermost tip of his tail.
Kristin smiled quietly and made as though she saw not —then
the dog jumped up on her bed and curled himself up by the
foot-board.

After a while she blew out the lamp, snuffed the wick, and
dropped the snuff down into the oil. From without, through the
little window-pane, the twilight of the summer night showed
dimly. Kristin said over the last prayers for the day, undressed
quietly, and crept into bed. She settled the pillows snugly about
her breast and shoulders, and the old hound nestled into her back.
Soon after she fell asleep.


Bishop Halvard had made Sira Dag his steward in the parish, and
from him Gaute had bought the bishop’s tithes for the next three
years. He bought hides and food stuffs in the parish too, and in |
winter, when the sleighing was good, he sent the wares to Raums-
dal, and on to Bjérgvin in the spring by ship. Kristin liked not over
well these dealings of her son’s—she herself had ever sold at
Hamar, for so both her father and Simon Andress6n had done. But
Gaute had joined with his brother-in-law, Gerlak Paus, in a kind
of trading fellowship — and Gerlak was a stirring trader, and was
near of kin to many of the richest German merchants in Bjorgvin.

Erlend’s daughter Margret and her husband had come to Jorund-
gaard the summer after her father’s death, they made great offer-
ings to the church for his soul’s weal. When Margret was a young
maid at home at Husaby there had been scant friendship ’twixt
her and her stepmother, and she had cared but little then about
her small half-brothers. Now she was thirty years old, and had had


The Cross 948

no children of her marriage; she showed her comely grown-up
brothers now much sisterly love, and "twas she who brought
about the understanding ’twixt her husband and Gaute.


meiial


Margret was fair still, but she was grown so big and stout that


Kristin deemed she had never seen so huge a woman. But all the
more room was there for silver plates upon her belt, and a brooch
as big as a small hand-shield adorned most fitly the space betwixt
her broad breasts. Her mighty body was ever decked out, like an
altar, with the most costly stuffs and fairly gilt metal — Gerlak
Tiedekenssén seemed to prize his wife exceeding highly.

The year before, Gaute had visited his sister and brother-in-law
in Bjérgvin at the time of the spring meetings, and in the autumn
he crossed the fells with a drove of horses which he sold there.
That journey brought him so much gain that Gaute swore he
would do the like again next autumn. Kristin thought ’twas well
to let him have his way in this. Belike he had somewhat of his fa-
ther’s thirst for travel in his blood — he would settle down when
he grew older. When his mother saw that he was impatient to get
away, she herself hastened his going — the year before he had had
to make his way home over the fells after the winter storms had
set in.

So he set forth one fair morning of sunshine, just after Bar-
tholomew’s Mass.* ’Tis the time for killing goats — and the whole
manor smelt of boiled goats’ flesh. The folk had eaten their fill and
were happy; all summer long they had not tasted fresh meat save


on the highest holy-days, but now for many days they had had the ©


savoury meat and rich, fatty broth both at the morning and the
evening meal. Kristin was tired, but in good spirits, after the first
great slaughtering and sausage-making of the year, as she stood
up on the highway and waved the fall of her coif after Gaute and
his train. "Iwas brave to look on — fine horses, blithe young men
who rode with shining weapons and jingling harness; the high
bridge, when they came on to it, resounded with the hoof-beats.
Gaute turned in his saddle and waved back with his hat, and Kris-
tin waved again with a dizzy little cry of gladness and pride.


Soon after winter-night,t rain and sleet set in on the lowlands,
storm and snow on the fells. Kristin was somewhat uneasy for
Gaute, who had not yet come back. But, truth to tell, she was


* 24th August. + 14th October.


949 The Cross


Pere ee Ew Pager esl EU ye ty Ree Crass
never so fearful for him as she had been for the others — she had
faith in this son’s fortune.

A week later Kristin was coming from the byre late in the eve-
ning, when she was ware of some horsemen up by the manor gate.
The mist billowed like white smoke in front of the lanthorn she
bore — she went upward in the rain to meet the troop of dark-clad
men in furs: was it not Gaute? —’twas not like that strangers
would come so late —

Then she saw that the first rider was Sir Sigurd of Sundbu — he
lighted down from his horse with somewhat of an old man’s stiff-
ness.

“Ay —I bring you tidings of Gaute, Kristin,” said the knight,
peor they had greeted one another. “‘ He came to Sundbu yester-

ay a35 ”?

"T'was so dark where they stood that she could not make out
his look. But his voice was so strange. And, as he went towards
the door of the hall-house, he bade his henchmen follow Kristin’s
stable-boy to the men’s lodging. She grew fearful as he said no
more, but she asked calmly enough when they stood alone to-
gether in the room:

“What manner of tidings are they, then, kinsman? Is he sick,
since he came not home with you? ”

“No, Gaute is as well as e’er I saw him. But his company was
weary —”

He blew the froth off the bowl of ale that Kristin handed him,
drank and praised the ale.

“A good regale for him that bears good tidings,” said the mis-
tress, smiling.

“ Ay, let us hear what you will say when you have heard my
news to an end,” he said, most ruefully. “ He came not alone this
time, your son —”

Kristin stood waiting. .

“He has with him — ay, ’tis the daughter of Helge of Hovland
— it seems he has taken this —this maid — taken her from her fa-
ther by the strong hand —”

Kristin still said naught. But she sat her down on the bench in
front of him. Her mouth was pinched, with close-pressed lips.

“Gaute begged me to come hither —he feared, I trow, you
would be ill pleased at this. He bade me tell you this— and now
have I done it,” Sir Sigurd ended, weakly.


The Cross 950

“You must tell me all that you know of this matter, Sigurd,”
Kristin prayed, calmly. \

Sir Sigurd did so —in a rambling, unclear fashion, with much ;
beating about the bush. "Twas clear he was himself much dismayed —
at Gaute’s deed. But thus much Kristin made out from his tale:/
Gaute must have met the maid last year at Bjorgvin. Jofrid was her
name — oh, no, she was not betrothed to any. But Gaute had seen,
belike, ’twould be of no avail for him to speak of the maid to her
kinsmen — Helge of Hovland was passing rich, of the house that
bore the name Duk and had their estates mostly in Voss. So the
devil had tempted the two young folk —Sir Sigurd wriggled in
his clothes and scratched his head, as though he were lousy all
over.

So in summer — when Kristin believed that Gaute was at Sundbu
and was out a-hunting with Sir Sigurd after the two big bears
among the seter hills —he had crossed the mountains to Sogn —
she was there with a wedded sister; Helge had three daughters and
no son. Sigurd groaned miserably — ay, he had promised Gaute
then to say naught of it. "Tis true he had known the boy was
after a maid — but how could he dream that ’twas aught so witless
Gaute had in mind —

“Ay, ’tis like he will have to pay dear for this, my son,” said
Kristin. Her face was set and calm.

Sigurd said the winter was setting in now in earnest — the roads
would be scarce passable. And when the Hovland men got time to
think over the matter, they would maybe deem —’twere best
Gaute were given Jofrid with her kinsmen’s consent — since she
was his already.

“ But if they deem not so — if they crave vengeance for the rape
of their woman? ”

Sir Sigurd twisted and scratched worse than ever:

“"Tis a felony,* belike,” he said, low. “I know not to a
nicety — ”

Kristin was silent. So Sir Sigurd went on, in a pleading voice:

“ He said, did Gaute, that he was well assured you would give
them a loving welcome. He said for sure you were not so old
that you had forgotten — ay, he meant, you understand, that you
got the husband you had set your heart on.”


¥ Ubotamaal, an offence that cannot be atoned by payment of fine and
compensation.


Kristin nodded.


“ She is the fairest child I have seen in all my days, Kristin,” said
Sigurd warmly; his eyes grew wet. “Tis an ill thing that the
devil’s lure has led Gaute astray into this misdoing — but I trow
you will welcome these two poor children in friendly wise? ”

Kristin nodded again.


The country lay soaking wet, wan and black under drenching
rain-showers, when Gaute rode into the courtyard next day about
the time of nones.

Kristin felt a cold sweat damp her brow as she leaned forward
under the door lintel to look — there stood Gaute lifting a woman
in a dark, hooded cloak from off her horse. She was small of stature,
reaching barely to the man’s shoulder. Gaute would have taken her
* hand and led her forward — but she pushed him aside and went
alone to meet Kristin. Gaute set to greeting the house-carls and
giving orders to the men who had been with him. When he looked
again towards the two before the house door, Kristin stood hold-
ing the stranger girl by both hands. Gaute sprang towards them
with a glad greeting on his lips. In the outer room Sir Sigurd took
him by the shoulder, and patted him right fatherly, puffing and
panting now the strain was at an end.

Kristin had been taken unawares when the girl lifted a face so
white and so lovely under the dripping hood of her cloak — and
she was so young, and small as a very child. When the stranger
said:

“T look not that you should welcome me, Gaute’s mother — but
now are all doors but this barred against me. If you will but suffer
me here in your manor, mistress, I shall not forget that I am come
hither without goods and without honour, with naught but good-
will to serve you and Gaute, my master — ”

— Then had Kristin taken both the girl’s hands ere she herself
knew of it:

“God forgive my son the wrong he has done you, my fair child
— come in, Jofrid — God help you both, as sure as I will help you
all I can! ”

Truly she felt, the moment after, that maybe she had been some-
what over warm in her greeting to this woman she did not know.
But now had Jofrid laid aside her outer garments. Her heavy win-
ter dress of sea-blue, homespun wadmal was dripping wet round


Phe Gross! in Nee
the bottom, and on the shoulders, where the rain had soaked clean
through her cloak. And there was a sad, gentle dignity about this
childlike girl — she bore her little dusky head graciously, bent a
little forward, and two thick, coal-black plaits hung down below
her waist. Kristin took Jofrid lovingly by the hand and led her to
the warmest place on the bench by the fireplace wall: “ You must
be cold? ”

Gaute came forward and took his mother vehemently to his
arms:

“ Mother — things must go as they are doomed to go — saw you
ever so fair'a maid as my Jofrid? I had to have her, whatever
it might cost me—and you will be good to her, my dearest
mother — ”

Lovely was Jofrid Helgesdatter — Kristin could not take her
eyes off her. She was short in stature, broad across the shoulders
and the hips, but round and fairly fashioned. And her skin showed
so soft and clear that she was fair in despite of her dead-white hue.
Short and broad were the features of her face, but the cheeks and
the wide, strong arch of the chin made it, too, comely, and she had
a wide, thin-lipped and bright red mouth with small, even teeth
like a child’s milk-teeth. And when she lifted her heavy eyelids,
her clear, grey-green eyes were like shining stars under her long
black lashes. — Black hair, light eyes — Kristin had deemed these
the fairest of all, ever since first she saw Erlend — most of her own
fair sons had them —

Kristin set Jofrid in a place on the women’s bench by her own
side. She sat dainty and bashful amid the strange house-folk, ate
little, and blushed brightly each time that Gaute drank to her dur-
ing the meal.

His face shone with pride and feverish happiness as he sat there
in his high-seat. In honour of her son’s home-coming Kristin had
spread a cloth upon the board and set forth two wax candles in
candlesticks of gilded copper. Gaute and Sir Sigurd drank to each
other without cease, and the old knight grew more and more
wrought up, laid his arm round Gaute’s shoulder, and vowed to
plead his cause with his rich kinsmen, ay, with King Magnus him-
self — ’twould go hard but he would bring Gaute at one with the
maid’s affronted kinsfolk. Sigurd Eldjarn himself had not an
enemy — ’twas his father’s shrewish temper and his own mishap
in marriage that had made him so lonely.


953 The Cross


At the last Gaute sprang up with the horn in his hand. How
proper a man he is, thought Kristin—and how like to father!
*Twas thus her father had been at the beginning of a drinking
bout — aglow with joy of life, erect and hearty —

“Now has it so befallen with me and this woman, Jofrid
Helgesdatter, that this day we are drinking our home-coming-ale,
and have yet to drink our bride-ale hereafter, if God will grant
us such good fortune. You, Sigurd. we thank for kinsmanly faith-
fulness, and you, mother, that you have welcomed us as I looked
you would, out of your true, motherly heart — for we brothers
oft-times said amongst us, you seemed to us to be the most great-
minded of women and the kindest of mothers. Therefore do I
beg that you will honour us yet further, and yourself make our
bridal bed so fair and stately that 1 may pray Jofrid without shame
to sleep therein with me, and that you will yourself lead Jofrid
to the loft, so that she may come to bed in as seemly wise as may
be, seeing she has no mother living nor kinswomen here —”

Sir Sigurd was well on in drink now; he broke into a laugh:

“— But you slept together in the loft at my house —I knew no
better, I deemed you two had lain in one bed before too —”

Gaute tossed his golden mane loftily:

“ Ay, kinsman — but this is the first night Jofrid will sleep in my
arms here in her own manor — if God so will.

“_ But you good folk I pray to drink and be merry to-night —
now you have seen her who shall be my wife, and mistress of
Jorundgaard -.she and no other woman, I swear it by God our
Lord and my Christian faith. I look to you to honour her, all of
you, both men and women, and I look that you, my men, will help
me to hold her and guard her as befits men of mettle.”

Amid the shouting and uproar that followed Gaute’s speech,
Kristin slipped from the board and whispered to Ingrid to come
with her up to the loft. Can,

Lavrans Bjérgulfsén’s stately upper hall had fared ill in the
years the Erlendss6ns were housed there. Kristin had had no mind
to throw away aught else than the most needful and the coarsest of
bed-gear and loose furnishings on the reckless lads, and she seldom
had the hall cleaned out, for ’twas not worth the pains. Gaute and
his friends brought in dirt and litter as fast as she had got it swept
out. There was a clinging smell as of men-folk who had come in
and flung themselves down upon the beds, wet and sweat-drenched


The Cross 954


and dirty from the forest or the farm; a smell of the stable and of
leathern clothes and wet hounds.

Now, hastily, Kristin and the serving-woman swept the room
and set it to rights as best they could. And the mistress brought ins
fine bed-gear, coverlids and pillows; burned juniper to rid the
smell, and set the silvern beaker with the last drop of wine she had
in the house, wheaten cakes, and a wax taper in a metal candle-
stick, on a little board, and moved it close to the bed. "Iwas as
fine here now as she could make it at such short warning.

On the boarded wall by the closet weapons were hanging —
Erlend’s heavy, two-handed battle-sword and the smaller sword
he was wont to wear, broad-axes, and fire-wood axes — and
Bjérgulf’s and Naakkve’s light hand-axes hung there still. There,
too, were two small axes which the boys seldom used, for that
they deemed them too light—but with them had her father
trimmed and fashioned all kinds of carpentry so featly and surely
that ’twas only for finishing he needed to go over the work with
gouge and knife. Kristin bore the axes into the closet and laid
them in Erlend’s chest, where were his bloody shirt and the axe
he had in his hand when he got his death-wound.

When Gaute, laughing, bade Lavrans to light the bride up to
the loft, the boy was both shamefaced and proud. Kristin saw that
Lavrans understood well enough that his brother’s lawless wed-
ding was a perilous game, but he was dizzied and wrought up
by these strange happenings — and he gazed with sparkling eyes
at Gaute and his fair bride.

On the stairs to the loft the candle blew out. Jofrid said to Kris-
tin:

“ Gaute should not have craved this of you, even though he was
drunken — go no farther with me, mistress. Fear not that I shall
forget I am an erring woman, broken away from my kinsfolk’s
word.”

“Too good to serve you I am not,” said Kristin, “ until my son
has made amends for his sin against you, and you can call me
mother-in-law with right. Sit you down, that I may comb out your
hair — passing fair it is, child, your hair —”

But when the household had gone to rest, and Kristin lay in her
bed, she felt again somewhat of disquiet — unwittingly she had
been drawn on to say more to this Jofrid than she was sure she
meant — yet. But the girl was so young —and she showed so


955 The Cross


clearly she did not crave to be judged as better than she was —a
child who had fled away from honour and duty.

So this was how it looked — when folk had their bridal-ride
and home-faring come before the wedding. Kristin sighed — once
she too had been willing to venture this for Erlend — but she knew
not whether she had dared, if his mother had been dwelling at
Husaby. No, no, she would not make things worse for the child
up there —

Sir Sigurd was still staggering about the hall —he was to sleep
with Lavrans — talking, somewhat mistily but with the heartiest
goodwill, of the two young folk —he would spare naught that
might help them to a good ending of this perilous venture —

The day after, Jofrid showed Gaute’s mother what she had
brought with her to the manor — two leathern sacks of clothes; in
a little casket of walrus ivory she had her trinkets. As if she had
read Kristin’s thoughts, Jofrid said that all these things were her
own — she had got them either as gifts or in heritage, for the most
from her mother; she had taken naught that was her father’s.

Kristin sat sorrowful, her cheek upon her hand. That night,
long ages ago, when she herself gathered together her precious
things in a casket that she might steal from home — most of what
she had laid together were gifts from the father and mother she
had beshamed in secret and was planning to grieve and dishonour
in full light of day —

— But if these were Jofrid’s own possessions, and her heritage,
in trinkets alone, from her mother, she must come from a most
wealthy home. Kristin would reckon the gear she saw here to be
worth more than thirty marks pure silver — the scarlet dress alone,
with white fur and silver clasps and the silk-lined cape that be-
longed thereto, had cost ten to twelve marks at the least. If the
maid’s father would come to an accord with Gaute ’twould be
good and well — but by no reckoning could he be accounted an
even match for this woman. And should Helge press the matter
home against Gaute as hardly as he had the right and the power to
do, then did things look black indeed. ; ;

“This ring,” said Jofrid, “ my mother wore alway — if you will
take it, mistress, at my hands, then shall I know you judge me
not so hardly as a good and high-born lady well might.”

“Nay, then ’twere likest I should strive to stand to you in a
mother’s stead,” said Kristin smiling, and slipped the ring upon


Phos Ones DS 0s a ee eee
her finger. It was a little silver ring set with a fair white agate, and
Kristin thought the child must hold it dear above its worth since
it minded her of her mother. “ Methinks ’tis but reason I should
give you a gift in return.” — She fetched her casket, and brought
forth the gold ring set with sapphires. “ This ring his father laid —
upon my bed when I had brought Gaute into the world.”

Jofrid took the ring and kissed her hand: “ But I had thought to
beg another gift in return from you — mother —” She smiled so ~
winningly. “ Be not afraid that Gaute has brought home a slothful
and handless woman. But I have no fitting workaday dress. Give
me an old one of yours, and grudge me not the right to,help you; —
mayhap then you will soon like me better than I can look you
should now —”

But now ’twas for Kristin to show the young girl what she had ~
in her chests, and Jofrid praised all Kristin’s goodly handiwork so
understandingly that the elder woman gave her one thing and
another —two linen sheets with knotted silk fringes, a blue-
hemmed towel, a twilled coverlid, and last of all the long tapestry
with the hawking picture on it: “ Loth would I be that these
things should leave this manor—and by God’s and Our Lady’s
help this house will some day be yours.” Then ’twas as well they
should go across to the storehouses — they spent many hours to-
gether there, and the time passed happily.

Kristin would have given Jofrid her green wadmal dress with
the inwoven black spots — but Jofrid deemed it all too good for a
working dress. Poor soul, doubtless she was striving to please her —
husband’s mother, thought Kristin, hiding a smile. At last they
found an old brown kirtle which Jofrid thought would do, if she
cut it short below and put patches under the arms and on the |
elbows. Naught would serve but she must straightway borrow a
pair of scissors and sewing-gear, and set her down to sew. Thereon
Kristin, too, took up some work, and thus the two women were
sitting when Gaute and Sir Sigurd came in for the evening meal.


Kristin avowed with all her heart that Jofrid was a woman who
had good use of her hands. Jf all went well, then Gaute had been
fortunate —he would have a wife who was as hard-working and


957 The Cross


diligent as she was rich and fair. She herself could scarce have
found a more notable woman to step into her shoes at Jérund-
gaard — not if she had searched all Norway through. So she said
one day — and afterwards she scarce knew how it was that the
words had fallen from her lips — that the day Jofrid Helgesdatter
became Gaute’s wedded wife, she would make over her keys to
the young woman and move into the old hall with Lavrans.

Afterwards, indeed, she thought it had been well if she had
weighed the matter more nicely ere she spoke of it. Often already
she had been over-hasty when she spoke to Jofrid —

But one thing was that Jofrid was ailing. Kristin had seen it,
well-nigh as soon as the young girl came to the manor. And Kris-
tin remembered that first winter when she dwelt at Husaby — she
was a wedded woman, her husband and her father were bound
together in law, howsoever chings might go with their friendship
when the wrong done came to light. Yet had she suffered sore re-
morse and shame, had been bitter against Erlend in her heart — and
she had been full nineteen winters old; Jofrid was but a bare seven-
teen. And here was she now, carried off by force and rightless by
law, far from her home among strangers, with Gaute’s child
under her heart. In her heart Kristin denied not that Jofrid
seemed much more strong and stout-hearted than she herself had
been.

But then Jofrid had not profaned the cloister’s holiness, nor
broken troth and handfasting, nor lied and deceived and stolen
her parents’ honour behind their backs. Even though these two
young folks in their rashness had sinned against the law of the land,
against duty and all seemliness— yet so sore a conscience they
needed not to have. Kristin prayed instantly for a good issue to
Gaute’s deed of madness — and she comforted her with the thought
that ’twas impossible God’s justice could deal out to Gaute and
Jofrid a harder lot than had fallen to her and Erlend — and they
had been wedded; their child of sin was born to be lawful partaker
in all his kindred’s heritage.

Since neither Gaute nor Jofrid spoke of the matter, Kristin
would not bring it forward, albeit she longed to speak to the un-
lessoned young girl: Jofrid ought to save her strength now, lie
long in the morning and rest instead of being up and about the first
of all on the manor — for Kristin marked that the girl had set her
heart on being up before her mother-in-law, and doing more than
she did. But Jofrid was not one to whom Kristin could proffer


EhenCrass eee
help or pity. She could but quietly take the heaviest work off her
hands, and, for the rest, treat her, both when alone and before the
house-folk, as though she were by lawful right the young mistress
of the manor. ;

Frida was furious that she must give up her place next to the mis-
tress to Gaute’s — she used an ugly word of Jofrid, one day she
and Kristin were in the kitchen-house together. For once Kristin
struck her serving-woman:

“ _ Fair words to come from your mouth, old jade that you are
and mad after men! ”

Frida wiped away the blood from her nose and mouth:

“Should you be no better, great men’s daughters like you and
this Jofrid, than cottar’s children — ? You know that a bride-bed
with silken sheets awaits you surely enough — you must be mad
after men and shameless to boot when you cannot wait, but must
make off to the woods with young blades and get you road-side
brats — fie upon such doings, say I! ”

“Be still now — go out and wash you — you are bleeding down
into the dough,” said the mistress, quietly enough.

In the doorway Frida and Jofrid met. Kristin saw by the young
girl’s face that she must have heard the words that had passed.

“The poor wretch chatters like the fool she is. I cannot drive
her away — she has nowhere to turn her to.” Jofrid smiled mock-
ingly, and on that Kristin went on: “She fostered two of my
sons.”

“Gaute she did not foster,” answered Jofrid. “ Of that she is
never tired of minding both him and me. Can you not have her
wed? ” she asked sharply.

Kristin could not but laugh.

“Think you I have not tried? But it never went further, when
once the man had speech with the bride-to-be —”

Should she seize the chance, Kristin thought, and speak with
Jofrid now — let her understand that from her she need look for
naught but motherly goodwill? But Jofrid looked so cold and
angered —

But yet ‘twas plainly to be seen now on Jofrid that she bore
another life within her. One day, soon after, she was to clean the
feathers for new bolsters. Kristin counselled her to bind some-


what over her hair to keep the down from flying into it. Jofrid tied
a linen cloth about her head:


959 The Cross .


“It becomes me better now, too, than a bare head, I trow,” she
said, laughing a little.

“That may well be,” said Kristin, shortly.

She could not understand that, as things stood with her, Jofrid
would jest about it.

Some days after, Kristin came out to the kitchen-house, and
saw Jofrid standing there cleaning some black game — already
blood had spurted up over her arms. In horror, Kristin pulled her |
aside:

“Child, you must not touch blood now —know you not so
much as that even—? ”

“Oh, deem you then that ’tis true, all such-like things that
women say? ” asked Jofrid, doubtingly.

Then Kristin told of the fire-marks that Naakkve had on his
breast. Of set purpose she told the tale so that Jofrid might
understand she was yet unwed when she watched the church
burning.

“You had not thought such things of me, I trow? ” she asked,
in a low voice.

“Yes, Gaute told me it all — your father had promised you to
Simon Andressén, but you ran from home with Erlend Nikulaus-
sén to his mother’s sister, and so Lavrans was forced to give con-
sent —”

“« Just so twas not — we ran not from home. Simon freed me so
soon as he knew I loved Erlend better, and on that father gave
consent — unwillingly, but he laid my hand in Erlend’s —I was
his handfasted maid for a year — Deem you that this was worse? ”
she asked, for Jofrid was grown burning red and looked at the
other aghast.

The girl scraped some blood and fibre from her white arm
with the knife.

“ Ay,” she said, low, but right firmly. “ Never had I cast away
good name and honour needlessly. — Ay, I shall tell Gaute naught
of this,” she said quickly. “ He believes his father carried you off
by force because he could not win you by fair suit —”

Most like she was right, thought Kristin.


As time wore on and Kristin thought and thought upon the
matter, it seemed to her ’twere the most honourable way for Gaute
to send a word to Helge at Hovland; put his case into his hands and


The Cross 960


he Cross ic eee
make suit to be given Jofrid to wife on such terms as Helge
thought fit to grant them. But when she spoke of this to Gaute,
he looked ill pleased and tried to turn the matter aside. At length
he asked hotly whether his mother could send a letter over the
mountains in winter-time? No, but Sira Dag could doubtless get
a letter sent to Nes, and from there along the coast, said his mother;
the priests could ever have letters sent forward, even in winter-
time. Gaute said ’twould be too costly.

“Then ’twill not be your wife that will bear you a child this
spring,” said his mother angrily. é

“In no case can the matter be set in order so hastily,” said
Gaute. Kristin marked that he was bitterly wroth.

An ugly, dark fear took hold on the mother as time went on.
She could not but see that Gaute’s first glowing joy in Jofrid was
quite gone; he went about sullen and moody. From the first this
matter of Gaute’s bride-rape had looked so ill as might be — but
his mother deemed ’twould be far worse if the man should now
show him affrighted at what he had done. If the two young folk
repented their sin, twere good and well — but there was an ugly
look about it, as though there were here more of unmanly fear of
the man he had wronged than of godfearing penitence. Gaute,
this one of her sons that she had ever trusted most — it could not
be true, as folk had said, that he was untrusty and light with
women, that already he was weary of Jofrid, now that his bride
was faded and dull, and the time drew near when he must answer
to her kinsfolk for his lawless deed.

She made excuse for her son—if she could let herself be led
astray so easily, she who never had aught before her eyes in her
girlhood but the virtuous ways of righteous folk — Her sons had
known from childhood that their own mother had done amiss,
that their father in his youth had children by another man’s wife,
and had sinned with a married woman when they were already
great lads. Ulf Haldorssén, their foster-father, Frida’s loose talk —
oh, strange it was not if these young men were weak in such things
— Wed Jofrid Gaute must, if he could win her kinsfolk’s consent —
and be thankful — but ’twere pity of the maid if she should see now
that Gaute took her because he needs must, against his will,


One day in the fast-time, Kristin and Jofrid were at work
making ready the food-wallets for the wood-cutters. They beat


i aaiel


961 The Cross


the dried fish thin and flat, pressed butter into boxes, filled wooden
bottles with beer and milk. Kristin saw that it irked Jofrid sorely
now to stand thus on her feet the whole time, but Jofrid did but
grow angry when Kristin prayed her to sit down and rest. To
please her a little it came into Kristin’s mind to ask of that story
of the stallion that folk said Gaute had broken in with a maiden’s
hair-ribbon for bridle: “ ”I'was yours belike? ”

“No,” said Jofrid angrily, flushing a deep red. But then her
mood changed:

“*Twas Aasa’s — my sister’s,” she said, laughing. “ T'was her
Gaute courted first; but when I came home, he knew not which
of us he liked the best. But ’twas Aasa he had looked to find at
Dagrun’s house last summer when he came down to Sogn. And
he grew wroth when I teased him about her — swore before God
and all men that he was not such an one as would be overbold with
good men’s daughters — there had been naught more ’twixt Aasa
and him, said he, but that he could sleep in my arms that night
without sin. I took him at his word —” She laughed again. When
she saw Kristin’s face, she nodded defiantly. im

“ Ay, ‘twas my will to have Gaute for my husband, and trust
me, mother, I shall get him. Things fall out most often so that I
get my will —”


Kristin woke in pitch darkness. The cold bit her cheeks and nose
— when she drew the skins more closely about her, she felt they
were rimy with her breath. It must be well on towards morning —
but she shivered at the thought of rising to look at the stars. She
curled herself up under the furs to keep warm a little longer. Of
a sudden she remembered her dream.

She thought she lay in bed down in the little hall at Husaby
and had even now borne a child. It lay in her arms, wrapped in a
lamb’s skin which had slipped up and twisted about the little dark-
red body — its tiny hands it held clenched over its face; the knees
were drawn up against its body and the feet crossed — now and
again it moved a little. It crossed not her mind to wonder that the
boy was not swaddled, and that there were no women in the room
with them. The warmth of her own body still enwrapped the
child as it lay there close to her; through her arms she still felt it
to the very roots of her heart each time the child moved. Weari-
ness and pain lay heavy upon her yet, like a darkness that begins


ee


The Cross ; 962


Une. Gross- 4 ake a eS GE SS eee
to pass away, while she lay looking on her son, and feeling joy and
love of him grow unceasingly, as the dawn-rim brightens along a
mountain ridge —

But at the same time as she lay there in the bed, she was standing
without too by the house wall. Beneath her lay the country-side
shining in the morning sun. "Twas early morning of a day between
winter and spring — she drank in the sharp, fresh air — the wind
was icy cold, but in it was a smack of the far-off sea and of melt-
ing snow; the ridges right across the dale lay in the morning sun,
with snowless patches around the farms, and the crusted snow
shone silvery white in all the clearings amid the dark-green woods.
The sky seemed freshly swept, clear yellow and pale blue, with
some few dark, wind-driven cloud-wisps swimming over it — but
twas cold; where she stood the snowdrift was stone-hard still
from the night’s frost, and between the houses lay cold shadow,
for the sun stood just above the eastern ridge behind the manor.
And right in front of her, where the shadow ended, the morning
wind moved the wan, last-year’s grass; it waved and shone, though
steely-bright ice clumps still bound its roots.

Ah! —ah! The moan burst from her breast against her will.
Lavrans she had with her still — she heard the boy’s even breathing
from the other bed. And Gaute —he lay there in the loft, with
his paramour. The mother sighed again, moved restlessly, and
Erlend’s old dog on the bed-spread shifted itself closer against her
up-drawn legs.

Now she heard that Jofrid was afoot in the loft, walking about
the floor. Kristin crept out swiftly, thrust her feet into her shaggy
fur shoes, and threw on her wadmal dress and fur coat. In the
dark she groped her way to the fireplace, squatted down, and
blew and raked in the ashes; but there kindled no least spark —
the embers had died out in the night.

She drew out the flint and steel from her belt-pouch, but the
tinder must have got wet —’twas frozen. At last she gave up the
struggle, took the fire-pan and went up to borrow live embers
from Jofrid.

, A good fire was burning in the little fireplace of the loft, casting
its shine out into the room. In the flickering light Jofrid sat sewing
the copper buckle more firmly upon Gaute’s reindeer coat. Over
in the twilight of the bed she could make out the man’s naked
breast and shoulders — Gaute slept without a shirt even in the bit-


963 The Oross


pee er nse e er ee See ON ehh re Lhe. ‘Cross
terest cold. He was sitting up — he had had his morning bait in bed,

Jofrid rose, heavy and matronly — would not mother have a
draught of ale? She had warmed up Gaute’s morning drink. And
mother must take this can to Lavrans — he was to go with Gaute
to the timber-felling to-day. [would be cold for the men —

Kristin pursed up her lips in misliking, as she stood in her own
room again making up the fire. Jofrid’s housewifely busyness,
Gaute lying there openly having his woman wait on him —the
paramour’s thoughtful care for her unrightful brother-in-law — it
all seemed to her so immodest and disgustful —

Lavrans stayed behind out in the woods, but Gaute came home
to the evening meal, tired and hungry. So the women sat on for
a little after the serving-folk had gone out, to keep the master
company while he drank.

Kristin saw that ’twas not well with Jofrid this evening. Of a
sudden the girl let her sewing sink upon her lap, and twinges of
pain passed over her face.

“ Are you in pain, Jofrid? ” asked Kristin, low.

“Oh, ay, a little —in the feet and legs,” answered the girl. She
had worked all day long, as was her wont — would hear naught
of sparing herself. Now she had got a stitch, and her legs were
swollen up.

All at once little tears started out from beneath her lashes.
Kristin had never seen a woman weep so strangely — she sat there
without a sound, her teeth set hard; and round, bright tears — to
Kristin they looked hard as pearls—rolled down her marred,
brown-flecked face. She seemed angered that she had been forced
to give way — unwillingly she let Kristin help her over to the bed.

Gaute came after them:

“ Are you in pain, my Jofrid? ” he asked, in a chapfallen fashion.
He was red as fire in the face from the cold, and he looked on
miserably while his mother made Jofrid easy on the bed, drew off
her shoes and her hose, and began to tend the swollen feet and
legs. “ Are you in pain, my Jofrid? ” he went on asking.

“ Ay,” said Jofrid, in a low voice, with smothered rage. “ Think
you, if I were not, I would bemoan me like this? ”

“ Are you in pain, my Jofrid —? ” he began again.

“ Sure you can see it — stand not there gaping like an oaf, boy! ”
Kristin turned on her son, her eyes flashing. The dull coil in her
mind — dread for what might come of it all, impatience at having


The Cross 964

to suffer the young folks’ lawless life here at her manor, gnawing
doubts of her son’s manhood — burst out in furious wrath: “ Are
you such a fool, you deem she can be well, perchance? — she sees
you are not man enough to dare cross the fells, because, forsooth,
tis blowing and snowing — You know well that soon she must
down upon her knees, this poor little thing, and writhe in the worst
of torments — and her child shall be called bastard because you
dare not face her father — you sit warming the bench in the hall,
and dare not so much as lift a finger to safeguard the wife you
have and the child that is coming to you — Your father was not
so fearful of my father that he dared not go to have speech with
him, nor so afraid of cold that he durst not fare on ski over
the fells in winter-time. Fie upon you, Gaute —and woe is me
that I must live to call craven one of the sons Erlend begot
with me! ”

Gaute took the block-chair in both hands, dashed it on the floor,
ran to the board, and swept off all that stood upon it. Then he
rushed out of the door, with a parting kick to the block-chair —
they heard him run cursing up the loft stairs.

“Nay, mother — now have you been over hard with Gaute —”
Jofrid raised her on her elbow. “ You cannot look with reason that
he should peril his life on the fells in winter —to find my father
and be told whether he must wed his dishonoured bride with the
shift he carried me off in for portion, or flee the land, an outlaw — ”

The waves of anger still ran high in Kristin’s heart. She an-
swered proudly:

“Nevertheless I scarce believe that zy son can think so! ”

“No,” said Jofrid, “— had he not had me to think for him—”
When she saw Kristin’s face, she went on, in a voice that bubbled
with laughter:

“ Dear mother — hard enough have I had to fight to hold Gaute
back —I will not have him do yet more follies for my sake, and
ee our children from the wealth I can look to have in heritage

rom my kinsmen, if Gaute can come to such accord with them as
will be best and most honourable for us all — ”

: What mean you by this? ” asked Kristin.

I mean that if my kinsfolk come in search of Gaute, Sir Sigurd
will meet them in such wise that they will see Gaute lacks not
kinsmen to back him. He will have to make full amends, but there-
after ’twill be for my father to handfast me to Gaute so that I shall


965 The Oross


again have right to share with my sisters what he leaves behind — ”
“So you yourself must share the blame,” asked Kristin, ‘“ when
_ your child comes into the world and you still unwed? ”

“Since I could flee from home with Gaute, why — None will
believe, now, I trow, that he has laid a drawn sword between us in
bed of nights —”

“Has he never at all made suit for you to your kinsfolk? ”
asked Kristin.

“No; we knew ’twould be in vain, even had Gaute been a much
richer man than he is.” Jofrid broke into laughter again. “ See you,
mother, father deems himself the shrewdest of all men at a horse-
bargain. But ’twould take a man far more wide-awake than my
father to get the better of Gaute Erlendssén in an exchange of
horses —”

Kristin could not forbear smiling — unglad though she was at

‘heart.

“I know not the law so nicely in such matters,” she said gravely,
“but I misdoubt me much, Jofrid, ’twill not be easy for Gaute to
come to such an accord as you will call good. Should Gaute be
doomed outlaw — and your father take you home with him, and
let you feel his wrath — or should he require that you go into a
cloister and atone your sins —”

“Send me to a cloister he cannot, without giving such rich
gifts with me that ’twere a cheaper bargain and more honourable
to make accord with Gaute and take amends from him; see you,
so could he wed me off and not need to lay out aught in goods and
gear. And methinks, for all the love he bears Olav, my sister’s
husband, he would be loath that I should not share with my sis-
ters in the heritage. Besides, then my kinsfolk would have this
child of mine on their hands too. And I trow that father will be-
think him twice ere he tries taking me home to Hovland with a
bastard child — to make me feel his wrath — he knows me —

“ __] know not so much of the law, either; but I know father
and I know Gaute. And now so much time has gone by, that this
matter can scarce go forward before I am lightened and grown
sound again; and then, mother, you shall not see me weep!
Oh, no, sure I am Gaute will win for us such an accord as —

“Nay, mother — Gaute, who is come of nobles and kings — and

ou who are kin to the best houses in the land — if so be you have
had to brook seeing your sons sunk down from the place they


The Cross 966


were born to stand in, yet shall you see your offspring rise in the
world again in Gaute’s children and mine — a.

Kristin sat silent. "T'was not unlike, indeed, that things might go
as Jofrid wished — she saw that she had had no need to grieve so
much for the girl. She had grown thin of face now — her cheeks
soft rounding was quite worn away, and all the more clearly could
it be seen how large and strong was her lower jaw.

Jofrid yawned, dragged her up into a sitting posture, and
looked round for her foot-gear. Kristin helped her to draw them
on. Jofrid thanked her:

“ And vex not Gaute any more now, mother. He takes it not
lightly himself that we cannot be wed before — but I will not
have my child made poor before even ’tis born —”


Fourteen days after, Jofrid bore a son, a great and comely boy.
Gaute sent word to Sundbu that same day; and Sir Sigurd came at
once to Jérundgaard and held Erlend Gautess6n at his christening.
But, glad as was Kristin Lavransdatter of her son’s son, it vexed
her none the less that Erlend’s name should be renewed for the
first time in a base-born child.

“Your father dared more to win his son his rights,” said she to
Gaute one evening, as he sat down in the weaving-house watching
her make the boy ready for the night. Jofrid was sleeping sweetly
already in the bed by the wall. “ He loved not old Sir Nikulaus
over much, yet would he never have honoured his father so little
as give his name to a son not born in wedlock.”

“No—Orm—’twas after his mother’s father, was’t not? ”
asked Gaute. “ — Ay, ay, mother, maybe this was no seemly speech
of a son. But I trow you can understand that all we brothers
marked well, what time our father lived, you deemed not then he
could be a pattern for us in all things — but now you speak of him
late and early as he had been a holy saint — almost. You wot well
that we know he was not that. Proud should we all be if any day »
we should grow to our father’s stature — ay, or to his shoulder —
we mind ever that he was a chieftain, and a man outdoing all men
in ail such gifts as adorn a man — but you cannot make us believe
he was the meekest and most virtuous of swains in a lady’s bower,
or the doughtiest of husbandmen —

“—_ Yet need none wish aught better for you, my Erlend, than
that you may grow to be his like! ” He took up the child, who was


967 The Cross


now swathed up for the night, and thrust his chin down on to the
little red face in the bright woollen swaddling-cloth: “‘ This well-
gifted and hopeful youth, Erlend Gautessén, of Jorundgaard —
you must tell your grandmother you are not afraid your father
will fail you —”” He made the sign of the cross over the child and
laid it back in Kristin’s lap, went over to the bed, and gazed on the
slumbering young mother:

“Tis as well -with my Jofrid as can be, say you? She looks pale
— but I trow you understand such things best — God’s peace and
sound sleep to all in this house! ”


A month after the boy’s birth Gaute held a great christening-
ale, and to it his kinsmen gathered from far and near. Kristin
guessed that Gaute had trysted them hither to take counsel with
them in this pass — ’twas spring now, and he might soon look to
hear news of Jofrid’s kin.

Kristin had the joy of seeing Ivar and Skule at home together.
And hither came too her cousins: Sigurd Kyrning, who was wed
with her father’s brother’s daughter from Skog, Ivar Gjesling of
Ringheim and Haavard Trondsson. She had not seen the Tronds-
s6ns since Erlend had drawn the men of Sundbu along with him
into mischance. They were of middle age now: they had ever been
careless and light-headed, but high-minded and gallant; and they
were little changed —they met both the Erlendsséns and their
cousin, Sir Sigurd, who stood in their shoes at Sundbu, with the
free and open bearing befitting kinsmen. Ale and mead now ran
in rivers in honour of little Erlend; Gaute and Jofrid gave their
guests as free and unabashed a welcome as had they been lawfully
wed and the King himself had made their marriage — all was mirth,
and none seemed to call to mind that the two young folks’ honour
and welfare were still at hazard. But Kristin learned that Jofrid
had not forgotten it:

“The more freely and boldly they meet my father, the easier
will he yield him,” said she. “ And Olav Piper could never hide
that he loves full well to sit on the same bench with men of the old
houses.”

The only one that seemed not wholly happy in this gathering
of kinsmen was Sir Jammezlt Halvardssbn. King Magnus had
dubbed him knight this last Yule; Ramborg Lavransdatter now
bore the name of lady.


The Cross 968


oe eee eee

This time Sir’ Jammelt had his eldest step-son, Andres Simons-
sén, with him. Kristin had begged this of him, when last Jammelt
was north, for she had heard a waif word that the boy was strange.
A great dread had fallen on her — could it be that he had taken
hurt in soul and body from those dealings of hers with him when
he was a child? But his step-father said no, the boy was sound and
strong, good as gold — and maybe his wits were better than most
folks’ —’twas but that he saw visions: he would seem rapt at
times, and afterwards would do often the strangest things — even
as twas last year. He had taken his silver spoon one day — ’twas the
very one he had from Kristin as a birth-gift — and a shirt-pin that
his father left him—and then he went forth from the manor
and down to a bridge that is over the river on the highway near
/Elin. There he sat waiting for many hours —at last there came
over the bridge three beggars, an old man and a young woman,
with a suckling-child. Andres goes up to them, gives them the
trinkets, and begs leave to bear the child for the woman. At home
they were beside themselves with fear, when Andres came not to
the midday meal nor yet to supper — they went out and searched
the country-side, and at length Jammelt got word that Andres had
been seen far north in the neighbouring parish in company with
some folk called Krepp and Kraaka; he was carrying their little
one. When next day Jammelt got hold of the boy at last, he said,
after much asking, that he had heard a voice the last Sunday dur-
ing Mass, while he stood looking at the picture painted on the
panel before the altar. "Iwas God’s mother and Saint Joseph
journeying with the child to the land of Egypt, and he had
wished he had lived in those days, for then would he have prayed
that he might have leave to go with them and bear the child for
Mary Virgin. Then had he heard a voice, the gentlest and sweetest
in all the world, and it promised to show him a sign if he would
go to the Bjerkheim bridge on a certain day —

Else was Andres loath to speak of his visions — for their parish
priest said they were likely part feigning and part brain-sick wan-
derings; and he frightened his mother well-nigh from her wits
with his strange ways. But he talked much with an old serving-
maid, a rarely pious woman, and with a preaching brother who
was wont to wander through the parish at Lent and Advent. "T'was
like enough the boy would choose the spiritual life—and so,
maybe, ’twould be Simon Simonssén who in time to come would


969 The Cross
settle down as master at Formo. He was a healthy and a lively
child, most like to his father, and Ramborg’s darling.

Ramborg and Jammelt had as yet had no children together.
Kristin had heard, from folk who had seen her at Raumarike, that
Ramborg was grown passing fat and sluggish. She went a-visiting
among the richest and mightiest folk in the south-land, but north
to her home country she would never come, and Kristin had not
seen her only sister since that day of their parting at Formo. But
_ Kristin deemed she could see that Ramborg still nursed the old
grudge against her. She lived happily with Jammalt, and he cared
for his step-children’s welfare with love and forethought. He had
taken order that the eldest son of the man who would be his chief
heir if he died childless should wed Ulvhild Simonsdatter; thus,
at the worst, Simon Darre’s daughter would have the good of his
estates after him. Arngjerd had been wedded with Grunde of
Eiken the year after her father’s death; Gyrd Darre and Jammelt
had made her as rich a portion as they knew Simon meant to give
this child of his, and she was happy, Jammelt said — Grunde let
himself be guided in all things by his wife, and they had three fair
children already.

Kristin was strangely moved when she saw Simon and Ram-
borg’s eldest son once more. He was Lavrans Bjérgulfsén’s living
likeness — much more even than Gaute. And in these last years
Kristin had had to give up her belief that Gaute was so like her
father in his frame of mind.

Andres Darre was now in his twelfth year, tall and slender, fair-
haired and comely, and somewhat quiet in bearing; though he
seemed healthy and happy of mood, had good strength of body,
and a good stomach to his food, save that he would eat no flesh.
Somewhat there was that marked him out from other boys, but
Kristin could not say what it was, though she watched him nar-
rowly. Andres was soon good friends with his mother’s sister, but
he never let fall aught of his visions, and fell not into any raptures
while he was in Sil.


The four Erlendsséns seemed to take pleasure in being together
in their mother’s manor, but Kristin got but little speech with her
sons. When they talked among themselves, she felt that their lives
and their concerns were slipping now beyond her range of sight
—the two who had come from without had parted them from


their home already, and the two who dwelt on the manor would
soon, for sure, be taking its governance out of her hands. The
meeting fell in the middle of the spring dearth, and she saw now
that Gaute must have made ready for it by saving fodder in winter
more than was common, and he had borrowed fodder from Sir
Sigurd too — but all this he had ordered without taking counsel
with her. And all the parleyings about Gaute s affair went on, as
’twere, over her head, even though she sat in the room with the
men. :

So ’twas little marvel to her when one day Ivar came and said
that Lavrans would keep him company when he went back to
Rognheim.

Howbeit one day Ivar Erlendss6n said to his mother that he
deemed ’twere well she should come to him at Rognheim when
once Gaute was wedded: ne a

“Signe were a more towardly daughter-in-law to bide in a
house with, I trow — and easy for you sure it cannot be to give up
the reins here, where you have been wont to rule.” For the rest,
‘twas plain he liked Jofrid, he and all the other men. Only Sir
Jammelt seemed to look upon her somewhat coolly.

Kristin sat with her little grandson in her lap, and thought, easy
*rwould scarce be for her either at the one or the other place.
"Twas a hard matter, growing old. So lately, it seemed, ’twas she
herself who was the young woman — then it was about her fate
that the men’s strife and counsels tossed. Now she had drifted
into a backwater. And not long ago her own sons had been even
as this one here. She bethought her of her dream of the new-born
babe — At this time the thought of her own mother rose often in
her mind — her mother that she could not remember as other than
an ageing, heavy-hearted woman. Yet she had been young, she
too, when she lay and warmed her baby girl with her body’s
warmth; her mother too had been marked in youth, body and
soul, by the bearing and nourishing of children; and she had
thought perchance no more than Kristin herself, when she sat
with that sweet young life at her breast, that so long as they two
lived each single day would lead the child farther and farther from
her arms.

“When you yourself had borne a child, Kristin, methought you
would understand,” her mother had said once. Now she under-
stood that her mother’s heart had been scored deep with memories


971 The Oross


ae ee se ee a UU TOSS
of her daughter, memories of thoughts for her child from the time
it was unborn and from all the years a child remembers nothing
of, memories of fear and hope and dreams that children never
know have been dreamed for them, until their own time comes
to fear and hope and dream in secret —


At length the gathering of kinsmen broke up, so far as that some
took up their abode with Jammelt at Formo, and some went with
Sigurd over to Vaagaa. But at last one day two of Gaute’s tenants
from south in the Dale came galloping in to the manor with tid-
ings: the Warden was on his way north to seek out Gaute at his
home, and the maid’s father and kinsmen were in his train. Young
Lavrans ran straightway to the stable — Next evening it looked as
though an army was gathered at Jorundgaard: all Gaute’s kinsmen
were there with their armed followers, and his friends in the parish
had come to tryst too.

Then came Helge of Hovland with a great following to crave
his right against the ravisher. Kristin caught a glimpse of Helge
Duk, as he rode into the courtyard alongside of Sir Paal Sérkves-
son, the Warden himself. Jofrid’s father was an oldish, tall and
bent-backed man of a sickly look — when he lighted from his horse
twas seen one leg was shorter than the other. The sister’s husband,
Olav Piper, was short, broad, and thick-set, red of skin and hair.

Gaute went forward to meet them, he bore him gallantly, with
head held high — and behind him he had the whole array of kins-
men and friends; they stood in a half-circle before the upper-hall
steps, in the midst the two elder men of knightly rank, Sir Sigurd
and Sir Jammeit. Kristin and Jofrid watched the meeting from the
shed of the weaving-house, but they could not hear the words
that fell.

The men went up into the loft, and the two women turned in
to the weaving-house. They could not speak. Kristin sat by the
hearth-place; Jofrid walked the floor, bearing her child in her
arms. Some time went by thus —then Jofrid wrapped a coverlid
about the boy and went out with him. An hour after, Jammelt
Halvardssén came in to his sister-in-law as she sat there alone, and
told her the outcome.

Gaute had proffered to Helge Duk sixteen marks in gold in
amends for Jofrid’s honour and for carrying her off by the strong
hand — ’twas the same as Helge’s brother had got for his son’s life.


The Cross 972


ee a
And he stood ready to espouse Jofrid at her father’s hands, making
her a fitting morning-gift and extra-gift; but on his part Helge
should accord him and his daughter his full forgiveness, so that she
should have a like portion with her sisters, and share with them in
the heritage. Sir Sigurd, on behalf of Gaute’s kin, stood surety that
he would keep his bond. Helge Duk seemed willing to fall in with
the proffer straightway; but his son-in-law, Olav Piper, and Nerid
Kaaressén, who was Aasa’s betrothed, spoke against it, and said
that Gaute must be the most brazen of all men, to presume to fix
terms himself for his wedding with a maid he had dishonoured
while she was in her brother-in-law’s manor, and thereafter borne
away by force —or to crave that she should share in her sisters’
heritage.

"Twas easy to see, said Jammelt, that Gaute himself liked but
little this haggling over the price he should pay for wedding a well-
born maid, whom he had led astray and who had now borne him
a son. But ’twas easy to see, too, he had been made to learn both
the lessons and the sermon by heart, so that he needed not to read
them from a book.

While yet they were in the midst of the parleyings, and friends
on both sides were seeking to bring them to accord, Jofrid came
in with the child in her arms. At that her father broke down, and
could not keep back his tears. So ’twas settled as she had wished.

That Gaute could never have paid such amends was clear; but
Jofrid’s portion was so fixed that the one quit the other. Thus, in
very deed, the outcome of the bargain was that Gaute took Jofrid,
and got little more with her than what she had in her wallets when
she came to the manor, while for her extra-gift and morning-gift
he gave her by deed the most of what he owned, his brothers con-
senting thereto. But some day great riches would come to him
through Jofrid — if, indeed, the marriage were not childless, said
Ivar Gjesling laughing — all the men joined in the laugh; but Kris-
tin flushed red, for Jammeelt sat listening to all the gross jests that
now flew about.

The next day Gaute Erlendssén handfasted Jofrid Helgesdatter,
and forthwith she held her churching, with as much honour as she
had been a wife — Sira Dag said she had a right to this now. Then
she journeyed with the child to Sundbu and abode in Sir Sigurd’s
ward until the wedding.


That day month, just after John’s Mass,* the bridal was held;


24th June.


973 The Cross


"twas a brave and a stately one. The morning after, with great so-
lemnity, Kristin Lavransdatter made over her keys to her son, and
Gaute fastened the bunch to his wife’s girdle.

Thereafter Sir Sigurd Eldjarn gave a great banquet at Sundbu,
and thereat he and his cousins, the former owners of Sundbu, sol-
emnly swore friendship and confirmed the oath with their hands
and seals. With a bounteous hand, Sir Sigurd made gifts from the
treasures that were at his manor, both to the Gjeslings and to all
the guests according to the nearness of their kinship and friend-
ship — drinking-horns, table-plate, trinkets, weapons, fur robes,
and horses. And thus all folk deemed that Gaute Erlendssén had
brought this matter of his bride-theft to a most honourable issue.


4


ONE summer morning the year after, Kristin was in the penthouse
in front of the old hearth-room house, setting in order some gear
in the chests that stood there. A noise came to her ears of horses
being led out, and she went and looked forth between the small
pillars of the penthouse. One of the house-carls was leading out
two horses, and Gaute came forth from the stable doorway; the
child Erlend was sitting astride his father’s shoulder. The bright
little face looked out about the man’s yellow hair, and Gaute held
the boy’s little hands in his great brown one up under his chin. He
handed the child to a maid who came across the yard, and mounted
his horse. But when Erlend screamed and reached up after his
father, Gaute took him again and set him on the saddle-bow be-
fore him. At that moment Jofrid came from the hall.

“Would you take Erlend with you — whither you are riding? ”

Gaute made answer he was bound for the mill — the river was
like to carry it away, “—and Erlend has a mind to go along with
father, he says.”

“ Are you out of your wits — ? ” She caught the boy quickly to
her arms, and Gaute laughed loud:

“T believe verily you deemed I meant to take him with me! ”

“ Ay —” His wife laughed too: “ You drag the poor thing about
with you everywhere — I well believe you would do as the lynx
does — eat the little one up ere you let any other get him —”

She waved with one of the child’s hands to Gaute as he rode


The Cross 974


The Oross 3+) OS eee
from the manor. Then she set the boy down on the sward,
crouched over him a moment, and talked to him a little, and then
ran across to the new storehouse and up to the loft.

Kristin stood still, watching her grandson—the morning sun
shone so fair on the little red-clad child. Young Erlend toddled
round in rings, gazing down into the grass. Now he grew ware of
a heap of chips, and straightway set to work, painfully heaving
them about. Kristin laughed.

He was fifteen months old, but forward for his age, his parents
thought, for he both walked and ran, and could say two or three
words to boot. Now he steered his way straight for the little water-
gutter that ran across the bottom of the courtyard and swelled to
a purling beck when rain had fallen in the fells. Kristin ran out and
took him up in her arms:

“ Mustn’t — mother will be angry if you wet you —”

The boy pouted — pondering belike if he should cry because he
was kept from paddling in the beck, or if he should give in — to
get wet was the deadly sin for him — Jofrid was all too strict with
him in such-like things. But he looked so sage — laughingly Kristin
kissed the boy, set him down, and got her back to the penthouse.
But her work went but slowly — for the most part she stood look-
ing out on the courtyard.

The morning sun shone so soft and fair on the three storehouses
over against her —’twas as though Kristin had not seen them
rightly for a long time past —how brave the houses were, with
their loft-balconies adorned with pillars and rich carving. The
gilded vane on the gable cross of the new storehouse elittered
against the blue haze that hung over the fell behind. This year,
after the wet early summer, the grass on the roofs was so fresh and
green.

Kristin sighed a little, looked once more on little Erlend, and
turned to her chests again.

All at once there came from without a child’s wailing cry —
she flung down all she had in her hands and rushed out. Erlend
stood shrieking, looking from his finger to a half-dead wasp lying
on the grass, and back again. When his grandmother lifted him up
with pitying words, he shrieked still louder, and when, with yet
more sounds of pity and compassion, she bound wet earth in a cold
green leaf upon the sting, his wailing grew fearful to hear.

Lulling and caressing him, she bore him into her room, and he


975 The Cross


shrieked as though his last hour were come — and stopped short in
the midst of a yell: he knew the box and the horn-spoon which
his grandmother took from the door lintel. Kristin dipped bits of
soft bannock in honey and fed him with them, while she went on
petting him, rubbing her cheek against his neck, where the fair
hair was still short and crinkled from the days when he had lain
still in his cradle and worn it away on the pillow. And Erlend had
forgotten his woes now — he turned his face up to the woman and
offered to pat and kiss her with sticky hands and mouth.

In the midst of these doings, Jofrid stood in the door: ;

“ Have you brought him in? — surely twas not needful, mother
— I was but up in the loft.”

Kristin told of the mischance that had befallen Erlend: ‘“ Heard
you not how he shrieked? ”

Jofrid thanked her mother-in-law, “—but now we will not
trouble you longer —” She took the child, that now reached out
co its mother and was fain to go to her, and went her way.

Kristin put away the honey-box. Then she sat on, her hands in
her lap: the chests in the penthouse might wait till Ingrid came in.


It had been meant that she should have Frida Styrkaarsdatter to
wait on her when she moved over into the old hall. But then Frida
was wedded off to one of the jackmen who had come over with
Helge Duk —a lad that might have been her son.

“Tis the use in our quarter of the land that our underlings
hearken to their masters when they counsel them for their good,”
said Jofrid, when Krsitin marvelled that this match was come
about.

“ And in this country-side,” said Kristin, “ the common folk are
unused to obey us further than ’tis reason they should, or to
hearken to our counsel except ’tis for their good as fully as for
ours. "Tis good counsel I give you, Jofrid, when I pray you to bear
this in mind.” i ;

“Tis as mother says, Jofrid,” said Gaute — but passing meckly.

— Even before he was wed with her, Kristin had seen that Gaute
was most loath to cross Jofrid. And he was grown to be a most
compliant husband.

The mother-in-law denied not that in many things Gaute might
do well to give ear to his wife — she was shrewd, notable, and hard-
working far beyond the common. And she was so more wanton


The Cross 976

than Kristin herself had been. She too had trodden underfoot her
duty as a daughter and sold her honour, because she could not win
~ the man she had set her heart on at a cheaper rate; but once she had
won her will, she was the most faithful and modest of wives. Kris-
tin knew that Jofrid loved her husband passing well — that she was


— a Sea


proud of his good looks and of his noble birth; her sisters were ~


richly wed, but their husbands were best seen at night when no
moon was shining, and of their forefathers the less said the better,
Jofrid let fall scornfully. She was jealous of her husband’s welfare
and his honour, as she understood them, and at home she spoiled
him all she could — but if Gaute ventured to be of another mind
than his wife in the least of trifles, Jofrid would first agree in such
a fashion that Gaute faltered straightway —and then she would
set to work and talk him round.

But Gaute throve and was content. None could doubt that the
two young folks lived well together. Gaute was happy with his
wife, and both were marvellous proud of their son, and loved him
beyond all measure.

So now everything might have been for the best. If only Jofrid
Helgesdatter had not been — ay, she was niggardly; Kristin could
not call it aught else. Had she not been so, ’twould have vexed Kris-
tin less that her son’s wife was so set on her own will.

The very first autumn, when she was but newly wedded and
come to be the mistress, Kristin had seen at the harvest-time that
the work-folk were ill content — though they scarce said a word.
But the old mistress marked it none the less.

It might have happed in Kristin’s time, too, that the folk had
to eat herring that had gone musty, bacon as yellow and high-
smelling as fir-root splints, and tainted meat. But then all had
known that the mistress would surely make up for it with some
extra good titbit at another time, milk-porridge or fresh cheese,
and good ale out of season. And when food came round that had
got a bad taste and must be eaten up, all knew ’twas but the over-
flow, as it were, of Kristin’s bursting storehouses — and when folk
were in sore need, then the abundance of the Jérundgaard store-
houses was a blessing to the whole parish. Already folk felt less
sure that Jofrid would prove open-handed in dealing out help in
food, when the common folk felt the pinch of dearth.

This it was that vexed the mother-in-law — for it seemed to
minish the honour of the manor, and of its master.


977 The Cross

That even in this one year she herself had been made to feel that
her daughter-in-law favoured her own part unduly was a thing
that touched her less nearly. It had shown already at Bartholo-
mew’s Mass,* when she had been given two of the slaughtered
goats instead of the four she should have had. True, the glutton
had made havoc among the small stock in the fells that summer —
still Kristin deemed it shameful to take count of two goats on so
great a manor; but she held her peace. And ’twas the same with
all her dues from the manor — autumn slaughtering, corn and
_ flour, fodder for her four cows and two saddle-horses — she was
ever given short measure or poor wares. She marked that Gaute
misliked this and was ashamed — but he dared not do aught for
fear of his wife, and so he made as if he saw it not.

Gaute was as open-handed as were all Erlend Nikulaussén’s sons,
In his brothers the mother had called it wastefulness. But Gaute
was a worker, and content with little for himself — had he but the
best of horses and hounds and some good hawks, he cared not, for
the rest, to live in other wise than the small farmers of the Dale.
But, if folk came to the manor, he was a free-handed host to
guests of every kind, and bountiful to beggars — and therein he
was a house-master after his mother’s heart; ’twas thus she deemed
great folk should live who dwelt upon their udal lands in their
own country-side, making their goods yield increase, wasting
naught uselessly, but neither sparing aught when love of God and
of His poor, or care for the honour of the house, required that
they should give from their store.

She saw now that Jofrid set most of Gaute’s rich friends and
kinsmen of worship. Howbeit in this matter Gaute seemed least
willing to be guided by his wife — he tried to hold fast to the old
comrades of his youth — brother tipplers, Jofrid called them; and
indeed Kristin learnt now that Gaute had been somewhat wilder
than she knew of. But those friends came not unbidden to his
manor after he was become a wedded man. And so far ’twas sure
no poor man had been sent away empty by Gaute. But he gave
much smaller gifts when Jofrid was looking on. Behind her back
he would give more, as ’twere by stealth. But twas not much that
could happen behind Jofrid’s back.

And Kristin saw that Jofrid was jealous of her. His mother had
had Gaute’s friendship and trust so wholly and fully all these years,

* 24th August.


The Cross 978


Be OTOSS soe A RL SS ee ee
since he was her poor sick child that was able neither to live nor
die. Now she marked that Jofrid liked it not if Gaute sat him down
by his mother, asked her counsel, or got her to tell stories as in the
old days. If the man forgot the time, and lingered a little by her
down in the old hall, ’twould not be long ere Jofrid found an
errand thither —

And she would grow jealous if her mother-in-law made too
much of little Erlend.

— Out in the yard there grew in the short, trodden grass cer-
tain herbs with coarse, dark, leathery leaves. But now, in the sunny
days of midsummer, there sprang a little stalk, with clear, pale-
blue flowerets, up from the middle of each flattened whorl. To
Kristin it seemed that the old outer leaves, scarred as they were
by every foot of man or beast that had trampled them, must love
the sweet bright flowering heart-shoot even as she loved her son’s
son.

He seemed to her to be life of her life and flesh of her flesh, as
surely as her own children, but yet more sweetly. When she had a
chance to hold him in her lap, and saw that the boy’s mother
watched the two jealously the while, took him away as soon as for
shame’s sake she might, laid him, secure in her ownership, to her
breast, and pressed him to her greedily — then it dawned on Kris-
tin Lavransdatter as never before that the preachers of God’s word
were right. The life of the body was tainted with unrest beyond
all cure; in the world where men mixed, begot new generations,
were driven together by fleshly love, and loved their own flesh,
there came heart-ache and broken hopes, as surely as rime comes
in autumn; both life and death sundered friends at last, as surely as
winter parts the tree from its leaves.


Now it befell one evening, fourteen days before Olav’s Mass,*
that a band of mumpers came to Jérundgaard, and prayed the loan
of a house for the night. Kristin was standing on the balcony of
the old storehouse — it was to be at her disposal now — she heard
Jofrid come out and answer the beggars: food they should have,
but she could not give them shelter: ‘“‘ We ourselves are many, and
we have our mother-in-law living on the manor — she has the half
of the houses — ”

Wrath flamed up in the one-time lady of the manor — never had
it happed before that wayfarers had been denied a night’s shelter


* 29th July.


ete


979 The Cross


at Jorundgaard — and the sun was already touching the western
ridges. She ran down and went across to Jofrid and the beggars:

“They can have lodging in my house, Jofrid, and, being there,
*twill be well I should give them their meat too. Never before on
this manor have we denied a fellow-Christian shelter, when he
asked it in God’s name.”

: “Do as you think fit, mother,” answered Jofrid, fiery red in the
ace.

When Kristin had looked more nearly at the beggars, she well-
nigh repented her proffer —’twas not quite without reason that
_ the young wife was loath to have these folk on the manor over-
night. Gaute and the house-folk were away on the far meadows
up by the Sil water, and would not be home at even; Jofrid was
alone at home, with the parish bedes-folk, an old couple and two
children, and Kristin and her servant in the old hall. And many and
strange as were the kinds of folk Kristin was used to see in wander-
ing bands of beggars, she liked the looks of these but ill. Four were
big and strong young men — three of them red-haired, with small»
wild eyes. These seemed to be brothers; but the fourth, who had
had both his nostrils slit and wanted his ears, spoke a broken
tongue, as though he were an outlander. Besides these there were
two old folks —a little crooked fellow, yellowish-green in face,
hair, and beard from dirt and age, with belly swollen as from some
ailment — he went on crutches — and an old woman, her neck and
hands covered with sores, and her head-cloth reeking with blood
and matter. Kristin shuddered at the thought that this creature
might have come near to Erlend. But, none the less, ’twas well for
these wretched old folk that the band should not need to wander
about the Hammer-fells that night.

But the beggars behaved them peaceably enough. Once the ear-
less one tried to catch a hold of Ingrid as she was setting food on
the board; but Bjérn straightway bristled up and growled. For the
rest they seemed out of heart and weary — they had suffered much
ill and got but little gain, they answered to the mistress’s ques-
tioning —’twould be better at Nidaros maybe. The woman was
pleased when Kristin gave her a goat’s horn full of good grease
made of purest lamb’s fat and little children’s water — but she
would not have it when Kristin offered to steep her head-clout in
warm water and to give her a clean linen cloth — the cloth, indeed,
she took.

All the same, Kristin had Ingrid, the young serving-maid, sleep


DheriGnoss: Whe | 0 Le a Se ee
innermost in her bed. Once or twice during the night Bjorn
growled, but else all was still. A little after midnight the dog ran
to the door and gave.a couple of short barks — Kristin heard hoof-
beats in the courtyard, and knew that "twas Gaute coming home.
She guessed that Jofrid had sent word to him.

Kristin filled the beggars’ wallets well the next morning; and
they were gone but a little way beyond the manor gate when she
saw Jofrid and Gaute making for her house.

_Kristin sat her down and took up her spindle. She greeted her
children fairly when they came in, and asked Gaute about the hay.
Jofrid sniffed — the guests had left a fusty smell behind them. But
her mother-in-law made as if she marked naught. Gaute shifted
about uneasily and seemed to find it hard to bring out his errand.
On that Jofrid took the word from him:

“There is one matter, mother, that I deem ’twere best we spoke
of now. I see well you think that I am more saving than you deem
befits the mistress of Jorundgaard. I know that you think this, and
you deem that I minish Gaute’s honour thereby. Now I will not
say aught of how I was afraid last night to take in this band, seeing
that I was alone on the manor with my baby child and a few old
parish folk, for I saw you understood it, so soon as you had come
to sight of your guests. But I have marked before, too, that you
deem I am a niggard with food and ungentle to the poor.

“Tam not so, mother; but Jérundgaard is no longer the seat of
a king’s man and a rich man, as it was in your father’s and mother’s
time. A rich man’s child were you; you went about amongst rich
and mighty kinsfolk; you were wedded richly, and your husband
lifted you up to yet greater power and station than you were
brought up to. None can look that you should fully understand
in your old age how far otherwise it is with Gaute, who has lost
his father’s heritage, and who must share the half of your father’s
riches with many brothers. But J dare nowise forget that I brought
little more to his estate than the child I bore beneath my heart, and
a heavy burden of amends for my love to pay — seeing that I was
party to the wrong he wrought my kin. Time may make that good
— but ’tis my duty to pray God to grant my father long life. We
are young folk, Gaute and I, we know not how many children
twill be our lot to have — You must believe, mother-in-law, I have


no other thought in all I do but for the good of my husband and
our children — ”


981 The Oross


i a ee a ea es Gross

“T beiieve it, Jofrid.” Kristin looked gravely into her daughter-
in-law’s flushed face. “ And never have I meddled with your house-
holding, nor denied that you are a notable woman and a good and
faithful wife to my son. But you must let me deal with my Own as
I am used to do. As you say, | am an old woman, and no longer apt
to learn new ways.”

The young folk understood that the mother had naught more to
say to them, and soon after took their leave.


As ever, Kristin felt she must own that Jofrid was right — at
first. But when she bethought her, it seemed to her — no, right she
was not, after all; twas against reason to liken Gaute’s alms with
her father’s. Gifts for the soul’s peace of the poor and strangers
dying in the parish; dowry gifts to fatherless maids; ale-feasts on
the holy-days of her father’s best-loved saints; doles to sick folk
and sinners journeying to seek Saint Olav — even had Gaute been
much richer than he was, none had looked that he should put him-
self to such costs; Gaute thought no more of his Maker than he
needs must. He was free-handed and good-hearted; but Kristin
had seen that her father held the poor he helped in reverence, be-
cause Jesus had chosen a poor man’s lot when He came in the
flesh. And her father had loved hard work and deemed that all
handicraft was honoured, since that God’s mother, Mary, chose
to be a working-woman who spun to win bread for herself and
hers, though she was a daughter of rich folk and came of the kin-
dred of the kings and high-priests of the Jewish land.


Two days after, early in the morning, while Jofrid was still go-
ing about half clad and Gaute lay abed, Kristin came in to them.
She had on a kirtle and cloak of grey wadmal, wore a wide-
brimmed, black felt hat above her coif, and strong shoes upon her
feet. Gaute flushed deeply when he saw his mother in this garb.
Kristin said she was minded to go afoot to Nidaros to Saint Olav’s
feast, and she prayed her son to see to her affairs the while.

Gaute strove eagerly to shake her purpose — he would have had
her at least borrow horses and groom from him and take her
serving-maid with her — but, as was most like, coming from a man
lying in his naked bed before his mother’s eyes, his words carried
little weight. So abashed was he, that in pity Kristin bethought her
to say she had had a dream.


The Cross 9382


“I think long, too, till I see your brothers again —”’ but at that
she had to turn her away; she had not yet dared to confess to her
own heart how she yearned and feared to meet her two eldest sons
again.

Teshies was set on bearing his mother company the first part of
her way. While he dressed himself and had a bite of food, Kris-
tin sat laughing and playing with little Erlend —he crowed, and
chirped, new wakened and in a twitter with morning life. She
kissed Jofrid at parting, and this she had never done before. In the
courtyard all the household was gathered — Ingrid had spread the
tidings that mistress Kristin was going on pilgrimage to Nidaros.

Kristin took the heavy, iron-shod staff in her hand, and, as she
would not ride, Gaute laid her double wallets across his horse and
drove it on before him.

Up on the church-green Kristin turned about and looked down
upon her manor — so fair it lay in the dewy, sun-bright morning.
The river shone white. The house-folk stood there yet — she could
make out Jofrid’s light dress and coif, and the child, a patch of red,
upon her arm. Gaute saw his mother’s face grow pale with the
fullness of her heart.

The road bore upwards through the woods under the shadow
of Hammer-fell. Kristin walked as lightly as a young maid. She
and her son spoke not much together. And when they had walked
for two hours, they came where the way bears off over Rost-
kampen, and the whole Dovre country-side lies spread before one
northward. Then Kristin said Gaute must go no farther with her;
but she would sit a while and rest before going on.

Down beneath them lay the Dale, with the river’s greenish-
white riband wandering through it, and the farms like small green
patches on the forest-covered slopes. But higher up the upland
mosses arched, brownish or yellow with lichen, inward towards
the grey screes and the bare heights flecked with snow-drifts.
Cloud shadows drifted over the Dale and the uplands, but north-
ward all was clear among the fells; the heaped-up hills had flung
off their cloaks of mist, and shone blue, one behind the other. And
Kristin’s yearning moved with the cloud-flocks northward on the
long road that lay before her, hurried over the Dale, in among the
great mountains that blocked the way, and along the steep tracks
across the uplands. A few days more, and she would be wending
her way downward through Trondheim’s rich, green dales, fol-


983 The Cross


lowing the river’s windings towards the great fiord. She shud-
dered at the memory of the well-known places by the sea, where
she and youth had gone about together. Erlend’s fair form moved
before her sight, with changing looks and bearing, swift, unclear,
as though she saw him mirrored in running water. Last of all she
would come forth on Feginsbrekka, by the marble cross — and
there would lie the town by the river mouth, between the blue
fiord and the green ridge of Strind, and on the river bank the
mighty, shining church with dizzy towers and golden vanes, the
evening sunlight burning on the rose midway on its breast. And
far up the fiord, under Frosta’s blue hills, lay Tautra, low and
black like a whale’s back, the church tower standing up like the
steering-fin. Oh, my Bjorgulf; oh, Naakkve —

-But when she looked back over her shoulder, she could still see
a little of the home fell below Hévringen. It lay in shadow, but
her well-used eye could see where the seter path went through
the woods. She knew the grey mountain-tops that rose above the
cloak of forest —they ringed about the Sil dwellers’ old ster
fields.

From the hills above came stray notes of a cow horn —a few
clear high tones, that died away and came again — it sounded like
children practising them in blowing. Far off tinkling of bells — and
the muffled roar of the river, and the deep sighs of the forest in the
still, warm day. Kristin’s heart trembled with unrest in the still-
ness. She was drawn as with home-sickness onward, as with home-
sickness backward to the parish and the manor. Visions swarmed
before her sight — pictures of daily life: she saw herself running
with the goats on the path through the sparse woods south of
their seter —a cow had got mired in the bog—the sun shone
brightly; when she stood a moment and listened, she felt her own
sweat bite into her skin. She saw the courtyard at home in a flurry
of snow—a grey day of storm, darkening into a wild winter
night — She was all but blown back into the outer room when she
opened the door, the storm took her breath away; but there they
loomed up, two shapeless bundles of men in snow-smothered fur
coats: Ivar and Skule had come home. Their ski sank deep into the
big drift that ever heaped itself together right across the yard
when ’twas blowing from the north-west. On such days there
were always deep drifts in two places in the courtyard — and all
at once ’twas as though she must think with love and longing of


The Cross 984.


eh SUC OP OSS hs Ne ta ae OE ie
these two snowdrifts that she and all folk on the manor had cursed
each winter — ’twas as if she were doomed never to see them more.

It seemed as if these yearnings burst her heart in sunder — they
ran hither and thither like streams of blood, seeking out ways to
all places in the wide-stretched land where she had lived, to all the
sons she had wandering in the world, to all her dead beneath the
moulds — She wondered — could it be that she was fey? She had
never felt the like of this before —

Then she saw that Gaute was sitting staring at her. And she
smiled quickly, as if in excuse — twas time they should say fare-
well, and she go on her way.

Gaute called to his horse, that had wandered forward grazing
along the green track. He ran after it and brought it back, and they
said farewell. Kristin had her wallets over her shoulder already,
and her son had set his foot in the stirrup — then he turned and
took a step forward:

“ Mother! ” For a moment she looked deep into his beshamed,
helpless eyes. “ You have not — you have not been over well con-
tent this last year, I trow — mother, Jofrid means well, she holds
you in great reverence—but mayhap even so I should have
said more to her, of what manner of woman you are and ever
were —”

“How come you to have such thoughts, my Gaute? ” His
mother spoke gently and wonderingly. “I know well myself that
I am no longer young, and old folk, they say, are hard to please,
but so old I am not yet that I have not wit to know your worth,
yours and your wife’s. An ill thing would I count it were Jofrid
to deem it had been all vain and thankless toil, all she has done to
spare me from work and care. Think not so of me, I pray you,
my son, as to deem I set not all due store by your wife’s worth and
your faithful, duteous love — if so be I have not shown it as much
as you could with reason look for, you must even bear with me,
remembering that ’tis the way of old folk —”

Gaute stared at his mother, open-mouthed — “ Mother —”
Then he burst into tears, and leaned against his horse, shaking with
sobs.

But Kristin kept a firm hold on herself; her voice bewrayed
naught but wonder and motherly kindness.

“ My Gaute, you are young in years, and true it is that you were
my pet lamb, as your father was wont to say. But none the less you


ad


985 The Cross
must not take this parting thus, son, now you are a man grown and
the master of a house. If I were bound for Rome or Jerusalem, then
indeed — but on this journey I shall scarce meet with such great
perils —I shall find folk to bear me company, you know, for sure
when I come to Toftar, if not before. For each morning at this
season pilgrim troops set out from thence —”

“ Mother, mother — forgive it us! so as we took all power and all
rule out of your hands, thrusting you aside —”

Kristin shook her head with a little smile: ‘I fear me you chil-
dren must deem me a woman over fond to rule —”

Gaute turned him to her: she took his hand in one of hers and
laid her other hand on his shoulder, while she begged him once
more to believe she was not unthankful to him or Jofrid, and
prayed that God be with him. Then she turned him round to-
wards his horse, and laughingly smote him between the shoulders
for good luck.

She stood looking after him, till he sank from sight below the
brow of the hill. So comely as he was on the big, dark-grey horse.

She felt her mood a strange one — all things without her came
so sharply to her sense: the sun-steeped air, the warm breath of
the pine wood, the twitter of tiny birds in the grass. Yet at the
same time, looking within herself, she saw pictures like the visions
that high fever brings — within her was an empty house, wholly
soundless, dark, and breathing desolation. The vision changed — a
strand at ebb, the tide far withdrawn from it; pale, worn stones,
heaps of dark, lifeless tangle; all kinds of driftage —

Then she settled her bag more easily on her shoulder, grasped
her staff, and set forth on her way down into the Dale. — If ’twere
not fated that she should come hither any more, then ’twas God’s
will — useless to be afraid. And most like ’twas but that she was
growing old —She crossed herself and went her way with firmer
step — willing all the same to get,down to the hill-slopes where the
road ran among the farms.

Only from one short stretch on the highway could one see the
houses at Haugen, high on the topmost mountain ridge. Her heart
set to throbbing at the thought.


As she had thought, she met with pilgrims not a few when she
came to Toftar late in the day. Next morning they made a little
troop as they set off up the fells in company.


i

A priest, with his servant, and two women, his mother and sis-
ter, were on horseback and soon were far ahead of those on foot. .
Kristin felt a pang in her heart as she looked after the second
woman, who rode between her two children.

In Kristin’s company there were two oldish yeomen from a ~
little farm here on Dovre. Then there were two younger men
from Oslo, craftsmen of the city, and a farmer with his daughter
and her husband; quite young people, these two; they were jour-
neying with the young folks’ child, a little maid, a year and a half
old maybe, and had a horse they rode by turns. These three were
from a parish far south in the land, Andabu by name — Kristin
knew not where it was. That first evening Kristin begged to look
at the child, for it cried and whimpered without cease — it looked
wretchedly, with a great, hairless head and small, slack-jointed
body; it could neither speak nor sit upright yet. The mother
seemed ashamed of it — and when next morning Kristin proffered
to bear her daughter a while for her, she was left with it on her
hands —the mother pushed on far in front; she seemed to be a
cuckoo mother. But they were over young, both she and her hus-
band, scarce eighteen years old, and she might well be weary of
bearing a heavy child that was ever puling and weeping. The
grandfather was an ugly, sulky, cross-grained man; but ’twas he
who had been set on journeying to Nidaros with his daughter’s
daughter, so he seemed to have some kindness for her. Kristin
walked beside him and the two Franciscan monks at the tail of the
troop —and it vexed her soul that the man from Andabu never
thought to lend the monks his horse a while — all could see that
the younger monk was grievously sick.

The elder, Brother Arngrim, was a round little man, with a
round, red, freckled face, lively brown eyes, and a foxy-red ring
of hair about his pate. He talked endlessly, most of the poverty
they lived in, the barefoot monks of Skidan —the order had but
newly got a house in that town, but they were so parlous poor
they were scarce able to keep going the services, and the church
they had been minded to build would never come to aught for
sure. He laid the blame on the rich nuns of Gimsdy, who pursued
the poor begging friars with envy and spite, and ‘now had a suit
at law against them; with glib-tongued relish he told all kinds of
evil tales about them. Kristin misliked to hear the monk talk in
this fashion, and his tales of how ’twas said their abbess had been


987 The Cross


ere se a ocean ee Mew wire) sy 5 A MO OSA
chosen uncanonically, and how the nuns missed the offices in
slothful slumber and were given to tattling and to unchaste talk
over the board in the refectory, seemed to her little to be trusted
—ay, of one sister he said right out that folk deemed she had not
kept her vows of chastity. But she saw that Brother Arngrim was
otherwise a good-hearted and kindly man. He bore the sick child
long stretches when he saw that Kristin’s arms were weary, and,
when it screamed too grievously, he would set off at a run over
the upland, with his gown kilted high, so that the juniper flogged
his black, hairy legs and the mire splashed up from the bog holes,
while he shouted and bawled to the mother that now she must
bide for them, for the child was thirsty. Then he trotted back to
the sick man, Brother Torgils; to him he was the tenderest and
most loving of fathers.

With the sick monk ’twas impossible to come to Hjerdkinn that
night; but the two Dovre men knew of a stone hut by a tarn a little
southward in the waste, and the pilgrims made towards it. The
evening was grown cold by now. The ground by the edge of the
water was swampy, and white mist rose from the marsh, so that
the birch trees dripped with wet. A thin sliver of moon hung over
the mountain-tops in the west, its pale yellow scarce showing
in the yellow evening sky. More and more often Brother Torgils
was forced to stand still; he coughed so sorely ’twas pitiful to hear.
Brother Arngrim held him up in these bouts, and after wiped his
face and mouth, then with a shake of the head showed Kristin his
hand — ’twas bloody with the sick man’s spittle.

They found the hut, but it had fallen into ruin. So they sought
out a sheltered spot and made them a bonfire. But the poor folk
from the south had not thought that night.on the fells would be
so icy cold. Kristin took from her sack the cloak that Gaute had
forced upon her because ’twas so passing light and warm — of fine
boughten cloth, lined with beaver fur. When she wrapped Brother
Torgils in it, he whispered —he was so hoarse he could scarce
speak — that he would be fain to have the child lie in it with him.
So they put the child in with him, it whimpered and wailed, and
the monk coughed; but between-whiles both of them got some
sleep.

Part of the night Kristin kept watch with one of the Dovre men
and Brother Arngrim, looking to the fire. The pale yellow light
drew round to the northern sky — the tarn lay at their side white


The Cross 988


Lhe CTOSS 5 ea OS EE eee
and still; fish rose and made rings upon the water — but under the
hill on the farther side the water mirrored black darkness. Once
an uncanny barking screech came to their ears from over there —
the monk started and gripped the other two hard by the arms.
Kristin and the farmer deemed ’twas some beast — then they heard
a stone roll, as if someone was walking on the hill-side screes, and
another cry like a gruff voice of a man. The monk began to pray
aloud — she caught the words: “ Jesus Christus, Soter,” and “ vicit
leo de tribu Juda” * —then they heard a door shut to, away un-
der the mountain.

The faint grey dawn began to show, the scree across the lake
and the clumps of birch came into sight — then the other Dovre
man and the man from Oslo took their place. The last thing Kris-
tin thought, ere she fell asleep, close in to the fire, was that, should
they make such short marches — and give an alms to the beggar
monks she must when they parted — ’twas like she would have to
beg her meat at the farms when they came down into Gauldal.

The sun was well up already, and the morning wind was dark-
ening the lake in little squalls, when the frozen pilgrims gathered
about Brother Arngrim while he said the mornng prayers. Brother
Torgils sat crouched together, with chattering teeth, striving to
keep back his cough as he mumbled the words over after him.
When she looked at the monks’ ashen-grey gowns with the sun
shining on them, Kristin called to mind that she had dreamed of
Brother Edvin—she could not remember her dream, but she
kneeled and kissed the monks’ hands and prayed for their blessing
on the company.


The sight of the beaver-skin cloak had shown the other pilgrims
that Kristin was not come of small folk. And when she chanced to
say that she had journeyed twice before by the king’s highway
over the Dovre-fjeld, she became a sort of guide and leader to the
band. The Dovre men had never been farther north than to Hjerd-
kinn, and the folk from Viken were, of course, quite strange here.

They came to Hjerdkinn before the hour of vespers, and, after
the service in the chapel, Kristin went out into the hills alone. She
would fain have found again the path she had followed with her
father, and the spot by the beck where she had sat with him. These


* Jesus Christ, the Saviour.— The lion of the tribe of Judah has con-
quered.


989 The Cross


eee ee eee er Ore ey Ts ly ne Cross
she could not find, but she deemed she had found the hillock she
had clambered up that she might gaze after him as he rode away
from her. So she thought — but the little stony ridges along the
pathway here were much alike.

She knelt amid the bearberry vines at the top of the knoll. The
summer evening was growing dusk — the birch-tree slopes on the
hill-sides, the grey screes, and the brown stretches of marshland
melted together, but, above the wide-stretched mountain waste,
the evening sky arched its clear, fathomless bowl. All the pools
shone whitely, and the heavenly brightness was given back, broken
and more faint, from the little mountain beck that hurried, chafing
restlessly over stones, to flow out between pale gravel banks into
a little moorland tarn.

Again there came upon her that strange, feverish inner vision —
the stream seemed to show her a picture of her own being; thus
had she hurried restlessly through the waste of these earthly years,
foamed up in turbulent chafing at every stone in her path — ’twas
but weakly and fitfully and palely that the everlasting light could
mirror itself in her life. — But it dawned upon the mother dimly,
that in anguish, and care, and love —each time the fruit of sin
ripened into sorrow —it had been granted to her earth-bound,
wilful soul to catch a reflection of the heavenly light.

Hail, all hail, Mary, rich in mercy! Blessed art thou among
women, and blessed the fruit of thy womb, Jesus, who gave His
sweat and blood for our sake —

While she said over the five Aves in memory of the redemp-
tion’s mysteries of pain, she felt twas through her sorrows only
that she dared seek shelter under the cloak of God’s mother. Her
sorrow for the children she had lost, her heavier sorrows for each
stroke of fate that fell upon her sons and that she could not ward
from them. Mary, the perfect in purity, in meekness, in obedience
to the Father’s will, had sorrowed the most of all mothers, and her
mercy would see and understand the pale and weak reflection
from a sinful woman’s heart, that had burned with hot and rav-
aging fleshly love and with all the sins that fleshly love brings with
it — untowardness and defiance, a stony, unforgiving spirit, stub-
bornness, and pride — yet was a mother’s heart in despite of all.

Kristin hid her face in her hands. For a moment it seemed to her
more than she could bear, that she was parted now from them all
— from all her sons.


The Cross 990


Then she said over the last Paternoster. She thought of her
parting from her father on this spot all those long years agone,
of her parting from Gaute but two days back. In childlike thought-
lessness her sons had offended against her — yet she knew that,
even had they offended against her as she against her father — wil-
fully and in sin —it could never have changed her heart toward
them. "Iwas easy to forgive one’s children —

Gloria Patri et Filio et Spiritu Sancto —she said thé words, and
kissed the cross her father had given her, humbly thankful to feel
that, despite of all, despite of her ungoverned spirit, yet had it
been granted to her restless heart to catch a faint gleam of the love
she had seen mirrored in her father’s soul, clear and still, even as
the brightness of the sky was thrown back now by the great still
moorland tarn.


Next day the weather was so grey and windy and cold, with mist
and rain-storms, that Kristin deemed she scarce dared go on with
the sick child and Brother Torgils. But the monk himself was the
most eager — she saw he was fearful he might die ere he came to
Nidaros. So they took their way across the upland; but the fog
was so thick at times that Kristin dared not venture down over
the headlong tracks, with cliffs both above and below, that she
remembered led down to the pilgrims’ shelter in Drivdal. So they
built a fire when they were come to the top of the glen and rested
there for the night. After evening prayer Brother Arngrim told
them a goodly saga of a ship in peril of the sea that was saved by
an abbess’s prayers to Mary Virgin, the morning star came out
over the sea at her command.

The monk seemed to have taken a liking to Kristin. While she
sat by the blaze, lulling and hushing the child that the others
might get to sleep, he edged close to her and began to tell about
himself in a whisper. He was a poor fisher’s son, and when he was |
fourteen years old, he lost his father and brother at sea one winter
night, but was saved himself by another boat. He had deemed this
a sign and token, and besides he had grown afeared of the sea;
and thus the thought came to him that he should turn monk. But
for three years more he had had to tarry at home with his mother,
and they toiled and starved, and he was ever afeared when in a
boat — but then his sister was wed, and her husband took over the
house and the share in the boat, and he could betake him to the


991 The Oross


Minorites of Tunsberg. There they had mocked at him at first
for his low birth — but the guardian was kind and stood his friend.
And, since Brother Torgils Olavssén was come into the brother-
hood, all the monks had grown much more pious and peaceable,
for he was passing pious and meek, though he was the best born
of them all, of a rich yeoman kindred away in Slagn — and his
mother and sisters were most bounteous to the cloister. But since
they were come to Skidan, and since Brother Torgils was fallen
sick, all things were grown much harder again. Brother Arngrim
gave Kristin to understand that he marvelled Christ and Mary
would make the path so stony for their poor brethren’s feet.

“"They chose poverty themselves, while they lived on earth,”
said Kristin.

“Tis easy for you to say such things, rich woman as you doubt-
less are,” said the monk angrily. “ I warrant you have never proved
what it is to go fasting —” and Kristin must even avow that so it
was —


When they were come down among the tilled lands, and fared
through Updal and Soknadal, Brother Torgils got now a ride and
now a drive for stretches of the way; but he grew weaker
and weaker, and Kristin’s company was ever changing, for folk
parted from them and went forward, and new pilgrims came up
with them. When they came to Staurin, none of them who had
crossed the mountains with her were left in her company, saving
the two monks. And in the morning Brother Arngrim came
to her weeping, and said that Brother Torgils had had a sore
blood-spitting in the night; he could go no farther — now, be-
like, they would come to Nidaros too late, and would miss the
festival.

Kristin thanked the brothers for their company, and for ghostly
guidance and help on the journey. Brother Arngrim seemed to be
astonished at the richness of her farewell gifts, for his face lighted
up — ay, she must have a gift in return from him, he said; he drew
forth from his wallet a case with some letters in it. On them
was written a goodly prayer with all God’s names at the end
thereof; an open place was left in the scroll wherein to print the
name of the supplicant.

Kristin told herself that ’twas not like the monk should know
aught of her, with whom she had been wed, or her husband’s fate,


The Cross 992
even if she gave her father’s name. Yet did she pray him to write
only: “ Kristin, widow.”


Down through Gauldal she took the paths on the outskirts of
the parishes, for she thought that if she met folk from the great
manors it might well befall that one or other would know the
sometime mistress of Husaby again, and she was loath to be known,
though she scarce knew why. The next day she climbed by the
forest tracks up over the ridge to the little church on Vatsfjeld,
that was sacred to John. the Baptist — but the folk thereabout
called “it Saint Edvin’s.

The chapel stood in an opening in the thick woods; it and the
knoll behind were mirrored in a pond that fed the healing spring.
A wooden cross stood by the beck, and round about lay crutches
and staves, and on the bushes near by hung tatters from old
bandages.

About the church was a little fenced-in plot, but the gate was
fast shut. Kristin kneeled down without, and thought of the time
she had sat within there with Gaute on her lap. Then she was
clad in silks, one of the company of bravely clad great folks, men
and women, from the country-side all around. Sira Eiliv stood
close by, holding Naakkve and Bjérgulf firmly; in the throng
without were her serving-maids and henchmen. Then had it been
the burden of her burning prayer, that might this poor, unhappy
child but be made whole in body and in wits, she would crave
for naught more — not even to be freed herself of the sore hurt
in her back that had plagued her since ever the twins were born.

She thought of Gaute, sitting his great iron-grey, a brave and
goodly horseman. And she herself — not many women of her age,
nigh to half a hundred years, were blessed with such health; she
had marked it well on her journey across the mountains. Lord,
give me but this and this and this — then will I thank Thee and
crave no more than this and this and this —

Never, it seemed to her, had she prayed to God for aught else
than that He might grant her her own will. And she had got al-
ways what she wished — most. And now she sat here with a bruised
spirit — not because she had sinned against God, but because she
was miscontent that it had been granted her to follow the devices
of her own heart to the journey’s end.

She had not come to God with her garland, nor with her sins and


a


993 The Cross


her sorrows — not so long as the world still held a drop of sweet-
ness to mix in her cup. But she came now, now she had learned
that the world is like a tavern — where he who has naught more
to spend from is cast out at the door.

She felt no joy in her resolve — but it seemed to Kristin that
*twas not she herself who had resolved. The poor beggars who
came in to her house had come to bid her go forth. Another will
than her own had set her in the company of the poor and sick,
and bidden her go with them, away from the home where she
had been the mistress and had ruled as the mother of men. And if
now she obeyed the call without too ill a grace, she knew ’twas
because she saw that Gaute would thrive the better when she was
. gone from the manor. She had bent fate to her will, she had had
the lot of her own choice — but her sons she could not fashion
after her will; they were as God had fashioned them, and their
natures drove them on; striving with them she must be worsted.
Gaute was a good farmer, a good husband and faithful father, a
doughty man, and as honourable as most folk — but the stuff for
a chieftain he was not, nor was he of a mood to long for what she
had coveted for him. But he loved her enough to be troubled,
when he knew she looked for more from him than he could give.
Therefore was she now minded to beg for harbour and sanctuary;
though ’twas bitter to her pride to come in such utter poverty
that she could bring no offerings in her hands.

But she knew that she was called to come. The fir woods on the
knoll stood drinking in the sunlight that sifted through them,
and sighing so gently; the little church lay there shut and silent,
breathing forth a smell of tar. Yearningly Kristin thought of the
dead monk who had taken her hand and led her into the radiance
of God’s enfolding love when she was an innocent child; had put
forth a hand time after time to lead her home from the paths of
transgression, both while he lived on earth and since — And of a
sudden she remembered as clear as day what she had dreamed of
him that night upon the fell:

She had dreamed that she stood in the sunshine in the courtyard
of some great manor, and Brother Edvin came towards her from
the hall-house door. His hands were full of bread, and, when he
came to her, he broke off a great piece and gave it her — she under-
stood that she had had to do as she had thought, beg for alms when
she came down into the parishes; but in some way or other she had


The Cross 994
joined company with Brother Edvin, and they two were faring on
together, begging — But at the same time she knew that the dream
had a two-fold meaning: the manor was not only a great manor,
’ but it seemed to her to betoken a holy place, and Brother Edvin
was one of the household there; and the bread which he brought
and gave to her was not the simple bannock it looked like — it
betokened the host, panis angelorum, and she took the bread of
the angels at his hands. And now she gave her promise to Brother
Edvin’s keeping.


5


So at last she was at her journey’s end. Kristin Lavransdatter sat
resting on a haycock by the wayside below Sionsborg. There was
sunshine and a blowing wind; the part of the meadow that was not
yet mown waved red and silky bright with seeding grass. No-
where but in the Trondheim country were the meadows red like
this. Below the slope she could see a glimpse of the fjord, dark blue
and flecked with foam; fresh white sea spray dashed up against
the bluffs, as far as she could see along the strand below the forest-
clad Byness.

Kristin drew a deep breath. After all, twas good to be here
again; good, though ‘twas strange as well to know that she should
never go from here any more. The grey-clad sisters out at Rein fol-
lowed the same rule, Saint Bernard’s rule, as the brothers at Tautra.
When she rose at cock-crow and went to the church, she would
know that now Naakkve and Bjorgulf too were going to their
places in the monks’ choir. Thus, after all, she would come to live
out her old age with certain of her sons — although not in the
fashion she had thought.

She drew off her shoes and stockings and washed her feet in the
beck. Into Nidaros she would walk barefoot.

Behind her on the path up the castle hill some boys were playing
noisily — they were hard at work below the barbican, trying to
find a way into the tumble-down work. When they grew ware of
her, they fell to calling down foul words at her, laughing and
hooting the while. She made as if she did not hear, till a little imp —
eight years old the boy might have been — came rolling down the


995 The Cross


eee ere eee re ee RS er 2 Ae UT Oss
steep sward and almost bumped into her, shrieking out some ugly
words he had picked up in wantonness from the older boys. Kris-
tin turned towards him and said smiling:

“ No need to shriek so to let me know you for a troll imp, for I
see you have the rolling-breeches * on you —”

When the boys marked that the woman answered, they came
bounding down, the whole pack. But they fell silent and abashed
when they saw ’twas an ageing woman in pilgrim’s garb, and that
she chid them not for their bad words, but sat looking at them
with great, clear, calm eyes and a stealthy little smile on her lips.
She had a lean, round face with broad forehead and small rounded
chin; she was sunburnt and much wrinkled under the eyes, but
after all she looked not so exceeding old.

So the boldest of the boys took to talking and asking questions.
to hide the sheepishness of the troop. Kristin felt she could have
laughed — these boys seemed so like her own rascals, the twins,
when they were small, though she prayed to God that hers had
never been so foul-mouthed. These seemed to be children of com-
mon folk in the town.

And when the moment came that she had longed for all through
her journey, when she stood below the cross on Feginsbrekka and
looked down on Nidaros, it came not so that she could collect her
thoughts for prayer or meditation. All the bells of the town burst
forth at that moment to ring to Vespers, and the boys all talked
together, wanting to point out all that was before her —

Tautra she could not see, for a squall of wind, with mist and
scudding showers, was sweeping over the fjord beneath Frosta.

In the midst of the flock of boys she took the steep path that led
down the Steinberg heights—and now cow-bells clinked and
herdsmen whooped around them — the cows were bound home-
wards from the town pastures. At the gate in the town wall across:
the Nidareid, Kristin and her young attendants had to wait while
the cattle were driven through — herdsmen hallooed, shouted, and
cursed, oxen butted, cows were crowded and crushed together,
and the boys named the owners of this bull or that as they passed.
And when they were through the port and were passing towards
the town lanes, Kristin had more than enough ado to pick her way
with her naked feet amid the cow-dung on the poached-up track.

Some of the boys followed her unbidden even into Christ’s.

* See Note 6.


The Cross 996


Church. And as she stood in the dim forest of pillars and gazed
towards the lights and the gilding of the choir, the boys plucked
ever at the stranger-woman’s gown, and would fain have shown
her all such things as most draw children’s eyes = from the patches
of coloured sunlight falling through the rose-window among the
arches, and the tombstones on the floor, to the canopies of costly
stuffs above the altars. Kristin was given no peace to collect her
thoughts — but each word the boys said wakened the dull yearning
in her heart — for her sons first and foremost, but for the manor
too, the houses, the outhouses, the cattle —for the toil and the
sway of motherhood.

She had still that loathness to be known again of any who had
been her friends or Erlend’s in days gone by. They were wont
ever to be in their town houses at festival tide and to have guests
living with them — she shrank at the thought of meeting a com-

any of them. Ulf Haldorssén she must seek out, for, as her bailiff,
Pe had charge of the shares she still had in some farms north of the
fells and meant now to give in payment for her commons ’in the
Rein cloister. But ’twas like he would have with him now his kins-
folk from the farm at Skaun; so she must wait. But she had heard
that a man who had served among Erlend’s men-at-arms in the
days he was Warden had his dwelling in a small yard out on
Bratéren,; he worked with the dolphin- and porpoise-fishers on
the fjord, and kept a lodging for seafarers.

When she came thither she was told that all the houses were
overfull already; but then came the man himself, Aamunde, and
knew her straightway. *T was strange to hear him cry out her old
name:

“Now I ween —is’t not Erlend Nikulaussén’s lady of Husaby
—all hail, Kristin — how can it be that you are come hither to my
house? ”

He was full glad that she would be content with such shelter
as he could give her for the night, and he promised he would sail
her out to Tautra himself, the day after the festival.

‘Till far on in the night she sat out in the courtyard talking with
their one-time house-carl, and it moved her deeply when she
marked that they that had been Erlend’s men still loved their
young chieftain’s memory and held it in high honour — again and
again Aamunde spoke of him as “ young.” From Ulf Haldorssén
they knew of his hapless death, and Aamunde said, never did he


997 The Cross


meet any of his old fellows of Husaby days but they drank to the
memory of their gallant master — and twice some of them had
put their money together and had masses said for him on his
death-day. Aamunde asked much after Erlend’s sons, and Kristin
too asked of old acquaintance. "T'was midnight ere she got to bed -
by the side of Aamunde’s wife — naught would serve him at first
but that they both should give up their bed to her, and at last she
was fain to accept with thanks of his proffer that at least she should
take his place.


Next day was Olav’s Wake. From early morning Kristin walked
about the shore by the river mouth, looking at the bustle on the
wharves. Her heart beat faster when she saw the Lord Abbot of
Tautra step ashore -- but the monks who were with him were
all elder men.

Long ere nones folk were streaming towards Christ’s Church,
bearing or holding up their sick and cripples, so that they might
come near the shrine when it was borne out in procession next day
after High Mass.

As Kristin came up through the booths set up by the fence
round the churchyard — they sold, for the most, meat and drink,
wax-candles, and mats woven of rush or birch twigs to lay beneath
one on the church floor — she stumbled upon the folk from An-
dabu, and Kristin took the child while the young wife got herself
a draught of ale. At that moment came the procession of English
pilgrims with songs and banners and lighted tapers; in the press and
crush, as they made their way through the throng of folk by the
booths, she lost the Andabu folk and could not find them again.

For long she wandered hither and thither on the outskirts of the
crowd, lulling the shrieking child. When she laid its face against
her neck and would have com<orted it with caresses, it mouthed
about and sucked at her skin; she saw that it was athirst, and she
knew not what to do. It seemed vain to seek for the mother; she
must go down into the streets and ask where she could get it milk.
But when she came out on to Upper Langstrete and would have
gone northward, there was again a great press of folk — from the
south came a train of knights, and at the same time the men-at-arms
from the palace marched into the space betwixt the church and
the Crossed-friars’ House. Kristin was thrust aside into the nearest
Jane; but here, too, folk were hurrying to the church ahorse and


The Cross 998


fe Urge * se eee
afoot, and the press grew so great that at length she had to take
refuge up on a stone dyke.

The air above her was full of the noise of bells — the cathedral
chimes ringing out 2ona hora. The child stopped shrieking at the
sound — it looked up at the sky, and a gleam of understanding
showed in its dull eyes — it smiled a little. Touched with pity, the
mother of other children bent and kissed the poor little creature.
Then she saw that she was sitting on the stone wall around the
garden of the Nikulaus house, their old town mansion.

— Well should she know the stone-built chimney rising through
the turf roof — the back of their hall-house. Close by her stood
the houses of the spital whose right to share the garden with them
had roused Erlend’s wrath.

She pressed the stranger-woman’s child to her breast, kissed it
and kissed it. Then someone touched her knee —

— A monk in the white gown and black cowl of the preaching
brothers. She looked down into a pale yellow, furrowed, old man’s
face —a long, narrow, in-fallen mouth, two deeply sunken, amber
eyes.

Me Can it be —is it you yourself, Kristin Lavransdatter? ” The
monk laid his crossed arms upon the dyke and buried his face in
them. “ Are you here? ” y

“ Gunnulf! ” At that he moved his head so that it touched her
knee where she sat: “ Deem you ’tis so strange that Iam here — ? ”
Then she called to mind that she was sitting on the garden wall
of this house that had been his first and her own afterwards, and
thought, ’twas strange indeed.

“ But what child is this you have on your knee — sure, this can-
not be Gaute’s son? ” é

“No—” At the thought of little Erlends healthy, sweet face,
and strong, well-made body, she pressed the poor little stranger-
child to her, overcome with pity: “”Tis the child of a woman that
crossed the fells along with me.”

— But then there dawned upon her what Andres Simonssén had
seen in his childish wisdom. Filled with reverence, she gazed on
the pitiful creature that lay upon her lap.

But now it wept again, and before aught else she had to ask the
monk if he could tell her where she could get milk for the child.
Gunnulf led her eastward round the church to the House of the


999 The Cross


Sy
Preaching Friars, and got her a bowl of milk. While Kristin was
feeding her foster-child, they talked together, but their talk went
but haltingly.

“So long a time has gone by, and so much has befallen since
last we met,” she said sorrowfully. “ And heavy to bear for you,
too, the tidings must have been — the tidings of your brother? ”

“ God be merciful to his poor soul,” whispered Brother Gunnulf
in a shaken voice.

Only when she asked about her sons at Tautra did Gunnulf
speak something more freely. With great gladness had the con-
vent welcomed these two novices, come of the best kindreds in
the land. Nikulaus seemed to have such excellent gifts of mind and
made such strides in learning and godliness that the abbot must
needs call to mind his noble forefather, the Church’s well-gifted
champion, Bishop Nikulaus Arnessén. That was in the first days.
But a while after the brothers had taken the cowl, Nikulaus had
misbehaved him grievously, and had wrought much trouble in the
cloister. Gunnulf knew not the causes of the trouble fully — one
was that Abbot Johannes would not suffer that young brothers
should be ordained priests before they were full thirty years old,
and he would not depart from this rule for Nikulaus’ behoof. And
as the reverend father deemed that Nikulaus read and pondered
more than sorted with his measure of spiritual ripeness, and that
he was breaking down his health with pious exercises, he thought
fit to send him to one of the cloister’s cattle-farms on Inder6, to
work there, under some of the elder monks, at the planting of an
apple orchard. Then, ’twas said, Nikulaus had broken out into flat
disobedience to the abbot’s behests, had charged his brethren with
having wasted the cloister’s goods in high living, with sluggishness
in the worship of God, and with looseness in their talk. The mat-
ter, said Gunnulf, was kept, for the most part, within the convent
walls, as was but reason; but ’twas said, too, that he had defied the
brother whom the abbot appointed to chasten him. For some time
he had lain in the penitentiary cell, Gunnulf knew, but since then
he had humbled him, when the abbot threatened to part him from
Brother Bjérgulf, and to send one of them to Munkabu — ’twas
_ like it had been the blind brother that egged him on. But on this
threat Nikulaus had grown meek and contrite.

“°Tis their father’s nature that is in them,” said Gunnulf bit-


The Cross 1000


AAA ln
terly. “ None could look that my brother’s sons should find it easy
to learn obedience, or that they should show steadfastness in the
godly life —

“Tis as like to be their heritage from their mother,” answered
Kristin, sorrowfully. “ Disobedience was the chief of my sins,
Gunnulf — and I too was unsteadfast. All the days of my life have
I longed both to go the right way and to follow’ my own wildered
paths as well —

“Erlend’s wildered paths, mean you? ’ ’ said the monk, darkly.
“Twas not once only that my brother lured you astray, Kristin;
I trow he lured you astray each day you lived with him. Such
forgetfulness he wrought in you that you remembered not, when
you thought thoughts you yourself blushed at, that you could
not hide the thoughts of your heart from an all- -knowing God —

Kristin gazed before her.

“Now I know not, Gunnulf, if you are right in this—I wot
not that I have forgotten at any time that God saw into my heart —
all the greater, belike, is my sin. And, moreover, ’tis not so, as you
deem perchance, that I had most need to blush for my immodest
wantonness and for my weakness — rather must I feel shame that
my thoughts of my husband were many a time more bitter than
the poison of serpents. But like enough it must needs have come
to this — twas you who once said to me, that they who have loved
one another with the fieriest desire come in the end to be as two
vipers biting each other’s tails.

“ But it has been my comfort in these years, Gunnulf, as often as
I thought how ‘twas Erlend’s lot to go before God's judgment-
seat unhouseled and unholpen, struck down with wrath in his
heart and blood upon his hands — that he did not grow to be—
what you said, and what I became. He bore in mind anger, and
wrong done Art. as little as he bore aught else in mind — Gunnulf,
he was so fair and he looked so peaceful when I had laid his bod
out —I wot that the all-knowi ing God knows that Erlend never
bore a a grudge to any man, for any cause —


The brother gazed at her with wide- -opened eyes. Then he
nodded.


After a while the monk asked:


“ Know you that Eiliv Serksson is priest and counsellor to the
nuns out at Rein? ”


“No? ” said Kristin, beaming with gladness.


1001 The Cross


“T deemed ’twas therefore you had chosen to enter there,”
said Gunnulf. Soon after, he said that he must go back to his clois-
ets


The first nocturn was begun already when Kristin came into the
church. In the nave and about all the altars there was a throng
of folk, but one of the vergers, who saw that she bore a most sickly
child in her arms, pushed her forward through the press till she
came right in front among the many cripples and sick folk in
sorest need, who were gathered in the middle of the church under
the great dome and in full view of the choir.

Many hundred lights burned in the church — the church serv-
ants took the pilgrims’ tapers and fixed them upon the little
hillock-shaped towers studded with spikes, that were set up all
down the nave and aisles. As the light of day died out behind the
many-coloured panes of glass, the church grew warm with the
smell of the burning wax, and ere long it was filled, too, with
the sour stench from the rags of the sick folk and the poor.

When the song of the choir soared under the vaulting, and the
organ pealed, and the noise of flutes, drums, and stringed instru-
ments resounded, Kristin understood why it might be that the
church was called a ship — in the mighty house of stone all these
folk seemed to be on board a vessel, and the singing was like the
noise of the sea whereon it was upborne. Ever and anon it came
to rest, as when the billows are stilled, and a single man’s voice bore
the lesson out over the listening throng.

The close-packed faces grew paler and more weary as the wake-
night wore on. Scarce one went out between the services, not at
least of those who had places midway of the church. Between the
nocturns they dozed or prayed. The child slept well-nigh the
whole night — once or twice Kristin had to lull it a little, or give
it milk from a wooden flask that Gunnulf had gotten for her from
the cloister. ’

The meeting with Erlend’s brother had stirred her strangely —
the more so that every step of the road hither had brought her
nearer and nearer home to the memory of the dead man. She had
thought little on him in these last years, while her work for her
growing sons gave her little time for memory of her own fate —
none the less the thought of him had been ever, as it were, close
behind her, only that she had not had the time to turn her towards


The Cross 1002


it. Now she seemed to see her soul as it had been in these years;
it had lived as folk live on a manor through the busy summer half-
year, when they move out of the great hall and bide in the store-
house loft. All day long they go to and fro past the winter hall,
never thinking of going in thither, though they have but to lay
their hand on a latch and push open a door. And when at last some
day they have an errand thither, the house has grown strange and
almost solemn, because of the air of loneliness and quiet that has
come to it— ="

But while she was speaking with him who was the last living
witness of the interplay ’twixt seed-time and harvest in her life
with the dead man, it seemed to her that she had come to look out
over her life in a new way: as when a man comes up on a height
above his native place where he has never climbed before, and
looks down from it into his own dale. He knows each farm and
fence, each thicket, the gully of each beck; but he seems to see
for the first time how these things all lie on the face of the land.
And seeing things in this new way, she had found all at once words
that swept away both her bitterness against Erlend and her terrors
for his soul, borne off by sudden death. Ill-will he had never borne
to any; she saw it now, and God had seen it always.

So at last she was come so far that she deemed she could look
on her own life as from the uppermost step of a glen. Now did
her road lead down into the darkling valley, but ere she took that
road she had been given grace to understand that, in the loneliness
of the cloister and at the gates of death, there waited for her one
who had ever beheld the life of mankind as men’s parishes look,
seen from the mountain brow. He had seen the sin and sorrow, the
love and hate, in the hearts of men, as one sees the rich manors
and the humble cots, the teeming cornfields and the abandoned
wastes, all borne on the bosom of the same country-side. And he
had descended; his feet had trodden the peopled lands, and stood
in palaces and in huts; he had gathered up the sorrows and the
sins of rich and poor, and lifted them aloft with him upon a cross.
Not my happiness and my pride, but my sin and my sorrow, O
my sweet Lord—She looked up where the crucifix stood, ups
lifted high over the triumphal arch.

— While the morning sun lit up the high-set coloured panes
deep among the pillars of the choir, and a glory, as of red and
brown and green and blue gems, dimmed the light from the ta-


10038 The Cross


pers on the altar and from the golden shrine behind, Kristin listened
to the last vigil —the matins. She knew that the lessons in this
service told of God’s healing miracles through the power vouch-
safed to his faithful knight King Olav Haraldssén. She lifted the
sick stranger-child up towards the choir, and prayed for it.

But she was so icy chill from her long vigil in the cold of the
church that her teeth chattered; and she felt faint from fasting.
The smell of the many folk, and the sickening fumes of the sick
and the beggars, mingled with the smoke of the wax-candles and
sank down in a heavy, strangely greasy and clammy cloud upon
the people kneeling on the stone floor, cold in the cold morning.
But a fat, kind, cheerful countrywoman who had sat dozing a
little against the foot of the pillar just behind them, with a bear-
skin below her and another over her lame legs, awoke now and
drew Kristin’s weary head down upon her wide lap: “ Rest a little
now, sister — you have need of it, I trow —”

Kristin slept in the strange woman’s lap, and dreamed:

She stepped over the threshold of the old hearth-room house at
home. She was young and unwed, for she saw her own uncovered
thick brown plaits hanging forward over her shoulders. She was
in company with Erlend, for he was even now drawing him up-
right, after going through the doorway before her.

By the hearth her father was sitting, binding arrow-heads on
the shafts — he had his lap full of bunches of sinew string, and on
either side of him on the bench lay piles of arrow-heads and
sharpened shafts. Just as they stepped in, he bent him forward over
the heap of embers and made to take up the little three-legged
metal cup that he ever used to melt resin in. But swiftly he caught
back his hand, shook it in the air, and then he stuck his burnt
finger-tips into his mouth and sucked them, while he turned his
head towards her and Erlend, and looked up at them with a
wrinkled brow and a smile about his lips —

Then she awoke, her face wet with tears.

She kneeled through the High Mass, when the Archbishop him-
self served the holy rite before the high altar. The clouds of in-
cense rolled through the echoing church, where many-coloured
sunlight was mingled now with the wax tapers’ shining; the fresh,
spicy scent of the frankincense spread abroad and overcame the
smell of poverty and sickness. With a heart that seemed bursting
with ruth for the flock of the infirm and the needy in whose midst


The Cross 1004


Ane OT08s as ts EE eee
God had set her, she prayed in a rush of sisterly tenderness for all
who were poor as she, and who suffered as she herself had suf-
fered —

—“] will arise and go to my father —”


6


THE CONVENT stood on a rising ground near the fjord, so that, with
most winds, the roll of the surf on the beach drowned the sough-
ing of the pine woods that covered great part of the ridge’s slopes,
north and west, and hid the sea from sight.

Kristin had seen the church tower above the trees when she
sailed by with Erlend, but the pilgrimage out to the nunnery that
his forefather had founded, which Erlend had sometimes said they
must make, had never come about. She had never landed at Rein
Cloister before she came to make it her abiding-place.

She had thought that the life here would be like that she knew
at the nunneries in Oslo or at Bakke, but here much was otherwise
than there, and ’twas far more quiet. Here the sisters were truly
dead to the world. Lady Ragnhild, the abbess, made it her boast
that ’twas five years since she had been in to the market town, and
as long since some of her nuns had set foot outside the bounds of
the cloister.

There were no children here to be nurtured, and, at the time
Kristin came to Rein, there were no novices either; so long was it
since any young maid had sought to be taken into the sisterhood,
that "twas six winters already since the last, Sister Borghild Mar-
cellina, had taken the veil. Youngest in age was Sister Turid, but
she had been sent hither in her seventh year by her father’s father,
who was priest of Clement’s Church, an exceeding strict and ear-
nest man, and the child had had a shrivelled hand from birth and
was besides something of a cripple, so she had donned the habit
as soon as she reached the age for it. Now she was thirty years old,
and sadly frail, but she had a lovesome face, and from the first
day she came to the cloister Kristin took great joy in serving her,
for she deemed that Sister Turid minded her of her own little
sister Ulvhild, who died so young.


Sira Eiliv said that low birth should assuredly not stand in the


1005 The Cross


pee ee ee ee eb ross
way of any maids who were minded to come hither to serve God.
Nevertheless, so it had been that, ever since the convent had been
set up, few but the daughters or widows of mighty and high-born
men of the Trondheim country entered there. But during the evil
and restless days that had been in the realm since King Haakon
Haalegg, of blessed memory, died, piety seemed to have fallen
away greatly amongst the great nobles —now ‘twas the daughters
of townsmen and well-to-do farmers for the most part who turned
their thoughts to a convent life. And they betook them rather to
Bakke, where many of them had been nurtured in godliness and
womanly handicrafts, and where the sisters for the most were
come of homely people — there, too, the rule was not so strict,
and the cloister lay not so far removed from the highway.
Howbeit, twas not often that Kristin had the chance to speak
with Sira Eiliv, and she soon saw that the priest’s duties and his
footing in the cloister were both toilsome and ticklish. Though
Rein was a rich cloister and the sisterhood scarce numbered half
as many nuns as the foundation might well have fed, yet its money
affairs were in great disorder, and it was hard put to it to meet its
outgoings. The ijast three abbesses had been more pious than
worldly-wise;, none the less they and their convent had fought,
with tooth and claw, to make good their freedom from the Arch-
bishop’s obedience — so far did they go in this that they would
not even take counsel proffered in fatherly goodwill. And the
brethren of their order from Tautra and Munkabu, chosen to be
priests of the convent church, had ever been old =-en, that no
colour might be given to evil speaking, and their guidance of the
cloister’s worldly weal had been none too skilful. When Kine
Skule built the fair stone church and gave his udal manor to the
cloister, the houses were first built of wood; and they had burnt
down thirty winters agone. Lady Audhild, who was abbess then,
began the building of them up again in stone; much was done in
her time for the betterment of the church, and the goodly convent
hall was built. She had journeyed also to the general chapter at the
mother house of the order, Tart * in Burgundy, and from that
journey she had brought back the noble ivory tower that stood
in the choir near the high altar —a fitting tabernacle for God’s
body, the church’s greatest adornment and the nuns’ pride and
darling treasure. Lady Audhild left behind her the fairest renown
* See Note 7.


r


The Cross 1006


for piety and worth, but her unskilful conduct of the building
works, and her unwise dealings with the convent lands, had
wrought mischief to the cloister’s welfare and the later abbesses
had not had the skill to repair the ill.

How it had come about that Sira Eiliv was sent thither as priest
and counsellor, Kristin never learned; but so much she understood,
that from the first the abbess and the sisters had met him, as a
secular, with misliking and mistrust; and so ’twas Sira Eiliv’s task
at Rein to be the nuns’ priest and spiritual guide, to set the hus-
bandry of the estates on its feet again, and bring order into the
convent’s money affairs, while deferring to the abbess’s overhead-
ship, the sisters’ right of self-governance, and the right of the
abbot of Tautra to oversee all, and keeping friends with the other

riest at the church, a monk from Tautra. His age and his name
for unstained purity of walk and conversation, humble fear of
God, and skill both of the canon law and of the law of the land,
stood him in good stead, but he had to walk most warily in all his
goings. Together with the other priest and the church servants,
he dwelt in a little house lying north-east from the cloister. "Twas
there, too, that the monks lodged who came out from Tautra on
divers occasions. Kristin knew that, if she lived so long, some time,
when Nikulaus had come to be ordained priest, she should hear her
eldest son say Mass in the convent church.


Kristin Lavransdatter had been received at first as a commoner.*
But after she had taken a vow of chastity and obedience to the
abbess and the sisterhood, before Lady Ragnhild and the sisters,
in presence of Sira Eiliv and two monks from Tautra, and, in token -
that she forwent all rights over worldly goods, had put her seal
into Sira Eiliv’s hands to be broken in pieces, she was given leave
to wear a garb like to the sisters’, but without the scapular; a grey-
white woollen robe, white head-linen and black veil. The intent
was that, after some time had gone by, she should seek to be re-
ceived into the sisterhood as a professed nun.

But twas still a hard matter for her not to think overmuch on
what had been. To read aloud during meal-times in the refectory,
Sira Eiliv had written out in the Norse tongue a book of the life
of Christ, made by the general of the Minorites, the most learned
and godly doctor Bonaventura. And while Kristin listened to it,

* See The Bridal Wreath (The Garland), Note Ney


1007 The Cross


and her eyes filled with tears as she thought how blessed they must
be who could love Christ and His mother, pains and afflictions,
poverty and humility, in such wise as was there written — yet all
the time she could not but remember the day at Husaby when
Gunnulf and Sira Eiliv had shown her the Latin book from which
this was taken. "Twas a thick little book, written upon parchment
so thin and shining white that she had never believed calfskin
could be wrought so fine; and there were the fairest pictures and
capital letters in it, the colours glowing like jewels against the gold.
And while she looked, Gunnulf spoke laughingly, and Sira Eiliv
gave assent with his quiet smile — of how the buying of this book
left them so penniless, they had to sell their clothes and get them
meat along with the alms-folk in a cloister, till they came to know
that some Norse churchmen were come to Paris, and made shift
to raise a loan from them.

When, after matins, the sisters went back to the dormitory,
Kristin would tarry behind in the church. On summer mornings
’twas sweet and delightsome to her there — but in winter it was
bitterly cold, and she was fearful in the dark among all the tomb-
stones, even though she kept her eyes bent fixedly on the little
lamp that burned always before the ivory tower with the host
in it. But, winter or summer, while she tarried in her corner of
the nuns’ choir, she thought of how Naakkve and Bjérgulf were
now watching and praying for their father’s soul; and that ’twas
Nikulaus who had begged her to join with them in these prayers
and penitential psalms each morning after matins.

Ever, ever.she saw before her those two, as she had seen them
that grey day of rain she went out to the monks’ cloister: when
Nikulaus stood before her in the parlour of a sudden, marvellous
tall and strange in the grey-white monk’s habit, with his hands
thrust under the scapular, her son, and yet so changed. "Iwas
most of all his likeness to his father that moved her so deeply —
’twas as though she saw Erlend in monk’s garb.

Whilst they sat talking together, and he had her tell him of all
that had befallen at the manor since he took his way from home,
she was waiting, waiting. At length she asked fearfully if Bjorgulf
would not come soon.

“T know not, mother,” answered her son. A little after he said:
“For Bjérgulf it has been a hard struggle to bow beneath his
cross and serve God — And it seemed to affright him when he


heard that you were here — lest too many thoughts should be
called up again —”

Thereafter she sat on, deathly sad, gazing at Nikulaus while he
talked. He was much sunburned in the face, and his hands were
worn with toil —he said, with a little smile, now had he had to
learn after all how to guide a plough and work with scythe and
sickle. In the hostel that night she could not sleep, and she hasted
to the church when the bell rang to matins. But the monks stood
so that there were but few whose faces she could see, and her
sons were not amongst these.

But next day she walked in the garden with a lay brother who
worked there, and he showed her the many rare plants and trees
it was renowned for. While they so walked, the clouds broke, the
sun came forth, and with it the scent of celery and onion and
thyme, and the clumps of yellow lilies and blue columbines that
decked the corners of the beds glittered with great raindrops. And
then came her sons; they came forth, both of them, from the little
arched door of the stone house. And Kristin deemed that she had
a foretaste of the joy of Paradise when she saw the two tall broth-
ers in light-hued raiment come down towards her on the path
beneath the apple trees.

Yet they spoke not much together; Bjérgulf was silent well-nigh
all the time. He had become a giant in frame, now he was full-
grown. And it seemed as though in the long time they had been
sundered her sight had grown keener — now, for the first time,
she understood to the full what the battle was that this son of hers
had fought, that doubtless he was still fighting, while he grew so
great and strong of limb, while his inward sight waxed keen, and
he felt his eyesight grow dim —

Once he asked after his foster-mother, Frida Styrkaarsdatter.
Kristin told him that she was wed.

“ God bless her,” said the monk. “ She was a good woman — to
me she was a good and faithful foster-mother.”

“ Ay, methinks almost she was more a mother to you than was
I,” said Kristin, sadly. “ Little must you have marked of the moth-
er’s heart in me, when you were tried so sorely in your youth.”

Bjorgulf answered low:

“T thank God, none the less, that the enemy was never suffered
to bow me to such unmanliness as to try the mother’s heart in you
— though I felt it, of a truth — but I saw that you bore too heavy a


1009 The Cross


burden already — and after God ’twas Nikulaus here who saved
me, those times I was like to fall into the Tempter’s power — ”

No more was said of this, nor of whether they were happy in the
cloister, nor of how ’twas said they had done amiss and brought
disgrace upon themselves. But it seemed to give them great joy
when they heard ’twas their mother’s purpose to take the veil in
Rein convent.


When, after this hour of prayer, Kristin went back through the
dormitory and saw the sisters sleeping two and two on sacks of
straw in the beds, clad in the habits which they never put off, she
thought how much unlike she must be to these women, who from
their youth up had done naught but serve their Maker. The world
was a master whom ’twas not easy to fly, when once one had
yielded to its dominion. Ay, and in sooth she had not fled the world
— she had been cast out, as a hard master drives a worn-out sery-
ant from his door —and now she had been taken in here, as a
merciful lord takes in an old serving-maid and of his mercy gives
her a little work, while he shelters and feeds the worn-out, friend-
less old creature —

From the nuns’ sleeping-house a covered way led to the weav-
ing-house. There Kristin now sat alone, and spun. The nuns of Rein
were famed for their linen, and those days in summer and autumn,
when all the sisters and lay sisters went to work in the flax-fields,
were like feast days in the cloister; but most of all the day the
plants were pulled. The nuns were busied in most of their work-
ing-hours with making ready the flax, spinning the thread, weav-
ing the linen, and making vestments from it. Here were none who
copied or adorned books, as the sisters in Oslo under Lady Groa
Guttormsdatter had done with such great skill, nor did they prac-
tise much the craft of broidering with silk and gold thread.

In a while she would hear with joy the sounds of the wakening
farm-yard. The lay sisters went to the kitchen-house to make
ready the food for the serving-folk; the nuns touched not meat
nor drink till after the Mass of the day, saving when they were
sick. When the bell rang for primes, Kristin went to the sick-ward,
if any lay there, to take the place of Sister Agata or of whichever
other nun was there. Sister Turid, poor soul, lay there often.

Soon, now, she might begin to look forward to the morning
meal, which followed after the third hour of prayer and the Mass


The Oross 1010


for the cloister’s serving-folk. Each day alike Kristin took joy in
this comely and solemn repast. The refectory was timber-built,
but a fair hall notwithstanding, and there all the women in the
cloister ate together — the nuns at the upper board, where the ab-
bess sat in the high-seat, and where the three old dames who were
commoners like herself had also seats — and the lay sisters further
down. When the prayer was ended, the meat and drink borne in,
and all sat eating and drinking in silence, with still, seemly be-
haviour, while often one of the sisters read aloud from a book,
Kristin would think that, could folk in the world without but
take their meals in such goodly wise, they might well come to
see more clearly that food and drink are gifts from God, and they
would begrudge them less to their fellow-Christians, and think less
on scraping together for their own and their children’s behoof.
But she herself had felt quite otherwise, when she spread her
board for a flock of wild, riotous men, amid laughter and uproar,
while the dogs snuffed about beneath the board, or thrust up their
noses and got a meat bone or a thwack, as the mood of the boys
might chance to be.


Travellers seldom came hither. At times a vessel with folk from
the nobles’ seats around would put in when sailing down or up the
fjord, and men and their wives, with children and young folk,
would go up to Rein to greet a kinswoman among the sisters. Then
there were the bailiffs from the cloister’s farms and fisheries, and a
messenger from ‘Tautra now and then. At the feast-tides that
were kept with greatest state— Mary Virgin’s Mass days, Cor-
pus Christi, and the day of Saint Andrew the Apostle — folk
sought the nuns’ church from the parishes on both sides the fjord,
but otherwise ’twas but those of the cloister’s tenants and work-
folk who dwelt nearest that came thither to the Masses. They
took up but little room in the great church.

Then there were the poor —the alms-folk who had their doles —
of ale and meat at fixed times under rich folk’s testaments, in re-
quital of yearly masses for the donors’ souls — and who, besides,
drifted up to Rein well-nigh daily, sat by the kitchen-house wall
and ate, and when the nuns came out into the courtyard made up
to them to talk of their sorrows and troubles. Sick folks, cripples,
and lepers wandered out and in — there were many here who suf-
fered from leprosy, but ’twas ever so in the sea parishes, said Lady


ere eee eee erly Te The Cross


Ragnhild. Tenants came to crave abatements in their rents or
grace time for their payments, and these had ever much to tell of
hardships and adversity. The more wretched and hapless these folk
were, the more open and unashamed they were in telling the sis-
ters of their condition, though most often they blamed others for
their ill-fortune, and had pious words ever on their lips. "Twas not
strange that the nuns’ talk at recreation and in the weaving-house
ran much on these folks’ lives — nay, Sister Turid avowed to
Kristin that when the nuns met in convent to take counsel together
concerning bargains and the like, the talk would often wander, and
turn to gossip about the folk who were mixed in the matters in
hand. Kristin marked, by what the sisters said, that they knew
little of what they talked of, save what they had heard from the
folks themselves or from the lay servants who had been out into
the parish. They were passing easy of belief, whether their un-
derlings praised themselves or spoke ill of their neighbours — and
she thought with anger of all the times she had heard godless lay
folk, ay, even a beggar monk like Brother Arngrim, cry down the
nunneries for dens of scandal, and tax the sisters with greedy swal-
lowing of waif rumours and immodest gossip. The very folk who
came hither and dinned Lady Ragnhild’s ears, or any of the sisters’
they could get speech of, full of idle talk, would be the first to
blame the nuns for talking among themselves of the tidings that
reached them from the world they had renounced. It seemed to
her ’twas the same with the talk of the convent ladies’ luxurious
living — it came from folk’s mouths who had many a time had
both morning bite and breakfast at the sisters’ hands, while these
servants of God watched, prayed and laboured fasting, ere they all
met for their first solemn meal in the refectory.

So Kristin served the nuns with loving reverence in the time
that must go by before she might make profession. A good nun
she could never be, she thought; she had scattered abroad all too
much what gift she might have had for meditation and piety — but
she would be as meek and as steadfast as God would give her grace
to be. "Iwas now well on in the summer of the year 1349; she had
dwelt in the Rein convent two years, and ere Yule-tide came she
was to take the veil. And the glad tidings came to her that, for her
dedication, both her sons would come out thither in Abbot Jo-
hannes’ train. Brother Bjorgulf had said, when he heard of his
mother’s purpose:


The Cross 1012


26 OTOSS: 5 A EE ee eee
“Now is my dream like to come true —I have dreamed twice
this year that before Yule we should both see her — though wholly
as it appeared in my dream it cannot be, for in my dream I saw
her.”
Brother Nikulaus, too, had been overjoyed. But at the same time
she heard other tidings of him that were not so good. He had
sorely mishandled certain farmers up the fjord near Steinker —
they were at odds with the cloister over some fishing-rights, and
when the monks came upon them one night while they were busy
breaking up the cloister’s salmon weir, brother Nikulaus had hurt
one man grievously and flung another into the river and there-
withal had sinned heinously in the matter of cursing and swearing.


7


A Few days after, Kristin went to the pine woods with some of
the nuns and lay sisters, to gather moss for green dye. This moss is
somewhat hard to come by, growing most on wind-fallen trees
and dry branches. So the women soon scattered through the
woods, and lost one another from sight in the fog.

For some days now this unwonted weather had held — windless,
with a thick mist, that showed a strange leaden blue out over the
sea and away against the hill-sides, when now and again it thinned
so much that the eye caught glimpses of the country round.
Between-whiles it thickened to a drizzling rain; then again it
lightened so much that a whitish patch showed where the sun
hung amid the towering mists. But there brooded ever a strange,
heavy warmth, as of a bath-house, that was unwonted down here
by the fjord, in especial at this time of the year —’twas two days
before Nativitas Mariz * — so that all folk talked of the weather
and marvelled what it might betoken.

Kristin sweated in the lifeless, damp heat, and the thought of
this tidings that she had heard of Naakkve weighed upon her
breast. She was come down to the skirts of the wood, to the log
fence by the path up from the sea, and, as she stood there scraping
moss from the fence, Sira Eiliv came riding homewards through
the fog. He stopped his horse and said some words of the weather,
and so they fell in talk. Then she asked the priest if he knew

* 8th September.


1013 The Cross


aught of this matter of Naakkve — though she knew ’twas in vain,
for Sira Eiliv ever made as though he had no knowledge of the in-
side affairs of the Tautra cloister.

“T trow, Kristin, you need have no fear that ’twill hinder his
coming hither in the winter, this mischance,” said the priest. “Tis
that you feared, belike? ”

“Tis more than that, Sira Eiliv. I fear me Naakkve never was
meant to be a monk.”

“Think you that you dare judge of such things? ” asked the

riest, bending his brows. He lighted down from his horse, bound
it to a fence log, and leaned over the fence, gazing fixedly and
searchingly at the woman. Kristin said:

“T fear ’tis hard for Naakkve to bow beneath the rule of the or-
der —and he was so young when he withdrew him from the
world, he knew not what he forwent, and knew not his own mind.
All that befell in his young days — the loss of his father’s heritage,
the sight of the discord ’twixt his father and mother, that ended
in Erlend’s death — so wrought in him that he lost all heart to live
in the world. But I could never mark that it made him godly —”

“You could not? — It may well have been as hard for Nikulaus
as for many another good monk to’ bow him beneath the order’s
rule; hot of mood is he, and a young man — too young, maybe, to
have understood, ere he turned his back on the world, that the
world is as hard a taskmaster as any other lord, and in the end a
tyrant without mercy. Of that, I ween, you yourself can judge,
sister —

“ And if so it be that Naakkve entered into the cloister more for
his brother’s sake than from love for his Maker — none the less I
believe not that God will let it go unrequited that he took up the
cross for his brother’s sake. God’s mother Mary, whom I know
that Naakkve honoured and loved from his boyhood up, will
surely show him clearly one day, that her son came hither to this
earthly home to be his brother and bear the cross for him —

“Nay —” The horse whinnied, with its nose against the
priest’s breast; he caressed it, while he said, half to himself:
“From his childhood up my Nikulaus had a wondrous gift of lov-
ing and of suffering — I deem that he should be right well fitted
for a monk.

“ But you, Kristin,” he said, turning to the woman, “ you should
have seen so much now, methinks, that you might trust in God


The Cross 1014.


Almighty with a surer trust. Have you not yet understood that
He bears up every soul so long as the soul lets not go its hold on
Him? Think you, woman, child that you still are in your old age,
that ’tis God punishing the sin, when you must reap sorrow and
humiliation because you followed your lusts and your overween-
ing pride over paths that God has forbidden His children to tread?
Would you say that you had punished your children if they
scalded their hands when they took up the boiling kettle you had
forbidden them to touch, or if the slippery ice broke under them
that you had warned them not to go upon? Have you not under-
stood, when the brittle ice broke beneath you—that you were
drawn under each time you let go God’s hand, and you were saved
from out the deep each time you called on Him? Was not the love
that bound you and your father in the flesh together, even when
you defied him and set your wilfulness against his will, was it not
a comfort and a solace none the less when you had to reap the
fruits of your disobedience to him?

“Have you not understood yet, sister, that God has helped you
each time you prayed, though you prayed half-heartedly and with
feigning, and helped you much beyond what you prayed for?
You loved God as you loved your father, not so hotly as you loved
your own will, yet none the less so that you ever sorrowed much
when you forsook Him — and therefore His mercy towards you
suffered good to grow, amidst the evil harvest you must needs reap
from the seed of your stubborn will — ;

“ Your sons — two of them He took to Himself while they were
innocent little children; for them you need never fear. And the
others have turned out well — even if they have not turned out as
you would have had them. Doubtless Lavrans deemed the like of

ou —

“And your husband, Kristin — God be merciful to his soul —I
wot you have blamed him in your heart early and late for his reck-
less unwisdom. Yet meseems it had been much harder for a proud
woman to remember that Erlend Nikulaussén led you with him
through shame and deceit and blood-guiltiness, if you had seen but
once that the man could do aught with cold contrivance. And al-
most I believe, too, ’twas because you were steadfast in anger and
hardness as in love, that you were able to hold Erlend fast so long
as you both lived — with him "twas out of sight, out of mind, with


all things else but you. God help Erlend; I fear me he never had


1015 The Cross


the wit to know true repentance for his sins — yet did your hus-
band repent and sorrow truly for his deeds wherein he sinned
against you. That lesson, we may dare to trust, has profited Erlend
now that he is dead.”

Kristin stood still and silent; neither did Sira Eiliv say any more.
He loosed the reins, gave her a “ Peace be with you,” mounted his
horse, and rode away.


When, a little after, she came back to the cloister, Sister Ingrid
met her at the door with word that one of her sons was come to
greet her — Skule he called himself; he was at the parlour gateway.

He was sitting talking with his boat-folk — he sprang up when
his mother came to the door. Ah, she knew her own by the quick
nimbleness — the small head, borne high above broad shoulders,
the long-limbed, slender form. Beaming with joy she went towards
him — but she stopped suddenly and caught her breath at the sight
of his face — oh, who had done this to her fair son — ?

His upper-lip showed as though kneaded out thin—a blow
must have crushed it, and afterwards it had grown together flat
and long and misshapen, barred with a network of white scars; it
had left his mouth twisted awry, fixed in what seemed a sneering
grimace — and the bone of his nose had been broken and had set
again crooked. He lisped a little when he spoke — he wanted one
front tooth, and another was blue-black and dead.

Skule reddened under his mother’s gaze: “I trow you know me
not, mother? ” He laughed a little, and passed a finger over his lip
—’twas not sure whether he pointed to his blemish, or whether
’rwas but a chance movement.

“So long parted, I trow, we have not been, my son, that your
mother should not know you again,” Kristin answered calmly,
with an untroubled smile.

Skule Erlendssén was come two days before with a light sloop
from Bjérgvin, with letters from Bjarne Erlingssén for the Arch-
bishop and the Treasurer of Nidaros. Later in the day, mother and
son walked in the garden beneath the ash trees, and, now that they
were alone, he gave his mother the news of his brothers:

Lavrans was in Iceland still. — His mother knew not even that he
had gone thither! Ay, said Skule, he had met his youngest brother
- in Oslo the winter before at the gathering of the nobles; he was
with Jammelt Halvardss6n. But, as she knew, the boy had ever had


a longing to come abroad and look about him in the world, and
so he took service with the Bishop of Skaalholt and sailed away —

Ay, he himself had gone in Sir Bjarne’s train to Sweden, and
thereafter to the war in Russia. His mother shook her head gently
— she had known naught of that either! Skule had liked the life, he
said, laughing — it had given him his chance to greet the old friends
his father spoke so much of — Karelians, Ingrians, Russians. No,
that brave scar of honour was not won in war — he laughed a little
—ay, ‘twas in a fight; the fellow that gave it him would never
have need now to beg his bread. More of it, or of the war, Skule
seemed to have little mind to tell. Now he was captain of Sir
Bjarne’s horsemen at Bjorgvin, and the knight had promised to get
back for him some of the manors his father had owned in Ork-
Jadal, that were now under the Crown—but Kristin saw that
Skule’s great, steel-grey eyes took on a strange, dark look as he
said this.

“You deem you cannot put much faith in such a promise? ”
asked his mother.

“No, no.” Skule shook his head. “ The deeds are even now be-
ing drawn. Sir Bjarne has kept all he promised when I took service
with him — calls me kinsman and friend. Almost I have the like
place in his household that Ulf had at home with us”—he
laughed; and the laugh became his marred face ill.

But he was the comeliest of men in bodily form, now that he
was full-grown — he wore garments of a new-fashioned cut, tight
hose and a small close-fitting kothardi that barely reached to the
middle of his thigh and was buttoned with small brass buttons all
down the front—it showed up in well-nigh unseemly wise his
body’s supple strength. He looked as though he went about in
his undergarments, thought the mother. But his forehead and his
comely eyes were not changed.

“ You look as though something were weighing on you, Skule,”
the mother ventured.

“No, no, no.” "Twas but the weather, he said, shaking himself.
There was a strange red-brown glow in the fog as the hidden sun
went down. The church stood out above the garden tree-tops,
strange and dark, melting into the dull red mist. They had had to
row the whole fjord, from the very mouth, ’twas so calm, said
Skule. Then again he shifted a little in his clothes, and began to
speak once more of his brothers.

He had been an errand south in the land for Sir Bjarne this


1017 The Cross


spring, so he could give her fresh tidings of Ivar and Gaute, for
he had ridden up overland and made his way across the fells from
Vaagaa home to the west country. All was well with Ivar; they
had two little sons at Rognheim, Erlend and Gamal, comely chil-
dren. “ But at Jorundgaard I chanced upon a christening-ale — and
Jofrid and Gaute deemed, as you were dead to the world now,
they might name the little maid after you; Jofrid is so proud that
you are her mother-in-law — ay, you laugh, but, now that you are
not to dwell under one roof, be sure Jofrid knows well it has a
brdve sound when she talks of ‘my mother-in-law, Kristin Lav-
ransdatter.’ But I gave Kristin Gautesdatter my best finger-ring,
for she has such winsome eyes; almost I deem she will be like
ou ”?

Kristin smiled sadly:

“Soon will you bring me to think, my Skule, that my sons deem
me as great and good as old folk are wont to be, once they are be-
neath the sod.”

“ Speak not so, mother,” said the man, with a strange vehemence.
Then he laughed a little: “ You wot well that all we brothers, ever
since we were breeched, deemed you were the bravest and most
high-minded of women — though you clinched us full tightly un-
der your wings many a time, and we flapped back, maybe, some-
what hard again ere we scaped from the nest —

“— But it has proved, sure enough, that you were right in deem-
ing Gaute the one of us brothers that was born to be a chieftain,”
said he, laughing loud.

“ No need to mock me for that now, Skule,” said Kristin — and
Skule saw that his mother flushed with a young, tender red. At that
he laughed all the more:

“°Tis true, my mother — Gaute Erlendss6n of Jorundgaard is
grown a mighty man in the northern dales, This theft of his bride
brought him such renown” — Skule laughed loudly, with the
laughter that so ill became his ravaged mouth. “ They sing a ballad
of it; ay, they sing now that he took the maid with iron and with
steel, and he fought her kinsmen three livelong days on the moun-
tain — and the feast that Sir Sigurd held at Sundbu, and whereat
he made peace betwixt the kinsmen with silver and with gold, for
that too Gaute gets all the honour in the ballad — and it seems to
make no matter that tis all a lie, Gaute rules the whole parish and
somewhat beyond —and Jofrid rules Gaute —”

Kristin shook her head, with her little sad smile. But she grew


The Cross 1018


young of face as she gazed on Skule. Now seemed it to her that
be was most like his father — after all, the young warrior with the
ravaged face had the most of Erlend’s gallant mettle — and that he
had so early had to take his fate into his own hands had given him
a cool firmness of spirit that filled his mother’s heart with a strange
security. With Sira Eiliv’s words of the day before in mind, she
saw all at once — fearful as she had been for her headstrong sons,
and hard as she had often laid hand upon them by reason of her
dread — yet had she been much less content with her children had
they been meek and unmanly.

Then she asked again and again of her grandson, little Erlend —
but him had Skule given small heed to, it seemed —ay, he was
strong and comely, and was wont to have his way at all times.

The uncanny glow in the fog, as of clotted blood, faded away,
the dark was falling. The church’s bells began to ring; Kristin and
her son rose. Then Skule took her hand:

“ Mother,” he said in a low voice. “ Mind you that I once lifted
my hand against you? I threw a bat at you in anger, and it struck
you on the brow — mind you of it? Mother, while we two are all
alone, tell me that you have forgiven me! ”

Kristin drew a long breath — ay, she remembered. She had bid-
den the twins go on an errand up to the seter— but when she
came out into the courtyard the horse was there, grazing, with the
pack-saddle on its back, and her sons running about and playing at
ball. When she chid them angrily for this, Skule flung the bat
from him in a towering rage — But she remembered best what
came after — How, as she went about after, one eye quite closed
by the swelling of the lid — the brothers looked at her and at Skule,
and shrank from him as though he were a leper — though Naakkve
had beaten him mercilessly first. And Skule wandered away, and
sat boiling with defiance and shame under a hard, scornful mien.
But when in the evening she was standing putting off her clothes
in the dark, he stole up to her — said nothing, but took her hand
and kissed it. And, when she touched his shoulder, he cast his arms
about her neck and pressed his cheek to hers —his was cool and
soft and still a little rounded; she felt ’twas a child’s cheek still —
he was but a child, after all, this headstrong, fiery youth —

“That have I, Skule — so fully, that God alone knows, for I can-
not tell you, how fully I have forgiven it you, my son!”

A moment she stood with her hand on his shoulder. Then he


1019 The Cross


grasped her wrists, gripped them so tight that she winced with
pain — and the next moment he flung his arms about her with the
same passionate, fearful, bashful tenderness as that other time.
“ My son — what ails you? ” whispered the mother, in fear.
She felt in the dark that the man shook his head. Then he let
her go, and together they went upward to the church.


During the Mass Kristin called to mind that she had forgotten
to bring in blind Lady Aasa’s cloak, from where they had sat to-
gether on the bench outside the priest’s door that morning. After
the service she went round to fetch it.

Under the archway stood Sira Eiliv, lanthorn in hand, and Skule.
“He died as we came alongside the wharf,” she heard Skule say,
in a strangely wild, despairing voice.

(79 Who? 2”?

Both men started violently when they saw her.

“One of my ship-folk,” said Skule, low.

Kristin looked from one to the other. At the sight of their blank,
strained faces in the lanthorn’s glimmer she broke unwittingly into
a little cry of fear. The priest set his teeth in his under-lip — she
saw that his chin quivered a little.

““*T were best, my son, you should tell your mother. Better that
we all make us ready to bear it, if ’tis God’s will this folk too shall
be awaked by so hard a —”’ But Skule uttered a kind of groan and
said no word; and on that the priest spoke: “ Pestilence has come
to Bjérgvin, Kristin — The great and deathly sickness that we have
heard say is laying waste the lands in the world around —”

“The black death — ? ” whispered Kristin.

“Tt boots not to try to tell you how things were in Bjérgvin
when I sailed from there,” said Skule. “ None can think it that has
not seen it. At first Sir Bjarne took the hardest measures to quench
the fire where it broke out, away in the houses around Jons clois- —
ter; he would have cut off the whole Nordnes from the town with
a chain of his men-at-arms, though the monks of the Michael clois-
ter threatened him with the Church’s ban — There came an Eng-
lish ship that had the pest aboard, and he would not suffer them to
unload the lading or to leave the ship; every man on the sloop died,
and then he had her scuttled. But some of the wares had already
been brought to land, and some of the burghers smuggled more
ashore one night — and the friars of the Jons church stood to it that


The Cross 1020


TES Lie ae Pe OR fe > Se Se
the dying must have ghostly comfort — Then folk began to die
throughout all the town, so ’twas bootless, we saw — Now is there
not a living soul in the city save the bearers of the dead — all flee
the town that can, but the pest goes with them —”

“© Jesus Christus! ”

“ Mother — mind you the last time ’twas lemming-year at home
in Sil? The throngs that rolled along all the roads and paths — mind
you how they lay and died in every bush, and rotted, and poisoned
every runnel with stench and festering foulness — ? ” He clenched
his fists; his mother shuddered:

“Lord, have mercy on us all— Praise be to God and Mary
Virgin that you were sent hither ever now, my Skule —”

The man ground his teeth together in the dark:

“So said we too, my men and I, the morning we hoisted sail and
stood down Vaagen out to sea. When we were come north to
Mold6 Sound, the first fell sick. We bound stones to his feet and
a cross upon his breast when he was dead, vowed a mass for his soul
when we came to Nidaros, and cast his body into the sea — God
forgive us. We put in to shore with the next two and got them help
for their souls, and Christian burial — for tis bootless to flee from
fate. The fourth died as we pulled into the river, and the fifth last
night —”

“Ts it needful that you go back to the town? ” asked his mother
a little later. “ Can you not bide here? ”

Skule shook his head, with a joyless laugh:

“— Oh, soon, methinks, twill matter naught where one is. Use-
less to be afeared — a man in dread is half dead. But would that I
were as old as you are, mother! ”

“None knows what they are spared who die young,” said his
mother, low.

“Be still, mother! Think on the time when you yourself were
three-and-twenty winters old — would you have missed the years
you have lived since then — ? ”


Fourteen days later Kristin saw for the first time one sick of the
lague. Rumour that the pest was raging in Nidaros and spread-
ing through the country-side had come to Rissa — how, "twas not
easy to understand, for folk kept their houses, and every man fled
to the woods or thickets if he saw an unknown wayfarer on the
road; none would open his door to stranger-folk.


reel ser ra LUE Phen ross


But one morning two fishers came up to the cloister bearing a
man between them in a sail; when at daybreak they came down to
their boat, they had found a strange bark at the wharf, and in its
bottom lay this man, senseless — he had found strength to make his
boat fast, but not to get out of it to land. The man had been born
in a house owned by the cloister, but his kindred had all left the
country-side.

The dying man Jay on the wet sail in the midst of the grass-
grown courtyard, the fishermen stood afar off talking with Sira
Eiliv. The lay sisters and serving-women had fled into the houses,
but the nuns stood in a cluster at the door of the convent hall —a
throng of startled, trembling, despairing old women.

Then Lady Ragnhild stepped forth. She was a little, thin old
woman, with a broad, flat face and a little round, red nose like a
button; her great, light-brown eyes were red-rimmed, and always
watered a little.

“In nomine patris et filii et spiritus sancti,’ she said in a clear
voice, then gulped once. “ Bear him into the guest-house —”

And Sister Agata, the eldest of the nuns, elbowed her way
through the throng and, unbidden, went with the abbess and the
men who bore the sick man.

Kristin went in thither late at night with a remedy she had
made ready in the pantry, and Sister Agata asked if she durst bide
there and tend the fire.

She deemed herself she should have been hardened — well used as
she was to births and deaths, she had seen worse sights than this —
she strove to think of all the worst that she had seen — The plague-
stricken man sat upright, for he was like to choke with the bloody
spittle that he brought up at each coughing-fit — Sister Agata had
slung him up in a band passed across his lean, yellow, red-haired
chest, and his head hung forward; his face was leaden grey-blue, :
and fit on fit of shivering shook him. But Sister Agata sat calmly
saying over her prayers, and, when the cough took him, she rose,
put one arm about his head, and held a cup below his mouth. The
sick man roared loud in his agony, rolled his eyes fearfully, and
at length thrust a black tongue far out of his gullet, while his
lamentable cries died away in pitiful groaning. The nun emptied
out the cup into the fire—and while Kristin threw on more
juniper, and the wet branches first filled the room with a stinging,
yellow smoke, and then burst hissing into flame, she saw Sister


The Cross 1022


NEO O88 <a a eee
Agata settle the cushions and pillows under the sick man’s back
and arm-pits, wipe his face and cracked brown lips with vinegar-
water, and draw the fouled coverlid up about his body. *T would
soon be over and done, she said to Kristin — he was cold already;
at first he had been hot as fire — but Sira Eiliv had prepared him
already for his going. Then she sat her down beside him, thrust
the calamus root into its place in her cheek with her tongue, and
fell again to prayer.

Kristin strove to overcome the fearful horror that she felt. She
had seen folk die a harder death — But ’twas in vain —this was the
plague, a chastisement from the Lord for all mankind’s secret hard-
ness of heart, of which He alone had knowledge. She felt as if
she were rocked giddily on a sea, where all the bitter and angry
thoughts she had ever thought towered up like one huge wave
amid a thousand, and broke in helpless woe and lamentation. Lord,
help us, for we perish —

Sira Eiliv came in late in the night. He chid Sister Agata sharply -
that she had not followed his counsel to bind a linen cloth dipped
in vinegar over her mouth and nose. She mumbled testily that.
’twas of no avail — but both she and Kristin had now to do as he
bade them.

The priest’s quietude and steadfastness put some measure of
courage into Kristin — or awoke a feeling of shame — she ventured
out of the juniper smoke and began to help Sister Agata. A chok-
ing stench came from the sick man, that the smoke availed not to
deaden — filth, blood, sour sweat, and a noisome smell from his
throat. She thought of Skule’s words about the lemming swarm;
once more there came upon her the awful longing to fly, though
she knew there was no place whither one could flee from this.
But when once she had taken heart of grace and touched the dying
man, the worst was over; and she helped as well as she might until


ee me breathed his last. He was black in the face already when he
ied.


The nuns walked in procession, with the holy relics, crosses, and
burning tapers, round the church and the cloister hill, and all in
the parish who could walk or crawl went with them. But, not
many days after, a woman died near by at Str6mmen — and then


the deadly sickness broke out at a stroke on every hand through-
out the country-side,


Se Oa aS Se ee


Li ae


Sa ae Oe ek ee


1023 The Oross


Death and horror and direst need seemed to bear away the land
and its folk into a timeless world —’twas not more than a few
weeks that were gone by, if one were to reckon the days, and al-
ready it seemed as if the world that had been, ere pestilence and
death stalked naked through the land, was fading from folk’s
memories, as a sea-coast sinks when one stands out to sea before
a rushing wind. "Iwas as though no human soul could keep in
memory that once life and the daily round of work had seemed
sure and near, death far away — or had the power to conceive that
so it would be again — if so be all men did not die. But “ Belike,
we shall all die,” said the men who came to the cloister with their
motherless little ones; some said it with dull, hard faces, some with
weeping and lamentations; they said it when they fetched a priest
to the dying, they said it when they bore the corpses to the parish
church down the hill and to the graveyard by the cloister chapel.
Often the bearers themselves must dig the grave —Sira Eiliv had
set the lay serving-men — such as were left — to work at saving and
garnering the corn from the cloister’s fields, and wheresoever he
went in the parish he admonished tne folk to get their crops
housed, and to help one another to care for the cattle, that so they
might not perish in the dearth the plague was like to leave behind
when it had spent its rage.

The nuns in the cloister met the visitation at first with a kind
of bewildered calm. They settled them down for good in the con-
vent hall, kept a fire blazing night and day in the great masoned
fireplace, slept there, and there took their food. Sira Eiliv coun-
selled that great fires should be kept up in the courts and in all
the houses where there were fireplaces; but the sisters were afraid
of fire —they had heard so many tales from the oldest sisters of
the burning of the convent thirty years before. Meal-times and
working-hours were kept no longer, and the divers offices of the
sisters could not be kept apart, by reason of the many children
who came from without, praying for food and help. Sick folk
were brought in— these for the most were well-to-do folk who
could pay for a grave-stead in the cloister and for masses for their
souls, or the poorest and loneliest of the poor who could get no
help at home. Those of a middle station lay and died in their
own houses. On some manors every human being died. But amid
all this the nuns had as yet made shift to keep up the hours of


prayer.


The Cross 1024


The first of the nuns who fell sick was Sister Inga, a woman
of Kristin’s age, near fifty years; but none the less was she ‘so
afeared of death that ’twas horrible to see and hear her. The shiv-
ering fit came upon her in the church during Mass, and she crept
on hands and knees, shaking and with chattering teeth, praying
and beseeching God and Mary Virgin for her life — Before long
she lay in a burning fever, groaning, and sweating blood from all
her body. Kristin’s heart shuddered within her — doubtless she,
too, would be as wretchedly afraid as this when her time came.
’Twas not alone that death was sure — ’twas the awful horror that
clung about death from pestilence. is)

Then Lady Ragnhild herself fell sick. Kristin had wondered a
little that this woman had been chosen to an abbess’s high office
— she was a quiet, somewhat peevish old woman, unlearned, and,
it seemed, lacking any great gifts of the spirit — but, when death
laid his hand upon her, she showed she was in truth a bride of
Christ. Her the sickness smote with boils —she would not suffer
even her spiritual daughters to bare her old body, but under one
of her arms the swelling grew at last as big as an apple, and under
her chin too boils broke out and waxed huge and blood-red, and
at last turned black; she suffered unbearable pains from them, and
burned with fever; but as oft as her mind was clear, she lay there
a pattern of holy patience, sighing to God for forgiveness of her
sins, and praying in fair and heartfelt words for her cloister and
her daughters, for all sick and sorrowful, and for the salvation of
all souls who now must part from hence. Even Sira Eiliv wept,
when he had given her the viaticum — and /is steadfastness as well
as his unwearied zeal in the midst of all this misery had been a
thing to wonder at. Lady Ragnhild had many times already given
her soul into God’s keeping and prayed Him to take the nuns into
His ward — and then at last the boils on her body began to burst.
But this proved a turning towards life, not death — and after, too,
folk deemed they saw that those whom the sickness smote with
boils were sometimes healed, but those to whom it came with a
bloody vomit, died everyone.

It seemed as though the nuns took new courage from the ab-
bess’s steadfastness, and from the having seen one stricken with the
pest who yet did not die. They had now to milk and tend the
byres themselves, to make ready their own food, and themselves
fetch home juniper and fresh pine branches to burn for cleansing


i i a ee, ee


mh) Sr


1025 The Oross


smoke — each one had to do what came to her hand. They cared
for the sick as best they could, and doled out remedies — theriac
and calamus root had given out; they dealt round ginger, pepper,
saffron and vinegar to ward off the poison; and milk and meat —
the bread gave out and they baked at night — the spices gave out,
and folk must needs chew juniper-berries and pine-needles against
the infection. One by one the sisters drooped and died; passing-
bells rang from the cloister church and the parish church early
and late in the heavy air; for the strange, uncanny mist still lay
upon the land; there seemed to be a secret privity ’twixt the fog
and the deadly sickness. Sometimes it turned to a frosty fog and
sifted down in small ice-needles and a half-frozen drizzle, and the
land grew white with rime—then came mild weather and mist
again. Folk deemed it a sign of evil omen that the sea-fowl, that
else were wont to flock in thousands along the creek that runs
inland from the fjord and lies like a river between the low stretches
of meadow, but widens to a salt-water lake north of Rein cloister
— that they suddenly vanished, and in their stead came ravens in
countless numbers — on every stone by the water-side the black
birds sat amidst the fog, making their hideous croaking; while
flocks of crows, so huge that none before had seen the like, settled
on all the woods and groves, and flew with ugly screechings over
the stricken land. ;

Now and again Kristin thought of her own — the sons who were
scattered so far and wide, the grandchildren she should never see
—little Erlend’s golden head wavered before her sight. But they
were grown to seem far off and pale to her. Almost it seemed as
though all mankind in this time of need were alike near to each
other and alike far apart. And then she had her hands full all day
long — it stood her in good stead now that she was used to all kinds
of work. While she sat milking, she would find beside her sud-
denly little starving children she had never before set her eyes on,
and she would scarce remember to ask whence they were or how
things were with them at home, she would give them food and
lead them to the shelter of the chapter-hall, or some other place
where a fire was burning, then stow them away in a bed in the
dormitory.

She marked, with a kind of wonder, that in this time of calamity,
when more than ever there was need that all should be vigilant
in prayer, she scarce ever found time to meditate or to pray. She


The Cross 1026


would fling her down in the church before the tabernacle when
she found a vacant moment, but naught came of it but wordless
sighs, and Paternosters and Aves uttered by rote. She herself
knew not that the nun-like ways and bearing she had fallen into in
these two years were dropping from her more and more, and that
she was growing ever liker to the housewife of the old days—as
the flock of nuns dwindled, the round of cloister duties fell into
disarray, and the abbess still lay abed, weak and with half-palsied
tongue — and the work grew more and more for the few that
were left to do it.

One day she learned by chance that Skule was still in Nidaros —
his ship-folk were dead or fled away, and he had not been able to
get new folk. He was whole yet, but he had plunged into wild
living, as had many young men in this desperate pass. For him
who was afraid, death was sure, they said, and so they deadened
thought with drink and riot, gambled and danced and wantoned
with women. Even honourable burghers’ wives and young maids
of the best kindreds ran from their homes in this evil time; in
company with the women of the bordels they caroused in the
inns and taverns amongst the wildered men. God forgive them,
thought the mother — but ’twas as though her heart were too
weary to sorrow much for these things.

But in the country-side too, for sure, there was enough of sin
and distraction. They heard little of it at the cloister, for there
they had no time for much talk. But Sira Eiliv, who went about
everywhere, without rest or respite, to the sick and dying, said
one day to Kristin that the folk’s souls stood in yet direr need
than their bodies.


There came an evening when they were sitting round the
chimney-place in the convent hall —the little flock of folk that
were left alive in Rein cloister. Four nuns and two lay sisters, an
old stable-man and a half-grown boy, two bedeswomen and some
children, huddled together round the fire. On the high-seat bench,
where a great crucifix gleamed in the dusk on the light-hued wall,
lay the abbess, and Sister Kristin and Sister Turid sat at her hands
and feet.

It was nine days since the last death among the sisters, and five
days since any had died in the cloister or the nearer houses. The
pestilence seemed to be lessening throughout the parish, too, said
Sira Eiliv. And for the first time for near three months something


ey


e—C ee eee ee ee “—_—


1027 The Oross


like a gleam of peace and hope and comfort fell upon the silent and
weary folk that sat together there. Old Sister Torunn Marta let
her rosary sink upon her lap, and took the hand of the little girl
who stood at her knee:

“What can it be she means? Ay, child, now seems it as we should
see that never for long does God’s mother, Mary, turn away her
loving-kindness from her children.”

“Nay, ’tis not Mary Virgin, Sister Torunn, ’tis Hel.* She will
go from out this parish, with both rake and broom, when they
offer up a man without blemish at the graveyard gate — to-mor-
row she’ll be far away —”

“What means she? ” asked the nun again, uneasily. “ Fie upon
you, Magnhild; what ugly heathenish talk is this? "I'were fit you
should taste the birch —”

“Tell us what it is, Magnhild — have no fear ” — Sister Kristin
was standing behind them; she asked the question breathlessly. She
had remembered — she had heard in her youth from Lady Aashild
— of dreadful, unnamably sinful devices that the devil tempts des-

erate men to practise —

The children had been down in the grove by the parish church
in the falling dusk, and some of the boys had strayed through the
wood to a turf hut that stood there, and had eavesdropped and
heard some men in it laying plans. It seemed from what they heard
that these men had laid hold on a little boy, Tore, the son of
Steinunn, that lived by the strand, and to-night they were to offer
him up to the pest-ogress, Hel. The children talked eagerly, proud
that the grown-up folk were paying heed to what they said. They
seemed not to think of pitying the hapless ‘Tore — maybe because
he was somewhat of an outcast. He wandered about the parish
begging, but never came to the cloister, and if Sira Eiliv or any
sent by the abbess sought out his mother, she ran away, or she
kept a stubborn silence, whether they spoke lovingly or harshly
to her. She had lived in the stews of Nidaros for ten years, but
then a sickness took hold on her, and left her of so ill a favour that
at last she could not win her livelihood so as she had used her to
do; so she had forsaken the town for the Rein parish, and now
dwelt in a hut down by the strand. It still befell at times that a
chance beggar or some such stroller would take lodging with her
for a while. Who was father to her boy she herself knew not.

“We must go thither,” said Kristin. “Here we cannot sit, I

* See Note 8.


The Cross 1028


Lhe Gross © ee eee
trow, while christened souls sell themselves to the devil at our
very doors.” :

The nuns whimpered in fear. These were the worst men in the
parish, rough, ungodly fellows; and uttermost need and despair
must have turned them now into very devils. Had Sira Eiliv only
been at home, they moaned. In this time of trial the priest had so
won their trust, that they deemed he could do all things —

Kristin wrung her hands:

“ Even if I must go alone — my mother, have I your leave to go
thither? ” )

The abbess gripped her by the arm so hard that she cried out.
The old, tongue-tied woman got upon her feet; by signs she made
them understand that they should dress her to go out, and called
for her golden cross, the badge of her office, and her staff. Then
she took Kristin by the arm — for she was the youngest and strong-
est of the women. All the nuns stood up and followed.

Through the door of the little room ’twixt the chapter-hall and
the choir of the church they went forth into the raw, cold winter
night. Lady Ragnhild’s teeth began to chatter and her whole
frame to shiver —she still sweated without cease by reason of her
sickness, and the pest-boil sores were not fully healed, so that it
must have wrought her great agony to walk. But she muttered
angrily and shook her head when the sisters prayed her to turn,
clung the harder to Kristin’s arm, and plodded, shaking with cold,
on before them through the garden. As their eyes grew used to
the darkness, the women made out the dim sheen of the withered
leaves strewn on the path beneath their feet, and the faint light
from the clouded sky above the naked tree-tops. Cold water-
drops dripped from the branches, and puffs of wind went by with
a faint soughing sound. The roll of the waves on the strand behind
the high ground came to them in dull, heavy sighs.

At the bottom of the garden was a little wicket — the sisters
shuddered when the bolt, fast rusted in its socket, shrieked as Kris-
tin withdrew it by main force. Then they crept onward through
the grove down towards the parish church. Now they could see
dimly the black-tarred mass, darker against the darkness; and
against the opening in the clouds above the low hills beyond the
lake they saw the roof-top, and the ridge turret with its beasts’
heads and cross over all.

Ay — there were folk in the graveyard — they felt rather than
saw or heard it. And now a faint gleam of light was to be seen


pen ee eee eee ee ee eS Oe


i


lis


1029 The Cross


low down, as of a lanthorn set upon the ground. Close by it the
darkness seemed moving.

The nuns pressed together, moaning almost soundlessly amid
whispered prayers, went a few steps, halted and listened, and went
on again. They were well-nigh come to the graveyard gate. Then
they heard from out of the dark a thin child-voice crying:

“ Oh, oh, my bannock; you’ve thrown dirt on it! ”

Kristin let go the abbess’s arm, and ran forward through the
churchyard gate. She pushed aside some dark shapes of men’s
backs, stumbled over heaps of upturned earth, and then was at
the edge of the open grave. She went down on her knees, bent
over, and lifted up the little boy who stood at the bottom, still
whimpering because the dirt had spoiled the good bannock he
had been given for staying quietly down there.

The men stood there frighted from their wits — ready to fly —
some stamped about on the same spot — Kristin saw their feet in
the light from the lanthorn on the ground. Then one, she made
sure, would have sprung at her — at the same moment the grey-
white nuns’ dresses came into sight — and the knot of men hung
wavering —

Kristin had the boy in her arms still; he was crying for his
bannock; so she set him down, took the bread, and brushed it
clean:

“There, eat it— your bannock is as good as ever now — And
now go home, you men ” — the shaking of her voice forced her to
stop a little. “ Go home’and thank God you were saved from the
doing of a deed ’twere hard to atone.” She was speaking now as
a mistress speaks to her serving-folk, mildly, but as if it could not
cross her mind that they would not obey. Unwittingly some of the
men turned towards the gate.

Then one of them shrieked:

“Stay a little—see you not our lives at the least are forfeit —
mayhap all we own — now that these full-fed monks’ whores have
stuck their noses into this! Never must they come away from here
to spread the tidings of it —” ;

Not a man moved — but Sister Agnes broke into a shrill shriek,
and cried in a wailing voice:

“© sweet Jesus, my bridegroom —I thank Thee that Thou
sufferest Thy handmaidens to die for the glory of Thy name —!

Lady Ragnhild pushed her roughly behind her, tottered for-
ward, and took up the lanthorn from the ground —no one moved


The Cross 1030


a hand to hinder her. When she lifted it up, the gold cross on her

breast shone out. She stood propped on her staff, and slowly

turned the light upon the ring about her, nodding a little at each

man she looked on. Then she made a sign to Kristin to speak.
_Kristin said:

“Go home peaceably and quietly, dear brothers—be sure
that the reverend mother and these good sisters will be as merciful
as their duty to God and the honour of His Church will suffer. But
stand aside now, that we may come forth with this child — and
thereafter let each man go his way.”

The men stood wavering. Then one shrieked out as though in
direst need:

“Ts’t not better that one be offered up than that we should all
perish —? This child here who is owned by none—”

“Christ owns him. "Iwere better we should perish one and all
than to hurt one of His little ones —”’

But the man who had spoken first shouted again:

“Hold your tongue — no more such-like words, or I cram them
back down your throat with this ” — he shook his knife in the air.
“Go you home, go to your beds and pray your priest to comfort
you, and say naught of this — or I tell you, in Satan’s name, you
shall learn "twas the worst thing you ever did to put your fingers
into our affairs —”

“You need not to cry so loud for him you named to hear you,
Arntor — be sure he is not far from here,” said Kristin calmly, and
some of the men seemed affrighted, and pressed unwittingly nearer
to the abbess, who stood holding the lanthorn. “The worst had
been, both for us and for you, had we sat quiet at home while you
went about to make you a dwelling-place in hottest hell.”

But the man Arntor swore and raved. Kristin knew that he
hated the nuns; for his father had been forced to pledge his farm to
them when he had to pay amends for man-slaying and incest with
his wife’s cousin. Now he went on casting up at the sisters all the
Enemy’s most hateful lies, charging them with sins so black and
unnatural that only the devil himself could prompt a man to
think such thoughts.

The poor nuns bowed them terrified and weeping under the
hail of his taunts, but they stood fast around their old mother,
and she held the lanthorn high, throwing the light upon the man,
and looking him calmly in the face while he raved.


_——_ i”


ee


OO TET ee ee a SO


1031 The Cross


But anger flamed up in Kristin like new-kindled fire:

“Silence! Have you lost your wits, or has God smitten you
with blindness? Should we dare to murmur under His chastise-
ment — we who have seen His consecrated brides go forth to meet
the sword that has been drawn by reason of the world’s sins? They
watched and prayed while we sinned and each day forgot our
Maker — shut them from the world within the citadel of prayer
while we scoured the world around, driven by greed of great
and small possessions, of our own lusts and our own wrath. But
they came forth to us when the angel of death was sent out
amongst us — gathered in the sick and the defenceless and the
hungry —twelve of our sisters have died in this plague — that
you all know — not one turned aside, and not one gave over pray-
ing for us all in sisterly love, till the tongue dried in their mouths
and their life’s blood ebbed away —”’

“Bravely speak you of yourself and your like —”

“Tam your like,” she cried, beside herself with anger; “I am not
one of these holy sisters —I am one of you—”

“You have grown full humble, woman,” said Arntor, scorn-
fully; “ you are frighted, I mark well. A little more and you will
be fain to call her —the mother to this boy — your like.”

“That must God judge — He died both for her and for me, and
He knows us both. — Where is she — Steinunn? ”

“Go down to her hut; you will find her there sure enough,”
answered Arntor.

“ Ay, truly someone must send word to the poor woman that
we have her boy,” said Kristin to the nuns. “ We must go out to
her to-morrow.”

Arntor gave a jeering laugh, but another man cried, uneasily:

“No, no — She is dead,” he said to Kristin. “”Tis fourteen days
since Bjarne left her and barred the door. She lay in the death-
throes then —”’

“ She lay in—” Kristin gazed ‘at the men, horror-struck. ‘“ Was
there none to fetch a priest to her — ? Is the — body — lying there
—and no one has had so much compassion on her as to bring her
to hallowed ground — and her child you would have —?”

At the sight of the woman’s horror, ’twas as though the men
went clean besides themselves with fear and shame; all were shout-
ing at once; a voice louder than all the rest rang out:

“Fetch her yourself, sister! ”


The Cross 1032


ihe Cnoss =. NS ee eee eee

“ Ay! Which of you will go with me? ”

None answered. Arntor cried:

“ You will have to go alone, I trow.”

“ To-morrow —as soon as ’tis light — we will fetch her, Arntor
-—I myself will buy her a resting-place and masses for her soul —”

“ Go thither now, go to-night — then will I believe you nuns are
choke-full of holiness and pureness —”

Arntor had stuck his head forward close to hers. Kristin drove
her clenched fist into his face, with a single loud sob of rage and
horror —

Lady Ragnhild went forward and placed herself at Kristin’s
side; she strove to bring forth some words. The nuns cried out


(=)
that to-morrow the dead woman should be brought to her grave.


But the devil seemed to have turned Arntor’s brain: he went on
shrieking:

“Go now —then will we believe on God’s mercy —”

Kristin drew herself up, white and stiff:

“T will go.”

She lifted the child and gave it into Sister Torunn’s arms,
pushed the men aside, and ran quickly, stumbling over grass
tussocks and heaps of earth, towards the gate, while the nuns
followed wailing, and Sister Agnes cried out that she would go
with her. The abbess shook her clenched hands towards Kristin,
beckoning her to stop; but she seemed quite beside herself and
gave no heed —

Suddenly there was a great commotion in the dark over by
the graveyard gate — next moment Sira Eiliv’s voice asked: who
was holding Thing here. He came forward into the glimmer of the
lanthorn — they saw that he bore an axe in his hand. The nuns
flocked around him; the men made shift to steal away in the
dark, but in the gateway they were met by a man bearing a
drawn sword in his hand. There was some turmoil and the clash
of arms, and Sira Eiliv shouted towards the gate: woe to any
who broke the churchyard peace. Kristin heard one say ’twas
the strong smith from Credo Lane—the moment after, a tall,
broad-shouldered, white-haired man appeared at her side — ’twas
UIf Haldorssén.

The priest handed him the axe — he had borrowed it from Ulf
—and took the boy Tore from the nun, while he said:

“Tis past midnight already — none the less ’twere best you all


1033 The Oross


came with me to the church; I must get to the bottom of these
doings this very night.”

None had any thought but to obey. But, when they were come
out on to the road, one of the light-grey women’s forms stepped
aside from the throng and turned off by the path through the
wood. The priest called out, bidding her come on with the others.
Kristin’s voice answered from the darkness — she was some way
along the track already:

“ Tcannot come, Sira Eiliv, till I have kept my promise — ”

The priest and some others sprang after her. She was standing
leaning against the fence when Sira Eiliv came up with her. He
held up the lanthorn — she was fearfully white of face, but, when
he looked into her eyes, he saw that she was not gone mad, as at
first he had feared.

“Come home, Kristin,” he said. ‘To-morrow we will go
thither with you, some men —I myself will go with you—”

“T have given my word. I cannot go home, Sira Eiliy, till I have
done that which I vowed to do.”

The priest stood silent a little. Then he said in a low voice:

“Mayhap you are right. Go then, sister, in God’s name.”

Like a shadow, Kristin melted away into the darkness, which
swallowed up her grey form.

When Ulf Haldorssén came up by her side, she said — she spoke
by snatches, vehemently: “Go back —I asked not you to come
with me —”

Ulf laughed low:

“Kristin, my lady — you have not learnt yet, I see, that some
things can be done without your asking or bidding — nor, though
you have seen it many a time, I ween —that you cannot alway
carry through alone all that you take upon you. But this burden
of yours J will help you to carry.”

The pine woods sighed above them, and the boom of the rollers
away on the strand came stronger or more faint as the gusts of
wind rose or died away. They walked in pitch darkness. After a
while Ulf said:

“_ T have borne you company before, Kristin, when you went
out at night — methought ’twere but fitting I should go with you
this time too —”’

She breathed hard and heavily in the dark. Once she stumbled
over somewhat, and Ulf caught her. After that he took her hand


The Cross 1034


EO. UTOSS. WE ae re
and led her. In a while the man heard that she was weeping as she
went, and he asked her why she wept.

“J weep to think how good and faithful you have been to us,
Ulf, all our days. What can I say —? I know well enough ’twas
most for Erlend’s sake, but almost I believe, kinsman —all our
days you have judged of me more kindly than you had a right to,
after what you first saw of my doings.” f

“T loved you, Kristin — no less than him.” He was silent. Kris-
tin felt that he was strongly stirred. Then he said:

“Therefore meseemed ’twas a hard errand when I sailed out
hither to-day —I came to bring you such tidings as I myself
deemed it hard to utter. God strengthen you, Kristin! ”

“Ts it Skule? ” asked Kristin softly in a little. “‘ Skule is dead? ”

“No; Skule was well when I spoke with him yesterday — and
now not many are dying in the town. But I had news from Tautra
this morning —” He heard her sigh heavily once, but she said
naught. A little after he said:

“°Tis ten days now since they died. There are but four broth-
ers left alive in the cloister, and the island is all but swept clean
of folk.”

They were come now where the wood ended. Over the flat
stretch of land in front the roaring of the sea and the wind came
to meet them. One spot out in the dark shone white — the surf
in a little bay, by a steep, light-hued sand-hill.

“She dwells there,” said Kristin. Ulf felt that long, convulsive
shudders went through her frame. He gripped her hand hard:

“You took this on yourself. Remember that, and lose not your
wits now.”

Kristin said, in a strangely thin, clear voice, that the blast caught —
and bore away:

“ Now will Bjérgulf’s dream come true —I trust in God’s and
Mary’s grace.”

Ulf tried to see her face — but ’twas too dark. They were walk-
ing on the strand — in some places ’twas so narrow under the bluffs
that now and then a wave washed right up to their feet. They
tramped forward over tangled heaps of seaweed and great stones.
inten a while they were ware of a dark hump in against the sandy

ank.


“Stay here,” said Ulf, shortly. He went forward and thrust


tp


See eee a ee


1035 The Cross


against the door —then she heard him hew at the withy bands
and thrust at the door again. Then she was ware that the door had
fallen inwards, and he had gone in through the black hole.

"Twas not a night of heavy storm. But it was so dark that
Kristin could see naught save the little flashes of foam that came
and vanished the same instant on the lifting sea, and the shining of
the waves breaking along the shores of the bay — and against the
sand-dune she could make out that black hump. And it seemed
to her that she was standing in a cavern of night, and that ’twas the
forecourt of death. The roll of breaking waves and the hiss of
their waters ebbing among the stones of the beach kept time with
the blood-waves surging through her, though all the time ’twas as
though her body must shiver in pieces, as a vessel of wood falls
apart in staves — her breast ached as if something would burst it
in sunder from within; her head felt hollow and empty and as
*twere rifted, and the unceasing wind wrapped her round and
swept clean through her. She felt, with a strange listlessness, that
she herself had surely caught the sickness now — but ’twas as
though she looked that the darkness should be riven by a great
light that would drown the roar of the sea with its thunder, and
that in the horror of this she should perish. She drew up her hood,


~ blown back from her head by the wind, wrapped the black nun’s


cloak close about her, and stood with her hands crossed beneath
it — but it came not into her thought to pray; ’twas as though her
soul had more than enough to do to work a way forth from its
mansion trembling to its fall, and as though it tore at her breast
with every breath. ,

She saw a light flare up within the hut. A little after, Ulf
Haldorss6n called out to her: ‘ You must come hither and hold
the light for me, Kristin” —he was standing in the doorway —as
she came, he reached her a torch of some tarred wood.

A choking stench from the corpse met her, though the hut was
so draughty and the door was gone. With staring eyes and mouth
half open —and she felt her jaws and lips grow stiff the while
and wooden—she looked round for the dead. But there was
naught to see but a long bundle lying in the corner on the earthen
floor, wrapped in Ulf’s cloak.

He had torn loose some long planks from somewhere and laid
the door upon them. Cursing his unhandy tools, he made notches


The Cross 1036


and holes with his light axe and dagger, and strove to lash the
door fast to the boards. Once or twice he looked up at her swiftly,
and each time his dark, grey-bearded face grew more hard set.

“T marvel much how you had thought to get through this piece
of work alone,” he said as he wrought — then glanced up at her —
but the stiff, death-like face in the red gleam of the tar brand was
set and unmoved as ever — twas the face of a dead woman or of
one distraught. “Can you tell me that, Kristin?” he laughed
harshly — but still "twas of no avail. “ Methinks now were the
time for you to say a prayer.”

Stiff and lifeless as ever, she began to speak:

“ Pater noster qui es in celis. Adveniat regnum tuum. Fiat volun-
tas tua sicut in celo et in terra —” Then she came to a stop.

Ulf looked at her. Then he took up the prayer:

“Panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie—” Swiftly and
firmly he said the Lord’s prayer to the end, went over and made
the sign of the cross over the bundle — swiftly and firmly he took
it up and bore it to the bier that he had fashioned.

“Go you in front,” he said. “Maybe ’tis somewhat heavier,
but you will smell the stench less there. Throw away the torch —
we can see more surely without it—and see you miss not your
footing, Kristin — for I had liefer not have to take a hold of this
poor body any more.”

The struggling pain in her breast seemed to rise in revolt when
she got the bier poles set upon her shoulders; her chest would not
bear up the weight. But she set her teeth hard. So long as they
went along the strand, where the wind blew strong, but little of
the corpse smell came to her.

“Here I must draw it up first, I trow, and the bier after,” said
Ulf, when they were come to the steep slope they had climbed
down.

“We can go a little farther on,” said Kristin; “’tis there they
come down with the seaweed sleighs — there "tis not steep.”

She spoke calmly, the man heard, and as in her right mind. And
a fit of sweating and trembling took him, now it was over — he
had deemed she must lose her wits that night.

They struggled forward along the sandy track that led across
the flat towards the pine wood, The wind swept in freely here, but
yet ‘twas not as it had been down on the strand, and, as they
drew farther and farther away from the roar of the beach, she


a re? eae = Fe


1037 ; DARTH ENOrose


felt it as a homefaring from the horror of utter darkness. Beside
their path the ground showed lighter —’twas a cornfield that
there had been none to reap. The scent of it, and the sight of
the beaten-down straw, welcomed her home again — and her eyes
filled with tears of sisterly pity — out of her own desolate terror
and woe she was coming home to fellowship with the living and
the dead.

At times, when the wind was right behind, the fearful carrion
stench enwrapped her wholly, but yet ’twas not so awful as when
she stood in the hut — for the night was full of fresh, wet, cold,
cleansing streams of air.

And much stronger than the feeling that she bore a thing of
dread upon the bier behind her, was the thought that Ulf Hal-
dorss6n was there, guarding her back against the black and living
horror they were leaving behind — and whose roar sounded fainter
and more faint.

When they were come to the edge of the pine woods they were
ware of lights: “ They are coming to meet us,” said Ulf.

Soon after, they were met by a whole throng of men bearing
pine-root torches, a couple of lanthorns and a bier covered with
a pall —Sira Eiliv was with them, and Kristin saw with wonder
that in the troop were many of the men who had been that same
night in the churchyard, and that many of them were weeping.
When they lifted the burthen from her shoulders she was like to
fall. Sira Eiliv would have caught a hold of her, but she said
quickly:
~ “Touch me not — come not near me —I have the pest myself;
\ feel it—”

But none the less Sira Eiliv stayed her up with a hand below her
arm:

“Then be of good cheer, woman, remembering that our Lord
has said: ‘Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these My brethren or sisters, ye have done it unto Me.’”

Kristin gazed at the priest. Then she looked across to where
the men were shifting the body from the stretcher that Ulf had
fashioned to the bier they had brought. Ulf’s cloak slipped aside
a little — the point of a worn-out shoe stuck out, dark wet in the
light of the torches.

Kristin went across, kneeled between the poles of the bier, and
kissed the shoe:


The Cross 1038


TOSS) re eee

“God be gracious to you, sister — God give your soul joy in
His light — God look in His mercy on us here in our darkness —”

Then it seemed to her as ’twere life itself that tore its way from
out of her —a grinding, inconceivable pain, as though something
within her, rooted fast in every outermost fibre of her limbs, were
riven loose. All that was within her breast was torn out —she felt
her throat full of it, her mouth filled with blood that tasted of
salt and foul copper — next moment her whole dress in front was
a glistening wet blackness — Jesus! is there so much blood in an
old woman? she thought.

Ulf Haldarss6n lifted her in his arms and bore her away.


At the gate of the cloister the nuns, bearing lighted candles,
came to meet the train of men. Already Kristin scarce had her full
senses, but she felt that she was half borne, half helped, through
the door, and was ware of the whitewashed, vaulted room, filled
with the flickering light of yellow candle flames and red pine
torches, and of the tramp of feet rolling like a sea — but to the
dying woman the light was like the shimmer of her own dying
life-flame, and the footfalls on the flags as the rushing of the riv-
ers of death rising up to meet her.

Then the candlelight spread out into a wider space — she was
once again under the open, murky sky —in the courtyard — the
flickering light played upon a grey stone wall with heavy but-
tresses and high, tall windows —the church. She was borne in
someone’s arms — twas Ulf again —but now he seemed to take
on for her the semblance of all who had ever borne her up. When
she laid her arms about his neck and pressed her cheek against his
stubbly throat, ’twas as though she were a child again with her
father, but also as though she were clasping a child to her own
bosom— And behind his dark head there were red lights, and
they seemed like the glow of the fire that nourishes all love.

— A little later she opened her eyes, and her mind was clear
and calm. She was sitting, propped up, in a bed in the dormitory;
a nun with a linen band over her lower face stood bending over
her; she marked the smell of vinegar. "Twas Sister Agnes, she
knew by her eyes and the little red wart she had on her forehead.
And now ’twas day — clear, grey light was sifting into the room
from the little glass window.


She had no great pain now —she was but wet through with


re ee ee ee ee ee ee


1039 The Cross


sweat, woefully worn and weary, and her breast stung and
smarted when she breathed. Greedily she drank down a soothing
drink that Sister Agnes held to her mouth. But she was cold —

Kristin lay back on the pillows, and now she remembered all
that had befallen the night before. The wild dream fantasies were
wholly gone —her wits must have wandered a little, she under-
stood — but ’twas good that she had got this thing done, had saved
the little boy, and hindered these poor folk from burdening their
souls with such a hideous deed. She knew she had need to be over-
joyed — that she had been given grace to do this thing just before
she was to die — and yet she could not rejoice as ’twas meet she
should; ’twas more a quiet content she felt, as when she lay in her
bed at home at Jorundgaard, tired out after a day’s work well
done. And she must thank Ulf too —

— She had spoken his name, and he must have been sitting hid-
den away by the door, and have heard her, for here he came
across the room and stood before her bed. She reached out her
hand to him, and he took and pressed it in a firm clasp.

Suddenly the dying woman grew restless; her hands fumbled
under the folds of linen about her throat.

““ What is it, Kristin? ” asked Ulf.

“The cross,” she whispered, and painfully drew forth her fa-
ther’s gilded cross. It had come to her mind that yesterday she
had promised to make a gift for the soul’s weal of that poor Stei-
nunn. She had not remembered then that she had no possessions
on earth any more. She owned naught that she could give, saving


~ the cross she had had of her father — and then her bridal ring. She


wore that on her finger still.

She drew it off and gazed at it. It lay heavy in her hand; ’twas
pure gold, set with great red stones. Erlend — she thought — and
it came upon her now ’twere liker she should give this away —
she knew not wherefore, but it seemed that she ought. She shut
her eyes in pain and held it out to UIE:

“To whom would you give this? ” he asked, low, and as she
did not answer: “ Mean you I should give it to Skule—? ”

Kristin shook her head, her eyes tight closed.

“Steinunn —I promised — masses for her—”

She opened her eyes, and sought with them the ring where it
lay in the smith’s dusky palm. And her tears burst forth in a swift
stream, for it seemed to her that never before had she understood


The Cross 1040


Phe Cross 7 © Se ee ee ee
to the full what it betokened. The life that ring had wed her to,
that she had complained against, had murmured at, had raged at
and defied — none the less she had loved it so, joyed in it so, both
in good days and evil, that not one day had there been when
’twould not have seemed hard to give it back to God, nor one
grief that she could have forgone without regret —

Ulf and the nun changed some words that she could not hear,
and he went from the room. Kristin would have lifted her hand
to dry her eyes, but she could not — the hand lay moveless on her
breast. And now the pain within was sore; her hand felt so heavy,
and it seemed as though the ring were on her finger still. Her
head began to grow unclear again —she must see if *twere true
that the ring was gone, that she had not only dreamed she had
given it away — And now too she began to grow uncertain — all
that had befallen last night: the child in the grave; the black sea
with its swift little flashing waves; the corpse she had borne —she
knew not whether she had dreamed it all or had been awake.
And she had no strength to open her eyes.

“Sister,” said the nun, “you must not sleep now— Ulf is gone
to fetch a priest for you.”

Kristin woke up fully again with a start, and fixed her eyes upon
her hand. The gold ring was gone, that was sure enough — but
there was a white, worn mark where it had been on her middle
finger. It showed forth quite clearly on the rough brown flesh —
like a.scar of thin, white skin —she deemed she could make out
two round spots on either side where the rubies had been, and
somewhat like a little mark, an M, where the middle plate of gold
had been pierced with the first letter of Mary Virgin’s holy name.

And the last clear thought that formed in her brain was that
she should die ere this mark had time to vanish — and she was
glad. It seemed to her to be a mystery that she could not fathom,
but which she knew most surely none the less, that God had held
her fast in a covenant made for her without her knowledge by a
love poured out upon her richly — and in despite of her self-will,
in despite of her heavy, earthbound spirit, somewhat of this love
had become part of her, had wrought in her like sunlight in the
earth, had brought forth increase which not even the hottest
flames of fleshly love nor its wildest bursts of wrath could lay
waste wholly. A handmaiden of God had she been — a wayward,
unruly servant, oftenest an eye-servant in her prayers and faith-


1041 The Cross


less in her heart, slothful and neglectful, impatient under correc-
tion, but little constant in her deeds — yet had he held her fast in
his service, and under the glittering golden ring a mark had been
set secretly upon her, showing that she was His handmaid, owned
by the Lord and King who was now coming, borne by the priest’s
anointed hands, to give her freedom and salvation —


Soon after Sira Eiliv had given her the last oil and viaticum,
Kristin Lavransdatter again lost the knowledge of all around. She
lay in the sway of sore fits of blood-vomiting and burning fever,
and the priest, who stayed by her, told the nuns that ’twas like
to go quickly with her.

— Once or twice the dying woman came so far to herself that
she knew this or the other face — Sira Eiliv’s, the sister’s — Lady
Ragnhild herself was there once, and Ulf too she saw. She strove
to show she knew them, and that she felt "twas good they should
be by her and wished her well. But to those who stood around it
seemed as she were but fighting with her hands in the throes of
death.

Once she saw Munan’s face —her little son peeped in at her
through a half-open door. Then he drew back his head, and the
mother lay gazing at the door — if perchance the boy might peep
out again. But instead came Lady Ragnhild and wiped her face
with a wet cloth; and that too was good — Then all things were
lost in a dark red mist, and a roar, that first grew fearsomely; but
then it died away little by little, and the red mist grew thinner and
lighter, and at last "twas like a fair morning mist ere the sun
breaks through, and all sound ceased, and she knew that now she


was dying —


Sira Eiliv and Ulf Haldorssén went out together from the room
of death. In the doorway out to the cloister yard they stopped
short —

Snow had fallen. None had marked it, of them who had sat by
the woman while she fought with death. The white gleam from
the steep church roof over against the two men was strangely
dazzling; the tower shone white against the ash-grey sky. The
snow lay so fine and white on all the window-mouldings, and all
buttresses and jutting points, against the church’s walls of grey
hewn stone. And ’twas as though the two men lingered because


The Cross 1042
they were loath to break with their footprints the thin coverlid
of new-fallen snow.

They drank in the air. After the noisome smell that ever fills
the sick-room of one pest-stricken, it tasted sweet — cool, and as it
were a little thin and empty; but it seemed as though this snow-
fall must have washed the air clean of all poison and pestilence —
’twas as good as fresh spring water.

The bell in the tower began to ring again—the two looked up
to where it swung behind the belfry bars. Small grains of snow
loosened from the tower roof as it shook, rolled down, and grew
to little balls—leaving spots where the black of the shingles
showed through.

“ This snow will scarce lie,” said Ulf.

“No, twill melt, belike, before evening,” answered the priest.
There were pale golden rifts in the clouds, and a faint gleam of
sunshine fell, as it were provingly, across the snow.

The men stood still. Then Ulf Haldorss6n said low:

“Tam thinking, Sira Eiliv —I will give some land to the church
here — and a beaker of Lavrans Bj6rgulfssén’s that she gave me —
to found a mass for her—and my foster-sons — and for him, Er-
lend, my kinsman —”

The priest answered as low, without looking at the man:

““— Meseems, too, you might think you had need to show your
thankfulness to Him who led you hither yestereven — you may
be well content, I trow, that ’twas granted you to help her through
this night.”

“ Ay, ’twas that I thought of,” said Ulf Haldorssén. Then he
laughed a little: “ And now could I well-nigh repent me, priest,
that I have been so meek a man — towards her! ”

“Bootless to waste time in such vain regrets,” answered the
priest.

“What mean you—?”

“T mean, ’tis but a man’s sins that it boots him to repent,” said
the priest.

“Why so? ”

“For that none is good saving God only. And we can do no
good save of Him. So it boots not to repent a good deed, Ulf, for
the good you have done cannot be undone; though all the hills
should crash in ruin, yet would it stand —”


“Ay, ay. These be things I understand not, my Sira. I am
weary —”


CO ee


1043 The Cross


“Ay —and hungry too you may well be—you must come
with me to the kitchen-house, Ulf,” said the priest.

“Thanks, but I have no stomach to meat,” said Ulf Haldorsson.

“None the less must you go with me and eat,” said Sira Eiliv —
he laid his hand on Ulf’s sleeve and led him along with him. They
went out into the courtyard and down towards the kitchen-house.
Unwittingly, both men trod as lightly and charily as they could
upon the new-fallen snow.


1 te’ Tee I aieg, Ake ape
Serre rey
¥ Gn? bey ie ee ae Bl y -
pe 2th Oe) veh heel cae


Ug St a


A aa a


4


PSS Se eee’ we


i Notes


THE CROSS


Pa2t: 1. Grace-deed

SiMoN, having committed an offence punishable with outlawry, has to
obtain a grace-deed permitting him to remain at his home unmolested until
his case is judged. See The Mistress of Husaby, Note 14.


Peers 5 2. Debtors

The word (skyldnere in the original) is, of course, used in the sense
which it bears in the Lord’s Prayer. In the text it has sometimes been neces-
sary to render it by the equivalent phrase: “ they that trespass against us.”


Pee Ole 3. The Comb-maker’s Seed
King Sverre’s putative father—the husband of his mother—was a


comb-maker. He claimed to be an illegitimate son of King Sigurd Mund;
but his opponents strenuously denied this.


Pa852; 4. Friggja-grass
Grass of Parnassus —Parnassia palustris. Popularly supposed to be an
aphrodisiac, and hence named after the goddess of love.


P. 881. 5. Oath with Compurgators

The original has “ settared eller tylvtared.” In certain cases the accused
might clear himself of a charge by taking oath to his innocence, along with
five, or eleven, compurgators (mededsmend). The oath with five compur-
gators was termed “settared,” that with eleven, “tylvtared.” The com-
purgators swore, not to the facts of the case, but to their knowledge of the
accused and their persuasion that he was telling the truth. According to
Norse law, the compurgators in the case of a woman accused of an offence
must be women.
P. 995: 6. Rolling-breeches

In the popular tales trolls are sometimes equipped with “rolling-
breeches” (trille-brok) — breeches which enable them to lie down and_roll
rapidly after prey, or from their pursuers.
P. 1005. 7. Tart in Burgundy


Now Tart Abbaye, in the Céte d’Or department, near Citeaux, the
cradle of the Cistercian order. Tart was the mother house of all the Scan-
dinavian Cistercian nunneries.


PaO? 7: 8. Hel

In Norse folk-lore the plague was personified as a hideous old woman
carrying a rake and a broom. Where she used the rake, some part of the
population survived; where she used the broom, she swept the country-side
of every living soul. It would be natural, in the fourteenth century, for the
popular imagination to identify her with Hel, the death goddess of the old


mythology.


DESIGNER’S NOTE


A pace of “old style” type (Linoty pe Janson) furnished with a
running-title of “modern face.” Quite irregular. For what reason?
To be perverse, and shock the typographically pure? No. The
purpose is to cut the running-head quite away from the text—
to put the two parts of the page in two different regions of his-
toric time almost—as though you had the old chronicle complete
in a compact type sympathetic to the narrative, and added the
running-title notations in script for your own convenience. To
keep he story moving at its own pace, in its own atmosphere,
without interference from merely indexing details. Whether or
not the project is a success the reader will have to say. He will see
that the flourished blackletter initials aim to contribute a faint
tinge of old time.

The book was set in type by the Plimpton Press, Norwood,
Massachusetts, and the printing and binding are by the Kingsport
Press, Kingsport, Tennessee.


W. A. Dwicerns


peered


Sharsereporerieresesseieeaee
Seepage herpes tepeteeetgnes


poteaeeapee Speer seeeereseseee=
Biresass 3 ateresss


spay ttayseses:


Ssaeryies ties Hegese


ahaa33


ee
$3
