The Vaisesika Sutras of Kanada
==============================
The Vaisesika Sutras of Kanada, translated by Nandalal Sinha (Allahabad: Panini Office, 1911), public domain. The first English translation of Kanada's sutras with Sankara Mishra's commentary, the root text of the Vaisesika school. Scan via Internet Archive.



wmm THE Fi^lNI OFFICE, BHUVANESWAEI ASBAMA, BxlHABURaANG


yv:::;:^:^

Printed by Panch Kory Mittra at the Indian Press


EDITED BY

MAJOR B. D. BASU, I.M.S.

(Retired)


THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE HINDUS


Translated by various Sanskrit Scholars


llllllll



mmiiBiwmmmiM

WMBMmsmrnmm

illimmsSB&MS

iiiiiiiiiiiii

liiililill

iliilliiiSi?



f


.; r }>



THE

tea


VAISESIKA SUTEAS OE KANADA


WITH


THE COMMENTARY OF ^ANKARA MI&'RA


EXTRACTS FROM THE GLOSS OF JATANlRlYANA


TOGETHER WITH V ^ ^ ^

NOTES PROM THE OOMMENTARY OF GHANDRAKAnTA AND


TRANSLATED BY

NANDALAL SINHA


AND


. - PUBUSHED BY : :.:•.. . ..v ,,^^

THE pInini office, bhijvanbs'wari as'rama, bahadurganj



ili


iiiilpill

liailiiii



iliii


jfiSffi


Iliilii

:l*ll


In the present work an attempt has been made to give a complete
. account of one of the principal schools of Indian philosophy, in the shape
of its original source and authoritative commentaries. It il apprehended
t that, in the hurry of a busy .oflScial life^ full justice has not been done
I to the undertaking. I am aware of the many imperfections appearing
in the work, and no one will be nibre sorry than myself, if my translation
leads to any misconception of the tenets of the author of the System.
I also regret that errors of print still appear in the book, in spite of every
care having been taken to ensure accuracy through the press. It is
hoped, liowever, that there will be occasion in the future when these
imperfections and inaccuracies will be removed as much as possible.
t In the meantime, useful criticism and friendly suggestions will meet


with welcome reception at my hand. Lastly, I acknowledge my indebt-
edness to previous writers ou the subject, for whatever help I have derived
from them.


'65, Maveepue Road, Alipue P. 0.
Calodtta.

' SSrd March, 1911.


NANDALAL SINHA,


TABLE OE CONTENTS.


FIRST BOOK.

/OHAOTEB. I., , .

. ■ lETOcation aiid , introduction ...

■ ' Befinitioii of .Bluima ■

Authority of the Yeda. «««

Enameratioii of the Predicables and source of the Supreme Good
Classification of Substances ...

Ciassitlcation of Attributes ...

Classification of Actions. ' V ...

Resemblance of Substance, Attribute, and Action
Biffereiice of Action from Substance and Attribute
Difference of Substance from Attribute and Actipii
' ;.DefihitiQh'pf ■Substance::;' ... '

;::'':Defimt!dn'o^^ ... ...

Definition of Action ...

Further resemblance of Substance, Attribute, and Action

OHAPTME'II.

Relation' of cause and effect .... ... .

Definition of Genus and Species ... ...

Existence ' as Geniis , ... ■. ... ,

, , : . Substancc-ness, At tribute-ness and Action^ness ... . ■

Final Species ....

Refutation of plurality .of Existence. .... ■... .


SECOND BOOK..


'CfiAPTEil'I.

„ '■Defiiiltio.n, ' of . 'Barth
Definition of Water
Definition of Wim ..

Definition of Air V.

Proof of Air

Proof of Ether

Attributes may be accidental or essential
Smell essential in Earth alone
Hot touch essential In Fire alone
' Cold touch essential In Water alone . ...
Proof of Time ... ... ... .

‘Causes of Doubt ... ‘""1.,

. Proof of Sound m an attribute


Page.

8

. -M
::'7'

S
17
i: IS

m

-M':

27

' "is
n

. 30


37

'as

43,46

43,48

45

50



THIRB BOOK*. '

ChaptbeI.

Proof of the Soul ...

Fallacies of inference ... ...

■Proof of Souls in others ••• ■ •••

OhaftbrIL

ProofofMind

Other imarks of inference of the Soul
Proof of the Soul eoncliided ...

Plaralityof Souls established

FOURTH BOOK.

Chapter I.

Definition of ‘eternal’

Proof of Ultimate Atoms
Reciiiisites of Perception

Existence and Attribute-ness perceptible to ail the senses ...

Chapter 11 .

Division of non-eternal substances
Bodies are made up of one substance only
Division of bodies ...

Prodaction and proof of a-sexual bodies

FIFTH BOOK.

CHAPTER I.

Volitional action ...

Non-volition al action

Action which causes merit ... ...

Action, virtuous, vicious, and indifferent
GHAPTBR'II. ,

Causes of action in the earth, water, fire, air, -ultimate atoms, and mind
Causes of pleasure and pain ... ...

Definition of ijoga ...

Definition of moJc$a

Darkness, not a substance, but a non-entity

Where action does not appear

Attributes are non-combinative causes of actions

SIXTH BOOK,

Chaptfe I.

Authority of the 'Veda established ^ ...

Actions which produce (dhafwa and adhama)

Chapter II.

Production of dharma and adhctrma further considered
Causes of desire ...

Desire and aversion lead into Sakdma activity
Birth and death, and re-birth, what? ... ...

Ko-w.^molm results

- 'r'' SEVENTH BOOK. •

^5>::';V0pl6o;r, 'Taste, are eternal and non-eternai


104,121
107
... 123


ChiptbeIL

Proof of EEifcy ••• , ' *** ■' '

■ ■ Proof of separateness ■ ...

OoBjunctioii and Bisjmiction ' ....

Kelation of word and object ... ... ...

Priority and Posteriority .... ... •••

Oombination ' , . ... ... ... .

EIGHTH BOOK.

CHAPTEE le

, Oognition ' examined ■ ....

Soul and 'Mind not ' perceptible ... , ...

Perceptioii examined ... ... ... . ...

Chapter IL

\ '' Complex cognition examined ... ... ...■ ... ■

: : ' ■ ........

''^^^■.'pereeption^^^^^ examined , ' . ....

NINTH BOOK.

..Chapter L

Perceptioii of .Non-existence ..... ■

’Perception hy yogins ... ... ...

■OHAPTBR'II." '■

Inferential cognition examined

'Verbal included in inferential, cognition

Analogy, etc.,' included ill iiiferenc ... ... ■ ...

'Eeminiscence examined ... ... ... ■ ... •

Dream examined ... ... ... ... ...

Consciousness accompanying dream, examined ...

Causes of A-vidyd ... ... ... . ... ■ ' ' ... ..

Befmition of A-vidyd : ... ... ... ■■ ...

Befinition , of ¥idyd , ... ^ •••

. ; Sagely cognitdon,^etc^^^^

/ TENTH HOOK. '

Chapter L , , ' ^ ■

: ; ':P!^^ form of Pain ... ' .

■..■ ■■,::Pleasure andiMn, not forms of cognition , ' ... . , ; ...

' .Biffereiice of effects, in spite of identity of, cause, bow ■produced

/GflAPTBRlL'"';.''^'

; : '-TiireefoM: .causes fcrtlier; examined ^ ^ ■' ■ ■,;

y Autliom^ Feda .confirmed,,', ,


INTRODUCTION.


■1. KA^ADArHIS AQ-B AN'D PAE'EOTAGrE, BTC. '

The Vai&esika is one of the well-known Six Schools of Hindu philosophy.
It was first presented to the civilised world by the great sage Aulukva, other-
wise known as K&iyapa, and, still better, as Kandda, in the form of more or
less three hundred and seventy Smrnsot short, pithy sayings. Of the author of
these aphorisms, very little can be known at the present day. It would appear,
from the distinctive appellations by which he is recognised in the vast field of
Sanskrit Literature, that he was tiie son «• of tJluka and a scion of the highly
^it itual family of KaSyapa.f He resided at PrabhdsaX^ possibly the modern
Pabhosa in the Allahabad district (fcran account of which, see the Modern Review
for June 1909), and was thedisciplej of So««a who was an incarnation^


* fhe word Aulukya is derived from the w'ord UlAlca with tlie affix YaU, according to
the rule of Pa-iini that words, denoting the lineal, male descendants otQarga and others,

are clei*i¥ed from the words Garga and others with the affix Yan ( IV. i. 105.);

and the word Clluka also is read amongst ‘ Garga and others.’ Now, it can be very easily
shown that AulUkgam none else than Kaidda himself. Thus, in the koia, a lexicon of that
name, we find, the name Auliikija should be imdersbood to

denote the Vaise^ika. In the Nydya-Vdrtika also it has been declared,

mmnvn, on which VachaspaU M ism

comments that the word : ‘ ' shows that the aboveds not the view: of the Nydya

School who maintain that conblaation is perceptible to the senses, but that of
And In the eoainieatary of Sanlmra Mism on the aphorisms 26 and 28 of the second chapter
of the seventh book,'We .shall' find that,: according v to- Kamday Gomhino^tion ib super-sea-'
sible. Oombiiiabloa is, again, referred to as the conclusion of AuMUya, in

Bhatta Kimdrila's gloss to Tantra-Vdrtika, I. i. 4. In Hemachandm's Ahhidkdna-OMntamanU
also, t,he ^^tisesikas are called Aidiikijas, And, lastly, in the Sarua-Darkiua-Bamgmha^
Mdclhaya-rlchfin/a gives an account of the pliilosophleal theories of Kaidda under the
lieadlng of Auldkya’-Dariana,

f The word Efiiyaixi is also , derived, in the sense of a lineal, male descendant,
.from the word Z’as'ya pa with the affix a 'i, according to the rule of Pd ;rbn*,

That It refers to Kaidda m also equally obvious. 'The lexicon Trlkdnda-$e.^a

— that Kaidda and Kdiyapaato one and the same individual. The
dkticm, Kdiyapa has 'declared a contradic-

tory, or an unproved, or a doubtful mark to foe no mark— embodies the view of Kaidda
(ylde K(t‘aula‘‘Butras^ III. L 17. Upaskdra)^ And in ^ the "in 'connection with

the ascertainment of marks In the ^ chapter on Inference," Udaydm^Acfmhja.also quotes
this clfelwm and attrifootes it to Ka-jada.. : . _ ,

, 1: ff wra*!: i JTsrraMir^rRT n li > l :

m n s^r frtf'fsir: i 35?.^r ^ ir ijol iK ; . :


INTRODWTION.


of Lord ,,^ ■ ■ He ■" 'lived, -a 'pigeon-life*, and used for his daily bread

particles of ricely:i.ng' scattered on public streets. ' .That is, why:;' lie,. .came to be..
'Called'"' by.' .the 'significant '' surname of Kandda^ with itS' variant Kana-bhuk or
Mmidbkubfit^ ,. meaning , one .-who;' '.feeds ' upoo' particles.' By such austerities he ,
.pleased, the mighty' Lord &iva^ the Grand ' Master ' of all. learniDg, who, .appearing
: '.in': the.',form of an owl, as tradition has it, delivered to him the'' trutlis about. .'the'''
...Six, Predicables, Substance, -Attribute,. Action, Genus, .Species, and Combi-
'nation, and' appoiiited' hini'to'Gom.p.ose a treatise, embodying those truths for the
;. .benefit"'':. .of the' world Thus,, under the grace of Godl and by His a.ppointmerit,,

: the '"'great; sage;-'.^^^ composed -the of the Vaiiedka .system.- ^ ..'

, ':' v; "'No popularity and antiquity of iht Canada Sutras^ there can

'.;'be.,'''hp.,,rea:son:'ab.le .doubt. ., The re.ferences that. w.e find to.'it ..in,. the Vdyu-’Pufdna'y.,
;:P^^dfna^Purdna^ 'DevkB:hdgavatay Mahdbhdrafa^ ^rlmad^BhdgQVUitz ^ and other .,
;:,:p6pu!''a"r,V:a bear infallible testimony to its antiquity, and' to the:,:.

popular i'ty aiid w by it. Even at the present

r'lnonient,,; t,h,e', Vais'erka, with "its ' sister system of' -"'die,

: thQ,ughh pupils alike in all the seats of ancient learning,' l' "!Ti:€'an,'

the iols and chafuspdthis, in Bengal. One may not be disposed, however, to accept
the authorit}^ of the Purdnas and other writings of that class on the question of
chronology; nor do we ask our readers to do so. But still it can be laid down,
with some degree of practical certainty, first, that the Vaidegika is the oldest of
all the six principal systems of Hindu Philosophy, and, secondly, that it is at
least three thousand years old.

Thus, as regards our first proposition : In the Veddnta-Suiras, the great
Vydsa has directly attacked the theories oi Kandda in these aphorismsj: : **Or


11 By the -way, we should notice here that tiie-worcl K'a.’uUla
has been . otherwise interpreted by som.e as . meaning A toin'-eater., a-nd -it - is: - suggested
that the auilior of the Vaiseiiika-Sutra& is called by that name because he has propounded
the theoi*y of atoms.

•j- There is a mass of evidence behind this traditional divine origin of the Vaiiefika
Philosophy, Vide L L 4, Vpashdra* In the concluding verse of his Bhdma, Praia sitapdda
in paying homage to EiviMa, has alluded to this tradition : racgf

h” And in the Tikd of NydyanmndaU, Bdjaie-
kliara, also has said ; ■ 1%^ gR'kfC

fyecWnta-SitJms, Il.ij. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17. Vide toI. XSXIV of the Sacred

‘Boo'ka of the East With 'regard to this-- and the foliowing criticisms of the Vaise-^ika
Bnrsana, we feel inclined 'to makfe only one '.observation* It seems to us that ail this
■criticism proceeds upon a, ’'misconception 'dr ''misconstruction of the position of Ku^uida
doe to oversight of the definite limitation, .w'hich we hope we shall be able to estabilshr
i*' of his stand point .and of the” '.scope and. province of his enquiry. We believe also that
” shch misconception' and misconstruction did hot exist on the part of the critics themselves,
"'•but in the school which' followed. -and advocated the system of iSTa^dcIa and against whom
. 'the criticisms were aecortogly 'directed.. .


IFmODWTION,


(the world may originate from Brahman)' as,, the great' and, the long origins:;:
from the short and the atoniief'^ ^In also -(in .nhe ■ cases of the

adrista inhering either i'n tiie atoms or the soul) action'(of the atoms) is, not,,
possible'; hence absence of that' (tm,' creation.- an^ pralaya).’'' And because in
consequence of Samavaya being admitted a re'gressus in infinitum results from
parity of reasoning. ■' ■ And on account of the permanent e^tisteoce (of activity
or noi>activity).^’ , And on account of the atoms having -colour, etc.; the reverse
(of the, Vaigesika tenet would take place);. as thus it is observed*” And 'as there
'.'are difficaities in both cases.’'’ And as ((he atomic theory) is not accepted (by'
'any,:autho'!;!t persons) it is to be disregarded altogether.” In the Sdnj^khya-
SiUm of I{apiia^aga.hi^ the Faiiegtht theories of Six ■Predicables/SalvaiioOj.'Ul-
tiraaie AtoniSy Externa! Perceptionj Combination, etc*, are, similarly 'qiioted.,,a:nd'
criticised ; ‘f VVedo not hold the theory^of Six Predicables,-;like'the
. au-d,,,':Otimrs,^.-f'^-— -,*f,T no uoi'formit}!' of. Six Predicables ; nor does "Salvation"'

(result) "from kiiomdedge-.of 'ihe'm Atoms are .'not' eternaJ,,',because
.^y^dic evidence that they ' are effects Indivisibility ■ (does).- .-not' .(be-lon-g
them), 'being effect-s,.”§,-~.'^‘.TIie .law, of .Perception, is. n':ot;''''c,onfi’!ied
^^Combination does not exist, there being no proof, etc. — {Sdmkhya-Suiram. L
etc.) The Yoga philosophy of again' adminedly'

com,cs later than tiie Sdn^khya, Next, in the Purva-mimdnsa'dariarta^ ^^(Soiind),
some, say, (is produced from) action, as it is. observed ■ therein,”/' ^nd' other
aphorisms M Jaimini rtq particularly directed against the Vaigesika ilitory. of the
non-eternality of sound. T’ne priority of the Vai^rpka to the Nydva peihaps is
'n- 0 "t so- obvious. Max Muller seems inclined to the view that tiie Vaisesika came
after tl-ie Nydya and other systems. For, in his' Six Spsiems of Indian Philosophy^
tliat.. great 'orientalist ; observes -: It {Kandda's system) does not contain much
that/1"s,-f-pecul,lar. to .it,. -at'id ,seems:to presu'ppose much that w.e,- fcmiid , already.
dh:.,:'.lhe'':Ot'h^ -the- .theory, of Anus or. atoms,, generally cii,e.d m:s-its

peculiar' character, was evidently 'k'nowii' to; tiie '■ Ny^aya, --i-hGiigh;'it is more ' fully .'.
developed by the Vaigesikas.” But it is abuodanify 'clear 'v-hm'ra.', what ^
,'is:idicated .above that the first proposition of Max Muller is not tenable-^' a-nd.'we,'
S'ha-li. -..-presently see that there , is virtually do justification for holding the . secon.d' '


ti HI =:Kn.- ■

t s=frSSI^5T?fr : II ibid. H I H

§ ^ it md. h i ii

I The great Bengali antiquariau Dr* Rajenclralala Mitra §xes. 'the age ' 'of Patanjali
at three ceuturies before Ohrlsfe, Vide the preface to his^editioa of the Yoga Aphorums'of



i ■■ , li


INTBOJOUGTIOm


also„ The verses of the Vdyu^ptirdna -cited on page i, foot-note go to show
that ' and AkmpMa^ the author of the Nyayk system, w='ere con-

temporaries and fellow students, A comparison of the two parallel systems
of thought evolved by them respectively leads us to the conclusion that the
Nydya of Akmpdda made its appearance after the Vai^esika of Kandda, For
we-find that the method of inference which Is briefly and 'imperfectly
in the Vaiiepka^ is more fully and elaborately developed in the Nydya. This
is also' the case- with regard to, the non-eternal ity ofsound, the investigatioiT o-f .
'the,' 'Soul,,- and other 'important topics. ■ Again, whereas the Vai'iefka recognises,
only three* kinds of fallacies of marks of inference, the Nydya admits fivet of
them and establishes their existence at great length. Had the -Vaiiemka come
after the Nydya, then, the five-foldness of those fallacies "would, in all probability,
have been specifically confuted in it, and their three-foldness vindicated by
co-gent'- arguments. It follows {hni Kandda showed the way to

Akmpdda, at any rare, that - what was begun by the former w^as completed by
the 'latter. We are - confirmed in this- conclusion by -the observationst-,^ :of: the
tmAiit ■Vdtsydyana while commenting upon the S?l/rwi§ l. i. 9, w^^h

■ Sense, Object, Reason, Mind, Activity or IncHDatlon,
Fault, Re-iocarnation, Fruits of Action, Pain, and Emancipation, — these are
things to be known . Vdtsydyana sees the incompleteness of the enumeration
and adds to it Substance, Attribute, Action, Genus, Species, and Combination,—
the six Predicables enumerated by thereby showing that the Aydya

presupposes the Va sesika, and not vice versa, as Max Muller seems to think.

We shall next discuss the age of Kandda and see what justification there
is for the assumed validity of the second proposition advanced by us. The
simplicity of his diction and the aphoristic form of his wmiting, while Dariana
or philosophy, professedly so called, was just making its appearance into the
thinking world, all, of course, unmistakeably point to a definite period in the
history of Sanskrit Literature. But unfortunately no reliable theory has been
as yet reached regarding the 'development of the Sanskrit language, and a
History of Sanskrit Literature still remains a desideratum. We, therefore,
turn to the researches of oriental scholars, both European and Indian, before
we proceed' to .'hazard any theory in the matter. Now, in 1S85, Professor
'Leumann published an article on The old reports on the Schisms of the
Jainas’^ in the Indlsche Siudein (XVII, pp. 91-135). Among the various
. , heresies there mentioned,' the sixth was founded by the aiithcir-of the Vaiie§iku-

t ii \ i ^ i v n

, Nydya-^ntram, L li* et seq,

A: , % « » » «



INTMOJDWTIOW.


SuHa^ of the ChaulU racCy and hence called Chauliiga. (Is Chauluga a degraded
■form'.ef' Aulfikya Tne author Jinabhadra also-mentions 144 so-called points'
Qf\t\mMm 4 esi'ka system,.' Jinabhadra’s .date ns.-fix-ed by Professor .Leiim a nii
ill: the eighth century A,D Again, Haribhadra,.a Bralimana convert- to Jainism,
has left' us a work .called Sad^Dariana^SamuchchayaSttiram, in which the
Vaidesika’^Dariana finds a place, Haribhadra died in 1055 of the Vira era, i,^.,
585 that is, 52S A. D, . Lastly, in- an accou.nt of king 'Kaniska

(85-106. A.. D.) and his Great Council under Vasumitra and POrnaka,' we read'
■that ..there was - at that time in Ka®mira a Buddhist of the 'iiame of Sutra, who
.:'is. ,sa,!d to ^ belonged ■ to the Vmdefka School This would prove the
existence o! the Philosophy' in the first century . A. D. Tiie accomifc

is .takeii froiii';^^ Choijung, and .the same ■authority states that, a fien. the

.death,, of: Kaniska, a rich householder of the name of Jati ■ who lived' . at, Aiva-
Paraiita, In the north, invited Vasumitra, a monk of the Vaidepka school, from
Maru in the west, and another, Ghosasahgha, from Sactria, and supported the
native clergy, consisting of three hundred thousand monks for a period of ten
years„ Journal of Buddhist Text Society, Vol. I, pp, 1, et seq., part 3,

p. 19.) Thus on tile result of modern researches, the Vftidegika would be two
■thG.usand.: years' old. But we need not stop there. We have just noW' seen
over what a vast range of country and people the Va.d-^sik^ spread, and how
it W’^as, still flourishing in the midst- of insurgent Jainism. ■ We have also' seen
that the Faid^'sika philosophy was propounded long before the Yoga system
of Patanjodi^ and that the age of the Yoga is fixed in the third century before
Christ. Fiiere is, moreover, reason for believing that tlie Pais^gika was
prevalent prior to the advent of Buddhism, and survived the moral and
intellectual revolution wrought by propagandists of the Bauddha School. For,
the Fa.’d^^ika does not consciously labour under the turmoil of that Buddhistic
revolution | and although some of its teachings may appear to have reference
to the theories of the Baiiddba PliilGsophy,*. i't-.is possible that the\^ liave in vieW'
only the germs of Buddiiisni latent in the Upamsafs and other older writings,



iilllplll

• ■ ' i


INTRODUCTION.


The philosophy of Madhyamika Buddhists was i ivuyaidda^ Mliilism or lllosionism, uamely,
that the objects of perceptiou are non-entities or a mere toIcL This system was
established by Nagarjiina, who flourished about the end of the second century A. D. On
the other hand, the Vijnamidda of the Yogachara Buddhists declares that external
objects are produced, so far as our consciousness is concerned, by ideas existing indepen-
dently of them. It was established by Asaiiga and bis younger Yasubandhu daring the
latter part of the fifth century A. D, But the Vaisc^^ika-D avsaua maintains the realistic
view that by perception we become truly cognizant of real objects, and in connection
with that, controverts the feunyavada, but does not refer to the Yijoanavada. It follows,
therefore, that it must have been composed between 200 and 450 A.D,

\¥e, on the contrary, contend that the Veda has been the one source of all the
philosophical theories including the above Buddhist philosophies, that have made their
appearance on the Indian soil, and that, therefore, the method adopted by the writer is
inconclusive. Even if we do not take the Veda into account, still the argument of the
writer is not sound. The VaiseHika-Daimna, it is significant to note, does not lUreetly
refer to, not to say, discuss, the .Sunyavada, which certainly would not have been the
case, had it been a fact that the former was composed after the definite establishment of
the school of Nihilism. It may be also pointed out in passing that as there is In the
Valseiiika’-Darsana reference to the theor^^ of Nihilism, so (here is also to the other theory,
namely Idealism lEo’-’dda mtra, III. i. 18), This is inconsistent with the winter’s position,
and consistent with ours. Lastly, it is equally possible, nay, more, than probable, we
should say, having regard to the natural developoient of lioman thought, that the
Eealism of the Viiise.fika philosophy was not preceded, but, on the contrary, was folIo%ved,
by the Nihilism and Idealism of the Buddhist schools. Acharya SahPmra, the great
commentator of the V ecUmta-Sutras^ seems to have taken the same view as ourselves. For
in his commentary on^the Vedanta IL ii. 18, be observes ; “ That (the Yai%sika)

•doctrine maybe called' semi-destructive '(or semi-nihillstic). That, the more thorough
doctrine which teaches universal non- permanency (Bflnyavada) is even less worthy of
being taken into consideration, we now proceed to show.*'

W.'iii, 87 . - , ■"

' ? H I. ii. 6. , ^


siiii


iiiiliil


mmoBWTiow^


book of KaiiddaS-uiram : (The^- statement of Genus ■ and Species has been

made) with the exception of the Final Species.'*'" ■

Max Miillerj however, observes as' follows:' may ’"be that the' 'Dame

of Vaisesika was given to, Kaeada’s philosophy from the. difFere.nces, ,or vise.sas
'which he establishes between substances, qualities, 'and .'actions, or it, may be,
from Visesa as a name of' individual things, applicable therefore to atoms.
But this, in the absence of decisive evidence, must for the present remain
undetermined. ”. ' Another writer has opined that vide^a is a, .nanie for the
ii'drama atom, and that the s^^stem of Kandda is called- the

■¥mdesika or Atomistic philosophy, because it teaches the theory of atom's, .But
,tli€se :suggest ions are , so palpably 'erroneous, and- absurd, as .-it .. 'will, be:., ..'after-
.wards. seen, ihat-ive need' not take the trouble to sliow theni up..


Jf a persoft knows the 4etf as *1, am/ then, for what


Vlll


iNfitOBUOTIOM.


who think that these systems ■ are at daggers drawn' with one another, the
reply may be given, once and for all, in tlie felicitous language of Max Muller :•
**-The longer I have studied the various systems, the more have i become
impressed with the truth of the view taken by VijEana-BhIkshu and others
that there is behind the variety of the six systems a common fund of what may
be called a national or popular philosophy, a large Manasa lake of philosophic-
cal thought and language, far away in the distant ‘North, and in the distant
.V ' ' past, from 'Which each -thio-ker.. was allowed to draw for his own purposes^' „■

(a) Siandpotnix

The Vaisesika philosophy looks at things from a particular, well-defined
point of view. It is the point of view of those to whom the lectures of Kandda'
were addressed. It is not, therefore, so much a complete, independent S3^stem
':':,:V ''Ohphilosophic thought, ■ as ■ a elaboration, an application, according to the
immediate environment of its origin, of the teachings of the Vedic and other
ancient sages who had gone before its. author. At its back there lies a whole
:^system/o^h ever since its development .or revelation eve.n up'to.'

the present moment, has constituted the "very fabric of Hindu social and’
domestic life and organisation. The existence of G )d, the immortality of .the
S«-ui, Transmigration, Providence, Creation, and many other weighty problems
of philosopsiy do not directly come up for consideration in the system of
Kandda^ not that his mind is absolutely blank on those points or ttiat he fails
to realize their importance for the well-being of his disciples, but because they
are practically accepted by inm as so many postulates of his system. For.
philosophy with him, as also with the authors of the other systems, is not
a mere inieHectual pursuit, a speculative science, but is intended to serve an
entirely practical purpose of the utmost importance. Readers stiould bear
this in mind when they institute comparisons, which can otherwise be only •
superficial, between one system of Indian Philosophy and another, and between
the philosophies of India .and Europe. Now, Kaiidda h^s' got waiting upon
himacHsS'Of disciples, who .have reached a defitiiie stage in the spiritual'
'education, of 'the Self. . 'They 'bear sp.>tless character, and are pure In conduct*
They have awakened to a sense of their state of bofidage in the evolution of
the universe ; .they have realized that the inexorable law of kurmu drags
along, as it were, the the embodied soul, from one state of existence to

another, and so on, and .that the course of these recurrent existence.s cannot

,,y; ' ' • ^

be arrested otherwise. than by the. unf ddment of the nature .of the Self, inas*

.-V,.. much as the various bodies, assumed are so many * vehicles of acdoid, and the
environments in which they appear, so many appropriate fields for the ex-
perieiice of the fruirs of .action meri-red-.fn previous ybirths, so /that when the
."’y/y Self comes to be aware. of i'tS' own nature and, tliereby placing itself in direct
'v.v-,y. pppbsitipn-to the Not-self, -gets free from the trammels of Imrma by renouncing

,.rpose, desiring' whidhi


3JV-'?I-


iMTRODmfTOW.


will he suffer along with the body ?”=** Spiritual evolution of the Self, again, in-
volves a process, and depends upon the assimilation of the truth about the Self.
Accordingly Yajfiavalkya eloquently preached to h's favourite consort, “ The Self,
O Maitreyi, should be belield, should be heard about, should be discriminated in
thought, and should be constantly meditated upon "f i Brihat Aranyaka Upanisat
II. iv.. 5). Herein he, one of the greatest teachers of his time, indicates also
the successive steps towards the beholding, the immediate vision, in other
words, the realisation, of the Self. These (1) ^ravana, hearing, that is, the
acquisition of information about the self from authoritative external sources, e.g.,
by the study of the Vedas, the Smritis, the Pur^nas, the /tiASstsis, and such
other vvritings ; (2) application of the internal organ, the mind, to the

information so acquired, in other words, intelligent discrimination between the
passing and the permanent, the Not-Self and the Self ; and (3) NididhyCisana,
constant meditation on the permanent, the Self, in other words, absorbing atten-
tion to the awakening, as it were, of the dormant Self. The disciples that stand
before 'Kanadct, have realized the painfulness and abnormality, so to say, of
human existence, and, in their eagerness and anxiety to get free, once and for
all, from the coil of mortal ity, have studied the Vedas, the Smritis, the
PUrtnas, Ihe ItikQ,sas, and other authoritative writings, and learnt therefrom
that the Spiritual intuition of the Self is the only means of attaining
salvation. They re.spectfully ask the very kind-hearted sage /tfarnttfa to teach
them how spiritual intuition of the Self may be possible for them. Kandda
starts from this point, and herein lies the limit to the universal application of
the Vaiiesika system as well as the unfairness of estimating it by the standard
of universal applicability. however, addressing those earnest seekers
after Salvation, says that what they stand in immediate need of, is Manana,
intelligent discrimination between the Self and the Not-Self, that Manana re-
quires tativa-jadm, or knowledge of truth about the Self and Not-Self, which
ultimately leads to the attainment of salvation, and that he will, therefore, teach
them primarily the truih about the Self and Not-Self, seeing that they have
already cultivated the habit of purity in thought, speech, and deed, by the
observance of precepts and prohibitions. This is the origin of the Vai&esiha
Svstera. Its standpoint, therefore, is in the first place, a thoroughly practical


one. Kandda is not a mere philosopher, lover of wisdom, but verily a light on
the path ; nor are his disciples also mere lovers of wisdom, but travellers on
their journey onward. In the second place, his standpoint is spiritual. The
Spirit, t!ie Self, is his look out, and not the Not-Self ; he analyses and explains
the Not-Self only to eliminate it, so that purely the Self may remain. And, in
the third place, his standpoint is individualistic. That is to say, he necessarily


W'lra a-Braaddra^ya^Upmti^ai, IV. iv. 12.


mmoDtrcTiom


recognises that the Karma of no two individuals is the same^ and accordingly
untertakes to teach, in a general way, how it may be possible for each in-
dividual, embodied Soul to attain moksa or salvation by mea^is ol iaiivajrmaa
or knowledge of the truth about the Self and the Nol-self.

(i) Scope :

Tl)e scope of the Vaiiesika Dariana has been suiiiciently indicated above,
its remote object is to teach what mokBa or salvation is, and also how to attara

and as moksa mid ' iaiiva-.
with adharma. or right' conduct,


it. Immediately, however, it teaches iattva-jfidfta
jndiia both depend upon dharma accompanied
■ it also defines d^nd ad hamta^ m\d otherwise indicates their source s' ; and
characteristics. The limitation of the scope of Kandda's enquiry will be pre-
sently pointed out below.

{c) Province :

■ In one sense, the whole choir of heaven and furniture of earth ” fall
■within the province of the Vaisesika, as indeed of ail, Philosophy., v It embraces
all nameable things within its purview, and resolves them into .their
^Mtiniat^ proceeds no further. Wc shall -explain what we, :: mean

by saying relatively^ The Hindu conception of the creation and dissolution of
the world and its relation to God is too big a theme to be adequately or appro-
priately dealt with in this place. It would be, however, sufficient for our
purpose to point out that Sarga^ creation, as well as Pralaya^ dissolution, is
two-fold, being primary or original, and secondary or derivative. 'Fhus, the
emanation of the world-stuff, so to say, from the pure Self existing all by itself
at the beginning of all creation, is the primary or original creation ; and the
.subsequent evolution of the world-stuff' into the organised sysiera of the
universe, tiirough its innumerable stages, is a succession of secondary or
derivative creatioiis. Thus, in the Taiiliriya Upanisat^ we find % “ From this,
that same Self emanated Ether; from Ether, Air ; from Air, Fire ; from Fire,
Waters; from Waters, EarthA*^ In the reverse order, again, the dissolution of
the world-system into the world-stuff is secondary pralaya^ and tiie dis-
appearance of the world-stuff into the pure Self is primary or Mahd^ tlie great,
p-praiayMP^d^^ 'seedtidary- m.ay, be 'cal led ,:a.|,so''. te.m pora.r;y 'as : ■ if ' i S' agaib"

followed by a secondary creation. Now, Kandda carries his analj^sis of the
world upto the beginning of the secondary creation, or, what is practically the
same thing, up to the last moment of the secondary dissolution, and leaves it
there. This is merely another limitation of his system, lie does not, nay he
cannot, as the spirit of Hinduism is' wholly and decisively against it, repudiate
ihe doctrine, inculcated in the Vedas^ tiie Smriiis, the Purdnas^ and the liih^sas,

. that there is but one, prime causeand that the same is God, and that only lie
'' the Self, verily exists.'' We' are supported in this view fay the,foIlowing observ-
^''atibnVpiade fay;- inf Taittiriya Upanisat :

-fv,, f ■



•' '• ' .8=1 ... f


liipiiii


INmOmGTIQN.


Gauiama (the author of the ■ x¥f^f others. ' haves ^he above
way, explained the process of creation (of ' uhe ''World), xommeaciag from, and
.siibsecjiieiit to, ''the time' wlien'. Ether, Time, Space,, and Ultimate Atoms (of
Earth, .Water, Eire., and Air), produced from the pure' Brahman, the root cause,
had, been given their d.elinite place and fimction.”'^ .'It would '.be hardly fair,,
therefore, tolay the charge of being an Atomist or Pluralist at the door of
Kandda ; far less, to compare his teaching with the materialistic Atoniisrii'of the:
west, and to draw a moral therefrom ; as has been done by some of his readers,
to wit, Dr. VViliiam 'Fleming, who lias the following two paragraphs in fits The
Diciiont'ar.y of Philosophy,” under the word, Atom : “ llie doctrine of atomism'
did' not' take itsnise in Greece, but in the East, it- is. found in the .'Indian - Phil o»'
Sophy.' Kanada, the author of the s^^stem, admitted '■ an - infinite : intelligence,
distinct from the world. But he could not believe matter to be infinitely divisible,
as in tills case a grain of sand would be equal to a mountain, both being infinite.
Matter consists, then, of ultimate indivisible atoms, whicii are indestructible and
eternal. Empedocles and Anaxagoras did not exclude mind or spirit from the
universe. Leucippus and Democritus did. Epicurus added nothing to their
doctrine. Lucretius gave to it the graces of poetry.

: “In all its forms explaining the universe by chance or necessity, it tends

to iiiateriaHsm or atheisni, although Gassendi has attempted- tO' reconcile it with
a belief in -God.” -

Fhe shallowness of this opinion will be quite obvious to the reader of
these -pages.. ,

{d) Method :

The method employed in the Vaiieqika Sutras^ for the purpose of teaching
its truths, is three-foid, consisting of adde^a, enumeration of things, which
includes their classification also, lakqana^ their definition and denotation, and
parik^d, examination or investigation by means of perceptual and inferential
processes, wiiicii will be presently described. And it teaches iaUva-jndna^
through their Sddharmya^ resemblance and Vaidharmyct^ difference, by
showing -hi' what.:. respects things resemble, and differ from, one another.


. 4. kaistada’s logic and epistemology.

Nihirey^sam^ the Supreme Good, results from Abh^udaya^ Taiivu-jndna^
or cognition of reality. What then are the sources of knowledge ? What is
the value of human cognition ? Are there any limits to human understanding ?
-"—These problems naturally next come up for consideration, ■ Before we proceed
further, we, however, propose to acquaint the reader with the current theoiy of


'’'ll' I f >

■ SiV


,'«.,_ ;W'«.V,:i ‘ I.,„

*'“*“" '' " Bliil


xii INTROmOTlOm

cognition as held by the followers of the sister systems of Nydya and
Vaiiesika. And we cannot do better than make the following excerpt from the
Tarka-Samgraka of Annam Bhatta,

Buddkt^ Understanding, denotes cognition which renders alt human
conduct possible. It is twofold, consisting of S#/nVf, Representative conscious-
ness or Recollection, and Amibhava^ Presentative consciousness or perception
and inference, etc. By Smriti is meant cognition producible by Saif^skara^

■ (Inipressioii ■ left:, by ' previous perception), alone. Cognition, different' ' froni;'
that, is called Anubhava, which is, again, tvro-fold, being real or luireal
(accordingly as it does, or does not, correspond with Artha^ object, that is,
objective reality). Anubhava of a thing, in a certain form possessed 'by that
thing, is real; e.g.^ the cognition in the form that this is silver, in the
case of a piece of silver. It is this which is called Pramd^ Certitude.
Anubhava, in a certain form, of a thing which lacks that form, is unreal, e.g.,
the cognition in the form that this is silver, in the case of a shining mother-of-
pearl It is this whieli is called A-^pramd,, lo-certiliide. Real Anubhava, again,
is fourfold, according as it is divided into Praiyaksa, Perceptual, Anumiti,
Inferential, Upmniti, Analogical, and ^dbda, Verbal ; and its Karana, instrument,
also is fourfold, according as it is divided into, Praf\ahsa, Perception, Ammtdna,.
Inference, Upamana, Comparison, and &abda, Word or 'Festimony. Karana,
instrument, is a Kdrana, cause, not general, (/.«?., limited to a particular effect),
and in the exercise of its function or capable of function, KUra-ua, cause, is
the invariable and unconditional antecedent; Kdrya, effect, is the counter-
opposite of antecedent non-existence. Cause is three-fold, according to the
difference of Samavdyi, the combinative, A-Samavdvi, tlie Non-combinative,
and NimiUa, the Efficient or conditional, causes. Combinative cause is that,
being combined in which the effect is produced ; eg,, threads, of the cloth ;
the cloth, of the colour, etc., appertaining to itself. Non-combinative cause is that,
the causality of which depends upon ' its being combined in one and the same
object either with the effect or with the (combinative) cause ; eg,, conjunction
of threads, of the cloth colour of the threads, of the cokurof the cloth.

■ CoBditiona! cause is a cause other than the combinative and the non-com-
binative cause; eg,, the shuttle, the weaver's beam, etc., of the cloth. Now,

' amongst these three-fold causes, (ffie cause) which is unique, not general,
only that is a or instrument

^*Now, the instrument of perceptual cognition is perception. Perception
' is cognition produced through' the contact of the senses and objects. It is two-
V fold r Rirvikaipaka, •Non-dsscriminative or Indefinite, and Smtkaipuka, Discri-
_ ,_.:;^.minative or Definite. Cognition’ which is void of any definite form or shape, is
^ ; Rirvikalpaka, eg,, that it 'is something^, cognition appearing in a definite form or
' shapejs Smtkulpaka^yg., ^This. is 'a wooden elephant/ ^Heisa Brihmaiia/

■ He^' is yellow-complexioned/ .Contact of the senses and objects, which Is
■'"vkV mpans^^of perceptual cognition, is‘ six-fold i Conjunction, combination in the

In the conjimct, combination,


- ‘ h..’’ i*>’' '','S ^ 4■'^' ‘ I , r , ■* ''


IMTEOBUGTIOM.


coEibinatioii in the coiiibioedj and the relation of 'tlie' distinction, and the distin-
guished. Conjunctioo constitutes the contact iti ■.the’'prodiictiQii of.'perceptua^^^^^^

. ..cognition of a water-pot bj tiie eye. ,, ia'theproduction of perceptual '
of the coluur of the,, water-pot, contact' is constituted ■■ by ' combination' iir.the '' "

conjunct, iDas,muGh, as the colour combines, in other .word, inheres, in the water- '■
pot wliich is , conjunct with the eye. In the case of perceptual cogiiitioii of the
./genus., coburiiess, contact is constituted by combination- in .the. combined in
the .co'ojunc inasiTiueh as co'louraess inheres in-tiie colour which^again'-, inheres'
in the water-pot, conjunct with the eye. Combination constitutes the contact
in the case' of immadiate cogniti-oa of, Sound, by, the aurai sense, inasmuch'

Ether, confined within the cavity of jhe ear, forms 'the aural sense, and Sound is
the -attribute of Ether, and the relation of an attrrbute:aad;that-o.f:'whichfjt'is.;^^
attribute, is combination. Combination la. the'co.mbiixed'"is,- thembntam^^ -in^^the-" ^
immediate cognition of (the genus) Soundness; since Sound-ness ,ioberes/iii'. Sound
wi3ich again is inherent in the aural sense., -The/Reiation of 't-he-
/the;.':D..ist!oguislied.:is, the; contact in the percept ual/.cogni.tion..:: of /"Noh-exi
inasmuch as in the case of the cognition, *l'he spot contains non-existence of a
.w.ater-pot,:- I'lon^existenGe of a water-pot is a distinction, a distinguishing content, ■

; of thespot' which is conjunct with the eye. Perception is cognition procluced' ''

■ from the six, kinds of contact so iormed. The senses - are its- instruments. ' it ■
is, therefore, proved that the senses are proof or evidence- of perception. '

‘*The instrument of inferential cognition is Anumdna, Inference, inferen-
tial cognition is cognition produced from PardmaHa, Sub-sumption or Manipu-
lation. Pardmaria is cognition of Paksa-dharmaid, the existence of the mark
of inference in the subject of the inference, accompanied with vydpH^ pervasion
or universal concomitance, for example, (where inference is going to be made
that there is fire in the mountain), the cognition that this mountain contains
smoke which is pervaded by fire, (so that wherever there is smoke there is fire),'
is called Pardmaria^ and the cognition, which is produced by the above cogni-
tion, that the mountain contains fire, is called inferentiai cognition. In what-
ever place, there is smoke, there is fire, —this uniformity of concomitance or
co-existence Is called vydpii^ Pervasion. Paksa-dharmaid denotes the existence
of the vydpva^ that which is pervaded, (the mark of inference, e: smoke, etc.),

in the mountain, and the like, (that is, the pakga^ the subject of the inference)*
Inference is two-fold, logical or for the sake of oneself or for the discovery of
truth, and rhetorical or for tiie sake of others' or for the propagation of truths
Logical inference is the means of inferential cognition in oneself. Thus, for
instance, after having grasped the pervasion that wherever there is smoke, 'v/^.
there is fire, by observation made by himself on numerous occasions in the ■
kitchen and other places, when a man happens to- come to the vicinity of a
mountain and, on seeing smoke in the mountain, • feels doubt/ as to the exist-
ence of fire therein, he recollects the pervasion that wherever there is smoke,
there is fire, immediately after this^ cognition is produced (in him) that 'T: ■'



AecorcliBg ,to Kai}M'a, tlie mai'k itself, aBcl not its manipulatioii, tliat causes

, . , au illation to be made.


XIV


INTRODUCTION.


mountain contains smoke which is pervaded by fire. It is this which is called
L’l^g^parimaria^ Manipulation of the Mark. From this is produced the cogni-
tion, that is, the inferential cognition, that the mountain contains fire. And this
■ isviogieal i.nference. Rhetorical inference, on the other hand, ' is, 'the
consisting of five members, which is pul forward for the purpose of enlightening
V .others, after having inferred, fire from .smoke for oneself. /For example, .the
mountain contains fire, because it contains smoke; whatever contains smoke,

■: ',..€,o.ntaiiis fire-; as.the kitchen--; so^ too does, this ; therefore, it contains fire, Here-^

' .: '':b,y'.(tbe'exis'ten^ of) fire is demonstrated to others also from the demonstrated
--.mark ■Pratijftd.y Enunciation or Premiss, Hetu^ Reason,,, - Jnstaoce/'
Vpmaya^ Application, and Nigamam^ Conclusion,— these are the five members,
(of, an- argument).-' - -The- mountain- contains fire,— this is the/^m/f/Via'-pbecause^^'-k
. contains -siiioke,— tills is, th heht] whatever contains smoke, (contains fire),— this'
uda : so too: does this, — this is the tipamya\ therefore, it contains ■■

— this is, iht nigamana It is Lingapardmoriad^' Manipulation of the Mark-, -
wdiich is the cause of inferential cognition, logical as well as rhetorical. The
dn-ference,':t,herefore,- isthe same as manipulation of the mark,.-

Marks of inference are of three kinds; Anvaya-vyatireki^ Positive-and-
Negative, Keva Idnvay^ Purely Positive, and Kevala Vyalireki^ Purely Negative,

A positive-and-negative mark is that which possesses vydpti^ pervasion, in
presence as well as in absence, as, e.g^ the possession of smoke, when fire is
the Sddhya^ that which is to be inferred. Here pervasion in presence or
positive pervasion consists in this that wherever there is smoke, there is fire
as in the kitchen ; and pervasion in absence or negative pervasion appears in
this way that where fire does not exist, there smoke also does not exist, as in
a large lake. A purely positive mark is that whicli possesses pervasion or coti-
comitance in presenee alone, as, e.g,^ in the inference that a water-pot, like a piece
of cloth, can be described in words, inasmuch as it can be proved to exist.
Here there is no concomitance in absence or negative pervasion of the being
describable and the being provable, inasmuch as all that exists is describable
as weli.as provable* A purely negative mark is that which possesses pervasion
or concomitance in absence alone, as, e,g,^ in the following inference : Eartli
differs from all else on account of its possession of smell ; that which does not
differ from the all else, does not possess smell, as, water; but earth is not
so void of smell) ; therefore, it is not so non-different from all else).
Here no positive instance exists that that which possesses smell, differs from all
else, since Earth as such is the subject of the inference*

Paksa or Subject of Inference is that in winch the existence of the
' or that which is to be inferred fire) is doubtful; as, e.g,^ the

mountain, when the hetu or reason,' 'that is, possession of smoke, is present.
Eapahfa^ Favourable Instance,' is that in which the existence of the Sddhya is


mTROBUGTIOM.


.certain I kitchen,, in ;the',, aforesaid .example.- Vipakmy Repog

or Contrary instance^ is, that, in which -. -the ' iion-eXisten the Sddk
'.certain ;. ,aSj ^ ^ la,rge la,ke in the aforesaid example.

■ ^.^Heiii^dhhdsa, Appearance of a Mark, or ■ False Mark- is of five=
being Smyabhichdra, ; Va-i-iab,le, : Viruddha, Contradictory, Sai^pratipak
irafy, Asiddha;\3n^vm Uokiiown, and Bddhita^

The variable mark is that which is not-one-poinied.
to -the - of Bddhdrana, the General,

AnHipasav(^hari\ the Inconclusive. Therein the ge.

Is that which, .appears also where there
thing-to, b -inferred, as ii
.Itris-pf-ovable,,'’ tnasm
non-existence of fire. T1


kinds,
w, Con-,
r, Imp.eded or Obstructed,
It is thr ee«fold, ' according
'ana^ the Particular, and
general not-one-pointed (.niark)
sistence of the- ' or the-'

mountain contains Tre; because,;,
-also in the lake wherehtbere '.is!
ointed 'inark) is""' that-; which.! -iS'
ourable and unfavoin able ins-
t^mices, as eternaVbeca-use it is Sound.” (For)

Sound-ness, being divergent from,; all eternals and -non-eternals, appears in Sound
alone. The inconclusive is that which is bereft of positive and negative ins-
tances, as in the argument, “ Everything is non-eternal, because it is provable.”
Here being the /flhw or subject of inference, there can be no rns-

Unce at all. The contradictory mark is that which is pervaded by, or included
in, the non-existence of the Sddhya or ihe thing to be inferred, as in the argu-
ment, “Sound is eternal, because it is artificially produced,” inasmuclf as
artificiality IS pervaded also by the non-existence of eternality, that is, non-
eternahty. The contrary (or, more fully, an equally valid argument to the
contrary) is that wliich contains another mark or reason probative of the non-
existence of the sddhya or the thing to be inferred, as to the argument, “Sound
IS eternal, because it is an object of aura! perception, like soundness,” (there is
an equally valid argument to the contrary that) “Sound is non-eternal,

because it is an effect, like a water-pot.” The unproved is of three .kinds ;
Airaya-asiddha, Unproved in respect of its receptacle, S'harapa-asMha, \id-
proved in ^respect of its proper or intrinsic form, and Vydpyatva-asiddha
Unproved in respect of the characteristic of being pervaded. An example of
Airaya-asiddha is to be found in the aVgument, “ .A, lotus-iri-the-air, like a lotus
;grpwi!ig wi fo is fragrant, because it is a lotus.”j: Here the lotus-in-the- ^
air is i\it dAraya or receptacle (of the supposed fragrance), and it verily does not
exist. Svariipa-astddha may be illustrated by the argument “Sound is an
attribute^ because It IS visible." Here visibility (the supposed mark) does not
exist in Sound, Sound being the object of aural perception. Vydpyalva-asiddha
s a or mark present in the company of an tZ/iarf/if or adjunct or condition
Upadhi IS that winch, while it pervades or invariably accompanies Sddhya c;


XVI


INTMODWTIOW.


accompany the Sddkana ■ or the instrument of inference^ (that is^ the heii 4 ^
the middle term). By the being pervasive of the Sddhya is meant the being
the nori-counter-opposite of the absolute iioa-existeace co-extensive, or appear™
lag in the same substratum, with the Sddhya ; and by the being noi>pervasive
of the Sddhana is meant the being the counter-opposite of the absolute non*
existence inherent in that which contains the Sddhana, In the argument, “ The
mountain contains smoke, because it contains fire,’' the conjunction of wet fuel
is the upddht^ I bus where there is smoke, there is conjunction of wet fuel,
and the upddht^ therefore, is pervasive of the sddhya but c )njLinctioa of wet
fuel does not exist wherever there is fire, there being no conjunction of wet fuel ''
ill a (red-hot) ball of iron, and the itpddhiy iheroiovo^ is non pervasive of the
Sddhana, Accordingly, conjunction of wet fuel is an upddhi^ inasmuch as
it is non-pervasive of the bddhana, while it is pervasive of the sddhya. Posses-
sion of fire, being accompanied by an upddhi^ is vydpyatva-asiddha or a too ;

- ::wide-m Bddhiia is a mark, non-existence of the sddhya or tbe thing,

to be inferred by which, has been ascertained by other proofs, as in the argu- ,
ment, Fire is not-hot, because it is a substance.” Here that the mark is
impeded. the inapplicability of the mark, appears in this wa}^ : Not-hot-
ness is the sddhya or the thing to be inferred; the non-existence or negation
of it is hot-ness ; and it is apprehended by tactual perception.

Upamdm^ Comparison is the instrument of analogical cognition. Upamiti^
analogical cognition is cognition of the relation or connection of names and
objects bearing those names. Its instrument is the cognition of similarity.
Recollection of the meaning of propositions heard at a different place, is a
subsidiary operation. Thus, when a man who does not know the designate
of the term gayal, but hears from some person who had been to the forests that
a gayal is an animal which looks like a cow, and, then, going to the forest,
recollects the meaning of tiie statement (made by the forester) at the same time
that he sees the body of an animal which looks like the body of a cow, immedi-
ately afterwards is produced (in him) analogical cognition in the form that that is
the designate of the term, gayal.

<1,';.:.. ........ ....*CS..aWa,..Wo:rd... or.'restimony, consists, .of the udkya^ saying, of .a.ii dpia^z

trustworthy person. He is an dpta^ whose speech is tuned to reality, Vdkya
' means a collection of pada^ words, e.g.^ Bring the' cow. Fada is that which
possesses force. is arbitrament by the will of God that from such

■and such a 'word, such and such a meaning is to be understood. Akd}^k§d
Yog^atd and Sannidht are causes of the cognition of the meaning of a sentence.

' Akdmk^d^ expectancy, denotes the inability of a word to force its syntactical
^connection into consciousness on ■ account of absence of some other word*

c.p-h ere n c ni ea.ns,. _ noh-im ped i men t to. .. . : .the : ......,mea ni n..g.., . ......... ■

Adjacency, is the proouncfation of words without interval A saying, destitute
of ,M4w/MJ,,e;tc.,fis no proof., .,T:hus^. ^ A...cqw,. a .horse, a man, an. elephant .is' not ,



fSSfSf


iMfROBiraTioN.


XYll


uttered separately at difierent praham, periods of three hours each, of the
day, would be no proof, because of the absence of Sannidhi. Sayings are of
two kinds. or scriptural and or secular, fhe sayings of the

Veda, having been declared by God, are all of them authoritative. Secular
or human sayings are authoritative, provided they come from the mouth of
ti ustvvorihy peisons. All else is unauthoritative. Verbal cognition is cognition

of the meaning of sayings, and its instrument is Sound or vVoid.

'^Unreal Anubhava is three-fold, according to its division into SamSaya,


; QU Error^ and Tarka, Hypothetical Reasoning. SajYiiaya is


cogoitioo conversant about the possession of diverse, opposite


properties' by;, a .


single object, e.g., “ Whether it be a pillar or a person.” Viparyaya \sia\s(i


cognition; as, e.g., the cognition that it is silver, in respect of a shining raother-
,y:;GfparJ.^^ consists in the attribution of the that which pervades, :

O-e., the major term) by means of the attribution of the Fy«/y«, that which
IS pervaded, {i.e., the middle term) ; “ Were there no fire, there would be

y: no smoke also.” ■ ' ^

"SrnrtH, Rem iniscence, also is two-fold : real and unrea] I’he real is
Oat which IS produc pramd ov correct anubhava or experience, the

unreal IS that which is produced from aprama or incorrect anubhava on

esperience.^^ ' , .

Jndnam, cognition, then, may be Certitude, and Apramd, In-

certitude, or, in other words, Vidyd, Science, and A-vidvd, Nescience
A-vidyd is imperfect or faulty cognition ( X. ii. it). According to Kandda,
a vidyd has foui vai ieties, Svapna, Dream, Doubt, Viparyaya, Error,

and Anadhyavasdya, Non-finality, or Regression. Dream (IX. ii. 7) and
?«flst-Dream (IX. ii. 8) result from a particular conjunction of the inner sense
with the soul and from impressions left by experience, as well as from merit
and dement previously acquired (IX. ii. 9). Doubt arises from the perception
of the general property, the non-perception of the fiifferehtia, and the re-
Mllection of the alternatives, all at once (II. ii, 17). Doubt also arises whereP
that which IS seen, resembles that which was seen (II. ii. iS), and where that
vvhich has been seen in one form, is seen in a different form (II ii 19)
Science and Ne-science also give rise to Doubt (II. ii. 20 ); Error spring ’from

imperfections of the senses as well as from : imperfections- of the impressions i

particular attribute only). Vidyd or faultless cognition (IX ii xyv

It is likewise four-fold, according to Kandda: Pralyaksa, Perception, Laihgika

|i||i-me|0?«r/;^frRenri„iscence, and : Sagely Cognit^

iililillp- i'- Vision by the Perfected, ' Ones ^i^friilfidciiiv ''

perception. The Vaiiepka theory of perception, we shall treat of hereafter

||||mepl|||||||4|pp|u:ced;jeit|Cr;;)y:;|ie;;:-|efi^^^^

ip|||||pi!W|||||||lj;||0Cr:imm|diate;brj;me|iatcfg



rMTMODtlGTIOM,


XVlll


are not, according to him, independent instruments of cognition (IX, ii. 3,
4* S)'

Now, mediate cognition, or cognition produced by means of marks,
appears in this form that one thing is the effect or cause of, or conjunct with,
or contradictory to, or combined in, another thing (IX. ii. i). It is therefore based
upon the uniformities of cause and effect, conjunction, contradiction, and com*
bination, according as the iihgcHy mark, variously called as apneiesa, pramdrm
and karana (iX, ii. 4), is (the cause or the effect), the conjunct, the contradictory,
or the combined (III, i. 9). The law of causation has been set forth in the
following aphorisms : Non-existence of effect follows from the non-existence
of the cause (1. ii. i), but non-existence of cause does not follow from the
non-existence of the effect (I. ii. 2). The attribute of the effect is preceded by
like attribute in the cause (II. i. 24), and the nature of tiie effect follows
from the nature of tiie cause (IV. i, 3). Cause and effect, on the other hand,
areuiot identical- nor do the two together form a distinct unit separate from -all:
-other 'things (Vil, ii. 7).. That which is termed a cause, is an invar liable and
unconditional antecedent of what may be then termed its effect. It is either
combinative, or non-combinative, or efficient or conditional. For example,
substance is a combinative cause, Attribute and Action are non-combinative
causes, and Time is a conditional cause. Conjunction and combination will be
explained in the sequel.

It must not be supposed, however, that it is these uniformities which lead
to inference. That which leads to inference is the consciousness of Vydpiiy or,
as Kandda prefers to call it. Prasiddhi, pervasion or imiversai concomitance, in
the form ^ Asya tdairiy that is, that the g\vm Sddhanay middle term, is pervaded
by, or included in, the given the major term (IX. ii. 3}. For, a mark,

whether it be a conjunct, a cornbind, a co-combined, or a contradictory (III, i,
9), or a co-eifect(IH. i. 10), ora non-effect (ill. i. ir), or an effect (HI. i. 12, 13),
must be accompanied with pervasion, (Hi, i. 14), in order that it may lead to an
inference. Otherwise, any one thing could be the mark of any other thing
(III. L 8), and the mark could as well be identical with that of which it would be
ihe' mark |Iii. i. 7). 'But this is not -so. The unproved or unpervaded is a false
mark in the very same way as the non-existent and the dubious also are false
/marks .(Hi. i. 15). To give. a few examples: Because it. has horns, therefore
it is a horse (Hi. i. 16); because it has horns, therefore, it is a cow (HI. i. 17).

•r: AVhat purpose, then, is served by the Introduction of these uniformities

\lh an account of the '.process of inference? They serve to render the applica-
,tion of ,the illustrative or corroborative member of tiie syllogism, in other
words, the appeal to. experience,^' more ready and effective (IX. ii. 2) We have
already ;^^stated_ what the. differentunembers of the s3dlogism are, and also which
Hs the illustrative one* incidentally ,we may observe that in this view, the
’ value ^ of the^ syllogism lies,, not in the discoveiT* but in the exposition, of truth,
y thapis it rather than a logical,, process.


INmOBUGTION.,


co-eYi«W/^”^^V ^ place in respect of succession as well as

to ekrf ' former kind; is either i.e., from cause

is /•^- from effect to cause. Inference of the latter class

which I , rt^la, i.e., inference by the equally observed mark {IX, ii. i)

, iowever, oes not establish a thing in its individual aspect (fl. i. i6).

^ subsidiary to inference. Tactual and visual languages

inarticulate sounds or cries md articulate
^ 01 ZDOU.S, If „we consider the . connection between these ' signs' and ' ^

W are two kinds of languages as , there are /tivo ' . ' ; -

^ "s o ^ signsj namely, a conventional and a natural language. ■ A, ''natm^^

^ ^ igua^ is .a. .collection of signs that are used' involuntarily:: an'd,'\/:with 6 ut ■ '

'S.ttained. Speech- is the language

tor iraiso assists in the formation and development of though^ “Thought;'

, „ sa)-s „ Plato,^;*is, aO : - interior . and , silent ■ conversation,, , of. -the- t sdul^:-^:Wi:th^
;^i,seh., Speech is its external ■ expression.'; -■ .So,mer,;:;;thinker3,:.,
at their Gonaection...''':with objects' is-' natui'al' a

liecessarj-. OJjers hold that words themselves have no power to convey

vest that function in' another Sound which they term ^
:,,,,s/;/io^^ and 21). Kandda does not accept these T theories ^

fact, he demolishes them (il. ii, .6, ^7, 28,39,30, 3 >,32, 33, 34, 35, 36, and
37, an . ■ x-, n, 14, 15, xT, and 19). According to him, words and objects
are unrelated^ (Vn. ii. 18,1. The intuition of objects from words follows from
convention (VII. ii, 20). The convention, however, is not of human origin,
but of divine. It has not been, at the same time, arbitrarily imposed by God
autiioiitativeiiess /Vr is denied by Kandda. The composition of sentences,
distribution of names, formulation of precepts and prohibitions in the Veda
and its various branches, have all been the work of an Intelligent and Inde-
pendent Person possessing accurate knowledge about the objects treated in
them (U. i, 18, 19, VI, i. i, 2, 3, and 4). Words as well as letters have, accordingly, i
. u d-etcruihiate and unalterable ineaoing^

The sources of cognition have been described. The validity of human
xognitian IS now in question. Kandda does not challenge it in the least. W^ :

hirn there IS nothing that stands between the knowing, sutqect aird the object : ;
known. I he channels of cognition remaining pure, perfect, and efficient,

and diarma, merit, and absence of demerit, co-bperating,: the Self : : :

I jpo^nises^ olyects as tliey are. •ITe .elements of cognition are, after all^dtat^^

,^: eo|seK)u,saess. Inference ultinJately -depends; upon - perception, and^

it- V :wy:shaii,;^^t

-''l^beo-ry :0'f

a solutely beyond the pale of human cognition? The question may seem : i

strange to modern readers, specially to our brethren of the west. But it was r '


U'V-



- J


I


''viiy

f

I

I

'‘1^.

j'vi


J

' 1

I

'if


wf‘%,

1


-


j

m


I

'iiV



XX mmOBUOTION.

not so to tlie ancient sages,, and people, in general, of Hindusthana, Indeed,
they had no occasion for raising the question at all Their conception of
, the' Self is,' as.the word Aimd itself. implies, that it is all-pervading, (¥ 11 ,, :i, 22),
Theirs is the Avackchhedavdda, the doctrine that the soul is the highest Self
far ' as ■ limited by its tip ddht\ adjuncts, the senses,, the physical ,

' ■ organism, the external world, time, space, and the like. Tt is consistently'
with-t^ sublime doctrine, th^t Eandda divides men, as koov/ing agents, into "■
: -■ /0'^ia,:O ascetics,. the .perfected ones, ■and...'m/s,

■--'.seers.'. , have ordinary perception and inference.. 5^5 cognise truth

instinctively. This intellectual intuition occasionally occurs to lokas also
(IX. ii, 13). Siddhas cognise ordinarily super-sensible objects by heightening
the,.',. efficiency of their 'senses -by means of mantras^ ointments, and ^ other"'

■ extraordinary.' :appM (IX. ii. 13). While theyo^ms possess omniscience ''

.ffi the potency of yoga (IX, i, ii, 12 13, 14, 15), which consists ia the '
of .the activities of the internal organ and in theconcentraiion'''.'.of '
the -Self ^'llpo^ itself, s that connection of the Self with those. limiting circum-. .."
stances is cut off and it becomes free in the exercise of its inherent power.
Thus unbounded knowledge is. not impossible for man, and there is no limit
to humarj understanding.

It is easy to characterise this doctrine as fanciful, but it is so much
interwoven into the daily life of even the preseopday Hindu society, and
backed by such wealth of literature and abundance of excellent thought in
the civilisation of ancient India, that one must pause and be sufficiently in-
foruied before one can pronounce any judgment in the matter.

5. PRIDICABLES ENUMERATED BY KAIjrADA.

The word used by Kandda to denote a predicable or category is Paddriha^

HL Object denoted by a term. Paddrthas are the highest classes into which
all Nameable Things, as Mill appropriately calls them, may be arranged for
philosophical purposes. For, philosophy seeks to know all things, and it is not
possible to know them individually. Every thinker, therefore, in every age
.and in every country, has attempted a classification of things suited to the
nature of his thought. In the history ■ of philosophy the categories have been
successive!}?'' universal classification of things, of words, of ideas, or of forms
^ of thought. And a complete, theory of classification, or a complete system of
categories, is still a desideratum. Kandda^s enumeration of the predicables,
however, appears to us to be eminently satisfactory. He divides all nameable
- tilings primarily Into two classes, Existence and Non-exisence. Objects
, of the first class are next sub-divided as' Dravya^ Substance, Guna^ Attributes
Action, Sdmdnya, Genus, 'Species, and Samavdva^ Combination*

T Thpse w)M''Abhdtm, _ No'n-existeace are the seven Paddrthas, Predicables
l’ ''{L^L 4), .^Substaace,^^ A.ttribute, and Action are further sub-divided under nine,

. twenty-four; and five ’class^’^ respectively (I i. 5, 6 and 7). Genera and


iPlSiliilliliipl*

gf'^/V'W:---.;


IFTRODUCTION.


6. THE TEACHINGS OF KAJ^TADA WITH REGARD TO THE PRBDIOABLBS.

{a) Suhsstanee.

of SubstanGe is that it possesses Action and Attribute, and
is the combinative cause (I. i. [5, X. ii, i, 2). It is Velatively eterDal as ultimate
atoms, (IV. i. i) and non-eternal as bodies in the wide sense of the term.

: their' cooibinative-; cause, /Tbey^-are^effeep-'®

Sl^^lte‘iSi^Satises, :; ® contain subaltern genera and species (I i 8|' tS'l'beP^^

andiro

The divisions of substance are nine only, viz, Earth, Water Fire Air
Ether, Time, Space, Soul, and Mind (1. i. 5). Ether, Time, and Space denote


'mTMOmGTIOM^.


single, realities, .while, the rest denote classes. Ether, Time, Space, and Soul
are' infinite,: while the restare- FINITE.; ■

possesses colour, "taste, smell, and touGh:(I!V !.' !),'and'niim:ber,:'q
tity, separateness, conjunction, disjunction, priority, posteriority, gravity, fluidity,
and', ■potential ' energy,. ■ , Of these, smell belongs to' Earth ajone; andjs;'.in'eon';Se«
0:''quen'ce5'its,.:'''d!sti,n€ti' \L . i and 2).. It is either fragrant' or...;n'.oo*

' -""fragrant^ '' ^ The' ■ colour .of Earth is -manifold, white, etc. Its taste is of .s-ix':. kinds,
sweet, etc. ; and its touch is neither too hot nor too cold, and is due to burning.

element, Earth .'■eonsists. '''Gf .'ultimate

;'Wliich:V:-are::;'r^^ existing at the- beginning'of.'secondary .creation^':,

v-.,.A;S:';a:, Coni pound groupings of ultimate atoms, it is non-eternal,.-beiog'

van. .efFeet... ;Terren .originate three things, naiiiely, body, sen'Se,'

:..;'''a.nd.,,- :Dbject';^ ii. 1, 2, 3, and 4). . Of . these, .'the body is two-fold, sex-born., and
y:;,,.n,pt^sex-born (IV; ii. -5, 6, 7, '8, 9,- 10 and n). A-sexual bodies.; 'thaf :.iS:, b'Gd^^^^^
produced independently of blood and semen,' are those of the celestials and seers

of little creatures such as gnats,, mosquitoes, eic. ^
Sexual bodies are produced from the coming together of blood and semen.
These are either womb-born, as those of men and the lower animals, or egg-
born, as those of birds and reptiles.

The seme of smell is the terrene sense (VIII. in 5), as it causes the
manifestation of smell, while it does not cause the manifestation of taste, etc.
It is originated by terrene particles unoverpowered by Water, etc.

The ohj ri which is terrene, is characterised as earth, stone, and the im-
moveable, The modifications of earth are the divisions of land, wall, brick, etc.
Stones are the mountains, jewels, diamond, red-chalk, etc. The immoveables
are grass, herbs, trees, shrubs, creepers, etc.

(u) Water,

Water ; possesses colour, taste, touch, fluidity, and viscidity (II. i 2) and
number, quantity, separateness, conjunction, disjunction, priority, posteriority,

. gravity, and potential energy. Its colour is white, taste sweet, and touch cold.
Viscidity belongs to Water alone * so also does constitutional fluidity. These
and cold touch -are the distinctive characteristics of Water (IL ii. 5). Like
, /Earth; Water also is relatively .eternal as a cause (consisting of ultimate atoms)
and noq-eternal as an effect. Its products are likewise threefold, body, sense,
,,.and object. , Aqueous -are 'all a-sexually generated. They exist i'li the

world of Varum and are capable of experiencing the fruits of Ranm^ Inasmuch
'■■'as; terrene particles enter .into their composition as contributory causes or
■conditions. The organ of- taste is the aqueous (VIIL il 6), as it causes

the nianifestation of ^ taste, only; while it does not cause the manifestation of
,,, coioiir, etc, y;It1$ originated,, by aqueous particles unoverpowered by heterogenC'*
pus sulistaiices, are'/rivers, seas, dew, haiLstone, etc, ^


I



,■ „u,


INTROLUCTION. xxiii

(iii) Fin.

Fire possesses colour ai:d touch (il. i. 3), and number, quantity, separate-
ness, conjunctioi], disjunction, priority, posteriority, .fluidity, and potentiality.
Its colour is white and luminous, and the hot is ^ts only touch. These are the
distinctive attributes of fire (II. ii. 3 and 4). It is also two-fold, existing as
simple substances or atoms and as compounds, that is, effects. It originates
body, sensv,, and object. Igneous bodies are all a-sexually produced. They
Xist in.tim woiid of Aditya^ and are capable of experiencing the fruits of
Kama, inasmuch as terrene particles enter into their composition as con-
ti 1 utary causes or conditions. The organ of vision is the igneous sense (VHI.
1). 6), as It causes the manifestation of colour only, while it does not cause the
manifestation of taste, etc. It is originated by igiVeous particles uDOver-
powered b^ other particles. Igneous are fourfold, being differentiated as

terrestrial, celestial, abdomena], and mineral. The terrestrial is that which is
produced from fuel, such as wood ; the celestial is that which is not produced
rom fuel, g.^., lightning, etc. ; the abdoineual is the stoniacliic, capatiie of
extracting the juice of rice, etc. ; and the mineral is gold, etc

(iv) Air.

Ail possesses touch (II. i. 4), number, quantity, separateness, conjunction,
disjunction, priority, and posteriority (iV. i. la), and poteniiality t V. i. . 4).
Its touch IS neither too hot nor too cold and at the same time, it is not due to
burning, louch and the flotation of 'leaves, clouds, air-ships, etc. are the
mark of the existence of Air as a substance, but the name Vdyu, Air, is obtain^
ed from the Veda. The collision of Air with Air is the mark of its plurality
1. 9, !0| II, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17). Air is two-fold, as ultimate atoms and
as their Foducts. These products, again, are fourfold, viz., body, sense
object, and Frotya or life-breath. Aerial bodies are all a-sexuaily produced. They
Mist in the world of the Manils, and are capable of experiencing the fruits of
ATama, inasmuch as terrene particles enter into their composition as
contributory causes or conditions. The skin, spreading over the whole body
IS the aerial sgiisg (VI I. 11. 6), as it causes the manifestation of touch only'
while it does not cause the manifestation of smell, etc. It is originated by
aerial particles uu-overpowered by terrene and other particles. Tiie aerial
object is the wind which is the seat or support of the touch which can be felt.
The fourth effect of Air, which is called Fraiya is the means of disposing of the
essences, excreta, and tlie humours or vital fluids within the body Thouo'h
one still acquires the names oi A p ana {i.e., the air which throws

etc.j according to the diversity cTf its functions. , . ■ •

' (v) Ether. ■ ' ' '

Colour, taste, smell, and touch do not belong to Ether {IT i ei Its
attributes are , sound, number, quantity, separateness, conjunction’ and dis-'
junction. Sound IS ns distinctive attribute, and leads to ihe inference of its
. Mistenc^ by .fhe ^method ot residues k


f' > \ -f

‘ I 1 '1 , 1

F i '


'P'''

iSllillli


liiililfliilll

SiSllliilllS



r'


Tt“^nfiti llln^^1r1-*^ - il ilYiWrf%*i i iilf rr ilniirillnii • n f 1V iir T"T ii f A iii n-rWMiw I laniiiiiiiii ‘-■■> - - ■■ v


INTRODUCTION.


. I


it ( 11 . i. 29^ 30, and 31). It is universally present, being infinitely large (VII. i.
22). In the form of the sense of hearing it becomes the instrument fi-r the
perception of sound. The organ of hearing, again, called the cavity of the ear,
is a portion of Ether determined by merit and de-merit which lead to agreeable
and disagreeable e^cperiences caused by sound. And although Ether is eternal,
deafness is due to tiie absence of these determining circumstances.

. . (v! , Time,

GognitionS' of (priority) posteriori t}^, simultaneity, slowness, quickness are:,
marks of the existence of Time ( 11 . ii. b). These cogniiions do not arise in respect
of eternal substances but arise in respect of substances which have a prodiiction,

■■ ■Time,' therefor ej is the name given to the occasional efficient cause of .all:

■ that' is 'produced (II. ii. 9 and V. ii. 26), and that which also makes possible.:the' :

application of the terras hibernal, vernal, pluvial, etc., to flowers, fruits, etc.

: Time ^ is ■ ■ s is eternal (JI. ii. 7)« Its attributes , are nuniberi

:"q:uantity, separateness, conjunction, and disjunction. Its unity and individuality;
'•are proved like those of Ether and Existence ( 11 . ii. S).. Being a cause, whether.;
specific or universal, it is all-pervaJing (Vii. i. 25). Its conjunction and dis»
junction are proved from the origin of temporal priority and temporal
posteriority (VIE iL '22). , The use of its manifoidness, in spite of its unity, is
occasioned by external conditions.

(vii) Space,

Space is that from which, in respect of two simultaneously existing bodies^
which are also fixed in direction and place, such cognition and usage arise
that the one is remote from, etc., the other (IE ii. 10). Like Air, Space is a
substance, and is eternal (IE ii* lOj. like Existence, it is one and possesses
individuality (IL ii. 12). Like Time, it is all-pervading, and possesses con-
junction and disjunction. The attribution of multiplicity to it is due to the
(IE ii- 13),. . ^Directions in Space are explained ' by
reference to conjunctions of the sun (IL ii. 14, 15? and 16}.

(viii) Sotil.

The immediate purpose of the Vais'e^ika Dars'ana is to teach the difference
-between the Self and the Not-SelE Kandda has accordingly entered into a
'detailed enquiry respecting the existence and attributes of the Soul He
has shown that the self is not an ' empty idea but has a real existence ; that
the soul is not a by-product of physiological processes, nor is identical with the
stream -of conscious states, nor, again, ultimately resolvable into the Supreme
Self .during the circle of' secondary creation and 'dissolutions but that it is a
distinct entity possessing distinct attributes, and length of experience. Now,

, among substances, the Soul, like; Ether, Time, Space, Air, and ultimate Atoms/

, is not' ail object of ■.external ■•perception (VIIE i. 2). It is also not an object of
internal perception by ordinary minds. Only persons who have attained to a
/ certain, level of spiritual development/ that can, through a particular coiijuiic-
jlp'n of the, ‘Soul and the Mind ‘in, .the Soul, have immediate consciousness of the
i;/exislenbe’aiiij altribu^^ Soul, as also of other Sabstapces as 'well as


‘ : rNTRODUOTIOm sxv

Arributes, and Actions (IX. i. is, 12, 13, 14, and 15). Otherwise the proof of
the existence and attributes of the Soul is by means of inference. The mark of
in ference is in this case supplied by the very fac t of experience. For, perception
of the objects of the senses is a universal experience among mankind (III. i. i) ;
and this universal experience of the objects of the senses is a mark of
the existence of an object, (namely the Soul) different from the senses and their
objects (III. i. 2 and 18). It cannot be a mark for the inference that the body
or the senses are the seat of consciousness (HI. i. 3); for there is no conscious-
ness in their causes (III. i. 4), as otherwise consciousness would have appeared
also in the other effects of those causes (III. i. 5), which is, however, not the
Gase (III. i, 6). Thus, upon the fact of perception, an employer, a presiding
Soul, is inferred from the employment, in perception, of the organ of J,tearing
and the other senses as instruments. That the relation of causation or identity
does not subsist between the Sou! and the senses does not affect the inference
in the least 8, 9, 10, n, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17). It is further implied

that not merely perception, but eognition as sijch, is a mark of the inference of
a distinct entity called the Soul. The fact of re-cognition, again, disproves the
theory that the soul is but a stream of conscious states in ceaseless flow (III. i.
18). Moreover, the ascending life-breath, the descending life-breath, the clos-
ing and opening of the eye-lids, life, the movement of the Mind, and the affec-
tions of the other senses, and also pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, and volition
aie marks of the existence of the Soul (HI. ii. 4). The view, held by some, that
the existence of the Soul is proved, not by cognition nor by inference, but by
Revelation alone, is not tenable, since, as Ether is proved by sound, so the Sou!
is proved in particular by the innate as well as the sensible cognition in the
toim of ‘I accompanied by the divergence of such cognition from all other things
7, 8, 9, 10, I I, 12, 13, 14, IS, 16, 17, and iS). The sense of ‘i -ness can-
not be eliminated even in the last analysis, and the popular attribution of |t tG
the body is not real but transferential. It is the sense of Thness, again, which
establishes the difference betwen the Soul and livar a, the Supreme Self.
Besides there is no sufficient ground for maintaining the unity of the Soul ; on
the contrary, variety of status or lots proves diversity of Souls (HI. ii. 19 and 20),
which is supported by the Veda also iHI. ii. 21),' And activity and inactivity’
observed in one’s own Sou!, become the marks for the inference of Souls in
other bodies (HI. i. 19).

Now, the Soul is a Substance, being a substratum of attributes, and is eternal,
so far as secondary creation and dissolution are concerned, as there is no proof
for the supposition of parts in it (HI. ii. 5), and infinite, in consequence of us
vast expansion (VII. i. 22). Its attributes accordingly are cognition, pleasure,
pain, desire, aversion, volition, merit, demerit, (VI. i. 5), impression or subcon-
scious latency, number, quantity, separateness, conjunction, and disjunction, - .

Isvara or God is the Supreme Self, His existence is. proved by Revela-
tion and inference. The universe infers the existence of an Active Principle, '
independent of adri^tar^, its creator, and the Veda infers the existence of an . ^


IP


m

1 if-f

in


.

1 1 r


I '


i ?



XXVI


INTitODWTION:


Independent Person, eternally free from all faults whatever ( 1 . i. 3, IL i. 18 and
■ ’19, VL I. I, 2, 3, and 4, and X. ii. 9), as its Author. In Him, there are, therefore
according to some, eight attributes, number^ quantity, separateness, conjunc-
tion, disjunction, cognition, desire, and volition, 01% as according to others, six
attributes, the above with the exception of desire and volition, His cognition
itself ^being, in their view, . sufficient to .translate itself into action. Being thus ■
the substratum' of these six or eight attributes, specially of cognition, He cannot
be essentially different from Souls ; and hence it follows that God is a Soulr; And;:"^
only '.one: Go'd, as' the supposition^ of a. plurality of gods is :.co.ntravened .
by redundancy.

(ix) Ahnd,

Like the Soul," it also is not an object '
i. 2), Its existence is^ inferred from" the, prod uctioir^
r:: ':a lid:, .11^0^^^^^ cognition,- even on the contact of the Soul wit!) the senses" :

, Its attributes are number, quantity, separateness, -con-
junction, disjunction, priority,- posteriority, and potentiality.'. Its siibsta'iieeness-;^
::r ■and^dternaHty, .are. pr o ved 1 ike t hose ' of A i r ( 1 1 1 . i i. . 2). From 'the: non -si m.ullanei,ty
y:-: follows. i,hat .thei'e is .only one Mind in each ■ organ'"^;;
ism (ill- ii. 3)* For the same reason, its quantity is atomic (VII i. 23).

Now, the Mind is the inner sense, the organ of internal perception* We
shall here describe theory of perceptual cognition in general Percep*

• tion denotes certain, unchanging cognition, produced in the soul, through the
contact of the senses and objects* This contact, or presentation of objects to
the Soul through the medium of the senses, is either iatikika or oidinary, or
a-^laukika or extraordinary, We have given a full account of ordinary presenta-
tion in the quotation which we have made above from the Tarka-Sav^graha. But
''’'^ '''ytiiecondluons under which external perception can take place, remain to be
pointed out. The first condition of external perception is that the five external
senses are respectively constituted by the very same elements which they
^ . : severally apprehend (VIIL ii, 5 and 6). Coniniunity of substance, therefore,
between the sense and object is the essential coLdiiion for the apprehension
of the external objects, Earth, Water, Fire. The conditions of external
perception in particular instances are laid down in the aphorisms (iV, i, 6, 7, S,

/ 9". 10,' ! 1,1 2, and 13,)

, Ordinary mental perception consists in ap|. rehension, through the medium
' of the inner sense, of all the attributes of the soul with the exception of
■' noi>discriininative cognition, and Jivanayoiiiyaim^ volition

"the .source of vitality. ^ ' '

.Objects that are beyond the reach of the senses, under ordinary circum-
tdnees, therefore, are the Ultimate Atoms,. Air, Space, Time, Ether, Mind, Soul,

^ Combmatioo, Gravity, etc* They are^ however, cognizable in two ways, namely,'
_rare cases, .as Tn the case of sagely cognition (IX* iL 13}, or
through the presentation of objects' to the



INTRODUCTION.


XXVI.


jndnalaksam, ana yogajadharma, that is, presentation through the
the genus, cognition, and virtue born of yoga. Presentation by th
consists in the cognition of the genus itself ; without it there can be no co
or formation of the general idea from particular instances ; or, as the
tualist would prefer to say, without it there can be no Cognition of the
which i as a real existence apart from concrete embodiment. Presenta
cognition consists in the immediate contact with the mind, of that in
of which cognition is going to arise. As in “Fragrant Sandal-wood
the concept ‘ fragrance ’ may be revealed by presentation by the gei
‘ fragrance-ness ’ can be revealed only by presentation by cognition.

5s two-fold, according as it is produced in those who are
those who are (IX. i. 13). It is of inconceivable efficacy an

everything, e.g., omniscience, possible to man. Tho process of pe
through presentation constituted by has been elaborately descr

in the aphorisms IX. i. ir, 12, 13, 14, and 15.

The doctrine of realism is founded upon this theory of

tion.

{b) Attribute.

The characteristic of an Attribute is that it naturally inheres i
stances, does not contain an Attribute itself, and is not an independen
of conjunction and disjunction (I. i. 16). There are twenty-four Ati
namely. Colour, Taste, Smell, Touch, Number, Measure or Quantity, S
ness, Conjunction, Disjunction, Priority, Posteriority, Understanding
nition, Pleasure, Pain, Desire, Aversion, Volition, Gravity Fiuiditv V


INTRODUCTION.



Uoity^ Individuality, Gravity, Fluidity, Viscidity, and Velocity5 are preceded
by like attributes in their causes; while Cognition, Pleasure, Pain, Desire,
Aversion, Volition, Merit, Demerit, Impression, and Sound are not so prece-
ded. Cognition, Pleasure, Pain, Desire, Aversion, Volition, Merit, Demerit,
Impression, Sound, Quantity produced by loose conjunction as in a mass of

occasional Fluidity, and Colour, -raste,.. Smell,
Touch .which are not producedby; burning, are , the effects, of Conjunctioii,,,;
i::'i:.,T;:;rv'Cbhjm .and. Velocity are effects of Action; ■ and Sc)iind.'and,y-

iTy/..: are effects' of- Disjunction* ' Priority, Posteriority,.

Two,' eta, depend, upon. Understanding.. Golour, .Ta.ste,;--
ly-r; -S ib too hot,; ' Sound, Quantity,. Unity, - -Individual ity.,:,:,vmdr.

likes ;'^S.le.asure, Pain, Desire,- Aversion-,, and,. Volition^:
|.:S.:T-i ; while' .Conjunction, Disjunct.ion; Number, Gravity, ■

-Merit, Demerit, and Potentiality originate both.:-'.
i^^C%h Aversion, Impression, . and. Sound ori.g.inate

the same substratum, in which - they themselves inher:e:;,';-''.Colbur5::-,
Viscidity,- and Volition originate '..their.-^effect-s: :
' P" ,■ in a different substratum ; while Conjunction, Disjunction, Number, Iiidividu-
- allty, Gravity, Fluidity, Velocity, Merit, and Demerit originate their effects in
both places. Gravity, Fluidity, Velocity, Volition, Merit, Demerit, and a par^
ticular Conjunction (called impact and Impulse) are causes of Action or Change*
Colour, Taste, Smell, Touch which is not too hot, Number, Quantity, Individu-
ality, Viscidity, and Sound are non-combinative causes ; Cognition, Pleasure,
Pain, Desire, Aversion, Volition, Merit, Demerit, and Impression are efficient
causes ; Conjunction, Disjunction, hot Touch, Gravity, Fiuidit}^, and Velocity
are both ; while Priority, Posteriority, Duality, Separateness of Two, etc,,
possess no causality at all, Conjunction, Disjunction, Sound, and particular
attributes of the Soul are separable, that is, may or may not exist in their
substrata ; while the rest are inseparable, that is, always exist in their sub-
strata. ColourpFaste, Smell, and Touch, which are not due to burning, and
Quantity, Unity, Individuality, constitutional Fluidity, Gravit}?, and Visciclit}^'
endure SO long as their respective substrata endure; while the rest vaoisli

during the 'continuance of their substrata.*^

/■ - ‘ ■ " The reader will find a detailed account of the mode of production, destruc-

tion. and apprehension of these attributes in the body of the book {vide Books
;p;' Vl,-Vil, Vm,TX, andX). '

:p' ' • The characteristic of Action is that it inheres in one Substance only, does
^ ' not possess 'Attribute, and is an independent cause of Conjunctions and Dis-

^ junctions (I. i, 17, 20, 26, and 3<^)* There are five kinds of Action, Throw-
■'!P';T., ^-ing Upwards, Throwing Downwards, Contraction, Expansion, and Going or
’ / Motioh p. p;7). . Although Motion is synonymous with Action, yet It issepa-
^ . rately mentioned here with the object of including such other forms of Action


P'


IWmODWTION^-:



as Rotation, Evacuation, Percolation, etc, ActioiT' is speedily destroyed (11 ii.
'^25).r:::it/app in corporal or finitey Substances, ooly"(IL;i 21)^ so that it does
Tiiiie, Spacey Etheiv.and^Soullas well as in ' Attribute, and Action
■ ,;(¥. ih 21' an Actioa is .produced fronv Gravity, Fruidii}^ Volitionj^^ and

Conjunction : (L i, 29)/ It is destroyed, by Conjunction produced' by itself
,(L i. i4y and ll. i. 23), , It operates as a non-combinative-' cause (X. ji. 3), and
produces its effect in its own substratum as well ,as in. other ' places. ■ .It do'es
not' vo.riginate its like ( L i. ii, 24, and 31), nor does it originate S'ubstanee ( 11 '
;2:fy:22,, and , 31) . ■ ■ ^ ■

may be volitional or non»volitional, as in the familiar instance of
"throwing, down a pestle into a mortar, and its bounding back/whereyagain^^^^
,::,|h,e : actions' are produced' from Conjunction, except, the ■ original ' action ':'w'hi,€,'h'-
is produced from volition (V. i i, 2, 3, 4, 5, and '6)...' ■ Gravity : caiises'^'l^^^
down in the absence of Conjunction , (V. i; 7), as 'in raining (V.^li/ 3')y' an'd';^

. Velocity (V, J. ,1 8), as in the - falling y down- of a discharged ■■ arrow '.whlch'^shopte
■up in;the sky in 'Consequence of Impulse, and- ,'Ve,locily:

■stances of non- volitional action are thC' playful- movements "■■'of t-he 'hands and'
legs of a child ■ "(¥*■ i. .i 1),' the bursting forth of burning bodies, and the move- '
mentS', of the body of a sleeping person (V. 1 13^ Evaporation of water is
■caused by the rays of the sun through conjunction with Air, etc. (■¥« ii. 5 and 6}*
Formation , and dissolution of clouds is caused by conjunction of Fire (V. ii.

' 1 1). Fluidity causes the flo wing of ' waters on the surface of the
earth (V.' ii, 4,)..'

Action is^ also produced from Impact and Impluse (V. -ii.- 1), and also from
principle, that is, the sum total of the potentialafter-
effects ■ofypixvlo.u^^ produced (V.- i. 15, V. ii. 13 and sj). ■

Voluntary action, under particular circumstances, becomes the source
of dharma, merit, or adharma^ demerit, as the case may be ; involuntary action
dots not produce d'harm(^ ov a dkarm(^^

(d) Genus^ and (e) Species.

Genus is the principle of assimilation, and , is the principW,d^

.■differentiation. , Both the notions are relative ■ to the understanding'- fl^ ii. 'g.)','
■•■Existence, however, is the mmmum genus as ' it causes assimilative 'cognition
.on.iy, ( 1 . ii. ■4.'). .Substa-oce-oess or ■t.liat,' ' Which .makes... substance.. what'-
Attribute-oess or that which makes ■ Attribute what it is, and Actiou-oess or
that which makes Action what it is, are, for example, both genera and species
(1 ii. 5,) While the mfimw specks are those ultimate differences, final
species, which inhere in each individual ultimate atom, Soul, Mind, and in
Space, Time, and Etiier, thereby constituting their distinctive peculiarities,
and, account for the very great variety of things and events in the universe
( 1 . ii. 6.) It is, as has been already pointed out, on account of the recognition
of these infinm species^ that the system of Kandda is called the philosophy of
Final Species* Genus and Species, again, are both eternaU Genus presup-
poses ^ more than one individual, different' from one another in all other ’


respects. The supposition of genus and species in genus and species and
combination would entail infinite regression. (VilL i 5.)

N0W5 by * Existence* we mean that which, in the case of Substance^
Attribute, and Action, makes possible intuition and predication In the 'form
that it is existent (I. ii. 7)* it is not identical with Substance, Attribute, and
Action (l.di. 8, '9, and 10). And there is but one Existence (I. ii. 17). . Substance-
ness, Attribute-ness, and Action-iiess also are not identical with Substance,
Attribute, and Action (I. ii. ii, 12, 13, 14, 15, and id.)

{/) Combination^

■Combination is that relation of things, inseparably .associated, by nature,
and bearing to one another the relation of the container and the contained,
which is the source of intuition 'in the form of dt is here' (VII. ii. 26). This
is the relation of parts and wholes, of objects and their attributes, of action
and thatdir which i species and things in which they

reside, and of eternal substances and their ultimate differences. Combination
:iS:hot^ For,-'Conju.nctioo is. the a.ssociation, externally pro-

duced, of se.parately in 'nature its various, causes are actioiinf
either of two things, action of both, and another Conjunction (\T 1 . ii, 9); it
terminates in Disjunction, is perceptible to the sense, is manifold, and is perish-
able; whereas none of these characteristics exists in Combination. On the
contrary, Combination has no production (V. ii. 23^ is super-sensuous, eternal,
arid one (VO. ii. 28). It is established by inference, and is quite distinct from
Substance, Attribute, Action, Genus, and Species (VII, ii. 27.)

(^) We shall now briefly dwell upon the second main division of Name-
able' Things, that is, N.on-existence. . .Non-existence is primaril)? ■ two-fold,
non-existence of relation and non-existence of identity. Non-existence of
relation is divided as antecedent, as of a water-pot prior to its coming into
existencevCGosequent,' as of the water-pot subsequent to ■ its. passing . out: 'Of.
existence^ and absolute, as darkness. Non-existence of identity is such that the
nature of a cow does not exist in a horse, and vice versa^ Non-existence is an
object of perception (IX. i. 1, 3, 3, 4, .5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10.)

’ The aphorisms of Kmndda^ just now cited, are specially directed to contro-
vert the Simhhya themy, Sat-Mija-vida^ that the effect is existent even prior
to its production. Vide also I. ii. 1 and VIE ii. 8.


:;;:h ' '.7. THE VAISBSIEA THIOEY OP CREATION AND DISSOLUTION

■ op tee cosmic system.^

We have already ‘observed" that if does not carry his analysis of
the Cosmic System' hebind the start of ,what' may be called secondary creation.
This limitation^ of his, enquiry 'should' be constantly borne in mind in estimating
'the Soundness ^ of his theories;’/ Now, at the beginning, of secondary creation,
there '€3tist iiltipiate,,.atorns-yof Earthy and A'ir, and Time, Space,.

5., 12,1$. VII. ji. 9, tO. X. ii. 2,


ii®«


mmoDucTioN.


Ether, Souls and Minds. Primary Creation means the emanation or evolution
of these entities from the Supreme being ; but with this we are not at present
concerned. It should be observed, however, that the system of the universe
has no internal purpose of its' own, but that it exists for the sake of the
Souls. In other words, the evolution of the world is not an end in itself ; the
reason of its existence lies in so far as it explains, accounts for, makes possible
and helps the evolution of the Souls, travelling in succession through all forms
of mortal existence, under the influence oi Adristam, according to the law of
Karma^ It should be also observed that each secondary creation and each
secondary dissolution that follows the former, make up one cycle, the duration
of which is twice 15,55,20,00,00,00,00,0 years, and a number of such cycle roll
by before one great cycle of primary creation and ultimate dissolution can be
coropleted. In each minor cycle, the great Lord presides over the universe,
during integration, as the Evolver, and, during disintegration, as the With-
drawer.

Now, at the close of the period of the Evolver, the great Lord desires to

give rest to the struggling souls, struggling to get relief from the sufferings

of mortal existence and release from the chain of Adri^\at^-, and no sooner is
such desire entertained by Him than are suspended the functions of the
Adristani, unseen pi inciples, appertaining to every Soul, which are the primary
causes of the formation of bodies, of senses, and of Earth, Water, Fire, and
Air. And the same desire of the Great Lord, penetrating into Souls and
Ultimate Atoms, produces actions which result in disjunction ol the constituent
causes of the bodies and senses, and on the cessation hereby of the conjunction
of those causes, disintegration continues till the Ultimate Atoms are reached.
Likewise, Earth, Water, Fire, and Air are, one after another, resolved back
mto their Ultimate Atoms. These Ultimate Atoms and Souls, charged with
merit, demerit, and latent impressions, exist in a state of disintegration during
the period of the Withdrawer. Such is the process of secondary dissolution.

At the close of the period of disintegration, again, the Great Lord desires
to create, and thereupon, under the influence of Adr„tan, merit and demerit
appenammg to every Soul, action is produced in the ultimate atoms of Air’
through conjunction with the desire of the Lord, and the great element of Air

IS thereby produced m the serie.s of binary atomic aggregates, etc., and floats
on Ether m ceaseless flow. In the same way, and following the same course
of evolution, the great element of Water appears, in Air, from the ultimate
atoms of Water : thereafter the P-reat . ,,,


INTMODWTIOM.


PlantiSf Celestials, Seers, Piiris, Men, and ,all other animals, high and low^
'■all differing, from one. another in cognitio.n, experience,' and dength , of .life,

., '.and' eiido'Ws them with religious teodencj^, cognition,, dispass!o.n,' . and'.ot.her
' : exceilences in accordance with their deserts. Such, is the process, of secondary'

.',;:..'C.rea.tlon/ '

Kandda of course has not given us such a complete account of creation

- and' dissolution in his .Aphorisms. ' But this is the traditional view," ■and. the

■ , reference to the. above in his aphorisms- is, In the circura'stances'of the' case,-
sufficient to show that he accepts it.

Now, in the above account we have started with ilie existence of Ultimate
Atoms and of Adristam, We will now see how Km],dda proves their existence.

{a) Ultimate Atoms.

The eternal Is that which is existent and uncaused (iV. i i). The eternal
. ...exists (IV. i, 4). Things as they appear in nature cannot be-eternal, for, being-
. - eSects,. -they are destroyed, as they are produced. In them, 'liowever,. tlie
relation of parts and wholes is a matter of ordinary experience.': "It cannot be
unlimited, since, otherwise, there would be no difference in quantity betw^een
v.mrount Mero grain.. of mustard seed, both being originated'' .by infinite

parts. Therefore, a substance without parts must be the limit, and that
substance is the ultimate atom (IV, i. 2). It Is eternal (IV. i. 5, and VIh i. 20)
and imperceptible. And as there are four elements, so there are four classes
of Ultimate Atoms.

{b) Adpstam.

Adristam has been declared to be the cause also of earthquake and other
.- terrestria!' disturbances (V. ii. 2'), - of the growth, flowers, fruits, and tbe llke-
cf. trees (V, ii. 7)^ of desire .for particular objects (VI, ii. io), and of othe-r
'^'effects-. ( What, then, may be this adp^pzm? It.

as its name implies, an unseen principle, capable, of initiating changes.- It, is
intended to denote the potential after-effects of volitional acts performed in
previous births. It consists of dkarma^ merit, and adharma, demerit, and
inheres in the Soul 'The doctrine of adpstam is based upon the law of

- karma which includes causation and coosei-vation of enej-gy. The existence
of udfis^am may be demonstrated in the following manner : Voluntary act

' is an act done with a definite purpose or end. Such ends are within view^

' in, the case of acts like milking, cooking, etc; fruits of certain other acts,
sowing, <ploughing, planting, etc., appear in the near or distant future, as the
‘ catse may be, but,, in any ease on earth, and generally within the life-lime of the
'agent ; while there are' other- acts .such as sacrifice, charity, pure living, high
thinking, religious observances, etc., .-(VI ii. 2, 3, 4, 5, d, 7, 8, and 9), tue fruits of
wvhich are not enjoyable on earth., These acts cannot be said to be, purposeless ;

can^mme and fame be the result of them,, for they are not performed with
,^aheye\feoJt.: ..Qiy/the pther^han^^ as the Veda declares, Exaliaiion is the
aels^tbe^pur of '.-which 'aVe • not within sight (VI ii.T and X* il 8),
''‘'and tire the - strongest proof (11 i 3 and X. -ii 9).



tNTROmCflON



IJSTMVJJUUTIUM


iilpiSi


simmMm.


Now, Kandda^s 'idea of salvation or more properly, release, moha^ wliereiti
consists Nihireyasam^ the Supreme Good, is relative to what the state of trans-
migratory existence, over and over again, as described above, implies. In the
first place, it implies a state of bondage,— of slavish attachment’ to objects of
pleasure and pain, of desire and aversion,— of limitation by the physical embo-
diment, by the senses, and by the surroundings, in time, place, and situation
and circumstances. In the 'second place, it implies all that is the necessary
accompaniment of such mortal existence, — multitude of afflictions caused by
influences from within the body as well as from outside it, from physical, animal,
human, and superhuman agencies, — in one word, pain, or suffering, technically
called, the three-fold afflictions. The Supreme Good, therefore, consists in the
final cessation of these three-fold applications (I. i. 4), and Release means
release from the coil of mortalit}^ (V. 11. 18).

How then can Release be obtained ? We have seen that dltarma and
adharma are causes of birth, tiiat is conjunction of Soul with body, mind, and
life, and of death, that is, disjunction of body, mind, and Soul (V. ii. 27 and VI,
ii, 15). Application to acts which produce dharnia and adhanna^ is induced by
Desire and Aversion (VI, ii. 14), Desire and Aversion arise respectively from
pleasure and pain (VI. ii. 10}, and promiscuously from habit (VI, ii, n). adnfa^i>
(VL ii. 12) and racial characteristics (VL ii. 13). Pleasure and Pain result
from contact of Soul, sense, mind, and object (V, ii. 10), action of the
mind establishing connection between the Soul and the senses and, objects.
Action does not originate in the mind when it has become steady in
the Soul ; after this, there is non-existence of pain in the embodied Soul.
It is this stale, of permanent impossibility of pain, which is called yoga
or holy communion (V. ii. 16). In yoga^ the Soul acquires perfect control
over the internal and external senses, and once more regains its natural
freedom from ail limitation in respect of cognition as well as volition
and creative power ’ (VL II. 16). It then derives accurate knowledge' of previ-
ously produced dkurma and adharma^ which have to be experienced in other
' ■ ‘ bodies ' and places, builds up various bodies suitable to such experience, and
exhausts that dharmG, and adharma by experiencing them in those bodies. And
' Release consists in the non-existence of conjunction with the body, whether
' " after death or during life, as is the case with those who are called Jivanmuktu^

' I/., released while living, wheiTthere is, at the same time, no potential body
' existing, and consequently re-birth cannot take place in future (V, ii. 18).
v;’ 'Eniaiicipaiion, 'therefore, characterised as final cessation of pain, ^ ensues on
'.the cessation of birth, duedo cessation of tendency to acts which bind down,
'consequence of ; non-production of subsequent dharnm and on

account of the dispersion of the mists of faults characterised as desire^ aversion^
’and by means_ of spiritual intuition of the Soul in the state oi yoga.


XXXIV


THE YAISESIKA SUTEAS OF KANADA


WITH THE


GOMMENTARY OF ^AliJRARA MISRA


AND


EXTRAOTS FROM THE GLOSS OF JAYANARAYAXA


Book First — Chapter First.

UpGsIcIm.—Saliluatiou to SYm Gasiesa. I bow to Hara, who has the heavenly rive.r
playing on the lap of ills uptied matted looks, and whose forehead is adorned with the
embellisher of the night. My salutations constantly reach those two, Kanada and Bha-
vanatha, by whom I have been thoroughly enlightened in the Vaisesika system. May
success attend this venture of mine who, like the funambulist in the air, walk here
without any support, with the only help of the Sutram (rope or aphorism).

Being overcome witli tlie tliree-fold afflictions,* people endowed
with discriminative intelligence, collected from the various Srutis, Srhritis,
ItihAsas and PuiAnas, in the course of their search for a radical remedy
for the prevention of the three afflictions, that the immediate under-
standing of the principle of the Soul or simply, self-realization, alone is
that remedy. They then approached the very kind sage KanAda with
the desire of enquiring of him the way for the attainment of that even.
Now, the sage KanAda, possessing knowledge of essences, lordliness and
dispassion, remembering that it is the knowledge of the essences of the
sis padarthas (predicables) by way of their resemblance and diffei'ence,
which is the great way for the attaimnent of self-realization, and thinking
that that knowledge will be of easy access to them through, the dharma
of renunciation and that therefore he will first of all teach them
dharma (piety) as it is in itself and in its characteristics, and after that


VAI8E8IKA PHlLOSOPlir


ViDriti . — He who of His own will spreads out the production, pre-
servation, and destruction of the universe ; He wlio, even thougli shining
fortli in suppression of all these, still is not known by other than wise
men ; He, by knowing whom as He is iii Himself, men are saved from
further immersion into the waves of the stream of transmigration ; the
same is Bhava (i.e., the Lord of Creation), and He is easy of access by
the path of communion with Him in constant devotion. May He be
pleased to give you prosperity. I adore Bhavani (the consort of Bhava),
Mahei^l (the consort of Mahefla, the Great Lord), who, Herself bearing
limbs as dark as the cloud, still dispels the mass of darkness by myriads
of collected rays ; who while cutting asunder the bond of re-birth of Her
devotees, is Herself bound by love to Bhava and is His constant delighier ;
who, although She is a lady of high birth, yet wears the clothes of the
quarters ; who, although She is born of the Immobile (the Him^laya\
still moves from place to place ; and who, while being the consort of the
Pure (Siva), is seated on a corpse.

After bowing to his good preceptor, the foi'tunate twdce-born
Jayaniirayana is writing out the vivriti (explanation or elaboration) of the
aphorisms of Kan4da for the pleasure of Isvara.

Here indeed one and all of the disciples, desiring to throw off the
multitude of afflictions arising from birth, decrepitude, death, and the
like, hear from the various Srutis, Sihritis, Itihasas, Puranas, etc., that
the vision of the reality of the Self is the fundamental means of escaping
them. Thus, there is the i^ruti : “ Verily, verily, the Self is to be seen, to
be heard about, to be thought over, and meditated upon. Verily, 0 verily,
this is (the measure of) immortality (BrihaclAranyaka 2, 4, 5) ; ” also, “ when
the Purusa (the iu-dweller) will know himself— -the Self — as “ I am,” then
wishing what,, for which desire, will he pursue the course of transmigra-
tion ? ” And the Smriti also ; “ By elahorating his luiderstanding in three
ways, namely by sacred writings, inference, and habitual flow of contem-
plation, a person attains to laudable communion.’’

Now, some disciples, who were unenvious and who bad properly
studied the Vedas and the VedaAgas, (f.e., treatises regarded as so many
limbs as it were of the Vedas) and had also achieved the Sravam {i.e., the
stage of self culture known hy the name, audition, in other words the mei’e
acquisition of knowledge or information as referred to in the preceding
.paragraph), with due rites, approached the great and mightyage Kanlida
for the puriJose of ma??.aiia or (the second stage of self-cultm-e,

:,Le,dhaLo| di^p'ca.matiye u.h^ Thereupon that sage, full of

gredhhPhipassibhlTatt^i them a system (of self-culture) in Ten . Books.


There in the First Book he has stated the entire group of padarthas
(Predicahles) ; in the Second Book he has ascertained Suhstaiiee ; in the
Third Book he lias described the Soul and the Inner Sense ; in the
Fourth Book he has discussed the body and its constituents ; in the
Fifth Book he has established Karma (ActionJ ; in the Sixth Book
lie has considered Dhavma (piety) according to Sruti ; in the Seventh
Book he- has established Attribute and Samavciya (co-inherence or com-
bination); in the Eighth Book be has ascertained the manifestation of
knowledge, its source, aiidsb on ; in the Ninth Book he has established
particular or concrete iinderstandin.^ ; and in the Tenth Book lie has


Atha, now. Atah, therefore, Dharramam, piety, religion.

Vyakhyasyamal.1, (We) shall explain.

L Now, tlierefore, we shall explain Dliarma , — L

IJpct&Mra,—^ Atlia’ indicates sequence to the desire of the disciples. ‘Atah ‘-—Beeanso
disciples, skilful in Smvana (audition), etc,, and unenvious, approached (him), therefore,
n,. ]^n,cs t.lie sense of ausDieiousness. For it has been said: “Omicdm


I'


ii i 'i ‘ -i

:-■ I ’ '


!l I S

i:! , 1, ■


'^'1 I -

ii i ■


:„>i-

h' 'I :

I ' ' ' *’

'ir;- :V;;oi,

.'i 'i;


i.'^ i ' :

I ' i* \(


VAISmiKA PHILOSOPHY.



of its nselessaess merely on account of the non-appearance, for the time being,
of the ffuit of that the obligatory nature of which has been taught in the Sruti and can
be inferred from the conduct of the elect or polite. Nor is it that there can be no suppo-
sition of something in another birth since it must produce its fruit in this (one) life only ;
because, as in the case of the sacrifice for the birth of a son, so here the characteristic
of producing fruit in one and the same life is not proved to exist. Whereas the character-
istic of producing fruit in one and the same life belongs to KAi-iri (sacrifice for rain) and
other sacrifices, because these are performed with that desire alone. Here the agent is
de,sirous of completion, as the agent in a sacrifice is desirous of heaven. The difference
is that there the object (of the observance) is a new entrance in the shape of adri^tam,
■while here it is the annihilation of hindrances, since the undertaking is with the desire
that ■what has been begun may be safely completed.

It cannot be said that the consequence of the observance is the mere
annihilation of hindrances while completion will follow from its own
cause. For, the mere annihilation of obstacles is not in itself an object of
volition, whereas completion as the means of happiness is an object of
volition, and it is also uppermost in the mind. Moreover the mere
destruction of demerits is not the end ; for that being otherwise capable
of accomplishment by propitiation, singing the name of God, crossing
the river Karman&slS-, etc-, thei'e will he a plurality of causes, i.e., a violation
of the rule (that only the observance of the omen will produce the end).
If it is held that the destruction of demerits is the end, as the destruction
of the particular demerits which obstruct the fulfilment of the undertaking,
then the fulfilment itself properly becomes the end. Here too there will
be a violation of the rule, since such destruction of particular demerits is
producible by gift of gold, bathing (at the confluence of the Ganga and
Yamuna) at Prayaga (Allahabad), etc. ; and it will be rash to speak of
them as so many good omens.

Again, the causality of the good omen consists in this that it being
observed, the completion must necessarily follow. So it has been said :
“ Because of the rule that the end necessarily results from an act, complete
in all its parts, according to the Veda.” Hence an alternative cause also is
certainly a cause, for the idea of a cause in the Veda refers only to the
uniformity of immediateness or to the immediate sequence of the effect.
It is perverse to suppose a difference in kind in the effects, in the ease of
a plurality of causes. Where causality has to be deduced from sequence
(i.e,, cause to effect) as well as from antecedence (i.e., from effect to cause)
there the rule of antecedence to the effect should be observed, but not in
' the Veda also, where the question of (arguing from effect to cause or)

; regression or reversion does not figure as a weighty consideration. Thus
■there is no violation of the rule that the omen being observed in {)11 its
parts, the eompletipanecessOTly follows.


:1


riFiDl SUTB.


■mance o£ wlaicli
In th© case of writings,
the case of a sacrifice,
in the addition of the
m the final contact of
and it should be similarly understood in all
Therefore in the case of completion due to auspicious

difference in kind in the effect,
ule in both respects (sequence and


Now, completion or fulfilment is that on the perfor
arises the belief that this act has been completed,
it consists in the writing of the last sentence, in
etc,, in the final oblation, in the case of a cloth, etc,
last thread, in the case of going to a village, etc,
the feet with the village
other cases,

obsei’vance, even if we suppose a
still there is no violation of the r
reversion).

An auspicious observance is an act which brings about fulfilnlent
as its end by the path of the annihilation of obstacles, and that is really
of the form of salutation to the deity, etc. Even where obstacles do not'
exist of themselves, although the commonly attributed '' (as above)
characteristic of issuing by the path of the annihilation of obstacles is
absent there, still the idea of the auspicious observance is not too narrow, .
because the salutation, etc., as such, possess the incidence of the character-
istic of issuing by the path of the annihilation of obstacles. This is the
point. — 1.

The Vivriti adds: Others again say that the non-existence of

any hindrance having been insured by the virtue born of concentration

{Yoga), the sage did not attend to the auspicious observance, or that if he
did, he has not inserted that at the beginning of the book. Later
thinkers, on the other hand, say that as in the treatise of Gautama {le.,
Ny4ya Sutra), in the recital of the word prammia (Proof) which falls
% 7 ithin the group of the names of God, so too in this treatise, the
auspicious ceremony has been observed, in the form of I'eciting the word
dharma, which also is a synonym of God.

It should be understood here that dharma leads up to knowledge
by tlie way of the purification of the mind {ehitta), thirst after knowledge,
and so on. For the Veda says : “ They come to thirst after knowledge

by the performance of sacrifices,” etc. And says the Sihriti also, “ Know-
ledo'e is uroduced after demerits or dark deeds have been destroyed by


Definition of Dharma.


whence. Abbyudaya, nlti^reyasa-

I, Supreme Good, Accomplislimen't ,Sa]^, that,


I I


m\'i

■ii'; ''4 ■


(i 1 .


, 8 ’

4 I'l

I',!-! '!


M ' ; 4 '


I' !

ir’>

ft >:

I i ‘


VAlSmSKA PHILOSOPHY.



■j


Dharma (is) that from whicli (results) the accomplish-
ment of Exaltation and of the Supreme Good. 2.

OpasMm.— Now lie describes the subject proposed :

‘ Abhyudaya ’ means knowledge of the essences. ‘Nihslreyasam’ is
final cessation of pain. That from which both of tliein result is
The compound of the two words, rendered as ‘nihslreyasa’ by the path
of ‘abhyudaya,’ belongs to that class of compounds which are formed by
the elision of the middle term ; or it is a Tat-pumsa compound ablatively
formed.

This dharma will be later on described as being characterised by
forbearance. If it is the effect of constant contemplation and other
practices of Yoga and is the same as adrisitam (the invisible, potential after-
effects of actions, or Merit and Demerit), then it is producible by positive
performances.

The Vrittikara, however, says : “ ‘ Abhyudaya ’ is happiness, and

‘ nihdreyasam ’ the simultaneous annihilation of all the particular attri-
butes (i.e., modifications) of the Soul. The proof is that in the case of
dharma, the body, etc., of Devadatta are made up of elements so directed
by the particular attributes of the enjoyer or sufferer, and as they are
products or effects, they are, as the means of his enjoyment or experience,
like a garland made by himself.” Now this explanation has been
discarded by superficial readers as being not wide enough to apply to
each and ail (a). Whereas in fact “ what is dharma ? and what its charac-
teristic ? ” — the enquiry of the disciples being of such a general nature,
the answer comes, “ That from which (.results) the accomplishment of
Exaltation and of the Supreme Good.”

Thus, that which leads to tlie attainment of Exaltation, and also
that which leads to the attainment of the Supreme Good, both of them
are dharma. Thus that the invariable cause of the object’ of volition is
dharma, being the matter to be expressed, the expression “ the accom-
plishment of Exaltation and of the Supreme Good ” has been used with
the object of specially introducing the two great objects of volition, viz.,
happiness and absence of pain. Because paradise and emancipation are
the only great objects of volition, being the objects of desire which is not
dependent upon desire for ulterior objects. And it will be shown that the
absence of pain also is an object of volition. — 2.

[Note.— («•). “ Not wide enougii to apply to (iach and all.” The separate eharactor-

tetlos are that it produces pleasure and that it produces the Supreme Good. The former
floes not iR^uflo the flhama yf ntyritti: and the latter does not include the ctharmn


.liviAfeiaiU-v


MAW AD A BUTBAS i, 1 - 3 .


of pravritti. Tlie coliective characteristic is that it produces both pleasure and the
Supreme Good. Ancl. this does not include that which produces pleasure only, nor that
which produces the Supreme Good only. Thus the definition of dliarmci as explained by
the l^fittikara is in either ease too narrow. This is, according to Upaskdra,, the view of
superficial readers.] '

Authority of the Veda,

i i i i ^ u

Tadvachanat, being His Word or declaration, or its (of dharma)
'■■exposition. ' Amnayasya, of the Veda, Pramanyanij authorita-

'■■■tiwness, ■■.. " ■

3. The author! tativeiiess of the Veda (arises from
its) being the Word of God [or being an exposition of clhar-
ma]. — 3.

Upaskiira,— It may be objected, “ \¥ell, the Veda is the authority for this that dlmnna
eharaeterised by nivritti is the source of the Supreme Good by means of the know-
ledge of the essence or reality. But we are doubtful about the authoritativeness of the
Veda itself, on aeeo mi t of the faults of falsity, contradiction, and repetition. Falsity is
shown by the non-production of the son, even after the sacrifice for a son has been per-
formed. The homa (oblation to fire) after sun-rise, etc., actually prescribed in the ordinan-
ces ‘He ofiers oblation unto fire after sunrise, he offers oblation unto fire before sunrise,
he offers oblation unto fire at a belated liour,’ is counteracted by such texts as ‘Syava
(a dog of Yama) eats up the oblation of him wdio offers oblation unto fire after sunrise,
&Wala (the other dog of Yama) eats up the oblation of him who offers oblation
onto fire before sunrise, S'yava and *'Savala eat up the obtafcion of him who offers, oblation
unto fire at a belated hour,’ etc. And repetition surely appears from the mention of the
thrice recital of the first and the last Mmidheiii (the Hik III. 27. 1-U. directed to kindle
fire) in ‘ He will recite the first for three times, he will recite the last for three times.’
Besides there is nothing to establish the authoritativeness of the Veda. Its eter-
nality being uncertain, its eternal freedom from defect also becomes doubtful. On the
other hand, if it is the product of a human brain, then by the possibility of mistake, over
sight, uncertainty, want of skill in the agent, etc., its characteristic of being the infallible
testimony of a great and good (dpta) man, certainly becomes doubtful. Tims there is no
Supreme Good, Jior is knowledge of reality its means, nor again is dharma. Thus all this



fAiissiKA pmtosoPtit


since that statement is really proof which, establishes something which is
authoritative. God and the quality of His being an &pta (i. e., a great and
good person) will be established later on.

Now, with refei'ence to what has been said, namely, “ on account
of the faults of falsity, contradiction, and repetition,” there in the case of
falsity, the explanation lies in the supposition of producing result in
another existence or the supposition of defect in the act, the agent, and the
instrument, since there is the rule that the result necessaiily follows from
an act, complete in all its parts, prescribed in the Veda. Moreover it is
not the case that the result must appear in this and only this life, as in tlie
case of Kartri. ii.e., sacrifice for rain). There the occupation is that of
one who desires a revival of crops Avhich are getting drJ^ In the case of
the sacrifice for a son, the occupation is that of one who desires a son only.
This is the difference. There is also no contradiction, because the con-
demnatory passages such as “Syiiva eats up his oblations,” etc., have
reference only to cases where after having particularly vowed oblations
after sunrise, etc., one performs such homas at other times. Nor is there
the fault of repetition, because the repetition has this justification that
eleven mantras for kindling fire having been as a matter of fact recited,
fifteen such mantras as required by the text, “ By the means of the
fifteen word-thunders he opposed that enemy who is here,” cannot be
obtained without reciting the first and the last mantra for three times

each. — 3. -

Vivriti. — Or here the word ‘ tat ’ itself denotes l^vara, on the strength
of the saying ; “ Om, Tat, Sat— this has been remembered to be the three-
fold reference to Brahman.”


Knowledge of Predieahles is the means of attaining the Supreme Good.


Dharmma-visesa-prasutat, Produced by a particular dhar
ma. Dravya-gupa-karnima-samanya-vii^esa-sam'

avayanam, of Substance, Attribute, Action, Genus, Species, and Combination
TOq^^—Padarthanam, of the paddrthas or predicables. !g'r«F§tq*s?fr>q{'—
Sadhartnmya-vaidliarmmyabhjatn, By means of resemblance and difference,
q=5^irrarfl''Tattvajnanat,:From knowledge of the essence. Nihg're-

yasam— Thfe Supretae Good,



KAH^ADA 8UTBAS 1, 1-4,


4. The Supreme Good (results) from the knowledge,
pioduced by a particular dharma, of the essence of the Pre-
dicables, Substance, Attribute, Action, Genus, Species, and
Combination, by means of their resemblances and differences.
Oi, the Supreme Good (results) from (the study of) this
Treatise or System, produced by a particular virtue, which
teaches the knowledge, etc. — 4.

v-i'li dosewbed the nature and characteristic of dhavmi in accordance

’I for ascertaining


age ot tlie e.ssences is dependeut upon the Vaiilesika
it goes witiiout saying that it too is a source of
k If, through its derivation in an instrumental sense,
ssence is knomi by it, the word ‘tattvajuAna’ refers
eu it^ will not have apposition- to the word ‘dhar-
In dravya-gupa, etc.,’ tlie compound is a ‘ copu-
wherein all the words are prominent, because the
essence of all the Predicahles is the source of the


VAjhSIKA PEILOSOPEY.


of tbe non-existence of ttat which proclnces the opposite (t. e., the exis-
tence of pain) ; and productiveness is merely compatibility with Uself.
Again, antecedent non-existence is not the last member or element,
so that it existing, the effect must necessarily appear ; for if it were so,
then it would follow that an effect also has tio beginning. Thus, as in
the absence of a contributory cause it did not produce the effect so long,
so also in future it will not produce it without the co-operation of a con-
tributory cause, the person operating to the eradication of the cause.
Therefore this aphorism too upholds antecedent non-existence. Hence in
tlie second aphorism of Gautama, “ Pain, birth, activity, faults, and false
notions — on the successive removal of these in turn, there is the removal
of the one next preceding and thereafter salvation ” the statement ol the
non-existence of the effect on the non-existence of the cause, strengtuens
the idea of salvation as having the form of tlie antecedent non-existence •
of pain. Removal of activity on tlie removal of faults, removal of birlli
on the removal of activity, of pain on the removal of birth — here removal
does not mean annihilation but non-production, and tliat is nothing but
antecedent non-existence. It is not that the opposite is not known to be
real, for the opposite is surely known to be real in the form of pain in gene-
ral, as in the case of propitiation, since there too only tlie non-production
of pain is expected through the annihilation of faults. In the world
also it is seen that the removal of the snake, tliorn, etc., has the object of
the non-production of pain. ■ So the activity of the wise is directed only
towards removing the causes of pain.

Some however say : “ Only tlie absolute noii-existeuce of pain is
salvation. If it is not seated in the Soul, yet as seated in tiie stone, etc.,
it is proved in the Soul ; and its proof lies in the annihilation of the pain
wdiich does not accompany the prior non-existence (or potential existence)
of pain, "as it is found in ‘ relation ’ to the annihilation of such pain, see-
ing that such annihilation taking place, there arises the consciousness of
the absolute non-existence of pain in that place. , Tliis being so, sncJi
texts of the A^eda as “ He moves about being absolutely relieved of pain,’'

A , also become explained.” We reply that it is not so. Absolute nou-exis-
■' tence of pain, being incapable of accomplishment, is not an olrjec^t of
, . voluntary activity. Nor has annihilation of pain any ‘relation ’ to tluxt,

y;; ' since this would entail a technicality. The text of the Veda “He moves
about absolutely' relieved of pain” implies tliat byway of the

' AA A he^ of causes prior non-existence of pain may be reduced into

a cbucUtion, sim^^ absolute non-existence of pain. Itoaii-

' A;'-Au,ot b^.said-, “ Thig-' is irb^.a^ object of the Will, as it is not an object of

Af'A\)^ A’',v_ - '■


C" L'-.,>'f-* ' ‘ ' _L.-‘ > ''•■ '*'"•*''' V''".


KANADA SOTRAS I, 1-4. li

, desire udiieli is not externally conditioned, because those only wlio seek
pleasure, oecome actire in tlie removal of pain, seeing that pleasure is not
produced at the tune of pain because it is equally easy to say tbe contrary
also. Will not desire for pleasure also be conditioned by the absence of pain ?
seeing that men ovenyhelmed with grief as well as those who turn their
faces away from pleasure, having in view only the absence of pain, are
inclined ^^to^ swallowing poison, hanging themselves, etc. Also it cannot
be said. Even if it is an object of the will, it is so only because it is an
object of cognition. But salvation as absence of pain is not even an
object of cognition. Otherwise {i. e., if to be an object of cognition were
not a necessary condition of being an object of the will) men would
be inclined to bring about states of swoon, etc.;” for that which is capable
of being known from the Veda and by inference cannot be reasonably
said to be unknowable. For there are the texts of the Veda : “ He moves
about being absolutely relieved of pain,” “ By knowing Him only one
transcends death,” etc. Tiiei'e is inference also : The series of pain is'
finally or absolutely rooted out, because it is a series like a series of
lamps ; and so on. It can be known by perception also, since final anni-
hilation of pain for a moment becomes the subject-matter of thought in
the realization of pain in consciousness, and also because the yogins per-
ceive the future annihilatiou of paiu hy virtue of the power bom of con-'
centratioij {yoga). It cannot be said, “ Still, the loss and gain being the
same, it is not tiie object of the will, since with pain, pleasure is also
removed, the removal of both being due to the same set of causes ;” for
men naturally dispassionate and fearful of dark days of suffering and
who overestimate every glow-worm of pleasure, are active to that end. It
cannot again be said, “ Cessation of pain is not the object of tbe will ;
because cessation of pain which is yet to come, is impossible, pain
which is past is in the past, and pain which is present will cease
even without an effort of the person ;” for the activity of the person is
towards the eradication of causes, as in penances. Thus false knowledge
attended with desire is the cause of SarasiJra, i. e., succession of mortal
existence; it is rooted out by the knowledge of" the truth about the
Self ; and knowledge of the truth about the Self is producible . by the
practices of Fogfu ; hence activity in this direction is justified.

It cannot be said that only the manifestation of permanent pleasure
is salvation and not the absence of pain ; for there is.no proof that pleasure
can be permanent, if there were such proof then the manifestation:. of ''
pleasure being constant, there would be ho difeence between a worldly-^
and an other-worldly or liberated man, - and also manifestation beihg ah,;: ■

V h'i ■ d,.vdi;vdV.-. '.tr-':.- ^



* — ' -I' " •


■ v-


VAI8ESIKA PEILOBOPEY


product or effect, on its termination tliere will again follow bamsara oi
stream of mortal existence.

It cannot be said that salvation consists in the laya or disappearance
of the JMtma or embodied Self into the Brahmdtmd or un-embodied or
universal Self ; for if laya means amalgamation, then there is an obstacle,
as two do not become one. It cannot be explained that laya means the
removal of the subtle embodiment composed of the eleven senses and of
the physical organism ; for hereby the absence of the causes of pain being
implied, it follows that the absence of pain alone is salvation.

Herebj’' the doctrine of the Ekadaridhis (a sect who carry staffs
consisting of single sticks) that salvation means the remaining of the pure
Self after the cessation of Nescience or false knowledge and that Sell is
bv nature true knowledge and happiness, is also refuted, because iheie is
no evidence that the Self is knowledge and happiness. The text of the
Veda “ Brahma is eternal, knowledge, and bliss,” is no evidence, because
it proves possession of knowledge and possession of bliss. For we have
the perceptions as “I know,” and “I am happy,” but not the perceptions
I am knowledge” and '*I am happiness.' Moreover Brahman being
even now existent, it would follow that there is no distinction between a
liberated and a worldly man. The cessation of Avidya or false knowledge
is also not object of the will. Brahman also, being eternal, is not a sddhija
or what has to be accomplished. The realization of Brahman within the
Self, having Him £is the object, is not a sddhya or what has to be accom-
plished. Similarly bliss also, having Him as its essence or object, is not a
sddhya. For these reasons activity directed towards Him is not justified.



KAN Ad A SUTBA I, 1-A


viee versa, still knowledge in the shape of recini’ent and divergent proper-
ties, is here intended.

Here the enumeration itself of the Predicables, Substance, etc., has
come to be their division, which has the effect of excluding a more or less
number. Therefore it follows that as a rule Predicables are only six in
number. And this is not proved. If any other Predicable which requires
to be excluded is known then the rule does not stand good ; if it is not
known, then the exclusion is invalid. It cannot be said that this is not
the exclusion of the addition of something else but the exclusion of non-
application ; in other words, that the non-application of the characteristics
of the six to all predicables or things is excluded. For all known
predicables having been included by the word ‘ Predicable,’ there is here
then the fault of proving over again, and also that something else is not
known. Moreover, which is to be excluded, non-application of the,
characteristics jointly or their non-application severally? In the first
alternative, joint non-application prevails everywhere, so that there can be
no exclusion. It cannot be said that in the second alternative also there
can be no exclusion as with reference to one another their individual non-
application prevails everywhere ; for the purpose of the rule is to exclude
the non-application of the characteristics of the six, when, according to
others, they do not apply to Energy, Number, Similarity, and other
predicables recognised by them. Therefore the meaning of the rule that
Predicables are only six in number is that in all perceptible objects, there
is application of one or other of the characteristics of the six, and not that
there is non-application. Now, ‘ only,’ if it goes with the noun, it means
exclusion of the addition of something else ; if it goes with the adjective,
it means exclusion of non-application ; and if it goes with the verb, it
means exclusion of absolute non-application. Here according to some
“ only ” has all this three-fold significance ; while others say that its force
lies in mere exclusion and that non-application, addition of something else,
etc., are things to be excluded, which are derived by association.

“ Produced by a particular dharma ” is the adjective of “ knowledge
of the essence.” Here “ particular dharma ” means piety characterised by
forbearance or withdrawal from the world. If by “ tattvajirlna ” explained
as “by this essence is known,” the treatise (i. e., the Aphorisms of
Kanada) is meant, in that case it should be said that “ particular dharma ”
means the grace of and appointment from God, for it is heard that the great
sage Ivan^da composed this System by obtaining the grace of and appoint-
ipent from God, In the aphorism by “ knowledge of the essep.ee ” the



VAI8B8IKA PHIL080PEY.


fc'ij'iu,' ". j ; Jifv '.


KA-NlDA SUTRA I, 1-4.


15


’I'i


..w-


This should be considered. If the word ‘ tattvajfiana ’ in the apho-
rism denotes the realization of one’s Self in the understaiidiiig which
counteracts false knowledge together with desires, then it would follovy
that the expression ‘ by means of generic and specific properties ’ as well
as the term, ‘of the Predicables,’ bearing the sense of the sixth case-
ending, ha\'e no syntactical connexion. 'For in tire matter of the
realization of the Self in the understanding there is neither the
modality of the generic and specific properties, nor the materiality or
substantiveness of the six Predicables ; because they do not exist there,
as tliey are distinct from the body, etc., whereas the realization of
the Self in the understanding is only competent to root out desires,
etc., which are not distinct from the body, etc. It cannot be said that
in the state of the representation of separateness from the other (i. e.,
the Not-Self) in the Self by the virtue born of Yoga (concentration),
knowledge of the six Predicables, namely Substance, etc-, by means of
their generic and specific properties, is also produced through their tem-
porary contiguity, inasmuch as the subject-matter of sucli knowledge (i. e.,
the Predicables, etc.) appears there for the time being. For notwithstand-
ing that such representation contains such indifferent generic property,
etc., within itself, since it is not necessary for the real purpose in view, the
description of it by the revered sage will mean so much mad talk on his
ifpartv' ^ '

Again, tlie venerable author of the Upaskara lias brouglit forward the
texts ‘‘ By knowing Him alone, etc. ” as being evidence that the realization
of the Self in the anderstanding is the cause of liberation. That too has
been improper. For the Supreme Self alone being implied by the text,

“ 1 know Him, the Great Person, of the colour of the Sun, beyond the
reach of darkness, ” the word ‘tat’ (that) has reference to the Supreme
Self, and therefore it cannot refer to tlie Jiudtma (Subordinate or Embo-
died Self) which has not been so implied. So much for the sake of
brevity.

Here the enumeration of six Predicables has been made under the
view of Existence or Being. In fact Non-Existence or Non-Being also
has been intended by the sage to be another Predicable. Hence
there is no impropriety either in the aphorism “ Non-existence of effect/
from non-existence of cause ” (L. ii..l) of the . second chapter or in
such aphorisms as “ From non-existence of qualifipation by Action arid
Attribute ” IX. i. 1) of the Ninth Bpop.r Accordingly in the Nydya- ^
Ltldmti, it has been said : “ Non-existence also should be state<l as cori-j ■
ducive to the , Supreme Good,. like the..m0difications of Existence. This


m


diately after the realization of tie truth abotit the Self in the nnclers-
tandihl* ,:,;,The.;p<)®ible; defects in these views are not shown here for
fear|%f^inchiasth^^^^^^^ But in all the views the


VAI8E8IKA PHILOSOPHY.


coudueiveness is proved by the fact that the non-existence of the effect
follows from the non-existence of the cause in all cases. ” In the Dravya-
hirandmli also, Ny4ya teachers have admitted that Non-Existence is the
seventh Predicable, in the passage ending thus : “ And these Predicables

have been mentioned as being the principal ones. Non-Eiiistence,
however, although it possesses a form of its own, has not been Jiientioned,
not that it is something negligible, but because its ascertainment
is dependent upon the ascertainment of its opposite. ” Thus the know-
ledge of the generic and specific properties of the seven (and not
six only) Predicables is conducive to the Supreme Good ; and that
conduciveuess, it should be observed, lies in the mode of knowledge
of marks (liuga), etc., in the matter of the establishment of separateness
from the Not-Self in the Self.


The Supreme Good, according to the views of the Nyaya, Vaisle§ika,
and Safikhya philosophies, consists in the permanent cessation of pain,
and results as the annihilation of pain, which is not synchronous with pain
co-existent witli itself. In fact, annihilation of ultimate pain is non-
synchronous with pain co-existent with itself, since no pain can at that
moment arise in the liberated Soul. With a section of the NyAya thinkers,
salvation means permanent cessation of demerit only, because, in their
view, this only can be directly accomplished by the realization of the Self
in the understanding, as the Veda says, “And his actioiis wear off when
he sees that High-and-Low (Mundaka 2, 2, 8).” In the opinion of theone-
staffied Vedantin, salvation lies in the cessation of nescience, and nescience
is (with him) a different Predicable. In the opinion of the three-staffed
Vedantin, salvation means the disappearance of the Embodied or finite
Self in the Great Self, and results as the cessation of the Upddhi or
external condition of the Jiwu (Embodied Soul), aud of the causal body.
Causal body again has been proved to be “ the organic coiilbination of
the five life-breaths, mind, understanding, and ten senses, arisisig from
the elements which have not been compounded {i. e., redintegrated),
possessing subtle limbs, and being the means of experience («. e., bhoga).”
The Bhattas however say that salvation consists in the manifestation of
eternal happiness, and that eternal happiness, though evidenced by the
Veda and penetrating all living beings (Jivas), is unmanifest in the state
d I,' of transmigration (SaThsi^m),, and becomes manifest to tie sense, imme-


KAVADA 8UTEAS 1, 1-6


perniauent cessation of pain in tlie state of salvation remains nncoiitra-
cUctecl. And that is oar point.

Now, it may be contended, “ There are additional Predicables such
as Energy, Similarity, etc. How else can it be explained that in the
vicinity of the jewel, etc., burning is not caused by that which causes
burning and is caused when it is not in the vicinity ? Therefore it
must be imagined that the jewel, etc., counteract the burning energy
of that which causes burns, and that the inciting remox’al of them
revivifies it. In like inanner, siinilarit3- also is a different Predicable.
For it does not fall within the six forms of existence, as it equally
applies to them all, since such similarity as in “ As bovine-ness is eternal,
so also is horeseness, ” is perceived. Nor is it a non-existence, as it
appears in the form of an e.xisteuee. ” But our reph' is that reconciliation
being possible by the mere supposition of the self-activity of fire, etc.,
existing away from the jewel, etc., or the supposition of the absc-mce,
etc., of jewel, as the cause of burning, etc., it is not proper to
imagine infinite Energy, its prior non-existence, and its annihilation.


mill


VAI&ESIKA miLOSOPHY


tbe exclusion of a greater or less number bavin g been secured by the force
of tbe division itself, there was no need for tbe word ‘ iti,’ then it should be
understood that it being possible to take the aphorism in a luerelj' deno-
tative, indicatory or enumerative sense, the word ‘Iti’ is used to indicate
that it has the object of division also, and that the w’ord is used also
to indicate that gold, etc., as well as God are included in them, and also
that Darkness which may be apprehended to be an additional substance
is a non-being. The fact that the words have not been compounded
goes to show that tliey are all equally prominent. And the author of the
aphorisms himself will point out their definitions' or differeutim while
treating of ‘ difference.’

It cannot he said that Gold is neither Earth as it has no smell, nor
water as it has no wetness and natural fluidity, nor Fire as it !}as weight
and on the last account, nor Air, nor again Time, etc. ; tlierefore it is
something over and above the nine, for, in tlie fii’st two cases, there can
be no comparison ; in the third case, that which has to be proved is some-i
thing imaginary (i.e., that gold is not a transformation of Fire). After
that there has been analoguoiis argument, although there is no doubt
about that wdiicb. has to be proved, and also the mark of inference is
fallacious. He will prove afterivards that gold is a transformation
of fire — 5.

Viviriti . — It may be objected, “ Tbe writer of tbe Kandali and tbe
Sfifikhya teachers have held that Dar-lcness is a Substance. And it is
right. For otherwise how can people have the peiception of quality and
action in it, vis., ‘ Dark Darkness moves’? Now, being devoid of Smell,
Darkness is not earth ; as it possess es dark colour it cannot be included
in Water, etc. Therefore how is it right to say that the substances are nine
only?” We replj', “ It is not so, because it is illogical to imagine another
Substance, when it can be produced by the absence of necessary Liglit. The
perception of dark colour is, like the perception of the vault of heaven,
erroneous. The perception of movement is also an error, occasioned
by the departure of light, as the perception of movement by tbe passen-
gers of a boat in respect of tbe trees, etc., standing on tbe ])ank of tbe
river, is occasioned by the , movement of the boat, etc. The supposition
ihatHarkness is a substance will entail the supposition of the antecedent
. %op^exjstence and annihilation of an infinite nxrmber of its parts. In the
. dpmion. qf; the writer of th Kandali, Darkness is included in Eartli. So
)‘Vthat. accbrfing- # impropriety in the exclusion of a



.'.'Cl,';


?T?Tf


VAISESIEA PHILOSOPHY.


are tlie effects of one and the same act. Priority and Postenority are
stated in the dual immher to show that they are to he known ni elation
to each other and that they are equally marks of Space ^ and Time. lie
plural number in ‘ understandings ’ indicates the refutation of the theory

of one and only one understanding held by the Safikhya tliinkers, on the

ground of its division into, knowledge, etc. The dual number in Pleasure
and Pain is intended to point out that both of them are causes of one
effect which is distinguished as experience ‘hhoga) and ^that they aie
eqnallr instrumental to the inference of adrktam, and also that even
Pleasure resolves into Pain. The dual number in Desire and Aversion indi-
cates that both of them are causes of Activity. The plural in Volitions
is meant to show that ten kinds of volitions which comprise both per-
mitted and prohibited acts, are causes of Virtue and ten other kinds are
.causes of Vice. .

Or, Colour, Taste, Smell, and Touch have been shown in. a samasa
foivn to teach that they are the means of the disposition of the elemental
senses or sense-organs or to establisli the operation or cliange dne to heat.
Numher is mentioned in the plural number to indicate a refutation of
this that there is a contrariety in numbers, such as duality, plurality,
etc. Separateness is separately mentioned to indicate that it is also pluial
on account of the plurality of Numbers, and also that its difference from
Numbers lies in its being revealed by the knowledge ot limits. In Mea-
sures or Extensions the plural numher is meant to remove the contradic-
tion of length, shortness, etc. The dual numlier in Conjunction «nd Dis-
junction points out their mutual opposition. .Priority and Posteriority are
mentioned also in the dual number lest it might be doubted that the
division of Attributes is too narrow, because Priority and Posteriority-
may be four-fold by the possibility of their being different in kind by
their difference as relating to Space and as relating to Time.

He will give their definition as he proceeds. — 6.

Hnumerationof Aetions.

:1C . U 9 1 5 I 'S H

Dtksepaiiain, throwing upwards. Avaksepanam,

! V throwing downwards. -^kunchaimm, contraction. sf^frOT^Prasara-

expansion.' nim Gamanaro, going motion, Iti, namely. gjiRfrt

x;''' ,.V' ^ ■ ■

upwards, Throwiiig downwards, Ooa-

I^^^Thactibn llijansionj aiid Motion are Actions.— 7. ■



KANADA SUTEA8 1. 1-7


PiJasMra.— Actions become the object of the sense by reason of tlieir jn’ocluotion
by tSubstanees and Attributes as well as of their Gombination with Substances having
colour. Therefore immediately after the statement of Substances and Attributes he states
the eaumeration and division of Actions.

Tlirotving upwards, Throwing downwards,. Contraction, Expansion,
and Motion are Actions. ‘ Iti ’ lias tiie force of determination, as Rotation
etc., aie included iii Motion. Here tlien there are five ‘ classes ' directiv
pervaded by Action-ness, namely, the quality of tlirowing npxvards, the
quality of throwing downwards, the quality of contraction, the quality
of expansion, and the quality of motion, (or throwing-upward-ness,
throwing-downward-ness, eontraction-ness, expansion-ness, and motion
; ness). - : ; '

Well, but it is disproved by the fact that Motion is a synonym of
Action, because the consciousness of Going is experienced in all cases.
The four classes, throwing-upward-ness, etc , which have the co-exten-
sion or common field of die absolute non-existence of each in the others,
are not known to be co-existent ; therefore tue classes pervaded by Action-
ness are only four. (To this objection we reply) ; It is true that Motion
IS another name for Action. But it is separately mentioned with the o]>
ject of collecting under one word Rotation, Evacuation, Percolation
Flaming upward, Bending, Uplifting, etc., which produce different states
of consciousness and are known by different names. Or Goiug-ness also
IS really a fifth class pervaded by Action-ness. So that the application of
Motion to Rotation, Evaeaation, etc., alone is primary, and if there is the
application of Going to throwing upwards, tlirowing downwards, etc.,
then it is secondary or analogous. The common property of the primary
ami analogous insiances is only this that they are tlie non-comhinative
causes (1. e., conditions) of Conjunction with and Disjunction from one’s
own suport ; whereas that which distinguishes the class of Going-ness
is its being the non-combinative cause of Coujiuiction with and Disjunction
from constantly changing places and directions, and this belongs to Rota-
doii and others, so that by the inclusion of Going these too\ave been
mcludecl.

The states of egress, ingress, etc., however, are not classes • for in
respect of one and the same Action, e. g., a person going from one room
to another, one observer will have the consciousness, ‘he enters’ ; while
another, ‘ he comes out ’ ; and thus there will result an intermixture of
classes. ^ So also in the case of Rotation, etc.,- on entering one water-course

after coming out by another, there wdll arise two states of eonsoiousi mss
he comes out and ‘ he enters';’ . therefore these should he resolved^into
Ireiativity in general, 1



.


VAISESIKA PHILOSOPHf


In the case of throwing upwards, etc., however, toe action ot
tlirowing upwanls is caused in tlie hand 1)}^ the volition • produced by the
desire M tlirow up the pestle,’ through tlie non-com binarive cause of
conjunction with the- soul, exercising volition ; then from the lujii-coinbi-
native cause of inctiou in tlie liand tlirown up, tliore ajipcai's the action
of tlii'owing upwards in the pestle also ; or, these two actions take place
sinndtaneously. I’hen through the conjunction of the soul exercising
volition produced by the desire to throw down the hand and pestle which
have been thrown up, and also through the motion of the hand, there is
produced in tlie hand and the pestle siinultaiieously the action of tlirow-
ing dowmwards favourable to the fall of the pestle within the niortar.
Then towards the sudden going upwards of trie pestle after conjunct ion
wdth a harder substance, neither desire nor volition is the cause, but the
springing up of the pestle is due onl}^ to Re-action ; and this is only
going and not throwing upwards, the application of tlirowing upwards,
to it is only secondary. Similarly is the application of tlie name of
Throw’ing upwards to two bodies of Air as well as to grass, cotton, etc.,
carried by them, going upwards by the force of the collismn of two bodies
of Air flowing in opposite directions. So also in the case of the going up
of Water under the collision of two currents. Thus the use of tlirowing
uuxvai-ds and throwiim’ downwards is primary, only in the case of the


4''


KANAdA smUAS 1-S.


in tlie case of going to a forbidden place, slaugliter, eating tobacco, etc.,
tliey^ are the products of conjunction with the soul exei’cising volition
tending towards the production of Vice.— 7.

Resemhlancci) of Stihstance, Attribute^ and Action.

^ I ^ I q y


, . /. ^ Aaityani, noa-eternal. Dravyavat, con-

^ niiiig substance, fvaiyyam, effect. Karanani, cause. 5rr5fTStn%-

Sanianya-vi^esavat, being both Genus and Species, ’frt ui, this.
Dravya-guna-karmraaiiam, of Substance, Attribute, and Action.

^ ^ \ '

8.^ The Resemblance of Substance, Attribute, and
Action lies in this that they are existent and non-eternal, have
Substance as their coiiihiuative cause, are eft'ect as tveli
as cause, and aie both Genus and Species.- — 8.

Ujws/c.'ira.- After tho oimiiioratioii of .Sab.sfcaiiee, etc., Jic bG{,nns the topic of the
Rosemblanee of tlio tliroo. He .state.s the Resomblanco of tho three oven before the
enumeration of the other three Prodicables, Genus, etc., inasmuoli as it is expected first

of all by the disciple.? booaaso the Resemblance of the throe, Suhstance, etc., is favotir-

able to the kiiowlcdg’c of reality,

^ In the presence of die word ‘ vis^esa ’ the word ‘avisje.sa ’ denotes
Jiesemblance, ‘ Sat ’ connote.s the quality of being the object of tlie per-
ception and name in the form of that which is existent, because all the
three have fitness for existence. ‘Anityam’ connotes the quality of that
which tends towards annihilation. Although it is not common to the
fdtnnate atoms, etc., still it is intended to denote the possession of the
or condition which distinguishes predicables having the function
or nature of that which tends towards annihilation. ‘Dravyavat’ means
that wliich contains substance as its combinative cause. Tliis too is not
present in^ the ultimate atom, etc. Therefore the intention is to denote
the posse.ssion of the upddhi or condition which distinguishes predieables
having the function of tliat which contains substance as its combinative
cause. ‘Kilryyam’ is intended to denote the possession of the

or condition which distinguishes predicables having the function of that
-whicli is the counter-opposite of antecedent -nonTexistence (or potential
existence). ‘KarananT indicates the possession .of the upddhi or condition
which distinguishes predicables having the function of that which belongs
to the class of constant (Mill’s invariable and .nnconditional) antecedent , '


lii


,.(8'


|V. .) f

v' ■!;<

I ' ' '


'vi'.-.'h'b.i

I'H A


:

.i:V


mm



VAI8E8IKA PI1IL080PB7,


of ail effects except knowledge. Tims the definition is Jiot too wide so
as to include the Soul which is the object of Self-intuition, as a cause of
Self-intuition, or to extend to the generic quality of being a cow, etc ; nor
is it too nari‘ow so as to exclude the ultimate atoms (lit , perfect spheres)
which are not causes. ‘ Samanyavisesavat/ means the possession of
those characteristics which though they ai-e genera, still are species
inasiriuch as they serve to diffei-entiate themselves severally, e. g,, Substaii-
ceness, Attribiiteness, Actionness, etc. It cannot be siiid that causality
is too wide, because from “ Give a cow,’’ A cow should not be touched
with the feet” and other texts of the Veda it appears that class or kind
(5frf^; also is a cause of virtue and vice ; for a class has the sole use of
limitation.

Tins aphorism is illustrative. It sliould be observed that the
Iteseinblance of the three lies also in their being capable of being denoted
by woi’ds Iniving the meaning inherent in them.

If it is said that the characteristic of being elfects and non-eternali-
ty belong to tliose only which have causes, and that tliis is their Resem-
blance as laid down by Professor Pras^astadeva in '' And causality (ap-
pears) elsewhere than in the perfect spheres (ultiinate atoms',” then accord-
ing to tlie aphorism it cannot be specified by the possession of the
itpdclhi or condition which distinguishes predicates,

Tlie characteristics of being the causes of Attributes and also the
effects of Att ributes belong to the three except the eternal Substances. — 8.

Bcsemblance of Siihstance and Attribute.


, Dravya-gunayoli, of Substance and Attribute.

Sajatiyarambliakatvam, the ctiaracten'stic of being the originator of congeoeis*
SMharoniiyam, Resemblance.

9. Tlie Resemblance of Substance and Attribute is tlie
cliaracteristic of being tlie originators of their congeners. — 9.

. U pasMm.— Yle now points out the Bosemblanee of Substance and iVt-tribute only.

He makes clear this very aphorism in the following one. — 9.

y ; Explanation of the foregoing aphorism.


f-ffd ’§f«si!fi!|;iPiavyani, Substances, ' Dravyantaram, another Substance.

«&?hhan;te,yongioate, . ; Gunah, Attributes. Cha, and.


SIAN Ad A 8UTRA8 t. 1-11


10. SulDstances originate anotlier. Sufestance, and
Attributes another Attribute. — 10. ' ’

iJ-pashhxi, The Keseoibiance in respect of the characteristic of being the originators
of congeners should be understood or observed with the exclusion of universal Substan-
ces composed of finai parts, the Attributes of what are composed of final parts, and also
the xAttribiites of Duality, the Separateness of Duals, Priority, Posteriority, etc. Or the
autnor means to indicate the possession of the upadhi or condition which distinguishes
predicables having the function of that wliicli originates its congener, whereby Substan-
'cesanclindivicliials which are not causes, are also included.— to.


Actions do not originate Actions,

^ m 8 ? I n

^ Karmma, action, Karmmasadhyam, producible by action,

sf Na, not. ^^ Vidyate, is known.

11. Action, producible by Action, is not known.— 11.

Upaskdra. But it may be asked : why do not Actions originate other Actions ? So he
says:

Here the root vid lias tlie sense of knowledge, and not existence.
The meaning is that there is no proof of the existence of Action, which is
producible by Action, as in the case of Substance and Attribute originated
by their congeners.

Here the idea is this : If Action is to produce Action, then it will,
like Sound, produce it immediately after its own production. Therefore
Disjunction from substances in Conjunction having been completely caused
by the first Action itself, from what will the second Action cause Disjunc-
tion ? For Disjunction must be preceded by Conjunction, and a new Con-
junction has not also been produced in the subject in question. But
the definition of Action suffers if there is non-production of Disjunction.
It cannot be said that a new Action will be produced at another moment ;
because a potency cannot be delayed and because there is nothing to be
waited for. In the case of the production (of Conjunction) at the very
moment of the destruction of the previous Conjunction, the production of
Disjunction (by Action) will be surely not proved. The same also will be
the result in the case of its production at the time of the production of
the subsequent Conjunction. And after the production of the subsequent
Conjunction there is really destruction of Action. Therefore it has been
well said that Action producible by Action is not Impwn. — 11. '

Difference of Suhstanae from Attribute and Action.


VAI8E8IKA PHIL080PBY.


'^ Na, not. Dravyam, substance. «^ps^ Ktryyanij effect. ^Rif ilara-
nam, cause. ^ Cha, and. Badhati, opposes ; annihilates.

12. SulDstance is not anniliilated either by effect or
by cause. — 12.

Upaskiira* — He mentions the Difference of Substance from Attribute and Action:

Substance is not destroyed either by its own effect or by its own
cause. The meaning is that the relation of tlie destroyer and the destroyed
does not exist between two Substances which have entered into the relation
of effect and cause, because, (and this is the purport), Substance is destroj^ed
only by the destruction of the support or substratum and the destruction
of the originative Oonj unction,

' The lorni ‘badhati ’ (instead of the correct form ^ hanti ’) is found in
aphorisms. — 12.

Above continued.


Uhhayatha, in both ways, ^r: Uunah, attributes.

13. Attributes (are destroyed) in both ways. — 13.

Upashara.—Uo says that Attributes are capable of being destroyed by effect and

cause. ■ ■ , . . , " .. A-'"'-'"

The meaning is I'that they are) capable of being destroyed by effect

as well as by cause. The initial Sound, etc., (in a series) are destroyed by
their effects, but the last is destroyed by its cause, for the last but one
destroys tbe last. — 13.

Above continued.

Karyya-virodhi, whereof the effect is the opposite or contradictory.

14. Action is opposed by its effect. — 14.

..r Upaslacm.— After stating that Attributes are opposed by (and so cannot co-oxist v«th)

both their effects and causes, he mentions the opposition of effect to Action :

‘ Kilryyat’irodlii ’ is a Bahuvrihi or adjective compound meaning that
of whicli tlie opposite is effect, because Action is destructible by subse-
quent Conjunction produced by itself.

The non-opposition of effects and causes is uniform in the case of
I >;C Substances only. But it is not the I'ule in the case of Attribute and Action,
i;');' ;-. For what tbe author desires to say is that those Attributes destroy, which
' ai'e .the 6pJ)0Sites,pf the destruction due to the destruction of the non-com-
ih;. biQati?6,,^i0q,.bf;tlif destruction of the substratum. — 14. '


27


Cliarmtevistie, of Siihstanee.


: . : vat. possessing Action and Attribute.

,v , . Samavayi-karanani^.Gomb cause., ff% iti, such. Dravya^Iaksanamj

; , ■ 'ma,r4c .of'substan

15. It possesses Action and Attribute, it is a combi-
native cause— sucli (is) the mark of Substance.— 15.

UpasMra.— After desoribing 6he Resemblance of the three according to the wish of
the disciples, be now goes oh to state their marks :

means wherein Actions and Attributes exist.
word ‘ laksana,’ by the force of its derivation, viz. ‘ By this it is marked out,’
denotes a mark as well as a particular differentiating mark or sign which
divides off objects of like and unlike kinds. Therein by Action it is
marked out that this is a substance. And by the possession of Attributes,
Substance, excluded from objects of like and unlike kinds, is marked out.

Of these the like kinds, i. e., objects which resemble one another in being
existent, are five, viz., Attributes, etc. The unlike kind however is Nou-
E.xistenee. Therefore Substance is different from Attribute, etc., because
it possesses Attribute. That which is not different from Attribute, etc.,
does not possess Attribute, :e. gr., Attribute, etc. Although the possession
of Attribute is not found in a substance made up of parts at the
moment of its origin, still the possession of the opposite of the absolute
non-existence of Attribute is meant to be stated, because the antecedent
and the subsequent non-existence of Attribute are also opposites
of the absolute non-existence of Attribute. Similarly, the being the
combinative cause also, which divides the six Predicables, is a mark of
the Predicable Substance.

Here the Scidhyo., i.c., that which has to be proved, does not suffer
from the fault of being unknown, for difference from Attribute, etc., is
proved by perception in the water-pot, etc. Nor is here the fault of
proving that which has been already proved, for although the difference
of the water-pot as such from others has been proved, yet such difference
remains to be proved in respect of it considered as a Substance. Some
say that in the case of the difference of that which defines the pah^a
(ie., the object in which the existence of the is sought to be i ;

proved, e.gr., the mountain when the existence , of fire is sought to he
proved in it), there can be no proving of that . which has already been
prdved, as, for instance, in “Word and Mind are qtbrnal.” , But this is not :
so, for thq.t which has to be proved being proved in anythipg whatever :


S;;'

N'’ ' -I';

V . ‘


H


1

tiiiftp?

1

. m; .

’1 '

1


1

llillli
'' 't ’ '■

i;

;

1

H ' j

;

■ . g'

■;

I :

IS

^ ^ dt -I P


VAliESlKA PEILOSOPHf.


5f Na, not. g55( Dravyam, substance. giissS Karyyam, effect. Kara-

pani, cause. =g Cha, and. Badhati, opposes ; annihilates.

12. Substance is not aiiniliilated eitlier by effect or
by cause. — 12.

Vpttskitra , — He mentions the Ditterence of Substance fi’om Attribute and Action.

Substance is not destroyed either by its own effect or by its own
cause. The meaning is that the relation of the destroyer and the destroyed
does not e-xist between two Substances which have entered into the relation
of effect and cause, because, (and tbis is the purport), Substance is destroyed
only by the destruction of the support or substratum and the destruction
of the originative Conjunction.

The form ‘ badhati ’ (instead of the correct form ‘ hanti ’) is found in
aphorisms. — 12.

Above continued.


MA: ' . wu* n 3 I 1 M ^ I

giwm Ubhayailja, in both ways. Gunah, attributes.

13. Attributes (are destroyed) in both ways.— 13.

Upusfcmi.-Ho says that Attributes are. capable of being destroyed by effect and

cause.

The meaning is I'that they are) capable of being destroyed by effect
as well as by cause. The initial Sound, etc., (in a series) are destroyed by
their effects, but the last is destroyed by its cause, for the last but one
destroys the last.— 13.

Above eontinued.

li ^ I ? ! «

Karyya-virodhi, whereof the effect is the opposite or contradictory.

" Karmma, action.

. , ■ 14. Action is opposed by its effect. — 14.

HjwsMra.— After stating that Attributes are opposed by (and so cannot co-exist with)


iiiiyyavtrodhi ’ is a Baliiwrihi or adjective compound meaning that
‘'’I j’), ; ■ of whicli the opposite is effect, becaxise Actionisdestructiblebysubse-

Sfhi)?' ■ quent Ooh|hhct^

i h' The , non-opposition of effects and causes is uniform in the ease of
\ ; ' Substances only. , But it is not the rule in the case of Attribute and Action,

i;; For tvhat the author desires to say is that those Attributes destroy, which


KANADA SUTEA I, 1 ~ 15 .


Vharaeteristie of Suhstanee.

ii ^ i ^ mil

I*^riy<l“gin,i a- vatj .possessing Action and--' Attribute.
Samavayi*karanani, combinative cause. |f|f if], such, Dravya-laksaiianij

iiiarf{ of substance.

15. It possesses Action and Attribute, it is a combi-
native cause— sncli (is) the mark of Substance.— 15.

^ .iljjasfebYb”^ deseribiiig tlie ResejaiWauce of the three according to the wish of
the disci pk\s, he now goes on to state their marks :

‘ Kriyslgunarat ’ means wliereiii Actions and Attributes exist. The
rrord ‘ laksana,’ by the force o! its derivation, viz. ‘ By this it is marked out,'
denotes a mark as well as a particular differentiating mark or sign winch
divides off objects of like and unlike kinds. Therein by Action it is
marked out that this is a substance. And by the possession of Attributes,
Substance, e.xcluded from objects of like and unlike kinds, is marked out.
Of these the like kinds, i. e., objects whicli resemble oue another in being
existent, are five, viz., Attributes, etc. The unlike kind however is Non-
E.dstence. Therefore Substance is different from Attribute, etc., because
it possesses Attribute. Tliat Avhich is not different from Attribute, etc.,
does not possess Attribute, :c. </., Attribute, etc. Although the possession
of Attribute is not found in a substance made up of parts at the
moment of its origin, still the possession of the opposite of the absolute
non-existence of Attribute is meant to be stated, because the antecedent
and the subsequent non-existence of Attribute are also opposites
of the absolute uoii-existence of Attribute; Simllady, the being
combinative cause also, which divides the six Predicables, is a mark M
the Predicable Substance.

Here the Sddhya, i.e., that which has to be proved, does not suffer
from the fault of being unknown, for difference from Attribute, etc., is
proved by perception in the water-pot, etc. Nor is here the fault of
proving that which has been already proved, for although the difference
of the water-pot as such from others has been proved, yet such difference
remains to be proved in respect of it considered as a Substance. Some



VAISE^JKA PHILOSOPHY.


cleterniiaed by that wbicli determines the cliaraeteristic of being a
pah^a, the pn&jo suffers in its essential, and lienee that which has to
be proved in aueh cases, must be proved as such, i. e., independently.

The word ‘ iti ’ means ‘ others.’ Therefore the possession of Number,
the possession of Measure, the possession of Separateness, the possession
of Conjunction, and the possession of Disjunction also are brought
together. — 15.

Characteristie of Attribute.

H ? I ? I II

Dravyasrayi, inhering in substance. Agunavan, not:

possesssing Attribute, Saiiiyoga-vibhagesu, in Conjunctions and

Disjunctions. Akaranam^ not a cause, Anapeksali, indepeo*

dent. ,fH Iti, sucii, laksanaiii^ mark of Attribute.

16. liiliering in Substance, not jDossessing Attribute,
not an independent cause in Conjunctions and Disjunc-
tions, — such is the mark of Attribute. — 16.

UjpasJrfi’fi.— Attributes having been enumerated after Substances, he gives their
mark:

* Dravyasfrayi ’ means that of wliich the nature is to reside in Subs-
tance. This however pervades Substance also. Therefore he says
‘ Aguiiavau ’ or Attribiiteless. Still it over-extends to Action ; so he
adds ‘ not a cause in Ooiijunctions ami Disjunctions.’ Yet it does not
include Conjunction, Disjunction, Merit, Demerit, knowledge of God, etc. ;
so he adds ‘ independent.’ After ‘independent,’ ‘Attribute’ should be
supplied. The meaning therefore is that Attribute is that which is not
an independent cause of Conjunctions and Disjunctions. Conjunctions
and Disjunctions, etc., are depended upon by Conjunction and Disjunction.
Attributeness is the chracteristic of possessing the genus pervaded by
existence and residing in tlie eternals with eternal functions. The re-
vealer of Attributeuess is the causality present in something possessing
genus and devoid of combinative causality and non-combinative causa-
lity towards Conjunction and Disjunction combined. Conjunction and
Disjunction are severally caused by Conjunction and Disjuction, but
,.,:y of Cod, etc., have been iu-

,, ' eluded because they are only occasional or conditional causes of both
,i ' ' any are Abt . t^eir combinative causes or non-combinative causes. Or ,

characteristic, co-extensive with genus,


t-hm^aeteinstie of Action,

! M t !VS I!

V ^51 Ekadravyam, resting or residing in one susbtance only. ^
Aguyam, devoid of Attribute. Sariiyoga-vibhagesu, in Conjunctions

and Uisjunctions. Anapeksa-karaijam, independent cause, sfs IH

such. Karniina-iaksanam,, Mark of Action;

17, Residing in one Substance only, not possessing
independent cause of Conjnnctions and Dis-
jimctions— sncb is the mark of Action.— 17.

Ppastom.— He states the mark of Action which has been mentioned after Attribute ;

Ekadravyani ' means that of which only one Substance is the subs-
tratum. ‘ Agunam ’ is tliat in whicli no Attribute exists. ‘ Samyoga, etc.’
means independent of something in the form of positire existence'’ which
comes to appear after its own production ; so that it is not nnestablished
where there is necessity for or dependence upon the comljinative cause
and also where tiiere is dependence upon absence of antecedent conjunc-
tion. Or independence of that, which has its production after the
production of Action itself, is meant, because the annihilation of the
antecedent conjunction also has its production after the production of
Action itself, and because as a non-existence it does not bear relation to
its first iiiorneiit.

Action-ness is the possession of the genus directly pervaded by
existence other than that residing in the eternals, or the possession of
the genus determinative of the uncommon or specific' causality which
produces the perception that something moves, or the possession of the
genus residing only in what is devoid of Attribute and not being an
Attribute, or the possession of the genus determinative of the causality
towards; Disjunction present at the moment immediately subsequent to
the production of Action itself.

And this again is a Preclicable evidenced by the perception that
something moves, which cannot be demonstrated by its production, etc.
at places having no interval between each other,. because the breaking up '
of a moment will be refifted later on, - ' ’ '



V'AISESIKA PHILOSOPHY.


Tlie aianuer in which the mark serves to distingiiisli it from others
is the same as has been already described. — 17.

Eesemblanee of Substance^ Attribute, and AetiorL

u 1 1 U u

Dravya-guna-kamimanani, Of Substance, Attribute^ and Action,
p^- Dravyam, Substance. Karanam, cause. ' Samanyani, Coinraotiy

•Uniform. ■

18. Substance is the one and the same cause of Subs-
tance, Attribute, and Action. — 18.

VpasMra.—Now be begins the topic of the Eesemblanee of the three only by way of
their cause :

‘ Sd,raanyain ’ (common) means the same, one, as in ‘ These two have
a common mother.’ The meaning is that Substance, Attribute and Action
exist in one and the same Substance whicli is their combinative cause.

The Resemblance of the three lies in the possession of the genus
havinc the function of that which has Substance as its combinative


Tatha, Similarly. Gunah, Attribute.

19. Similarly Attribute (is the common cause of Subs-
tance, Attribute, and Action). — 19.

irpas7car« He states the Resemblance of the three as having Attribute as their
noB-oombinative cause ;

The Resemhlance of the three lies in the possession of the genus
residing in that wliieh has Attribute as its non-combinative cause. Con-
Junctiou is the non-combinative cause of substances. The possession, as
their non-combinative cause, of Attributes which are the causes of their
congeners, belongs to the Attributes of effects, e. g., Colour, Taste, Smell,'
Touch, Number, Extension orMaguitade, Separateness, etc. The Attrihritds
of the ultimate atoms of Earth have Conjunction with Fire as their non-com-
hinative cause. The non-combinative cause of Actions, however, are Fire
etc., internal vibration, impact, weight, fluidity, impression, conjunction
with soul possessing invisible consequences of Actions (adristam), conjunc-
• tion with Soul exercising Volition, etc. These should be respectively under-
stood by the reader. . , Sometimes even one Attribute gives rise to all the
RiihRtarice’, Attribute^ and Action ; for instance, Conjunction with a
' baU of V'(dl1dn'^£)^i^W.; Impetus, produces Action in another ball of


KANIDA SUTEAS I, M2. U

cotton, originates a Substance, viz,, an aggregate of two balls of cotton, and
tile Extension of that aggregate also. Sometimes a single Attribute origi-
nates a Substance and an Attribute ; c. , 9 ., Con junction whicli maybe
described as an aggregation independent . of Impetus, wdtli a ball of
cotton, originates a Substance wliicli is an-aggregate of two balls of cotton
^aS:.w,eil;as itS:Exterision.— 19. , ■■

Effects of Action,

. ■ 'N *

Sariiyoga-vibhaga-veganam, Of Conjunction, Disjunction,
and impetus, Karmma, Action. g'JfH Samanam, Common.

tke common cause of Conjunction^ Dis-
junction, and Impetus. — 20. ^

UpaskarcL — He says that sometimes a single Action is productive of a multitude of

: 'effects 'V \ '\v-,v5

The word ‘ karapam ^ slioiild be supplied. Producing as many. Dis-
junctions as the number of Substances in conjunction with the Substance
in whicli Action, is produced, it (Action) also produces an equal number of
Conjunctions elsewhere. And the same Action again produces Impetus in
its own substratum.

The word Impetus indicates Elasticity also. — 20 .

Difference between Substance and Action,

^ ^ w ^ \ ^ r r i ii

?r Na, not. g's^raf Dravysinam, Of Substances. Karmma, Action.

21. Action is not the cause of Substances. — 21,

U‘pasJciira,—Bnt it may be argued that originative Conjunction having been brought
about by substance possessed of Action, the substance wliich is originated thereby, is
surely produced by Action since Action has been its antecedent as a rule. Hence he
/■says:. '

The meaning is that Action is not the cause of substances. — 21.

Above continued.

\ \ \ w \\ ; ■ : / ;:';:::a

:;:Vy:atirekat,:becau.sc;pf Gessation.'' a

i:;;/|| A A|2:2A/./: is not? the / /cause . of ' SubstanGe|: hecahs Aftiiip

|ll||biiia|ioh.:-^-22./;:;? ■////?;’ ■:^/.:/f

;;||J|'/A:;;tf|jii,l||l|i|^|le/h:blhfe'’:put' why ;'it/is ''so ■^: ?■■/' ^

|S|||||yy||i||S||Ar|e|nsAh.iGGbph|bf?£?es|adoiA:/i^^


VAISE8IKA PHtLOSOPMf


is not a cause of Substance. Neitlier is Action which has ceased to exists
a cause of Substance. ' Moreover if Action be such a caiisOj it must be either
the non-combinative cause of Substance or its conditional cause. It cannot
be the first, because then it will follow that Substance will be destroyed,
even on the destruction of the Action of the parts inasinucli as Substance
is capable of being destroyed by the destruction of the non-combioative
cause. Nor can it be the second, for in that case there will be a violation
of the rule, since small pieces of cloth being produced just from the Ooii-
junctions still existing after the destruction of a large piece of cloth, it is
seen that even parts which are devoid of Action, originate Substance. 22.

Difference between Substance and Action.

% \ \ \ ^\\\

t)ravyanam, of many substances, Dravyam, a single sub-
stance. karyyam, effect. Samanyam, common.

23. A single Substance may be tlie common effect of
more than one Substance. — -23.

UpasWra .—Having stated that one may be the originator of many, he now states that
of one effect there may be many originators :

Of Substances, i. e., of two Substances as well as of more than two
Substances. Thus by two threads a piece of cloth consisting of two
threads is originated, so also by many threads one piece of cloth is
originated. It cannot be said that a piece of cloth consisting of one
thread is seen where the warp and woof are supplied by one and the
same thread, for owing to the non-existence of the Conjunction of a single
object, there is no non-combinative cause here. Nor again can it be said


1


KAN AD A SDTBAS I, 1-26.


33


24. Action is not the joint effect of many Actions, on
account of the Difference of their Attributes. — 24.

- UpasM ra.— ’Well, Ifc may be asked, as a singie Substance is the effect of many Siibsfcaiicesj
as also a single Attribute of many Attributes, so is a single Action the effect of many
.'Actions ? ' Hence. lie says :

' Kary 3 ^aui ’ is the conipleineut. It has been alreacty stated that
the Resemblance of Substance and Attribute is that they originate their
congeners. Also it has been already denied that Actions are productive
of Action, in the aphorism “ Action producible by Action is not known.”
This is here rej^eated. This is the idea. — 24.

Difference hetween AUrihute and Action,

Dvitva-prabhritayah, Duality, etc. Saiiikhyahj Numbers,

Prithaktva-saniyoga-vibhagah, Separateness, Conjunction,
and. "Disjunction. ...xf, Cha, And.


Duality and other Numbers, Separateness, Con-
juiictioii, and Disjunction (are originated by more than one
Substance) . — 25 .

Ppas/cni-a. -Now, pointing out that Attributes which reside in aggregation are origi-
nated by many Substances, he says ;

“ Oi'iginatecl by more than one substance” — This is the complement.
The word Separateness appearing together with Duality, etc., also denotes
Separateness of two, etc. Thus Numbers beginning with Duality and
ending with the highest arithmetical figure, Separateness of two, etc.,
Conjunctions, and Disjunctions are originated by two as well as by
more tlian two Substances. So that the characteristic of residing in more
Substances than one belongs to them. And this characteristic again is
the same as co-extension with the mutual non-existence of combinative

causes. — 25. _

Above eontivued.

P' .. -fV' ' %

?RI*r^r5rr(l)i Asamavayat, on account of nou-combination. 5(Frr?araF5«[,
Satnanya-karyyam, common effect, Kannma, action, fr, Na, not.

Vidyate, is known. : ^ V,.

i 26. Action wMcb is the joint result (of an aggregate
of two or more substances,) is not known, as it is not found
■ in combination with them,-— 26. ^ ,(/.■; ■hAA-AA' v , ■ ,( A;

: ’ {Tpasfcclra.— Well, it niay be asked, as .Sitbstanoes which’ are made up of parts, as well
as Attribfes already ineutioned, have the charaoteristie of residing in aggregation, so
does hot that characteristic belong to Actions also ? So to says ; - ? ,


' Hr


m



VAlisSIKA PHtLOSOPBY.


nation ’ slionld be joined with in two
'0 substances/ Thus a single Action
es ; nor does a sing'le Action combine
that Action which is the effect of an
vid ’ in Sddyate' has the
Tf '.Action resided in
til ere would arise the cO'Hscious-
vYO substances and more than two
Action does not reside in aggie-


' On account of non-comh
substances/ and ^ in more than t
does not combine in two substan
in more than two substances ; so
aggregate, is not known. Here too the lOot
sense of knowledge and does not denote existence
aggregation, then one substance moving
ness, 'It moves/ in respect of t
substances ; but it is not so ; therefore
gation. This is the meaning.

It cannot be argued, “ The Action of the body and its parts are
certainly originated by many substances, namely, the body and its paits,
otherwise, the body moving, how can there be the consciousness, It moves,
in respect of the hands, feet, etc. ? Similarly in the case of othei objects
made up of parts/’ For such consciousness is due to the fact tliat the
quantity of the Action of the parts is pervaded by the quantity of the
Action of the whole made up of these parts. lire contrary is not the
case, because the part moving there does not arise the consciousness, It
moves,’ in respect of the entire whole made up of the paiis. Otherwise
from the conjunction of cause and not-cause, the conjunction of effect and
iiot-effect also will not follow, since there can be conjunction of an effect
also, only with the Action of the cause. —26.

Resemblance of Substance^ Attribute and Action,

II ^ M I II

Sarhyogan am, of Conjunctions, Diavyai

27. Substance is the joint effect of n
tions*— 27,

UpasMra. — He again mentions a single efleot of many (causes) ;

The meaning is that substance is the single effect
tious. It should he observed that here ‘ Conjunctions ’
to the exclusion of the conjunctions of touch-less subst
made up of hnal parts or ultimate foimations, and h
stances.— 27.

Above eonUnum.

wwax U ^ M 1 u

Rupanam, Of colours. RQpam, colour.

; ^ '/ ,28. Colour (is the joint effect) of many colours. — 28.

says'tha-t many Attributes produce on© Attribute' as tlieir


UllC-


KANADA 8UTEA I. 1-29


^Colour is tlie single ’ effect — this is the connection. - The. word
^ colour ’ in 'both the instances are indicatory, and its indicative power
is such that it does not abandon its own meaning. And the common
property of the intrinsic and the indicatory significance is dependence
upon the relation of the product and producer by means of the proximity
kiiowm as combination with an object which is one and the same as the
cause. Hence Colour, Taste, Smell, Touch, Liquidity, Natural Fluidity,
Unity, and Separateness of one are brouglit together. For these, being
present in the cause, originate in the effects only one Attribute of the
saine kind. Tii fact the operation of non-eombinative causes is two-fold.
Some produce their effects proximity to the object which is one and
the same as the cause. Here the cause is tlie combinative cause and it
is the cause of tiie effect, luimely colour, etc., vhic!} have to be produced.
Thus Colour which is present in the potsherd orighiates the Colour of the
pot by means of the combination, knowm as coi ibimitioii with the object
which is otie and the same as the cause, witli the combinative cause,
namely pot, etc., of the effect such as Colour, etc. Similarly Taste, etc.
In some places, however, there is an operation of non-combinatire causality
by means of proximity to the object which is one and the same as the
effect. For instance, Sound, although it is a cause, originates in the
sky another Sound, although it is an effect. In the sky itself Colour,
etc., also are produced by Conjunction of Fire with the ultimate atoms
of Earth by means of the proximity in the form of combination with the
object which is one and the same as the effect. — 28.

Above continued.

IM M i hs. ii

Gurutva-prayatna-samyoganam, of gravity, Volition, and
Conjunction. Utksepanam, Throwing upwards

29. Throwing upwards (is tlie joint product) of
Gravity, Volition, and Conjunction. — 29.

XJpaskara.—B.e says that a single Action may be the effect of many causes :

The meaning is that Throwing upwards is their single effect.
Here Weight residing in the hand, stone, etc., is the conditional cause and
Conjunction of the Soul exercising Volition is the non-conbinative cause,
of the Throwing upwards seated in the hand, whereas the non-combina-
tive cause of the Throwing upwards seated in the stone is the internal

movement or vibration of the hand. _ ^ j;

Here also the terra Throwing np-wards is indicatory of Throwing

downwards, etc.— §9, .v ; :v



VAI8E8IKA PHILOSOPHY.


Oawality of Action upheld.

? I ? I II

Samyoga-yibhag^i, Conjunctions and Disjunctions. ^ Cha^
and* Karmnianam, of Actions.

30. Conjunctions and Disjunctions also (are individual-
ly the products) of Actions. — 30.

ITpaskdra.— But it has been said that Attributes which have taken a shape^
(i. e., by appearing in some Substance) are, as effects, preceded (and so caused) by the
Attributes of the causes ; it has also been said that they are preceded by the Attributes of
that' . in . which . they ■ reside ; therefore it. follows that Action produces no.' effect' whatevei\:,:
That being so, even the inference of ultrasensual phenomena such as the movements of the
Sun, etc., becomes impossible in the absence of any mark of inference. For this reason,
merely reminding the reader of what has alread^^ been said in the aphorism Action is
the common cause of Conjunction, Bis j unction, and Impetus,’ ' he sa5^s :

‘ .Products ' is tlie complement. Tiie plural number is for the
purpose of individual reference. ^ Impression ^ also should be taken as
indicated. — 30.

VmHti. — The word ^cha’ implies Impetus and Elasticity in addition
(to Conjunctions and Disjunctions},

Above continued.


Karana-samdnye, under the topic of cau.ses in general. :
Dravya-karmnianam, of Substances and Actions. Karnimag

Action, Akdranam, not cause. Uktani, said.

31. Under the topic of causes in general, Action has
been stated to he not a cause of Substances and Actions.-— 31.

OpasMra.— Bttt it has been already said that Substance and Action are not the efieots
of Action. Conjunction and Disjunction again are the effects of Conjunction and Disjunc-
tion alone. So that the affirmation of the Causality of Action here seems to be self-con-
tradictory. So he says :

The word ‘ KAranasa.ma,Dya’ denotes the topic of causes in general.
Thus in the topic of the statement of causes in general, Action has been
said to be not a cause of Substance and Action, and not that it is alto-
gether 'a not-cause, only, whereby the aphorism “Conjnnctionsand Dis-

I 6 .'junctions also are individually the products of Actions” might be

‘ V the first chapter lesson of the First Booh in the Ooramep-


KAFADA SUTBA I. 2-1.


Book First, Chapter Second.

Causation.

^TRwr^mrfm im i r i ? ii

Karaiiabhavat, fronv the non-existence of cause, ^

Karjyabiiavalij non-existence of effect. -

1. Non-existence of effect (follows) from the non-exist-
ence of cause.— 32.

Vpmkttra, — Well, in this section (f. e., the last half of the book) the Resetnblaiice
of the three Predieables has been stated as constituted by the identity or sameness
of their effects and causes* But this is not established as the relation of effect aiid
cause itself has not been proved. Therefore he says :

Whereas it is seen that in spite of eartli, wheel, water, potter, thread,
etc., being brought together, thei'e is non-existence of the pot, if there is
non-existence of the potter's staff, and that in spite of earth, water, etc.
being brought together, there is non-existence of the shoot if there is non-
existence of the seed ; it fi. c., non-existence) cannot be explained without
the relation of effect and cause between the potter’s staff and the pot or
between the seed and the shoot. Otherwise there will be non-existence of
the pot even on the non-existence of the loom, etc., and there will be non-
existence of the shoot even on the non-existence of pieces of stone, etc.
Moreover it is seen that the pot, a piece of cloth, etc., exist for a time only.
That even cannot be explained without the relation of cause and effect.
Foi* they being non-existent at one time, their temporariness in the form of
existence at another time is not possible but by the dependence of existences
upon causes. For if there were no dependence upon causes, then a thing
could onl}^ be or not be, but could not be for a time only ; since an existing
thing cannot be non-existent, nor can it come into existence from that
which is not its cause, nor can. it come into existence from one knows not
what, nor can it come into existence from unreal things such as the horn
of a hare, etc,, but from a really existing limit or beginning like the
potter’s staff, the loom, etc., as is seen in such effects as a pot, a piece of
cloth, etc. Now the limit or beginning is nothing but the cause.

Thus if the relation of effect and cause did not exist, there would be
jio , inclination or disinclination to activity. Then the world would be- ,
come desireless, inert. For there can be no activity without the know-
ledge that this is the means of attaining that which is desired ; nor can
there be forbearance without the 'knowledge that this is the means o.f
-g^voiding that which is not desired, — 1, ' , ■



IllliSi


VAI^ESIKA PHILOSOPHY.


Vwriti , — The SaMdiya thinkers argue as follows : A water-jaij

etc., existing in an enveloped state in earth, etc,, from before, develop
into visible existence, and again by being struck willi a cudgel, etc., are
enveloped therein and exist. So that production and ‘destruction are not
real, but merely develoj)ment and envelopment. This being so, why
should not a water-jar be produced from yarns ? It cannot be said that
the existence of effects in causes prior to their production is without evi-

.pplied by such texts of Veda as ‘ Only the exis-
’ (Chliandogya 6, 2, 1*, etc/’

The admission of the development
on. the other hand, development
necessary to admit prodiictiQii
existence 'pf
Tims causality is ■the helong-:

h,ich;canhGt'


deuce, for the proof is su
tent, 0 Dear One, was at the beginning.

This view should he considered,
of development will entail non-Finality. If,
be previously non-existent, then it will be
from the non-existent, and hence the supposition of the prior
the water-pot, etc., will become groundless

ing to the class of invariable and unconditional antecedents w
be otherwise accounted for, or the quality of that which fails to produce
an effect on account of defect in the contributories, or an additional Pre-
dicable, being a particular relation arising out of its own nature.

Above continued,

iM J R I ^ II

!T Na, not. ^Tii, but. Kar.yyabhavat, from non-existence of

effect. g;iwr*rrf! Karanabhavah, non-existence of cause.

2. Blit non-existence of cause (does) not (follow) from
the non-existence of the effect. — 33.

U'pasMra—lb may be objected that only the existent is produced, and not the
non-existent, according to the authority of the Veda, e. f/., “ Verily the existent was at the
beginning, O calm one !,” etc. Otherwise in the case of undifferentiated non-existence

there will’bo no such uniformity that a piece of cloth is produced from threads only and

not from potsherds. If it is so then, we reply, this uniformity must be accepted by the
advocates of the doctrine of transformation : ) ^bo admit the theory of causes ;

otherwise how it happens that the mauifestatioii of the pot is only in the potsherds, and
not in threads? Moreover if the manifestation or development also really existed from
before, then that too being eternal, it comes to this that production and destruction are
merely development and envelopment. Now, development and envelopment depend upon
causes. There‘fore it results that a pot, a piece of cloth, etc., also surely depend upon
causes and also that there is production of that wdiieh was not before. The objection that
there is no proof of the uniformity towards the cause is answered by the uniformity of the
uature of the cause, and this uniformity of the nature of the cause (to produce the effect)
becomes toown by the method of agreement and difference. For it is a universal experi-
ence that no pot is produced without a potter’s staff and that a pot is produced when
there is pottestfs staff. Thus, causality is the quality of that which belongs to the class
invariable' aifitf &epiiditibnal aniiecedenijs, which cannot be otherwise established 09



KAVABA SUTRAS I.


explained, or the diaracteristic of being attended ^vith the non-production of the efect
due to defect in .some contributory cause. Although there is no invariable antecedence in
such places as one should perform sacrifice with barley or with paddy,’' etc., because the
sacrifice witli paddy is not an antecedent of the result producible b}' the sacrifice with
barley, still a cause ordained in the alternative is truly a cause, as causality is proved in
the case of both even though the results are similar in kind. Tims the characteristic of
being attended with the non-production of the effect due to defect in some contributory
cause, forms the causality which is common to both secular and scriptural practices ;
whereas invariable antecedence known by the method of agreement and difference Is the
causality which is secular only. For in such eases as ‘‘ He who desires heaven should
perform sacrifice,” etc., the difference or negative side is not required, because knowledge
of the agreement or positive side alone is sufficient to induce activity. For this reason
also, if the alternative is assumed, then both lose their significance in the code, for the
result of the same kind being secured by one alone, the performance of the other becomes
futile. Hence also it has been rightly said : “ The result necessarily follows from practi-
ces taught in the Veda, if performed in all their parts.” When the Acliaryya (preceptor)
says And this object proceeding from the Veda, breach of uniformity is no fault,” he
only means to refer to ordinary objects. In the case of grass, igniting wood, and Jewei,
however, heterogeneity of effect is necessary ; because there causality being ijiferred by
agreement and difference, non-existence of the effect is necessary from non-oxisteuce of the
cause. If heterogeneity of effect is supposed in alternative cases, causality’- will bo in the
alternative in RaJasCi^’a, Vajapeya, and other sacrifices. For these reasons he goes on
establisliing the same law of the relation of effect and cause.

n the law of the relation of eflect and cause do not exist, then non-
existence of cause will follow also from non-existence of effect. Non-
existence of effect is not instrumental towards the non-existence of cause ;
but non-existence of cause is instrumental towards non-existence of effect.
Thus the application of this introductory section of two aphorisms is that
persons desirous of mohsa (salvation) are concerned in non-existenca of
birth for the sake of non-existence of pain, in non-existence of activity for
the sake of non-existence of birth, in non-existence of faults for the sake
of non-existence of activity, in prevention of false knowledge for the sake
of non-existence of faults, and in spiritual intuition of the Self for the
sake of prevention of false knowledge. — 2.

Genus and Species relative to understanding.

^ ror ^ t ^ IM M

Samaoyam, Genus, Visesab, Species.

Buddhyapeksaro, relative to understanding.

3.. Tlie notions G-enus and Species are relative to
the Understanding. — 34

, Upccslcdra..— After the marks of the three Predicabies in the order of their eiihmera-
tioa, he now states the mark of the Predicable Genus which has also been mentioned :

Genas is two-fold, high and low, of which the first is Existence and the

second is SubstanCeness, etc., pervaded by Eristence. The Understanding


¥IA8ESIKA PHiLOSOPHY.


dark of Genus and its Species: tlie cognition of re-appear-
arrence, of Genus, and the cognition of disappearance or
species. The word ‘ iti ’ takes them singly, and hence the
lyapeksam ’ has been used in the neuter gender. The writer
i however applies it to species only and explains its use in
number and neuter gender bj^ the rule A word in the neuter
with a word not in the neuter gender optionally entails
sr and singular number.” ‘Buddhyapeksam means that of
.rnderstanding or cognition is the mark or the definition.
:he aphorism means that which is eternal and resides in more
than one. Or, Genus, whether high or low, is, while it is
sisteiit in the same substratum with the mutual non-existence
tuation or foundation. Moreover Genus also takes the- name
as for example, at the same time that there is the cognition of
;e or recurrence, namely, ‘ This is Substance,’ ‘ This is Substan-
on, there is the particular cognition that it is not Attribute,

; Action, etc. So that the nature of species belongs to the
selves, e. g., substanceness, etc.

■ be objected, “ Genus (i. e., the Universal^ as an objective
1 non-entity, since the consciousness of recognition can be
without it) by the absence of reversion or divergertce. For
: the cognition, “ It is a cow,” is that it is not different
Even the advocate of the doctrine of kinds ijati) admits that
subject-matter of the concrete cognitions of bovineness, etc. ;
ness or particularity is not something other than absence of
rom itself ; it is the absence of divergence from a cow, etc.,
0 the occasion of the use of the words cow, etc. Moreover,
the Genus of bovineness reside ? Not surely in the bovine
anse the animal is non-existent prior to the appearance of


A'? 'As,


41


IANAdA S^TBAS L 2-3.


in part for a ‘class’ is not confined to one part. So it has heen said, “It
does not move, nor was it there. Nor is it prodnced, nor has it parts.
Nor does it leave its former residence. Alas ! the succession of difficul-
ties.” Genus exists and that is manifested by situation or organisation
only like bovineness, potness, etc. But it does not belong to Attribute
and Action also.” Such is the quarrel of kindred thinkers.

To this it is said, “ Genus is eternal and pervasive ; and pervasive-
ness consists in being related to all place by its own form. It does not arise
that places should be treated in the terms of bovineness, for the use of
bovineness is obtained by the relation known as combination ; as ‘ Time
possesses form or colour ’ — such cognition and use do not arise, because
Time does not possesses form or colour, etc. Nor can it be said that Time
verily does not exist, since it is found that it is only a different name for the
five heads” {i. e., of the Bauddhas, e. g., Perception, Cognition, Feel-
ing, Conception with Naming, and Impression), because Time will be
established later on. Thus bovineness which pervades a particular
spot, combines with the organism which is produced in tlrat very place,
as it is found that ‘ it is i^roduced ’ and “ it is combined (witli bovineness),”
refer to the same moment of Time. Hereby “ where does it reside ?” is
answered by “ where it is perceived ;” “where it resides and “ what sort
of a body it was prior to the appearance of bovineness?” by “ It did not
exist at all. ” Similarly “ It does not move, nor was it there, etc.,” is so
much cry of despair. The Genus of bovineness is nothing but non-diver-
gence of cognition from what it has been, —this is obstructed or contradict-
ed by the real or positive cognition “It is a cow or ox.” For the cogni-
tion also i.s not explained, as it has been said that the cognition of a real
existence does not help the understanding of negation, nor does diver-
gence from a cow or ox come to light in the cognition “ It is a cow or ox.”
The option of whole and part can arise only if a single Genus appear as a
whole or as a part. Whole-ness means multitude and infinity, and it is
not proved in an individual. “‘This is a cow or ox ’ — such cognitions
arise iii respect of non-entities and ai-e not capable of establishing
entities ” — to this the reply will be given afterwards.

Tlie followers of Prabhakara (a thinker of the MimanftS, School)
however say that Genus is manifested by its situation [i. e,, the organism'
where it resides). If it is evidenced by recognitive. understanding^ then *
what offence have been committed by Genera belonging to Attribute and ,
Action ? For there arises consciousness of fecdgiiition or knowing again
in respect of Colour, Taste, etc. ; and this coitsciousness surely establishes
a ‘ class ’ ijatiX since there is no obstrtieHptt*^ Asih is itt the case of Siy-ness ,


iiii



VAISESIKA PHILOSOPHY.


identity of the individual is not the ohstniction in the case of the class
attributes of Colour, etc. Nor is co-extension the obstruction here as it
is in the case of Understanding and Knowledge or in the case of the class-
es of water-pots and water-jai's, because of the multiplicity of individual
Colours, Tastes, etc. For co-extension is denotation of neither more nor
less individuals; and the class attributes of colour, etc., have a narrower
denotation than Attribute-ness, and have a wider denotation than blue-ness,
etc. For this reason also, there is no overlapping or intermixture (which
is also an obstruction to the existence of Genus), as there is in the case of
the characteristics of being material and ponderable substances, because
although their mutual absolute non-existences co-exist in the same subs-
tratum, yet there is no co-existence with any other class. Nor is here
instabilit}^ or infinite regression, because other Genera included in Colour-
ness, etc., are not recognised. Nor is here loss of form or transformation
as in the case of species. If species, while residing in substances, possess
classes or jdti then they will become either Attributes or Actions ; if


KAN AD A SUTBA I, '2-5, 43

Now, Sk3"-iiess is not a Geniis, as it denotes only one individual. Pot-iiess
and Jar-ness are not two genera, because the individuals denoted by the
one are neither more nor less than by the other. Material-iiess and ponder-
ableness are not genera, because by appearing in the same individual
the substrata o!: their respeetiv'-e absolute non-existence would then inter-
mix. G'eniis-ness is not a Genus, on account of infinite regression. The
traiisforiiiation of Species which is by nature exclusive, is an obstruction
to ■■ its being a Germs. If Particularity be a Genus, then, itself possessing "
Genus, it will not be possible for it to distinguish itself and therefore its
special property of self-distinction will suffer. Therefore Particiiiaritj"
or Species is not a Genus. Or transformation ina}^ mean change of
nature. 'So that if Species, while appearing in p^onderable things, possess
Genera, then they would be either Attributes or Actions. If while
appearing in tlie uuiversals ie. g., Sky, Space, Time, and Soul) they possess
Genera, then they would be Attributes. In this way change of nature of
the Species is the obstruction to Species possessing the characteristic of
Genus. Oombinatioii or Oo-inherence is not a Genus, as the relation of
combination does not exist in it, since the admission of combination into
coinbination would entail, infinite regression. This applies to the view
that combinations are many in number and undergo production and
destruction. Otherwise from the identity of the individual also Combina-
tion cannot be a Genus. Similarly the absence of the relation of Combi-
nation is an obstruction to Non-existence being a Genus ; and other ins-
tances should be understood.

Existence is Genus only,

U ! I ^ I « I!

' . isrrf:' Bhavafi, existence, being. Anuvritteh, of recLirreoce,. ■

assimilation' or extensive denotation, ff Eva, only, Hetutv^t, being."'

the cause, — Samanyam, Genus, Eva, only.

4. Existence, being tlie cause of assimilation only,
is only a Genus. — 35.

tjpasklm,— Proving the two-foldness which has been stated above of Genus and
::Species', .he saj^s ; ' . .

' Blutvah,' i.e., existence, is the cause of assimilation only, and not of
differentiation also. Therefore it does not take the name Species. — 4,

Oeriera-Species,

\\ \ \ \ \ x w

-V;-. ^ ^ Dravyatvam, substance-ness., ■ Gunatvam, attributeness.

Karinmatvam, action-ness. Cha, and, ig w f' wn r q Samaiijani, Generi

Vi^esaE species. Cha, also,



VAI8ESIKA PHILOSOPHY.


ing-iip-ness, and otner genera Deiongnig to Action. ouustance-iiessy etc.^

have been left uncompouncled in order to indicate the absence of the
relation of that which pervades and that which is pervaded, from amongst
them. ‘ Genera and Species ’ have not been compounded so that it may
be understood that these are Species also even while they possess the
characteristics of Genera. Otherwise (if the words were compounded)
there might be a mistake that the compound was a genitive one and then
the being Species would not have been perceived in the presence of
Genus-ness.

It might be objected, “ Substance-ness cannot be something which
penetrates into or inheres in the forms of substance and is beyond the
cognizance of the senses, because if it somehow exists in Earth, etc., its
existence is impossible in the case of Air, Sky, etc. It cannot be estab-
lished as something which constitutes the combinative cause of an effect
determined by Attribute-ness, because Attribute-ness, as it appears in
eternal and non-eternal objects, is not the determinant of being an effect.
The rejoinder that it is required for the sake of Attribute-ness does not
improve the situation.” The objection however does not arise, for
Substance-ness is established by the way of constituting the combinative
causality of an effect determined by the characteristic of Conjunction.
This causality cannot be constituted by the class attribute of Earth-ness,
which is of a narrower comprehension, nor by Existence which has a wider
A denotation; and there must be something to constitute or define it, as
otherwise suddenness or chance would be the result. Now Conjunction
;; must necessai’ily be recognized in the case of ultimate atoms, as supplying

) the non-eombinative cause of a molecule of two atoms; in the case of

' : molecule of two atoms each, as supplying the non-combinative cause of a

molecules of three atoms ; in the case of the four universals (e.g., Time,
; Space, Ether, and Soul), tlirough their being in conjunction with all pon-
, derable things ; in the case of Mind, as the ground for the conjunction of
t) : Mind and the Senses ; in the case of Air, as the support for the movement
‘ of grass, etjj,; in the case of perceptible Substances, through their very

' -p - perceptibility^^^^^ the other hand, there is no un-origiuated Conjunotiog
h.p-.-y.sd that it cbuld-i)e ^ quality of Conjunction even, appearing


in effects and not-effects, could not be the determinant of being an effect.

In like manner, it is easily demonstrable that substance-ness is established
also by the way of constituting the combinative causality of Disjunction
also. Attribute-ness again, it has been already said, is proved by its
being the determinant ol the causality which exists in a tiling possessing
Genus and not containing the non-combinative causality of the combina-
tive causality of Conjunction and Disjunction. The class attribute of
Actions also, is, in the case of perceptible Substances, cognizable by the
cognition, ‘ ft moves,’ but in other places can be inferred from Conjunc-
tion and Disjunction, for Action-ness is required to be established also by
its being the determinant of the non-combinative causality of botli Con-
junction and Disjunction. For this reason also it is possible to infer
the movement of the sun from its reaching another place. Here although
the other place, e.g., of Sky, etc., is beyond the reach of tiie senses, yet the
Conjunction and Disjunction of the solar rays are perceptible by tlie solar
zone, audit is from these Conjunctions and Disjunctions that the inference
of the movement ot the sun can be drawn. The learned Uddyotahava has
said: “Tlie inference of the movement of the sun is by its ivaehing a
different place, which again is also a mattter of inference in the following
way : The sun which is perceived by a man when facing eastwards, is
also perceived by him when facing the west, and is recognised by him.

This fact together with the fact that the sun is a substance and is not
destroyed and produced again at every moment, is proof that the sun has
readied a different place from where it was before.” — 5.

Final Species excluded.

I! ! s H I II

Anyatra, elsewhere, Antyebliah, final. Vi&sebhahi

than species.

6. (The statement of Gemis and Species has been
made) with the exception of the final Species.^ — 37.

Upaskdm^— But is it the same Species which has been enumerated as a Predicable^
which is here described as both Genas and Species ? EemoYing this curiosity of • the
disciples he says ; , , ^

The meaning is that the statement of Genus and Species is to the
exclusion of those final Species'^ residing in eternal substances, wliicli have , • ■
^been mentioned above, ' Antyab/ i e., ' final/ means those which exist '
ar,;appeanat the end, (of the division ov' dissolution of 'compounds.) The •..vfT'.lrl;/:

I . ' ' * It is the introdiiotioa of these ‘‘final species,’* which is the reason why the system" ' /: '

' pf ifa|ldan Is called the VaUefika philosophy or the philosophy of iaal speeies^ r.V- “ /'•V-/'”') “ ; .*


VAISESIKA PHILOSOPHY


tliat they are ‘ final,’ because after them there is no other
According to the Vrittikdr-a they are ‘final
eternal Substances, f. e., Substances which,
at the end of production and destruction. Thej’^ are really bpecies

of differentiation, and not of the form


teachers say

prii^ciple of differentiation.

Species,’ because they exist in
exist

only, the causes of the consciousness
of Genus also.' -6.

Existence defined.

ui ?rarni ? I =i ii

^ Iti, Urns, sjsf: Yatah, whence. Dravya.-

of. Substance, Attribute, and Action, Sa, that.


Sat, existent,
guaa^karaiasu, in respect
Salta, "existence.,

7 . Existence is that to which are clue tlie beiiet and
usage, namely ‘ (It is) existent,’ in respect of Substance,
Attribute, and Action. — 38.

VpashCirci. A good many men doubt that Existence is a Genus. Bo he gives its proof:

By the word ‘ iti ’ he teaches the inode of belief and usage. Thus
Existence is that which causes the belief in this way that this is existent,
that that is existent, in the case of the triad of Substance, etc., or on which
depends the application of the words in the form of ‘ it is existent,’ - it is
existent.’— 7.

Existence not identical with Substance, Attribute, or Action.

II ^ M I c: n

Dravya-guna-karmmabhY’ali, from Substance, Attribute, and
Action. Arthantarain, a different object. Satta, existence.

8. Existence is a different object from Substance,
Attribute, and Action. — 39.

OpaBkarcL — But Existence is not perceived as being separate from Biibstaoe©, Attri#
bote, and Action. Therefore Existence is nothing else than one or other of Bubstanee, etc.
Because that which is different from something else is perceived by means of its difference
from that, as a water-pot from a piece of cloth. But Existence is not perceived by means
of its difference from them. Therefore it is identical with them. To meet this objection
ie says : . \

’ Substance, etc., are non-assimilative but Existence is assimilative.
Thus ‘ Existence is a different, etc.,’ because its difference from them is
established by the consideration of the opposite properties characterised
■‘ by’: assimilativeness and non-assimilativeness. That, however, it is not
pdteeived ^elsewhere than,^ m is due to tlie virtue of their priinary

Qi- .hatucsd . inter-relation,, whereas the relation of a pot and a piece of clotb
-ds de4ya|i¥e"«T.;ii,rtifipial, - • ' ■ • ' : ' ■ , '


''•■Mi



^1/YlDl SiJtbA I, 2-iO.


The intrinsic foiiii of the individual is not Existence, for iiiclividiials
do not assimilate themselves or form themselves into classes. If the inner
nature be assimilative, then the same is nothing but Existence. If noii-
assimilative inner natures or essences be the means of classification, then
the class attributes of bovineness, etc., are also gone. TJiis consideration
also dismisses the objection, WJien the practice of classification is estab-
lished by those very objects in which as substrata Existence inheres, then
what IS the use of Existence ? ” For the same reason also it is not valid
to hold that Existence is the property which makes an object and its action
possible, or that Existence is reasonableness or reliability ; for the cogni-
tion ^ It is existent/ arises even in the absence of any enquiry in those
respects. — 8.

Above mntimied,

^ wwTfT gw: li V t ^ 1

Guna-kaniniiasu, in Atiributes and Actions. Ciia, and. vjHri
Bhavat, from E.Kistence. sr Na, not ^[*4 Karmma, Action, q- N.n, not.

Gunal.i, Attribute. . ^

9. And as it exists in Attributes and Actions, there-
fore it is neitlier Attribute nor Action. — 40.

He points out rinother ditt’erentia :

Neither Attribute nor Action” — this being the matter to be expressed,

their individual mention (i. e., the words being not compounded) indicates
that Existence is not Substance also. For an Action does not exist in
Actions, nor an Attribute in Attributes, nor does Substance exist in an
Attribute or Action. Existence however resides in Attribute and Action.
Therefore on account of its Difference from Substance, Attribute, and
Action, Existence is really different from them.— 9.

Above eonthiued.

V - ^ ^ ^ I n

\ Sanianya-visesabhavena, by reasonof the absence 'ofGeaus*'^^

Species. Cha, and

10 . (Existence is different from Substance, Attribute,

and Action), also by reason of the absence of Genus-Species
in it.— 41.

Hpasicdm.— He mentions another differentia- : ■ . -v

If Existence be Substance, Attribute, or Action, then it would contain
in it Genera which are Species also. But in Existence these Genera-
Species, namely, Substance-ness, etc., ai-e not perceived. For nobody ever
has the perception that Existence is Substance, Attribute, or Action.— 10, , ,



■VAISE8IKA PEILOSOPHY,


Suhstanee-ness not identical with Siihstance^ Attribute or Action


Aneka-dravya-vattvena, by means of its containing more than
one Substance, Dravyatvaui, Substance-ness. Uktani, explained.

11. Substance-ness lias been explained by means of
its containing more than one Substance. — 42.

Vpashlra.—EsbYing thus stated the distinction of Existence from Bubstance, Attri-
bute, and Action, he states the distinction of Substance-ness from them :

‘ Anekadravyavat ’ means tliai to which belong more than one
Substance as its combinative causes. The term ‘ more than one ' here
denotes all. Hence it is distinguished from Earth-ness, etc. Its ‘ eter-
nality ’ is obtained simply from its being a Genus ; hence its distinction
from wholes made up of parts. And ‘ anekdravyavattvarn ’ means the
being combined with more than one Substance in general ; hence its
distinction from E-vistence. Therefore Substance-ness is eternal and
combined with more than one Substance in general. Hence it is implied
that conjunction is not desired. And Substance-ness also has been verily
established. ‘ Substance-ness explained. ' means that Substance-ness also
has been explained in the very same way as Existence.— 11.

. Above continued.

H \ \ \ I n

S^m^nya-visesa-abhavena, by reason of tlie absence of
Genera-Species. *1^ Cha, and.

12. (Substance-ness is distinct from Substance, Attri-
bute, and Action) also by reason of the absence of Genera-
Species in it. — 43.

UjjasJcara.— But Substance-ness is also a ‘class,’ and can be quite non-distinet from
its own ground. What is the fault here ? So ho says :

If the ‘ class ’ of Substance-ness be really identical with Substance,
etc., then in it will exist Earthness, Waterness, Fireness, and other Genera
which are also Species. : The sense is that nobody lias the perception that
Substance-ness is Earth, Water, or Fire. Hence it is distinct, etc. — 12.

: y ‘ . ‘ Atti4bute-ness not identical with Substance, Attribute or Action.

yiAy y?n?t n ? i =< i ? ^ i

y.'; - Gunesu, in Attributes. Bbavat,

;y gaf^ Ga^atvam; Attribute-ness. Uktani, explained.



i:ANlDA 8UTBA I, 2-16,


13. (That Attribute-ness is disti
Attribute, and Action is) explained fi
Attributes. — 44,

: UpaBMra.-~Se states Attributeaess :

The meaning is that in the verj^ same wa^
ness is explained to be distinct from Substance”
from its existence in (i. e., combination with) Attr


Sanianya-visesabhavena, by reason of the absence o
Genera-Species. =sr Cha, and.

14. (Attribute-ness is distinct from Substance, Attri-
bute, and Action) also by reason of the absence of Genera-
Species in it. — 45.

Upaslcam.—He points out anotliei* differentia :

^ If Attributeness be not something over and above Substance,
Attribute, and Aci,ion, their it should be perceived as containing Substance-
ness, Attributeness, and Action-ness, and their sub-classes. This is the

'>iiaean.ing. — 14 .

Action-ness not identical with Substance, Attribute, or Action.

IM ! s ^ H II

Karmniasu, in Actions, Bhavat, from its existence.

Kaniiroatvam, action-ness, Uktam, explained,

15. (That) Action-ness (is distinct from Substance,
Attribute, and xiction is) explained from its existence in
Actions. — 46.

(7pasJc«ra.-He points out that which distinguishes Action-ness from Substance

and. Action ^ ?

Like Existence, Action-ness also, which is another ‘class,’ is
explained as distinct from Substance, Attribute, and Action, imm its
existence in (i. e, combination with) Actions only. — 15.

Above continued.


Samanya-vyesabhavena, by
Genera-Species. '^.Chaj and. ' ' , - .


reason of the absence of



VAliESIKA PHILOSOPQt.


16. (Action-ness is distinct from Substance, x\.ttribute,
and Action) also by reason of the absence of Genera-
Species in it. — 47.

VpasMra . — He meations another differentia :

Tlie meaning is that if Aetion-ness be identical with Substance, etc.,
then the Genus-Species of Substanceness, etc., will combine in it.

It should be noted that these four aphorisms, identical in form, are
stated so as to form one section for explaining the distinction from Sub-
stance, Attribute, and Action, of the four classes, Existence, Substance-
ness, Attributeness, and Action-ness. — 16.


Existence is one.

Sat, existent, Iti, this. Lingavisesat, from

non-particuiarity or uniformity of the mark. Vis€sa4ii%-abhtvatj^^

from the absence ot a particular or distinctive mark. ^ Cha, and. Ekali,

One, Bhavab, Existence.

17. Existence is one, because of the uniformity of the
mark, viz., tliat it is existent and because of tbe absence of
any distinguishing mark.-— 48.

Upctsfedra.— But why should not Existence which is present in Substance, Attribute,
and Action, be rendered different by the difference of the determinants of Substance-
ness, etc. ? So he says ;

The knowledge or the use of words iu this form that it is existent,
is the mark of Existence. And it is the same, i. e., non-particularized, in
respect of Substance, Attribute, and Action. Therefore one and the same
Existence resides in them. Otherwise, Existence having the same denota-
tion or manifestation as Substance-ness, etc., either it would not exist or
they would not exist. ‘ Vin^esalifigAbhavat Cha ’ — means that there is
no difference, as inference whicli is the mark of niseja, i. e., difference,
does not here exist. As in the judgment, ‘This lamp is verily that,’
the mark of distinction is the difference of measure such as length,
shortness, etc., so here there is no such mark of distinction. This is
.fjVvyn'vfv:' . ■ .the, idea.— 17.; A ■■ A, ^

1; ' S A', ;.: .Here ends the second chapter of the First Book in the Commen-

:i .14 , Yaii^esika aphorisms of Kaiiada of great

'


KAISlADA 8UTEA II. 1-1


ivianitold bolour such as blue, yellow, etc., belongs to Earth alone.
Tima the characteristic is the possession of the ‘ class ' pervaded by Siibs”
tance-ness and eo-estensive with blue colour. Similarly manifold Taste
such as bitter, sour, etc., resides in Earth alone. Thus the (second) charac-
teristic is the possession of the ‘ class ’ pervaded by Substance-ness and
co-extensive with bitter Taste. In like manner other characteristics should
be understood by the substitution or interpolation of the words ‘ soui-,’ etc;
Smell is of two kinds, fragrant and non-fragrant. Thus the (third) cha-
racteristic is the possession of the ‘class ’ pervaded by Substance-ness and
co-estensive with Smell. It will be therefore seen that Earth is a Subs-
tance which is the substratum or location of ‘ class ’ which is co-estensive
with Smell but not eo-extensive with an Attribute which is not co-
extensive with Smell. It mixst not be objected that as Smell and Taste
are not perceived in a stone, etc., therefore both of them fall short
of being universal here. For, though Smell and Taste are not per-
ceived there in the first instance, still they are found to be present
in their ashes ; and the very same parts which originate the stone do
also originate its ashes. Hence there is no want of universality. How
then is there such perception as “The air is fragrant,” “Water
mixed with ‘ Karavella ’ is bitter ?” The Question does unf. ni-i’cio



;V'’ i'l


VAI^ESIKA PE1L080PEY.


flowers of Sivisa and Lcivdfigi (clove-creeper) ; flut it is not so in tlie Toticli
of Water, etc, Altlioiigli in a wliole made up of parts Toiiclijetc., are not
produced directly through the conjunction of Fire, from heating, joi there
too a particular heterogeneity should be recognised by the way of its
being the product of a series of parts and wholes.

But/’ it may be objected, this mark or characteristic is what is
called a mark of disagreement or a negative mark which is the proof of its
difference from others or of the mode of its treatment. Now, Earth is
distinguished from others because it has Smell. That which is not different
from others, does not possess Smell, e. gf., Water, etc. And Earth is what
has Smell which is counter-opposite of the non-existence of the pervader of


KA-NABA 8VTEA U. 1-1.


way, like pot-ness, to be the occasion of the significance of an accidental
word, the woj-d Earth contains the occasion of the significance of Earth-
ness. If it contains the occasion of not signifying others— not-Earth-ness,
then as it appears together with that which is the occasion of the
significance, it should be proved in the way, viz., ‘ That which is not so,
is not so. Thus here too there is surely the fault of ignorance of the
qu£8situm, etc.”

It is not so, the author replies, difference of others such as Water, etc.,
being manifest in the pot itself, because the difference, i. e., the mutual
non-existence of Air, and other super-sensuous objects also is pi’oved by
sense-perception itself in the pot, etc., inasmuch as only the fitness for the
location or ground or substratum governs the apprehension of mutual
non-existence, as is seen in cases like “ The column is not a pidacha (a
ghost-like being).

It should not be said, “ This is not the case. Let then the pot only
be the analogue or'example. What is the use of a negative mark? Who
will prove in a roundabout fashion a conclusion arrived at in a straight
way ? ” If the non-negative mark be not a mere simulacrum, then this
path too is unobstructed to him who is described as arguing in a round-
about way ; because with the removal of the fault of ignorance of the
qutBsitum, all other faults which arise out of it, are also removed. There
is no contradiction, because the positive pervasion or the relation
in agreement is apprehended along with the negative relation or because
the positive pervasion is inferred by the negative pervasion. Nor is there
futility of the minor premiss, because the very mark of wdiich the per-
vasion has been obtained, is proved in the minor term ; as has been
said : “ Whatever relation of the determinable and the determinant

subsists between two existences, just the reverse of it is to be understood
in the ease of the corresponding non-existences.” Usage again follows
from the teaching “ Earth possesses Smell,” as what possesses a narrow,
twisted neck, etc., is the object of reference of the word ‘ pot.’ Thus that
by which, anywhere and everywhere, in the case of clarified butter, etc.,
clay, etc., the being the occasion of the force of the word Earth is
derived, from the above teaching, in Earth-ness by means of the indication,
namely, the possession of Smell, also operates as a negative mark in this
way that that which is not this, is not this, because everything which
possesses Smell is the object of referenceiof the word Earth, through its
possession of Smell, by means of Earth-nesi yrbiph ig tho occasion of the
;'foree' of the word,., .A, ■' WkW'Wb



VAlSmKA PHILOSOPHY



KAN Ad A SUTRAS It I-


IS neltlier the defiaitioii nor the description, , because it is attacked with
the fear of belonging to unascertained objects. — T.

\ it nil. The revered iSafikara Mi^r
necessity was of carrying
oioii of Sineli, up to the possession of the 'class
ness co-extensive with Smell.


■a himself knows what thi
the investigation here, leaving aside the posses'

pervaded by Substance'


Characteristics of Water


: ROpa-rasa-sparsavatyah, possessed of Colour, Taste, and
Toucli. Apah, Waters, fqr: Dravah, Fluid. f5r»wr: Snigdhah, Liquid,

viscid.

2. Waters possess Colour, Taste, and Toucli, and
are fluid and viscid. — 50.

Upaskira. -He states the eliaraeteristie of Water mentioned after Earth :

The Colour, Taste, and Touch are respectively White, Sweet, and
Cool only. Fiuidness is constitutional but Viscidity is by nature or-
essential.

But it is not correct to say that the Colour of Water is only White,
because blueness is observed in die water of die river Yamuna, etc. That
the Taste is only the sweet is also not correct, because acidness, bitterness,
etc., are observed in the juice of the blackberry, /camuiro, etc. That the
Touch is only the Cool one is also not proved, because at mid-day hotness
also is observed. Constintional Fluidity again is too limited, as it is
absent in ice, hail-stone, etc. Viscidity also is not proved as essential
and is too wide, as it is not perceiv^ed in Water, and is perceived in
clarifaed butter and other terrene objects. Moi'eover Water-ness is not a
class even, which may be the charactex'istic of Water, because it is not
proved on, account of the non-existence of that which will establish it.
Nor is it proved by die characteristic of the determinant of its being the
combinative cause of Viscidity, because the nature of Viscidity, appearing
in both the effect and wliat is not the effect, is not the determinant of the
state of being the effect. Therefore in the absence of a differentia, Water
is not differentiated. All this objection cannot be raised. For uon-
luininous white colour alone is really the differentia of Water, the blueness
in the Water of the river Yamund, etc., is due to the condition or environ-



VAlhsiKA PHtLOSOPHY.


)Ssessioii of the class Avhicli is directly pervaded by Subs-
Avhich is present in colour which is not co-existent with
■luminous white Colour. The Taste also is only the sweet
;erness, acidness, etc., in the juice of the blackberry,
are due to the condition or environment supplied by tne
rticles of Earth. It should not be said that sweetness is
lived in Water, since it is revealed after the eating of some
jstance. _Nor does this sweetness belong to the yellow
ilf and is'capable of being revealed by Water, because only
Taste is observed in it. As in amalald so in yellow
ly the astringent is the Taste, the same alone being perceiv-
n is there non-production of Taste on account of the conflict
because the parts also there possess astrignent Taste, ihe
t Tastes is due to its producing the respective effects of those
fold Taste again is removed simply by the absence of proof.



ii:ANlDA SUTRAS IL 1


tiori IS not possible in the case of a class. It cannot be said Let Viscidity
be an Attribute. But what is the evidence that it is present in water
for it is inferred from tlie mixing or compounding of barley, sand, etc.,
by water. A compound is a particular combination or conjunction
caused by ABscidity and Fluidity. It is not due to Fluidity alone, be-
cause no coiDpoiindmg is established by the Fluidity of glass or gold ;
nor is it due to Viscidity alone, because no compounding is established
by condensed clarified butter, etc. Therefore by the method of agree-
ment and difference it is proved to be caused by Viscidity and Fluidity.
And this compounding, being seen to take place in barley, sand, etc*,
by water, confirms Viscidity in Water. This argument is based upon
wide experience itself, as Viscidity is an object of sense-perception. Vis-
cidity which however is found in clarified butter, etc., is of the Water
which is the occasional cause of that clarified butter, and it appears as
though belonging to the clarified butter tlirough combination with the
conjoint. So also in the case of oil, juice, etc. And Water which is the
occasional cause of clarified butter, contains a preponderance of Viscidity ;
therefore owing to this very preponderance of A^iscidity, this Water does
not counteract Fire. If ABscidity were a particular Attribute of Earth,
then, like Smell, it would have been present in all terrene objects.
Lastly, Water-ness is a class which is directly pervaded by Substaiice-ness,
because it has been proved that a class which determines the being the
combinative cause of the conjunction present only in objects possessing
A^iscidity, is common to the ultimate atoms. — 2.

CharacieristiGS of Fire,

^ II I t t ^ ti

: Tejas, fire. Rupa-sparsavat, possessed of Colour and

.■Touch* ■'■■ '

3. Fire possesses Colour and ToucL — 51.

f7pas?caf a.— Following the order of enumeration lie states the characteristic of Pu*e ;

The meaning is that Fire possesses Colour which is luminous, and
Touch which is hot. If it be objected, “ Luminousness is the being the
illuminator C'f other bodies, and'such Colour is not found in beat or in Fire
as it exists in gold, in a frying-pan, or in Water. White Colour also is
found nowhere in these, nor is hot Touch found in moonlight or in gold.
How then is this so ? ” We reply that there can be no i such objection,
because luminous Colour maybe inferred in hotness, etc., by means of
Fire-ness. If it be objected that Fire-ness itself is : ^ .proved , therb. as
such, we reply that it is inferred in theijbyfihfii' possessing hot Touch.



Mi


tAlSmiKA PHILOSOPBT.


If it be asked, How is it proved in gold ?” our reply is that the autlior
desires to say that it is because, even in the absence of liiminoiis Colour in
it, Fire-ness is inferred by the negative mark, viz,^ the characteristic of
being the substratum or ground of Fluidity which is produced but not
destro^'ed bj’' the closest Conjunction of fire. And in the case of Fire as
existing in the frying-pan, etc., Fire-ness is inferred from their possession
of hot Touch.

Fire is four-fold : that in which both Colour and Touch are partly
developed, as the solar, etc.; that in which Colour is partly developed but
Touch is undeveloped, as the lunar ; that in which both Colour and Touch
are altogether undeveloped, as the ocular ; and that in which Colour is
undeveloped and Touch is developed, as of the summer season, and also
' Fire present in Water, frying-pan, etc. He will prove the ocular ;Fire
later on. ~3.

Characteristic of Air,

n R i t 1 ^

Spar sa van, possessed of I ouch.

4. Air possesses Toucii.--'52.

UpaslmrcL—'B.Q states tlie cliaracteristic of Air whlcii is the next in order :

The cliaracteristic of Air is the possession of tlie ‘ class ’ co-existent
with Touch which does not co-exist with Colour, or the possession of the
‘ class ’ co-existent with Touch which is neither hot nor cold and which
does not co-exist with Taste, or the possession of the ‘ class ’ co-existent
with Touch which is neither hot nor cold and which does not co-exist with
Smell, or the possession of the ‘ class ’ co-existent with a distinctive ;^ttri-
bute which does not co-exist with any distinctive Attriliute other than
Touch. — 4.

The above eharacteristics do not belong to Ether.


! % Te, these. Akase, in Ether, sr Na, not, Vidyante, are

observed or found,

S|:h- ; ; 5. These (characteristics) are not found in Ether. — 53.

, I . Upasfcnra.— -Blit why is not the possession of Colour, etc., the efiaracterisrie also of

„ ■ &ky, Time, Space and Soul ? He replies :

' Here the:root ^vid ’,iix - vidyante ’ means to perceive. The meaning
A ,../V . then is that because they are not perceived therefore they do not exist,

; ) in Eth^V^^^^ either uniformly or by nature, or collectively, :

pr “How does the perception arise, that

. . Ether -' ^ we reply that it is due to the impression


KAmDA SUTRA II, 1-7,


created by the perception of the white colours of the rays of the sun. If
it be asked, “How then does the perceptioa arise that Sky is blue?” vye
reply that it is due to the impression created in the minds of the observers
who are looking at the radiance of the emerald peak lying largely extended
over the south side of Sumeru mountain. It has been opined that it is
due to the impression created by the eye when after travelling to a long dis-
tance it turns back and reaches its own pupil. This is not a sound opinion,
because those who possess jaundiced eyes also have such impressions.

From the perception, “ Here now there are Colour, etc.,” it cannot
be argued that Colour and the three other Attributes belong to Space and
Time also, because they have been already stated to be the characteristics
of Earth, etc., only by the relation of combination and not by any other
relation also. “Here now there is absolute non-existence of Colour ” —
from this perception again it follows that Space and Time are the substrata
or grounds or foundations of all things. — 5.

Objection to Fluidity being a cka7'aete7'istie of Water, answered- ■

Sarpir-jjatu-madhQcliehistanatn, of clarified butter, lac, and
wax. Agni-saiiiyogat, through conjunction of Fire, Dravatvam,

Fluidity. Advih, with Waters. Samanyam, similarity, Com-

monness.

6. The Fluidity of clarified butter, lac, and wax,
through conjunction with Light, is similar to that of
■Water.— 5d:.d ^

U-paskdra^—li it be argued that it is not correct to say that Fluidity is the character-
istic of Water, because Fluidity is observed even in Barth ; so he replies :

The Fluidity which belongs to clarified butter, etc., results from
conjunction, of Fire which is its occasion, and is not constitutional; wherS’-
as constitutionaLFluidity is the characteristic of Water. Therefore the
to Water is in respect of mere Fluidity, and not in
respect of, c^Btitutional Fluidity.' also. Hence : 'the .characterise
definition is net too wide. This is the meaning. — 6.

Above continued.


I ? I vs u

Trapu-sisa-loha-fajata-suvarpanSm, of tin, lead, iron,
silver, and gold. Agnisamyogat, through Conjunction of. Fire.

5«t?f Dravatvam, Fluidii'j. Advi]^, with Waters, Samanyam,

similarity. ,, .... [[ -r'f'xf'MX


VAI8E8IKA PHILOSOPHY.


7 . Tlie Fluidity of tin, lead, iron, silver, and gold,
through conjunction with Fire, constitutes their similarity
to Water.— 55.

Upaskara , — But stiil because that condition, i. e., Fluidity, appears in tin, lead, iron,
and other modifications of Fire, therefore that condition itself is an instance that the de-
finition is too wide. To this objection he replies :

Tills is an indication; bell-metal, copper, brass, etc., are also im-
plied. The characteristic which is common to those which have been
mentioned and those which are implied, is that they are the foundation
of the Fluidity which is produced but is not destroyed by the closest
Conjunction of Fire. Thus the Fluidity of gold, etc., also is only occa-
sional, the occasion which is the Oonjunetion of Fire, being proved by
the method of agreement and difference. Moreover there is this distinc-
tion ; in the last aphorism the word ‘ agni ’ denotes Light — tejas — possess-
ing an excess or abundance of heat, but liere it denotes fire.

If it be objected, “ Gold, etc., also must be either modifications of
Eai'th or different Substances ; because yellowness, weight, etc., establish
terreneness, and because the non-annihilation of Fluidity which constitutes
their difference from Earth, is perceived in them, and because this is cap-
able of establishing difference of Substance.” We reply that gold is a
modification of Fire, and its fieriness is proved in the negative way,
namely, “ That which is not tluis, is not thus, as Earth,” by the character-
istic of its being the foundation of Fluidity which is not annihilated even
at the closest Oonjunetion of Fire.

Again tliere is no contradiction in the ultimate atoms of Water,
because Fluidity should be qualified as being non-eternal. Nor is there
incommensurability as the mark does not appear in the lamp and other
objects of the ascertainedj class, because the fact which is to be px'ovecl is
that gold is not a modification of Earth. Nor is there any obstacle to tlie
receptacle of weight becoming the minor term here; the foundaj-Jju or
substratum will not be proved if something else were the/Htuor term, as
the minor term must be the foundation of Fluidity. Nor is it hard to


E:A'^ADA 8UTBA II. 1-8.


61


.•(' V

is not combined with the tot^ty of Fluidity. Or the founda-

tion of yellowness and weighV conjo'ijs^^p-'it is with Fluid Substance
which excludes all Colour different from^llow Colour, does not therefore
become the foundation of any Colour different from yellow Colour even at
the Conjunction of Fire for three hours, like a piece of yellow cloth placed
inside Water which is conjoined with Fire. If it be objected, “ The Colour
of gold will then be visible in darkness as there will be nothing to cloud
or overpower its Colour, because overpowering means the non-apprehension
caused by the apprehension of a more powerful like object,” we reply
that overpowering denotes the mere relation with a like object which is
mOTe powerful by the power of the effect produced by it. So it has been
said, “ Other Colour does not at all shine under the influence of the asso-
ciation of the earth.” This is our view.— 7.



Use of Inference.

ftrfu II ^ I ? I II

VisanI, possessing horns, Kakudvan, possessing a hump.

Prante-valadhifl, with a tail hairy at the extremity. ^retTWr^,
Sasnavan, possessing a dewlap. fS%, Iti, such, srir^ Gotve, in cow-ness,
of being a cow. Dristam, observed, admitted, Lihgam, mark.

8. That it has horns, a hump, a tail hairy at the
extremity, and a dewlap— such is the admitted mark of being
a cow,^ — 56.

hpaskara. Having thus finished the section on the characteristic of the four Sub-
stances which possess Touch, the author, seeing that the characteristic of Air is not
proved by its foundation or with a view to avoid this, at the outset introduces the method
of proof by inferenc^v-and then first of all establishes the probative force or value of
inf/iteiffAJtgelf, o'XSOTding to experience, and thereby begins the'sootion of demonstration
. -Of Air : ''*■

The import is that as horns, etc., are the marks, the pervasion, or
univeisal 01 invariable relation of which is well-known or recognised, '
towards the proof of cow-ness, so also the commonly-observed marks of
the five super-sensuous Substances, Air, etc., assume the form ofproof.^' ^ ^
Here although the mere possession of horns is not the mark of cow-ness , ^ : ,

since it is also found in the buffalo, etc.; nor is the possession of the
dew-lap, etc., the distinction or differentia since in that case the name . '

will become senseless ; still with them who can discern in the horn of the 1 ' '
cow difference in characteristic in coniparisoji with the hoi'ns tlje . '


VAISBSIKA PEIL080PHY.


buffalo, the sheep, etc., all those distinctions trulj^ assume the nature of
marlcs. And all those distinctions such as straightness, crookedness,
hardness, softness, shortness, length, etc., wliich are capable of being
known by observers of superior skill, do really exist in horns also.
Thus ill respect of the body of a cow at a distance standing by itself, the
inference is altogether unobstructed that it is a cow because, like the
body of a cow wliich has been previously perceived, it possesses peculiar
liorns. Similarly, the possession of a hump also is a mark of being
a cow. The possession of a tail hairy at the extremity is also a
truly independent mark of being a cow. ‘ PrAntevaladhih ’ means
that in which hair are placed at the extremity, that is, a particular
tail. From the use of the alttk compound (i. e., that form of compound
words in which the inflection of the first ivord is not elided), the tail of
the cow only is denoted by the word ‘ Antevaladhih.’ For the character-
istic of the tail hairy at the extremity, which is found in the tails of
cows, does not belong to the tails of the horse, sheep, etc., as these tails
are covered with hair all over. In the tail of the buffalo, etc., there is
not so much prolongation. From this difference in characteristic, the
possession of a tail hairy at the extremity is also a mark of being a
cow. The dropping of the inflection conveying the sense of possession
(i. e., the use of the word tail only instead of tail-bearing) shows that only
the body of the cow has been in view. Thus (the inference) “ It is a
cow” because, like the body of the cow which has been previously perceived,
it possesses a tail which is hairy at tlie extremity. The possession of a
dew-lap, again, is simply a w'ell-known mark of being a cow. — 8.

Touch infers Air.

H R M I ^ n

Sparsah, ^Foucii. Clia, and Vayoby of air.

9. And Touch (is a mark) of Air. — 57. >

Upasfcnra.— Having thus pointed out, according to observation, tif© probative value
of inference by which all human affairs are carried on, he, intending to begin the section
of proof of Air, says r

‘ Liflgam,’ mark, is the complement of the aphorism. By the ivord
■ ‘ cba ’ Sound, upholding, and quivering are brought forward.

It cannot be said, “ The Touch which is being perceived must be
: of Earth itself of which the Colour is not yet developed,” because the
f'-' developed To'uch. pf Earth cannot be separated from developed Coloui’.
.’•,H#bce the Touch which is perceived, being Touohi ninst reside somewhere,
: dike' the etc. Some foundation of Touch being thus proved



i i . i h u ^”'1 !frAi,


by inference, by analogj’, (S&mrnyato dristam), the foundation of Touch
is not identical with the triad of Earth, etc , because it does not possess
Colour, nor is it identical with the pentad of Sky, etc., as it possesses Touch.
Therefore by the inference together with the exclusion of others a Sub-
stance over and above the eight Substances is proved. In like manner
a particular Sound also is a mark of Air. Thus in the absence of the
impact of Substances possessing Colour, the series of Sounds (arising in
leaves, etc.) which is heard amongst leaves, etc., must be occasioned by
the impact of substances possessing Touch and Impetus, like the series
of sounds produced in a drum by the percussion of the drumstick, because
it is a series of sounds which is in relation to a substance the parts of
which are indivisible. The absence of the impact of Substances possessing
Colour, is, again, known by the non-perception of what might be expected
or the cerrelative. And from exhaustion,- that Substance possessing Touch
and Impetus is verily an addition to the group of the eight substances.
Similarly, a particular upholding also is a mark of Air. Thus the steadi-
ness or flotation of grass, cotton, cloud, and air-ship in the sky, is due
to the conjunction of some substance possessing Touch and Impetus,
since it is the flotation of substances which are not presided over by a
conscious being, like the flotation of grass, wood, boat, etc., on a stream ;
whereas in the flotation of poison, etc., caused by thought directed towards
it, human and other influence is without doubt present. So also in the
upholding of the bird, the branch of a tree, etc. Nor is the distinctive
mark not proved on account of its being influenced by God, because by’’
the word ‘ conscious ’ all else except God is meant. Similarly, quivering
too is a mark of the existence of Air. Thus this Action in grass, etc.,
without the impact of Substances possessing Colour, is due to the impact
of some Substance possessing Touch and Im’petus, because it is an Action
which is not produced by Weight and Conjunction of Sonl exercising
Volition, like the Action of a cane-bush when struck by the waves of a
river. The word ‘ weight ’ implies Conjunction of Soul attended with
odfMtam (invisible after-effects of past acts), Fluidity and Impression;
hence the being an action not produced by them is the mark.

It cannot he said, “ Air is only an object of sense-perception and
that therefore there is no need of the investigation of its marks for,
Air is not perceptible; only its supersensuousness is proved, by the
inference : “ Being a colourless external Substance, it is like Sky.” ;. It
cannot be replied “ Its perceptibility is inferred; ' in this way that being
the seat of Touch Air is perceptible like the watempot;)’ for the possession
of developed Colour is here the oonditipa, upMhi. If ifc . be ,ob,iectedj


KA'NAdA 8UTRA II. 1-9.


VIAhsiKA PHILOSOPHY.


“ In the case of Colour, etc., as well as Soul, it is not pervasive of the
major term, since it pervades the major term when the latter is determined
by the being the external substance which is the minor term containing
the middle term, or is determined by the middle term which is the means
of inference. Nor does it govern a body’s being an object of visual per-
ception, because it is there that its presence and absence are observed as
a rule. On the other hand, a body’s being an object of tactual perception
is governed by the mere possession of an adequate Touch.” We reply
that both the presence and absence of Colour govern here ; for perceptibi-
lity only by means of Touch proved by both positive and negative marks,
has not been, observed without the perception of Colour. Moreover, if
Air were an object of sense-perception, then it would govern also the
apprehension of general Attributes, e. g., Number, etc. If it be objected,
“ Perceptibility does belong to Number in blowing by the mouth, etc.,
to Measure or Extension, e. g., cubit, span, etc., and to Separateness as
well as to Priority and Posteriority of two Airs existing on both aides.
On the other hand, it is not the rule according to you also that they are
perceptible by means of there being individual masses of Air, because
they are not observed in the cloth, etc., lying on the back.” We reply,
that it is the rule that they are perceived by means of there being in-
dividual masses of Air. Number, etc., are obtained in the cloth, etc.,
fixed upon the back, if they lie straight ; if they are not obtained, it is
because of the defect that the latter do not lie straight. “ Developed
Colour and Touch govern the perceptibility of e.vternal substances, only
when they operate jointly. Light, the yellow substance within the eye,
and the radiation or heat of the moon are not perceptible because their
Touch is undeveloped. Hotness as in summer, heat and Watery Substances
the parts of which have been dispersed (steam) are not perceptible, be-
cause Colour is undeveloped there.” This is the view of the commentator
i of NyA,ya-Vfirtikas. But light, etc., are really perceptible although Touch
is undeveloped. Therefore the Conjunction and Disjunction of the bird
and the branch of the tree are really perceptible in the sky under moon-
light.” So say those who know the traditions of the system. Nor can
" it be said that the possession of developed Touch (universally) excites to
the perceptibility, of universally external Substances, for then the light of
■ the emerald' would be iion-perceptible. Nor is only the posse-ssion of
.;,;the deveibped distinctive Attribute the governing condition, for then Sky
■■ too would become perceptible. Nor again is the possession of the deve-
loped ^distinctive Attribute co-exk^^ with the ensuant or resulting


KA-FADA SUTRAS II, 1-11. 65

o£ tlip tongue is imperceptible in spite of the developineat or manifestation
of bitterness. Therefore only the possession of developed or manifested
Colour governs the perceptibility of all Substances except Soul. Ami
this is ti(jt present in Air. Hence Air is not an object of sense-percep-
tion.— 9. .

Touch ichieJi infers Air, cannot be explained by visible objects.

?SHf ^ ^ I ? I n

;f Na, not. Cha, and, Dristauam, of the ob.^erved or v'sible or

seen. ?cr§j Sp-irs'ali, touch. fi% !ii, hence. A-dns’a-Iihgali, not-con-

.. : tai ning-tt,ie-mar,k-of«- 1 he-'visi'ble V^v uh, air

it is not the Touch of the visible (Suhstan-
ces);^ p (of the infereace) of Air: is

the visible (Substances). — -58.

y UpashircL"-lt he objeeteci, “Here tliere.is no -mark whiclx can be kno'wii:1:)3^::.seiise-^
perception. For liere tlie pervasion or universal relation is not obtained by sense -per-
ception like that of Ore and smoke. Moreover this will be also the Touch of one or other
: Therefore he says :

■ .■ The Toucli wliicli is made the sabjecc of enquiry does not belong to ■'

visible Substances, viz., Earth, Water, and Fire, because it is not accom-
panied by Colour. Therefore the inference is that this Touch resides
somewhei’e. Hence in virtue of the middle-term, i. e., the mark of inference,
being contained somewhere, we get Air although the mark is not the mark
of the visible Substances, i. e., although tlie mark is observed in analogous
Substances. This is tlie meaning. Although only the quartet of observed
Touch, etc., are the mark, yet because their relation with Air is not
apiprehended, theiefore it is said that the mark of Air is not the mark of
the visible Substances. For it is not possible to prove Air after first
proposing that this which possesses this or that property is Air. Therefore
the import is that the proof of Air is by inference from analogy together
with the exclusion of (possible) others [i. e., by hypothesis). — 10.

Air is a Substance.

II H I ^ I n II

A-dravya-vattvena, by not containing Substance (as its support).

Dravyam, Substance.

Air is a Substance, because it does not contain or
reside in Substance. — 59^

'■ Uimskira^-Ilaviag proved Air as a whole made up of -parfcs, .■which is the fbUEdatioii
. of Touch capable of beiag perceived^ he says, iwithA'Wiew to (prove,;' Air characterised as

ultimate atoms br'(''-yA. r.''-' A? ^ :■ '


iii


VAI^EPIKA PEILOSOPEY.


' i <


'ifii

fsi

f'iVI



d i '


'll 1 1


,1 1 ‘

:

' 'l ’

:■ i


‘ Dravyavat’ means tliat which has Substance as its support. Adra-
vyavat,’ i. e., not ‘ dravyavat,’ means not resident in or supported by
Substance. Thus like Sky, Air cbaracterised as ultimate atom is a Subs-
tance, because the other Predicables reside in substances, because it has
been stated that the being resident, i. e., dependence, applies elsewhere
than in eternal Substances, and because the origination of a large whole
made up of parts is capable of being demonstrated by the evolution of
dyads, etc., from the formation of a dyad by two ultimate atoms, and so
on.— 11.

Air is a Substance. — continued.

II R I ! I n H

Kriya-vattvat, because of possession of Action. gufTfTl
■■■vativat, btcause of possessiuM ot Attribute. Cha, and.

12. Air is a Substance, also because it possesses Action
and Attribute.— 60.

Upask&ra.— Bringing forward two (more) marks or gronuds of estabiisliing the Sobs«
taace-ness of the ultimate atoms of Air, he says :

‘ The ultimate atom of Air is a Substance ’ — this is the complement
of the aphorism. Although, there is this mutual dependence or correlation
that Sul stance-ness being proved, the possession of Action and the posses-
sion of Attribute are also proved and in their proof the proof of Substanee-
ness lies, yet the possession of Action is proved by this that the ultimate
atom which is the constituent element of the composite whole which is the
foundation of the Touch which is being perceived, cannot be establisiied
otherwise than by the Conjunction of the non-combinative cause ; and
the possession of Attribute is proved by the rule that the Touch, ("olour,
etc., of the composite whole are preceded by like Attributes in its cause ;
and by these two Substance-ness also is proved ; so that here there is no
fault, namely repetition or vicious circle. Of these the possession of Action
extends to a portion of the objects of the same ascertained class, while
the possession of Attribute pervades all the objects of the same ascertained
class. 'I’he word ‘ cha ’ brings forward the characteristic of being the
combinative cause, which proves Substar)ce-ness.

If it be objected, “ There is no proof (of the existence) of the ultimate
Ittoraa themselves.. Then the Substance-ness of which is being proved ?,”
■we'wply that by the maxim of the division, etc., of the action of dense
eSects, a, body which is being divided and sub-divided becoming smaller,

! Bmallestj.etoJj' that than -which no smaller unit can be obtained, the same
is the ultoate htoia.;- If .the ( relation of part and -whole were unlimited,


KANADA 8UTEAS IT, 143, ' 6T

tlieii it would folllow that tlie niouatain Sumeru and a iriostard seed^ etc.^
will hare the same Measure or Mass, because in that case they would

possessing infinite, parts, and because without '
the distinction of the number ol: causes (he., constituent elements measure" '
and magnitude, .mass and voliitne, do not rule the difference of Measure. ■

■ It cannot be said tliat this relation of part and whole continues only up tO '
t!ie limit of <lestruction ; for, that which remai.nS' at the end having' UO^ ■ . ■ ■
parts, its destruction is noc possible; and if it contains parts, then non-
. finality will bo the result, and its defect lias been already pointed oui^ ■ ■

If it is said, ^'Truii ti e., a minute part is the limit, because it is risible
and there is no reason for , the supposition of som thing invisible,” we
rejoin that as it is a visible Substance it must possess extension or large*'

.: iiess ..aiid.'.m,any Siil:)stances. ■ ■ ■.' .■

Hence as in tlie case of Eartb, etc., so also in the case of Air, the
part of the part of a combination of three atoms, is really ther iiltirnate
atom. Thus the ultimate atom of Air is proved. — 12.

Air is eternal.

n \ i I I ii

Adravyatveria, by not residing in or combining v¥iih other SuH-
stances, H^srct Nityatvanu eternality, (Jk tarn, said

13. The eternality (of Air) is evident from its not
combining with other Substances. — 61.

Upaskdm.-~lt may be said that because Air possesses Action and Attribute, therefore,
like the water-pot, etc., it should be inferred to be non-eternal. Hence he says :

“ Of Air cliaracterised as ultimate atom ” this is the complement of
the aphorism A Substance is destroyed by the destruction of the one or
tlie other of its cnmhiiiative and uon-combinative causes. But the ulti-
mate atom containing no parts, both. of these causes do not belong to it.
Therefore there being nothing to destroy it, it is not liable to destruction.

Where the possession of Action and Attribute is the cause of non-eter- ■;

nality, there the possession of parts is the condition, upMhi, and this ’•

condition pervades the major term which is determined by the Substance-
ness of the minor term; whereas the condition which is pervasive of the ’
major terra as such, is the characteristic of being the counter-opposite of ' ^ ^
prior non-existence. — 13. , , , ' ■ , ' . 'A.^

Vi m-iti.— Some read the first word of the aphorism as ‘adravyadra\ 7 -::v: i
atvena’ unstead of ‘adravyatvena’j, (meaning “by its being a Substance^,,:'- ; A
vsdiich does not cdntain any other SnbstaiK:e)..’b ■



!

HI

I

I

4 - :


1 ,

i

\ .

fei

"o''.

'' :

"''ri'.


‘ 1 '



VAISE8IKA PHILOSOPHY,


Air is manifold.


Vayoli, of Air, Vayusaiiimurchchhanam, concurrence or

collision with Air. Nanatva-lihgam, mark of diversity or plurality.

14. The collision of Air wi til Air is tlie mark of its
plurality. — 62.

. l7pag?«Ta,-~-In order to prove, in a different manner also, tlie plurality of iiir -wliieii lias^
been already proved in the proof of its origination by the course of dyads, etc., lie says : ,

^ Vayiisammurclieliaiiam’ means the collision, i, e., a mode of conjiwio-:
tioiij of; two or more Airs. It is the co-incidence, tlie falling in togetlie.r,
'.of, two.. Airs of equal Impetus, flowing in opposite di.rectioiis and prodiicing :
contrary Actions. ■ And it is inferred from tlie fl.ylng upwards of grass, ;
cottoi, etc-., because the flowing upwards and also the falling in together
of , .two ^ Airs, are - beyond the reach of the senses, whereas the perceptible'
Action characterised as flying upwards of grass, etc., which are perceptible,
is inferred to be produced either by the impact or the vibration (i, c., the
molar or the molecular movement) of Substances possessing Touch and
Impetus. Thus the flowing upwards of Air the nature of which is to flow
obliquely, not being capable of proof or possible without mutual collision,
proves the mutual collision, the same being observed in the case of the
water and the wave, of the river. Their going upwards also is to be
inferred by the going upwards of grass, etc. For the going upwards oF
grass, etc., is not , possible without either the collision or the ' internal,
''Vibration of Substances possessing Touch and Impetus. — 14.

No visible mark of Air,


iu m nil

Vayu-sannikarse, in contact or association with Air.
Pratyaksabhavat, from the absence <.f perceptiof. ge Dristani, visible.
Lihgam, mai k. Na, not. Vidyate, exists,

15- There being no perception of the association (i. e.,
universal relation) with Air, there is no visible mark (of the
existence of Air), — 63.

. npasfcdru.— It has been stated that the mai?k of Air is not like the mark of the visible
Substances. how isit so ? .Hence he says :

^^ep,,,,,thp,,,.,mark...is,.^ to., be .visible where .tlie,.., ii,aiyersal. relation..

is perception, as 'Smoke is of fire. Butin the case of associa-
tion.. is no perception of the appearance of the mark in


V"V>'


KANADA 8DTEA8 II, 1-16,


accompaniment witk Air. For Air itself not being an object of sense-
perception, nobody can hare tlie perception, “ Things which give Touch,
quivering, etc., are Air.” Therefore the meaning is that no such mark
esists the pervasion of which can be grasped bj' perception. — 1 5.


Air is inferred not as sueJi hut as a Suhstanee in general


Samanyato-dristat, from the method of inference known as
general inference or inference by analog-y, Cha, and. Avigesah,

not in particular. General

16. And, "by inference by analogy, Air is not proved
as a particular substance, but as Substance only. — 64.

Upa8kdr(u—BQ\Y then can there be any iiiferenee at all of Air ? Hence to strengthen
what has been already 'Stated, lie says :

Inference is three-fold : from cause to effect, from effect to cause, and
from the commonly observed to the unobserved, or from analogy. Thus
this Touch which is being felt, mtist reside somewhere, because 'it is a
Touch or because it is an Attribute. From this analogy or common
observation or experience, accompanied by the exclusion of other possibi-
lities, its residence in a Substance in addition to the eight Substances, is
proved. This is the meaning.

It cannot be said that the inference from effect to cause is then
gone. Foi-, after the exclusion of other possibilities, where analogy
prevails, there proceeding upon the proved qualification of tlie minor term
that it does not reside in the eiglit Substances, the proposition that this
Touch which does not reside in the eight Substances must reside some-
where, does not result except on the assumption of its being resident in a
Strbstance in addition to the eight Substances, Therefore the proposed
object being not explained othei-wise, it is proved by inference from cause
to effect alone. But wliere analogy arises from the appearance of exolusion
at the very beginning, there the proposed object results at last and the
mode of inference is found to be inference from effect to cause. It is not
sound to hold that inference from effect to cau.se only shows the manner,
for in the case of being accompanied by the exclusion of other possibilities,
inference from cause to effect itself comes to show the manner. The rule
also that inference merely shows the manner which determines the
pervasiveness, is not valid, for the appearance of a different manner is
possible from the association of particular njaterials.—lO, A


70


VAXSE^IKA PHILOSOPHY .



f ' 55^-3^ Sariijfia-karnmia, name and effect, Tu, on the other hand. But,

I ~ v':’ tt r ^qf^'fe gi q |r.:A8^ad-vi4i?tanam, . beings distinguished from, othec than, orsu-

^’'Lmgam, mark.


Thi name A ir is derived from Scripture.

11 ^ I ! I U

TfWf^ Tasraat, ■ therefore.. Agamikanij, proved, by revelatioiij,

the Veda.

17. Therefore the name, Air, is proved by the
Veda.— 65.

Upash'iVCL—But if it is intended to be said that according to “ not as a particular
Substance”' in the last aphorism, there is no infereoee in the form, ‘‘‘.Tills is Air,”, but that.

■ Air - is inferred by way of the mark being resident in a Substance in addition to :th0,,e.ight.,
Snbstaiicesj then, what is the evidence of that Substance being' called by the naiiie of-, Air .?, .,

"-So. heeays; ' ■ ■ ■ ' -

'■■i:;''' there is no inference in the particular form^ therefore • thS'

■■narae Air is proved by agama, i. a, the Veda. This is the meaning.. Air,,. ■
is the moving deity,” ‘‘ One should offer a white goat to Air/h ,^ Aiid .
this Air is all colour, the carrier of all smells, and pure,” — from these and
other recommendations which have acquired the force of regulations,
the name, Air, is obtained. As the name, heaven, is obtained from
the recommendation “That which is not pierced with pain nor is
clouded afterwards ; ” the name, barley, from the recommendation,
“The leaves of all crop-plants fall off in spring. But the barley
plants possessing ears of corn thrive in it as if with joy;” the name,
cane “from the recommendation” “cane is born in water;” ami the name,
bear “ from the recommendation” “ cows run after the bear.” Otherwise in
the case of such instructions as “He wlio desires heaven should perform
sacrifice,” etc., in the non-appearance of the pailicular happiness for the
time being, men desiring beaveii will not be inclined towards the perfonm
ance of sacrifice, etc. Nor will tliere be any ari’est of activity according
to the usage of the Mlechchas, i.e. the impure, in respect of “ His becomes a
' mess of barley,” “ He kindles tlie creative fire on a cane mat,” “ Shoe of
bear-skin,” etc., for the Mleehchhas apply the words badey, bear, and
'cane, 'to yellow ■ paddy, crow, and black'berry (or Jackal; respectively.
Thus , there will be room for doubt without tliose recomiiieridations.

■ Therefore their respective meanings are known from the Veda only.
This ms '''the/, import. Only the name is proved by the Veda ; the profd of
the Substance, however, is really by analogy. — 17.

''A' ..^[--''Bxktenee of Ood,


MABADA SUTRAS II, 1-19.


18. But name and effect are the mark (of the ex-
istence) of beings distinguished from ourselves. — 66.

Upaskara,— Haring thus finished the section on Air, he establishes that the Yeda is
tlie^revelation ,.,.by the All-knower, in .order to answer the. objection, “is their the name, ■
.Air, also like the names, dittha and dabittlia (L e.., the gibberish or abracadabra), littered
','by a Qiad .man T\ and with a view to open the section on Isvara or God, says ; ■ '

The word ‘ tu ’ has the sense of differentiating from such other
maife. a Touchj ' etCo ' Samjfiii ’ L e., name, ‘ kannina ’ i, e., effect, e. g.,
Earth, ete , — both of them -are the mark of the existence also of beings dis-
tinguished from ourselves, namely, Wvara and great sages. - 18 .

Existence of Ood — continued,

a R I 5 I u II

because they follow from perception,
of name, and effect.

19. Because name and effect follow from perception. —

67.-

. Upaskdra. — He, explains how it is so :

Here also the singular form or the resolution into one, of ‘ name ’
and ‘ effect,’ from the copulativ'e compound meaning collection, is
intended to indicate the identity of the author of the name and the
author of the universe. Thus he only is competent to give the names
‘heaven,’ ‘apurua’ (i.e., that which was not before, that is to say, adrutam),
etc., with whom ‘ heaven ’, ‘ apurva ’, etc., are objects of sense-perception,
as in the giving the names, ‘ Chaitra,’ ‘ Maitra,’ etc., to tlie bodies of
Cliaitra, Maitra, etc., which are perceptible, by their father and others.
Similarly, the application of the names, ‘ pot,’ ‘ cloth,’ etc., is only under
the direction of Wvara. The word which has been directed or indicated
• by Hvara in a particular place, the same is appropriate there ; e. g.; ‘ all
those herbs which have been touched by the edge of the mongoose’s tooth
counteract the venom of the snake.’ Such direction is the mark, i. e , the
means of inference, of beings distinguished from ourselves. And The
hamej ' Maitra ’, etc., w the father gives to the son, that also Is suflly'
directed by Infvara by such rules as “ The father should give a name (to
the son) on the twelfth day. ”

Thus it is proved that naming is a mark of the existence of Kvara.

, ■ In like manner action, i. <?., effect, also, is a mark of the existence of
Wvara, , for, thus, Earth, etc., must have a creator because they are
effects like a pot, etc. . . .:''S

Here Earth,- etc., do not meaii ; a product producible by the body, I
nor a product producible by the volition of ano^er product, nor a product"


Hii*


VAISEm(A PIlILOf^OPUY.


which has become the subject-matter of dispute as to rvliether it lias been
produced by an agent or not, nor a product the production of which by^ an
agent has been the suhject of doubt, because Earth, etc., also are producibSe
by the volition of aiiotlier product by means.of adripi [i invisible after-
effects of voluntary acts , and because d.ispnte and doubt, being too wine,
do not determine tlie minor term. Aloreover if by the expression tli t
they have a creator, it is meant that they are the products of an active
principle, then the production -in question may be explained by reference
to ourselves, etc., for the causality of ourselves also is productive of Earth,
etc., by means of adviMa, (the invisible after-eflects of past acts). It is the
same also if the product be producible by an active principle operating
upon given materials, for the acts of ourselves, etc., also are relative to
some given material. Then if the being an elleet, on the other haiid,
means tlie being tire counter-opposite of prior non-existence {or potential
existence , then it will include annihilation also, lout notwithstaiming
all this, earth must have a creator because it is an effect. Here the having
a creator means the being the product of an active principle independently
of and the being an effect means the being the counter-opposite

of existence determined by prior non-existence. In tlie case of sprouts,
etc., there is no fault of doubtfulness or mnltifariousness, for these faults
arise where there is doubt as to the existence or non-existence of the
middle term when the non-existence of the major tei’in has to be ascer-
tained ; for otherwise all inference will liave to be abandoned. Nor should
it be said that this is the fault beyond the minor term, for it will entail
the command of the king; for it is not the glory of a fault tliat it does
not attack the minor term. Therefore at the stage of sprouting, the proof
of The existence of) the major term (in the minor terra) by tlie mark
or middle term the universal relation of which is well ascertained, being
unobstructed, where is the doubtfulness or mnltifariousness? And a
fortiori at the stage of non-sprouting, these faults verily do not exist.
Thus in brief. — 19.

Marlis of Ether, aaeording to Pdnkhya 'philosophy.


Niskramanatn, egress. si%3Er^ Praveganani, ingress, iti, such.
Akasasya, o f Sky. Lihgam, mark.

„ ^ .. 20. Egress and Ingress — sncli is the mark (of the
;(eki|tehqe)_hf;E#^ , ■:

tie on Is vara, by tii© last two apliorisms.

and tolrii3i^,to''bogia'tkes6etioii6E:Bt!ier, be says’: , . ' -


: ■ klriptivaidiiarniyatj on accouat of

difference from the characteristic or sign of another cause. Chaj and.

22. And also because they differ in property from the
characteristic of another (i.e., the non-combinative) cause. —


■ CJpasfeflm— Lest it migM be said that egress, ingress, etc., will infer Ither ■ as their'
Bon-corobinative cans©,' so he says : ,

‘ Anuklripti ’ means cTiaracteristic or sign, by the etymologj^ ‘ that by
whicb a thing is made known.’ The meaning is : on account of difference
from that which is the characteristic of another cause, i e., the non-combi-
native cause.

Substance does not surely at all become a non-combinative cause.
Now non-combinative causality arises by proximity in the same object
with the cause, or by proximity in the same object with the; effect.
The first is illustrated in the case of the colours of the yarns
towards the colour of the cloth. And this non-combinative causality is
called ‘ great,’ as it produces a larger effect. The second ds as that of the
conjunction of Soul and Mind towards k:n 0 wl^dg©|j or cognition, ete. And


The word ‘ iti ’ signifies manner and brings forward Actions, namely,
Throwing upwards, etc., also. Egress and Ingress are the movement of
Substances possessing Touch. That is the mark of the existence of Ether,
which is not an effect. This is the view of the Sifikbya philosophers— 20,

The above are no marks.

II R I ? I 11

?ffj Tat, that, I. e., movement or egress and ingress, irlirf Aiihgam, no
mark. ?i9Kyss5[i>iir^ Eka, dravyatvat, having but one Substance, Karmmanah,

of an action.

21. That is no mark, as an Action bas but one Subs-
tance (as its combinative cause) — 69.

CTpasIfidra.— To discredit this view, he says :

Actions such as egress, ingress, etc., do not at all infer Ether as their
combinative cause, because Action ‘ has but one Substance, ’ in other
words, has only one corporal Substance as its combinative cause. Action
also, it has been already stated, does not simultaneously appear in mors
than one place, nor does it appear in non-corporal Substances.— 21.


VAI8ESIKA PEIL080PEY.


’’ u : \
'•"1)


Vi

' l'

:-ij


ifi

''-i ( r

. h


' ;l; I this Bon-coml 3 mative causality is called ^ small/ as it produces a smaller

'vj 'I effect. But Ether is neither the combinative cause iiorj agairi^ the nomconi-

; /'i'l I binative cause of egress, ingress, and other Actions. Hence Action is not

,;;i - a mark of the existence of Ether. — 22.

' || VivT'ki . — He says that Action does not infer Ether even as its non-

;; combinative cause.

,}t;iA!;' On the maxim that a verbal affix signifies an object, ^ aiiiiklripti

I ''lA . (agreement) means ‘ anuklripta/ i. e,, that wliich is agreed to by the oppo-

j.:!/ . site disputants; and such a different cause is the noii-combinative cause,

Attribute and Action. Therefore the meaning is that egress, etc., do
I'"'*- ' not warrant the inference of Ether as their non-combinative cause, because'

'^1 /. ' • difference from Attribute and Action (which are non-comb inative causes),

in the form of Substance-ness, exists in Ether.

’'p ^ The above are no marks — continued.

ii ^ i i ii

; f/ii l; { Samyogat, on account of Conjunction. Abhavali, non-pioduc-

; vji Cv tion. ^4?!! Karinniaijali. of Action.

23. Action is not produced on account of Conjunc-
1 tion. — 71.

; . Upasfednu— It may be said, ‘‘ Let Btber be the occasional cause of Action, for the

; I moYements of birds and arrows, etc., are seen in Ether.'’ So he says :

.^'[’1 '* - The non-production of Action is due to the obstruction of Impetus,

Gravity, etc., which are the causes of Action, by Conjunction with corporal
! i i j! substances, and is not due to the non-existence of Ether which is all-per-

. A ‘ vasive. Therefore the meaning is that the presence of or agreement with

‘I j,'!!!, , . Sky which should be really explained otherwise, does not prove that Ether

| ;j 7. is it® occassional cause of Action. — 23.

■ Inf erenee of Ether by Sound.

| ^ fS: H M I I

1 ‘j,;, g;RSI5P!r'i?l^: Karaija-guna-pQivvakah, preceded by the Attributes of the
v'.' jV; - '.'. cause. Karyya-gunah, Attribute of the effect. Dristah, is seen or

'jj 'y observed.

j. || ' ■ . 24. The Attribute of the effect is seen to be preceded

‘ ' ' by the Attribute of the cause. — 72.

i h / .-A

I; ^ '‘''bi -A ’ npasfedm.— Having thus discredited the SMhhya view, and going to prove Sound as

of Sky, he prepares the ground for inference by exhaustion, by saying :

H, 'i' 'i parri^ Attributes such, as colour, etc., ivMch exist in the

jj " ' 'yv'‘''' 'y;yj;j;e%ctcharacterised as Earth, etc., are found to be preceded by like Attri-
4' / j ' . 4'A'hutesvdn\- ,theb;:vCJiu^ Sound 'filso is a particular or distinctive'


KANADA SUfEAS il, 1-26.


Attnsbute, tor m spite of its l)eiag a ‘class,.’ it is, like colour, etc., appre-
en y only one of the esternal senses. Thus the meaning is that such
ettect IS not observed in which sound preceded by a like Attribute in the

cattse' tliereof may appear. — 24 .

^ Sound^ not an Attribute of tangible things.

_ Karyyantarapradurbhavat, because of the non-appearance

or =.„„.h.rora dlUerenteSec. , C., and. Sabdal.,, sound.

Spaisavatam, of ihings possessing Touch, Agun.J,, not an attribute.

_ ■ hOimd is not an Attribute of tilings possessing

loucli, because of the non-appearance of (similar) otlier
eitects. — 73.

ihell observed in a lute, flute, tabour, conch-

n thLir cares!’’ The "T “ -nseauently it is preceded by a like Attribute

It would have been so, if, as when Colour, Taste, etc., are observed
n yarns, potsherd, etc., other Colour, Taste, etc., homogeneous with the
:ormer, are also observed in a cloth, pot, etc., so the'congener of the
.ound Winch IS observed in the constituent parts of a lute, flute, tabour,
|tc were also observed in the wholes made up of those parts, i e., lute,
lute, tabour, etc. But this is not the case, for, in fact, it is seen that a lute
>tc.. are originated by constituent parts which are destitute of all Sound’
rhereas it is not seen that a cloth, a pot, etc., have their origin in yarns’
sheidb, etc., which are destitute of Colour. Moreover if Sound were a
ar icular AUribute of tangible things, then the relation of high and
ighei and low and lower tones, etc., would not be observed in it For
-olour, etc., winch appear in a single composite whole are not observed to
a varying m d^ree. Therefore Sound is not a distinctive Attribute of



■ : ; ; ‘ ;Pij;ayjfatwa-tii|yatve, -Substance-iiess and eternality, 9!!*!!'

V&pdft/by AifV'sslr^.yy'akhyate/explaih^^^ ^


VAliESIKA PHILOSOPHY.


“I am hppay,” “I try,” “I

the case ; on the contrary^ the


If sound were an Attribute of Soul, then there would be such states
of consciousness as I am filed (with Air)/’ I am sounded/’ I give out
Sound/’ etc., as there are such states as
haow/’^ desire/’ etc. But it is not

experience of all ■ men is that a conch-shell is filled with Air, a lute is
played, upon, etc. . Moreover, Sound is not an Attribute, of Soul, because,

. like ' colour, ' etc., it is apprehended by the external sense. Also if Sound;
■were ' a particular Attribute proper to Soul, then it would, .be, like. pain;,;
etc:, ■ perceived by a- deaf man also. Therefore it has ■been rightly said,
Because ■ it comhines with other objects.” He states the reason of its not
' '■'being "an Attribute of Mind, by^sayirig Because it is an object of seose-
■perception.”" The fact that the words atman and manas have not been com**
"'pounded, as they could have been, in the form '' na atmamanasor ' gimah,
■■■indicates that, by the logic or law of siiiiilarSj^ the, very,saiii6 reasoii,;-/^B6"

' caus© it is an object of^ sense-perception,” excludes' the idea that Sound ^
might be an Attribute of Space or of Time even. — 26.

Therefore of Ether,

■v Parisesit, from exhaustion, Liiigam, mark.

.■.:.ya,'Of' Ether. .

27. By tke method of exhaustion (Sound) is the mark
of Ether. — - 7 5.

Ppasfcdm.— He states why this method of exhaustion lias been applied :

‘ Sound ’ is the complement of the aphorism. Here too a Substance,
over and above the eight Substances, is proved by analogous inference, in
this way that, being an Attribute, Sound, like Colour, etc., must reside
somewhere. And it is an Attribute, because, like Colour, etc., it belongs to
1:1';' a ‘class’ capable of being apprehended by only one external sense.

: Being non-etemal, it resembles knowledge, etc., both of which are com-

i’ hined with ‘ Universal Substances.’ And its non-eternality will be shown
■ '.' ■“i-t later on. The .^ubstance, proved by exhaustion, is eternal, as there is no
V ' reason for the supposition of constituent parts in it, and is also universal,

' , ■ ' because Sound is observed in all places. — 27.

Ettier is a Substance, and is eternal.



KANADA SUTEA 8 II, 1 - 30 ,


28. Tlie Substance-ness and etemality~of Etiier liave
been explained by (the explanation of the Snbstance-ness
and eternality of) Air. — 76.

. ^rasJenra.— To prove, by analogy or over-extension, the Substance-ness and eternality

of oky of wMcIi tlie mark is Somid, iie says :

As Air is eternal because it does not possess any other Substanee as
its combinative cause, so also is Ether. As Air is a Substance because it
possesses Attributes, so also is Ether. This is the meaning.— 28.

Ether is one.


■ Tattvaiii,, that-nessy One-ness,

39. The unity (of Ether
tion of the unity of) Existence

VpasMm.—Is there then one Ether or are

The agreement of the words in
(or explained}, i.e.
changed. The
Ether


Unit3b Bhavena, by existence.

is explained) by (the explana-


To this he ■ replies' :

idth ‘ vyakhy 4 tam ’
the same word, as in the last aphorism, with the inflection
meaning is that as ‘Bhavah,’ i.e., Existence, is one, so also
is only one and not many. — 29 .

Above continued.

11 ^ t ^ II

TO[r%[T%39«rrf ^abdalihgavi^esat, because there is no difference in Sound
which is the mark. V.^esalingabhavat, because there exists no

distinguishing mark. ^ Ctia, and.

30. (Ethci IS one), heesus© there is no difference in
Sound which is its mark, and because there exists no other
distinguishing mark. — 78.

Upaskara.~lt may be asked, “ The unity of Existence is proved by the virtue of
assimilative experience. How will unity be proved in Ether, by comparison with that

So he says ; * „

The sense is that the unity of Ether is proved. Ether being ubiquitous
or universal, all Sounds are explained by their having that one and the
same foundation or seat. Therefore to suppose a different basis will be
shewing an exuberance of imagination. Besides the very same Sound
must be the mark of the different Ether which is to be supposed, and that
k e., Sound, is undifferentiated ; nor is there any other mark which. can
prove the differentia or the difference or division; It will be stated after-
wards that although the ihark, e. g., knowledge, etc.., of Souls is vauhJ ,



VAISESIKA PEILOSOPHT


iioii-differentiated, still the plurality of Souls is proved by
according to ‘ difference of conditions ’ or, circuiiistaiices.' 3(
Ffi;riH.”Plurality of Souls is proved by the diffe
products of tlie Soul, pleasure and pain, seeing tiiat 3
same time an effect in the form of pleasure is produced in on
in another Soul an effect in the form of pain is produced. T
of Ether there is no differenciation of Sound which is its mar
multiplicity of Ether might be established. Nor is there a
which can establish a plurality of Ether. So that on account
of proof, and on account of simplicity, Ether is one and not

Individuality of Ether.

: rs .... .


: Tad-anu-bidhanat, because it follows or accompanies, that,,

unity, Eka-prithaktvam, separateness of one or iiidividualit}^:: 'Wv

Cha, and. Iti, finished.

31. And individuality also belongs to Etlier, since in*-
dividnality follows unity. — 79.

VpasMra , — It may be said, “ Let unity by all means belong to Ether. Let it also have
extreme largeness, as it is universal. Let Conjunction and Disjunction also belong to it
as it is the non-combinative cause of Sound. But iiow can individuality belong to it? " So
ho says :

Individuality is proved by this that individuality regularly goes
together with unity. ‘ Iti ’ indicates the end of the chapter.

The subject-matter of the chapter is the definition or statement
of the characteristics of Substances possessing particular Attributes and
which are not the objects of mental perception or perception by the inter-
nal organ. Hence the characteristics of Earth, Wafer, Fire, Air, and Ether,
and, in passing, of the divine Soul also, are stated in this eliapter.
Thus Earth possesses fourteen Attributes, and tliese Attributes are Clolour,
Taste, Smell, Toiich, Number, Measure, Separateness, Conjunction, Dis-
junction, Priority, Posteriority, Gravity, Fluidity, and Impression. Exactly

■ the same number of Attributes, Avith the exception of Smell and addition
. of Viscidity, belong to Water. These same Attributes, with the exception
■'o|^ Taste, Smell, Viscidity, and Gravity, belong to Fire, and rvith tlie

■ e^ceptipn of Smell, Taste, Colour, Gravity, Viscidity, aud Fluidity, belong

. to. Air.: -iV^th '^he addition of Sound, the five Attributes beginning with
■j , Number,. bplbni;tp.E^^ five Attributes beginning with Number

belong to ;S.g%b.ai4^;Tite five Attiibutes beginning with Number,


KAN Ad A SUTRAS /r 2-1.


79


togethei with Priority, Posteridnty, and Impetiis^ belong to Mind. The
hve Attribiites beginning with Number, and Desire, and

yGlition belong to Wrara.— 31.

y g 13} Sankara to the Vai*sika aphorisms of Kan«tla of mat

: powers. * s-«-cab

subject-matter of this chapter is the definition of

bubstances possessing particular Attributes which do not appear in that

which possesses bhavana,’ i e., impression or meditative unL-standing!
biich bubstances are the five elements and God.


Book Second— Chaptee Second.

Smell may he essential or aeeidental.

11 ^ I ^ I ^ II

Puspa-vastrayoh, ofa floweranda cloth. ^ Sati, existing
?IT5rat«r Sannikarse, contact. jpipffWfHrf.- Gunantarapradurbhavah non-

Attribute. Vastre, in the cloth.

Gandhabhava-lingam, mark of the non-existence of Smell.

1. The non-production (of the smell which is perceived
m the cloth), after or during its contact with a flower, from
the Attribute (of the constitutive cause of the cloth), is the
mark of the non-existence of smell in the cloth. — 80.

nf ® examine the characteristics, such as Smell etc

f the elements (bhfita). Therefore, by way of establishing that Smell, etc , may be
essential or natural as well as accidental or conditional, he says : . ay be

Where Colour, Taste, Smell, and Touch are produced from the
corresponding Attributes in the cause, there they become essential and
TO acquire tbe nature d being characteristic marks, and not otherwise.
For, the fragrance which is perceived in the breeze, or the cold which is
perceived in a tablet of stone, or the warmth which is perceived in water
does not become a characteristic. Therefore he says. ‘ Of a flower and
a cloth. ’ For Ae fragrance of the golden ketahi { Pandanus Odoratiesimus) '
which IS perceived in the cloth when the cloth has been brought into
contact with the golden hetaki flower, does not belong to the cloth
because It is not produced according to the (corresponding) Attribute
of the cause (t. e., yarns), . Jhat, then ? ft is , ^oideptal or conditional, " ,


this. Usnata, Hotness,


■; - V

;v »f. M- '

. ..i'l ’ ,


VAl^ESIKA PHILOBOPEY.


• t *1.^ .vrviriAn TfPtnH • for the non-existence y

because due to the proximity of the goideu kM , m

of Smell in the hetaki is not the mark of the non-existence of Smell in

cl^r What is the mark? So it has been said, ‘‘ Non-appear^^

another Attribute'’ i- e,, iion-prodiiction from the Attiibu . .

oaai For it the’ Smell, which is perceived in the cloth, were essentml
: il, '.hen U wonld he perceived in the cloth also before

TMe iftn::'., %h„s.heSmei. in .nestion
ie trot inherent in the cloth, because, like cold and hot »tc.,^ m a

particrrlar Attrihnt. which is not produced by the AUrtbute

““‘‘""mi been already staled that the possesion of SmeU
etc, are the marks of Ear^ etc.

iv’tht-'reason heshowsthat the perception

of Smell, etc., in Air, etc., is accidental.

Smell is essential in Earth.

sqgfbra; 11 =1 1 =1 >

Vyavasthitali, established. 9^ PrithivySm, in Earth.

Smell. ■

2 Smell is established in Earth.—Sl.

Up«s..Fa -HesaystUate.senti.I S.en ist^^^^

‘Established in the Earth .3 that Smell

tion as I^i^L'to'diffiermitiate Earth from objects of

is the mar?, ecci has Smell only and only Earth

1 fli i -1 ' ^ established that Smell which differentiates

' . ^StLiL SgSlimilar^ beginning ^th ^ ^d the h.e dis-

sj|y£;:;

nothing to oppose it.


Beat may he essential or aeaidental

U R I ^ I ^ H


KANADA SUTRAS II,


o. By this hotness is exj3laiiiecl. — 82.

■/«sMr<,.-ExtcBdi„g. the mode of o.sfcaWisMng Smell as aa essential A
.b <tJso, 'niueli js tno dianictenstic of Firo, ho says :

pis extousiou or Utiaiogy slioiild be luiderstood also in
(.Jicss, eto., n-bicb are tlie cliaracterjsl,if« of Wofe... o


lejasah, ofFire. Usnata, Hotness.

Hotness (is the characteristic) of

n.—Ho oxamiues the characteristic of Fire :

.ueaning is tliat natural or essential Hotnet
Jolonr, white and luminous, is also implied

Coldness is essential in Water


ei's sffr^ffr Sitata, Coldness.

(is the characteristic) of Water

tlic cliaractcristic of Water :
cit natural or essential colcliicss is tt
is not too wide by over-extenclino’
Coloiii and T^aste also are saic
111 the same way as coldness wbinb


VMBE8IKA FHlLOSOPay


all that ill gold as well as in niooii-light, etc., the ToiiGhes of Laidli and
Water overcooie the Touch of Fire.

Marks of Time.

.


^ R K II


;bat which is pos'tenor. Aparani,

s. Chiram, slow, f%Jr Ksipram,

marks of Time.

is posterior,
’ — Siicli (cognitions) are the


Aparasmin, in
posterior, Yugapat,

quick. ^ Iti, such. SRRtf^rfn Kala-lingani

6. ‘ Posterior’ in respect of that \

‘ simultaneous’, ‘ slow,
marks of Time. — 85.

UpasMra.— Thus it has been stated that particular Attributes
of tangible things, which are preceded by like Attributes m tl
characteristics of Earth, etc. Now he begins the section on tt
Time, brought in by the order of enumeration, i)y saying :

The word ‘iti’ wliich shows the mode of cogiiitioii,
individual word i so that the ineauiiig is that the co^
terior,’ the cognition ‘ it is simultaneous,’ the cognition
late,’ the cognition ‘ it is ciuick or early,’— -arc the marl
‘posterior in respect of that which is posterior,’ we are a
‘ prior in respect of that which is prior.’ Therefore tlie i
we make a youth our point of view or starting point, l
of Priority is produced in an old man, whose birth has
a large number of the revolutions of the sun ; and thit
upon some uon-combiuative cause. Noiv, Colour, et
uon-comhiuative cause, owing to their variable pres
beginning with Smell, do not produce Priority in resp<
also, rendered different by the difference of hot, etc,

. variable in its presence. TSIor is a fixed Measure th
cause, for it does not originate a heterogeneous obj
remains at last that, the revolutions of the sun being
different substratum, conjunction with a Substance dc
' revolutions is really the required uon-comhinative cause

tance, being conjoint both with the lump of matter on earth {e.g., the body
of a youth) as well as the sun, must be universal. If the characteristic of
> that Substance be supposed to be belonging to Ether, then it would follow
?fe' > ;rthat the beating of a drum at any place will produce Sound in all drums
T|C;?!f, 0 yj^^^lxere. Thus the Conjunction of Time alone, which is conjoint with
lump of matter in question, is the uon-comhinative cause
’ T demonstrates the action of the sun, because,


iMiHs


. k'-’j-/ ’t',

^ i


KANADA SUTRAS II, 2-8.


lor tile purpose of tlie deterininatioii-of af”'’*

the properties of a different Substance, the Soul
affinity in addition to its
kusu7nhha Aowev at- Vilrai
Patna also. But
dependence i _

Time also would
)een established only as that which always demonstrates

In the same way, the production of Posteriority !
tained inayouth, with an old man as the starting poi
ons’: ‘They are born simultaneously,’ ‘They exist

rjiey act simultaneously,’— in such cognitions, ‘simultan
the Raine time, during tbe same moveraeiit of the sun, i
the same time as determined by the movement of tin
unconnected movements of the sun, which undergo tl
e.g., ‘ simultaneously born,’ etc. ; nor are these connect
nature. Therefore, these specific cognitions being incapa
proof, the Substance winch establishes the snp>p;f]f>ai-:T,-,


different Substance in the case of
_ - - — ^ dependent ujion an:

n ^propinquity, otherwise the redness of a
(Benares) would entail redness in a crystal at
■s supposed to be of that very nature tliis (i e
up™ another affinity) ie no fault here. If it be asked, why’
i i lot transmit colour, we reolv- if. i.Q Kiaoaitorx



VAISEBIKA PEILOSOPE


vyakayate


meanmg


aifflii


■


iiliiiiiiiiiillif^


panada srr/iAS ii, 2-10.


cfrilme^ ‘UTtt hen!? KAiakhja, the name

9. Tl.e name Time is applicable to a cause, inasmuch
as It does not exist in eternal substances and exists in non-

eternal substances. — 88.

^r«sW---Here he says that Time is the of all that is produced. ^ ^ ^

Ihe word iti IS used in tlie sense of ‘because.’ For this reason

<hLr“ ’L r, “ 7*’''““® “■ *'» caiiso of .oil tut is pro-

™ntr, 0 i-“Boca„„ it does not exist i.i ot.mafe

and beoimso it exists m non-sternals.” The meaning is this- Because

CO ‘ ,I 'T"* 7'' " "i- ‘l>e

1 = .tons produced siniidt-aneously,” “produced slowly or ktc ”

prodiioed gineldx o.._ ■■ prodneed noiv,” - prodneed dm i„l tl

arFc in dif ^^simultaneity, etc" do

W ><" m thoT, r‘“ P“-. *‘h. etc. ; Hiei-efbe,

a caul I i 1 1 “f «'”« i* to bi

causrof a L is" “I “o'-ional or cfBoieul

«il 1 lilei ; I , , 7 ‘''f “«"itic„s of

s.mulfane ty, etc but also m virtue of the application of the terms liiber

nal, vernal, pluvial, etc., to flowers, fruits, etc ~9 '

Time'i'TmTalpll/X'fr' ‘“'“7”’' - “^11 is prcil need from

effect. ■ ' ^ i^^at is an

MarJi of Space.

firifq; II :t I i? I ? o II

a.Ta?ih«''fe^n-'''’'‘' Hi, such, *r: Yatali, whence.

5? ral, th.l, ROT Disyam, relaling ,o Space. fi^Liigam, mark.

(eos-nition and

usage) as This (is rermote, etc.) from this, ’’-(the same is)

tile mark of Space.— 89 . ^

^ trijafiMra.— Having fhiislied the section on the mark of ‘mri a, - ^ .

section on the mark of 8paee, he say^s : ■ • .-,oing to begin the

■ Dirfyam ’-that which bdciigs to .Space, i. e., i, the mark of the in
ference of .Space, The me.a„iug is this , ■ Space ’ is that subslce ‘ III ’
w I(di m iespect of two simultaneously existing bodies which are

that th e, , e., the ground or substratum of the oonjunctiols of a
cpmparatnioly large number of eonjoint things, is prior ■ ^


L


VAISE8IKA PHIL080PH


the siibstratitm of the conjunctions ot a compara-
and also that ‘ this i. e., the snbs-

i number of the conjmictiGns of the

, tlie substratum of the comparative
lumiber of the coiijunctions of the conjoint. For, without the

is no other means of establisliing.a
ions of the conjoint
there be any parti-
; nor, without such
nor, without their


distinct from) this i.e.
lively small number of conjoint, tilings,
tratum of the comparative smallness ii
conjoint, is ‘ posterior ’ to this, !■. r,

largeness in i

existence of such a substance, there
comparatively largo or small numbe
ill the two bodies ; nor, without such establishment, cf
cular or concrete understanding about them respective,
nnderstanding, can Priority and Posteriority arise
appearance, can there he concrete cognition and usage about them ^

It cannot he said, “ Let Time be the means also of establishing the
conjunctions. What is the use of another Substance?” For Time is
pro'ved only as tlie means of establishing constant or unchangeable actions.
If, on the contrary, it is supposed to be the means of establishing the in-
constant or changing property of Remoteness, then it would establish the
colonrina of the paste of the saffron of Ividmira (Casmere) on the breasts
of the women of Karnata (the Carnatic). The same will he the implica-
tion if Ether and Soul also are similarly made to be the means of communi-
cating the property of Remoteness. Whereas Space being proved only as
the invariable means of communicating the property of Remoteness, there
is 110 such absurd implication. In this way Space, which estahiislies
conjunctions, is really separate from Time, which_ establishes actions^

Moreover, these cognitions, namely “ This is east of that, This is
south *of that,” “ This is west of that,” “ This is north of that,” “ This is
of that,” “Tina ia aonlh-tveat of that,” “Tina h n^th-
west of that,” “ This is north-east of tliat,” This is below that, ihis
is above that,”— are brought together by the statement “ This from this,’
because it is not possible for these cognitions to have another occasional or
Further, Time estahiislies external conditions or upMMs


K AN Ad A SUTDAS IT, 2-12.


sets, witJi reference to ai
Nearness, again, is the I
these couju actions with th
established by Space
by the portion of S
is nor tlx ; the d
is soiitli ; while
the coiistitiieiit
of the conjunction
iioii“Coiiibii]ati\x) cause,
;;p|;,;tlie: , wliicl:

adridam (iiivisibie

wise referred to
marked out by their
Vanina, V


uner airection, is west in relation to tli

vraess -of the conjunctions of the conjoi

«un, whether tliey be a few or many, a
In like nianaer, the direction, vyliich is deb
e falling on the left of a pei-soa facing to wai
determined by the right division of such a
ss and leftuess are particular ‘ classes ’ res;
paits of the body, fhe direction, wliicli is the
vvdjich IS produced by an act of whicli Weigl:
js below ; and the direction, udiich is the i
.1 IS produced by the conjunction of Soul pos
consequences of conduct) or by the action oJ
way, from their reference as east, etc., they are alsc
as lu the stateinent, " Directions are ten in num

Pi-esided over by ludra, Agni, Yuma 1

iitij Isaiia Naga, and Brahma.” — 10.

■c Air, Space is a Suhstance, and is elerual


ioravyatva-nityatve, Substance-ness and etcrna-itv
Vayuua,_by Air.^ Vyakhayate, ei^plained. etcinahty.

1 r W A and eteriiaiity (of Space aroY

explained !3y (the explanation of the Substaiiee nr - ^ i
eternality of) Air.---90. ^LibUaiiee-iieBs and

and also eteiMnUlM-i. ^ x.V,;- .■

'0 the ultiiiiafce atom of Ah\ feio lie says : ■' ^ ' wa^r^

^ _ The meaning is that it possesses Substance-ness because it u d ^

Attributes, and eternality, because it is independent of m- - l^bfeesses

iiij .otlier substance. — 11. ■

Like Exidenee,^ Space is one

It ^ I j ^ ^ |j

W?t Fattvain, unity, Bhavena, by Existence.

The unity (of Space is explained) by (the explain
loiiof the unity of) Existence.— 91. ^ t^xpiaiia-

ajm-fc<i,.«..-Bxtencling or attributing unity (to Space), he says •

Unity IS proved in Space, as in Existence bv tV r . ‘

|.oe iu the marfa of Space togetW with ’the' noe-eXtenceAf
iffereatiatuig mark. Separateness of one ie iuri:.ud r T ^

. Space, beoauee icdiUduality conetaatlr’fouYre jl' Y



» i. -i H., I * , ,


VAlSEIjlKA FHiLOtiOPE T .


Above Qon tin ue(L

IS R I ^*1 I

owing to difference .or .. .distiiictioii.


of


Karyya^visesena
effects, Naiiatvaui, multiplicity or diversity.

13. The diversity (of Space) is due to the diftereiice of
effects.— 92.

Upastetra.-Itmaybeaskecl, “If Spaceis onlyono, iiowtlioiicanthci-o bo its cogni-
tion and use as ton ciuarters or directions So ho says :

The meaning is that the attribution of multiplicity is due to the

divergence of effects. — 13.

Directions expiained.

Aditya-sariiyogat, from the conjunction of the sun.
Bhuta-phrwat, past and gone, Bhavisyatab, future.

Bhutat, what has taken place or come into existence; present.

Cha, and. sir^, Prachi, east. (/^/. Orient).

14. (The diretion comes to be regarded as) the east,
from the past, future, or present conjunction of the sum— 93.

Uixisfcdra.-Showing the aforesaid divergence of effects, he says :

The east (prachi) is so called, because the sun first (pnik) luoteb
(ahehati) there. Thus that direction is called the east, wherein the first

conjunction of the sun took place, or will take place, or is taking place,

ill the course of its circulation round Mount Meru.

Here the reference to the three times rests upon the diiiereucey

of the conceptions of the person (i. e., tlie observer). For, ’ivith some one,
on the morning of the previous day, the conjunction of the sun first took

■ place in this direction therefore it is the east so the use of the word,

f east. With some other, the next day, the conjunction of the sun will
. first take place in this direction ; so, in view of this, ihe use of the word,
'‘I:: , ’'’"east. ■■ With some other, again, at this moment, the conjunction of the
^■iSSf^yunds taking place in this direction ; so, in view of this, the use of the
jfViV'V east. In .the word, ‘bhutat,’ the affix, ‘kta,’ is used in the sense of

b ’bVijifeipient action. Therefore, no fixed point being invariably necessary, the
' SM. ' ' xep6titm'df,the use of the word, east, is proved also in those cases, even

■ ' , ' b- wliere' dl^eye'is sun, as at night, or at mid-day, etc.

' ^ • This is- lhelfiij^ojBt,:r-H'' ‘ - ■



KANlDA SUTRAS IT, 2-17


Above — continued.

^ II ^ I R I IV. ri


ar^rr Tatha, similarly. Daksina, south. 51#=#, Pratichi, west.

Udichl, north. Cha, also.

15. South, West, and North also are similarly (dis-
tingiiislied).— 94.

L^paskam.— Extending the samo method to the use of the other directions also,

lie says :

In the very same way, the rise of the term, South, arises from the
past, or future, or present conjunction of the sun with the mountain
situated iu the south direction. The use of the West and North also
is to be similarly understood. Rightness and leftness (have their technical
or recognised ineanings, or) have been explained above, — 15.

Above — continued.


I R ! H II

intervals of Space


Etena, by this. RnscrtTSTIH, Digantaralftni,
or Direction. VyakhyStani, explained.

16. By this, the intervals of direction are explained. — 95.

l'pr/K?ivnY(.~~Sx.tencli!)g the vci*y same metliocl to the intervals of direction also,
■he sOi.ys : : .

Tito use of South-East arises froiu tlie intermixture of the mark
of the East and the Soiitli direction. South-West, West- North, and
North-East are to be similarly understood.

It has been explainefi at length in Kcmdda-Rahasyavi (lit., the
secret of Kanada) that Space or Direction is tliat universal Substance by
which the above eoujnuctions of the snn are established. — 16.

Causes of Doubt or Disbelief.

Samanya-pratyaksat, from the perception of the Genus
or general property. R%5rTJr?Tgrf, Vi^esapratyaksat, from the non-perception
of the Species or special property or differentia. , Vi^esa-smriteh,

from the recollection of particulars, i. e., alternatives. Cha, and.
Saffi^ayah, doubt.

17. Doubt arises from the perception of (the object

containing) the general property, the non-perception of the
differentia, and the recollection of the alternatives, all at
once or in one act ol thought. — -96, ; > :



VAlBEf^IKA miLOBOPBl


VpaisMra . — It has beeh. already established that the cliaraetcristics, e. g. Ooloiir, etc.,
of the four ‘ elements ’ are essential, if they are preceded by like Attributes in their
causes, and if not, then they are conditional or acoidental. The marks of the ■ nniversal
substances*’ which are devoid of any distinctive Attribute, have also been statetl. A'ow,
the mark of Ether, i. e., Sound, should ho examined. And hero vi'e meet with the contradic-
tory conclusions of the Tantrikas. Some say that Sound is a Sni)stance, and some cnii
it an Attribute. Even when they call it an Attribute, it i.s eternal according to some,
while according to others it is non-eternal. Other, s, again, distinguish even iii Soiiiul
another Sound, whicli they call bj' the name, “S-phota.” Accordingly, to liegiii the
examination of Sound, he first of all estalilishes Doulit itself, which is the first element
or member of an examination, by its characteristic and cause, and says :

‘ Stimanyapratyaksat ’ means from the perception, i. a, apprelionsion,
of the object whicli possesses the general property, the affix ‘ nmtnp,’
signifying possession, having been elided. ‘ Videsilpratyaksat ’ means
from the non-perception or non-appreliension of the property ndiich is
the means of mutual differentiation, e. g., crooked, hollow, etc., and also
head, hand, etc. ‘ Viifesasihriteh ’ means from the recollection of tiie
particulars, i. e., the alternatives ehai’acterised as a ti-unk and as a person.
Recollection also includes apprehension by sense, because, in some
instances, bodies whicli are being perceived also become the alternatives.
The word ‘ cha ’ brings together adridam (invisible conseq uences of
voluntary conduct) etc., which are also the causes of Doubt.

It has not been said that an individual or particular property is the
source of uncertain knowledge. Nor has it been said that a particular
or special propertjq being the means of disciimination, is such a cause, and
that this differenciation from similar and dissimilar objects is realty the
common property. Contradiction, again, consists of two propositions
arising from t\yo opposite conclusions ; one being ‘ Sound is eteiual,’
and the other being ‘ Sound is non-eternal.’ Both of them as well as
both the forms of knowledge produced hy them, do not tog(;11ioi- hef’ome
the source of Doubt,, since they do fiot exist simnltaneonsly. Tlenco il
has not been separately stated that there the cause of Donljt is cither
the non-cornmon property, such as Soundness, or the common property,
such as the being existent, the being the subject of proof, etc.

Uncertain knowledge finds.no place in the kindred sj^stem ofCantamn
tyi. e.j NyHya Philosophy;, and so a' non-common property has been men-
tioned 'there as, a cause of Doubt. Contradiction, i. e,, two opposite
: propositions, containing, as a rule a positive and a negative statement, has
l-ljeen 'mentioned as a cause of .Doubt, In the commentary on Nyava.
.vDoubb^aa been deseribed as live-fold, acc()i-di.ng as the fact tlial. soiiie-
' thing, js.lifiiiig,pei;peiyed, or the, fact that som'othing is not being pei’ceived,


' , , ?> &


KANADA SUTRAS LL iJ-lS.


ifi t le caiiye o!: DouLl. Thus Doubts luay arise whetlie]- wiiat is being
pereonx'd bo cxislciil, whether what is l^eing perceived be iiou-existent,
u' tether tins thiJiy irhidi is being perceived be existent or uoii-existent,
^rteiliei' wiuU, is not being perceived be existent, such as a radish, a latch,
oic., and ivJicLher what is jiot being perceived be non-existent, as a lotus in
the air. But ail these are really , if the same kind, being explained in the
very same way by tiio expression ‘ from the perception of the common
property. Again, the^ three-fold ness of Doubt, according to differences
in Its cause, as taught ill the Nyaya-Varttika, is also not possible, as the .

^ pi.e)pei-ty, etc., themselves cannot be causes on account^: hd

For heterogeneity should not be supposed - here, '
iike Jieteropueity in lire produced from grass, a strike-stick (arani)(h
where hre is kindled by striking two sticks against each other), and a
gem, because /lypnthed the causality consists of the common property
Ox prudiiciiig nil effect defined by the characteristic of jJoribt The
heterogeneity which is .said to appear in the form of referring primarily^^^^^^^^^^^^

to to the negative alternative, etc' : ^

does not serve the purpose of a differentia, as it is not sufficiently ex- -
tensive, or wide.

Thus Doubt is neither three-fold nor live-fold, biu is of one kind

only The WTiter of the aphorisms, however, will himself explain its

;;;:btwd4bldiiessj.ii ,an^

It may be objected, ‘Doubt is knowledge which produces the desire
.to know. riiis is not the definition, as it overlaps uncertainty. ‘ Doubt is
knowledge which does not produce imiuession (saihskai-a).’ — dffiis too is
common to unmodified or undifferentiated knowledge or state of conscious-
ness ; for, li: It m a concrete knowledge, tlien Doubt also produces an im-
pression. Again, tliongli it is a ‘ class,’ yet the quality of Doubt is
not a characteristic, for as the quality of Doubt does not reside in the
object containing the property (the perception of whicli is the occasion
of the Doubt}, the ‘ class ' also does not appear there, since it is not found
that a^‘ class ’ appears elsewhere than in what it classifies.” To this our
reply is that from the definition of Doubt it follows that Doubt is know-
ledge of diverse and contradictory forms in respect of one and the same
object. — 17. , - , '

G(0US6S of Douht OV Oishclief'-^GOn^ _ 'x

U 1 ltd'll

' ^ »ri?tam, that which ; i« ;seeri., „ ;Cha,:;and.:: , drista~vat, Like ^

' that which was seen. - ...x;.,''


18.

was seen


VAI 8 ESIKA PHI LOm-'B F.


x4.ud that which is seen, resembles that 'which
-(this also is the source of Doubt.) — U7.

IJjxisMra , — Doubt is two-fold : that wliich relates to external ol>Jects, and that wiiicli
relates to internal objects. And that which relates to extcriuii objects, is also two-l'oicl:
where the object is visible, and wliere the object Is not visible. 01* these. Doubt, in whicli
the object is visible, may be illustrated as the uncertainty wdiet-hci* it ])e a post or a
person, ivhich arises on seeing some object distinguished by height ; and Doubt, in wiiiel!
the .object is not visible, is such as when on seeing the horns only in the body ot a eow
or a gayal (Bos gavmiis), etc., ivhlch is concealed by tlie intervention of a bosh, etc.,
the uncertainty arises, “ whether it be a cow or a gayal.” In fact, in the latter ease also
the Doubt really relates to the property of the horn, i.c., wdietlier the horns arc the
lioriivS of a cow or of a gayal. The statement of the t'wo-foldiiess of Doubt is, liowevor,
.a'-'figure , of . speech. Now, the Genus (he., Common property) wlilcli is the source of Doubt, ■
raises Doubt by being observed either in more than one object or in one object. He
explains the first kind :

Height, which is seen, is the source of Doubt. ‘ JJristavat ’ is formed
by,‘vati,’ -i.e., the affix of simijarity. Thus, something similar to tJie
previously seen post and person, lies before. The meaning is that the
height, which is observed in what lies before, is a source of Doubt, because
it has been previously observed (in more than one object). — 10.


Causes of Doubt or Disbelief. — eoiitimicd.

lU I ^ I H ^8

A^ath^-dristam, that which has been seen ia a certain form.,
A because it is not seen in that form, ^ Cha^ and.

19. (Doubt also arises), wliere that wliicli has been
seen in one form, is seen in a different form. — 98.

UpasMra , — He illxtstrates the observed common property wliicli relates to one
object :•

The source of Doubt” — this completes the aphorism. The word
^cha ^ understands what has been said before. The loeaniiig is that
because an object is seen in a different form, therefore that which was
seen in a certain form, also gives rise to Doubt, as Chaitra wlio was seen
ill a certain' form, f.e., , with hair on his head, is at another time seen not
in that .'form, i.e., with the hair removed. Then afterwards whe.u the
Very 'Same Ohaitraf is, seen with his head covered with a piece of clothe
'Doubt arises whether this. Chaitra has hair or not. Here the identit37
'of /Chhitradh the common property w gives rise to Doubt ^ and it is
:^^n\hV:'Qm\]6h^§0% , Therefore what is, here the source of Doubt is

seen 'm uudSf erentiated _ object,— 19.^


KANADA SUTRAS II, 2 - 20 .


Above continued.


■ , ff^TS Vidj’a-a-vidyatali, .from 'b^cience'' and' ■ riebCiciir.c. Glia,

' aaici./ ' ' Sajiisayalj/'

20. Doubt (arises) also from Bcienee and iieseieiict'. --■ 01.

^ Uj)askjva.~!l(i says that the very eom men property of beinp,* ieo^40..iised oide^o-
object of tlio ufth. t is the cause of Do iibt :

Internal Doubt really spjrings Itooi scieiice and nescience, i'or
instance, an astroiioiner predicts cori’eo.tly, and i'cedicts iiu'ori'ectly,

■ eclipses olDdie Accordingly Doubt arises in Iris mind as to

.his knowledge, wlietlier it be accurate or not. (Jr knowledge is senne-
diniesdb nometiines nescience, Ac., wanting in proof; and,

consequently, Doubt arises with respect' to sonietliing, \vhctlier, inas-
iiiucli as it is known, it be existent oi non-existent.

Tile retention of the word, ‘Doubt,’ in tlie aphoi'isin, indicates that
liera too Doubt arises on!}' from the perception ol* the coinnion prope.!‘ty,
and not .from any other source. Thus the opinion held by some that
the uncertainty or iucuiistancy of cognition and non-cognition alluded
to in the , .defiiiitioii of Gauiaina, “.Doubt is deliberation in expectation
of amiiffereiitia, due to the proof of the coinmon ].>rope..rties as weTi as
of the properties of si]ni.lar and dissimilar objects, the non-proof of,

’ these properties, and also tlie unccidainty or in-
00 iistanc 3 y:of' cognition and non-cognition,” (Nyaya-Sutras 1. 1. 22), is
mdifferentvSOiireemf 'Doiibt, is hereh 3 ^refnt^^^

. y : Vivriti.--A^^ the/ affix 1 tasi in " vidya-avidyatas ’ is used in the
gemiivo sense. Therefore the expression means “ of t-rne knowledge and
false knowledge.” And the doubt is whether it be true knowledge oi-
false knowledge. Fi-oiii the word ^ chad ^andd it follows that Doul)t


VAISEBIKA PHILOHOl^ll):


^SW** H li ^ I < I «

*^^=-^rotra-grahanah, of which ^ear is the

21. Sound is that object of which the organ of appre-

the nature ami

i« the firab member of an examination, ho now exi>lams the object Sound ^^luUl
subject-matter of examination, and says : ^ • . t ..

‘SrotKif^rabaiiah ’ means that ol which eai is the oi^^an ci ’

Arthah’ means that wliicli contains propei ties.

not the defect of orer-extending to Souud-ness,
.)ute-uess, Existence, and other properties residing
g perceived by the ear. By the word
that which contains propei’ties, the possession of a
intended; hereby it is indicated that Sound eaUed
which the words of a sentence can convey a complete,

Sound, does not exist. .

follows ; “ Bijhota must be postulated on^ the

, ‘ one sentence,’ for the intuition
composed of several letters, nor in a
And the wood sphota forms a
the elucidation of the sense depends, dhe
not at all produce the intuition of the meaning
tlieir combination again is impossible, because
itered bj’' one speaker ; therefore the
of the whole arises from sphoki only, because
;e without the knowledge of it.
i one and all the letters staUding
the last letter.” We- reply that it is
Thus the sense being intuited
what is tlie use of sphota ?
mce, intended to dcuule
6 sense, possessed by a large number
,i sentence. If some inner meaning
)nent letters, could be apprehended
;ht have been admitted to be sphota.
has overlooked this doctrine of


meat of apju'ehensioii
So that the definition has
louduess, etc., Altri
in Sound and capable of oemg
‘ arthah ’ meaning
class property is
‘Sphota^ ('i.fi-5 by
sense), inherent in

It may be argued as
strength of the intuitions, one woid
of unity does inU arise in a word '
sentence composed of several letters,
name or nominal on ivhich
letters individually do
of the whole sentence
they speedily disapjoear, oeing ut
intuition of the sense

elucidation of the sense does not take plac
And this sphota, although it is present in
as words, yet becomes manifest in tk.

not so. Oonventioiial letters form words,

from the word in virtue of convention cdoiie,
The use of the expression ‘ one word ’ is a
■ the one property of making up on
■’ of letters. So also in the case of i
■" of the word, beyond that of its compc
r by perception, then, the skne mig
‘ Thm^efore fthfe autlior of the ■ aphorisms
spliota , as beihgybf ■■ tio cpnsideration,-— 21 ,,


95



KANADA STjTRAS II, 2-2.


Causes of Doubt loith respeet to Sound.


^ I utya-jatiyesLi, m huniugeiieous things. Artiiamara

bhiitesu, in heterogeneous things. Vifsesa.syn, of the particular, «>., thi

difference, or differentia, Ubhayatha, in both. Dristatv’at, frorr

toe being', observed because it is observed.

22 . (Doubt arises .ill respect of Sound), because its dif-
ference is observed both in (from) homogeneous objects and

in (from) heterogeneous objects.- — 101.

^ (jpask3.m.~8onnd having thus appeared a.s an object wliioli contains properties its

depends solely on its being .in Attribute. Therefore to establish
Its Attribute-ness, he bring.s out the trilateral Doubt, and .says :

“Jtonbt arises in respect of sound, ”~is time ciuplement of the
apiorism. Souud-ness aiul perceptibility b,y the ear are observed iu Sound.
And this gives rise to Doubt wliether Sound be an Attribute, or a Subs-
tance, or an Action, because the ‘particular,’ ie., the difference or diver-
gence is observed both iu homogeneous objects, namely, tbe twenty-three
Attrioutes, and in heterogeneous objects, namely Substances, and Actions,
but Doubt whether it be a Genus, or a Species, or a Combination, does not
arise, inasmuch as difference in point of being existent, being produced
... .by a cause, etc., is observed.

It may be said, “A non-common iiroperty cannot bo the cause of
■Doubt by being the cause of indecision or uncertainty. And Sonnd-ne.ss
ns well as^perceptibility by the ear is really a non-common property.”

‘ e say : Truly its difference or divergence is common to liomogeneous and
hetrogeneou.s things, and so only this common difference or divergence has
been stated to be tiie cause of Doubt. Difference or divergence, which is
the counter-opposite of Sound-ness, is the common property ; and the
characteristic of being the counter-opposite of the difference or divero-ence
belonging to both, in otlier words, Sonnd-ness, is the non-common property
Tlierefore It hns been said : “ From the observation of tlie ilifference in’
iiotli. ^ i-Jere the observation of particular, ie., the difference, in both. ie.
m loniogeneous and heterogeneous things, constituting the cause of Doubt”
it becoiuas really tlie eonimoii DroBertv — 22 ^



FAI^ESI JCA PIllTMOrn 1'


Nor an Action


satvat,


because it is not an object


of visual perG6ptioii.—ltM.

Up«sfcam.-It may be said, “Action is snroly uni-soos.anlia,.

be ail Action.” So lie says : .

Because tlio intuition or perception ot i-sounr! i

produced by an external sense-organ other tliaiWno
import is that, like the quality of Taste, ete.. Sound
reside in Actions, because it is a ‘class’ winch does

objects of visual perception.— 24.

Sound in transient, and not eternal.

^ Gunasya, of Atlribute. Sataii, being,

speedy destruction. sRs'frfSt: Karnimabbil.i, with Actions
myani, resemblance.

27. The resemblance (of Sound), altlio
tril)ute, with Actions, consists in its speedy de:

Lq,asMn<.-If it is said that, as it spoetlily disappears, iike ’

therefore Souud is an Action ; so he says : ^

‘ Apavargah ’ means speedy destruction. And this, oven in the case

■of Attribute-ness, is dependent upon the incidence of a rapidly appearing
destroyer, in the same way as duality, etc., are. This constitutes only its
resemblance to Actions, and not its Action-ness. The quality of nadergo-
ing rapid destruction which you U.e., the ohjector) advance as an argu-
ment is not one-pointed i.e., multifarious, because it is found in Duality,
••■Knowledge, Pleasure, Pain, etc., as well. This is the import.— 2r>.

^ ^ ■ Above contiimed,

ava;; Ay- ^ ^ II I 51 s

: Sa'tah/ of (Sound as) existent. Lihgftbhavat, from the

' "absence of ■'iWatkA'h-'-;-' ‘ .■ ' ... i ,


Tlierc-fcro Bound mn


' . ih


26. (Somid does not exist before utterance), because
there is no mark of (Sound as) existent (before utterance), —

105.

. U'pasMm.— It may be said, '‘'‘ Let Sound be proved as an Attribute.. Still it cannot be ■
the mark of the existence of Ether. For it would Justify the inferenee of Ether, if it were
an effect of it. But it is eternal instead. Its occasional iion-cognitioii, iio^vever, is clue to '
the absence of something wiiieli could reveal it.” With this apprehension, he says r

For, if Sound, were existent (before and after utterance), then there
would be found some ' mark/ he., additional proof, of it as existent. But .
ill the state of non-hearing, there is no proof that Sound exists. There-
fore it is only an effect, and not something which requires to he revealed
only, — 26 .

Above eontimied.

II I ^ I u

Nitya-vaiadharnmiat, owing to difference in property from

what' is eternal.

27. (Sound is not something which only requires to be
brought to light), because it differs in property from what
is eternal. — 106.

U pashdrcL—Ue says that for this reason also, it (8ound) is not something which only
recpiires to be made known :

The difference of Sound from what is eternal, is observed. Where-
as, as in “ Chaitra speaks,” the existence of Chaitj-a, Maitra, etc., even
though they are covered from view, may be inferred from their voice ;
and whereas that which reveals, e.g., the lamp, etc., is never inferred by
that which is revealed, e.g., the water-pot, etc. ; therefore Sound is only a
product, and not something wliich requires to be brought to light. This
is the sense. — 27.

Above continued.

♦

II ^ I R I Rq II

Anityah, non-eternal, “sf Clia, and, ^ Ayam, it. Kara-

natah, from its having a cause.

28. And Sound is non-eternal, (because it is observed t

to be produced) by a cause. — 107. ■

Upasfcdm.— Pointing out the objections to its being something to be revealed only, i
he now states the ground of its being non-etemai ; 7 ^ '

: ■ “ Because its production is observed,” — this is the complement. For

Sound is observed as issuing out: of the ^ (temporary) conjunction of the '
drum and the drum-stick, etc, ) So that it m noh-6ternal, because it


KAVADA SUTRAS II, 2-28.


VAISESIKA PHILOSOPHY


)1v tlie reasnii


a production (or beginning),
tliat it has a cause. — 28.


a use


Above continued.


H Na, not. Cha, and /\siddham, disproved, Vikarat,

from change. _ ^

29. Nor is (the dependence of Sound upon a cause)

disproYed by its modifications. — 108.

UixtsMra.-Lest it might be said that the possession of a cause is disproved in Somid
by its very nature, so he says :

From observing the loudness, softness, and other modifications, it
should not be concluded that tlie possession of a cause by Sound is there-
by disproved. For a loud or soft sound is perceived according to the
liai’dness oi* softness of the beating oi the drum witii the druni-stiCK, and
the like ; whereas the loudness, etc., [i.e., the intensity) of that which is
made known, is not dependent on the loudness, etc., (i.e., the intensity)
of that which makes it known.. Hence from its undergoing modification
according to the modification of the cause, it is inferred to he a product,

and not something to be revealed only. — 29.

Above continued.


Abhivyaktau, in (the theory of the) manifestation or revelation
(of Sound). Dosat, from defect. Because there will be a defect.

30. (Sound is not eternal), because the theory that it
requires to he revealed only, will eotail a defect. — 109.

Upa.slmra,--'lt may be argued, is the virtue of that which reveals, that it reveals
ill the form of intensity, softness, etc. And it is Air impelled by the drum and the drum-
stick, etc., which, being intense and soft or slow (in velocity and volume), produces
like perceptions.’* Hence he says :

On the theory of the revelation of Sound, the defect will arise that
(in each case) an invariable relation of the revealer and the revealed will
have to be admitted in respect of things co-existent and capable of being
perceived by the same sense. But tlie invariable relatioiisliip of tlie
revealer and the revealed is nowhere observed of such tilings. If it be
not assumed here, then it will follow that on the inanifestation of one
letter^ say. fea,. all the letters will become manifest. The rejoinder that
'"ail invariable relation oi the revealer and the revealed is in fact observed
';,‘t0.’.obtaii\'among the^ characteristic of being existent, the characteristic
;;o|",|)eiSg V Brlihma^a, which are


99



KAFADA SUTRAS 11, -2-33,


also co-esteiisive and are revealed by their individual differeiicej situa-
tion, and origin, is invalid. For they lack in being co-extensive,
inasmuch as the extension of the characteristic of being a man, or of the
, characteristic of being a Brahiiiana, is not so large asdliat of the 'charac-
teristic' of beii^^^

Above eontiniied {Production of Sound)

II H j ^ I ^ 1 II

, i^sif¥rf5f Saibyogat, from Conjunction. Vibhagat, from Disjunctioo*.

Cha, and. ^avdar, from Sound. ^ Cha, and. ^abda-nis-'

■pattili, "production of Sound.

produced from Conjunction, from Dis-
junction, and from Sound also. — -110.

Ujyaskdra , — He saj^-s that for the following reason also Sound is not something which
,re(iiiires to 'be revealed oidy r''

CFroin Conjunction ’ — ne., from Conjunction of the drum and the
drum-stick. ' From Disjunction ’-—f.c., when a bamboo is being split uj).
Here Conjunction is by no means the cause of the first Sound, because
there is then no Conjunction. Therefore the Disjunction of the Hvo
halves of the bamboo is the efficient or conditional cause, and the Dis-
junction of the halves and Ether is the noii-conibiiiative cause. And where
Sound is produced in a distant flute, and the like, there Sound which is
produced in the order of a current, reaches the portion of Ether limited by
tlie hollow of the ear, and thereby becomes heard. Therefore Sound
'iS':produc6d 'from' 'Sound also.— Sl.'d' "■

Above contimied.


Liiigat, from its mark. ^ Cha, and. . Anityali, non-etera

'^^r'^abdah,' Sound. ,'

32. Sound is non-eternal, alsobecause of its mark.----lil.

U pasha r CL— B.Q brings forward anotlier ground of its being non-cternal :

The meaning is that Sound, consisting of letters ( 2 . 6 ,, articulate SoiindX
is non-eternal, because, while possessing a ^ class/ it is capaple of being
perceived by the ear, like the vSoiind of a lute, etc. — 32.

Arguments for the eternality of Sound. ,


' f#: Dvayah, of both, gTu,.bun ' sff^: PravriUyoh, of the activities
or occupations, Abh^vat, .from the ndn-existencelor absence. I' ■ ^



Arguments for the eternality of Sotmd—eontinued.

iM I i II

qsnrrsassrr^ Prathamagabdat, from the word ‘ the first.’

34. From tlie word, ‘tlie-first,’ (it follows that Sound
is eternal). — 113.

Upa$kara. He translates another reason urged in favour of the eteriialitj;^ of Soiind :

The meaning is that tlte thrice recitation of the first and the last
mqtntm^ for kindling a sacrificial fire, as enjoined in the text, “ The first
:^i|^ig|^citcd^three,tim^^ three times,” is not justified or


VAI8ESIKA PHILOSOPHY.


33. (Sound is eternal), because (otherwise) the occu-
pations of both (the teacher and the pupil) will vanish out
of existence. — 112.


■ , Upaskdra. — Now, iii' order to confute the argauients, advar.ced.: ^by ■ the conciusioiiist
(the Sliraamsa thinker), in support of the eternality of Souiicl, he says :

The word ’ cuts off connection with the context, and introduces
the statement of an objection of the first party. The occupation or em-
ployineiit ' of both,’ i.e., of the teachei’ and the pupil in teaching and
learning respectively, is observed. “ From its uomexisteiice or absence/’
ne.j from the entailment of its non-existence. For teaching is an act of
gift or donation. The teacher makes a gift of the Veda to the pupil. If
it is something constant or fixed, then a donation of it is possible. The
second party may say, A cow, and the like which are being given away,
are perceived as standing between the donor and tlie donee; whereas
the Veda, etc., are not perceived as lying between the teacher and the
pupil. Therefore teaching cannot be a donation.” Our (i.e.^ the first
party’s) reply is that they are perceived in the interval between the teacher
and the pupil hy the ear of a person standing there. Moi’eover, the eter-
nality of Sound follows from recurrence also. As in “ He sees the colour
for five times,” tlie recurrence or persistency of colour which is constant
or permanent is observed, so the recurrence or persistency of Sound in
'' The anuvaka ov paragraph has been read ten times, twenty times,”
is proof of the constancy or permanence of Sound. And constancy or
steadiness being proved, since nothing is known u^liich can destroy it,
its eternality also is necessarily proved, on the principle '' Wiiat will
afterwards destroy it which is constant or lasting all this time ? Tliis .is
the import. — 33.



KANIDA SUTRAS II, 2-36


Above continued.


Sanipratipalti-bhavat, from the possibility or existence
of recognition. =q- Cha, and. ^

35. (Tlie eternality of Sound follows), also from tlie
possibility of recognition. — 114.

U ‘pcishar a, —lie translates aiiotlier reason advanced by the conclusionist for the eter-
iialifcy of Sound :

, VSiaiipratipattibliavat ’ — i c., from tlie existence of recogiiitioi], /Tlie:
word ‘pratipatti ' (cogiiitioii) alone Avould have conveyed tlie sense of re-
cognition which is a particular kind of the former ; therefore the prefix
SSam^ (in the sense of thorough-ness) implies certainty. Thus, ''Elois
recitiiig the. A^^erY' same, poem which: was recited by Maitna/’:. ‘'l'He)'is
iiig the same verse ’ OA'er and over again,” You are repeatedly saying
the same thing which has been said before,” ‘.‘You are even now making
tlie very same statement which was made by you last year and the j^ear

before,” “It is that same letter ga,” on the strength of the recognition

of Sound in such cases, the steadiness or permanence of Sound is proved.


e same re


— Saudigdh^ii, Doubtful. Uncertaiu. inconclusive. Sati,

existing. ^f#vVahutve, plurality. ■ , z ^ - ■ ! . ''/h-

36. Plurality (of Sound) existing, (tliese arguments
are) inconclusive. — 115.

, JJ'pasMra. — Confuting all these reasons, lie says :

‘ Sandigdliah,’ i. e., not one-pointed. So it has been said^
taiight that a contradictory, unproved, or uucertaiu mark
Thus it is observed that there can be lear
cognition, also if there is a
arguments are iiicouclusive
dancing,” “ .He danced the same dance twice,” '
dance to-day, which you danced the other day,”
the same dance which was
learning, repetition, and
(the conclusionist) too do not
eternality) of dancing which


apa

was no mark.”
•ning, repetition, and also re-
plurality or diversity of Sound, therefore these
h’or, “He learns dancing,” “ He practises
You are dancing the same
‘ This man also is dancing
danced by another dancer,” — in these cases^
recognition (of Action) are observed. But you
on this account admit the permanence (or
is a particular kind of Action. — 36. ■ ; :


VAISE8IKA PElLOBOmt.


Gaunter ohjeation stated and ansicered.

\\ R

SariikhyabhavaJi, tlie existence or application of Number.
!^[i||??S|gfj-—-SamaDyatah, from Genus.

37. The existence of number (in Sound) is with re-
ference to the Genus.— 116.

U pasMra . — It may be objected, “ Fifty letters ; an eight-lettered mantra ; a three-
iettered mcnitm ; the eight-lettered metre, anustiibh; etc. — How can there be .such uses
of numbers, when, the letters being non-eternal, there is a possibility of their being infinite
in number according to the dift'erence of utterance ?” So he says :

Tlie meaLing is that the existence of the number, fitly, etc., arises
from the class notion of /ca, ga, etc. Although there might be an infinity
of ka's, etc., the letters (lelermined by the notions of &a, ga, etc., are
fifty, three, or eight, in the same way as Substances, Attributes, etc.,
are nine, twenty-four, etc., although there may be an infinity of them
according to differences within the group of each of them. This is tlie
import.

The objector may say : ‘‘This is that c/a,’' — This rocognition itself
proves the permanence of Sound. Nor is it opposed by the perception,

' Loud ga, soft ga,' which conveys, contrary properties ; because loudness,
etc., are there due to external conditions. Nor is it to be maintained that
there cannot appear any difference from the difference of the external
condition also ; for, then, the crystal also will not shine as different, deve-
loping in the form of blue, yellow, etc., from the conjunction of the China
rose, tapwja, etc., nor will the face also, when reflected as elongated, etc.,
in tlie sword-blade, jewel, and looking-glass, apj^ear to be different.
If it be asked, To what does this property of loudness, etc., belong,
which infiuen.ces ga? We reply : It maybe the property of Air, or of
utterance, or of resohance. What is tlie use of fixing upon the particular
one amongst them ? You also admit that loudness, etc., are natural dis-
tinctions, as the relation of high and low amongst them cannot be esta-
blished or explained by the notions of /ca, ga, etc. ”

We reply : It is not so. Because even when such contrary percep-
tion exists, m., J ga is produced/ ^ ga is destroyed,’ which was just
heard, does not exist,’ ‘ the noise has stopped/ etc., if this recognition
‘doesmot then cease, then it must be supposed to relate to class-notions.
/Ctlierwise such recognition comingTo rest upon the permanence or steadi-'
individual ■ Sounds, _ the .above contrary perceptions themselves
be /produced. ! Nor is this the property of Air, because the


KANADA SUTRAS IL 2-37. 103


tlie property of the utterance ; for if utterance is only Air, then the defect
has been already painted out; if it is sonietliiug else, then nobody can
say what it is. Nor again is it the property of resonance, for loudness,
etc., are perceived also in the resonance from the conch, etc., even thougli
ga is not found there. The naturalness of loudness, etc., however, does not
involve an intermixture of classes, for its diversity is obtained from its
being pervaded by the class-notion of ga, etc. Moreover, there is a veiy
distinct mode of distinguishing forms in the ga’s, etc., utterered by male
and female parrots and man, as also in those ixttered by a male and a
female, as well as in those uttered by those who are neither males nor
females ; bj’ which a parrot, etc., concealed from vision by branches, a
screen, etc., ai’e inferred. But their being produced by external condi-
tions does not arise from external conditions which can be perceived,
as in “ a young woman looking yellow with saffron.” Nor is their being
produced by external conditions proved by argument, for no proof of
such a conclusion exists. So far in brief. — 37.

Here ends the second chapter of the second book in Sankara’s
commentary on the Vai^esika aphorisms.

Vivriti . — Some explain the production of Sound on the principle
of ripples and waves. According to them, the first Sound is produced from
the impact of a drum and a drum-stick, etc., within the limits of that
.particular Space. Then outside that circle and within the confines of the
ten rpiarters the second Sound is produced from the first, and extends it.
After that, beyond this second circle, and within tlie confines of the ten
quarters, the third Sound is produced from the second. And in the same
way the production of the fourth and other Sounds should be xinderstood.
Others, however, hold that the production of Sound takes place on the
principle of the ball of the kadamha flower. In their viexv, the second
and other Sounds are neither single nor confined to the ten quarters taken
together, but are produced ten-fold in ten quarters. (Thus the one is the
theory of the successive production of single Sounds, while the other is the
theory of the simultaneous production of multiple SoundsV This is the
difference. ' ■ ■ ■ "v ^ ' v ■ v / v ^



I


I


ft I


H



'» \ i-'h


■VAISESIKA PHILOSOPHY.


Book Third— Chapter First.

Objects of the senses.

SIT%^ fT%Wrt (I ^ I ^ I ! H

JTTl^r: Prasiddhah, universally known, perce!ved. fi%2tl?rf:-Indn-

yarthali, object of the senses. ^

1. The objects of the senses are universally known.—
117.

. ' UpasMra -Having thus in the second hook completed the examination of the exter-

; : aal Substances, he, following the order of enumeration, now proceeds to construct a

basis for an inauiry respecting the Soul. mi .1

-■ i ]Plie objects of the Senses, e.gf., Smell, Taste, Colour, louch, and

Sound, are capable of being apprehended by the several external sense-
organs Amongst them, the universal cognition or experience of Sound
ha”dno’ been shown by the aphorism, “ Sound is that object of which the
orgaa'^of apprehension is the ear” (II. ii. 21), it is in like manner demon-
strated that Smell, etc., ending with Touch (i.e., Smell, Taste, Colour,
Touch) are universally known. Thus, Smell is that object of which the
organ of apprehension "is the olfactory organ; Taste is that object of
which the organ of apprehension is the organ of taste ; Colour is that
. .t . . . object of which the organ of apprehension is the eye alone ; Toucli is

ii? ■ ;> i that object of which the organ of apprehension is the organ of touch

ii lIlL , alone. And by the word, ‘ object,’ there is, in all these cases, denoted

a real entity possessed of properties, and therefore the definitions cannot
be too wide by over-extending to Smell-ness, etc., and to the non-exist-
ence of Smell, etc. Hence Smell-ness is the possession of a sub-class
of Attribute-ness, appearing in what is apprehended by the olfactory
organ. So also with regard to Taste, etc. Consequemly, snpersensuous

Smell, etc., are not left out.-- -1.

Pi-asiddhah'; means subject of ascertainment by per-
ception.

Mark of supersensuous object.

^ I V I =1 H

f: ^jpfsn^i—Indriyartha-prasiddhih, tlie universal expeidencie
, objects of the senses. |[pgjn^».^|:~lndriyarihebhayaii, from the^senses and
their objects. OTf*5FR®l"”Arthantaras3’a, of a different object. %g;— •Hetul.l,

Tbe universal experience of tlie objects of tne
/. '"fsLis^ is tiie mark of (the existence of) object different from

. , , ; ' ybe seiisek — US;


105


kais/Ada sutbas in, i-s.


(Jp((s?c((ra.— He explains t he application of the universal experience of the objects
of fclio senses to the inquiry I’espocting the Soul.

‘ Ffetah,’ ie., ;^[a)■k, ‘Arthantarasya/ i.e., of the Soul. ‘ Indriyarthebh-
yah,’ I.e., from the senses as well as their objects. The meaiiing is
that it is the mark of the Soul which is a different object from Colour,
etc., as well as from those which possess them. Though it is implied here
that only knowledge is the mark of the existence of the Soul, yet inas-
much as there being a universal experience of the objects of the senses,
the immediate presentation to the mind of Colour, etc., is more commonly
known, the mark of there being a Sonl is described as constituted
by that universal experience. Now this universal experience must
reside somewhere, either as an effect as a water-pot, or as an Attribute,
or as an Action. This universal experience, again, since it is an act in
the same manner as cutting is an act, must be produced by an instrument,.
That which is the instrument of the universal experience is the sense ;
and the latter, being an instrument, must be employed by an agent, as
an axe and the like, are employed. Thus, that in which this universal
experience resides, and which employs tlie olfactory and other organs
for its instruments, is the Soul. — 2.

The body or the mises are not the seat of perception.

^ I ^ I ^ II

set: Sab, that, ie., perception, Anapades^ah, the semblance or simu-

lacrum of a mark ; a false mark,

3. Perception (as a mark inferring the body or the
senses as its substratum) (is) a false mark. — 119.

Upashh^a.—Lost Ir he }=?aid, “ Leb tlie body or tlie senses he the foundation of the
iiiilversal experience or perception, because their presence, and absence are more 'manifest
v aS' determining perception. What is the use of the supposition of any other, foundation?' "

' conscious ness is an attribute oC the body, being its effect, like its Coloiiib" etc, ' The ■'

/■ same should be ■ .understood in the case of its being an attribute of the senses ; ‘’ so he says ;

‘ Aiiapadeyah ’ means the appearance or semblance of an ' aparlesla/
i, e., mark. Thus the nieatiiug is tliat the being an effect of the body or
the senses is the mere semblance of a mark, inasmuch as it applies to the
cognition produced by a lamp, and is therefore not-one-poiiited, i. e., iniilti-
farions. — -3.

Above continued,

\ I T I 8 u

Karaiiajfianat, because the causes or constituents are devoid of
’ cognition or consciousness.

'' 14



existed in the pri;

;6t';,ty'-;:l3odj,. aamely. the' ultimate atoms, then it u-mxld alsc.

'etc,, .which are the -ef^cts originated by them also,


„• , \-r M‘ i t

„ "* '«■ \ il.- r,‘ I


VAI^EBmA PHILOSOPHY.


4. (The body or the senses cannot be the seat of ]Der-
ceptioii), because there is no consciousness in the causes
(he., the component parts of the bo(iY).""120.

' may be rejoined, By • the being an effect of


ietic of con, seioiSness; whereas the whole of conaciousnoss is not the offset ol t lie, amp,

'etc; ' f&eref ore there is nO' iiidetermmateiiess or fiacbiiatioii.’': So lie says : „

It, ismeaift ''.that the body or the senses cannot be the seat of
(lerceptiou), because of the absence of consciousness in the hands, feet, cU;.,
nr in their parts, which are the causes, i.e., components of the hoiiy. I'or
it is observed that the particular attributes of Earth, etc., are preceded. b,y
like attributes in thejr causes. In like manner, if there existed conseions-
ness in the compone& of the body, it might possibly exist also in the body.
But 'this is not the case, ft cannot be urged that consciousness may exist
also in the components of the body ; for it would entail the absence of
uniformity in the actions of the body, since uniformity is never observed
amongst a plurality of sentient beings. It would then also follow that,
after the amputation of the liand, there will l:ie no more recollection of that
which was experienced within the limit of the hand, according to the
maxim, “ One does not remember that which has been experienced by
another.” Moreover, the supposition would entail that, after the des-
truction of the body, there would be no experience of the consequences of
the acts performed by the body, e.^., causing hurt, etc.; for certainly
Jilaitra does not suffer the consequences of the sins committed by Uliaitra.
And hence there would be an annihilation of acts perfoimied, and an aqce,s-
sion of acts not performed.— 4 .

The hody or the senses are not the seat of peraeption, continnccl


V ■ Karyyesu, in . the effects, Jnftnfft, because there^^ w

7.V, a, . be consciousn.ess. . .

'’iV'iyp;.,,, 5. Because (tliere would be) consciousness i,n tlie

ij -■ ‘ I- ' I ppa.skdm.— It may he added in objection that eousoionsness exists in a niiuute degree

; ; ill the components of the body, whereas it is manifest in the body, and that therefore it

;|i’ cannot be said that it is not preceded by a like attribute in the cause, nor does there
'"1 ■' ;;';;y;'';,arise the impossibility of uniformity. Anticipating this, he says ;


i


KAFADA SUTRAS HI, 1 ^ 7 .


coiiseioiiBnes8 w-oiild exist in. products such as water-pots, etc., also because
the particuhir attributes of Earth pervade all teixene existence. But
cojiscioiisness is iiot obisei'ved to exist in these, products. — 5.

T/<e body or the senses are not the seat of perception, continued,

do -do II ^ M K II

'■b' Ajfiaoat, because it is not known, W Cha, and.

because it is not known (tliat any minute
degree of consciousness exists in the water-pot, etc.) — 122.

Uprn*klra.—In arifciclpatioii'of the farther rejoinder that eonsciousiiess may in ■ reality ■'
exist, ill an imperceptible degree, in the water-pot, etc., also, he says : ■

is that there is no consciousness in the water-jar, ef.c.,
known , by any means ,of- knowledge.'' !£■ you.' admit
the rangemf all means' of knowledge, then yon will
y;;:bave;;; tO', adiiiit ' 'also that a hare has horns, and so' on.' ' For, by no "kind of
.' evidence., is' it known' that consciousness exists in the water-jar, etc.— 6. ' '

: Vivriti, — .it is moved proper to conceive' some one other substance
: aS:),.the'' Beat' of 'consciousness than to imagine a plurality of consciousness ■.

■ ill various portions of matter. This is the import.

■■ Until e theory that consciousness resides- in the bod}^ recoil eel ion
- of 'what i experienced ■ in infancy, will be impossible in yo'iitb, etc., be- '
..';paiisem)f:''thej:ioii-existe.i^^^^^ of that whicli.had the.. experience, since tlie
.' . infant-body must be observed l)y tlie destruction of its

■material. 'Siinilarly no-activity at sucking the breas'ts .on "''

'.'..the/part .of a^'ch because. of the i-nipossibility afc'that stage of

, . the. 'uiideieta.tidiii^^ that , this is the means oi attaining the desirable, wdiicli

■ is", the caii'se^ of activity. According to the advocate of the existence of a
separate conscious bei.iig, the activity is explained by the possibility of

.oreiiiiiiisceiice due, to the impression produced by the understandirig in the ' ■
...previous birth that this is the means of attaining the' desirable. ' 'liecob ' ■■'
lection of other experiences in the previous birth does not take place
owung to the absence of external stimuli.

Fallacious mark,

fsrfeiRqtscr: ii ^ i t i vs ii


^ ■srfsji!;. Anyat, something else, Eva, certainly. 1g: Hetu^i, mark.
Iti, hence. Anapade^ah, no mark. '

7. A mark is certainly something else (than that of
which it is a mark). Hence (a mark, which is identical with
the thing of which it ia a mark^ is) no mark (at all.)— -123. ;


108


VAISESIKA FEILOSOPHY,


lipasMra,—lt may be urged, ''It lias been affirmed tliafc (a presicliiig soul) an ciiiployci-r
is Inferred from the organ of hearing and other liistniuiouts. but this is not a legitimate
inference, for the auditory and other organs are neither ideiiticai witli, nor arc produced
by, the 8oul, and, unless one of these aiternatives be admitted, there is no proof of the
universal, concomitance or inseparable existence, of tliest's organs and the Hoiil ; and. unless
there be such iliseparabie existence, there can bo no inforenco.” 8o lie says In reply :

The mark or means of proof can but be sonielhiiig else than that
wliicli is to be proved. It cannot be identical with that which is to be
proved ; for, were it . 80, it would follow that the thing, which is to be
proved, would have no difference from the means of proof. Therefore, a
means of proof, constituted by ideutily with that which is to be proved,
is no means of proof, f.e., no mark at alb— 7 .

Faltaeiom marh — continued,

Artliautarani, any one thing, ff Hi, because. Arth-

antarasya, of any other thing. Anapadesa],, not a mark.

8. (Althoiigli a mark is quite different from that of
which it is a mark, still they are not wholly unconnected),
for, any one thing cannot be a mark of any other thing. — 124.

OpasMra.— It be may said, “As the Soul is not identical with the auditory and other
..orgausvof sease, so there is no production of the' latter from the ' former. . For the sOiise-
orgaas of hearing, etc., are not produed from the Soul, as smoke is produced from lire.'’
"So hC'eays-: ■

Because,. ^ the effect, e,g., smoke, etc., is a dift’ereiit thing troiii"

an ass, so it is also a different thing from its cause, e.g., fire, etc. So that
in the absence of any distinction in respect of being a different object,
a particular nature is the regulative principle here, whereby the smoke
does not infer an ass, but only tire. And if that nature belongs to any
thing other than the effect, then that too really becomes a mark. Thus
an effect cannot be a mark, if it is devoid of the particular nature in-
tended here. Thus, identity and causation only constitute inseparable
existence or universal concomitance ; these two are reduced into inse-
parable existence ; or, it is co-ordinate with them as the principle of in-
ference ; or, its apprehension, is dependent upon the apprehension of the
above two only. Hence the ap hoi ism is only the statement of an argument
for causing confusion to the disciples in the above way. This is the
import. — 8.

' , : , Marks of inf erence.

II ^ I ? I s. II



iliillii


ZlA'iDA STS4S IIT, 1-10,



tTjpasfeiTO.— He illustrates another contradictory mark :

■ There is sometimes infei'ence ol ail existing contradictory from aii-
otlier existing contradictory ; as wlien, on seeing a snake swelling tYitli
auger,- oit, is inferred that there is an ichneumon behind a bush. In this
hasey-tli^nake excited is that which is, i.e., is existent, and the Iclineitmon
hidden' by. flte-.}jnsliis 'also in existence.- , There is, therefore, an existent,


VAlhsiKA FlULOSOPl-IV.


11. Tlie opposite, i.e., tke non-existeut (is a in ark) of
tile existent. — 127.

He iiluytrates the eoutmilk'-topy mark.

That wliicl). lias not taken place, e.g., a sliower, is a itiai'k o! tliat wliicli
has taken place, e.g,, tlie con j unction of air aiui eiomls, ; wliore eJouds
being dispersed b}"' air, showers do not fake place?. So also is ino reeHa-
tion of a mantra wliicli is the contradictory or coiinier-agent oio
etc. Thus that which has not taken place, ie,, has not been produced,
e.g., a tumour, etc., is the mark o£ that which has taken place, e.g., tlie
recitation of a mantra or sacred text, (where a tiiiiiour is prevented by the
recitation of the appropriate mantra), — \\,

M arks of in fere ) ice — co nti n 1 1 ed.

II ^ I ! I II

..X.' Bh.Q:tatn that which has taken place. AbhOtasya,xxQf;ori^^

which has not taken place.

12. That which has taken place, (is a mark) of that
which has not taken place. — 128.

Upaskdm.--He gives another illustration.' of a contradictory m,ark :

That which has taken phiec, eaj,, a, tumour, etc., is a ofp A

which has not taken place, e,c/., the recitation of a mantra. So also that:
which has taken place, e.g., the conjunction of air and clouds, is a mark of '
that which has not taken place, c.g., a sluurer. Similarly, that w.hich has.
taken place, e.g., a burn, is a mark of that which has iiot taken .place,, :
e,g,, the application of a gem, etc., to destroy the burning po\ver cif
fire. Similar instances should be understood. — 12.

contimied.

: ^ u ^ M I H kiiillm:;;'

Bhhtah, that which has taken place, Bhiltasya, of that

which has taken place.

13. That which has taken place, (is a mark) of that

’■ which has taken place. — 129.


• • '"*:■ 4® '»«'/! 3'WT"^ " i,T ^


Z* 4 NiZ )4 stlTBAB III, 1 - 14 .


as the i)iark f>f another existent object. On the otl.er I, and a «],fnver
camiot exist at the same time as the conjunction of air and cinnds nm-
can tumours, etc,, co-exist with the I'ecitation of mnufras. -Vi.

^io/t‘hs of mference—continved.


?8 II


™^Wfrai-F,a.iddhipI,.v.aka.v«, because preceded by (,be recol
l.«,0b „0 ,be . peryesb,., ■ ciyerse, re, .doe, ^t^^-Apede/ssj!!: „ “bj


U. (liiese are ralid marks), because tlie ehai’aeteristio

ot an iniereiitial mark is that it, is preceded ])y (the recollec-
tion of the) iniiversa] relation (of itself and of tliat of which
it IS a mark). — 1 30 .

(leaotes Vma Tr”? ‘ Apadeda "

Z7JZ m'Tor f "f »» atgnn.ent which

x'l ' " ' h tiiat member which, states the deduction • so that

fio!."''Th's “ “ >>“" preceded by ,-eoollecUon of nniveml relh

cases of taIrcTf “ •™e major premissj e.aists in aU these

oases of infeience ot an agent by the instrnmeiKs snob as the ora,., „f

hearing, etc., and of tl,e Son] as their substmlum by the ' • i ‘

knowledge, etc.; whereas there is no unive “ Uel 1 f

which yon («., the „pp„,.e„t) have songh, to estHisir 1 ,

- — “ » a .1 £ £,;■

not known that mvtolable or invariable concomitance is the beinc L ,I c

Noi* is It inseparable existence, for that is pitliAi- tUr. , c, • n :

of the mark in the absence ot that wh4 is to be „1‘ ed

the mark .after deduction Itas been d«wn of

preyed,. Iteanno.be said Uta. because aometitertiT ir’i^^il,:; 1


I'v'iA'’:::'

hiy'i' o”'


:...


i


, ‘ \>A.


VAI8E8IKA PHILOSOPHY


oe smoke, also where no ass exists, and there is existence ot smoke also
wliere au ass exists, therefore uniform agreement and uniform difference
are intended here ; because the verj? same uniformity is the suhjecl of
enquiry.

Nor is it relation to a whole. If it be the relation of the whole of
the major term to the middle teriu, such relation does not exist e\en
in the ease of smoke, etc., which are not equally pervasive as theii coiies-
ponding major terms. Let it be relation oi the whole of the middle tei m
to the major term ; but this is impossible, for there does not exist in the
whole of the middle term relation to a single major term. Lot it he
relation of the whole of the major term to the whole of tlie middle term.
This also is not valid, for it is nowhere possible thattliere should he relation
of the whole of the major term to the whole of the middle tei-m, inasmuch
as the individuals denoted by the major and the middle term are related
each to each. And in the case of the terms being unequally pervasive,
there would be a want of pervasion orunivessal relation.

Nor is the relation essential. For essence means either the nature
or condition of a thing, or fcomlition in itself, or production by itself)-
Now, if the nominal affix which converts ‘ essence into the form essential,
has the sense of production thereby, then, the definition will be too narrow
tn apply to universal relation Characterised as combination. Tf the affix
bears the sense of dependence upon it or residing in it, in that case also
the definition will be too naiTow to apply to Combination, lor combination
does not reside in, i.e., depend npon, anything whatever ; and also liecanse
ev^en Conjunction neitlior resides in, nor is produced by, smoke-ncss, etc.,
which are the properties of the middle term.

Nor is the relation, non-accidental or non-c‘onditiona1. For an
ufiidhi, accident or external condition, itself is clilTicult to ascribe, and were
it easy to ascribe, would be difficult to conceive. And were it easy to
conceive, it won]<l still involve ‘mutual dependence’ or b-eciprocity’ oi' argu-
ment in a circle, for there ])eing pervasion of tlio major term, the concep-
tion of the non-pervasion, etc., of the middle term would depend upon the
conception of the universal relation.

Nor is universal relation mere relation. For, though variable relation
also appears as universal relation, through its reference to particular
place and particxtlar time, yet, as the knowledge of it does not govern
' the inferential process, it is, therefore, required to determine that



iliill


' “i tv

IBIlfe


VO' .

' ,

L-,,,. '.i


Clou, Decause it is a ouDstance, me aetiiiition would become too narrow, as
tlie absolute non-existence of Conjunction would be co-extensive with
the mark or means of inference. It cannot be said, “ Universal relation
is CQ-extension with the major terra which is not the counter-opposite of
the absolute non-existence which is co-extensive with itself and which is
the contradictory of the counter-opposite, because the absolute non-existence
of conjunction falls, short of being the contradictory of the counter-
opposite.” For the absolute non-existence of conjunction also is the con-
tradictory of the counter-opposite ; otherwise, it would he useless to ima-
gine differences of delimiting circuinstances, for differences of delimitations
are not imagined for the purpose of sliowing the states of being produced
and non-eternal.

Nor is universal relation the not being the foundation or substratum
of. nou-co-extension with th.^ major term ; for, in the inference from cause
to effect, there is not known any such iiou-co-extensioii with tlie major
term. It is in fact another form of being the foundation of that which is
not the foundation of the major term.

Nor is the imivmrsal relation of a thing the possession of the form
which determines its relation to something else, for the characteristic of
fire- also has the function of determining relation to or the co-extension
of smoke. It cannot be said that because of wider extension this is not
the case ; for it is observed that, that which determines the pervasion ^e.g.,
fire) lias a wider extension (in other words, fire exists where there is no
smoke), and the characteristic of Smoke also has a wider extension inas-
much as there exists smoke pendant on the surface of the sky (e.g., in
clouds). If therefore, a qualification he added for the purpose of excluding
sucli instances, then it must be allowed that, that which determines the
characteristic of being the middle term (vydpya), the same. is intended to
determine the characteristic of being co-extended, and hence there is the
fallacy of self-dependence {dtmdsmya). The view also that two things are
universally related, when the one possesses the form of determining the co-
existence of the other in a common substratum,, is fallacious in the same way.

In reply to the above objections, we may pi'ooeed to state as follows :
pervasion or universal .relation is a non-accidental relation while bV the


VAI&E8IKA PHILOSOPHY.


:beiiig'iioii.“acci(ieutal is- 'meant co-existence , i-ii ..,:tlie same substratum witii
a variably present sadhija or that which has to be proved the major

term whicli is predicated of the minorj in the conclusion;, oi all those in
which the mark or middle term is sometimes present and sometimes
absent, or co-existence in the same substratum vrith a sadhya co-existent
with the absolute non-existence of the counter-opposites of all those which

non-existence co-existing in the.
The meaning of the two ■ expressions ..is'

is not pervaded
the, middle term ; ■ iii:


are the counter-opposites of the absolute
same substratum with the mark.

co-existence in the same substratum with the sadhya which
by anything that does not pervade the sddhana or
other words, it is the characteristic of being pervaded by all that wliicn is
pervasive of the sddhya. It may be said that this is difficult to under-
stand from the relative compound which has been employed here. For
this reason there is need of observation and argument also. In other
wmrds, pervasion, vydpti, is co-existence in the same substratum with the
sadhya which is not the counter-opposite of the absolute non-existence
co-existing in the same substratum with the sddhana. By absolute non-
existence is intended that which possesses the counter-opposite determined
by the genera of fire-ness, etc. Therefore, even though in the smoke of the
kitchen hearth there is co-existence in the same substratum with the'absolute
non-existence of mountain fire, yet it is no fault, because there never arises
the intuition that there is not fire in that which has smoke. Substance-
ness, however, is never co-existent in the same substratum with tlie abso-
lute non-existence of the characteristic of being in conjunction, for ive
never have the intuition that substance is not conjunct, because, altliougli
conjunctions singly do not appear in that wdiLich is tlie subject of
pervasion, yet the generic quality of being conjunct appears in that
which is the subject of pervasion, and is itself pervasive.

Objeetion,— But the being non-accidental implies the absence
of accident or adjunct, upddhi ; and upddhi itself is difficult to obtain.

Ji^iswer,— It is not so. Because the cliaracteristic of upddhi belongs
to that which does not pervade the sddhana^ i,e,^ the middle term, while
it does pervade the sadhya, i.e,, the major term. So it has been said,
upddhi is that which is dependent upon another upddhi, (for determining*
non-accidentality), in the case of the sddhana, and which is not dependent
upon another upddhi, {lox determining non-accidentality), in the case of
‘Ahe sadhya,'^

the definition does not include an wpacf/ii which is
rpnly,,nph^ervasiyepf the sadhya. For example, Air is perceptible, because


it is tlie substratum of toiieli which is perceptible. Here the possession
of developed colour is such an iipMIiL So also is the characteristic of'

. being produced by -eating herbs (which might produce blackness), : in^

■ 'He is black, because he is the son of'Mitra ’’ ' (a low-born woman). . For,
the possession of developed colour is not pervasive of perceptibility,' since- '

■ it does- not - exist in the perceptioii of the Soul as well as, of Attribute and :
Action ; nor is the characteristic of being produced by eating herbs per- '
vasive of blackness, since it does not exist in the case of the blackness of, ^
the black crow, cuckoo, cloud, black-berries, etc.

. : ' Answer. — The objection is not valid. For, that ' which is ,iiO!,i-perva- --
sive of the sddhana^ while it is pervasive of the sddhija as finall^y deter-
mined, — the same is intended as the upadhi. And a sddhya becomes
linaliy deterinined, when it is determined by a property, by determination
by which the pervasiveness of the upadhi remains unbroken. In the in-
stances given, the possession of developed colour is pervasive of percep-
tibility by the determination or limitation of external substantiality, and
is- , apprehended by agreement and difference. As regards the . second ' ■
iiistaiice, it has been ascertained in the works of Oharaka, Su^lriita, and
other medical writers, that t,he characteristic of being produced by eating -,
herbs is pervasive towards the sddhya determined by the blackness of a
person, which can be produced (artificially). Other cases should be
similarly understood.

Objection. — Still it is not the meaning of the word, upadhi. An
upadhi is something the property of which shines in another object, e.g.,
a China rose, etc., in reference to a crystal, etc. In the case of an un-
equally pervaded upadhi. there being absence of the characteristic of
That which' can be pervaded, its property cannot shine in the approved. '
sMhana.

Answer. — This is true. The primary use of the word, ttpadhi, is
only where it is equally pervaded (as the sddhya]^ is.g., in the possession
of fire produced from moist faggots, (for wherever there is such fire, there
is smoke, B,iid vice versa). In other places, its use is secondary. The
secondary sense infers variation, or deviation, according to the rule that,
that which deviates from the pervader of something, also deviates from
that thing. And there exists sddhana which deviates from the upadhi -
which is pervasive of the sddhya. ^ Hence, that, the sadhana deviates from 'i
the sddhya^ and that, that which is not pervaded, 'by that which pervades ,
an object, is also not pervaded , by that object^- together infer that th^re
is no proof of the characteristic of being.- pervaded, mr brings forward"';h"


KAhUDA SUTRAS III, lAi.


VAI8E8IKA PHILOSOPHY.


contrary aTgamen% satpmtipakm, there being proof of the non-existence
of the sadhija from the non-existence of tlie tipadhi, wiiich is perrasive
of tlie sddhya, in the pakm, L e., the subject, is the minor term).

So it lias been said, The disputant may bring for mird an upddhi, go-
Yerning the sddhya finally deterniiued, eren. tliough it be divorced from
the rule or determination of the sadhya njaintaiued bj' the speaker, such
upddhi being equally (a means of discrediting the conclusion, or) a source
of satpratipahmP And sucli upddhi is brought forward argiimefits
adverse to the absence of arguments in favour of bddlia^ obstruction, u'.e.,
the certainty of the non-existence of tlie sddhya)^ and deviation (i.e., the
non-co-existence of the sddhana with the sMhya).

It has been held that by the non-co-existence of wdiich the noii«eo-
existence of the sddhana with the sddhya arises, the same is upddhi. But
here the instrumental case-ending is used to express neither instrument,
nor means, nor mode, nor mark. Kor is the coostruction to be completed
tluis, By the non-co-existence of which being known^ the non-co-existence
of the sddhana with the sddhya becomes known ; for the definition, not
applying to an unknown upddhi^ would not apply to upddhis in obvious
cases of non-co-existence. It is difficult to ascertain, it upddhi)

significatively or by its significance, since it is impossible to formulate or
invent, an upddhi without (first.) establishing the characteristic of being
the means of the inference of non-co-existence. The characteristic of
being other than the paksa ('or the subject of the conclusion), again, though
suffering from the characteristic of an upddhi, is yet not an upddhi ; for, it
vvould involve obstruction to itself, e, g.^ dubiousaess and not-one-poiuted-
ness in the pakm. For, if there is no doubt about it, then it is not a pafea ;
if it is a paksa, then doubt is necessary, and consequently, dubiousness
and not-one-pointed-ness become certain. That which remains to be said
on this topic, may he sought in the Maydkha. — 14.

^ A satpratipak-^a lias been defined as an ai’gameat wliieli contains a counter-mark
capable of demonstrating the non-existence o! that which iias to be proved,” (vide Tarka-
samgraha).

Enumeration of fallacies.


ws^f^i^pAprasidhab, .unproved, mim: Anapadesafi, a fallacious mark.
Asan, noo-existent. ' Sandigdhafi, dubious, ^ Gha, and.

;Anapade4ab, A fallacious mark,

I ;;r ■ >,15. The unproved is a false mark ; the non-existent
^Iso are false mnrks,— 131, . , . ,


KAMDA SUTRAS III, 146,


upammu-^Now, with a view to distingniisli (logical) mar
gone before as well as those which will come liereaffcer, from
the section of fallacies, and says :

Aprasiddbah ’ .niOciiis tliat whicli 'i
relation, and. that the universal'

: and., that which is in opposite in
diie ivord includes the two forni!
relation or being pervaded, and the
existent in the or the riiinor

pioperty or possibility of residing in the pak
,xl lie .sometimes to the unreality of the for
,.,,,SQiiieti,iiie,s,.,to, the absence of uncertainty i
the proof of that which lias been already
that which causes the doubt whether the
eii.t (in, the, subject .of .the conclusion).' And thii
observation of


■s not' pervaded ■ or' in '' iiiiive'rsal
relation of: which' has .not , . been ■ observed,
■liversal relation, t.e., .the . con,tr'ad.ic'tory,.
3 of the iinprovecl, in point of universal
contradictory. Asaii ’ means non-
term, tliat which has not the
. i^L,ksa or subject. And this
’in (attributed to^ tlie, inark)j:':,ahi
and the .desire: : tov.prove'lfa^^^^^^^
proved. ^ Sandigdliah ’ means
/n be existent or non-exist-
■S arises .sometimes from the
a cornmon property, sometimes from the observation of a
uon-common property, and sometimes from the observation of the mark
accompanying the sMhya as well as its non-existence. The first is general
dusive — 15 particular multifarious, and the third is incon-

Fallaaij illustrated.


UpaskCira.— Of the above-
wliich is fallacious beeause'-i
because it is contradictory, an

butecl to it : ■

Where, the body c
coiielusion, such coiifiisi
horns/’ due to the observe
disagreement) that that
a jackal, a man, a mon]
the iiot-pervaded, the i
fallacies of non-pervasion


loiiecl false marks, lie ■ gives an illn
not pervaded by the denotation off
o because it is not known to exist


m or subject of the
torse, because it has
existence (or, simply^

)t horned as a hare,
it is an example of
fcory marks (ie., the


VAI8E8IKA PHTL080PH7.


Yasmat, because. f%-srr3!fi' Visani, (it) has horns. Fasmat,

therefore, Gauh, a cow. ffw Iti, such, this. =Br Cha, and.

Anaikantikasya, of a not-oiie-pointed or nianj^'^ided maik, Udaha-

ranani, an example.

17. And, “ Because (it) lias horns, therefore (it is) a
cow,” such is the example of a many-sided (mark).— 133.

UpasMtra , — He illustrates multifariousiiess :

VYhere, taking a buffalo as tbe pahsa or subject, it is eonelucled that
it is a cow because it has horns, there is general many-sidecl-ness. But
when it is concluded that Ether is eternal because it is the seat of Sound,
then there is particular many-sided-ness. So also in such examples as
“ Sound is iion-eternal because it is sound,” there being no universal
relation, there is only particular many-sided-ness. But when the sddhya
or the middle term is proved (to exist) only in the pahsa or the minor
term, by bringing forward arguments which exclude vipaksa* or contrary
instances, it is then, that is, when co-existence with sapakswf (or objects of
the same class as the paksa), becomes known, that the mark of infei-ence
is a valid mark, for a pa7e?af also must be a sapaksa.

There, [i.e., in the fifteenth Sutram above), the xmproved is
that which is not proved by pervaded appearance in the pahsa. And
it is three-fold ; {a) unproved in point of being pervaded, (b) unproved
as such or by itself, (ie., in respect of the form attributed to it}, and fe)
unproved by substratum or situation. Of these, the unproved in point
of being pervaded, is that of which the pervasion or invaiiable co-exist-
ence has not been observed, whether from the non-observation of actually
existing pervasion, or from the non-existence of pervasion. Hence the
non-existence of favourable arguments, etc., are different kinds of the un-
proved. And this invalid mark has a thousand divisions according to the
diversity of impassibility of predicate, impossibility of subject, impossi-
bility of both, uncertainty and impossibility of predicate, uncertainty and
impossibility of subject, uncertainty and impossibility of both, and so
on. And in all these eases, only absence of proof can be discerned.

Here the idea is this : The mark of infei-ence is of three kinds only,
according to its division into the purely positive, the positive-and-
' negative, and the pui-ely negative. Amongst these, the purely positive

; iVv; ;> * Vipaksa is that -whereia the non-existenee of that which has to he proved, is certain.

■ t Sapaksa is that wherein the existence of that which has bo be proved, is certain.

7) wherein the existence of that which has to be proved, is


KANADA 8UTEA8 III, 1-17;


is an attribute belonging to all subjects of attributes, (i.e,, objects) ;
e,g,, knowableness, nameableness, qoalifiability, predicability, absolute
non-existence Q.f amiihilation in attributes, etc., destructible by the
destruction of 4lie substratum of the absolute non-existence oE eternal
substances, etc." Yqy, no such thing exists, as that in which .these
attributes do yiot exist. The characteristic of the purely positive, there-
fore, is that it penetrates everywhere, or that it is the counter-opposite
of absolute non-existence. Though these exist in themselves also, (and
so that uniformity of the mutual distinction of the container and' the
eontaiiied, is violated), that is no fault; for it has been said, “In the
case of appearance or existemce (of one thing in another), recourse
should be had to proof, and not to that which establishes difference and
iion-differenca.’’ ' ...

That mark is purely positive, of which the sddhya is purely positive,
(jf this there are four forms, namely, existence of the paltm, existence of
iliQ sapahsa, iinobstriictedness, and the not being confronted with a satpra-
tipakm or equally valid argument to the contrary, which are the means
of leading to inference. The same, together with the non-existence of the
vipaksa, are the five foniisof thepositive-and-negative. With the exception
of tlie existence of the sapaksa, the remaining are the four forms of the
purely negative. That mark, therefore, is a mere semblance, i.e., a false
mark, which is void of one or another of all the forms which, as a true mark,
it might possess as the means of leading to an inference. Accordingly,
the characteristic of being a false mark or fallacy, is the being void of one
or another of the forms wdiich are the means of leading to an inference.
Hence doubt also, like certainty, about the voidness of one or another
of these forms, is an obstruction to inference, and proof of the inconchi-
siveness, of the mark put forward by the speaker. But the purely
.positive and purely, negative marks do not become fallacies by being'
void of one or another of their forms ; because, in the case of the
purely positive, non-existence of the vipokm^ and in the case of the purely
negative, existence of the sapaksd, lack the characteristic of being the
means of leading to an inference. Similarly, the unproved by situation
{e.g., a castle in the air), the unproved by itself {e.g.^ a golden lion), and
the improved in part, are fallacies by reason of the absence of that form
whicii is existence of the paksa ; the unproved in point of being pervaded,
the contradictory, and the general many-sided, are fallacies by reason of
defect HI tliat form which is non-existence oivipaksa ;'the particular niaiiy-
sided and the inconclusive areiallaqies.by :mspn'pf;\defeOt
istenco^of the sapak§a y. the obstructed and the 'confronted with an equally



VAI8ESIKA PHILOSOPRT,


valid argumeut to contrary, are fallacies by reason of tlie absence o!
tlie characteristics of not being obstructed and of not being confronted with
an ecjiially valid argument to the contrary, bo also, accidentahness and
inapplicability do not lead to inference, because of the absence of certainty
of the noivexistence of the vipaksa ; absence of favourable argument, and
unfavourable argument, also do not lead to inference because oi tne
absence of certainty of the non-existence of the vipaksa. In like manner,
apparent (but fallacious) examples, inade<iuate in regard to the sadhya, or
in regard to the sadkana^ or in regard to both, if invalid as being fallacies,
are so through the uncertainty of the existence of the sapaksa. If they
are fallacious by themselves as being examples in appearance only,
yet they are so mediately through the mark which is the same uncer-
tainty of existence of the sapaksa.

Marks of which the positiveness or agreement is not manife^st, and
marks of which the negativeness or difference is not manifest, however,
are resolved only into the insufficient, the inopportune, and the ground
of defeat.

Self-dependence, mutual dependence, circle in an argument, and
infinite regression, by unsettling the certainty of univei’sal relation or per-
vasion, become deficient in respect of one or the other of the forms of
existence of the sapaksa and non-existence of the vipaksa, and thereby
acquire the nature of fallacies.

Amongst tlmse fallacies, that is accompanied with non-co-existence,
which causes doubt alternating betw^een the existence and the non-
existence of the sddhya. The contradictory is that fallacy which produces
certainty of the non-existence of the sddhya. The unproved is that which
is void of pervasion, existence in the paksa, and i)roving. According to
Eiailyai3a, obstruction and an equally valid argument to the contrary are
not independent fallacies. Of these, obstruction resolves itself either as
the unproved by situation, or as the many-sided ; as it has been said,
In obstruction {bddhd), the mark is either non-existent in tlie pa'ksa, or
is many-sidedd^ , An equally valid argument to the contrary, also, by
causing doubt in respect of pervasion or invariable co-existence, etc., in
.other places, really resolves itself into the many-sided, etc.

‘ w of the vfitti, however, says that the word /ch a/ in the

(Hi, i, 15, ibid.), has the sense'
Mdha (obstruction), and satpratipaksa (an equally
contrary), and.thereby follows the view of Gautama'

which is accompanied


y-sv’- - *.* ' , ..


KANADA SUTRAS IIL 148,


ndtii non-co-existence, the contradictory, that wlrich is identical with the
pahm^ that which is identical with the sadhya and that which is past in
time,” (Nyaya Sutrain, L ii.4). But, from such statements as The contra-
dictory, the unproved, ciiid the dubious, declared Kaj^yapa, are no marks,”
it iippears tliat tlie Sutrakara, (i.e., Kanada), himself was incliued to
uphold the tlireefoldness of fallacy. The word ‘ cha,’ however, has the
object of l^ringing forward ndiat has been stated before.

This is the idea. 1 have not dilated upon it, for fear of increasing
the bulk of tlie book. More details should be sought in llayCihha. — 17.

lu i ? i n

■ ■ ■ "N , ■

Atnia-iiidriya-artha-saiiiiiksrsat, from contact of the
soul, the sense, and the object. ^(| Yat, which, Nispadyate, is produced.

Tat, that. Anyat, other, different

18. Tliat (i.e., knoAvledge) whicli is produced from
tlie contact of tlie soul, tlie sense, and the object, is other
(than a false mark) — 134.

U paskdm.—llQ now ijoints out the result of the analysis of fallacies :

From the contact of the soul, the sense, and the object, it is know-
ledge that is piroduced. And it is a mark of the existence of the soul, and,
as such a mark, is different from the unproved, the contradictory, and
the many-sided, that is to say, is not a fallacy. Thus, knowledge is, in
twm ways, a mark of the existence of the soul ; either by the infer-
ence that knowledge must reside somewhere, because it is an effect, like
colour, etc., or by assuming the form of recognition, gjj.^ '4 who saw am
the same as I who arn touching.” In the former case, effect ness belonging
to knowledge is not unproved, because of the assertion “ (that) which is
produced nor it is contradictoiy, for here, as in all other instances of
analogiioiis inference or inference from a samdnyatodrista or coiiimonly-
observecl mark, there can bo no contradiction ; nor is it many-sided, for the
very same reason. So that by means of the conmioiily-observed charac-
teristic, appertaining to it, viz., of being an effect or an attribute, know-
ledge truly becomes a mark of the existence of the soul. Recognition,,
again, resiling from other agents, resolves into having but one agent or
. cause.'" - ■ ' , ' ' . • , ^ '-'.p''

(The Baiiddha theory criticised.)

' Ohjection . — Recognition 'may be 'also due entirely to the relation of - ■
eifect and cause subsisting between understanding und consciousiiess. ' '’vf-rA;


12i


VAISE81 KA PHILOSOPliy



! !-


Answer. — This caiiuot be, as it would cuUiil reeug'iiitiini also of ilic
understandings of tlie disciple and the preceptor.

Objeetiun . — But the relation of tlie niatter (i.c., knowledge wliich
causes activity or inclination) and the form does not exist there ; and that
relation is the exciting cause of recognitioji.

Answer. — ‘Matter,’ liaving the property of Substance, cannot possibly
exist in the undei'standing (which is an attribute'. Even if its existence
were possible, understandings being nioinentary, recognition of what was
perceived before, would not be po.ssible. For, no impression is thrust into
subseeptent understandings by a jDrevious understanding, since you do not
admit the existence of an abiding impression. And if it consists of the
form of a stream of temporary under.staudings, it cannot bo the cause of
recollection at another time, nor of recognition.

Objection. — The stream of subjective consciousness, which is really
different from the stream of objective consciousness, is that wliiclr recollects
as well as that which recognises.

Answer. — If it is permanent, then our object is fulfilled. If it is of
;■ the form of a stream of temporary understandings, then it has not yet

*. freed itself from the fault already pointed out ; for then even there can he

; no permanent impression. Moreover, proof is wanting that it is something

■ ;■ different from objective consciousness.

f v: Objection . — Proof is supplied by the stream of understandings, ‘ I am,’

!, ‘I am,’ and so on.

Ansiver.—May be. But if here states of objective consciousness take
'■ in or receive as theii* matter, only the subjective consciousness, then, in

■''! / ; the absence of the characteristic of being the matter, from the states of

: objective consciousness, tbeir efficient causality also will disappear; fur

i . ■ efficient causality is derived from tbe characteristic of being pervaded bv

■ j t - 1 the characteristic of the material cause.

. Objection. — Let tliere he no efficient causality also,

A mwe7\— In that case, their existence also is gone. For the cha-
ractetistic of an entity or real substance is that it is the means of serving
, iiecef5sary purposes. ■ ; ' - '

. Objection.—Both the streams are received, as material, jointly by
* objective ' consciousness and the stream of subjective

;|liilli|l?i^hBciousness.;;'-d^jAVL'^AL;Aiw d . ' , ' ■ 1*111

S0,,then wlmt fault has been committed by coniunc-
I I; you also admit tliat a cause

?i! i , P '' 'V'-d id': ‘'C-y'' 'Af '' "’''d d'' '' '■ '.w ‘ ’

i' ' W' '■ ' i ^ ' • ' ‘‘d f.midbVd '-vd: i


i i’’ r


KANADA SUTBA8 HI, 1-19.


Tlici-eFure, recogiutioii pi'oves, as being perniaueiit, the soul which is
inferred by knowledge, as its su'bstvatuiu. Hence iiolhiiig remauis


unproved.

Or, the sutrmn, is calculated to

refute the Sarhkhya tlieory that the uudei'staii cling, being eternal, is not
fit to infer the soul as its cause. It should be, tlien, interpreted thus:
what you call the principle or entity, the iinderstaiiding, is nothing
hut knowledge; foi*, there is tlie statement of s^monyms, namely, “inuler-
standiiig, comprehension, knowledge.” And it is produced from the
contact of the soul, etc., and is really other than the inner sense the
existence of wliich .you admit. This is the meaning. The import, there-
fore, is that that does become the mark of tlie existence of the soul.— 18.

Vwriti . — He gives anotlier proof of the existence of the Soul :

From ‘contact,’ f.e., of tlie mind with the ‘object of the sense/
whicli is the ‘soul,’ in other words, from the conjunction of the soul and
the mind, the ‘ knowledge which is produced,’ in the form of “ I am happ 3 ",”
etc., is ‘ dlti'erent,’ i.e., other than inference, as a proof of the existence


of the Soul. This is a roundabout wav of indicating that knowledge


produced by the cognition of the soul and the mind, is perceptual, since
tlie delinition of perception, is knowledge produced from the contact of the
senses and objects. Altliough such, perception does not prove the soul
as different from the body, etc,, yet, as it proves the soul in general, it is
unobstructed. This is tlie import.

Or, tlie sntram states that the mark whicli infers tlie soul, is not a


false mark. ,


Pravritti-nivrkti, activity and inactivity, occupation and
withdrawal. ^ Cha and, ^^iTr???R“~Frotyag-atman!, in. the in-going or
in-dwelling soul, in one’s own soul. ^ Driste, observed, Paratra,

elsewhere, of other souls. Lifigani, mark. . • •

19. And activity and inactivity, observed in one’s
own soul, are tlie mark of (the existence of) other souls. — 135.

D'paskn^a.— 'Having desci'ibed the inference of one’s own. sool, he now shows the
inference of other souls : . . ^ , . y, ,, ■

‘Prafcyag-atmani’ means in one’s own soul. ‘ Pravritti-niTptti’ are ‘
particular volitions caused by desire and aversion. By tbem are produced , , .
bodily actions, cliarac'terised as or. inumular, rnotion, of iwliicli the ol> '
jects are the acquisition of the agreeable. 'abd,: the avoidance of . the y


—I

-

'


1 I ' I ■ \ ‘ c V,;. ^

^ . . ' hk ; -.yy-vy;: ,


ilfiiiiii


' n- . ,ri'; ''


MoreoTor^ Mind is iiiiiTersal
aidft$^•TObsteBe,e^,;?oicl of any 'distiiictiTe attribiite;


filM


' i" ■


r


.VAISE8IKA PHILOSOPHY.


disagreable* So that, on observing niiiscuJar motion in another body„ the
inference of another soul takes place in tlie following manner : Tiiis imis-
eiilar motion must Jiave been produced by volition, because it is iimscular
motion, as is my muscular motion. And. that volition, is th product of a
soul, or is seated in a soul, because it is volition, as is my volition. — lU.

Here ends the first chapter of tlie tliird book in the ClomrneiitajT of
f^afikara upon the Vaii^esika Apliorisms.


Book Third — Chapter Secoxd.


Mark of the existence of Miv/h


II R I I II

Atmendriyarthasaimikarse, on contact of the Soul with


the senses and their objects. Jhanasya, of knowledge, Bhavah,

existence, production, appearance, ; Abhavah, non-existence, ndn«

production’iion-appearance, ^ Cha, and. Manasaii, of the Mind. |%f3|

Lihgain, Mark.

1. The appearance and non-appearance of knowledge,
on contact of the Sonl with the senses and their objects, are
the marks (of the existence) of the Mind. — 136.

Upaskdra . — Bistiiictioii of real a?u'l faJIacions marks is the sulrjeet-niatter of the
(preceding) chapter. Now, going to bring the examination of tlio Son! to a close, the aitthor,
by a transgression of the order of ennineration (of the Sabstaneos) (?.'/df^ [. i. 5), introcinces
the examination of the Mind, and saj's :

Pie will say tliat the movement of tlieMiiid is the mark (of tlic Soul).
If, therefore, Miud is found on examination to be tlie instrument or moans
of kao.wiedge, and as being dense, moulded, or ponderable ( lf% ), tlien it
becomes proved that the Soul is that, being directed by which, thie Afind
comes to be connected with the sense apprehensive of tlie desired or agree-
able object, rather than with any other sense. This is the reason of the
violation of the order of ennineration. The meaning is that the i\Pind is
that which, there being contact of the Sonl wkith the sense and its cdiijeet,
being connected with the sense, there is production of knowledge, and
A'-'! ) being so connected with the sense, there is non-p-roduction of

;:y knowledge* , , ' ' .

p j; -j' ’d yfph ^ Obp^tmi.—MinA is all-pervading or uni versa] . Nevertheless, non-



KAN Ad Aw STB AS III 2-1


because, like tlie Soul, it is the substratum of Conjunction wliicli is the
non-comb illative cause of knowledge ; and because, like Ether, it; possesses
tlie absolute non-existence of Touch ; and there are similar other proofs
of its nniversalitv.

Answer. — ft is not so. fi Mind were universal oi all-pervading,
thesias it would be connected with all the senses, there would be only one
cognition including all the senses (i.e., omni-sensuous). If it be replied
tliat (objection) such is not the case, because there is a contrariety amongst
the effects ; we deny this, [ansirev) for a complete cause does not take
notice of contrariety and non-contrariety wdiereby it might be apprehensive
of tlio contrariety of tlio characteristics of belonging to perception by the
03^0, the organ of taste, etc. It cannot be said, {objection) “Or, it (cogni-
tir)n) may be of a variegated form like variegated colour, as it is in the
case of eating some pudding,’’ (where perceptions of taste, flavour, etc.,
take place all together) ; for, (answer) even there attention or attachment
to a particular object (be., taste or flavour, etc.) is observed. Nor can
it he Ci^kel {objection) 'diow then does the complex belief arise, vire., A
perceive Colour, Taste, Smell, and Touch simultaneously’ ?”; for, (answer)
it is merely a sense of simultaneity in respect of the five cognitions, pro-
(lucedCoy tlie Bwifthmnoviiig Mind and presented in memory. It cannot
be objected that attention to particular objects is also dependent upon,
the property of the iiistruinent, for the answmr has already been given.
If it be maintained (objection) that attention depends upon the desire to
understand; we deu}" this, for, (answer) on that supposition, it^vould follow
that when there was a desire to understand all, there wmiild be a total
pres(3ntation of all objects, wdieroas the onlj^ result of a desire to under-
stand is connection of Mind with the sense percipient of tire object desir-
ed. Inasmuch, therefore, as non-simultaneity of cognition is otherwise
■impossible, the Mind, is proved to possess a ininimum of ' divisibility.^'''
Consequently, the marks of unir^ersality are obstructed by proof which
comprehends or infers the subject. Moreover, if the Mind were all-per-
vading, then there would not be such local character of pleasure, etc., as
in “pleasure in my foot,” “pain in mj^ head,” etc.; for, the effects of
hiniversal substances’ iiniformlj^ appear in places delimited by their non-
coinbinative causes. It cannot be said that in our view also it follows
that pleasure, etc., are confined to the place of the atom ; for, the rule is
that a non-coinbinative cause really produces an extensive effect at, its own
place, so that there is no opposition to their production even beyond the
limits of their instrumental causes^ sandal-woody;, .etcl It '•cannot be
urged, TMiiie toqdsi*eque^t for remotenessTrom, the instrument causes;


X^ATSEBIKA PHILOSOPHY:


far, if. would oiitail abroach of the a1)ove unlCorinity, Purtliej*, hm will
there be conjunction of the iiniverHal Mind with the Soul ? It cannot be
replied that it is without beginning, jb:r then disjunction will also neees'-
sarily become beginningless. It cannot l)e said th.at owing io the diffei’-
ence of their limitations (Ke., snbsti’ata wdioi-ein they tr\ke plareg both
of them remain nncontradicted ; for, the diirerence of 1 he iiinitations of
eon junction and disjunction depends upon their owoi causes, wlioreas in
tlie case of the rliherence of things which have no beginning, such depeiv
deuce does not exist. This is the direction. — 1.

Miiul 2-9 a siih^tance, and is eternal,

fr|?rT iu i r u m

Tasya, its, of the mind. Dravyatva-nityatve, substance-

oess and eternality. ^fgrtr Vayuna, by Air, ssflWf Vyakhyate, explained.

2. Tlie Snbstance-ness aud eternality of Mind are
explained by (the explanation of the Suhstaiice-iiess and
eternality of) Air. — 137.

ITposfetj'a.— Now, it may he asked, “The pai-coptioii of pleasiu-e, etc., is producible
by au instrument, because it is .an act, like the j)erception of Colour : from inference in this
way, or ])y the iion-prodiietionof siiiuilfcaneoiis cognition, hriiul is proved as the Instrument
ot' that perception. But wlienec docs it derive its Bahstance-noss, and etcunality Hence
he says :

As the ultimate atom of Air, inferred fj’Om Substance made up of
parts, is a Substance, because it possesses attribute cind action ; so Mind,
inferred by the noinproiluction of simultaneous cognition, is a Substance,
because it posseses attribute. For it is not ydrodiictivc of cognition, witliont
conjunction with the sense, whereby it might apjiear that possession <d’‘
attribute docs not belong to it. Moreovei', the presentation of pleasure,
etc., (to the Soul) must have a sense as its iiistiurnent, because it is a
presentation, like the presentation, of CJoloiir, etc. Hence Mind is proved
as an instrument or sense. And tlie being a sense means tlie being the
foundation or seat of: the conjunction of the Mind wliich is the instniineiit
of cognition ; so that the Siibtaiice-ness of Mind is proved without mucii
ado. Aud its eternality follows from its not being made up of any
other Substance.. And this latter characteristic follows from the absence
of any proof: for the supposition of its being made up of parts.— 2.

h'ihdjde;:'':;' , . ■ , ■ 'Mind is one.


II II R I % If


I. ' ^ . ' i . . iV'i ■, ' /,"t'

iiSSiliiWiSIlii


lilpii



KANlhA SUTRAS III,


5T*0rr^''T^Ifl Pi’ayatnayaugapadyat, from .the non-smiultaueity of \'oii-
tions. ITRfr^'TOTfl Jnauayaugapaclyat, from the non-simultaneity of cogni-
tions. ^ — Cha, and. ^gF;q,El;am, one.

3. From the nbii-siiiiultaiieity of volitions,, and from
the nou-siiuultaiieity of cognitions, (it .follows that there is
only) one (Mimi) (in each organism) — 138.

Then the doa])t arises whetlior there he one Mind, or more than one Miiid,
existing In cacii indiviilunl body. Ho states the means of decision :

“ Mitid ill each organism ” is the complement ofybe Sutram.

II' tlierc were manj’- Minds in a single organism, tlien cognitions
aud volitions would he simultaneous. It is not a valid couclnsioii that
many volitions are produced at- one and the same time, because siimilta-
ueous actions are observed in the fingers of the liauds and the toes of tiie
feet of a dancing girl ; for, that being explained or possible by the swift
movement alone of the Mind, simultaneity of the necessaiy or correspond-
ing particular attributes of the Soul iii their indestructible state, is not
obtained. liereby {i.e., by the non-simultaneity of the necessary j)arti-
cular attributes of the Soul in their indestructible state), the theory that
in one and the same body there are five Minds, and that on the conjunc-
tion of two, three, four or live of them with their resj)ective senses, tw'o,
three, four or live cognitions are simultaneously produced, is refuted,
as it -would entail a supei-lluity of supposition ; wdiile the sense of
simultaneity is upheld fas an illusion). The implication of the siranl-
tan'eity of twm cognitions, e.g., the cognitions “bitter treacle,” produced
by the connection of the Mind with the sense-organ of Touch, under the
limitation of the sense-organ of Taste, also does not exist in view’’ of the
property {i.e., of rapid transition) of tlie instrument or internal sense, {i.e.,
Mind). Action also in the two parts of a lizard, snake, etc., cut into
two or three pieces, tirises from the impact of the chopper, etc., or the
rapid transition of the Mind, or the invisible operation of another (and
barreJij Mind which has just slipped off from a liberated Soul.

The view that Mind is really a whole made up of parts, like a
leech, and that by its contraction and expansion, like those of a leech,
simultaneity and non-simultaneity of cognitions are respectively produced,
is opposed by the fault of redundancy in the supposition of its parts.


^ ■


S '


wi


'’,iV"\


it !' i


'' 1


128 VAI8EBIKA PHILOHOFHY.

sn'Bir'Tf^Mr»H'5r3ft^’T’?*Tr^H?r%5ir?c!?^OTcr: . Frana-Apana-N imewa-Unmesa-
Jivana-Manogati-Indriyantaravikarah, ascending life-breath, descendiug
life-breath, closing the eyelids, opening tlic et’clicls, life, tne inovenient
of the Mind, and affections of the other senses. Sukha-

DJiupkha-lchcliha-Dvesa-Prayatna-Pkasure, Pain, Desire, Aversion, and
Volition. =er Cha, and. ?rr?>T^'- Atmanali, of the Soul. r%^f% Lingani,
marks.



4. The ascending life-breath, the descending life-
breath, the closing of the eye-lids, the opening of the eye-
lids, life, the movement of the Mind, and the tiffections of
the other senses, and also Pleasnre, Pain, Desire,. Avprsio®^^^
and Volition are marks (of the existence) of the feoiil. lo9.

UiKiskCiPCi. — Now, showing the purpO‘'^G oi' t.li0 violatioji oi the opcIol* ol (.iiuinieration,
ho says, with a view to complete the enfpiii'y Into the Ronl :

It mnst not be imagined tliat cognition itself is tlie only mark ol
tlie Soul. There are also the ascending life-breath, etc., which are the
marks of the Soul. Thus that is surely the Soul in consequence (h' the
volition, of which the upward and downward motions iii the air moving
within the body and characterised as the ascending and the descending
life-breath, take place, not being possible otherwise than by volition,

- just as the throwing upward and the throwing downward of a pestle, etc.,

i (in a mortar', etc.), are not jiossible rvithout volition. For, .Air, the iiatui'e

of which is to blow obliquehq cannot uiifiergo such change of nature
without volition. It cannot be said that two bodies of Air JloAving in
i'-’-'. opposite directions and producing different effects may, like two similar

h - ' bodies of water, have an upward motion. For, were this the case, there

would be then the upward motion only but not lire downward motion,

1 : ' nor the oblique motioir as in exsufilatiou or blowing by the mouth.

■ There is then a being, who, by his volition, impels the air upwards or

■p: ' downwards. It cannot be asked how there could be upward and down-

P',.,. , ^ ward motions of the ascending and descending life-breaths in a state of

I ' " deep or dreanr-less sleep; for, at that time, though volition proper does

4 not exist, there exists airother kind of A’-olitiorr AvhicJi is called volition

P'-' - the source of vitality. In like trranuer, the closing and the opening of

l the eye-lids also infer a presiding agent in the organism. Thus the

(bVPP’ h',, A closing of the eye-lids {n'^mesa) is an action Avhich p»rocluces the conjunc-
:i ,vPGpp'' rtion of the lids of the eye,;- Hnmesa or the opening of the eye-lids is an
1 PPb'''P:P'abtiq'n •Which, .produces , their disjunction. Those two actions, being.

'without 'ahy visible cause, such as molecular urotion, ;


j , op 1 - -I . '



KAl^^iBA SUmAS III, 2-4,


impact-, etc., are not produced otlierwi&e than by volition. As the dancing
of a wooden manikin depends upon some one’s volition, so also does the
dancing of the eye-lids. Thereby an entity, possessing volition, is inferred.
Similarly, life also is a mark of the Soul. Thus by the word ‘ life ’ the
effects of vitality, such as growth, the building up of wounds, fractures,
etc., are indicated by implication. So that as the owner of a house builds
up a broken edifice or enlarges a building which is too small, so the
presiding agent of the organism effects, b}’- food, etc., the increase or
enlargement of the organism, which is to him in the stead of a habita-
tion, and with medicine and the like, causes what is wounded to grow
again, and broken hands and feet to grow together again. Thus like
the master of a house, a guardian of the body is also proved. In the
same way, the movement of the Mind also is a mark of the Soul. Thus
it has been proved, in the foregoing section, that the Mind is something
moulded or ponderable imurta) and that it is indivisible. Its applica-
tion to a sense percipient of the desired object is dependent upon desire
and attention. So that the inference is that the Soul is that being
whose desire and attention direct the Mind, as a boy standing at the
corner of a room sends a top or a ball of- lac hither and thither within
the room itself.

It may be objected, “ The dancer of the wooden manikin, the master
of a house, or the hoy (referred to above) is not different from his body,
so tbat be could be adduced as an example. . Moreover, it is tbe body
which is the seat of consciousness inasmuch as it is the object of the sense
of I-ness [aharhkdra) ; for, there are “ I am fair,” “ I am stout,” ‘ and the
like intuitions which are co-extensive with I-ness. It may be urged that,
on this theory, a man would not recollect in his youth or old age what
he perceived in his boyhood, because as in the case of a difference of
bodies, like those of Chaitra and Maitra, so here too there would be no
recognition, on the maxim, “ One does not remember what another saw.”
Here we may point out that Chaitra and Maitra being two different
currents, there may not be any correlation, whereas {in the case of a single
individual) in spite of the differences of boyhood and youth, the current
being tbe same, correlation by means of tbe relation of cause and effect
will be possible.” To this argument we will reply that it would follow,
on the above theory, that tlie son also would remember ...what was
perceived by the father. If it be rejoined that perception* of the ‘difference
of body prevents this, we reply that correlation (hi, the form of recollection)
will not be possible also in the casF" of an old ; laan,, rtvho peroeives hii
present body oply as different' -from' ..tlie bo,4y .;'''wbicb he ha,d as a boy


I ’


1 ? ^



'ill

■1 !■'!'''’ 'll'

: :


ilfh.l' 'ill-

till


iso VAI8E8IKA PHILOSOPUY.

and also that there is no perception of the difference of bodj' for a boy
who has never Icnown his father. In “ My body,” the sense of T-ness
appears as identical with the sense of ‘ My-ness ’ (and not as identical
with the intuition of the body). If it be replied that the same holds good
in the case of “My Soul” also ; we reply that it does not, because the
use of ‘My’ is there tropical, since the genitive may be used even whore
there is no difference, as in “ The head of RMm ” (Rahu being ail liead).
The consequences of killing, etc. (ie., Merits and Demerits) also will
not result to the agent or doer, as his body will be different and different
(at every stage of transmigration). Further, (on your theory), conscious-
ness being limited to the hhUtas or elements (which constitute the body
and are different at every new birth), if a man desires a sinful act, he
will escape the consequences of his own acts, and there will be also the
defect of the acquisition of the results of acts not done by him wdio
experiences them. This is the point.

“ From the affections of the other senses.” — For surely is observed
an overflow of the salivary juice, induced by a strong desire for the taste,
of one who, after experiencing the particular taste, accompanied bj^ the
particular colour, of an orange or a ahira-villva, observes such fruit again.
Now, this cannot take place without the inference of the acid taste ; nor
the inference, without the recollection of the universal relation or invari-
able co-existence (of the taste and the colour) ; nor the recollection, with-
out impression {Sa7hsMra ) ; nor the impression, without the experience
of the universal relation ; nor the experience, without repeated observation.
This concatenation of cognitions, standing to one another in the relation
of cause and effect, cannot be possible without (the existence of) a self-
same agent. Thus there is the Stltram of Gautama. “ From the affections
of the other senses.” (Ny^ya-Sutraih, III. i. 12).

Pleasure and the like also are to be regarded, like cognition, as
marks of the Soul. Thus pleasure and the like must reside somewhere
or must reside in some substance, because they are things which are
prodxiced, or qualities like colour, etc. Hence an inference by analogy,
accompanied by an exclusion of other possibilities, takes for its subject
inherence or residence in a Substance other than the eight Substances.
For the proposition that desire which does not reside in Earth and seven
) other Substances, resides in a Substance, is not complete unless it assumes
y te its mood the being resident in a Substance other than the eight Subs-
■ iances- "Where, however, exclusion of other possibilities does not appear
: at first, there the being resident in a Substance other than the eight
substances, will have to be proved by argument from effect to cause or


KAN Ad A SUTRAS


negative reasoning. This is the distinction. It is absurd to say that
inference has only the mood of that which determines the universal rela-
tion ; for that alone is the mood there, without which the intuition or
inference would not result. Otherwise, in A dyad not being resident
in an ellect, must reside somewhere, because it is a whole made up
of parts,” and such other cases, there would be no inference having for
its mood the being resident in a iioiveffect. — 4.

Soul is a substance, and is eternal.

' 'Mm wT|?fT lu I 1 :

Tasya, its, of the Soul. Dravyatva-nityatve, Substance-ness

and eternality. Vayuna, by Air. Vyakhy ate, explained.

5. Its Substance-ness and eternality are explained by
(tlie explanation of the Substance-ness and eternality of)
Air.— 140.

Upas/eara.— Well, granted that there is proof of a fixed Soul. But whence is it eter-
nal, and whence is it a Substance ? To meet this objection, he says :

As tliere is no proof for the supposition of parts in the ultimate
atom of Air, and therefore Air is eternal, so also in the case of the Soul.
As the ultimate atom of Air is a Substance, because it possesses attributes,
so also is the Soul. This is the meaning. — 5.

Objeetioris : 1. Mark of the Soul, not visible.

: Yajnadattah, He is Yajnadatta. fi% Iti, this. Sannikarse,

there being contact. sr?rgnTRT(I Pratyaksabhavat, from the absence of per-
ception. Because there is no perception. ^ Dristam, visible, Lingam,

mark, sf Na, not, Vidyate, exists.

6. There is no visible mark (of the existence of the
Soul), because there being contact (of the senses with the
body of yajnadatta), perception does not arise that this Soul
is Yajfiadatta, — 141.

Upaslcdm,— He cites an objection of the opposite party to the foregoing eonclusiou :

There being contact, if no such perception take place as “ This is
Yajnadatta,” then there is no visible mark, i.e., no mark the universal
relation of which with the sadhya or what has to be proved, has been
grasped by perception. The meaning is that as smoke, perceived as
accompanying fire which is perceptible, is a visible mark in the case of fire,
so there is no such visible mark which can establish the existence of the
Soul, — 6, , ■ ",


l.i


VAISESIKA PHILOSOPHY.


2. Analogy does not prove Soul as suoli.


lu I ^ I ^ n

?rRrKrar€Sr^ Samanyato-dristat, from a commonly-observed or analogous
mark. Cha, and. Avis^esali uoii-parlicular. Not a thing in particular


or as such,

7. And from a commonly-observed mark (there is) no
(inference of anything in) particular. — 142.

Upasfcam.— Lesfc ib migUb be urged, “ Although no visible mark exists, the universal
relatioa o£ which has been observed by perception, yet a s.im'inyatodristam, or coinmonly-
obsorved or analogous mark, will be the mark, for ib is not that there can be no inference
from that,” therefore the objector says :

A coninaonly-observed mark also becomes a mark of inference. But
it does not prove tlie Soul as Soul, nor as a Substance over and above
the eight Substances. It would only prove that desire, etc., must be resi-
dent somewhere. And this does not suggest the thought of a Soul. Tiiis
is the meaning. Therefoi-e it is stated, “ Not a, thing in particular. 7.


— Therefore Soul proved hy Revelation.

Tasmat, therefore, because the Soul cannot be proved fay
reasoning. Agamikah, scriptural, proved by the revealed texts.

8. Therefore (the Soul is) proved by Revelation. — 143.

Ujwsk1.!-rt.— Are then the texts of the Vedas, tor instance, “He is the Soul, in whom all
sins are killed,” etc., meaningless ? Apprehending this, the same objector says :

TJie Soul is really proved by Revelation only, but not by inference,
since visible ^nd commonly-observed marks do not exist. Therefore,
mental vision of the principles or essences of things results from the proper
hearing of the Upanisads, and not from the course of intellection. So
that this Regulation (i.e., the Yait^esika system), which teaches intellec-
tion, is no regulation. For, it is observed in the case of “ ten ghosts,
swimming across the river,” etc., that the cognition of the person who has
: representation of these things in his consciousness, arises only from the
very instructions Rhat ten ghosts dwell on this tree, that such and such
an object floats across the.river, etc.). — 8.


Objections answered.

I II ^ I H I ^ II


A ^abcjasya, of the word.

abhorrence, Na, not,


: v,/'


I \ \ b\N """ ' ' b A ''

V)b'^sb''’'b'f'bbb&;b •


KAMDA SUTRAS m 2-9,


9. (The proof of the existence of the Sotil is) not (solely)
from revelation, because of the non-application of the word
‘ T (to other designates or objects). — 144,

TJpasJaira . — To tkis objeetion of the firsb party, set forth in the three foregoing shtras,
the upholder of the doctrine of inference replies :

Revelation alone is not the proof of the existence of the Sonl ; but
the Soul is proved also by the inference that the word ‘ I,’ or the word
‘Soul,’ must liave some designate (or objective reality corresponding to it),
because it is a word, like the word, water-pot, etc. Lest it might be said
that it is Earth, etc., which are its designates, so he says, “ Because of
non-application,” in other words, because of the non-application or diver-
gence of the word ‘ I’ from Earth, etc. For, there never arises any such
use of language or intuition as “ I am Earth,” “ I am Water,” “lam
Fire,” “ I am Air,” I am Ether,” “ I am Time,” 1 am Space,” “ I am
Mind.” If you object that such intuition or use arises with respect to
the body, we reply that it does not, for it would then entail such intuition
or use with respect to the bodies of others ; if, that it arises with respect
to one’s own body, we reply that it is not so, for ‘ one’s own’ or one’s self,
as different from the Soul, has no meaning or is not proved by etymology,
and because the intuition, “My body,” proceeds upon a difference of
substrata. It cannot be said, [objection) “ Well, but this too is an inference
by analogy which however does not end with a particular thing, and is
therefore defective;” hr, [answer) in the word ‘1,’ I-ness or Soul-ness
itself forms the specification or distinction. So that on the strength of
the property of its being an attribute of the subject of the argument
(paksa), it follows that I-ness is the cause of the inference of the Soul, and
as it is not common to any other object, therefore the particular object
(or the Soul in particular) is proved. Similarly, there is proof of the parti-
cular object from the analogous inference or commonly observed mark
accompanied with the exclusion of other possibilities. The objection
which has been made, namely, “ From ‘ heanng' alone results realization
or intuition of the Soul; what is the need of all this proof ?”, is not.
sound. For, without reflection or intellection, the dross of unbelief in
wavering minds cannot be purged away ; without this purification, there
can be no aptitude in them for constant meditation ; and without constant
meditation, there can be no realization of trath or intuition of the Soul,-
which is capable of uprooting false knowledge together with desires or
appetencies, as it is from habit only that a sa,d lovter ' suddenly comes to
h^ve a mental realiza^ipEL, .^pf his helpyed lady,, and' because verbal or


|ji ii 134 VAl^ESIKA PEILOSOFHY.

f i , — — - "

j| < ; inferential knowledge is not capable of uprooting false knowledge, as is

: ;< j ;i. gggQ the case of delusion in respect of direction in Space, etc. I Ms

*|k| 1 ?'•■ is the import. ... ....

h If it be asked, “ Still how can a sign or indication (of its existence)

' r : ■ 1 , be apprehended in the Soul which is imperceptible we reply, “ Who has

t i I ever said that the Soul is not perceptible? On the contrary, ^the Soul is

’ f apprehended by its proxmity through or in the form of conjunction, to

! ' , the Mind. Otherwise, how can there be such intuitions as ‘ I am happy,’

’ . ' ‘ 1 know,’ ‘ I desire,’ ‘ I will,’ ‘ I feel pain,’ etc. ? For these intuitions are

; ' neither unsubstantial nor of doubtful substantialitj% because like that of

; ,, ; „ perception of blueness, their substantiality is undoubted. Nor are they

I ': : inferential or derived from marks, for they arise even without any know-

j ; i ledge of marks. Nor again are they derived from verbal information or

1 I ; iv : authority, for they do not follow upon enquiry for that.” If it be urged

j.jii: that they are appearances of perception (and not true perceptions), we

j jj reply that they must have then for their object something which is not

| ,|m apparent (i.e., real), for it will be shown in the sequel that that which

ij «' is not an object of certain knowledge, cannot be applied by metaphor to

:! Jip or superimposed upon, another object. 9.

| , l| t VivTitl—ThQ sutram is illustrative. It should be known that in-

! I’:' fences, as described above, by the marks of knowledge, etc., are also

’ . proofs of the existence of the Soul.

. ' Gounter-objeetion stated.

' ' jl I ' , qft II i I R I II

' i Yadi, if. ^ Dnstain, observation, Anvaksatn, sensuous,

-V ' Aham, i. ' 'l^evadattah, Devadatta. Aham, 1. Yajnadattah,

Y'' Yajhadatta. Iti, such.

I lOi If (there are) such sensuous observations (or per-

l eeptions) as ‘ I am Devadatta,’ ‘I am Yajnadatta,’ (then

li'fSh: there is no need of inference).— 145.

•’ hi i’ k . ■ Upashira.-~“lt this b3 so ( i.e., l£ tlia Soul can be known by .sense-poroepfcion),” the

'< '*•. ■ The word ‘iti’ marks the form of knowledge. In ‘ dri§tam,’ the

hvi;,;'':/. affix , ‘ kta’ is used in a passive sense. ‘ An vaksam ’ means sensuous or
'f ^ perceptual. Therefore the meaning is : it there is perceptual or sensuous
! . q.bse^yation in the form of ‘ This is Devadatta,’ ‘This is Yajnadatta,’ then

, Of* flio frAnKla aP I'n-.alrinn* cs lYAt* orj


KAl^ADA 80TBA8 HI 2-ll.


. Above answered.

lu n ^ u «

^ 2 “ Driste, (lit. Seen), grasped by perception. six;cPrf% Atmani, the soul
mf Linge, being accompanied with marks, Ekah, one. ff Eva, only.

Dridhatvat, because it becomes more firm or fixed, Pratyaksavat,

like other percepts or perceptions. src2?5f-‘ Pratyayah, intuition. Belief.

11. As in the case of other percepts, so, if the Soul,
which is grasped by perception, is also accompanied -with, or
comes at the top of, marks (from which it can be inferred),
then, by means of confirmation, the intuition becomes
fastened to one and only one object. — 146.

Upaskdra , — To this the advocate of inference says :

‘ Driste,’ i.e., grasped by perception ; ‘^tinaiii ’ ; ‘ liage,’ i.e., having'
all its marks or causes developed ; ‘ eka eva,’ i. e., having one object only
as its matter ; ‘ pratyayah ‘ Pratyayah ’ implies the expulsion of all
apprehension of error. “ How can it be so?” Hence he says, ‘dj'i’idhatv4t,’
i.e., because the current of proof is capable of removing the apprehension
of its being otherwise. He gives an example, ‘ pratyaksavat’ ; i.e., as even
when there is perception of water from a distance, yet inference of water
by the mark of the baldkds (water birds) is made for the purpose of corro-
boration. So it has been said, “ Skilful logicians desire to understand by
inference even what is grasped by perception.” The import here is this :
Although at times the Soul really shines in mental perception, yet, like
knowledge, produced by the flash of lightning, it does not derive so much
fixity or permanence, being overclouded by such other conflicting percep-
tions as “ I am fair,” “ I am lean,” and the like. Here another form of
knowledge produced by marks which cannot but lead to their proper in-
ference, confirms or fixes the very knowledge previously obtained from
perception. Moreover, inference must be applied to ihe Soul owinc to
the desire to infer the knowledge that intellection of the Soul as taught in
the precepts “(The Soul) should be heard about, reflected upon,” and the
like, is a means towards the realization of that which is desirable, i.e., the
Supreme Good. Because if there be no intellection of the Soul, then cons-
tant meditation would be impossible, and consequently there would be ' ■ •

no realization of the Soul in the understanding, and so salvation would be -- ■
impossible. This is the purport. \.-v'

The^ statement of the two separate intuitions, ‘ I am Devadatta,’ and >v
' “ I am Yajnadatta,” in the foregoing Sutram, is 'intended to show that

there can be only individual intuition . of every; SouL'—rll. • ’ ■



, : ’ . ' ■■ s ' , v:

'V?>.:C'X-yV*t.->jvr.x-


'■' \l , '•

''<m ■

M'^v


VAliESIKA PHILOSOPHY.


Gounter-objection stated and answered.

^, 5 -f;_Devadattali, Devadatta. n^rt

Yaifiadattah, Yajnadatta. if the Lody. ‘

^^^-Upacharat, by transference, mrt -Sa. u e, m the y

Pratyayah, intuition. Belief. ? * 4I

12. ‘Devadatta goes,’ ‘ Yajuadatta goes, --m tliese

cases, the helief (that their respective bodiesgo) is due to

transference.— 147. , ,

substratum with Going, as in ‘Yajnadatta goes, is impo.si ^ ^ “

For there are such intuitions as “1 am fair, am ^ o" >

there I .eto e»oh difterenlial intaitioe ae " My body.” Now, ,n Devadatta
tr lit perception of co^exietenoe with motion, and Ae uee of language

to express it, are tropical, whereas the intuition “ my is real as cawymg

its own meaning. Although the property of being Devadatta is a km
or genus, existing in the body, whereby the use of language as Devadatta

goes” is in the primary sense and the intnitioii^is true in its own mean-

ing, yet if the term Devadatta be applied to the boul delimited by it, it is
then to be understood as a transferred epithet.

Another objection.

lu 1 ^ 11^ II

Sandigdhah, doubtful. 3 Tu, however. Upacharah,

Transference,

13 The transference, however, is doubtful.~148.

r i o. i .1. , . CJpftsMra.— Here he apprehends (an objection) :

The word Uu’ points out the opponent’s view* The intuition and

the use of the word, ‘ I,’ are observed both in respect of the Soul and the
Therefore, Ae doubt arises which intuition and expression be the

'primary, and which, the secondary ones.— 13.

■' 'I ' ' ' ' '

Ptatyag-atmani, in the ih-going or
». ^ Otherwhere.'



KA'NADA SUTRA.S tit, 2:i4


WHffrii Abliavat, because it does not exist. Afthdntara-pratyaksal.i

tluiuitiou) wherein the individual soul is the object of perception.

14. Because tlie iiituitiou ‘ I ’ exists in one’s own soul,
and because it c[oes not exist otlieiayhere, therefore the
intuition has the individual Soul as the object of perceiittioil.



VAHSESIKA miLOtiOPin


Another ohjeotion.

11 ^ 1 R 1 IK H

DevadattaJi, Devadalta.

3T=srKI'^ Upacharat, from transference,
ference to Soul, Conceit, Egotism, or i
therefore. ^arirapratyaksali, having

Ahahkaral.i, ahainkdm. The intuition ol 1. l-ncas

15 Tlie iiituitiou of ‘ I’ lias the bod.)' for its ob.jcei.
Therefore to say that, in ‘ Devadatta goes, there is a trans-
ference (of epithet), is

Upaskdm,

* Alifiiikarab,’

that which has the body
determined that the intuition or
“ Devadatta goes,
fancied one, bees
“ I am lean, ” “ 1
like, cannot be reconciled
meaning.-— 15.

Above answered.

li ^ I ^ I "

Sandigdhali, doubtful, g Tu, but. 57^^: Upacharah, trans.

16. The transference, (as characterised by yon), hon-
' Cver, is doubtful. 151.

UBaste4fa.~-Ho gives the solution : . , „ , „ • . . i-

The word ‘ tn ’ here points out the solution fof the foregoing ob

ieotion). The meaniug is that there is doubt even in what has been sau
(by you, he., the opponent), namely that the transference is a fancied one
b- "whereas the intuition of ‘I’ is in respect of the body itself. Siuci
■ therefore, the intuition is a false witness on either side, we must ei
deavour to find out a distinction. Since on making this endeavour, u
^Si.bbserye that.eveil a man, whose eyes have been closed, stiU has the intu
Iv dition refers to an object different from tl

d "bddyyi-ggiivhbyphfi'fhe ^ of the external senses. II it referred i

' ■'u' .fche.bWf it WoMdiTefW to, tlih bodies, pf others, and also, would not tal


Gachchhali, goes, 'itiy iliis.

!• Abhimanat, from fancy, ic-

Self-identification. rtRir Tavat, because,
the body as the object, yflfR:


:i mere laiicy. iJ'u

•He apprelieiicls anotlicr objection ;

the intuition of ‘ I. ’ It is barirapiatVcU
as the percept or subject-matter,
for the matter of that, the e?
is due to transforence. Now, this traaste)
3 such intuitions and e.xpre.s3ious as l a
nate, my brith is a mere repetition,
on the theory of transference. Tb


KANADA SUTRAS HI, 2-11


place ill iiKlo£fOUilencc oi' the eyes. If it be asked how tliere cun be such
corainon :iuea:sure or co-ex tensioii as in who am stoiit or” thin, am
hoppy we reply that in this case it is possible that the body would
appear as Ihc condition of pleasure, etc., as in This forest is resonant
with tlie roar of a lion ” (there is siich appearance). Mere I-ness, pre-
sented by the Mind, is siiperini|)osed upon the body, just as heat, presented
by the organ of touch, in the judgments, ‘‘ The \rater is hot/’ The
body is hot, ” etc.— 16. '

Above answered — eontinued.

H Na, not. g Tu, but. !![n9'cra^r*?r5 ^arira-vi^esat, perceiving the difference
of bodies. Yajfiadatta-Visnumitrayoh, of Yajnadatta and Vispu-

mitra. ftrsi Jnanara, knowledge, thought. Visayah, object.

17. But the thoughts of Yajnadatta and Visnumitra
do not become objects of percej)tion to tbem, while they
perceive the difference of their bodies. (Therefore cons-
ciousness is not an attribute of the body). — 152.

Upaskdrci . — ^By elaborating the solution he says :

‘ Jfiftnam’ implies sensible pleasure, pain, and other attributes of the
Soul. As the bodies of Ihijnadatta and Visnumitra are mutually different,
so are also their knowledge, pleasure, pain, and the like, different. Accor-
dingly, as is this body of Yajnadatta, so also, though no knowledge, or
pleasure, etc., be proflucod in Yajnadatta, will the knowledge, etc., “I
feel pleasure, ” “ T know, ” “ I will, ” “ 1 desire, ” he objects (of perception) ;
because the sensible body being an object of perception, knowledge, etc.,
which are (ex hypothesi] its properties, like its colour, etc., will have the
possibility of being perceptible. But this is impossible. Therefore, such
is the import, it should he said that the seat or subject of knowledge, etc.,
is something really different from the body. ‘ Sarlravii^esat ’ means from
difference of body. The fffth case-ending has been used in the sense of
the infinitive. So that the meaning is that knowledge or thought is not
an object of perception, while difference of body is being perceived. — 17.

Proof of Soul not from Eevelation only.


‘ Ahani, I. Iti, this. Mukbya-yogyabhyam, by innate

or self-evident and perceptive or sensible cognition, ^abdavat, like sound.


VAI8ESIKA PHILOSOPHY


Vyatirekabyabhicharat, from ihe invariability of absence or

divergence. Vi^esa-siddhe^i, from proof in particular, ff Na, not.

Agamikali, scriptural, proved by revelation.

18. (Tlie soul is) not proved (only) by revelation, since,
(as Ether is proved l^y Sound, so) (the Soul is) proved in
particular, by the innate as Avell as the sensible cognition ifi
the form of ‘ I,’ accompanied hy the invariable divergence
('nf sneb comiition from all other ihinns), as is the ea-He with


jjpdHMfa.—'Jt may lio ob,|ocbot.l as lollow.s :™~- Tn.e sooi is nob peroe’pnoie, .ciniee, mro
Ktheis ifc is a colourless Substance, or a .Substance without eomponGiit parts. Tliereroro
llie body itself should be alUrmed to bo the object of the cognition '' S. am thin, pale.” Jf
ocea.sionai]y there arises also the eonsciousness ” I feel pleasure,” it is proper to siip|)Ose
that pleasure and the like, becoming manifest witliout a substratum, are transferred to or
superimposed upon tlie body. As In “ Hot, fragrant v/ater,” beat and fragrance appearing
■without a substratum are superimposed upon veater, but for the sake of this the intuition
of water also does not contain a, s its object anything except common -water ; so I-ness in
am” is real only In reference to the body, wiioreas i}loasiirc and the like are. sometimes
superimposed upon it. There is then, in respect of the Soul, no knowledge o.f it in the
form of perception. That which has to be supposed as the substratum, of pleasure, etc.,
must be established hy revelation. There is no pc'reeption of it.” In reply lo tins
objection, he says :

This is the meaning : The cognition, “ I feei pleasure,” or “ I am
in pain,” isneitlier scriptural, nor verhaliy communicated, nor inlerential,
since it arises even withoirt the lielp of verbal corauiaiiieation or
o^ marks of inference. Whereas it has been said that colourlessness and
simplicity (or the not being an aggregate of component parts) are obstacles
to the perception of the soirl, this holds true in the case of perception by
external senses, for of this the possession of colour and tiie possession of more
than one substance are, the necessary conditions or exciting causes, while
mental perception is independent of tlrese. It may be objected that tliis
would be the case were there proof of the existence of the Soul, but that
there is none. Accordingly it has been said, “From proof in particular by
invariable divergence, as is the case with Sound.” As in the Substances,
Earth, etc., the absence of Sound is invariable, i e., uniform, and there is
thereby proof of a particular Substance, namely Ether, in addition to tlie
eight Substances, as the.Onbstratum of Sound, so on account of the invariable
'(divergence of desire .from Earth, etc., the substratum of desire also must be
"'-"different, .from' the 'eight Substances. Lest it be argued that all this goes
' Wshow pnly that the ;.So,ul is a subject of inference, not an object of peiv

well as the sensible cognition in the


KAl^lDA SUTRAS III, 18,


form of ‘ I ’ ” are emploj'ed. By the word dti’ the form of the cognition is
indicated. Therefore the cognition, in the form of T,’ which is prodnced,
without the help of verbal communication and mark of inference, in one
whose eyes are closed, should be explainecl by the innate idea of Egoity Oi-
1-n.ess and its sensible or perceptible attributes, and not by reference to the
l)ody, and the like, since tlie divergence or absence of desire is invariable
there. After “ by the innate as well as the sensible cognition” the words
“ Should be established ” arc to be sn]3plied. There are many proofs of
the existence of the Sonl. They ai’e omitted here for fear of increasing the
rolnme of the treatise. They should he sought in the Maynkha— 18.

Virriti. — Vedantins, however, hold that the soul is nothing but
eternal knowledge (viju.-lna) according to the Sridi,

frsfWwT afir, “ Eo I the Soul, imperishable, is truth, knowledge, in-
hnite, and all-pervading,” iBrihadaranyalta Upanisad IV. v. 14). Although,
in reality, it is one, j'et, owing to the diversity of its uptidhi or adjuncts in
the form of the inner sense, which ai’o products of Mdyd, i.e., limitation,
it appears as manifold. That it is so, follows from such Srutis as
One only, without a second,” {Chlitmdorjya Upanimd,
VT. ii. 1), “ So tlie one inner Self

of ail beings, for every form, became its conn terfoi-m ” {Katha Upanisad,
IT. V. 9). '

He discredits tliia view.

The words, ‘object of perception ’ are tlie complement of ‘aham iti,’

‘ I ’ — this. Thus, the object of such popular mental perceptions as ‘ I feel
pleasure,’ etc., is not ‘4gamika,’ i.e., identical with Irfvara, the prohandum
of such ‘agama ’ or text of thelVeda as “ trutli, knowledge, infinite, and all-
perx’-ading,” (Taittiriya Upanimd, II. i. 1). He states the reason of this by
etc. because difference from Idvara is established

by pleasure and pain, which, though primary or instinctive or original or
innate, are yet sensible. The instinctiveness of pleasure lies in agreeables
nr desirables, since it is there the object of desire whicli is not dependent
upon any other desire ; wliereas the instinctiveness of pain lies in
disagreeables or undesirables, since it is there the object of aversion
which is not dependent upon any other axmrsion. Sensibleness, again,
is the being the object of j)erception (Ee. by the inner sense). This is
mentioned for the purpose of removing the (possible) apprehension' ' that
the mark is an unproved or imknown . mark, and also to'pfmmnt over-
extension^, in the case xvhere eternal bliss, is attributed^to Wara, because
eternal bliss can never , be an object of nefeention. . Pleasure and -nain.


VAI8EBIKA PHILOSOPFIY


■ '.I-:'’- ..J-'; , '

ifiillfSiiiill


therefore, being products, arc proof of tlio difl’erciicc ijctwccii tlj'o Jh'a
and Isfrara. This argument is illustrative: it should be observed that
knowledge, volition, desire, and also aversion, as products, establish
difference from Wvara.

It may be urged that in such inferences as, “ Tlie soul which is the
object of the perception,' I am,’ is different from Wvara, because it
possesses pleasure which is a product,” there being no example, and
consequently no observation of congruity of similar instances, knowledge
of tbe universal relation is impossible. For this reason, it has been said
i-0., from the uniformity of difference. The ixse of
the ablative inflexion has the object of denoting the (necessary^ condition
leading to the inference, and the sxmtactical connection of the word is
with the word Tlie iniporfcj tlieref(|re, is, that, even tlioiigh

there is no example way of agreement, yet, Isvara being an example
by way of difference, an inference with respect to the matter in hand is
possible, through the observation of tlie universal relation of difference,
dependent upon the concomitance or congruity of difference.

It may be urged, again, that a mark can establish difference
from l^vara, by the universal relation of difference, has not been known
before. To remove this apprehension, it has been stated he.,

like vSound, etc. The meaning is this : As the difference of Ether from
liilvara is proved by the mark, nameh^ Sound, which is known by the
method of tlie universal relation, or uniformity, of difference, so the
difference of the soul from Ls'vara is proved by the |)ossession of pleasure,
etc., which are products.

M :: V Ufiity of Soul, as an ohjection,

g^^^^p^H’^Tt^lfw^r^'Suklia-dulikhahn^na-idspatti-avisesat, becausethere
is no difference in the production of pleasure, pain, and knowledge.
Aikatmyani, identity or uni £3?^ of Soul.

19., Soul is one, since tliere is no difference in tlie
'production of leleasiire, pain, and knowledge. — 154.

npa.s'Mra.-~'Havliig thus fmlsliecl the section on Investigation of the Soul, lie
now begins the ^seefcioll on the ptoallty of Souls, Tliereiii tlie following apliorlsni sets
'■;'&i?th4n:ad.v<^se,^etnneF;'^Av

Vj--:;';., 'There is only one Soul, in spite of the diffei-ence of the bodies of
’/■;tijiai,tiVa,;,;^it^^^^ a,nd;otheiu Why? Because of the non-distinction in the
: Ttnowledge, i.e., because the origin of



lOiKUiDA SUTRAS III, 2-20


pleasiirOj pain, and knowledge is really iindiffereiitiated in tliis tliat it is
determined by, or confined to, the body as a whole. li there wore another
mark to prore the ditference of the Soul, the difference of llio Soul inigijt
be proved, but there is no such mark. As Ether is only one, in spite of
tiie produotioii of Sounds within the limits of particular spaces, since
there is no Jistiiietioii in Sound wliicli is its mark ; as Time is only one,
since there is no distiuctiou in the intuition of simultaneity, etc., wliicli
is its mark; as Space is only one, since there is no distinction in the
intuition of East, West, etc., which is its mark; (so the Soul is only

Vwivti . — It may be urged that the identity of Ji^a and Ijlvara must
be admitted, on the strength of the texts of the Veda, ''One only, without
a second," ^xmm '' Tiioii, 0 Svetaketu, art tChhaudogya

Upaiiisad V[. viii. 7), etc. it cannot be held that difference is proved by
the aforesaid inference; because pleasure, pain, ecc., being properties of
the internal organ, are improved by themselves {i.e., have no independent
existence). Thus, says the Brihadaranyaka Upanisad, [. V. 3., ^flf

igti “ Desire, inten-

tion, Doubt, Faith, Unfaitli, Patience, Impatience, Modesty, Intelligence,
Awe, — all this is verily Mind.” Here the word Desire denotes pleasure,
and the word Intelligence denotes knowledge in the form of a faculty.
Moreover, pain also, appearing, as it does, in co-existence with pleasure,
cannot be an attribute of the Soul.

This he apprehends :

TJie meaning is that, i.e., because the difference of the

divAtnifi (the embodied Soul) from liivara is not proved, 'i-c.,

by the certainty or ascertainment, i.e., of pleasure, pain,

and knowledge , in other words, they, being proved in the mind bv the
above Sruti or Vedic text, are thereby disproved in the Soul.


VAISSSIKA FRlLOmmy


\ '! 'It./ :


Soiilsj ijro\^e a diveisity of Souls. It cannot be maintained tliat as the
status of one and the same Soul is diversided by the dillxu’ence of birth or
hy the dirferenee of cluldhood, youth and old age, so also it will be in the
case of the difference of tlie bodies of Chaitra, Maitra, and otliers, for it is
possible to impose contradictory attributes (on one ajid the s<iuie subject)
by jneaus of change of Time (i. a., at different liniesj. 20.

VivrUi.—tle removes the apprehension. means no ideniity of

the Souls, in other words, that the Jivjitina is not identical with Is vara.
Whence ? because of the certainty of the existence of pleasure,

pain, and knowledge, in the Soul. For pleasure, etc. are not properties of
the mind, because the mind not having largeness or large size, pleasure,
etc., would be imperceptil)le ; and minuteness or atonniiess or subtleness
niiibi be afiirmed of the mind as detenniiiing the riOiKsimnltaueiU'' of acts
of knowdng. The Sruti, ^'iJesire, liesolution, etc.'', liowever, like '‘Life is
clarified butter,'’ etc., demonstj-aios that the mind is the cause of desire,
etc., but not that it is their receptacle, nor that it is identical with them.

Hs diversity explained — continued.

u ^ s R 5 n

Sastra-samarihyat, from the aulhoriiy (or force or signitlcancc)
of the ^dslras. «srCha, and.

21. (Plurality of Souls follo^vs) tilso from the authority
or siguificaiice of the Sdsbras. — 15(1

U‘iMskdra.~lIo gives auotlicr proof;

‘ Sastnim ’ means A^eda ov revelation. Because dill'ereiicu of Buiil is
proved By it also. For it is Beard, “ Two Brahmatis {ie., Souls.t have to bo
known, ” etc. ; and also “ Two birds, fricuds and kindred, embrace the
same tree, etc.” (Mnndaka Upanisad III, i. 1 .) — 21 .

Here ends the second chapter of the third book in llm CouuneiUujy
of Sfi Sahkara on the- Apliorisras of Kanada.

Vivriti. — It cannot be asked, “ AVbat tlien will be the fate of these
texts, vis., “Thou art that, 0 Svetaketu ! ” “One who knows Brahinan,
verity becomes Brahman,” etc. ? For the text, “ Tliou art That, ” (’,onveys
the sense of identity in this sense that what is devoted to, or belongs to,
That," is not different from That. The text, “ One who knows Brahman,
i yeiity; becomes Brahman,’'' does not .convey the sense of identity, but that
y-f similarity;of the Jiva (ie.,' the embodied Soul), to Iiilvara (ie., the Great
■',86nll';m;-,pbih't;p,f; frei5d'om(Xc>M'S.n:fferiug, etc.; for, otherwise, the text.
'.“-The/s^fiii^-Bkd-httmnd: to. Sttprem,e. similarity,” can have' no. meaning.


KANADA SUTRAS IV, 1-1.


hi popuiar language also there is the tropical use of identitj' iu the sense
of resemhliince, as wlien there is an abundance of wealtli, it is said,
“this priest has become a king,” and so on. Nor should it be maintained
that identity is produced in the state of salvation, on the cessation of
ignorance or false knowledge, since difference, being eternal, is incapable
of destruction, and even if we admit tlie destruction of difference, then
since there is necessity for the existence of two individuals. So much in
brief.

Book Fourth.— Chapter First.

The eternal defined.

U 9 I 1 ( ^ n

Scitj existent. not s csusGj tincciusccl

ratfsa SUL Nityam, eternai.

1. The eternal is that which is existent and uncaus-
ed.— 157.

PjMsftfira.— Having finished the enumeration, definition, and examination of the nine
Suhstances, Barth, etc., and desiring to rofnto the doctrine, held by the Samkhya philoso-
phers, that prakriti or Matter is the prime cause, and to establish that ultimate atoms are
the prime causes and enter into the composition of eartli, etc., he first of all gives the
definition of the Genus, eternality.

‘ Aka.ranawat,’ means not having a precedent cause, on the maxim
of the purity of words 1 which excludes other interpretations of the term).
Hereby the v.ater-pot, and the like are excluded. Still the definition may
be too wide by including previous non-existence; so he says, ‘ existent’
i.e., having connection with existence. In the case of the Predicahles,
Combination and Species, connection with existence is nothing but combi-
nation or inhei'ence in one and the same object with existence. In the
case of any other Genus and of existence, connection with existence
consists only in being the object of the cognition that it exists. This
cognition is not iu respect of a thing as such. “ Let it be so,” it cannot
be objected, “in other cases also. What is the use of existence ?” For,
existence has already been proved as the cause of assimilative under-
standing.- — >1. ^ . I'

Some hold that the existent is produced from the non-
existent. What they have in view is this : Seeds, etc., are not productive ' h i-
of effects such as' shoots, etc. Were this the case, then Seeds, etc., lying ^ i
in a granary, would ako produce shoots, etc. ■ Bui since shoots appear
■ only after the destruction of seeds sown on . a .field, by the' disjunction of


VAISmiKA PHILOSOPHY


tlieir parts, it follo\¥s, that it is the destnictioa of seeds, etc., which is the
cause of shoots, etc. So we have the sutmm of Gautama, stating the argu-
ment of an opponent, “ Production of existence (is) from non-existence,
as there is no appearance without destrojdng.” (Ny/iya-.Sntnun, (7. i.


Only to refute this view, lie strengthens the theory of progressive
origination by the series of ultimate atoms, etc.

‘Sat,’ means something in the form of existence; ‘aklranavat’
means a non-produet ; ‘ nityam ’ means an entity which opposes annihila-
tion. The meaning .is : the primary cause of compound bodies is not
non-existent, tliat is to say, because, if causality of desiamction wore admit-
ted, tlien it would entail the prodnctioii of shoots oven from powdered
seeds.

Mark of existence of ultimate atoms.


:^^''ftri'-;t?s?::


KANADA SUTRAS IV, 1-3, l4f

visible substance, it possesses magnitude, and is composed of more sub-
stances tliau one ; magiii tilde, as the cause of visual perception, presuj)-
poses, or is dependent upon, multiplicit^f of substance; else there would be m>
magnitude even, what then would be the cause ? Nor are t!ie constituent
,r parts of the mote atoms, for we must infer that the,y also, as originative

of a substance possessing magnitude, are composed of parts, like thread,
and like potsherd. Thei’efore, wliatever substance is an eliect, is com-
posed of parts, and whatever substance is composed of parts, is an effect.

So that from whichever }:>art the nature of being an effect goes away, from
it goes away also the nature of being made up of parts. Tiiis is the proof
of the existence of indivisible ultimate atoms. So it lias been said by
Professor Pra^atadeva, 'kEarth is two-fold, eternal and iion-etenial.'’— *2.

Law of Gaiimtion,

: H ^ I t I ^ U

Karana-hhaviit, from existence in the cause, Karyya-

bhavali, existence in the effect.

3. The existence (of colour, etc.) in the effect, (folloAvs)
from (their) existence in the cause. — 159.

fJpasJci r«.— Now he states an acgiiment or proof, to prove that there are colour, etc,,
in the ultimate' atom : ,

The existence of colour, etc., in tlie effect, is due to their existence in
the cause. For the attributes of the effect result from the attributes of the
cause, the same being observed in the case of the water-pot, canvas, ate.,

This is the meaning. — 3.

Vioriti . — He points out an objection to the primary causality of uom
'I'v existence.

kBhavali,’ ixy the existence, of the ‘effect,’ i.e,^ compouiKl
bodies, follows from the existence of the ^ cause,’ be., the primary cause
(rvc., ultimate atoms). Otherwise, like the quality of being clayey, of that
wdiicli is made of clay, it would follow that effects, be., compound bodies,
would be non-existent, because they are constituted by wliat is non-
\ existent. . .

‘ !'■ ■ The eternal exists. ■■ VV::;y,;’:kvkN

'v ^ \ % \ «

. Anityah, non-eterna-l. iti, such, i.e , such hituitioa and expres-

I , sipn. Viiesatalj, of the particulari z^«;, the eterinaL Prati- -r

' sedha-bhavati, the form of negation. , . , W , ;


VAISESlKA PHILOSOPHY


7 ’ i Avidya, ignorance, error.

5. (It is) all error (to suppose that the ultimate atom
is uot eternal.)— 161.

i3'pnsS^*’a.-~It jnay be objected as follows: The ultimate atom is not eternal, since
' it is corporal or ponderable, like a water-pot. Similarly, the possession of colour, the
' possession of tas^, cte.i may bie, One by one, adduced as so many reasons. So also by
, smuttanebuyo^uaci^ atoms), an nUimate atom has six^ parts;


KANADA SUTRAS /F. 1-6,


ofcemal). Moreo\'Oi-, if thei-e be Bthei- within an ultimate atom, then being- porous, it must
have parts ; if tiicro l)e no Ethor inside it, then it would follow that Ether does not pene-
trate everywhere. Further, (the ultimate atom is not eterjial), because it casts shadow,
and possesses circulation. Again, the non-eternal ity of the ultimate atom follows also
from tlio inference which .03 tablisiies traimieney, e.cj., the inference, tiiat alJ that exists is
momentary, li then there bo such a series of inferences, how can it bo maintained that
the ultimate atom is eternal ?

To meet these objections, lie says :

Every inference, wliich. lias for its sii)3jeot the non-eteruality of the
ultimate. atom, is ignorance, i'C., is of the form of error, since it springs
from a fallacy. This fallacy is occasionally obstruction or opposition to
■ the proof which comprehends the subject ; always absence of the character-
istic of being peiiaded (or being’ the mark), due to want of evidence
preventive of its existence iu the vipakm {i.e., in which the nou-existence
of that whicli has to be proved, is certain) ; sometimes unproof by itself;
and others which should be learnt from the kindred system (i.e., the
Nyaya-Sutraiu of Gautama). — u.

Requisites of perception.

Mahati, in respect of an object possessing magnitude.
Aneka-dravya-vattvat, by means of its possession of what is composed of more
than one substance. Rupat, by means of colour. ^ Cha, and.

Upalabdhih, external perception. '

6. External |>6rception (takes place), in respect of an
object poasessing magnitude, by means' of its possession
of diat which is composed of more sabstaiices than one,
and by means of its colour. — 162.

_ Upaskara.~It may be objected, “ VYell, if the ultimate atom c.vists, why is it not poi-
coivedbythe SOUSO.S? it i,s you who have proved that the possession of colour, the
po,ssesMon of touch, etc., are exciting causes of .sensibility.” Hence he says :

‘ Mahati ’ means lu respect of a substance possessing magnitude, the
affixe, 7Hatup, denoting possession, amongTalExes denoting quality, being
elided after the ivord, viahat, denoting measure. ‘ Anekadravyavattvdt^
means from the nature or state of containing that of which more substances
than one are the substrata. This being so, Air also would be perceptible '
Hence he says, “ And by means of Colour,” i.e., as will he, later W
developed and n n eclipsed or nnohscured. col our. “ TJpaladhih ’S's comple’
meiited by the words,' ‘‘by the external senses.” Therefore'it' goes with-:-'
out saying that there is no eifcema! perception of the ultimate atom, since' '


'X


HMSI


?i


I Miii s

isii


VA l8E?irKA PHILOSOPE V.


'iii



it does not possess magnitude. “ The possession of that ivhich is com- ■
posed of more tliau one substance ” means either the being constituted
by a compound of more than one substance, or tlie being the substratum
of the magnitude which is due to a multiplicity of component parts.

It cannot be said that the possession of that which is a compound
of )iiore than one substance, is rendered futile (as a condition precedent
of perception), by tlie Tery possession of magnitude; since the rever.se
is also possible. Nor can it- be said, “Futility of the producer is caused
by the producible, but not that of the producible by the producer;”
for tlie agreement and the difference of the producible and the producer
being simultaneously apprehended, there is no futiUti', since otherwise
it would follow tiiat the futility of tiie staif, etc., wnll be caused bj’ the
whirling’ of it, etc. Nor can it be said that there is a development ol, or
rise in, perceptibility at a distance due to development of, or rise in, magni-
tude ; for a development of, or rise in, the possession of a compound of
more substances than one being also possible, there can be no discrimina-
I tioii. Moreover, while a spider’s ive1i measuring four cubits, etc., is not

i . ■ perceptible from a, distance, the perceptibility of the spider itself is

• ■ certainly due to a development of the possession ol a compound of more

} substances than one, since a preponderance of magnitude exists in the

•web. So also it should be observed that while a piece of cloth, consti-
■ ' tuted by five yarns, is not perceptible at a distance, in spite of a prepoiuler-

T ance of magnitude in it, a club of a vsi’v smail magnitude is perceptible

1. . ' there. — 6.

! - Gause of no7i-pereeption.

I ,

f jr H 8 I I I vs «

1' Sati, there being. Api, even, in spite of. Dravyatve, sub-

Biaace-uess. ifffl Mahatve, magnitude, RCipa, colour, Samskara^

, . impression; evolution, reformat! jq. Abhavat, on account of the ab*

U sence or non-existence of, ff#: Vayoh, of Air, Anupalabdhlb, non-

id; perception., •

II ' - ’ 7. The non-perceptioii of Air, in. spite of there boing

; ' : . suhstauce-iiess aiid luagaitude, is due to the non-existence


it migiit be , urged, also I'je peveeptioii


: ■/•A'

I *lv - '■ ’’



-■ '• t') ■



‘KAN AD A SUTBA8 IV, 1-8.


By tlie term '' evolution of colour’' are intended combination or
iiiliesioii of colour, tlie development of colour to tlie degree of appreciabi-
lily, and tlie nomobsciiration of colour. Thougli, therefore, in the case of
Air, tliG selfsame combination of touch is also the combination of colour,
yet it is not qualified or determined by colour, for there is in it absolute
non-existence of colour. In the light of the eye, there is no evolution, that
is, appreciability, of colour. In the light of the sliooting star at midday,
there is iio evolution, that is, non-obscuration, of colour. Of these, there-
fore, there is no perceptibility. In like manner, evolution of colour is to
be analogously applied to the lieat of the summer, the fire in a fiying
pan, gold, etc.

The writer of the Vritti has, however, said that eom-

pound of the words and formed by the elision of one of

tlie two and that, therefore, tlie non-perception of Air is in conse-
quence of tlie non-existence of colour in it, while the iion-percejption of the
ocular liglit, etc., is due to the noii-existence of the evolution of
colour, — 7,

Eequisites of perception of colour.


|1 ^ j l | /q ll:',

Aneka, more than one. Dravya, substance, Samavayat,

from combinatioa in. Rupa, colour. Visesat, from some special

characteristic of. Rupa, colour, Upalavdhih, perception.

8. Perception of colour (arises) from its combination
with, a compound of substances more than two, and from (its
possession of) some special characteristic of colour.----l64. d -

UpasMira.--ln tills waj/ having, iui mediately after the section on the eternality of the
ultimate ntopi.s, finished rho section Oil the pe.rceptibility of externai objects, as a subsi-
diary topic, f)y tlieii* being the infereiitial inarks of the iiitimate atoms, and intending to

set forth, by iotrodueing an example, the section on the perceptibility of Attributes, he
says ;

^ Riipaviflesa ’ means the species or peculiarity inherent in colour,
and that consists of the characteristics of being developed to the degree of
appreciability, of being luiobscured, and of being colour. From, this,
perception of colour takes place. Lest it might be said that, such being
the ease, the colour of the ultimate atom as well as of the dyad would be
perceived, so^ it has been added— * anekadravya-samavayatd '■ TheAvord
* aneka \ deiiotes^ multitude p hence • ' anekadravya ' means ‘that to which,'
many substances belmig as, its substratum, 'a (molecule of three' atoms,',

and the like. Tliejerm * anekadravjra-sam therefore, means from


ii®^


ssis?ssiiii§i|^^S


VAT8ESIKA PHrLOSOPHS


combination with such a coinpoiuid substance. The water-pot, etc., al-
though they are originated by two parts, [i.e., potsherds, etc.), realh'
contain a multitude of substances as their substratum, in the serial
arraiigeinent of the parts of these parts, and so on. As taste, toueli, etc.,
lack in the characteristic of colouniess, so there is no ocular perceiption
of them. Ill the case of ocular fire or light, non- visibility is due to the
absence of the degree of appreciabilitjn Development or appreciability is
only a particular universal entity or ‘^class’ belonging to the particular
attributes of colour, etc., and is pervaded by, or included in, colouniess,
etc.

Objeetion: — This being so, no relation of higher and lower (classifica-
tion) will be at all established even by whiteness, fragraiitness, sourness,
etc. If, however, you suppose a nianifoldness of development or appreci-
ability, pervaded by, or iiicluded in, them respectively, then there will be
a redundancy of supposition, and the term development or appreciability,
also will have various meanings.

Answer It is not so ; foiy development or appreciability denotes the
iipddhi or condition, namely the characteristic of the attribute capable of
being apprehended by each individual external sense, while non-develop-
inent or non-appreciabiiity denotes only the absence of the upddhi or con-
ditiom Some say that appreciability is simply the non-existence of non-
appreciability. This should be considered, since non-appreciabiiity also
cannot be similarly established. It may be said that non-appreciabiiity
is a particular attribute beyond tlie cognizance of the senses. If it be so,
then it would follow that appreciability is a particular attribute within
the reach of the senses. If it be asked, What is the determinant of sen-
suousness we reply that both of us, (he,, tlie disputants) are equally
at a disadvantage here.. They also say tliat appreciability is the one and
only one ' class ) present in all particular attributes, and that the non-
establishment of the relation of higher and lower is no fault in tlie case
of the class inhering in attributes. — -8.

w Perception of Taste^ Smell, and Touch,

? iruT sqmmu u ^ M I ^ H

%«f Tena, by this. Rasa-gandha*spar^esu, in respect of taste,

:f snleli,: and touch. ; Jnana^ - knowledge. Vyaldiyatam, explained.

:f.; 9.; Hereby, is explained (perceptual) knowledge in the

— 165 . ‘


r


'mMfm.


KANADA. 8UTRAB IV, 1 - 9 . 153

UpcisJcdm.—Oi tlie attributes otlier than Touch, co-exsistenoe in the same substratum
with colour is itself the necessary condition of their being perceptible b^^ the external
sensGS. For this reason, after having stated the conditions of perception of colour, lie
now extends them to other cases, and says :

' Tena’ means hj the preceptual knowledge of colour. As percep-
tion of colour arises from some special characteristic of colour, viz,, colour-
ness, non-obscuration, and appreciability, so perception of taste arises
from some particularity of taste, characterised as tasteness, non-obscura-
tion, and appreciability. This should be applied to other cases. Com-
biriatioii with a compound of more than two substances, should be also
extended. From inappreciability to the organs of the ear, the tongue,
and the skin, results non-apprehension of smell, taste, and touch. Being
undeveloped or inappreciable, smell and taste are not perceived in a stone,
etc. ; for they are pierceived in their ashes. Some maintain that they are
perceived indeed in the stone, etc., but not distinctly. The .non-apprehen-
sion of the colour of a watery substance, the parts of which have been
disjoined from one another, is due to non-developnient of the colour. So
also is the noii-apprehension of taste. In hot water, there is non-apprehen-
sion of the colour of the fire, in consequence of its non-develoj)ment, and
of touch, in consequence of its obscuration. Tn comminuted camphor,
the champalm flower, etc., non-apprehension of colour, taste, and touch
is due to their non-development or inappreciability. In gold, and the
like, colour is indeed developed, but whiteness and luminousness are
obscured. Some hold that colour also is obscured, whereas the apprehen-
sion of gold takes place with the help of other colour. Obscuration,
again, is non-apprehension caused by the apprehension of a more powerful
like object, and not merely relation or connection wdth a j)ow^erful like
object. Fo.r, since connection with a powerful like object has to be
ascertained by non-apprehension, it is the non- apprehension which is of
primary iniportance. Whereas the powerful like object is not of primarv
importance, as the necessary condition of non-apprehension ; because
neither non-apprehension, nor antecedent non-existence of apprehension,
nor its absolute non-existence is subject to its operation, while the an-,
nihilation of apprehension does not exist there. If it be objected, Then
your proposition also, that obscuration is rxon-opprehension caused by
the apprehension of a more powerful like object, is not proved,’' we
reply, '' Let it be so. Still apprehension and non-apprehension alone are
the necessary conditions of the strength or weakness, of., a like object or


of tlie existence of siicli-a relation ; : and the .same :iS :& of the

, word, obscuration.” — ^ ^ ^


20


li


im


illill


I


VAlBmiKA PHILOSOPHY.


' Oraoity, not perGeptible.

11 « I ? I «

Tasya, of this, i\e., the geous of colourless, etc . and development or
appreciability, Abhavat, because of tlie non-existence.

Avyabhicharaii, non-deviation. No breach of uniforniiiy or of the rule.

10. Because of the non-existence of this, there is no
violation (of the above law of perceptibility in the case of
G-ravity.) — 166.

U'pasfcdm.— It may be asked, “Since Gravity also is combined with a compomid of
more than two substances (i.e., atoms), and appears in the same substratum with colour
and magnitude, wdiy then is it not perceptible ?” Bence he says :

Gravity is not perceptible, because of tlie non-existence, in Gravity,
of this, viz., the genus of colourness, etc., and development or apprecia-
bility. It might be said that granted that, colourness, etc., do not exist
there, yet there may be perception of Gravity. To prevent this, lie adds
' avyabhicharah.’ There is ‘ non-deviation’ i.e., unbroken uniformity of
the five ‘classes’ or miiversals, e.g., colourness, etc., towards apprehensi-
bility by each individual sense. Wherever there exists one or another of
the pentad of colourness, etc., there also exists apprehensibility by the res-
pective external senses, as shown by the method of difference (that where
the former are not, there the latter does not exist). Tliis is the meaning.

Gravity, by reason of its being left obscure in the siitram, as the
topic of discussion, by Pras^astadeva classed among things supersensuous,
is by Vallavacharya said to be perceived by touch. — 10.

Where Nitmhers, etc., are objects of visual perception,

=qifqrftr ii « i ? i ?? a

Sarhkbyah, numbers. Parimanani, magnitudes, extensions.

Pritliakivam, separateness. Sarny oga*vibhagau, conjunction

and, disjunction. Paratva-aparatve, piiority and posteriority,

Karmma, action. «5f Cha, and. Rupi-drayya-samavayat, through ,

combination with substances possessing colour. Chaksusani, visible,

objects of visual perception.

f-' ; ' 11. Numbers, Magnitudes, Separateness, Conjuiictioii'

y,: and Disjunction., Priority and Posteriority,, and Action
beco|be,p^^ |),erception, through their coinbina- .


i .r. ; ' „JJ,, , 1. I,.,

X ■->

L.,j — I ' ' • '-y" ’r/-;,), mi


155


KA'NADA SUTEAS IV, 1-12.


PprtsMra.— Having thus stated objects perceptible by the senses hidivddually, he now
cnume ates olijeots perceptible by two senses jointly :

The words have not been formed into a compound in order to indi-
cate their mutual iudepeiidence in respect of their visual or tactual
perceptibility. Although there is dependence upon i.e., largeness,

yet it is not as upon a mode of extension or magnitude. The word ‘ cha’
has the force of involving the addition of Viscidity, Fluidity, and Impetus.
The word implies tactual perceptibility ; or the word ‘cha’

should be applied after the word also. The plural number in

Numbers, comprehends all numbers, from unity upwards. If it be held
that unity is only a Genus, and not an Attribute, then if it appear in
substances only, its denotation will be neither more nor less than that of
siibstanceness ; if, on the other hand, it be present in attributes and actions
also, then its denotation will be neither more nor less than that of exist-
ence. “How, then,” if it be asked, “ can there be perception of nnity,
etc., in attribute, etc. ?,” it may be answered that it is by means of
attributed unity ; or that by reason of the proximity known as combina-
tion or co-inherence in one and the same object, the perception of nnity
is quite justified. This unity is eternal in eternal substances, and in
non-eternal substances it has causal unity for its non-combinative cause.
On the other hand, duality, etc., are the product of relative understanding.
Relative understanding is the mental basis or support of variorrs unities,
when two homogeneous or heterogeneous substances are in contact with
the eye. — 11.

Where they are not.

n 2 I t t H

Arupisu, in substances not possessing colour. Achaksu-

sani, not objects of visual perception.

12. In substances not possessing colonr, they are not
objects of visual perception. — 168.

PpasMra.— Having in view all the above things up to action, he says :

Numbers, etc , up to action, are not objects of visual perception,
when they ai-e present in substances which are devoid of colour. It should
be observed that they are not objects of tactual perception also. It has
not been said that they are imperceptible ; for, if it were so, then the unity
of the Soul also would not be an object of perception. — 12. . . ,

Attribute-ness and existenae pei'eeptihle to all the senses.


Hijiiii


SSfc


ilKli


VAIBE8IKA PHILOSOPHY


Etena, by this, Gunatve, in regard to attributeness, bhave,

ill regard to existence. Cha, and. t::)arvvendriyanij onini-sensuodi*.

Relating to all the senses. jhanam, knowledge. Cognition,


UiJ ' ,


i ■:


Vyakhyatam, explained,

13. By this it is explained that knowledge in regard
to attribnteness and existence, is omni-sensnoiis or of all the
senses. — 169.

UjX-ishdra, — 'Colour, etc., are uni-sensnotis or perceptible by the senses individually.
Numbers, etc., are bi-sensuous or perceptible by two senses jointly. Pleasure, etc., are
mental or perceptible by the inner sense. So that it results that the two Genera, Attribute-
ness and existence, are omni-sensuous. So he says :

Capability to apprehend the individuals, is itself the capability to
apprehend the class. And if the indiridnals are respectively apprehended
by all the senses, then it resnlts that also the classes, viz., Attribute-ness
and Existence, are apprehensible b}^ all the senses. This is the meaning.
—13.

Here ends the first chapter of the fourth book in the Commentary of
SaAkara upon the Vaislesika Aphorisms.


•kii '

;Wji i,'

; iii’' '

I ' 111 .1 , . ,


Book Foueth. — Chapter Second;


Three-fold division of Earth, and other products.


wi' i : it!',


i* ill V''!:!, '


9 ! r I ^ n

that, Punali, again, Prithivi-adi-karyya-dravyanij

earth, and other product-substance. Tri-vidham, three- fold,

^arirahndriya-visaya-sarbjhakani, named as body, sense, and object,

1. The. aforesaid product-substance, Earth, etc., is,
again, three-fold, under the names of body, sense, and ob-
ject. — 170.


1. 'A-'^

,1 I ' I I


UpasMm."— Ill the fourth book, of which the subject-matter is the examination of
tangible substances, intending to examine only tangible substances by their effects, imme-
diately after the examination of che ultimate atoms 'which are the root causes, he


idl.'V.-:::


■ I ' A';,-- ,, Here corporeity or , the ' characteristic of the body is a kind of


7 -i’ ivd' d?' 7 upadhi or adjunct namely, the characteristic of being constituted by final


■«;m'


KAN AD A 8UTBA8 IV, 2-2. 157

no relation oi higher and lower divisions. The characteristic of being a
sense, is the being the seat of the conjunction of the mind, which is the
cause of knowledge which produces no reiiiiuiscence, or the being a seat of
the conjunction of the mind, which is the cause of knowledge, while at
the same time it is not a substratum of appreciable particular attributes
other than sound. On the other hand, the light of the ej'e of animals that
prowl at night, is really another kind of light. In regard to its being
treated as forming the rdsual sense, the words “ not being a substratum
of appreciable particular attributes other than sound and colour”
should be added. The characteristic of being a sense, however, is not a
‘class,’ for then the characteristic of Earth, etc., will not establish the
relation of higher and lower divisions . without entailing cross-division).
And objectivity, or the characteristic of being an object, although it is the
being the means of phenomenal experience, that is to say, the being the ob-
ject of orrlinary perception, common to substance, attribute, action, genus,
and non-existence - -yet should be, in accordance with the aphorism, observed
to be the characteristic of being a product-substance which is the object of
ordinary perception, for the aphorism is this only that Earth and other
product-substances are three-fold. Objectivity also, therefore, is not a
class or universal entity. — 1.

Body is not a eompoiind of five elements.

ii' 9^.^ 1

Pratyaksa-apratyaksanam, of perceptible and non-percep-
tibie objects. Saniyogasya, of conjunction. Apratyaksatvat,

on account of imperceptibility. '^.inchatmakam, Penta-substantial.

Constituted by five elements. ?f Na, n.n. ffSW Vidyate, exists.

2. (Nothing exists, which is constituted by five ele-
ments, or) the body is not constituted by five elements, for
the conjunction of things, perceptible and imperceptible, is
imperceptible . — 171.

UpasMrali—'Now, in order to refute the assertion that the "body is composed of three
elements or four elements, he says.

Were the body, by reason of its odour, moisture, digestive heat,

; breath, and porosity, composed of. five elements, then it would be imper-
ceptible. In the same manner as the conjuhetion . of . perceptible and
imperceptible objects, e.g., air lahd^'fe the body

also would be imperceptible, , ,Thp, fh,e‘ aphorism empjoys an example.


!lli


IIS


,'byC'

':,b.


I!


:;h .


VAI^mKA PHILOSOPHY


The word ‘ bodj’’ ’ is the complement oE “ penta-snhstautial does not exist.
Moisture, digestive heat, etc., however, belong to tne efficient causes or
conditions of the l)ody, namely, water and lire. The theory that the body
is composed' of four elements should be also similarly understood. Let it
then it may be urged, contain three elements, as there is perception of three
elements. This cannot be, for an origination out of hetorogeneous elements
is denied. One attribute in a whole made up of parts is not originative
of similar other attributes. If, therefore, the production were from Earth
and Water then that which they originate would be void oJ smell and
taste In like manner, if it originated in Earth and Fire, it would not
possess smell, colour, and taste ; if in Earth and Air, it would be destitute
of smell, taste, colour, and touch. Other cases should be similarly under-

stood. — 2.

A^or a Gornpoiind of three elements.


Guna-amara-apradurbbavat, by reasr n oi in
pezrauce of another attribute. ^ Cha, and. H Na, not.
iam,' tri-s'.;bstaniial. Composed of ihr ee elements.

3. And by reason of tli© non-appearance
attribute, it is not composed of three elements.

UpasMra,

A. body originated by Eartb
of perception, might be perceived, if there
attribute having for its antecedent a
can never be the case, as it
etc., is not originative,
elements, he., is not (


of another
172 . ;^

-He continues the same topic :

Water, and Fire only, which are objects

were manifested in it another
like attribute in the cause. But this
has been already stated that a single smell,
!. Therefore the body is not composed of even three
originated by the three elements possessing colour.


Conjunction of vci^ious utoms, not denied.

♦ . ^ ■ I ■ . «


Anu-sanyogain, conjuncuuu aiuuio. ^ ^
Apratisiddhah, not denied.

4. But a conjunction of atoms is not denied

:pp«sWra.---How^hehis:there,peEeeption ot digestive heat, etc., in on«
Hd gives the answer b / ‘y.

-Amtitaal' conjunction of the _ five elements as (the basi

’iioaal causes., of W-ahotherV, fe ndt denied But it is not desi
■’ eonijihiilbh' -of - tvyo’’'; hetarogoMoi^s ^oms ■ om he the non-'

yi A- ^ ^


KAh^DA SUTRAS- IV, 24.



cause of a substance. Tims, as its conditional or efficient causes, digestive
lieat, etc., are perceived in tlie body. If it be asked, then, of what nature
the human body is, the answer is given by the aphorism of Gautama, —
'' (The body is) terrene, the distinctive attribute of Earth being perceived
(in it).” (Nya^'a-Sutrarn III. i. 28(?) ). Smell which is the distinctive
attribute of Earth, is observed in the human body as not departing from
it till its dissolution, whereas digestive heat, etc., are not observed in
the decayed body. These attributes, therefore, are accidental 'while
Smell is essential. Hence its terrenness is established. — 4.

Body is two-fold : sexually produced, and a-sexually produced.

Tatrr, therein, amongst teiTeae, aqueous, and other bodies, scrfit
^ariram, body, terrene body. D vivid ham, twofold. A^onijani, sex-

begotten, sexually generated. Ayonijarn, not sexualh’ gen.eraled Cha,


*



6. Of these, the body is two-fold, sex-horn and iiot-
sex-born. — 174.

UlKiskam . — He divides the body :

Of these, i,e,, among terrene, aqueous, and other bodies, the terrene
body is two-fold. Wliat are the two kinds ? In answer, he says, ‘ sex-
born and not-sex-born.’ Aqueous, igneous, and aerial bodies, well-known
in the spheres of Varuna, Aditya, and Vayu, are entirely a-sexuah
A-sexuality means independence of the commixing of semen and blood.
The bodies of gods and sages are also a-sexiial, according to the text of"
revelation, ‘^Manu and others, the mind-born or desire-born of Brahma.”
If it be asked how there can be an effect without a cause, we reply that
the female organ of generation is not a cause essential to or determining
corporeity, as it does not apply to the bodies of worms, mosquitoes, etc.,
produced by waiunth. The possession of a particular constitution ulm is
not proved, since our bodies are different in appearance in comparison
with the bodies of gods and sages.

The sexual body, again, is two-fold, womb-born and egg-born.
Womb-born are the bodies of men and animals, wild and domestic, the.
womb being the name given to the receptacle of the embryo. The bodies
of birds and reptiles are egg-born, Snakes, worms, fishes, etc.,, also are
redly 'reptiles, since it is their nature- to crawl about/,

Trees and the like also are no doubt so many -kinds of bodies, being
the seat of .experience the field wherein paytibulEf'Spttlsuea^ the con-
sequences of their acts iii previbus/lokths).' For-without the eharaoteristic"



I .

y;|l

Z'.'l '


> i', ' J ■

:-r


fifllv .. ifin VAI&ESIKA PHILOSOPHY. _ •

|;-l ' — -------

■ Tf the eeat o! expetieeoe, life, tleeth, eleep,

1:^ ■ pvopaitalion ef the seed, approaching the agreeable, " ' '

!gree5,le, etc,, troold be in.possible, S""'*

h ; ! woturfs and fractnres, tvhich prove expenenoe, are nianiftst . ,

There is also the sacred text ; ^

i ; I ; ?rTr*?t 'I’OTT

' ! i “The Sarah and Arjuna trees, which grow on

: S' “ : Narmadi, from contact with the waters of the Narmada, alta.n to tl

' •; ’ hisliest state hereafter, ” etc. And also,

«Ef ;s

d' i, ! ' • • “ In the cemetery grows a tree haunted by herons and vultures, etc.,”

■■ ' ■ ' ' etc Yet germinant bodies do not evidently possess activity or moveine.i „

i; : ' and senses, and they are therefore not treated as bodies.-o

Vivriti.-Th^t trees, etc., are bodies (,z.e., ground of the experience

:i|ib ■;! of the consequences of acts) is evidenced by the text o . ,

I ,? :f man acquires the condition of an immovable existence, oy faults of

born of the body.”

I ,V Asexual bodies, hoio produced.

’ ■' dr A-nivata-dik-dc4a-purvakatvat, because it (/.rh, a-sexual

I antecedent ultimate atoms vvliich are not constant in direction

|l' ^ 0 _ Becatise a-sextial bodies are formed by ultimate

■ I' ’ atoms inconstant in direction and place.--175.

' He states the cause from which as-exiiai bodies are procUicocl : ^ ^

| r;’fd)q '’y. Ultimate atoms, inconstant in direction and place, possess activity

; , pp or movement produced by a particular tona or virtue. And they arc

, ,1 I'f/t';; - 't ' ^Ue antecedents of a-sexual bodies. 6.

'*!;j //i;. ; Vivnti — In the worlds of Vanina, etc., there exist a-sexual, aqiieons,

. igneous, aerial, and mental bodies, which are not dependent, for their

.hgill'd’V:, ■' production, upon semen, blood, etc. Whence come the ultimate atoms

1: „ .Ulichorigiiatethem? In the case of sexual bodies, it is observed that

ultimate atoms, of semen and blood are their originators. To
apprehension, the present aphorism has been formulated.,

^ )Since there isnothingto confine them to direction

I lj ' )(.'{*?•;> , be. ,m scarcity of ultimate ^ atoms in the production

; ‘I 1 ' ■' ■' ' ' ■-i'hv, ^ b .p ‘p ,


f.l'A'i

I ) llll) I ll)l'


I 1 /J A ?'•:

f'li ; i"'"'

i* ' '



161


KAKADA' SUTRAS IV, 2-8.


of a-sexxial bodies. For it is not the case -that ultiniate atoms other than
the ultimate atoms of semen and blood, are not originative of bodies,
seeing that in that ease there would be no production of gnats, mosquitoes,
trees, sliriibs, etc.

A-b’exual bodies, how produced— coiitinnecL

II ^ i I vs II

Dliarmina-visesat, from a par ticular dharma ox virtue. ^

'Clia, and.

7 . And (tlie action of the ultimate atoms arises) from
a particular dharma or virtue. — 176;

U.paskdriL-—lt may be objected, how there can be procliictioii of a substance (te., a
body), without conjunction which is the non-eoinbi native cause of substance, seeing* that
there can be no conjunction wdtliout the action of the ultimate atoms. Hence he SB^ys :

The sense is that, at tlie beginning of creation, action or motion
arises in the ultimate atoms in consequence only of the conjunction of the
soul carrying with it the invisible (adristani) consequences of its previous
acts, and that the ultimate atoms, having by that action come together,
originate, in the order of binary atomic aggregates, etc., the a-sexual bodies
of gods and sages.

The aphorism is illustrative. It should.be also observed that, in
consequence of particular adharma or vices, the tortured bodies of mos-
quitoes and other small insects, generated by heat, are produced.— 7.

Proof of their existence.

n « i ^ ^ «

Samakbya-bhavat., because names or definitions exist.

^ Cha, also.

8. Also because names or definitions exist. — 177.

Upaskura.-^llo gives aiiofchei- pi-oof that the bodies of gods and sages ave a-so.xual :

means a significant name, or definition, such as is well-
Jiiiown ill Siuti, Siuriti, Itihasa, Parana, etc. Thus, Durvass, and other
sages were born from the mind (of Brahma) ; Afigiras was produced from
ahamhara (the sense of ‘ I am ’) ; and so on. From tliis also it is known
that there are a-sexiial bodies of gods and sages.- — 8.

V'ii3riXh--But whence do a-sexual bodies derive their nauies, in the

absence of parents, etc, ? For it is , observed on eai-th that the names '
Gliaitra, Maitra, etc., are affixed by parents, ete. ,-Jjest ‘ there be such an '
apprehension, so he says '■ -• "


VAI8ESIKA PHiLOBOPm


‘Bhavat’, i.e., from the existence, of ‘Samakhyu,’ /.e., the name ; even
in the ahsonce of the proci’eative pai'ents, etc. is the complement, i oi,
all-names are nut affixed only by parents, etc., as it is not the case with the

etc. Therefore, the import is that the names,
have been pnt upon a-sexual bodies, by the verj
have been affixed to the water-pot, canvas.


nameSg water-pot, caiivaS;

Mann, iMariclii, etc.
same Islvara by whom names
and other unconscious objects.

Asexual bodies, hoio produeed—eontinued.

II « I R I II

Saiiijnayah, of name, Aditvat, because of the primitiveness.

9. (The existence of a-sexiial bodies is proved) from
the primitiveness of the name. — 178.

CJpcisMm.— He gives another proof :

By means of the name, Brahma, etc., which came to be the begin-
ning. i.e., primordial, at the beginning of creation, it is known thata-sexnal
body exists. For then there were not parents of Brahma, by whom the
name Brahma, etc , should he given. — 9.

Vivriti. — But thei'e being no proof of the existence of Itivara, bow
can it be affirmed that the names of the water-pot, the canvas, etc., have
been given by Him ? So he says.

Because fslvara, which is the complement of the aphorism, is the
beginning (adi), i.e., the cause or source, of names. Thus, the proof of
lilvara having been alread^^ stated, by tire characteristic of His being the
author of names, in the apliorism, “ But name and effect are the mark
'of the existence) of beings distinguished from ourselves ” { II. i. 18 Ibid),
Ifivara’s being the author of names remains unobstructed. This is
the' sense. .

Conclusion : Asexual bodies exi^t.


Sauti, exist. Ayoiiijali, a-sexual bodies,

' v. 10. A-sexual bodies exist. — 179.

(b'’;’"' IJpasMw— He coBciticles, :

■ ' , The words “ particular forms of bodies ” are the complement of the

d,;’; aphorism. — lO.;',';'; . ;

do-,;,'.. ' „ Awtdier proof that asexual , bodies exist.

ddd;;:;#dlpdd';dor-'^'^^®'’^, "


KANADA SUTRAS IV, 2-11.


Veda-lingat, from the texts wliich throw light upon the mantra
portion of the Veda, from the Brahmana porticn of the Veda. ^ Cha, and.

11. (The existence of a-sexnal bodies is j)roved) also
from the Brahmana portion of the Teda. — 180.

Upaskdixi , — In order to strengthen the above conclnsiou all the more, he gives another
proof : ■ ■

‘ Veda ’ means mantra. That by which it is lifigyate, i,e.^ made
known, is ^ vedmlingan]/ kch, Bralimanam . From this also a-sexual body
is proved. This is the meaning. Thus there is tlie Bvahma'oain :

srsn^%: srsTT =3 ?r%scr<37gr srarr ^

“ Prajapati [i.e., the lord of creation) created numerous creatures ;

He j>ractised peuance, witli the desire, “ I may be able to create creatures.”

He created the Bralimana from His inoutli, the King from liis arms, the
Vaifcfya from His thighs, the Sddra from His feet.’'

There is also the Veda :

m''

smim ?55rT% i

“ His mouth became the Brahmana ; tlie arms were made the King
(i.e,, ksattrij'a) ; it was His thigli, which became the Vais'ya ; tlie 8hdra
was born from the feet, etc.”

Thus terrene body, sexual and a-sexual, has been described in the
abore way. .\queous, igneous, and aerial bodies cau^be oiuy a-sexnal,
since semen and blood are, as a rule, terrene, and a terrene substance does
not originate an aqueous one.

The terrene sense is the organ of smell, common to all living beings.

The organ of smell is oi-iginated by terrene particles unorerpowered or
unobscured by water, etc. The organ of smell is terrene, because it
causes the manifestation of smell, while it does not cause the manifestation
of taste, etc., like the excrement of the fowl which causes the mani-
festation of the perfume of the musk. Similarly, the organ of taste, tlie
tongue, is the aqueous sense, as it causes the manifestation of taste only,
wliile it does not cause the manifestation of coloui', etc., like water which
causes the manifestation of the taste of the pudding. In like manner,
the eye is the igneous sense, because it causes the manifestation of colour
only, while it does not cause the manifestation of taste, etc., like light.

The skin is the aerial sense, because it causes the manifestatibn of touch 1
only, while it does not cause the manifestation, of smell, etc.( like the .8
wind blown by the fan which causes the .' nxahife^tatioh ' 'o^ the coolness yr';
of the water (perspiration) sticlring tp thb body. ; ' . . ■, „ ,


VAI8E8IKA PniLOSOPI-n


Tiie object wbicli is terrene, is cliaracterised as earth, stone, and
,he immoveable. Therein the modifications of eavtli are the divisions
)f the land, wall, brick, etc. Stones are the mountains, jewels, diamond,
red-chalk, etc. The immoveable are grass, herbs, trees, shrubs, creepers,
and trees bearing fruits without flowers. .Aqueous objects are rivers,
seas, dew, hail-stone, etc. Igneous object is four-fold, diifereiitiated as
terrestrial, celestial, abdomeiial, aud mineral. The terrestrial is that
which is produced from fuel, such as wood'. The celestial is not pro-
duced from fuel ; e.g., lightning, etc. The abdomenal is the stomachic,
capable of extracting the juice of rice. etc. And the mineral, is gold,
etc. The aerial object is the wind which is the seat or support of touch
which can be felt. The fourth effect of Air, which is called Prana, i.e.,
the life-breath, and which is the means of disposing of the essences {rasa),
excreta, and the humours or ^■ital fluids {dhatu) within the body, though
it is oiie, still accpiires the names of Apilna (i.e., the air which throws out),
etc., according to the diversity of its functions. — 11.

Here ends the second chanter of tlie fourth book in the Commentary


Book FIpth — Chapter First

Action in the hand, how produced.


f wim h 1 1 1 ui

Atma-sarayoga-prayatnabhyam, by means of conjunction
with, and volition of, the soul, f ^ Haste, in the hand, Karmma, action.

1. Action in hand (is pro cl need) by means of conjunc-
tion with, and volition of, the Soul. — 181.

tJpasMm.— The subject of the fifth book is the investigation of Action. The investi-
gation of Action, producible by volition, is the subject of the first chapter. In this there are
sections treating of (1) throwing upwards, (2) throwing upwards otTectod without
volition, (3) action which has virtue or merit as its cause, and (4) actions, good, bad, and
indifferent.

With reference to a particular form of muscular or bodily action,
he says :

By means of conjunction and volition of the soul, Action (is pro-
duced) ill the hand which is its combinative cause. And of this Action,
conjunction with the soul exeicising volition, is the non-combi native
cause, and volition is the efficient or conditional cause. It is this which
is called muscular action ; fpr muscular action is action which has for its
i'hon-cpmbmativebanse cdnjuijcdpR w the soul exercising, volition, or


KANADA SUTRAS V, 1-3.


action producible by volition other than that which possesses touch and
which is not co-iiihereiit io and is excluded from itself. — 1.

Vivritd. — Here ' in the hand/ is an illustration. The meaning
is that by tlie conjunctioib and volition, of the soul, action, in tlie form of
muscular motion, is caused in the body as well as in the parts tliereof.
So it has been said,

i

F^^rr li

That which is produced by the Soul, may be called Desire. That
which is produced by Desire, may be called first Impulse or stir. That
wdiich is produced by Impulse, may be called muscular motion. It is that
which is produced by muscular motion, that may be called Action, or
physical change.

Action in the pestle deserihed,

f II m ^ I R II

Fatha, similar, Hasta-sarhyogat, from conjunction with the

hand ^ Cha, and. Musale, in the pestle. Karmma, action.

2. And, from conjunction with the hand, a similar
Action appears in the pestle. — 182.

Upaskdra , — After deseribing the throwing upwards of the hand, he describes the
throwing upwards of the pestle, which depends upon the formor ;

The word ^cha’ implies \gra\dtw,’ which is another eflicieut cause.
^Tatlul, ’ means Hike that,’ i.c., of the form of throwing upwards. Or
HathA’ and Oiastasamjmgat ’ may be taken as constituting a single term,
which will then mean ‘ from conjunction with the hand possessing upward
motion^ Here, again, conjunction of the pestle with the hand conjoined
with the soul exercising volition, is the iion-combinative cause ; the pestle
is the combinative cause ; volition and gravity are the efficient causes. — 2.

Above continued.

iiH u I ^11

Abhighata-je, produced by impact. isrSTfl^ Musaladau, in the
pestle, etc. Karmmani, in action, Vyatirekat, because of

absence (of volition). Akaraijam, not cause. Hasta-samyogali,

conjunction with the hand. /

3. In tlie action, produced in. tlie pefe, etc.,' by
impact, conjunction with the hand is : not a' ^

of the absence (of volition).-— 183.;


4 .|«I -fr’'!' t 5 . . iH . * r V" •' SPr^/^, , ‘ '', ■'

' riii^L. - 'll...


VAlSmiKA PHILOSOPHY.


'■


ilSii


'la' 1 .:i''


ji'i 'f

1 -ai

li'l.l


ir


a I


i: .1

ft j

1 i.


t

I ■':



Upaskdm , — He states the cause of the sudden upward iriotlon which Is prod sic cd in
the pestle ^Yilen struck hy the mortal* :

Here, tlioiigli tVi ere is also conjunction ol: the lianci witli tlie rising
pestle, yet that conjunction possesses no causality. On the other ijarul, the
impact of the mortar only is the. nou-combinative cause. It may be asked,
^^Why so?” Therefore he adds, ‘ vyatirekat/ which means ''because of
the absence or opperativeness of volition.” IE there were volition at that
moment, there would surely be no sudden upward motion in the pestle.
By a volition to hold fast, there would be rather sustention of the pestle ;
or, the upward motion again oE the pestle would be caused by muscular
action. This is the import. — 3.

V'lvrih. — Ooiij unction with, the liand is not the coinhinatlve cause.
'^Conjunction’ is indicative. Volition and muscular action also, it sliould
be understood, are not the efficient causes.

Action in the hand,

u v i ? i a «

latha, the same, «>., not a cause. Atma-sathyogali, conjunc-
tion with the soul Hasta-karmmani, in the action of the hand.

4. In the case of action of in the hand, conjnnction
with the soul is not a cause. — 184.

UjxisMm, — \Yit.h a view to specify a particular cause of the action of the iiantl, as it
flies upwards with the pestle, and for the purpose of disproving the 3ion* combinative
causality of conjunction with the soul exercising volition, he says :

In the case oE the action of the hand, as it springs upwards wdth d.ie
pestle, 'conjunction wdth the soul,’ i, a, conjunction with the soul exeicis-
iiig volition, is ' the same,’ i,e., not a cause. Tlie term ' not-a-'Cause ’ wlricli
appears in the preceding aphorism, is carried over here by ' tatha,’ tlie
same. — 4.

Vivriti, Tliis too is illustrative. It should he understood that
volition also is not .a nomcommon efficient cause.

Above continued,

Abhighamt, from, impact. Musala-samyogat, from

. conjunction with the pestle, , ^^>-diaste, in the hand. Karmma^ action.

..,5.: The action {i. e. upward motion) in the hand is
" hom impact, and. from cohjnuction with the pestle. — 185.

■ rjwaMi-te.— ‘i ;wiien0e':thea;£tt aailm4 the upward Inanswep



w


KAN AD A SUTRAS F, 1-7.


Asj wlien tlie pestle flies upwards, tlie ‘ iron-ring at the end of the
pestle rises upwards, so the hand also at that time springs upwards. Here
by the word, ‘ impact,’ re-action (he., recoil) produced by impact, is
expressed by traasfereuce.^ By the vigorous action of the up- going pestle,
accompanied with, the impact, re-action or recoil is produced in the pestle
itself ■which is the substratum of that action. Subject to the re-action so
effected, upward motion appears in the hand also, in consequence of the
conjunction of the hand and the pestle, as its non-conibinative cause ; and
not that this upward motion lias for its non-coinbinative cause coiijmic-
tioii with the soul exercising volition, for tlie band rises in voluntarily
together with, the pestle. This is the idea. — 5.

Action in the body,

V;;:/ ^ M :

Atma-karmma, action of tiie body, and its members.

Hasta-sarnyogat, from conjunction with the hand. ^ Cba, and, a so.

6. Action of the body and its members is also from
conjunction with the hand.— 186.

Upaskdra, — Well,” it may be asked, “ conjunction with the soul exorcising Tolition
is the cause of the action which is produced in the body or in a part of the body. Why
is it not so in the present instance ’■ ? Hence he says :

The word SltmA/ by transference, means the body and its parts.

For, impossibility of order or coherence in the text, is the germ of a
transference of epithet. Thus the action which appears in v part of the
body also, that is, in the hand, arises from the conjunction of the hand and
the pestle. The word ‘cha’ implies also im|)atus. In the action of the
hand, conjunction with the hand is reality the no n-combi native cause.

There is no deviation or breacdi of uniformity in this respect. This con-
junction is sometimes conjunction with the soul exercising volition, and
sometimes conjunction of the hand wdth pestle, etc., iDossessing impekis,
as is the case with the action of the body and its parts, of a mad man, — f>.

Falling how jorodticed-

^ i ^ i ^ u 1

Sadiyoga-abhdve, in tlie absence of conjunction, Gurutvat, y';.:;;:;,/ 'y;

gravity*,, Patanam, falling. ' ■ a ■ ,

X. ' Iiiydbe absence, ;cd;^icprijyijacdby.yf^|j|KyAesu
' from gravity. — 187. , . ' ' ' " 'V''

, “ Hpasfedra.”— He begins tlie seetiou on action mdepeadent of, volitioE ; • _ ^ '


!SS?S


VAlSESiKA PlULOSOPBl


By tlio term, ‘ conjunction,’ every kintBid imijedunent is indicated,
lie lice ill fclie absence of impediments, in conseciiience of gravity as its
uuu-combiuative cause, fulling, i.e., an actiuii resulting in conjunction
below, is produced. Here in fruit, etc., possessing gravity, the impediineut
is conjunction ; in a bird, etc., however, volition to hold up is the impedi-
ment to falling; in an arrow, etc., wlien. discharged, it is the re-action
that is the impediment to falling. The meaning is that, in the absence of
these, falling is caused by gravity. In the case of holding up of poison,
etc., in the air, by thought-transference, etc., conjunction with the soul
endowed with a4ristam (invisible aftei-etfects of previous acts), or mantra,
and the like are really the impediments. These also are included by the
term ‘ conjunction.’ — 7.

Falling how produoed — continued.

Nodatia-visesa-abhavat, owing to the absence of a particu-
lar molecular movement or impulse. ^ Na, not. Urddhvam, upward.

^ Na, not* Tiryyak, oblique, sideward. Gamanam, going.

8. Owing to the absence of a particular inolecniar
movement, there arises no upward or sideward motion • (in


sjaiarftlsiT^Prayatna.visesat, from a particular volition, Notjaua-

' 3 ^' vi4e.sal.i, particular molecular movement or impulse.

fifS':; . : 9. Particular , molecular movement (results) from

IfSpartichiaf. volition.-^ ,

! id'r; raoieeular movement itself prbdueecl t H© gives'

‘ '1 W'-.v, iVi -v. . ‘ ,


KANADA SUTRAS V, 141. 169;

Particular volition is caused by the desire I will throw sideward,
upward, far, or near.” By- this particular molecular movement is pro-*-
duced, from which upward or sideward motion is possible or produced'
in a substance possessing gravity, e,g., a stone, etc. — 9. -• ■

Throwing far away, hoiD proditeed. -■ ■' ’

n I ^ I io it

Nodaii a- visesat, from a particular molecular ■ movemeiit,
Udasan.a-visesali, particular throwing away. , ,

10. From particular molecular movemeut, (results)
particular throwing away. — 190.

Upaslmra. — ‘Udasanam* means throwing far upwards.

Vioriti. — ’"-s-, froEa a lieterogeiieoas molecular move-
ment produced by tbe aforesaid volition, i.e., throwing high

upwards, going upwards, 517^%, i.e., takes place, which completes the
aphorism. Thus, by agreement and difference, the causality of a parti-
cular molecular movement towards upward motion, is pi’oved.
going upwards, is an indication. Sideward motion, etc., also should be
understood .

'Non-voUtional action, not a cause of virtue or vice.

VI I ^ I n H

Hasta-karmmana, by the action of the hand. Daraka-

karrama, tlie action of a child. sjtpiURT^ Vyakhyatam, explained.

11. By the action of the hand, the action of a child
(has been) explained. — 191.

UpaskdnL—’Tlie act/lon which is produced in the hand together Arith the pestle, by
the impact of the rnortaih is not at all preceded by Arollfcion, nor is it the source .of virtue
and vicci. H'.^. os tends a similar natiiee to the -playful movements of the hands and feet,
etc., of a child : , ■

Altlioiigli a child’s uioveuieiit of* its liaiids, feet, etc,, is surely
preceded by volition, it lias not for its result the acquisition of the good
and the avoidance oE the evil, nor is it a source of virtue and vice. This
is the meaning of the extension or analogy.— 11.

Vidriti . — But liow is action, in the form of sideward and upward
motion, of the hands and feet of a child lying on the lap, produced, in
the absence therefrom of the particular molecular movement or, impulse ?
So'be says: ’ ' . , ’ . ' ’


i''''

liilifci*


liSfll


"


1


VAISE8IKA PEILOSOPBY.


By tlie action o! the hand, of the form of throwing upwards, etc,,
simnltaneoiis with the throwing upwards of a stone, the action, i,e., the
throwing upwards of the hands and feet, of a child, is explained,
proved. Thus, a particular molecular inovement is not the cause of all
throwing high upwards, but only of particular acts of throwing high iip“
wards. Hence the thi*owing upwards of the hands and feet of a child
is not unproved. Otherwise, the throwing upwards, of the hands of one
who throws up a stone, etc., will be also unproved.

Gertain volitional actions also, not a cause of virtue or vice.


n ^ I t I n n


gjn' Tatha, the same. c[»SRSf Dagdhasya, of a burnt person.
Visphotone, in the case of a boii.

12. The same (is action directed towards the killing
of a felon), when (a house being set on fire by him) the body
of a person burnt therein, is torn open by fire. — 192.

Upaskafa.— Now, exteiicluig sim.ilai'ity to the action of a child to action \Yhicli, though
preceded by volition, is yet not the cause of virtue and vice, he says :

A house being set on fire by a felon and in it boils being caused to a
person burnt by the fire, action which is produced in the hand, etc,, by
volition directed towards the killing of that felon, is neither a cause of
virtue nor a cause of vice; as it has been said, “ In the slaying of a felon,
there is no sin in him that slays openly or covertly- wrath eucouiiters
wrath. An incendiary, a poisoner, an assassin, a thief, a ravislier of wile
and field, — these six are felons.”~12,

Vivriti. — Sometimes throwing upwards, etc., result also from parti-
cular molecular movements which are not dependent upon particular
volitions produced by the desires, 1 throw upwaixls.” etc. Ihis he
points, out •

- . ' * ' ' of a burnt body, building, fruit, etc.;

sideward and upward of their parts; molecular movement, caused by
a particular volition, is not the cause. This is the meaning.

N on-volitional actrion in the body described.


n H J 1 11


. .j . , Ya^na-abhive, in the ab.sence of volition. Prasuptasya, of

b , the sleeping. “STSTSTSf ChaJanam, movement.

13. ‘Movement of tbe sleeping (takes place) in tbe ab-


liiSilisi


KABlDA S0TEA8 V, 1-15.


The word ‘ prasupfcasya ’ implies the state of absence of consciousness.
Therefore, the movement caused by air in the' unconscious state of a
person in swoon, while living, should be observed here.— 13-.

Vivriti. — Even in the absence of volition caused by the desii’e, “ I
throw up,” etc., ‘ movement ’ of the body, i.e., action such as the
sideward and upward movements of the limbs, of a person ‘sleeping ’ or
attended with deep sleep, is produced. Therefore, a particular volition is
not everywhere tlie cause. This is the import.

Action in things other than the body.

^ ^ II t I t I II

Trine, in the grass, Karmraa, action. Vayu-samyogat

from conjunction with air.

14. Action in the grass (arises) from conjunction
with air. — 194.

Uixts/fdra.— Having explained the acfcioiis of the body, he treats of other actions :

By the term ‘ grass,’ he implies trees, shrubs, creepers, and all such
other objects. — 14.

V ivriti . — He points out similar other actions also.

Even in the absence of a particular volition, from conjunction with air,
action is produced in the grass.

Actions ■produced by adfistam.

Manhgamanam, movement of -the jewel Siichi-abhi-

sarpanam, approach of the needle. Adrista-karanakam, have

adriBiam^ (z>,, the invisible consequences of previous acts) as their cause.

15. The movement of the jewel, and the approach
of the needle, have adrisfam as their canse. — 195.

Vpasle&ra . — Enumerating actions dependent upon adrl^tam, he says :

By the terra ‘jewel’, bell-metal, etc., are implied. In the going, which
takes place, therefore, of the jewel, bell-metal, etc., informed withmoni?’® or
incantation, towards the thief, there, of that movement, the jewel, etc.,
are the combinative cause, conjunction of the jewel with the Soul of the
thief possessed of a^vistam, is the non-combinative cause, and the vice of
the thief is the efficient or instrumental cause. By the word, . ‘ needle,’ in ;
‘ the approach of the needle,’ all metal as well as grass are implied.'
Thus in the case of the movement of the needle, .etc., -towards . that which
is attractive of iron the, mague% the moyement of gmsa


iiiiM



VAI&ESIKA PEILOSOPPI'


.towards that which is attractive of grass, the needle, etc., are the combi-
native cause, conjunction with the soul of the person possessed of iujristam,
who is affected for good or for bad by that movement of the grass, the
needle, etc., is the non-combinative cause, and his very adrktmn is the
instrainental cause. Other instances, e.g., the flaming irpwards of fire,
the sideward motion of air, the action of the ultimate atoms at the begin-
ning of creation, etc., should be similarly understood. — 15.

Vivriti.—Qj the term, ‘ jewel, ’ are intended vessels made of gold, etc.,
and filled with, water. To such a vessel magicians apply incantations for
the recovery of stolen property. The tradition of the ancients is this :
The vessel is set on the ground, and some other person lays his right hand
upon it. The vessel accompanied with the hand, in consequence of the
efficacy of the incantation, moves towards the spot where the stolen proper-
ty has been deposited, and on reaching that place, stops.

The reason of the movement of such a vessel is not a particular voli-
tion, but the efficient cause is the merit of the former possessor or the
demerit of the thief. The non-combinative cause is conjunction of such a
vessel with soul possessing such adristam (or results of actions done in
previous states of existence) ; and the combinative cause is such a vessel.
In like manner, adfijtum is also the cause of the attraction towards a
loadstone which takes place in needles, i.e., iron-rods, when in proximity
with the magnet. If it be asked, in consequence of whose adristam motion
takes place in needles, etc., the I’eply, is that it is the adristam of him to
whom benefit or injury accrues by the motion, that is the cause. The term,
‘needle,’ is indicative, iron in general attracted by the load-stone being
intended. It is to be understood that adristam is the cause of the motion
of grass attracted by that which is attractive of grass (amber ?), of the
upward flaming of fire, of the sideward motion of airs, and of the action of


KANlDA SUTEAS F, 147.


In ' isan ' the locative inflection has been nsed in the sense of the
genitive. The sense of the aphorism is as follows : After conjunction
with a wall and the like, of an arrow,' etc., moving with impetus, a cessa-
tion of motion is observed, even though the arrow, etc., still exist. Here
it is not the destruction of the substratum which causes the destruction
of the motion, for the substratum continues to exist. Any contradictory
attribute is also not observed. It is, therefore, inferred that it is conjunc-
tion prodticed by itself, that destroys the action. And this conjunction,
produced at the fourth moment, destroys action of the fifth moment.

Thus, first there is production of action, then disjunction, next destruction
of the previous conjunction, after it subsequent conjunction, and lastlj^
destruction of action. The meaning, therefore, is that peculiarities of
non-siinultaneous conjunctions make known the diversity of the action.

‘ Sariiyoga-vi^esah’ means peculiarity in conjunction, which is nothing but
self-prod uced-ness. Otherwise, w^ere conjunction, as such, destructive of
action, action could not abide anywhere. — 16.

Action produced hy Sanhskara.

II m ? I II

Nodanat, from impulse or molecular movement, Adyam, ori-

ginal, first, fqr: isoh, of the arrow. ^3:^ Karmma, action.

Tat-Karmma-Karitat, produced by that action. Cha, and. Sarhs-

karat, from resultant energy, Uttarain, the next, Tatha, similarly.

Uttaram, the next, Uttaram, the next. Cha, and

17. The first action of the arrow is from, impulse ; the
next is from resultant energy produced by that (i.e., the
first) action ; and similarly the next, and the next. — 197.

Upaskdra,-' After the section on Action producible by impulse, he begins the section
on Action producible by resuitanl energy.

Of tlie first action, wliich is produced in an arrow', when discharged
from a howstriiig, drawn by the volition of a person, the arrow is the
combinative cause, volition and gravity are the efficient causes. -And by
this first action, resultant energy, called impetus, and having the same
gabspatum, is loroduced. It is proved even by perception, viz.i
the arrow) moves Avith velocity.” By that resultant energy, action is "
produced in that ariwy of which the nomcombinative cause is the result-
: ant energy, the combinative cause is the unnw;: -yyhile.the efficient cause
ig an intense form of molecular movement, In like' manner, a succession .,.0 ,


■'ti


11


174 VA18B8IKA PHILOSOPHY.

of actions one after auotller is produced by tire resnltaut energy \vliicli
continues until tlie arrow falls.

Since, on an action being destroyed by subsequent conjunction
produced by (the action) itself, another action is produced by resul-
tant energy, therefore a single resultant energy only is productive
of a succession of actions ; whereas, on tlie ground of redundancy, it
is not proper to assume a succession of resultant energy, similar
to the succession of actions. To point out tliis, he says similarly the
next, and the next,” and also uses the singular number in from resultant
energy produced by that action.” In the Ny^aya doctrine, however, whicli
admits a succession of resultant energies like the succession of actions,
there is redundancy. The reason, again, that of two arrows, simultaneous-
ly discharged, the impetus of the one is swift and that of the other slow,
is the swiftness and slowness of the impulse or molecular movement. — 17.

Vivnti. — The original action itself of a discharged arrow, etc.,
destroys, at the third moment from its own origin, its own cause,
molecular movement or impulse, given by the bow. Therefore, there
being absence of impulse, how wdll other actions be produced at the fifth,
and succeeding moments ? In view of this objection, he states the
aphorism.

Falling of arroiD^ how caused.

II H I u II

Saiiiskara-abhave, in the absence of resultant energy (or pro-
pulsive energy generated by action), Gurutvat, from gravity.

Fatanam, falling.

18. In tlie absence of propulsive energy generated by
action, falling (results) from gravity. — 198.

Upaskdra.— But if only a single resulfctiut energy be productive of a succession of
ctions, then there would, foe, under no circurasfcances whatever, a falling of the arrov^b
because of the existence of the resultant energy which is productive of action. To this
objection, he replies :

Gravity, wliich is the cause of falling, invariably follows (the arrow),
at every inoment. That gravity, being counter-acted by resultant en ei’gy,
could not cause the falling (of the arrow). Now, in the absence of the
counter-active, the very same gravity causes falling. This is the mean--'
-ing.T— 18 . ' ■ . '

Here ends the fii“St chapter of the fifth book in Sahkara’s Commen'
tary on the Vais^esika Aphorisms.


. ,v,-<


liSfiiiiiiilii


*!*««*»?''*


SIANADA 8UTBA8 V, 24. . 175

Book Fifth. — Chaptee Second.'

Causes of action in Earth.

sfT^n^'srr^rr^ Nodana-abbigbatat, from molecular niovement or impulse,
and from impact, Samyukta-Samyogat, from conjunction with the

conjunct. ^ Cha, and. ff§f5?E[r Prithivyam, in Earth. Karmma, action.

1. Action in Earth (results) from impulse, impact,
and conjuntion with the conjunct. — 199.

Upaskdra , — This is the section on the examination of Action producible by impulse,
etc. Therein he says :

^T^if is a particular form of conjunction: conjunction, action
produced by wliicli does not become the cause of the disjunction of
conjoint things from eacli other ; or, conjunction which does not become
the efficient cause of Sound. That particular form of conjunction is
called impact, wliicli becomes the efficient cause of Sound, and action
produced by which becomes the cause of disjunction of conjoint things
from each other. By each of them also action is produced in Earth called
clay. In Earth action is produced from impulse given by the foot, as
well as from the impact of the foot. Here clay is the combinative cause ;
impulse and impact are respectively non-combinative causes ; gravity,
impetus, and volition are, so far as they are necessary, efficient causes.

From conjunction with the conjunct Because action is siimiltaneously
observed in a water-pot, etc., lying on clay, when action is produced in
that clay from impulse or from impact. — 1.

Above eontiniied,

fat, that, t.e.f action in Earth. Visesena, with a particular

consequence. Adrista-karitam, caused by adrisiam or destiny,

2. (If action in Eartli liaxDpens) with a particular
conseqnence, it is caused by adristam,. — 200.

Upaskdra.— Bxit what is the noii-combinatiYe cause of earthciiiake, etc., which take
place without the interveirfcion of impulse and impact ? He gives the answer :

' Tat ' alludes to action in Earth. Action in Earth alone, if it
happens "with a ];>articular consequence?, i.e., under the tendency i%)dsana)
of transmigratory souls towards birth, life, and experience (blioga)^ is then
caused by adristam. Therefore, the non-combinative cause of earthquake
is conjunction of the soul, possessing adristam, of a person whose pleasure


.Mm


'x


VAIBB8IKA PEILOaOPHY.


or pain is prodncGd by the eartlKiiiake ; the earth is the conibiriatiA e
cause ; and adristam is the efficient cause. /

Or, ' tat ’ alludes to impulse and impact. ‘ Viflesah ’ means absence.
So that, the meaning is, action in Earth, ^^hich is produced in the absence
o£ iinpulse and impact, is caused by adristam— 2.

Cause of rain.

Sariiyoga-abhave, in the absence of con-
cavity. Patanam, falling.

tte aljssiice of conjunc-


’ ■ ?pjt ApSm, of waters,
junction. Gurutvat, from g

3. The falling of waters, in
tion, is due to gravity.— -201.

tJpasMra.— Now, in the section on the examination of action combined with fluid
(which includes liquid) substance, he says :

The falling of waters, in the form of a shower, is caused by gravity,
which is its non-combinative cause. It takes place in tbe absence of
conjunction, i.e., conjatnotion with the cloud. Therefore, absence of con-
junction is the efficient cause. This is the meaning. 3.

Causes of flowing of icater.

Dravatvat, from fluidity, Syandanam, flowing.

IP' 4. Flowing (results) from fluidity. — 202.

i' [7pngfcam.—Bnt how is action, productive of mutual conjunction amongst the drops

of w'ater themseives, produced ? He gives the answer.

■ By the mutual conjunction of drops of water fallen on earth, a

large body of water, in the form of a stream, is produced. And tlie flowing
or distant progression, which takes place in it, is produced from fluidity
as its non-combinative cause, and from gravity as its efficient canse, in
water drops wdrich are its combinative causes.— 4.

Cause of evaporation of loater.

Nadyah, the sun’s rays. ^rf^sfiJiniL Vayu-saiiiyogat, through con-
junction with air. Arohanam, ascent.

5. Tke sun’s rays (cause) tlie ascent (of water), tlirougli
conjunction with air ,-^203.^

; . ' ,3, UpasMrc(.~Bnt the falling in rain, due to gravity, would be possible, if water lying on

earth went up. But how does this take place? Sohesays:

‘cause’ {verb),' -is the complement of the aphorism. The
up of -water, through conjunction with air.


ilgfgl'WplaKSigpiiis' jg-^ : • V

Where the reading is iTT^gfl^^nr?!;_ there it should be i iiterprefced
as coujiaiction with air, related to the sun’s rays. — 5-

Cause of evaporation of water, continued.

— Nodana-^pidanat, from concussion, -or being vicleiitly
shaken bj or through the impulse. Sarayukia-sariiyogat, . from

conjunction with the conjunct. ^ Cha, and.

6. (Particles of water fly upwards), by means of

concussion with, impulse, aud of conjunction with the con-
junct. — 204 . . ■

Upaskdra . — But how do the sun’s rays come fco possess such power that they carry
up water lying on the earth ? Hence he says.

Particles of water fly up, being conjoined with the sun’s rays,
which are, in turn, conjoined with air, through concussion with the
impulse of strong wind ; in the same way as the rays of fire, bestirred
by air, carry up particles of water boiling in a cauldron. The word
‘ cha ■' conve\’’s the sense of ' as.’ And here only j)articles of water boiling
in a cauldron should be observed to be the simile. — 6.

Note : Upaskdra compares the two processes of evaporation and
ebullition of water

Cause of circulation of water in trees.

Vriksa-abhisarpanam, circulation in trees. ff% Itl, this.

Adrista-karitam, caused by adn'stam or destiny.

7. The circulation (of water) in trees is caused by

adristam . — 205 . " '., 7 . ..

U'pasMra.— Water poiiTed at the i*oot, goes up in all directions, through the interior ■ .
of a tree. Heitlier impulse and impact, nor the sun’s rays prcYail there. How, then,
is it caused? He gives the an^$wel^ " ■ "

‘ Abhisarpanam ’ means -flowing towards or all... over. That takes
place ill a tree, of water poured at its root. It is caused by *.e., ( i

of those souls whose pleasure or pain is produced by the growth of . the yi^vf’''- i
leaves, ^branches, fruits, flowers, etc. .The meaning, then, is that acflon .i .7' !


il


■I


a,


, non-combmative' cause, , hud- f
whioh is jts.,eombio.ative caps©


ve cause, , and; ffo.tp- adri?toOT>.ab;itB;.©£flcieat cause, in water' : •

mbio.ative cause..-r-7. f '';:.'’' ;■ .


VAISESIEA PHlLOSOPBf.


Game of condensation and dissolution of water.

ml ii v. j r i q ii

^gnri' Apam, of waters. Sanghatahy condensation, Vilaya*

naiii, dissolution. ^ Cha, and, -^#¥TT^— Tejaii-samyogat, from conjunction
with fire.

8, Condensation, and dissolution, of water, are due
to conjunction witk fire.— 206.

Upaftlcara, — Ooastitutional fluidity has been stated to be the characteristic of water*
Upward, downward, and sideward motion of such water only has been proYed. The
aqueoasaess of snow, hail, etc., also are proved without a dispute, since they possess
coldness. Therefore, how do these possess condensation, i.e., hardness, and how disso-
lution? Hence he says.

Aqueous ultimate atoms, originating a binary atomic aggregate, in
consequence of being impeded by celestial fire, do not originate fluidity
in these binary atomic aggregates. Snow, hail, etc., void of fluidity, are
thus originated, in the course of binary and other atomic aggregates, by
constituent parts void of fluidity. Tlierefo.re hardness is observed in them.

Such being the case, it may be asked, what proof is there that
snow, hail, etc., are modifications of water? Accordingly it has been
said, ‘‘ Dissolution also from conjunction with fire.” By a more powerful
conjunction with fire, action is produced in the ultimate atoms originative
of snow, hail, etc. Action produces disjunction. From the successive
destruction thereby of originative conjunctions follows the destruction
of the larger compounds, snow, hail, etc. In consequence of the departure
therefrom of conjunction with fire, which was ai) impediment to fluidity,
the \ ery same ultimate atoms originate fluidity in binary atomic aggi’O-
gates j whence dissolution takes place of snow, hail, etc., thus endowed
with fluidity. Here also the subsequent ingress of a more powerful fire


latra, there, in the case of the ingress of fire into water*
Vispburjjathufi, the pealing of thunder. mark*

j J;; 9. The pealing of thunder is the mark of that.— 207.

what is the proof that there is subsequent ingress into water of a
ittore jpowerful flre present in ether ? So he says ;

• i.e.yiu th.e matter of the subsequent ingress of fire, present

Ifi:; eth|r,.| 'ihto water floating in ether, ‘ visphurjjathuh lifigam,’ is., the

"j, ..‘i’ ^ ^ ' .


eanada bdtbab' r, 2-11


liteR Vaidikam, Vedic, Derived from Veda. Cha and.

10. (Tliere is) Vedic (proof) also. — 208.

UpasMra.—Oi. this he gives yet another proof.

Tke meaning is that the ingress of fire into water is proved by
the Veda also. Tims:---

?iT nvf 1

“ Those waters held fire in their womb, which held fire in their
womb,” etc.— 10.

Gause of thundering.

?i<T’r ^JTrfkflrRRr ii i i 5 1 a

Apam, of waters, Samyogat, from conjunction. ^sTmTii;

Vibhagat, from disjunction. ?er Cha, and. Stanayitnoh, of cloud.

11, (Tlitinder-clap results) from conjunction with,
and disjunction from, water, of the cloud. — 209.

Vpaslmra.—Bat how is tlniadaring produoed, since conjnnofcionand disjunction, which
are the causes of Sound, are not observed ? Hence he says :

“ Visphurjjathuh ” is the complement of the aphorism. Conjunction
with, and disjunction from, water, of the cloud, by becoming efficient
cairses, produce sound, f.e., thundering, in ether as the combinative cause,
through the conjunction of the cloud itself with ether, as the non-combi-
native cause. Sometimes, again, conjunction with, and disjunction from,
air, of the cloud, are the efficient causes, and conjunction of the cloud
with ether, and its disjunction therefrom, are the non-comhinative ca:nse8.
This is collaterally mentioned in the topic of the causes of action, ; Or) ■
since action is the leading topic here, it is indicated that, conjunction s of
the cloud and ether, or their disjunction, beipg the non-comhinative cause
of sound, the (efficient) cause is , action produced from fhe'^'ra
impact of water alone — 11, . , ‘.j ■ . ; ■ . .


3011] unction of water, i.e.,
action from tlie cloud.


%5I;^ n SJJTWrR


H V. I R i ^ R u


ira^wtJsrr


V


o of Earth* Tejah-

action of air. Cha, and.

le action of- Air are



sMra. — It has been stated that conjunction with soul possessing adristam is a
arth“Q.uake, As there, so in the ease of the action which is produced in hre which
sudden conflagration, and in air which causes a sudden agitation of trees and the
auction with soul possessing adri§tcm is also the non-combinative cause ; air
re the eombinativc causes ; and adristam is the efficient cause* This is the

he {twice recuiTehce of the word action in the aphorism, has the
Causes of initial action of fire, air, atoms, and mind.

II Vf I I ^ ^ »


Agneh, of fire. LJrddhva-jvalanam, flaming upward.

Vayol,!, of air. ^^35^ Tiryyak, sideward, 17^^ Pavaiiam, blowing.
A^unam, of atoms, Manasati, of mind. ^ Cha, and. Adyam, initial,

first. Karmma, action, Adrista-karitani, caused by adrifam.

13. The initial np-ward flaming of fire, the initial
sideward blowing of air, and the initial actions of atoms,
and of mind are caused 'hy adristam. — 211.

Upaskdm,— He mentions other actions of w^hich conjunction with soul possessing
adristam is the iion-eombinative cause.

‘Idyam’ means contemporaneous with, or existing at, the lieginning
of creation. At that stage, impulse, impact, etc., being non-existent, con-
junction \yith soul possessing adristam is in these cases the non-combina-
tive cause. The adjective, * initial,’ qualifies upward flaming, and side-
■ ward bloyidng. It is proper to hold that imjietus is the non-eombinative
oansd of other ..bhan initiabractions of fire and air, for there being a visi-
ifele'ctt’ known; cause there is ho occasion lor the supposition of an invisible
;,br unknown canse—J3.. ^ ’


KA-NADA SVTEA8 V, %-U^


Gause of action of mind.

^ u ^ \ r \ ^2 w

Hasta-karmnian^, by the action of the hand. Manasah

of mind or the internal organ, karnima, action, Vyakhyatanfij

^explained,. ■

14. Tlie action of mind is explained by the action of
the hand. — 212.

UpasMim* — With reference to non-initial action, he says :

As in tlie tlirowing upward, etc., of the pestle, the action of the hand
has for its noii-combi native cause conjunction with soul exercising volition,
so the action of the mind also, for the purpose of corning into contact with
the (external) sense receptive of tlie object desired, really has for its non-
combiiiative cause conjunction with soul exei'cising volition. Althougii
mind, the sense, is not directly subject to volition, still it should be observed
that action is produced ill mind by volition wdiich can be reached by the
nervous process by which mind travels. That the nervous process can be
apprehended by the tactual sense-organ, however, must be admitted ;
for, otherwise, assimilation of food, drink, etc., also will not be possible
volition wdiicli can be reacliecl by the nervous process through which life
or the vital energy travels, — 14.

Pleasure and fain are mavlts of action of mind.


Atma-indriya-manali-artha-sannikarsat, from contact
of soul, sense, mind, and object. Sukha-duiikhe, pleasure and pain.

15. Pleasure and pain (result) from contact of soul,
sense, mind, and object. — 213.

UpasJedra, Bat, it may be objected, there is no proof that action is produced in the

•minclV' ^ ■ . .

Pleasure and pain is indicative ; cognition, volition, etc., are to be
understood. The universality or ubiquity of mind has been alreadj^ refuted
and its atom-iiess established. It has also been stated that the non-
production of cognitions simultaneously is the mark of mind. There
eoiild, therefore, be no pleasure and pain at all, without the conjunction,
of mind with the respective localities of the senses. The meaning is that,
did no action take place in mind, there could be no feeling in the form of
“ Pleasure in my .foot/' “ Pain in my head,” etc. Although all the pcirti-
ciilar attributes of the soul depend upon contact of mind, yet pleasure
and pain are (alone ; expressly) , mentioned,- because,', on account of', their
intensity, they are very manifesi— 35*;.,,: ■ ■ ; - . „ . .


“1


182 . VAI8E8IKA PHILOSOPHY.

Yoga deserihed.

isJsrrwnRT: ?r

U I u

^^?fn:5:vr: Tat-anarambhah, non-origination of thatj pleasure and pain^
or action of mind. Atmasthe, steady in the soul. Manasi,mind beings

^arirasya, of body, i.e,^ of the embodied soul, f dulikha-abhavah,

non-existence of pain, Sab, that, ^'ogah, yoga^ communion,

16. Non-origination of tliat (follows) on tliemind be-
coming steady in the soul ; (after it, there is) non-existence
of pain in the embodied soul. (This is) that yoga. — 214.

Upaskdra, — Well, if the mind is so fickle or restless, then there being no inhibition
or restraint of the Internal organ there can be no yoga oy eommmiion, and ^Yithont yoga
there can be no intuitWe knowledge of the soul, and without it, there can be no moksa
or salYation. Therefore, the undertaking of this treatise is futile. In anticipation of
this objection, he says :

Wlien tlie mind o£ an indifferent wlio has come to believe in the
vanity of all objects of enjoyment, comes to stay only in the soul, at that
.stage, owing to the absence of volition* corresponding to its action, action
is not produced in the mind which then becomes comparatively steady.
It is this (state) which is (called) since the characteristic of yoga is
the inhibition or restraint of the internal organ, cJiittam.

‘ Tat-anfi 2 *ambha .b' means non-origination of action of mind. Or, by
the word, ‘tat,' ‘that,’ only pleasure and pain are denoted, being in the
context. ‘ Dnhkha-abliavah ’ ; Being the means of the non-existence of
pain, Yoga itself is (spoken of as) non-existence of pain, as is the expres-
sion “ Food is life.” Or, it is a relative compound word meaning where
, there is non-existence of pain. ‘ Sarirasya ’ means the soul as limited or
determined by the body. ‘ Sah yogah ’ : here the word, ‘ that/ refers to a
universally known object, (the meaning being) this is that Yoga,

Or, by the word, ‘atma,' life is here denoted by transference, since
soul is inferred by life. So that, by action in the nervous firocess which
is the channel of the life-breath, action of the life-breath, (respiration),
is also produced. Or, the action of the life-breath lias, for its non-combina-
tive cause, conjunction of the life-breath with soul exercising volition the
source of vitality. And volition, which is the source of vitality, is super-
sensible, and has to fee inferred by the movement of the life-breath. Other-
wise, how can there be inspiration and expiiation of air, even in the
state of deep sleep ? This is the import.— 16.


■ 'AO X :* - A. ''A,-


ICANIDA SUTRAS V, 2-17.


■ Vivriti . — ‘ Atmastlie maaasi,’ i.e,, when, quitting the senses, etc.,
in virtue o£ the six-limbed Yoga, .mind abides in the soul alone, then,

‘ tat-an4rauibhah,’ i.e., ‘ anarambhah ’ or non-productioii of action of
mind. The mind then becomes fixed or steady. In this state, ‘ Sanrasya
duhkha-abhavah,’ i.e., pain in relation to the body is not produced.

‘ Sal),’ i.e., conjunction of mind, resiling from the outside, with soul,
is called Yoga.

The following verses of the Shandafurariam also prove the same
thing :

sr^jTf rcjjg' i

‘^So also, {i.e, restless) is Ghitta, {i,e,, the internal organ), smitten
with air* 'rherefore, do not trust it. Accordingly, restrain air, for the
purpose of steadiness of Ohitta, For the purpose of restraining air,
j)ractise Yoga^ of which there are six ahgas or .limbs. Posture, Regula-
tion of breath, Abstraction or Inhibition of the senses, Concentration of
mind, Meditation, and Absorption, — these are the six angas or limbs of
Fogu or communion.”

Therefore, there being cessation of false knowledge, etc., brought
about by the manifestation of intuitive knowledge of soul, after th^j
attainment of Yoga, final emancipation remains unimpeded. Conse-
quently a system of thinking about things (like Karj^dda Stums'^ is not
fruitless. This is the import.

Other actions of mind, etc. independent of volition, and dependent on adristam,

9if5^iTfcrrfir n it i i ii

Apasarpanam, going out, egress. ?qrer^-Upasarpanam,
coming into, ingress. ?rr%5rfr?rd#»Tri— A^ita-plta-saniyoga|i, conjunctions
of what is eaten and drunk. Karyva-antara-sathyogafi,

conjunctions of other effects or products. =gf Cha and. ?T^girR?iT^ Adrista-
karitani caused by adn^tam.

17. Egress and ingress (of life and mindj from and
into, body), conjunctions (i.e., assimilation) of food and drink,
and. conjunctions of other . products,— tbese are caused by : ■

■ ■' ■


VAISBSIKA PBlLOSOPUy.


if. Tolitioii "WBro fell© efficient cause ot the actioii, .of life auci iniiicly
tlieiij when life and mind go out from the body, in the state of death, and, on the produe™
tioii of another body, re-enter into it, there being no volition, both these actions would foe
impossible. How, again, can be produced action, productive of conjunction of even what
is eaten and drunk, ie., food and drink, which conjunction is the cause of the growth
of the body and its limbs, as well as action which causes conjunction and disJiirictio.n
during life within the womb ? In anticipation of this objection, he says :

Here the neuter gender iu the word ‘ adrista-karittlni ’ is according
to the rule that a word of the neuter gender, appearing together with a
word of. another gender, may optionally entail neuter gender in both.
The word, ‘Samyoga,’ again, secondarily denotes action which is its
cause. ‘ Apasarpaiiaih,’ i.e., the going out of life and mind from the
body alone, on the wearing away of action which originated the body ;

‘ Upasarpanaifa,’ i.e., the entrance of life and mind into another body as
it is produced ; action which is the cause of the conjunction (i.e., assimi-
lation) of food, drink, etc. ; and action which is the cause of the conjunction
(i.e., pulsation, etc.) of another product, i.e., the foetus all these have
as their non-comhi native cause conjunction with soul possessing adriftam.
The word, ‘ iti,’ implies that the actions of the humours and excreta
of the body are also caused by conjunction with soul possessing adriftam,
as their non-combinative cause. — 17.

Vivi'iti. — He mentions other actions dependent on adri^pxm :

‘ Apasarpanam,’ i.e., egress of mind from the body at death ; ‘ Upa-
sarpanaih,’ i.e., the ingress of mind into another bod}’- when it is
pi'odnced ; action from which conjunctions of what is eaten and drunk,
i.e., food and water, are produced ; action from which conjunctions of
other effects, i.e., the senses and life, xvith the body, are produced
all these are caused by conjunction with soul possessing adriftam, as the
non-combinative cause.


-Moksa described:


^ w % \ \ \\

Tat-abhave, in the non-existence of that, i.e., the causal body, or
potential body, or the subtle body of impressions and tendencies, acquired
during life, which becomes the cause of re-birth, and in re-birth, becomes
encased, as it were, in the gross, physical body. Samyoga-abhavah,

non-existence of conjunction, /,<?., with the existing physical body.
A-p.radurbhavah, .haurre-appearance, or non-re-birth. Cha, and.
Aloksah, salvation,- ;

; 18 . the non-existence of conjnno-

tion ^th the body, when there is, at the the same^ time, no


KABABA SUTBAS V, 2-18,


Here the idea is as follows: The power of Yoga produces intui-
tive knowledge of tlie self ; false knowledge, attended \vith desire, is there-
bj' annihilated; consequently, attraction, aversion, stupidity or irration-
ality or spiritual blindness [molia), and other faults due to it, disappear ;
then inclination or activity goes away ; birth, due to it, therefore, does
not take pilace ; and, consequently, pain, bound up with birth, also
vanishes away. This, then, is the nature of things. Now, in vii tue of
the power born of yoga, a yogin, considering the entire mass of virtues
and vices, or merits and demerits, which are the uncommon or particular
causes of pleasure and pain to be enjoyed, at particular places and times,
in the bodies of a horse, an elephant, a serpent, a bird, etc., in accordance
with those merits and demerits, and then going through those several
forms of physical existence, thei’eby wears away or. exhausts his pre-
viously produced merits and demerits by experiencing them. His faults
being thus neutralised, -when other merits and demerits are not produced,
and when there is in consequence no production of another future or
potential body, at that time, it is the non-existence of conjunction, which
then exists, with the former body, that is (called) moksa. ‘ Tat-abhave’
means in the absence of conjunction, in the non-production of a future,
body. .....

To meet the objection that this state is common to all at pralaya,
or periodical dissolution of ci-eation, he adds ‘apradurbhavah’. The
meaning is, after which manifestation of body, etc., does not again
take place. ‘ Sah moksah that is. anhilation of pain, which results in.
that state, is Moksa. — 18.

Vivriti. — It may be objected that the stream of bodies being without-
beginning and without end, the impossibility of emancipation is also the
same. Heiicehesays:

‘ Tat-abhave,’ i.e., in the absence of adriqtam, that is to say, where
future adristam is exhausted by intuitive knowledge of self, and existing
adristam, by experience, bhoga ; ‘ sam.yoga-abhiTah,’ i.e., a severance '^kes. :
place from connection with the stream or succession of bodies ; following
it, is ‘ aprMurbhavah ;. f.e., non-production . of pain, since the oau&s, ,-
mz., body and adfistam, do not exist. It is then and. there that emancl-"
pation becomes possible, ".^ Therefore/emaacipation is hot chimericah like
the horns of a hare. This is the import, . . ■ k' ■


: PHILOSOPHY.


.abstaiice is observed , also in
s.” dXei’e there is no volition,
it energy. Therefore, another
dthlii observation. Accordingly


UiJasl^clm.— It may be objected :
darkness, there being the perception,
no impulse or impact, no gravity or
efficient cause shonld be enumerated ;
he says ;

By this aphorism, the cletermiaatioii or delirnitatioii that substances

are. uine only, also becomes established

Now, the prodwctioii
possessing touch ; but in
touch is only undeveloped here

to development of colour. . .

Ohjeetion . — This is the rule in case of Earth, whereas darkness .is

the tenth substance.- . - ■ . . c 1. 1

Anmer. — It, is not- For no other substance is substi'atum ol. blue

colour, and gravity is .inseparable from blue colour, as also are taste and

' Objeatioji.— As sound is the only distinguishing attribute of Ether,
so-also will blue colour be the only distinguishing attribute of darkness. '

• ■ Answer.— -It is not so, as there is contradiction to its visibility. For,
1+' darkness were something - possessing blue colour, or were it blue coloui


o£ substance is dependent upon
darkness, touch is not felt. It can
for de vel oilmen t of touch


Above contim.(ed.


'the ' perception of Kiofeiott '(ih ^ giyes*


kaMda suteas,v,:2^


Light' being obscured 'by another moving substances iiori-existence
of light is not observed in the places falling behind, and is observed in
the places lying before. It is from this resemblance of the non-existence
of light to the luoviiig substance, that motion is mistaken in it, but not
that motion is real in it. This is the meaning, the perception appearing
so (1.6., erroneous) from agreement and difference. tTliat is, whenever
a body in' motion obscures light, the shadow caused thereby also moves ;
and where the obscuring body is not in motion, the shadow also does not
move).

Darkness, (then), is non-existence of every trace of light possessing
developed or appreciable colour. — 20

Spaee^ Time, Ether, and Soul are void of action,

Dik-kalaii, space and time. Akasaih, ether. ^ Cha, and

also. Kriyavat-vaidharmmyat, because of difference from that

which possesses activity. Niskriyaiii, inactive.

21, Space, Time, and also Ether are inactive, because
of their difference from that which possesses activity. — 219.

UjKiHMm Raving* tlins finished the parenthetical section on darkness, in two aphor-
isms, he begins the seccion on voidness of action :

The word ‘ Oha ’ brings in the soul. Difference from that which
possesses activity lies in the imponderableness or incorporiety of space, ’■
etc,, for activity always accompanies corporeity or form. — 21.

Action, Attribute, Qemis, Species, and Oombination are void of action.

fwrfftr s^n^^rrar: ii k i :? i n

gtena, by this, q^sftfrar Karmmani, actions, GunSh, attributes.

=sf Cha, and. sjpuffffr: Vyakhyatah, explained.

22. By this, Actions and Attributes are explained (as

inactive), — 220. . :

He points out the inactivity of actions and attributes :

‘Etena’ means by difference from that which possesses activity.
Difference from that which possesses activity, in other words, incorporeity
or iinponderableness, belongs to attribute and action. They are, therefore
explained to be inactive. 22. , • . ■■ | -

The word ‘Oha’ implies Genus, etc... :

: ' Combination has no beginning, and, so is independent of petims. '

II n I I II


VArSESIKA ParLOSOPEY.


Niskriyanam, of the inactive, Samavayalj, combination.

Karmmabhya|i, from actions. hR®: Nisiddhah, excluded, beyond, inde-
pendent.

23. (The relation) of the inactive {i.e., Attribute and
Action), (to Substance), is Combination, (which is) indepen-
dent of actions. — 221.

Vpcskdvtx , — It may be urged t — If attribute and action are inactive, bow then can
there be relation of substance with them? Connection by conjunction may be possible ;
but that is denendent upon action. Hence he says :


TOflf Karanam, cause. 5 Tu, however. A-samavayinab, non-

combinative. Guijah, attributes.

24. Attributes are, however, non-coinhinative cau-
ses. — 222.

UpasMra :-'It may be objected ; If attributes, being imponderable, are not the com-
binative causes of action, then how are attributes and actions produced attributes ?
For causality, save and except in the form of combinative causality, is not possible. To
meet this objection, he says :

Attributes are non-combinativ’^e causes but not combinative causes
also, whereby they might be receptacles or fields of action. And that
non-combinative causality arises, in some cases, from combination in the
same object with the effect, as that of the conjunction of soul and mind
in the particular attributes of the soul, and of conjunction, disjunction,
and sound in sound, and, in other cases, from combination in the same
object with the cause, as that of the colour, etc., of potsherds, etc., in the
colour, etc., of the water-pot, etc. — 24.

Vivriti . — The use of ‘ cause ’ instead of causes, is aphoristic.

Space is a non-eombinative cause.

A ?) H ^ 1 I H

5^: Gupaihj by attributes. f^Dik, space. is?ir«?!tr?rr Vyakhyatah» ex-


is explained by Attributes.— 223


(i


KAN AD A SUTRA§::¥I,.A^


. . IJpasMra.— It may be objected :~“Actlc>u:!?j produced here, ActioE.is proclueed wm.'
On 'the strength of smeh perceptions, Space and 'Time 'also are snrely combinative causes of
nctiom....,How,,otheinvise,. could, they be assigned as the seat of action in. these cases?
Accordingly he says : ’

Tiie meaning is that as gravity, and other attributes, being im-
ponderable, are not the combinative cause of action, so space also, being
imponderable, is not the combinative cause of action. As to being the
seat or receptacle, however, it can arise even without combinative causal-
ity, as iu “ cotton-seeds in a bowl,” “curd in a bowl,” “ the roaring of a
lion in the forest,” and other instances. — 25.

Time is an efficient cause.

11 V I l II

Kiraijena^ by cause, by way of efficient causality,

Killali, Time.

26. By Wciy of officiont cOiUScility, (tlio .rofcronco of
action to Time as its seat, being explained), Time (is ex-
plained to be inactive, so far as combinative causality is con-
cerned). — 224.

Upufifedm.— With the same ebject as already stated, he says ;

The syntactical connection of the aphorism is with “ explained to
be inactive,”— corresponding words in the preceding aphorism, with ne-
cessary changes. The use of ‘ Karanena, ’ instead of ‘ nimittakaranena,’ .
IS an instance of denoting an object principally as an existence, (i.e.,
wiAoiit qualification). The meaning, therefore, is that Time, being the
efficient cause, is only the seat of action, but is not its combinative cause.


^ Here ends the second chapter of the fifth book in the Commentary
of Saiikara upon the Vais^esika Aphorisms.

Book Sixth — Chapter First.

7 he 1' eda is a work of intelligence, and therefore, authoritative,

IK I ? I ? II

Buddhi-purwa, preceded by understanding. Vakya-

Kritiji, composition of sentences. It Vede, in the Veda. > '

. : 1. In tbe yeda tbe composition of sentences has been

preceded by understanding.— 225. , ‘ .

Vpash&ra. The snbjeot of the sixth book is the esamihatioii of dftanna, virtne or
merit, and adiharma, vice or demerit, -which are the root causes of transmigration, Dharnia


1 ^*



Piil


fifiiilisss

^p!

,:iv! :


VAISESIKA PHILOSOPHY


and adharina^ again, have to be siipponed on the strength of such precepts and prohibitions
as Let him who desires -heaven j perform sacrifices,^' •‘^Let him not eat tobacco/’ etc., and
their existence depends upon the authoritativeness of these preceptive and prohibitive
texts. And that authoritativeness can be possible or arise from the speaker’s previously
possessing the attribute characterised as knowledge of the accurate meaning of the sen-
tences ; since aathoritatlveness per se is excluded. Hence the author, in the first place,
commences the demonstration of the attribute which clothes the Veda with authoritative-
ness.

‘ Vakya-kritih] ’ i.e., composition of sentences, is ‘ buddlii-purvva,’
i.e., preceded by the speaker’s knowledge of the accurate meaning of the
sentences, because it is composition of sentences, like composition by
ourselves and others of such sentences as “ There lie five fruits on the
hank of the river.’

‘ In the Veda ’ means in the aggregate of sentences. Here the com-
position of aggregated sentences is the pa/sja (i.e., the subject of the con-
clusion). It cannot he otherwise established (as authoritative), namely by
the characteristic of being 'preceded by the understanding of ourselves and
others ; for, in such instances as “ Let him who desii-es heaven, perform
sacrifices,” the fact that performance of sacrifices is a means of attaining
the desired object, or that securing heaven is an effect, is beyond the reach
of our and others’ understanding. It is, therefore, proved that the Veda,
as an effect, has for its antecedent an Absolute or Independent Person.
z\nd the characteristic of the Veda is that, while the subject of its mean-
ing is not certain knowledge produced by proof other than the proof sup-
plied bj' words and all that which depends upon them, it is word of
which .the proof or authority is not produced by knowledge of the mean-,
iiig of sentences produced by words.— 1.

Vioriti . — By this aphorism, the doctrine of Mimamsfi philosophy,
that word is eternal, is refuted.

The Veda is a loorh of intelligenee, and therefore, authoritative, continued.


STiW Brahmane, in the portion of Veda, so called, SanijnS-Karma,

attribution or distribution of names. Siddhi-lingaiii, mark of know-

ledge of things named, or of the conclusion that the Veda is an intelligent
production- '

;V‘ 2. THe distribution of names in tlie BriJnnana (por-

tion of the Veda) is n mark of knowledge, (on the part of the
.Earner of the names); of the things named (therein).— 226.

of tlie Veda have been



KA.NADA, SUTBAS


Here Brahmanam ’ denotes a particular portion of the Veda.
* Samjni.>-Karmma/ i.e., the distribution , of names, which appears there,
points to iiiiderstaiiding on the part of the framer of the names, as in the
world the distribution of such names as Long-ear, Long-nose, Long-neck,

The Veda 26 ' a work of intelligence^ midAherefore^ ciuthoritative^ eontimied.


Buddhi-piirvvah, preceded by understanding. Dadatih, gives^

.■'to': give,; gift, , ' , ■

3. (Precepts enjoining) gift (are) preceded by under-
standing.~227.

Upashdra, — He Eientions another fortn of proof :

The injunction of gift (as a source of dlmrma), which has been estab-
lished in such text as “ Let iiitn who desires heaven, give a cow,” has been
made from the knowledge that it is the means of attaining the object de-
sired. The conjugated form, ‘dadatih,’ gives, tropically denotes ‘ gift ’
which is the meaning of the root ‘ to give.’ — 3.

Above continued'


ffSTT Tatha, so, the same. Pratigrahah acceptance.

4. Tbe same is acceptance (of a gift.) — 228.

U paskdm,~-Ee gives yet another proof

Texts of the Veda, enjoining acceptance of gifts, are also preceded
by understanding. The word, '' pratigrahah” indicates a Vedic text of
which it is the subjeet Thus, texts of the Veda, enjoii]i.ug acceptance of
land, etc., imply its efficacy to the welfare of the acceptor. Texts of the
Veda, of which the subject-matter is the acceptance of the skin of a black«
arid-white -antelope, ^ point out or - bring to light its efficacy towards
that which is not desired by the acceptor. And efficacy towards the
desired’ and efficacy towards the uiidesired, or potencies for good and for
evil, cannot, in these cases, appropriately fall within the cognizance of
the iinderstau cling of persons later born. — 4.

V'lvripL — Although all these have been . already explained by the
first aphorism,. still this much undertaking is for the purpose oh pointing

out some of the dharmas or duties. ' . - ’ „ ■

- . .. AttvihihteB -of one soul do not produce sheets in another soul : he

reaps, ioha . :: '


192 VAI§EBIKA PBIL080PHY.

Atraa-antara-giin^nam, of the attributes of one soul*
AtEia*aotare, in another soul. , A“karanatvaty because there is no

causality*

5. [“Result (of action) indicated by the &5astra, (accrues)
to the perfoiiner”], hecatise there is no causality of the attri-
butes of one soul in (the attributes of) another soul. — 229.

U‘pmkdra, — Now, in in.Bfcillcat'ion of the apliofistn of Jaiaiini, Result (of action)?
indicated by the asbra, (accrues^ to the performer, (Phrva-Miraams4 Siutram) he says :

Because the attributes of one soul, e. g., merits and demerits arising
from sacrifice, slaughter, etc., are not causes of the attributes, in the shape
of pleasure and pain, of another soul. This being the case, pleasure and
pain are produced bj^ dharma and adharma appertaining to each indivi-
dual soul, and not bj^ dharma and adharma existing in different substrata.
Otherwise, the fruits of sacrifice, slaughter, etc., will accrue to him by
whom these were not performed, and hence, loss of the fruits of acts done,
and acquisition of the fruits of acts not done will be the result.

Objection . — There is no such universal rule, since there is a violation
of it in the sacrifice for the birth of a son, sacrifice in favour of the
departed ancestors, etc. Thus, it is heard that the fruits of SrMdha or
performance of obsequies, etc., performed by the son, accrue to the
departed ancestor ; it is also heard that the fruit of the sacrifice for the
birth of a son, performed by the father, accrues to the son. Nor can there
be notliing but co-existence of the performance and its fruit in the same
subject, the agent-enjoyer, hy means of the fruit accruing to the son and
the departed ancestor; in the one case, the Srdddha being intended as the
means of enabling the departed ancestor to participate in the enjoyments
of heaven, and, in the other case, the sacrifice being intended as the
means of securing the birth of a vigorous son.

Ijzm’er.— This view cannot be maintained, since, it conflicts with
the Veda ; for, it is heard that the fruit is only the satisfaction, etc., of
the departed ancestor, and the vigorousness, etc., of the son, the sup-
position of any other fruit being precluded by redundancy.

Objeaiion, Let then apurvath, or adrt^tani accrue to the agent as
the' fruit, while heaven accrues to the departed ancestor.

Answer.— It cannot be so, since activity must uniformly co-exist in
the same subject^ with the fruit. Otherwise, immediately after the pei-
■ formanc'e of - the Sraddha, the son bemg freed from his obligation, heaven
will not accrue to the departed ancestor. .

, Objectun.~h cannot be said that it “ will not accrue, ” since it is
the name in , the other way, for, when the departed ancestor is liberated


tAUlBA 8UTEA8 VI, 1-5. 193

(i.e. freed from tlie bonds of all enjoyment and suffering whatever), then
no sucli fruit will issixe from the SrMdha, however perfect it may be in
all its parts. But this is not the ease. For, the declaration that “ Result
(of action'!, indicated by the ^astra, (accrues), to the performer, ” being a
general rule, admits of exception, in the presence of a strong contradic-
tion, and, in the matter in hand, it is ' the tradition of the fruit accruing
to the departed ancestor and the son, which is the contradiction. This
being so, there is proving too much.

Insarcr.— Not so, for, the corresponding texts of the Teda them-
selves prevent 8113 ^ such' too much proving.

Objection.— Ill the case of the gi'eatest gifts (mahddanani, a technical
term which denotes sixteen kinds of specially meritorious gift), heaven
only is the certain fruit, and in the name of whomsoever person they
are performed, the fruit they produce, accrues to that person.

Answer. — Tliis is an absurd argument. For, here there being no
contradiction to the general observation, the general observation accom-
panied with the absence of contradiction or exceptional instance, becomes
the rule, and hence, it would not follow that kings and such other persons
need observe fast, etc , for observance of such and such acts would be
possible for them by means of other persons, with the intention or prayer
that the fruit of those acts may accrue to the former. Moreover, it is the
rule, that the thorough performance of the duties of a householder produces
fruit in the form of attainment of the world of Brahma, and thus the de-
claration in general terras has been made with the object of showing that
fruit accrues to each individual agent.

The writer of the Vritti, however, says : “ Result (of action), indi-
cated by the 6 astra,” etc., is really a rule without an exception. On the
other hand, the fruit which accrues to the departed ancestor, etc., results
from the influence of benedictory mantras proiionucecl by Br 4 hmana.s

./ ■ . f, •, *

entertained at the oraddha^ etc., the mantra^ in question being in the
case of sacriffce for the departed ancestor, “ May thy pitria or departed
ancestors have their objects fulfilled, ” and, in the case of sacrifice for the
son, “ May a sou be born unto thee, who will be vigorous, beautiful as the
moon, and the feeder of all, ” in the same way as neutralization of the' ‘
effect of poison on the body of a person bitten by a snake, is pTOduced
from the recitation of mantras or incantations by.foresters.—'S ) ) ;

Vivriti — “Result, (of action), indicated' by tRh ; ^Sstra, . ^accrues) to
the performer,” — this aphorisni of the syste'pa Of tT^mihi should be supplied 4


' ’ >' ,■ > '(T ^ '


I ' 1 ' r ^



VAISmKA PEILOSOJPEY.


ill©


iSsi


at the end of the present aphorism ; for otherwise, the ablative in it will
remain unconnected.

EntertcbinMent of imfivre Bvahnianas at a bracldha is tiseless.

gf||sv(i5R ^ lU 1 1 U n

S'!! Tat, that, i.e., the fruit of benediction. Dusta-bhojane, (^raddha)

in which impure (Brahmaiias) are entertained. ^ Na, not Vidyate, exists,
accrues, '

6. That does not exist where the impure are enter-
tained. — 230.

UpasMra.— Those fruits aecrite from the beueclictioii of Brahmanas who have been
satisfied with the entertainment, and who are not wicked, in other words, whose conduct
is in accordance with the Scistra, but not from the benediction of the wicked who have
been excluded from the category of recipients, e.g., an illegitimate son born during wed-
lock, an illegitimate son born after the death of the husband, etc. This is hat he saj s
here; , ,

‘ Tat ’ alludes to tlie fruit of beued iction . The meaning is that where
at a Sraddha {i.e., the observance of obsequial rites) evil or impure
Brahmanias are entertained^ there the fruit of benediction does not accrue
to the departed ancestor, or the meaning is this that the frnit of the
■ Srdddha itself does not accrue to the departed ancestoi-.— 6.

Impure explained.

gt dustam wickedness, impurity. rf5rr*fT»I. himsayam, in killing.

7. Impurity (lies) in killing.— 231.

Bpaafeoru.-— Who are they that are called impure? Accordingly he states the
characteristic of the impure.

Here ‘ hiinsS.yam ’ is indicative of all prohibited acts whatever.
The meaning, therefore, is that a person, given to or occupied in a pro-
hibited act, should be known as impure.— 7.

Assoeiation icith the impure is smful.

5R!t lit I ? I c II ^

^—Xasya, his, of the wicked or impure Brfihraana. OTf5'T52ir?R;t.'— Sa-

jnabhivyaharatah, from companionship or association. —Dosah, vice,

: demerit, adhartna,

8“ Beixierit' results from association with Mm.— 232, "

HOtt-existence ol fruit accrues from eutertamijag ^
^ ^rMdha^ hut nhi also aecrixes. -


KANADA SUTBAS VI, 1-10.


meaning is that ^ dosah/’ ia,, Bin, aecraes, ^ Saniabhi?yaha'-
ratah/ i.e., from association, cliaracteidsed as eating in the same row,
slee-ping in couipam^, reading in company, etc., with a Braiimana engaged
in forbidden acts. — S.

Entertainment of a pure Brahma\ia is not sinfuL
^ _ .. .. .


^ iKi? u n


that, sin, Adusne, in the case of (entertaining) one

who is not impure, ff— Na, not. — Yidyate, exists, accrues.

9. This does not accrue in the case of (entertaining)
one who is not impure.— 232.

UpasMm.“-.Does then sin accrue also fro in association with one who is not impure ?

tte'$ay|8rK0.V\\^\:^

The meaning is that ‘'tat/ i.e., sin, ' na yidyate/ does not accrue,
where a Brahmana, whose conduct is in accordance with the precepts and
prohibitions of the Sdstra, is entertained at a Srdddha.—9,

Preferenee should he given to wor-thy recipients afterwards*

5 ?f) Punati, again, afterwards, Vigiste, in or to a superior, or

a qualified or worthy person, i.e,, recipient. srf(%: Pravrittih, inclination,
attention, preference,

10. Preference (should he given), to a worthy reci-
pient (who is available) afterwards. — 234.

UpasMra,— “It may ho asked, what should the rule of conduct be in a case where
worthy recipients being not available, un worthy ones are at first invited, but gradually
worthy recipients become available. To this ho replies :

At a Srdddha, or where gifts have to be received, if qualified persons,
i.e., those who do not transgress the rules of the Sdstra in their conduct,
are obtained, then one should entertain them only, leaving aside the
censurable ones, although invited. The rule, “ One should not reject
persons invited,” refers to worthy recipients only. One should, however,
gratify censurable persons, who have been invited, by giving money,
etc. — 10.

Vivriti — But what is to be done where Srdddha, etc., have been
performed through the services of an impure BrShmapa ? He gives the

reply: ■■ .. .

- Attention should be given again to the thing of . quality,' A, '
re-performance of the SMcidha, - etc., by a piire. Brihmana, etc. The!:
previously performed, is all useless, This is the import.


i»n "

m :


196 ' VMSE8IKA PEILOSOPEY.

Equcils or inferioTs, if pure, should he acoepted as g-uests o?’ reeip>ients.

^ ^ Jt#!: III. 1 1 1 U H

5r% Same, in or to an equal, Hlne, in or to an inferior, ir

Pravrittih, inclination , attention, preference.

11. Preference (should be given) to an equal, or to an
inferior, (if he is free from impurity or fault).— 235.

U'pdBlcciTCi , — He lays down the rule of conduct where, at a diBiadbiition of

gifts, etc.,, recipients superior to the agent himself, are not obtained ;

The meaning is that at a Srdddha, charity, etc., attention or p.refer»
ence should be given to a recijjient, free from fault, w.ho is ecxvial,
like oneself, or inferior, i,e,, less than oneself, in point of merit, etc.,
because happiness accrues, to the departed ancestor, from blessings pro-
nounced by them only. The import is that persons prohibited are by all
means to be rejected, but not the pure, whether they be equals or infe-
riors. — 11.

Eeeeption of gift is also a som^ee of dliarma^ or, stealing is notsinfvl, %n

certain circumstances,

sqT^t-

aij nil? I?’tll

Etena, by this, Hina-sama-vi^ista-diiarmmike-

bhyali, from inferior, equal, superior virtuous persons. Parasva-ada-

nam, reception of property, ssfr^lrl^ Vyakhyatam, explained,

12. By this is explained .reception of |)roperty from
virtuous persons who are inferior, equal, or superior (to one-
self),— 236.

fJpasMm.—Having described the production of clkarma by the merito,noi;is eliaractor
of [the*donatiou at a Srdddha or charity, he extends production of dkarma from reception
also of a similar nature ;

The excellence of dharma is in the order of its mention. The mean-
ing is ^that dharma accrues frotn the reception of a gift of land, etc., from
a virtitous person, wliether he be inferior, equal, or superior to oneself.

‘ ParasvS.d4nain ’ means i-eceptioa of property from another.

The writer of the Fntti, however, says: “ ‘Parasvfidanam,’ i.e., the
taking of another’s property, by theft, etc., is explained. Thus, according
: to the Sntfcj, to

■Jeayeh^ starvation, a. man may steal

.-s.iihe (lopd .ohdra, '. when he has not obtained food, for seven davs.


KANADA SUTBA8 VI, 1-M.


Similarly, wlieii he has not obtained food for ten days, or when he has not
obtained food for fifteen days, or when life is in danger, to steal food
fx’Oin a Vaislya, a Ivsatriya, or a BrAhmana respectively, does not tend to
adharma or sin.” — 12.

Killing is not sinf ul in certain circumstances.

^ ?im: IK I ? I II

Tatha, likewise, Viruddhan^m, of those who stand in the

way. Fyagali, the making awa^^' with.

13. Likewise the making away with those who stand
in the way, (is justified).^ — 237.

l^paskdm.— Not only is the taking of another’s property, when life is in danger,
not forhiclden, but in such eircuinstances those who do not give anything to take away,
should even foe put to death. By all this there is no loss of dliarma^ or appearance or
production of adharmii. This is what he says :

The meaning is that they are to be j)ut to death who act in the con-
trary manner, {i.e., who play the enemy), in such circumstances. So it
has been said :

“ Let a man save his poor self by wliatsoever deed, mild or cruel.
When he is able, let him practise dhartna or righteousness.” — 13.

Vivriti. — He points out that certain censui-able deeds also do not
produce sin :

The meaning is that the killing of those who are abont to take one’s
life, is likewise not forbidden, according to the saying “ Let one kill an


VMSmiKA PffILOSOPHY


Killing is not sinful in certain circumstances, continued.

^ WT tK I ? m U

Same, in the case of an equal. Atnia-tyagah, self-abandon-
ment, Suicide. Para-tySgah) destruction of another. qrVa, or.

15. In the case of an equal, either suicide or destruc-
tion of the other (may he resorted to). — 239.

U'pasMm.— With reference to an equal, lie says :

Whei'e it is a Brahmana, equal to oneself, who becomes theadversaiy,
then destruction of oneself only by starvation, etc., is to be coimiiitted.
Or, if there appear no other means of preserving oneself or one’s family,
and the opponent be an equal, lie is to be then made away witln — 15.

Above Qontinuech

WRntJn’t ffir iK i ? i u ii

Vi^iste, in the case of a superior. Atma-tyagahi self-des^^

truction,

16. In the case of a superior, self-destruction (is to
he committed). — 240.

UpasMrcu — If, then, a person, superior to oneself, become the adversary, should he
even be put to death ? He says, No ;

In the case of a person, superior to oneself, i.c., excellent by the
study of the Veda, etc., becoming the oppo.nent, destruction of oneself
only is lawful. The meaning is that even when life is in danger, a man
may design only bis own death, but must not slay a Brahmana.

'Tti,’ indicates the end of the chapter.— 16.

Here ends the first chapter of the sixth book in the Commentary
of Sa/ikara upon the Vais^esika Aphorisms.


Book SIxth. — Chaptee Second,

Exaltation is the motive of actions of ivhieh no visible motive exists.

IK I ^ I ^ II

Drista-adrista-prayojandnam, of which the motives are
visible and invisible. Drista-abhave, where no visible motive exists,

Prayojanam, motive,. Abhyudayaya, for the purpose of exab

tation or knowledge of reality.

1. (Of actions) of wMch the motives are visible and
inyisib^^^ motiy|i, ;y?]iere no visible (motive) exists,


Si'siSSs


KANAdA SUTRAS VI, 2-2.


VpasMra.—Th.ns, in the lli-st chapter, hecause the proof, supplied by the Veda, is
produced by some attribute or quality, therefore, in connection with its production,
a description of the attribute or qualitj', then the consideration that “ Result (of action), .
indicated by the Sdstra, (accrues) to the performer,” and also the consideration of this
that xaider certain circumstances there is non-production of demerit, even on the per-
formance of forbidden acts, have taken place. Now, the author, with a view to explain
the second apliorism, Dlutrnm is that from which (results) the attainment of exaltation
and the Supreme Good (1. i. 2, above), is going to make an examination of the production
of dharma or merit, in particular cases, and accordingly he says :

Actions of wliicli the motives Ere visible, Ere Egriculture, commerce,
service under the king, etc. Actions of which the motives are invisible,
are sacrifice, charity, hvahnictehai'yci or celibacj’ and devotion to learning,
etc., Amongst these actions, ivhere no visible object is observed, there
an invisible object has to be supposed, And that is conducive to ‘ exalta-
tion, i.e., knowledge of reality or truth. Or, in ‘abhyuda3'’aya,’ the dative
has been used in the sense of the nominative. The meaning, therefore,
is that the fruit (of the action) is exaltation. The invisible fruit is
nothing but adri^Uth (or potential after-effects of past acts). If it is pro-
duced bj’’ yoga or_holy communion, then the exaltation is spiritual intui-
tion of the self. If it is produced by sacrifice, charity, etc., then the
exaltation is heav en. Here, again, unlike the actions milking, cooking,
etc., which bear fruit then and there, but like the actions sowing, plough.-
ing, etc., which bear fruit after a while, the actions sacrificing, giving
alms, practising brahmacharya, etc., by no means bear fruit then and
there, for no such production of fruit is observed. Nor are gain, etc.,
through being known as virtuous, themselves the fruit ;Hor those who prac-
tise brahviaeharya have no eye to such fruit. Therefore, heaven, etc.,
which will accrue in the distant future, are the fruit. And this is not
immediately connected with action which by nature speedily vanishes
out of existence. Hence it results that there is an intermediate common
substratum of the action and the fruit, and this is apAroatii or adrista-ni.

Actions of which the motive is invisible.

, Abf3isecha-"'''' ' ■

na-._iipavtsa-brahmapharyya-guru kulavasa-vtoaprastha-yajlia-dana-proksana-dik-
aaksatra^kila-niyauiaii**— 'Ablution^ Fast, Brahmuchetrypi^ Residence in the- family ’’ ''(h
of th6 preceptor, Life of retirement 'in tbeiprest^ Gift, Oblation, 'Direct '

lion, -Constellation, ^ Seasons, and Religious^ obser'Vaiie^’S*;^ liwra



fATSMllCA PHtLOSOPBf


2. AlDlution, fast, hrahmaeJiarya , residence in the
family of the preceptor, life of retirement in the forest, sac-
lifice, gift, ohlation, directions, constellations, seasons, and
religions observances conduce to invisible fruit. — 242.

XJpcishctra — He enumerates actions of wliicii the fruits are iiiTlsiblo:

‘ Aclristaya ’ means for the pnrpose of the fruit characterised as adrin-
tam, or for the pni-pose of the fruit, characterised as heaven and salvation,
thi'ough the gate of adfhtard. Hereby are inclnded all actions or duties
enjoined in the Veda and the Snrriti and having adristam as their fruit.
Here ‘abhisechanam’ means ablution as enjoined in such precepts as “ One
should bathe in the Gaiiga (Ganges).” Fast denotes such as is enjouied
in such precepts as “ One should abstain from food on tlie eleventh day of
the moon. ” ‘ Brahmacharyyam ’ means cultivation of dharma in general.

‘ Guvukulavasah’ is that of Brahmaehctrins or students for the purpose of
studying the Veda, the twelve-year vow called Mahavrata, etc. Vanapras-
thain ’ means the duty of those who have retired to the forest on the ripen-
ing of age. ‘ Yajnah’ denotes Eajasuya, !■' djpeya, and other sacrifices.

‘ Dilnaih’ is as enjoined by such precepts as “One should give away a cow.

‘ Prok|anaiii, is as enjoined by such precepts as “One should offer rice. ”
‘ Dili’ denotes such as is enjoined by tbe precepts, “ One should perform
sacrifice on au altar inclined towards the east,” “ One should eat rice,
etc., facing towards the east,” etc. ‘ Naksatram ’ is such as Magha (the teirth
lunar asterism), etc., on the occasion of a srdddha, etc. ‘Mantrah’ denotes
“0, ye waters, who are the sources of pleasures,” etc. (Rig Veda X. ix. 1),
and other sacred hymns. ‘ Kiilah’ is as is enjoined by such precepts as
“ Month after month food shall be given to thee ” where one should offer
food, in the afternoon of the day of new moon, “In summer let one bo
surrounded with five fires, ” “ In spring let one deposit the sacrificial
fires, ” etc. ‘Xiyamah’ means conduct, in accordance with the t^listra, of
those who observe the distinctions of caste and the four stages of holy
living, i.e., Vania and Asrama.

Now, it will be seen that of the dharma, so produced, the soul is the
combinative cause, conjunction of the soul and the mind is the non-com-
binative cause, and faith and the knowledge of the motives or objects
characterised as heaven, etc, j are the efficient causes. — 2., ■,

Other soiiraes of dharma, and sources of adharma.

. H i R « \ II , ' \

jCbpura^ramyadi^.thc observance of the four A^ramas or, stages of
and scholarship, the life of a householder,


KA'NALA SUTRAS VI, 2-5,


the life of retirement in the woods, and the life of absolute self-renunciation,
{lit. living on alms), Upadhali, defects in respect of faith, misbeliefs'

and disbeliefs, An upadhali, non-defects in respect of faith, beliefs =q-

Cha, and.

3. Tlie observance of the four .^sramaa (has been already
mentioned). Misbeliefs and disbeliefs as well as beliefs are
also (sources of adristam or dharma and adharma ). — 243.

Ui3a.5fatn{.— Having thus raoiifcionecl the sources of dimnna, he now mentions them
aioag with the sources of adharma also :

1 hat whicli is tlio uisans of dhojVdKx^ cooiiiioii to tho four AuSTO^TiitCis^
has been, and thus the sentence should be completed, exhaustively denoted
by the preceding aphorism alone. ‘Upadliah’ means defects of hhdva
sentiment) or faith ; auupadhah’ means non-defects of hhdva or faith*
They too should be understood to be the sources of dharma and adharma^
according to themselves. By the word, ‘ upadhah,’ all the means of
adharma Jiave been included. — 3.

Lj padhd a)id aiiitpadhd etCplaiiied,

ii ^ u i « ii

^rf?r«r: Bhava-dosah, defect of feeling, impurity of emotion, or of the soul.

Upadha, (efjv.) that which is placed, or settles .upon anything. Impurity.
3Ttrsr; Adosah, non-defect. Purity of emotion, or of the soul. ■irS'TWr Anupadha
purity. ’

4. Upadhd or Impurity (denotes) impurity of emotion,
or of the soul ; anupadJid (denotes) purity. — 244.

tJpasfeo-tt.— nistinguisliing- upadM or impurity, and unupdhct or purity, as regards
their characteristic, he says :

Feeling, desire, attraction, inattention, unfaith, vanity, conceit,
envy, and other impurities of the soul are denoted by the word upadkd
or impurity. Faith, complacence of mind, perseverance in the perform-
ance of prescribed actions, determination of what should be done in
particular situations, (or presence of mind), and certitude are called
anupadha or purity of the soul. The efficient causality of all these
towards dharma and adharma, is here declared. — 4.

What objects are pure or holy.

Yat, which. ista-rflpa-rasa-gandha-spar^am, pos-
sesses prescribed colour, tastCj smell, and touch. Proksitanij aspersed

Sprinkled with water together with the ‘ prohuneiation of maHiras or sacred



VAl&ESIKA PRlLOSOPHy


hymns. AbtiyuKsnam,

of mantras. The above rendering of the two woi ds, p

rsur*’ is in accordance with the view of Sankara M,sra.

■ vS

Sprinkling of

that with the supinated hand is
inclined hand is known as (

From the above say in;
translations would be, sprinkled with
- proksitam,- and sprinkled with water with supination m tne case o> • aouyu.-

sitam.' =^Cha,and. Tat. that. ^

5. Tlie pure is that which posseses prescribed uoioui,
Taste, * Smell, and Touch, and is sprinkled with water
alona with the recitation of sacred hymns, and also with-
if nr is snrinkled with water both with pronation and


water with the pronated hand is called /
called abhyukganam ; and the sai

avokscinainr —

g of the Smrili^ it would appear that
water with pronation, in


ckaraotwnstic of impure objects



iSlfil


KANADA SUTRAS VT, 2-8,


The meaning is that the contrary of such substance as is pui-e, is
impure. In other words, a substance of unpraiseworthy colour, taste,
smell, and touch, or not aspersed, or not sprinkled, or sprinkled with
forbidden water, or unlawfully acquired, as the substance of a Brahmana
acquired by agriculture and commerce, is impure. — 6.

What objects are impure or unholy, continued.


Arthantaram, something else. Another thing. ^ Cha, and.

7. .(It is) also something else. — 247.

Upaskdm , — He mentions other impure objects:

The meaning is that where a thing possesses praiseworthy colour,
taste, smell, and touch, and is at the same time aspersed, sprinkled, and
lawfully acquired, even there that thing also is impure, if it is vitiated
by speech or vitiated by intention. — 7.

To produce exaltation, purity must be coupled loith self-restraint.


'SrsRTfsr Ayatasya, of the unrestrained. Suchi-bhojanat, from

eating that which is pure, Abhyudayait, exaltation, ff Na, not.

Vidyate, exists. Accrues, f^qirmrfni Niyama-abhavat, owing to the absence
of self-restraint. Vidyate, exists.’ Accrues, fr Va, and.

Artha-antaratvat, being a different thing. Yamasya, of self-restraint.

8. To the mirestrained, exaltation does not accrue
from eating what is pure, inasmuch as there is an absence
of self-restraint ; and it accrues, (where there is self-res-
traint), inasmuch as self-restraint is a different thing (from
eating). — 248. , '

Vpasmra.—Now he points out another contributory Icause of dhanna and adJiarma :

‘Ayatasya’ means void of restraint, or unrestrained. The eating of
one, void of the restraints brought out in such precepts as “A man should
take food after washing his hands and feet, and rinsing his mouth,
restrained in speech ; while taking food, though restrained, he should
twice rinse his mouth,” does not tend to exaltation, but to sin. ’ It may'
be asked, Why? Hence he says, ‘niyama-abhhv^t7 i,e., owing to the
absence of self-restraint, which is a contributory bause. : That which
takes place where self-restraint exists, is how Stated. ‘Vidyate i.e.,



VAISBSIKA PHILOSOPHY.


exaltation verily accrues from eating by means of tiie acooiiipanimeiit
o£ the self-restraint mentioned above. It may be -asked, How? So he
says, ‘Artha-antaratvit yamasya’, i.e., because self-restraint is something
else than eating. Therefore the meaning is that without the contributory
cause there is no production of the fruit, and that with it, there is pio
duction of the fruit. — 8.

.Self-restraint alone, again, is not suffioient for the purpose.

lU u 1 1 u

^^Asati, non-existing. ^ Cha, and, Abhavat, because of

non-existence.

9. (Self-restraint alone is not the canse of exaltation),
for tliere is non-existence (of exaltation), where (the eating
of pure food) does not exist. — 249.

U2XisMm.-It may be obieetea, “ U self-restraint alone is the governing element, then
eating is not a governing element at all’.' Accordingly he says :

‘Of exaltation’ is the complement of the aphorism. ‘ Abh4vat,’ i.e.,
since exaltation does not exist, ‘ asati,’ i e., where the eating of pure
food does not exist, although there is self-restraint. The meaning,
therefore, is that it is both of them, namely self-restraint and eating,

^ which is the cause of merit. The word, eating, is illustrative. Yama

and Hiyaina, i.e., self-restraint, external and internal, are accessoiies
also of sacrifice, charity, ablutions, oblations, and otlier actions prescribed
by the Veda and the Smriti. — 9.

Origin of desire whieh, hemg a fault, is an accessory to adharma.

Sukhat, from pleasure, tru: Ragah, {Lii. Colouration), Desire.

10. From Pleasure (arises) Desire. — 250.

Upaskcira.-Jta,vmg thus stated self-restraint as a contributory towards the pro-
duction of dJiat-ma, he now ^points out the origin of fault, vrith a view to specify fault
as an accessoTy to adharma :

‘ Sukhat,’ t.e., from pleasure derived from the enjoyment of gai-
- lands, sandal-paste, women, and other objects, ragah, i.e., desiie, is
r ' produced successively for pleasure of> similar kind, or for the means
). of attaining it. It. isalso f0 .be considered that from pain begotten by

> ’ . ' with regard to such pain, or

source. / Desire, . aversion, and infattiation are called
. 1 . "fltey . are, incentives to activity (which serves fo bitid


iKIBI!


tlie agent down to tliis world). Accordingly there is the aj)horism of
Gantama, “Faults have for their characteristic inciteuient to activity
(or worldly occupations).” . (Nyaya-Sutram, I. i. 18). 10.

Origin of desire lohiah, being a fault, is an aeeesso7‘y to udharma, Gontiniied.

w I' u i u

Tat-maj^atvat, from transformation] into, absorption, or entire
occupation of mind with, or habituation to, that. Cha, and.

11. (Desire and Aversion arise) also through habitua-
tion to that. — 251.

UpasMrcL — ifc may be objected, ‘‘if only pleasaue and pain X3 reduce desire
and ayersion, bow then can the latter exist after the destruction of the former V* Hence
he says : ^

^ Desire and aversion arise’— this is the complement of the aphorism.
*Tat“mayatvam’ means a particular kind of comparatively powerful im-
pression produced by constant or habitual experience of objects, — through
the influence of which, a sad lover, who does not win his mistress, sees
his beloved in every object ; and he who has been once bitten hy a snake,
in consequence of the strong impression regarding that, sees snakes
everywhere. So it has been said, ''Tctt-mayatmiii (lit, full-of-that-ness)
means the manifestation of that both internally and externally.” — IL

Above Gontinued.

Adristat, from destiny^ or adpstam. ^ Cha, and. Also.

12. (Desire and Aversion arise) from adristam also.
—252.

UpasMm.—'He brings forward another source (of desire and aversion) :

‘ Desire and aversion’ — this forms tlie complement of the aphorism.
Although adri^tarh is a universal cause, still particular causality, towards
desire and aversion, sometimes attends it. For instance, it should be in-
ferred by such cases as of desire for a (mistress or) woman on the breaking
forth of youth even in one who has not in that birth enjoyed the pleasures
of love, and of aversion towards snakes even in those who have not ex-
perienced the pain of snake-bites. Nor is it only sathshdra or^ impression
produced in a previous existence (that is to say, instinct), which supplies , . y
the missing link in these cases. For- there . being ho: proof for the suppo- -
sition of its existence, or for the suppositiop of its rehnspitatioii,^ the suppq- h -
pjtion of acir Ajarfo becomes pecessarjr. — 12,.; } ‘J;. (


w


VAliEBlKA PIULOSOPEY.


Origin of desire tchieli, being a fault, is an aeeessory to adharma, eontinued.

III. I ’ll U «


Jati-vi4esat, from particularity of race or racial distinction,
«^Cha, and. * i i*

13. (Desire and Aversion arise) also from racial dis-
tinctions.: — 253.

UpasMra.— He mentions another contributory cause (of desire and aversion) :

Irmnau "beings liave desire tor ricOj etc . , auituals of tlie cleei
class, tor grass, etc. ; tliose of tlie camel class, for briers. In these cases
also adristath which produces birth in such and such a race, is the govern-
ing' pr^^ile, ^rhile race, i.e., distinction of birth, is only a means or
medium. Similarly, pigeons, etc., possess desire for crops. In the same
way, animals of the buffalo class possess aversion towards the horse ;
dogs, towards the jackal ; ichneumons, towards snakes ; and from other
instances, it is to be inferred (that racial distinction is a means of desire
and aversion). — 13.

Desire and aversion produce dharma and adharma through inclination.

u I. R I ^ ^ u

Ichchhd-dvesa-pxirvvika, preceded by, or having for its
antecedents, desire and aversion. ^dtqwf!rfr%: Dharma-adharma-pravrittih,
Activity, tendency, inclination, or application to dharma and adhatma.

14. Application to dharma and adharma has for its

antecedents Desire and Aversion. 254.


UmisMrcL— Haying thus enumerated the efficient causes of desire and aversion, desire
and aversion being the efficient causes of dharma and adharma, he now points out that
the causality of faults towards dharma and adharma operates through the medium of

activity or inclination :

‘ Pravrittili ’ or employment in a prescribed action, is clue to the
link of desire, and in a prohibited action, e.g., killing, is due to the link
of aversion. Employment, due to the link of desire, in sacrifices, etc.,
begets dharma j employment, due to the link of aveisioii, in killing, etc.,
begets adharma. These same desire and aversion cause the wheel of
/ : transmigration to revolve. Accordingly there is the aphorism of Gautama,

. ’ “ pfcivntti or employment is the operation or exertion of speech, mind,

.and body,”, {Nyaya-Satram, I. i. 17). Verbal employment is exertion of
A speech ; it is meritorious, if it is for the expression of wbat is true, kind,
|GA 'iAand bei(eficiai;;; ii;:is sinful, if it is for the expression of what is untrue, un-
“ . o«/ihanAhil.. - "Rv ‘ Riiddhih.’ (mind), is meant that by which objects


I" •


KANADA SUTRAS VI, 2-16.


are cognised, i.e., mind. Therefore mental employment is compassion to-
wards all creatures, and other actmties. Bodily employment, such as
almsgiving, ministration, etc., is tenfold as sinful, and tenfold as meri-
torious. 14.

Vivirti.—The aphorism has been framed in a general way. Hence
no harm has been done to the production of dharma, etc., also from chance
contact with the water of the Gafigg. (the Ganges) and such other sources,
even though desire and aversion do not exist here.

Dharma and adharma are causes of birth and death.

reOTtFTT ftfvrm: H I. R m n

'I’at-sariiyogah, conjunction produced by them, f^snrr: Vibhagah,
disjunction, ■'

15. Conjunction (of soul with body, sense, and life),
produced by them (i.e., dharma and adharma), (is called
birth) ; Disjunction (of body and mind, produced by them,
is called death). — 255.


Upaskdra»—J^ov/ he states the end or object of dharma and adharma^ i.e., re-
appearance after passing away:

From these, namely dharma and adharma^ conjunction, birth,
results. Connection with non-pi’e-existing body, sense, and life is here
termed conjunction. ‘ Vibliagah ’ again, denotes disjunction of body
and mind, characterised as death. The meaning, therefore, is that this
system of births and deaths, safnsdra or ceaseless flow of existences, other-
\Yise termed pretya-hhdva or re-appearance after passing away, is caused
by dharma and adharma. The Vedic name of this very pretya-hhdva is
ajarnjart-bMva or non-deciepit decrepitude. — 15.

Hoiv mchsa is attained.


ssTwqra: il 1 i ? ^ H


Atma-karmniasu, actions of the soul taking place. : moskah,
salvation. • Vyakhyatah, declared. y


16. (It has been) declared that the actions of the
soul taking place, salvation (results). — 256. (


Upasfectra.— To ascertain, therefore, what mofe-ja is, in which there is an end of this
re-appearance after passing away, of the system of births and deaths, he says, : ; ■

This same disjunction of body and mind rises into mo?e§a or liber^
tion, wiien there exist the actions of the soul. This iiS the meaning. Now,
the actions of the soul collectively are as follows: ‘audition,’ intellection,



IlillliSiiil

IlMil


l s



1 ''i



VAISU8IKA PHIL080PBY.


Will


practice of holy comniuaioa, or yoga, constant meditation, posture, regula-
tion of breath, (lib. lengthening of life), the acciuisition of the control of
the external senses and of the control of the internal sense, spiritual
intuition of one’s own soul and of the souls of others, accurate knowledge
of previously produced dharma and adliarma which have to be experienced
in other bodies and places, the building up of various bodies suitable to
such experience, the exhaustion of that dliavTtia and adJiav'fna by experi-
encing them, and ultimate success or emancipation, characterised as cessa-
tion of pain, on the cessation of birth, when there is cessation of tendency to
action, in consequence of the non-production of subsequent dharma and
adliarma, due to the overcoming of the mists of faults characterised as
desire and aversion. Of these the prime action of the soul is knowledge
of the real nature or essence of the six Predicables. — 16.

Bere ends the second chapter of the sixth book in the Oommeniary
of l^ankara upon the Vai^esika Aphorisms.

Vivriti. — Spiritual intuition of the reality of the self steals away
false knowledge, sprung from spiritual blindness, of which the subject-
matter is that the soul is not distinct from the body, , etc. Thereupon there
is cessation of faults, characterised as desire and aversion ; from which
follows destruction of activity or inclination productive of dharma and
adharma. And from the non-existence of inclination results annihilation
of birth in the form of the initial conjunction of life with a future body.
And hence there results final annihilation of the threefold afflictions. It is
in this that consists. Therefore, this treatise is xiseful, as a system

of thouglit intended for the purpose of intelleobion or thinking about
things.



KAl^ADA SdTRAB VIT, 1-2.


Boojk Seventh.— Chaptee Fiest,

Allusion to I. {. 6.


3^: Uktah, stated, mentioned, enumerated, jpjr! gunaj?, attributes.

1. Attributes (have been) mentioned (above). — 257.

JJpaskCim . — Having examined dliarma and adharmci, these being the root causes of
8amscmi or transmigration, the ejBQcient causes of all that has a production, the means of
hlwga or worldly experience, and uniformly attaching to each individual soiil, from their
origin, as well as the adristairi of others as conducive to fruits to be experienced by those
others, the author now calls back to the mind of the disciples the enumeration and defini-
tion of Attributes with the intention of examining these Attributes. ^

The meaning is that Attributes iave been enumerated and. defined.
Of these colour, etc., seventeen in all, have been verbally stated, and seven
have been brought forward by the word eha, and. . Accordingly .all the


prithivr-adi-rflpa-rasa-gandha-spariiah, The- Colour,
Taste, Smell, and Touch of Earth, etc., i.e.-, of Earth, Water, Fire, and Air.

dravya-anityatvat, on account of the non-eternality of the sub-
stances in.which they, reside. . aETH^; AnitTiab,, non-eternal, ,'g' .Cha, also.

2, . The : Colour, , Taste, : Smelly, 'and Touch of Earth,
Water, 'Fire, and -Air, are also non-eternal, on acOount of the
non-eternality of their substrata. — 258. .

Hpaskara,— Now," the examination of Attributes, 'as Attributes, is the subject of the
seventh book. .Of this, in the ..first . Chapter, there arje.five sections, viz,, (1) the examination
of Attributes as eternal, (2) th e examination of Attributes as non-eternal , (3) the exami-
nation of Attributes duo to the action of heat, (4) the examination ' of Attributfeg which
appear or function in more substances than one, c.g., Number, etc., and (5) the examination
of measure or extensiok’'-Herein^he -states^'tW 'Uou’^eternality of i, the ‘four Attributed,
colour, etc, - ■ • I-



VAI^B^KA PEIL080PBY.


Of tlie wholes made up of parts, beginning with Earth, and ending
with Air, the four Attributes, colour, and the following, are non-eternal.
Although other Attributes also, being present in wholes made up of parts,
are really non-eternal, yet (they are not referred to here, because) their
destruction is also due to other causes. The four Attributes, beginning

the destruction of their substrata, and not
and contradictory, Attribute. ‘ Dravya-
The meaning is that the non-eternality of the dependents is
of the non-etemality of substances upon which they


with colour, disappear only on
in conseq_uence of another,
anityatvat
on account
depend. — 2.

What attributes are eternal.

1^ u v5 1 % \ \ w

^ Etena, by this, Nityesu, in eternals, Nityatvam, eter-

iiality. Ukta IiBplicd.

3, By tMs is implied eternality (of Colour, etc., whicli
reside) in eternal substances. — 259.

Upasfelra.— If the non-eteraality of substrata governs the non-eternality of colour
etc., then, he says, it is obtained from necessary implication, that those colour, etc.
"wliieh reside in eternal substrata, possess eternality.

Of the same four Attributes, colour, etc., present in eternal substrata,
eternality is implied ‘ by this,’ which means, by the declaration of non-
eternality by reason of the uon-eternality of the substrata.

The writer of the Vritti, however, explains thus :

this is the reading, with the addition of an (so that instead oJ

‘ eternality,’ the reading is ‘non-eternality.’) Thus, colour, etc., residing
in terrene ultimate atoms, disappear on the eonjunction of fire. o.



1, '*■ , ' ' ' , " t , .-f ' '


za^Aba sutbab fn, i-s


In aqueous ultimate atoms, Colouri Taste, and Touch are eternal ;
in igneous ultimate atoms, Colour and Toucli ; in ultimate atoms of Air
Touch is eternal. “ But,” it inaT be ashed, “'urhat is- the contradiction, if
colour, etc., present even in things eternal, be^ themselves non-eternal like
Sound, Understanding, etc.?” Accordingly, an additional reason, viz.,
non-appearance of another attribute (vide lY. ii. 3> ante), is indicated by the
word gr, ‘and.’ For, in Sound, the manifestation of a different attribute
is observed in the form of tones, high, low, etc.; and in knowledge, etc.,
saiTiskdra, impression or habit, etc., contradictory of, or which oppose,
knowledge, etc., (are observed). In aqueous, igneous, and aerial ultimate
atoms, other attributes, contradictory of colour, etc., do not appear. If
they appeared, then Colour, etc., heterogeneous from- the antecedent ones,
would be observed also in the aqueous and other wholes made up of parts,
or compounds, originated by the same ultimate atoms, in the order of
binary and other atomic aggregates. But colour, different in kind from
white colour, does not belong to Water and Fire ; nor do Touches, different
in kind from cold and hot Touches. “Hot water,” “Cold air,” — -such
intuitions are, hoTvever, due to the influence of wpad/if or adj unct or extexmal
condition. This is the import. — 4.

Vivviti . — “ But Colour, etc., residing in aqueous ultimate atoms,,
being destructible by the conjunction of fire,” it may be objected, “ why
this generalisation, namely, “in eternals ” (in the preceding aphorism) ?”
Hence he speciiies the eternals.

The meaning is that Colour, etc., inherent in the eternal earth (i.e.
ultimate atoms of earth), are not certainly eternal,, but that it has been
stated in the preceding aphorism that those only are eternal, which in-
here in the eternal Water, Fire, and Air (i. a.,, aqueous, igneous, and aerial
ultimate atoms).

What attributes are non-eternal.


Anityesu, in non-eternals, Anityah, non-eternaJ.

Dravya-anityatvat, in consequence of the non-eternality of

substrata.

5. In non-eternals, (Colour, etc., are) non-eternal, in
consequence of the non-eternality of their substrata. 261,

Upa$kdra.--Alredtdj it has been stated, that. (Oolour, etc., are) non-eternal in n
eternals among terrene substances. Now he states it in the case of aqueous and othei
non-eteraals also. ‘ ■ ^ ■


t : :


212 TAISESIKA PBILOSOPHT.

Tlie meaning is that Colour, etc., of aqueous, and other wholes
made up of parts, disappear; only on the dissolution of substrata, but hot
in consequence of other, contradictory,, attributes. — 5.

Vini-iti. — Are Attributes, inhering in non-eternals, and other than
Colour, etc., eternal ? If so, then Conjunction, etc., also will be eternal.
To remove this apprehension, he says :

The meaning is that Attributes which exist in non-eternal substan-
ces, are, all of them, non-eternal, because their substrata are non-eternal,
so that eteimal Attributes do not at all exist in non-eternal substances.

Colour, etc,, of Earth, produced hy hurning.

, n VS I ^ K n

^ K^^p i P;s| ^r*^Kararia~guna~pQrvvakah, preceded by, or having for ante-
cedents, the attributes of the causes Prithivyam, in earth,

Pakajab, produced by burning. Due to the action of heat. Thermal

6. In Eartli, (Colour, Taste, Smell, and Touch) have
for their antecedents (like) attributes in (its combinative)
causes, (and are also) due to the. action of heat. — 262.

.■•'"m UpasMr'a.---Iii earth, appearing in the form of wholes made up of parts, (i.e., in

I^K terrene bodies), also, Colour, etc., appear and disappear only on the conjunction of Are.

How, therefore, are they destraetible only hy the destruction of their substrata ? To
remove this apprehension, he says :

Kg ' Ptikajah ’ means Colour, Taste, Smell, and Touch, due to the action

i' of heat, ‘ Karana-guna-purvvakah ’ means preceded by the attributes

of that, e.g., potsherds, etc., which is the combinative cause of the subs-
J tratum of Colour, e.g., a water-pot. Thus, the Colour of the potsherd is

the non-combinative cause of the colour of the water-pot, by means of the

I I ■ proximity known as combination in the same object with the cause. So

also in the case of Taste, etc. Colour, Taste, Smell, and Touch possess
the jdti or ‘ class ’ directly pervaded by attribiite-ness such as colour-
ness, etc,

: ■ Objection. — Colourness, which is nothing hut apprehensibility by the

;i ; eye,. is the upddhi hr external condition (of colour-perception),

f : ' Answer.— -It is not. For, this would entail non-appearance of the

intuition , of colour.,, iipmediately on the falling of the sense, since an
Upddki or external condition which is not adjacent, is unfit for producing,
;, i the intuition of that which is conditioned or super-imposed. Here the

upadht, again, is tihe .eye, afld the satne— the ocular senses — is supersensu-

i : the being the object of apprehension.

A’rViV V, . '’■I-'"'


KmlDA SUTEAS Vll, 14,


This 'too is not an 'object of ociilat perception, since' perception dis-
tinguished or determined by colour-ness is ocular.. Coloul’-ness, therefore;
is the characteristic of the attribute perceptible by the external sense
of the ejm alone. . ^

Objection. — But it does not pervade or include supersensuous
colour. , ,

Answer. — The objection does not arise ; for, the possession of the
jati or class apprehensible by the external sense of the eye alone, is
intended. Such a ' jati is colour-ness ; as also are blue-ness, etc.

Objection.— The, manifestations ,of blue, yellow, etc., are eternal,
only as each of them is a single, individiial, manifestation. There are
not blue-ness, and other classes, inasmuch as their denotation is a single '
individual. . ' , ■

Answer. — This is not the case, as it would entail the non-appearance
of the intuition of deeper blue, deepest blue, etc.

Objection. — But the use of the comparative and the superlative
may be caused here by the absence of inter-penetration of whiteness,
etc.

Answer. — It cannot, since there is no proof of it, and also because
of the intuition, “ Dark colour is gone, ‘red produced.”'

Objection.— Bvit such intuition is caused by. the production and
destruction of combination. ■ • '

Answer. No, since there is no trace of combination there, and
since combination is eternal. The same (i.e., production and destruction
of combination) being applicable also in the case of the non-eternality
of the water-pot, etc., the result would be non-finality, since Anyathd- -
siddhi, production by other means, or plurality of causes, can be easily
ascribed there by way of the very non-eternality of combination.

Objection. — The attributes, blue, yellow, etc., are not different from
substance, since there is no difference' between a property and that of’
which it is a property. • .. ;

Answer.^ This cannot be the case, as it would entail such uses as
“ Colour is water-pot,” “ Touch is water-pot,” etc.

Objection.— But there is no harm' in it, ihasniuch as there'are really
such intuitions as “ White cloth,” “ Blue cleth',” etc. "

Answer,— The analogy does not- hold, because the ' intuitions . are ■
explained by the supposition of -. elision ' of the affixy matup, dehoting '
possession, or'by the supposition’ of transference of .identity; " '’

Objection.— This supposition irwould Be .somewl^t' proba'ble, w^re ’



vAim^KA mitoBomt.


appears in eternal non-existence, iiKe tne cnaracierisiic or aosouiie nuu-
existence (or non-exi§tence wliicli is the countei'-opposite of connection with
the past, the present, apd the. future, e.g-, theie.is no water-pot inside the.
earth)., - . •

Answer . — ^This is not the case. For, in virtue of the intuition: of
conjunction and- its absolute non-existence, the characteristic of appearing
in that which is not pervaded, is observed of absolute non-existence^,
but, in the case of mutual non-existence, such intuition does not
exist.

Nowy this colour is- of various kinds, in Earth ; in Water and. Fire,, it
is only white. Sometimes, there is one more colour, f.e;, variegated or
compound, colour, also in a cloth,, etc. ; for,, otherwise, they would not be
objects of visual perception, since only- substances possessing colour can
be objects of perception by the eye.

Ohjection.-^'Qni there can -be; no origination of colour- by heteroge-
neous colours. , ■ : ■

Ansiren.-^This isnot.the case ; foryhomogeneityj only as consta'tuted
by. the characteristic of being; colour, is. required' in the origination of
blue, yellow,., etc*',, since, otherwise,; as has been already stated, they
wduld.nothe objects of visasl peroept&n. •

06 ^'ectohn,-x-Eut,the; apprehension of the colour of a< whole made up-
partes pQPsibfei by means o^ihe apprehension- of the cq1ou» of those
parts,


KAWIDA -miTEAS ¥11, l-B.


Answer. — It is aot, as it would entail that the parts alsOj possessing
variegated or compound colour, are themselves void of colour. Moreover,
wherever, in consequence of the action of heat^ variegated colour appears
in ultimate atoms, there also variegated colour is produced in the cloth,
etc., originated by them successively.

Objection. — In the yellow myrobalan, then, , taste also is variegated.

Answer. — No, for no harm would be donej even if the yellow
myrobalan were void of taste. The tradition of sis- tastes, however, is
due to the causality which produces the- effects or properties of those
tastes* ■ j ■ ,

Similarly, smell also is not variegated, since a fragrant and a non-
fragrant part ai’e not its originators.

Objection. — In the parts of a karhnti or cucumber, there is sometimes
bitterness, and sometimes sweetness. Which taste, then, exists in harhati f

Answer. — Only sweetness.

Objection. — There existing a conflict of attributes, how can it
be so ?

Answer. — account of the non-existence of bitterness in the parts
thereof.

Objection. — How, then, does sueh sensation (of bitterness) arise ?

Answer. — It arises from the bitter taste of the bilious substance exist-
ing at the tip of the tongue irritated by the eating of the kai'katt. It ia
from this cause that sometimes the mouth also becomes bitter.

Objection. — But how does not this explanation apply in the case of
the yellow myrobalan also ?

Answer. — Because, in the parts of the yellow myrobalan, various
tastes are felt, e.g., sour, sweet, salt, etc. There is no need of further
argumentation or elaboration.

And this colour is an auxiliary to the eye.

Ohieetion.— Such being the case, how do the nonexistence of Colout
in air, and darkness become objects of ocular perception ?

Answer. — The question does not arise, since colour is an auxiliary to
the eye in the apprehension only of existences or objective realities* TI 10
colours of all the three, viz., the object, the light, and the eye, are exciting
causes of ocular perception.

Taste, again, is that which possesses the jMi or ' cla^,’ taste-ness*
Taste-ness is the jati or ‘ class ’ which is the ohjeol of immediate cognition
producible by the sense of taste alone. And the possession of such a j&ti
or ‘ class ’ is taste-ness. It is this, the of vitality^ growth, strength*


yAI$EBlKA PEILOSOFEY.


and health, that is dri ‘ auxiliary to the tongue. Thus, taste-ness being
possession of the jati or * class’ pervaded by attribute-ness capable
of being apprehended by • the organ of the tongue, there is no non-perva-
sion, i.e.,- exclusion, of super-sesnsuous taste. •

Attribute, apprehensible by the nose alone, is Smell. Smell-ness is
the possession of thejati or ‘ class’ pervaded by attribute-ness apprehensible
by the nose only. It is two-fold, being fragrant and non-fragrant. Or
Smell-ness denotes the possession of the j&ti or * class ’ directly pervaded by
attribute-ness appearing only in that which, is present in Earth.

In like manner, Touch also is the attribute possessing the jati or
' class,’ toueh-ness. Touch-ness denotes the possession of the jdti or ‘ class ’
directly pervaded by attribute-ness apprehensible by the organ of the skin
only^ Inhering in the quartet of substances, (namely, Earth, Water, Fire,
Air), it is, again, three-fold, according to the difEerences of neither hot nor
cold, cold, and hot.

Now, in passing,- the process due to the action of heat; is considered.
Here, according to those who hold the theory of the burning of an earthen
pot (as a- whole), the whole of the effect and the cause -is burnt: Those who
hold the theory of the burning of the ultimate atoms (constituting the
whole), maintain that it is the ultimate atoms which are separately burnt,
that it is in them that there take place destruction of the previous colour
and production of the succeeding colour, etc., and that, following the
course of the attribute of the cause, colour, etc., are produced in the burnt
(wholes made up again) of (burnt) parts. Here the sense is as follows:
From the impulse or the impact, given by fire, to a raw sitbstance, e.g'.-,
a water-pot, etc., thrown, in . a kiln, disjunction, which is the counter-
opposite of conjunction . .originative of a compound substance, appears
among the ultimate atoms originative of that raw substance, and on the
destruction of originative conjunction by that : disjunction; destruction of
the . substance niust take place. For, it is seen'that of rice, etc., placed in
a pan, destruction takes place at once from 'frying, only by the application
of heat from below, and that, (under similar conditions), intense ebullition
, takes place in milk, w^er,’ and the like. Therefore, it is hoping too .much
that substances, smitten .with flames of fire on . all sides, in a kiln, will
endure. Moreover, if there be no destruction of substances, then burning at
their centre' will nbtbe possible. - For,, there is no possibility of -conjunction
of fife at the centre which is enclosed with harder other constituent parts!
So that there will’ he this ^eat inCongi-uity that the parts are dark but the


I^A-NABA SUTRAS Ylt 1-6,


tnin]/ r Tt ' wlxoles made up of parts, are cer

j nij poious. How, otherwise, ,caa oil, clarified butter, etc, poured int(

a jar, etc, ooze out, and how also cau these be boiled ? Heuce at th^
centre aisOj there can be conjunction of fire.

4ns!wr.~-This cannot be, inasmuch as, on account of the exclusior
ot ponderab e or corporal or dense substances in virtue of the propertv ol
impenetrability, conjunction of fire is impossible at the centre which is
already conjoined with other (constituent) parts.

_ there is destruction of the substance, how, then, can

eie be the recognition, “ This is that very water-pot ? ” How again, in
all changes of conditions, in the kiln, etc, are the water-pot, etc, observed
m one and the some form ? How is it that a pan, a plate, etc, placed on the
.mmng water-pot, etc., are observed in the same position? For they
should fall down on the dissolution of the water-pot, etc. How, a-^ain arl

Za°£d afterwards

' M 1 ^ ^ process of burning, the origination is

possib e, of more or less substances, by the (dissolved) ultimate atoms in
the order of binary and other atomic aggregates. How, again, are water-
pot, etc. of exactly the same dimensions, observed to come out from the
furance . How, again, will not the marks of lines and prints be obliterat-
ed . Burning, therefore, takes place only in the wholes

Wr.-Such is not the case. For disjunctioa of three or four

tertiary atomic aggregates being effected from a water-pot, etc., with the

point of a needle there being destruction of substance as a wholet con
sequence of the destruction of coiij unction originative of substance all
such contradictions appear in, or are explained on, both the theories For
eveu tw WK„ Kold the theoty of the botoing of tL wa4 « a yh^fe

o “ ,7 ■* destfoyelTn hi

case of the above instance. ■’

Eveum that. case the water-pot, etc., are not destroyed since it k
possible for an effect to continue to exist by inhering in the ’remaininc.
constituent parts even when there has been destruction of some constituen't
parts. Were it not so, recognition, etc., would be really impossible This
IS he view of the But they should be asked how the

wa ei-pot, etc., hearing relation to the situation or arrangement of all the •

fc be their reply that it is possible ip the: same way as is possible dontrac

ion of measure or, extension pr.quantity -in . a.:do.t^^ ,

ed.; we reply that there can beno sucii anaWfov ,


gis VAliBSl KA mlLOBOPM.

of contraotion aad e^panaion ia tte caae of wood, stoae. pilte, earthen
iar etc made np of harder conetitaent parts. It cannot he rejoined by
them to what is said to destroy the water-pot. etc., destroys only its
measure or extension j for, measure or extension can be destroyed only by
the destruction of its substatum. Moveover, like the recognition o he

water-pot, etc., measure or extension also is recognised in the case of tie

needleecratch, whereas in their view its destruction also is impossible.
This is the point.

On the theory of those who hold that disjunction which is the counter-
oppoJteoT conjunction originative of substance as well as disjunction
which is not its counter-opposite, are produced by one and the same ac ion
in the constituent part, there is production of red colour, etc, at the
ninth moment counting from the destrnction of the binary atomic ^ag-
gregate, in another binary atomic aggregate, since action is conceited
List in the very same ultimate atom. Thus, there is first action in the
ultimate atom originative of the binary atomic aggiegate, rom^ le im
pulse given by fire ; then, disjunction; then destruction of conjunction
originative of substance ; then, destraction of the binary atomic aggregate ;
then, in consequence of conjunction of fire, disappearance of dark colour,
etc., from the pure or singly existing ultimate atom, after the destruction
of the binary atomic aggregate ; after destruction of dark colour, etc.,
production of red colour, etc., from another conjunction of fire ; after pro-
duction of red colour, etc., cessation of action in the ultimate atom ;
following it, action in the ultimate atom, from conjunction of soul posses-
sing adristam or destiny ; then, disjunction ; then, cessation of previous
conjunction ; then, conjunction, originative of substance, with another ulti-
mate atom ; then, production of the binary atomic aggregate ; after the pio-
duction of the binary atomic aggregate, production of red colour, etc.,
in the progressive order of the attribute of the cause. These aie the nine
moments, if a different action is produced just at the moment of the cessa-
tion of the previous action. If, on the other hand, a different action is
produced not at the moment of the cessation of the previous action, then
there are ten moments.. Even if disjunction, etc., produced by disjunction,
be admitted, still there are ten moments, if disjunction produced by dis-
junction has reference to the time in which destrnction of conjunction
originative of substance, takes place. If, on the other hand, disjunction
produces another disjunction 'iyith reference to the time in which destruc-
.,tiono| rabstance takes -'place, then there are eleven moments in the


r J , "V"


v;:- ,;6:-bbr • \ ,


SUTRAS vn, 1-7.

produced by disjunction, at one moment ; then, destruction of previous
conjunction, and cessation of dark colour, etc. ; subsequent conjunction and
production of red colour, etc. ; cessation of disjunction produced by dis-
junction and of action, by means of subsequent conjunction ; tben, action
in the ultimate atom, favourable to origination of substance ; disjunction
from action ; cessation of previous conjunction from disjunction; thence,
conjunction originative of substance; thence production of substance;
production of red colour, etc., in the produced substance. These are the
ten moments. Where, however, production of disjunction by disjunction
depends upon the passing of tlie time containing the destruction of
substance, there are, by the increase of one moment; eleven moments. Thxis,
destruction of substance ; then disjunction produced by disjunction and
cessation of dark colour, etc. ; then subsequent conjunction and production
of red colour, etc. ; then cessation of disjunction produced by disjunction
and of action ; then action in the ultimate atom, favourable to the origina-
tion of substance ; then disjunction; cessation of previous conjunction;
production of conjunction originative of substance ; production of the
binary atomic aggregate ; production of red colour, etc. These are the
eleven moments. Sucli is the process on the conception of action and cessa-
tion of action in one and the same ultimate atom. If action favourable to
the origination of substance is conceived to take place in a different ulti-
mate atom, then the production of red colour, etc., should be understood to
appear at the fifth, sixth, seventh, or eighth moment commencing from
destruction of the binary atomic aggregate. The same lias been explained
in Ka^adorRahasyam. — 6.

Colour, etc., of Earth, 'produced hy burning, continued.

\B \ % I VS IJ

Eka-dravya-tvat, Because of the characteristic of inhering in one

substance.

7. Because tlieir substratum is the same. — 263.

_ Upamra.-ln order to establish that the Colour, etc., of terrene ultimate atoms have
oonjunotion of Are as their non-combinative cause, he says :

The expression, “of (attributes) produced from burning,” is the
complement of the aphorism. “ Being attributes,” and “ being effects ”

are also intended here. ^ The whole sentence, therefore, means ; Colour
etc., of terrene ultimate atoms, have conjunction for their non-combinative’
cause, inasmuch as these, being product-attributes, die at the same time
pqa-^bhorrent or non-incongruent attributes inherm^ in eternals, like



VAliBSIKA PHIL080PEY


their substratum, that is to say,
substratum. Thus, even though
in the effect by the relation of
; they exist in the effect by the
ttum in the form of combination
lem, their productiveness of the
rhis is the import.


Ano]^, of the Etom or atomic. iVlcihatali, ot tiie inoiccuiar oi inc

dense or the extended, <sr Ciia, and. Upalabdhi-anupalabdhI,

cognition and non-cognition, r*!?! Nitye,^_in (the book tieating of) the eteiiial.
sjffiTOf Vyakhyate, explained.

8. Cognition and non-cognition of the atomic and the
extended or massive, respectively, have been explained in
(the hook treating of) the eternal. — 264.

UpasJedra.— Having elneidated Colour, Taste, Smell, and Touch, by long discourses, and
going to begin first the examination of Measure or Extension, in violation of the order of
enumeration (of the Attributes), following the maxi m'^ of the needle and the {kettle, inas-
much as Measure or Extensioh is proved by common consent, whereas there is a wide
range of divergent views. on the ciuestion of Number,— he says ;

the .needle, and ''the kettle is that when a man has got to turn out_a
needle and a kettle, he first inake^ the needle, the smaller and easier piece of work, and
tes his energy, and,, time to the manufaetpre of the hettleythe


KANIDA SUTRAS TII, 1-8,


Tlie term, ' in the eternal,’ signifies the fonrtli book, demonstrative
of the eternal, i.e., the container, by the contained. ‘ Cognition and non-
cognition ’ : The application (of these words) will be according, to
relevancy, on the maxim, “ When one thing is relevant to irnother, it
belongs to that other, even though lying at a distance.” So that the
proposition, “ Non-cognition of the atomic,” is obtained. In like inanner,
in the perceptual cognition, therefore, namely, “ A large, blue jug,”
Measure or Extension also is as much an object (of perception) as blue
colour. And by means of this Measure or Extension, Measure or Extension
terminating in the ultimate atom, is inferred, as also from Substance-ness..
Moreover, in the perceptibility of Substance, Measure or Extension also is
a cause, like colour; for,. without magnitude, substance cannot be percep-
tible. It is, therefore, ascertained that, as being a cause of the percepti-
bility of Substance, and being itself perceptible, an attribute, - called
Measure or Extension, exists. For, were the distinctive form of a water-
pot, etc., its Measure or Extension, a man would bring any water-pot,
when he was told to bring the massive or the extended, . and thus
there would be a contradiction between the order of the master and the
apprehension of it by the servant. Likewise from the term water-pot,
Measure or Extension would be understood, or from the term, Measure or
Extension, a water-pot.

Measure or Extension is the non-common or specific ■ cause of the
usage or application of measures, or a uniA'ersal attribute inhering in the
object which is the cause of the perceptual cognition of Substance.
Application of measures is the application of cubits, spans, etc., but not
the application of weights, numbers, etc. This Measure or Exteirsion
is of four kinds, namely, Largeness, Smallness, Length, and Shortness.
Of these, extreme largeness and extreme length exist in the four ‘ univer-
sals ’ (i.e., Space, Time, Ether, and Soul) ; extreme smallness and extreme
shortness exist in the ultimate atoms ; the next (higher) degree of-
smallness and shortness exists in binary atomic aggregates ; largeness and
length exist in substances from tertiary atomic aggregates upwards to
composite wholes (or compound bodies as they exist in nature). In this
manner, all substances whatever possess two Measures or Extensions. The
attribution of smallness to a vilva or a hael fruit, amalaka (phylanthus
amhlica), etc., and of shortness to fuebsticks, sugar-canes, etc., is relative.
And relativity here denotes the non-existence of bulkiness. The bulkiness
that exists in the amalaka (emblic myrobalan), does not exist in the
Jujube; the bulkiness that ‘-exists in the does not exist in the


222


VAI8E8IKA PHILOSOPHY.


HBII


amalaka. It is this bulkiness, which is the denotation of the term,
relativity, inasmuch as it partakes of both the primary and secondary
uses.

Some maintain that length and shortness do not exist in the eternal
substances. Others hold that these are not even modes of Measure or
Extension ; for, what they mean is this ; As in the command, “ Bring the
longer ones from amongst those bodies,” so also in the command, “ Bring
the spherical and the triangular ones from amongst those bodies,” discri-
mination being equally possible, sphericity or round ness, etc., also will
have to be admitted as modes of Measure or Extension. — 8.

Largeness or magnitude how 'produced.

ii vs i i i s. u

^rOTinE^^TO.Karana-vahutvat, from a multiplicity of causes. Cha, also.

9. Largeness or Magnitude is produced, from a
multiplicity of causes also. — 265.

Upaskdra. — He now enumerates the causes of measure or extension.

The word ‘ cha ’ implies the addition of magnitude and praahaya, i.e.,
loose conjunction among parts. “ Measure or extension is produced ” —
this is the complement of the aphoi-ism. Among these, multiplicity of
causes alone produces largeness or magnitude and length in tertiary
atomic aggregates, since magnitude and accretion do not exist in their
causes. That multiplicity is produced by the relative understanding of
God, and the apprehension of particular adristatn or destinies, deter-
mines this plurality of objects in such relative understanding. Likewise,
it will be stated hereafter, duality existing in two atoms is productive of
measure or extension in a binary atomic aggregate. In a piece of cloth,
originated by two non-coalescent threads, it is magnitude alone which
i& the non-combinative cause, since multiplicity and coalescence do not
exist there. Where again, a ball of cotton is originated by two other
balls of cotton, in this case, inasmuch as an increase of measure or exten-
sion is observed, therefore accretion is the cause, since multiplicity does
not exist, and since magnitude, though existing, is not a condition or
occasion for increase of measure or extension. Such being the case, were
magnitude a cause here, there would be no defect in the argument, for it
has been said, ‘' By two, by one, or by all.”

; : Proo/iayo, co^escence or accretion, is originative conjunction, and

i ^ ^®Stted as conjunction in an object of some of its constituent parts to-

constituent parts wei-e not if!



alll':;::®!;::; si^mAs yn, i-ii.; ^ ;

conjunction towards itself. And this conjunction o£ constituent parts, it
has been observed, is dependent upon a loose conjunction among their
own constituent parts, is productive of measure or extension, and is
involved in the origination of Attributes and Actions. — 9.

The atomic i$ the opposite of the large or massive ; the short, of the long.

Ataii, of this. Viparitam, the contrary, ^ Anu, the atomic,

small, or minute.

10, The contrary of this is the atomic. — 266.

Upaskdra . — Having demonstrated magnitude and length, ■ he now demonstrates
atomic-ness or minuteness.

^ Atah/ i.e., from large or massive measure or extension established
by perception ; Wiparitam,’ (i.e., divergent). The meaning is that that is
atomic measure or extension. The contrariety arises from imperceptihility,
and from contrariety of causes also. For in the case of magnitude or
massiveness, magnitude, multiplicity, and accretion are the causes, while
in the case of atomic-ness or minuteness, duality inhering in the cause and
produced by the relative understanding of God, is the cause. By this is
also to he understood that the contrary of length is shortness, and here
too the contrariety is as aforesaid. — 10.

In lohat se77se the same thing appears hoih small and large.

Anu, atomic, small, minute, Mahat, large, massive. Iti, such.
tff%r5|^Tasmin, in that, f.?,, in respect of one and the same object.
Vigesa-bhavat, from the existence of the species, or of the peculiarity.
ViiJesa-abhavat, from the non-existence of the species, or of the peculiarity.

11. ‘(It is) smaller,’ ‘(It is) larger,’ — such, affirm-
ations, in respect of one and the same object, arise from the
existence of the species, or of the peculiarity, and from the
non-existence of the species, or of the peculiarity.—- 267

Upaslmm.— Ue now shows that in the case of a jujube, an dmilaka, etc., the attribu-
tion of smallness is secondary or relative. '

The word, ‘ iti,’ indicates the sense of attribution or usage, There
is, then, all this usage that a jujube is small in relation to a 6aeZ-fruit,
that an emblic myrobolan is large in relation to a jujube, that a haeZ-fruit
is large in relation to ^ eibblifs myrobakh,:'.; Amongst these, ‘ (It is)
large ’r-such usage with regard to them k primary'. If it he asked, hdw


'' • -


VAI8E8IKA PElLOSOFHf.


it is so, lie says, ‘ vin^esa-bliavat,’ i.e., beeanse of ‘ bli4va,’ i.e., the existence ■
of ‘ vWesa,’ i.e., the very species, magnitude, by ‘bh&va,’ i.e., tlie
-relation of more, most, etc. On the other hand, the treatment of them as
being small, is secondary or relative. If it be asked how this is so, he
says, ‘ viii^esa-abh§;v4t,’ i.e., because of the non-existence in them of the
species, smallness. For, smallness, as an effect, resides only in binaiy
atomic aggregates, and, as eternal, resides in the ultimate atoms, and
consequently it does not exist in a Jujube, etc.

Or, the meaning may be, that the treatment of a jujube, etc., as
small is secondary, because of the ‘ bh^va,’ i.e., the existence, in the
■ constituent parts of the jujube, etc., of the ‘vi^esa,’ i.e., the cause of
magnitude, namely, multiplicity of constituent parts, magnitude, and
accretion', and because of the abhava, i.e., the non-existence, in the
constituent parts of the jujube, etc., of the vis^esa, i.e., the cause of smallness,
namely, duality which does not co-exist in the same substratum with
magnitude. — 11.

In what sense the same thing appeaj’s hath small and large, eontinued-


vs r ^ 1 n H


Eka-kala-tvat, from simultaneity (of the cognitions of largeness
and smallness),

12. (The attrihntion of smallness is secondary), be-
cause of the simultaneity (of the cognition of largeness and
smallness in respect of the same object.) — 268.

U paskdra.—lle gives fclie reason wliy the attribution of smallness is secondary:

Magnitude and , minuteness are perceived at one and the same time.
And thesOj magnitude and minuteness, being mutually contradictory,
cannot appear together in one and the same, substratum. The intuition
of magnitude, therefore, is there primary inasmuch as the cause of
magnitude exists there, and the intuition and application of minuteness


are secondary. This is the meaning. — 12.


A.hove eontinued.


u IS I n u

Drisl^utiiiJfrto example, or analogue- ^ Cha, And,

13. ■ Also becaii’se^ there is the analogue.- — 269.

UpasM7*a,—lle states the ro.asoa for the primariiiess of the iEtuitioix o.f laagiiitiide

■The meaning is , h' -is seen likewise that iu the natural order


■ of


'%■'< V/.c,'. .d-v ■■■,■.■ . - - ■v?-: y:' ■ ■ ■ i , . ■


KA-NlDA SUTRAS VII, 1-15.


and largest, must be with regard only to things possessing magnitude,
namely, the jujube, the emblic myiobalan, and the bael fruit, just as the
application of white, whiter, and rr bitest, is, according to the nature of
things, with regard only to white objects, namely, a piece of cloth, a
conch-shell, a crystal, etc. — 13.

Minuteness and magnitude do not exist in minuteness and magnitude.

Anutva-mahativayoh, in minuteness and magnitude.

Ai^iutva-mahattva-abhavali, non-existence of minuteness and
of magnitude, Karmma-gunaili, by Actions and Attributes,

Vyakhyatali, explained,

14. The non-existence of minuteness and magnitude,
in minuteness and magnitude, is explained by (the explana-
tion, already given, of the non-existence of Actions and
Attributes, in) Actions and Attributes. — 270.

Upaskdnt,— -It may be objected : la virtue of the usage, ‘bSniall Measure or Extension,*'
Large Measure or Extension,” it is known that there is magnitude also in magnitude as
a measure or extension, and that there is smallness in smallness also. ITowh then, can
these be said to exist in Substance alone ? How, again, does not the contradiction result,
in Attribute, of being existent in Attribute ?

To this he replies :

The meaning is that as Attribute and Action do not possess minuteness
and magnitude, so also do not minuteness and magnitude possess minu-
teness and magnitude. The usage should be regarded as derivative. — 14.

Above continued .

sRWfiftr n 's i ? i m h

Karmmabhih, by actions. Karmmani, actions. 55%: Gunaifi,

by attributes, "sr Cha, and, Gunah, attributes. sjjRsJJTfT; Vyakhyatali,

15. Actions have been explained (to be void) of
Actions, and Attributes, of Attributes. — 271.

U'pasfediTi.—'It may be urged that as Attributes are i^ossessed of Attributes,— and
how else could there be such uses as Large (i.e., extensive) Bound,” “ Two Sounds,” “ One
Sound,” Twenty-four Attributes,” etc. ?— and as Actions appear to foe possessed of
Actions,— and how else could there be such uses as ** It goes quickly,” It goes swiftly
so minuteness and magnitude must also be possessed of minuteness and magnitude.


i


#


Sliliili



v'i'\ . ;'";'


f!»i



226 VAlhsiKA PHILOSOPHY..

With this in view, he saj^s :

By Actions, Actions are not possessed of Actions. By Attributes,
Attributes are also not p) 0 ssessed of Attributes. In like manner, minute-
ness and magnitude are also not possessed of minuteness and magnitude.
The usage, however* is, in all these cases, derivative. This is the mean-
ing. — 15.

Minuteness and Macjnilude do not exist in Attribute or in Action.

o^TTWrCT: U V9 | ^ I U

Atjutva-mahattvabhyim, by minuteness and magnitude.

Karmma-gunab, actions and attributes. ^ Cha, and. Vyakhya-

tab, explained.

16. By minuteness and magnitude, Actions and
Attributes also are explained (to be void of minuteness
and magnitude). — 272.

UpasMnu—lb may be urged that usage such as “ Large Actions,” “ Minute Actions,”
** Large Attributes,” “ Minute Attributes,” etc., entails that Actions possess minuteness
and magnitude, and also Attributes possess both of them. In anticipation of this, he

wsaysvr:-.. , ■ ■; ■ ■■

The meaning is that as minuteness and magnitude are not possessed
of minuteness and magnitude, so Actions are not possessed of either
of them, nor are Attributes possessed of either of them. Their treatment
as such, however, is derivative as aforesaid. This is the import.— 16.

Length and shortness do not exist in length and shortness.


II V9 I ? I H


Ji-,,


Etena, hereby. Dirghatva-hrasvatve, length and shortness.

Bnp@!jra Vyakhyate, explained.

17. Hereby are explained Length and Shortness. — 273.

Updskflra,— He extends the process of minuteness and magnitude to length and
shortness.

Length aud shortness also are not possessed of length and shortness.
Whatever is productive of magnitude, the same is productive of length ;

, whatever is productive ot minuteness, the same is productive of shortness.
If it he asked, the cause heing the same, how there can be this difference
, ia the effect, the reply is that it is proved or explained, like attributes
produced by burning, (Jby: ; the difference of antecedent non-existence.-
Wherever there is niinutbhess,_ there is -shortness ; where there is eternal
mip.uteness,'tbw6 is/ etetUal ishniiM^^ etc. , This is the meaning of the


KANADA SUTRAS VII, 1-19.


How Measure or Extension is destroyed.


H vs I % I tq 11


Anitye, in the non«eterna]. Anityam, non-eternal, perishable.

18. Ill the non-eternal, (Measure or Extension also is)
non-eternal. — 274.

Upaskdm.—HQ now points oat tiiat which destroys (Measure or Extension)

All this four-fold Measure or Extensiou, being present in perishable
substance, disappears only on the destruction of tlie substratum, and not
on account of contradictory, other attributes.

Objeetion. — But the Measure or Extension of a water-pot is destroyed,
although the water-pot still exists ; how else, even after the breaking of
the neck of the water-pot, can there be the recognition, “ This is that very
water-pot ” ?

Answer. — This is not the case, inasmuch as the destruction of the
water-pot is necessary or inevitable, by the destruction of the substratum.
For, it stands neither to reason nor to experience that, the binaiy atomic
aggregates being destroyed on the destruction of the conjunction of two
ultimate atoms, there is non-destruction of the tertiary atomic aggregates
constituted by the binary ones, and of limestone, etc., constituted by the
tertiary atomic aggregates.

Objeetion. — How then does the recognition arise ?

Answer. — It is an error, like 'the recognition, “ This is that very
flame of the lamp.”

Objeetion. — But the recognition of the lamp is certainly correct know-
ledge; whereas minuteness and magnitude undergo production and des-
truction.

Answer. — This cannot be maintained, because it has been already
mentioned that their destruction is not possible without the destruction of
their substratum. — 18.

What Measure or Extension is eternal.


^ H VS M I u u


Nitye, in the eternal. i^rafNityam, eternal.

19. In tlie eternal, (Measure or Extension also is)


UpasMra,—Is then minnteEcs^# Inhering In ultimate atoms, destroyed, as are Coloiu*
etc., of te.rrene ultimate^ atoms magnitiide. also,'. luheribgiB; ether, etc., destroyed m '
are Sound, Understanding, etc.? In anticipation of these objections, he says :


VAliESIKA PHILOSOPHY.

'X' ]!jj 0 asure or Extension which, exists in eternal substances^ s.g., ethev,

/;i etc., and also in the ultimate atoms, is eternal, since there is nothing to

destroy it. — 19.

j- i. Eternal Measure or Extension is ealled Pariinandalam.

I u vs M i »

f: , Nityam, eternal, Parimandalam, Partmaiidala^ the ali-

L : round, or the spherical. Measure or Extension of the ultimate atom.

n 20. Parimand^aZa is eternal. — 276.

- Upashdm , — ^He states the name by ^vhich the ISIeasure or Extension of the ultimate

; ^ ; atom is denoted in the Vaisefdca system : —

:] P dr imandaly am has the same denotation as ‘ Parimandalam.’ So it

j;? lias been said, Elsewhere than in Pdrimandalya, etc.” — 20.

ph Proof of trite Minuteness and true Shortness,

I ; ^ ii vs n i n

} '' Avidyd, false knowledge. Nescience. ^ Cha, moreover, and.

: I ' Vidyd-lihgam, mark or indication of knowledge,-

|l|; 21. False knowledge is, moreover, the (inferential)

mark of (true) knowledge. — 277.

Upasfedra.— It may bo asked : If minuteness, or shortness, as applied respeetively to
a jujube, an emblie rayrobalan, etc., and to fuel-sticks, sugar-canes, etc., is not transcend-
ental or real, (but apparent only), what then is the proof of thorn as transcendental ?
Accordingly lie says :

^ The mark of knowledge’ is ‘false knowledge.’ The ineaning,
therefore, is this : The cognition or consciousness of minuteness in Tespect
of a jujube, an emblie niyrobalan, etc., and the consciousness of shortness
in resiDect of sticks for fuel, sugar-canes, etc., are all avidyd or false know-
ledge, inasmuch as real or transcendental minuteness and shortness do
not exist there. Moreover, it is admitted by those who hold the doctrine
of anyatha-hhyati, illusion of the senses, that everywhere unscientific know-
ledge is just preceded by scientific knowledge. So that true consciousness
of minuteness, as well as true consciousness of shortness, should be in-
ferred. This is the meaning. In like manner, secondary use of words
being impossible without the primary use, minuteness and shortness, in
the primary sense of the terms, must be thouglit of to be present some-
where. — 21.

Vivriti — But why should substance, in the form of the ultimate
atom, be admitted, when it is not perceptible to the senses? On the
other, hand, substance wlricli is perceptible to the senses, such as a tertiary
atomic aggregate, etc., should be recognised.



228


KANADA SUTRAS VII, 1-22. . 229

To meet tliis objection he says :

^ AYidyaj’ i.e,, unscientific knowledge, in other words, cognitions,
sncli as Earth is eternal,’’ “ Water is eternal,” etc., of which the objects
are wholes made up of parts, is the inferential ‘ mark,’ of ‘ Vidya/ i,e,,
scientific knowledge, namely, that Earth is eternal, of which the object is
(i.(3,, ill respect of), the nltiiiiate atom ; because everywhere scientific
knowledge, is preceded by unscientific knowledge, for nowhere it is
possible for a man to have the erroneous idea that Earth is eternal, if he
does not know what eternality is> This is an indirect proof. The method
of proof of ultimate atoms as realities, which has been pointed out before,
should be preferred.

Ethe-r^ and Soul possess infinite Measure or Extension.

n ^ I i i R u

Vibhavat, in consequence of omnipresence, infinite expansion, or
universality. Mahan, vast. Immense. Infinitely large, Akasah,

Ether, Tatha, so. The same. ^ Cha, and. Also, Atma, Soul.

22. Ether, in consequence of its vast expansion, is
infinitely large. So also is the Soul. — 278.

Upaskdra . — He describes the nature or iDroper form of the Measure or Extension of
Ether, etc., which has been already inferred by the mark of their^substance-ness.

‘ Vibhavah ’ denotes capacity for conjunction, or the characteristic of
being in conjunction, with all dense bodies ; and this, being impossible,
or incapable of proof, without vast magnitude, leads to the inference of
.vast magnitude. It is also observed by us that Sounds are produced, just
at one and the same time, both at Bara?.(asi (Benares) and at Pataliyufra
(Patna) ; it is one and the same Ether that is here the combinative cause.
Consequently the pervasion of Ether is proved. Pervasion, again,
consists only in connection with infinitely vast Measure or Extension.
To suppose a diversity of Ether would be superfluous ; hence only one
Ether should be recognised. Such reference as “ A portion or division,
of Ether,” is, however, relative, being due to conjunction with the water-
pot, etc., (occupying a limited space, or) possessing limits. And the rela-
tivity consists in the characteristic of being in conjunction with substances
possessing limits.

‘ Tath& 4tmil ’ : As Ether is immensely vast, since it possesses
universal pervasion, that is, the characteristic of being in conjunction
with all dense bodies, so is also the Soul immensely vast. Did not the
pliaracteristic of being in conjunction with all dense bodies belong to tlie


.


■»t4.


I ''('I



VAISmKA PHILOSOPHY


KAN Ad A SUTRAS VII, 1-25.


Objeation. — Minuteness cannot be thus proved from non-existence
of universal expansion, since the inference would be unduly applicable to
the water-pot, etc.

Answer. — It would not, inasmuch as non-pervasion is proved in the
case of the Avater-pot, etc., by non-existence of universal pervasion.

In one body, therefore, there is just one mind, since the
supposition of plurality Avould entail redundancy. To imagine parts even
of a single mind wottld be shoAving exuberance of imagination. Moreover,
being touchless, they cannot originate. By such arguments, (infinite)
minuteness is proved. This is the import.^23.

(Space is all-'pervading.

5^: Guiiaih, by attributes, Dik, space. Vyakhyftta, ex-

plained.

24. By attributes, Space is explained (to be all-per-
vading). — 280.

UpasMm . — He states the argument for the infinite magnitude of space : —

The meaning is that, ‘ gunaih ,’ i.e., by attributes characterised as
priority and posteriority inherent in all dense bodies, and appearing in the
forms of the intuitions of the East, the West, etc., common to all persons
inhabiting all the islands or divisions of the globe, space also is explained
under the aspect of pervasion. For, it will be mentioned later on that in
the production of (the notions of) priority and posteriority, the cause is
relative understanding having for its subject-matter larger and smaller
number of conjunctions with the conjunct. Moreover, the supposition of
a plurality of space is contravened by (the fault of) superfluity of sup-
position.

Objection. — How, then, can there be the intuition and the expression
or reference, namely, “ Ten spaces {i.e., quarters)”?

Answer. — The objection does not arise, since it has been already stated
that they are due to particular upadhi or external conditions. — 24.

Time is all-pervading.

Karane, in cause. To a specific cause, or to a universal cause*
Kala|ij time. ^

25. Time (is the name given) to (a specific,, or univer-
sal) cause. (Hence, in either case, it is all-pervading).-— 281.

the uaiversal. expansion of' 'Time ^


IB**


VAlisSIKA PHILOSOPHY.


Time is the name which fully designates the substance which is the
cause of the intuitions of reciprocal prior and posterior, simultaneity, non-
simultaneity, slow, and fast. Such an intuition, common to all persons in
all countries, would be impossible without the universal pervasion of time.
Universal pervasion, that is to say, connection with infinite magnitude,
therefore, belongs to it.

Or, in virtue of such intuitions as “ born now,” Time is known to be
the efficient or occasional cause of all that is pi’oduced ; and this is depen-
dent upon universal pervasion, for an occasional cause must be, as a rule,
in proximity with the combinative and non-combinative causes.

Or, the use or application of past, future, and present is universal :
consequently time is all-pervading.

Or, time is the name of the substance which is the cause of the
application or use of moments, lavas (thirty-six winks), hours, watches,
days, days-and-nights, fortnights, months, seasons, half-years, years, etc.
Consequently, such use or application being universal, time is universal,
and, therefore, infinitely large.

The supposition of its inanifoldness is, as has been already stated,
contravened by (the fault of) superfluity of supposition. — 25.

Here ends the first chapter of the seventh book in the Commentary
of Safikara upon the Vai^etika Aphorisms.


KAMDA SUTRAS Vlt, 24.


Book Seventh— Chapter - Second.

Number : Proof of Unity.


li vs. I -R I i

because of

diftei'eoce from Colour, 'Paste, Smell, and Touch, Arthantarani, a

different object. Ekutvam, unity.

1. Because of its diiference from Colour, Taste,
Smell, and Touch, Unity is a different object. — 282.

Upaskdm.—ln. the seeoiid chapter tliere are five sections : (a) the section on the
examination of attributes existing in one, and in more than one, object ; (b) the section on
tlie examination of attributes existing only in more than one object; (c) the section, in
passing, on the examination of the relation of sound and significance (ic., of words and
their meanings) ; (d) the section on tii 3 examination of attributes existing in Ofie object
and having for their non-eombinative cause eonjunetioii with universal substances void of
13artieular or distingaishiiig attributes ; and, (c) the section on the examination of combi-
natimi. Now, the percept! bliity oi: Nu nber, etc., also is dependent upon combination in the
same object w.lth magnitude. Accordingly, with a Anew to examine number, and also
separateness, iinmediately after the deter mlnabioii of measure or extension, in An.olation of
the order of enumeration, lie says :

‘ Ruparrasa-garidlia-spars% ’ is indicatoi^ of all attributes other than
the pentad beginning with number, (i. <3., number, measure or extension,
separateness, conjunction, and disjunction). ^ Vyatirekat ’=because of
difference or divergence. The meaning, therefore, is this : “ One Avater-
pot’' — Such particular intuition can be produced by some particularity.
And that particularity is not colour, etc., for, the intuition is produced by
diiference from, or without, them. Nor is it the being a Avater-pot, etc.,
that is the condition or occasion ^of the intuition), for Biiclx intuition is
produced in respect of a piece of cloth also. Nor is unity a Genus, like
existence, for its denotation is neither less nor more than that of existence.
No.r, again, is it a Genus confined to substance only, for it is neither less
nor more extensir^e than Substance-ness. Nor does the difference or
mutual distinction (of Unity and Substance-ness) arise from difference of
infciiition, OAmii though they are neither less nor more extensive than each
other; .for, if difference of intuition were caused by itself, existence also ^
. would be differentiated; i.f, on the other hand, it were to be caused by
difference of subject-matter, then, difference of subject-matter,, as has been
' stated, is not possible, since, otherwise, there' Would; be' difference of the
characteristics of being a sniali water-pot and pf'beingir large water-pot.


m


VAI^ESIKA PHILOSOPHY.


Nor is the riew, held by BMeofO. timt onily is non-difference fvoni ta
identity with, itself, a reasonable one. Were self-.dent.ty o! the watei-

pot its X.Tnity, then there wonld he no intnition of Unity ,n the ease of a

Lth, etc. other view, namely, that dilereiiee ■' 0 “ d^^f

constitutes Duality, etc., is also not valid ; for, variety o uses o . ' i e-ence
from itself or self-distinction, as being common to three, four, and so oi ,
is not possible or capable of proof. This is the import— 1.

Proof of Separateness.

^ U VS 1 R I R U

?rjrr Tatha, similarly. Prithakatvam, separateness. • Individual-


2. Similarly, Se-parateness (is a different objectj.-


UjxtsHnt.— With a view to piwe separateness also, by means of its similarity

practice of .discrimiuatiou or separation verily exists, in the
form, namely “ This is separate from, other than, a different object from,^
this ” For separation means definite apprehensiou or grasp, having
regard to cmtain limits. Here, again, Colour, etc., are hot the cause, since
they are not its invariable antecedents, and also because the limits (of
them) are nndefinable.

Objection . — Separateness is nothing but anyonya-ahhava,
non-existence, non-existence which opposes identity; for, like ‘ 1 his is
separate from, other than, a differeat object from, this,” the intuition
“ (This is) different from this) ” rests on anyonya-abhdca.

is not so. Although the terms, separate, etc., are
synonymous they do not convey the sense of anyonya-abliam, since in
that case the use of the ablative C from’) wonld not he possible or
able because the intuitions, '• This is separate from this, and liiis is
not this,” contain different subject-matter. Nor is sei^rateness an object
or entity which possesses anyonya-abhava, for, then, in “ A cloth is a not-
water-pot,” there wonld also be the use of the ablative.

Objection.— The intuitions, “It is separate,” and “ Tt is distinct,”
havint^ the same form. Separateness is nothing hnt distinctness.

Ansieer— It is not. For, in that case, while Maitra possessed the
distinction of a staff, the intuition, “ This Maitra is separate from Maitra,”
would also arise. Likewise it would entail the application of separateness
to Ether where it is distinguished by Sound, and to the Soul when it is


KAhUDA SUTRAS VII, 2-3. 235

For the same reasoDj dissiinilarity or difference in property also is
not Separateaoss, iiiasinucli as it would entail, in the case of a water-iDOt,
which has bef n burnt to redness, such usage as “ This ^Yater•“pot is
separate from the dark wmter-pot.” For, it is the possession of properties
repugnant to a thing, that constitutes difference in XDroperty from that
tiling. And this appears in the state of redness immediately after
darkness’

Nor is it Genus itself, which is Separateness. For, the limits of a
Genus are uiidefiiiable. Moreover, it would entail inter-mixture of classes;
for, if it exist only in existent things, then its denotation would be neither
less nor more than tliat of existence, and if it exist in substance only,
then, than that of Substance-ness. — 2.

Unity and Separateness do not exist in Unity and Separateness,

II 'S I R I ^11

Ekatva-ekaprithaktvaj^oli, in Unity and Separateness
of one, or individuality. Ekatva-ekaprithakatva-abhavali,

non-existence of Unity and Individuality. Anutva-mahat-

tvabliyam, by minuteness and magnitude. S3|fg§35[r^: Vyakhyatali, explained.

3. TKe non-existence of Unity and Individuality, in
Unity and Individuality, is explained by minuteness and
magnitude. — 284.

npasJaim.— It luay be argued tiiat iiiasiniicli as there is this usage, namely “One
Unity/’ “Separateness is separate from colour, etc./’ therefore there is Unity also in
Unity, Separateness also in Separateness, and similarly, in other and other instances.
Accordingly he says :

Tlie meaning is that as minuteness and magnitude do not possess
minuteness and magnitude, the application of which to them is derivative,
so Unity and Individuality do not loossess Unity and Individuality, the
application of which to them is derivative.

“ By Actions, Actions,” “ By Attributes, Attributes,” — these two
aphorisms (vii. ii. 24, 25, infra) also, which employ analogy, here seem
to carry the same import as the preceding {i.e., the present) aphorism
employing an analogy. The meaning is that as Actions are not possessed
of Actions, nor are Attributes possessed of Attributes, so Unity and Indivi-
duality are not possessed of Unity and Individuality. — 3.


I


I

1


K'l

PA


I


'

'U'h


iliill



VAlSEBi:S^A PH1L080PEY


at, in consequence ol the nc
function. Secoadariness
Vidyate, exists,



KANADA SUTRAS VII, 2-7.


6. In consequence of tlie non-existeuce of Unity,
however, seconclariness would not exist. — 287.

Upask(U'CL—Jt may lie asked; “ Let this application of IJnity be secondary in the case
of substances also, and the ijitiiition of it erroneous, what is the use of iiiiitj" at all ? ”
To this, he replies :

If in its transcendental or real sense be nowliere^to be observ-

ed, tlieii tlie application of the term could not be secondary, for tlie second-
ary, has for its antecedent the primary, use. Nor, again, could the intuition
be erroneous, for error has for its antecedent certain knowledge. For it
IS the certaiidy known that is lerroneously) attributed, and not the erro-
neous, for the intuition of the non-existent lias been disproved, and the
intuition of the otherwise (f.e., the existent) has been idroved. — 6.

Unity and Separateness of one do not exist in effect and cause.


Kdryya-karanayoh, of or in effect and cause.

Ekatva-ekaprithakatva-abhavat, in consequence of non-exist*^
ence of identity and non*heterogeneity. Ekatva-ekapritha-

katvani, Unity and Individuality. Na, not. \hdyate, exsits.

7. Efect and cause are neither the same nor similar
(in being equally distinguished from all other things) ;
therefore. Unity and (single) Individuality do not exist in
them. — 288.

IJpashdm.—Wect and cause, e.g., threads and cloth, possess Unity and single Indivi-
duality. Single Individuality also belongs to them for the very same reason for which
Unity belongs to them. For it is not possible that a thing can be separate from itself.
For .when a piece of cloth is torn asunder and the threads are drawn out one after another,
a piece of cloth diiferent from them is not observed. Were a piece of cloth dlfterent from
the threads, then it should be observed under the characterstic of being different from
them, like a water-pot. In like manner, a water-pot also i.s nothing but identical with
the two potsherds (which compose it), since a water-pot also being broken, nothing over
and above the two potsherds is observed. Accordingly it has been said, “ A whole made
up of parts is nothing else than the parts.” This is the view of the Samkh3’’a thinkers.
And for the purpose of controverting it, he says :

Effect and cause — these two are not one. Why? So he says : from
non-existence of ‘ ekatva,’ i.e., from non-existence, of non-difference,, and
because co-existence of plurality and unity in :tbe same substratum is not
therefore, possible, aswould be required by tb^qproposition that the very


VAjimKA PHILOSOPHY


mm


1


same tiling wliicli is tlie effect, is also the cause, e.g., that threads are a

piece of clotb. . . i

Ohjeetion.—Bui there is as a matter of fact such co-esistence m t le
same substratum, seeing that the term, waters, is applied to a drop o

water only, and also seeing that the term, wives, is applied to a g
WOIBEB.

Answer.-Snch is not the case. For such applications can be
■possible by reference to multiplicity of constituent parts. In -re case o
the ultimate atom of water, however, such _ application
cording to some thinkers, by means of multiplicity of colour, etc natui-
allv belonging to it ; while, according to others, it is due to the chaiacter-
“ LlIoe otiuncdrl..nguag. which should uot be found fan . wUh
Nor do fibres present in a mlvinia eucullata and honey-comb obtain the
appellation of cloth. Nor do threads singly prevail to contain and to drag

anything.

Nor a^ain, can the two, effect and cause, become the substratum
of sinc^le individuality, for it is seen that they become the limits of each
other" How? So he says, ‘ eka-prithakatva-abhavAt,’ i.e., in consequence
of the non-existence of ‘eka-prithakatvain,’ or non-heterogeneity or non-
difference in property, in other words, because, of effect and cause, dif-
ference in property is observed, for it is universal among mankind that
the notions of thread and cloth, as well as of water-pot and potsherds, are
embraced by different acts of understanding.

Objection. — Why, then, are not Colour, Taste, Smell, and rouch,
cognised by their difference (or separately from one another, ie., one after
another always) ?

Answer.— BBC&ase of the absolute similarity of their forms, i.e.,
modes of manifestation. And when sometimes, as in a piece of cloth of
variegated colour, etc,, separate cognition also takes place, it is because
the differences of Number, Measure or Extension, etc., are most mani-

fest tliere. — 7.

Only non-eternal iinity and separateness of one proceed from like
attributes in their causes,

' II VS 1 S c: U

■ Etat, this, £i?., the characteristic of having the attributes of the cause

as antecedents. Anityayoh, of the two non-eternals, namely, Number

Separateness.: ■ Vyakhyatam, explained,


' r


tnicfcion of relative imderstancling hj moans of that reasoning, and a
qualified or concrete understanding having for its content the attribute
Duality as qualified with the notion or cliaracteristic of Dualitj^ And
in the next moment there are simultaneously produced destruction of the
attribute Duality in consequence of the destruction of relative understand-
ing, and cognition, in the form of “Two substances,” qualified with
Duality. : Thereafter, results Samskara, impression or a fixed idea, from
the above cognition of substances qualified with .Duality. Thus, -to sum

or impression, there are eight moments; 'wk', -.contact’ of the sense with"


KA-NADA stiTRAS vn, 2 - 8 .


8. This, (as) explained in the case of the two non-
etenials (namely, fTiunber and Separateness, should he under-
stood only in the case of non-eternal Unity and Separateness
of one).— -289.


Upaskdra . — -Be points out that non-etenial Unity and Sieparateness of one hare for
their antecedents attributes of their causes.


The characterstic of having attributes of the cause as antecedents,
which has been explained in the ease of non-eternal Number and Sepai'ate-
ness, should be understood to apply only to non-eternal Unity and Separate-
ness of one, since other Numbers and Separatenesses are produced b}''
relative understanding. As the characteristic of having attributes of the
cause as antecedents belongs to non-eternal colour and touch of Fire, so
it belongs also to non-eternal Unity and Separateness of one. This is
the import. It follows, therefore, that Numbers beginning with two and
ending with the highest arithmetical number, possess or reside in more
than one substance. It also follows that separatenesses beginning with
Separateness of two and ending with Separateness of the highest arithmeti-
cal number, co-exist in the same substratum witli those Numbers. Now,
the processes of the production and destruction of Duality, etc., are as
follows: When two homogeneous or heterogeneous substances are in
contact with the eye, cognition of the attribute qualified with the notion
or characteristic of Unity, which is the genus of the two numbers, Uni-
ties, inhering in the two substances, are produced immediately after the
elimination of differences in thought He., the assimilation of the two sub-
stances under the notion of Unity) ; and it is this cognition which is
called relative understanding or the conception of the one in the manJ^
By it Duality is produced in the two substances. Then there takes place
reasoning about the notion or characteristic of Daulity Avhich is the genus
of the Duality so produced. After it, simultaneously there appear des-


ir

. ; ::::


ifil


li


. Wh


tAlBESlKA PHILOSOPHY:


tlie substratum of DuaUty which is going to be produced,, then cognition
of the genus inherent in the attribute Unity, then relative understanding
in the form of cognizance of the many along with the attribute Unity as
qualihed with the generic notion or characteristic of Unity, then produc-^ , ■
tion of the attribute Duality, then cognition of the genus inherent m
Duality, then cognition of the attribute Duality^ as qualifittl with that
genus, then cognition of substances as qualified with the attribute Duality,
and then Sanisk&ra ov impression. The order of destruction, again, is as
follows : Destruction of the generic notion or characteristic of Unity, from
relative understanding ; destruction of relative understanding, from cog-
nition of the generic notion or characteristic of Duality ; destruction of
the generic notion or characteristic of Duality, from cognition of the
attribute Duality ; destruction of cognition of the attribute Duality, from
cognition of substances as qualified with the possession of Duality ; and

destruction of the latter, from Sa).a.!iMj‘a or impression, or from cognition

of otlier objects

' Ohjeetion—Whvis not cognition of substance qualified with the
possession of Unity, itself produced after the cognition of Unity, when
.all the causes of its production are present there? For, cognition of
attribute taking place, there can be no delay in tlie cognition of
substance. From that same cognition (of substance so qualified), therefore,, ,
there being destruction of relative understanding, from its destruction
will follow, at its very next moment, destruction of Duality. Hence
destruction of Duality resulting at the very moment prior to the qualified
or concrete cognition in the form of “ Two substances,” the production of
cognition of substance as qualified with the possession of Duality,
becomes impossible.

iinsioer.— The argument is defective; for, it is relative uuderstand-
ing uninfluenced or unobstructed or unobscured by tlie causes of the
production of Duality, etc., which invariably produces cognition qualified
with the content of substance, the above supposition being made on the
strength of the result.

"Ofijeetion.— But still destruction of relative understanding being-
caused by the very scLinslidva or impression produced by iiself, the fault,
pointed out above, again appears all the same, since there is possibility of
h'. ^ destiTictioii of Duality at the very moment prior to the cognition qualified

' with Duality. .■ ,

■ Answer . — It .'.does’ not, since cognition of pure attribute, or of
' ■'^'l'’'^ittribut©'massQciated with s^ is not productive of sanisMra or


m


SUTRAS VIT, 2^8,


impression.. For pure attribute can be nowhere called back tomindj since
everywhere it is only by the background of, or as contained in, substance,
that there caa be recollection of attribute,

OhjeeMon, —Let it be so ; still inasmuch as even at the time of the
production of qualified or ctmcrete cognition, there may be destruction of
Duality, the possibilit}^ of non-production of qualified cognition remains
in thievery same state. For qualified or specific cognition, illuminative
of that which is present, cannot possibly appear at the moment of the
destruction of the qaalificati«)ii or that which serves to specify, since there
is no such observation.

Answer, — This is not the case. For, cognition of that wdiich serves
to specify, contact of sense with that which is specified, and non-appre-
hension of non-association of the above two, make up the whole

cause of specific cognition, are possible also in the case of the subject under
discussion. If, however, contact of sense with that which serves to specify,
is also required, then this too existing at the preceding moment, the very
contact, which exists at the preceding moment, is observed to be the
cause. That which serves to specify, or a qualification or distinction,
which is beyond the compass of specified cognition, may also exist ; for, it
is only the being the object or content of cognition productive of specified
cognition, which determines the characteristic of being a distinction or
that which serves to specify, but the being the object of specified cognition
does not also determine it.

Ohjeetion. — In this view, an upalaksanam or indication also will come
to have the nature of a visesaiiam or distinction.

Answer. --By no means; for, existence in the same substratum,
which is invariable and which does not cause specified cognition, deter-
mines the characteristic of being a distinction, whereas an indication exists
in a different substratum from that which it indicates. Thus, when there
is possession of a raven in the house of Devadatta, then the raven is a
distinction. But wdien, flying over the house, it does not exist in it, then
the raven is an indication.

Objection . — This being vso it would follow that in such cases as
There is taste in that which possesses colour, ” etc., colour, etc., also
would be distinctions.

Ansioer. — This is not an objection, since it is desired to be so. :

Objection . — Then there too taste willexist . '' ' ,

' ' No, since that which exists iii: something vdistingiiished by

the possession of soiiiething else; '''does riot ^nscessariljr exist 'in that' bjr /:y


VAI8SSIKA PEILOSOPHy


so distinguisTied. For a distinction and that wliicii is dis-
e not one and the same thing.
m.—At the time of the destruction
ith the distinction,

1 is distinguished, be produced ?

'.—The question does not arise, for the meaning of the term,
stinguished or qualiHed, is only non-variation or non-deviation
rgenee from that [i.e., the distinction) ; whereas the mamfesta-
i e the distinction) exists there {i.e., in specified cognition) also.


of Duality, the
How can specified cognition, (


constituent parts of the substratum ot ijuainy. n. lu
in constituent parts and cognition of the genus; Disjunctkni and relative-
understanding; destruction of Conjunction and production of attribute
Duality ; destruction of constituted substance and cognition of tlie genus
Dualitj' ; — here destruction of Duality results from destruction of
substance, and destruction of relative understanding from cognition of
the genus Duality ; since, destruction of relative understanding taking
place at the same time with, destruction of Duality, there exists no
relation, resembling the relation of effect and cause, between them.
'Where, however, there is simultaneity of action in the constituent parts
of the substratum of Duality and relative understanding, there destruc-
tion of Duality results from both destruction of substratum and
destruction of relative understanding. It is in this way : Action in Hie
constituent parts and relative understanding ; production of disjunction
and production of Duality ; destruction of conjunction and cognition of
the genus Duality ; destruction of constituted substance and destruction
■ ■ of relative understanding destruction of Duality from both, the capacity
; ■ ' of each for destroying, being observed. This process properly -fits m with
‘ the theory of -two , cogmtions being related as the destroyed and the
d^strbyp:, ’,^ which is legitimate or established by proof,



KAN Ida. SUTRAS VII, 2-8,


Okjeotipn , — The entire group of causes being the smie iix the cases of
Dualitj^, Triplicily, etc., how is it that there is' this difference in their
effects, namely Dnalitj^ is coiistitated by two Unities, Triplicity by three
Unities ?

Answer , — The question cannot arise, since Dualitjq etc., do not exist
in Unity.

Objection . — It is Duality, Triplicity,- etc., inhering in the combinatiTO
cause, wdiicli determine cognitions of Duality, Triplicity, etc.

Answer. --This is not the case ; for, prior to the production of Duality,
etc., Duality, etc., being absent therefrom, the enc|uiry after the cause
of Duality, etc., does not cease even there, and the existence of such
difference in relative understanding, and in Unities, or in the supposition
of that on the strength of the result, is contravened by non-observation.

Objection . — Let the use also of Duality, etc., x^roceed from the same
source ; what is the need of Duality, etc.? Difference will result from
difference of aclristam.

Answer.— Were it so, Triplicity, and Four-iiess, would be sometimes
produced also by the set of causes originative of Duality. Hence it would
entail noii-niiiforniity. Moreover, it may be said in this connexion that
difference in the effect is explained by difference in prior non-existence ;
as in the case of colour, taste, smell, and touch, produced by burning,



VAI8ESIKA miLOSOPEY.



KANADA SUTRAS VII, 2»8,


being produced by the dual and the single limiting each other, there is
such perception in the case of their individual separateness. Nor does
this theory entail and explain Priority of two, for Priority of two is
explained and possible by means of two i^riorities existing in the same
substratum, or co-extensive, with Duality. The contradiction in respect of
one being the limit of the other, wliich exists in the case of separateness,
does not exist in the case of Priority ; since the intuition, “ These two
are j)rior,’’ is possible or proved in the same way as the intuiiion, These
two are blue.’’ For, though two bodies occupying the same part of space
possess equal manifoldness of conjunctions with the conjunct, yet produc-
tion of different efiects is possible by means of the difference of the
conjunction of space and body, which is the non-combinative cause. More-
over, as two Unities jointly become the non-combinative cause of Duality,
it being, in like manner, possible for two separatenesses of one or single
individualities, jointly operating, to possess non-combinative causality
towards the production of separateness of two, or dual individuality, it is
not observed that more than one, i,e,, many, conjunctions are, by their joint
operation, originative of one effect, wliich is not a constituted substance,
by means of the proximity known as combination in the same object with
the effect. On the other hand, hy means of the proximity known as
combination in the same object with the cause, a larger number of conjunc-
tions of threads and the cylinder of wood in a loom do really originate a
single conjunction of a cloth and the cylinder of wmod in a loom. Tliis
is the direction.

On the analogy of destruction of Duality, etc., should be understood
also destruction of separateness of two, etc.,— -8.

VwritL—~lt may be objected: “The thread i’. distinct from the
cloth and is dissimilar to the cloth” — such intuitions are simply erroneous,
since it is threads conjoint among themselves, wbicli becomes the cloth,
and since no proof exists that the cloth is distinct from the threads. It
cannot be said that difference from the thread can be proved to exist in
the cloth by means of its dissimilarity to the thread, for dissimilarity itself
is not proved. For, the nature of the cloth does not constitute its dissi-
milarity to the thread, inasmuch as in the state of the manifestation of the
cloth, the nature of the cloth is i^ecognised in the threads themselves.
Accordingly it has been taught by Professor IsvaraJmsxia : —



VAISmKA PHILOSOPRY.


The effect is existent (in the cause, iu an enveloped state, ^ prior to its
production) ; For, there can be no production and manifestation of that
which is non-existent ; there can be no connection of the cause with the
effect (if the latter be non-existent) ; (some connection must exist between
the cause and the effect, since) the production of everything is not possible
from everything else ; there can be production of one thing from another, if
the two are mutually related as the producer and the producible (and such
relation cannot be possible if the effect be non-existent); and the cause
and the effect are identical, (so that the one cannot be non-existent,
while the other is existent). {SdvMiyaUriM., verse 9).

Tlris being the case, the non-existence of non-difference and non-
dissimilarity between the cause and the effect remaining itself unproved,
Imw oan it establish the relation of Unity and of Separateness of one or


asequence of tlie possession of the non-existence or
n-dissimilarity, has been observed, ‘ anityayoh, that
-eternal cause and non-eternal effect, ibis is the
:ly on the hypothesis of the non-difference of the
ivould follow that in the state of the production of
ould arise the intuition and use of language that the
ed ; in the state of the production of the cloth, that
ig produced ; in the state of the destruction of the
L is being destroyed ; in the state of the desti notion
lie threads are being destroyed ; and so on. Nor can
■nvArl netinn Uiiid destruction are not themselv^es en-



KANADA SUTRAS FI/, 2-9.


G on junction^ hmjo 'produced,


An3narn-Karmma-jah, pi'odaced b}^ the action o^ either of
two things. Ubhaya-karmma-jali,; produced by action of both*

Samyoga-jali, produced by conjunction. ^ Cha, and. Samyogah,

conjunction.

9. Conjimction is produced by action of any one of
two things, is produced by action of both, and is produced
by Conjunction, also. — 290.

Vpaskdra.—He begins anotlier section or topic
Unobstructed intuition tliat things are conjunct is proof of conjunc-
tion. So also are effects ; e.g., substance, in the case of conjunctions of
constituent parts ; colour and other attributes pi-oduced by burning, in tlie
case of conjunction of fire ; particular measure or extension, in the case
of accretion ; sound, in the case of Conjunction of the drum and ether;
such other instances should he understood. Nor is Conjunction merely
production without thy intervention of empty space. The theories of
transiency and transformation of things having been thrown away, Con-
junction is the coming together which has non-coming together for its
antecedent. And it is produced by the action of one of two things ; as is
the conjunction of a motionless post with a hawk in motion, or the
conjunction of one in motion, when the motion is not directed where the
conjunction takes place, e.g-., conjunction of a runner with the back of
another runner. Conjunction jirodueed by the action of both the

conjunct is that of two rams or of two wrestlers, since it is produced by
both of them exercising strength towards each other. Tlie third
(conjunction produced by conjunction) is the conjunction of the hand and
the tree resulting from the conjunction of the finger and the tree. .And
it resnlts sometimes from one conjunction even, as the conjunction of
cloth and reed may result from the conjunction of thread and reed. In
some cases, one conjunction is produced from two conj unctions, as from
two conjunctions of ether with two threads may result only one conjunc-
tion of a two-threaded cloth with ether. In some cases, again, a single
conjunction is originated even by a plurality of conjunctions, as ten
conjunctions of ether with ten threads may originate only one conjunc-
tion of a ten-threaded cloth and ether. Sometimes, on the other hand,
two conjunctions are produced even Trom a single conjunction as their
non-combinative cause. .For example.,! there having first taken -Dlace


VAISEBIKA PUIW80PHY.


li


aqueous, subsequently two conjunctions, originative of two binary
atomic aggregates,, are produced, namely, one in the terrene ultimate atom
with another terrene ultimate atom, and another in the aqueous ultimate
atom with another aqueous ultimate atom. By these two conjunctions
inhering in homogeneous things, two binary atomic aggregates are simul-
taneously produced. Therein by that one non-origiuative conjunction
alone, produced between the terrene and the aqueous ultimate atom,
one conjunction of the terrene ultimate atom with the aqueous binary
atomic aggregate, and another conjunction of the aqueous ultimate atom
with the terrene binary attomic aggregate, are produced simultaneously
with the production of the colour, etc., of the two binary atomic aggre-
gates.

Inasmuch as the conjunction of cause and not-cause must necessarily
produce conjunctions of effect and not-effect, the conjunction of all pervad-
ing substances (ofs.. Space, Time, Ether and Soulj with dense or corporal
bodies is produced by action of one of the two only. Of two all-pervading
substances, however, tliere is no conjunction, since there is no cause
(of conjunction). For in tlieni there is no action, nor is there any
(combinative) cause ; hence there cannot he in this case also conjunction
j of effect and not-effect resulting from conjunction of cause and not-cause.
Eternal oonjnnction, on the other, hand, is not possible, for conjunction is
the coming together of two things, which lias the not-coining together as its
antecedent, and eternality is opposed to it. And were conjunction eternal.
Disjunction also would he, without production ; and eternality of conjunc-
tion will not he obtained, since it would he impossible for Conjunction arid
Disjunction, which are contradictories, to exist side by side in their
indestructible states. Moreover, yuta-siddhi or iincombined or naturally
unassociated existence is a necessary condition of Conjunction, and it is
not possible in the case of two all-pervading substances. • For yuta-siddhi
is merely the separate existence of two or of one of two (unrelated) things,
or the relation of one thing being inherent in another, as its substratum,
when the two have been externally brought into relation with each other.

Destruction of Conjunction, however, results from Disjunction having
a common substratum with Conjunction. In some cases it results from
, , destruction of substratum also. For example, action is produced in the

, constituent fibre of a thread immediately after the Conjunction of two
; : ’ threads ; thereby is caused Disjunction from another fibre; from Disjunction
. results destruction of originative conjunction ; from this follows destruction
(.hi) of tbe th%ad j of the thread results destruction


I


KANADA SUTRAS VII, 2-10.


of Oonjutiction, where two threads having been long conjoined, action
is not produced in them. Some, on the contrary, maintain that Oonjuno-
tioii is destro 3 md by simultaueousty produced destruction of substratum,
and Disjunction, inasmucli as action is conceived to exist in another
thread at the moment when by action in the constituent parts of a thread
there is effected destruction of Conjunction originative of the thread.
This is impossible ; for there can be no production of .Disjunction at the.
moment of destruction of tlie combinative cause, since the rule is that the
combinative cause is of equal duration with the effect.

This same Conjunction which is an independent agent in the origi-
nation of substances, and a dependent agent in the origination of attri-
butes and actions, is the counter-opposite of the absolute uon-existeiice
existing in the same substratum with itself, since it is observed to be so.
For it is perceived that there is conjunction of an ape in the Banyan tree,
although conjunction of the ape present in a large Ban jmix tree is limited
to a branch onl,y. iVere such mere limitation to a part not sufficient to
account for it, then conjunction would come to exist in ultimate atoms,
and so would not be cognizable. In the case of the all-pervading
substances also, it is the difference of upadhi, adjunct or external condition
which serves to localise them. Conjunction present by limitation to that
is not pervaded in its denotation. Of Conjunction residing in the ultimate
atoms also, direction in space, and the like should be regarded as deter-
minants, — 9.

Disjunetioti, lioio produced.

11 R I ? O n

Etena, by this Vibhagah, disjunction, Vyakhyatah,

explained.

10. By this Disjunction is explained. — 291.

CJpaskam.— By exteading the-mpde of tlie production of Conjunction to Disjunction he

says ;

Like Conjunction, Disjunction also is produced by action of either of
two things, by action of both, and by Disjunction. Disjunction takes place
between a hawk and a post by the action of the hawk ; disjunction of two
wrestlers or of two rams fighting with each other, by the actions of both.
And Disjunction in these cases lias its production at the moment
immediately following the production of action, inasmuch as there exists
nothing else to be waited for or depended upon. Accordingly it has been
said, “Action is an independent cause of Conjunction and Disjunction ”

, (ttde I. i. 17, aSoue), ’ .


iSlilliiiBS

ilHillliBiii


iiiiliiailS


mm


VAI^BBIKA PEILOSOPEY.


r


Objection— There is dependence txpon substratum where Disjunction
has to he produced, and upon destruction of antecedent Conjunction
Conjunction has to be produced.

Anstcei' — This is not tie ease, tor action is indepeinient since it
does not depend upon anything in the form of an existence which has its

production immediately after the production of itself.

Disjunction, produced by Disjunction, however, is two-fold accord-
ins to the difierence of Disjunction of cause and not-cause, produced by
Disjunction of cause alone, and the difference of Disjunction of effect and
not-effect, produced by Disjunction of cause and not-cause. Iherein
Disjunction of potsherd and Ether, resulting from Disjunction of the two
potsherds, is an example of Disjunction of cause and iiot-cause, resu tuig
from Disjunction of cause alone ; and Disjunction of band and tree resulting
from Disjunction of finger and tree, and Disjunction of body ami tiee, le
suiting from Disjunction of hand and tree, are examples of Disjunction
of effect and not-effect, resulting from Disjunction cf cause and not-cause.

Objeetion.-There is no proof of Disjunction itself, the term. Disjunc-
tion, being used to denote only non-existence of Conjunction.

^lisu-er.-It is not so. For, if non-existence of Conjunction he abso-
lute non-existence, then it would follow that the term Disjunction would ,
be used to denote attribute and action also.

Objeetion.—Ahsolute non-existence of Conjunction, being present in
two substances, is the source of the intuition of the disjunct.

Answer.— It cannot be, since it would iu that case follow that abso-
lute non-existence of Conjunction, being present also in a constituted whole
and its constituent parts, would he the source of the intuition of the
disjunct.

Ohjeetion.—The term “ two substances” should be qualified by the
expression “ not being related to each other as effect and cause.”

Ansioei’.— In that case, absolute non-existence of Conjunction, being
present in the Vindhya and Himalaya mountains also, would he the cause
- ' of the intuition of the disjunct.

; Objection. — Indeed there it is.

• : ' Answer. — It is not, For there being existence of erroneous intuition,
to it, in the ease of attribute and action also, it should be considered
lar'it'Will be 'V’alid to make it the source of convention or usage with


251


KAhJlDA SdTEAS VII, 2-10. '


Objeetion. — Destj'uction of Conjunction is Disjunction.

Ansivev. —Were this the case, it would entail the use of tiie term
Disjunction on Conjunction being destroyed by the destruction of any one
of the two things in Conjunction.

Otjeetion.—" Things in Conjunction ” should be qualified as being


tion

‘all


existent. 0 ^

Answer . — In that case, it would entail the intuition of Disjunction
even in the state of Conjunction of a jujube and an emblic myrobalan
which become conjunct again immediately after the destruction of one
conjunction.

Ohjeetion . — Disjunction is the destruction of all Conjunctions.

Answer . — If it be so, then there would be non-existence of Disjunc-
in the case of destruction of one Conjunction, since the denotation of
finds no place there.

Disjunction, therefore, exists, and it is an additional attribute.

This atttribute, again, is destructible by another contradictory attri-
bute, inasmuch as, so long as the substratum exists, destruction of
attribute cannot be possible without a contradictory attribute existing
in the same substratum.

Ohjeetion . — Action itself may be destructive of Conjunction.

Answer . — It cannot be, since only a contradictory attribute is destruc-
tive of attribute. Moreover, although where finger, hand, arm, and body
come to have conjunction with the tree, by means of their respective
actions, there is possibility of destruction of conjunction of the finger and
the tree, by means of the action produced in the finger only, yet there
would not follow destruction of conjunctions of the hand and the tree,
of the arm and the tree, and of the body and the tree, since the hand, etc.
are inactive, and the action of the finger rests in a difierent substratum.

If it be supposed that even action resting in a difierent substratum
may be destructive of conjunction, it would then follow that there would
be destruction of all conjunctions at one and the same moment of time,
by action wherever it may be produced.

Objection . — What then is the solution here on your theory ?

A^iswer . — Disjunction of the hand and the tree, produced by Dis-
junction of the finger and the tree, is destructive of conjunction of the
hand and the tree. This is a matter of observation. ' . D

Sarvajna has said that there may veiy well be destruction of ;
conjunction of the hand and tree, by the very action of the finger, resting
in a different substratum, and that there, will be no undue extension :


ii 252 VAmSIKA PHILOSOPHY.

: (of the causality of action), inasmnch as it is observed that mutual non-

conjunction of the container and the contained is itself destructible by
action resting in a different substratum. This too is not a sound opinion ;
for, destructiveness is everywhere observed to belong only to a contra-
dictory attribute -appearing in the substratum, and it is not reasonable
to abandon that without some argument to the contrary.
f| Sound and Disjunction, again, are effects of Disjunction. Therein

1| -we shall ponder over the non-combinative causality of Disjunction to-
il wards tire production of Sound. For, of the Sound which is produced,

j?, when a bamboo is being split up, and one of the two halves is hold down

] 3 y the pressure of the foot, and the other is drawn upwards, we find no
I other non-combinative. cause than the disjunction of the half and ether

(or of the ether within the halves). Nor do we find any non-combinative
. :.i cause over and above- Disjunction in the case of the sounding forth of a

; 1; bamboo bursting out while it is being burnt in a conflagration. We

[; !,j also infer the Disjunction of the effect and not-effect from- the Disjunc-

I tiouofthe cause and not-cause. Bo's? else, where conjunction of the
finger and the tree, conjunction of the hand and the tree, conjunction
of the arm and the tree, and conjunction of the bodj^ and the tree

' are produced by the respective actions of the finger, etc., can there be

' destruction of the conjunction of the hand and the tree, and of other

^ conjiiTictious, even on the destruction of the conjunction of the finger

* and the tree, consequent on the disjunction of the finger and the tree

produced by action produced in the finger alone? For, in this case,

' it is the series of disjunctions, produced by disjunctions that is, as has •

t been already stated, destructive of the corresponding conjunctions,

i' .. There is, however, no clear evidence in the case of disjunction of the

I ■ cause and not cause, of which the antecedent is the disjunction of the

i:' two (constituent) causes the two halves of the bamboo); for, it is

observed that, production of the disjunction of ether, etc., like the dis-
I- ;; junction of one of the two halves of the bamboo, being also possible

by the action produced in the other half, disjunction is produced by
the action of that other half from all those with which that half was
1); conjunct. For it is not that disjunctions are not produced also from

lib; particular parts of ether, etc., by action produced in a finger, equally

if V ; as disjunction from another finger. Nor is it that disjunctions from

II ' ■ > particular parts of ether, etc., are not originated by action produced in a

Kvi;} disjunction from another lotus-leaf is produced. We

Ih^i, Let' a single action' originate even a hiiudi-ed disjunctions

" which are 'hot opposed to the conjunction originative of substance. But


KANADA SUTRAS VII, 2-10. 253

that action which originates disjunction which is opposed to the con-
junctiou originative of substance, cannot also originate disjunction
which is jiot opposed to the conjunction originative of substance. And
that wliicli originates disjunction which is not' opposed to the conjunction
originative of substance, cannot also originate disjunction whicli is
opposed to the conjunction originative of substance.”

Ohjectioii . — Is there any reason for taking such a view ?

Answer, — Yes, there is, diversity of cause being rendered necessary
by diversity of effect.

Objection , — Variety is necessary in action, so that one action may
produce disjunction which is opposed to conjunction originative of
substance, as in the case of flowering lotus-blossoms, etc., and another
action may produce both, i,e., disjunctions which are opposed and not
opposed to conjunctions originative of substance.

Ansioer . — This cannot be. For contrariety of effect is the origin
of the supposition of diversity of cause ; and that contrariety arises
by way of the characteristic of the one being the counter-opposite of
conjunction originative of substance, but by way of the characteristic
of the other not being the counter-opposite of conjunction originative of
substance, inasmuch as diversity also ought to be supposed by those very


. This same action, present in the one half of the bamboo, produces
only disjunction of the two halves. And this disjunction first originates
disjunction from the particular parts of ether, etc., — disjunction which is
not the counter-opposite of conjunction originative of substance. And
if it produced disjunction by itself, it would then bear the characteristic
of action ; hence it depends upon time whicli is distinguished with the
possession of destruction of substance.

Objection , — At that moment also let that action itself produce
Disjunction.

Ansimr , — It cannot do so, being past in time. In the production
of Disjunction, Time follows immediately after the production of action
itself.

Objection, —But subsequent Disjunction being thus produced by
antecedent Disjunction, action cannot produce conjunction with other

Answer , — This is not the case,; for towards the production of con-
junction, action is not. past in, time. . . Other will be never
destroyed, it being destructible only by subsequent conjunction.


254 VAlisSIKA PEIL080PEY.

This same Disjunction, destructible hy subseciuent conjunction, lasts
for three moments only. Sometimes it is^ destructible by destructimr of
substratum. It is in, this rvay : Action is produced in the fibre which is.
a constituent part of. the thread ; Disjunction of two fibres follows it ; at
the same moment, action is produced in another thread ; then there is
destruction of conjunction, originative of the thread, by disjunction of
two fibres, and Disjunction is produced by action in the thread ; then
there is destruction of the thread from destruction of conjunction origi-
native of substance, and from destruction of the thread results d estruction
of Disjunction produced by action in another thread.

Ohjeetion . — Such being the case, there will be no destruction of
action produced in another thread, since there is nothing to destroy it.
For it can be destroyed by subsequent conjunction, but Disjunction

being destroyed, there is no subsequent conjunction.^

A»r -The argument is not valid. As DisjuncDpn of the thread
the state of being destroyed is produced by action which is produced
in the thread, so by the same action should be produced Disjunction of
the thread from the fibre also. Such Disjunction also k, really opposed
o originative conjunction. By ^his Disjunction of the fibre and the
bread is produced Disjunction of the thread and ether, which produces
subsequent conjunction, and this, in its turn, causes destruction of action.
Or' whenever action is produced in a thread, action is produced in its
fibre also. That action, again, in the thread m the state of being des-
troved originates simultaneous Disjunctions from the constituent parts
of the thread, and particular parts of ether, etc., all these Disjunctions
bein- not opposed to originative conjunction. There is, therefore, des-
truction of action combined or co-inherent in the thread, by conjunction

whicli has its production immediately after the Oisjunction of the e eet,
e.q. thread, from the not-effect, e.g., ether, etc., produced from the Dis-
junction of the cause, e.g., the fibre, and the not-cause, e.g., ether, etc. ^

Sometimes Disjunction is destroyed jointly by subsequent conjunc-
tion and destruction of substratum. It is in this way : There being
conjunction of a thread and a reed, action is produced in the constituent
part of the thread, namely, the fibre, and action is produced in the reed.
This is one moment of time. By action in the fibre is produced Disjunc-
tion from another fibre, and by this there is destruction of conjunction
originative of the thread. By the action in the reed also, there is Dis-
junction of the thread and the reed, and there is also destruction of the
conjunction of the thread and the reed. Destruction of the thread imme-
diately follows destruction of conjunction originative of the thread.


s&TEAS vii, MB.

C'Ouj 11 notion of tlie reed witli another portion of space immediately follows
destruction of conjunction of tlie thread and the reed. Joiutlj^ from
both of them, viz., destruction of substratum, and conjunction, results
destruction of Disjunction. — 10. . ■

Conjunction and Disjunction do not possess Conjunction and Disjunction.

ti vs 1 \ \ \ % n

Saipyoga-vibhagayoh, in Conjunction and Disjunction.

Sam3’’oga-vibhaga-abhavahr non-existence of Conjunction
and Disjunction. .^nut va mabattvabliyam, by minuteness and

magnitude. sj|POT?r: vyakhyatah, explained.

1 1 . The non-existence of Conjunction and Disjunction,
in Conjunction and Disjunction, is explained by Minuteness
and Magnitude. — 292.

UpasMm.-— It may be said, ‘‘ Let there he Conjunction in Conjunction also, and
Disjunction in Disjunction also.” To prevent this he says;

As Minuteness and Magnitude are not possessed of Minuteness
and Magnitude, so also are not Conjunction and Disjunction possessed
of Conjunction and Disjunction. — 11.

Actions are void of actions^ and Attributes of attributes.

iiwi?!in

g^iffSr: Karramabhih, By actions. Karnimani, actions. 5[%;

Gunaih, by attributes. sj^ST: Gunah, attributes. Anutva-

mahattvabliyam, by minuteness and magnitude. Iti, this.

12. Actions are (void) of Actions ; Attributes are
(void) of Attributes. This (is explained) by Minuteness
and Magnitude. — 293.

XJpaskdni . — This second aphorism has been already explained. (Tide TIL i 15,
supra)

Gonjunction and Disjunction of effect and cause do not exist.

• ;/ : ;V:;

Yutasiddhi-abhavat, in consequence of the absence of
separate or independent existencer- Kafyya-Karanayoh, of effect

and cause. Samyoga-vibhagau, ; Conjunction and Disjunction, sr Na,


liiais


VAIBESIKA PHILOSOPHY.


13. In consequence of the absence of se|)arate exis-
tence, there exist not Conjunction and Disjunction of effect
and cause. — 294.

Vpaskam.—lt at he asl<ed ^vhy there cannot be eohk|unction of two sabstances,
namely of eonstitueiit part and constituted whole, so he says ;

‘ Yntasirldhih ’ means the state of being existent, of two things which
have no connection with each other, or the characteristic of being sup-
ported by separate substrata. A constituent part and a constituted whole,
however, do not possess this. This is the meaning.— 13.

Vivviti — ‘ Yutasiddhih ’ means the existence of two uncdmbined
things. Of cause and effect, e.g., of constituent part and constituted
whole, conjunction and disjunction do not exist, because of the absence
of their uncombined existence. For constituted wholes such as a water-
pot, etc., do not exist having no relation to constituent parts such as
potslierds, etc., whereby their conjunction and disjunction might be
possible.

The relation hettoeen a word and its meaning is neither eonjunetion
, nor combination.

u vs i H u

Gunatvat, because it is an attribute.

14. (There can be no conjunction of Sound or Words
with Objects), because (Conjunction) is an Attribute. — 295. •

Upasfeoj-a.— Now follows from the eoiitoxt another section iiitencled to establish the
conventional relation of words and objects. Therein he states an adverse argument.

‘Of conjunction ’—this is the complement. Thus, the meaning is,
how can there be conjunction which is an attribute, of an attribute, e.g,,
Sound or Word, with objects such as a water pot, etc. ? — 14.

Above continued.

pftsRr a v3 i I a

5JII!: i.ih, attribute, mg Api, also, fggist# Vibhavyate, is known or
established.

15. Attribute also is known (to be an object denoted
by Word), or is established (by word). — 296.

[JpasMm —Moreover the object also is sometimes c.haraeterised as colour, taste,
etc, Therefere, coujuuction is not possible, inasmuclx as the existence of attribute in
jii’; an attnbute has not been, admitted. This is what he says :


^ Attribute also, object ’ — this is the complete sentence. Attribute
also, e.f/,, colour, etc., is an object denoted by Word, but with that there
is no relation of donj unction. This is the meaning. Or, the meaning is
that attribute also is established (by being denoted) by Word and that
.with that there is no relation of conjunction of Word.- -15.

The relation betiveen a word and its meaning is neither eonjunotion
nor eomhination^ continued,

U vs J R I U

Niskriyatvat, because of inactivity or inertness.

16. Because Word and Object are inert. — 297.

UpaskdrcL—FiiMieVj eoiijaiietiou (of Weed and Object) cannot be produced by the
action of either or by the action of both, because any substance whatever, c.0., Ether, etc.,
as well as Word are inert. This is What he says :

‘ Of Word and of any Object whatever’ — vSuch is the complement of
the aphorism. — 16. i

Above continued.

^ sr#nTTd[ h vs i ii

?raT?r Asati, not existing. jrrreT Nasti, (It) does not exist, Iti, such.
=sr Cha, and. srCmffl Prayogat, because there is application.

17. (Word and Object are not in conjunction), also
because in tbe case of a non-existent object there is such
application (of word) as “ (It) does not exist.” — 298.

Upasfcdm.— He states another obstruction to the inter-relation (of Word and Object) :

Even in the case of a non-existent water-pot, cloth, etc., such appli-
cation (of word) is observed as “ There is no water-pot in the room,”
“ Cloth does not exist,” “ The letter ga which was heard before, no longer
exists,” “ There was a cloth,” “ There will be a cloth,” etc. ; therefore (there
is no inter-relation). This is the meaning. The import accordingly is that
there is no conjunction, nor again combination, of Word with a non-
existent water-pot, etc. — 17.

Word and Object are unrelated.

U vs I 5^ I U

^abda-arthau, sound and sense. Word and object. Asam-

bandhau, unrelated.

18. (Therefore), W ord aud Ohj ect are unrelated. — 299.

Upasfedfa,'— -What then ? He gives the answer ;

If Conjunction of Word and Object does not exist, it then comes to
this that Word and Object are unrelated. This is the meaning. — 18.


■5

1 i


—


258 VAI8E8IKA PHILOSOPHY.

Word and object are ivnrealed^ continued.

u vs j I H n

Saipyoginah, which is in conjunction. 'I he- conjunct, D^n-

dat, from the staff. Samabayinah, which is in combination. The

combined, Visesat, from a distinction or distinguishing element, •sf

Cha, and.

19. (Cognition of Conjnnction results) from (that, e. g.,)
the staff, which is in conjunction (with the hand of a man),
and (of Combination) from a distinguishing element which
is in combination (with the whole). — 300.

CJjOCtsMra.— It may be asked Avhy one or other of the relations of Conjunction and
Combination should not exist (between 'Word and Object). Aecordingiy he says :

'‘This person is carrying a staff,” “ The elephant possesses a trunk,”
—these intuitions take place. Of these, the first results from conjunction,
and the second from combination. The intuition in respect of the trunk
which is a particular member of the body, is dependent upon its combina-
tion with the elephant, since it arises from the distinction that that is an
elephant to which belongs a trunk as being in combination with it. The
distinction itself, ris., the trunk, etc., is distinctive in consequence of the
relation of combination. But there is no intuition of threads, etc., also
such as “ A cloth possesses threads ” etc., under the relation of distinctive
possession of the parts. Likewise, “The object, water-pot, is that which
possesses the w^ord, ivater-pot,” — such intuition does not take place. Of
Word and Object, therefore, tliere is neithe.r conjunction, nor again combi-
nation. This is the import.— 19.

Intuition of object from word proceeds from convention.

n vs i ^ i

Samayikal?, conventional. According to direction. soT^i^SRERf:—
Sabda-artha-pratyayah, intuition of object from word.

20. Tbe intuition of Object from Word (takes place)

' according to tlie direction (of God). — 301,

UpasMra.—lf there is neither conjunction nor combination between W'ord and Object,
then by what relation does a %vord establish a determinate object ? To this, he giyes

, “ ' Samayikah : ' Samaya ’ means the direction of God, in the form

that' such an object should be understood from such a word. Whatever
'..word lias been assigned by God to a particular object, denotes that object.

GodwMch supplies tbe link between word and object.


KAIsJADA SUTRAS VII, 2-20,


Tile same is coin-eiition, dependent upon the will of God ; as, for example,
“ Whatever plant the ichneumon touches with its teeth, is an antidote to
poison.” This is the meaning.

This convention is learnt sometimes from usage ; e.g., when an
employer gives the order “ Bring the water-pot,” and an employee brings
an object possessing a tubular neck, a boy standing near by infers the
knowledge of the latter in this way. This his activity is produced by
knowledge, because it is activity, like ray activity ; that knowledge again
is produced by the ivords of this order, because it follows immediately
after it ; and the subject-matter of this knowledge, namely, this object
with a tubular neck, is the denotation of the term, water-pot. By such
processes of transposition of verbs and cases, the boy becomes informed
in respect of the objects, water-pot, cloth, etc.

Sometimes the convention is learnt directly from testimony alone ;
e.g., that this tubular-necked object is designated by the term, water-pot.
Sometimes it is learnt from comparison ; e.gf., from a comparison of resem-
blance in such cases as, that a gayal is that which is like a cow, that
as is miidga, so is mudga-pariji (a kind of bean), that as is mam, so
is m&saparrji (a leguminous plant), etc. Sometimes (knowledge of
objects is derived) from condemnatory passages also ; e.g., “ 0, the camel
with too pendulous upper lip and long neck, the eater of hard thorns,
the vilest of animals ” — when after hearing this condemnatoiy sentence,
one sees a body of this description, knowledge arises in one, viz., “ This is
that camel.” Sometimes it springs from community of substratum, or
synonymy, with ■words of known import ; e.g., “ The honey-bee is sipping
the honey within cloven lotus-blossoms ” — after hearing tliis proposition,
(the knowledge arises), “This is what is designated by the term, honey-
bee, because it is the sipper of honey within cloven lotus-blossoms,” or
as in the case of the proposition, “ The cuckoo sings sweetly in the
mango-tree.” Here, in the above instances, it is either a case of inference,
or a case of word itself being productive of knowledge through the force
of synonymy with words of known import, or only a particular mode
of compai-ison or analogy, inasmuch as the being the agent in drinking
honey infers resemblance to other individuals such as the bee, etc.

The convention, again, has reference to classes only, individuals
being brought home by means of special characteristics, — such is the view
of the followers of Tutdta. According to the followers pi Prabhaltara,
the force of word is in respect of both the, class aihd the individual, but so
far as it refers to the class, it'Heixotes the^'^ the word, by being

known, and so far as it refers to the individual, by being its proper form.


VAI8E8IKA PHILOSOPHY.


The teaching of the ancients or elders is that coiivention is the force
itself and that classes appearing in the forms of the individuals are the
objects denoted by words. This is the case with words like cow, etc-,
but the objects denoted by words expressive of attribute and action are
both classes and individuals, as detailed in the Mayukha. — 20.

Vivriti . — He now points out the connectioji between words and
objects, which is the means of verbal knowledge.

* * ® ‘ Samayah ’ is arbitrament or convention. It is two-

fold, eternal and modern. Eternal arbitrament is called force (of words),
and modern arbitrament is called definition. Arbitrament has for its
form. This object is to be understood fj-oni this word, or Let this word
convey this signification. Accordingly it has been said.

Convention has been declared to be two-fold, original and modern.
Therein the original is the eternal, which is called force ; whereas the
modern is the occasional, imposed by scientific writers and others.

The apprehension of the. force of words proceeds from conduct,
etc. So it has been said,

erfw^isr: fiSTT

II

The elders declare the apprehension of the force of words to proceed
from grammatical analysis or etymology, from comparison or analogy,
from lexicography, from authoritative sayings or testimony, from conduct
(of the employer who gives an order which is carried out by the employed),
from contiguity to a word of well-known import, from context, and from
explication or description.

* & * iphe doctrine of the force of the word to denote
primarily the class is not sound, for, in such instances as “ Bring the
cow,” the fact which is established by experience, namely, that the indivi-
dual is the object oi verbal cognition, cannot be explained except on the
theory of the force of the word primarily to denote the individual. Nor
does the knowledge of the individual arise from implication or derivatively,
for in the absence ofa'primai'y use a derivative use is impossible. Nor
is j|he knowledge of the individual possible even by the equivalence of the
act and the object of cognition (in verbal knowledge); for, inasmuch


SI^TRAS ni, 2-21.


as tlie being an object of verbal cognition, standing in the position of an
.effect, must be produced by a cause, the equivalence of the act and the
object of cognition (in verbal knowledge) which is supposed to be the
condition, cannot be the condition there, as'is desired. We should, therefore,
respect the doctrine that the force of the words cow, etc., lies in denoting
the individual characterised by, oP possessing, the generic form and the
class or the universal. It has been accordingly laid down in the aphorism
of Gautama, “ The individual, the generic form, and the universal are,
however, the object of the word.” (Nydya-Sutmm, II. ii. 63 1


Priority and Posteriority, how produced.


U vs I I U

Eka-dikkabhyarp, lying in the same direction. Eka-

kalabhy^m, existing at the same time, Sannikrista-vipkrarista-

bhy^m, near and remote. Pdram, prior. Aparatn^ posterior. ^ Cha, and,

21. The Prior and the Posterior (are produced hy
two objects) lying in the same direction, existing at the
same time, an d being near and remote. — 302.

UpctaMra.—Nov! he explains Priority and Posteriority, the next in the order of
enumeration, in one context, as these are the causes of mutually involved uses, and for the
purpose of clearing up the luiderstauding of the disciples as well as for the sake of brevity.

‘The Prior and the Posterior’ — the reference here is principally in a
substantive sense. “Are produced” — such is tlie complement. Or, the
word “usage” or “convention” is to be supplied after ‘The Prior and
the Posterior : such’ The word “such” should be understood. ‘Eka-
dikkabbyam’ means by two bodies which have the same direction in
space. Two bodies occupying equal place [i.e., equally distant) may also
have the same dii-ection in space, but by them Priority and Posteriority
are neither produced, nor come into use. Accordingly it has been said,
‘Near and remote,’ which expression means, possessing nearness, i.e., the
quality or state of containing a smaller number of conjunctions with the
conjunct, and remoteness, i.e., the quality or state of containing a larger
number of conjunctions with the conjunct. Hereby combinative cause
(of Priority and Posteriority) is stated ; whereas conjunction of bodies and
direction in space is the non-combinative cause. Priority and Posteriority
are thus produced in a man standing with liis face towards the east, by
observing a relative paucity of conjunctions with the conjunct in one of
two bodies lying in the east and a relative plurality of conjunctions with


\ ‘‘Wk. rt, •’ ■ !>'

‘ - ,L

t. G'i


Siilfplii


hH


VAISBSIKA PHILOaOPBY.


the coujuct in the other. The noii-comhinative cause is thus stated.
‘Near and remote’— ^ the term implies intuition,' as the contained metaphori-
cally .denotes the container. Relative understanding or cognition of
relativity is thus stated to be the efficient cause. Priority and Posteri-
ority are produced in respect only of two bodies lying in the same direc-
tion in .space ; hence there is no production of them in all places. Relative
understanding is produced in one and the same observer only ; hence there
is no production of them in all circumstances. Being regulated by relative
undei-standing, there is no production of them at all times. There is no
mutual dependence between them, inasmuch as, being produced from the
capacity or power of the cause, they are proved by sense-perception. For
otherwise they would be neither produced nor perceived. For in case of
mutual dependence there would be non-production as well as non-percep-
tion of both of them. But Priority and Posteriority are perceived, and their
perception cannot be possible without their production

‘Existing at the same time’ — this has refei*ence to Priority and
Posteriority in time. Now ‘existing at the same time’ means, by two bodies
one young and the other old, which occupy the same, present, time.

Here nearness is the state of having the birth intervened by a fewer number
of revolutions of the sun, and remoteness is the state of having the birth
intervened by a larger number of revolutions of the sun. Here too under-
standing, le., the container, is implied by the contained. Thus the young
and old ])odies are the combinative causes. Conjunction of time and
bodies is the nou-combinative cause. The understanding of the state of
having the birth intervened by a few'er number of revolutions of the sun
is the efficient cause in the case of Posteriority, and the understanding of
the state of liaving the birth intervened by a larger number of revolu-
tions of the sun is the efficient cause in the case of Priority.

These, Priority and Posteriority, again, are produced even in respect
of bodies indeterminate in place and direction in space.

Now there is a seven-fold destruction of Priority and Posteriority
in space, hut their production is simultaneous, else there would be mutual
dependence. Priority and Posteriority in space then are destroyed from
the desti-uction of relative understanding (1) from the destruction of con-
junction which is the non-combinative cause, (2) from the destruction of
substance which is the combinative cause, (3) from the destruction of the
efficient and non-combinatiye causes, (4) from the destruction of the
e^ient and combinative causes, (5) from the destruction of the efficient
bau^y (61 frprn' the destruction of the non-combinative cause, and (7)


263



KAVABA StiTRAS VII, 2-21.


of relative uiiderstaiidiug, tints : Production of Priority ; knowledge
of the genus Priority ; then destruction of relative understanding ; after
its destruction, at the motnent of knowledge of substance distinguished by
Priority, destruction of Priority, — the process should be understood in the
same way as in the case of destruction of duality. Destruction of Priority
and Posteriority follows also from the destruction of the non-combinative
cause. Thus, as soon as there is I'elative understanding, action takes place
in the body which is the substratum of Priority ; as sooir as Priority is
produced therefrom, disjunction takes place between direction in space
and the body ; after it, when there is knowledge of the genus Priority, then
there is destruction of the conjunction of direction in space and the body j
then, destruction of relative understanding follows knowledge of the genus ;
at the very same moment, destruction of Priority and Posteriority results
from destruction of conjunction of direction in space and the bodies. And
in this case destruction of relative understanding does not destroy them,
inasmuch as it is synchronous with destruction of Priority.

Objection . — On the theory of destruction of attribute even from de-
struction of non-combinative cause, great confusion will result from the
thus possible destruction of Sarriskara (tendencies, impressions), adristmi
(invisible after-elfects of acts performed), etc.,. also from the destruction of
the conjunction of Mind and Soul.

Answer . — It is not so. For Priority being pervaded by the char-
acteristic of being remote, there must needs be cessation of Priority conse-
quent on the non-existence of remoteness on the removal of the substratum
of Priority to some other place. Nor is tliere at the time any other
agent of destruction ; hence, such destruction being otherwise impossible,
destruction of conjunction alone is conceived to be the destroying
agent. On the other hand, samskdra, adri^tam etc., as well as their
effects, e.g., recollection, pleasure, etc., cannot be supposed to be so
destroyed, inasmuch as they are observed even after a long time.

This also implies that Priority and Postei-iority are destroyed also by
the destruction of the conjunction between that particular place and the
standard limit as well as the observer, the argument being the same as
above.

Destruction of Priority sometimes results also from destruction of
combinative cause. Thus, relative understanding arises at the very same
moment that action produced in a portion of a body causes disjunction
from another portion ; from disjunction results destruction of the conjunc-
tion originative of the body, and then production of Priority ; at the next
moment, destruction of substance results from destruction of conjunction,



VA78E8IKA PEILOSOPEy


Priority follows destruction of substance, and destruction of relative
understanding follows knowledge of the genus. So that, being synchronous,
destruction of i-elative understanding does not destroy Priority.

Destruction of Priority sometimes takes place by the destruction of
substance and destruction of relative understanding. It happens in this
way : Production of action and relative understanding in a portion of the
body ; then, disjunction from another portion, and production of Priority ;
next, destruction of originative conjunction and knowledge of the genus ;
thereafter, destruction of substance and destruction of relative under-
standing ; and following them, there is destruction of Priority.

Destruction of Priority takes place sometimes from destruction of
substance and destruction of conjunction. It is in this way: Simultane-
ously with disjunction amongst the constituent parts of substance, there is
production of action in the body and of relative understanding ; following
it, appear destruction of conjunction of constituent parts, disjunction
between space and body, and production of Priority ; thereafter there
are destruction of substance, destruction of conjunction of space and
body, and production of knowledge of the genus ; thereafter destruction of
Priority results from destruction of substance and destruction of conjunc-
tion of space and body, and destruction of relative understanding from
knowledge of the genus.

Destruction of Priority takes place sometimes from destruction of
conjunction and destruction of relative understanding.. It is in this way :
Production of Priority, and action in the body ; knowledge of the genus,
and disjunction ; destruction of relative understanding, and destruction of
conjunction of space and the body : then, destruction of Priority.

Destruction of Priority results sometimes from destructions of combi-
native, non-combinative and efficient causes. It is in this way : Produc-
tion of Priority, disjunction among constituent parts of the body, and
action in the body, take place simultaneously ; knowledge of the genus
Priority, destruction of conjunction of constituent parts, and disjunction
between space and the body follow them ; thereafter results destruction
of Priority or of Posteriority in space, from destruction of relative under-
standing, destruction of substance, and destruction of conjunction of space
and the body, which destructions are simultaneously produced.

Of Priority and Posteriority in time, however, there is no destruction
dme to destruction of non-comhinative cause. As in the case of Priority
and Ppateyionty in space, there is destruction of nearness and remoteness



KAIUDA 8I)tEA8 VII, 2-22.


on the destruction of conjunction of space and the body, so it is not the
case with Priority and Posteriority in time. The three cases, thei’efore,
of their destruction, namely from destruction of combinative cause, from
destruction of relative understanding, and from both jointly, should be
understood in the way described above. — 21-

Vivriti . — It sliould be observed that, according to the writer of
MuktavaU, destruction of relative understanding is destructive of Priority
and Posteriority in both their forms {i.e., in space and in time), whereas in
the Upaskaj'a it is stated that it is the destruction of their three-fold causes
which is destructive of Priority and Posteriority.

Priority and Posteriority in Time, how 'produced.

Karana-paratvat, from priority of the cause, Karaija

aparatvat, from posteriority of the cause. Cha, and.

22. (Temporal Priority and temporal Posteriority
are said, by suggestion, to arise respectively) from Priority
of the cause and from Posteriority of the cause. — 303.

Upaskara.—He states a peoaliavity in tlie case of temporal priority and posteriority.

The cause of Priority and Posteriority is time. Priority and Posteriority
belong to it Conjunction of time which is the non-combinative cause of
priority, and conjunction of time which is the non-combinative cause of
posteriority are stated, by implication, as otherwise, the result would be
want of congruity or syntactical connexion. For, priority and posteriority
cannot be produced by priority and posteriority themselves. The terms,
priority and posteriority, therefore, denote, by implication, conjunctions
of fime which are productive of them. — 22.

Vivriti. — If the uses of prior (remote) and posterior (near) are pro-
duced by cognitions of remoteness and nearness, then, inasmuch as the
cognition, (Benares) is near in relation to PraySga (Allahabad), refers
also to PraySga as its object or subject-matter, why does not there arise
the use of Posteriority (or nearness) in respect of Pray^ga ? Likewise,
why is there not the use of Priority (or remoteness), in respect of Ka^i,
etc., which also become the subject-matter of the cognition of remoteness ?

He removes this incidental doubt. .

‘ Karan.a-paratv4t,’ i.e., owing to the priority or remoteness of the
combinative cause ; and also owing to its posteriority or nearness. The
uses of priority and posteriority are only in respect of the combinative
cause, but not in respect of anything else, simply because it becomes the

34 ' ' ■ ' • '■ ' ^


266 VAI8ESIKA PHILOSOPHY.

subject-matter of relative understanding. For use is determined by the
object in respect of which the use arises. This is the import.

Priority and Posteriority do not exist in Priority and Posteriority.

sqr^qm: II vs I I U

paratva-aparatvayol;, in priority and posteriority.
Paratva-aparatva-abhavaJ?, non-existence of priority and posteriority.

Anutva-mahattvabhyam, by minuteness and magnitude*
Vyakhyatah, explained.

23. The non-existence of Priority and Posteriority,
in Priority and Posteriority, is explained by mintiiteness
and magnitude. — 304.

Actions are void of actions.

gpsfrH: Karmmabhlli, by actions. eKwrfro Karmmani, actions.

24. Actions are (void) of Actions. — 305.

Attributes are void of attributes.

gt#!rT: II I !i I II

Gunaih, by attributes, prrr: Gunati. attributes.

25. Attributes are (void) of Attributes. — 306.

Upuska m.-Tbese aphorisms, being virtually explained above, are not explained
here.— 23, 24, 25.

Gomhination described-

II vs I H I 11

Iha, here, t. e., in the cause. Idam, this, U, the effect. Iti, ^udi.
*Rr: YataJi, whence. Karyya-karanayoli, of effect and cause. Sail,

that wmW- Saniavayah, coni bination.

26. That is Combination by virtue of which (arises
■the intuition) in the form of “ This is here, ” with regard to
effect and cause. — 307

Upask&m.—Ib has been stated that priority, posteriority, etc., are combined in dense
.OB corporal substances only, and that knowledge, pleasure, etc., are combined in the soul.
•|Jpw,Wli^isthiseombinationitself? Having regard to this inquiry of the disciples he
Understanding which is the next subject for treatment according to the order
oi enumeration, and describes the examination of Combination,


miM



KAI^ABA StJTEA8 VII, 2-26,


‘ Kiiyya-kSranayoli ’ is an indication ; non-efiect and non-cause also
are implied. So it lias been said in the section called the Locality of the
Predicables, “Combination is that relation of things mutually immlved or
associated in nature and bearing to one anothei' the relation of the
contained and the container, — which is the source of intuition in the
form of “ (It is) here.”” Ayuta-siddhil^, inseparable association, is the non-
existence of things unrelated. As in the case of “ There is curd here in the
bowl,” “ There are jujubes here in the bowd, ” so in the case of “ There is
cloth here in the threads, ” “ Iheie is mat here in the reeds, ” “ There are
substance, attribute, and action' here in substance, ” “ There is bovineness
here in the cow, ” “ There is knowledge here in the soul, ” “ There is
Sound here in Ether, ” the cognition of which is thus produced,
cannot be produced without some relation ; whereby it is infen-ed
that some relation exists. And this relation is not mere conjunction.
For the causes of conjunction, namely, action of either of the two things,
etc., are absent her’e; it does not terminate in disjunction; related things
do not exist unrelated ; it can be inferred as a uniform substratum ; it is
not perceptible to the senses ; it is one ; and it is eternal.

Objeetion. — If combination be one, it would then entail intermixture
of substance-ness, etc., since combination of action-ness, etc., would be
possible in substance.

Armoer. — This cannot be the case, since non-intermixture follows
from the very rule of tlie container and the contained. Although the
same combination whicli is the combination of substance-ness, is also the
combination of attribute-ness, action-ness, etc., still substance is not their
container or substratum, since they are not observed there. Substance-ness
is observed in substances only, attribute-ness in attributes only, action-ness
in actions only, but not elsewhere. It is from the observation of this
agreement and difference, that the uniformity (of the container and the
contained) results. As even in the absence of a particular conjunction
between the bowl and the cui’d, it is the bowl which is the container, and
not the curd, and hence there is the uniformity of the relation of the
container and the contained, so the uniformity is valid in this case also
from the very difference of the power of the revealed and the revealer,
for action-ness, etc., are not revealed by substance in the same way as
substance-ness is. Accordingly it has been said

AlLpowerful consciousness is verily our resource in the apprehen-
sion, of things. For conseiousnessdu respect of the being the container


VAI^ESIKA PHILOSOPHY..


iB not reversible ; nor is there the intnition that substance is action ; nor,
again, that threads are in the cloth. It is for this reason that, notwith-
standing the combination of colour m Air, Ihere is coloui in ir
such characteristic of being the container is not observed in the_ case of
Air. It is natural capacity, therefore, which everywhere deteimmes the

relation of the container and the contained. , . . ,

This combinauon. again, is eternal, inasmuch as it is uncaused.

For the rule of production from combinative causes applies to emsteuces
or beings, and efloient and non-oombinalive causes are subsidiary to those
causes. Thorefote that which would be the combinative cause of com-
bination would be either another combination or that combination itself
It cannot be the Srst, as it would entail non-fiuality : nor the second, as it
wonld involve self-dependence, for that very combination cannot produce

combination with itself. . , ] , • i • a.-

Ohjeetion.-~Ho^ does the intuition arise tbk there is combination

of cloth in threads, and that there is combination of i^olour in cloth ?

Ausu-.r.-ltisbymeanso£the relation of their mtrmsic form, or
essential relation, as the supposition of another combination would entail

'"'^'''^otiSmn.-Tbe intuition of here, e.g., “ Ihere is colour here in the
cloth ” will, theu, arise by means of the same essential relation. What


noTsl, since there is no obstruction here to the admis-


sion of an additional relation. . .

Obieetion.-mtheso, then “Herein this place there is uon-existence

of the water-pot,”— in this case also there will, he either comhiiiation: or any

other relation. , c x.- i

Answer. — No, as the intuition can be possible by means of essential

relation itself. For, on the contrary supposition, the absolute and mutual
non-existenees of the water-pot, which are eternal and combined with
more than one substance, would have the characteristic of being Genera,
subsequent non-existence also, being an effect in combination, wonld be
perishable or destructible, and autecedent non-existence also, not being
produced, though combined, would he indestructible.

Nor is the quality of existence the determining factor there, tor the

.if; quality of existence can he produced at any time.

; The Bhattas maintain that in non-existence there really is present a

different relation called distinguishedness or qualifiedness. _ Now if this

distinguiBhedness be one and the same in the case of ah individual^ mam
: festatioM of nou-existence, then it would follow that there is non-existeno.


KANADA 8VTBA8 VII, 2-28,


of tlie water-pot even in that which contains a water-pot,, inasmuch as the
distinguishediiess of the non-existence of the water-pot would exist by
means of the same distinguisliedness of the non-existence of the clotlic

Objection. — But the water-pot itself will in this case prevent the
cognition of the non-existence of the water-pot,

Ansim\ — It cannot do this, since the non-existence of that which
will prevent such cognition is itself present there by means of the relation
of distinguishedness. Nor is the very nature of the substratum {i.e., where
the water-pot lies) such that on account of it there can be no manifestation
of the non-existence of water-pot in that place, for immediately after the^
removal of the water-pot follows tlie intuition of the non-existence of water-
pot in that very place.

Objection. — In your view also, why is there not intuition of possession
of colour after the destruction of colour, since Combination is, as you say,
eternal and one ?

Answer. — Because non-intuition of colour is proved from the very
destruction of colour.

The arguments against Combination have been demolished in the
Mayiikha under Sense-Perception. So we stop here. — 26.

Comhination is different from Substance, Attribute, Action,

Oenus, and Species.

n vs I ^ u

Dravyatva-gunatva-pratisedhah, negation or exclusion of
substance-ness and attribute-ness, (in or from Combination). Bhavena,

by existence, Vyakhyatah, explained.

27' The negation of Snbstance-ness and Attribnte-
ness (in Combination) is explained by Existence.— 308.

fJpasMm.— By way of proving its difference from the five beginning with Substance
(i e., Substance, Attribute, Action, Genus, and Species), he says :

Bhavah ’ means Existence. As Existence is not identical with
substance, etc., being cognised by a different form of understanding, so
combination also is different from the same Substance, etc. ‘ Dravyatva-
gunatva’ is an indication ; Action-ness, etc., also should be understood.


Comhination is one.


ift^Tattvam, that-ness. One-ness. Unity. Bhavena, by Exis,


tence,



PETLOSOPHY.


Up(iskdm,—Kc proves Unity :

‘ Explained ’ is the complement. ‘ Tattvam,’ i.e., Unity, ‘ bliavena,’
i.e., by Existence, is explained. As one Existence everywhere induces
the cognition of the existent, so one Combination everywhere induces the
cognition of the combined". Moreover the inferential mark of Combination
is not differentiated", nor is there any other particular mark. For, we do
not find" any particular mark, i.e., differentiating mark, of Combination,
whereby we could recognise its diversity. For the very same reason,
Combination is eternal ; for, as in the case of Existence, non-eternality
cannot appropriately belong to it which is undifferentiated even in the
difference of Space, Time, etc.

Ofo'eetion.— If combination is nothing but this relation, then there
may be disunion of threads and cloth, or of the cloth and its colour.

Answer . — This cannot be, for in the absence of (previous) uncorrelat-
ed existence, disunion is not possible. For, there is no unrelated existence
of colour and that which possesses the colour, or of the parts and the
whole, that there may be a disunion between them.

Ohjeetwru—^TXt their uncorrelated existence may be brought to

pass.

Answer.— It cannot, for the effectuation is contravened by being
never so experienced.

The follower of PraIMkara hold that Combination is manifold and
also non-eternal. But this is not a reasonable view to take, for the
intuition is “ Colour is destroyed,” whereas it is the intuition of no body
that the Combination of colour is destroyed.

The view of the school of Nyaya that Cdmbination is perceptible to
the sense is also not valid: Combination is supersensuous, for being
different from the Soul, it is at the same time in, a state of being, uncom-
bined, like the Mind,. or like Time, etc. — 28.

Here ends the second chapter in the seventh book of Saftkara’s
Commentary on the Vaiile§iika Aphorisms.



kAjada-s^teas. vtiJ, 1 - i ,



VAimiKA FHtLOSOPBt.


or stainless like a mirror. And. tnat
of it, wliieh. takes the form of an object in snch
“ It is a cloth,” etc., through the channel
1 , and facl^ltJ^ vntti.

the same as a kind of abhiTncind, ©soity 91
which arises in consequence


And this understanding is pure
particular transformation
shapes as “ It is a water-pot,

of the external senses, is called cognition, fndnam.

Apprehension, upalahdhi, is the

self-consciousness, in the form of , _ i-pf .

of the non-perception or non-apprehension of the distinctness or di er-
ence of Puru-ju which is consciousness, by cogmtmn present m transpa-
rent or pure understanding. Pratyaya, Intuition, is that paitk.u ar tians
formation of understanding itself, which takes the form of pleasure, pain,
etc through the channel of the senses alone, in consequence of the contact
of irland, sandalwood, and other objects of sense. Hence is it_ that
cognition, pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, volition, reminiscence, virtue,
and vice are, all of them, particular transformations of understanding,
and being present in Praknti itself, in subtle forms or m minute pio-
portions, appear and disappear, according to difference of circumstances ;
while Puru^a is as free from adhesion or affinity or attachment as a
lotus-leaf, but casts its shadow in the understanding.^ This dieory which
theSaPkhyas hold is thrown away by the proof indicated in the above
declaration of (these terms as) synonyms. Thus, if the term, under-
standing, be derived in the instrumental sense, viz., as that which a
thing is understood, then it comes to be nothing else than the mind. Nor

- jeptioii, whereas understanding is surely cog-

1 form of “ I understand.” Nor are cognition,
internal sense, inasmuch as they are proved
ropertics of an agent. For the manifestation
I apprehend,” takes place as having commu-
. If they reply that this phenome-
that it cannot be so, since there is
It cannot be contended that such ob-
characteristic of the Purusa as being
that is to say, by its not being the receptacle of adven-
we would then reply that eternality


etc., the properties
to exist only as bei
of “ I know,” “ I i

nity of substratum with I-ness or egoity.
non is oddiivtoiiio/ or conceit, we lejoin
no obstruction to its being real,
struction is supplied by the very
seated in the cave;
titious properties or changes , for,
is compatible with the nature of being the substratum of adventitious
modes. For that which possesses a property and the property are not
one and the same reality, so that the production and destruction of the
property should themselves be the production and destruction of the
substratum of the property. It is only he, then, who is conscious, that
"^Sinderstands, cognises, apprehends, and intuits. Hence the hypothe-
sis of’ distinct^ entities is not reasonable. This is the point.— 1.



KAl^lBA-Sl^mAS. VIII, 1-2,


Soul, Mind, Ether, Thne, Space, Air and U Itimate Atoms are not
{ordinarily) perceptible.

U c; I ^ I u

Tatra, therein, among substances. ^r^JTr Atma, soul. Manas,

mind, ^ Cha, and others, e.g.^ Ether, Time, Space, Air and Ultimate Atoms,

A-pratyakse, non-perceptible, not objects of perception.

2 . Among Substances, the Soul, the Mind and others
are not objects of perception. — 311.

U paskdra.— This cognition, again, is two -fold, Vidyd, Science or true knowledge, and
A-vidydf Nescience or false knowdedge. Vidyd is of four kinds, characterised by perception,
inference, memory and testimony. A-vidyd olso has four kinds, characterised by doubt,
error or mistake, dream, and uncertainty or indecision or non-finality. Among the above
four kinds of true knowledge, that which is inferential, is not produced as the senses.
Why this is so, is explained here.

Tlie word, soul, in the aphorism denotes the soul of another or one’s
own soul. That even one’s own soul is not an object of perception, has
been already declared, inasmuch as the casual mental intuition of the I,
ahaj-ji, in one’s own soul, is repudiated by such intuitions as “I am fair,”
“ I am thin,” “ I have long arms,” etc. The word, “cha,” extends the
application of the predicate to the substances, namely, ether, time, space,
air, and ultimate atoms. Sense-born cognition again is of two degrees,
being that of tbe omniscient and that of the non-omniscient. That of the
omniscient is the cognition of such and such complements of objects by
means of the proximity or presentation (or reaching upto ordinarily
supersensuous objects) characterised by virtue or merit springing from
Yoga {i.e., iiiliibition of'the activity of the internal organ, the mind, and
consequent freedom of the all-pervading soul, in other words, the steadi-
ness of the mind in the soul. Vide v. ii. 16 above.) Thus ultimate atoms
fall within its sphere, (or possess conjunction), being demonstrable,
nameable, and existent.

Objection. — Since there is no material or data of such cognition, how
can this be tbe case ? Magnitude also is a cause of sense-pex’ception, but
ultimate atoms do not possess magnitude. The possession of colour, again,
is the cause of visual pei’ception, but space, etc., do not possess colour.
How then can there be perception in these cases ?

Answer.— The objection does not stand, for such omniscience is
possible by means of the mind alone as an auxiliary to the virtue or merit
born of Fog'a, or by .means of the eye and other senses under the favour-
able influence of such mind. For the virtue or merit produced by Yoga is
ef inconceivable efiicac;^, and does not stand in need of any other auxiliary.


VAI^BBIKA PEILOSOPHY.


“The man whose omniscience is the subject of controversy, is not
omniscient, because he is a. man like myself,”— such reasonings, however,
are inapplicable, since they are void of argument which would render
impossible the proposition of the other side (maintaining the existence of
omniscience in the man in question), as is the case with the reasoning,
■“ A follower of PrahMkara (a writer of the Mim&nisa school) is not versed
in MimaipsH, because he is a man like myself.”

Perception of the non-omniscient, again, is two-fold, discriminative
and non-discriminative. Discriminative cognition, according to Dharma-
Mrti and Dinnaga and others of the Bauddha school, is not certain
knowledge or proof. Thus they argue : Such cognition owes its manifesta-
tion or apparent reality to connection with words. But the connection of an
object with a word, a name, is not possible, that there should^ be such
intuition, coloured with a name, as it were, as “ A water-pot,” or “ A piece
of cloth.” Nor is j&ti, the universal, really existent or objectively real,
that the being distinguished with the possession of it should be appre-
hended in objects by the sense. Nor is possible connection of the
existent characterised by itself with that which is non-existent. Nor^ is
the non-existent within the cognizance of the senses. Therefore, excitation
(S.lochanam) is produced by the senses, and while in the process of being
produced, and leading to corresponding objects, by the power of the
excitation, discriminative cognition is called perception and also proof.
(To this the commentator gives the reply.) Now, while discriminative
cognition may be objectively unreal, because it owes its manifestation or
apparent reality to connection with words, it may be at the same time
real, because it is the product of contact of sense and object. Hence it is
.. doubtful that discriminative cognition is unreal. Moreover, the being
distinguished with the possession of a name may very well be a possible
object in visual cognition, its appearance in consciousness being possible
from presentation by memory, as is the case with the perception “Frag-
rant sandalwood.” Or, it may be, the being distinguished with the
possession of a name does not come to light in perceptual cognition, and
there is only recollection of the name, which as soon as it is recollected
serves to distinguish its corresponding object, like the recollection of the
counter-opposite in the case of the cognition of non-existence. Also it
has been proved that jdii, the universal or class, etc., are immanent in
'objects or entities. Hence, discriminative or modified cognition also
,.|ss, perception, inasmuch as it is produced from contact of senses and



KAhjADA-SUTBAS FIJI, 1-3,


Objecfio> 2 .— ^Noil-discriminative/ or .-tinniodified, cognition, neither
excites to activity, nor is an object of ctirrent use. What then is the proof
of its existence ? .

Answer . — The proof is discriminative, or modified, cognition itself ;
for, this is a specialized cognition, or the cognition of a thing as possess-
ing, and being accordingly distinguished by," something else. Nor can it
be produced without the cognition of that which is possessed and serves
to distinguish or individualize, that is, -the distinctive element. For it has
been ascertained above that the cause of specialized cognition is cognition
of that which serves to specialize, contact of sense and that wliich is going
to be specialized, and non-apprehension of non-connection of both. — 2.

Cognition, Itoto produced.


Jnaiia-uirddese, in the differentiation of a particular cognition.

Jnaiia-nispatti-vidhili,mode or process of production of cognition.
StR; uktah, stated, described.

3. The mode of the production of Cognition is being
described, in connection with the dijfferentiation of a parti-
cular Cognition. — 312.

Upn Sidra.— In order to elucidate how Cognition is produced, in what eireumstances.
and from wiiat causes, he says :

A cognition should be marked ofE or distingnished from ether
cognitions, in respect of the mode of its production, in respect of its sub-
ject matter, and in respect of its property. Now, differentiation of
cognition having to he made, the process of the production of cognitidn
is going to he described. This is the meaning. In 'uktah’ the past
participle affix kta is used iu the sense of incipient action.— 3,

Fwirffi— What is the cause of cognition ? There being this expect-
ancy, he says :

; , ‘ Jfiana-nirddeife, ’ i.e., in the third book, where enunciation of

cognition has been made. TJiere too the process of the production of
cognition has been described. The meaning is that the causes of cogni-
tion have been mentioned in the aphorism, “That {i.e., knowledge)
which is produced from the contact of the soul, the sense and the obieV
is other (than a false mark)” (IH. i. 18.) Thus, the soul is the combi-
native cause of cognition, conjunction of the soul and the mind is the
non-combinative cause, and contact or contipity of the object is the
efficient cause, This has been mentioped’ ip that very aphorisni. |t



VAI8E8IKA PEILOSOPHT.


sliould be observed that the causality of contact bas been stated under
tbe topic of perception.

Suhstanee is the muse of cognition of Attributes and Actions.

5f!ror>i, % i « »

Guna-karmmasu, Attributes and Actions. Sannikristesu,

being in contact. Jriana-nispatteb, of tbe production of cognition.

jBij, dravyain, substance. Karanara, cause.,

A. Substance is tbe cause of tbe production of cog-
nition, where Attributes and Actions are in contact (witb
tbe senses). — 313.

Pjjflsifam.— He describes the mode of production (of cognition) :

Substance is tbe cause of tbe cognition wbicb is produced in respect
of attributes, e.g., colour, etc., and in respect of actions, e.g., throwing
upwards, etc. Both of them are apprehended only in so far as they
inhere in substances appropriate or perceptible to the senses. Hence
it is the appropriateness or perceptibility of the substances which deter-
mines their perceptibility. It is by substance, moreover, that their
contact tvith the senses is constituted, they being apprehended by means
of their combination with the conjunct {i.e., Substance which is conjunct
with the sense). Although there is apprehended the odour of dispersed
particles of e/iunrpa/ta flower, and of portions of camphoi, which are all
imperceptible, yet it is substance, imperceptible though it be, which
effects their contacts. Although perceptibility of substance is not a requi-
site in the apprehension of sound, yet sound is apprehended only as it is
combined or inherent therein, and hence this itself is the requisite. If
it be asked, why is made this supposition of contact which is invisible ?
we reply that the production of cognition, being an effect, necessitates the
supposition of a cause. This is the import.— 4.

Substance is the cause of cognition of Qenus and Species also.

Samanya-vi^esesu, in genera and species. Hr*IRrra^5|THRT(l
Samanya-visesa-abhavit, in consequence of the non-existence of genus and
species. SR! Tatah, thence, from substrata. ^ Eva, alone, Jfianam,

cognition.

5. In consequence of the non-existence of Genus
and Species in genera and species, cognition (of them) is
■)|^|i6;.;to.,,that alonev----:314 ■ ' . ‘

another mo^e of the proanetion of knowledge



KANAdA-SUTBA'S till, 1-6


1


VAIBI^SIKA PEIL080PEY


trmsMra.— It may be asked : As, lu coiisey.u«iii.« v. ^

species, eognitiott of genus and species is absolutely independent of tbem,_ is it like

absolutely independent of them in the case of substance, attribute and action also .

“Cognition is produced'”— this is the subject in discourse.^ In
respect oE substance, attribute and action, there is no doubt cognition
specialized with the content of aubstance-ness, attribute-ness and action-
ness. Such specialized cognition, again, cannot be produced without the
contact of the subject specified, that which serves to specify, and the
sense. Hence dependence upon genus and species is there ^necessary.
For there is such specialized cognition as “ This is substance,” “ This is
attribute,” “ This is action.” This is the import.- 6.

Suhsta 7 iee, Attribute and Action are causes of cognition of Substance.

^ U c; M I VS U

5^ Dravye, in substance. gsjJSmgRsfftTgw Dravya-guna-karmma-apeksam,
dependent upon substance, attribute and action,

7. ('Oosnition), in tlie case of Substance, (is) depen-


* Cognition is produced” — this is the subject in discourse. A white
ossessing a bell, is going,” — this is a cognition. Heie substance,
>11, is the distinction or that which serves to specify; ‘white’
sail atttribute ; ‘is going’ denotes action. Hius in specialized
ion or intuition of a thing distinguished with the possession of
ling else, there cannot be non-apprehension of the distinction or
?hich serves to specify, nor can such specialized intuition take
without relation to that which serves to specify. Hence in the cog-
of substance there is dependence upon substance, attribute and
, Such is the import. — 7.

Attribute and Action are not causes of cognition of Attribute

and Action.


Guija-karmrnasu, in attributes and actions. Ciupa-

karninia-abhavat, in consequence of the non-existence of 'attribute and action.

Guna-karmma-apeksam, dependent upon attribute and action,
noth Viclyate, exists.' . , ' ’ ' ‘

■ ' ; ; 8. (Cognition), dependent upon Attribute and Action,
aoe^^^^, ,^c^st .in the case of Attributes ; and' Actions^


KA1:JAI>A-SUTBA8 VlII, 1-9,


inasmucli as Attribute and Action do not exist in Attribute
and Action. — 3] 7.

UpasMcra. — Is there, then, dependence upon attribute and action, also in the case of
attribute and action ? He says, No :

“ Cognition ” is the complement of the aphorism. Since there is no
cognition of attribute as distinguished with the possession of another
attribute, and since there is no cognition of action as distinguished with
the possession of another action, there is no cognition thereof, which is
dependent upon attribute and action. For there exists no attribute in an
attribute nor action in actions, wliereb}^ they might appear as distinctions
in them. This is the import, — 8.

Gomhination (as loell as Attribute) is a cause of Gognition,

n c i 5 i e. n

Samavayinah, of that in which combination exists, the substra-
tum, ^vaityat, from whiteness, ^vaitya-buddheh, from cognition

of whiteness. ^ Cha, and* ^vete, in a white object, Buddhih, cog-
nition. % Te, they. Ete, these. Karyya-karapa-bhfite, related

as effect and cause,

9 , Tbe cognition, (‘ It is white ’) in respect of a white
object, (results) from whiteness of the substance in which
combination of whiteness exists, and from the cognition of
whiteness. These two, (cognition of white object, and cog-
nition of whiteness), are related as effect and cause. — 318.

XJpaskdra ^ — Lest it might be asked that siuee there is manifestation of attribute and
action (in the cognitions thereof), why there should not be dependence upon attribute
and action in the cognition of attribute and in the cognition of action, so he begins an-
other topic in reply to that :

By using tbe term ‘ Samavayinah ’ he states the' causality of relation.
Thus, inasmuch as combination of attribute does not exist in attribute,
and inasmuch as combination of action does not exist in action, in their
respective cognitions there is no dependence upon attribute and action as
distinguishing marks or qualifications ; but there does exist dependence
upon attribute and action as the subject-matter or objects of cognition.
This being so, it is stated that in tbe case of such intuitions as “ A white
conch shell,” the combination of whiteness, the attribute whiteness, and
the cognition of whiteness as a distinction or that which serves to specify,
are the causes. So that relation with the distinction, the distinction


rtlBt .

ii *" ' '


2gO f Al^EBIKA PBlLOSOpm.

aud cognition of tliem are the causes of specialized perceptual cognition.
Hereby is proved all that has been stated before. — 9.

Exception to the above : In the case of Substances^ Cognition is not
a cause of cognition,

Dravesu, in substances, An-itara-itara-karanah, not

causes, one of another*

, 10. In the case of Substances, (cognitions are) not

causes of one another. — ^319.

UpasMra , — It may be objected : As in the case of Possessing a bell,” cognition
of substance the cow possessing the bell) is dependent upon substance {e,g,, the
bell), so also in the ease of (the serial cognitions of) “It is a pillar,” “It is a Jar,” etc.,
where the cognition does not embrace another substance as a distinction, cognition
of (the first) substance, (the pillar), is the cause (of the cognition of the second substance,
the Jar), {and so on). Thus nowhere can there be cognition of substance in the first
instance or at first hand :

Accordiugly he says :

Cognitions ’’ is the complement of the aphorism. Cognition of
the jar, even though it takes place immediately after the cognition of
the pillar, is yet not the eSect of the cognition oE the pillar, inasmuch as
the. pillar cannot properly be the distinction of, or that which serves
to specify, by being contained in, the jar. — 10.

The exception explained,

^ .

5f II =: I ? I u II

Kirana-ayaugapadyat. from non-simultaneity of causes.

Kfirana.-Kramat, from succession of causes, ^ Cha, and.

5ffw Ghata-pata-adi-buddhinam, of the cognitions of the water-pot, the cloth,
etc mnt Kramah, succession. ^ Na, not, Hetu-phala-bhavfit, in

consequence of the relation of cause and ehect,

11. The sequence of th,e cognitions of the water-pot,
the cloth, etc., (results) from the sequence of their causes,
due to the non-simultaneity of the causes, and not in conse-
quence of the relation of cause and efiect (amongst the cog-
''i.;,,.)||itiohs.)~320. ' - -A

, ' \ B^sMra.—lt may be urged that the sequence of the cognitions of the water-pot, the

iB^dneonl, tottie reUtionof efiMJfc' WId



kanAda-sutras yjiT, i-ii


282 ’


VAI^ESIKA PHILOSOPHY.


illations from purely positive conditions (or by Mills method of agiee-
ment). “ B^artb differs from other substances, inasmuch as it is possessed
of odour,” and the like are illations from purely negative conditions,
tor by Mill’s method of difference) ; and “ The mountain is fiery, inasmuch
as it smokes,” and the like are illations from both positive and negative
conditions tor by Mill’s method of agreement and difference.) Bepresen-
tation, reproduction or memory, on the other hand, is uniform, dependent
on that forin of SarrisMra which is called Bliavana or permanent mental
impression, having the same form as the original presentation and depen-
dent upon certain cognition in which inattention played no part. In
another point of view also, understanding is two-fold, science or correct
knowledge, pram&, and nescience or incorrect knowledge, aprama.


Science is cognition in a certain form of that which has that form.


cienee is cognition in a certain form of that in which there is non-exist-
ence of that form. Understanding or Intelligence is also two-fold,
accordingly as it is divided into doubt, samkaya, and certitude, nisehaya.
i>oubt is a cognition whereof the form is (mutually) repugnant existence
and non-existence in one and the same object ; certitude in regard to a
thing is cognition in the form thereof, and not in the form of the non-
mcistence thereof. In this doctrine, in the case of cognition of similarity,
and in that of knowledge of terms, an inference takes place by the pro-
duction of a judgment respecting the inferential mark, subsequently
thereto. Evidence or proof, pramam, is of two kinds, perception and
inference ; and science is exact experience or correct presentation or
presentation in accordance with reality. This will be explained by the
author of the aphorisms himself in the sequel.


"'U: ‘ 1


KAhJlDA-SUTBAS till, 2-2.


Book Eighth. — Chaptee Second.

Cognition of a doubly speoiaUzed nature^ illustrated.

spiira 5^ II t; I I ? II

^^Ayam, this, iqrq*: PIsah, that. Tvayi, by you. Kritam, done.

Bhojaya, feed tj?r^ Enam, him. fr% Iti, such. Buddhi-apeksam,

dependent upon understanding or cognition.

1. ‘ TMs,’ ‘ Tliat/ ‘Done by you,’ ‘ Feed him’ — such
(cognitions are) dependent upon Understanding. — 321.

Upiisfeo ra.—HaYing describecl the mode of production of perceptual cognition, both
discriminative and nari-diseriminative, now the author, with a view to describe the per>
eeption of (a double specialized nature, or) the being specialized in the specialized, gives
a few examples :

Tlie cognition, ‘tliis,’ arises in respect of an object which is near,
and, ‘that,’ in respect of an object wliich is distant. ‘ By you’ — such cog-
nition, coloured with the characteristic of being an agent, presupposes or
depends upon the cognition that he is independent in the action. The
cognition of the act, namely, ‘ done,’ depends upon the cognition that it
is the subject of the operation of the instrument of the action. The
cognition, ‘feed,’ depends upon the cognition that he is the agent in the
act of feeding, and also the employer of the instrument. The cognition,

‘ him,’ depends upon the cognition that he is the subject of the operation
or relation of the fed and tlie feeder. Similar other instances of cognition,
dependent upon cognition, should be understood. — 1.

Dependence of cognition upon cognition, explained.

^ II C I R I II

^ Dristesu, in the case of objects seen. Bhavat, from their exist-
ence or appearance, A-dristesu, in the case of objects unseen. HJTTflH

Abhavat, from their non-existence or non-appearance.

2. (Sucb cognitions depend upon previous other cog-
nitions), inasmuch as they appear in respect of objects seen,
and do not appear in respect of objects unseen. — 322.

CpasMm.— He says that this (ie., the dependence of cognition upon cognition in
isome cases) is proved by induction from agreement and difference ;

When the contiguous object of the coghitiou ‘ This,’ the object,
though distant yet presented in consciousness, of the cognition' That,’
the object, i.e., the contiguous agent, of the cognition ‘ By you,’ the object,

the action, of the cognition ‘ done,’ f.e,, the employer, i


VA18E8IKA PHILOSOPHY.


,1 1


and the employed, of the cognition. Feed/ the object, le., the occupation
of both of them, - of the cognition ‘Him/ — when these objects come into
contact with the senses, then snch cognition is produced. Whereas with
reference to unseen objects these cognitions do not appeal'. Hence this
(i.e,y the dependence of cognition upon cognition) can be inferred from
agreement and difference. This is tbe meaning. — 2.

Siihstanee^ Att'nbute and Action are called artha or object

U g I ^ I II

Artbah, object, Iti, such. Dravya-guna-karmmasu,

in respect of substance, attribute, and action.

3. (The Vaisesikas apply) the term, object, to Sub-
stance, Attribute and Action. — 323.

i UpasMra , — He now begins another topic :

! Of these, i.c., Substance, Attribute and Action, the characteristic of

^ being sought after or apprehended (by the senses) or objectified in such
I , and such ways, lias been stated. Hence, ‘ (It is) an object/ — such is the

terminology of the Vaiilesiba thinkers with regard to them, inasmuch as
■ . as they are presented by the term, object. Accordingly it has been said

by Professor Prasastaiem, “ Tbe cbaracteristic of being denoted by the
term, object, belongs to tbe three,” — 3.

IV. a. 2, re-called.

5rT%fW3[ II I I 9 11

sN^f, Dravyesu, under substances. Paficha-atmakatvam,

penta-substantiality, the characteristic of being a compound of five substances.

Pratisiddham, denied, contravened.

j 4. In (the topic dealing with the ascertainment of)

1. Substances, (the theory) that bodies, etc., are a compound

I of fire elements, has been refuted. — 324.

^ UpaskdrcL — He introduces anothe.r topic : ^ .

‘ Under substances’ — tbe term indicates tbe topic of the determina-
tion of tbe predicable, substance. By tbe aphorism (IV. ii. 2, supra), “ Of
things perceptible and imperceptible, etc.,” tbe penta-substantiality of the
. ' ; body, etc., that is to say, (tbe theory) that they are compounds of five

y •; elements, ‘ pratisiddham,’ has been refuted. As a variety of constituent

causes does not belong to tbe body, so also it does not belong to the senses
i‘; ' of smell, etc., which are going to be described. It, therefore, becomes
' - ipupyed that the senses are uniformly percipient of their con-esponding
:ji TWsJe the import. — 4, . '


This, is the import , — A


KANADA-S&TEAS Vllt, 2-6.


The Sense of Smell is eonstUiited hy the element of Earth.

H t; 1 ^ I V 11

Bhuyastvat, by reason of preponderance or predominance.
Oandha-vatvat, by reason of possession of smell. =5r Cha, and.
Frithivi, earth. ?rpWcrr% Gandha-jnane, in (the constitution of) that by
which smell is perceived, />., the olfactory sense. srp%: Prakyitili, matter,
material cause, essence. ""

5 . By reason of its predominance, and of possession of
Smell, Earth is the material cause of the olfactory sense.


■He states the proposition for which the topic was begun :

gandlia-jiianam,’ that is, the
prabritih,’ the mate-
Accordingly he says *ganda-

can-

The possession of smell
is proved from the rule or
es pos-

are apprehensible by them,
there be such uniformity that the charac-
ng to the other members
even when terrene-ness
So be says ‘ bhuyastv^t,’
■rene particles uninfluenc-
lyastvam, ’ ‘ predominance. ’
term, and has been so used in the
the Nyaya-Sttt7‘airi) also. — 6.

Similarly the Se?ises of Taste, Colour and Touch are respectively
constituted hy the Elements of Water, Fire and Air.

Tatha, in like manner, wq: Apah," waters. Tejah, fire,

Vayuh, air. =«r Cha, and. Rasa-rQpa-sparsa-avise.sat, be-
cause of the non-differeuce of taste, colour and touch. ' '

6. In like manner, Water, Fire and Air (are the
material causes of the sense-organs of Taste, Colour and

nn *1 \ . , _ ^ ^ CVXXM.


UpasMra,

That by -which smell is cognised, is
olfactory sense. Therein ‘ prithivi,’ Earth, alone is
rial cause. It may be asked, why it is so ?
vatvat,’ for it has been said already that that which possesses smell
not be originated by that which is void of smell
(by the olfactory sense) or its odorousness
well-known uniformity of nature that the external senses themselv
sess attributes similar in kind to those which
If it be urged, bow then can 1’
teristic of being the revealer of smell does not belong
of the body but only to the olfactory sense-organ
belongs to all of them without distinction ?

It is the being constituted or origi
ed by other substances, which is
This, ‘ bhuyastvain,’ is a technical
kindred system {i.e.


VAlhSIKA

PpasMi-a.— He extends the argument to the other senses ;

‘ Tke material causes of tlie organs of the tongue, the eye, and tne

gibin’ this is the complement of the aphoristn. Water, etc., are then

respectively the material causes of the tongue, etc., inasmuch as the latter
respectively apprehend the objects with which they are uniformly related.

Here too it is ‘ bhuyastvam,’ ‘ predominance,’ which governs the uniformity
. (that the characteristics of being the revealer of taste, etc., belong respc-

I' if tively to the tonguO, . etc.) It has been declared that it is the rule or

fii- 4) uniformity that the tongue, etc., possess particular attributes of the same

kind as are apprehensible by them, that is the proof of the possession of
taste etc, by the tongue, etc. Likewise the organ of hearing is only a
portion or division of Ether confined within the hollow of the ear and
favourably influenced by a particular adristam or destiny.— 6.

H^re ends the second chapter of the eighth book in the Commentaiy j
of Sahkara upon the Vaiflesika Aphorisms.


KAFADA-SUTBAB IX, 1-1


Book Ninth.— Ohaptee Fiest,


Perception^ e,g.^ of antecedent non-existence, is produced by other means
than conjunction or combination,

II i I ? M II

Kriy^-guna-vyapadesa-abhavat, in consequence of the
non-existence of application or predication of action and attribute. sjTfS prak,
prior, antecedently, A-sat, non-existent.

1. In consequence of the non-application of Action
and Attribute (to it), (an effect is) non-existent prior (to its
production.) — 327.

UpasMra.— After the determination of popular or ordinary perception produced
from contact or contiguity in the form of either conjunction or combination, the author
begins the ninth book of which the object is to demonstrate ordinary or popular and super-
ordinary or hyper-popular perception produced from proximity or presentation due to
other causes s

‘ An effect/ — such is the complement of the aphorism. ' Prilk/ ie.,
prior to the production of the effect, ‘ an effect,’ e.g., a water-pot, cloth,
etc., ‘ a-sat,’ (ie., non-existent), that is to say, the counter-opposite or
contradictory of the contemporaneous non-existence of its own producer.
Here the reason is the impossibility of the application of action and
attribute. If the effect, e.g., a water-pot, etc., were really existent during
that time also, then it would be affirmed to possess action and attribute.
As in the case of a water-pot already produced reference cap be made to
it in such forms as “The water-pot is at rest,” “The water-pot is in
motion,” “ The water-pot is seen to possess colour,” etc., there can be no
reference made to it in like manner also prior to its production. It is
therefore inferred that the water-pot is, during that time, non-existent.
On the other hand, while straws are in the course of weaving or threads
in the course of joining, or when clay is placed on the potter’s wheel,
while the activity of the potter, etc., is yet going on, there is a universally
experienced perceptual cognition that there wiU he in that place a mat, or
a piece of cloth, or a water-pot, inasmuch as such cognition takes place as
soon as the eyes are opened. ' Here proximity or presentation constituted
either by conjunction or by combination cannot be the cause of the cogni-
tion. Hence proximity or presentation in which the thing in itself is
connected with the sense, is here the necessary condition of perception.
It cannot be said that in this explanation there is mutual r.f



liSil


288 VAI8ES1KA PHILOSOPHY.

being existent,, there is perception of it and the perception being existent,
there also exists its proper form ; for, the thing in itself which is nothing
but the proper or essential foam of both the sense and the object, is capa-
ble of producing perception involving or embracing both, and that is
really existent even prior to the perception, as it has been declared in the
Nyaya-V&ritiha, “ In combination as well as in non-existence, there exists
the relation of vise§am that which serves to specify and that which

is specified.”

This same antecedent non-existence is productive of its counter-
opposite (that is, the object not yet existent). For when a water-pot is
produced, it is not produced just at that very moment. Even though the
other (partial) causes existed at the time, the imperfectness of the cause,
being pursued, should pursue only the imperfectness consisting of the
antecedent non-existence of the water-pot itself. If it be objected that the
(antecedently non-existent) water-pot itself would then be an impediment
to its own production ; our reply is that (since, as a matter of fact, it does
not operate as such an impediment) its causality by way of its not operat-
ing as an impediment should not be thrown away. Nor can it be objected
that the water-pot itself constituting the non-existence of its antecedent
non-existence, it would follow that its antecedent non-existence will again
appear when the water-pot is destroyed ; for, the destruction of the water-
pot also is repugnant to its antecedent non-existence, so that there can be
no appearance of a contradictory also during the existence of another
contradictory. For the contradiction between them is not merely spatial,
so that they might be simultaneous like (the genera of) bovine-ness and
horse-ness. The contradiction is temporal also, and therefore how can they

be existent at one and the same time? — 1.

this and the few following aphorisms, the author deals with the topic of
non-emistenceu Now, non-existence is primarily diyided into two kinds, samscu^ga-ahhava
and anyonya’Obhdva, Anyonya'-ahlidva or reciprocal non-existence is characterised as non-
existence of which the counter-opiiosite (i.c., the object non-existent) is determined by
the relation of identity ; in other words, it is eqxiivalent to absence of identity, that is,
difference, Sainscu'ga-'ahhdva or relational non-existence is non-existence other than
reciprocal non-existence, and it is sub-di-vided as antecedent, consequent, and absolute
non-existences.

Consequent non-existence also is proved by perception and inference.

II 5. I ? i H II

Sat, exi'steut. A-sat, non-existent

I'-' V The existent (becomes) non-existent.— S 28 .' ‘ >

' states tliAli another. '(form of) aoa-existeaee 'is .estaWishecl ''tte' ' . _



KANADA-SUTBAS IX, 1-4.


As the noivexistence of the effect, prior to the operation of the cause,
is proved by perception and inference, so is it proved by perception and
inference, after the operation of a club, etc., which destroys it, that a really
existent effect, e.g,, a water-pot, etc., is now non-existent. And this same
non-existence is commonly described as annihilation or destruction (or
consequent or emergent non-existence.) For there arise such cognitions
as that the water-pot is now destroyed, annihilated, that the letter
which was heard before, no longer exists, etc. This is the import. — 2.

The existent is a different thing from the non-existent, so that
after annihilation there can he no continuation of existence,

A-satah, from the non-existent. Kriya-guna-

vyapadesa-abhavat, in consequence of the non-existence of reference by, or
predication of, action and attribute. Artha-antaraip, a different object.

3. (Tte existent is) a different object (from tbe non-
existent), inasmuch as Action and Attribute cannot be
predicated of the non-existent. — 329.

Upas/cdm.— It may be objected : It is the same water-pot that under a particular
condition gives rise to the idea, or conventional use, of annihilation ; and not that the
annihilation of the water-pot is different from the water-pot :

Accordingly he says :

“ The existent ’’—such, is the complement of the aphorism. The
existent is a different object from the non-existent. If it be asked, How ?
So he says, ‘ kriya-guna-vyapade!^a-ahhSv4t.’ For the re can be no such
predication, during the period of annihilation also, as “ The water-pot
remains,” “ The water-pot exists at this moment,” “The water-pot possesses
colour,” “ Bring the water-pot,” etc. In consequence of this difference,
therefore, the existent is a different thing from the non-existent. — 3.

Beoiproeol non-existence or absence of identity, explained.


Sat, the existent. <Br Cha, and, also. ?rgw A-sat, non-existent.

4. The existent also is non-existent. — 330.

Upashdra,— Antecedent and consequent non-existences being proved, the present
aphorism is laid down with the purpose of proving mutual or reciprocal non-existence :

Where a really existent water-pot, etc., are spoken of as being non-
existent, there non-existence of identity is perceived. For there arise
such cognitions as “ The horse is non-existent by the nature of the cow,”
“ The cow is non-existent by the nature of the horse,” “ A piece of cloth



VAISESIKA PE1L080PE7,


is non-existent by tbe nature of a water-pot, ” “ A piece of cloth is a not-
water-pot,” “ A cow is a not-horse,” “ A horse is a not-cow,” etc. Now,
“ A cow possesses reciprocal non-existence with a horse,” “ A water-pot
possesses reciprocal non-existence with a piece of cloth,”— it is this
reciprocal non-existence, otherwise called absence of identity, that appears
in the above cognitions. Here identity is that which determines the
couttter-oppositeness or contrariety (of absence of identity). And this
(reciprocal) non-existence has the same substratum or denotation or
extension as its counter-opposite [i.e., identity) ; for there is such cogni-
tion as that the water-pot is not the ground (on which it lies). It is
also eternal, for it is impossible that there should be at any time
identity between a water-pot and a piece of cloth. — 4.

In addition to antecedent, consequent, and reciprocal, non-existence,
there is absolute non-existence.


'& three things repugnant to absolute non-exist-
jposite or the object non-existent, its antecedent
consequent non-existence. The ancients teach
darh coloqr does not exist in a red water-pot, and


that red coloxxr does not exist in a dark water-pot, are conversant about
consequent and antecedent non-existences, but not* absolute non-existence.
The moderns, on the other hand, maintain that consequent and antece-
dent non-existences are not repugnant to absolute non-existence, and
hence that there may be absolute non-existence even during the time of
consequent and other non-existences. They hold that when a water-pot,
etc., previously removed, are brought back to a place, there can be no
cognition of the absolute non-existence of the water-pot, so long as the
water-pot exists, inasmuch as the time during which the water-pot is
existent does not constitute connection wi^ non-existence. Some, again,
teach that when there has formerly stood in any place a water-pot, and
this has been removed and brought back again, there arises in this case
cognition of a fourth kind of non-existence under the aspect of connection
{Samsarga-abhava), called temporary non-existence, and not of absolute
non-existence.

Causes of the perception of consequent non-existence.


n 5. 1 5 K u


A-sat, non-existent, fit Iti, such. ^jjisr?rgprraRr BhQta-pratyaksa-
abhavat, because of the non-existence of the perception of a past object,
Bhata-smriteh, because of the recollection of a past object,
Virodhi-praiyaksa-vat, similar to the perception of the contradictory or
opposite,

6. “ (It is) non-existent” — sncli (perceptual cognition)

is similar to tlie perception of the counter-opposite (of non-
existence), because (in both cases) there is non-existence of
the perception of that which is past and gone, and there is
recollection of the past. — 332.

UpasMra»‘-^'Be now begins another section and therein states the causes of the
perception of consequent non-existence :

‘A-sat iti’: By the word, ‘iti,’ he indicates cognition in the form
of perception. Thereby (it is obtained that) there is such perceptual
cognition as “ The water-pot is non-existent,” , The water-pot has been
destroyed,” “The water-pot is now in a state of annihilation.” An
e3?ample of this cognition is given by ‘ virpdbi-pratjraksavat;’ ; as tbei'e ig


llilllilll


., 1 ,..


VAISmKA PEIL080PE7,


iliillii


clear perception, of tlie counter-opposite (of non-existence), e.fif., n water-
pot, etc., so tliere is of* its annihilation or consequent non-existence also.
The reason of this is stated as ‘ bhuta-pratyaksa-abhavat, which means,
because there is non-existence of the perception of bhuta, i.e., a watei-
pot, etc., which having been first produced have been subsequently
destroyed. Hereby .the non-apprehension of the (once) apprehensible is
stated. I'liere, again, the following argument is confirmatory (of the
perceptual cognition) ; If there were a water-pot here, it would be seen,
as the place is seen j but it is not visible ; therefore there is none. He
mentions another auxiliary cause : ‘ bhuta-smriteh,’ which means, because
thei'e is recollection of the counter-opposite, e.g., a water-pot, etc., which is
past and gone. Hereby recollection of the counter-opposite is stated. 6.

Vivriti . — The four kinds of non-existence being explained, the per-
ception of consequent non-existence is explained. i

‘ A-sat iti ’ ; “The water-pot is non-existent,” “The water-pot is
destroyed,” “The water-pot is annihilated,”— such perception, ‘ virodhi-
pratyak§avat,’ is similar to the perception of the which is the

counter-opposite (of its non-existence), that is to say^^Pproved by sense-
experience and produced fipm the ordinary or jt^ilarly understood
contact (of sense and object). Between them th^e is, however, this
difference that the perception of the counter-oppositf is produced from the
conjunction of the eye, etc. (with their objects), jvhi te the pere eption of
consequent non-existence is produced from the determlnafidiTor intrinsic
form (of the object perceived) being conjoint with the eye, etc. He men-
tions another point of difference, vis., ‘ bhuta-pratyaksa-abh§,v4t.’ The
meaning is that perception of consequent non-existence is produced from
a cause in the form of the non-apprehension of the apprehensible conse-
quent on the non-existence of the perception of the past, i.e., the
counter-opposite, e.g., the water-pot, etc., and also from the recollection of
the past water-pot, etc., in other words, from cognition of the counter-
opposite, which cognition is here identical with recollection. Thus the
perception of consequent non-existence is produced from the non-percep-
tion of its counter-opposite as well as from the cognition of the counter-
opposite, whereas the perception of the counter-opposite is not so produced.
There is, therefore, difference between them in this respect also. This is
the import. It should be observed that recollection as such is not intended
(in this aphorism, though the word has been used), but mere cognition is

■ }d. That being so, the idea is this that as the water-pot, etc., are
Ipy, perception, so also are their consequent non-existences,

''s' :



KANADA-SI^TBAS IX. 1-7


Causes of the 'perception of antecedent non-existence,

^i^iT Tath^, similarly, A-bhave, in the case of (antecedent) non-
existence. Bhava-pratyaksatvat, in consequence of the perceptibi-

lity of the existent. ^ Cha, also.

7. Similarly (there is perceptual cognition) of (ante-
cedent) non-existence, in consequence also of the perceptibi-
lity of the existent. — 333.

I72)as7au*a.— Extending to antecedent non-existence the mode in which consequent
non-existence is an object of perception, he says :

Although this word, non-existence, is a general term, still from the
context it signifies antecedent non-existence. As there is perceptual
cognition in the case of consequent non-existence, so also in the case of
antecedent non-existence. Q.— How ? A. — ‘ Bhava-pratyaksatv4t ’ : ‘ praty-
aksatvat,’ in consequence of the characteristic of being made an object of
cognition by perception, ‘ bhavasya,’ of straws, etc., while these are in
the course of weaving (for a mat which is then antecedently non-existent.)
Or, the meaning is this : ‘ pratyaksatvht,’ in consequence of the ‘ fitness ’
(for the senses) or apprehensibility, ‘ bh^va^a,’ of the substratum as w'ell
as of the counter-opposite (i.e., the mat after production) ; inasmuch as
the apprehensibility of the substratum as well as the apprehensibility of
the counter-opposite govern the apprehension of Sanisarga-abhdva or
relational non-existence. The word ‘cha,’ also, brings forward the
recollection of the counter-opposite and the argument already stated (in
the preceding aphorism, as contributory causes of the perception of
antecedent non-existence.) (It is to be observed that), although antecedent
non-existence has no beginning, and although consequent non-existence
has no end, yet they are perceptible under particular conditions only.— 7,

Vivriti.— It may be asked, inasmuch as antecedent non-existence has
no beginning, how is it that there is no perception of it long before the
production of the conjunction of the two halves of a water-pot, etc., the
fore-mentioned causes (of such perception) being possible at that time
also ? Hence the author adds, ‘ bhava-pratyaksatvat.’ ‘ Bh^va ’ means the
final collocation of causes, according to its derivation from the root hM, to
be, by the affix gkan, in the ablative sense that it springs from this. ‘ Bhgva-
pratyaksatvat ’ means the state or condition of that whereof perception
takes place by means of ‘bhhva.’ The . resultant meaning of the term
therefore, is, because it must be manifested by the final collocation of
causes. Thus, the import is, in the instance in auestion ..ov. i,


VAI8E8TKA PETLOSOPHT.


perception of antecedent non-existence in consequence of the non-existence
of tlie final collocation of causes.

Games of the perception of reciprocal non-existence.

,. A T ** ^

U i M I =: II

1 ^^ Etena, hereby. A-ghatafe, not-water»pot. A-gauJi, not-

cow. A-dharmah, not-dharma, ^ Cha, and, also, Vyikhyatat,

explained.

8. Hereby also are explained ‘ not-water-pot,’ ‘ not-
cow/ ‘ not-dharma.^ — 334.

Vpaskara . — He shows that reciprocal non-existence is an object of perception :

‘ Etena ’ — by this term he extends (the causality of) the recollection
of the counter-opposite, apprehension of the substratum, and the argument
stated before. Non-apprehension of the apprehensible is the same in all i
cases. The word, ‘cha/ also, has the object of bringing forward what
has been stated before. ‘ A-dharmah ’ : By saying that the reciprocal
"non-existence of dharma, merit, though it is supersensible, is an object of
perception in its substratum, e.g., pleasure, knowledge, etc., he suggests
that in the apprehension of reciprocal non-existence, apprehensibility of
the counter-opposite is not the governing condition, but that only the
apprehensibility of the substratum is the governing condition. How
otherwise could the reciprocal non-existence of a fiend, in the form that '
the pillar is not a fiend, be apprehended in the pillar ? For, the non-
apprehension of a fiend as being coincident or identical with the pillar is
the cause of the apprehension of the reciprocal non-existence of a fiend
(in the pillar), and, it is again impossible, were the pillar identical with a
fiend, that there should be such non-appi-ehension (of a fiend in the pillar)/
since such non-apprehension is contradictory to, or contravened by,
the existence of the entity [e.g., a fiend) which is the counter-opposite (of
its non-existence.)

Ohjection.— Identity with a fiend is not in this instance the counter-
opposite. Is it then a fiend ? But it may be that though it is present
in the piUar, yet, like its gravity, it is not apprehended. Hence its non-
apprehension would not be contradictory to the existence of the entity
which is the counter-opposite, {viz,, a fiend.)

Answer.— It is not so, for, like the non-apprehension of the counter-
opposite, the non-apprehension of that which determines the characteristic
being the counter-opposite, also causes the apprehension of non-



KAT^lDA-SUTBAS IX, 1-9,


Ohjeation . — The apprehension of reciprocal non-existence is depend-
ent upon the apprehension of connter-opposite-ness, and counter-opposite-
ness is identity with the absence of reciprocal non-existence ; and hence it
follows that the apprehension of reciprocal non-existence is really depend-
ent upon the apprehension of reciprocal non-existence.

Answer . — This is not the case ; for, as has been already stated, it is a
property A^hieh is cognised as being not present in any given substratum,
that determines the characteristic of being the counter-opposite, but the
apprehension of that property also as that which determines counter-
opposite-ness, is not the governing condition {oi the apprehension of
reciprocal non-existence.) — 8.

Vivriti . — The causes of the apprehension of reciprocal non-existence
are determination (or possession of attribution, or intrinsic form) in rela-
tion to the senses, — indriya-sambaddha-vise§amta, — non-apprehension of
the counter-opposite, and cognition of the countei'-opposite. The differ-
ence, however, is this that the perceptibility of the counter-opposite is
the condition of apprehension of SaTrisarga-ahhava or relational non-exist-
ence, whereas it is the perceptibility of the substratum that is the condi-
tion of apprehension of reciprocal non-existence. Thus, in spite of the
super-sensibility of dharma or merit, there is no impediment to the per-
ception of its reciprocal non-existence in the sensible substratum thereof,
e-gf., pleasure and the like. Whereas some have taught that perceptibi-
lity of both the counter-opposite and the substratum is the condition of
apprehension of relational non-existence, this is inaccurate ; for, were
this the case, the perception of non-existence of fragrance in a stone, of
non-existence of bitterness in treacle, of non-existence of colour in air,
and of non-existence of touch as well as sound in ether would be impossi-
ble, inasmuch as their respective substrata are not perceptible to the
several senses cognisant thereof respectively. It is from this considera-
tion that Pak^adhara Misra has maintained that the perception of the
destruction (or cessation) of the touch of air is produced by determination
thereof in its intrinsic form by time conjoint with the skin.

Perception of absolute non-existence, how produced.

n s. I ^ 1 u

A-bhQtam, not produced. Na, not; Asti, exists. 5% Iti, this.

An-artha-antaram, not different objects.

9. That which, has not been produced, does not exist ;
— this is an identical proposition. — 335,


'A‘



VMSBSIKA FEILOSOPEy


Upiiskctra . — Now ia tMs aphorism he says that absolute non-existenee is an object of

perception: • '

That which was produced, at present does not exist— such cognition
rests upon annihilation, and is not conversant about, or does not bring
out, the having been produced ; whereas perceptual cognition which
embraces simply this that it does not exist, reposes upon absolute non-
existence. ‘ A-bhhtaip,’ (that which has not been pr-oduced), denotes non-
cognizance of production and destruction. The being ‘ an-artha-antaratn,’
not difierent objects, means also purporting that only. For example,
Earth-ness does not exist in Water, and Water-ness does not exist in
Earth. For, were there Earth-ness in watery wholes, it would be per-
ceived, but it is not perceived, therefore it does not exist ; — a reference
to such argument is to be observed in this case also. We must, in like
manner, hold that there is absolute non-existence of a thing where such a
thing will never be, nor even has been, produced. The cognition, on the
other hand, in the form that it does not exist, of the non-existence in their
substratum, of that which has been, and that which will be, depends
upon consequent non-existence and antecedent non-existence. Hence it
is that this (absolute non-existence) is designated as absolute or illi-
mitable and as of trinal time or eteimal. — 9.

Vivfiti. — ‘ Na asti iti,’ perception in the form that something does
not exist, which is ‘ abhhtaiii,’ not conversant about the past, ‘ an-artha-
antaram,’ that is, has for its object nothing but absolute non-existence,
such as consequent non-existence etc. ® ® ® ®. The word ‘ bhiita ’ or
past includes the future also.

The perception, “ The water-pot does not {now) exist in the room,” explained.

?rr ^ lu i ii

Na, not. Asti, exists, Ghaiah, water-pot. Gehe, in the

ropm. Ith such, Satah, existent. Ghatasya, of water-pot.

Geha-satpsarga-pratisedhah, negation of association with the


KANADA-8t)TEA8 IX, 1-10.


of mmsarga-aWidva or non-ejcisteace of association, siniee in that case the three-fold
division of the non-existence of association would be disproved.

To meet this objection, he says : '

(‘ Gelia-samsarga-pratisedliah ’ meauB) the negation or privation of the
association or conjunction of the water-pot with the room. And it would
be simply absoute non-existence, if the water-pot do not exist at any time
whatever, antecedent non-existence in the case of the water-pot which will
exist, and consequent non-existence in the case of the water-pot which
had its existence in the past.

Objeetion. That being so, the cognition should have been in this
form that connection of the water-pot does not exist in the room.

Answer.— Wh^t is meant by ‘ the cognition should have been’? If
it means ‘ the cognition of which the object or content is the connection
of the water-pot, should have been,’ and so conveys the sense of inclusion,
then what is desired is obtained. If, on tho other hand, it means ‘(the
cognition) which refers to or suggests that {i.e., connection of the water-
pot), then (we reply that), it is the reference to the substratum, viz., in
the room, which leads to, and results in, the reference to the connection,
inasmuch as it is the being the substratum that appears in the form of
connection of the property (or conjunction of the contained.)

Objection. Does then the water-pot really exist there ?

^ Ansiaer.— What do you mean by ‘really exist’ ? Is it combined or
conjunct ? It cannot be the first, since there is in the room non-existence
of the water-pot as combined with it. Nor the latter, since there is denial
of conjunction.

Objection.— It would then follow that the water-pot, etc., are always
present, inasmuch as there is everywhere denial only of the one or the
otlier of their conjunction and combination.

Ansiren— This would not follow, since the denial itself of both of
them is idential with the denial of the water-pot. Are then the water-pot
and its conjunction one and the same thing, whereby denial of conjunction
of the water-pot would be the denial of the water-pot ? Are then the water-
pot and Its combination one and the same thing, whereby the admission
itself of its combination would be the admission of the water-pot ? For
there is not presence of the water-pot there where both of them (conjunc-
tion and combination) are denied, whereby the water-pot might be in cons-
tant agreement. Thus where there is admission or affirmation of something
the denial or negation of this is itself the denial or negation of that.

: Or, It may be that , there is really absolute nbn-existenca of the

water-pot m the room in the relation of being .in combination, and that


298


VAISE8IKA PHILOSOPHY.


piiipif


it is tHs (absolute noii:existence) that is the object of the cognition that
the water-pot does not 'exist , in the room ; as, for example, (there is absolute
non-existence of the water-pot) in the potsherd in the relation of being in
conjunction*

Ohjectioyi.’^Siioh being the case, the Avater-pot would be non-existent,
being the counter-opposite of the constantly present absolute non-existence*
Answer. — It AAroiild be so, were it everywhere non-existent by the
relations or characteristics of being in conjunction and being in combi-
nationi— 10. . ’ ;

^erceiption of the Soiil^ hoio prodiieed, in the yogins who are {called)

united.


Atmani, in the soul. Atma-manasoh, of soul and mind*

Samyoga-visestt, from a particular conjunction, Atma-

pratyaksam, perception of the soul.

11. Perceptual cognition of tlie Soul (results) from a
particular conjunction of tlie Soul and tlie Mind in the Soul.
— 337 .

UpasMra*— Haying thus ascertained popular perception having for its object exisr
tence and non-existence, he begins a new section in order to ascertain the perception of
the yogins :

Knowledge is produced — such is the complement (of the aphor-
ism.) Now, the yogins or ascetics are divided into two classes : those
whose internal organs have been steadied in samddhi or deep meditation,
and they are called united ; and those whose internal organs are no longer
steadied in samddh% and they are called disunited. Therein those who
are united, having with eagerness fixed their mind on the object to be
presented to it, are engaged in constant meditation ; and in them cogni-
, tion of the soul, of their own souls as well as of the souls of others, is pro-
duced. ‘ Itrna-pratyaksarn ’ means in the manner of the cognition in
which the soul is the percept or object of presentation to the sense.
Although in ourselves and others also, cognition of the soul sometimes
exists or appears, yet, as it is obscui*ed by avidya or nescience, it has been
declared to bo virtually non-existent* ‘ Atma-manasoh saniyoga-visiesat ’
means from a particular contiguity between the soul and the mind, namely,

, a favourable influence by virtue born of yoga or holy communion —11.

Vivriti. Having examined perception produced through ordinary or
■ physical presentation or contiguity, he now explains perception produced


KANADA-8VTBA8 IX, 1-12,


is three-fold, according to its division as 8amanya-laTi^ana, having the
form of the genns, jnana-lali^aija,, having the form of cognition, and
yogaja-dharma, virtue or power born of holy communion. Therein
yogaja-dharma is a particular merit or virtue produced by the practice of
yoga or holy communion, and to the existence of which the Vedas, PurS-
p^s, etc., testify. It is again two-fold according to the two-fold-ness of
the yogins as those who are united or have attained to holy communion
and those who are in the process of being united or are in the course of
attaining to holy communion. Among them those are called the united,
w'ho have subdued their mind or inner sense by the practice of yoga and
have achieved the siddhis or ‘ powers,’ or perfections or attainments by
means of Samddhi or meditation. It is they that are also called the
specially united, on account of their possessing conspicuous or advanced
yoga. Those who are in the process of being united are they whose
minds are turned away from objects of the senses and who are immediate
beholders of all objects through the accompaniment of contemplation.
The present aphorism has been laid down with reference to such yogins only.

Note. It would seem that the word viyukta has been diferently used by Sankara

Mura and Jayamraija ; by the former in the sense of the dmmited, and by the latter

as denoting those who are specially united [through the possession of highly advanced
yoga. Yide IX. I 13 infra, TJpaskdra. Saiikara Misra ohvionsly does not recognise the
distinction, made by Jayandrctya^ia, of the united and those in the process of being united.
According to him, yogins are of two classes, namely, the united and the ultra-united or
dis-united.

Omniscience of the united yogins, how possible.

mt ii s. i % i u ii

jrqr Tatha, similarly, Dravya-antaresu, in the case of other

substances. Jj’grgH Pratyaksain, perceptual.

12. Perceptual (cognition is) similarly (produced) ip
the case of the other substances. — 338.



VAISESIKA PHILOSOPHY.


Ifjmsfedra.— Do then the united have cognition in respect of the soul only ? How
therefore can they possess omiscience ? In reply to these possible qneries, he says :

■“ Cognition is produced ” — this is implied by the contest. ‘ TathS, ’
means by the mind only as favourably influenced by, or accompanied
■with, the virtue or power, horn of yoga or holy communion. ‘ Dravya-
antaresu’ means in respect of the four kinds of ultimate atoms, the mind,
air, space, time and ether. By the term, substance, are included attribute,
action axid genus inhering in substance, the predicahle, species ; com-
bination ; also gravity, elasticity, etc., appertaining to perception ; and
also volition, the source of vitality (or spontaneity), non-discriminative
tliouglit, dharma, adharma, etc., residing in the soul. Fox- the favoui-able
influence of the virtue or power born of yoga is equivalent to a perceptive
apparatus ; otherwise omniscience would not be affirmed (of those who are
united.) — 12.

Omniseienae belongs also to those yogins who are (called) dis-united.

wxTOrr%rRT:5OTn' lu i ? 1 1 ^ ii

Asam^hita’-antahkaranah, whose internal organs are not
attached to meditation, Upsamhrita-samadhayali, who have

given up meditation. Tes^ip, their, ^qr Cha, also.

13. They whose internal sense-organs are not attached
to meditation, are those by whom meditation has been
given up. They too (have perception of hidden and distant
objects.) — 339.

UpaskdrcL—Baving described the perceptual cognition ot the united^ he now describes
that of the disunited,

‘ Upasainhrita-saraftdhayah ’ is simply an explication of ‘ asamShita-
antai^karanSh.’ Or, to the question, why they are called ‘ asm^hita-
antahkaranth ’ ? the reply is given by ‘ upasaqxbrila-samcldhayah,
meaning, because they are those by wffiom ‘ Samfidhi ’ of xvhich the essence
is constant meditation, ‘ upasaiphrita, ’ has been thrown away. For they,
being able to transcend the senses through the influence of SarnddU,
ahsoi-ption or intentness of mind on one object only, and, acquiring iarira-
Siddhi, powers over, or perfection of, the physical organism, e.g., the
power of attenuation, etc,, and Indriya-Siddhi, powers over, or perfections
of, the senses e.y., the power of hearing at a distance, i.e., clair-audience,
eto., and then feeling the insufficiency of Samddhi itself, realise the need of
other practices as referred to in the following and other texts of the Veda:

Theie is need for ibsolongas ,
I §nd fulffled. Learning, therefore, that every form of hhoga


pip


- ;


KAWIDASUTEAS I.I4,. 301

or experience, whether agreeable or disagreeable, shonld be undergone,
and that they undoubtedly stand on firm gi-ound so long as they go on
experiencing Larma-asaya, vehicles of karma, i.e., physical organisms,
previously merited or acquired, in different countries, divisions of the
land, peninsulas, etc., by different births as horses, elephants, birds,
serpents, etc., as well as by existence as^ celestials, sages, or men, they
make the whok universe of things, hidden and distant, the objects of
t leir perception, the powers of their senses having been enlarged or
heightened by the force cf the virtue or power born of Yoga. — 13.

Vivriti. After describing the perception of the yogin who is in
course of union, he describes that of the yogin who has attained union.

w^ose internal sense is destitute
o± bamadhi or meditation; ‘upasairrhrita-samidhayth,’ those by whom
samadht or deep meditation has been consummated, that is, carried to
ruition, in whom are produced the various siddhis, perfections or attain-
ments winch are the fruit oi^amddhi or deep meditation ;~sueh united
yogins attain perception of souls and other substances. Such is the sense
to be gathered from the aphorism. In fine, in the perception of the yogin
whais in course of union, there is need for dhydna, thought or contem-

pla ion while m the perception of i,

ItlT a- thought or contemplation.

Note, According to tiie vivHli^ the word ^asamahitn t »

not to have syntactical connection' in the aohorism -ri. \ a^J^aranah would seem

by Jaymdmyana, is, therefore, so far unsatisfactory. ‘ ^ of yogi„s, made

TJw Yogim’ perception of Substance, Attribute and Action,
'popularly explained,

II S. I t I II

Tat-saniav§yat, from combination with that f. c.K .
karmma-gunesu, in respect of actions and attdbutes ’ ’

14 . ^ (Perception) of Actions, and Attributes (arises)
from (tbeir) combination with Substance.— 340 .

Yogin^)ifrmetaT,?nas"r^^^^^^^^^ (of the

coLec^L^wItt t^y apprehend objects p^rSe^tas bting'

in the case of certain predieables, and sa^.; ^ the medium of cognition)

“ Perceptual cognition is- producpd thia * 1 , i


7AISE8IKA PHILOSOPHY.


sentatioii or contiguity (o£ objects to tbem for the appreneiision oi tiiose
objects by tliem), tben from tbe combination in tbat wMch is in conjunc-
tion with the mind of the perceiver, of attributes and genera combined or
inhering in the idtimate atoms, ether, space and time, and from com-
bination in other substances, of that which is conjoint with sterile minds
through the various conjunction of sterile .minds, favourably directed
towards the experience of mortal coils, cognition is produced in respect
of those substances, attributes, etc. This is declared here, regard being
had to, or in view of* easy demonstration. In fact, in the case of the
external senses as well as of the mind, it is the virtue or power born of
■yoga that constitutes the ‘proximity’ or presentation to the senses,
inasmuch as all uncertainty or impossibility of proof is set at rest by it
alone. The drinking up of the ocean by Agastya (the sage), and the
conversion of the kingdom of Darj-^aka into a forest are examples in
point. — 14.

Vivriti.—li may be urged that omniscience is not possible or proved
in the Yogin, for though there be perception of substances, there is no
such cognition of attributes, etc. Accordingly he says :

The meaning 4s that from combination of ‘ that, ’ i.e., conjunction
of mind facilitated by the power or virtue born of Yoga or holy com-
munion, there is produced in the Yogin, whether united or in course of
union, perception of attributes and actions.

* * * The term ‘ of actions and attributes ’ is indicative, and

genus, etc., also are to be understood. In a like manner, should be
understood perception produced from super-ordinary or hyper-physical
presentation or contiguity in the form of Samdnya-laksam or general im-


(t.e tlie soul ^rl.ich is conjoint with - the mind i, as it is with ourselves
ami others. The meaning, therefore, is -that in such- cognition there is
ao dependence upon any othei- form of contiguity or presentation. Now,
ordinary m- popular perception is cognition, whicli is never changing’
produced from the contact of the senses and objects. It may be said to be
produced by objects. Tiie sensuous or immediate cognition of uon-
yogins IS perception. And this is common to ordinary or popular and to
super-ordinary or hyper-popular cognitions.— To.

_ Here ends the first chapter in the ninth book of the Oommentarj.
of S<^fik<3.ra Oil tiio Veiis^Gsikci Aphorisms.


iiliiiiiliiiii


I


S04 TAliEf^IKA PHILOBOPBY.

Book Ninth. — Chapter Second.

Marlts of inference enumerated.

SfffSR^ 11 5. 1 R 1

^ Asya, of this, Idam, it. gjp^ Karyyam, effect, groi Karanam,
cause. Sarayogi, conjunct, Virodhi, contradictory. Sama-

vayi, combined. =sr Clia, or. It', ^uch. IffSK^L Laingikam, produced by the
mark of inference, mediate.

1. “ It is the effect or cause of, conjunct with, con-

tradictory to, or combined in, this,”— such is (cognition)
produced by the mark of inference. — 342.

Thus in the preceding chapter the perception ot‘ yogins and iion-t/ogins
havS been determined according to its cause, its nature, and its characteristic. Of the
two kinds into which pratm ta or proof has been divided, perceptual i or sensuous and
inferential or produced by marks, he now comiiienees to determine that which is produced
by means of marks ;

‘ Cognition’— this is the topic in hand. ‘ Laiiigikam’ means pro-
duced from lifigaiYi or mark. Lifigam is a property of the pah<^a, possess-
ing vyapti, pervasion or invariable concomitance with the major term.
Therein i^ydpti has been already declared. {Vide Ilf. i. 14, supra,)

One thing is pak^a in relation to another, when there is in the former
non-existence of proof or evidence i-epngnant to the desire for proving the ;

latter. Such evidence includes proof and disproof, or is demonstrative
as well as obstructive, for a paksa or minor term is that which contains
non-existence of both of them. For, there existing either demonstrative
or obstructive evidence, no one feels doubt or desire of demonstration.

It is for this reason that the ancients defined the paksa to be an object
wherein the existence of the sddhya^ that which has to be established,
the major term, is doubtful, or an object wherein the existence of the
sddhya, is desired to be demonstrated. According to Jlvanatha Uisra^
a pak§a is that in which there is non-existence determined by the being
evidence preventive of the appearance of doubt terminable by the ascer-
tainment of the possession of producible sddhya. Some others say that
that is a pafem in which there is non-existence of demonstrative evidence
accompanied, with absence o£ desire of proof., In this view, the nature
m|:the even in the case of obstruction (i.a., even where j


words, evidence which ^ disproves the


KANADA-SI)TRA8 IX, II-l.


existence of the major term in the minor, exists.) This then may be
seen in the Anum&na-Maii'dkha.

It then becomes apparent that the property or . characteristic of thia
paksa is the Ufiga or mark of inference. And the cognition, in the form
of a presentative state of consciousness, which the mark, whether it be a
visible, an inferred, or a heard one, produces, is ‘ laihgikaip ’ or that
which is produced from a mark. Accordingly it has been said,

?r^T% g cr%f ngniwf. ii

That mark is the medium of inference, whicli is connected with that
which is to he inferred, is known to exist in that which is accompanied
witli that which is to be inferred, and does not exist at all where that does


not exist.


It is, therefore, the mark w’hich is the instrument of inferential cog-
nition, and not its pardmarsa, subsumption, inasmuch as subsumption,
being destitute of function, lacks causality, -whereas it is the same that
is the function of the mark.

Objection . — How can there be illation or inferential cognition, where
the smoke, etc. {i.e., marks) are either past or future ?

Answer . — This is not a valid objection, as in this case the sadhya or
that which is to be proved, is also inferred as past or future.

Objection.— Bow can there be illation where, in consequence of
an impediment in the case, it is not ascertained whether the smoke, etc.,
be past, future or present ?

There can be by no means, since in such an instance
there is uncertainty also as to the sadhya, that which is to be proved.

Objection . — How can an illation take place where there is certainty
as to the existence (of tlie mark) on a previous and a following day, and
uncertainty as to the intermediate day?

Ansiuer.— In such a case, the inferential cognition results from the
inference of fire, etc., limited to those days, by means of smoke, etc., limit-
ed to those days, such having been ascertained to be the causuaiity of
vyapti, pervasion or the universal concomitance of the major and minor
terms, (in the process of inference.)

Objection.— Eow does inferential cognition arise from a cloud of
dust mistaken for smoke ?

Answer . — It is because that which is , unddrstobd to bp pervaded (i.e.
the cloud of dust, supposed to be smoke, and therefore pervaded by fire),


is the mark vof inference), and because the inference is correct or incorrect


iBliiiSliliiStlili


i:::: I


VAISBS7KA PHILOSOPHY.


according to the correctness or incorrectness of such understanding ; else
how should your own paraniarsa or siihsiimptioii be tlie instruinent (of
inferential cognition) in such a case ?

Ohjection. — In the case of a supersensible mark, paramarsa or sub-
sumption not being producible thereby, how can the mark have the
function (of being the means of inference) ?

Answer —Snoh function is effected by tliere being a practical or
saving argument demonstotive of its existence (or of its relation to the
major and minor terms); for, otherwise, the function of combination in
the ease of hearing, etc., would not be possible.

Inference results from a mark which is an effect, as the inference of
fire, etc., from smoke, light, etc. ; also from (a mark which is) a cause, as
the inference of sound by a deaf man from a particular conjunction of the
drum and the drumstick, or the inference of dharma or merit, heaven,
etc., by a pious man from the due performance of sacrifice, ablation, etc.,
or the inference of rain from the due performance of fcunrl or Sacrifice
for rain, or the inference of the efflux of water from a channel which
men are digging out from a river, etc., full of water, or the inference of the
rising of a stream from the observation of rain overhead. This is, then,
a single connection, characterised as the relation of effect and cause,
which has been stated in two ways. Inferetice from a conjunct object is
such as the inference of the sense-organ, of the skin from the observation
of the physical organism which is in conjunction with it. Inference from
a Contradictory or repugnant object is such as the inference of an ichneu-
mon concealed by bushes, etc., from the observation of an excited snake
which is its natural antagonist. Inference from a combined object is
such as the inference of fire connected with water by means of the
warmth of the water. — 1.

Fiviriti — Cognition by means of marks is of three kinds,
according as it contains a cause, or an effect, or a co-existent thing as
the mark, and is called piiroa-mty sesa-vat^ or sdmdmjato-dristani. Pur--
m-vat means that which contains as the mark the antecedent, that is, the
cause. Sem-vat means that which contains as the mark the consequent,
that is, tlie effect Sdmdnyato-dristam means that which contains as
the mark something other than a cause or an effect. The author explains
these forms of inference, which have been also explained in the aphorisms of
Qautaina fJie N ydya-SiUmni% ‘ As^^aidam kary 3 mrn’ : ‘ Asya/ of this,
H.e., of, the sddhya.ox that which is to be proved, ‘ idam/ this, the sddliana


s ii’i



KASUDA St)TBAS IX 2-2.


the iafei’ential mark, e.g,, the inference of fire and the like, bj’' the mark of
tlie smoke and the like 'Asya idam karanana’ : that is, inference of which
the mark is a cause is as, e.g., the inference of a shower by means of a
particular ascent of clouds. Sdmdnyato-dristam or that which appears
in the form of tliat of which tlie inferential mark is something other than
a cause or an effect, is manifold; as, for example, the inference of the iron
ring as being in conjunction with the mortar and the like, by means of
the mark of a particular pestle which is conjoint with the iron ring (at its
end) ; so also is the inference of an ichneumon concealed behind bushes
and the like, by the sight of a particular excited snake whicli is the enemy
of the iehnennion ; and also the inference of fire and the like (as existing)
in a frying pan and the like, by means of the hot touch combining in fire,
in the form of the counter-opposite of combination favourable to fire.

Infereme and the Law of Cause and Effect^ how related.


Asya, its, to it Idam, it. Ka^yya-karana-sam-

bandhah, ( The suggest! m or introduction of) the relation of effect and cause.
^ Cna, and, whereas. Avayavat, from a member of the argument or

syllogism, Bhavati, arises.

2. ‘ It is its ’ (--this cognition is sufficient to cause an

illation to be made) ; whereas (the introduction of) the
relation of effect and cause arises from a (particular) member
(of the argimient). — 343.

Upaskdra . — It may be objected that this enaraeratioii (of marks) is inadequate, since
it does not include the inference of the heaving of the ocean from the rising of the moon,
of the rise of Canopus (a bright star in the southern constellation Argo navis) from
the tranquillity or clearness of the waters, of the rising of the moon from the expansion
of the Nymphsea, of the setting of the fourteen lunar mansions or naksatras from the
rising of the other fourteen, of colour from taste, or of a particular taste from a particular
colour.

In anticipation of this objection, he says:

‘It is its’— this much only becomes the instrument of illation.
‘Asya,’ i.e., of the means of illation, e.g., smoke, etc., ‘idam,’ i.e., (it is)
that which is to be established, e.g., fire, etc. ; or, ‘asya,’ ie., of the
pervader, e.gi., fire, etc., ‘idam,’ i.e., (it. is) that whicli can be -pervaded,
e.g., smoke, etc. It is, therefore, only the apprehension of the being that
which can be pervaded, that governs (the process of illation ),' and hot
also ttie relation of effect and cause, etc. ‘j Leet dthnight be objects that
the enumei'ation (of marks of inference) in tke pi’eceding aphorism is


VAI^ESIKA PEIL0B0PE7.


consequently futile, lie adds ‘ the relation of effect and cause.’ Other
relations ii.e., of the conjunct, the contradictory, and the combined),
mentioned above, are also hereby implied. In the word relation, there

is the tropical suggestion of that in which relation is the thing contained.
‘ Relation ’ accordingly means the introductionor talk of relation. Whence
does the introduction or talk of relation arise ? He gives the reply by
saying ‘avayavat,’ i.e., from a part or member (of the argument), that is to
say, only from the udakaTdijta or example or illustration. The fifth case-
ending on the ablative inflection (in ‘ avayavM ’) bears the sense of the
infinite. The meaning, therefore, is that, in this Barsano. or philosophy
as well as in the Samkhya and other Darsanas, the introduction of the
relation of effect and cause, etc., has been made in conformity with, or
regard being had to, the Mdaftctratju or illustration.

Thus, then, vyapyatva, the being that which can be pervaded (as the
mark, by that of which it is the mark) denotes the possession of a natural
connection, the natxrral being that which is not accidental or adventitioxrs.
This quality of being non-accidental is known simply from its being ascer-
tained that some perceptible objects do not pervade (or are not invariably
concomitant with) that which is to be proved (or that which is denoted by
the major term), and from the certainty that others pervade the instrument
of inference or inferential mark. Of supersensible objects established by
proof, some are pervasive of both (that which is to be proved, and the
instrument of inference), or non-pervasive of both, or pervasive only of the
instrument of inference, or non-pervasive only of that which is to be proved.
Amongst these, the quality of being non-accidental is to be ascertained, in
the first case, from their being pervasive of the instrument of inference ;
in the second case, from their being non-pervasive of that which is to be
proved ; and in the fourth case also, from their being pervasive of the
instrument of inference. In the third case also, there being room for the
further inquiry that while it is not pos-sible or proved why that which
pervades, should pervade only this much (i.e., the instrument of inference)
and not more, how it is at the same time possible for that which does not
pervade, to pervade even so much {i.e., the instrument of inference), and
thus acquisition and preservation (or loss and gain) being counter-balanced,
and from other considerations, the quality of being non-accidental should
be adhered to. The attitude of mind that the demon of apprehension that
some upadhi, accident, adjunct, or external condition, may exist in these
cases, attacks all rules of conduct, prescriptive and prohibitive, should be
i rejeh^^d^ina^i^aadh,, as . possibility of certainty of non-accidental


KAN Ad A SOTBAS IX, 2-2.


nature. Tlie definitions of iipadhi and vyapti (pervasion) have been already
stated.

This inference is of two kinds, self-satisfying or logical, and other-
satisf 3 'ing or rhetorical. Therein inference for the sake of, or originating
from, oneself, arises from tlie investigation by a person himself of vyapti,
pervasion or nniversal concomitance of the major and middle terms, and
pak^adbarinatd, the being a propeily or characteristic of the minor term or
the existence- of the middle in the minor term ; and inference for the sake
of, or originating from, another, results fiom the knowledge of vyapti and
paksadharmata produced from an argument enunciated by another.

A nyaya argument or syllogism is a proposition productive of verbal
cognition which leads to the recognition or sub-sumption of the mark of
illation in the third member of the syllogism. The members thereof are
five; and membership here denotes the being, a proposition productive of
verbal cognition, wliicli again is productive of another verbal cognition lead-
ing to the recognition or sub-sumption of the inferential mark in the third
member. Such propositions are: pratijnd, enunciation; hetu, mark or
reason; uddharava, illustration ; application, ratiocination, or

deduction ; and nigamava, conclusion Of these the pratijnd, enunciation,
is a proposition wdiich is a member of the argument or syllogism, conveying
verbal cognition the object whereof is neither less nor greater than that
of the inferential cognition desired ; the Tzetw, mark or reason, is that
member of the syllogism, ending with the ablative inflection, which is
applied to the instrument of inference or the middle term under consi-
deration ; the liddkararia, illustration, is that member of the syllogism
which is declaratoiy or demonstrative of the inseparable existence of the
given major and middle terms; the iipanayo, application or deduction,
is that member of the syllogism which establishes that the hetu which
is so distinguished by the possession of inseparable existence, is a distin-
guishing characteristic or content of the paksa, the subject of the conclu-
sion, i.e,, the minor term ; and the nigamana, conclusion, is that member
of the syllogism which declares that the object denoted by the given
major term is a distinguishing characteristic or content of the pah^a.
Thus the syllogism proceeds as follows: —

Sound is non-eternal,


pratijndj
Because it is an effect, — hetu,

Whatever is an effect or producible is non-eternal, — uddharam,
It (sound) possesses effectness or; producibility pervaded by non-

Therefore, (it is) non-eternal,


I


310


VAI^ESIKA PHILOSOPHY.


I M;


lll:j


ill.


The significant appellations given by tlie Vaisedkas to these very
members are pratijna (enunciation of that which is to be proved), apadem
(reason), nidarsana (instance), aimsandhdna (investigation), and pratydm-
naya (conclusion). In this connection, the mode of the application of vdda,
theory or discourse, disputation or demolition of the argument of the

opponent and establishment of one’s own theory, and vitmuld, controversion
or only destructive criticism, and the characteristics of ehhala^ mis-
construction, jati, futile or adverse replj% and nigraha-sthdna, ground of
defeat, i.e., misapplication or non-application of the argument advanced,
may be sought in tlxe Vadi-vinoda,—2,

Inferential Cognition indudes Verbal Cognition.

n 5. i r i ^ «


Etena, hereby, sdfs? ^abdam verbal, siireiirclff VyakhyataTi ex-


plained.

3. Hereby verbal (cogaition is) explained. — 344.

UiKislfdra.— With the purpose of including other forms of proof into the inferential, he
commences another topic.

This cognition is ‘ Sabdam’ (verbal), produced by the instrumentality
of sound or word— this doctrine, maintained by the Nyaya school, is
also, ‘ vyakby&tmi,’ explained, ‘ etena ’ (b3' this), by the characteristic of
being inferential, that is to say, simply as being produced from marks
(of inference.) As inferential cognition depends upon pervasion,

■pakmdharmata, the existence of the middle in the minor term, and re-
collection, so does verbal cognition also. Thus, e.g., “These objects
denoted by words, or meanings of words, are mutually connected, since
they are represented* in memory by words possessing expectancy for, or de-
pendence upon, one another, etc., as are the meanings of words in ‘ Drive
away the cow,’ Here it is by observing or apprehending the character-
istic of being represented in, or called to, memory by a number of words
possessing expectancy for, or dependence upon, one another, which
characteristic is pervaded by the possession of mutual connection by
these meanings of, or objects denoted by, those words, that one infers
the possession of connection. What then is the use of the supposition
of sound or word or language as a form of proof ? .

Objeation . — There can be no inference in cognition produced by
words, inasmuch as such inference fails wdiere the words are spoken
by an untrustworthy person, e.g., that there are five fruits on the river
bask ■■ ^ : /■ ' > - / , , . ^ ^ ,



KANADA 81)TBAS IX, 2-3.


Answer . — The objection does not arise, as the words must have
the qualification of._ coming from the mouth of an apta or trustworthy
person. For trustworthiness denotes the possession of knowledge of the
meaning of tlie statement corresponding to objective reality within the
reach of the meaning of the given statement, and not merely that a
person is not a deceiver.

Objection . — But this is hard to apprehend, prior to the intuition
of the meaning of the statement.

Answer . — Not so, for even those who hold the theory of the autho-
ritativeness of word or language, admit the apprehensibility of the quality
of being spoken by a trustworthy person, which serves to differentiate
fallible or false language.

Objection — They depend upon that (i.e., the quality of being
spoken by a trustworthy person) for the apprehension of authoritative-
ness, whereas verbal cognition is produced even without the apprehen-
sion of that quality. But in yoxir case the apprehension must be in
accordance with the nature of the inferential mark; and that which is
pervaded {i.e., the middle term), is qualified with the possession of the
quality of being spoken by a trustworthy person.

A/isioer.— The objection is not successful, since it is possible to
have such general apprehension as “ It is here infallible.”

Objection. — But the term ‘ here ’ ultimately means the same thing
as the term ‘ the connection under consideration.’ So that to apprehend
that [i.e., the quality of being spoken by a trustworthy person), previ-
ously, is simply impossible.

Answer . — It is not, in consequence of the possibility of ascertainment
of the inferential mark by means of the possibility of ascertainment
in a general way of the quality of being spoken by a trustworthy person,
from the force of association with the topic and other circumstances. If
even then discrepancy sometimes appears between them, the inferential
process proceeds as by the property of smoke (mistaken) in vapour, etc.

Objection . — What is in this case th.esddhya or the major terra ? Is it
that the meanings of words are in fact connected, or that their connec-
tion is something possible ? It cannot be the first, as it is not the case
wdth the statement of an untrustworthy person. Nor can it be the second,
for, even though mere connectibility or coherence of words be . proved,
still inference cannot proceed unshaken, in cojisiequehce of the uncertainty
of actual connection. ' Moreover, coherence being previously known as the
qualification of the inferential mark, whatis the of inference?


YATSB&IKA PHILOSOPHY.


Answer . — This is not a valid objection, inasmuch as it is the gene-
ral proposition or nniformity which is the sMhya or the thing to be
proved, and, as has been already stated, there can be no exception to it in
consequence of the qualification by the characteristic of being spoken
by a trustworthy person. .

Ohjeation . — Expectancy or interdependence of the words of a sen-,
tence is equivalent to antecedent non-existence in the hearer of the cogni-
tion of connection (of the meanings of words) producible by it. It is only
so long as it exists as such that it can be the inferential mark. The
futility of inference (in verbal cognition), therefore, follows from this
that in oj-der to the cognition of expectancy, the cognition of connection
must take place beforehand, and not at any other time.

Answer . — This is pot the case, for we do not say that expectancy
is merely antecedent non-existence of the cognition of connection. . On the
other hand, expectancy is distinguished with the possession of inseparable
existence or universal agreement of what is presented to consciousness by
the words heai’d and what is represented in memory, as it is from the cog-
nition of this adjective element that the cognition of expectancy results.

Objection . — Let then inseparable existence itself constitute ex-,
peetancy.

Answei’. — By. no means. For, “ The water of the river is pure, ”
“ The buffalo grazes in the basin of the river” — in these cases also it
would entail the consciousness of the agreement or co-existence of the
river and the basin by means of their inseparable existence. And in such
instances as “ The water-lily is blue, ” even in tlie absence of inseparable
existence of the watemlily and blueness, it would make the inseparable
existence of the substance and attribute presented to consciousness by the
words, possible.

Or, it may be that expectancy is nothing but the desire to know
or enquiry witli reference to the object recalled by words, or that it is
the complement of the connotation. Still the cognition of it is necessary,
inasmuch as in a cause xvhich is being known, there must appear diver-
gence in characteristic from what is not a cause, appropriate to such
cognition, as is the case with pervasion or universal concomitance. It is
for. .the very same reason, whether connectibility or coherence of the words
of a sentence mean the absence of certainty of non-agreement, or tlie non-
existence of contradictory evidence, or the observation of agreement with
similar other words, or that in the connection of the meaning df the one
yford. (s.^-j'fi^ of another {e.g., wets i, there exists, as sdnse'tMng



tiAMDA SIjTBAS IX, ''B.


contained therein, certain knowledge that 'the one {e.g., fire) is not
the counter-opposite of absolute non-existence inherent in tlie other {ejj.,
wets), that cognition of coherence is necessary. Cognition of adjacency of
the words of a sentence, in the form of recollection without interval, is
also a condition. It may be that differences or peculiarities of connection
of words result only from the peculiarities or differences of the words
which are going to be connected ; and the proof of the peculiarity or
difi’erence in this way, is not undesired. Or, the desired peculiarity may
be proved by the characteristic of its so determining cognition, inasmuch
as the inference takes place that these words, being a collection of words
possessing expectancy, co-herence, and adjacency, are preceded by, or have
for their antecedent, cognition of the connection of the ideas or meanings
represented in memory,' as is the case with the group of the words Drive
away the cow. ” The opposition that the sddhya or - thing to be proved
is that these words have connection with the meanings recalled, and that
that possession by words of connection with the meanings of those words,
18 impeded, is better left unnoticed. Nor is it the being expressive of, or
the means of making known, connection, by being the inferential mark,
that is the possession of connection by the words, since the mark not
being proved to exist prior to the inference, there can be no apprehension
or cognition of the pervasion thereof.

Some say that expressive movement or gesture is a new^ form of proof.
To this it is replied : Gesture is of two kinds, conventional and non-con-
ventional. Therein that wliicli is conventional, calls back to mind the
sound or word lying iiTthe understanding or intent or common consent,
but does not also produce certain cognition of connection (between
gesture and its significance), as letters do. It is sound or woixl, rising up
in memory, that is the means of proof here, and it has been already
declared that the characteristic of being a mark of illation belongs to
sound or word. Nor is recollection of the word a collateral or secondary
function of gesture, inasmuch as, in order to exercise such function, gesture
would liave to be aniforinly present in all cases, whereas there takes
place intuition of meanings from words even without the intervention of


VAJSESIEA tuiLonomr.


gesture, when it is iinpcssible for him to grasp the sense or connection
of, the meaning or idea also. His conduct, again, springs from the appre-
hension of inseparable existence (or serviceable associated habit", in the
same way as particular adaptations of conduct are possible in the case of
the elephant and the horse in accordance with the pricks of tliorns and
strokes of sticks.

On. the other hand, iion-conventional gesture, — that kind of it which,
further, is in agreement or association with action, — causes activity in the
employee by reminding him of the intention of the employer, but does not
produce sure cognition in any case. For example, as according to the
instruction You should come on the blowing of the conch-shell, the
man turns up on hearing the blowing of the conch-shel], so a man strikes
another at the proper time according to the pre-ordination '‘You should
strike him when I shall raise my fo3*efinger, ” hut this does not prove
anything. - Non-con ventioiial gesture, again, which is in agreement with
cognition, is either prominent on its subjective side, as in “ By the rais-
ing of the ten fingers, it should be understood by you that tlie number of
coins, (or contortions of the limbs in ascetic posture), or of the Purd^as is
ten ; ” or it is prominent on its verb or predicate side, as in “You should
come up, after seeing contraction of the hand.’’ Thus, by this form of
gesture tlie meanings of words are no doubt recalled, but only severally
or each independently of the rest ; but their mutual association or con-
currence also is not illuminated by it, as it is by nominatve, objective, and
other case-endings which explain that inter-relation, inasmuch as’’[in the
case under consideration, invariable or constant components of gesture
do not exist.

Objectio‘n, — How do then activity and inactivity proceed from gesture
in the absence of cognition of connection ?

Avsuwk — You may take it that these follow from either the one or
the other of doubt or uncertainty and fvatihhd or inventive genius.

Gesture also is, therefore, no proof. — 3.

Sound or word cannot 'produce cognition of its sense or meaning,

SOTW U S. M I 8 II


If; Hetul;i, reason. Apadesa^i, description, Sound. ^ Lingani,

mark, Pranianam, proof. Karanam, instrument, iti, these.

An-artha-antarara, not different things,

,4. Reason, Description, Mark, Proof, Instrament—
these are not antonyms.— 345.


if



KANADA Sl^TBAS IX, 1-4,


UpasMrcL---'lt may be asked, liow sound (or word) could be a mark of illation, when
its ditereiice from the mark appears from its possessing the nature of an cLpadesa or a
description. Anticipating this, he says :

‘ Apadeislah' iiieaDS sound (or word), according to its derivation that
by it objects are referred to, affirmed or described. And it is really a
synonym of hetu^ reason, and lipga, mark. ‘ Pramdnain ’ means the instru™
ment of true cognition in the manner of the inferential mark. In like
manner, the word ‘ karanam ’ also is equivalent to the mark itself which
is the instrument {harava) of inferential cognition. For the operation of
Imrana or the instrument is two-fold : Some harava operates or exercises
its function under or subject to contact or contiguity, and some Parana
exercises its function on the strength of inseparable existence. Sound
(or word), on the contrary, has neither contact nor inseperable existence
with the object or meaning ; hence, how can it lead to the object ?

Objection , — It leads to the object with the help of arbitrament or
according to direction.

Armoer , — It cannot do so, for arbitrament or direction is with
reference to the meanings of words, and not to their connection.

Objection,— There may be arbitrament or direction with reference
to that also.

Ansiver. — No, for that connection being of a manifold nature, it is im-
possible that it could be the object of reference by arbitrament or direction.

Objection , — But it is from the force of arbitrament or direction in
the case of words and meanings that the meaning of a sentence also
becomes manifest.

Answer , — This is not the case, as there would be then over-extension
or undue application of the principle, if something is brought forward or
called up by arbitrament or direction with regard to something else.

Objection , — Invariable antecedence or pervasion of connection in this
case will be that of connection as recalled by sound.

A nswer . — If it be so, then, by that admission, inference itself finds
admittance on the strength of invariable antecedence or pervasion.
Arbitrament or direction also, if it implied mere intention or desire, would
be unduly applied or too wide.

But the desire of IsSvara, God, cannot be said to be too

Answer. — Yes, it may be so, inasmuch as even in the absence of
divine will, the wmrds, river or Qafig4 (Ganges), etc,, suggest or call up the
ideas of the bank, etc. ;

This is enough of over-forwardness in a 'logician.'^4.



V:AlSEf^IKA PHILOSOPHY,


Comparison, Presumption, Suh-sumption, Privation, and Tradition
are all meluded in Inference.


Asya, its. f? Idara, it. Iti, such. I'liis. Buddbi-

apeksitatvat, because of tbe cognition or notion being needed.

5. (Comparison, Presumption, Sub-sumption, Priva-
tion, and Tradition are all included in Inference by marks),
because tbey depend, for tbeir origin, upon tbe cognition,
namely, “ It is its.” — 346.

Upaskctra , — For the purpose of showing that eoinparison, etc., also, recognised by
others (assoniany independent means of proof) and which proceed on the strength of
inseparable existence or universal concomitance, are merely different forms of inferential
cognition, he says :

The words “of comparison, presumption, comprehension or sub-
sumption and privation ” complete tbe aphorism. ‘Asya,’ of the pervader,
‘idam’ (it is) the pervaded, — the cognition is in this form. They are depen-
dent upon it, by which it is depended upon as their orginator. ‘ Buddhi-
apeksitatva’ means -the state of being so dependent. In consequence of
such dependence, — this is the meaning of the term, it being a relative
compound formed similarly to aliita-agnil} (by whom fire has been
deposited), or being formed with the affix ita (which signifies that some-
thing, e.g., dependence upon the cognition, has been produced in the
something else, e.g., comparison, etc.), according to the rule that it is
applied to the words star, etc., (so that tdrakd+ita-=tdTaliita==s,ii\rTY,
heaven).

Vpamana, comparison , or analogy, is in every respect nothing
but anurndna, or inference, by means of words. Now the sentence, “ A
gavmus or gayal looks like a cow,” is spoken by a forester in reply to the
enquiry by a townsman, viz., “ What does a gayal look like to ? ” Here
immediately after hearing the above sentence at a distant place, the towns-
man determines the meaning of the name, gayal, on the strength of the
community of substratum, namely, that which is like a cow^ is the object
of reference by, or designate of, tbe word, gayal. Then when he goes to
the forest and meets an animal body of that description, he recognises
that that is that which is the designate of the word, gayal.

Objection. — At the time of hearing . the sentence at a distant place,
the generic nature of the gayal, which is the condition or occasion of the
iwognition or application of the name, is not known. How then can
there he ^ch determination by, or a;pplication of, the name ?


KAWIDA SUTBAB- mi- 2-^5.


Answer . — There can be such deterinination, as the cognition thereof
of the generic nature) is possible by means of suggestion or meta*r
phorically.

Objection ^vhere is the room for suggestion, when in the
sentence, “ A gayal looks like a cow,” there is no want of proof of the
agreement or opposition of the subject and predicate ?

Answer , — There is room for suggestion, inasmucli as complete equi-
valence of the two terms still remains to be proved. For it is not proper
to hold lip before one, who desires to be enlightened in the matter, like-
ness to a cow as the condition or occasion of partial application of the
name. Therefore, it (the name) refers to a particular genus or class in its
entirety. Hence arises the possibility of suggestion. Or, the word, gayal,
is denotative of the animal, gayal, being applied tlmreto by the elect, and
there existing no other application of it. Other applications being
non-existent, whatever wmrd is applied by the elect to a certain object,
the same is denotative of that, as the word, cow, is of the cow. It is from
this inference that the appiication of the name, gayal, comes to he deter-
mined.

And the reasoning which you may set forth as being auxiliary to
tipmnana, comparison, wmuld better go with amimana, inference, which
has been established as a method of proof. What is the use of upamana
which, as a method of proof, is yet to be supposed ?

More detailed consideration on this subject may be sought in the
Amimana-Mayuhha,

AriMpa/fi, Presumption or Explanation, also is nothing but infer-
ence. Thus, (1) presumption from the observed, arises where by means of
the non-existences of Ghaitra who is living, in the house, ascertained by
stronger evidence, {exj.^ perception), his existence outside it is presumed.
Here the cognition of Cliaitra's existence outside the house is wholly depeiir
dent upon the ascertainment of the relation of the pervaded and the jjervader,
between the demonstoble and the demonstrator. For, as a matter of fact,,
the non-existence of a living person in the house is accompanied with his
existence outside it, or there arises the cognition that the non-existence of a
living person in the house is impossible without his existence outside it.
In the first case, there is apprehension of positive pervasion or concomit->
ance, and, in the last, of negative pervasion. ,

Objection —'Pernmon does exist, but the apprehension thereof does
not here take place.



a

{I 1 i
i|

I I ’ r.


I Lf

?-4 I

I ' I 'll"*®' fl

Jii' I

11 Jt! i r ■ ;

I >!n'- ■


318 VAISWSIKA PBILOSOPEY.

Ansioer.— Were:tbis the case, then, in the ahaence of the apprehen-
sion of pervasion, there would be no scope or occasion for the mainfesta-
tiou of presumption, and there would consequently be supposition of only
that which, as an entity, would demonstrate pervasion existing in its proper
form or as such* This is the direction oi point.

The inclusion of presumption due to the instrumentality of doubt or
uncertainty as’ well as of that due to the instrumentality of contradiction
or contrast or opposition, in inference, should be also understood or infer-
red ■ for, contrast or opposition, characterised as uniformity of non-eo-
existence, also is constituted by pervasion or (negative) concomitance.

(2) Presumption from what is heard, is also inference by means of the
infewed. “ Deva-datta, who is stout, does not eat by day” — By this pro-
position, stoutness is infeired, and, by means of that stoutness, there
takes place inference of eating at night in this way that Deva-datta
eats at night, because, as he does not eat by day, stoutness cannot

otherwise appear in him. . , . , j. j.

' Samhhaoa, ComprehensioTi or Sub-sumption, also is merely a form of

inference. For, the examples of it are : A drom (a standard measure)
does not exceed a hh&ri (one' ?cMn=4 dro^ms) ; an a(!ha'ka does not
exceed a drom *one drona=4: ddhakas)-, a hundred does not exceed
a thousand ; etc. Here a hhari contains a drova, being constituted by
it. One thing being constituted by another thing, the former is

possessed of the latter by means of the latter, as a water-pot is pos-
sessed of its components. Other instances shoidd be similarly under-
stood. That learning is probable in a Brdhmam (because Brdhmanas as a
class are learned), that valour is probable in a Kqatriya (because K?at')’iyas
as a class are valiant), etc., on the other hand, do not at all become means
of proof, inasmuch as they do not produce certainty.

Ahhdva, Non-existence or Privation, also is not a different form of evi-
dence ; for, being similar to the inference of the cause by means of the
effect, the inference of the non-existence of the cause by means of the non-
existence of the effect, is included within inference itself, as pervasion or
universal concomitance is the ground of such inference by means of non-
existence.

The Bhattas {PrabMkara and other Mimamsakas', however, maintain
that the evidence which causes the apprehension of non-existence in the
ground, etc., (e.j,, The water-pot does not exist on the ground), is called
non-perception. Now, this evidence or proof is in some cases included in
it) perteeptipp,; .and,^ & eases, inference, inasmuch as non-existence is

.,1 ' - ’’ "W '■* ' ' 1/^1 XT Tit'rMp* x-f Til rtf’ 1*110' CiCill fl 'f.TtCif.


senses are exhausted just in the apprehension of the substratum (of non-
existence, e.g,^ the groaiid), since their ^function continues up to the
appi:ehensioii of nomexistence.

Aitihya^ Tradition, is a succession of sayings of ^yhiGh the authors are
not known. Itiha — this collection of expletives appears in the narration
of past events. The state of being such narration of past events is called
aitihya^ traditional saying. If it is not impeded in its meaning, then,
coming under the class of verba! cognition, it is a mode of inference. For
example, In this Banyan tree there dwells a Fnfcm, Tliere is a Oaim (a
Buddhistic Spirit) in the madhiika tree, etc. Now, if the traditional sayings
come from the mouth of trustworthy persons, then they are as has been
already declared ; if they do not come frona the mouth of trustworthy :
persons, then they are no evidence at all.

Accordingly it is established that proof or evidence is of two kinds
only, perception and inference. — 5.

Yivriti—Sambhcwa or Probability is cognition dependent upon a
plurality of concomitances ; ar/., learning is probable in Brahmarta ; ^
hundred is probably contained in a thousand.

Is ole. — Tlie construction pu^t by Jayavdrcoyav upon the wmrd.
Samhhava is explicitly rejected by Saf,kora lf%sva. In the lexicon Medhn
also we find that the meaning of the word is Adheyosyg ddhdrdiiatinh-
tatvdm, i.e., the state of wdiat is contained not exceeding that which
contains it, or, simply, the relation of the part not being greater than the
whole.

Reminiscenee, hotv 'produced.

lU U I I, U

Alina- nianasoii, between the soul and the mind.
Saniydga-visesat, froni a particular conjunction. Samskarat, from

impression or retention or latency. ^ Cha, and. Smritih, Reminiscence.

6. Reminiscence (results) from, a particular conjunc-
tion between the Soul and the Mind and also from Impression
or latency.— 347.

OpaHfctti'a.— Inferential cognition having been explained, he no%v begins another
topic. . .

“Results” — This is the complement of the aphorism. ‘Saniyoga-
vWesah’ means contactor contiguity such as reflection or meditation or
inter- penetration, etc. From this as the non-combinative cause, in the
soul as the comhinative cause, ‘ Smritih” (remiiiiseence), a particular hinil


VAIBEBIKA PHILOSOPHY.


of cognition or knowledge, is produced. He states the efficient cause by
‘ Samstarat.’ By the word ‘eha ’ he implies past experience which too is
operative here as the object recalled. Reminiscence or recollection imi-
tates the correctness or incorrrectness of the previous experience, such
alone being the recollection of him who has mistaken a rope for a snake
and has consequently fled from it. It does not, moreover, follow that remi-
niscence should take place at all times or continually, since it depends on
the resuscitation of the mental impression. Accordingly it hasbeen said by
the revered Prasastadem, “ Reminiscence, caused by the inferential process
fas in inferring Are from smoke there is recollection of the universal con-
comitance of fire and smoke), desire, re-production (or suggestion of one
idea by another), and aversion, and having for its content the past, among
objects seen, heard, and otherwise experienced, (results) from a particular
conjunction between the soul and the mind, due to the observation of a
suggestive mark, voluntary attempt at recollection, etc., and from impres-
sion or latency produced by intuitions constantly repeated and attended
to with interest.”

The cognition of highly advanced sages, or their intellectual intuition
has not been separately noticed by the author of the aphorisms- It is
included within perception by Fogfus or ascetics. In the treatise, called
the Padai'tha-Pvadesa, an account of it has been given, which is as follows :
“ Prescient or inventive cognition which is produced from conjunction
between the soul and the mind, and also from a particular dharma, virtue
or merit, independently of inferential marks, etc., in advanced sages, the
promulgators of the Vedas, in respect oi objects, supersensible, or past, pre-
sent, and future, or in respect of dharma, etc., as preserved in books, — that
is called sagely cognition ” Tills form of cognition at times arises
in ordinary or wordly people also ; as when a young maiden says, “ My heart
assures me my brother will depart to-morrow.” — 6.

Dream, how produced.

^ : II I ^ I vs U

ggf, Tatha, so. ?^rr: Svapnah, dreaming.

7. So (also is) dreaming.-— 348.

Ujpnsfcdm,— Thus four-fold vidyd, or true cognition, or knowledge, having been
explained, it now becomes proper to explain avidyd or false cognition or knowledge,
Therein doubter uncertainty and error have been ineidentaliy ascertained before* For
the purpose of ascertaining dreaming, he says ;

The meauing k that as reminiscence results from a particular con-
junotion between the soul and the mind, and from impression or latency, so


KANIDA SUTRAS IX, 2-8.


also does cognition in dreaming. Cognition in dreaming is tbe mental
experience, throngli the eliannels of the senses, belonging to one, when
one’s senses have ceased to be active and one’s mind is in a quiescent
state. And this is of three kinds. It partly arises from acuteness of
impression or facility of reproductiveness ; as in a man who, in love or in
anger, thinks intently on some object, when he goes to sleep, in that state,
cognition resembling perception, in the form, “This is the contest be-
tween Kama and A r/una” (two heroes of the Mahabhamta), is produced,
through the influence of impression, reproductiveness or latency, produced
by previous hearing of the Ptu'w^as, etc. It arises partly from derange-
ment of tlie humours or affections of the body, viz., wind, bile, and phlegm.
Therein, in consequence of disorder of the wind, one dreams of moving
about in the sky, wandering about on the earth, fleeing with fear from
tigers, etc., and the like ; under the influence of an unwholesome excess
of the bile, one dreams of entering into fire, embracing flames of fire,
golden mountains, corruseations of flashing lightning, sudden extensive
conflagrations, etc.; while, through predominance of phlegmatic derange-
ment, one dreams of swimming upon the sea, immersions in rivers, sprink-
lings with showers of rain, silver mountains, etc. Dreams appear also
under the influence of adri^tam (the invisible after-effects of past acts)
or deserts. These are cognitions, produced in one whose internal sense
has been lulled to sleep or overpowered with sleep, in respect of the
experiences of the present or previous states of existence. Therein somnial
cognition, signifying good, results from dharma or merit, and has for its
object the riding upon elephants, ascending on mountains, acquisition of
the royal umbrella, feasting upon pudding, interviews with the sovereign,
and the like ; whereas somnial cognition, signifying evil, arises from
adharma or demerit, and has as its object unction with oil, falling into
blind wells, riding upon camels, immersion in mire, the seeing of one’s
own nuptials, and the like.

The above three, only a^3 jointly operating, have causality here {i.e.,
in the production of dreams). It should be fiirther observed that this
division of causes, is based oil the predominance of one or another of the
qualities of these causes in their effects. — 7.

Cognition aGcompanying dreaming, hoic produced.

H 5- r Si I q «

Svapna-antikatn, that which intervenes in, or lies near to, or
accompanies, dream. . , . _ \

8. (So is) consciousness accompanying dreams.— 349^ -


B22


VM8ESIEA PHILOSOPHY.


VpasMra.—lt may he objected : —The cognition which springs np in the midst of a
dream, in the form of recollection of the very same object which is experienced in somnial
cognition, does not possess the nature of dreaming, inasmuch as dreaming takes the
form of perceptual experience. Prom what cause, then, does it arise ?

To this he gives the reply :

The ■word ‘so ’ comes in from the preceding aphorism. The meaning,
therefore, is that as dreaming, so also consciousness accompanying dream-
ing arises from a particular conjunction between the soul and the
mind and also from impression or retention. The difference between the
two cases extends only thus far that somnial cognition results from impres-
sion or retention produced by former experience, while consciousness
accompanying dreaming results from impression or retention produced
by experience arising at the very time fof dreaming.) It has been accord-
ingly stated by Professor Prakastadeva, “Somnial cognition is merely
recollection, inasmuch as it results from looking back upon past cognitions.”
The writer of the ariyi also says, “ Somnial cognition, its function being
the illumination of experienced objects, is not a different thing from
recollection.”

Some teach that ‘ consciousness accompanying dreaming ’ is cognition
amounting to certitude, in the midst of dreams, as, for example, “ I ain in
a state of lying on the bed,” etc. — 8.

Another came of dreaming and of cognition in dreaming.

n 5. I R I 5. u

Dbarmit, from dharma or merit. ^ Cha,'^aIso.

9. (Dreaming and consciousness accompanying dream-
. ing result) from dharma also. — 350.

UpasMm.—He adds another cause of dreaming and eonsoioiisness aeeomiianying
dreaming.

The word ‘ cha ’ is used with the purpose of adding adharyna, demerit.
This has been already explained.— 9.

Vivriti.—^^ * ® Some think that this aphorism has been laid

down for the purpose of showing that in some cases dreaming, etc., are also
produced from dharma, etc., alone, even withoiit the action of Samshdra or
impression, and that the poetic observation of Briharsa that the maid Sleep
brings before the vision of man, through the all-pervading efficacy of
admtoi]!, even objects ■which have not been observed before, accordingly
' ex;^lained»'.’^:“ ‘T '■ ' ■ ,


KA-^^ADA SUTRAS IX, 2rll


Causes of Avidya or Incertitude.


5{f Tat, that Avidya. false knowledge. Dusta-jnanam imperfect

cognition.

11. That (he., Avidya) is imperfect knowledge, — 352.

UpasMra . — He states tlie characteristic or definition of umdyd in general ;

‘ Tat,’ an indeclinable word, conveying the sense of a pronoun,
alludes to aOTdt/4 That, awd?/®, is ‘dustajn4nam’, i.e., cognition which, is
unduly applied, cognition that a thing is what in fact it is not, in other
words, cognition determined in the manner of a divergent object, and
having the mode which does not reside in the object in question. Imperfec-
tion consists also of cognition taking the form of uncertainty. Doubt,
therefoi'e, even where' there is only one altemativp, is vicious, being identi-
cal with non-assurance or non-ascertainmeht.’ ■ - ■


I:, i J


VAl^Bf^rKA PBILOSOPHT.


The four (forms of atidya), therefore, namely, Doubt, Error, Dream,
and Regression or Indecision are included in this aphorism, ll-

The eharaeteristie of Vidy^.


n s. I R I H


Adustam, not imperfect. Free from imperfection. Rsil Vidya, true
knowledge. Vidyd.

12. (Cognition), free from imperfection, is (called)
Vidyd or scientific knowledge. — 353.

UpasMm,— iUe declares what scientific cognition is :)

The word “Cognition” comes in (from the preceding aphorism).
‘ Adustam ’ means produced by organs of sense which are not inefficient or
defective (in consequence of any derangement mentioned above). The
meaning, therefore, is that vidya is the experience of a thing in its proper
place, or the experience of a thing in the same manner in which another
thing having a common substratum with the former is experienced, or
experience of a thing not having the mode which does not reside in the
thing in question. It is of two kinds, immediate or sensuous, and mediate
or inferential. — 12.

Cognition hy Sages and Siddhas, how produced.

II 5. I R M ^ u

^ Arsam, sagely. Of advanced sages. Siddha-dar^anam,

vision of the Perfected Ones. Cha, and. : Dharmmebhyah, from

dharma or merits.

13. Cognition of advanced sages, as also vision of
tke Perfected Ones, (results) from dharma or merits, — 354,

OpasMm.— It may be objected ; The cognition (of objects beyond the reach of senses),
by advanced sages, also appears in the very same form in which other cognitions, having
a common substratum with the former, take place. It is again not produced by the senses,
inasmuch as it cognizes objects which are not in contact with them. Nor is it produced
by means of inferential marks, as it is produced in the absence of any investigation of such
marks* Hence it follows that there is a fchird form of , proof (besides perception and infe-
renee) which is the instrument of such cognition.

In view of this objection, he says :

‘ Irbaru ’ or sagely cognition is the cognition of sages such as Galava,
etc., having for its object things past and yet to come. ‘ Siddha-darsfemani ’
means the vision by those who have attained success in the direction of
cognition apprehensive of objects remote as well as screened from view, by


KANADA 8t)TBAS IX, 2-13.


memx^ ol mantra OX incantation, herbs, eye-salve prepared from cocoon, etc.
Both of them arise from dJiarma or merit, such that there is cognition of
objects in their true light. The author of the Vritti observes that this
cognition is not a different kind of vidya or scientific knowledge, as it is
included in Yogic or ascetic percei^tion. Sagely cognition is really the
fourth kind of vidya, and it oceiirs to sages as well as to worldly people.
And it is simply a form of mental perception, being produced by the mind
accompanied with inattention (to internal and external objects), or pro-
duced by inferential marks such as faithful observances of the rules of
conduct. The cognition of loervasion which is the ground of inference
is here solely dependent upon or due to Samsltdra, or impression having its
origin in a former state of existence instinct), in the same way as is the
pervasion or universal concomitance of sucking the breast and the cognition
that this is the means of securing what is desired, (in the case of the ins-
tinctive application of the baby to sucking the breast).

The revered Professor Prasastadeva, however, says that ^ Siddha-
clarilanam,’ cognition of the Perfected Ones, is not a different form of cogni-
tion. His reasoning is as follow’^s : If it is said that cognition, by the
Perfected Ones, of objects remote and hidden from view, takes its rise from
conditions brought about by means of eye-salve prepared from cocoon,
and the like, then it is nothing hut perception. If it be, on the other hand,
cognition wdiich apprehends objects belonging to tlie earth, the region
lying between the earth and the vault of heaven, and the space beyond it,
and which is dependent upon the conditions or inferential marks such as
the movements, etc., of planets and the lunar mansions [nahsati^as], then it
is nothing but inferential cognition, inasmuch as pervasion, or universal
concomitance of til e tiling to be inferred and the mark of inference, is deter-
mined by the observation of such accompaniment. — 13.

Here ends the second chapter of the ninth book in the Commentary of
Safikara upon the Vuislesika Aphorisms.


VAI^BSIKA. PElLOBOPBf.


Book Tenth— Ohaptbe Fiest.


Pleasute and pain are two diff event things.



fir?! 1^!^-


H I t I ? i>

rence of cause., (in the forms of) desirables and undesirables, Virodliat,

oa account of oppoaitioa. ^ Cba. and. Ra,; Mithah, between the™, tow»^
each other, mutual. Snkha-dubkh.yot,, between pleasure and patn.

^p:ns5R*TR: Artha-antara-bhavaib, relation ot different objects.

1. Ill eonseij^Tieiice of tlie difference of (their) causes,
hi the form of desirables and undesirables, and on account
of (their) mutual opposition, Pleasure and Pain stand in the
relation of objects different from each other.— 355.


OpasMra.-The purpose of the tenth hook is the exposition of the differences of tte
attrihuL of the soul according to their causes. Now, i" sit

enumerates or classifies the provahles or objects ot certitude,^!.., Soul, Body, Sense,

Object, Understanding, Mind, Activity, Fanlt, Metempsychosis, ®

nation are the provables" i^aya-t fitmm, I. i. 9.), there being no mention of pleasure, the

^ ^ that Tilf^asiire is reallT not different from pain. With the purpose of

"„e l”. error, the .uthir .ret ot .11 point, o.l the dllwto... «, pl«w«..

and pain themselves.

‘ Sutlia-dnhkhajmh,’ (between pleasure aud pain, there exists)
‘mithah,’ nuitnai, ‘ artha-antara-bliarab,’ distinction. Whence jdoes this
distinction arise)? To it lie replies, ‘ ista-anii-ta-Mrana-vislesat,’ ne., m
■consequence of ‘ vWesah,’ distinction or difference, of their causes which

have in the one case, the form of ‘istam,’ desirable objects snch as garlands,

sandLl-paste, women, etc., and, in the other case, the fornr of ‘ ani^.am
undesirable objects such as snakes, thorns, etc. hor heterogeneity of
effect necessarily depends upon heterogeneity of cause. He^ lays down
another principle of distinction, viz., ‘ virodhat,’ on account of opposition
characterised by non-dwelling together. For pleasnre and pam are not
experienced in one and the same soul at one and the same time, ihe

word ‘cha,’ and, biings forward the difference of the effects of pleasnre

and pain as a further means of distinguishing between them. Thus
graciousness, the embrace, clearness of the eyes, etc., are the effects of

pleasure, while despondency, a sullied countenance, etc., are the effects

of pain. V hence on this ground also pleasure and pain must differ from



SUTRAS X, 1-2.


each other. Accordingly it has been stated by Professor Prasasta-deva,

“ Pleasure has the characteristic of agreeable feeling. In the presence of
garlands and other desirable objects, from the contact of the senses and
objects in the recognition of something desirable produced, and from con-
junction of the soul and the mind dependent upon dharma or merit and
the like, that which is produced and is the cause of complacence, embraces,
and kindliness of the eyes, etc., is pleasure.” Now, in the case of gar-
lands, sandal-paste, etc., enjoyed in the past, pleasure arises from smriti,
reminiscence, and in, the case of future objects, it arises from Safikalpa,
desire or appetency or imagination.

The non-enumeration of pleasure in the aphorism of Qautama is to
promote indifference or dispassion, in other words, to teach that dispassion
would arise in one who should account even pleasure as pain. {Of. Nydya-
SAlram, IV. i. 58, The idea of pleasure takes

place in an alternative form of pain). — 1.

Pleasure and Pain are not forms of cognition.

f li: U 1 o I

Sam^aya-niinaya-antara-abhava, non-inclusion in
doubt and cenainty. 'Sf Cha, and. Jnana-antaratve, in the matter

of being different from cognition. Hetulj, reason, mark,

2. And the non-inclusion (of Pleasure and Pain)
in Doubt or Certainty is the mark that they are other than
cognition. — 356.

Ppas7mm.— It may be urged : Let pleasure and pain be mutually distinct. But they
may be non-diflerent from cognition, like recollection and perception or sensation.

Accordingly he says :

The meaning is that non-inclusion in doubt or certainty is the
mark of inference that pleasure and pain are other than, ie., different
from, cognition. The idea is this : Were pleasure or pain a kind of cog-
nition, it would either have the form of doubt, or have the form of
certainty. It cannot be the first, as the two alternatives (which must
be present in doubt) do not exist; nor can it be the second, as the single
alternative does not exist. And the species or parts being thus excluded,
the genus or whole is necessarily excluded. For the species of cognition
are two only, the characteristic- of doubt and the characteristic of certainty.
And both of them are excluded from pleasure as well as from pain j
hence the characteristic of cognition also finds no place in them.


iSiilll


VAISESIKA PHILOSOPHY.


The word, ‘ cha ’ and, adds on the exclusion o£ external sensation
or perception. The' perception of pleasure and pain is mental i.e. by
the inner sense, in the form, “ I feel pleasui'e,” “I feel pain ; wnereas
perception of them does not take such shape or form as in I know,

“ 1 am doubtful,” “ I am certain.” — 2.

Yi'oriti.— * * Neither pleasure nor pain has the form in which

two repugnant alternatives are present together, that it should be probable
that they have the -nature of doubt, nor has either possession of a given
form together with absence of negation of that form, that it should be
likely that they have the nature of certainty. The supposition of a
third form of cognition is chimerical like the horn of a hare. Conse-
quently neither pleasure nor pain can come under knowledge.

Pleasure and Pain are not forms of cognition continued,

n ^ ® > v i ^ n

Tayoh, their, of doubt and certainty, Nispattih, pro-
duction. Pratyaksa-laihgikabhyam, by means of perception

and inference.

3. The production thereof (i.e., of Douht and Cer-
tainty) is hy means of perception and inference. — 357.

Upaskdra.— He lays down another principle of differentiation.

^ Tayoh/ of doubt and certainty, ‘nispattih,’ production, (is) from
perception and from inferential marks. Neither pleasure nor pain is
produced by the perceptive apparatus or by inferential marks. For,
pleasure is four-fold, being objective, subjective, imaginative or sympathe-
tic, or habitual. Of these, the last three by no means possess the
characteristic of taking their origin from the contact of the (outer) senses
(with their objects). Should it be contended that the first is cognition,
inasmuch as it is generated by contact of the senses and. their objects,
we reply that it is not so, for part only of the whole cause, (being the
same), cannot entail homogeneity in the effect ; else all and sundry effects
would come to be homogeneous as having space and time as their common
antecedents. Moreover (if pleasure were cognition), the pleasure which
is not produced through contact of the senses and their objects, would
be either non-discriminatire or indefinite, or discriminative or definite.
But it cannot be the first, for then it would be supersensible; nor can
it be the second, inasmuch as it does not .consist of a judgment respecting
two objects in the relation of subject and predicate. Again, a pleasure
.an5p^p;|re necessar%' :accom^ sensibility ; '(were they forms,


.... 1


KANADA SIJtBAS X, 1-4.


of cognition), there would be involved in the (consequent notion of a
sensibility of cognition a regression to infinity. ^ Laifigikam ’ (the

adjective) means merely ^litigam ’ (the noun), mark, as the word, objective,
(means an object).

The author of the Vritti, on the other hand, explains the aphorism
thus, that the origin thereof, i.e,, of cognition and pleasure, is explained,
^pratyaksa-laifigikabhyarn,’ i.e,^ by the explanations of perceptual and
inferential cognitions, that is to say, that whereas perceptual cognition
is produced by the senses, and inferential by marks of illation, it is not
so with pleasure, etc. — 3.

Vivritti , — It may be urged that as non-discriminative cognition is
neither doubt . nor certitude, so too may be pleasure and pain. Accord-
ingly he says :

The proof of pleasure and pain is furnished by perception and
inference. In one’s own soul, pleasure and pain are proved by per-
ception ; in other souls, pleasure is inferred by brightness of the eyes,
etc., and pain by paleness of the face, etc. So that, had they the form
of non-discriminative cognition, there could be no perception, nor could
it be possible for them to be the subject of inference by such marks as
brightness or paleness of the face, and the like. Hence, the import is,
they are not included in cognition.

Pleasure and Pain are not forms of cognition. — continued.

u i ? I 9 II

Abhat, (it) was. Iti, such modal distinction, Api, also.

4. “(It) was” — such (modal distinction) also (estab-

lishes the difference between pleasure or pain and cognition),

PpasMm,— He points out the difference of pleasure, etc., from inferential cognition,
depending upon a difference of their modes or forms of appearance.

The word ‘ iti ’ indicates the form. The word ‘ api ’ implies another
form, viz., “(It) will be.” Thus, in inferential cognition, ngf., “There
was or will be fire in the mountain,” the modal distinction of the past,
etc., is observed ; but pleasure or pain, produced under this form, has never
been observed. — 4.

Vivriti . — ® Cognition is conversant about objects past,

future, and present. But of either pleasure or pain, no object whatever
exists, Therefore, by the application of . contradictory proper-ties, viz.,
objectivity and non-objectivity, it follows that pleasure and pain are not


7AI8E8IKA PHILOSOPHY.


Pleasure and Pain are not forms of cognition — continued.

^ ^ U ^ o I ^ I ^ u

?rf?r Sati, existing. "Br Cha, also. Kflryya-adar^anat, because

of the non-observation of the effect.

5. Also (Pleasure and Pain are not forms of cogni-
tion), inasmucli as tlie efiect, (pleasure or pain), is not ob-
served, where (the antecedents of cognition) are present.


VpasMra.—'B.e brings forward a further ground of differentiation :

Pleasure or pain is not merely perception or merely inferential cog-
nition, since the effect, pleasure or pain, is not observed, where contact of
the senses and objects exists, or where there is recognition of the universal
concomitance (which is the ground of inference!, of the mark of inference
being a property of the minor term, etc. The meaning, therefore, is as
follows: 't has been already stated that pleasure and pain are not cognition
in general, (i.e., non-discriminative cognition). Should they be cognition
in particular (or discriminative cognition), they would he either perceptual
cognition or cognition in tlie form of inference. (Pleasure and pain
cannot be the former), inasmuch as there is {sometimes) no experience of
the element of pleasure in the perception of garlands, sandal-paste, etc.,
during the contact of the senses and their objects ; nor can they be the
latter, since there is (sometimes) no experience of the pleasui’able or the
painful, as the case may be, where there exists an inference respecting
sandal-paste, etc., or an inference respecting fire, etc. In like manner,
pleasure and pain being not (always) experienced in particular instances
of perception or in particular instances of inference, they,gre also not
those particulars of perception or inference. — 5.

Above continued : Causes of Pleasure and Pain.

w I ^ \{

Eka-artha-samavayi-karaua-antaresUj there existing
other causes co-inherent in one and the same object. Dristatvat, from

the being observed. Because they are observed.

6. (Pleasure and Pain are not forms of cognition),
because they are observed, when there exist other causes
po-inherent in one and the same object, (i.e., the soul).


KANADA sdTEAS X, 1-7.


'' Of pleasure and pain sucli is the complement (of the aphorism).
In relation to pleasure, uncommon or specific causes co-inhereiit in one
and the same object are dharma or merit, attachment to, or attraction for,
pleasure, desire for the cause of pleasure, volition or striving to secure
the material (cause) of pleasure, and cognition of garlands, sandal-paste,
etc., while in relation to pain, they are adharma or demerit, and cogni-
tion of thorns and other undesirable objects. The meaning is that
(pleasure and pain differ from cognition), inasmuch as they are observed
on the co-inherence of these causes in one and the same object. But cog-
nition which is non-discriminative, does not at all stand in need of an
uncommon cause co-inherent in the same object (with it). Discriminative
cognition, of course, depends upon a cognition of predication or attribution
(or judgment), but this is not another cause, that is, a cause heterogeneous
to the cause of the cognition itself. Conjunction of the mind, as being a
cause common (to pleasure and pain with cognition), does not require
mention. Though reminiscence requires samskdra^ impression or repro-
ductiveness, as its specific or uncommon cause, yet the difference there-
from is quite obvious, as it is for this reason that the difference (of plea-
sure and pain) has been investigated with reference only to cognition or
perceptual experience. Although in inferential cognition there is depend-
ence upon the recollection of pervasion or universal concomitance, the
cognition that the mark is a property of the minor term, etc., yet it is
thrown overboard by the very %vord ‘ antara,’ other, (in the aphoiism).
The probative sense (of the aphorism) is, therefore, that pleasure and pain
are different from cognition, inasmuch as they are the products of uncom-
mon or particular causes of their own kind, co-existing in the same subs-
tratum with them, as is the case with reminiscence, and with the first
sound (in. a series of sounds). — 6.

An objection answered.


Eka-dese, in the. part such. This. Ekasmin, in

one (body), fm: ^irah, the head." ^ Pristham, the back. ^ Udaram, the
stomach. Hmm Marmmani. the vitals, Tat-visesah, their distinctions.

Tat-vigesebhyah, from the distinctions of their causes,

7. The head, the hack, the stomach, the vitals are
in the parts of one and the same (tsodjr) ; this their difference


332 VAI8E8IKA PEIL080PE7.

(results) from tlie differences thereof (i. e., of their causes).

- 361 .

Upaafedra.— It may be objected : If the difference of pleasure and pain from cognition
depend on ihe difference of their causes, and if the difference of pleasure and pain from
each other be Just like the mutual difference between a pillar and a water-pot, etc*, then
there can be no mutual difference between the body and its parts, such as the head, the
feet* the back, the stomach, etc., there being, in regard to these, no difference in their
causes, whether they be the ultimate atoms, binary atomic aggregates, etc,, or blood and
semen.

To meet this objection, he says :

‘ Eka-dei^a iti ’ raeans, in the part. ‘ Ekasmin ’ means in the body.
‘Sii-ah’— this is one part; ‘ ndaram ‘prisjham’; and, ‘ marmm&ni/
i.e., the sinews, etc.; their ‘ vi^esah difference in kind, (results)

‘ tat-vi4e§ebhyah,’ from the difference in kind of their causes. There,
again, (i.e., in the case of the heterogeneity of the causes), heterogeneity
results only from the heterogeneity of the causes (of those causes);
for, the combinative causes of the stomach, the back, etc., also are
not just of tbe same kind as that of the head ; just as the hetero-
geneity of a piece of cloth, a water-pot, etc., results from the hetero-
geneity of threads, potsherds, and other material causes ; heterogeneity
being possible in them also, the heterogeneity of threads, potsherds, etc.,
also, results from the heterogeneity of fibres, dust, etc. Heterogeneity
is, in like manner, to be sought in the successive material causes ; for,
while the ultimate atoms may be common, the heterogeneity of the
respective material causes universally gives rise to heterogeneity (in ,
their respective effects) ; wheras homogeneity of the material causes, con-
stituted by their substanceness, does not cause such heterogeneity. This
is the point. — 7.

Here ends the first chapter of the tenth book in tbe Commentary
of Safikara upon the Vai^esika Aphorisms.

Book Tenth — Chaptbb Second.

Substance is the only combinative cause.


rs- , >„


u to I I ^ n


Karapain, cause, Iti, such, Dravye, in substance,
Karyya-samavayat, from the combination of effect.

1. “ (It is tke combinative) cause ” — sucb (intuition

and usage), with regard to Substance, (arise) from tbe com-
bination of effect (in it)* — 36B,


KANADA SOTEAB X, 2-2.


Upaskdra»~- As a collateral topic, lie now commenees a special discrimination of the
three causes :

^ Karanam that is, that it is the combinative cause ; ‘ iti / snch
intuitioji and usage are to be observed, ‘ dravye with regard to substance.
Why so ? He gives the reply ‘ karyya-samav^at because effects,
substance, attribute, and action, combine in it alone. — 1.


1 '


Vivriti . — The definition of a cause in general is that

causabty consists in constant antececle.nce, there existing at the same time
Yoidness of failure to produce the effect ('that is to saj^, in Mill’s phra-
seology, causality consists in invariable and unconditional antecedence).
There are three kinds of causes, according to their division into the com-
binative or material, non-combi native or formal, and instrumental or
efficient. ^ ^ ^


Substance is efficient cause also.


wmm w \ ^ \ R II


Samyogat, from conjunction, gr Va, or, and.

2. And, through, conjunction, (Substance becomes the
efl&cient or conditional cause also). — 363.

UpasMi’a.— It may be asked : Do then substances possess only combinative causa-
lity?

So he says :

As combinative causality, so also efficient causality, belongs to the
threads, in the production of a piece of cloth. Inasmuch as conjunction
of the shuttle and the threads is also a cause of the cloth, the shuttle and
the thread, are, mediately through that conjunction, also efficient cause of
the cloth. The word ‘va’ is used in a collective sense, inasmuch as,
though the thread possesses combinative causality towards the conjuction
of the shuttle and' the thread, yet it possesses efficient causality towards
the cloth, mediately through such conjunction.- -2.

Vivriti . — He says that combinative causality belongs to substances,
not only because effects combine in them, but also because they are fields
for the operation of non-comhinative causes,

‘Samyogat’ means because they are the support or substratum
wherein takes place conjunction which is the non-combinative cause.* ^

Note . — h will be observed that Vivfi^i -takes vd in a distributive sense.


VAlhsIKA PEILOSOPRY.


Actions are non-eomhinative causes

n i ^ 1 ^

^ Karane, in the cause. Saniavayat, from combination,

Karmmani, actions.

3. Througli combination in tbe (combinatiye) cause,
Actions (are non-combinative causes).— 364.

Umsicfira.— He explains what causality resides in Action:

■‘Non-combiiiative caW— sadi ia the complement (ot the ophoriem.
Non-oombmative eaueality ie eattsality oombmed or co-inherent m one am
the Htme objeot connected with the relation ot effect and canee _ .Such cane
ality resnte either from combination in the same object w.th ** '«“*' °
frotn combination in tbe same object with the cause Of theso^ tb
fLer is called, in the terminology ot the VA^as, the slighter or mtno.
and the latter, the greater or major, proximity. If it bo asked, by mean
of which proximity, then, actions possess nonetombinatiTe causalit
towards conjunction, disjunction, and smpaMm or irapr^ion ; it is her
replied -kavane samavS,4t.' (that it is) throngh oombmalion in th
ZbinatWe canse of conjunction, etc. The meaning therefore iB th,

non^iomhinative causality is- exercised hy action in (the production 0

eonjnnction, etc., by means of tbe minor proximity oharaolerised .
combination in the same object with the effect. 3.

Certain Attributes are non-comUnative causes, and occasionally
efficient causes also.


KAI^ADA SUTRAS X, 2-6,


proximity (constituted) by (tlieir) combination in tbe same object with the
whole, which is the combinative cause of the colour, etc., of that whole ;
as, for instance, the colour, etc., of the potsherds originate the colour,
etc., ill the water-pot, and similarly it should be observed in all other
cases. The word ‘ cha’ implies that occasionally colour, etc., possess
efficient causality also. — 4/

Oonjunotion is a non^comhinative eatise,

#TFr: W { \ [ \ W

Karana-samavayat, through combination in the cause.
g%rr: Sarayogah, conjunction, trtrw Patasya, of the cloth,

5. Through, combination in the (combinative) cause,
Conjunction (is a non-combinative cause) of tbe cloth. — 366.

VpasMra.—'He states that the minor proximity belongs to conjunction while it is
a non-combinative cause in the origination of substances :

The meaning is that, through combination in the combinative cause,
conj unction also is a non-combinative cause, in the production of effects
such as a piece of cloth, etc., by means of the proximity characterised
as combination in the same object with the effect. The word ‘cloth’
indicates product substance as such.

A certain author maintains that if, on the other hand, conjunction
of part with part be also a non-combinative cause of a piece of cloth and
the like, then combination in the same object with the cause is also
(a non-combinative cause). — 5.

Above continued.

II ?o M I ^ H

Karana-karana-samavayat, through combination in tlie
cause of the cause. Cha, and, also.

6. And, through combination in the cause of the
cause, (conjunction becomes a non-comhinative cause by
means of the major proximity) also. — 367.

rpasMra.—He says that causality sometimes pertains to conjunction by means of
' the major ' proximity.

The conjunction, technically termed praohaya, {loose) coalition, and
residing in the constituent parts of a bale of cotton, originates magnitude
in the bale of cotton. Here the proximity is constituted by combination
in the same object with the cause. This is the meaning. — 6,


|iM|


H

Jmi



VAISE^IKA PHILOSOPHY.


Efficient causes declared.

^^TtW^ ^l^^y^^^ta-samavayat, through combination in the conjunct.

Agoeh, of fire, Vai^esikam, distinctive attribute.

7. The distinctive attribute of Fire, {i.e., heat), (be-
comes an efficient cause), through combination in the con-
junct. — 368.

Pjjttisfear^,— Having thus ascertained causality determined by the combinative cause,
he begins a new section for ascertaining efficient causality.

‘Vaii^esikaui,’ distinctive attribxite, ‘agneh,’ of fire, in other word,
heat, becomes an efficient cause in relation to the effects (coloui, etc.) pro-
duced by burning or baking, through combination (of colour, etc.) in the
conjunct, {i.e., the water-pot placed in fire.) This is indicative ; in relation
to cognition everything possesses efficient causality. Understanding,
pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, volition, merit, demerit, and impression
possess efficient causality only. It should be observed that this system or
elaboration of thought has the purpose of establishing the mutual differen-
ces of pleasure, etc. — 7. _

Vivritti.—* ® The general definition of an efficient cause is

to be understood to be a cause other than the combinative and non-

combinative causes. ® * * ’■•

Observances produce adristam as their fruit, on the authority

of the V eda.

fSRT subtfs

\\ 1 o I q U

ggnf Dristanam, of'^cis observed or known to be productive of good.

Drista-prayojananara, of acts the purpose of which has been
taught Unsta-abhave, in the absence of visible or observed faults or

defects. Prayogah, performance, Abhyudayaya, for the pro-

duction of exaltation or (xdTi%twPii-

8. The performance of acts of observed utility and
of acts the purpose whereof has been taught (in the
sacred writings), is for the production of adristam, (as these
teachings are authoritative, being the word of God in whom)
the defects found in ordinary speakers do not exist, 369.

Opo»!faro.-Now,.in order to confirm the authoritativeness of the Vedas, he repeats

the very same statement which has been made by him before :

‘ Dribfc^nam ’ means, of acts which have been proved to be useful by the
evidence of experience, e.g., sacrifices, almsgivings, ablution, and the like.


iRIiliiiWifi


KANiDA 8UTBAS 1, 2-8.


‘Dfisia-prayojan&nlim’ means, of acts the purpose whereof has been taught.
For, thus, in such precepts as “He who desires heaven, shall perform
sacrifice, ” “ He who desii'es heaven, shall offer oblation in the agnihotra
sacrifice,” etc., the fruit or purpose is mentioned at once along with the
injunction ; in some eases, the purpose is given out by way of a recommen-
dation, as in “The •pitris or departed ancestors of him who studies during
these nights, pour down upon, or send down to, him streams of clarified
butter and streams of honey,” etc.; in other cases, the purpose is left to be
imagined, as in “ He shall perform the Visvajit sacrifice, ” etc., for, here the
purpose is neither mentioned along with the injunction nor presented by
way of a recommendation, and is, therefore, suppositional, and (it cannot be
any thing but heaven), for heaven alone should be supposed as the pm-pose
or fruit which is charming in itself. That being so, it does not stand to
reason that these acts which so shortly come to their end, should have
causality towards the production of fruits or results in the distant future.
Hence, the meaning is, ‘ prayogah,’ the performance, of these acts, is
‘abhudayaya,’ for the purpose of aptJrnam, that is, or deserts.

It might be objected as follows: This would have been the case,
were the authoritativeness of the Vedas a fact. But that is hard to
maintain. For the authoritativeness of the Vedas as being eternally
free from faults or defects in themselves, is not desired by you, {i.e., the
Vaise-pka), as it is by the Mimatrisd school, inasmuch as you recognise
them as the production of a person, and in that ease, it is possible
that mistake, absence of mind, intention to mislead, and other defects
existed in the person. To this the reply is given by the phrase, ‘drista-
abh^ve ’ which means, there being non-existence of personal defects such as
error, absence of mind, desire to mislead, and the like, which are found
in other persons, namely, in ourselves and others; inasmuch as the
Supreme Person, inferred whether as the Creator of the earth or as the
Speaker of the Vedas, is presented to us entirely under the characteristic
of freedom from faults or defects. So that His words can neither have
no meaning, nor convey a contrary meaning, nor convey a useless meaning.
Tt is only impurities caused by error, absence of mind, inefficiency of the
senses, and the like, due to disorder or defectiveness of the elements con-
stituting the physical organism, the external senses, and the mind, that
may possibly vitiate speech. But they cannot possibly lurk in the word
of Kvara. It has been accordingly declared : —



338 VAliESlKA PEIL080PH7.

Bsiiigl influehcsd ‘l>y passion, ignorancs, and the like, a speaker

may tell "untruths. But these do not exist in lilvara. How can He speak

otherwise (than truthfully) ?— 8.

Note— c/. VI. ii. 1, sMpra,

_Thus the Breclicables have been ascertained, as also
Resemblance and Difference. This S&tra or System of Self-culture faci-
litates manana, intellection or thinking about things, in them only whose
ehitta, or inner sense or mind, has been purified by the performance of
acts and not in them whose ehitta has not been so purified. Observances
are 'productive of purity of ehitta, as declared by such text of the Veda
as “ They desire to know,” etc. The same has been mentioned before. He
repeats it for further confirmation.

•a -s «- Observances, *** when performed disinteres-

tedly, do not produce elysian bliss, etc., as their fruit, but produce as their
result purity of ehitta or intellect, etc,, according to the text of the of Veda,
“ They desire to know,” and the Smrtt*, “ When worldly attachment has,
by observances, borne its fruits, knowledge is afterwards produced.”

Authqritativeness of the Veda established.


Tat-vacSianat, from being the word of Him, God.
Amnayasya^ of the Vedas. Jir'IUPl Pramanyam, authoritativeness, Hi,

finis^

9. The authoritativeness of the Veda (follows) from
its being the Word of God. — 370.

Upaskara.—lt may be urged : The Veda has been revealed by God,— it is here
that there is conflict of opinions.

Accordingly lie sa-ys : ^

‘ Iti ’ indicates the conclusion of the Sdstra or system. The authori-
tativeness, ‘ am niiyasya,’ of the Veda, (is derived), ‘ vachan4t,’ from its
being the composition, ‘ tena,’ by Isvara. For, thus, we- have already
proved that the Vedas have a personal author, inasmuch as they are a
collection of sentences or declarations. Nor can we and others possibly
be the speakers of them, divided and sub-divided as they are in a thousand
branches, for they treat of objects which transcend the senses, and beings
of our nature cannot behold objects which transcend the senses. More-
over, the Vedas must have been spoken by a trustworthy person, inasmuch
as they are accepted by men of light and leading. That which is not
spoken by a trustworthy person, is not accepted by men of light and
leading, the Vedas are accepted by men of light and leading, therefore



KAI^ADA Sl^TRAS J, 2-9.


they have been spoken by a trustworthy person. To be spoken by a trust-
worthy person is to be declared by a self-governed or independent peison ,
and to be accepted by men of light and leading is to be believed in, and
acted upon, by persons attached to all the systems of thought. It has
been stated before that non-appearance of the fruit or result, which
occasionally happens, is due to defect or flaw in the act or performance,
the agent, and the means or requisites. If it be denied that this is so,
there being no recollection on the part of the agent ; we reply that the
denial has no value, it having been already proved that there is recol-
lection on the part of the agent. The composition thereof by Him is
proved, inasmuch as they could be declared only by an independent person,
while such independent power to declare the Vedas in their thousand
branches is, as has been said, impossible for beings of our nature. More-
over, since certitude must be the product of excellence or superiority,


Here ends the second chapter of the tenth book in the commentary
on the Vaisiesika Aphorism by Sri Safikara Misira, son of Mahamahop&-

And complete is ako this treatise.


APPENDIX A.

Index of Aphorisms


N.B.-- Words left oat by some editors are showa within brackets


...VIl. i. i6


■■ . . .IV. ;ii. I : ■

,.,vii. i. 8

{%q € j f a ni...vii. i. lo ...

...I i- 1


pit ?I%FITW% !S5?qT^’J5Rli..X ii- 3


slill



-..IX. i. 9

...X. i. 4

?I1WI ...Vl, ii. 8

^■«I^J?....V111. ii. 1 ..

„.1V. i. 12...

IwlstIT 'Sr ...XL ii. 7

l-g^TScITSqT^sPlt^ ...

lliRIT ...IV. i. 5
irf^ =g i. ^1

3ig#% ...VL ii. 6

?reffcr'5rmTWjg;...VJ. ii. 9 ...

irer^ ^ st^rm^ ... ^ii^jj^i T ...

iFgmp5rTg[. ^ ^ ...i. i- 26

lTO1ITft5rr«^!^vC?nT ^ ...IX. i. 13 ..


...ia. n.

...IIL ii. 14


#^RFTir , ..IX. ii. 6

' ,■ ... ;■ •


ITR^R WT#S5i?T^ ( JfS{%[ ...III

...IX, ii. 13 ... ...


f^sfn) ...if.


...YII. ii. 26

3^ !|nnr: ...


;n||p3i7mT^^^


...VII. ii. 21 261

...X. :i,V;

... 219


...VII. ii. 8


sqris^lW^ ii. 10
JETP^r* an^RW ... IX. ii. 3


illi


...VTi. i. 17 ...

...ix. i. 8 . .

s^TPs^rrar ...n, u. 3

51 ...I- i- 11

qR3pftf5r* ^ v» l nr ilB ...vii. ii. 24
33^. aB?5iftr 3 I 5 5!ir

sKwftps ?prr sETf^^iraT! ...xir.
9 Klfi [|5 ...1- ii- 15

^i<?B5<u«i5 ^» gg? ...n. i. 24 ...

’#Pif «7Rv3rrj ...vii. i. 6


...iv. i. 3

gjwiliSBfCJUJfTEil

TO® g^HTJ ..J- ii- 24

TOPBlTOTgr ...ni- i. 4


TOMTOn^ ^T®irTOrJ ...l. n. 1 ...

TO®rat*Twg; TO®^w®
5rl5TO?TrgTg;...viir. i. 11
TO^I^BT^ ...VII. i. 25
TO^ iT TO5J ...V, ii. 26
TO® 4ilH<^l«ffg[SR*6li5 ...X. ii. 3
TO^! ...X. ii. 5 ...

TOqf :..ni. i. 10


wS|fil^«lvJ5S ...I. i- 14 ... .^,

!TI*!Tcgrq;...II. ii. 13

g;T%cRIlTTfSlWs^ 5K* ...H. i. 25

SEWtlTOng:...!!!. i. 5 ...

§K*Tra^^ ...n. i. 12

^ ...VIII,

;^IRRr ® 5®} ,..I. ii. 9 ...


• *



5?!lcgT?5;...VlLli. J4 ... ... _ \

...I- i. 24 ..„

gpn^jr «R#f^5 qrawi\... ii. n. 25

^ q w q snf ^ ...iv. ii. 3 ...

ijlff^Birv..^ ■ ...

... \ .

^ i. 3 ...

...^I- i- 29; IL ii. 8; J[. ii. 12; VII. ii. 28 .

Wlfsr . .

gfWOT qffstra^ . . . VI 1 1 . i . 2
gPa^T^T%(Tr»TJ ...VI. ii. 15

qgff . . . T ii. 13 ;

4 ... .

: ...v.'i. 42; ,..„■ ';: ■ ': :.;

...

...Vill. ii. 6

?r«iTsr%?[f; ...VI. i. 4 ... .

I ^ii r ,-,r~ Tr'T-TT ^if i f-T r i’^i- T r " « - l j v ‘ • a

^ '^TqiRETwiTsrraM ...X. 11. 4 ...

cfsOT 9im5 ...VI. i. 13

qsfitr ...IX. ii. 7
qsiT iqfq%*Tpg «ivP& ...V. i. 2

?fifsJfT3|%5T firat ...VI. i. - ...


Page.

276


96

... 158

... 266

188 , 231
... 256

... 35


77 , 83 , 87 , 269


( in^Ti^?TsnwnRn^^)..J- i. 3; x. ii. 9.

cT^jnw f j’araRs ^ ^

...H- i 31
...Vn. i. 23 ...

cTc^iTT^ #l'WrffTlTS«lf'ifft^*a ...^- ’>• 18
H«jR4*ii<*ni®yrsIta ...fl-i- 21


5[gRR'RP^TfIII^...V. 11. 4 ...

(Sja^pRE^) S[ai ^TTflRW^ ...1. i. 18

5GraT,..J. li. 8

’9rra^%...T. i- 9


SCsq?# JpUcg-* ...I. ii. 5 ...

san’isjiTcrt ,,.¥1L ii. 27 ...

' s['cq<^f ^;% i^l^T ...II. i. 28 ; II. ii- 7 ; 11. ji. 11

S[3nms[5?i •■•

s(y4 T HLi JpOTfcT^J^ . . .1 . i- 10

(?pR5^Pini.) ...I. i. 16 .:.


|S^T^ff^T^WT^R^...If. i •••

... 1. i. 2

i. 4

... ...

siwrlsa ...IX ii. 9

^ 'sr i^iTvjf (^*.) ...n. i. lo

n ...II. ii. 29


fi’mfim i^|fq.)...ii. i- 20

^if%*rTJnt ^Jrarr??! ,.,v. ii. 23

w%!rmf ...yii, ii. 4


ijfi
IS i


( viii )


Page.

177

175


IV. ii. -2


•" '••

qscsr^sro^rr^^Mtyii^i^ .-^i- 1- — •*■ .. ''‘ Ai

...vn- u. 2^ ...

t T{l ^ M n%fffl ^n[TO ...IT- i- '27 ... '•• — '

...^"I- i- 10 ... — ^ •.;• .■.”, „Q

50,^1 »• 1

j^f$p|Ti^q<:^4|rV44:tRft ^ ■“ . , ’” I

afgam^^TTO^^ '“ ...

;;;

Sl?q[^ffR^ ^^^{...in. 19 ... ••• ”•

; sr5smRi3cfRi;...ii- i>. 34 ... — ••• '■' ^gg

...^ ••• * ^gg

^ ”■ ”■ ^23

^ J^cEPTl^?^ "• ■” 1Q4 (

S^feraci iP^?lT*3^‘ ...HI. i- 1 ... ••• ■■'

(OT!asirfei^...ii[.ii.i - - ;;; j'j,

1 ^( 3 ^ ...VI. 1 . 1 ..• •••

...VI. i- 3 ...^ ’” •” ”■

1- 2 ... •■• •■'

¥imtT^ ^:iT^^S3^...Vl. ii. 4 ... ... —

...111. i- 12 ..• - - - iig

wcre*i ...III. 1. 13 ... — — "•

; >3^4y4 l f T Fa ^x^ #t^ TF=gt^ S[^? ...VIIL ii. 5... ... '

^^.,.VI!.u..5 ...

IT^CTTtR • “ .^‘g ‘ ’ 149

?lsairM'^41<idW(A^'X. -.1^^ i- S ... ***

m ^ ...ni- ^

:;;:^,«nf|m](«^ ^ “•■: ’ "X', '/'**'" .j


I. ii. 4


YlII. ii. 5..


.111. ii. 6


127

189
191

190
201

48

110

no

285

236

171

149

290

131

5


Different Readings and Interpretaiions^ as given by Ptvfessor Chandrakdnia

Tarkdlankdra of Calcutta.


Professor Chandrakdnta

— --^observes^ under L i. i : The classification oi Dharma^ Merit or
meritorious acts, is not shown by Kandda^ as it does not fall within the scope
of his philosophy ; for, he has undertaken the ^dstra with the purpose of
teaching tallva-jndnar^^ knowledge of truth, only.

^comments on I. i. 2 : Wherefrom does the production of the Good and

the Ultimate Good result? The production of the Good and the Ultimate
Good results from Pravrilti^ activity or employment, that is (observed in the
world as) exertion of speech, mind, and the body. 1 herein, it is said, that
a person cultivates Dharma with the speech, by telling agreeable and whole-
some truths and studying the sacred writings; with the mind, by showing
compassion, contentment, and faith ; with the body, by practising charity and
relieving the poor and the distressed and those who are in dagger.

This text of the Veda also shows that is

the designate of the word, Wajati/ to perform (sacrifices, &c.)

— .^.^ifitroduces I. i. 4 : Dharma presents two aspects, that is, under
the characteristic of PravrlUi or worldly activity, and the characteristic of
Nivriiii or withdrawal from worldly activity. Of these, Dharma^ characterised
hy Nivniti^ hvings iorthtaitvaffndnar^ or knowledge of truths, by means of
removal of sins and other blemishes. Hence.

—and observes : (i) Mere the separate enumeration of Sdmdnya^ etc., is

unnecessary, on account of their non-divergeace ; for, Sdmdnya, etc., falling, as
they do, within Substance, etc., do not differ from the latter. Their separate
mention, Jiovvever, is justified on the possibility ol difference in the mode of
treatment adopted by the author. Systems, differing in their methods, are taught
for the benefit of embodied souls, differing from one another. This is, then, the
Valieffika System, of which the distinctive features are Sdmdnya^ etc., as are,
in the other (Nydya) System, Doubt, etc,, although they are included in the Proof
and the Provable, respectively. Accordingly, this System is enabled to stand
apart by means of Sdmdnya and the other Predicables ; and so it is called
the Vaiiesika System. Otherwise it would be merely an Upanigaf teaching
Adhydtma-vidyd^ Philosophy of the Embodied Self. ^ * Samanyam '

means possession of similarity. ^ ^ Doubt and Error arise from

(observation of) and from non-observation of or (distinctive)

peculiarity. Observing the common properties, altitude and extension, of a
pillar and a person, and remaining ignorant of their differentia, one feels the
doubt wbetlier it be a pillar or a person ; err also. arise^^ in this way : observing



the common property only and in consequence ot tault or mipertection,
one mistakes a pillar for a person or a mother of pearl for a piece ot silver.
False cognition, again, is the root of all suffering. It is for this reason that
•Samanyam’ has been separately mentioned, notwithstanding that it is included
in Substance, etc, ‘Vi^esa’ is that by which a thing is reduced to itself.
False cognition which springs from (observation of only) the common property
is corrected by the observation of the distinctive property: whence arises
correct knowledge, which is called taUva-jndnam. * * ® ^ For this reason

‘ Visesa ’ is separately mentioned, although it is included in Substance, etc.
If, again, it is a single reality that, being determined in particular ways, comes
to be used as ‘Samanyam’ and ‘Vigesa,’ then it falls within (the class of)
Attributes. Or, if these are mere technical names, then they are not additional
Predicables. ‘ Samavaya ’ means complete approximation, identification :
as it has been said, ‘ Samavaya ’ is inseparable existence. *
is an attribute, which is the counter-opposite of Separateness,
ised as plurality or characterised as difference in kind,
and does not possess Attribute ; nor is it a form of Ac
a particular conjunction (of the Self) with the hoc
feelings. Thereafter the Jiva errs that the Self hr

from the body, etc., in consequence of which a person transmigrates
suffers a multitude of pains, and on the cessation of which he is liberated, the
stream of his sufferings being dried up. Hence ‘ Samavaya,’ though included

in Attributes, is separately mentioned. r, r ^

(a) There are other Predicables also, viz., fmm&na. Proof; prameya.
Provables ; Doubt ; prayojana, Purpose ; dn^nla Instance ; siddh&nta

Tenet; Member (of a syllogism) ; tarka, Confutation (or Reasoning) j

Ascertainment ; vdda, Discussion;y«/(!>«, Wrangling ; Cavilling;

hetvdbiiasa, Faiiacv ; chhala, Equivocation Showing the futility of the marc
of inference ; and nigraha^sihana, Ground of Defeat or Opponent’s Error.
These too come under the Predicables of Kandda^

(3) 'Die Supreme Good results from knowledge of truth about the
Self, etc., while knowledge of truth about the rest is auxiliary to it. False
knowledge about the Seif, etc,, is of various kinds, e.g^, the sense of Noii-Egc
in the Ego, the sense of Ego in the Non-Ego.

under L i« 5 ; The separate mention of Time and Space

is intended to indicate the difference in the uses of these terms according to
the difference of the effects, though it is one, stiil admits of a variet}

of names and uses, according to the difference of effects. It is not that Time
and Space are essentially different objects from Ikdia, Ether.

interprets I, i. 13, to mean that an attribute sometimes destroys its

cause, in chemical compounds), and sometimes does not destroy ii

{e,g.^ in physical compounds or masses),^

under I. L 15 i Although the Self is void of action, t.e,

change, stilHt appears to possess action by th^ action of the mind or interna


* Samavaya’.
either character-
It inheres in Substance,
on. Now, birth means
% the senses, and the
, no separate existence
and


organ of se'ose^ in the stale of its phenomenal existence ; and hence it is called

«-reads L i. 19, as Ubhayuihdgtindh instead of as Tathd gunah aod^

interprets it to mean that Attributes sometimes become the cause of Substance^
Attribute, and Action, and sometimes do not.

reads h\. 21 and 22 as one aphorism,

and interprets it thus : Action does not become the immediate cause of
substances. Why ? In consequence of its cessation.. For, when a Substance
becomes what it is, at that moment cessation of Action takes place. Action
in the constituent pares of a Substance * ce ases on conjunction, and the
Substance becomes what it is. Action, therefore, is not an immediate cause
in the production of Substances. What the author means to say is, as the
expression shows, that the mediate causality of Action in the production of
Substances is not refuted.

introduces 1 . ii. r, as follows : Predicables called Substance, Attribute,

and Action have been mentioned. Their Sdmdnya or common characteristic
has been stated. Their Vi4cm or distinctive characteristic, again, follows from
its contrariety to the common characteristic. All this is sufficient for the pro-
duction of tattva-jndna. The Supreme Good results from tativa-jndna. This is
apavarga^ Salvation, But what is its characteristic form? How does !t
appear ?— All this is now being described.

And explains the same to mean : Non-existence of the effect, the
faults (namely, desire, aversion, and infatuation), etc., (results) from non-
existence of the cause, e.g., false knowledge (eg,, the idea of the Self in the
Not-Seif), etc. *^Thus, Pain, birth, activity, faults, and false knowledge, -on the
successive annihilation of these in turn, there is the annihilation of the one
next before the other,” (Nydya StVram, I. i. 2), the ultimate consequence being
Emancipation, the return of the Self into its own nature,

introduces 1. ii. 2, as follows : The aphorism is meant for them who

think that apavarga is mere absence of pain.

And explains it thus : Non-existence of the cause, viz,, birth, etc., does
not follow from non-existence of the effect, viz,, pain. Birth, etc., therefore, may
still take place even when no pain exists. If birth, etc., are thus possible,
then there is possibility of pain also, in consequence of the appearance of the
causes of pain. Apavarga, accordingly, does not lie in the mere absence of
pain, but in the permanent impossibility of pain, resulting in the order of the
successive non-existence of false knowledge, etc.

explatnsl, ii.8, thus: Existence is a different ‘object’ from Substance,

Attribute, and Action. Substance, Attribute, and Action are called objects (VIII.
ii. 3). Existence is, therefore, included amongst them.. But it is not contained
in the ascertained classes of Substance, Attribute, and Action, Hence it is
said to be a different object from them, (the known classes).

' / - ' — >^reads L ii, i7| with the outissiop of the word (ifyga in


,1:1 ,L„ ii < '


^read$ IL i, 25 as two aphorisms^ Also because of the non-

appearance of different effects {kdrya-antara-aprddurbhdvdi cha\ and Sound ‘(is)
not an attribute of tangible things {^abdah sparsavatdm agtma}f),~-i\\t meaning,
however, remaining the same,

observes, under II. i, 27, that the idea o( Kandda is that Time as well

as Space are really identical with Ether.

--observes, under II. ii 12; According to Kandda, it appears, there is
but one Substance, variously called as Ether, Fime, and Space. For, he has
taken much pain to establish the difference of Ether from tangible things, Self,
and Mind, but he has made no attempt to prove the difference of >Eiher . from
Time and Space as well Nor has he attempted to prove the difference of Time
and Space themselves from any other Substance. It may be, therefore, con-
sidered that with the difference of Ether, the difference of Time and Space also
has been established. But it may be asked, if there be one Substance only,
how does it come to be vanously called as Ether, Time, and Space ? He replies
that this is due to the variet}? of effects produced by it (IL ii. 13) and also to
the variety of external conditions attending it (II, ii. 14, 15, and 16).

— — *reads IL ii, 34 as Praihapnd-ddi-mbddi while the meaning remains
unchanged. (Adi=and others, e.g., the second).

readsll. ii. 36 as simpl}' sandigdbdlp, supplying for himself the reason

for the declaration there, and joins the latter part of it to IL ii 37, and interprets
. it to mean that in spite of plurality of individual sounds, their definite enume-
ration is possible by means of reference to their genera or types.

interprets III. i. 3 to mean that the sense or the object cannot be a

mark for the inference of the Self,

reads IIL i. 5 and 6 as one aphorism, and explains it in the sense that

as cognition is found within one effect, e.g., the body, and is not found within
another effect, e,g.f ajar, therefore, it follows that there can be no cognition in
their combinative causes (which must be the same in both cases).

III. i. 7* thus : Something quite different is the mark of

inference of the Self ; the sense or the object cannot be such a mark. What this
Something quite differentMs, is declared in the eighteenth aphorism of this
chapter.

— splits up IIL h 15 into two aphorisms : Aprasidhah anapadedah
and Asansandigdhah cha anapadesahP

• -reads the words ^bhdvaJp and * abhdvah' in IIL ii. i in a compounded

form as ^ bhdvdbhdvaJp

observes that in III, ii 6— 17, the author gives, in the form of a

dialogue, contrary arguments as to whether the Seif be an object of perception'
only, or of inference only, or of both, and gives his own conclusion in III. ii, iB,
— — '‘Interprets IIL ii, 19, 20, and 21 in the monistic sense, namely, that
-there exists only one Self,, variously differentiated on the phenomenal plane, as
witnessed by such texts as ** One only, without a second,” One shining Being


V



is immawnt in .11 oreated things," “All Snlve. becomn one,” "Alt e.e.vet, en»

ivTs-Ta^d “s two

Mft-a UrfMavo’ nilya *V and ftom

themto mean, respecti.ely, “ -‘'I’e f "j’l! e,r„r

the nature ot the cause (which is eteniall is non-eternal, compound

to snppose that because things (a ^., atoms) eaist as ^ ,f2j^ „

bodies), therefore they cannot exist in the causal (or atomic) . f-,gpce

cxplaii the application of .he word " n.„-ctcrn.l " in 1. 1. 8 where the reference

is to things wliich are products. » » rr - ’’

3 as two aphorisms, Gundniardpfadu^

and irydt}}icik(^'^V*^

-reads in V. i.

explains adrif^a in V. ii

causes of seismic o -

the sun, and of other actions in
— ^‘‘—splits up V,

Vilayanancha tejaJt samyogdt,

cuts off Vidyaievd^rihdnfaraivdt yamasya

as a separate aphorism. ^

interprets VII. i. i6 to mean that minuteness and magnitude may be

predicated of action and attribute. ^ ^ e

fcf ties the word pavhnandala in VII. i. 20 in the sense o per e

sphericity, , ,

and introduces VII. i. 22 as giving examples of it, which may be both smal

and large, . , . „ ..

explains VII. ii. 5 as demolishing the view contained in Vll. 11. 4,

and explains VII. ii. 6, in support of the above interpretation of VII. ii. S,
thus; Did not unity exist everywhere, there would be no bhakti, production, of
things at all. For, any one thing is the joint product of several things ; but
there can be no such production in the absence of one-ness or unity; unity,

therefore, exists in all places. _ ^ _

yeads VII. ii. 12 as two aphorisms, viz., Karmabhirharm&^t guf}atr-

guml} and Ai}utvamahallvdbhydmiti, and explains them in the same way as

Svii-if: i6.:V ; V-v 'iC- ^

... reads VII. ii. 24 and 25 as one aphorism.

^interprets VII. ii. 28 to mean .that Combination is proved to be an

attribute in the same way as is existence, and further, that, like existence, Com-
bination also 18 produced by itself, i>., decs not depend upon any other Combi-

-----ofisems, under VIII. i. 2, that among^ substances. Self, Mind, and
Ether are not objects of perception. . , .e

' • : y^ads Vlll. i. 9 as two aphorisms, wa.v ; Svmtydchchh^

^ dim buddheicha £vete buddhi^, and Ta ete kdrydkdmi}abhiUe.


7, Sar^skdra in the place of Samyoga.

• ” 'i. 2 in the sense of unseen natural forces, the

disturbances, of the revolution of the terrestrial globe round

■■ - " i Earth, . . , . 7 a

ii. 8 into two aphorisms, vis., Apdni Sahghatali, an

from VI, ii. 8, and reads it


. . ^^^iniroduces the topic 'of Non-Existence with the observation that Non-

Existence is not the seventh predicable, inasmuch as absolute non-existence^
a castle in the air, is not a predicable at all, while non-existence of the
existeat^ ill the forms, of non-production, destruction, and absence of identity,
cannot exceed the number of the ^ix predicables.

• — itiierpreiea IX J, 2 and 3 to, mean that whatever is noo-existent prior

to its appearance as an effect, is non-existent only by the nature of an effect, but
is really existent at the time by the nature of a cause, and that, therefore, it is
essentially different, from absolute non-existences,

the first chapter of the ninth book with the observation that,

in the view of Kandd% there are only three independent and ultimate predicables,
namely, Substance, Attribute, and Action, for, while describing the process of
yogic cognition of all realities, he deals with these three predicables only, and is
entirely silent with regard to the other so-called predicables.

Sail cha of X. i. 5 as a sepai ate aphorism, and explains it thus :
Cognition arises, Sati^ in respect of objects actually existing at the moment.
Cognition accordingly relates to past, present, and future objects. But this is
not the case with pleasure and pain. Herein also, therefore, there is difference
between cognition, on the .one hand, and pleasure and pain, on the other.

- — — reads Ekade^e ih of X. i. 7 with X. i. 6, and explains it as giving an
additional reason why pleasure and pain cannot be forms of cognition, the
meaning being that pleasure and pain are localised in the body, whereas cogni-
tion is. not so localised.

kdfiha^Smnmdydchcha. ,



THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE HINDUS

Translated by various Sanskrit Seholars..

Edited. by Major D. Basu, I.M.S;,


PjAofessor Max Muller: rendered an , i.mportant service to tlie
cause of comparative theology by the piiblicatioji of the Sacred
Books of the East.” The 4i) volumes in that series represent
■the moslv ; iniportant ' scri:ptures of tliC pjrincipal iiatioiis^ of , Asia.
Of these, 21 are translation of Sanskrit worls. But still some
of the most important sacred books of the Hindus have not been
published in that series.

■ It is the duty of evei 3 ^'faitliful and true Votary ' of Hiiidaism
to do all tliat lies in his power to make known the contents of
his sacred books to the world at large and to liis fellow brethren
in faith in India. It is not too much to say that a very large
number of English educated Hindus, iinacquainted wdth Sanskritj
possess very little kiiowdedge of their sacred scriptures. So,
while the Chi’istian and the Moliamadan are well acquainted with
their religious scriptures, the Hindu alone is ignorant of his
sacred books.

To remove this rvant, the Panini OGSce has been publishing,
since July, 1909, the original texts of the sacred books together
with their English translations. One part of 100 pages or so much
as wdll complete a book or a chapter is published every month.

The subscription rate for those wd.io subscribe to the complete
series is one rupee per 100 pages, royal octavo. The,y get 1,200
pages in a year for which they have to pay Rs. 12, exclusive
of postage.

To purchasers of separate parts or volumes the rate is
Re. 1-8 per part of 100 pages.


ORDER FORM


The MANAGER,

P&iini Office, Bhiivaneslwari

Baha4urganj\ Allahabad,

Sir,

Please enlist my name as a subscriber to the Sacred Books
of the Hindus for one year, and realise the annual subscription of
Rs. 1242-0 (inclusive of pastage), by sending me all the numbers
published since July, 1910, per V, P. P.

Yours faithfully,

[ Name ’

Please write very 1

lepihlv 1 Address


BOOKS ALREADY PUBLISHED.

The Sacped Books of the Hindus.

Vol. I.-XTpanisads -Thelsa, Keaa, Katlia, Prasna.Mundaka, and
Manduka TTpanisads with Madhva’s commentary, translated into
English with copious explanatory notes by Srisa Chandra Vasu.
Cloth bound, silver letters. Price 5 Rupees.

"Vol. II.— Yajnavalkaya Smriti with the commentary, Mitaksara
and notes from the gloss, Balambhatti. translated into English
with copious explanatory notes by Srisa Chandra Vasu, This work
is indispensable to Indian lawyers of those parts of India where
Hindu Law according to the Mitaksara School is administered.

Part I.-Mitaksara wits^Halambhatti, two chapters.

Price - One Rupee and eight annas. Ditto, Sanskrit Text, Rs. 2.

Vol. III.- The Chhandogya ITpanisf-d with Madhva’s Bhasya,
waBsiatsd into JSngijsb. witii copious explanatory notes by Srisa
Chandra Vasu. Cloth bound,. gilt letters. Price Eleven Rupees.

Vol. IV. Aphorisms of Yoga by Patanjali, with the commentary
of Vyasa and the gloss of Vachaspati Misra : by Rama Prasada,
M.A., cloth bound, silver letters-Rs. 6.

V,— The Vedanta Sutras with Baladeva’s Commentary
translated into English with copious explanatory notes by Srisa
Chandra Vasu, Price Rs. 4-8. ^ j j

Vaisesika Sutras of Kanada with the Commentary
T from the gloss of Jayanarayana,

translated by Nanda LaJ Sinha, Parts 1, 2 and 8. Price 4 Rs. 8 as.

these publications have been very favourably spoken of by the
press and competent Sanskrit Scholars of India and Europe. ^ ^


OUR PATRONS.

The following Governments and Native States have encouraged
the publication by subscribing to it

(1) The Secretary of State for India.

(2) The Government of India.

(3) The Government of Madras.

(4) The Government of the United Provinces of Agra and

Oudh.

(5) The Government of B. B. and Assam.

(6) H. H. the Maharaja of Travancore.

(7) H. H. tile Maharaja of Mysore.

(8) EL H. the Maharaja of Indore.

(9) M. H. tiie Maharaja Gaekwar of Baroda.

(10) H. H. the M iliaraja of Kolhapur.

(11) H. H. the Maharaja of Jodhpur.

(12) H. H. the Maharaja of Bewah.

(13) H, H, the Maharaja of Benares.

(14) His Excellency the Dewan Saheb of Indore.

(15) ' His Excellency the Dewan Saheb of Bhownagar, &c., &c.


^ ( -3^ ).

Jtliep fiilliGatioss of tfei Foitw oleo

THE SIDDhIntI KAUMUDI

Or Panini’s Grammatical Aphorisms as arranged and explained

By BHATTOJI DIKSITA-

Sanskrit Text and English Translation ^

By SRISA CHANDRA VASU and VAMANA DA&A VA&U.

Completed in three Volumes in 2400 pages, Royal 8vo.

CONTEN'^"

TOIiUME I— Name and Sxibstaiiti ves, pages 1028. ■

Bo. 11— Part 1. Verbs and tlieir Conjiiiiction, 713.

Bo. II— „ 11. Kridanta or making of nouns from roots, pages 408.

Do. Ill— Vaidika Grammar, pages 247.

It 'contains 4,000 Sutras of Panini, 000 Sutras of Sakatayana (Unadi), 200
SOtras on accent (Pliit SOtras), >2,000 verbal roots and tbeir conjugation in-
corporating the wbole of the Madhayiya Dhatuvritti with copious explanatory
extracts from Kasika, Maliabhasya, Tattvabodhini, Manorama, &c., &c.

Indian pate, of postage, Hs. 45.

a' /'F opelg'n pate,':'.exciasiv.e of postag’e, dB 3.

“ This is a standard work on Sanscrit grammar, and Sanskrit scholars
spend at least a dozen years in mastering its intricacies. ^ * *** It may be men-
tioned that the Oriental Translation ITund of England advertised about three
quarters of a century ago as under preparation the English translation of the
Siddhanta Kaiiraudi by Professor Horace Hayman Wilson. But perhaps he
found the work too laborious for him, for the advertised traiislation was
never published .” — (The Indian Mirvor, The Hindoo and the Indian People.)

N.B.— The book win be soid up to 3 1st March 1911, for 33 Rupees only,
exclusive of postage.

Index to the Sutras of Panini, Dhatupatha,
XJnadi and Phit Sutras.

rupee and eight annas only.

THE ASTADHYiYI OF PANINI

Complete in 1682 pages, Royal Octavo :

Containing Sanskrit SiUras and Vrittis with notes and Explana-
tions in English, based on the celebrated Commentary
called the Kds^ika,

Indian ... ... ... Rs. 4S O 0

yoneig’n";^^^ r' • ::f ^ • e : S' ■ o: 0 : :



( 4 )

THE DAILY PRACTICE OF THE HINDUS.

CoutaiMS tJie morning and mid-day duties. 2nd Edition— revised and

enlarged.

Price Re. 1-4.


Tile of ' RaJei' Raxiri MoMati Rn-w*' '

an English translatioa of Tuhfatiii Miiwalihiddin (His Arabie-Persi^i
phlet.) This edition also contains some additional letters, an introdnctioifaiid


The Dietetic Treatment of Diabetes

By Major B. D. Basu, I.M.S. (Retd.)

Cloth bound, Gilt letters, Price one Rupee and eight annas only

The Private Joornai of the larqness of Hastings,

A VERY INTERESTING WORK
Papsr cover Rs. 2 : Cloth Rs 3, Postage extra.

FOLK-TALES OF HINDUSTAN

BY

SHAIKH CHILLI.

Price, paper cover, Re. 1-4; doth, gilt letters-Re. 1-12.



JUST OUT-

Surya Siddhanta, Sanskrit text, Bengali translation with explanatorv
numerous plates of stars, &c., in S60 pages, Royal Octavo, got letters
cloth bound, by Swaini Tijaananda o/jus Hari Prasanna Chatterji, B.A. LCE
*• (late District Engineer, V. P.). Price Rs. 6-8-0. Paper cover, Rs. 5-0-0 : ' ' ‘

Price.

Prayag or Allahabad, with 57 half-tone photos, cloth, dlt
letters ... ... ... ___

An Easy introduction to Yoga Philosophy
Siva Saiahita (English translation)

Vedanta Tatvatraya „

The Three Truths of Theosophy

^he light of Wahabis to pray in the same niosciue withithe
Sunnis— an important judgment on a verv disputed
question of Muhammadan Law
A treatise on Waterworks in Bengalee, in 2 vo'ls.

The Bengalee works of Rajah Bam Mohan Boy, cloth vilt
letters ... ... ... ...

Life and teachings of Paramhamsa Bam Krisn'a (in Hindi)"

The Oonvention of Beligions, 1909 ... " '

Hinduism, Ancient and Modern, by Eai Bahadur Lala Baij

Bhagwat Gita in modern life
To be had of—

The; MANAGER,

Bhuvanei.:‘;,.,ri Asram,

Bah»> lij, ALLAHABAD.

Printed by fauoh Kory Mittra at thv Xuuiaa Press, Allah aba d .
