Pepita Jiménez (Juan Valera, 1886)
==========================================================
Spain's great 19th-century love novel; a classic of the Spanish realist novel. Public domain. Source note: Internet Archive scan (bwb_P9-CDP-500).

Library 


St. Olaf College 


Northfield, Minn. 


A 
JIMENEZ 


TRANSLATED FROM 
THE SPANISH 


| JUAN or i, 
PEPIT | 


if 


INTRODUCTORY ESSAY ON 
SPANISH FICTION BY PROF. 
MAURICE FRANCIS EGAN 


A FRONTISPIECE AND A 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


P. F. COLLIER & SON 
NEW YORK 


PEPITA JIMENEZ 


(E)—VoL, 13—1 


CONTENTS 
PAGE 
NTRODUCTION .ss.-- © © « fe e'e efe° 0's #1 ¢ 0 © oe 2'@ Ole eee 5 
Ramm CVE VALOR ee meta tuha\hs)B\a\5 (2s) = ai'lle\si\'e) 2 b-b's-<. TF 


\UTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE First AMERICAN 
EE OUETON: pon pera Men tan ei i OE 


JISCOVERY OF THE MANUSCRIPT. .e-0s cecreeeseees 35 


PART I 
JETTERS FROM My NEPHEW........0ee-eeresreee 38 


PAR. IT 

ARAL IP OMEN Rie Wielene alahe Wein ghee ble ee es Bieta aa OO 
PART III 

ETTERS OF My Broruer..... Avia 2 aie hieiaw ety | ROS 


_.  - INTRODUCTION 
HE three modern Spanish novels, “Pepita 
Jiménez,” by Juan Valera; “The Fourth 
Estate,” by Armando Palacio Valdés; and 
‘Dojia Perfecta,” by Benito Pérez Galdés, are typi- 
cal of the life of Spain, seen from various points of 
yiew—but all Spanish points of view—of to-day. 
[hey are not only artistic books of fiction, but soci- 
logical and psychological documents of the great- 
st value. Of the three, “Pepita Jiménez” is the 


hree, is least touched by the French influence of 
he naturalistic school. Yet, if one compares the 
masterpiece of Fernan Caballero, which is “The 
yea Gull,” with a novel like “The Swan of Villa- 
norta,” by her successor, Madame Pardo Bazan, 
ne finds that there is something in the genius of 
spanish literature itself not unrelated to the less 
‘scientific’ and less repellent form of naturalism. 
30th in “Pepita Jiménez” and “The Fourth Es- 
ate” there is that “complete synthesis of gravity 
f matter and gaiety of manner,” which, as Coven- 
c5 ) 


Introduction 


try Patmore says, “is the glittering crown of art, 
and which out of Spanish literature is to be found 
only i in Shakespeare, and even in him i in a far less 
obvious degree.” Valera’s masterpiece is a mas- 
terpiece of exquisite, cheerful, sensuous, but n not 

“sensual, art. It is difficult to find words to express 
its high value, and no words can express the name- 
less charm of personality which permeates its style 
and which is not lost in our colder English. 

Of these three typical novelists, the author of 
“Pepita Jiménez” is the most joyously in love with 
life. In “Dofia Perfecta,’ Galddés, as in all his 
best-known works, is almost dangerously in love 
with his thesis—less so, perhaps, in “Dofia Per- 
fecta” than in his more ponderous novel “Gloria,” 
and the gaiety of the manner of Valdés sometimes 
leaves the English-speaking reader in doubt as to 
whether he takes life seriously. ‘The realism of 
Galdos is more philosophical than that of Valdés, 
more abstract, and not impartial at all. In fact, 
the “tendency” with Galdds sometimes almost 
obliterates the “novel” quality, and we hear the 
preacher through the thin veil of fiction. On the 
other hand, the opponent to his doctrine, though 
his colleague in manner, Padre Coloma, is even 

6 


Introduction 


more gloomy in his realism than Galddéds. ‘The 
hopelessness of “Currita,’”’ Coloma’s masterpiece, is 
even deeper than that of “Dofia Perfecta,” where 
one feels the coming of the storm from the very 
beginning. Neither Coloma, the defender of the 
faith as held by the orthodox Spaniard, nor Galdos, 
the iconoclast, looks on Spain with cheerful eyes. 
If in ‘“Currita” the society of Madrid is depicted 
as holding only male and female rakes, in “Dofia 
Perfecta” the society of the provinces is composed 
of bigots without hearts and even without common 
sense. 

“The Fourth Estate” is the best example of 
Spanish realism extant. Valdés knows the sea— 
witness “The Joy of Captain Ribot’—and the land 
by the sea as well. The town of Sarrio we can not 
see with our eyes, we can not know the color of its 
walls, nor touch the furniture of its clubs, but we 
know it in reality as well as we know Anthony 
Trollope’s “‘Barchester,” George Eliot’s “Middle- 
march,” Mrs. Gaskell’s “Cranford,” Mrs, Oli- 
phant’s “Carlingford,” or Mrs. Deland’s “Old 
Chester”—as well as we know Father Goriot’s 
boarding-house, or the interior of Mr. Squeers’s 
school. Valdés owes much to Balzac, but here, 

7 


Introduction 


tod, when we speak of “influences,” we must allow 
greatly for a certain Spanish quality, frequent in — 
Calderon and Cervantes, which is not the realism 
of Balzac, but different from it because it is not 
self-conscious. Now, Galdds is often self-con- 
scious, and Madame Pardo Bazan always is so; 
Valdés makes his picture with a light and cheer- 
ful touch, inexorably true, but with no constant 
assertion that he paints for the sake of truth. . 
The tragedy of “The Fourth Estate” is as inex- 
orable as that of “Dofia Perfecta,” but it is not the 
main thing. All the life in the book is not sub-~ 
servient to this tragedy. There is, as in life, much ~ 
comedy and many sidelights from the sun. And 
the ending of Gonzalo, his refusal to live after the 
loss of a woman he loved, whom he ought to have 
hated, is brought about by the processes of his soul, 
and not by any vulgar use of machinery. The end 
» ds, as Robert Louis Stevenson once said in regard 
_to a story of his own, “inevitable”—it could not 
have been otherwise. And, after all, this is the 
only excuse for a tragedy in a novel—even in a 
novel of Continental realism, which differs as 
- much from our realism as gray from complete 
black. The plain speaking of Valdés has no pru- 
8 


Introduction 


riency in it. It is the plain speaking of Calderon, 
not the self-conscious analysis of Bourget or the 
deliberate pruriency of Zola, in which the roots of 
life, which are in the mud, are exposed at the ex- 
pense of the splendid blooms that open to heaven. 
Valdés, in “The Fourth Estate,” is less religious 
than Valera, in “Pepita Jiménez”; but one feels 
that he is writing of a people who, as René Bazin 
says of the English, “‘still penetrated with Chris- 
tianity, conserve, from their traditions, a divine 
ideal mingled with all human appetites.” Let us 
take, for instance, the central figure in “The Fourth 
Estate,” Cecilia. She is purity itself, though she 
loves Gonzalo with all her heart, even after his 
marriage with her sister. Christianity, working 
in one of the highest types of womanhood, could 
alone have produced such a creature. Don Ro- 
sendo and his wife, Dofia Paula, are most carefully 
done—touch by touch their characters are painted 
until they stand before us, as if we saw them. 
Dojia Paula’s progress from the costume of the 
cigarette-maker to the gloves and hat of the great 
lady, and its effect on the conservative minds of 
Sarrio, is shown to us rather than told. ‘‘When- 
ever Dofia Paula appeared in public with the 
9 


Introduction 


abhorred hat upon her head, or with any other 
departure from her old attire, she was always 
greeted with a murmur of disapproval. The fault 
of the matter lay in her never having’ resented, in 
public or in private, or even in the sanctum of her 
own feelings, this malignant treatment of her fel- 
low townsfolk. She considered it natural and rea- 
sonable, and it never occurred to her that it ought 
not to have been; her ideas of conventionality had 
never prompted her to rebel against the tyranny of 
public opinion. She believed in all good faith that 
in adopting the gloves, the mantilla, or the hat, she 
had committed a breach of laws both human and 


divine, and that the murmurs and mocking glances — 


were the just retribution for the infraction.” 


Dojia Paula, married to a man much above her 


in rank, ardently desiring the prerogatives of her 
new class, and foolishly wretched when she acquires 


them, develops, as the story goes on, until we forget 


her frivolities and follies and learn to respect her. 
Don Rosendo, the rich, sentimental, and vain phi- 


lanthropist, is a man who could only have existed 
in a Latin country, and in a town like Sarrio. The 


triumph of the character drawing of Valdés is in 
Venturita, the younger sister—charming, beauti- 
10 


Introduction 


ul, seductive—who allured Gonzalo from his duty 
nd his contentment. In the figure of the Duke, 
he egotistic, sensual, esthetic, and blasé man of 
he old nobility, it is easy to recognize a modern 
ype presented often by the pessimist, Padre Co- 
oma; but Valdés makes him individual and novel, 
Ine of the steps that lead to the end is the note- 
vorthy scene of the picture. It is not reticently 
lone—the process of the unveiling of the husband’s 
yes is not discreetly softened, as it is in the case of 
.awdon Crawley by Thackeray. Nothing is left 
n doubt, though the end is different, Rawdon 
Srawley did not love his wife as Gonzalo loved 
enturita, nor had he surrendered honor itself for 
er, and he would not die because, though she had 
reacherously betrayed him, he could live without 
er. 

Cecilia makes the greatest sacrifice a woman can 
2ake, that of her good name—not to save her sister, 
ut to save the man she loves from the madness she 
nows will come upon him should he learn the 
ruth. And, in this episode, the fineness of the art 
f Valdés is shown. It is an old situation—as old 
s the earliest Italian romance; it reeks with the 
mell of gas and the orange-peel of the melodramas 

II 


Introduction 


of the nineteenth century. Many ladies in the 
theatre and in the novels exist only that, at the right 
moment, they should put themselves innocently in — 
an equivocal position, to thrill the- reader with — 
their heroism. But the art.of Valdés makes it new, 
and deprives it both of stupidity and indecency. 
About the central persons of the tragedy walk, 
talk, laugh, grieve, love, and hate the burghers of 
the town of Sarrio—this town of the fourth estate; 
no two are alike; the smallest person of the crowd — 
is distinct and differentiated. 

The minor characters in ““Pepita Jiménez” are 
admirably drawn, too, but there are fewer of them; 
by comparison, one can not help wishing that 
Valdés had more of Valera’s cheerful tolerance. 
He is sometimes relentlessly pitiless, as in the case 
of Galino Maza, the retired naval officer, of M. 
Delaunay, the Belgian engineer, and of the eager 
agitator, Sinforoso Suarez; and this is the more re- © 
markable as there are occasions of great seriousness 
when he is almost absurdly gay. These passages 
have the effect on the reader that the reply of an 
amiable Tagalog, in Philippine “store” clothes, had 
on the grave clergyman who asked him what his 
neighbors would do to the public school teachers 

12 


Introduction 


when these devoted folk should go among them. 
“Kill them, of course,” the ingenuous savage re- 
plied, with a fetching and happy smile. One for- 
gives Valdés because there are only a few flies of 
this kind in the amber. 

There is nothing to forgive in “Pepita Jiménez” 
—the style and the fable g° well together. Here, 
as Coventry Patmore says, “there is no sense of dis- 
location or incompatibility between the natural and 
spiritual.” To the Puritan mind, Pepita is very 
shocking, and. the means by which she awakens the 
mistaken young acolyte from his dreams of an im- 
possible mysticism as horrible as the subterfuge of 
Marianna in “Measure for Measure.” But the 
wise old ecclesiastic, who knows that the perfection 
of celibacy is not for all, watches the case, smiles, 
and forgives. English taste and English morals re- 
quire that Don Luis—in fiction—should kill him- 
self after the manner of Lucretia; but Valera is less 
exacting, and more true to life. The preface to 
‘Pepita Jiménez” is one of the most delicious 
pieces of writing in any language. To the English 
mind the story represents the failure of the ideal 
to overcome the material—a failing which, under 
the. circumstances, was necessary. To the Spanish 

13 


Introduction 


x 

mind, imbued with the principles of Catholicism, 
the motive is entirely different; Don Luis, the false 
mystic, does not fall essentially; he rises to a knowl- . 
edge of his own nature, and he is happy because he, 
in time to save himself, recognizes in time its : limi- 
‘tations and its true vocation. It would be a bold 
man who would excuse the grave Don Luis and the 
pious Pepita; let us leave them, as Valera leaves 
them, very charitably and gaily. 

There is very little cheerfulness in ‘“Dofia Per- 
fecta.” There is, however, great power of descrip- 
tion and terrible intensity of bitterness, One leaves 
Sarrio with regret; one even wants to go back to 
the spot where agonized Gonzalo dropped into the 
sea, to observe Cecilia, with his children, praying 
in the church; but one does not care to return to the 
town of Orbajosa, with all its dignities. Galdos’s 
Rosarito is sweet, innocent, lovely, the Lucy of — 
Lammermoor or the Ophelia of modern Spanish ~ 
literature; she is more like Lucy and less like 
Ophelia, Pepe is a conceited young fellow, of 
good intentions and fine talent, who has neither 
common sense nor tact. The town is full of preju- 
dices. Pepe, fresh from the scientific schools of 
Madrid, outrages them all. In spite of this, he has — 

14 


Introduction 


our sympathies, for all the world loves a lover. 
Dofia Perfecta, proud, cold, unscrupulous, mis- 
takes bigotry for spirituality and the exterior form 
for the sacred heart beneath the symbols of religion. 
She is beloved in the town because she seems to be 
serenely good—and she is good when no human 
being crosses her will. Galdds seems to hate her 
from the first moment she enters; she is to point his 
moral that religion—of the formal sort—destroys 
the law rather than fulfils it. And she does point 
it with a vengeance. 

Rosarito, her daughter of pearl, of alabaster, 
compact of soft sighs and tender fears, and devo- 
tion to the things of Heaven, loves Pepe. And he, 
as his father intends, loves her. But Dofia Per- 
fecta and all the country about conspire against 
him—all, according to their own point of view, 
for the love of God. They are too blind to see that, 
under the “scientific” bumptiousness of Pepe, there 
is a faith in God as strong and more simple than 
their own. Dojfia Perfecta draws out the evil from 
those around her, that Pepe, who has outraged all 
her beliefs, opinions, and prejudices, may be forced 
back to Madrid. Hypocrisy and hatred spring up 
wherever she moves, seemingly as pure and kind as 

15 


Introduction 


the Lady in Milton’s “Comus.” Rosarito’s love 
awakens depth in what seems surface shallowness, 
and she stakes all on her faith in Pepe. ‘The in- 
tense scene at the foot of the crucifix is the great 
moment of the novel; and, after that, Pepe’s awful 
dread grows on him. It is the dread of a soul in 
the dark, surrounded by avenging forms. Rosarito 
fails him through weakness, and the end comes; but 
the real tragedy is not for them that die, but for 
them that live. ‘“Dofia Perfecta” is a realistic 
novel, not of detail, or analysis, not of physiol- 
ogy, but of psychology. Its thesis is modern—of 
the time of the beginning of Darwinism—but its 


pathos and humanity are of all time. It would — 


have been better if the thesis were not so evident, 
for then Dojia Perfecta might have been permitted 
to have one moment of womanly weakness, and this 


would have redeemed her. With all its bitterness — 


and didacticism, “Dofia Perfecta” deserves, as a 


sociological study, a place in this trilogy represent- 
ing the modern novels of Spain. More than that, 
there are passages of such luminous atmosphere 
that only an author with more genius than talent 
could have written them. 
MAURICE FRANCIS EGAN. 
1659 


——— 


LIFE OF VALERA 


T would be hard to count up even a very small 
| number of professional diplomats who have 
made a permanent impression through literary 
achievement. But America, a country noted for 
entrusting its interests abroad to novices, has sent 
forth two such amateur representatives highly dis- 
tinguished in the field of belles-lettres. Each of 
these went to Spain as Envoy Extraordinary and 
Minister Plenipotentiary—Washington Irving at 
the behest of President Tyler, and James Russell 
Lowell upon appointment by President Hayes. 
In return, Alfonso XII issued credentials to the 
novelist and essayist Don Juan Valera y Alcala 
Galiano, which were presented at Washington 
during Arthur’s administration. 
- Don Juan Valera had, however, the adeatitned 
over Irving and Lowell of possessing considerable 
diplomatic experience, as in his younger days he 
had served at Naples, Lisbon, Rio de Janeiro, 
17 


Life of Valera 


Dresden, and St. Petersburg. He was versed in 
home politics as well, for the year 1859 saw him 
elected a member of the Cortes, and he subse- 
quently held Cabinet rank as Secretary of Com- 
merce. ‘His next official post was that of Spanish 
Minister at Frankfort, where he remained until 
1867. The following year was one of revolution 
in his country, the republican government creat- 
ing him director of national education, the honors 
of the Senate and a privy councilorship being yet 
in store for him. 

Thus far, Don Juan had done little to earn that 
universal admiration for his literary talents which 
came to him after the publication of “Pepita 
Jiménez” (1874). Still, an early book of poems, — 
three volumes of miscellaneous essays, a translation 
of the Greek romance “Daphnis and Chloé,” and 
a rendition from the German of Friedrich yon 
Schack’s admirable work on Moorish art and — 
poetry in Spain, gave him sufficient credit to 
obtain a seat in the Spanish Academy and a hear- 
ing as public lecturer. The social life of this 
author had been brilliant at the outset, His 
parents were both _pure-blooded aristocrats, the 
father an admiral in the Spanish navy, the ¢ mother j 

18 aoe 


Life of Valera 


a lady of title and ancient lineage, Don Juan was 
born at Cabra, Andalusia, on the 18th of October, 
1824, and “aha the usual schooling took up the 
study of philosophy at Malaga. Then he went to 
another university, at Granada, to take a course of 
law. But at neither seat of learning was he con- 
spicuous for industry. On the contrary, he was 
well known at both places and at Madrid for a 
gay, reckless young man of the world, as amiable 
as he was extravagant. His light love affairs,\ 
gambling escapades, feats of horsemanship, a 
bull- -fighting exploits, of course ingratiated him 
with the gilded youth of the capital, and by no 
means formed a bar to welcome in fashionable 
circles. 

But long before “Pepita Jiménez” appeared, 
Don Juan’s blood had cooled, and he had, as 
chronicled above, served his country usefully. 
To her literature he also added several other works 
of fiction, besides composing a number of more 
ephemeral writings. These consist in short tales, 
literary criticisms, philosophical and sociologic al 
essays, political articles, and what not. From 1879 
to 1886 he | collaborated with Modesto Lafuente i in 
a six-volume history of iti and as late as 1903 

19 


=< 


Life of Valera a 


published a book of essays and sketches entitled 
“The Superman.” His best known novels, apart 
from “Pepita Jiménez,’ are “The Illusions of 
Doctor Faustino,” el mcaandet Mendoza,” and 
“Dofia Luz”; they were all printed within five 
years of the work selected for the “Foreign oe 
sical Romances, 


20 


AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE FIRST 
AMERICAN EDITION 


To the Messrs. APPLETON: 

Gentlemen:—It was my intention to write a 
preface for the purpose of authorizing the edition 
you are about to publish in English of “Pepita 
Jiménez”; but, on thinking the matter over, I 
was deterred by the recollection of an anecdote 
that I heard in my young days. 

A certain gallant, wishing to be presented at the 
house of a rich man who was about to give a mag- 
nificent ball, availed himself for that purpose of 
the services of a friend, who boasted of his famil- 
iarity with the great man, and of the favor he en- 
joyed with him. They proceeded to the great 
man’s house, and the gallant got his introduction; 
but the great man said to him who had introduced 
the other: “And you, who is to introduce you, for 
I am not acquainted with you?” As I entertain 
a profound respect and affection for this country, 
and have not, besides, the assurance that such an 

21 


Author’s Preface 


occasion would require, it would not do for me to 
say what the introducer of my story, is said to have 
answered: “I need no one to introduce or to 
recommend me, for I am just now going away.” 

I infer from my story, as its evident moral, that 
I ought to refrain from addressing the public of the 
United States, to which I am entirely unknown 
as an author, notwithstanding the fact of my hav- 
_ing maintained pleasant and friendly relations with 
its Government as the representative of my own. 

The most judicious and prudent course I can 
adopt, then, is to limit myself to returning you 
earnest thanks for asking from me an authorization 
of which you did not stand in need, either by law 
or by treaty, for wishing to make known to your 
countrymen the least insipid of the products of my, 
unfruitful genius, and for your generous purpose 
of conceding to me author’s rights. 

This, however, does not preclude the fact that, 
in thus expressing my thanks to you publicly, I 
incur a responsibility which I did not assume on — 
any other occasion, either in Germany, Italy, or — 
any other country where my works have been 
translated; for then, if they failed to please the — 
public, although the fact might pain me, I could 

22 


Author’s Preface 


still shrug my shoulders, and throw the blame of 
failure on the translator, or the publisher; but in 
this case I make myself your accomplice, and 
share or rather receive, all the disgrace of failure, 
if failure there should be. 

“Pepita Jiménez” has enjoyed a wide celebrity, 
not only in Spain, but in every other Spanish-speak- 
ing country. Iam very far from thinking that we 
Spaniards of the present day are either more easily 
satisfied, less cultured than, or possessed of an in- 
ferior literary taste to, the inhabitants of any other 
region of the globe; but this does not suffice to dis- 
pel my misgivings that my novel may be received 
with indifference or with censure by a public 
somewhat prejudiced against Spain by fanciful 
and injurious preconceptions. 

My novel, both in essence and form, is distinct- 
ively ‘national and. classic. Its merits—supposing 
it to have such—consist i in the language and the 
style, and not in the incidents, which are of the 
most commonplace, or in the plot, which, if it can 
be said to have any, “is of t the simplest. 

The characters are 1 not wanting, as I think, in 
individuality, or i in such truth to human nature as 
makes them seem like living beings; but, the action 

\ 


Author’s Preface 


being so slight, this is brought out and made mani- 
fest by means of a subtle analysis, and by the lan- 
guage chosen to express the emotions, both of 
which may in the translation be lost. There is, be- 
sides, in my novel a certain irony, good-humored 
and frank, and a certain humor, resembling | rather 
the humor of the English than the esprit. of the 
French, which qualities, although happily they do 
not depend upon puns, or a play upon words, but 
are in the subject itself, require, in order that they 
may appear in the translation, that this should be 
made with extreme care. 

In conclusion, the chief cause of the extraor- 
dinary favor with which “Pepita Jiménez” was re- 
ceived in Spain is something that may fail to be 
noticed here by careless readers. 

I am an advocate of art for art’s sake. I think 
it is very bad taste, always impertinent, and often 
pedantic, to attempt to prove theses by writing 
stories. For such a purpose dissertations or books 
purely and severely didactic should be written. 
The object,of a novel should be to charm, through 
a faithful representation of human actions and 
human passions, and to create by this fidelity to to 
nature a beautiful work. The object of art is the 

24 


Author’s Preface 


creation of the beautiful, and whoever applies it 
to any other end, of however great utility this end 
may be, debases it. But it may chance, through a 
conjunction of favorable circumstances, by a happy 
inspiration—because in a given moment everything 
is disposed as by enchantment, or by supernatural 
influences—that an author’s soul may become like 
a clear and magic mirror wherein are reflected all 
the ideas and all the sentiments that animate the 
eclectic spirit of his country, and in which these 
ideas and these sentiments Jose their discordance, 
and group and combine themselves in pleasing 
agreement and harmony. 

Herein is the explanation of the interest of “Pe. 
pita Jiménez.” It was written when Spain was 
agitated | to its centre, and everything was. thrown 
out of its regular course by a rgdical..revolution 
that at the same time shook to their foundations 
the throne and eccligions unity. It was written 
when everything in fusion, like molten metal, 
might readily amalgamate, and be molded into 
new forms. It was written when the strife raged 
fiercest between ancient and modern ideals; and, 
anally, it was written in all the plenitude of my 
powers, when my soul was sanest and most joyful 


a5 


Author’s Preface 


a7 


in the possession of an enviable optimism and an 


a eee ae ene — 


all- -embracing love and sympathy for ‘humanity — 
that, to my misfortune, can never again 1 find place | 
within my breast. | 

If I had endeavored by dialectics pi by reason-— 
ing to conciliate opinions and beliefs, the disap- 
probation would have been general; but, as the 
conciliating and syncretic spirit manifested itself 
naturally in a diverting story, every one accepted — 
and approved it, each one drawing from my book — 
the conclusions that best suited himself. Thus it | 
was that, from the most orthodox Jesuit father 
down to the most rabid revolutionist, and from the - 
ultra-Catholic who cherishes the dream of re- 
storing the Inquisition, to the rationalist who is 
the irreconcilable enemy of every religion, all were 
pleased with “Pepita Jiménez.” 

It would be curious, and not inopportune, to 
explain here how it came about that I succeeded in 
pleasing every one without intending it, without 
knowing it, and, as it were, by chance. 

There was in Spain, some years ago, a conser- 
vative minister who had sent a godson of his to 
study philosophy in Germany. By rare good fo 
tune this godson, who was called Julian Sanz del 

26 


Author’s Preface 


Rio, was a man of clear and profound intelligence, 
»f unwearied application, and endowed with all the 
jualities necessary to make of him a sort of apostle. 
le studied, he formulated his system, he obtained 
he chair of metaphysics in the University of 
Madrid, and he founded a school, from which has 
ince issued a brilliant pleiad of philosophers and 
tatesmen, and of men illustrious for their learn- 
ng, their eloquence, and their virtues. Chief 
mong them are Nicolas Salmeron, Francisco 
siner, Gumersindo Azcarate, Frederico de Castro, 
ind Urbano Gonzalez Serrano. 

The clerical party soon began to stir up strife 
igainst the master, the scholars, and the doctrines 
aught by them. They accused them of mystical 
yantheism. 

I, who had ridiculed, at times, the confused 
erms, the pomp of words, and the method which 
he new philosophers made use of, regarded these 
yhilosophers, nevertheless, with admiration, and 
ook up their defense—an almost solitary cham- 
yion—in periodicals and reviews. 

I had already maintained, before this, that our 
treat dogmatic theologians, and especially the 
elebrated Domingo de Soto, were more liberal 

27 


Author’s Preface 


than the liberal rationalists of the present day, af- 


firming, as they do, the sovereignty of the people | 


by divine right; for if, as St. Paul declares, all 
authority proceeds from God, it does so through 
the medium of the people whom God inspires to © 
found it; and because the only authority that pro- 
ceeds directly from God is that of the Church. | 

I then set myself to demonstrate that, if Sanz ~ 
del Rio and his followers were pantheists, our mys- 
tical theologians of the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries were pantheists also; and that, if the | 
former had for predecessors Fichte, Schelling, | 


Hegel, and Krause, St. Theresa, St. John de la | 
Cruz, and the inspired and ecstatic Father Miguel | 
de la Fuente followed, as their model, Tauler and © 


others of the Germans. In saying this, however, — 
it was not my intention to deny the claims of any | 
of these mystical writers as founders of their school 
in Spain, but only to recognize, in this unbroken 


transmission of doctrine, the progressive continu-~ ~ 


ity of European civilization. 7 
For the purpose of carrying forward my under- 
taking, I read and studied with ardor every Span- 
ish book on devotion, asceticism, and mysticism 

that fell into my hands, growing every day more 
28 . 


Author’s Preface 
teined with the richness of our literature in such 
‘works; with the treasures of poetry contained in , 
them; with the boldness and independence of their _ 
authors; with the profound and delicate observa- 
tion, in which they excel the Scottish school, that 
they display in examining the faculties of the soul; 

and with their power of entering into themselves, 
of penetrating to the very centre of the mind, in 
order there to behold God, and to unite themselves 
with God, not t therefore losing their own personal- | 
ity, or theincen capacity for an/active life, but issuing 
from the ecstasies,and Be haverts of divine love 
more apt than before for every work that can ben- 
efit the human species, as the steel is more finely 
tempered, polished, and bright after it has burned 
in the fires of the forge. 

Of all this, on its most poetic and easily under- 
stood side, I wished to give a specimen to the Span- 
ish public of to- o-day, who had forgotten it; but, as 
leary aman of 1 my epoch, a — not very exem- 
plary as regards penitential practises, and had the 
reputation of a freethinker, I did not venture to 
undertake doing this in my own name, and I cre- 
ated a theological student who should do it in his. 
I then fancied that I could paint with more vivid- 


29 


Author’s Preface 


ness the ideas and the feelings of this student by 
contrasting. them with an earthly love; and. this 
was the origin of “Pepita Jiménez.” Thus, when 
it was farthest from my thoughts, did. I become a 
novelist. My novel had, therefore, the freshness . 
and the spontaneity of the unpremeditated. 

The novels I wrote afterward, with premedita- 
tion, are inferior to this one. 

“Pepita Jiménez” pleased the public, also, as I 
have said, by its transcendentalism. | 
The rationalists supposed that I had rejected 
the old ideals, as my hero casts off the clerical 
garb. And the believers, with greater unanimity 
and truth, compared me with the false prophet 
who went forth to curse the people of Israel, and 
without intending it exalted and blessed them. 
What is certain is that, if it be allowable to dra 
any ‘conclusion from a ‘story, the inference that may 


aiaetee 


be deduced from mine is, that faith i in an all-seeing 


and personal God, and in the love of this God, who 
is present in the agoths of the soul, even hal we 
refuse to follow the higher vocation to which H 
would persuade and solicit us—even were we car- 
ried away by the violence of mundane passions to 
commit, like Don Luis, almost all the capital sin 


3 fe) 


| 
: Author’s Preface 


ina a Single day—elevates _ the soul, purifies the 
‘other emotions sustains human dignity, and lends 
‘poetry, “nobility, and holiness to the commonest 
State, condition, and ‘manner of life. 

| Such is, in my opinion, the novel you are now 
‘about to present to the American public; for I re- 
| peat that I have not the right to make the presen- 
tation. 

| Perhaps, independent of its transcendentalism, 

_my novel may serve to interest and amuse your 
‘public fora couple of hours, and may obtain some 
‘favor with it; for it is a public that reads a great 
deal, that is eaieae and that differs from the 
English public—which is eminently exclusive in 
its tastes—by its generous and cosmopolitan spirit. 
[have always regarded as a delusion of national 
vanity the belief that there is, or the hope that 
‘there ever will be, anything that, with legitimate 
and candid independence, may be called American 
literature. Greece diffused herself through the 
world in flourishing colonies, and, after the con- 
quests of Alexander, founded powerful states in 
Egypt, in Syria, and even in Bactriana, among peo- 
ples who, unlike the American Indians, possessed 
a high civilization of their own. But, notwith-. 
3r 


| 


Author’s Preface 


standing this dispersion, and this political sever- 
ance from the mother-country, the literature of 
Syracuse, of Antioch, and of Alexandria was as 
much Greek literature as was the literature of 
Athens. In my opinion, then, and for the same 
reason, the literature of New York and Boston will 
continue to be as much English literature as the 
literature of London and Edinburgh; the literature 
of Mexico and Buenos Ayres will continue to be 
as much Spanish literature as the literature of 
Madrid; the literature of Rio»Janeiro will be as 
much Portuguese literature as the literature of 
Lisbon. Political union may be severed, but, be- 
tween peoples of the same tongue and the same 
race, the ties of spiritual fraternity are indissoluble, 
so long as their common civilization lasts. There 
are immortal kings or emperors who reign and 
rule in America by true divine right, and agains 
_ whom no Washington or Bolivar shall prevail— 
no Franklin succeed in plucking from them theii 
sceptre. These tyrants are called Miguel de 
Cervantes, William Shakespeare, and Luiz d 
Camoens. 
All this does not prevent the new nation from 

bringing to the common fund, and pro indivis 
32 


Author’s Preface 


of the culture -of their race, rich elements, fine 
traits of character, and perhaps even higher qual- 
ities. Thus it is that I observe, in this American 
literature, of English origin and language, a cer- 
tain largeness of views, a certain cosmopolitanism 
and affectionate comprehension of what is foreign, 
broad as the continent itself which the Americans 
inhabit, and which forms a contrast to the narrow 
xclusivism of the insular English. It is because 
of these qualities that I venture to hope now for 
a favorable reception of my Jittle book; and it is in 
these qualities that I found my hope that the fruits 
of Spanish genius in general will, in future, be 
better known and more highly esteemed here than 
in Great Britain. 

Already, to some extent, Irving, Prescott, Tick- 
10r, Longfellow, Howells, and others have con- 
ributed, with judgment and discretion, translating, 
criticizing, and eulogizing our authors, to the 
realization of this hope. 

Forgive my wearying you with this letter, and 
delieve me to be sincerely yours, 

JUAN VALERA. 

New York, Afril 18, 1886. 


(E)—Vot. 13—2 33 


PEPITA JIMENEZ 


DISCOVERY OF THE MANUSCRIPT 


“NESCIT LABI VIRTUS” 


THE reverend Dean of the Cathedral of : 
eceased a few years since, left among his papers 
bundle of manuscript, tied together, which, pass- 
ng from hand to hand, finally fell into mine, 
yithout, by some strange chance, having lost a 
ingle one of the documents contained in it. In- 
cribed on this manuscript were the Latin words 
use above as a motto, but without the addition of 
he woman’s name I now prefix to it as its title; 
nd this inscription has probably contributed to the 
reservation of the papers, since, thinking them, 
o doubt, to be sermons, or other theological mat- 
r, no one before me had made any attempt to untie 
1e string of the package, or to read a single page 
f it. i: 
The manuscript is in three parts. The first is 
ntitled “Letters from my Nephew’”’; the second, 
Paralipomena”’; and the third, ‘““Epilogue—Let- 
srs from my Brother.” 

All three are in the same handwriting, which, it 


35 


Pepita Jim enez 


may be inferred, is that of the reverend Dean; anc 
as taken together they form something like a novel 
I at first thought that perhaps the reverend Dea 
wished to exercise his genius in composing one it 
his leisure hours; but, looking at the matter mort 
closely, and observing the natural simplicity o 
the style, I am inclined to think now that it i 
no novel at all, but that the letters are copies o: 
genuine epistles which the reverend Dean\tore up 
burned, or returned to their owners, and that th 
Narrative part only, designated by the pedantic 
title of “Paralipomena,” is the work of the rev 
erend Dean, added for the purpose of complet 
ing the story with incidents not related in th 
letters. 

However this may be, I confess that I did no 
find the reading of these papers tiresome; I founc 
them, indeed, rather interesting than otherwise 
and as nowadays everything is published, I have 
decided to publish them too, without further in. 
vestigation, changing only the proper names, s¢ 
that if those who bear them be still living they may 
not find themselves figuring in a book without 
desiring or consenting to it. 

The letters contained in the first part seem tc 
have been written by a very young man, with 
some theoretical but no practical knowledge of the 
world, whose life was passed in the house of the 
reverend Dean, his uncle, and in the seminary, anc 

36 


Pepita Jimenez 


who was imbued with an exalted religious fervor 
and an earnest desire to be a priest. 

We shall call this young man Don Luis de 
Vargas. 

The aforesaid manuscript, faithfully transferred 
to print, is as follows. 


37 


PART I 


- LETTERS FROM MY NEPHEW: 


March 22d. 


Four days ago I arrived in safety at this my 
native village, where I found my father, and the 
reverend vicar, as well as our friends and rela- 
tions, all in good health. The happiness of seeing 
them and conversing with them has so completely 
occupied my time and thoughts that I have not 
been able to write to you until now. 

You will pardon me for this. 
| Having left this place a mere child, and com-. 
' ing back a man, the impression produced upon 
me by all those objects that I had treasured up in 
my memory is a singular one. Everything appears 
to me more diminutive, much more diminutive, 
but also more pleasing to the eye, than my recol- 
lection of it. My father’s house, which in my im- 
agination was immense, is, indeed, the large house 
of a rich husbandman, but still much smaller than 
the seminary. What I now understand and appre- 
ciate better than formerly is the country around 
here. The orchards, above all, are delightful. 
What charming paths there are through them! 

38 


Pepita . Jimenez 


On one side, and sometimes on both, crystal waters 
flow with a pleasant murmur. The banks of these 
streams are covered with odorous herbs and flowers 
of a thousand different hues. In a few minutes one 
may gather a large bunch of violets. The paths 
are shaded by majestic trees, chiefly walnut and fig 
trees; and the hedges are formed of blackberry 
bushes, roses, pomegranates, and honeysuckle. 

The multitude of birds that enliven grove and 
field is marvelous. 

I am enchanted with the orchards, and I spend 
a couple of hours walking in them every afternoon. 

My father wishes to take me to see his olive plan- 
tations, his vineyards, his farmhouses; but of all 
this we have as yet seen nothing. I have not been 
outside of the village and the charming orchards 
that surround it. 

It is true, indeed, that the numerous visits I re- 
ceive do not leave me a moment to myself. 

Five different women have come to see me, all 
of whom were my nurses, and have embraced and 
kissed me. 

Every one gives me the diminutive “Luisito,” or 
“Don Pedro’s boy,” although I have passed my 
twenty-second birthday; and every one inquires of 
my father for “the boy,” when I am not present. 

I imagine I shall make but little use of the books 
I have brought with me to read, as I am not left 
alone for a single instant. 


39 


Pepita Jimenez 


The dignity of squire, which I supposed to be 
a matter for jest, is, on the contrary, a serious mat- 
ter. My father is the squire of the village. 

There is hardly any one here who can under- 
stand what they call my caprice of entering the 
priesthood, and these good people tell me, with 
rustic candor, that I ought to throw aside the cleri- 
cal garb; that to be a priest is very well for a poor 
young man; but that I, who am to be a rich man’s 
heir, should marry, and console the old age of my 
father by giving him half a dozen handsome and 
robust grandchildren. 

In order to flatter my father and myself, both 
men and women declare that I am a splendid fel- 
low, that I am of an angelic disposition, that I have 
a very roguish pair of eyes, and other stupid things 
of a like kind, that annoy, disgust, and humiliate 
me, although I am not very modest, and am too 
well acquainted with the meanness and folly of 
the world to be shocked or frightened at any- 
thing. 

The only defect they find in me is that I am too 
thin through overstudy. In order to have me grow 
fat they propose not to allow me either to study or 
even to look at a book while I remain here; and, 
besides this, to make me eat of as many choice 
dishes of meats and confectionery as ~ know 
how to concoct in the village. 

It is quite clear—I am to be stall-fed. There i is 


40 


Pepita Jimenez 


not a single family of our acquaintance that has not 
sent me some token of regard. Now it is a sponge- 
cake, now a meat-salad, now a pyramid of sweet- 
meats, now a jug of syrup. 

And these presents, which they send to the 
house, are not the only attentions they show me. 
I have also been invited to dinner by three or four 
of the principal persons of the village. 

To-morrow I am to dine at the house of the 
famous Pepita Jiménez, of whom you have doubt- 
less heard. No one here,is ignorant of the fact 
that my father is paying her his addresses. 

My father, notwithstanding his fifty-five years, 
is so well preserved that the finest young men of 
the village might feel envious of him. He pos- 
sesses, besides, the powerful attraction, irresistible 
to some women, of his past conquests, of his celeb- 
rity, of his—of course exaggerated—reputation as 
a modern rival to that national rake, Don Juan 
Tenorio. 

I have not yet made the acquaintance of Pepita 
Jiménez. Every one says she is very beautiful. I 
suspect she will turn out to be a village beauty, and 
somewhat rustic. From what I have heard of her 
I can not quite decide whether, ethically speaking, 
she is good or bad; but I am quite certain that she 
is possessed of great natural intelligence. Pepita 
is about twenty years old, and a widow; her mar- 
ried life lasted only three years. She was the 


4l 


Pepita Jimenez 


daughter of Dofia Francisca Galvez, the widow, 
as you know, of a retired captain, 


**Who left her at his death, 
As sole inheritance, his honorable sword,”’ 


as the poet says. Until her sixteenth year Pepita 
lived with her mother in very straitened circum- 
stances—bordering, indeed, upon absolute want. 
She had an uncle called Don Gumersindo, the 
possessor of a small entailed estate, one of those 
petty estates that, in olden times, owed their foun- 
dation to a foolish vanity. Any ordinary person, 
with the income derived from this estate, would 
have lived in continual difficulties, burdened by 
debts, and altogether cut off from the display and 
ceremony proper to his rank. But Don Gumer- 
sindo was an extraordinary person—the very gen- 
ius of economy. It could not be said of him that 
he created wealth himself, but he was endowed 
with a wonderful faculty of absorption with re- 
spect to the wealth of others; and in regard to dis- 
pensing, it would be difficult to find any one on the 
face of the globe with whose maintenance, preser- 
vation, and comfort, Mother Nature and human 
industry ever had less reason to trouble themselves. 
No one knows how he lived; but the fact is that he 
reached the age of eighty, saving his entire income, 
and adding to his capital by lending money on un- 
questionable security. No one here speaks of him 


42 


Pepita Jimenez 


as a usurer; on the contrary, he is considered to 
have been of a charitable disposition, because, 
being moderate in all things, he was so even in 
usury, and would ask only ten per cent a year, 
while throughout the district they ask twenty and 
even thirty per cent, and still think it little. 

In the practise of this species of industry and 
economy, and with thoughts dwelling constantly 
on increasing instead of diminishing his capital, 
indulging neither in the luxury of matrimony and 
of having a family, nor even of smoking, Don 
Gumersindo arrived at the age I have mentioned, 
the possessor of a fortune considerable anywhere, 
and here regarded as enormous, thanks to the 
voverty of these villages, and to the habit of 
exaggeration natural to the Andalusians. 

Don Gumersindo, always extremely neat and 
clean in his person, was an old man who did not 
inspire repugnance. 

The articles of his modest wardrobe were some- 
what worn, but carefully brushed and without a 
stain; although from time immemorial he had al- 
ways been seen with the same cloak, the same 
jacket, and the same trousers and waistcoat. Peo- 
ple sometimes asked each other in vain if any one 
had ever seen him wear a new garment. 

With all these defects, which here and elsewhere 
many regard as virtues, though virtues in excess, 
Don Gumersindo possessed excellent qualities; he 


43 


Pepita Jimenez 


was affable, obliging, compassionate; and did his 
utmost to please and to be of service to everybody, 
no matter what trouble, anxiety, or fatigue it might 
cost him, provided only it did not cost him money. 
Of a cheerful disposition, and fond of fun and 
joking, he was to be found at every feast and merry- 
making around that was not got up at his expense, 
which he enlivened by the amenity of his manners, 
and by his discreet although not very Attic con- 
versation. He had never had any tender incli- 
nation for any one woman in particular, but, 
innocently and without malice, he loved them all; 
and was the most given to complimenting the girls, 
and making them laugh, of any old man for ten 
leagues around. 

I have already said that he was the uncle of 
Pepita. When he was nearing his eightieth year 
she was about to complete her sixteenth. He was 
tich; she, poor and friendless. 

Her mother was a vulgar woman of limited in- 
telligence and coarse instincts. She worshiped her 
daughter, yet lamented continually and with bit- 
terness the sacrifices she made for her, the priva- 
tions she suffered, and the disconsolate old age and 
melancholy end that awaited her in the midst of 
her poverty. She had, besides, a son, older than 
Pepita, who had a well-deserved reputation in the 
village as a gambler and a quarrelsome fellow, and 
for whom, after many difficulties, she had suc- 


gy 1 
4 t. 


Pepita Jimenez 


ceeded in obtaining an insignificant employment 
in Havana; thus finding herself rid of him, and 
with the sea between them. After he had been a 
few years in Havana, however, he lost his situation 
on account of his bad conduct, and thereupon be- 
gan to shower letters upon his mother, containing 
demands for money. The latter, who had scarcely 
enough for herself and for Pepita, grew desperate 
at this, broke out into abuse, cursed herself and her 
destiny with a perseverance but little resembling 
the theological virtue, and ended by fixing all her 
hopes upon settling her daughter well, as the only 
way of getting out of her difficulties. 

In this distressing situation Don Gumersindo 
began to frequent the house of Pepita and her 
mother, and to pay attentions to the former with 
more ardor and persistence than he had shown in his 
attentions to other girls. Nevertheless, to suppose 
that a man who had passed his eightieth year with- 
out wishing to marry, should think of committing 
such a folly, with one foot already in the grave, was 
so wild and improbable a notion that Pepita’s 
mother, still less Pepita herself, never for a mo- 
ment suspected the audacious intentions of, Don 
Gumersindo. 

Thus it was that both were struck one day 
with amazement when, after a good many com- 
pliments, between jest and earnest, Don Gumer- 
sindo, with the greatest seriousness and without 


45 


\ 


Pepita Jimenez 


the least hesitation, proposed the following cate- 
gorical question: 

“Pepita, will you marry me?” 

Although the question came at the end of a great 
deal of joking, and might itself be taken for a joke, 
Pepita, who, inexperienced though she was in 
worldly matters, yet knew by a certain instinct of 
divination that is in all women, and especially in 
young girls, no matter how innocent they may be, 
that this was said in earnest, grew as red as a 
cherry and said nothing. Her mother answered 
in her stead: 

“Child, don’t be ill-bred; answer your uncle as 
you should: ‘With much pleasure, uncle—when- 
ever you wish.’ ” 

‘This “with much pleasure, uncle—whenever you 
wish,” came then, it is said, and many times after- 
ward, almost mechanically from the trembling lips 
of Pepita, in obedience to the admonitions, the 
sermons, the complaints, and even the imperious 
mandate of her mother. 

I see, however, that I am enlarging too much on 
this matter of Pepita Jiménez and her history; 
but she interests me, as I suppose she should inter- 
est you too, since, if what they affirm here be true, 
she is to be your sister-in-law and my step- 
mother. 

I shall endeavor, notwithstanding, to avoid 
dwelling on details, and to relate briefly what 


46 


Pepita Jimenez 


perhaps you already know, though you have been 
away from here so long. 

Pepita Jiménez was married to Don Gumer- 
sindo. The tongue of slander was let loose against 
her, both in the days preceding the wedding and 
for some months afterward. 

In fact, from the point of view of morals, this 
marriage was a matter that will admit of discus- 
sion; but, so far as the girl herself is concerned, if 
we remember her mother’s prayers, her complaints, 
and even her commands—if we take into consid- 
eration the fact that Pepita thought by this means 
to procure for her mother a comfortable old age, 
and to save her brother from dishonor and infamy, 
constituting herself his guardian angel and his 
earthly providence, we must confess that our con- 
demnation will admit of some abatement. Besides, 
who shall penetrate into the recesses of the heart, 
into the hidden secrets of the immature mind of a 
young girl, brought up, probably, in the most abso- 
lute seclusion and ignorance of the world, in order 
to know what idea she might have formed to her- 
self of marriage? Perhaps she thought that to 
marry this old man meant to devote her life to his 
service, to be his nurse, to soothe his old age, to 
save him from a solitude and abandonment embit- 
tered by his infirmities, and in which only mer- 
cenary hands should minister to him; in a word, 
to cheer and illumine his declining years with the 


47 


Pepita Jimenez 


glowing beams of her beauty and her youtn, like 
an angel who has taken human form. If some- 
thing of this, or all of this, was what the girl 
thought, and if she failed to perceive the full sig- 
nificance of her act, then its morality is placed 
beyond question. | 

However this may be, leaving aside psycholog- 
ical investigations that I have no authority for 
making, since I am not acquainted with Pepita 
Jiménez, it is quite certain that she lived in edify- 
ing harmony with the old man during three years, 
that she nursed him and waited upon him with 
admirable devotion, and that in his last painful and 
fatal sickness she ministered to him and watched 
over him with tender and unwearying affection, 
until he expired in her arms, leaving her heiress 
to a large fortune. 

Although more than two years have passed since 
she lost her mother, and more than a year and a 
half since she was left a widow, Pepita still wears 
the deepest mourning. Her sedateness, her retired 
manner of living, and her melancholy, are such 
that one might suppose she lamented the death of 
her husband as much as though he had been a hand- 
some young man. Perhaps there are some who 
imagine or suspect that Pepita’s pride, and the cer- 
tain knowledge she now has of the not very poetical 
means by which she has become rich, trouble her 
awakened and more than scrupulous conscience; 


48 


Pepita Jimenez 


and that, humiliated in her own eyes and in those 
of the world, she seeks, in austerity and retirement, 
consolation for the vexations of her mind, and 
balm for her wounded heart. 

People here, as everywhere, have a great love of 
money. Perhaps I am wrong in saying, as every- 
where; in populous cities, in the great centres of 
civilization, there are other distinctions which are 
prized as much as, or even more than, money, be- 
cause they smooth the way to fortune, and give 
credit and consideration in the eyes of the world; 
but in smaller places, where neither literary nor 
scientific fame, nor, asa rule, distinction of man- 
ners, nor elegance, nor discretion and amenity in 
intercourse, are apt to be either valued or under- 
stood, there is no other way by which to adjust the 
social hierarchy than the possession of more or less 
money, or of something worth money. Pepita, 
then, in the possession of money, and beauty be- 
sides, and making a good use, as every one says, 
of her riches, is to-day respected and esteemed in 
an extraordinary degree. From this and the sur- 
rounding villages the most eligible suitors, the 
wealthiest young men, have crowded to pay their 
court to her. But, so far as can be seen, she rejects 
them all, though with the utmost sweetness, for she 
wishes to make no one her enemy; and it is com- 
monly supposed that her soul is filled with the most 
- ardent devotion, and that it is her fixed intention 


49 


Pepita Jimenez 


to dedicate her life to practises of charity and 
religious piety. 

My father, according to the general opinion, has 
not succeeded better than her other suitors; but 
Pepita, to fulfil the adage that ‘“‘courtesy and can- 
dor are consistent with each other,” takes the great- 
est pains to give him proofs of a frank, affectionate, 
and disinterested friendship. She is unremitting 
in her attentions to him, and when he tries to speak 
to her of love she brings him to a stop with a ser- 
mon delivered with the most winning sweetness, 
recalling to his memory his past faults, and endeav- 
oring to undeceive him in regard to the world and 
its vain pomps. | 

I confess that I begin to have some curiosity to 
know this woman, so much do I hear her spoken 
of! nor do I think my curiosity is without founda- 
tion, or that there is anything in it either vain or 
sinful. I myself feel the truth of what Pepita says; 
I myself desire that my father, in his advanced 
years, should enter upon a better life; should for- 
get, and not seek to renew, the agitations and pas- 
sions of his youth; and should attain to the enjoy- 
ment of a tranquil, happy, and honorable old age. 
I differ from Pepita’s way of thinking in one thing 
only: I believe my father would succeed in this 
rather by marrying a good and worthy woman who 
loved him, than by remaining without a wife. For 
this very reason I desire to become acquainted with 


50 


Pepita Jimenez 


Pepita, in order to know if she be this woman; for 
I am to a certain extent troubled—and perhaps 
there is in this feeling something of family pride, 
which, if it be wrong, I desire to cast out—by the 
disdain, however honeyed and gracious, of the 
young widow. 

If my situation were other than it is, I should 
prefer my father to remain unmarried. Then, 
being the only child, I should inherit all his wealth, 
and, as one might say, nothing less than the position 
of squire of the village. But you already know 
how firm is the resolution I have taken. Humble 
and unworthy though I’ be, I feel myself called to 
the priesthood, and the possessions of this world 
have but little power over my mind. If there is 
anything in me of the ardor of youth, and the 
vehemence of the passions proper to that age, it | 
shall all be employed in nourishing an active and 
fecund charity. Even the many books you have 
given me to read, and my knowledge of the history 
of the ancient civilizations of the peoples of Asia, 
contribute to unite within me scientific curiosity 
with the desire of propagating the faith, and invite 
and animate me to go forth as a missionary to the 
fac East. As soon as I leave this village, where 
you, my dear uncle, have sent me to pass some time 
wih my father, and am raised to the dignity of 
the priesthood, and, ignorant and sinner as I am, 
fee, myself invested by free and supernatural gift, 

5r 


Pepita Jimenez 


through the sovereign goodness of the Most High, 


with the power to absolve from sin, and with the 


mission to teach the peoples—as soon as I receive 
the perpetual and miraculous grace of handling 
with impure hands the very God made man, it is 
my purpose to leave Spain, and go forth to distant 
lands to preach the Gospel. 

I am not actuated in this by vanity. I do not 
desire to believe myself superior to other men. 
The power of my faith, the constancy of which I 
feel myself capable, everything after the favor and 
grace of God, I owe to the judicious education, to 
the holy teaching, and to the good example I have 
received from you, my dear uncle. 

‘There is something I hardly dare confess to my- 
self, but which, against my will, presents itself 
with frequency to my mind; and, since it presents 
" itself to my mind, it is my desire, it is my duty to 
confess it to you: it would be wrong for me to hide 
from you even my most secret and involuntary 
thoughts. You have taught me to analyze the feel- 
ings of the soul; to search for their origin, if it be 


good or evil; to mate. in short, a scrupulous exami- 


nation of conscience. 

I have often reflected on two different methods 
of education: that of those who endeavor to keep 
the mind in innocence, confounding innocence with 
ignorance, and believing evil that is unknown to be 
avoided more easily than evil that is known; and 


52 


J 


J 


Pepita Jimenez 


that of those, on the other hand, who courageously, 
and as soon as the pupil has arrived at the age of 
reason, show him, with due regard for modesty, 
evil in all its hideous ugliness and repulsive 
nakedness, to the end that he may abhor and 
avoid it. 

According to my way of thinking, it is necessary 
to know evil in order the better to comprehend the 
infinite Divine goodness, the ideal and unattainable 
end of every virtuously born desire. I am grateful 
to you that you have made me to know, with the 
honey and the butter of your teaching, as the Scrip- 
ture says, both good ard evil, to the end that I 
should aspire to the one and undone the other, 
knowingly and with discreet ardor. I rejoice that 
_ Iam no longer in a state of mere innocence, and 
that I shall go forward in the progress toward I 
virtue, and, in so far as is permitted to humanity, 
oaard perfection, with.a.knowledge of all. the 
- tribulations, all the asperities that there are in the 
pilgrimage we are called upon to make through 
this valley of tears; as I am not ignorant, on the 
other hand, of how. smooth, how easy, how pleas- 
ant, how flowery the road is in appearance that 
leads to perdition and eternal death. 

Another thing for which I feel bound to be grate- 
ful to you is the indulgence, the toleration—not 
condescending nor lax, but, on the contrary, serious 
and thoughtful—with which you have been able 


53 


Pepita Jimenez 


to inspire me for the errors and the sins of my, 
fellow men. 

I say all this to you because I wish to speak to 
you on a subject of so delicate a nature that I hardly 
find words in which to express myself concerning 
it. In short, I often ask myself whether the reso- 
lution I have adopted had not its origin, in part 


‘|’ at least, in the character of my relations with my 
\5 father. In the bottom of my heart have I been 


able to pardon him his conduct toward my poor 
mother, the victim of his errors? 

I consider this matter carefully, and I can not 
find an atom of hatred in my breast. On the con~ 
trary, gratitude fills it entirely. My father has 
brought me up affectionately. He has tried to 
honor in me the memory of my mother, and one 
would have said that in my bringing up, in the 
care he took of me, in the indulgence with which 
he treated me, in his devotion to me as a child, he 
sought to appease her angry shade—if the shade, 
if the spirit of her who was on earth an angel 
of goodness and gentleness, could be capable of 
anger. 

I repeat, then, that I am full of gratitude toward 
my father; he has acknowledged me, and, besides, 
he sent me at the age of ten years to you, to whom 
I owe all that I am. | 

If there is in my heart any germ of virtue, if 
there is in my mind any element of knowledge, if 


54 


Pepita Jimenez 


there is in my will any honorable and good pur- 
pose, to you it is I owe it. 

My father’s affection for me is extraordinary; 
the estimation in which he holds me is far supe- 
rior to my merits. Perhaps vanity may have some- 
thing to do with this. In paternal love there is 
something selfish; it is, as it were, a prolongation 
of selfishness. If I were possessed of any merit, 
my father would regard it all as a creation of his 
own, as if I were an emanation of his personality, 
as much in spirit as in body. Be this as it will, 
however, I believe that/my father loves me, and 
that there is in his affection something self-sustain- 
ing, and superior to all this pardonable selfishness 
of which I have spoken. 

I experience a great consolation, a profound 
tranquillity of conscience—and for this I return 
most fervent thanks to God—when I discern the 
fact that the power of blood, the tie of nature, that 
mysterious bond that unites us, leads me, without 
any consideration of duty, to love my father and to 
reverence him. It would be horrible not to love 
him thus—to be compelled to force myself to love 
in order to obey a Divine command. Nevertheless 
—and here comes back my doubt—does my pur- 
pose of becoming a priest or a friar, of not accept- 
ing, or of accepting only a very | small part of, the 
immense fortune that will be mine by hea e ce 
and which ¥ I might enjoy even during my father’s 


55 


y See ; 
Pepita Jimenez 


lifetime; does this proceed solely from my con- 
tempt of the things of this world, from a true voca- 
tion for a religious life, or does it not also proceed 
from pride, from hidden rancor, from resentment, 
from something in me that refuses to forgive what 
my mother herself, with sublime generosity, for- 
gave? This doubt assails and torments me at times, 
but almost always I resolve it my favor, and come 
to the conclusion that I have no feeling of pride 
toward my father. I think I would accept from 
him all he has, if I were to need it, and I rejoice 
to be as grateful to him for little as for much. 

Farewell, uncle. In future I will write to you 
often, and as much at length as you desire, if not 
quite so much so as to-day, lest I should appear 
prolix. 


56 


Pepita Jimenez 


March 28th. 


I BEGIN to be tired of my stay in this place, and 
every day the desire grows stronger within me to 
return to you and to receive my ordination. But 
my father wishes to accompany me. He wishes to 
be present at that solemn ceremony, and desires 
that I should remain here with him at least two 
months longer. He is so amiable, so affectionate 
with me, that it would be impossible for me not to 
gratify hin: in all his wishes. I shall remain here, 
therefore, for the time Ke desires. In order to give 
him pleasure I do violence to my feelings, and 
make an effort to seem interested in the amusements 
of the village, the country sports, and even shoot- 
ing, in all of which I am his companion. I try to 
appear gayer and more animated than I am by 
nature. As in the village, half in jest, half by way 
of eulogy, I am called “The Saint,” I endeavor, 
through modesty, to avoid the appearance of sanc- 
tity, or to soften and humanize its manifestations 
with the virtue of moderation, displaying a serene 
and decent cheerfulness which was never yet op- 
posed to holiness nor to the saints. I confess, never- 
theless, that the merry-making and the sports of 
these people, with their coarse jokes and boister- 
ous mirth, weary me. I do not want to fall into the 
sin of scandal, nor to speak ill of any one, though 


Oy 


Pepita Jimenez 


it be only to you and in confidence; but I often 
think that it would be a more difficult enterprise, 
as well as a more rational and meritorious one, to 
preach the Gospel to these people, and try to ele- 
vate their moral nature, than to go to India, Per- 
sia, or China, leaving so many of my country- 
people behind, who are, if not perverted, at least 
to some extent gone astray. Many, indeed, are of 
the opinion that modern ideas, that materialism 
and infidelity, are to blame for this. But if that be 
the case, if they it be that produce such evil effects, 
then it must be in some strange, diabolical, and 
miraculous manner, and not by natural means; 
since the fact is, that here the people read no. 
books, either good or bad; so.that I do not well see 
how they can be perverted by any evil doctrines 
the books in fashion may contain. 

Can these evil doctrines be in the air, like a 
miasma or an epidemic? Perhaps—and I am sorry 
this thought, which I mention to you only, should 
occur to me—perhaps the clergy themselves are in 
fault? Are they, in Spain, equal to their mission? 
Do they go among the people, teaching and preach- 
ing to them? Are they all capable of this? Have 
those who consecrate themselves to a religious life 
and to the salvation of souls a true vocation for 
their calling? Or is it only a means of living, like 
any other, with this difference—that in our day 
only the poorest, only those who are without ex- 

58 


Pepita Jimenez 


pectations and without means, devote themselves to 
it, for the very reason that this calling offers a less 
brilliant prospect than any other? Be that as it 
ymay, the very scarcity of virtuous and learned | 
' priests ; arouses all the more within me the desire to 
be a priest. I would not willingly let self-love de- 
ceive me. I recognize all my defects; but I feel 
within me a true vocation, and many of those de- 
fects it may still be possible, with the divine help, 
to correct. 

The dinner at the Goan of Pepita Jiménez, 
which I mentioned to you, took place three days 
ago. As she leads so refired a life, I had not met 
her before; she seemed to me, in tfuth as beautiful 
as she is said to be, and I nedeed that hes amiabil- 
ity with my father was such as to give him reason 
to hope, at least judging superficially, that she 
will yield to his wishes in the end, and accept 
his hand. 

As there is a possibility of her becoming my step- 
mother, I have observed her with attention; she 
seems to me to be a remarkable woman, whose 
moral qualities I am not able to determine with 
exactitude. There is about her an.air of calm- 
ness and serenity that may come either from cold- 
ness of heart and spirit, with great self-control and 
power of calculating effects, accompanied by little 
or no sensibility; or that may, on the other hand, 
proceed from the tranquillity of her conscience 


59 


Pepita Jimenez 


and the purity of her aspirations, united to the 
purpose of fulfilling in this life the duties imposed 
upon her by society, while her hopes are fixed, 
meantime, upon loftier things, as their proper goal. 
What is certain is that, either because with this 
woman everything is the result of calculation, 
without any effort to elevate her mind to a higher 
sphere, or, it may be, because she blends in perfect 
harmony the prose of daily life with the poetry of 
her illusions, there is nothing discernible in her 
out of tone with her surroundings, although she 
possesses a natural distinction of manner that ele- 
vates her above and separates her from them all. 
She does not affect the dress of a provincial, nor 
does she, on the other hand, follow blindly the 
fashions of the city; she unites both these styles in 
her mode of dress in such a manner as to appear 
like a lady, but still a lady country-born and coun- 
try-bred. She disguises to a great extent, as I 
think, the care she takes of her person. There is 
nothing about her to betray the use of cosmetics or 
the arts of the toilet. But the whiteness of her 
hands, the color and polish of her nails, and the 
grace and neatness of her attire denote a greater 
regard for such matters than might be looked for 
in one who lives in a village, and who is said, be- 
sides, to despise the vanities of this world and to 
think only of heavenly things. 

Her house is exquisitely clean, and everything in 

60 


Pepita Jimenez 


it reveals the most perfect order. The furniture 
is neither artistic nor elegant, nor is it, on the other 
hand, either pretentious or in bad taste. To give 
a poetic air to her surroundings, she keeps in the 
rooms and passages, as well as in the garden, a 
multitude of plants and flowers. There is not, in- 
deed, among them any rare plant or exotic, but her 
plants and flowers, of the commonest species here, 
are tended with extraordinary care. 

Canaries in gilded cages enliven the whole 
house with their songs. Its mistress, it is obvious, 
has need of living creatures on which to bestow 
“some of her affection; and besides several maid- 
servants, that one would suppose she had selected 
with care, since it can not be by mere chance that 
they are all pretty, she has, after the fashion of old 
maids, various animals to keep her company— 
a parrot, a little dog, whose coat is of the 
whitest, and two or three cats, so tame and sociable 
that they jump up on one in the most friendly 
manner. 

At one end of the principal saloon is a species of 
oratory, whose chief ornament is an Infant Jesus, 
carved in wood, with red and white cheeks and 
blue eyes, and altogether quite handsome. The 
dress is of white satin, with a blue cloak full of 
little golden stars; and the image is completely 
covered with jewels and trinkets. The little altar 
on which the figure is placed is adorned with 


61. 


Pepita Jimenez 


ee 
flowers, and around it are set pots of broom and 
bay; and on the altar itself, which is furnished 
with steps, a great many wax tapers are kept burn- 
ing. When I behold all this I know not what to 
think, but for the most part I am inclined to be- 
lieve that the widow loves herself above all things, 
and that it is for her recreation, and for the pur- 
pose of furnishing her with occasions for the effu- 
sion of this love, that she keeps the cats, the ca- 
naries, the flowers, and even the Infant Jesus itself, 
which, in her secret soul, perhaps does not occupy 
a place very much higher than the canaries and 
the cats. 

_ It can not be denied that Pepita Jiménez is pos- 
sessed of discretion. No silly jest, no impertinent 
question in regard to my vocation, and, above all, in 
regard to my approaching ordination, has crossed 
her lips. She conversed with me on matters relat- 
ing to the village, about agriculture, the last crop 
of grapes and olives, and the means of improving 
the methods of making wine, expressing herself 
always with modesty and naturalness and without 
manifesting any desire of appearing to know more 
than others. 

My father was at his best; he seemed to have 
grown younger, and his pressing attentions to the 
lady of his thoughts were received, if not with 
love, at least with gratitude. 

There were present at dinner, the doctor, the 

62 : 


Pepita Jimenez 


notary, and the reverend vicar, who is a great 
friend of the house and the spiritual father of 
Pepita. 

The reverend vicar must have a very high opin-} 
ion of her, for on several occasions he spoke to me 
apart of her charity, of the many alms she bestows, 
of her compassion and goodness to every one. In 
a word, he declared her to be a saint.) 

In view of what the vicar has told me, and rely- 
ing on his judgment, I can do no less than wish 
that my father may marry Pepita. As my father 
is not fitted for a life of penance, in this way only 
could he hope to change’ his mode of life, that up 
to the present has been so dissipated, and settle 
down to a well-ordered and geet, if not exemplary, 
old age. » 

When we reached our house, after leaving that 
of Pepita Jiménez, my father spoke to me seriously 
of his projects. He told me that in his time he had 
been very wild, that he had led a very bad life, and 
that he saw no way of reforming, notwithstanding 
his years, unless Pepita were to fall in love with 
and marry him. 

Taking for granted, of course, that she would do 
so, my father then spoke about money matters. He 
told me that he was very rich, and would leave me 
amply provided for in his will, even though he 
should have other children. I answered him that 
ifor my plans and purposes in life I needed very 

63 


Pepita Jimenez 


little money, and that my greatest satisfaction 
would always consist in knowing him to be happy 
with wife and children, his former evil ways for- 
gotten. 

My father hen spoke to me of his tender hopes 
with a candor and eagerness that might make one 
suppose me to be the father and the old man, and 
he a youth of my age, or younger. In order to 
enhance the merit of his mistress and the difficul- 
ties of his conquest, he recounted to me the accom- 
plishments and the excellences of the fifteen or 
twenty suitors who had already presented them-, 
selves to Pepita, and who had all been rejected. 
As for himself, as he explained to me, the same 
lot, to a certain extent, had been his also; but 
he flattered himself that this want of success 
was not final, since Pepita showed him so many 
kindnesses, and an affection so great that, if it were 
not love, it might easily, with time and the per- 
sistent homage he dedicated to her, be converted 
into love. 

There was, besides, in my father’s opinion, some- 
thing fantastic and fallacious in the cause of Pe- 
pita’s coldness, that must in the end wear away. 
Pepita did not wish to retire to a convent, nor did 
she incline to a penitential life. Notwithstanding 
her seclusion and her piety, it was easy to see that 
she took delight in pleasing. Her daintiness and 
dress and the care she bestowed upon her person 

64 


Pepita Jimenez 


indeed exhibited little of the conventual. The 


cause of her coldness, then, my father declared to .- 
be, without a doubt, her pride—a pride to a certain »: 


extent well founded. She is naturally elegant and 
distinguished in appearance; both by her force of 
character and by her intelligence she is superior 
to those who surround her, no matter how she 
may seek, through modesty, to disguise it. How, 
then, should she bestow her hand upon any of the 
rustics who up to the present time have been her 


suitors? She imagines that her soul is filled with “>. 


a mystic love of God, and that God only can sat- 
isfy it, because thus far no mortal has crossed her 
path intelligent enough and agreeable enough to 
make her forget even her image of the Infant Jesus. 
“Although it may seem conceited on my part,” 
added my father, “I flatter myself that I am the 


_ happy man.” 


Such, dear uncle, are the occupations and the 
projects of my father here, and such the matters, 
so foreign to my nature, and to my aims and 
thoughts, of which he speaks to me with fre- 
quency, and on which he requires me to give an 
opinion. 

It would almost seem as if your too indulgent 


opinion of my judgment had extended itself to 
_ the people here, for they all tell me their troubles, 


and ask my advice as to the course they should 
adopt. Even the reverend vicar, exposing himself 


| (E)—Vot. 13-3 65 


Pepita Jimenez 


to the risk of betraying what might be called secrets 
of confession, has already come to consult me in 
regard to several cases of conscience that have pre- 
sented thernselves to him in the confessional. 

One of these cases—related, like all the others, 
with much mystery, and without revealing the 
name of the person concerned—has greatly inter- 
ested me. 

‘The reverend vicar tells me that a certain peni- 
tent of his is troubled by scruples of conscience, 
because, while she feels herself irresistibly attracted 
toward a solitary and contemplative life, she yet 
fears at times that this devout fervor is not.accom- 

panied by a true humility, but that it is in part 
excited by, and has its source in, the demon of 

pride himself. 
fae To love God in all things, to seek Him in the 
inmost recesses of the soul wherein He dwells, to 
purify ourselves from all earthly passions and 
affections, in order to unite ourselves to Him— 
these are, in truth, pious aspirations and virtuous 
inclinations; but the doubt arises in determining 
whether the source of these aspirations and inclina- 
tions be not an exaggerated self-love. “Have they 
their origin,” the penitent, it seems, asks herself, 
“in the thought that I, although unworthy and a 
sinner, presume my soul to be of more value than 
the souls of my fellow-mortals—that the interior 
beauty of my mind and of my will would be 

66 ; 


Pepita Jimenez 


dimmed by harboring affection for the human 
beings by whom I am surrounded, and whom I 
deem unworthy of mer Do I love God above all 
things, infinitely, or only more than the little things 
that I know, and that I scorn and despise, that can 
not satisfy my heart? If my piety is founded upon 
this feeling, then there are in it two great defects: 
the first, that it is not based upon a pure love a 


without foundation, is unstable and inefficacious. 
For who can be certain that the soul will not forget 
the love of its Creator, when it does not love Him 
infinitely, but only because there is no other being 
whom it deems worthy of endowing with its , 
love? ui 
It is concerning this case of conscience, refined 
and subtle enough thus to exercise the mind of a 
simple rustic, that the reverend vicar has come to 
consult me. I would have excused myself from 
saying anything in the matter, alleging, as a reason 
for doing so, my youth and inexperience; but the 
reverend vicar has shown himself so persistent in 
the matter that I could do no less than discuss the 
question with him. I said—and it would rejoice 
me greatly should you concur in my opinion—that 
what this troubled penitent requires is to regard 
those who sourround her with greater benevo- 
lence; to try to throw the cloak of charity over 


67 


Pepita Jimenez 


their faults, instead of analyzing and dissecting 
them with the scalpel of criticism, bringing into 
relief and dwelling upon their good qualities, to 
the end that she may esteem and love them; to 
endeavor, in fact, to behold in every human being 
an object worthy of her love, a true fellow-creature, 
her equal, a soul wherein there is a treasure of good 
qualities and virtues—a being made, in short, in 
the image and likeness of God. Entertaining this 
exalted view of our surroundings, loving and es- 
teeming others for what they are, and as more 
than they are, striving not to hold ourselves supe- 
rior to them in anything, but, on the contrary, 
searching courageously in the depths of our own 
consciousness for the purpose of discovering all our 
faults and sins, and thus acquiring a devout humil- 
ity and contempt of self—standing upon such a 
principle as this, the heart will feel itself full of 
human affection, and, instead of despising, will 
value highly the worth of things and of persons. 
(Then, if afterward, Divine love should, with irre- 
sistible power, erect itself upon and tower above 
this foundation, there can be no fear but that such 
a love has its origin, not in an exaggerated self- 
esteem, in pride, or in an unjust contempt for our- 
neighbor, but in a pure and holy contemplation of 
Infinite Beauty and Goodness. 

If, as I suspect, it be Pepita Jiménez who has 
consulted the reverend vicar in regard to these 

68 


Pepita Jimenez 


doubts and tribulations, I think my father can not 
yet flatter himself with being very dear to her; but 
if the vicar should resolve on giving her my advice 
and she accepts it and acts upon it, then she will 
either become a sort of Maria de Agreda, a self- 
conscious recluse, or, what is more probable, she 
will cast away mysticism and coldness altogether, 
and will consent to accept, without further cavil- 
ing, the hand and heart of my father, who is in no 
respect her inferior. 


Pepita Jimenez 


‘A pril ath. 


My life in this place begins, from its monotony, 
to be wearisome; and not because it is, physically, 
less active here than it was elsewhere; on the con- 
trary, I walk and ride a great deal, and make ex- 
cursions into the country, and, to please my father, 
visit the club-house and go to parties; in short, my 
life and my surroundings are quite uncongenial to 
me. For my intellectual life is a blank; I read 
nothing, and there is hardly a moment left me in 
which to reflect and meditate with tranquillity; 
and, as reflection and meditation were what consti- 
tuted the chief charm of my existence, my life 
without them seems to me monotonous. ‘Thanks 
to the patience which you have recommended to 
me for every occasion, I am able to endure it. 

Another thing that prevents my spirit from being 
completely at rest is the longing, that becomes 
every day more ardent within me, to embrace that 
life to which I have for years been so earnestly 
inclined. It seems to me that, in those moments 
when I feel myself so near to the realization of 
the constant dream of my life, it is something like 
a profanation to allow my mind to be distracted by 
other objects. So much does this idea torment me, 
and to so many doubts does it give rise within me, — 
that my admiration for the beauty of things cre- 


7° 


i Jimenez 


fied of the heavens, so full of stars in these serene 
nights of spring, and in this favored region of 
Andalusia; of these smiling fields, now covered 
with verdure; of these cool and pleasant gardens, 
abounding in shady and delightful walks, in gently 
flowing streams andrivulets, in sequestered nooks, 
in birds that enliven them with song, and in flowers 
and odorous herbs—this admiration and enthu- 
siasm, I repeat, which formerly seemed to me in 


perfect harmony with the religious feeling that 4~” 


filled my soul, animating and exalting it, instead 
of weakening it, seems to me now almost a sinful 
distraction, and an unpardonable forgetfulness of 
the peel for the temporal, of the uncreated and 
the spiritual for the material and created. 

Although I have made but little progress in vir- 
tue, although my mind is never free from the 
phantasms of the imagination; although the inte- 
rior man is never exempt in me from the influence 
of external impressions, and from the need of em- 
ploying in meditation the fatiguing argumentative 
method; although I can not, by an effort of love, 
withdraw myself to the very centre of pure intel- 
ligence, to the loftiest sphere of thought, in order 
to behold there goodness and truth divested of 
images and forms; though this is all true, yet 
I confess to you that the method of mental prayer, f. 
unrestricted by set forms, makes me afraid. Even 
rational meditation inspires me with distrust. I 
( n 


: 


4 
fy 


Pepita Jimenez 


do not want to employ a process of reasoning in 
order to know God, nor to adduce arguments for 
loving, in order to love Him. {I desire, by a single 
effort of the will, to elevate myself to and be ab- 
sorbed in the Divine contemplation. Oh that I had 
the wings of a dove, to fly to the bosom of Him 
whom my soul loveth! But what and where are 
my merits? Where the mortifications, the ex- 
tended prayers, and the fasting? What have I 
done, oh my God, that Thou shouldst favor me? 

I know that the ungodly of the present day ac- 
cuse—though without any foundation whatever— 
our holy religion of inciting souls to abhor the 
things of this world, to despise or to contemn 


~ Nature, perhaps to fear it also, as if there were in 


‘it something diabolical, placing all their affections 


on what these ungodly call the monstrous egotism ' 
of Divine love, for they say that the soul loves her- 
self in loving God; I know, too, that this is not the 
case; that the Divine love is charity, and that to 
love God is to love all things, for-alf things are in 
God, in a supreme and ineffable manner. I know 
that I commit no sin in loving material things for 
the love of God, which is to love them for them- 
selves, righteously; for what are material things 
but the manifestation, the creation, of the love of 
God? Yet I often feel some undefinable fear, 
some unwonted scruple, some vague and scarcely 
perceptible remorse tormenting me even at the 


72 


Pepita Jimenez 


moment when I am experiencing an effusion of 
tenderness, a sort of ecstasy of enthusiasm, on 
penetrating into a leafy grove; on hearing the song 
of the nightingale, or the twittering of the swal- 
lows, or the tender cooing of the dove; on looking 
at the flowers; on beholding the stars. 

I imagine, at times, that there is in all this some- 
thing of sensual pleasure, a something that makes 
me forget, for the moment at least, more lofty aspi- 
rations. I do not desire that in me the spirit should 
sin against the flesh; but neither do I desire, on the 
other hand, that the beauty of the material world 
—that its delights, even those most delicate, subtle, 
and ethereal ones that are perceived rather by the 
spirit than by the senses, such as the soft sigh of 
the zephyr, laden with rural scents, the song of 
the birds, the peaceful and majestic silence of the 
night in these gardens and orchards—that these 
delights should distract me from the contempla- 
tion of higher beauty, or weaken, even for a 
moment, my.love toward Him who has created 
this harmonious fabric of the world. 

I know that all these material things are like the 
letters of a book, the signs and characters in which 
the soul, eager for knowledge, may find a hidden 
meaning, and decipher and discover the beauty of 
God, which is shadowed forth in them, though but 
dimly, and of which they are the pictures, or rather 
emblems, because they do not represent, but only 


f 73 


Pepita Jimenez 


symbolize that beauty. On this distinction I dwell 
at times to fortify my spirit and mortify the flesh. 
For, I consider, if I love the beauty of earthly 
things for itself, it is idolatry; I ought to love this 
beauty as a sign and symbol of a beauty occult and 
divine and infinitely superior to it. 

A few days ago I completed my twenty-second 
year. Heretofore my religious fervor has been 
such that I have felt no other love than the im- 
maculate love of God Himself and of His holy, 
religion, which I desire to diffuse and see trium- 
phant in all the regions of the earth. 

But I must needs confess that something of a 
profane sentiment has mingled itself with this 
purity of affection. You are aware of this; I have 
told it to you many times, and you, regarding me 
with your accustomed indulgence, have answered 
me that man is not an angel, and that even to aspire 
to so great a degree of perfection is pride; that I 
should endeavor to moderate these sentiments 
rather than seek to eradicate them entirely. Love 
of knowledge, a desire for the reputation which is 
founded on the possession of knowledge, even a 
not unfavorable opinion of one’s own merits— 
these, even when kept within just bounds, though 
guarded and moderated by Christian humility, and 
directed toward a good end, have in them, doubt- 
less, something of selfishness, but they may serve as 
a stimulus and a support to the noblest and most 


74 


Pepita Jimenez 


constant resolutions. The scruples that trouble 
my conscience now, therefore, have not their source 
in_ pride, in an overweening self-confidence, in a“*- 
desire for worldly fame, or in a too great love of 
knowledge. Nothing of this nature it is that 
troubles me; nothing bearing any relation to self- 
conceit, but, in a certain sense, something entirely 
opposed to it. I feel a lassitude, a debility and 
abandonment of the will so great that it almost _ 
makes me afraid: I am too ready to weep for ten- | 
derness when I see a little flower, or when I con- 
template the ray, mysterious, slender, and swift, of 
a remote star. / 

Tell me what you think of these things; and if 
there be not something morbid in this disposition 
of my mind. 


75 


Pepita Jimenez 


April 8th. 


THE amusements of the country, in which, very 
much against my will, I am compelled te take 
part, still go on. - 

My father has taken me to see almost all his 
plantations, and he and his friends are astonished 
to find me not altogether ignorant in matters per- 
taining to the country. It would seem as if, in 
their eyes, the study of theology, to which I have 
dedicated myself, were incompatible with a famil- 
iarity with Nature. How much have they not 
wondered at my knowledge, on seeing me discrimi- 
nate, among the vines that have only just begun to 
sprout, the common from the choice varieties! 
‘How much have they not wondered, too, at my 
being able to distinguish, among the young plants 
in the fields, the shoots of the barley from those of 
the bean; at my being familiar with many fruit 
and shade trees; at my knowing the names of many 
plants, even, that grow spontaneously in the woods, 
as well as something of their properties and virtues! 

Pepita Jiménez, who has heard through my 
father of the delight I take in the gardens here, 
has invited me to visit one that she owns at a short 
distance from the village, and eat the early straw- 
berries that grow there. This caprice of Pepita’s 
to show so many little attentions to my father, while 

76 


Pepita Jimenez 


at the same time she declines his addresses, seems 
to me at times to partake somewhat of coquetry, 


and to be worthy of reprobation. But whenever x 
I see her, and find her so natural, so frank, and so ; ~ 


simple,this bad opinion is dispelled, and I can not 
believe her to have any other end in view than to 


maintain the friendly relations that exist between 


her and our family. 

Be this as it may, yesterday afternoon we went 
to Pepita’s garden. It is charmingly situated, and 
as delightful and picturesque a place as one can 
imagine. The river, that by means of innumerable 
drains waters almost all these gardens, falls into a 
deep ravine, bordered on both sides by white and 
black poplars, willows, flowering oleanders, and 
other leafy trees. The waterfall, clear and trans- 
parent, precipitates itself into this ravine, sending 
up a cloud of spray, and then follows its tortuous 
course by a channel formed for it by Nature her- 
self, enameling its banks with a thousand plants 
and flowers, and just now covering them with a 
multitude of violets. The declivity at the end of the 
garden is full of walnut, hazel, fig, and other fruit 
trees; and in the level portion are beds planted 
with strawberries and vegetables, tomatoes, potatoes, 
beans, and peppers. There is also a little flower- 
garden, with a great abundance of flowers, of the 
kinds most commonly cultivated here. Roses espe- 
cially abound, and of these there are innumerable 


77. 


Pepita Jimenez 


varieties. (The gardener’s house is prettier and 
cleaner than the houses of its class that one is accus- 
tomed to see in this part of the country; and near, 
it there is another, smaller building, dedicated to 
the use of the mistress of the place, where Pepita 
regaled us with a sumptuous collation. The pre- 
text for this collation was the strawberries, to eat 
which was the chief purpose of our visit. The 
quantity of strawberries, considering the earliness 
of the season, was astonishing. They were served 
with the milk of goats, which belonged likewise 
to Pepita. 

‘There were present at this banquet the doctor, 
the notary, my aunt Casilda, my father, and my- 
self, and of course the indispensable vicar, spiritual 
father, and, more than spiritual father, admirer 
and perpetual eulogist of Pepita. 

By a sort of Sybaritic refinement, it was not by, 
the gardener, nor his wife, nor the son of the gar- 
dener, nor by any other rustic, that we were served 
at this banquet, but by two lovely girls, confidential 
servants, in a manner, of Pepita’s, dressed like 
peasants, but with the greatest neatness and even 
elegance. They wore gowns of gay-colored cotton, 
short and confined at the waist, and around their 
shoulders silk handkerchiefs. Their lustrous and 
abundant black hair, without covering, was braided 
and arranged in a knot behind; and in front they 
wore curls confined to the head by large hairpins, 


78 


Pepita Jimenez 


here called caracols. Above the knot, or chignon, 
they each displayed a bunch of fresh roses. 
Pepita’s attire, except that it was black and of 
rich material, was equally unpretending. Her 
merino gown, made in the same style as those of 
her maids, without being short, was yet not long 
enough to catch the dust of the ground. A modest 
handkerchief of black silk covered also, according 
to the usage of the country, her shoulders and 
bosom; and on her head she wore no other orna- 
ment, either flower or jewel, than that of her own 
blonde tresses. 
The only particular, with respect to Pepita, in 
which I observed a certain fastidiousness, and in 
which she departed from the customs of the coun- 
try people, was in wearing gloves. It is evident 
that she takes great care of her hands, and is, per- 
haps, to a certain extent, vain of their beauty and 
whiteness, as well as of her rose-colored and pol- 
ished nails; but if this be so, it is to be pardoned 
to the weakness of the flesh; and indeed, if I re- 
member aright, I think that St. Theresa, in her 
youth, had this same species of vanity, which did 
not prevent her, however, from becoming a great 
saint. 
In truth, I can understand, even though I do 
not excuse, this little piece of vanity. It is so dis- 
tinguished, sO aristocratic, to possess a beautiful 
hand! I even think, at times, that there is some- 


79 


Pepita Jimenez 


thing symbolic in it. The hand is the instrument 
by which we execute our works, the sign of our 
nobility, the means by which the intellect gives 
form and shape to its artistic conceptions, by which 
it gives reality to the mandates of its will, by which 
it exercises the dominion that God conceded to 
man over all other creatures. The rough, strong, 
sinewy, horny hand—it may be, of a laborer, a 
workman—testifies nobly to this dominion, but on 
its rudest and least intellectual side. The hands of 
Pepita, on the contrary, transparent almost, like 
alabaster, but rosy-hued, and in which one can al- 
most see the pure and subtle blood circulate that 
gives to the veins their faint bluish tinge—these 
hands, I say, with their tapering fingers and un- 
rivaled purity of outline, seem the symbol of the 
magic power, the mysterious dominion, that the 
human spirit holds and exercises, without the inter- 
vention of material force, over all those © visible 
things that are the creation of God by a-direct act 
of His will, and which man, as the instrument of 
God, improves and completes. It would be im- 
possible to suppose that any one with hands like 
Pepita’s should have an impure thought, a gross 
desire, an unworthy purpose at variance with the 
purity of the hands that would be called upon to 
put them into effect. 

It is unnecessary to say that my father appeared 
as much charmed with Pepita, and she as atten- 

80 


: 


Pepita Jimenez 


tive and affectionate toward him, as always; though 
her affection seemed, perhaps, of a character more 


q filial than he could have wished. The fact is, that 


my father, notwithstanding the reputation he has 
of being in general but little respectful or reverent 
toward women, treats this one woman with such 
respect and consideration that not even Amadis, 
in the most devoted period of his wooing, showed 
greater toward Oriana. Not a single word that 


‘. might shock the ear, no indelicate or inopportune 


compliment, no coarse jest, of the kind the Anda- 


_lusians permit themselves so frequently to employ, 


does he ever indulge in. Hardly does he dare say 
to Pepita, “What beautiful eyes you have!” and, 
indeed, should he say so, he would only speak the 
truth, for Pepita’s eyes are large, green as those 
of Circe: expressive, and well-shaped. And what 
enhances their beauty i is that she seems unaware of 
all this, for there is not to be detected in her the 
slightest wish to please or attract any one by the 


__. sweetness of her glances. 


One would say she thought eyes were only made 
to see with, and for no other purpose—the contrary 
of what I suppose to be the opinion, according to 
what I have heard, of the greater number of young 
and pretty women, who use their eyes as a weapon 
of offense, or as a sort of electric battery, by means 
of which to subdue hearts and captivate them. Not 


_ like those, indeed, are Pepita’s eyes, wherein dwell 


&1 


Pepita Jimenez 


a peace and a serenity as of heaven. ‘And yet if 
can not be said that there is anything of coldness 
in their glance. Her eyes are full of charity and 
sweetness. ‘They rest with tenderness on a ray of 
light, on a flower, on the commonest object in 
Nature; but with greater tenderness still, with 
signs of a softer feeling, more human and benign, 
do they rest on her fellow man, without his daring 
to imagine in that tranquil and serene glance, how- 
ever young or handsome or conceited he may hap- 
pen to be, anything more than charity and love 
toward a fellow man, or, at most, a friendly pref- 
erence. ! 

I sometimes wonder if all this can be studied, 
and if Pepita be, in truth, an accomplished actress; 
but the acting would be so perfect, and so purpose- 
less the play, that it seems to me, after all, impos- 
sible that this should be the case. Nature herself 
it is, then, who serves as teacher and as type for 
that glance and for those eyes. First, Pepita loved 
her mother; then circumstances led her to love 
Don Gumersindo through duty, as the companion 
of her existence; and then, doubtless, all passion 
that any earthly object could inspire was extin- 
guished in her breast, and she loved God, and loved 


’ ¢, material objects for the love of God; and so arrived 


at last at a peaceful and even enviable condition of 
spirit, in which, if there be anything to censure, ‘it 


a nay 


82 


Pepita Jimenez 


__unconscious. It is very convenient to love in this 


aban, somata 


mild fashion, without allowing ourselves to be dis- 


- turbed by our feelings, to have no passion to com- 
bat, to make of our love and affection for others’* 
an addition to, and, as it were, the complement Ont 


self- love. 

‘T ask myself at times if, when I censure this state 
of mind in Pepita, it be not myself I censure. How 
do I know what passes in the soul of this woman 
that I should censure her? Perhaps, in thinking I 
behold her soul, it is my own soul that I behold. I 
never had, nor have I now, any passion to conquer. 
All my virtuous taehinacions, all my instincts, good 
or bad, tend, thanks to your wise teachings, without 
obstacle or impediment, to the furtherance of the 
one purpose. In the fulfilment of this purpose, I 
should satisfy not only my noble and disinterested 
desires, but my selfish ones also—my love for dis- 
tinction, my desire for knowledge, my curiosity to 
see distant lands, my longing for name. and fame. 


_ All these are centred in the completing of the 
‘career upon which I have entered. I fancy at times 


that, in this respect, | am more worthy of censure 
than Pepita, supposing her even to deserve censure 
at all. 

As regards this career, I have higeady begun it. 
I have cast out from my soul the vanities of the 
world; I have received the tonsure; I have conse- 
“crated. myself to the service of the altar. I have a 


83 


Pepita Jimenez 


future full of ambition before me, and I dwell with 
pleasure on the thought that this future is within 
my reach. I please myself in thinking that the 
conditions I possess for it are real and efficacious, 
though I call humility to my aid, at times, to save ~ 

me from an overweening self- coufidenaal 
‘To what, on the other hand, does this woman 
aspire, and what are her hopes? I censure her for 
the care she takes of her hands, for regarding her 
beauty, perhaps, with complacency; I almost cen- 
sure her for her neatness, for the attention she 
bestows on her dress; for a certain indefinable co- 
quetry there is in the very modesty and simplicity 
of her attire. But must virtue be slovenly? Must 
holiness be unclean? Can not a pure and clean 
soul rejoice in the cleanliness and purity of the 
body also? Is there not something reprehensible 
in the displeasure with which I regard the neat- 
ness and purity of Pepitae Is this displeasure, 
perchance, because she is to be my stepmothere 
But perhaps she does not wish to be my step- 
mother. Perhaps she does not love my father! It 
is true, indeed, that women are incomprehensible, 
It may be that in her secret heart she already feels 
inclined to return my father’s affection, and marry 
him, though, in accordance with the saying that 
“what is worth much costs much,” she chooses 
first to torment him with her affected coldness, to 
reduce him to unquestioning submission, to put his — 
84 


Pepita Jimenez 


constancy to the proof, and then means to end by 
quietly saying Yes: We shall see. 

-r><What there is no question about is, that our 
garden party was decorously merry. We talked of 
flowers, of fruit, of grafts, of planting, and of in- 
numerable other things relating to husbandry, 
Pepita displaying her knowledge of agriculture 
in rivalry with my father, with myself, and with 
the reverend vicar, who listens with open mouth to 
every word she utters, and declares that in the sev- 
enty odd years of his life, and during his many 
wanderings, in the course of which he has traversed 
almost the whole of Andalusia, he has never known 
a woman mote discreet or more judicious in all she 

thinks and says. 

‘~On returning home from any of these excursions, 
J renew my entreaties to my father to allow me 
to go back to you, in order that the wished-for 
moment may at last arrive in which I shall see 
myself elevated to the priesthood. But my father | 
is so pleased to have me with him, he is so happy 
here in the village, taking care of his plantations, 
exercising the judicial and executive authority 
of squire, paying homage to Pepita, and con-. 
sulting her in everything as his Egeria, that he al- 
ways finds, and will find perhaps for months to 
come, some plausible pretext to keep me here. 

Now he has to clarify the wine of I know not how 
_ many casks; now he has to bottle more wine still; 
85 


ae 


Pepita Jimenez 


now it is necessary to hoe around the vines; now to 
plow the olive groves and dig around the roots of 
the olives; in short, he keeps me here against my 
wishes—though I should not say “against my, 
wishes,” for it gives me great pleasure to be with 
my father, who is so good to me. 

The evil is that, with this way of life, I fear I 
shall grow too material, I am conscious in my 
devotions of a certain aridity of spirit. My relig- 
ious fervor diminishes; common life begins to 
_ penetrate, to infiltrate my nature. When I pray, I 
suffer distractions; in my solitary meditations, 
when the soul should raise itself up to God, I can 
no longer concentrate my thought as formerly. 
My sensibility of heart, on the other hand, which 
refuses to occupy itself ‘With any worthy “obieet, or 
employ and consume-itself on its legitimate ends, 
wells forth, and, as it were, overflows at times for 
objects and under circumstances which are almost 
puerile, which seem to me ridiculous, and of 
which I am ashamed. If I awaken in the silence 
of the night, and hear by chance some lovelorn 
rustic singing, to the sound of his badly played 
guitar, a verse of a song, neither very original nor 
very poetical, nor very delicate, J am wont to be 
affected as if I were listening to some celestial 
melody. 

A feeling of pity, childish, even absurd, comes 
over me at times. The other day the children of 

86 


Pepita Jimenez 


my father’s overseer stole a nestful of young spar- 
rows, and on seeing the little birls, not yet fledged, 

torn thus violently from their tendér mother, I felt 
a sudden pang of anguish, and I confess I could 
not restrain my tears. A few days before this a 
peasant had brought in from the fields a calf that 
had broken its leg. He was about to carry it to the 
slaughter-house, and came to ask my father what 
part he wished for his table. My father an- 
swered, “Ihe head and the feet, and a few pounds 
of the flesh.” I was touched by compassion on 
seeing the calf, and, but that shame prevented me, 
would have bought it from the man, in the hope of 
curing and keeping it alive. In short, my dear 
uncle, nothing less than the confidence I have in 
you would make me recount to you these signs of 
an extravagant and restless emotion, so that you 
may judge by them how necessary it is that I should 
return to my former way of life, to my studies, to 
my lofty speculations, and be at last elevated to the 
_ priesthood, in order to provide with its fit and 
proper aliment the fire that consumes my soul. x¥ 


SB 


Pepita Jimenez 


April 14th. 


I CONTINUE to lead the same life as usual, and 
am detained here still by my father’s entreaties. 

The greatest pleasure I enjoy, after that of be- 
ing with him, is my intercourse and conversation 
with the reverend vicar, with whom I am in the 
habit of taking long walks. It seems incredible 
that a man of his age—for he must be near eighty 
—should be so strong and active, and so good a 
walker. I grow tired sooner than he; and there 
is no rough road, no wild place, no rugged hill- 
top in the neighborhood where we have not been. 

The reverend vicar is reconciling me in a great 
degree with the Spanish clergy, whom I have stig- 
matized at times, in speaking to you, as but little 
enlightened. How much more to be admired, I 
often say to myself, is this man, so full of candor 
and benevolence, so simple and affectionate, than 
one who may have read many books, but in hose 
soul the flame of charity, fed by the purest and sin- 
cerest faith, burns less brightly than it does in his! 
Do not suppose from this that the understanding 
of the reverend vicar is a limited one; his is a 
spirit uncultured, indeed, but clear and sagacious. 
At times I fancy that the, good opinion I entertain 
of him may be due to the attention with which he 
listens to me; but if this be not the case, it seems 

88 


Pepita Jimenez 


to me that he reasons on every subject with remark- 
able perspicacity, and that he knows how to unite 
an ardent love of our holy religion with an appre- 
ciation of all the good things that modern civiliza- 


tion has brought us. I am charmed, above all, by... 
the simplicity, the sobriety, of sentiment, the natu- © 


ralness, in short, with which the reverend vicar per- 
forms the most disagreeable works of charity. 
There is no misfortune he does not seek to alleviate, 
no suffering he does not strive to console, no error 
he does not endeavor to repair, no necessity which 
he does not hasten solicitously to relieve. 

In all this, it must be confessed, he has a power~. 
ful auxiliary in Pepita, whose piety and compas- 
‘sionate disposition he is always extolling. 

his species of homage which the vicar pays to 
Pepita is founded upon, and goes side by side with, 
the practise of a thousand good works—the giving 
of alms, prayer, public worship, and the care of 
the poor. Pepita not only gives alms for the poor, 
but also gives money for special prayers, sermons, 
and other observances of the Church. If the altars 
of the parish are gay at times with beautiful flow- 
ers, these flowers are due to the bounty of Pepita, 
who has sent them from her garden. If Our Lady 
of Sorrows, instead of her old worn cloak, wears 
to-day a resplendent and magnificent mantle of 
black velvet embroidered with silver, Pepita it is 
who has paid for it. 

89 


Pepita Jimenez 


‘These and other similar acts of beneficence the 
vicar is always extolling and magnifying. Thus it 
is, when I am not speaking of my own aims, of my 
vocation, of my studies, to hear about’ which gives 
the reverend vicar great delight, and keeps him 
hanging upon my words, that, after a thousand 
turns, he always ends by speaking of Pepita Jimé- 
nez. And of whom, indeed, should the reverend 
vicar speak to mer His intercourse with the doc- 
tor, with the apothecary, with the rich husbandmen 
of the place, hardly gives ground for three words 
of conversation. As the reverend vicar possesses 
the very rare quality, in one bred in the country, 
of not being fond of scandal, or of meddling in 
other people’s affairs, he has no one to speak of 
but Pepita, whom he visits frequently, and with 
whom, as may be gathered from what he says, he is 
in the habit of holding the.most familiar colloquies. 

T know not-what books Pepita Jiménez tread, 
nor what education she_ may have received, but 
_from what the reverend vicar says it may ie de- 
duced that she possesses a restless soul and an 
inquiring spirit, to which a multiplicity of ques- 
tions and problems present themselves that she 
longs to elucidate and resolve, bringing them for 
that purpose before the reverend vicar, whom she 
thus puts into a state of agreeable perplexity. 

This man, educated in country fashion, a priest 
whose breviary is, as one may say, his library, pos- 


90 


Pepita Jimenez 


sesses an understanding open to the light of truth, 
but is wanting in original power, and thus the 
problems and questions Pepita presents to him open 
before him new horizons and new paths, nebulous , . 
and vague indeed, and which he did not even im- 
agine to exist, which he is not able to follow with 
exactitude, but whose vagueness, novelty, and mys- 
tery enchant him. 

The vicar is not ignorant of the danger of all 
this, and that he and Pepita expose themselves to 
falling, without knowing it, into some heresy; but 
he tranquilizes his conscience with the thought that, 
although very far from being a great digoldpian: 
he has his Catechism at his fingers’ ends, he has 
confidence in God that He will illuminate his 
spirit, and he hopes not to be led into error, and 
takes it for granted that Pepita will follow his 


, counsels, and never deviate from the right path. 


Phuaeds both form to themselves a thousand | 


poetical conceptions, full of charm although vague, .. 
of all the mysteries of our religion and the articles 


of our faith. Great is the devotion they profess 
to the most Holy Virgin, and I am astonished to 
see how they are able to blend the popular idea or 
conception of the Virgin with some of the. sublim- 
est theological thoughts. 

From what the vicar relates I can perceive that 


_ Pepita Jiménez’s soul, in the midst of its apparent 


_ calmness and serenity, is transfixed by the sharp 
gl 


a 


Pepita Jimenez 


arrow of suffering; there is in it a love of purity 
in contradiction with her past life. Pepita loved 
Don Gumersindo as her companion, as her bene- 
factor, as the man to whom she owed everything; 
but she is tortured, she is humiliated, by the recol- 
lection that Don Gumersindo was her husband. 

Inher devotion to the Virgin there may be de- 
tected a feeling of painful humiliation, of suffer- 
ing, of sadness, produced by the recollection of her 
ignoble and childless marriage. 

Even in her adoration of the Infant Jesus, in the 
beautiful carved image she has in her house, there 
is something of maternal love that lacks an object 
on which to expend its tenderness, of maternal love 
that seeks this object in a being not born of sin and 
impurity. oi 

The vicar says that Pepita worships the Infant 
Jesus as her God, but that she also loves him with 
the maternal tenderness she would feel for a son, 
if she had one, and whom she had no cause to re- 
gard with any other feeling than affection. The 
vicar sees that Pepita, in her prayers to the Holy 
Virgin, and in her care of her beautiful image of 
the Child Jesus, has in her thoughts the ideal 
Mother and the ideal Son, both alike immaculate. 

I confess that I know not what to think of all 
these singularities. I know so little of women! 
What the vicar tells me of Pepita surprises me; 
and yet, though on the whole I believe her to be 


92), 


Pepita Jimenez 


good rather than the contrary, she inspires me at 
times with a certain fear on my father’s account. 
N otwithstanding his fifty-five years, I believe that 
he is in love; and Pepita, although virtuous 
through cotiviction, may, without premeditating or 
intending it, be an instrument of the spirit of evil, Me 


‘may practise a species of coquetry, involuntary aid a 


instinctive, more irresistible, efficacious, and fatal 
than that which proceeds from premeditation, cal- 
culation, and reasoning. | 

Who noms, I say to myself at times, notwith- 
standing her prayers, her secluded and devout life, 
her alms and her gifts to the churches—on all 
which is based the affection that the vicar enter- 
tains for her—if there be not also an earthly spell, 
if there be not something of diabolical magic in 
the arts she practises, and. with which she deludes 
and beguiles this simple vicar, so that he thinks 
and speaks only of her on all occasions? 

The very influence that Pepita exercises over a 
man so incredulous as my father, a man whose 
nature is so vigorous and so little sentimental, has 
in it, in truth, something extraordinary. 

Nor do the good works of Pepita suffice to ex- 
plain the respect and affection with which she in- 
spires these country people in general. On the 
rare occasions on which she leaves the house the 
little children run to meet her and kiss her hand; 
_ the young girls smile, and salute her with affec- 


93 


Pepita Jimenez 


tion; and the men take off their hats as she passes, 
and incline themselves before her with the most 
spontaneous reverence and the most natural good 
feeling. | ( 

‘i Pepita Jiménez, whom many of the villagers 
have known since she was born, and who, to the 
knowledge of every one here, lived j in poverty with 
her mother until her ciabatta the decrepit and 
avaricious Don Gumersindo, has caused all this to 
be forgotten, and is now looked upon as a won- 

-drous being, a visitant, pure and radiant, from 
some distant land, from some higher sphere, and is 
regarded by her fellow townspeople with affec- 
tionate esteem, and something like loving admira- 
tion. 

I see that I am inadvertently falling into the 
same fault that I censure in the reverend vicar, 
and that I speak to you of nothing but Pepita. 
But this is natural. Here no one speaks of any- 
thing else. One would suppose the whole place 
to be full of the spirit, of the thought, of the image 
of this singular woman, in regard to whom I have 
not been able to determine if she be an angel or an 
accomplished coquette, full of instinctive astute- 
ness, although the words may seem to involve a 
contradiction. For I am fully convinced in my, 
own mind that this woman does not play the co- 
quette, nor seek to gain the good-will of others, in 
order to gratify her vanity. 


94, 


Pepita Jimenez 


fo Pepita’s soul is full of candor and sincerity. 
One has only to see her to be convinced of this. 
Her dignified and graceful bearing, her slender 
figure, the smoothness and clearness of her fore- 
head, the soft and pure light of her eyes, all blend 
into a fitting harmony, in which there is not a 
single discordant note. 

How deeply I regret, having come to this place, 
and having remained here so long! I had passed 
my life in your house, and in the seminary; I had 
seen and known no one but my companions and 


_ my teachers; 1 knew nothing of the world but, ,_ 
through speculation and.through theory; and‘ > 


suddenly I find myself thrown. into..the midst of 
this world, though it be only that of a village, 
and distracted from my studies, meditations, and 


a prayers by a thousand profane objects. 


~ ati a 


95 


* 


Pepita Jimenez 


April 20th. 


Your last letters, dearest uncle, have been a wel- 
come consolation to my soul. Benevolent, as al- 
Ways, you admonish and enlighten me with pru- 
dent and useful reflections. 

It is true my impetuosity is worthy of repro- 
bation. I wish to attain my aims without making 
use of the means requisite to their attainment; 
I wish to reach the journey’s end without first 
treading, step by step, the rough and ae 
path. 

I complain of an aridity of spirit in prayer, of in- 
ability to fix my thoughts, of a_proneness to dissipate 
my tenderness on childish objects; I desire to elevate 
myself to and be absorbed in God, to attain at once 
to the contemplation of essential being; and yet I 
disdain mental prayer and rational and discursive 
meditation. How, without attaining to its purity, 
how, without beholding its light, can I hope to 
enjoy the delights of divine love? 

I am by nature arrogant, and I shall therefore 
endeavor to humiliate myself in my own eyes, it in 
order that God may not suffer the spirit of evil, 
in punishment of my pride and Pres ea to 
cover me with humiliation. 

I do not believe that it would be easy for me to 
fall into a lapse from virtue so shameful and unex- 


96 


Pepita Jimenez 


pected as the one you fear. I do not confide in 
myself; I confide in the mercy of God and in His 
grace; and I trust they will not fail me. 


Nevertheless, you are altogether right in advis- \"\ 


ing me to abstain from forming ties of friendship 
with Pepita Jiménez; I am far enough from being 
bound to her by any tie. 
I am not ignorant that, when those holy men and 
saints, who should serve us as models and examples, 
\ were bound in close intimacy and affection with 
women, “it was in their old age, or when they were 
Bircady proved and disciplined by penitence; or 
when there existed a noticeable disproportion in 
years between them and the pious women they 
elected to be their friends, as is related of St. 
Jerome and St. Paulina, and of St. John of the 
Cross and St. Theresa. And even thus, even with 
a purely spiritual affection, 1 know it is possible 
to sin through excess; for God only should occupy 
who dwells in it should do 30, but as the friend, 
the servant, the creation of the Spouse, and as 
one in whom the Spouse delights. 
Do not think, however, that I vaunt myself on ~ 


_ being invincible, , that T ‘demise danger, and defy ~~ 


and seek it. Sie abo loves danger shall perish 
DD ercin And if the prophet-king, though so 
agreeable in the sight of God, and so favored of 
Him, and Solomon, notwithstanding his super- 


4 (E)—Vot. 13—4 97. 


Pepita Jimenez | 
natural and God-given wisdom, were troubled and 
fell into sin because God turned His face away, 
from them, what have not I to fear, miserable sin- 
ner that I am, so young, so inexperienced in the 
wiles of the devil. and so. wavering and unpractised 
in the combats of virtue? 

/° Filled with a salutary fear of God, and imbued 
with a fitting distrust of my own weakness, I shall 
not be forgetful of your counsels and your prudent 
admonitions; and I shall pray meantime with fer- 
vor, and meditate on holy things, in order to abhor 


the things of the world, in so far as they deserve _ 


abhorrence; but of this I may assure you, that, 


however deeply I penetrate into the depths of my _ 


conscience, however carefully I search its inmost 
recesses, I have thus far discovered nothing to 
make me share your fears. 


If my former letters are full of encomiums on 


the virtue of Pepita, it is the fault of my. father 


and of the reverend vicar, and not mine; for at | 


first, far from being friendly to this woman, I was 


unjustly prejudiced against her. 


As for the beauty and physical grace of Pepita, 
be assured that I have contemplated them with en- | 
tire purity of thought, and, though it cost me some- _ 


thing to say it, and may cost you a little to hear it, 


I confess that, if any cloud has arisen to dim the | 
clear and serene image of Pepita in the mirror of | 


my soul, it has been owing to your harsh suspicions, | 


98 


- 


Pepita Jimenez 


_ which for an instant have almost made me suspect 


myself... 
But no; what thought have I ever entertained 


with regard to Pepita, what have I seen or praised 


in her that should lead any one to suppose me to _ 


have any other feeling for her than friendship, and * 
the admiration, pure and innocent, that.a. work of 
art_may inspire, the more especially if it be the 


work of the Supreme Artist, and nothing less than 


. the temple wherein He dwells? 


e 


y 


| 


Besides, dear uncle, I shall have to live in the 
world, to hold intercourse with my fellow beings, 
to see them, and I can not, for that reason, pluck 
out my eyes. You have told me many times that 
you wish me to devote myself to a life of action, 
preaching the Divine law, and making it known in 


the world, rather than to a contemplative life in 


the midst of solitude and isolation. Well, then, 


this being so, how would you have me act in order 


to avoid seeing Pepita Jiménez? Unless I made 


myself ridiculous by closing my own eyes in her 


presence, how could I fail to notice the beauty of 
hers; the clearness, the roseate hue, and the purity 
of ber complexion ; the evenness ane pearly white- 
ness of her teeth, which she discloses with fre- 
quency when she smiles: the fresh carmine of her 
lips, the serenity and ey eer of her brow, and 
a thousand other attractions with which Heaven 


has endowed her? It is true that for one who bears 


99 


Pepita Jimenez 


within his soul the germ of evil thoughts, the 
leaven of vice, any one of the impressions that 
Pepita produces might be the shock of the steel 
against the flint, kindling the spark that would set 
fire to and consume all around it; but, prepared_ 
for this danger, watching against it, and guarded 
with the shield of Christian prudence, I do not 
think I have anything to fear. Besides, if it be 
rash to seek danger, it is cowardly not to be able to 
face it, and to shun it when it presents itself. 
Have no fear; I see in Pepita only a beautiful 
creation of God, and in God I love her as a sister. 
If I feel any predilection for her, it is because of 
the praises I hear spoken of her by my father, by; 
the reverend vicar, and by almost every one here. 
For my father’s sake it would please me were_ 
Pepita to relinquish her inclination for a life of 
seclusion, and her purpose to lead it, and to 
marry him. But were it not for this—were 
I to see that my father had only a caprice 
and not a genuine passion for her—then I 
should be glad that Pepita would remain resolute 
in her chaste widowhood; and when I should be 
far away from here—in ladis, or Japan, or some 
other yet more dangerous mission—I might find a 
consolation in writing to her of my wanderings 
and labors. Then, when I returned here in my 
old age it would be a great pleasure for me to be 
on friendly terms with her, who would also then 
100 


a 


Pepita Jimenez 


be aged, and to hold spiritual colloquies with her, 
and chats of the same sort as those the father vicar 
now holds with her. At present, however, as I 
am but a young man, I see but little of Pepita; I 
hardly speak to her. I prefer to be thought bash- 
ful, shy, ill-bred, and rude, rather than give any 
one the _least_occasion for thinking that I feel 
toward her as I ought not to, or even for suspicion 


or for gossip. 


As for Pepita herself, not even in the most re- 
mote degree do I share the apprehension which 
vaguely you express. What projects could she form 
in respect to a man who, in two or three months 
more, is to be a priest! She, who has treated so 
many others with disdain—why should she be at- 
tracted by me? I know myself well, and I know 
that, fortunately, I am not capable of inspiring a 
passion. They say I am not ill-looking, but I am 
awkward, dull, shy, wanting in amiability; I bear 
the stamp of mia J am—a humble student. What 
am I, compared with the gallant if somewhat 
rustic youths who have paid court to Pepita— 
agile horsemen, discreet and agreeable in conver- 
sation, Nimrods in the chase, skilled in all bodily 
exercises, singers of renown in all the fairs of An- 
dalusia, and graceful and accomplished in the 
dance? If Pepita has scorned all these, how 
should she now think of me, and conceive the dia- 


bolical desire, and the more than diabolical project, 


-Ioft 


- 


Pepita Jimenez 


of troubling the peace of my soul, of making me 
abandon my vocation, perhaps 3 plunging me 
into perdition? No, it is not possible. Pepita I 
believe to be good, ae myself—and I say it in all 
sincerity—insignificant; insignificant, be it under- 
stood, so far as inspiring her with love is concerned, 
but not too insignificant to be her friend, to merit 
her esteem, to be the object one day, in a certain 
sense, of her preference, when I shall have suc- 
ceeded in making myself worthy of this preference 
by a holy and laborious life. 

I ask you to forgive me if I have vindicated my- 
self too warmly from certain half-expressed sus- 
_ picions in your letter—suspicions that sound like 
accusations, or like prophetic warnings, 

I do not complain of these suspicions: you have 
given me judicious advice, the greater part of 
which I accept and intend to follow; if you have 
gone a little beyond what is just in your suspicions, 
it is owing, without doubt, to the interest you take 
in me, and for which I am grateful to you with all 
my heart. 


102 


Pepita Jimenez 


May 4th. 


IT is strange that in so many days I should not 
have had time to write to you, but such is the fact. 
My father does not let me rest a moment, and I 
am besieged by visitors. 

In large cities it is easy to avoid secing visitors, 

to isolate one’s self, to create for one’s self_a sul. 
tude, a Thebaid in the midst of the tumult; in an 
Andalusian village, and, above all, when one has 
the honor of being the son of the squire, it is 
necessary to live in public. Not only now to my 
study, but even to my bedroom, do the reverend 
vicar, the notary, my cousin Currito, the son of 
Dojia Casilda, and a hundred others, penetrate 
without any one daring to oppose them, waken me 
if I am asleep, and carry me off with them wher- 
_ ever they wish. 
The clubhouse here is not a place of amusement 
_ for the evening only, but for all the hours of the 
_ day. From eleven o’clock in the morning it is full 
_ of people, who chat, glance over a paper to learn 
the news, and play at ombre, which, I have come to 
the conclusion, is the Spaniard’s favorite game of 
cards; there are persons here who spend ten or 
twelve hours a day atit. In short, there is as much 
enjoyment here as one could well desire. In order 
that this enjoyment may be uninterrupted there 
103 


Pepita Jimenez 


are a great many amusements. Besides ombre, 
there are many other games at cards. Draughts, 
chess, and dominoes are not neglected. And, 
finally, there is a decided passion for cock-fighting. 

All this, together with making calls, going to the 
fields to inspect the work, settling accounts every 
night with the overseer, visiting the wine-vaults 
and cask-stores, superintending the clarifying, re- 
bottling, and perfecting of the wines, treating with 
gipsies and horsedealers for the purchase, sale, or 
barter of horses, mules, and donkeys, or with dealers 
from Xeres who come to buy our wine in order to 
convert it into sherry, are here the daily occupa- 
tion of the gentry, squirearchy, or whatever else 
they may choose to call themselves. On extraordi- 
nary occasions there are other tasks and amuse- 
ments that give a greater appearance of animation 
to everything: as in harvest-time, at the vintage, 
and the gathering in of the olives; or when there 
is a fair or a bull-fight, either here or in a neigh- 
boring village; or when there is a pilgrimage to 
the sanctuary of some miraculous image of the 
Holy Virgin, where, if it be true that many go 
through curiosity, or to amuse themselves, and 
give to their sweethearts a fairing of a Cupid or a 
rosary, many more go through devotion, or in ful- 
filment of a vow or promise. One of these sanc- 
tuaries is situated at the top of a very high moun- 
tain, yet there is no lack of delicate women who, 

104 


Pepita Jimenez 


to reach it, will climb, with bare feet wounded by 
the stones and brambles, the steep and rugged path 
that leads to it. 

There is a certain charm in the life here. For 


one who_has no desire for fame, no ambition, J cans& 


understand that it might be a very easy and agree- 
able life. Even solitude may be obtained by an 
effort. As I am here only for a short time, I can 
neither make this effort, nor ought I to do so; but 
if I_were settled here, i should find no difficulty 
in secluding iyself—and that, too, without offend- 
ing any one—for several nines or for the whole 
day, if it were necessary, in aide to devote myself 
to my studies and meditations. 

Your last letter has troubled me a little. I see 
that you persist in your suspicions, and I know not 
what answer to make in order to justify myself 
but the answer I have already made you. 

You say that the victory, in a certain kind of war- 
fare, consists in flight; that to fly is to conquer. 
Why should I seek to deny what the Apostle and so 
many holy Fathers and Doctors of the Church 
have said? But you well know that, in this case, 
flight does not depend. upon me. My father is 
resolved that I shall not go; he keeps me here 
against my will, and I must obey him. The vic- 
tory must be ‘gained by other means, then, than by 
flight. 
oa 0 set your mind at rest, I repeat that matters 
) (T05 


Pepita Jimenez 


have not gone so far as you think; that you see 
them in a much more advanced stage than they 
really are. 

There is not the slightest sign that Pepita Jimé- 
nez loves me. And even did she love me, it would 
be in a different way from that in which these 
women loved whom you cite as a salutary warning 
to me. A lady of our times, virtuous and well 
brought up, is neither so susceptible nor so wanting 
in decorum as those matrons of whose adventures 
ancient history is full. 

The passage you cite from St. John Chrysostom 
is indeed worthy of consideration; but it is not alto- 
gether applicable to the circumstances. The great 
lady who in On, Thebes, or Diospolis Magna, fell 
in love with the favorite son of Jacob, was in all 
probability extremely handsome. By such a sup- 
position only can one comprehend the words of the 
saint, that it was a greater miracle that Joseph 
should have passed through this ordeal unscathed, 
than that the three young men whom Nebuchad- 
nezzar caused to be placed in the fiery furnace 
were not reduced to ashes! 

As far as beauty is concerned, I confess frankly 
that I can not think that the wife of the Egyptian 
prince, chamberlain of the palace of the Pharaohs, 
or whatever else may have been his title, was in 
any degree superior to Pepita Jiménez. But 
neither am I endowed with as many gifts and ex- 

106 


Ae Me. .” 


Pepita Jimenez 


cellences as was Joseph, nor is Pepita a woman 
without religion and without decorum, And even 
were the circumstances such as he relates, were all 
those horrors true, I can only account for the ex- 
aggerated language of St. John Chrysostom by the 
fact that he lived in the corrupt capital, half Gen- 
tile still, of the Lower Empire, in the midst of that 
Court whose vices he so harshly censures, and 
where the Empress Eudoxia herself gave an 


example of scandal and corruption. 


But in our day, when the morality taught in thes 


Gospel has penetrated more deeply into the strata ~ 
of society, it seems to me an exaggeration to think 
the chaste scorn of the son of Jacob any more mi- 
raculous than the material incombustibility of the 
three young men of Babylon. 

There is one point on which you touch in your 
letter that encourages and pleases me greatly. You 
condemn, as is right, the exaggerated sentimental- 
ity, and the tendency to be easily moved and to 
weep from childish motives, from which I told 
you that I suffered at times; but since this dispo- 
sition of soul, so necessary to combat, exists in me, 
you rejoice that it does not affect my prayers and 
meditations and contaminate them. You recognize 

and praise in me the virile energy that should ani- 
mate the passions and the mind that seek to elevate 
themselves to God. 

- The intelligence that strives to comprehend Him 


ae. ae 


bravely against every appetite, and defeating and 
putting to flight « every temptation over self. The 
even in weak and miserable mortals, to ‘exalt itself, 
by an ecstasy of love, to God Himself, attaining by, 
a supernatural illumination to the knowledge of 
Him, is the offspring of a steadfast and upright 
character, as well as of the Divine grace. This 
languor, this debility of the will, this morbid ten- 
derness have nothing in them in common with 
charity, with piety, or with Divine love. The for- 
mer are the attributes of a nature less than femi- 
nine; the latter are passions, if passions they can 
be called, of angels rather than of men. God will 
be my surety, and with His help I will fight for my, 
own salvation. But should I sink into perdition, 
not in disguise nor by capitulation shall the ene- 
mies of the soul and the sins of the flesh enter into 
the fortress of my conscience, but with banners 
flying, laying waste everything before them by fire 
and sword, and after a desperate conflict. 

In the past few days I have had occasion to 
practise patience in an extreme degree, and to mor- 
tify my_self-love in the most cruel manner. My 
father, wishing to return Pepita’s compliment of 
the garden-party, invited her to visit his villa at 
the Pozo de la Solana. The excursion took place 


1098 


Pepita Jimenez 


on the 22d of April. I shall not soon forget the 
date. 

The Pozo de la Solana is about two leagues dis- 
tant from the village, and the only road to it is 
a bridle-path. We all had to go on horseback. As 
I never learned to ride, I had on former occasions 
accompanied my father mounted on a pacing mule, 
gentle, and, according to the expression of Dientes 
the muleteer, as good as gold, and of easier motion 
than a carriage. On the journey to the Pozo de la 
Solana I went in the same manner. 

My father, the notary, the apothecary, and my 
cousin Currito were mounted on good horses. My 
aunt, Dofia Casilda, who weighs more than two 
hundred and fifty pounds, rode on a large and 
powerful donkey, seated in a commodious side- 
saddle. The reverend vicar rode a gentle and easy 
mule like mine. 

As for Pepita Jiménez, who, I supposed, would 
go also mounted on a donkey, in the same sort of 
easy saddle as my aunt—for I was ignorant that 
she knew how to ride—she surprised me by making 
her appearance on a black and white horse full of 
fire and spirit. She wore a riding-habit, and man- 
aged her horse with admirable grace and skill. 

I was pleased to see Pepita look so charming on 
horseback, but I soon began to foresee and to be 
mortified by the sorry part I would play, jogging 
on in the rear beside my corpulent aunt Casilda 


109 


Pepita Jimenez 


and the vicar, all three as quiet and tranquil as if 
we were seated in a carriage, while the gay caval- 
cade in front would caracole, gallop, trot, and make 
a thousand other displays of their horsemanship. 

I fancied on the instant that there was something 
of compassion in Pepita’s glance as she noted the 
pitiable appearance I no doubt presented, seated on 
my mule. My cousin Currito looked at me with a 
mocking smile, and immediately began to make 
fun of me and to tease me. 

Confess that I deserve credit for my resignation 
and courage. I submitted to everything with a 
good grace, and Currito’s jests soon ceased when 
‘he saw that I was invulnerable to them. But what 
did I not suffer in secret! The others, now trot- 
ting, now galloping, rode in advance of us, both 
in going and returning. The vicar and I, with 
Dofia Casilda between us, rode on, tranquil as the 
mules we were seated upon, without hastening or 
retarding our pace. 

I had not even the consolation of chatting with 
the vicar, in whose conversation I find so much 
pleasure, nor of wrapping myself up in my own 
thoughts and giving the rein to my fancy, nor of 
silently admiring the beauty of the scenery around 
us. Dofia Casilda is gifted with an abominable lo- 
quacity, and we were obliged to listen to her. She 
told us all there is to be told of the gossip of the 
village; she recounted to us all her accomplish- 

110 


Pepita Jimenez 


ments; she told us how to make sausages, brain- 
puddings, pastry, and innumerable other dishes 
and delicacies. There is no one, according to her- 
self, who can rival her in matters pertaining to the 
kitchen, or to the dressing of hogs, but Antofiona, 
Pepita’s nurse, and now her housekeeper and gen- 
eral manager. I am already acquainted with this 
Antofiona, for she goes back and forth between her 
mistress’s house and ours with messages, and is in 
truth extremely handy—as loquacious as Aunt 
Casilda, but a great deal more discreet. 

The scenery on the road to the Pozo de la Solana 
is charming, but my mind was so disturbed during 
our journey that I could not enjoy it. When we 
arrived at the villa and dismounted, I was relieved 
of a great load, as if it had been I who carried the 
mule, and not the mule who carried me. 

We then proceeded on foot through the estate, 
which is magnificent, of varied character and ex- 
tensive. There are vines, old and newly planted, 
all on the same property, producing more than five 

hundred bushels of grapes; olive trees that yield 

to the same amount; and, finally, a grove of the 
most majestic oaks that are to be found in all Anda- 
lusia. The water of the Pozo de la Solana forms 
a clear and deep brook, at which all the birds of 
the neighborhood come to drink, and on whose 
borders they are caught by hundreds, by means of 
_ reeds smeared with bird-lime, or of nets, in the 
HID 


Pepita Jimenez 


centre of which are fastened a cord and a decoy. 
All this carried my thoughts back to the sports of 
my childhood, and to the many times that I too 
had gone to catch birds in the same manner. 

Following the course of the brook, and espe- 
cially in the ravines, are many poplars and other 
tall trees, which, together with the bushes and the 
shrubs, form a dark and labyrinthine wood. A 
thousand fragrant wild flowers grow there spon- 
taneously, and it would, in truth, be difficult to 
imagine anything more secluded and sylvan, more 
solitary, peaceful, and silent than this spot. Even 
in the fervor of noonday, when the sun pours down 
his light in torrents from a heaven without a cloud, 
the mind experiences the same mysterious terror as 
visits it at times in the silent hours of the night. 
One can understand here the manner of life of the 
patriarchs of old, and of the primitive shepherds 
and heroes; and the visions and apparitions that - 
appeared to them of nymphs, of gods, and of angels, 
in the midst of the noonday brightness. 

As we walked through this thicket, there arrived 
a moment in which, I know not how, Pepita and 
I found ourselves alone together. The others had 
remained behind. : 

I felt a sudden thrill pass through me. For the 
first time, and in a place so solitary, I found my- 
self alone with this woman; while my thoughts 
were still dwelling on the noontide apparitions, 

112 


Pepita Jimenez 


how sinister, now gracious, but always supernatu- 
ral, vouchsafed to the men of remote ages. 

Pepita had left the long skirt of her riding-habit 
in the house, and now wore a short dress that did 
not interfere with the graceful ease of her move- 
ments. She had on her head a little Andalusian 
hat, which became her extremely. She carried in 
her hand her riding-whip, which I fancied to my- 
self to be a magic wand by means of which this 

~ I am not afraid to transcribe here these. eulogies \; 
of her beauty. In this sylvan scene she appeared ~ 
to me more beautiful than ever. The precaution 
recommended in similar cases by ascetics, to think 
of her beauty defaced by sickness and old age, to 
picture her to myself dead, the prey of corruption 
and of the worm, presented itself, against my will, 
to my imagination; and I say against my will, for 
I do not concur in the necessity for such a precau- 
tion. No thought of the material, no suggestion of 
the evil spirit, troubled my reason or infected my 
will or my senses. 

What did occur to me was an argument—at least 
to my mind—in disproof of the efficacy of this 
precaution. Beauty, the creation of a Sovereign 
and Divine Power, may indeed be frail and eph- 
emeral, may vanish in an instant; but the idea of 
beauty is eternal, and, once perceived by the mind, 
‘it lives there an immortal life. The beauty of this 

M13 


Pepita Jimenez 


woman, such as it manifests itself to-day, will dis- 
appear in a few short years; the graceful form, 
those charming contours, the noble head that raises 
itself so proudly above her shoulders: all will be 
food for loathsome worms; but—though the mate- 
rial must of necessity be transformed—its idea, the 
creative thought—abstract beauty, in a word— 
what shall destroy this? Does it not exist in the 
Divine Mind? Once perceived and known by me, 
must it not continue to live in my soul, triumphing 
over age and even over death? 

I was meditating thus, striving to tranquilize 
my spirit and to dissipate the doubts which you 
have succeeded in infusing into my mind, when 
Pepita and I encountered each other. I was 
pleased and at the same time troubled to find 
myself alone with her—hoping — and yet fearing 
that the others would join us. 

The silvery voice of Pepita broke the silence,. 
and drew me from my meditations, saying: 

“How silent you are, Don Luis, and how sad! I 
am pained to think that it is perhaps through my, 
fault, or partly so at least, that your father has 
caused you to spend a disagreeable day in these 
solitudes, taking you away from a solitude more 
congenial, where there would be nothing to dis- 
tract your attention from your prayers and pious 
books.” 

I know not what answer I made to this. It must 


114 


Pepita Jimenez 


have been something nonsensical, for my mind was 
troubled. I did not wish to flatter Pepita by pay- 
ing her profane compliments, nor, on the other 
hand, did I wish to answer her rudely. 

She continued: 

‘You must forgive me if I am wrong, but I fancy 
that, in addition to the annoyance of seeing your- 
self deprived to-day of your favorite occupation, 
there is something else that powerfully contributes 
to your ill-humor.” 

“And what is this something else?” I said ; 
pia since hy have discovered it, or fancy you have 

done so.’ 

“This something else, 
feeling not_ altogether becoming..in one who is 
going to be a priest so soon, but very natural in 
 a_young man of twenty-two.” 

On hearing this I felt the blood mount to my 
face, and my. face burn.-- I imagined a thousand 
_ absurdities; I thought myself beset by evil spirits; 
I fancied myself tempted by Pepita, who was 
doubtless about to let me understand that she knew 
I loved her. Then my timidity gave place to 
haughtiness, and I looked her steadily in the face. 
There must have been something laughable in my 
look, but either Pepita did not observe it, or, if 
she did, she concealed the fact with amiable dis- 
cretion; for she exclaimed, in the most natural 
manner; 


” 


115 


responded Pepita, isa 


Pepita Jimenez 


“Do not be offended because I find you are not 
without fault. This that I have observed seems 
to me a slight one. You are hurt by the jests of 
Currito, and by being compelled to play—speak- 
ing profanely—a not very dignified part, mounted, 
like the reverend vicar with his eighty years, on 
a placid mule, and not, as a youth of your age and 
condition should be, on a spirited horse. The fault 
is the reverend dean’s, to whom it did not occur 
that you should learn to ride. To know how to 
manage a horse is not opposed to the career you 
intend to follow, and I think, now that you are 
here, that your father might in a few days give you 
the necessary instruction to enable you to do so. If 
you should go to Persia or to China, where there 
are no railroads yet, you will make but a sorry 
figure in those countries as a bad horseman. It is 
possible even that, by this oversight, the missionary 
himself may come to lose prestige in the eyes of 
those barbarians, which will make it all the more 
difficult for him to reap the fruits of his labors.” 

This and other arguments Pepita adduced in 
order to persuade me to learn to ride on horseback; 
and I was so convinced of the necessity of a mis- 
sionary’s being a good horseman that I promised 
her to learn at once, taking my father as a teacher. 

“On the very next expedition we make,” I said, 
“T shall ride the most spirited horse my father has, 
instead of the mule I am riding to- day.” 

T16 


Pepita Jimenez 
“T shall be very glad if you do,” responded Pe- 
pita, with a smile of indescribable sweetness. 

At this moment we were joined by the rest of the 
party, at which I was secretly rejoiced, though for 
no other reason than the fear of not being able to 
sustain the conversation, and of saying a great many 
foolish things, on account of the little experience I 
have had in conversing with women. 

After our walk my father’s servants spread 
before us on the fresh grass, in the most charming 
spot beside the brook, a rural and abundant col- 
lation. 

The conversation was very animated, and Pepita 
acquitted herself with much discretion and intelli- 
gence. My cousin Currito returned to his jests 
about my manner of riding and the meekness of 
my mule. He called me a theologian, and said 
that, seated on muleback, I looked as if I were dis- 
pensing blessings. This time, however, being now 
firmly resolved to learn to ride, I answered his jests 
_ with sarcastic indifference. I was silent, neverthe- 
less, with respect to the promise I had just made 
Pepita. The latter, doubtless thinking as I did— 
although we had come to no understanding in the 
matter—that silence for the present was necessary 
to ensure the complete success of the surprise that 
I would create afterward by my knowledge of 
horsemanship, said nothing of our conversation. 
Thus it happened, naturally and in the simplest 


IT7, 


* 


Pepita Jimenez 


manner, that a secret existed between us; and it 
produced in my mind a singular effect. 

Nothing else worth telling occurred during the 
day. . 

In the afternoon we returned to the village in the 
same manner in which we had left it. Yet, seated 
on my easy-going mule and at the side of my aunt 
Casilda, I did not experience the same fatigue or 
sadness as before. 

During the whole journey I listened without 
weariness to my aunt’s stories, amusing myself at 
times in conjuring up idle fancies. Nothing of 
what passes in my soul shall be concealed from 


you. I confess, then, that the figure of Pepita was, 


as it were, the centre, or rather the nucleus and 
focus, of these idle fancies. " 

The noonday vision in which she had appeared 
to me, in the shadiest and most sequestered part of 
the grove, brought to my memory all the visions, 
holy and unholy, of wondrous beings, of a condi- 
tion superior to ours, that I had read of in sacred 
authors and in the profane classics, Pepita ap- 
peared. to the eyes and on the stage of my fancy 
in the leafy seclusion of the grove, not as she rode 
before us on horseback, but in an ideal and ethereal 
fashion—as Venus to Aineas, as Minerva to Calli- 
machus, as the sylph who afterward became the 
mother of Libusa to the Bohemian Kroco, as Diana 
to the son of Aristaus, as the angels in the valley 

118 


Pepita Jimenez 


of Mamre to the Patriarch, as the hippocentaur to 

St. Anthony in the solitude of the wilderness. 

_ That the vision of Pepita should assume in my 
mind something of a supernatural character seems 
to me no more to be wondered at than any of these. 
For an instant, seeing the consistency of the illu- 
sion, I thought myself tempted by evil spirits; but 
I reflected that in the few moments during which 
I had been alone with Pepita near the brook of 


_ the Solana, nothing had.occurred that was not ©” 


natural and commonplace; that it was afterward, 
as wi _tode_ along quietly onmy.mule, that-some 
demon, hovering inyisible around me, had. sug- 
gested. these extravagant fancies. 

‘That night I told my father of my desire to learn 
to ride. I did not wish to conceal from him that 
it was Pepita who had suggested this desire. My 
father was greatly rejoiced; he embraced me, he 
_ kissed me, he said that now not you only would be 
my teacher, but that he also would have the pleas- 
ure of teaching me something. He ended by assur- 
ing me that in two or three weeks he would make 
me the best horseman of all Andalusia; able to go 
to Gibraltar for contraband goods, and come back | 
laden with tobacco and cotton, after eluding the 
vigilance of the Custom-house officers; fit, in a 
word, to astonish the riders who show off their 
horsemanship in the fairs of Seville and Mairena, 
and worthy to press the flanks of Babieca, Buce- 


119 


Pepita Jimenez 


phalus, or even of the horses of the sun themselves, 
if they should by chance descend to earth, and I 
could catch them by the bridle. 

I don’t know what you will think of this notion 
of my learning to ride, but I take it for granted you 
will see nothing wrong in it. 

If you could but see how happy my father is, 
and how he delights in teaching me! Since the 
day after the excursion I told you of, I take two 
lessons daily. There are days on which the lesson 
is continuous, for we are on horseback from morn- 
ing till night. During the first week the lessons 
took place in the courtyard of the house, which is 
unpaved, and which served us as a riding-school. 

We now ride out into the country, but manage 
so that no one shall see us. My father does not 
want me to show myself on horseback in public 
until I am able to astonish every one by my fine 
appearance in the saddle, as he says. If the vanity 
natural to a father does not deceive him, this, it 
seems, will be very soon, for I have a wonderful 
aptitude for riding. 

‘It is easy to see that you are my son!” my father 
exclaims with joy, as he watches my progress. 

My father is so good that I hope you will pardon 
him the profane language and irreverent jests in 
which he indulges at times. I grieve for this at the 
bottom of my soul, but I endure it with patience. 
These constant and long-continued lessons have re- 

120 


Pepita Jimenez 


duced me to a pitiable condition with blisters. My 
father enjoins me to write to you that they are 
caused by mortification of the flesh. 

As he declares that within a few weeks I shall be 
an accomplished horseman, and he does not desire 
to be superannuated as a master, he proposes to 
teach me other accomplishments of a somewhat 
irregular character, and sufficiently unsuited to a 
future priest. At times he proposes to train me in 
bull-fighting, in order that he may take me after- 
ward to Seville, where, with lance in hand, on the 
_ plains of Tablada, I shall make the braggarts and 
the bullies stare. Then he recalls his own youthful 
days, when he belonged to the bodyguard, and de- 
clares that he will look up his foils, gloves, and 
masks, and teach me to fence. And, finally, as my 
father flatters himself that he can wield the Sevil- 
lian dagger better than any one else, he has offered 
to teach me even this accomplishment also. 

You can already imagine the answer | make to 
all this nonsense. My father replies that, in the 
good old times, not only the priests, but even the 
bishops themselves, rode about the country on 
horseback, putting infidels to the sword. I rejoin 


that this might happen in the Dark Ages, but ev 


that in our day the ministers of the Most High 
should know of no other weapons than those of 
persuasion. 
“And what if persuasion be not enough?” says 
I2l 


Pepita Jimenez 


my father. “Do you think it would be amiss to 
reenforce argument with a few good blows of a 
cudgel?” 

The complete missionary, according to my 
father’s opinion, should know how, on occasion, 
to take recourse to these heroic measures, and as 
my father has read a great many tales and ro- 
- mances, he quotes various examples in support of 
his opinion. 

He cites, in the first place, St. James, who on his 
white horse, without ceasing to be an apostle, put 
more Moors to the sword than he preached to or 
convinced. He cites a certain Sefior de la Vera, 
who, being sent on an embassy to Boabdil by Fer- 
dinand and Isabella, became entangled in a theo- 
logical discussion with the Moors in the Court of 
the Lions, and, having exhausted his arguments, 
drew his sword and fell upon them with fury in 
order to complete their conversion. And he finally 
cites the Biscayan nobleman, Ignatius Loyola, who, 
in a controversy he had with a Moor regarding the 
purity of the Holy Virgin, growing weary at last 
of the impious and horrible blasphemies with 
which the aforesaid Moor contradicted him, fell 
upon him, sword in hand, and, if he had not taken 
to his heels, would have forced conviction upon his 
soul in a terrible fashion. In regard to the inci- 
dent relating to St. Ignatius, I answer my father 
that this was before the saint became a priest; and 

122 


Pepita Jimenez 


in regard to the other examples, I answer that nis- 
torians are not agreed. 

In short, I defend myself as best I can against 
my father’s jests, and I content myself with being 
a good horseman, without learning other accom- 
plishments unsuited to the clergy, although my 
father assures me that not a few of the Spanish 
clergy understand and practise them with fre- 
quency in Spain, even in our own day, with a view 
to contributing to the triumph of the faith, and to 
the preservation or the restoration of the unity of 

the Church. ik 
_ Lam grieved to the‘soul by this levity of my 
father’s, and that he should speak with irreverence 
and jestingly about the most serious things; but a 
respectful son is not called upon to go further than 
I do in repressing his somewhat Voltairean free- 
dom of speech. I say Voltairean, because I am not 
able to describe it by any other word, At heart my 
father_is a good Catholic, and this thought con- 
soles me. 

Yesterday was the Feast of the Cross, and the vil- 
lage presented a very animated appearance. In 
each street were six or seven May-crosses covered 
with flowers, but none of them was so beautiful as 
that placed by Pepita at the door of her house. It 
was adorned by a perfect cascade of flowers, 

In the evening we went to an entertainment at 
the house of Pepita. The cross which had stood 


123 


Pepita Jimenez 


at the door was now placed in a large saloon on 
the ground floor, in which there is a piano, and 
Pepita presented us with a simple and poetic spec- 
tacle—one that I had seen when a child, but had 
since forgotten. 

From the upper part of the cross hung down 
seven bands or broad ribbons, two white, two green, 
and three red, the symbolic colors of the theologi- 
cal virtues. Small children, five or six years old, 
representing the seven sacraments, and holding 
the seven ribbons that hung from the cross, per- 
formed with great skill a species of contra-dance. 
‘The sacrament of baptism was represented by a 
child wearing the white robe of a catechumen; 
ordination, by another child as a priest; confirma- 
tion, by a little bishop; extreme unction, by a pil- 
grim with staff and scrip, the latter filled with 
shells; marriage, by a bride and bridegroom; and 
penance, by a Nazarene with cross and crown of 
thorns. 

The dance was a series of reverences, steps, 
evolutions, and genuflexions, rather than a dance, 
performed to the sound of very tolerable music, 
something like a march, which the organist played, 
not without skill, on the piano. 

The little dancers, children of the servants or 
retainers of Pepita, after playing their parts, went 
away to bed loaded with gifts and caresses. 

‘The entertainment, in the course of which we 


124 


Pepita Jimenez 


were served with refreshments, continued till 
twelve; the refreshments were syrup served in 
little cups, and afterward chocolate with sponge- 
cake, and meringues and sugared water. 

Since the return of spring Pepita’s seclusion and 
retirement are being gradually abandoned, at 
which my father is greatly rejoiced. In future 
Pepita will receive every night, and my father 
desires that I shall be one of the guests. 

Pepita has left off mourning, and now appears, 
more lovely and attractive than ever, in the lighter 
fabrics appropriate to the season, which is almost 
summer. She still dresses, however, with extreme 
simplicity. ? 
~ I cherish the hope that my father will not now 
detain me here beyond the end of this month at 
farthest. In June we shall both join you in the 
city, and you shall then see how, far from Pepita, 
to whom I am indifferent, and who will remember 
me neither kindly nor unkindly, I shall have the 
pleasure of embracing you, and attaining at last 
to the happiness of being ordained. 


125 


Pepita Jimenez 


May 7th. 


PEPITA, as I mentioned to you before, receives 
every evening, from nine to twelve. 

Four or five married ladies of the village, and 
as many more unmarried ones, including Aunt 
Casilda, are frequent visitors; as well as six or 
seven young men, who play at forfeits with the 
girls. Three or four engagements are the natural 
result. 

The sedate portion of the company are the same 
as usual. ‘These are, as one may say, the high func- 
tionaries of the village—my father, who is the 
squire, the apothecary, the doctor, and the vicar. 

Pepita plays ombre with my father and the vicar 
and a fourth player. 

I am at a loss to know in which division to place 
myself. If I join the young people, my gravity 
proves a hindrance to their games and flirtations; 
if I stay with the elders, I must play the part of 
a looker-on in things I aye no. knowledge of. The 
only games of cards I know are simple and old- 
fashioned, and do not seem to be in vogue here, 
in polite society. 

The best course for me to pursue would be to 
absent myself from the house altogether, but my 
father will not hear of this. By doing so, accord- 
ing to him, I should make myself ridiculous. 

126 


Pepita Jimenez 


My father shows many signs of wonder when he 
sees my ignorance in certain things. That I should 
not know how to play even ombre fills him with 
astonishment. 

“Your uncle has brought you up quite out of the 
world,” he says to me, “cramming you with the- 
ology, and leaving you in the dark about everything 
else you ought to know. For the very reason that 
you are to be a priest, and can neither dance nor 
_ make love in society, it is necessary that you should 

know how to play ombre. Otherwise how are you 
going to spend your time, unhappy boy?” 

_ To these and other arguments of a like kind I 
have been obliged to yield, and my father is teach- 
ing me at home to play ombre, so that, as soon as I 
have learned it, I may play it at Pepita’s. He 

wanted also, as I already told you, to teach me to 
fence, and afterward to smoke and shoot and throw 
the bar; but I have consented to nothing of all this. 

“What a difference,” my father exclaims, “be- 

tween your youth and mine!” 

And then he adds, laughing: 

“In substance it is the same thing. I, too, had. 
canonical hours in my regimental quarters: a cigar 
was the censer; a pack of cards, the hymn-book; 
and there were never wanting other devotions and 
exercises of a more or less spiritual character.” 

Although you had warned me of my father’s 

levity of disposition, on account of which I have 

127, 


Pepita Jimenez 


lived with you for twelve years of my life—from 
the age of ten to that of twenty-two—yet his say- 
ings, altogether too free at times, perturb and mor- 
tify me. But what is to be done? Although I can 
not reprove him for making use of them, I do not, 
on the other hand, applaud or laugh at them. The 
strangest part of it is, that my father is altogether 
another person when he is in the house of Pepita. 
Never, even by chance, does he utter a single 
phrase, a single jest of the kind he is so prodigal 
of at other times. At Pepita’s my father is pro- 
priety itself. ‘He seems, too, to become every day 
more attached to her, and to cherish greater hopes 
of success. 

My father continues greatly pleased with me as 
his pupil in horsemanship. He declares that in 
four or five days I shall have mastered the art, and 
that I shall then mount Lucero, a black horse bred 
from an Arab horse and a mare of the race of 
Guadalcazar, full of fire and spirit, and trained to 
all manner of curvetings. 

‘Whoever succeeds in getting on the back of 
Lucero,” my father says to me, “may venture to 
compete in horsemanship with the centaurs them- 
selves; and that you shall do very soon.” 

Although I spend the whole day out of doors on 
horseback, in the clubhouse, or at Pepita’s, I yet 
steal a few hours from slumber, sometimes volun- 
tarily, sometimes because I can not sleep, to medi- 

128 


Pepita Jimenez 


tate on my situation and to examine my conscience. 
The image of Pepita is always present to my mind. 
“Can this be lover” I ask myself. 

‘The moral obligation I am under, the vow I 
have made to consecrate myself to the service of 
the altar, although not confirmed, is nevertheless 
in my eyes full and 1 binding. If anything opposed 
to the fulfilment of this vow has entered into my 
soul, it must be combated. 

I note, too—and you must not accuse me of arro- 
gance because I mention this to you—that the em- 
pire of my will, which you have taught me to ex- 
ercise, | is ; complete over my senses. While Moses 
on the top of Mount Sinai conversed with God, the 
rebellious people on the plain below adored the 
golden calf. Notwithstanding my youth, my spirit 
has no fears of falling into a like rebelliousness. I 
might commune with God in full security, if the 
enemy did not come to attack me in the sanctuary 
itself. But the image of Pepita presents itself to 
my soul. It is a spirit that makes war against my 


ual purity, that stands before the sanctuary of the 
soul, where God resides, and prevents me from 
reaching Him. 

I do not shut my eyes to the truth, however; 
I_can see clearly; I can reason; I do not deceive 
myself. 

Above and beyond this spiritual inclination that 
_ (E)—Vot. 13-5 129 


Pepita Jimenez 


draws me to Pepita, is the love of the Infinite and 
of the Eternal. Although I represent Pepita to 
myself as an idea, as.a poem, it is still the idea, the 
poetry of something finite, limited, concrete;.while 
the love of God and the conception of God ecnbeack 
everything. But notwithstanding all my efforts, 
I am unable to give form in my mind to-this su- 
preme conception—this object of the highest love 
—in order that it may combat the image, the 
memory of the frail and ephemeral reality that 
continually besets me. 

Fervently do I implore Heaven to awaken 
within me the power of the imagination, that it 
may create a likeness, a symbol of this conception, 
that shall be ali- comabfacines and absorb and efface 
the image of Pepita. This highest conception, on 
which I desire to centre my love, is vague, shadowy, 
indescribable, like the blackness of darkness; while 
Pepita’s image presents itself to me in cleatly de- 
fined outlines, bright, palpable, luminous with the 
subdued light that may be borne by the eyes of the 
spirit, not bright with the intense light that for the 
eyes of the spirit is as darkness. 

“=weeee very other consideration, every other object, is 
of no avail to destroy her image. It rises up be- 
tween the crucifix and me; between the most sacred 
image of the Virgin and me; I see it on the page 
of the religious book I am reading. 

Yet I do not believe that my soul is invaded by 

130 


Pepita Jimenez 


what in the world is called love...And even if this ~,.- 


were so, 1 would do battle against this love, and. 
conquer in the end. 

“The daily sight of Pepita, the hearing her 
praises sounded continually, even by the reverend 
vicar, preoccupy me; they turn my spirit toward 
profane things, and withdraw it from its proper 
meditations. But no—I do not yet love Pepiia; lL 
will go away from here.and. forget her. 

‘While I remain here I will battle valiantly. I 
will wrestle with the Lord in order to prevail with 
Him by love and submission. My cries shall reach 
Him like burning arrows, and shall break down 
the buckler wherewith He defends and hides 
Himself from the eyes of my soul. I will fight 
like Israel in the silence of the night and the Lord 
shall wound me in the thigh, and shall humble me 
in the conflict, in order that, being vanquished, I 
may become the victor. 


131 


Pepita Jimenez 


May 12th. 


BEFORE I had any intention of doing so, my. 
dear uncle, my father persuaded me to ride Lucero. 
Yesterday, at six in the morning, I mounted the 
beautiful..wild-beast, as my father calls Lucero, 
and we set out for the country. My father rode 
a spirited chestnut. 

I rode so well, I kept so firm a seat, and looked 
to such advantage on the superb animal, that my 
father could not resist the temptation of showing off 
his pupil; and about eleven in the morning, after 
resting at a farm he owns half a league distant from 
here, he insisted on our returning to the village and 
entering by the most frequented street, which we 
did, our horses’ hoofs clattering loudly on the pav- 
ing stones. It is needless to say that we rode by 
Pepita’s house, who for some time past is to be 
seen occasionally at her window, and who was then 
seated at the grating of a lower window, behind 
the green shutter. 

Hardly had Pepita heard the noise we made 
than, lifting up her eyes and seeing us, she rose, 
laid down the sewing she had in her hands, and set 
herself to observe us. Lucero, who has the habit, 
as I learned afterward, of prancing and curveting 
when he passes the house of Pepita, began to show 
off, and to rear and plunge. I tried to quiet him, 

132 


Pepita Jimenez 


but as there was something unfamiliar to him in 
the ways of his present rider, as well as in the rider 
himself, whom perhaps he regarded with con- 
tempt, he grew more and more unmanageable, and 
began to neigh and prance, and even to kick. But 
I remained firm and serene, showing him that I was 
his master, chastizing him with the spur, touching 
his breast with the whip, and holding him in by 
the bridle. Lucero, who had almost stood up on 
his hind legs, now humbled himself.so_far_as to 
bend his.knees gently and make a reverence. 

The crowd of idlers who had gathered around us 
broke into boisterous applause. My father called 
out to them: 

“A good lesson that for our braggarts and 
blusterers!” 

And, observing afterward that Currito—who has 
no other occupation than to amuse himself—was 
among the crowd, he addressed him in these words: 

“Look at that, you rascal! Look at the theolo- 
gian now, and see if you don’t stare with wonder, 
instead of laughing at him!” 

And, in fact, there Currito stood open-mouthed, 
stock-still with amazement, and unable to utter 
a word. 

My triumph was great and assured, although 


unsuited to my character. The unfitness of the tri- 79 ~ 


umph covered me with confusion. Shame brought 
the blood to my cheeks. I must have turned as red 
133 


Pepita Jimenez 


as scarlet, or redder, when I saw that Pepita was 
applauding and saluting me graciously, while she 
smiled and clapped her beautiful hands. 

“In short, I have been adjudged a man of nerve 
and a horseman of the first rank. 

My father could not be prouder or happier than 
he is. He declares that he is completing my educa- 
tion; that in me you have sent him a book full of 
wisdom, but uncorrected and unbound, and that 
he is now making a fair copy, and putting it be- 
tween covers. 

On two occasions I played ombre with Pepita. 
Learning ombre, if that be a part of the binding 
_ and the correcting, is also done with. 

The night after my equestrian feat Pepita re- 
ceived me with enthusiasm, and—what she had 
never done before, nor perhaps desired to do— 
gave me her hand. 

Do not suppose that I did not call to mind what 
sO many moralists and ascetics recommend in like 
cases, but in my inmost thoughts I believed they ex- 
aggerated the danger. Those words of the Holy 
Spirit, that it is as dangerous to touch a woman as 
a scorpion, seem to me to have been said in another 
sense. In pious books, no doubt, many phrases and 
sentences of the Sctipti tes are, with the best in- 
tentions, interpreted harshly. How are we to 
andcestand otherwise the saying that the beauty 
of woman, this perfect work of God, is always the 


134 


| Pepita Jimenez 


cause of perdition? Or how are we to understand, 
in a universal and invariable sense, that woman is 
more bitter than death? How are we to under- 
stand that he who touches a woman, on whatever 
occasion or with whatsoever thought, shall not es- 
cape without stain? 

However, I made answer rapidly within my own 
mind to these and other similar counsels; I took 
the hand that Pepita kindly extended to me, and 
pressed it in mine. Its softness made me compre- 
hend all the better the delicacy and beauty of the 
hand that until now I had known only by sight. 

According to the usages of the world, the hand, 
once given, should always be given on enter#fig a 


room and on taking leave. I hope that in this -,o—- 


ceremony, in this evidence of friendship, in this 
‘manifestation of kindness, given and accepted in 
purity of heart, and Sahel any mixture of levity, 
you will see nothing either evil or dangerous. 

As my father is often obliged of an evening to 
see the overseer and others of the country people, 
and is seldom free until half-past ten or eleven, 
I take his place with Pepita at the card-table. The 


reverend vicar and the notary are generally the 


other partners, and we play for very small stakes, 
so that not more than a piastre or two changes 
hands. 

As the game thus possesses but little serious in- 
terest, we interrupt it constantly with pleasant con- 


135 


. 
a 


Pepita Jimenez 


versation, and even with discussions on matters 
foreign to the game itself, in all which Pepita dis- 
plays such clearness of understanding, such live- 
liness of imagination, and such extraordinary grace 
of expression as to astonish me. 

I find no sufficient motive to change my opinion 
with respect to what I have already said in answer 
to your suspicions that Pepita perhaps feels a 
certain liking for me.. She manifests toward me 
the affection he would naturally entertain for the 
son of her suitor, Don Pedro de Vargas, and the 
timidity and shyness that would be inspired by a 
man in my position, who, though not yet a priest, 
is sen to become one. 

Nevertheless, as I always speak to you in my, 
letters as if I were kneeling before you in the con- 
fessional, I desire, as is my duty, to communicate 
to you a passing impression I have received on two 
or three occasions. This impression may be but a 
hallucination or a delusion, but I have none the 
less felt it. 

I have already told you in my former letters that 
the eyes of Pepita, green as those of Circe, are 
frank and tranquil in their gaze; she does not seem 
to be conscious of their power, or to know that 
they serve for any other purpose than to see with. 
When she looks at one, the soft light of her glance 
is so clear, so candid, and so untroubled that, in- 
stead of giving rise to any evil thoughts, it seems 

136 


Pepita Jimenez 


to give birth to pure thoughts, and leaves innocent 
and chaste souls in untroubled repose, while it de- 
stroys every incitement to evil in souls that are 
not chaste. ‘There is no trace of ardent passion, 
no fire to be discovered in Pepita’s eyes. Their 
light is like the mild ray of the moon. 

Well, then, notwithstanding all this, I fancied i 
detected, on two or three occasions, a sudden 
brightness, | gleam as of lightning, a swift, 1 


Gan this be the reste of a ridiculous vanity, in- 
spired by the arch fiend himself? 

I think so. I believe it is, and I wish to be- 
lieve it. 

The swiftness, the fugitive nature of the i impres- 
sion make me conjecture that it had no external 
reality, that it was only an illusion. 

The serenity of heaven, the coldness of indiffer- 
ence, tempered, indeed, with sweetness and charity 
—this is what I always discern in Pepita’s eyes. .)- 

Nevertheless, this illusion, this vision of a 
strange and ardent glance, torments me. 

My father affirms that in affairs of the heart it 
is the woman, not the man, who takes the first step; 
but that she takes it without thereby incurring any 
responsibility, and with the power to disavow or 
retract it whenever she desires to do so. Accord- 
ing to my father, it is the woman who first declares 
her passion through the medium of furtive glances, 


137 


Pepita Jimenez 


which she afterward disavows to her own con- 
science if necessary, and of which he to whom they, 
are directed divines, rather than reads, the signifi- 
cance. In this manner, by a species of-electric 
shock, by means of a subtle and inexplicable intui- 
tion, he who is loved perceives that he is loved; 
and when at last he makes up his mind to declare 
himself, he can do so confidently, and in the full 
security that his passion is returned. 

Perhaps it is these theories of my father, to 
which I have listened because I could not help it, 


0 that have heated my fancy and made mé Imagine 


what has no existence.in reality. 

‘thought sO beard. so incredible, that this ‘illusion 
should have an existence in reality? And if it 
had, if I were pleasing in Pepita’s eyes otherwise 
than as a friend, if the woman to whom my father 
is paying his addresses should fall in love with 
me, would not my position then be.terrible?_. 

But let us cast away these fears, the creation, no 
doubt, of vanity. Let us not make a Phaedra of 
Pepita, or a Hippolytus of me. 

What in reality begins to surprise me is my 
father’s carelessness and complete consciousness of 
security. Pardon my pride, ask Heaven to pardon 
it; for at times this consciousness of security piques_ 
and offends me. What! I say to myself, is there 
something so absurd in the thought that it should 

138 


Pepita Jimenez 

not even occur to my father that, notwithstanding 
my supposed sanctity, or perhaps because of my, 
supposed sanctity, 1 should, without wishing it, 
inspite Pepita with lover 

There is an ingenious method of reasoning by 
which I explain to myself, without wounding my 
vanity, my father’s carelessness in this important 
particular. My father, although he has no reason 
for doing so, regards himself already in the light 
of Pepita’s husband, and shares that fatal blind- 
ness with which Asmodeus, or some other yet more ° 
malicious demon, afflicts husbands. Profane and 
ecclesiastical history is full of instances of this 
blindness, which God permits, no doubt, for provi- 
dential purposes. The most remarkable example 
of it, perhaps, is that of the Emperor Marcus 
_ Aurelius, who had for his wife a woman so vile as 
Faustina, and though so wise a man and so great a 
philosopher, remained in ignorance to the end of 
his days of what was known to every one else in the 
Roman Empire; so that in the meditations, or me- 
moirs, that he composed, he gives infinite thanks 
to the immortal gods for having bestowed upon 
\him so faithful and so good a wife, thus provoking 
he smiles of his contemporaries and of future gen- 
erations. Every day since that time we see ex- 
amples of great men, and men of exalted rank, 
who make those who enjoy the favor of their wives 
their private secretaries, and bestow honors on 


139 


Pepita Jimenez 


them. Thus do I explain to myself my father’s 
indifference, and his failure to suspect that, even 
against my will, I might become_his_rival. 

Would it be a want of respect on my part, should 
I fall into the sin of presumption or insolence, if I 
were to warn my father of the danger which he 
himself does not see? But he gives me no oppor- 
tunity to say anything to him. Besides, what 
could I say to him? That once or twice I fancy 
Pepita has looked at me in a way different from 
that in which she usually does? May not this be 
an illusion of mine? No;I have not the least proof 
that Pepita desires to play the coquette with me. 

What, then, could I tell my father? Shall I say 
to him that it is I who am in love with Pepita, that 
I covet the treasure he already regards as his own? 
This is not the truth; and, above all, how could I 
tell this to my father, even if, to my misfortune and 
through my fault, it were the truth? 

The best course I can adopt is to say nothing; 
to combat the temptation in silence, if it should 
indeed assail me, and to endeavor as soon as pos- 
sible to leave this place and return to you. 


140 


Pepita Jimenez 


May toth. 


I RETURN thanks to Heaven and to you for the 
letters and the counsels you have lately sent me. 
To-day I need them more than ever. 

The mystical and learned St. Theresa is right 
in dwelling upon the suffering of timid souls that 
allow themselves to be disturbed by temptation; 


but a thousand times worse than that suffering is «/ 


the awakening from error of those who, like me, 
have permitted themselves to indulge in arrogance 
and self-confidence. 

“Our bodies are the temples of the Holy Spirit; 
but when fire is set to the walls of the temple, 
though they do not burn, yet they are blackened. 

The first evil thought is the head of the serpent; 
if we do-not crush it with firm and courageous foot, 
then will the venomous reptile climb up and hide 
himself in our bosom. 

The nectar of earthly joys, however innocent 
they be, is sweet indeed to the taste; but afterward 
_ it is converted into gall, and into the venom of the 
serpent. 

It is true—I can no longer deny it to _you—I 
ought not t to have allowed my eyes to rest with so 
much complacency on this dangerous woman. 

I do not deem myself lost; but I feel my soul 
troubled. $ 


141 


Pepita Jimenez 


Even as the thirsty hart desires and seeks the 
water-brooks, so does my soul still seek God. To 
God does it turn that He may give it rest; it longs 
to drink at the torrent of His delights, whose gush- 
ing waters rejoice Paradise, and whose clear waves 
can wash us whiter than snow; but deep calleth 
unto deep, and my feet have stuck fast in the mire 
that is hidden in their abysses. 

Yet have I still breath and voice to cry out with 
the psalmist: “Arise, my joy! If thou art on my 
side, who shall piovail against me?” 

I say unto my sinful soul, full of the chimerical 
imaginings and sinful Htsires engendered by un- 
lawful thoughts: “Oh, miserable daughter of 
‘Babylon! happy shall he be who shall give thee 
thy reward! Happy shall he be that dasheth thy 
little ones against the stones!” 

Works of penance, fasting, prayer, and penance, 
are the weapons wherewith I shall arm myself to 
the combat, and, with the Divine help, to van- 
quish. 

It was not a dream; it was not madness; it was 
” - the truth: she lets her eyes rest upon me at times 
“ with the ardent glance of which IJ have told you. 

There is in her glance an inexplicable magnetic 

attraction. It draws me on, it seduces me, and I 

can not withdraw my gaze from her. On such 

occasions my eyes must burn, like hers, with a fatal 
flame, as did those of Ammon when he turned them 


142 


Pepita Jimenez 


upon Tamar, as did those of the prince of She- 
chem when they were fixed upon Dinah. 

i W. hen our glances t thus meet, I forget even God. 
ee image rises up within my soul, the conqueror 
of everything. Her beauty outshines all other 
beauty; the joys of heaven seem to me less desira- 
ble than her affection. An eternity of suffering 
would be little in exchange for a moment of the 
infinite bliss with which one of those glances which 
pass like lightning inundates my soul. 


When I return home, when I am alone in my ,. 
room, in the silence of the night, I realize-all.the » 


horror of my position, and I form good resolutions, 
only to break them again. 


—_ 
I resolve to feign sickness, to make use of any 


pretext so as not to go to Pepita’s on the following 
night, and yet I go. >< 

My father, confiding to the last degree, says to 
me when the hour arrives, without any suspicion 
of what is passing in my soul: 

“Go to Pepita’s; I will go later, when I have 
finished with the overseer.” 

No excuse occurs to me; I can find no pretext 
ree hat and depart. 

On entering the room I shake hands with Pepita, 
and as our hands touch she casts a spell over me; 
my whole being is changed; a devouring fire pene- 
trates my heart, and I think only of her. Moved 


143 


3 


Pepita Jimenez 


by an irresistible impulse, I gaze at her with i insane 
ardor, and at every instant I think I discover’ in 
her new perfections. Now it is the dimples in her 
cheeks when she smiles, now the roseate whiteness 
of her skin, now the straight outline of her nose, 
now the smallness of her ear, now the softness 
of contour and the admirable modeling of her 
throat. 

_ I enter her house against. my will, as though 
summoned there by a conjuror, and no sooner am 
I there than I fall under the spell of her enchant- 
ment. I see clearly that I am in the power of an 
enchantress whose fascination is irresistible. 

Not only is she pleasing to my sight, but her 
words sound in my ears like the music of the. 
spheres, revealing to my soul the harmony of the. 
universe; and I even fancy that a subtle fragrance 
emanates from her, sweeter than the perfume of 
the mint that grows by the brookside, or the wood- 
like odor of the thyme that is found among the 
hills. aaa 

I know not how, in this state of exaltation, Iam 
able to play ombre, or to converse rationally, 
or even to speak, so completely am I absorbed 
in her. 

_ When our eyes meet, our souls rush forth in them > 

and seem to join and interpenetrate each other. In 
that meeting a thousand feelings are communicated 
that in no other way could be made known; poems 


144 


Pepita Jimenez 


are recited that could be uttered in no human 
tongue, and songs are sung that no human voice 
could sing, and no guitar accompany. 

Since the day I met Pepita by the Pozo de la 
Solana I have not seen her alone. Not a word has 
passed between us, yet we have told each other 
everything. a 

When I withdraw myself from this fascination, 
when I am again alone at night in my chamber, t 
set myself to examine coolly the situation in which | 
I am placed; Isee.the abyss that is about to engulf 
me yawning before me; I feel my feet slip from 
under me, and that I_am sinking into it. us 

You counsel me to reflect upon death—not on 
the death of this woman, but on my own. You 
counsel me to reflect on the instability, on the 
insecurity of our existence, and on what there is 
beyond it. But these pansiderations, these reflec- 
tions neither terrify nor daunt.me. Why should 
I, who desire to die, fear death? Love and death 
are brothers. A sentiment of self-abnegation 
springs to life within me, and tells me that my 
whole. being should be consecrated to and anni- 
hilated_in the beloved object. I long to merge 
myself in one of her glances; to diffuse and exhale 
my whole being in the ray of light shot forth from 
her eyes; to die while gazing on her, even though 
I should be eternally lost. 

What is still to some extent efficacious with me 


145 


Pepita Jimenez 


against this love is not fear, but love itself. Supe- 
rior to this deep-rooted love with which I now 
have the evidence that Pepita inspités-me, Divine 
love exalts itself in my spirit in mighty uprising. 
Then everything is changed within me, and I feel 
that I may yet obtain the victory. The object of 
my higher love presents itself to my mental vision, 
as the sun that kindles and illuminates all things, 
and fills all space with light; and the object of my 
inferior love appears but as an atom of dust floating 
in the sunbeam. All her beauty, all her splendor, 
all her attractions are nothing but the reflection 
of this uncreated sun, the brilliant, transitory, fleet- 
ing spark that is cast off from that infinite and 
inexhaustible fire. 

My soul, burning with love, would fain take to 
itself wings and rise to that flame, in order that 
all that is impure within it might be consumed 
therein. 

My life, for some days past, is a constant strug- 
gle. I know not how it is that the malady from 
which I suffer does not betray itself in my counte- 
nance. I scarcely eat, I scarcely sleep; and if by 
chance sleep closes my eyelids, I awake in terror, 
as from a dream in which rebel angels are arrayed 
against good angels, and in which I am one of the 
combatants. In this conflict of light against dark- 
ness I do battle for the right, but 1 sometimes im- 
agine that I have gone over to the enemy, that I 

146 


Pepita Jimenez 


am a vile deserter; and I hear a voice from Patmos 
saying, “And men loved darkness rather than 
light’; and then I am filled with terror, and I look 
upon myself as lost. 

No resource is left me but flight, If, before the 
end of the month, my father does not go with me, 
or consent to my going alone, I shall steal away like 
a thief, without a word to any one. 


147 


Pepita Jimenez 


May 23d. 


. TT am a vile worm, not a man; I am the 
opprobrium and disgrace of humanity. [ am a 
hypocrite. ‘i 
~ [have been encompassed by the pangs of death, 
and the waters of iniquity have passed over me. 

I am ashamed to write to you, and yet I write. 
I desire to confess everything to you. 

I can not turn away.from evil. Far from 
abstaining from going to Pepita’s, I go there each 
night earlier than the last. It would seem as if 
devils took me by the feet and carried me there 
against my will! 

appily, I never find Pepita alone; I do not de- 
sire to find her alone. I almost always find the 
excellent vicar there before me, who attributes our 
friendship to similarity of feeling in religious 
matters, and bases it on piety, like the pure 
and innocent friendship he himself entertains 
for her. 

The progress of my malady is rapid. Like the 
stone that is loosened from the mountain-top and 
gathers force as it falls, so is it with my spirit. 

When Pepita and I shake hands, it is not now as 
at first. Each one of us, by an effort of the will, 
transmits to the other, through the handclasp, every 
throb of the heart. It is as if, by some diabolical 

148 


Pepita Jimenez 


art, we had effected a transfusion and a blending 
together of the most subtle elements of our blood. 
She must feel my life circulate through her veins, 
as I feel hers in mine. 

When I am near her, I love her; when I am“ 
away from. her, Ihate Ter. When ft am in fer 
presence she inspires me with love; she draws me 
to her; she subjugates me with gentleness: she. lays 
upon me a very easy yoke. 

But the recollection of her undoes me. When I 
dream of her, I dream that she is severing my head_ 
from my body, as Judith slew the captain of the 
Assyrians; or that she is driving a nail into my 
temple, as Jael did to Sisera. But when I am near 
her, she appears to me the Spouse of the Song of 
Songs, and a voice within me calls to her and I 
bless her, and I regard her as a sealed fountain, 
as an enclosed garden, as the flower of the valley, 
as the lily of the fields, my dove and my sister. 

I desire to free myself from her, and I can 
not. I abhor, yet I almost worship Rep! Eber 
spirit enters into me and takes possession of me 
as soon as I behold her; it subjugates me, it 
abases me. 

I leave her house each night, saying, “This is the 
last night I shall return here”; and I return there 
on the following night! 

When she speaks, and I am near, my soul hangs, 
as it were, upon her words. When she smiles, IL 


149 


Pepita Jimenez 


imagine that a ray of spiritual light enters into my, 
heart and rejoices it. 

It has happened, when playing ombre, that our 
knees have touched by chance, and then I have felt 
a thrill run through me impossible to describe. 

Get me away from this place. Write to my 
father and ask him to let me return to you. If it 
be necessary, tell him everything. Help me! Be 
my refuge! 


- 


150 


Pepita Jimenez 


May 30th. 


Gop_has given me strength to resist, and I have 
resisted. 

It is now many days since I have been in 
the house of Pepita, many days since I have 
seen her. 

It is scarcely necessary that I should feign sick- 
ness, for I amin reality sick. I have lost my color, 
and dark circles begin to show themselves under 
my eyes; and my father asks me, full of affectionate 
_ anxiety, what the cause of my suffering is, and 

manifests the deepest concern. 

_ The kingdom of Heaven is said to yield to 
violence, and I am resolved to conquer it. With 
violence I call at its gates that they may open 
to me. 
to prove me; and in vain do I supplicate Pint’ to Tet 
this cup of bitterness pass away from me. But, as 
I have passed and still pass many nights in at 
delivered up to prayer, a loving inspiration from 
the Supreme Consoler has come to sweeten the 
bitterness of my cup. 

I have beheld with the eyes of the soul the new 
country; and the new song of the heavenly Jeru- 
salem has resounded within the depths of my heart. 

If in the end I should conquer, glorious will be 

Oe it: 


With wormwood am I fed by the Lord, in order 4 ‘ 


Pepita Jimenez 


the victory; but I shall owe it to the Queen of 
Angels, under whose protection.I place myself. 
She is my refuge and my defense; the tower of the 
house of David, on whose walls hang innumerable 
shields and the armor of many valiant champions; 
the cedar of aie ee which puts the serpent to 
flight. 

The woman who inspires me with an earthy 
love, on the contrary, 1 endeavor to despise and 
abase in my thoughts, remembering the words of 
the sage, and applying them to her. 

“Thou art the snare of the hunter,” I say of her; 
“thy heart is a net of deceit, and thy hands are 
bands tliat imprison; he who fears God will flee 
from thee, and the sinner shall be taken captive 

by thee.” 

‘ In my meditations on love I find a thousand rea- 
sons for loving God, and against loving her. 

I feel, in the depths of my heart, an indescribable 
balvusiasrn that convinces me that for the love of 
power, dominion. I feel myself capable of daaltai- 
ing Christ, and if the Tempter should carry me off 
to the taountain-top: and should there offer me all 
the kingdoms of the earth if I consented to bow the 
knee before him, yet would I not bend it. But 
were he to offer me this woman if I should do so, 
I feel that I should waver, that I could not reject 
his offer. Is this woman, then, worth more in my 

152 


Pepita Jimenez 


eyes than all the kingdoms of the earth? More 
than fame, honor, power, and dominion? 

‘Is the virtue of love, I ask myself at times, 
always the same, even when applied to pe 
objects? Or are there two species and qualities 


of love? To love God seems to me to be the giving Tat” 


up of self and selfish interest. Loving Him, I de- 
sire to love, and I can love, all things Sager Him, 
and I am not troubled or jealous because of His 
love toward all things. I am not jealous of the 
saints, or of the martyrs, or of the blessed, or even 
of the seraphim. The greater I picture to myself 
to be the love of God for His creatures, and the 
graces and gifts He bestows upon them, the less 
am I troubled by jealousy; the more I love Him, 
the nearer to me do I feel Him to be, and the more 
loving and gracious does He seem toward me. My 
brotherhood, my more than brotherhood, with all 
creatures, stands forth then in a most pleasing light. 
It seems to me that I am one with all things, and 
that all things are. bound together in the bonds of 
love, through God and in God. 

Very different is it when my thoughts dwell 
upon Pepita, and on the love with which she in- 
spires me. This love is a love full of hatred, that 
separates me from everything but myself. I love 
her for myself, altogether for myself, and myself 
altogether for her. Even devotion to her, even 
~ sacrifices made for her sake, partake of the nature 


153 


ZS 


Pepita Jimenez 


of selfishness. To die for her would be to die of 


despair at not being able to possess her in any other 
manner—from the fear of not enjoying her love 
completely, except by dying and commingling 
with her in an eternal embrace. 

By these reflections I endeavor to render the love 


, of Pepita hateful to me. I invest my love in my 


imagination with something diabolical and fatal; 
but, as if I possessed a double’soul; a” double under- 


standing, a double will, and a double imagination, 


in contradiction to ‘this ‘thought, other feelings rise 
have just affirmed, and peauely endeavor ‘to_recon-. 
cile the two loves. Would it not be possible, I 
ask myself, to fly from Pepita, and yet continue to 
love her, without ceasing therefore to consecrate 
myself with fervor to the love of God? For, as 
the love of God does not exclude love of country, 
love of humanity, love of learning, love of beauty 
in Nature and in Art, neither should it exclude an- 
other love, if it be spiritual and immaculate. I 
will make of her, I say.to myself, a symbol, an 
allegory, an image of all that is good, of all that _ 
is beautiful. She shall be to me, as Beatrice was to 
Dante, the image and the symbol of country, of 
badrledee, and of beauty. 

This intention suggests to me a horrible fancy, a 
monstrous thought. In order to make of Pepita 
this symbol, this vaporous and ethereal image, this 


154 


Pepita Jimenez 


sign and epitome of all that I can love under God, ? 
in God, and subordinate to God, I picture her to 
myself dead, as Beatrice was dead when Dante 
made her the subject of his song. 

If I picture her to myself. among the living, then ch 
I am ‘unable t to ) convert. her.into.a.pureidea;.and © 
if IConvert her sr into a pure idea, I kill her in my 
thoughts, 

Then I weep; I am filled with horror at my 
crime, and I draw near to her in spirit, and with 
the wane of my heart I bring her back to life 
again; and I behold_her, not errant, diaphanous, 
floating in shadowy | outline among roseate clouds 
and celestial | flowers, as the stern Ghibelline beheld 
his beloved in the upper sphere of Purgatory; but 
coherent, solid, clearly defined in the pure.and 
} serene ‘ air, like vine masterpieces of Greek art, like 
Galatea ‘already animated by the love of Pygma- 
lion, and descending from her pedestal of marble, 
full ing fire , exhaling | love, rich in youth and beauty. 

Then I cen in the depths of my perturbed 
heart: “My virtue faints! My God, do not Thou 
forsake me! Hasten to my help; show Thy, coun- 
tenance, and I shall be saved!” 

Thus do I recover strength to resist temptation. 
Thus again does the hope spring to life within me, 
that I shall regain my former tranquillity when I 
shall have left this place. . 

The Devil longs with ardor to swallow up the 


q55, 


Pepita Jimenez 


pure waters of Jordan, by which are symbol- 
ized the persons who are consecrated to God. Hell 
conspires against them, and lets loose all her mon- 
sters upon them. St. Bonaventure says: “We 
should not wonder that these persons have sinned, 
but rather that they have not sinned.” 

Notwithstanding, I shall be able to resist and not 
sin. The Lord will protect me. x 


1} 


156 


Pepita Jimenez 


June 6th. 


PEPITA’S nurse—now her housekeeper—is, as my 
father says, a good bag of wrinkles; she is talka- 
tive, gay, and skilful, as few are. She married the 
son of Master Cencias, and has inherited from the 
father what the son did not inherit—a wonderful 
facility for the mechanical arts, with this differ- 
ence: that while Master Cencias could set the screw 
of a wine-press, or repair the wheels of a wagon, 
or make a plow, this daughter-in-law of his knows 
how to make sweetmeats, conserves of honey, and 
other dainties. The father-in-law practised the 
useful arts; the daughter-in-law those that have 
for their object pleasure, though only innocent, or 
at least lawful pleasure. 

Antofiona—for such is her name—is permitted, 
or assumes, the greatest familiarity with all the 
gentry here. She goes in and out of every house 
as if it were her own. She uses the familiar “thou” 
to all young people of Pepita’s age, or four or five 
years older; she calls them “child,” and treats them 
as if she had nursed them at her breast. 

She behaves toward me in this way; she comes 
to visit me, enters my room unannounced, has asked 
me several times already why I no longer go to 
see her mistress, and has told me that I am wrong 

_ in not going. 
157 


Pepita Jimenez 


My father, who has no suspicion of the truth, 
accuses me of eccentricity; he calls me an owl, and 
he, too, is determined that I shall resume my visits 
to Pepita. Last night I could no longer resist his 
repeated importunities, and I went to her house 
very early, as my father was about to settle his 
accounts with the overseer. 

Would to God I had not gone! 

Pepita was alone. When our glances met, when 
we saluted each other, we both turned red. We 
shook hands with timidity and in silence. 

I did not press her hand, nor did she press mine, 
but for a moment we held them clasped together. 

In Pepita’s glance, as she looked at me, there 
was nothing of love; there was only friendship, 
sympathy, and a profound sadness. 

She had divined the whole of my inward strug- 
gle; she was persuaded that Divine love had tri- 


umphed in my soul—that my resolution not to love | 


her was firm and invincible. 

She did not venture to complain of me; she had 
no reason to complain of me; she knew that right 
was on my side. A sigh, scarcely perceptible, that 
escaped from her dewy, parted lips, revealed to 
me the depth of her sorrow. 

Her hand still lay in mine; we were both silent. 
How was I to tell her that she was not destined for 
me, nor I for her; that we must part forever? 

But though my lips refused to tell her this in 

158 


Pepita Jimenez 


words, I told it to her with my eyes; my severe 
glance confirmed her fears; it convinced her of 

the irrevocableness of my decision. 

All at once her gaze was troubled; her lovely 
countenance, pale with a translucent pallor, was 
full of a touching expression of melancholy. She 
looked like Our Lady of Sorrows. Two tears rose 
slowly to her eyes, and began to steal down her 
cheeks. 

I know not what passed within me, nor how to 
describe it, even if I knew. 

I bent toward her to kiss away her tears and our 

lips met. 

_ Rapture unspeakable, a faintness full of peril, 
invaded us both. She would have fallen, but that 
I supported her in my arms, 

Heaven willed that we should at this moment 
hear the step and the cough of the reverend vicar, 
who was approaching, and we instantly drew apart. 

Recovering myself, and summoning all the 
stren strength of my will, I brought to an end this ter- 
rible scene, that had been enacted in silence, with 
these words, which I pronounced in low and in- 
tense accents: 
| “The first and the last!” 

I made allusion to our profane kiss; but, as if my 
words had been an invocation, there rose before 
me the vision of the Apocalypse in all its terrible 
‘majesty. I beheld Him who is indeed the First and 


159 


Pepita Jimenez 
the Last, and with the two-edged sword that pro- 
ceeded from His mouth He pierced my soul, full 
of evil, of wickedness, and of sin. 

All that evening I passed i in a species of Pees 
an inward delirium, that I know not how I was 
able to conceal.. 

I withdrew from Pepita’s house very early. 

The anguish of my soul was yet more poignant 
in solitude. 

When I recalled that kiss and those words of 
farewell, I compared myself with the traitor Judas, 
who made use of a kiss to betray; and with the 
sanguinary and treacherous assassin Joab, who 
plunged the sharp steel into the bowels of Amasa 
while in the act of kissing him. 

I had committed a double treason; I had been 
guilty of a double perfidy. I had sinned against 
God and against her. i 

I am an execrable wretch. 


160 


Pepita Jimenez 


June ith. 


EVERYTHING may still be remedied. 

Pepita will in time forget her love and the weak- 
ness of which we were guilty. 

Since that night I have not returned to her 
house. Antofiond has not made her appearance 
in ours. 


By dint of entreaties I have obtained a formal “* 


promise from my father that we shall leave here 
on the 2th, the day after St. John’s day, which is 
here celebrated with splendid feasts, and on the 
eve of which there is a great vigil. 

Absent from Pepita, I begin to recover my se- 
renity and to think that this first beginning of love 
was a trial of my virtue. 

All these nights I have prayed, I have watched, 
I have performed. many acts of penance. 

The persistence of my prayers, the deep contri- 
tion of my soul, have found favor with the Lord, 
who has manifested to me His great mercy. 

The Lord, in the words of the prophet, has sent 
fire to the stronghold of my spirit; He has illumi- 
nated my understanding, He has kindled-my.-reso- 
lution, and He has given me guidance. 

~The working of the Divine love which animates 
the Supreme Will has had power, at times, without 
my deserving it, to lead me to that condition of 
{E)—VoL,. 13—6 IOL 


Pepita Jiménez 


prayerful contemplation in which the soul enjoys 
_ repose. I have cast out from the lower faculties 


10 of my soul every image—even.her.image: and I 
f a PSE >] 


am persuaded, if pride does not deceive me, that, 
in perfect peace of mind and heart I have tabwn 
and enjoyed the Supreme Good that dwells within 
the depths of the soul. 

Compared with this good all else is worthless— 
compared with this beauty all else is deformity 
—compared with these heights all else is vile. 
Who would not forget and scorn every other love” 
for the love of God? 

Yes; the profane image of this woman shall de- 
part finally and forever from my soul. I shall 
make of my prayers and of my penance a sharp 
scourge, and with it I will expel her therefrom, 
as Christ expelled the money-lenders from the 
‘Temple. 4 


162 


Pepita Jiménez 


June 18th. 


THis is the last letter I shall write to you. On 
the 25th I shall leave.this.place-without-fail, 

I shall soon have the happiness of embracing 
you. Near you I shall be stronger. You will in- 
fuse courage into me, and lend me the energy in 
which I am wanting. 

A tempest of conflicting emotions is now raging 
in my soul. The disorder of my ideas may be 
known by the disorder of what I write. 

Twice I returned to ‘the house of Pepita. I 
was cold and stern. I was as I ought to have been, 
but how much did it not cost me! 

My father told me yesterday that Pepita was 
indisposed, and would not receive. 

The thought at once assailed me that the cause 44- 
of her indisposition might be her ill-requited love. 7° 

Why did I return her glances of fire? Why did 
I basely deceive her? Why did I make her believe 
I loved her? Why did my vile lips seek hers with 
ardor, and communicate the ardor of an unholy 
love to hers? 

But no; my sin shall not be followed, as its\ un- 
avoidable consequence, by another sin! 

What has been, has been, and can not be undone; 
but a repetition of it may be avoided—shall be 
avoided in future. 

163 


Pepita Jimenez 3 


On the 25th, I repeat, I shall depart from here 
without fail. 

The impudent Antofiona has just come to see 
me. I hid this letter from her, as if it were a crime 
to write to you. 

Antofiona remained here only for a moment. 

I arose, and remained standing while I spoke to 
her, that the visit might be a short one. 

During this short visit she gave utterance to 
a thousand mad speeches, which disturbed me 
greatly. Finally, as she was going away, she ex- 
claimed, in her half-gipsy jargon: 

“You deceiver! You villain! My curse upon” 
you! You have made the child sick, and now you 
are killing her by your desertion. May witches . 
fly away with you, body and bones!” 

Having said this, the fiendish woman gave me, 
in a coarse vulgar fashion, six or seven ferocious 
pinches below the shoulders, as if she would like - 
to tear the skin from my back in strips, and then 
went away, looking daggers at me. 

I do not complain. I deserve this brutal jest, 
granting it to be a jest. I deserve that fiends should 
tear my flesh with red-hot pincers. 

Grant, my God, that Pepita may forget me! 
Let her, if it be necessary, love another, and be 
happy with him! 

Can I ask more than this of Thee, oh, my 
God? 

164, 


Pepita Jiménez 


My father knows nothing, suspects nothing. It 
is better thus. 

Farewell for a few days, till we see and em- 
brace each other again. 

How changed will you find me! How full of 
bitterness my heart! How soiled my. purity! How 
bruised and wounded my soul! 


165 


PARAUIPOMENA 


HEeErE end the lett¢rs of Don Luis de Vargas. 

We should therefore be left in ignorance of the 
subsequent fortunes gf these lovers, if one familiar 
with all the circumstances had not communicated 
the following parti¢ulars: 
: No one in the village found anything strange in 
the fact of Pepitg’s being indisposed, or thought, 
still less, of attributing her indisposition to a cause 
of which only we, Pepita herself, Don Luis, the 
reverend dean, and the discreet Antofiona, are thus 
far cognizant./ ; 

They might rather have wondered at the life of 
gaiety that Pepita had been leading for some time 
past, at the daily gatherings at her house, and the 
excursions into the country in which she had joined. 
That Pepita should return to her habitual seclu- 
sion was quite natural. 

Her secret and deeply rooted love for Don Luis 
was hidden from the searching glances of Dofia 
Casilda, of Currito, and of all the other person- 
ages of the village of whom mention is made in the 

166 


Pepita Jiménez 


letters of Don Luis. Still less could the public 
know of it. It never entered into the head of any 
One, no one imagined for a moment, that the theo- 
logian, the “‘saint,” as they called Don Luis, could 
become the rival of his father, or could have suc- 
ceeded where the redoubtable and powerful Don 
Pedro de Vargas had failed—in winning the heart 
of the graceful, coy, and reserved young widow. 

Notwithstanding the familiarity of the ladies of 
the village with their servants, Pepita had allowed 
none of hers to suspect anything. Only the lynx- 
eyed Antofiona, whom nothing could escape, and 
more especially nothing that concerned her young 
mistress, had penetrated the mystery. 

Antofiona did not conceal her discovery from 
Pepita, nor could Pepita deny the truth to the 
woman who had nursed her, who idolized her, and 
who, if she delighted in finding out and gossiping 
about all that took place in the village, being, as 
she was, a model scandal-monger, was yet, in all 
that related to her mistress, reticent and loyal as 
but few are. | 

In this manner Antofiona made herself the con- 
fidante of Pepita; and Pepita found great consola- 
tion in unburdening her heart to one who, though 
she might be coarse in the frankness with which 
she expressed her sentiments, was not so either in 
the sentiments or the ideas that she expressed. 

In this may be found the explanation of An- 

167 


Pepita Jimenez 


tofiona’s visits to Don Luis, as well as of her words, 
and even of the ferocious and disrespectful pinches, 
given in so ill-chosen a spot, with which she bruised 
his flesh and wounded his dignity on the occasion 
of her last visit to him. 

Not only had Pepita not desired Antofiona to 
carry messages to Don Luis, but she did not even 
know that she had gone to see him. Antofiona had 
taken the initiative, and had interfered in the mat- 
ter simply because she herself had wanted to do so. 

As has already been said, she had with wonder- 
ful perspicacity discovered the state of affairs be- 
tween her mistress and Don Luis. 

_ While Pepita herself was still scarcely conscious 
of the fact that she loved Don Luis, Antofiona 
already knew it. Scarcely had Pepita begun to 
cast on him those furtive glances, ardent and in- 
voluntary, which had wrought such havoc— 
glances which had been intercepted by none of 
those present when they were given—when An- 
tofiona, who was not present, had already spoken of 
them to Pepita. And no sooner had those glances 
been returned, than Antofiona knew that also. 

There was but little left, then, for the mistress 
to confide to a servant of so much penetration, and 
so skilled in divining what passed in the inmost 
recesses of her breast. 

Five days after the date of Don Luis’s last let- 
ter our narrative begins: 

168 


Pepita Jimenez 


I 


IT was eleven o’clock in the morning. Pepita 
was in an apartment on an upper floor, contiguous 
to her bedroom and dressing-room, where no 
One ever entered without being summoned, save 
Antojfiona. | 

The furniture of this apartment was simple, but 
comfortable and in good taste. The curtains and 
the covering of the easy-chairs, the sofas, and the 
armchairs, were of a flowered cotton fabric. On 
a mahogany table were writing materials and 
papers, and in a bookcase, also of mahogany, were 
many books of devotion and history. The walls 
were adorned with pictures—engravings of relig- 
ious subjects, but with this peculiarity in their 
selection—unheard-of, extraordinary, almost in- 
credible in an Andalusian village—that, instead of 
being bad French lithographs, they were engrav- 
ings in the best style of Spanish art, as the Spasimo 
di Sicilia of Raffael; the St. Ildefonso and the Vir- 
gin, the Conception, the St. Bernard, and the two 
Lunettes of Murillo. 

On an antique oak table, supported by fluted 
columns, was a small writing-desk, or escritoire, 
inlaid with mother-of-pearl, ivory, and brass, and 
containing a great many little drawers, in which 

169 


Pepita Jimenez 


Pepita kept bills and other papers. On this table 
were also two porcelain vases filled with flowers; 
and, finally, hanging against the walls were sev- 
eral flower-pots of Seville Carthusian ware, con- 
taining ivy, geraniums, and other plants, and three 
gilded cages, in which were canaries and larks. 

This apartment was the retreat of Pepita, where 
no one entered during the daytime except the doc- 
tor and the reverend vicar; and in the evening only, 
the overseer, to settle accounts. This apartment 
was called the study, and served the purpose of 
one. 

Pepita was seated, half reclining on a sofa, be- 
- fore which stood a small table with some books 
upon it. 

She had just risen, and was attired in a light 
summer wrapper. Her blond hair, not yet ar- 
ranged, looked even more beautiful in its disorder, 
Her countenance, somewhat pale, and showing 
dark circles under the eyes, still preserved its fresh 
and youthful aspect, and looked more beautiful 
than ever under the influence of the trouble which 
robbed it of color. 

Pepita showed signs of impatience; she was ex- 
pecting some one. 

At last the person she was awaiting, who proved 
to be the reverend vicar, arrived, and entered with- 
out announcement. 

After the usual salutations the vicar settled him- 


I 
37° 
* 


Pepita Jimenez 


self comfortably in an easy-chair, and the conver- 
sation thus began: 

“T am very glad, my child, that you sent for me; 
but, even without your doing so, I was just coming 
to see you. How pale you are! What is it that ails 
your Have you anything of importance to tell 
me?” 

Pepita began her answer to this series of affec- 
tionate inquiries with a deep sigh; she then said: 

“Do you not divine my malady? Have you not 
discovered the cause of my suffering?” 

_ The vicar made a gesture of denial, and looked 
at Pepita with something like terror in his gaze; 
for he knew nothing of all that had taken place, 
and was struck by the vehemence with which she 
spoke. 

_ Pepita continued: 

“T ought not to have sent for you, father. I 
should have gone to the church myself instead, to 
speak with you in the confessional, and there con- 
fess my sins. But, unhappily, far from repenting 
of them, my heart has hardened itself in wicked- 
ness. I have neither the courage nor the desire to 
speak to the confessor, but only to the friend.” 

“What are you saying about sins and hardness 
of heart? Have you taken leave of your senses? 
What sins can you have committed, you who are 

so good?” 

“No, father, I am wicked. I have been deceiv- 

170 
a 


Pepita Jimenez 


ing you; I have been deceiving myself; I have 
tried to deceive God.” 

“Come, come, calm yourself; speak with 
moderation and common sense, and don’t talk 
foolishly.” ‘i 

“And how shall I avoid talking foolishly when 
the spirit of evil possesses me?” 

“Holy Virgin! Don’t talk nonsense, child; the 
demons most to be feared who take possession of 
the soul are three, and none of them, I am certain, 
can have dared to enter into yours. One is Levia- 
than, or the spirit of Pride; the other is Mammon, 
or the spirit of Avarice; and the other is Asmodeus, 
or the spirit of Unholy Love.” 

“Well, I am the victim of all three; all three 
hold dominion over me.” 

“This is dreadful! Calm yourself, I repeat. 
(The real trouble with you is that you are 
delirious.” 

“Would to God it were so! The contrary, un- 
happily for me, is the case. I am avaricious, be- 
cause I possess riches, and do not perform the 
works of charity I ought to perform; I am proud, 
because I scorn the addresses of my many suitors, 
not through virtue, not through modesty, but be- 
cause I thought them unworthy of my love. God 
has punished me; God has permitted the third 
enemy you have named to take possession of me.” 

“How is this, child? What diabolical notion 

172 


Pepita Jimenez 


has entered into your mind! Have you by chance 
fallen in love? And, if you have, what harm is 
there in that? Are you not free? Get married, 
then, and stop talking nonsense. I am certain it is 
my friend Don Pedro de Vargas who has wrought 
the miracle. That same Don Pedro is the very 
Devil! I confess I am surprised. I did not think 
matters had gone quite so far as that already.” 

“But it is not Don Pedro de Vargas that I am 
in love with.” 

“And with whom, then?” 

Pepita rose from her seat, went to the door, 
opened it, looked to see if any one was listening 
outside, drew near to the reverend vicar, and with 
signs of the deepest distress, in a trembling voice 
and with tears in her eyes, said, almost in the ear 
‘of the good old man: 

“T am hopelessly in love with his son.” 

“With whose son?” cried the reverend vicar, 
who could not yet bring himself to believe what 
he had heard. 

“With whose son should it be? I am hopelessly, 
desperately in love with Don Luis.” 

Consternation and dolorous surprise were de- 
picted on the countenance of the kind and simple 
priest. There was a moment’s pause; the vicar 
then said: 

“But this is love without hope; a love not to be 
thought of. Don Luis will never love you.” 


373 


Ver a 


Pepita Jimenez 


A joyful light sparkled through the tears that 
clouded Pepita’s beautiful eyes: her rosy, dewy. 
lips, contracted by sorrow, parted in a smile, dis- 
closing to view her pearly teeth. 

“He loves me,” said Pepita, with a faint and ill- 
concealed accent of satisfaction and triumph, which 
rose exultant over her sorrow and her scruples of 
conscience. 

The consternation and astonishment of the rev- 
erend vicar here reached their highest pitch. If 
the saint of his most fervent devotions had been 
suddenly cast down from the altar before him, and 
had fallen, broken into a thousand fragments, at 
his feet, the reverend vicar could not have felt 
greater consternation. He still looked at Pepita 
with incredulity, as if doubting whether what she 
had said were true, or only a delusion of feminine 
vanity, so firmly did he believe in the holiness and 
mysticism of Don Luis. 

“He loves me,” Pepita repeated, in answer to 
his incredulous glance. 

‘Women are worse than the very Devil!” said 
the vicar. ‘You would set a snare for old Nick 
himself.” 

“Did I not tell you already that I was very, 
wicked?” 

“Come, come! calm yourself. The mercy of 
God is infinite. Tell me all that has happened.” 

“What should have happened? That he is dear 


74 


\ 


\ 


\ 
\ 


Pepita Jimenez 


to me; that I love him; that I adore him; that he 
loves me, too, although he strives to conquer his 
love, and in the end may succeed in doing so; and 
that you, without knowing it, are very much to 
blame for it all!” 

“Well, this is too much! What do you mean by, 
saying I am very much to blame?” 

“With the extreme goodness which is character- 
istic of you, you have done nothing but praise Don 
Luis to me; and I am sure that you have pro- 
nounced still greater eulogies on me to him, al- 
though very much less deserved. What is the 
natural consequence? Am I of bronze? Have 
I not the passions of youth?” 

“You are more than right; ] am a dolt. I have 
contributed, in great part, to this work of Lucifer.” 

The reverend vicar was so truly good, and so full 
of humility, that, while pronouncing the preceding 
words, he showed as much confusion and remorse 
as if he were the culprit and Pepita the judge. 

Pepita, conscious of her injustice and want of 
generosity in thus making the reverend vicar the 
accomplice, and scarcely less than the chief author 
of her fault, spoke to him thus: 

“Don’t torment yourself, father; for God’s\sake, 
don’t torment yourself! You see now how perverse 
I am. I commit the greatest sins, and I want to 
throw the responsibility of them on the best and 
the most virtuous of men. It is not the praises you 


175 


Pepita Jimenez 


have recited to me of Don Luis that have been my 
ruin, but my own eyes, and my want of circumspec- 
tion. Even though you had never spoken to me 
of the good qualities of Don Luis, I should still 
have discovered them all by hearing him speak; 
for after all, I am not so ignorant, nor so great a 
fool. And in any case, I myself have seen the grace 
of his person, the natural and untaught elegance 
of his manners, his eyes full of fire and intelli- 
gence—his whole self, in a word, which seems to 
me altogether amiable and desirable. Your eulo- 
gies of him have indeed pleased my vanity, but 
they did not awaken my inclinations. Your praises 
charmed me because they coincided with my own 
opinion, and were like the flattering echo—dead- 
ened, indeed, and faint—of my thoughts. The 
most eloquent encomium you have pronounced in 
my hearing on Don Luis was far from being equal 
to the encomiums that I, at each moment, at each 
instant, silently pronounced upon him in my own 
soul.” 

“Don’t excite yourself, child,” interrupted the 
reverend vicar. 

Pepita continued, with still greater exaltation: 

“But what a difference between your encomiums 
and my thoughts! For you, Don Luis was the ex- 
emplary model of the priest, the missionary, the 
apostle; now preaching the Gospel in distant lands, 
now endeavoring in Spain to elevate Christianity, 

176 


Pepita Jimenez 


so degraded in our day through the impiety of 
some, and the want of virtue, of charity, and of 
knowledge of others. I, on the contrary, pictured 
him to myself, handsome, loving, forgetting God 
for me, consecrating his life to me, giving me his 
soul, becoming my stay, my support, my sweet com- 
panion. I longed to commit a sacrilegious theft: 
I dreamed of stealing him from God and from His 
temple, like a thief, the enemy of Heaven, who 
robs the sacred monstrance of its most precious 
jewel. To commit such a theft I have put off the 
mourning garments of the widow and orphan, and 
have decked myself with profane adornments; I 
have abandoned my seclusion; I have sought com- 
pany and gathered it around me; I have tried to 
make myself look beautiful; I have cared for every 
part of this miserable body, that must one day be 
lowered into the grave and be converted into dust, 
with an unholy devotion; and finally, I have looked 
at Don Luis with provoking glances, and on shak- 
ing hands with him I have sought to transmit from 
my veins to his the inextinguishable fire that is con- 
suming me.” 

“Alas! my child, what grief it gives me to hear 
this! Who could have imagined it?” said the vicar. 

“But there is still more,” resumed Pepita. “TI 
succeeded in making Don Luis love me. He de- 
clared it to me with his eyes. Yes, his love is as 
profound, as ardent as mine. His virtues, his aspi- 


177, 


Pepita Jimenez 


rations toward heavenly things, his manly energy, 
have all urged him to conquer this insensate pas- 
sion. I sought to prevent this. Once, at the end 
of many days during which he had stayed away, 
he came to see me, and found me alone. When he 
gave me his hand, I wept; I could not speak; but 
hell inspired me with an accursed, mute eloquence 
that told him of my grief that he had scorned me, 
that he did not return my love, that he preferred 
another love—a love without stain—to mine. Then 
he was unable to resist the temptation, and he ap- 
proached his lips to my face to kiss away my tears. 
Our lips met. If God had not willed your ap- 
proach at that moment, what would have become 
of me?” 

“How shameful! My child, how shameful!” 
said the reverend vicar. 

Pepita covered her face with both hands and be- 
gan to sob like a Magdalen. Her hands were in 
truth beautiful, more beautiful even than Don Luis 
had described them to be in his letters: their white- 
ness, their pure transparency, the tapering form of 
the fingers, the roseate hue, the polish and the 
brilliancy of the pearl-like nails, all were such as 
might turn the head of any man. 

The virtuous vicar, notwithstanding his eighty, 
years, could understand the fall, or rather, the slip, 
of Don Luis. 

“Child!” he exclaimed, “don’t cry so! It breaks 

178. 


Pepita Jimenez 


my heart to see you. Calm yourself; Don Luis has 
no doubt repented of his sin; do you repent like- 
wise, and nothing more need be said. God will 
pardon you both, and make a couple of saints of 
you. Since Don Luis is going away the day after 
to-morrow, it is a sure sign that virtue has tri- 
umphed in him, and that he flees from you, as he 
should, that he may do penance for his sin, fulfil 
his vow, and return to his vocation.” 

“That is all very well,” replied Pepita; ‘fulfil 
his vow, return to his vocation, after giving me my 
death-wound! Why did he love me, why did he 
encourage me, why did he deceive me? His kiss 
was a brand; it was as a hot iron with which he 
marked me and stamped me as his slave. Now 
that I am marked and enslaved, he abandons and 
betrays and destroys me. A good beginning to give 
to his missions, his preachings, and Gospel tri- 
umphs! It shall not be! By Heaven, it shall 
not be!” 

This outbreak of anger and scorned love con- 
founded the reverend vicar. 

Pepita had risen. Her attitude, her gesture, had 
something in them of tragic animation. Her eyes 
gleamed like daggers; they shone like two) suns. 
The vicar was silent, and regarded her almost with 
terror. She paced the apartment with hasty steps. 
She did not now seem like a timid gazel, but like 
an angry lioness. 


179 


Pepita Jimenez 


“What!” she said, once more facing the vicar, 
“has he nothing to do but laugh at me, tear my 
heart to pieces, humiliate it, trample it under foot, © 
after having cheated me out of it? He shall re- 
member me! He shall pay me for this! If he is 
so holy, if he is so virtuous, why did he with his 
glance promise me everything? If he loves God 
so much, why does he seek to hurt one of God’s 
poor creatures? Is this charity? Is this religion? 
No; it is pitiless selfishness.” 

Pepita’s anger could not last long. After she 
had spoken the last words, it turned to dejection. 
She sank into a chair, weeping more bitterly than — 
ever, and abandoning herself to real anguish. 

The vicar’s heart was touched with pity; but he 
recovered himself on seeing that the enemy gave 
signs of yielding. 

“‘Pepita, child,” he said, “be reasonable; don’t 
torment yourself in this way. Console yourself 
with the thought that it was not without a hard 
struggle he was able to conquer himself; that he 
has not deceived you; that he loves you with his 
whole soul, but that God and his duty come first. 
This life is short, and soon passes. In heave 
will be reunited, and will love cach OTHEE aaa 

angels qovensiGod will accept your sacrifice; he 

will reward you, and repay you with interest. 

Even your self-love ought to be satisfied. How 

great must be your merit, when you have caused 
180 


Pepita Jimenez Me 
a man like Don Luis to waver in his resolution, , 
and even to sin! How deep must be the wound you | 
have made in his heart! Let this suffice you. Be 
generous, be courageous! Be his rival in firmness, ~ 
Let him depart; cast out from your heart the fire 
of impure love; love him as your neighbor, for 
the love of God. Guard his image in your mem- 
ory, but as that of the creature, reserving to the 
Creator the noblest part of your soul. I know not 
what I am saying to you, my child, for I am very 
much troubled; but you have a great deal of intel- 
ligence and a great deal of common sense, and you 
will understand what I/mean. Besides, there are 
powerful worldly reasons against this absurd love, 
even if the vocation and the vow of Don Luis were 
not opposed to it. His father is your suitor. He 
aspires to your hand, even though you do not love 
him. Does it look well that the son should turn 
out now to be the rival of his father? Will not 
the father be displeased with the son for loving 
your See how dreadful all this is, and control 
yourself, for the sake of Jesus and His blessed 
Mother!” 

“How easy it is to give advice!” returned Pepita, 
becoming a little calmer. “How hard for me to 
follow it, when there is a fierce and unchained 
tempest, as it were, raging in my soul! I am afraid 
I shall go mad!” 

“The advice I give you is for your own good. 
181 


Pepita Jimenez 


Let Don Luis depart. Absence is a great remedy 
for the malady of love. In giving himself up to 
his studies, and consecrating himself to the service 
of the altar, he will be cured of his passion. When 
he is far away you will recover your serenity by 
degrees, and will preserve in your memory only 
a grateful and melancholy recollection of him that 
will do you no harm. It will be like a beautiful 
poem, whose music will harmonize your existence. 
Even if all your desires could be fulfilled, earthly 
love lasts, after all, but a short time. The delight 
the imagination anticipates in its enjoyment—what 
is it in comparison with the bitter dregs. How 
much better is it that your love, hardly yet con- 
taminated, hardly despoiled of its purity, should 
be dissipated, and exhale itself now, rising up to 
heaven like a cloud of incense, than that, after it 
is once satisfied, it should perish through satiety! 
Have the courage to put away from your lips the 
cup while you have hardly tasted of its contents. 
Make a libation of them and an offering to the 
Divine Redeemer. He will give you, in exchange, 
the draft He offered to the Samaritan—a draft that 
does not satiate, that quenches the thirst, and that 
gives eternal life!” 

“How good you are, father! Your holy words 
lend me courage. I will control myself—I will 
conquer myself. It would be shameful—would it 
notP—that Don Luis should be able to control and 

182 


Pepita Jimenez 


conquer himself, and that I should not be able to 
doso? Let him depart. He is going away the day 
_after to-morrow. Let him go, with God’s blessing. 
See his card. He was here, with his father, to take 
leave of me, and I would not receive him. I will 
never see him again. I did not even want to pre- 
serve the poetical remembrance of him of which 
you speak. This love has been a nightmare; I will 
cast it way from me.” 

“Good—very good! It is thus that I want to see 
you—energetic, courageous.” 

“Ah, father, God has cast down my pride with 
this blow! I was insolent in my arrogance, and the 
scorn of this man was necessary to my self-abase- 
ment, Could I be more humbled or more resigned 
than I am nowe Don Luis is right—I am not 
worthy of him. However great the efforts I might 
make, I could not succeed in elevating myself to 
him and comprehending him, in putting my spirit 
into perfect communication with his. I am a rude 
country girl, unlearned, uncultured; and he—there 
is no science he does not understand, no secret of 
which he is ignorant, no region of the intellectual 
world, however exalted, to which he may not soar. 
iThither on the wings of his genius does he mount; 
and me he leaves behind in this lower sphere— 
poor, ignorant woman that I am—incapable of 
following him, even in my hopes or with my 

aspirations!” 
: 183 


Pepita Jimenez 


“But, Pepita, for Heaven’s sake, don’t say such 
things, or think them! Don Luis does not scorn 
you because you are ignorant, or because you are 
incapable of comprehending him, or for any other 
of those absurd reasons that you are stringing to- 
gether. He goes away because he must fulfil his 
obligation toward God; and you should rejoice that 
he is going away, for you will then get over your 
love for him, and God will reward you for the 
sacrifice you make.” 

Pepita, who had left off crying, and had dried 
her tears with her handkerchief, answered quietly: 

“Very well, father. I shall be very glad of it; 
I am almost glad now that he is going away. I 
long for to-morrow to pass, and for the time to 
come when Antofiona shall say to me when I 
awake, ‘Don Luis is gone.’ You shall see then 
how peace and serenity will spring up again in 
my heart.” 

“God grant it may be so!” said the reverend 
vicar; and, convinced that he had wrought a 
miracle, and almost cured Pepita’s malady, he 
took leave of her and went home, unable to repress 
a certain feeling of vanity at the thought of the 
influence he had exercised over the noble spirit 
of this charming woman. 


184 


e ° 2 
6 Pepita Jiménez 


i 


PEPITA, who had risen as the reverend vicar was 
about to take his leave, after she had closed the 
door, stood for a moment motionless in the middle 
of the room—her gaze fixed on space, her eyes 
tearless. A poet or an artist, seeing her thus, would 
have been reminded of Ariadne, as Catullus de- 
scribes her, after Theseus has abandoned her on 
the island of Naxos. All at once, as if she had but 
just succeeded in untying the knot of a cord that 
was strangling her, Pepita broke into heartrending 
sobs, let loose a torrent of tears, and threw herself 
down on the tiled floor of her apartment. There, 
_her face buried in her hands, her hair loose, -her 
dress disordered, she continued to sigh and moan. 

She might have remained thus for an indefinite 
time if Antofiona had not come to her. Antofiona 
had heard her sobs from without, and hurried to 
her apartment. When she saw her mistress ex- 
tended on the floor, Antofiona gave way to a thou- 
sand extravagant expressions of fury. 

“Here’s a pretty sight!” she cried; “that sneak, 
that blackguard, that old fool, what a way he has 
to console his friends! I shouldn’t wonder if he 
has committed some piece of barbarity—given a 
couple of kicks to this poor child, perhaps; and 

185 


Pepita Jimenez 


now I suppose he has gone back to the church to 
get everything ready to sing the funeral chant, and 
sprinkle her with hyssop, and bury her out of sight 
without more ado.” 

Antofiona was about forty, and a hard worker— 
energetic, and stronger than many a laborer. She 
often lifted up, with scarcely more than the strength 
of her hand, a skin of oil or of wine weighing 
nearly ninety pounds, and placed it on the back of 
a mule, or carried a bag of wheat up to the garret 
where the grain was kept. Although Pepita was 
not a feather, Antofiona now lifted her up in her 
arms from the floor as if she had been one, and 
placed her carefully on the sofa, as though she 
were some delicate and precious piece of porcelain 
that she feared to break. 

“What is the meaning of all this?” asked An- 
tofiona. “I wager anything that drone of a vicar 
has been preaching you a sermon as bitter as aloes, 
and has left you now with your heart torn to pieces 
with grief.” 

Pepita continued to weep and sob without 
answering. 

“Come, leave off crying, and tell me what is the 
matter. What has the vicar said to your” 

“He said nothing that could offend me,” finally 
answered Pepita. 

Then, seeing that Antofiona was waiting anx- 
iously to hear her speak, and feeling the need of 

186 


Pepita Jimenez 


unburdening herself to some one who could sym- 
pathize more fully with her, and with more human 
feeling, Pepita spoke as follows: 

“The reverend vicar has admonished me gently 
to repent of my sins; to allow Don Luis to go 
away; to rejoice at his departure; to forget him. 
I have said yes to everything; I have promised 
him to rejoice at Don Luis’s departure; I have 
tried to forget him, and even to hate him. But, 
look you, Antojiona, I can not; it is an undertaking 
superior to my strength. While the vicar was here 
I thought I had strength for everything; but no 
sooner had he gone than, as if God had let go His 
hold of me, I lost my courage, and fell, crushed 
with sorrow, on the floor. I had dreamed of a 
happy life at the side of the man I love; I already 
saw myself elevated to him by the miraculous 
power of love—my poor mind in perfect com- 
munion with his sublime intellect, my will one with 
his, both thinking the same thought, our hearts 
beating in unison. And now God has taken him 
away from me, and I am left alone, without hope 
or consolation. Is this not frightful? The argu- 
ments of the reverend vicar are just and full of wis- 
dom; for the time, they convinced me. But he 
has gone away, and all those arguments now seem 
to me worthless—a tissue of words, lies, entangle- 
ments, and sophistries. I love Don Luis, and this | 
argument is more powerful than all other argu- 

187 


Pepita Jimenez 


‘ments put together. And if he loves me in return, 
| why does he not leave everything and come to me, 
| break the vows he has taken, and renounce the 
| obligations he has contracted? I did not know 
| what love was; now I know—there is nothing 
stronger on earth or in heaven. What would I 
/ not do for Don Luis? And he—he does nothing 
for me! Perhaps he does not love me. No; Don 
Luis does not love me. I have deceived myself; 
I was blinded by vanity. If Don Luis loved me, 
he would sacrifice his plans, his vows, his fame, 
his aspirations to be a saint and a light of the 
| Church, he would sacrifice all to me. God forgive 
-| me, what I am about to say is horrible, but I feel 
| it here in the depths of my heart, it burns here in 
_my fevered brow: for him I would give even the 
salvation of my soul!” 
Holy Virgin!” exclaimed Antofiona. 
“It is true; may our blessed Lady of Sorrows 
‘ pardon me—I am mad—lI know not what I say, 
I blaspheme!” 

“Yes, child; you are talking indeed a little 
naughtily. Heaven help us! ‘To think how this 
coxcomb of a theologian has turned your head! 
Well, if I were in your place, I would not take 
Heaven to task, which is in nowise to blame, but 
the jackanapes of a collegian, and I would have it 
out with him, or never again call myself Pepita 
Jiménez. I should like to go hunt him up, and 

188 


Pepita Jimenez 


bring him here to you by the ear, and make 
him beg your pardon and kiss your feet on 
his knees.” 

“No, Antofiona; I see that my madness is con- 
tagious, and that you are raving too. There is, in 
fact, nothing left for me to do but what the rev- 
erend vicar advises. And I will do it, even though 
it should cost me my life. If I die for him, he} 
will then love me; he will cherish my image in 
his memory, my love in his heart; and God, who is 
so good, will permit me to see him again in Heaven | 
with the eyes of the soul, and will let our ee | 
mingle together and loye each other there.” 

Antofiona, although of a rugged nature, and not 
at all sentimental, on hearing these words felt the 
tears start to her eyes. 

“Good gracious, child!” she said; “do you want 
to make me take out my handkerchief and begin 


| 


to bellow like a calf? Calm yourself, and don’t © 


talk about dying, even in jest. I can see that your 
nerves are very much excited. Sha’n’t,bring you 
a cup of fine flower tea?” 

“No, thanks; leave me—you see how calm I am 
now.” 

“T shall close the window, then, to see if you 
can sleep. How should you feel well when you 
have not slept for days? The devil take that same 
Don Luis, with his fancy for making himself a 

priest! A nice price you are paying for it!” 


189 


a) 


Pepita Jimenez 


Pepita had closed her eyes; she was calm and 
silent, weary now of her colloquy with Antofiona. 
_ The latter, either thinking she was asleep, or 
hoping her to be so, bent over Pepita, imprinted 
a kiss softly and slowly on her white forehead, 
smoothed out the folds of her dress, arranged the 
windows so as to leave the room half dark, and 
went out on tiptoe, closing the door behind her, 
without making the slightest noise. 


190 


Pepita Jimenez 


III 


WHILE these things were taking place at the 
house of Pepita, Don Luis de Vargas was neither 
happier nor more tranquil in his, 

His father, who scarcely let a day pass without 
riding out into the country, had to-day wished to 
take Don Luis with him; but he had excused him- 
self, on the pretext of a headache, and Don 
Pedro had gone without him. Don Luis had 
spent the whole morning alone, delivered up to 
his melancholy thoughts, and continuing firm as 
a rock in his resolution of blotting from his. soul 
wholly t to God. ee 

“Let it not be supposed, however, that he did not 
love the young widow. We have already, in his 
letters, seen the proof of the vehemence of his pas- 
sion for her, but he continued his efforts to curb it 
by means of the devout sentiments_and elevated 
feflections « of. which he has given us in his letters 
so extended a specimen, and of which we may here 
omit a repetition, in order not to appear prolix. 

Perhaps, if we examine into this matter closely, 
we shall find that the reasons which militated in 
the breast of Don Luis against his love for Pepita 
were not only his vow to himself—which, Be 
Ig1 


Pepita Jimenez 


unconfirmed, was binding in-his eyes—or the ne 
‘of God, or respect for his father, whose rival he 
did not wish to be; or, finally, the vocation which 
he felt himself to hove for the priesthood. There 
were other reasons of a more doubtful character 
than these. 
Don Luis was stubborn; he was obstinate; he 
had that quality of soul which, well directed, con- 
| stitutes what is called firmness of character, and 
| there was nothing that lowered him more in his 
| own eyes than to feel himself obliged to change his 
| opinions or his conduct. The purpose of his life— 
a purpose which he had declared and maintained 
on all occasions—his moral ideal, in a word, was 
that of an aspirant to holiness, of a man consecrated 
to God, of one imbued with the sublimest religious 
teachings. All this could not fall to earth, as it 
would fall if he allowed himself to be Daesicd 
away by his love for Pepita, without great dis- 
credit. Although the price, indeed, was in this 
case incomparably higher, yet Don Tis felt that, 
_should he yield to his passion, he would be fol- 
lowing the example of Esau, selling his birthright, 
and bringing opprobrium on his name. 
~ Men, as a rule, allow themselves to be the play- 
things of circumstances; they let themselves be car- 
ried along by the current of events, instead of de- 
voting all their energies to one single aim. We do 
not choose our part in life, but accept and play the 
192 


Pepita Jimenez 


part allotted us, that which blind fortune assigns 
to us. The profession, the political faith, the en- 
tire life of many men, depend on chance circum- 
stances, on what is fortuitous, on the caprice and 
the unexpected turns of fate. 

Against all this the pride of Don Luis vigorously ' 
rebelled. What would be thought of him, and, 
above all, what would he think of himself, “ the 
ideal of his life, the new man that he had created 
in his soul, if all his plans of virtue, of honor, and 
even of holy ambition, should rey in an instant, 
should melt away in the warmth of a glance, at 
the fugitive flame of a pair of beautiful eyes, as 
the hoar-frost melts in the yet mild ray of the 
morning sun? 

These and other egotistic reasons militated 
against the young widow, side by side with others 
more weighty and legitimate, but every argument 
clothed itself in the same religious garb, so that 
Don Luis himself was unable to recognize and 
distinguish between them, believing to be the love 
of God not only what was in truth the love of God, 
‘but also self-love. He recalled to mind, for in- 
stance, the examples of many saints who had re- 
sisted greater temptations than his, and he did not 
wish to be less ‘than they. And he recalled to 
mind, above all, the notable firmness of St. Chrys- 
ostom, who was able to disregard the caresses of a 
good and tender mother, and her tears and gentle 


(E)—Vo. 13-7 193 


Pepita Jimenez 


entreaties, and all the eloquent and touching word 
she spoke to him, in the very room where he wa 


born, to the end that he might not abandon her anc 


become a priest. And after reflecting on this, Dot 
Luis could not tolerate in himself the weakness } 
being unable to reject the entreaties of a womat 
who was a stranger to him, whom he had know! 
for so short a time, and of still wavering betweet 
his duty and the attractions of one who perhaps 
after all, did not really love him, but was only ; 
coquette. 

Don Luis then reflected on the supreme positiot 
of the sacerdotal dignity to which he was called 
regarding it in his thoughts as superior to all thi 
dignities and unsatisfying honors of the world 
since it was founded neither-by. any. mortal man 
nor by the caprice of the variable and servile popu 
lace, nor by the irruption or invasion of barbarians 
nor by the violence of rebellious armies urged ot 
by greed, nor by angel nor archangel, nor by an’ 
created power; but by the Paraclete Himself 
How for a motive so unworthy, for a mere woman 
for a tear or two, feigned perhaps, scorn that augus 
dignity, that authority which was not conceded by 
God even to the archangels nearest to His throne 
How should he descend to be one of the obscur 
people, become one of the flock—he, who hac 
dreamed of being the shepherd, tying and untyins 
on earth what God should tie and untie in Heaven 


etal 


Pepita Jimenez 


pardoning sins, regenerating the people by water 
and by the spirit, teaching them in the name of an 
infallible authority, pronouncing judgments that 
should be ratified and confirmed by the Lord of 
the heavens—he, the instructor and the minister in 
tremendous mysteries inscrutable by human rea- 
son, calling down from Heaven, not, like Elias, 
the flame that consumes the victim, but the Holy 
Spirit, the Word made flesh, the river of grace that 
purifies hearts and makes them clean like unalloyed 
gold? 

When Don Luis let his mind dwell on these 
thoughts his sp spirit took wings and. soared up above 
the clouds into the empyrean, and poor Pepita Ji- 
ménez remained below, far..away,..and_hardly, 
within sight, 
_ But the wings of his imagination soon drooped, 
and the spirit of Don Luis touched earth again. 
Again he saw Pepita, so graceful, so young, so in- 
genuous, and so enamored. Pepita combated in 
his soul his firmest and most deep-seated resolu- 
tions, and Don Luis feared that in the end she 
would put them all to flight. 

In this way was Don Luis allowing himself to 
be tormented by opposing thoughts, that made war 
on each other, when Currito, without asking leave 
or license, entered his room. 

Currito, who had held his cousin in very slight 
esteem so long as he was only a student of theology, 


195, 


nf\s 


: Pepita Jimenez 

now regarded him with wonder and veneration 
looking upon him, from the moment when he hac 
seen him manage Lucero so skilfully, as something 
more than human. 

To know theology and not know how to ride 
had discredited Don Luis in the eyes of Currito 
but when Currito saw that, in addition to his learn 
ing, and to all those other matters of which he him 
self knew nothing, although he supposed them tc 
be difficult and perplexing, Don Luis could als« 
keep his seat so admirably on the back of a fiery 
horse, his veneration and his affection for hi 
cousin knew no bounds. Currito was an idler, < 
good-for-nothing, a very block of wood; but hi 
- had an affectionate and loyal heart. 

To Don Luis, who was the idol of Currito, hap 
pened what happens with all superior nature 
when inferior persons take a liking to them. Dor 
Luis permitted himself to be loved—that is to say 
he was governed despotically—by Currito in mat 
ters of little importance. And as for men like Dor 
Luis there are hardly any matters of importanc 
in common daily life, the result was that Dor 
Luis was led about by Currito like a little dog. 

“T have come for you,” the latter said, “to tak 
you with me to the clubhouse, which is full o: 
people to-day, and unusually gay. What is the us 
of sitting here alone gazing into vacancy, as if you 
were waiting to catch flies?” 

196 


Pepita Jimenez 


Don Luis, without offering any resistance, took 
his hat and cane, as though the words were a com- 
mand, and saying, “Let us go wherever you wish,” 
followed Currito, who led the way, very well 
pleased with the influence he exercised over his 
cousin. 

The clubhouse was full of people, owing to the 
festivities of the morrow, which was St. John’s 
day. Besides the gentry of the village many 
strangers were there, who had come in from the 
neighboring villages to be present at the fair and 
the vigil in the evening. 

The principal point of reunion was the court- 
yard, which was paved with marble. In its centre 
played a fountain, which was adorned with flower 
pots containing roses, pinks, sweet basil, and other 
flowers. Around this courtyard ran a corridor or 
gallery supported by marble columns, in which, as 
well as in the various saloons that opened into it, 
were tables for ombre, others with newspapers ly- 
ing on them, others where coffee and other refresh- 
ments were served, and finally, lounges, benches, 
and several easy-chairs. The walls were like snow, 
from frequent whitening; nor were pictures want- 
ing for their adornment. There were French col- 
ored lithographs, a minute explanation of the sub- 
ject of each being written, both in French and in 
Spanish below. Some of them represented scenes 
in the life of Napoleon, from Toulon to St. Hel- 


197, 


Pepita Jimenez 


ena; others, the adventures of Matilda and Malek- 
Adel; others, incidents in love and war, in the lives 
of the Templar, Rebecca, Lady Rowena, and Ivan- 
hoe; and others, the gallantries, the intrigues, the 
lapses and the conversions of Louis XIV. and 
Mademoiselle de la Valliére. 

Currito took Don Luis, and Don Luis allowed 
himself to be taken, to the saloon where were gath- 
ered the cream of the fashion, the dandies and 
cocodés of the village and of the surrounding dis- 
trict. Prominent among these was the Count of 
Genazahar, of the neighboring city of —. The 
Count was an illustrious and much admired per- 
_sonage. He had made visits of great length to 
Madrid and Seville, and, whether as a country 
dandy or as a young nobleman, was always ates 
by the most fashionable tailors. 

‘The Count of Genazahar was a little past bated 
He was good-looking, and he knew it; and could 
boast of his prowess in peace and in war, in duels 
and in love-making. The Count, however—and 
this notwithstanding the fact that he had been one 
of the most persistent suitors of Pepita—had re- 
ceived the sugar-coated pill of refusal that she was 
accustomed to bestow on those who paid their ad- 
dresses to her and aspired to her hand, 

The wound inflicted on his pride by this rejec- 
tion had never quite healed. Love had turned 
into hatred, and the Count lost no occasion of giv- 

198 


Pepita Jimenez 


ing utterance to his feelings, holding Pepita up on 
such occasions to ridicule as a prude. 

The Count was engaged in this agreeable exer- 
cise when, by an evil chance, Don Luis and Currito 
approached and joined the crowd that was listen- 
ing to the odd species of panegyric, which opened 
to receive them. Don Luis, as if the Devil himself 
had had the arrangement of the matter, found him- 
self face to face with the Count, who was speaking 
as follows: 

“She’s a cunning one, this same Pepita Jiménez, 
with more fancies and whims than the Princess 
Micomicona. She wants to make us forget that 
she was born in poverty, and lived in poverty until 
she married that accursed usurer, Don Gumer- 
sindo, and took possession of his dollars. The only 
good action this same widow has performed in her 
life was to conspire with Satan to send the rogue 
quickly to hell, and free the earth from such a con- 
tamination and plague. Pepita now has a hobby 
for virtue and for chastity. All that may be very 
well; but how do we know that she has not a secret 
intrigue with some plow-boy, and is not deceiv- 
ing the world as if she were Queen Artemisia 
herself?” 

People of quiet tastes, who seldom take part in 
reunions of men only, may perhaps be scandalized 
by this language. It may appear to them indecent 
and brutal even to the point of incredibility; but 
i 199 


ae 


» BI 


Pepita Jimenez 


those who know the world will confess that lan- 
guage like this is very generally employed in it, and 
that the most amiable and agreeable women, the 
most honorable matrons, if they chance to have an 
enemy, or even if they have none, are often made 
the subjects of accusations no less infamous and 
vile than those made by the Count against Pepita; 
for scandal, or, to speak more accurately, disre- 
spect and insult are often indulged in for the pur- 
pose of showing wit and effrontery. 

Don Luis had from childhood been accustomed 
to the consideration and respect of those around 
him, first, of the servants and dependents of his 
father, who gratified him in all his wishes, and then 
of every one in the seminary, not only because he 
was a nephew of the dean, but also on account of 
his own merits, and when he heard the insolent 
Count thus drag in the dust the name of the woman 
he loved, he felt as if a thunderbolt had fallen at 
his feet. 

But how undertake her defense? He knew, in- 
deed, that although he was neither husband, 
brother, nor other relative of Pepita’s he might yet 
come forward in her defense as a man of honor; 
but he saw what scandal this would give rise to, 
since, far from saying a word in her favor, all the 
aised persons present joined in applauding the wit 
of the Count. He, already the minister, almost, 
of a God of peace, could not be the one to give the 

200 


Pepita Jimenez 


lie to this ruffian, and thus expose himself to the 
risk of a quarrel. u, 

“Don Luis was on the point of departing in 
silence; but his heart would not consent to this, 
and striving to clothe himself with an authority 
which was justified neither by his years nor by his 
countenance, where the beard had scarcely begun 
to°make its appearance, nor by his presence in that 
place, he began to speak with earnest eloquence in 
_ denunciation of all slanderers, and to reproach the 
Count, with the freedom of a Christian and in 
severe accents, with the vileness of his conduct. 

This was to preach in the desert, or worse. The 
Count answered his homily with gibes and jests; 
the bystanders, among whom were many strangers, 
took the part of the jester, notwithstanding the fact 
that Don Luis was the son of the squire. Even 
Currito, who was of no account whatever, and who 
was, besides, a coward, although he did not laugh, 
yet made no effort to take the part of his friend, and 
the latter was obliged to withdraw, disturbed and 
humiliated by the ridicule he had drawn on 
himself. 


eileen 


20r 


Pepita Jimenez 


IV 
cr 


LHIs flower only was wanting to complete- the 
nosegay,’ muttered poor Don Luis between his 
teeth when he had reached his house and shut him- 
self up in his room, yexed.and_.ill at ease because 
of the jeers of which he had been the butt. He 
exaggerated them to himself; they seemed. unen- 
durable. He threw himself int a chair, depressed 
and disheartened, and a thousand contradictory, 
ideas assailed his mind, 

The blood of his father, which boiled in his 
veins, incited him to anger, and urged him to 
throw aside the clerical garb, as he had in the 
beginning been advised to do in the village, and 
then give the Count his deserts; but the whole 
future he had planned for himself would be thus 
at a blow destroyed. He pictured to himself the 
dean disowning him; and even the Pope, who had 
already sent the pontifical dispensation permitting 
him to be ordained before the required age, and 
the bishop of the diocese, who had based the peti- 
tion for the dispensation on his approved virtue 
and learning and on the firmness of his vocation 
—all appeared before him now to reproach him. 

Then those other arguments, cited by his father, 
of which the apostle St. James, the bishops of the 
202 


Pepita Jimenez 


Middle ‘Ages, and St. Ignatius Loyola had made 
use, occurred to his mind, and now seemed less 
preposterous than before, and he almost aaah 
of not having put them into practise. 

He then recalled the custom of a distacaiatiest 
philosopher of Persia, of our own day, mentioned 
in a book recently written on that country—a cus- 
tom which consisted in punishing with harsh words 
his hearers and pupils when they laughed at his 
teachings or could not understand them, and if this 
did not suffice, in descending from his chair, sabre 
in hand, and giving them all a beating. This 
method, as it appears, had proved efficacious, espe- 
cially in controversy; although it had chanced that: 
the said philosopher, coming across an opponent 
of the same way of thinking as himself, had re- 
ceived a severe wound in the face from him. 

Don Luis, in the midst of his mortification and 
ill-humor, could not help laughing at the absurdity 
of this recollection. He thought philosophers were 
not wanting in Spain who would willingly adopt 
the Persian method, and if he himself did not put 
it into practise, it was certainly not through fear 
of the wounds he might receive, but through con- 
siderations of greater weight. 

At last better thoughts returned and somewhat 
comforted his soul. 

“I did very wrong in preaching there,” he said 
to himself; “I should haye remained silent. Our 

203 


Pepita Jimenez 


Lord Jesus Christ has said, ‘Give not that which 
is holy to dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before 
swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and 
turn again and rend you.’ ” 

“But, no; why should I complain? Why should 
I return evil for evil? Why should I allow myself 
to be vanquished by anger? Many holy fathers 
have said, ‘Anger in a_priest.is even worse than 
lasciviousness.” The anger of priests has caused 
many tears to be shed, and has been the cause of 
terrible evils.” 

“It was anger—the terrible counselor—that at 
times persuaded them that it was necessary for the 
people to shed blood at the Divine command, and 
that brought before their sanguinary eyes the vision 
of Isaiah; they have then seen, and caused their 
fanatic followers to see, the meek Lamb converted 
into an inexorable avenger, descending from the 
summit of Edom, proud in the multitude of his 
strength, trampling the nations under foot, as the 
treader tramples the grapes in the wine-press, their 
garments raised, and covered with blood to the 
thighs. Ah,no. My God! I am about to become 
‘Thy minister. ‘Thou art the God of peace, and my 
first. duty should be meekness, Thou makest the 
sun to shine on the just‘and the unjust, and pourest 
down upon all alike the fertilizing rain of inex- 
haustible goodness. Thou art our Father, who 
dwellest in the heavens, and we should be perfect, 

204. 


Pepita Jimenez 


even as Thou art perfect, pardoning those who 
have offended us, and asking Thee to pardon them, 
because they know not what they do. I should 
recall to mind the beatitudes of the Scripture: 
Blessed are ye when they revile you and persecute 
you, and say all manner of evil things against you. 
The minister of God, or he who is about to become 
His minister, must he humble, peaceable, lowly of 
heart; not like the oak that lifts itself up proudly 
MGT the thunderbolt strike it, but like the fra- 
grant herbs of the woods and the modest flowers 
of the fields, that give sweeter and more graceful 
perfume after the rustic has trodden them under 
foot.” 

In these and other meditations of a like nature 
the hours passed until three o’clock, when Don 
Pedro, who had just returned from the country, 
entered his son’s room to call him to dinner. The 
gay joviality of his father, his jests, his affectionate 
attentions during the meal, were all of no avail to 
draw Don Luis from his melancholy, or to give 
him an appetite; he ate little, and scarcely spoke 
while they were at table. 

Although much troubled by the silent etn 
choly of his son, whose health, though indeed 
robust, might nevertheless suffer from it, Don 
Pedro—who rose with the dawn and had a busy 
time of it during the day—when he had finished 
his after-dinner cigar and taken his cup of coffee 
208 


Pepita Jimenez 


‘and his glass of anisette, felt fatigued, and went, 
according to his custom, to take a long nap. 

Don Luis had been care not to draw the atten- 
tion of his father to the offense done him by the 
Count of Genazahar; for Don Pedro, who, for his 
part, was not plepating for the priesthood, and 
who, besides, was not of a very meek disposition, 
would otherwise have rushed instantly to wreak 
the vengeance his son had foregone. ~ 

When his father had retired the young man also 
left the dining-room, that he might give himself 
up undisturbed to his thoughts in the seclusion of 
his own apartment. 


206 


Pepita Jimenez 


V 


Don Luis had been sunk in meditation for a long 
time, seated before his desk, with his elbows rest- 
ing upon it, when he heard a noise close by. He 
raised his eyes and saw standing beside him the 
meddlesome Antofiona, who, although of such 
massive proportions, had entered like a shadow, 
and was now watching him attentively, with a 
mixture of pity and of anger. 

Antofiona, taking advantage of the hour in 
which the servants dined and Don Pedro slept, 
had penetrated thus far without being observed, 
and had opened the door of the room and closed 
it behind her so gently that Don Luis, even if he 
had been less absorbed, would not have noticed it. 

She had come resolved to hold a very serious 
conference with Don Luis, but she did not quite 
_know what she was going to say to him. Never- 
theless, she had asked heaven or hell, whichever 
of the two it may have been, to loosen her tongue 
and bestow upon her the gift of speech—not such 
grotesque and vulgar speech as she generally used, 
but correct, elegant, and adapted to the noble re- 
flections and beautiful things she had in her mind 
_ and wanted to express, 

When Don Luis saw Antofiona he frowned, and 


207 


Pepita Jimenez 


showed by his manner how much this visit dis- 
pleased him, at the same time saying roughly: 

‘What do you want here? Go away!” 

“T have come to call you to account about my 
young mistress,” returned Antojfiona, quietly, “and 
I shall not go away until you have answered me.” 

She then drew a chair toward the table and sat 
down in it, facing Don Luis with coolness and 
effrontery. j 

Don Luis, seeing thee was no help for it, re- 
strained his anger, armed himself with patience, 
and, in accents less harsh than before, exclaimed: 

“Say what you have to say!” 

“T have to say,” resumed Antofiona, “that what 
you are plotting against my mistress is a piece of 
wickedness. You are behaving like a villain. You 
have bewitched her; you have given her some 
malignant potion. The poor angel is going to die; 
she neither eats nor sleeps, nor has a moment’s 
peace, on account of you. To-day she has had two 
or three hysterical attacks at the bare thought of 
your going away. A good deed you have done be- 
fore becoming a priest! Tell me, wretch, why did 
you not stay where you were, with your uncle, 
instead of coming here? She, who was so free, 
so completely mistress of her own will, enslaving 
that of others, and allowing her own to be taken 
captive by none, has fallen into your treacherous 
snares. Your hypocritical sanctity was doubtless 

208 


Pepita Jimenez 


the 1ure you employed. With your theologies and 
your pious humbug you have acted like the wily 
and cruel sportsman, who whistles to attract the 
silly thrushes only to catch them in his net.” 

“Antofiona,” returned Don Luis, “leave me in 
peace. For God’s sake, cease torturing me! I am 
a villain; I confess it. I ought not to have looked 
at your mistress; I ought not to have allowed her 
to believe that I loved her; but I loved her, and I 
love her still, with my whole heart; and I have 
given her no other potion or philtre than the love 
Ihave for her. It is my duty, nevertheless, to cast 
away, to forget this love. God commands me to 
do so. Do you imagine that the sacrifice I make 
will not be—is not already—a tremendous one? 
Pepita ought to arm herself with fortitude and 
make a similar sacrifice.” 

“You do not give even that consolation to the 
unhappy girl,” replied Antofiona. “You sacrifice 
voluntarily, on the altar, this woman who loves 
_ you, who is already yours—your victim. But she 
—how do you belong to her that she should offer 
you up as a sacrifice? What is the precious jewel 
she is going to renounce, what the beautiful orna- 
ment she is going to cast into the flames, but an 
ill-requited love? How is she going to give to 
God what she does not possess? Is she going to 
try to cheat God, and say to Him: ‘My God, since 
he does not love me, here he is; I offer him up to 


209 


Pepita Jimenez 


you; I will not love him either.’ God never laughs 
—if He did, He would laugh at such a present 
as that!” 

Don Luis, confounded, did not know what an- 
swer to return to these arguments of Antojiona, 
more painful than her former pinches. Besides, 
it was repugnant to him to discuss the metaphysics 
of love with a servant. 

“Let us leave aside,” he said, “these idle discus- 
sions. I can not cure the malady of your mistress. 

What would you have me do?” 

“What would I have you do?” replied Anto- 
fiona, more gently and with insinuating accents; 
“T will tell you what I would have you do. If you 
can not cure the malady of my mistress, you should 
at least alleviate it a little. Are you not saintly? 
Well, the saints are compassionate, and courageous 
besides. Don’t run away like an ill-mannered 
coward, without saying good-by. Come to see my, 
mistress, who is sick. Do this work of mercy.” 

“And what would be.gained by.such a visit? 
It would aggravate her malady, instead of cur- 
ing. it.” 

“Tt will not do so; you don’t see the matter in 
its proper light. You shall go to see her, and, with 
your honeyed tongue and the gift of the gab that 
Nature has bestowed upon you, you will put some 
resignation into her soul, and leave her consoled 
for your departure; and if you tell her, in addition 

210 


Pepita Jimenez 


to this, that you love her, and that it is only for the 
sake of God you are leaving her, her woman’s 
vanity, at least, will not be wounded.” 

“What you propose to me is to tempt God; it is 
dangerous both for her and for me.’ 

“And why should it be to tempt God? Since 
God can see the rectitude and the purity of your in- 
tentions, will He not grant you His favor and His 
grace that you may not yield to temptation during 
the visit to her, which it is but justice you should 
make? Ought you not to fly to her to deliver her 
_ from despair, and bring her back to the right pathe, 
If she should die of grief at seeing herself scorned; 
or if, in a frenzy, she should seize a rope and hang 
herself to a beam, I tell you, your remorse would 
_be harder to bear than the flames of pitch and 
sulphur that surround the caldrons of Lucifer.” 

“This is horrible! JI would not have her grow 
desperate. I shall arm myself with courage—I 
will go to see her.” mn 

“May Heaven bless you! But my heart told me 
you would go. How good you are!” 

“When do you wish me to gor” 

“To-night, at ten o’clock precisely. I will be at 
the street-door waiting for you, and will take you 
to her.” 

_ “Does she know you have come to see me?” 

“She does not—it was all my own idea; but I 
- will prepare her cautiously, so that the surprise, 
21t 


Pepita Jimenez 


the unexpected joy of your visit, may not be too 
much for her. You promise me to come?” 

“I will go.” 

“Good-by. Don’t fail to come. At ten o’clock 
precisely I shall be at the door.” 

And Antofiona hurried away, descended the 
steps two at a time, and so gained the street. 


212 


Pepita Jimenez 


VI 


IT can not be denied that Antofiona had dis- 
played great prudence, and that her language had 
been so dignified and proper that some may think 
it apocryphal, if there were not the very best au- 
thority for all that is related here, and if we did 
not know, besides, the wonders a woman may work 
by her natural cleverness when she is spurred on 
by interest or by some strong passion. 

Great, indeed, was the affection Antofiona enter- 
tained for her mistress, and, seeing her so much in 
love and in such desperate case, she could do no 
less than seek a remedy for her ills. The consent 
she had succeeded in obtaining from Don Luis 
was an unexpected triumph; and in order to derive 
the greatest possible advantage from this triumph, 
she was obliged to make the most of her time, and 
to use all her wordly wisdom in preparing for the 
occasion. 

Antofiona had suggested ten as the hour of Don 
Luis’s visit, because this was the hour in which Don 
Luis and Pepita had been accustomed to see each 
other in the now abolished or suspended gatherings 
at the house of the latter. She had suggested this 
hour also in order to avoid giving rise to scandal 
or slander; for she had once heard a preacher say 

213 


Pepita Jimenez 


that, according to the Gospel, there is nothing so 
wicked as scandal, and that a scandal-monger ought 
to be flung into the sea with a millstone hung round 
his neck. 
Antofiona then returned to the house of her mis- 
tress, very well satisfied with herself, and with the 
firm determination so to arrange matters that the 
temedy she had sought should not prove useless, 
or aggravate instead of curing Pepita’s malady. 
She resolved to say nothing of the matter to Pe 
' pita herself until the last moment, when she would 
‘tell her that Don Luis had asked her of his own 
accord at what hour he might make a farewell 
visit, and that she had said ten. / 
In order to avoid giving rise to talk, she deter- 
mined that Don Luis should not be seen to enter 
the house, and for this the hour and the internal 
arrangement of the house itself were alike propi- 
tious. At ten the street would be full of people, 
on account of the vigil, which would make it easier 
for Don Luis to reach the house without being 
observed. ‘To enter the hall would be the work 
of a moment, and Antofiona, who would be waiting 
for him, could then take him to the library without 
any one seeing him. 
=~ All, or at least the greater part, of the Handtome 
So uneeybalies of Andalusia are built as double 
rather than single houses. Each of these double 
houses has its own door. ‘The principal door leads 
2t4 


Pepita Jimenez 


‘to the courtyard, which is paved and surrounded 
by columns, to the parlors and the other apart- 
ments of the family.- The other door leads to 
the inner yards, the stable, and coach-house, the 
kitchens, the mill, the wine-press, the granaries, 
the buildings where the oil, the must, the alcohol, 
the brandy, and the vinegar are kept in large jars, 
and also to the cask stores, or cellars, where the 
wine, new and old, is stored in pipes or barrels. 
This second house, or portion of a house, although 
it may be situated in the heart of a town of twenty 
or twenty-five thousand inhabitants, is called the 
“farmhouse.” The oyerseer, the foreman, the 
muleteer, the principal workmen, and the domes- 
tics who have been longest in the service of the 
master are accustomed to gather here in the even- 
ings, during the winter, around the enormous fire- 
place of a spacious kitchen, and in summer in the 
open air, or in some cool and well-ventilated apart- 
ment, and there chat or take their ease until the 
master’s family are ready to retire. 

Antofiona was of opinion that the colloquy or 
explanation which she desired should take place 
between her mistress and Don Luis must be abso- 
lutely undisturbed, and interrupted by no one; and» 
she therefore determined that, as it was St. John’s” 
Eve, the maid-servants of Pepita should be to- 
night released from all their occupations, and 
should go to amuse themselves at the farmhouse, 


215 


Pepita Jimenez 


where, in union with the rustic laborers, they 
might get up impromptu amusements, to consist 
of the recitation of pretty verses, playing the casta- 
nets, and dancing jigs and fandangoes. 

In this manner the dwelling-house—with no 
other occupants than Pepita and herself—would 
be silent and almost deserted, and therefore quiet 
enough for the interview she had planned, and 
on which perhaps—or rather to a certainty—de- 
pended the fate of two persons of such distin- 
guished merit. 


216 


Pepita Jimenez 


VA 
v VII 


WHILE Antofiona went about turning over and 
arranging in her mind all these things, Don Luis 
had no sooner been left alone than he repented of 
having proceeded with so much haste, and weakly 
consenting to the interview Antofiona had asked 
of him. As he reflected upon it it seemed to him 
full of peril. He saw before him all the danger 
to which he was exposing himself, and he could per- 
ceive no advantage whatever in thus making a visit 
to the beautiful widow in secret and by stealth. 

To go and see her in order to succumb to her at- 
tractions and fall into her snares, making a mock- 
ery of his vows, and placing not only the bishop, 
who had cmercd his petition for a dispensation, 
but even the holy Pontiff, who had conceded it, 
in a false position, by relinquishing his purpose 
of becoming a priest, seemed to him very dishonor- 
able. It was, besides, a treason against his father, 
who loved Pepita and desired to marry her; and 
to visit her in order to undeceive her in regard to 
his love for her, seemed to him a greater refinement 
of cruelty t than to depart without saying anything. 

Influenced by these considerations, the first 
thought of Don Luis was to fail, ichenis excuse 
or warning, to Keep. his appointment, and leave 

217 


Pepita Jimenez 


Antofiona to wait in vain for him in the hall; but 
then, as Antofiona had, in all probability, already 
announced his visit to her mistress, he would, by 
failing to go, unpardonably offend, not only An- 
tofiona, but Pepita herself. 

He heh resolved on writing Pepita a very.affec- 
tionate and discreet letter, excusing himself from 
going to see her, justifying his conduct, consoling” 
her, manifesting his.tender sentiments toward her, 
white letting her see that duty and Heaven were 
before everything, and endeavoring to inspire her 
with the courage to make the same sacrifice as he 
himself was making. 

He made four or five different attempts to write 
this letter. He blotted a great deal of paper 
which he afterward tore up, and could not, in the 
end, succeed in getting the letter to his taste. Now 
it was dry, cold, pedantic, like a poor sermon or 
a schoolmaster’s discourse; now its contents be- 
trayed a childish apprehension, as if Pepita were 
a monster lying in wait to devour him; now it had 
other faults not less serious. In fine, after wasting 
many sheets of paper in the attempt, the letter 
remained unwritten. 

“There is no help for it,” said Don Luis to him- 
self; “the die in Casts I must summon up all my 
courage and go.” 

He comforted his spirit with the hope that his — 
self-control would not forsake him during the 

218 


Pepita Jimenez 


coming interview, and that God would endow his 
lips with eloquence to persuade Pepita, who was 
so good, that it was she herself who, sacrificing her 
earth arthly love, urged him. to fulfil his vocation, re- 
are not wanting examples, who not ‘only renounced 
the society of a bridegroom or a lover, but even the 
companionship of a husband, as is narrated, for 
instance, in the life of St. Edward of England, 
whose queen lived with him as a sister. 

Don Luis felt himself consoled and encouraged 
by this thought, and he already pictured himself 
as St. Edward, and Pepita as Queen Edith. And 
under the form and in the character of this virgin 
queen Pepita appeared to him, if possible, more 
graceful, charming, and romantic than ever. 
Don Luis was not, however, altogether so secure 
of himself, or so tranquil, as he should have been, 
after forming the resolution of following the ex- 
ample of St. Edward. There seemed to him some- 
thing almost criminal, which he could not well 
define, in the visit he was about to make to Pepita 
without his father’s knowledge. He felt tempted 
to awaken him from his nap, and to reveal every- 
thing to him} two or three times he rose from his 
chair with this purpose, then he stopped, feeling 
that such a revelation would be dishonoring and a 
disgraceful exhibition of childishness. He might 
_betray his own secrets, but to betray those of Pepita, 
219 


Pepita Jimenez 


in order to set himself right with his father, seemed 
to him contemptible enough. The baseness and 
the ridiculous meanness of the action were still fur- 
ther increased in his eyes by.the-reflection that what 
prompted him to it.was the fear of not being strong 
enough to resist temptation. 

Don Luis kept silence, therefore, and revealed 
nothing to his father. 

More than this, he did not even feel that he had 
the confidence and composure necessary to present 
himself before his father, with the consciousness of 
this secret interview interposing itself as a barrier 
between them. He was, indeed, so excited and so 
_beside himself, under the influence of the contend- 
ing emotions that disputed the possession of his 
soul, that he felt as if the room, though a large 
one, was too small to contain him. Starting to his 
feet, he paced with rapid strides up and down the 
floor, like some wild animal in his cage, impatient 
of confinement. At last, although—being summer 
—the window was open, he felt as if he could re- 
main here no longer, lest he should suffocate for 
want of air; as if the roof pressed down upon his 
head; as if, to breathe, he needed the whole atmos- 
phere; to walk, he required space without limits; 
to lift up his brow and exhale his sighs and elevate 
his thoughts, to have nothing less than the immeas- 
urable vault of heaven above him. 

Impelled by this necessity, he took his hat and 


220 


Pepita Jimenez 


cane and went out into the street. Thence, avoid- 
ing every one he knew, he passed on into the coun- 
try, plunging into the leafiest and most sequestered 
recesses of the gardens and walks that encompass 
the village and make for a radius of more than 
half a league a paradise of its surroundings. 

We have said but little, thus far, concerning the 
personal appearance of Don Luis. Be it known, 
then, that he was in every sense of the word a 
handsome fellow—tall, well-formed, with black 
hair, and eyes also black and full of fire and ten- 
derness. His complexion was dark, his teeth were 
white, his lips delicate and curling slightly, which 
gave his countenance an appearance of disdain; his 
bearing was manly and bold, notwithstanding the 
reserve and meekness proper to the sacred calling 
of his election. The whole mien of Don Luis bore, 
in a word, that indescribable stamp of distinction 
and nobility that seems to be—though this is not 
always the case—the peculiar quality and exclusive 
privilege of aristocratic families. 

On beholding Don Luis one could not but con- 
fess that Pepita Jiménez was esthetic by instinct. 

Don Luis hurried on with precipitate steps in the 
course he had taken, jumping across brooks and 
hardly glancing at surrounding objects, almost as 
a bull stung by a hornet might do. The country- 
men he met, the market-gardeners who saw him 
pass, very possibly took him for a madman. 

221 


Pepita Jimenez 


‘Tired at last of walking on so aimlessly, he sat 
down at the foot of a stone cross near the ruins of 
an ancient convent of St. Francis de Paul, almost 
two miles from the village, and there plunged anew 
into meditation, but of so confused a character that 
he himself was scarcely conscious of what was 
passing in his mind. 

The sound of the distant bells, calling the faith- 
ful to prayer, and reminding them of the saluta- 
tion of the angel to the Most Holy Virgin, reached 
him in his solitude through the evening air, and at 
last drew Don Luis from his meditations, recalling 
him once more to the world of reality. 

The sun had just sunk behind the gigantic 
peaks of the neighboring mountains, making their 
summits—in the shape of pyramids, needles, and 
broken obelisks—statid out in bold relief against 
a background of topaz and amethyst—for such was 
the appearance of the heavens, gilded by the beams 
of the setting sun. The shadows began to deepen 
over the plain, and on the mountains opposite to 
those behind which the sun was sinking the more 
elevated peaks shone like flaming gold or crystal. 

‘The windows and the white walls of the distant 
sanctuary of the Virgin, patroness of the village, 
situated on the summit of a hill, and of another 
small temple or hermitage situated on a nearer hill 
called Calvary, still shone like two beacon lights 
touched by the oblique rays of the setting sun, 

222 


Pepita Jimenez 


Nature exhaled a poetic melancholy, and all 
things seemed to intone a hymn to the Creator, with 
that silent music heard only by the spirit. The 
slow tolling of the bells, softened and almost lost 
in the distance, hardly disturbed the repose of the 
earth, and invited to prayer without distracting the 
senses by their noise. Don Luis uncovered his 
head, knelt down at the foot of the cross, the 
pedestal of which had served him as a seat, and 
repeated with profound devotion the Angelus 
Domini. 

The shades of evening were gathering fast, but 
when Night unfolds her mantle, and spreads it 
over those favored regions, she delights to adorn 
it with the most luminous stars and with a still 
brighter moon. The vault of, heaven did not ex- 
change its cerulean hue for the blackness of night; 
it still retained it, though it had assumed a deeper 
shade. The atmosphere was so clear and pure that 
myriads of stars could be descried shining far into 
the limitless depths of space. The moon silvered 
the tops of the trees, and touched with its splendor 
the waters of the brooks that gleamed, luminous 
and transparent, with colors as changeful and iri- 
descent as the opal. In the leafy groves the night- 
ingales were singing. Herbs and flowers shed a _ 
tich perfume. Countless multitudes of glowworms 
shone like diamonds or carbuncles among the grass 
and wild flowers along the banks of the brooks. In . 

223 


Pepita Jimenez 


this region the fire-fly is not found, but the common 
glowworm abounds, and sheds a most brilliant 
light. Fruit trees still in blossom, acacias, and 
roses without number perfumed the air with their 
rich fragrance. — 

Don Luis felt himself swayed, seduced, van- 
quished by this voluptuousness of Nature, and 
began to doubt himself. He felt compelled, 
however, to fulfil his promise and keep his 
appointment. 

Deviating often from the straight path, hesitat- 
ing at times whether he should not rather push 
forward to the source of the river, where, at the 
foot of a mountain and in the midst of the most 
enchanting surroundings, the crystal torrent that 
waters the neighboring gardens and orchards 
bursts from the living rock, he turned back, with 
slow and lingering step, in the direction of the 
village. 

In proportion as he approached it, the terror in- 
Spired by the thought of what he was about to do 
increased. He plunged into the thickest of the 
wood, hoping there to behold some sign, some won- 
der, some warning, that should draw him back. 
He thought often of the student Lisardo, and 
wished that, like him, he might behold his own 
burial. But heaven smiled with her thousand 
lights, and invited to love; the stars twinkled at 
each other with love; the nightingales sang of loves 

224 


Pepita Jimenez 


even the crickets chirped their amorous serenade. 
All the earth, on this tranquil and beautiful night, 
seemed given up to love. All was life, peace, joy. 

Where was his guardian angel now? Had he 
abandoned Don Luis as already lost; or, deeming 
that he ran no risk, did he make no effort to turn 
him from his purpose? Who can say? Perhaps 
from the danger that menaced him would in the 
end result a triumph? St. Edward and Queen 
Edith presented themselves again to the imagina- 
tion of Don Luis, and the vision strengthened his 
resolution. 

Engrossed in these meditations, he delayed his 
return, and was still some distance from the vil- 
lage when ten, the hour appointed for his interview 
with Pepita, struck from the parish clock. The 
ten strokes of the bell were ten blows that, falling 
on his heart, wounded it as with a physical pain— 
a pain in which dread and treacherous disquiet 
were blended with a ravishing sweetness. 

Don Luis hastened his steps, that he might not 
be too late, and shortly found himself in the village. 

The hamlet presented a most animated scene. 
Young girls flocked to wash their faces at the spring 
outside the village; those who had sweethearts, 
that their sweethearts might remain faithful to 
them; and those who had not, that they might 
obtain sweethearts. Here and there women and 
children were returning from the fields, with ver- 
(E)—Vot. 13—8 225 


Pepita Jimenez 


bena, branches of rosemary, and other plants, 
which they had been gathering, to burn as a charm. 
Guitars tinkled on every side, words of love were 
to be overheard, and everywhere happy and tender 
couples were to be seen walking together. The 
vigil and the early morning of St. John’s Day, al- 
though a Christian festival, still retain a certain 
savor of paganism and primitive naturalism. ‘This 
may be because of the approximate concurrence 
of this festival and the summer solstice. In any 
case, the scene to-night was purely mundane and 
not religious. All was love and gallantry. In our 
old romances and legends the Moor always carries 
off the beautiful Christian princess, and the Chris- 
tian knight receives the reward of his devotion to 
the Moorish princess on the eve or in the early 
morning of St. John’s Day; and the traditionary 
custom of the old romances had been, to all appear- 
ances, preserved in the village. 

The streets were full of people. The whole vil- 
lage was out of doors, in addition to the strangers 
from the surrounding country. Progress, thus 
rendered extremely difficult, was still further im- 
peded by the multitude of little tables laden with 
almond sweetmeats, honey-cakes, and biscuits, with 
fruit-stalls, with booths for the sale of dolls and 
toys, and cake-shops, where gipsies, young and old, 
fried the dough—tainting the air with the odor 
of oil—weighed and-served the cakes, responded 

226 


Pepita Jimenez 


with ready wit to the compliments of the gallants 
who passed by, and told fortunes. 

Don Luis sought to avoid meeting any of his ac- 
quaintances, and, when he caught sight by chance 
of any one he knew, turned his steps in another 
direction. ‘Thus, by degrees, he reached the en- 
trance to Pepita’s house without having been 
stopped or spoken to by any one. His heart now 
began to beat with violence, and he paused a mo- 
ment to recover his serenity. He looked at his 
watch; it was almost half-past ten. 

“Good heavens!” he exclaimed; 
waiting for me nearly half an oun’? 

He then hurried his pace and entered the hall. 
The lamp by which it was always lighted was burn- 
ing dimly on this particular evening. 

No sooner had Don Luis entered the hall than 
a hand, or rather a claw, seized him by the right 
arm. It belonged to Antofiona, who said to him 
under her breath: 

“A pretty fellow you are, for a divinity student! 
Ingrate! Good-for-nothing! Vagabond! I began 
to think you were not coming. Where have you 
been, you idiot? How dare you delay, as if you 
had no interest in the matter, when the salt of the 
earth is melting for you, and the sun of beauty 
awaits your” 

While Antofiona was giving utterance to these 
complaints, she did not stand still, but continued 

227 


: “she has been 


Pepita Jimenez 


to go forward, dragging after her by the arm the 
now cowed and silent collegian. They passed the 
grated door, which Antofiona closed carefully and 
noiselessly behind them. ‘They crossed the court- 
yard, ascended the stairs, passed through some cor- 
ridors and two sitting-rooms, and arrived at last 
at the door of the library, which was closed. 

Profound silence reigned throughout the house. 
The library was situated in its interior, and was 
thus inaccessible to the noises of the street. The 
only sounds that reached it, dim and vague, were 
the clatter of castanets, the thrumming of a guitar, 
and the murmur of the voices of Pepita’s servants, 
who were holding their impromptu dance in the 
farmhouse. 

Antofiona opened the door of the library and 
pushed Don Luis toward it, at the same time an- 
nouncing him in these words: 

“Here is Don Luis, who has come to take leave 
of you.” | 

This announcement being made with due cere- 
mony, the discreet Antofiona withdrew, leaving the 
visitor and her mistress at their ease, and closing 


the door behind her. 


Pepita Jimenez 


VIII 


AT this point in our narrative we can not refrain 
from calling attention to the character of authen- 
ticity that stamps the present history, and paying 
a tribute of admiration to the scrupulous exactness 
of the person who composed it. For, were the in- 
cidents related in these paralipomena fictitious, as 
in a novel, there is not the least doubt but that an 
interview so important and of such transcendent 
interest as that of Pepita and Don Luis would have 
been brought about by less vulgar means than those 
here employed. 

Perhaps our hero and heroine, in the course of 
some new excursion into the country, might have 
been surprised by a sudden and frightful tempest, 
thus finding themselves obliged to take refuge in 
the ruins of some ancient castle or Moorish tower, 
with the reputation, of course, of being haunted 
by ghosts or other supernatural visitants. Perhaps 
our hero and heroine might have fallen into the 
power of a party of bandits, from whom they 
would have escaped, thanks to the presence of mind 
and courage of Don Luis; taking shelter after- 
ward for the night—they two alone, and without 
the possibility of avoiding it—in a cavern or grotto. 

Or, finally, perhaps the author would have ar- 
229 


Pepita Jimenez 


ranged the matter in such a way that Pepita and 
her vacillating admirer would have been obliged 
to make a journey by sea, and, although at the 
present day there are neither pirates nor Algerine 
corsairs, it is not difficult to invent a good ship- 
wreck, during which Don Luis could have saved 
Pepita’s life, taking refuge with her afterward on 
a desert island, or some other equally romantic and 
solitary place. 

Any one of these devices would more artfully, 
prepare the way for the tender colloquy of the 
lovers, and would better serve to exculpate Don 
Luis. We are of the opinion, nevertheless, that, 
instead of censuring the author for not having had 
recourse to such complications as those we have 
mentioned, we ought rather to thank him for his 
conscientiousness in sacrificing to the truth of his 
relation the marvelous effect he might have pro- 
duced had he ventured to adorn it with incidents 
and episodes drawn from his own fancy. 

If the means by which this interview was 
brought about were, in reality, only the officious- 
ness and the skill of Antofiona, and the weakness 
with which Don Luis acceded to her request that 
he should grant it, why forge lies, and cause the 
two lovers to be impelled, as it were, by Fate, to see 
and speak with each other alone, to the great dan- 
ger of the virtue and honor of both? Nothing of 
the kind! Whether Don Luis did well or ill in 


230 


Pepita Jimenez 


keeping his appointment, and whether Pepita 
Jiménez, whom Antofiona had already told that 
Don Luis was coming of his own accord to see 
her, did well or ill in rejoicing over that somewhat 
mysterious and untimely visit, let us not throw the 
blame on Fate, but on the personages themselves 
who figure in this history, and on the passions by 
which they are actuated. We confess to a great 
affection for Pepita; but the truth is before every- 
thing, and must be declared, even should it be to 
the prejudice of our heroine. 

At eight o’clock, then, Antofiona had told her 
that Don Luis was coming, and Pepita, who had 
been talking of dying, whose eyes were red, and her 
eyelids slightly inflamed with weeping, and whose 
hair was in some disorder, thought of nothing from 
that moment but of adorning and dressing herself 
to receive Don Luis. She bathed her face with 
warm water, so that the ravages her tears had made 
might be effaced to the exact point of leaving her 
beauty unimpaired, while still allowing it to be 
seen that she had wept. She arranged her hair so 
as to display, rather than a studied care in its ar- 
rangement, a certain graceful and artistic careless- 
ness, that fell short of disorder, however, which 
would have been indecorous; she polished her 
nails, and, as it was not fit that she should receive 
Don Luis in a wrapper, she put on a simple house- 
dress, In fine, she managed instinctively that all 

231 


Pepita Jimenez 


the details of her toilet should concur in heighten: 
_ ing her beauty and grace, but without allowing any 
trace to be perceived of the art, the labor, and the 
time employed in the details. She would have i 
appear, on the contrary, as if all this beauty anc 
grace were the free gift of Nature, something in. 
herent in her person, no matter how she might 
owing to the vehemence of her passions, neglect i 
on occasion. 

Pepita, so far as we have been able to discover 
spent more than an hour in these labors of the 
toilet, which were to be perceived only by thei: 
results. She then, with ill-concealed satisfaction 
gave herself the final touch before the looking 
glass. At last, at about half-past nine, taking ; 
candle in her hand, she descended to the apart 
ment in which was the Infant Jesus. She firs 
lighted the altar candles, which had been extin. 
guished; she saw with something of sorrow tha: 
the flowers were drooping; she asked pardon of the 
sacred Image for neglecting it so long, and, throw 
ing herself on her knees before it, prayed in he: 
solitude with her whole heart, and with that frank 
ness and confidence that a guest inspires who ha: 
Yeen so long an inmate of the house. Of a Jesu 
of Nazareth bearing the cross upon his shoulders 
ind crowned with thorns; of an Ecce Homo, in 
sulted and scourged, with a reed for derisive scep 
tre, and his hands bound with a rough cord; of: 

232 


Pepita Jimenez 


Christ Crucified, bleeding and in the last throes of 
death, Pepita would not have dared to ask what 
she now asked of a Saviour, still a child, smiling, 
beautiful, untouched by suffering, and pleasing to 
the eye. Pepita asked him to leave her Don Luis; 
not to take him away from her, since he, who was 
so rich and so well provided with everything, 
might, without any great sacrifice, deny himself 
this one of his servants, and give him up to her. 
Having completed these preparations, which 
we may classify as cosmetic, decorative, and relig- 
ious, Pepita installed herself in the library, and 
there awaited the arrival of Don Luis with feverish 
impatience. 
_ Antofiona had acted with prudence in not tell- 
ing her mistress that Don Luis was coming to see 
her until a short time before the appointed hour. 
Even as it was, thanks to the delay of her gallant, 
poor Pepita, from the moment in which she had 
finished her prayers and supplications to the Infant 
Jesus, to that in which she beheld Don Luis stand- 
ing in the library, was a prey to anguish and 
disquietude. | 
The visit began in the most grave and ceremo- 
nious manner. ‘The customary salutations were 
mechanically interchanged, and Don Luis, at the 
invitation of Pepita, seated himself in an easy- 
_ chair, without laying aside his hat or cane, and at 
a short distance from her. Pepita was seated on 


| 233 
. 


Pepita Jimenez 


the sofa; beside her was a little table on which were 
some books, and a candle, the light from which 
illuminated her countenance. On the desk also 
burned a lamp. . Notwithstanding these two lights, 
however, the apartment, which was large, remained 
for the greater part in darkness. A large window, 
which looked out on an inner garden, was open 
on account of the heat; and although the grating 
of the window was covered with climbing roses 
and jasmine, the clear beams of the moon pene- 
trated through the interlaced leaves and flowers, 
and struggled with the light of the lamp and 
candle. Through the open window came, too, the 
distant and confused sounds of the dance at the 
farmhouse, which was at the other extremity of 
the garden, the monotonous murmur of the foun- 
tain below, and the fragrance of the jasmine and 
roses that curtained the window, mingled with that 
of the mignonette, sweet-basil, and other plants that 
adorned the borders beneath. 

There was a long pause—a silence as difficult to 
maintain as it was to break. Neither of the two 
interlocutors ventured to speak. The situation 
was, in truth, embarrassing. They found it as diffi- 
cult to express themselves then as we find it now 
to reproduce their words; but there is nothing else 
for it than to make the effort. Let us allow them 
to speak for themselves, transcribing their words 
with exactitude. 


234, 


Pepita Jimenez 


IX 


“So you have finally condescended to come and 
take leave of me before your departure,” said Pe- 
pita; “I had siready given up the hope that you 
would do so.’ 

The part Don Luis had to pena was a serious 
one; and, besides, in this kind of dialogue, the man, 
not only if he be a novice, but even when he is 
old in the business and an expert, is apt to begin 
with some piece of folly. Let us not too freely 
condemn Don Luis, therefore, because he began 
unwisely. 

“Your.complaint.is unjust,” he said. “I came 
here with my father to take leave of you, and, as 
we had not the pleasure of being received by you, 
we left cards. We were told that you were some- 
what indisposed, and we have sent every day since 
to inquire about you. We were greatly pleased to 
learn that you were improving. I hope you are 
now much better.” 

“T am almost tempted to say I am no better,” 
answered Pepita, “but, as I see that you have come 
as the ambassador of your father, and I do not want 
to distress so excellent a friend, it is but right that 
I should tell you, that you may repeat it to him, 
that I am much better now. But it is strange that 


. 235 


i 
«. 
. 
ig 


Pepita Jimenez 


you have come alone. Don Pedro must be very 
much occupied indeed, not to accompany you.” 

“My father did not accompany me, because he 
does not know that I have come to see you. I have 
preferred to come without him, because my fare- 
well must be a serious, a solemn, perhaps a final 
one, and his would naturally be of a very different 
character. My father will return to the village 
in a few weeks; it is possible that I may never re- 
turn to it, and, if I do, it will be in a very differ- 
ent condition from my present.” 

Pepita could not restrain herself. The happy 
future of which she had dreamed vanished into 
air. Her unalterable resolution to vanquish this 
man, at whatever cost, the only man she had loved 
in her life, the only one she felt herself capable of 
loving, seemed to have been made in vain. She 
felt herself condemned at twenty years of age, with 
all her beauty, to perpetual widowhood, to solitude,. 
to an unrequited love—for to love any other man 
seemed impossible to her. 

The character of Pepita, in whom obstacles only 
strengthened and rekindled her desires, with whom 
a determination, once taken, carried everything 
before it until it was fulfilled, showed itself now 
in all its violence and without restraint. She must 
conquer, or die in the attempt. Social considera- 
tions, the fixed habit of guarding and concealing 
the feelings: acquired in the great world, which 

236 | 


Pepita Jimenez 


serve as a restraint to the paroxysms of passion, and 
which veil in ambiguous phrases and circumlo- 
cution the most violent explosion of undisciplined 
emotion, had no power with Pepita. She had had 
but little intercourse with the world, she knew no 
middle way; her only rule of conduct hitherto had 
been to obey blindly her mother and her husband 
while they lived, and afterward to command des- 
potically every other human being. 

Thus it was that on this occasion Pepita spoke 
her thoughts and showed herself such as she really 
was. Her soul, with all the passion it contained, 
took form in her words; and her words, instead of 
serving to conceal her thoughts and her feelings, 
gave them substance. She did not speak as a 
woman of the world would have spoken, with cir- 
cumlocutions and attenuations of expression, but 
with that idyllic frankness with which Chloe spoke 
to Daphnis, and with the humility and the com- 
plete self-abandonment with which the daughter- 
in-law of Naomi offered herself to Boaz. 

«—<Do you persist in your purpose?” she asked. 
“Are you sure of your vocation? Are you not 
afraid of being a bad priest? Don Luis, I am go- 
ing to make a supreme effort. I am going to forget 
that I am an uncultured girl; I am going to dis- 
pense with all sentiment, and to reason as coldly 
as if it were concerning the matter most indifferent 
to me. Things have taken place that may be ex- 


237 
# 


Pepita Jiménez 


plained in two ways; both explanations do you dis- 
credit. I will tell you what I think: 

“If a woman who, with her coquetries—not very 
daring ones, in truth—almost without a word, and 
but a few days after seeing and speaking to you 
for the first time, has been able to provoke you, 
to move you to look at her with glances which re- 
veal a profane love, and has even obtained from 
you such a proof of that love as would be a fault, 
a sin, in any one, but is so especially in a priest— 
if this woman be, as she indeed is, a simple country, 
girl, without education, without talent, and with- 
out elegance, what may not be feared for you when © 
in great cities you see and converse with other 
women a thousand times more dangerous? Your 
head will be turned when you are thrown into the 
society of the great ladies who dwell in palaces, 
who tread on soft carpets, who dazzle the eye with 
their diamonds and pearls, who are clad in silks 
and laces instead of muslin-and cotton, who dis- 
play their white and well-formed throat instead 
of covering it with a plebeian and modest hand- 
kerchief, who are adepts i in all the arts of flirtation, 
and who, by reason of the very ostentation, luxury, 
and pomp that surround them, are all the more de- 
sirable for being apparently more inaccessible. 
Yes, these elegant and beautiful women discuss 
politics, philosophy, religion, and literature; they 
sing like canaries; they are enveloped, as it were, 

238 


Pepita Jiménez 


in clouds of incense, adoration; and homage, set 
upon a pedestal of triumphs and of victories, glor- 
ified by the prestige of an illustrious name, en- 
throned in gilded drawing-rooms, or secluded in 
voluptuous boudoirs; and there enter only the 
blessed ones of the earth, its titled ones, perhaps, 
who only to their most intimate friends are ‘Pe- 
pita,’ ‘Antofiita,’ or ‘Angelita,’ and to the rest of 
the world, ‘Her Grace the Duchess,’ or ‘The 
Marchioness.. ~~” 

“Tf you have yielded to the arts of a mere country 
girl when you were on the eve of being ordained, 
and in spite of all the enthusiasm for your calling 
that you may naturally be supposed to entertain— 
if you have thus yielded, urged by a passing im- 
pulse, am I not right in foreseeing that you will 
make an abominable priest, impure, worldly, and 
of evil influence, and that you will yield to temp- 
tation at every stepr 

“On such a supposition as this, believe me, Don 
Luis—and do not be offended with me for saying 

-so0—you are not even worthy to be the husband of 
an honest woman. If, with all the ardor and ten- 
derness of the most passionate lover, you have 
pressed the hand of a woman, if you have Jooked 
at one with glances that foretold a heaven, an eter- 
nity of love; if you have even kissed a woman who 
inspired you with no other feeling than one that 

_for me has no name—then go, in God’s name, and 


239 
t 


Pepita Jimenez 


do not marry her! If she is virtuous, she will not 
desire you for a husband, nor even for a lover. 
But, for God’s sake, do not become a priest either! 
The Church needs men more serious, more capable 
of resisting temptation, as ministers of the Most 
High.) 

“Tf oh the other hand, you have felt a noble 
passion for the woman of whom we are speaking, 
although she be of little worth, why abandon and 
deceive her so cruelly? However unworthy she 
may be, if she has inspired this great passion, do 
you not suppose that she must share it, and be the 
victim of it? For, when a love is great, elevated, 
and passionate, does it ever fail to make its power 
felt? Does it not irresistibly vanquish and subju- 
gate the beloved object? By the extent of your 
love for her you may measure hers for you. How 
then can you avoid fearing for her, if you abandon 


e@ 


her? Has she the masculine energy, the firmness — 


of character produced by the wisdom learned from 
books, the attraction of fame, the multitude of 
splendid projects, and all the resources of your 
cultured and exalted intellect, to distract her mind, 
and turn her away without destructive violence, 
from every other earthly affection? Can you not 
see that she will die of grief, and that you, called 
by your destiny to offer up bloodless sacrifices, will 
begin by pitilessly sacrificing her who most loves 
your” 
240 


Pepita Jimenez 


“T too,” returned Don Luis, endeavoring to con- 
quer his emotion, and to speak with firmness—“I 
too am obliged to make a great effort in order to 
answer you with the calmness necessary to one who 
opposes argument to argument, as in a controversy ; 
but your accusation is supported by so many reasons 
and you have invested those reasons—pardon me 
for saying so—with so specious an appearance of 
truth, that I have no choice left me but to disprove 
them by other reasons. I had no thought of being 
placed in the necessity of maintaining a discussion 
here, and of sharpening my poor wits for that pur- 
pose; but you compel me to do so, unless I wish 
to pass for a monster. I am going to reply to the 
two extremes of the cruel dilemma in which you 
have placed me. 

“Though it is true that my youth was passed in 
my uncle’s house and in the seminary, where I saw 
nothing of women, do not therefore think me so 
ignorant, or ‘possessed of so little imagination, that 
i can not picture to myself how lovely, how seduc- 
‘tive they may be. My imagination, on the. _con- 
trary, went far beyond the reality. Excited by the 
reading of the sacred writers and of profane poets, 
it pictured women more charming, more graceful, 
more intelligent, than they are commonly to be 
found in real life. I knew then, and I even exag- 
gerated to myself, the cost of ig sacrifice I was 

making, when I renounced the love of those women 


241 


Pepita Jimenez 


for the purpose of elevating myself to the dignity 
of the priesthood. I know well how much the 
charms of a beautiful woman are enhanced by rich 
attire, by splendid jewels, by being surrounded 
with all the arts of refined civilization, all the ob- 
jects of luxury produced by the indefatigable labor 
and the skill of man. I knew well, too, how much 
the natural cleverness of a woman is increased, how 
much her natural intelligence is sharpened, quick- 
ened, and brightened by intercourse with learned 
men, by the reading of good books, even by the 
familiar spectacle of the wealth and splendor of 
great cities, and of the monuments of the past that 
they contain. All this I pictured to myself with 
so much vividness, my fancy painted it in such 
glowing colors, that you need have no doubt that, 
should I be thrown into the society of those women 
of whom you speak, far from feeling the adoration 
and the transports you prophesy,_I shall rather ex- 
perience a disenchantment _on seeing-how great a 
distance there is between what I dreamed of and 
the truth, between the living reality and the picture 
of it that my fancy drew.” 

“This is indeed specious reasoning,” exclaimed 
Pepita. “How can I deny that what you have 
pictured in your imagination is, in truth, more 
beautiful than what exists in reality? But who 
will deny, either, that the real possesses a more 
seductive charm than that which exists only in the 

242 


Pepita Jimenez 


imagination? The vague and ethereal beauty of 
a phantasm, however great, can not compete with 
what is palpable and visible to the senses. I can 
understand that holy images might triumph over 
worldly dreams, but I fear they would scarcely 
be able to vanquish worldly realities.” 

“Have no such fear,” returned Don Luis. “My _ 
fancy, by_its own creations, has more power over 
my spirit than the whole uni iverse—only_ excepting © 
yo gurself—by_what. it transmits to it through the 
senses,” 

“And why except me?. Such an exception gives 
room to another suspicion. The idea you have of 
me, the idea which you love, may be but the crea- 
tion of this potent fancy of yours, and an illusion 
that resembles me in nothing.” 

“No, this is not the case. You may be assured 
that this idea resembles you in everything. It may 
be that it is innate in my. soul, that it has existed 
in it. ‘since it was created by. God, that it is a part 
of 3 its of its essence, the best and purest part of its being, 
as the perfume is of the flower.” 

“This is what I had feared, and now you confess 
it to me. You do not love me. What you love 
is the essence, the fragrance, the purest part of 
your own soul, that has assumed a form resembling 
mine.” 

“No, Pepita; do not amuse yourself by torment- 

‘ing me. What I love is you—and you such as you 
45 

i) 


“FF 


Pepita Jimenez 


really are; but what I love is also so beautiful, so 
pure, so Nageate that I can not understand = it 
should have reached my mind, in a material man- 
ner, through the senses. I take it for granted, then, 
and it is my firm belief, that it must have had an 
innate existence there. Tt i is like the idea of f God 
which is inborn in my soul, “whi ch has “unfolded 
and developed itself within me, and which, never- 
theless, has its counterpart in realit lity, superior, in- 
finitely superior to the idea. As I believe that God 
exists, so do I believe that you exist, and that you 


are a thousand times superior to. ‘the ide idea that bie 


have formed of you.” 


“Still, I have a doubt left. May it not be woman _ 
in general, and not I, solely and exclusively, that _ 


has awakened this idea?” 


“No, Pepita; before I saw you, I had felt in | 
imagination what might be the magic power, the © 
fascination, of a woman beautiful of soul and — 


graceful in person. There is no duchess or march- 
ioness in Madrid, no empress in all the world, no 
queen or princess on the face of the globe, to be 
compared to the ideals and fantastic creations with 
whom I have lived. 

“These were inhabitants of the castles and bou- 
doirs, marvels of luxury and taste, that I pleased 
myself in boyhood by erecting in my fancy, and 


that I afterward gave as dwelling-places to my 


Lauras, Beatrices, Juliets, Marguerites, and Leo- 
244 


Pepita Jimenez 


noras; to my Cynthias, Glyceras, and Lesbias. I 


crowned them in my imagination with coronets 


and, Oriental diadems; I clothed them in mantles 


of purple and gold, and surrounded them with 


regal pomp like Esther and Vashti. I endowed 
them, like Rebecca and the Shulamite, with the 


BR icblic simplicity of the patriarchal age; I be- 


stowed on them the sweet humility and the devo- 
tion of Ruth; I listened to them discoursing like 


_Aspasia, or Hypatia, mistresses of eloquence. I 


enthroned them in luxurious drawing-rooms, and 
cast over them the splendor of noble blood and 
illustrious lineage, as if they had been the proudest 
and noblest of patrician maidens of ancient Rome. 
I beheid them graceful, coquettish, gay, full of 
aristocratic ease and manner, like the ladies of the 


time of Louis XIV, in Versailles; and I adorned 


them, now with the modest sto/a, inspiring venera- 
tion and respect; now with diaphanous tunics and 


_ peplums, through whose airy folds were revealed 
_all the plastic perfections of their graceful forms; 


now with the transparent coa of the beautiful cour- 


tezans of Athens and Corinth, showing the white 
and roseate hues of the finely molded forms that 
glowed beneath their vaporous covering. 

“But what are the joys of the senses, what the 


glory and y and magnificence of the world, to a soul that 


be 


burns and ¢ consumes itself in Divine love, as I be- 
lieved mine, _ perl 1aps With too much arrogance, to 
OO ec 


245 


aN 
a 
i 


Pepita Jimenez 


burn_and consume.itself? As volcanic fires, when 
they burst into flame, send flying into air, shattered 
in a thousand fragments, the solid rocks, the moun- 
tainside itself, which obstruct their passage, so, or 
with even greater force, did my spirit cast from 
itself the whole weight of the universe and of 


created beauty that lay upon it and imprisoned it, | 


preventing it from soaring up to God, as the centre : 


of its aspirations. 

“No; Lhave rejected no delight, no sweetness, no 
glory, through ignorance. “I-knew them all, and 
valued them all at more than their worth, when 


I rejected them all for a greater delight, a greater 


sweetness, a greater glory. The profane love of | 


woman presented itself to my fancy, clothed, not 
only with all its own charms, but with the sover- 
eign and almost irresistible charms of the most 
dangerous of all temptations—of that which ‘the 
not yet undeceived by experience and by sin, in, pic- 
tures to itself in the transports of love a Supreme 
and ineffable delight immeasurably superior to all 
reali 


ih “Byer since I reached manhood—that is to say, | 


for many..years past, for my “youth was short—I 
have scorned those delights and that ‘beauty that 


were but the shadow and the reflex of the arche- | 


typal beauty of which I was enamored, of the su- 
preme delight for which I longed. I have sought 
246 eS 3 | 


Pepita Jimenez 


to die to myself, in order to live in the beloved 
) bject; to free, not. only my senses, but even my 
soul itself, from. every earthly : affection, from illu- 
sions and imaginings, in order to be able to say 
with truth that itis not I who live, but Christ 
who lives in me. Sometimes, no doubt I sinned 
through arrogance and self- donfidence; and God 
wished to chastise me; you came across my_ path, 
and tempted me and led me astray.” 

“Now you “upbraid me, you deride me, you ac- 
cuse me of levity and preahiines but in Gpuraddine 
me and deriding me you insult yourself, for you 
thus imply that any other woman might have had 
equal power over me. I do not wish, when I ought 
to be humble, to fall into the sin of pride, by trying 
to justify my fault. If God, in chastisement of my 
pride, has let me fall from’ Fig" grace, it is possible 
‘that any t temptation, , however slight, might have 
made -Mme._waver and fall. Yet I confess that I do 

so. It may be that I err in my judgment 
that this is but the consequence of my undisciplined 
pride, but, I repeat, I do not think so. I can not > 
‘succeed in persuading myself that the cause of 
my fall had in it anything either mean or base. 
: “Above all the dreams of my youthful im- 
agination, the reality, such as I beheld it in 
you, enthroned itself. You towered above all 
the nymphs, queens, and goddesses of my fancy. 
Above the ruins of my ideal creations, overthrown 


247, 


Pepita Jimenez 


and shattered by Divine love, there arose in my 
soul the faithful image, the exact reproduction of 
the living beauty which adorns and is the essence 
of that body and of that soul. There may be even 
something mysterious, something supernatural in 
this; for I loved you from the moment I first saw 
you—almost before I saw you. Long before I was 
conscious of loving you, I loved you. It would 
seem as if there were some fatality in this—that it 
was decreed, that it was predestination.” 

‘And if it were predestined, if it be decreed,” 
said Pepita, “why not submit to Fate, why still 
resist? Sacrifice your purpose to our love. Have 
not I sacrificed much? Am I not now sacrificing 
my pride, my modesty, my reserve, in supplicating 
you thus, in making this effort to overcome your 
scorn? I too believe that I loved you before I saw 
you. Now I love you with my whole heart, and 
without you there is no happiness for me. It is 
true indeed that in my humble intelligence you can 
find no rival so powerful as that which I have in 
yours. Neither with the understanding, nor the 
will, nor the affections, can I raise myself all at 
once up to God. Neither by nature nor by grace 
can I mount, or desire to mount, up to such exalted 
spheres. My soul, nevertheless, is full of religious 
devotion, and I know and love and adore God; but 
I only behold His omnipotence and admire His 
goodness in the works that have proceeded from 

248 


- 


| Pepita Jimenez 
His hands. Nor can I, with the imagination, 
weave those visions that you tell me of. 

“Yet I too dreamed of some one nobler, more 
intelligent, more poetic, and more enamored than 
the men who have thus far sought my hand; of a 
lover more distinguished and accomplished than 

_ any of my adorers of this and the neighboring vil- 
lages, who should love me, and whom I should 
love and to whose will I should blindly surrender 
mine. This some one was you. I had a presenti- 
ment of it when they told me that you had arrived 
at the village. When I saw you for the first time, 
I knew it. But, as my imagination is so sterile, the 
picture I had formed of you in my mind was not 
to be compared, even in the most remote degree, to 
the reality. I too have read something of romances 
and poetry. But from all that my memory retained 
of them, I was unable to form a picture that was 
not far inferior in merit to what I see and divine 
in you since I have known you. ‘Thus it is that 
from the moment I saw you I was vanquished and 

~ undone. 

“Tf love is, as you say, to die to self, in order to 
live in the beloved object, then is my love genuine 

_ and legitimate, for I have died to myself, and live 
_ only in you and for you. I have tried to cast this 
_love away from me, deeming it ill-requited, and I 
have not been able to succeed in doing so. I have 
prayed to God with fervor to take away from 


249 


Pepita Jimenez 


me this love, or else to kill me, and God has not 
deigned to hear me. I have prayed to the Virgin 
‘Mary to blot your image from my soul, and my 
prayer has been in vain. I have made vows to my 
patron, Saint Joseph, to the end that he would 
enable me to think of you only as he thought of 
his blessed spouse, and my patron saint has not 
succored me. 

“Seeing all this, I have had the audacity to 
ask of Heaven that you should allow yourself 
to be vanquished, that you should cease to de- 
sire to be a priest, that there might spring up 
in your soul a love as great as that which is in 
my heart. ; 

‘Don Luis, tell me frankly, has Heaven been 
deaf to this last prayer also? Or is it, perchance, 
that to subjugate a soul as weak, as wretched, and 
as petty as mine, a petty love is sufficient, while to 
master yours, protected and guarded as it is by 
vigorous and lofty thoughts, a more powerful love 
than mine is necessary, a love that I am neither 
worthy of inspiring, nor capable of sharing, nor 
even able to understand?” 

“Pepita,” returned Don Luis, “it is not that your 
soul is less than mine, but that it is free from _obli- 
gations, and mine is not. The love you have in- 
spired me with is profound, but my obligations, my 
vows, the purpose of my whole life so near to its 
realization, contend against it. Why should I not 

250 


Pepita Jimenez 


Say it without fearing to offend your If you suc; 


ceed in making me love you, you do not humiliate 


yourself. If I succumb to your love, I both humil-/ 
late and abase myself.” T Teave the Creator for the. a 


creature. I renounce the unwavering. purpose. of 


; my life, I break the image of Christ that was in my 


soul; and the new man, which I had created in my- 
self at such COSt,. disappears, that the old man may 
come to life again. Instead of my lowering myself 


to the earth, to the impurity of the world that I 


have hitherto despised, why do not you rather 


elevate yourself to me by virtue of that very love 


_you entertain for me, freeing it from every earthly 


alloye Why should we not love each other with- 
out shame, and without sin, and without dishonor? 


God 5 penetrates holy souls with the pure and reful- 


gent fire of His love, and so fills them with it that, 


as metal fresh from the forge, without ceasing to 
be a metal, shines and glitters and is all fire, these 
souls are filled with joy, and see God, in all things 


‘penetrated by God in every part, through the grace 
of the Divine love. ‘These souls love and enjoy 


each other, as if they loved and enjoyed God, lov- 
ing and enjoying Him in truth because they are 


_ God. Let us mount together in spirit this steep 


| 


and_ mystical ladder. Let our souls ascend, side 
by : side, to to this bliss, which even in this mortal life 
is abesibla! But to do this we must separate in the 


_ body; it is essential that I should go whither I am 


251 


Pepita Jimenez 


called by my duty, my vow, and the voice of the 
Most High, who disposes of His servant, and has 
destined him to the service of His altar.” 

“Ah, Don Luis,” replied Pepita, full of sorrow 
and contrition, ‘now indeed I see how vile is the 
metal I am made of, and how unworthy I am 
that the Divine fire should penetrate and trans- 
form me. I will confess everything, casting away 
even shame. 

“Tam a vile sinner; my rude and uncultured 
understanding can not grasp these subtleties, these 
distinctions, these refinements of love. My rebel- 
lious will refuses what you propose. I can not 
even conceive of you but as yourself. For me you 
are your mouth, your eyes, your dark locks that I 
desire to caress with my hands; your sweet voice, 
the pleasing sound of your words that fall upon 
my ears and charm them through the senses; your 
whole person, in a word, which charms and se- 
duces me, and through which, and only through 
which, I perceive the invisible spirit, vague and 
full of mystery. My stubborn soul, incapable of 
these mystical raptures, will never be able to fol- 
low you to those regions whither you would take 
it. If you soar up to them, I shall remain alone, 
abandoned, plunged in the deepest affliction. I 
prefer to die; I deserve death; I desire it. It may 
be that after death my soul, loosening or breaking 
the vile bonds which chain it here, will be able to 

252 


Pepita Jimenez 


understand the love with which you desire we 
should be united. 

“Kall me, then, in order that we may thus love 
each other; kill me, and my spirit, set free, will 
follow you whithersoever you may go, and will 
journey invisible by your side, watching over your 
steps, contemplating you with rapture, penetrating 
your most secret thoughts, beholding your soul as 
it is, without the intervention of the senses. 

“But in this life it can not be. I love in you, 
not only the soul, but the body, and the shadow cast 
by the body, and the reflection of the body in the 
mirror and in the water, and the Christian name, 
and the surname, and the blood, and all that goes 
to make you such as you are, Don Luis de Var- 
gas; the sound of your voice, your gesture, your 
gait, and I know not what else besides. I repeat 
that you must kill me. Kill me without compas- 
sion. No, I am not a Christian; I am a material 
idolater.” 

Here Pepita made a long pause. Don Luis 
knew not what to say, and was silent. Tears bathed 
the cheeks of Pepita, who continued, sobbing: 

“T know it; you despise me, and you are right 
to despise me. By this just contempt you will kill 
me more surely than with a dagger, and without 
staining either your hands or your conscience with 
blood. Farewell! I am about to free you from my 
odious presence. Farewell forever!” — 


: 253 


Pepita Jimenez 


Having said this, Pepita rose from her seat, and, 
without looking at Don Luis, her face bathed with 
tears, beside herself, rushed toward the door that 
led to the inner apartment. An _unconquerable. 
tenderness, a fatal pity,.took.possession of Don 
Luis. He feated Pepita would die, He started 
forward to detain her, but it was too late. Pepita 
had crossed the threshold. Her form disappeared 
in the darkness within, Don Luis, impelled by a 
superhuman power, drawn as by an invisible hand, 
followed her into the unlighted chamber. 


Pepita Jimenez 


x 


THE library remained deserted. . 

The servants’ dance must have already termi- 
nated, for the only sound to be heard was the mur- 
mur of the fountain in the garden below. 

Not even a breath of wind troubled the stillness 
of the night and the serenity of the air. 

The perfume of the flowers and the light of the 
moon entered softly through the open window. 
After a long interval, Don Luis made his appear- 
ance, emerging from the darkness. ‘Terror was 
depicted on his countenance, mingled with despair 
—such despair as Judas may have felt after he had 
betrayed his Master. 

He dropped into a chair, and burying his face 
in his hands, with his elbows resting on his knees, 
he remained for more than half an hour plunged 
in a sea of bitter reflections. 

To see him thus, one might have supposed that 
he had just murdered Pepita. 

Pepita, nevertheless, at last made her appear- 
ance. With a slow step, and an air of the deepest 
melancholy, with bent head, and eyes directed to 
the floor, she approached Don Luis, and spoke. 

“Now, indeed,” said she, “though, alas! too late, 
{ know all the vileness of my heart and the iniquity 


255 


Pepita Jimenez 


of my conduct. I have nothing to say in my own 
defense, but I would not have you think me more 
wicked than lam. You must not think I have used 
any arts—that I have laid any plans for your de- 
struction. Yes; it is true that I have been guilty 
of an atrocious crime, but an unpremeditated one; 
a crime inspired, perhaps, by the spirit of evil that 
possesses me. Do not abandon yourself to despair, 
do not torture yourself, for God’s sake! You are 
responsible for nothing. It was a frenzy, a mad- 
ness, that took possession of your noble spirit. 
Your sin is a light one; mine is flagrant, shameful, 
horrible. Now I am less worthy of you than ever. 
It is I who now ask you to leave this place. Go; 
do penance. God will pardon you. Go; a priest 
will give you absolution. Once cleansed from sin, 
carry out your purpose, and become a minister of 
the Most High. Then, through the holiness of 
your life, through your ceaseless labors, not only 
will you efface from your soul the last traces of 
this fall, but you will obtain for me, when you have 
pardoned me the evil I have done you, the pardon 
of Heaven also. You are bound to me by no tie, 
and even if you were I should loosen or break it. 
You are free. Let it suffice me that I have taken 
captive by surprise the star of the morning. It is 
not my desire—I neither can nor ought to seek to 
keep him in my power. I divine it, I read it in 
your manner, I am convinced of it—you despise 
256 


Pepita Jimenez 


me more than before. And you are right in de- 
spising me; there is neither honor, nor virtue, nor 
shame in me!” 

When she had thus spoken, Pepita, throwing 
herself on her knees, bowed her face till her fore- 
head touched the floor. Don Luis continued in the 
same attitude as before. Thus, for some moments, 
they remained both silent with the silence of 
despair. 

In a stifled voice, and without raising her face 
from the floor, Pepita after a time continued: 

“Go, now, Don Luis, anddo not, through an in- 
sulting pity, remain any Jonger at the side of so 
despicable a wretch as I. I shall have courage to 
bear your indifference, your forgetfulness, your 
contempt, for I have deserved them all. I shall 
always be your slave—but far from you, very far 
from you, in order that nothing may recall to your 
memory the infamy of this night!” 

Pepita’s voice, as she ended, was choked with 
sobs. 

Don Luis could restrain himself no longer. He 
arose, approached Pepita, and, raising her in his 
arms from the floor, pressed her to his heart; then, 
putting aside from her face the blond tresses that 
fell in disorder over it, he covered it with passion- 
ate kisses. ) 

“Soul of my soul,” he said at last, “life of my 
life, treasure of my heart, light of my eyes, raise 


| (E)—Vot. 13—9 257 


Pepita Jimenez 


your dejected brow, and do not prostrate yourse! 


any longer before me. The sinner, the vile wretcl 


he who has shown himself weak of purpose, wh 
has made himself the butt of scorn and ridicule, - 
I, not you. Angels and devils alike must laugh ; 
me¢_and mock me. I have clothed myself with 

false sanctity. I was not able to resist temptatior 
and to undeceive you in the beginning, as woul 
have been right, and now I am equally unable t 
show myself a gentleman, a man of honor, or 

tender lover who knows how to value the favo: 
of his mistress. I can not understand what it we 
you saw in me to attract you. There never we 
in me any solid virtue—nothing but vain sho 
and the pedantry of a student who has read piov 
books as one reads a novel, and on this foundatio 
has based his foolish romance of a future devote 
to converting the heathen and to solemn ‘medits 
tions, If there had been any real virtue in me 

should have undeceived you in time, and neithe 
you nor I would have sinned. True goodness : 
not so easily vanquished. Notwithstanding you 
beauty, notwithstanding your intelligence, notwith 
standing your love for me, I should not have falle 
if I had been really good. God, to whom all thing 
are possible, would have bestowed His grace upo 
me. It would have needed nothing less than 

miracle, or some other supernatural event, to hav 
enabled me to resist your love, but God would hay 

258 


Pepita Jimenez 


wrought the miracle, if I had been worthy of it 
and there was a motive sufficient for its being 
wrought. You are wrong to counsel me to become 
a priest. I know my own unworthiness. It was 
only pride t that_actuated me. “It was a worldly 
ambition, like any other. What do I say—like 
any other? It was worse than any other; it was 
hypocritical, sacrilegious, simoniacal.” 

“Do not judge yourself so harshly,” said Pepita, 
now more tranquil, and smiling through her tears. 
“I do not want you to judge yourself thus, not 
even for the purpose of making me appear less un- 
worthy to be your comparion. No; I would have 
you choose me through love—freely; not to repair 
a fault, not because you have fallen ifto the snare 
you perhaps think I have perfidiously spread for 
you. If you do not love me, if you distrust me, if 
you do not esteem me—then go. My lips shall not 
breathe a single complaint if you abandon me for- 
ever, and never think of me again.” 

To answer this fittingly, our poor and beggarly, 
human speech was insufficient for Don Luis. He 
cut short Pepita’s words by pressing his lips to 
hers, and again clasping her to his heart. 


». 259 


Pepita Jimenez 


XI 


SOME time afterward, with much previous | 


coughing and shuffling of the feet, Antofiona en- 
tered the library with the words: 


“What a long talk you must have had! The | 


sermon our student has been preaching this time 
can not have been that of the seven words—it came 


very near being that of the forty hours. It is time | 
you should go now, whe Luis; it is almost two | 


o’clock in the morning.” 


“Very well,” answered Pepita; “he will go 


directly.” 


Antofiona left the library again, and waited | 


outside. 


Pepita was like one transformed. One might | 
suppose that the joys she had missed in her child- | 


hood, the happiness and contentment she had failed 
to taste in her early youth, the gay activity and 


sprightliness that a harsh mother and an old hus- | 


band had repressed, and, as it were, crushed within 


her, had suddenly burst into life in her soul, like | 
the green leaves of the trees, whose germination 
has been retarded by the snows and frosts of a long | 


and severe winter. 


A town-bred lady, familiar with what we. 
call social conventionalities, may find something 


| 


260 


i 


—— 


Pepita Jimenez 


strange, and even worthy of censure, in what I am 
about to relate of Pepita. But Pepita, although 
refined by instinct, was a being in whom every feel- 
ing was spontaneous, and in whose nature there 
was no room for the affected sedateness and cir- 
cumspection that are customary in the great world. 
‘Thus it was that, seeing the obstacles removed that 
had stood in the way of her happiness, and Don 
Luis conquered, holding his voluntary promise that 
he would make her his wife, and believing herself, 
with justice, to be loved—nay, worshiped—by him 
whom she too loved and worshiped, she danced 
and laughed, and gave way to other manifestations 
of joy that had in them, after all, something child- 


_ like and innocent. 


But it was necessary that Don Luis should now 


_ depart. Pepita took a comb and smoothed his hair 


lovingly, and kissed him. She then rearranged 
hig necktie. 
“Farewell, lord of my life,” she said, “dear sov- 


_ ereign of my soul. I will tell your father every- 
_ thing if you fear to do so. He is kind, and he will 
_ forgive us.” 


—— 


At last the lovers separated. 

When Pepita found herself alone, her restless 
gaiety disappeared, and her countenance assumed 
a grave and thoughtful expression. 

Two thoughts now presented themselves to her 
mind, both equally serious; the one possessing a 

261, 


Pepita Jimenez 


merely mundane interest, the other an interest of 
a higher nature. The first thought was that her 
conduct to-night—the delirium of passion once 
past—might prejudice her in the opinion of Don 
Luis; but, finding after a severe examination of 
her conscience, that neither premeditation nor ar- 


tifice had had any part in her actions, which were ~ 


the offspring of an irresistible love, and of im- 
pulses noble in themselves, she came to the con- 
clusion that Don Luis could not despise her for it, 
and she therefore made her mind easy on that 
point. 

Nevertheless, although her frank confession that 
she was unable to comprehend a love that was 
purely spiritual, and her taking refuge afterward 


in her chamber—without foreseeing consequences © 
—were both the result of an impulse innocent 

enough in itself, Pepita did not seek to deny in 
her own mind that she had sinned against God, 


and on this point she could find for herself no ex- 


cuse. She commended herself, with all her heart, — 


therefore, to the Virgin, entreating her forgiveness. 
She vowed to the image of Our Lady of Solitude, 
in the convent of the nuns, seven beautiful golden 
swords of the finest and most elaborate workman- 
ship, to adorn her breast, and determined to go to 
confess herself on the following day to the vicar, 
and to submit herself to the harshest penance he 
should choose to impose upon her, in order to 
262 


Pepita Jimenez 


merit the absolution of those sins by means of 
which she had vanquished the obstinacy of Don 
Luis, who, but for them, would without a doubt 
have become a priest. 
' While Pepita was engaged in these reflections, 
and while she was arranging with so much dis- 
cretion the affairs of her soul, Don Luis had 
descended to the hall below, accompanied by 
Antofiona. 
Before taking his leave, Don Luis, without 
preface or circumlocution, spoke thus: 
“Antofiona, tell me, you who are acquainted 
with everything, who is the Count of Genazahar, 
and what has he had to do with your mistress?” 
“You begin to be jealous very soon.” 
; “Tt is not seahotisy that makes me ask this; it is 
2 simply curiosity.” 
“So much the better. There is nothing more 
M tiresome than jealousy. Well, I will try to satisfy 
_ your curiosity. This same Count has given room 
enough for talk. He is a dissipated fellow, a gam- 
_ bier, and a man of no principle whatever, but he 
~ has more vanity than Don Roderick on the gallows. 
He made up his mind that my mistress should fall 
_ in love with him and marry him, and as she has re- 
i fused him a thousand times he is mad with rage. 
any his does not prevent him, however, from keeping 
‘in his money chest more than a thousand piastres: 
that Don Gumersindo lent him years ago, without 


4, 263 


Pepita Jimenez 


any more security than a bit of paper, through the 


| 


fault and at the entreaty of Pepita, who is better | 


than bread. The fool of a Count thought, no 
doubt, that Pepita, who was so good to him when 


i 


a wife that she persuaded her husband to lend him | 


money, would be so much better to him as a widow 
that she would consent to marry him. He was 
soon undeceived, however, and then he became 
furious.” 

“Good-by, Antofiona,” said Don Luis, as he left 
the house, grave and thoughtful. 


The lights of the shops and of the booths in the _ 


fair were now extinguished, and every one was go- 
ing home to bed, with the exception of the owners 


of the toy-shops and other poor hucksters, who | 


slept beside their wares in the open air. 


Under some of the grated windows were still to 


be seen lovers, wrapped in their cloaks, and chat- 


ting with their sweethearts. Almost every one else 
had disappeared. 


Don Luis, once out of sight of Antofiona, gave a _ 


loose rein to his thoughts. His resolution was 


taken,...and_.all_his.. reflections tended to confirm | 
this. resolution. The sincerity and ardor of the © 
passion with which he had inspired Pepita, her 


beauty, the youthful grace of her person, and the 


fresh exuberance of her soul, presented themselves _ 


to his imagination and made him happy. 
Notwithstanding this, however, he could not but 
264 


iz Pepita Jimenez 


reflect, with mortified vanity, on the change that 
had been wrought in himself. What would the 
dean think? How great would be the horror of 
the bishop! And, above all, how serious were the 
grounds for complaint he had given his father! 
The displeasure of the latter, his anger when he 
should know of the bond ae united his son to 
Pepita, caused him infinite disquietude. 

As for what—before he fell—he had called his 
fall, it must be confessed that, after he had fallen, 
it did not : seem to him either so very serious or. 
so-very reprehensible. His spiritual-miidedness, 
viewed in the light that had just dawned upon him, 
he fancied to have had-neither reality nor consist- 
ency ;, to. have been but the vain and artificialprod- 
uct.of.his reading, of his is boyish arrogance, of his | 
aimless softness in the innocent days of his college | 
life. ‘When he remembered that he hadvat times 

thought himself the recipient of supernatural gifts 
and graces, had heard mystic whisperings, had held 
spiritual communion with superior beings; when 
_ he remembered that he had fancied himself almost 
beginning to tread the path, that leads to spiritual 


. Serine into es recesses of the soul, and arouniting 
up to the region of pure tnicHligence. he smiled to 
himself, and began to suspect that during tbe) 
period in question he had not been altogether in ) 
_ his right mind. SAE 


SO aS pe 


265 


Pepita Jimenez 


It had all been simply the result of his own arro- 
gance. He had neither-done penance, nor passed 
long years in meditation; he did not-possess, nor 
had he ever possessed, patios merits for God to 
favor him with such privileges as_ these. The 
greatest proof he could give himself of the truth 
of this, the greatest certainty he could possess that 
the supernatural favors he had enjoyed were spuri- 
ous, mere recollections of the authors he had read, 
was that not one of them had ever given him the 
rapture of. Pepita’s “I love you,” or of ‘the Soft 
touch of her hand caressing his dark locks. 

Don Luis had recourse to another species of 
Christian humility, to justify in his eyes what he 
now no longer called his fall, but his change of 
purpose. He confessed anet unworthy to be a 
priest. He reconciled himself to becoming a com-= 


monplace married man, a good sort of country 


gentleman, like any other, taking care of his vines 


and olives, and bringing up his children—for he | 


now desired to have children—and to being a 
model husband at the side of his Pepita. 


266 


Pepita Jimenez 


XII 


HERE again I think myself under the necessity— 
responsible as I am for the publication and dis- 
closure of this history—of interpolating various 
reflections and explanations of my own. 

I said at the beginning of the story that I was 


- inclined to think that the narrative part, called 


paralipomena, was composed by the reverend Dean 
for the purpose of completing the story and sup- 
plying incidents not related in the letters; but I 
had not at that time read the ane uae with 
attention. Now, on observing the freedom with 
which certain matters are treated, and the indul- 
gence with which certain frailties are regarded by 
the author, I am compelled to ask whether the 
reverend Dean, with the severity of whose morals 
I am well acquainted, would have spent his time 
in writing what we have just read. 

There are not sufficient grounds, however, for 
denying positively that the reverend Dean was 
the author of these paralipomena. ‘The question, 


=- 


therefore, may still be left in doubt, as in substance © 


they contain nothing opposed to Catholic doctrine 
or to Christian morality. On the contrary, if we 


_ examine them carefully, we shall see that they con- 
_ tain a lesson to pride and arrogance in the person 


267 


Pepita Jimenez 


of Don Luis. This history might easily serve as 
an appendix to the “Spiritual Disillusions” of 
Father Arbiol. 

As for the opinion entertained by two or three 
ingenious friends of mine, that the reverend Dean, 
if he were the author, would have used a differ- 
ent style in his narration, saying “my nephew” in 
speaking of Don Luis, and interposing, from time 
to time, moral reflections of his own, I do not think 
it an argument of any great weight. The reverend 
Dean proposed to himself to tell what had taken 
place, without seeking to prove any thesis, and 
he acted with judgment in narrating things 
as they were, without analyzing motives or mor- 
alizing. © 

He did not do ill either, in my opinion, in con- 


cealing his personality, and in avoiding the use of - 


the word J, which is a proof, not only of his humil- 


ity and modesty, but of his literary taste also; for : 


the epic poets and historians, who should serve us 


as models, do not say J, even when speaking of | 


themselves or when they are the heroes of the 
events they relate. The Athenian Xenophon, to cite 


an instance, does not say J in his “Anabasis,” but — 


speaks of himself, when necessary, in the third 


person, as if the historian of those exploits were 
one person and the hero of them another. And — 
there are whole chapters in which no mention at _ 


all is made of Xenophon. Only once, a little be- 


268 


Pepita Jimenez 


fore the famous battle in which the youthful Cyrus 
met his death, while this prince was reviewing the 
Greeks and barbarians who formed his army, and 
when that of his brother Artaxerxes was already 


' near—having been descried on the broad, treeless 


plain afar off, first as a little white cloud, then 
as a dark stain, and, finally, clearly and distinctly, 
while the neighing of the horses, the creaking of 
the war-chariots armed with formidable scythes, 
the snorting of the elephants, and the sound of 
warlike instruments reach the ears, and the glitter 
of the brass and gold of the weapons irradiated by 
the sun strike the eyes of the spectators—only at 
this moment, I repeat, and not before, does Xeno- 
phon appear in his own person. Then he emerges 
from the ranks to speak with Cyrus, and explains 


_ to him the cry that ran from Greek to Greek. It 


was what in our day would correspond to a watch- 


_ word, and on that occasion it was “Jupiter the 
_ savior, and victory!” 


The reverend Dean, who was a man of taste and 
very well versed in the classics, would not be likely 


_ to fall into the error of introducing himself into 


the narrative, and mixing himself up with it, under 
the pretext of being the uncle or tutor of the hero, 


_ and of vexing the reader by coming out at every 
step, slightly difficult or slippery, with a “Stop 


there!” or, “What are you about to do?” or, “Take 
care you do not fall, unhappy boy!” or other warn- 


yr 


Pepita Jimenez 


ings of a like sort. Not to open his lips, on the 
other hand, or manifest disapprobation in any way 
whatever, he being present at least in spirit, would, 
in the case of some of the incidents related, have 
been but little becoming. In view of these facts, 
the reverend Dean, with the discretion which was 
characteristic of him, may possibly have composed 
the paralipomena without disclosing his identity to 
the reader. ‘This much is certain, however: he 
added notes and comments of an edifying and 
profitable character, where such and such a pas- 
sage seemed to require them. But these I have 
suppressed, for the reason that notes and comments 
are now out of fashion, and because this book 
would become unduly voluminous if it were 
printed with these additions. 

I shall insert here, however, in the body of the 


text, the comment of the reverend Dean on the _ 


rapid transformation of Don Luis from spiritual- 
mindedness to the reverse, as it is curious, and 
throws much light on the whole matter. 


'“This change of purpose of my nephew,” he 
says, “does not disappoint me. I foresaw it from 
the time he wrote me his first letters. I was de- 
ceived in regard to Luisito in the beginning. I 
believed him to have a true religious call, but 
I soon recognized the fact that his was a vain, 
poetic spirit. Mysticism was the form_his poetic 

270 


Se 


—_— 


wy 


Pepita Jimenez 


imaginings took,.only until a more seductive form 
presented itself. ON ae 

“Praised be God, who has willed that Luisito 
should be undeceived in time! He would have 
made but a bad priest if Pepita Jiménez had not 
so opportunely presented herself. His very im- 
patience to attain to perfection at.a single bound 
would havé caused me to suspect something if I 
had not beet blinded by the affection ‘of an uncle. 
What! are the favors of Heaven thus obtained all 
at once? Is it only necessary to present one’s self 
in order to triumph? A’ friend of mine, a naval 
officer, used to relate that, when he was in certain 
cities of America, being then very young, he sought 
to gain favor ai the ladies with too much pre- 
cipitation, and that they would say to him in their 
languid American accent: ‘You have only just pre- 
sented yourself, and you already want to be loved. 
Do something to deserve it, if you can.’ If these 
ladies answered thus, what answer will not Heaven 
give to those who hope to gain it without merit, 
and in the twinkling of an eye? 

“Many efforts must be made, much purification 
is needed, much penance must be done, in order to 
begin to stand well in the sight of God and to enjoy 
His favors. Even in those vain and false philos- 
ophies that have in them anything of mysticism, 
no supernatural gift or grace is received without 


___a powerful effort and a costly sacrifice. Iambli- 


‘271 


Pepita Jimenez 


chus was not given power to evoke the genii, and 
cause them to emerge from the fountain of Gadara, 
without first spending days and nights in study, and 
mortifying the body with privations and absti- 
nences. Apollonius of Tyana is thought to have 
mortified himself severely before performing his 
false miracles. And in our own day the Krausists, 
who behold God, as they affirm, with corporeal 
vision, are forced to read and learn beforehand the 
whole “Analytics” of Sanz del Rio, which is a 
much harder task and a greater proof of patience 
and endurance than to flagellate the body until it 
looks like a ripe fig. My nephew desired, without 
effort or merit, to be a perfect man, and—see how 
it has ended! 

“The important thing now is that he shall baeke 
a good husband, and that, since he is unsuited for 
great things, ie may be fit for smaller ones—for 
domestic life, and to make Pepita happy, whose 
own fault, after all, is to have fallen madly in love 
with him, with all the innocence and violence of an 
untamed creature.” 


Thus far the comments of the reverend Dean, 
written with easy familiarity, as if for himself 
alone; for the good man was far from suspecting 
that I would play him the trick of giving them 
to the public. 


2"2 


SSS 


LS 


Pepita Jimenez 


XIII 


Don LUIS, in the middle of the street, at two 
o'clock in the morning, was occupied with the 
thought, as we have said, that his life, which until 
now, he had dreamed might be worthy of the 
“Golden Legend,” was about to be converted into 
a sweet and perpetual idyl. He had not been able 
to resist the lures of earthly passion. He had 
failed to imitate the example set by so many saints, 
among others by St. Vincent Ferrer with regard 
to a certain dissolute lady of Valencia; though, in- 
deed the cases were dissimilar. For if to flee from 
the diabolical courtezan in question was an act of 
heroic virtue in St. Vincent, to flee from the self- 
abandonment, the ingenuousness, and the humility 
of Pepita would in him have beén something as 
monstrous and cruel as if, when Ruth lay down at 
the feet of Boaz, saying to him, “I am thy hand- 
maid: spread therefore thy skirt over thine hand- 
maid,” Boaz had given her a blow and sent her 
about her business! Don Luis, then, when Pepita 
surrendered herself to him, was obliged to follow 
the example of Boaz, and exclaim: “Daughter, 
blessed be thou of the Lord; thou hast showed 


‘more kindness in the latter end than at the be- 
ginning.” 


273 


Pepita Jiménez 


Thus did Don Luis justify himself in not fol- 
lowing the example of St. Vincent, and other 
saints no less churlish. As for the ill success of 
the design he had entertained of imitating St. Ed- 
ward, he tried to justify and excuse that also. St. 
Edward married for reasons of state, and without 
entertaining any affection for Queen Edith; but in 
his case and in that of Pepita Jiménez there were 
no reasons of state, but only tender love on both 
sides. 

Don Luis, however, did not deny to himself— 
and this imparted to his present happiness a slight 
tinge of melancholy—that he had proved false to 
his ideal; that he had been vanquished ‘in the’con- 
flict. Those who have no ideal, who have never 
had an ideal, would not distress themselves on this 
account. Don Luis did distress himself; but he 
presently came to the conclusion. ‘that-he_would 
substitute a more humble and easily attained ideal 
for his former exalted one. And although the rec- 
ollection of Don Quixote’s resolution to turn shep- 
herd, on being vanquished by the Knight of the 
White Moon, here crossed his mind with ludicrous 
appositeness, he was in no way daunted by it. He 
thought, in union with Pepita Jiménez, to renew, 
in our prosaic and unbelieving time, the golden 
age, and to repeat the pious example of Philemon 
and Baucis, creating a model of patriarchal life 
in these pleasant fields, founding in the place where 


274 


4 : 7? 
Pepita Jimenez 


he was born a home presided over by religion, that 
should be at once the asylum of the needy, the 
centre of culture and friendly conviviality, and 
the clear mirror in which the domestic virtues 
should be reflected ; joining in one, finally, conjugal 
love and the love of God, in order that God might 
sanctify and be present in their dwelling, making 
it the temple in which both should be His minis- 
ters, until by the will of Heaven of should be 
called to a better life. 

‘Two obstacles must first be emu however, 
before all this could be/realized, and ‘Don Liais 
began to consider with himself how he might best 
remove them. 

The one was the displeasure, perhaps the anger, 
of his father, whom he had defrauded of his dear- 
est hopes. The other was of a very different and, 
in a certain sense, of a much more serious charac- 
ter. Don Luis, while he entertained the purpose 
of becoming a priest, was right in defending Pepita 
from the gross insults of the Count of Genazahar 
by the weapons of argument only, and in taking no 
vengeance for the scorn and contempt with which 
those arguments were listened to. But having now 
determined to lay aside the cassock, and obliged, 
as he was, to declare immediately that he was be- 
trothed to Pepita and was going to marry her, Don 
Luis, notwithstanding his peaceable disposition, 


__his dreams of human brotherhood, and his religious 


275 


Pepita Jiménez 


belief, all of which remained intact in his soul, 
and all of which were alike opposed to violent 
measures, could not succeed in reconciling it with 
his dignity to refrain from breaking the head of 
the insolent Count. He knew well that dueling is 
a barbarous practise, that Pepita had no need of the 
blood of the Count to wash from her name the stain 
of calumny, and even that the Count himself had 
uttered the insults he had uttered, not because he 
believed them, nor perhaps through an excess of 
hatred, but through stupidity and want of breed- 
ing. Notwithstanding all these reflections, how- 
ever, Don Luis was conscious that he would never 
again be able to respect himself, and, as a conse- 
quence, would never be able to perform to his taste 
the part of Philemon, if he did not begin with that 
of Fierabras, by giving the Count his deserts, ask- 
ing God, meantime, never to place him in a similar 
position again. 

This matter, then, being decided upon, he re- 
solved to bring it to an end as soon as possible. 
And as it appeared to him that it would be inex- 
pedient, as well as in bad taste, to arrange the affair 
through seconds, and thus make the honor of Pe- 
pita a subject of common talk, he determined to 
provoke a quarrel with the Count under some other 
pretext. 

Thinking that the Count, being a stranger in the 
village and a confirmed gambler, might possibly 

276 


Pepita Jimenez 


be still engaged at play in the club-house, notwith- 
standing the lateness of the hour, Don Luis went 
straight there. 

The club-house was still open, but both in the 
courtyard and the parlor the lights were nearly 
all extinguished. In one apartment only was there 
still a light. Thither Don Luis directed his steps, 
and on reaching it, he saw through the open door 
the Count of Genazahar engaged in playing monte, 
in which he acted as banker. Only five other per- 
sons were playing; two were strangers like the 
Count; the others were the captain of cavalry in 
eharce of the remount/ Currito, and the doctor. 
Things could not have been better arranged to suit 
the purpose of Don Luis. So engrossed were the 
players in their game that they did not observe 
him, who, as soon as he saw the Count, left the 
club-house and went rapidly homeward. 

On reaching his house the door was opened for 
him by a servant. Don Luis inquired for his 
father, and finding that he was asleep, procured 
a light and went up to his own room, taking care 
to make no noise lest he should disturb him. There 
he took about a hundred and fifty piastres in gold. 
that he had laid by, and put them in his pocket. 
He then called the servant to open the door for him 
again, and returned to the club-house. 

Arrived there, Don Luis noisily entered the par- 
lor in which the players were, comporting himself 


277, 


Pepita Jimenez 


with an assumed foppish swagger. The players 
were struck with amazement at seeing him. 

“You here at this hour!” said Currito. 

“Where do you come from, little priest?” said 
the doctor. 

“Have you come to preach me another sermon?” 
cried the Count. 

“T have done with sermons,” returned Don 
Luis, calmly. ‘The bad success of the last one I 
preached has clearly convinced me that God does 
not call me to that path in life, and I have chosen 
another. You, Count, have wrought my conver- 
sion. I have thrown aside the cassock. I have 
come here for amusement; I am in the flower of 
my youth, and I want to enjoy it.” 

“Come, I am glad of that,” returned the Count; 
“but take care, my lad, for if the flower be a deli- 
cate one, it may wither and drop its leaves before 
their time.” 

“T shall take care of that,” returned Don Luis. 
“T see you are playing, and I too feel like trying 
my luck. Do you know, Count, I think it would 
be amusing if I could break your bank?p” 

“You think it would be amusing, eh? You have 
been dining liberally!” 

“T have dined as I pleased.” 

“The youngster is learning to answer back.” 

“T learn what it is my pleasure to learn.” 

“Damnation!” cried the Count; and the storm 

278 


Pepita Jimenez 


was about to burst when the captain, interposing, 
succeeded in reestablishing the peace. 

“Come,” said the Count when he had recovered 
his temper, “out with your cash, and try your 
luck.” 

Don Luis ed himself at the table, and took 
out all his gold. At sight of it the Count regained 
his serenity completely, for it must have exceeded 
in amount the sum he had in the bank, and he 
thought he should at once win it of this novice. 

“There is no need to cudgel one’s brains much 
in this game,” said Don Luis to the Count; “I think 
I understand it already/ I put money on a card, 
and if the card turns up I win; if not, you win.” 


“Just so, my young friend; you have a strong 


intellect.” 


“And the best of it is that I have not only a 


strong understanding, but a strong will as well. 
But though I may have the stubbornness of a don- 
key, I am not such a donkey as many people in this 
neighborhood.” 

“What a witty mood you are in to-night, and 
how anxious you are to display your wit!” 

Don Luis was silent. He played a few deals, 
and was lucky enough to win almost every time. 

The Count began to be annoyed. 

“What if the youngster should pluck me?” he 
_ said to himself. ‘Fortune favors the innocent.” 
_ - While the Count was troubling himself with this 


279 


Pepita Jimenez 


reflection, Don Luis, feeling fatigued, and weary 
now of the part he was playing, determined to end 
the matter at once. 

“The object of all this,” he said, “‘is to see if I can 
win all your gold, or if you can win mine. Is it 
not so, Count?” 

“Just so.” 

“Well, then, why should we remain here all 
night? It is getting late, and according to your 
advice I ought to retire early, so that the flower 
of my youth may not wither before its time.” 

“How is this? Do you want to go away already? 
Do you want to back out?” 

“T have no desire to back out. Quite the con- 
trary. Currito, tell me, in this heap of gold here 
is there not already more than there is in the 
bank?” 

Currito looked at the gold and answered: 

“Without a doubt.” 

“FYow shall I explain,” asked Don Luis, “that I 
wish to stake on one card all that I have here, 
against what there is in the bankP” 

“You do that,” responded Currito, “by saying, 
‘I play bancol’” 

“Well, then, I play banco,” said Don Luis, ad- 
dressing himself to the Count; “I play banco on 
this king of spades, whose companion will to a 
certainty turn up before his opponent, the three, 
does.” 

280 


Pepita Jimenez 


The Count, whose whole cash capital was in the 
bank, began to be alarmed at the risk he ran; but 
there was nothing for it but to accept. 

It is a common saying that those who are fortu- 
nate in love are unfortunate at play, but the reverse 
of this is often more nearly the truth. He who is 
fortunate in one thing is apt to be fortunate in 
everything; it is the same when one is unfortunate. 

The Count continued to draw cards, but no 
three turned up. His emotion, notwithstanding 
his efforts to conceal it, was great. Finally, he 
came to a card which he knew by certain lines at 
the top to be the king of hearts, and paused. 

“Draw,” said the captain. 

“Tt is of no use! The king of hearts! Curses 
on it! The little priest has plucked me. Take up 
your money.” 

The Count threw the cards angrily on the table. 

Don Luis took up the money calmly, and with 
apparent indifference. 

After a short silence the Count said: 

“My little priest, you must give me my revenge.” 

“T see no such necessity.” 

“Tt seems to me that between gentlemen—” 

“According to that rule the game would have 
no end,” said Don Luis, “and it would be better 
to save one’s self the trouble of playing altogether.” 

“Give me my revenge,” replied the Count, with- 

out paying any attention to this argument. 
281 


Pepita Jimenez 


“Be it so,’ returned Don Luis; “I wish to be 
fair.” 

The Count took up the cards again, and pro- 
ceeded to deal. 

“Stop a moment,” said Don Luis; “let us under- 
stand each other. Where is the money for your 
new bank?” 

The Count showed signs of confusion and 
disturbance. 

“I have no money here,” he returned, “but it 
seems to me that my word is more than enough.” 

Don Luis answered, with grave and measured 
accent: 

“Count, I should be quite willing to trust the 
word of a gentleman, and allow him to remain 
in my debt, if it were not that in doing so I should 
fear to lose your friendship, which I am now in a 
fair way to gain; but as I heard this morning of the 
cruelty with which you have treated certain friends 
of mine to whom you are indebted, I do not wish 
to run the risk of becoming culpable in your eyes 
by means of the same fault. How ridiculous to 
suppose that I should voluntarily incur your 
enmity by lending you money which you 
would not repay me, as you have not repaid, 
except with insults, that which you owe Pepita 
Jiménez!” 

From the fact that this accusation was true, the 
offense was all the greater. The Count became 

282 


I 


t 

\% 
wy 
w 


Feet 


e = ZA 
Pepita Jimenez 


livid with anger, and, by this time on his feet, ready 
to come to blows with the collegian. 

“You lie, slanderer!” he exclaimed. “I will tear 
you limb from limb, you—” 

This last insult, which reflected on his birth and 
on the honor of her whose memory was most sacred 
to him, was never finished; its end never reached 
the ears of him against whom it was directed. 
For, with marvelous quickness, dexterity, and 
force, he reached across the table which was be- 
tween himself and the Count, and with the light, 
flexible bamboo cane with which he had armed 
himself, struck his antagonist on the face, raising 
on it instantly a livid mark. 

There was neither retort, outcry, nor uproar. 

(When the hands come into play, the tongue is apt 
to be silent. The Count was about to throw him- 
self on Don Luis for the purpose of tearing him 
to pieces, if it were in his power. But opinion had 
changed greatly since yesterday morning, and was 
now on the side of Don Luis. The captain, the 
doctor, and even Currito, who now showed more 
courage than he had done on that occasion, all held 

back the Count, who struggled and fought fero- 
ciously to release himself. 

“Let me go!” he cried; “let me get at him and 
kill him!” 

“T do not seek to prevent a duel,” said the cap- 

tain; “a duel is inevitable. I only seek to prevent 

283 


Pepita Jimenez 


your fighting here like two porters. I should be 
wanting in self-respect if I consented to be present 
at such a combat.” 

“Let weapons be brought!” said the Count; “I 
do not wish to defer the affair for a single moment. 
At once—and here!” 

“Will you fight with swords?” said the captain. 

“Yes,” responded Don Luis. 

“Swords be it,” said the Count. 

All this was said in a low voice, so that nothing 
might be heard in the street. Even the servants 
of the club-house, who slept on chairs in the kitchen 
and in the yard, were not awakened by the noise. 

Don Luis chose as his seconds the captain and 
Currito; the Count chose the two strangers. ‘The 
doctor made ready to practise his art, and showed 
the emblem of the Red Cross. 

It was not yet daylight. It was agreed that the 
apartment in which they were should be the field 
of combat, the door being first closed. The cap- 
tain went to his house for the swords, and returned 
soon afterward carrying them under the cloak 
which he had put on for the purpose of concealing 
them. 

We already know that Don Luis had never 
wielded a weapon in his life. Fortunately, the 
Count, although he had never studied theology, or 
entertained the purpose of becoming a priest, was 
not much more skilled than he in the art of fence. 

284 


Pepita Jimenez 


The only rules laid down for the duel were that, 
their swords once in hand, each of the combatants 
should use his weapon as Heaven might best direct 
him. 

The door of the apartment was closed. The 
tables and chairs were placed in a corner, to leave 
a free field for the combatants, and the lights were 
suitably disposed. 

Don Luis and the Count divested themselves 
of their coats and waistcoats, remaining in their 
shirt-sleeves, and each selected his weapon. - The 
seconds stood on one side. At a signal from the 
captain the combat begén. Between two persons 
who know neither how to parry a stroke nor how 
to put themselves on guard, a combat must of ne- 
cessity be brief; and it was. 

The fury of the Count, restrained for some time 
past, now burst forth and blinded his reason. He 
was strong, and he had wrists of steel; and with his 
sword he showered down on Don Luis a storm of 
strokes without order or sequence. Four times he 
succeeded in touching Don Luis—each time, for- 
tunately, with the flat of his weapon. He bruised 
his shoulders, but did not wound him. The young 
theologian had need of all his strength to keep from 
falling to the floor, overcome by the force of the 
blows and the pains of his bruises. A fifth time 
the Count hit Don Luis, on the left arm, and this 
time with the edge of his weapon, although aslant. 

. 285 


Pepita Jimenez 


The blood began to flow abundantly. Far from 
stopping, the Count resumed the attack with re- 
newed fury, in the hope of again wounding his 
antagonist. He almost placed himself under the 
weapon of Don Luis. ‘The latter, instead of put- 
ting himself in position to parry, brought his sword 
down vigorously on his adversary, and succeeded 
in wounding the Count in the head. The blood 
gushed forth, and ran down his forehead and into 
his eyes. Stunned by the blow, the Count fell 
heavily to the floor. 

‘The whole combat was a matter of a few seconds. 
Don Luis had remained tranquil throughout, like 
-a Stoic philosopher who is obliged by the hard law 
of necessity to take part in a conflict opposed alike 
to his habits and his ways of thought. But no 
sooner did he see his antagonist extended on the 
floor, bathed in blood and looking as though he 
were dead, than he experienced the most poignant 
anguish, and feared for a moment that he should. 
faint. He who, until within the last five or six 
hours, had held unwaveringly to his resolution of 
being a priest, a missionary, a minister, and a mes- 
senger of the Gospel, had committed, or accused 
himself of having committed, during those few 
hours, every crime, and of breaking all the com- 
mandments of God. There was now no mortal 
sin by which he was not contaminated. First, his 
purpose of leading a life of perfect and heroic 

286 


Pepita Jimenez 


holiness had been put to flight; then had followed 
his purpose of leading a life of holiness of a more 
easy, commonplace sort. The devil seemed to 
please himself in overthrowing his plans, He re- 
flected that he could now no longer be even a 
Christian Philemon, for to lay his neighbor’s head 
open with a stroke of a sabre was not a very good 
beginning of his idyl. 

Don Luis, after all the excitement of the day, 
was now in a condition resembling that of a man 
who has brain fever. Currito and the captain, one 
at each side, took hold of/him and led him home. 

| / 


287 


Pepita Jimenez 


XIV 


DoN PEDRO DE VARGAS got out of bed in terror 
when he was told that his son had come home 
wounded. He ran to see him, examined his bruises 
and the wound in his arm, and saw that they were 
none of them attended with danger; but he broke 
out into threats of vengeance, and would not be 
pacified until he was made acquainted with the 
particulars of the affair, and learned that Don Luis 
had known how to avenge himself in spite of his 
theology. 

The doctor came soon after to examine the 
wound, and was of opinion that in three or four 
days’ time Don Luis would be able to go out again 
as if nothing had happened. With the Count, on 
the other hand, it would be a matter of months. 
His life, however, was in no danger. He had re- 
turned to consciousness, and had asked to be taken 
to his own home, which was distant only a league 
from the village in which these events took place. 
A hired coach had been procured, and he had been 
conveyed thither, accompanied by his servant and 
also by the two strangers who had acted as his 
seconds. 

Four days after the affair the doctor’s opinion 
was justified by the result, and Don Luis, although 
sore from his bruises and with his wound still un- 

288 


Pepita Jimenez 


healed, was in a condition to go out, and promised 
a complete recovery within a short time. 

The first duty which Don Luis thought himself 
obliged to fulfil, as soon as he was off the sick list, 
was to confess to his father his love for Pepita, and 
his intention of marrying her. 

Don Pedro had not gone out to the country, nor 
had he occupied himself in any other way than in 
taking care of his son during his sickness. He 

_ was constantly at his side, waiting on him and pet- 
ting him with tender affection. 

On the morning of the’27th of June, after the 

_ doctor had gone, Don Pedro being alone with his 
son, the confession, so difficult for Don Luis to 
make, took place in the following manner: 

“Father,” said Don Luis, “I ought not to de- 

- ceive you any longer. To-day I am going to con- 
fess my faults to you, and cast away hypocrisy.” 

“Tf it is a confession you are about to make, my 
boy, it would be better for you to send for the rev- 

_erend vicar. My standard of morality is an indul- 
gent one, and I shall give you absolution for every- 
thing, without my absolution being of much value 

_ to you, however. But if you wish to confide to me 

some weighty secret, as to your best friend, begin 

, by all means; I am ready to listen to you.” 

“What I am about to confess to you is a very 

‘ serious fault of which I have been guilty; and I 

_ am ashamed to—” 

(E)—Vot. 13—10 289 


Pepita Jimenez 


“You have no need to be ashamed before your 
father; speak frankly.” 

Here Don Luis, growing very red, and with 
visible confusion, said: 

“My secret is, that I am in love with—Pepita 
Jiménez—and that she—” 

Don Pedro interrupted his son with a burst of 
laughter, and finished the sentence for him: 

‘And that she is in love with you, and that on 
the night of St. John’s Eve you had a tender meet- 
ing with her until two o’clock in the morning, 
and that, for her sake, you sought a quarrel with 
the Count of Genazahar, whose head you have 
broken. 

“A pretty secret to confide to me, truly! There 
isn’t a cat or a dog in the village that is not fully 
acquainted with every detail of the business. The 
only thing there seemed a possibility of being able | 
to conceal was, that your interview lasted until just 
two o’clock in the morning; but some gipsy-cake 
women chanced to see you leave Pepita’s house, and _ 
did not stop until they had told every living crea- 
ture in the place of it. Pepita, besides, makes no | 
great effort to conceal the truth, and in this she | 
does well, for that would be only the concealment _ 
of Antequera. Since you have been wounded, | 
Pepita comes here twice a day, and sends Anto- | 
fiona two or three times more to inquire after you; | 
and if they have not come in to see you, it is be: | 

290 


Pepita Jimenez 


cause | would not consent to their doing so, lest 
it should excite you.” i 

The confusion and the distress of Don Luis 
reached their climax when he heard his father thus 
compendiously tell the whole story. 

“How surprised,” he said, “how astounded you 
must have been!” 

“No, my boy, I was neither surprised nor as- 
tounded. The matter has been known in the vil- 
_ lage only for four days, and indeed, to tell the 
truth, your transformation did create some sur- 
_ prise. ‘Oh, the sly-boots! the wolf in sheep’s cloth- 
ing! the hypocrite!’ every one exclaimed; ‘how we 
have been deceived in him!’ The reverend vicar, 
above all, is quite bewildered. He is still crossing 
himself at the thought of how you toiled in the 
_ vineyard of the Lord on the night of the 23d and 
_ the morning of the 24th, and of the strange char- 
acter of your labors. But there was nothing in 
these occurrences to surprise me, except your 
_ wound. We old people can hear the grass grow. 
- It is not easy for the chickens to deceive the 


~ huckster.” 


“Tt is true, I sought to deceive you! I have been 
b a hypocrite!” | | 

_ “Don’t be a fool; I do not say this to blame you. 
_ I say it in order to give myself an air of perspi- 
cacity. But letusspeak with frankness. My boast- 
ing is, after all, without foundation. I knew, step 
291 


Pepita Jimenez 


by step, for more than two months past, the prog- 
ress of your love affair with Pepita; but I know it 
because your uncle the dean, to whom you were 
writing all that passed within your mind, has com- 
municated it to me. Listen to your uncle’s letter 
of accusation, and to the answer I gave him, a very 
important document, of which I have kept the 
copy.” 

Don Pedro took some papers from his pocket, 
and read aloud his brother’s letter: 


“My DEAR BROTHER: 

“Tt grieves me to the heart to be obliged to give 
_ you a piece of bad news; but I trust that God will 
grant you patience and endurance to enable you 
to hear it without feeling too much anger or bit- 
terness. 

‘““Luisito has been writing me strange letters for 
some days past, in which he reveals, in the midst of 
his mystical exaltation, an inclination, earthly and 
sinful enough, toward a certain widow, charming, 
mischievous, and coquettish, who lives in your vil- 
lage. Until now I had deceived myself, believing 
Luisito’s call to be a true one; and I flattered my- 
self with giving to the Church of God a wise, vir- 
tuous, and exemplary priest. But his letters have 
dispelled my illusions. Luisito shows himself, in 
them, to have more of poetry than of true piety in 
his nature; and the widow, who must be a limb of 

292 


Pepita Jimenez 


Satan, will be able to vanquish him with but a 
very slight effort. Although I wrote to Luisito 
admonishing him to flee from temptation, I am 
already certain that he will fall into it. This ought 
not to grieve me; for if he is to be false to his vo- 
cation, to indulge in gallantries, and to make love, 
it is better that this evil disposition should reveal 
itself in time, and that he should not become a 
priest. I should not, therefore, see any serious 
objection to Luisito’s remaining with you, for the 
purpose of being tested by the touchstone and an- 
alyzed in the crucible of/such a love, making the 
little widow the agent by whose means might be 
discovered how great is the quantity of the pure 
gold of his clerical virtues, and how much alloy is 
mixed with that gold, were it not that we are met by 
the difficulty that the widow whom we would thus 
convert into a faithful assayer, is the object of your 
own addresses, and, it may be, your sweetheart. 

“That your son should turn out to be your rival 
would be too serious a matter. This would be a 
monstrous scandal, and to avoid it in time I write 
to you to-day, to the end that, under whatever 
pretext, you may send or bring Luisito here—the 
sooner the better.” 


Don Luis listened in silence, and with his eyes 
cast down. His father then read him his reply to 
the dean: 

293 


Pepita Jiménez 


“DEAR BROTHER AND VENERABLE SPIRITUAL 
FATHER: 

“T return you a thousand thanks for the news 
you send me, and for your counsel and advice. 
Although I flatter myself with not being wanting 
in shrewdness, I confess my stupidity on this occa- 
sion; I was blinded by vanity. Pepita Jiménez, 
from the time that my son arrived here, manifested 
so much amiability and affection toward me that 
I began to indulge in pleasing hopes on my own 
account. Your letter was necessary to undeceive 
me. I now understand that in making herself so 
sociable, in showing me so many attentions, and in 
- dancing attendance on me, as she did, this cunning 
Pepita had in her mind only the father of the 
smooth-faced theologian. I shall not attempt to 
conceal from you that, for the moment, this dis- 
appointment mortified and distressed me a little; 
but when I reflected over it with due consideration, 
my mortification and my distress were converted 
into joy. 

“Luis is an excellent boy. Since he has been 
with me I have learned to regard him with much 
greater affection than formerly. I parted from 
him, and gave him up to you to educate, because 
my own life was not very exemplary, and, for this 
and other reasons, he would have grown up a 
savage here. You went beyond my hopes and even 
my desires, and almost made a father of the 


294 


° lg ¢ 
Pepita Jimenez 


Church of Luisito. To have a holy son would 
have flattered my vanity; but I should have been 
very sorry to remain without an heir to my house 
and name, who would give me handsome grand- 
children, and who after my death would enjoy my 
wealth, which is my glory, for I acquired it by 
skill and industry, and not by cunning and trickery. 
Perhaps the conviction I had that there was no 
remedy, and that Luis would inevitably go abroad 
to convert the Chinese, the Indians, or the blacks 
of the Congo, made me resolve on marrying, so as 
to provide myself with an heir. 

“Naturally enough, Y/ cast my eyes on Pepita 
Jiménez, who is not, as you imagine, a limb of 
Satan, but a lovely creature, as innocent as an 
angel, and ardent in her nature, rather than coquet- 
 tish. I have so good an opinion of Pepita that, if 
_ she were sixteen again, with a domineering mother 
who tyrannized over her, and if I were eighty, 
like Don Gumersindo—that is to say, if death were 
already knocking at the door—I would marry Pe- 
pita, that her smile might cheer me on my death- 
bed, as if my guardian angel had taken human 
shape in her, and for the purpose of leaving her my | 
position, my fortune, and my name. But Pepita 
is not sixteen, but twenty; nor is she now in the 
power of that serpent, her mother; nor am I eighty, 
but fifty-five. I am at the very worst age, because 
I begin to feel myself considerably the worse for 


295 


Pepita Jimenez 


wear, with something of asthma, a good deal of 
cough, rheumatic pains, and other chronic ail- 
ments; yet devil a bit do I wish to die, notwith- 
standing! I believe I shall not die for twenty 
years to come, and, as I am thirty-five years older 
than Pepita, you may calculate the miserable future 
that would await her, tied to an old man who would 
live forever. At the end of a few years of marriage 
she would be reduced to hating me, notwithstand- 
ing her goodness. Doubtless it is because she is 
good and wise that she has not chosen to accept me 
for a husband, notwithstanding the perseverance 
and the obstinacy with which I have proposed to 
her. 

“Flow much do I not thank her for this now! 
Even my self-love, wounded by her scorn, is soothed 
by the reflection that, if she does not love me, at 
least she loves one of my blood, is captivated by 
ason of mine. If this fresh and luxuriant ivy, I 
say to myself, refuses to twine around the old trunk, 
worm-eaten already, it climbs by it to reach the 
new sprout it has put forth—a green and flourish- 
ing offshoot. May God bless them both, and make 
their love prosper! 

“Far from bringing the boy back to you, I shall 
keep him here—by force, if it be necessary. I have 
determined to oppose his entering the priesthood. 
I dream already of seeing him married. I shall 
grow young again contemplating the handsome 


296 


Pepita Jimenez 


pair joined together by love. And how will it be 
when they shall have given me a family of grand- 
children? Instead of going as a missionary, and 
bringing back to me from Australia, or Madagas- 
car, or India, neophytes black as soot, with lips the 
size of your hand, or yellow as deerskin, and with 
eyes like owls, will it not be better for Luisito to 
preach the Gospel in his own house, and to give me 
a series of little catechumens, fair, rosy, with eyes 
like those of Pepita, who will resemble cherubim 
without wings? ‘The catechumens he would bring 
me from those foreign lands I should have to keep 
at a respectful distance; in order not to be over- 
powered by their odor; while those I speak of 
would seem to me like roses of Paradise, and would 
come to climb up on my knees, and would call me 
grandpapa, and with their little hands pat the bald 
spot I am beginning to acquire. 

“When I was in all my vigor I had no particular 
longing for domestic joys; but now that I am ap- 
proaching old age, if I have not already entered on 
it, as I have no intention of turning monk, I please 
myself in thinking that I shall play the part of a 
patriarch. And do not imagine, either, that I am 
going to leave it to time to bring this young engage- 
ment to a happy close. No! I shall myself set to 
work to do this. * 

“Continuing your comparison, since you speak 
of Pepita as a crucible and Luis as a metal, I shall 


297 


Pepita Jiménez 


find, or rather I have found already, a bellows, or 
blow-pipe, very well adapted to kindle up the fire, 
so that the metal may melt in it the more quickly. 
Antofiona has an understanding with me already, 
and through her I know that Pepita is over head 
and ears in love. 

“We have agreed that I shall continue to seem 
blind to everything, and to know nothing of what 
passes. The reverend vicar, who is a simple soul, 
always in the clouds, helps me as much as An- 
tofiona does, or more, and without knowing it, 
because he repeats to Pepita everything Luis says 
to him, and everything Pepita says to Luis; so that 
this excellent man, with the weight of half a cen- 
tury in each foot, has been converted—oh, miracle 
of love and of innocence!—into a carrier-dove by 
which the two lovers send each other their flatteries 
‘and endearments, while they are as ignorant as he 
is of the fact. 

“So powerful-a.combination of natural and arti- 
ficial methods ought to give an infallible result. 
You will be made acquainted with. this result 
when I give you notice of the wedding, so that 
you may come to perform the ceremony, or else 
send the lovers your blessing and a handsome 
present.” 


With these words Don Pedro finished the read- 
ing of his letter; and on looking again at Don Luis 
_ 298 


Pepita Jiménez 


he saw that he had been listening to him with his 
eyes full of tears. 

Father and son united in a long and close 
embrace. 

Just a month from the date of this interview the 
wedding of Don Luis de Vargas and Pepita Jimé- 
nez took place. 

The reverend Dean—fearing the ridicule of his 
brother at the spiritual-mindedness of Don Luis 
having thus come to naught, and recognizing also 
that he would not play a very dignified part in the 
village, where every one/would say he was a poor 
hand at turning out saints—declined to be present, 
excusing himself on the ground of being too busy, 
although he sent his blessing, and a magnificent 
pair of earrings as a present for Pepita. 

The reverend vicar, therefore, had the pleasure 
of marrying her to Don Luis. 

The bride, elegantly attired, was thought lovely 
by every one, and was looked upon as a good ex- 
change for the hair shirt and the scourge. 

That night Don Pedro gave a magnificent ball 
in the courtyard of his house and the contiguous 
apartments. Servants and gentlemen, nobles and | 
laborers, ladies and country-girls were present, 
and mingled together as if it were the ideal golden 
age—though why called golden I know not. Four 
skilful, or, if not skilful, at least indefatigable, 
guitar-players played a fandango; two gipsies, a 

299 


Pepita Jimenez 


man and a woman, both famous singers, sang verses 
of a tender character and appropriate to the occa- 
sion; and the schoolmaster read an epithalamium 
in heroic verse. 

‘There were tarts, fritters, jumbles, gingerbread, 
sponge-cake, and wine in abundance for the com- 
mon people. The gentry regaled themselves with 
refreshments—chocolate, lemonade, honey, and 
various kinds of aromatic and delicate cordials. 

Don Pedro was like a boy—sprightly, gallant, 
and full of jests. It did not look as if there were 
much truth in what he had said in his letter to the 
Dean in regard to his rheumatism and other ail- 
ments. He danced the fandango with Pepita, as 
also with the most attractive among her maids, and 
with six or seven of the village girls. He gave 
each of them, on reconducting her, tired out, to her 
seat, the prescribed embrace, and to the least de- 
mure a couple of pinches, though this latter forms 
no part of the ceremonial. He carried his gal- 
lantry to the extreme of dancing with Dofia Ca- 
silda, who could not refuse him, and who, with her 
two hundred and fifty pounds of humanity, and the 
heat of July, perspired at every pore. Finally, 
Don Pedro stuffed Currito so full, and made him 
drink so often to the health of the newly married 
pair, that the muleteer Dientes was obliged to carry 
him home to sleep off the effect of his excesses, 
slung like a wine-skin across the back of an ass! 

300 


Pepita Jimenez 


The ball lasted until three in the morning; but the 
young couple discreetly disappeared before eleven, 
and retired to the house of Pepita. 

Although it is the unfailing use and custom of 
the village to treat every widow or widower who 
marries again to a terrible charivari—that par- 
ticularly noisy kind of mock serenade—leaving 
them not a moment’s rest from the cow-bells dur- 
ing the first night of marriage, Pepita was such a 
favorite, Don Pedro was so much respected, and 
Don Luis was so beloved, that there were no bells 
on this occasion, nor was there the least attempt 
made at ringing them—a singular circumstance, 
which is recorded as such in the annals of the 
village. 


301 


Dae: ed Maw pil 


LETTERS OF MY BROTHER 


THE history of Pepita and Luisito should, prop- 
erly speaking, end here. This epilogue is not 
necessary to the story, but, as it formed part of the 
bundle of papers left at his death by the reverend 
Dean, although we refrain from publishing it 
entire, we shall at least give samples of it. 

No one can entertain the least doubt that Don 
Luis and Pepita, united by an irresistible love, al- 
most of the same age—she beautiful, he brave and 
handsome, both intelligent and full of goodness— 
would enjoy, during a long life, as much peace and 
happiness as falls to the lot of mortals. And this 
supposition, which for those who have read the 
preceding narrative is a logically drawn deduction 
from it, is converted into a certainty for him who 
reads the epilogue. 

The epilogue gives, besides, some information 
respecting the secondary personages of the nar- 
rative, in whose fate the reader may possibly be 
interested. It consists of a collection of letters 
addressed by Don Pedro de Vargas to his brother 
the Dean, dating from the day of his son’s mar- 
riage to four years later. 

302 


Pepita Jimenez 


Without prefixing the dates, although following 
their chronological order, we shall transcribe here 
a few short extracts from these letters, and thus 
bring our task to an end: 


Luis manifests the most lively gratitude toward 
Antofiona, without whose services he would not 
now possess Pepita. But this woman, the accom- 
plice of the sole fault of which either he or Pepita 
had been guilty in their lives, living as she did on 
the most familiar footing in the house, and fully 
acquainted with all that had taken lice: could not 
but be in the way. |To éet rid of her, then, and at 
the same time to do her a service, Luis set to work 
to bring about a reconciliation between her and 
her husband, whose daily fits of drunkenness she 
had refused to put up with. The son of Master 
Cencias gave his promise that he would get hardly 
ever drunk; but he would not venture on an abso- 
lute and uncompromising never. Confiding in this 
half-promise, however, Antofiona consented to re- 
turn to the conjugal roof. Husband and wife being 
thus reunited, it occurred to Luis that a homeo- 
pathic principle of treatment might prove effica- 
cious with the son of Master Cencias in curing him 
radically of his vice; for having heard it affirmed 
that confectioners detest sweets, he concluded that, 
on the same principle, tavern-keepers ought to de- 
test spirits, and he sent Antofiona and her husband 


393 


Pepita Jimenez 


to the capital of the province, where at his own cost 
he set them up in a fine tavern. Both live there 
together happily; they have succeeded in obtaining 
many patrons, and will probably become rich. He 
still gets drunk occasionally; but Antofiona, who is 
the stronger of the two, is accustomed at such times 
to give him a good trouncing, to help on his cure.’ 


Currito, anxious to imitate his cousin, whom he 
admires more and more every day, and seeing and 
enjoying the domestic felicity of Pepita and Luis, 
made haste to find a sweetheart, and married the 
daughter of a rich farmer of the place, healthy, 
fresh, red as a poppy, and who promises soon 
to acquire proportions as ample as those of her 
mother-in-law Casilda. 


The Count of Genazahar, after being confined to 
his bed for five months, is now cured of his wound, 
and, it is said, is very much improved in manners. 
He paid Pepita, a short time ago, more than half 
of his debt to her, and asks for a respite in the pay- 
ment of the remainder. 


We have had avery great grief, although one that 
we had foreseen for some time past. The father 
vicar, yielding to the advance of years, has passed 
to a better life. Pepita remained till the last at 
his bedside, and closed his eyes with her own beau- 
tiful hands, The father vicar died the death of a 


304, 


Pepita Jimenez 


blessed servant of the Lord. Rather than death, it 
seemed a happy transit to serener regions. Never- 
theless, Pepita and all of us have mourned him 
sincerely. He has left behind him only a few 
piastres and his furniture, for he gave all he had 
in alms. His death would have made orphans of 
the poor of the village, if it were not that Pepita 
still lives. 


Every one in the village laments the death of 
the reverend vicar, and there are many who regard 
him as a real saint, worthy of religious honors, and 
who attribute miracles to him. I know not how 
that may be, but I do know that he was an excel- 
lent man, and that he must have gone straight to 
heaven, where we may hope that he intercedes 
for us. With all this, his humility, his modesty, 
and his fear of God were such that he spoke 
of his sins in the hour of death as if he had in 
reality committed many, and he besought our 
prayers to the Lord and to the Virgin Mary for 
their forgiveness. 

A strong impression has been produced on the 
mind of Luis by the exemplary life and death of 
this man. He was simple, it must be confessed, 
and of limited intelligence, but of upright will, 
ardent faith, and fervent charity. When Luis 
compares himself with the vicar, he feels humil- 
iated. This has infused into his soul a certain 


305 


Pepita Jimenez 


bitter melancholy; but Pepita, who has a great 
deal of tact, dissipates it with smiles and caresses. 

Everything prospers with us. Luis and I have 
some wine-vaults, than which there are no better in 
Spain, if we except those of Xeres. The olive crop 
of this year has been superb. We can afford to 
allow ourselves every luxury; and I advise Luis 
and Pepita to make the tour of Germany, France, 
and Italy as soon as Pepita is over her trouble, and 
once more in her usual health. The dear children 
can afford to spend a few thousand piastres on the 
expedition, and will bring back some fine books, 
pieces of furniture, and objects of art, to adorn 
their dwelling. | 


We have deferred the baptism for two weeks, in, 
order that it may take place on the first anniversary 
of the wedding. ‘The child is a marvel of beauty, 
and is very healthy. I am the godfather, and he 
has been named after me. I am already dreaming 
of the time when Periquito shall begin to talk, and 
amuse us with his prattle. 


In order that nothing may be wanting to the 
prosperity of this tender pair, it turns out now, 
according to letters received from Havana, that 
the brother of Pepita, whose evil ways we feared 
might disgrace the family, is almost—and indeed 
without an almost—about to honor and elevate it 
by becoming a person of eminence. During all 

306 


Pepita Jimenez 


the time in which we heard nothing from him he 
has been profiting by his opportunities, and for- 
tune has sent him favoring gales. He obtained 
another employment in the Custom-house; then he 
trafficked in negroes; then he failed—an occur- | 
rence which for certain business men is like a good 
pruning for trees, making them sprout again with 
fresh vigor; and now he is so prosperous that he 
has formed the resolution of entering the highest 
circles of the aristocracy, under the title of Mar- 
quis or Duke. Pepita is frightened and troubled 
at this unexpected turn of fortune, but I tell her 
not to be foolish: if her brother is, and must in any 
case be, a rascal, is it not better that he should at 
least be a fortunate one? 


We might thus go on making extracts did we 
not fear to weary the reader. We shall end, then, 
by copying one of the latest letters: 


My children have returned from their travels in 
good health. Periquito is very mischievous and 
very charming. Luis and Pepita have come back 
resolved never again to leave the village, though 
they should live longer than Philemon and Baucis. 
They are more in love with each other than ever. 

They have brought back with them articles of 
furniture, a great many books, some pictures, and 
all sorts of other elegant trifles, purchased in the 
various countries through which they have trav- 


307 


Pepita Jimenez 


eled, and principally in Paris, Rome, Florence, 
and Vienna. 

The affection they entertain for each other, and 
the tenderness and cordiality with which they treat 
each other and every one else, have exercised a 
beneficent influence on manners here; and the ele- 
gance and good taste with which they are now com- 
pleting the furnishing of their house will go far 
to make superficial culture take root and spread. 

The people in Madrid say that in the country 
we are stupid and uncouth; but they remain where 
they are, and never take the trouble to come and 
reform our manners. On the contrary, no sooner 
does any one make his appearance in the country 
who knows or is worth anything, or who thinks he 
knows or is worth anything, than he makes every 
possible effort to get away from it, and leaves the 
fields and provincial towns behind him. Pepita 
and Luis pursue the opposite course, and I com- 
mend them for it with my whole heart. They are 
gradually improving and beautifying their sur- 
roundings, so as to make of this secluded spot a 
paradise. 

Do not imagine, however, that the inclination 

( of Pepita and Luis for material well-being has 
cooled in the slightest degree their religious feel- 
ings. The piety of both grows deeper every day; 
and in each new pleasure or satisfaction which 
they enjoy, or which they can procure for their 

308 


Pepita Jimenez 


fellow beings, they see a new benefaction of 
Heaven, in which they recognize fresh cause for 
gratitude. More than this, no pleasure or satisfac- 
tion would be such, none would be of any worth, or 
substance, or value in their eyes, were it not for the 
thought of higher things, and for the firm belief 
they have in them. 

Luis, in the midst of his present happiness, never 
forgets the overthrow of the ideal he had set up 
for himself. ‘There are times when his present 
life seems to him vulgar, selfish, and prosaic, com- 
pared with the life of sacrifice, with the spiritual 
existence to which he believed himself called in the 
first years of his youth. But Pepita solicitously, 
hastens to dispel his melancholy on such occasions; 
and then Luis sees and acknowledges that it is pos- 
sible for man to serve God in €very state and con- 
dition, and succeeds in reconciling the lively faith 
“and the love of God that fill his soul with this 
legitimate love of the earthly and perishable. But 
in the earthly and perishable he beholds the divine 
principle, as it were, without which, neither in the 
stars that stud the heavens, nor in the flowers and 
fruits that beautify the fields, nor in the eyes of 
Pepita, nor in the innocence and beauty of Feri- 
quito, would he behold anything lovely. The 
greater world, all this magnificent fabric of the 
universe, he declares, would without its all-seeing 
God seem to him sublime indeed, but without 


399 


Pepita Jimenez 


order, or beauty, or purpose. And as for the 
world’s epitome, as we are accustomed to call man, 
neither would he love that were it not for God; 
and this, not because God commands him to love it, 
but because the dignity of man, and his title to be 
loved, have their foundation in God Himself, who 
not only made the soul of man in His own likeness, 
but ennobled also his body, making it the living 
temple of the Spirit, holding communion with it 
by means of the sacrament, and exalting it to the 
extreme of uniting with it His incarnate Word. 
In these and other arguments, which I am unable 
to set forth here, Luis finds consolation. 

He reconciles himself to having relinquished 
his purpose of leading a life devoted to pious medi- 
tations, ecstatic contemplation, and apostolic works, 
and ceases to feel the sort of generous envy with 
which the father vicar inspired him on the day of 
his death; but both he and Pepita continue to give 
thanks, with great Christian devoutness, for the 
benefits they enjoy, comprehending that not to their 
own merit do they owe these benefits, oo only to 
the goodness of God. 

And so my children have in their house a couple 
of apartments resembling beautiful little Catholic 
chapels or oratories; but I must confess that these 
chapels have, too, their trace of paganism—an 
amorous-pastoral-poetic and Arcadian air. which 
is to be seen only beyond city walls. 

310 


Pepita Jimenez 


‘The orchard of Pepita is no longer an orchard, 
but a most enchanting garden, with its araucarias 
and Indian figs, which grow here in the open air, 
and its well-arranged though small hothouse, full 


of rare plants. Hoe ; 
The room in which we ate the strawberries 6h 


the afternoon on which Pepita and Luis saw and 
spoke with each other for the second time, has 
been transformed into a graceful temple, with por- 
tico and columns of white marble. Within is a 
spacious apartment, comfortably furnished, and 
adorned by two beautiful pictures. One represents 
Psyche discovering by tke light of her lamp Cupid 
asleep on his couch; the other represents Chloe 
when the fugitive grasshopper has taken refuge in 
her bosom, where, believing itself secure, it begins 
to chirp in its pleasant hiding-place, from which 
Daphnis is trying, meanwhile, to take it forth. 

A very good copy, in Carrara marble, of the 
Venus de Medici occupies the most prominent 
place in the apartment, and, as it were, presides 
over it. On the pedestal are engraved, in letters of 
gold, this thought of Lucretius: 


‘‘Without thee, darkness reigns instead of light, 
And nothing lovely is, and nothing ever bright.’’ 


311 


Date Due 


PRINTED | IN U.S. A. | 


J. OLAF COLLEGE 


Ss 
paQ6s73.P4 —5 1886 
- Pepita Jimenez. translated fro 


m th 


Valera, Juan
